Radioactive Substances and Their Radiations (Ernest Rutherford, 1913)
==========================================================
The nuclear atom's discoverer systematizes radioactivity; the Cambridge school's bible. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (radioactivesubs00ruthgoog).

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


72  ( 


■'j 


RADIOACTIVE    SUBSTANCES 

AND   THEIR 

RADIATIONS 


CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

ILonUon:    FETTER  LANE,  E.G. 

C.  F.  CLAY,  Manager 


C^inburgf):    1(N),  PRLNCES  STREET 

lonton:  U.  K.  LEWIS,  \m.  GOWEtt  STREET,  W.C. 

Btrlin:  A.  ASHER  AND  CO. 

l.cipM0:   F.  A.  BKOCKUAUS 

%tvp}ia:  AKADBMISCHE  VERLAGSGESELIJSCHAFT  m.h.  U. 

iitxa  fiork:  G.   V.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 

fiombou  ant  Calcutta:  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


AJl  right  A  rcKerrcff 


\DIO ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES 


AND   THEIR 


RADIATIONS 


BY 


E5  RUTHERFORD,  D.Sc,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 

NOBEL    LAUREATE 
LANG  WORTHY    PROFESSOR    OF    PHYSICS,    UNIVERSITY    OF    MANCHESTER 


Cambridge : 

at  the  University   Press 

New  York  : 
G.    P.    Putnam's    Sons 


Cambnlige : 

PRINTKD  BT  JOHN  OLAT,    UJi, 
AT   TUR    UNIVKBSIIT    PBB8R 


PREFACE 


TN  1904  I  published  through  the  Cambridge  University  Press 
a  collected  account  of  radio-active  phenomena  entitled  Radio- 
activity.     This  was  followed  a  year  later  by  a  revised  and  enlarged 
edition.     In  the  seven  years  that  have  elapsed  since  the  latter 
publication  there  has  been  a  steady  and  rapid  growth  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  properties  of  the  radiations  fh)m  active  sub- 
stances, and  of  the  remarkable   series  of   transformations   that 
occur  in  them.     In  the  present  work  I  have  endeavoured  to  give 
an  accurate  and  concise  account  of  the  whole  subject  as  it  stands 
to-day  within  the  compass  of  a  single  volume.     A  few  pages  from 
the  earlier  book  have  been  utilised,  but,  otherwise,  the  present 
volume  is  an  entirely  new  work. 

It  is  of  interest  to  signalise  some  of  the  main  directions  of 
advance  since  the  publication  of  the  second  edition  of  my  Radio- 
activity.    There  has  been  a  very  great  increase  in  the  amount  and 
accuracy  of  our  knowledge  of  the  radiations  from  active  substances, 
the  nature  of  their  absorption  by  matter,  and  of  their  connection 
mih  the  transformations.     The  discovery  of  methods  of  counting 
single  a  particles  has  proved  of  great  service  not  only  in  extending 
our  knowledge  of  the  a  rays,  but  also  in  obtaining  accurate  data 
for  the  calculation  of  a  number  of  important  radio-active  quantities 
and  atomic    magnitudes.     The  discovery  of  the  recoil  of  radio- 
active atoms  resulting  from  the  expulsion  of  a  particles  has  proved 


^64771 


VI  PREFACE 

very  valuable  as  a  means  of  separation  of  radio-active  substances, 
and  has  also  added  another  very  interesting  type  of  corpuscular 
radiation  for  study.  Our  knowledge  of  the  series  of  transforma- 
tions in  active  substances  has  been  much  extended.  In  1905 
twenty  of  these  were  known ;  the  number  is  now  thirty-two,  and 
there  is  some  evidence  that  a  few  still  remain  undetected. 

The  study  of  radio-activity  is  concerned  not  only  with  the 
radiations  and  transformations  of  active  substances,  but  also  with 
the  distribution  of  active  matter  and  the  products  of  its  trans- 
formation in  minerals  and  throughout  the  earth's  crust  and 
atmosphere.  The  researches  of  Strutt,  Joly,  and  others,  have 
added  greatly  to  our  knowledge  of  the  amount  and  distribution 
of  active  matter  in  typical  rocks,  and  have  indicated  that  the 
accompanying  heating  effect  has  an  important  bearing  on  the 
duration  of  the  earth's  internal  heat  and  on  geological  changes 
in  general.  The  investigations  of  Elster  and  Geitel,  Eve,  and 
others  have  brought  out  clearly  that  the  electrical  state  of  our 
atmosphere  is  undoubtedly  influenced  greatly  by  the  distribution 
of  active  matter  throughout  it.  The  use  of  radio-active  substances 
for  therapeutic  purposes  has  been  widely  extended,  but  a  considera- 
tion of  this  question  is  outside  the  scope  of  the  present  volume. 

In  one  respect  the  treatment  of  the  subject  has  necessitated 
very  little  change;  for  the  transformation  theory  advanced  in 
explanation  of  radio-active  phenomena  has  undergone  no  essential 
modification  in  the  interval.  This  theory  has  been  found  not  only 
to  give  a  reasonable  explanation  of  all  the  facts  that  are  at  present 
known,  but  has  suggested  many  lines  of  investigation  resulting  in 
a  wide  extension  of  our  knowledge. 

The  passages  in  my  previous  work,  which  I  have  found  it 
desirable  to  retain  are,  mainly,  those  dealing  with  the  ionisation 
of  gases  and  the  methods  of  radio-active  measurement,  for  it 
seemed  to  me  that  the  book  was  in  no  sense  complete  without 


PREFACE  VU 

a  brief  reference  to  these  important  subjects.  I  have  added 
three  short  Appendixes,  the  subject-matter  of  which  could  not 
be  conveniently  included  in  the  main  body  of  the  volume.  In 
the  first  an  account  is  given  of  the  methods  of  measurement  of 
quantities  of  radium.  In  the  second  a  brief  statement  is  given  of 
the  remarkable  method  devised  by  C.  T.  E.  Wilson  for  rendering 
risible  the  trails  of  single  a  and  ^  particles.  I  am  much  indebted 
to  Mr  C.  T.  B.  Wilson  for  permission  to  reproduce  two  of  the 
admirable  photographs  obtained  by  him.  A  short  account  is  also 
given  of  improvements  in  methods  for  registering  the  effects 
produced  by  single  a  particles,  and  for  counting  the  number 
emitted  by  radio-active  substances. 

I  desire  to  express  my  sincere  thanks  to  Professor  B.  B. 
Boltwood  of  Yale  University,  and  Dr  H.  Qeiger  for  the  great  care 
and  trouble  they  have  taken  in  the  correction  of  proofs,  and  for 
many  helpful  suggestions.  I  am  also  greatly  indebted  to  Dr  Geiger 
for  undertaking  the  laborious  task  of  revising  the  great  number  of 
references  to  original  work  which  are  included  in  the  volume. 

E.  BUTHEEFOBD. 


University  of  Manchester, 
October,  1912. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


CHAP. 

I.  Radio-active  Substances 

XL  lonisation  of  Gases 

III.  Methods  of  Measurement 

IV.  The  Alpha  Rays  . 

V.  The  Beta  Rays     . 

VI.  The  Gamma  or  Very  Penetrating  Rays 

VII.  Properties  of  the  Radiations 

VIII.  Continuous  Production  and  Decay  of  Radio-active  Matter 

IX.  Radio-active  Gases 

X.  Active  Deposits 

.  XI.        Theory  of  Successive  Transformations 

XII.  Uranium,  Ionium,  and  the  Origin  of  Radium 

XIII.  Radium  and  its  Emanation 

XIV.  Active  Deposit  of  Radium  .... 

XV.  Actinium  and  its  Products 

XVI.  Thorium  and  its  Products  .... 

XVII.  Production  of  Helium  and  Emission  of  Heat 
XVIII.  General  Results  and  Relations 

XIX»      Radio-activity  of  the  Earth  and  Atmosphere 

Appendix  A.     Comparison  of  quantities  of  Radium  and 
International  Radium  Standard   .... 

Appendix  B.     The  Tracks  of  Ionising  Particles  in  Gases 
Counting  of  a  Particles 

Appendix  C.    Tables 

Index 


PAGE 
1 

26 
87 
114 
193 
257 
296 
329 
.347 
391 
410 
444 
469 
4«6 
519 
534 
553 
587 
624 

657 

663 
665 
671 


Figures  printed  as  Plates 

Figures  70  a,  b,  c 

Figure  81 

Figures  82  a,  b 
Figures  83  a,  b 
Figure  109    . 
Figures  1,  2,  3 


) 


to  face  p.  253 
p.  303 


n 


„       p.  310 


» 


»> 


p,  482 
p.  664 


CHAPTER  I. 


RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES. 


1.  Introduction.  The  close  of  the  old  and  the  beginning 
rf  the  new  century  have  been  marked  by  a  very  rapid  increase  of 
our  knowledge  of  that  most  important  but  comparatively  little 

known  subject — thft    finnnftPtinn    bpfw^fn    aUntnmty  aym^    mstttAr 

No  study  has  been  more  fruitful  in  surprises  to  the  investigator, 

both  from  the  remarkable  nature  of  the  phenomena  exhibited  and 

from  the  laws  controlling  them.   The  more  the  subject  is  examined, 

the  more  complex  must  we  suppose  the  constitution  of  matter  in 

order  to  explain  the  remarkable  effects  observed.     While  the 

experimental  results  have  led  to  the  view  that  the  constitution 

of  the  atom  itself  is  very  complex,  at  the  same  time  they  have 

confirmed  the  old  theory  of  the  discontinuous  or  atomic  Htnictnrft 

of  matter.    The  study  of  the  radio-^active  substcmces  and  of  the 

discharge  of  electricity  through  gases  has  supplied  very  strong 

experimental  evidence  in  support  of  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the 

existing  atomic  theory.    It  has  also  indicated  that  the  atom  itself 

is  not  the  smallest  unit  of  matter,  but  is  a  complicated  structure 

nude  ap  of  a  number  of  smaller  bodies. 

A  great  impetus  to  the  study  of  this  subject  was  initially 
given  by  the  experiments  of  TrflP**^^  on  the  cathode  rays,  and 
I7  Bontgen's  discovery  of  the  X  rays.  An  examinati(m  of  the 
woductivity  imparted  to  a  gas  by  the  X  rays  led  to  a  clear  view 
of  the  mechanism  of  the  transport  of  electricity  through  gases 
bjr  means  of  charged  ions.  This  ionisation  theory  of  gases  has 
)eeD  shown  to  afford  a  satisfactory  explanation  not  only  of  the 
Mttsage  of  electricity  through  flames  and  vapours,  but  also  of  the 

B.  R.-A.  1 


2  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

complicated  phenomena  observed  when  a  discharge  of  electricity 
passes  through  a  vacuum  tube.  At  the  same  time,  a  further 
study  of  the  cathode  rays  showed  that  they  consisted  of  a  stream 
of  charged  particles,  projected  with  great  velocity,  and  possessing 
an  apparent  mass  small  compared  with  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom. 
The  connection  between  the  cathode  and  Rontgen  rays  and  the 
nature  of  the  latter  were  also  closely  examined.  Much  of  this 
admirable  experimental  work  on  the  nature  of  the  electric  dis- 
charge has  been  done  by  Professor  Sir  J,  J.  Thomaon  and  hi» 

students  in  the  HavftriHifih   TAhnratory^   CAmhriHpft. 

An  examination  of  natural  substances,  in  order  to  see  if  they 
gave  out  dark  radiations  similar  to  X  rays,  led  to  the  discovery  of 
the  radio-active  bodies  which  possess  the  property  of  spontaneously 
emitting  radiations,  invisible  to  the  eye,  but  readily  detected  by 
their  action  on  photographic  plates  and  by  their  power  of  dis- 
charging electrified  bodies.     A  detailed  study  of  the  radio-active 
bodies  has  revealed  many  new  and  surprising  phenomena  which 
have  thrown  much  light,  not  only  on  the  nature  of  the  radiations 
themselves,  but  also  on  the  processes  occurring  in  those  sub- 
stances.    Notwithstanding  the  complex  nature  of  the  phenomena, 
the  knowledge  of  the  subject  has  advanced  with  great  rapidity, 
and  a  large  amount  of  experimental  data  has  now  been  accumu- 
lated. 

In  order  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity,  Ruther- 
ford and  Soddy  in  1903  advanced  a  theory  which  regards  the 
atoms  of  the  radio-active  elements  as  suffering  spontaneous  dis- 
integration, and  giving  rise  to  a  series  of  radio-active  substances 
which  differ  in  chemical  properties  from  the  parent  elements. 
The  radiations  accompany  the  breaking-up  of  the  atoms,  and 
afford  a  comparative  measure  of  the  rate  at  which  the  disin- 
tegration takes  place.  This  theory  is  found  to  account  in  a 
satisfactory  way  for  all  the  known  facts  of  radio-activity^  and 
welds  a  mass  of  disconnected  &cts  into  one  homogeneous  whole. 
On  this  view,  the  continuous  emission  of  energy  fi-om  the  active 
bodies  is  derived  from  the  internal  energy  inherent  in  the  atom 
itself,  and  does  not  in  any  way  contradict  the  law  of  the  con- 
servation of  energy.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it  indicates 
that  an  enormous  store  of  latent  energy  is  resident  in  the  atoms 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  3 

themselves.  This  store  of  energy  had  not  been  observed  previously, 
on  account  of  the  impossibility  of  breaking  up  into  simpler  forms 
the  atoms  of  the  elements  by  the  action  of  the  chemical  or  physical 
forces  at  our  command. 

On  this  theory  we  are  witnessing  in  the  radio-active  bodies  a 
veritable  transformation  of  matter.  This  process  of  disintegration 
was  initially  investigated,  not  by  direct  chemical  methods,  but 
by  means  of  the  property  possessed  by  the  radio-active  bodies 
of  giving  out  specific  types  of  radiation.  In  the  case  of  weak 
radio-active  substances  like  uranium  and  thorium,  the  process  of 
disintegration  takes  place  so  slowly  that  it  would  only  be  possible 
by  working  with  large  quantities  in  a  limited  time  to  obtain 
direct  evidence  of  the  transformation  by  means  of  the  balance 
or  spectroscope.  In  the  case,  however,  of  a  very  active  substance 
like  radium,  the  process  of  disintegration  is  sufficiently  rapid  to 
obtain  convincing  evidence  of  transformation  with  quantities  of 
material  weighing  only  a  fraction  of  a  gram.  In  illustration,  we 
may  refer  to  the  isolation  and  determination  of  the  physical  and 
chemical  properties  of  that  most  remarkable  gas,  known  as  the 
radium  emanation,  which  is  a  product  of  the  transformation  of 
radium.  The  proof  of  the  continuous  production  from  radium  and 
other  radio-active  substances  of  the  rare  gas  heUum  has  added' 
a  strong  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  in  support  of  the  trans- 
formation theory.  Several  products  of  the  transformation  of  the 
radio-active  bodies  have  been  obtained  in  sufficient  quantity  to 
examine  by  ordinary  chemical  methods,  and  a  further  study  of 
these  and  other  radio-active  substances  opens  up  new  and  im- 
portant fields  of  chemical  enquiry. 

In  this  book  the  experimental  &cts  of  radio-activity  and  the 
connection  between  them  are  interpreted  on  the  disintegration 
theory.  Most  of  the  phenomena  observed  can  be  investigated  in 
a  quantitative  manner,  and  prominence  has  been  given  to  work 
of  this  character,  for  the  agreement  of  any  theory  with  the  facts, 
which  it  attempts  to  explain,  must  ultimately  depend  upon  the 
results  of  accurate  measurement. 

The  value  of  any  working  theory  depends  upon  the  number 
of  experimental  £acts  it  serves  to  correlate,  and  upon  its  power  of 
saggesting  new  lines  of  work.    In  these  respects  the  disintegration 

1—2 


4  KADIO-ACTIV£  SUBSTANCES  [CU. 

theory,  whether  or  not  it  may  ultimately  be  proved  to  be  correct, 
has  abready  been  completely  justified  by  its  results. 

Not  only  has  it  served  as  a  reliable  guide  to  the  investigator 
in  tracing  the  long  series  of  transformations  taking  place  in  radio- 
active matter,  but  it  has  predicted  numerous  relations  which  have 
afterwards  been  verified  by  experiment.  It  is  safe  to  say  that 
the  rapidity  of  growth  of  accurate  knowledge  of  radio-active 
phenomena  has  been  largely  due  to  the  influence  of  the  disin- 
tegration  theory. 

2.  Radio-active  substances.  The  term  ''radio-active"  is 
now  generally  applied  to  a  class  of  substances,  such  as  uranium, 
thorium,  radium,  and  their  compounds,  which  possess  the  property 
of  spontaneotisly  emitting  radiations  capable  of  passing  through 
plates  of  metal  and  other  substances  opaque  to  ordinary  light. 
The  characteristic  property  of  these  radiations,  besides  their 
penetrating  power,  is  their  action  on  a  photographic  plate  and 
their  power  of  discharging  electrified  bodies.  In  addition,  a 
strongly  radio-active  body  like  radium  is  able  to  cause  marked 
phosphorescence  and  fluorescence  on  some  substances  placed 
near  it.  In  the  above  respects  the  radiations  possess  properties 
analogous  to  R5ntgen  rays,  but  it  will  be  shown  that,  for  the 
major  part  of  the  radiations  emitted,  the  resemblance  is  only 
superficial. 

The  most  remarkable  property  of  the  radio-active  bodies  like 
uranium  and  thorium  is  their  power  of  radiating  energy  spon- 
taneously and  continuously  at  a  constant  rate,  without,  as  far  as 
is  known,  the  action  upon  them  of  any  external  exciting  cause. 
The  phenomena  at  first  sight  appear  to  be  in  direct  contradiction 
to  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy,  since  no  obvious  change  with 
time  occurs  in  the  radiating  material.  The  phenomena  appear 
still  more  remarkable  when  it  is  considered  that  the  radio-active 
bodies  must  have  been  steadily  radiating  energy  since  the  time  of 
their  formation  in  the  earth's  crust 

It  is  diflicult  to  give  at  this  stage  a  short  and  rigorous 
definition  of  the  term  "radio-active."  It  is  not  sufficient  to 
say  that  a  radio-active  substance  emits  a  type  of  penetrating 
radiation,  for  we    shall  see  that  a  few   substances  which  are 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  8tTBSTAyCSS  5 

ordinarily  callckl  radio-active  either  emit  no  specific  radiation 
or,  at  any  rate,  emit  radiations  of  such  small  penetrating  power 
that  they  are  difficult  to  detect.  At  the  same  time,  each  of 
these  so-called  "  raylese  "  products  exhibits  the  main  characteristic 
of  radio-active  substances,  %.e.  it  undergoes  spontaneous  atomic 
transformation  and  gives  rise  to  a  new  substance,  which  itself 
njay  emit  characteristic  penetrating  radiations.  From  this  point 
of  view,  it  is  desirable  to  restrict  the  term  **  radio-active "  to 
subetimces  which  undergo  spontaneous  atomic  transformation, 
without  regard  to  the  character  of  the  radiation  emitted. 

The  discharging  and  photographic  action  alone  cannot  be 
taken  as  a  criterion  as  to  whether  a  substance  is  radio-active 
or  not.  It  is  necessary  in  addition  to  examine  the  radiations, 
and  to  test  whether  the  actions  take  place  through  appreciable 
thicknesses  of  all  kinds  of  matter  opaque  to  ordinary  light.  For 
example,  a  body  giving  out  short  waves  of  ultra-violet  light  could 
be  made  to  behave  in  many  respects  like  a  radio-active  body.  As 
Lenard*  has  shown,  short  waves  of  ultra-violet  light  will  ionise 
the  gas  in  their  path,  and  will  be  absorbed  rapidly  in  the  gas. 
They  will  produce  strong  photographic  action,  and  may  pass 
through  some  substances  opaque  to  ordinary  light.  The  similarity 
to  a  radio-active  body  is  thus  &irly  complete  as  regards  these 
properties.  On  the  other  hand,  the  emission  of  these  light  waves, 
unlike  that  of  the  radiations  from  an  active  body,  will  depend 
largely  on  the  molecular  state  of  the  compound,  or  on  temperature 
and  other  physical  conditions.  But  the  great  point  of  distinction 
lies  in  the  nature  of  the  radiations  from  the  bodies  in  question. 
In  one  case  the  radiations  behave  as  transverse  waves,  obeying 
the  nsual  laws  of  light  waves,  while  in  the  case  of  a  naturally 
active  body,  they  consist  for  the  most  part  of  a  continuous  flight 
of  material  particles  projected  from  the  substance  with  great 
Telocity. 

Several  substances   have   been  found  which  are  able  under 

certain  conditions  to  discharge  positive  and  negative  electricity 

at  a  rapid  rate.     For  example,  a  freshly  cut  surface  of  phosphorus 

brought  near  to  an  electrified  body  is  able  to  discharge  it.     This 

discharging  power,  however,  is  not  due  to  an  ionisation  of  the  gas 

*  Lenard,.  ilmiaZ.  d,  Phyt.  1,  p.  49S;  a,  p.  29S,  1900. 


6  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  | 

by  a  penetrating  radiation,  as  in  the  case  of  uranium,  but  rat 
to  chemical  action  taking  place  at  its  surface.  The  compou 
of  phosphorus  do  not  exhibit  any  effect,  and  in  this  res] 
phosphorus  differs  completely  from  uranium  and  the  other  ra 
active  bodies  where  the  activity  is  an  atomic  property. 

Le  Bon*  has  also  observed  that  quinine  sulphate,  if  heated 
then  allowed  to  cool,  possesses  for  a  short  time  the  property 
discharging  both  positively  and  negatively  electrified  bodies, 
is  necessary,  however,  to  draw  a  sharp  line  of  distinction  betw 
phenomena  of  this  kind  and  those  exhibited  by  the  naturally  ra 
active  bodies.     While  both,  under  special  conditions,  possess 
property  of  ionising  the  gas,  the  laws  controlling  the  phenoni 
are  quite  distinct  in  the  two  casea     For  example,  only  one  c 
pound  of  quinine  shows  the  property,  and  that  compound  < 
when  it  has  been  subjected  to  a  preliminary  heating.     The  ac 
of  phosphorus  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  gas,  and  varies  \ 
temperature.     On  the  other  hand,  the  activity  of  the  natur 
radio-active  bodies  is  spontaneous  and  is  exhibited  by  all  c 
pounds,  and  is  not  altered  by  change  in  the  chemical  or  phyg 
conditions. 

3.  Discovery  of  radio-activity.  The  discovery  by  Ront 
in  1895  of  the  X  rays  and  their  remarkable  properties  crej 
the  most  intense  interest  throughout  the  scientific  world, 
occurred  to  several  physicists  to  try  whether  ordinary  bo 
emitted  a  similar  radiation,  which  was  able  to  pass  thro 
matter  opaque  to  ordinary  light.  Since  the  production  of  X  : 
by  a  discharge  through  a  vacuum  tube  appeared  to  be  conne< 
with  the  strong  phosphorescence  and  fluorescence  excited  on 
glass  by  the  cathode  rays,  it  was  natural  at  first  to  examine  tl 
substances  which  phosphoresced  brightly  under  the  actioi 
light.  Several  observers  at  first  affirmed  the  presence  of  s 
a  penetrating  radiation  firom  phosphorescent  calcium  sulph 
but  these  results  have  not  stood  the  test  of  more  rigo 
experiment.  Following  out  the  same  idea.  Professor  H 
Becquerel  exposed  a  number  of  phosphorescent  substances 
veloped  in  black  paper  under  a  photographic  plate.     The  res 

*  lie  Bon,  C.  R.  180,  p.  S91,  1900. 


RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  7 

entirely  negative.  It  then  occurred  to  him  to  try  experi- 
nts  with  the  salts  of  uranium,  the  phosphorescence  of  which 
been  previously  investigated  by  him.  Among  these  salts 
Mere  some  fine  crystals  of  the  double  sulphate  of  uranium  and 
.potassium,  which  he  had  prepared  about  fifteen  years  before.  The 
jerystals  were  first  exposed  to  light  and  then  enveloped  with  two 
layers  of  black  paper,  and  placed  below  the  photographic  plate 
iWith  a  small  plate  of  silver  between.  After  an  exposure  of 
meral  hours  and  development,  a  distinct  photographic  effect 
was  observed.  The  experiment  was  at  once  repeated  with  a 
plate  of  glass  O'l  mm.  thick  between  the  uranium  salt  and  the 
photographic  plate  in  order  to  cut  off  effects  due  to  possible 
^pours.  A  distinct  but  slightly  feebler  photographic  impression 
was  again  obtained. 

The  results  of  these  experiments,  which  were  communicated 
to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  on  February  24th,  1896, 
indicated  that  the  salt  of  uranium  emitted  a  type  of  radiation 
capable  of  penetrating  through  a  considerable  thickness  of  matter 
opaque  to  ordinary  light.  These  simple  experiments  mark  the 
discovery  of  a  new  property  of  matter — radio-activity — the  further 
nvestigation  of  which  was  to  lead  to  such  remarkable  conse- 
[iiences*. 

It  was  at  first  natural  to  suppose  that  the  emission  of 
enetrating  rays  was  in  some  way  connected  with  the  power  of 
•hosphorescence,  but  later  observations  by  Becquerel"f'  showed 
hat  there  was  no  connection  whatever  between  them.  The 
iranic  salts  are  phosphorescent,  while  the  uranous  salts  are  not. 
'he  uranic  salts,  when  exposed  to  ultra-violet  light  in  the 
)hosphoro8cope,  give  a  phosphorescent  light  lasting  about  '01 
econd.  When  the  salts  are  dissolved  in  water,  the  duration 
s  still  less.  The  non-phosphorescent  are  equally  active  with  the 
)hosphorescent  compounds  The  amount  of  radiation  given  out 
s  unaltered  if  the  uranium  salt  be  kept  continuously  in  darkness. 
The  rays  are  given  out  by  solutions,  and  by  crystals  which  have 
)een  deposited  horn  solutions  in  the  dark  and  never  exposed  to 
ight.     This  shows  that  the  radiation  cannot  be  due  in  any  way 

*  Beeqaerel,  C.  R,  182,  pp.  420,  501,  559,  6S9,  762, 10S6.     1896. 
t  Beeqaerel,  C.  R,  128,  p.  501,  1S96. 


8  RJLDIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

to  the  gradual  emission  of  energy  stored  up  in  the  crystal  in. 
consequence  of  exposure  to  a  source  of  light. 

The  property  of  emitting  a  tjrpe  of  penetrating  radiation  was 
found  to  be  exhibited  by  all  the  compounds  of  uranium  and  by 
the  metal  itself  The  photographic  effect  of  any  given  compound 
depends  on  the  thickness  of  the  layer  employed  and  the  pro- 
portion of  uranium  present. 

The  power  of  giving. out  penetrating  rays  thus  seems  to  be 
a  specific  property  of  the  element  uranium,  since  it  is  exhibited 
by  the  metal  as  well  as  by  all  its  compounds.  These  radiations 
from  uranium  are  persistent,  and,  as  &r  as  observations  have  yet 
gone,  are  unchanged,  either  in  intensity  or  character,  with  lapse  of 
time.  Observations  to  test  the  constancy  of  the  radiations  for 
long  periods  of  time  were  initially  made  by  Becquerel  by  the 
photographic  method  and  Mme  Curie  by  the  electric  method, 
but  no  appreciable  variation  was  observed  over  an  interval  of 
five  years.  This  result  is  to  be  expected  in  view  of  our  later 
knowledge,  for  it  will  be  seen  later  that,  while  the  activity  of 
uranium  itself  must  decrease  with  the  time,  the  variation  is 
so  slow  that  an  interval  measured  by  millions  of  years  would 
be  required  to  show  any  detectable  change.  The  comparative 
permanency  of  the  radiation  from  uranium  itself  must  not  be 
confused  with  the  fact  that  the  activity  of  ordinary  compounds 
of  uranium  can  be  temporarily  reduced  by  separation  of  one  or 
more  of  its  radio-active  constituents. 

The  activity  of  uranium  is  unaffected  by  changes  of  tempera- 
ture, or  by  the  action  of  any  physical  or  chemical  agency.  No 
definite  proof  has  yet  been  given  that  the  radio-active  processes 
occurring  in  uranium  or  in  any  radio-active  substance  can  be 
altered  in  any  way  by  the  most  drastic  physical  or  chemical 
treatment.  The  energy  radiated  in  various  fonns  from  uranium 
and  its  compounds  is  derived  from  the  uranium  itself,  and 
accompanies  the  transformation  of  the  uranium  atoms. 

In  addition  to  the  action  of  the  rays  from  uranium  on  a 
photographic  plate,  Becquerel*  showed  that  uranium  rays,  like 
B5ntgen  rays,  possessed  the  important  property  of  discharging 
both  positively  and  negatively  electrified  bodies.     This  effect  is 

*  Becqaerol,  C.  R,  12S,  p.  559, 1896. 


Ij  RADIO-ACTIVB  SUBSTAyCES  9 

• 

most  simply  shown  by  bringing  an  uncovered  uranium  compound 
near  the  charged  plate  of  an  electroscope.  The  dissipation  of 
the  charge  is  shown  by  the  rapid  collapse  of  the  gold  leaves. 
The  results  obtained  by  Becquerel  were  confirmed  and  extended 
hj  Lord  Kelvin,  Smolan  and  Beattie*.  The  writer f  made  a 
detailed  comparison  of  the  nature  of  the  discharge  produced  by 
aranium  rajrs,  and  showed  that  in  both  cases  thf^^imipnti^n  ^f 
Ml  electric  charge  is  due  to  the  production  of  charged  ionsby 
the  radiations  throughout  the  volume  of  the  gas.  This  electric 
property  of  the  radiations  is  of  great  importance,  and  has  formed 
the  basis  of  a  qualitative  and  quantitative  examination  of  the 
radiations  from  radio-active  bodies.  A  detailed  account  of  this 
method  is  given  in  Chapter  II. 

From  his  earlier  experiments,  Becquerel  concluded  that  the 
rays  from  uranium  were  intermediate  in  properties  between 
ordinary  light  and  X  rays,  since  he  observed  some  evidence  of 
reflection,  refraction,  and  polarisation.  The  results  were  not 
confirmed  by  later  experiments  of  Le  Bon,  Rutherford  and 
Becquerel  himself.  While  there  is  no  evidence  of  direct  re- 
flection, there  is  always  a  diflFuse  reflection  of  the  penetrating 
radiation  striking  an  obstacle,  so  that  the  shadow  of  an  absorbing 
screen  is  always  surrounded  by  a  difiFuse  border.  The  absence  of 
the  properties  of  light  waves  necessarily  follows  from  our  present 
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  uranium  rays ;  for  the  radiation, 
mainly  responsible  for  the  photographic  effects,  consists  of  a  flight 
of  charged  particles  projected  with  great  velocity. 

The  radiations  from  uranium  are  complex  in  character,  and 

will  be  shown  later  to  consist  of  three  distinct  types  known  as 

the  alpha,  beta  and  gamma  rays  (a,  y8,  7).      The  a  rays,  which 

are  very  easily  absorbed  by  thin  sheets  of  metal  foil  or  by  gases, 

consist  of  a  stream  of  positively  charged  particles  projected  with 

great  velocity.     The  )S  rays  are  far  more  penetrating  and  are 

identical  with  the  negatively  charged  particles  constituting  the 

cathode  rays.     The  7  rays,  which  are  very  penetrating,  appear  to 

be  analogous  in  properties  to  the  X  rays.     With  a  thin  layer  of 

any  uranium  compound,  the  electric  discharge  is  due  mainly  to 

♦  Phil,  Mag,  43,  p.  418,  1897;  45,  p.  277,  1898. 
t  Butherford,  Phil.  Mag.  47,  p.  109,  1S99. 


10  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

the  a  rays.  The  electric  effect  due  to  the  y  rays  is  very  feeble 
in  comparison  and  is  difficult  to  detect  unless  several  hundred 
grams  of  material  are  employed  as  a  source  of  radiation. 

The  radiations  from  uranium  are  thus  analogous,  as  regards 
their  photographic  and  electrical  actions,  to  X  rays,  but  compared 
with  the  rays  from  an  ordinary  X  ray  tube,  these  actions  are 
extremely  feeble.  While  with  X  rays  a  strong  impression  is 
produced  on  a  photographic  plate  in  a  few  minutes  or  even  by  a. 
single  discharge,  a  day's  exposure  to  the  uranium  rajrs  is  required 
to  produce  a  well-marked  action,  even  though  the  uranium  com- 
pound, enveloped  in  black  paper,  is  placed  close  to  the  plate. 
The  discharging  action,  while  very  easily  measurable  by  suitable 
methods,  is  also  small  compared  with  that  produced  by  X  rays 
from  an  ordinary  focus  tube. 

4.  Thorium.  Following  the  discovery  of  the  activity  of 
uranium,  the  question  naturally  arose  whether  this  property  was 
confined  to  uranium  and  its  compounds  or  whether  it  was  ex- 
hibited to  an  appreciable  extent  by  other  substances.  In  the 
course  of  an  examination  of  a  number  of  substances  by  the 
electric  method,  Q.  C.  Schmidt*  and  independently  Mme  Curie f, 
found  that  thorium  and  its  compounds  and  also  thorium  minerals 
possessed  properties  similar  to  those  of  uranium.  The  rays  from 
thorium  compounds,  like  those  from  uranium,  possess  the  property 
of  discharging  bodies  and  acting  on  a  photographic  plate.  Under 
the  same  conditions,  the  discharging  action  of  the  rays  is  about 
equal  to  that  of  uranium,  |)ut  the  photographic  effect  Hnp>  t^  hhe 
13  rays  is  distinctly  weaker.  Thorium  like  uranium  emits  a,  0 
and  7  rays,  but  the  7  rays  from  thorium  are  more  intense  and 
more  penetrating-  than  thnsft  from  nr^nii^m. 

The  presence  of  thorium  in  a  substance  can  be  readily 
determined  by  its  property  of  emitting  a  radio-active  emanation, 
which  has  all  the  properties  of  a  radio-active  gas.  The  emanation 
can  be  removed  from  the  thorium  compound  by  means  of  a 
current  of  air,  and  its  activity  can  be  detected  at  a  distance. 
The  activity  of  the  emanation  is  not  permanent  but  practically 
disappears  in  the  course  of  ten  minutes. 

*  Schmidt,  Ann.  d,  Phys.  66,  p.  141,  1898. 
t  Mme  Curie,  C.  R,  IM,  p.  1101,  1898. 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  11 

f  A  detailed  examination  of  thorium  has  shown  that  it  contains 
a  number  of  radio-active  substances  which  are  derived  from  the 
transformation  of  thorium  itself.  Two  of  these  products,  dis- 
covered by  Hahn*  and  called  meso-thorium  and  radio'thorium, 
retain  a  considerable  fraction  of  their  activity  for  some  years. 
Meso-thorium,  which  has  chemical  properties  very  similar  to  those 
of  radium,  can  be  separated  from  the  thorium  on  a  commercial 
scale,  and  preparations  of  this  substance,  which  have  an  activity 
comparable  with  that  of  pure  radium,  are  now  sold  commercially. 
An  account  of  the  chemical  properties  of  the  numerous  radio- 
active substances  derived  from  thorium  will  be  discussed  in 
detail  later. 

The  activity  of  compounds  of  thorium  which  have  been 
separated  from  thorium  minerals  is  initially  not  constant.  The 
activity  measured  by  the  a  rays  decreases  slowly  for  several  years, 
passes  through  a  minimum,  and  finally  after  a  long  interval 
reaches  a  maximum  value  which  is  equal  to  that  in  an  equal 
weight  of  thorium  in  the  mineral  before  separation.  This  variation 
of  activity  is  not  due  to  any  variation  of  the  activity  of  thorium 
itself,  but  is  due  to  the  growth  in  the  thorium  of  new  radio-active 
sabetances  which  had  been  left  behind  in  the  isolation  of  thorium 
by  commercial  methods.  There  is  reason  to  believe  t}}f\\t  tfho"*""' 
in  radio-activeequilibrium  ultimately  decreases  in  activity  at  a 
rate  even  slower  than  that  of  uranium. 

5.  Potatsiam.  By  the  electrical  method,  using  a  suitable 
electroscope  or  electrometer,  it  is  possible  to  measure  easily  the 
activity  of  any  substance  which  shows  an  effect  of  1/1000  of  that 
of  urauium.  With  special  precautions  it  is  possible  to  detect 
and  measure  still  smaller  activities.  Mme  Curie  made  a  detailed 
examination  by  the  electric  method  of  a  great  majority  of  known 
oibstances,  including  the  very  rare  elements,  in  order  to  see  if 
they  showed  any  activity.  In  many  cases  several  compounds  of 
the  elements  were  examined.  With  the  exception  of  thorium 
already  mentioned  and  phosphorus,  none  of  the  other  substances 
possessed  an  activity  of  even  1/100  of  that  of  uranium.     It  has 

*  Hfthn, .  Proe.   Ro^.  8oe,  T6,  p.  115,  1905 ;    Phyt.    Zeit.  8,  p.   277,  1907 ; 
t,  p.  S92,  1906. 


12  RADIO-AOTIVB  StTBSTANCES  [CH. 

already  been  pointed  out  in  section  2  that  the  discharging  effect 
of  phosphorus  is  due  to  a  surface  chemical  action,  and  is  not  due 
to  radio-activity. 

The  examination  of  substances  of  veiy  feeble  activity  is 
complicated  by  the  fact  that  ordinary  materials  show  a  minute 
activity.  As  a  result  of  a  detailed  examination  of  the  activity 
of  ordinary  matter,  N.  R.  Campbell*  discovered  in  1907  that  the 
compounds  of  potassium  and  of  rubidium  showed  an  activity  con- 
siderably greater  than  the  majority  of  ordinary  substances.  The 
investigation  of  this  property  of  potassium  is  very  difficult  on 
account  of  the  smallness  of  the  electrical  effects.  There  seems, 
however,  little  doubt  but  that  potassium  has  a  specific  radio- 
activity, for  it  is  shown  by  all  the  compounds  of  potassium,  whether 
obtained  from  potassium  deposits  in  the  earth  or  &om  wood  ashes. 
Unlike  the  majority  of  radio-active  bodies,  potassium  apparently 
emits  only  B  rays  of^penefacating  pnwftr  q-Knut  eqii^^  ^^  fVinBo  nf 
uramum.  The  small  ^lAPtrir^jil  ^ffipK^t^  Hue  to  potassium,  may  be 
judged  from  the  observation  that  the  activity  is  only  fthont  1/1  OOP 
that  ot  tHe  p  rav.q  of  a^  ^Tml  w<>i£r}it  9f  iira.nium  compound. 

his  property  of  potassium  and  of  rubidium  is  of  great  interest, 
for  besides  the  elements  of  high  atomic  weight,  uranium,  thorium, 
radium  and  their  products,  they  are  the  only  other  chemical  sub- 
stances of  small  atomic  weight  that  show  radio-activity.  In  some 
cases,  other  substances  have  been  found  to  show  a  trace  of  activity, 
but  no  proof  has  been  given  that  it  is  due  to  the  element  itself,  and 
not  to  some  radio-active  impurity  present.  Taking  into  account 
the  wide  dissemination  of  radio-active  materials  throughout  the 
earth's  crust,  it  would  not  be  surprising  to  find  that  some  of  the 
numerous  radio-active  substances  would  be  separated  in  minute 
amount  with  some  of  the  permanent  elements.  For  example,  it 
is  to  be  anticipated  that  both  lanthanum  and  cerium  would  show 
a  slight  activity,  since  it  is  known  that  the  radio-active  substance, 
actinium,  is  normally  separated  with  them. 

6.  The  dlBCovery  of  radium.  Mme  Curie  examined  the 
radio-activity  of  a  large  number  of  minerals  containing  uranium 

*  CampbeU  and  Wood,  Proc.  Camb,  Phil,  Soc,  14,  p.  15,  1907.     Campbell, 
Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  14,  p.  211,  1907. 


I] 


RADIO- ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES 


13 


and  thorium.  The  electrical  method  was  used,  and  the  current 
was  measured  between  two  parallel  plates  8  cms  in  diameter  and 
3  cms.  apart,  when  one  plate  was  covered  with  a  uniform  layer  of 
the  active  matter  in  a  powdered  state.  On  account  of  the  historical 
importance  of  these  measurements,  some  of  her  determinations  are 
given  below ;  the  numbers  give  the  order  of  the  saturation  or 
maximnm  current  i  in  amperes. 


Pitchblende  from 

I  Johanngeorgenstadt 

8-3x10-" 

»» 

Joachimsthal 

•  •  • 

7-0      „ 

>» 

Padbran 

•  •                •  •  • 

6-6      „ 

w 

Cornwall 

1  •  •                •  •  • 

1-6      „ 

Clevite 

t  •  •                •  •  • 

14      „ 

Chalcolite  ... 

1  •  •                •  •  • 

5-2      „ 

Autunite    ... 

1  •  •                •  •  • 

2-7       „ 

Camotite    ... 

»  •  •                •  •  • 

6-2      „ 

Thorite 

from  0-3  to  1*4      „ 

Qrangite     ... 

•  •  •                •  •  • 

1  •  •                 •  •  • 

2-0      „ 

Some  activity  is  to  be  expected  in  these  minerals,  since  they  all 
contain  either  uranium  or  thorium  or  a  mixture  of  both.  An 
examination  of  the  action  of  the  uranium  compounds  vdth  the 
same  apparatus  and  under  the  same  conditions  led  to  the  following 
lesnlts: 


Uranium  (containing  a  little  carbon) 

Black  oxide  of  uranium      

urFeen     ,,  ^  ...        ... 

Sulphate  of  uranium  and  potassium 
^LOcxavO  •••         ...         ...         ... 

Phosphate  of  copper  and  uranium 


2*3x10  ""amperes 

2-6 

1-8 

0-7 

0-7 

0-9 


>» 


}> 


J) 


» 


>» 


The  interesting  point  in  connection  with  these  results  is  that 
some  specimens  of  pitchblende  have  about  four  times  the  activity 
of  the  metal  uranium ;  chalcolite,  the  crystallised  phosphate  of 
copper  and  uranium,  is  twice  as  active  as  uranium ;  and  autunite, 
a  phosphate  of  calcium  and  uranium,  is  as  active  as  uranium. 
From  the  previous  considerations,  none  of  the  substances  should 
have  shown  as  much  activity  as  uranium  or  thorium.  In  order 
to  be  sure  that  the  large  activity  was  not  due  to  the  particular 
chemical  combination,  Mme  Curie  prepared  chalcolite  artificially, 
starting  with   pure  products.      This  artificial  chalcolite  had  the 


14  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

activity  to  be  expected  from  its  composition,  viz.  about  0*4  of  the 
activity  of  the  uranium.  The  natural  mineral  chalcolite  is  thus 
about  five  times  as  active  as  the  artificial  mineral. 

From  her  observations  of  the  activity  of  different  compounds 
of  uranium  Mme  Curie  concluded  that  the  radio-activity  of  uranium 
was  an  atomic  property,  i.e.  that  the  total  radiation  emitted  fix)m 
a  compound  was  proportional  to  the  amount  of  uranium  element 
present,  and  independent  of  its  combination  with  other  inactive 
substances.  The  observed  activity  of  thick  layers  of  the  compound 
is,  of  course,  to  some  extent  affected  by  the  amount  of  inactive 
elements  present.  On  this  view,  it  seemed  probable  that  the 
large  activity  of  some  of  these  minerals  compared  with  uranium 
and  thorium  must  be  due  to  the  presence  of  small  quantities  of 
an  unknown  element  or  elements  of  activity  greater  than  uranium 
and  thorium.  Relying  on  this  hypothesis,  M.  and  Mme  Curie 
proceeded  to  examine  whether  it  was  possible  to  separate  this 
unknown  active  substance  from  uranium  minerals.  Their  work 
was  completely  successful,  and  led  immediately  to  the  discovery  of 
two  new  substances  called  polonium  and  radium,  the  latter  of 
which  in  the  pure  state  is  now  known  to  have  an  activity  of  several 
million  times  that  shown  by  an  equal  weight  of  uranium. 

This  important  discovery  was  due  entirely  to  the  property  of 
radio-activity  possessed  by  the  new  bodies.  The  only  guide  in  their 
separation  was  the  activity  of  the  products  obtained.  In  this 
respect  the  discovery  of  these  bodies  is  quite  analogous  to  the 
discovery  of  rare  elements  by  the  methods  of  spectrum  analysis. 
The  method  employed  in  the  separation  consisted  in  examining 
the  relative  activity  of  the  products  after  chemical  treatment.  In 
this  way  it  was  seen  whether  the  radio-activity  was  confined  to 
one  or  another  of  the  products,  or  divided  between  both,  and  in 
what  ratio  such  division  occurred. 

The  activity  of  the  specimens  thus  served  as  a  basis  of  rough 
qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis,  analogous  in  some  respects 
to  the  indication  of  the  spectroscope.  To  obtain  comparative 
data  it  was  necessary  to  test  all  the  products  in  the  dry  state. 
The  chief  difficulty  lay  in  the  fact  that  pitchblende  is  a  very 
complex  mineral,  and  contains  in  varying  quantities  nearly  all  the 
known  metals. 


l]  RADIO-ACnVE  SUBSTANCES  15 

Following  the  procedure  sketched  above  M.  and  Mme  Curie* 
made  a  systematic  chemical  examination  of  the  constituents  of 
pitchblende.  The  mineral  was  first  obtained  in  solution  and  then 
put  through  a  regular  course  of  chemical  analysis.  On  precipi- 
tating with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  it  was  found  that  an  active 
sabstance  was  separated  with  the  bismuth.  By  special  methods, 
preparations  of  bismuth  were  obtained  of  high  activity.  The  name 
polonium  was  given  by  Mme  Curie  to  this  new  active  substance 
present  in  bismuth  in  honour  of  the  country  of  her  birth. 

It  was  next  observed  that  another  active  substance  was 
separated  with  barium,  and  to  this  was  given  the  name  of  radium  f. 
This  name  was  a  happy  inspiration  of  the  discoverers,  for  radium 
in  a  pure  state  shows  the  radio-active  property  to  an  astonishing 
degree.  Radium  is  extracted  from  pitchblende  and  uranium 
minerals  generally  by  the  same  process  required  to  separate 
barium,  to  which  radium  is  very  closely  allied  in  chemical  pro- 
perties. After  the  removal  of  inactive  impurities,  the  radium 
remains  behind  mixed  with  the  barium.  Jt  can  h^  pftc.*^^^°^1 
separated  from  the  latter  by  the  difference  in  solubilitv  oj 
cHondes  in  water,  alcohol,  or  hydrochloric  acid.  The  chloride.of^ 
radium  is  less  soluble  than  that  of  barium,  and  can  be  separated 
from  It  by  the  method  of  fractional  crystallisation.  After  a  large 
Damt)er  of  tractionations,  the  radium  can  be  freed  almost  com- 
pletely from  the  barium.  Qiesel^  observed  later  that  separation 
of  radium  from  barium  proceeded  much  more  rapidly  if  tne  bromide 
were  used  instead  of  the  chloride.  He  found  that  six  or  eight 
'crystallisations  of  the  bromide  are  sufficient  to  free  the  radium 
almost  completely  from  the  barium. 

In  order  to  obtain  sufficient  radium  to  determine  its  atomic 
weight  and  other  properties,  it  was  necessary  to  carry  out  the 
chemical  work  on  a  large  scale,  for  radium  is  present  in  very 
minute  amount  in  pitchblende.  It  will  be  shown  later  that  the 
weight  of  radium  in  most  radio-active  minerals  is  always  pro- 
portional to  the  weight  of  uranium.    The  amount  of  radium  presen,t 

•  P.  and  S.  Curie,  C.  R.  127,  p.  176,  1898. 
t  U.  and  Mme  Garie  and  G.  B^mont,  C.  R.  127,  p.  1215,  1898. 
;  Oiesel,   Ann,  d.  Phyt.  69,  p.  91,  1890 ;  Ber,  d.  D.   Chem.   Ges,   p.  3608, 
1902. 


16  RADIO-ACnVlB  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

is  about  3*4  partg  in  10,000,000  of  uranium  element*.    Consg; 
quently  in  a  mineral  containing  3  kilograms  ot  uranium  there  la 

jr^^nt.  1  milHpp^m  nf  ruHinm       Tn  ]  ftOQ  kiloprams  of  Joachimsthal 

pify*hK1<anHp^  wKiVh  pnntAins  aKo]]t|  ^Q  per  cent,  of  uranium,  there 
_is  present  about  200  milligrams  of  radium.  Mme  Curie  was 
indebted  for  her  first  workmg  material  u>  the  Austrian  Govern- 
ment, who  generously  presented  her  with  a  ton  of  uranium  residues 
from  the  state  mine  of  Joachimsthal  in  Bohemia.  At  this  place 
there  are  considerable  deposits  of  pitchblende  or  uraninite,  which 
are  mined  for  the  uranium  they  contain.  In  addition,  financial 
assistance  was  given  by  scientific  societies  and  private  individuals 
to  defi^y  the  expenses  of  the  long  and  laborious  work  of  the 
separation  of  the  radium  from  these  residues.  It  would  be  out  of 
place  in  a  physical  treatise  of  this  kind  to  give  the  chemical 
details  of  working  up  the  uranium  residues.  An  excellent  account 
was  initially  given  by  Mme  Curie  f  and  later  by  Haitinger  and 
Ulrich^,  who  were  responsible  for  separation  of  the  radium  and 
other  radio-active  constituents  from  the  uranium  residues  obtained 
firom  Joachimsthal 

Mme  Curie  states  that  after  treatment  of  the  residues  the 
activity  of  the  radiferous  barium  is  30  to  60  times  as  great  as 
uranium.  The.  radium  is  then  separated  by  firactional  crystal- 
lisation, by  the  methods  described  above.  Mme  Curie  finally 
succeeded  in  separating  about  a  decigram  of  pure  radium  salt ; 
the  atomic  weight  was  determined,  and  found  initially  to  be  225 
and  later  226*5. 

Radium  was  found  to  give  a  characteristic  bright  line  spectrum. 
Recently  Mme  Curie  and  Dr.  Debieme  have  succeeded  in  preparing 
metallic  radium.  There  is  thus  no  doubt  that  radium  is  a  new 
chemical  element  of  high  atomic  weight,  with  chemical  properties 
closely  allied  to  those  of  barium.  It  differs,  however,  from  ordinary 
elements  in  possessing  the  radio-active  property  to  an  intense 
degree. 

It  has  been  thought  desirable  to  give  a  complete  and  collected 
account  of  the  properties  of  radium,  and  the  other  radio-active 

*  Rutherford  and  Boltwood,  Amer.  Joum.  Set.  22,  p.  1,  1906 ;   26,  p.  26^,  1908. 
t  Mme  Curie,  Thbset  pri»ent6e  tk  la  FaculU  des  Sciences  de  Parist  1903. 
X  HaitiDger  and  Ulrich,  Wien,  Ber.  117,  p.  619,  1908. 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  17 

substances  in  the  chapters  devoted  to  that  subject  later  in  the 
book.  At  this  stage  a  preliminary  account  only  wUl  be  given. 
Radium  like  uranium  and  thorium  emits  a,  0,  and  7  ray&  On 
account  of  its  great  activity  the  photographic,  phosphorescent  and 
electric  effects  produced  by  the  radiations  are  exceedingly  intense. 
A  few  milligrams  of  radium  salt  produce  a  well-marked  photo- 
graphic action  in  less  than  a  minute  on  a  plate  brought  near  it. 
The  a  rays  light  up  brightly  a  screen  of  phosphorescent  zinc 
sulphide  or  of  willemite,  while  the  )8  and  7  rays  produce  a  well- 
marked  phosphorescence  in  barium-platino-cyanide  and  willemite. 
The  discharging  effects  are  on  a  very  marked  scale.  1/1000  of  a 
milligram  of  radium  causes  an  almost  instantaneous  discharge  of 
an  electroscope,  when  it  is  brought  near  the  charged  plate.  A  few 
miUigrams  of  radium  surrounded  by  a  lead  screen  several  milli<p 
metres  thick,  so  as  to  stop  the  a  and  /3  rays,  causes  a  rapid  discharge 
of  the  electroscope  due  to  the  7  rays  alone. 

We  shall  see  later  that  the  emission  of  7  rays  from  radium  vq. 
eqoiUbrium  has  been  utilised  as  an  accurate  method  of  determining 
the  quantity  of  radium  present,  even  though  it  lb  contained  in  a 
sealed  tube.  Pure  radium  compounds  give  a  weak  phosphorescence 
onder  the  influence  of  their  own  radiations.  This  luminosity 
is  more  marked  in  barium-radium  preparations  than  in  radium 
itself 

Shortly  after  the  discovery  of  radium,  the  Curies  arranged  that 
preparations  of  barium  containing  radium  could  be  bought  com- 
mercially through  the  Soci^t^  Centrale  de  Produits  Chimiques. 
This  company  under  the  direction  of  Debieme  initially  undertook 
the  work  of  treatment  of  pitchblende  residues  for  the  Curies. 
Many  of  the  initial  experiments  on  the  properties  and  radiations 
60m  radium  were  made  with  this  material  We  are  indebted  to 
Dr  Giesel,  Chemist  of  the  Chininfabrik,  Braunschweig,  for  first 
patting  preparations  of  nearly  pure  radium  salt  on  the  market. 
)(aoy  scientific  workers  in  this  way  obtained  nearly  pure  radium 
bromide  at  a  price  initially  of  lees  than  one-tenth  of  the  prices 
to-day.  The  exceedingly  high  prices  of  radium  at  the  pres^it 
day  (about  £16  per  milligram  pure  radium  bromide)  bear  no 
idation  to  the  cost  of  separation  of  the  radium  from  uranium 
minerals.      The  present  price  is  ^tificial   and  has  resulted  in 

B.  R.-A.  2 


18  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

part  fix)m  the  comparative  rarity  of  deposits  of  pitchblende  or  of 
uranium  minerals  containing  a  birly  high  percentage  of  uranium. 
The  extensive  use  of  radium  for  medical  purposes,  as  well  as  for 
physical  and  chemical  experiments,  has  so  far  absorbed  the  output. 
At  the  same  time,  the  undoubtedly  large  profits  to  be  realised  at 
the  present  prices  have  led  to  a  very  careful  search  for  uranium 
deposits  in  various  countries.  It  is  known  that  there  are  extensive 
deposits  of  low  grade  uranium  ores  in  various  parts  of  the  world, 
and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  in  the  immediate  future  methods 
will  be  devised  of  treatment  of  such  ores.  There  seems  to  be 
no  reason  why  the  present  abnormally  high  prices  of  radium 
should  be  ultimately  maintained. 

It  is  known  that  radium  is  only  one  of  a  number  of  highly 
active  substances  that  can  be  separated  from  uranium  minerals. 
The  prominence  of  radium  as  a  source  of  intense  radiations  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  it  can  be  isolated  easily  in  nearly  a  pure  state  from 
uranium  minerals.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  radiations  from 
radium  as  ordinarily  used  are  due  largely  not  to  the  radium  itself 
but  to  the  radio-active  products  produced  in  it.  For  example, 
radium  itself  emits  only  a  rays  and  has  only  about  one-fifth  of  the 
a  ray  activity  of  radium  which  is  about  one  month  old.  The 
penetrating  /3  and  7  rays  arise  entirely  from  the  products  of  radium. 
Radium,  like  thorium,  produces  a  radio-active  emanation,  which 
can  be  released  frt>m  the  radium  by  heating  or  dissolving  it.  This 
intensely  radio-active  gas,  which  contains  more  than  three-quarters 
of  the  activity  of  the  radium  from  which  it  is  derived,  has  been 
widely  used  as  a  source  of  radiation  in  place  of  radium  itself.  The 
use  of  the  emanation  possesses  many  advantages  as  a  source  of 
radiation,  for  it  can  be  readily  transferred  frt)m  one  vessel  to 
another  and  highly  concentrated.  The  radium  itself  is  then  merely 
used  as  a  source  for  production  of  the  emanation,  and  is  not  dis- 
seminated and  lost  by  use  in  a  multitude  of  experiments.  The 
activity  of  the  emanation  is  not  permanent  but  decays  to  half 
value  in  3'85  days,  and  becomes  very  small  after  a  month's 
interval 

7.  Actinium,  The  discovery  of  radium  in  pitchblende  gave 
a  great  impetus  to  the  chemical  examination   of  this  mineral. 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  19 

and  a  systematic  search  early  led  to  the  detection  of  several  new 
radio-active  bodies.  Debieme*  in  1899,  while  working  up  the 
uranium  residues  for  M.  and  Mme  Curie,  discovered  the  presence 
of  a  new  active  substance  which  he  stated  was  precipitated  with 
the  iron  group  of  elements,  and  had  chemical  properties  closely 
allied  to  thorium,  but  the  activity  of  the  preparation  was  found  to 
be  many  thousand  times  greater  than  that  of  thorium.  This  new 
substance  was  called  by  him  actinium.  After  the  announcement  of 
his  discovery  several  years  elapsed  before  any  definite  results  upon 
it  were  published  by  Debieme.  In  the  meantime,  Gieseli*  had 
found  that  a  very  active  substance  was  separated  from  pitchblende 
which  seemed  similar  in  some  respects  to  the  actinium  of  Debieme. 
This  active  substance  was  separated  with  the  rare  earths,  and 
afiier  chemical  treatment  the  active  substance  was  associated  mainly 
with  lanthanum.  Giesel  early  observed  a  very  striking  property 
of  sach  preparations  for  they  continuously  emit  a  radio-active 
emanation,  the  activity  of  which  decays  to  half  value  in  a  few 
seconds.  For  this  reason  he  initially  gave  it  the  name  "  emanating 
substance,"  and  later  "emanium."  It  is  not  necessary  here  to 
enter  into  the  details  of  the  discussion  which  took  place  in  regard 
to  the  identity  of  actinium  with  emanium.  Ultimately,  it  was 
shown  that  the  preparations  of  Debieme  and  Oiesel  were  identical 
in  radio-active  properties,  and  the  name  actinium  was  retained  for 
the  new  substance.  The  emanating  property  of  actinium  observed 
bjr  Giesel  can  be  illustrated  by  a  very  striking  experiment.  A 
highly  active  preparation  of  actinium  enclosed  in  thin  tissue  paper 
is  placed  on  a  screen  of  phosphorescent  zinc  sulphide.  In  a  dark 
room  a  brilliant  phosphorescence,  marked  by  characteristic  scintil- 
lations, extends  for  some  distance  firom  the  active  preparation. 
On  directing  a  slight  current  of  air  across  the  screen,  the  phos- 
phorescence is  displaced  in  the  direction  of  the  air  current,  and 
becomes  much  feebler.  A  large  part  of  the  phosphorescence  ob- 
served initially  was  due  to  the  actinium  emanation  which  diffused 
through  the  thin  paper  over  the  surface  of  the  screen.  When  the 
air  current  ceases,  the  emanation  which  is  constantly  supplied  by 

•  Debieme,  C.  R,  129,  p.  698,  1899 ;  180,  p.  206,  1900. 

t  Gieeel,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Oet.  p.  8608, 1902 ;  p.  842,  1903. 

2—2 


20  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

the  actinium,  rapidly  diflfuses  over  the  screen  and  lights  it  up 
again  brightly. 

There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  actinium  is  a  new  element 
which  possesses  the  radiating  property  to  a  degree  at  least  com- 
parable with  that  of  radium.  Although  by  special  methods  very 
active  preparations  of  actinium  have  been  obtained,  it  has  not  yet 
been  found  possible  to  isolate  it ;  consequently  neither  the  atomic 
weight  nor  spectrum  of  this  element  is  yet  known. 

In  addition  to  the  emission  of  a  characteristic  emanation, 
actinium  preparations  some  months  old  emit  a,  0,  and  7  rajrs. 
The  7  rays,  however,  are  less  penetrating  than  those  from  radium 
or  thorium.  It  will  be  shown  later  that  actinium,  like  radium, 
gives  rise  to  a  series  of  active  products. 

8.  Polonium.  We  have  already  mentioned  that  polonium 
was  the  first  active  substance  separated  by  Mme  Curie*  bom 
uranium  minerals.  In  chemical  properties,  it  is  allied  to  bis- 
muth, and  is  ordinarily  separated  with  it.  Mme  Curie  showed 
that  it  was  possible  to  concentrate  the  polonium  by  several  methods 
and  to  obtain  preparations  of  polonium  of  high  activity.  Polonium 
possesses  the  peculiarity  of  emitting  only  a  rays;  its  activity  is 
not  permanent  but  decays  with  the  time,  &lling  to  half  value  in 
about  140  days.  Consequently,  a  few  years  after  separation^ 
polonium  preparations  have  lost  the  greater  part  of  their  activity. 

In  1903  Marckwaldf  found  that  a  very  active  substance  could 
be  separated  from  the  residues  of  uranium  minerals  by  placing  & 
polished  bismuth  plate  in  a  suitably  prepared  solution.  The  active 
matter  deposited  on  the  bismuth  plate  was  found  to  be  associated 
with  tellurium,  and  for  this  reason  was  initially  called  "radio- 
tellurium."  By  special  methods  Marckwald  separated  the  polonium 
from  the  residues  corresponding  to  15  tons  of  pitchblende,  and 
finally  obtained  several  milligrams  of  a  preparation  far  more  active, 
weight  for  weight,  than  pure  radium.  He  found  that  the  active 
matter  had  no  connection  with  tellurium,  and  could  be  completely 
isolated  from  it.  Marckwald  initially  thought  that  his  preparations 
did  not,  like  polonium,  lose  their  activity  with  time.      In  later 

•  M.  and  Mme  Curia,  CB.  127,  p.  175,  1898. 

t  Marckwald,  Pfa/«.  Zeit.  4,  p.  51,  1908;  Ber,  d.  D.  Chem,  Get,  p.  2662.  1903. 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  21 

I  investigatioiis  by  himself  and  others  it  was  shown  that  the  rate  of 
decay  of  mdio-tellurium  was  identical  with  that  of  the  polonium 
of  Hme  Curie,  and  there  is  now  no  doubt  that  the  radio-active 
substances  were  identical  Highly  active  preparations  of  polonium 
OD  a  polished  bismuth  disc  or  rod  were,  some  years  ago,  placed  on 
the  market.  Recently,  Mme  Curie  has  made  further  experiments 
to  isolate  polonium,  obtaining  preparations  of  very  great  activity, 
and  has  determined  some  of  the  lines  of  its  spectrum.  The 
quantity  of  polonium  in  pitchblende  is  only  about  1/5000  of  that 
of  radium,  and  it  will  be  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  to  obtain 
a  sufficient  quantity  of  this  substance  to  determine  its  atomic 
weight  It  will  be  shown  later  that  polonium  itself  is  one  of  the 
series  of  products  resulting  from  the  transformation  of  radium. 

9.  Radio-lead.  Several  observers*  noted  that  the  lead 
separated  firom  pitchblende  showed  considerable  activity.  This 
was  at  first  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  small  quantities  of  radium 
and  polonium.  Hofmann  and  Strauss  f,  however,  concluded  that 
lead  separated  firom  uranium  minerals  contained  a  new  active 
substance  which  they  called  radio-lead.  Later  work  has  shown 
that  this  active  material  has  a  slow  rate  of  transformation,  and  is 
identical  with  jbhe  product  radium  D  derived  from  the  trans- 
formation of  radium.  It  has  not  so  &r  been  found  possible  to 
concentrate  to  any  degree  the  active  matter  separated  with  the 
lead  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  preparations  of  radio-lead  serve 
as  very  convenient  sources  of  polonium.  In  a  solution  of  radio- 
lead,  polonium  is  produced  at  a  constant  rate.  The  polonium 
present  at  any  time  can  be  separated  by  placing  a  bismuth  plate 
in  the  solution. 

10.  Ionium.  Bolt  wood  I  in  1907  discovered  the  presence  of 
another  radio-active  substance  in  uranium  minerals,  which  he 
called  ionium.  This  substance  has  chemical  properties  so  closely 
allied  ¥rith  thorium  that  it  has  not  been  found  possible  to  separate 

*  Elster  and  Geitd,  Ann,  d.  Phyi.  %%,  p.  88,  1899.  Giesel,  Ber,  d,  D.  Ghem. 
(iti.  p.  3775.  1901. 

t  Hofmann  and  Strauss,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem,  Get.  p.  3035,  1901. 

:  Boltwood,  Amer.  Joum.  Sci.  M,  p.  370,  1907;  30,  pp.  365,  493,  1908;  and 
Phyi.  Zeit,  8,  p.  884, 1907. 


22  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

them  from  each  other.  Ionium  emits  only  a  rays,  and  has  apparently 
a  very  slow  period  of  transformation.  Commercial  preparations  of 
actinium  have  been  found  in  most  cases  to  contain  ionium.  There  is 
reason  to  believe  that  ionium  exists  in  greater  quantity  in  uranium 
minerals  than  radium,  but  it  has  not  yet  been  found  possible  to 
isolate  it.  Ionium  has  a  special  interest,  as  it  is  a  direct  parent 
of  radium.  A  preparation  of  ionium  initially  freed  from  radium 
is  found  to  grow  radium  at  a  rapid  rate. 

11.  Other  radio-active  substanceB.  A  brief  account  has 
so  far  been  given  of  the  radio-activity  of  thorium  and  of  uranium, 
and  of  the  radio-active  substances  separated  from  uranium 
minerals.  With  the  exception  of  ionium,  the  presence  of  these 
substances  was  detected  early  in  the  history  of  radio-activity. 
In  addition  to  these,  however,  a  large  number  of  other  radio- 
active substances  are  now  known.  Substances  like  uranium, 
thorium,  radium,  and  ionium  show  a  fairly  permanent  activity, 
for  no  change  can  be  detected  over  an  interval  of  several  years. 
Most  of  the  other  substances  show  only  a  temporary  activity, 
and  their  activity  largely  disappears  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours 
or  months.  It  may  be  not  out  of  place  here  to  summarize 
briefly  the  general  properties  of  these  bodies.  .  Ekich  of  these 
substances  has  distinctive  chemical  and  physical  properties  and 
emits  radiations  of  a  characteristic  type,  and  loses  its  activity 
at  a  distinctive  rate.  These  substances  undergo  spontaneous 
transformation  and  are  to  be  regarded  as  transition  elements, 
that  is,  elements  which  exist  only  for  a  short  time.  The  law 
of  transformation  is  the  same  for  all  these  substances,  although 
the  rate  varies  in  each  individual  case.  This  is  expressed  by 
the  statement  that  the  element  is  transformed  according  to  an 
exponential  law.  For  example,  if  Kq  be  the  number  of  atoms  of 
the  substance  present  initially  and  Nt  the  number  after  an 
interval  t  then  Jf^t/^o  =  ^~^'  where  X  is  a  definite  constant  charac- 
teristic of  the  element  and  e  is  the  base  of  natural  logarithms. 
It  is  convenient  to  express  the  rate  of  transformation  in  terms  of 
the  half  value  period,  that  is,  the  time  required  for  half  the 
matter  to  be  transformed  For  example,  if  T  be  the  half  value 
period,  half  of  the  matter  remains  untransformed  after  a  time  T, 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  23 

one-quarter  after  2T,  one-eighth  after  a  time  ST,  and  so  on. 
Including  the  primary  active  substances,  more  than  thirty  of 
these  transition  elements  are  now  known.  From  the  purely 
scientific  point  of  view,  each  of  these  elements  of  short  life  is 
intrinsically  as  important  as  radium  or  the  other  elements  which 
are  transformed  more  slowly,  for  the  production  of  each  substance 
marks  a  definite  stage  in  the  series  of  transformations  which  take 
place  in  the  atoms.  All  the  radio-active  substances,  whether  of 
long  or  short  life,  are  undergoing  spontaneous  atomic  transfor- 
mation. For  example,  radium  itself  is  a  transition  element  which 
is  produced  by  the  transformation  of  ionium,  which  in  turn  is 
derived  fit)m  uranium. 

These  new  substances  are  most  conveniently  tabulated  as 
products  of  the  more  permanent  element  from  which  they 
originate.  In  the  following  tables,  the  products  of  uranium, 
thorium,  and  actinium,  are  tabulated  for  convenience  of  reference 
in  later  chapters.  The  radiation  emitted  from  the  product  and 
its  half  value  period  are  also  added.  In  each  of  these  series 
the  product  imder  consideration  is  produced  from  the  one  above 
it  and  is  transformed  into  the  one  succeeding  it.  The  tables 
also  show  the  connection  between  uranium,  ionium,  and  radium. 
The  properties  and  mode  of  separation  of  these  series  of  products 
are  discussed  in  detail  in  later  chapters.  In  the  tables,  the  names 
of  products  which  have  a  half  value  period  larger  than  100  days 
are  given  in  larger  print. 

The  problem  of  giving  specific  names  to  such  a  large  number 
of  new  substances  has  been  very  difficult.  It  is  obviously  im- 
portant that  the  name  of  the  series  to  which  the  element  belongs 
should  be  given.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  products  of  the 
emanations  of  thorium,  actinium,  and  radium  are  called  by  the 
letters  A,  B,  C,  or  D,  etc.  added  to  that  of  the  parent  element. 
The  nomenclature  of  the  earlier  products  is  not  so  systematic, 
many  of  these  products  have  been  discovered  comparatively  late, 
and  it  has  been  difficult  to  arrange  for  the  uniformity  of  the 
nomenclature  of  the  difierent  series  without  producing  confusion. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  there  is  as  yet  no  certainty  that  all 
the  products  present  have  been  detected.  At  the  same  time  there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  no  product  emitting  a  rays  in  the  main 


24 


RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES 


[< 


line  of  descent  remains  undiscovered,  but  there  is  still  some  doi 
in  regard  to  possible  /3  ray  products  and  products  which  m 
appear  as  lateral  branches  of  the  main  series. 


List  of  radio-active  substa/nces. 


Element 

Radiation 

Half  yalae  period 

URANIUM 

a 

6xl0»  years 

Uranium  X^ 

Uranium  Y) 

P-k-y 

24*6  days 

P 

1-5  days 

IONIUM       

a 

greater  than 
20,000  years 

RADIUM      

a -4- slow  /3 

2000  years 

Emanation     

a 

3*85  days 

Radium  A      

a 

3  minutes 

Radium  B      

P+y 

26*8  minutes 

Radium  C  J    * 

a+fi+y 

19*5  minutes 
1*4  minutes 

RADIUM  D     1 
RADIO-LEAD  /      •" 

slowiS 

16*5  years 

Radium  E      

i3+y 

5  days 

RADIUM  F  1 

polonium! 

a 

136  days 

ACTINIUM 

no  rays 

1 

1 

Radio-actinium 

a+P 

19*5  days 

Actinium  X 

a 

10*5  days 

Emanation 

a 

3*9  seconds 

Actinium  A 

a 

•002  second 

Actinium  B 

alow  p 

36  minutes 

Actinium  C 

a 

2*1  minutes 

Actinium  D 

/3+y 

3*47  minute8 

I] 


KADIO-ACnVE  SUBSTANCES 


25 


List  of  radio-iieHve  aubttances  (continued). 


Element 

Radiation 

Half  value  period 

,   THORIUM 

a 

3xl0>®year8 

MESOTHORIUM  1 

no  rays 

6*5  years 

Mesothorium  2 

/3+y 

6-2  hours 

RADIOTHORIUM 

a 

2  years 

'   Thorium  X    

a+P 

3*64  days 

EiDADation     

a 

64  seconds 

Thorium  A     

a 

0-14  second 

Thorium  B     

slow  /3 

10*6  hours 

Thorium  C      * 
.  Cf 

a 
a 

60  minutes 
very  rapid? 

Thorium  D    

/9+y 

3*1  minutes 

CHAPTER   II. 

lONISATION  OF  GASES. 

12.  lonisation  of  gBMes  by  radiation.  The  most  impoi 
property  possessed  by  the  radiations  from  radio-active  matt* 
their  power  of  discharging  bodies  whether  positively  or  negati 
electrified.  As  this  property  has  been  made  the  basis  of  a  me 
for  an  accurate  quantitative  analysis  and  comparison  of 
radiations,  the  variation  of  the  rate  of  discharge  under  diffe 
conditions  and  the  processes  underlying  it  will  be  considere 
some  detail. 

In  order  to  explain  the  similar  discharging  power  of  Ron 
rays,  the  theory*  has  been  put  ^^K*irth 

forward    that    the    rays    pro-     _  f 

duce  positively  and  negatively  , 

charged     carriers     throughout  + 

the   volume    of  the   gas   sur-  \ 

rounding  the  charged  body,  and    >.^.^l^..^^.CgL. 

(t.hftt  t.liP   rfl.t.A   nf  prnHnnt.^'^y^   fa 
proportional  tn  ihP'.  intftnsity  of 

the  radiation.  These  carriers, 
or  ionsf  as  they  have  been  termed,  move  with  a  uniform  vel 
through  the  gas  under  a  constant  electric  field,  and  their  vel 
varies  directly  as  the  strength  of  the  field. 

Suppose  we  have  a  gas  between  two  metal  plates  A  ai 
(Fig.  1)  exposed  to  the  radiation,  and  that  the  plates  are 

*  J.  J.  Thomson  and  Bntherford,  Phil.  Mag.  42,  p.  392, 1896. 

t  The  word  ion  has  now  been  generaUy  adopted  in  the  literature  of  the  si 

Tn  nwiny  ^his  word,  it  i«  nnt  a^ttnmftH  that  the  ^nna  in  yases  are  the  sayie 
<fflrpHipnnaing  innw  in  the  electrolvflia  of  solntipna. 


ceh]  ionisation  of  gases  27 

at  a  constant  difference  of  potential     A  definite  number  of  ions 
will  be  produced  per  second  by  the  radiation,  and  the  number 

produced  will  depend  in  general  iip^n  tl^  natiirp.  and  prftawnrft  of 

thfi.gas.  In  the  electric  field  the  positive  ions  travel  towards  the 
negative  plate,  and  the  negative  ions  towards  the  positive,  and 
consequently  a  current  will  pass  through  the  gas.  Some  of  the 
ions  will  also  recombine,  the  mt^  nf  iw»nmhinAtion  K^iTig  pmpor. 
tigpal  to  the  square  of  the  nnrnhf  ^  pfftspnt;  For  a  given  intensity 
of  radiation,  the  current  passing  through  the  gas  will  increase  at 
first  with  the  potential  difference  between  the  plates,  but  it  will 
reach  a  limit  when  all  the  ions  are  removed  by  the  electric  field 
bef(»%  any  recombination  occurs. 

This  theory  accounts  also  for  all  the  characteristic  properties  of 
gases  made  conducting  by  the  rays  fix)m  active  substances,  though 
there  are  certain  differences  observed  between  the  conductivity 
phenomena  produced  by  active  substances  and  by  X  rays.  These 
di&rences  are  in  part  the  result  of  unequal  absorption  of  the  two 
types  of  rays.  Unlike  Bontgen  rays,  a  large  proportion  of  the 
iidiation  finom  active  bodies  consists  of  rays  which  are  absorbed 
in  their  passage  through  a  few  centimetres  of  air.  The  ionisation 
of  the  gas  is  thus  not  uniform,  but  &lls  off  rapidly  with  increase  of 
distance  from  the  active  substance.  In  addition,  there  are  marked 
differences  in  the  distribution  of  ions  produced  by  X  rays  and  by 
srays. 

13.  Variation  of  the  current  with  voltage.  Suppose  that 
a  layer  of  radio-active  matter  is  spread  uniformly  on  the  lower  of 
two  horizontal  plates  A  and  JB  (Fig.  1).  The  lower  plate  A  is 
connected  with  one  pole  of  a  battery  of  cells  the  other  pole  of  which 
ia  connected  with  earth.  The  plate  B  is  connected  with  one  pair  of 
(joadrants  of  an  electrometer,  the  other  pair  being  connected  with 
earth. 

The  current*  between  the  plates,  determined  by  the  rate  of 
movement  of  the  electrometer  needle,  is  observed  at  first  to  in- 
creaae  rapidly  with  the  voltage,  then  more  slowly,  finally  reaching 

*  A  minnte  cairent  is  observed  between  the  plates  even  if  no  radio-active  matter 
W  ialrodiioed.  This  has  been  found  to  be  dae  mainly  to  a  slight  natural  radio- 
MiiTitj  of  the  matter  composing  them. 


28  lONISATION  OF  GASES  [CH. 

a  value  which  increases  very  slightly  with  a  large  increase  in  the 
voltage.  This,  as  we  have  indicated,  is  simply  explained  on  the 
ionisation  theory.  > 

The  radiation  produces  ions  at  a  constant  rate,  and,  before  the 
electric  field  is  applied,  the  number  per  unit  volume  increases 
tuntil  the  rate  of  production  of  fi'esh  ions  is  exactly  balanced  by  the 
|recombination  of  the  ions  already  produced.  On  application  of  a 
small  electric  field,  the  positive  ions  travel  to  the  negative  electrode 
and  the  negative  to  the  positive. 

Since  the  velocity  of  the  ions  between  the  plates  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  electric  field,  in  a  weak  field 
the  ions  take  so  long  to  travel  between  the  electrodes  that  most  of 
them  recombine  on  the  w^. 

The  current  observed  is  consequently  small.  With  increase  of 
the  voltage  there  is  an  increase  of  speed  of  the  ions  and  a  smaller 
number  recombine.  The  current  consequently  increases,  and  will 
reach  a  maximum  value  when  the  electric  field  is  sufficiently 

occurred.  The  value  of  the  current  will  then  remain  constant  even 
though  the  voltage  is  largely  increased. 

This  maximum  current  will  be  called  the  "aatumtinn"  current, 
and  the  value  of  the  potential  difference  required  to  give  this 
maximum  current,  the  "aa.t.iimtinn  p.d."*  or  "saturation  voltage.*" 

The  general  shape  of  the  current-voltage  curve  is  shown  in 
Fig.  2,  where  the  ordinates  represent  current  and  the  abscissae 
volts. 

Although  the  variation  of  the  current  with  voltage  depends 
nnly  on  the  vftlncity  of  the  ions  and  their  rate  of  rftoombinfttinn, 

the  full  mathematical  analysis  is  intricate,  and  the  equations, 
expressing  the  relation  between  current  and  voltage,  are  only 
integrable  for  the  case  of  uniform  ionisation.  The  question  i« 
complicated  by  the  inequality  in  the  velocity  of  the  ions  and  bj 
the  disturbance   of  the   potential   gradient   between  the   platef 

*  ^is  nomenclature  has  arisen  from  the  similarity  of  the  shape  of  the  oorrent 
voltage  carves  to  the  magnetization  carves  for  iron.  Since,  on  the  ionisatioi 
theory,  the  mazimam  current  is  a  result  of  the  removal  of  all  the  ions  from  the  gac 
before  recombination  occurs,  the  terms  are  not  very  suitable.  They  have  howeve 
now  come  into  general  use  and  will  be  retained  throughout  this  work. 


]  lOKISATION  OF  OASES  29 

y  the  movement  of  the  ions.  J.  J.  Thomson*  has  worked  out 
he  case  for  uniform  production  of  ions  between  two  parallel 
)lates,  and  has  found  that  the  relation  between  the  current  i 
md  the  applied  potential  difference  V  is  expressed  by 

where  A  and  B  are  constants  for  a  definite  intensity  of  radiation 
and  a  definite  distance  between  the  plates. 

In  certain  cases  of  uns}rmmetrical  ionisation,  which  arise  in  the 
study  of  the  radiations  from  active  bodies,  the  relation  between 
current  and  voltage  is  very  different  fi-om  that  expressed  by 
the  above  equation.  Some  of  these  cases  will  be  considered  in 
section  28. 


While  the  equation  expressing  the  relation  between  the  current 
vA  the  voltage  is  very  complicated  even  in  the  case  of  a  uniform 
nte  of  production  of  ions  between  the  plates,  an  approximate 
theory,  which  is  of  utility  in  interpreting  the  experimental  results, 
OD  be  simply  deduced  if  the  disturbance  of  the  potential  gradient 
ii  disregarded,  and  the  ionisation  assumed  uniform  between  the 
plates. 

Suppose  that  the  ions  are  produced  at  a  constant  rate  q  per 
cubic  centimetre  per  second  in  the  gas  between  parallel  plates 
distant  I  cms.  fix)m  each  other.     When  no  electric  field  is  applied, 

•  J.   J.   Thomson,  PhU,  Mag.  47,   p.  253,   1899 ;    Conduction  of  EUctricity 
tknugk  Gatet^  ehapter  in,  2iid  edition. 


30  lONISATION  OF  OASES  [CS. 

the  number  N  present  per  cc,  when  there  is  equilibrium  between. 

the  rates  of  production  and  recombination,  is  given  by  5=5  aJP^ 

where  a  is  a  constant. 

If  a  small  potential  diflFerence  V  is  applied,  which  gives  only  ik 

small  fraction  of  the  maximum  current,  and  consequently  has  not 

much  effect  on  the  value  of  N,  the  current  %  per  sq.  cm.  of  th© 

plate,  is  given  by 

.     NeuV 


»i  = 


I 


where  u  is  the  sum  of  the  velocity  of  the  ions  for  unit  potential 

uV 
gradient,  and  e  is  the  charge  carried  by  an  ion.     -j-  is  the  velocity 

V 
of  the  ions  in  the  electric  field  of  strength  y . 

The  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  in  a  prism  of  length  i 
and  unit  area  of  cross-section  is  ql.  The  maximum  or  saturatioa 
current  /  per  sq.  cm.  of  the  plate  is  obtained  when  all  of  these 
ions  are  removed  to  the  electrodes  before  any  recombination  hafl 
occurred. 

Thus  •  7  «  g .  Z .  e, 

%     NuV      uV 

This  equation  expresses  the  fact  previously  noted  that,  for  sisal] 

voltages,  thft  fiiirrent  1  is  proportional  tO  K 


T  * 

Let  J^  P> 

then  r^P^^^. 

U 

It  is  of  importance  in  many  experiments  to  determine  (he 
saturation  current  through  an  ionised  gas,  as  this  is  a  direct 
measure  of  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  in  the  volume  of  gas 
considered.    The  potential  required  to  produce  saturation  depeiuls 

upon  a  number   of  conditions — npnn   thp>   jntenaity  nf  inn^flii.fcfftn^ 

the  distance  Kot.iyApn  th^  plat.P«^  and  the  Jiatuig_aiid..f£^adre 
nf  thfii  gy-q.     The  value  of  the  saturation  p.d.  is  in  general  diflScmlt 


Il]  lONISATION  OF  GASES  31 

to  cftlcolate,  and  it  is  desirable  in  all  cases  to  determine  it  ex- 
perimentally. From  the  equation  given  above,  the  variation  of 
the  saturation  voltage  with  conditions  can  be  simply  deduced. 
The  greater  the  value  of  V  required  to  obtain  a  given  value  of  p, 
supposed  small  compared  with  unity,  the  greater  is  the  saturation 
Toltage.  It  follows  from  this  that  for  a  given  intensity  of  ionisa- 
tion  the  saturation  voltage  increases  with  the  distance  between 
the  plates.  In  the  equation  for  small  values  of  p,  V  varies  as  l\ 
This  holds  for  uniform  ionisation,  but  only  approximately  for 
non-uniform  ionisation. 

For  a  given  distance  between  the  plates,  the  satuiatimijcaltage 

inrrMWPg  wit.li    f.liP   int-Pnaify   nf  inniqatmn       Using  a   Very  active 

material,  for  example,  a  radium  preparation,  the.  inm'Hftt.inTi  rlAaft 

t/>  %  rar^iiiTn  la   aq  intAngft   fhsLt  \Tary  Inrga  vnltftgpa  urA   required 

to  produce  even  approximate  saturation.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
potential  gradient  of  a  few  volts  per  centimetre  is  sufficient  to 
produce  very  approximate  saturation  in  a  gas  when  the  ionisation 
is  very  small.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  the  ionisation  is 
produced  by  the  fi  and  7  rays.  The  difficulty  of  saturation  for  a 
gas  ionised  by  a  rays  is  discussed  in  the  next  section. 

For  a  given   intensity  of  radiation,  the   saturation   voltage 

decreases   rapidly   wif,^    iha   l/^nro^ng   ^^f   \\^^   prftaanrp   nf   tha   gma 

This  is  due  to  two  causes  operating  in  the  same  direction,  viz.  a 
decpftftaft  in  thff  iptpTift^'^y  ^f  ^-^^1  iQTiinftf.mTi  and  an  increase  in  the 

▼elnrity  nf  the  ionn.  The  inniflAhinT^  VArifta  Hi'rpctly  na  the  prfifipnre, 
whilp  tKp    v^lofiity   V^^P^H   invafaf>1y   <tfi    f}\^    prftaa^fft       This    will 

obviously  have  the  effect  of  causing  more  rapid  saturation,  since 
the  rate  of  recombination  is  slower  and  the  time  taken  for  the  ions 
to  travel  between,  the  electrodes  is  less. 

The  saturation  curves  observed  for  the  gases  hydrogen  and 
carbon  dioxide*  are  very  similar  in  shape  to  those  obtained  for  air. 
For  a  given  intensity  of  radiation,  saturation  is  more  readily 
obtained  in  hydrogen  than  in  air,  since  the  ionisation  is  less  than 
in  air  while  the  velocity  of  the  ions  is  greater.  Carbon  dioxide  on 
the  other  hand  requires  a  greater  p.d.  to  produce  saturation  than 
does  air,  since  the  ionisation  is  more  intense  and  the  velocity  of 

ions  less  than  in  air. 

*  Botherford,  PhU.  Mag.  47,  p.  109,  1S99. 


32 


lONISATION  OF  OASES 


[CH. 


14.  Difficnlty  of  saturation  with  a  rayi.  When  the  ionisa- 
tion  of  a  gas  is  produced  by  the  )3  or  7  rays  from  an  active  substance 
or  by  Bontgen  rays,  almost  complete  saturation  is  readily  obtained 
if  the  ionisation  is  not  too  intense  and  the  current-voltage  curve 
is  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  in 
general  very  difficult  to  obtain  complete  saturation  when  the 
ionisation  is  produced  by  a  rays  frx)m  active  matter,  even  when 
the  average  ionisation  is  very  weak.  It  was  noticed  by  Ruther- 
ford* in  his  initial  experiments  with  the  a  rays  of  uranium  that 


100 


S 


it  was  difficult  to  obtain  complete  saturation  even  if  a  very  strong 
electric  field  was  applied.  The  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  3  for 
parallel  plates  2*5  and  25  mms.  apart  respectively.  A  thin  layer 
of  uranium  oxide  was  spread  uniformly  on  the  lower  of  the  two 
plates  and  the  ionisation  was  mainly  due  to  the  a  rays.  It  is  seen 
that  at  first  the  current  increases  rapidly  and  then  more  slowly ; 
but  there  is  no  evidence  of  complete  saturation  even  for  large 

*  Batherford,  PhiL  Mag,  47,  p.  109,  1899. 


U]  lONISATION   OF  GASES  33 

voltages.  Taking  into  consideration  the  early  part  of  the  curves 
the  cnrrent  does  not  reach  its  maximum  value  nearly  so  rapidly  as 
should  be  expected  on  the  ionisation  theory. 

In  the  course  of  their  work  on  the  a  rays,  Bragg  and  Kleeman* 
obsen^ed  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  obtain  saturation  for  gases 
ionised  by  a  rays.  This  was  especially  marked  near  the  end  of 
the  path  of  a  pencil  of  a  rays.  This  effect  was  ascribed  to  initial 
recombination  of  the  ions.  On  this  view,  the  process  of  ionisation 
by  the  a  rays  led  to  the  production  of  positive  and  negative  ions, 
which  were  only  separated  a  short  distance  from  each  other. 
These  ions  consequently  had  a  greater  tendency  to  recombine  with 
each  other  than  with  the  ions  distributed  throughout  the  volume 
of  the  gas.  A  strong  electric  field  would  be  required  to  draw 
the  ions  apart  from  each  other  before  recombination  occurred. 
Kleemant  later  investigated  the  question,  and  found  that  this 
initial  recombination,  while  marked  in  the  case  of  a  rays,  was 
small  for  ionisation  by  X  rays,  and  by  yS  and  7  rays. 

A  somewhat  different  explanation  of  the  diflBculty  of  satura- 
tion with  a  rays  was  put  forward  later  by  Moulin  J,  who  made 
a  detailed  study  of  the  question.  The  a  rays  are  projected 
particles,  and  travel  nearly  in  straight  lines  through  the  gas, 
producing  about  40,000  ions  per  centimetre  of  their  path  in  air. 
In  a  gas  traversed  by  a  rays,  the  ionisation  will  consequently  at 
any  moment  not  be  equally  distributed,  but  restricted  to  a  number 
of  columns  where  the  ionisation  is  exceedingly  intense.  The 
difficulty  of  saturation  is  ascribed  to  the  density  of  the  ionisation 
along  the  path  of  the  a  particle,  and  consequent  rapid  recombi- 
nation. 

In  support  of  this  view  Moulin  showed  that  saturation  was 
more  readily  obtained  if  the  electric  field  was  perpendicular 
instead  of  parallel  to  the  path  of  the  a  rays.  In  the  former  case, 
the  ions  of  opposite  sign  are  rapidly  separated  from  each  other  by 
the  electric  field. 

The  ease  of  saturation  depends  on  the  pressure  and  nature  of 
the  gas.    For  example,  saturation  is  more  readily  obtained  in 

*  Br&gg  and  Eleeman,  Phil.  Mag,  U,  p.  466,  1906. 

t  KleeoiaD,  PhiL  Mag,  U,  p.  273,  1906. 

X  Moalin,  C.  R,  148,  p.  1757,  1909 ;  TheiU  Faculty  of  ScienceM,  Paris,  1910. 

K.  R.-A.  3 


84  lONISATION  OF  OASES  [Cl 

hydrogen  than  in  air,  and  less  readily  in  carbonic  acid  than  in  ai 
The  saturation  voltage  rapidly  diminishes  with  lowering  of  tl 
preflsure. 


rem  nr  CaMmetrt 

Pig.  4  A. 


VbUi  ptr  CmHatbt 
■      Fig.  4B. 


n]  lONISATION   OF  GASES  35 

The  difficulty  of  saturation  with  a  rays  is  well  illustrated  by 
the  curves  (Fig.  4)  obtained  by  Moulin.  Curve  I  is  obtained 
when  the  a  rays  are  perpendicular  to  the  field,  Curve  II  at  an 
angle  of  45°,  Curve  III  parallel  to  the  field,  Curve  IV  was 
obtained  for  about  the  same  ionisation  produced  by  ^  and  7  rays. 
It  is  seen  that  saturation  is  far  more  easily  reached  in  the  latter 
case.  The  upper  figure  gives  the  initial  part  of  the  saturation  curve 
for  weak  fields,  the  lower  for  fields  up  to  500  volts  per  centimetre. 

The  subject  was  taken  up  again  by  Wheelock*  who  concluded 
that  the  variation  of  the  current  with  voltage  was  not  completely 
explained  by  this  columnar  ionisation.  The  problem  is  com- 
plicated ;  but  it  appears  that  the  difficulty  of  saturation  is  to  be 
ascribed  mainly  to  the  density  of  the  ionisation  along  the  path  of 
the  a  particle.  This  offers  a  reasonable  explanation  of  the  greater 
diflSculty  of  obtaining  saturation  near  the  end  of  the  range  of  the 
a  particle,  where  we  know  the  ionisation  of  the  a  particle  per 
unit  path  is  most  intense.  At  the  same  time,  especially  in  com- 
plex gases  and  vapours,  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  type  of  initial 
recombination  as  suggested  by  Bragg  may  play  some  part. 

The  difficulty  of  obtaining  complete  saturation  holds  even 
when  the  average  ionisation  due  to  a  rays  is  very  weak.  It  is 
practically  not  possible  to  obtain  complete  saturation  unless  an 
electric  field  of  about  1500  volts  per  centimetre  is  applied.  It  is 
generally  necessary  to  reduce  the  pressure  of  the  gas  in  order  to 
obtain  saturation  with  the  potential  differences  available.  At  the 
same  time,  approximate  saturation  is  reached  for  much  weaker 
electric  fields,  and  the  relative  currents  observed  under  such 
conditions  bear  nearly  the  same  relation  to  one  another  as  the 
true  saturation  currents.  Consequently  comparisons  of  activity 
due  to  the  a  rays  can  be  made  with  accuracy,  for  example,  with 
an  ordinary  a  ray  electroscope,  even  when  the  voltage  is  only 
sufficient  to  give  about  85  per  cent,  of  the  true  saturation  current. 

This  difficulty  of  saturation  has  been  discussed  in  some  detail, 
^  it  has  an  important  bearing  on  accurate  measurements  of 
ionisation  in  radio-active  workf. 

•Wheelock,   Amer,  Joum.    Sci,  80,   p.   233,    1910;    Le  Radium,    7,   p.   374, 
1910. 

t  See  Begener,  Verh.  d,  D.  Phys,  Ges.  13,  p.  1005,  1911. 

3—2 


36 


lONISATION   OF  GASES 


[CH. 


16.  lonisation  by  collUion.  Townsend*  has  shown  that, 
for  low  pressures,  the  variation  of  the  current  with  the  voltage  is 
very  dififerent  from  that  observed  at  atmospheric  pressure.  If  the 
increase  of  current  with  the  voltage  is  determined  for  gases, 
exposed  to  Rontgen  rays,  at  a  pressure  of  a  few  mms.  of  mercuiy, 
it  is  found  that  for  small  voltages  the  ordinary  saturation  curve  is 
obtained ;  but  when  the  voltage  applied  increases  beyond  a  certain 
value,  depending  on  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the  gas  and  the 
distance  between  the  electrodes,  the  current  commences  to  increase 
slowly  at  first  but  very  rapidly  as  the  voltage  is  raised  to  the 
sparking  value.  The  general  shape  of  the  current  curve  is  shown 
in  Fig.  6. 


roiu 

Fig.  6. 

The  portion  OAB  of  the  curve  corresponds  to  the  ordinary 
saturation  curve.  At  the  point  B  the  current  commences  to 
increase.  This  increase  of  current  has  been  shown  to  be  due  to 
the  action  of  the  negative  ions  at  low  pressures  in  producing  fi'esh 
ions  by  collision  with  the  molecules  in  their  path. 

In  many  of  the  experiments  of  Townsend,  negative  ions  were 
liberated  by  the  action  of  ultra-violet  light  from  the  surface  of 
a  metal   plate  A,  which  was  charged  negatively.     The  current 


*  Towiuend,  Phil.  Mag.  1,  p.  79,  1901 ;  3,  p.  557,  1902. 


Il]  lONISATION  OF  GASES  37 

passing  between  this  plate  and  a  parallel  plate  B  was  measured 
for  different  voltages  and  for  different  distances  between  the 
plates.  Consider  a  space  bounded  by  two  planes  distant  x  and 
X'\-dx  from  the  plate  A  and  parallel  to  it.  If  n  be  the  number 
of  negative  ions  passing  across  this  plane,  the  number  dn  formed 
in  the  space  is  given  by  dn  ==  andx,  where  a  is  a  constant  for  a 
given  electric  field  but  varies  with  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the 
gas  and  the  strength  of  the  electric  field.  Integrating  this 
equation  log  n  =  our  +  ^  where  A:  is  a  constant.  If  n^  ions  are 
liberated  per  second  from  the  surface  of  the  plate  A  by  the  ultra- 
violet light,  n  =  rio  when  a;  =  0,  and  fc  =  logno.  If  the  plates  are 
distant  d  apart,  the  number  n  of  negative  ions  reaching  the  plate 
B  is  given  by  n  =  n^e^^. 

The  value  of  rio  is  determined  by  measuring  the  value  of  the 
saturation  current  for  a  voltage  too  small  to  produce  ions  by 
collision.  The  value  of  n  thus  increases  rapidly  with  increase 
of  the  distance  d.  This  relation  with  distance  was  found  by 
Tovmsend  to  hold  very  closely  for  weak  electric  fields;  but  as 
the  electric  field  approached  the  sparking  value,  the  value  of  n 
increased  Car  more  rapidly  than  was  given  by  the  simple  theory 
outlined  above.  Townsend  showed  that  this  increase  was  due  to 
production  of  fresh  ions  by  the  collision  of  the  positive  ions  with 
the  molecules.  Although  for  a  given  electric  field,  the  positive 
ions  are  far  less  efficient  than  the  negative  in  generating  ions  by 
collision,  the  net  result  of  this  additional  ionisation  is  to  cause 
a  very  rapid  increase  of  the  current  with  the  voltage.  Finally, 
the  current  reaches  so  large  a  value  that  a  spark  or  electric  dis- 
charge takes  place. 

There  is  thus  a  marked  difference  between  the  positive  and 
native  ions  in  their  power  of  generating  ions  by  collision.  The 
iBsolts  indicate  that  the  negative  ion  at  low  pressures  is  identical 
with  the  electron  which  has  an  apparent  mass  small  compared 
with  that  of  the  atom  of  hydrogen,  while  the  positive  ion  is  always 
of  atomic  magnitude.  JExperiment  shows  that  the.  negative  ion  is 
able  to  produce  firesh  ions  by  collision  when  it  acquires  a  velocity 
equivalehf  to  that  gained  in  moving  freely  between  two  points 
differing  in  potential  by  about  20  volts.  If  m  be  the  mass  of  the 
electron,  e  its  charge^  the  velocity  u  acquired  in  moving  between 


38  lONISATION  OF  GASES  [CK 

two  points  at  a  difference  of  potential  V  is  given  by 

^u*  =  Fe  or  tt  «  ^/2F.  - . 

Taking  the  value  e/m  =  1*7  x  10*  e.m.  units  for  the  electron  at  low 
speeds  and  F  =  20  volts  =  2  x  10*  e.m.  units,  m  =  2*6  x  10*  cms. 
per  second.  This  velocity  is  very  large  compared  with  the 
velocity  of  agitation  of  the  gas  molecules  themselves.  The  mean 
free  path  of  the  electron  is  about  four  times  as  long  as  that  of  the 
molecule  of  the  gas  in  which  it  is  moving.  The  number  of  ions 
produced  by  the  collision  of  the  negative  ions  increases  with  the 
electric  field  to  a  maximum  when  each  collision  results  in  the 
production  of  a  new  pair  of  ions.  Under  these  conditions,  one  ion 
produces  21  new  ions  by  collision  for  each  millimetre  of  path  in 
air  at  a  pressure  of  one  millimetre  of  mercury*. 

Apart  from  the  importance  of  this  effect  in  electrical  con- 
duction, the  principle  of  ionisation  by  collision  affords  a  very 
convenient  means  of  magnifying  weak  ionisation  currents.  By 
adjusting  a  voltage  just  below  the  sparking  value,  the  number  of 
ions  produced  in  the  gas  by  an  external  agency  can  be  increased 
several  thousand  times  by  collision.  Using  this  method,  it  has 
been  found  possible  to  detect  the  presence  of  a  single  a  particle 
by  its  electrical  effect,  and  to  count  the  number  emitted  by  radio- 
active substances. 

16.  Rate  of  recombination  of  the  ions.  A  gas  ionised 
by  the  radiation  preserves  its  conducting  power  for  some  time 
after  it  is  removed  from  the  presence  of  the  active  body.  A 
current  of  air  blown  over  an  active  body  will  thus  discharge  an 
electrified  body  some  distance  away.  The  duration  of  this  after 
conductivity  can  be  examined  very  conveniently  in  an  apparatus 
similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  6. 

A  dry  current  of  air  or  any  other  gas  is  passed  at  a  constant 
rate  through  a  long  metal  tube  TL,  After  passing  through  a 
quantity  of  cotton- wool  to  remove  dust  particles,  the  current  of 
air  passes  over  a  vessel  T  containing  a  radio-active  body  such  as 

*  An  excellent  account  of  the  theory  and  experiments  on  this  subject  has  been 
given  by  Townsend  in  a  book  entitled  The  theory  of  ionisation  of  gases  by  collision 
(Ck)nBtable  and  Co.,  London),  1910. 


U]  lONISATIOK  OF  OASES  39 

uianiam,  which  does  not  give  off  a  radio-active  emanation.  By 
means  of  insulated  electrodes  A  and  B,  charged  to  a  suitable 
potential,  the  current  between  the  tube  and  one  of  these  electrodes 
can  be  tested  at  various  points  along  the  tube. 

A  gauze  screen,  placed  over  the  cross-section  of  the  tube  at  A 
serves  to  prevent  any  direct  action  of  the  electric  field  in  abstracting 
ions  from  the  neighbourhood  of  T. 

If  the  electric  field  is  sufficiently  strong,  all  the  ions  travel  to 
the  electrode  at  A,  and  no  current  is  observed  at  the  electrode  B. 
If  the  current  is  observed  successively  at  different  distances  along 
the  tube,  all  the  electrodes  except  the  one  under  consideration 
being  connected  with  earth,  it  is  found  that  the  current  diminishes 
with  the  distance  fix>m  the  active  body.  If  the  tube  is  of  fisdrly 
wide  bore,  the  loss  of  the  ions  due  to  diffusion  is  small,  and  the 
decrease  in  conductivity  of  the  gas  is  due  to  recombination  of 
the  ions  alone. 


£ ^      L 


T        D 
Uranium\  • 


Fig.  6. 

The  rate  of  recombination  is  proportional  to  the  product  of 

the  number  of  positive  and  negative  ions  per  unit  volume.     The 

number  dn  of  ions  per  unit  volume  which  recombine  in  the  time  dt 

is  given  by 

dn 

where  a  is  a  constant.  Equal  numbers  of  positive  and  negative 
ions  are  formed  per  unit  volume,  and  in  the  absence  of  an  electric 
field  »!  =  fij 

Consequently  in  this  case 

dn  - 

dt 

Integrating  this  equation, 

n     N 
UN  IB  the  initial  number  of  ions,  and  n  the  number  after  a  time  t. 


40  lONISATION  OF  GASES  [COI. 

The  experimental  results  obtained*  have  been  shown  to  agre^ 
very  well  with  this  equation. 

In  an  experiment  similar  to  that  illustrated  in  Fig.  6,  usingf 
uranium  oxide  as  a  source  of  ionisation,  it  was  found  that  half  the 
number  of  ions  present  in  the  gas  recombined  in  2*4  seconds,  and 
that  at  the  end  of  8  seconds  one-fourth  of  the  ions  were  still 
uncombined. 

Since  the  rate  of  recombination  is  proportional  to  the  square 
of  the  number  present,  the  time  taken  for  half  of  the  ions  present 
in  the  gas  to  recombine  decreases  very  rapidly  with  the  intensity 
of  the  ionisation.  If  radium  is  used,  the  ionisation  is  so  intense 
that  the  rate  of  recombination  is  extremely  rapid.  It  is  cm 
account  of  this  rapidity  of  recombination  that  large  voltages  are 
necessary  to  produce  saturation  in  the  gases  exposed  to  very 
active  preparations  of  radium.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out 
in  section  14  that  the  ionisation  produced  by  a  rays  is  initially 
not  uniform.  In  this  case  the  initial  rate  of  recombination  is 
more  rapid  than  if  an  equal  amount  of  ionisation  were  uniformly 
distributed. 

The  value  of  a,  which  may  be  termed  the  coefficient  of  recom- 
bination, has  been  determined  in  absolute  measure  by  Townsendf, 
M*K^lungJ  and  Langevin§  by  diflferent  experimental  methods  but 
with  very  concordant  results.  Suppose,  for  example,  with  the 
apparatus  of  Fig.  6,  the  time  T,  taken  for  half  the  ions  to  re- 
combine  after  passing  by  the  electrode  A,  has  been  determined 

experimentally.     Then  -^^  =  aT,  where  N  is  the  number  of  ions 

per  C.C.  present  oA,  A,  If  the  saturation  current  %  is  determined 
at  the  electrode  A,  i  =  NVe,  where  e  is  the  charge  on  an  ion  and  V 
is  the  volume  of  uniformly  ionised  gas  carried  by  the  electrode  A 

per  second.     Then  a  =  -r^ . 

The  following  table  shows  the  value  of  a  obtained  for  different 
gases. 

♦  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  44,  p.  422,  1897 ;  47,  p.  109,  1899. 

t  Towheend,  Phil  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  193,  p.  167,  1899. 

t  M«Clung,  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  283,  1902. 

§  LaDgevin,  Theii$  presented  to  Faculty  of  Sciences,  Paris,  p.  151,  1902. 


n]  lONISATION   OF  QASE8  41 

Value  of  a. 


QtM 

Townsend 

M'Clung 

Langevin 

xk.\i           *  *  •            •  •  • 

3420  X  e 

3384x6 

3200x6 

Carbon  Dioxide 

3500x6 

3492X6 

3400X6 

Hydrogen 

3020x6 

Assuming  that  the  value  of  e  (see  section  20)  is  4*65  x  10"" 
e^  units,  a  =  1"5  x  10~^. 

Using  this  value,  it  can  readily  be  shown  from  the  equation  of 
recombination  that,  if  10"  ions  are  present  per  c.c,  half  of  them 
recombine  in  about  0*7  sec.  and  99  7o  ^^  "^0  sees. 

The  efifect  of  pressure  of  the  gas  on  the  recombination  constant 
has  been  examined  by  M^Clung  and  Langevin.  The  results 
indicate  that  the  rate  of  recombination  diminishes  rapidly  with 
lowering  of  the  pressure.  Erikson*  and  Phillipsf  have  shown 
that  the  value  of  a  decreases  rapidly  with  rise  of  temperature. 

In  experiments  on  recombination  it  is  essential  that  the  gas 
should  be  free  from  dust  or  other  suspended  particles.  In  dusty 
air,  the  coeflRcient  of  recombination  is  much  greater  than  in  dust- 
free  air,  as  the  ions  diffuse  rapidly  to  the  comparatively  large 
dust  particles  distributed  throughout  the  gas.  The  effect  of  the 
suspension  of  small  particles  in  a  conducting  gas  is  very  well 
illustrated  by  an  experiment  of  OwensJ.  If  tobacco  smoke  is 
blown  between  two  parallel  plates  as  in  Fig.  1,  the  current  at 
oDoe  diminishes  to  a  small  fraction  of  its  former  value,  although  a 
voltage  is  applied  sufficient  to  produce  saturation  under  ordintory 
conditions.  A  much  larger  voltage  is  then  necessary  to  produce 
saturation.  If  the  smoke  particles  are  removed  by  a  stream  of  air, 
the  current  returns  at  once  to  its  original  value. 

17.  Mobility  of  the  ions.  Determinations  of  the  mobility 
of  the  ions,  t.e.  the  velocity  of  the  ions  under  a  potential  gradient 
of  1  volt  per  cm.,  have  been  made  by  a  number  of  observers  for 
gases  exposed  to  Bdntgen  rays.  Although  widely  different  methods 
have  been  employed,  the  results  have  been  very  concordant,  and 
folly  support  the  view  that  the  ions  move  with  a  velocity  pro- 
portional to  the  strength  of  the  field.     On  the  application  of  a 

•  Erikson,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  328,  1909. 

t  PhiUipe,  Proc.  Roy.  Soe.  A,  88,  p.  246,  1910. 

X  Owens,  Phil  Mag.  48,  p.  360,  1899. 


42  lONISATIOK  OF  OASES  [CB. 

uniform  electric  field,  the  ions  almost  instantly  attain  the  velocit)r 
corresponding  to  the  field  and  then  move  with  a  uniform  speed. 

Zeleny*  first  drew  attention  to  the  tact  that  the  positive  and 
negative  ions  in  most  cases  have  different  velocities.  The  velocitj 
of  the  negative  ion  is  in  most  cases  greater  than  that  of  the  positive, 
and  varies  with  the  amount  of  water  vapour  present  in  the  gas. 

The  results,  previously  discussed,  of  the  variation  of  the  current 
with  voltage  and  of  the  rate  of  recombination  of  the  ions  do  not  of 
themselves  imply  that  the  ions  produced  in  gases  by  the  radiatioDfl 
fi'om  active  bodies  are  identical  with  those  produced  by  B6ntgen 
rays  under  similar  conditions.  They  merely  show  that  the  con- 
ductivity under  various  conditions  can  be  satisfactorily  explained 
by  the  view  that  charged  ions  are  produced  throughout  the  volume 
of  the  gas.  The  same  general  relations  would  be  observed  if  the 
ions  differed  considerably  in  size  and  velocity  from  those  produced 
by  Rontgen  rays.  The  most  satisfactory  method  of  determining 
whether  the  ions  are  identical  in  the  two  cases  is  to  determine  the 
velocity  of  the  ions  under  similar  conditions.  This  can  be  done 
by  a  number  of  methods,  but  a  brief  account  will  be  given  of  the 
flow  method  which  was  used  by  the  writer  and  also  by  Zeleny. 

In  order  to  compare  the  velocity  of  the  ionsf ,  the  writer  used 
an  apparatus  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  6  on  p.  39. 

The  ions  were  carried  with  a  rapid  constant  stream  of  air  past 
the  charged  electrode  A,  and  the  conductivity  of  the  gas  was  tested 
immediately  afterwards  at  an  electrode  B,  which  was  placed  close 
to  A.  The  insulated  electrodes  A  and  B  were  fixed  centrally  in 
the  metal  tube  X,  which  was  connected  with  earth. 

For  convenience  of  calculation,  it  is  assumed  that  the  electric 
field  between  the  cylinders  is  the  same  as  if  the  cylinders  were 
infinitely  long. 

Let  a  and  6  be  the  radii  of  the  electrode  A,  and  of  the  tube  I 
respectively,  and  let  y=  potential  of -4. 

The  electric  force  X  (without  regard  to  sign)  at  a  distance  9 
firom  the  axis  of  the  tube  is  given  by 

*  Zeleny,  Phil.  Mag,  46,  p.  130,  189S. 
•f  Rutherford,  Phil  Mag,  47,  p.  109,  1S99. 


lOj  IONI8ATION  OF  OASES  43 

Let  Ki  and  jET,  be  the  velocities  of  the  positive  and  negative 
ixw  for  a  potential  gradient  of  1  volt  per  cm.  If  the  velocity 
:/  IB  proportional  to  the  electric  force  at  any  point,  the  distance  dr 
1  tnyened  by  the  negative  ion  in  the  time  dt  is  given  by 

dr  -  XK^dt, 

log^- rdr 
or  dt^      «*ii^ 

Let  r,  be  the  greatest  distance  measured  from  the  axis  of  the 
tube  from  which  the  negative  ion  can  just  reach  the  electrode  A 
in  the  time  t  taken  for  the  air  to  pass  along  the  electrode. 

Then  '-HvK^^-S^-a 

If  ^  be  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  the  negative  ions  that  reach 
the  electrode  A  to  the  total  number  passing  by,  then 


p.   ' 


r.'  -  a» 


Therefore 

pt(b'-a*)\og,- 

^' m-^ <^>- 

Similarly  the  ratio  pi  of  the  number  of  positive  ions  that  give 
up  their  charge  to  the  external  cylinder  to  the  total  number  of 
positive  ions  is  given  by 

Pi  (6"  -  a*)  log,  - 

^' Wt       • 

In  the  above  equations  it  is  assumed  that  the  current  of  air  is 
umform  over  the  cross-section  of  the  tube,  and  that  the  ions  are 
uniformly  distributed  over  the  cross-section ;  also,  that  the  move- 
ment of  the  ions  does  not  appreciably  disturb  the  electric  field. 
Since  the  value  of  t  can  be  calculated  from  the  velocity  of  the 
current  of  air  and  the  length  of  the  electrode,  the  values  of  the 
velocities  of  the  ions  under  unit  potential  gradient  can  at  once  be 
determined. 

The  equation  (1)  shows  that  pa  is  proportional  to  V, — i.e.  that 
the  rate  of  discharge  of  the  electrode  A  varies  directly  as  the 


44 


lONISATION  OF  OASES 


[€■ 


potential  of  A,  provided  that  the  value  of  Fis  not  large  enoiigk 
to  remove  all  the  ions  from  the  gas  as  it  passes  by  the  electrodil 
This  was  found  experimentally  to  be  the  case.  i 

In  the  comparison  of  the  velocities,  the  potential  F  was  adja8te| 
to  such  a  value  that  p^  was  about  one  half,  when  uranium  ozidi 
was  placed  in  the  tube  at  L,  The  active  substance  was  thea 
removed,  and  an  aluminium  cylinder  substituted  for  the  htm 
tube.  X  rays  were  allowed  to  feill  on  the  centre  of  this  aluminitui 
cylinder,  and  the  strength  of  the  rays  adjusted  to  give  about  tin 
same  conductivity  to  the  gas  as  the  uranium  had  done.  Undfl 
these  conditions  the  value  of  p^  was  found  to  be  the  same  as  fiifl 
the  first  experiment. 

This  experiment  shows  conclusively  that  the  ions  producec 
by  Rontgen  rays  and  by  uranium  move  with  the  same  velodt] 
and  are  probably  identical  in  all  respects.  The  method  describee 
above  is  not  very  suitable  for  an  accurate  determination  of  tiu 
velocities,  but  gave  values  for  the  positive  ions  of  about  1'4  cnu 
per  second  per  volt  per  centimetre,  and  slightly  greater  values  fa 
the  negative  ions. 

Determinations  of  the  mobility  of  the  ions  produced  by  B5ntg8i 
rays  were  first  made  by  Rutherford*,  Zelenyf  and  Langevin} 
Zeleny  used  a  method  similar  in  principle  to  that  explained  above 
His  results  are  shown  in  the  following  table,  where  ^+  is  th( 
mobility  of  the  positive  ion  and  K—  that  of  the  negative  ion. 


Gas 

1 

K- 

K- 

Temperature 

Air,  dry      

1-36 

1-87 

1-375 

13^-5  C. 

„     moist 

1-37 

1-51 

110 

W" 

Oxygen,  dry 

1-36 

1-80 

1-32 

n** 

„        moist 

1-29 

1-62 

1-18 

16** 

Carbon  dioxide,  dry 

0-76 

0-81 

107 

17^-5 

„            „        moist 

0-81 

0-75 

0-915 

17" 

Hydrogen,  dry 

6-70 

7-95 

1-15 

20" 

„          moist   ... 

5-30 

6-60 

1 

105 

20° 

•  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  44,  p.  422,  1897. 
t  Zeleny,  Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  195,  p.  193,  1900. 

t  Langevin,  C.  R.  184,  p.  646,  1902,  and  Thesis  FacuUy  of  Sciences,  Pari 
p.  191,  1902. 


m 


lONlSATION   OF  OASES 


45 


Langevin  determined  the  velocity  of  the  ions  by  a  direct 
method  not  involving  a  current  of  air.  The  gas  was  ionised  by 
I  flash  of  X  rays,  and  the  time  taken  for  the  positive  or  negative 
on  to  travel  over  a  known  distance  was  observed.  The  principle 
»f  this  method  which  has  been  used  in  many  later  investigations, 
ras  employed  by  Wellisch*  to  measure  the  velocities  of  the  ions 
D  gases  and  vapours.  His  results  are  given  in  the  following 
able  for  atmospheric  temperature  and  for  a  pressure  of  760  mms. 
f  mercury.  It  will  be  noted  that  in  some  of  the  vapours  the 
legative  ion  has  a  smaller  mobility  than  the  positive. 


Om  or  Tapour 

Formula 

Molecular 
weight 

K+ 

K- 

cm. /sec. 

cm./8«c. 

Air 

1-64 

1-78 

Carbon  monoxide 

CO 

28 

110 

114 

^  „       dioxide     ... 

COj 

44 

0-81 

0-86 

}(itrous  oxide 

N,0 

44 

0-82 

0-90 

Ammonia   ... 

NH3 

17 

0-74 

0-80 

Aldehyde 

CjH^O 

44 

0-31 

0-30 

Ethyl  alcohol 

C,HeO 

46 

0-34 

0-27 

Aoeton        

CsHflO 

68 

0-31 

0-29 

Sulphur  dioxide    ... 

SO2 

64 

0-44 

0-41 

Ethyl  chloride 

CjHftCl 

64-6 

0-33 

0-31 

'    Pentane      

CfiHij 

72 

0-36 

0-36 

Methyl  acetate      ... 
Ethyl  fonnate 

CjH.O, 

74 

0-33 

0-36 

0,H,0, 

74 

0-30 

0-31 

„      ether 

C.HjoO 

74 

0-29 

0-31 

M      acetate 

C4H,0, 

88 

0-31 

0-28 

Methyl  bromide    ... 

CHjBr 

95 

0-29 

0-28 

»       iodide 

CH,I 

142 

0-21 

0-22 

Carbon  tetrachloride 

ecu 

164 

030 

0-31 

Ethyl  iodide 

1      C,H»I 

1 

1 

156 

017 

016 

The  velocity  of  the  ions  in  the  monatomic  gas,  helium,  have 
been  measured  by  Franck  and  Pohl  f .  The  value  of  K-^  was 
S'OO  and  K—  6*31  cms.  per  second,  velocities  somewhat  lower  than 
those  observed  in  hydrogen. 

Measurements  of  the  velocity  of  the  ions  have  also  been  made 
by  Przibmm  I  for  a  number  of  vapours  near  their  condensation 

*  Welliech,  Pkil.  Trans,  Roy.  Soe.  A,  209,  p.  249,  1909. 
t  Franck  and  Pohl,  Verh.  d.  D.  Phys.  Get.  9,  p.  194, 1907. 
X  Pnibram,  Wien,  Ber,  na,  117,  p.  665,  1906. 


46  lONISATION  OF  QASBS  [( 

point.    The  values  obtained  are  somewhat  less  than  those  to 
expected  from  measurements  at  lower  pressures  of  the  vapour. 

P.  Phillips*  using  Langevin's   method  has  shown  that 
velocity  of  the  ion  depends  on  temperature,  and  found  that 
the  range  of  temperature  between  94°  C.  and  411''  C.  absolute 
velocity  of  the  positive  and  negative  ion  was  nearly  proporti( 
to  the  absolute  temperature. 

A  number  of  observations  have  been  made  by  Wellischt 
the  velocity  of  the  ions  through  gaseous  mixtures,  and  no  i^j 
dication  was  found  that  ions  of  two  distinct  mobilities  WM^ 
present.  Such  experiments  have  an  important  bearing  on  thA"^ 
question  of  the  size  and  nature  of  the  ions  produced  in  differeot- 
gases. 

The  velocity  of  the  ions  varies  inversely  as  the  pressure  of  tin: 
gas.    This  was  shown  by  Rutherford  j  for  the  negative  ions  js>? 
duced  by  ultra-violet  light,  and  by  Langevin§  for  both  the  negatifej 
and  positive  ions  produced  by  Rontgen  rays.   Experiments  on  thiij 
question  have  also  been  made  by  Kovarik  || .     The  general  resalti 
show  that  below  a  pressure  of  about  200  mms.  of  mercury  ths 
velocity  of  the  negative  ion  increases  far  more  rapidly  than  tfiat 
of  the  positive  ion.     This  indicates  that  on  the  average  the  maa 
of  the  negative  ion  is  diminishing.    At  low  pressures  the  negative 
ion  does  not  attach  itself  to  the  atom  or  molecule  of  matter  bat 
is  identical  with  the  electron. 

18.  CondenBation  eaqperimenti.  Some  experiments  will 
now  be  described  which  have  verified  in  a  direct  way  the  theory 
that  the  conductivity  produced  in  gases  by  the  various  types 
of  radiation  is  due  to  the  production  of  charged  ions  throughout 
the  volume  of  the  gas.  Under  certain  conditions,  the  ions  form 
nuclei  for  the  condensation  of  water,  and  this  property  allows  U8 
to  show  the  presence  of  the  individual  ions  in  the  gas,  and  also  to 
count  the  number  present.  • 

It  has  long  been  known  that,  if  air  saturated  with  water- vapour 

♦  Phillips,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  78,  p.  167,  1906. 

t  Wellisch,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A.  82,  p.  500,  1909. 

X  Rutherford,  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  9,  pt.  vra,  p.  401,  1898. 

§  Langevin  {loc.  cit.). 

11  Kovarik,  Phys.  Rev.  30,  p.  415,  1910. 


U]  lONISATION  OF  OASES  47 

be  suddenly  expanded,  a  cloud  of  small  globules  of  water  is  formed. 
These  drops  are  formed  round  the  dust  particles  present  in  the  gas, 
which  act  as  nuclei  for  the  condensation  of  water  around  them. 
The  experiments  of  R.  von  Helmholtz  and  Richarz*  had  shown  that 
chemical  reactions,  for  example  the  combustion  of  flames,  taking 
place  in  the  neighbourhood,  affected  the  condensation  of  a  steam- 
jei  Lenard  showed  that  a  similar  action  was  produced  when  ultra- 
violet light  fell  on  a  negatively  charged  zinc  surface  placed  near 
the  steam-jet  These  results  suggested  that  the  presence  of  electric 
diarges  in  the  gas  facilitated  condensation. 

A  very  complete  study  of  the  conditions  of  condensation  of 
water  on  nuclei  has  been  made  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson  f.  An  apparatus 
was  constructed  which  allowed  a  very  sudden  expansion  of  the  air 
over  a  wide  range  of  pressure.  The  amount  of  condensation  was 
observed  in  a  small  glass  vessel  A  beam  of  light  was  passed 
into  the  apparatus  which  allowed  the  drops  formed  to  be  readily 
observed  by  the  eye. 

Preliminary  small  expansions  caused  a  condensation  of  the 
water  round  the  dust  nuclei  present  in  the  air.  These  dust  nuclei 
were  removed  by  allowing  the  drops  to  settle.  After  a  number  of 
raocessive  small  expansions,  the  air  was  completely  freed  from 
dust,  so  that  no  condensation  was  produced. 
Let  Vi  =  initial  volume  of  the  gas  in  the  vessel, 

v^  =  volume  after  expansion. 
If  -  <  1-25  no  condensation  is  produced  in  dust-free  air.     If 

however  -  >  1*25  and  <  1*38,  a  few  drops  appear.     This  number  is 

roughly  constant  until -=1*38,  when  the  number  suddenly  in- 
creases and  a  very  dense  cloud  of  fine  drops  is  produced. 

If  the  radiation  from  an  X  ray  tube  or  a  radio-active  substance 
is  now  passed  into  the  condensation  vessel,  a  new  series  of  phenomena 

is  observed.     As  before,  if  -  <  1*25  no  drops  are  formed,  but  if 

*  Helmholtz  and  Bioharz,  AnruU,  d,  Phyt.  40,  p.  161,  1890. 
tWUson,  Phil  Trans.  Roy.   Soc.  A,  1S9,  p.  265,    1897;  192,  p.  403,  1899; 
m,  p.  289,  1899. 


48  lONISATION   OF  GASES  [CH. 

V 

-  =  1*25  there  is  a  sudden  production  of  a  cloud.   The  water  dropi 


of  which  this  cloud  is  formed  are  finer  and  more  numerous 
greater  the  intensity  of  the  rays.  The  point  at  which  condensa- 
tion begins  is  very  marked,  and  a  slight  variation  of  the  amount 
of  expansion  causes  either  a  dense  cloud  or  no  cloud  at  all. 

It  now  remains  to  be  shown  that  the  formation  of  a  cloud  by 
the  action  of  the  rays  is  due  to  the  production  of  ions  in  the 
gas.  If  the  expansion  vessel  is  provided  with  two  parallel  plateB 
between  which  an  electric  field  can  be  applied,  it  is  seen  that  the 
number  of  drops,  formed  by  the  expansion  with  the  rays  acting, 
decreases  with  increase  of  the  electric  field.  The  stronger  the 
field  the  smaller  the  number  of  drops  formed.  This  result  is  to  be 
expected  if  the  ions  are  the  centres  of  condensation;  for  in  a  strong 
electric  field  the  ions  are  carried  at  once  to  the  electrodes,  and  thuB 
disappear  from  the  gas.  If  no  electric  field  is  acting,  a  cloud  can 
be  produced  some  time  after  the  rays  have  been  cut  oflF;  but  if  a 
strong  electric  field  is  applied,  under  the  same  conditions,  no  cloud 
is  formed.  This  is  in  agreement  with  experiments  showing  the 
time  required  for  the  ions  to  disappear  by  recombination.  In 
addition  it  can  be  shown  that  each  one  of  the  fine  drops  carries 
an  electric  charge  and  can  be  made  to  move  in  a  strong  uniform 
electric  field. 

The  small  number  of  drops  produced  without  the  action  of  the 


V. 


rays  when  -  >  1*25  is  due  to  a  very  slight  natural  ionisation  of 

the  gas.  The  existence  of  this  ionisation  has  been  clearly  shown 
by  electrical  methods. 

The  evidence  is  thus  complete  that  the  ions  themselves  serve 
as  centres  for  the  condensation  of  water  around  them.  These 
experiments  show  conclusively  that  the  passage  of  electricity 
through  a  gas  is  due  to  the  presence  of  charged  ions  distributed 
throughout  the  volume  of  the  gas,  and  verify  in  a  remarkable 
way  the  hypothesis  of  the  discontinuous  structure  of  the  electric 
charges  carried  by  matter. 

This  property  of  the  ions  of  acting  as  nuclei  of  condensation 
gives  a  very  delicate  method  of  detecting  the  presence  of  ions  in 
the  gas.     If  only  a  few  ions  are  present  per  cc,  their  presence 


Il]  lONISATION  OF  OASES  49 

ifkr  expansion  is  at  once  observed  by  the  drops  formed.  In  this 
t¥ay  the  ionisation  due  to  a  small  quantity  of  uranium  held  a  yard 
iway  from  the  condensation  vessel  is  at  once  made  manifest. 

C.  T.  R  Wilson*  has  recently  employed  this  property  to 
render  visible  the  effect  of  a  single  a  or  /8  particle.  The  path 
>f  the  individual  a  particle  is  shown  by  the  condensation  of 
nrater  on  the  ions  formed  in  its  path,  and  is  seen  as  a  straight 
uminous  trail  which  can  be  photographed.  A  similar  effect  is 
)beerved  for  a  /3  particle,  but  the  trail  is  not  nearly  so  intense 
m  account  of  the  smaller  ionisation.  These  experiments  are  of 
2;Teat  importance  in  showing  that  the  fi  particle  is  a  definite 
entity.  The  development  of  this  method  promises  to  be  of  great 
value  in  throwing  light  on  the  fundamental  processes  involved  in 
the  ionisation  of  gases. 

19.    DifTerence  between  the  positive  and  negative  ions. 

In  the  course  of  experiments  to  determine  the  charge  carried  by 
an  ion,  J.  J.  Thomson  f  observed  that  the  cloud  formed  under  the 
influence  of  X  rays  increased  in  density  when  the  expansion  was 
about  1*31,  and  suggested  in  explanation  that  the  positive  and 
negative  ions  had  different  condensation  points. 

This  difference  in  behaviour  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions 
was  investigated  in  detail  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson  J  in  the  following  way. 
X  rays  were  made  to  pass  in  a  narrow  beam  on  either  side  of  a 
plate  AB  (Fig.  7)  dividing  the  condensation  vessel  into  two  equal 
parts.  The  opposite  poles  of  a  battery  of  cells  were  connected 
with  two  parallel  plates  C  and  D,  placed  symmetrically  with  regard 
to  A.  The  middle  point  of  the  battery  and  the  plate  A  were  con- 
nected with  earth.  If  the  plate  G  is  positively  charged,  the  ions  in 
the  space  CA  at  a  short  distance  from  A  are  all  negative  in  sign. 
Those  to  the  right  are  all  positive.    It  was  found  that  condensation 

V 

occurred  only  for  the  negative  ions  in  AC  when  -  =  1*25  but  did 
not  occur  in  AD  for  the  positive  ions  until  -  =  1*31. 

•  C.  T.  R.  Wilson,  Proe,  Roy.  Sot:  A,  86,  p.  285,  1911. 
t  Thomson,  Phil  Mag,  46,  p.  528,  1898. 
t  Wilaon,  PkiL  Tram.  A,  198,  p.  289,  1899. 


so 


lONISATION  OF  OASES 


[GV. 


Thus  the  negative  acts  more  readily  than  the  positive  ioa 
as  a  centre  of  condensation.  This  is  not  the  case  with  all 
vapours,  for  Frzibram  has  shown  that  for  some  organic  vaponiB 
condensation  takes  place  more  easily  on  the  positive  than  on  the 
negative  ion.  The  greater  efiPect  of  the  negative  ion  in  causiogr 
condensation  of  water  has  been  suggested  as  an  explanation 
of  the  positive  charge  ;alwa3rs  observed  in  the  upper  atmosphere^ 
The  negative  ions  under  certain  conditions  become  centres  for  the 
formation  of  small  drops  of  water  and  are  removed  to  the  earth  bj 
the  action  of  gravity,  while  the  positive  ions  remain  suspended. 


Earth 


Fig.  7. 

With  the  apparatus  described  above,  it  has  been  shown,  that 
the  positive  and  negative  ions  are  equal  in  number.  If  the 
expansion  is  large  enough  to  ensure  condensation  on  both  ions, 
the  drops  formed  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  vessel  in  Fig.  7  are 
equal  in  number  and  fall  at  the  same  rate,  i.e,  are  equal  in  size. 

Since  the  ions  are  produced  in  equal  numbers  from  a  gas 
electrically  neutral,  this  experiment  shows  that  the  charges  on 
positive  and  negative  ions  are  equal  in  value  but  opposite  in  sign. 

20.  Charge  carried  by  an  ion.  For  a  known  sudden  ex- 
pansion of  a  gas  saturated  with  water  vapour,  the  amount  of  water 
precipitated  on  the  ions  can  be  calculated  readily.   The  size  of  the 


Uj  lONISATION  OF  GASES  51 

drops  can  be  determined  by  observing  the  rate  at  which  the  cloud 
settles  under  the  action  of  gravity.  From  Stokes'  equation,  the 
terminal  velocity  u  of  a  small  sphere  of  radius  r  and  density  p  falling 
through  a  gas  of  which  the  coefficient  of  viscosity  is  /i  is  given  by 

where  g  is  the  acceleration  due  to  gravity.  The  radius  of  the  drop 
and  consequently  the  weight  of  water  in  each  drop  can  thus  be 
determined.  Since  the  total  weight  of  water  precipitated  is  known, 
the  number  of  drops  present  is  obtained  at  once. 

This  method  was  initially  used  by  J.  J.  Thomson*  to  determine 
the  charge  carried  by  an  ion.  If  the  expansion  exceeds  the  value 
1 31,  both  positive  and  negative  ions  become  centres  of  condensa- 
tion. From  the  rate  of  fall  it  can  be  shown  that  approximately 
the  drops  are  all  of  the  same  size. 

The  condensation  vessel  was  similar  to  that  employed  by 
C.  T.  R.  Wilson.  Two  parallel  horizontal  plates  were  fitted  in  the 
vessel,  and  the  radiation  from  an  X  ray  tube  or  a  radio-active 
substance  ionised  the  gas  uniformly  between  them.  A  difference 
d  potential,  small  compared  to  that  required  to  saturate  the  gas, 
was  applied,  and  from  the  measurement  of  this  current  the 
Dumber  of  ions  present  in  the  gas  at  the  moment  of  expansion 
was  determined.  In  this  way,  the  charge  carried  by  the  drop 
tormed  round  the  ion  was  measured.  In  his  last  determination 
Sir  J.  J. .  Thomson  found  that  the  value*  of  the  ionic  charge 
e=3'4x  10"***  electrostatic  units.  Experiments  by  a  somewhat 
different  method  were  made  by  H.  A.  Wilson  f  who  found 
e=3'l  X  ID""***.  The  rate  of  fall  of  the  drops  was  determined 
when  a  strong  electric  field  was  applied  between  the  parallel 
plates.  The  general  evidence  indicates  that  the  ion  formed  in 
different  gases  has  initially  the  same  charge.  Wilson,  however, 
ohserved  that  some  of  the  drops  formed  by  condensation  carried 
multiples  of  two  or  more  ionic  charges.  This  no  doubt  is  to  be 
Mcribed  to  the  coalescence  of  two  or  more  drops. 

*  Thomson,  Phil,  Mag.  46,   p.  528,  1898 ;   0,   p.  34G,   1903 ;    Comiuction  of 
f^kctrieity  through  Oatet,  Gamb.  Univ.  Press,  2nd  edit.,  p.  150,  1906. 
t  H.  A.  Wilson,  Phil.  Mag.  6,  p.  429,  1903. 

4—2 


52  lONISATION   OF  GASES  [CH. 

The  value  of  e,  which  other  evidence  shows  to  be  identical 
with  the  positive  charge  carried  by  the  atom  of  hydrogen  liberated 
in  the  electrolysis  of  water,  is  a  fundamental  constant  of  great 
importance,  and  represents  the  smallest  unit  into  which  a  quantity 
of  electricity  is  divisible.     A  large  number  of  different  principles 
and  methods  have  been  employed  in  recent  years  to  determine 
the  value  of  e  with  the  greatest  possible  accuracy.     Millikan*  has 
made  a  number  of  accurate  measurements,  employing  a  similar 
principle  to  that  used  by  H.  A.  Wilson.     The  main  difficulty  of 
experiment  with  water  drops  is  their  rapid  evaporation  with  time. 
To  overcome  this,  Millikan   used   minute   drops   of  oil.     These  "! 
charged  drops  were  introduced   between  the  parallel  plates  in 
which  a  strong  electric  field  was  applied,  and  the  movements  rf  . 
individual  drops  were  followed  by  a  microscope.    By  adjusting  the 
value   of  the   field  which   acted   against   gravity,  it   was  found 
possible  to  keep  an  ion  suspended  in  nearly  the  same  position  in 
the  gas  for  an  hour  at  a  time.     The  experiment  showed  that  eadi 
of  these  drops  of  oil  carried  a  definite  multiple  of  the  smallest 
charge.     A  number  of  experiments  were  made  to  test  the  validity 
of  Stokes'  law  for  drops  of  different  sizes,  and  a  suitable  correction 
was  made  from  the  observations.     The  final  result  obtained  gave 
a  value  e  =  490  x  10~"  electrostatic  units.     On  the  other  hand, 
Perrinf  from  an  examination  of  the  equilibrium  and  distribution 
in  a  solution  of  fine  particles  which  show  the  Brownian  movement, 
concludes  that  the  value  of  6  =  4*1  x  10~'^ 

A  determination  of  e  from  radio-active  data  was  made  by 
Rutherford  and  Geiger J,  of  which  an  account  is  given  in  section  61. 
The  number  of  a  particles  passing  into  a  vessel  were  directly  counted, 
and  the  total  charge  carried  by  the  particles  determined.  It  was 
found  that  each  a  particle  cauried  a  charge  9*3  x  10~"  units,  and 
from  various  evidence  it  was  concluded  that  this  was  twice  the 
unit  charge.  Observations  of  a  somewhat  similar  character  were 
made  by  Regener§.     In  this  case,  the  a  particles  were  determined 

*  Millikan,  Phil.  Mag.  19,  p.  209,  1910;  ScUnce,  32,  p.  436,  1910. 

t  Perrin,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  353,  1909 ;  Ann.  d.  Chem.  et  Phy».  Sept.  1909.  See 
also  Brmonian  Movement,  Taylor  and  Francis,  1910  (translated  by  F.  Soddy, 
F.R.S.). 

X  Batiierford  and  Geiger,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  162,  190S. 

§  Begener,  Ber.  d.  k.  Preuss.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  88,  p.  94S,  1909. 


Uj  lONISATION  OF  OASES  53 

by  noting  the  number  of  scintillations  produced  on  a  diamond. 
Tie  value  found  by  him  was  e  =  4'79  x  10~*".  Observations  by 
a  nnmber  of  other  methods  have  also  been  made,  and  in  practically 
all  cases  the  value  for  e  lies  between  4  x  10~"  and  5  x  10~"  units. 
In  the  present  book  the  value  of  e  =  4*65  x  lO^'^  electrostatic 
units  is  taken.  This  value,  as  we  have  seen,  was  determined  by 
nMiio-active  measurements,  and  is  about  a  mean  value  of  the 
results  obtained  by  different  methods. 

21.  Diiniiioii  of  the  ioni.  Elarly  experiments  with  ionised 
gases  showed  that  the  conductivity  was  removed  from  the  gas  by 
passage  through  a  finely  divided  substance  like  cotton-wool,  or  by 
babbling  through  water.  This  loss  of  conductivity  is  due  to  the 
fiM^t  that  the  ions  in  passing  through  narrow  spaces  difiuse  to  the 
sides  of  the  boundary,  to  which  they  either  adhere  or  give  up  their 
ebarge. 

A  direct  determination  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  ions 
produced  in  gases  by  Rontgen  rays  or  by  the  rays  from  active 
mbatances  has  been  made  by  Townsend*.  The  general  method 
employed  was  to  pass  a  stream  of  ionised  gas  through  a  diffusion 
vessel  made  up  of  a  number  of  fine  metal  tubes  arranged  in  parallel. 
Some  of  the  ions  in  their  passage  through  the  tubes  diffuse  to  the 
sides,  the  proportion  being  greater  the  slower  the  motion  of  the 
gas  and  the  narrower  the  tube.  Observations  were  made  of  the 
conductivity  of  the  gas  before  and  after  passage  through  the  tubes, 
b  this  way,  correcting  if  necessary  for  the  recombination  during 
the  time  taken  to  pass  through  the  tubes,  the  proportion  R  of 
either  positive  or  negative  ions  which  arc  abstracted  can  be 
deduced.  The  value  of  R  can  be  expressed  mathematically  in 
terms  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  D,  the  length  and  radius  of  the 
tube  and  the  velocity  of  the  gas  current. 

The  following  table  shows  the  results  obtained  by  Townsend 
when  X  rays  were  used.  Almost  identical  results  were  obtained 
later,  when  the  radiations  from  active  substances  replaced  the 
X  rays. 

The  moist  gases  were  saturated  with  water  vapour  at  a  tem- 
perature of  IS"  C. 

*  Townaend,  Phil.  Tram.  Ray.  Soc.  A,  198,  p.  129,  1899. 


64 


lONISATION  OF  OASES 


[CH. 


Coefficients  of  diffusion  of  ions  into  gases. 


D  for  -  ions 


Air,  dry      

„     moist  ... 
Oxygen,  dry 

„        moist 
Carbonic  acid,  dry 

„  „     moist 

Hydrogen,  dry 


»» 


moist 


•028 

•032 

•025 

•0288 

•023 

•0246 

•123 

•128 


'  Mean  value 
of/) 


Ratio  of 
Talaes  of  D 


•043 

•0347 

•035 

•a335 

•0396 

•0323 

•0358 

•a323 

•026 

•0245 

•0255 

•025 

•190 

•156 

•142 

•135 

154 
1-09 


•58 
•24 
•13 
•04 
•54 
•11 


It  is  seen  that  the  negative  ion  in  all  cases  diffuses  faster  than 
the  positive.  This  difference  in  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  iora 
at  once  explains  an  interesting  experimental  result.  If  ionised 
gases  are  blown  through  a  metal  tube,  the  tube  gains  a  negative 
charge  while  the  gas  itself  retains  a  positive  charge.  The  number 
of  positive  and  negative  ions  present  in  the  gas  is  originally  the 
same,  but,  in  consequence  of  the  more  rapid  diffusion  of  the 
negative  ions,  more  of  the  negative  ions  than  the  positive  give  up 
their  charges  to  the  tube.  The  tube  consequently  gains  a  nega- 
tive and  the  gas  a  positive  charge. 

From  a  comparison  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  ions  in 
various  gases  with  the  mobility  of  the  ions,  it  is  seen  that  they 
are  directly  proportional  to  each  other.  The  negative  ion  in  the 
simple  gases  travels  faster  than  the  positive  ion,  and  also  diffuses 
faster.  This  relation  is  to  be  expected  theoretically  and  can  be 
deduced  from  simple  considerations*.  According  to  the  definition 
of  diffusion,  the  number  of  ions  which  in  unit  time  cross  unit  area 

of  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  a:  is  2)  -r- ,  where  n  is  the 

number  of  ions  per  unit  volume.     The  ions  may  consequently  be 

supposed  to  move  in  the  direction  of  x  with  an  average  velocity  of 
1       J 

-  D-j  .     Since  the  ions  exist  in  the   gaseous   state,  they  will 
n     doc 

produce  a  partial  pressure  p  proportional  to  their  concentration. 


See  J.  J.  Thomson,  Conduction  of  EUctrieity  through  Oases,  1906,  p.  42. 


nj  lONISATION  OF  OASES  55 

This  average  velocity  is  therefore  -  D  -p  .     Now  -J-  is  the  force 

J9       CLOO  CUD 

acdng  on  unit  volume  of  the  gas  parallel  to  x.  It  follows  from 
this  that  we  may  regard  the  ions  to  move  with  an  average  velocity 
Dip  along  the  axis  of  x  when  the  force  dp/dx  is  unity.  If  now  an 
electric  force  X  along  the  axis  of  x  be  supposed  to  act  on  the 
ionised  gas,  the  force  on  the  ions  per  unit  volume  is  Xen,  If  u 
be  the  average  velocity  of  the  ions  along  the  axis  of  Xy  then 

u  =  Xen .  -  . 
P 

Let  N  be  the  number  of  molecules  in  unit  volume  of  the  gas  at 
the  pressure  P  and  the  temperature  (15"*  C.)  for  which  the  values 
of  D  have  been  determined.  Since  the  ion  is  supposed  to  act 
like  the  molecules  of  a  perfect  gas  N/P  may  be  substituted  for 
njp  snd  is  a  constant  for  all  gases  at  the  same  temperature. 
When  X  is  equal  to  one  volt  (1/300  e.s.  unit)  per  cm.,  u  is  the 
same  as  the  mobility  K  of  the  ions.     Taking  P  at  atmospheric 

preflsure  =  10*  dynes  per  sq.  cm.,  Ne= j^^  -  .     This  result 

shows  that  the  values  of  K  and  D  should  be  proportional  to  each 
other  for  all  gases,  and  this  we  have  seen  is  very  approximately 
the  case. 

Townsend  {loc,  cit.)  has  shown  that  another  conclusion  of 
great  importance  can  be  deduced  from  this  relation  by  comparing 
the  value  of  Ne  for  the  ions  with  the  corresponding  value  for 
the  charged  atoms  of  hydrogen  obtained  from  the  electrolysis  of 
water. 

It  is  known  that  one  absolute  electromagnetic  unit  of 
electricity  in  passing  through  water  liberates  1*23  c.c.  of  hydrogen 
at  a  temperature  of  15°  C.  and  standard  pressure.  The  number  of 
atoms  in  this  volume  is  2*46  Ny  and,  if  e'  is  the  charge  on  the 
hydrogen  atom  in  the  electrolysis  of  water, 

2-46  Ne  =3x  10"  e.8.  units, 
and  Ne^  =  122  x  10"  e^.  units. 

Thus  -,  =  2-46x  10-^^. 

e  L 


56  lONISATION  OF  GASES  [CH. 

For  example,  substituting  the  values  of  K  and  D  determined 
in  moist  air  for  the  positive  ion, 

6^246     137 

c'  ~  100  ^  032  "  ^'^^ 

Values  of  this  ratio,  not  very  different  fix)m  unity,  are  obtained 
for  the  positive  and  negative  ions  of  the  gases  hydrogen,  oxygen, 
and  carbon  dioxide.  Taking  into  consideration  possible  experi- 
mental errors  in  the  values  of  K  and  D,  these  results  indicate 
that  the  charge  carried  by  an  ion  in  all  gases  is  the  same  and  is 
equal  to  that  cai^ried  hy  the  hydrogen  ion  in  the  electrolysis  of 
liquids, 

22.  Sixe  and  nature  of  the  ioni.  An  approximate  estimate 
of  the  mass  of  an  ion,  compared  with  the  mass  of  the  molecule  of 
the  gas  in  which  it  is  produced,  can  be  made  from  the  determi- 
nation of  the  coefficient  D  of  inter-diffusion  of  the  ions  into  gases. 
The  value  of  D  for  the  positive  ions  in  moist  carbon  dioxide  has 
been  shown  to  be  '0245,  while  the  corresponding  value  of  D  for 
the  inter-diffusion  of  carbon  dioxide  with  air  is  '14.  The  value 
of  D  for  different  gases  is  approximately  inversely  proportional  to 
the  square  root  of  the  products  of  the  masses  of  the  molecules  of 
the  two  inter-diffusing  gases;  thus,  the  positive  ion  in  carbon 
dioxide  behaves  as  if  its  mass  were  large  compared  with  that  of 
the  molecule.  Similar  results  hold  for  the  negative  as  well  as  for 
the  positive  ion,  and  for  other  gases  besides  carbon  dioxide. 

This  early  led  to  the  view  that  the  ion  consists  of  a  charged 
centre  surrounded  by  a  cluster  of  molecules  travelling  with  it, 
which  are  kept  in  position  round  the  charged  nucleus  by  electrical 
forces*.  A  rough  estimate  shows  that  this  cluster  consists  of  about 
30  molecules  of  the  gas.  This  idea  is  supported  by  the  variation 
in  velocity,  i.e.  the  variation  of  the  size  of  the  negative  ion,  in  the 
presence  of  water  vapour;  for  the  negative  ion  undoubtedly 
appears  to  have  in  most  cases  a  greater  mass  in  moist  that  in  dry 
.  gases.  At  the  same  time  it  is  possible  that  the  apparently  large 
size  of  the  ion,  as  determined  by  diffusion  methods,  may  be  in 
part  a  result  of  the  charge  carried  by  the  ion.     The  presence  of 

*  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  M,  p.  422,  1897. 


nj  lONISATION   OF  GASES  57 

t  charge  on  a  moving  body  would  increase  the  frequency  of 
collision  with  the  molecules  of  the  gas,  and  consequently  diminish 
the  rate  of  diffusion.  The  ion  on  this  view  may  not  actually  be 
of  greater  size  than  the  molecule  from  which  it  is  produced. 

Theories  to  take  into  account  the  effect  of  the  charge  of  the 
ion  on  its  rate  of  diffusion  have  been  advanced  by  Langevin*  and 
WelUschf.  The  latter  concludes  that  the  experimental  results 
can  be  explained  by  assuming  that  the  ions  have  the  same  mass 
as  a  molecule  of  the  gas  in  which  they  are  formed.  From  physical 
considerations,  however,  it  appears  very  probable  that  a  charged 
ion  would  become  the  centre  of  an  aggregate  of  neutral  molecules 
which  travel  with  it.  The  apparent  mass  of  the  ion  may  be  due 
to  the  combined  effects  of  the  charge  and  of  the  attendant  cluster. 
It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  velocity  of  the  positively  charged 
recoil  atoms  &t)m  radio-active  matter  which  have  a  molecular 
weight  of  over  200  travel  in  an  electric  field  in  hydrogen  with  the 
nme  velocity  as  the  hydrogen  ion^.  Such  a  result  indicates  that 
the  initial  mass  of  the  positive  ion  has  little,  if  any,  effect  on  its 
velocity. 

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  negative  and  positive 
ions  differ  in  size,  and  this  difference  becomes  very  pronounced 
for  low  pressures  of  the  gas.  For  example,  at  atmospheric  pres- 
sure, the  negative  ion  liberated  by  the  action  of  ultra-violet  light 
from  a  metal  sur£EU^  is  identical  with  the  ion  produced  in  the 
aame  gas  by  X  rays.  At  low  pressures,  J.  J.  Thomson  showed 
the  negative  ion  set  free  by  ultra-violet  light  is  identical  with  the 
electron.  It  thus  appears  that  the  negative  ion  at  low  pressures 
sheds  its  attendant  cluster.  The  general  evidence  indicates  that 
the  electron  retains  its  individuality  for  some  time  in  a  gas  at 
low  pressure,  but  at  high  pressures  it  rapidly  becomes  attached  to 
a  molecule  of  the  gas  and  moves  with  it. 

It  is  generally  supposed  that  the  process  of  ionisation  in  gases 
consists  in  the  removal  of  a  negative  corpuscle  or  electron  from 
the  molecule  of  the  gas.  At  ordinary  pressure,  the  electron 
attaches  to  itself  a  molecule  or  group  of  molecules,  and  becomes 

*  Langevin,  Aim,  d,  Phy$,  et  Chimie,  rii.  28,  p.  835,  1903. 
t  WelliBoh,  Pkil.  Trani.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  909,  p.  249.  1909. 
X  J.  Franck,  Verh.  d,  D.  Phyt.  Get,  11,  p.  897,  1909. 


58  lONISATION   OF  GASES  [CB. 

the  negative  ion.  After  removal  of  the  negative  corpuscle,  the 
molecule  retains  a  positive  charge,  and  possibly  becomes  also  the 
centre  of  a  cluster  of  neutral  molecules. 

Although  the  above  view  of  the  mechanism  of  ionisatioD 
does  not  assume  that  a  complex  molecule  is  dissociated,  the 
process  of  ionisation  is  undoubtedly  accompanied  by  marked 
chemical  action.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the  rapid  decompod* 
tion  of  water  by  a  rays  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  and  also  by  the 
reverse  process  of  recombination  of  these  gases  when  exposed  to 
the  same  rays.  This  dissociation  of  complex  molecules  by  the 
radiation  may  be  a  secondary  and  not  a  primary  effect.  The 
amount  of  chemical  action  produced  by  the  a  rays  is  of  the  right 
magnitude  to  be  expected  if  the  ionisation  of  each  molecule  was 
accompanied  by  its  dissociation  (see  section  115). 

From  consideration  of  the  action  of  various  agents  in  pro- 
ducing ionisation  in  gases,  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson  and  also  Bragg  have 
suggested  that  the  process  of  ionisation  may  be  more  complex 
than  ordinarily  supposed,  and  that  the  initial  process  of  ionisation 
consists  in  the  removal  of  a  neutral  doublet.  This  breaks  up  into 
a  positive  and  negative  charge,  each  of  which  becomes  attached 
under  ordinary  conditions  to  the  molecules  of  the  gas  and  moves 
with  them. 

23.    The  number  and  diitribution  of  the  ioni.     The 

main  part  of  the  radiation  from  active  bodies  consists  of  a  stream 
of  charged  particles  projected  with  great  velocity.  Of  this  radia- 
tion, the  a  particles,  which  under  ordinary  conditions  produce 
most  of  the  ionisation  in  the  gas,  consist  of  charged  atoms  ol 
helium  projected  with  a  velocity  of  about  1/15  of  the  velocity  ol 
light.  The  /9  rays  are  identical  with  the  cathode  rays  produced 
in  a  vacuum  tube,  and  in  general  move  with  a  velocity  of  the 
same  order  as  that  of  light.  The  a  particles  travel  nearly  in 
straight  lines,  and  produce  a  very  intense  ionisation  along  theii 
path.  The  number  of  ions  produced  in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure 
depends  on  the  speed  of  the  a  particle,  and  varies  between  2000 
and  6000  per  millimetre  of  path.  The  high  speed  /9  particle  is  in 
general  a  much  less  efficient  ioniser,  and  does  not  produce  more 
than  20  or  30  ions  per  millimetre  of  path  (see  section  93).    It  ie 


n]  lONISATION   OF  OASES  59 

thus  seen  that  the  ionisation  produced  by  each  of  these  radiations 
is  not  uniform,  but  is  initially  confined  to  columns  in  the  gas  of 
a  small  cross-section.  When  a  large  number  of  particles  pass  e€w;h 
second  through  the  gas,  the  process  of  diffusion  tends  to  equalise 
to  some  extent  the  distribution  of  ions  in  the  volume  considered. 
In  most  cases  the  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  in  the  gas 
is  minute  compared  with  the  number  of  molecules  present.  For 
example,  by  the  electric  method,  it  is  possible  to  detect  in  a 
volume  of  about  one  litre  the  production  of  one  or  two  ions  per 
CLC  per  second.  Since  the  number  of  molecules  in  one  c.c.  of  a  gas 
at  standard  temperature  and  pi-essure  is  2*7  x  10'^  about  one 
molecule  in  lO^'  is  ionised  per  second. 

If  %  be  the  saturation  current  through  a  volume  of  a  gas  which 
is  uniformly  ionised,  the  number  of  ions  q  produced  per  second  is 
given  by  5  =  %/e  where  e  is  the  charge  carried  by  the  ion  which 
is  equal  to  4*65  x  10~^**  e.s.  units.  In  dealing  with  very  active 
substances  like  radium,  the  ionisation  near  its  surface  due  to  the 
B  rays  is  very  intense.  It  is  of  interest  to  calculate  the  rate  of 
production  of  ions  in  an  extreme  case  which  can  be  realised 
experimentally.  Suppose  that  the  emanation  from  100  milli- 
grams of  radium  is  purified  and  confined  in  a  small  glass  sphere 
one  millimetre  in  diameter,  the  walls  of  which  are  so  thin  that 
the  a  particles  are  projected  through  it  with  little  absorption. 
The  number  of  a  particles  emitted  per  second  from  the  emanation 
in  equilibrium  is  10'^  Each  a  particle  will  produce  about  2000 
yaoB  per  millimetre  of  its  path  near  the  sphere.  A  simple  calcula- 
tion shows  that  the  fraction  of  the  molecules  ionised  per  second 
near  the  surface  of  the  sphere  is  about  2  x  10~*.  In  the  course  of 
a  few  days,  it  is  evident  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  molecules 
of  the  gas  present  would  have  undergone  ionisation  and  consequent 
recombination.  In  such  a  case  as  we  have  been  considering,  the 
ionisation  of  the  air  would  have  been  accompanied  by  chemical 
action  resulting  in  the  formation  of  ozone  and  of  the  oxides  of 
nitrogen. 

21    Variation  of  the  current  under  different  conditions. 

It  is  now   necessary  to  consider  the  variation  of  the  current 
duough  ionised  gases  under  different  experimental  conditions. 


60  lONISATION  OF  OASES  [Cfl. 

With  unscreened  active  material,  the  ionisation  of  the  gas  is  in 
most  cases  mainly  due  to  the  a  rays  which  are  absorbed  in  their 
passage  through  a  few  centimetres  of  air.  In  consequence  of  this 
rapid  absorption,  the  ionisation  decreases  rapidly  fix>m  the 
sur&ce  of  the  active  body,  and  this  gives  rise  to  the  conductivity 
phenomena  different  in  character  from  those  observed  in  cases 
where  the  ionisation  is  more  uniform.  The  full  expression  of  the 
variation  of  the  ionisation  with  distance  from  a  large  plane  surfisMse 
of  active  matter  is  very  complicated.  It  has  been  found  experi- 
mentally, however,  that  the  intensity  of  the  ionisation  in  many 
cases  falls  off  approximately  according  to  an  exponential  law  with 
distance  from  the  plate.  For  simplicity  of  calculation,  this  law 
of  decrease  will  be  assumed  as  it  brings  out  clearly  the  main 
points  under  consideration.  The  ionisation  q  per  unit  volume  at 
a  distance  x  bom  the  surfEtce  of  the  plate  is  given  hy  q  —  go«~**i 
where  \  is  a  constant,  x  the  distance  from  the  plate,  and  90  ^^^ 
intensity  of  the  ionisation  at  the  surfistce  of  the  plate.  Suppose, 
for  example,  the  saturation  current  is  measured  between  two 
parallel  plates  distant  d  apart,  when  the  lower  plate  is  uniformly 
covered  with  radio-active  matter.  The  saturation  current  %  per 
unit  area  of  the  plate  is  given  by 


I  =  q,e  fe-^dx  =  ??-  (1  -  er^), 

Jo  A. 


where  e  is  the  charge  carried  by  the  ions.  When  \d  is  small, 
i.e.  when  the  ionisation  is  nearly  constant  between  the  plates, 

i  =  qed ;   when  \d  is  large  the  saturation  current  io  =  ^  ,  and  is 

independent  of  further  increase  in  the  value  of  d.  In  such  a  case, 
the  radiation  is  completely  absorbed  in  producing  ions  between 
the  plates  and  i/io  =  1  —  e"^.  In  the  case  of  a  thick  layer  of 
uranium,  thorium  or  radium,  the  average  ionisation  per  unit 
volume  decreases  to  half  value  after  traversing  less  than  I  centi- 
metre of  air,  at  atmospheric  pressure. 

26.  Variation  of  the  current  with  preeeure.  The  rate 
of  production  of  ions  by  the  radiations  from  active  substances  is 
directly  proportional  to  the  pressure  of  the  gas.  The  absorption  of 


irj  lONISATION  OF  OASES  61 

the  radiation  in  the  gas  also  varies  directly  as  the  pressure.  The 
latter  result  necessarily  follows  if  the  energy  required  to  produce 
LQ  ion  is  independent  of  the  pressure. 

In  cases  where  the  ionisation  is  uniform  between  two  parallel 
)late8,  the  current  will  vary  directly  as  the  pressure ;  when  however 
he  ionisation  is  not  uniform,  on  account  of  the  absorption  of  the 
adiation  in  the  gas,  the  current  does  not  decrease  directly  as  the 
treasure  until  the  pressure  is  reduced  so  far  that  the  ionisation 
3  sensibly  uniform.  Consider  the  variation  with  pressure  of  the 
ataration  current  t  between  two  large  parallel  plates,  one  of  which 
s  covered  with  a  uniform  layer  of  active  matter. 

Let  \i  =  absorption  constant  of  the  radiation  in  the  gas  for 
tnit  pressure. 

For  a  pressure  p,  the  ionisation  q  at  any  point  x  is  given  by 
/  ?o  =  ^~''^'*-     The  saturation  current  t  is  thus  proportional  to 

pq^e'P^^' .  dx  =  Y  (1  -  ^^''')- 


Jo  Jc 


\ 


If  r  be  the  ratio  of  the  saturation  currents  for  the  pressures 
t7|  and  Pi, 

1  —  ^-Pi^id 


r  = 


i-e-P.A.d- 


The  ratio  is  thus  dependent  on  the  distance  d  between  the 
plates  and  the  absorption  of  the  radiation  by  the  gas. 

The  diflFerence  in  the  shape  of  the  pressure-current  curves*  is 
well  illustrated  in  Fig.  8,  where  curves  are  given  for  hydrogen,  air, 
wd  carbonic  acid  for  plates  3'5  cms.  apart. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  the  current  at  atmospheric 
pressure  and  temperature  in  each  case  is  taken  as  unity.  The 
actual  value  of  the  current  was  greatest  in  carbonic  acid  and 
least  in  hydrogen.  In  hydrogen,  where  the  absorption  is  small, 
fche  current  over  the  whole  range  is  nearly  proportional  to  the 
pressure.  In  carbonic  acid,  where  the  absorption  is  large,  the 
mrrent  diminishes  at  first  slowly  with  the  pressure,  but  is  nearly 
proportional  to  it  below  the  pressure  of  235  mms.  of  mercury. 
Fhe  curve  for  air  occupies  an  intermediate  position. 

*  Batherford,  Phil  Mag.  47,  p.  109, 1S99. 


62  lONISATION  or  OAHES  [cs. 

In  oases  where  the  distance  between  the  plates  is  large,  the 
saturation  curreat  will  remain  constant  with  diminution  of  pn^ 
sure  until  the  absorption  is  so  reduced  that  the  radiation  reaches 
the  other  plate. 


Fig.  H. 
26.  Conductivity  of  different  gasee.  For  a  given  intensity 
of  radiation,  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  in  a  gas  varies  for 
different  gases  and  increases  with  the  density  of  the  gas.  Strutt* 
and  later  Kleeman-f-  have  made  a  very  complete  examination  of 
the  relative  conductivity  of  gases  exposed  to  the  different  types 
of  rays  emitted  by  active  substances.  To  avoid  correction  for  any 
difference  of  absorption  of  the  radiation  in  the  various  gases,  the 
pressure  of  the  gas  was  always  reduced  until  the  ionisation  was 
directly  proportional  to  the  pressure,  when,  as  we  have  seen  above, 

*  Stnitt,  Phil.  TToiu.  A,  IM,  p.  307,  1901  and  Pr«e.  Rm/.  Soe.  A,  T4,  p.  308, 
1903. 

t  Kleemai),  Proe.  Roy.  Soe.  A.  n,  p.  930,  1W7. 


nj 


lONISATION  OF  GASES 


63 


the  iooisation  must  everywhere  be  uniform  throughout  the  gas. 
For  each  type  of  rays,  the  ionisation  of  air  is  taken  as  unity.  The 
eorrents  through  the  gases  were  determined  at  different  pressures, 
and  were  reduced  to  a  common  pressure  by  assuming  that  the 
ionisation  was  proportional  to  the  pressure. 

With  unscreened  active  material,  the  ionisation  is  almost 
entirely  due  to  a  rays.  When  the  active  substance  is  covered  with 
a  layer  of  aluminium  '01  cm.  in  thickness,  the  ionisation  is  mainly 
due  to  the  13  or  cathodic  rays,  and  when  covered  with  1  mm.  of  lead, 
ihe  ionisation  is  solely  due  to  the  7  or  very  penetrating  rays.  The 
bllowing  table  gives  the  relative  conductivities  of  gases  exposed 
to  various  kinds  of  ionising  radiations. 

Relative  ionisation  produced  in  various  gases  by 

a,  /9.  and  7  rays. 


Gas 


O 


Air 

H... 

0... 

XjO 

COj 

NH3 

L^ 

C1H4O 
C,H,Cl 

CHCI3 

CCI4 

Ni(Co)4 

CHjBr 

CH5I 


Relative    , 

density     I 

a 

1-00        ' 

1^00 

•069      . 

0-24 

Ml 

M5 

1-53 

1-53 

1-53 

1-59 

•590      1 

0-81 

2^19 

2-01 

264 

2-99 

2-5'; 

4-40 

£•50 

4^85 

r53 

2^12 

224 

312 

4^15 

4^08 

5-35 

5-28 

5-99 

330 

2^75 

4-93 

3-43 

5-41 

4-00 

/3 


X  rays 
(Strutt) 


MX) 

0115 

117 

1-55 

1-60 

•888 
2-25 
3-62 
439 
4-55 
2-14 
324 
4^94 
6-28 

373 

5^11 
5-90 


1-00 

1-00 

0-160 

0114 

1-16 

1-39 

1-55 

158 

160 

0-898 

2-27 

797 

3-66 

4-29 

453 

217 

— 

319 

— 

4^93 

633 

45-3 

5-98 

3  81 

— 

5-37 

647 

In  the  above  table,  taken  from  Eleeman,  the  relative  ionisation 
is  expressed  in  terms  of  air  taken  as  unity.  Some  of  the  values 
for  Rontgen  rays,  obtained  by  Strutt,  are  added  for  comparison. 
The  ionisation  by  the  jS  and  7  rays  is,  in  many  cases,  nearly  pro- 
portional to  the  density  of  the  gas  or  vapour.  This  relation  does 
not  hold  for  the  a  rays,  where  the  absorption  of  the  radiations  by 


64  lONISATION   OF  OASES  [C^ 

the  gas  follows  a  different  law.  Eleeman  has  shown  that  for  the 
three  tj^pes  of  the  radiation,  the  values  obtained  are  consistent 
with  the  view  that  the  ionisation  for  a  complex  molecule  is 
additive,  and  can  be  deduced  from  a  knowledge  of  the  ionisation 
due  to  its  component  atoms.  In  the  case  of  X  rays,  the  ionisa- 
tion, especially  for  heavy  gases  and  vapours,  increases  much  more 
rapidly  than  the  density.  It  should  be  pointed  out,  however,  that 
the  relative  ionisation  of  gases  due  to  X  rays  is  not  a  constant, 
but  depends  very  greatly  upon  the  penetrating  power  of  the 
radiation  employed.  The  large  ionisation  observed  appears  to 
be  connected  with  the  emission  of  marked  secondary  radiation 
from  the  gas.  Eve*  has  show^  •  '-^or  ^  -  '^  penetrating  X  rays, 
that  the  relative  ionisation  teij  .u  the  values  observed 

for  penetrating  7  rays.  The  coHv*  .^uivity  of  gases  is  approximately 
proportional  to  the  absorption  of  the  energy  of  the  radiation  by 
the  gas. 

In  order  to  determine  the  relative  energy  required  to  produce 
a  pair  of  ions  in  different  gases,  it  is  necessary  to  measure  thi 
total  ionisation  produced  in  gases  by  the  complete  absorption  o 
the  radiation.     This  has  been  done  by  Rutherford  f  and  by  Laby^ 
by  using  a  sufficient  volume  of  gas  to  absorb  completely  the  a  rays 
from  uranium  and  by  measuring  the  saturation  currents.     Bragg^ 
and  Kleeman||  have  investigated  the  question  by  a  more  indirect 
method.   The  ionisation  at  a  definite  point  of  the  range  of  a  penci" 
of  homogeneous  a  rays  was  determined  for  gases  and  vapours  a 
suitable  pressures.     Knowing  the  variation  of  ionisation  of  the 
a  particle  at  different  points  of  its  range,  the  total  ionisation 
produced   by  a  complete   absorption   of  the   a  particle   can  be 
deduced.      Some   of  the   results  obtained  by  various  observers 
are  given  in  the  table  on  the  next  page. 

For  the  simple  gases  the  total  ionisation  is  approximately  the 
same,  indicating  that  about  the  same  energy  is  required  in  each 
case  to  produce  a  pair  of  ions.     For  complex  gases  and  vapours 

•  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  610,  1904. 

t  Rutherford,  Phil  Mag.  47,  p.  109,  1899. 

I  Laby,  Proc.  Roy.  Soe.  A,  79,  p.  206,  1907. 
§  Bragg,  Phil  Mag.  18,  p.  383, 1907. 

II  Eleeman,  Proc.  Roy,  Soe.  A,  79,  p.  220,  1907. 


.;ij  lONlSATION  OF  OASES  65 

aowever,  it  is  seen  that  the  total  ionisation  is  in  some  cases  about 

30  per  cent,  greater  than  in  air.    There  is  a  possible  source  of 

error  in  some  of  the  values  deduced  by  Bragg.    It  was  supposed 

at  the  time  of  the  experiments  that  the  relative  ionisation  at 

different  points  of  the  range  of  an  a  particle  was  the  same  for  all 

gases.     More  recent  experiments  by  Taylor*,  however,  show  that 

this  is  not  correct.    This  question  is  discussed  in  more  detail  later 

(section  67).   The  question  whether  the  amount  of  energy  absorbed 

,  in  the  process  of  ionisation  is  dependent  on  the  nature  of  the  gas 

I  is  very  important.     As  we  have  seen,  the  process  of  ionisation  for 

j  complex  molecules  may  not  only  result  in  the  initial  expulsion  of 

■  an  electron  but  also/'fjiva^/7h?fr\kal  dissociation  of  the  molecule 

i  ■• 

into  two  charged  cuij,^o''''j.['.  t»i  •  one  energy  required  for  the  two 
types  of  dissociation  may  De'(|niJcif  different  in  magnitude. 


Total  ionisation  due 

to  a  rays. 

Gas 

Rutherford 

Laby 

Bragg 

Air 

•  •• 

lOO 

1-00 

1-00 

Hydrogen 

•  •i 

0-96 

— 

— 

Nitrogen 

•  •  • 

— 

0-96 

Nitrous  oxide 

•  •  ■ 

0-99 

1-05 

Ammonia 

•  • « 

1-01 

0-90 

Carbonic  acid 

•  •  « 

0-96 

1-03 

1-08 

Acetylene 

■  ■ « 

1-27 

1-26 

Pentane  ... 

•  • 

— 

1-345 

i-ds 

Ether 

•  •  1 

1-29 

1-31 

Ethyl  chloride 

•  •  1 

MS 

1-30 

r. 


It 


r^ 


27.  Potential  Qradlent.  The  normal  potential  gradient 
between  two  charged  electrodes  is  always  disturbed  when  the  gas 
is  ionised  in  the  space  between  them.  If  the  gas  is  uniformly 
ionised  between  two  parallel  plates,  Child  and  Zeleny  have  shown 
that  there  is  a  sudden  drop  of  potential  near  the  surface  of  both 
plates,  and  that  the  electric  field  is  sensibly  uniform  for  the  in- 
tennediate  space  between  them.  The  disturbance  of  the  potential 
gradient  depends  upon  the  difference  of  potential  applied,  and  is 
different  at  the  surface  of  the  two  plates. 

•  Taylor,  Amer.  Joum,  SeL  28,  p.  357,  1909;  Phil.  Mag.  21,  p.  571,  1911. 
R.  R.-A.  5 


66  lOIflSATION   OF  OASES 

In  moet  measurements  of  radio-activity  the  material  is  s]: 
over  one  plate  only.  In  Buch  a  case  the  ionisation  is  to  a  I 
extent  confined  to  the  volume  of  the  air  close  to  the  active  [ 
The  potential  gradient*  in  such  a  case  is  shown  in  Fig.  9. 
dotted  line  shows  the  variation  of  potential  at  any  point  beti 
the  plates  when  no  ionisation  is  produced  between  the  pli 
curve  A  for  weak  ionisation,  such  as  is  produced  by  uran 
curve  B  for  the  intense  ionisation  produced  by  a  very  ai 
substance.  In  both  cases  the  potential  gradient  is  least 
■fV 


Fig.  9. 
the  active  plate,  and  greatest  near  the  opposite  plate.     For 
intense  ionisation  it  is  very  small  near  the  active  siir&ce. 
potential  gradient  varies  slightly  according  as  the  active  plal 
charged  positively  or  negatively. 

28.  Variation  of  current  with  voltage  for  mrl 
Ionisation.  Some  very  interesting  results,  giving  the  vans 
of  the  current  with  voltage,  are  observed  when  the  ionisatic 
intense,  and  confined  to  the  space  near  the  surface  of  on 
two  parallel  plates  between  which  the  current  is  measured. 
•  Entherford,  Phil.  Mag.  VI,  p.  109,  1899. 


U]  lONISATION   OF  OASES  67 

The  theory  of  this  subject  has  been  worked  out  independently 
by  Child*  and  Rutherford f.  Let  V  be  the  potential  difference 
between  two  parallel  plates  at  a  distance  d  apart.  Suppose  that 
the  ionisation  is  confined  to  a  thin  layer  near  the  surface  of  the 
plate  A  (see  Fig.  1)  which  is  charged  positively.  When  the  electric 
field  is  acting,  there  is  a  distribution  of  positive  ions  between  the 
plates  A  and  B. 

Let  7^  =  number  of  positive  ions  per  unit  volume  at  a  distance 
X  from  the  plate  A, 

Ki  =  mobility  of  the  positive  ions, 

e  =  charge  on  an  ion. 

The  current   ii   per  square   centimetre   through   the  gas  is 
coDstaDt  for  all  values  of  Xy  and  is  given  by 

•      J.       dV 

By  Poisson's  equation 

dW     Siri^x 


Integrating  (^^j  ^K,'^^^ 


dV 
where  il  is  a  constant.     Now  A  is  equal  to  the  value  of    r-  when 

dV 
^=0.    By  making  the  ionisation  very  intense,  the  value  of -7- 

can  be  made  extremely  small. 

Putting  il  =  0,  we  see  that 

dV 
dx 


= ±  v"^-. 


This  gives   the   potential    gradient    between   the   plates   for 
different  values  of  x. 

*  ChUd,  Phy$.  Reo,  12,  pp.  65,  185,  1901. 

t  Bntherford,  Phil,  Mag,  S,  p.  210, 1901 ;  Phyi,  Rev.  18,  p.  32, 1901. 

5—2 


68  lONISATION  OF  OASES 

Integrating  between  the  limits  0  and  d, 


r=±i^^^S, 


If  t^  is  the  value  of  the  current  when  the  electric  fie 
reversed,  and  K^  the  velocity  of  the  negative  ion, 

and  -*  =  Yr^ . 

The  current  in  the  two  directions  is  thus  directly  proport 
to  the  velocities  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions.  The  cu 
should  vary  directly  as  the  square  of  the  potential  diflfei 
applied,  and  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  between 
platea 

The  theoretical  condition  of  surface  ionisation  cannot  be  ful 
by  the  ionisation  due  to  active  substances,  as  the  ionisation  exi 
some  centimetres  fix)m  the  active  plate.  If,  however,  the  dist 
between  the  plates  is  large  compared  with  the  distance  over  ¥ 
the  ionisation  extends,  the  variation  of  current  with  voltaj 
in  approximate  agreement  with  the  theory.  On  account  oi 
difference  in  velocity  of  the  positive  and  negative  ion,  the  irn 
tude  of  the  current  for  a  given  voltage  depends  upon  the  dire 
of  the  electric  field,  and  is  always  greater  when  the  active 
is  charged  negatively.  These  effects  are  well  illustrated  by  i 
an  active  preparation  of  radium  as  a  source  of  a  rays  and  measi 
the  variation  of  current  with  voltage  for  parallel  plates  a 
10  cms.  apart. 

When  the  gas  between  the  plates  is  at  a  high  pressure 
ionisation  extends  a  very  short  distance  from  the  active  j 
The  theoretical  conditions  are  then  nearly  fulfilled,  and  the  cu: 
is  found  to  vary  over  a  considerable  range  as  the  square  oi 
potential  difference  applied.  By  using  a  preparation  of  ioi 
as  a  source  of  radiation,  Kovarik*  has  employed  this  methc 

*  Kovarik,  Proe.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  86,  p.  154,  1911. 


U]  lONISATION  OF  OASES  69 

detennine  the  velocity  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions  up  to 
presBures  of  100  atmospheres. 

29.    Magnetic  field  produced  by  an  ion  in  motion.     It 

will  be  shown  later  that  the  two  most  important  kinds  of  rays 
emitted  by  radio-active  substances  consist  of  electrified  particles, 
spontaneously  projected  with  great  velocity. 

The  methods  adopted  to  determine  the  character  of  these  rays 
are  very  similar  to  those  first  used  by  J.  J.  Thomson  to  show  that 
the  cathode  rays  consisted  of  a  stream  of  negatively  electrified 
particles  travelling  with  great  speed. 

The  proof  that  the  cathode  rays  were  corpuscular  in  character, 
and  consisted  of  charged  particles  whose  mass  was  very  small  com- 
pared with  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom,  marked  an  important  epoch 
in  physical  science:  for  it  not  only  opened  up  new  and  fertile  fields 
of  research,  but  also  profoundly  modified  our  previous  conceptions 
of  the  constitution  of  matter. 

A  brief  account  will  accordingly  be  given  of  the  effects  produced 
by  a  moving  charged  body,  and  also  of  some  of  the  experimental 
methods  which  have  been  used  to  determine  the  mass  and  velocity 
of  the  particles  of  the  cathode  stream*. 

Consider  an  ion  of  radius  a,  carr)nng  a  charge  of  electricity  e, 
and  moving  with  a  velocity  u,  small  compared  with  the  velocity  of 
light.  In  consequence  of  the  motion,  a  magnetic  field  is  set  up 
around  the  charged  ion,  which  is  carried  with  it.  The  charged  ion 
in  motion  constitutes  a  current  element  of  magnitude  eu,  and  the 
magnetic  field  H  at  any  point  distant  r  fix)m  the  sphere  is  given  by 

euBin  6 


fr= 


r« 


where  0  is  the  angle  the  raditis  vector  makes  with  the  direction  of 
motion.  The  lines  of  magnetic  force  are  circles  around  the  axis 
of  motion.  When  the  ion  is  moving  with  a  velocity  small  compared 
with  the  velocity  of  light,  the  lines  of  electric  force  are  nearly 

*  A  simple  and  ezoeUent  account  of  the  effects  produced  by  the  motion  of  a 
ehuged  ion  and  also  of  the  electronic  theory  of  matter  was  given  by  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge  in  1903  in  a  paper  entitled  "  Electrons  "  {Proceedingt  of  the  Imtitution  of 
KUetrieal  Engineen,  Part  159,  Vol.  83, 1903).  See  also  J.  J.  Thomson*s  Electricity 
and  Matter  (Soribner,  New  York,  1904). 


70  lONISATION   OV  QASfiS  [CB. 

radial,  but  as  the  speed  of  light  is  approached,  they  tend  to  leave 
the  axis  of  motion  and  to  bend  towards  the  equator.  When  the 
speed  of  the  body  is  very  close  to  that  of  light,  the  magnetic  and 
electric  field  is  concentrated  to  a  large  extent  in  the  equatorial 
plane. 

The  presence  of  a  magnetic  field  around  the  moving  bodT* 
implies  that  magnetic  energy  is  stored  up  in  the  medium  surround- 
ing it.  The  amount  of  this  energy  can  be  calculated  very  simply 
for  slow  speeds. 

In  a  magnetic  field  of  strength  H,  the  magnetic  energy  stored 
up  in  unit  volume  of  the  medium  of  unit  permeability  is  given  by 

H*  . 

Q— .     Integrating  the  value  of  this  expression  over   the  region 

exterior  to  a  sphere  of  radius  a,  the  total  magnetic  energy  due  to 
the  motion  of  the  charged  bodj'  is  given  by 


_  c*w*  p  dr 

~~3   Ja"^ 


dr     eW 


The  magnetic  energy,  due  to  the  motion,  is  analogous  to  kinetic 
energy,  for  it  depends  upon  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  the  body, 
In  consequence  of  the  charge  carried  by  the  ion,  additional  kinetic 
energy  is  associated  with  it.  If  the  velocity  of  the  ion  is  altered, 
electric  and  magnetic  forces  are  set  up  tending  to  stop  the  change 
of  motion,  and  more  work  is  done  during  the  change  than  if  the 
ion  were  uncharged.  The  ordinary  kinetic  energy  of  the  body  it 
^mu*.     In  consequence  of  its  charge,  the  kinetic  energy  associated 

with  it  is  increased  by  -^—  .     It  thus  behaves  as  if  it  possessed  c 

mass  m-^-mr^  where  m^  is  the  electrical  masSy  with  the  value  ^ . 

We  have  so  far  only  considered  the  electrical  mass  of  a  charged 
ion  moving  with  a  velocity  small  compared  with  that  of  light.  A& 
the  speed  of  light  is  approached,  the  magnetic  energy  can  nc 
longer  be  expressed  by  the  equation  already  given.     The  general 


Il]  lONISATION   OF   OASES  71 

values  of  the  electrical  mass  of  a  charged  body  for  speed  were  first 
worked  out  by  J.  J.  Thomson  *  in  1881.  A  more  complete  examina- 
tion was  made  in  1889  by  Heavisidef,  while  SearleJ  worked  out 
the  case  for  a  charged  ellipsoid.  Recently,  the  question  was  again 
attacked  by  Abraham§.  Slightly  different  expressions  for  the 
variation  of  electrical  mass  with  speed  have  been  obtained,  de- 
pending upon  the  conditions  assumed  for  the  distribution  of  the 
electricity  on  the  sphere. 

Let  mo  =  mass  of  ion  for  slow  speeds, 

m  =  apparent  mass  of  electron  at  any  speed, 
u  =  velocity  of  ion, 
V  =  velocity  of  light. 

IfM/7=^,  the  expression  found  by  Abraham  is  /w/mo  =  3/4'^()9), 

where 

Later,  Lorentz,  and  Einstein  using  the  principle  of  relativity  have 

deduced  the  expression  m/rwo  =  (1  —  /S*)"*.  The  first  experiment 
to  determine  the  variation  of  the  apparent  mass  of  an  ion  with 
speed  was  made  by  Eaufmann  using  a  radium  preparation  as  a 
source  of  high  speed  13  rays.  His  results  showed  that  the  apparent 
mass  of  the  fi  particle  or  electron,  increased  rapidly  with  speed 
near  the  velocity  of  light.  By  comparison  with  the  theoretical 
expression  developed  by  Abraham,  it  was  deduced  that  the  mass 
of  the  electron  must  be  mainly  electrical  in  origin,  and  that  there 
was  no  necessity  to  assume  a  material  nucleus  on  which  the 
charge  was  distributed.  Experiments  by  another  method  were 
made  later  by  Bucherer,  who  found  that  the  variation  of  the  mass 
of  the  electron  with  speed  was  in  close  agreement  with  the 
Lorentz-Einstein  formula  given  above.  An  account  of  these 
^experiments  will  be  given  later  (section  81).  The  value  of  e/nio 
for  the  electron  at  low  speeds  was  found  to  be  1*70  x  10'  e.m. 
units.     We  have  seen  that  the  electrical  mass  of  an  ion  at  slow 

*  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil.  Mag,  11,  p.  229,  1881. 
t  Heaviside,  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  2,  p.  514. 
:  Searle,  Phil,  Mag.  44,  p.  329,  1897. 
§  Abraham,  Phys,  Zeit.  4,  p.  57,  1902. 


72  lONISATION   OF  OASES  [CH. 

speeds  is  given  by  m©  -  2^/3a,  where  a  is  the  radius  of  the  ion.  j 

2  e  i 

Consequently    a  =  ^  —  . «  =  103  x  lO"*',    taking   e  =  1'55  x  10^ } 

e.m.  units.    The  electron  thus  behaves  as  if  it  were  an  electrioal  | 
charge  distributed  over  a  sphere  of  radius  small  compared  witfc   ; 
the  apparent  diameter  of  an  atom  of  matter,  viz.  10"'  or  10"*  cnw. 
In  consequence  of  its  minute  dimensions,  the  greater  part  of  the 
electric  and   magnetic  energy  associated   with   the   electron  in 
motion  is  stored  up  in  a  sphere  of  radius  about  10~"  cma 

All  the  calculations  agree  in  showing  that  the  electrical  mass 
is  practically  constant  for  slow  speeds,  but  increases  as  the  speed 
of  light  is  approached,  and  is  theoretically  infinite  when  the  speed 
of  light  is  reached.  The  nearer  the  velocity  of  light  is  approached, 
the  greater  is  the  resisting  force  to  a  change  of  motion.  An  infinite 
force  would  be  required  to  make  an  electron  actually  attain  the 
velocity  of  light,  so  that,  according  to  the  present  theory,  it  would 
be  impossible  for  an  electron  to  move  faster  than  light,  t,e.  faster 
than  an  electromagnetic  disturbance  travels  in  the  ether. 

The  importance  of  these  deductions  lies  in  the  fistct  that  an 
electric  charge  in  motion,  quite  independently  of  any  material 
nucleus,  possesses  an  apparent  mass  in  virtue  of  its  motion,  and 
that  this  mass  is  a  function  of  the  speed.     For  the  positive  ion, 
where  the  charge  is  associated  with  an  actual  atom  of  matter,  the 
electrical  mass  due  to  its  motion  is,  in  general,  small  compared 
with  the  observed  mass  of  the  atom.     In  the  case  of  the  electron, 
however,  we  have  seen  that  the  whole  mass  is  electrical  in  origin. 
This  has  led  to  the  suggestion  that  the  mass  in  general  may  be 
electrical  in  origin,  and  result  from  the  motion  of  the  charged 
particles  composing  the  atom. 

30.  Action  of  a  magnetic  and  electric  field  on  a  moving 
ion.  Let  us  consider  the  case  of  an  ion  of  mass  m  carrying  a 
charge  e  and  moving  freely  with  a  velocity  u.  If  u  is  small  com- 
pared with  the  velocity  of  light,  the  ion  in  motion  corresponds  to 
a  current  element  of  magnitude  eu.  If  the  ion  moves  in  an 
external  magnetic  field  of  strength  H,  it  is  acted  on  by  a  force 
at  right  angles  both  to  the  direction  of  motion,  and  to  that  of  the 
magnetic  force  and  equal  in  magnitude  to  Heu  sin  0,  where  0  is 


II]  lONISATION   OF  OASES  73 

the  angle  between  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  force  and  the 
direction  of  motion.  Since  the  force  due  to  the  magnetic  field  is 
always  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  motion,  it  has  no  effect 
upon  the  velocity  of  the  particle,  but  can  only  alter  the  direction 
of  its  path. 

If  p  is  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  path  of  the  ion,  the  force 

along  the  normal  is  equal  to  —  ,  and  this  is  balanced  by  the  force 

Hen  sin  0. 

If  fl  =^  ,  i.e,  if  the  ion  is  moving  at  right  angles  to  the  direction 

of  the  magnetic  field  Heu  =  —  or  Hp  =      w.    Since  u  is  constant, 

p  is  also  constant,  i.e,  the  particle  describes  a  circular  orbit  of 
radius  />.  The  radius  of  the  circular  orbit  is  thus  directly 
proportional  to  u,  and  inversely  proportional  to  H. 

If  the  ion  is  moving  at  an  angle  0  with  the  direction  of  the 
magnetic  field,  it  describes  a  curve  which  is  compounded  of  a 
motion  of  a  particle  of  velocity  u  sin  0  perpendicular  to  the  field  and 
tt  cos  0  in  the  direction  of  the  field.    The  former  describes  a  circular 

orbit  of  radius  p,  given  by  Hp  =  —  t/  sin  ^ ;  the  later  is  unaffected 

by  the  magnetic  field  and  moves  uniformly  in  the  direction 
of  the  magnetic  field  with  a  velocity  u  cos  0.  The  motion  of 
the  particle  is  in  consequence  a  helix,  traced  on  a  cylinder  of 

radius  p  =       -«r     ,  whose  axis  is  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic 

field.  Thus  an  ion  projected  obliquely  to  the  direction  of  a 
uniform  magnetic  field  always  moves  in  a  helix  whose  axis  is 
parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force*.     If  the  magnetic  field 

is  perpendicular    to   the   path    of  a   pencil    of  rays,   —  =  Hp. 

Consequently  the  value  —  for  the  ion  is  known  when  H  and  p 
are  known.     In  many  experimental  cases,  the  radius  of  curvature 

*  A  fuU  aoooant  of  the  path  described  by  a  moving  ion  under  various  conditions 
i*  given  by  J.  J.  Thomson,  Conduction  of  Rlectrieity  in  Oaset  (Camb.  Univ.  Press, 
1908),  chapter  nr. 


74 


lONlSATION   OF  OASES 


[CB. 


p  of  the  path  of  the  ion  is  deduced  from  observations  of  the  small 
deflection  of  a  pencil  of  rays  in  a  vacuum  after  passing  through 
a  uniform  magnetic  field. 

Suppose,  for  example  (Fig.  10  A),  that  the  line  PA  represents 
the  original  direction  of  a  pencil  of  positive  ions  moving  at  uniform 
speed.  A  constant  magnetic  field  of  strength  H  is  applied  over 
a  length  of  the  path  PC  =  a,  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  paper.  The  ion  describes  the  arc  of  a  circle  PD. 
After  escaping  from  the  magnetic  field  at  D,  the  ion  travels  in 
a  straight  line  which  is  a  tangent  to  the  path  at  D  and  strikes  a 
screen  or  photographic  plate  at  B  which  is  perpendicular  to  the 
original  path  of  the  ions. 


A 

F 
B 


Fig.  IDA. 


Draw  DF  parallel  to  PA.  Let  AF=^d^,  FB  =  d^,  AB  =  d 
PC=a,  CA  =  b.  If  the  deviation  CD  is  small  compared  with  the 
length  PC,  by  a  property  of  the  circle  2p .  CD  =  PC^  where  p  ifi 


a' 


the  radius.     Consequently  dj  =  ^  ;  cJa  =  FB  =  6  tan  ^,  where  0  vt 

the  angle  between  BD  and  PA,     Since  when  the  deflection  is 

2(1 

small,  the  tangent  at  D  if  produced  bisects  PC  at  i?,  tan  tf  =  — 


a 


and  cL  =    --^  =  —  .     The  total  deviation 
a        p 

rf  =  d,  +  da  =  -  Ti  +  o)  • 
Substituting  this  value  of  p. 


mu 


^Hp^ 


d 


The  ions  are  also  deflected  in  their  passage  through  an  electric 
field.     Suppose  that  a  pencil  of  positive  ions  travels  at  constant 


n] 


lONISATION   OF  GASES 


75 


speed  in  the  direction  PA  between  two  parallel  plates  L,  M, 
distant  I  apart,  of  length  a  charged  to  a  difference  of  potential  V 
(Fig.  10  B).  If  the  plate  is  charged  positively  the  path  of  the 
ioDs  is  deviated  in  the  direction  PD.  Since  the  value  of  the 
electric  field  X  =  V/l  is  constant  between  the  plates,  the  positive 
ma  experience  a  constant  acceleration  a  =  Xe/m  downwards  in 
a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  original  direction  of  the  pencil. 
The  path  described  by  the  pencil  of  rays  is  evidently  a  parabola 
of  which  PA  is  a  tangent  at  the  vertex  P.  The  particle  aft.er 
escaping  from  the  electric  field  travels  in  a  straight  line  DB  which 
is  a  tangent  to  the  parabola  at  B,  and  strikes  the  screen  or  photo- 
graphic plate  at  B,     The  time  t  taken  for  the  ions  to  traverse  the 


Fig.  10  B. 


electric  field  is  a/u  and  the  space  CD  passed  over  in  this  time 

1  Xe  a* 
under  the  constant  acceleration  is  riven  by  CD  =  ^  —  .  -  .    With 

the  same  notation  as  before  the  total  deviation 

d  =  AF-^FB  =  dJl  +  -), 
Substituting  the  value  of  d, 

e    ~  2dA        aj- 

From  a  combination  of  the  deflections  observed  in  a  magnetic  and  in 
an  electric  field,  both  the  velocity  and  value  of  e/w  for  the  ions  can 

be  determined   for  —  =  A  and   —  =  jB,  where  A  and  B  are 

e  e 

quantities  which  can  be  measured. 


76  lONISATION   OF  OASES  [CH. 

31.    ]>etennination  of  e/m  for  tbe  cathode  stream.    Hie ! 

cathode  rays,  first  observed  by  Varley,  were  investigated  in  detail ' 
by  Crookes  and  Hittorf.    These  rays  are  projected  fi^m  the  cathode  ;- 
in  a  vacuum  tube  at  low  pressure.    They  travel  in  straight  line% ; 
and  are  readily  deflected  by  a  magnet,  and  produce  strong  lumiii-  - 
osity  in  a  variety  of  substances  placed  in  their  path.    The  rays  aie 
deflected  by  a  magnetic  field  in  the  same  direction  as  would  be 
expected  for  a  negatively  charged  particle  projected   firom  the 
cathode.     In  order  to  explain  the  peculiar  properties  of  these  layi 
Crookes  supposed  that  they  consisted  of  negatively  electrified 
particles,   moving  with  great  velocity  and  constituting,  as  he 
appropriately  termed  it,  ''a  new  or  fourth  state  of  matter."    The 
nature  of  these  rays  was  for  twenty  years  a  subject  of  mach 
controversy,  for  while  some  upheld  their  material  character,  othen 
considered  that  they  were  a  special  form  of  wave  motion  in  the 
ether. 

Perrin  and  J.  J.  Thomson  showed  that  the  rays  always  carried 
with  them  a  negative  charge,  while  Lenard  made  the  important 
discovery  that  the  rays  passed  through  thin  metal  foil  and  other 
substances  opaque  to  ordinary  light.  Using  this  property,  he  sent 
the  rays  through  a  thin  window  and  examined  the  properties  of 
the  rays  outside  the  vacuum  tube  in  which  they  were  produced. 

The  absorption  of  the  rays  by  matter  was  shown  to  be  neaily 
proportional  to  the  density  of  matter  over  a  very  wide  range, 
and  to  be  independent  of  its  chemical  constitution. 

The  nature  of  these  rays  was  successfully  demonstrated  by 
J.  J.  Thomson*  in  1897.  If  the  rays  consisted  of  negatively 
electrified  particles,  they  should  be  deflected  in  their  passage 
through  an  electric  as  well  as  through  a  magnetic  field.  Such  an 
experiment  had  been  tried  by  Hertz,  but  with  negative  results. 
J.  J.  Thomson,  however,  foimd  that  the  rays  were  deflected  by  an 
electric  field  in  the  direction  to  be  expected  for  a  negatively 
charged  particle,  and  showed  that  the  failure  of  Hertz  to  detect 
the  same  was  due  to  the  masking  of  the  electric  field  by  the  strong 
ionisation  produced  in  the  gas  by  the  cathode  stream.  This 
effect  was  got  rid  of  by  reducing  the  pressure  of  the  gas  in  the 
tube. 

*  J.  J.  Thomaon.  Phil.  Mag,  M,  p.  293,  1897. 


II] 


lONISATION   OF  GASES 


77 


The  experimental  arrangement  used  for  the  electric  deflection 
of  the  rays  is  shown  in  Fig.  11. 

The  cathode  rays  are  generated  at  the  cathode  C,  and  a  narrow 
pencil  of  rays  is  obtained  by  passing  the  rays  through  a  perforated 
disc  AB.  The  rays  then  passed  midway  between  two  parallel 
insulated  plates  D  and  E,  d  centimetres  apart,  and  maintained  at 
a  constant  difference  of  potential  F.  The  point  of  incidence  of  the 
pencil  of  rays  was  marked  by  a  luminous  patch  produced  on  a 
phosphorescent  screen  placed  at  PP\ 

The  particle  carrying  a  negative  charge  e  in  passing  between 
the  charged  plates,  is  acted  on  by  a  force  Xe  directed  towards  the 
positive  plate,  where  X,  the  strength  of  the  electric  field,  is  given 

The  application  of  the  electric  field  thus  causes  the  luminous 
patch  to  move  in  the  direction  of  the  positive  plate.      If  now 


Fig.  11. 


&  aniform  magnetic  field  is  applied  between  the  plates  D  and  E, 
perpendicular  to  the  pencil  of  rays,  and  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the 
plates,  and  in  such  a  direction  that  the  electric  and  magnetic 
forces  are  opposed  to  one  another,  the  patch  of  light  can  be 
brought  back  to  its  undisturbed  position  by  adjusting  the  strength 
of  the  magnetic  field.  If  if  is  the  strength  of  the  magnetic  field, 
the  force  on  the  particle  due  to  the  magnetic  field  is  Heu,  and 
when  a  balance  is  obtained 


or 


Heu  =  Xe, 
X 


(1). 


78  lONISATION   OF  OASES  [CK 

Now  if  the  magnetic  field  H  is  acting  alone,  the  curvature  p  oj 
the  path  of  the  rays  between  the  plates  can  be  deduced  from  the 
deflection  of  the  luminous  patch.     But  we  have  seen  that 

^P=~    (2). 

From  equations  (1)  and  (2),  the  value  of  u  and  ejm  for  the  particle 
can  be  determined. 

The  velocity  u  is  not  constant,  but  depends  upon  the 
potential  difference  between  the  electrodes,  and  this  in  turn 
depends  upon  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the  residual  gas  in 
the  tube. 

By  altering  these  factors,  the  cathode  particles  may  be  made 
to  acquire  velocities  varying  between  about  10*  and  10^®  cms.  pei 
second.  This  velocity  is  enormous  compared  with  that  which  can 
be  impressed  ordinarily  upon  matter  by  mechanical  means. 

As   a  result   of   a  series    of   experiments    the    mean   value 

-  =  7*7  X  !()•  was  obtained.  The  value  of  elm  is  independent  of  the 
m 

nature  or  pressure  of  the  gas  in  the  vacuum  tube  and  independent 

of  the  metal  used  as  cathode.    A  similar  value  of  ejm  was  obtained 

by  Lenard*  and  others. 

Schusterf,  Kaufmann^  and  Simon§  used  a  different  method  tc 
determine  the  value  of  ejm.  The  potential  difference  V  between 
the  terminals  of  the  tube  was  measured.  The  work  done  on  the 
charged  particle  in  moving  from  one  end  of  the  tube  to  the  other  ii 
Fe,  and  this  must  be  equal  to  the  kinetic  energy  \mv}  aoquirec 
by  the  moving  particle.     Thus 

e       ?*' 


m 


2V    ^^^ 


By  combination  of  this  equation  with  (2)  obtained  by  measure- 
ment of  the  magnetic  deflection,  both  u  and  ejm  can  be  deter- 
mined. 

*  Lenard,  Annal.  d.  Phy;  M,  p.  279,  1898. 

t  Schuster,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  87,  p.  317,  1884;  47,  p.  626,  1890. 

X  Kaufmano,  AnnaL  d,  Phy$.  61,  p.  544;  62,  p.  596,  1897;  65,  p.  431,  1898. 

§  SimoD,  AnnaL  d.  Phy$.  69,  p.  589,  1899. 


II]  lONlSATlON   OF  OASES  79 

Simon  found  by  this  method  that 

-=  1-865  X  10^ 
m 

It  will  be  seen  later  (section  81)  that  a  similar  value  was  deduced 
by  Kaufmann  for  the  electrons  projected  from  radium,  while 
Bucherer  later  found  a  value  1*70  x  10^ 

These  results,  which  have  been  based  on  the  effect  of  a 
magnetic  and  electric  field  on  a  moving  ion,  were  confirmed  by 
Wiechert*,  who  determined  by  a  direct  method  the  time  required 
for  the  particle  to  traverse  a  known  distance. 

The  particles  which  make  up  the  cathode  stream  were  termed 
"corpuscles"  by  J.  J.  Thomson.  The  name  "electron,"  first  em- 
ployed by  Johnstone  Stoney,  has  also  been  applied  to  them  and 
has  come  into  general  usei*. 

^  The  methods  above  described  do  not  give  the  mass  of  the 
electron,  but  only  the  ratio  of  the  charge  to  the  mass.  A  direct 
comparison  can,  however,  be  made  between  the  ratio  e/m  for  the 
electron  and  the  corresponding  value  for  the  hydrogen  atoms  set 
bee  in  the  electrolysis  of  water.  E^h  of  the  hydrogen  atoms 
is  supposed  to  carry  a  charge  e,  and  it  is  known  that  96,470 
coulombs  of  electricity,  or  9647  electromagnetic  units  of  quantity, 
are  required  to  liberate  one  gram  of  hydrogen.  If  N  is  the 
number  of  atoms  in  one  gram  of  hydrogen,  then  Ne  =  9647.  But 
if  111  is  the  mass  of  a  hydrogen  atom,  then  Nvi  =  1.     Dividing  one 

ky  the  other  —  =  9647.      We  have  seen  already  that  a  gaseous 

ion  carries  the  same  charge  as  a  hydrogen  atom,  while  indirect 
evidence  shows  that  the  electron  carries  the  same  charge  as  an 
ioD,  and  consequently  the  same  charge  as  the  atom  of  hydrogen. 
Hence  we  may  conclude  that  the  apparent  mass  of  the  electron  is 
wily  about  y^^iy  of  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  The  electron 
Aqs  behaves  as  the  smallest  body  known  to  science. 

In  later  experiments  J.  J.  Thomson  showed  that  the  negative 

*  Wieohert,  Ann,  d,  PhyM,  09,  p.  739,  1899. 

t  A  complete  ducuflsion  of  the  various  methods  employed  to  measure  the 
^^^ty  and  mass  of  electrons  and  also  of  the  theory  on  which  they  are  based  will 
be  found  in  J.  J.  Thomson's  Conduction  of  EUctiicity  through  Oases. 


80  lONISATION   OF  OASES  [C 

ions  set  free  at  low  pressures  by  an  incandescent  carbon  filamei 
and  also  the  negative  ions  liberated  from  a  zinc  plate  exposed 
the  action  of  ultra-violet  light,  gave  the  same  value  for  ejm  as  t 
electrons  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube.  It  thus  seemed  probal 
that  the  electron  was  a  constituent  of  all  matter.  This  vi< 
received  strong  support  from  measurements  of  quite  a  difFere 
character.  Zeeman  in  1897  found  that  the  lines  of  the  spectru 
from  a  source  of  light  exposed  in  a  strong  magnetic  field  we 
displaced  and  doubled.  Later  work  has  shown  that  the  lines 
some  cases  are  trebled,  in  others  sextupled,  while,  in  a  few  ca» 
the  multiplication  is  still  greater.  These  results  received  a  genei 
explanation  on  the  radiation  theories  previously  advanced 
Lorentz  and  Larmor.  The  radiation,  emitted  from  any  source,  w 
supposed  to  result  from  the  orbital  or  oscillatory  motion  of  t 
charged  parts  constituting  the  atom.  Since  a  moving  ion  is  act 
on  by  an  external  magnetic  field,  the  motion  of  the  charged  io 
is  disturbed  when  the  source  of  light  is  exposed  between  the  pol 
of  a  strong  magnet.  There  results  a  small  change  in  the  peri* 
of  the  emitted  light,  and  a  bright  line  in  the  spectrum  is,  in  co 
sequence,  displaced  by  the  action  of  the  magnetic  field.  Accordii 
to  theory,  the  small  change  in  the  wave-length  of  the  emitted  lig 
depends  upon  the  strength  of  the  magnetic  field  and  on  the  rat 
ejm  of  the  charge  carried  by  the  ion  to  its  mass.  By  comparison 
the  theory  with  the  experimental  results,  it  was  deduced  that  tl 
moving  ion  carried  a  negative  charge  and  that  the  value  of  ej 
was  about  10^.  The  charged  ion,  responsible  for  the  radiati< 
from  a  luminous  body,  is  thus  identical  with  the  electron  set  fii 
in  a  vacuum  tube. 

It  thus  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  atoms  of  c 
bodies  are  complex  and  are  built  up,  in  part  at  least,  of  electroi 
whose  apparent  mass  is  very  small  compared  with  that  of  tl 
hydrogen  atom.  The  properties  of  such  disembodied  charges  h 
been  examined  mathematically  among  others  by  Larmor,  who  se 
in  this  conception  the  ultimate  basis  of  a  theory  of  matt< 
J.  J.  Thomson  and  Lord  Kelvin  have  investigated  mathematical 
certain  arrangements  of  a  number  of  electrons  which  are  stable  f 
small  disturbances.  This  question  will  be  discussed  more  in  detc 
later. 


]  lONISATlON   OF  GASES  81 

32.  Canal  rays.  If  a  discharge  is  passed  through  a  vacuum 
abe  provided  with  a  perforated  cathode,  within  certain  limits  of 
iressure,  luminous  streams  are  observed  to  pass  through  the  holes 
ind  to  emerge  on  the  side  of  the  cathode  remote  from  the  anode, 
rhese  rays  were  first  observed  by  Goldstein*  and  were  called  by 
iiim  the  **  Canal-strahlen."  These  rays  travel  in  straight  lines  and 
produce  phosphorescence  in  various  substances. 

Wien^f"  showed  that  the  canal  rays  were  deflected  by  strong 
magnetic  and  electric  fields,  but  the  amount  of  deflection  was  very 
jmall  compared  with  that  of  the  cathode  rays  under  similar  con- 
ditions. The  deflection  was  found  to  be  opposite  in  direction  to 
the  cathode  rays,  indicating  that  the  canal  rays  consist  of  positive 
ions.  Wien  determined  their  velocity  and  the  ratio  «/m,  by 
measuring  the  amount  of  their  magnetic  and  electric  deflection. 
The  value  of  elm  was  found  to  be  variable,  depending  upon  the  gas 
in  the  tube,  but  the  maximum  value  observed  was  about  10*. 
This  shows  that  the  positive  ion,  in  no  case,  has  a  mass  less  than 
that  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  It  seems  probable  that  the  canal  rays 
consist  of  positive  ions,  derived  either  from  the  gas  or  the  elec- 
trodes, which  travel  towards  the  cathode,  and  have  suflScient 
velocity  to  pass  through  the  holes  of  the  cathode  and  to  appear 
in  the  gas  beyond. 

A  large  amount  of  experimental  work  has  been  done  in  recent 
rears  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  positively  charged  particles 
)f  the  canal  rays,  and  the  anode  rays  which  originate  near  the 
mode  of  a  discharged  tube.  The  particles  in  the  canal  rays 
xmsist  of  positively  charged  ions  moving  with  widely  different 
elocities.  The  value  of  «/m  for  the  particles  has  been  determined 
lirectly  by  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson  J  by  passing  a  narrow  pencil  of  the 
ays  through  an  electric  and  magnetic  field  at  right  angles  to  each 
rther,  and  measuring  the  deflection  of  the  traces  of  the  pencil  of 
^ys  obtained  on  a  photographic  plate.  The  mass  and  velocity  of 
the  charged  ions  depend  upon  the  nature  of  gas  in  the  tube.     In 

•  Goldstein,  Berlin  Sitz,  39,  p.  691,  1886;  Ann,  d.  Phys.  64,  p.  45,  1898. 

t  Wien,  Ann.  d.  Phys,  65,  p.  440,  1898. 

t  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil,  Mag,  ao,  p.  752,  1910;  21,  p.  225,  1911. 

B.  B.-A.  6 


82  lONISATION   OF   GASES  [CH. 

some  cases  the  ions  carry  a  positive  charge  and  others  a  negative 
charge,  and  the  charge  carried  by  an  ion  may  be  several  multiples 
of  the  fundamental  charge.  In  complex  gases  and  vapours,  the 
canal  rays  consist  of  a  number  of  carriers  of  different  atomic 
weight  and  carrying  various  multiples  of  the  unit  charge. 

Such  results  are  of  great  importance  in  showing  that  the 
atoms  of  matter  may  carry  different  charges,  and  afford  a  very 
sensitive  method  of  analysis  of  the  gases  contained  in  the  dis- 
charge tube. 

It  is  remarkable  that,  so  far,  no  case  has  been  observed  where 
the  carrier  of  a  positive  charge  has  an  apparent  mass  less  than 
that  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  Positive  electricity  always  appears  to 
be  associated  with  the  atoms  of  matter.  We  have  seen  that  the 
process  of  ionisation  in  gases  is  supposed  to  consist  of  the  ex- 
pulsion of  an  electron  ftx>m  the  atom.  The  corresponding  positive 
charge  remains  behind  on  the  atom  and  travels  with  it.  This 
difference  between  positive  and  negative  electricity  appears  to 
be  fundamental,  and  no  explanation  of  it  has,  as  yet,  been  forth- 
coming. 

33.  Radiation  of  energy.  If  an  electron  moves  uniformly 
in  a  straight  line  with  constant  velocity,  the  magnetic  field,  which 
travels  with  it,  remains  constant,  and  there  is  no  loss  of  energy 
from  it  by  radiation.  If,  however,  its  motion  is  hastened  or 
retarded,  the  magnetic  field  is  altered,  and  there  results  a  loss  of 
energy  from  the  electron  in  the  form  of  electromagnetic  radiation. 
The  rate  of  loss  of  energy  from  an  accelerated  electron  was  first 

calculated  by  Larraor*  and  shown  to  be  ^y.  x  (acceleration)',  where 

e  is  the  charge  on  the  electron  in  electromagnetic  units,  and  Fthe 
velocity  of  light. 

Any  alteration  in  the  velocity  of  a  moving  charge  is  thus 
always  accompanied  by  a  radiation  of  energy  from  it.  Since  the 
electron,  set  free  in  a  vacuum  tube,  increases  in  velocity  in  passing 
through  the  electric  field,  energy  must  be  radiated  from  it  during 
its  passage  fi'om  cathode  to  anode.  It  can,  however,  readily  be 
calculated  that,  in  ordinary  cases,  this  loss  of  energy  is  small 

♦  Larmor,  Phil  Mag.  M,  p.  593,  1897. 


U]  lONISATION   OF  GASES  83 

compared  with  the  kioetic  energy  acquired  by  the  electron  in 
passing  through  the  electric  field. 

An  electron  moving  in  a  circular  orbit  is  a  powerful  radiator  of 
energy,  since  it  is  constantly  accelerated  towards  the  centre.  An 
electron  moving  in  an  orbit  of  radius  equal  to  the  radius  of  an 
atom  (about  10"~*  cms.)  would  lose  most  of  its  kinetic  energy  of 
motion  in  a  small  fraction  of  a  second,  even  though  its  velocity 
was  originally  nearly  equal  to  the  velocity  of  light.  If,  however, 
a  number  of  electrons  are  arranged  at  equal  angular  intervals  on 
the  circumference  of  a  circle  and  move  with  constant  velocity  round 
the  ring,  the  radiation  of  energy  is  much  less  than  for  a  single 
electron,  and  rapidly  diminishes  with  an  increase  in  the  number  of 
electrons  round  the  ring.  This  result,  obtained  by  J.  J.  Thomson, 
will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  later  when  the  stability  of  systems 
composed  of  rotating  electrons  is  under  consideration. 

Since  the  radiation  of  energy  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the 
acceleration,  the  proportion  of  the  total  energy  radiated  depends 
upon  the  suddenness  with  which  an  electron  is  started  or  stopped. 
Now  some  of  the  cathode  ray  particles  are  stopped  abruptly  when 
they  impinge  on  the  metal  cathode,  and,  in  consequence,  give  up 
a  fraction  of  their  kinetic  energy  in  the  form  of  electromagnetic 
radiation.  Schuster,  Stokes  and  Weichert  suggested  that  this 
radiation  constituted  the  X  rays,  which  are  known  to  have  their 
origin  at  the  surface  on  which  the  cathode  rays  impinge.  The 
mathematical  theory  has  been  worked  out  by  J.  J.  Thomson*. 
If  the  motion  of  an  electron  is  suddenly  arrested,  a  thin  spherical 
pulse  in  which  the  magnetic  and  electric  forces  are  very  intense 
travels  out  from  the  point  of  impact  with  the  velocity  of  light 
The  more  suddenly  the  electron  is  stopped,  the  thinner  and  more 
intense  is  the  pulse.  On  this  view  the  X  rays  are  not  corpuscular 
like  the  cathode  rays,  which  produce  them,  but  consist  of  trans- 
verse disturbances  in  the  ether,  akin  in  some  respects  to  light 
waves  of  short  wave-length.  The  rays  are  made  up  of  a  number 
of  pulses,  which  are  non-periodic  in  character,  and  which  follow 
one  another  at  irregular  intervals. 

On  this  theory  of  the  nature  of  the  X  rays,  the  absence  of 

*  J.  J.  ThomBon,  Phil,  Mag.  46,  p.  172,  1898. 

6—2 


8+  lONISATION   OF  GASES  [CH. 

direct  deflection,  refraction,  or  polarisation  is  to  be  expected,  if 
the  thickness  of  the  pulse  is  small  compared  with  the  diameter 
of  an  atom.  It  also  explains  the  non-deflection  of  the  path  of  the 
rays  by  a  magnetic  or  electric  field.  The  intensity  of  the  electric 
and  magnetic  force  in  the  pulse  is  so  great  that  it  is  able  to  cjiiise 
a  removal  of  an  electron  from  some  of  the  atoms  of  the  gas,  over 
which  the  pulse  passes,  and  thus  causes  the  ionisation  observed. 

A  detailed  examination  of  the  effects  produced  when  X  rays 
pass  through  matter  have  brought  up  certain  difficulties  in  the 
pulse  theory.  For  example,  it  is  found  that  when  X  rays  pass 
through  matter  high  speed  electrons  are  liberated,  and  that  the 
speed  of  the  electron  depends  upon  the  penetrating  power  of  the 
radiation  but  is  independent  of  the  intensity  of  the  radiation.  The 
speed  of  the  electron  is  apparently  the  same  for  all  distances  from 
the  discharge  tube,  although  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  and 
electric  forces  in  the  pulse  must  become  weaker  with  distance 
from  the  origin.  In  addition,  if  the  energy  of  the  electron  is 
derived  from  the  pulse,  the  atom  must  have  the  property  oi 
abstracting  the  energy  from  an  area  of  the  wave-front  very  large 
compared  with  atomic  dimensions.  In  order  to  account  for  this 
difficulty,  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson  has  suggested  that  the  energy  of  the 
pulse  is  concentrated  in  definite  directions,  and  is  not  uniform  over 
the  sphere.  He  has  also  suggested  that  the  atom  may  have  the 
property  of  storing  up  energy  from  a  succession  of  pulses  passing 
over  it  and  ultimately  restoring  it  in  the  form  of  a  high  speed 
electron.  From  a  comparison  of  the  ionisation  effects  produced 
by  the  rays  from  a  radio-active  substance  and  by  X  rays,  Bragg* 
suggested  that  the  X  rays  are  corpuscular  in  character,  consisting 
of  neutral  doublets  travelling  with  great  velocity.  Some  of  thest 
doublets  are  broken  up  in  their  passage  through  the  atoms  o 
matter,  and  give  rise  to  the  appearance  of  a  high  speed  electron 
On  this  view,  the  energj'  of  the  electron  is  derived  from  the  double 
and  not  from  the  atom  itself.  This  hypothesis  has  served  to  ex 
plain  in  a  simple  way  some  of  the  effects  observed ;  for  example 
it  has  been  shoWn  that  when  X  rays  fall  upon  matter  the  electron' 
are  emitted  more  freely  on  the  side  of  emergence  than  on  the  8id< 

♦  Bragg,  Phil.  Mag,  14,  p.  429,  1907 ;   15,  p.  663,  1908 ;   16,  p.   918,  1908 
M,  p.  385,  1910. 


I 


ll]  lONISATION   OF  GASES  85 

of  incidence.  This  is  to  be  expected  on  the  hypothesis  of  Bragg, 
although  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  pulse  theory,  since  the 
momentum  of  the  pulse  as  well  as  of  the  doublet  is  in  the  direction 
of  motion  of  the  wave-front.  If  the  pulses  are  regarded  as  bundles 
of  concentrated  energy  which  spread  little  from  the  source,  the 
ti^o  theories  are  in  main  essentials  identical,  and  it  would  be 
difficult  to  distinguish  between  them  by  experimental  method, 
dilate ver  may  be  the  ultimate  explanation  of  the  nature  of 
X  rays,  both  theories  have  served  a  very  useful  purpose  in  direct- 
ing attention  to  the  more  salient  facts  observed  when  X  rays  pass 
through  matter. 

Barkla*  has  made  a  systematic  examination  of  the  effects 
produced  when  X  rays  pass  through  gaseous  and  solid  matter. 
He  has  found  that  the  incidence  of  rays  on  matter  sets  up  a 
secondary  radiation  in  all  directions,  which  has  about  the  same 
penetrating  power  as  the  primary  rays.  There  seems  to  be  no 
doubt  that  this  is  to  be  ascribed  to  a  scattering  of  the  X  rays 
without  appreciable  change  of  type.  He  has  also  brought  to 
light  some  very  surprising  effects  which  are  of  great  theoretical 
importance.  In  addition  to  the  scattered  radiation  already  men- 
tioned, each  element  has  been  shown  under  certain  conditions 
to  emit  equally  in  all  directions  one  or  more  characteristic  types 
of  radiation.  These  rays  are  of  the  same  type  as  the  primary 
X  rays,  and  are  apparently  homogeneous  and  absorbed  according 
to  an  exponential  law  by  matter.  This  characteristic  radiation 
suddenly  appears  when  the  primary  rays  are  of  slightly  greater 
penetrating  power  than  the  characteristic  radiation.  This  type 
of  radiation  has  been  termed  by  Barkla  the  characteristic  or 
fluorescent  radiation,  on  account  of  its  analogy  in  optics.  In 
a  series  of  researches,  Barkla  has  brought  out  the  essential  pro- 
perties of  these  characteristic  radiations,  and  the  peculiar  variations 
in  their  absorption  by  elements  of  different  atomic  weight. 

A  detailed  investigation  has  been  made  by  Whiddingtonf  on 
the  conditions  attending  the  production  of  X  rays  by  the  cathode 
rays  in  a  vacuum  tube.  He  has  determined  the  connection  between 
the  speed  of  the  cathode  particles  and  the  penetrating  power  of 

•  Barkla.  PhU.  Mag.  17,  p.  739,  1909  ;  21,  p.  270,  1911. 
t  Whiddington,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  85,  pp.  99,  323,  1911. 


86  lONISATION   OF  GASES  [CH.  II 

the  radiation  produced  in  different  metals  and  the  velocity  of  the 
cathode  rays  necessary  to  excite  the  characteristic  radiation  in  a 
number  of  metals. 

The  properties  of  X  rays  have  been  discussed  briefly  at  this 
stage  because  of  their  importance  in  considering  the  nature  and 
origin  of  the  7  rays  emitted  by  radio-active  substances. 

In  this  chapter  an  account  of  the  ionisation  theory  of  gases  has 
been  given  to  the  extent  that  is  necessary  for  the  interpretation 
of  the  measurements  of  radio-activity  by  the  electric  method.  It 
would  be  out  of  place  here  to  discuss  the  development  of  that 
theory  in  detail,  to  explain  the  passage  of  electricity  through 
flames  and  vapours,  the  discharge  of  electricity  from  hot  bodies, 
and  the  very  complicated  phenomena  observed  in  the  passage  of 
electricity  through  a  vacuum  tube. 

For  further  information  on  this  important  subject,  the  reader 
is  referred  to  J.  J.  Thomson  s  Conduction  of  Electricity  through 
Gases,  in  which  the  whole  subject  is  treated  in  a  full  and  complete 
manner.  A  simple  account  of  the  effect  of  moving  charges  and 
the  electronic  theory  of  matter  was  given  by  the  same  author  in 
the  Silliman  Lectures  of  Yale  University  and  published  under  the 
title  Electricity  ami  Matter  (Scribner,  New  York,  1904). 


CHAPTER  III. 


METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT. 


31  Methods  of  Measurement.  Three  general  methods 
have  been  employed  for  examination  of  the  radiations  from  radio- 
active bodies,  depending  on 

(1)  The  action  of  the  rays  on  a  photographic  plate. 

(2)  The  ionising  action  of  the  rays  on  the  surrounding  gas. 

(3)  The  luminosity  produced  by  the  rays  on  a  screen  of 
platinocyanide  of  barium,  zinc  sulphide,  or  similar  substance. 

The  photographic  method  has  been  used  very  widely,  especially 

in  the  earlier  development  of  the  subject,  but  has  gradually  been 

displaced  by  the  electrical  method,  as  a  quantitative  determination 

of  the  radiations  became  more  and  more  necessary.    In  certain 

directions,  however,  it  possesses  distinct  advantages  over  the  elec- 

Jrical  method.    For  example,  it  has  proved  a  very  valuable  means 

of  investigating  the  curvature  of  the  .path  of  the  rays,  when 

deflected  by  a  magnetic  or  electric  field,  and  has  allowed  us  to 

determine  the  constants  of  these  rays  with  considerable  accuracy. 

On  the   other  hand,  as  a  general  method  of  study  of  the 

radiations,  it  is  open  to  many  objections.     A  day's  exposure  is 

generally  required  to  produce  an  appreciable  darkening  of  the 

sensitive  film  when  exposed  to  a  weak  source  of  radiation  like 

uranium  and  thorium.     It  cannot,  in  conseq^uence,  be  employed 

to  investigate   the    radiations  of  those  active  products  which 

mpiSIy  lose    their    activity.     Moreover,  it    is   shown  that    the 

clarkening  of  a  photographic  plate  can  be  produced  by  many 

agents  which  do  not  give  out  rays  like  those  of  the  radio-active 

bodies.     This  darkening  of  the  plate  is  produced  under  the  most 


88  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMExNT  [CH.   J 

varied  conditions,  and  very  special  precautions  are  necessarj'  when 
long  exposures  to  a  weak  source  of  radiation  are  required. 

The  chief  drawback  of  the  photographic  method  lies  in  the 
difficulty  of  deducing  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  from  measure- 
ments of  the  density  of  the  photographic  impression.  In  additionV 
the  relative  photographic  effect  of  the  different  types  of  radiation 
is  dependent  on  the  thickness  and  mpidity  of  the  films  and  plates 
employed.  In  some  cases,  for  example,  using  thick  layers  of 
uranium  oxide,  the  photographic  effect  is  largely  due  to  /8  rays. 
In  most  cases,  however,  where  thin  films  of  radio-active  matter 
are  used,  the  photographic  effect  in  a  vacuum  or  close  tn^tfee^ 
active  film  is  mainly  due  to  the  a  i-ays,  A  detailed  study  of  the 
photographic  effects  due  to  the  a  rays  has  been  made  by 
Kinoshita,  and  some  of  his  conclusions  will  be  discussed  later 
(section  110). 

The  electrical  method,  on  the  other  hand,  offers  a  i-apid  and 
accurate  method  of  quantitatively  examining  the  radiations.  It  cSfi 
be  used  as  a  means  of  measurement  of  all  the  types  of  radiation 
emitted,  excluding  light  waves,  and  is  capable  of  accurate  measure-" 
ment  over  an  extremely  wide  range.  With  proper  precautions  it 
can  be  used  to  measure  effects  produced  by  radiations  of  extremely 
small  intensity. 

The  luminosity  produced  by  the  o,  ^  and  7  rays  in  barium 
platinocyanide  and  willemite  is  only  of  service  in  qualitative 
work.  On  the  other  hand,  the  luminosity  in  the  form  of  scintil- 
lations produced  in  zinc  sulphide  by  the  a  rays  has  proved 
invaluable  in  quantitative  work.  It  has  afforded  a  direct  method 
of  counting  the  number  of  a  particles  and  has  been  widely 
employed  in  researches  upon  the  a  rays. 

36.  Electrical  Methods.  The  electrical  methods  employed 
in  studying  radio-activity  are  all  based  on  the  property  of  the 
radiation  in  question  of  ionising  the  gas,  i.e.  of  producing  positively 
and  negatively  charged  carriers  throughout  the  volume  of  the  gas. 
The  discussion  of  the  application  of  the  ionisation  theory  of  gases  to 
measurements  of  radio-activity  has  been  given  in  the  last  chapter. 
It  has  been  shown  there  that  the  essential  condition  to  be  fulfilled 
for  comparative  measurements  of  the  intensity  of  the  radiations 


Ill]  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  89 

is  that  the  electrical  field  shall  in  all  cases  be  strong  enough  to 
obtain  the  maximum  or  saturation  current  througH  the  gas. 
the  difficulty  of  obtaining  complete  saturation  when  the  lonisa- 
tion  is  due  to  o  rajrs  has  been  discussed  in  section  14.  It  has, 
however,  been  pointed  out  that  approximate  comparative  measure- 
ments of  a  ray  activities  can  be  made  even  though  saturation  is 
fer  from  complete. 

The  electric  field  required  to  produce  practical  s<\tu ration 
vanes  with  the  intensity  of  the  ionisation  and  consequently  with 
the  activity  of  the  preparations  to  be  examined.  For  preparations 
which  have  an  activity  not  more  than  500  times  that  of  uranium, 
under  ordinary  conditions,  a  field  of  100  volts  per  cm.  is  sufficient  to 
produce  a  practical  saturation  current.  For  very  active  samples 
of  radium,  it  is  often  impossible  to  obtain  conveniently  a  high 
enough  electromotive  force  to  give  even  approximate  saturation. 
Under  such  conditions  comparative  measurement  can  be  made 
by  measuring  the  current  under  diminished  pressure  of  the  gas, 
when  saturation  is  more  readily  obtained. 

The  method  to  be  employed  in  the  measurement  of  the  ionisa- 
tion current  depends  largely  on  the  intensity  of  the  current  to  be 
measured.  If  some  very  active  radium  is  spread  on  the  lower  of 
two  insulated  plates  as  in  Fig.  1,  and  a  saturating  electric  field 
applied,  the  current  may  readily  be  measured  by  a  sensitive  gal- 
vanometer of  high  resistance.  For  example,  a  weight  of  '45  gr.  of 
impure  radium  chloride  of  activity  1000  times  that  of  uranium  oxide, 
spread  over  a  plate  of  area  33  sq.  cms.,  gave  a  maximum  current  of 
11  X  10~*  amperes  when  the  plates  were  4*5  cms.  apart.  In  this 
case  the  difference  of  potential  to  be  applied  to  produce  even 
approximate  saturation  was  about  600  volts.  Since  most  of  the 
ionisation  is  due  to  rays  which  are  absorbed  in  passing  through 
a  few  centimetres  of  air,  the  current  is  not  much  increased  by 
widening  the  distance  between  the  two  plates.  In  cases  where 
the  current  is  not  quite  large  enough  to  give  a  convenient  deflec- 
tion, the  current  may  be  determined  by  connecting  the  upper 
insalated  plate  with  a  well  insulated  condenser.  After  charging 
for  a  definite  time,  say  one  or  more  minutes,  the  condenser  is 
diachaiged  through  the  galvanometer,  and  the  current  can  readily 
bedednced. 


90 


METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 


B 


In  most  cases,  however,  when  dealing  with  less  active 
stances  like  uranium  or  thorium,  or  with  small  amounts  of  ; 
material,  it  is  necessary  to  employ  methods  for  measuring 
smaller  currents  than  can  be  detected  conveniently  by  an  ore 
galvanometer.  The  most  convenient  apparatus  to  employ  fc 
purpose  is  one  of  the  numerous  types  of  quadrant  electrome 
an  electroscope  of  special  design.  For  many  observations,  esp( 
where  the  activity  of  the  two  substances  is  to  be  compared 
constant  conditions,  an  electroscope  offers  a  very  certain  and  s 
method  of  measurement.  As  an  example  of  a  simple  app 
of  this  kind,  a  brief  description  will  be  given  of  an  olectrc 
which  the  writer  has  *oun'^   iseful  for  accurate  work.    ' 

The   general   arrangement   is  clearly  seen   in   Fig.  12. 
active  matter  is  placed  on  the  plate 

D.     The  upper   plate  C  is  rigidly  ,1"  ...  , 

connected  with  the  gold-leaf  system 
CG,  and  is  insulated  and  supported  by 
the  sulphur  stopper  S.  The  system 
is  charged  through  the  projecting 
rod  to  a  suitable  potential  to  give  a 
deflection  of  about  40°  to  the  gold- 
leaf  G,  When  the  system  is  charged 
a  cap  T  is  placed  over  the  project- 
ing rod.  One  of  the  sides  of  the 
lower  vessel  A  opens  on  a  hinge, 
and  the  lower  plate  Z),  mounted  on 
a  slide,  can  then  be  moved  out  to 
place  the  active  matter  in  position. 
The  lower  plate  D  and  the  external 
case  are  connected  with  earth.  The 
movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  ob- 
served through  suitable  windows  by 
means  of  a  tele-microscope  (magni- 
flcation   about    10),   provided   with 

m 

a  clearly  marked  scale  in  the  eye- 
piece.    In  practice,  the  time  taken 
for  the  gold-leaf  to  pass  between  two  fixed  points  on  the  s< 
observed  by  a  stop-watch.     It  is  then  convenient  to  expre 


w 


Fig.  12. 


METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  91 

of  discharge  in  terms  of  the  average  number  of  divisions 

over  per  minute  by  the  gold-leaf.    By  suitable  adjustments 

i  he  length  of  leaf  and  its  distance  from  the  outer  case,  it  is 

}    (ifficult  to  arrange  that  the  gold-leaf  moves  nearly  uniformly 

T*  the  greater  part  of  the  scale  for  a  constant  rate  of  discharge. 

the  capacity  of  the  charged  system  is  nearly  constant,  the 

rage  rate  of  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  directly  proportional 

the  ionisation  current  between  D  and  C,  i.e.  to  the  intensity  of 

radiation  emitted  by  the  active  substance.    In  ^  electroscope 

the  type  described,  the  natural  leak  of  the  apparatus,  when  all 

io-active   material   is   removed,  is   usually  small.     It  should, 

wever,     .  all  cases  be  determined.;  p^     ,^ 

Suppose  it  is  required  to  compare  the  relative  activity  of  two 

tive  preparations,  e.g,  the  activity  of  a  mineral  with  uranium 

lide  to  be  taken  as  a  standard.     An  equal  weight  (about  1  gram) 

f  the  mineral  and  uranium  oxide  in  a  powdered  form  are  taken 

nd  spread  uniformly  on  two  shallow  metal  vessels  about  3  cms. 

1  diameter.     Suppose  di  is  the  average  number  of  scale  divisions 

assed  over  per  minute  by  the  gold-leaf  when  the  plate  of  uranium 

ade  is  in  position,  and  dj  the  corresponding  number  for  the 

lineral.     Then  if  d  divisions  per  minute  is  the  natural  leak  of 

le  electroscope,  the  activity  of  the  mineral  is  proportional  to 

,  -  d  and  the  uranium  oxide  to  di'-d.     Consequently  we  may 

ly  the  activity  of  the  mineral  compared  with  uranium  oxide  is 

,     di  —  d 

It  is  found  by  experience  that  if  the  plates  C  and  D  are  not 
lore  than  4  cms.  apart,  and   the  system  is  charged  to  about 
X)  volts,  approximate  saturation  is  obtained,  provided  the  ionisa- 
on  is  not  so  intense  as  to  cause  a  rapid  movement  of  the  gold-leaf. 
Such  an  a  ray  electroscope  is  very  convenient  for  comparison 
activity  measured  by  the  a  rays,  and  for  determining  the  decay 
active  products  which  emit  a  rays.     It  is  desirable  to  measure 
le  activities  due  to  /8  and  y  rays  in  a  diflferent  type  of  electro- 
ope. 
A  modified  form  of  the  gold-leaf  electroscope  can  be  used 
determine  extraordinarily  minute  currents  with  accuracy,  and 
n   be    employed   in    cases   where   a   sensitive   electrometer  is 


<J2 


METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 


Mi^ 


Fig.  13. 


unable  to  detect  the  cun-ent.     A  special    type   of  electros- 
has  been  used  by  Elster  and  Geitel,  in   their  experiments 
the  natural  ionisation  of  the  atmosphere. 
A  very  convenient  tyi>e  of  electroscope  to 
measure  the  current  due  to  minute  ionisii- 
tion  of  the  gas  is  shown  in  Fig.  13. 

This  type  of  instrument  wjis  first  used 
by  C.  T.  K  Wilson*  in  his  experiments 
of  the  natural  ionisation  of  air  in  closed 
vessels.  A  brass  cylindrical  vessel  is  taken 
of  about  1  litre  capacity.  The  gold-leaf 
system,  consisting  of  a  narrow  strip  of 
gold-leaf  L  attached  to  a  Hat  rod  R,  is 
insulated  inside  the  vessel  by  the  small 
sulphur  bead  or  piece  of  amber  S,  sup- 
ported from  the  rod  P.  In  a  dry 
atmosphere  a  clean  sulphur  bead  or  piece 
of  amber  is  almost  a  perfect  insulatc^r. 
The  system  is  charged  by  a  light  bent  rod  CC  passing  thr 
an  ebonite  cork.  If  the  apparatus  is  required  to  be  air-tight 
gold-leaf  system  can  be  charged  by  means  of  a  piece  of  magne 
steel  wire,  which  is  made  to  touch  the  rod  R  by  the  approai 
a  magnet.  The  rod  G  is  connected  to  one  terminal  of  a  ba 
of  small  accumulators  of  200  to  300  volts.  If  these  arc 
available,  the  system  can  be  charged  by  means  of  a  re 
sealing-wax.  The  charging  rod  CC  is  then  removed  from  co 
with  the  gold-leaf  system.  The  rods  P  and  C  and  the  cyl 
are  then  connected  with  earth. 

The  rate  of  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  observed  by  a  rei 
microscope  through  two  holes  in  the  cylinder,  covered  with 
mica  or  glass.  In  cases  where  the  natural  ionisation  due  t 
enclosed  air  in  the  cylinder  is  to  be  measured  accurately, 
advisable  to  enclose  the  supporting  and  charging  rod  and  su 
bead  inside  a  small  metal  cylinder  M  connected  to  earth,  so 
only  the  charged  golf-leaf  system  is  exposed  in  the  main  vc 
of  the  air. 

In  an  apparatus  of  this  kind,  the  small  leakage  over  the  su 

*  Wilson,  Proc.  Uoy.  Soe.  M,  p.  152,  1901. 


\    m]  METHODS  OF   MEASUREMENT  93 

I  bead  can  be  eliminated  almost  completely  by  keeping  the  rod  P 

.  charged  to  the  average  potential  of  the  gold-leaf  system  during 

^  the  observation.    This  method  has  been  used  with  great  success  by 

^  C.T.  R.  Wilson  {loc.  cit).  Such  refinements,  however,  are  generally 
unnecessary,  except  in  investigations  of  the  natural  ionisation  of 

[  gases  at  low  pressures,  when  the  conduction  leak  over  the  sulphur 

.  bead  is  compamble  with  the  discharge  due  to  the  ionised  gas. 

r 

I  36.  Ionisation  Current.  The  electric  capacity  (7  of  a  gold- 
leaf  system  about  4  cms.  long  is  usually  about  2  electrostatic 
units.  If  V  is  the  decrease  of  potential  of  the  gold-leaf  system  in 
i  seconds,  the  current  i  through  the  gas  is  given  by 

.     CV 


I  = 


t 


With  a  well  cleaned  brass  electroscope  of  volume  1  litre,  the 
of  potential  due  to  the  natural  ionisation  of  the  air  was  found 

to  be  about  6  volts  per  hour.     Since  the  capacity  of  the  gold-leaf 

sj'stem  was  about  1  electrostatic  unit 

1x6 
*  =  s^.Ar. — sx/x  =  5'6  X  10~*  e.a  units  =  11)  x  10"~"  amperes. 
3600  X  300  ^ 

With  special  precautions  a  rate  of  discharge  of  1/10  or  even 
1/100  of  this  amount  can  be  measured  accurately. 

The  number  of  ions  produced  in  the  gas  can  be  calculated  if 
the  charge  of  an  ion  is  known. 

Let  (^  =  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  per  cubic  centi- 
metre throughout  the  volume  of  the  electroscope, 
/S=  volume  of  electroscope  in  cubic  centimetres. 
If  the  ionisation  be  uniform,  the  saturation  current  i  is  given 

Now  for  an  electroscope  with  a  volume  of  1000  cc,  i  was  equal 
to  about  1*9  X  10""  amperes.  Taking  the  charge  carried  by  an 
ion  as  4*65  x  10~"  electrostatic  units  or  1*55  x  10~*®  coulombs, 
this  current  corresponds  to  a  production  j  of  12  ions  per  cc.  per 
Beoond. 

With  suitable  precautions  an  electroscope  can  thus  readily 
measure  an  ionisation  current  corresponding  to  the  production  of 
one  ion  per  cubic  centimetre  per  second. 


94  METHODS  OF  MEASUBEMENT  [CH. 

The  great  advantage  of  an  apparatus  of  this  kind  lies  in  the 
&ct  that  the  current  measured  is  due  to  the  ionisation  inside  the 
vessel  and  is  not  influenced  by  the  ionisation  of  the  external  air 
or  by  electrostatic  disturbancea 

For  accurate  measurements  with  electroscopes  generally  it  ii 
desirable  that  the  sulphur  or  amber  insulator  should  be  made 
as  small  as  possible  in  order  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  absorption 
of  electric  charge.  With  large  insulators  it  is  observed  that  the 
apparent  natural  leak  is  much  greater  when  the  apparatus  is  fint 
charged  than  an  hour  or  so  later.  It  appears  to  take  some  time  ! 
for  the  absorption  to  reach  a  constant  value.  For  this  reason  it  is  j 
desirable  to  charge  the  electroscope  some  time  before  measurements  i 
are  begun,  or  still  better  to  keep  the  gold-leaf  system  permanently  : 
charged  by  means  of  accumulators.  It  is  important  that  the 
illumination  required  to  see  the  scale  clearly  should  be  as  small  as 
possible.  If  a  strong  source  of  illumination  is  employed,  the 
electroscope  is  heated,  and  the  air  convection  currents  set  up  often 
cause  irregular  and  marked  disturbances  of  the  gold-leaf.  It  is 
convenient  to  use  a  small  electric  lamp,  which  is  only  switched  on 
for  the  short  time  required  to  take  a  reading.  It  is  desirable  that 
the  gold-leaf  should  have  a  straight  edge  on  which  the  microscope 
can  be  accurately  focussed.  For  this  purpose,  H.  W.  Schmidt  has 
suggested  the  use  of  a  fine  quartz  fibre  which  is  attached  to 
a  small  segment  cut  out  of  the  leaf.  C.  E.  S.  Phillips  has  employed 
a  fine  fibre  of  the  conducting  glass  made  by  him  in  place  of  the 
gold-leaf.  For  flexibility,  this  fibre  is  attached  to  the  insulated 
support  by  a  short  length  of  gold-leaf.  By  this  method  the 
microscope  can  be  focussed  very  accurately  on  the  fibre. 

37.  ^  and  y  ray  electroscope!.  A  modification  of  the 
type  of  electroscope  shown  in  Fig.  13  affords  a  very  convenient 
apparatus  for  the  comparison  of  the  13  and  y  ray  activities  of  radio- 
active substances.  For  use  as  a  )8  ray  electroscope,  a  circular 
opening  is  cut  in  the  base,  and  this  is  covered  by  a  thin  sheet 
of  aluminium  of  just  suflScient  thickness  to  absorb  the  a  rays. 
The  material  whose  /8  ray  activity  is  to  be  measured  is  placed  under 
the  electroscope.  For  this  purpose  the  electroscope  is  supported 
above  the  table  on  a  stand.     For  comparison  of  y  ray  activities,  it 


METHODS  OF   MEASUREMENT 


95 


ulvisable  that  the  electroscope  should  be  made  of  sheet  lead 
•r  3  mms.  thick  so  that  no  radiation  can  enter  the  vessel  without 
fiing  through  this  thickness  of  lead.  The  material  to  be  tested 
placed  to  one  side  of  or  below  the  electroscope  at  such  a  distance 
to  give  a  suitable  rate  of  leak.  The  13  rays  are  completely  absorbed 
the  lead  walls  of  the  electroscope,  and  the  ionisation  inside  the 
metroscope  is  due  entirely  to  the  y  rays.  For  use  with  y  rays  it 
desirable  that  the  windows  should  be  covered  with  thick  glass, 
id  protected  firom  stray  radiation  by  projecting  lead  screens.  It 
ould  be  noted  that  saturation  is  far  more  readily  obtained  for 
le  ionisation  due  to  the  0  and  7  rays  than  for  the  a  rays. 


Fig.  14. 

38.  Tilted  Electrofcope.  A  modified  form  of  electroscope 
*Uch  has  proved  very  useful  in  place  of  an  electrometer  for 
^li^uring  minute  currents  was  devised  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson*. 
The  construction  of  the  apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  14. 

The  case  consists  of  a  rectangular  brass  box  4  cms.  x  4  cms. 
^  3  cms.  A  narrow  gold-leaf  L  is  attached  to  a  rod  R  passing 
tbough  a  clean  sulphur  cork.  Opposite  the  gold-leaf  is  fixed  an 
^J^8ulated  brass  plate  P,  placed  about  1  mm.  from  the  wall  of  the 
W    The  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  observed  through  two 

*  C.  T.  B.  WilBon,  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc,  12,  p.  135,  1903.  See  also  Eaye, 
^.  Pk^t.  Soc.  88,  p.  209,  1911. 


96  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  [Cl 

small  windows  by  means  of  a  microscope  provided  with  a  micromete 
scale.  The  plate  P  is  maintained  at  a  constant  potential  (generalh 
abinit  200  volts).  The  electroscope  case  is  placed  in  an  inclined 
position  as  shown  in  the  figure,  the  angle  of  inclination  and  the 
potential  of  the  plate  being  adjusted  to  give  the  desired  sensitive- 
ness. The  gold-leaf  is  initially  connected  to  the  case,  and  the 
microscope  adjusted  so  that  the  gold-leaf  is  seen  in  the  centre  of 
the  scale.  For  a  given  potential  of  the  plate,  the  sensitivenea 
depends  on  the  angle  of  tilt  of  the  case.  There  is  a  certain  critical 
inclination  below  which  the  gold-leaf  is  unstable.  The  most 
sensitive  position  lies  just  below  the  critical  angle.  In  a  particular 
experiment  Wilson  found  that  with  an  angle  of  tilt  of  30°  and  with 
the  plate  at  a  constant  potential  of  207  volts,  the  gold-leaf,  when 
raised  to  a  potential  of  one  volt  above  the  case,  moved  over  200 
scale  divisions  of  the  eyepiece,  54  divisions  corresponding  to  one 
millimetre. 

In  use,  the  rod  R  is  connected  with  the  external  insulated 
system  whose  rise  or  fall  of  potential  is  to  be  measured.  On 
account  of  the  small  capacity  of  the  system  and  the  large  movement 
of  the  gold-leaf  for  a  small  difference  of  potential,  the  electroscope 
is  able  to  measure  very  minute  currents.  The  apparatus  i» 
portable.  If  the  plate  P  be  connected  to  one  pole  of  a  dry  pile 
the  gold-leaf  is  stretched  out  towards  the  plate,  and  in  this  position 
can  be  carried  without  risk  of  injury. 

39.  A  variety  of  forms  of  electroscope  differing  in  details  of 
constniction  have  been  used  for  radio-active  measurement.  Wulf  * 
in  place  of  a  gold-leaf  used  a  doubled  quartz  fibre  silvered  to 
make  it  conducting.  This  is  strung  on  an  insulating  support 
and  the  lower  ends  are  connected  together  to  a  bow  of  quartz.  On 
charging  the  system,  the  quartz  fibres  diverge  and  their  movement 
is  observed  by  a  microscope.  The  deflection  is  nearly  proportional 
to  the  voltage  between  about  40  and  240  volta  This  form  of 
apparatus  is  very  convenient  for  measuring  ionisatiou  currents  at 
sea,  for  the  deflection  of  the  fibres  is  not  much  altered  by  the 
motion  of  the  shipf. 

•  Wulf,  P/ry«.  Ztit.  8,  pp.  246.  537.  780,  1907 ;  9,  p.  1090,  1910. 
t  See  Simpson  and  Wright.  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  80,  p.  175.  1911. 


nij  ICETHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  97 

40.  Electrometers.  Although  the  electroscope  can  be  used 
with  advantage  in  special  cases,  it  is  limited  in  its  application. 
The  most  generally  convenient  apparatus  for  measurement  of 
ionisation  currents  through  gases  is  one  of  the  numerous  types  of 
quadrant  electrometer.  With  the  help  of  auxiliary  capacities,  the 
electrometer  can  be  used  to  measure  currents  with  accuracy  over 
a  wide  range,  and  can  be  employed  for  practically  every  kind  of 
measurement  required  in  radio-activity. 

The  elementary  theory  of  the  symmetrical  quadrant  electrometer 
as  given  in  the  text-books  is  very  imperfect.  It  is  deduced  that 
the  sensibility  of  the  electrometer — measured  by  the  deflection  of 
the  needle  for  1  volt  P.D.  between  the  quadrants — varies  directly 
as  the  potential  of  the  charged  needle,  provided  that  this  potential 
is  high  compared  with  the  P.D.  between  the  quadrants.  In  most 
electrometers  however,  the  sensibility  rises  to  a  maximum,  and  then 
decreases  with  increase  of  potential  of  the  needle.  For  electrometers 
in  which  the  needle  lies  close  to  the  quadrants,  this  maximum 
j^nsibility  is  obtained  for  a  comparatively  low  potential  of  the 
needle.  This  variation  in  sensibility  of  an  electrometer  was  first 
observed  by  Hopkinson  in  1885  and  has  been  the  subject  of 
considerable  discussion.  A  simple  physical  explanation  of  the  effect 
and  of  the  correct  formula  has  been 
recently  given  by  R  Beattie  *.  The 
effect  is  due  to  the  presence  of  the 
air  space  that  necessarily  exists 
between  adjoining  quadrants. 

Suppose  that  it  is  required  to  I— — o    o \^EaHh 

measure  with  an  electrometer  the 

ionisation    current    between     two 

horizontal   metal  plates  A   and  B  Active Mauriai 

(Fig.  15)  on  the  lower  of  which  some  I 

Jctive  material  has  been  spread.     If  tI*" ^^^^-^  Earth 

he  saturation  current  is  required,  Fig.  15. 

he  insulated  plate  A  is  connected 

nth  one  pole  of  a  battery  of  sufficient  E.M.F.  to  produce  satura- 

ion,  the  other  pole  being  connected  to  earth.     The  insulated 

*  Beattie,  EUctneian,  Aug.  12,  1910. 
R.  IL-A.  7 


d8  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  [CBT. 

plate  B  is  connected  with  one  pair  of  quadrants  of  the  electro- 
meter, the  other  pair  being  earthed.  By  means  of  a  suitable  key 
Kf  the  plate  B  and  the  pair  of  quadrants  connected  with  it  may  be 
either  insulated  or  connected  with  earth.  When  a  measurement 
is  to  be  taken,  the  earth  connection  is  broken.  If  the  positive  pole 
of  the  battery  is  connected  with  A,  the  plate  B  and  the  electro- 
meter connections  immediately  begin  to  be  charged  positively,  and 
the  potential,  if  allowed,  will  steadily  rise  until  it  is  very  nearly 
equal  to  the  potential  of  A.  As  soon  as  the  potential  of  the 
electrometer  system  begins  to  rise,  the  electrometer  needle  com- 
mences to  move  at  a  uniform  rate.  Observations  of  the  angular 
movement  of  the  needle  are  made  either  by  the  telescope  and  scale 
or  by  the  movement  of  the  spot  of  light  on  a  scale  in  the  usual 
way.  If  the  needle  is  damped  so  as  to  give  a  uniform  motion 
over  the  scale,  the  rate  of  movement  of  the  needle,  i.e,  the  number 
of  divisions  of  the  scale  passed  over  per  second,  may  be  taken  a^ 
a  measure  of  the  current  through  the  gas.  The  rate  of  movements 
is  most  simply  obtained  by  observing  with  a  stop-watch  the  tim& 
taken  for  the  spot  of  light,  after  the  motion  has  become  steady,  to 
pass  over  100  divisions  of  the  scale.  As  soon  as  the  observation  \& 
made,  the  plate  B  is  again  connected  with  earth,  and  the  electro- 
meter  needle  returns  to  its  original  position. 

41.  A  very  useful  electrometer  of  great  sensibility  which  has 
come  into  general  use  has  been  devised  by  Dolezalek.  It  is  of  the 
ordinary  quadrant  type  with  a  very  light  needle  of  silvered  paper, 
spindle  shaped,  which  lies  fairly  close  to  the  quadrants.  A  very 
fine  quartz  suspension  is  employed.  In  consequence  of  the  lightness 
of  the  needle  and  its  nearness  to  the  quadrants,  it  acts  as  its 
own  damper.  These  instruments  can  readily  be  made  to  give 
a  sensibility  of  several  thousand  divisions  for  a  volt  when  the 
needle  is  charged  to  about  one  hundred  volts.  The  sensibility  of 
the  electrometer  passes  through  a  maximum  as  the  potential 
of  the  needle  is  increased.  It  is  always  advisable  to  charge  the 
needle  to  about  the  value  of  this  critical  potential.  The  capacity 
of  the  electrometer  is  in  general  high  (about  50  electrostatic 
units)  but  the  increased  sensibility  more  than  compensates  for 
this.     In  addition  to  its  great  sensibility,  the  advantage  of  this 


ni]  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  99 

iostrument   is  in   the   steadiness  of  the   zero  and  in   the  self- 
damping. 

If  a  quartz  suspension  is  employed,  the  needle  is  charged  by 
tightly  touching  it  with  a  fine  wire  connected  with  one  terminal  of 
a  battery  of  accumulators. 

For  ordinary  measurements  where  great  sensibility  is  not 
required,  it  is  desirable  to  use  a  fine  suspension  of  phosphor 
bronze,  and  to  keep  the  needle  permanently  charged  to  the  required 
potential  by  means  of  a  battery. 

A  sensibility  of  10,000  millimetre  divisions  per  volt  can  be 
readily  obtained  with  this  electrometer,  if  a  very  fine  quartz  fibre 
be  used.  The  use  of  such  high  sensibilities  cannot,  however,  be 
recommended  except  for  very  special  experiments.  The  period  of 
swing  of  the  needle  under  these  conditions  is  several  minutes  and 
the  natural  leak  of  the  testing  vessels  employed,  as  well  as 
electrostatic  and  other  disturbances,  make  themselves  only  too 
manifest 

For  most  measurements  in  radio-activity,  an  electrometer  which 
iias  a  sensibility  of  200  divisions  per  volt  is  very  suitable,  and  no 
advantage  is  gained  by  using  an  electrometer  of  greater  sensibility. 

If  measurements  of  minute  currents  are  required,  an  electroscope 
of  the  type  described  in  section  35  is  often  to  be  preferred  to 
i  very  sensitive  electrometer.  The  electroscope  readings  in  such 
i  case  are  more  accurate  than  similar  measurements  made  by  an 
flectrometer. 

In  adjusting  an  electrometer,  it  is  important  to  arrange  that 
he  needle  shall  lie  symmetrically  with  regard  to  the  quadrants, 
rhis  is  the  case  where  the  needle  is  not  deflected  on  charging,  the 
|uadrants  all  being  earthed.  When  this  condition  is  fulfilled, 
he  zero  reading  of  the  electrometer  remains  unaltered  as 
he  needle  loses  its  charge,  and  the  deflection  on  both  sides  of 
he  zero  should  be  the  same  for  equal  and  opposite  quantities  of 
Jectricity. 

For  work  with  electrometers,  a  special  key  is  necessary  in  order 
0  make  and  break  from  a  distance  the  connection  of  the  quadrants 
rith  earth  so  as  to  avoid  electrostatic  disturbances  at  the  moment 
be  current  is  to  be  measured.  This  is  most  simply  done  by 
perating  the  key  with  a  string  or  by  some  electromagnetic  device. 

7—2 


100  METHODS  OF  MSASUREMSNT  [CB^ 

It  is  desirable  that  the  movement  of  the  conductor,  which  breaks 
the  contact,  should  be  as  small  as  possible. 

In  working  with  a  sensitive  instrument  like   the  Dolezalek 
electrometer,  it  is  essential  that  the  electrometer  and  the  testing* 
apparatus  should  be  completely  enclosed  in  a  screen  of  wire-gauze 
connected  with  earth,  in  order  to  avoid  electrostatic  disturbances. 
If  an  apparatus  is  to  be  tested  at  some  distance  from  the  electro- 
meter, the  wires  leading  to  it  should  be  insulated  in  metal  cylinders 
connected  with  earth.     The  size  of  the  insulators  used  at  vanous 
points  should  be   made  as  small  as  possible,  in  order  to  avoid 
disturbances  due  to  their  electrification.     In  damp  climates  amber 
or  sulphur  insulates  better  than  ebonite.     All  insulators  should  be 
diselectrified  by  means  of  a  spirit-lamp  or  still  better  by  leaving 
some  uranium  near  them.     Care  should  be  taken  not  to  touch  th& 
insulation  when  once  diselectrified. 

In  accurate  work  it  is  advisable  to  avoid  the  use  of  gas  jets  oX" 
Bunsen  flames  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  electrometer,  as  th^ 
flame  gases  are  strongly  ionised  and  take  some  time  to  lose  theif 
conductivity.  If  radio-active  substances  are  present  in  the  roonEr 
it  is  necessary  to  enclose  the  wires  leading  to  the  electrometer  its- 
fairly  narrow  tubes,  connected  with  earth.  If  this  is  not  done,  ii> 
will  be  found  that  the  needle  does  not  move  at  a  constant  rate* 
but  rapidly  approaches  a  steady  deflection  where  the  rate  of  loa& 
of  charge  of  the  electrometer  and  connections,  due  to  the  ionisatioLi 
of  the  air  around  them,  is  balanced  by  the  current  to  be  measured* 
This  precaution  must  always  be  taken  when  observations  are  madi^ 
on  the  very  penetrating  rays  from  active  substances.  These  rays 
readily  pass  through  ordinary  screens,  and  ionise  the  air  around 
the  electrometer  and  connecting  wires.  For  this  reason  it  is 
difficult  to  make  accurate  measurements  of  small  currents  in 
a  room  which  is  used  for  the  preparation  of  radio-active  material. 

42.  String  electrometer.  In  sensitive  electroscopes  or 
quadrant  electrometers,  the  moving  system  responds  tardily  to 
a  difference  of  potential  applied.  These  instruments  consequently 
cannot  be  used  with  advantage  to  measure  rapid  changes  in  the 
value  of  an  ionisation  current.  The  detection  of  such  rapidly 
varying  currents  is  now  of  considerable  interest  and  importance 


m]  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  101 

iD  connection  with  the  study  of  discontinuous  phenomena,  such  as 
is  exhibited  in  the  expulsion  of  a  and  /8  particles  from  a  radio- 
active substance. 

Types  of  electrometers  fulfilling  the  necessary  conditions  have 
been  devised  by  Lutz*,  Labyf  and  Elster  and  GeitelJ.  A  fine 
quartz  thread  silvered  to  make  it  conducting,  is  suspended  centrally 
between  two  parallel  plates,  which  are  connected  to  opposite  poles 
of  a  battery  of  about  200  volts,  the  middle  point  of  which  is 
earthed.  Any  charge  communicated  to  the  quartz  fibre  is  then 
shown  by  a  movement  of  the  fibre,  and  the  deflection  from  the 
zero,  when  the  fibre  is  earthed,  is  measured  by  a  high  power 
microscope.  As  far  as  regards  the  quartz  fibre  and  the  microscope, 
the  arrangements  are  similar  to  those  employed  in  the  Einthoven 
string  galvanometer.  By  suitable  adjustment  of  the  voltage,  the 
fibre  can  be  made  to  give  a  deflection  of  several  hundred  divisions 
of  the  microscopic  scale  corresponding  to  a  rise  of  potential  of  one 
volt.  The  string  electrometer  responds  rapidly  to  any  change  of 
voltage.  The  rapidity  of  movement  is  controlled  in  part  by  the 
tension  of  the  fibre.  An  electrometer  of  this  type  is  very  useful 
for  counting  a  particles  by  the  electric  method,  and  for  measuring 
the  probability  variations  in  the  emission  of  a  and  /8  particles. 
(Sections  59,  75.) 

43.  Steady  deflection  method.  The  rate  method  for 
measuring  ionisation  currents  by  means  of  an  electrometer  is  to 
be  relied  on  only  if  the  rate  of  movement  of  the  needle  is  slow. 
If  the  rate  of  movement  is  rapid,  successive  measurements  may 
agree  closely,  but  may  nevertheless  be  in  considerable  error,  for  it 
takes  some  time  for  the  motion  of  the  electrometer  needle  to 
become  steady.  Bronson  has  developed  a  method  of  measurement 
in  which  the  currents  are  measured  by  an  electrometer  as  in  a 
galvanometer  by  a  steady  deflection.  In  order  to  realise  this 
practically,  it  is  necessary  that  the  charge  on  the  electrometer 
«ystem  should  leak  away  through  a  high  resistance.  For  measure- 
ment of  ionisation  currents  of  the  magnitude  ordinarily  employed, 

*  Lutz,  Phffi.  Zeit.  9,  p.  100,  1908. 

t  Laby,  Proe.  Camb,  Phil,  Soc.  15,  p.  106,  1909. 

::  Elster  and  Q^iieh  Phyt.  Zeit.  10,  p.  664,  1909. 


102 


METHODS  OP  MEASUREMENT 


[CH^ 


a  resistance  of  more  than  10,000  megohms  would  be  required  in 
order  to  obtain  a  reasonable  steady  deflection  of  the  needle  of  an 
ordinary  electrometer.  It  is  difficult  to  obtain  a  sufficiently  high 
and  constant  resistance  to  answer  the  purpose*,  and  in  their  place 
Brpnsonf  employed  what  may  be  called  an  "air  resistance."  The 
arrangement  of  the  experiment  is  shown  in  Fig.  16. 


Earth 


juuuuMyuuuuuuftB 


7 


QM«X>K»»K«M«^»*^^l.^ 


Earth 


Earth 


Fig.  16. 


The  electrometer  system  was  connected  with  the  upper  of  two- 
insulated  parallel  plates  AB,  on  the  lower  of  which  was  spread  eu 
layer  of  a  very  active  substance.  The  lower  plate  B  was  connected 
to  earth.  The  charge  communicated  to  the  upper  plate  of  the^ 
testing  vessel  CD  and  the  electrometer  system  leaked  away  in 
consequence  of  the  strong  ionisation  between  the  plates  AB,  and 
a  steady  deflection  was  obtained  Avhen  the  rate  of  supply  was 
equal  to  the  rate  of  discharge. 

Bronson  found  that  such  a  constant  air  resistance,  suitable  for 
measurement  over  a  large  range,  could  be  constructed  by  using  as 
a  source  of  radiation  a  small  plate  on  which  a  trace  of  radium  salt 
had  been  evaporated.  This  was  placed  at  the  bottom  of  an  ebonite 
cylinder  with  the  upper  electrode  several  centimetres  above  it. 

*  W.  Campbell  {Phil,  Mag.  21,  p.  301,  1911)  states  that  a  resistance  consisting 
of  a  mixture  of  xybol  and  absolute  alcohol  in  thermometer  tubing  is  very  suitable 
for  the  purpose. 

t  Bronson,  Amer,  Journ,  Sci,  10,  p.  185,  1906. 


Ill]  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  103 

The  apparatus  was  completely  sealed  to  avoid  the  escape  of 
emanation.  This  air  resistance  obeyed  Ohm's  Law  over  a  con- 
sidemble  range,  so  that  the  steady  deflection  of  the  electrometer 
was  pmportional  to  the  current.  By  applying  a  suitable  voltage 
to  the  radium  plate  in  order  to  balance  the  greater  part  of  the 
ionisation  current  which  was  being  measured,  the  electrometer 
can  be  employed  to  measure  currents  accurately  over  a  wide 
range.  When  the  ionisation  current  was  due  to  a  rays,  Bronson 
observed  that  the  electrometer  needle  never  came  to  rest  but 
oscillated  irregularly  about  a  mean  position.  This  is  now  known 
to  be  due  to  the  probability  variations  in  the  rate  of  emission  of 
a  particles.     (Section  75.) 

41    Balance  and  compeniation  methods.    The  increasing 

importance  of  accurate  measurements  of  ionisation  currents  has 

led  to  the  use  of  a  number  of  compensation  and  balance  methods. 

For  example,  if  the  small  variations  of  the  ionisation  current  in 

a  testing  vessel  are  to  be  accurately  determined,  it  is  advisable  to 

balance  the  main  current  by  means  of  an  opposite  current  supplied 

bvthe  ionisation  due  to  a  constant  source  of  radiation  like  uranium 

oxide.    The  variations  of  the  current  in  the  testing  vessel  are  then 

directly  indicated  by  the  motion  of  the  electrometer  needle.     If 

the  ionisation  current  to  be  balanced  is  very  small,  it  is  desirable 

to  use  the  ff  rays  rather  than  the  a  rays  of  uranium  as  the  source 

of  radiation,  for  the  probability  variations  in  the  case  of  the  0 

rays  is  smaller  than  for  an  equal  ionisation  by  the  a  rays  (see 

section  75). 

Allen*  has  described  a  simple  compensation  method  in  which 
the  current  to  be  measured  is  balanced  against  that  due  to  uranium 
oxide  as  a  source  of  radiation.  The  current  supplied  by  the  latter 
in  an  electric  fi^ld  is  varied  by  altering  the  area  of  the  radiating 
surfisw^.  The  current  due  to  the  uranium  oxide  in  a  given  electric 
field  is  calibrated  by  suitable  methods.  Townsend  has  employed 
another  form  of  compensation  method.  One  terminal  of  a  con- 
denser is  connected  with  the  electrometer,  and  the  other  with 
a  source  of  E.M.F.,  the  magnitude  of  which  can  be  varied  rapidly 
and  at  will  by  means  of  a  simple  type  of  potentiometer.     In 

♦  AUen,  Phil.  Mag.  14,  p.  712,  1907. 


104 


METHODS  OP  MEASUREMENT 


[CH. 


experiments  by  this  method,  the  electrometer  needle  is  kept 
balanced  as  nearly  as  possible  for  a  definite  interval  of  about 
one  minute,  and  the  current  to  be  measured  is  then  equal  to 
the  capacity  multiplied  by  the  average  rate  of  rise  of  potential 
of  the  condenser.  In  this  case,  the  current  is  determined  at  once 
in  absolute  measure  for  each  observation,  and  the  electrometer  is 
merely  used  as  a  detector  rather  than  as  a  measurer  of  the  current. 

46.  Quarts  Pleio-electrique.  A  compensation  method 
based  on  quite  a  different  principle  has  been  largely  used  in 
France.  It  depends  on  the  use  of  the  quartz  piezo-electrique 
devised  by  the  brothers  MM.  J.  and  P.  Curie*. 


To  Suppori 


Earth 


Fjirth 


Earth 


To  WeUjht 


Fig.   17. 


The  essential  part  of  this  instrument  consists  of  a  plate  of 
quartz  which  is  cut  in  a  special  manner.  The  plate  of  quartz  AB 
(Fig.  17)  is  cut  so  that  the  optic  axis  of  the  crystal  is  horizontal 
and  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  paper.  When  this  plate 
is  placed  under  tension,  there  is  a  liberation  of  electricity  equal 

*  J.  and  P.  Curie,  C.  R,  91,  pp.  38  and  294,  1880.  See  also  Friedel  and 
J.  Garie,  C.  R.  96,  pp.  1262  and  1389,  1883,  and  Lord  Kelrin,  Phil  Mag.  M, 
pp.  331,  342,  384,  414,.  453,  1893. 


m]  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  105 

in  amoimt  but  opposite  in  sign  on  the  two  sides  of  the  plate. 
The  plate  is  hung  vertically  and  weights  are  added  to  the  lower 
end. 

The  two  fistces  A  and  B  are  normal  to  one  of  the  binary  axes 
(or  electrical  axes)  of  the  crystal.  The  tension  must  be  applied  in 
a  direction  normal  to  the  optic  and  electric  axes.  The  two  faces 
A  and  B  are  silvered,  but  the  main  portion  of  the  plate  is  electrically 
insulated  by  removing  a  narrow  strip  of  the  silvering  near  the  upper 
and  lower  ends  of  the  plate.  One  side  of  the  plate  is  connected  with 
the  electrometer  and  with  the  conductor,  the  rate  of  leak  of  which 
is  to  be  measured.  The  quantity  of  electricity  set  free  on  one  face 
of  the  plate  is  accurately  given  by 

Q  =  00677 ^  F, 

where  L  is  the  length  of  the  insulated  portion  of  the  plate,  b  the 
thickness  AB,  and  F  the  weight  attached  in  kilogrammes.  Q  is 
then  given  in  electrostatic  units. 

Suppose,  for  example,  that  it  is  required  to  measure  the 
current  between  the  plates  CD  (Fig.  17)  due  to  some  radio-active 
material  on  the  plate  C,  for  a  given  difference  of  potential  between 
C  and  D,  At  a  given  instant  the  connection  of  the  quadrants  of 
the  electrometer  with  the  earth  is  broken.  The  weight  is  attached 
to  the  quartz  plate,  and  is  held  in  the  hand  so  as  to  apply  the 
tension  gradually.  This  causes  a  release  of  electricity  opposite 
in  sign  to  that  given  to  the  plate  D.  The  electrometer  needle  is 
kept  at  the  position  of  rest  as  nearly  as  possible  by  adjusting  the 
tension  by  hand.  The  tension  being  fully  applied,  the  moment 
the  needle  commences  to  move  steadily  fi;om  zero  is  noted.    The 

Q 
current  between  the  plates  CD  is  then  given  by  -^  where  t  is  the 

z 

time  of  the  observation.    The  value  of  Q  is  known  from  the  weight 

attached. 

In  this  method  the  electrometer  is  only  used  as  a  detector  to 

show  that  the  system  is  kept  at  zero  potential.     No  knowledge  of 

the  capacity  of  the  insulated  system  is  required.     With  practice, 

measurements  of  the  current  can  be  made   in   this   way  with 

mpidity  and  certainty. 


106 


METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 


[ 


46.  Testing  Apparatus.  The  arrangement  shown  in  Fig.  18 
is  very  convenient  for  many  measurements  in  radio-activity.  Two 
parallel  insulated  metal  plates  A  and  B  are  placed  inside  a  metal 
vessel  Vy  provided  with  a  side  door.     The  plate  A  is  connected 


TSo'EUctrmneUT 


B 


Actixit  Material 

\  L 


To  Battery 


Fig.  18. 


with  one  terminal  of  a  battery  of  small  storage  cells,  the  other  pole 
of  which  is  earthed;  the  plate  B  is  connected  with  the  electio* 
meter,  and  the  vessel  V  with  earth.  The  shaded  areas  in  the 
figure  indicate  the  position  of  ebonite  insulators.  The  active 
material  to  be  tested  is  placed  on  the  brass  plate  A,  In  order  to 
avoid  breaking  the  battery  connection  every  time  the  plate  A  is 
removed,  the  wire  from  the  battery  is  permanently  connected 
with  the  metal  block  N  resting  on  the  ebonite  support  In  this 
arrangement  there  is  no  possibility  of  a  conduction  leak  from  the 
plate  A  to  By  since  the  earth-connected  vessel  V  intervenes. 

An  apparatus  of  this  kind  is  very  convenient  for  testing  the 
absorption  of  the  a  and  ^  radiations  by  solid  screens,  as  well  as 
for  making  comparative  studies  of  the  activity  of  different  bodies. 
Unless  very  active  preparations  of  radium  are  employed,  a  battery 
of  300  volts  is  sufficient  to  ensure  practical  saturation  when  the 
plates  are  not  more  than  5  centimetres  apart.  If  substances  which 
give  off  a  radio-active  emanation  are  being  tested,  the  effect  of 
the  emanation  can  be  eliminated  to  a  large  extent  by  passing  a 
steady  current  of  air  between  the  plates. 


m]  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  107 

If  a  clean  plate  is  put  in  the  place  of  A,  a,  small  movement  of 
the  electrometer  needle  is  always  observed.  If  there  is  no  radio- 
active substance  in  the  neighbourhood,  this  effect  is  due  to  the 
small  natural  ionisation  of  the  air. 

We  have  often  to  measure  the  activity  due  to  the  emanations 
of  thorium  or  radium,  or  the  activity  imparted  by  those  emanations 
to  rods  or  wires.  A  convenient  apparatus  for  this  purpose  is 
shown  in  Fig.  19.     The  cylinder  B  is  connected  with  the  battery 


B 


^ 


i|i-H«|i-^ 


Enrth 
Fig.    19. 


in  the  usual  way,  and  the  central  conductor  A  with  the  electro- 
meter. This  central  rod  is  insulated  from  the  external  cylinder 
by  an  ebonite  collar,  which  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  metal 
ring  CC  connected  to  earth.  This  ring  acts  the  part  of  a  guard- 
ring,  and  prevents  any  conduction  leak  between  B  and  A.  The 
ebonite  is  thus  only  required  to  insulate  satisfactorily  for  the 
8mall  rise  of  potential  produced  on  A  during  the  experiment.  In 
all  accurate  measurements  of  current  in  radio-activity  the  guard- 
ring  principle  should  always  be  used  to  ensure  good  insulation. 
This  is  easily  secured  when  the  ebonite  is  only  required  to  insulate 
for  a  fraction  of  a  volt,  instead  of  for  several  hundred  volts,  as  is 
the  case  when  the  guard-ring  is  absent. 

For  measurements  of  radio-activity  with  an  electrometer,  a 
steady  source  of  E.M.F.  of  at  least  300  volts  is  necessary.  This 
is  best  obtained  by  a  battery  of  small  cells  made  simply  by 
immersing  strips  of  lead  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  or  by  a  battery 
of  small  accumulators  of  the  usual  construction.  Small  accumu- 
lators of  capacity  about  one-half  ampere-hour  can  now  be  obtained 
at  a  moderate  price,  and  are  more  constant  and  require  less 
attention  than  simple  lead  cells. 


108  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  [OK 

In  order  to  measure  currents  over  a  wide  range,  a  graduated 
series  of  capacities  is  required.  The  capacity  of  an  electrometer 
and  testing  apparatus  is  usually  about  50  electrostatic  units  or 
•000056  microfarads.  Subdivided  condensers  of  mica  are  con- 
structed in  which  capacities  varying  from  *001  to  '2  microferads 
are  provided.  With  such  a  condenser,  another  extra  capacity 
is  required  to  bridge  over  the  gap  between  the  capacity  of  the 
electrometer  and  the  lowest  capacity  of  the  condenser.  This 
capacity  of  value  about  200  electrostatic  units  can  readily  be 
made  by  using  parallel  plates  or  still  better  concentric  cylinders. 
With  this  series  of  capacities,  currents  may  be  measured  between 
3  X  10~"  and  3  x  10~®  amperes — a  range  of  over  one  million.  Still 
larger  currents  can  be  measured  if  the  sensibility  of  the  electro- 
meter is  reduced,  or  if  larger  capacities  are  available. 

47.    Measurement  of  Current.     In  order  to  determine  the 
current  in  the  electrometer  circuit  by  measuring  the  rate  of  move- 
ment of  the  needle,  it  is  necessary  to  know  both  the  capacity  of 
the  circuit  and  the  sensibility  of  the  electrometer. 

Let  G  ~  capacity  of  electrometer  and  its  connections  in  E.S.  units, 

d  =  number  of  divisions  of  the  scale  passed  over  per  second, 

D  =  sensibility  of  the  electrometer  measured  in  scale  divi- 
sions for  1  volt  P.D.  between  the  quadrants. 

The  current  i  is  given  by  the  product  of  the  capacity  of  the 
system  and  the  rate  of  rise  of  potential. 

Thus  i  =  o/wxT)  E.S.  units, 

Cd 

^gxio^D^^'P^'^'- 

Suppose,  for  example, 

C  =  50,    d  =  5,    i)  =  1000; 
then  1  =  2*H  x  10~"  amperes. 

Since  the  electrometer  can  readily  measure  a  current  corn 
spending  to  a  movement  of  half  a  scale  division   per  second 


m]  METHODS  OF  MBA8UBEMENT  109 

we  see  that  an  electrometer  can  measure  a  current  of  3  x  10""^* 
amperes,  which  is  considerably  below  the  range  of  the  most 
sensitive  galvanometer. 

The  capacity  of  the  electrometer  itself  must  not  be  considered 
as  equal  to  that  of  the  pair  of  quadrants  and  the  needle  when  in  a 
position  of  rest.  The  actual  capacity  is  very  much  larger  than  this, 
OD  account  of  the  motion  of  the  charged  needle.  Suppose,  for 
example,  that  the  needle  is  charged  to  a  high  negative  potential, 
and  kept  at  the  zero  position  by  an  external  constraint.  If  a 
quantity  Q  of  positive  electricity  is  given  to  the  electrometer  and 
it8  connections,  the  whole  system  is  raised  to  a  potential  F,  such 
that  Q=CV,  where  C  is  the  capacity  of  the  system.  When  how- 
ever the  needle  is  allowed  to  move,  it  is  attracted  into  the  charged 
pair  of  quadrants.  This  corresponds  to  the  introduction  of  a 
negatively  charged  body  between  the  quadrants,  and  in  con- 
'^^uence  the  potential  of  the  system  is  lowered  to  V\  The  actual 
capacity  C  of  the  sjrstem  when  the  needle  moves  is  thus  greater 
than  C*,  and  is  given  by 

Thus  the  capacity  of  the  electrometer  is  not  a  constant,  but 
depends  on  the  potential  of  the  needle,  %.e.  on  the  sensibility  of  the 
electrometer. 

48.  Capacity  of  electrometer.  The  capacity  of  the  electro- 
meter and  its  connections  cannot  be  measured  by  any  of  the 
commutator  methods  used  for  the  determination  of  small  capacities, 
for  in  such  cases  the  needle  does  not  move,  and  the  capacity 
measured  is  not  that  of  the  electrometer  system  when  in  actual 
use.  The  value  of  the  capacity  may,  however,  be  determined  by 
the  method  of  mixtures. 

Let  C  =  capacity  of  electrometer  and  connections, 
C,  =  capacity  of  a  standard  condenser. 

The  electrometer  and  its  connections  are  charged  to  a  potential 
F,  by  a  battery,  and  the  deflection  di  of  the  needle  is  noted.  By 
means  of  an  insulated  key,  the  capacity  of  the  standard  condenser 
is  added  in  parallel  with  the  electrometer  system.  Let  Fj  be  the 
potential  of  the  system,  and  d^  the  new  deflection. 


no 


MKTHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 


Then 


and 


C  +  fi  ^  F,     ^ 

ri ri        ^ 

U  —  t/i  ;y -^  . 

»!  — Cla 


A  simple  standard  capacity  for  this  purpose  can  be  construci 
of  two  concentric   brass  tubes  the  diameters  of  which  can 
accurately  measured.    The  external  cylinder  D  (Fig.  20)  is  mount 


BatPery 


Fig.  20. 


on  a  wooden  base,  which  is  covered  with  a  sheet  of  metal  or  tin- 
connected  to  earth.  The  tube  C  is  supported  centrally  on  eboB 
rods  at  each  end.     The  capacity  is  given  approximately  by 

formula 

I 


(7  = 


2  log,-' 


where  b  is  the  internal  diameter  of  D,  a  the  external  diameter  ol 
and  I  the  length  of  the  tubes. 

The  following  method  can  be  used  in  some  cases  with  advant« 
While  a  testing  vessel  is  in  connection  with  the  electromete 
sample -of  uranium  is  placed  on  the  lower  plate  A,  Let  d^  x 
di  be  the  number  of  divisions  passed  over  per  second  by  the  nee 
with  and  without  the  standard  capacity  in  connection. 


Then 


and 


C=C, 


di  —  di 


nt]  METHODS  OF  MBASUREMEKT  111 

This  method  has  the  advantage  that  the  relative  capacities  are 
expressed  in  terms  of  the  motion  of  the  needle  under  the  actual 
conditions  of  measurement. 

49.  lonisation  itandardi.  In  many  experiments  in  radio- 
activity, it  is  necessary  to  measure  by  the  electric  method  the 
variations  in  activity  of  a  substance  over  long  intervals  of  time. 
As  the  sensibility  of  electroscopes  and  other  measuring  instru- 
ments may  alter  from  time  to  time  due  to  a  variety  of  causes,  it 
is  ver)'  desirable  to  have  some  simple  means  of  correcting  for 
these  variations.  This  is  most  simply  done  by  the  use  of  radio- 
active standards.  The  most  convenient  substance  to  employ  for 
this  purpose  is  the  black  oxide  of  uranium,  which  for  all  practical 
purposes  may  be  considered  to  be  an  invariable  source  of  radia- 
tion. 

Such  a  standaid  can  be  readily  prepared  by  a  method  first 
used  by  McCoy*.     Some  uranium   oxide   is  ground  to  a  fine 
powder  and  thoroughly  mixed  with  an  organic  liquid,  e.g,  chloro- 
form or  ether.     The  mixture  is  then  poured  or  uniformly  spread 
over  a  plate  of  aluminium  or  of  copper.    The  liquid  soon  evaporates 
aod  leaves  behind  a  uniform  film  of  uranium  oxide  which  adheres 
firmly  to  the  plate.     In  this  way,  films  of  uranium  oxide  of  any 
desired  thickness  or  area  can  be  readily  prepared.     Practically  all 
the  ionisation  produced  by  these  films  is  due  to  the  a  rays.     The 
ionisation  current  due  to  the  active  substance  under  observation 
is  directly  compared  under  definite  conditions  with  that  due  to 
the  uranium  standard.     The  ratio  of  these  two  currents  is  inde- 
pendent of  any  variations  in  the  sensibility  of  the   measuring 
instrument. 

By  weighing  the  metal  plate  before  and  after  the  film  is 
deposited,  the  weight  of  the  film  is  determined.  The  number  of 
a  particles  emitted  per  second  from  the  film  can  be  deduced  from 
the  observations  of  Geiger  and  Rutherford  f,  that  one  gram  of 
uranium  emits  2*37  x  10^  a  particles  per  second.  The  uranium 
standaid  thus  not  only  serves  to  correct  for  variations  of  the 
sensibility  of  the  electrometer  or  electroscope  but  aifords  a  simple 

*  MoCoj,  Phil.  Mag.  U,  p.  176,  1906;  Amer.  Journ.  Sci.  26,  p.  521,  190B. 
t  Geiger  and  Ratherford,  Pkih  Mag.  M,  p.  691,  1910. 


112  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  [caC. 

ineth<Ml  of  deducing  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  by  tke 
active  matter  under  observation  when  the  differences  of  the 
rangc;H  of  the  a  particles  emitted  in  the  two  cases  are  taken  into 
account  (see  section  67). 

If  a  standard  of  greater  activity  be  required,  a  thin  film  of  an 
ionium  preparation  may  be  used  in  place  of  uranium  oxide.  The 
activity  of  an  ionium  film  which  emits  a  rays  is  practically  constant 
for  the  interval  of  a  lifetime.  Ionium  is  always  separated  from 
radio-active  minerals  with  thorium,  from  which  it  cannot  be  chemi- 
cally separated.  In  most  cases,  however,  the  activity  due  to  the 
thorium  in  the  preparation  is  negligible  compared  with  that  due 
to  the  ionium. 

A  thick  layer  of  uranium  oxide  spread  uniformly  over  a  shallo^^ 
dish  makes  a  convenient  standard  for  calibrating  a  0  ray  electro- 
scope. In  a  similar  way,  the  7  rays  from  a  small  quantity  of 
radium  preparation  kept  in  a  sealed  tube  affords  a  simple  method 
of  standardising  a  7  ray  electroscope. 

60.     Radio-active  contamination.    In  a  laboratory  in  which 
radio-active  experiments  are  constantly  made,  it  is  desirable  thftt 
all  sources  of  active  matter  should  be  kept  in  sealed  vessels,  in 
order  to  avoid  possible   radio-active  contamination  due  to   the 
distribution  of  radio-active  material.    This  is  especially  important 
with  a  substance  of  a  high  activity  like  radium.     The  presence  in 
a  closed  room  of  an  unsealed  capsule  containing  a  few  milligrams 
of  radium  salt,  on  account  of  the  escape  of  the  emanation,  is 
sufficient  in  the  course  of  a  day  to  increase  greatly  the  spontaneous 
leak  of  neighbouring  electrometers  and  electroscopes.    It  is  highly 
important  not  to  perform  chemical  work  with  strong  preparations 
of  radium  in  a  laboratory  used  for  radio-active  measurements,  for 
general  experience  has  shown  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  avoid 
a  permanent  radio-active  contamination  of  the  laboratory  in  con- 
sequence.    Such  work  should  be  done  in  a  building  outside  the 
main  laboratory.     In  many  laboratories,  the  radium  emanation  is 
now  used  in  the  place  of  radium  itself  for  many  experiments.     It 
is  important  that  this  emanation  should  be  kept  in  sealed  vessels, 
and  the  work  of  transference  should  be  done  in  some  part  of  the 
laboratory  where  any  accident  involving  the  escape  of  emanation 


m] 


METHODS  OF   MEASUREMENT 


113 


shall  not  lead  to  the  contamination  of  the  main  part  of  the 
building.  The  disturbance  of  measurement  due  to  the  escape  of 
radium  emanation  is  for  the  most  part  temporary  in  character; 
bat  a  continuous  escape  of  emanation  leads  ultimately  to  all  the 
surfece  of  the  building  becoming  strongly  active  due  to  the 
deposition  of  the  products  of  slow  decay  derived  from  the  emana- 
tion. If  accurate  work  with  small  activities  is  to  be  done  in  a 
laboratory,  the  importance  of  handling  all  radio-active  material 
with  the  greatest  care  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  upon. 


».R.-A. 


8 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  ALPHA   RAYS. 

Comparison  of  the  Radiations. 

61.  The  Three  Types  of  Radiation.  All  the  radio- 
active substances  possess  in  common  the  power  of  acting  on  a 
photographic  plate  and  of  ionising  the  gas  in  their  immediate 
neighbourhood.  The  intensity  of  the  radiations  may  be  compared 
by  means  of  their  photographic  or  electrical  action ;  and,  in  the 
case  of  the  strongly  radio-active  substances,  by  the  power  they 
possess  of  lighting  up  a  phosphorescent  screen.  Such  comparisons, 
however,  do  not  throw  much  light  on  the  question  whether  the 
radiations  are  of  the  same  or  of  different  kinds,  for  it  is  well 
known  that  such  different  types  of  radiations  as  the  short  waves 
of  ultra-violet  light,  Rontgen  and  cathode  rays,  all  possess  the 
property  of  producing  ions  throughout  the  volume  of  a  gas, 
lighting  up  a  fluorescent  screen,  and  acting  on  a  photographic 

I 

of  regular  reflection,  refraction,  or  polarisation.  ■ 

Two  general  methods  can  be  used  to  distinguish  the  types  of 
the  radiations  given  out  by  the  same  body,  and  also  to  compare 
the  radiations  from  the  different  active  substances.  These  methods 
are  as  follows : 

(1)  By  observing  whether  the  rays  are  appreciably  deflected 
in  a  magnetic  and  in  an  electric  field. 

(2)  By  comparing  the  relative  absorption  of  the  rays  by  solids  - 
and  gases. 


plate.     Neither  can  the  ordinaiy  optical  methods  be  employed  to  j 
examine  the  radiations  under  consideration,  as  they  show  no  trace  ! 


CH.    IV]  THE   a  RAYS  115 

Exauiinc^l  in  these  ways,  it  has  been  found  that  there  are 
thrt^e  distinct  types  of  radiation  emitted  from  radio-active  bodies, 
which  for  brevity  and  convenience  have  been  termed  by  the 
\*Titer  the  a,  /9,  and  7  rays*. 

(i)  The  a  rays  are  very  readily  absorbed  by  thin  metal  foil 
ami  by  a  few  centimetres  of  air.  They  have  been  shown  to  consist 
of  pc»sitively  charged  atoms  of  helium  projected  with  a  velocity  of 
about.  1/15  the  velocity  of  light.  They  are  deflected  by  intense 
ms\gnetic  and  electric  fields,  but  the  amount  of  deviation  is  minute 
in  c«»inparison  with  the  deviation,  under  the  same  conditions,  of 
the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

(ii)  The  fi  rays  are  on  an  average  far  more  penetrating  in 
character  than  the  a  rays,  and  consist  of  negatively  charged  bodies 
projected  \*ath  velocities  of  the  same  order  as  the  velocity  of 
light.  They  are  far  more  readily  deflected  than  the  a  rays,  and 
are  in  type  identical  with  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum 
tube. 

(iii)  The  7  rays  are  extremely  penetrating,  and  non-de viable 
by  a  magnetic  or  electric  field.  Their  true  nature  is  not  definitely 
settled,  but  they  are  analogous  in  most  respects  to  very  pene- 
trating Rontgen  rays. 

The  four  best  known  radio-active  substances,  uranium,  thorium, 
rachum  and  actinium,  when  in  equilibrium  with  their  products, 
alTgTve  out  these  three  types  of  rays. 

52.  Compariion  of  the  rays.  The  rays  emitted  from  the 
active  bodies  thus  present  a  very  close  analogy  with  the  rays 
which  are  produced  in  a  highly  exhausted  vacuum  tube  when  an 

*  In  an  examination  of  urauinm  the  writer  [Phil.  Mag,  47,  p.  110,  1899)  found 
that  the  rays  from  oraniam  consist  of  two  kinds,  differing  greatly  in  penetrating 
power,  which  were  called  the  a  and  p  rays.  Later,  it  was  found  that  similar  types 
of  rays  were  emitted  by  thorium  and  radium.  On  the  discovery  that  very 
penetrating  rays  were  given  out  by  uranium  and  thorium  as  well  as  by  radium,  the 
tenn  y  was  applied  to  them.  The  word  **ray*'  has  been  retained  in  this  work, 
•Ithongh  it  is  now  settled  that  the  a  and  /)  rays  consist  of  particles  projected  with 
gnat  velocity.  The  term  is  thus  used  in  the  same  sense  as  by  Newton,  who  applied 
it  in  the  Prineipia  to  the  stream  of  corpuscles  which  he  believed  to  be  responsible 
for  the  phenomenon  of  light.  The  name  ''emanation  "  is  used  only  with  reference 
to  the  ndio-aotive  gases  which  diffuse  from  thorium,  actinium,  and  radium. 

8—2 


116 


THE   a   RAYS 


[CH, 


electric  discharge  passes  through  it.  The  a  rays  are  analogous 
to  the  canal  rays,  discovered  by  Goldstein,  which  have  been  shown 
by  Wien  to  consist  of  positively  charged  bodies  projected  with 
great  velocity  (see  section  32).  The  /8  rays  are  the  same  as  the 
cathode  rays,  while  the  7  rays  resemble  the  Rontgen  rays.  In  a 
vacuum  tube,  a  large  amount  of  electric  energy  is  expended  in 
producing  the  rays,  but,  in  the  radio-active  bodies,  the  rays  are 
emitted  spontaneously,  and  at  a  rate  uninfluenced  by  any  chemical 
or  physical  agency.  The  a  and  ^  rays  from  the  active  bodies 
are  projected  with  much  greater  velocity  than  the  corresponding 
rays  in  a  vacuum  tube,  while  the  7  rays  are  of  much  greater 
penetrating  power  than  Rontgen  rays. 

The  effect  of  a  magnetic  field  on  a  pencil  of  rays  from  a  radio- 
active substance  giving  out  three  kinds  of  rays  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  21. 


Fig.  21. 

Some  radium  is  placed  in  the  bottom  of  a  narrow  cylindrical 
lead  vessel  R,  A  narrow  pencil  of  rays  consisting  of  a,  yS,  and  7 
rays  escapes  from  the  opening.  If  a  strong  uniform  magnetic 
field  is  applied  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and 
directed  towards  the  paper,  the  three  types  of  rays  are  separated 
from  one  another.  The  7  rays  continue  in  a  straight  line  without 
any  deviation.  The  /9  rays  are  deflected  to  the  right,  describing 
circular  orbits  the  radii  of  which  vary  within  wide  limits.  If  the 
photographic  plate  -4C  is  placed  under  the  radium  vessel,  the  fi 
rays  prcjduce  a  diffuse  photographic  impression  on  the  right  of  the 
vessel  ii.     The  a  rays  are  bent  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that 


IV]  THE  a  RAYS  117 

of  the  y3  rays,  and  describe  a  portion  of  the  arc  of  a  circle  of  large 
radius,  but  they  are  rapidly  absorbed  after  traversing  a  distance 
of  a  few  centimetres  from  the  vessel  R.  The  amount  of  the 
deviation  of  the  a  rays  compared  with  the  ^  rays  is  much  exagge- 
rate in  the  figure. 

53.     Ionising  and  penetrating  power  of  the  rays.     Of 

the  three  types  of  rays,  the  a  rays  produce  most  of  the  ionisation 
in  the  gas  and  the  7  rays  the  least.     For  example,  using  a  thin 
layer  of  a  radium  compound  spread  on  the  lower  of  two  parallel 
plates  5  cms.  apart,  the  amount  of  ionisation  due  to  the  a,  yS,  and 
7  rays  is  of  the  relative  order  10,000,  100  and  1.     These  numbers 
are   only  rough  approximations  and  the  differences  become  less 
marked  as  the  thickness  of  the  radio-active  layer  is  increased. 
Since  each  type  of  rays  from  radio-active  substances  is  usually 
complex  and  consists  of  radiations  which  are  absorbed  to  an  un- 
equal extent,  it  is  difficult  to  give  an  accurate  comparison  of  the 
relative  j)enetrating  power  of  the  three  types  of  rays.     As  a  rough 
working  rule,  it  may  be  taken  that  the  y8  rays  are  about  100  times 
as  penetrating  as  the  a  rays  and  the  7  rays  from  10  to  100  times 
as  penetrating  as  the  13  rays. 

It  is  often  convenient  to  know  what  thickness  of  matter  is 
sufficient  to  absorb  a  specifixj  type  of  radiation.  A  thickness  of 
"006  cms.  of  aluminium  or  mica  or  a  sheet  of  ordinary  writing- 
j  paper  is  sufficient  to  absorb  completely  all  the  a  rays.  With 
such  a  screen  over  the  active  material,  the  external  effects  are 
duo  only  to  the  ^  and  7  rays,  which  pass  through  with  a  very 
slight  absorption.  Most  of  the  /8  rays  are  absorbed  in  5  mms.  of 
aluminium  or  1  mm.  of  lead.  The  radiation  passing  through  such 
screens  consists  very  largely  of  the  7  rays.  As  a  rough  working 
rule,  it  may  be  taken  that  a  thickness  of  matter  required  to 
absorb  Miy  type  of  rays  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  density 
oTlhe  sabstance,  i,e.  the  absorption  is  proportional  to  the  densit}'. 
This  rule  holds  approximately  for  light  substances,  but,  in  heavy 
substances  like  mercury  and  lead,  the  radiations  are  more  readil}* 
absorbed  than  the  density  rule  would  lead  us  to  expect. 

64.    Difficulties  of  comparative  measurements.     It   is 

difficult  to  make  quantitative  or  even  qualitative  measurements 


118  THE   a   RAYS  [CH.| 

of  the  relative  intensity  of  the  three  types  of  rays  from  activei 
substances.  The  three  general  methods  employed  depend  upon 
the  action  of  the  rays  in  ionising  the  gas,  in  acting  on  a  photo- 
graphic plate,  and  in  causing  phosphorescent  or  fluorescent  effecti 
in  certain  substances.  In  each  of  these  methods  the  fraction  of 
the  rays  which  is  absorbed  and  transformed  into  another  fonn  of 
energy  is  different  for  each  type  of  ray.  Even  when  one  si>ecific 
kind  of  ray  is  under  observation,  comparative  measurements  ar^ 
rendered  difficult  by  the  complexity  of  that  type  of  rays.  For 
example,  the  ^  rays  from  radiK^r-  consi^'  '"'■^  'J' '  ''"^^S'  charged 
particles  projected  with  a  wide  range  of  velocity,  and,  in  conse- 
quence, they  are  absorbed  in  different  amounts  in  passing  through 
a  definite  thickness  of  matter.  In  each  case,  only  a  fraction  of 
the  energy  absorbed  is  transformed  into  the  particular  type  of 
energy,  whether  ionic,  chemical,  or  luminous,  which  serves  as  a 
means  of  measurement. 

The  necessity  of  taking  into  account  the  relative  ionisit^ 
photographic  effects  produced  by  the  a  and  /9  rays  is  well  illu 
trated  by  the  earlier  experiments  with  uranium.    With  unscreened 
material,  the  ionisation  observed  is  due  mainly  to  the  a  rays  while 
the  photographic  effect  is  largely  due  to  the  8  rays.     The  faihn 
to  appreciate  this  difference  led  at  first  to  considerable  confus 
and  apparent  contnidiction  in  the  effects  observed. 


The  a  Rays. 

56.  The  a  rays.  The  magnetic  deviation  of  the  fi  rays  wai: 
discovered  towards  the  end  of  1899,  at  a  comparatively  early  stage 
in  the  history  of  radio-activity,  but  three  years  elapsed  before 
the  true  character  of  the  a  rays  was  disclosed.  It  was  natural 
that  great  prominence  should  have  been  given  in  the  early  stages 
of  the  subject  to  the  )8  rays,  on  account  of  their  great  penetrating 
power  and  marked  action  in  causing  phosphorescence  in  manj 
substimces.  The  a  rays  were,  in  comparison,  very  little  studied 
and  their  importance  was  not  generally  recognised.  It  will,  how- 
ever, be  shown  that  the  a  rays  play  a  far  more  important  pari 
in  radio-active  processes  than  the  /8  mys,  and  that  the  gi-eatei 


IV]  THE  a  RAYS  119 

portion  of  the  energy  emitted  in  the  form  of  heat  and  of  ionising 
radiations  is  due  to  them. 

The  nature  of  the  a  rays  was  difficult  to  determine,  for  a 

magnetic  field  sufficient  to  cause  considerable  deviation  of  the 

j3  rays  produced  no  appreciable  effect  on  the  a  rays.     It  was 

suggested  by  several  observers  that  they  were,  in  reality,  secondary 

rays  set  up  by  the  ff  or  cathode  rays  in  the  active  matter  from 

which  they  were  produced.    Such  a  view,  however,  failed  to  explain 

the  radio-activity  of  polonium,^ which  gave  out  a  rays  only.     Later 

work  alsvy  '  '"t  ^e  ma  *  -  which  gave  rise  to  the  ff  rays 

I  from  uranium,  could  be  chemically  separated  from  the  uranium, 

I  while  the  intensity  of  the  a  rays  was  unaffected.     These  and  other 

results  show  that  the  a  and  /9  rays  are  produced  in  many  cases 

quite  independently  of  one  another.     The  view  that  they  were 

an  easily  absorbed   type   of  Rontgen   rays   failed   to   explain  a 

characteristic  property  of  the  a  rays,  viz.  that  the  absorption  of 

ys  in  a  given  thickness  of  matter,  determined  by  the  elec- 

ical  method,  increases  with  the  thickness  of  matter  previously 
traversed.  This  peculiarity  of  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  was 
first  clearly  shown  by  Mme  Curie*  in  1900  using  polonium  as  a 
.^urce  of  radiation.     In  explanation,  she  suggested  that  the  a  rays 

psisted  of  projected  particles,  which  lost  their  energy  by  passing 
arough  matter.  From  observations  of  the  ionisation  produced  in 
gjises  by  the  a  and  fi  rays  Strutt'f  in  1901  suggested  that  the 
a  rays  might  be  analogous  to  the  canal  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum 
tube,  and  thus  might  consist  of  positively  charged  particles  pro- 
jected with  great  velocity.  A  similar  suggestion  was  made  in 
1902  by  Sir  William  CrookesJ. 

The  writer  was  led  to  the  same  view  from  consideration  of  a 
mass  of  indirect  evidence,  which  only  received  an  explanation  on  the 
assumption  that  the  a  rays  consisted  of  projected  charged  matter. 
If  this  were  the  case  a  pencil  of  a  rays  should  be  deflected  in  a 
magnetic  and  in  an  electric  field.  Preliminary  experiments  in  this 
direction  were  unsuccessful,  but  finally  in  1903  when  a  more  active 
preparation  of  radium  was  obtained,  the  writer  was  able  to  show 

*  Mme  Cane,  C.  R,  180,  p.  76,  1900. 

t  Stratt,  Phil.  Trant.  Roy.  Soe,  A,  196,  p.  507,  1901. 

X  Crookes,  Proe.  Roy.  Soe.  A,  69,  p.  418,  1902. 


120  THE  a  RAV8 

by  the  electric  method  that  the  a  rays  were  deflected  hot 
magnetic  and  by  an  electric  field*.  The  gmallness  of  the  nii 
deviation  may  be  judged  fix)in  the  fact  that  the  a  rays  pr 
at  right  angles  to  a  magnetic  field  of  10,000  C.G.S.  units  d 
the  arc  of  a  circle  of  about  40  cma.  radius ;  while  under  th< 
conditions  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube 
deaciihe  a  circle  of  about  '01  cms.  radius.  It  is,  therefo 
surprising  tliat  the  a  rays  were  for  some  time  thought  to  I 
deviable  by  a  magnetic  field. 

66.    The  magnetic  and  electric  deflection  of  the  : 

A  brief  account  will  be  given  of  the  original  experiments  t 

that  the  a  mys  PnnHiHt,>-(]  ofpmj.^t^i  i^artiHt.^  .•jinyiiig  nil  r 


charge.  The  gcnentl  arrangeuient  of  the  (jxperiment  ia  ah 
Fig.  22.  The  method  employee!  to  detect  the  magnetic  de 
of  the  a  rays  wnn  t.n  ^llnw  t.hf  raya  t.n  jmsg  t.hmiij^h  pai-ivi 
and  to  "'^"n"  wh''th"r  t^"  "■*^°  "f  ij>nwat,iini  tlm-  t.^  rho 

wnn  nltorpH  l^y  ttiu  applii-^itinn  ..f  p,  atmng  inftfrnptif  fiel(^      T 

from  a  thin  layer  nf  radium  sivlt  [Muac'd  upwiirds  through  a  i 
of  narrow  slits  0  in  parallel,  and  then  through  n  thin  alui 
foil  into  the  testing  vessel  Kwhei-e  the  ionisation  was  nu 

*  Bntherford,  Plisi.  Zeil.  4,  p.  235,  1!<03;  Phil.  Hag.  B,  p.  177,  190 


1Y]  the  a  RAYS  121 

by  a  gold-leaf  electroscope.     In  order  to  increane  the  electrical 
effect  in  the  testing  vessel,  the  rays  passed  through  ahnnt  twenty 

slita  of  equal  Wi^tb  pl«^^d  aidp.  hy  gi/^^  ^Kriiif  1  TYim  gpvrf.  A 
'"^P'^tifi  fipld  ^'°''  opp^^'*^  p^rpopHir*nlnr  f./^  th^  planp  of  the  paper 

ianH  pLwillp]  t,n  t^^  pioTi^  f>f  fKi:>  fiUfc     Xhe  rays  are  thus  deflected 

in  the  ^'^-^lior  pprppnrlir»nlftr  \.n  thp.  planp  nf  t.hft  slits,  and  a  ver}' 

small  amount  of  deviation  is  sufficient  to  cause  the  rays  to  impinge 
on  the  side  of  the  plate  where  they  arp  ahaorhpd.  A  steady 
onm'nt  f^f  hyHmgPn  waa  pawapH  f.hrnngh  the  apparatus  to  removc 

any  Pmanftf;ion  lihprated  from  tfhft  ^^"^"^  ««lt,  ftP^  i"  nrt\(^r  tO 
rpHiiPP   ftiP    ftKflnrpti^Ti    r^f  tKo   /^^   rfty<^    in    pfi-twing   fVirnngVi    f^«^    gas. 

It  was  found  that  the  ionisation  in  the  electroscope  due  to  the 
a  rays  />/mi1^  y^  rt^^n^A  tt^  ^  pmAll  frft/>t.inn  nf  it^  initial  value 
by  use  f>f  a^  vpjy  ^tmng  magnptio  fiplH      This  showcd  that  the  a 

raya  mnof  n.-kTiaiQf  r^f  pw^j^oi^^/^  nhar-gt^A  pgi-fiVlf^g  The  sigU  of  thc 
chargft  waa  dfttprmippH  Ky  Vinlf  r^nvorJTijj^  t.fiP  fnp  nf  f.hn  aWt^  >\ath  a 

hia^LStup.    The  diminution  of  the  rate  of  discharge  in  the  testing 

vessel  Ky  a    giv^Ti    magnpfio  fi<:*1H  than  HpppnHa  npr>r|  fV>Q   /^ironfinti 

of  the  fifild.     In  this  way,  it  was  found  that  the  a  rays  were 

dt^flftctpd    in    ftp    oppr^aif.^    a^nat^    frnm    th(^    oathru\t^    rays.      Since 

the  latter  consist  of  negatively  charged  particles  the  a  rays  must 
consist  of  positively  charged  particles.  If  the  rays  consist  of 
charged  particles  they  must  be  deflected  in  passing  through  an 
electric  field  as  well  as  by  a  magnetic  field.  This  was  found  to  be 
the  case  by  a  modification  of  the  same  apparatus.  The  plates 
were  insulated  firom  each  other  and  alternate  plates  were  con- 
nected together  and  charged  to  a  high  potential  by  a  battery 
of  accumulators.  On  application  of  a  strong  electric  field  the 
ionisation  in  the  testing  vessel  was  diminished. 

From  a  consideration  of  the  dimensions  of  the  apparatus,  and 
the  decrease  of  the  ionisation  when  a  magnetic  and  electric  field 

was    applipH,    it.     \^    p^ftqiblp    t^    riorlnoo    tUiA     v^l^nihy    u    of    the    S 

particles,  and  the  value  of  e/m,  the  ratio  of  the  charge  to  the 
mass  of  the  a  particle.     The  values  found  were 

w  =  2*5  X  10®  cms.  |)er  sec. 
e/m  =  6000  electromagnetic  units. 

These  results  were  only  approximate  in  character,  for  the  radiation 


122  THE  a  RATS  [CH. 

from  the  radium  salt  was  complex,  consisting  of  particles  projected 
at  different  speeds.  The  results  were  soon  confirmed  by  Des 
Coudres*  by  the  photographic  method,  using  some  nearly  pure 
radium  bromide  as  a  source  of  a  rays.  His  results  were  in  good 
agreement  and  gave  the  value  ejm  =  6400. 

Since  the  value  of  e/m  for  the  hydrogen  atom  is  9647  e.m.  units 

the  value  of  e/m  fnnnH  fnr  tliP  n  ptrtiVlA  inHifiatAri   that,  ih  WA«  oC 
At^m\r.  HiTYiftTiHinnH^  atiH  nf  masiR  Rhnnt.  twifft  that  of  thft  hyHmgea 
atom,  assuming  that  the  a  pA.rt.inlp  PAm'fts  thp  an-mp  pHrt^p  aa  tho 

hyrlrngpn  at^m.     It  was  thus  clear  that  the  a  rays  must  consist  of 

a  fttrPATn  nf  pnaif.ivply  nliargprl  ai^^ma  nf  mat^^r  prr>jpf*f.pH  wit.li  grftftfc 

velocity. 

Becquerelf  confirmed  the  deflection  of  the  a  rays  in  a  magnetic 
field  by  a  different  method.  A  narrow  pencil  of  a  rays  after 
passing  through  a  slit  fell  on  a  photographic  plate  placed  at  a 
small  angle  with  the  issuing  pencil  and  perpendicular  to  the 
magnetic  field.  If  the  field  is  reversed  during  the  experiment, 
the  plate  on  development  shows  two  lines  diverging  from  the 
slit.  By  measuring  the  deviation  of  the  pencil  of  rays  at  different 
distances  fi*om  the  slit,  Becquerel  found  that  the  radius  of  curva- 
ture of  the  rays  increases  with  distance  from  the  slit  These 
results  seemed  at  first  sight  very  remarkable,  but  it  will  be  seen 
later  (section  65)  that  they  are  completely  explained  by  taking 
into  account  the  complexity  of  the  a  radiation. 

In  1905,  further  experiments  were  made  by  Mackenzie^  using 
pure  radium  bromide  as  the  source  of  radiation.  A  photographic 
method  was  employed  in  which  the  a  rays  fell  on  a  glass  plate 
coated  on  its  lower  surface  with  zinc  sulphide.     A  photographic 

plat^p  Yi^  P^^^<^(^  ^"  ^^^  npppr  aiHp  f^^r'  f.liP  glnaa  plfttf^,  ftnH  waS 
ant^H  on  by  t.hp  light,  frnm  t.hp  apintilUit.mnH  prf>Hnr>pd  hy  a  particles 
in  thp  7infi  anlphiHp  an^PPn  innmpHiiit.p]y  Kplnw  it.  The  deflection 
of  a  ppnnil  nf  rays  was  pb^ryp^  both  in  a  pri^g"*^^^^  '^"^  oloAtfir* 

field.  The  rays  were  found  to  be  complex.  Taking  a  mean  value 
for  the  deflected  rays,  the  velocity  wjis  found  to  vary  between 
1'3  X  10*  and  1*96  x  10*  cms.  per  second,  while  the  value  of  e/vi 

*  Des  Coudres,  Phya.  Zeit.  4,  p.  483,  1903. 

t  Becquerel,  C.  R.  136,  p.  199,  1903. 

t  Mackenzie,  Phil.  Mag,  10,  p.  538,  1906. 


[nj  THE  a  RAYS  123 

WW  found  to  be  4600.  The  experiments  were  continued  by 
W.  R  HuflF*,  using  a  thin  film  of  polonium  on  a  bismuth  rod  as 
a  source  of  radiation.     He  found  value  for  polonium  rays 

1^  =  1-41x10*, 

e/m  =  4300. 

67.     Magnetic  deflection  of  homogeneous  rays.     The 

liscovery  of  the  production  of  helium  by  radium  suggested  the 
possibility  that  the  a  particles  consisted  of  charged  particles  of 
lelium.  To  throw  light  on  this  question,  the  writerf  made 
mother  and  more  accurate  determination  of  the  value  of  e/m  for 
;he  a  particle.  In  the  interval  between  these  and  the  original 
experiments,  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  absorption  of  the 
I  rays  had  greatly  increased.  Bragg  had  shown  that  the  a  particles 
Grom  a  thin  film  of  radio-active  matter  of  one  kind  have  a  definite 
range  of  ionisation  in  air,  and  that  the  ionisation  produced  by  the 
R  particle  falls  off  abruptly  near  the  end  of  its  path.  He  had 
ooDcladed  from  his  experiments  that  a  thin  film  of  one  kind  of 
active  matter  emits  a  particles  of  identical  range  and  identical 
velocities,  and  that  the  velocity  of  the  a  particles  are  all  reduced 
W  an  equal  amount  in  passing  through  the  same  thickness  of 
matter.    In  order  to  AKfAin  an  M*I*^^TfLta  Hoff^rminafmn  of  e/m,  it 

was  HiftPTit.isLl  tfhftt  ^  p^Tipjl  of  hoTnngpneoiiR  rs^ya  ahnn1<l  Ka  AmplnyAH 
in  the  experiments.       It  was  found  tliaf.  a  rJApngif.  nf  raHinm  Q  uroa 

legLsiiitAble  for  thp  p^irpoRp  If  a  negatively  charged  wire  is 
placed  for  some  hours  in  a  vessel  containing  radium  emanation, 

ihe  wire  >^^>onmpa  intpnsftly  ftp.tivft  by  t\\(^  or^noontr^t\cm  upon  it 
of  thp  onfiivA  Hppnfiif;  prnHiifiPfl  ^rnm  t,hft  ATnanatinn.  This  active 
<fep08it  consists  of  the  three  products,  mdi^im   A,  radinrr^  p,  and 

odinm  C     Fifteen  minutes  after  removal  from  the  emanation, 

the  o  ^y  ai^fivity  (\^^  to  radium  A  haa  prn/*t.ipAl1y  HiRappAJirPfl^ 
Ud  thA  n  ToAiAtinr]   j^   then  due   A^f^^irply  t^  rflHinm    f!,  €rkr  radium 

B^emif^  only  ^  raya.  Such  a  wire  then  serves  as  a  convenient 
<mrce  of  homogeneous^,  mya,  t.hp  rRTjgp  ^f  ^yhiffb  i"  air  isf  7  cms. 

^J  using  ^^TTga  qimntiffif^p  ti^  rft/linm   PmAnat.inTij  a.  thin  wire  may 

e  made   intensely  active.     The  activity  of  radium   C  decays 

•  Huff,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  78,  p.  77,  1906. 
t  Bntherford,  Phil.  Mag.  12,  p.  848,  1906. 


1 


124 


THE  a  KAYS 


[CH. 


rapidly  and  two  bom's  after  removal  from  the  emanation  is  ODiy 
14  per  cent,  of  its  initial  value. 

In  order  to  determine   the  value  of  e/in  it  is  necessary  to 
measure  the  deflection  of  the  a  rays  in  a 
magrnetic  ^nd  in  sin  plf^t.rio  fiplrl      Fig.  23 

shows  the  arrangement  adopted  to  deter- 
mine the  deflection  in  a  magnetic  field. 

Aa  activa  wifv>  nns^f^A  wihh   rftHiiim   f!  was 
pln/yH     in     a     grnnvA     A  The    rayS     paSS 

through  a  nn.rrf>w  slit.  R  And  fall  nn  a  small 

pJAPP  ^f  ph(7tng^^p^^^  plati*^  atf  0,      The 
apparatus    is    enclosed    in    a    cylindrical 

vessel  Pj  which  can   ^   mpidly  PYVianahpH 

of  air.     The  apparatus  is  placed  between 

the  pol^  pienea  of  si  |argp   Hlftntmniagrnftt. 
so    t.bftt.    tbp   ipRgnpiir!   fiolH    ia   pamJl^l    tO 

the  direction  of  the   wir^   and  slit,  and  ^^^*  ^^' 

uniform  over  the  whole  path  of  the  rays.     The  electromagnet  is 
excited  by  a  constant  current,  wViiph  ia  r^vpropH  pvpty  t^n  iY)irmfj>ft 

On    developing    the    plate     twn    wplKHpfinpH    ImnHa    arp    nKaprirtfiH 

corresponding  to  the  pencils  of  rays  which  have  been  deflected 
equally  on  opposite  sides  of  the  normal  position  of  the  band. 

^^.^LJfi  ^^^  mHina  nf  Piirva.t.nrP  of  t.hp  mrr*n1ar  aiv*  Hpor^rilipH  V>y  \.ha 


inu 


n^ys  in  ft  fiplH  nf  at.nmgt.h    H^  then  Hp  =  —   where  ti  is  the 
velocity  of  the  rays.     If  2d  =  distance  between  bands  on  reversal 

of  the   fipid,   /)  =  d^«^^"^'*^  f^f  ^^'^    ^^^^    ^hp   ftoiim^,  r(,  a»  fliftfAnf^P  of 

platiP  ^''^'^  ■sli^  ^^^r^  ^^^  ^«  flmRll 

•  2pd  =  a{a'\-b) 


and 


mu      rr      Ha  (a  +  6) 

-T^^P^      -Id 


In  the  actual  photogri-jiphs,  tfie  width  nf  \Mi\  deflected  band 
was  the  same  as  t.hp    nndfifiected    baiid.  f^^minng   thaf.  all    the 

porf^nloa  v^-pr^    prr jf>/*t^#j    ^yj^jh    identipal    SpPJ^d.       The    ttaCeS   Of  the 

pencil  of  rays  (see  Fig.  24)  stand  nnt  pl«*;ir1y  with  w^]l-definftd  P>Hprp>ft^ 
so  that  the  value  2d,  the  distance  of  thc4nside  edge  of  one  band 
to.lhe-outiflide  Pflge.  of  thp  other,  can  easily  be  measured.     In  this 


IVj  THE   a  RAYS  125 


i     waj  the  value  of  Hp  for  the  a  pirticles  emitted  from  radium  C 

/      was  fnnnH    t^   Vw>    A-Ofi  ^  ^0^        In   a    »inifArm    fi^M    nf   10^000  f^,ft,p 

i      oflits,  the  a  particle  consequently  describes  a  circle   of  radius 
jMxms. 

With  a  modification  of  the  experimental  arrangement  given 
in  Fig.  23  it  can  be  simply  shown  that  the  a  particles  decrease 
in  velocity  in  passing  through  matter.     By  means  of  mica  plates, 
placed  at  right  angles  to  the  slit,  the  apparatus  is  divided  into 
two  equal  parts.     One  half  of  the  photographic  plate  is  acted  on 
by  the  rays  from  the  bare  wire,  and  the  other  by  the  rays  which 
have  passed  through  an  absorbing  screen  placed  over 
the  wire.     A  drawing   of  a   photograph  obtained  by 
this   method  is  shown  in  Fig.   24.     The   two   upper 
kudB  A  represent  the  traces  of  the  pencil  of  rays 
H|pined  by  reversal  of  the  magnetic  field  for  the  rays 
from  the  uncovered  half  of  the  wire ;  the  lower  bands 
B  were  obtained  for  the  rays  from   the  wire,   when 
covered    with    aluminium    foil,    of    thickness    about 
<K)25cms.    The  apparatus  was  exhausted  during  the 
experiment,  so  that  the  absorption  of  the  rays  by  the      Yia  24 
gas  is  negligible*. 

The  greater  deflection  of  the  pencil  of  rays  which  has  passed 
through  the  aluminium  is  clearly  seen  in  the  figure.  It  will  be 
shown  later  that  the  value  of  e/m  for  the  particles  does  not  change 
in  consequence  of  their  passage  through  matter.  The  greater 
deflection  of  the  rays  is  then  due  to  a  decrease  of  their  velocity 
after  passing  through  the  screen.  We  have  seen  that  the  a 
particles  from  radium  C  are  all  projected  initially  with  the  same 
speed.  The  absence  of  dispersion  of  the  rays  after  passing  through 
the  screen  shows  that  the  velocity  of  all  the  a  particles  is  reduced 
by  the  same  amount  in  traversing  the  screen. 

58.     Electrostatic    deflection    of    homogeneoua    rays. 

Unless  very  strong  electric  fields  are  employed,  the  deviation  of 

*  If  a  fine  wire  coated  with  radium  C  is  used  as  a  source  with  a  narrow  slit,  it 

is  observed  that  the  photographic  traces  are  not  uniform  over  the  width,  but  that 

the  edges  of  the  band  are  far  more  intense  than  the  centre.     This  effect,  which  is 

Olastimted  in  the  figure,  is  to  be  expected  if  the  rays  are  uniformly  expelled  in  all 

direetioiM  from  each  part  of  the  wire  (see  section  113). 


126 


THE   a   RAYS 


[CH. 


t.lip  n  prf.iolf^  iw  AmM  anrl  Hiffimilt.  %n  inPAJ^ni-p  The  arrangement 
employed  for  this  purpose  is  shown  in  Fig.  25.  The  rays  from  the 
active  wire  W,  after  tm-vprsing  a  thin  niim  plate  in  the  base  of 

the  brass  vessel  M,  pngg^H  KphwPPn  f.wn  pi-flllpl   inanlMfpH  p1ftt.<>a  ^ 

and  B,  °^iitr  ^  ^*^^s  h^'g^  ^^^  ^'^^  "^"^^  ^{y^^^  The  plates  il 
and  B  were  nhargpH  to  a  knoum  Hiffprpnpp  nf  pntpntial  by  means 
of  a  battery.  The  pencil  of  rays  after  emerging  from  the  parallel 
plates  fell  on  a  photographic  plate  P,  pla^npH  a  flpfinih*  HiRfAncA 
away.     The  whole  apparatus  was  ^vV»Qnsted  tn  n  higl^    vgr^tinm 


Fig.  25. 

In. this  arrangement,  the  parallel  plates  A  and  B  serve  the  double 
purpose  of  a  slit,  and  as  a  means  for  applying  an  intense  electric 
field.  Li  their  passage  between  the  charged  plates,  the  a  particles 
describe  a  parabolic  jmth,  and  those  which  emerge  travel  in  a 
straight  line  to  the  photographic  plate.  Fig.  26,  A  shows  the 
natural  width  of  the  line  on  the  plf^t.^  whpn  no  electric  field  is 
acting.     B  and   C  show   the   traces  of  the  deflected  pencil  of 

rays  for  rpvprai^l    of  pnt.pnt.i«1    Hiffprpnnps    nf  34Q    and    4^7    Vi^lfa 

respectively.  The  outside  edges  of  the  bands  are  sharply  defined 
with  homogeneous  rays,  but  the  inside  edge  is  not  distinct,  and 


IV] 


THE   a  RAVS 


127 


the  width  of  the  band  narrows  with  increase  of  the  electric  field. 

Such  an  pfFppt  ift  tr>  ho  oyj)^(^tt^f}  thpnrpf.iriiilly 

It  can  be  shown  that  if  T)  \h  tho  Hiatrnn^^  hptw^Pn  th^  avfmmp 

edges    of    the   deflected   bands   for   the   reversal    of  a   potential 
difference  £ 

where  e  is  the  charge  of  the  a  particle,  m  its  mass,  v  its  velocity, 

And  /  t.bp  HUt^nr^P  nf  thp  phnt.ngrftpViip  platp  fmin    thp  f>nH    nf  thp 


ABC 

Fig.  26. 

parallel  plates,  and  d  the  distance  between  the  parallel  plates. 

This  simple  equation  holds  only  if  the  field  is  strong  enough  to 

deflect   the  a  particle  through  a  distance  greater  than  d  in  its 

passsage  through  the  electric  field.     For  small  values  of  the  field, 

a  modified  form  of  this  equation  must  be  used. 

The  a  rays  from  radium  C  deposited  on  a  thin  wire  were  usikI 
as  a  source  of  radiation.  The  decrease  of  velocity  of  these  rays  in 
passing  through  the  mica  plate  at  the  base  of  the  vessel  was 
determined  experimentally  by  measuring  the  magnetic  deflection 
of  the  rays  after  passing  through  thu  mica.     The  value 


niv 


•—  =Hp  =  310  X  W 


and 


e 


=  4-87  X  10" 


for  rays  of  the  same  velocity.  Consequently  t;=  1*57  x  10*  cms. 
per  see.  and  e/m=*5070.  Correcting  for  the  retardation  of  the 
a  particles  in  passing  through  the  mica  plate,  the  initial  velocity 


128  THE  a   RATS  [CH. 

of  the  a  rays  from  radium  C  was  found  to  V>^  Q-QI|  x  ly^wML 
per  sec. 

By  similar  methnda  it  was  found  that  the  value  of  e/m  of  the 

a  particle  did  nnt  n.lt.pr  V>y  its  pytftftgp  t.hmngh  ofitv^Png  qf  Hiffprpnfc 

thicknesses.  Determinations  of  e/m  were  also  made  for  selected 
products  of  radium,  actinium,  and  thorium.  The  products  em- 
ployeil  were  radium  A,  radium  F  (polonium),  actinium  C  and 
thorium  C.  The  experiments  with  the  active  deposit  of  thorium 
were  made  in  conjunction  with  Dr  Hahn,  using  his  intensely 
radio-active  preparations  of  radiothorium.  While  the  velocity  of 
the  a  particles  from  each  of  these  products  differed  considerably, 

the  value  of  p/m  was   found   t^  b^  ^^^  aamA  in  nil  oxia^a  ^'jth'^   the 

limit  of  experimental  error.  These  results  show  that  the  a 
particles  from  all  of  these  products  are  identical,  and  suggest  that 
the  a  particles  from  all  radio-active  products  consist  of  the  same 
kind  of  matter. 

A  difficulty  immediately  arose  in  regard  to  the  conclusions  to 
be  drawn  from  these  experiments.  We  have  seen  that  the  value 
of  e/m  for  the  hydrogen  atom  is  9647.  If  the  o  particle  were 
a  helium  atom  (of  atomic  weight  4)  and  carried  the  same  positive 

ohargft   as   that   of  n.  ViyHmgPn    atntYi    f.]ii>   vnlnp   nf  ^/m  should   be 

2415  or  about  half  the  value  actually  observed.  In  order  to 
reconcile  t.hft,valiio  of  p/m  fgr  ^hp  a  pftrt.inlo  with  the  theoretical 

value,  it   wn^g  f.hiiR   nf^r^papary  tn  A«agnmP   t.hflt.   f,^P  a  particlc  CarrieS 

two  unit  positivp  ^b>trgPH.  This  suggestion  at  the  time  seemed 
the  most  probable ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  recognised  that 
the  results  would  be  equally  explained  by  supposing  that  the 
a  pirticle  was  a  hydrogen  molecule  or  an  atom  of  atomic  weight 
about  2.  We  shall  now  consider  some  further  experiments  which 
have  thrown  much  light  on  these  questions. 

69.  Counting  the  a  particles.  The  total  number  of  a 
particles  expelled  per  second  from  one  gram  of  radium  was 
initially  estirjiated  by  Rutherford*  by  measuring  the  positive 
charge  carried  by  the  a  particles  emitted  fi-om  a  known  quantity 
of  radium  in  the  form  of  a  thin  film.  On  the  assumption,  that 
each  a  particle  carried  an  ionic  charge  3*4  x  10~"  electrostatic 


Rutherford,  Phil  Mag.  10,  p.  193,  1905. 


IV]  THE   a   RAYS  129 

unite,  the  results  showed  that  62  x  10^®  a  particles  are  expelled 
per  second  from  one  gram  oF  radiimi  rtselT,  and  four'fTmesTiliiir 
Bumber  when  the  radium  is  m  equilibrium  >ylfctits  three'  a  ray 
products.  The  uncertainty,  however,  of  the  actual  magnitude  of 
lie  charge  carried  by  the  a  particle  rendered  it  desirable  to 
deteraiine  this  number  by  an  independent  method.  We  shall 
see  later  that  the  a  particle  from  radium  C  of  range  about  7  cms. 
produces  about  2*37  x  10*  ions  in  its  path  in  air  before  absorption. 
If  each  ion  carries  a  charge  4*65  x  10~*°  units,  this  corresponds  to 
a  transfer  of  11  x  10~*  electrostatic  units  in  a  strong  electric  field. 
This  quantity  of  electricity  is  small,  but  should  be  detectable^ 
using  a  very  sensitive  electroscope  or  electrometer.  The  detection 
of  a  single  a  particle,  however,  by  its  direct  electrical  effect,  while 
not  impossible,  is  beset  by  many  experimental  difficulties. 

In  order  to  increase  the  electrical  effect,  Rutherford  and 
Geiger*  developed  a  method  of  automatically  magnifying  the 
ionisation  due  to  a  single  a  particle,  using  the  principle  of  the 
production  of  ions  by  collision.  In  an  admirable  series  of  papers, 
Townsend  has  worked  out  the  conditions  under  which  ions  can 
b<?  generated  by  collision  with  neutral  gas  molecules  in  a  strong 
electric  field.  The  general  principle  involved  has  already  been 
explained  in  section  15.  If  a  strong  electric  field  acts  on  a  gas  at 
a  low  pressure,  the  number  of  ions  pro<luce(l  in  the  gas  by  an 
external  source  is  greatly  increased  by  the  movement  of  the  ions 
in  the  electric  field.  If  the  voltage  applied  is  near  the  sparking 
value,  the  ionisation  current  may  in  this  way  be  increased  more 
than  a  thousand  times.  In  the  experiments  of  Rutherford  and 
Geiger  to  detect  a  single  a  particle,  it  was  arranged  that  the 
a  particles  were  fired  through  a  gas  at  low  pressure,  exposed  to  an 
electric  field  somewhat  below  the  sparking  value.  In  this  way, 
the  small  ionisation  produced  by  one  a  particle  in  passing  along 
the  gas  could  be  magnified  several  thousand  times.  The  sudden 
current  through  the  gas,  due  to  the  entrance  of  a  single  a  particle 
in  the  detecting  vessel,  was  by  this  method  increased  sufficiently 
to  give  an  easily  measurable  deflection  to  the  needle  of  an  oi-dinary 
eJectrometer. 

*  Botherford  and  Geiger,  Proe.  Roy.  8oc.  A,  81,  p.  141,  1908;  Phyt.  Zeiu  10, 
).  1, 1909. 

B.  R.-A.  9 


130 


THE  a  RAYS 


[CH. 


The  experimental  arrangement  adopted  is  shown  in  Fig.  27. 
The  detecting  vessel  consisted  of  a  brass  cylinder  A  from  15  to 
20  cms.  in  length,  and  1*77  cms.  in  diameter,  with  a  centrally 
insulated  wire  B  passing  through  ebonite  plugs  at  the  end.  The 
cylinder  was  exhausted  to  a  pressure  varying  from  2  to  5  cms. 
of  mercury.  The  central  wire  was  connected  with  the  electro- 
meter and  the  outside  tube  with  the  negative  terminal  of  a 
battery  of  accumulators,  the  other  pole  of  which  was  earthed. 
If  the  tube  were  connected  to  the  positive  pole  of  the  battery, 
the  magnification  by  collision  became  large  only  very  close  to  the 
vSparking  value,  and  was  less  under  control  than  when  the  field 
was  reversed.  In  the  ebonite  plug  (7,  was  fixed  a  short  glass  tube 
JD,  in  the  end  of  which  was  a  circular  opening  of  about  1*5  mms. 
diameter.     This  opening,  through  which  the  a  particles  entered 


450  c  ft 


Fig.  27. 

the  testing  vessel,  was  covered  with  a  thin  sheet  of  mica.  In  most 
experiments  the  thickness  of  the  plate  of  mica  was  equivalent  in 
stopping  power  of  the  a  particle  to  about  5  mms.  of  air  at  ordinary 
pressure.  Over  the  tube  D  was  fixed  a  wide  rubber  tube,  to  the 
other  end  of  which  was  attached  a  long  glass  tube  E,  450  cms.  in 
length.  A  stopcock  F  with  a  wide  opening  was  placed  near  the 
detecting  vessel.  The  general  procedure  of  an  experiment  was  as 
follows : — The  voltage  applied  to  the  testing  vessel  was  adjusted 
so  that  the  current,  due  to  an  external  source  of  7  rays,  was 
increased  by  collision  several  thousand  times.  The  active  mattei 
in  the  form  of  a  thin  film  of  small  surface  area  was  placed  in  the 
long  tube  E,  and  its  distance  from  the  detecting  vessel  could  be 
varied  by  means  of  an  external  magnet.  The  glass  tube  was  then 
exhausted  to  a  low  vacuum.  When  the  stopcock  F  was  closed,  no 
a  particles  could  enter  the  detecting  vessel,  and  the  steadiness  of 


IV] 


THE   OL   RATS 


131 


the  electrometer  needle  could  thus  be  tested  at  intervals  during 
the  experiment.  On  opening  the  stopcock,  a  small  fraction  of  the 
total  number  of  the  a  particles  expelled  from  the  source  passed 
through  the  aperture  into  the  detecting  vessel.  The  intensity  of 
the  source  and  its  distance  from  the  aperture  were  adjusted  so  that 
from  3  to  5  a  particles  entered  the  detecting  vessel  per  minute. 
The  entrance  of  an  a  particle  into  the  detecting  vessel  was 
signified  by  a  sudden  ballistic  throw  of  the  electrometer  needle. 
By  adjusting  the  potential,  it  was  not  difficult  to  obtain  a  throw 
of  50  to  100  mms.  on  the  electrometer  scale  for  a  single  a  particle. 
The  following  table  illustrates  the  results  obtained  in  an  actual 
experiment.  The  voltage  applied  was  1320,  and  the  detecting 
vessel  cont-ained  carbon  dioxide  at  a  pressure  of  4*2  cms.  Elach 
•scale  division  was  equal  to  2'5  mms. 


N  amber  of 

Magnitude  of  successive 

minute 

throws 
4 

throws  in  scale  divisions 

l.Ht 

11,  12,  10,  11 

:2iid 

J? 

.3 

10,  11,  8                             i 

3rd 

1) 

5        . 

10,  9,  13,  8,  12 

4th 

«) 

4 

18*    8,  12 

5th 

ff 

3 

10,  6,  10 

fJth 

f) 

4 

9,  10,  12,  11 

7th 

n 

22 

10.   11 

Sth 

j» 

3 

11,  13,  8 

nth 

ft 

3 

8,  20* 

loth 

.vcrage  i»er  i 

4 

8,  12,  14,  6 

A 

[uiuute  =  3*5 

Avenige  throw  =  10  divisious 

It  will  be  seen  that  two  of  the  throws  are  marked  by  asterisks. 
The  large  deflection  observed  in  each  of  these  cases  was  un- 
doubtedly due  to  the  entrance  of  two  a  particles  within  a  few 
seconds  of  each  other.  This  was  readily  seen  from  the  peculiarity 
of  motion  of  the  spot  of  light  on  the  scale.  As  the  electrometer 
needle  was  moving  slowly  near  the  end  of  its  swing  caused  by  one 
«  particle,  a  second  impulse  due  to  the  entrance  of  another  was 
communicated  to  it.  Provided  the  interval  between  two  successive 
particles  is  not  too  small,  such  double  throws  are  easily  recognised. 

9—2 


132  THE  a  RATS  [CIL 

The  main  difficulty  in  these  experiments  was  to  obtain  a 
detecting  vessel  in  which  the  natural  disturbances  under  the 
experimental  conditions  were  small  compared  with  that  due  to  aa 
a  particle.  For  this  purpose,  it  was  necessary  to  use  as  detecting 
vessel  a  cylinder  of  small  diameter,  for  the  number  of  such 
disturbances  falls  off  rapidly  with  decrease  of  diameter.  It  was 
also  found  necessary  to  use  short  tubes,  in  order  to  avoid  large 
inequalities  in  the.  magnitude  of  the  throws  due  to  individual 
a  particles.  This  effect  was  found  to  be  due  to  the  scattering  of 
the  a  particles  in  their  passage  through  the  mica  plate  and  through 
the  gas  in  the  detecting  vessel. 

By  this  electric  method,  the  emission  of  a  particles  was 
observed  from  all  the  known  radio-active  substances.  For  the 
accurate  determination  of  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled  from 
radium,  its  product  radium  C  was  used  as  a  source  of  rays. 
A  deposit  of  radium  C  was  obtained  on  a  suitable  surface  by 
exposure  to  the  emanation.  The  amount  of  radium  C  present  at 
any  time  was  determined  by  comparing  its  7  ray  effect  with  that 
due  to  a  radium  standard. 

Let  Q  be  the  avei-age  number  of  a  particles  expelled  per  second 
fix)m  the  source,  distant  ?•  from  the  aperture  of  area  A.  Since  it 
was  verified  experimentally  that  the  a  particles  on  an  average  are 
projected  equally  in  all  directions,  the  number  n  of  a  particles 

entering  the  detecting  vessel  per  second  is  given  by  71  =  ^~~^' 

This  expression  holds  provided  that  each  portion  of  the  active 
source  can  fire  particles  through  the  aperture.  As  a  result  of 
a  number  of  experiments,  it  was  found  that  the  number  of  a 
particles  emitted  per  second  from  the  product  radium  C  in  equi- 
librium with  one  gram  of  radium  was  8*4  x  10".  From  other 
evidence,  it  is  known  that  the  same  number  of  a  particles  is 
emitted  per  second  from  one  gram  radium  itself  and  from  each  of 
its  three  a  ray  products  in  equilibrium  with  it  (see  section  66), 
Consequently  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled  per  second  from 
one  gram  of  radium  itself  is  3'4  x  10",  and  from  radium  in 
equilibrium  13-6  x  10". 

The  movements  of  an  electrometer  or  electroscope  due  to  the 
entrance  of  successive  a  particles  in  the  detecting  vessel  can  be 


IV]  THE   a  RAYS  133 

photographically  recorded,  thus  aflFording  a  method  of  countiog 
the  a  particles.  This  has  been  done  by  Rutherford  and  Qeiger 
using  a  string  electrometer,  by  Duane*  using  a  sensitive  electro- 
scope and  by  Mme  Curie  f  using  an  electrometer.  Since  the  a 
particles  are  expelled  at  random  from  the  source,  considerable 
fluctuations  in  the  number  of  a  particles  are  observed  when  a 
small  number  of  particles  is  counted.  A  discussion  of  these 
probability  variations  is  given  later  in  section  75. 

60.  Countiiig  of  scintillations.  It  was  found  by  Giesel 
that  a  screen  of  Sidot's  hexagonal  blend  (phosphorescent  zinc 
sulphide)  lights  up  brightly  when  exposed  to  a  rays.  If  the 
surface  of  the  screen  is  examined  by  a  magnifying  glass,  the  light 
from  the  screen  is  found  to  be  not  unifonnly  distributed,  but  to 
consist  of  a  number  of  scintillating  points  of  light,  scattered  over 
the  whole  surface,  exposed  to  the  radiation,  and  having  only  a  short 
duration.  This  remarkable  effect  of  the  a  rays  on  a  zinc  sulphide 
screen  was  discovered  by  Sir  William  CrookesJ,  and  independently 
by  Elster  and  Geitel  §.  The  former  has  devised  a  simple  apparatus 
called  the  spiivUiariacope  to  show  the  scintillations  due  to  radio- 
active matter.  A  small  surface  coated  with  a  trace  of  radium  is 
placed  several  millimetres  away  from  the  zinc  sulphide  screen, 
which  is  fixed  at  one  end  of  a  short  tube,  and  is  viewed  by  a  lens  at 
the  other  end.  In  a  dark  room  the  surface  of  the  screen  is  seen  as 
a  dark  background  dotted  with  brilliant  points  of  light,  which  come 
and  go  with  great  rapidity.  The  experiment  is  extremely  beautiful, 
and  brings  vividly  before  the  observer  the  idea  that  the  radium  is 
shooting  out  a  stream  of  projectiles,  the  impact  of  each  of  which  on 
the  screen  is  marked  by  a  flash  of  light.  The  scintillations  of  zinc 
sulphide  are  produced  by  a  rays  and  not  EjT^  rayg.  A  similar 
property  is  exhibited  by  certain  kinds  of  diamonds.  Regener|| 
found  that  the  /8  particles  produced  a  similar  scintillating  effect  in 
barium-platino  cyanide ;  but  the  scintillations  are  very  feeble. 

Regenerjl  was  the  first  to  count  systematically  the  scintillations, 

*  Doane,  C.  R.  161,  p.  22S,  1910;   Le  Radium,  7,  p.  196,  1910. 

t  Mme  Curie,  Le  Radium,  8,  p.  354,  1911. 

t  CrookeB,  Proe.  Roy,  Soe.  A,  71,  p.  405,  1903. 

§  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phys.  Zeit,  4,  p.  489,  1903. 

!l  Begener,  Verh.  d,  D,  Phyt.  Qe$.  19,  pp.  7S  and  851,  190S. 


134  THE  a  RAYS  [CH, 

and  has  determined  the  most  favourable  conditions  for  their  obser- 
vation. It  is  desirable  in  ordinary  cases  to  employ  a  microscope 
of  magnification  about  50  with  an  object  glass  of  large  aperture, 
in  order  to  make  the  scintillations  as  bright  as  possible.  The 
experiment  should  be  made  in  a  dark  room  when  the  eye  is 
rested,  and  the  surface  of  the  screen  should  be  faintly  lighted  up 
in  order  to  keep  the  eye  focussed  on  it. 

The  development  of  the  electric  method  of  counting  made  it 
possible  to  settle  definitely  whether  each  scintillation  was  produced 
by  a  single  a  particle.  Rutherford  and  Geiger  {loc,  cit)  found  that 
the  number  of  a  particles,  counted  by  the  scintillation  method,  was 
the  same  as  the  number  of  a  particles  incident  on  the  screen 
determined  by  the  electric  method.  On  a  uniform  screen  of  zinc 
sulphide,  there  is  thus  no  doubt  that  each  a  particle  produces 
a  visible  scintillation.  This  optical  method  of  counting  a  particles 
is  much  simpler  than  the  electric  method,  and  has  been  widely 
used  as  a  direct  means  of  counting  the  number  of  a  particles 
emitted  firom  all  types  of  radio-active  matter.  Under  the  best 
conditions,  the  error  of  counting  need  not  exceed  more  than  one 
or  two  per  cent.  Unless  a  screen  is  very  carefully  made,  the 
number  of  scintillations  observed  is  usually  5  to  10  per  cent,  less 
than  the  number  of  incident  a  particles.  It  is  essential  foi 
accurate  work  that  the  area  of  screen  seen  in  the  microscopti 
should  be  completely  coated  with  zinc  sulphide  crystals. 

We  have  thus  two  distinct  methods  of  detecting  single  a 
particles,  one  electrical,  depending  on  the  ionisation  produced 
in  the  gas,  and  the  other  optical,  depending  on  the  luminosity 
produced  in  certain  substances.  Kinoshita*  has  also  shown  that 
each  a  particle  produces  a  detectable  photographic  effect.  A 
more  complete  discussion  of  the  scintillations  and  also  of  the 
photographic  effect  of  the  a  particles  is  given  in  Chapter  VII 

C.  T.  R.  Wilsonf  has  recently  devised  a  striking  method  o: 
making  visible  the  path  of  a  single  a  or  /8  particle.  It  has  beer 
shown  in  section  18  that  the  ions  become  centres  of  condensatior 
in  a  moist  gas  when  a  definite  supersaturation  of  water  vapour  is 
reached  by  a  sudden  expansion.     Under  suitable  conditions,  the 

*  Kinoshita,  Proc.  Rot/,  Soc,  A,  88,  p.  432,  1909. 

t  C.  T.  R.  Wilson,  Proc,  Roy,  Soc,  A,  86,  p.  285,  1911. 


JT] 


THE   a  RATS 


135 


tml  of  the  ions  produced  by  the  passage  of  an  a  particle  through 
the  gas  is  marked  by  a  line  of  fine  water  drops.  These  trails  of 
the  particles  can  be  readily  photographed.  This  method  of  detec- 
tion is  so  delicate  that  the  trail  of  the  )3  particle  can  also  be  seen, 
though  it  is  far  less  dense  than  that  due  to  the  a  particle  on 
account  of  the  much  smaller  ionisation  produced  per  unit  path  by 
the  former. 

61.  The  charge  carried  by  the  a  particle.  Since  the 
number  of  _g_P9Jticl£-^g^-  be.  directly  counted,  the  charge ..cacde^ 
by  each  ojgarticle  can  be  d^i^^^^  by  measuring  the  total  charge 
carried  by  a  counted  number  of  a  particles.  The  determination  of 
the  positive  charge  carried  by  the  a  particles  was  at  first  difficult* 
on  account  of  the  secondary  elec- 
trical effects  produced  when  a  rays 
feJl  upon  matter.  J.  J.  Thomson  f 
showed  that  a  film  of  polonium 
emitted,  in  addition  to  a  rays, 
a  great  number  of  negatively 
charged  particles,  which  he  termed 
the  8  (delta)  rays.  These  par- 
ticles, which  are  identical  with 
electrons,  always  appear  when 
the  a  particles  impinge  on  matter, 
whether  in  a  liquid,  solid  or 
gaseous  state.  To  determine  the 
charge  carried  by  the  a  rays  it  is 
necessary  to  eliminate  the  effects 
doe  to  the  S  rays.  This  can  be 
done  by  placing  the  active  matter 
in  a  strong  magnetic  field.  Under 
such  conditions,  the  S  particles, 
which  are  emitted  at  a  slow  speed 
from  a  surface,  describe  a  small 
orbit,  and  return  to  the  surface 
irom  which  they  set  out.     In  order  to  meiisure  accurately  the 

♦  See  Rutherford,   Bakerian  Lecture,  Phil.  Trans.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  204,  p.   169, 
1904 ;  Phil.  Mag.  10,  p.  193,  1905. 

t  J.  J.  Thomson,  Proc.  Camb.  PhiL  Soc.  IS,  p.  49,  1904. 


Fig.  28. 


136  THE  a  RAYS  [CH. 

charge  carried  by  the  a  rays,  Rutherford  and  Geiger*  employed 
radium  C  as  a  source  of  radiation.  The  experimental  arrange- 
ment is  shown  in  Fig.  28.  The  active  matter  in  the  form  of  a 
thin  film  was  distributed  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  vessel  K 
The  a  rays,  after  passing  through  a  thin  aluminium  plate  B,  were 
stopped  by  the  plate  GA,  the  lower  surface  of  which  was  also 
covered  with  a  thin  aluminium  foil.  The  whole  apparatus  was 
placed  in  a  strong  magnetic  field  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  eflfect 
of  the  B  particles,  and  to  bend  away  from  the  measuring  vessel 
the  /3  rays,  which,  in  addition  to  a  rays,  are  emitted  fi-om  radium  C. 
The  apparatus  was  exhausted  to  a  charcoal  vacuum  and  the  current 
between  CA  and  B  was  measured  by  an  electrometer.  The  7  ray 
activity  of  the  active  deposit  was  measured  in  terms  of  radium, 
and  from  this  the  number  of  a  particles  entering  the  measuring 
chamber  was  deduced.  Using  a  strong  magnetic  field,  the  upper 
plate  received  a  positive  charge,  whether  the  lower  plate  was 
charged  positively  or  negatively.  The  current  was  first  measured 
with  the  lower  plate  charged  to  a  potential  +  F,  and  then  with 
the  same  plate  at  a  potential  —  V,  Let  t'l  be  the  current  observed 
in  the  first  case  and  i^  in  the  second  case,  i,  is  always  numerically 
less  than  tj,  the  ratio  depending  upon  the  degree  of  exhaustion. 
Let  to  be  the  current  through  the  gas  due  to  the  ionisation  of  the 
residual  gas  between  the  plates  by  the  a  rays.     Then 

i,^nE  +  i (1) 

where  n  is  the  number  of  a  particles  passing  into  the  upper  plate 

per  second  and  E  the  charge  on  each.     On  reversing  the  voltage, 

the  ionisation  is  equal  in  magnitude  but  reversed  in  its  direction. 

Consequently 

ii  =  nE  -to (2). 

Adding  (1)  and  (2) 

It  was  found  in  this  way  that  the  charge  carried  by  om 
a  particle  was  9*3  x  10~***  e.s.  units.  Fnmi  consideration  of  the 
values  of  the  ionic  charge,  previously  obtained  by  J.  J.  Thomson 
Wilson   and   Millikan   and   Begeman,  who   had   obtained  values 

*  Rutherford  and  Geiger,  Proc,  Boy.  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  162,  1908;  Pky$.  Zeit.  10 
p.  42,  1909. 


iy]  the  a  RAYS  137 

3-4 X  10-»,  3-1  X  10-w  406  x  lO"*^  respectively  (see  section  20),  it 
was  concluded  that  the  a  particle  carried  two  unit  positive  charges. 
The  value  of  the  fundamental  unit  of  charge  was  thus  half  this 
value,  or  4*65  x  10~^°  e.s.  units.  The  adoption  of  this  view  recon- 
ciled the  observed  value  of  e/m  with  the  value  to  be  theoretically 
expected  if  the  a  particle  were  a  helium  atom. 

Regener*  determined  the  charge  carried  by  the  a  rays  from 
polonium  by  the  same  general  method.  In  his  experiments,  how- 
ever, the  a  particles  were  counted  by  observing  the  scintillations 
produced  on  -a  small  diamond.  As  a  result  of  very  careful 
measuremjents,  he  found  the  charge  on  an  a  particle  to  be 
9*58  X  iP""",  and  consequently  the  fundamental  unit  of  charge 
to  be  4*79  X  10""*°,  a  value  agreeing  closely  with  the  determination 
of  Rutherford  and  Geiger.  There  is  one  possible  source  of  error 
in  the  experiments  of  Regener.  The  charge  carried  by  the  a  rays 
wa.s  determined  with  an  uncovered  polonium  plate.  It  is  known 
from  the  experiments  of  Russ  and  Makower,  and  Hahn  (see 
section  73)  that  the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle  causes  a  recoil  of 
the  residual  atom.  In  a  vacuum  these  recoil  atoms,  which  usually 
cany  a  positive  charge,  would  travel  with  the  a  rays  and  give  up 
their  charge  to  the  same  plate.  For  this  reason  the  apparent 
charge  carried  by  the  a  particle  would  tend  to  be  too  high.  In 
the  experiments  of  Rutherford  and  Geiger,  this  possible  error  was 
not  present,  as  a  thin  aluminium  sheet  was  interposed  between 
the  source  and  the  measuring  vessel,  of  thickness  ample  to  stop 
the  recoil  atoms.  An  account  of  the  values  obtained  for  the 
ftindamental  unit  of  charge  by  other  methods  has  been  given  in 
section  20.  The  value  of  the  fundamental  unit  is  throughout 
this  work  taken  as  465  x  10~"  electrostatic  units,  since  a  large^ 
amount  of  radio-active  data  has  been  given  in  terms  of  this  unit. 

62.    Nature  of  the  a  particle.     From  the  determination  of 
the  charge  carried  by  the  a  particle,  it  seemed  established  from  in- 
direct evidence  that  the  a  particle  was  a  helium  atom,  carrying  two 
unit  positive  charges.     This  conclusion  was  confirmed  by  a  direct 
experiment  made  by  Rutherford  and  Roydsf,  who  showed  that 

*  Begener,  Sitz,  Ber.  d.  k,  Preusg.  Akad,  d.  Wi$8.  38,  p.  94S,  1909. 
f  RaUierford  and  RoycU,  Phil,  Mag,  17,  p.  281,  1909. 


138 


THE  a   RATS 


[OIL 


accumulated  a  particles,  quite  independently  of  the  matter  from 
which  they  were  expelled,  consist  of  helium.  The  method  of 
experiment  will  be  clearly  seen  from  Fig.  29.  A  large  quantity 
of  radium  emanation  was  compressed  into  a  fine  glass  tube  A 
about  1*5  cms.  long.     This  tube,  which  was  sealed  to  a   larger 


Fig.  29. 

capillary  tube  -B,  was  sufficiently  thin  to  allow  the  o  particles 
from  the  emanation  and  its  products  to  escape ;  but  sufficiently 
strong  to  withstand  atmospheric  pressure.  The  thickness  of  the 
glass  wall  was,  in  most  cases,  less  than  1/100  mm.  On  introducing 
the  emanation  into  the  tube,  the  escape  of  the  a  particles  from 


iy]  the  a  RATS  139 

the  emanation  was  clearly  seen  by  the  scintillations  produced  at 
some  distance  on  a  zinc  sulphide  screen.     The  glass  tube  A  was 
surrounded  by  a  cylindrical  glass  tube  T,  and  a  small  spectrum 
tube  V  was  attached  to  it.    The  tube  T  was  completely  exhausted 
to  a  charcoal  vacuum      By  means  of  the  mercury  column  H  the 
gases  in  the  tube  T  could  at  any  time  be  compressed  into  the 
spectrum  tube  F,  and  the  nature  of  the  gases  present  determined 
spectroscopically.     It  was  found  that  two  days  after  the  intro- 
duction of  the  emanation,  the  spectrum  showed  the  yellow  line  of 
helium,  and  after  six  days  the  whole  helium  spectrum  was  ob- 
served.    In  order  to  be  certain  that  the  helium  had  not  diffused 
through  the  thin  walls  of  the  tube  A,  the  emanation  was  pumped 
out  and  helium  substituted.     No  trace  of  helium  could  be  observed 
in  the  vacuum  tube  after  several  days,  showing  that  the  helium 
observed  in  the  first  experiment  must  have  originated  from  the 
a  particles,  which  had  been  fired  through  the  thin  glass  tube  into 
the  outer  cylinder. 

Most  of  the  a  particles  penetrate  some  distance  into  the  walls 
of  the  outer  tube,  and  some  of  these  gradually  ditfuse  out  into  the 
exhausted  space.  The  presence  of  helium  in  the  spectrum  tube 
can  be  detected  after  a  shorter  interval  if  a  thin  cylinder  of  lead 
is  placed  over  the  emanation  tube,  since  the  helium  fired  into  the 
lead  difiFuses  out  more  rapidly  than  fi'om  glass.  A  still  more 
definite  proof  of  the  identity  of  the  a  particle  with  the  helium 
atom  was  obtained  by  removing  the  outer  glass  cylinder  and 
placing  a  cylinder  of  sheet  lead  over  the  emanation  tube  in  the 
open  air.  Helium  was  always  detected  in  the  lead  after  it  had 
remained  several  hours  over  the  thin  tube  containing  a  large 
quantity  of  emanation.  In  order  to  test  for  the  presence  of  helium 
in  the  lead,  the  gases  present  were  released  by  melting  the  lead 
in  a  closed  vessel.  There  can  thus  be  no  doubt  that  the  a  particle 
becomes  a  helium  atom  when  its  charge  is  neutralised.  The 
value  of  the  charge  carried  by  the  a  particle,  and  also  the  value  of 
tf/m,  show  in  addition  that  the  a  particle  must  carrj^  normally  two 
unit  charges.  It  is  difficult  to  offer  any  definite  explanation  why 
the  atom  of  a  monatomic  gas  like  helium  should  carr^'  a  double 
chaige.  Even  supposing  the  a  particle  was  initially  emitted 
without  charge,  it  would  acquire  a  charge  immediately  due  to 


140  THE  a  KAYS  [CH. 

collision  with  the  molecules  of  matter  in  its  path.  If  the  helium 
atom  can  readily  lose  two  negative  electrons,  either  at  disintegra* 
tion  or  as  a  result  of  the  violent  collisions  wuth  the  atoms  of 
matter,  this  would  result  in  leaving  the  helium  atom  with  a  doable 
positive  charge.  There  is  no  definite  evidence,  however,  that  the 
a  particle  has  not  its  final  charge  at  the  moment  of  its  expulsion 
from  the  atom.  This  question  has  been  examined  in  detail  by 
Soddy  who  finally  concluded  that  there  was  no  definite  evidence 
that  the  a  imrticle  was  uncharged  at  the  moment  of  its  expulsion. 

63.  Atomic  and  radio-active  conBtanta.  The  determina- 
tion of  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  by  radium  and  of  the 
value  of  the  unit  charge  allows  us  at  once  to  deduce  the  values  of 
a  number  of  important  atomic  and  radio-active  magnitudes*.  If 
e  be  the  unit  of  charge  carried  by  the  hydrogen  atom  in 
electrolysis,  and  n  the  number  of  atoms  in  one  gram  of  hydrogen, 
it  is  known  from  Faraday  s  experiments  that  ne  =  9647  electro- 
magnetic units.  Since  e  =  4*65  x  10~^®  electrostatic  units,  or 
1*55  X  10~"  electromagnetic  units,  the  value  of  n  is  at  once  deter- 
mined. From  this  it  is  a  simple  matter,  assuming  Avogadros 
law,  to  deduce  the  number  of  molecules  in  one  cubic  centimetre  of 
any  gas  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature.  For  convenience 
some  of  the  more  important  atomic  and  radio-active  constants  are 
tabulateil  below. 

Charge  carried  by  the  hydrogen  atom         =  4*65  x  10"""  e.s.  units. 

Value  of  e/m  for  a  particle  =  5070  e.m.  units. 

Charge  carried  by  the  a  particle  =  93  xlO"""  e.s.  units. 

Number  of  atoms  in  1  gram  of  hydrogen     =  6*2  x  10". 

Mass  of  an  atom  of  hydrogen  =  1*60  x  10~**  gram. 

Number  of  molecules  per  cubic  centi- 
metre of  any  gas  of  standard  pressure 
and  temperature  =  2*78  x  10". 

Number    of    a    particles    expelled   per 

second  per  gram  of  radium  itself  =«  3*4  x  10*^ 

Number  of  a  particles  expelled  per 
second  per  gram  of  radium  in  equi- 
librium with  its  products  =  13*6  x  10". 

*  Rutherford  and  Geiger,  Proc,  Roy,  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  162,  1908. 


IV]  THE  a  RAYS  141 

With  the  aid  of  these  data,  it  is  possible  to  deduce  at  once  the 
rate  of  production  of  helium  from  any  substance,  for  example 
radium,  for  which  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  per  second 
has  been  determined.  It  is  known  that  one  gram  of  radium  in 
equilibrium  produces  13*6  x  10*^  atoms  of  helium  per  second. 
Dividing  by  the  number  of  atoms  of  helium  in  one  cubic  centi- 
metre, this  corresponds  to  a  production  of  helium  of  490  x  10"* c.c. 
per  second,  or  158  cubic  mms.  per  year.  It  will  be  seen  in 
Chapter  XVII  that  this  calculated  value  is  in  close  agreement 
with  that  determined  experimentally.  Such  a  close  concordance 
between  calculation  and  experiment  affords  strong  evidence  of 
the  essential  correctness  of  the  data  on  which  the  ciilculations 
are  based. 

64.    Retardatioii  of  the  a  particle.   We  have  seen  in  section 
57  that  the  a  particles  diminish  in  velocity  in  passing  through 
matter.     Using  a  pencil  of  homogeneous  rays,  the  reduction  of 
velocity  in  traversing  normally  a  uniform  screen  is  nearly  the  same 
for  all  the  a  particles,  so  that  a  homogeneous  pencil  of  rays  remains 
nearly  homogeneous  after  traversing  the  screen.     In  the  ordinary 
arrangement,  the  effects  of  scattering  of  the  a  particles  in  passing 
through  matter  does  not  come  in  appreciably,  but  we  shall  see  later 
(section  74)  that  there  is  some  evidence  that  a  small  fraction  of  the 
a  particles  owing  to  scattering  suffer  a  greater  reduction  of  velocity 
than  the  average.     In  discussing  the  laws  of  retanlation  of  the 
a  particles,  it  is  convenient  to  connect  the  velocity  of  an  a  particle 
with  its  range  of  ionisation  in  air.     It  will  be  seen  later  that 
Bragg  has  shown  that  the  ionisation  due  to  a  homogeneous  pencil 
of  a  rays  ends  comparatively  abruptly  after  they  have  traversed  a 
certain  distance  of  air.     This  distance  is  called  the  range  of  the 
tt  particle  in  air.     The  magnitude  of  the  range  is  inversely  pro- 
portional  to   the  density  of  the  air,  and  thus  depends  on  the 
pressure  and  temperature.     The  range  in  air  is  usually  given  for 
air  at  standard   pressure   and   at   laboratory   temperature.     For 
example,  the  range  of  the  a  particles  from  a  thin  film  of  radium  C 
is  T-OC  cms.  at  20**  C.     On  placing  a  uniform  screen,  for  example 
of  alnminium,  over  the  source,  the  range  of  ionisation  is  reduced 
say  to  5  cms.    In  this  case,  the  screen  of  aluminium  is  said  to 


142  THE   a  RATS 

have  a  "  stopping  power  "  for  the  a  particle  equivalent  to  2( 
of  air. 

The  decrease  of  velocity  with  thickness  of  matter  tra 
was  first  determined  by  Rutherford*  by  observing  the  def 
of  the  rays  in  a  magnetic  field.  Radium  C  was  used  as  a 
of  homogeneous  rays  and,  by  the  photographic  method,  the 
tion  of  velocity  of  the  a  particles  was  observed  after  j 
through  various  thicknesses  of  aluminium,  for  which  the  st 
power  of  the  a  particle  was  determined  in  terms  of  air. 
found  that  the  photographic  effect  of  the  a  particles  i 
rapidly  near  the  end  of  their  range,  and  that  it  was  not  p 
to  detect  by  the  photographic  method  a  particles  whose  v 
had  fallen  below  about  '4  of  the  initial  velocity  of  projeci 
the  a  particles  from  radium  C,  i.e,  below  8  x  10®  cms.  per  t 
It  thus  appeared  at  first  as  if  the  a  particles  lost  their  c 
teristic  photographic  and  ionising  properties  while  they  we 
moving  at  a  high  speed.  The  question  was  re-investiga 
Geiger"f"  using  the  scintillation  method,  and  uniform  sere 
mica  instead  of  aluminium  in  the  path  of  the  rays.  He 
that  it  was  possible  to  detect  the  presence  of  a  partic 
scintillations  for  still  lower  velocities,  although  the  numb 
intensity  of  the  scintillations  are  much  diminished.  The 
of  the  investigations  of  Rutherford  and  Geiger  are  given 
following  table  in  terms  of  the  air  equivalent  of  the  st 
power  of  the  mica  screen.  The  velocities  are  expressed  in 
of  the  initial  velocity  of  the  a  particle  from  radium  C. 


laivalent  distance 
of  air  traversed 

Observed  velocity 
Bntherford                  Geiger 

0 

1-00 

1-00 

1 

0-95 

096 

2 

0-87 

0-89 

3 

0-80 

0-82 

4 

0-75 

0-75 

5 

0-66 

0-66 

6 

0-52 

0-52 

7 

0-43 

0-2 

♦  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  12,  p.  134,  1906. 
+  (Geiger,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  88,  p.  506,  1910. 


IV]  THE   a  RAYS  143 

Rutherford  showed  from  his  experiments  that  the  decrease  of 
lekicity  F  of  an  a  particle  of  range  R  cms.  could  be  expressed 
approximately  by  the  formula 

F«  =  i2  +  l-25. 

Geiger  showed  that  his  results  were  more  accurately  expressed  by 
the  fonnula  F'  =  aR  where  a  is  a  constant. 

This  simple  relation  holds  very  approximately  over  the  range 
of  velocities  examined.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  it  is  ver}' 
difficult  to  make  accurate  measurements  when  the  velocity  of  the 
0  particles  falls  much  below  -5  of  the  maximum  velocity  of  the 
rays  from  radium  C,  for  the  photographic  and  scintillation  effects 
<if  the  a  particles  become  very  feeble  near  the  end  of  their  range. 
It  is  essential  to  employ  absorbing  screens  of  uniform  thickness, 
for  otherwise  the  photographic  eflFect  is  mainly  due  to  the  rays 
which  have  suflFered  the  least  retardation.  The  scattering  of  the 
0  particles  also  becomes  of  great  importance  near  the  end  of  their 
range  and  tends  to  reduce  the  intensity  of  the  scintillating  and 
photographic  eflFects. 

65.  The  photographic  effect  of  the  a  rayi  from  thick 
l&yen.  Since  the  velocity  of  the  a  particle  is  reduced  by  its 
passage  through  matter,  the  a  particles  reaching  the  surface  of  a 
Aick  layer  of  radio-active  matter  must  have  all  velocities  up  to 
the  initial  velocity  of  expulsion  of  the  swiftest  a  particle.  It  is 
con.sequently  to  be  expected  that  the  particles  in  a  pencil  of  a  rays 
from  a  thick  layer  should  be  unequally  deflected  both  by  a 
magnetic  and  an  electric  field — a  result  observed  experimentally*. 
The  photographic  effect  f  of  the  a  rays,  using  ordinary  plates,  falls 
off  rapidly  as  the  velocity  of  the  a  particles  is  reduced. 

For  this  reason  the  photographic  effect  of  a  pencil  of  raj-s  from 
A  thick  layer  of  radium  in  a  magnetic  field  is  mainly  confined  to 
a  range  of  velocities  between  '6  V  and  F,  where  F  is  the  initial 
velocity  of  expulsion  of  the  a  particles  from  radium  C.  In 
practice,  unless  the  darkening  of  the  photographic  plate  is  very 

*  Mackenzie,  Phil  Mag.  10,  p.  638,  1905.    Ratherford,  Phil.  Mag.  11,  p.  166, 
1906. 

t  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag,  11,  p.  553,  1906;  IS,  p.  134,  1906. 


144 


THE  a  RAYS 


[CI 


intense,  it  is  diflScult  to  observe  the  photographic  eflfect  of  raj 
of  velocity  lower  than  '6V, 

We  have  already  referred  (section  56)  to  an  interestin 
observation  made  by  Becquerel.  He  observed  that  the  trace  i 
a  pencil  of  a  rays  from  a  thick  layer  of  radium  in  a  magnetic  fiel 
showed  a  steadily  increasing  curvature.  He  also  obsen^ed  laU 
that  the  deflection  of  such  a  pencil  of  rays  was  not  altered  b 
placing  a  metallic  screen  over  the  radium.  The  latter  result  ? 
first  sight  indicated  that  the  velocity  of  the  a  particles  was  no 
altered  by  passing  through  matter*.  It  will  be  seen,  howeve 
that  these  apparently  anomalous  results  receive  a  simple  explan^ 
tion  when  we  take  into  account  the  complexity  of  the  radiatio 
under  examination.  The  general  arrangement 
of  Becquerels  experiment  is  shown  in  Fig.  30. 
A  narrow  vertical  pencil  of  rays  from  the 
radium  at  22  fell  on  a  photographic  plate,  which 
was  placed  at  right  angles  to  the  slit,  and 
inclined  at  a  small  angle  with  the  vertical.  The 
apparatus  was  placed  in  a  uniform  magnetic 
field  perpendicular  to  the  pencil  of  rays  and 
parallel  to  the  slit.  By  reversing  the  magnetic 
field  two  fine  diverging  lines  SP,  SP'  were 
observed  on  the  plate.  The  distance  between 
these  lines  at  any  point  represents  twice 
the  deflection  of  a  pencil  of  rays  at  that  point. 
By  careful  measurement,  Becquerel  f  found 
that  these  two  diverging  lines  were  not  accurately  the  arcs  « 
a  circle  but  that  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  path  of  the  raj 
increased  with  the  distance  from  the  source.  This  was  at  fin 
ascribed  to  a  progressive  change  of  e/vi  of  the  a  particles  in  thei 
passage  through  the  air.  BraggJ  and  Rutherford§  independentl 
showed  that  this  peculiarity  in  the  trace  of  the  rays  could  b 
simply  explained  by  taking  into  account  the  change  of  velocity  ( 


Fig.  30. 


•  Becquerel,  C.  i?.  141,  p.  485,  1905;  148,  p.  365,  1906;  Pkys,  Zeit.  7,  p.  17' 
1906. 

t  Becquerel,  C.  R.  186,  pp.  199,  431,  977,  1517  (1908). 

X  Bragg,  Phil.  Mag.  11,  p.  617,  1906. 

§  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  11,  p.  166,  1906. 


I 


IV]  THE   a   RAYS  145 

the  a  particle  in  passing  through  matter,  without  any  assumption 
of  the  alteration  of  the  value  of  ejm.  Consider,  for  example,  the 
outfiide  edge  of  the  trace  at  a  point  A,  The  photographic  effect 
at  this  edge  of  the  trace  is  due  to  the  particles  of  lowest  velocity 
which  are  just  able  to  produce  a  detectable  photographic  action 
at  A,  Consider  next  the  point  B  further  removed  from  tbe 
source.  The  o  particles  which  produce  the  edge  of  the  trace  have 
the  same  velocity  as  in  the  first  case ;  but  since  they  have  had  to 
travel  through  a  greater  distance  of  air  they  must  have  initially 
started  with  a  greater  velocity.  The  average  velocity  of  these 
a  particles  along  their  path  RB  is  consequently  greater  than  in 
the  first  case,  and  the  outside  edge  would  be  deflected  through 
a  smaller  distance  than  would  be  expected  if  the  average  velocity 
were  the  same  for  the  two  paths  RA,  RB.  Consequently  the 
trace  of  the  rays  will  show  evidence  of  steadily  increasing  radius 
of  curvature  as  we  proceed  from  the  source.  An  opposite  effect  is 
produced  on  the  inside  edge  of  the  trace,  for  this  is  produced  by 
the  swiftest  a  particles  from  radium,  viz.  those  emitted  from 
radium  C.  Since  the  velocity  of  these  particles  decreases  in  their 
passage  through  the  air  the  inside  edge  will  show  evidence  of 
decreasing  radius  of  curvature.  This  will  have  the  effect  of  con- 
tiacting  the  natural  width  of  the  trace.  This  effect  is,  however, 
small  and  tends  to  be  masked  experimentally  by  the  scattering  of 
the  a  particles  in  their  passage  through  air. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  effect  of  placing  a  thin  sheet  of 
matter  over  the  radium.  The  photographic  effect  at  the  outside 
of  the  trace  is  due  to  a  particles  of  the  same  velocity  as  before ; 
not,  however,  by  the  same  a  particles  but  by  another  set  whose 
velocity  has  been  diminished  to  the  same  amount  in  their  passage 
through  the  absorbing  screen.  The  radius  of  the  curvature  of  the 
tirace  at  A  would  consequently  be  unaltered  by  the  interposition 
of  the  absorbing  screen.  The  explanation  of  this  apparent  paradox 
is  thus  seen  to  follow  necessarily  from  the  fact  that  the  a  particles 
are  reduced  in  velocity  in  passing  through  matter. 

A  discussion  of  these  effects  has  been  given  on  account  of  their 
intrinsic  interest  and  the  part  they  played  in  the  development  of 
our  knowledge  of  the  a  rays.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that 
the  photographic  effects  due  to  a  complex  pencil  of  a  rays,  under 

R.  B.-A.  10 


146  THE  a  RAYS  [| 

ordinary  experimental  conditions,  are  confined  to  particles 
comparatively  narrow  range  of  velocity.     There  is  usually 
photographic  effect  due  to  the  /8  and  7  rays,  or  to  other 
and  this  in  practice  tends  to  obscure  the  weak  photographic 
of  the  more  slowly  mo\dng  a  particles.     The  apparent  sharpm 
the  trace  for  a  complex  pencil  of  rays  is  to  a  large  extent  illi 
and  it  is  desirable  to  interpret  such  photographic  results 
great  caution. 

66.  Abiorption  of  a  rajrs.  The  absorption  of  a  rap 
matter  was  initially  investigated  by  using  a  thick  layer  of 
active  material  spread  over  a  plate,  and  examining  the  variatic 
of  the  saturation  current  between  this  plate  and  another  ph 
parallel  to  it  when  successive  screens  were  placed  over  the  actii 
matter.  Experiments  of  this  kind  were  made  by  Rutherford,  wl 
showed  that  the  ionisation  current  decreased  approximat 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  thickness  of  matt 
traversed.  It  was  found  that  the  absorption  of  a  rays  varied  fol 
diflferent  materials  It  was  greatest  for  the  rays  from  uranium, 
and  least  for  the  radiation  fix)m  the  active  deposit  of  thorium. 
The  experiments  showed  that  the  ionisation  fell  off  rapidly  with 
increase  of  distance  from  the  active  plate,  and  was  mainly  con- 
fined to  a  range  of  a  few  centimetres  from  the  active  surfiice 
The  decrease  of  the  ionisation  with  thickness  of  aluminium  is 
shown  in  Fig.  31  for  a  number  of  active  substances.  By  diminish- 
ing the  pressure  of  the  gas  the  range  over  which  ionisation  was 
observed  increased  inversely  proportional  to  the  pressure  of  the 
gas.  Measurements  of  the  absorption  of  a  rays  by  these  methods 
have  been  made  by  Rutherford*,  Owens f,  Rutherford  and 
Miss  BrooksJ,  Meyer  and  Schweidler§,  and  others.  It  was  natural 
at  first  to  suppose  that  the  a  rays,  like  the  cathode  rays,  would  be 
absorbed  according  to  an  exponential  law.  It  will  be  seen,  how- 
ever, that  these  results  tended  to  mask  the  tnie  character  of 
absorption  of  the  a  rays. 

*  Butherford,  Phil.  Mag,  47,  p.  109,  1899;  49,  p.  161,  1900. 
t  Owens,  Phil.  Mag.  48,  p.  360,  1900. 
X  Batherford  and  Miss  Brooks,  Phil,  Mag,  4,  p.  1,  1902. 
§  Meyer  and  Sohweidler,  Wien  Ber.  U6,  p.  713,  1906. 


I  THE  a  BATS  147 

Some  experiments  on  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  were  made 
B  dififereot  way  by  Mme  Curie*  using  a  thin  film  of  polonium 
a  source  of  radiation.  The  rays  &om  polonium  passed  through 
liole  in  a  metal  plate  covered  with  a  wire  gauze  or  thin  sheet  of 
'tal,  and  the  ionisation  current  was  measured  between  this  plate 
d  a  parallel  plate  placed  3  cms.  above  it  No  appreciable 
Brent  was  observed  when  the  polonium  was  4  cms.  below  the 
»le,  but  as  this  distance  was  diminished  beyond  a  certain  value 
pe  current  increased  very  rapidly,  so  that  for  a  small  variation  of 
vtance  there  was  a  large  alteration  in  the  current.     This  rapid 


uvrtMs  or  JkuiniNMnnHLi'OMi*  ens  THicHi 
Fig.  81. 

3  of  the  current  suggested  that  the  ionising  property  of  the 
( rays  ceased  suddenly  after  traversing  a  definite  distance  in  air. 
By  placing  a  layer  of  metal  foil  over  the  polonium  this  critical 
Ustance  was  diminished. 

Id   1904  the  question  of  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  was 
ittacked  by  Bragg  ajnl  by  Bragg  and  Kleemanf ,  and  the  interesting 

•  Udm  Curie,  C.  R.  ISO,  p.  76,  1900. 

t  Bragg,  PML  Mag.  »,  p.  719,   1904;   10,  p.  600,   1905;   11,  p.  617,  1906. 
Intgg  and  KImduii,  FkU.  Slag.  S,  p.  796,  1904;  10,  p.  818,  1006. 

10—2 


148 


THE  a  BATS 


[« 


experiments  made  by  them  have  thrown  a  great  deal  of  light 
the  ionisation  by  the  a  rays,  and  on  the  laws  of  their  abso 
by  matter. 

In  order  to  account  for  their  experimental  results,  a  simj 
theory  of  absorption  was  formulated.  On  this  theory  all 
ft  particles  from  a  thin  layer  of  radio-active  matter  of  one  kind 
projected  with  equal  velocities  and  pass  through  a  definite  dis 
in  air  before  complete  absorption.  The  velocity  of  the  a  parti 
decreases  in  its  passage  through  the  gas  in  consequence  of  i 
expenditure  of  its  eneif[y  in  ionising  the  gas.  This  range  of 
a  particle  varies  for  each  a  ray  product  on  account  of  the  diflfereni 
in  the  initial  velocities  of  projection  of  the  a  particles.  If 
absorbing  screen  is  placed  in  the  path  of  the  rays,  the  velociti' 
of  the  a  particles  from  a  simple  product  should  all  be  diminished 
by  the  same  amount,  and  the  range  in  air  of  the  emerging  particle^ 
reduced  by  a  definite  amount  depending  on  the  thickness  andj 
atomic  weight  of  the  screen. 

The  main  conclusions  of  Bragg  have  been  confirmed  later  bf 
direct  experiment.  It  has  been  shown  definitely  that  the  a  particlei 
from  a  simple  product  are  expelled  with  identical  velocity,  and; 
that  this  velocity  is  reduced  by  a  definite  amount  in  passing  j 
through  matter.  Provided  the  measurements  are  made  some  j 
distance  from  the  end  of  their  range,  it  has  been  shown  by  the  . 
scintillation  method  that  the  a  particles  are  unchanged  in  number, ; 
although  reduced  in  velocity  after  traversing  an  absorbing  screea 

In  order  to  investigate  the  ionisation  of  the  o  particles  along 
their  paths  an  apparatus  similar  to 
that  shown  in  Fig.  32  was  employed 
by  Bragg.  A  narrow  pencil  of  rays 
from  a  source  R  passes  into  a  shallow 
ionisation  vessel  AB  through  a  wire 
gauze  A.  The  current  between  A 
and  B  at  various  distances  fi*om  the 
source  is  measured  by  an  electro- 
meter. Since  all  the  a  particles  in 
a  narrow  pencil  of  rays  pass  into  the 
ionisation  chamber,  the  variation  of 
the  current  with  distance  affords  a 


Fig.  82. 


THE  a  RATS 


149 


KM  measure  of  the  ionisation  produced  by  the  a  particles  at 
erent  points  of  their  path  in  air.  Using  a  thin  layer  of  radio- 
ive  matter  of  one  kind,  it  was  found  that  the  ionisation  per 
itimetre  of  path  increases  from  the  source,  passes  through 
Diaximum  and  then  falls  rapidly  to  zero.  T}^ical  ionisation 
rves  for  radium  itself  (Bragg)  and  for  radium  C  (McClung)*  are 
)wn  in   Fig.  33,  where   the  abscissae   represent   the  current 


10 


8 


i  6 


S 


V 

s 
s 


1 

L 

Ss^jurriC 

■***-^, 

1 

/ 

*■ — 

_Radi'um     1 

> 

Ionisation 
Fig.  83. 

wened  and  the  ordinates  the  distance  in  air  from  the  active 
atter.  The  incline  of  the  ionisation  curve  near  the  end  of  the 
nge  of  the  a  particles  and  the  sharpness  of  the  maximum  depend 
some  extent  on  the  depth  of  the  testing  vessel  and  on  the  angle 
the  cone  of  rays.  Using  a  broad  cone  of  rays,  the  maximum  is 
B  marked  and  the  incline  less  steep.  A  ver}'  strong  electric 
d  is  required  to  produce  saturation,  especially  near  the  knee  of 
t  ionisation  curve. 


MoClang,  Phil  Mag,  11,  p.  131,  1906. 


150 


THE  a  RATS 


[CE 


The  shape  of  the  ionisation  curve  is  typical  for  all  radio-activ 
products.  For  example,  the  ionisation  curve  due  to  a  thin  film  c 
radium  itself,  the  a  particles  of  which  have  a  range  of  3*50  cms.  i 
air,  is  identical  with  that  part  of  the  curve  of  radium  C  measure 
from  a  distance  3*5  to  7*0  cms.  In  other  words  the  a  rays  froi 
radium  show  the  same  velocity  and  produce  the  same  ionisation  8 
the  rays  fix)m  radium  C  after  passing  through  3*5  cms.  of  air.  I 
cases  where  no  y8  rays  are  emitted  from  the  product,  the  currei 
in  the  testing  vessel  falls  to  zero  at  the  end  of  the  range.  If 
and  7  rays  are  present  there  is  always  a  small  residual  ionisatic 
which  remains  approximately  constant  as  the  testing  vessel 
moved  beyond  the  range  of  the  a  particles. 


s 
o 


6 


IS     4 

I    3 


o 

^'*<f'um  ( 

7° 

/ 

i 
f 

/ 

1 

*^'um  A 

-^ 

/ 

/ 

• 

^'"^^ 

>^ 

—^~~- 

i 

/ 
/ 

t 

/ 
/ 

/ 
/ 
/ 

1 

y 

c 

e 

g 

k 

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8 

Fig.  34. 

Bragg  and  McClung  showed  that  the  range  of  a  given  set 
a  particles  in  air  was  reduced  by  about  an  equal  amount  1 
placing  successively  thin  layers  of  foil  of  the  same  thickness  ov 
the  source.     Bragg  and  Kleeman  have  determined  the  range 
the  a  rays  from  the  diflFerent  a  ray  products  present  in  a  thin  fil 
of   radium   in  radio-active  equilibrium,   viz.   radium   itself,   tl 


it]  the  a  RAYS  151 

emanation,  radium  A  and  radium  C.  The  results  obtained  are 
shown  in  Fig.  34.  The  first  a  particles  entered  the  testing  vessel 
!  at  a  distance  of  7*06  cms.  from  the  source.  These  rays  were 
•  emitted  from  radium  C  and  have  the  greatest  range  of  all  the 
!  rays  fix)ra  radium  products.  At  the  point  6  the  curve  suddenly 
j  turns  through  an  angle,  showing  that  at  this  angle  the  a  rays  from 
another  product  whose  range  is  4*83  cms.  have  entered  the  testing 
vessel.  There  is  a  similar  though  not  so  well-defined  break  in  the 
cunes  at  d  and  /  for  ranges  4*23  and  3*50  cms.  respectively.  It 
has  been  found  that  the  a  rays  of  range  4*83,  4'23,  3*50  cms. 
belong  respectively  to  radium  A,  the  emanation,  and  radium 
ii*^lf. 

If  the  curve  ab  is  produced  downwards  to  c,  the  curve  oabc 
represents  the  ionisation  due  to  radium  C  alone  at  different 
distances  from  the  source.  Suppose  the  ordinates  of  the  curve 
are  lowered  through  a  distance  2*23  cms.,  corresponding  to  the 
difference  in  range  between  7  06  cms.  and  4*83  cms.,  and  the 
abscissae  of  the  two  curves  added  together.  The  resultant  curve 
hde  lies  accurately  along  the  experimental  curve  bd.  If  the  curve 
be  again  lowered  through  a  distance  60  mms.,  corresponding 
to  the  difference  of  range  for  the  next  products,  and  a  similar 
addition  be  performed,  the  resulting  curve  d/g  again  lies  on  the 
experimental  curve.  Finally  if  the  curve  is  lowered  through 
7'3  mms.,  it  is  similarly  found  that  the  theoretical  curve  lies  on 
the  experimental  curve /Ai. 

Knowing  the  ionisation  curve  of  one  product,  the  experimental 

cune  for  the  combined  products  can  thus  be  built  up  from  it  in  a 

vei}'  simple  way.     Such  a  result  shows  clearly  that,  allowing  for 

the  differences  in  the  initial  velocities  of  projection,  the  ionisation 

curves  for  radium  and  €?ach  of  its  products  are  identical.     It  also 

shows  that  the  same  number  of  a  particles  are  projected  per  second 

from  each  of  the  a  ray  products.     This  result  follows  from  the 

disintegration  theory  if  the  various  products  are  successive  and  in 

equilibrium,  provided  each  atom  emits  one  a  jmrticle  during  its 

transformation. 

The  results  of  Bragg  and  Kleeman  have  thus  continued  in 
a  novel  and  striking  way  the  theory  of  successive  changes,  initially 
developed  from  quite  distinct  considerations.     They  show  that  the 


152 


THE  a  RAYS 


[< 


products  are  successive,  for  otherwise  the  experimental  curve  cooIlE: 
not  be  built  up  from  consideration  of  the  ionisation  curve  of  ooa 
product  alone. 

The  curves  so  far  considered  refer  only  to  thin  films  of  radio- 
active matter  where  the  a  rays  from  each  product  escape  wittx 
identical  velocity  and  suffer  no  loss  of  range  in  traversing  the 
active  matter  itself  The  shape  of  curve  obtained  in  a  similar 
way  with  thick  layers  of  active  matter  is  quite  diflferent.     In  such 


3.  4.  5.  6-  7. 

^Rate  of  discharge  in  arbitrary  tcale 

Fig.  85. 


cases,  the  radiation  at  any  point  of  the  pencil  is  heterogeneous  and 
consists  of  a  particles  moving  over  a  wide  range  of  velocities. 
Examples  of  such  ionisation  curves  for  a  thick  layer  of  radium 
have  been  given  by  Bragg.  The  curve  (Fig.  35)  consists  of  a 
number  of  approximately  straight  lines  with  feirly  well-defined 
points  of  intersection.  Beyond  Q  the  ionisation  is  due  to  a  rays 
from  radium  C  alone.  At  Q  the  ionisation  due  to  radium  A  adds 
its  effect.  A  similar  break  is  obser\'ed  at  R  and  S  where  the 
a  rays  from  the  two  other  products  enter  the  testing  vessel.     The 


it]  the  a  RAVS  158 

diape  of  these  curves  caa  be  deduced  Irom  a  knowledge  of  the 
iauLsatton  curve  for  a  thin  film. 

67.  loniaatlou  due  to  one  a  particle.  Geiger"  made  an 
ucuiate  determination  of  the  variation  of  the  ionisation  of  the 
a  particle  at  variouB  points  of  its  range.  The  a  mys  from  a  point 
wum  of  radium  C  passed  through  a  small  opening  covered  with 
1  thin  aheet  of  mica,  and  the  ionisation  between  two  parallel 


Range   in   cms    of  air 

Fig.  ae. 

]>late8  was  measured  in  a  second  vessel  containing  hydrogen  at 
f  dimioished  presBnre.  This  corresponded  to  a  very  shallow  testing 
reweL  By  altering  the  pressure  of  the  air  between  the  source 
and  the  opening,  the  ionisation  was  determined  corresponding  to 
various  points  of  the  range.  The  curve  obtained  is  shown  in 
Fig.  36. 

*  Oeigvr,  Proc.  Sag.  Soe.  A,  U,  p.  486,  1909. 


154  THE  a  RAYS  [CE. 

By  measuring  the  ionisation  produced  by  a  definite  number  of 
a  particles,  Geiger  has  determined  the  total  number  of  ions 
produced  in  hydrogen  by  complete  absorption,  and  found  it  to  be 
2*37  X  10*.  The  ionisation  per  millimetre  of  path  at  atmospheric 
pressure  and  12^  C.  for  the  a  particles  from  radium  C  is  shown  in 
the  following  table. 


Distanoe  from 
sooree  in  cmB. 

1 

Number  of  ions 
per  mm.  of  path 

2250 

2 

2300 

3 

2400 

4 

2800 

5 

3600 

6 
6-6 

7 

(about) 

6500 
7600 
4000 

Each  square  of  the  curve  shown  in  Fig.  36  represents  10,00^ 
ions.  The  number  of  ions  produced  within  any  part  of  the  rangf -^ 
can  therefore  be  deduced  at  once. 

Ejiowing  the  range  of  the  a  particles  from  the  various  a  ra-3 
products  of  radium,  the  total  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  irorzM: 
each  can  be  deduced  from  the  curve.  The  results  are  included  i  ^ 
the  table  given  in  section  70.  It  will  be  seen  fi^m  section  69  thai-1 
the  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  of  range  R  should  be  propo:x'- 

tional  to  B^. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  ionisation  curve  was  determined  t^J 
Geiger  in  hydrogen  on  account  of  the  greater  ease  of  obtaininig 
a  saturation  current  in  that  gas.     Later,  however,  Taylor*  show^^i 
that   the   ionisation   curves   in  air  and  hydrogen  are  somewhdt 
different.     The   curves   obtained  by  him  are  shown  in  Fig.  37. 
The  pressure  of  the  air  was  reduced  so  as  to  give  exactly  the  same 
range  as  for  hydrogen  at  standard  pressure.    It  will  be  seen  that 
the  ionisation  in  hydrogen  is  less  initially  than  in  air,  but  the 
curves  intersect  and  the  maximum  is  more  pronounced  in  hydrogen. 
Taylor  showed  by  integrating  the  curves  that  the  total  ionisation 
produced  in  hydrogen  was  about  equal  to  that  in  air,  a  result 
which  had  been  independently  obtained  by  different  methods  by 

*  Taylor,  Amer.  Jour.  Sci,  88,  p.  867,  1909;  PhiL  Mag.  21,  p.  671,  1911. 


IT] 


THE   a  RAYS 


155 


Rutherford  and  Bragg.  There  appears  to  be  little  doubt  from  the 
work  of  Taylor  that  the  ionisation  curves  will  vary  somewhat  in 
shape  for  different  gases,  and  that  the  ionisation  per  centimetre 
of  path  will  show^  less  variation  for  gases  of  heavy  atomic  weight. 
The  reason  of  these  differences  will  be  seen  from  the  discussion  in 
section  71.  On  account  of  the  differences  in  the  ionisation  curve 
in  air  and  hydrogen,  it  is  probable  that  the  maximum  of  the 
ionisation  curve  observed  by  Geiger  (Fig.  36)  is  somewhat  more 


23466789 


Ionisation 
Fig.  37. 


11 


Pronounced  than  it  would  be  in  air,  and  that  the  relative  number 
rfions  per  millimetre  of  path  given  for  air  are  slightly  in  error. 

Since  one  gram  of  radium  at  its  minimum  activity  emits 
3*4  X  lO**^  a  particles  per  second,  the  total  ionisation  current  due 
^  a  thin  film  containing  one  gram  of  radium  in  which  half  the 
«  particles  produce  ionisation  is  equal  to  1*21  x  10®  e.s.  units,  or 
W  X  10~*  amperes.  Geiger  (loc,  cit)  has  pointed  out  that  this 
number  may  be  useful  in  estimating  small  quantities  of  radium. 


156  THE  a  RAYS 

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  numbei 
above  refers  to  the  saturation  current.  This  current  is  difl 
obtain  in  practice  unless  a  ver}'  strong  electric  field  is  ap] 
unless  the  ionisation  is  measured  under  reduced  pressure. 

68.    Explanation  of  the  ioniiation  cunre.     We  ha 

that  the  ionisation  per  centimetre  of  path  due  to  a  pencil  o 
increases  at  first  slowly  as  we  pass  from  the  source,  the 
rapidly  to  a  well  marked  maximum,  and  then  decreases  ra] 


a) 


e60 


o 
1 40 


Polonium  Radium  C. 


3  3-5  4  6  6-5 

Roing^  in  cms.  of  dur —  Range  in  cms.  of 

Fig.  38. 


zero.  It  is  now  necessar}-  to  consider  the  explanation 
characteristic  curve  of  ionisation  due  to  a  pencil  of  a  rays, 
been  definitely  proved  that  the  a  rays  from  a  simple  prod 
expelled  initially  with  the  same  velocity.  Regener  and  Ge 
the  scintillation  method  have  shown  that  the  number  of  a  p 
at  first  remains  constant  when  successive  sheets  of  ab 
matter  are  placed  in  the  path  of  the  absorbing  rays,  but  di 
rapidly  at  the  end  of  the  range  of  the  a  particle.     Asch 

*  Aflchkinass,  Verh.  d,  D.  Phyt,  Get,  10,  p.  953,  1908;   Ann,  d.  J 
p.  377,  1908. 


f 


it]  the  a  RATS  157 

and  also  Greinacher*  found  that  the  a  particles  retained  their 
charge  to  the  end  of  their  path  and  that  the  charge  carried  by 
them  fell  off  near  the  end  of  the  range  in  a  similar  way  to  the 
iooisation  of  the  gas.  The  decrease  in  the  number  near  the 
end  of  the  range  has  been  investigated  in  detail  by  Geigerf  by  the 
scintillation  method,  using  a  very  narrow  pencil  of  rays.  He  found 
that  the  number  commenced  to  decrease  about  one  centimetre 
irom  the  end  of  their  path  in  air,  and  rapidly  decreased  to  zero. 

The  experimental  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  38  using  narrow 
pencils  of  rays  from  polonium,  range  3'86  cms.,  and  of  radium  C» 
range  7*06  cms.,  as  a  source  of  rays.  This  decrease  in  number  is 
probably  to  be  ascribed  to  the  scattering  of  the  a  particles  in 
their  passage  through  the  gas.  This  scattering  not  only  causes 
inequalities  in  the  actual  distance  traversed  by  the  a  particles  but 
probably  gives  rise  to  small  changes  of  velocity  for  particles  that 
have  traversed  the  same  distance  (see  section  74).  ^ 

On  this  view,  it  is  seen  that  the  distance  where  the  ionisation 
ceases,  viz.  7*06  cms.  for  radium  C,  marks  the  greatest  range,  while 
the  average  range  of  the  particles  is  about  6*7  cms.  This 
diminution  in  the  number  of  a  particles  near  the  end  of  their 
path  offers  a  reasonable  explanation  of  the  rapid  decline  in  the 
ionisation  curve.  This  decline  of  the  curve  is  always  observed 
however  narrow  the  pencil  of  rays  or  however  shallow  the  ionisa- 
tion chamber. 

It  has  been  shown  previously  in  section  64  that  at  a  distance 

X  from  the  source,  the  velocity  F  of  an  a  particle  passing  through 

air  can  be  represented  very  closely  by  the  equation  V^^a(R'-x) 

where  a  is  a  constant  and  R  the  maximum  range  of  the  a  particla 

In  comparing  this  equation  with  the  experimental  results,  R  was 

taken  as  7*06  cms.     From  the  manner  in  which  the  observations 

were  made  it  is  clear  that  the  results  give  the  change  of  velocity 

of  the  a  particle  which  happens  to  travel  the  maximum  range. 

For  comparison,  however,  with  the  ionisation  curve  it  is  desirable 

to  express  R  in  terms  of  the  average  range,  viz.  6*7  cms.     It  is 

natural  to  suppose  that  the  ionisation  produced  by  an  a  particle 

per  unit  path  is  proportional  to  the  energy  absorbed.    The  change 

•  Greinicher,  Verh,  rf.  D.  Phy$.  Oet.  11,  p.  179,  1909. 
t  Geiger,  Proe,  Roy.  Soc,  A,  88,  p.  505,  1910. 


158  THE   a  RATS  [CH. 

of  energy  dE  of  the  a  particle  in  the  distance  dx  after  traveising 
a  distance  x  is  given  by 

dE  K  K, 


d^     (R-x)^      V 


(1). 


where  K  and  K^  are  constants. 

The  ionisation  is  thus  inversely  proportional  to  the  velocity  of 
the  o  particle,  or  in  other  words  is  directly  proportional  to  the 
time  taken  to  cross  the  atom.  It  also  follows  directly  by  integra- 
tion that  the  total  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  of  range  22  is 

proportional  to  B^.  From  the  above  considerations,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  equation  expressing  the  connection  between  the  velocity 
and  the  distance  can  be  deduced  by  assuming  the  relation  given 
in  equation  (1)  and  the  proportionality  between  ionisation  and 
expenditure  of  energy.  Supposing  that  the  ionisation  per  unit 
path  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  velocity,  it  follows  that  the 
ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  should  increase  rapidly  near  the 
end  of  its  path  and  then  fall  suddenly  to  zero.  No  doubt  this 
relation  will  not  hold  accurately  to  the  very  end  of  the  path.  It 
seems  more  probable  that  the  ionisation  will  increase  to  a  definite 
maximum  when  each  collision  produces  ions  and  then  stop  almost 
abruptly  when  the  velocity  falls  below  a  certain  critical  value. 
The  curve  for  a  pencil  of  a  rays  will  be  different  from  that  of  a 
single  a  particle,  since  there  are  inequalities  in  the  number  and 
velocity  of  the  a  particles  near  the  end  of  their  range.  The  actual 
curve  will  be  built  up  of  a  great  number  of  similar  curves,  grouped 
about  the  curve  of  average  range.  Geiger  has  shown  that  the 
resultant  curve  built  up  in  this  way  will  be  very  similar  to  that 
observed  experimentally.  The  theoretical  curve  for  a  single 
a  particle  from  radium  C  of  average  range  6*7  cms.  is  shown  in 
Fig.  39  by  the  full  curve.  The  dotted  line  represents  the  resultant 
ionisation  curve  for  a  distribution  of  a  particles  such  as  is  shown 
in  Fig.  38. 

Energy  required  to  produce  an  ion.  From  the  data  already 
given,  the  energy  required  for  production  of  a  pair  of  ions  by  an 
a  particle  can  be  simply  deduced.  We  have  seen  that  an  a  particle 
from  radium  C,  which  has  a  kinetic  energy  of  I '31  x  10"^  ergs, 


ivl 


THE   a  RATS 


159 


produces  2*37  x  lO"  ions.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  energy 
required  to  produce  a  pair  of  ions  is  5'5  x  10~"  ergs.  This 
corresponds  to  the  energy  required  by  the  fundamental  unit  of 
d&arge  in  moving  freely  between  two  points  of  potential  difference 
85  volts.  It  seems  not  improbable  that  about  the  same  energy  is 
lequired  to  produce  an  ion  in  the  case  of  /3  and  7  rays.  If  the 
energy  of  a  particle  in  traversing  a  gas  is  mainly  used  up  in 
producing  ions,  conversely  it  is  possible  to  deduce  the  energy  of 


c 
o 


I 

c 
■0 


2  4  6 

Ranj'e   in  cma.  of  air 

Fig.  89. 


8 


tlie  tadiation  by  determining  the  total  ionisation  produced  by  the 
complete  absorption  of  the  radiation. 


Decrease  of  ionisation  with  distance  firom  a  uniform 
Aset  of  radio-actiTe  matter.  It  is  sometimes  of  importance 
to  deduce  the  decrease  of  ionisation  with  distance  from  a  plane 
onifinm  sheet  of  radio-active  matter.  We  shall  first  consider  the 
ctte  of  a  large  plane  sheet  covered  uniformly  with  a  thin  film 
of  ndio-sctive  matter  which  emits  a  particles  of  definite  range  R 
in  the  gas  under  consideration.    Suppose  N  a  particles  are  emitted 


160 


THE  a  RAYS 


in  the  upward  direction  from  each  square  centimetre  of  suri 
and  that  these  a  particles  escape  equally  in  all  directions.    ' 
number  which  passes  between  two  cones  making  angles  0 
0  +  d0  with  the  normal  is  N  sin  0d6. 

Consider  the  ionisation  in  the  space  above  a  plane  A'B'  pan 
to  ^J3  and  distant  d  from  it  (Fig.  40).  After  traversing  the 
in  the  direction  0,  the  range  of  the  particles  issuing  through  J 
IB  R  —  d  sec  0,  Supposing  that  the  ionisation  at  £^y  point  of 
path  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  velocity,  it  foHows  that 
total  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  of  range  R  is  proporti< 


A' :s^ ^— B' 


Fig.  40. 

to  i2*.     The  ionisation  la  produced  above  the  plane  A'B'  is  co: 
quently  given  by 

Id  =  KN  sin  OiR-d  sec  0)^  d0 

Jo 

where  if  is  a  constant ;  iZ  =  a',  i2  —  d  =  6*. 
The  total  ionisation  Iq  when  d  =  0  is 

The  ratio  /d//o  can  thus  be  at  once  deduced  for  any  value  c 
This  relation  should  hold  more  accurately  if  the  value  oi 

is  taken  as  the  average  rather  than  the  maximum  range  of 

a  particle. 


I?]  THE   a  RAYS  161 

Calculations  of  this  character  have  been  given  by  Bragg  but, 

in  the  older  calculations,  the  relation  assumed  between  velocity 

and  ionisation  was  different  from   that  considered  here.    The 

results  show   that    the  ionisation   initially  decreases  with    the 

dktance  d  approximately  according  to  an  exponential  law,  but 

fiJls  off  more  rapidly  than  this  near  the  end  of  the  ionisation  curve. 

The  calculations  given  above  refer  also   to  the  case  where 

a  uniform  absorbing  screen  is  placed  over  the  active  matter.     In 

this  case  d  refers  not  to  the  thickness  of  the  screen  but  to  its 

stopping  power  of  the  a  particle  in  terms  of  the  gas  above  it.' 

In  a  similar  way  calculations  can  be  made  for  a  thick  layer  of 
radio-active  matter,  but  the  expression  is  of  a  very  complicated 
form.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  total  ionisation  due  to 
thick  layers  of  radio-active  matter  of  different  kinds  is  approxi- 
mately proportional  to  jR*  when  R  is  the  range  of  the  a  particles 
emitted. 

70.  Range  of  a  particles.  The  maximum  range  of 
ionisation  of  an  a  particle  from  a  simple  product  is  a  constant  for 
a  definite  pressure  and  temperature  of  the  gas.  This  range  varies 
inversely  as  the  pressure  of  the  gas,  and  directly  as  its  absolute 
temperature.  The  value  of  the  range  depends  upon  the  absorbing 
gas  in  the  manner  discussed  in  Section  71.  It  has  been  usual 
to  express  the  range  of  the  u  particles  from  various  products  in 
terms  of  air  at  standard  pressure  and  laboratory  temperature  of 
about  15°  C.  Measurement  of  the  ranges  of  the  a  particles  fix)m 
radium  were  first  made  by  Bragg  and  Kleeman*  by  the  electric 
method,  and  a  similar  method  has  been  employed  by  Hahn  for 
the  a  ray  products  in  thorium  and  actinium.  In  some  cases,  the 
scintillation  method  has  been  used,  for  it  is  found  that  the 
scintillations  disappear  at  a  point  corresponding  to  the  end  of  the 
range  of  the  a  particles.  Since  the  scintillation  method  is  not 
quite  so  sensitive  as  the  electric  method,  it  gives  a  value  of  the 
range  one  or  two  millimetres  less  than  the  latter. 

Bragg's  method  is  very  suitable  for  determining  the  range 
of  the  particles  emitted  by  very  active  material  where  a  narrow 
and  intense  pencil  of  a  particles  can  be  used.     Measurements  by 

*  Bragg  and  KieemaD,  Phil.  Mag,  10,  p.  SIS,  1905. 
IL  a.-A.  11 


162 


THE  a  RATS 


this  method  have  been  made  by  Bragg  and  Eleeman*  for  rad 
and  its  products,  by  Hahnf  for  the  active  deposits  of  thorium 
actinium,  and  by  Levin^  and  Kucera  and  Masek§  for  poloni 
The  range  of  the  a  particles  from  ionium  has  been  determine( 
Boltwoodll  by  the  scintillation  and  electric  methods.     In  the 
of  weak  radio-active  substances  like  uranium  and  thorium 
electrical  eflfects  are  too  small  to  employ  Bragg  s  method, 
range  of  the  particles  can,  however,  be  deduced  by  determii 
the  decrease  of  the  ionisation  when  successive  layers  of  alumin 
or  other  foils  are  placed  over  a  layer  of  the  active  material.     [ 
method  has  been  employed  for  uranium  and  thorium  by  Bra^ 
and  for  uranium  by  Geiger  and  Rutherford**     The  latter  met 
is  not  very  satisfactory ;  but  Geiger  and  Nuttallff  have  dev 
a   simple   method   for   the   determination   of   the   range   of 
a  particle  from  all  kinds  of  active  matter,  provided  they  are 
gaseous,   when   only   weak   activities    are 
available.     The    general    arrangement    is 
shown  in  Fig.  41.     The  active  material  is 
placed  in  the  centre  of  a  bulb  on  the  small 
metal  disc  B,  which  is  connected  to  the 
electrometer  by   means   of    the   wire   H. 
The   bulb   is  spherical  and  of  7*95  cms. 
radius.    The  saturation  current  is  measured 
for  different  pressures.     For  low  pressures 
the  current  is  found  to  vary  nearly  pro- 
portionally with  the  pressure;  but  when 
the  pressure  reaches  a  value  such  that  the 
a  particles  are  completely  absorbed  in  the 
gas,  the  current  reaches  a  maximum  value 

Via    4^1 

and  there  is  no  further  change  with  increase  ^'     ' 

of  pressure.     In   order   to   obtain   the  best   results,   the   ac 

*  Bragg  and  Kleeman,  Phil.  Mag.  10,  p.  318,  1905. 

t  Hahn,  Phyt.  Zeit.  7,  p.  456,  1906;   Phil.  Mag.  12,  pp.  82,  244,  1906. 

t  Levin,  PhyB.  Zeit.  7,  p.  519.  1906. 

§  Kuoera  and  Masek,  Phys,  Zeit.  7,  p.  887,  1906. 

II  BoUwood,  Amer.  Joum.  Sci.  26,  p.  365,  1908. 

%  Bragg.  Phil.  Mag.  11,  p.  754,  1906. 

••  Geiger  and  Rutherford.  Phil.  Mag.  20.  p.  691,  1910. 

tt  Geiger  and  Nuttall,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  613.  1911. 


H 


]  THE   a  RAYS  163 

itter  should  be  in  the  form  of  a  thin  film  of  a  few  millimetres 
mieter.  ExampleB  of  results  obtained  are  shown  in  Fig.  42 
ere  the  ordinales  represent  the  ionisation,  and  the  abscissae  the 
;ssure  of  air  in  the  bulb.  It  is  seen  that  there  is  a  sudden 
«k  in  each  curve  for  a  definite  pressure.  This  corresponds  to  the 
limum  range  of  the  a  particles  in  the  gas  at  that  pressure. 
icc  the  range  of  the  a  particles  is  inversely  proportional  to  the 


I 

I 

i 


Fig.  42. 
>!saure,  the  range  in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure  can  at  once  be 
daced. 

The  ranges  of  the  o  particle  from  the  various  radio-active 
[»tance3  are  given  in  the  next  table.     In  Column  2  the  ranges 

given  in  terras  of  air  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature ; 
Column  3  in  air  at  15°  and  standard  pressure.  The  latter 
nber  js  convenient  for  practical  work,  but  can  be  readily 
;ulated  from  the  other  since  the  range  is  directly  proportional 

11—2 


164 


THE  a  RATS 


[CH. 


to  the  absolute  temperature.  Some  observers  have  given  the 
ranges  at  laboratory  temperature  and  pressure,  but  with  no  infor- 
mation as  to  their  exact  values.  The  number  of  ions  produced 
by  the  absorption  of  the  a  particle  (see  Section  67)  is  given  in 
the  last  column.  For  convenience  the  initial  velocity,  momentum 
and  kinetic  energy  of  the  a  particle  are  added.  The  velocity  Vis 
deduced  fix)m  the  formula  obtained  by  Geiger,  viz. 

where  R  is  the  range,  assuming  that  the  velocity  of  the  a  particles 
from  radium  C  of  range  7*06  cms.  at  20^  C.  is  2'06  x  !()•  cms.  per 
second  (see  Section  58). 


Product 


Uranium  1... 
Urauium  2... 
Ionium 
Radium 
Emanation... 
Radium  A ... 
Radium  C  ... 
Radium  F  ... 


Range  i  Hange 


in 
cms. 

at 
0°C. 


in 
cms. 

at 
16°  C. 


Velocity 

of  the 

a  particle 

in  cmH. 

per  sec. 


Momentum 

of  the 
a  particle 


Thorium     ... 
Radio-thorium 
Thorium  X 
Emanation* 
Thorium  A 
Thorium  Ci 
Thorium  C2 


2-37 
2-75 
2-84 
313 
3-94 
4-50 
6-57 
3-58 


I 


2-58 

3-67 

5-4 

6-2 

5-6 

4-73 

8-15 


Radio-actinium 
Actinium  X 
Emanation... 
Actinium  A 
Actinium  C 


4r)5 
4-17 
5-40 
616 
512 


2-50 
2-90 
300 
3-30 
416 
4-75 
6-94 
3-77 


2-72 

3-87 

6-7 

5'5 

5-9 

5-0 

8-6 


4-80 
4*40 
5-70 
6r)0 
5-40 


1-45  xlO»' 

1-53    „ 

1-56 

1-61 

1-73 

1-82 

2-06 

1-68 


>? 


n 


1-50 
1-70 
1-94 
1-90 
1-97 
1-85 
2-22 


1-83 
1-76 
1-94 
2-02 
1-89 


>» 


>» 


•89x10-" 

•94        „ 

•966 

•987 
106 
Ml 
1-26 
1-03 


>» 


Kinetic 
Energy 
in  ergs 


•645  X  10-*^ 
•72 


•920 
1^04 
119 
1-16 
r21 
113 
137 


»» 


•746 
•794 
•915 

1^01 

131 
•866 


•690 

•886 

•15 

•10 

•19 


1^05 
153 


» 

»> 
if 
»» 


n 


Whole 

nnmba 

of  ioDi 

prodocf 


r26x 

1^37 

140 

1^50 

1-74 

1-88 

2-37 

1*63 


1-32 

1-66 

21 

2-0 

22 

1^9 

29 


112 
1^07 
1-19 
1-24 
M6 


>» 
» 


I  — 


189 
179 
210 
227 
2-02 


The  range  of  the  a  rays  from  thorium  X  is  not  yet  know 
with  certainty. 

*  Barratt  {Proc.  Phyt,  Soc.  M,  p.  112,  1912)  finds  the  ranges  of  the  a  partid 
from  thorium  emanation  and  thorium  A  to  be  5^0  and  5*4  cms.  respeotiTelj. 


nr]  THE  a  rats  165 

A  very  interesting  connection  between  the  range  of  the  a  particles 
fiDZD  different  products  and  their  period  of  transformation  is  dis- 
cussed later  in  Chapter  XVIII. 

Eve*  has  shown  that  the  range  of  the  a  particles  in  air  is 
altered  in  appreciable  amount  by  their  movement  in  a  strong 
electric  field,  and  in  the  direction  to  be  expected  if  the  a  particle 
carries  a  positive  charge.  In  these  experiments,  the  a  particle  moved 
between  two  conductors  charged  to  a  potential  difference  of  about 
30,000  volts.  A  similar  result  has  been  observed,  by  Reinganumf. 
The  amount  of  change  of  range  is  of  about  the  magnitude  to  be 
expected  theoretically. 

71.    The   stopping  power  of   substancei.      Bragg    and 

Kleeman^   found  that  the  range   of  an  a  particle  in  different 

materials  was  connected  in  a  simple  way  with  the  atomic  weight. 

They  found  that  the  "  stopping  power  "  of  an  atom  for  an  a  particle 

was  approximately  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  its  atomic 

weight     For  example,  the  range  of  the  a  particles  in  hydrogen 

is  four  times  the  range  of  the  a  particles  in  oxygen  at  normal 

pressure  and  temperature.     Generally,  in  the  case  of  metals,  the 

weight  of  matter  per  unit  area  required  to  stop  completely  the 

a  particle  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  its  atomic  weight. 

The  stopping  power  was  deduced  from  observations  of  the  decrease 

of  the  range  of  the  a  particle  in  air  after  passing  through  known 

thicknesses  of  matter.     The  stopping  powers  of  various  atoms 

were  compared  with  that  of  the  average  atom  of  air.     Since  the 

stopping  power  of  the  atoms  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  differ  very 

little,  the  average  atom  of  air  may  be  assumed  to  have  an  atomic 

Weight  14*4  and  an  atomic  square  root  3*79. 

Some  of  the  results  obtained  are  given  in  the  following  table. 
The  first  line  gives  the  observed  stopping  power  s  of  the  atom  in 
terms  of  air  as  unity ;  the  next  line  the  value  of  the  atomic  weight 

«  and  the  third  line  the  value  «/^/<k). 

If  the  stopping  power  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of 
the  atomic  weight,  th^  figures  in  the  third  lines  should  all  be 

•  Eve,  Phil  Mag,  15.  p.  720,  1908. 
t  Betnganam,  Annal.  d,  Phys.  88,  p.  134,  1909. 

X  Bragg  and  Kleeman,  Phil  Mag,  10,  p.  818,  1905.     Bragg,  Phil.  Mag,  10, 
p.  600,  19a5;   11,  p.  617,  1906. 


166  THE  a  RAYS 

equal.     This  will  be  seen  to  be  approximately  the   case. 

quotient  sj'Jta   is   seen,   however,   to   increase   progressive) 
elements  of  light  atomic  weight  up  to  aluminium. 


H 

C 

N 

0 

A1 

S 

CI 

Fe 

*      ...          • .. 

•24 

•85 

•94 

1*05 

1-495 

1-76 

178 

2-29 

v« 

1-00 

3-47 

3-74 

4-00 

5-20 

5-65 

5-96 

7-48 

«/\/i  X  lOS 

240 

246 

251 

262 

287 

312 

299 

307 

Co 

Br 

Ag 

Sn 

I 

Pt 

Au 

o              •  * .           .  >  • 

2-46 

2-60 

3^28 

3-56        3-44 

4-14 

4-22 

B\6i 

7-96 

8-93 

10-37 

10-9 

11-2 

13-95 

14-0 

sl's/ZxlCfi 

309 

291 

316 

326 

307 

297 

301 

This  rule  for  determination  of  stopping  power  holds  ab 
complex   molecules,   provided   it   is   assumed   that   the  sto] 
power  of  the  molecule  is  the  sum  of  the  stopping  powers 
constituent  atoms.     For  example,  if  the  molecule  is  compo^i 
Ni  atoms  of  atomic  weight  a>i,  N^  atoms  of  atomic  weight  cdo 

the  stopping  power  of  the  molecule  is  iV,  Vo),  +  N^  *J(d.,, 

The  following  table  shows  the  calculated  and  observed  sto; 
power  for  a  number  of  complex  gases.  For  purposes  of  calcul 
it  is  assumed  that  the  stopping  power  of  H^  =  '24,  C-  = 
O2=»l"03,  Cl2  =  l'78  compared  with  the  average  atom  of  a 

C2H2  C2H4  CflHfl         CflHia        CH4O        CgH 


Calculated 

109 

1-33 

3-27 

3-66 

1-41 

2-0 

Observed 

111      M 

^-35 

3-33 

3-59 

1-43 

2-0 

C4H,oO 

CO2 

CCI4 

CHCls 

CgHfiCl 

Calculated      341 

1-47 

3-98 

3-21 

2-34 

0l)8erved 

3-33 

1-48 

4-00 

316 

2-36 

The  'range  of  the  a  particles  from  polonium  was  also  in 
gated  by  E.  P.  Adams*  for  a  number  of  gases.  The  maxi 
distance  d  in  cms.  between  the  source  of  radiation  and  a 
sulphide  screen  was  determined  for  a  pressure  p  of  the  gas  in 
of  mercury  when  the  scintillations  on  the  screen  just  disapp( 
The  value  of  the  range  pd  was  found  to  be  constant  for  difl 
pressurei^.     Some  of  his  results  are  given  in  the  following 

*  £.  P.  Adams,  Phys,  Jtev.  M,  p.  108,  1907. 


IV]  THE  a  RAYS  167 

where  S\/^  expresses  the  sum  of  the  square  roots  of  the  constituent 

atoms. 


Kangepc? 

H 
1106 

He 
954 

A 
301 

0 
269 

Air 
276 

Pentane 
CftHij 

77 

Nickel 
Carbonyl 
Ni(C0)4 

56 

Js^i     ... 

2-0 

2-0 

6-32 

8-0 

7-60 

29-3 

37-5 

pd.l^ 

2216 

1908 

1902 

2152 

2098 

2256 

2100 

The  results  for  helium  and  argon  are  of  special  interest  as 
these  are  monatomic  gases.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  observed 
ranges  for  these  gases  are  about  5  per  cent,  less  than  would  be 
expected  firom  the  square  root  law  taking  air  as  the  standard  of 
cumparison.  The  range  in  the  monatomic  gas  helium,  atomic 
weight  3*99,  is  nearly  the  same  as  the  range  in  the  diatomic  gas 
hydrogen,  atomic  weight  1. 

From  these  results  it  is  clear  that  the  stopping  power  of 
a  complex  molecule  is  very  approximately  an  additive  property. 
Such  a  result  indicates  that  the  loss  of  energy  in  passing  through 
the  average  molecule  depends  only  on  the  number  and  atomic 
weight  of  its  constituent  atoms,  and  is  independent  of  the  character 
of  the  molecular  grouping.  Using  this  rule,  it  is  possible  to  calcu- 
late approximately  the  range  of  the  a  particle  in  any  kind  of 
matter,  whether  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous. 

In  the  earlier  experiments  by  Bragg,  McClung  and  others  it 

was  observed  that  in  the  case  of  a  light  element  like  aluminium, 

the  loss  of  range  in  passing  through  a  give  i  thickness  of  matter 

was  nearly  independent  of  the  velocity  oi   the  a  particle.     For 

example,  a  sheet  of  aluminium   caused   very   nearly   the  same 

reduction  of  range  of  the  a  particle  whether  placed  close  to  the 

source  of  radiation  or  near  the  end  of  the  path  of  the  a  particle. 

Some  later  observations,   however,   indicated    that    this   simple 

relation  did  not  hold  generally.     For  example,  Bragg*  observed 

that  the  ionisation  curves  for  radium  were  somewhat  different  in 

methane  than   in  air,  and  that  a  metal  sheet  placed  over  the 

radium  did  not  cause  exactly  the  same  decrease  of  range  for  each 

*  Bngg  and  Cooke,  Phil.  May.  14,  p.  425, 1907,    Bragg,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  507, 
1007. 


168  THE  a  RAYS  [Ca 

of  the  sets  of  a  particles.  Eucera  and  Masek*  made  a  further 
examination  of  this  point  and  found  that,  for  metal  sheets,  the 
loss  of  range  in  air  decreased  as  the  screen  was  moved  away  from 
the  source  of  radiation.  This  showed  that  the  loss  of  range  for 
a  given  sheet  depended  on  the  velocity  of  the  a  particle.  It  was 
found  that  the  loss  of  range  was  greater  the  swifter  the  a  particle, 
and  that  the  effect  was  most  marked  for  atoms  of  high  atomic 
weight.  Bragg  {loc.  cit)  confirmed  these  results  and  showed  in 
addition  that  the  stopping  power  of  a  combination  of  two  sheets 
of  different  metals  altered  when  the  sheets  were  reversed.  For 
example,  the  loss  of  range  due  to  a  double  sheet  of  aluminium 
and  gold  was  slightly  greater  when  the  gold  was  next  the  source 
than  for  aluminium  next  the  source.  Bragg  pointed  out  that  this 
effect  offers  an  explanation  of  some  earlier  observations  recorded 
by  Mme.  Curie,  where  the  ionisation  due  to  a  pencil  of  a  rays 
was  determined  after  passing  through  a  combination  of  two  metal 
plates.  A  marked  difference  was  observed  for  inversion  of  the 
plates,  especially  near  the  end  of  the  range  of  the  a  particles. 
Rutherford  had  suggested  that  this  might  be  due  to  the  presence 
of  a  secondary  radiation  set  up  by  the  a  rays  which  varied  for 
different  kinds  of  matter.  Kucera  and  Masek  later  ascribed  the 
effect  to  a  differential  scattering  of  the  a  particles.  It  seems 
clear,  however,  that  the  effect  is  mainly  if  not  entirely  due  to 
a  variation  of  stopping  power  of  the  combination  with  inversion  of 
the  plates. 

The  question  of  the  change  of  stopping  power  with  velocity  of 
the  a  particle  was  later  investigated  in  detail  by  Taylorf.  The 
stopping  powers  of  different  metals  in  terms  of  air  were  determined 
at  various  points  of  the  range  of  an  a  particle  from  polonium  and 
radium  C.  It  was  observed  that  the  loss  of  range  in  air  due  to  a 
given  metal  sheet  decreased  progressively  the  further  it  was 
moved  fix)m  the  source  of  radiation.  The  difference  in  range  was 
very  small  for  a  light  element  like  aluminium,  but  became  very 
marked  for  a  metal  of  high  atomic  weight  like  gold.  For  example, 
a  certain  sheet  of  aluminium  showed  a  decrease  of  range  equal  to 
1'209  cms.  of  air  when  the  a  particles  entering  the  sheet  had 

*  Kucera  and  Masek,  Phyt,  Zeit,  7,  p.  630,  1906. 

t  Taylor,  Ainer,  Journ.  Sci,  28,  p.  357,  1909;   Phil  Mag,  18,  p.  604,  1909. 


it]  the  a  RATS  169 

a  range  of  5*7  cms.  When  the  range  of  the  entering  a  particle 
was  21  cms.,  the  corresponding  loss  of  range  was  1*131,  or  a  change 
of  about  6  per  cent.  Under  similar  conditions  of  initial  velocities 
of  the  a  particles,  the  loss  of  range  for  a  gold  sheet  varied  from 
1*375  cms.  to  1*127,  or  a  change  of  18  per  cent.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  sheet  of  celluloid  or  paper  showed  very  little  change.  The 
rate  of  change  of  the  stopping  power  with  range  of  the  entering 
a  particle  was  found  to  be  approximately  proportional  to  the 
square  root  of  the  atomic  weight.  Special  experiments  were 
made  with  hydrogen,  using  a  cell  closed  by  thin  celluloid  sheets. 
A  converse  effect  was  observed,  for  the  loss  of  range  increased  as 
the  speed  of  the  entering  a  particle  decreased.  Such  results 
indicate  that  there  is  a  progressive  change  in  the  absorption  of 
the  energy  of  the  a  particle  along  its  path  as  the  matter  changes 
from  low  to  high  atomic  weight. 

In  the  case  of  air,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  expenditure  of 
energy  per  unit  path  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  velocity 
of  the  a  particle,  and  that  the  ionisation  curve  for  a  pencil  of  rays 
is  in  general  agreement  with  this  result  if  it  be  assumed  that  the 
expenditure  of  energy  by  the  a  particle  is  proportional  to  the 
ionisation  produced.  Since  the  laws  of  absorption  of  the  a  particle 
hold  for  solids  as  well  as  for  gases,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  energy  of  the  a  particle  in  passing  through  a  metal  is 
mainly  used  up  in  producing  ions  in  the  metal.  From  the 
observations  of  the  change  of  stopping  power  of  a  sheet  of  metal 
with  velocity  of  the  a  particle,  it  is  clear  that  the  rate  of  expendi- 
ture of  energy  with  velocity  of  the  a  particle  varies  with  the 
nature  of  the  absorbing  substance.  If  the  expenditure  of  energy 
is  proportional  to  the  ionisation,  it  is  consequently  to  be  expected 
that  the  ionisation  curve  should  be  different  for  different  materials. 
This  is  borne  out  by  the  results  of  Taylor,  who  found  that  the 
ionisation  curve  for  hydrogen  (see  Fig.  87)  differed  from  that  of 
Eur  and  showed  a  more  marked  maximum  in  hydrogen  than  in 
lir.  This  is  to  be  expected  from  the  increase  of  stopping  power 
}(  hydrogen  compared  with  air  for  decreasing  velocities  of  the 
:  particle. 

In  the  case  of  matter  of  high  atomic  weight  like  mercury 
ap)ur,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  ionisation  curve  would  be 


170  THE   a  RAYS  [CH. 

more  nearly  constant  along  the  path  of  the  a  particle  than  in  the 
case  of  air.  If  the  ionisation  were  constant  along  the  path,  the 
range  R  of  the  a  particle  would  be  connected  with  the  velocity  V 
by  the  relation  F*  =  bR  instead  of  the  relation  found  for  air,  viz. 
F'  =  aR,  From  consideration  of  the  results  obtained  by  Taylor, 
it  can  be  calculated  that  the  expenditure  of  energy  per  unit  path 
in  gold  is  more  nearly  in  accord  with  the  relation  F'  =  bR  than 
with  the  latter.  Such  a  result  is  to  be  expected  when  the 
a  particle  ionises  each  atom  in  its  path.  This  condition  must 
be  nearly  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  metals  or  gases  of  high  atomic 
weight. 

72.  Secondary  radiations  accompanying  a  rays.  There 
are  two  types  of  radiation  which  always  accompany  the  emission 
of  a  particles  from  radio-active  matter,  viz.  (1)  delta  rays  con- 
sisting of  slow  speed  negative  electrons,  large  in  number  compared 
with  the  a  particles;  (2)  recoil  radiation  consisting  of  heavy 
atoms  of  matter,  usually  radio-active,  which  escape  with  a  positive 
charge  and  with  a  velocity  of  about  3  x  10'  cms.  per  second.  The 
number  of  these  recoil  atoms  is  always  less  than  the  number  of 
a  particles. 

Delta  rays.  We  have  already  referred  in  Section  61  to  the 
appearance  of  a  large  number  of  slow  speed  electrons  from  matter 
traversed  by  the  a  rays,  and  to  the  consequent  diflficulty  of 
measuring  the  charge  carried  by  the  a  particles  themselves.  The 
presence  of  this  type  of  radiation  was  first  definitely  proved  by 
J.'  J.  Thomson*,  who  called  them  the  delta  rays.  A  plate  coated 
with  polonium,  which  emits  a  rays  but  no  /8  rays,  was  placed  in 
a  good  vacuum  close  to  a  parallel  metal  plate  connected  with  an 
electroscope.  The  rate  of  discharge  was  found  to  be  much  greater 
when  the  electroscope  was  charged  positively  than  when  nega- 
tively, indicating  that  a  large  number  of  negatively  charged 
particles  were  emitted  from  the  polonium  plate.  In  a  strong 
magnetic  field,  these  particles  after  describing  small  orbits  re- 
turned to  the  plate  from  which  they  were  emitted.  Under  such 
conditions,  the  rate  of  discharge  is  diminished  to  a  small  fraction 
of  its  value  without  the  field  and  the  positive  charge  carried  by 

*  J.  J.  ThomBon,  Proc.  Camh,  Phil.  Soe,  18,  p.  49,  1904. 


]  THE  a  RATS  171 

?  a  particles  could  be  measured.  J.  J.  Thomson  concluded  that 
^  S  rays  consisted  of  slowly  moving  negative  electrons,  whose 
locity  of  expulsion  was  about  that  acquired  in  foiling  through 
potential  di£ference  of  a  few  volts  only.  Miss  Slater*  showed 
It  a  similar  radiation  was  emitted  fix)m  the  emanations  and 
ive  deposit  both  of  thorium  and  of  radium.  Polonium  is  the 
tst  suitable  source  of  radiation  for  examining  the  conditions 
emission  and  properties  of  the  B  rays,  the  results  not  being 
npUcated,  as  in  the  case  of  radium,  by  the  emission  of  /3  rays. 
Dsequently  this  substance  has  been  used  as  a  source  of  S  rays  in 
st  of  the  later  researches.  Experiments  to  estimate  the  velocity 
emission  of  the  S  rays  from  matter  have  been  made  by  Ewers  f, 
geman*,  Moulin§,  Lattfes||,  and  more  recently  by  Hauserf  and 
mpbell**.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  S  rays  are 
piously  emitted  not  only  from  the  active  plate  but  from  any 
bstance  traversed  by  the  a  rays  whether  solid  or  gaseous. 
Consider  the  current  between  a  polonium  plate  A  and  a  second 
rallel  plate  B  close  to  it  in  a  vacuum.  The  variation  of  current 
th  voltage  between  the  two  plates  is  shown  in  Fig.  43  taken 
Di  Logeman's  paper.  It  is  seen  that  the  current  reaches  a 
ictical  maximum  at  about  20  volts,  but  its  value  depends  on 
?  direction  of  the  electric  field.  The  magnitude  of  the  current 
ilways  greater  when  A  is  charged  negatively.  These  results  re- 
ve  a  general  explanation  by  taking  into  account  (1)  the  positive 
irge  carried  by  the  a  rays,  (2)  the  emission  of  S  particles  from- 
i  inner  surfaces  both  of  A  and  B.  Suppose  the  plates  A  and  B 
i  so  close  together  that  all  the  a  particles  from  A  are  absorbed 
B.  Let  K  and  iT'  be  the  average  number  of  S  particles  emitted 
m  A  and  B  respectively  for  one  a  particle.  Then  for  no 
Id  acting,  the   current  i©  in   the   direction   AB  is  given   by 

=  n(jE  +  K'  —  Ke)  where  E  and  e  are  the  charges  carried  by  the 

*  Miss  Slater,  Phil.  Mag.  10,  p.  460,  1905. 

t  Ewen,  Phyt.  Zeit.  7,  p.  148,  1906. 

X  Logeman,  Proe.  Roy.  Soe.  A,  78,  p.  212,  1906. 

S  Moalin,  C.  R.  IM,  p.  1416,  1907;  Le  Radium,  4,  p.  852,  1907. 

H  Latt^,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  97,  1908. 

H  Hauser,  Phyi.  Zeit.  13,  p.  466,  1911. 

**  Campbell,  Phil.  Mag.  82,  p.  276,  1911 ;  2S,  p.  46,  1912. 


172 


THE  a  RAYS 


[t 


a  and  S  particles  respectively  and  n  is  the  number  of  a  partic 
emitted  per  second. 

When  A  is  charged  to  a  high  positive  potential,  so  that  t 
8  particles  from  A  are  turned  back  by  the  electric  field,  t 
current  is  given  by  n(E  +  K'e);  similarly  when  A  is  negati 
the  current  is  given  by  n(E  —  Ke),  If  now  a  magnetic  field 
applied  so  that  the  S  particles  are  prevented  fix)m  escaping  fit 
either  plate,  the  value  of  the  charge  nE  carried  by  the  a  rays  c 


40 


20 


a    -0 


2  "20 
.5   -40 


s 
a 


60 


80 


-100 


I  A — — — ^— ^ 


-20        -15-10-6  0  5  10  15         20 

Potential  of  Polonium  Plate  in  Volts 
Fig.  43. 

be  directly  measured.  In  this  way,  the  value  of  K  and  K'  can 
measured.  From  the  experiments  of  Logeman,  it  appears  tl 
practically  all  the  8  particles  are  turned  back  for  a  potent 
difference  of  about  10  volts.  This  would  correspond  to  a  maximi 
velocity  of  expulsion  of  the  electron  of  1*8  x  10*  cma  per  seco: 
Ewers  (loc.  cit)  deduced  that  the  value  of  e/m  for  the  S  particle  ^ 
about  that  found  for  the  electron  and  that  the  velocity  of  emiss 
was  approximately  3*25  x  10*  cms.  per  second.  In  practice,  h( 
ever,   it   is  doubtful   whether   very  definite   information   of 


THE  a   RATS  173 

ty  of  the  S  particles  can  be  deduced  from  curves  such  as 
shown  in  Fig.  43,  for  Campbell  has  shown  that  the  increase 
rrent  with  voltage  may  be  in  part  due  to  a  dragging  out  of 
tides  from  the  surface  layer  of  the  plates.  Several  observers 
noted  that  the  emission  of  S  particles  fix)m  a  surface  is  often 
cious  and  depends  apparently  on  the  condition  of  the  sur&ce 

• 

in  estimate  of  the  number  of  8  particles  for  each  a  particle 
a  plate  coated  with  the  active  deposit  of  radium  has  been 
:•  by  Duane*.  He  concludes  that  about  20  to  50  S  particles 
emitted  for  each  a  particle.  He  also  obtained  some  evidence 
radium  B,  which  emits  only  /3  rays,  emits  also  a  large 
ber  of  S  particles. 

tIcLennanf  and  Campbell  have  made  a  detailed  examination 
he  emission  of  S  particles.  The  latter  concluded  that  the 
ber  emitted  from  thin  foils  of  aluminium,  silver  and  gold  was 
ly  the  same.  The  number  thus  appears  to  be  independent  of 
metal.  His  results  also  show  that  the  number  of  S  particles 
ted  frt>m  a  thin  foil  for  one  a  particle  increases  with  decrease 
be  velocity  of  the  a  particle.  If  the  emission  of  S  particles  is 
lortional  to  the  ionisation,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  number 
particles  produced  should  vary  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the 
iation  along  the  path  of  a  pencil  of  a  rays.  This  has  been 
-rimentally  verified  by  Bumstead^.  He  found  that  the 
iber  of  S  particles  emitted  was  independent  of  the  material 
he  absorbing  screens  and  suggested  in  explanation  that  the 
lys  arise  not  from  the  metel  itself  but  from  the  air  film 
ched  to  its  surfisu^e. 

The  general  evidence  indicates  that  the  process  of  ionisation  of  an 
a  consists  in  the  emission  of  a  8  particle.  The  latter  at  ordinary 
isure  attaches  itself  to  a  molecule  or  group  of  molecules,  and 
)me8  the  negative  ion.  The  number  of  S  particles  released  by 
I  particle  should  on  this  view  be  equal  to  the  number  of  ions 
iuced.  The  number  of  S  particles  emitted  from  metal  foils 
cates  that  on  an  average  the  S  particle  must  be  able  to  escape 

«  Dmme,  Le  Radium,  0,  p.  65,  1908. 

t  McLennan ,  British  Ai$,  ReporU,  p.  895,  1909. 

X  BamflteMl.  Phil.  Mag,  at,  p.  907,  1911. 


174  THE  a  RAYS  [ClLi 


from  a  depth  corresponding  to  a  layer  of  molecules  from  10  to 
in  thickness.     It  is  naturally  to  be  expected  that  the  S  partidei  g 
escaping  from  a  surface  would  have  all  velocities  between  zero  and 
the  maximum  velocity. 

It  has  always  been  observed  that  a  polonium  plate  emits  mon 
B  particles  than  a  metal  plate  on  which  all  the  a  ra}rs  Ml.  Thk 
is  to  be  expected  if  the  layer  of  polonium,  and  any  impuritiei 
associated  with  it,  is  more  than  one  molecule  thick.  McLennan 
(loc.  cit)  found  that  the  number  of  S  particles  from  polonium 
deposited  on  different  plates  of  metal  was  independent  of  the 
metal  but  depended  only  on  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted. 
In  any  case,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  expulsion  of  an 
a  particle  from  the  radio-active  atom  itself  liberates  three  8  par- 
ticles, for  otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  single  po6iti?e 
charge  carried  by  the  recoil  atoms  (Section  73). 

If  the  S  particle  accompanies  the  act  of  ionisation  of  the  atom 
of  matter,  it  is  to  be  expected  from  the  principle  of  conservation 
of  momentum  that  it  would  on  the  average  be  projected  in  the 
direction  of  travel  of  the  a  particle.  Kleeman*  found  evidence  of 
the  existence  of  this  effect  by  comparing  the  number  of  S  particles 
emitted  from  each  side  of  a  thin  sheet  of  matter  traversed  bjr 
a  rays,  but  the  difference  was  not  very  marked.  On  the  other 
hand,  Campbell  {loc,  cit)  failed  to  detect  any  certain  differences. 

73.  Recoil  radiations.  When  a  particle  of  mass  m  and 
velocity  v  is  ejected  from  an  atom  of  mass  Jf,  from  the  principle  of 
the  conservation  of  momentum,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the 
residual  atom  of  mass  M—m  would  recoil  with  a  velocity  V  given 
by  (Jlf—w)  F=mt;.  Since  the  momentum  of  the  a  particle, 
ejected  from  a  radio-active  substance,  is  much  greater  than  the 
momentum  of  the  average  0  particle,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the 
velocity  of  recoil  of  the  residual  atom  would  be  much  greater  for 
the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle  than  for  the  expulsion  of  a  ^  particle. 
Let  us  consider,  for  example,  the  case  of  the  transformation  of 
radium  A  of  atomic  weight  218.  An  a  particle  of  mass  4  is 
expelled  with  a  velocity  of  1*82  x  10*  cms.  per  second.  The  residual 
atom,  radium  B,  has  an  atomic  weight  214.     Consequently  on  the 

*  Kleeman,  Proe,  Roy,  Soc.  83,  p.  195,  1910. 


it]  the  a  RAYS  175 

|rinciple  of  momentum,  an  atom  of  radium  B  should  recoil  with 
a  Telocity  of  3*4  x  10'  cms.  per  second. 

Next  consider  the  transformation  of  radium  B  into  radium  C, 
which  is  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  an  electron  with  an 
wemge  speed  such  that  jEfp  =  1300  about.  Taking  the  atomic 
Height  of  radium  C  as  214,  the  velocity  of  recoil  of  radium  C 
eomes  out  to  be  5  x  10*  cms.  per  second.  This  velocity  of  recoil  is 
only  about  1/700  of  that  due  to  the  emission  of  an  a  particle ;  but 
it  will  be  seen  later  that  it  is  apparently  sufficient  to  cause  the 
occasional  escape  of  an  atom  of  radium  C  during  the  transformation 
of  radium  B. 

The  hypothesis  of  recoil  was  first  employed  to  explain  the 
distribution  of  the  active  deposit  from  the  emanations  of  thorium 
ind  radium  at  low  pressures  of  the  gas  (Section  150).  At  ordinary 
pressure,  the  active  deposit  is  mainly  confined  to  the  negative 
electrode  in  a  strong  electric  field.  At  low  pressures  of  the  gas 
containing  the  emanation,  the  active  deposit  is  nearly  uniformly 
distributed  over  the  surface  of  the  containing  vessel.  This  was 
ascribed  to  the  recoil  of  the  carriers  of  the  active  deposit  at 
s  considerable  speed  in  consequence  of  the  expulsion  of  an 
«  particle  fix)m  the  emanation.  At  low  pressures,  these  carriers 
have  sufficient  velocity  to  reach  the  surface  before  they  are  stopped 
by  collisions  with  the  gas  molecules  and  turned  back  by  the 
electric  field.  It  is  of  interest  to  record  an  experiment  made  by 
Miss  Brooks*  in  1904.  She  observed  that  an  inactive  plate  placed 
near  another  coated  with  the  active  deposit  of  radium  became 
active  due  to  the  deposition  of  radium  B  on  the  plate.  This  effect 
was  most  marked  during  the  first  few  minutes  after  removal  of  the 
active  plate  fix)m  the  emanation,  and  in  explanation  the  writer 
suggested  that  the  radium  B  was  set  fixje  by  recoil  during  the 
transformation  of  radium  A. 

The  importance  of  this  principle  as  a  general  method  of 
radio-active  analysis  was  not  recognised  until  the  striking  experi- 
ments of  B[ahnf  and  of  Russ  and  Makower^  in  1909.  Hahn 
showed  that  a  number  of  radio-active  products  could  be  separated 

*  Miss  Brooks,  Nature,  July  21,  1904. 

t  Hahn,  Verh,  d,  D.  phy$,  Ges.  11,  p.  55,  1909. 

;  Boss  and  Makower,  ^oc.  Boy,  Soc.  A,  82,  p.  205,  1909. 


176  THE  a  RATS 

in  a  pure  state  by  the  method  of  recoil.  The  general  met 
employed  was  to  place  an  inactive  plate  charged  negatively 
a  plate  covered  with  active  matter  and  observe  the  actii 
imparted  to  it.  The  recoil  atoms  were  concentrated  on 
negative  plate  showing  that  they  carried  a  positive  charge.  H" 
application  of  this  method  led  to  the  discovery  of  several  D'T 
products.  For  example,  when  a  plate  was  placed  for  a  few  sea* 
near  another  plate  coated  with  the  active  deposit  of  actinium,- 
plate  on  removal  showed  a  ff  ray  activity  which  decayed 
a  half  value  period  of  about  five  minutes.  This  radiation 
shown  to  be  due  to  a  new  product  called  actinium  D,  which 
liberated  by  recoil  in  consequence  of  the  transformation  of  >'  \ 
a  ray  product  actinium  C.  In  a  similar  wrty,  a  new  yS  ray  proQi  I 
thorium  D  was  found  in  the  active  deposit  of  thorium.  Usiojji 
the  recoil  method,  it  was  found  that  radium  C  must  consist  of  ■! 
least  two  products.  A  further  discussion  of  this  important  res»l*; 
is  given  in  Section  198.  The  phenomenon  of  recoil  was  foui*' 
be  quite  general.  Badium  B  was  obtained  by  recoil  from  ra^  i 
A,  radium  C  from  radium  B,  the  emanation  from  radium> 
actinium  X  from  radio-actinium. 

Buss  and   Makower  initially   made   their  experiments   wi> 
a  layer  of  radium  emanation  condensed  in   the   bottom   of  l: 
exhausted  glass   vessel.     They   found   that   a  plate  placed  neai 
became  active  by  recoil  and  was  coated  with  varying  proportior 
of  radium  A,  radium  B  and  radium  C.     In  these  experiments,  i 
recoil  atoms  were  projected  on  to  the  plate  through  a  vacuum  ai* 
no  electric  field  was  employed.     They  investigated  the  absorptioi 
of  the  recoil  atoms  by  hydrogen  and  air,  and  showed  that  the 
number  of  recoil  atoms  reaching  the  plate  decreased  approximate!} 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  pressure  of  the  gas.    Aii 
was  more  effective  than  hydrogen  in  stopping  the  recoil  atoms 
The  law  of  stopping  of  the  recoil  atoms  in  passing  through  mattei 
has  also  been  investigated  by  Wertenstein*.     Badium  A  was  usee 
as  a  source  of  radiation  and  the  amount  of  radium  B  obtained  b] 
recoil  on  a  parallel  plate   was   measured  for  different  distance! 
between  the  plates  and  at  different  pressures.     The  amount  o 
radium  B  waa   found   to  fall  off  with  increase  of  distance  an( 

*  WertenBteio,  C.  R.  160,  p.  S69,  1910. 


THE  a  RAYS  177 

ssure  of  the  ga&    The  product  of  range  of  recoil  atoms  aad 

pressure  measured  in  millimetres  varied  between  80  and  90. 
is  showed  that  the  range  of  the  recoil  atoms  in  air  at  atmo- 
leric  pressure  was  about  1/10  mm. 

Hahn*  and  Makower  and  Russf  both  showed  that  radium  C 
s  obtained  by  recoil  fix>m  radium  B.  This  is  of  great  interest, 
^e  radium  B  emits  for  the  most  part  /3  particles  of  slow  speed 

ing  its  transformation.  The  fraction  of  the  total  amount  of 
?  radium  C  which  is  liberated  by  recoil  is  only  about  1/6000, 
lile  in  the  case  of  an  a  ray  transformation  like  radium  A  or 
minium  C,  a  considerable  part  of  the  product  is  obtained  by 

>il  under  normal  experimental  conditions. 

If  the  recoil  atouio  carry  a  charge  they  should  be  deflected  in 

ssing  through  a  magnetic  and  an  electric  field  in  a  vacuum. 

cperiments  to  examine  this  point  have  been  made  by  Russ  and 

akower  J  and  Makower  and  Evans§.     A  deposit  of  radium  A  on 

le  wire  was  used  as  a  source  of  radiation,  and  a  pencil  com- 

J  of  the  recoil  atoms,  radium  B,  passed  through  a  magnetic 

a  electric  field.     The  direction  of  deflection  of  the  radiation 

-asured  either  by  the  electric  or  photographic  method  showed 

at  the  recoil  atoms  carried  a  positive  charge.     It  was  found  that 

e  deflection  of  the  recoil  atoms  in  a  magnetic  field  was  one  half 

the  corresponding  deflection  of  the  a  particles  emitted  from 
Jium  A.  Since  the  momentum  of  the  recoil  atom  should  be 
ual  and  opposite  to  that  of  the  expelled  a  particle,  this  result 
ows  that  the  recoil  atom  has  wie  half  of  the  charge  carried  by 

a  particle.  This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  the  amount  of 
flection  in  a  magnetic  field  of  a  pencil  of  rays  is  proportional 

the  charge  of  the  particle  divided  by  the  momentum.  Since 
e  a  particles  are  known  to  carry  two  unit  positive  charges  it 
lows  that  the  recoil  atom  carries  a  single  positive  charge.   Since 

a  gas  at  ordinary  pressure,  the  recoil  atoms  are  carried  to  the 
gative  electrode,  it  is  evident  that  they  retain  their  positive 
arge  unaltered  in  passing  through  the  gas.    No  doubt  in  a  weak 

*  Hahn,  Le. 

t  Makower  and  Buss,  Phil,  Mag,  19,  p.  100,  1910. 
t  Buss  and  Makower,  Phil.  May,  20,  p.  875,  1910. 
§  Makower  and  Evans,  Phil,  Mag,  ao,  p.  882,  1910. 

R    K.-A.  12 


178  THE   a  RATS  [cd 

electric  field  many  of  the  recoil  atoms  lose  their  charge  due  to! 
recombination,  as  in  the  case  of  ordinary  ions.     By  observing  thft^ 
deflections  of  a  pencil  of  recoil  rays,  both  in  a  magnetic  and  eh 
field,  the  velocity  and  value  of  e/m  of  the  recoil  atoms  can  be] 
deduced.     Experiments  on  this  question  are  still  in  progress ;  but; 
the  results  so  far  obtained  show  that  the  value  of  e/m  observed 
agrees  within  the  limit  of  experimental  error  with  the  calculated 
value  on  the  assumption  that  the  recoil  atom  carries  a  single 
charge.     For  example,  it  has  been  deduced  that  the  velocity  rf 
recoil  of  radium  B  from  radium  A  is  3*23  x  10'  cms.  per  second, 
and  the  value  of  e/m  =  49*7.     Taking  the  atomic  weight  of  radium 
B  as  12  units  less  than  that  of  radium,  the  calculated  value  of  e/m   | 
is  46*7  em.  units. 

There  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  this  recoil  method  can 
be  developed  to  determine  with  accuracy  the  atomic  weights 
of  a  number  of  products  which  exist  in  too  small  quantity 
to  be  determined  by  direct  chemical  methods.  For  example, 
it  should  be  possible  to  obtain  in  this  way  the  value  of  e/m 
for  the  recoil  atoms  constituting  actinium  D,  thorium  D  and 
radium  D. 

There  are  a  number  of  interesting  points  connected  with  recoil 
phenomena  which  have  not  yet  been  fully  investigated  The 
interpretation  of  experiments  is  in  some  cases  complicated  by  an 
apparent  volatility  of  some  products  at  ordinary  temperatures. 
In  addition,  there  is  some  evidence  that  radio-active  matter  is  torn 
oflf  a  plate  by  exhausting  the  air  surrounding  it.  This  effect 
appears  to  be  purely  mechanical,  and  is  to  be  expected  if  the  active 
matter  is  merely  resting  on  the  surface  and  not  in  close  contact 
with  it.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  the  recoil  atoms  on  account  of 
their  slow  velocity  would  suffer  a  marked  scattering  in  passing 
through  matter.  Some  evidence  of  this  has  been  obtained  by 
Makower  and  Russ  *.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  notwithstanding 
its  heavy  mass  the  recoil  atom  of  thorium  D,  for  example,  after 
it  has  lost  its  initial  velocity  travels  through  the  gas  in  an  electric 
field  at  the  same  rate  as  positive  ions  produced  by  any  agency  in 
the  same  gas. 

*  Makower  and  Russ,  Manch.  Lit.  aiid  Phil,  Soc,  60,  No.  2,  1910. 


LV]  THE  a  RAYS  179 

lonisaiion  due  to  recoil  atoms,    Townsend   has  shown  that 
positive  ions  moving  in  an  electric  field  are  able  to  produce  fresh 
ions  by   collision   when   their  velocity   exceeds  a  certain   value 
depending  on  the  gas.     Since  the  recoil  atoms  are  initially  ex- 
pelled with  a  velocity  considerably  greater  than  this  minimum 
velocity,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  recoil  atoms  should  ionise 
the  gas  traversed  by  them.     This  has  been  shown  to  be  the  case 
by  Wertenstein*  using  radium  A  as  a  source  of  the  recoil  radia- 
tion.   An  active  plate  2  cms.  in  diameter  was  placed  beneath  a 
testing  vessel  of  parallel  plates  2  mms.  apart,  between  which  the 
ioniasition  was  measured.     The  distance  between  the  active  matter 
and  the  testing  vessel  could  be  varied  and  also  the  pressure  of  the 
gas.    The  eflFect  in  the  testing  vessel  is  due  to  the  ionisation 
produced  by  the  a  rays  plus  the  ionisation  due  to  the  recoil  atoms. 
At  a  pressure  of  5  mms.  of  mercury,  the  ionisation  diminished 
rapidly  for  increase   of  distance   between   the   active  plate  and 
testing  vessel,  from  5  mms.  to  24  mms.     Above  this  distance,  the 
ionisation  was  sensibly  constant,  showing  that  the  recoil  atoms  no 
longer  are  eflfective.     At  a  pressure  of  10  mms.,  the  ionisation  due 
to  the  recoil  atoms  disappeared  for  a  distance  of  10  mms. 

The  following  example  illustrates  the  type  of  results  obtained. 
For  a  pressure  of  air  of  3'15  mms.,  the  ionisation  in  the  testing 
vessel  due  to  the  recoil  atoms  was  6*5  times  that  of  the  a  rays  for 
a  distance  of  6'5  mm&  between  the  plate  and  testing  vessel.  The 
ionisation  fell  to  one  quarter  of  this  value  for  an  increase  of 
<li8tance  to  24*5  mms.  at  the  same  pressure.  Since  probably  the 
number  of  recoil  atoms  liberated  from  the  plate  is  about  one  half 
of  the  number  of  a  particles,  these  results  show  that  the  heavy 
slow  speed  recoil  atoms  produce  more  than  10  times  as  many  ions 
^  an  a  particle  traversing  the  same  path.  It  thus  appears  that 
the  recoil  atom  is  a  very  eflBcient  ioniser  and  in  this  respect  re- 
sembles the  a  particle  near  the  end  of  its  range  (Section  67).  If 
^he  greater  part  of  the  energy  of  the  recoil  atom  is  expended  in 
producing  ions,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  recoil  atom  will 
produce  about  1/50  of  the  total  ionisation  due  to  the  corresponding 
« particle. 

•  WertenBtein,  C.  R.  152,  p.  1667,  1911. 

12—2 


180  THE  a  RAYS  [CE 

74.  Scattering  of  the  a  rays.  It  is  well  known  that 
a  narrow  pencil  of  /3  or  cathode  rays  is  scattered  in  its  passage 
through  matter,  so  that  the  pencil  of  emergent  rays  is  very 
diffused.  This  scattering  is  so  great  for  /3  rays  that  a  considerable 
fraction  of  the  /8  particles  is  returned  from  the  plate  on  the  side  of 
incidence.  In  giving  his  theory  of  the  nature  of  the  absorption  of 
a  rays,  Bragg  pointed  out  that  scattering  should  be  much  less 
marked  for  the  a  particles  than  for  /3  particles  on  account  of  the 
much  smaller  kinetic  energy  of  the  latter.  He  supposed  that  the 
a  particle  would  pursue  a  nearly  rectilinear  course  passing  through 
the  atoms  of  matter  in  its  path.  Experiment,  however,  has  shown 
that  there  is  an  undoubted  small  scattering  of  the  a  rays  in 
passing  through  matter  in  general,  and  that  the  amount  of  this 


Fig.  44. 

scattering  increases  with  diminution  of  the  velocity  of  the  a  particle. 
The  presence  of  this  sciittering  was  initially  shown  by  Rutherford* 
using  the  photographic  method.  In  an  experiment  such  as  was 
described  in  section  57,  the  bands  produced  on  a  photographic 
plate  have  their  edges  sharply  defined  in  a  vacuum ;  but  in  air  at 
atmospheric  pressure  the  bands  are  broader  and  the  edges  more 
diffuse.  The  scattering  of  the  a  rays  is  easily  illustrated  by  placing 
a  sheet  of  matter  over  the  slit  in  the  apparatus  shown  in  Fig.  23. 
The  photographic  trace  of  the  pencil  of  rays  is  made  much 
broader,  and  the  intensity  of  the  photographic  effect  £Etdes  off 
slowly  on  either  side  of  the  centre.     Geigerf  has  made  a  systematic 

•  Rutherford.  Phil.  Mag.  11,  p.  166,  1906. 

t  Geiger,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  81,  p.  174,  1908,  and  88,  p.  492,  1910. 


IV]  THE  a  BAYS  181 

examination  of  the  amount  and  character  of  the  scattering  of  the 
s  rays  in  passing  through  different  kinds  of  matter.  He  has 
employed  the  scintillation  method,  which  possesses  many  advantages 
over  the  photographic  or  electric  method  for  this  type  of  investiga- 
tion. The  arrangement  of  the  apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  44. 
In  these  experiments  it  was  necessary  to  employ  a  small  and 
intense  source  of  homogeneous  a  ra3rs.  For  this  purpose  radium 
emanation  was  introduced  into  a  conical  tube  Ay  closed  by  a  thin 
sheet  of  mica,  and  was  allowed  to  remain  for  several  hours.  After 
removing  the  emanation  by  expanding  into  the  vessel  By  the 
radiation  after  a  short  interval  came  almost  entirely  from  the 
thin  film  of  radium  C  deposited  on  the  walls  of  the  conical  vessel. 
A  narrow  pencil  of  homogeneous  rays  was  obtained  by  means  of 
the  slit  D ;  the  distribution  of  scintillations  was  observed  on  a 
zinc  sulphide  screen  8  with  the  aid  of  a  microscope.  Various 
screens  could  be  introduced  at  the  point  E.  In  a  good  vacuum, 
a  bright  band  of  light,  due  to  the  narrow  pencil  of  a  rays,  was 
observed  on  the  zinc  sulphide  screen.  On  introducing  a  thin 
sheet  of  matter  at  E,  the  bright  band  vanished,  due  to  the 
scattering  of  the  a  particles  over  a  much  greater  area.  The  dis- 
tribution of  the  a  peuiiicles  was  measured  by  taking  observations 
of  the  number  of  scintillations  on  a  given  area  at  different 
distances  fix)m  the  centre.  Examples  of  the  results  obtained 
are  given  in  Fig.  46.  The  curve  A  shows  the  distribution  of  the 
« particles  in  a  vacuum,  the  curve  B  the  distribution  when  the 
nys  were  scattered  by  passing  through  one  gold  leaf,  and  the 
curve  C  through  two  gold  leavea  It  will  be  seen  that  the  density 
of  the  a  particles  per  unit  area  falls  off  rapidly  on  either  side  of 
the  centra 

From  measurements  of  this  kind  it  is  possible  to  deduce  directly 
the  most  probable  angle  of  scattering  of  the  rays  for  a  given  screen. 
This  is  determined  by  using  a  circular  aperture  and  finding  the 
distance  from  the  centre  for  which  the  value  of  27rm  is  a  maximum 
^here  r  is  the  distance  from  the  centre,  and  n  the  number  of 
scintillations  per  unit  area.  The  most  probable  angle  6  of  scattering 
ia  then  given  by  tan  0  =  rjl  where  /  is  the  distance  between  the  screen 
^d  the  scattering  material.  For  example,  with  a  sheet  of  gold 
corresponding  in  its  stopping  power  on  the  a  particle  to  3*68  cms* 


182 


THE  a  BATS 


of  air,  the  most  probable  angle  of  scattering  was  7  < 
Geiger  found  that  the  angle  of  scattering  depended  greatl} 
atomic  weight  of  the  scattering  metal.  This  is  shown  in 
where  the  ordinates  represent  the  most  probable  angle  of  sa 
and  the  abscissae  the  stopping  power  of  the  metal  foil  in  t 
air.  The  angle  of  scattering  is  for  small  thicknesses 
proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  thickness,  but  with 
screens  the  curves,  as  is  seen  in  the  figure,  are  approx 


o 

I 


B 


10  B  6         4         2  0 

Distance  from  Centrr 

Fig.  46. 


10  mm 


linear.  This  effect  is  due  to  the  diminution  of  velocity 
a  particle  in  passing  through  the  screen  and  the  consequ 
crease  of  scattering.  In  a  special  experiment,  it  was  shown  t 
most  probable  angle  of  scattering  is  inversely  proportiona! 
third  power  of  the  velocity  of  the  a  particle.  When  the 
with  velocity  of  the  scattering  coefficient  is  taken  into  i 
the  experimental  curves  are  in  good  accord  with  thos< 
expected  from  the  general  laws  of  probability. 


IVJ 


THE  a  RATS 


183 


It  was  deduced  that  the  average  angle  of  scattering  per  atom 
of  matter  traversed  is  approximately  proportional  to  the  atomic 
weight 

Geiger  and  Marsden*  observed  another  very  striking  eflfect. 
A  veiy  small  fraction  of  the  a  particles  are  scattered  through  such 
a  large  angle  that  they  emerge  again  on  the  side  of  incidence. 
The  amount  of  this  diffuse  reflection  increases  at  first  with  the 


1  2 

Thickness  of  metal  foil  in  cms.  of  air 

Fig.  46. 


thickness  of  the  plate  on  which  the  a  particles  fall,  and  is  thus 

a  volume  and  not  a  surface  effect.     The  fraction  of  a  particles 

thus  reflected  increases  more  rapidly  than  the  atomic  weight  of 

the  radiator,  and  is  thus  much  smaller  for  aluminium  than  for 

gold.     It  is  surprising,  however,  that,  in  the  case  of  a  metal  of 

high  atomic  weight  like  gold,  about  half  of  the  maximum  number 

*  Oeiger  and  liianden,  Proc,  Roy,  Soe»  A,  82,  p.  495,  1909. 


184  THE  a  RAYS  [<* 

of  reflected  a  particles  is  obtained   from  a  thin  sheet  of  gold 
equivalent  in  stopping  power  to  about  2  mms.  of  air. 

When  radium  C  is  used  as  a  source  of  rays  and  platinum 
as  a  radiator,  it  was  found  that  1  in  8000  a  particles  incident  (ffl 
the  plate  were  scattered  back  from  the  plate  through  more  than 
a  right  angle.  In  making  this  calculation,  it  was  assumed  that 
the  a  particles  were  scattered  back  equally  in  all  directiona 
Taking  into  account  the  average  angle  of  scattering  of  the  main 
pencil  of  a  particles,  it  can  be  calculated  on  the  laws  of  probability 
that  the  fiw3tion  of  the  particles  scattered  through  more  than 
a  right  angle  should  be  much  smaller  than  that  observed  experi- 
mentally. 

To  account  for  the  experimental  results,  it  is  necessary  to 
suppose  that  the  atom  is  the  seat  of  such  intense  electrical  forces 
that  occasionally  the  a  particle  can  be  deflected  fix)m  its  path 
through  more  than  a  right  angle  in  an  encounter  with  a  single 
atom.  This  indicates  that  the  atom  must  contain  a  highly 
concentrated  charged  nucleus,  and  that  the  a  particle  in  passing 
through  the  atom  close  to  the  nucleus  suffers  a  wide  deflection 
of  its  orbit.  In  order  to  calculate  the  effects  to  be  expected,  the 
writer*  has  supposed  that  the  atoms  of  matter  consist  of  a  central 
charge  ±  Ne  surrounded  by  a  compensating  charge  +  i^Te  dis- 
tributed over  a  sphere  of  radius  comparable  with  the  radius  of  an 
atom.  Assuming  this  central  charge  is  concentrated  at  a  point,  it 
can  be  simply  shown  that  the  a  particle  describes  a  nearly 
hyperbolic  orbit  in  passing  close  to  the  centre.  The  angle  of 
deviation  <f>  of  the  particle  is  given  by 

cot  <f>/2  =  2p/6, 

where  p  is  the  perpendicular  distance  from  the  centre  on  the 
direction  of  initial  motion  of  the  particle,  and 

2NeE 


b  = 


mu^ 


where  Ne  is  the  central  charge,  E  the  charge  on  the  a  particle, 
m  its  mass  and  u  its  velocity.  Suppose  a  pencil  of  a  particles  &lls 
normally  on  a  very  thin  screen  of  matter  of  thickness  t    Let 

♦  Rutherford,  Phil  Mag.  21,  p.  669,  1911. 


IV]  THE  a  RAYS  185 

n  s  number  of  atoms  in  unit  volume  of  the  material.     Then  the 

probability  m  of  entering  an  atom  within  a  distance  p  of  its 

centre  is  given  by 

m  =  irp^nt 

The  chance  dm  of  striking  within  radii  p  and  p-^-dpvR  given  by 

dm  =  -ju.t.b^  cot"  <l>/2. 

Here  dm  is  the  fraction  of  the  total  number  of  a  particles  scattered 
through  an  angle  ^.  In  practice  the  scattering  is  determined  by 
counting  the  number  of  a  particles  falling  on  unit  area  at  a 
constant  distance  r  from  the  radiator.  In  this  case  the  number  y 
of  scattered  particles  on  unit  area  is  given  by 

_ntb'Qco8ec*<f>/2 

where  Q  is  the  number  of  a  particles  incident  on  the  radiator. 
On  this  theory,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  number  of  a  particles 
scattered  through  any  angle  <f>  should  be  proportional  to 

(1)  cosec*  ^/2  or  1/^*  if  <^  be  small, 

(2)  thickness  of  scattering  material  provided  this  is  small, 

(3)  magnitude  of  central  charge  Ne, 

(4)  and   inversely  proportional   to  (niu*y  or  u*  if  m   be 

constant. 

In  these  calculations,  it  is  assumed  that  the  screen  is  so  thin  that 
the  a  particle  suffers  only  one  deflection  of  large  angle  in  traversing 
the  screen. 

The  correctness  of  these  conclusions  has  been  tested  by 
Geiger*.  By  using  a  fine  thin-walled  glass  tube  filled  with  radium 
emanation  as  a  source  of  a  rays,  he  found  that  the  number 
scattered  through  a  given  angle  ^  for  gold  was  nearly  proportional 
to  t  and  varied  very  nearly  as  cosec*  ^/2  over  a  wide  range  of  angle. 
This  theory  serves  to  explain  in  a  satisfactory  way  the  main  results 
of  scattering  observed  both  for  a  and  for  /8  rays,  incident  on  thin 
screens  of  matter.  The  theory  supposes  that  the  a  particle  may 
suffer  any  deflection  from  0**  to  180*"  in  traversing  an  atom,  but  the 

*  Oeiger,  Proe,  MancK  Lit,  and  Phil.  Soc,  60,  Pt.  n,  p.  xz,  1911. 


186  THE  a  RATS  [CH. 

probability  of  a  large  deflexion  is  very  small.  For  any  given  angle 
of  scattering,  however,  the  eflfect  of  "  single "  scattering  is  more 
marked  than  "  compound  "  scattering,  i.e.  the  probable  deflection 
due  to  a  multitude  of  encounters  where  the  deflection  is  small 

The  general  results  indicate  that  the  value  of  the  central 
charge  Ne  is  nearly  proportional  to  the  atomic  weight  of  the  atom, 
and  has  a  value  of  about  100^  for  gold.  If  the  value  of  N  variee 
as  the  atomic  weight,  the  theory  shows  that  the  amount  of 
scattering  for  equal  thicknesses  varies  as  DAy  where  D  is  the 
density  and  A  the  atomic  weight.  For  example,  the  scattering  by 
gold  should  be  about  50  times  that  by  aluminium.  This  con- 
clusion has  been  verified  experimentally  by  Geiger  and  Marsden. 
If  there  is  no  loss  of  momentum  by  radiation  in  an  atomic 
encounter,  it  is  to  be  expected  theoretically  that  the  a  particle 
should  diminish  in  velocity  when  it  is  deflected  by  an  atom.  This 
loss  of  velocity  for  large  deflections  should  be  small  for  gold,  bat 
marked  for  aluminium  and  elements  of  low  atomic  weight  The 
effects  of  scattering  by  light  atoms  like  those  of  hydrogen  and 
helium,  which  are  comparable  in  mass  with  the  a  particle,  are  of 
special  interest,  but  have  not  yet  been  examined  experimentally. 

Since  the  high  speed  a  and  ^8  particles  undoubtedly  pass 
through  the  atomic  system,  the  law  of  scattering  of  such  particles 
by  matter  affords  one  of  the  most  promising  methods  of  elucidating 
the  structure  of  the  atom.  A  further  discussion  of  scattering  in 
connection  with  /8  and  7  rays  is  given  in  later  chapters. 

75.  Probability  yariationi.  The  rate  of  disintegration  of 
all  radio-active  substances  is  expressed  by  a  simple  law,  namely, 
that  the  number  of  atoms  n  breaking  up  per  second  is  proportional 
to  the  number  N  of  atoms  present.  Consequently  n  =  \Ny  where 
X  is  a  constant  characteristic  for  a  particular  radio-active  substance. 
E.  v.  Schweidler  first  pointed  out  that  the  rate  of  disintegration 
should  follow  the  laws  of  probability,  and  that  the  value  of  n 
should  be  subject  to  fluctuations  on  either  side  of  the  average 
value  which  is  given  by  n  =  \N, 

From  the  theory  of  probability,  it  is  known  that  the  absolute 
average  error  e  in  a  large  number  of  observations  for  two  events 
P  and  Q  is  given  by  e  =  ±  s/Npq  where  N  is  the  number  of 


y]  the  a  RAYS  187 

oibeervations,  and  p  and  q  are  the  probabilities  for  the  events  P 
uA  Q  respectively.  Applying  this  formula  to  the  radio-active 
cbanges,  the  number  of  atoms  breaking  up  during  the  given  time 
T,  small  compared  with  the  half  value  period  of  the  substance,  is 
given  by  XtN,  while  the  number  of  atoms  still  unchanged  at  the 
end  of  the  interval  is  (1  —  Xt)  N.  The  probability  of  a  single  atom 
breaking  up  during  the  time  t  is  \t  while  the  probability  that 
the  same  atom  will  exist  after  that  time  is  1  —  \t.     Consequently 

the  absolute  average  error  €  =  ±  VNKt{1  —  \t).     Since  the  square 

of  Xt  is  small  compared  with  Xr  itself,  e  =  +  ViVXr  or  ±  <s/Zy  where 
Zis  the  average  number  of  atoms  disintegrating  during  the  time 
T.   The  actual  number  of  atoms  breaking  up  in  the  time  t  thus 

shows  a  deviation  from  the  average  value  of  magnitude  ±  VZ. 
The  absolute  value  of  the  error  V^  increases  with  the  number 
of  atoms  breaking  up  in  the  interval  under  consideration;  but 

the  relative  error  *JZ/Z  decreases. 

In  radio-active  substances  which  break  up  with  the  expulsion 
of  a  particles,  the  number  of  o  particles  emitted  is  in  most  cases 
equal  to  the  number  of  atoms  breaking  up.  The  variations  from 
the  average  value  should  be  detected  by  variations  in  the  satura- 
tion current  due  to  the  ionisation  by  the  a  particles.  Schweidler* 
calculated  that  these  probability  deviations  should  be  easily  de- 
tected for  substances  emitting  a  rays.  The  first  experiments  to 
test  the  correctness  of  this  theory  were  made  by  Kohlrauschf  by 
balancing  the  ionisation  currents  due  to  two  sources  of  a  radiation 
against  each  other,  and  measuring  the  fluctuations  from  the 
balance  by  means  of  an  electrometer.  Observations  of  a  similar 
kind  were  made  later  by  Meyer  and  Regener  J  by  balancing  the 
satomtion  ionisation  current  due  to  the  source  of  a  radiation 
against  a  Bronson  resistance  (Section  43).  Experiments  were 
also  made  independently  by  Geiger§  by  balancing  one  source  of 
radiation  against  another.  It  was  important  to  settle  initially 
whether  the  fluctuations  from  the  balance  observed  experimentally 

*  T.  Schweidler,  Ck>ngrto  international  pour  I'^tude  de  la  radiologic  et  de 
lloQiiaUon;  Li^e,  1905. 

t  EohlzBasch,  Wien  Ber.  116,  p.  673,  1906. 

t  Keyer  and  Begener,  Ann.  d.  Phys,  25,  p.  757,  1908. 

I  Gfdger,  PhiL  Mag,  15,  p.  539,  1908. 


188  THE  a  RATS  [( 

were  due  to  probability  variations,  or  whether  they  could 
ascribed  to  instrumental  disturbances.  To  test  this  point 
same  pencil  of  a  particles  was  arranged  to  pass  through 
separate  testing  vessels,  and  the  saturation  currents  were  balai 
against  each  other.  The  disturbances  from  the  balance  were  found*: 
to  be  small  compared  with  those  observed  when  two  distinek 
sources  of  a  radiation  were  employed.  In  addition,  Geiger  showed 
that  for  equal  ionisations  produced  by  the  a  and  /8  rays,  the 
disturbances  observed  in  the  latter  case  were  much  smaller  than 
in  the  former.  This  is  to  be  expected,  since  the  ionisation  due  to 
a  j3  particle  is  much  smaller  than  that  due  to  an  a  particle,  and 
consequently  a  much  larger  number  of  ff  peuiiicles  is  required 
to  produce  the  same  current.  Meyer  and  Regener,  and  Geiger 
showed  that  the  deviations  observed  were  of  about  the  right 
magnitude  to  be  expected  on  the  probability  theory.  A  complete 
discussion  of  the  theory  and  methods  of  observations  in  these 
cases  has  been  given  by  Campbell*. 

Since  the  average  error  is  a/Z  for  a  number  of  atoms  Z,  the 
ratio  ^/Z/Z  can  be  determined  by  electrometer  observations  by 
observing  the  fluctuations  fix)m  the  balance.  Consequently,  this 
method  could  be  used  to  determine  the  actual  value  of  Z.  The 
importance  of  such  experiments  has,  however,  diminished  on  account 
of  the  development  of  methods  for  counting  the  a  particles  directly. 

The  probability  variations  are  at  once  obvious  when  the 
number  of  a  particles  in  a  given  short  interval  are  counted  by  the 
electric  or  scintillation  method.  In  the  scintillation  method,  for 
example,  it  is  observed  that  the  interval  between  successive  a 
particles  is  very  variable.  Examples  of  such  probability  variations 
have  been  given  by  Regener  and  by  Rutherford  and  Geiger.  It 
is  of  importance  to  settle  whether  the  emission  of  a  particles 
follows  a  simple  probability  law,  t.e.  whether  the  a  particles  are 
emitted  at  random  both  in  time  and  space.  This  has  been 
investigated  by  a  special  method  by  Rutherford  and  Geiger 
applying  a  formula  worked  out  by  Batemanf.  A  large  number 
of  a  particles,  emitted  from  a  thin  film  of  polonium,  were  counted 

♦  Campbell,  Proc,  Camh.  Phil.  Soc.  15,  p.  117,  1909. 

t  Batherford  and  Geiger,  and  Bateman,  Phil.  Mag,  80,  p.  698,  1910.    See 
also  E.  C.  Snow,  Phil.  Mag.  28,  p.  198,  1911. 


nrj 


THE  a  RAYS 


189 


by  the  scintillatioii  method.  The  time  of  appearance  of  each 
scintillation  was  recorded  on  a  revolving  tape  by  pressing  an 
electric  key.  About  10,000  scintillations  were  counted,  and  the 
number  appearing  in  equal  intervals  was  then  deduced  from  the 
tape.    Bateman  showed  that  the  probability  that  n  a  particles 

should  appear  in  a  given  interval  is  given  by  —  e~^  where  x  is 

the  average  number  during  the  interval,  and  n  may  have  any 
positive  value  firom  0  to  oo .  The  agreement  between  theory  and 
experiment  is  shown  by  the  following  table.  The  number  of  times 
that  0,  1,  2,  3,  etc.,  a  particles  were  observed  in  a  definite  interval 
are  given  in  the  horizontal  colunms  together  with  the  calculated 


2  4  6  6  10         12 

Mumbt  of  OL   Rarticlcs  m  interval 

Fig.  47. 

deduced  from  the  theory.  The  number  of  a  particles 
counted  was  10,097,  and  the  average  number  appearing  in  the 
interval  under  consideration,  namely,  1/8  minute  was  3*87.  These 
^ults  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  47  where  the  circles  represent 
observed  numbers  and  the  full  line  the  theoretical  curve. 

Camber  of  a  particles  observed  in  interval : 


0        1         2        3        4        5 

Obaerved  number  of  occurrences : 
57    a03     383     525    532     408 

^eoretical  number  of  occurrences 
54    210    407     525     508     394 


6 


8       9     10     11     12     13     14 


273     139    45     27     10      4      0       1       1 


254     140    68     29     11 


1       1       1 


190 


THE   a  RATS 


Considering  the  comparatively  small  number  of  a  part 
counted,  the  agreement  between  theory  and  experiment  is  q 
as  close  as  could  be  expected. 

Marsden  and  Barratt*  have  used  another  method  of  com|>a 
the  distribution  in  time  of  the  a  particles  with  the  theor 
probability.  If  the  average  time  between  successive  o  part 
from  a  constant  source  is  l//i,  the  probability  that  no  scintilla 
is  observed  on  the  screen  in  any  interval  t  is  e~*^K  The  pr 
bility  that  a  scintillation  occurs  in  the  interval  between  t 
t-^  dt  is  fidt  Consequently  the  probability  of  an  interval  gre 
than  t  and  smaller  than  t  +  dtis  fie'^^^dt  In  a  large  numbt 
of  intervals,  the  probable  number  of  intervals  larger  than  t 
smaller  than  t-^dtis  Nfie~**^^  dt  This  deduction  shows  that  si 
intervals  are  more  probable  than  large  ones.    If  a  curve  be  plo 


1 

Duration  of  interval 

1 

Number  of  Intervals 

between  successive 

scintiUations 

(seconds) 

Observed 

Calculated 

0  to  1-0 

3106 

3059 

1-0  to  2-0 

1763 

1822 

20  to  3-0 

1115 

1085 

30  to  4-0 

668 

646 

4-0  to  5-0 

389 

385 

5-0  to  6-0 

206 

229 

6-0  to  7-0 

130 

136 

7-0  to  8-0 

86 

81 

8-0  to  9-0 

42 

48 

1            9-0  to  X 

1 

68 

71 

with  the  number  of  intervals  as  ordinates  and  the  interval  in  secc 
as  abscissae,  the  curve  is  exponential.  Marsden  and  Barratt  \\ 
shown  that  this  relation  agrees  well  with  experiment.  Later 
same  authorsf  pointed  out  that  this  relation  could  be  used  to 
the  accuracy  of  counting  scintillations,  and  also  to  correct 
observed  number  of  a  particles  for  failures  to  record  or  de 
those  which  follow  each  other  within  a  very  short  time  intei 
The  results  are  illustrated  by  the  above  numbers  obtained  f 


*  Marsden  and  Barratt,  Proe,  Phy$.  Soe.  28,  p.  867,  1911. 
t  Marsden  and  Barratt,  Proc,  Phyt.  Soc,  24,  p.  oO,  1911. 


if]  the  a  RAYS  191 

an  examinatdon  of  the  record  of  the  scintillations  on  the  chrono- 
graph tape  in  the  experiments  by  Rutherford  and  Qeiger  pre- 
riously  mentioned.  The  number  of  intervals  of  duration  greater 
than  ti  and  less  than  ^  is  given  by  iV(«~'*^'  —  e~*^^*\ 

The  total  number  of  intervals  was  7564  in  14598  sees,  and  the 
average  interval  l//i  was  1*930  sees. 

The  agreement  between  theory  and  experiment  is  excellent 
and  indicates  that  the  a  particles  are  emitted  at  random  and  that 
the  variations  accord  with  the  laws  of  probability.  The  possi- 
bility that  the  disintegration  of  one  atom  influences  that  of 
another  seems  to  be  excluded. 


Double  scintillations. 

The  theory  of  probability  given  above  refers  to  cases  where 
each  atom  in  breaking  up   emits   one  a  particle.     Geiger  and 


Fig.  48. 

Marsden*  have  found  in  the  case  of  certain  substances  that  two 
«  particles  are  emitted  nearly  simultaneously.  The  method  of 
experiment  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  48.  A  narrow  cell  is  formed  by 
two  zinc  sulphide  screens  Sj,  S^.  The  emanation  from  an  actinium 
preparation  at  K  diflfuses  up  between  the  plates.  All  the  a 
particles  emitted  from  the  emanation  between  the  plates  and  the 
active  deposit  to  which  it  gives  rise  fall  on  the  zinc  sulphide 
screen,  and  the  scintillations  are  viewed  by  two  observers  with  the 
nucroscopes  Mi,  M^.  Each  observer  sees  clearly  the  scintillations 
produced  on  one  screen  but  not  the  scintillations  on  the  other.  In 
this  way,  Geiger  and  Marsden*  showed  that  the  scintillations 

*  Qeiger  and  Marsden,  Phy$,  ZeiU  11,  p.  7,  1910. 


192  THE   a  RAYS  [CH.IV 

from  the  emanation  of  actinium  appeared  as  pairs,  sometimes  one 
on  each  screen,  and  in  other  cases  both  on  one  screen.  For 
example,  they  found  that  the  emanation,  plus  10  per  cent,  of  the 
active  deposit,  gave  66  per  cent,  of  the  total  number  of  scintillations 
as  doubles.  Under  similar  conditions,  the  doubles  observed  for 
polonium  and  radium  emanation  varied  between  0*8  and  4  per  cent 
of  the  total.  These  results  suggested  that  either  the  atom  oi 
the  actinium  emanation  in  breaking  up  emitted  two  a  particles 
simultaneously,  or  that  two  a  ray  products  were  present  in  the 
emanation,  one  of  which  had  a  half  period  of  transformation  less 
than  1/10  of  a  second.  The  latter  conclusion  has  been  confirmed 
later  by  the  discovery  by  Qeiger  of  two  successive  a  ray  products 
in  the  emanation,  the  latter  oi  which  has  a  period  of  1/500  second 
In  a  similar  way,  Geiger  and  Marsden  found  a  large  number  oi 
the  scintillations  emitted  from  the  thorium  emanation  while  not 
appearing  simultaneously  corresponded  to  doubles  with  a  short 
time  interval  between.  They  concluded  that  two  a  ray  products 
must  be  present,  one  of  which  had  an  average  life  of  about 
1/5  second.  This  has  been  confirmed  by  the  discovery  by  Geigei 
of  a  new  product  in  the  thorium  emanation.  The  half  value 
period  was  measured  by  Moseley  and  Fajans  and  found  to  be 
0*14  second. 

It  will  be  seen  from  these  considerations  that  a  study  of  the 
distribution  of  a  particles  with  regard  to  time  has  been  instru- 
mental in  bringing  to  light  a  number  of  striking  facts.  Th( 
general  method  outlined  above  can  be  employed  in  all  cases  t< 
settle  definitely  whether  an  atom  in  breaking  up  emits  more  thai 
one  a  particle. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  BETA  RAYS. 

76.  IMflCOveiy  of  the  /3  rays.  A  discovery  which  gave 
a  great  impetus  to  the  study  of  radiations  fix)m  active  bodies  was 
made  in  1899  by  Giesel*,  and  confirmed  shortly  afterwards  by 
Meyer  and  Schweidler  and  Becquerel  and  P.  Curie.  It  was 
observed  that  the  preparations  of  radium  gave  out  some  rays 
which  were  deviable  by  a  magnetic  field  and  very  similar  to  the 
cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube.  The  initial  observation 
of  Elster  and  Geitelf  that  a  magnetic  field  altered  the  conductivity 
produced  in  air  by  radium  rays,  led  Giesel  to  examine  the  efiect  of 
a  magnetic  field  on  the  radiations.  In  his  experiments,  the  radio- 
active preparation  was  placed  in  a  small  vessel  between  the  poles 
of  an  electromagnet.  The  vessel  was  arranged  to  give  a  pencil  of 
rays  which  was  approximately  perpendicular  to  the  field.  The 
rays  caused  a  small  fluorescent  patch  on  the  screen.  On  exciting 
the  electromagnet,  the  fluorescent  zone  was  observed  to  broaden 
oati)n  one  side.  On  reversing  the  field,  the  deflection  of  the  zone 
was  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  deviation  of  the  rays  thus 
indicated  was  in  the  same  direction  and  of  the  same  order  of 
magnitude  as  that  for  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

Meyer  and  SchweidlerJ  showed  the  deflection  of  the  rays  by 
the  alteration  of  the  conductivity  of  the  air  when  a  magnetic  field 
^as  applied,  while  Becquerel  §  employed  a  photographic  method. 
Curie  1 1  found  that  the  rays  from  radium  consisted  of  two  kinds, 

*  Giesel,  Armal  d.  Phys.  69,  p.  834,  1899. 

t  Elster  and  Qeitel,  Annal.  d.  Phyt,  69,  p.  88,  1899. 

t  Meyer  and  Schweidler,  Phya.  Zeit,  1,  pp.  90,  113,  1899. 

§  Beoqaerel,  C.  R,  139,  pp.  997,  1205,  1899. 

II  P.  Curie,  C.  R.  180,  p.  73,  1900. 

R.  R.-A.  13 


194  THE  fi  RATS  [CS. 

one  apparently  non-deviable  and  easily  absorbed  (now  known  as 
the  a  rays),  the  other  more  penetrating  and  deviable  by  a  magnetic 
field  (now  known  as  the  P  rays).  Under  ordinary  conditions,  the 
ionisation  effect  due  to  the  /3  rays  was  small  compared  with  that 
due  to  the  a  rays.  Later  investigations  have  shown  that  ordinary 
preparations  of  uranium,  radium,  thorium  and  actinium  emit  /3  as 
well  as  a  rays,  while  ionium  and  polonium  emit  only  a  rays. 

The  /3  rays  from  a  few  milligrams  of  radium  in  equilibrium 
produce  a  strong  phosphorescence  in  barium  platinocyanide  when 
brought  near  it.     With  the  aid  of  a  screen  coated  with  this 
material,  many  of  the  properties  of  the  yS  rays  may  be  simply 
illustrated  by  experiments  in  a  dark  room.    A  quantity  of  radium 
is  placed  at  one  end  of  a  short  narrow  lead  tube  to  give  a  well 
defined  pencil  of  /3  rays.    The  lead  tube  rests  on  a  screen  of 
barium  platinocyanide,  and  the  whole  is  placed  between  the  pole 
pieces  of  a  large  electromagnet.     When  the  field  is  excited,  the 
rays  are  deflected  and  the  screen  is  brightly  lighted  up  on  one 
side  over  an  area  elliptical  in  shape.     The  direction  of  deflectioa 
is  reversed  by  reversal  of  the  field.     The  complex  nature  of  the 
rays  is  shown  by  the  broad  extent  of  the  phosphorescence.    The 
path  of  the  rays  at  any  point  can  be  observed  by  placing  a  small 
metal  screen  in  the  path  of  the  rays,  and  noting  the  positions  of 
the  shadow  cast  on  the  screen. 

77.    Magnetic  deflection  by  the  photographic  method. 

Becquerel   made  a  very  complete  study,  by  the   photographic 

method,  of  the  /3  rays  from  radium,  and  has  shown  that  they 

behave  in  all  respects  like  cathode  rays,  which  are  known  to  be 

negatively  charged  particles  moving  with  a  high  velocity.     The 

motion  of  a  charged  ion  acted  on  by  a  magnetic  field  has  been 

discussed  in  section  29.     It  has  been  shown  that  if  a  particle 

of  mass  m  and  charge  e  is  projected  with  a  velocity  m,  at  an 

angle  a  with  the  direction  of  a  uniform  field  of  strength  JST,  it  will 

describe  a  helix  round  the  magnetic  lines  of  force.     This  helix  is 

wound  on  a  cylinder  of  radius  12,  with  the  axis  parallel  to  the  field, 

where  R  is  given  by 

^     viu   . 
n  =  -fr  sm  a. 
ne 


■]  THE  13  RAYS  195 

When  a  =  ^ ,  %.e.  when  the  rays  are  projected  normally  to  the 

Beld,  the  particles  describe  circles  of  radius 

mu 


R  = 


He' 


The  planes  of  these  circles  are  normal  to  the  field.  Thus,  for 
a  particular  velocity  u,  the  value  of  R  varies  inversely  as  the 
strength  of  the  field.  In  a  uniform  field  the  rays  projected  nor- 
mally to  the  field  describe  circles,  and  their  directions  of  projection 
are  the  tangents  at  the  origin. 

This  conclusion  has  been  verified  experimentally  by  Becquerel 
for  the  fi  rays  of  radium,  by  an  arrangement  similar  to  that  shown 
in  Fig.  49. 


V "     / 


Fig.  49. 


A  photographic  plate  P,  with  the  film  downwards,  is  enveloped 
in  black  paper  and  placed  horizontally  in  the  uniform  horizontal 
^nagnetic  field  of  an  electromagnet.  The  magnetic  field  is  sup- 
posed to  be  uniform,  and,  in  the  figure,  is  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  the  paper.  The  plate  is  covered  with  a  sheet  of  lead, 
^d  on  the  edge  of  the  plate,  in  the  centre  of  the  magnetic  field, 
^  placed  a  small  lead  vessel  R  containing  the  radio-active  matter. 

On  exciting  the  magnet,  so  that  the  rays  are  bent  to  the  left 
of  the  figure,  it  is  observed  that  a  photographic  impression  is  pro- 
duced directly  below  the  source  of  the  rays,  which  have  been  bent 
^und  by  the  magnetic  field.  The  active  matter  sends  out  rays 
dually  in  all  directions.  The  rays  perpendicular  to  the  field 
describe  circles,  which  strike  the  plate  immediately  under  the 
^nrce.  A  few  of  these  rays,  ^i,  A^y  A^,  are  shown  in  the  figure. 
The  rays,  normal  to  the  plate,  strike  the  plate  almost  nornially, 
^hile  the  rays   nearly  parallel  to  the  plate  strike   the  plate  at 

13—2 


196  THE  fi  RAYS  [CH. 

grazing  incidence.  The  rays,  inclined  to  the  direction  of  the 
field,  describe  spirals  and  produce  effects  on  a  line  parallel 
to  the  field  and  passing  through  the  source.  In  consequence  of 
this,  any  opaque  screen  placed  in  the  path  of  the  rays  has  its 
shadow  thrown  near  the  edge  of  the  photographic  plate. 

78.  Complexity  of  the  rayi.  The  deviable  rays  from 
radium  are  complex,  i.e.  they  are  composed  of  a  flight  of  particles 
projected  with  a  wide  range  of  velocity.  In  a  magnetic  field  every 
ray  describes  a  path,  of  which  the  radius  of  curvature  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  velocity  of  projection.  The  complexity  of 
the  radiation  has  been  shown  very  clearly  by  Becquerel*  in  the 
following  way. 

An  uncovered  photographic  plate,  with  the  film  upwards,  was 
placed  horizontally  in  the  horizontal  uniform  magnetic  field  of 
an  electromagnet.  A  small,  open,  lead  box,  containing  the 
radio-active  matter,  was  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  field,  on 
the  photographic  plate.  The  light,  due  to  the  phosphorescence 
of  the  radio-active  matter,  therefore,  could  not  reach  the  plate. 
The  whole  apparatus  was  placed  in  a  dark  room.  The  impression 
on  the  plate  took  the  form  of  a  large,  diffuse,  but  continuous 
band,  elliptic  in  shape,  produced  on  one  side  of  the  plate. 

Such  an  impression  is  to  be  expected  if  the  rays  are  sent  out 
in  all  directions,  even  if  their  velocities  of  projection  are  the  same, 
for  it  can  readily  be  shown  theoretically,  that  the  path  of  the  rays 
is  confined  within  an  ellipse  whose  minor  axis,  which  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  field,  is  equal  to  22J,  and  whose  major  axis  is  equal 
to  ttR.  If,  however,  the  active  matter  is  placed  in  the  bottom  of 
a  deep  lead  cylinder  of  small  diameter,  the  emerging  rays  are 
confined  to  a  narrow  pencil,  and  each  part  of  the  plate  is  acted  on 
by  rays  of  a  definite  curvature. 

In  this  case  also,  a  diffuse  impression  is  observed  on  the  plate, 
giving,  so  to  speak,  a  continuous  spectrum  of  the  rays  and  showing 
that  the  radiation  is  composed  of  rays  of  widely  different  velocities. 
Fig.  50  shows  a  photograph  of  this  kind  obtained  by  Becquerel, 
when  strips  of  paper,  aluminium,  and  platinum  were  placed  on  the 
plate. 

♦  Becquerel.  C.  B.  180,  pp.  206,  372,  810,  979,  1900. 


V]  THE  j3   BAYS  197 

When  screens  of  various  thickness  are  placed  on  the  plate,  it  is 
olwerved  that  the  plate  is  not  appreciahly  affected  within  a  certain 
diabmce  &om  the  active  matter,  and  that  this  distance  increases 
with  the  thickness  of  the  screen.  This  distance  is  obviously  equal 
to  twice  the  radius  of  curvatiu^  of  the  path  of  the  rays,  which  are 
just  able  to  produce  an  impression  through  the  screea 


These  experiments  show  very  clearly  that  the  most  deviable 
nys  are  those  most  readily  absorbed  by  matter. 

79.    Haffnetlc   defleoUon   of  ff  rayi   by  th«   electric 
luthod.     The  presence  of  easily  deviable  rays  given  off  ^m  an 
active  substance  can  most  readily  be  shown  by  the  photographic 
method,  but  it  is  necessary,  in  addition, 
to  show  that  the  penetrating  rays  which 
pniace  the  ionisation   in   the   gas   are 
the  same  as  those  which  cause  the  photo- 
graphic actiotL    This  can  be  conveniently 
t«st«d  in  an  arrangement  similar  to  that 
shown  in  Fig.  51. 

The  radio-active  matter  A  is  placed 
00  a  lead  block  B"  between  the  two 
pmllel  lead  plates  BB'.  The  rays  pass 
between  the  parallel  plates  and  ionise 
the  gas  between  the  plates  PP'  of  the 

testing  vessel.     The   magnetic    field    is  Fig.  SJ.  _ 

applied  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 

the  paper.     The  dotted  rectangle  EEEE  represents  the  position 
of  the  pole  pieces.     When  a  layer  of  uranium,  thorium  or  radium 


198  THE  fi  RAYS  [CH. 

compound  is  placed  at  A,  the  ionisation  in  the  testing  vessel  is 
due  mainly  to  the  action  of  the  a  and  fi  rays.  The  a  rays  are  cut 
off  by  adding  a  layer  of  aluminium  *01  cm.  thick  over  the  active 
material  When  the  layer  of  active  matter  is  not  more  than  a 
few  millimetres  thick,  the  ionisation  due  to  the  7  rays  is  usually 
small  compared  with  that  produced  by  the  /8  rays.  On  the 
application  of  a  magnetic  field  at  right  angles  to  the  mean 
direction  of  the  rays,  the  ionisation  in  the  testing  vessel  due  to 
the  rays  steadily  decreases  as  the  strength  of  the  field  increases, 
and  in  a  strong  field  it  is  reduced  to  a  very  small  firaction  of  its 
original  value.  In  this  case  the  rays  are  bent  so  that  none  of 
them  enter  the  testing  vessel. 

Examined  in  this  way,  it  has  been  found  that  the  /3  rays  of 
uranium,  thorium,  radium  and  actinium  consist  entirely  of  rays 
readily  deflected  by  a  magnetic  field. 

80.  Charge  carried  by  the  fi  rayi .  The  experiments  of 
Perrin  and  J.  J.  Thomson  have  shown  that  the  cathode  rays  cany 
with  them  a  negative  charge,  while  Lenard  found  that  they  still 
retained  this  charge  after  passing  through  a  thin  screen  of  matter. 
When  /8  rays,  or  cathode  rays,  are  stopped  in  matter,  they  give  up 
their  negative  charge,  and  the  quantity  of  negative  electricity 
communicated  to  the  plate  is  a  measure  of  the  quantity  oi 
electricity  carried  by  the  absorbed  pju-ticles. 

The  total  charge  carried  by  the  /S  rays  emitted  per  second  froti 
a  gram  of  uranium  or  thorium  is  very  small,  and  can  only  h* 
detected  by  very  delicate  measurements.  Using  a  milligram  o 
radium,  the  charge  carried  by  the  /8  rays  from  it  can  be  measure^ 
easily  by  an  electroscope  or  ordinary  electrometer. 

Suppose  that  an  active  preparation  of  radium  is  spread  on  < 
metal  plate  connected  with  earth,  and  that  the  /8  rays  are  absorbed 
by  a  parallel  plate  connected  with  an  electrometer.  If  the  ray^ 
are  negatively  charged,  the  top  plate  should  receive  a  negative 
charge  increasing  with  the  time.  On  account,  however,  of  the 
great  ionisation  produced  by  the  rays  between  the  plates,  any 
charge  given  to  one  of  them  is  almost  instantly  dissipated.  In 
many  cases,  the  plate  does  become  charged  to  a  definite  positive  or 
negative  potential  depending  on  the  metal,  but  this  is  due  to  the 


V]  THE  0  SATS  199 

contact  difference  of  potential  between  the  plates,  and  would  be 
[oodaced  whether  the  rays  were  charged  or  not.  The  ionisation  of 
ibe  gas  between  the  plates  is  greatly  diminiBhed  by  placing  over 
tbe  active  material  a  metal  screen  which  absorbe  the  a  rays,  bat 
allows  the  yS  rays  to  pass  through  with  little  absorption. 

The  rapid  loss  of  any  charge  communicated  to  the  top  plate  can 
be  very  much  reduced,  either  by  diminishing  the  pressure  of  the 
pa  surrounding  it  or  by  enclosing  the  plate  with  suitable  insulators. 

The  latter  method  was  adopted  by  M.  and  Mme  Curie* 
in  their  experiments  which  first  showed  that  the  ^  rays  from 
ndium  carried  with  them  a  negative  charge. 
They  found  that  the  fi  rays  fired  into  tbe 
Dpper  plate  gave  it  a  negative  charge ;  while 
the  insulating  plate  canying  the  radium 
preparation  acquired  a  positive  charge  of 
equal  amount. 

Tbe  simplest  and  most  accurate  method 
of  measuring  the  charge  carried  by  the  j8 
nys  is  to  enclose  the  active  material  in  a 
giasB  or  metal  tube  of  thickness  sufficient  to 
completely  stop  the  a  rays,  but  thin  enough 
to  allow  most  of  the  /9  rays  to  escape.  If  the 
ndium  tube  is  insulated  inside  an  exhausted 
space,  it  gains  a  positive  charge,  and  in  a 
liigb  vacuum  this  may  easily  reach  several 
hundred  volts  before  the  loss  of  charge 
tbrongh  the  insulator  and  gas  balances  the 
»te  of  supply. 

A  very  striking  experiment  of  this  kind 
bis  been  devised  by  Struttf.  and  the  ex- 
perimeDtal  arrangement  is  shown  in  Fig.  52. 
To  a  sealed  tube  AA  containing  the  radium 
*u  attached  at  one  end  a  pair  of  thin  gold 
leaves  CC  in  metallic  connection  with  the 
ndium,  which  was  insulated  by  means  of  a  pjg.  53. 

quartz  rod  B.     The  inner  surface  of  the  tube 

*  M.  tai  Mine  Carie.  C.  R.  ISO,  p.  647,  1900. 
+  Stratt,  Phil.  Mag.  S,  p.  68S,  1S03. 


200  THE  P  RATS  [CH. 

was  coated  with  tinfoil  EE  connected  to  earth.  The  glass  surfiux 
o{  AA  was  made  conducting  by  a  thin  coating  of  phosphoric  ackL 
The  air  in  the  outer  tube  was  exhausted  as  completely  as  possible 
by  means  of  a  mercury  pump,  in  order  to  reduce  the  ionisation  in 
the  gas,  and  consequently  the  loss  of  any  charge  gained  by  the 
gold  leaves.  After  an  interval  of  20  hours,  the  gold  leaves  were 
observed  to  diverge  to  their  full  extent,  indicating  that  they  had 
acquired  a  large  positive  charge.  In  this  experiment  Strutt  used 
half  a  gram  of  radiferous  barium  of  activity  only  100  times  that  of 
uranium. 

If  the  tube  is  filled  with  30  mgrs.  of  pure  radium  bromide, 
the  leaves  diverge  to  their  full  extent  in  the  course  of  about  a 
minute.  If  it  is  arranged  that  the  gold  leaf,  at  a  certain  angle  of 
divergence,  comes  in  contact  with  a  piece  of  metal  connected  with 
earth,  the  apparatus  can  be  made  to  work  automatically.  The 
leaf  diverges,  touches  the  metal,  and  at  once  collapses,  and  this 
periodic  movement  of  the  leaf  will  continue,  if  not  indefinitely,  at 
any  rate  as  long  as  the  radium  lasts.  This  "  radimiLsLock  "  should 
work  at  a  sensibly  uniform  rate  for  many  years,  but,  fixun  evidence 
considered  later  (Section  176),  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the 
number  of  /8  particles  emitted  would  ultimately  decrease  ex- 
ponentially with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  2000 
years.  The  rate  of  movement  of  the  leaf  should  thus  gradually 
decrease  with  the  time,  and  ultimately,  after  a  very  long  interval 
of  time,  the  effect  would  become  too  small  to  observe. 

An  interesting  experimental  result  has  been  described  by 
Dom*.  A  small  quantity  of  radium  salt  was  placed  in  a  sealed 
glass  tube  and  left  for  several  months.  On  opening  the  tube  with 
a  file,  he  states  that  a  bright  electric  spark  was  observed  at  the 
moment  of  fi:»cture,  indicating  that  there  was  a  large  difference 
of  potential  between  the  inside  of  the  tube  and  the  earth. 

In  this  case  the  a  rays  were  absorbed  in  the  walls  of  the  tube, 
but  a  large  proportion  of  the  /8  rays  escaped.  The  inside  of  the 
tube  thus  became  charged,  in  the  course  of  time,  to  a  high  positive 
potential ;  a  steady  state  would  be  reached  when  the  rate  of  escape 
of  negative  electricity  was  balanced  by  the  leakage  of  positive 

*  Dorn,  Phyt.  Zeit,  4,  p.  507,  1903. 


V]  THE  /9   RAYS  201 

electricity  through  the  walls  of  the  tube.  The  external  surface  of 
the  glass  would  be  always  practically  at  zero  potential,  on  account 
of  the  ionisation  of  the  air  around  it. 

The  writer  has  not  personally  observed  any  marked  evidence  of 
such  an  effect,  even  when  small  tubes  have  contained  a  large 
quantity  of  radium  or  the  radium  emanation.  It  is  probable  that 
ordinary  glass  is  su£Sciently  conducting  under  the  influence  of  the 
a  rays  to  prevent  the  rise  of  any  great  difference  of  potential 
between  the  inner  and  outer  surfaces. 

The  first  estimate  of  the  amount  of  the  charge  carried  by  the 
iJrays  from  a  known  weight  of  radium  salt  was  made  by  Wien*. 
>  A  small  quantity  of  radium  bromide,  placed  in  a  sealed  platinum 
vessel,  was  hung  by  an  insulating  thread  inside  a  glass  cylinder, 
which  was  exhausted  to  a  low  pressure.  A  connection  between 
the  platinum  vessel  and  an  electrode  sealed  through  the  external 
glass  cylinder  could  be  made,  when  required,  by  tilting  the  tube. 
Wien  found  that  in  a  good  vacuum  the  platinum  vessel  became 
charged  to  about  100  volts.  By  measuring  the  rate  of  loss  of 
the  negative  charge  from  the  platinum  cylinder,  the  number  of 
i9  particles  escaping  from  the  tube  per  second  can  be  deduced  by 
assuming  that  each  p  particle  carries  the  fundamental  unit  of 
charge.  In  the  experiments  of  Wien,  a  considerable  fraction  of 
the  ^  rays  emitted  by  the  radium  were  absorbed  in  their  passage 
through  the  platinum,  so  that  the  estimate  of  the  number  of  0 
particles  emitted  by  the  radium  per  second  was  much  too  low. 

In  order  to  reduce  this  absorption  by  the  containing  envelope 
to  a  minimum,  the  writerf  employed  a  lead  cylinder  coated  with 
a  thin  film  of  the  active  deposit  of  radium  as  a  source  of  ^  rays. 
The  lead  cylinder  was  covered  with  a  thickness  of  aluminium  foil 
just  sufficient  to  stop  all  the  a  rays,  but  not  enough  to  stop  the 
iS  rays  appreciably.  The  lead  cylinder  was  insulated  inside  a 
brass  tube  which  was  exhausted  to  a  low  vacuum.  In  a  good 
vacuum  the  current  passing  between  the  two  cylinders  is  always 
in  the  same  direction  whether  the  inside  electrode  is  charged 
positively  or  negatively,  but  the  actual  current  is  larger  in  the 
latter  case.     This  difference  is  due  to  the  small  ionisation  of  the 

•  Wien,  Phy$.  Zeit,  4,  p.  624,  1903. 

t  Rutherford,  Phil,  Mag.  10,  p.  193,  1905. 


202  THE  fi  BATS  [CH.  | 

I 

residual  gas.    By  taking  the  mean  of  the  two  currents  obtained 
by  reversal  of  a  weak  electric  field,  the  total  charge  of  the  fi 
particles    emitted   per    second   was    directly    determined.    The 
amount  of  radium  C  was  deduced  by  comparison  of  the  7  ray 
activity  of  the  lead  cylinder  with  a  standard  quantity  of  radium 
in  equilibrium,  and  suitable  corrections  were  made  for  the  decay 
of  the  active  deposit  durinqf  the  experiment.     Since  the  /3  rays 
emitted  from  radium  are  ^c^nly  due  to  the  products  radium  B 
and  radium  C,  it  was  thus  possible  to  deduce  the  total  number 
of  )8  particles  emitted  frop^       .  gram  of  radium  in  equilibrium 
Taking  the  charge  as  4^     :lQr^^  e.s.  units,  the  number  of  fi 
particles  expelled  per  gram  of  radium  per  second  comes  out  to 
be  6'3  X  lO^*.     In  the  light  of  later  knowledge,  there  are  certain 
objections  to  this  arrangement.     A  considerable  fr-action  of  the 
fi  particles  which  are  fired  into  the  lead  are  so  scattered  that 
they  emerge  again  from  the  surface.     In  addition,  for  a  similar 
reason,  some  of  the  fi  particles  on  striking  the  outer  tube  are 
scattered  and  give  up  their  charge  to  the  lead  cylinder.     In  order 
to  avoid  these  difficulties,  Makower*  used  as  a  source  of  radiation 
a  thin  glass  tube  of  small  diameter  filled  with  emanation.     This 
was  of  sufficient  thickness  to  let  through  all  except  the  easily 
absorbed  fi  rays,  and  at  the  same  time  was  of  such  small  diameter 
that  the  greater  part  of  the  ^  rays  which  escaped  ultimately  gave 
up  their  charge  to  the  outer  cylinder,  quite  independently  of  the 
scattering  when  they  struck  the  surface.     Using  a  glass  tube  of 
thickness  "078  mms.  he  found  that  3'68  x  10"  fi  particles  were 
expelled  per  second  from  the  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  one 
gram  of  radium.     Using  the  absorption  curve  for  the  fi  rays  from 
radium  B  given  by  Schmidt,  he  deduced  that  the  total  number  of 
/9  particles  expelled  per  second  per  gram  of  radium  was  5*0  x  1(H'. 
This  number  is  calculated  on  the  assumption  that  radium  B  and 
radium  C  emit  an  equal  number  of  /8  particles. 

Makower  determined  the  absorption  of  the  p  rays  by  placing 
cylinders  of  glass  of  known  thickness  over  the  source  of  radiation. 
He  found  that  the  curve  expressing  the  relation  between  the 
number  of  ^  particles  which  emerged,  and  the  thickness  of  the 
absorbing  screen  was  very  similar  to  the  absorption  curve  obtained 

♦  Makower,  PhiU  Mag,  17,  p.  171,  1909. 


V] 


THE  fi  RATS 


203 


by  measuring  the  ionisation  of  the  air  between  the  cylinders  at 
atmospheric  pressure  for  different  thicknesses  of  absorbing  screens. 
The  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  53  where  the  ordinates  are  propor- 
tional to  the  number  of  )3  particles  emitted,  and  the  abscissae  to 
the  thickness  of  glass  in  mms.  The  circles  refer  to  the  charge, 
and  the  crosses  to  the  ionisation  for  the  same  thickness.  The 
dotted  line  shows  the  extrapolated  part  of  the  curve.  It  will  be 
seen  that  the  two  curves  are  in  gov^v*  agreement  over  their  whole 
range. 

This  is  an  important  result,  ^  'Dpears  to  indicate  that  the 
ioDLsation  is  proportional  to  the  l  >er  of  )3  particles  emitted, 
and  independent  of  any  change  of  velocity  resulting  from  their 


I 


I 


8  1-2 

Millimetres 

Fig.  58. 


1-6 


'2-0 


passage  through  the  absorbing  screen.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind, 
however,  that  the  )8  rays  from  radium  are  very  complex,  and 
remain  complex  after  passing  through  absorbing  screens.  The 
results  obtained  thus  refer  in  each  case  to  the  average  ionisation 
produced  by  a  number  of  ^  particles  moving  at  very  different 
speeds. 

Supposing  that  an  atom  of  both  radium  B  and  radium  C  in 
breaking  up  emits  one  /8  particle,  the  number  of  ^  particles 
emitted  per  second  from  the  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  one 
gram  of  radium  should  be  equal  to  twice  the  number  of  a  particles 
from  radium  C,  t.e.  6*8  x  10*°  /S  particles.  The  actual  number 
observed  is  less  than  this.     This  low  value  is  certainly  striking 


204  THE  /8   RAYS  [CHT- 

when  we  take  into  consideration  the  recent  results  obtained  by 
V.  Baeyer  and  Hahn  and  Meitner  and  by  Danysz  (Section  95). 
The  latter  found  that  twenty-nine  distinct  groups  of  fi  rays  were 
emitted  from  radium  6  and  radium  C  together.     Hahn  has  also 
shown  that  radium  itself  emits  two  groups  of  very  easily  absorbed 
fi  rays. 

There  is  one  point  of  importance  which  so  fer  has  not  been 
taken  into  account  in  the  measurement  of  the  charge  carried  by 
the  ^  rays  proper.  We  have  seen  (Sections  61,  72)  that  the  a 
particles  iu  passing  through  matter  cause  the  emission  of  a  number 
of  slow  moving  electrons  (S  rays).  Since  the  ionisation  of  gases 
and  solids  by  /8  rays  is  probably  very  similar  in  character  to  that 
produced  by  a  rays,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  y9  particles  on 
emerging  from,  or  impinging  upon,  matter  will  release  some  slow 
moving  8  particles.  Evidence  to  this  effect  has  recently  been 
obtained  by  Moseley.  The  emission  of  i  particles  tends  to  make 
the  rate  of  loss  of  charge  observed  somewhat  greater  than  that 
actually  due  to  the  escape  of  the  primary  /8  particles. 

Moseley  has  recently  made  a  careful  determination  of  the 
number  of  /3  particles  from  the  radium  emanation  contained  in 
very  thin  glass  tubes.  Correcting  as  far  as  possible  for  the 
absorption  of  the  /8  rays  in  the  matter  required  to  stop  the 
a  rays,  he  found  that  the  emanation  together  with  its  products 
radium  B  and  radium  C  in  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  radium 
emitted  7  x  10*®  ^  particles  per  second  or  2*2  times  the  number 
of  a  particles  from  one  gram  of  radium  itself.  Other  experi- 
ments showed  that  about  an  equal  number  of  ^  rays  were  expelled 
from  radium  B  and  radium  C  when  in  equilibrium  with  each 
other. 

81.    Determination  of  e/m  and  its  variation  with  speed. 

We  have  seen  (Section  31)  that  in  their  passage  between  two 
charged  plates,  cathode  rays  are  deflected  towards  the  positive 
plate.  Shortly  after  the  discovery  of  the  fi  rays  from  radium, 
Dorn*  and  Becquerelf  showed  that  the  fi  rays  were  deflected  in 
an  electric   fleld  in   the    same   direction   as  the    cathode   rays 

♦  Doru,  C.  R,  ISO,  p.  1129,  1900. 
t  Becquerel,  C.  R,  180,  p.  809,  1900. 


V]  THE  0  RAYS  205 

Beoquerel  made  an  approximate  determination  of  the  velocity  of 
the  ff  T&ys,  and  of  the  value  of  e/m  by  determining  separately  the 
deflection  of  a  pencil  of  rays  both  in  a  magnetic  and  an  electric 
field  by  the  photographic  method.  An  active  preparation  of 
radium  was  used  as  a  source  of  ^  rays.  Since  radium  emits 
8  rays  over  a  wide  range  of  velocity,  a  narrow  pencil  of  rays 
forms  a  broad  band  on  the  photographic  plate  when  the  rays 
pass  through  a  magnetic  or  electric  field.  The  deflection  of  the 
3  particles  of  average  velocity  was  measured.  In  this  way  it  was 
ound  that  the  avemge  velocity  of  the  yS  particles  of  radium  was 
ibout  1*6  X  lO*'  cms.  per  second,  and  that  the  value  of  e/m  was 
ibout  l(y  e.m.  units. 

These  approximate  results  indicated  that  the  13  particles  had 
about  the  same  small  mass  as  the  cathode  ray  particles,  and  were 
projected  with  a  velocity  about  half  that  of  light.  This  velocity  is 
considerably  greater  than  can  be  impressed  on  the  cathode  particles 
in  an  ordinary  vacuum  tube.  It  was  clear,  however,  that  the 
d  particles  were  probably  identical  in  all  respects  except  velocity 
with  the  cathode  ray&  An  accurate  determination  of  the  value 
of  e/m  for  0  particles  at  different  speeds  was  first  made  by 
Kaufmann*.  The  fact  that  radium  emits  /3  particles  over  a  wide 
range  of  velocity,  and  that  some  of  them  have  nearly  the  velocity 
of  light,  was  utilised  by  him  to  determine  the  variation  of  the 
value  of  e/m  with  the  speed  of  the  particle.  We  have  seen 
(Section  29)  that  according  to  the  electromagnetic  theory,  a  charge 
of  electricity  in  motion  behaves  as  though  it  had  apparent  or 
electrical  mass.  For  speeds  small  compared  with  that  of  light, 
this  additional  mass  is  equal  to  2e^l3a  where  e  is  the  charge 
supposed  distributed  over  a  sphere  of  radius  a.  According  to  the 
theoiy,  the  apparent  mass  should  increase  rapidly  as  the  speed  of 
light  is  approached.  It  was  of  great  importance  to  settle  definitely 
whether  the  mass  of  the  electron  is  due  partly  to  mechanical  and 
partly  to  electrical  mass,  or  whether  it  can  be  explained  by  virtue 
of  electricity  in  motion,  independently  of  the  usual  conception  of 
mass. 

The  experimental  method  employed  by  Kaufmann  to  determine 
the  value  of  e/m  for  /3  particles  of  different  velocities,  was  similar  to 

*  KauAnann,  Phyt.  Zeit.  4,  p.  54,  1902. 


206  THE  fi  BATS  [( 

the  method  of  crossed  spectra.  Some  strongly  active  radium 
was  placed  at  the  bottom  of  a  brass  box.  The  rays  from 
passed  between  two  brass  plates  insulated  and  about  1*2  mm.  a] 
These  rays  fell  on  a  platinum  diaphragm,  containing  a  small  opening 
about  0*2  mm.  in  diameter,  through  which  passed  a  narrow 
bundle  of  ray&  The  rays  then  struck  a  photographic  plate 
enveloped  in  a  thin  sheet  of  aluminium. 

In  the  experiments  the  diaphragm  was  about  2  cms.  from  the 
active  material  and  at  the  same  distance  from  the  photographic 
plate.  When  the  whole  apparatus  was  placed  in  a  vacuum,  a  P.D. 
of  from  2000  to  5000  volts  could  be  applied  between  the  platei 
without  a  discharge  taking  place.  The  rays  were  deflected  in  their 
passage  through  the  electric  field,  and  produced  what  may  he 
termed  an  electric  spectrum  on  the  plate. 

If  by  means  of  an  electromagnet  a  magnetic  field  is  super- 
imposed parallel  to  the  electric  field,  a  magnetic  spectrum  is 
obtained  perpendicular  to  the  electric  spectrum. 
The  combination  of  the  two  spectra  gives  rise  to  a 
curved  line  on  the  plate.  The  double  trace  obtained 
on  the  photographic  plate  with  reversal  of  the 
magnetic  field  is  shown  in  Fig.  54.     Disregarding  ^la,  54. 

some   small  corrections,  it  can  readily  be   shown 
(see  Section  30)  that  if  y  and  z  are  the  electric  and  magnetic  devia- 
tions respectively  corresponding  to  any  point  on  the  photographic 

plate  y  =  Ki  — ^  ^  z  =  k^  —  where  Ki  and  k^  are  constants  which 

can  be  determined.  From  these  two  equations,  the  value  of  e/m 
of  the  y8  particle  corresponding  to  any  value  u  of  the  velocity  can 
be  deduced.  Kaufmann  initially  compared  his  result  with  the 
theory  developed  by  Abraham  (see  Section  29).  He  found  that 
the  value  of  e/m  decreased  with  increase  of  speed,  and  deduced 
that  the  value  e/irio  for  rays  of  slow  speed  was  1*84  x  10*  e.m. 
units — a  value  in  close  accord  with  that  obtained  by  Simon* 
(1*86  X  10')  for  cathode  rays  of  average  speed  7  x  10^  cms.  per 
second. 

The  agreement  of  his  observations  with  the  theory  of  Abraham 
is  shown  in  the  following  table.     The  first  column  gives  the  ratio 

*  Simon,  AnnaL  d,  Phyu  69,  p.  589,  1899. 


THE  fi  BAYS 


207 


ihe  velocity  u  of  the  )8  particle  to  the  velocity  of  light  F,  the 
md  the  ratio  of  the  observed  ratio  of  the  mass  m  at  that  speed 
the  mass  m^  for  slow  speeds. 


Value  of 

Observed  value  of 

Percentage  difference 

u 

m 

from  theoretical 

V 

fllO 

1 

values 

Small 

•732 

1-34 

-l-ftVo 

•762 

1-37 

-©•9  „ 

•777 

1-42 

-0-6  „ 

•801 

1-47 

+0-6  „ 

•830 

1-545 

+0-5  „ 

•860 

1-65 

0      „ 

•883          ! 

1-73 

+  2-8  „ 

•933 

205 

-7-8  „? 

-949 

2-145 

-1-2  „ 

•963 

1 

2-42 

+  0-4  „ 

It  is  seen  that  for  particles  moving  with  '963  the  velocity  of 
h%  the  apparent  mass  is  2*42  times  greater  than  for  slow 
^edfl.  From  the  agreement  of  experiment  with  theory,  Kaufmann 
icladed  that  the  mass  of  the  yS  particle  or  electron  was  entirely 
ctromagnetic  in  origin.     In  a  later  paper*,  he  considered  that 

results  were  in  better  agreement  with  the  formula  of  Abraham 
in  with  that  deduced  by  Lorentz  from  different  considerations 
e  Section  29). 

In  the  meantime,  the  principle  of  relativity  had  been  developed 

Einstein  and  others.     This  led  to  a  somewhat  different  relation 

the  variation  of  ejm  with  speed,  viz.  ejm  =  —  ( ^  ""  irj)    where 

is  the  velocity  of  the  particle  and  V  the  velocity  of  light.  In 
ler  to  test  the  validity  of  this  formula,  Bucherer-f  made  a  deter- 
nation  of  the  variation  of  ejm  with  speed  by  a  new  method. 
A  small  fragment  of  radium  salt  was  placed  at  the  centre  of 
3  circular  parallel  plates,  8  centimetres  in  diameter,  and  0'25 
llimetre  apart.  A  magnetic  field  produced  by  a  current 
ough  suitable  coils  was  applied  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the 

*  Kaufmann,  Ann,  d.  Phys,  19,  p.  487,  1906. 

f  Buoherer,  Ann.  d,  Phys.  28,  p.  513,  1909,  and  29,  p.  1063,  1909. 


208  THE  fi  RATS  [CH 

plates.  Let  H  and  X  be  the  values  of  the  magnetic  and  electric 
fields  respectively  between  the  plates,  and  u  the  velocity  of  the 
/8  particle.  If  the  force  on  a  /8  particle  due  to  the  magnetic  field 
is  equal  and  opposite  to  that  due  to  the  electric  field,  the  fi 
particle  will  pass  between  the  plates  without  deviation  but  will 
be  deflected  by  the  magnetic  field  extending  beyond  the  plates. 
This  will  be  the  case  for  y8  particles  making  an  angle  a  with  the 
direction  of  the  magnetic  field  if  Xe  ==  Heu  sin  a. 

The  rays  emerging  at  a  definite  angle  with  the  magnetic  field, 
will  thus  consist  to  a  large  extent  of  particles  moving  with  the 
same  speed.  The  pencil  of  rays  after  emergence  is  deflected  by 
the  magnetic  field  alone,  and  falls  on  a  photographic  film  which 
envelopes  the  inner  surface  of  a  cylinder  16  cms.  in  diameter,  the 
axis  of  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  plates,  and 
passes  through  the  centre  of  the  plates. 

By  reversal  of  the  fields,  the  film  on  development  shows  twa 
continuous  bands,  whose  distance  apart  at  any  point  is  a  measure 
of  twice  the  deflection  produced  by  the  magnetic  field.  From  the 
experimental  results,  the  velocity  and  value  of  ejm  of  the  p 
particle  for  each  point  of  the  curve  can  be  deduced.  Bucherer 
determined  the  value  of  ejm  for  velocities  between  0*32  and  0*7 
the  velocity  of  light.  He  found  that  his  results  were  in  close 
accord  with  the  formula  of  Lorentz  and  Einstein,  but  did  not 
agree  so  well  with  that  deduced  by  Abraham.  The  value  of  ejm^ 
was  found  to  be  1*73  x  10^  e.m.  units,  which  is  slightly  lower  than 
the  original  value  found  by  Kaufmann.  Several  other  determina- 
tions of  the  value  of  e/mo  have  been  made  by  other  observers, 
including  H.  Starke*,  Bestelmeyerf,  and  Classen^.  Hupka§ 
determined  the  variation  of  ejm  with  speed  for  electrons  emitted 
by  a  metal  surface  exposed  to  ultra  violet  light.  The  electrons 
were  set  in  motion  in  a  vacuum  between  two  plates  charged  to 
a  high  difiference  of  potential.  The  variation  of  ejm  with  speed 
was  found  to  be  in  close  agreement  with  the  foimula  of  Lorentz 
and  Einstein. 

*  H.  Starke,  Verh,  d,  D.  Phyt,  Get,  6,  p.  241,  1908. 
t  Bestelmeyer,  Annal.  d.  Phys,  82,  p.  429,  1907. 
X  Classen,  Phyi.  Zeit.  9,  p.  762,  1908. 
§  Hupka,  Verh,  d.  D.  Phyt.  Get.  11,  p.  249, 1909. 


V]  THE  )8  RAYS  209 

At  the  end  of  this  book,  a  table  is  added  which  shows  the 
variation  of  ejvi  with  speed  for  particles  of  different  velocities 
according  to  the  formula  of  Lorentz  and  Einstein.     The  corre- 

spending  values  of  — ,  —  are  added  for  convenience.     These 

:  tables  will  be  found  useful  in  deducing  the  momentum  and  kinetic 
:  energy  of  the  0  particle  at  different  speeds  and  also  for  deducing 
i  the  velocity  of  /8  particles  where  the  value  Hp  =  muje  is  measured 
i  experimentally.  The  value  of  ejrn^  is  taken  as  1*77  x  10^  electro- 
magnetic units. 

82.    The  passage  of  the  ^  rays  through  matter.     We 

have  seen  in  the  last  chapter  that  the  main  phenomena  connected 
with  the  absorption  of  a  rays  can  be  approximately  explained  by 
a  simple  law.  The  passage  of  the  /8  rays  through  matter  is,  in 
some  respects,  far  more  complicated,  and  although  a  large  amount 

:  of  experimental  work  has  been  done  to  bring  out  clearly  the  more 
important  factors  involved,  no  final  and  definite  conclusions  have 
yet  been  reached.  It  is  desirable  at  this  stage  to  give  an  historical 
rkume  of  the  development  of  our  knowledge  of  this  subject. 
It  was  early  found  that  the  /8  rays  were,  as  a  whole,  far  more 
penetrating  than  the  a  rays*.     Their  absorption  by  matter  was 

[  initially  examined  by  the  electrical  method  by  placing  metal 
screens  over  a  layer  of  active  matter.  For  this  purpose  a  /8  ray 
electroscope  was  employed,  or  a  testing  vessel  such  as  is  shown  in 
Fig.  13.  The  active  matter  which  emitted  the  ^  rays  was  phiced 
under  the  electroscope,  or  rested  on  the  lower  of  the  two  parallel 
plates.  The  ionisation  of  the  gas  due  to  the  y8  rays  was  found  to 
decrease  approximately  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the 
thickness  of  matter  traversed  by  the  rays.  This  is  expressed  by 
the  relation  ///©  =  e"*^  where  /  is  the  electrical  effect  after  passing 
through  a  thickness  d  and  /q  the  initial  value  for  a  thin  screen 
of  safficient  thickness  to  absorb  the  a  rays,  and  /i  a  constant  of 
absorption.  This  relation  was  initially  found  to  hold  approximately 
for  the  ^  rays  from  uranium  but  not  for  the  fi  rays  from  radium 
and  thoriuHL  Since  Lenard  had  shown  that  cathode  rays,  which 
are  identical  with  /8  rays  of  low  speed,  are  absorbed  according 

*  Bntherford,  Phil,  Mag,  47,  p.  109,  1899. 
R.  B.A.  14 


r 


210  THE  /8  RAYS  [CH. 

to  an  exponential  law,  it  was  natural  at  first  to  suppose  that  the 
exponential  law  of  absorption  was  an  indication  that  the  /8  rays 
were  homogeneous,  i.e.  consisted  of  fi  particles  projected  with  the 
same  speed.  On  this  view,  the  /3  particles  emitted  from  uranium 
which  gave  a  nearly  exponential  law  of  absorption,  were  supposed 
to  be  homogeneous.  On  the  other  hand,  the  y9  rays  from  radium 
which  did  not  give  an  exponential  law  of  absorption  were  known 
from  other  evidence  to  be  heterogeneous.  In  order  to  account  for 
the  observation  that  very  nearly  the  same  exponential  law  was 
obtained  for  thick  and  thin  layers  of  uranium,  it  was  implicitly 
assumed  that  the  /3  particle  suffered  only  a  very  small  change 
of  velocity  in  passing  through  a  considerable  thickness  of  matter, 
so  that  the  rays  issuing  from  a  thick  layer  of  matter  were  only 
slightly  altered  in  velocity  by  their  passage  through  it. 

The  )8  rays  expelled  from  the  various  radio-active  products  vary 
in  velocity  between  '3  and  '99  the  velocity  of  light.  These 
velocities  are  much  higher  than  those  impressed  on  the  cathode 
rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube.  Lenard  had  carefully  investigated 
the  latter  and  shown  that  they  were  absorbed  approximately 
according  to  an  exponential  law,  and  that  the  absorption  for 
difiFerent  kinds  of  matter  was  nearly  proportional  to  the  density  of 
material  over  a  very  wide  range.  The  penetrating  power  of  /8 
rays  increases  very  rapidly  with  their  velocity,  so  that  the  rays 
from  many  of  the  radio-active  products  have  a  very  much  greater 
penetrating  power  than  the  slower  velocity  cathode  particles. 
Although  the  0  particle,  on  the  average,  is  expelled  with  a  velocity 
more  than  ten  times  greater  than  that  of  the  a  particle,  its 
apparent  mass  is  so  small  that  its  momentum  and  kinetic  energy 
are,  on  an  average,  small  compared  with  that  of  the  a  particle. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  a  particles  are  deflected  from 
their  rectilinear  path  by  their  passage  through  the  atoms  of 
matter.  On  account  of  the  much  smaller  momentum  and  energy 
of  the  )8  particle,  the  latter  is  far  more  readily  deflected  in  its 
encounters  with  atoms  of  matter  than  the  massive  a  particle, 
Lenard  early  showed  that  a  pencil  of  cathode  rays  after  passing 
through  a  screen  of  matter  was  widely  scattered,  and  emerged  as 
a  very  diffused  beam.  A  similar  scattering  is  exhibited  by  fi  rays. 
This  scattering  is  so  marked  that   a   considerable   part  of  the 


V]  THE  P  RAYS  211 

/3  particles  incident  on  a  metal  screen  emerge  again  on  the  side  of 
incidence.  This  scattering  of  the  fi  particles  plays  a  very  im- 
portant part  in  the  passage  of  the  /3  rays  through  matter,  and  is 
one  of  the  main  causes  of  the  wide  diflference  in  the  character 
of  the  absorption  shown  by  the  a  and  fi  rays.  This  subject  of 
scattering  is  very  important,  and  will  be  considered  in  detail  later. 

A  study  of  the  a  rays  has  shown  that  a  thin  film  of  active 
matter  of  one  kind  expels  a  particles  with  the  same  speed,  and 
that  the  velocity  of  each  of  these  a  particles  is  reduced  by  the  same 
amount  in  passing  through  a  metal  screen.  This  shows  that  each 
atom  of  radio-active  matter  breaks  up  in  the  same  way,  and 
expels  an  a  particle  with  a  definite  velocity  characteristic  of  the 
particular  substance  undergoing  disintegration.  It  is  now  known 
that  a  number  of  products  like  uranium  X,  radium  B,  radium  E 
and  meso-thorium  2  are  transformed  with  the  emission  of  /C^  rays, 
but  no  a  rays.  These  yS  particles,  which  are  expelled  at  a  great 
speed,  seem  to  be  a  primary  effect  of  the  transformation  of  the 
atoms,  and  in  this  respect  resemble  the  o  rays.  From  analogy 
with  the  a  rays,  it  was  natural  a  priori  to  expect  that  the  (i  rays 
fix)m  a  thin  film  of  active  matter  of  one  kind  should  escape  with 
identical  velocity. 

Hahn  and  Meitner*  adopted  the  view  that  the  exponential  law 
«>f  absorption  was  a  proof  of  the  emission  of  such  homogeneous 
rays,  and  used  this  principle  in  a  search  for  further  products  of 
the  transformation  of  radio-active  matter.  This  view  proved  very 
valuable  as  a  working  hypothesis,  for  they  were  able  to  show  in 
a  number  of  cases  that  a  radio-active  material  which  emitted 
^  rays  of  a  complex  character,  i,e,  rays  which  were  not  absorbed 
according  to  an  exponential  law,  contained  more  than  one  /8  ray 
product  In  the  meantime,  W.  Wilsonf  made  some  experiments 
on  the  absorption  of  approximately  homogeneous  rays,  obtained 
by  sorting  out  the  complex  /8  rays  of  radium  by  a  magnetic  field. 
An  account  of  these  experiments  will  be  given  later,  but  it  suffices 
to  say  at  this  point  that  he  concluded  that  homogeneous  rays 
were  not  absorbed  according  to  an  exponential  law ;  and  further, 

*  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phyt,  Zeit,  9,  p.  321,  1908;  10,  pp.  697,  948,  1909. 
+  W.  Wilson,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  82,  p.  612,  1909. 

U— 2 


212  THE  /8   RAYS  [CB 

by  using  aluminium  screens,  that  an  exponential  law  of  absorp- 
tion indicated  tjiat  the  /J  rays  were  complex  in  character. 

In  order  to  throw  light  on  this  point,  J.  A.  Gray*  examined 
the  deflection  of  the  /9  rays  from  radium  E  in  a  magnetic  field 
by  the  photographic  method,  using  an  apparatus  similar  to  that 
employed  for  the  a  rays  shown  in  Fig.  23.  The  deflected  /8 
rays  showed  a  continuous  band  or  spectrum,  indicating  that  the 
rays  were  heterogeneous.  At  the  same  time,  he  found  that  the 
/3  rays  from  both  a  thick  and  thin  layer  of  radium  E  were  absorbed 
according  to  an  exponential  law.  These  results  thus  confirmed  in 
some  respects  the  conclusions  reached  by  W.  Wilson,  v.  Baeyer, 
Hahn  and  Meitnerf  in  the  meantime  had  independently  in- 
vestigated the  question  of  the  complexity  of  the  /3  rays  by 
a  similar  photographic  method.  As  sources  of  fi  rays,  they 
employed  thin  films  of  active  matter  deposited  on  fine  wires 
The  photographs  obtained  in  a  magnetic  field  showed  several  well- 
marked  bands,  indicating  that  each  of  these  sources  emitted  sets 
of  rays  of  definite  velocity.  In  later  work  it  was  found  that  the 
emission  of  0  rays  was  very  complicated,  and  that  in  some  cases 
a  large  number  of  bands  was  observed  for  a  single  product.  For 
example,  the  active  deposit  of  radium,  consisting  of  radium  B  -f  C 
gave  at  least  nine  distinct  types  of  rays  which  were  clearly 
observable  on  a  photographic  plate.  It  was  also  found  that  while 
the  slower  rays  were  apparently  homogeneous  and  gave  sharp 
lines,  the  swifter  rays  gave  more  diffuse  bands,  indicating  that  the 
particles  were  expelled  over  a  considerable  range  of  speed.  A 
discussion  of  these  interesting  and  important  results  is  given  later 
in  Section  95. 

83.  Scattered  or  reflected  rayv.  We  have  seen  that  when 
the  yS  rays  fall  on  matter,  part  is  transmitted  and  part  is  diffusely 
scattered  from  the  plate  on  the  side  of  incidence.  This  scattered 
radiation  is  identical  in  type  with  the  primary  jS  rays,  and  was 
initially  given  the  name  of  secondary  /8  radiation.  Later  work, 
however,  has  indicated  that  this  diffuse  radiation  consists  of  the 

•  Gray,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  84,  p.  136,  1910. 

t  V.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phys.  ZeiUchr.  U,  p.  488,  1910,  and  1% 
p.  273,  1911. 


V]  THE  /9  RAYS  213 

fi  particles  that  are  scattered  through  such  a  large  angle  by 
the  matter  that  they  return  on  the  side  of  incidence.  There  is  no 
definite  evidence  that  fi  particles  on  striking  the  plate  give  rise  to 
]  a  true  secondary  radiation  of  the  /8  ray  type,  which  is  excited  in 
\  the  atoms  of  matter  by  the  impact  of  /B  rays.  Taking  the  view 
j  that  the  7  rays  are  pulses  accompanying  the  expulsion  of  0  rays, 
it  might  reasonably  be  expected  that  some  7  rays  would  be 
produced  by  the  stoppage  of  the  /8  particles  by  matter.  This 
production  of  7  rays  by  /8  rays  has  been  recently  observed  by 
J.  A.  Gray*  using  the  /9  rays  of  radium  E  as  a  source.  In  the  case 
of  radium  and  thorium,  however,  this  effect  is  so  small  compared 
with  that  due  to  the  primary  7  rays  generated  in  the  radio-active 
matter  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  detect.  From  analogy  with  the 
0  rays,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  some  slow  velocity  electrons  would 
appear  on  the  sides  of  incidence  and  emergence  of  the  /3  rays ;  but 
the  ionising  effect  of  these  would  only  extend  to  a  minute  distance 
from  the  surface  of  the  plate. 

It  will  be  very  convenient  to  call  the  rays  which  are  turned 
back  on  the  side  of  incidence  the  reflected  rays,  and  those  which 
pass  through  the  plate  the  transmitted  rays.  In  using  the  term 
"  reflected,"  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  phenomenon 
has  no  analogy  with  light,  but  that  the  reflected  rays  consist 
of  the  primary  fi  particles  which  have  been  so  scattered  by 
the  atoms  of  matter  that  they  emerge  again  in  all  directions. 
Becquerel  first  showed  by  the  photographic  method  the  presence 
of  these  reflected  rays,  and  pointed  out  that  these  reflected  rays 
falling  on  matter  gave  rise  in  turn  to  another  set  of  reflected 
rays,  and  so  on.  The  rays  produced  by  one  and  two  reflections 
are  sometimes  known  as  secondary,  tertiary,  etc. 

Evef  investigated  the  reflected  radiation  by  an  electric 
method;  the  arrangement  is  shown  in  the  following  figure  (Fig. 
55).  The  /8  rays  from  a  tube  R  containing  radium  fell  on  a  plate 
of  material  called  the  radiator,  and  the  reflected  rays  passed  into 
an  electroscope,  the  face  of  which  was  covered  with  a  thin  sheet 
of  aluminium.  A  lead  screen  was  put  in  position  to  cut  off  the 
greater  part  of  the  direct  transmitted  j3  and  7  radiation.     The 

•  Gmy,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  86,  p.  131,  1911. 
t  Eve,  Phil.  Zlag.  8,  p.  669,  1904. 


214 


THE  yS   RAYS 


[CB. 


effect  observed  in  the  electroscope  was  due  to  the  reflected  yS  rays, 
and  also  in  small  part  to  scattered  7  rays,  and  the  ^  rays  which  are 
known  to  be  produced  when  the  7  rays  pass  through  matter.  Eve 
found  that  this  reflected  radiation  increased  at  first  with  the 
thickness  of  the  radiator,  soon  reaching  a  practical  maximum. 
This  shows  that  the  primary  rays  penetrate  some  distance  before 
the  amount  of  scattered  radiation  reaches  its  maximum.  He 
measured  the  amount  of  reflected  radiation  from  thick  radiators  of 
a  number  of  materials  and  found  that  the  amount  of  radiatioa 
increased  with  the  density  of  the  material,  but  was  greater  for 
light  substances  like  paper  and  wood  than  would  be  expected 
if  the  amount  of  reflected  rays  were  proportional  to  the  density- 


Fig.  65. 

The  same  problem  was  independently  investigated  about  the  same 
time  by  McClelland*.  In  order  to  investigate  the  distribution 
of  the  reflected  y8  particles,  the  arrangement  was  that  shown  in 
Fig.  50.  AB,  AjBi  were  cylindrical  testing  vessels  identical  in 
size  ;  the  former  was  fixed  and  was  used  to  detennine  the  intensity 
of  the  13  rays  from  the  radium  R.  The  latter,  which  was  moved 
round  the  arm  of  a  circle,  was  used  to  measure  the  intensity  of 
the  scattered  radiation  from  the  plate  F  at  different  angles  0  from 
the  normal.  It  was  found  that  the  amount  of  scattered  radiation 
entering   the  small   testing  vessel   varied    approximately  as   the 

♦  McCleUaml,  Tram.  ncnj.  Duh,  Soc.  9,  Pt.  1,  p.  1,  1905;  9,  Pt.  2,  p.  9.  1906; 
Proc.  Boy.  Soc.  A,  80,  p.  501,  1908. 


V]  THE  0  RAYS  215 

casiae  0.  Even  if  the  rays  are  scattered  equally  in  all  directions, 
those  which  emerge  at  an  angle  0  have  on  the  average  passed 
thruugh  a  greater  thickness  of  matter  than  those  which  escape 
normally,  and  consequently  by  absorption  are  reduced  relatively 
■  in  number,  and  probably  also  in  velocity  and  penetrating  power, 
McClelland  also  investigated  the  amount  of  reflected  radiation 
from  thick  radiators  of  difTcrent  metals,  and  found  that  the 
aoiount  of  this  reflected  radiation  increased  with  the  atomic 
weight  of  the  radiator.  Evidence  was  also  obtained  that  the 
amount  of- scattered  radiation  appeared  to  be  a  periodic  function 
of  the  atomic  weights. 


Fig.  5li. 

Righi*  investigated  the  amount  of  reflected  radiation  by 
a  different  method.  0  rays  were  allowed  to  fall  on  a  plate  placed 
in  an  exhausted  vessel  and  connected  with  an  electrometer.  The 
plate  gained  a  negative  charge;  but  the  rate  of  charging  was 
greater  for  light  than  for  heavy  atoms.  For  example,  it  was  found 
that  the  rate  of  charging  for  aluminium  was  about  twice  as  great 
»s  for  lead.  The  explanation  of  this  effect  is  simple.  The  charge 
given  to  the  plate  ia  proportional  to  the  number  of  0  particles 
■  Bighi,  Phy.  Zeil.  t,  p.  81fi,  1005. 


216 


THE  fi  RATS 


[CH. 


striking  the  plate  less  the  number  scattered  back.  It  is  clear 
from  these  results  that  a  radiator  of  high  atomic  weight  scatten 
back  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  /3  particles  than  a  metal 
of  light  atomic  weight.  This  is  in  agreement  with  the  resulto 
obtained  by  other  methods. 

The  amount  of  reflected  radiation  for  different  materials  baa 
been  closely  investigated  by  H.  W.  Schmidt*  and  later  by  Kovarikf, 
using  electroscopic  methods.  The  apparatus  employed  by  Kovarik 
is  shown  in  Fig.  57.  The  source  of  /8  rays  was  a  thin  film  of 
active  matter  spread  on  a  very  thin  plate  of  mica  or  of  aluminium. 
A  layer  of  aluminium  of  thickness  just  suflScient  to  completely 


Fig.  67. 

stop  the  a  rays  was  placed  over  the  active  matter.  The  testing 
vessel  was  hemispherical  in  shape,  and  the  active  matter  was 
placed  over  an  opening  SS  in  the  base  of  the  hemisphere.  The 
advantage  of  this  arrangement  was  that  all  the  /8  rays  escaping 
upward  from  the  plate  passed  into  the  testing  vessel  and  had 
nearly  the  same  path  in  air.  By  placing  a  thick  layer  of  metal 
under  the  active  plate  the  greater  part  of  the  scattered  radiation 
entered  the  testing  vessel  and  added  its  effect  to  that  of  the  direct 
radiation.  In  this  way,  the  amount  of  scattered  radiation  was 
determined  directly  as  a  percentage  of  the  primary  radiation. 
Small   corrections   were   made   for  the  slight  absorption  of  the 

♦  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Ann,  d.  Phys.  28,  p.  671,  1907. 
t  Kovarik,  Phil,  Mag.  ao,  p.  849,  1910. 


i]  THE  ff  RAYS  217 

jS  rays  in  passing  through  the  aluminium  screen  surrounding  the 
active  matter.  Some  of  the  results  obtained  by  Kovarik  are  given 
in  the  following  table,  for  the  13  rays  from  a  thin  layer  of  radium  E 
and  of  actinium  D  obtained  from  the  active  deposit  of  actinium. 

The  /8  radiations  from  each  of  these  materials  is  absorbed  very 
nearly  according  to  an  exponential  law.  The  coefficient  of 
absorption  in  terms  of  cms.  of  aluminium  is  43*5  for  the  rays 
from  radium  E  and  28*5  for  the  rays  from  actinium  D.  The 
incident  radiation  is  taken  as  100. 


Atomic  weight 

Percentage  reflected  /3  radiation 

Reflector 

Badium  E 

Actinium  D 

Bismuth 

208-5 

70-9 

81-0 

Lead 

206-9 

70-2 

80-0 

Gold 

197-2 

67-8 

78-7 

PlatinuTn 

194-8 

67-7 

77-6 

Tin 

119-0 

62-5 

69-7 

Silver 

107-9 

67-4 

63-5 

Zinc 

65-4 

45-5 

52-6 

Cop})er 

63-6 

44-7 

51-9 

Nickel 

58-7 

43-5 

48-0 

Iron 

55-9 

41-2 

471 

Sulphur 

32-1 

321 

40-1 

Aluminium 

271 

30-0 

38-3 

Carbon 

12-0 

17-1 

27-4 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  amount  of  scattered  radiation  increases 
with  the  atomic  weight,  and  also  depends  on  the  velocity  of  the 
/9  rays.  The  yS  rays  from  actinium  are  swifter  than  those  from 
radium  E  and  show  a  greater  percentage  reflection. 

In  a  paper  by  Kovarik  and  W.  Wilson*,  it  was  shown  that 
the  amount  of  reflected  radiation  from  different  materials  increases 
with  the  velocity  of  the  /3  rays  up  to  a  certain  point  and  then 
decreases  again.  For  example,  the  amount  of  reflected  radiation 
from  lead  increases  until  the  rays  have  a  velocity  about  0*9  the 
velocity  of  light  and  then  slowly  decreases  for  higher  speeds. 

Schmidt  and  Kovarik  (loc,  cit)  have  shown  that  the  reflected 
radiation  is  always  of  less  average  penetrating  power  than  the 
incident.     For  example,  using  a  thin  film  of  radium  E  as  a  source 

*  EoYarik  and  Wilson,  Phil.  Mag,  80,  p.  866,  1910. 


218  THE  /8  RAYS  [CH. 

of  /c3  rajrs,  Eovarik  found  that  the  absorption  coeflScient  /i  of  the 
transmitted  radiation  varies  with  the  material  placed  beneath  the 
active  matter.  With  air  underneath,  ^  =  42*4  (cms.)'"\  with  lead 
underneath,  ^  =  44*8,  with  aluminium  underneath,  ^  =  43*3.  Such 
a  result  is  to  be  expected  since  the.  scattered  ^  rays  have  on 
an  average  encountered  a  large  number  of  atoms  before  they 
emerge,  and  have  had  their  velocity  reduced  to  some  extent  in 
consequence  of  these  encounters  (see  Sections  92  and  93). 

84     Scattering  of  transmitted  y3  rays.     Crowther*  early 
showed   that   the   y8  particles  were   much   scattered  in  passing 
through  thin  sheets  of  matter  in  which  the  absorption  was  small 
The  general  idea  of  the  experiment  will  be  clear  from 
Fig.  58.     AG  and  BD  are  two  parallel   plates  close 
together,  so  that  a  narrow  beam  of  y8  rays  emerges 
from  CD  when  the  source  of  /8  rays  is  at  AB,     If  now 
a  thin  metal  screen  is  introduced  between  the  plates  at 
XY,  any  /8  rays  which  are  scattered  through  more  than 
a  small  angle  in  traversing  the  screen  are  absorbed  by 
the  walls  of  the   parallel  plates.     The   effect   of  the 
screen  is  thus  to  reduce  the  number   of  /3  particles 
emerging  from  CD,     In  the  experiments,  uranium  was 
used  as  a  source  of  yS  rays,  and  a  number  of  plates  in         ^^' 
parallel  were  used  to  increase  the  magnitude  of  the  electrica 
effect  due  to  the  issuing  rays.     The  current  due  to  the  issuing 
rays  was  found  to  decrease  rapidly  with  thickness  of  the  screen  at 
X  Y,     Crowther  found  that  practically  all  the  rays  were  scattere( 
for  a  thickness  of  aluminium  '015  cm.  and  for  a  thickness  of  golc 
•0002  cm. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  in  the  arrangemen 
of  Crowther,  the  ^  rays  have  only  to  be  scattered  through  a  com 
paratively  small  angle  to  be  absorbed  by  the  walls  of  the  paralle 
plates.  The  experiments  do  not  throw  light  on  the  distributioi 
of  the  scattered  radiation  but  afibrd  a  means  of  comparing  th 
amount  of  scattering  by  different  materials. 

The  scattering  of  the  /8  rays  of  radium  by  thin  layers  of  metf 

•  Crowther,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  80,  p.  186,  1908. 


t. 


I 

i 


V]  THE  /8   RAYS  219 

was  examined  later  by  Madsen*.  The  general  principle  of  the 
experiment  was  similar  to  that  of  Crowther,  but  the  arrangements 
were  such  that  the  scattered  radiation  entered  a  hemispherical 
testing  vessel  and  that  the  distance  traversed  by  each  scattered 
particle  was  the  same.  Madsen  examined  the  amount  of  scattered 
f  radiation  both  on  the  side  of  "  emergence  "  and  on  the  side  of 
"incidence."  The  former  is  always  far  more  marked  than  the 
latter.  For  example,  using  thin  metal  foils,  the  amount  of 
emergent  scattered  radiation  was  9  times  the  amount  of  the 
scattered  "  incident "  radiation  for  aluminium,  and  about  5  times 
for  gold. 

Madsen  found  that  the  amount  of  scattered  radiation  increased 
rapidly  at  first  with  thickness  of  the  scattering  material,  passed 
through  a  maximum,  and  then  decreased  slowly.  Such  results 
are  to  be  expected;  for  at  first  the  absorption  of  the  )8  rays  is 
small,  and  the  amount  of  scattering  becomes  more  marked  with 
increasing  thickness  of  the  screen.  For  larger  thicknesses,  the 
absorption  of  the  rays  by  the  screen  becomes  important  and 
finally  leads  to  a  decrease  in  the  amount  of  emergent  radiation. 

85.    Scattering  of  fi  rayi  by  thin  sheets  of  matter.     The 

experiments  previously  described  deal  for  the  most  part  with  the 
scattering  of  complex  ^  rays  from  comparatively  thick  sheets  of 
matter.  In  these  cases,  the  amount  of  scattered  radiation  is  not 
only  a  function  of  the  velocity  of  the  rays  but  also  depends  on  the 
amount  of  absorption  of  the  rays  by  different  materials.  Under 
these  conditions,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  experimental 
results  would  show  any  simple  relation  either  with  the  average 
velocity  of  the  ^  particles  or  with  the  atomic  weight  of  the 
scattering  material.  A  comparison  of  experiment  with  any  theory 
f>f  scattering  is  best  made  by  observing  the  distribution  of  the 
scattered  radiations  after  passing  through  sheets  of  matter  so  thin 
that  the  absorption  of  the  incident  rays  is  negligible.  Experiments 
of  this  kind  have  been  made  by  Crowther f. 

The  experimental  arrangement  is  shown  in  Fig.  59.  A  nearly 
homogeneous  pencil  of  )3  rays  from  a  radium  preparation  A  was 

•  Madsen,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  909,  1909. 

t  Crowther,  Proe.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  84,  p.  226,  1910. 


220  THE  ^  RATS  [CH. 

obtained  hj  passing  the  rays  between  the  poles  of  an  electro-  ^ 
magnet  EFGH.  This  homogeneous  pencil  passed  through  the 
opening  D  into  the  scatteriog  chamber  S.  The  rays  then  paawd 
through  an  opening  RiuS  covered  with  thin  aluminium  foil  and 
entered  the  testing  vessel  T  where  the  ionisation  current  due  to 
them  was  measured.  In  order  to  avoid  the  scattering  of  the 
/3  rays  by  the  gas,  their  path  to  R  was  through  an  exhausted 
space.  On  introducing  a  thin  metal  screen  at  P,  the  pencil  of 
rays  is  scattered,  and  the  effect  measured  in  T  is  then  dae  to  the 
^  rays  which  have  been  scattered  through  an  angle  less  than  ^, 
where  0  is  half  the  angle  subtended  by  the  o[>ening  R. 


Fig.  69. 

This  apparatus  was  very  convenient  for  studying  the  scatteriDg 
of  /3  rays  of  different  velocities  by  very  thin  metal  foils.  I" 
order  to  obtain  a  pencil  of  rays  as  homogeneous  as  possible,  the 
opening  at  D  was  small.  Under  these  conditions,  the  effect  of 
the  7  rays  from  the  radium  was  comparable  with  that  due  to  the 
(9  rays.  A  balance  method  was  employed  to  obtain  accurate 
measurements.  The  results  obtained  were  compared  with  » 
theory  of  scattering  advanced  by  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson*. 

*  J.  J.  Thomson,  I'rac.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  10,  p.  16S,  1910. 


THE  yS  BAYS 


221 


"his  theory  has  been  already  referred  to  in  Section  74.  The 
of  matter  was  supposed  to  consist  of  a  sphere  of  uniform 
ive  electrification  in  which  was  distributed  an  equal  and 
site  charge  in  the  form  of  negative  electrons.  The  /8  particle 
rses  the  atom  and  sufiers  irregular  deflections  due  to  a  close 
)ach  to  the  constituent  electrons  or  to  the  field  due  to  the 
ive  sphere.  The  deflections  were  supposed  to  be  in  general 
,  and  the  observed  deflection  of  ^  particles  was  ascribed 
e  probability  distribution  resulting  from  a  large  number  of 
I  average  deflections.  If  0  is  the  average  deflection  due 
ach   encounter   with    an   atom,    the    mean   deflection   of    a 

cle  after  N  encounters  was  taken  as  ^^N .  6.  Now  if  n  be  the 
ber  of  atoms  per  unit  volume  of  material,  6  the  radius  of  the 
,  the  number  of  encounters  in  passing  through  a  thickness 

nTrbrt.    Consequently  the  mean  deflection  ^^  =  '^nirlr^t .  d  or 

t  should  be  constant  for  a  given  material.     The  theory  also 

ates  that  the  value  mu^j^tm  should  be  constant  for  a  given 
rial  for  a  given  value  of  ^,  where  \mu^  is  the  energy  of  the 
irticle  and  t^,  is  the  value  of  t  required  to  cut  down  the 
ition  to  half  value.  These  two  relations  have  been  verified 
rimentally  by  Crowther,  and  his  results  for  aluminium  are 
1  in  the  following  tables.  In  the  first  table  the  velocity  of 
8  particle  was  constant,  but  the  angle  <^  and  thickness  of 
n  were  varied.  In  the  second  table  0  was  constant,  and 
velocity  and  thickness  of  the  screen  were  varied. 


Scattering  for  alurainiura. 
Velocity  of  0  particles  =  2681  x  10*<»  cm./sec. 


0  (radians) 

'm  (cms.) 

0/>/"«m 

0-20 
0-24 
0-31 
0-41 

0-0022 
0-0033 
0-0054 
0-0090 

4-3 

4-2 
4*2 
4  3 

222 


THE  ;8  RAYS 


[CE 


Scattering  for  aluminium. 


Hp 

u 

■ 
mu^Je 

t^  (cms.) 

0-00183 

0-00406 

0-0056 

0-0084 

0-0122 

0-0226 

mu^lfijt^ 

2260 
2870 
3420 
4050 
4840 
6500 

2-40x1010 
2-58x1010 
2-68x1010 
2-77x1010 
2-83x1010 
2-90x1010 

5-41x10" 

7-40x10" 

9-15x10" 

11-  2x10" 

13-  7x10" 

18-  9x10" 

1-26x1015 
1-16x1015 
1-23x1015 
1  -22  X 1015 
1-25x1015 
1  -26  x  1015 

In  consideriDg  the  scattering  of  a  rays  (Section  74),  a  theor}'  of 
scattering  has  been  advanced  which  is  based  on  different  views. 
On  this  theory,  it  is  supposed  that  a  moving  electrified  particle 
can  be  deflected  through  a  large  angle  by  a  single  atomic 
encounter,  and  it  has  been  concluded  that  the  observed  scattering 
of  the  a  rays  is  mainly  due  to  the  effect  of  this  single  scattering, 
and  that  the  compound  scattering  on  which  the  theory  ot 
J.  J.  Thomson  is  based,  is  of  less  importance  in  determining  the 
distribution  of  scattered  particles.  It  has  been  shown  that  the 
theory  of  single   scattering  explains  most  of  the   experimental 

results  obtained  by  Crowther ;  for  example,  on  this  theory,  0 ' v^/w 

and  mu^je*Jtm  should  be  constant.  There  is,  however,  one  im- 
portant point  of  difference  in  the  deductions.  The  theorj'  ol 
J.  J.  Thomson  indicates  that  if  <f>  is  constant  and  t  is  varied,  the 
fraction  ///q  of  the  total  radiation  entering  S  is  given  by 
IJIq  =  1  —  e~^'^  where  A:  is  a  constant.  The  numbers  given  by 
Crowther  seem  to  be  in  accord  with  this  relation.  Such  a  result 
cannot  hold  on  the  theory  of  single  scattering  where  it  can  be 
simply  shown  that  Ijl^  =\  —  \t  where  \  is  a  constant.  This  is  an 
important  point ;  but  it  is  a  difficult  one  to  decide  experimentally 
on  account  of  the  difficulties  of  the  measurements.  Both  theories 
of  scattering  are  only  applicable  when  the  screens  are  so  thin 
that  no  absorption  of  the  radiation  takes  place  and  the  scattering 
is  not  complete.  A  theory  of  scattering  to  include  the  effects  of 
absorption  and  change  of  velocity  of  the  yS  particle  would  of  neces- 
sity be  complicated. 


THE  j3   RATS  223 

16.  The  trannnltted  radiation.  The  absorption  of  the 
emitted  raya  by  matter  has  been  usually  investigated  by  the 
rcacopic  method.  The  source  of  ^  rays  is  placed  some 
ince  below  the  opening  in  the  base  of  a  yS  ray  electroscope. 

iooisatioD  current  in  the  electroscope  is  determined  for 
rent  thicknesses  of  matter  placed  between  the  electroscope 

the  source  of  radiation.  When  uranium  X  or  radium  E  are 
i  as  sources  of  8  rays,  the  current  is  found  to  tall  off  very 
ly  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  thicknesses  of 


Thicknett  of  abiminium  in  mm. 

FiR.  eo. 

ter  traversed.  Consequently  the  intensity  /  measured  by  the 
iration  current  after  traversing  a  thickness  d  cms.  of  the 
«rial  is  given  by  ///„  =  e~'^  where  /„  is  the  value  for  thickness 
ad  fi,  is  the  coefficient  of  absorption  for  the  material.  If  d 
Jie  thickness  in  cms.  to  reduce  the  current  to  half  value 
bg,  2/d  =  -693/^  (cms.)-'.  Consequently  if  the  curve  is 
:t«d  with  the  logarithms  of  the  currents  as  ordinates,  and  the 
:Vneases  of  matter  traversed  as  abscissae,  the  curve  of  ab- 
ption  is   a  straight   line.     The  logarithmic  curves,  given  by 


224  THE  )8   RAYS  [CH. 

H.  W.  Schmidt,  showing  the  absorption  in  aluminium  for  the 
)8  rays  from  uranium  X,  from  radium  E  and  actinium  D,  are 
shown  in  Fig.  60.  It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  owing  to 
the  presence  of  some  easily  absorbed  rays,  there  is  always  a 
slight  initial  rapid  drop  in  the  curve  not  shown  in  the  figure. 

If  the  absorbing  screens  are  placed  some  distance  above  the 
active  matter,  so  that  an  approximately  normal  pencil  of  j8  rays 
falls  on  them,  the  curve  always  shows  a  rapid  initial  drop.  This 
effect,  first  noticed  by  Crowther*,  is  due  to  the  scattering  of  the 
(i  rays  in  all  directions  by  the  screen.  Kovarikf  has  shown  that 
in  some  positions  of  the  screen  relative  to  the  electroscope,  the 
ionisation  current  at  first  increases  when  thin  layers  of  mattei 
are  placed  over  the  source.  Affcer  passing  through  a  maximum 
the  current  decreases  according  to  an  exponential  law.  This 
initial  effect  is  also  to  be  ascribed  to  scattering.  In  order  t^ 
avoid  these  initial  disturbances,  which  are  largely  dependent  oi 
the  relative  positions  of  the  source  of  radiation  and  the  absorbing 
screen  with  regard  to  the  electroscope,  it  is  desirable  to  place  th< 
absorbing  material  close  to  the  base  of  the  electroscope  so  that  al 
radiation  scattered  in  the  direction  of  emergence  may  enter  tht 
electroscope.  Under  such  conditions,  the  absorption  curv^e  is  nearU 
exponential  from  the  start.  Since  the  amount  and  penetrating 
power  of  the  scattered  radiation  depend  upon  the  scatterin|2 
material,  the  coeflBcient  of  absorption  is  influenced  to  some  extent 
by  the  thickness  of  radiating  material  and  the  matter  on  which 
it  is  placed.  The  correction  for  this  is  not  large,  and  can  be 
made  if  necessary.  The  most  trustworthy  method  of  determining 
the  absorption  is  to  use  a  very  thin  layer  of  the  material  on  thir 
plates  of  metal  or  mica,  and  to  place  equal  thicknesses  of  mateiia 
above  and  below  the  active  matter  which  is  placed  directly  undei 
the  electroscope.  In  such  cases,  the  escaping  radiation  is  sjrm 
metrical  on  both  sides  of  the  plates  and  the  effect  of  scattering 
is  to  a  large  extent  compensated.  This  method  has  been  adoptee 
by  Kovarik. 

The  absorption  coefficients  of  the  fi  rays  irom  activ< 
products  have  been   determined  by  a  number  of  investigators 

*  Crowther,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc,  A,  80,  p.  186,  1908. 
t  Kovarik,  Phil,  Mag,  SO,  p.  849,  1910. 


THE  /8  RAYS 


225 


le  results  are  given  in  the  following  table  where  aluminium  is 
ed  as  the  absorbing  substance.  For  many  of  the  products  the 
)sorption  is  approximately  exponential.  It  must,  however,  be 
)me  in  mind  that  in  nearly  all  cases  the  radiation  emitted  from 
•en  one  product  is  complex.  This  will  be  clear  from  a  con- 
deration  of  the  evidence  discussed  in  Section  95.  At  the  same 
me,  it  is  very  convenient  and  of  practical  importance  to  dis-  ^ 
inguish  between  the  radiations  by  their  absorption  by  matter 
Qeasured  by  the  electric  method. 


I 

Sabstance 

Coefficient  of  absorption 

/i(cm8.)-»                                First 
in  aluminium                      determination 

Uranium  X 

15,  610 

Rutherford  ;  H.  W.  Schmidt* 

Radium 

312 

Hahn  and  Meitnert 

Radium  B 
Radium  C 

13-1,  80,  890 
13-2,  53 

H.  W.  Schmidt* 

Radium  D 

130 

Hahn  and  Meitnert 

Radium  £ 

43-3 

IJ.  W.  Schmidt* 

Mesothorium  2 

20  to  38- J  N 

Thorium  B 
Thorium  D 

110 
163 

Hahn  and  Meitnert 

Radio-actinium 

140 

Actinium  D 

28-5 

Godlewski  I 

The  values  of  fi  for  these  substances  have  been  determined 
by  many  observers  who  have  obtained  slightly  diflferent  values 
depending  on  the  experimental  arrangement  employed.  For 
convenience  of  reference,  the  results  given  are  those  most  recently 
published.  The  names  of  the  investigators  who  made  the  first 
determinations  are  added,  though  not  in  all  cases  the  value  of  fi 
found  by  them.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  radiations  from 
radium  B  and  C  are  both  very  complex  (see  Section  95).  The 
values  given  above  are  those  deduced  by  Schmidt  in  order  to 
account  for  the  absorption  curves. 

The  absorption  of  the  /8  rays  from  radium  has  been  investigated 
W  Seitz§  by  a   different  method.     The  rays  from  the   radium 

•  H,  W.  Schmidt,  Phys.  ZeiU  7,  p.  764,  1906;  8,  p.  361,  1907;  10,  p.  6,  1909. 
t  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phys,  Zeit.  9,  pp.  321,  697,  1908;  10,  p.  741,  1909;  12. 
p.  378, 1911. 

:  Godlewski,  PhiL  Mag,  10,  p.  375,  1905. 
§  Seitz,  Phyt,  Zeit,  5,  p.  315,  1904. 

R.  R.-A.  15 


226 


THE  fi  RAYS 


[CE 


passed  into  an  exhausted  vessel  through  a  thin  mica  window,  and 
the  negative  charge  communicated  per  second  to  a  thick  insukted 
plate  was  determined.  This  is  a  measure  of  the  number  of  j8 
particles  absorbed  by  the  plate.  By  placing  screens  over  the 
radium,  an  absorption  curve  was  obtained  which  was  similar  in 
general  character  to  that  obtained  by  the  ordinary  electroecopic 
method.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  absorption  curves  should 
be  identical,  since  the  ionisation  in  the  electroscopic  method 
depends  not  only  on  the  number  of  yS  particles  but  also  on  their 
velocity.  The  difl'erences,  however,  are  not  very  marked  for  the 
P  rays  from  radium,  for  we  have  seen  (Section  80)  that  Makower 
found  that  the  absorption  curves  obtained  by  the  two  methods 
were  in  good  accord. 

87.     Absorption   and    chemical   constitution.     Lenard* 
showed  in  1895  that  the  coefficient  of  absorption  /a  of  the  cathode 


Substance 

1 
At.  Wt. 

4-65 

Substance 
'     Arsenic 

1 
At.  Wt. 

m/d 

Boron 

11 

76 

1 

1      8-2 

Carbon 

12 

4-4           ; 

Selenium    ... 

1       79 

8-65 

Sodium 

23 

4-95 

Strontium  ... 

,       87-5 

8-5 

Magnesium  . 

...     !       24-4 

51 

Zirconium  ... 

90-7 

8-3 

Aluminium 

27 

6-26     i 

1     Palladium  ... 

106 

8-0 

Silicon 

28 

5*5       ] 

Silver 

108 

8-3 

PhosphoruH 

31 

61 

Tin 

118 

9-46 

Sulphur 

32 

6-6 

Antimony  ... 

120 

9-8 

Potassium 

39 

()-53 

Tellurium  ... 

126 

10-8 

Calcium 

40 

6-47     ; 

Iodine 

126 

10-8 

Titanium 

..     1       48 

6-2 

Barium 

137 

8-8 

Chromium    . 

52 

6-25 

Platinum    ... 

195 

9-4 

Iron  ... 

56 

6-4       ' 

Gold 

197 

9-5 

Cobalt 

69 

6-48     j 

Lead 

207 

10-8 

Copper 

63-3 

6-8       1 

Uranium    ... 

240 

101 

Zinc  ... 

65-5 

6-95 

1 

1 

rays  was  approximately  proportional  to  the  density  D  of  the 
material  over  a  very  wide  range.  The  extreme  limits  of  the 
ratio  /i/D  were  2070  and  5610,  although  the  absorbing  materials 
employed  in  the  experiments  varied  in  density  between  3"6  x  10'' 


♦  Lenard,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  M,  p.  276,  1895. 


V]  THE  p  RATS  £27 

for  hydrogen  at  3  mms.  pressure  to  193  for  gold.  Rutherford* 
showed  that  a  similar  relation  held  approximately  for  the  swifter 
0  rays  from  uranium  X  ;  but  it  was  shown  that  the  value  of  fijO 
fur  elements  of  high  atomic  weight  like  lead  was  about  twice 
u  great  as  for  the  lighter  elements  like  aluminium.  Similar 
results  were  obtained  by  Struttf  for  the  complex  y9  raya  emitted 
by  indium.     The  question  was  re-examined  by  Crowther^,  using 


w    w    eo    so   too  120  no  m  iso  20o  220  zw 

Atomic  vtight 
Fig.  fll. 

» lai^  number  of  elements,  and  the  results  are  included  in  the 
table  on  p.  226. 

The  8  rays  from  uranium  X  employed  as  a  source  of  radiation 
ve  absorbed  approximately  according  to  an  exponential  law. 
The  cocfUcient  of  absorption  referred  to  is  the  one  defined  in 
the  last  section  and  is  not  corrected  for  reflection  of  the  jS  rays. 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  value  of  /a//)  shows  for  most  elements 

>  BntherfoTd,  PkH.  Mag.  «T,  p.  109,  1B99. 

t  Strntt,  Naturt,  ei,  p.  S3S,  1900. 

;  Crowtber  Phil.  Mag.  11,  p.  aTH,  1S06. 


228  THE  /3  RAYS  [C 

a  progressive  increase  from  light  to  heavier  elements,  being 
than  twice  as  great  for  lead  as  for  boron. 

It  has  been  mentioned  in  Section  83  that  McClelland  fo 
that  the  amount  of  scattering   of  )8  rays  from  thick  layers 
different  elements  showed  some  connection  with  their  posit 
in  the    Periodic  System.      A  similar  result  was   found  to 
by  Crowther  for  the  transmitted  rays.     The  results  are  she 
diagrammatically  in  Fig.  61.     It  is  seen  that  the  elements 
themselves  along   a   series   of  simil**ii  curves   which   corresj 
closely  in  extent  with  the  grr  ♦•      ^l  num -elements  in  the  peric 
table.     In  each  group  of  el«  J  "       alue  of  /x/Z)  changes  sloi 

at  first  and  then  rises  sha^        t*      jiaodimum. 

Such  experiments  indi  auc  that  the  value  of  /x/i)  is  a  peric 
function  of  the  atomic  weights,  and  is  connected  with  the  posil 
of  elements  in  the  periodic  table.  On  the  other  hand,  it  she 
be  pointed  out  that  when  account  is  taken  of  the  scattered 
the  true  coefficient  of  absorption  divided  by  the  density  does 
show  any  such  marked  periodic  variations  (see  Section  89). 

Crowther  (loc,  cit)  also  showed  that  the  absor])tion  of 
(i  rays  for  compounds  followed  an  additive  law  and  could 
deduced  from  a  knowledge  of  the  absorption  of  the  individi 
components.  The  absorption  of  /8  rays  by  liquids  has 
examined  by  Campbell*,  S.  J.  AUenf,  H.  W.  SchmidtJ  a 
Borodowsky§.  Using  the  j3  rays  of  radium,  the  latter  shovl 
that  their  absorption  by  compounds  followed  accurately  an  addi** 
law  and  did  not  depend  upon  the  degree  of  concentration  Oi 
chemical  dissociation  of  the  liquids.  For  example,  the  reducti 
of  intensity  of  the  y8  rays  was  determined  after  passing  throiij 
two  shallow  trays,  one  containing  water  and  the  other  sulphin 
acid.  On  mixing  the  contents  of  the  two  trays,  the  intensity^ 
the  transmitted  radiation  was  unchanged.  This  result  holds  ev^ 
in  cases  where  precipitation  occurs  owing  to  the  mixture.  T\ 
absorption  of  y8  rays  by  a  number  of  organic  liquids  was  cxamini 
by  Allen,  Borodowsky  and  Schmidt,  and  was  found  to  follow  i 

m 

•  Campbell,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  180,  1909. 
t  S.  J.  Allen,  Phys,  Rev.  29,  p.  178,  1909. 
X  H.  \V.  Schmidt,  Phyt.  Zeit.  11,  p.  262,  1910. 
§  Borodowsky,  Phil.  Mag.  19,  p.  605,  1910. 


THE  /3   RATS  229 

litive  law.  The  absorption  of  the  rays  by  the  liquid  could  be 
luced  from  a  knowledge  of  the  absorption  of  the  constituent 
rnents. 

It  is  thus  clear  that  the  absorption  of  yS  rays  is  an  atomic 

lenomenon  and  is  not  affected  by  the  chemical  combination  of 

le  atoms.    Such  a  relation  appears  to  hold  generally  for  all  types 

\  radiations  emitted  by  radio-active  substances. 

\  It  is  of  interest  to  consider  a  method   of  determining  the 

Sorption  of  ^  rays  in  t^*^  material  from  which  they  arise.     If 

ie  emergent  radiation  relieve     ,  ^'•ient  of  absorption  fi  in  the 

Hive  material,  it  can  Ix  -t^O^./  ur   /n  that  the  intensity  /  of 

te  rays  issuing  from  a  k*^     •  *ve  matter  of  thickness  d 

I  given  by 

-fcere  Iq  is  the  intensity  due  to  a  very  thick  layer.  This  equation 
^  been  confirmed  experimentally  by  the  writer  in  the  case  of 
-Janium  oxide.  ///©  was  equal  to  one  half  for  a  thickness  of  oxide 
Irresponding  to  '11  gr.  per  sq.  cm.  This  gives  a  value  for  fi/D  of 
B.  This  is  a  value  somewhat  greater  than  that  observed  for  the 
isorption  of  the  same  rays  in  aluminium.  Such  a  result  shows 
lat  a  substance  which  gives  rise  to  /3  rays  does  not  absorb  them 
»a  greater  extent  than  does  ordinary  matter  of  the  same  density 

,  88.     The  absorption   of  /3  rays  fi*om   radium  by  air. 

r,.re*  has  investigated  the  distribution  of  the  ionisation  in  the 
^  ghbourhood  of  a  small  radium  preparation  supported  in  the 
itre  of  a  large  room.  In  order  to  avoid  the  disturbing  effects 
le  to  absorption  and  scattering  of  the  yS  rays  by  matter,  an 
jctroscope  was  constructed  whose  sides  consisted  of  thin  alu- 
linium  foil,  and  the  ionisation  produced  in  this  electroscope  was 
lured  at  different  distances  from  the  radium  preparation, 
feing  an  electroscope  with  such  thin  walls,  the  effect  of  scattering 
pd  absorption  of  the  rays  by  the  electroscope  itself  is  small,  and 
he  ionisation  observed  in  the  electroscope  is  very  nearly  a  measure 
if  the  amount  of  the  ionisation  existing  at  that  place  before  the 
lectroscope  was  introduced.     At  some  distance  from  the  radium, 

le  found  that  the  ionisation  was  proportional  to  —^ ,  where  r  is 

•  Eve,  Phil.  Mag,  21,  p.  8,  1911;  22  p.  661,  1911. 


230  THE  fi  RAYS  [CH. 

the  distance  from  the  radium  preparation,  and  ft  the  coefficient  of 
absorption  of  the  fi  rays  by  the  air.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
rays  from  radium  are  complex;  but  at  some  distance  from  the 
source  the  value  of  fi  for  air  was  found  to  be  '004  (cms.)~*  corre- 
sponding to  the  swifter  rays  from  radium  C.  Consequently,  the 
average  path  of  the  fi  particle  in  air  is  Ijii  or  260  cms.  By  using 
a  thin  film  of  radium  B  -f  C  as  a  source  of  rays,  the  value  of  /i 
was  found  to  vary  between  '012  and  '013  for  distances  from  40  to 
100  cms.  By  integrating  the  ionisation  observed  over  a  spherical 
surface.  Eve  concluded  that  the  total  number  of  ions  produced  in 
air  by  the  /8  rays  from  radium  C  corresponding  to  one  gram  of 
radium  was  about  4  x  10"  and  from  radium  B  about  0*7  x  10".  A 
later  determination  under  more  definite  conditions  was  made  by 
Moseley  and  Robinson  in  the  laboratory  of  the  writer.  The  total 
number  of  ions  due  to  the  /8  rays  from  radium  B  +  C  in  one  gram 
of  radium  was  found  to  be  9  x  10". 

89.  Theories  of  absorption.  From  the  standpoint  of  our 
present  knowledge,  it  is  a  very  difficult  matter  to  formulate  a 
satis&ctory  theory  of  the  passage  of  /3  rays  through  matter. 
Taking  the  simplest  case  of  normal  incidence  of  a  pencil  of 
homogeneous  ^  rays  on  a  uniform  sheet  of  matter,  it  is  necessaiy 
to  take  into  account  the  scattering  of  the  fi  rays  and  its  variation 
with  velocity,  and  also  the  reduction  of  the  velocity  and  penetrating 
power  of  the  particles  as  a  result  of  the  atomic  encounters.  There 
appears  to  be  little  doubt  that  a  homogeneous  pencil  of  fi  rays 
after  transmission  through  some  thickness  of  matter  becomes 
heterogeneous.  It  is  thus  very  difficult  to  obtain  a  general  ex- 
pression to  take  into  account  all  the  eflFects.  Before  this  can  be 
done,  it  will  be  necessary  to  know  accurately  the  laws  which 
govern  the  individual  factors  involved.  Certain  fundamental 
points  are  not  yet  definitely  settled.  For  example,  it  is  not  known 
definitely  whether  the  /8  particle  can  be  stopped  in  mid  career  by 
a  violent  encounter  with  an  atom,  or  whether  each  particle 
gradually  loses  its  velocity  in  consequence  of  a  succession  of  atomic 
encounters  involving  scattering  and  ionisation. 

Bragg*  has  suggested  that  the  fi  particles  of  a  given  velocity 

*  Bragg,  Phil,  Mag.  20,  p.  386,  1910. 


V]  THE  /8   RAYS  231 

may,  like  the  a  particles,  have  a  definite  range  in  matter,  and  he 

has  collected  some  evidence  in  support  of  this  view.     In   this 

case,  the  range  does  not  refer  to  the  distance  between  the  point 

of  entrance  and  final  absorption,  but  is  the  integral  of  the  total 

tortuous  path  of  the  y9  particle.     The  evidence  as  a  whole  indicates 

that  some  of  the  y8  particles  are  gradually  slowed  up  by  their 

passage  through  matter,  and  that  the  absorption  observed  is  due 

[  to  the  stopping  of  those  particles  which  have  lost  most  of  their 

energy  by  a  long  succession  of  atomic  encounters.     At  the  same 

time,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  the  ^  particles  must 

suffer  a  sudden  and  marked  loss  of  velocity  in  occasional  violent 

encounters  where  the  /8  particle  passes  close  to  the  centre  of  the 

atomic  system.     Both  of  these  factors  may  be  involved  in  the 

absorption  of  /9  rays  by  matter.     Definite  progress  has  already 

been  made  in  deducing  the  laws  of  scattering  for  thin  films,  and 

in  determining  the  law  of  retardation  of  /8   particles  and  the 

variation  of  ionisation  with  velocity. 

The  first  attempt  to  formulate  a  theory  of  absorption  of  ^  rays 
taking  into  account  the  effect  of  "scattered  rays**  which  were 
then  thought  to  be  "secondary  rays"  was  made  by  McClelland* 
in  1905.  He  supposed  that  the  reduction  in  intensity  of  the 
pencil  of  rays  depended  on  (1)  a  true  absorption  proportional  to 
the  intensity,  and  (2)  a  production  of  secondary  or  scattered  rays 
which  was  proportional  to  the  energy  absorbed.  Expressions  were 
obtained  by  which  the  value  of  the  true  absorption  coefficient  and 
the  amount  of  radiation  scattered  back  from  a  plate  of  matter 
could  be  deduced. 

A  somewhat  modified  theory  was  developed  later  by  H.  W. 
Schmidtf .  He  supposed  that  of  the  energy  /  passing  through  a 
layer  of  matter  of  thickness  dx,  a  part  aldx  was  absorbed  and 
another  part  ^Idx  was  scattered  back. 

The  scattered  rays  were  assumed  to  have  the  same  properties 
as  the  primary  rays  both  as  regards  absorption  and  scattering,  and 
to  result  firom  a  volume  and  not  a  surface  effect.  Assuming  the 
rays  to  be   homogeneous  and  to  be  unchanged   in   velocity  in 

*  McClelland,  Roy.  Soc.  Trans.  Dub.  8,  p.  169;  9,  p.  1,  1906. 
t  H. W.  Schmidt,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  23,  p.  671,  1907 :   Phys.  ZeiU  10,  p.  929,  1909; 
11.  p.  262, 1910. 


232  THE  /8  RAYS  [ca 

traversing  matter,  he  deduced  that   the  fraction  p  of  the  lavs 
scattered  back  from  a  plate  of  thickness  x  was  given  by 

and  S  the  transmitted  fraction  bv 


where  the  constants  fi  and  p  are  connected  with  o  and  ^  by  the 
relations 

When  a  plate  is  thick,  j?  =  oo  and  p  =/>,  Le,  p  is  the  fraction  of 
the  total  radiation  scattered  back  from  the  plate.  Since  p  is 
always  less  than  1,  the  equation  of  the  transmitted  radiation  for 
small  values  of  x  is  approximately  given  by 

Schmidt  determined  the  variation  of  p  with  x  for  a  number  of 
materials  using  uranium  X  as  the  source  of  ^  rays.  The  values 
of  p  for  thick  plates  obtained  by  Kovarik  have  been  given  m 
Section  83. 

Knowing  the  value  of  p,  the  true  coeflBcient  of  absorption  /* 
can  be  deduced.  The  results  obtained  by  Schmidt  using  the 
P  rays  from  uranium  X  are  included  in  the  table,  p.  233,  where 
A  is  the  atomic  weight,  D  the  density  of  the  material,  /t  the  true 
absorption  coefficient,  /8  the  reflection  or  scattering  coeflicient.  and 
p  the  total  fraction  scattered  back  from  thick  plates. 

It  is  seen  from  the  table,  p.  233,  that  the  values  of  y^ii*  and 

Q 

"An  ^^^  approximat-ely  constant  for  all  substances,  the  mean  values 

being  11*2  and  12*4  respectively,  the  maximum  departure  from  the 
mean  being  about  14  per  cent. 

Schmidt  considers  that  these  values  are  universal  constants  of 
matter  for  a  given  radiation.     If 

c,  =  -j^A^     and    C2  =  j-^, 
a  =  CiDA~K    ^^c^AD. 


THE  /8  RAYS 


233 


The  constant  of  scattering  /8  used  by  Schmidt  is  practically 
aivalent  to  the  fraction  of  particles  deflected  through  a  given 
gle  <f>,  for  which  the  theory  has  been  given  in  Sections  74  and  85. 
has  there  been  pointed  out  that  the  experiments  on  scattering 


>i 

1 

-   1 

^  ^ 

5;=i 

• 

m 

00 

• 

0 

• 

« 

■ 

05 

• 

• 

00 

• 

9 

04 

• 

9 

CO 

• 

»p 

5i-: 

(N 

l-H 

9i 

04 

r- 1 

04 

l-H 

r-H 

04 

l-H 

l-H 
l-H' 

04 

l-H 

• 

s 

05 

• 

CX) 

• 

10 

• 

00 

• 

9 

• 

05 

• 

op 

• 

9 

9 

9 

05 

• 

0 

0 

^^ 

PM 

m^ 

-n 

^ 

l-H 

m^ 

0 

i-M 

l-H 

0 

05 

O  :Q 

r^ 

r^ 

^^ 

r^ 

1-^ 

1-^ 

^^ 

l-H 

f-l' 

l-N 

l-H 

l-H 

l-H 

•Ni 

? 



■  

— 

'^ 

— 

CO 

s 

Oi 

0 

c 

0 

05 

•• 

'^a 

0 

a 

•0 

• 

8 

• 

0 

g 

s 

8 

■$ 

s 

s 

i: 

^ 

1— i 

l-N 

1— i 

"^ 

■^ 

04 

04 

^ 

f* 

« 

1 

H  OB 

• 

p 

• 

• 

0 

• 

CO 

• 

9 

9 

CO 

• 

9 

04 

• 

CO 

• 

CO 

• 

■"C 

s 

;o 

00 

'i* 

CO 

0 

t- 

^^ 

S 

CD 

Ift 

^H 

CO 

05 

CO 

• 

04 

94 

94 

(N 

04 

04 

-^ 

CO 

^H 

< 

■S 

1 

• 

9 

• 

• 

<? 

•P 

04 

• 

9 

CO 

• 

0 

9 

m 

• 

<? 

§ 

CO 

04 

s? 

0 
0 

0 

s 

S 

s 

i 

^ 

%> 

Q 

52 

S5 

(N 

(M 

r* 

a> 

I-H 

CD 

CO 

iC 

• 

0 

04 

to 

"4: 

<? 

CO 

• 

CO 

• 

• 

• 

CO 

•• 

CO 

9 

0 

• 

05 

1^ 

• 

l-H 

• 

• 

CD 

>o 

t^ 

t^ 

t* 

t- 

t^ 

00 

00 

t* 

05 

05 

05 

05 

1 

'S 

0 

• 

9 

0 

•o 

^ 

4.  CO 

0 

i« 

t- 

CO 

m^ 

CO 

04 

CO 

s 

00 

0 

l^ 

CO 

04 

a 

^^ 

f^ 

«ft 

CO 

CO 

CO 

0 

0 

»a 

0 

00 

0 

05 

to' 

•2 

^ 

r^ 

l-H 

^H 

'^ 

0 

0 

8 

• 

CO 

05 

Q 

• 

<P 

00 

• 

•p 

• 

9 

0 

• 

CO 

• 

• 

CO 

■ 

• 

• 

no 

r^ 

(M 

1- 

00 

00 

00 

l>- 

0 

t- 

^H 

05 

^H 

05 

^H 

1— 1 

04 

l-H 

l-H 

o 

SO 

"   " 

^ 

CO 

S 

"^ 

• 

• 

(3i 

■ 

1^ 

• 

0 

• 

• 

• 

• 

05 

• 

0 

• 

00 

• 

04 

• 

• 

9 

'^ 

^ 

1^ 

0 

X 

Oi 

CO 

»C 

8 

I^ 

0: 

-^ 

I> 

8 

00 

vt 

VI 

0 

»c 

•a 

;o 

CD 

0 

l-H 

05 

Oi 

0 

^ 

l-H 

1-^ 

1— ( 

pi^ 

w^ 

99 

04 

e 

1 

1 

<*• 

i 

B 

3 

1 

B 

S 

a 

• 
• 
• 

a 

s 

1— 1 

• 
• 
• 

0 

• 
• 
■ 

0 
0 

• 
• 
• 

0 

• 
• 
• 

0 

S 

a 

• 
• 
• 

> 

• 
• 
• 

a 

a 

•-< 

s 
0^ 

• 
m 
• 

0 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

a 

as 
PQ 

y  thin  films  of  matter  both  with  a  and  ^  rays  indicate  that  /8 
aould  be  proportional  to  J.D,  the  empirical  relation  found  by 
•chmidt. 


S84  THE  P  RATB 

SiDce  D  =  NA,  where  N  is  the  number  of  atoms  pei 
volume,  it  follows  that  a  ia  proportional  to  the  cross  section  ' 
atom  and  ^  to  the  volume  of  the  atom. 

The  above  theories  are  of  necessity  very  imperfect  expre 

of  the  facts  of  absorption,  for  no  account  is  taken  of  the  retar 
of  the  /3  particles,  nor  of  the  variation  of  ionisation  and  scat 
with  velocity.  In  addition,  the  experimental  deductions 
been  made  by  using  Q  rays  which  are  very  heterogeneous,  i 
same  time,  such  theories  are  of  importance  in  bringing  out 
of  the  main  points  involved,  and  in  making  comparisons  i 


character  of  the  absorption  and  scattering  by  different  elei 
It  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  relations  between  absorptio 
scattering  for  different  elements  deduced  by  Schmidt  with  t 
of  the  theory  may  prove  to  have  an  essential  basis  in  fact. 

90.    The  atworptton   of  homogeneous  raye.     We 

seen  that  it  was  initially' supposed  that  an  exponential  I 
absorption  of  /3  rays  indicated  that  the  /S  rays  were  all  pro 
with  the  same  speed.     By  sorting  out  rays  of  a  definite  veloc 


THE  /3  RATS  £36 

IS  of  a  magnetic  field,  W.  Wilson"  found  that  homogeneous 
were  not  absorbed  according  to  an  exponential  law.  The 
imeDtal  armngement  is  shown  in  Fig.  62.  The  source  of 
tioQ  was  either  radium  itself  or  a  small  glass  tube  filled  with 
m  emanation.  The  complex  rays  from  the  source  passing 
igh  &  magnetic  field  were  bent  into  circles  of  different  radii. 
velocity  of  the  rays  entering  the  electroscope  E  was  conse- 
tly  determined  by  the  strength  of  field.     Since  the  openings 


Tbiclinfti  of  aiuminium  in  mm. 
Pig.  65. 

f  finite  size,  the  rays  entering  the  electroscope,  although 
imately  homogeneous,  consisted  of  0  particles  whose  velocity 
by  about  ten  per  cent.  The  screens  MM  were  placed  in 
I  to  constrain  the  path  of  the  rays,  and  to  prevent  as  far 
ibie  scattered  rays  from  entering  the  electroscope.  The 
ion  of  the  rays  was  measured  in  the  electroscope  E  by 
screens  of  different  thickness  over  the  opening  in  the 

*  W.  WilMD,  Proc.  Roy.  Soe.  A,  SI,  p.  613,  1909. 


236 


THE  yS  RAYS 


[Ctt 


bottom  of  the  electroscope.     The  eflfect  of  direct  /8  and  7  rayi 
was  cut  off  to  a  large  extent  by  a  suitable  lead  screen  A  ;  but  in 
each  experiment  the  effect  of  the  7  rays  in  the  electroscope  had 
to  be  allowed  for.     The  general  results  obtained  for  aluminiam 
are  shown  in  Fig.  63  for  rays  of  different  velocity.     It  will  be , 
seen   that   the   curves  plotted   with   the   ionisation    current  u 
ordinate,  and  thickness  of  screen  as  abscissa,  are  nearly  straight 
lines  over  a  considerable  range  of  thickness  and  depart  wide^   j 
from  the  ordinary  exponential  curve.     Later  Crowther*  repeated    • 
the  experiments  using  the  general  arrangement  shown  in  Fig.  59. 

10 


80 


60 


40 


•20 


1 

\ 

Alumlnli  im . 

0 

\ 

\ 

.\ 

\ 

\ 

Th 

crvNCSS  — 

r— 

•02 


•04 


08 


•10  cms 


•06 

Fig.  64. 

The  vacuum  chamber  S  was  removed  and  a  hemispherical  ionisa- 
tion vessel  substituted  and  the  opening  D  was  closed  with  thin 
aluminium.     The   rays  were   rendered    more  homogeneous  than 
those  employed  by  Wilson.     The  absorption  curve  obtained  for 
aluminium  is  shown  in  Fig.  64.     The  ionisation  at  first  falls  off 
slowly,  then  nearly  according  to  a  linear  law  and  finally  more 
slowly,  but  the  latter  part  of  the  curve  could  not  be  determined 
accurately.     The  initial   part   of  the   curve  would  indicate  that 
there  was  little,  if  any,  absorption  for  thin  layers,  but  the  re- 
duction was  mainly  due  to  scattering  of  the   rays  on  the  side 
of  incidence.     On  the  other  hand,  Crowther  found  that  if  the 

♦  Crowther,  Proc,  Roy,  Soc.  A,  84,  p.  226,  1910. 


]  THE  P  RAYS  237 

omogeneous  rays  were  first  passed  through   a  platinum  plate 
K)l  em.   thick,  the   emerging  rays  were   absorbed   very  necurly 
x!Cording  to  an  exponential  law.     The  explanation  of  this  effect  is 
lot  obvious,  but  it  is  probably  connected  with  the  wide  difference 
n  the  scattering  coeflScient  for  aluminium  and  platinum*.     The 
rays  passing  through  '001  cm.  of  platinum  are  very  completely 
mattered,  and  the  effect  of  this  scattering  may  make  the  rays 
heterogeneous  to  some  extent  as  regards  velocity.     The  question  of 
the  nature  of  the  absorption  of  very  homogeneous  pencils  of  /8  rays 
has  been  later  examined  in  detail  by  W.Wilson  (Proc. -Roy.  Soc.  1912). 
The  experiments  of  Wilson  indicate  that  for  approximately 
homogeneous  beams,  the  rays  must  decrease  steadily  in  velocity  in 
traversing  the  aluminium.     On  his  results,  the  intensity  /  of  the 
rays  measured  by  the  ionisation  current  after  passing  through 
a  thickness  x  is  given  by  /=  A:  (a  —  a?)  where  a  is  the  distance  from 
the  origin  of  the  point  where  the  straight  line  if  produced  cuts 
the  axis  of  abscissae.     If  we  define  the  coeflScient  of  absorption  ^ 
in  the  usual  way,  viz.  d/  =  —  fildx,  it  is  seen  that  /i  =  l/(a  —  x). 
The  absorption  coeflScient  is  thus  not  constant  but  increases  in 
value  with  the  thickness  x  traversed.     Such  a  result  indicates 
that  the  rays  decrease  rapidly  in  penetrating  power  and  con- 
sequently in  velocity  in  their  passage  through  matter.     This  was 
shown  later  to  be  the  case  by  Wilson  (Section  92)  and  the  decrease 
of  velocity  was  found  to  be  in  fair  accord  with  that  deduced  fi:om 
the  change  of  the  coeflScient  of  absorption  with  thickness.     It 
must  not,  however,  be  forgotten  that  the  interpretation  of  the 
amount  of  ionisation  due  to  the  transmitted  rays  depends  on  three 
factors,  (1)  the  scattering  of  the  fi  particles  back  on  the  side  of 
incidence,  (2)  the  number  of  y8  particles  stopped  by  the  matter, 
and  (3)  the  change  with  velocity  of  ionisation  per  unit  path  of 
the  particle.     The  importance  of  each  of  these  factors  requires 
to  be  settled  before  any  very  definite  deductions  can  be  made. 

The  apparent  absorption  according  to  an  exponential  law 
of  /3  rays  from  some  radio-active  substances  is  not  easy  to  account 
for  on  these  results.  It  would  appear  that  the  rays  must  be 
complex  to  a  considerable  extent  before  such  a  law  of  absorption 
»n    hold  even  approximately.     Wilson  has  calculated  from  his 

*  See  Bragg,  Phil  Mag,  20,  p.  8S5,  1910. 


238  THE  )8  RAYS  [CB 

results  the  distribution  with  velocity  of  ^  particles  required  to  gin 
approximately  an  exponential  law  of  absorption.  Gray  and  Wilson* 
found  that  the  absorption  of  /8  rays  from  radium  E,  which  were 
shown  to  be  complex  both  by  the  electric  and  photographic  method, 
was  the  same  for  a  thick  and  thin  layer  over  a  considerable  range 
of  thickness.  Such  a  result  shows  that  the  initial  distribution  of 
/8  rays  with  velocity  for  a  thin  film  must  be  nearly  the  same  as  the 
distribution  in  the  case  of  a  thick  layer.  At  the  same  time,  the 
experiment  of  Crowther  on  the  exponential  law  of  absorption  of 
homogeneous  y3  rays  after  traversing  some  thickness  of  platinum, 
indicates  that  the  results  are  to  a  large  extent  affected  by  the 
nature  of  the  absorbing  screen. 

91.  Variation  of  absorption  with  speed.  It  was  early 
recognised  by  Becquerel  that  radium  emitted  complex  yS  rays,  and 
that  their  penetrating  power  increased  rapidly  with  velocity. 
From  the  considerations  advanced  later  in  Section  95,  it  will  be 
seen  that  the  sources  of  /8  radiation  ordinarily  employed  are  not 
homogeneous,  so  that  the  coefficient  of  absorption  found  in  the 
usual  way  applies  to  a  mixture  of  rays  of  diflferent  speeds.  The 
mean  velocity  of  the  yS  rays  emitted  by  radium  E  and  uranium  X 
have  been  determined  by  H.  W.  Schmidtf  using  an  electric  method 
and  found  to  be  2-31  x  10^®  and  276  x  10^® cms.  per  second  re- 
spectively. These  rays  are  absorbed  according  to  an  exponential 
law  and  give  values  of  /i  =  43*3  and  /it  =  15  (cms.)~*  respectively  for 
aluminium.  These  results  show  that  the  value  of  /n  decreasei 
rapidly  with  increase  of  average  velocity  of  the  rays. 

The  absorption  of  cathode  rays  has  been  investigated  by 
Lenard,  who  found  that  the  absorption  coefficient  /i  variei 
inversely  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  velocity  and  is  nearly 
proportional  to  the  density  of  the  material  over  a  wide  range. 
No  doubt  the  cathode  rays  employed  by  Lenard  were  hetero- 
geneous, and  the  absorption  coefficients  found  by  him  correspond 
to  a  mixture  of  rays  of  different  velocities.  The  value  of  ^  for 
the  cathode  rays  is  very  large  compared  with  that  for  the  muA 
swifter  rays  from  active  substances. 

♦  Gray  and  Wilson,  Phil.  Mag.  20,  p.  870,  1910. 

t  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Phyt.  ZHU  8,  p.  361,  1907;  10,  p.  6,  1909. 


1 


THE  /8  RAYS 


289 


The  variation  of  absorption  with  speed  for  homogeneous  rays 
as  been  investigated  by  Wilson  by  the  method  described  in  the 
irevious  sectioa 

The  absorption  curve  for  aluminium  was  approximately  linear, 
ind  the  coefficient  of  absorption  was  deduced  from  the  relation 
i=l/(a  — a:)  where  x  is  the  thickness  of  aluminium  traversed 
ind  a  the  distance  from  the  origin  where  the  straight  line  if 
produced  cuts  the  axis  of  abscissae  (see  Fig.  63).  The  results  are 
Deluded  in  the  following  table  where  u  is  the  velocity  of  the 
ncident  rays. 


Hp 
(Gauss  cm.) 

u 
(cms.  per  seo.) 

a 
(in  mmi.) 

/i(cm8.)~^ 

1310 

1  -79  X  10>» 

0-14 

71-5 

8-12  X  1021 

1860 

2-20     „ 

0-26 

38-5 

1001      „ 

2760 

2-545    „ 

0-70 

14-3 

8-41      „ 

3860 

2-74      „ 

1-32 

7-6 

8-27      „ 

4450 

2-794    „ 

1-67 

6-0 

8-33     „ 

5390 

2-855    „ 

2-08 

4-81 

9-17     „ 

6350 

2*899   f) 

2-64 

3-79 

9-43     „ 

8000 

2-920    „        i 

3-29 

3  04 

10-8       „ 

8580 

2-930   „ 

4  09 

2-44 

9-87     „ 

8960 

2-937    „        ' 

4-69 

1-13 

909     „ 

Avei 

•age     9-25  x  10«i 

It  is  seen  that  there  is  a  rapid  variation  of  /x  with  velocity. 
For  an  increase  of  velocity  from  1*79  to  2*937  x  10^^  the  value  of 
lA  varies  in  the  ratio  of  63  to  1.     In  the  last  column,  the  writer 

\m  included  the  value  f J   fi  for  the  fi  particle.     This  is  seen 

to  be  approximately  constant  over  the  range  of  velocities  examined. 

We  may  consequently  conclude  that  fiocE"^  approximately 
where  E  is  the  energy  of  the  incident  /8  particle.  The  above 
relation  is  of  value  in  considering  the  connection  between  the 
change  of  absorption  and  change  of  velocity  of  the  fi  particle  in 
pftssiDg  through  matter.  Whiddington*  concludes  that  fi.u*  is  a 
constant  for  slow  fi  rays  excited  by  X  rays. 

•  Whiddington,  Proc.  Camb.  Phil,  8oe,  16,  p.  326,  1911. 


240  THE  P  RATS  [C 

Since  we  have  seen  that  /i=  l/(a  —  x)  where  x  is  the  thicknc 

of  matter  traversed,  ^  =  t  (a  —  or),  where  k  is  a  constant.  Suppo 
that  the  energy  of  the  incident  particle  is  E^  when  x  =  0 :  the 

i?»*  ~  E^  »kx  gives  the  relation  between  the  energy  JE"  of  tl 
issuing  particle  and  the  thickness  of  matter  traversed.  It  will  I 
seen  in  the  next  section  that  the  reduction  of  velocitv  of  the  /9  rai 
in  passing  through  aluminium  can  be  approximately  expressed  t 
an  equation  of  this  type. 

If  it  be  supposed  that  the  decrease  of  energy  of  the  transmittt 
p^.'ncil  of  rays  is  due  entirely  to  the  ionxsation  produced  in  tl 
sul>stance,  the  variation  of  ionisation  with  velocity  can  be  at  on< 

deducirfl.     Since  E^^k{a-x),  dEjdx  ac(a-  x)~^  oc  E^-.    Su] 
jx>s<.*  that  the  radiation  passes  through  one  centimetre  of  gas,  tht 
if  the  absorption  of  energy  dE  is  proportional  to  the  number 
ions  prrxluced  in  traversing  one  centimetre,  / .  \^E  is  a  constar 

i.e.  the  ionisation  per  unit  path  varies  inversely  as  ^E  or  \-mu\ 
It  will  be  seen  (Section  93)  that  this  relation  approximate 
expresses  the  variation  of  ionisation  with  velocity  for  swift  13  ray 
It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  this  relation  is  equivalent  to  thi 
deduced  for  the  a  particle  by  Geiger  (Section  68). 

92.  The  retardation  of  the  0  particles.  The  laws  c 
absoq)tion  of  /3  particles  by  matter  is  very  similar  in  solids,  liquid 
and  gases.  Since  it  is  known  that  the  passage  of  the  jS  partial 
through  gases  is  accompanied  by  ionisation  and  consequently  b; 
abs<)q)tion  of  energy,  it  seems  probable  that  ionisation  is  ab 
produccjd  by  the  y8  particle  in  passing  through  liquid  and  soli 
matter.  It  is  thus  to  be  expected  that  the  velocity  of  the  / 
particles  should  decrease  in  passing  through  matter.  This  ha 
been  simply  shown  in  the  case  of  the  a  rays,  where  homogeneou 
radiations  arc  available.  In  the  case  of  the  ^  rays,  the  diminutio; 
i)f  velocity  has  been  more  difficult  to  determine,  partly  on  accouD 
of  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  homogeneous  fi  radiation,  and  parti; 
on  account  of  the  marked  scattering  of  the  /8  rays  in  passinj 
through  matter.  The  initial  experiments  on  the  absorption  c 
fi  mys  at  first  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  reduction  of  velocit 
in  ]M\«8ing  through  matter  must  be   small.     This  question  wa 


y]  the  ^   RATS  241 

eiamined  in  detail  by  W.  Wilson  ".  The  experimental  arrangement 
is  ahown  in  Fig.  65.  The  rays  from  a  tube  A  filled  with  radium 
eounation  passed  between  the  pole  pieces  of  an  electro-magnet  C, 
described  a  circular  path,  and  passed  through  an  opening  0 
between  the  poles  D  of  another  electro-magnet,  where  they  were 
■gain  bent  to  enter  the  electroscope  E.  In  this  way,  raya  of  a 
definite  velocity  were  made  to  pass  through  an  absorbing  screen 
at  0,  and  the  velocity  of  the  emerging  rays  was  then  analysed  by 
the  second  magaetic  field. 


Fig.  66. 

The  method  of  conducting  the  experiment  was  as  follows: 
By  passing  currents  of  known  strength  through  the  electro- 
magnets C  and  D,  an  approximately  homogeneous  radiation  was 
allowed  to  pass  through  the  hole  0  into  the  magnetic  field  D. 
The  field  in  D  was  varied,  while  that  in  C  was  kept  constant. 
The  ionisation  in  the  electroscope  was  determined  for  each  value 
ot  the  field  in  D,  and  the  values  thus  obtained  were  plotted 
against  the  current  through  D.  The  curve  A  (Fig.  66)  shows 
the  variation  of  ionisation  with  current  when  there  is  no  screen  at 
0.  If  the  rays  had  been  completely  homogeneous,  it  would  be 
•  W.  Wileon,  Proe.  Soij.  Soc.  A,  8«,  p.  HI,  1910. 


242  THE  /?  RATS  [CB. 

expected  that  they  could  only  pass  in  the  electroscope  £  for 
a  definite  value  of  the  current  in  D.  In  consequence,  however,  0/ 
the  finite  width  of  the  openings,  the  rayg  were  not  completely  homo- 
geneous. Under  these  conditions,  an  effect  in  the  electroscope  is 
observed  over  a  considerable  range  of  current  in  the  second 
electro- magnet,  but  the  curve  has  a  sharp  maximum  which 
corresponds  to  the  rays  of  mean  velocity.     The  curves  B,  C,  B 


Current  through  D 
Pig.  66. 

were  obtained  when  screens  of  aluminium  of  increasing  thickoea 
were  placed  at  0.  The  effect  of  these  screens  is  to  reduce 
markedly  the  ionisation  due  to  the  0  rays  in  the  electroscope. 
It  is  seen  that  the  maxima  of  the  curves  are  displaced  towardi 
the  lower  magnetic  fields.  This  shows  that  the  average  velocity 
of  the  issuing  rays  has  been  redficed  by  traversing  matter.  His 
reduction  of  velocity  is  also  shown  by  the  increase  of  the 
coefficient  of  absorption  ft  of  the  issuing  rays  with  thickness  of 


THE  P   RAYS 


243 


tter  traversed.  The  results  are  shown  in  the  following  table 
rting  with  /8  particles  of  velocity  2*86  x  10"  cms.  per  second. 
The  velocity  was  determined  from  the  curvature  of  the  path  of 
rays  using  the  Lorentz- Einstein  formula.  It  is  seen  that  the 
uction  of  velocity  in  passing  through  a  considerable  thickness 
aluminium  is  apparently  not  very  marked;  but  it  must  be 
Qe  in  mind  that  this  alteration  in  velocity  corresponds  to  a 
rked  change  in  the  energy  and  penetrating  power  of  the  trans- 
ted  particles.  For  example,  the  rays  of  velocity  200  x  10"  are 
f  absorbed  by  a  thickness  of  matter  less  than  1/10  that  required 


lickness  of  Al. 
in  mm. 

/u  in  om.~i 

Velocity  in 
10**  cm./sec. 

Energy  of  /3  particle    | 
in  ergs               i 

0-00 
0-51 
0-83 
1-03 
1-20 
1-34 
1-48 
1-58 
1-66 
1-72 
1-78 
1-82 
1-86 
1-88 
1-95 

4-7 

6-2 

7-7 

9-1 

10-8 

12-7 

16-4 

18-2 

21-3 

241 

28-6 

32-3 

37-0 

40-0 

56-6 

2-86 
2-80 
2-75 
2-70 
2-65 
2-60 
2-56 
2-50 
2-45 
2-40 
2-35 
2-30 
2-25 
2-20 
2-00 

18-6  X  10-' 
14-3      „ 

12-0      „               I 
10-4      „               1 

9-2      „ 

8-1      „ 

715    „ 

6-5      „ 

5-9      „ 

5-4      „ 

4-9      „ 

4-5      „ 

41      „ 

3-8      „ 

2-76    „ 

particles  of  velocity  2*86  x  10^°.  The  results  clearly  show  that, 
an  average,  the  fi  particles  do  diminish  in  velocity  m  passing 
ough  matter  and  that  consequently  their  absorption  coefficient 
lergoes  a  progressive  change. 

It  has  been  deduced  in  the  last  section  that  the  relation  between 
energy  E  of  the  transmitted  particle  and  the  thickness  x  of 

iter  traversed  should  be  given  by  E^  —  E^  =  kx  where  A  is  a 
3tant  and  Eq  the  energy  of  the  incident  particle.  This  formula 
1  fair  agreement  with  the  results  included  in  the  above  table, 
son  (loc,  cit,)  has  shown  that  the  results  are  also  approximately 
ressed  by  a  formula  of  the  type  Eo  —  E  =  kiW,  but  on  account 

U—2 


244  THE  fi  RAYS  [Cfl. 

of  the  uncertainty  in  the  measurement  of  the  lower  velocities,  it  is 
difficult  to  decide  definitely  between  this  relation  and  a  relation  of 
the  type  E^  —  ^«  =  kiX,  From  measurements  of  the  retardation 
of  cathode  rays  between  velocities  6*3  x  10"  and  8*6  x  10*  cms.  per 
second  Whiddington*  concludes  that  the  retardation  is  expressed 
by  the  formula  V^  --V^  —  kx  where  V^  is  the  initial  velocity  of  the 
^  particle  and  V  the  velocity  of  the  issuing  particles  after 
traversing  a  thickness  x  of  matter. 

Decrease  of  velocity  by  ike  Photographic  method. 

The  decrease  of  velocity  of  the  y8  particles  in  passing  through 
matter  has  been  shown  by  v.  Baeyerf  in  a  striking  way  by  the 
photographic  method.  It  will  be  seen  in  the  next  section  that 
the  active  deposit  of  thorium  expels  several  sets  of  homogeneous 
)8  rays.  This  is  shown  by  the  photographic  method  using  an 
apparatus  similar  to  that  given  in  Fig.  23.  The  writer  is  indebted 
to  Dr  V.  Baeyer  for  the  photograph  reproduced  later  in  Fig.  70  a. 
The  central  part  A  of  the  figure  shows  the  photograph  obtained 
when  the  active  wire  is  uncovered.  The  dark  band  in  the  centre 
is  due  to  the  a  and  7  rays.  The  symmetrical  bands  on  either 
side  due  to  the  ^8  rays  are  obtained  by  reversal  of  a  weak  magnetic 
field.  The  dark  bands  on  the  right  and  left  correspond  to  an 
emission  of  a  set  of  homogeneous  rays  of  velocity  1*89  x  10*"  cms- 
per  second.  The  upper  and  lower  parts  B  and  C  of  the  figure 
show  the  deflection  of  the  same  rays  after  passing  through  0440111. 
and  '022  cm.  of  aluminium  respectively.  It  is  seen  that  the 
bands  are  more  deflected  than  before  showing  that  the  velocity  of 
the  transmitted  /8  rays  has  been  reduced  in  their  passage  through 
the  aluminium.  The  reduction  of  velocity  is  more  marked  for  the 
thicker  sheet  of  aluminium.  The  bands  after  traversing  the 
aluminium  are  still  distinctly  defined  showing  that  the  transmitted 
rays  are  approximately  homogeneous.  It  can  also  be  observed  io 
the  photograph  that  the  intensity  of  the  band  of  higher  velocit) 
becomes  relatively  more  marked  after  passing  through  th< 
aluminium.  It  is  difficult  to  decide  with  certainty  fix)m  suc^ 
photographs  whether  the  homogeneous  /8  rays  remain  entirel 

♦  Whiddington,  Proc.  Camh,  Phil.  Soc.  16,  p.  321,  1911. 
t  V.  Baeyer,  P?ty9.  Zeit,  18,  p.  48ff,  1912. 


V]  THE  P  RAYS  245 

homogeneous  after  traversing  matter.  It  would  be  difficult,  for 
example,  to  decide  whether  a  fraction  of  the  transmitted  /8  particles 
were  heterogeneous  as  regards  velocity,  since  the  photographic 
effect  of  the  distributed  rays  would  be  too  feeble  to  detect. 

93.    lonisation  and  velocity  of  the  ^  particle.     The 

activity  of  /8  rays  and  their  absorption  by  matter  are  usually 
measured  by  the  electric  method.  Since  many  radio-active  sub- 
stances emit  )8  particles  with  a  wide  range  of  velocity,  il  is  of 
importance  for  the  interpretation  of  results  to  know  how  far  the 
ionisation  current  is  a  measure  of  the  number  of  /3  particles 
present.  This  will  obviously  depend  upon  the  variation  with 
velocity  of  the  number  of  ions  produced  by  a  ^  particle  in  its 
passage  through  the  gas  in  the  ionisation  chamber.  In  his  experi- 
ments on  ionisation  by  collision,  Townsend  found  that  the  number 
of  ions  produced  by  an  electron  moving  in  an  electric  field  was 
small  at  first  for  weak  fields,  but  increased  with  the  strength  of  an 
electric  field  to  a  maximum  corresponding  to  a  production  of  about 
20  ions  per  centimetre  of  path  in  air  at  a  pressure  of  one  milli- 
metre. Under  these  conditions,  each  collision  of  the  electron 
with  an  atom  produced  a  pair  of  new  ions.  Suppose  next  the 
electron  is  expelled  with  sufficient  velocity  to  produce  a  number 
of  ions  before  it  is  stopped  and  that  no  electric  field  is  acting. 
The  ionisation  per  unit  path  in  the  gas  then  decreases  rapidly 
with  increase  of  velocity  of  projection.  This  is  shown  by  the 
experiments  of  Durack*  with  the  cathode  rays.  The  charge 
carried  by  the  cathode  rays  emerging  from  a  Lenard  tube  was 
measured  and  also  the  ionisation  produced  by  them  in  air  at  low 
pressures.  The  number  a  of  ions  produced  per  centimetre  of  path 
per  particle  is  for  such  swift  particles  proportional  to  ap,  where  p 
is  the  pressure,  supposed  small.  The  value  of  a  for  p  =  1  mm.  of 
mercury  was  found  to  be  0*43  for  air  with  rays  of  average  velocity 
(recalculated)  7  x  !()•  cms.  per  second.  A  recent  determination  of 
«  has  been  made  by  Glassonf  under  more  definite  conditions,  who 
found  a  value  a=  1*5  for  cathode  particles  of  velocity  4*8  x  lO'cms 
per  second.     In  a  similar  way,  Durack  J  determined  the  value  of 

♦  Durack,  Phil.  Mag,  4,  p.  29,  1902. 
t  Olasson,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  647,  1911. 
X  Doraok,  Phii.  Mag.  6,  p.  550,  1903. 


i4fi  THE  fi  RATS  [C] 

a  for  high  Hpeed  fi  particles  (average  velocity  aboot  2'6  x  10 
HinxtuA  by  a  radium  preparation.  The  valoe  of  a  was  still  lowt 
viz,  0'17  at  1  EQUL  presBure,  showing  that  only  one  pair  of  ions  i 
on  the  average,  produced  by  the  fi  particle  traversing  6  cms.  < 
air  at  1  mm.  pressure.  Recent  estimates  by  different  methoc 
have  been  rna^ie  by  Eve*  and  by  Geiger  and  Kovarik*'-.  Tl 
fonner  found  that  on  an  average  a  fi  particle  from  radium  * 
pnxluced  48  ions  per  cm.  of  path  at  atmospheric  pressure,  whi 
iUAgtT  and  Kovarik  found  108.  The  corresponding  values  of  a  a] 
•06  and  '13  respectively.  It  is  difficult  to  make  a  direct  con 
[/ariHon  of  these  two  numbers  as  the  measurements  were  mac 
under  very  different  conditions.  The  number  given  by  Geig« 
and  Kovarik  refers  to  the  ionisation  over  the  first  centimetre  « 
path  of  the  average  fi  particle  from  radium  C ;  the  value  by  E\ 
to  the  average  ionisation  per  centimetre  produced  by  the 
particles  along  their  whole  path. 

It  is  thus  clear  that  the  high  speed  /8  particle  is  a  vei 
inefficient  ioniser  compared  with  the  o  particle.  From  the  resul 
given  by  Geiger  (Section  67)  it  is  seen  that  the  o  particle  at  i 
highest  velocity  produces  about  2250  ions  per  millimetre  of  pat 
in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure,  or  30  ions  per  cm.  at  1  mi 
pressure.  The  relative  ionisation  per  unit  path  produced  by  tl 
average  a  or  /3  particle  expelled  from  radium  thus  varies  in  tl 
ratio  of  about  200  to  1. 

It  has  been  deduced  in  Section  91  that,  if  the  loss  of  energy 
the  yS  rays  is  due  mainly  to  the  energy  required  for  ionisation,  tl 

ionisation  per  unit  path  of  the  /8  particle  should  vary  as  l/EJ^  whe 
E  is  the  energy  of  the  fi  particle.  It  is  of  interest  to  calculate  ( 
this  assumption  the  value  of  o  in  air  (number  of  ions  per  cm. 
1  mm.  pressure)  for  difierent  values  of  the  velocity.  The  latter 
expressed  in  the  table  by  ff,  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  tl 
/3  particle  to  the  velocity  of  light.  For  the  purpose  of  calculatic 
the  value  of  Qlasson  a  =  1*5  for  ^  =  '16  is  assumed  to  be  correct 

Valuo/9    -012       -Oft       -1       -16 
Value  a      20      4*8      24    1*5 

♦  Eve,  PhiL  Mag.  82,  p.  651,  1911. 

t  Geiger  and  Kovarik,  Phil,  Mag,  82,  p.  604,  1911. 


•2 

•3 

•4 

•5 

•6 

•7 

•8 

•9 

•9 

1-2 

•8 

•57 

•46 

•36 

•29 

•23 

•16 

•0 

y] 


THE  13  RATS 


247 


It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  values  obtained  for  high 
yelocities  are  in  reasonable  agreement  with  the  data  so  far 
obtained.  The  value  of  a  reaches  20  for  a  velocity  3*6  x  10* 
cms.  per  second,  while  Townsend  observed  that  an  'electron 
produces  a  pair  of  ions  in  each  collision  when  the  velocity  was 
that  acquired  in  moving  freely  between   two  points  of  differ- 


Fig.  67. 

ence  of  potential  20  volts.  This  corresponds  to  a  velocity  of 
2*6  X  10*  cms.  per  second.  For  a  velocity  corresponding  to  that 
of  initial  expulsion  of  an  a  particle  from  radium  C,  viz.  2*06  x  10* 
cm&  per  second,  the  value  of  a  is  3*5  for  the  fi  particle  ai^d  30  for 
the  a  particle.  Consequently  at  the  same  speed  an  a  particle 
produces  in  air  nearly  9  times  the  number  of  ions  produced  by  a 


248  THE  /9  RAYS  [CH. 

/8  particle.  Since  the  a  particle  carries  twice  the  charge  of 
the  /S  particle  and  is  also  of  much  greater  mass,  this  difference 
in  eflSciency  is  about  that  to  be  expected  on  general  theoretical 
grounds. 

An  investigation  has  been  made  by  W.  Wilson*  to  determine 
the  variation  of  ionisation  of  high  speed  fi  particles  with  velocity. 
For  this  purpose,  a  small  tube  filled  with  the  radium  emana- 
tion served  as  an  intense  source  of  13  rays.  The  general 
arrangement  employed  is  seen  in  Fig.  67.  The  rays  from  the 
source  at  A  passed  into  a  flat  brass  box  C  fixed  between  the 
pole  pieces  of  an  electro-magnet,  were  bent  by  the  magnetic  field 
and  entered  the  copper  vessel  JF,  in  which  the  charge  carried  by 
the  pencil  of  /3  rays  was  measured  by  means  of  a  gold  leaf  electro- 
scope attached  to  it.  The  whole  apparatus  was  hermetically 
sealed  and  exhausted  to  a  low  vacuum.  A  number  of  screens 
were  arranged  in  the  vessel  C  to  cut  off  stray  radiation,  so  that 
the  rays  entering  D  were  approximately  homogeneous  after  being 
sorted  out  by  the  magnetic  field.  By  varying  the  magnetic  field, 
j3  particles  of  different  velocities  entered  the  vessel  E,  and  their 
charge  was  measured.  The  velocity  of  the  particles  was  deduced 
from  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  rays,  assuming  the  Lorentz- 
Einstein  formula.  In  order  to  measure  the  ionisation,  the  vessel 
E  was  removed  and  an  ionisation  vessel  b  was  substituted.  Air 
was  admitted  to  a  low  pressure,  and  the  ionisation  was  measured 
for  pressures  between  1  and  50  millimetres.  At  such  low  pressures, 
the  ionisation  is  proportional  to  the  pressure.  The  results  are 
given  in  the  table  on  p.  249. 

Column  II  gives  the  velocity  of  the  ^  particles ;  column  III, 
the  charge  carried  by  the  fi  particles  which  entered  the  electro- 
scope for  different  mean  velocities;  column  IV,  the  observed 
ionisation  in  arbitrary  units  for  a  constant  air  pressure.  Since 
many  of  the  ^  particles  are  diffusely  reflected  from  the  walls 
of  the  ionisation  vessel  and  after  a  number  of  successive  reflections 
are  absorbed  by  the  walls,  the  ionisation  observed  is  much  greater 
than  that  due  to  the  j3  particle  in  traversing  the  length  of  the 
vessel.  Since  the  amount  of  reflection  (Section  83)  is  a  function 
of  the  velocity  of  the  /8  particles,  it  is  necessary  to  correct  the 

♦  W.  Wilson,  Proc.  Roy.  8oe.  A,  86,  p.  240,  1911. 


v] 


THE  ^  RAYS 


249 


observed  ionisation  for  reflection.  The  corrected  values  are 
given  in  column  V.  Column  VI  gives  the  values  /  of  the 
corrected  ionisation  divided  by  the  charge;  /  in  this  case  corre- 
sponds to  the  relative  ionisation  per  particle  in  travelling  the 
length  of  the  vessel.  Column  VII  gives  the  product  Iv?  where  u 
is  the  velocity  of  the  fi  particle,  and  column  VIII  the  relative 

vahies  / .  E^  where  E  is  the  energy  of  the  /8  particle.     From  the 


I 

on. 
850 

n 

in 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VITI 

see. 

Belative 

No.  of 

particles 

(charge) 

Belative 
lonisatioii 

Ionisation 
corrected 

for 
reflection 

7-67 

Ionisation 
Charge    ~ 

Iv} 

168 

1-35 

49 

7-67 

15-7 

28 

1150 

1*66 

73 

9-82 

8-31 

11-4 

31 

157 

1390 

1-87 

87 

10-99 

810 

9-3 

32 

150 

1650 

2-08 

105 

10-97 

7-20 

6-85 

30 

127 

1B90 

2-23 

106 

10-47 

6-50 

6-14 

30 

126 

2160 

2-35 

108 

9-77 

5-89 

5-45 

30 

123 

2440 

2-46 

102 

8-64 

5-06 

4-95 

30 

121 

2750 

2-55 

104 

7-82 

4-66 

4-48 

29 

119 

3300 

2-67 

89 

6-44 

3-63 

4-08 

29 

121 

39(0 

2-74 

76 

5-43 

3-06 

4-03 

30 

132 

4«00 

2-82 

56 

3-82 

216 

3-86 

31 

142 

5430 

2*86 

47 

2-97 

1-71 

3-64 

30 

142 

5910 

2-88 

44 

2-58 

1-52 

3-46 

29 

143 

6350 

2-90 

39 

1 

2-23 

1-37 

3-52 

30 

165 

Me£ 

m  137 

I 


agreement  of  the  product  lu^  for  different  velocities,  Wilson  con- 
cluded that  the  ionisation  per  unit  path  was  inversely  proportional 
^  the  square  of  the  velocity  over  the  range  of  measurement. 

We  have   seen   above   that   it   is   to   be   expected   that   the  ' 

ionisation  should  vary  as  1/^.  Consequently  I  ,E^  should  be  a 
constant.  The  values  of  this  product  given  in  the  last  column 
do  not  agree  so  well  with  one  another,  as  the  values  for  the 
elation  given  by  Wilson.  Considering,  however,  the  difficulty  of 
the  measurements,  the  agreement  is  sufficiently  good  to  indicate 


260 


THE  P  RATS 


[( 


that  the  ionisation  may  be  taken  to  vary  inversely  as  the  squfl 
root  of  the  energy  of  the  /8  particle.  The  actual  value  of  t 
ionisation  in  a  copper  vessel  uncorrected  for  reflection  was  foui 
to  be  expressed  very  nearly  by  a  relation  of  the  form  /  =  A?  (c  — 
where  k  and  c  are  constants. 

Geiger  and  Eovarik*  have  determined  the  average  number 
ions  produced  per  )3  particle  for  the  first  centimetre  of  its  path 
air  at  atmospheric  pressure  for  a  number  of  fi  ray  products.    Tl 
total  average  ionisation  due  to  each  /3  particle  was  calculated  fro 
this  quantity.     In  these  experiments,  the  actual  number  of 
particles  emitted  by  the  material  was  not  directly  measured,  bi 
it  was  assumed  that  each  atom  in  disintegrating  emitted  oi 
P  particle.     The  number  of  atoms  disintegrating  per  second  w; 
obtained  by  counting  the  a  particles  emitted  by  the  product  itse 
or  by  a  product  in  equilibrium  with  it.     The  results  are  includ( 
in  the  following  table : 


Substance 

Absorption 

Coefficient 

M  (cms.)"* 

in  aluminium 

Current  per 
j9  particle  in 

e.s.  units. 

Average 
Value 

Number 

of  Ions 

produced 

in  first  om. 

of  path 

Whole 

number  of 

Ions  prodocec 

Actinium  D   ... 
Thorium  C  + 1) 
Radium  B 
Radium  C 
Radium  £ 
Uranium 

Thorium  B     ... 
Radio-actinium 
Actinium  B    ... 
Radium  D 

28-5 
16-3 
750 
13-5  to  50 
43-3 
14-4 

130 
175 
125 
120 

6-3x10-8 
6-3    „ 
6-2    „ 
5-0    „ 
3-2    „ 
3-6    „ 

20     „ 
0-7    „ 
0-4    „ 
0-5    „ 

136 
136 
133 

108 
69 
78 

10-0  xlO» 

17-3    „ 

3-7    „ 

7-7    „ 

3-3    „ 

11-3    „ 

94.     Diitribution  with  velocity  of  the  ^  vBjn.    It  w] 

early  recognised  that  the  ^  rays  from  radium  and  thorium  we; 
complex  and  consisted  of  p  particles  projected  over  a  considerab 
range  of  velocity.  The  distribution  of  particles  with  velocii 
depends  to  a  large  extent  on   the   thickness  of  the   layer 

*  Geiger  and  EoTarik,  Phil,  Mag,  SS,  p.  604,  1911. 


V] 


THE  )3   RATS 


251 


radio-active  material  from  which  the  radiations  emerge,  and  also 
on  the  thickness  of  the  screens  surrounding  the  preparation.  The 
distribution  with  velocity  of  the  /3  particles  from  a  preparation  of 
radium  was  first  determined  by  Paschen*  by  measuring  the  total 
charge  carried  by  the  /8  rays  which  were  not  bent  away  by  a 
known  magnetic  field.  The  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  68. 
Curve  I  gives  the  charge  due  to  the  fi  rays  for  different  values  of 
the  magnetic  field.  Curve  II  is  the  first  differential  of  Curve  I, 
and  the  ordinates  represent  the  relative  number  of  ^  particles 


2^000 


8 

7 

V- 

* 

1 

6 

At 

< 

5. 

X 

N 

« 

\ 

V 

^ 

4 

\ 

la 

^^ 

\ 

\ 

2 

1  < 

u 

\ 

V 

t 

-<l 

tjSliaui 

'Kau/f 

w/»«»j 

^ 

^^ 

JU/^ 

1 

_II 

Ci: 

I 

r. 

r^ 

4,000  6,000  8,000 

Magmtic  FieUl  in  C.O.S.  Units 

Fig.  68. 


10,000 


12,000 


for  each  velocity.  It  is  seen  that  a  considerable  number  of  slow 
velocity  rays  are  present,  but  the  curve  shows  a  maximum  for  the 
penetrating  radiations  for  a  field  corresponding  to  2500  Gauss. 

If  the  distribution  is  examined  by  sorting  out  the  13  rays  by  a 
Qiagnetic  field,  and  measuring  the  ionisation  current  due  to  them 
ID  an  electroscope,  the  distribution  f  is  similar  to  that  shown  in 
^ig-  69,  curve  a.  The  ionisation  reaches  a  maximum  for  a  value 
3500  Gauss,  which  corresponds  to  a  velocity  of  2*7  x  10**  cms.  per 
second.     The  distribution   curve  depends  on  the   thickness  of 


*  Pasoben,  Ann.  d,  Phy$.  14,  p.  389,  1904. 

t  W.  Wilson,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  82,  p.  612,  1909. 


252 


THE  )8  RAYS 


matter  traversed.     Curves  b  and  c  give  the   distribution 
passing  through  0*489  and  1*219  mms.  of  aluminium  respec 
placed  under  the  electroscope  (see  Fig.  67);  d  and  e  are 
sponding  curves  when  the  screens  are  placed  in  the  path  < 
rays  be/ore  entering  the  magnetic  field. 

95.    Homog^eneouB  groups  of  fi  rays.     We  have  al 
outlined   in   Section  82  the  changes  of  view  in  regard   t 


s    8 
a 


I 
■I   4 


t 

/^ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

V 

/ 

r 

^ 

"/> 

%■ 

< 

\ 

// 

/ 

1 

N 

^ 

^ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

""^ 

> 

^^^ 

\ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

/ 

/ 

y 

/ 

V 

^ 

1> 
0 

0 

m 

00 

40 

00 

6G 

100 

80 

00 

Hp  in  Gauss  cm. 
Fig.  69. 

absorption  of  /8  particles  by  matter.  A  notable  advance  i 
knowledge  of  the  emission  of  /8  particles  by  different  kii 
radio-active  matter  has  resulted  from  the  investigatio 
V.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  Meitner*.  They  have  examined  by  a  ] 
graphic  method  the  "  spectrum  "  in  a  magnetic  field  of  the  / 
expelled  from  thin  films  of  radio-active  matter.     The  arrang 

*  V.  Baeyer  and  Hahn,  Phys.  Zeit.  11,  p.  488,  1910.    ▼.  Baeyer,  Ha 
Meitner,  Phys,  Zeit,  12,  pp.  273,  378,  1911;  3,  p.  264,  1912. 


M. 


Fig.  TOc.     (Nat.  size.) 


THE  )8   RAYS  253 

the  experiment  is  very  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  23.  used  for 
}  a  rays.  The  source  of  radiation  was  a  fine  wire  coated  with  a 
ry  thin  film  of  radio-active  matter.  The  experiments  were  made 
a  vacuum  with  the  wire  unscreened,  so  that  the  a  rays  produced 
strong  effect  on  the  plate.  These  o  rays  are  only  very  slightly 
fleeted  for  magnetic  fields  suflScient  to  give  a  large  deviation  of 
e  /8  rays.  It  was  found  that  in  many  cases  sharp  bands  were 
>tained  on  the  photographic  plate  showing  that  the  active 
atter  emitted  sets  of  homogeneous  yS  rays  with  different  but 
laracteristic  velocities.  Examples  of  the  results  obtained  for 
le  active  deposit  of  thorium  have  already  been  mentioned  in 
action  92  and  are  shown  in  Fig.  70a.  The  distribution  of  the 
roups  of  13  rays  fi:om  mesothorium  2  is  shown  in  Fig.  70  B.  The 
Titer  is  indebted  to  Dr  Hahn  for  this  photograph.  Fig.  70  c 
btained  by  the  writer  shows  some  of  the  more  marked  groups  of 
]  rays  which  are  emitted  by  the  active  deposit  of  radium.  In 
his  case  the  rays  fi"om  a  fine  tube  containing  radium  emanation, 
liter  passing  through  a  narrow  slit,  fell  on  a  photographic  plate 
Dlaced  at  an  angle  of  about  45°  with  the  horizontal.  The  central 
iark  line  is  due  mainly  to  the  a  rays.  The  magnetic  field  was 
•eversed  during  the  experiment. 

It  was  at  first  thought  that  each  of  the  bands  was  due  to  a 
;,'roup  of  homogeneous  rays,  but  a  closer  investigation  has  shown 
that  while  the  easily  absorbed  rays  of  comparatively  slow  velocity 
give  sharp  bands  or  traces  on  the  photographic  plate,  some  of 
the  more  penetrating  rays  of  swifter  velocity,  for  example  those 
from  thorium  D,  show  broader  and   more   diffuse   bands.     This 
difference  is  of  great  interest.     The  results  indicate  that  the  slow 
velocity  particles  are  emitted  with  a  definite  and  characteristic 
Velocity,  but  that  the  more  penetrating  rays   consist  either  of 
particles  projected  over  a  considerable  range  of  velocity  or  contain 
a  number  of  groups  of  rays.    This  photographic  method  of  analysis 
has  proved  of  great  value,  and  has  led  to  a  definite  determination 
of  the  velocities  of  the  sets  of  rays  emitted  from  different  kinds  of 
active  matter.     The  general  results  show  that  the  emission  of 
^  rays  is  a  very  complex  phenomenon,  and  there  appears  to  be 
no  definite  connection  between  the  number  of  a  and  the  number  of 
groups  of  /8  particles  emitted  by  any  given  product.     For  example. 


254  THE  /3  RATS  [ 

it  is  known  that  the  /8  radiation  from  radium  B  and  C  to; 
consists  at  least  of  twenty-nine  distinct  sets  of  /8  rays,  which 
clearly  on  the  photographic  plate.     Consequently  in   these 
successive  transformations,  where  only  one  a  particle  is  emii 
per  atom  of  radium  C,  there  are  at  least  twenty-nine  se 
13  particles.     The  bearing  of  these  results  on  the  charactei 
the  transformations  will  be  considered  later  in  Chapter  X 

There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  number  of  )8  parti 
emitted  in  each  of  the  sets  of  rays  is  only  a  fr^x^tion  of  the 
number  of  atoms  transformed,  for  we  have  seen  (Section  80)  tb( 
Moseley  could  detect  the  presence  of  only  about  21  j3  partidl 
corresponding  to  tb  »nsformation  of  an  atom  of  both  radium 
and  radium  C.  The  examination  of  the  types  of  rays  emitted  1 
0  ray  products  has  not  been  completed,  but  the  velocities  so  i 
obtained  are  given  below. 

Velocity  of  groups  of  rays  as 
Substance  fractions  of  the  velocity  of  light 

Uranium  X  Continuous  )3  ray  spectrum 

Radium  .g    .g- 

(freed  from  active  deposit)  ' 

Radium  B  -36,    41,    63,    70,    74 

Radium  C  -80,    86,   94,  -98 

Radium  D  -33,  '39 

Radium  E  Continuous  /3  ray  spectrum 

Mesothorium  2  37,  -39,  -43,  '60,  -67,  '60,    66 

The  swifter  rays  have  not  yet  been  analysed 

Thorium  X  47,  -51 

Thorium  B  -63,  '72 

Thorium  C+D  -29,    36,  '93— -95  (broad  band) 

It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  radiations  from  both  uranii 
X  and  radium  E  give  an  apparently  continuous  spectrum  on  t 
photographic  plate,  and  no  definite  evidence  of  the  emission 
groups  of  homogeneous  rays  has  yet  been  obtained. 

The  fi  ray  products  of  actinium  have  not  yet  been  analys 
on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  sufficiently  acti 
preparations. 

Danysz*  has  recently  published  a  more  complete  list  of  t 
different  sets  of  yS  rays  emitted  from  the  radium  emanation.     T 

*  Danysz,  C.  R,  168,  pp.  339,  1066,  1911 ;  Le  Radium  9,  p.  1,  1912. 


THE  13  RAYS 


255 


Dation  from  about  200  milligrams  of  radium  was  concentrated 
very  fine  glass  tube.  After  passing  through  a  narrow  slit  the 
fell  on  a  photographic  film  inclined  at  a  small  angle  with 
direction  of  the  ra)r8.  On  applying  a  uniform  magnetic  field 
ght  angles  to  the  slit,  each  set  of  rays  traced  out  the  arc  of  a 
e  on  the  photographic  plate.  His  results  are  given  in  the 
^wing  table. 


Jlo. 

Hp 

fi 

Remarks 

No. 

Hp 

P 

Remarks 

1 

1320 

•615 

8. 

13 

31 

•882 

f. 

2 

1390 

•634 

f. 

14 

3420 

•897 

f. 

3 

1490 

•660 

v.f. 

15 

4000 

•920 

f 

4 

1580 

•682 

8. 

16 

4670 

•940 

8. 

5 

1680 

•705 

f. 

17 

4800 

•943 

f. 

6 

1750 

•718 

V.f. 

18 

4980 

•946 

f. 

7 

1830 

•735 

8. 

19 

5100 

•949 

m. 

8 

1900 

•748 

m. 

20 

5700 

•957 

8. 

9 

1970 

•760 

f. 

21 

5990 

•962 

f. 

10 

2150 

•786 

8. 

22 

11200 

•988 

complex 

11 

2190 

•790 

f 

23 

18100 

•996 

— 

12 

2870 

1 

•862 

8. 

From  the  observed  value  of  Hp,  where  H  is  the  strength  of 
le  magnetic  field  and  p  the  curvature  of  the  rays  in  a  magnetic 
j1(1,  the  velocity  was  deduced  by  the  aid  of  the  Lorentz-Einstein 
rmula  assuming  that  e/rrio  =  1*772  x  10'.  The  velocity  is  ex- 
•essed  in  the  table  by  )8,  the  fraction  of  the  velocity  of  light. 
he  intensity  of  the  traces  on  the  photographic  plate  varies 
idely,  strong  lines  are  marked  s.,  feeble  lines  f ,  very  feeble  lines 
f.,  and  lines  of  medium  intensity  m.  The  lines  marked  s.  are 
isy  to  measure.  The  lines  for  numbers  1  to  9  are  slightly 
■oader  than  is  to  be  expected  theoretically  for  a  completely 
unogeneous  pencil  from  the  dimensions  of  the  source  and  slit. 
16  variation  of  velocity  in  the  bundle,  however,  is  not  more  than 
6  per  cent.  The  swifter  rays  give  finer  lines  of  about  the 
eoretical  breadth.  Number  22  consists  of  several  sets  of  rays 
»m  3  to  5  in  number,  for  which  the  values  of  /8  lie  between  98 
d  '99.  The  swiftest  fi  rays  observed  gave  Hp  =  26000  and 
=  '998.     The  stronger  lines   observed  by  Danysz  are  in  good 


256  THE  /8  RAYS  [CH. 

accord  with  those  found  by  v.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  Meitner 
included  separately  under  radium  B  and  radium  C  in  the  previoi 
table. 

The  results  so  far  obtained  show  how  extraordinarily  compl 
are  the  ^  radiations  from  radio-active  substances.  In  the  light 
the  results  given  above  it  appears  not  improbable  that  the 
tinuous  )8  ray  spectrum  observed  for  uranium  X  and  radium 
may  be  ultimately  resolved  into  a  number  of  line&  It  is  quite 
possible  also  that  the  somewhat  diffuse  band  given  by  thorium  D 
may  be  caused  by  the  overlapping  of  several  groups  of  raya 

A  possible  explanation  of  the  complexity  of  /8  rays  from  radio- 
active substances  is  suggested  in  Chapter  XVIII. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  GAMMA  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS. 

6.  In  addition  to  the  a  and  ^  rays,  a  number  of  the  radio- 
e  substances  give  out  a  radiation  of  an  extraordinarily 
trating  character  called  the  y  rays.  These  rays  are  con- 
ubly  more*  penetrating  than  the  X  rays  produced  in  a  **  hard  " 
urn  tube.  Their  presence  can  readily  be  observed  for  an  active 
tance  like  radium,  but  is  difficult  to  detect  for  uranium  and 
11  m  unless  a  large  quantity  of  active  material  is  used, 
'illani*,  using  the  photographic  method,  first  drew  attention 
le  fact  that  radium  gave  out  these  very  penetrating  rays,  and 
d  that  they  were  non-deviable  by  a  magnetic  field.  This  result 
confirmed  by  Becquerelf. 

Jsing  a  few  milligrams  of  radium,  the  7  rays  can  be  detected 
(lark  room  by  the  luminosity  they  excite  in  the  mineral 
;mite  or  in  a  screen  of  platinocyanide  of  barium.  The  a  and 
ys  are  completely  absorbed  by  placing  a  thickness  of  2  milli- 
es  of  lead  over  the  radium,  and  the  rays  which  then  pass 
ugh  the  lead  consist  entirely  of  7  rays.  The  very  great 
trating  power  of  these  rays  is  easily  observed  by  noting  the 
It  diminution  of  the  luminosity  of  the  screen  when  plates  of 
al  several  centimetres  thick  are  placed  between  the  radium  and 
screen.  These  rays  also  produce  ionisation  in  gases  and  are 
t  investigated  by  the  electrical  method.  The  presence  of  the 
iys  from  30  mgrs.  of  radium  can  be  observed  in  an  electroscope 
iv  passing  through  30  cms.  of  iron. 

♦  Villard,  C.  R.  130,  pp.  1010,  1178,  1900. 
t  Becquerel,  C.  R.  180,  p.  1164,  1900. 

R.  R.-A.  17 


258 


THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  BAYS 


I 


97.    The  absorption  of  y  rays  firom  radium.     The  7  n 

are  emitted  in  large  amount  only  from  those  radio-active  substant 
which  emit  penetrating  fi  rays.  Before  the  eflfect  due  to  t 
7  rays  can  be  studied,  it  is  necessary  either  to  deflect  the  y8  ra 
away  from  the  measuring  apparatus  by  a  strong  magnetic  field 
to  place  a  sufficient  thickness  of  matter  over  the  preparation 
completely  absorb  the  fi  rays.  The  latter  method  is  usual 
adopted,  and  it  is  found  that  a  thickness  of  two  millimetres 
lead  is  sufficient  to  completely  cut  off  the  fi  rays.     Investigatio 


100 


80 


•S  60 

a.40 
•s 


20 


1 

— -     -f 

^ 

10                                         20  SO 

.  Thickness  of  Lead  in  mnu. 

Fig.  71. 


on  the  absorption  of  the  7  rays  can  be  most  simply  carried  out  1 
electroscopic  methods.  For  this  purpose  it  is  desirable  to  u 
a  lead  electroscope,  whose  walls  are  at  least  2  mms.  thick.  T 
windows  of  the  electroscope  should  be  suitably  shielded  to  preve 
fi  rays  entering  through  them. 

In  Fig.  71  is  shown  the  effect  on  the  ionisation  in  an  ordina 
/8  ray  electroscope  when  screens  of  lead  of  different  thickness 
are  placed  between  the  active  material  and  the  electroscoi 
Initial  observations  on  the  absorption  of  the  7  rays  from  radii 


Vl]  THE  7  OR   VERY   PENETRATING   RAYS  259 

by  the  electric  method  were  made  by  Rutherford*  and  later  by 
McClelland  f.     The  latter  found  that  the  absorption  of  7  rays  was 
not  exponential  until  the  rays  had  passed  through  several  centi- 
metres of  lead.     If  the  coefficient  of  absorption  ii  is  defined  in 
the  usual  way  by  dl  =  ^Idx,  where  /  is  the  intensity  measured  by 
the  ionisation  produced,  it  was  found  that  the  value  of  /x  showed 
a  progressive  decrease  with  thickness  for  heavy  elements  like  lead 
and  mercury,  but  was  sensibly  constant  for  lighter  elements  like 
1  aluminium.     The  absorption  constant  /it  was  approximately  pro- 
■  portional  to  the  density  D  of  the  material  after  the  radiation  had 
I:  passed  through  a  considerable  thickness  of  lead. 

Observations  on  the  absorption  of  7  rays  from  radium  have 
been  made  by  EveJ,  Wigger§,  Tuomikoski||,  and  Soddy  and 
i  Russell  f.  Using  the  electroscopic  method  and  interposing  screens 
of  lead  between  the  absorbing  material  and  the  electroscope,  the 
coefficient  of  absorption  is  found  at  first  to  decrease  with  the 
thickness  of  matter  traversed.  The  values  found  by  Tuomikoski 
for  the  variation  of  the  ionisation  current  with  thickness  of  lead 
up  to  19  cms.  are  shown  in  the  following  tables.  The  value  of  /x 
is  deduced  from  the  relation 

^here  /,  is  the  intensity  after  traversing  a  distance  d„  and  I^  the 
intensity  after  a  distance  dj. 

Corresponding  values  of  /a  for  dififerent  thicknesses  deduced 

^    from  these  results  are  given  in  the  second  table.     It  is  seen  that 

\    there  is  a  progressive  decrease  of  the  value  of  //.  with  increasing 

thickness.    The  coefficient  fi  =  '50  (cms.)~^  shows  that  after  passing 

through  about  5  cms.  of  lead  an  additional  thickness  of  1*4  cms.  is 

required  to  cut  down  the  ionisation  to  half  value. 

The  values  of  the  coefficient  of  absorption  obtained  by  ordinary 
methods  vary  somewhat  according  to  the  arrangement  adopted. 

♦  Rutherford,  Phy».  Zeit.  8,  p.  517,  1902. 

t  McClelland,  Phil  Mag.  8,  p.  67,  1904. 

X  Eve,  Phil.  Mag,  16,  p.  224,  1908 ;  18,  p.  275,  1909. 

§  Wigger,  Jakr.  Badioakt.  2,  p.  430,  1905. 

II  Tuomikoski,  Phy».  Zeit.  10,  p.  372,  1909. 

H  Soddy  and  Russell,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  620,  1909. 

17—2 


260 


THE  7  OR   VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS 


Mr  and  Mrs  Soddy,  and  Russell*  have  made  an  extem 
investigation  of  the  absorption  of  7  rays  from  radium 
different  materials.  The  absorption  by  lead  was  investiga 
by  a  special  electroscopic  method,  and  the  value  of  /x  was  foi 
to  be  0*60  (cms.)"*  for  a  range  of  thickness  between  2  cms.  j 
22  cms.  This  value  agrees  well  with  that  found  by  Tuomikc 
(see  above)  between  2  and  12  cms.  of  lead.     Soddy  and  Rusi 

Absorption  of  7  rays  from  radium  by  lead. 


Thickness  of 

lonisation 

Thickness  of 

lonisation 

lead  in  cms. 

current 

lead  in  cms. 

1 

current 

0-3 

100 

10 

0-63 

1 

61-6 

11 

0-39 

2 

331 

1             12 

0-30 

3 

19-9 

'             13 

0-20            : 

4 

11-7 

14 

Oil            . 

5 

7-07 

15 

0-07 

6 

4-26 

16 

005 

7 

2-57 

:             17 

004 

8 

1-62 

18 

003 

9 

i 

1 

19 

0-02 

0-4—  10 
1-0—  2-2 
2-2—  5-4 
5-4— 120 
12-0— 15-8 
15-8—18 


0-70 
0-58 
0-52 
0-50 
0-39 
0-25 


ascribe  the  decrease  in  the  value  of  fi  found  by  Tuomikoski 
greater  thickness  to  the  presence  of  a  secondary  penetrat 
radiation  which  enters  any  unprotected  point  of  an  electrosc< 
for  example,  the  windows.  This  radiation  penetrates  alumini 
and  brass  very  readily,  but  is  stopped  by  a  few  millimetres  of  I 
When  examined  by  the  ordinary  methods,  the  absorptioi 
the  7  rays  of  radium  by  lead  does  not  follow  an  exponential 

*  Mr  and  Mrs  Soddy,  and  Russell,  Phil.  Mag.  19,  p.  725,  1910. 


VI]  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  261 

but  the  apparent  value  of  /i  decreases  rapidly  to  a  value  of  about 
0*50  for  a  thickness  of  2  cms.  of  lead.     In  order  to  investigate  the 
absorption  of  the  rays  for  small  thicknesses,  Soddy  and  Russell 
employed  a  diCFerent  arrangement.     The   ionisation    vessel   con- 
sisted of  two  concentric  hemispherical  copper  bowls  40  and  20 
cms.  diameter  respectively,  while  the  radium  was  placed  at  their 
centre.     The  rays  thus  had  the  same  path  in  the  ionisation  vessel 
for  angles  up  to  180°.     The  absorbing  material  was  constructed 
of  plates  so  cut  as  to  build  up  a  hemisphere  with  the  radium 
at  its  centre.     The  values  of  /it  for  the  truncated  hemispheres 
were  calculated,  allowance  being  made  for  the  variation  in  lengths 
of  path  of  the  y  rays  in  passing  obliquely  through  the  absorbing 
material.     The  ordinary  formula  of  absorption  cannot  be  applied 
unless  a  narrow  pencil  of  7  rays  falls  normally  on  the  absorbing 
material.     Suppose  that  the  7  rays  emitted  over  an  angle  of  180"* 


I 


L 


\ 


I  « 

Fig.  72. 

from  a  source  R  (Fig.  72)  enter  the  ionisation  chamber,  and  let  /© 
be  the  total  energy  of  the  radiation  over  this  angle.  Let  I^  be 
the  corresponding  value  when  the  rays  have  traversed  a  screen  of 
uniform  thickness  d. 

Suppose  the  absorption  coeflScient  is  defined  in  the  usual  way, 

viz.  X  =  -r  "T" »  where  dx  is  the  thickness  traversed  and  /  the  in- 
/  dx 

tensity  of  the  radiation. 

Let  j&  =5  intensity  of  radiation  at  unit  distance.  Within  a 
solid  angle  dta  the  energy  of  the  radiation  transmitted  through 
the  plate  at  an  angle  0  with  the  normal  is  Edcoe"'^^^^^,  Con- 
sequently the  total  energy  I^  transmitted  through  the  screen  is 
given  by 

/d«r   Ee'»^l^^27ram0d0, 
Jo 


262  THE  7  OB   VERY  PENETRATING  BAYS  [OL] 

Since  I^  =  2irE, 

I4II,  =  f '^  e-'^'^^  sin  0d0  =  fidr^dy,   if  y  =  /irf/cos  6, 

Jo  J md  !r 


The  latter  integral  known  as  the  "  exponential  integral "  has 
been  evaluated  by  Glaisher.  In  a  similar  way,  it  is  a  simple 
matter  to  deduce  the  ratio  /j//o  when  the  incident  rays  are 
included  within  a  known  angle.  The  value  of  fi  can  thus  be 
calculated  from  the  observed  ratios  TJT^  of  the  ionisation.  The 
value  of  /i  so  found  is  less  than  that  deduced  from  the  ordinary 
exponential  formula,  where  the  angular  width  of  the  pencil  of 
incident  rays  is  neglected.  For  example,  Soddy  and  Russell 
calculated  that  for  a  pencil  of  semi-angle  IS""  the  value  of  ^  was 
about  2  to  2*5  per  cent,  less  than  the  ordinary  value  over  a  wide 
range  of  thickness.  The  correction  is  consequently  not  large  under 
these  conditions.  The  absorption  of  the  7  rays  for  thickness  of 
lead  up  to  7*5  cms.  was  examined  by  the  method  described  above, 
and  found  to  be  approximately  exponential  over  the  whole  range 
with  a  value  of  /i  =  0'50  for  lead.  In  this  arrangement,  all  the 
radiation  passing  through  the  absorbing  sheets  entered  the  testing 
vessel,  so  that  there  was  no  disturbance  due  to  scattering  of  the 
emergent  rays.  The  absorption  of  a  number  of  metals  was  made 
by  the  same  method  with  somewhat  varjdng  results.  For  example, 
in  zinc,  the  absorption  curve  for  small  thicknesses  showed  initially 
wide  departures  from  the  exponential  law. 

From  the  fact  that  under  certain  experimental  conditions  the 
7  rays  of  radium  are  absorbed  nearly  exponentially  over  a  wide 
range  of  thickness,  Soddy  and  Russell  concluded  that  the  7  rays 
must  be  homogeneous.  The  evidence  obtained  from  scattering, 
however,  does  not  support  such  a  conclusion.  It  seems  probable 
that  the  exponential  law  of  absorption,  as  in  the  case  of  /S  rays, 
cjinnot  be  regarded  as  definite  evidence  of  homogeneity*. 

The  value  of  the  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  7  rays  by 
matter  is  considerably  influenced  by  the  disposition  of  the  absorbing 

*  Bee  Kleeman,  PhiU  Mag,  20,  p.  248,  1910;  and  Sodd^,  PhiL  Mag.  20,  p.  383 
1910. 


n]  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  263 

jcreen  between  the  source  and  the  testing  vessel.     When  the 
ibsorption  is  measured  by  placing  plane  sheets  of  matter  between 
the  source  and  the  electroscope,  all  observers  have  found  that  the 
value  of  /i  for  the  7  rays  of  radium  at  first  decreases  rapidly  with 
the  thickness.     This  is  especially  marked  in  lead,  and  has  been 
ascribed  to  a  lack  of  homogeneity  of  the  primary  7  rays.     The 
initial  part  of  the  absorption  curves  obtained  with  heavy  elements 
like  lead  and  mercury  show  more  marked  variations  than  with 
a  light  element  like  aluminium.     This  is  expressed  by  the  state- 
ment that  lead  hardens  the  radiation,  i,e,  the  average  penetrating 
power  of  the  issuing  rays  after  passing  through  lead  is  increased 
for  all  substances.     This  is  ascribed  to  the  property  of  lead  and 
other  heavy  elements  of  rapidly  absorbing  the  soft  radiation.     On 
this  view,  the  hardness  of  the  issuing  rays  is  due  to  the  removal 
of  a  large  proportion  of  the  less  penetrating  7  rays.     This  effect 
is  not  exhibited  to  anything  like  the  same  extent  by  light  elements 
like  aluminium  and  iron.    The  values  of  the  coefficient  of  absorption 
found  thus  depend  to  some  extent  on  whether  the  electroscope  is 
made  of  lead  and  the  source  covered  with  lead  to  cut  off*  this  soft 
radiation.     In  addition,  it  will  be  shown  later  that  the  7  rays  are 
scattered  by  their  passage  through  matter,  and  that  the  softer  or 
less  penetrating  rays  are  more  readily  scattered  than  the  harder 
or  more  penetrating  radiation.     The  value  of  /i  will  thus  vary 
with   the   arrangement,   depending  on   how   much   of  this   soft 
scattered  radiation  enters  the  electroscope.     Soddy  and  Russell 
(/oc.  cit)  and  Florance*  have  drawn  attention  to  the  variation  of 
/^  with  the  disposition  of  the  electroscope  and  absorbing  screens. 

98.  Connection  of  absorption  with  density.  Soddy  and 
Russell  examined  the  relation  between  absorption  and  density  for 
the  7  rays  from  radium  and  from  an  intense  source  of  uranium  X. 
The  values  found  for  the  two  types  of  7  rays  are  included  in  the 
table  on  page  264. 

It  is  seen  that  the  7  rays  of  radium  are  more  penetrating  than 
those  from  uranium.  Some  of  the  curves  of  absorption  for  radium 
7  rays  in  different  materials  obtained  by  Soddy  and  Russell  are 
shown  in  Fig.  73  where  the  logarithms  of  the  ionisation  in  the 

•  Florance,  Phil,  Mag.  20,  p.  921,  1910. 


264 


THE  7  OR  VERY   PENETRATING   RAYS 


electroscope  are  plotted  as  ordinates  and  the  thicknesses  of  ma 
as  abscissae.  In  this  case  the  7  rays  initially  passed  thi 
1  cm.  of  lead.     It  is  seen  that  in  most  cases  the  curves  are  r 


00 

B 


"5: 


04  CO 


CN  O  (N  O  O  05  05 
t^  t^  t>»  t^  ^  CO  CD 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

^j'     ^r     "^     ^^     ^^^     ^^r     'nT 


Tt<  CD  <N 

00  1— I  ^ 

-rjt  lb  O 


CD 

s 


00  t> 


sD  CM  O  1-^  Oi  ^t 
_  (35  ;0  t  CN  C5     _ 
-^  CO  eo  C5  CJ  i-t  »-i 


s 


1-^  CO 
(N  05!  CO 
(N  &  '^ 


oo 

B 


CM  "^ 
t^  CO 

•  • 


00  Oi  ^  00  CO  "^  ^ 

Oi  00  05  00  Oi  "-^  p 

CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  ^  ^ 


B 


(N  lO 

1«  05 
CD  -^ 


f-^  O  ^  "-^  00  00  •— • 
»0  (N  Q  00  Ol  —I  r-i 
CO  CO  W  (M  ©1  i-H  ^ 


CD  a  '^ 

.-H  CO  CD 

•  a  • 

^     ^*     ^ 


lO  00  (N 

r9? 


O   •  ^ 


o  « 

O    g    00 

S.S2  o 


to  05 

•  • 

CO  t^ 

S3 

CO 


CD  (N 

CD  00  CD  »0  O  "^   • 

t^  O  I"*  >0  CD  05  ^ 

SSSS3SS 
0000000 


CO  CD  '«J* 

•  •  ■ 

1— I  1-^  I-- 

I— <   l-H   l-H 

•«J  -tS  .«j 

000 


oo 

d 


05O 

»0  '^ 

CO  ^ 

^-<  1— t 

I^  o  c^ 
,     (p  00  t;* 

00  00  t*  r*  r*  (N  (N 


i-i  if5  (M  '"d' 
X  CO  CD  (N 


O  ©4 

(N  00  CD 
iO  i^  X 

•  •  • 

<M  ^  O 


eS 


a. 


«5l 


?^£  p  2  ^  ^«^ 


e8 


o 


r-  <N 


CO  ^  .0  ?c  r-  X  05 


O  --^  (N 


straight   lines,   showing   that   the    absorption    is    approxiir 
exponential. 

The  values  of  fi/D  given  in  the  table  show  that  the  n 
may  be  conveniently  divided  into  three  groups.     The  first  \ 


THE  7  OR   VERT   PENETRATINQ   RATS  265 

ling  mercury  and  lead  for  which  the  values  of  (i,jD  are 
nctly  higher  than  for  the  eleraenta  of  lower  atomic  weight, 
second  group  contains  elements  of  density  between  8"8  and 
n  which  the  values  of  ^jD  are  sensibly  constant,  showing  that 
absorption  is  very  nearly  proportional  to  the  density.  The 
J  group  contains  lighter  substances  in  which  /x/i)  has  a  some- 
t  higher  value.  From  a  consideration  of  these  results  and  the 
Its  for  the  absorption  of  7  rays  by  gases  given  later,  it  is  clear 


Fig.  78. 

t  the  value  of  (tjD  passes  through  a  minimum  for  elements  of 
■rmediate  atomic  weight  like  aluminium  and  copper.  This  is 
experimental  result  of  great  interest  for  which  no  explanation 
as  yet  been  offered. 

Absorption  by  Oases. 

The  absorption  of  the  7  rays  Irom  radium  by  gases  has  been 
mined  by  Chadwick*  by  a  balance  method.     The  ionisation 
*  Chadwick,  Proe.  Pkyt.  Soe.  M,  p.  1G2,  191SI. 


266 


THE  7  OR  VERY   PENETRATING   RAYS 


[CH. 


effect  in  a  lead  vessel  due  to  a  source  of  7  rays  was  balanced 
against  the  constant  ionisation  due  to  the  a  rays  from  uranimn, 
and  the  disturbance  of  the  balance  due  to  the  passage  of  the  rajfi 
through  known  thicknesses  of  absorbing  matter  was  determined. 
The  absorption  of  7  rays  by  liquid  air  and  by  solid  carbon  dioxide 
was  measured  and  compared  with  the  absorption  of  the  rays  by  air 
and  carbon  dioxide  contained  in  cylinders  under  high  pressure. 
The  absorption  was  found  to  vary  directly  as  the  pressure  of  the 
gas.  The  value  fi/D  for  air  and  carbon  dioxide  was  found  to  be 
practically  the  same  by  the  two  methods,  indicating  that  lowering 
of  temperature  has  no  effect  on  the  absorption  of  the  7  rajrs. 

The  observed  values  of  fi/D  are  included  in  the  following  table 
for  the  three  gases  and  also  for  some  of  the  lighter  substances 
measured  under  similar  conditions.     In  column  I  is  given  the  value  jjj 
of  fi  for  the  rays  which  traverse  3  mms.  of  lead  before  entering 
the  electroscope  and  in  column  II  for  10  mms. 


Substance 

I 

II 

100  fjLJD 

100  fi/D 

Hydrogen 

4-7 

Air  (under  pressure) 

4-8 

— 

Air  (liquid) 

4-84 

4-60 

CO2  (under  pressure) 

51 

47 

Wood          

5-21 

4*29 

Water         

5-58 

4-72 

Aluminium 

4-45 

3-95 

Iron             

4-48 

4-00 

Lemi            

9-03 

5-99 

It  is  seen  that  the  value  of  fi/D  is  greater  for  gases  and  water 
than  for  aluminium,  but  is  much  less  than  for  lead  under  the  same 
conditions.  The  variations  are  less  marked  for  more  penetrating 
rays. 

Since  the  value  of  fi/D  for  air  does  not  change  much  with  the 
penetrating  power  of  7  rays,  the  average  coefficient  of  absorption 
of  the  7  rays  from  radium  by  air  can  be  calculated  taking  the 
value  fi/D  =  -048.  Since  the  density  of  air  at  normal  pressure 
and  at  15*"  C.  is  00125,  fi  for  air  at  ordinary  temperature 
=  60  X  10"*  (cm.)"*.    This  value  is  of  importance  in  determining' 


]  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  267 

e  distance  traversed  by  the  y  rays  in  air.  The  7  rays  from 
dium  are  half  absorbed  in  a  distance  of  115  metres  of  air  at 
)rmal  pressure  and  temperature,  and  their  intensity  is  reduced 

1/100  after  traversing  760  metres. 

Experiments  on  the  absorption  of  the  7  rays  from  radium  by 
r  have  also  been  made  by  Hess*.  The  ionisation  due  to  the 
rays  from  about  a  gram  of  radium  was  measured  for  diflferent 
stances  from  the  radium.  Assuming  that  the  intensity  of  the 
rays  at  a  distance  r  from  the  radium  is  proportional  to  e'^^^jr^y 
e  value  of  fi  can  be  deduced  from  the  relative  values  of  the 
nisation  observed  in  an  electroscope  for  different  values  of  r. 
ess  found  that  fi  =  4*47 .  10"'  (cms.)"*  for  air.  This  is  a  value 
stinctly  lower  than  the  value  obtained  by  Chadwick  given  above, 
It  the  conditions  of  measurement  were  very  different  in  the  two 

99.    7  radiation  from  other   radio-active    substancei. 

he  absorption  of  the  7  rays  from  actinium  was  initially  examined 
s  Godlewskif  and  Eve  and  from  uranium  and  thorium  by  EveJ. 
he  latter  early  observed  that  the  penetrating  power  of  the  7  rays 
T)m  thorium  was  about  the  same  as  from  radium,  while  the  rays 
om  actinium  and  uranium  X  were  less  penetrating.  A  careful 
)raparison  of  the  quantity  and  penetrating  power  of  the  7  rays 
^)m  these  substances  has  been  made  by  Russell  and  Soddy§.  The 
•llowing  radio-active  products  were  used  as  sources  of  7  rays: 
i<lium  C,  uranium  X,  thorium  D,  mesothorium  2.  A  large 
uantity  of  uranium  X  was  separated  from  several  kilograms  of 
ranium,  while  the  mesothorium  was  separated  from  several 
ilograms  of  thorium  nitrate.  The  thoriuin  D  was  obtained  by 
xposure  to  the  thorium  emanation  from  an  active  preparation  of 
adio-thorium. 

The  coefficients  of  absorption  of  the  7  rays  from  these  sub- 
tances  were  obtained  under  similar  conditions  by  an  electroscopic 
nethod.    The  rays  had  in  all  cases  to  pass  through  a  thickness 

*  Hess,  Phys.  Zeit.  12,  p.  99S,  1911. 

t  Godlew«ki,  P;»7.  Mag.  10,  p.  376,  1905. 

X  Eve,  Phil,  Mag,  11,  p.  686,  1906. 

§  Rossell  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag,  21,  p.  ISO,  1911. 


268 


THE  7  OH  VERY  PENETRATING  RATS 


[ 


of  1  cm.  of  lead  before  entering  the  electroscope.     The  absorpt 
was  in  all  cases  nearly  exponential.     The  relative  values  oi 


X 

a 

'S 


=>  i   4. 


^ 

s 

CO 

r-A 

3 


CD 
I"- 


CO 


II 


2 


(N 

2 


(N  CO 

83 

•  • 

CO 


a  I  S 


o 

ja 
•*» 
o 

00 
0) 


4 


ec  »a  »o  r-i  Tf 

(N  (N  .-•  (N  <M 

•  •  •  •  • 

'•Jt  tJ<  ^  ^  •^ 


CO 


CO 

•  ■ 

1"  »a 


a 


o 


o 

CO 


CO  lO  CO  o 
t*  o  ^  ~ 

CO  CO  CO 


O  CO 

•  • 

o    ,  o 


CO  o 

o  o 


9 


Tj«  O  X  CO 

g 

t^  -t 

(N 

CO 

a  ^ 

CO  IN  (N  (X 

CO  «>l 

o 

(N 

iO  CO 

• 

•         • 

• 

• 

•         • 

CO  C9  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 

CO 

CO 

CO  CO 

:l    I 


CO 


"1*  ^  Q  CO  CO 
Oi  1^  »i^  CO  CO 
(N  (N  'M  'M  (N 

t  •  •  •  • 

o  o  o  o  o 


^  CO 

CO 

X 

f>i 

CO  ^ 

H 

s 

? 

8§ 

o  o 

o 

c 

o  o 

ao   08 


a 


S- 


O  M  kS  H  tS3  CQ -«<1 


:  H 

'Be* 


and  fi/D  are  shown  in  the  table  where  the  absorbing  screen 
placed  directly  over  the  active  matter  some  distance  from 


1 


THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS 


269 


metroscope.  The  values  of  /a  were  found  to  depend  to  some 
tent  on  the  particular  arrangement  employed. 

The  nature  of  the  absorbent  has  a  marked  effect  on  the  relative 
netrating  power  of  the  four  types  of  rays.  Taking  the  absorp- 
m  coeflScient  of  radium  C  as  un^ty,  the  relative  values  of  fi  are 
own  in  the  following  table  (1)  for  lead,  (2)  for  the  average  metal 

Class  II  where  /a/D  is  nearly  constant,  and  (3)  for  a  light 
bstance  like  paraffin  wax. 

Relative  values  of  fjL(cm8.)''\ 


Absorbent 

Kadinm  C 

Thoriam  D 

Mesothorinm  2 

Uramuin  X 

Lead 

Class  11      ... 

Paraffin  wax 

1-00 
1-00 
100 

0-924 

0-82 

0-78 

1-24 
1-06 
1-26 

1-45 
M8 
1-08 

The  rays  from  thorium  D  are  slightly  more  penetrating  than 
hose  from  radium  C,  while  the  rays  from  mesothorium  2  and 
imninm  X  are  less  penetrating,  although  the  differences  are  not 
en  marked. 

Moseley  and  Makower*  have  recently  shown  that  radium  B 
-inits  7  rays  of  a  comparatively  soft  type.  The  ionisation  due  to 
hese  7  rays  through  3  mms.  of  lead  is  about  12  per  cent,  of  the 
onisation  due  to  the  7  rays  from  the  radium  C  in  equilibrium 
A'ith  it. 

The  7  rays  of  actinium  are  considerably  less  penetrating  than 
Aose  from  the  above  group  of  radio- elements.  Godlewski  first 
treasured  the  absorption  of  these  rays  and  found  fi  =  4*54  for  lead 
for  a  thickness  0  to  3*5  mms.  The  corresponding  values  for  iron 
ind  zinc  were  fi  =  l'23  and  /a=  1*24  respectively  for  thicknesses 
^  to  10  mms.  The  large  absorption  for  lead  relative  to  iron  is  more 
Daarked  for  the  actinium  rays  than  the  rays  from  radium  0.  Eve 
found  fjL  =  4*1  for  lead  over  a  similar  range,  but  after  2*7  mms.  a 
change  to  /a  =  2*7  took  place.  The  question  was  re-examined  by 
Russell  and  Soddy  {loc.  cit)  using  a  stronger  preparation.  The 
absorption  of  the  7  rays  by  aluminium  and  zinc  was  found  to  be 

*  Moseley  and  Makower,  Phil,  Mag.  23,  p.  312,  1912. 


270  THE  7  OB   VERT  PENETRATING   RATS  [CE 

nearly  exponential  with  values  of  /i  =  0*217  and  /x  =  0*420  respec- 
tively. The  absorption  by  lead  is  abnormal.  There  is  a  change 
in  the  value  of  /x  after  3  mms.  and  also  after  8*5  mms.  The 
relative  values  of  /a  compared  with  those  for  the  7  ra)r8  from 
radium  C  depend  considerably  upon  the  arrangement  adopted 
for  measurement. 

100.  Connection  of  7  rB,jB  with  ff  rays.  We  have  so  far 
given  the  results  of  investigations  on  the  penetrating  power  of 
7  rays  from  different  substances  without  reference  to  the  relative 
quantity  emitted.  It  has  been  usually  assumed  that  the  pro- 
duction of  7  rays  always  accompanies  the  emission  of  high  speed 
/8  particles  from  radio-active  matter,  and  this  is  borne  out  by  the 
fact  that  7  rays  have  so  far  only  been  obtained  from  active  products 
which  emit  penetrating  13  rays.  On  the  other  hand,  some  veiy 
striking  differences  occur  in  the  intensity  of  7  rays  compared  with 
the  intensity  of  the  13  radiation.  For  example,  uranium  X,  which 
emits  high  speed  ^  particles,  shows  a  relatively  small  7  ray  activity, 
although  the  7  radiation  is  comparatively  penetrating.  A  similar 
result  holds  for  actinium.  This  difference  is  most  marked  for 
radium  E,  which  emits  y8  rays  of  moderate  penetrating  power,  but 
which  emits  7  rays  very  feeble  in  intensity  and  in  power  of 
penetration.  The  relative  ^  and  7  activity  for  a  number  of  radio- 
active products  has  been  examined  by  Ruasell  and  Soddy  (foe.  cit\ 
The  ratios  of  these  two  activities  will  obviously  be  dependent  on 
the  particular  arrangement  employed,  for  example,  on  the  distance 
of  the  preparation  from  the  testing  vessel  and  the  thickness  of 
absorbing  screen  through  which  the  7  rays  pass.  The  relative 
values  given  below  were  obtained  for  the  fi  and  7  ray  activity 
under  the  following  conditions.  The  source  of  13  rays  was  placed 
60  cms.  below  a  brass  electroscope  whose  base  was  covered 
with  aluminium  foil  095  mm.  thick.  The  ionisation  was  then 
mainly  due  to  the  more  penetrating  y8  rays.  The  source  of 
7  rays  was  placed  8  6  cms.  below  a  lead  electroscope  whose  base 
was  of  lead  3  mms.  thick.  The  results  are  included  in  the  following 
table,  y/^  represents  the  ratio  of  7  to  )8  ray  activity  measured 
by  the  method  described  above,  the  ratio  for  radium  C  being 
taken  tis  unity. 


l]  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  271 

The  ratios  for  actinium  and  uranium  X  were  measured  under 
omewhat  different  conditions  from  the  others,  so  that  the  relative 
alues  are  only  approximate.  It  is  thus  seen  that  the  ratio  7/^8 
loes  not  differ  markedly  for  the  first  three  substances,  but  is  less 
han  1/10  for  actinium  D  and  about  1/50  for  uranium  X. 


7/^ 

Radhim  C 

1-00 

Mesothorium  2 

113 

Thorium  D 

074 

Actinium  D 

0-077 

Uranium  X 

0-02 

This  difference,  as  already  mentioned,  is  far  more  marked  for 
•adium  E,  where  the  ratio  is  about  1/1000  or  even  less  (see  Section 
103).  This  wide  difference  in  the  relative  intensity  of  the  7  and 
8  rays  from  different  active  substances  at  first  sight  suggests  that 
there  may  be  no  definite  connection  between  the  expulsion  of 
8  rays  and  the  appearance  of  7  rays.  We  know,  however,  that 
cathode  rays  give  rise  to  X  rays,  while  Gray  (Section  103)  has 
shown  that  swift  ^  rays  in  traversing  matter  give  rise  to  7  rays. 
In  addition,  no  product  has  yet  been  found  where  the  7  rays 
appear  independently  of  ^  rays.  It  is  to  be  expected  theoretically 
that  7  rays  would  appeiir  in  consequence  of  the  expulsion  of  yS 
particles  from  the  atom.  The  wide  variation  in  the  quality  and 
quantity  of  the  7  rays  from  different  substances  indicates  that 
the  production  of  7  rays  is  either  dependent  on  the  structure 
of  the  particular  atom  undergoing  transformation  or  upon  some 
peculiarity  in  the  origin  and  mode  of  expulsion  of  the  y8  particle 
from  the  atom.  We  have  seen  in  Section  95  that  the  emission  of 
^particles  from  radio-active  matter  is  a  very  complex  phenomenon, 
^d  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  appearance  of  intense  7  rays  may 
^  connected  with  some  peculiarity  in  the  mode  of  emission  of  the 
^rays. 

101.  Secondary  /3  rays  produced  by  7  rays.  We  have 
seen  that  fi  rays  falling  on  matter  are  diffusely  scattered,  but  that 
there  is  no  definite  evidence  that  the  ^  rays  give  rise  to  a  true 
secondary  radiation  of  the  y8  ray  type.  It  has  long  been  known 
that  the  a  rays  falling  on  matter  give  rise  to  secondary  rays  which 


272  THE   7  OR  VERT  PENErTRATtNO  RATS  [Ol 

consist  of  negatively  charged  particles  anal<^us  in  all  respect*  ti? 
very  slow  ^  rays,  A  secondary  radiation  of  the  /9  ray  type  is  iflfc] 
up  in  matter  of  all  kinds  by  7  rays  but  the  0  particles  M 
relatively  far  swifter  and  more  penetrating  than  the  S 
set  up  by  a  rays. 

Faschen*  observed  that  a  preparation  of  radium  sarTOundel 
by  a  thickness  of  lead,  sufficient  to  stop  completely  the  /9  n^ 
gained  a  small  positive  chaise  in  a  vacuum.  He  suggested  in 
consequeoce  that  the  7  rays  were  in  reality  very  swift  (3  »J» 


■^  »:  V:^ 


travelling  at  a  velocity  close  to  that  of  light.  The  explanation^ of 
the  charge  observed  was  given  by  Evef,  who  showed  that  matter 
struck  by  7  rays  emitted  freely  a  secondary  radiation  of  the  /3  raj 
type.  In  consequence  of  the  expulsion  of  negatively  charged 
particles  from  the  lead,  the  latter  acquired  a  positive  chai^ 
The  method  employed  to  find  the  presence  of  yS  rays  is  shown 
in  Fig.  74.  A  small  electroscope  was  mounted  on  one  side  of 
a  lead  platform  1-2  cms.  thick,  which  rested  on  a  lead  cylinder 

■  Fascheo,  Ann.  d.  Phy:  14,  p.  3SS,  19(M. 
+  Eve,  PMl.  Mag.  8,  p.  669,  1904. 


^l]  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  273 

10  cms.  high  and  10  cms.  in  diameter.  The  radium  R  was  placed 
in  a  hole  reaching  to  the  centre  of  the  cylinder.  The  effect  in  the 
electroscope  was  partly  due  to  the  y  rays  traversing  the  lead  and 
fBitlj  to  secondary  ff  rays  excited  in  the  lead  platform.  On 
applying  a  magnetic  field  so  as  to  bend  the  /8  rays  towards  the 
electroscope,  the  discharge  was  much  increased.  On  reversing 
the  field,  the  effect  was  diminished.  Since  the  7  rays  are  them- 
selves undeflected  by  a  magnetic  field,  this  experiment  shows  that 
the  7  rays  excite  secondary  S  rays.  These  have  an  average 
velocity  more  than  half  that  of  light. 

The  penetrating  power  and  distribution  of  this  fi  radiation 
excited  by  7  rays  has  been  examined  by  a  number  of  observers 
under  somewhat  different  conditions.  It  is  necessary  at  this  stage 
to  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  /8  radiation  which  escapes 
fiom  the  side  of  the  plate  on  which  the  7  rays  fall  and  the  fi 
ladiation  which  emerges  fix>m  the  far  side  of  the  plate.  The 
former  will  be  called  the  incidence  radiation  and  the  latter  the 
emergence  radiation.  Preliminary  experiments  were  for  the  most 
part  made  on  the  incidence  /3  radiation.  In  addition  to  the 
emission  of  fi  rays,  a  substance  traversed  by  7  rays  gives  rise  to 
a  secondary  or  scattered  radiation  of  the  7  ray  type.  If  the  plate 
is  not  very  thick,  the  ionisation  due  to  the  latter  is  small  compared 
with  that  due  to  the  excited  /3  radiation.  Eve  *,  using  the  7  rays 
:  of  radium,  made  a  number  of  experiments  with  the  arrangement 
i  shown  in  Fig.  65.  The  primary  fi  rays  were  absorbed  by  sur- 
rounding the  radium  with  lead  and  the  amount  of  incidence 
^  radiation  from  different  materials  was  measured  in  the  electro- 
scope. The  emission  of  13  rays  was  found  to  be  a  volume  effect, 
for  the  number  of  /9  particles  increased  at  first  with  thickness  of 
the  radiator.  The  thickness  to  give  an  approximate  maximum  for 
aluminium  was  3  mms.  Such  a  result  is  to  be  expected  if  the 
fi  rays  are  emitted  equally  at  each  point  of  the  radiator  traversed 
hy  the  7  rays.  The  thickness  required  for  a  maximum  effect  is  . 
then  dependent  on  the  absorption  of  the  excited  /8  rays  by  different 
materials. 

The  amount  of  the  incidence  radiation  was  found  to  increase 

♦  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  669,  1904. 
R.  R.-A.  18 


274 


THE  7  OR  VERT  PENETBATINO  RAYS 


[Ci 


in  a  regular  maimer  with  the  atomic  weight  of  the  radiator.  Th 
relative  amount  of  )8  radiation  from  diflferent  substances  follow 
the  same  order  as  the  amount  of  scattered  radiation  observa 
when  a  pencil  of  fi  rays  falls  on  different  materials  (Section  83] 
S.  J.  Allen*  and  Eve  (loc,  cit)  showed  that  the  penetrating  powe 
of  these  0  rays  was  about  the  same  as  that  of  the  primary  /9  rajn 
from  radium.  Eve  also  showed  that  the  radiation  from  lead  ii 
slightly  more  penetrating  than  that  from  light  elements  like  carboi 
or  aluminium.  This  is  again  analogous  to  the  difference  in  pene 
trating  power  between  the  primary  /8  rays  and  the  scatterec 
radiation  from  elements  of  different  atomic  weight  (Section  83). 


Metal 

Soft  7  raya 

Hard 

1 

y  rays              1 

Incident 

Emergent 

Incident 

Emergent 

radiation 

radiation 

radiation 

■ 

radiation 

Carbon 

170 

2280 

58 

1150 

Aluminium 

280 

1810 

120 

795 

Sulphur 

340 

1575 

154 

685 

Iron 

487 

1350 

163 

560 

Copper 

658 

202 

523 

Tin 

1051 

1170 

333 

303 

Lead 

1723 

2001 

497 

470 

1 

Mackenzie  f  first  drew  attention  to  the  striking  fact  that  th 
emergence  yS  radiation  was  always  far  more  intense  than  th 
incidence  radiation.  This  difference  is  observed  for  all  kinds  c 
matter  but  is  most  marked  for  elements  of  light  atomic  weight 
It  was  pointed  out  by  Bragg  that  this  effect  was  a  necessar 
consequence  of  his  view  that  the  7  rays  are  corpuscular  in  natuK 
This  theory  will  be  discussed  later  but  it  suffices  to  say  at  presen 
that  the  /8  rays  produced  in  matter  by  the  7  rays  should  on  th 
whole  be  expelled  in  the  direction  of  travel  of  the  7  rays.  Th 
difference  in  the  amount  of  emergence  and  incidence  radiatio] 


♦  Allen,  Phys.  Rev,  28,  p.  65,  1906. 

t  Mackenzie,  Phil,  Mag,  14,  p.  176,  1907. 


THE  7  OB   VERT   PENETRATING   RATS 


276 


examined  by  Bragg*  for  a  number  of  metala  The  7  rays, 
as  far  as  possible  from  /3  rays  by  a  magnetic  field,  traversed 
sheets  of  matter.  The  /8  radiation  escaping  on  the  side  of 
ence  and  emergence  was  separately  examined.  The  results 
bitrary  units  are  given  in  the  table  on  p.  274  for  soft  7  rays 
y  rays  hardened  by  their  passage  through  lead. 
t  is  seen  that  for  light  substances  the  emergent  radiation  is 
much   greater  than   the   incident.     For  heavy  metals  the 


§ 


% 


^o 


1 

] 

1 

5 

> 

J 

5 

• 

t 

«0 

J 

/ 

\ 

sye.Cu2 

S/n 

/ 

—  C<f 

Fig.  75. 


irence  is  far  less  marked.     Such  a  result  is  to  be  expected 
account  of  the  marked  scattering  of  heavy  atoms  even  if  the 
lys  are  initially  projected  in  the  direction  of  the  7  rays. 
Bragg  and  Madsenf,  EveJ  and  Hackett§  have  shown  that  the 


♦  Bragg,  Phil.  Mag.  15,  p.  6R3,  1908. 

t  Bragg  and  MadRen,  Phil.  Map.  16,  p.  918,  1908. 

X  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  275,  1909. 

§  Hackett,  Tram,  Roy.  Dubl.  Soc,  9,  p.  201,  1909. 


18—2 


276  THE  7  OB  VERT  PENBTRATINO  RATS  [CE 

amounts  of  emergence  radiation  from  thick  plates  of  matter  do 
not,  like  the  incidence  radiation,  increase  regularly  with  atomic 
weight   but   pass   through    a   minimum    for    an  atomic  weight 
corresponding  to  about  that  of  zinc.     If  the  amount  of  emergence  i 
radiation  is  plotted  as  ordinate  and  the  atomic  weight  of  the  ^ 
radiator  as  abscissa,  the  elements  roughly  lie  on  a  curve  approxi*  i 
mately  parabolic  in  form.     The  shape  of  the  curve  is  to  some  ^ 
extent    dependent   on   the    penetrating   power    of    the    y  »ji  1 
employed.     The  type  of  curve   obtained   for  y  rays  of  radium  : 
which  have  passed  through  2  mms.  of  lead  is  shown  in  Fig.  75. 
This  curve  has  been  drawn  by  Eve  from  the  experimental  data 
given  by  Hackett. 

The  general  results  obtained,  both  as  regards  the  incidence 
and  emergence  radiation,  are  in  conformity  with  the  view  that 
the  7  rays  in  passing  through  matter  in  some  way  give  rise  to 
/8  rays  in  amount  proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  y  radiation. 
The  results  indicate  that  the  /3  particles  initially  escape  in  the 
direction  of  the  7  rays,  and  with  the  same  speed  for  all  kinds 
of  matter.  The  velocity  of  the  expelled  yS  particle  will  depend, 
however,  on  the  penetrating  power  of  the  7  rays  and  increases 
with  it.  As  we  have  seen,  the  differences  in  absorption  of  the 
incidence  ff  radiation  from  different  elements  are  to  be  explained 
by  the  wide  differences  in  absorption  and  scattering  of  ff  rays  by 
different  kinds  of  matter  and  not  to  any  difference  in  the  initial 
velocity  of  expulsion.  Assuming  that  the  fi  rays  excited  in 
matter  by  complex  7  rays  are  absorbed  according  to  an  ex- 
ponential law,  a  general  explanation  can  be  given  of  the  results 
observed. 

Suppose  that  a  pencil  of  7  rays  of  intensity  /o  falls  normally 
on  a  plane  sheet  of  matter  of  thickness  d.  The  number  of  P 
particles  formed  in  the  matter  between  two  planes  distant  x  and 
X  +  dx  from  the  side  of  incidence  should  be  proportional  to  the 
energy  of  the  7  radiation  absorbed  in  the  layer,  %.€.  to  filoe'^^dS: 
where  /a  is  the  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  7  rays  by  th^ 
matter.  Since  the  fi  particles  are  initially  supposed  to  travel  itJ 
the  direction  of  the  7  rays,  the  laws  of  absorption  are  the  same  ai 
for  a  normal  pencil  of /8  rays  passing  through  matter.     If /ii  is  th^ 


l]  THK  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  277 

oeflBcient  of  absorption  of  the  /8  rays  by  matter,  the  total  intensity 
»f  the  emergence  radiation  is  thus  proportional  to 


Jo 


^  f^h 


Since  /i,  is  of  the  order  100/a,  it  is  seen  that  the  intensity  of 
;be  emergence  P  radiation  is  at  first  proportional  to  the  thickness 
^hen  this  is  small,  passes  through  a  maximum  when 

d=-l_log,^, 

ind  finally  decreases  exponentially  with  the  intensity  I^e'^  of 
the  7  rays. 

These  conclusions  are  in  general  agreement  with  the  experi- 
mental observations  of  Bragg  and  Madsen. 

If  the  emergence  radiation  is  determined  for  plates  of  diflferent 
materials  of  sufficient  thickness  to  give  the  maximum  radiation, 

the  intensity  of  the  emergent  radiation  is  proportional  to 


Ml -/A 

(since  e'*^  ia  nearly  unity  in  most  cases),  i.e,  to      ,  J; —   ,  ^r ,  where 

fji^jD  -  fAlD 

I)  is  the  density  of  the  material. 

By  comparing  the  values  of  /Lt/D  for  the  7  rays  from  uranium  X 
(Section  99)  with  the  value  /^i/D  for  the  fi  rays  from  uranium  X 
(Section  89),  the  value  of  this  quantity  can  be  approximately 
estimated  for  diflferent  materials.  On  these  data,  the  values  for 
aluminium,  iron,  copper  and  lead  are  84,  65,  64,  59,  70  x  10~* 
respectively.  This  shows  that  the  emergence  radiation  should 
pass  through  a  minimum  with  increase  of  atomic  weight.  This 
is  in  general  agreement  with  the  experimental  results  already 
discussed. 

If  the  excited  fi  radiation  travels  in  the  direction  of  the  7  rays, 
the  amount  of  incidence  radiation  will,  as  in  the  case  of  ^  rays 
falling  on  matter,  depend  mainly  on  the  scattering  power  of 
different  elements  for  P  rays,  and  should  thus  increase  regularly 
with  the  atomic  weight.     This  is  observed  experimentally. 


278 


THE  7  OR  VERT  PENETRATING  RATS 


[Cfl 


Variation  of  ionisation  -with  material  of  electroscope. 

On  account  of  the  variation  in  the  amount  of  incidence  and 
emergence  radiation  for  different  kinds  of  matter,  the  ionisation 
observed  in  a  7  ray  electroscope  for  a  given  intensity  of  7  rayi 
depends  on  the  material  with  which  it  is  lined.  This  has  been 
observed  by  Eve.  Bragg*  made  an  accurate  comparison  of  th( 
ionisation  under  definite  conditions.  The  ionisation  chamber  wai 
of  lead,  cylindrical  in  shape,  and  the  radium  as  a  source  of  7  rayi 
was  placed  some  distance  away  on  the  axis  of  the  cylinder.  Tb( 
lining  of  the  chamber  was  of  sufficient  thickness  to  give  th< 
maximum  amount  of  secondary  /9  radiation.  The  results  an 
shown  in  the  following  table.  Column  II  gives  the  thickness  0 
lining;  Column  III  gives  the  relative  ionisations,  taking  leac 
as  100,  when  the  7  rays  first  passed  through  '47  cm.  of  lead 
C<ilumn  IV  the  relative  ionisations  when  the  rays  first  passed 
through  1*6  cms.  of  lead. 


I 

II 

Metal 

Thickness  of 

in 

IV 

ased  for  lining 

lining  in  cms. 

Lead 

100 

100 

Tin  ... 

•16 

58 

68 

Zinc 

•21 

47 

55 

Iron 

•165 

45 

54 

Aluminium 

•21 

40 

49 

Card 

•24 

39 

46 

The  change  in  the  relative  values  in  the  two  columns  is  raainl 
due  to  the  change  in  lead  only ;  for  the  rays  have  been  hardene 
in  passing  through  the  extra  thickness  of  lead. 

In  these  cases,  the  ionisations  observed  are  mainly  if  no 
entirely  due  to  the  secondary  /S  rays  (see  Section  105)  and  resul 
from  a  combination  of  the  effects  of  the  incidence  and  emergenc 

*  Bragg,  PhiL  Mag,  80,  p.  385,  1910. 


VI]  THE  7  OR  VERT   PENBTRATINO  RAYS  279 

radiations.  Bragg  has  utilised  these  results  to  form  an  estimate 
of  the  relative  total  range  of  the  fi  particle  in  different  metals 
before  absorption. 

102.     Scattered  7  radiation.     We  have  already  mentioned 

that  in  addition  to  the  excitation  of  13  rays,  7  rays  in  traversing 

matter  give  rise  to  a  scattered  radiation  of  the  7  ray  type.     This 

radiation  has  usually  been  called  the  secondary  7  radiation  and 

was  first  observed  by  Eve*.     Extensive  investigations  on   the 

nature  of  this  secondary  radiation  have  been  made  by  Kleemanf, 

Madsen^,  and  Florance§.     From  an  examination  of  the  differences 

in  penetrating  power  of  the  13  rays  excited  in  different  substances 

and  of  the  penetrating  power  of  the  secondary  7  rays,  Kleeman 

cohcluded  that  the  7  rays  of  radium  consisted  of  at  least  three 

distinct  kinds  having  different  penetrating  powers.     Madsen  by 

a  different  method  investigated  the  character  of  this  secondary 

7  radiation  on  the  side  both  of  incidence  and  emergence.     He 

showed  that  the  radiation  on  the  side  of  incidence  was  m)ich 

weaker  and  more  easily  absorbed  than  the  radiation  on  the  side  of 

emergence.     The  question  was  re-examined  by  Florance  using 

a  sufficient  quantity  of  radium  to  determine  the  amount  of  the 

secondary  radiation   emitted    at    different 

angles  with    the    radiator.     The    general 

arrangement  is  clearly  shown  in  Fig.  76. 

The  testing  electroscope  E  was  made  of 

lead,  about  3   mms.   thick.     It  could  be 

moved  on  the  arm   of  a  circle  with  the 

radiator  as  centre  in  order  to  examine  the 

quantity  and   quality  of  the   secondary  7 

radiation  emitted  at  different  angles  with 

the  radiator.     The  variation  of  the  amount 

of  radiation  with   thickness  for   different 

positions  of  the  electroscope   is  shown  in  ig-  7  . 

Kg.  77.    The  electroscope  was  placed  in  seven  different  positions ; 

*  Eve,  Phil.  Mag,  8,  p.  669,  1904. 
t  Kleeman,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  p.  638,  1908. 
t  Madsen,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  423, 1909. 
§  Florance,  Phil.  Mag.  M,  p.  921,  1910. 


Uttrmtetft 


280 


THE  7  OK  VERT   PENSTRATINO  RATB 


[COL 


in  the  first  (not  given  in  the  diagram)  the  direct  effect  of  the  rayi 
was  measured,  in  position  YII  the  secondary  7  radiation  at  right 
angles  to  position  I  was  determined;  the  other  positions  yren 
intermediate  between  the  first  and  seventh.  It  is  seen  thftt 
the  amount  of  radiation  for  position  II  increases  with  tiie 
thickness  to  a  maximum  and  then  decreases.  The  shape  of  thi 
curve  undergoes  a  progressive  change  until,  when  at  right  ang^ 


Sons 


Fig.  77. 


TnichN£S5 


//cm^ 


BelatioD  between  amount  of  secondary  radiation  and  thiokness 

of  iron  radiator. 

to  the  original  beam,  the  radiation  increases  slowly  with  the 
thickness  of  the  radiator.  The  curve  II  is  of  the  shape  to  be 
theoretically  expected.  For  small  angles,  the  amount  of  secondary 
radiation  is  nearly  proportional  to  the  thickness.  The  curve 
passes  through  a  maximum  and  decreases  owing  to  the  decrease 
of  intensity  of  the  7  rays  in  passing  through  the  absorbing  screen. 
The   angular  distribution   of  the  secondary  radiation  is  shown 


THE  f  OB  TERT   PENBTRATINO   BAT8  281 

Pig.   78   for  different   thicknesses  of  iron.     It  is  seen  that 
secondary  radiation  falls  off  , 

idly    with    angular    distance 

n  the  pencil  of  7  rays  and  is 

.11    for    a   position   at   right 

les.  Florance  found  that  using  ^ 

ens  of  different  materials,  of  ^ 

ch   the   thickness   multiplied 

density  was  constant,  i.e.  of 

al   mass   per   unit   area,   the 

lunt    of   secondary   radiation 
greater  for  carbon  and  iron 

n  for  lead.    The  quality  of  the 

mdary  radiation  was  found  to 

>'  with  the  angle  of  the  radia- 
The     radiation     scattered 

)ugh  a  large  angle  was  much 

e  easily   absorbed   than    the 

nary  7  radiation.    The  results 

shown  in  the  following  tabic. 


Fig.  78. 

Position  of  «le<itiowope. 

CoTTes  sbowing  relatioD  between  poii- 

tian  of  electioseope  uid  tbe  amonnt 

of   BeooDd&>7  radiation    when    the 

thicknesa  is  constant  (or  eaoh  enrre. 


Coeficient  of  absorptiov  fi  (cnw.)~'  for  lead. 


Radiator 

Direct 
radiation 

-68 

■6S 
■85 
■59 
625 

angle  25° 

aniile  55" 

Carbon    A  cma 
Carbon  10    ., 
Iron       2-2     „ 
Iron          5     „ 
■    Lead    -416    „ 

1-18 
1-17 

Ml 

1-77 
1-70 
1-68 
1-56 
^65 

The  general  results  of  the  experiments  indicate  that  the 
ondary  7  rays  are  in  reality  scattered  primary  rays.  The 
lilts  admit  of  a  simple  explanation  if  it  be  supposed  that  the 
oaiy  7  rays  of  radium  are  complex  and  consist  of  a  mixture 
T  rays  of  different  penetrating  powers.  The  softer  rays  are 
re  readily  scattered  than  the  harder  rays  and  consequently 
■  penetrating  power  of  the  scattered  radiation  decreases  pro- 
saively  with  angular  distance  &om  the  direction  of  the  primary 


282  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RATS 

7  rays.    It  is  not  possible  to  decide  definitely  from  the  experii 
whether  the  7  rays  can  be  divided  into  distinct  groups  of 
There  is  a  progressive  alteration  of  the  quantity  and  qualit 
the  scattered  rays  with  angular  distance,  but  there  is  no 
evidence  that  this  is  due  to  distinct  groups  of  rays.     No  evi< 
has  been  obtained  that  these  scattered  7  rays  can  be  ascril 
a  characteristic  radiation  set  up  in  the  radiator  by  the  prii 
7  rays.     It  appears  far  more  probable  that  the  main  effects  arej 
be  ascribed  to  scattering  of  the  primary  rays.     The  amoimt 
sc»Attered  radiation  appearing  on  the  side  of  incidence  is 
small  compared  with  that  on  the  side  of  emergence,  and  is  mi 
softer.     Crowther  and  others  have  shown  that  the  distribul 
of  scattered  X  rays  is  somewhat  similar,  although  the  amoi 
appearing  on  the  side  of  incidence  is  more  marked  than  for  7  raj 
For  substances  which  emit  a  characteristic  radiation  when  X 
fall  upon  them,  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  is  nearly  symmetric 
on  the  sides  of  incidence  and  emergence. 

103.    Production  of  7  rays  by  fi  rayi.     When  the  cat 
rays  in  a  vacuum  tube  impinge  on  any  material,  they  give  rise  ul 
X  rays  which  are  not  deflected  by  a  magnetic  field  and  are  mnck 
more  penetrating  than   the  cathode  rays  which  produce  th 
It  is  therefore  to  be  expected  that  a  type  of  X  rays  should  *r 
excited  when  ^  rays  fall  on  matter.    The  7  rays  emitted  by  radio- 
active substances  appear  with  the  0  rays  and  apparently  ari' 
a  consequence  of  the  expulsion  of  a  /8  particle  fix>m  the  : 
Experiments  to  test  whether  ff  rays  fix)m  radium  in  traveru:;*^ 
matter  gave  rise  to  a  type  of  penetrating  7  rays  were  made  by 
H.  Starke*  and  Davissonf  by  different  methods,  but  no  very 
definite  evidence  of  the  production  of  7  rays  was  observed.    Their 
experiments  indicated  that  if  7  rays  were  excited,  their  ionisation 
effect  was  very  small  compared  with  that  due  to  the  primary 
7  rays  firom  the  radio-active  substance  J. 

*  H.  Starke,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  35,  1908. 

t  DaviHRon.  Phy».  Rev.  28,  p.  469,  1909. 

X  Chad  wick  in  the  laboratory  of  the  writer  has  found  that  the  p  rays  from 
radium  excite  7  rays  in  amount  increasing  with  the  atomic  weight  of  the  element 
on  which  they  fall.  The  maximum  amount  of  excited  7  rays  is  only  about  one-hil' 
per  cent,  of  that  due  to  the  primary  7  rays  from  radium. 


THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RATS 


283 


has  been  pointed  out  in  Section  100  that  there  are  notable 
nces  in  the  relative  intensities  of  the  /8  and  7  rays  from 
ictive  substances.  For  equal  /3  ray  intensity,  the  7  rays 
uranium  X  are  only  2  per  cent,  of  those  frx>m  radium  C, 
the  7  rays  from  radium  E  produce  a  still  smaller  effect. 
;  to  its  comparative  poverty  in  primary  7  rays,  radium  E  is 
illy  suitable  as  a  source  of  y3  radiation  to  examine  whether 
i  are  excited  by  fi  rays.  With  this  source  of  radiation. 
Gray*  has  shown  de6nitely  that  7  rays  are  produced  by 
^  and  has  examined  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  radiation 
)  by  the  impact  of  /3  TB,ya  in  different  substances.     The 

material  initially  employed  was  a  preparation  of  radium 
,  mixed  with  lead,  which  had  been  separated  from  radium, 
cally  all  the  /9  radiation  is  due  to  radium  E  which  was  in 
)rium  with  radium  D.  This  gave  a  very  strong  /3  radiation 
?ak  7  rays. 

will  be  convenient  to  call  the  7  rays,  produced  in  ordinary 
:  by  the  /8  rays,  the  "excited"  7  rays.  This  serves  to 
^lish  them  from  the  "primary"  7  rays  emitted  by  the 
ictive  matter,  and  the  "  secondary "  or  "  scattered "  7  rays 
ed  when  7  rays  traverse  matter. 

e  presence  of  excited  7  rays  was  shown  in  the  following  way. 
rtive  matter  facing  downwards 
aced  beneath  an  electroscope 
^.  79).  The  base  of  the  electro- 
vas  covered  with  sufficient  alu- 
n  or  cardboard  FE  to  absorb 
^tely  the  primary  j3  rays.  The 
ion  in  the  electroscope  was 
ue  to  the  7  rays  from  the  pre- 
)n  itself  and  its  surroundings, 
lacing    a    lead    radiator    PB 

the  active  material,  the 
ion  in  the  electroscope  was 
}ed.  The  additional  effect  was 
)  the  7  rays  excited  by  the 
s   £aJling   on   the   lead.     The 


Fig.  79. 


•  J.  A.  Gray,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  85,  p.  181,  1911. 


284 


THK  7  OB  VERT  PENSTRATINO  RATS 


n 


excited  y  rays  were  of  about  the  same  penetrating  power  as 
primary  7  rays,  and  were  not  deflected  by  a  magnetic  field, 
connection  of  these  7  rays  with  the  fi  rajrs  was  shown  by  in 
posing  sheets  of  paper  between  the  active  matter  and  the  I 
radiator.  Since  the  amount  of  7  rajrs  excited  in  paper  is  m 
less  than  in  lead,  the  intensity  of  the  excited  7  rays  fell  off 
about  the  same  proportion  as  the  intensity  of  the  /3  rays  t 
mitted  through  the  paper.  Such  a  result  shows  that  the  e 
observed  cannot  be  due  to  a  scattering  or  excitation  of  secon 
7  rays  in  the  lead  radiator  by  the  primary  7  rays.  The  production 
of  7  rays  in  different  materials  was 
simply  studied  by  the  arrangement 
shown  in  Fig.  80.  The  source  was 
placed  at  A  between  the  poles  of  a 
large  electromagnet,  and  the  radiator 
at  R  under  the  electroscope.  The  /3 
rays  could  be  prevented  from  falling 
on  the  radiator  by  applying  a  strong 
magnetic  field.  In  some  later  experi- 
ments, a  source  of  radium  E  was  used 
spread  in  a  very  thin  layer  on  filter 
paper.  With  this  arrangement,  the 
primary  7  rays  were  only  a  small  per- 
centage of  the  7  rays  excited  when 
a  lead  plate  was  placed  over  the  active 
material.  This  showed  that  the  greater  part  of  the  7  radiation 
observed  with  the  first  preparation  which  was  less  concentrated 
was  in  reality  excited  in  the  lead  mixed  with  the  active  matter. 

It  was  found  that  the  quantity  and  penetrating  power  of  the 
excited  7  radiation  increased  rapidly  with  the  atomic  weight  of 
the  radiator.  This  is  shown  by  the  table  below.  The  numbers 
given  refer  to  the  ionisation  due  to  excited  7  rays  in  divisions  per 
minute  of  the  electroscope. 

The  7  radiation  excited  in  paper  is  not  much  more  penetrating 
than  13  rays,  while  that  from  lead  was  more  penetrating  than  the 
primary  7  radiation  from  the  active  material. 

It  was  found  that  the  amount  of  7  rays  excited  in  a  giveO 
radiator  depended  on  its  thickness  and  varied  in  direct  proportion 


Fig.  80. 


] 


THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RATS 


285 


srith  the  amount  of  fi  rays  absorbed  by  it.     The  amount  of  7 
jBdiation  appearing  on  the  side  of  emergence  was  always  greater 


Radiator 

No  lead         Absorbing  screen 
screen        '     0*U5  mm.  lead 

Absorbing  screen 
0*1  mm.  lead 

2'7  mms.  of  paper  ... 
0*3  mms.  iron 
0*12  mms.  lead 

•56                         -10 
1-10                         70 
2-18                      1-72 

■02 

•40 

136 

than  on  the  side  of  incidence.     These  results  are  illustrated  in  the 
following  table. 


Radiator 

Incident  7  rays 

Emergent  7  rays 

*30  mm.  iron  .•• 

0-47 

1-10 

!      1  lead  foil    .., 

0-37 

1^05 

2        „ 

0^75 

vm 

3 

1-15 

2^00 

4 

1-40 

216 

6        „ 

157 

2^20 

7 

1-80 

2-17 

9        „           ... 

1-84 

1-99 

When  the  )9  rays  fall  on  the  radiator,  part  are  transmitted  in 

the  forward   direction   and   part  scattered   back   to  the  side  of 

bcidence.     On  an  average,  therefore,  a  certain  fraction  of  the 

fi  particles  in  the  radiation  are  travelling  onwards  and  a  certain 

fraction   backwards.     Taking  this  effect  into  consideration,  the 

results  indicate  that  the  7  ray  travels  on  the  average  in  the  same 

direction  as  the  /8  ray  which  produces  it.     Such  a  result  has  an 

important  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  nature  of  the  7  ray  and 

its  connection  with  the  /8  ray. 

In  the  case  of  graphite,  an  effect  was  observed  which  indicated 
that  the  primary  7  rays  from  the  active  material  were  markedly 
scattered  by  this  substance.  The  active  matter  was  placed  under 
the  electroscope  and  a  sufficient  thickness  of  graphite  placed 
helow  to  absorb  the  ^  radiation.  On  increasing  the  thickness  of 
graphite,  the  effect  in  the  electroscope  steadily  increased  up  to  a 


286  THE  7  OB  VERT  PENETRATING  RAYS         [f 

thickness  of  4  cms.    With  lead  instead  of  graphite,  the  inc 
was  hardly  noticeable.     This  effect  was  at  first  thought  to  be 
to  the  excitation  by  the  7  rays  of  the  radiation  characteristic 
carbon,  but  was  later  shown  to  be  due  to  scattering  alone, 
later  experiments,  Gray  has  obtained  definite  evidence  that 
primary  7  rays   of  radium  E  are  able  to  excite   charactei 
radiations  (see  Section  33)  in  elements  of  atomic  weight  betw< 
silver  and  didymium.    Such  results  are  of  great  interest  in  shoi 
the  identity  of  X  and  7  rays. 

104.     Nature  of  the  7  rays.     In  addition  to  their 
penetrating  power,  the  7  rays  differ  from  the  a  and  yS  rays  in 
being  deflected  by  a  magnetic  or  electric  field.     In   a  stro 
magnetic  field,  it  can  be  shown  by  the  photographic  method  t' 
there  is  an  abrupt  discontinuity  between  the  P  and  7  rays,  for 
former  are   bent   completely   away   fix)m    the   latter.     Paschen*ij 
passed  7  rays  through  a  very  intense  magnetic  field  and  observed^ 
no  deviation.    He  calculated  that  if  the  7  rays  consisted  of  charged]^ 
particles  projected  with  nearly  the  velocity  of  light,  they  mart 
have  an  apparent  mass  certainly  greater  thah  45  times  that  of  the 
atom  of  hydrogen.     The  heating  effects  of  the  7  rays  fi"om  radium 
are  of  about  the  same  magnitude  as  that  due  to  the  /8  rays,  so 
that  the  last  possibility  is  excluded. 

It  has  generally  been  supposed  that  X  rays  and  7  rays  are 
analogous  types  of  radiation,  the  main  difference  being  that  the 
7  rays  are  on  the  whole  far  more  penetrating  than  the  X  rays. 
There  are  at  first  sight  certain  apparent  differences  in  properties 
between  the  X  rays  and  7  rays  which  might  indicate  a  difference 
of  nature.  For  example,  ordinary  X  rays  produce  relatively  far 
more  ionisation  in  complex  gases  and  vapours  compared  with 
air  than  penetrating  7  rays.  A  further  study  has  shown,  however, 
that  this  relative  ionisation  is  not  a  constant  but  depends  on 
the  penetrating  power  of  the  X  rays  employed.  Evef  showed 
that  the  high  relative  values  of  the  conductivity  for  some  complex 
gases  were  greatly  reduced  when  very  penetrating  X  rays  were 
used.      Barkla  has  shown  that  '*  characteristic  **  radiations  are  set 

*  Paschen,  Ann.  d,  Phyi.  14,  pp.  164,  389,  1904 ;  Phy$,  Zeit,  6,  p.  563.  1904. 
t  Eve,  Phil.  May.  8,  p.  610,  1904. 


THE  7  OR   VERY   PENETRATING   RAYS  287 

in  some  elements  when  X  rays  traverse  them.  Such  an  eifect 
ft  not  so  far  been  generally  observed  for  7  rays,  but  we  have 
ea  that  Gray  has  obtained  some  evidence  that  a  characteristic 
niiation  is  set  up  in  heavy  elements  by  the  soft  7  rays  from 
idium  E  (Section  103).  The  X  rays  in  traversing  matter  liberate 
fctype  of  )8  radiation  of  moderate  velocity  and  penetrating  power  ; 
^e  7  rays  also  liberate  y8  particles  but  with  still  greater  velocity, 
there  is  at  present  no  definite  evidence  to  indicate  that  the 
K  rays  and  7  rays  are  fundamentally  different  kinds  of  radiation. 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  7  rays  arising  from 
adio-active  matter  would  show  identical  properties  with  X  rays 
if  the  same  penetrating  power. 

We  have  seen  (Section  33)  that  the  X  rays  were  initially 
believed  to  be  narrow  spherical  electromagnetic  pulses  set  up  by 
die  sudden  stopping  of  electrons  by  matter.  On  this  view,  the 
aithode  rays  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  parents  of  the  X  rays. 
b  a  similar  way,  there  appears  to  be  little  doubt  that  the 
appearance  of  7  rays  from  radio-active  matter  is  connected  with 
the  expulsion  of  yS  rays,  for  7  rays  have  only  been  observed  from 
products  which  emit  )8  rays.  At  present,  there  is  no  definite 
evidence  of  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  7  ray  in  the  atom.  It  may, 
for  example,  be  due  to  the  rapid  acceleration  or  retardation  of  an 
escaping  electron  in  moving  through  the  strong  electric  field  inside 
the  atom.  A  discussion  of  the  possible  origin  of  the  /8  and  7  rays 
and  of  their  connection  with  atomic  transformations  is  given  in 
Chapter  XVIII. 

The  spherical  pulse  theory  at  first  seemed  to  offer  a  satisfaotory 
explanation  of  the  nature  and  origin  of  X  rays,  but  a  closer  com- 
parison of  experiment  with   theory  has  raised  many  difficulties. 
The  passage  of  X  or  7  rays  through  matter  is  always  accompanied 
l)y  the  appearance  of  high  speed  electrons  or  /8  rays.     The  initial 
velocity  of  escape  of  these  electrons  is  independent  of  the  intensity 
of  the  rays  and  apparently  does  not  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
material   from  which  they  arise.     The  initial  velocity,  however, 
does  depend  on  the  quality  or  penetrating  power  of  the  rays, 
increasing  with  the   hardness   of  the   rays.     For   example,   soft 
X  rays  give  slow  velocity  fi  particles,  while  penetrating  7  rays 
from  radium  give  rise  to  )8  particles  which  have  a  velocity  greater 


288  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  | 

than  '9  of  the  velocity  of  light.     It  is  of  interest  to  note  that 
initial  velocity  of  expulsion  of  the  /8  particle  fix)m  matter  travc 
by  X  rays  is  of  about  the  same  magnitude  as  the  velocity  of 
cathode  particles  which  generate  the  X  rays. 

The  evidence  as  a  whole  indicates  that  the  energy  of  tl 
secondary  high  speed  /8  particles  is  derived  mainly  if  not  entii 
fix)m  the  energy  of  the  primary  radiation.  It  has  been  suj 
that  the  energy  of  the  P  ray  may  possibly  be  derived  sit 
expense  of  the  internal  energy  of  the  atom  by  some  sort 
"trigger"  action.  There  is  no  definite  evidence  in  support 
this  view,  and  much  indirect  evidence  against  it.  ExperimeoH 
bearing  on  this  point  have  been  made  by  Bumstead*  ani 
Angererf.  The  necessary  concentration  of  the  energy  of  thi 
pulse  in  an  atom  in  order  to  be  emitted  again  in  the  form  <l 
the  high  speed  electron  raises  many  difficulties.  These  may  W 
illustrated  by  consideration  of  the  passage  of  the  7  rajrs  fixn 
radium  through  air.  The  total  number  of  fi  particles  emitted  per 
second  from  one  gram  of  radium  in  equilibrium  is  about  7  x  10*. 
Assuming  for  simplicity  that  each  fi  particle  in  escaping  from  the 
radio-active  atom  gives  rise  to  one  pulse,  the  number  of  pulses 
emitted  per  second  is  7  x  lO*'*.  The  total  energy  of  the  7  rays 
from  one  gram  of  radium  is  certainly  not  much  greater  than  4  gram 
calories  per  hour  or  4*7  x  10*  ergs  per  second.  Taking  this  value^ 
the  average  energy  in  a  pulse  is  thus  6*7  x  10"'  ergs.  The  7  raye 
are  half  absorbed  in  passing  through  115  metres  of  air,  and  the 
ionisation  due  to  the  7  rays  from  one  gram  of  radium  at  100  metres 
distance  is  easily  measurable,  for  it  would  cause  three  to  four 
times  the  natural  rate  of  leak  to  a  well  insulated  electroscope. 
Disregarding  absorption,  the  energy  per  square  centimetre  of  the 
surface  of  the  advancing  pulse  at  a  distance  of  100  metres  from 
the  source  is  5*3  x  10~**  ergs.  Now  we  have  seen  that  the  7  rays 
liberate  high  speed  ^  particles  of  velocity  independent  of  the 
intensity  of  the  rays  and  their  distance  from  the  source.  Supposing 
that  the  /8  particle  is  ejected  .with  a  velocity  '9  of  that  of  light, 
the  energy  absorbed  from  the  radiation  corresponds  to  7*5  x  10^^  ergs. 
This  energy  is  enormous  compared  with  that  contained  in  one 

•  Bumstead,  PhiL  Mag.  11,  p.  292,  1906. 
t  Angerer,  Ann.  d.  Phyt.  24,  p.  370,  1907. 


'Tl]  THE  7  OR  VERY   PENETRATING  RAYS  289 

iquare   centimetre   of  the   pulse   at   a   distance   of  100   metres. 

vapposing  that  the  atom  has  the  property  of  abstracting  energy 

^"fiom  one  square  centimetre  of  the  surface  of  the  pulse,  and  storing 

dt  up,  12  X  10*  pulses  must  pass  over  the  atom  before  it  acquires 

•ofiScient  energy  to  eject  the  /3  particle  at  the  observed  speed. 

Jlssuming,  as  seems  far  more  probable,  that  the  atom  can  only 

'abstract  energy  from  the  pulse  for  a  distance  comparable  with  the 

^diameter  of  the  atom,  it  is  seen  that  an  interval  measured  by  years 

"must  elapse  before  the  atom  can  acquire  the  requisite  amount  of 

'Energy  from  the  pulses  passing  over  it.     Such  a  calculation  brings 

cut  clearly  the  inadequacy  of  the  ordinary  spreading  pulse  theory 

to  account  for  the  observed  facts,  even  when  it  is  supposed  that 

«ome  of  the  atoms  have  the  power  of  absorbing  and  storing  up 

eoergy  from  the  pulses  and  finally  liberating  it  in  the  form  of  a 

bigh  speed  electron.     The  difficulty  of  explanation  still  remains 

e?en  if  it  be  supposed  that  the  pulse  is  concentrated  to  some 

extent,  for  example,  if  it  spreads  out  in  a  cone  instead  of  a  sphere. 

From  a  recognition  of  these  difficulties  in  the  pulse  theory  and 

of  the  close  similarity  of  the  ionisation  effects  produced  by  X  and  7 

iiys  with  those  due  to  a  and  )S  rays,  Bragg*  suggested  that  the 

7  rays  were  corpuscular  in  nature.    As  a  simple  working  hypothesis, 

he  supposed  that  the  X  or  7  rays  consisted  of  a  negative  electron 

united  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  positive  electricity  to  neutralise 

its  charge.     These  "neutral  doublets"  were  occasionally  broken 

up  in  traversing  the  atoms  of  matter,  when  a  negative  electron 

appeared  endowed  with  a  velocity  corresponding  to  that  of  the 

doublet  before   disintegration.      On   this   view,  the   penetrating 

power  of  the  X  or  7  ray  depends  on  its  velocity.    This  variation  of 

velocity  of  the  doublet  offered  a  direct  explanation  of  the  variation 

of  the  velocity  of  the  expelled  electron  with  the  quality  of  the 

7  rays.     A  definite  proof  that  X  or  7  rays  are  propagated  with 

the  velocity  of  light  would  invalidate  this  special  theory  of  the 

structure  of  the  entity  constituting  the  7  ray.    The  determination 

of  the  velocity  of  X  rays  is  beset  with  great  difficulties,  but  Marx 

has  given  strong  evidence  that   they  are  propagated  with   the 

velocity  of  light    The  essential  point,  however,  involved  in  Bragg  s 

theory  is  that  the  X  or  7  ray  is  a  definite  and  concentrated  entity 

*  Bragg,  FhU.  Mag.  14,  p.  429,  1907 ;  16,  p.  663,  1906 ;  20,  p.  385,  1910. 
R.  B.-.'L  19 


290  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  [CB 

and  not  a  spreading  pulse  or  wave.  If  it  be  preferred,  it  may  bi 
assumed  as  has  been  done  by  Stark*  that  the  7  ray  is  a  oov 
centrated  bundle  of  electromagnetic  energy  which  is  propagatd 
without  change  of  form  with  the  velocity  of  light. 

According  to  Bragg's  theory,  the  X  or  7  ray  and  the  fi  ray  an 
mutually  convertible  forms  of  energy.  Consider,  for  example,  tlift 
effects  of  a  stream  of  cathode  rays  falling  on  the  anti-cathode  ii 
a  vacuum  tube.  Part  of  these  rays  are  scattered  back,  while  the 
others  lose  in  energy  by  ionisation  and  collisions  with  the  atomi 
of  matter  composing  the  anti-cathode.  Occasionally  one  of  the 
particles  is  suddenly  stopped  by  an  atom,  and  the  energy  of  the 
particle  is  converted  into  another  form  and  appears  as  an  X  my 
which  travels  on  in  the  original  direction  of  the  particle  at  tiw 
moment  of  absorption.  For  all  practical  purposes,  the  X  ray  thea 
behaves  as  an  uncharged  corpuscle.  As  it  is  electrically  neutral, 
it  is  far  more  penetrating  than  the  cathode  ray  which  produced  ii 
The  X  ray  travels  through  the  gas  suffering  deflections  of  its  path 
in  passing  through  the  atoms. 

It  will  be  seen  in  the  next  section  that  the  experimental 
evidence  shows  that  the  X  ray  or  7  ray  does  not  itself  ionise  the 
gas  to  an  appreciable  extent,  so  that  probably  the  7  ray  loses  but 
little  of  its  energy  in  passing  through  many  atoms.  In  c<m- 
sequence  of  a  violent  atomic  encounter,  the  7  ray  disappears  and 
its  energy  is  converted  into  that  of  a  high  speed  )8  particle,  which 
travels  usually  in  the  direction  of  the  7  ray.  The  fi  partidfi 
suffers  deflections  from  its  path  in  the  atomic  encounters,  and 
loses  energy  rapidly  by  ionisation.  Occasionally  a  particle,  how- 
ever, may  be  suddenly  stopped  by  an  atom,  and  change  again  to 
an  X  ray.  This  theory  offers  a  concrete  and  general  explanation 
of  the  connection  between  the  X  or  7  rays  and  the  /8  rays.  It 
suggests  why  the  ^  particle  excited  by  a  7  ray  travels  on  in  the 
direction  of  the  7  rays,  and  also  why  the  7  ray  travels  on  in 
the  direction  of  the  0  ray  which  produced  it. 

We  have  already  drawn  attention  to  some  of  the  diflSculties  ol 
the  spreading  pulse  theory,  and  the  modifications  of  it  that  have 
been  proposed.     It  is  of  interest  at  this  stage  to  consider  som^ 

*  J.  Stark,  Phyi.  Zeit,  10,  p.  902,  1909 ;  U,  pp.  24,  179,  1910. 


Vl]  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING   RAYS  291 

experiments  that  have  been  made  by  E.  Meyer*  to  decide  between 
the  two  hypothesea  The  general  method  adopted  was  similar  to 
that  described  in  Section  75  to  show  that  the  a  and  fi  radiations 
are  discontinuous,  and  that  there  are  always  fluctuations  when 
one  source  of  ionisation  is  balanced  against  another.  In  Meyer's 
experiments  the  fluctuations  of  the  balance  were  determined  when 
the  ionisation  due  to  the  7  rays  was  measured  (1)  in  a  hemi- 
sphere, (2)  in  a  cone  of  small  solid  angle.  On  the  spreading 
pulse  theory,  the  same  number  of  pulses  would  pass  per  second 
through  the  apparatus  in  both  cases.  But  on  a  corpuscular  theory 
of  7  rays  the  number  is  not  the  same  but  varies  in  the  ratio 
of  the  solid  angles.  From  a  comparison  of  the  experimental 
results  obtained  in  the  two  cases,  Meyer  found  a  better  agreement 
with  the  corpuscular  theory.  The  question  is,  however,  somewhat 
more  complicated  than  appears  at  first  sight,  since  the  ionisation 
due  to  7  rays  is  mainly,  if  not  entirely,  due  to  the  /8  rays  which 
they  excite  in  matter.  Campbell  f  has  discussed  in  detail  the 
theory  of  Meyer  s  method,  and  concludes  that  the  observations  of 
Meyer  do  not  afibrd  a  decisive  test  between  the  two  theories.  The 
problem  is  a  difficult  one  and  is  still  under  investigation. 

LabyJ  balanced  against  each  other  the  ionisation  produced  in 
two  vessels  by  the  7  rays  and  found  that  there  were  marked 
fluctuations  of  the  balance.  He  concluded  that  either  the  energy 
of  the  7  rays  is  confined  to  one  direction  or  that  the  ionisation 
produced  by  them  is  subject  to  variations. 

If  it  be  supposed  that  the  pulse  does  not  spread  but  consists 
of  a  bundle  of  energy  propagated  with  a  velocity  of  light,  the  main 
distinctions  between  the  theories  disappear,  and  it  is  difficult  to 
obtain  a  decisive  test  between  them.  The  general  pulse  theory 
in  the  hands  of  Barkla  has  proved  of  great  utility  in  suggesting 
investigations  which  have  brought  to  light  some  facts  of  great 
importance.  Reference  has  already  been  made  (Section  33)  to  the 
very  remarkable  results  obtained  by  Barkla  with  regard  to  the 
excitation  and  absorption  of  the  radiations  which  are  set  up  when 

*  Meyer,  Ber,  d.  kgl.  Preuts.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  32,  p.  647, 1910.  and  Phys.  Zeit.  11, 
p.  1022,  1910.     See  also  v.  Sehweidler,  Pkyt,  Zeit,  11,  pp.  225,  614,  1910. 
t  Campbell,  Phys,  Zeit,  11,  p.  826,  1910. 
X  Laby,  Nature,  87,  p.  144,  1911. 

19—2 


292  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS  [C 

X  rays  traverse  matter.     Barkla  has  found  that  certain  so 
can  emit  several  types  of  characteristic  radiations  which 
widely  in  penetrating  power.     It  is  not  yet  settled  whether 
characteristic  radiations  are  set  up  directly  by  the  passage  of 
X  rays  through  the  atoms  or  whether  the  X  rays  are  first  conve 
into  /9  particles  which  in  their  turn  are  converted  into  charac 
istic  X  rays. 

Whiddington*  has  shown  that  the  characteristic  radial 
of  a  given  metal  appears  when  the  velocity  of  the  cathode  parti< 
in  a  vacuum  tube  exceeds  a  certain  definite  value  which  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  atomic  weight  of  the  substance.  The  type 
characteristic  radiation  can  thus  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
velocity  of  the  electi-ons  required  to  excite  it.  It  appears  as  if 
the  y8  particle  must  possess  a  certain  energy  before  it  can  penetrate 
the  region  of  the  atom  where  the  yS  particle  is  converted  into  the 
X  ray.  The  excitation  of  several  types  of  characteristic  radiations 
may  be  due  to  the  existence  of  several  such  successive  regions  in 
the  structure  of  the  atom. 

Since  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  7  rays  are  of  the  type  of 
penetrating  X  rays,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  some  evidence  should 
be  obtained  of  the  excitation  of  characteristic  radiations  by  the 
passage  of  7  rays  through  matter.  We  have  seen  that  Gray 
has  obtained  evidence  of  effects  of  this  kind  using  the  7  rays 
from  radium  E.  There  are  certain  anomalies  in  the  absorption  of 
7  rays  by  different  kinds  of  matter  which  are  probably  connected 
with  the  excitation  of  characteristic  radiations  by  7  r&ys.  The 
experimental  evidence  available  is,  however,  too  incomplete  to  drav 
definite  conclusions. 

It  is  evident  that  the  passage  of  X  rays  and  7  ray^  through 
matter  is  a  very  complicated  phenomenon,  and  further  examination 
promises  to  throw  much  light  not  only  on  the  nature  of  X  rays  aod 
7  rays  but  also  indirectly  on  the  structure  of  the  atoms  of  matter. 

105.     The   ionisation  and  absorption   of  7  rays.    The 

intensity  of  the  7  rays  emitted  from  a  radio-active  substance  is 
not  influenced  by  temperature  nor  by  placing  the  active  matter 
in  a  strong  magnetic  field.     In  addition,  the  absorption  of  the 

♦  Whiddington,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  85,  p.  328,  1911 ;  Nature,  88,  p.  143. 1911. 


Vl]  THE  7  OR  VEBY   PENETRATING   RAYS  293 

7  rays  by  matter  depends  only  on  the  number  of  atoms  traversed 
and  is  independent  of  their  molecular  combinations,  and  in  this 
respect  resembles  that  of  a  and  ^  rays.  W.  Wilson*  showed  that 
the  absorption  of  7  rays  by  iron  was  not  influenced  by  raising  the 
temperature  of  the  iron  block  to  a  red  heat.  The  ionisation  due 
to  the  7  rays  after  the  transmission  through  the  iron  block  was 
found  to  be  slightly  greater  for  a  high  than  for  a  low  temperature. 
This,  however,  was  completely  accounted  for  by  correcting  for  the 
change  of  the  density  of  the  iron  with  temperature. 

There  has  been  considerable  discussion  of  the  question  whether 
X  rays  and  7  rays  themselves  ionise  the  gas  they  traverse  or 
whether  the  ionisation  is  due  to  the  ^  particles  which  are  released 
fbm  matter  by  the  action  of  the  primary  rays. 

Bragg  f  has  investigated  the  question  for  X  rays,  and  concludes 
that  on  the  whole  the  evidence  indicates  that  the  ionisation  is  due 
to  the  /8  radiation  and  not  to  the  X  rays  themselves.  In  the  case  of 
the  7  rays,  some  light  is  thrown  on  the  question  by  measurements 
of  the  ionisation  by  7  rays  in  gases  at  high  pressures.  Experiments 
of  this  kind  have  been  made  by  Laby  and  Kaye  J  and  by  W.  Wilson§. 
It  is  found  that  the  ionisation  at  first  increases  nearly  proportion- 
ally with  the  pressure,  but  at  higher  pressures,  e,g.  from  20  to  100 
atmospheres,  the  ionisation  increases  more  slowly  with  rise  of 
pressure.  The  shape  of  the  curves  giving  the  relation  between 
ionisation  and  pressure  depends  upon  the  dimensions  of  the 
ionisation  chamber.  Suppose,  for  example,  the  ionisation  due  to 
Sin  external  source  of  7  rays  is  measured  in  a  metal  electroscope 
containing  gas  at  high  pressure.  The  ionisation  in  the  electroscope 
is  then  due  (1)  to  the  /8  particles  emitted  hova  the  walls  of  the 
vessel,  (2)  to  the  fi  particles  emitted  from  the  gas  itself,  and  (3)  to 
a  possible  volume  ionisation  of  the  gas  by  the  7  rays  themselves. 
The  ionisation  due  to  (1)  tends  to  reach  a  maximum  value  when 
the  pressure  is  sufficiently  high  to  absorb  the  fi  particles  before 
they  have  crossed  the  vessel.     The   ionisation   due   to   (2)   will 

• 

increase  steadily  with  pressure,  since  the  emission  of  y8  particles  is 

•  W.  Wilson,  Phil,  Mag,  31,  p.  632,  1911. 

t  Bragg,  Phil,  Mag,  20,  p.  385.  1910 ;  Proc.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  86,  p.  349,  1911. 

:  Laby  and  Eaye,  Phil.  Mag,  16,  p.  918,  1908. 

i  W.  WUson.  Phil.  Mag,  17,  p.  216,  1909. 


294  THE  7  OR  VERY  PENETRATING  RAYS         [( 

proportional  to  the  density  of  the  gas,  i,e.  to  the  pressure  of 
gas.  The  ionisation  (3)  would  be  expected  to  vary  directly  as 
pressure.  By  assuming  that  the  ionisation  in  the  electi 
was  due  to  (1)  and  (3)  alone,  Wilson  showed  that  the  volunwl 
ionisation  of  the  7  rays  in  a  metal  vessel  could  not  be  more  than' 
1/6  of  the  ionisation  due  to  the  ^  rays.  By  taking  the  effect  of! 
(2)  into  account,  this  fraction  becomes  much  smaller.  The  evidence! 
from  such  experiments  thus  indicates  that  the  greater  part,  if  nofci 
all,  of  the  ionisation  in  an  enclosure  is  due  to  the  excited  /3  rays 
and  not  to  the  7  rays  themselves.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  veiy 
difficult  to  decide  definitely  that  the  7  rays  themselves  produce  no 
ionisation  at  all. 

According  to  Bragg's  view,  the  7  ray  does  not  produce  any 
ionisation  until  its  energy  is  transformed  by  an  atomic  encounter 
into  a  ^  ray.  This  /8  particle  travels  on  and  expends  its  energy 
in  ionisation  of  the  gas. 

Eve*  has  made  measurements  to  determine  the  ionisation  due 
to  the  7  rays  and  the  secondary  rays  produced  by  them  at  various 
distances  ftx)m  a  given  quantity  of  radium,  which  is  surrounded  by 
screens  of  sufficient  thickness  to  stop  completely  the  j3  rays.  The 
ionisation  /  at  a  distance  R  fix)m  a  point  source  of  Q  grams 
of  radium  is  given  by 

where  fi  is  the  coeflScient  of  absorption  of  the  7  rays  by  air  and  K 
is  the  constant  which  represents  the  number  of  ions  per  cubic  centi- 
metre due  to  one  gram  of  radium  as  a  point  source  at  a  distance 
of  one  centimetre.  Eve  found  that  -fiT  =  3*8  x  10*.  Assuming  the 
value  of  fi  —  6*0  x  lO"*  for  air  given  in  Section  98,  it  follows  that 
the  total  number  of  ions  produced  by  complete  absorption  of  the 
7  rays  from  one  gram  of  radium  is  7*8  x  10".  Disregarding  the 
small  7  ray  effect  of  radium  B,  and  taking  the  number  of  7  rays 
or  entities  expelled  from  one  gram  of  radium  as  equal  to  the 
number  of  /8  particles  expelled  from  the  radium  C  present,  viz. 
about  3*4  X  10'^  per  second,  it  follows  that  each  7  ray  on  the 
average  produces  23,000  ions.    Assuming  that  the  energy  required 

♦  Eve,  Phil,  Mag.  22,  p.  651,  1911. 


THE  7  OE  VERY  PENETRATING  RATS  295 

luce  an  ion  is  equal  to  55  x  10-"  ergs  (Section  68)  this 
on  would  be  produced  by  a  ^  particle  of  initial  velocity 
95  of  the  velocity  of  light.  This  velocity  is  of  about  the 
lagnitude  as  that  observed  for  the  swift  ^  particles  released 
7  rays  from  matter. 

jeiey  and  Robinson  in  the  laboratory  of  the  writer  repeated 
teriments  made  by  Eve  and  found  the  total  number  of  ions 
id  by  the  y  rays  to  be  about  13  x  10",  a  value  somewhat 
than  that  obtained  by  Eve.  From  the  theoretical  dia- 
on  the  y9  and  y  rays  given  in  Chapter  XVIII,  it  will  be  seen 
lere  is  strong  evidence  that  several  7  rays  arise  for  the 
on  of  each  (3  ray  from  a  radio-active  atom.  In  such  a  case, 
Tgy  emitted  in  a  single  7  ray  may  be  much  less  than  the 
alculated  above. 


CHAPTER  VII 

PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS. 

106.  Luminous  effects.  Besides  their  power  of  acting  on 
a  photographic  plate,  and  of  ionising  gases,  the  radiations  from 
active  bodies  are  able  to  produce  marked  chemical  and  physical 
actions  in  various  substances.  Most  of  these  eflfects  are  due  eithei 
to  the  a  or  y8  rays.  The  7  rays  produce  little  eflFect  in  comparison 
Since  the  fi  rays  are  similar  in  all  respects  to  high  velocity  cathode 
rays,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  they  will  produce  eflfects  similai 
in  character  to  those  produced  by  the  cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum 
tube. 

Becquerel*  initially  studied  the  action  of  radium  rays  in  pro- 
ducing phosphorescence  in  various  bodies.  The  substance  to  be 
tested  was  placed  above  the  radium  in  the  form  of  powder  on  a  verj 
thin  mica  plate.  Examination  was  made  of  the  sulphides  of  calciun 
and  strontium,  ruby,  diamond,  varieties  of  calcite,  phosphorus  anc 
hexagonal  zinc  blende.  Substances  like  the  ruby  and  calcite,  whict 
phosphoresce  under  luminous  rays,  did  not  phosphoresce  under  th( 
radium  rays.  On  the  other  hand,  those  which  were  made  luminoui 
by  ultra-violet  light  were  also  luminous  under  the  action  of  radiun 
rays.  The  radium  rays  show  distinct  diflFerences  from  X  rays.  Foi 
example,  a  diamond  which  was  very  luminous  with  radium  rayj 
was  unaflfected  by  X  rays.  The  double  sulphate  of  uranium  anc 
potassium  is  more  luminous  than  hexagonal  zinc  blende  undei 
X  rays,  but  the  reverse  is  true  for  radium  rays;  under  the  in- 
fluence of  these  rays,  sulphide  of  calcium  gave  a  blue  luminositj 
but  was  hardly  aflFected  by  X  rays. 

*  Becquerel,  C.  JR.  129,  p.  912,  1899. 


a.  vii] 


PROPEBTIES  OF  THE   RADIATIONS 


297 


The  following  table  shows  the  relative  phosphorescence  excited 
\  various  bodies. 


Snbstance 


Hexagonal  zinc  blende 

Platiuf )-cyaiiide  of  barium 

Diamond 

;  Douhle  .sulphate  of  uranium  and  potassium 
Calcium  fluoride         


Without  screen. 
Intensity 


13-36 
1-99 

ri4 

1-00 
•30 


Across  screen 

of  black 

paper 

•04 
•05 
•01 
•31 
•02 


In  the  last  column  the  intensity  without  the  screen  is  in  each 
case  taken  as  unity.  The  great  diminution  of  intensity  after  the 
rays  have  passed  through  black  paper  shows  that  most  of  the 
phosphorescence  developed  without  the  screen  is,  in  the  majority 
of  cases,  due  to  the  a  rays. 

Bary*  has  made  a  very  complete  examination  of  the  class  of 
substances  which  become  luminous  under  radium  rays.  He  found 
that  the  great  majority  of  substances  belongs  to  the  alkali  metals 
and  alkaline  earths.  All  these  substances  were  also  phosphorescent 
under  the  action  of  X  rays. 

Crystalline  zinc  sulphide  (Sidot's  blende)  phosphoresces  very 
brightly  under  the  influence  of  the  rays  from  radium  and  other 
very  active  substances.  This  property  of  zinc  sulphide  was 
initially  observed  by  Giesel  and  has  proved  invaluable  as  a  delicate 
optical  means  of  comparing  quantitatively  the  activity  of  substances 
emitting  a  rays.  It  is  an  especially  sensitive  means  of  detecting 
the  presence  of  a  rays,  since  it  exhibits  the  "scintillating"  property 
already  discussed  in  Section  60.  In  order  to  show  the  luminosity 
due  to  the  a  rays,  the  screen  should  be  held  close  to  the  active 
substance,  as  the  rays  are  absorbed  in  their  passage  through  a  few 
centimetres  of  air.  Zinc  sulphide  is  also  luminous  under  the  action 
of  the  /8  rays,  but  the  phosphorescence  is  far  more  persistent  than 
vhen  produced  by  the  a  rays  and  does  not  show  obvious  scintil- 
lations. 

Very  brilliant  luminous  eflfects  can  be  produced  by  admitting 
^  large  amount  of  radium  emanation  into  a  glass  tube  coated 

•  Bary,  C.  R,  150,  p.  776,  1900. 


298  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CH 

internally  with  zinc  sulphide.  In  a  similar  way,  if  the  radium 
emanation  is  concentrated  in  a  very  thin- walled  glass  tube  which 
allows  the  a  rays  to  escape  with  little  absorption,  intense  lumin- 
osity is  produced  on  a  zinc  sulphide  screen  brought  near  it. 

Very  beautiful  luminous  effects  are  produced  by  large  crystals 
of  the  platinocyanides  exposed  to  the  radium  rays.  Those  con- 
taining lithium  give  a  brilliant  pink  colour.  The  calcium  and 
barium  salts  fluoresce  with  a  deep  green  light,  and  the  sodium 
compound  with  a  lemon  yellow.  The  mineral  willemite  (zinc 
silicate)  as  discovered  by  Kunz,  is  an  even  more  sensitive  means  of 
detecting  the  presence  of  the  radiations  than  platinocyanide  of 
barium.  It  fluoresces  showing  a  beautiful  greenish  colour,  and  a 
piece  of  mineral  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  rays  appears  quite 
translucent.  The  crystals  of  the  platinocyanides  of  barium  and 
lithium  are  especially  suited  for  showing  the  action  of  the  7  rays, 
and,  in  this  respect,  are  superior  to  willemite. 

A  very  striking  effect  is  shown  by  the  mineral  kunzite— a 
new  variety  of  spodumene  discovered  by  Kunz*.  This  is  a 
transparent  gem-like  crystal,  often  of  very  large  size,  which 
glows  with  a  beautiful  reddish  colour  under  the  action  of  the  /3  or 
7  rays,  but  does  not  appear  to  be  sensitive  to  the  a  rays.  The 
luminosity  extends  throughout  the  crystal,  but  is  not  so  marked  as 
in  the  platinocyanides  or  willemite.  The  mineral  sparteitef,  a  form 
of  calcite  containing  a  few  per  cent,  of  manganese,  has  been  found 
by  Ambrecht  to  fluoresce  with  a  very  deep  orange  light  under  the 
^  and  7  rays.  The  colour  appears  to  depend  on  the  intensity  of 
the  rays,  and  is  deeper  close  to  the  radium  than  at  some  distance 
away. 

If  kunzite  and  sparteite  are  exposed  to  the  action  of  the 
cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube,  the  colour  is  different  from  that 
produced  by  the  radium  rays. .  The  former  appears  deep  yellow, 
instead  of  deep  red  as  observed  with  the  radium  rays. 

The  different  actions  of  the  radium  rays  on  these  fluorescent 
substances  can  be  illustrated  very  simply  and  beautifully  by  the 
following  experiment.  A  small  U  tube  is  filled  with  fragments  of 
the  fluorescent  substances  arranged  in  layers.     The    U   tube  is 

*  Kunz  and  Baskerville,  Amer,  Journ,  Science^  16,  p.  335,  1903. 
t  See  Nature,  69,  p.  623,  19P4. 


Il]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE   RADIATIONS  299 

mmersed  in  liquid  air  and  the  emanation  from  about  20  mgrs. 
tf  radium  is  condensed  in  the  tube.  On  closing  the  tube  and 
amoving  it  from  the  liquid  air,  the  emanation  distributes  itself 
miformly  in  the  tube.  The  shades  of  colour  produced  in  the 
lifferent  substances  are  clearly  seen. 

It  is  observed  that  all  the  crystals  increase  in  luminosity 
For  several  hours,  on  account  of  the  growth  of  active  deposit  from 
the  emanation.  This  efifect  is  especially  observed  in  kunzite, 
wrhich  at  first  hardly  responds  to  the  rays,  since  the  fi  and  7  rays, 
ffhich  cause  it  to  fluoresce,  are  not  given  out  by  the  emanation 
itself  but  by  its  later  products.  The  intensity  of  the  0  and  y 
rays  is,  in  consequence,  small  at  first  but  rises  to  a  maximum  after 
several  hours ;  the  luminosity  observed  varies  in  a  corresponding 
manner. 

An  account  of  the  various  luminous  effects  produced  in 
diflPerent  gems  by  exposure  to  the  rays  from  radium  and  actinium 
has  been  given  by  Kunz  and  Baskerville*. 

The  effect  of  radium  rays  on  the  diamond  has  been  examined 
by  several  observers.  Some  kinds  of  diamona  are  strongly 
luminous  while  others  are  not.  Glewf  and  RegenerJ  found  that 
some  diamonds  give  scintillations  when  exposed  to  a  rays  but 
these  are  of  less  intensity  than  those  shown  by  zinc  sulphide. 
The  scintillations  produced  in  a  thin  diamond  plate  were  used  by 
Regener  to  count  accurately  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted 
from  polonium  (Section  61).  Sir  William  Crookes§  has  given  an 
iccount  of  the  changes  of  colour  in  a  diamond  exposed  for  a  long 
time  to  the  a,  fi  and  y  rays  from  radium. 

When  barium  platinocyanide  is  exposed  to  the  action  of  a  or 
3  and  7  rays,  it  rapidly  changes  to  a  brown  or  red  colour  and  its 
luminosity  rapidly  decreases.  Beilby||,  who  has  made  an  extensive 
examination  of  the  luminosity  produced  in  various  substances  by 
i3  and  7  rays,  found  that  the  luminosity  of  barium  platinocyanide 
rapidly  sank  to  1/12  its  initial  value  and  then  remained  constant. 
The  luminosity  was  not  regenerated  by  exposure  to  a  strong  light 

*  Kanz  and  Baskerville,  Sciencey  18,  p.  769,  1903. 

t  Glew,  Arch.  Rontgen  Rays^  June,  190i. 

X  Regener,  Ber.  d.  Akad,  d.  Wistt.  Berlin,  38,  p.  948,  1909. 

§  Crookes,  Proe,  Roy,  Soc.  A,  74,  p.  47,  1904. 

II  Beilby,  Proe.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  74,  pp.  606,  611,  1906. 


300  PROPERTIES  OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CE 

but  could  only  be  regained  by  solution  and  re-crystallisation.  He 
concluded  that  the  change  in  colour  was  due  to  the  loss  of  the 
water  of  crystallisation  under  the  influence  of  the  mys.  Giesel 
made  a  screen  of  platinocyanide  of  radio-active  barium.  The 
screen,  very  luminous  at  first,  gradually  turned  brown  in  colour, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  crystals  became  dichroic.  In  this 
condition,  the  luminosity  was  much  less,  although  the  active 
substance  had  increased  in  activity  after  preparation. 

The  scintillations  produced  in  zinc  sulphide  are  of  very  short 
duration.  R.  W.  Wood*  concluded  that  the  luminosity  did  not 
last  more  than  1/40,000  of  a  second. 

The  action  of  continued  bombardment  of  a  zinc  sulphide 
screen  by  o  and  fi  rays  is  of  special  importance  on  account  of  the 
extensive  use  of  such  screens  for  counting  the  number  of  a  particles 
emitted  by  radio-active  matter.  Marsden  f  found  that  the  number 
of  scintillations  produced  by  a  constant  source  of  a  rays  on  a  zinc 
sulphide  screen  was  not  altered  when  the  screen  had  been  exposed 
to  a  very  intense  bombardment  of  a  particles,  but  each  scintillation 
became  much  feebler.  At  the  same  time,  owing  to  the  bombard- 
ment, the  average  luminosity  of  the  screen  rapidly  diminished  to 
a  small  fraction  of  its  initial  value.  The  decay  of  the  luminosity 
was  observed  in  small  glass  tubes  coated  internally  with  zinc 
sulphide  in  which  a  large  quantity  of  the  radium  emanation 
was  introduced.  After  an  initial  rise  due  to  the  growth  of 
the  active  deposit,  the  luminosity,  measured  by  a  photometer, 
was  found  to  decrease  far  more  rapidly  than  the  activity  of 
the  emanation,  and  had  diminished  to  a  few  per  cent,  of  its 
initial  value  in  a  few  days.  A  similar  result  was  observed  for 
willemite,  but  the  loss  of  luminosity  for  a  given  a  ray  bombard- 
ment was  somewhat  slower  than  for  zinc  sulphide.  In  the  case 
of  barium  platino-cyanide,  the  luminosity  due  to  the  a  rays 
decreased  with  great  rapidity  and  became  small  after  a  few 
hours.  In  explanation  of  these  results,  the  writerj  suggested 
that  each  of  these  phosphorescent  substances  contained  a  number 
of  "  active  centres  "  which  were  dissociated  by  the  radiations  with 

♦  R.  W.  Wood,  PhiL  Mag.  10,  p.  427,  1905. 
t  Marsden,  Proc.  Boy.  Soc.  A,  88,  p.  64S,  1910. 
X  Rutherford,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A.  88,  p.  661,  1910. 


ni]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  301 

the  emission   of  light.     Each   centre   after  it  had  been  struck 

ceased  to  be  effective,  and  the  decay  of  luminosity  was  ascribed 

to  the  gradual  destruction  of  these  active  centres  throughout  the 

volume   exposed   to   the   a  radiation.    The   gradual   decrease  in 

nnmber  of  the  active  centres  offered  an  explanation  of  the  fact 

that  an  intense  bombardment  by  a  rays  did  not  alter  the  number 

of  scintillations  but  only  their  intensity.     The  observed  curves  of 

decay  of  the   luminosity  were  in  fair  accord  with  the  theory. 

From  a  knowledge  of  the  range  of  the  a  particles  in  the  material 

and  the   number  of  a  particles   falling   on   the   screen,   it   was 

calculated  that  a  single  a  particle,  on  the  average,  destroyed  all 

the  active  centres  in  its  path  in  zinc  sulphide  within  a  cylinder 

of  length  equal  to  the  range  of  the  a  particle  and  of  diameter 

1*3  X  10^'  cms.     This  is   comparable  with   the  diameter  of  an 

atom  and  indicated  that  the  luminosity  of  a  scintillation  must  be 

due  to  the  dissociation  of  molecules  or  small  molecular  aggregates 

and  not,  as  had  been  suggested,  to  the  mechanical  disruption  of 

the  crystals.     The  corresponding  cylinder  of  action  for  willemite 

was  somewhat  greater,  viz.  2*5  x  10""''  cms.     On  the  other  hand, 

results  for  barium  platino-cyanide  indicated  that  the  a  particle 

was  instrumental  in  destroying  all  the  active  centres  within  a 

diameter  1*6  x  10~'  cms.     This  suggests  that  the  disturbance  due 

to  an  a  particle  in  this  substance  extends  for  a  considerable  area 

around  its  path. 

Stefan  Meyer*  observed  that  a  specimen  of  kunzite  after 
exposure  for  several  days  to  radium  rays  lost  its  violet  colour  and 
became  green. 

Marsden  {loc.  cit.)  made  a  detailed  examination  of  the  duration 
of  the  luminosity  in  zinc  sulphide  and  willemite  after  exposure 
to  ff  and  7  rays.  On  exposing  zinc  sulphide  to  a  constant  source 
of  fi  rays,  the  luminosity  increased  for  about  20  minutes.  On 
removing  the  source  of  y9  rays,  the  luminosity  sank  more  gradually 
than  it  had  risen.  Willemite  showed  different  effects.  The 
uminosity  due  to  fi  rays  rose  rapidly  to  a  maximum  in  a  few 
ninutes,  while,  on  removal  of  the  yS  rays,  the  luminosity  sjink  at 
»nce  to  a  small  fraction  of  its  value.  There  was  then  a  slow  decay 
0  zero. 

*  Stefan  Meyer,  Phyt.  ZeiL  10,  p.  iS3,  1909. 


302  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CH. 

107.  laomiiioflity  of  radium  compounds.  All  radiom 
impounds  are  spontaneously  luminous.  This  luminosity  is  es- 
pecially brilliant  in  the  dry  haloid  salts,  and  persists  for  long 
intervals  of  time.  In  damp  air  the  salts  lose  a  large  amount  of 
their  luminosity,  but  they  recover  it  on  drying.  With  very  active 
radium  chloride,  the  Curies  have  observed  that  the  light  changes 
in  colour  and  intensity  with  time.  The  original  luminosity  is 
recovered  if  the  salt  is  recrystallized.  The  luminosity  of  radium 
persists  over  a  wide  range  of  temperature  and  is  as  bright 
at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  as  at  ordinary  temperatures^ 
A  slight  luminosity  is  observed  in  a  solution  of  radium,  and  if 
crystals  are  being  formed  in  the  solution,  they  can  be  clearly 
distinguished  in  the  liquid  by  their  greater  brightness. 

Very  active  preparations  of  actinium  show  a  similar  luminosity,  I 
the  intensity  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  impurities  present 
Becquerel*  has  observed  that  crystals  of  uranium  nitrate  were 
spontaneously  but  feebly  luminous.  Struttf  observed  that 
crystals  of  the  uranium  mineral  autunite  showed  a  feeble  spon- 
taneous luminosity.  It  will  be  seen  later  (Section  191)  that 
solidified  radium  emanation  emits  an  intense  orange  coloured 
light  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air. 

While  it  is  difficult  to  give  an  exact  explanation  of  the  origin 
and  changes  of  luminosity  in  radium  preparations,  there  appears 
to  be  no  doubt  that  the  phosphorescence  is  connected  with  the 
presence  of  small  quantities  of  impurities  which  become  luminous 
under  the  continuous  bombardment  by  the  radiations.  It  is 
known  that  radium  compounds  exposed  in  air  undergo  marked 
chemical  changes  and  this,  no  doubt,  is  responsible  for  the  gradual 
changes  of  luminosity  with  time. 

108.    Light  emission  of  gases  exposed  to  a  rays.     We 

have  seen  that  radium  salts  are  feebly  self-luminous.  The 
spectrum  of  this  weak  luminosity  was  initially  examined  by  Sir 
William   and   Lady   HugginsJ.     On   viewing  the  light   with  a 

•  Becquerel,  C.  R.  18S,  p.  184,  1904. 
t  Strutt,  Vroc.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  S3,  p.  70,  1909. 

t  Sir  William  and  Lady  Huggins,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  72,  pp.  196,  409,  19W; 
7S,  p.  488,  1906  ;  77,  p.  180,  1906. 


pi 

I 

1 


Vn]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  303 

direct  vision  spectroscope,  there  were  faint  indications  of  variations 
of  luminosity  along  the  spectrum.  In  order  to  get  a  photograph 
of  the  spectrum  within  a  reasonable  time,  they  made  use  of  a 
quartz  spectroscope  of  special  design  which  had  been  previously 
employed  in  a  spectroscopic  examination  of  faint  celestial  objects. 
After  three  days*  exposure  with  a  slit  of  1/450  of  an  inch  in 
width,  a  negative  was  obtained  which  showed  a  number  of  bright 
lines.  The  magnified  spectrum  is  shown  in  Fig.  81.  The  lines 
of  this  spectrum  were  found  to  agree  not  only  in  position  but  also 
in  relative  intensity  with  the  band  spectrum  of  nitrogen.  The 
band  spectrum  of  nitrogen  and  also  the  spark  spectrum*  of 
radium  are  shown  in  the  same  figure.  Crookes  and  Dewar  later 
showed  that  the  spectrum  of  nitrogen  was  not  obtained  if  the 
radium  was  contained  in  a  highly  exhausted  tube.  It  thus 
appeared  that  the  spectrum  is  due  to  the  nitrogen  of  the  air 
or  to  nitrogen  occluded  in  the  radium  salt. 

These  results  have  been  confirmed  by  a  number  of  later 
observers,,  including  Himstedt  and  Meyerf,  Walter  J,  and  Pohl§. 
The  spectrum  of  the  luminous  radium  bromide  is  in  part  con- 
tinuous due  to  the  fluorescence  of  the  crystals.  In  an  atmo- 
sphere of  helium,  three  helium  lines  were  faintly  observed.  In 
hydrogen,  carbon  monoxide  and  carbon  dioxide,  no  trace  of  a 
line  spectrum  was  seen.  There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that 
the  line  spectrum  observed  in  nitrogen  and  helium  is  due  to 
Dhe  bombardment  of  the  gas  by  the  a  particles.  This  is  borne 
}ut  by  the  observations  of  Walter,  Marckwald  and  Herrmann  ||,  who 
found  that  the  a  rays  firom  polonium  in  air  also  produced  the 
band  spectrum  of  nitrogen.  With  a  very  active  preparation,  the 
uminosity  can  be  detected  some  centimetres  from  the  source  of 

*  The  spark  spectrum  of  the  radium  bromide  showed  the  H  and  K  lines  of 
ialcium  and  also  faintly  some  of  the  strong  lines  of  barium.  The  characteristic 
ines  of  radium  of  wave-lengths  3814*59,  3649  7,  4340*6  and  2708-6,  observed  by 
>emar9ay  and  others,  are  dearly  shown  in  the  figure.  The  strong  line  of  wave- 
ength  about  2814  is  due  also  to  radium. 

t  Himstedt  and  G.  Meyer,  Phy»,  Zeit.  6,  p.  688,  1905 ;  7,  p.  762,  1906. 

X  Walter,  Ann.  d.  Phy»,  17,  p.  367,  1905 ;  20,  p.  327,  1906. 

§  Pohl,  Ann.  d.  Pkys.  17,  p.  375,  1905 ;  Verh.  d.  D.  Phys.  Get.  7,  p.  468,  1905. 
\ralter  and  Pohl,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  18,  p.  406,  1905. 

H  Marckwald  and  Herrmann,  Verh.  d.  D.  Phy$,  Ges.  7,  p.  227,  1905. 


304  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CB. 

a  rays.  Stark  and  Giesel*  using  a  strong  polonium  preparation 
observed  that  the  source  was  surrounded  by  a  luminous  zone 
extending  over  the  range  of  the  a  particles. 

These  results  are  of  great  interest,  for  they  show  that  the 
a  rays  are  able  to  excite  a  weak  luminosity  in  the  gases  they 
traverse,  of  which  the  spectrum  is  similar  to  that  produced  by 
the  electric  discharge  under  special  conditions.  Sir  William  and 
Lady  Huggins  were  initially  led  to  examine  the  spectrum  of  the 
spontaneous  luminosity  of  radium  with  the  hope  of  throwing 
some  light  on  the  processes  of  transformation  occurring  in  thai 
substance.  Taking  into  consideration  the  intense  bombardment 
to  which  the  radium  compound  is  subjected  by  its  own  radiations 
as  well  as  the  violent  atomic  disruptions  which  occur,  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  the  radium  or  its  products  of  transformation  should 
be  set  in  vibration.  So  far,  however,  no  indication  of  such  an 
eflfect  has  been  observed.  Possibly  the  radiations  emitted  are 
either  too  feeble  or  of  too  short  wave-length  to  be  detected. 
Gieself  observed  that  the  spectrum  of  the  weak  luminosity  shown 
by  a  very  active  preparation  of  actinium  showed  three  bright 
lines.  An  examination  of  the  spectrum  was  made  by  HartmannJ 
and  it  was  concluded  that  the  lines  were  due  to  impurities  present 
in  the  preparation  and  probably  to  didymium  which  gives  a 
fluorescent  spectrum  under  the  action  of  cathode  rays  similar  to 
that  observed  for  the  actinium  preparation. 

109.  Thermo-luminescence.  E.  Wiedemann  and  G.  C. 
Schmidt§  have  shown  that  certain  bodies  after  exposure  to  the 
cathode  rays  or  the  electric  spark  become  luminous  when  they 
are  heated  to  a  temperature  much  below  that  required  to  cause 
incandescence.  This  property  of  thermo-luminescence  is  most 
strikingly  exhibited  in  certain  cases  where  two  salts,  one  of  which 
is  much  in  excess  of  the  other,  are  precipitated  together.  It  is 
to  be  expected  that  such  bodies  would  also  acquire  this  property 
when  exposed  to  the  yS  rays  of  radium.     This  has  been  found  to 

♦  Stark  and  Giesel,  Phys.  Zeit.  8,  p.  680,  1907. 

t  Giesel,  Btr.  d.  D.  Chem.  Ges.  37,  p.  1696,  1904 ;  88,  p.  775,  1905. 

X  Hartmann,  Phys.  Zeit,  6,  p.  570,  1904 ;  6,  p.  401,  1905. 

§  Wiedemann  and  Scbn^idt,  Ann,  d,  Phys.  69,  p.  604,  1905. 


^1  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  305 

»  the  case  by  Wiedemann*.  Becquerel  showed  that  fluor-spar, 
sxpoeed  to  the  radium  rays,  was  luminous  when  heated.  The 
1^  tubes  in  which  radium  is  kept  are  rapidly  coloured.  On 
beating  the  tube,  a  strong  luminosity  is  observed,  and  the  colour- 
ition  to  a  large  extent  disappears.  The  peculiarity  of  many  of 
diese  bodies  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  property  of  becoming 
hminous  when  heated  is  retained  for  a  long  interval  of  time 
ifter  the  body  is  removed  from  the  influence  of  the  exciting 
cause.  It  appears  probable  that  the  rays  cause  chemical  changes 
in  diese  bodies,  which  are  permanent  until  heat  is  applied.  A 
portion  of  the  chemical  energy  is  then  released  in  the  form  of 
visible  light. 

110.  Photographic  action  of  the  rayi.  Active  prepara- 
tions of  all  radio-active  substances  produce  a  marked  action  on 
the  photographic  plate.  In  the  case  of  the  o  rays,  the  photo- 
graphic action  disappears  when  the  a  particles  lose  their  power 
of  ionisation  and  of  producing  scintillations  in  zinc  sulphide. 
Fairly  clear  radiographs  of  objects  can  be  obtained  with  the 
j8  or  7  rays.  On  account  of  the  marked  scattering  of  the 
iJ  rays,  the  edges  of  objects  are  not  so  clearly  defined  as  with 
X  rays.  Radiographs  obtained  by  the  7  rays  show  a  better 
definition  than  with  fi  rays ;  but  to  obtain  the  best  effects  it  is 
desirable  to  deflect  away  the  /8  rays  which  accompany  the  7  rays 
with  a  magnetic  field.  There  is  not  the  same  Contrast  for 
substances  of  different  density  which  are  shown  by  radiographs 
with  X  rays.  For  example,  the  bones  of  the  hand  do  not  show 
out  so  clearly  with  7  rays  as  with  X  rays. 

A  detailed  examination  of  the  photographic  action  of  the 
t  particles  was  made  by  Kinoshitaf.  A  rod  coated  with  radium 
X  which  emits  homogeneous  a  rays,  was  used  as  a  source  of 
swJiation.  The  variation  of  the  density  of  the  photographic  film 
1  development  with  the  number  and  the  velocity  of  a  particles 
icident  upon  it  was  experimentally  determined  under  various 
*nditions.  By  using  several  thin  superimposed  films,  the  variation 
the  photographic  action  at  different  points  of  the  range  of  the 

*  WiedemaDD,  Phys.  Zeit.  8,  p.  269,  1901. 

t  Kinoshita,  Proc,  Roy,  Soc,  A,  88,  p.  432,  1910. 

R.  R.-A.  20 


306  PBOPEBTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS 

a  particle  was  measured.     The  general  conclusioii, 
that  the  photographic  action  was  nearly  constant  along 
part  of  the  range  of  the  a  particle,  but  fell  o£f  rapidly^t 
end  of  its  path. 

We  have  seen  that  the  ionisation  due  to  a  pencil 
increases  with  lowering  of  velocity  to  a  well  marked 
and  then  fisills  rapidly  to  zero.  Since  the  law  of  a1 
a  rays  in  solids  is  similar  to  that  in  gases,  it  is  to  be 
that  there  should  be  a  similar  variation  of  the  ionisatic 
the  a  particle  along  its  path  in  the  film.  The  constancj 
photographic  effect  along  the  range  of  the  a  particle  indical 
each  grain  of  the  silver  salt  traversed  by  the  a  parti 
rendered  capable  of  development,  independently  of  the 
of  ions  produced  in  it.  Microscopic  measurements  show 
the  grains  so  produced  were  about  the  same  size.  By  c 
with  a  microscope  the  number  of  grains  in  a  thin  fil 
exposure  to  the  a  rays,  Kinoshita  found  that  the  nui 
grains  was  equal  to  the  number  of  a  particles  incident 
film,  provided  the  density  of  the  photographic  impress 
small.  This  is  an  important  result,  for  it  shows  thi 
a  particle  produces  a  detectable  photographic  effect, 
suitable  conditions,  there  appears  to  be  no  doubt  tl 
photographic  methods  developed  by  Kinoshita  could  be  er 
to  count  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  by  the  radi 
substances 

The  effect  of  continued  bombardment  of  a  film  b) 
rays  produces  a  different  action  to  that  of  over  exposure  1 
For  small  densities  of  the  film,  the  number  of  grains  obs< 
directly  proportional  to  the  number  of  a  particles  falliu] 
With  increased  bombardment  the  number  of  grains  h 
more  slowly  and  finally  reaches  a  maximum  value  when 
grains  of  silver  salt  are  acted  upon.  As  the  fraction  of  t 
number  of  grains  traversed  by  the  a  particles  approache 
it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  additional  photographic  efl 
to  a  given  number  of  a  particles  would  decrease  since  th( 
can  only  produce  an  effect  on  the  free  grains  which  have 
the  previous  bombardment. 

The  photographic  action  of  the  yS  rays  from  the  thin 


PROPERTIES  OF  THE   RADIATIONS  307 

3  was  found  to  be  1/3  to  1/4  that  of  the  a  rays,  while 

%  of  the  7  rays  on  thin  films  was  negligible  in  comparison. 

ifwever,  the  /3  and  7  rays  are  far  more  penetrating  than 

iys,  only  a  small  fraction  of  their  energy  is  spent  in  the 

iphic  film.     It  is  thus  to  be  expected  that  for  an  equal 

•of  0  particles,  the  slower  velocity  rays  will  produce  more 

kphic  action  in  the  thin  film  than  the  swifter,  since  the 

Ibs  of  energy  in  traversing  the  film  is  less  for  the  latter. 

^  fefi  of  such  effects  have  been  observed  experimentally  by 

~fer,  Hahn   and   Meitner  in  their  work  on  the  magnetic 

In  of  ^  rays  (Section  95).     It  is  well   known  that  the 

iaphic  effect  of  a  thick  layer  of  uranium  is  mostly  due  to 

^rays,  and  that  the  effect  due  to  the  a  rays  is  small  in 

tison*.     This  is  to  be  expected  fi-om  the  relative  photo- 

ic  effiects  of  a  and  fi  rays  for  thin  films  found  by  Kinoshita. 

dnganumf   observed   photographically   the   trail   of    an   a 

le  in  the  film  by  allowing  the  a  particle  to  strike  at  grazing 

Qce. 

L.  Colouration  of  bodies.  The  radiations  from  active 
produce  marked  chemical  actions  in  a  number  of  substances, 
fects  due  to  the  a  rays  are  in  general  far  more  evident  than 
lue  to  the  /8  and  7  rays.  One  of  the  most  striking  effects 
the  radiation  is  the  marked  colouration  of  glass  under  the 
ce  of  the  rays.  This  is  produced  by  all  three  types  of 
on  but  to  different  degrees.  The  initial  observations  on 
bject  were  made  by  M.  and  Mme  Curie.  Ordinary  soda  glass 
ired  a  deep  violet,  and  with  long  continued  action  the  glass 
iS  almost  black,  even  if  it  has  no  lead  in  its  composition, 
kinds  of  glass  are  coloured  brown  or  yellow.  The  coloura- 
16  to  the  a  rays  extends  only  for  a  short  distance  corre- 
ig  to  the  range  of  the  a  particles  in  the  glass.  The 
,tion  due  to  more  penetrating  jS  and  7  rays  extends 
hoot  the  whole  of  the  glass  exposed  to  the  radiation. 
I  has  shown  that  glass  exposed  to  the  radiation  exhibits  in 

Idy,  Trails,  Chem,  Soc.  81,  p.  SCO,  1902. 

nganum,  Verh.  d.  D.  Phyn.  Ges.  13,  p.  848,  1911. 

Jge,  Roy.  Soc.  South  Africa,  Oct.  18th,  1911 ;  Nature,  88  p.  167,  1911. 

20—2 


308  PROPERTIES  OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

many  cases  a  zonal  structure  in  its  colourations  and  that  there 
are  abnipt  changes  in  the  depth  of  colouration  depending  upon 
the  structure  of  the  glass.  The  colouration  of  glass  by  radium 
rays  is  similar  to  that  observed  in  X  ray  tubes  which  have  been 
long  in  use. 

Giesel*  found  that  he  could  obtain  as  much  colouration  in 
rock-salt  and  fluor-spar  by  radium  rays,  as  by  exposure  to  the 
action  of  cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube.  The  colouration, 
however,  extended  much  deeper  than  that  produced  by  the 
cathode  rays.  This  is  to  be  expected,  since  the  radium  rays  have 
a  higher  velocity,  and  consequently  greater  penetrating  power, 
than  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  an  ordinary  vacuum  tube. 
Goldstein  observed  that  the  colouration  is  far  more  intense  and 
rapid  when  the  salts  are  melted  or  heated  to  a  red  heat.  Melted 
potassium  sulphate,  under  the  action  of  a  very  active  preparation 
of  radium,  was  rapidly  coloured  a  strong  greenish  blue  which 
gradually  changed  into  a  dark  green.  Salomonsen  and  Dreyerf 
found  that  plates  of  quartz  were  coloured  by  exposure  to  radium 
rays.  When  examined  minutely,  plates  cut  perpendicular  to  the 
optic  axis  showed  the  presence  of  lines  and  striae,  parallel  to  the 
binary  axes.  Adjacent  portions  of  the  striated  system  diflFered 
considerably  in  intensity  of  colouration  and  clearly  revealed  the 
heterogeneity  of  the  structure  of  the  crj^stal.  Similar  observations 
have  been  recorded  by  Honigschmid  J.  Berthelot§  found  that  some 
specimens  of  quartz  were  not  coloured  by  radium  rays,  indicating 
that  the  colouration  observed  in  other  specimens  is  due  to  the 
presence  of  some  impurity.  The  writer  observed  that  a  fused 
quartz  tube  after  continued  exposure  to  the  radium  emanation 
became  brittle  and  cracked,  and  the  whole  tube  on  examination 
showed  a  multitude  of  approximately  circular  cracks.  Mme  Curie 
found  that  quartz  tubes  cracked  when  exposed  to  the  action  of  the 
a  rays  from  a  very  active  preparation  of  polonium.  There  seems 
to  be  no  doubt  that  quartz  for  this  reason  is  a  very  unsuitable 
substance  in  which  to  enclose  very  radio-active  preparations. 

*  Giesel,  Verh.  d.  D.  Phys.  Ges.  2,  p.  9,  1900. 

t  Sftlomonsen  and  Dreyer,  C.  R.  189,  p.  533,  1904. 

X  H6nig8chmid,  Wien.  Ber.  120,  p.  1617,  1911. 

§  M.  Berthelot,  C.  JR.  1«,  p.  710,  1907 ;  D.  Berthelot,  C.  R,  IW,  p.  818,  1907. 


ll]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  309 

Doelter*  has  made  a  detailed  examination  of  the  colouration 
»roduced  in  minerals  by  radium  rays,  and  has  suggested  explana- 
ions  of  the  effects  observed  in  different  cases.  He  found  that 
he  colouration  rapidly  disappeared  under  the  action  of  ultra- 
iolet  light. 

The  cause  of  these  colourations  by  cathode  and  radium  rays 
las  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion.  Elster  and  Geitelf 
•bserved  that  a  specimen  of  potassium  sulphate,  coloured  green 
>y  radium  rays,  showed  a  strong  photo-electric  action,  i.e.  it 
apidly  lost  a  negative  charge  of  electricity  when  exposed  to  the 
xjtion  of  ultra-violet  light.  All  substances  coloured  by  cathode 
ays  show  a  strong  photo-electric  action,  and,  since  the  metals 
odium  and  potassium  themselves  show  photo-electric  action  to 
,  very  remarkable  degree,  Elster  and  Qeitel  have  suggested  that 
he  colourations  are  caused  by  a  solid  solution  of  the  metal  in 
he  salt. 

Although  the  colouration  due  to  radium  rays  extends  deeper 
ban  that  due  to  the  cathode  rays,  when  exposed  to  light  the 
olour  fieules  away  at  about  the  same  rate  in  the  two  cases.  The 
olouration  of  glass  tubes  is  to  a  large  extent  destroyed  by 
leating  them  to  the  temperature  of  luminescence. 

112.  Pleochroic  halos.  Plates  of  mica  are  rapidly  coloured 
)rown  or  black  by  a  rays,  the  rapidity  of  colouration  depending 
•n  the  composition  of  the  mica.  Geologists  long  regarded  with 
uriosity  small  coloured  areas  in  certain  kinds  of  mica,  for  example, 
n  biotite,  cordierite,  and  muscovite.  The  sections  of  these 
oloured  areas  are  usually  circular  in  shape,  and  exhibit  the 
)roperty  of  pleochroism  under  polarised  light,  and  for  this  reason 
vere  called  "pleochroic  halos."  The  centres  of  these  areas  usually 
H)ntain  a  minute  crystal  of  foreign  matter.  JolyJ  first  pointed 
)ut  that  these  halos  were  of  radio-active  origin,  and  were  due  to 
ihe  colouration  of  the  mica  by  the  a  rays  expelled  from  a 
Qucleus  which  contains  radio-active  matter.    This  subject  has  been 

*  Doelter,  Le  Radium,  7,  p.  58,  1910,  "Das  Radium  and  die  Farben." 
Th.  Steinkopf.    Vienna. 

t  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phys.  Zeit,  3,  p.  113,  1902. 
X  Joly,  Phil.  Mag.  13,  p.  381,  1907. 


310  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CE 

investigated  in  great  detail  by  Joly*,  and  Joly  and  Fletchert, 
and  many  facts  of  great  interest  have  been  brought  to  light 
There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  in  homogeneous  material,  the 
halos  are  spherical  with  a  radio-active  inclusion  as  centre.  The 
diameter  of  the  central  section  varies  in  different  halos  between 
about  '013  mm.  and  '04  mm.  The  range  of  the  a  rays  in  any 
material  can  be  calculated  from  a  knowledge  of  its  compontion. 
Joly  has  deduced  that  in  a  specimen  of  biotite  the  range  of  the 
a  particles  from  uranium  and  ionium  is  about  *013  mnL,  from 
radium  C  about  '033  mm.  and  from  the  swiftest  a  particle  from 
thorium  C   04  mm. 

Joly  has  shown  that  the  halos  exhibit  a  well  marked  structure, 
and  from  the  diameter  of  the  halo  it  can  be  shown  whether  the 
radio-active  nucleus  contains  a  uranium  or  thorium  mineral.    The 
detailed  structure  of  the  halo  is   clearly  shown  in  the  micro- 
photograph  of  Fig.  82a.    The  central  blackened  area  or  pupil  is 
produced  by  the  a  particles  emitted  from  all  the  products  con- 
tained in  the  mineral,  and  its  limit  is  defined  by  the  range  of 
the  a  particles  from  radium  itself     The  limit  of  the  second  ring, 
which  is  much  lighter  in  colour,  marks  the  range  of  the  swifter 
a  particles  from  radium  A,  while  the  edges  of  the  outer  ring,  or 
corona,  mark  the  limit  of  action  of  the  a  rays  from  radium  C. 
It  was  observed  in  all  halos  that  the  darkening  due  to  the  a 
particles  from  radium  C  is  most  intense  near  the  end  of  theii 
range.     The  reason  of  this  is  clear  when  we  take  into  coi 
tion  the  variation  of  the  ionisation  along  the  path  of  the  a 
(Sections  66  and  67).    The  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  shows^ 
sharp  maximum  near  the  end  of  its  range  and  then  bila  rajHi 
to  zero.     Assuming  that  the  colouration  of  the  mica  at  any 
depends  upon  the  density  of  ionisation,  it  is  to  be  expected 
the  darkening  of  the  mica  would  show  the  type  of  gradatJon 
illustrated  in  the  figure. 

Joly  has  shown  that  halos  in  all  stages  of  development  can  be 
seen  in  a  single  specimen  of  mica.  If  the  radio-active  nucleus  is 
very  small  or  only  feebly  active,  the  intensity  of  the  a  radiation 
is   so   small   that   only  the  inner  ring  shows  colouration.    The 

*  Joly,  Phil.  Mag.  19,  p.  327,  1910. 

t  Joly  and  Fletcher,  Phil,  Mag.  19,  p.  680,  1910. 


:]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  311 

rkening  due  to  the  a  rays  from  radium  A  and  radium  C  is  too 
ble  to  be  observed.  Joly  has  found  that  a  completely  developed 
lo  contains  a  nucleus  which  is  often  of  diameter  less  than 
( 10~*  cm.     The  corresponding  volume  is  about   6  x  10""  c.c. 

composed  of  uraninite  having  the  density  8,  the  mass  would 

approximately  5  x  10~"  gram,  and  the  associated  radium  in 
2h  nucleus  about  10""^*  gram.  From  the  known  data  of  the 
mber  of  the  a  particles  expelled  per  second  fi'om  one  gram  of 
anium  mineral  in  equilibrium  (Section  170),  it  can  be  calculated 
3kt  the  nucleus  gives  off  only  one  a  particle  in  about  10  hours. 
lis  is  a  maximum  estimate,  since  the  nucleus  in  this  case  is 
pposed  to  be  composed  of  the  most  radio-active  of  naturally 
3urring  minerals.  Even  smaller  nuclei  than  this  sufficed  to 
dduce  small  simple  halos  whose  radio-active  origin  is  un- 
stakable.  In  certain  embryonic  halos,  it  can  be  shown  that 
ey  must  have  been  produced  by  a  radio-active  material  which 
1  not  expel  more  than  80  a  particles  per  year.  It  is,  therefore, 
ssible  to  recognise  by  the  colouration  of  mica  the  presence  of 
juantity  of  radium  of  about  10~^^  gram.  This  quantity  is  very 
ich  less  than  that  which  it  is  possible  to  detect  by  electric 
;thods,  viz.  about  10""  gram. 

It  is  thus  seen  that  the  colouration  of  mica  is  due  to  the 
•egrated  effects  of  the  a  particles  extending  over  geological 
38.  Joly  pointed  out  that  it  is  possible  to  draw  another 
luction  of  great  importance  from  the  examination  of  a  substance 
e  mica,  which  is  easily  coloured  by  the  a  rays.  Mica  is  found 
siltered  and  unaffected  in  association  with  many  elements  which 
!  present  in  quantity  enormous  relatively  to  the  amounts  of 
inium  considered  above.  This  appears  to  show  conclusively 
it  such  elements  do  not  expel  any  ionising  rays  even  over 
ervals  of  time  measured  by  geological  epochs. 

Rutherford*  showed  that  an  effect  similar  in  character  to 
J  colouration  produced  in  mica  could  be  observed  in  glass.  A 
ge  quantity  of  radium  emanation  was  enclosed  in  a  capillary 
>e  and  allowed  to  decay  in  situ.  The  microscopic  examination 
)wed  that  the  glass  was  coloured  to  a  depth  of  about  '04  mm. 

*  Rntherford,  Phil,  Mag,  19,  p.  192,  1910. 


312  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [C8. 

from  the  inner  surface  of  the  tube.  This  distance  correspoDded 
to  the  range  of  the  a  particles  from  radium  C.  A  micro-photo- 
graph in  illustration  is  shown  in  Fig.  82b,  where  EF  is  the  gltfi 
tube,  C  is  the  base  of  the  capillary,  AB  are  the  boundaries  of 
the  colouration. 

113.    The  distribution  of  radiation.     The  general  results 
of  experiment  show  that  a  and  ff  particles  are  expelled  equally  in 
all  directions  from  a  thin  layer  of  active  matter.     By  exposing 
solid  bodies  in  the  presence  of  the  emanation  of  radium,  thorium 
or  actinium,  they  become  coated  with  an  exceedingly  thin  film 
of  the  active  deposit  from  which  particles  escape  at  their  maximum 
initial  velocity.     For  these  reasons  the  distribution  of  the  radia- 
tion is  in  these  cases  very  different  from  that  observed  for  the 
same  body   when   heated   to  a  sufficient   temperature   to  emit 
ordinary  light*.     In  the  case  of  light,  the  distribution  is  con- 
trolled by  Lambert's   Law,  which   supposes   that    the  intensity 
of  radiation  in  any  direction  is  proportional  to  the  cosine  of  the 
angle  between  the  normal  and  the  direction  of  the  emitted  light. 
In  a  thin  film  of  radio-active  matter,  Lambert's  law  does  not  hold. 
For  example,  if  a  pinhole  photograph  be  taken  of  a  luminous  sphere, 
e.g,  the  sun,  the  intensity  of  the  photographic  effect  is  nearly  uniform 
over  the  cross  section.     If,  however,  we  take  a  pinhole  photograph 
of  a  small  sphere  uniformly  coated  with  a  thin  film  of  active  matter 
by  the  aid  of  the  radiations  emitted  from  it,  the  intensity  of  the 
radiation,  and  consequently,  of  the  photographic  impression,  i= 
greatest  at  the  extreme  edge  of  the  image  and  shades  off  rapidiv 
towards  the  centre.    In  a  similar  way,  the  photographic  impression 
due  to  a  cylinder  coated  with  a  thin  film  of  active  matter,  aftei 
the  rays  have  passed  through  a  narrow  slit  parallel  to  the  cylinder 
is  greatest  at  the  edges  of  the  geometrical  image,  and  falls  ofl 
rapidly  towards  the  centre.     If  the  photographic  effect  is  weak 
the  image  of  the  cylinder  often  appears  to  consist  only  of  twc 
straight  lines  corresponding  to  the  edges  of  the  image. 

The  effects  of  distribution  can  be  simply  and  strikingly 
illustrated  in  another  way.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  rod  oi 
triangular  or  square  cross   section,  several  centimetres  long,  is 

*  Bntherford,  Phil.  Mag,  18,  p.  152,  1906. 


rii]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  313 

exposed  in  the  presence  of  radium  emanation.  The  active  deposit 
18  then  nearly  uniformly  distributed  over  the  surfieu^.  After 
removal,  the  rod  is  placed  vertically  on  a  photographic  plate. 
Examples  of  the  positives  of  the  photographs  produced  in  this  way 
by  the  a  rays  are  shown  in  Fig.  83.  In  the  case  of  the  rod  of 
square  cross  section,  the  photograph  is  marked  by  four  dark  bands 
at  right  angles  to  each  other,  of  the  same  width  as  the  rod.  In 
each  of  these  dark  bands,  the  photographic  effect  is  due  to  the 
radiation  from  one  side  of  the  rod  only.  Immediately  outside 
the  dark  bands,  the  radiations  from  two  sides  produce  their  effect, 
80  that  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  varies  very  nearly  in  the 
ratio  of  one  to  two  in  crossing  the  boundary.  By  using  very 
active  bodies,  this  effect  of  distribution  can  be  very  clearly  seen 
on  a  screen  of  zinc  sulphide.  The  results  obtained  are  to  be 
expected  theoretically  if  the  a  rays  are  expelled  equally  in  all 
directions  and  escape  from  the  metal  without  appreciable  absorp- 
tion. 

In  the  experiments  described  the  photographic  effect  is  due 
ilmost  entirely  to  the  a  rays;  but  no  doubt  somewhat  similar 
fffects  would  be  observed  if  the  thin  film  of  active  matter  gave 
»ut  only  13  rays. 

Greinacher*  has  investigated  the  distribution  of  radiation 
round  a  prism  of  uranium  metal,  which  is  placed  on  a  photo- 
;raphic  plate.  In  this  case  the  radiation  is  emitted  from  the 
p'hole  volume  of  the  material,  and  the  photographic  action  is  due 
aainly  to  the  fi  rays  of  various  velocities  which  emerge  from  the 
iranium.  The  distribution  of  the  radiation  was  very  different 
rom  that  already  shovm.  For  thick  films  of  active  matter  the 
)hotographic  effect  was  greatest  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of 
he  triangle  and  small  in  the  space  formed  by  the  continuation  of 
he  sides,  where  in  the  case  of  a  thin  film  the  intensity  would  be 
itrongest. 

In  another  experiment,  a  radium  preparation  was  placed  in 
i  cubical  lead  box,  which  was  placed  on  a  photographic  plate. 
The  radiation  was  most  intense  opposite  the  sides,  and  least  where 
the  radiations  from  two  sides  of  the  box  produced  their  effect. 

This  distribution  of  radiation  was  ascribed  by  Greinacher  to 

*  Greinacher,  Phys.  ZeiU  9,  p.  885,  1908;  10,  p.  146,  1909. 


314  PBOPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CE 

the  effect  of  secondary  radiations.  H.  W.  Schmidt*  offered  an 
alternative  explanation  by  taking  into  account  the  distribution 
of  )8  particles  emitted  in  various  directions  from  a  thick  layer  of 
radio-active  matter.  According  to  the  experiments  of  McClelland, 
the  distribution  of  radiation  from  a  plate  is  greatest  in  the  direction 
of  the  normal,  and  falls  off  approximately  as  the  cosine  of  the  angle 
from  the  normal.  Assuming  such  a  cosine  law  of  distribution, 
Schmidt  showed  that  the  calculated  distribution  of  radiation  was 
similar  to  that  observed  by  Greinacher  experimentally. 

114  General  chemical  actioni.  We  have  already  dis- 
cussed the  changes  of  colour  in  certain  substances  produced  by 
the  radiations  from  active  matter.  In  addition,  the  radiations, 
and  especially  the  a  rays,  produce  marked  chemical  effects  in  a 
number  of  substances.  In  general,  the  chemical  actions  produced 
by  the  radiations  in  gases  appear  to  be  similar  to  those  due  to  the 
silent  electric  discharge.  In  some  cases,  complex  molecules  are 
dissociated,  in  others,  more  complex  molecules  are  built  up. 

The  production  of  ozone  by  the  rays  of  radium  was  early 
obsei*ved  by  M.  and   Mme   Curie  f,  and  was  initially  of  great 
interest  as  illustrating  in  a  striking  way  the  energy  connected 
with  the  radiations.     If  some  radium  is  enclosed  in  a  stoppered 
tube,  on  removing  the  stopper  the  presence  of  ozone  can  be  detected 
either  by  the  smell  or  by  the  action  on  iodide  of  potassium  starch 
paper.     The  production  of  ozone  appears  to  be  mainly  due  to 
the   a  rays,  and  becomes  very  marked  when    a   very  intense 
a  radiation  is  used.     For  example,  if  the  emanation  from  about 
50  milligrams  of  radium  is  enclosed  in  a  thin-walled  glass  tube 
which  allows  the  a  rays  to  escape,  a  very  marked  odour  of  ozone  is 
observed.     A  metal  plate  coated  with  the  active  deposit  of  radium 
shows  a  similar  effect.     The  a  rays  rapidly  oxidise  mercury,  lead, 
aluminium  and  other  metals  exposed  in  air.     This  effect  is  most 
simply  shown  by  placing  close  to  the  metal  a  very  thin  walled 
glass  tube  containing  a  large  quantity  of  radium  emanation.     The 
oxidation  of  metals  is  in  this  case  mainly  due  to  the  a  rays  and 
is  no  doubt  connected  with  the  rapid  production  of  ozone  in  the 

♦  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Phys,  Zeit.  9,  p.  537,  1908. 
t  8.  and  P.  Curie,  C.  R.  129,  p.  823, 1899. 


11]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  315 

lurrounding  air.  Bctdium  compounds  are  themselves  chemically 
icted  upon  by  the  intense  radiations  to  which  they  are  subject. 
For  example,  radium  bromide  exposed  to  the  air  gives  oflF  bromine 
md  is  ultimately  changed  into  carbonate.  The  water  of  crystallisa- 
tion is  decomposed  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen.  Impure  radium 
preparations  containing  barium  undergo  alteration  and  colouration. 

The  decomposition  of  water  by  the  radiations,  which  will  be 
discussed  in  detail  later,  is  no  doubt  responsible  for  the  occasional 
explosions  of  tubes  containing  radium  compounds.  If  the  radium 
preparation  is  not  dry,  the  water  is  decomposed  by  the  radiations 
into  hydrogen  and  oxygen  and  the  pressure  may  become  high 
mough  to  burst  the  tube.  The  general  evidence  indicates  that 
^lass  is  itself  acted  on  by  the  radiations  and  tends  to  become  more 
)rittle  and  diminishes  in  strength.  Mme  Curie*  observed  that 
t  solution  of  chloride  of  radium  contained  in  a  platinum  vessel 
apidly  attacks  it,  platinum  passing  into  solution.  This  effect  is 
)robably  the  result  of  the  production  of  nascent  chlorine  by  the 
adiations.  In  general,  the  radiations  rapidly  decompose  organic 
oatter  with  evolution  of  gases.  For  example,  the  radiations  from 
he  radium  emanation  rapidly  produce  carbon  dioxide  from  the 
jease  of  stop  cocks,  and  for  this  reason  such  stop  cocks  have  to 
large  extent  to  be  dispensed  with  in  purification  of  the  radium 
manation.  Boltwood  and  Rutherford  observed  that  a  large 
olume  of  gas  was  produced  when  some  radium  emanation  was 
Qclosed  in  a  glass  tube  coated  with  solid  paraffin.  The  latter 
ras  changed  in  appearance  and  in  properties  by  the  action  of  the 
sdiations.  Under  the  action  of  an  intense  a  radiation,  paraffin 
nd  vaseline  become  hard  and  infusible.  In  experiments  with 
irge  quantities  of  radium  emanation  the  sticking  of  stop  cocks 
oated  with  vaseline  due  to  this  cause  is  often  very  troublesome, 
^ecquerelf  found  that  white  phosphorus  is  changed  into  the  red 
ariety  by  the  action  of  radium  rays.  This  effect  is  due  mainly 
a  the  j8  rays.  Radium  rays,  like  ordinary  light  rays,  also  produce 
precipitate  of  calomel  in  the  presence  of  oxalic  acid. 

Hardy  and  Miss  WilcockJ  found  that  a  solution  of  iodoform  in 

♦  Mme  Curie,  Le  Radium,  4,  p.  349,  1907. 

t  Becquerel,  C.  R.  133,  p.  709,  1901. 

t  Hardy  and  Miss  Wilcock,  Proe,  Ray,  Soe,  A,  72,  p.  200, 1908. 


316  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CE 

chloroform  turned  purple  after  an  exposure  of  a  few  minutes  to 
a  few  milligrams  of  radium  bromide.  This  colouration  is  caused 
by  the  liberation  of  iodine,  and  appears  to  be  mainly  due  to  the 
fi  rays.     X  rays  produced  a  similar  eflfect. 

Hardy*  also  observed  an  action  of  the  radium  rays  on  the 
coagulation  of  globulin.  Two  solutions  of  globulin  from  ox  serum 
were  used,  one  made  electro-positive  by  adding  acetic  acid,  and 
the  other  electro-negative  by  adding  ammonia.  When  the  globulin 
was  exposed  close  to  the  radium  in  naked  drops,  the  opalescence 
of  the  electro-positive  solution  rapidly  diminished,  showing  that 
the  solution  became  more  complete.  The  electro-negative  solution 
was  rapidly  turned  to  a  jelly  and  became  opaque.  These  actions 
were  found  to  be  due  to  the  a  rays  of  radium  alone. 

Ramsay f  and  Cameron  and  Ramsay  t  made  a  detailed  study 
of  the  action  of  the  radium  emanation  on  gases.  The  purified 
emanation  from  about  1/10  of  a  gram  of  radium  was  added  to 
the  gas  contained  in  a  closed  vessel,  and  the  emanation  allowed 
to  decay  in  situ.  The  changes  in  pressure  of  the  gas  were  observed 
day  by  day,  and  the  final  products  analysed.  In  this  way  they 
found  that  carbon  dioxide  was  transformed  into  carbon,  carbon 
monoxide  and  oxygen.  Carbon  monoxide  was  decomposed  with 
the  appearance  of  solid  carbon  and  oxygen.  Ammonia  was  changed 
into  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,  and  hydrochloric  acid  gas  into  hydro- 
gen and  chlorine.  They  found  that  the  amount  of  chemical  change 
was  proportional  at  any  time  to  the  activity  of  the  emanation, 
showing  that,  under  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  the  trans- 
formation of  each  atom  of  the  radium  emanation  produces  a  definite 
chemical  effect.  They  also  found  that  gases  were  re-combined  by 
the  action  of  the  radiation.  For  example,  nitrogen  and  hydrogen 
combined  to  form  ammonia. 

Jorissen  and  Ringer§  showed  that  hydrogen  and  chlorine 
combined  to  form  hydrochloric  acid  under  the  influence  of  yS  and  7 
rays  from  radium.     Usher  ||  repeated  the  results  of  Ramsay  and 

♦  Hardy,  Proc.  Physiolog.  Soc.  May  16,  1903. 
t  Bamsay,  Joum.  Chem.  Soc.  91,  p.  981,  1907. 

X  Cameron  and  Bamsay,  Joum.  Chem.  Soc.  91,  p.  1593,  1907 ;  98,  pp.  966,  992, 
1908. 

§  Jorissen  and  Ringer,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Get.  89,  p.  2093,  1906. 
II  Usher,  Joum.  Chem.  Soc.  97,  pp.  889, 1198,  1910. 


m]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  817 


^ameroQ  on  the  combination  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  to  form 
ioimoiiia,  but  found  that  the  rate  of  recombination  was  very  small. 
3e  examined  in  detail  the  decomposition  of  ammonia  by  the 
adium  emanation. 

Frischauer*  observed  that  the  /8  rays  of  radium  influenced 
he  rate  of  crystallisation  of  sulphur.  A  layer  of  fine  drops  of 
alphur  was  obtained  by  distillation  between  two  glass  plates, 
hie  half  was  exposed  to  13  rays  and  the  other  half  protected  by 
lead  plate.  The  crystallisation,  observed  by  a  microscope,  was 
mnd  to  proceed  far  more  rapidly  in  the  part  exposed  to  /3  rays. 
b  appears  that  the  /3  rays  provide  additional  nuclei  for  crystalli- 
ition. 

115.     The  decomposition  of  water  by  the  radiations. 

.  large  number  of  investigations  have  been  made  on  the  decom- 
[>sition  of  water  by  the  action  of  the  radiations  from  radio-active 
ibstances.  On  account  of  its  importance  this  question  will  be 
iscussed  in  some  little  detail. 

Curie  and  Debiemef  first  observed  that  radium  preparations 
laced  in  an  exhausted  vessel  always  lowered  the  vacuum.  The 
18  evolved  was  always  mixed  with  the  radium  emanation, 
ieselj  first  drew  attention  to  the  rapid  evolution  of  gas  fi'om 
)lutions  of  radium  compounds.  From  one  gram  of  a  radium 
reparation  of  5  per  cent,  purity,  3*6  c.c.  of  gas  was  obtained  in 
6  days.  The  gas  was  found  to  be  mainly  hydrogen  with  about 
2  per  cent,  of  oxygen.  In  later  experiments  Ramsay  and  Soddy§ 
)und  that  50  milligrams  of  radium  bromide  in  solution  evolved 
ases  at  the  rate  of  about  '05  c.c.  per  day.  An  analysis  of  the 
ases  showed  that  there  was  always  an  excess  of  hydrogen  over 
lat  to  be  expected  from  the  decomposition  of  water  into  two 
olumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  of  oxygen.  The  reason  of  this  effect 
ill  be  discussed  later. 

There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  decomposition  of  water 
J  brought  about  by  all  three  types  of  radiation ;  but  the  effect 
ue  to  the  a  rays  is  much  greater  than  that  due  to  the  0  and 

*  Frischauer,  C.  R,  148,  p.  1261,  1909. 

t  Curie  and  Debierae,  C.  R.  82,  p.  768,  1901. 

t  Giesel,  Ber,  d.  D.  Chem.  Ges.  86,  p.  3605,  1902. 

§  Bamsay  and  Soddy,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  72,  p.  204,  1903. 


318  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CB. 

7  rays.  Mme  Curie  and  Debierne*  and  Bergwitzf  found  that 
a  very  active  preparation  of  polonium,  which  emits  only  a  rays, 
produced  rapid  decomposition  of  water  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen. 
Different  observers  have  found  very  different  rates  of  evolution  of 
gases  from  radium  solutions.  This  is  to  be  expected  since  the 
intensity  of  the  radiation  acting  on  the  water  depends  on  the 
relative  volume  occupied  by  the  solution  and  the  free  space  above 
it.  The  a  rays  from  radium  itself  no  doubt  produce  gases  at  a 
constant  rate  in  the  solution ;  but  a  greater  part  of  the  action  is 
due  to  the  radium  emanation  which  divides  itself  between  the 
solution  and  the  air  space  above  it  in  amount  depending  on  the 
relative  volumes,  and  also  on  the  temperature.  This  will  be  clear 
from  the  experiments  described  later  (Section  143). 

In  addition,  as  Cameron  and  Ramsay  have  shown,  the  converse 
action  takes  place,  and  some  of  the  hydrogen  and  oxygen  re- 
combine  under  the  influence  of  the  radiations  to  form  water. 

Estimations  of  the  rate  of  evolution  of  the  mixed  gases  have 
been  made  by  Ramsay  and  Cameron,  Debierne,  Kembaum  and 
Usher. 

Debierne  J  observed  the  decomposition  of  water  in  solutions  of 
actinium  and  radium,  and  found  that  one  gram  of  radium  in  solution 
produced  about  13  c.c.  of  mixed  gases  per  day.  The  production 
of  gases  by  fi  rays  has  been  examined  by  Debierne  (loc.  cit)  and 
Kembaum§.  The  radium  preparation  was  placed  inside  a  double 
walled  glass  vessel  containing  water.  Debierne  found  by  pressure 
measurement  that  the  evolution  of  gases  proceeded  at  nearly  a 
constant  rate  for  over  a  month  and  then  apparently  somewhat 
more  slowly.  The  rate  of  evolution  in  the  gas  was  increased 
about  5  per  cent,  by  placing  a  lead  screen  round  the  vessel.  This 
increase  was  due  to  the  effect  of  the  13  rays  excited  by  the  7  rays 
in  the  lead  envelope.  Kembaum  made  a  detailed  study  of  the 
effect  of  yS  rays  on  water  and  showed  that  only  hydrogen  was 
evolved,  while  the  oxygen  remained  with  the  water.  He  con- 
cluded that  /3  rays  like  the  rays  of  ultra-violet  light  decompose 

*  Mme  Curie  and  Debierne,  C.  R.  160,  p.  386,  1910. 

t  Bergwitz,  Le  Radium,  7,  p.  181,  1910;  Phys.  Zeit.  11,  p.  276,  1910. 

X  Debierne,  C.  R.  liS,  p.  703,  1909;  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  65,  1909. 

§  Kembaum,  C.  R,  1«8,  p.  705,  1909;  La  Radium,  6,  pp.  225,  352,  1909. 


U]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  319 

rater    in    an    abnormal    way,   which    is    represented    by    the 
quation 

2H,0  =  HA  +  Ha. 

It  appears  probable  that  the  excess  of  hydrogen  evolved  from 
radium  solution,  drawn  as  observed  by  Ramsay,  is  due  to  a 
milar  action 

A  definite  comparison  of  the  rate  of  evolution  of  gases  by  the 
and  /3  rays  has  been  recently  made  by  Usher*,  using  the  radium 
nanation  as  a  source  of  radiation.  A  known  quantity  of  radium 
nanation  was  dissolved  in  a  large  quantity  of  water  with  no  free 
race  above  it,  and  subjected  to  a  pressure  of  about  half  an  atmo- 
)here.  In  the  course  of  a  month  the  emanation  has  decayed  to 
small  fraction  of  its  value.  The  gases  were  then  pumped  out 
id  found  to  consist  mainly  of  electrolytic  gas  with  an  excess  of 
fdrogen,  a  little  carbon  dioxide  and  a  trace  of  nitrogen.  He 
Kluced  that  the  amount  of  gas  produced  by  the  decomposition 
'  the  emanation  from  one  gram  of  radium  was  equal  to  136'7  c.c. 
his  is  due  to  the  combined  action  of  the  a  and  /3  rays.  The 
>rresponding  amount  for  /9  rays  was  6*49  c.c.  The  relative 
Bciency  of  the  a  and  /3  rays  fi'om  emanation  in  decomposing 
ater  is  thus  about  20  to  1.  The  energy  required  to  produce 
le  amount  of  gas  observed  is  less  than  3  per  cent,  of  the  total 
lergy  of  the  a  radiation  determined  by  its  heating  effect 
Chapter  XVII). 

There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  marked  chemical  action 
■  the  a  and  yS  rays  is  connected  with  the  ionisation  they  produce 
I  all  kinds  of  matter.  The  total  number  of  ions  produced  in  air 
Y  the  complete  absorption  of  the  a  rays  from  one  gram  of  radium 
:  from  the  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  it  can  be  deduced  fix)m 
le  tables  given  in  Sections  67  and  70.    If  each  pair  of  ions  formed 

responsible  for  the  production  of  one  molecule  of  gas,  it  can 
e  calculated  that  the  emanation  from  one  gram  of  radium 
uring  its  radio-active  life  should  produce  about  363  c.c.  of  gas. 
his  is  about  three  times  the  amount  observed  experimentally 
y  Usher,  but  is  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude.  There  appears 
)  be  no  doubt  that  the  dissociation  of  matter  by  the  radiations 

*  Usher,  Jahrb.  d.  Radioakt.  8,  p.  323,  1911. 


320  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CH. 

is  connected  with  the  ionisation  that  must  be  produced  in  all 
matter  by  the  action  of  the  radiations.  In  the  case  of  water,  it 
appears  probable  that  the  ionisation  of  the  molecule  of  water  is 
accompanied  by  the  chemical  dissociation  of  the  molecule  or  of  its 
components. 

We  have  already  referred  to  this  matter  in  Section  22,  and 
have  pointed  out  that  it  is  difficult  to  decide  whether  this  chemical 
dissociation  is  a  direct  eflfect  of  the  radiations  or  a  secondary  eflfect 
brought  about  by  the  process  of  ionisation.  The  marked  coloura- 
tion in  pleochroic  halos  (Section  112)  near  the  end  of  the  range 
of  the  a  particles  from  radium  C  indicates  that  the  chemical 
action  is  most  intense  where  the  ionisation  is  strongest.  Apart 
from  the  greater  ionisation,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  a  particle 
may  be  relatively  far  more  effective  in  producing  dissociation  when 
its  velocity  has  fallen  to  a  fraction  of  its  initial  value. 

The  mixed  gases  obtained  from  radium  solutions  or  from  the 
action  of  the  radium  emanation  on  water  always  contain  a  small 
quantity  of  helium.  This  important  result  is  discussed  in  detail 
in  Chapter  XVII. 

116.    Attempti  to  transform  matter  by  the  radiations. 

We  have  seen  that  the  radiations  from  active  matter  produce 
a  marked  dissociation  of  complex  molecules  through  which  they 
pass.  In  addition  to  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  radium  and  the 
radium  emanation  in  solution  in  water  always  give  rise  to  small 
quantities  of  helium.  As  we  have  already  seen  in  Section  62,  the 
a  particles  from  radio-active  matter  consist  of  helium,  and  the 
helium  observed  is  due  entirely  to  the  a  particles  absorbed  in 
the  solution.  Since  there  are  strong  reasons  for  supposing  that 
the  radiations  from  active  matter  actually  penetrate  the  atoms 
in  their  path,  it  seems  not  impossible  that  the  radiations  might 
themselves  cause  a  disintegration  of  some  of  the  atoms  of  matter 
which  they  traverse.  In  consequence  of  the  great  energy  associated 
with  the  a  particles  expelled  from  active  matter,  it  is  to  be  ex- 
pected that  the  a  rays  would  be  most  effective. 

A  brief  statement  will  be  given  of  a  number  of  experiments 
made  by  Cameron  and  Ramsay*  in  order  to  test  whether  ordinary 

*  Cameron  and  Ramsay,  Joum,  Chem.  Soc.  91,  p.  1593,  1907 ;  93,  pp.  966,  992, 
1908. 


Il]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE   RADIATIONS  321 

latter  can  be  transformed  by  the  radiations.  The  question  is 
difficult  one  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  eflFects  to  be 
xpected.  Several  positive  results  have  been  published ;  but  these 
lave  not  stood  the  test  of  more  rigorous  and  careful  examination, 
tlamsay  and  Cameron  first  investigated  the  action  of  the  radium 
emanation  on  water.  For  this  purpose,  a  large  quantity  of  the 
emanation  was  added  to  a  small  bulb  partly  filled  with  pure  water. 
In  this  case  part  of  the  emanation  was  absorbed  in  the  water  and 
part,  remained  in  the  gases  formed  above  it.  They  concluded  that 
not  only  did  the  emanation  produce  helium  but  also  neon  and  a 
small  trace  of  argon.  The  experiment  was  repeated  by  Rutherford 
and  Royds*  who  found  evidence  only  of  helium.  The  neon  and 
argon  observed  in  the  experiment  of  Cameron  and  Ramsay  were 
undoubtedly  derived  from  the  small  quantity  of  air  which  admittedly 
leaked  into  the  apparatus.  Neon  is  so  sensitive  spectroscopically 
that  by  suitable  methods  its  presence  in  1/10  c.c.  of  air  can  be 
easily  observed.  Cameron  and  Ramsay  also  observed  that  the 
radium  emanation  added  to  a  solution  of  salts  of  copper  gave  rise 
to  small  quantities  of  sodium,  potassium,  and  lithium,  and  con- 
cluded that  lithium  was  produced  by  the  transformation  of  copper. 
The  experiments  were  carefully  repeated  by  Mme  Curie  and 
Mile  Gleditschf,  who  were  unable  to  confirm  the  results.  The 
experiments  are  difficult  since  traces  of  lithium  are  ordinarily 
present  in  many  substances.  They  found,  for  example,  that  when 
pure  water  had  rested  for  some  time  in  a  glass  vessel  and  then 
evaporated,  a  small  residue  was  obtained  consisting  chiefly  of 
sodium,  but  also  containing  a  small  quantity  of  lithium.  Similar 
results  were  observed  with  quartz.  To  avoid  these  difficulties, 
experiments  were  carried  out  in  platinum  vessels,  and  in  this 
case  the  presence  of  lithium  could  not  be  observed. 

The  question  was  attacked  in  another  way  by  Mile  GleditschJ 
md  McCoy§  by  determining  the  amount  of  lithium  in  radio-active 
ninerals  containing  copper.  If  copper  was  transformed  into  lithium 
»y  the  radiation,  it  would  be  expected  that  there  would  be  some 

*  Ratherford  and  Boyds,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  p.  812,  1908. 
t  M.  Curie  and  MUe  Gleditsoh,  C.  R.  147,  p.  345,  1908. 
t  Gleditsch,  C.  R,  146,  p.  1148,  1907 ;  146,  p.  331,  1908. 
§  McCoy,  Nature,  77,  p.  79,  1907. 

R.   B.-A.  '21 


322  PBOPKRTIE8  OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

relation  between  the  proportions  of  copper,  radium  and  lithium 
in  the  various  minerals  of  about  the  same  age,  but  no  evidence 
was  obtained  of  any  such  relation.  Ramsay  and  Usher*,  later, 
stated  that  carbon  dioxide  was  produced  by  the  radium  emanation 
in  solutions  of  thorium  and  zirconium.  It  is  well  known  that 
the  emanation  gives  rise  to  the  carbon  dioxide  when  any  organic 
matter  is  present,  and  it  is  very  diflScult  to  prove  that  carlxn 
dioxide  is  derived  from  the  atomic  transformation  of  thorium  and 
zirconium. 

The  question  attacked  by  Cameron  and  Ramsay  is  of  great 
importance,  but  there  is,  so  far,  no  good  evidence  that  the 
ordinary  inactive  chemical  elements  can  be  transformed  by  the 
radiations  from  active  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  in- 
dubitable evidence  that  atomic  transformations  spontaneously 
occur  in  the  radio-active  elements  themselves. 

Physical  Actions. 

117.  Electric  effects.  The  rays  from  active  matter  have 
the  same  eflfect  as  ultra  violet  light  and  X  rays  in  increasing  the 
facility  with  which  a  spark  passes  between  electrodes.  Elster  and 
Geitelf  showed  that  if  two  electrodes  were  separated  by  a  distance 
such  that  the  spark  just  refused  to  pass,  on  bringing  up  a 
specimen  of  radium  the  spark  at  once  passes.  This  eflFect  is  best 
shown  with  short  sparks  from  a  small  induction  coil.  The  Curies 
have  observed  that  radium  completely  enveloped  by  a  lead  screen 
1  cm.  thick  produces  a  similar  action.  The  effect  in  that  case  is 
due  to  the  y  rays  alone.  This  action  of  the  rays  can  be  very 
simply  illustrated  by  connecting  two  spark-gaps  with  the  induction 
coil  in  parallel.  The  spark-gap  of  one  circuit  is  adjusted  so  thai 
the  discharge  just  refuses  to  pass  across  it,  but  passes  by  the 
other.  When  some  radium  is  brought  near  the  silent  spark-gap 
the  spark  at  once  passes  and  ceases  in  the  other. 

Willows  and  Peck  J  found  that  under  some  conditions,  especially 

*  Bamsay  and  Usher,  Chem,  News,  100,  p.  209,  1909 ;  see  also  Ramsay,  C.  R 
153,  p.  373,  1911. 

t  Elster  and  Geitel,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  69,  p.  673,  1899. 
J  Willows  and  Peck,  Phil.  Mag.  9,  p.  378,  1906. 


▼n]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  323 

for  long  sparks,  the  rays  from  radium  hindered  the  passage  of  the 
spark. 

Hemptinne*  found  that  the  electrodeless  discharge  in  a  vacuum 
tabe  began  at  a  higher  pressure  when  a  strong  preparation  of 
ladium  was  brought  near  the  tube.  In  one  experiment  the  dis- 
diarge  without  the  rays  began  at  51  mms.  but  with  the  radium 
nys  at  68  mms.     The  colour  of  the  discharge  was  also  altered. 

Himstedtf  found  that  the  resistance  of  selenium  was  dimin- 
ished by  the  action  of  radium  rays  in  the  same  way  as  by  ordinary 
light. 

F.  Henning^  examined  the  electrical  resistance  of  a  barium 
chloride  solution  containing  radium  of  activity  1000,  but  could 
observe  no  appreciable  difference  between  it  and  a  similar  pure 
solation  of  barium  chloride.  This  experiment  shows  that  the 
action  of  the  rays  from  the  radium  does  not  produce  any  appreci- 
able change  in  the  conductivity  of  the  barium  solution. 

Eohlrausch  and  Henning§  have  made  a  detailed  examination 
of  the  conductivity  of  pure  radium  bromide  solutions,  and  have 
obtained  results  very  similar  to  those  for  the  corresponding  barium 
solutions.  Eohlrausch  II  found  that  the  conductivity  of  water 
exposed  to  the  radiations  from  radium  increased  more  rapidly 
than  water  which  had  not  been  exposed.  This  incretise  of  con- 
ductivity may  have  been  due  to  an  increase  of  the  conductivity 
of  water  itself  or  to  an  increased  rate  of  solution  of  the  glass  of 
the  containing  vessel. 

When  the  air  space  between  plates  of  two  different  metals  is 
ionised  by  the  radiations,  the  plates  rapidly  acquire  the  contact 
lifference  of  potential.  This  action  of  the  radiations  affords  a 
?ery  convenient  and  simple  method  of  determining  the  contact 
lifference  of  potential  between  metals. 

Specimens  of  active  material  have  been  employed  to  obtain 
he  potential  at  any  point  of  the  atmosphere.  The  ionisation  due 
)  the  active  substance  is  so  intense  that  the  insulated  conductor 

*  Hemptinne,  C,  R,  183,  p.  934, 1901. 

t  Himstedt,  Pky$,  Zeit.  1,  p.  476,  1900. 

X  Henning,  Ann,  d.  Phys,  7,  p.  562,  1902. 

§  Kohlraoscb  aud  Henning,  Verh,  d.  D.  Phyt,  Get,  6,  p.  144,  1904. 

y  KohlraoBoh,  VerK  d.  D,  Phyt.  Get.  6,  p.  261,  1903. 

21—2 


324 


PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS 


[ 


to  which  it  is  attached  rapidly  takes  up  the  potential  of  the 
surrounding  the  active  substance.  In  this  respect,  it  is  m 
convenient  and  rapid  in  its  action  than  the  ordinary  taper 
water  dropper.  Henning*  found  that  a  radium  collector  did 
give  the  same  potential  as  the  water  dropper,  and  concluded  t 
this  was  due  to  the  accumulation  of  ions  near  the  conductor, 
similar  conclusion  was  reached  by  Linkef.  On  the  other  ha 
MoulinJ  found  that  if  the  radium  collector  is  exposed  in  free 
and  exposed  to  the  wind,  measurements  may  be  made  with 
sensible  error.  Moulin  employed  the  sulphate  of  radio-aci 
barium  protected  by  varnish  as  a  source  of  ionisation.  Simp 
and  Wright§  employed  a  preparation  of  ionium  for  the  purp 
This  substance  has  the  advantage  of  emitting  only  a  rays  of  si 
range,  so  that  the  ionisation  extends  only  a  short  distance  fi 
the  collector. 

118.    Effect  on  liquid  and  lolid  dielectricB.     P.  Cui 

made  the  very  important  observation  that  liquid  dielect 
became  partial  conductors  under  the  influence  of  radium  rays, 
these  experiments  the  radium,  contained  in  a  glass  tube,  ^ 
placed  in  an  inner  thin  cylinder  of  copper.  This  was  surroun( 
by  a  concentric  copper  cylinder,  and  the  liquid  to  be  examii 
filled  the  space  between.  A  strong  electric  field  was  appli 
and  the  current  through  the  liquid  measured  by  means  of 
electrometer. 

The  following  numbers  illustrate  the  results  obtained : 


Substance 

Conductivity  in 
mhos  per  1  cm.' 

Carbon  bisulphide    ... 
Petroleum  etner 
Amvl  alcohol 
Carbon  tetrachloride 
Benzene 

Liquid  air       

Vaseline  oil 

20x10-1* 
15      „ 
14      „ 

8      „ 

4      „ 
1-3      „ 

1-6      „ 

*  Henning,  Ann,  d.  Phys.  7,  p.  893,  1902. 

t  Linke,  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  661,  1903. 

X  Moulin,  Le  Radium,  4,  p.  6,  1907. 

§  Simpson  and  Wright,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  85,  p.  175,  1911. 

II  P.  Curie,  C,  R,  1S4»  p.  420,  1902. 


ni]  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  325 

Liquid  air,  vaseline  oil,  petroleum  ether,  amyl  alcohol,  are 
lormally  nearly  perfect  insulators.  The  conductivity  of  amyl 
ilcohol  and  petroleum  ether  due  to  the  rays  at  — 17"  C.  was  only 
L/10  of  its  value  at  O''  C.  There  is  thus  a  marked  action  of 
temperature  on  the  conductivity.  For  very  active  material  the 
mrrent  was  proportional  to  the  voltage  for  small  voltages.  With 
ooaterial  of  only  1/500  of  the  activity,  it  was  found  that  Ohm's 
law  was  not  obeyed. 

The  following  numbers  were  obtained : 


Volts 

Cnrrent 

60 

109 

100 

186 

200 

265 

400 

335 

For  an  increase  of  voltage  of  8  times,  the  current  only  increases 
about  3  times.  The  current  in  the  liquid  thus  tends  to  become 
"saturated"  as  does  the  ordinary  ionisation  current  through  a  gas. 
These  results  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  ionisation  theory, 
and  show  that  the  radiation  probably  produces  ions  in  the  liquid 
as  well  as  in  the  gas.  X  rays  were  found  to  produce  a  similar 
effect  to  radium  rays. 

The  conductivity   of    liquid   and   solid   dielectrics   has   been 

examined  in  detail  by  a  number  of  investigators,  who  have  obtained 

results  of  a  similar  character.     The  conductivity  has  been  found 

to  depend  greatly  on  the  purity  of  the  material,  so  that  special 

precautions  are  necessary  to  purify  the  substances  as  carefully  as 

possible.     In  the  case  of  liquids,  all  observers  have  found  that  the 

current  increases  at  first  nearly  proportionally  with  the  voltage 

and  then  more  slowly  as  the  potential  difference  is  increased. 

Jatfe*  concluded  that  the  current  through  a  liquid  consisted  of 

two  parts,  one  of  which  increased  with  the  voltage  v  according  to 

Ohm's  law,  and  the  other  of  which  tended  to  reach  a  maximum  or 

saturation  value. 

The  current  i  through  the  liquid  is  thus  expressed  by  a  relation 
of  the  form  i  =  /ct;+/(t;).  In  the  case  of  purified  petroleum  ether, 
the  part  of  the  current  represented  by  f(v)  reached  a  saturation 

*  Jaff^,  Joum.  d.  Phyt,  4,  p.  263,  1906;  Ann.  d,  Pky$,  30,  p.  227,  1908;  28, 
p.  326,  1909. 


326  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CK 

value  for  a  field  of  about  900  volts  per  cm.  The  value  of  %  dependi 
on  the  intensity  of  the  radiations  and  also  on  the  distaoee 
between  the  plates.  In  later  experiments,  Jaff6  has  carefiillj 
examined  the  nature  of  the  conductivity  shown  by  pure  hexaoe 
under  various  conditions.  Cacilia  Bohm-Wendt  and  K  v.  Schwdd- 
ler*  examined  the  conductivity  of  petroleum  ether  and  vaseline 
oil  under  radium  rays  and  estimated  the  mobility  of  the  ions. 

Bialobjeskyf  examined  the  conductivity  of  a  number  of  Uquid 
hydrocarbons  which  had  been  specially  purified  and  deduced  the 
mobility  of  the  ions. 

H.  BecquerelJ  and  A.  Becker§  showed  that  the  conductivi^ 
of  solid  dielectrics  was  increased  by  exposure  to  radium  raj& 
Greinacherjl  tested  whether  the  conductivity  of  thin  plates  of  solid 
dielectric  was  altered  by  exposure  to  the  a  rays  fix)m  polonium 
but  with  negative  results. 

119.  Motion  of  radium  in  an  electrio  field.  JolyT  foand 
that  a  disc,  one  side  of  which  is  coated  with  a  few  milligrams  of 
radium  bromide,  exhibits,  when  an  electrified  body  is  brought 
near  it,  motions  very  difierent  to  those  observed  in  the  case  of 
an  inactive  substance.  The  electrified  body,  whether  positive  or 
negative,  repels  the  suspended  body  if  brought  up  to  it  on  the 
side  coated  with  radium,  but  attracts  it  if  presented  to  the  naked 
side. 

This  eSect  is  very  simply  shown  by  constructing  a  small 
apparatus  like  a  radiometer.  Two  cover  glasses  are  attached  tc 
the  end  of  a  glass  fibre  about  6  cms.  long,  the  surfaces  lying  m 
the  same  plane.  The  apparatus  is  free  to  rotate  on  a  pivot.  The 
two  vanes  are  coated  on  alternate  faces  with  radium  bromide,  and 
the  whole  apparatus  enclosed  within  a  glass  receiver.  If  ai 
electrified  rod  of  ebonite  or  sealing  wax  is  brought  up  close  U 
the   receiver,  a  rotation   is  communicated   to   the   vane   whici 

*  Bobm-Wendt  and  v.  Schweidler,  Phys.  Zeit.  10,  p.  326,  1909. 
t  Bialobjesky,  Le  Radium,  7,  pp.  48,  76,  1910;   8,  p.  293,  1911;    C.  R,  1« 
p.  279,  1909. 

X  H.  Beoqaerel,  C.  R,  186,  p.  1173,  1903. 

§  A.  Becker,  Ann.  d,  Phys.  13,  p.  125,  1903. 

II  Greinacher,  Phys,  Zeit,  10,  p.  986, 1909 ;  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  219,  1909. 

ir  Joly,  Phil,  Mag.  7,  p.  303,  1904. 


ni]  PfiOPSRTIES  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  327 

increases  as  the  pressure  of  the  air  is  lowered  to  5  or  6  cms. 
3f  mercury.  By  placing  the  apparatus  between  parallel  plates 
Domiected  with  the  terminals  of  a  Wimshurst  machine,  a  steady 
rotation  is  communicated  to  the  vanes.  The  rotation  is  always  in 
such  a  direction  that  the  radium  coated  surface  is  repelled  from 
the  electrified  body. 

This  action  was  examined  still  further  by  attaching  the  vanes 
to  the  glass  beam  of  a  Coulomb's  balance.     A  metal  sphere,  which 
could  be  charged  from  without,  was  fixed  facing  the  side  coated 
with  radium.     A  repulsion  was  always  observed  except  when  the 
charge  was  very  strong  and  the  vane  near  the  sphere.     If,  how- 
ever, the  two  vanes  were  connected  by  a  light  wire  and  a  similar 
sphere   placed   exactly   opposite    the    other,   an    attraction   was 
observed   if  one   sphere  was  charged,  but  a  repulsion   if  both 
were  charged.     These  effects  were  observed  whether  the  vanes 
were  of  aluminium  or  glass. 

Joly  found  that  the  effect  could  not  be  explained  by  any  direct 
action  due  to  the  movement  of  the  ions  in  an  electric  field.  The 
tecoil,  due  to  the  expulsion  of  a  particles  from  one  side  of  the  vane, 
is  far  too  small  to  account  for  the  movement  observed. 

There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  movement  observed  is 
a  result  of  the  inequality  of  the  ionisation  on  the  two  sides  of  the 
vane.  This  leads  to  a  disturbance  of  the  potential  gradient  and 
the  vane  is  moved  by  the  electric  forces  brought  into  play. 

Some  physiological  actions, 

120.  Walkhoff  first  observed  that  radium  rays  produce  bums 
of  much  the  same  character  as  those  caused  by  Rontgen  rays. 
Experiments  in  this  direction  have  been  made  by  Giesel,  Curie  and 
Becquerel,  and  others,  with  very  similar  results.  There  is  at  first 
a  painful  irritation,  then  inflammation  sets  in,  which  lasts  from  10 
to  20  days.  This  effect  is  produced  by  all  preparations  of  radium, 
and  appears  to  be  due  mainly  to  the  a  and  /3  rays. 

Care  has  to  be  taken  in  handling  radium  on  account  of  the 
painful  inflammation  set  up  by  the  rays.  If  a  finger  is  held  for 
)ome  minutes  at  the  base  of  a  capsule  containing  a  radium 
preparation,  the  skin  becomes  inflamed  for  about  15  days  and 


328  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  RADUTIONS  [CH.  VD 

then  peels  off.     The  painful  feeling  does  not  disappear  for  two 
months. 

Another  interesting  action  of  the  radium  rays  has  been  ob- 
served by  GieseL  On  bringing  up  a  radium  preparation  to  the 
closed  eye,  in  a  dark  room,  a  sensation  of  diffiise  light  is  observei 
This  effect  has  been  examined  by  Himstedt  and  Nagel*  who  have 
shown  that  it  is  due  to  a  fluorescence  produced  by  the  rays  in  the 
eye  itself.  The  blind  are  able  to  perceive  this  luminosity  if  the 
retina  is  intact,  but  not  if  the  retina  is  diseased.  Hardy  and 
Anderson  f  have  examined  this  effect  in  some  detail.  The 
sensation  of  light  is  produced  both  by  the  /3  and  7  rajrs.  The 
eyelid  practically  absorbs  all  the  fi  rays,  so  that  the  luminosity 
observed  with  a  closed  eye  is  due  to  the  7  rays  alone.  The  lent 
and  retina  of  the  eye  are  strongly  phosphorescent  under  the  action 
of  the  /8  and  7  ray&  Hardy  and  Anderson  consider  that  the 
luminosity  observed  in  a  dark  room  with  the  open  eye  (the  phos- 
phorescent light  of  the  radium  itself  being  stopped  by  black  paper) 
is  to  a  large  extent  due  to  the  phosphorescence  set  up  in  the 
eyeball  The  7  rays,  for  the  most  part,  produce  the  sensation  of 
light  when  they  strike  the  retina. 

It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  give  an  account  of  the  very 
numerous  investigations  that  have  been  made  by  physicists  and 
physiologists  on  the  effects  of  the  rays  of  radium  and  of  other 
active  substances  on  different  organisms.  The  use  of  radium  raya 
has  been  found  beneficial  in  certain  diseases  and  **  Radium  Insti- 
tutes" have  been  founded  in  several  countries  for  therapeutic 
purposes. 

•  Himstedt  and  Nagel,  Ann,  d,  Phys,  4,  p.  687,  1901. 

t  Hardy  and  Anderson,  Proc,  Roy,  Soc.  A,  72,  p.  393,  1908. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  AND  DECAY  OF  RADIO- 
ACTIVE MATTER. 

121.  Introduction.  The  earlier  experiments  with  uranium 
d  thorium  had  indicated  that  their  activity  was  spontaneous  and 
rmanent,  for  no  appreciable  change  in  the  intensity  of  the 
diations  emitted  could  be  detected  over  a  period  of  several  years. 
lis  apparent  permanency  was  further  emphasised  by  the  discovery 
radium,  for  notwithstanding  its  enormous  activity,  this  substance 
owed  no  appreciable  decrease  of  activity  with  time.  It  was  at 
Bt  thought  that  the  activity  of  polonium  was  also  constant,  and 
was  not  till  some  years  after  its  discovery  that  it  was  found  to 
se  the  greater  part  of  its  activity  in  the  course  of  a  year.  On 
e  other  hand,  in  1899  and  1900  a  number  of  new  facts  were 
•ought  to  light  which  indicated  that  some  radio-active  substances 
3t  the  greater  part  of  their  activity  in  the  course  of  a  few 
inutes  or  hours.  For  example,  it  was  found  that  thorium 
Qitted  a  radio-active  gas  or  emanation  which  lost  half  of  its 
tivity  in  less  than  one  minute.  Substances  exposed  in  the 
ighbourhood  of  an  uncovered  radium  or  thorium  compound 
3re  found  to  acquire  radio-active  properties.  For  example,  a 
etal  plate  exposed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  thorium  oxide  for 
me  hours  was  found  to  show  considerable  activity.    The  radiations 

this  plate  were  not  permanent  but  decayed  according  to  a 
^finite  law  with  the  time,  the  activity  falling  to  half  value  in 
K)ut  eleven  hours,  and  practically  disappearing  in  the  course  of 
week.  In  a  similar  way,  plates  exposed  in  the  presence  of 
dium  acquired  temporary  activity  which  disappeared  in  the 
urse  of  a  few  hours.     The  evidence  indicated  that  an  invisible 


330       CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OP  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER      [( 

film  of  radio-active  matter  had  been  deposited  on  the  plai 
This  phenomenon  was  at  first  included  under  the  name  of  ''excited 
or  "  induced  "  radio-activity.     A  full  discussion  of  the  properties 
the  emanations  and  of  the  activity  produced  by  them  is  given  i 
the  following  chapters. 

It  thus  seemed  clear  that  in  addition  to  the  more  permani»^^: 
radio-active  elements,  other  active  substances  were  present,  whi  i 
retained  their  activity  for  only  » •"^^-mite<J.  ♦^in*^  W>>il**  it  «.| 
recognised  that  this  ephemeral  s^'^ 

presence  of  minute  quantities'  J 

significance  of  such  phenoirujyy^  '•  -'j^gttUped'Kiiivii  the"^       i 

1902.  '  *  .  :       j 

We  shall  now  consider  some  experiments  which  threw  a  fi     | 
of  light  on  radio-active  processes,  and  led  to  the  developmeiAj 
of  a  general  theory  in  explanation  of  radio-active  phenomena.     **| 
this  stage,  we  shall  confine  ourselves  to  a  consideration  of  a 
experiments  made  with  uranium  and  thorium,  although  it  w'*- 
shown  later  that  similar  efiects  are  exhibited  by  all  the  radio-a<H 
substances.     In  this  respect,  we  shall  be  following  the  historic* 
order  of  development,   for  it  was  firom  a  consideration  of  th< 
experimental  results  described  in  this  chapter  that  the  theor 
of  the  transformation   of  radio-active  matter  was  initially  pu' 
forward. 

122.  Uranium  X.  The  initial  experiments  of  Mme  Curie 
had  shown  that  the  radio-activity  of  uranium  is  an  atomi< 
phenomenon,  for  the  activity  of  any  uranium  compound  depends 
only  on  the  amount  of  that  element  present,  and  is  unaffected  by 
its  chemical  combination  with  other  inactive  elements.  Since  the 
activity  of  uranium  is  a  specific  property  of  that  element,  it  did 
not  appear  probable  that  the  activity  could  be  diminished  by 
chemical  or  physical  agencies. 

In  1900,  however,  Sir  William  Crookes*  showed  that,  by  a  single 
chemical  operation,  uranium  could  be  obtained  photographically 
inactive  while  the  whole  of  the  activity  could  be  concentrated 
in  a  small  residue  firee  from  uranium.     This  residue,  to  which  he 

*  Crookes,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  66,  p.  409, 1900. 


-f 


^IIl]     CONTINUOUS  PBODUCTION  OP  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER       331 

^ve  the  name  of  uranium  X,  was  many  hundred  times  more  active 
jphotographically,  weight  for  weight,  than  the  uranium  from  which 
it  had  been  separated.  The  method  employed  for  this  separation 
iras  to  precipitate  a  solution  of  the  uranium  with  ammonium  car- 
■  onate.  On  dissolving  the  precipitate  in  an  excess  of  the  reagent, 
^.  insoluble  residue  remained  behind.  This  was  filtered  off,  and 
-i.-^instituted  the  Ur  X.  The  active  substance  Ur  X  was  probably 
^♦•esent  in  ver^  •^mall  nuantit^    mixed  with  impurities  derived  from 

Te  observed  in  its  spectrum.     A 
of  uranium  was  also  effected  by 
ler  mocA.  ^.     v^ij.  'um  nitrate  was  dissolved  in 

r,  and  the   uranium   divided   itself  between   the   ether  and 
.er  present  in  two   unequal   fractions.     The   small   part   dis- 
solved in  the  water  layer  was   found  to  contain   practically  all 
*^^^  activity  when  examined  by  the  photographic  method,  while 
other  fraction  was  almost  inactive.     These  results,  taken  by 
,iiselves,   pointed   very   strongly   to   the   conclusion   that   the 
Lvity  of  uranium  was  not  due  to  the  element  itself,  but  to 
ome   other   substance,   associated   with   it,   which    had    distinct 
-chemical  properties. 

7  Results  of  a  similar  character  were  obtained  later  by  Becquerel  *. 
:}It  was  found  that  barium  could  be  made  photographically  very 
active  by  adding  barium  chloride  to  a  uranium  solution  and 
precipitating  the  barium  as  sulphate.  By  a  succession  of  precipi- 
tations the  uranium  was  rendered  photographically  almost  inactive, 
.while  the  barium  was  strongly  active. 

The  inactive  uranium  and  the  active  barium  were  laid  aside ; 
but,  on  examining  them  a  year  later,  it  was  found  that  the  uranium 
had  completely  regained  its  activity,  while  the  activity  of  the  barium 
sulphate  had  completely  disappeared.  The  loss  of  activity  of 
uranium  was  thus  only  temporary  in  character. 

In  the  above  experiments,  the  activity  of  uranium  was  examined 
by  the  photographic  method.  The  photographic  action  produced 
by  uranium  under  ordinary  experimental  conditions  is  due  almost 
entirely  to  the  /3  rays.  The  a  rays,  in  comparison,  have  little 
if  any  effect.     Now  the  radiation  from  Ur  X  consists  entirely 

*  Beoqaerel,  C.  R.  181,  p.  137,  1900 ;  138,  p.  977,  1901. 


332       CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  ICATTKR       [CH. 

of  fi  rays,  and  is  consequently  photographically  very  active. 
If  the  activity  of  uranium  had  been  measured  electrically  without 
any  screen  over  it,  the  current  observed  would  have  been  due 
very  largely  to  the  a  rays,  and  little  change  would  have  been 


r£\} 

A 

[  \ 

k 

100' 

\ 

j< 

jf^ 

jjai,.^ 

^^ 



\ 

•^ 

80 

\ 

V 

/ 

60 

/ 

\ 

\^ 

< 

J 

f 

\^ 

40 

V 

/ 
1 

1 

> 

K 

! 

1 

\ 

\^ 

20 

^ 

^,^,/^ 

=^ 

( 

0 

4 

. 

B 

1 

2 

1 

6 

2 

►0 

Tinxe  in  Days 
Fig.  84. 

observed  after  the  removal  of  Ur  X,  since  only  the  constituent 
responsible  for  the  13  rays  was  removed. 

123.     Thorium  X.     Rutherford  and  Soddy*,  working  with 
thorium  compounds,  found  that  an  intensely  active  constituent 

*  Bntherford  and  Soddy,  Phil,  Mag,  4,  pp.  870,  569,  1902 ;  Trant,  Chem,  Soe. 
81,  pp.  821  and  887,  1902. 


Ill]      CONTINUOUS  PBODUCTION   OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER       833 

>uld  be  separated  from  thorium  by  a  single  chemical  operation. 
:  animonia  is  added  to  a  thorium  solution,  the  thorium  is  precipi- 
ited,  but  a  large  amount  of  the  activity  is  left  behind  in  the 
Itrate,  which  is  chemically  free  from  thorium.  This  filtrate  was 
vaporated  to  dryness,  and  the  ammonium  salts  driven  off  by 
jnition.  A  small  residue  was  obtained  which,  weight  for  weight, 
ras  in  some  cases  several  thousand  times  more  active  than  the 
horium  from  which  it  was  obtained,  while  the  activity  of  the 
precipitated  thorium  was  reduced  to  less  than  one  half  of  its 
•riginal  value.  This  active  constituent  was  named  Th  X  from 
inalogy  to  Crookes*  Ur  X. 

The  active  residue  was  found  to  consist  mainly  of  impurities 
rem  the  thorium ;  the  Th  X  could  not  be  examined  chemically, 
md  undoubtedly  was  present  only  in  minute  quantity.  It  was 
ilso  found  that  an  active  constituent  could  be  partly  separated 
rom  thorium  oxide  by  shaking  it  with  water  for  some  time.  On 
iltering  the  water,  and  evaporating,  a  very  active  residue  was 
)btained  which  was  analogous  in  all  respects  to  Th  X. 

On  examining  the  products  a  month  later,  it  was  found  that 
he  Th  X  was  no  longer  active,  while  the  thorium  had  completely 
'egained  its  activity.  A  long  series  of  measurements  was  then 
mdertaken  to  examine  the  time-rate  of  these  processes  of  decay 
md  recovery  of  activity. 

The  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  84,  where  the  final 
ictivity  of  the  thorium  and  the  initial  activity  of  the  Th  X  are  in 
iach  case  taken  as  100.  The  ordinates  represent  the  activities 
letermined  by  means  of  the  ionisation  current,  and  the  abscissae 
epresent  the  time  in  days.  It  will  be  observed  that  both  curves 
ire  irregular  for  the  first  two  days.  The  activity  of  the  Th  X 
ncreased  at  first,  while  the  activity  of  the  thorium  diminished. 
Disregarding  these  initial  irregularities  of  the  curves,  which  will  be 
explained  later,  it  will  be  seen  that,  after  the  first  two  days,  the 
:ime  taken  for  the  thorium  to  recover  half  its  lost  activity  is 
ibout  equal  to  the  time  taken  by  the  Th  X  to  lose  half  its 
ictivity.  This  time  in  each  case  is  about  four  days.  The  per- 
i^ntage  proportion  of  the  activity  regained  by  the  thorium,  over 
iny  given  interval,  is  approximately  equal  to  the  percentage  pro- 
portion of  the  activity  lost  by  the  Th  X  during  the  same  interval. 


3S4      CONTINUOUS  PBODUCTIOK   OF  BADIO-ACTIVB  HATnQt      [Ctt 

If  the  recovery  curve  is  prodaced  backwards  to  meet  tiia 
vertical  axis,  it  does  so  at  a  minimum  of  25  per  cent^  and 
the  above  conctusionB  hold  more  accurately,  if  the  reoovery  a 
assumed  to  start  from  this  minimum.  This  is  clearly  shown  hj 
Fig.  85,  where  the  percentages  of  activity  recovered,  reckoned 
from  the  25  per  cent,  minimum,  are  plotted  as  ordinates.  In 
the  same  figure  the  decay  curve,  after  the  second  day,  is  shown 
on  the  same  scale.     The  activity  of  the  Th  X  decays  with  the  time 


Time  in  Daui 

Fid-  es. 

according  to  an  exponential  law,  falling  to  half  value  in  about 
four  days.  If  I,  is  the  initial  activity  and  /,  is  the  activity  after 
a  time  t,  then 

/,//,  =  e-w, 

where  X  is  a  constant  and  e  the  natural  base  of  logarithms.  The 
experimental  curve  of  the  rise  of  activity  &om  the  minimum  to 
the  maximum  value  is  therefore  expressed  by  the  equation 


II]     GOHTUrnOUS  PBODDCTION   of  RADlO-ACnVB  HATTSB       335 

lere  I,  is  the  amount  of  actmty  recovered  when  the  state  of 
Qstant  activity  is  reached,  T,  the  activity  recovered  after  a 
ne  t,  and  X  is  the  same  cotutant  as  before. 

Deo^  and  riie  of  Uranlntn  X.  Similar  results  were 
•tained  when  uranium  was  examined.  The  Ur  X  was  separated 
'  Becquerel's  method  of  successive  precipitations  with  barium, 
le  decay  of  the  separated  activity  and  the  recovery  of  the  lost 
tivity  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  86. 

The  curves  of  decay  and  recovery  exhibit  the  same  peculiarities 
id  can  be  expressed  by  the  same  equations  as  in  the  case  of 


Fig.  86. 

lorium.  The  time-rate  of  decay  and  recovery  is,  however,  much 
ower  than  for  thorium,  the  activity  of  the  Ur  X  &lling  to  half  its 
alue  in  about  22  days. 

A  large  number  of  results  of  a  similar  character  have  been 
btained  with  other  radio-active  products,  separated  from  the 
)dio-elements,  but  the  cases  of  thorium  and  uranium  will  suffice 
)r  the  present  to  form  a  basis  for  the  discussion  of  the  processes 
hat  are  taking  place  in  radio-active  bodies. 

124.  Theory  of  the  phenomena.  These  processes  of  decay 
ad  recovery  go  on  at  exactly  the  same  rate  if  the  substances  are 


336       CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER     [Ctt 

removed  from  the  neighbourhood  of  one  another,  or  enclosed  in 
lead,  or  placed  in  a  vacuum  tube.  It  is  at  first  sight  a  remaik- 
able  phenomenon  that  the  processes  of  decay  and  recovery  shonU 
be  so  intimately  connected,  although  there  is  no  possibility  of 
mutual  interaction  between  them.  These  results,  however,  receiye 
a  general  explanation  on  the  following  hypotheses : 

(1)  That  there  is  a  constant  production  of  fr^sh  radio- 

active matter  by  the  radio-active  body; 

(2)  That  the  activity  of  the  matter  so  formed  decreases 

according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time  from 
the  moment  of  its  formation. 

Suppose  that  q^  particles  of  new  matter  are  produced  per  second 
from  a  given  mass  of  matter.*  The  rate  of  emission  of  energy  due 
to  the  particles  produced  in  the  time  dty  is,  at  the  mpment  of  their 
formation,  equal  to  Kqodt,  where  -K"  is  a  constant. 

It  is  required  to  find  the  activity  due  to  the  whole  matter 
produced  after  the  process  has  continued  for  a  time  T. 

The  activity  d/,  due  to  the  matter  produced  during  the  time  di 
at  the  time  t,  decays  according  to  an  exponential  law  during  the 
time  T—t  that  elapses  before  its  activity  is  estimated,  and  in 
consequence  is  given  by 

where  \  is  the  constant  of  decay  of  activity  of  the  active  matter. 
The  activity  Ij>  due  to  the  whole  matter  produced  in  the  time  T  is 
thus  given  by 

J  0 
A 

The  activity  reaches  a  maximum  value  /» when  T  is  very  great, 
and  is  then  given  by 

thus  ^=l-e-*^. 


Ill]     CONTINUOUS  PHODUCrriON   OF   RADIO-ACTIVK  MATTEft       337 

This  equation  agrees  with  the  experimental  results  for  the 
jcovery  of  lost  activity.  Another  method  for  obtaining  this 
juation  is  given  later  in  Section  126. 

A  state  of  equilibrium  is  reached  when  the  rate  of  loss  of 
:;tivity  of  the  matter  already  produced  is  balanced  by  the  activity 
ipplied  by  the  production  of  new  active  matter.  According  to 
lis  view,  the  radio-active  bodies  are  undergoing  change,  but  the 
ztivity  remains  constant  owing  to  the  action  of  two  opposing 
recesses.  Now,  if  this  active  matter  can  at  any  time  be  sepa- 
ited  from  the  substance  in  which  it  is  produced,  the  decay  of 
s  activity,  as  a  whole,  should  follow  an  exponential  law  with 
be  time,  since  each  portion  of  the  matter  decreases  in  activity 
ccording  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  whatever  its  age 
lay  be.  If  /©  is  the  initial  activity  of  the  separated  product,  the 
ctivity  It  after  an  interval  t  is  given  by 

I  ""        ' 

Thus,  the  two  assumptions — of  uniform  production  of  active 
aatter  and  of  the  decay  of  its  activity  according  to  an  exponential 
aw  from  the  moment  of  its  formation — satisfactorily  explain  the 
elation  between  the  curves  of  decay  and  recovery  of  activity. 

125.  EiXperimental  evidence.  It  now  remains  to  consider 
urther  experimental  evidence  in  support  of  these  hypotheses- 
The  primary  conception  is  that  the  radio-active  bodies  are  able  to 
)roduce  from  themselves  matter  of  chemical  properties  diflferent 
rom  those  of  the  parent  substance,  and  that  this  process  goes  on 
It  a  constant  rate.  This  new  matter  possesses  the  property  of 
letivity,  and  loses  it  according  to  a  definite  law. 

The  constant  rate  of  production  of  new  active  matter  by 
:horium  was  not  diifficult  to  verify  experimentally.  The  thorium 
was  first  completely  deprived  of  thorium  X  by  successive  precipi- 
tations with  ammonia.  It  was  then  set  aside  and  the  new  thorium 
X  formed  in  a  definite  interval  was  again  separated  and  its  amount 
HQeasured  by  its  radio-activity.  The  amount  1%  formed  in  an 
interval  t  was  found  to  be  in  fair  agreement  with  that  to  be 
expected  on  the  theory,  viz.  Ii\I^  =  1  -  e~^^  or  yjL  when  the  interval 
^as  short.     The   thorium   nitrate   which   had   been   freed   from 

B.  R.-A.  2*1 


Z^'^     f'jf%t\%%y0:%  ruffOL'f.'nos  cjw  eamo-actite  matter    [ch. 

Tn  X  nvt  Puttpn^A  v>  kXsaA  f'jr  ocj^  m^HtilL  »zA  vas  again  sob- 
j*:f:x^\  V/  tri^  JMUEi^  pr^%«fe.  The  aoa^xm;  of  Th  X  was  ioand  to 
(^;  </|'i^  in  Atuonnt  u>  that  obtaiAed  from  an  equal  veight  of  the 
//n^ifial  th</riurii  nitrate.  In  ^ioe  uKAth,  therefore,  the  Th  X  had 
}y^fi  th^^UhTHX/A^  and  harl  a^^ain  reached  a  limiting  maximam 
valuer*, 

f>vtf;r  th^;  interval  examine^],  the  results  showed  that  Th  X 
wan  f'jfniiunonfAy  prrjduced  from  the  thoriam  compound  at  a 
tutunliiUt  mU%  It  will  be  seen  later  that  the  amount  of  Th  X 
derivi^l  from  one  gram  of  thorium  is  exceedingly  minute;  but  the 
«:U'j'Xrirjil  effdsctM  due  Up  its  radiations  are  so  large  that  the  process 
of  pniiluction  can  ht:  followed  after  verj-  short  intervals. 

At  the  time  at  which  these  experiments  were  made  there  was 
a  U;ndency  U)  explain  the  temporary  activity  of  substances  on  the 
[irificiple  of"  nulio-active  induction."  It  was  supposed,  for  example, 
that  the  mere  pn^cess  of  mixture  of  an  active  substance  with 
iriiu;tiv<!  matter  conferred  on  the  latter  the  property  of  radio- 
iMitivity.  On  this  view,  the  activity  in  the  thorium  filtrate,  which 
W(i  have  uwjrilied  to  thorium  X,  might  be  due  to  an  "induction" 
efl((!(;t  on  the  solution  itself.  If  this  be  the  case,  however,  it  is  to 
l>u  (!X{M!(*.t<i(l  that  any  re-agent  capable  of  removing  the  thorium 
corii|)hjttily  from  the  solution  should  yield  active  residues  similar 
to  thowj  obtained  from  ammonia.  This  was  however  disproved  by 
oxpcriment;  for  exauiple,  when  thorium  nitrate  is  precipitated 
by  Hodiuin  or  aminoniutn  carbonate,  the  residue  from  the  filtrate 
iifU»r  twaporation  and  ignition  is  practically  free  from  activity, 
whilo  tiio  precipitated  thorium  carbonate  retains  the  normal 
amount.  Wo  shall  see  later  (Chapter  XVI)  that  several  re-agents 
boNidrH  mniiionia  have  been  found  capible  of  separating  Th  X 
fn)m  a  thorium  solution.  It  has  been  shown  that  thorium  and 
uranium  behavo  quite  ditierently  with  regard  to  the  action  of 
ammonia  and  ammonium  carbonate.  Uranium  X  is  completely 
piHHnpitatiHl  with  the  unuiium  in  an  ammonia  solution,  and  the 

*  If  thorium  X  wore  Hupplieil  at  a  cimstant  rate,  this  process  of  production  and 
HO)mrHtiou  of  Th  \  couUl  U>  oontinueil  iudednitely.  It  will  be  seen  later,  howerer, 
that  anot)\cr  raiUo-aotivo  Hubstance,  mesothorium,  is  separated  with  the  thorium  X 
and  that  tho  t^tTtn^t  of  this  is  to  decrease  the  rate  of  supply  of  thoriam  X  orer  ao 
iutorval  of  Mnoral  yt>ars. 


VIIl]    CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION   OF  RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER       339 

filtrate  is  inactive.  On  the  other  hand,  Ur  X  is  separated  by 
ammonium  carbonate.  Ur  X  and  Th  X  consequently  behave  like 
distinct  types  of  matter  with  well-marked  chemical  properties, 
quite  distinct  from  those  of  the  substances  from  which  they  are 
produced.  This  point  of  view  is  completely  borne  out  by  an 
examination  of  the  numerous  distinct  products  which  have  been 
separated  from  uranium  and  thorium  at  later  dates.  It  is  not 
desirable  at  this  stage  to  discuss  the  question  why  such  chemical 
separations  are  eflFective  even  when  the  substance  separated  is 
present  in  infinitesimal  amount.  From  the  chemical  point  of 
view,  the  behaviour  of  radio-active  substances  present  in  extremely 
small  amount  is  of  great  interest ;  for  by  radio-active  methods  it 
is  possible  to  examine  the  chemical  properties  of  substances 
present  in  such  minute  amount  that  it  would  be  impossible  to 
detect  them  by  the  most  sensitive  balance  or  by  the  spectroscope. 
The  initial  rise  of  the  activity  of  Th  X  and  the  initial  decay 
of  the  thorium  itself  shown  in  Fig.  84  are  explained  later  in 
Chapter  XVI.  It  suffices  to  state  here  that  Th  X  gives  rise  to  the 
thorium  emanation  which  behaves  as  a  radio-active  gas,  and  that 
the  emanation  in  turn  is  transformed  into  the  active  deposit  of 
thorium.  The  initial  rise  of  activity  is  due  to  the  production  of 
the  active  deposit  in  the  Th  X,  the  activity  of  which  is  added 
to  that  of  Th  X  and  of  the  emanation.  In  a  similar  way,  it  will 
he  shown  that  the  active  deposit  remains  behind  with  the  thorium 
when  Th  X  is  separated.  It  consequently  decays  in  situ  and  this 
results  in  an  apparent  decrease  of  the  activity  of  the  thorium. 

126.     Rate  of  decay  of  activity.     It  has  been  shown  that 

the  activity  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X  decays  according  to  an  exponential 

law  with  the  time.     This,  we  shall  see  later,  is  the  general  law  of 

decay  of  activity  in  any  type  of  active  matter,  obtained  by  itself, 

and  &«ed  from  any  secondary  active  products  which  it  may,  itself, 

produce.     In  any  case,  when  this  law  is  not  fulfilled,  it  can  be 

shown  that   the  activity  is  due  to  the  superposition  of  two  or 

more  efiects,  each  of  which  decays  according  to  an  exponential 

law  with  the  time.     The  physical  interpretation  of  this  law  still 

remains  to  be  explained. 

It  has  been  shown  that  in  uranium  and  thorium  compounds 

22—2 


340       CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  BADIO-ACTIVB  HATTER     [CH. 

there  is  a  continuous  production  of  active  matter  which  keeps  the 
compound  in  radio-active  equilibrium.  The  changes  by  which 
the  active  matter  is  produced  must  be  atomic  in  nature,  since 
the  products  are  diflferent  in  chemical  properties  fix)m  the  matter 
in  which  the  changes  take  place.  The  activity  of  the  products 
has  afforded  the  means  of  following  the  changes  occurring  in 
them.  It  now  remains  to  consider  the  connection  between  the 
activity  at  any  time,  and  the  amount  of  radio-active  change 
taking  place  at  that  time. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  found  experimentally  that  the  saturation 
ionisation  current  it,  after  the  active  product  has  been  allowed  to 
decay  for  a  time  t,  is  given  by 

where  to  is  the  initial  saturation  current  and  \  the  constant  of  decay. 
Now  the  saturation  current  is  a  measure  of  the  total  number 
of  ions  produced  per  second  in  the  testing  vessel.  It  has  already 
been  shown  that  the  a  rays,  which  produce  the  greater  proportion 
of  ionisation  in  the  gas,  consist  of  positively  charged  particles 
projected  with  great  velocity.  Suppose  for  simplicity  that  each 
atom  of  active  matter,  in  the  course  of  its  change,  gives  rise  to 
one  projected  a  particle.  Ektch  a  particle  will  produce  a  certain 
average  number  of  ions  in  its  path  before  it  strikes  the  boundaries 
or  is  absorbed  in  the  gas.  Since  the  number  of  projected  particles 
per  second  is  equal  to  the  number  of  atoms  changing  per  second, 
the  number  of  atoms  tie  which  change  per  second  at  the  time  t  is 
given  by 

Wo 

where  ?io  is  the  initial  number  which  changes  per  second.  On  this 
view,  then,  the  law  of  decay  expresses  the  result  that  the  number 
of  atoms  changing  in  unit  time,  diminishes  according  to  an  ex- 
ponential law  with  the  time.  The  number  of  atoms  Nt  which, 
remain  unchanged  after  an  interval  t  is  given  by 


Vf^^jntdt 


VIll]    CONTINUOUS  PRODUCrrON  OF  BADIO-ACnVB  MATTER       341 

If  i^T,  is  the  number  of  atoms  at  the  begmning, 

Thus  f!  =  *"** ^^^' 

or  the  law  of  decay  expresses  the  fact  that  the  activity  of  a  pro- 
duct at  any  time  is  proportional  to  the  number  of  atoms  which 
remain  unchanged  at  that  time, 

ThLs  is  the  same  as  the  law  of  mono-molecular  change  in 
chemistry,  and  expresses  the  fact  that  there  is  only  one  changing 
system.  If  the  change  depended  on  the  mutual  action  of  two 
systems,  the  law  of  decay  would  be  different,  since  the  rate  of 
decay  in  that  case  would  depend  on  the  relative  concentration 
of  the  two  reacting  substances.  This  is  not  so,  for  not  a  single 
case  has  yet  been  observed  in  which  the  law  of  decay  was  affected 
by  the  amount  of  active  matter  present. 

From  the  above  equation  (1) 

dNt 


dt 


=  -xi\re, 


or  the  number  of  systems  changing  in  unit  time  is  proportional  to 
the  number  unchanged  at  that  time. 

In  the  case  of  recovery  of  activity,  after  an  active  product  has 
been  removed,  the  number  of  systems  changing  in  unit  time,  when 
radio-active  equilibrium  is  produced,  is  equal  to  \Nq,  This  must 
be  equal  to  the  number  q^  of  new  systems  supplied  in  unit  time,  or 

and  ^  =  -^  ; 

\  has  thus  a  distinct  physical  meaning,  and  may  be  defined  as 
the  proportion  of  the  total  number  of  systems  which  change 
per  second.  It  has  different  values  for  different  types  of  active 
matter,  but  is  inveuiable  for  any  particular  type  of  matter.  For 
this  reason,  X  will  be  termed  the  "radio-active  constant'*  of  the 
radio-element. 

We  are  now   in  a  position   to   discuss  with   more   physical 
definiteness  the  gradual  growth  of  Th  X  in  thorium,  after  the 


342       CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER     [CH. 

Th  X  has  been  completely  removed  from  it.  Let  go  particles  of 
Th  X  be  produced  per  second  by  the  thorium,  and  let  N  be  the 
number  of  particles  of  Th  X  present  at  any  time  t  after  the 
original  Th  X  was  removed.  The  number  of  particles  of  Th  X 
which  change  every  second  is  \N,  where  X  is  the  radio-active 
constant  of  Th  X.  Now,  at  any  time  during  the  process  of  re- 
covery, the  rate  of  increase  of  the  number  of  particles  of  Th  X 
equals  the  rate  of  production,  less  the  rate  of  change ;  that  is 

^  =  ?o-AJVr. 

The  solution  of  this  equation  is  of  the  form  JV=  ae"^^  +  6,  where 
a  and  b  are  constants. 

Now  when  t  is  very  great,  the  number  of  particles  of  Th  X    ; 
present  reach  a  maximum  value  Nq. 

Thus,  since  N  =  No  when  ^  =  00, 

since  iV  =  0  when  ^  =  0, 

hence  6  =  — a  =  iVo, 

and  the  equation  becomes 

Nr 

This  is  equivalent  to  the  equation  already  obtained  in  Section 
123,  since  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  is  always  proportional  to 
the  number  of  atoms  present. 

127.    Influence   of  conditionB  on  the  rate  of  decay. 

Since  the  activity  of  any  product,  at  any  time,  may  be  taken  as 
a  measure  of  the  rate  at  which  radio-active  change  takes  place,  it 
may  be  used  as  a  means  of  determining  the  effect  of  conditions 
on  the  changes  occurring  in  radio-active  matter.  If  the  rate  of 
change  should  be  accelerated  or  retarded,  it  is  to  be  expected 
that  the  value  of  the  radio-active  constant  \  will  be  increased  or 
decreased,  i.e.  that  the  decay  curve  will  be  different  under  different 
conditions. 


^IIl]     CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER       343 

No  such  effect,  however,  has  yet  been  observed  in  any  case  of 
radio-active  change,  where  none  of  the  active  products  produced 
are  allowed  to  escape  from  the  system.  The  rate  of  decay  is 
unaltered  by  any  chemical  or  physical  agency,  and  in  this  respect 
the  changes  in  radio-active  matter  are  sharply  distinguished  from 
ordinary  chemical  changes.  For  example,  the  decay  of  activity 
of  any  product  takes  place  at  the  same  rate  when  the  substance 
is  exposed  to  light  as  when  it  is  kept  in  the  dark,  and  at  the 
same  rate  in  a  vacuum  as  in  air  or  any  other  gas  at  atmospheric 
pressure.  Its  rate  of  decay  is  unaltered  by  surrounding  the 
active  matter  by  a  thick  layer  of  lead  and  under  conditions  where 
no  ordinary  radiation  from  outside  can  affect  it.  The  activity  of 
the  matter  is  unaffected  by  ignition  or  chemical  treatment.  The 
material  giving  rise  to  the  activity  can  be  dissolved  in  acid  and 
re-obtained  by  evaporation  of  the  solution  without  altering  the 
activity.  The  rate  of  decay  is  the  same  whether  the  active 
matter  is  retained  in  the  solid  state  or  kept  in  solution.  When 
a  product  has  lost  its  activity,  resolution  or  heat  does  not  re- 
generate it,  and  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  rate  of  decay  of  the 
active  products,  so  far  examined,  is  the  same  at  a  red  heat  as  at 
the  temperature  of  liquid  air.  In  fact,  no  variation  of  physical  or 
chemical  conditions  has  led  to  any  observable  difference  in  the 
decay  of  activity  of  any  of  the  numerous  types  of  active  matter 
which  have  been  examined. 

The  recovery  of  the  activity  of  a  radio-element  with  time, 
when  an  active  product  is  separated  from  it,  is  governed  by  the 
rate  of  production  of  fresh  active  matter  and  by  the  decay  of 
activity  of  that  already  produced.  Since  the  rate  of  decay  of  the 
activity  of  the  separated  product  is  independent  of  conditions,  the 
rate  of  recovery  of  activity  can  be  modified  only  by  a  change  of 
the  rate  of  production  of  fresh  active  matter.  As  far  as  experi- 
ments have  gone,  the  rate  of  production,  like  the  rate  of  decay,  is 
independent  of  chemical  or  physical  conditions.  There  are  indeed 
certain  cases  which  are  apparent  exceptions  to  this  rule.  For 
example,  the  escape  of  the  radio-active  emanations  from  thorium 
and  radium  is  readily  affected  by  heat,  moisture  and  solution. 
A  more  thorough  investigation,  however,  shows  that  the  excep- 
tion is  only  apparent  and  not  real.     These  cases  will  be  discussed 


344       CONTINUOUS  PKODUCTION   OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER      [CH. 

more  in  detail  in  the  next  chapter,  but  it  may  be  stated  here  that 
the  diflferences  observed  are  due  to  diflferences  in  the  rate  of  escape 
of  the  emanations  into  the  surrounding  gas,  and  not  to  differences 
in  the  rate  of  production. 

These  observations  as  well  as  many  others  made  later  show 
that  neither  the  activity  nor  its  rate  of  change  can  be  altered  by 
any  physical  or  chemical  agency.  Since  any  change  in  the  rate  of 
production  of  a  new  substance  would  involve  a  change  in  the  rate 
of  decay  of  the  parent  substance,  it  is  consequently  to  be  expected 
that  the  recovery  curve  of  any  active  matter  should  be  uninfluenced 
by  conditions  provided  that  no  radio-active  materials  are  allowed 
to  escape.  All  experiments  made  to  detect  any  such  change  have 
so  far  yielded  negative  results. 

128.  Difintegration  hypotheiig.  In  the  discussion  of  the 
changes  in  radio-active  bodies,  only  the  active  products  Ur  X 
and  Th  X  have  been  considered.  It  will,  however,  be  shown  later 
that  these  two  products  are  only  examples  of  many  other  types  of 
active  matter,  and  that  each  of  these  products  has  definite  chemical 
as  well  as  radio-active  properties,  which  distinguish  it,  not  only 
from  the  other  active  products,  but  also  from  the  substance  fix)m 
which  it  is  produced. 

The  full  investigation  of  these  changes  will  be  shown  to 
verify  in  every  particular  the  hypothesis  that  radio-activity  is  the 
accompaniment  of  atomic  changes  of  a  special  kind  occurring  in 
matter,  and  that  the  constant  activity  of  the  radio-elements  is 
due  to  an  equilibrium  process,  in  which  the  rate  of  production  of 
fresh  active  matter  balances  the  rate  of  change  of  that  already 
formed. 

The  nature  of  the  process  taking  place  in  the  radio-elements, 
which  gives  rise  to  the  production  at  a  constant  rate  of  new 
kinds  of  active  matter,  will  now  be  considered.  Since  in  thorium 
or  uranium  compounds  there  is  a  continuous  production  of  radio- 
active matter,  which  differs  in  chemical  properties  from  the  parent 
substance,  some  kind  of  change  must  be  taking  place  in  the  radio- 
element.  This  change,  by  which  new  matter  is  produced,  is  very 
different  in  character  from  the  molecular  changes  dealt  with  in 
chemistr}-,  for  no  chemical  change  is  known  which  proceeds  at  the 


^•Ill]     CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATfER       345 

same  rate  at  the  temperatures  corresponding  to  a  red  heat  and 
to  liquid  air,  and  is  independent  of  all  physical  and  chemical 
actions.  If,  however,  the  production  of  active  matter  is  supposed 
to  be  the  result  of  changes,  not  in  the  molecule,  but  in  the  ato7n 
iUelf,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  temperature  would  exert 
much  influence.  The  general  experience  of  chemistry  in  failing 
to  transform  the  elements  by  the  action  of  temperature  is  itself 
strong  evidence  that  wide  ranges  of  temperature  have  not  much 
etfect  in  altering  the  stability  of  the  chemical  atom. 

The  view  that  the  atoms  of  the  radio-elements  are  undergoing 
spontaneous  disintegration  was  put  forward  by  Rutherford  and 
Sodily  as  a  result  of  evidence  of  this  character.  The  discovery  of 
the  material  nature  of  the  a  rays  added  strong  confirmation  to 
the  hj^thesis ;  for  it  was  difficult  to  explain  the  expulsion  of  an 
atom  of  matter  with  great  velocity  except  on  the  basis  of  an  atomic 
explosion.  In  addition,  the  loss  of  an  a  particle  from  an  atom  gave 
an  obvious  explanation  of  the  change  in  chemical  and  physical 
properties  of  the  new  substance  which  reappeared  as  the  result  of 
the  atomic  transformation. 

Taking  the  case  of  uranium  as  an  example,  the  processes 
occurring  in  the  atom  may  be  pictured  in  the  following  way.  The 
atoms  of  uranium  are  not  permanently  stable  systems,  but  on  an 
average  a  constant  small  proportion  of  them  (about  one  atom  in 
ever}' 10")  becomes  unstable  and  breaks  up  each  second.  The  atomic 
explosion  is  violent,  and  results  in  the  expulsion  from  the  atom  of 
one,  or  possibly  two,  a  particles  with  great  velocity.  Since  the  a 
particle  is  an  atom  of  helium  of  atomic  weight  about  4,  the  residue 
of  the  atom  after  the  expulsion  of  one  a  particle  has  decreased  in 
atomic  weight  by  4  units.  Consequently  in  addition  to  the 
helium  atom,  a  new  atom  is  formed  of  atomic  weight  less  than 
that  of  the  parent  atom.  These  new  atoms  show  physical  and 
chemical  properties  quite  distinct  from  those  of  uranium,  and 
constitute  the  new  substance,  uranium  X.  The  atoms  of  Ur  X 
ire  far  more  unstable  than  those  of  uranium  itself,  for  on  an 
iverage  one  in  10'  disintegrates  per  second.  The  transformation 
»f  Ur  X  gives  rise  in  turn  to  a  new  substance,  and  the  process  of 
ransformation  continues  through  a  long  series  of  definite  stages, 
'he  expulsion  of  a  particles  from  uranium  constitutes  the  radiation 


346   CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER   [CH.  VUI 

from  uranium,  while  the  expulsion  of  fi  particles  from  Ur  X 
constitutes  the  radiation  from  that  substance.  If  it  be  assumed 
that  one  a  particle  or  one  fi  particle  is  expelled  as  a  result  of 
the  explosion  of  each  individual  atom,  the  number  of  a  particles 
or  /8  particles  projected  per  second  from  radio-active  matter  is 
obviously  a  measure  of  the  number  of  atoms  breaking  up  per 
second.  It  will  be  shown  later  that  a  process  of  transformation, 
very  similar  to  that  described  for  uranium,  must  be  supposed  to 
take  place  in  thorium,  radium  and  actinium.  A  full  discussion  of 
the  transformation  products  of  these  substances  is  given  in  later 
Chapters. 

In  this  chapter,  the  evidence  of  production  and  transformation 
of  active  matter  heus  been  based  on  measurements  of  activity.  The 
actual  amount  of  matter  involved  was  in  most  cases  far  too  small 
to  detect  by  ordinary  chemical  methods.  From  the  considerations 
advanced  in  Chapter  XVI,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  weight  of  the 
equilibrium  amount  of  Th  X,  which  can  be  separated  from  one 
gram  of  thorium,  is  about  7  x  10~"  gr.  Notwithstanding  the 
minuteness  of  the  amount  of  matter  involved,  the  Th  X  from  one 
gram  of  thorium  gives  an  inconveniently  large  electrical  efifecfc 
for  measurement  with  an  electroscope.  The  detection  of  small 
amounts  of  matter  by  their  activity  is  extraordinarily  delicate, 
and  far  surpasses  in  sensitiveness  the  balance  or  the  spectroscope. 

It  will  be  seen  later,  however,  that  in  some  cases  a  sufiBcient 
amount  of  matter  has  been  obtained  to  examine  the  correctness 
of  this  hypothesis  by  direct  chemical  methods.  For  example,  the 
radium  atom  is  transformed  with  the  emission  of  an  a  particle 
into  the  atom  of  a  gaseous  substance,  the  radium  emanation. 
A  sufficient  quantity  of  this  emanation  has  been  collected  to 
isolate  it  by  chemical  methods  and  to  examine  its  physical  and 
chemical  properties.  It  has  been  shown  to  be  a  new  element 
with  a  characteristic  spectrum,  and  well  marked  and  distinctive 
physical  and  chemical  properties.  It  is,  however,  not  a  permanent 
but  a  transition  element,  for  it  has  practically  all  disappeared  a 
month  after  its  separation. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES. 


129.     Introduction.     In  this  and  the  following  chapter,  an 
tccount  will  be  given  of  the  general  properties  of  the  radio-active 
emanations  and  the  active   matter  derived  from  them.     These 
types  of  active  matter,  which  show  only  a  temporary  activity, 
have  been  studied  in  more  detail  than  many  of  the  other  radio- 
active substances.     They  exhibit  a  number  of  interesting  general 
properties  which  can   be  most   conveniently  considered  at  this 
rtage.     The  existence  of  radio-active  matter  in  the  gaseous  state 
has  proved  of  great  utility  in  throwing  light  on  radio-active  pro- 
cesses, and   affords  a  simple  method  of  studying  a  number  of 
radio-active  substances  quite  apart  from  the  active  matter  from 
which   they   arise.     A    most    important    and   striking  property 
possessed  by  radium,  thorium,  and  actinium,  but  not  by  uranium, 
ionium  or  polonium,  is  the  power  of  continuously  emitting  into 
the  surrounding  space  a  material  emanation,  which  has  all  the 
properties  of  a  radio-active  gas.     Each  of  these  emanations  is  able 
to  diflFuse  rapidly  through  gases  and  through  porous  substances, 
and  may  be  separated  firom  the  gas  with  which  it  is  mixed  by 
condensation   at   a   very   low    temperature.      These    emanations 
form  the  connecting  link  between  the  radio-elements  themselves 
and  their  power  of  imparting  activity  to   surrounding  objects. 
Fhe  emanations  from  the  three  active  bodies  all  possess  similar 
udio-active  properties,  but  the  effects  are  most  marked  in  the 
ase  of  the  radium  emanation,  on  account  of  its  relatively  slow 
ate  of  decay. 


348  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [CH. 

The  radium  emanation  has  proved  of  great  practical  importance 
as  a  means  of  readily  obtaining  an  intense  source  of  radiation 
concentrated  in  a  very  small  volume. 

130.  Discovery  of  the  emanations.  In  the  course  of 
examination  of  the  radiations  of  thorium,  several  observers  had 
noted  that  some  of  the  thorium  compounds,  and  especially  the 
oxide,  were  apparently  very  inconstant  sources  of  radiation,  when 
examined  in  open  vessels  by  the  electrical  method.  Owens*  found 
that  this  inconstancy  was  due  to  the  action  of  air  currents. 
When  a  closed  vessel  was  used,  the  current,  immediately  after  the 
introduction  of  the  active  matter,  increased  with  the  time,  and 
finally  reached  a  constant  value.  By  drawing  a  steady  stream  of 
air  through*  the  vessel,  the  value  of  the  ionisation  current  was 
much  reduced.  It  was  also  observed  that  the  radiations  could 
apparently  pass  through  large  thicknesses  of  paper,  which  com- 
pletely absorbed  the  ordinary  a  radiation. 

In  an  investigation  of  these  peculiar  properties  of  thorium 
compounds,  the  writerf  found  that  the  effects  were  due  to  an 
emission  of  radio-active  particles  of  some  kind  from  the  thorium 
compounds.  This  "  emanation,"  as  it  was  termed  for  convenience, 
possesses  the  properties  of  ionising  the  gas  and  acting  on  a  photo- 
graphic plate,  and  is  able  to  diffuse  rapidly  through  porous 
substances  like  paper.  The  emanation,  like  a  gas,  is  completely 
prevented  from  escaping  by  covering  the  active  matter  with  a 
thin  plate  of  mica.  The  emanation  can  be  carried  away  by  a 
current  of  air ;  it  passes  through  a  plug  of  cotton-wool  and  can  be 
bubbled  through  solutions  without  appreciable  loss  of  activity.  In 
these  respects  it  behaves  very  differently  from  the  ions  produced 
in  the  gas  by  the  rays  from  active  substances,  for  these  give  up 
their  charges  completely  under  the  same  conditions.  Special 
experiments  showed  that  the  emanation  could  not  consist  of 
particles  of  dust  given  off  by  the  radio-active  matter  but  appeared 
to  be  a  type  of  gaseous  or  volatile  radio-active  matter. 

Although  the  emanation  from  thorium  is  given  off  in  minute 

♦  Owens,  Phil  Mag,  48,  p.  360,  1899. 
t  Rutherford,  Phil,  Mag.  49,  p.  1,  1900. 


^] 


RADIO-ACTIVE  GA8E8 


349 


uantity,  its  ionisation  effects  are  sufficiently  large  to  be  readily 
aeasured  by  means  of  an  electroscope  or  electrometer. 

For  an  examination  of  the  emanation,  an  apparatus  similar  in 
irinciple  to  that  shown  in  Fig  87  was  employed. 

The  thorium  compound,  either  bare  or  enclosed  in  a  paper 
nvelope,  was  placed  in  a  glass  tube  C.  A  current  of  air  from  a 
[asometer,  after  passing  through  a  tube  containing  cotton- wool  to 
emove  dust  particles,  bubbled  through  sulphuric  acid  in  the  vessel 
1.  It  then  passed  through  a  bulb  containing  tightly  packed  cotton- 
wool to  prevent  any  spray  being  carried  over.  The  emanation, 
nixed  with  air  was  carried  from  the  vessel  G  through  a  plug  of 
3otton-wool  D,  which  removed  completely  all  the  ions  carried  with 
the  emanation.  The  gas  then  passed  into  a  long  brass  cylinder, 
which  was  insulated  and  charged  to  a  suitable  potential  by  means 
of  a  battery  of  accumulators.    Three  insulated  electrodes,  E,  F,  H, 


To  Electromnter 


QoMmetrr 


Fig.  87. 


of  equal  lengths,   were   placed  along  the  axis  of  the  cylinder, 

supported  by  brass  rods  passing  through  ebonite  plugs  in  the  side 

of  the  cylinder.    The  current  through  the  gas,  due  to  the  presence 

of  the  emanation,  was  measured  by  means  of  an  electrometer. 

An  insulating  key  was  arranged  so  that  any  one  of  the  electrodes 

£,  F,  H  could  be  rapidly  connected  with  one  pair  of  quadrants  of 

the  electrometer,  the  other  two  electrodes  being  always  connected 

with  earth.     The  current  observed  in  the  testing  cylinder  was  due 

entirely  to  the  ions  produced  by  the  radiation  from  the  emanation 

carried  into  the  vessel  by  the  current  of  air.     On  substituting  a 

uranium  compound  for  the  thorium,  not  the  slightest  current  was 

observed.     After  a  constant  flow  has  passed  for  about  10  minutes, 

the  current   due   to   the   emanation  reached   a   nearly  constant 

value. 


350  RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES  [CR 

The  variation  of  the  current  with  the  voltage  was  similar  to  that 
observed  for  a  gas  ionised  by  the  direct  radiations  from  the 
active  bodies.  The  current  at  first  increased  with  the  voltage, but 
finally  reached  a  maximum. 

The  emanation  from  thorium  rapidly  loses  its  activity  with 
tiiue.  This  is  very  readily  shown  with  the  apparatus  of  Fig.  87. 
When  the  emanation  is  conveyed  with  a  current  of  air  along  the 
cylinder,  the  ionisation  current  is  found  to  diminish  progressively 
along  the  cylinder,  and  the  variation  from  electrode  to  electrode 
depends  on  the  velocity  of  the  flow  of  air.  Another  convenient 
method  of  determining  the  rate  of  decay  is  to  stop  the  flow  of  air' 
and  close  the  openings  of  the  cylinder.  The  decrease  of  the 
saturation  current  with  time  is  then  a  measure  of  the  decay  of 
activity  of  the  emanation. 

Shortly  after  the  discovery  of  the  thorium  emanation,  Dom* 
showed  that  radium  also  gave  off  an  emanation.  The  amount  of 
emanation  was  small  at  ordinary  temperatures  but  was  much 
increased  when  the  radium  compound  was  heated.  The  emana- 
tion behaved  similarly  to  that  of  thorium  but  lost  its  activity  bx 
more  slowly. 

We  have  referred  in  Section  7  to  the  discovery  by  Giesel  of  an 
emanation  of  very  short  life  given  out  by  the  substance  now 
known  as  actinium,  and  of  the  striking  way  in  which  its  presence 
can  be  shown  with  the  aid  of  a  zinc  sulphide  screen. 

131.  Decay  of  the  emanations.  Each  of  these  emanations 
loses  its  activity  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time. 
From  the  point  of  view  developed  in  the  last  chapter,  the  emana- 
tions are  to  be  regarded  as  active  substances  in  the  gaseous  state- 
If  No  be  the  initial  number  of  atoms  present  and  N  the  number 
remaining  after  an  interval  ty  then  the  exponential  law  of  decay  is 
expressed  by  N/Nq  =  e~^  where  X  is  the  radio-active  constant. 

It  is  convenient  to  express  the  decay  in  terms  of  the  hall 
value  period,  i.e.  the  interval  required  for  the  activity  or  numbei 
of  atoms  present  to  fall  to  half  value.  In  his  initial  experiments 
Rutherford  found  that  the  half  value  period  of  the  thorium  emana 
tion  was  about  one  minute.     Later  experiments  by  Rossignol  an( 

*  Dorn,  Abh.  d.  Naturforsch.  Ges.fiirHalU-a'S,  1900. 


:±]  RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES  351 

Griiningham*  gave  a  value  of  51  seconds.  Bronsonf  measured  the 
rale  of  decay  of  the  emanation  directly  and  found  a  value  of 
54  seconds,  while  HahnJ,  using  the  flow  method,  found  a  value  of 
533  seconds.  The  half  value  period  will  be  taken  as  54  seconds. 
The  iictivity  due  to  the  emanation  alone  thus  practic^iUy  dis- 
appears ten  minutes  after  its  introduction  into  a  vessel.  The 
determination  of  the  decay  of  the  emanation  is  to  some  extent 
complicated  by  the  gradual  growth  of  active  deposit  during  the 
time  the  measurements  are  in  progress. 

The   period   of  decay  of  the   actinium   emanation  was   first 
measured  by  the  flow  method  by  Debierne§,  who  found  a  value  of 
3*9  seconds.     A  similar  number  was  found  by  Hahn  and  Sackur||, 
who  showed  that  the  emanation  from  GieseFs  "emanium"  and 
Debierne  s  "actinium"  had  identical  periods  of  decay.    The  disturb- 
ance of  measurements  in  a  given  time  due  to  the  production  of 
active  deposit  is  far  more  marked  with  actinium  than  with  thorium. 
The  emanation  practically  disappears  in  the  course  of  one  minute. 
The  rapidity  of  decay  can  be  simply  illustrated  by  blowing  a  puflf 
of  air  mixed  with  emanation  into  a  charged  electroscope.    There  is 
a  rapid  rate  of  movement  of  the  gold  leaf  for  the  first  few  seconds, 
but  after  about  30  seconds  the  movement  becomes  very  small. 

Radium  emanation.  It  was  early  recognised  that  the  radium 
emanation  lost  its  activity  slowly,  but  the  first  systematic 
measurements  of  its  decay  were  made  by  P.  CurielT  in  1902,  and 
Rutherford  and  Soddy**  in  1903.  On  account  of  the  use  made 
of  the  radium  emanation  in  many  types  of  radio-active  measure- 
ments, it  is  of  importance  to  know  its  rate  of  decay  with  the 
greatest  possible  accuracy.  The  methods  adopted  to  determine 
the  decay  may  be  conveniently  divided  into  two  types:  (1)  obser- 
vations of  the  decrease  of  activity  of  the  emanation  alone  or  of 
the  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  measured  by  the 

• 

*  Kossignol  and  GimiDgham,  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  107,  1904. 
t  BroDSon,  Amer.  Joum.  Sci,  19,  p.  185,  1905. 

*  HabD,  Jahrbuch.  d.  Radioakt.  2,  p.  233,  1905. 
§  Debierne,  C.  R.  136,  p.  446,  1903. 

Il  Hahn  and  Sackur,  Chem.  Her.  38,  p.  1943,  1905. 
t  P.  Curie,  C.  R.  135,  p.  857,  1902. 
•♦  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  6,  p.  445,  1903. 


352  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  [CH.! 

a  niys ;  (2)  decrease  of  activity  of  the  emanation  in  sealed  veaseb 
measured  by  the  ^  and  7  rays  or  the  7  rays  alone. 

As  an  example  of  the  first  method,  we  may  refer  to  th« 
measurements  of  Rutherford  and  Soddy.  A  quantity  of  emanatioa 
mixed  with  air  was  contained  in  a  small  gasometer  over  mercury. 
At  various  intervals,  a  definite  volume  of  the  air  plus  emanatioo 
was  removed  and  discharged  into  a  testing  vessel  where  the 
saturation  ionisation  current  due  to  it  was  measured.  In  order 
to  avoid  a  correction  for  the  rapid  increase  of  ionisation  due  to  the 
growth  of  the  active  deposit,  the  current  was  determined  at  a 
definite  interval  after  its  introduction.  Measured  in  this  way,  the 
activity  of  the  emanation  was  found  to  decrease  exponentially 
with  the  time  with  a  half  value  period  of  3*71  days. 

Sackur*  by  a  similar  method  found  the  period  386  days. 
Bumstead  and  Wheelerf  determined  the  decay  of  the  emanation 
in  equilibrium  with  its  products  in  a  sealed  vessel  by  measure- 
ment of  the  ionisation  current  and  found  the  period  3*88  day& 
RumelinJ  determined  the  decay  by  a  somewhat  different  method. 
Emanation  was  uniformly  distributed  between  two  glass  vessels  A 
and  B,  of  which  A  had  a  volume  small  compared  with  B,  The 
emanation  in  A  was  transferred  to  an  emanation  electroscope  and 
its  effects  measured.  The  emanation  in  B  was  allowed  to  decay 
several  weeks  and  then  transferred  to  the  electroscope.  Knowing 
the  ratio  of  the  volumes  of  A  and  B,  the  period  of  decay  can  be 
deduced  from  the  observed  effects  in  the  electroscope  in  the  two 
cases.     Rumelin  found  a  half  value  period  of  3'75  days. 

The  second  method  was  employed  initially  by  P.  Curie  {loc.  cit). 
The  emanation  was  contained  in  a  sealed  glass  tube  and  the  ionisa- 
tion due  to  the  more  penetrating  /8  and  7  rays  measured  between 
two  concentric  cylinders.  The  general  arrangement  of  the  apparatus 
is  clearly  seen  in  Fig.  88.  In  this  case,  the  radiation  of  the 
emanation  itself  is  not  measured  but  the  radiation  from  the  active 
deposit  produced  from  the  emanation  and  in  equilibrium  with  it. 
The  emanation  emits  only  a  rays  which  are  absorbed  by  the  walls 


•  Sackur,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem,  Ges.  88,  p.  1763,  1905. 

t  Bumstead  and  Wheeler,  Amer,  Joum.  Sci.  17,  p.  97,  1904. 

X  Rumelin,  Phil.  Mag.  14,  p.  550,  1907. 


RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  358 

e,  but  the  active  deposit  emits  /3  and  7  rays.  About. 
:  hours  after  the  in- 
of  the  emanation 
e,  the  active  deposit 
s  maximum  value, 
/  decays  at  exactly 
ute  aa  the  emanation 
luces  it.  By  measur- 
ituration  current  at 

the    decay    of    the 

itself  is  determined, 
y  this  method  found 
ition  decayed  expo- 
I'ith  a  period  of  3*99 

ul  series  of  measure- 
a    similar    method 

;  by  Mrae  Curie*  in  ^'«-  ^■ 

ne    activity    of    the 
measured  for  an  interval  of  30  to  40  days,  and  the 
found  to  be  accurately  exponential.     The  following 

s  the  values  of  X  found  in  the  various  experiments. 


Timeofobaenalioa 

x(dar)- 

460  hours 

■1799 

360      „ 

■1807 

700      „ 

■1793 

800      „ 

■1799 

1040      „ 

■1768 

Mean  value 

■1793 

)r  series  of  measurements  were  made  on  small  quantities 
urn  in  a  sealed  vessel.     The  results  are  given  in  the 
he  next  page, 
n  value  of 

1801  (day)-'  =  00751  (hour)"'  =  2^085  x  lO""  (sec.)"' 
id.    This  corresponds  to  a  half  value  period  of  385  days. 
*  Mme  Cnrie,  Le  Radium,  1,  p.  S3,  1910. 

23 


354 


RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES 


[CH 


Time  of  observation 

X  (day)- 

470  hours 

•1811 

450 

» 

•1807 

430 

w 

•1804 

430 

>» 

•1811 

680 

»> 

Mean  value 

•1807 

•1807 

Recently  the  writer*  made  a  determination  of  the  decay  ol 
the  emanation  over  an  interval  of  more  than  100  days  correspond- 
ing to  a  change  of  intensity  of  the  radiation  of  100  million  times. 

The  general  principle  of  the  method  was  as  follows.  The 
equilibrium  quantity  of  emanation  from  about  50  milligrams  ol 
radium  was  collected  in  a  small  sealed  tube.  The  7  rays  effect  ol 
this  emanation  (see  Appendix)  was  compared  for  several  weeks 
with  that  due  to  a  specimen  of  radium  salt  kept  as  a  standard 
In  this  way,  the  quantity  of  emanation  present  in  the  tube  at  anj 
time  could  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  emanation  ir 
equilibrium  with  a  known  quantity  of  radium.  The  emanation 
was  then  allowed  to  decay  to  about  1/10*  of  its  initial  value.  The 
emanation  remaining  in  the  tube  was  then  transferred  into  an 
"  emanation  electroscope  "  and  its  electric  effect  measured.  The 
amount  of  emanation  present  was  compared  with  that  derived 


Initial  quantity 
of  emanation 

Final  quantity 
of  emanation 

Interval 

X  (day)-i 

53*1  mg.  Ra. 
56-3       „ 
46-2        „ 
47-0        „ 
1       48-8        „ 

3-24x10-7  mg.  Ra. 
2-57  X  10-7       „ 
5-52x10-7        „ 
2-83x10-7       „ 

2-44x10-7       „ 

105-2  days 
106-3     „ 
101-2     „ 
105-15    „ 
106-2      „ 

0-1800 
0-1807 
0-1802 
0-1800 
0-1800 

Mean  value  =  0-1802 


from  a  standard  radium  solution  (see  Appendix),  which  containe 
a  known  fraction  of  the  radium  in  the  7  ray  standard.  Tl 
accuracy  of  the  standard  solution  which  had  been  prepared  fi^ 

♦  Rutherford,  Wien  Btr.  120,  p.  303,  1911. 


:X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES  355 

irears  before  was  verified  by  a  special  series  of  experiments.  The 
:^ults  of  a  number  of  experiments  are  included  in  the  above 
liable. 

The  decay  constant  \  is  deduced  on  the  assumption  that  the 
emanation  decays  exponentially  over  the  whole  interval  of  more 
:han  100  days  corresponding  to  a  change  of  concentration  in  the 
■atio  of  about  1  to  200  millions.  An  error  of  10  per  cent,  in  the 
neasurement  of  the  quantity  of  emanation  only  leads  to  an  error 
>f  about  1/2  per  cent,  in  the  value  of  \. 

The  mean  value  \  =  0*1802  (day)"^  =  2-085  x  10-«  (sec.)"^  corre- 
sponds to  a  half  value  period  of  3'846  days  or  to  the  nearest 
Bgure  3'85  days.  This  number  is  in  excellent  agreement  with 
that  deduced  by  Mme  Curie  by  different  methods. 

The  measurements  as  a  whole  thus  indicate  that  the  decay  of 
the  emanation  follows  accurately  an  exponential  law  over  an 
enormous  range.  The  period  of  decay  of  the  emanation  is  unin- 
fluenced by  the  concenti^ation,  indicating  that  its  rate  of  transfor- 
mation is  not  aflfected  by  the  bombardment  of  its  own  radiations. 
This  is  shown  by  the  independence  of  the  rate  of  decay  with  the 
quantity  of  emanation  over  a  very  wide  range.  In  order  to  test 
this  point  definitely,  the  writer  {loc.  cit)  compared  the  7  ray  effect 
of  nearly  pure  emanation  in  equilibrium,  forced  under  pressure 
into  a  small  capillary,  with  the  7  ray  effect  when  the  same 
quantity  was  allowed  to  expand  to  a  volume  2000  times  greater. 
Allowing  for  the  decay  of  activity  in  the  few  hours  between  the 
measurements,  no  appreciable  change  of  activity  could  be  de- 
tected. 

P.  Curie  early  showed  that  the  decay  of  the  emanation  was 
unaffected  by  variation  of  temperature  between  450°  C.  and  the 
temperature  —  186°  C.  of  liquid  air.  The  writer  (loc.  cit.)  using  a 
balance  method  has  been  unable  to  detect  any  change  of  decay  of 
the  emanation  between  ordinary  temperature  and  that  of  liquid 
air.  In  such  experiments,  it  is  essential  to  enclose  the  emanation 
in  very  small  tubes,  for  otherwise  the  disturbance  due  to  change 
of  distribution  alone  may  produce  a  marked  disturbance  of,  the 
balance. 

Several  observers  have  noted  apparent  slight  irregularities  in 
:he  decay  of  the  emanation  for  the  first  two  days  after  separation. 

23—2 


356 


RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES 


[CE 


No  definite  evidence,  however,  of  a  real  change  of  period  has  been 
obtained. 

The  value  of  X  for  the  emanation  thus  appears  to  be  a  definite 
and  characteristic  constant,  which  is  independent  of  physical  and 
chemical  conditions.  As  P.  Curie  suggested,  the  decay  of  the 
radium  emanation  could  be  employed  to  fix  a  standard  of  time 
quite  independent  of  all  other  units  adopted  in  Physics. 

The  decay  constants  of  the  three  emanations  are  compared  in 
the  following  table.  The  average  life  T  of  an  atom  is  expressed 
by  T=  1/X.    (See  Section  157.) 


Emanations 

Half-value 
period 

Average 
Ufe 

Decay  constant 
\ 

Time  taken 

to  decay  to 

1/100  of 

initial  valae 

Actinium 

Thorium 

Radium 

3*9  sees. 
64     „ 
3-85  days 

5*6  sees. 
78     „ 
5*66  days 

•178  (sec.) -1 
•0128    „ 
2'085xlO-«„ 
7-51  X  10-3  (hr.)-i 
•1800  (day)-i 

26  86G& 

6  minutes 
25-6  days 

From  considerations  advanced  in  the  last  chapter,  the  emana- 
tions are  to  be  regarded  as  distinct  types  of  radio-active  matter 
of  comparatively  short  life,  which  are  undergoing  spontaneous 
transformation.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  emanations  ai^ 
distinct  elements  with  characteristic  physical  properties.  As  fitf 
as  observation  has  gone,  the  three  emanations  behave  as  chemi- 
cally inert  gases,  and  in  this  respect  resemble  the  well-known 
helium-argon  group.  The  differences  in  stability  of  the  atoms  of 
the  three  emanations  are  very  marked  Taking  the  half  value 
period  as  a  measure  of  stability,  it  is  seen  that  the  emanation  of 
radium  is  about  85,000  times  more  stable  than  that  of  actinium. 


I 


! 


132.  Radiations  from  the  emanations.  Special  methods 
are  necessary  to  examine  the  nature  of  the  radiations  from  the 
emanations,  for  the  radiations  arise  from  the  volume  of  the  gas 
in  which  the  emanations  are  distributed.  Some  experiments  to 
examine  the  radiations  from  the  thorium  emanation  were  made 
by  the  writer  in  the  following  way. 


IX]  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  357 

A  highly  emanating  thorium  compound  wrapped  in  paper  was 
placed  inside  a  lead  box  B  about  1  cm.  deep,  shown  in  Fig.  89. 

An     opening     was     cut     in     the  ^  To  Electrometer 

top  of  the  box,  over  which  a 
very  thin  sheet  of  mica  was 
waxed.     The  emanation  rapidly  ^Mica 


diffused  through  the  paper  into         ^         Emanntim        j^  \ 
the  vessel,  and  after  ten  minutes  B  "  ^''^ 

reached  a  maximum.    The  pene-  ^^' 

trating  power  of  the  radiation  from  the  emanation  which  passed 
through  the  thin  mica  window  was  examined  by  the  electrical 
method  in  the  usual  way  by  adding  screens  of  thin  aluminium 
foil.  The  decrease  of  the  current  with  thickness  showed  that  only 
a  rays  were  emitted.  By  a  similar  method,  it  can  be  shown  that 
the  emanation  of  actinium  emits  only  a  rays.  In  the  latter  case, 
it  is  necessary  to  take  the  observations  rapidly,  for  the  active 
deposit  derived  from  the  emanation  increases  quickly  in  amount 
and  the  radiations  from  it  soon  become  relatively  important.  The 
emission  of  a  rays  can  also  be  conveniently  examined  by  a  similar 
arrangement  using  the  scintillation  method,  and  in  this  way  the 
ranges  of  the  a  particles  from  the  emanations  have  been  measured. 
The  radium  emanation  also  emits  only  a  rays.  The  absence  of  fi 
and  y  rays  from  the  radium  emanation  itself  can  be  proved  very 
conclusively  by  a  simple  experiment.  The  emanation  freed  from 
active  deposit  is  rapidly  introduced  into  a  thin-walled  glass  tube 
which  stops  the  a  rays  but  allows  the  /9  rays  to  penetrate.  No 
effect  due  to  yS  rays  and  7  rays  is  initially  observed.  The  appear- 
ance of  ff  and  7  rays  from  the  tube  later  is  not  due  to  the 
emanation  itself,  but  to  the  active  deposit  derived  from  it. 

We  have  already  referred  in  Section  75  to  the  emission  of  two 
«  particles  at  nearly  the  same  time  from  the  emanation  both  of 
thorium  and  of  actinium.  Geiger*  has  observed  that  the  actinium 
emanation  under  ordinary  conditions  emits  two  sets  of  a  particles 
of  different  range  A  similar  result  is  observed  for  thorium,  but 
^he  diflference  of  range  is  not  so  marked.  This  peculiarity  is 
due  to  the  production  from  the  emanation  of  another  substance 
^Wch  has  a  very  short  life,  and  which  is  transformed  with  the 

♦  Geiger,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  201,  1911. 


358  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  [^ 

expulsion  of  an  a  particle.     If  the  emanation  is  exposed 
strong    electric    field,   the    new  product   is    to   a  large    e: 
removed  from  the  gas  to  the  negative  electrode  as  fast  as  it 
formed.    This  question  will  be  discussed  in  detail  later  in 
147. 

133.  Effect  of  conditions  on  the  escape  of  thorium 
actinium  emanations.  The  amount  of  emanation  to  be  ob 
from  a  thorium  compound,  for  example,  the  oxide  or  hydro 
depends  on  the  thickness  of  the  layer.  If  the  thorium  o: 
enveloped  in  paper  is  placed  in  a  closed  vessel,  the  ionisal 
current  in  the  vessel  is  due  mainly  to  the  emanation,  w 
diffuses  through  the  paper,  for  the  a  rays  emitted  by  the  thorii 
are  completely  absorbed  by  the  paper.  It  is  then  found  that  ^ 
amount  of  emanation  increases  at  first  with  the  thickness  of  t) 
layer  of  thorium,  but  finally  reaches  a  limiting  value,  when  tl. 
emanation  takes  so  1^^< .;  ,o  diffuse  from  the  lower  layers  into  t) 
gas  that  it  has  pracucally  decayed  in  transit.  The  liberation 
emanation  from  a  thorium  compound  is  not  influenced  by  ^ 
nature  of  the  gas  surrounding  it,  and  appears  to  be  independe) 
of  the  pressure  over  a  wide  range. 

The  compounds  of  thorium  in  the  solid  state  vary  widely  | 
the  amount  of  emanation  they  emit  under  ordinary  conditio^ 
It  is  convenient  to  use  the  term  emanating  power  to  express  t^ 
amount  of  emanation  given  off  per  second  by  one  gram  of  t|| 
compound.  Since,  however,  we  have  no  direct  means  of  detei 
mining  the  volume  of  emanation  present,  all  measurements 
emanating  power  are  of  necessity  comparative.  In  most  cases, 
is  convenient  to  take  a  given  weight  of  a  thorium  compound,  b 
under  conditions  as  nearly  as  possible  constant,  and  to  com 
the  amount  of  emanation  emitted  by  the  compound  under  exan]| 
nation  with  this  standard.  , 

In  this  way  comparisons  of  the  emanating  power  of  thoriui 
compounds  have  been  made  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy*,  using  I 
apparatus  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  87. 

It  was  found  that  thorium  compounds  varied  enormously 

♦  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Tram.  Chem.  Soc,  81,  p.  321,  1902;  Phil.  Mag. 
p.  370,  1902. 


RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  359 

kting  power,  although  the   relative   proportion  of  thorium 
It  in  the  compound  was  not  very  diflferent.     For  example, 
[emanating  power  of  thorium  hydroxide  was  generally  3  to  4 
greater  than  that  of  ordinary  thorium  oxide,  obtained  from 
manufacturer.     Thorium  nitrate,  in  the  solid  state,  had  only 
of  the  emanating  power  of  ordinary  thorium  oxide,  while 
Ltions  of  the  carbonate  were  found  to  show  yride  differences, 
iding  upon  slight  variations  in  the  method  of  preparation, 
emanating  power  of  diflFerent  compounds   of  thorium  and 
im    is    much    affected   by   the   alteration   of   chemical   and 
ical  conditions.     In  this  respect  the  emanating  power,  which 
measure  of  the  rate  of  escape  of  the  emanation  into  the 
mnding  gas,  must  not  be  confused  with  the  rate  of  decay  of 
activity  of  the  emanations  themselves,  which  is  unaffected  by 
lemal  conditions. 

Dorn  (loc.  dt.)  first  observed  that  the  emanating  power  of 
^um  and  radium  compounds  was  mu  fected  by  moisture. 
a  fuller  investigation  of  this  point  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy, 
^as  found  that  the  emanating  power  of  thorium  oxide  is  from 
>  to  three  times  greater  in  a  moist  than  in  a  dry  gas. 
The  rate  of  escape  of  emanation  is  much  increased  by  dissolv- 
the  compound  and  by  sending  a  current  of  air  through  the 
ition.  For  example,  thorium  nitrate,  when  in  solution  in  water 
an  emanating  power  600  to  800  times  greater  than  in  the 
d  state. 

Actinium  is  usually  separated  with  the  rare  earths  lanthanum 
.  cerium,  and  the  oxides  and  oxalates  of  these  substances  are 
y  porous  and  allow  the  emanation  in  the  compound  to  diffuse 
idly  into  the  surrounding  gas.  The  marked  emanating  power 
actinium  preparations  compared  with  that  of  radium  is  all  the 
fe  remarkable  when  we  consider  the  very  short  life  of  the 
dnium  emanation ;  for  obviously  a  slight  retardation  in  the  rate 
ttififusion  of  the  emanation  from  the  compound  would  enormously 
Puce  its  emanating  power. 

i  It  is  of  special  interest  to  consider  the  eflfect  of  temperature 
I  the  emanating  power  of  thorium  compounds.  A  temperature 
[a  red  heat  increases  the  emanating  power  of  ordinary  thorium 
ode  three  or  four  times.     If  the  temperature  is  kept  constant, 


360  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [CH. 

the  emanation   continues   to   escape   at   its   increased   rate  but 
returns  to  its  original  value  on  cooling.     If,  however,  the  com- 
pound is  heated  for  some  time  at  a  white  heat,  the  emanating 
power  is  diminished,  and  on  cooling  is  only  ten  per  cent,  of  its 
original  value.    Rutherford  and  Soddy  showed  that  the  emanating 
power  of  the  oxide  decreased  rapidly  with  the  lowering  of  tem- 
perature, and  was  only  about  ten  per  cent,  of  its  ordinary  value  at 
the  temperature  of  solid  carbonic  acid.     It  regains  its  original 
value  when  the  cooling  agent  is  removed.     A  variation  of  tem- 
perature   from    —  80°  C.    to   about   800°  C.    thus    increases   the 
emanating  power  by  about  forty  times,  and  between  these  ranges 
of  temperature  the  effects  of  heating  and  cooling  can  be  repeated 
without  permanent  change  in  the  emanating  j)ower.     We  have 
seen  that  the  emanating  power  of  thorium  oxide  is  greatly  reduced 
by  raising  the  temperature  to  a  white  heat.     This  is  due  to  a 
physiciil  alteration  of  the  oxide,  which  tends  to  retard  the  escape 
of  the  emanation.     The  experimental  evidence  indicates  that  in 
all  thorium  compounds  the  rate  of  production  of  emanation  is 
constant  for  equal  weights  of  thorium  in  equilibrium,  and  that  the 
differences  in  the  escape  of  emanation  depend  purely  on  physical 
conditions.     For  example,  we  have  seen  that  thorium  nitrate  in 
a  solid  state  allows  verj'  little  emanation  to  escape.     On  the  other 
hand,  the  emanation  is  readily  removed  by  bubbling  air  through 
the  solution.     If  the  rate  of  production  of  the  emanation  is  the 
same  in  the  solid  as  in  solution,  it  is  evident  that  the  emanatioD 
which  does  not  escape  in  the  solid  state  must  be  stored  up  or 
occluded  in  the  mass  of  the  compound.     This  was  simply  illus- 
trated  by  an   experiment.     Some   thorium   nitrate  was  rapidly 
dissolved   by  placing  it  in   hot  water   and    the   emanation   was 
swiftly  removed  by  a  current  of  air  through  the  solution,  and  the 
amount  tested  in  an  apparatus  similar  to  that  in  Fig.  87.     The 
vessel  containing  the  solution  was  then  closed  and  the  emanation 
again  collected  in  the  solution  and  in  the  space  above  it.     After 
about  ten  minutes,  when  a  state  of  equilibrium  was  reached,  the 
emanation  was  again  swept  out  rapidly  into  the  testing  vessel. 
The  effects  were  found  to  be  equal  in  the  two  cases,  showing  that 
the  amount  of  occluded  emanation  in  the  solid  was  equal  to  the 
equilibrium  amount  in  the  state  of  solution.    It  is  thus  clear  that 


C\  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  361 

he  emanation. is  produced  at  the  same  rate  in  the  solid  as  in  the 
3lution. 

134.  Elfoct  of  conditions  on  escape  of  radium  emana- 
ion.  We  have  seen  that  ordinary  radium  compounds  allow  very 
ittle  emanation  to  escape  at  ordinary  temperatures,  so  that  the 
jreater  part  must  be  occluded  in  the  radium  compound.  This 
Kjcluded  emanation  can  be  completely  liberated  by  heating  the 
■adium  compound  to  a  state  of  fusion,  or  by  dissolving  it.  Under 
mch  conditions,  practically  the  whole  of  the  emanation  can  be 
removed  either  by  an  aspiration  method  or  by  means  of  a  pump. 
In  consequence  of  the  slow  rate  of  decay  of  the  emanation,  it  takes 
nearly  a  month  before  the  amount  of  emanation  again  reaches  its 
equilibrium  value. 

On  account  of  the  importance  of  the  radium  emanation  in 
radio-active  measurements,  it  is  desirable  to  consider  somewhat  in 
detail  the  eflFect  of  temperature  and  other  conditions  on  the  escape 
of  the  emanation.  In  the  first  place,  it  should  be  noted  that  most 
of  the  radium  compounds  allow  only  a  few  per  cent,  of  the  equi- 
librium amount  of  emanation  to  escape.  This  also  holds  true  for 
preparations  of  radiferous  barium.  We  have  seen  that  the  fraction 
of  emanation  escaping  from  the  radium  is  affected  to  some  extent 
by  moisture  and  by  the  physical  state  of  the  compound.  A 
radium  compound  when  spread  in  a  thin  film  loses  a  much 
greater  proportion  of  its  emanation  than  when  spread  in  a  thick 
layer.  The  whole  of  the  occluded  emanation  can  be  removed  by 
fusion  or  solution.  Mme  Curie  has  shown  that  the  quantities 
of  emanation  obtained  by  the  two  methods  are  identical  for  equal 
weights  of  radium. 

The  effect  of  temperature  on  the  rate  of  escape  of  the  radium 
emanation  has  been  closely  investigated  by  Kolowrat*.  The 
quantitative  effects  observed  depend  to  a  considerable  extent 
upon  the  compound  employed,  and  on  its  state  of  purity.  In 
general,  it  is  found  that  the  amount  of  emanation  released 
Jepends  not  only  on  the  temperature  to  which  it  is  exposed  but 
ilso  on  the  time  of  heating.  The  anaount  released  at  a  given 
emperature   increases  at  first   with    the   time,  but  reaches    a 

*  Kolowrat,  Le  Radium,  4,  p.  317,  1907;  6,  p.  321,  1909;  7,  p.  266,  1910. 


362  BADIO-ACnVK  OASES  [CK 

practical  limit  after  three  or  four  honre  heating.  In  the  cua 
of  tadium  chloride  which  has  been  previously  melted,  the  effect  if 
temperature  does  not  become  marked  until  above  300°  or  400*. 
It  then  increases  rapidly  to  about  830°.  The  results  are  shon 
graphically  in  Fig.  90,  where  the  ordinates  represent  the  fractici 
of  the  emanation  released  when  the  compound  is  raised  rapidly  ti 
a  fixed  temperature  and  kept  constant  for  3'75  hours.  The  Ion 
of  emanation  is  comparatively  small  up  to  a  temperature  <i 
about  300°.  It  then  increases  rapidly  to  £  at  830°.  Above  thii 
temperature,  the  loss  of  emanation  diminishes  again  to  a  minimi 


Tenptraturt 
Fig.  90. 

B"  about  920°,  and  then  increases  again  to  the  temperature  of 
fusion,  about  1000°,  when  the  whole  of  the  emanation  is  liberated 
There  is  evidence  that  the  fall  of  the  curve  to  a  minimum  is 
connected  with  an  actual  change  of  the  physical  state  of  the 
compound.  Kolowrat  also  observed  the  interesting  point  that  the 
loss  of  emanation  by  heating  to  a  definite  temperature  for  a  fixed 
interval  of  time  is,  under  certain  conditions,  independent  of  the 
total  amount  of  the  emanation  stored  up  in  the  compound. 
Suppose,  for  example,  the  emanation  had  been  accumulating  in 
a  radium  compound  in  the  cold  for  an  interval  T.     On  heating  fur 


IX]  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  363 

a  definite  interval,  e,g.  from  2  to  4  hours,  a  certain  quantity  of 
emanation  is  released.  On  allowing  the  emanation  to  accumulate 
for  a  second  interval  T  and  then  heating  under  the  same  con- 
ditions as  before,  the  same  quantity  of  emanation  is  again  obtained, 
although  the  actual  amount  stored  in  the  compound  at  the  time 
of  the  second  heating  is  much  greater  than  in  the  first  experiment. 
In  explanation  of  these  and  other  results  of  heating,  Kolowrat 
suggests  that  the  atoms  of  emanation  formed  in  the  radium 
preparation  are  not  all  held  with  the  same  degree  of  fixity.  On 
heating  the  radium  to  a  definite  temperature,  all  those  atoms  of 
emanation  which  are  lightly  held  in  position  are  released  and 
these  constitute  a  definite  fraction  of  the  atoms  produced.  The 
residue  of  the  atoms  are  so  strongly  held  that  they  cannot  be 
released  until  the  temperature  is  increased  further.  If  the 
emanation  again  accumulates  in  the  cold,  as  in  the  case  described 
above,  a  second  heating  under  identical  conditions  releases  the 
same  definite  fraction  of  the  emanation  accumulated  in  the 
interval,  but  has  no  efifect  on  the  part  which  previously  remained 
with  the  radium  after  the  first  heating.  In  most  of  the  experi- 
ments of  Kolowrat  the  effects  of  temperature  were  studied  on  a 
radium  compound  which  had  been  initially  fused,  for  in  this  way 
it  was  found  possible  to  bring  the  compound  back  to  the  same 
physical  conditions  for  a  repetition  of  experiments. 

It  is  of  importance  to  note  that  radium  chloride  with  its  water 
of  crystallisation  loses  a  greater  part  of  its  emanation  at  a 
temperature  considerably  below  that  of  fusion.  When  once  the 
water  of  crystallisation  is  removed,  a  much  higher  temperature  at 
the  second  heating  is  required  to  drive  oflf  all  the  emanation.  In 
this  case,  there  is  a  considerable  change  in  the  physical  and 
chemical  state  of  the  chloride  after  heating. 

There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  evidence  that  the  emanation 
is  held  in  chemical  combination  with  the  radium,  for  neither 
radium  nor  radiferous  barium  are  able  to  absorb  again  appreciably 
the  emanation  which  has  once  been  released.  The  general  results 
indicate  that  radium  compounds  are  very  impervious  to  the  escape 
of  emanation,  and  that  the  liberation  of  emanation  is  due  mainly 
to  the  process  of  diffusion,  which  is  much  facilitated  by  rise  of 
temperature.    If  the  process  of  escape  is  one  of  pure  diffusion,  it  is 


364  RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES  [( 

to  be  expected  that  the  amount  of  emanation  released  at  a  gii 
temperature  should  be  increased  to  some  extent  by  increasing 
fineness  of  division  of  the  material  so  as  to  expose  a  large  si 
for  the  emanation  to  escape.     In  the  case  of  thin  films,  anotl 
factor  assists  the  loss  of  emanation.    The  atom  of  emanation  is 
in  rapid  motion  due  to  the  recoil  produced  by  the  a  partic 
expelled  from  the  parent  radium  atom.     The  velocity  thus 
quired  is  sufficient  for  some  of  the  atoms  of  emanation  to 
fi"om  the  film.     This  effect  should  be  more  marked  the  thii 
the  layer  of  radio-active  matter. 

From  the  practical  point  of  view,  the  most  satisfactory  raethc 
of  obtaining  the  emanation  from  radium  is  to  keep  the  radium  ii 
solution,  and  to  remove  by  means  of  a  mercury  pump  the  emaMrj 
tion,  together  with  the  hydrogen  and  oxygen  formed  from  thftj 
water  by  the  radiations.     A  description  of  the  methods  employed' 
for  this  purpose  is  given  later  in  Chapter  XIII. 

136.  Condensation  of  the  emanation.  The  proof  that 
the  emanations  could  be  condensed  by  the  action  of  extreme  cold 
was  a  step  of  great  importance  in  the  development  of  our  know- 
ledge of  their  nature,  for  it  afforded  a  definite  indication  that  the 
emanations  were  material  and  behaved  like  ordinary  gases.  During 
an  investigation  of  the  effect  of  physical  and  chemical  agencies  on 
the  thorium  and  radium  emanations,  Rutherford  and  Soddy  found 
that  the  emanations  passed  unchanged  in  amount  through  s 
white-hot  platinum  tube  and  through  a  tube  cooled  to  the  tem- 
perature of  solid  carbon  dioxide.  In  later  experiments  the  effects 
of  still  lower  temperatures  were  examined,  and  it  was  then  found 
that  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  both  thorium  and  radium 
emanations  were  condensed*. 

If  either  emanation  is  conveyed  by  a  slow  stream  of  hydrogen, 
oxygen,  or  air  through  a  metal  spiral  immersed  in  liquid  air,  and 
placed  in  connection  with  a  testing  vessel  as  in  Fig.  87,  only  ft 
small  fraction  of  the  emanation  escapes  in  the  issuing  gas.  When 
the  liquid  air  is  removed  and  the  spiral  plunged  into  cotton-wool 
several  minutes  elapse  before  any  deflection  of  the  electrometer 
needle  is  observed,  and  then  the  condensed  emanation  volatilizes 

*  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Pkil,  Mag,  6,  p.  561,  1908. 


BADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  363 

y,  and  the  movement  of  the  electrometer  needle  is  veiy 
D,  especially  in  the  case  of  radium.  With  a  fairly  large 
Qt  of  radium  emanation,  under  the  conditions  mentioned,  a 
few  seconds  elapse  after  the  first  sign  of  movement  hefore 
lectrometer  needle  indicates  a  deflection  of  several  hundred 
)QS  per  second.  It  is  not  necessary  in  either  case  that  the 
iting  compound  should  be  retained  in  the  gas  stream.  After 
nanation  is  condensed  in  the  spiral,  the  thorium  or  radium 
)Hnd  may  be  removed  and  the  gas  stream  sent  directly 
^he  spiral.     But  in  the  case  of  thorium,  under  these  condi- 

the  effects  observed  are  naturally  snmll  owing  to  the  rapid 
f  the  activity  of  the  emanation  with  time,  which  proceeds  at 
3.me  rate  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  as  at  ordinary 
>rature8. 

a  lai^e  amount  of  radium  emanation  is  condensed  in  a  glass 
>G,  the  progress  of  the  condensation  can  be  followed  by  the 
•y  means  of  the  phosphorescence  which  the  radiations  excite 
i  glass.  If  the  ends  of  the  tube  are  sealed  and  the  tempera- 
lUowed  to  rise,  the  glow  diffuses  uniformly  throughout  the 

and  can  be  concentrated  at  any  point  to  some  extent  by 
cooling  of  the  tube  with  liquid  air.  A  simple  experimental 
gement  to  illustrate  the  con- 
.tion  and  volatilization  of  the 
ation  and  some  of  its  charac- 
ic  properties  is  shown  in  Fig. 
The  emanation  obtained  from 
I'  milligrams  of  radium  salt 
olution  or  heating  is  con- 
^d  in  the  glass  U  tube  T 
irsed  in   liquid   air.     This    U 

is  then  put  into  connection 

a  larger  glass  tube  V,  in 
ipper  part  of  which  is  placed 
ce  of  zinc  sulphide  screen  Z, 
,n  the  lower  part  of  the  tube 


«e  of  the   mineral  willemite. 


Fig.  ! 


itop-cock  A  is  closed  and  the 

ibe  and  the  vessel    V  are  partially  exhausted  by  a  pump 


366  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [CI. 

through  the  stop-cock  B,  This  lowering  of  the  pressure  cauaei 
a  more  rapid  diffusion  of  the  emanation  when  released.  The 
emanation  does  not  escape  if  the  tube  T  is  kept  immersed  ii 
liquid  air.  The  stop-cock  B  is  then  closed,  and  the  liquid  air 
removed.  No  luminosity  of  the  screen  or  the  willemite  in  the^ 
tube  V  is  observed  for  several  minutes,  until  the  temperature  of 
T  rises  above  the  point  of  volatilization  of  the  emanation.  The: 
emanation  is  then  rapidly  carried  into  the  vessel  F,  partly  \j 
expansion  of  the  gas  in  the  tube  T  with  rising  temperature,  anl 
partly  by  the  process  of  diffusion.  The  screen  Z  and  the  Mrillemite 
W  are  caused  to  phosphoresce  brilliantly  under  the  influence  di 
the  rays  from  the  emanation  surrounding  them.  ^ 

If  the  end  of  the  vessel  V  is  then  plunged  into  liquid  air,  the 
emanation  is  again  condensed  in  the  lower  end  of  the  tube,  and  the  .. 
willemite  phosphoresces  much  more  brightly  than  before.  This  i« 
not  due  to  an  increase  of  the  phosphorescence  of  willemite  at  the 
temperature  of  the  liquid  air,  but  to  the  effect  of  the  rays  from 
the  emanation  condensed  around  it.  At  the  same  time  the  lumin- 
osity of  the  zinc  sulphide  gradually  diminishes,  and  practicallj 
disappears  after  several  hours  if  the  end  of  the  tube  is  kept  in 
the  liquid  air.  If  the  tube  is  removed  from  the  liquid  air, 
the  emanation  again  volatilizes  and  lights  up  the  screen  Z.  The 
luminosity  of  the  willemite  returns  to  its  original  value  after  the 
lapse  of  several  hours.  This  slow  change  of  the  luminosity  of 
the  zinc  sulphide  screen  and  of  the  willemite  is  due  to  the  gradual 
decay  of  the  active  deposit  produced  by  the  emanation  on  the 
surface  of  all  bodies  exposed  to  its  action.  The  luminosity  of  the 
screen  is  thus  due  partly  to  the  radiation  from  the  emanation 
itself  and  partly  to  the  radiation  emitted  by  the  active  deposit 
As  soon  as  the  emanation  is  removed  from  the  upper  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  tube,  the  radiation  due  to  the  latter  cause  gradually 
diminishes  in  the  upper  and  increases  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tube. 

136.  Determination  of  the  temperature  of  condenft' 
tion.  A  detailed  investigation  was  made  by  Rutherford  and 
Soddy  (Zoc.  cit)  of  the  temperatures  at  which  condensation  and 
volatilization  commenced  for  the  two  emanations.  The  experi- 
mental arrangement  of  the  first  method  is  shown  clearly  in  Fig.  9i 


IX] 


RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES 


367 


A  slow  constant  stream  of  gas,  entering  at  A,  was  passed  through 
a  copper  spiral  8,  over  3  metres  in  length,  immersed  in  a  bath 
of  liquid  ethylene.  The  copper  spiral  was  made  to  act  as  its 
own  thermometer  by  determining  its  electrical  resistance.  The 
resistance  temperature  curve  was  obtained  by  observation  of  the 
resistances  at  0**,  the  boiling  point  of  liquid  ethylene  — 103'5°, 
the  solidification  point  of  ethylene  —  169**  and  in  liquid  air.  The 
resistance  of  the  spiral  was  deduced  from  the  readings  of  an 
accurately  calibrated  Weston  millivoltmeter,  with  a  constanii 
electric  current  through  the  spiral.  The  liquid  ethylene  was  kept 
vigorously  stirred  by  an  electric  motor,  and  was  cooled  to  any 
desired  temperature  by  surrounding  the  vessel  with  liquid  air. 


ManxH>ltmeter 


Ammeter 


To  Earth 


Pig.  92. 


The  general  method  employed  for  the  radium  emanation  was 
to  pass  a  suitable  amount  of  emanation,  mixed  with  the  gas  to  be 
used,  from  the  gas  holder  B  into  the  spiral,  cooled  below  the 
temperature  of  condensation.  After  the  emanation  was  condensed 
in  the  spiral,  a  current  of  electrolytic  hydrogen  or  oxygen  was 
passed  through  the  spiral.  The  temperature  was  allowed  to 
rise  gradually,  and  was  noted  at  the  instant  when  a  deflection  of 
the  electrometer,  due  to  the  presence  of  emanation  in  the  testing 
vessel  T,  was  observed.  The  resistance,  subject  to  a  slight  correc- 
tion due  to  the  time  taken  for  the  emanation  to  be  carried  into 


368 


R^DIO-ACTIYE  QASE8 


[CE 


the  testing  vessel,  gave  the  temperature  at  which  some  of  the 
emanation  commenced  to  volatilize.  The  ionisation  current  in 
the  testing  vessel  rose  rapidly  to  a  maximum  value,  showing  that, 
for  a  small  increase  of  temperature,  the  whole  of  the  radium 
emanation  was  volatilized.  The  following  table  gives  an  illustratioe 
of  the  results  obtained  for  a  current  of  hydrogen  of  1'38  cubk 
centimetres  per  second. 


Temperature 

Divisions  per  second 
of  the  electrometer 

-160** 
-156'' 
- 154"  -3 
- 153"  -8 
-152" -5 

0 

0 

1 

21 

24 

The  following  table  shows  the  results  obtained  for  different 
currents  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen. 


Current  of  Gas 

Ti 

Ti 

Hydrogen   ... 

•25  CO.  per  sec. 

-151-3 

-150 

»» 

•32       „         „ 

- 153-7 

-151 

» 

•92       „        „ 

-152 

-151 

»»          ... 

1-38       „ 

-154 

-153 

>»          ••• 

2-3         „         „ 

-162-5 

-162 

Oxygen 

•34       „         „ 

- 152-5 

-151-5     ' 

» 

•58        „ 

-155 

-153 

The  temperature  Tj  in  the  above  table  gives  the  temperatun 
of  initial  volatilization,  T,  the  temperature  for  which  hatf  of  th« 
condensed  emanation  has  been  released.  For  slow  currents  c 
hydrogen  and  oxygen,  the  values  of  Ti  and  T^  are  in  good  agree 
ment.  For  a  stream  of  gas  as  rapid  as  2*3  cubic  centimetres  pe 
second  the  value  of  Ti  is  much  lower.  Such  a  result  is  to  I 
expected ;  for,  in  too  rapid  a  stream,  the  gas  is  not  cooled  to  tl 
temperature  of  the  spiral,  and,  in  consequence,  the  inside  surfai 
of  the  spiral  is  above  the  mean  temperature,  and  some  of  tl 
emanation  escapes  at  a  temperature  apparently  much  lower.    ] 


IX] 


RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES 


369 


"the  case  of  oxygen,  this  eflfect  appears  for  a  gas  stream  of  0*58  cubic 
centimetres  per  second. 

In  the  experiments  on  the  thorium  emanation,  on  account  of 
^he  rapid  loss  of  activity,  a  slightly  diflferent  method  was  neces- 
sary. The  steady  stream  of  gas  was  passed  over  the  thorium 
oompound,  and  the  temperature  was  observed  at  the  instant  when 
an  appreciable  movement  of  the  electrometer  appeared.  This  gave 
t;he  temperature  at  which  a  small  fraction  of  the  thorium  emanation 
escaped  condensation,  and  not  the  value  T,  observed  for  the  radium 
emanation,  which  gave  the  temperature  for  which  a  small  fraction 
of  the  previously  condensed  emanation  was  volatilized. 

The  following  table  illustrates  the  results  obtained. 


i 

Current  of  Gas 

Temperature 

Hydrogen 
Oxjgen 

•71  c.c.  {yer  sec. 

1  -38       „         „ 
•58        „        „ 

-  ISS**  C. 
-159^0. 
- 155**  C. 

On  comparing  these  results  with  the  values  obtained  for  the 
radium  emanation,  it  will  be  observed  that  with  equal  gas  streams 
the  temperatures  are  nearly  the  same. 

A  closer  examination  of  the  thorium  emanation  showed,  how- 
ever, that  this  apparent  agreement  was  only  accidental,  and  that 
there  was,  in  reality,  a  very  marked  diflference  in  the  effect  of  tem- 
perature on  the  two  emanations.  It  was  found  experimentally  that 
the  radium  emanation  was  condensed  very  near  the  temperature 
^t  which  volatilization  commenced,  and  that  the  points  of  conden- 
sation and  volatilization  were  defined  fairly  sharply. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  thorium  emanation  required  a  range 
of  over  30°  C.  after  condensation  had  started  in  order  to  ensure 
complete  condensation.  Fig.  93  is  an  example  of  the  results 
obtained  with  a  steady  gas  stream  of  1'38  c.c.  of  oxygen  per  sec. 
The  ordinates  represent  the  percentage  proportion  of  the  emana- 
tion uncondensed  at  diflTerent  temperatures.  It  will  be  observed 
that  condensation  commences  about  -  120°,  and  that  very  little  of 
the  emanation  escapes  condensation  at  —  155°  C. 

R.  B.-A.  24 


370 


BADIO-ACTIVE  OASES 


[ 


To  investigate  this  diflFerence  in  behaviour  of  the  two  ema 
tions,  a  static  method  was  employed,  which  allowed  an  examinat 
of  the  two  emanations  to  be  made  under  comparable  conditio 
The  emanation,  mixed  with  a  small  amount  of  the  gas  to  be  us 
was  introduced  into  the  cool  spiral,  which  had  been  exhaust 
previously  by  means  of  a  mercury  pump.  The  amount  of  emar 
tion  remaining  uncondensed  after  definite  intervals  was  rapic 
removed  by  means  of  the  pump,  and  was  carried  with  a  consui 
auxiliary  stream  of  gas  into  the  testing  vessel. 


100 


-100 


-110 


-150 


•120  -IdO  -140 

Tnupcrtiturr  Crntiifradf 

Fig.  93. 


Tested  in  this  way,  it  was  found  that  the  volatilization  poi 
of  the  radium  emanation  was  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  ( 
tained  by  the  blowing  method,  viz.  -  150'  C.  With  thorium, 
the  other  hand,  the  condensation  started  at  about  —  120^  C,  a 
as  in  the  blowing  method,  continued  over  a  range  of  about  30' 
The  proportion  of  the  emanation  condensed  at  any  temperati 
was  found  to  depend  on  a  variety  of  conditions,  although  the  po 
at  which  condensation  commenced,  viz.  —120'  C,  was  about 
same  in  each  case.  It  depended  on  the  pressure  and  nature  of 
gas,  on  the  concenbmtion  of  the  emanation,  and  on  the  time 


X]  BADIO- ACTIVE  GASES  371 

«rhich  it  was  left  in  the  spiral.  For  a  given  temperature  a  greater 
proportion  of  the  emanation  was  condensed,  the  lower  the  pressure 
and  the  loDger  the  time  it  was  left  in  the  spiral.  Under  the 
8ame  conditions,  the  emanation  was  condensed  more  rapidly  in 
hydrogen  than  in  oxygen. 

The  condensation  of  the  actinium  emanation  was  first  noted  by 
Goldstein*  and  later  investigated  in  more  detail  by  Henriotf  and 
KinoshitaJ.  In  Henriot's  experiment,  an  actinium  preparation 
was  placed  at  one  end  of  a  glass  tube  in  series  with  several 
U  tubes  and  a  screen  of  zinc  sulphide  was  placed  at  the  far  end. 
The  whole  was  exhausted  so  that  the  emanation  diffused  rapidly 
through  the  tubes,  and  the  scintillations  produced  on  the  screen 
were  counted  with  the  aid  of  a  microscope.  The  U  tubes  were 
initially  cooled  to  a  low  temperature  measured  by  a  thermometer 
and  the  temperature  then  allowed  to  rise  slowly.  Scintillations 
were  first  observed  at  a  temperature  of  about  — 143''  C.  and 
increased  in  number  to  about  — 103°  C.  These  two  temperatures 
mark  the  limits  between  complete  and  initial  condensation. 

Kinoshita  employed  a  modification  of  the  second  method  used 
in  the  experiments  of  Rutherford  and  Soddy.  The  emanation 
mixed  with  a  gas  at  suitable  pressure  was  allowed  to  remain  a 
definite  time  in  the  condensation  spiral  and  was  then  rapidly 
removed  by  expansion  into  an  exhausted  electroscope,  where  its 
amount  was  measured.  He  found  that  the  emanations  of  thorium 
and  actinium  behaved  very  similarly.  The  temperature  of  complete 
condensation  in  both  cases  was  about  — 150*"  C,  and  the  emana- 
tions escaped  condensation  above  a  temperature  of  — 120°  C. 
Between  these  limits,  the  amount  condensed  depended  not  only 
on  the  temperature  but  on  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the  gas,  and 
the  time  allowed  for  condensation  in  the  spiral.  A  comparison  of 
the  condensation  of  the  emanations  of  thorium  and  actinium 
under  similar  conditions  indicated  that  the  former  condensed  at  a 
temperature  2°  or  3°  higher  than  the  latter. 

There  is  seen  to  be  a  striking  difference  between  the  pheno- 
nena  of  condensation  as  exhibited  by  the  radium  emanation  on 

♦  GolcUtein,  Ber.  d,  D.  Phys.  Ges'.  5,  p.  303,  1903. 
t  Henriot,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  41,  1908. 
t  Kinoshita,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  p.  121,  1908. 

24—2 


372  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [CH. 

the  one  hand  and  by  the  thorium  and  actinium  emanation  on  the 
other ;  for  the  former  appears  to  condense  and  volatilize  between 
much  narrower  limits  of  temperature  than  the  latter.  This 
difiference  in  behaviour  is  probably  due  to  the  wide  variation  in 
the  amount  of  matter  present  in  the  two  cases.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  in  the  experiments  described,  the  emanations 
were  present  in  the  gas  with  which  they  were  conveyed  in  exceed- 
ingly minute  proportion.  A  simple  calculation  shows  that  if  100 
a  particles  were  expelled  per  second  due  to  emanation,  it  would 
give  rise  in  air  to  an  electric  current  easily  measurable  by  an  electro- 
meter or  electroscope.  In  order  to  produce  an  equal  eflfect,  however, 
the  actual  number  of  atoms  of  the  three  emanations  present  is 
very  different.  On  the  theory  of  transformation  when  N  atoms  are 
present  \N  break  up  per  second.  In  order  to  give  rise  to  100 
a  particles  per  second,  the  number  of  atoms  of  emanation  present 
of  radium,  thorium,  and  actinium  is  4-3  x  10*,  7*8  x  10*,  5*62  x  10*. 
respectively.  Consequently  for  equal  electrical  effects,  the  radium 
emanation  must  be  present  in  about  5000  times  greater  quantity 
than  that  of  thorium.  The  difference  in  behaviour  during  conden- 
sation is  probably  to  be  ascribed  to  this  cause.  The  probability  of 
the  molecules  coming  into  each  other's  sphere  of  influence  will 
increase  very  rapidly  as  the  concentration  of  the  molecules  increases, 
and,  in  the  case  of  the  radium  emanation,  once  the  temperature  of 
condensation  is  attained,  all  but  a  small  proportion  of  the  total 
number  of  molecules  present  will  condense  in  a  very  short  time. 
In  the  case  of  the  thorium  emanation,  however,  the  temperature 
might  be  far  below  that  of  condensation,  and  yet  a  considerable 
portion  remains  uncondensed  for  comparatively  long  intervals.  On 
this  view  the  experimental  results  obtained  might  reasonably  be 
expected.  A  greater  proportion  of  emanation  condenses  the  longei 
the  time  allowed  for  condensation  under  the  same  conditions 
The  condensation  occurs  more  rapidly  in  hydrogen  than  in  oxygen 
as  the  diffusion  is  greater  in  the  former  gas.  For  the  same  reasoi 
the  condensation  occurs  faster  the  lower  the  pressure  of  the  ga 
present. 

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  if  the  condensation  of  th 
emanation  of  radium  could  be  examined  under  the  same  conditioi 
and  for  the  same  partial  pressure  as  for  the  thorium  emanation, 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  373 

v'ould  show  correspondingly  wide  diflFerences  between  the  terapera- 
iires  of  final  and  initial  condensation. 

The  temperature  of  condensation  observed  for  very  small  partial 
)ressures  of  the  emanation  must  not  be  confused  with  the  true 
condensation  temperature  at  atmospheric  pressure.  It  will  be 
jeen  later  (Section  190)  that  the  emanation  of  radium  has  been 
obtained  in  sufficient  quantity  to  determine  its  boiling  point  at 
itmospheric  pressure,  and  to  measure  its  vapour  pressure  over  a 
wide  range  of  temperatures.  Its  boiling  point  —  64°  C.  at  atmo- 
spheric pressure  is  very  different  from  the  condensation  point  at 
low  pressures,  viz.  about  — 150**  C.  When  present  in  quantity, 
the  radium  emanation  behaves  in  all  respects  like  an  ordinary 
gas,  and  for  every  temperature  there  is  a  definite  vapour  pressure. 

Using  the  electric  method,  it  is  possible  to  examine  the 
condensation  behaviour  of  the  emanations  for  partial  pressures  very 
much  smaller  than  for  any  other  gas.  The  eflfects  observed  are 
probably  similar  in  general  character  to  what  would  be  shown  by 
ordinary  gases  if  their  condensation  could  be  followed  at  such 
minute  pressures. 

The  condensation  of  the  emanations  has  been  observed  for 
partial  pressures  certainly  less  than  10~*'  of  an  atmosphere.  At 
these  small  pressures,  it  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  the  emana- 
tions can  be  condensed  at  all  fi-om  the  gas  with  which  they  are 
conveyed.  The  amount  of  emanation  is  far  too  small  to  form  a 
layer  of  molecular  thickness  on  even  a  small  area.  It  does  not 
appear  probable  that  the  effects  observed  can  be  due  to  a  true 
condensation  but  rather  to  a  surface  attraction  between  the  atoms 
of  emanation  and  the  atoms  of  the  boundary.  In  order  to  test  this 
point,  Laborde*  determined  the  temperature  of  condensation  of  the 
radium  emanation  in  spirals  of  copper,  lead,  silver  and  glass.  He 
observed  that  the  temperatures  of  condensation  were  the  same  for 
the  metals  but  different  for  glass.  Boylei*  confirmed  the  results 
in  regard  to  metals  but  did  not  find  so  marked  a  difference  for 
glass.  It  thus  appears  that  the  condensation  of  the  emanation  is 
not  materially  influenced  by  the  nature  of  the  condensing  surface, 
where   this  does   not   appreciably  absorb   the   emanation   under 

♦  Laborde,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  289,  1909 ;  7,  p.  294,  1910. 
t  Boyle,  Phil.  Mag.  20,  p.  965,  1910. 


374  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [CH. 

normal  conditions.  The  eflFects  observed  would  be  quite  different 
if  the  surface  were  a  strong  absorbent  of  the  emanation,  e.p. 
cocoa-nut  charcoal.  It  is  probable  that  the  condensation  of  small 
quantities  of  radium  emanation  is  due  in  part  to  a  true  condensa- 
tion, i.e.  to  an  attraction  of  the  emanation  atoms  for  each  other  and  in 
part  also  to  an  absorption  effect  of  the  boundary,  i.e.  to  an  attraction 
of  the  atoms  of  emanation  for  the  atoms  of  the  boundary  sub- 
stance. 

Boyle,  using  the  flow  method,  found  the  temperature  of  volati- 
lization of  the  radium  emanation  to  be  about  —  160°  C,  which  is  a 
somewhat  lower  value  than  that  found  by  Rutherford  and  Scxldy. 
The  condensed  emanation  appears  to  exhibit  under  all  conditions 
a  slight  vapour  pressure,  which  increases  rapidly  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  —  160°  C.  If  a  current  of  air  is  kept  continually  passing 
through  a  tube  containing  condensed  emanation,  the  latter  gradually 
escapes  from  the  surface  on  which  it  is  condensed  and  is  removed 
by  the  gas  stream.  This  effect  is  well  exhibited  when  working 
with  larger  quantities  of  emanation.  If  the  emanation  is  con- 
densed in  a  glass  tube,  immersed  in  liquid  air,  continuous  pumping 
slowly  removes  the  emanation,  indicating  that  the  emanation  has 
a  sensible  vapour  pressure  even  at  the  temperature  of  — 186°  C. 

In  later  experiments,  Boyle*  examined  the  condensation 
behaviour  of  larger  quantities  of  emanation  contained  in  glass 
tubes  under  small  pressures.  He  concluded  that  the  emanation 
behaved  in  all  cases  as  if  it  had  a  vapour  pressure  corresponding 
to  each  temperature,  and  that  there  is  no  definite  temperature  at 
which  the  emanation  may  be  said  to  condense  or  volatilize  unless 
the  pressure  of  emanation  is  kept  constant.  At  the  same  time, 
there  appears  to  be  some  evidence  that  when  the  emanation  is 
condensed  in  a  glass  tube,  the  amount  of  free  emanation  in  the 
space  above  it  is  dependent  to  some  extent  upon  the  quantity  of 
emanation  when  this  is  small,  and  on  the  concentration  of  the 
emanation. 

The  condensation  behaviour  of  the  radium  emanation  at  low 
partial  pressures  has  been  discussed  in  some  detail  partly  beciiuse 
of  its  practical  importance  in  many  experiments,  and  partly  on 
account  of  its  theoretical  interest  as  indicating  the  behaviour  of  a 

*  Boyle,  Phil.  Mag.  21,  p.  722,  1911. 


iX]  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  375 

^as  when  present  in  infinitesimal  quantity.  The  condensation  of 
the  radium  emanation  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  has  proved 
3f  great  practical  importance  as  affording  a  simple  and  reliable 
method  of  isolation  of  the  emanation  from  the  gases  with  which  it 
Ls  mixed,  and  is  daily  employed  in  a  radio-active  laboratory  for 
i^ncentration  and  purification  of  the  emanation. 

137.  Absorption  of  emanation  by  liquids.  Some  early 
experiments  by  Mme  Curie  indicated  that  water  was  made  active 
by  exposure  to  the  emanations,  and  that  this  was  to  be  ascribed  to 
the  absorption  of  the  emanation  by  the  water.  The  discovery 
later  that  well  water  and  springs  contained  considerable  quan- 
tities of  radium  emanation  but  no  radium  suggested  that  the 
emanation  must  be  soluble  in  water.  The  first  definite  investi- 
gations on  this  subject  were  made  by  von  Traubenberg*,  who 
showed  that  if  air  containing  the  radium  emanation  were  shaken 
up  with  water,  a  state  of  equilibrium  was  soon  reached  where  the 
emanation  divided  itself  between  the  air  and  water  in  definite 
proportions.  In  this  respect,  the  emanation  behaves  as  an  ordinary 
gas  which  obeys  Henry's  law,  for  the  emanation  is  absorbed  by 
the  water  until  equilibrium  is  reached  between  the  partial  pressure 
of  the  emanation  in  the  gas  and  liquid.  The  coefficient  of  absorption 
of  the  emanation  by  a  liquid  may  be  defined  as  follows.  Suppose 
that  the  absorption  vessel  contains  a  volume  Fj  of  air  or  any  other 
gas  and  F3  of  liquid.  When  equilibrium  is  reached,  suppose  the 
total  amount  of  emanation  mixed  with  the  gas  is  Ei  and  with  the 
liquid  jffj.  Then  EJVi  is  a  measure  of  the  concentration  of  the 
emanation  in  the  gas  and  E2/  V^  in  the  liquid.     The  ratio  of  these 

concentrations  -^jrw  or  -rrrr  is  a  measure  of  the  absorption  coeffi- 

cient  a.  The  value  of  a  is  determined  experimentally  by  shaking 
up  the  liquid  and  gas  containing  emanation  until  equilibrium  is 
reached,  and  then  by  a  suitable  electric  method  measuring  the 
relative  amount  of  emanation  in  the  air  and  water,  v.  Trauben- 
Wg  found  o  =  0*33 ;  Machef,  later,  a  =  0*32.     Hofinann  J  showed 

♦  von  Traubenberg,  Phys.  Zeit.  5,  p.  130,  1904. 
t  Mache,  Wien  Ber,  118,  p.  1329,  1904. 
t  Hofmann,  Phys.  Zeit.  6,  p.  337,  1905. 


376 


RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES 


[CE 


that  the  value  of  a  decreased  with  temperature  and  was  equal  to 
0-245  at  3°  C,  023  at  20°  C.  and  012  at  80**  C.  Kofler*  found 
the  value  of  o  for  a  number  of  solutions  of  different  concentrations, 
and  observed  that  its  value  decreased  with  increase  of  the  concen- 
tration of  the  dissolved  substance. 

The  validity  of  the  application  of  Henry's  law  of  absorption  w 
the  radium  emanation  was  closely  examined  by  Boyle"|-.  The 
amount  of  emanation  in  the  gas  and  water  was  measured  separately 
by  the  y  ray  method.  For  a  definite  temperature,  the  value  of  fl 
was  found  to  be  independent  of  the  amount  of  emanation  over  a 
wide  range,  and  also  independent  of  the  nature  and  pressure  of  the 
inactive  gas  mixed  with  the  emanation.  The  value  of  a  was  found 
to  decrease  rapidly  with  the  temperature.  The  results  are  included 
in  the  following  table. 


Absorption  of  the  radium  emanation  hy  water  at 

differ eM  temperatures. 


Temperature 

Coeffioient  of 
absorption,  a 

1 

Temperature 

CoefScient  of 
absorption,  a 

0°C. 

•507 

20-3'  C. 

•260 

4-3  „ 

•424 

26-8  „ 

•206 

5-7  „ 

•398 

31  •e  „ 

•193 

10-0  „ 

•340 

34-8  „ 

•176 

14-0  „ 

•303 

39-1  „ 

•160 

17-6  „ 

•280 

The  coefficient  of  absorption  thus  decreases  to  less  than  one- 
third  of  its  value  between  temperatures  0*"  C.  and  39*"  C.  It  is 
seen  from  the  above  table  that  if  emanation  is  introduced  into  a 
vessel  half  filled  with  water  at  20°  C,  when  equilibrium  is  reached, 
1/4  of  the  emanation  is  dissolved  in  the  liquid  and  the  remaining 
3/4  in  the  gas. 

Boyle  found  that  salt  water  absorbs  less  emanation  than  fresh 
water.  The  absorption  coefficient  for  salt  water  at  14°  C.  was  '255, 
while  that  of  fresh  water  was  '303. 


♦  Kofler,  Phyt,  ZeiU  9,  p.  6,  1908. 
t  Boyle,  Phil.  Ma^.  22,  p.  840,  1911. 


IXJ 


RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES 


377 


A  number  of  observers  have  noted  that  organic  liquids  are 
strong  absorbents  of  the  emanation.  The  coefficient  of  absorption 
for  a  few  such  liquids  was  determined  by  Boyle  and  for  a  large 
number  by  Eva  Ramstedt*.  Her  results  are  included  in  the 
following  table  where  o  is  the  absorption  coefficient. 

The  absorption  of  the  emanations  of  thorium  and  actinium  is 
difficult  to  measure  with  accuracy  on  account  of  the  rapid  decay 
of  the  emanations.  Measurements  made  by  Klausf  for  the 
emanation  of  thorium  gave  a  value  of  a  of  I'Ob  for  water  at  19°  C, 

Absorption  of  radium  emanation  by  liquids. 


1 

Liquids 

a 

+  18"C. 

O^C. 

- 18^  C. 

Glycerine 

0-21 

1 

,     Water      

0-285 

0-52 

Aniline 

3-80 

4-45 



Absolute  alcohol 

617 

8-28 

11-4 

Acetone 

6-30 

7-99 

10-8 

Ethyl  acetate     ... 

7-35 

9-41 

13-6 

Paraffin  oil 

9-2 

12-6 

Benzene 

12-82 

Xylene 

12-75 

Toluene 

13-24 

18-4 

27-0 

Chloroform 

1508 

20-5 

28-5 

Ether      

1508 

20-9 

291 

Hesane 

10-5(5 

23-4 

35-2 

Carbon  bisulphide 

23-14 

33-4 

50-3 

and  5*01  for  petroleum,  v.  HevesyJ  found  that  the  emanation  of 
actinium  was  absorbed  by  liquids  and  found  that  the  order  of 
absorption  for  a  number  of  liquids  was  the  same  as  for  the  nidium 
emanation.  The  evidence  so  far  obtained  indicates  that  the 
emanations  are  all  readily  absorbed  by  liquids  but  to  diflerent 
degrees. 

The  absorption  of  the  emanations  by  liquids  is  of  special 
interest  both  from  the  theoretical  and  practical  point  of  view.  The 
possibility  of  measurement  of  minute  quantities  of  radio-active 

*  Ramstedt,  Le  Radium,  8,  p.  253,  1911. 

t  Klaus,  Phys.  Zeit.  6,  p.  820,  1905. 

X  V.  Hevesy,  Phys.  Zeit.  12,  p.  1214,  1911. 


378  RADIO-ACnVE  GASES  [OL 

matter  by  the  electric  method  aflFords  an  opportunity  of  testing  thaj 
laws  of  absorption  of  a  gas  like  the  emanation  over  a  very  mi 
range,  and  for  partial  pressures  exceedingly  minute  in  companson! 
with  those  possible  for  inactive  gases.     The  absorption  by  wat 
of  the  emanations  even  when  present  in  minute  quantity  apj 
to   follow    accurately   Henry's    law,   and  in    these    respects  th< 
emanations  behave  similarly  to  ordinary  gases.     The  absorption 
the  radium  emanation  by  fresh  and  salt  water,  and  its  variation^ 
with  temperature  are  of  importance  in  connection  with  the  emana- 
tion content  of  spring  and  well  water.   They  have  also  an  important 
bearing  on  the  relative  distribution  of  the  radium  emanation  overl 
land  and  sea. 

138.    AbBorption  of  the  emanations  by  solidB  and  by 
charcoal.     When  a  substance  is  exposed  for  some  hours  in  the 
presence  of  the  radium  emanation,  it  shows  a  strong  activity  on 
removal.     This  iactivity,  which  is  due  to  the  deposit  of  active 
matter  from  the  emanation,  decays  rapidly  with  time  and  becomee  ^ 
exceedingly  small  after  an  interval  of  12  hours.     P.  Curie  and 
Danne*    found,   however,   that    certain    substances,   particularly 
celluloid  and  rubber,  retained  a  considerable  activity  for  some 
days  after  removal.     This  is  due  to  an  absorption  or  occlusion 
of  the  emanation  by  the  substance.     In  free  air,  the  activity  due 
to  this  cause  diminishes,  partly  due  to  the  ordinary  decay  of  the  J 
emanation  in  situ  and  partly  to  the  escape  of  the  emanation  ji 
from  the  substance  into  the  surrounding  gas.     A  similar  efiFect  \ 
is  shown  to  a  small  extent  by  metals,  especially  by  lead,  and 
is   generally    exhibited   by   porous   substances,   for   example,  by 
platinum  black  and  charcoal. 

The  writerf  showed  that  charcoal  and  notably  cocoa-nut 
charcoal  is  a  strong  absorbent  of  the  emanations  of  radium  and  of 
thorium.  This  can  be  illustrated  by  a  simple  experiment  A 
glass  tube  about  20  cms.  long  contains  several  grams  of  cocoa-nut 
charcoal  at  the  lower  end,  and  the  upper  part  is  coated  with  zinc 
sulphide.     After  heating  the  charcoal  and  exhaustion  of  the  air, 

♦  P.  Curie  and  Danne,  C.  R.  136,  p.  364,  1903. 

t  Rutherford,  Nature,  74,  p.  634,  1906  ;  Manch.  Lit.  and  Phil  Soc.  M,  No.  2, 
1908 ;  Chevi.  News,  99,  p.  76,  1909. 


.]  RADIO-ACnVE  OASES  379 

irified  radium  emanation  is  introduced  into  the  tube.  The  phos- 
borescence  of  the  zinc  sulphide  is  observed  to  decrease  rapidly 
ith  time  due  to  the  absorption  of  the  emanation  by  the  charcoal 
t  ordinary  temperatures.  If  the  charcoal  is  then  heated,  a  large 
^t  of  the  emanation  is  released,  and  this  shows  itself  by  a 
»eat  increase  in  the  luminosity  of  the  zinc  sulphide.  The 
fcsorption  by  cocoa-nut  charcoal  increases  with  the  lowering  of  the 
3mperature.  A  tube  containing  '08  gram  of  cocoa-nut  charcoal 
faa  heated  and  exhausted,  and  surrounded  by  a  pentane  bath  at 
-150'' C.  The  equilibrium  amount  of  emanation  from  83  milli- 
rams  of  radium  was  then  introduced  and  absorbed  by  the 
harcoal.  The  temperature  of  the  bath  was  allowed  to  slowly  rise, 
nd  the  tube  containing  the  charcoal  connected  at  intervals  with 
Q  exhausted  space.  The  emanation  which  escaped  from  the 
liarcoal  was  collected  and  its  amount  determined  by  the  7  ray 
lethod.  The  emanation  escaped  slowly  until  the  temperature 
)se  to  about  —  40°  C.  At  19°  C.  the  amount  still  absorbed  was 
0  per  cent,  and  at  100°  C,  19  per  cent.  The  whole  of  the  emana- 
ion  was  released  by  strong  heating.  The  volume  of  emanation 
bsorbed  at  19°  C.  was  about  02  cubic  millimetre,  but  this  is  no 
idication  of  the  amount  that  would  be  absorbed  by  the  charcoal 
'  surrounded  by  the  emanation  at  atmospheric  pressure.  There 
ppears  to  be  little  doubt  that  if  the  radium  emanation  could  be 
btained  in  quantities  comparable  with  ordinary  gases  it  would 
low  an  absorption  in  charcoal  at  ordinary  temperatures  comparable 
ith  carbon  dioxide. 

The  conditions  of  absorption  of  the  emanations  by  charcoal 
ere  investigated  in  detail  by  Boyle*.  A  large  number  of  experi- 
ents  were  first  made  with  the  thorium  emanation.  The  emanation 
as  conveyed  by  a  current  of  air  through  a  tube  containing 
larcoal,  and  the  fraction  absorbed  was  deduced  by  mejisurement 

the  activity  of  the  issuing  emanation.     Absorption  took  place 

all  kinds  of  charcoal,  but  was  most  marked  in  cocoa-nut  charcoal. 

le  absorption  increased  with  its  fineness  of  division,  and  decreased 

th  temperature.     The  results  could  be  satisfactorily  explained 

the  assumption  that  the  absorption  of  the  emanation  by  the 
ircoal  at  any  point  was  proportional  to  the  partial  pressure  of 

*  Boyle,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  374,  1909. 


380  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [C 

the  emanation  at  that  point,  and  that  there  was  a  definite  eqi 
brium  between  the  concentration  of  the  emanation  in  the  gas 
the  charcoal.    The  absorption  of  the  radium  emanation  by  chj 
can  be  very  simply  illustrated  by  introducing  radium  eraanatic 
into  an  electroscope,  at  the  base  of  which  is  a  tray  containii 
charcoal.     The  emanation  is  rapidly  absorbed,  and  this  is  ii 
cated  by  a  rapid  decrease  in  the  rate  of  discharge  of  the  elect 
scope.     Hevesy  *  observed  that  the  emanation  of  actinium  is  aW 
strongly  absorbed  by  charcoal. 

This  property  of  charcoal  has  been  utilised  by  Evef  anl 
SatterlyJ  to  determine  directly  the  amount  of  radium  emanatioc 
in  the  atmosphere.  A  definite  quantity  of  air  is  passed  slowly 
through  the  charcoal,  and  a  certain  fraction  of  the  emanation  is 
absorbed  by  it.  The  charcoal  is  then  removed  and  the  emanatioii 
and  other  gases  are  driven  off  by  strong  heating.  The  collected 
gases  are  introduced  into  an  electroscope,  and  the  quantity  of 
emanation  measured.  Under  ordinary  conditions  the  amount  of 
emanation  absorbed  depends  on  the  velocity  of  the  current  of  air 
and  the  mass  of  charcoal.  The  fraction  absorbed  is  determined  by 
sending  a  known  quantity  of  emanation  through  the  charcoal  iand 
observing  the  fraction  retained. 

139.  Diffusion  of  the  emanation.  We  have  seen  that  the 
emanations  have  the  properties  of  radio-active  gases  released  in 
minute  quantity  from  radio-active  material.  In  the  case  of  the 
radium  emanation,  a  sufficient  quantity  has  been  obtained  in 
recent  years  to  isolate  it  and  measure  its  volume  and  density, 
and  to  determine  its  spectrum  and  boiling  point.  The  evidence 
thus  obtained  shows  that  the  radium  emanation  is  to  be  regarded 
as  a  monatomic  gas  of  high  atomic  weight,  222,  with  characteristic 
physical  and  chemical  properties  which  distinguish  it  from  all 
other  gases.  On  account  of  the  rapidity  of  decay  of  the  emanations 
of  thorium  and  of  actinium,  it  has  so  far  not  been  found  possible 
to  obtain  a  sufficient  quantity  to  test  them  in  a  similar  way;  but 
from  the  similarity  of  their  origin  and  of  their  behaviour  com- 
pared with  the  radium  emanation,  there  appears  to  be  no  doubt 

♦  V.  Hevesy,  Phys.  Zeit.  12,  p.  1214,  1911. 

t  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  16.  p.  622,  1908. 

I  Satterly,  PkiL  Mag.  16,  p.  684,  1908 ;  80,  p.  778,  1910. 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  381 

hat  they  also  must  be  regarded  as  radio-active  gases  with  high 
mt  diflFerent  atomic  weights.  In  the  earlier  development  of  radio- 
ustivity,  the  question  of  the  true  nature  of  the  emanations  was  a 
■latter  of  conjecture  and  of  some  difference  of  opinion.  While 
Aey  appeared  to  behave  as  radio-active  gases  or  vapours,  they 
were  emitted  in  such  minute  amount  that  it  was  not  possible  to 
xttle  the  question  by  ordinary  chemical  or  physical  experiments. 
tt  consequently  was  of  importance  to  utilize  indirect  methods  to 
best  their  properties,  and  to  form  an  estimate  of  their  molecular 
weight.  For  this  purpose,  the  diffusion  method  offered  many 
Ewivantages,  for  by  using  the  electric  method  to  determine  quan- 
titatively the  amount  of  emanation  present,  it  was  found  possible 
fco  compare  the  rates  of  inter-diffusion  of  the  emanation  into  air 
and  other  gases  with  the  corresponding  values  found  for  gases 
and  vapours  of  known  molecular  weight,  even  though  the  emana- 
tdon  was  present  in  exceedingly  minute  quantity. 

We  shall  first  consider  the  theory  of  a  simple  case  where  the 
emanation  is  diffusing  along  a  cylinder  filled  with  an  inactive  gas 
and  where  the  concentration  of  the  emanation  is  uniform  over  the 
cross  section.  I^et  N  be  the  number  of  atoms  per  cubic  centimetre 
at  a  distance  x  from  a  fixed  point  along  the  axis  of  the  tube,  and 
J)  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  emanation  through  the  gas ; 
then  in  consequence  of  diffusion,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  number 

of  atoms  of  the  emanation  per  cubic  centimetre  is  equal  to  D-t--, 

Since  the  emanation  is  undergoing  spontaneous  transformation 

iwith  the  radio-active  constant   X,  the   rate  of  decrease  of  the 

number  of  atoms  in  the  emanation  per  cubic  centimetre  due  to 

this  cause  is  \N.     Taking  these  two  factors  into  account  it  is 

seen  that 

dN      ^d'N     ^  ^ 

dt  da^ 

When  a  steady  state  is  reached 

f  =  0  and  D^  =  XN. 
dt  da? 

In  consequence  of  the  wide  differences  in  the  rate  of  the  decay 
of  the  three  emanations,  their  distribution  due  to  diffusion  is  very 


382  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [C 

diflferent  under  ordinary  experimental  conditions.  For  example 
consider  a  uniform  layer  of  an  actinium  preparation  spread 
the  bottom  of  a  uniform  tube.  If  the  emanation  is  emitted 
a  constant  rate  into  the  gas,  a  steady  state  is  soon  reached  il 
which  the  amount  of  emanation  per  unit  volume  decreases  rapidlj 
as  we  proceed  from  the  surface  of  the  preparation.  For  example; 
in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  temperature,  the  amount  al 
emanation  falls  to  half  value  for  each  additional  distance  of  5*5  mm 
Since  the  thorium  emanation  decays  more  slowly,  the  correspondinj 
distance  is  greater  and  equal  to  about  1*9  cms.  The  correspondiiq 
distance  for  the  radium  emanation  has  not  been  determined  experi- 
mentally ;  but  is  probably  about  150  cms.  On  account  of  th« 
slow  decay  of  the  radium  emanation,  the  amount  transformed 
during  the  time  required  for  diffusion  of  the  emanation  into  vessels 
of  ordinary  laboratory  dimensions,  is  generally  small,  and  in  some 
cases  may  be  neglected.  Taking  advantage  of  the  smallness  ol 
this  effect,  Curie  and  Danne*  showed  that  the  radium  emanation 
distributes  itself  between  two  vessels  connected  by  a  short  tube 
of  fairly  wide  bore  in  proportion  to  their  volumes.  In  another 
case  where  one  reservoir  was  kept  at  a  temperature  of  10**  C.  and 
the  other  at  350°  C,  the  emanation  divided  itself  between  them 
in  the  same  proportion  as  would  a  gas  under  the  same  conditions. 
In  these  respects  the  radium  emanation  thus  behaved  like  an 
ordinary  gas. 

The  rapidity  of  inter-diffusion  of  the  emanations  is  increased 
by  lowering  the  pressure  of  the  gas  through  which  it  diffuses. 
For  example,  if  the  emanation  is  introduced  into  a  reservoir  in 
which  the  pressure  of  the  gas  is  under  one  millimetre,  the  rate  of 
diffusion  is  so  rapid  that  the  emanation  is  nearly  uniformly  dis- 
tributed after  an  interval  of  several  minutes. 

140.  IMEethods  of  measuring  diffusion.  Several  methods 
have  been  employed  to  determine  the  inter-diffusion  constant  of 
emanations  through  various  gases  with  the  object  of  estimating 
the  molecular  weight  of  the  emanation  by  comparing  its  rate  of 
diffusion  with  those  of  gases  of  known  molecular  weight.  These 
methods  may  be  classified  as  follows : 

♦  P.  Curie  and  Danne,  C.  R.  186,  p.  1314,  1903. 


XX]  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  383 

(1)  The  diffusion  of  the  emanation  along  tubes  of  wide  cross 
4Bection.     (Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks,  Debieme,  Russ,  Bruhat.) 

(2)  The  diffusion  through  narrow  tubes.  (Curie  and  Danne, 
Chaumont.) 

(3)  The  diffusion  through  porous  pots  or  other  finely  divided 
materials.     (Bumstead  and  Wheeler,  Makower,  Perkins.) 

(4)  Effusion  through  small  openings.    (Debieme,  Miss  Leslie.) 

The  first  attempt  to  determine  the  molecular  weight  of  the 
ladium  emanation  was  made  by  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks*  in 
1901.  The  method  employed  was  similar  to  that  of  Loschmidtf  in 
1871,  in  his  investigations  of  the  coefficient  of  inter-diffusion  of  gases. 

A  long  brass  tube  6  cms.  in  diameter  was  divided  into  two 
equal  parts  by  a  movable  slide.  One  half  contained  air  mixed 
with  emanation.  On  opening  the  slide,  the  emanation  gradually 
'  diffused  into  the  other  half.  The  relative  amount  of  emanation 
in  the  two  halves  of  the  tube  at  any  time  was  determined  by  the 
electric  method.  From  this  the  value  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion 
of  the  emanation  into  air  can  be  deduced.  As  the  result  of  a 
number  of  experiments,  the  values  of  D  were  found  to  lie  between 
•07  and  09. 

Some  experiments  on  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  radium 
emanation  into  air  were  made  by  P.  Curie  and  Danne  J.  If  the 
emanation  is  contained  in  a  closed  reservoir,  it  has  been  shown 
that  its  activity,  which  is  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  emanation 
present,  decreases  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time. 
If  the  reservoir  is  put  in  communication  with  the  outside  air 
through  a  capillary  tube,  the  emanation  slowly  diffuses  out,  and 
the  amount  of  emanation  in  the  reservoir  is  found  to  decrease 
according  to  the  same  law  as  before,  but  at  a  faster  rate.  Using 
tubes  of  different  lengths  and  diameters,  the  diffusion  of  the 
emanation  was  found  to  be  in  accord  with  the  ordinary  gas  laws. 
The  value  obtained  for  D  was  01 00.  This  is  a  somewhat  greater 
value  than  that  observed  by  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks. 

*  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks,  Tram,  Roy.  Soc.  Canada^  1901;  Chem.  News, 
1902. 

t  Loschmidt,  Wien  Ber.  61,  p.  367,  1871. 

:  P.  Curie  and  Danne,  C.  R,  136,  p.  1314,  1903. 


384 


RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES 


[Cfl. 


A  series  of  experiments  by  a  similar  method  were  made  later 
by  Chaumont*.  The  emanation  contained  in  one  vessel  diffused 
through  a  long  narrow  tube  into  another  vessel  of  smaller  size,  in 
which  the  quantity  of  emanation  present  was  measured  at  regular 
intervals.  The  whole  apparatus  was  enclosed  in  a  freezing  mixture 
of  ice  and  water  in  order  to  get  rid  of  temperature  disturbances. 
The  value  of  D  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature  was  found 
to  be  i>  =  0101. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  a  few  of  the  coefficients  of 
inter-diffusion  of  gases,  compiled  from  Landolt  and  Bomstein's 
tables,  are  given  below. 


Oas  or  vapour 

CoeDicieDt  of 
diffusion  into  air 

Molecular  weight 

Water  vapour 
Carbonic  acid  gas 
Alcohol  vapour 
Ether  vapour 
Radium  emanation  ... 

0-198 
0-142 
0101 
0-077 
0-07  to  010 

18 
44 
46 
74 
? 

The  table,  although  not  very  satisfactory  for  the  purpose  of 
comparison,  shows  that  the  diffusion  constant  decreases  with 
increase  of  the  molecular  weight.  According  to  the  law  of 
Graham,  the  constant  of  inter- diffusion  of  different  gases  should 
be  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  their  molecular 
weights.  It  is  seen,  however,  from  the  above  numbers  that  the 
vapours  of  ether  and  alcohol  show  lower  diffusion  constants  com- 
pared with  carbonic  acid  than  is  to  be  expected  from  Graham's 
law.  The  estimation  of  molecular  weights  is  very  uncertain  in 
cases  where  the  diffusion  of  a  monatomic  gas  like  the  emanation 
is  compared  with  that  of  a  complex  vapour  like  ether  or  alcohol. 
From  a  general  consideration  of  the  results,  it  was  concluded  in 
these  earlier  experiments  that  the  emanation  behaved  like  a  gas 
having  a  molecular  weight  approximately  100. 

It  is  of  interest  to  compare  the  value  of  i)  =  0*1  with  the  value 
of  D  determined  by  Townsend  (Section  21)  for  the  gaseous  ions 
produced  in  air  at  ordinary  pressure  and  temperature,  by  Rontgen 


Chaumont,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  106, 1909. 


t]  RADIO-ACTIVE   GASES  385 

ays  or  by  the  radiations  from  active  substances.  Townsend  found 
ihat  the  value  of  D  in  dry  air  was  "028  for  the  positive  ions  and 
043  for  the  negative  ions.  The  uncharged  radium  emanation 
thus  diffuses  more  rapidly  than  the  ions  produced  by  its  radiation 
b  the  gas,  and  behaves  as  if  its  mass  were  smaller  than  that  of 
Ihe  ions  produced  in  air,  but  considerably  greater  than  that  of  the 
air  molecules  with  which  it  is  mixed. 

Diffusion  through  porous  material, 

Bumstead  and  Wheeler*  compared  the  rates  of  diffusion  of 
the  radium  emanation  and  of  carbon  dioxide  through  a  porous 
plate,  and,  assuming  Graham's  law,  concluded  that  the  emanation 
had  a  molecular  weight  of  about  180. 

Makowerf  made  a  number  of  measurements  by  a  similar 
method.  The  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  emanation  through  a  porous 
plug  of  plaster-of-Paris  was  compared  with  that  of  the  gases 
oxygen,  carbon  dioxide,  and  sulphur  dioxide.  It  was  found  that 
Craham's  law,  viz.  that  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  D  is  inversely 
proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  molecular  weight  M,  was 

not  strictly  applicable.  The  value  of  D  ^/M  was  not  found  to  be 
constant  for  these  gases,  but  decreased  with  increase  of  molecular 
'Weight  of  the  gas.  If,  however,  a  curve  were  plotted  with  D  \^M 
as  ordinate  and  D  as  abscissa,  the  points  corresponding  to  the 
values  of  O,  CO,  and  SOj  were  found  to  lie  on  a  straight  line. 
By  linear  extrapolation,  the  molecular  weight  of  the  emanation 
>^as  estimated.  The  value  obtained  from  experiments  on  three 
different  porous  plugs  was  85*5,  97,  and  99  respectively.  This 
method  indicates  that  the  molecular  weight  of  the  radium  emana- 
tion is  about  100. 

We  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  deduction  of  the 
molecular  weight  of  emanation  by  such  methods  is  only  approxi- 
mate, since  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  emanation  which  is  present 
in  minute  quantity  is  compared  with  the  rates  of  diffusion  of 
other  gases  having  complex  molecules  present  in  large  quantity. 
In  order  to  remove  one  of  these  difficulties,  special  experiments 

*  Bumstead  and  Wheeler,  Amer.  Jouni,  Sci.  17,  p.  97,  1904. 
t  Makower,  Phil.  Mag,  9,  p.  66,  1905. 

R.  R.-A.  25 


386  RADIO- ACTIVE  OASES  [CH. 

were  made  by  Perkins*  to  compare  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the 
radium  emanation  with  that  of  mercury  vapour  under  the  same 
conditions.  Since  the  vapour  of  mercury  behaves  like  a  moo- 
atomic  gas,  and  has  an  atomic  weight  not  very  different  from  that 
of  the  radium  emanation,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  a  comparison 
of  the  rates  of  diffusion  should  give  the  molecular  weight  of  the 
emanation  with  more  certainty.  In  his  experiments  the  diffusion 
of  the  radium  emanation  through  an  asbestos  plug  was  compared 
with  that  of  mercury  vapour  for  temperatures  varying  between 
260 "C.  and  275°  C.  In  one  case  the  diffusing  vessel  contained 
hydrogen  and  the  emanation,  and  in  the  second  case  hydrogen  and 
mercury  vapour.  The  fraction  of  the  amount  of  radium  emanation 
and  of  mercury  vapour,  which  diffused  through  the  asbestos  plate 
in  a  given  time,  was  measured.  In  this  way  it  was  found  that 
the  diffusicm  coefficient  for  the  emanation  was  '034,  and  for  the 
mercury  vapour  037.  Assuming  Graham's  law,  this  gives  a  value 
for  the  molecular  weight  of  the  emanation  of  234.  This  is  not 
very  different  from  the  correct  molecular  weight,  namely,  222. 

141.  Method  of  eflVision.  The  difficulty  of  obtaining  a 
reliable  estimate  of  the  molecular  weight  of  the  radium  emanation 
by  the  ordinary  methods  of  diffusion  led  Debiernef  to  apply  » 
modific4ition  of  the  method  of  effusion  used  long  ago  by  Bunsen. 
In  this  methixl,  the  rate  of  escape  of  a  gas  through  a  small  orifice 
in  a  thin  partition  due  to  a  difference  of  pressure,  is  proportional 
to  the  density  of  the  gaa  The  apparatus  used  by  Debierae  con- 
sisted of  two  glass  vessels,  A  and  5,  separated  by  a  very  thin 
platinum  plate,  in  which  was  a  very  small  hole.  The  vessel  B 
wjis  atUichtKl  to  a  Gaede  pump  and  kept  exhausted  to  a  very  low 
pn*s8\m\  The  pressure  p  of  the  gas  in  A  was  found  to  vary 
oxiK>nontially  with  the  time,  and  p/p^  =  e'*^^.  Preliminary  experi- 
ments made  with  a  number  of  gases  introduced  in  -^l  at  low 
pn^ssures,  measured  by  a  Macleod  gauge,  showed  that  the  vjUut 
of  the  coefficient  fi  was  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  rooi 
of  the  moltH^ular  weight.  The  emanation,  purified  to  some  extent 
was  then  introduced  into  A,  and  the  value  of  fi  determined,  usin| 

•  Perkins,  Amrr,  Joum.  Sci.  86,  p.  461,  1908. 
t  Debierne.  C\  R.  15©,  p.  1740.  1910. 


IX] 


RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES 


387 


the  electric  method  to  measure  the  amount  of  emanation  in  A  at 
any  time.  The  value  of  /x  was  found  to  be  independent  of  the 
presence  of  other  gases  as  impurities,  even  when  the  emanation 
was  only  present  in  the  proportion  of  1  in  200.  Assuming  the 
square  root  law,  it  was  deduced  that  the  molecular  weight  of  the 
emanation  was  about  220 — a  result  in  good  accord  with  the  value 
to  be  expected  theoretically. 

142.    DifiUsion  of  the  thorium  and  actinium  emanations. 

On  account  of  the  rapid  decay  of  the  emanations  of  thorium 
and  actinium,  it  is  in  general  not  possible  to  determine  the 
constant  of  diffusion  by  the  methods  employed  for  the  radium 
emanation.  The  value  of  D  can,  however,  be  measured  in  the 
following  way  with  considerable  accuracy. 
Fig.  94  represents  the  arrangement  used  by 
the  writer  to  determine  the  value  of  D  for 
the  thorium  emanation,  and  is  typical  of  the 
methods  employed  later  for  both  the  thorium 
and  actinium  emanatibns.  A  plate  C  covered 
with  thorium  hydroxide  was  placed  hori- 
zontally near  the  base  of  a  long  brass 
cylinder  P.  The  emanation  released  from 
the  thorium  diffuses  upwards  in  the  cylinder. 
A  permanent  state  is  soon  reached  where  the 
rate  of  increase  of  atoms  of  emanation  per 
unit  volume  by  diffusion  upward  is  balanced 
hy  the  rate  of  decrease  due  to  the  trans- 
formation of  the  emanation.  If  N  be  the 
number  of  atoms  of  emanation  per  unit  volume  supposed  uniform 
over  the  cross  section  at  a  distance  x  from  the  thorium, 

rhere  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation. 
The  solution  of  this  equation  is  of  the  form 


Fig.  94. 


Since  N  =  0     when  a?  =  x  ,     5  =  0. 
If        iV  =  A^o  when  x  =  0,      /I  =  No, 


25—2 


388  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  [CU 

Consequently  N  =  NqB'  V  ^  *  *,  | 

or  the  concentration  of  the  emanation  should  decrease  exponentiall| 
with  increase  of  x. 

It  is  not  convenient  in  experiments  of  this  kind  to  determiua 
directly  the  variation  in  the  amount  of  emanation  along  thf 
cylinder,  but  an  equivalent  method  was  used.  A  long  rod  A^ 
charged  negatively  was  fixed  axially  in  the  tube.  Under  thes^ 
conditions,  the  amount  of  active  deposit  at  each  point  of  the  nxl 
some  hours  after  its  introduction  is  proportional  to  the  amount  ol 
emanation  at  1^  ■  •  rresponding  height.  After  exposure  for  a  daj 
or  more  undi.,,.  ,  ^stant  temperature  conditions,  the  rod  was  rei 
moved  and  the  variation  in  the  amount  of  active  deposit  along 
length  was  determined  by  the  electric  method.  In  this  way 
was  found  that  in  dry  air  at  ordinary  temperature  and  pressure^ 
the  amount  of  emanation  decreased  to  half  value  for  successive 
distances  of  1*9  cms. 

Taking  the  half  value  period  of  the  emanation  as  54  sec* 
X  =  '0128  (sec.)~^  Substituting  these  values  in  the  equi, 
D=096.  ,' 

A  series  of  experiments  by  a  similar  method  was  made; 
by  Russ*  with  air  at  diflferent  pressures.     As  is  to  be  expec. 
theoretically,  the  diflfusion  constant  was  found  to  vary  inversely  «» 
the  pressure  of  air  over  the  range  examined,  viz.  from  8  cms  ' 
76  cms.  of  mercury.     The  average  value  of  /)  =  0*103  was  | 
for  the  thorium  emanation  in  air  at  ordinary  temperature 
pressure. 

Miss  Leslie  t  employed  the  method  of  effusion  used  by  Debiem« 
(Section  141)  to  determine  the  molecular  weight  of  the  thoriun 
emanation.  Assuming  the  half  value  period  of  the  eraanatioi 
was  54  seconds,  she  deduced  that  the  molecular  weight  wai 
about  200. 

The  diffusion  of  the  actinium  emanation  in  air  has  beej 
measured  by  DebierneJ,  Russ§  and  Bruhat||.    In  the  arrangemen 

*  Russ,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  412,  1909. 

t  Miss  Leslie,  C.  R.  153,  p.  328,  1911. 

X  Debierne,  Le  Radium,  4,  p.  213,  1907. 

§  Russ,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  412,  1909. 

,  Bruhat,  C.  R.  liS,  p.  628,  1909 ;  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  67,  1909. 


IX]  RADIO-ACTIVE  GASES  389 

of  Debierne,  the  emanation  from  the  actinium  preparation  dif- 
fiised  upwards  between  two  parallel  vertical  plates  placed  close 
fogether.  To  ensure  constant  temperature  conditions  the  whole 
apparatus  was  surrounded  by  a  water  bath  through  which  water 
iras  circulated.  The  distribution  of  active  deposit  with  or  without 
im  electric  field  is  proportional  at  any  point  to  the  amount  of 
emanation  between  the  plates.  As  in  the  case  of  the  thorium 
•manation,  the  amount  of  emanation  decreases  exponentially  with 
the  distance  from  the  active  matter.  At  ordinary  pressure  and 
lemperature,  the  emanation  decreased  to  half  value  through  suc- 
cessive distances  of  5*5  mms.  The  value  of  -  found  to  be 
^112.  The  values  of  D  for  gases  besides  aii  -.e  determined 
th  the  same  arrangement  by  Bruhat.  The  value  of  D  in 
ydrogen  was  0*412  and  in  carbon  dioxide  0077.  The  value  of 
J)  was  found  to  vary  inversely  as  the  pressure  of  the  gas. 

Russ  by  a  similar  method   examined   the   diffusion   of  the 

nium    emanation    with    air,   hydrogen,   carbon    dioxide,   and 

ur  dioxide,  and  found  relative  values  in  good  accord  with 

am's  law.     A  special  experiment  was  made  to  compare  the 

'on  of  the  emanation  through  air  and  through  the  mon- 

ic  gas  argon.     The  values  found  were  D  =  *120  for  air  and 

=  107   for  argon.      These   values   are    in    good    accord   with 

Jraham's  law.     Russ  made  a  comparison  of  the  value  of  D  for 

num    and    actinium   emanation   under   similar   experimental 

^tions.      The  value   for  actinium   emanation  was   D  =  '123, 

for  thorium  emanation  Z)=  '103.     The  ratio  of  the  diCFusion 

instants  is  1*19.     Assuming  Graham  s  law,  it  follows  from  these 

data  that  the  molecular  weight  of  the  thorium  emanation  is  (1*19)^ 

or  1*42  times  that  of  actinium  emanation. 

Miss  Leslie  working  in  the  laboratory  of  the  writer  found  that 
the  values  of  D  for  the  thorium  and  actinium  emanations  varied 
p-eatly  with  the  experimental  arrangements  and  with  the  activity 
of  the  emanations.  This  variation  seems  to  be  due  to  the  diffusion 
of  the  atoms  of  the  active  deposit  which  have  lost  their  charge  by 
recombination  with  the  ions.  Experiments  made  with  the  thorium 
and  actinium  emanations  under  very  similar  conditions  indicated 
that  the  value  of  D  was  about  the  same  for  both  gases. 

From  the  experiments  already  considered,  it  is  clear  that  the 


390  RADIO-ACTIVE  OASES  [CH.  IX 

diffusion  constants  for  the  thorium  and  radium  emanations  are 
not  very  different.  This  would  indicate  that  these  emanations  do 
not  differ  much  in  molecular  weight — a  result  to  be  expected  from 
our  present  knowledge  of  the  transformation  of  these  substances. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  diffusion  constant  of  the  actinium  emana- 
tion is  not  known  with  sufficient  certainty  to  deduce  its  molecular 
weight.  The  results  obtained  by  Miss  Leslie,  however,  indicate 
that  the  molecular  weight  of  the  actinium  emanation  cannot  differ 
much  from  that  of  the  thorium  emanation.  In  the  absence  of  any 
definite  knowledge  of  the  atomic  weight  of  actinium  or  any  of  its 
products,  experiments  on  the  diffusion  of  the  actinium  emanation 
afford  the  only  means  at  present  available  of  estimating  its 
probable  molecular  weight. 

143.  DifiUsion  of  the  emanation  into  liquids.  Experi- 
ments were  made  by  Wallstabe*  to  determine  the  coeflScient  of 
diffusion  of  the  radium  emanation  in  various  liquids.  The  liquid 
was  contained  in  a  cylinder,  and  the  emanation  passed  into  the 
space  above  it.  After  a  definite  time,  samples  of  water  at  different 
levels  were  removed,  and  the  amount  of  emanation  present  deter- 
mined. The  coefficient  of  the  diffusion  D  into  the  liquid  is 
obtained  from  the  same  equation  used  to  determine  the  diffusion 
of  the  thorium  and  actinium  emanations  into  a  gas,  viz. 

where  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation  and  x  the 

depth  of  the  layer  of  water  from  the  surface.     The  value  of  D  for 

cm.^ 
water  was  found  to  be  "066  3— ^ . 

day 

The  value  of  D  found  by  Stefan  f  for  the  diffusion  of  carbon 

cm.* 
dioxide  into  water  was  1*36  ,— ^  .     These  results  are  thus  in  har- 

day 

mony  with  the  conclusion  drawn  from  the  diffusion  of  the  radium 

emanation  into  air,  and  show  that  the  radium  emanation  behaves 

as  a  gas  of  high  molecular  weight. 

♦  Wallstabe,  Phys,  Zeit.  4,  p.  721,  1903. 
t  Stefan,  Wien  Ber.  2,  p.  371,  1878. 


CHAPTEK  X. 

ACTIVE  DEPOSITS. 

144.  Active  deposits.  One  of  the  most  interesting  and 
remarkable  properties  of  radium,  thorium  and  actinium  is  their 
power  under  certain  conditions  of  imparting  temporary  activity  to 
all  bodies  in  their  neighbourhood.  .  A  substance  which  has  been 
exposed  for  some  time  in  the  presence  of  radium,  thorium  or 
actinium,  behaves  as  if  its  surface  were  coated  with  an  invisible 
deposit  of  intensely  radio-active  matter.  The  activity  thus  pro- 
duced on  inactive  substances  was  initially  known  as  "  induced  "  or 
"  excited "  radio-activity.  But  as  there  is  now  no  doubt  that  it 
results  fix)m  the  deposit  of  active  matter  on  the  surface  of  the 
bodies  and  not  from  any  change  in  the  inactive  body  itself,  it  is  not 
desirable  to  retain  these  terms.  The  active  matter  will  in  general 
be  termed  the  "active  deposit,"  thus  emphasising  the  material 
origin  of  the  activity  observed. 

This  property  was  first  observed  by  M.  and  Mme  Curie*  for 
radium  and  independently  by  the  writerf  for  thorium. 

If  any  solid  body  is  placed  inside  a  closed  vessel  containing  an 
emanating  compound  of  thorium,  radium  or  actinium,  its  surface 
becomes  radio-active.  For  thorium  and  actinium  compounds  the 
amount  of  activity  on  a  body  is  in  general  greater  the  nearer  it  is 
to  the  active  material.  In  the  case  of  radium,  however,  provided 
the  body  has  been  exposed  for  several  hours,  the  amount  of 
activity  is  to  a  large  extent  independent  of  the  position  of  the 
body  in  the  vessel  containing  the  active  material.     Bodies  are 

♦  P.  and  S.  Curie,  C.  R.  129,  p.  714,  1899. 
t  Batherford,  Phil.  Mag.  49,  p.  161,  1900. 


392 


ACTIVE   DEPOSITS 


[CH. 


made  active  whether  exposed  directly  to  the  action  of  the  radio- 
active substance  or  screened  from  the  action  of  the  direct  rays. 
This  has  been  clearly  shown  in  some  experiments  of  P.  Curie.  A 
small  open  vessel  a  (Fig.  95)  containing  a  solution  of  radium 
is  placed  inside  a  larger  closed  vessel  V, 

Plates  Ay  5,  C,  D,  E  are  placed  in  various  positions  in  the 
enclosure.  After  exposure  for  a  day,  the  plates  after  removal  are 
found  to  be  radio-active  even  in  positions  completely  shielded  from 
the  action  of  the  direct  rays.  For  example,  the  plate  D  shielded 
from  the  direct  radiation  by  the  lead  plate  P  is  as  active  as  the 
plate  Ey  exposed  to  the  direct  radiation.     The  amount  of  activity 


B 


Fig.  96. 

produced  in  a  given  time  on  a  plate  of  given  area  in  a  definite 
position  is  independent  of  the  material  of  the  plate.  Plates  of 
mica,  copper,  cardboard,  ebonite,  all  show  equal  amounts  of  activity. 
The  amount  of  activity  depends  on  the  area  of  the  plate  and  on 
the  amount  of  free  space  in  its  neighbourhood. 

146.  Connection  with  the  emanations.  In  an  examina- 
tion of  the  conditions  under  which  the  activity  is  observed,  the 
writer  (loc.  cit.)  found  that  the  active  deposit  is  only  produced 
when  the  emanation  is  present.  If  a  thorium,  radium,  or  ac- 
tinium compound  is  covered  with  a  thin  sheet  of  mica  so  that 
no  emanation  can  escape,  no  activity  can  be  communicated  to 


X]  ACTIVE   DEPOSITS  393 

external  bodies.  Not  only  is  the  emanation  necessary  to  produce 
this  eflfect,  but  the  amount  of  active  deposit  is  always  propor- 
tional to  the  amount  of  emanation.  In  fact,  the  power  of  imparting 
activity  is  a  characteristic  property  of  the  emanations  and  is 
observed  wherever  any  emanation  is  present.  For  example,  the 
radium  emanation  stored  by  itself  in  a  vessel  will  produce  activity 
on  bodies  in  contact  with  it  as  long  as  the  emanation  remains, 
and  in  amount  always  proportional  to  the  amount  of  emanation 
present.  On  account  of  the  rapid  decay  of  the  emanations  of 
actinium  and  of  thorium,  the  amount  of  emanation  distributed 
by  diffusion  decreases  rapidly  from  the  surface  of  the  emanating 
matter  (Section  139).  Consequently  the  amount  of  active  deposit 
on  a  given  plate  decreases  rapidly  with  its  distance  from  the 
radio-active  preparation.  On  account  of  the  slow  decay  of  the 
radium  emanation,  this  want  of  uniform  distribution  is  not 
noticeable  in  vessels  of  ordinary  dimensions. 

146.     Production  and  decay  of  the  active  deposits.    The 

active  deposit  arising  from  each  of  the  emanations  has  character- 
istic radiating  properties,  and  also  a  characteristic  curve  of  decay 
with  time.     It  will  be  shown  later  that  the  decay  curve  of  each 
active  deposit  depends  greatly  on  the  time  of  exposure  to  the 
emanation,  and  also  on  the  type  of  rays,  whether  a  or  /S  or  7,  used 
for  measurement.     This  variation  in  the  decay  curves   is  due 
to   the    complexity   of    the    active    matter    considered.     Under 
ordinary  conditions,  each  of  the  three  emanations  give  rise  to 
a  series  of  four  or  more  successive  products.     It  is  not  desirable 
at  this  stage  to  discuss  the  decay  curves  in  detail,  for  this  will  be 
done  later  when  the  active  deposits  are  analysed  into  their  com- 
ponents.   A  close  study  of  the  phenomena  shows  clearly  that  each 
of  the  emanations  is  transformed  into  a  new  type  of  matter.     For 
example,  the  atom  of  radium  emanation  in  breaking  up  emits  an 
0  particle.     The  residue  of  the  atom  is  lighter  than  before  and 
becomes  the  atom  of  a  new  substance,  radium  A,  which  at  ordinary 
temperature  behaves  as  a  solid  and  tends  to  adhere  to  the  surface 
of  bodies  to  which  it  diffuses  or  to  which  it  is  conveyed  by  an 
electric  field.     Radium  A  undergoes  a  series  of  transformations 
giving  rise  in  turn  to  new  types  of  matter,  radium  B,  radium  C, 


394  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  [CH. 

etc.  A  similar  result  occurs  in  the  cases  of  the  thorium  or 
actinium  emanation.  The  first  transformation  product  of  the 
emanation  in  each  case  behaves  as  a  solid  known  as  thorium  A, 
and  actinium  A  respectively. 

We  have  seen  that  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  active  deposits 
depends  on  a  number  of  conditions,  resulting  from  the  complexity 
of  the  active  matter.  The  decay  for  the  first  few  hours  is  in 
general  not  exponential,  but  ultimately  each  active  deposit  decays 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time.  The  half  value 
period  is  for  the  active  deposit  of 

Hadium  26*8  minutes 

Actinium        36  „ 

Thorium         10*6  hours. 

The  activity  of  the  radium  and  actinium  deposits  falls  to  a  small 
fi:^ction  of  its  original  value  in  four  hours.  On  account  of  the 
slower  decay  of  the  deposit  of  thorium,  its  activity  can  be  detected 
after  several  days. 

The  active  deposits  can  be  readily  distinguished  from  each 
other  by  their  characteristic  decay  curves,  and  by  the  penetrating 
power  of  the  types  of  radiation  emitted. 

If  a  body  is  placed  in  a  vessel  containing  a  constant  quantity 
of  emanation,  the  activity  imparted  to  it  increases  with  the  time 
and  ultimately  reaches  a  constant  maximum  value.  The  growth 
of  activity  is  quite  analogous  to  the  recovery  of  activity  of 
uranium  after  removal  of  uranium  X,  or  of  thorium  after  removal 
of  thorium  X,  and  the  maximum  is  explained  in  a  similar  way. 
If  a  body  is  exposed  in  the  presence  of  a  constant  quantity  of 
emanation  for  sufficient  time  for  the  active  deposit  to  reach  an 
equilibrium  value,  the  decay  of  activity  with  time,  measured  by 
one  of  the  types  of  radiation  is  given  by  ///max.  =/(0  where /(O 
is  some  function  of  the  time  t 

The  curve  showing  the  rise  of  activity  with  time  measured  by 
the  same  type  of  radiation  is  complementary  to  the  decay  curve. 
Consequently  the  rise  curve  is  expressed  by  the  relation 

///max.  =  1-/(0. 

Such  a  relation  always  holds  between  rise  and  recovery  curves 


l]  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  395 

provided  the  active  matter  in  the  latter  case  is  supplied  at  a 
constant  rate. 

It  follows  fix)m  these  considerations  that  the  amount  of  active 
deposit  to  be  derived  from  a  constant  supply  of  the  emanations  of 
nulium  and  actinium  reaches  a  practical  maximum  in  3  or  4  hours ; 
in  the  case  of  thorium  the  corresponding  interval  is  about  3  days. 

147.  Active  products  of  very  quick  decay.  In  addition 
to  the  active  matter  derived  from  the  emanations  mentioned  in 
the  last  section,  proof  has  recently  been  obtained  of  the  existence 
of  an  fl  ray  product  of  rapid  decay  derived  from  the  thorium  and 
also  from  the  actinium  emanation.  The  history  of  the  discovery 
of  these  products  is  of  unusual  interest  as  it  illustrates  possible 
methods  of  attack  to  detect  the  existence  of  very  rapidly  decaying 
products.  Bronson*  measured  the  relative  a  ray  activity  of  the 
emanation  of  actinium  and  of  its  active  deposit  in  equilibrium 
with  it.  Since  it  was  known  that  the  active  deposit  of  the  latter 
contained  one  a  ray  product,  actinium  C,  it  was  to  be  expected 
that  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled  twm  the  emanation  should 
be  equal  to  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled  from  actinium  C  in 
equilibrium  with  it.  Bronson,  however,  found  that  twice  as  many 
«  particles  were  expelled  by  the  former.  In  a  similar  way,  it 
was  supposed  at  the  time  of  the  experiments  that  the  active 
deposit  of  thorium  contained  two  successive  a  ray  products.  On 
this  view,  experiment  showed  that  the  emanation  of  thorium 
emitted  four  o  particles  for  one  from  each  of  the  later  products. 
Geiger  and  Marsdenf  investigated  the  question  later  by  a  diflferent 
method.  Using  the  experimentjil  arrangement  shown  in  Fig.  48 
(Section  75)  they  observed  that  the  majority  of  the  a  particles 
from  the  actinium  emanation  appeared  as  doubles,  indicating  that 
rither  the  atom  in  breaking  up  emitted  two  a  particles  or  that 
the  emanation  gave  rise  to  another  a  ray  product  of  very  rapid 
transformation.  In  a  similar  way,  they  found  that  the  scintilla- 
tions from  thorium  did  not  appear  as  simultaneous  doubles  but 
one  scintillation  was  always  followed  by  another  within  an  average 
uiterval  of  about  1/5  of  a  second.   They  concluded  that  the  thorium 

♦  BronsoD,  Phil  Mag.  16,  p.  291,  1908. 

t  Geiger  and  Marsden,  Phys,  Zeit,  11,  p.  7,  1910. 


396  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  [CH. 

emanation  must  contain  two  a  ray  products,  the  latter  of  which  had  I 
an  average  life  of  about  1/5  of  a  second.  In  1911,  Geiger*  found 
evidence  by  the  scintillation  method  that  two  sets  of  o  particles  of 
ranges  5*7  and  6*5  cms.  were  emitted  by  the  actinium  emanation. 
The  product  which  emitted  the  a  rays  of  long  range  was  found  to 
move  in  the  electric  field  as  if  it  carried  a  positive  charge.  This 
was  clearly  shown  by  the  arrangement  given  in 
Fig.  96.  The  actinium  emanation  was  sucked 
through  a  metal  tube  of  rectangular  section. 
The  part  AB  of  the  tube,  about  2*5  cms.  long, 
was  cut  out  and  the  opening  covered  by  a  thin 
sheet  of  mica  through  which  the  a  particles  j-jg  9^ 

escaped.  An  insulated  wire  W  placed  to  one 
side  could  be  charged  negatively  to  any  potential  required.  It 
the  short-lived  product  following  the  emanation  is  positivelf 
chai-ged,  this  product,  as  soon  as  it  is  formed,  will  be  drawn  to  the 
negative  electrode  with  a  speed  depending  on  the  intensity  of  the 
electric  field.  This  was  found  to  be  the  case,  for  on  charging  the 
wire  W  to  a  high  negative  potential,  the  a  rays  of  range  6*5  cms. 
were  greatly  reduced  in  number,  while  those  of  range  5*7  cms. 
were  unaffected.  By  assuming  that  the  charged  radio-active 
atom  had  the  same  mobility  as  the  positive  ion  in  air,  it  was 
deduced  that  the  period  of  the  new  substance  of  the  actinium 
emanation  was  about  1/500  of  a  second.  In  a  similar  way,  evidence 
was  found  of  the  existence  of  two  a  ray  products  in  the  thorium 
emanation,  but  the  difference  of  the  ranges  was  less  marked  than 
in  the  case  of  the  emanation  of  the  actinium.  There  seems  to  be 
no  doubt  that  these  products  of  quick  decay  behave  as  solids  and 
not  as  gases,  and  for  this  reason  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  first 
members  of  the  actinium  and  thorium  active  depositsf.  These 
products  will  be  called  actinium  A  and  thorium  A  respectively. 

The  presence  of  these  substances  can  be  shown  in  a  striking 
way  by  a  simple  experiment.  Suppose,  for  example,  a  highly 
emanating  preparation  of  meso-thorium  or  radio-thorium  is  placed 
in  a  small  metal  box.  An  endless  metal  wire  insulated  from 
the  box  by  ebonite  stoppers  and  charged  negatively  is  drawn  at  a 

♦  Geiger.  Phil.  Mtuj.  22,  p.  201,  1911. 

t  Rutherford  and  Geiger,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  621,  1911. 


X]  ACTIVE   DEPOSITS  397 

constant  rate  through  the  box.  Some  of  the  positively  charged 
atoms  of  thorium  A  are  deposited  on  the  wire.  When  a  long 
screen  of  zinc  sulphide  is  placed  close  to  the  wire  where  it  issues 
from  the  box,  a  marked  phosphorescence  is  observed,  the  intensity 
of  which  falls  off  rapidly  with  distance  from  the  box.  This 
luminosity  is  due  to  the  o  rays  emitted  from  thorium  A.  The 
period  of  decay  of  thorium  A  can  readily  be  estimated  by  observ- 
ing the  number  of  scintillations  emitted  from  the  wire  at  different 
distances  ftx)m  the  box  when  the  rate  of  translation  of  the  wire  is 
known.  The  presence  of  actinium  A  can  be  shown  in  a  similar 
way  using  a  strong  actinium  preparation.  In  consequence,  how- 
ever, of  the  rapidity  of  its  decay,  the  wire  has  to  be  moved  at  a 
much  greater  speed  to  show  the  corresponding  effects. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  ordinary  methods  for  measuring  the  rate 
of  decay  of  active  matter  are  not  directly  applicable  to  such 
swiftly  changing  substances.  The  periods  of  thorium  A  and 
actinium  A  were,  however,  determined  by  Moseley  and  Fajans* 
by  a  new  method  devised  by  them.  A  rapidly  rotating  metal 
disc  was  employed.  The  active  matter  whose  decay  was  to  be 
tested  was  deposited  from  the  emanation  on  the  face  of  the  disc 
by  charging  the  disc  negatively.  The  activity  of  the  matter  so 
deposited  was  examined  at  different  angular  distances  from  the 
point  of  deposit  by  electric  methods.  In  this  way,  they  found  by 
direct  measurement  that  actinium  A  has  a  half  value  period  of 

002  second,  and  thorium  A  of  0*14  second.  Actinium  A  has  the 
shortest  period  of  any  product  that  has  so  far  been  detected.  The 
principle  of  the  method  developed  by  Moseley  and  Fajans  should 
be  capable  under  suitable  conditions  of  determining  the  decay  of 
any  a  ray  product  whose  period  of  decay  is  not  less  than  1/100,000 
of  a  second. 

The  product  of  the  radium  emanation  which  corresponds  to 
actinium  A  and  thorium  A  is  called  radium  A,  and  has  a  period  of 

3  minutes.  This  product  has  long  been  known,  and  its  life  is  long 
*inough  to  permit  a  determination  of  its  period  by  ordinary  methods. 

148.  Concentration  of  the  deposit  on  the  negative 
electrode.     When  an  emanating  compound  of  thorium  is  placed 

*  Moseley  and  Fajans,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  629,  1911. 


398 


ACTIVE   DEPOSITS 


[CE 


in  a  closed  vessel,  the  whole  interior  surface  becomes  strongly 
active.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  strong  electric  field,  the  writer* 
found  that  the  activity  was  confined  entirely  to  the  negative 
electrode.  By  suitable  arrangements,  the  whole  of  the  active 
deposit,  which  was  previously  distributed  over  the  surface  of  the 
vessel,  could  be  concentrated  on  a  small  negative  electrode  placed 
inside  the  vessel.  An  experimental  arrangement  for  this  purpose 
is  shown  in  Fig.  97. 

•  The  metal  vessel  V  containing  a  large  amount  of  thorium 
oxide  is  connected  with  the  positive  pole  of  a  battery  of  about 
300  volts.  The  wire  A B  to  he  made  active  is  fastened  to  a  stouter 
rod  BC,  passing  through  an  ebonite  plug  inside  a  short  cylinder  J), 


Fig.  97. 

fixed  in  the  side  of  the  vessel.  This  rod  is  connected  with  the 
negative  pole  of  the  battery.  In  this  way  the  wire  AB  is  the 
only  conductor  with  a  negative  charge,  and  it  is  found  that  the 
whole  of  the  active  deposit  is  concentrated  upon  it. 

In  this  manner  it  is  possible  to  make  a  short  thin  metal  Mrire 
over  10,000  times  as  active  per  unit  surface  as  the  thorium  oxide 
from  which  the  active  deposit  is  derived. 

In  a  strong  electric  field  at  atmospheric  pressure,  the  activity 
on  the  wire  as  anode  is  only  about  1  '200  of  the  amount  deposited 
when  the  wire  is  cathode. 

In  a   similar  way,  the   active   deposit  of  radium  is  mainly 

•  Rutherford.  Phil.  Mag.  i9,  p.  161.  1900. 


1  ACTIVE   DEPOSITS  399 

mcentrated  on  the  cathode.  Under  ordinary  experimental  con- 
itions  about  5  per  cent,  is  deposited  on  the  anode.  Wellisch  and 
Jronson*  have  found  that  in  a  very  strong  electric  field,  the  small 
yctivity  which  appears  on  the  anode  is  due  to  the  diflfusion  of 
mcharged  atoms  of  the  active  deposit. 

The  distribution  of  the  active  deposit  of  actinium  in  an  electric 
field  has  been  examined  by  Russ"f-  and  Kennedy^.  In  the  ex- 
periments of  Buss  two  parallel  charged  plates  were  supported 
symmetrically  above  an  actinium  preparation,  which  emitted 
emanation  freely.  The  ratio  of  the  amounts  of  the  active 
deposits  on  the  positive  and  negative  plate  was  found  to  vary 
with  the  distance  from  the  actinium.  Close  to  the  actinium, 
the  activity  mostly  appeared  on  the  cathode.  At  a  considerable 
distance,  the  activity  on  the  anode  was  about  half  that  on  the 
cathode.  There  is  thus  a  wide  difference  under  some  conditions 
in  the  character  of  the  distribution  of  the  active  deposits  of 
actinium  and  thorium  in  an  electric  field. 

The  concentration  of  the  active  deposit  on  the  cathode  in- 
dicates that  the  carriers  of  the  active  matter  must  he  positively 
charged.     Since  the  emanation  of  thorium,  for  example,  breaks 
up  with  the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle  which  carries  two  unit 
positive   charges   2e,  it  would   naturally   be   expected   that   the 
residue  of  the  atom  would  retain  a  charge  —  2e,  and  would  travel 
in  an  electric  field  to  the  anode.     The  reverse  is  observed.     We 
have  seen,   however,   that   the   passage   of  a  particles   through 
matter  liberates  a  large  number  of  S  particles,  i.e.  slow  speed 
negative  electrons.     The  escape  of  the  a  particle  from  the  atom 
of  the  emanation  may  in  a  similar  way  liberate  several  electrons 
from  the  atom  itself     If  three  electrons  were  emitted  at  the  same 
time  as  the  a  particle,  the  residue  of  the  atom  would  retain  a 
charge  -f-  e.     Whatever  may  be  the  actual  process  involved,  the 
general  evidence  obtained  fi'om  recoil  phenomena  in  an  electric 
field  indicates  that  the  residue  of  the  atom  after  expulsion  of 
4n  a  particle  retains  a  unit  positive  charge.     While  this  accounts 
"or  the  concentration  on  the  cathode  of  the  active  deposits  of 

*  WeUisch  and  Bronson,  Phil.  Mag.  23,  p.  714,  1912. 
+  Ru88,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  pp.  601,  737,  1908. 
t  Kennedy,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  744,  1909. 


400  ACTIVE   DEPOSITS  [CH. 

radium  and  thorium,  it  does  not.  without  other  assumptions  explain 
the  complex  effects  observed  for  actinium. 

The  general  results  so  far  obtained  in  the  case  of  actinium 
indicate  that  the  carriers  of  the  active  deposit  which  have  a 
negative  charge  increase  relatively  in  number  with  the  time  that 
the  carriers  exist  in  the  gas.  This  may  possibly  be  connected 
with  the  presence  of  the  a  ray  product  of  short  life  into  which 
the  emanation  is  transformed.  Further  investigation,  however,  is 
required  before  any  definite  explanation  can  be  given. 

149.  Effect  of  electric  field.  In  a  strong  electric  field  at 
atmospheric  pressure,  when  the  emanation  is  not  present  in  large 
amount,  the  active  deposit  is  mainly  concentrated  on  the  negative 
electrode.  Without  a  field,  the  carriers  of  the  active  deposit  diffuse 
through  the  gas,  and  are  ultimately  deposited  on  the  walls  of  the 
containing  vessel.  The  actual  amount  of  active  deposit  to  be 
derived  from  the  emanation  is  the  same  whether  it  is  concentrated 
by  an  electric  field  or  diffused  over  the  walls  of  the  vessel.  In 
an  electric  field  of  moderate  strength,  only  a  fraction  of  the  active 
deposit  is  carried  to  the  negative  electrode.  This  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  positively  charged  carriers  behave  like  positive  ions, 
and  some  lose  their  charge  by  recombination  with  negative  ions. 
Only  the  carriers  which  retain  a  positive  charge  are  deposited 
on  the  negative  electrode  by  the  field.  The  uncharged  carriers 
diffuse  to  the  sides  as  in  the  case  of  no  electric  field. 

The  loss  of  charge  by  recombination  has  been  clearly  sho^n 
by  Helming*  and  H.  W.  Schmidt f.  In  the  experiments  of  the 
latter,  the  amounts  of  active  deposit  obtained  in  a  given  time  on 
a  negatively  charged  wire  exposed  in  a  vessel  filled  with  radium 
emanation  were  compared  for  different  voltages.  The  curve  showing 
the  relation  between  amount  of  active  deposit  and  voltage  was  very 
similar  in  shape  to  the  curve  showing  the  relation  between  ionisa- 
tion  current  through  the  gas  and  voltage  applied.  It  will  be  seen 
later  that  the  charged  carriers  travel  in  an  electric  field  with  about 
the  same  velocity  as  the  positive  ions  formed  in  the  same  gas. 
Consequently  the  close  similarity  of  the  two  curves  shows  that  the 

*  Henning,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  7,  p.  562,  1902. 
t  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Phyt.  Zeit.  9,  p.  184,  1908. 


\ 


X]  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  401 

carriers  lose  their  charge  by  recombination  at  relatively  the  same 
rate  as  the  positive  ions  produced  by  the  radiations  in  the  gas. 
In  fact,  from  the  point  of  view  of  recombination,  they  may  be 
considered  to  be  positive  ions. 

In  order  to  concentrate  most  of  the  active  deposit  on  the 
negative  electrode,  it  is  consequently  necessary  to  apply  a  voltage 
sufficient  to  obtain  "  saturation  "  as  regards  ionisation  of  the  gas. 
It  is  difficult  to  concentrate  the  deposit  to  any  marked  extent  in 
the  presence  of  a  large  quantity  of  emanation  when  the  ionisation 
is  very  intense  unless  a  very  strong  electric  field  is  applied. 

150.  Effect  of  pressure.  In  the  original  experiments  on 
the  active  deposit  of  thorium,  the  writer  showed  that  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  active  deposit  iii  an  electric  field  depended  greatly 
on  the  pressure  of  the  gas.  The  emanating  thorium  compound 
was  placed  inside  a  long  closed  cylinder  about  4  cms.  in  diameter 
through  which  passed  an  insulated  central  rod,  which  was  kept 
charged  to  —  50  volts.  Down  to  a  pressure  of  about  10  mms.  of 
mercury,  the  activity  of  the  cathode  was  found  to  be  independent 
of  the  pressure.  With  still  further  lowering  of  the  pressure,  the 
activity  on  the  cathode  steadily  diminished,  and  at  a  pressure  of 
1/10  mm.  was  only  a  fraction  of  its  original  value.  This  was  not 
due  to  any  change  in  the  amount  of  active  deposit  formed  from 
the  emanation,  but  the  active  deposit  at  low  pressure  was  found  to 
be  mainly  distributed  over  the  surface  of  the  cylinder. 

Experiments  of  a  similar  kind  were  made  later  by  Makower* 
with  the  radium  emanation,  and  a  similar  eflfect  of  pressure  on 
distribution  of  the  active  deposit  on  the  electrodes  was  observed. 

The  explanation  of  these  phenomena  is  clear  in  the  light  of 
later  experiments.  The  emanation,  for  example,  of  radium,  breaks 
up  with  the  emission  of  an  a  particle  with  great  velocity.  The 
residue  of  the  atom  acquires  an  equal  and  opposite  momentum, 
and  recoils  at  a  considerable  speed.  Since  the  atomic  weight 
of  the  emanation  is  222  and  the  a  particle  is  a  helium  atom  of 
atomic  weight  4,  the  residual  atoms  recoil  with  about  1/55  of  the 
velocity  of  the  a  particle  and  also  about  1/55  of  its  kinetic  energy. 

*  Makower,  Phil,  Mag.  10,  y.  526.  1905.    See  also  Jackson,  Phil.  Mag.  10, 
p.  532,  1905. 

R.  R.-A.  26 


402  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  [CH. 

In  consequence,  the  residue  of  the  atom  is  able  to  penetrate  a 
certain  thickness  of  matter  before  it  is  brought  to  rest.  In 
consequence  of  its  large  kinetic  energy,  an  electric  field  of  ordinary 
strength  has  no  appreciable  effect  in  accelerating  or  retarding  the 
charged  atom,  but  is  able  to  direct  it  to  the  cathode  when  once 
its  velocity  has  been  largely  lost  by  collision  with  the  gas  molecules. 
The  average  distance  traversed  by  the  recoil  atom  before  it  is 
brought  to  rest  depends  on  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the  gas 
through  which  it  moves. 

At  ordinary  pressures,  the  greater  number  of  the  recoil  atoms 
is  brought  to  rest  in  the  gas  within  a  short  distance,  and  are 
then  directed  by  the  electric  field. to  the  cathode.  At  low  pressures, 
however,  a  large  proportion  of  the  recoil  atoms  is  able  to  pass 
through  the  gas  before  their  velocity  is  much  reduced,  and  embed 
themselves  in  the  walls  of  the  vessel.  An  electric  field  under 
these  conditions  has  little  eflect  in  concentrating  the  recoil  atoms 
on  the  cathode.  It  is  consequently  to  be  expected  that  at  lovr 
pressures  the  deposit  should  be  distributed  on  the  interior  surface 
of  the  vessel,  and  its  distribution  should  be  only  slightly  aflFected 
by  an  electric  field.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  experiments  of 
Makower,  and  later  of  Russ*,  who  made  a  systematic  examination 
of  the  distribution  in  an  electric  field  of  the  active  deposit  of 
radium  at  various  pressures.  The  amounts  of  active  deposit  ob- 
tained on  a  central  wire  in  a  vessel  were  compared  when  charged 
to  equal  and  opposite  potentials.  For  radium,  the  amount  collected 
on  the  cathode  at  low  pressures  of  air  fell  to  a  very  small  fractioa 
of  its  value  at  ordinary  pressure.  The  amount  collected  on  th& 
wire  as  anode  increased  slightly  with  lowering  of  pressure,  but  at 
the  lowest  pressure  used,  the  amount  was  always  slightly  less  than 
that  obtained  on  the  wire  as  cathode.  A  similar  effect  was  ob- 
served  in  hydrogen  and  sulphur  dioxide.  In  the  case  of  hydrogen, 
the  recoil  atom  has  a  larger  range  than  in  air,  and  consequently 
the  amount  of  deposit  on  the  cathode  and  anode  was  practically 
the  same  for  all  pressures  lower  than  1  mm.  Kennedy  f  examined 
the  distribution  of  the  active  deposit  of  actinium  between  two 
parallel  plates  placed  close  together.     At  ordinary  pressure,  the 

•  Ru88,  Phil,  Mag.  IB,  p.  601,  1908. 
t  Kennedy,  Phil.  Mag,  18,  p.  744,  1909. 


X]  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  403 

active  deposit  was  mainly  directed  to  the  cathode,  but  at  low 
pressures  tended  to  be  equally  distributed  on  the  two  plates. 

151.  Range  of  the  recoil  atoms.  The  distance  traversed 
by  the  recoil  atoms  in  a  gas  can  be  deduced  from  the  observed 
distribution  of  the  active  deposit  on  the  two  electrodes.  Suppose 
that  the  recoil  atom  has  a  range  i2  in  a  gas  before  it  is  brought 
to  rest  by  collision  with  the  gas  molecules  and  that  this  range 
varies  inversely  as  the  pressure  p.  The  recoil  atoms  are  all  sup- 
posed to  have  a  positive  charge,  and  consequently  travel  to  the 
cathode  if  they  are  stopped  in  the  gas  before  reaching  the  anode. 
Suppose  the  emanation  is  uniformly  distributed  between  two 
parallel  plates,  and  the  amount  of  active  deposit  on  the  electrodes 
is  determined  for  a  saturation  voltage.  Consider  the  emanation 
confined  between  two  planes  parallel  to  the  plates  distant  a  and 
x-\-dx  from  the  anode.  Since  the  recoil  atoms  are  on  an  average 
expelled  equally  in  all  directions,  the  recoil  atom  making  an 
angle  0  with  the  axis  of  x  just  reaches  the  plate  if 

6  =  COS"*  n  • 

If  n  recoil  atoms  are  generated  per  second  per  unit  volume, 
the  number  per  second  which  reaches  unit  area  of  the  anode  before 
they  are  stopped  by  the  gas  is  given  by 

\ndx\        ^miOdO  or  \n\\  —  ^\dx. 

Integrating  this  over  the  distance  d  between   the  plates,  the 
number  per  second  reaching  the  anode  by  recoil  is 

indfl-^)  if  ^  ip  >d (Casel), 

and  ^nR  if  R<d (Case  2). 

The  fraction  p  of  the  total  number  of  recoil  atoms  which  reach 
the  anode  in  a  strong  electric  field  is  consequently  given  by 


^^^v'ir)  f^r^^®(i)' 


and  P  =  Tj  f^r  ^^^^^  (2)- 


4(2 

26—2 


404 


ACTIVE  DEPOSITS 


[CH. 


If  Rj  be  the  range  of  the  recoil  atom  at  1  mm.  pressure,  the 
range  at  a  pressure  p  is  Ri/p. 

Consequently    p  =  ^  n  —  ^-J  for  case  (1), 

and  p  =s  RJ^pd  for  case  (2). 

In  the  case  (2),  the  value  of  p  varies  inversely  as  the  pressure 
of  the  gas.  The  accuracy  of  this  theory  can  be  tested  by  making 
use  of  the  data  given  by  Kennedy  (loc.  cit)  for  the  distribution 
of  the  active  deposit  of  actinium  between  two  parallel  plates  at 
various  pressures  of  air.  The  plates  were  2  mms.  apart  and  a 
saturation  P.D.  of  250  volts  was  applied.  The  actual  amount  of 
active  deposit  on  the  two  plates  varied  with  the  pressure  on 
account  of  the  variation  of  eflfects  of  diflFusion  of  the  emanation 
with  pressure,  but  the  relative  amounts  on  the  two  plates  need 
only  be  considered. 


1 
1 

PreBgnre 

Amount  on  cathode 
Amount  on  anode 

Fraction  p 
on  anode 

•49 

Kange  R^  at      i 

1  mm.  pressare    , 

(calculated)       ' 

'5  mm. 

1-03 

1 

1       ,. 

103 

•49 

1 

2       „ 

1-09 

•48 

7-5    „ 

1-29 

•44 

/6-2  cms. 

12       „ 

1-48 

•40 

6-0    „ 

25       „ 

2-19 

•31 

6-6    „ 

42       „ 

4-66 

•18 

]e-o   „ 

1         72       „ 

9-2 

1          ^098 

5*6     „ 

92       „ 

12-1 

•076 

\5-6     „ 

i       136       „ 

14-6 

•064 

6-9     „ 

;      192       „ 

22-2 

'          ^043 

6-6     „ 

320       „ 

37*4 

•027 

6-9     „ 

750       „ 

45 

'          -021 

12-2     „ 

A  simple  consideration  shows  that  we  should  not  expect  ex- 
periment and  theory  to  agree  well  when  the  fraction  on  the  anode 
becomes  small,  for  under  such  conditions  the  presence  in  the  gas 
of  a  small  fraction  of  the  recoil  atoms  which  have  lost  their  charge 
by  recombination  would  have  a  large  eflfect.  In  addition,  it  is 
necessary  at  higher  pressures  in  the  case  of  actinium  to  take 
account  of  the  rapid  transformation  of  actinium  A  and  the  possible 


X]  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  405 

change  of  sign  of  the  recoil  atom.     The  values  of  the  range  iZi, 

deduced  for  pressures  between  7*6  and  92  mms.  are  in  reasonable 

agreement,  and  show  that  the  average  range  iJ,  of  the  recoil  atom 

from  the  emanation  of  actinium  is  about  6  cms.  at  1  mm.  pressure 

or  08  mm.  at  atmospheric  pressure. 

A  consideration  of  the  results  given  by  Kennedy  for  hydrogen 
shows  that  the  range  in  that  gas  is  about  4  times  that  in  air  at 
a  corresponding  pressure.  The  ranges  of  the  recoil  atoms  deduced 
in  this  way  are  in  fair  agreement  with  the  ranges  determined 
directly  by  Russ  and  Makower*  and  by  Wertensteinf  for  the 
recoil  of  radium  B  from  radium  A.  The  latter  found  that  the 
maximum  range  of  the  recoil  atoms  in  this  latter  case  was 
012  mm.  for  air  and  about  0*7  mm.  for  hydrogen  at  atmospheric 
pressure.  The  average  range  of  the  recoil  atoms  was  about  one 
fc  thalf  of  the  maximum.  The  range  of  a  recoil  atom  from  different 
0  my  products  varies  of  course  with  the  speed  of  the  expelled 
a  particle  and  also  with  the  mass  of  the  recoil  atom,  but  the 
diflferences  in  range  would  not  be  large  in  ordinary  cases. 

162.    Effect    of    gravity  on   the   distribution.      In  the 

absence  of  an  electric  field,  the  active  deposit  is  distributed  on 
Wlies  near  it  by  the  process  of  diffusion.  P.  Curie  observed  that 
the  amount  of  deposit  obtained  on  parallel  plates  placed  in  a  large 
vessel  containing  emanation  was  approximately  proportional  to 
the  distance  between  the  plates  when  the  distance  did  not  exceed 
3  cms,  DebierneJ  later  examined  the  distribution  in  more  detail 
and  found  that  the  amount  of  active  deposit  tended  to  reach  a 
maximum  limiting  value  for  a  certain  distance.  The  limiting 
distance  decreased  with  the  amount  of  emanation  present.  This 
effect  is  diflScult  to  explain  unless  it  be  supposed  that  the  carriers 
of  the  active  deposit  tend  in  time  to  aggregate  together,  and  thus 
diffuse  very  slowly.  An  examination  of  the  decay  curves  indicated 
that  the  matter  diffusing  to  the  plates  was  mainly  radium  A. 
The  atoms  of  radium  A  must  lose  their  positive  charge  very 
rapidly,  due  to  recombination  with  the  negative  ions,  especially 

*  Buss  and  Makower,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  82,  p.  205,  1909. 
t  Wertenstein,  C.  R,  160,  p.  869,  1910;  151,  p.  469,  1910. 
t  Dobieme,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  97,  1909. 


406 


ACnVB  DEPOSITS 


[CE 


when  a  considerable  amount  of  emanation  is  present.  It  appears 
probable,  therefore,  that  the  atoms  of  radium  A  are  for  the  most 
part  uncharged  when  they  reach  the  walls  by  diffusion. 

If  the  atoms  of  the  active  deposit  remain  as  single  molecules, 
it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  their  distribution  would  be  affected 
by  gravity.  Mme  Curie*,  however,  has  described  some  interesting 
experiments  which  show  that  under  certain  conditions  gravity 
does  produce  an  effect.  The  arrangement  employed  is  shown  in 
Fig.  98. 

A  bell  jar  contained  a  number  of  pairs  of  parallel  plates  of 
equal  size,  some  vertical  and  some  horizontal.     By  covering  the 


Fig.  98. 

outer  faces  of  the  plates  by  metal  foil,  it  was  arranged  that  only 
the  two  opposing  faces  of  the  plates  themselves  were  made  active. 
After  exposure  for  some  days  to  the  emanation,  the  vertical  plates 
showed  equal  activities,  but  the  activity  on  the  lower  of  the  hori- 
zontal plates  was  found  to  be  several  times  greater  than  the 
corresponding  upper  plate. 

This  effect  indicates  that  nuclei  of  some  kind  must  be  present 
in  the  gas  on  which  the  active  deposit  collects  by  diffusion.  These 
nuclei  fall  slowly  through  the  gas  under  gravity,  and  make  the 
lower  plate  more  active  than  the  upper.     In  order  to  exhibit  this 

♦  Mme  Curie,  C.  R,  146,  p.  477,  1907;  Le  Radium,  4,  p.  881,  1907. 


X]  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  407 

effect,  the  gas  must  Dot  be  at  too  low  a  pressure  and  water  vapour 
must  be  present  in  reasonable  amount.  It  is  produced  in  moist 
air,  hydrogen,  and  carbonic  acid.  The  effect  increases  with 
increase  of  distance  between  the  plates,  and  is  not  appreciable  for 
distances  less  than  2  mms.  It  increases  also  with  increase  of  con- 
centration of  the  emanation.  The  general  results  indicate  that 
nuclei  are  produced  in  the  gas  by  the  radiations  from  the  emana- 
tion when  water  is  present.  These  nuclei  are  invisible,  but  act  as 
centres  for  the  collection  of  the  active  deposit,  and  gradually  fall 
under  gravity  like  a  fine  cloud,  carrying  the  deposit  with  them. 
Mme  Curie  estimated  that  the  particles  fall  with  a  velocity  of  the 
order  of  10"^  cms.  per  second. 

163.     Velocity  of  the  canieni  in  an  electric  field.     We 

have  seen  that  the  carriers  of  the  active  deposit  for  thorium  and 
radium  are  charged  positively,  and  travel  to  the  negative  electrode 
at  ordinary  pressure.  Fehrle*  showed  that  the  carriers  travel 
along  the  lines  of  force  in  an  electric  field.  For  example,  a  nega- 
tively charged  plate  exposed  in  the  presence  of  an  emanation  has 
more  activity  on  the  edges  and  comers  than  on  the  central  part. 

At  the  moment  of  their  expulsion,  the  carriers  are  projected 
with  a  speed  of  about  3  x  10'  cms.  per  second,  but  are  brought  to 
rest  in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure  after  traversing  about  1/10  mm. 
The  carriers  are  then  positively  charged,  and  unless  they  lose 
their  charge  by  recombination  travel  through  the  gas  to  the 
cathode. 

In  order  to  obtain  some  evidence  of  the  size  of  these  carriers, 
the  writerf  determined  their  velocity  in  an  electric  field,  by  a 
special  method.  The  carriers  were  found  to  travel  at  the  same 
rate  as  positive  ions  produced  in  the  gas,  and  had  a  velocity  of 
about  1*4  cms.  per  second  for  a  gradient  of  one  volt  per  cm.  The 
velocity  of  the  positively  charged  carriers  in  the  recoil  of  thorium 
D  from  thorium  C  was  later  measured  by  FranckJ,  and  found  to  be 
about  the  same  as  for  the  positive  ion  in  the  same  gas.  There  is 
good  evidence  that  the  carriers  of  the  active  deposit  have  a  single 

♦  Fehrle,  Phys.  Zeit.  S,  p.  130,  1902. 

t  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag,  5,  p.  95,  1903. 

X  FraDok,  Verh,  d.  D.  Phyt.  Qe$.  11,  p.  897,  1909. 


408  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  [CH 

unit  charge,  and  have  an  atomic  weight  above  200.  The  agree 
ment  of  the  velocity  of  the  carrier  with  that  of  the  positive  ior 
does  not  of  itself  throw  any  definite  light  on  the  mass  of  the 
carrier.     (See  Section  22.) 

Since  the  carrier  of  the  active  deposit  travels  at  the  same  rate 
as  a  positive  ion,  and  also  loses  its  charge  by  recombination  in  the 
same  way,  the  equations  of  its  motion  through  a  gas  in  an  electric 
field  are  the  same  as  for  the  positive  ion. 

Since  under  ordinary  experimental  conditions,  the  number  ol 
ions  present  in  the  gas  is  very  large  compared  with  the  numbei 
of  carriers  of  active  deposit  present,  the  fraction  of  the  carriers 
which  lose  their  charge  by  recombination  must  be  the  same  as  foi 
the  ordinary  ions.  For  example,  if  the  current  through  the  ionised 
gas  is  1/10  of  its  saturation  value,  9/10  of  the  ions  and  of  the 
carriers  have  lost  their  charge  by  recombination,  and  only  1/10  ol 
the  total  number  of  positive  ions  and  of  carriers  reach  the  cathode. 

Physical  aiid  chemical  properties  of  Uie  active  deposits. 

In  the  original  experiments  on  the  active  deposit  of  thorium, 
Rutherford  showed  that  the  activity  observed  must  be  due  to  an 
invisible  film  of  radio-active  matter  deposited  on  the  surface  of  th€ 
material.  For  example,  the  deposit  on  a  platinum  plate  was  to  » 
large  extent  removed  by  placing  the  plate  in  strong  hydrochloric 
or  sulphuric  acid.  The  activity  was  not  destroyed  by  this  process 
for  on  evaporating  the  acid,  it  remained  behind.  In  general,  tht 
active  deposits  of  thorium,  radium,  and  actinium  are  soluble  ic 
strong  acids,  and  a  solution  of  the  active  deposit  can  thus  bt 
readily  obtained.  The  active  deposits  are  only  slightly  soluble  in 
water  and  alcohol.  A  detailed  examination  of  the  general  physical 
and  chemical  properties  of  the  active  deposit  of  thorium  was  made 
initially  by  v.  Lerch*.  A  solution  of  the  Jictive  deposit  was 
prepared  by  dissolving  the  metal  which  had  been  exposed  for 
some  time  to  the  emanation.  On  dipping  plates  of  different 
metals  into  the  solution,  active  matter  was  deposited  electn)- 
chemically  upon  them.  The  amount  of  activity  thus  obtained 
depended  upon  the  nature  of  the  metal.     In  other  experiments, 

*  F.  von  Lerch,  Ann.  d,  Fhys,  12,  p.  745, 1903. 


X]  ACTIVE  DEPOSITS  409 

various  substances  were  precipitated  in  the  solution  and  the 
amount  and  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  precipitate  were  determined. 
It  was  also  found  that  active  matter  could  be  separated  from  a 
solution  of  the  active  deposit  by  electrolysis.  Experiments  of  this 
kind  were  first  made  by  Dom  using  a  radium  solution,  and  v. 
Lerch*  and  Pegramf  on  the  active  deposit  of  thorium.  The 
amount  and  decay  of  the  activity  obtained  on  the  electrodes  varied 
according  to  the  condition  of  the  experiments.  In  the  light  of 
lat^r  knowledge  such  results  were  to  be  expected,  for  the  active 
deposit  of  thorium  contains  several  distinct  substances.  A  discus- 
sion of  the  electro-chemical  and  electrolytic  methods  of  separation 
of  active  substances  is  given  later  in  Chapter  XVIII. 

It  was  early  observed  that  the  active  deposit  of  thorium  on  a 
platinum  plate  could  be  almost  completely  driven  otF  at  a  tempe- 
rature of  a  white  heat.  Miss  Gates  J  showed  that  the  activity  was 
not  destroyed  by  this  process,  but  manifested  itself  on  neighbouring 
bodies.  When  the  active  wire  was  heated  electrically  in  a  closed 
cylinder,  the  active  deposit  was  transferred  from  the  wire  to  the 
c^iinder  in  unaltered  amount.  Similar  results  were  found  with 
the  active  deposit  of  radium.  The  effect  of  temperature  appears 
to  be  mainly  due  to  an  actual  volatilisation  of  the  substances 
composing  the  active  deposit.  The  effect  of  temperature  on  the 
active  deposits  of  thorium,  radium  and  actinium  were  later  made 
the  subject  of  a  detailed  examination.  In  general,  it  was  found 
that  the  components  of  the  active  deposits  volatilised  at  diflFerent 
temperatures,  and  in  this  way  a  partial  separation  of  the  products 
could  be  eflfected.  The  active  deposit  of  actinium  is  much  moje 
easily  volatilised  than  that  of  thorium  or  radium.  The  main 
results  of  these  experiments  will  be  discussed  later  when  an 
account  is  given  of  the  analysis  of  the  active  deposit  into  its 
various  components. 

•  F.  von  Lerch,  Ann,  d.  Phijs.  12,  p.  745,  1903. 
t  Pegram,  Phys.  Rev.  17,  p.  424,  1903. 
t  Miss  Gates,  Fhyg.  Rev.  16,  p.  300,  1903. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS. 

154.  A  brief  account  has  already  been  given  in  Chapter  VIII 
of  the  development  of  the  disintegration  theory  and  of  some 
experimental  evidence  in  support  of  it.  Before  considering  the 
general  application  of  the  theory  to  any  number  of  successive 
transformations  a  brief  review  will  first  be  given  of  the  working 
hypotheses  which  have  served  as  a  guide  to  the  investigators  in 
the  field  of  radio-activity.  These  working  theories  have  in  many 
cases  been  modified  or  extended  with  the  growth  of  experimental 
knowledge. 

The  early  experiments  of  Mme  Curie  had  indicated  that  radio- 
activity was  an  atomic  and  not  a  molecular  phenomenon.  This 
was  still  further  substantiated  by  later  work,  and  the  detection  and 
isolation  of  radium  from  pitchblende  was  a  brilliant  verification  of 
the  truth  of  this  hypothesis. 

The  discovery  that  the  ^  rays  emitted  by  active  matter  were 
similar  to  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube  was  an 
important  advance,  and  has  formed  the  basis  of  several  subsequent 
theories.  J.  Perrin*,  in  1901,  following  the  views  of  J.  J.  Thomson 
and  others,  suggested  that  the  atoms  of  matter  consisted  of  parts 
and  might  be  likened  to  a  miniature  planetary  system.  In  the 
atoms  of  the  radio-elements,  the  parts  composing  the  atoms  more 
distant  from  the  centre  might  be  able  to  escape  from  the  central 
attraction  and  thus  give  rise  to  the  radiation  of  energy  observed 
In  1901,  Becquerelf  put  forward  the  following  hypothesis,  which, 

♦  Perriu,  Revue  Scientifique,  April  13,  1901. 
t  Becquerel,  C.  -R.  188,  p.  977,  1901. 


CH.  XI]  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  411 

he  stated,  had  served  him  as  a  guide  in  his  investigations. 
Adopting  the  view  of  J.  J.  Thomson,  radio-active  matter  may  be 
supposed  to  consist  of  negatively  and  positively  charged  particles. 
The  former  have  a  mass  about  1/1000  of  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen 
atom,  while  the  latter  have  a  mass  about  one  thousand  times 
greater  than  that  of  the  negative  particle.  The  negatively  charged 
particles  (the  )8  rays)  would  be  projected  with  great  velocity,  but 
the  larger  positive  particles  with  a  much  lower  velocity,  forming 
a  sort  of  gas  (the  emanation)  which  deposits  itself  on  the  surface 
of  bodies.  This  in  turn  would  subdivide,  giving  rise  to  rays 
(induced  activity). 

In  1901,  Rutherford  and  McClung*  calculated  the  amount  of 
energy  emitted  per  year  from  uranium  and  radium  in  the  form 
of  ionising  radiations  and  showed  that  its  value  was  large  for  the 
latter  substance.  The  suggestion  was  made  that  this  energy  might 
be  derived  from  a  re-grouping  of  the  constituents  of  the  atom  of 
the  radio- elements,  and  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  possible  energy 
to  be  derived  from  a  greater  concentration  of  the  components  of 
the  atom  was  large  compared  with  that  given  out  in  molecular 
reactions. 

In  the  original  papersf  giving  an  account  of  the  discovery  of 
the  emanation  of  thorium  and  of  the  active  deposit  produced  by 
it,  the  view  was  taken  that  both  of  these  manifestations  were  due 
to  the  presence  of  radio-active  matter.  The  emanation  behaved 
like  a  gas,  while  the  matter  which  caused  the  so-called  induced 
activity  attached  itself  to  solids  and  could  be  dissolved  in  some 
acids  but  not  in  others.  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks  showed  that 
the  radium  emanation  diffused  through  air  like  a  gas  of  heavy 
molecular  weight.  At  a  later  date  Rutherford  and  Soddy  showed 
that  the  radium  and  thorium  emanations  behaved  like  chemically 
inert  gases,  since  they  were  unaffected  by  the  most  drastic  physical 
and  chemical  treatment. 

P.  Curie  J,  who  in  conjunction  with  Debieme,  had  made  a  series 
of  researches  on  the  radium  emanation,  did  not  at  first  consider 
that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  that  the  emanation  was  material 

♦  Rutherford  and  McClung,  Phil,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  196,  p.  26,  1901. 
t  Butherford,  Phil.  Mag.  49,  pp.  1,  261,  1900. 
t  P.  Curie,  C.  R.  136,  p.  223,  1903. 


412  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [CB. 

in  nature.  He  suggested  that  the  emanation  consisted  of  centm 
of  condensation  of  energy  attached  to  the  gas  molecules  and  movioi 
with  them. 

M.  and  Mme  Curie  initially  took  a  very  general  view  of  the 
phenomena  of  radio-activity,  and  did  not  put  forward  any  definite 
theory.  In  1902,  they  gave  an  account  of  the  general  workiDg 
theory*  which  had  guided  them  in  their  researches.  Radio- 
activity was  an  atomic  property,  and  the  recognition  of  this  W 
had  created  their  methods  of  research.  Elach  atom  acted  as  a 
constant  source  of  emission  of  energy.  This  energy  might  either 
be  derived  from  the  potential  energy  of  the  atom  itself,  or  eack 
atom  might  act  as  a  mechanism  which  instantly  regained  the 
energy  which  it  lost.  They  suggested  that  this  energy  possibly 
might  be  borrowed  from  the  surrounding  air  in  some  way  not 
accounted  for  by  the  principle  of  Carnot. 

In  a  paper  announcing  the  discovery  of  the  heat  emission  of 
radium,  P.  Curie  and  Labordef  state  that  the  heat  energy  might 
be  equally  well  supposed  to  be  derived  from  a  breaking  up  of  the 
radium  atom  or  from  energy  absorbed  by  the  radium  from  sonw 
external  source. 

J.  J.  Thomson  in  an  article  on  "  Radium,"  communicated  to  i 
NatureX,  put  forward  the  view  that  the  emission  of  energy  from  \ 
radium  was  probably  due  to  some  change  within  the  atom,  and 
pointed  out  that  a  large  store  of  energy  would  be  released  by 
a  contraction  of  the  atom. 

Sir  William  Crookes§,  in  1899,  proposed  the  theory  that  the 
radio-active  elements  possessed  the  property  of  abstracting  enerj5y 
from  the  gas.  If  the  moving  molecules,  impinging  more  swiftly 
on  the  substance,  were  released  from  the  active  substance  at  a 
much  lower  velocity,  the  energy  released  from  the  radio-elements 
might  be  derived  from  the  atmosphere.  This  theory  was  advanced 
again  later  to  account  for  the  large  heat  emission  of  radium, 
discovered  by  P.  Curie  and  Laborde. 

F.  Re  1 1   advanced   a   very  general    theory  of  matter  with  a 

*  M.  and  Mme  Curie,  C.  R.  134,  p.  85,  1902. 
t  P.  Curie  aud  Laborde,  C.  R.  136,  p.  673,  1903. 
X  J.  J.  Thomson,  Nature,  67,  p.  601,  1903. 
§  Crookes,  C\  R.  128,  p.  176,  1899. 
ii  F.  Re,  C.  R.  136,  p.  1393,  1903. 


l]  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  413 

)ecial  application  to  radio-active  bodies.  He  supposed  that  the 
arts  of  the  atom  were  originally  free,  constituting  a  nebula  of 
streme  tenuity.  These  parts  had  gradually  become  united  round 
sntres  of  condensation,  and  had  thus  formed  the  atoms  of  the 
lements.  On  this  view  an  atom  might  be  likened  to  an  extinct 
an.  The  radio-active  atoms  occupied  a  transitional  stage  between 
tie  original  nebula  and  the  more  stable  chemical  atoms,  and  in 
he  course  of  their  contraction  gave  rise  to  the  heat  emission 
bserved. 

Lord  Kelvin  in  a  paper  to  the  British  Association  meeting, 
903,  suggested  that  radium  might  obtain  its  energy  from  external 
aurces.  If  a  piece  of  white  paper  is  put  into  one  vessel  and 
piece  of  black  paper  into  an  exactly  similar  vessel,  on  ex- 
K>sure  of  both  vessels  to  light  the  vessel  containing  the  black 
>aper  is  found  to  be  at  a  higher  temperature.  He  suggested 
hat  radium  in  a  similar  manner  might  keep  its  temperature 
tbove  the  surrounding  air  by  its  power  of  absorbing  unknown 
adiations. 

Armstrong  and  Lowry*  in  1903  suggested  that  radio-activity 
night  be  an  exaggerated  form  of  phosphorescence  or  fluorescence 
vith  a  slow  rate  of  decay. 

In  the  course  of  a  detailed  study  of  the  radio-activity  of 
ihorium,  Rutherford  and  Soddyf  found  that  it  was  necessary 
jO  suppose  that  thorium  was  continuously  producing  from  itself 
lew  kinds  of  active  matter,  which  possess  temporary  activity  and 
liffer  in  chemical  properties  from  the  thorium  itself.  The  constant 
•adio-activity  of  thorium  was  shown  to  be  the  result  of  equilibrium 
between  the  processes  of  production  of  active  matter  and  the 
change  of  that  already  produced.  At  the  same  time,  the  theory 
was  advanced  that  the  production  of  active  matter  was  a  con- 
sequence of  the  disintegration  of  the  atom.  The  work  of  the 
following  year  was  devoted  to  an  examination  of  the  radio-activity 
of  uranium  and  radium  on  similar  lines,  and  it  was  found  that  the 
conclusions  already  advanced  for  thorium  held  equally  for  uranium 

*  Armstrong  and  Lowry,  Chem»  Neicn,  88,  p.  89,  1903. 

t  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Trans,  Chem.  Soc.  81,  pp.  321,  837,  1902;  Phil.  Mag, 
4.  pp.  370,  5C9,  1902. 


414  THEORT  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [d, 

and  radium  *.  The  discovery  of  the  condensation  of  the  radio-actifs 
emanation8-|-  gave  additional  support  to  the  view  that  the  emanft- 
tions  were  gaseous  in  character.  In  the  meantime,  the  writer* 
had  found  that  the  a  rays  consisted  of  positively  charged  bodiei 
atomic  in  size,  projected  with  great  velocity.  The  discovery  of  tke 
material  nature  of  these  rays  served  to  strengthen  the  theoijof 
atomic  disintegration,  and  at  the  same  time  to  offer  an  explanataoi 
of  the  connection  between  the  a  rays  and  the  changes  occurring  in 
the  radio-elements.  In  a  paper  entitled  "  Radio-active  Change,* 
Rutherford  and  Soddy§  put  forward  in  some  detail  the  thewy 
of  atomic  disintegration  as  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of 
radio-activity,  and  at  the  same  time  some  of  the  more  important 
consequences  which  follow  from  the  theory  were  discussed. 

165.  DiscuMion  of  theories.  From  the  survey  of  the 
general  hypotheses  advanced  as  possible  explanations  of  radio- 
activity, it  is  seen  that  they  may  be  divided  broadly  into  two 
classes,  one  of  which  assumes  that  the  energy  emitted  from  the 
radio-elements  is  obtained  at  the  expense  of  the  internal  energy  of 
the  atom,  and  the  other  that  the  energy  is  derived  from  extemi 
sources,  but  that  the  radio-elements  act  as  mechanisms  capable  of 
transforming  this  borrowed  energy  into  the  special  forms  manifefited 
in  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity.  Of  these  two  sets  of  hypo- 
theses the  first  appears  to  be  the  more  probable,  and  to  be  best 
supported  by  the  experimental  evidence.  Up  to  the  present  not 
the  slightest  experimental  evidence  has  been  adduced  to  show 
that  the  energy  of  radium  is  derived  from  external  sources. 

It  was  initially  suggested  that  the  radiation  of  energy  from 
active  bodies  might  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  space  is 
traversed  by  a  type  of  7  rays,  and  that  the  active  substances 
possess  the  property  of  absorbing  them.  Later  work  has  un- 
doubtedly shown  that  7  rays  are  everywhere  present  on  the 
earth's  surface,  but  their  energy  is  far  too  feeble  to  account  even 
for  the  weak  radiation  of  energy  from  an  element  like  uranium^ 

♦  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  6,  pp.  441,  446,  1908. 

t  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil  Mag.  5,  p.  661,  1903. 

t  Rutherford,  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  236,  1902;  Phil.  Mag.  5,  p.  177. 1903. 

§  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  6,  p.  676,  1903. 


XI]  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  415 

The  activity  of  radium  measured  by  the  7  rays  is  unaltered  by 
any  physical  or  chemical  process.  In  addition,  the  7  ray  activity 
of  radium  remains  unchanged  with  time  when  it  is  hermetically 
sealed  in  a  thick  block  of  lead.  Even  supposing  that  the  radio- 
active elements  possess  to  a  marked  degree  the  power  of  absorbing 
energy  from  the  outside,  there  still  remains  the  fundamental 
difficulty  of  accounting  for  the  peculiar  radiations  emitted  by  the 
radio-elements,  and  the  series  of  transformations  occurring  in 
them.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for  the  heat  emission  only 
(Chapter  XVlI),  for  it  has  been  found  that  the  emission  of  heat  is 
directly  connected  with  the  emission  of  the  radiations. 

In  addition,  the  distribution  of  the  heat  emission  of  radium 
amongst  the  radio-active  products  which  arise  from  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  explain  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  energy  emitted  is 
borrowed  from  external  sources.  It  has  been  found  that  more 
than  three-quarters  of  the  heat  emitted  by  radium  is  due  to  the 
emanation  together  with  the  active  deposit  which  is  produced  by 
it.  When  the  emanation  is  separated  from  the  radium,  its  power 
of  emitting  heat,  after  reaching  a  maximum,  decreases  with  the 
time  according  to  an  exponential  law.  Itjatould  thus,  he^necessary 
on_the  absoiBtion  hypothesis  to  postulate  that  most  of  the  heat 
"emigpion  of  radium,  observed  under  ordinary  conditions,  is  not  due 
to  the  radium  itself  but  to  something  produced  by  the  radium, 
whose  jgwer  of  absorbing  energy  from  external  sources  diminishes 
^witt  fiine. 

A  similar  argument  also  applies  to  the  variation  with  time  of 
the  heating  effect  of  the  active  deposit  produced  from  the  emana- 
tion. 

The  strongest  evidence  against  the  hypothesis  of  absorption  of 
external  energy  is  that  such  a  theory  ignores  the  fact,  that,  when- 
ever radio-activity  is  observed,  it  is  always  accompanied  by  some 
change  which  can  be  detected  by  the  appearance  of  new  products 
having  chemical  properties  distinct  from  those  of  the  original 
substances.  This  leads  to  some  form  of  "  chemical "  theory,  and 
other  results  show  that  the  change  is  atomic  and  not  molecular. 

166.  Theory  of  radio-active  change.  The  processes  occur- 
ring in  the  radio- elements  are  of  a  character  quite  distinct  from 


416  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [CB.{ 

any  previously  observed  in  chemistry.   Although  it  has  been  shown  i 
that  the  radio-activity  is  due  to  the  spontaneous  and  continuooij 
production  of  new  types  of  active  matter,  the  laws  which  conti 
this  production  are  diflFerent  from  the  laws  of  ordinary  cheraic 
reactions.    It  has  not  been  found  possible  in  any  way  to  alter] 
either  the  rate  at  which  the  matter  is  produced  or  its  rate 
change  when  produced.    Temperature,  which  is  such  an  importaotl 
factor  in  altering  the  rate  of  chemical  reactions,  is,  in  these  cas^j 
entirely  without   influence.     In  addition,  no   ordinary  chemicil 
change   is    known   which    is   accompanied   by   the   expulsion  of] 
charged  atoms  with  great  velocity.     Whatever  hypothesis  is  prt| 
forward  to  explain  radio-activity,  it  must  account  not  only  for  the 
production  of  a  series  of  active  products,  which  differ  in  chemical; 
and   physical   properties   from  each  other  and  from  the  parait] 
element,  but  must  account  also  for  the  emission  of  rays  of  a  special 
character.     Besides   this,   it   is   necessary   to   explain   the  large 
amount  of  energy  continuously  radiated  from  active  matter. 

The  radio-elements,  besides  their  high  atomic  weights,  do 
not  possess  in  common  any  special  chemical  characteristics  whicb 
differentiate  them  from  the  other  elements,  which  do  not  posseai 
the  property  of  radio-activity  to  an  appreciable  degree.  Of  all 
the  known  elements,  uranium,  thorium,  and  radium  possess  the 
greatest  atomic  weights,  viz. :  radium  226,  thorium  2320,  and 
uranium  238*5. 

If  a  high  atomic  weight  is  taken  as  evidence  of  a  complicated 
structure  of  the  atom,  it  might  be  expected  that  disintegration 
would  occur  more  readily  in  the  heavier  atoms.  At  the  same 
time,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  elements  of  the>j 
highest  atomic  weight  must  be  the  most  radio-active;  in  fact, 
radium  is  far  more  active  than  uranium,  although  its  atomic 
weight  is  less.  This  is  seen  to  be  the  case  also  in  other  radio- 
active products;  for  example,  the  radium  emanation  is  enormously 
more  active  weight  for  weight  than  the  radium  itself,  and  it  is 
known  that  the  emanation  has  an  atom  lighter  than  that  of 
radium. 

In  order  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity,  RuthfiifiinL 
and   Soddy  have  advanced    the    theory  that   the   atoms   of  the 
radio-elements  suffer  spontaneous  disintegration^  and  that  each 


Xl]  THEORY   OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  417 

disintegrated  atom  passes  through  a  succession  of  well-marked 
I^Sahges,  accompanied  in  most  cases  by  the  emission  of  a  rays. 

"K  preliminary  account  of  this  hypothesis  has  already  been 
given  in  Section  1^8.  The  theory  supposes  that,  on  an  average, 
a  definite  small  proportion  of  the  atoms  of  each  radio-active 
substance  becomes  unstable  at  a  given  time.  As  a  result  of  this 
instability,  the  atoms  break  up.  In  most  cases,  the  disintegration 
is  explosive  in  violence  and  is  accompanied  by  the  ejection  of  an 
a  particle  with  great  velocity;  in  a  few  cases,  a  and  0  particles 
are  expelled  together,  while  in  others  a  /3  particle  alone  escapea 
In  a  few  cases,  the  change  in  the  atom  appears  to  be  less  violent 
in  character,  and  is  not  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  either  an 
a  or  )9  particle.  The  expulsion  of  an  a  particle,  of  atomic  weight 
4,  leaves  behind  it  a  new  system  lighter  than  the  original  one,  and 
possessing  chemical  and  physical  properties  quite  different  from 
those  of  the  original  element.  This  new  system  again  becomes 
unstable,  and  expels  another  a  particle.  The  process  of  disintegra- 
tion, once  started,  proceeds  from  stage  to  stage  at  a  definite 
measurable  rate  in  each  case. 

At  any  time  after  the  disintegration  has  commenced,  there 
exists  a  proportion  of  the  original  matter,  which  is  unchanged, 
mixed  with  the  part  which  has  undergone  change.  This  is  in 
accordance  with  the  observed  fact  that  the  spectrum  of  radium, 
for  example,  does  not  change  progressively  with  time.  The 
radium  breaks  up  so  slowly  that  only  a  small  fraction  has  been 
transformed  in  the  course  of  a  few  years.  The  unchanged  part 
still  shows  its  characteristic  spectrum,  and  will  continue  to  do 
so  as  long  as  any  radium  exists.  At  the  same  time  it  is  to  be 
expected  that,  in  old  preparations  of  radium,  the  spectra  of  those 
products  which  have  been  formed  in  any  quantity  should  also 
appear. 

The  striking  dissimilarity  which  exists  in  many  cases  between 
the  chemical  and  the  physical  properties  of  the  parent  matter  and 
the  product  to  which  it  gives  rise  is  very  well  illustrated  by  the 
case  of  radium  and  the  radium  emanation.  Radium  is  an  element 
so  closely  allied  in  chemical  properties  to  barium  that,  apart  from 
a  slight  difference  in  the  solubility  of  the  chlorides  and  bromides, 
it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  chemically  between  them.     It  has  a 

R.  R.-A.  27 


418  THEORY  OF   SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [CH 

definite  spectrum  of  bright  lines  similar  in  many  respects  to  tb^ 
spectra  of  the  alkaline  earths.  Like  barium,  it  is  non-volatile  ai 
ordinary  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  the  emanation  whidj 
is  continually  produced  from  radium  is  a  radio-active  and  chen' 
cally  inert  gas  which  at  very  low  pressures  is  condensed  at 
temperature  —  150°C.  A  sufficient  amount  of  this  gas  has 
collected  to  determine  its  volume,  density,  spectrum  and  boilii 
point  (see  chapter  XIII).  Both  in  its  spectrum  and  in  the  absenc 
of  definite  chemical  properties,  it  resembles  the  argon-helii 
group  of  inert  gases.  The  emanation  must  be  considered  to  be 
unstable  gas  of  high  molecular  weight,  which  breaks  up  with  thi 
emission  of  a  particles.  After  the  expulsion  of  helium  atoms,  tl 
residual  atoms  form  a  new  substance  called  radium  A,  whiclT 
behaves  as  a  solid. ^]y|J^  deposited  on  the  surface  of  bodies.  The|. 
chemical  and  ph)/  ^^^properties  of  this  new  substance  are  agaiip 
entirely  distinct  it^,A  radium  and  its  emanation.  Radium  A  m 
turn  gives  rise  to  a  long  series  of  successive  products,  each  of 
which  has  certain  distinctive  chemical  and  physical  propertiei. 
which  allow  of  its  separation  from  a  mixture  of  the  others. 

The  mathematical  theory  of  successive  changes  and  its  appli- 
cation to  the  analysis  of  radio-active  substances  was  put  forward; 
by  the  writer*  in  the  Bakerian  Lecture  to  the  Royal  Society  in 
1904  and  described  in  a  paper  entitled  "The  Succession  of  Changes 
in  Radio-active  Bodies."  The  general  theory  has  been  discussed 
by  Stark f,  GrunerJ  and  Bateman§.  The  latter  described  a  simpl* 
method  of  writing  down  in  a  symmetrical  form  the  mathematicji' 
solution  for  any  number  of  changes. 

157.  Theory  of  one  transformation.  Before  considering 
the  evidence  from  which  these  changes  are  deduced,  the  generai 
theory  of  radio-active  changes  will  be  considered.  It  is  verj 
convenient  in  discussing  mathematically  the  theory  of  successive 
changes  to  suppose  that  the  initial  matter  called  A  changes 
into  B,  B  into  C,  C  into  D,  and  so  on.     We  shall  first  considei 

♦  Rutherford,  Phil,  Tram.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  204,  p.  169,  1904. 

t  J.  Stark,  Jahrb.  d.  Radioakt.  1,  p.  1,  1904. 

t  P.  Gruner,  Arch,  sc,  phys,  et  nat.  (4)  23,  pp.  5,  113,  329,  1907;  (4)  81,  p.  509 

1911. 

§  H.  Bateman,  Proc,  Camb,  Phil,  Soc,  16,  p.  423,  1910. 


[]  THE30RT  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  419 

le  transformation  of  a  single  substance  A,  It  has  been  found 
cperiraentally  that  any  single  radio-active  substance,  obtained 
Y  itself,  decays  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time. 
7e  hayB.-aefttt'  tliat  tEisr"caJcn)e~"expreasedr  15y  the  relation 
7JV"o  =  6"^_where  N^  is  the  number  of  atoms  initially  present 
id  N  the  number  remaining  after  an  interval  ^^  This  general 
'Wof_tran§jB2jm^a^^  holds  universally  for  all  .the.  products,  but 
has  a  different  biit  characteristic  value  for  each  product, 
•ifferentiatisg,  dN/dt  =  —  XJV.  or,  in  other  words,  the  rate  of 
E^crgaae  of  the  number  of  atoms  is  proportional  to  the  number 
resent.  If  each  atom  of  A  changes  into  one  of  B,  \N  is  equal 
>  the  nuraW  of  atoms,  of, .fi  formed,  per  second..  Since  the 
idiatiori  accompanies  the  tranbis  '^n  dNjdt  is  also  propor- 
onal  to  the  intensity  of  the  radia»        .•     •     d  by  the  product. 

We  have  previously  shown  in   Secv  'that  the  rate  o{(^  A 

:unsformation  of  a  product  is  governed  by  inv;  laws  of  probability.  "N 
'he  number  of  atoms  breaking  up  in  a  given  time  is  subject  to    /^ 
actuations  round  the  average   value  of  the    magnitude    to  be  /     ., 
xpected   from  the  general  probability  theory.      In   this  case  \_ 
opresents  the  average  fraction  of  the  number  of  atoms  which 
)fga^**f> -p^J^  second.     The  value  of  N  given    by   the   relation 
K:X^,  =  e~^^  has  been  shown  by  v.  Schweidler  to  represent  the 
aio^ j^bable^value.     The  experimental  evidence  so  far  obtained 
^hows  that  the  exponential  law  of  transformation  holds  universally 
fofalTproducts,  and  is  completely  independent  of  physical  and 
chemical  conditions.     The  fraction  of  a  product  transformed  per 
>;ocyud,  is  independent,  ior~example,  of  the  age  of  the  product, 
md  is  quite  unaffected  by  the  concentration  of  the  active  matter 

These  conclusions  are  well  illustrated  by  experiments  on  the 
rate  of  decay  of  the  radium  emanation  under  different  conditions 
iiscussed  in  Section  131.  It  has  been  shown  that  radium  emanation 
QQore  than  three  months  old  decays  at  exactly  the  same  rate  as 
iinanation  freshly  produced  from  radium.  The  constancy  of  the 
law  of  transformation  is  from  the  physical  point  of  view  very 
remarkable.  It  shows  that  the  chance  of  any  atom  breaking  up 
in  a  given  time  is  independent  of  the  age  of  the  atom,  and  is  the 
same,  for  example,  whether  it  is  produced  a  second  before  or  has 

27—2 


420  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [Cl 

existed  independently  for  more  than  three  months.  Such  result 
show  that  the  decay  of  the  emanation  is  independent  of  its  pa5 
history.  It  does  not  seem  possible,  for  example,  to  suppose  tha 
each  atom  at  its  birth  begins  to  lose  energy  by  radiation,  anc 
that  its  disintegration  is  a  result  of  the  drain  of  energy  from  the 
system.  On  such  a  view  it  would  be  expected  that  the  rate  ol 
decay  would  increase  with  the  age  of  the  atoms.  It  would  appear 
as  if  the  rate  of  transformation  of  the  atoms  depends  purely  on 
the  laws  of  probability,  and  is  uninfluenced  by  their  past  histor)*. 
The  law  of  transformation  shows  that  theoretically  any  atom 
may  exist  unchanged  for  any  time  from  zero  to  infinity.  In 
practice,  however,  it  is  often  convenient  to  speak  of  the  average 
life  of  a  large  number  of  atoms.  This  has  a  definite  value  which 
can  be  simply  calculated.  Suppose  that  Nq  atoms  of  a  substance 
are  initially  present.  After  a  time  t,  the  number  which  change 
in  the  time  dt  is  equal  to  \Ndt  or  XNoe'^dt,  Each  of  these 
atoms  has  a  life  t,  so  that  the  average  life  of  the  whole  number 

is  given  by   /    \te~^^dt  or  l/X.     The  average  life  of  an  atom  is 

consequently   measured    by   the    reciprocal    of    the    radio-active, 
constant. 

168.    Theory  of  succeBsive  transformation.     We  shall 

now  consider  a   number,  of  important   cases   where   the  active 
matter  passes  through  a  succession  of  changes. 

Suppose  that  P,  Q,  iJ  ...  represent  the  number  of  particles 
of  the  matter  A,  B,  and  (7  ...  respectively  at  any  time  t  l^^ 
Xa,  X21  ^3  ...  be  the  constants  of  change  of  the  matter  A,  B,  and 
C  ...  respectively. 

Each  atom  of  the  matter  A  is  supposed  to  give  rise  to  one 
atom  of  the  matter  B,  one  atom  of  B  to  one  of  C,  and  so  on. 

The  expelled  "rays"  or  particles  are  non-radio-active,  and  so  do 
not  enter  into  the  calculation. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  deduce  mathematically  the  number  of 
atoms  of  F,  Q,  JK, . . .  of  the  matter  A,B,Cy .,,  existing  at  any  tini^ ^ 
after  this  matter  is  set  aside,  if  the  initial  values  of  P,  Q,  A  ••• 
are  given.  In  practice,  however,  it  is  generally  only  necessary  to 
employ  three  special  cases  of  the  theory  which  correspond,  ^^ 


:i]  THEORT   OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  421 

xample,  to  the  changes  in  the  active  deposit,  produced  on  a  plate 
xposed  to  a  constant  amount  of  radium  emanation  and  then 
emoved,  (1)  when  the  time  of  exposure  is  extremely  short 
ompared  with  the  period  of  the  changes,  (2)  when  the  time  of 
xposure  is  so  long  that  the  amount  of  each  of  the  products  has 
cached  a  steady  limiting  value,  and  (3)  for  any  time  of  exposure. 

There  is  also  another  case  of  importance  which  is  practically 

converse  of  case  3,  viz.  when  the  matter  A  is  supplied  at  a 

instant  rate  from  a  primary  source  and  the  amounts  oi  A,  B,C 

re  required  at  any  subsequent  time.     The  solution  of  this  can, 

owever,  be  deduced  immediately  from  case  3  without  analysis. 

169.     Case  1.     Suppose  that  the  matter  initially  considered 
all    of  one   kind   A,     It  is   required   to  find   the  number   of 

articles  P^  Q,  R,  S  ..,  of  the  matter  A,  B,  (7,  D  ...  respectively 

resent  after  any  time  t 

Then  P  =  P^e~^^*,  if  Pq  is  the  number  of  particles  of  A  initially 
resent.  Now  dQ,  the  increase  of  the  number  of  particles  of  the 
latter  B  per  unit  time,  is  the  number  supplied  by  the  change  of 
le  matter  A,  less  the  number  due  to  the  change  of  B  into  C, 

lUS 

dPjdt^-X^P  (1), 

dQ/dt^T^P-X^Q    (2). 

imilarly  dRjdt  ^XJI^ -\,R    (3). 

ubstituting  in  (2)  the  value  of  P  in  terms  of  Po> 

he  solution  of  this  equation  is  of  the  form 

Q  =  Po(ae-^.*+6«-^0     (4). 

ly  substitution  it  is  found  that  a  =  Xi/(Xj  —  \i). 

ince  Q  =  0  when  ^  =  0,  6  =  —  Xi  (Xj  —  Xi). 

hus  Q  =  ;r^^(e-V_^-V)    •. (5). 

Xj  —  Xi 

ubstituting  this  value  of  Q  in  (3),  it  can  readily  be  shown  that 

iJ=P,(ae"'^»^  +  6«-V  +  c6-M)      (6), 


422 


THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TBANSFOBMATION8 


[CH. 


where 


a  = 


W 


6  = 


x,x. 


(X^-X,)(X,-X,)'  ^      (X|->^)(X,-X,)' 

\\ 

(Xi-X,)(\,-X,)' 
Similarly  it  can  be  shown  that 

where 


a  = 


c  = 


(X,-\i)(X,-Xi)(\4-X0' 

A>iA>a\3 

(\,-\,)(\,-X,)(X,-X,)' 


6» 


d  = 


.(7), 


(X,-X,)(X,-\,)(\.-X,)' 
(X,-\,)(\,-X«)(\,-X,)* 


ou 

till 

Relative  number  of  Atoms  of  A,  B,  C,  D 

1* 

t 

iresent  at 

any  timt 

e  (Case  x 

) 

^"^ 

Oil 

1  /S\ 

^ 

D^ 

60 

If— 

V 

7- 

40 

i 

A 

^ 

< 

20|    y/ 

y 

^^^^ 

^-^^ 

.0 

^ 

/ 

^^ 

-^^ 

20 


40  60  80 

Time  in  minutet 
Fig.  99. 


100 


120 


140 


The  method  of  solution  of  the  general  case  of  n  products  has 
been  given  in  a  symmetrical  form  by  Bateman*.  The  amount  of 
the  nth  product  N  (t)  at  the  time  t  is  given  by 

iV(0  =  c,e-V  +  ce-M  ...  cne'^     (8), 


*  Bateman,  Proe,  Camb.  Phil,  ^.  15,  p.  428,  1910. 


Xl]  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  423 

AiAg  ...  A|i_)/^o 


where  Ci  = 


c«  = 


(\,-X,)(X,-Xi)...(X^-X,)' 

Aj A<j  . . .  Aj|_j  Jlq 
(Ai  —  A2)  (X3  —  Xj)  . . .  (X^  —  Xj) 

etc. 


The  variations  in  the  values  of  P,  Q,  i2,  S,  with  time  t  after 

removal  of  the  source  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  99,  curves 

A,  B,  C  and  D  respectively.     The  curves  are  drawn  for  the 

practical  and  important  case  of  the  first  four  products  of  the 

active  deposit  of  radium,  known  as  radium  A,  B,  C,  and  D.     The 

matter  is  supposed  to  consist  initially  only  of  radium  A.     This 

corresponds  to  the  case  of  a  body  exposed  for  a  few  seconds  in  the 

presence  of  the  radium  emanation.     The  values  of  Xi,  X,,  X,  are 

taken  as  385  x  10"^  4-33  x  10"*,  593  x  10^* (sec.)"^  respectively 

corresponding  to  the  half  value  periods  oi  A,  B  and   C  of  3, 

26*8  and  19*5  minutes  respectively.     The  half  value  period  of 

radium  D  is  about  16*5  years.     Over  the  small  interval  under 

consideration  in  the  figure,  one  may  suppose  that  the  atoms  of 

radium  D  suffer  no  appreciable  decrease  by  transformation.    The 

equation  (7)  can  then  be  simplified  for  calculation  by  putting 

X4  =  0. 

The  ordinates  of.  the  curves  represent  the  relative  number  of 
atoms  of  the  matter  A,  B,  Cy  and  D  existing  at  any  time,  and  the 
value  of  Po»  the  original  number  of  atoms  of  the  matter  A 
deposited,  is  taken  as  100.  The  amount  of  matter  B  is  initially 
zero,  and  in  this  particular  case  passes  through  a  maximum  about 
10  minutes  later,  and  then  diminishes  with  the  time.  In  a 
similar  way,  the  amount  of  C  passes  through  a  maximum  about 
35  minutes  after  removal.  After  an  interval  of  several  hours  the 
amount  of  both  B  and  G  diminishes  very  approximately  according 
to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in  both 
cases  in  26*8  minutes. 

Over  the  interval  considered,  the  amount  of  D  increases 
steadily  with  time,  although  very  slowly  at  first.  A  maximum 
is  reached  when  B  and  C  have  disappeared.  Finally  the  amount 
of  D  would  decrease  exponentially  with  the  time  with  a  period 
of  16*5  yeara 


424  THEORY   OF  SUCCESSIVE   TRANSFORMATIONS  [CH. 

160.  Case  2.  A  priniary  source  supplies  the  matter  A  at  a 
constant  rate  and  the  process  luis  continued  so  long  that  the  amotv4 
of  the  products  A,  B,  C,  ...  has  reached  a  steady  limiting  valu$. 
The  primary  source  is  then  suddenly  removed.  It  is  required  to 
find  the  amounts  of  A,  JS,  C,  ...  remaining  at  any  subsequent  timet 

In  this  case,  the  number  no  of  particles  of  -4,  deposited 
per  second  from  the  source,  is  equal  to  the  number  of  particla 
of  A  which  change  into  B  per  second,  and  of  B  into  C,  and  so 
on.     This  requires  the  relation 

n,=  \Po=\,Q,  =  7^Ro     (9), 

where  Pq,  Qo»  Ro  are  the  maximum  numbers  of  particles  of  the  ' 

matter  A,  B,  and  C  when  a  steady  state  is  reached. 

The  values  of  Q,  R,  and  S  at  any  time  t  after  removal  of  ! 

the  source  are  given  by  equations  of  the  same  form  as  (4),  (6)  ', 

and  (7)  for  a  short  exposure.     Remembering  the  condition  that   ; 

initially 

jP  =  Po  =  no/\i, 

it  can  readily  be  shown  that 

P^'^e-^^'     (10). 

Ai 

«=x;--\-(^-*^-«-^'0  (")• 

R  =  no{ae-^^^+be'^^  +  ce-^)      (12),      I 


where 


Xq  ,  Ai 

a  =  >j ■  -r  ,z .  -V .  0  = 


Similarly  for  four  changes  it  can  be  shown  that 

S  =  no{ae'^^^  +  be'^  -h  C£?-^»*  +  de'^O     0^)' 

where 

"  (X,  -  X.)  (X,  -  X,)  (\4  -  X.)  '  (x,-x,)(x,-x,)(x,-xO' 

C=    TT --TTT --.-;- L-T    .  »   = 


(X,-X,)(X,-\3)(X,-X,)'  {\i'\)i\t-\)(\,'\) 


THSORT  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS 


425 


^man  has  pointed  out  that  the  solutions  for  case  2  can  be 
from  case  1.  This  is  obvious  when  it  is  remembered 
e  amount  of  (7,  for  example,  remaining  after  a  definite 
t  is  made  up  of  (1)  supply  from  A  through  B,  (2)  supply 
(3)  part  of  C  remaining.  Remembering  that  the  amounts 
i,  C  initially  present  are  no/X,,,  Wo/X,,  no/Xs  respectively, 
ition  can  be  written  down  with  the  aid  of  equations  (5) 

relative  numbers  of  atoms  of  P,  Q,  R  existing  at  any 
-i  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  100  curves  A,  5,  (7 respectively. 


.B 


\  \  \ 

Relative  number  of  atoms  of  matter  A,  B,  C 

present  at  any  instant  (Case  a) 


60  80 

Time  in  minutes 
Fig.  100. 


120 


140 


mber  of  atoms  Qo  is  taken  as  100  for  comparison,  and  the 
3f  \i,  Xj,  X,  are  taken  corresponding  to  the  3,  26*8,  and 
nute  changes  in  the  active  deposit  of  radium.  It  should 
bed  out  that  the  curves  show  the  variation  oi  A,  B  and  C 
►val  of  a  body  which  has  been  exposed  for  a  long  interval 
mstant  amount  of  emanation.  The  curves  are  slightly 
t  for  the  practical  case  where  the  body  is  exposed  in  a 
7  source  of  emanation. 


426  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFOBMATIONS  [CE 

A  comparison  with  Fig.  99  for  a  short  exposure  brings  out 
very  clearly  the  variation  in  the  relative  amounts  of  P,  Q,  Jl 
corresponding  to  cases  1  and  2.  In  case  2  the  amount  of  R 
decreases  at  first  very  slowly.  This  is  a  result  of  the  tact  that 
the  supply  of  C  due  to  the  breaking  up  of  B  at  first  nearly  com- 
pensates for  the  breaking  up  of  G.  The  values  of  Q  and  R 
after  several  hours  decrease  exponentially,  fsilling  to  half  value 
in  26'8  minutes. 

A  consideration  of  the  formulae  for  cases  1  and  2  brings 
out  the  interesting  point  that  the  amount  of  C  ultimately  de- 
creases according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  period  of 
26*8  minutes,  which  is  characteristic  of  radium  B  and  not  of 
radium  C.  This  is  an  expression  of  a  general  result  that  the 
product  of  longest  period  ultimately  governs  the  decay  curve  in 
all  cases. 

161.  Case  3.  Suppose  that  a  prirtiary  source  ha^  supj^ied 
the  matter  A  at  a  constant  rate  for  any  time  T  and  is  iJm 
suddenly  removed.  Required  the  amounts  of  A,  B,  C  at  ony 
subsequent  time. 

Suppose  that  n^  particles  of  the  matter  A  are  deposited  eadi 
second.  Afler  a  time  of  exposure  T,  the  number  of  particles  ff 
of  the  matter  A  present  is  given  by 


At  any  time  f,  after  removal  of  the  source,  the  number  of 
particles  P  of  the  matter  A  is  given  by 

P  =  Pre-A.<  =  ^«(l-e-A.r)«-M (14). 

Aq 

Consider  the  number  of  particles  n^t  of  the  matter  A  produced 
during  the  interval  dt  At  any  later  time  t,  the  number  of 
particles  dQ  of  the  matter  5,  which  result  from  the  change  in  i, 
is  given  (see  equation  5)  by 

dQ  =  -^(e-M-e-A,<)d^  =  n,/(0(ft  (15). 

Ai  ~~  Aj 


:i]  THXOBY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFOBMATIOMS  427 

After  a  time  of  exposure  T,  the  number  of  particles  Qj>  of  the 
latter  B  present  is  given  by 

Qr=no[/(T)dt'{'/{T-dt)dt  + '^f(0)dt] 


n.(  f(t)dt. 

Jo 


If  the  body  is  removed  from  the  emanation  after  an  exposure 
\  at  any  later  time  t  the  number  of  particles  of  B  is  in  the  same 

ay  given  by 

rT+t 

e  =  noJ^      f{t)dt. 

It  will  be  noted  that  the  method  of  deduction  of  Qt  and  Q  is 
kdependent  of  the  particular  form  of  the  function /(O. 

Substituting  the  particular  value  of  f(t)  given  in  equation  (15) 
ad  integrating,  it  can  readily  be  deduced  that 

Qr^        a^b     - '- ^^^)' 

^here  a  =  — r ,         o  =  — . 

A^  Ai 

In  a  similar  way,  the  number  of  particles  R  of  the  matter  C 
resent  at  any  time  can  be  deduced  by  substitution  of  the  value 
tf(t)  in  equation  (6). 

Rt"  a  +  b-k-c 

In  a  similar  way  the  amount  of  any  product  may  be  written 
own. 

162.  Case  4.  The  matter  A  is  supplied  at  a  constant  rate 
om  a  primary  source.  Required  to  find  the  number  of  particles 
'  Ay  Bf  C  at  any  subsequent  time  t,  when  initially  A,  B,  C  are 
sent 


(17), 


428  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [CB 

The  solution  can  be  simply  obtained  in  the  following  wa| 
Suppose  that  the  conditions  of  case  2  are  fulfilled.  The  prod 
A,  B,C  are  in  radio-active  equilibrium  and  let  Po>  Oo»  -Ro  l>e 
number  of  particles  of  each  present.  Suppose  the  source  i 
removed.  The  values  of  P,  Q,  R  at  any  subsequent  time  are  givi 
by  equations  (10),  (11)  and  (12)  respectively.  Now  suppose 
source,  which  has  been  removed,  still  continues  to  supply  A 
the  same  constant  rate  and  let  P, ,  Qj,  R^  be  the  number 
particles  of  -4,  5,  C  again  present  with  the  source  at 
subsequent  time.  Now  we  have  seen,  that  the  rate  of  change 
any  individual  product,  considered  by  itself,  is  independent 
conditions  and  is  the  same  whether  the  matter  is  mixed  with 
parent  substance  or  removed  from  it.  Since  the  values  of  Po,  Qi, 
represent  a  steady  stat»e  where  the  rate  of  supply  of  each 
of  matter  is  equal  to  its  rate  of  change,  the  sum  of  the  num 
of  particles  A,  B,  C  present  at  any  time  with  the  source,  and  it 
the  matter  from  which  it  was  removed,  must  at  all  times  be  equal 
to  Po,  Qo,  Rq,  •••,  that  is 

P,+P  =  Po. 

Q.  +  Q  =  Qo, 

Bi  4"  -R  =  -Bq* 

This  must  obviously  be  the  case,  for  otherwise  there  would  be  i 
destruction  or  creation  of  matter  by  the  mere  process  of  8eparati<» 
of  the  source  from  its  products ;  but,  by  hypothesis,  neither  the 
rate  of  supply  from  the  source,  nor  the  law  of  change  of  the 
products,  has  been  in  any  way  altered  by  removal. 

Substituting  the  values  of  P,  Q,  R  from  equations  (10),  (U)i 
and  (12),  we  obtain 

J;=i-e-^^^ m 

^^  =  l-(X,6-^.'-\,e-^.0/(^i  -X,)    ...-(19)' 

§  =  l-\,(a6-^'*  +  6«-^^  +  C6-V) (20). 

etc., 

where  a,  6,  and  c  have  the  values  given  after  equation  (12).  Th« 
curves  representing  the  increase  of  P,  Q,  R  are  thus,  in  all  cases 


l]  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  429 

3mplementary  to  the  curves  shown  in  Fig.  100.  The  sum  of 
ie  ordinates  of  the  two  curves  of  rise  and  decay  at  any  time  is 
qual  to  100.  We  have  already  seen  examples  of  this  in  the  case 
F  the  decay  and  recovery  curves  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X. 

163.  Secular  and  transient  equilibria.  The  theory  of 
Bises  2  and  4  have  been  worked  out  on  the  assumption  that  there 
%  a  permanent  equilibrium  between  the  successive  products  of 
pansformation.  This  is  impossible  to  realise  completely  in  practice 
luce  the  amount  of  every  radio-active  substance  is  always  de- 
reasing  with  time.  No  sensible  error,  however,  is  introduced 
rhen  the  primary  source  is  transformed  so  slowly  that  there  is  no 
.ppreciable  change  in  its  amount  in  an  interval  of  time  required 
or  the  later  products  to  attain  approximate  equilibrium  with  the 
irimary  source.  This  condition  is  very  nearly  fulfilled,  for  example, 
n  the  case  of  radium  and  the  radium  emanation,  where  the  period 
rf  the  former  is  2000  years,  and  of  the  latter  3*85  days.  The  latter 
ipproaches  its  equilibrium  value  very  closely  after  the  emanation 
las  been  supplied  continuously  from  the  radium  for  an  interval  of 
2  months.  During  this  time,  the  fraction  of  the  radium  trans- 
formed is  only  about  6/100,000,  so  that  for  the  interval  under 
consideration,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  constant  source  without 
sensible  error.  It  is  convenient  to  apply  the  term  "secular" 
equilibrium  to  this  and  similar  cases. 

Consider  next  the  important  case  of  the  emanation  and 
its  products,  radium  A,  B  and  C.  A  stage  of  equilibrium 
between  the  emanation  and  its  products  is  reached  after  the 
emanation  has  been  stored  about  5  hours,  and  the  amount  of 
each  of  the  products  then  decays  exponentially  with  the  period  of 
the  emanation.  This  is  a  case  of  "  transient "  equilibrium,  for  the 
amounts  of  the  products  are  changing  comparatively  rapidly.  The 
amounts  of  radium  A,  B  and  C  at  any  subsequent  time  are  always 
appreciably  greater  than  the  amounts  for  secular  equilibrium  if 

the  supply  of  emanation  were  kept  constant. 

Consider,   for  example,   the   case   of  radium   C.     Using   the 

notation  of  Section  159,  the  number  of  atoms  S  of  radium  C  at 

any  time  t  is  given  by 


430  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORBIATIOKS  [( 

where  Xi,  X,,  X,,  X4  are  the  constants  of  transformation  of 
emanation,  radium  A,  B  and  C  respectively.     Since  the  value 
Xi  is  much  smaller  than  X,,  X,  or  X4,  by  making  t  very  large 
the  first  term  becomes  important,  t.e.  when  t  is  large 

a_. XiXgXsX^o g-A|<  /2n 

(x,-x,)(x,-Xi)(\i-x,)        ^  ^ 

For  the  instant  t,  the  amount  So  of  radium  C  which  would  be  ii 
secular  equilibrium  with  the  emanation  is  given  by 

Consequently    |=- ^  ^,^W,^ —  =  1-0089 

^         -^    So     (X,-Xa)(X^-Xi)(X4-X,) 

when  the  values  of  X  are  substituted  in  the  equation. 

This  shows  that  the  amount  of  radium  C  present  is  0*89  pef 
cent,  gredter  than  corresponds  to  secular  equilibrium.  For  example, 
consider  a  certain  quantity  of  emanation  existing  alone  by  itself ' 
and  an  equal  quantity  of  emanation  associated  with  the  amount 
of  radium  with  which  it  is  in  equilibrium.  The  amount  of 
radium  C  in  transient  equilibrium  with  the  emanation  in  the 
first  case  is  '89  per  cent,  greater  than  in  the  latter.  Now  the  7 
radiation  (after  passing  through  2  cms.  of  lead)  from  radium  in 
equilibrium  or  from  a  tube  filled  with  radium  emanation  arises 
mainly  from  radium  C.  If  the  7  radiation  from  the  emanation 
tube  is  compared  with  that  due  to  a  standard  radium  preparation 
through  2  cms.  of  lead,  the  amount  of  emanation  actually  present 
in  the  tube  at  the  time  of  observation  is  obviously  '89  per  cent 
less  than  that  deduced  by  direct  measurements  of  the  7  ray  effects. 

In  a  similar  way,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  amount  of  radium 
A  and  radium  B  present  are  "054  and  '54  per  cent,  greater 
respectively  than  the  true  equilibrium  amount. 

It  is  clear  from  these  considerations  that  the  decay  curve  of 
the  active  deposit  after  a  long  exposure  to  a  source  of  radium 
emanation  stored  by  itself  does  not  follow  exactly  the  theory  given 
in  Section  160,  for  the  relative  ratios  of  radium  A,  B  and  C  above 
the  true  equilibrium  are  as  1*00054  :  1*0054  :  1*0089.  It  is  obvious 
however,  that  the  differences  from  the  theoretical  curves  given  ii 
Fig.  100  will  be  small. 


h.  ' 


:i]  THBOBT  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  431 

The  general  question  of  the  ratios  which  the  amounts  of 
ubstances  in  radio-active  equilibrium  bear  to  one  another  has 
>een  examined  by  Mitchell*  and  Lotkaf  for  any  number  of 
uccessive  changes  If  the  successive  products  have  periods 
"^i,  T^...Tn  of  which  Ti  has  a  period  long  compared  with  any  of 
he  others,  then  it  can  be  simply  shown  from  equations  analogous 
0  (21)  that  the  ratio  of  the  amount  of  the  nth  product  to  the 
rst 

4:('4:)('4:)-('4:) 

This  question  is  of  interest  in  considering  the  relative  quan- 
ities  of  various  radio-active  substances  in  very  old  uranium 
ainerals.  These  arise  from  uranium  which  is  half  transformed  in 
kbout  6  X  lO*  years.  The  period  of  radium  (2000  years)  and  of 
onium  (possibly  10*  years)  are  so  short  compared  with  uranium, 
hat  secular  equilibria  should  be  reached  in  minerals  about  10 
nillion  years  old,  and  the  ratio  of  the  amount  of  the  nth  to  the 
irst  product  is  practically  TJTi,  The  case  of  uranium  itself  is 
>f  special  interest  and  will  be  considered  later  in  Section  171. 

164.  Application  to  some  practical  cases.  In  the  analysis 
)f  radio-active  transformations  and  in  radio-active  problems  gene- 
•ally,  frequent  use  has  been  made  of  the  calculations  previously 
liscussed.  It  may  be  of  value  and  of  interest  to  consider  the 
ipplication  of  the  general  theory  to  several  of  the  great  number  of 
problems  to  which  it  is  applicable. 

Growth  of  radium  D  and  polonium  {radium  F)  from  radium. 
Suppose  that  radium  initially  deprived  of  all  its  products  is  placed 
n  a  closed  vessel.  The  successive  transformations  occurring  are 
hown  below  with  the  half  value  period  of  each  product  added. 

Badiam     Emanation    Bad.  A 

2000  3-86  3 

years  days  min. 

•  Mitchell,  Phil,  Mag.  21,  p.  40,  1911. 
t  Lotka,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  353,  1911. 


B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

26-8 
min. 

19-6 
min. 

16-5 
years 

5 

days 

136 
days 

432  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [CH, 

The  complete  calculation  of  the  amount  of  radium  D  or  radium  F 
present  at  any  time  t  later  would  be  very  intricate,  since  it  involva 
a  large  number  of  successive  changes.  In  practice,  however,  if  w« 
are  considering  a  time  measured  by  days,  the  products  A,  B,  C 
may  be  omitted  without  sensible  error,  and  the  emanation  may  be 
supposed  to  change  directly  into  D. 

If  Pq  be  the  initial  number  of  atoms  of  radium,  the  number  Ji 
of  atoms  of  radium  D  is  obtained  at  once  from  equation  (6),  section 
159,  and  is  given  by 

where  Xi,  X^,  \,  refer  to  radium  emanation  and  radium  D  respec- 
tively. 

Noticing  that  X,  is  very  large  compared  with  X,  and  X,,  the 
values  of  a,  b,  c  given  after  equation  (6)  reduce  to 

a  =  Xi/X,  — Xi,     6  =  X,/X9,     c  =  Xj/Xi  — X,. 
Substituting  the  values  of  Xi,  X,,  X,, 

R  =  -OOSSSPo  (e-^»^  -e-^^  +  -OOOeSe-^O- 
The  third  term  must  be  retained  in  calculations  for  the  first  few 
weeks,  since  the  first  and  second  terms  initially  nearly  cancel  out. 
The  curve  showing  the  variation  of  R  with  time  is  similar  in 
general  shape  to  curve  DD,  Fig.  99.  The  amount  of  R  rises 
slowly  for  the  first  few  days,  then  increases  nearly  proportionally 
with  the  time  for  several  years.  jB  reaches  half  value  in  about 
16  years,  passes  through  a  maximum  in  81  years  and  finally 
decays  according  to  the  first  term,  viz.  i2=  00833^0^"^' ^  showing 
that  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  atoms  of  radium  D  and  radium 
present  at  any  subsequent  time  is  •00833. 

In  a  similar  way  the  amount  of  polonium  at  any  time  may  be 
calculated,  but  it  involves  five  exponential  terms.  An  approximate 
calculation  can,  however,  be  readily  made  by  supposing  that 
radium  changes  directly  into  radium  D  and  radium  D  into 
radium  F.  This  corresponds  to  the  theory  of  three  changes  given 
in  equation  (6),  section  159. 

By  a  similar  method,  the  amount  of  polonium  present  at  any 
time  in  a  tube  filled  with  a  known  quantity  of  radium  emanation 
may  be  deduced.  This  calculation  has  been  utilised  by  Antonoff 
to  determine  the  period  of  transformation  of  radium  D. 


l]  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  433 

165.  Rayless  changes.  Certain  important  cases  occur  in 
he  analysis  of  radio-active  transformations  where  one  of  the 
Toducts  either  does  not  emit  rays  at  all  (rayless)  or  emits  such 
weak  radiation  that  it  is  diflBcult  to  detect.  The  presence  of 
iich  a  rayless  product  can,  however,  not  only  be  inferred  but  its 
•eriod  and  its  physical  and  chemical  properties  can  be  determined 
y  observations  on  the  variations  of  the  activity  shown  by  the 
ucceeding  product. 

Let  us  consider,  for  example,  the  case  where  the  rayless 
latter  A,  initially  all  of  one  kind,  changes  into  the  matter  B 
'hich  gives  out  rays.  The  matter  A  is  supposed  to  be  trans- 
■)rmed  according  to  the  same  law  as  the  radio-active  products, 
-et  X,,  Xq  be  the  constants  of  change  of  A  and  B  respectively, 
f  Pc,  is  the  number  of  particles  of  Ay  initially  present,  we  see  from 
he  equation  (5),  section  159,  that  the  number  of  particles  of  the 
latter  B  present  at  any  time  is  given  by 

Xj  —  A-i 

Differentiating  and  equating  to  zero,  it  is  seen  that  the  value 
f  Q  passes  through  a  maximum  at  a  time  T  given  by  the  equation 

X2e-^^=Xie-^»^. 

For  the  sake  of  illustration,  we  shall  consider  the  variation  of 
he  activity  of  the  active  deposit  of  thorium,  due  to  a  very  short 
xposure  to  the  emanation. 

The  active  deposit  consists  of  four  successive  products  called 
horium  A^  B,  C  and  D  respectively.  Thorium  A  disappears 
bout  one  second  after  removal  and  need  not  be  considered  in 
he  calculation.  Thorium  B  then  remains,  and  this  gives  out 
very  weak  0  radiation.  B  changes  into  C,  which  emits  a  rays, 
nd  the  end  product  D  emits  yS  and  y  rays  only. 

The  half  periods  of  transformation  of  thorium  B,  C  and  D  are 
0*6  hours,  1  hour,  and  3'1  minutes  respectively. 

The  a  radiation  from  the  deposit  arises  entirely  from  (7,  and 
s  thus  proportional  to  the  amount  of  C  present.  If  Xi,  X-,  are 
-lie  constants  of  change  of  thorium  B  and  C  respectively,  the 
amount  of  C  present  at  any  time  t  is  given  by  equation  (6), 
section  159.    The  variation  of  the  amount  of  (7,  and  consequently 

R.  K'A.  28 


434 


THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS 


[< 


of  the  a  radiation  with  time  is  shown  in  Fig.  101.     The  actini 
rises  to  a  maximum  in  226  minutes  and  then  decays  ultima 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  period  of  10'6  hours. 
There  are  several  points  of  interest  in  connection  with 
activity  curve  of  this  character.     The  activity,  some  hours  a 
removal,  decays  according  to  an  exponential  law,  not  at  the 
of  the  product  C,  from  which  the  activity  rises,  but  at  the  sai 
rate  as  the  first  ray  less  transformation.     This  will  always  be  thel 
case  if  the  rayless  product  has  a  slower  rate  of  change  t 
the  succeeding  active  product.     Given  an  activity  curve  of  il 
character   of  Fig.   101,  we   can   deduce   from   it    that   the  fi 
change  is  not  accompanied  by  rays  and  also  the  period  of  tl 


100 

80 

-n          ^^ 

\ 

60 

40 

1 

■^ 

20 

3 

1 
"ime  in  Hour 

't 

6 


8  10 

Fig.  101. 


12 


14 


16 


two  changes  in  question.  We  are,  however,  unable  to  determine 
from  the  curve  which  of  the  periods  of  change  refers  to  the  ray- 
less  product.  It  is  seen  that  the  curve  is  unaltered  in  shape  if 
the  values  of  Xj,  A-,,  that  is,  if  the  periods  of  the  products  are 
interchanged,  for  the  equation  is  symmetrical  in  Xj,  X,.  For 
example,  in  the  case  of  the  active  deposit  of  thorium,  without 
further  data  it  is  impossible  to  decide  whether  the  period  of 
the  first  change  has  a  value  of  1  hour  or  106  hours.  In  such 
cases  the  question  can  be  settled  only  by  using  some  physical 
or  chemical  means  in  order  to  separate  the  product  B  from  C, 
and  then  testing  the  rate  of  decay  of  their  activities  separately. 


j]  THEORY  OP  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORBIATIONS  436 

D  practice,  this  can  often  be  eflfected  by  electrolysis  or  by  utilizing 
he  diflference  in  volatility  of  the  two  products.  If  now  a  product 
V  separated  firom  the  mixture  of  B  and  G  which  emits  a  rays  and 
lees  it«  activity  according  to  an  exponential  law,  falling  to  half 
Blue  in  one  hour  (and  such  is  experimentally  observed),  we  can 
t  once  conclude  that  the  a  ray  product  0  has  the  period  of 
ne  hour. 

The  characteristic  features  of  the  activity  curve  shown  in 
*ig.  101  become  less  marked  with  increase  of  the  time  of  ex- 
osure  of  a  body  to  the  emanation,  that  is,  when  more  and  more 
f  C  is  mixed  with  B  at  the  time  of  removal.  For  a*  long  time  of 
iposure,  when  the  products  B  and  C  are  in  radio-active  equi- 
brium,  the  activity  after  removal  is  proportional  to  Q,  where 

Aj  ^  A^   xAj 

lee  equation  (11),  section  160).  The  value  of  Q,  in  this  case,  does 
ot  increase  after  removal,  but  at  once  commences  to  diminish. 
'he  activity,  in  consequence,  decreases  from  the  moment  of  re- 
loval,  but  more  slowly  than  would  correspond  to  an  exponential 
iw.  The  activity  finally  decays  exponentially,  as  in  the  previous 
ise,  falling  to  half  value  in  10*6  hours. 

In  the  previous  case  we  have  discussed  the  activity  curve 
btained  when  both  the  active  and  inactive  product  have  com- 
aratively  rapid  rates  of  transformation.  In  certain  cases  which 
rise  in  the  analysis  of  the  changes  in  actinium  and  radium,  the 
iyless  product  has  a  rate  of  change  extremely  slow  compared  with 
lat  of  the  active  product.  This  corresponds  to  the  case  where 
le  active  matter  B  is  supplied  from  ^  at  a  constant  rate.  The 
ctivity  curve  will  thus  be  identical  in  form  with  the  recovery 
arves  of  Th  X  and  Ur  X,  that  is,  the  amount  iV*  of  5  at  any 
me  t  will  be  represented  by  the  equation  N/Nq  =  1  —  e~^*^  where 
\  is  the  maximum  amount  of  B  and  A-,  its  constant  of  change. 

166.    Analysis  of  activity  curves.     In  the  previous  cal- 

ilations  we  have  seen  how  the  number  of  atoms  of  each  of  the 

iccessive  products  varies  with  the  time  under  different  conditions. 

is  now  necessary  to  consider  how  this  number  is  connected  with 

e  activity  due  to  a  series  of  successive  products. 

28—2 


436  THEORY   OF  SUCCESSIVE   TRANSFORMATIONS  [( 

If  N  is  the  number  of  atoms  of  a  product,  the  number  break 
up  per  second  is  XN,  where  \  is  the  constant  of  change.    If 
atom  of  each  product,  in  breaking  up,  emits  one  a  particle,  we 
that  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled  per   second  firom 
mixture  of  products  at  any  time  is  equal  to  XjP  +  XaQ+  Xjii  +  .. 
where  P,  Q,  iJ,  ...  are  the  numbers  of  atoms  of  the  successr 
products  A,  B,  C,  .,..     Substituting  the  values  of  P,  Q,  R  aire 
found  from  any  one  of  the  four  cases  previously  considered, 
variation  with  the  time  of  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled 
second  can  be  determined. 

The  ideal  method  of  measuring  the  activity  of  any  mixt 
of  radio-active  products  would  be  to  determine  the  number  of 
or  0  particles  expelled  from  it  per  second.     In  practice,  however, 
this  is  inconvenient  and  also  very  difficult  experimentally. 

Certain  practical  difficulties  arise  in  endeavouring  to  compare 
the  activity  of  one  product  with  another.  We  shall  see  later  that> 
in  many  cases,  all  of  the  successive  products  do  not  emit  o  raya 
Some  give  out  /8  and  y  rays  alone,  while  there  are  several  abioet 
*'  rayless  "  products.  . 

In  practice,  the  relative  iictivity  of  any  individual  product  at  4 
any  time  is  usually  determined  by  measurements  of  the  saturatioay^ 
ionisation  current  produced  between  the  electrodes  of  a  suitabbr^ 
testing  vessel.  i 

Let  us  consider,  for  example,  the  case  of  a  product  whidiJ 
emits  only  a  rays.  The  passage  of  the  a  particle  through  the  gas; 
produces  a  large  number  of  ions  in  its  path.  Since  the  a  particle! 
from  any  individual  product  are  projected  with  the  same  velocity 
under  all  conditions,  the  amount  of  the  ionisation  produced  per 
second  in  the  testing  vessel  serves  as  an  accurate  means  of  dete^ 
mining  the  variation  of  its  activity.  No  two  products  of  the 
same  series,  however,  emit  a  particles  with  the  same  velocity. 
The  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  depends  on  its  range  in  air 
and  the  latter  is  different  for  each  product.  Thus  the  relative 
saturation  current,  due  to  two  different  products  in  a  testing  vessel 
does  not  serve  as  an  accurate  method  for  comparing  the  relative 
number  of  a  particles  expelled  per  second.  The  ratio  of  the  currents 
will  in  general  depend  upon  the  distance  between  the  plates  of 
the  testing  vessel,  and,  unless  the  relative  ionisation  due  to  the 


-i] 


THEOBT  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS 


437 


verage  a  particle  from  the  two  products  is  known  from  other 
ata,  the  comparison  of  the  currents  can,  at  best,  be  only  an 
pproximate  guide  to  the  relative  number  of  a  particles  escaping 
ito  the  gas. 

Some  examples  will  now  be  considered  to  show  how  the  factors, 
bove  considered,  influence  the  character  of  the  curves  of  activity 
btained  under  different  experimental  conditions.  For  the  pur- 
cse  of  illustration,  we  shall  consider  the  variation  of  the  activity 
n  a  body  which  has  been  exposed  for  diflTerent  times  to  a  constant 
upply  of  the  radium  emanation  and  then  removed.  The  active 
eposit  on  removal  consists  in  general  of  a  mixture  of  the  products 
adium  A,  B,  and  C.  The  nature  of  the  rays  from  each  product, 
he  time  for  each  product  to  be  transformed  to  half  value,  and  the 
alue  of  X  are  tabulated  below  for  convenience : — 


Product 

Rays 

T. 

X  (sec."*) 

Badiuiu  A 

a  rays 

3  min. 

3-85x10-3 

Radium  B 

ft  7  rays 

26-8  min. 

4-33x10-* 

Radium  C 

a,  A  y  rays 

19*5  min. 

5-93x10-* 

Since  radium  B  does  not  give  out  a  rays,  the  number  of 
I  particles  expelled  from  the  active  deposit  per  second  is  pro- 
portional to  XiP  4-  X,jR.  The  activity  measured  by  the  a  rays, 
ising  the  electrical  method,  is  thus  proportional  at  any  time  to 
L,P  +  Kx^R,  where  JT  is  a  constant  which  represents  the  ratio  of 
he  average  number  of  ions,  produced  in  the  testing  vessel,  by  an 
I  particle  from  C  compared  with  that  from  an  a  particle  emitted 
\y  A.  For  this  particular  case,  K  is  for  some  arrangements  nearly 
mity.  Taking  iT  =  1,  the  activity  at  any  time  after  removal  is 
proportional  to  XjP  -h  XsiJ. 

Case  1.  We  shall  first  consider  the  activity  curve  for  a  short 
xposure  to  the  radium  emanation.  The  relative  values  of  P,  Q, 
Jid  R  at  any  time  corresponding  to  this  case  have  been  graphically 
hown  in  Fig.  99.  The  activity  measured  by  the  a  rays  at  any 
ime  will  be  the  sum  of  the  activities  due  to  A  and  C  separately. 

Let  curve  AA  (Fig.  102)  represent  the  activity  due  to  A. 
*his  decreases  exponentially,  falling  to  half  value  in  3  minutes. 
1  order  to  show  the  small  activity  due  to  C  clearly  in  the  figure, 
te  activity  due  to  A  is  plotted  after  an  interval  of  6  minutes. 


4S8  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORM ATI0K8 

wheD  the  activity  has  been  reduced  to  25  per  cent,  of  its  maxi 
value.  The  activity  due  to  C  is  proportional  to  X,R,  and  in 
to  represent  the  activity  due  to  C  on  the  same  scale  as  A. 
necessary  to  reduce  the  scale  of  the  ordinates  of  curve  C 

Fig.  99  in  the  ratio  ^. 

The  activity  due  to  C  is  thus  represented  by  the  curve 
Fig.  102.  The  total  activity  ia  thus  represented  by  a  curve  ;' 
whose  ordinates  are  the  sum  of  the  ordinates  of  A  and  C. 

8 


16 
I 


Timt  in  miruila 
Fig.  102. 

This  theoretical  activity  curve  is  very  similar  in  its  gt 
features  to  the  curve  found  experimentally  when  the  activ 
measured  by  the  a  rays. 

Case  2.  The  activity  curve  for  a  long  exposure  U 
emanation  will  now  be  considered.  The  activity  after  rei 
of  A  and  C  is  proportional  to  X^P  +  Xjfi,  where  the  values 
and  R  are  graphically  shown  in  Fig.  100  by  the  curves  AA 


XI] 


THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS 


439 


Initially  after  removal,  \iPo  =  ^^>  since  A  and  C  are  in  radio- 
active equilibrium,  and  the  same  number  of  particles  of  each 
product  breaks  up  per  second.  The  activity  due  to  A  alone  is 
shown  in  curve  AA,  Fig.  103.  The  activity  decreases  exponen- 
tially, falling  to  half  value  in  3  minutes.  The  activity  due  to  C 
at  any  time  is  proportional  to  R,  and  is  initially  equal  to  that 
of  A.  The  activity  curve  due  to  C  is  thus  represented  by  the 
curve  CG,  which  is  the  same  curve  as  the  curve  CO  of  Fig.  100. 
The  activity  of  A  and  C  together  is  represented  by  the  curve 
A^-C  (Fig.  103),  where  the  ordinates  are  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  ordinates  of  the  curves  A  and  C.  This  theoretical  curve  is 
seen  to  be  very  similar  in  shape  to  the  experimental  curve  showing 


100 


45    60    75    90 
Fig.  103. 


105   120   135 


the  decay  of  activity  of  the  active  deposit  for  a  long  exposure 
measured  by  the  a  rays. 

The  products  B  and  C  emit  7  rays,  but  the  rays  from  the 
former  are  far  more  easily  absorbed.  By  passing  the  rays  through 
a  screen  of  lead  2  cms.  thick,  the  7  rays  from  radium  B  are 
stopped,  and  the  eflFect  in  an  ionisation  vessel  is  then  due  to 
the  7  rayp  from  radium  C  alone.  Under  these  conditions,  the 
activity  will  be  proportional  to  the  amount  of  C  present  at  any 
time,  that  is,  to  the  value  of  R  at  any  time.  For  a  long  exposure, 
the  variation  of  activity  with  time  measured  by  the  7  rays  will 
thus  be  represented  by  the  curve  CC  of  Fig.  103,  where  the 


440  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIOKS  [CH. 

ordinates  represent  activity.     This  curve   is  of  importance  in 
determining  the  amount  of  radium  C  by  7  ray  measurements. 

167.  Application  to  a  case  in  thorium.  We  shall  next 
consider  a  special  case  of  importance  connect^  with  the  trans- 
formation of  thorium,  which  has  several  points  of  interest.  The 
initial  changes  in  thorium,  discussed  in  Chapter  XVI,  are  shown 
diagram matically  below  and  the  half- value  period  of  transformation 
of  each  product  is  added. 

Thorium  -^  Mcsothorium  1  -^  Mesothorium  2  -^  Radiothorium  -^  eto. 
3  X 10'*^  years         5*5  years  6*2  hours  2  years 

It  will  be  shown  in  Chapter  XVI  that  in  the  process  of  separation 
of  thorium  from  thorium  minerals,  mesothorium  1  is  completely 
removed  from  the  thorium,  while  the  whole  of  the  radiothorium 
remains  with  the  thorium. 

We  shall  first  consider  the  variation  of  the  amount  of  radio- 
thorium in  the  thorium  preparations  at  diflferent  times  after 
separation  of  the  mesothorium.  It  is  supposed  that  initially  the 
thorium  in  the  mineral  is  in  secular  equilibrium  with  all  its 
products. 

The  amount  of  radiothorium  existing  at  any  time  may  k 
supposed  to  be  made  up  of  two  parts,  (1)  the  amount  of  old 
radiothorium  remaining  with  the  thorium,  supposing  it  to  decay 
with  its  period  of  2  years  from  the  moment  that  the  mesothorium 
is  separated,  and  (2)  the  amount  of  new  radiothorium  formed  from 
the  thorium  in  the  interval  under  consideration. 

Since  thorium  has  a  very  long  period  of  transformation  wm- 
pared  with  its  products,  it  may  be  supposed  to  break  up  at  a 
constant  rate.  Since  mesothorium  2  has  a  very  short  period  of 
transformation  compared  with  mesothorium  1,  the  former  product 
may  without  sensible  error  be  omitted  from  the  calculations,  and 
mesothorium  1  may  be  supposed  to  form  radiothorium  directly- 
Suppose  no  atoms  of  thorium  break  up  per  second.  If  Po»  ft 
are  the  number  of  atoms  of  mesothorium  and  radiothorium 
respectively  in  equilibrium  with  the  thorium,  then 

Wo  =  ^1-1 0  ==  ^yo» 
where  \i,  X,  are  their  respective  constants. 


THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS 


441 


amount  Qi  of  radio  thorium  due  to  (1)  at  a  time  t  after 
n  is  given  by  Qi/Qo^e"^^.  The  amount  Q,  of  radio- 
formed  afresh  is  given  by  equation  (19),  section  162, 

variation  of  Qi  with  time  is  shown  in  Fig.  104,  Curve  I, 
taken  as  100.  The  variation  of  Q^  with  time  is  shown 
ame  scale  in  Curve  II.  The  amount  of  radiothorium 
^ith  the  thorium  is  equal  to  Qi  +  Qa,  and  is  thus  obtained 
g  the  ordinates  of  Curves  I  and  II.     The  resultant  curve 


' 

^ 

iif 

^0^ 

" 

^ 

^ 

K 

bX 

A 

N 

? 

/ 

I 

• 

8  12  16 

Time  in  years 

Fig.  104. 


20 


24 


28 


in  Curve  III.  It  is  seen  from  Fig.  104  that  the 
f  radiothorium  present  with  the  thorium  decreases  with 
,  passes  through  a  minimum  after  4*6  years  and  then 
rises  towards  the  equilibrium  value  100. 
horium  emits  only  /3  and  7  rays  while  thorium,  radio- 
and  four  of  its  successive  products  emit  a  rays.  Since 
is  of  transformation  of  the  products  of  radiothorium  are 
ipared  with  the  period  of  radiothorium,  we  may  without 
or  suppose  radiothorium  to  be  in  equilibrium  with  its 


442  THEORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  [ci 

products,  and  that  five  a  particles  are  expelled  from  the  radi^ij: 
thorium  series  in  equilibrium  with  thorium  for  oiie  from  thoriu^^ 
itself.  I 

The  number  of  a  particles  emitted  from  the  thorium  togethei 
with  its  products  at  any  time  after  separation  can  be  e«isil^ 
deduced.  Suppose  that  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  fron 
the  thorium  series  when  in  equilibrium  is  100.  Of  this  nuuibet 
the  thorium  itself  provides  1/6  and  the  radiothorium  series  5/ 
The  number  of  a  particles  emitted  from  the  thorium  is  showi 
by  the  straight  line  in  Fig.  10^         '.  '  '\  o  the  axis  of  abscissae 

100'  '  '  -'6-2  ho 


12  T6 

Time  in  years 

Fig.  105. 

The  number  due  to  radiothorium  is  deduced  from  Curve  III 
Fig.  104,  by  multiplying  the  ordinates  by  5/6  and  is  shown  ii 
Curve  II,  Fig.  105.  The  resultant  number  of  a  particles  i 
shown  in  Curve  III  by  adding  the  ordinates  of  the  two  cur^ej 
This  resultant  curve  showing  the  number  of  a  particles  passe 
through  a  minimum  at  the  same  time  as  the  Curve  III,  Fig.  10- 
showing  the  amount  of  radiothorium  alone. 

If  the  variation  of  activity  is  measured  by  ionisation  methodi 
the  curves  obtained  will  be  similar  in  shape  but  the  drop  in  th 


j]  THEORY   OF  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSFORMATIONS  443 

?sultant  curve  will  depend  to  some  extent  on  the  relative  ion- 
w-tion  of  an  a  particle  from  thorium  itself,  and  from  radiothorium 
nd  each  of  its  a  ray  products. 

It  will  be  seen  in  Chapter  XVI  that  the  period  of  mesothorium 
ssuined  in  these  calculations  has  been  deduced  with  the  aid  of 
leory  from  a  knowledge  of  the  period  of  radiothorium  and  from 
le  variation  of  a  ray  activity  of  thorium  preparations  with  age. 

168.     In  this  chapter  we  have  considered  the  variation  with 

iine,  under  different  c^»^^*  *»^  /if  the  number  of  atoms  of  the 

iccessive  products,  when  .^  xi  and  number  of  the  changes 

.given.     It  has  been  seen'  "tEe  activity  curves  to  be  ex- 

ed  under  various  conditio  be  readilj'  deduced  from  the 

imple  theory.     In  practice,  Y.       Vtr,  the  investigator  has  been 

iced  with  the  much  more  diffi         inverse  problem  of  deducing 

period,  number,  and  charactLi>*of  the  products,  by  analysis 

le  activity  curves  obtained  under  various  conditions. 

Q  the  case  of  radium,  where  at  least  seven  distinct  changes 

jiir,  the  problem  has  been  one  of  considerable  difficulty,  and  a 

olution  has  only  been  possible  by  devising  special  physical  and 

liemical  methods  for  isolating  some  of  the  products. 

In  the  following  chapter  the  theory  of  successive  changes  will 
)o  applied  to  the  analysis  of  radio-active  matter,  and  will  be  shown 
;o  account  satisfactorily  for  the  complicated  processes  which  take 
Dlace. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM. 

169.     Uranium  and  its  products.    Uranium  has  the  highest 
atomic   weight   238*5  of  any  known  element.     It  is   ordinarily 
separated  from  the  mineral  uraninite,  where  it  is  always  found 
associated  with  the  radio-active  substances  ionium,  radium  and 
actinium.     Uranium  occupies  a  very  important  place  in  the  trans- 
formations which  will  be  studied  in  the  next  three  chapters,  for  it 
will  be  shown  that  uranium  is  the  primary  source  from  which 
ionium,  radium  and  actinium  are  derived.     In  order  to  bring  out 
clearly  the  main  points  that  will  be  discussed  in  some  detail  in 
this  chapter,  it  is  necessary  first  of  all  to  consider  the  relations 
that  should  exist  between  uranium  and  its  transformation  products. 
The  evidence  so  far  obtained  indicates  that  the  following  series  of 
transformations  takes  place : 

Uranium  ->  Ur  X  ->  Ionium  —>  Radium  and  its  series  of  products. 

On  this  scheme,  both  ionium  and  radium  are  to  be  considered 
as  products  of  uranium,  and  ionium  is  the  direct  parent  of  radium. 
The  connection  of  Ur  X  with  uranium  has  previously  been  dis- 
cussed (Section  122).  The  most  direct  and  convincing  evidence 
of  these  relations  is  obtained  from  a  study  of  the  radio-active 
constituents  of  old  primary  uranium  minerals,  in  which  no  sensible 
chemical  alteration  by  the  action  of  external  agencies  has  occurred 
for  periods  of  time  measured  by  geological  ages.  Under  such  con- 
ditions, equilibrium  should  have  been  established  between  uranium 
and  its  products.  Supposing,  as  will  be  seen  to  be  the  case 
later,  that  uranium  is  transformed  very  slowly  compared  with  its 


H.  XIl]     URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  445 

►r<xluet«,  the  number  of  atoms  N^^  N^y  N^  of  uranium,  ionium  and 
adium  respectively  in  the  mineral  should  be  connected  b}'  the 
elation  XjiV,  =  X^Ni^sX^Niy  where  Xj,  Xg,  X3  are  the  radio-active 
lonstants  of  the  three  substances  mentioned.     Then 

NJN,  =  X,/X„     lYJK,  =  X,/X3,     iV3/iV,  =  X^X, ; 

or  in  other  words,  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  atoms  of  each 
substance  compared  with  that  of  uranium  is  inversely  proportional 
to  the  ratio  of  the  constants  of  transformation.  It  follows  from 
this  that  the  amount  of  ionium  and  of  radium  in  any  old  mineral 
should  be  directly  proportional  to  the  amount  of  uranium  present. 
This  has  been  most  completely  tested  in  the  case  of  radium 
(Section  177),  and  it  has  been  found  that  there  is  the  direct 
proportionality  to  be  expected  from  the  theory.  This  relation 
cannot  be  expected  to  hold  for  relatively  new  minerals,  or  for  those 
minerals  which  have  undergone  chemical  alteration.  The  whole 
question  is  discussed  in  detail  later  in  Section  177.  Boltwood  has 
shown  that  the  amount  of  ionium  separated  from  a  mineral  is 
always  proportional  to  its  content  of  uranium. 

There  is  another  and  possibly  more  direct  experimental  method 
of  attacking  this  problem.  If  uranium,  ionium  and  radium  are 
genetically  connected  and  in  equilibrium,  the  same  number  of 
atoms  of  each  must  break  up  per  second.  Since  the  number  of 
atoms  of  each  product  transformed  per  second  is  proportional  to 
the  radiation  from  it,  it  follows  that  the  relative  energies  of  the 
radiations  emitted  by  the  uranium,  ionium  and  radium  contained 
in  all  old  minerals  should  be  the  same.  In  addition,  the  energy 
emitted  by  uranium  and  by  all  its  products  in  a  mineral  should  be 
in  a  constant  ratio  to  the  energy  emitted  by  uranium  itself 

This  question  has  been  carefully  examined  by  McCoy*  using 
the  electric  method.  In  order  to  avoid  corrections  due  to  absorp- 
tion of  the  radiations  in  the  mineral  itself,  it  is  necessary  to 
employ  exceedingly  thin  films  of  active  matter  obtained  by  grinding 
the  mineral  to  an  impalpable  powder.  In  order  to  obtain  measure- 
ments which  will  be  comparable  under  all  conditions,  it  is 
desirable  to  use  an  ionisation  vessel  or  electroscope  chamber  of 

♦  MoCoy,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Gea.  87,  p.  2641,  1904;  PhiL  Mag.  11,  p.  176,  1906; 
Joum.  Amer.  Chem.  Soc.  39,  p.  1698,  1907. 


446 


URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OP  RADIUM 


[ceI 


sufficient  dimensions  to  absorb  all  the  a  rays  in  the  gas  hehn 
they  strike  the  walls.  Under  these  conditions,  the  energy  of  tiie 
a  particles  emitted  from  each  product  is  directly  proportional  to 
the  ionisation  they  produce.  In  this  way  McCoy  found  that  the 
total  activity  of  a  mineral  was  in  all  cases  proportional  to  the  totil 
activity  of  the  uranium  contained  in  it.  McCoy  (loc.  cit)  and 
Boltwood*  have  determined  the  ratio  of  the  total  activity  of  the 
mineral  to  that  of  the  uranium  under  the  conditions  mentioned 
above,  and  the  latter  found  a  value  4*64.  In  making  this  deter- 
mination, it  is  necessary  to  correct  the  observed  activity  of  the 
mineral  for  the  loss  of  radium  emanation  which  diflfuses  from  it 

It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  how  the  activity  is  divided 
amongst  the  various  products.  For  this  purpose,  it  is  necessary 
to  separate  each  of  the  products  ionium,  radium  and  polonium 
from  the  mineral  and  determine  its  activity  separately.  The 
relative  values  of  the  activity  due  to  radium  and  its  short  lived 
products,  viz.  emanation,  radium  A,  B  and  C  can  be  determined 
separately.  As  a  result  of  a  number  of  careful  experiments  on 
diiferent  minerals,  Boltwood  {loc.  cit)  gives  the  following  numbers, 
which  refer  to  the  relative  ionisations  produced  when  the  a  rays 
are  completely  stopped  in  the  gas  of  the  testing  vessel. 


Products 
Uranium    ... 
Ionium 
Radium 
Ra.  Emanation 
Radium  A 
Radium  B  ... 
Radium  C  ... 
Ra.  F  (polonium) 
Actinium  and  its  products 


Relative 
total  activity 

1-00 

0-34 

0-45n 

0-54 

0-62 

0-04 

0-91 

0-46; 

0-28 


,302 


Range  of 
a  particles  at  15°  C. 

average  range  2*7  cm. 

3-00  cm. 

3-30 

416 

4-75 


11 


11 


11 


11 


6-94 
3*77    „ 
average  range  5*36  cm. 


Total  activity    =    4*64  x  Uranium 

In  this  table  several  products,  viz.  Ur  X,  radium  D  and 
radium  E  are  omitted,  as  they  give  out  only  ^  rays,  and  the 
ionisation  due  to  them  is  very  small  compared  with  that  due  to 
the  a  ray  products. 


♦  Boltwood,  Amer.  Joum,  Sci.  25,  p.  269,  1908. 


aUl]  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  447 

Boltwood  found  that  under  the  conditions  of  measurement,  the 
BK)tal  ionisation  due  to  an  a  particle  was  roughly  proportional  to 
Ets  range.  The  range  of  the  a  particles  at  standard  pressure  and 
116°  C.  from  each  product  are  added  in  the  third  column  for  com- 
j)arison.  The  values  of  the  activities  given  by  Boltwood  for 
^Bmanation  and  radium  A  are  transposed  as  they  were  based  on  the 
assumption  that  the  range  of  the  a  particles  from  the  emanation 
^as  greater  than  that  for  radium  A. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  five  a  ray  products  of  actinium, 
although  their  average  range  is  greater  than  that  of  the  five  a  ray 
products  of  radium,  only  constitute  about  9  per  cent,  of  the  total 
activity  due  to  all  the  latter.  For  these  and  other  reasons,  it  has 
l)een  concluded  that  actinium  cannot  be  a  product  in  the  main 
uranium  series  like  ionium  or  radium,  but  must  arise  as  a  side 
1)ranch  (see  Section  209). 

170.  Complexity  of  uranium.  Taking  into  consideration 
the  range  of  their  o  particles,  it  is  seen  that  ionium,  radium  and 
its  products,  including  polonium,  each  contribute  about  the  activity 
to  be  expected  if  the  products  are  successive  and  if  the  same 
number  of  a  particles  are  expelled  at  the  disintegration  of  each 
atom.  The  activity  of  uranium  itself  is,  however,  more  than  twice 
the  activity  of  radium.  Boltwood  consequently  concluded  that 
the  disintegration  of  uranium  contributed  at  least  two  a  particles 
for  one  from  ionium  or  from  radium.  This  important  conclusion 
has  been  confirmed  by  Geiger  and  Rutherford*  by  counting 
directly  by  the  scintillation  method  the  number  of  a  particles  fi'om 
films  of  uranium  and  films  of  uranium  minerals  containing  a  known 
quantity  of  uranium.  It  was  found  that  each  gram  of  uranium 
emitted  2*37  x  10*  a  particles  per  second,  while  a  mineral  in 
radio-active  equilibrium  (correcting  for  loss  of  emanation)  emitted 
9*6  X  10*  per  second  per  gram  of  uranium  present.  Allowing  for 
the  presence  of  a  small  quantity  of  actinium,  these  results  show 
that  the  mineral  emits  four  times  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted 
by  uranium.  Since  there  are  six  a  ray  products  in  the  ionium- 
radium  series,  and   each   breaks  up  with   the   emission   of  one 

*  Geiger  and  Rutherford,  Phil,  Mag.  20,  p.  691,  1910;  see  also  J.  Brown,  Proc, 
Roy.  Soc.  A,  84,  p.  151,  1910. 


I 


448  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  [CH. 

a  particle  per  atom,  it  follows  that  uranium  breaks  up  with  the 
emission  of  two  a  particles. 

In  Qrder  to  explain  this  result,  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  either 
that  (1)  the  uranium  atom  in  disintegrating  emits  two  a  particles 
simultaneously,  or  (2)  uranium  contains  two  distinct  substancei 
in  equilibrium,  each  of  which  breaks  up  with  the  emission  of  one 
a  particle. 

(1)  has  been  disproved  by  Marsden  and  Barratt*  by  testing 
whether  the  scintillations  from  uranium  appeared  as  doubles,  using 
an  arrangement  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  48,  page  191.  Xo 
evidence  of  such  doubles  was  observed.  If  uranium  consisted  of 
two  a  ray  products,  it  was  deduced  that  the  latter  must  certainly 
have  a  life  greater  than  a  few  seconds. 

It  therefore  seemed  probable  that  uranium  itself  must  consist 
of  two  successive  components,  which  are  transformed  with  the 
emission  of  a  rays.  Numerous  attempts  have  been  made  to 
reduce  the  a  ray  activity  of  uranium  by  chemical  treatment,  but 
without  success.  This  indicates  that  the  two  components  present 
in  ordinary  preparations  of  uranium  are  chemically  so  allied  that 
none  of  the  ordinary  chemical  methods  are  eflfective  in  separating 
them. 

There  is  one  indirect  method,  however,  of  throwing  light  on 
the  question.  Unless  the  two  components  emit  a  particles  with 
very  nearly  the  same  velocity,  it  should  be  possible  to  detect  in 
uranium  the  presence  of  two  sets  of  a  rays  of  diflFerent  ranges 
by  determining  the  Bragg  curve  showing  the  variation  of  the 
ionisation  of  a  pencil  of  a  particles  along  their  path.  Experiments 
on  this  question  have  been  made  by  Fochf  and  FriedmannJ;  the 
latter  concluded  that  two  sets  of  a  rays  were  present  of  ranges 
1*6  cms.  and  2*7  cms.;  but  the  method  of  proof  deduction  of  the 
shorter  range  was  uncertain.  The  determination  of  the  ionisation 
curve,  due  to  a  narrow  pencil  of  a  rays,  is  very  difficult  on  account 
of  the  very  weak  activity  of  thin  films  of  uranium.  Geiger  and 
Nuttall§,  however,  have  obtained  definite  evidence  that  the  Bragg 

•  Marsden  and  Barratt,  Proe,  Phyg.  Soc.  28,  p.  367,  1911. 

t  Foch,  Le  Radium,  8,  p.  101,  1911. 

I  Friedmann,  Wien  Ber.  180,  p.  1361,  lUll. 

§  Geiger  and  Nnttall,  Phil,  Mag.  28,  p.  489,  1912. 


UHANIDH,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  44S 

r  a  narrow  pencil  of  raya  differs  from  that  to  be  expected 
nple  a  ray  product.  Their  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  106 
he  ionisation  curves  due  to  the  a  rays  from  uranium  and 
ire  given.  These  two  curves  were  determined  under  the 
nditions.  The  ionium  was  mixed  with  uranium  to  avoid 
lible  difference  due  to  absorption  of  the  a  rays  in  the  thin 
iranium  employed.  The  dotted  line  gives  the  correspond- 
isation   curve   for   a   single    product,   e.g.   for 


Range  of  a  partUltt  in  emi. 
Fig.  106. 

u.  It  is  seen  that  the  actual  curve  obtained  for  uranium 
Ledly  different.  Geiger  and  Nuttall  showed  that  the 
30  between  the  dotted  and  full  curves  was  explained  by 
g  that  two  groups  of  a  rays  are  emitted  from  uranium, 
range  25  cms.  and  the  other  of  range  2'9  cms.  at  15°  C. 
dence  is  thus  in  conformity  with  the  view  that  uranium  is 
lex  substance  and  must  contain  at  least  two  components 


450  UBANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RJLDIUM  [CB. 


' 


which  emit  a  rays.  This  conclusion  is  of  great  interest  from  tbe 
purely  chemical  point  of  view,  for  no  method  has  yet  been  devised 
of  separating  these  two  components  from  each  other.  It  is  poesibk 
that  the  chemical  properties  of  the  two  components  are  so  simik 
that  no  separation  is  possible.  Several  examples  of  a  similar  kiiii 
have  been  observed  in  radio-active  substances.  For  example, 
thorium  and  ionium,  mesothorium  and  radium  are  chemicallj 
inseparable. 

171.  Period  of  uranium.  The  period  of  transformation  d 
the  primary  component  of  uranium  can  be  directly  deduced  from 
the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  per  gram  of  uranium.  This 
number  was  found  to  be  2*37  x  10*  by  Geiger  and  RutherfoiA 
Since  one  gram  of  uranium  of  atomic  weight  238  contains 
5'2  X  10*^  atoms  (Section  63),  the  fttwtion  \  disintegrating  per 
year  is  1*44  x  10""^^  From  this  it  follows  that  the  half  value 
period  of  uranium  is  4*8  x  !()•  years,  while  the  average  life  ii 
7  X  10"  years.  In  making  this  calculation  it  is  assumed  that  the 
primary  component  of  uranium  emits  one  a  particle  per  atom.  It 
is  of  interest  to  compare  these  values  with  those  obtained  with  the 
aid  of  quite  distinct  data.  Boltwood  has  shown  experimentally 
that  radium  had  a  half  value  period  of  2000  years  (see  Section  176), 
while  Rutherford  and  Boltwood  have  shown  that  3*4  x  10~^  gram 
of  radium  is  present  in  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  uranium  in 
a  mineral.  Since  the  same  number  of  a  particles  is  emitted  from 
each  per  second 

Xii^x (for  uranium)  =  X^Nzitor  radium). 

In  this  case  Niy  N^  refer  to  the  number  of  atoms  of  uranium  and 

radium  present.    Taking  N^  to  correspond  to  one  gram  of  uraoiam 

238 
and  iV'a  =  ^^  X  3*4  x  lO'^iV^i  to  correspond  to  3*4  x  10"^  gram  of 

radium  of  atomic  weight  226,  TJT^  =  XjXi  =  2*8  x  10«,  where 
Ti,  Ta  are  the  half  value  periods  of  uranium  and  radium  respec- 
tively. Consequently  Ti  =  5*6  x  10*  years.  This  is  in  fidr  agree- 
ment with  the  number  4*8  x  10*  years  deduced  by  direct  counting 
of  the  a  particles. 

It  is  of  interest  to  calculate  the  effect  on  the  relative  number 
of  a  particles  if  the  two  components  of  uranium  supposed  to  be  in 


l]  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIXTM  451 

iiilibrium  with  each  other  have  periods  of  the  same  order  of 

Eignitude.     It  can  readily  be  deduced  from  the  equations  given 

Section  159  that  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  per  second 

'  the  first  component  is  \iPo^"^'*i  ai^d  by  the  second  component 

^^ — ^ — ,  where  P©  is  the  number  of  atoms  of  the  first  com- 

nent  initially  present,  said  X^,  X^  are  the  constants  of  transforma- 
m  of  the  two  components.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  if  the 
riods  of  transformation  of  the  two  components  are  of  the  same 
ier  of  magnitude  equilibrium  would  only  be  reached  for  an 
berval  of  time  long  compared  with  the  age  of  the  oldest  known 
anium  mineral.  This  difficulty  would  be  removed,  however,  if 
e  uranium  minerals  known  to  us  were  supposed  to  be  formed 
>in  uranium  deposits  in  which*  equilibrium  between  the  two 
mponents  had  been  reached. 

Remembering  that  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  by 
iium  in  a  mineral  must  be  equal  to  that  emitted  by  the  second 
mponent,  it  is  seen  that  the  ratio  of  the  number  fix>m  the  two 
mponents  of  uranium  to  the  number  firom  radium  is  2  —  T^/Tii 
Ti  =  27*9,  the  fraction  becomes  1*5,  which  is  much  less  than  the 
lue  2  observed.  We  may  consequently  conclude  that  the  period 
the  second  component  cctnnot  be  so  great  as  3  x  10^  years.  If 
=  3  X  10^  years,  the  frtu^tion  becomes  1*95,  which  does  not 
9er  from  2  by  more  than  the  experimental  error.  This  evidence 
of  interest  in  forming  a  maximum  estimate  of  the  period  of  the 
3ond  component. 

It  will  be  shown  in  Chapter  XVIII  that  a  definite  relation  has 
en  found  to  exist  between  the  range  of  the  a  particles  emitted 
>m  a  product  and  its  period  of  transformation.  On  this  relation, 
e  shorter  the  range  of  the  a  particle  the  longer  its  period.  It 
us  seems  probable  that  the  a  rays  of  range  2*5  cms.  belong  to  the. 
st  component  of  longer  period,  uranium  1,  and  the  rays  of  range 
)  cms.  to  the  second  component  of  shorter  period,  uranium  2. 
iiger  and  Nuttall  have  calculated  frovn  this  relation  that  the 
riod  of  the  second  component  is  about  10^  yeara  Assuming  the 
riod  of  uranium  2  is  about  one  million  years,  the  amount  in  a 
anium  salt  of  uranium  2  relative  to  uranium  1  is  1  to  5000. 
nee  the  atomic  weight  of  uranium  2  must  be  four  units  less  than 

29—2 


452  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  [CH 

uranium  1,  the  presence  of  the  second  component  does  not 
materially  influence  the  value  of  the  atomic  weight  of  uranium 
determined  by  ordinary  chemical  methods. 

172.  Uranium  X.  The  ordinary  preparations  of  uraniam 
salts  sold  as  chemically  pure  usually  contain  minute  quantities  of 
radium  and  other  radio-active  substances.  By  successive  fractional 
crystallisations  uranium  can  be  obtained  practically  free  from  all 
radio-active  impurities.  Ordinary  preparations  of  uranium  emit 
a,  j8  and  7  rays.  The  ^  and  7  rays  arise,  however,  not  from  uranium 
itself,  but  from  its  transformation  product  Ur  X.  Uranium  com- 
pletely freed  from  Ur  X  emits  only  a  rays. 

Uranium  X  loses  its  activity  according  to  an  exponential  law. 
Its  decay  of  activity  has  been  examined  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy*, 
and  Soddy  and  Russell  f,  who  have  found  that  the  half  value 
period  is  22  and  24*6  days  respectively.  Soddy  and  Russell 
separated  a  large  quantity  of  Ur  J  from  40  kilograms  of  uranium 
nitrate,  and  examined  the  decay  of  activity  over  a  long  interval. 
It  was  found  to  decay  to  zero,  for  no  appreciable  residual  activity 
was  observed.  Ur  X  emits  /8  and  7  rays  but  no  a  rays.  When 
no  absorbing  screens  are  used,  the  activity  of  a  thin  film  of 
uranium  is  due  mainly  to  the  a  rays  and  shows  only  a  very  slight 
diminution  when  the  Ur  X  is  completely  separated  from  it.  On 
the  other  hand  the  photographic  action  of  thick  layers  of  uranium 
salt  is  due  mostly  to  the  ^  rays  J.  This  difference  in  the  two 
methods  initially  led  to  some  confusion.  The  fi  rays  from 
uranium  are  fairly  penetrating  with  an  absorption  coefficient 
/Lt  =  16(cms.)""*  in  aluminium.  It  also  emits  some  soft  /8  rays  of 
which  /A  =  500  (cms.)""^  in  aluminium.  The  ionisation  effect  of 
these  soft  ^  rays  was  at  first  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  some 
a  rays  emitted  from  Ur  X.  This  was  disproved  by  Levin§  and 
others. 

Eve  showed  that  uranium  X  emitted  7  rays.  Soddy  investi- 
gated this  question  in  detail,  using  relatively  large  quantities  of 

♦  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  PhiU  Mag,  6,  p.  441,  1903. 
t  Soddy  and  Rassell,  Phil,  Mag,  18,  p.  858,  1909. 
X  Soddy,  Tram.  Chem,  Soc,  81,  p.  460,  1902. 
§  Levin,  Pkys,  Zeit,  8,  p.  585,  1907 ;  9,  p.  655, 1908. 


]  URANIUM^  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  453 

X  and  showed  that,  in  comparison  with  the  /8  rays,  the  7  ray 
ivity  was  very  feeble,  although  of  a  penetrating  power  not 
ch  less  than  that  of  the  7  rays  emitted  by  radium  or  thorium 
e  Section  99). 

173.  Methods  of  separation  of  Ur  X.  One  of  the  simplest 
thods  of  concentrating  Ur  X  from  uranium  is  to  take  advantage 
the  greater  solubility  of  Ur  X  in  water.  This  was  first 
ierved  by  Godlewski*.  If  a  layer  of  crystals  of  the  nitrate 
heated  and  then  allowed  to  cool  slowly,  so  that  crystallisation 
jins  at  the  bottom,  the  Ur  X  is  gradually  pushed  to  the 
rface  layers.  In  consequence  of  this  the  fi  ray  activity  of  the 
per  surface  increases  rapidly  to  a  maximum  when  the  crystal- 
ation  is  completa  In  the  course  of  some  days  the  Ur  X 
^dually  diffuses  from  the  surface  layers  through  the  crystals  and 
comes  more  uniformly  distributed.  This  interesting  property 
Ur  X  was  shown  by  Godlewski  to  account  for  the  anomalous 
anges  of  the  ^8  ray  activity  of  uranium  first  observed  by  Meyer 
d  V.  Schweidlerf.  Soddy  and  Russell  J  have  utilised  this  method 
r  the  rapid  concentration  of  the  Ur  X  fi-om  a  large  quantity  of 
anium  nitrate.  They  state  that  if  a  hot  solution  of  density 
)5  be  allowed  to  cool,  about  2/3  of  the  salt  crystallises  and  the 
other  liquor  contains  about  6/7  of  the  total  amount  of  Ur  X 
esent.  By  successive  crystallisations,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
r  X  can  be  rapidly  concentrated. 

We  have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  methods  devised  by 
ookes  (Section  122)  for  the  separation  of  Ur  X.  The  precipi- 
tion  of  Ur  X  by  adding  an  excess  of  ammonium  carbonate 
patently  depends  on  the  presence  of  small  quantities  of  iron 
d  aluminium  as  impurities§. 

The  methods  of  separation  of  Ur  X  have  been  investigated  in 
tail  by  Moore  and  Schlundt||.  Various  organic  solvents  were 
ed,  and  it  was  found  that  in  many  cases  the  removal  of  Ur  X 

*  Qodlewski,  Phil.  Mag.  10,  p.  45,  1905. 

t  Meyer  and  v.  Sohweidler,  Wien  Ber,  118,  p.  1057,  1904. 

X  Soddy  and  Bussell,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  620,  1909. 

§  Soddy  and  Kassell,  Phil  Mag.  18,  p.  861,  1909. 

11  Moore  and  Schlandt,  Phil.  Mag.  12,  p.  393, 1906. 


454  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUK  [OL 

was  much  facilitated  by  the  addition  of  a  ferric  salt  to  the  solutioiL 
In  this  way,  by  precipitation  with  ammonium  carbonate,  it  ii 
generally  possible  to  separate  the  greater  part  of  Ur  X  in  a  single 
operation,  since  Ur  X  attaches  itself  to  the  iron  precipitate. 
Lloyd*  states  that  the  Ur  X  can  be  separated,  if  necessary,  froo 
the  iron  by  dissolving  the  precipitate  in  hydrochloric  acid  and 
extracting  the  solution  with  ether  saturated  with  hydrogen 
chloride.  Under  these  conditions,  Ur  X  remains  in  the  aqueom 
layer. 

Becquerelf  showed  that  Ur  X  is  entrained  when  barium  » 
precipitated  as  sulphate  in  the  solution.  The  effect  of  conditions 
on  the  separation  of  Ur  X  by  this  method  has  been  examined  in 
detail  by  BerryJ.  The  absorption  of  Ur  X  by  charcoal  has  also 
been  used  as  a  method  of  separation.  Lampblack  is  added  to  the 
solution  and  part  of  the  Ur  X  is  separated  with  it.  The  carbon  is 
then  removed  by  ignition.  Ritzel§  made  a  careful  examination  of 
the  amount  of  Ur  X  separated  by  carbon  under  different  conditions, 
and  showed  that  it  must  be  an  absorption  phenomenon.  He  found 
that  if  thorium  were  added  to  the  uranium,  the  Ur  X  could  not  be 
separated  by  charcoal.  This  no  doubt  is  a  consequence  of  the  feet 
that  Ur  X  and  thorium  have  very  similar  chemical  properties. 
The  Ur  X  in  minerals  is  always  removed  with  the  ionium  or  the 
thorium,  and  it  has  generally  been  concluded  that  Ur  X  must 
have  chemical  properties  very  closely  allied  to  those  of  thorium. 
The  methods  of  separation  of  Ur  X  described  above  are  quite 
consistent  with  this  view. 

174.  Uranium  Y.  In  the  course  of  an  examination  of  Ur  X 
separated  fi-om  pure  uranium  salts,  Antonoffjl  observed  that  the 
decay  curve  of  Ur  X  for  the  first  few  days  depended  on  whether 
it  had  been  separated  by  precipitating  barium  in  the  uranium 
solution  or  by  adding  an  iron  salt  and  precipitating  it  by  boiling. 
These  two  methods  will  be  called  the  barium  and  ferric  method 

*  Lloyd,  Joiim.  Phys.  Chem,  14,  pp.  476,  609,  1910. 

t  Becquerel,  C.  -R.  131,  p.  137,  1900;  183,  p.  977,  1901. 

X  Berry,  Joum,  Chem.  Soc.  97,  p.  196,  1910. 

§  Ritzel,  ZeiUch.  /.  phyg.  Chem.  67,  p.  724,  1909. 

II  Antonoff,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  419,  1911. 


XIl]  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OP  RADIUM  455 

respectively.  The  decay  curve  of  Ur  X  separated  by  the  barium 
method,  whether  measured  by  soft  or  hard  /3  rays,  was  quite 
exponential  from  the  beginning  with  the  period  of  24  days.  On 
tiie  other  hand,  Ur  X  separated  by  the  ferric  method  decayed 
more  rapidly  than  the  normal  for  the  first  few  days,  when  the  soft 
fi  rays  were  used  for  measurement.  When  a  suitable  screen  was 
interposed  to  absorb  most  of  the  soft  /8  rays,  the  decay  was 
again  quite  normal  from  the  beginning  with  a  period  of  24  days. 
Antonoff  found  that  this  anomalous  initial  decay  could  be  explained 
by  supposing  that  a  new  product,  called  uranium  Y  (Ur  Y)  was 
separated  with  Ur  X  by  the  ferric  method  but  not  by  the  barium 
method.  It  was  deduced  from  the  decay  curve  that  Ur  Y  had  a 
half  value  period  of  1*5  days.  It  emits  soft  fi  rays  for  which 
H  as  300  (cms.)"\  and  also  some  very  easily  absorbed  rays  for  which 
fjk  =  2500  (cms.)""*  about.  Some  evidence  was  found  that  Ur  Y 
emitted  a  rays,  but  in  amount  very  small  compared  with  the  fi 
rajTS.  By  determining  the  rise  6urve  due  to  Ur  X  from  uranium 
completely  deprived  of  Ur  X,  it  was  found  that  Ur  Y  could  not  be 
the  parent  product  of  Ur  X.  The  fact  that  the  amount  of  Ur  Y 
separated  was  independent  of  the  age  of  the  uranium  preparation, 
indicated  that  it  was  not  produced  by  Ur  X.  It  appears  probable 
that  Ur  Y  is  derived  directly  from  the  uranium,  €md  is  to  be 
regarded  as  a  lateral  or  branch  product  of  the  uranium  series. 
The  experiments  were  difficult  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the 
P  ray  activity  of  Ur  Y  compared  with  Ur  X.  The  possibility  of 
a  branch  product  of  uranium  is  of  great  interest  as  affording  a 
possible  explanation  of  the  origin  of  actinium. 

Danne*  found  evidence  of  the  existence  of  another  product  in 
Ur  X  which  he  called  radio-uranium.  His  experiments,  however, 
have  not  been  repeated,  and  it  is  difficult  to  draw  any  definite 
conclusion  from  the  published  data.  It  is  essential  in  such 
experiments  that  the  uranium  should  be  carefully  purified  before- 
hand, for  the  ordinary  commercial  preparations  contain  traces  of 
many  radio-active  substances. 

175.     Ionium.     The  discovery  of  ionium  is  intimately  con- 
nected with   the    search   for  the   radio-active   substance   which 

*  Danne,  G.  R.  148,  p.  337,  1909. 


456  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  [CH. 

changes  directly  into  radium.    The  constancy  of  the  ratio  between 
radium  and  uranium  in  radio-active  minerals  indicated  that  radium 
was  derived  from  the  transformation  of  uranium.     If  this  were 
the   case,   radium   should   be   produced   at    a    rapid   and  easily 
measureable  rate  in  uranium  solutions.     Ebcperiments  made  to 
detect  this  growth  of  radium  (see  Section  178)  had  shown  that 
radium,  if  produced  at  all,  was  generated  at  a  rate  very  slow 
compared  with  that  to  be  anticipated  if  uranium,  or  uranium  X 
changed  directly  into  radium.     It  therefore  seemed  probable  that 
there  must  exist  an  intermediate  substance  of  slow  rate  of  trans- 
formation between  uranium  and  radium,  for  the  presence  of  such 
a  product  would  greatly  retard  the  initial  appearance  of  radium. 

During  a  search  for  this  missing  product,  Boltwood*  separated 
from  the  uranium  mineral  camotite  an  active  preparation  which 
he  supposed  to  be  actinium.  After  dissolving  the  mineral  aod 
treatment  with  hydrogen  sulphide,  a  small  quantity  of  thorium 
was  added,  which  was  precipitated  by  the  addition  of  oxalic  acid 
The  precipitate  so  obtained  was  many  times  more  active  than  the 
corresponding  amount  of  thorium.  From  the  analogy  between 
the  chemical  properties  of  this  active  substance  and  those  of 
actinium  as  initially  described  by  Debieme,  Boltwood  at  first 
concluded  that  the  active  substance  separated  with  the  thorium 
consisted  of  actinium.  The  active  preparation,  after  conversion 
into  the  chloride,  was  dissolved  and  sealed  up  in  a  glass  bulb. 
Two  months  later,  the  amount  of  radium  present  was  determined 
by  the  emanation  method  and  found  to  be  5*7  x  lO"*  gr.  Ra.  The 
bulb  was  then  sealed  up  and  tested  again  for  radium  193  days 
later.  The  amount  now  present  was  14*2  x  10"*  gr.  Ra,  indicating 
that  during  this  interval  a  quantity  of  radium  8*5  x  10~*  gr.  Ka 
had  been  formed.  This  was  equivalent  to  the  production  of 
16  X  10~®  gr.  Ra  by  the  solution  per  year.  It  was  consequently 
concluded  that  actinium  was  the  parent  of  radium  and  the  missing 
intermediate  product  between  uranium  and  radium. 

On  repeating  the  experiments  of  Boltwood  with  a  preparation 
of  actinium   obtained   from  Dr  Giesel,  the  writerf  found  that 

*"  Boltwood,  Amer.  Journ,  Sci.  22,  p.  637,  1906. 

t  Rutherford,  Nature,  76,  p.  270,  1907;  76,  p.  661,  1907;  PhiL  Mag,  14,  p.  733, 
1907. 


]  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  457 

■adium  was  formed  rapidly  in  the  preparation.  By  suitable 
^emical  treatment  it  was  found  possible  to  obtain  a  preparation 
«»f  actinium  which  did  not  grow  radium  to  an  appreciable  extent, 
"^hile  another  of  about  equal  activity  grew  radium  at  a  rapid  rate. 
lit  thus  seemed  clear  that  the  parent  of  radium  was  not  actinium 
lut  an  unknown  substance  present  in  the  preparation,  which 
^8ould  be  wholly  separated  from  the  actinium.  On  a  further 
^examination  of  his  original  preparation,  Boltwood  found  that  it 
^was  not  actinium  at  all  but  contained  a  new  active  substance 
"nrhich  he  named  ionium. 

By  separating  the  ionium  from  a  number  of  minerals,  Boltwood  * 
found  that  the  amount  of  ionium  present  was  proportional  to  the 
^unount  of  uranium,  and  that  the  rate  of  production  of  radium 
was  proportional  to  the  amount  of  ionium.  The  latter  was  found 
to  grow  radium  at  a  constant  rate  over  an  interval  of  measurement 
of  500  days. 

Ionium  emits  a  rays  of  characteristic  range  3*0  cms.,  which  is 
only  slightly  greater  than  the  range  of  the  a  rays  from  uranium 
itself.  Boltwood  found  that  the  ionium  preparation  showed 
initially  a  marked  /3  ray  activity.  This,  however,  decayed  with 
the  time  with  a  period  of  about  22  days,  showing  that  it  was 
due  to  the  presence  of  Ur  X  separated  from  the  mineral  with 
the  ionium. 

Keetmanf ,  to  some  extent  independently  of  Boltwood,  investi- 
gated the  methods  of  separation  of  ionium  from  minerals  and 
made  a  careful  examination  of  its  radio-active  and  chemical 
properties.  Neither  Boltwood  nor  Keetman  was  able  to  separate 
the  ionium  from  the  thorium  with  which  it  is  always  found 
associated.  Keetman  converted  the  thorium  containing  the 
ionium  into  thorium  acetylacetone,  which  melts  at  170°  C,  and 
sublimes  at  higher  temperatures.  It  was  not  found  possible  to 
separate  the  ionium  from  thorium  by  fractional  distillation  in  this 
way.  The  conclusion  that  ionium  and  thorium  are  so  closely 
allied  in  chemical  properties  that  no  separation  appears  possible 
has  been  confirmed  by  Auer  von  WelsbachJ. 

*  Boltwood,  Amer.  Journ.  Sci.  24,  p.  370,  1907;  25,  p.  365,  1908. 

t  Keetman,  Jahrb.  d.  Radioakt,  6,  p.  265,  1909;  TheiU,  Berlin,  1909. 

t  Auer  V.  Welsbach,  Wien  Ber.  119,  p  1,  1910. 


458  UBANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  [(3i\ 

It,  therefore,  does  not  seem  possible  to  isolate  ionium  chemi- 
cally unless  a  mineral  is  found  which  contains  no  thorium.  Tbj 
uraninite  obtained  from  Joachimsthal  is  relatively  free  bm\ 
thorium,  but  even  with  this  mineral  the  activity  of  thorium- 
ionium  preparations  does  not  exceed  about  5000  times  that  of 
uranium.  Boltwood*  separated  from  some  radio-active  residiiei 
obtained  from  Joachimsthal  a  quantity  of  about  1*5  gr.  of  thoriutt 
oxide  which  was  found  to  emit  1*51  x  10®  a  particles  per  seconi 
The  number  of  a  particles  emitted  per  gram  of  thorium  pin* 
ionium  is  equivalent  to  the  number  from  about  4'3  milligrams  of 
radium  itself.  From  these  numbers  it  is  possible  to  calculate  a 
superior  limit  to  the  life  of  ionium.  Assuming  that  the  prepara- 
tion was  pure  ionium,  it  cannot  have  an  average  life  greater  than 
230  times  that  of  radium.  Since  the  average  life  of  radium 
(Section  176)  is  about  2800  years,  the  life  of  ionium  cannot  be 
greater  than  8  x  10*  years.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the 
material  is  mainly  thorium,  so  that  the  life  of  ionium  must  be 
considerably  shorter  than  this.  From  considerations  based  on  the 
growth  of  radium  in  uranium  (see  Section  178)  Soddy  deduced 
that  ionium  cannot  have  an  average  life  less  than  30,000  years. 
We  may  consequently  conclude  that  the  average  life  of  ionium 
lies  between  3  x  10*  and  8  x  10*  years,  and  is  probably  about 
100,000  years.  If  this  be  the  case,  ionium  must  be  preswit 
in  uranium  minerals  in  about  30  times  greater  quantity  than 
radium. 

The  simplest  method  of  fixing  accurately  the  life  of  ionitira 
would  be  to  determine  the  activity  by  the  scintillation  method  of 
the  ionium  which  is  formed  in  a  given  time  in  a  known  weight 
of  uranium.  It  can  readily  be  shown  from  the  data  given  in 
Section  171  that  the  number  of  atoms  of  ionium  formed  per  year 
per  gram  of  uranium  is  3*7  x  10".  If  the  average  life  of  ionium 
be  100,000  years,  3*7  x  10*  a  particles  are  expelled  from  thu 
quantity  per  year  or  about  7  per  minute.  Consequently  100  gram! 
of  uranium  should  give  an  easily  measurable  amount  of  ioniun 
per  year.  From  the  relation  between  the  period  of  a  produc 
and  the  range  of  the  a  particles  emitted,  Geiger  and  Nutta 
have  estimated  that  the  period  of  ionium  is  about  200,000  year 

♦  Boltwood,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  85,  p.  77,  1911. 


[l]  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  TUB  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  459 

Both  Soddy  and  Boltwood  have  found  that  an  a  ray  substance 
separated  with  uranium  X  from  uranium,  but  it  has  not  yet 
een  definitely  proved  to  be  ionium  produced  by  uranium. 

176.  lAfe  of  radium.  The  discovery  of  ionium  affords  a 
ample  method  of  determining  experimentally  the  average  life  of 
radium  itself  Consider  a  mineral  in  which  the  ionium  and  radium 
are  in  radio-active  equilibrium.  Then  \Ni=:\N2  where  JVi,  N^ 
are  the  number  of  atoms  of  ionium  and  radium  and  \,  \,  their 
respective  constants.  Suppose  the  quantity  of  radium  in  the 
mineral  has  been  accurately  measured  by  the  emanation  method 
in  terms  of  the  ionisation  current  I'l  of  the  electroscope.  Suppose 
next  the  ionium  is  completely  separated  &om  the  mineral  and  the 
radium  formed  in  it  in  the  time  t  be  measured  in  terms  of  the 
mrrent  i,  of  the  same  electroscope.  Then  since  ionium  initially 
MToduces  radium  at  the  rate  of  XjiV^  atoms  per  second,  the  amount 
bnned  in  time  t  is  X^Nit     Consequently 

[n  this  way,  Boltwood*  showed  as  the  result  of  a  number  of 
experiments  that  the  average  life  of  radium  was  about  2880  years, 
md  the  period  about  2000  years.  Using  the  same  general 
nethod,  Keetman  (he.  cit)  found  the  period  to  be  1800  years.  It 
ihould  be  noticed  that  the  method  used  by  Boltwood  does  not 
nvolve  any  question  of  the  purity  of  the  radium  standard  which 
nay  be  employed  to  determine  the  actual  quantity  of  radium  in 
the  mineral. 

The  experimental  value  of  the  period  may  be  compared  with 
:he  value  calculated  by  Rutherford  and  Geigerf  from  the  number 
)f  a  particles  emitted  per  second  per  gram  of  the  radium  used  as 
I  standard.  The  period  found,  1760  years,  is  somewhat  less  than 
he  2000  years  found  by  Boltwood.  The  calculated  value,  however, 
epends  on  the  accuracy  of  the  radium  standard.  Corrected  in 
3rms  of  the  Vienna  standard,  prepared  by  Honigschmid  (Section 
S2)  the  period  becomes  1850  years.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
ethod  of  Boltwood  tends  to  give  too  high  a  value  of  the  period 

•  Boltwood,  Amer.  Joum.  Sci.  25,  p.  493,  1908. 

t  Rutherford  and  Geiger,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  162,  1908. 


462  UBANIDM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  OBIOIN  OF  RADIUK  . 

With  the  exception  of  some  of  the  monazitea,  the 
show  a  Burprisingly  good  agreement,  and,  taking  into  ow 
the  great  variation  of  the  content  of  uranium  in  the 
minerals,  and  the  wide  range  of  locality  from  which  i 
obtained,  the  results  afford  a  direct  and  satisfactory  prooi 
amount  of  radium  in  the  minerals  is  directly  proportioi 
amount  of  uranium.  Results  of  a  similar  character  wen. 
Strutt. 

The  weight  of  pure  radium  per  gram  of  uranium  in 
in  radio-active  equilibrium  should  thus  be  a  definite 
This  constant  ratio  Ra/Ur  was  determined  by  Ruthe 
Bottwood*  who  compared  by  the  emanation  method  tht 
of  radium  in  a  mineral  of  known  uranium  content' 
amount  of  emanation  horn  a  standard  solution  of  radi' 
amomit  of  radium  per  gram  of  uranium  was  found  to  be 
gram.  This  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  radium  Btaadar< 
the  writer.  Consequently,  one  gram  of  radium  is  joe 
mineral  containing  3000  kilos  of  uranium. 

Knowing  the  percentage  of  uranium  in  a  given  mL 
amount  of  radium  can  be  at  once  deduced  without  meu 
This  is  the  liret  example  of  a  case  where  the  amoui 
element  can  be  inferred  from  the  amount  of  another  ] 

In  the  foniiation  of  a  uranium   mineral  it  is  prob 
uranium    is    deposited   without    its    products.      Suppot 
uranium  changes  into  ionium  and  ionium  into  radiufn,  at 
of  about  10  million  years  will  be  required  for  the  radiuiE 
a  practical  equilibrium  with  the  uranium.     In  thia  oakp 
is  supposed  that  the  pt 
million  years.     If  the  j 
million  years  will  suffice 
constant  for  old  minen 
would  also  depend  to  a 
been  altered  by  the  a 
agencies.     If  one  or  mo 
equilibrium  is  disturbed 
as  for  old  unaltered  mini 

*  Batherfoid  and  BoltwM 
wood,  Amer.  Joitn.  Sci.  U,  p. 


;  aCnT    ■   __:' 


will 
lave 


ling 
rala, 
M 
-,ha 


iing 
<ted 


ipi- 
the 


low 
.fa 
ate 


""•ImbieodnwT;  m  a  n-.-.;-.  : 
■«a«»ittikoliK.  whetv  ;hf  r-ii. 
*"  1»1/  Ike  Dgtnul  valoe.    T;"«    . 
*!  "He  Glrfitaeki  Soddv  aii.l    K 


I  of 
iver 

inge 
■X  of 
am) 


464  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  [CH. 

examination  of  the  ratio  Ra/Ur  in  a  number  of  minerals  by  tw 
methods.  In  one  case  barium  was  precipitated  as  sulphate  in  tke 
solution  of  the  mineral  which  entrained  the  radium  with  it.  After 
obtaining  the  radium  in  solution,  the  amount  of  radium  was 
determined  by  the  emanation  method.  The  amount  of  radiun 
was  also  directly  determined  by  observing  the  production  of 
emanation  in  a  solution  of  the  mineral.  Both  methods  usualij 
gave  concordant  results.  Her  results  are  included  in  the  table  on 
p.  463. 

While  the  average  value  Ra/Ur  for  a  number  of  minerals  b 
about  the  same  as  that  found  by  Boltwood,  some  of  the  minerals, 
for  example,  the  first  six,  give  a  value  of  the  ratio  distinctly  belof 
the  normal,  while  the  specimen  of  Cornwall  pitchblende  gives  i 
high  value  of  the  ratio.  Soddy  and  Pirret  found  the  ratio  Ba^'Ci 
for  autunite  from  Portugal  to  be  0*45  of  that  for  Joachimstha 
pitchblende.  Marckwald  and  Russell  examined  specimens  o 
autunite  from  Portugal  and  France,  and  found  a  ratio  fix)m  M 
to  068  of  the  value  for  Joachimsthal  pitchblende. 

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  minerals  which  give  a  loi 
ratio  Ra/Ur  are  believed  to  be  of  relatively  recent  formatioD  an 
are  secondary  minerals,  i,e.  minerals  derived  from  the  decompos; 
tion  of  primary  uranium  minerals.  The  low  ratio  Ra/Ur  may  I 
ascribed  to  one  or  both  of  two  causes,  viz.  (1)  to  the  recent  foraw 
tion  of  the  mineral,  or  (2)  to  the  removal  of  part  of  the  radium  fc 
percolating  water  or  other  chemical  agencies.  If  (1)  is  correct, 
is  to  be  expected  that  not  only  should  the  ratio  be  low  for  radioi 
but  equally  so  for  ionium.  This  point  has  been  examined  I 
Marckwald  and  Russell  (loc,  cit)  who  found  the  ratio  lo/Ur  f( 
autunite  to  vary  between  0*76  and  093  of  the  ratio  for  pitchblend 
These  values  are  distinctly  higher  than  the  corresponding  rati 
for  Ra/Ur,  viz.  0*24  to  0*68. 

The  evidence,  so  far  obtained,  is  not  sufficiently  precise 
distinguish  between   the   two   possible   explanations.     It  seen 
however,  probable  that  the  alteration  of  the  equilibrium  by  t! 
action  of  water  is  in  many  cases  of  paramount  importance. 

It  is  difficult  to  explain  the  relatively  high  ratio  found 
Mile  Gleditsch  for  certain  old  minerals.    If  alteration  has  occurr 
it  is  possible  in  some  cases  that  the  radium  dissolved  £ix>m  c 


IlJ  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  465 

art  of  a  mineral  may  be  deposited  in  another,  and  this  will 
^mporarily  disturb  the  values  of  the  ratio.  Examples  of  this  have 
•een  observed  by  Mile  Gleditsch. 

Considering  the  chemical  and  other  difficulties  in  determining 
ccurately  the  relative  amounts  of  radium  or  uranium  in  minerals, 
he  evidence  as  a  whole  strongly  supports  the  view  that  for  old 
tnaltered  minerals,  the  ratio  Ra/Ur  is  a  definite  constant  with  a 
^alue  3*4  x  10~'  by  weight. 

178.  Production  of  radium  from  uranium.  In  putting 
forward  the  disintegration  theor}%  Rutherford  and  Soddy  suggested 
that  uranium  was  the  primary  source  from  which  radium  was 
derived.  If  this  were  the  case,  radium  should  appear  in  the 
course  of  time  in  preparations  of  uranium  initially  freed  from 
radium.  Assuming  that  uranium  passes  directly  into  radium,  it 
can  readily  be  calculated  that  one  kilogram  of  uranium  in  equili- 
brium with  Ur  X  should  produce  1*2  x  10~'  gr.  Ra  per  year. 

Initial  experiments  to  test  this  point  were  made  by  Soddy*, 
A  solution  of  uranium  nitrate  was  deprived  of  radium  by  precipi- 
tating barium  as  sulphate  in  the  solution.  It  was  found  that  the 
rate  of  production  of  radium  in  the  uranium  solution  was  less  than 
1/1000  of  the  rate  to  be  expected  if  uranium  changed  directly  into 
radium.  In  later  experiments,  evidence  was  obtained  of  a  slow 
but  uniform  growth  of  radium  in  the  solution.  Experiments  of  a 
similar  kind  were  made  by  Boltwoodf  using  uranium  nitrate 
which  had  been  carefully  purified  by  a  large  number  of  successive 
crystallisations.  He  found  no  evidence  of  a  detectable  growth  of 
radium  in  a  solution  containing  100  grams  of  uranium  nitrate  over 
a  period  of  390  days. 

These  results  clearly  showed  that  uranium  did  not  change 
directly  into  radium  but  indicated  that  an  unknown  product  of 
slow  rate  of  transformation  intervened  between  uranium  and 
radium.  This  conclusion  was  ultimately  verified  by  the  discovery 
of  ionium  which  changes  directly  into  radium. 

In  the  light  of  this  discovery  it  is  possible  to  estimate  the  rate 

♦  Sofldy,  Nature,  70.  p.  30,  1904;  71,  p.  294,  1905;  Phil.  Mag.  9,  p.  768,  1905; 
6,  p.  632,  1908;  18,  p.  846,  1909;  20,  p.  340,  1910. 
f  Boltwood,  Amer,  Joum.  Sci.  20,  p.  239,  1905. 

K.  R.-A.  30 


/: 


466  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  [(MA 

of  formation  of  radium  to  be  expected  in  a  uranium  solution.  Lil 
-^0}  Qo>  Ro  be  the  number  of  atoms  of  uranium,  ionium  and  radiui 
in  equilibrium  ^ith  each  other  and  \i,  X,,  X,  their  respectiiij 
constants  of  transformation.     Then 

Disregarding  the  correction  due  to  Ur  X,  the  number  of  atom 
of  ionium  formed  in  a  time  t,  short  compared  with  its  period,  il 
XiPo^-  The  number  R  of  atoms  of  radium  formed  in  this  timea 
given  by 

0 

It  is  seen  from  this  calculation  that  in  a  solution  of  uranium 
initially  freed  from  radium,  the  amount  of  radium  formed  should 
be  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  time.  The  amount  of  radiuii 
formed  in  a  given  time  can  readily  be  calculated.  Taking  one 
kilogram  of  uranium, 

iJo  (by  weight)  =  3*4  x  10"* ;    \,  =  3*4  x  10"*  (year)->. 

Taking  the  average  life  of  ionium  as  100,000  years, 

X,  =  10-»(year)-^ 

Substituting  these  numbers 

iJ  =  6  X  10-»  t\ 

where  t  is  expressed  in  years. 

If  the  formation  of  10~"  gram  can  be  detected,  the  interval 
required  is  about  4  years.  The  formation  of  10~"  gram  will 
require  about  13  years.  The  interval  required  will  be  larger  if 
the  period  of  ionium  has  been  underestimated. 

It  is  clear  from  these  calculations  that  the  slow  growth  of 
radium  in  uranium  solutions,  observed  initially  by  Soddy,  was  due 
to  a  small  quantity  of  ionium  present  as  an  impurity  with  the 
uranium.  Soddy  and  Mackenzie*  have  shown  that  ordinaiy 
commercial  preparations  of  uranium  nitrate  grow  radium  at  a  slow 
but  constant  rate  due  to  the  ionium  initially  present.  No  detect- 
able growth  of  radium  was  observed  by  them  in  uranium  solutions 

*  Soddy  and  Mackenzie,  Phil,  Mag,  14,  p.  272,  1907. 


^- 


Xn]  URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  RADIUM  467 

from  which  the  ionium  was  initially  separated.  From  observations 
<ftf  this  kind  it  is  possible  to  calculate  a  lower  limit  to  the  life  of 
t  ionium  by  a  comparison  with  the  simple  thebry  given  above. 
In  this  way  Soddy*  has  shown  that  ionium  cannot  have  an  average 
life  less  than  30,000  years. 

This  calculation  supposes  that  no  other  product  of  life  com- 

|.  parable  with  radium  intervenes  between  uranium  and  ionium.     If 

I  Bach  a  product  be  present  it  is  easy  to  show  that  the  formation  of 

r  Tadium  in  one  kilogram  of  uranium  would  not  be  detectable  within 

the  limits  of  a  lifetime.     No  definite  proof  of  the  formation  of 

,  radium  from  pure  uranium  has  yet  been  obtained.     Soddyf  made 

experiments  to  test  whether  a  large  quantity  of  Ur  X  gave  rise  to 

ionium  or  radium  in  its  transformation.     No  detectable  amount 

rf  radium  was  observed,  nor  was  any  certain  evidence  obtained 

tluit  an  a  ray  product  made  its  appearance.     If  ionium  is  the  only 

product  of  long  period  between  uranium  and  radium,  the  amount 

of  radium  formed  should  be  proportional  to  the  square  of  the 

time.    If  this  relation  is  found  to  hold,  it  will  afford  a  definite 

proof  that  no  other  product  of  long  period  is  present  in  the  series. 

Some  recent  experiments  of  Russell  and  Rossi  are  of  interest 

in  this  connection.     Using  a  large  Rowland  grating,  they  obtained 

the  arc  spectrum  of  the  thorium-ionium  preparation  separated  by 

Boltwood,  which  has  been  mentioned  on  page  458.     The  spectrum 

of  thorium  was  obtained  but  not  a  single  line  was  observed  that 

could  be  attributed  to  ionium.     On  the  assumption  that  ionium 

has  a  life  of  100,000  years,  the  preparation  should  have  contained 

10  per  cent,  of  ionium.     Since  probably  the  presence  of  one  per 

cent,  of  ionium  would  have  been  detected  spectroscopically,  it 

would  appear  that  the   ionium   was  present   in   small   amount, 

indicating  that  the   life   of   ionium    must    be   much   less   than 

I      100,000  years.    The  results  suggest  that  the  failure  to  detect 

'      the  growth  of  radium  in  uranium  may  be  due  to  the  presence  of 

an  unknown  product  between  Ur  X  and  ionrum  rather  than  to 

the  long  period  of  ionium  itself 

Hahnj  showed    that  radium   was   produced    in    commercial 

•  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  858,  1909. 
t  Soddy,  PhiL  Mag.  20,  p.  342,  1910. 
X  Hahn,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Ge».  40,  p.  4415,  1907. 

30—2 


468 


URANIUM,  IONIUM  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OP  RADIUM     [CH.  M 


preparations  of  thorium.  This  is  due  to  the  feet  that  the  thorium 
minerals  contain  some  uranium  and  the  ionium  produced  by  the 
latter  is  always  separated  with  the  thorium. 

179.  Uranium  series.  For  convenience,  the  series  of  trans- 
formations considered  in  this  chapter  is  given  below.  The 
product  Uranium  2  is  considered  to  break  up  in  two  ways,  and  to 
give  rise  to  Uranium  X  and  Uranium  Y.  The  evidence  indicates 
that  the  Ur  Y  is  formed  in  amount  small  compared  with  Ur  X, 
and  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  branch  product.  There  is  no  infor- 
mation available  whether  or  not  Ur  Y  gives  rise  to  other  successive 
products. 

The  atomic  weights  are  also  added.  These  are  deduced  by 
supposing  that  the  loss  of  an  a  particle  lowers  the  atomic  weight 
by  4  units.  There  is  supposed  to  be  no  appreciable  change  in 
atomic  weight  due  to  the  expulsion  o{  a.  /3  particle.  The  weight 
of  each  product  in  equilibrium  with  one  kilogram  of  uranium  is 
also  added. 

Uranium  Series, 


Uranium 
Series 


Atomic 
weight 


f  Uranium  1 
UrJ         ^ 


iu 


raniiim  z 
Ur  Y 


Uranium  X 

Ionium 

Kadium 


238-5 

234-5 

230-5  (?) 

230-5 

230-5 

226-5 


Weight  per 

kilogram  of 

Uranium 


10®  mg. 
196   „  (?) 
8xlO-7mg. 
1-3x10-6,, 

39  mg.  (?) 


0-34 


»» 


Half-value 
period 


Rays 


5  X  10»  yrs. 

10°  yn*.  (?) 

15  days 

24-6    „ 

2  X  10*  ynj.  (?) 

2000  yrs. 


3+y 


Range  of 
a  raTs 
15=  C. 


2-5  cms. 
2-9   M 


3-00  „ 
3-30  n    , 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

RADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION. 

180.  We  have  given  in  Chapter  I  a  brief  account  of  the 
history  of  the  discovery  of  radium  and  mentioned  some  of  its 
properties.  In  the  last  chapter,  it  has  been  shown  that  radium  is 
to  be  regarded  as  a  transition  element  which  is  half  transformed 
in  about  2000  years.  It  is  derived  from  the  transformation  of 
ionium,  which  in  turn  is  derived  from  uranium.  In  old  primary 
minerals,  there  is  a  definite  relation  between  the  amount  of  radium 
and  uranium  in  the  mineral.  For  each  gram  of  uranium  in 
equilibrium  with  its  products,  3*4  x  10~'  gr.  Ra  is  present.  Conse- 
quently in  1000  kilos  of  a  mineral  containing  60  per  cent,  of 
uranium,  the  quantity  of  radium  present  is  204  milligrams.  We 
have  seen  that  in  some  secondary  minerals  of  recent  formation 
like  autunite,  the  amount  of  radium  is  less  than  half  of  the  normal 
amount. 

It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  the 
methods  of  separation  of  radium  from  uranium  minerals  on  a 
commercial  scale.  It  suffices  to  say  that  radium  is  separated  from 
the  mineral  by  a  process  similar  to  that  required  to  separate 
barium,  and  is  ultimately  obtained  mixed  with  the  relatively  large 
amount  of  barium  present  in  the  mineral.  The  radium  is  then 
separated  from  the  barium  by  the  process  of  fractional  crystallisa- 
tion of  the  chloride  or  the  bromide.  These  salts  of  radium  are 
less  soluble  than  the  corresponding  salts  of  barium  and  crystallise 
out  first.  The  concentration  of  the  radium  by  this  method  is 
comparatively  simple  and  proceeds  rapidly  in  the  case  of  the 
bromide.  Giesel  found  that  fitictionation  with  the  bromide  was 
far  more  effective  than  with  the  chloride,  and  that  six  or  eight 


470 


RADIUM   AND   ITS   EMANATION 


[CH. 


crystallisations  suffice  to  obtain  the  radium  bromide  in  a  Dearij 
pure  state.  The  main  difficulty  of  purification  is  to  separate  the 
last  traces  of  barium  from  the  radium. 

Radium  salts  crystallise  in  exactly  the  same  form  as  the  com- 
sponding  salts  of  barium.  The  crystals  of  radiferous  barium 
chloride  several  hours  after  preparation  usually  assume  a  yellow 
or  rose  tint.  The  intensity  of  this  colouration  depends  on  the 
relative  proportions  of  barium  and  radium  present  in  the  ciystaL 
Nearly  pure  radium  chloride  crystals  do  not  show  this  colouration, 
indicating  that  the  presence  of  barium  is  necessary. 

181.  Spectrum  of  radium.  The  spectrum  of  radium 
was  first  determined  by  Demar9ay*  using  material  purified  hj 


Spectrum  of  Radium, 


Wave  length 

Intennity 

Wave  length 

Intensity 
4 

Wave  length 

Intensity 

6446-3 

8 

5505-8 

482612 

20 

64391 

4 

5502-07 

8 

4699-43 

6 

6337-2 

6 

5488-83 

6 

4682-36 

60 

6200-6 

10 

5482-15 

6 

4641-41 

6 

6167-4 

8 

6406-78 

8 

4533-33 

10 

6151-3 

4 

6400-31 

8 

4436-49 

20 

6958-4 

10 

531969 

6 

4426-0 

4 

5861-0 

5 

6283-42 

6 

4366-6 

4 

5823-9 

5 

5264-57 

6 

4340-83 

50 

5813-85 

15 

5205-96 

6 

4334-5 

4 

5796-2 

5 

5097-49   ' 

6 

4305-0 

1 

5778-5 

5 

5081-20 

6 

42651 

4   1 

5755-8 

5 

5041-52 

6 

4178-0 

6 

57292 

23 

5017-9 

4 

4010-53 

6 

5690-3 

5 

4982-10 

6 

3814-68 

100 

5660-81  . 

10 

4971-88   1 

6 

3649-75 

50 

5616-73 

8 

4918-61 

3 

2836-57   : 

5 

5601-72 

8 

4903-2 

5 

2813-84 

10 

5556-17 

6 

4856-25 

8 

2709-045 

8 

5553-81 

6 

! 

Mme  Curie.  He  showed  that  radium  gave  a  well  marked  and 
characteristic  spectrum,  similar  in  general  aspect  to  the  spectra 
of  the  alkaline  earths.     Later  determinations  of  the  speetram 


•  Demar^ay,  C.  R,  127,  p.  1218,  1898;  1S9,  p.  716,  1899;  181,  p.  268, 1900. 


LXIl]  BADIUM   AND  ITS  EMANATION  471 

>£  radium  have  been  made  by  Runge*,  Exner  and  Haschekf, 
3rooke8+,  and  Runge  and  Precht^  The  lines  in  the  spark 
spectrum  of  radium  and  their  relative  intensities  found  by 
Runge  and  Precht  are  given  on  page  470.  Lines  below  intensity  4 
are  omitted. 

Recently  Exner  and  Haschek||  compared  the  arc  and  spark 
spectrum  of  radium  for  barium-radium  preparations  containing 
"001  per  cent.,  01  per  cent,  and  70  per  cent,  of  radium  respectively. 
They  conclude  that  the  line  5017*9  observed  by  Runge  and  Precht 
belongs  to  barium  and  did  not  observe  the  line  6439*1,  which 
Runge  and  Precht  had  concluded  did  not  belong  to  calcium. 

GiesellT  observed  that  radium  salts  gave  a  beautiful  carmine 
colour  to  the  Bunseh  flame.  This  flame  spectrum  was  examined 
by  Runge  and  Precht**.  The  following  lines  and  bands  show  up 
clearly,  4826,  6130—6330,  6329,  6349,  6630—6700,  and  6653. 

The  radium  line  3815  can  be  detected  in  a  barium-radium 
preparation  of  activity  only  50.  Exner  and  Haschek  observed  the 
two  radium  lines  3815,  4682  in  a  preparation  containing  only 
*001  per  cent,  of  Ra.  The  spectroscopic  test  for  the  detection  of 
ludium,  as  for  the  other  elements  belonging  to  the  alkaline  earths, 
is  thus  very  delicate,  but  does  not  compare  in  sensibility  with  the 
radio-active  methods. 

182.  Atomic  weight.  Mme  Curie  ff  has  made  successive 
determinations  of  the  atomic  weight  of  radium  with  specimens 
of  steadily  increasing  purity.  The  purified  radium  chloride  was 
treated  with  silver  nitrate  and  the  amount  of  silver  chloride 
determined.  The  first  definite  determination  gave  a  value  of  the 
atomic  weight  225.  A  second  determination  made  in  1907  with 
%  larger  quantity  of  radium  gave  a  value  226*4.     A  determination 

♦  Runge,  Ann.  d,  Phys.  2,  p.  742,  1900;  12,  p.  407,  1903. 
t  Exner  and  Haschek,  Wien  Ber,  110,  p.  964,  1901. 
::  CrookeB,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  72,  p.  295,  1904. 
§  Range  and  Precht,  Ann.  d.  Phyt.  14,  p.  418,  1904. 
11  Exner  and  Haschek,  Wien  Ber.  120,  p.  967,  1911. 
II  Giesel,  Phyn.  Zeit.  3,  p.  678,  1902. 
♦*  Runge  and  Precht,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  10,  p.  665,  1903. 

+t  Mme  Curie,  C.  R,  129,  p.  760,  1899;  181,  p.  382,  1900;  135,  p.  161,  1902; 
L46,  p.  422,  1907. 


472  RADIUM   AND   ITS   EMANATION  [( 

of  the  atomic  weight  was  also  made  by  Thorpe*,  using  a 
70  milligrams  of  radium.     The  value  found  was  226'7. 

Recently  a  determination  has  been  made  by  O.  Honigschmi 
using  more  than  one  gram  of  radium  chloride  provided  for 
purpose  by  the  Radium  Institute  of  Vienna.     A  series  of  v 
concordant  determ:     tions  were  made  which  gave  a  value  225 
for  the  atomic  weigi    » )f  radium.     Silver  and  chlorine  were  take^" 
as  107'88  and  35'4r-       espectively.     Five  standard   preparatio 
were  made  from  thi^  purified  material  containing  10,  31,  40,23 
and  680  mg.  Ra  Cla     jspectively.     It  was  found  that  the  ato 
weight  was  not  altered  by  50  additional  crystallisations. 

Another  determination  has  been  recently  made  by  Gray 
Ramsay  J  using  about  200  mg.  Ra.     The  atomic  weight  was  fr 
to  be  226-45. 

Mme  Curie  controlled  the  final  purification  of  radium  fr 
barium  by  the  spectroscopic  method  by  comparison  of  the  relati 
intensity  of  two  neighbouring  lines,  viz.  4533*3  of  radium  wifiil 
4554*2,  the  strongest  line  in  the  spectrum  of  barium.  By  cm 
tinned  purification,  the  barium  line  became  relatively  very'  feeble.] 

In  the  last  chapter  evidence  has  been  given  that  uranium' 
emits  two  a  particles  for  one  from  ionium.  If  the  radium  atom 
is  derived  by  the  loss  of  three  a  particles  from  the  uranium  atoraj 
the  atomic  weight  of  uranium  should  be  225*95  -f  3  x  3*09  =  2*^" 
on  Honigschmid's  value,  and  238*3  on  Mme  Curie's  last  vu. 
The  accepted  value  of  the  atomic  weight  of  uranium,  determineti 
by  Richards,  is  238*5. 

Evidence  has  been  given  in  the  last  chapter  that  uraniun 
contains  two  a  ray  components.  These,  if  successive,  should  diffe 
in  atomic  weight  by  3*99  units.  The  observed  atomic  weight  o 
uranium  is  a  little  higher  than  the  values  deduced  above  by  th 
addition  of  3  helium  atoms  to  the  radium  atom.  Assuming  th 
correctness  of  the  values  for  uranium  and  radium,  this  show 
clearly  that  the  second  component  of  uranium  must  exist  in  sue 
small  amount  compared  with  the  primary  component  that  it  doe 
not  seriously  influence  the  atomic  weight  of  the  mixture.     Fo 

♦  Thorpe,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  80,  p.  298,  1908. 

t  0.  Honigschmid,  Wien  her,  120,  p.  1617,  1911. 

X  Gray  and  Ramsay,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  86,  p.  270,  1912. 


j]  RADIUM   AND  ITS  EMANATION  473 

wnple,  if  the  two  components  were  present  in  equal  amounts, 

*  atomic  weight  of  the  first  component,  deduced  from  the  mean 
>mic  weight  of  radium,  should  be  2381  and  for  the  second 
41.  This  would  give  an  atomic  weight  2361  for  the  mixture, 
is  is  much  lower  than  the  observed  value^ 

183.     Metallic  radium.     Radium  was  obtained  in  a  metallic 

e  in  1910  by  Mme  Curie  and  Dr  De):>i^me*.     The  method 

tployed  was  similar  to  that  used  by  Guntz  ^i  the  preparation  of 

ttallic  barium.     About  01  gram  of  pure  .judium  chloride  was 

ctrolysed  with  a  cathode  of  mercury  and  an  anode  of  platinum- 

lium.     The  amalgam  of  radium  so  obtained  was  quite  liquid 

^    decomposed  water.     The  radium  amalgam  was  placed  in  an 

/oat  and  the  mercury  slowly  distilled  in  an  atmosphere  of 

rogen  kept  at  a  suitable  pressure.     At  400°  C.  the  amalgam 

solid  but  melted  at  higher  temperatures.     At  700°  C.  the 

•  b  of  the  mercury  was  volatilised,  and  there  was  left  behind  a 
re  white  metal  constituting  metallic  radium.  The  radium 
L»tal  melts  at  about  700°  C.  and  the  vapour  given  off  rapidly 
tacks  quaitz.  Radium  metal  is  far  more  volatile  than  barium 
etal.  Metallic  radium  alters  rapidly  when  exposed  to  air, 
obably  due  to  the  formation  of  a  nitride.  It  energetically 
.composes  water  and  dissolves  in  it. 

, I. lire  radium  showed  the  radio-active  properties  to  be  expected 
_idio-iictivity  is  an  atomic  phenomenon.  It  produced  radium 
manation,  and  its  activity  increased  with  time  at  the  theoretical 
ate.  Eblerf  made  experiments  to  obtain  metallic  radium  by  the 
lethod  of  Curtius.  The  latter  method  was  also  used  by  Hersch- 
nkell  but  with  negative  results. 

184.  General  properties.  Radium  forms  a  series  of  salts 
nalogous  in  chemical  properties  and  appearance  to  those  of 
arium.  In  the  course  of  time,  radium  salts  are  generally 
oloured  by  the  action  of  their  own  radiations.  The  decom- 
osition  of  salts  of  radium  by  the  action  of  the  radiation  has 

•  Mme  Curie  and  Dr  Debieme,  C.  R.  161,  p.  623,  1910;  Le  Radium,  7,  p.  309, 

no. 

t  Ebler,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Oes.  43,  p.  2613,  1910. 
:;:  Herschfinkel,  Le  Radium,  8,  p.  299,  1911. 


474  RADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION  [CH. 

been  already  mentioned  (Section  114).  The  crystals  of  the 
chloride  and  bromide  are  isomorphous  with  those  of  barium  and 
like  the  latter  crystallise  with  two  molecules  of  water. 

The  magnetic  properties  of  pure  radium  chloride  have  been 
examined  by  P.  Curie  and  Cheveneau.  Radium  chloride  is  para- 
magnetic and  the  value  of  susceptibility  k  is  1'05  x  10~*.  The 
corresponding  salt  of  barium  is  diamagnetic  with  a  value  of 
A:  =  -  0-40  X  10-*. 

In  general  properties,  radium  is  analogous  to  the  metals  of  the 
alkaline  earths,  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  higher  homologue  of 
barium. 

186.  RadiationB  from  radium.  In  preparations  of  radium 
some  days  old,  most  of  the  activity  observed  is  contributed  not  by 
radium  itself  but  by  its  products,  viz.  the  radium  emanation, 
radium  A,  B  and  C.  By  continued  heating  of  a  radium  salt  or 
by  boiling  the  solution,  the  radium  can  be  almost  completely 
deprived  of  its  products.  Under  these  conditions,  radium  emits 
a  rays  of  characteristic  range  3'30  cms.  in  air  at  IS'^C.  The 
a  ray  activity  of  radium  itself  measured  by  the  electric  method 
is  less  than  20  per  cent,  of  its  activity  in  equilibrium  with  its 
products,  while  its  7  ray  activity  is  nil.  Radium  itself  emits  one 
a  particle  for  four  when  in  equilibrium  with  its  products. 

Hahn  and  Meitner*  found  that  radium,  completely  freed  from 
its  short-lived  products  and  also  containing  no  radium  D,  E  or  F, 
emitted  a  ^  radiation  of  easily  absorbed  type  with  a  coefficient  of 
absorption  fi  in  aluminium  of  about  312  (cms.)""".  This  was  con- 
firmed in  a  series  of  experiments  by  Kolowratf  who  found  a  value 
of  /i,  =  200  (cms.)~^  This  /8  ray  activity  due  to  radium  measured 
by  the  electric  method  corresponds  to  about  2  per  cent,  of  the 
total  0  ray  activity  of  radium  in  equilibrium  with  its  products. 

V.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  MeitnerJ  have  shown  by  the  photo- 
graphic method  that  the  ^8  rays  from  radium  itself  consist  of  two 
homogeneous  groups  of  rays  expelled  with  velocities  0*52  and  0*65 
of  the  velocity  of  light. 

*  HahD  and  Meitner,  Phys,  Zeit.  10,  p.  741,  1909. 

t  Kolowrat,  Le  Radium,  7,  p.  269,  1910. 

X  V.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phys.  Zeit.  12,  p.  1099,  19II. 


XIIl]  RADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION  475 

The  emission  of  )3  rays  from  a  substance  known  to  emit  a  rays 
is  of  great  interest  and  importance.  It  suggests  the  possibility 
that  radium  may  consist  of  two  products,  one  emitting  a  rays  and 
the  other  soft  /8  rays.  But  so  fer  no  definite  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  such  a  product  has  been  observed.  In  the  absence  of 
such  evidence,  it  is  simplest  to  assume  that  the  emission  of  slow 
fi  particles  accompanies  the  emission  of  an  a  particle  irom  the 
radium  atom. 

186.  Radium  emanation.  A  general  account  of  the  pro- 
perties of  the  radium  emanation  has  been  given  in  Chapter  IX. 
It  has  there  been  shown  that  the  emanation  is  a  radio-active  gas  of 
high  molecular  weight,  which  is  chemically  analogous  to  the  inert 
group  of  gases,  helium,  argon,  krypton  and  xenon.  It  is  a  transition 
element  which  is  transformed  according  to  an  exponential  law  with 
a  period  of  385  days.  Its  average  life  is  5'56 days.  It  is  absorbed 
by  charcoal  and  by  liquids.  At  very  low  pressures,  it  is  con- 
densed from  the  gas  with  which  it  is  mixed  at  a  temperature 
of  about  -  150°  C. 

The  radium  emanation  is  produced  by  radium  at  a  constant 
rate  in  amount  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  radium  present. 
The  radium  atom  disintegrates  with  the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle 
and  the  residue  of  the  atom  forms  the  atom  of  the  radium  emana- 
tion. Starting  with  a  radium  compound  freed  from  emanation  by 
continued  heating,  the  emanation  accumulates  according  to  the 
equation  Q/QmMx.  =  1  —  ^"^  where  Q  is  the  quantity  of  emanation  at 
a  time  t  and  Qnux.  *he  final  equilibrium  value.  \  is  the  decay  con- 
stant of  the  emanation  and  is  equal  to  2*085  x  10"*(sec.)~*  and 
0180  (day)*^  Tables  for  calculation  of  the  fraction  of  the  equi- 
librium quantity  accumulated  in  a  given  interval  are  given  in 
the  appendix.  The  quantity  of  emanation  reaches  half  value  in 
3*85  days,  75  per  cent,  in  7  70  days,  and  is  within  1  per  cent,  of 
the  equilibrium  quantity  in  30  days. 

In  a  solid  preparation  of  radium,  most  of  the  emanation  is 
occluded  in  the  compound  and  only  a  small  fraction  escapes.  The 
calculations  given  above  refer  to  the  amount  of  emanation  when 
the  radium  is  enclosed  in  a  sealed  vessel  when  no  emanation  can 
escape. 


476  RADIUM   AND  ITS   EMANATION  [( 

We  have  seen  that  radium  freed  from  all  its  products  ei 
a   rays   and  soft  /8  rays.     The   variation   of  activity  of  radii 
preparations  with  time  measured  by  the  a  rays  is  given  by 

I II ro.r.  =  a  +  (1  -  a.)  (1  -  e-«) 

where  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation  and  o  is 
constant  which  depends  on  the  thickness  of  the  layer  and  the 
mensions  of  the  ionisation  chamber.    The  value  of  a  varies  betwe 
about   12  and  '17.     If  the  radium  salt  is  in  the  form  of  a  tl 
film,  a  considerable  fraction  of  the  emanation  escapes  into  the 
Assuming  that  the  rate  of  escape  of  the  emanation  is  proportioi 
at  any  time  to  the  amount  of  emanation  present,  it  can  readily 
shown  that  the  rise  of  activity  to  a  maximum  is  more  rapid  tin 
the  normal.     The  value  of  X  in  the  equation  is  replaced  by  X+«] 
where  k  represents  the  fraction  of  emanation  escaping  per  second 

Since  radium  does  not  emit  hard  y8  rays  or  7  rays,  the  rise 
activity  of  radium  with  time,  measured  by  hard  ^  rays  or  7  rajij 
is  given  by  Ijlm&x.  =  1  —  €r^^.  This  equation  requires  a  slight 
correction  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  /9  and  7  rays  I 
arise  not  from  the  emanation  itself  but  fix)m  the  later  producta, 
radium  B  and  C. 

187.     Separation   and  purification   of  the   emanation. 

The  emanation  occluded  in  radium  preparations  can  be  released 
by  heating  or  dissolving  them.  The  effect  of  heat  on  the  escape  of 
the  emanation  has  been  discussed  in  detail  in  Section  134.  The 
most  convenient  method  of  collecting  the  emanation  fix>m  radium  is 
to  keep  the  radium  salt  in  solution  and  to  pump  off  the  emanation 
with  the  comparatively  large  quantities  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
formed  in  the  solution  by  the  action  of  the  radiations  (Section  115^ 
This  method,  first  used  by  Ramsay,  is  very  simple  and  convenient, 
if  supplies  of  radium  emanation  are  required  at  intervals. 

A  simple  arrangement  used  by  the  writer  is  shown  in  Fig.  107. 
It  consists  essentially  of  a  bulb  R  containing  the  radium  solution* 
and  a  small  Toepler  pump  T  for  collecting  the  gases  given  off  by 
the  solution  in  the  tube  B  over  mercury.  A  ground  glass  join* 
at  J  allows  the  radium  solution  to  be  removed  without  troubfe 
There  is  a  stopcock  at  S  and  a  drying  bulb  of  phosphoron* 
pentoxide  at  P, 


Jll] 


RADIUM  AND   ITS   EMANATION 


477 


After  the  radium  is  obtained  completely  in  solution,  some 
ydrochloric  acid  is  added  to  ensure  that  the  radium  will  not 
recipitate  itself  in  the  course  of  time  by  the  action  of  its  radia- 
Lons.  The  air  is  then  completely  removed  by  the  pump.  The 
>opcock  S  is  then  closed  and  the  emanation  and  electrolytic  gases 
•'liich  are  formed  collect  in  the  solution  and  the  space  above  it. 
'lie  writer  found  that  0*25  gr.  pure  radium  produced  about  30  c.c. 
P  mixed  gases  per  week.  It  is  desirable,  therefore,  that  the  bulb 
£  and  its  connections  should  have  a  volume  between  50  and 
OO  C.C.  to  ensure  that  the  gas  pressure  will  not  rise  to  a  dangerous 
egree  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks. 


Fig.  107. 

When  it  is  required  to  collect  the  emanation,  the  stopcock 

S  is  slowly  opened  and  the  mixed  gases  allowed  to  expand  into 

the   exhausted   pump.      A   large   part   of  the   water   vapour   is 

absorbed  in  P.     S  is  then  closed  and  the  gases  collected  in  the 

burette  B.     The  gases  in  R  are  then  allowed  to  expand  again 

into  the  pump,  and  the  process  is  repeated  until  the  whole  of  the 

gases  is  removed.     At  a  low  pressure  of  the  gas,  the   radium 

solution  boils  vigorously  and  this  assists  the  complete  removal 

of  the  emanation. 


478 


RADIUM  AND  ITS  EBCANATION 


[eg 


TO  PUI«* 


Since  the  mixed  gases  contain  ozone,  the  mercury  is  attacked 
and  the  pump  requires  cleaning  every  few  months. 

The  mixed  gases  consist  of  electrolytic  gases  with  an  excenaf 
hydrogen,  the  emanation,  helium  and  usually  some  carbon  dioxidi 
formed  by  the  action  of  the  emanation  on  the  grease  of  the  8to|K 
cock.  The  gases  are  transferred  into  a  burette  and  explodel 
The  residual  gases  usually  from  ('1  to  '5  c.c.)  are  then  introduoei 
over  mercury  into  a  small  tube  containing  a  small  piece  of  caoBtie 
potash  to  absorb  the  carbon  dioxide. 

For  the  purification  of  the  radium  emanation,  the  writer  hn 
found  the  apparatus  shown  in  Fig. 
108  very  convenient.     The  whole 
apparatus  is  exhausted  by  a  Toepler 
pump  not  shown  in  the  figure.    By 
means   of  a   mercury  trough,  the 
sparked  gases  are  introduced  into 
C     The   stopcocks  A  and  B  are 
then  closed  and  the  U  tube  sur- 
rounded by  liquid  air.     By  alter- 
nately  raising   and   lowering    the 
mercury     in     C,    practically    the 
whole   of  the   emanation   is   con- 
densed in  the  U  tube.     B  is  then 
opened  to  the  pump  and  the  un- 
condensed  gases,  e.g,  hydrogen  and 
helium,  are  pumped  out  and  col- 
lected  over    mercury.     The   mer- 
cury is  then  lowered  in  D  and  the 
liquid  air  removed  so*  that  the  emanation  comes  in  contact  with 
the  caustic  potash  lining  the  tube  D  in  order  to  remove  the  last 
traces  of  carbon  dioxide.     The  emanation  is  condensed  again  is 
the  U  tube,  and  the  whole  apparatus  completely  pumped  out 
The  emanation  is  then  allowed  to  expand  into  the  chamber  E. 
To  avoid  loss  of  emanation  in  the  U  tube,  the  emanation  may  be 
all  condensed  in  E  by  applying  a  pad  of  cotton  wool  soaked  in 
liquid  air  to  the  side  of  the  tube.     The  stopcock  A  is  then  closed 
and  the  emanation  compressed  into  the  apparatus  required  whidi 
is  attached  at  i^. 


Ill]  BADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION  479 

In  order  to  avoid  the  formation  of  carbon  dioxide  and  other 
ases  by  the  action  of  the  radiations  during  the  purification,  it  is 
esirable  that  the  stopcocks  should  be  lubricated  with  phos- 
liorous  pentoxide.  It  is  convenient  in  many  cases  to  attach  a 
barcoal  tube  to  the  tube  R  to  allow  of  complete  exhaustion  of 
le  vessel  E  when  required.  Instead  of  the  caustic  potash  tube 
>,  a  side  tube  containing  P,Os  and  KHO  and  provided  with  a 
i^pcock  is  very  serviceable.  After  the  preliminary  purification, 
le  emanation  is  removed,  by  condensation,  to  this  tube  and  left 
►r  some  time.  If  the  emanation  gives  a  red  colouration  when 
Dndensed  at  a  point  it  is  strong  evidence  that  the  emanation 
t  practically  pure.  Ramsay  found  that  the  last  traces  of  foreign 
ases  could  be  removed  fi'om  the  emanation  by  exposing  it  to 
eated  lime.  The  main  difficulty  of  purification  of  the  emanation 
rises  from  the  fact  that  the  volume  of  the  emanation  to  be 
urified  is  seldom  more  than  -^  cubic  millimetre.  Using  amounts 
f  emanation  irom  a  hundred  milligrams  of  radium,  the  phosphor- 
scence  produced  by  it  in  glass  is  very  striking.  In  a  dark  room, 
his  luminosity  aflfords  a  very  convenient  method  of  determining 
he  distribution  of  the  emanation  in  the  pump  and  its  connections. 

188.  Volume  of  the  emanation.  The  amount  of  emanation 
1  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  pure  radium  is  a  definite  quantity. 
it  the  Radiology  Congress  in  Brussels  in  1910,  it  was  decided  to 
all  this  equilibrium  quantity  a  "curie,"  in  honour  of  M.  and 
Ime  Curie.  We  shall  see  that  a  curie  of  emanation  can  be 
xpressed  as  a  weight  or  as  the  volume  of  the  purified  emana- 
ion  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature.  Since  a  curie  is 
comparatively  large  unit  in  comparison  with  the  quantities  of 
manation  ordinarily  available  in  a  laboratory,  it  is  convenient 
D  use  the  term  millicurie  as  a  smaller  unit.  Ten  millicuries 
leans  the  quantity  of  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  ten 
lilligrams  of  pure  radium. 

The-  volume  of  the  emanation  from  one  gram  of  radium  can 
e  readily  calculated  from  a  knowledge  of  the  number  of  a 
irticles  emitted  per  second  per  gram  of  radium  itself.  This 
imber  (Section  63)  is  3*4  x  10^®.  Since  each  radium  atom  after 
pulsion  of  an  a  particle  becomes  an  atom  of  the  emanation, 


480  RADIUM   AND   ITS   EMANATION 

the  number  q  of  atoms  of  emanation  formed  per  gram  per 
is  3*4  X  10*^     When  equilibrium  is  reached,  the  number  H 
atoms  of  emanation  present  per  gram  is  given  by  N=ql\.    Si 
\  =  2085  X  10-«  (8ec.)-S  N  =  1-63  x  10»'.   Since  there  are  2-78  x  I 
molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  any  gas  at  standard  p 
and  temperature  (Section  63)  the  volume  of  one  curie  of  emaofc] 
tion,  supposed  monatomic,  is  0*59  cubic  millimetre.     The  rate 
production  of  emanation  per  second  is  1"24  x  10~®  c.c.  per  second 

The  first  experiments  to  determine  the  volume  of  the  eman*"; 
tion  were  made  by  Ramsay  and  Soddy*  using  about  30  millic 
of  emanation.  The  emanation  was  purified  and  its  volu 
measured  by  compressing  it  into  a  capillary  tube.  The  voloiu 
per  curie  was  found  to  be  about  1  cubic  millimetre.  Latff 
Cameron  and  Ramsay  f  made  a  number  of  experiments  witk 
much  larger  quantities  of  radium,  and  found  a  volume  of  abonl 
7  cubic  millimetres  per  curie.  This  is  much  greater  than  tb 
calculated  value  and  was  due  to  the  presence  of  impuritiea  TIm 
question  was  examined  in  1908  by  the  writerj,  who  found  a  value 
of  the  volume  about  0*6  cubic  mms.,  viz.  0*68,  0*66,  0*59  in  thrw 
separate  experiments.  This  was  in  good  accord  with  the  calculatii 
value.  The  emanation,  after  as  complete  a  purification  as  possible, 
contracted  in  volume  for  the  first  few  hours.  The  true  volume  of 
the  emanation  was  taken  as  the  minimum  volume.  These  results 
were  confirmed  by  Debieme§,  who  found  values  0*60,  0*52,  0*61, 
0*59  in  four  experiments.  Finally  Gray  and  Ramsay||  as  a  mean 
of  three  concordant  experiments  found  a  value  0*60  cubic  mms. 
There  is  thus  an  excellent  agreement  between  theory  and  experi- 
ment. The  agreement  of  various  observers  is  closer  than  would 
be  expected  considering  the  uncertainty  of  the  relative  values  of 
the  radium  standards  employed.  The  calculated  value  is  based  oft 
the  standard  employed  by  the  writer. 

In  experiments  of  this  kind,  it  is  essential  that  the  amount 
of    purified    emanation   in    the   measuring   capillary   should  be 

*  RaruKay  and  Soddy,  Proc,  Ray.  Soc.  A,  73,  p.  346,  1904. 

t  Cameron  and  Ramsay,  Trans,* Chem.  Soc,  91,  p.  1266,  1907. 

+  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag,  16,  p.  300,  1908. 

§  Dcbierne,  C.  R.  148,  p.  1264,  1909. 

li  Gray  and  Ramsay,  Trans.  Chem.  Soc,  90,  p.  1078,  1909. 


^Ul]  BADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION  481 

tiandardized  by  comparison  of  its  7  ray  effect  with  that  of  a 
i^ndard  quantity  of  radium.  In  the  process  of  purification, 
tout  10  per  cent,  of  the  emanation  is  usually  removed  by  the 
•limp.  Purified  emanation  obeys  the  ordinary  laws  of  gases. 
lJI  observers  have  found,  that  partially  purified  emanation  when 
>rced  into  a  capillary  undergoes  marked  changes  of  volume 
uring  the  first  few  hours.  This  is  due  to  chemical  action  of  the 
atense  radiations  on  the  gas  mixed  with  the  emanation.  In 
Dme  cases,  the  volume  contracts  and  in  other  cases  expands, 
©pending  upon  the  nature  of  the  impurity  present.  After  the 
aitial  changes,  the  volume  generally  does  not  alter  much  with 
ime.  With  purified  emanation,  the  volume  usually  does  not 
hange  much  as  the  emanation  decays.  The  actual  volume  of 
he  emanation  should  decrease  at  the  same  rate  as  its  activity, 
mt  this  is  compensated  for  by  the  release  of  the  helium  which 
las  been  fired  as  a  particles  into  the  walls  of  the  tube.  Since 
he  rate  of  release  of  helium  from  the  walls  of  the  capillary  will 
lepend  on  the  nature  of  the  glass,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the 
thanges  of  volume  of  pure  emanation  will  vary  with  the  kind 
rf  glass  employed.  The  presence  of  helium  in  the  capillary  is 
readily  shown  by  sending  a  discharge  through  it.  The  spectrum 
>f  helium  comes  out  brightly  if  the  emanation  has  been  kept  in 
ihe  capillary  for  some  days. 

189.  Density  of  the  emanation.  Since  radium  is  trans- 
'ormed  into  emanation  with  the  emission  of  a  helium  atom  of 
itomic  weight  3*99,  the  atomic  weight  of  the  emanation  should  be 
i26  —  4  or  222.  Gray  and  Ramsay*  measured  the  weight  of  a 
mown  volume  of  pure  emanation  by  means  of  a  very  sensitive 
quartz  micro-balance  modelled  upon  the  balance  first  devised  by 
i^teele  and  Grantf.  This  balance  was  sensitive  to  about  one- 
nillionth  of  a  milligram.  Assuming  the  emanation  is  a  monatomic 
^,  they  deduced  that  its  atomic  weight  was  223  as  a  mean  of  five 
ieterminations  giving  values  227,  226,  225,  220,  218.  The  agree- 
tient  between  the  measurements  is  surprisingly  good,  considering 
ihat  the  weight  of  the  emanation  itself  was  less  than  jj^^jj  milligram, 

*  Gray  and  Bamsay,  Proe,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  84,  p.  536,  1911. 
t  Steele  and  Grant,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  82,  p.  5S0,  1909. 

B.  B.-A.  31 


482  RADIUM  AND   ITS   EMANATION  [CE 

while  the  weight  of  the  glass  tube  containing  the  emanation  wss 
usually  about  30  milligrams. 

The  mean  value  obtained  is  in  good  accord  with  the  theoretical 
value.  The  radium  emanation  has  thus  111  times  the  density  rf 
hydrogen  and  is  the  heaviest  gas  known. 

190.  Spectrum  of  the  emanation.  Ramsay  and  Collie* 
in  1904,  using  a  small  quantity  of  purified  emanation  compressed 
in  a  small  spectrum  tube,  observed  visually  a  number  of  bright  lines 
which  were  ascribed  to  the  spectrum  of  the  emanation.  In  1908, 
Rutherford  and  Roydsf  photographed  the  spectrum  of  purified 
emanation,  compressed  into  a  small  spectrum  tube  about  50  cubic 
mm.  capacity  provided  with  fine  platinum  electrodes.  About 
130  millicuries  of  emanation  were  used,  corresponding  to  » 
volume  of  "08  cubic  mm.  at  standard  pressure.  The  photograph, 
which  was  found  to  consist  of  a  large  number  of  bright  lines,  is 
shown  in  Fig.  109.  The  spectrum  of  helium,  which  was  used  for 
comparison,  is  shown  above  and  below  the  emanation  spectrum. 
The  colour  of  the  discharge  through  the  emanation  was  bluish, 
and  not  so  intense  as  with  a  helium  tube.  The. spectrum  observed 
visually  was  a  brilliant  one  of  bright  lines.  The  most  noticeable 
were  a  group  of  strong  lines  in  the  green  and  another  in  the  violet. 
By  condensing  the  emanation  in  a  side  tube,  the  colour  of  the 
discharge  completely  changed,  and  the  emanation  lines  disappeared. 
When  a  discharge  passes  through  the  emanation,  it  is  driven  into 
the  walls  of  the  tube,  and  the  tube  soon  runs  out.  The  emana- 
tion can  then  be  released  only  by  a  strong  and  long  continued 
heating  of  the  tube.  The  wave  lengths  and  intensities  of  some  of 
the  lines  photographed  are  given  on  the  next  page.  In  addition 
to  the  lines  recorded  photographically  the  following  lines  of  feeble 
intensity  were  observed  visually: 

6079,    5976,    5945,    5829,    5765,    5372,    5257,     5120. 

Later,  Cameron  and  Ramsay  J  published  a  list  of  emanation 
lines    derived    from     three    difierent    photographs.      With    the 

♦  Ramsay  and  CoUie,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc,  A,  78,  p.  470,  1904. 

t  Rutherford  and  Royds,  Phil  Mag.  16,  p.  313.  1908. 

X  Cameron  and  Ramsay,  Proc.  Roy,  Sqc.  A,  8X,  p.  210,  1908. 


^n] 


•RADIUM   AND   ITS  EMARATIOK 


^8 


:ceptiori  of  several  of  the  strongest  lines  of  the  emanation, 
oyds*  showed  that  the  final  spectrum  was  that  of  xenon.  There 
id  apparently  been  an  accidental  and  unsuspected  contamination 
the  emanation  with  this  gas.  Watson  f,  later,  rie-determined  the 
►ectrum  of  the  emanation  and  found  values  in  excellent  agreement 
ith  the  spectrum  given  by  Rutherford  and  Royds.  RoydsJ 
itermined  the  grating  spectrum  of  the  emanation  showing  several 
Iditional  lines  in  the  ultra  violet.     The  emanation  has  thus  been 


ntensity 

Wave  length 

intensity 

Wave  length 

Inteoeity 

Wave  length 

I 

57150 

7 

4578-7 

10 

4018-0 

8 

5582-2 

1 

4549-9 

12 

3982-0 

0 

5392-4 

9 

4509-0 

9 

3971-9 

4 

5084-5 

2 

4504-0 

7 

3957-5 

4 

4979-0 

10 

4460-0 

3 

3952-7 

0 

4965-6 

2 

4440-6 

3 

3933-3 

00 

4949-4 

8 

4435-7 

I 

3927-7 

00 

4914-6 

3 

43840 

2 

3905-7 

0 

4889-5 

4 

4372-1 

4 

3867-6 

4861-3 

15 

4350-3 

2 

3818-0 

1 

4827-8 

7 

4340-9 

0 

3811-2 

4 

4817-2 

10 

4308-3 

10 

3753-6 

1 

4796-7 

2 

4225-8 

1 

3748-6 

3 

4767-9 

10 

42()3-V 

7      • 

3739-9 

5 

■  4721-5 

5 

4188-2 

2 

36904 

2 

4701-7 

20 

4166-6 

1 

3679-2 

10 

4681-1 

7 

4114-9 

10 

3664-6 

1 

4671-8 

-   6 

4102-2,. 

0 

3650-0 

1 

4659-3 

2 

4088-4 

2 

3626-6 

10 

4644-7 

1 

4055-7 

1 

3615-4 

8 

4625-9 

2 

4051 -r* 

6 

3612-2 

4609-9 

4 

4045-4 

4 

4604-7 

1 

4040*2 

- 

■ 

lown  to  have  a  characteristic  spectrum  which  is  quite  distinct 
Dm  its  parent  substance,  radium.  No  certain  evidence  of  the 
"esence  of  the  emanation  has  been  observed  in  stellar  spectra. 

191.  Boiling  point  of  emanation.  We  have  seen  in 
bapter  IX  that  the  radium  emanation  at  very  low  partial 
assures  condenses  on  a  surface  of  matter  between  —150°  C. 

♦  Royds,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  82,  p.  22,  1909. 
t  Watson,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  83,  p.  60,  1909. 
t  Royds,  Phil.  Mag.  X7,  p.  202,  1909. 

31—2 


484  BADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION  [CH. 

and  — 160°  C.  If  the  emanation  behaves  as  an  ordinaiy  gas,  it  is 
to  be  expected  that  the  temperature  of  condensation  vrill  depend 
on  the  pressure  of  the  emanation.  An  accurate  determination  of 
the  variation  of  vapour  pressure  of  the  emanation  with  temperature 
is  rendered  difficult  by  the  very  small  volume  of  radium  emanation 
available  for  experiment.  Most  of  the  experiments  discussed  Intd 
were  made  with  a  volume  of  not  more  than  01  cubic  mm.  at 
atmospheric  pressure. 

The  first  experiments  on  this  subject  were  made  by  tie 
writer*.  The  emanation  was  purified  and  compressed  in  a  fin( 
capillary  tube  of  internal  diameter  about  '05  mm.  The  volume  o 
emanation  available  occupied  about  3  cms.  length  of  this  capillaiy 
The  end  of  the  capillary  containing  the  emanation  was  surroundec 
by  a  bath  of  pentane  cooled  with  liquid  air,  the  temperature 
being  measured  by  a  thermocouple.  The  temperature  of  con 
densation  was  observed  by  the  decrease  of  pressure  and  by  tbt 
increased  phosphorescence  of  the  glass  at  the  end  of  the  capillar; 
At  atmospheric  pressure,  it  was  found  that  the  emanatioi 
started  to  condense  at  —  65**  C.  The  vapour  pressures  of  th( 
emanation  at  different  temperatures  determined  in  this  way  an 
given  below. 


K>ar  preware 

Temperatore 

76crn8. 

-  es'^a 

25     „ 

-   78^  C. 

6     ,, 

-  lor  c. 

0-9,, 

-127' C. 

W.  Gray  and  Ramsay  f  determined  the  vapour  pressure  of  th< 
emanation  at  higher  temperatures  by  a  difierent  method.  Th^ 
purified  emanation  was  compressed  into  a  capillary  tube  with  th 
aid  of  a  modified  Andrew's  apparatus  and  the  formation  of  Uqui 
at  the  end  of  the  capillary  was  observed  with  the  aid  of  a  lo 
power  microscope.  Observations  of  the  vapour  pressure  were  mac 
between  — 10"*  C.  and  104*5'*  C,  the  critical  temperature  of  tl 
emanation.  The  vapour  pressure  curve  was  compared  with  tl 
known  curve  for  methyl-alcohol  and  the  values  of  the  vapo 

•  Rutherford,  Nature,  79,  p.  467,  1909 ;  Phil.  Mag,  17,  p.  723,  1909. 
t  Gray  and  Bamsay,  Trans,  Chenu  Soc.  96,  p.  1073,  1909. 


n] 


RADIUM  AND  ITS  EMANATION 


486 


essure  of  the  emanation  at  temperatures  below  — 10"  C.  deduced 
'  extrapolation.     The  following  values  were  given  by  them. 


Ehressure 
in  mm. 

Temp. 
°ab8. 

Pressure 
in  mm. 

Temp. 
°  abs. 

Pressure 
in  mm. 

Temp, 
^abs. 

500 

202-6^ 

5000 

262-8' 

30000 

346-0'* 

800 

212-4 

10000 

290-3 

35000 

356-0 

1000 

217-2 

15000 

307-6 

40000 

364-4 

2000 

234-5      . 

20000 

321-7 

45000 

372-9 

4000 

255-3 

25000 

334-5 

47450 

377-5  (crit.) 

will  be  seen  that  the  numbers  in  the  first  column  were  not 
tually  observed  but  obtained  by  extrapolation  fix)m  the  vapour 
essure  curve.  The  boiling  point  at  standard  pressure,  —  62°  C, 
iduced  by  Gray  and  Ramsay  is  in  good  accord  with  the  value 
65°  C.  found  by  the  writer. 

The  liquified  emanation  undergoes  a  marked  variation  of  colour 
ith  lowering  of  the  temperature.  At  ordinary  temperatures  the 
]uid  is  nearly  colourless.  Gray  and  Ramsay  consider  that  the 
nanation  cannot  exist  as  a  liquid  below  —71**  C.  On  cooling 
3I0W  this  temperature,  the  condensed  emanation  increases  in 
-illiancy  and  shows  as  a  brilliant  point  of  light.  As  the  tem- 
Brature  is  decreased,  the  colour  changes  to  yellow  and  becomes 
1  orange  red  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air.  On  raising  the 
mperature  again,   the   red    phosphorescence    disappears  about 

US'*  C.  The  observation  of  these  colour  changes  is  compli- 
ited  by  the  marked  phosphorescence  set  up  in  the  glass  of  the 
ipillary  containing  the  condensed  emanation,  but  can  be  made 
lost  simply  with  the  aid  of  a  low  power  microscope.  From 
leasurements  of  the  volume  occupied  by  the  emanation  when 
>ndensed  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air,  it  has  been  found 
lat  the  density  of  solid  emanation  is  between  5  and  6. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM. 

192.  In  Chapter  X  the  general  properties  of  the  active 
deposit  derived  from  the  transformation  of  the  radium  emanation 
have  been  discussed.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  surface  of 
bodies  exposed  to  the  emanation  becomes  coated  with  an  invisible 
film  of  radio-active  matter.  On  removal  from  the  emanation,  the 
activity  of  this  deposit,  which  as  a  whole  emits  a,  fi  and  7  rays, 
decays  with  the  time  and  has  fallen  to  a  minute  fraction  of  ite 
initial  value  after  24  hours.  If,  however,  a  body  is  exposed  for 
several  days  to  the  radium  emanation  and  then  removed,  there  is 
always  a  small  residual  activity  of  the  order  of  one-millionth  of 
the  initial  activity.  This  residual  activity  measured  by  the  a  rays 
increases  steadily  with  time  over  an  interval  of  several  years. 

It  will  be  shown  in  this  Chapter  that  at  least  six  successive 
transformations  occur  in  the  active  deposit.  The  matter  initially 
produced  from  the  emanation  is  called  radium  A,  and  the  suc- 
ceeding products  B,  C,  D,  E,  F»    The  equations  expressing  the 

quantity  of  A,  B,  C, present  at  any  time  are  very  complicated, 

but  the  comparison  of  theory  with  experiment  may  be  much 
simplified  by  temporarily  disregarding  some  unimportant  terms: 
for  example,  the  products  A,  B,  C  are  transformed  at  a  very  raj»d 
rate  compared  with  D.  The  activity  due  to  D  -H  E  -h  F  is,  in  most 
cases,  negligible  compared  with  that  of  A  or  C,  being  usually 
less  than  1/100000  of  the  initial  activity  observed  for  A  or  C 
The  analysis  of  the  active  deposit  of  radium  may  thus  be  con- 
veniently divided  into  two  stages: 

(1)  Analysis   of   the   deposit   of  rapid   change,   which  is 

composed  of  radium  A,  B,  and  C ; 

(2)  Analysis    of   the    deposit   of   slow   change,   which  is 

composed  of  radium  D,  E,  and  F. 


I.  XIV]  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OP  RADIUM  487 

193.    Analysis  of  the  deposit  of  rapid  cluinge.    The 

unplete  analysis  of  the  active  deposit  of  rapid  change  into  its 
tree  components  and  the  determination  of  the  period  of  each 
•oduct  and  the  nature  of  the  radiations  emitted  has  been  attended 
ith  considerable  difficulty.  Before  considering  the  details  of  the 
ansformations,  it  is  desirable  to  give  a  brief  review  of  the  historical 
jvelopment  of  our  knowledge  of  these  transformations.  It  was 
Lrly  observed  by  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks*  that  the  active 
jposit  decayed  more  rapidly  and  in  a  more  complicated  way  than 
le  active  deposit  of  thorium.  The  decay  of  the  activity  was 
:amined  in  detail  by  Curie  and  Dannef.  They  found  that  the 
jcay  of  activity  depended  on  the  time  of  exposure  of  the  body  to 
le  emanation.  The  decay  curve  was  found  to  be  independent  of 
le  time  of  exposure  provided  this  was  greater  than  four  hours, 
id  could  be  empirically  expressed  by  a  difference  of  two  ex- 
mentials.  The  variation  of  the  activity  /  (disregarding  the  first 
)  minutes  after  removal)  was  expressed  by 

///o  =  ac"^»^  — (a  — 1)6~*«*, 
here      \  =  413  x  lO"*  (sec.)-^     X^  =  5-38  x  lO"*  (sec.)-^ 

id  the  constant  a  =  4*20. 

Several  hours  after  removal,  the  decay  of  activity  was  nearly 
cponential  with  a  half-value  period  of  28  minutes  corresponding 
»  \j. 

In  an  examination  of  the  decay  of  activity  of  the  deposit,  the 
riter  J  found  that  the  decay  curves  for  different  types  of  radiation 
►uld  be  explained  by  the  assumption  of  three  successive  changes 
.  the  active  deposit  called  radium  A,  radium  B  and  radium  C. 
adium  A  had  a  period  of  3  minutes  and  emitted  only  a  rays, 
adium  B  had  a  period  of  21  minutes  and  was  ray  less,  while 
idium  C  of  period  28  minutes  emitted  a,  0  and  y  rays.  The 
npirical  relation  for  the  decay  found  by  Curie  and  Danne  was 
und  to  agree  closely  with  the  calculations  based  on  the  trans- 
•rmation  theory,  and  the  periods  21  and  28  minutes  were  deduced 
om  the  constants  Xj,  Xj  given  by  them.     It  was  shown  that  it 

■  •  •  •  . 

*  Bntherford  and  Miss  Brooks,  Phil  Mag,  4,  p.  1,  1902. 

t  Curie  and  Danne,  C.  R,  136,  p.  364,  1903 ;  1S8,  pp.  683,  748,  1904. 

X  Rutherford,  Phil.  Trans,  A,  804,  p.  169,  1906. 


488  ACnVK  DEPOSIT  OP  RADIUM  [CH. 

was  impossible  to  decide  from  the  decay  curve  whether  the 
shorter  period  of  21  minutes  was  to  be  ascribed  to  radium  B  or 
radium  C. 

Curie  and  Danne*  observed  that  the  decay  curves  of  the 
active  deposit  were  much  influenced  by  heating  to  a  hij^ 
temperature.  This  was  investigated  later  by  Bronsonf,  who 
showed  that  the  eflfects  observed  were  not  due  to  any  influence  of 
high  temperature  on  the  rate  of  transformation  of  the  products, 
but  arose  from  the  difference  of  the  volatility  of  the  products 
radium  B  and  radium  C.  Radium  B  was  volatilised  from  a  metal 
wire  far  more  readily  than  radium  C.  Under  suitable  conditions, 
he  found  that  the  decay  curve  of  the  wire  after  heating  was 
exponential  over  a  wide  range  with  a  period  of  19  minutes.  This 
showed  clearly  that  the  shorter  of  the  two  periods  was  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  last  product  radium  C  and  not  to  radium  B. 
Bronson  found  that  the  decay  curves  for  short  and  long  exposures 
agreed  closely,  with  theory  if  the  periods  of  radium  A,  B  and  C 
were  3,  26  and  19  minutes  respectively. 

In  the  meantime,  H.  W.  SchmidtJ  by  measuring  the  changes 
of  /8  ray  activity  of  a  body  exposed  for  a  short  interval  to  the 
radium  emanation,  had  found  that  radium  B  was  not  rayless  as  at 
first  supposed,  but  emitted  /8  rays.  Most  of  the  13  rays  emitted 
by  radium  B  were  much  more  easily  absorbed  than  the  conpe- 
sponding  rays  from  radium  C,  but  a  small  fraction  had  about  the 
same  coeflScient  of  absorption  as  the  swifter  rays  from  radium  C 
These  results  have  recently  been  confirmed  by  Fajans  and  Ma- 
kower§.  Moseley  and  Makower||  have  also  shown  that  radium  B 
emits  some  easily  absorbed  y  rays.  The  ionisation  due  to  these 
under  ordinary  conditions  is  about  13  per  cent,  of  those  which 
arise  from  radium  C  in  equilibrium  with  radium  B.  Von  Lerch^ 
showed  that  radium  C  could  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state  by 
dipping  a  nickel  plate  into  a  solution  of  the  active  deposit.    He 

•  Curie  and  Daune,  C.  i?.  188.  p.  748,  1904. 

t  Bronson,  Amer,  Joum.  ScL  20,  p.  60,  1905;  PhiL  Mag.  11,  p.  143,  1906. 

+  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Ann,  d,  Phyt,  21,  p.  609,  1906. 

§  Fajans  and  Makower,  Phil,  Mag.  28,  p.  292,  1912. 

i;   Moseley  and  Makower,  Phil.  Mag.  28,  p.  302,  1912. 

t  V.  Lerch,  Ann.  d.  Phyt.  20,  p.  345,  1906. 


:iy]  AcnvE  deposit  of  radium  489 

Dund  that  radium  C  emitted  a,  13  and  7  rays  and  decayed  with 
period  of  19*5  minutes. 

Hahn  and  Makower  and  Russ  (see  Section  73)  showed  that 
adium  B  could  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state  by  recoil  from  radium  A, 
Bd  that  radium  C  could  be  obtained  by  recoil  from  radium  B. 
Iiis  new  method  of  separation  of  the  products  has  been  of  great 
ssistance  in  making  an  accurate  comparison  of  experiment  with 
heory. 

In  the  calculations  of  this  Chapter,  the  periods  of  radium  A, 
I  and  C  will  be  taken  as  3,  26*8,  and  195  minutes  respectively. 
Ime  Curie*  states  that  the  decay  curve  of  the  active  deposit 
etween  5  and  7  hours  after  removal  was  found  to  be  27*2  minutes 
nd  between  7  and  10  hours  26*8  minutes.  For  this  reason  the 
alue  26'8  minutes  will  be  used  for  the  period  of  B.  The  periods 
f  B  and  C  are  slightly  higher  than  those  found  by  Bronson  by 
Qalysis  of  the  decay  curves,  viz.  26  minutes  and  19  minutes 
^spectively. 

The  sequence  of  changes  of  the  emanation  under  consideration 
ad  the  radiations  emitted  are  shown  graphically  below. 

a  a  J3y  o.$y 

/      r     jf         r// , 

Emanation ^  Bad  A )  Rad.  B >   Bad.  C >.... 

xla  3*85  days  3  mins.  26*8  mins.  19*6  mins. 

^.°H  X  =  2-085 X  10 -•»    X,  =  3-85xlO"3    X2-4-33xlO-*    X3-6-93xl0'* 

,'e  of  \ 

ays    \       4-16  cm.  476  cm.  .  —  6*94  cm. 

C.)  J 

he  half- value  periods,  the  value  of  \  (sec.)~*,  and  the  ranges  of 

le  a  particles  emitted  are  added  for  comparison. 

194.  Decay  curves  for  a  rays.  The  decay  curves  are  very 
ifferent  in  shape  according  to  the  type  of  rays,  whether  a,  /S  or  7, 
sed  for  measurement.  It  is  convenient  to  consider  the  decay 
urves  for  a  very  short  and  for  a  very  long  exposure,  measured 
y  a  or  )8  or  7  rays.  We  shall  first  consider  the  decay  curves 
leasured  by  the  a  rays  when  the  body  has  been  exposed  for  a 
efinite  time  to  a  constant  quantity  of  emanation.     It  will  be 

*  Mme  Curie,  RadioactiviU,  2,  p.  822,  1910. 


490  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUK  [CB. 

shown  later  that  these  curves  dififer  slightly  from  the  practicit 
case  where  the  body  is  exposed  to  a  naturally  decajdng  source  of 
emanation  removed  from  the  radium. 

(1)  Very  short  exposure  (a  few  seconds).  This  case  has 
already  been  considered  in  Section  166  as  an  example  of  the 
method  of  deducing  the  activity  curves.  The  a  ray  activity  at 
any  time  is  due  to  the  a  rays  from  radium  A,  plus  the  rays  fipom 
radium  C.  If  Po  be  the  number  of  atoms  of  radium  A  deposited, 
P,  Q,  R  the  number  of  atoms  of  A,  B,  C  respectively  after  removal 
for  a  time  t,  the  activity  is  proportional  to 

(1)  XiP-h\,iJ  when  the  decay  is  observed  by  counting 

scintillations, 

(2)  AXiP-f  X,i2  when  the  decay  is  observed  by  the  electric 

method. 

P  =  P^er^  and  R  is  given  by  equation  6,  Section  159,  while  i  is 
a  constant. 

Since  the  a  rays  from  radium  C  have  a  longer  range  than   | 
those  from  radium  A,  the  value  of  k  varies  with  the  dimensions  of 
the   ionisation   chamber.     Bronson   for   example   found   k  =  1*26 
when  the  active  wire  was  placed  in  a  cylinder  of  25  cms.  radius. 
In  this  case,  the  average  a  particle  from  radium  A  produced  more 
ionisation  than  that  from  radium  C.     With  a  testing  vessel  of  ?i 
sufficient  dimensions  to  absorb  the  long  range  a  particles  froni'  J 
radium  C,  the  value  of  k  would  be  less  than  unity.     The  foUowinf  \ 
numbers  given  by  Bronson*  show  the  agreement  between  the  ' 
observed  and  theoretical  values  of  the  activity  for  a  short  exposure 
to   the    emanation.     The    theoretical    values   in   this   case  were 
calculated  by  Bronson  on  the  assumption  that  the  three  periods 
under  consideration  were  3,  26  and  19  minutes.     The  theoretical 
values  are  only  slightly  different  from  those  calculated  for  the 
accepted  periods  3,  26*8,  19*5  minutes  respectively.     The  value 
of  k  was  taken  as  1*26.     The  curve  of  decay  for  a  short  exposure 
analysed   into   its   constituents,   has  been    shown    in    Fig.  102, 
Section  166. 

It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  between  25  and  40  minutes,  the 
a  ray  activity  remains  nearly  constant. 

♦  Bronson,  Phil.  Mag,  la,  p.  73,  1906. 


] 


ACTIVE .  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM 


491 


-  The  activity  after  several  hours  decreases  to  half  value  in 
^fcilxMit  27  minutes,  %,e.  according  to  the  period  of  radium  B.  These 
naeasurements  of  the  decay  of  activity  were  made  by  means  of  & 
IroDson  resistance  (Section  43),  which  was  carefully  calibrated. 

Since  the  periods  of  decay  of  the  products  were  determined 
ith  the  same  apparatus  and  using  the  same  calibration  constants, 
t^e  close  agreement  between  the  observed  and  calculated  numbers 
chords  the  strongest  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  the  theory. 

Decay  of  a  ray  activity.     Short  exposure. 


Time  in 

• 

Activity 

Activity 

1 

'    Time  in 

Activity 

Activity 

minntes 

obsenred 

calculated    | 
100 

minutes 

observed 

calculated 

0 

60 

3-66 

3-()5 

2 

64-0 

63-2 

60 

.  3-27 

3-26 

4 

39-9 

40-2 

70 

2-81 

2-84 

6 

26^9 

25-9 

80 

236 

2-40  . 

9 

13-8 

14^0 

100 

1-60 

1-64  . 

16 

6-73 

6^72 

i       120 

1-03 

1-07 

21 

412 

4-11 

140 

•66 

•68 

26 

3-92 

3^91 

160 

•41 

•43 

30 

3-92 

3-93 

180 

•26 

•26 

40 

391 

3-91 

1 

200 

•16 

•16 

(2)    Long  exposure.     After  exposure  to  a  constant  supply  of 
emanation  for  at  least  5  hours,  the  products  A,  B  and  C  are  in 
equilibrium   and   XiPo  =  \iQo  =  ^8-Ro«     The  activity  as   before   is 
proportional  to  kXiP-^X^R  where  P  =  Po«~^'*  and  R  is  given  by 
equation  12,  Section  160.     The  calculated  decay  curve  is  shown 
in  Fig.  110,  curve  A-^B-^-C  assuming  A;=  1.     The  various  con- 
stituents which  make  up  the  resultant  activity  curve  are  shown 
clearly  in  the  figure.     Curve  A  A  gives  the  activity  contributed 
by  radium  A,  curve  LL  the  activity  contributed  by  radium  C. 
The  latter  may  be  divided  into  two  parts,  (1)  the  activity  (curve 
CC)  due  to  radium  C  present  at  the  moment  of  removal  which 
decays  exponentially  with  a  period  of  19*5  minutes,  and  (2)  the 
activity  (curve  BB)  contributed  by  the  subsequent  change   of 
radium  B  into  radium  C.     The  activity  due  to  the  latter  passes 
through  a  maximum  after  35  minutes.    After  20  minutes  A  has 
practically  disappeared  and  the  activity  is  then  proportional  to 


492 


ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM 


[CH. 


X,i2.  Bronson  (loc.  cit)  has  shown,  as  in  the  case  of  short  ex- 
posure, that  the  experimental  and  calculated  values  are  in  good 
agreement. 

If  the  decay  curve  is  obtained  by  covering  the  active  body 
with  an  absorbing  screen  of  sufficient  thickness  to  absorb  completely 
the  a  rays  from  radium  A,  but  to  allow  some  of  the  a  particles 
fr*om  radium  C  to  escape,  the  a  ray  activity  at  any  time  after 
removal  is  accurately  proportional  to  X,i2.  The  curve  of  decay  is 
then  shown  by  curve  LL,  Fig.  110. 

100 


80 


60 


40 


20 


• 

^*^ 

• 

r 

sO 

^8 

■fti^ 

^"^^■^■■■^ 

> 

<1 

.•^^^ 

■ 

^^^ 

10  20  30  40  50 

Time  in  minutei 

Fig.  110. 


60 


70 


80 


(3)  Any  time  T  of  exposure.  As  in  the  other  cases,  the 
activity  at  any  time  t  after  removal  is  proportional  to  ArXjP  +X,iJ 
where  P  is  given  by  equation  14,  and  R  by  equation  17,  Section 
161.  The  decay  curve  for  any  time  of  exposure  can  be  calcu- 
lated from  the  equations.  In  this  way,  with  increasing  time  of 
exposure,  a  family  of  curves  is  obtained  which  progressively 
changes  from  the  shape  of  the  curve  for  a  short  exposure  to  that  for 
a  long  exposure.  Examples  of  such  decay  curves  have  been  given 
by  Miss  Brooks*,  P.  Curie  and  Dannef  and  H.  W.  Schmidt  J.  The 
activity  of  A  relative  to  C  decreases  with  increase  of  time  of 

*  Miss  Brooks,  Phil.  Mag,  8,  p.  373,  1904. 
t  P.  Curie  and  Danne,  C.  R.  136,  p.  364,  1903. 
X  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Ann,  d,  Phys,  21,  p.  609,  1906. 


IV]  ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  493 

cposure,  so  that  the  initial  rapid  drop  due  to  A  becomes  of 
datively  less  importance.  For  an  exposure  of  more  than  4  hours, 
le  curves  are  practically  identical  with  that  due  to  a  longer  time 
*  exposure. 

195.  Decay  cunres  for  )3  rays.  Short  exposure.  We  have 
jen  that  Schmidt  observed  that  radium  B  emits  some  soft  ^  rays 
\  well  as  a  small  number  of  /8  rays  of  about  the  same  penetrating 
>wer  as  those  from  radium  C. 

The  activity  at  any  time  t  after  a  short  exposure  is  consequently 
roportional  to  ArXaQ  +  Xj-B  where  Q  and  R  are  given  by  equations 
>)  and  (6)  respectively  (Section  159). 

The  value  of  k  varies  very  widely  according  to  the  thickness 
f  screen  placed  over  the  active  matter.  For  screens  just  thick 
aough  to  absorb  the  a  rays  k—\  nearly ;  for  screens  suflBciently 
lick  to  absorb  most  of  the  soft  /8  rays,  A;  =  '1  about. 

We  have  shown  (Fig.  99)  that  for  a  short  exposure,  the  amount 
f  radium  B  reaches  a  maximum  in  10  minutes,  while  the  amount 
f  radium  C  reaches  a  maximum  in  35  minutes.  If  radium  B 
mitted  no  /8  rays,  the  curve  of  activity,  measured  by  )8  rays, 
ould  be  identical  with  the  curve  CC  (Fig.  99)  showing  the 
ariation  of  the  amount  of  C  with  time.  In  consequence  of  the 
mission  of  /8  rays  from  radium  B,  H.  W.  Schmidt*  showed  that 
tie  time  of  reaching  a  maximum  depends  upon  the  thickness  of 
jreen  placed  over  the  active  deposit.  For  a  thick  screen,  the 
f  ray  curve  is  not  very  different  from  the  curve  CC  (Fig.  99). 
b  rises,  however,  more  rapidly  at  the  beginning  and  reaches 
maximum  somewhat  earlier. 

The  relative  /8  ray  activity  due  to  radium  B  and  C  under 
iflferent  conditions  is  best  examined  by  obtaining  pure  radium  B 
y  recoil  from  radium  A,  using  a  short  time  of  exposure.  Under 
ich  conditions,  radium  B  is  obtained  nearly  pure,  and  the 
ariation  of  its  activity  with  time  can  be  conveniently  studied. 
Ve  have  then  to  consider  the  case  of  two  successive  changes 
iscussed  in  Section  159.  Taking  P  and  Q  as  the  amounts  of 
idium  B  and  C  respectively  at  any  time  t,  the  ^  ray  activity  is 
roportional  to  k\iP  ■\-\^Q  where  Xj  and  Xj  are  taken  as  the 

♦  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Ann.  d.  Phyt.  21,  p.  609,  1906, 


494 


ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  BADItJM 


[ca 


constants  of  B  and  0,  and  P  and  Q  are  given  by  equations  (1) 
and  (4). 

Fajans  and  Makower*  in  this  way  examined  the  fraction  of 
the  ^  rays  supplied  by  radium  B  compared  with  radium  C.  The 
variation  of  ^  ray  activity  with  time  for  different  thicknesses  of 
absorbing  Screens  is  shown  in  Fig.  111. 

The  maximum  j3  ray  activity  is  for  each  curve  taken  as  100. 
Curve  A  shows  the  rise  of  activity  measured  by  the  o  rays.    The 


100 

• 

80 

0 

■ 

E^ 

^^ 

^ 

^ 

^^^^0^ 

^^^^0^^^^ 

!^ 

x60 

^^^ 

^ 

0^ 

5^ 

^ 

^ 

40 

^"^"^ 

^ 

, 

'     20 

^ 

^ 



• 

• 

0 

( 

>            /) 

^              e 

1 

i 

5                 t 

D                  \i 

• 

(^                   le 

Curve  A.  No  aluminium.  Curve  E.  0*21  mm.  of  aluminium. 

,,     B.  0*0140  mm.  of  aluminium.  ,,      F.  0*36    „     „ 

„      C.  0*0306     .,     „           „  „      G.  0*73     „ 

,,     D.  0*0446 


♦f      »f 


t( 


Fig.  111. 

curve  does  not  start  exactly  from  zero,  probably  on  account  of  the 
relatively  large  ionisation  supplied  by  the  soft  /8  rays  from 
radium  B.  Curves  B  and  (7,  for  thicknesses  of  aluminium  not 
suflBcient  to  stop  the  a  rays,  show  that  the  ionisation  supplied 
by  )8  rays  from  radium  B  becomes  relatively  more  important 
Curve  D  shows  the  variation  of  /8  ray  activity  with  time  when 

*. Fajans  and  Makower,  Phil,  Mag,  28,  p.  292,  1912. 


KIV]  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  '495 

the  a  rays  are  completely  absorbed  by  the  aluminium  screen.  It 
Is  seen  that  the  curve  starts  to  deci-ease  from  the  origin,  showing 
i^hat  a  larger  fraction  of  the  fi  ray  effect  is  due  to  radium  B. 
With  increasing  thickness  of  aluminium,  the  yS  rays  from  radium  B 
ire  relatively  more  absorbed  than  those  from  radium  C.  This 
Ljs  shown  by  curves  E,  F  and  0.  The  effect  of  the  ^  rays  from 
radium  B  compared  with  those  from  radium  C  becomes  relatively 
smaller  with  increasing  thickness  up  to  0*7  mm.  of  aluminium. 
For  all  thicknesses  greater  than  this,  the  rise  curves  agreewith 
cune  (?,  which  shows  an  initial  activity  about  10  per  cent,  of  the 
maximum.  These  experiments  show  that  radium  B  not  only 
emits  some  very  easily  absorbed  ^  rays  but  also  a  small  quantity 
of  more  penetrating  fi  Tdi,yB  which  have  about  the  same  coefficient 
of  absorption  as  the  average  /8  rays  from  radium  C.  Fajans  and 
]iIakower  deduced  that  the  rays  from  radium  B  could  be  divided 
into  two  groups  whose  coefficients  of  absorption  in  aluminium  were 
91  (cms.)-i  and  18  (cms.)-^ 

/8  ray  curves.  Long  exposure.  The  activity  for  a  long  exposure 
measured  by  ^  rays  is  proportional  to  iXsQ  +  X,B  where  Q  and  R 
are  given  by  equations  (11)  and  (12),  Section  160.  The  shape  of 
the  decay  curve  will  obviously  depend  on  the  value  of  k  which 
is  determined  by  the  thickness  of  the  absorbing  screen.  By 
choosing  a  suitable  value  of  k,  Bronson  {loc.  dt)  showed  that  the 
decay  curve  obtained  was  in  good  agreement  with  the  theory. 

196.  Decay  curvei  for  7  rays.  Long  exposure,  Moseley 
^nd  Makower*  showed  that  radium  B  emits  some  soft  7  rays, 
which  produce  about  13  per  cent,  of  the  ionisation  due  to  the 
7  rays  from  radium  C  in  equilibrium  with  it,  when  measured 
through  3  mm.  of  lead. 

The  activity  for  a  long  exposure  is  thus  proportional  to 
tXjQ  +  Xs-ft  where  k  is  not  more  than  '13  under  normal  experi- 
nental  conditions.  By  using  an  absorption  screen  of  lead  2  cms. 
hick,  the  7  rays  from  radium  B  are  completely  absorbed  and  the 
ctivity  is  then  proportional  to  \j7?.  The  variation  of  activity 
irith  time  is  thus  shown  by  curve  LL  (Fig,  110).  The  presence 
f  some  7  rays  from  radium  B  does  not,  under  ordinary  conditions, 

*  Moseley  and  Makower,  Phil.  Mag.  23,  p.  802,  1912. 


496 


ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM 


[CH. 


very  markedly  alter  the  decay  curve  based  on  the  assumption 
originally  held  that  the  7  rays  arise  entirely  from  radium  C. 

Moseley  and  Makower  found  that  the  effect  of  the  7  rays 
from  radium  B  shows  itself  most  markedly  in  the  initial  part  of 
the  rise  curve  measured  by  7  rays  through  3  mm.  of  lead.  The 
emanation  freed  from  active  deposit  was  introduced  into  a  small 
glass  tube  which  was  immediately  sealed.  The  variation  of  7  raj 
activity  with  time  for  the  first  10  minutes  is  shown  by  curve  F 
(Fig.  112).     The  theoretical  curve  obtained  on  the  assumption 


1-0 
1-8 

1 

/ 

I 

/ 

/ 

■J 

r 

j 

/ 

/ 

/ 

1 

y 

f 

4  6 

Minutes 

Fig.  112. 


8 


10 


that  the  7  rays  arise  entirely  from  radium  C  is  shown  for  com- 
parison in  curve  E.  The  emission  of  7  rays  from  radium  B  offers 
an  explanation  of  the  similar  curves  given  on  page  394, 2nd  Edition, 
Radio-activity. 

Recovery  cunrei.  For  exposure  to  a  constant  supply  of 
emanation,  the  curve  of  rise  of  activity  due  to  the  active 
deposit  is  complementary  to  the  decay  curve  for  a  long  expoeuie 
(Section  194).  Taking  ifc  =  1,  the  dark  line  of  Fig.  113  represente 
the  rise  of  activity  to  a  maximum  of  100  measured  by  the  a  rays. 


^] 


ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM 


497 


le  a  ray  decay  curve  for  a  long  exposure  is  added  for  comparison, 
d  also  the  corresponding  curves  for  rise  and  decay  measured  by 
netrating  7  rays.  In  the  latter  case,  the  rise  curve  is  given  for 
e  7  rays  after  traversing  2  cms.  of  lead  which  cuts  oflF  the  7  rays 
>m  radium  B. 

197.     Practical  casei  of  decay   and  recovery  curves. 

e  have  so  far  for  simplicity  of  calculation,  considered  the  rise 

d  fall  of  the  activity  of  a  body  exposed  to  a  constant  quantity 

emanation.    This  corresponds  to  the  case  where  the  body  is 


60  80 

Time  in  minuUi 
Fig.  113. 


120 


140 


posed  in  the  air  space  above  a  radium  solution  which  is  in 
uilibrium  with  the  emanation.     In  practice,  however,  it  is  usual 

expose  the  body  to  be  made  active  in  the  emanation  removed 
>m  the  radium.  Since  this  is  a  decaying  source,  we  have  the 
se  of  **  transient "  equilibrium  discussed  in  Section  163.  The 
tive  deposit  after  about  6  hours,  is  in  equilibrium  with  the 
lanation  and  diminishes  afterwards  at  the  same  rate  as  the 
lauation  itself 

We  have  shown  in  Section  163  that  the  amounts  of  radium  A, 

32 


R.   B«~A. 


498  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM 

B  and  C  are  '054  per  cent.,  '54  per  cent.,  0*89  per  ca 
tively  greater  than  corresponds  to  the  true  equilibriun 
amount  of  emanation  present  at  the  moment  under  com 
In  order  to  obtain  the  true  curve  of  decay,  it  is  r 
consider  the  case  of  four  changes.  Taking  Xi,  X^,  Xj,  X 
the  emanation,  radium  A,  B,  and  C  respectively,  it  f 
Sections  159  and  163,  that  the  number  Nt  of  atoms  • 
at  any  time  t  is  given  by 


•972      (>      \)(\-\i)(K'-'\ 

the  other  three  terms  in  e"^',  e"^»',  e~^^  included 
summation  can  be  written  down  from  symmetry. 

The  maximum  value  is  attained  after  258  minul 
factor  '972  is  introduced  so  that  the  right-hand  si 
unity  after  that  interval.  Rutherford  and  Chadwick* 
experimentally  that  the  maximum  7  ray  activity  is  att; 
time  calculated  from  theory. 

The  decay  of  the  amount  of  radium  C  is  similar 
the  equation 

It  can  easily  be  shown  that  this  expression  can  be  d< 
the  equation  (1)  given  above.  Suppose  for  illustratic 
emanation  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  in  a  tube  A 
to  a  tube  B,  The  amount  of  radium  C  remaining  in  t 
the  amount  formed  in  tube  5,  must  be  equal  at  any 
amount  of  radium  C  which  would  have  existed  in  tu 
emanation  had  not  been  removed. 

The  rise  and  decay  of  radium  C  with  time  have  bee 
from  the  equations  (1)  and  (2)  by  Moseley  and  Mak 
half-value  periods  of  the  emanation,  radium  A,  B  and 
as  8*85  days,  3,  26*8  and  195  minutes  respectively, 
are  shown  in  columns  II  and  IV  of  the  following  tab] 
rise  curve,  the  maximum  amount  of  radium  C  is  re 
258  minutes  and  is  taken  as  unity.  For  the  decay 
initial  amount  of  mdium  C  is  taken  as  unity. 

♦  Ratherford  and  Chadwick,  Proc.  Phya.  Soc.  24,  p.  141,  1 


ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM 


499 


timbers  in  column  IV  which  refer  to  a  long  exposure 
Cl)  the  relative  amount  of  radium  C  at  any  time  after 
'^X)m  the  emanation ;  (2)  the  decay  of  the  7  rays  from 
♦  provided  the  rays  from  radium  B  are  absorbed  by  a 
of  more  than  2*3  cms.  of  lead;  (3)  the  decay  of  the 
Mvity  of  the  active  deposit  25  minutes  afber  the  removal 


II 

1 
TIT 

IV 

V 

Calculated  rise 

Calcolatr    rise 

Caloalated  fall 

Calculated  fall 

of  Kadium  C 

of  ionis.      n  by 

of  Radium  C 

of  ionisation  by 

from 

7  rays  through 

after  removal 

7  rays  through 

emanation 

3  mm.  of  lead 

from  emanation 

3  mm.  of  lead 

0-0000 

0-000 

1-0000 

1000 

•000252 

•001 4:i 

•9995 

•998 

•000801 

•00323 

•9989 

•997 

•001770 

•00570 

•9978 

•994 

•003239 

•00885 

•9963 

•991 

1 

•005244 

•0126 

•9942 

•987 

•01097 

•0221 

•9884 

•978 

•01899 

•0338 

•9805 

•966 

02925 

•0475 

•9703 

•953 

04154 

•0630 

•9582 

•938 

06343 

•0890 

•9368 

•912 

08876 

•118 

•9120 

•884 

■1368 

•170 

-8650 

•883 

1897 

•225 

•8134 

•779 

' 

3015 

•338 

•7046 

•669 

4118 

•446 

•5985 

•566 

5125 

•543 

•4987 

•469 

•6021 

•629 

•4112 

•385 

7440 

•763 

•2719 

•253 

•8775 

•888 

•1396 

•129 

9468 

•952 

•06913 

•0639 

9800 

•982 

•03347 

•0308 

•9994 

1-00 

•00752 

•00691 

1-000 

1-00 

•00477 

•00438 

^^^^ 

•00352 

manation.  The  initial  decay  is  complicated  by  the  presence 
in  A,  but  this  has  practically  disappeared  after  25  minutes, 
ivity  due  to  radium  C  is  at  that  moment  0*865  of  its  initial 


s  often  convenient  to  deduce  the  amount  of  radium  C  by 
ison  of  the  7  ray  effect  of  the  active  deposit  measured  by 

32—2 


500  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  [CE 

the  7  rays  through  about  3  mm.  of  lead.  In  this  case  the  7  ray 
effect  of  radium  B  is  11*5  per  cent.,  and  of  radium  C  88*5  per  cent, 
of  the  total.  The  results  calculated  on  this  basis  given  by  Moseley 
and  Makower  are  shown  in  columns  III  and  V  of  the  table.  It 
will  be  seen  that  the  decay  and  rise  curves  differ  sensibly  from 
those  deduced  on  the  assumption,  ordinarily  made,  that  the  7  rays 
arise  entirely  from  radium  C. 

In  order  to  determine  by  7  ray  measurements  the  amount  of 
radium  C  present,  it  is  desirable  to  absorb  the  7  rays  from 
radium  B  by  using  a  screen  of  lead  at  least  2  cms.  thick.  The 
amount  of  radium  C  is  then  proportional  to  the  ionisation  pro- 
duced by  the  7  rays. 

198.  Complex  nature  of  radium  C.  In  all  the  calculations 
previously  given,  it  has  been  supposed  that  radium  C  is  a  simple 
product  of  period  19*5  minutes,  which  emits  a,  /8  and  7  rays  in  its 
transformation.  Since  most  products  emit  either  a  rays  or  /8  and 
7  rays,  it  seemed  possible  that  radium  C  might  be  a  complex 
substance,  one  component  emitting  a  rays  and  the  other  /3  and  7 
rays.  In  order  to  examine  this  point,  Hahn  and  Meitner*  separated 
a  large  quantity  of  radium  C,  by  placing  a  nickel  plate  in  the 
solution  of  the  active  deposit  of  radium,  and  tested  the  nature  of 
the  recoil  radiations  from  the  plate.  By  placing  a  negatively 
charged  conductor  above  the  active  plate  in  order  to  collect  the 
recoil  atoms,  they  obtained  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  short 
lived  product  of  period  estimated  between  2  and  2*5  minutes.  The 
activity  of  the  new  product  measured  by  the  electric  method  was 
very  minute,  compared  with  that  due  to  the  radium  C  on  the 
nickel  plate  from  which  it  was  derived. 

Fajansf,  using  larger  quantities  of  emanation,  exfimined 
this  effect  more  in  detail.  He  found  that  a  new  substance  was 
separated  by  recoil,  which  emitted  8  rays  but  no  a  rays,  and  which 
was  half  transformed  in  1*38  minutes.  The  experiments  were,  to 
some  extent,  complicjited  by  a  deposit  of  radium  C  itself  on  the 
collecting  plate,  due  probably  to  a  slight  volatilisation  of  radium  C 
at  ordinary  temperatures. 

•  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phys,  ZeiL  10,  p.  697,  1909. 
t  Fajans,  Phyt.  Zeit,  12,  p.  369,  1911. 


X\y]  ACTIVE   DEPOSIT   OF   RADIUM  501 

The  /8  rays  were  of  about  the  same  penetrating  power  as  those 
emitted  by  radium  C.  The  amount  of  the  new  product  obtained 
by  recoil  was  small,  for  it  gave  only  about  1/6000  of  the  fi  ray 
activity  due  to  the  radium  C  from  which  it  was  derived. 
These  experiments  show  clearly  that  radium  C  is  complex.  It  is 
convenient  to  speak  of  the  two  components  of  radium  C  as  radium 
Ci  and  radium  Ca.  The  latter  refers  to  the  new  )8  ray  product  of 
period  1*38  minutes. 

Fajans  showed  that  pure  radium  C  produced  radium  D  by 
recoil  in  about  the  amount  to  be  expected  for  a  vigorous  a  ray 
lecoil.  The  small  amount  of  radium  C,  obtained  by  recoil  indi- 
cated that  it  could  not  be  a  direct  product  of  radium  C. 

By  an  examination  of  the  rise  curve  of  radium  C  from  radium 
B,  Fajans  and  Makower*  showed  that  the  new  product  could  not 
come  before  radium  Q.  From  general  consideration  of  the 
evidence,  Fajans  concluded  that  radium  Ca  could  not  be  a 
product  in  the  main.  line  of  descent  but  must  be  a  branch 
product.  On  this  view  the  atoms  of  radium  C  may  be  supposed 
to  break  up  in  two  ways.  The  greater  fraction  is  transformed 
directly  into  radium  D  and  a  small  fraction,  about  1/6000,  into 
radium  Ca. 

Such  a  deduction  was  of  great  interest,  for  it  was  the  first  time 
that  definite  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  branch  product  had 
l)een  obtained.  On  general  grounds  it  seems  not  unlikely  that 
atoms  of  a  single  product  may  break  up  in  different  ways  (see 
Section  209). 

In  order  to  explain  the  small  quantity  of  actinium  in  uranium 
Diinerals,  the  writer  early  suggested  that  actinium  was  not  in  the 
main  line  of  descent  of  the  uranium-radium  series  but  belonged 
to  a  branch  series.  We  have  seen  in  Section  174,  that  Antonoflf 
obtained  evidence  of  the  existence  of  another  branch  product  (Ur  Y) 
in  the  transformation  of  uranium.  There  are  strong  reasons  for 
believing  that  not  only  radium  C  but  also  thorium  C  is  transformed 
in  an  abnormal  manner.  Such  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  of 
transformations  are  of  unusvial  interest,  for  they  may  help  to  throw 
some  light  on  the  mechanism  of  the  transformations. 

*  Fajans  and  Makower,  Phil,  Mag.  28,  p.  292, 1912. 


502  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  [CB. 

199.  loniiation  due  to  the  emanation  and  acttii 
deposit.  The  total  ionisation  in  air  due  to  one  curie  of  emana- 
tion or  to  one  curie  of  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  its  producti 
radium  A,  B  and  C  can  be  simply  calculated  from  the  data  given 
in  Section  67.  One  curie  of  emanation  emits  3*4  x  10*®  a  particl« 
per  second,  and  the  total  number  of  ions  due  to  one  a  particle  from 
it  is  1*74  X  10*.  Consequently  the  total  number  of  ions  produced 
per  second  by  the  radiation  from  one  curie  of  emanation  by  itself 
is  5*9  X  10".  Taking  the  charge  on  each  ion  as  4*65  x  10~**  imita, 
the  corresponding  saturation  current  is  2*75  x  10*  e.s.  units  or 
9*2  X  10"*  ampere.  In  a  similar  way,  taking  into  account  the 
ionisation  due  to  radium  A  and  radium  C,  it  can  be  shown  that 
one  curie  of  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  gives  a 
total  ionisation  current  of  8*9  x  10*  e.s.  units. 

Measurements  of  the  ionisation  due  to  one  curie  of  emanation 
have  been  made  by  Duane*  and  by  Duane  and  Labordef  in 
cylindrical  vessels  of  different  diameters.  In  this  case  it  is 
necessary  to  determine  the  average  fraction  of  the  range  of  the  a 
particles  which  is  effective  in  producing  ionisation.  Making  the 
necessary  corrections,  it  was  found  that  o*ne  curie  of  emanation 
gave  a  saturation  current  of  2*5  x  10*  e.s.  unitsj.  The  value  of 
the  saturation  current  due  to  one  curie  of  emanation  was  re- 
determined by  Mache  and  St.  Meyer§  and  found  to  be  2*67  x  10* 
e.s.  units  in  terms  of  the  Vienna  Standard.  Considering  the 
difficulties  of  the  experiments,  these  results  are  in  excellent  accord 
with  the  calculated  value. 

200.  Effect  of  temperature  and  other  conditions.  Miss 
Gates  (see  Section  153)  first  showed  that  the  active  deposit  of 
radium  was  driven  off  from  a  platinum  wire  above  a  red  heat,  and 
was  deposited  on  the  surface  of  a  cold  cylinder  surrounding  it 
These  results  were  extended  by  Curie  and  Danne,  who  examined 
the  decay  of  the  activity  of  wires  which  were  exposed  for  a  short 
time  to  temperatures  varying  between  IS""  and  1350**.  They 
examined  the  decay  of  the  active  matter  left  on  the  wire  itself, 

*  Duane,  C,  R.  140,  pp.  581,  786,  1905. 
t  Duane  and  Laborde,  C.  R.  IW,  p.  1421,  1910. 
X  See  Mme  Curie,  Radioactiviti,  2,  p.  365,  1910. 
§  Mache  and  St.  Meyer,  Phyt.  ZeiU  IS,  p.  320,  1912. 


XIV]  ACnVB  DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM  503 

and  also  of  the  active  matter  which  had  been  volatilised  from  it. 
They  found  that  the  variations  of  activity  were  much  influenced 
by  the  temperature  to  which  the  wire  was  exposed.  Bronson 
showed  that  the  results  obtained  by  Curie  and  Danne  could  be 
explained  by  supposing  that  radium  B  was  more  volatile  than 
radium  C.  After  heating  a  wire  to  a  high  temperature,  the 
radium  B  was  completely  volatilised  and  the  a  ray  activity  of  the 
wire  then  decayed  exponentially  with  a  period  of  19  minutes, 
which  was  taken  as  the  period  of  radium  C.  No  evidence  was 
obtained  of  any  alteration  of  the  rate  of  transformation  of  radium  B 
or  C  at  high  temperatures.  In  another  series  of  experiments, 
Bronson*  showed  that  the  7  ray  activity  due  to  some  radium 
enclosed  in  a  quartz  tube  was  not  appreciably  altered  by  exposure 
to  temperatures  up  to  1300°  C. 

The  eflfect  of  temperature  on  the  decay  of  the  products  of 
radium  have  been  investigated  by  many  observers  including 
Makower"f",  Makower  and  RussJ,  H.  W.  Schmidt§,  Schmidt  and 
Cermak||,  Englerf ,  and  Russell**.  All  observers  agree  that  the 
7  ray  activity  due  to  the  active  deposit  alone  or  to  the  emanation 
in  equilibrium  with  the  latter  is  not  altered  by  exposure  to  high 
temperatures  up  to  1300°  C.  When  the  source  of  active  matter 
was  emanation  enclosed  in  a  quartz  tube,  it  was  found  that  the 
period  of  decay  of  the  emanation  when  tested  in  the  cold  was  not 
altered  by  the  effect  of  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  marked 
variations  have  been  observed  when  the  activity  is  measured  by 
the  yS  rays.  The  results  obtained  by  different  observers  were 
very  conflicting,  some  finding  that  rise  of  temperature  caused  a 
temporary  increase  of  the  activity,  and  others  a  temporary  decrease. 
These  anomalies  have  been  examined  in  detail  by  Russell  (loc. 
cit.)  using  radium  emanation  in  small  quartz  tubes  as  a  source 
of  radiation.  He  found  that  the  effects  obtained  by  various  ob- 
servers could  be  completely  explained  by  taking  into  account  the 

♦  BronsoD,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  78,  p.  494,  1907. 

t  Makower,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  77,  p.  241,  1906. 

X  Makower  and  Bass,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  79,  p.  158,  1907. 

§  H.  W.  Schmidt,  Phys.  Zeit.  9,  p.  113,  1908. 

i|  H.  V7.  Schmidt  and  Cermak,  Phyi.  Zeit.  11,  p.  793,  1910. 

^  Engler,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  26,  p.  483,  1908. 

••  Bassell,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  86,  p.  240,  1912. 


504  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  [CH. 

distribution  of  the  radio-active  products  at  various  temperatura. 
He  obtained  definite  evidence  that  in  a  quartz  tube  the  radium C 
began  to  volatilise  at  a  much  lower  temperature  than  had 
previously  been  supposed.  The  distribution  of  the  active  matter 
throughout  the  volume  of  the  quartz  tube  produces  marked 
effects  on  the  ^  ray  activity  measured  by  an  electroscope  in  the 
ordinary  way.  For  example,  when  the  tube  is  cold,  the  active 
deposit  is  mainly  distributed  on  the  walls  of  the  tube.  As  the 
temperature  is  raised  the  radium  B  and  C  commence  to  volatilise 
and  an  increasing  fraction  is  distributed  throughout  the  volume 
of  the  tube.  At  600°  C.  both  radium  B  and  C  and  probably 
radium  A  are  completely  volatilised  and  are  uniformly  distributed 
throughout  the  volume  of  the  heated  tube.  This  change  in  dis- 
tribution produces  a  marked  effect  on  the  /8  ray  activity,  for  even 
in  a  small  spherical  bulb  of  uniform  thickness  the  average 
absorption  of  the  ^  rays  in  passing  through  the  quartz  depends 
on  whether  the  active  matter  is  on  the  walls  of  the  tube  or 
distributed  throughout  its  volume.  The  absorption  is  always  leas 
when  the  active  matter  is  volatilised.  If  one  end  of  the  quartz 
tube  is  kept  cool,  the  active  matter  at  temperatures  below  600° 
is  concentrated  at  the  cold  end.  In  this  way,  the  whole  of  the 
active  deposit  can  be  shifted  from  one  end  of  the  tube  to  the 
other  by  suitably  varying  the  temperature  of  the  two  ends.  This 
effect  can  be  simply  shown  by  observing  the  variations  of  the 
luminosity  at  different  points  of  the  tube  by  means  of  a  screen  of 
barium  platinocyanide.  There  are  consequently  marked  variations 
of  the  fi  ray  activity  according  to  the  experimental  conditions 
up  to  a  temperature  of  600"*.  Above  that  temperature  the  active 
deposit  exists  in  a  gaseous  form,  and  the  /8  ray  activity  due  to 
it  does  not  alter  by  further  increase  of  temperature.  Russell 
showed  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  activity  or  period  of 
transformation  of  the  emanation  or  of  its  products,  radium  A,  B 
and  C,  were  in  any  way  altered  by  high  temperatures.  The 
marked  irregularities  which  are  observed  under  different  con- 
ditions are  wholly  due  to  the  differences  of  partition  of  the 
radium  A,  B  and  C  at  different  temperatures  and  consequent 
alterations  in  the  average  absorption  of  the  fi  rays  by  the  walls  of 
the  vessel. 


XJV]  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  505 

Rutherford  and  Petavel*  introduced  some  radium  emanation 
into  a  high  pressure  bomb  in  which  cordite  was  exploded.     The  7 
ray  activity  of  the  emanation  was  found  not  to  be  altered  at  the 
inoment  of  the  explosion  although   the  maximum  temperature 
^ras  about   2500°  and   the   corresponding   pressure   about   1000 
atmospheres.     Certain  subsequent  changes  of  the  activity,  which 
extended  over  some  hours,  were  no  doubt  due  to  the  diflference  in 
^distribution  of  the  active  deposit  brought  about  by  the  explosion, 
fichusterf  showed  that   the  7  ray  activity  of  radium  was  not 
altered  by  exposure  to  a  pressure  of  2000  atmospheres.     A  similar 
result  was  obtained  by  Eve  and  Adams |.     It  is  thus  seen  that  no 
evidence  has  been  pbtained  that  high  temperatures  or  pressures 
lave  any  influence  in  accelerating  or  retarding  the  rate  of  trans- 
formation of  any  radio-active  substance.  The  rate  of  transformation 
proceeds  at  the  same  rate  at  a  temperature  of  liquid  air  —186°  as 
4it  a  temperature  of  1500°.      Such  a  result  brings  out  clearly 
the  difference  between  the  atomic  transformations  dealt  with  in 
ladio-activity  and  ordinary  molecular  changes  in  chemistry  where 
alteration  of  temperature  exerts  a  marked  influence  on  the  rate  of 
reaction. 

201.  Volatility  of  the  active  deposit.  We  have  already 
referred  to  the  efibct  of  temperature  on  the  active  deposit  in 
Section  193.  The  experiments  of  Curie  and  Duane  show  that 
radium  B  volatilised  freely  from  a  plate  coated  with  the  active 
deposit  at  a  temperature  of  about  600°  C,  while  the  radium  C 
remained  behind.  Duane§  found  some  evidence  that  radium  A 
was  even  more  volatile  than  radium  B.  Makower||  investigated 
the  temperatures  of  volatilisation  of  radium  A  by  the  following 
taethod.  A  thin  platinum  wire  charged  negatively  was  heated  in 
a  cylinder  containing  radium  emanation.  The  amount  of  radium  A 
obtained  on  a  wire  in  a  given  time  began  to  decrease  when  the 
wire  was  raised  to  a  temperature  of  800°,  and  was  very  small  at  a 

*  Rutherford  and  Petavel,  Brit.  Assoc.  Reports,  Section  A,  p.  456,  1907. 
t  Schuster,  Nature,  76,  p.  269,  1907. 

*  Eve  and  Adams,  Nature,  76,  p.  269,  1907. 
§  Duane,  Journ.  d.  Phys,  4,  p.  605,  1905. 

II  Makower,  Manch.  Lit.  and  Phil.  Soc.  53,  Pt.  n,  1909 ;  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  50, 
1909. 


506  ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  [CE 

temperature  of  900°.  He  consequently  concluded  that  radium  A 
commenced  to  volatilise  at  800°  and  was  completely  volatile  at 
900°.  By  a  similar  method  he  showed  that  no  appreciable  amount 
of  radium  A,  radium  B,  or  radium  C,  could  be  collected  on  a 
platinum  wire  for  temperatures  above  900"  whether  the  wire  was 
charged  negatively  or  positively. 

Makower  examined  the  volatilisation  of  radium  C  by  using 
plates  of  nickel,  platinum  and  quartz  coated  with  the  active 
deposit.  In  all  cases  volatilisation  of  radium  C  was  appreciable 
between  700  and  800°.  All  the  radium  C  was  driven  off  firom 
platinum  and  nickel  at  1200°,  but  the  volatilisation  of  radium  C 
from  a  quartz  surface  was  incomplete  at  1300°.  Such  results  show 
that  the  volatilisation  of  radium  C  depends  upon  the  surface  on 
which  it  is  deposited. 

We  have  seen  in  Section  199  that  Russell  found  evidence  that 
radium  C  was  completely  volatilised  at  a  temperature  of  600%\ 
in  a  quartz  tube.  It  appears  that  the  amount  of  volatilisation 
of  a  given  product  at  any  temperature  depends  on  several  fectors. 
It  is  quite  probable  that  the  components  of  the  active  deposit 
may  in  some  cases  combine  with  the  surrounding  gases  to  form 
oxides  or  other  compounds.  In  such  cases  it  might  be  expected 
that  the  apparent  temperature  of  volatilisation  would  depend  on 
the  nature  of  the  gases  to  which  the  active  deposit  is  exposed 
Some  experiments  by  Dr  Schrader*  in  the  Laboratory  of  the 
writer  are  of  importance  in  this  connection.  Using  the  active 
deposit  of  actinium,  he  found  that  the  temperature  of  volatilisa- 
tion was  much  lowered  when  a  platinum  wire  coated  with  active 
deposit  had  been  exposed  in  an  atmosphere  of  chlorine.  The 
solubility  of  the  active  deposit  in  water  was  also  much  increased. 
These  results  are  of  great  interest  as  indicating  a  method  of  * 
studying  the  formation  of  chemical  compounds  by  radio-active 
matter  existing  in  a  minute  amount.  In  consequence  of  the 
production  of  ozone  by  the  a  rays  in  air,  it  appears  likely  that 
the  components  of  the  active  deposit  exposed  in  air  would  tend 
to  form  oxides.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  experiments  on  the 
volatilisation  of  active  products  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen. 
A  number  of  volatilised  products  were  found  to  deposit  at  a  much 

♦  Schrader,  Phil.  Mag.  24,  p.  126,  1912. 


[IV]  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  507 

Qwer  temperature  in  this  gas  than  in  oxygen.  It  appeared 
>robable  that  the  low  temperature  of  volatilisation  found  by 
lussell  for  radium  B  and  radium  C  was  due  to  the  presence  of 
lydrogen  with  the  emanation.  This  was  verified  by  Russell*  in 
ater  experiments.  He  showed  that  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen, 
volatilisation  takes  place  at  about  360°  C.  for  radium  C.  The 
emperature  required  for  volatilisation  of  radium  C  in  an  atmo- 
phere  of  oxygen  was  much  higher. 

The  volatilisation  here  considered  must  not  be  confused  with 
he  distinct  phenomenon  of  transference  of  radio-active  matter  by 
adio-active  recoil.  We  have  seen  (Section  73)  that  numerous 
adio-active  substances  can  be  separated  in  a  pure  state  by  this 
)rocess.  In  every  case  so  far  examined,  the  recoil  atoms  carry  a 
X)sitive  charge  and  are  concentrated  on  the  negative  electrode, 
^o  evidence  has  been  obtained  that  volatilised  active  matter 
arries  a  charge. 

202.    Active  deposit  of  slow  transformation.     Radium 

I>  +  B  +  P.  Mme  Curie  and  Giesel  early  observed  that  bodies 
vhich  have  been  exposed  for  a  long  interval  in  the  presence  of 
he  radium  emanation  did  not  lose  all  their  activity  on  removal. 
The  magnitude  of  this  residual  activity  depends  on  the  quantity 
►f  emanation  and  on  the  time  of  exposure  to  the  emanation. 

The  analysis  of  this  small  residual  activity  has  yielded  results 
►f  great  importance  and  interest.  The  active  matter  will  be  shown 
o  consist  of  three  successive  products  called  radium  D,  radium  E 
jid  radium  F.  Radium  D  is  a  slowly  decaying  substance  which 
mits  soft  ^  rays  and  is  identical  with  the  primary  radio-active 
onstituent  present  in  the  "radio-lead,"  separated  by  Hofmann 
.nd  Strauss  from  uranium  minerals.  Radium  E  emits  yS  rays  and 
v^eak  7  rays,  and  has  a  period  of  5  days.  Radium  F  emits  a  rays 
jod  has  a  period  of  136  days.  It  is  identical  with  polonium,  the 
irst  radio-active  substance  separated  from  pitchblende  by  P.  and 
lime  Curie. 

Disregarding  the  complexity  of  radium  C,  the  succession  of 
hanges  which  occur  are  shown  diagrammatically  on  the  next  page. 

*  Bassdl,  Phil,  Mag.  M,  p.  134,  1912. 


508 


ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM 


[CE 


The  initial  experiments  to  show  the  complex  nature  of  this 
deposit  were  made  by  the  writer*.  Plates  of  metal  were  exposed 
for  several  days  in  the  presence  of  a  moderately  large  quantity  of 
radium  emanation.  One  day  after  removal,  the  active  deposit  of 
rapid  change  had  practically  disappeared.  The  weak  residual 
activity  was  then  examined  over  a  long  interval.  The  activity 
measured  by  the  a  rays  was  found  to  increase  steadily  with  time. 
The  results  obtained  are  shown  in  Fig.  114.  The  curve  for  the 
first  few  months  is  nearly  a  straight  line,  but  after  300  days 
the  rate  of  increase  of  activity  is  much  slower.  The  activity  is 
evidently  tending  to  approach  a  maximum  value. 

dBy  slotuB  Bweaky      fH 

w      T       rr       r 

^  Bad-,I>  TT^  ^^«^  E  ^  Rad.  F  -)  t 


PeriodH 
Range  a  rays  \ 
(15^  C.)      / 

240 


Radium  C 


19*5  mins. 
6*94  cms. 


(radio-lead) 
16'5  yrs. 


5  days 


(poloDium) 
136  days 

3*77  cms. 


40 


80 


T20      163      200     240     280    800 

Time  in  days 
Fig.  114. 


The  activity  measured  by  the  fi  rays  is  shown  in  Fig.  115. 
The  activity  reaches  a  practical  maximum  after  40  days.     This 


♦  Rutherford,  Phil,  Trans.  A,  204,  p.  169,  1905;  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  636,  1904; 
10,  p.  290,  1905. 


xiv] 


ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM 


509 


lise  curve  showed  the  existence  of  a  )8  ray  product,  radium  E,  of 
period  about  6  days.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  /8  ray 
activity  of  radium  D  measured  by  the  electric  method  is  small 
compared  with  that  due  to  radium  E.  For  this  reason,  radium 
D  was  initially  supposed  to  be  a  rayless  product. 

The  constancy  of  the  /8  ray  activity  after  reaching  a  maximum 
indicated  that  radium  D  was  very  slowly  transformed. 

In  another  experiment  the  emanation  from  about  30  mg.  Ra 
was  condensed  in  a  glass  tube  and  allowed  to  decay  in  situ. 
The  active  deposit  on  the  surface  of  the  glass  was  then  dissolved 
in  sulphuric  acid  and  left  to  stand  for  a  year.  The  a  ray  activity 
steadily  increased  in  this  interval.     By  introducing  a  polished 


10 


30 


TB — 5f5 — 58" 

Time  in  days 
Fig.  116. 

bismuth  disc  into  the  solution,  the  a  ray  product  (radium  F)  was 
deposited  electrochemically  upon  it.     The  bismuth  disc  emitted 
<^nly  a  rays.     The  activity  decayed  exponentially  with  the  time 
with  a  period  of  143  days.     The  similarity  of  the  nature  of  the  a 
radiation  and  of  chemical  properties  indicated  that  radium  F  was 
identical  with  the  polonium  of  Mme  Curie.     A  platinum  plate 
coated  with  the  active  deposit  of  slow  transformation  was  exposed 
for  some  minutes  in  a  furnace  to  a  temperature  of  over  1000°  C. 
ilost  of  the  radium  F  was  volatilised.     The  small  a  ray  activity, 
observed  immediately  after  removal  from  the  furnace,  increased 
^pidly  for  the  first  two  weeks  and  then  more  slowly.     The  varia- 
tion of  a  ray  activity  with  time  is  shown  in  Fig.  116.     A  curve 


610 


ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM 


[CH. 


of  this  character  is  to  be  expected  if  radium  E  is  the  parent  of 
radium  F.  The  action  of  the  high  temperature  volatilised  the 
greater  part  of  radium  D  and  radium  F  but  did  not  drive  off 
radium  E.  The  radium  E  was  then  transformed  with  a  period  of 
about  4*5  days  into  radium  F.  On  account  of  the  uncertainty  of 
the  initial  corrections  required  for  the  recovery  curve  of  radium  E 
after  heating  the  platinum  plate,  the  period  of  radium  E  was  over- 
estimated in  the  rise  curve  and  under-estimated  in  the  decay  curve. 
The  true  period  of  radium  E  found  later  by  Antonoff  and  Meyer 
and  V.  Schweidler  is  50  days. 

lOOt 


20        •      40 

Time  in  Days 
Fig.  116. 

The  general  evidence  indicated  that  radium  D  was  the  primary 
constituent  in  radio-lead,  and  that  radium  F  was  identical  with 
polonium.  Hoftnann,  Gonder  and  Wolfl*  had  made  a  chemical 
examination  of  the  constituents  of  "radio-lead**  separated  firom 
uranium  minerals.  Various  metallic  salts  were  added  to  the  solu- 
tion and  precipitated  and  the  resulting  activity  measured.  Some 
showed  only  an  a  ray  activity,  others  a  /8  ray  activity.  They 
stated  that  the  /3  ray  activity  so  obtained  disappeared  in  six 
weeks  and  the  a  ray  activity  in  one  year.  It  appeared  probable 
that  the  a  ray  product  was  radium  F  and  the  ^  ray  product 
radium  E. 

The  analysis  of  the  active  deposit  of  slow  transformation  of 
radium  was  confirmed  in  a  series  of  important  investigations  by 

*  Hofmann,  Gonder  and  Wolfl,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  15,  p.  616,  1904. 


V]  ACTIVK   DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM  511 


Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler*.  They  examined  also  the  products 
obtained  from  radio-lead  and  showed  that  the  periods  of  decay 
■were  identical  with  those  found  for  radium  E  and  radium  F  pro- 
educed  from  the  radium  emanation.  It  is  now  definitely  established 
that  radium  F  is  identical  with  polonium  and  that  radium  D  is  the 
primary  radio-active  constituent  separated  with  lead  from  uranium 
minerals. 

It  seemed  probable  that  radium  D  was  directly  derived  from 
the  transformation  of  the  product  radium  C.  This  has  been 
recently  confirmed  by  Fajansf,  who  found  that  radium  D  could 
l>e  obtained  by  recoil  from  pure  radium  C.  This  was  shown  by 
the  steady  rise  of  the  a  ray  activity  due  to  radium  F. 

203.    Radium  D.    We  have  seen  in  Section  9  that  radium  D 

is  separated  with  the  large  amount  of  lead  usually  present  in 

radio-active  minerals.    In  the  course  of  time,  radium  D  produces 

radium  F  (polonium),  and  the  a  ray  activity  of  the  lead  becomes 

about  equal  to  that  of  uranium.     The  polonium  can  be  separated 

hy  dissolving  the  lead  nitrate  in  water  and  crystallising,  when  the 

polonium  remains  in  solution.     In  chemical  properties  radium  D 

is  so  closely  analogous  to  lead,  that  no  satisfactory  methods  have 

been  found  for  concentration  of  this  product.     Experiments  in 

this  direction  have  been  made  by  Hofiuann  and  WolflJ,  Szilard§ 

^d  Herchfinkelll.     The  amount  of  radium  D  present  is  tested  by 

the  ^  ray  activity  one  month  after  separation.     The  radium  E 

Can  in  many  cases  be  concentrated.     This  is  shown  by  a  high 

B  ray  activity  which   falls   in   the   course   of  a   month   to  the 

equilibrium   value   corresponding   to   the   amount   of  radium  D 

present. 

The  simplest  way  of  obtaining  pure  radium  D  is  to  allow  a 
large  quantity  of  emanation  to  decay  in  a  sealed  vessel.  The 
radium  D  can  then  be  dissolved  out  by  acid.  Cameron  and 
Ramsay  found  that  after  a  large  quantity  of  purified  emanation 

♦  St.  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler,  Wien  Her.  114,  p.  1195,  1905 ;  115,  pp.  63,  697, 
1906. 

t  Fajans,  Phys,  Zeit.  12,  p.  369,  1911. 

*  Hofmann  and  Wdlfl,  Chem.  Ber.  40,  p.  2425,  1907. 
§  Szilard,  Le  Radium,  6,  p.  1,  1908. 

II  Herchfinkel,  Le  Radium,  7,  p.  198,  1910. 


512  ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM  [CH. 

had  been  allowed  to  decay  in  a  small  capillary,  the  surface  showed 
a  black  deposit  which  they  ascribed  to  radium  D  derived  from  the 
emanation.  This  appears  to  be  the  simplest  way  of  obtaining  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  pure  radium  D  to  determine  its  chemical  and 
physical  properties.  The  transformation  of  one  curie  of  emanation 
should  give  rise  to  about  1/200  milligram  of  radium  D. 

Since  radium  D  is  a  product  of  radium,  another  simple  method 
of  obtaining  active  preparations  of  radium  D  is  to  separate  the 
latter  from  old  preparations  of  radium.  This  can  be  done  by 
precipitation  with  hydrogen  sulphide,  a  little  lead  and  bismuth 
being  added  to  ensure  the  separation  of  radium  D  and  radium  F 
together. 

204.  Period  of  radium  D.  The  transformation  of  radium  D 
is  too  slow  to  deduce  its  period  by  direct  measurements  unless 
observations  are  continued  for  a  decade  or  more.  Estimates  of 
the  period  of  radium  D  by  indirect  methods  were  first  made  by 
Rutherford  {loc,  cit.)  and  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler*.  Since  the 
emanation  changes  into  radium  D,  the  number  of  atoms  of  radium 
D  present  after  one  month  is  nearly  equal  to  the  number  N  of 
atoms  of  emanation  initially  present.  The  number  of  atoms  w,  of 
emanation  initially  breaking  up  per  second  is  \iN\  the  corre- 
sponding number  n^  for  radium  D  is  \N  where  Xj  and  \  are  the 
constants  of  transformation  of  emanation  and  radium  D  respec- 
tively. Then  XjXi  —  nJrii.  If  njrii  can  be  determined,  the  value 
of  X4  can  be  deduced.  An  estimate  of  this  ratio  was  initially 
made  by  the  writer  by  comparing  the  /S  ray  activity  of  radium 
D  +  E  produced  from  the  emanation  with  that  due  to  radium  C  in 
equilibrium  with  the  amount  of  em<anation  initially  present.  It 
was  assumed  that  the  average  ionisation  due  to  the  y8  rays 
expelled  from  each  atom  was  the  same  for  both  products.  The 
period  came  out  to  be  40  years.  In  a  similar  estimate,  Meyer  and 
V.  Schweidler  found  a  period  37*5  years.  The  estimate  by  fi  rays  is 
subject  to  large  errors,  for  the  average  velocity  of  the  ^  rays  from 
each  product  is  very  different.  It  is  better  to  determine  714/711  by 
comparison  of  the  initial  a  ray  activity  of  the  emanation  with  that 
due  to  radium  F  in  equilibrium  with  radium  D.     In  this  case  a 

♦  St.  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler,  Wien  Ber.  116,  p.  701,  1907. 


XIV]  ACTIVE   DEPOSIT   OF   RADIUM  613 

correction  is  required  for  difference  in  ionisation  by  the  a  particles 
finom  the  two  products.  In  this  way  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler 
found  a  period  of  12*5  years. 

The  period  was  re-detennined  by  Antonoff  *.  A  known  quantity 

of  emanation  was  allowed  to  decay  in  a  glass  tube.     The  total 

number  of  a  particles  emitted  by  the  polonium  on  its  walls  after 

a    known  interval  of  time  was  determined  by  the   scintillation 

method.     The  number  S  of  atoms  of  polonium  existing  at  any 

time  t   after   the   introduction   of    the   emanation   is   given   by 

equation  7,  Section  159.     The  quick  period  products  radium  A, 

B  and  C  can  be  neglected  without  sensible  error  and  Xi,  Xj,  X3,  \4 

in  the  equation  are  to  be  taken  as  the  constants  of  transformation 

of  the  emanation,  radium  D,  E  and  F  respectively.     Pq  is  the 

initial  number  of  atoms  of  emanation  present.     The  latter  value 

was  deduced  from  Rutherford  and  Geiger's  determination  that  one 

curie  of  emanation  contains  3*4  x  lO^^^i  atoms  of  emanation.    A 

number  of  concordant  experiments  gave  a  period  of  165  years. 

Mme  Curie,  as  a  result  of  direct  measurements  over  a  period 
of  five  years,  of  the  a  ray  activity  of  radium  D  +  E  -h  F  in  equi- 
librium found  that  the  decay  observed  is  in  approximate  agreement 
with  the  above  period.  Taking  the  period  of  radium  D  as  16*5 
years,  the  average  life  is  23*8  years  and  \  =  '042  (year)~\ 

Starting  with  a  preparation  of  radium  freed  from  radium  D, 

the  amount  of  radium  D  will  increase  with  time  according  to 

equation   5,   Section    159,   where   Xi   and   X,   are   the    constants 

of  transformation  of  radium  and   radium  D  respectively.     The 

radium  is  here  supposed  to  change  directly  into  radium  D.     The 

amount  of  radium  D  will  reach  half  its  maximum  value  in  16  years 

and  attain  an  equilibrium  value  with  radium  (period  2000  years) 

in  112  years.     Ultimately,  the  amount  of  radium  D  will  decrease 

according  to  the  period  of  radium  itself. 

Since  radium  D  is  transformed  into  a  y8  ray  product  radium  E, 
the  )8  ray  activity  of  pure  radium  preparations  will  increase  with 
time  for  a  long  interval.  This  presence  of  /8  rays  due  to  radium  E 
can  readily  be  tested  by  dissolving  the  radium  and  driving  oflF  the 
emanation  by  continued  heating  over  a  period  of  several  hours  to 
allow  the  rapidly  changing  deposit  to  decay.     The  )8  ray  activity 

•  Antonoflf,  Phil.  Mag.  19,  p.  826,  1910. 
R.  R.-A.  33 


514  *  ACTIVE   DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  [CB. 

observed  is  then  due  mainly  to  radium  D-f  E  formed  in  it.  In  a 
similar  way,  since  radium  F  is  formed  from  radium  D,  the  a  ray 
activity  will  increase  with  time  over  a  long  interval.  The  intenal 
required  to  reach  a  maximum  value  can  readily  be  calculated  from 
the  known  periods  when  suitable  assumptions  are  made  for  the 
relative  activity  of  the  products  under  consideration. 

Radium  D  was  at  first  thought  to  emit  no  rays  at  all,  but 
Hahn  and  Meitner*  detected  a  feeble  /S  radiation  for  which 
Kovarikf  found  /a  =130  (cms.)"*  in  aluminium.  Hahn  and 
Meitner  showed  by  the  pliotographic  method  that  the  /8  rajs 
consisted  of  two  homogeneous  beams  emitted  with  velocities  MJ 
and  0*31  of  the  velocity  of  light.  No  evidence  has  been  obtained 
of  the  emission  of  7  rays  from  this  substance.  If  any  are 
emitted,  they  must  be  exceedingly  feeble  in  quantity  and  pene- 
trating power. 

206.  Radium  E.  Radium  E  can  be  readily  separated  from 
a  solution  of  radium  D  +  E  -t-  F  by  deposition  on  a  nickel  plate 
The  experiments  of  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler  show  that  it  is 
partially  separated  vv'ich  polonium  by  a  number  of  metals  when 
these  are  dipped  into  the  solution. 

We  have  seen  that  the  period  found  first  by  the  writer  for 
radium  E   by  two   methods  was   6   and   4*5   days.     Meyer  and 
V.  Schweidler  (loc.  ciL)  obtained  evidence  that  two  0  ray  products 
were  present  in  radio-lead  with  periods  of  4*8  days  and  6  2  days 
respectively.      It  was  suggested  that  these  products  were  suc- 
cessive and  that  the  longer  period  product  was  rayless.    For  these 
reasons,  the  product  radium   E  was  for  some   time  written  as 
radium  E,  +  radium  E^.    Later  work  by  AntonofF,  using  radium  D 
derived    directly    from    radium    emanation,    has    indicated    the 
presence   of  only  one   product.     By  precipitating   barium   in  a 
solution   of  radium   D  +  E  +  F,   he   found   that   radium    D  was 
entrained  while  radium  E  and  F  remained  behind.     The  )3  ray 
activity  of  the  filtrate  was  found  to  decay  exponentially  with  a 
period  of  5  days.     The  rise  curve  of  radium  E  after  an  exposure 
of  24  hours  to  a  large  quantity  of  emanation  was  also  determined. 

♦  Hahn  aud  Meitner,  Phys.  Zeit,  12,  p.  378,  1911. 
t  Kovarik,  Phil.  Mag,  20,  p.  849,  1910. 


xiv] 


ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM 


515 


The  results  showed  that  only  one  /8  ray  product  having  a  period 
of  5  days  was  present.  These  observations  were  quite  incompatible 
with  the  older  view  that  two  successive  products  of  periods  5 
and  6  days  were  produced.  Giesel*  found  a  /8  ray  product  of 
period  6  days  which  he  separated  with  polonium  and  consequently 
called  y8-polonium.     This  is  no  doubt  identical  with  radium  E. 

Badium  E  emits  0  rays  which  are  absorbed  exponentially  with 
a  value  /Lt  =  43  (cms.)~^  in  aluminium.  The  ff  rays  give  a  con- 
tinuous spectrum  and  no  resolution  into  homogeneous  groups  of 
rays  has  yet  been  observed.  We  have  seen  (Section  103)  that 
radium  E  emits  7  rays  which  are  feeble  in  intensity  and  penetrat- 
ing power. 

206.  Radium  F  (Polonium).  We  have  seen  that  this 
product  emits  only  a  rays  of  range  38  cms.  in  air.  The  identity 
of  radium  F  with  the  polonium  of  Mme  Curie  and  the  radio- 
tellurium  of  Marckwald  was  finally  shown  by  comparison  of  the 
absorption  of  the  a  rays  and  of  the  periods  of  decay.  The  periods 
of  decay  found  by  various  observers  are  shown  below. 


Substance 


Half-valae 

period  in 

days 


Observer 


Radium  F      

a  ray  product  from  radio-lead 
Radio-tellurium 
Radio-active  bismuth  ... 

Radium  F      

Radio-tellurium 
Radio-tellurium 

Polonium        

Polonium        


138-2 

134-5 

136-5 

138-9 

143 

143 

139-6 

140-0 

136 


St.  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidlert 


)> 


Rutherford  J 


>» 


n 


Marckwald  and  Greinacher§ 

Mme  Curie|| 

Regenerir 


Considering  the  diflBculty  of  determining  such  a  long  period 
with  accuracy,  the  agreement  of  the  numbers  is  excellent  and 

♦  Giesel,  Ber,  d,  D,  Chem.  Ges,  39,  p.  780,  1906. 

t  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler,  Wien  Ber.  116,  p.  63,  1906. 

X  Katherford,  Phil,  Mag.  10,  p.  290,  1905. 

§  Marckwald  and  Greinacher,  Jahrh.  d.  Radioakt,  2,  p.  136,  1905. 

li  Mme  Curie,  C.  R.  142,  p.  273,  1906 ;  Phys.  Zeit.  7,  p.  146,  1906. 

t  Regener,  Ber.  d.  D.  Phys.  Ges.  13,  p.  1027,  1911. 

33-2 


516  *  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM  [CH. 

shows  the  identity  of  the  active  matter  under  consideratioD.  The 
half- value  period  is  taken  as  136  days,  and  \  =  0051  (day)~^  The 
latter  value  has  been  obtained  by  Regener  when  special  pre- 
cautions were  taken  to  ensure  complete  saturation.  It  is  seen 
that,  after  an  interval  of  one  year,  5/6  of  the  polonium  has  been 
transformed.  In  a  preparation  of  radium  D,  the  amount  of 
polonium  present  reaches  a  practical  maidmum  in  three  yeare.  It 
will  finally  decrease  exponentially  with  the  period  of  radium  D. 

207.  Chemical  properties  of  polonium.  Polonium  is 
separated  from  a  uranium  mineral  with  the  bismuth  that  is 
ordinarily  present.  About  3  kilograms  of  bismuth  oxychloride 
are  usually  obtained  from  one  ton  of  Joachimsthal  pitchblende. 
Mme  Curie  employed  initially  several  methods  of  concentrating 
the  polonium :  (1)  Precipitation  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen  in  a 
strong  hydrochloric  acid  solution.  The  polonium  is  concentrated 
in  the  sulphides.  (2)  Precipitation  of  basic  nitrate  with  water. 
The  polonium  is  concentrated  in  the  precipitate.  (3)  Sublimation 
of  mixed  sulphide  in  a  vacuum.  The  active  sulphide  is  more 
volatile  than  that  of  bismuth. 

We  have  referred  in  Section  8  to  the  separation  by  Marckwald 
of  an  intensely  active  preparation  of  polonium.  By  immersing 
plates  of  bismuth,  copper  or  silver  in  the  hydrochloric  acid  solu- 
tion, practically  all  the  polonium  was  deposited  on  the  plates. 
Stannous  chloride  added  to  the  same  solution  produced  a  small 
precipitate  which  consisted  mainly  of  tellurium  and  contained 
most  of  the  polonium.  Methods  were  devised  for  separating  the 
polonium  from  the  tellurium.  Finally  4  milligrams  of  intensely 
active  material  were  obtained  from  two  tons  of  material. 

The  separation  of  polonium  on  a  bismuth  or  copper  plate  is  a 
very  simple  and  convenient  method.  With  care  the  polonium  may 
be  obtained  on  a  plate  of  very  small  area.  An  active  plate  of  this 
kind  is  very  useful  in  many  experiments,  for  it  emits  homogeneous 
a  rays  and  no  jS  rays. 

Polonium  may  always  be  obtained  in  considerable  quantity 
from  old  preparations  of  radium.  A  preparation  of  radium  D 
separated  from  radium  is  a  convenient  source  for  obtaining 
polonium  at  intervals. 


XIV]  ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF  RADIUM  517 

The  amount  of  polonium  to  be  obtained  from  a  uranium 
mineral  can  be  simply  calculated.  The  amount  of  polonium  to  be 
obtained  from  one  gram  of  radium  when  radium  U  has  reached 
its  equilibrium  value  or  from  a  mineral  containing  one  gram  of 
radium  is  nearly  equal  in  grams  to  the  ratio  of  the  period  of 
polonium  to  the  period  of  radium,  or  about  0*19  milligram  by 
weight. 

Since  a  mineral  containing  3  tons  of  uranium  yields  1  gram 
of  radium,  it  is  seen  how  small  a  quantity  of  polonium  can  be 
obtained  under  the  best  conditions.  Mme  Curie  and  Debieme* 
recently  made  experiments  to  isolate  a  weighable  quantity  of 
polonium.  Using  several  tons  of  pitchblende,  about  two  milli- 
grams of  intensely  active  matter  were  finally  obtained,  probably 
containing  about  1/10  milligram  of  pure  polonium.  The  spectrum 
showed  the  presence  of  a  number  of  elements  but  several  new  lines 
were  observed,  viz.  4642*0,  4170*5,  3193-6.  3652-1,  which  were 
ascribed  to  the  spectrum  of  polonium.  The  line  41705  was  strong. 
Several  other  lines  were  observed  the  connection  of  which  with 
polonium  was  doubtful. 

It  can  be  calculated  that  one  milligram  of  polonium  in  the 
pure  state  emits  as  many  a  particles  as  five  grams  of  radium  itself. 
An  almost  invisible  amount  of  pure  polonium  will  thus  produce 
brilliant  luminosity  on  phosphorescent  screens  which  are  brought 
near  it.  Mme  Curie  showed  that  the  a  rays  fi'om  polonium  pro- 
duced chemical  and  physical  eSects  similar  to  the  corresponding 
rays  from  radium  or  its  emanation. 

Apart  from  the  interest  attaching  to  the  isolation  of  a  weighable 
quantity  of  polonium  and  the  determination  of  its  spectrum,  it  is  of 
great  importance  to  determine  the  substance  into  which  polonium 
is  transformed.  There  is  strong  reason  to  believe  (Chapter  XVIII) 
that,  after  the  emission  of  a  helium  atom,  polonium  turns  into 
lead.  If  this  be  correct,  the  spectrum  of-  polonium  should  become 
feeble  as  the  polonium  decays,  and  the  spectrum  of  lead  should 
appear.  The  direct  proof  of  the  production  of  lead  is  obviously 
attended  with  great  difficulties  on  account  of  the  minute  amount 
of  polonium  available  for  experiment. 

After  polonium  has  decayed,  no  residual  activity  has  been 

*  Mme  Curie  and  Debieme,  C.  R,  150,  p.  386,  1910. 


518 


ACTIVE  DEPOSIT  OF   RADIUM 


[CH.  XIV 


observed,  so  that  it  is  believed  that  the  transformatioDS  of  the 
uranium-radium  series  end  at  this  stage,  with  lead  as  the  final 
product. 

In  the  following  table  various  data  in  connection  with  radium 
and  its  series  of  products  are  collected  for  reference.  In  the 
third  column,  the  weight  of  each  product  in  equilibrium  with 
one  gram  of  radium  is  given. 

Radium  Series. 


Radium  !  Atomic 

Series  weight 


Radium  226 

Rjv.  Emanation  222 

Radium  A  218 

Radium  B  214 

Radium  G  214 

Ro.  Ca  — 

Raduim  I)  210 

Indium  E  210 

Radium  F  210 


Weight 
per  gram 
of  radium 


1  gr. 
6-7xlO-«gr. 
31x10-9   „ 
2-7x10-8   „ 
20x10-8   „ 

8-6x10-3   „ 
71x10-0   „ 

1-9x10-*   „ 


Half-value 
period 


2000  yrs. 

3-85  days 

3-0  mins. 

26-8  mins. 

19 '5  mins. 

1-4  mins. 
16-5  yrs, 
5*0  days 
1.36  days 


Radiation 


a -f  slow  ^ 


Range  of 

a  rays  at 

16=  C. 


3*30  cms. 


4-16 


4-75    „ 
a+i3  +  y    I     6-57    ., 
slow  p 


3-7 


55 


CHAPTER  XV. 

ACTINIUM  AND  ITS   PRODUCTS. 

208.  Separation  of  actinium.  We  have  already  referred 
X)  the  history  of  the  discovery  of  actinium  in  Section  7.  Debierne*, 
n  two  papers  published  in  1899  and  1900,  gave  a  brief  account  of 
the  chemical  properties  of  a  new  chemical  element  which  he  called 
ictinium.  It  was  stated  that  the  chemical  properties  of  this 
substimce  were  similar  to  those  of  thorium,  from  which  it  had  not 
been  found  possible  to  separate  it.  In  1902,  Gieself  published  an 
account  of  an  active  substance  obtained  from  pitchblende.  This 
t^xly  was  separated  with  the  cerium  earths,  and  was  ultimately 
obtained  mixed  with  lanthanum.  Giesel  showed  that  this  sub- 
stance was  characterised  by  the  emission  of  a  short-lived  emanation, 
lod  for  this  reason  he  called  it  the  emanating  substance  or 
ernanium."  Emanium  was  not  separated  with  thorium,  and 
Jiesel  concluded  that  it  could  not  be  identical  with  actinium. 
[^ter  Debierne  J  stated  that  his  preparations  also  emitted  an 
'Hianation  similar  to  that  found  by  Giesel  for  emanium.  After 
<>nie  controversy  §  it  was  finally  agreed  to  retain  the  name  of 
actinium  for  this  substance.  The  chemical  properties  initially 
bribed  by  Debierne  to  actinium  are  similar  to  those  now  known 
0  belong  to  ionium.  The  rapid  growth  of  radium  observed  by  the 
mter  in  a  preparation  of  emanium  obtained  from  Giesel  showed 

*  Debierne,  C.  R.  129,  p.  693,  1899 ;  130,  p.  906,  1900. 

t  Giesel,  Ber,  d,  D,  Chem,  Gfs.  35,  p.  3608,  1902;  36,  p.  342,  1903;  87,  p.  1696, 

m, 

t  Debierne,  C.  R,  139,  p.  638,  1904. 

§  See   Giesel,  Ber,  d,  D.   Chem,   Ges,   37,  p.  396b,   1904 ;   38,   p.  775,  1905 ; 
ebieme,  Phys.  Zeit.  7,  p.  14,  1906. 


520  ACTINIUM  AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  [CE 

that  the  latter  substance  certainly  contained  some  ionium,  and 
this  no  doubt  was  the  case  also  with  Debierne's  preparations'. 
The  identity  of  the  emanations  emitted  by  actinium  and  emanium 
were  shown  by  Hahn  and  Sackurf.  MarckwaldJ  found  some 
evidence  that  emanium  and  actinium  were  not  the  same  substance 
but  stood  in  a  genetic  relation  with  each  other.  The  appareni 
difference  was  shown  by  Hahn§  to  be  due  to  the  presence  of  a  new 
product  which  he  called  "  radio-actinium." 

Oiesel  found  that  the  activity  of  actinium  preparations  in- 
creased for  a  month  after  separation.  This  will  be  seen  to  be  due 
to  the  production  of  a  series  of  products  by  actinium.  Giesel  and 
Debierne  have  shown  that  actinium  can  be  concentrated  to  some 
extent  by  fractional  crystallisations  of  the  double  nitrate  of  the 
rare  earths  and  magnesium,  and  also  by  precipitating  barium  as 
sulphate  in  the  solution.  By  these  methods  preparations  of 
actinium  have  been  obtained  showing  about  100,000  times  the 
activity  of  uranium.  No  new  lines,  however,  have  been  observed 
in  the  spectrum,  so  that  it  appears  probable  that  actinium,  if 
it  could  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state,  would  show  au  activity  as 
great,  if  not  greater  than  that  of  radium. 

Auer  von  Welsbach||  made  a  number  of  experiments  to  separate 
actinium  from  the  rare  earths.  He  concludes  that  it  has  the 
chemical  properties  of  an  element  between  calcium  and  lanthanum. 
He  found  that  actinium  could  be  completely  precipitated  in  the 
presence  of  manganese  from  basic  solutions  as  a  manganate,  and 
used  this  method  in  separating  the  actinium  from  the  mineral 
residues. 

V.  Hevesy'i  has  found  that  the  presence  of  actinium  in 
uranium  minerals  can  be  shown  directly  by  the  emission  of  its 
short-lived  emanation.  A  rapid  current  of  air  is  aspirated  through 
a  solution  of  the  mineral  into  an  electroscope. 

Far  less  is  known  about  actinium  itself  as  a  radio-active 
element  than  of  any  other,  for  it  has  been  found  impossible  to 

*  See  Boltwood,  Ainer.  Jonrn.  Sci.  25,  p.  365,  1906. 

t  Hahn  and  Sacknr,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Ge«,  38,  p.  1943,  1905. 

X  Marckwald,  Ber.  d.  I).  Chem.  G^'.s.  38,  p.  2264,  1905. 

§   Hahn,  Phil.  Mag.  13,  p.  165,  1907;  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem,  Ges.  39,  p.  1605,  1906. 

,1  Auer  vou  WeUbach,  IVien  Ber.  119,  11 «,  p.  1,  1910, 

%  V.  HevcHy,  Phys.  Zeit.  12,  p.  1213,  1911. 


XV]  ACTINIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  521 

isolate  it  from  the  rare  earths  with  which  it  is  mixed,  or  to  locate 
its  position  in  the  scheme  of  transformations.  The  only  evidence 
of  its  period  is  derived  from  some  observations  of  Mme  Curie*, 
who  found  a  decrease  of  the  y8  ray  activity  of  old  actinium  pre- 
parations of  about  10  per  cent,  in  three  years.  This  would  give  a 
mean  life  of  actinium  of  about  30  years.  If  this  be  the  case,  it 
should  not  be  difficult  to  locate  the  position  of  actinium  in  the 
uranium  series,  for  the  growth  of  actinium  in  its  parent  should 
be  detectable  within  a  few  years.  Taking  into  consideration  the 
close  analogy  between  the  successive  transformations  of  thorium 
and  actinium,  Mme  Curie  suggests  that  an  unknown  product  of 
long  period  may  exist  between  actinium  and  radio-actinium,  which 
is  separated  with  the  actinium  in  excess  of  the  equilibrium  value. 
The  decay  observed  would  in  that  case  be  due  not  to  actinium 
but  to  the  new  product. 

Actinium  freed  from  all  its  products  is  either  rayless  or  emits 
radiations  of  very  weak  intensity.  Actinium  in  equilibrium  with 
its  products  emits  a,  8  and  7  rays.  The  8  rays  are  only  of 
moderate  penetrating  power.  The  7  rays,  in  comparison  with  the 
/3  rays,  are  relatively  feeble  and  are  much  less  penetrating  than 
the  7  rays  from  radium,  thorium  or  uranium  (Section  100). 

209.     Connection  of  actinium  with  the  uranium  series. 

Boltwoodf  showed  that  the  amount  of  actinium,  measured  by  its 
activity,  present  in  uranium  minerals  was  approximately  propor- 
tional to  the  percentage  of  uranium.  This  indicates  that  actinium, 
like  radium,  must  belong  to  the  uranium  series  and  stand  in  some 
genetic  relation  with  it.  Boltwood,  however,  showed  that  the 
activity  due  to  the  actinium,  together  with  its  series  of  a  ray 
products,  separated  from  a  mineral  was  much  smaller  than  would 
be  expected  if  actinium  belonged  to  the  main  uranium-radium 
series.  The  total  activity  of  actinium  with  its  products  in  a 
mineral  was  only  0*28  of  the  activity  of  the  uranium  (see  Section 
169).  Radium  and  its  series  of  products,  including  polonium, 
showed  an  activity  306  times  that  of  uranium,  or  11  times  that 
of  actinium.     This  difference  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  diflFerence 

•  Mme  Curie,  Le  Radiuvij  8,  p.  353,  1911. 

t  3oltwood,  Amer,  Journ.  Sci.  25,  p.  269,  1908. 


522  ACTINIUM   AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  [CH. 

in  the  number  of  a  ray  products  in  the  two  cases,  for  actinium 
contains  five  a  ray  products  of  an  average  range  greater  than  those 
of  the  radium  products.  There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  of  the 
essential  correctness  of  these  conclusions.  In  order  to  explain  this 
anomalous  relation  the  writer*  suggested  that  actinium  was  a 
branch  product  of  the  main  series.  In  the  majority  of  products, 
so  far  examined,  the  atom  breaks  up  in  only  one  way.  For 
example,  each  atom  of  radium  emanation  emits  one  a  particle  and 
forms  one  atom  of  radium  A.  It  seems  not  improbable,  however, 
that  the  residue  of  an  atom  after  losing  an  a  or  ^  particle  may  in 
some  cases  exist  for  some  time  in  more  than  one  stable  form.  The 
ejection  of  an  a  or  /S  particle  in  the  process  of  disintegration  must 
result  in  a  very  violent  disturbance  of  the  atomic  system,  and  this 
may  lead  to  the  formation  of  more  than  one  arrangement  of  the 
component  parts,  which  is  temporarily  stable.  This  would  result 
in  the  appearance  of  at  least  two  products  in  addition  to  the 
expelled  a  or  (i  particle.  These  products,  although  of  equal  atomic 
weights,  would  probably  have  different  chemical  properties  and  be 
capable  of  separation  from  each  other,  and  would  be  transformed 
in  different  ways.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  two  products  should 
be  fonned  in  equal  amount.  One  might  be  formed  in  relatively 
large  amount  compared  with  the  other.  There  are  several  other 
possibilities  to  be  considered.  The  atom  might  break  up  into  two 
parts  of  different  atomic  weight.  In  this  case  the  number  of  atoms 
of  each  of  the  two  products  formed  would  be  the  same  as  for  the 
parent  product.  If,  for  example,  each  atom  emitted  an  o  particle 
at  disintegration,  each  of  these  products  would  supply  the  same 
activity  iis  the  parent  substance. 

In  recent  years  some  direct  evidence  has  been  obtained  of  the 
existence  of  such  branch  products.  As  we  have  seen  (Section  198), 
Fajans  concluded  that  the  product  radium  Cj  of  period  1*4  minutes 
derived  from  radium  C  must  be  a  branch  product.  In  a  similar 
way  Antonoff  found  some  evidence  that  Ur  Y  is  a  branch  product 
of  uranium.  It  will  be  seen  later  that  the  mode  of  transformation 
of  the  product  called  thorium  C  is  very  anomalous  and  appears 
undoubtedly  to  indicate  that  the  atoms  of  this  substance  can 
break  up  in  two  distinct  modes. 

*  Radio-active  Trawformatiotn,  p.  170  (1906). 


XV]  ACTINIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  523 

Taking  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  there  is  good  reason  to  believe 
that  actinium  is  a  branch  product  at  some  point  of  the  long 
uranium-radium  series.  There  is  as  yet  no  definite  evidence  of  its 
position  in  the  scheme  of  changes.  It  may  possibly  be  connected 
with  the  branch  product  Ur  Y.  The  evidence  obtained  by  Fajans 
of  the  absence  of  actinium  in  the  active  deposit  of  radium  does 
not  support  the  view  that  it  can  be  derived  from  radium  C,.  If 
it  were  possible  to  determine  the  atomic  weight  of  actinium  or  of 
any  of  its  products,  the  point  of  origin  of  actinium  in  the  uranium 
series  could  be  located.  The  only  evidence  bearing  on  the  atomic 
weight  is  derived  from  comparison  of  the  coefficients  of  difi'usion 
of  the  thorium  and  actinium  emanations  (Section  142).  The 
data  so  far  obtained  by  this  method  indicates  that  the  actinium 
emanation  is  of  about  the  same  atomic  weight  as  the  thorium 
emanation.  Since  the  deduction  of  the  atomic  weight  from  the 
coefficient  of  diflfusion  involves  the  square  of  the  period  of  decay 
of  the  emanation,  a  small  error  in  the  latter  constant  seriously 
affects  the  value  deduced.  The  question  is  one  that  requires 
careful  re-examination. 

If  actinium  is  genetically  connected  with  uranium  as  a  branch 
product,  the  ratio  p  of  the  number  of  atoms  of  actinium  and  radium 
formed  per  second  in  a  mineral,  can  be  approximately  calculated 
from  the  measurements  of  their  relative  activity  given  by  Bolt- 
wood.  We  have  seen  that  the  activity  of  radium  together  with 
its  four  a  ray  products  in  equilibrium  with  it  is  3*0  times  that 
of  uranium.  The  activity  of  actinium  together  with  its  products 
is  0*28.  Now  the  average  range  of  the  five  groups  of  a  rays  from 
radium  and  its  products  is  4'3  cms.  and  for  the  five  sets  of  a  rays 
fi-om  actinium  and  its  products  is  51  cms.  reduced  to  0°C. 
Assuming  the  ionisation  to  be  proportional  to  the  range,  it  follows 
that  the  ratio  p  =  '08,  or  in  other  words,  only  8  per  cent,  of  the 
atoms  of  the  parent  substance  are  transformed  into  actinium. 

210.  Analysis  of  the  active  deposit.  It  is  convenient  to 
consider  first  the  products  of  the  actinium  emanation,  for  the 
former  are  obtained  in  a  pure  state  by  exposure  of  a  metal  plate 
to  the  actinium  emanation. 

Actinium  A.     We  have  seen  that  actinium  preparations  emit 


524  ACTINIUM   AND  ITS   PRODUCTS  [ffl, 

an  emanation  of  period  39  seconds  (Section  131).  The  atonnf 
the  emanation  breaks  up  with  the  emission  of  an  a  particle  rf 
range  57  cms.  and  gives  rise  to  the  atom  of  actinium  A.  Thii 
has  the  shortest  life  of  any  known  product,  for  it  is  half  trausfonneJ 
in  1/500  second.  It  breaks  up  with  the  emission  of  an  o  particie 
of  range  65  cms.  (Section  147).  There  appears  to  be  no  doubt 
that  actinium  A  is  a  non-gaseous  form  of  matter,  but  in  consequence 
of  its  short  life  it  is-  usually  found  associated  with  the  emaiutiin. 
At  the  moment  of  formation  it  carries  &  positive  charge  aodii 
transferred  to  the  negative  electrode  in  a  strong  electric  field.   It 


Time  in  Minulei 
Fig.  117. 

then  gives  rise  to  thi'ee  successive  products  called  actinium  B,  C 
and  D,  whose  properties  will  now  be  considered. 

Actinium  B  and  C.    When  a  plate  is  exposed  in  the  presence 
of  the  actinium  emanation  for  several  hours,  it  becomes  acti«> 

'  To  &voiJ  coiifoBioD,  it  eliould  be  pointed  out  that  the  products  hen  olM  I 
actinium  B  aod  C  were  initially  known  aa  Kctinium  A  and  B  respectively.    Tl»  I 
ebnnge  of  nomenclature  arose  from  the  compantivel;  late  discovery  of  tba  ibnrt^ 
lived   product  of   the  emanation   now  called   actininm  A.     A  diecnssioD  of  lb 
reaHone  for  the  nomenclature  of  the  active  deposits  adopted  in  this  book  was  girai 
b;  Rutherford  and  Oeiger,  Fhil.  Mag.  B3,  p.  631,  1911. 


V]  ACTINIUM  AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  526 

be  rate  of  decay  of  this  active  deposit  which  emits  a,  13  and  7 
ys  is  independent  of  whether  the  activity  is  collected  on  the 
ate  by  diffusion  or  by  the  intermediary  of  an  electric  field.  The 
itial  part  of  the  curve  of  decay  measured  by  the  a  rays  for  a  long 
:posure  is  shown  in  Fig.  117  (marked  21  hours).  The  activity 
lis  slowly  the  first  10  minutes,  but  afterwards  more  rapidly, 
jcreasing  finally  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time 
ith  a  period  of  36  minutes.  No  doubt,  if  observations  were  made 
Lthin  1/500  of  a  second  after  removal,  the  decay  of  activity  due 

actinium  A  could  be  observed.  The  half-value  period  was 
itially  determined  by  Debierne*,  who  found  a  value  of  40 
inutes.  Later  observations  by  Bronsonf,  Elster  and  GeitelJ, 
eyer  and  v.  Schweidler§,  Hahn  and  Sackur||,  gave  values  of  about 
)  minutes. 

Miss  Brooksl,  found  that  the  activity  curves  depended  greatly 
I  the  time  of  exposure  to  the  emanation.  Examples  of  the  o  ray 
irves  obtained  by  her  for  various  times  of  exposure  are  shown  in 
ig.  117.  The  activity  at  first  increases,  passes  through  a  maximum 
id  ultimately  decreases  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  a 
Bfiod  of  36  minutes.  Bronson  determined  accurately  the  activity 
irve  for  a  short  exposure.  This  is  shown  in  Fig.  118,  the 
laximum  activity  being  taken  as  100.  The  shape  of  this  curve 
idicatod  the  presence  of  two  products,  one  of  which  emits  a  rays 
id  the  other  does  not**.  The  activity  /  at  any  time  is  proportional 
>  g  A,^_g-Aa^     Tjjjg  jg  ii^Q  relation  (equation  5,  Section  159)  to 

3  expected  for  a  short  exposure  where  two  products  are  involved, 
le  of  which  emits  a  rays  and  the  other  does  not. 

The  final  decrease  of  the  activity  according  to  an  exponential 
w  with  a  period  of  36  minutes  fixes  the  period  of  one  product  as 
5  minutes.  The  corresponding  value  of  \i  =  *0192(min.)~^  By 
)mparison  with  the  experimental  curve,  Bronson  found  the  value 
'  X,  to  be  •322(min.)~\     This  corresponds  to  a  product  of  period 

•  Debierne,  C.  R.  138,  p.  411,  1904. 
t  Bronson,  Amer.  Journ.  Sci.  19,  p.  185,  1905. 

t  Elster  and  Oeitel  (see  Giesel,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Ges.  37,  p.  3963,  1904). 
§  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler,  Wien  Ber.  114,  p.  1147,  1905. 
II  Hahn  and  Sackur,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Ges,  38,  p.  1943,  1905. 
%  Miss  Brooks,  PhiL  Mag.  8,  p.  373,  1904. 
♦•  Rutherford,  PhiL  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  204,  p.  169,  1904. 


526 


ACTINIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS 


[CHi! 


2*15  minutes.  The  diflSculty  here  arises  of  determining  whick 
of  the  two  products  emits  a  rays  (Section  165).  This  was  settled 
by  the  observation  of  Miss  Brooks*  that  in  the  electrolysis  of  tfce 
active  deposit  of  actinium,  an  a  ray  product  was  separated,  whkk 
decayed  to  half  value  in  about  1'5  minutes.  Later  Meyer  and 
V.  Schweidlerf  showed  that  when  a  platinum  plate  coated  with  the 
active  deposit  of  actinium  was  heated  to  a  bright  red  heat,  the 
residual  a  ray  activity  decayed  with  a  period  of  about  15  minute 
In  a  similar  experiment  Hahn  and  MeitnerJ  found  that,  correcting 
for  the  residual  activity  which  decayed  slowly,  the  a  ray  produci 
decayed  with  a  period  of  21 5  mins. — a  value  in  close  agreemeni 


120 


100 


with  the  period  deduced  by  Bronson  from  the  activity  curve.  It 
was  thus  clear  that  the  product  of  period  36  minutes  was  vola- 
tilised tat  a  high  temperature,  and  that  the  product  of  shorter 
period  left  behind  emitted  a  rays.  Levin§  showed  that  actinium  B 
conmienced  to  volatilise  at  400*"  C.  and  actinium  C  at  TW  C. 

The  active  deposit  thus  consists  of  at  least  two  successive 
products,  viz.  actinium  B  of  period  36  minutes,  which  does  not 
emit  a  niys,  and  actinium  C  of  period  21 5  minutes  which  emits 
o  ravs. 

♦  Miss  Brooks,  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  373,  1904. 

t  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler,  Wien  Ber.  114,  p.  1147,  1905. 

t  Hahu  and  Meitner,  Phyg.  Zeit.  9,  p.  649,  190S. 

§  Levin,  Phys.  Zeit.  7,  p.  812,  1906. 


]  ACTINIUM  AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  627 

Actinium  D.  The  /9  and  7  rays  emitted  from  the  active  deposit 
re  initially  ascribed  to  actinium  C.  Hahn  and  Meitner*,  how- 
3r,  showed  later  that  another  product,  actinium  D,  of  period 
r>ut  5  minutes,  followed  actinium  C.  This  product  emitted  y8 
d  7  rays,  but  no  a  rays.  The  presence  of  this  substance  is 
)st  simply  shown  by  using  the  method  of  recoil.  A  negatively 
irged  plate  is  brought  near  another  parallel  plate  coated  with 
3  active  deposit  of  actinium.  After  a  few  minutes*  exposure 
t  plate  on  removal  shows  a  B  ray  activity  which  decays  ex- 
nentially  with  a  period,  found  by  Hahn  and  Meitner,  of  5*1 
nutes.  In  this  way  about  20  per  cent,  of  the  total  amount  of 
:iniu!n  D  formed  in  the  interval  of  exposure  is  transferred  to 
:*  recoil  plate.  Evidence  of  the  existence  of  this  product  was 
tained  in  several  ways  by  Hahn  and  Meitner.  If  a  platinum 
ite  were  exposed  for  a  short  interval  to  a  high  temperature,  the 
binium  B  and  also  the  actinium  D  were  almost  completely 
latilised.  As  we  have  already  seen,  the  a  ray  activity  due  to 
binium  C,  which  is  left  behind,  decays  with  a  period  of  21 5 
nutes.   Under  similar  conditions,  however,  the  activity  measured 

the  /9  rays  rises  at  first,  passes  through  a  maximum  after 
out  5  minutes,  and  finally  decays  exponentially  with  a  period  of 
LO  minutes.  The  increase  of  activity  observed  is  due  to  the 
Illation  of  actinium  D  by  the  transformation  of  actinium  C. 
le  decrease  of  activity  is  finally  governed  by  the  period  of 
tinium  D.  It  was  also  found  that  actinium  D  was  separated 
t  from  a  solution  of  the  active  deposit  on  spongy  platinum  and 

carbon  in  the  form  of  soot. 

As  the  result  of  a  number  of  concordant  determinations  of  the 
cay  of  activity  of  actinium  D  obtained  by  recoil,  Kovarikf, 
:er,  found  its  period  to  be  47 1  minutes. 

Meyer  and  v,  Schweidler J  observed  that  a  metal  plate  exposed 
r  a  long  time  in  the  presence  of  an  actinium  preparation  showed 
very  small  residual  activity  which  decayed  exponentially  with 
period  of  about  11  days.  The  origin  of  this  activity  was  at 
st  diflScult  to  explain,  but  later  Hahn§  showed  that  it  was  due 

*  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phijs.  ZeiU  9.  p.  649,  1908. 

t  Kovarik,  Fhy».  Zeit.  12,  p.  83,  1911. 

X  Meyer  and  v.  Schweidler,  Wien  Her,  116,  p.  316,  1907. 

i  Hahn,  Phij»,  Zeit.  10,  p.  81,  1909. 


528  ACTINIUM   AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  [CH. 

to  the  recoil  of  actinium  X  during  the  transfonnation  of  rA(li«> 
actinium.  The  recoil  atoms  carry  a  positive  charge  and  are 
collected  on  the  cathode. 

211.  Decay    curves    of  the    active    deposit.     For   the 

ordinary  practical  cases  of  the  calculations  of  activity  curves,  the 
effect  of  the  short-lived  product  actinium  A  may  be  neglected  and 
the  three  products  B,  C  and  D  need  only  be  considered.  Since 
the  third  product  of  the  deposit,  viz.  C,  emits  a  rays  and  the  fourth 
product  D  emits  /3  rays,  it  is  evident  that  the  variation  of  f 
activity  with  time  for  a  long  or  short  exposure  will  be  some 
different  fro',    y'  ves  given  in  Fig.  117  for  a  rays.     Fo. 

short  expos  ay  activity  initially  rises  much  less  rapiJly 

than  the  aci  j  aue  to  a  rays  and  passes  through  a  maximum 
later.  For  a  long  exposure,  the  activity  due  to  /3  rays  decreii:>es 
more  slowly  for  the  first  10  minutes  than  for  the  a  rays.  The 
variation  of  ff  ray  activity  for  a  long  exposure  is  proportional  to 
the  value  of  R  (equation  12,  Section  160),  and  for  a  short 
exposure  to  the  value  of  R  given  by  equation  6,  Section  159. 
where  A-i,  X^,  A^  are  the  constants  of  decay  of  actinium  B,  C  and 
D  respectively.  In  a  similar  way,  the  rise  or  decay  curve  for  any 
time  of  exposure  can  be  deduced.  Hahn  and  Meitner  hav. 
shown  that  the  experimental  curves  are  in  good  agreement  witl 
the  theory. 

212.  Actinium  X.  Godlewski*  and  Gieself  independently 
found  at  about  the  same  time  that  a  new  product  called  actinium  S 
could  be  sepamted  from  actinium  preparations  by  treatment  witl 
ammonia.  Actinium  X  is  separated  from  actinium  by  the  Siimi 
method  first  employed  to  separate  thorium  X  irom  thorium,  anr 
is  similar  to  thorium  X  in  chemical  properties.  On  addinj 
ammonia,  the  actinium  is  precipitated  and  actinium  X  remains  ii 
the  filtrate.  The  active  deposit  is  also  removed  with  actinium  y 
but  is  partially  volatilised  when  the  ammonium  salts  are  driver 
ofl*  by  heat.  The  a  ray  activity  of  the  actinium  X  immediately 
after  separation  rises  about  20  per  cent.,  passes  through  a  maximun 
and   ultimately  decays   exponentially   with   a  period,   found   bj 

*  Godlewski,  Fhil.  Mag.  10,  p.  35,  1905. 

t  Giesel,  Jahrb.  d,  liadioakt  1,  p.  345,  1904. 


V]  ACTINIUM   AND   ITO   PRODUCTS  529 

icKllewski,  of  10*2  days.  Godlewski  showed  that  actinium  X  was 
he  parent  of  the  emanation,  for  the  amount  of  emanation  to  be 
btained  from  actinium  X  finally  decreased  at  the  same  rate  as 
8  iictivity.  while  actinium  deprived  completely  of  actinium  X 
litially  gave  off  no  emanation.  The  initial  rise  of  the  activity 
loasured  by  o  rays  is  due  to  the  formation  of  the  active  deposit 
y  the  emanation.  Actinium  X  emits  o  rays  and  some  very  easily 
bsorbed  /8  rays.  Consequently,  if  actinium  B  and  D  are  vola- 
lised  by  strong  heating  of  the  preparation  of  actinium  X,  the 
V  activity,  as  shown  by  Godlewski,  is  small  at  first  but  rapidly 
^s  to  a  maximum  in  about  four  hours,  j'^I  ,^**nately  decays 
ith  the  period  of  10*2  days. 

Debieme  early  found  that  barium  preci^^'ci  .a  solution  of 

jtinium  showed  an  activity  which  decayed  with  the  time.  This 
as  no  doubt  due  to  the  separation  of  actinium  X  with  the 
arium. 

213.  Radio-actinium.  In  the  course  of  an  examination  of 
he  activity  of  an  actinium  preparation  freed  from  actinium  X, 
lahn*  found  that  the  activity  increased  to  a  maximum  much 
Qorc  slowly  than  was  to  be  expected  if  actinium  were  transformed 
lirectly  into  actinium  X.  This  observation  led  to  the  discovery  of 
adio-actinium,  an  a  ray  product  intermediate  between  actinium  and 
ictinium  X.  It  is  in  general  difficult  to  effect  a  complete  separation 
yf  radio-actinium  from  actinium.  Hahn  employed  the  following 
methods.  On  adding  ammonia  to  an  actinium  solution,  radio- 
actinium  precipitates  earlier  than  the  actinium.  In  this  way,  by 
successive  precipitations,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  radio-actinium 
almost  fi-ee  from  actinium  and  actinium  X.  By  adding  hypo- 
sulphite of  sodium  to  a  hydrochloric  acid  solution  of  actinium, 
amorphous  sulphur  separates  out  and  entrains  the  radio-actinium 
with  it.  On  filtering  off  the  sulphur  and  heating  it,  the  radio- 
actinium  is  left  behind. 

The  variation  of  a  ray  activity  with  time  of  a  nearly  pure 
preparation  of  radio-actinium  is  shown  by  the  full  curve  I  in 
Fig.  119.  The  a  ray  activity  increases  at  first,  passes  through 
a  maximum  after  about  17  days,  and  finally  decreases  exponentially 

•    Hahn,  PhiL  Mag.  12,  p.  244,  1906;  IS,  p.  165,  1907. 
'     R.-A  34 


530  ACTINIUM  AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  [CE 

with  a  period  of  196  days,  corresponding  to  the  period  of 
radio-actinium.  The  decay  curve  of  radio-actinium  by  itself 
shown  OD  the  dotted  curve  III.  The  rise  of  activity  shown  in 
curve  I  is  due  to  the  fonnation  of  actinium  X  and  its  succi 
products  from  the  radio-actinium.  This  was  proved  by  Eeparating 
actinium  X  firom  a  preparation  of  radio-actinium  after  reaching 
its  masimum.  The  activity  provided  by  actinium  X  and  iti 
products  is  shown  by  the  dotted  cur\e  II.  Cunes  II  and  III 
add  up  to  form  cune  I. 


Time  in  dayi 
Fig.  119. 

Since  the  successive  products  of  actinium  X  are  all  of  short 
period  compared  with  that  of  radio-actinium  or  of  actinium  X 
the  calculation  of  the  rise  of  activity  of  actinium  with  time 
corresponds  to  the  case  of  two  successive  changes.  The  a  nj 
activity  at  any  time  is  proportional  to  \,P  +  k\,Q  where  X,,  \ 
are  the  constants  of  transformation  of  radio -actinium  and  actinium 
X  respectively ;  F  and  Q  are  given  by  equations  1  and  J 
(Section  159). 

Since  a  rays  are  emitted  by  actinium  X  and  three  of  its  later 
products,  it  would  be  expected  that  k  =  4i  about.  Hahn  found 
a  good  agreement  between  the  calculated  and  experimental  valua 
taking  k  =  3-5. 


:v] 


ACTINIUM   AND   ITS  PRODUCTS 


531 


Levin*,  who  independently  had  obtained  some  evidence  of  the 
xistence  of  radio-actinium,  found  that  actinium  deprived  of  all 
ts  actinium  X  showed  a  residual  a  ray  activity  of  25  per  cent,  of 
he  equilibrium  value.  By  removing  as  completely  as  possible  all 
he  radio-actinium  as  well  as  actinium  X,  Hahn  found  that  the 
:  ray  activity  of  actinium  itself  could  be  reduced  to  about  2  per 
ent.  of  the  equilibrium  value.  The  rise  curve,  found  by  Hahn, 
5  shown  by  the  full  curve  in  Fig.  120.  The  activity  rises  slowly 
t  first  and  reaches  half  its  maximum  value  after  an  interval 
f  about  33  dajrs,  and  requires  150  days  to  reach  a  practical 
naxinium.    The  activity  at  any  time  is  proportional  to  XjPi  +  kX^Q 

100 


80 


60 


^   40 


20 


y 

^^^ 

1 

/ 

f 

/ 

^ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

• 

1 

1 
1 
1      , 

/ 

!/ 

15  30  45  60  75  90         105 

Time  in  days 
Fig.  120. 

'^here  Pi  and  Qi  are  given  by  equations  18  and  19  in  Section  162. 
tahn  showed  that  the  experimental  rise  curve  was  in  close  agree- 
ient  with  theory.  The  rise  curve  to  be  expected  if  actinium 
banged  directly  into  actinium  X  is  shown  by  the  dotted  curve 
I  the  figure. 

214.    Radiations  firom  actinium  and  its  products.    We 

ive  seen  that  Hahn" was  able  to  reduce  the  a  ray  activity  of  acti- 

um  to  about  2  per  cent,  of  the  maximum.     This  indicates  that 

liinium  does  not  emit  a  rays.     Levin  (loc.  cit.)  showed  that  the 

ray  activity  of  actinium  deprived  completely  of  actinium  X 

♦  Levin,  Phil.  Mag.  12,  p.  177,  1906. 

34—2 


632  ACTINIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  [(% 


sank  to  5  or  6  per  cent,  of  the  maximum  value.  Since  Hahn 
Meitner  found  later  that  radio-actinium  emits  some  penetrating 
fi  rays,  the  residual  /S  radiation  in  actinium  plus  radio-actiniuii 
may  have  been  due  to  the  latter.  The  evidence  is  not  suflScienk 
to  decide  definitely  whether  actinium  is  rayless.  If  soft  fi  raji 
were  emitted,  they  would  be  difficult  to  detect  by  the  electric 
method  under  ordinary  conditions. 

Hahn  determined  by  the  Bragg  method  the  ranges  of  the 
a  rays  from  actinium  products.  Some  of  the  numbers  have 
required  correction  as  the  short-lived  a  ray  product,  actinium  A, 
was  not  known  at  the  time  of  the  experiments  (see  Section  147)l 

Hahn  and  Meitner*  later  made  a  systematic  examination  of 
the  products  of  actinium  which  emit  /3  rays.  The  greater  part 
of  the  penetrating  radiation  arises  from  actinium  D.  The  /3  raw 
from  this  substance  are  half  absorbed  in  0'24  mm.  of  aluminiuiiL 
They  also  found  some  soft  /8  rays  from  radio-actinium  which  were 
half  absorbed  in  004  mm.  of  aluminium.  Evidence  was 
found  of  the  presence  of  some  penetrating  /8  rays.  Actinium  B  i» 
not  rayless  but  emits  soft  /8  rays. 

Mile  Blanquiesf  has  found  some  evidence  that  the  a  rajs 
emitted  from  actinium  C  are  complex.  The  Bragg  curve  showing 
the  variation  of  the  ionisation  along  the  path  of  a  pencil  of  o  rayi 
from  actinium  C  was  slightly  dififerent  from  the  corresponding 
curves  for  simple  a  ray  products  like  radium  C  and  poloniuia 
Further  experiments  gave  some  indication  that  actinium  C  was 
complex  and  consisted  of  two  a  ray  products.  These  results, 
however,  lack  confirmation  J. 

The  two  products  radium  C  and  thorium  C  both  break  up  ifl 
an  abnormal  way.  From  the  close  analogy  between  the  C  products 
of  the  radium,  thorium  and  actinium  series,  it  might  be  expected 
that  actinium  C  would  show  some  peculiarities  in  its  mode  of 
transformation.  Further  investigation  is  required  to  clear  up  th^ 
point. 

It  will  be  shown  later  (Chapter  XVIII)  that  there  is  a  mosi 

*  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phys.  Zeit,  9,  p.  697,  1908. 
t  Mile  Blanquies,    C.  R.  151,   p.   57,   1910;    Le  Radium,   6,  p.  230,  19W; 
7,  p.  159,  1910. 

t  See  aUo  Moseley  and  Fajans,  Phil.  Mag,  82,  p.  629,  1911. 


xv] 


ACTINIUM  AND   ITS   PRODUCTS 


533 


remarkable  analogy  between  the  modes  of  transformation  and  the 
chemical  properties  of  the  products  of  the  actinium  and  thorium 
seriea  The  products  A,  B,  C,  D  exhibit  a  similar  gradation  of 
properties  for  both  elements.  Stromholm  and  Svedberg*  showed 
that  actinium  X  and  thorium  X  are  undistinguishable  as  regards 
chemical  properties  and  probably  belong  to  the  group  of  alkaline 
earths.  Radio-actinium  has  properties  closely  allied  to  thprium, 
while  actinium  has  properties  intermediate  between  calcium  and 
lanthanum.  Neither  actinium,  radio-actinium  nor  actinium  X  is 
appreciably  volatilised  at  a  red  heat  under  ordinary  experimental 
conditions. 

215.  Actinium  BerieB.  The  series  of  transformation  pro- 
ducts of  actinium  and  some  of  their  constants  are  given  in 
the  table  below.  In  the  absence  of  any  definite  knowledge  of 
the  place  of  origin  of  actinium  in  the  uranium  series,  it  is  not 
possible  to  give  the  atomic  weights  of  actinium  or  of  its  products. 
Taking  the  unknown  atomic  weight  of  actinium  as  A,  the  relative 
atomic  weights  are  given  in  the  second  column.  An  expulsion 
of  an  a  particle  is  supposed  to  lower  the  atomic  weight  by  four 
units. 

Actinium  Series, 


Actinium 
Series 

Actinium 
Radio-actinium 
Actinium  X  ... 
Emanation     ... 
Actinium  A  ... 
Actinium  B   ... 
Actinium  C   ... 
Actinium  D  ... 

Atomic 
weight 

A 

Half-value 
period 

• 

Badiation 

Bange  of 

a  rajs  at 

16°  C. 

? 

raylftss 

A 

19*5  days 

a4-/3 

4*60  cms. 

A-A 

A-S 

10-2  days 
3*9  sees. 

a 
a 

4-40    „ 
5-70    „ 

A -12 

•002  860. 

a 

6-50    „ 

A-\6 

36  mins. 

slow  /9 

A-\6 

2'1  mins. 

a 

5-40    „ 

A-20 

471  mins. 

/3+y 

StrOmholm  and  Svedberg,  ZeiUchr.  Anorg,  Chem.  68,  p.  197,  1909. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THORIUM  AND  ITS  PRODUCTS. 

216.  We  have  given  in  Section  4  a  brief  statement  of  the 
discovery  of  thorium  and  of  its  radio-active  properties.  In  this 
chapter,  the  long  series  of  transformations  occurring  in  thorium 
will  be  discussed  in  some  detail.  For  clearness,  it  is  desirable 
first  of  all  to  consider  the  transformation  of  the  thorium  emanation. 
We  have  seen  (Section  130  et  seq,)  that  thorium  compounds  emit 
a  characteristic  emanation  of  period  54  seconds.  On  exposing 
a  negatively  charged  plate  in  the  presence  of  the  emanation,  it 
becomes  coated  with  the  active  deposit.  The  concentration  of  the 
deposit  on  the  cathode  in  an  electric  field  shows  that  the  carriere 
of  the  active  matter  have  a  positive  charge.  In  the  absence  of  an 
electric  field,  the  surface  of  all  bodies  in  contact  with  the  emanation 
becomes  active  by  diffusion  of  the  carriers. 


Thorium  A.  We  have  seen  in  Section  147  that  an  a  ray 
product  of  short  life  was  found  by  Geiger  to  be  always  associated 
with  the  thorium  emanation.  This  substance,  called  thorium  A*, 
is  the  first  product  of  the  emanation.  The  latter  breaks  up  with 
the  emission  of  an  a  particle  and  the  residue  of  the  atom  becomes 

*  To  avoid  confasion,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  product  here  ctUcd 
thorium  B  was  initially  known  as  thorium  A.  The  complex  product  here  calM 
thorium  C  was  initially  considered  as  two  and  called  thorium  B  and  thoriaxn  C 
The  name,  thorium  D,  remains  unchanged.  The  alteration  of  nomenclature  arosi 
from  the  comparatively  late  discovery  of  the  product  in  the  emanation  now  called 
thorium  A.  A  discussion  of  the  reasons  for  the  nomenclature,  which  is  adopted  in 
this  book,  was  given  by  Rutherford  and  Geiger  (Phil,  Mag,  22,  p.  621,  1911). 


CH.  XVl]  THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  535 

the  atom  of  thorium  A.  Geiger*  and  Rutherford  and  Geigerf 
showed  that  the  atoms  of  thorium  A  were  initially  charged 
positively,  and  were  transferred  to  the  cathode  in  a  strong  electric 
field.  Thorium  A  breaks  up  with  the  emission  of  a  particles  and 
is  transformed  into  thorium  B.  The  period  of  thorium  A  was 
measured  by  Moseley  and  FajansJ  and  found  to  be  0*14  second. 
Under  ordinary  experimental  conditions,  thorium  A  has  practically 
disappeared  before  the  activity  of  the  deposit  on  a  plate  which 
has  been  exposed  to  the  emanation  can  be  measured.  The 
activity  on  removal  is  then  due  to  the  products  thorium  B, 
C  and  D. 

The  range  of  the  o  particles  from  the  emanation  and  thorium  A 
are  not  very  diflferent.  Barratt  by  the  scintillation  method  found 
the  ranges  of  the  a  particles  from  the  emanation  and  thorium  A 
to  be  5  0  and  54  cms.  respectively.  Geiger  and  Nut  tall  by  the 
electric  method  found  the  corresponding  values  50  and  5*7  cms. 
at  15"  C. 

There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  thorium  A  behaves  as  a 
non-gaseous  substance.  Its  association  with  the  emanation  under 
ordinary  conditions  is  due  to  the  shortness  of  its  life,  for  the 
greater  part  of  it  is  transformed  in  situ  before  it  has  time  to 
diffuse  to  the  surface  of  the  containing  vessel.  As  we  have  seen,  it 
is  most  conveniently  separated  by  concentration  on  the  cathode  in 
an  electric  field. 

Thorium  A  is  very  analogous  in  all  its  properties  to  the 
corresponding  product  of  the  actinium  emanation,  actinium  A,  of 
period  1/500  second. 

217.  Thorium  B  and  C.  If  a  plate  be  exposed  for  several 
days  in  the  presence  of  a  constant  supply  of  thorium  emanation, 
the  activity  on  removal  decays  slowly  at  first,  but  after  a  few 
hours  decreases  exponentially  with  the  time  with  a  period  of 
10*6  hours.  The  decay  of  the  active  deposit  is  practically  the 
same  whether  a,  /9  or  7  rays  are  used  for  measurement.  The 
curve  of  decay  for  a  long  exposure  is  shown  in  Fig.  121,  curve  BB, 

•  Geiger,  Phil.  Mag.  92,  p.  201,  1911. 

t  Rutherford  and  Geiger,  Phil.  Mag.  32,  p.  621,  1911. 

X  Moseley  and  Fajans,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  629,  1911. 


536 


THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS 


[CH. 


The  variation  of  activity  with  time  was  shown  by  Rutherford  and 
Miss  Brooks*  to  depend  upon  the  time  of  exposure  to  the  emana- 
tion. The  curve  for  a  short  exposure  of  a  few  minutes  is  shown  in 
Fig.  121,  curve  A  A,  The  activity  starts  nearly  from  zero,  passes 
through  a  maximum  after  about  220  minutes  and  ultimately 
decays  with  the  time  with  a  period  of  10*6  hours.  Miss  Brookst 
has  examined  the  variation  of  activity  for  different  times  of 
exposure.  The  analysis  of  the  activity  curves  was  given  by  the 
writer}.  The  observations  were  shown  to  accord  with  the  assump- 
tion that  thorium  B,  which  does  not  emit  either  a  rays  or 
penetrating  ^  and  7  rays  is  transformed  into  thorium  C  which 
emits  a,  /J  and  7  rays. 


100 


8  12 

Time  in  hours 
Fig.  121. 

If  Po  be  the  amount  ot  thorium  B  deposited  during  a  short 
exposure,  the  amount  Q  of  thorium  C  existing  at  a  time  t  later  is 
given  by  equation  5,  Section  159,  viz. 


P  =  P„e-*.<, 


*  Rutherford  an<i  Miss  Brooks,  Phil.  Mag.  4,  p.  1,  1902. 

t  Miss  Brooks,  Phil.  Mag.  8,  p.  373,  1904. 

t  Batherford,  Phil,  Trans.  A,  204,  p.  169,  1905. 


Vl]  THORIUM  AND  ITS   PRODUCTS  537 

rhere  Xj,  X^  are  the  constants  of  thorium  B  and  C  respectively, 
'he  activity  measured  by  the  a  rays  is  proportional  to  Q.  The 
nal  exponential  decay  with  a  period  of  10*6  hours  fixes  the 
eriod  of  one  of  the  products,  say  thorium  B,  as  10*6  hours.  The 
omparison  of  theory  with  experiment  shows  that  the  other  product 
as  a  period  of  about  1  hour.  As  we  have  seen  in  Section  165,  it 
J  impossible  to  decide  from  the  activity  curve  whether  thorium  B 
r  C  has  the  longer  period  of  10*6  hours.  This  question  has  been 
ittled  by  the  discovery  of  several  methods  of  separating  thorium 
I  from  thorium  C.  Miss  Slater*  showed  that  thorium  B  could 
e  separated  from  thorium  C  by  their  difierence  in  volatility. 
-  platinum  wire  coated  with  the  active  deposit  was  heated  for 
jveral  minutes  to  a  temperature  of  about  1000°  C.  Thorium  B 
as  completely  volatilised  and  the  activity  of  the  wire  measured 
Y  the  a  rays  was  then  found  to  diminish  exponentially  with  the 
ine  with  a  period  of  about  1  hour.  This  showed  that  the  a  ray 
roduct,  thorium  C,  had  the  shorter  period,  and  that  the  period  of 
)*6  hours  must  be  ascribed  to  thorium  B. 

By  exposing  the  wire  for  a  few  minutes  to  a  temperature 
nder  700°  C,  the  a  ray  activity  of  the  wire  was  not  diminished, 
lowing  that  thorium  C  was  not  volatilised  at  this  temperature, 
it  the  decay  afterwards  was  always  more  rapid  than  the  normal, 
he  volatilised  thorium  B  was  collected  on  a  cold  cylinder  sur- 
►unding  the  wire.  The  curve  for  the  variation  of  the  activity  of 
le  cylinder  with  time  was  identical  with  curve  AA,  Fig.  121,  for 
short  exposure  to  the  emanation.  This  is  to  be  expected  if 
lorium  B  alone  is  volatilised  from  the  wire.  By  heating  the 
ire  to  1200""  C,  all  the  thorium  C  was  volatilised. 

Miss  Slater  also  observed  that  an  active  plate  exposed  to  the 
tthode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube  lost  some  of  its  activity.  In  this 
tse  the  apparent  volatilities  of  the  products  were  reversed,  for  it 
as  shown  that  thorium  C  was  more  readily  removed  from  the 
ate  than  thorium  B. 

The  results  obtained  by  v.  Lerchf  and  PegramJ  by  electrolysis 

a  solution  of  the  active  deposit  also  showed  that  two  products 

♦  Mi88  Slater,  Phil.  Mag,  9,  p.  628,  1905. 

t  F.  V.  Lerch,  Ann.  d.  Phyn,  12,  p.  745,  1903 ;  Wien  Ber,  U4,  p.  653,  1905 

X  Pegram,  Phys,  Rev.  17,  p.  424,  1903. 


538 


THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS 


[CH. 


were  present.  The  activity  on  the  electrodes  was  found  to  decaj 
abnormally,  falling  to  half  value  in  times  varying  from  1  to  5  horn 
These  results  showed  that  the  matter  obtained  by  electrolysis 
consisted  of  thorium  B  and  C  in  varying  proportions  F.  v.  Lerch* 
found  that  pure  thorium  C  was  deposited  on  a  nickel  plate  placed 
in  a  solution  of  the  active  deposit.  The  decay  of  the  activity  on 
the  nickel  was  exponential  with  a  period  of  60  minutes.    Levinf 


10 


8 


5   6 


|4 


c 

( 

> 

• 

-~^-^ 

7 

< 

/ 

> 

>■ 

IG 

/ 

« 

12  3  4  5 

lonitation 
Fig.  122. 

found  that  by  adding  carbon  in  the  form  of  soot  to  a  solution  of 
thorium  B  +  C,  the  thorium  C  was  removed  with  the  carbon  and 
B  remained  in  solution. 

F.  v.  Lerch  found  that  thorium  B  is  not  rayless  as  at  first 
supposed  but  emits  soft  /8  rays.  Hahn  found  the  coefficient  of 
absor|)tion  of  these  rays  in  aluminium  to  be  175  (cms.)~^    The 


♦  F.  V.  Lerch,  Ann.  d,  Phys.  12,  p.  746,  1903;  Wien  Ber.  114.  p.  658,  1905. 
t  Levin,  Phys,  Zeit.  B,  p.  129,  1907. 


THORIUM   AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  539 

Bs  of  the  groups  of  /8  rays  emitted  have  abready  been  given 
Ion  95. 

Complex  nature  of  thorium  C.     In  examining  the 

►f  the  a  particles  from  the  active  deposit  of  thorium  by 

method  (Section  66),  Hahn*  showed  that  two  groups  of 

of  distinct   range   were   present.     The   ionisation   curve 

d  by  him  is  shown  in  Fig.  122.     It  is  clear  from  the  figure 

• 

le  set  of  a  rays  has  a  range  of  8*6  cms.,  and  the  other 
5  of  50  cms.  The  ranges  were  redetermined  by  Marsden 
rratt  who  found  values  in  good  accord,  viz.  4*8  and  8*6  cms. 
hese  results  it  was  at  first  concluded  that  two  successive 
roducts  were  present.  It  was  found  impossible  to  separate 
yo  products  by  chemical  or  physical  methods,  and  for  this 
ler  reasons  it  was  supposed  that  the  product  emitting  rays 
3  8*6  cms.  had  probably  a  short  period  of  transformation, 
aore  detailed  examination,  however,  has  indicated  that  the 
ray  products  in  thorium  C  are  not  successive.  If  the 
s  were  successive,  it  would  be  expected  that  the  second 
be  separated  by  recoil  from  the  first.  Hahnf,  however, 
)btain  no  evidence  of  separation  by  this  method.  This 
^  as  confirmed  by  Geiger  and  Marsden  under  such  conditions 
the  a  ray  product  were  separated  by  recoil,  it  would  be 
fl  even  if  its  period  were  of  the  order  of  a  millionth  of 
d.  BronsonJ  and  Geiger  and  Marsden  §  also  showed  that 
^e  a  particles  emitted  by  the  emanation  plus  the  active 
in  equilibrium  with  it,  one  only  was  contributed  by 
1  C.  Since  there  are  only  three  a  ray  substances  con- 
viz,  the  emanation,  thorium  A  and  thorium  C,  it  is  clear 
e  number  of  a  particles  emitted  from  thorium  C  corresponds 
one  product  in  equilibrium  with  the  emanation.  Further 
is  been  thrown  on  the  question  by  Marsden  and  Barratt||. 
)und  that  the  a  particles  from  thorium  C  of  range  4*8  and 
►'6  cms.  were  not  equal  in  number  as  at  first  supposed,  but 

♦  Hahn,  I'hiL  Mag.  11.  p.  793,  1906. 

t  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Verh,  d.  D.  Phy$.  Ges,  11,  p.  55,  1909. 

X  Bronson,  Phil.  Map.  16,  p.  291,  1908. 

§  Geiger  and  Marsden,  Phys.  Zeit.  11,  p.  7,  1910. 

II  Marsden  and  Barratt,  Proc,  Phys.  Soc.  24,  p.  50,  1911. 


540  THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  [CH. 

that  65  of  the  total  number  was  of  the  longer  range  and  '35  of  tie 
shorter  range.     Considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  it  appears 
certain  that  thorium  C  breaks  up  in  two  distinct  ways.    The 
nature  of  the  anomalous  transformation  of  thorium  C  has  been 
examined  in  detail  by  Marsden  and  Darwin*.    The  two  component 
products  generally  included  under  the  name  thorium  C,  one  d 
which  emits  a  rays  of  range  4*8  and  the  other  of  range  8  6  cms., 
will  for  convenience  be  called  thorium  Ci  and  thorium  Cj  respec- 
tively.     It  was   found  that  thorium   Ci  and  Cg  always  appear 
together  in  constant  ratio,  and  that  it  was  impossible  to  effect 
a  separation  either  by  physical  or  chemical  methods  or  by  recoil 
from  thorium  B.     They  found,  however,  that  thorium  C  emitt^ 
some   0   rays   of    greater    penetrating    power   than    those    from 
thorium  D.     This  was  confirmed  by  measurements  of  the  relative 
penetrating  power  of  the  ff  radiation  from  thorium  B  +  C  +  D, 
C  4-  D,  and  D.     On  the  other  hand,  thorium  C  gave  out  little,  if 
any,  y  radiation  compared  with  thorium  D.     The  efficiency  of  the 
recoil  of  thorium   D   from  thorium  C  was  12   per   cent,  when 
measured  by  /S  rays  and  30  per  cent,  when  measured  by  7  rays. 
Similar  results  were  independently  obtained  by  Hahn  and  Meitnerf. 

In  explanation  of  these  results,  Marsden  and  Darwin  suggest 
that  the  atoms  of  thorium  C  are  transformed  in  two  distinct  way& 
On  the  average  about  one-third  of  the  atoms  breaks  up  with  the 
emission  of  a  rays  of  range  4*8  cms.  and  two-thirds  with  the 
emission  of  ^  rays.  The  a  ray  transformation  gives  rise  to 
thorium  D,  which  breaks  up  with  emission  of  )8  and  7  rays,  and 
the  yS  ray  transformation  to  thorium  Cg  which  breaks  up  with  the 
emission  of  swift  o  particles  of  range  8*6  cms.  It  is  seen  that  the 
order  of  transformation  with  regard  to  the  emission  of  an  0  or 
/3  particle  is  reversed  in  the  two  branches. 

The  transformation  of  the  active  deposit  discussed  above  is 
shown  in  the  diagram.  The  letter  a  or  /9  in  the  direction  of 
the  arrow,  indicates  the  direction  of  the  transformation  of  that 
component  of  the  product  which  emits  a  or  /3  rays.  It  would 
appear  that  the  end  product  of  both  branches  should  have  the 
same  atomic  weight. 

•  Marsden  and  Darwin,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  87,  p.  17,  1912. 
t  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phys.  ZeiU  13,  p.  390,  1912. 


XVl]  THORIUM   AND  ITS  PRODUCTS  541 

This  system  of  transfonnation  not  only  agrees  with  the  experi- 
mental facts  but  also  is  not  contrary  to  the  relation  found  by 
Geiger  and  Nuttall  (Chap.  XVIII)  between  the  range  of  the 
a  particles  and  the  period  of  transformation  of  the  products.  On 
this  rule  the  period  of  thorium  Cj,  which  emits  the  swiftest 
a  particles  known,  is  of  the  order  of  10~"  seconds. 

7 


/^ 


ThorD  >? 

3*1  mins 

Thor  A  ^  Thor  B >-  Thor  C"  .<2,-^^ 

Periods      '14  mc  10*6  hre  60  mins      p^^,  ^^ 

10-^2  sec  (?) 

Further  important  evidence  on  this  question  has  been  obtained 
by  L.  Meitner*.  By  a  special  chemical  method,  she  has  succeeded 
in  separating  the  two  components  of  thorium  C.  A  few  drops  of 
stannous  chloride  were  added  to  a  weak  hydrochloric  acid  solution 
of  the  active  deposit  of  thorium  and  several  nickel  plates  were 
dipped  successively  into  the  boiling  solution.  The  residue  was 
then  rapidly  evaporated  to  dryness  and  the  rise  curves  were 
measured  by  a  rays  and  also  by  7  rays.  The  7  ray  curve  started 
from  the  origin  while  the  a  ray  curve  started  from  a  minimum  of 
17  per  cent.  Without  the  addition  of  stannous  chloride,  the  a 
and  7  ray  rise  curves  both  start  from  the  origin.  These  results 
indicate  that  nickel  in  the  presence  of  stannous  chloride  separates 
only  one  component  of  thorium  C.  The  component  above  desig- 
nated C«  remains  behind  with  thorium  B.  It  would  appear  that 
the  transformation  of  thorium  B,  rather  than  of  thorium  C,  is 
anomalous  and  gives  rise  to  two  products. 

This  anomalous  transformation  is  of  great  interest  and  import- 
ance, for  it  is  the  most  definite  example  of  a  single  substance 
which  has  two  distinct  modes  of  transformation.  We  have 
already  seen  (Section  198)  that  radium  C  also  breaks  up  in  two 
ways,  but  in  a  very  different  relative  proportion  to  those  observed 
in  the  present  case. 

♦  L.  Meitner,  Phya.  Zeit.  18,  p.  623,  1912. 


542  THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  [CB. 


219.     Thorium  D.     It  was  at  first  supposed  that  the  jS 
7  rays  from  the  active  deposit  arose  entirely  from  the  product 
thorium   C.     Hahn    and   Meitner*    showed,   however,   that  the 
emission  of  /3  and  7  rays  belonged   to  a  successive  product  of 
thorium  C,  which  will  be  called  thorium  D.     Thorium  D  is  most 
simply  separated  by  the  method  of  recoil.     A  negatively  charged 
plate  is  exposed  for  a  short  interval  above  a  plate  coated  with  the 
active  deposit.     On  removal  the  activity  on  the  recoil  plate  is  due 
entirely  to  ^  and  7  rays,  and  decays  exponentially  with  a  period 
of  3*1  minutes.     The  amount  received  by  recoil  is  proportional 
to  the  amount  of  thorium  C  present,  and  there  appcixrs  to  be 
no  doubt  that  thorium  D  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  successive 
product  of  thorium  C.     Hahn   and  Meitner  also   succeeded  in 
separating  thorium    D   by   chemical    methods.     Thorium   D  is 
entrained  by  precipitation  with    hydrogen   sulphide   or  by  the 
addition  of  animal  charcoal  to  a  solution  of  the  active  deposit 
V.  Lerch  and  v.  Wartburgf  found  that  thorium  D  was  readily 
separated  from  the  active  deposit  by  heat.     It  volatilises  more 
easily  than  thorium  B  or  C. 

It  is  at  present  not  certain  whether  thorium  D  is  formed  as 
a  result  of  each  of  the  two  modes  of  transformation  of  thorium  C 
or  whether  it  arises  from  only  one  of  them,  although  we  have  seen 
in  the  last  section  that  the  latter  is  more  probable.  There 
appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  separation  of  thorium  D  by  recoil 
is  a  consequence  of  the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle.  Some  light 
may  be  thrown  on  the  origin  of  thorium  D  by  an  examination  of 
the  range  of  the  recoil  atoms  of  thorium  D  in  air  at  reduced 
pressure. 

Hahn  and  MeitnerJ  found  that  the  ^  rays  from  thorium  D 
were  absorbed  exponentially  with  a  coefficient  of  absorption  in 
aluminium  of  about  /i  =  15  (cms.)""^  The  velocities  of  the  com- 
ponent groups  of  rays  emitted  from  this  product  have  already 
been  given  in  Section  95.  The  7  rays  from  thorium  D  are 
slightly  more  penetrating  than  those  emitted  from  radium  C. 

No  residual  activity  has  been  observed  after  sufficient  time 

*  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Verh.  d.  D,  Phys.  Qes.  11,  p.  55,  1909. 
t  V.  Lerch  and  v.  Wartburg,  Wien  Ber,  118,  p.  1576, 1909. 
X  Hahn  and  Meitner,  Phyt,  Zeit.  9,  p.  821, 190a 


XVl]  THORIUM    AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  543 

lias  elapsed  for  the  complete  decay  of  the  ordinary  active  deposit. 
Consequently  thorium  D  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  last  active 
product  of  the  thorium  series.  The  question  as  to  the  nature  of 
tile  end  product  will  be  discussed  later  in  Chapter  XVIII. 

220.  Thorium  X.  An  account  of  the  discovery  and  pro- 
perties of  thorium  X  has  already  been  given  in  Chapter  VIII, 
Section  123.  Thorium  X  is  most  simply  separated  from  thorium 
-aalts  by  precipitation  of  the  thorium  by  ammonia.  The  thorium  X 
then  remains  in  the  solution.  Rutherford  and  Soddy  showed 
tihat  thorium  X  was  the  parent  of  the  thorium  emanation,  for 
tihe  amount  of  the  latter  was  always  proportional  to  the  amount 
of  thorium  X  and  decayed  with  it.  Rutherford  and  Soddy  found 
that  the  period  of  thorium  X  was  about  4  days.  Later  observa- 
tions by  V.  Lerch*  and  Levin  f  fixed  the  period  as  3'65  days.  By 
the  ammonia  method  of  separation,  thorium  X  is  separated  by 
itself  without  the  active  deposit.  In  consequence  of  the  production 
of  the  active  deposit  through  the  intermediary  of  the  emanation, 
there  is  an  initial  rise  of  a  ray  activity  of  about  20  per  cent, 
during  the  first  twenty-four  hours.  After  passing  through  a 
maximum,  the  activity  ultimately  decays  with  the  period  of 
thorium  X,  viz.  365  days. 

Geiger  and  Nuttall  have  found  that  thorium  X  emits  a  rays 
of  range  about  43  cms.  at  15°  C.  The  variation  of  activity  of 
thorium  X  with  time  can  be  simply  calculated  assuming  that  it 
is  separated  without  the  active  deposit.  We  may  neglect  without 
^sensible  error  the  eflfects  due  to  the  quick  period  products,  viz. 
the  emanation  and  thorium  A.  Thorium  X  may  be  supposed 
to  be  transformed  directly  into  thorium  B  and  the  latter  into 
thorium  C.  Remembering  that  thorium  X,  the  emanation, 
thorium  A  and  thorium  C  emit  a  rays,  while  thorium  B  emits 
only  soft  )9  rays,  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  at  any  time  t 
is  given  by  ZXiP -^X^R  where  Xi,  X,,  Xj  are  the  constants  of 
thorium  X,  thorium  B  and  thorium  C  respectively,  and  P  and  jR 
are  given  by  equations  5  and  6,  Section  159.  The  activity 
measured  by  the  electric  method  at  any  time  t  is  proportional  to 

•  ▼.  Leroh,  Wien  Ber.  114,  p.  663,  1906. 
t  Levin,  Phil.  Mag.  12,  p.  177,  1906. 


544  THORIUM  AND  ITS  PRODUCTS  [Cl 

3\iP-\-k\R  where  k  is  about  1*3,  but  its   value  depends  on 
conditions  of  measurement. 

The  variation  of  activity  of  thorium  after  complete  removal  of 
thorium  X  can  be  calculated  in  a  similar  way.  The  activity 
curves  have  already  been  given  in  Fig.  84. 

Schlundt  and  Moore*  showed  that  thorium  X  could  be  separatfcd 
from  thorium  if  pyridine,  fu  marie  acid,  or  meta-nitro  benzoic  arid 
were  used  instead  of  ammonia.  With  these  reagents  thorium  B 
is  separated  with  the  thorium  X,  so  that  there  is  not  the  same 
initial  rise  of  activity  of  the  latter  or  decay  of  activity  of  the 
thorium,  observed  as  when  ammonia  is  used.  If  thorium  is  to  be 
prepared  freed  as  far  as  possible  from  the  active  deposit  as  well  as 
from  thorium  X,  these  reagents  are  to  be  preferred. 

Thorium  X  has  chemical  properties  similar  to  the  alkaline 
earths.  It  cannot  be  separated  from  radium  nor  from  meso- 
thorium.  Stromholm  and  Svedbergf  made  a  number  of  experi- 
ments upon  the  crystallisation  of  numerous  salts  mixed  with  a 
solution  of  thorium  X.  In  most  cases,  thorium  X  was  left  in  the 
mother  liquor,  but  in  the  case  of  barium  the  relative  concentrati(» 
remained  the  same  in  the  crystals  and  in  the  solution.  They 
concluded  that  thorium  X  was  isomorphous  with  barium  and  had 
similar  chemical  properties. 

Thorium  X  can  be  separated  by  electrolysis  in  an  alkaline 
solution.  The  active  deposit  present  in  a  solution  of  thorium  X 
can  be  electrolysed  from  an  acid  solution,  leaving  the  thorium  X 
behind. 

221.  Radiothorium.  It  was  initially  supposed  that  thorinm 
X  was  derived  directly  from  the  transformation  of  thorium  itselt 
Later  investigation  has  revealed  the  presence  of  three  products 
which  intervene,  known  as  meso thorium  1  and  2  and  radiothorium. 
In  examining  some  residues  obtained  from  the  separation  of 
thorium  from  the  mineral  thorianite,  HahnJ  found  that  a  new  and 

*  Schlandt  and  Moore,  Joum,  Phys.  Chem,  9,  p.  6S2, 1905. 

t  Strdmholm  and  Svedberg,  Zeitsch.  Anorg.  Chem,  61,  p.  338,  1909 ;  63,  p.  197, 
1909. 

X  Hahn,  Proc,  Roy,  Soc.  A,  76,  p.  115,  1905;  Jahrb,  d,  Radioakt,  2,  p.  2S3, 
1906. 


XVl]  THORIUM   AND  ITS  PRODUCTS  545 

very  active  substance  was  present  which  he  called  radiothorium. 
This  substance  formed  thorium  X  and  some  days  after  preparation 
gave  oflF  the  thorium  emanation  freely.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
radiothorium  is  the  direct  parent  of  thorium  X.  Hahn*  found 
that  radiothorium  emitted  a  rays  of  range  39  cms.,  and  decayed 
'with  a  period  of  about  two  years. 

G.  A.  Blanc  f  independently  about  the   same   time   made  a 

number  of  interesting  observations  which  showed  the  presence  of 

It  new  radio-active  element  in  the  sediment  deposited  by  the  hot 

springs  of  Echaillon,  and  of  Salins  Moutiers.     This  sediment  was 

fbund  to  emit  the  emanation  characteristic  of  thorium,  and  to 

give  rise  to  the  corresponding  active  deposit.     In  later  work,  he 

^as  able  to  separate  from  the  sediment  a  new  substance  far  more 

active  than  thorium  itself,  which  gave  rise  to  thorium  X  and  its 

characteristic  products.     This  substance  was  found  to  be  identical 

^th  the  radiothorium  obtained  by  Hahn  from  thorianite.     Blanc 

determined  the  period  of  decay  of  radiothorium  and  found  it  to 

1)8  737  days.     Later  observations  have  shown  that  radiothorium 

lias  properties  so  closely  allied  to  thorium  that  it  has  not  been 

fcond  possible  to  separate  one  from  the  other.     In  the  light  of 

later  results,  it  is  clear  that  the  radiothorium  obtained  by  Hahn 

feom  the  thorianite  residues  was  not  directly  separated  from  the 

thorium  but  had  been  formed  afresh  from  the  parent  substance, 

xnesothorium,  left  in  the  residues. 

Since  radiothorium  has  chemical  properties  similar  to  thorium, 
it  is  precipitated  from  a  solution  of  mesothorium  by  ammonia, 
the  mesothorium  remaining  in  the  filtrate.  This  is  the  simplest 
^ay  of  obtaining  very  active  preparations  of  radiothorium  freed 
fix)m  mesothorium.  No  doubt  the  radiothorium  separated  by 
Slanc  from  the  sediment  of  the  hot  springs  was  derived  from 
mesothorium  which  had  been  dissolved  in  the  water  and  brought 
to  the  surface. 

222.     Mesothorium.     After  the  discovery  of  radiothorium, 
it   was   supposed   that   radiothorium   was   formed   directly   from 

*  Hahn,  PkiL  Mag,  12,  p.  82,  1906. 

t  G.  A.  Blanc,  Phyt.  Zeit.  6,  p.  703,  1905    7,  p.  620,  1906 ;  8,  p.  321,  1907. 

B.  B.-A.  35 


546  THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  [Ctt 

thorium  itself.  In  1906,  Boltwood*  and  McCoy  and  Rosaf 
independently  made  a  comparison  of  the  relative  activity  of  a 
number  of  thorium  minerals.  The  activity  of  the  mineral  in  the 
form  of  thin  films  was  compared  by  the  electroscopic  method 
After  correcting  for  the  activity  due  to  the  uranium  which  wm 
present  in  some  of  the  minerals,  they  found  that  the  activity 
of  the  thorium  in  the  mineral  was  proportional  to  its  per- 
centage content  of  thorium.  The  specific  activity  of  the  oxides 
prepared  directly  from  the  minerals  was  found  one  month  after 
separation  to  correspond  to  that  due  to  the  thorium  in  equi- 
librium in  the  mineral.  On  the  other  hand,  the  activity  of  the 
oxides  obtained  from  commercial  salts  possessed  a  much  smaller 
activity,  in  some  cases  not  more  than  half  of  the  normal  amount 
DadourianJ  confirmed  these  results  by  measurements  of  the 
amount  of  thorium  emanation  evolved  by  a  solution  of  the 
thorium  salt  or  of  a  mineral.  The  amount  of  emanation  was 
compared  by  measuring  the  activity  of  the  deposit  obtained  by 
exposing  a  negatively  charged  plate  in  the  presence  of  the  emana- 
tion. Since  radiothorium  forms  thorium  X  and  the  latter  the 
emanation,  the  amount  of  emanation  or  of  its  active  deposit 
should  be  proportional  to  the  amount  of  radiothorium  contained 
in  the  solution.  In  this  way,  Dadourian  found  that  the  amount 
of  radiothorium  in  commercial  preparations  was  in  some  cases 
less  than  half  of  the  equilibrium  amount.  Similar  results  were 
observed  by  Eve§  by  comparing  the  intensity  of  the  7  rap 
emitted  by  the  mineral  and  by  commercial  preparations.  It  was 
at  first  natural  to  suppose  that  the  deficiency  of  radiothorium 
was  due  to  the  separation  of  part  of  it  from  the  thorium  during 
the  chemical  processes  of  purification.  On  this  assumption, 
Boltwood  deduced  from  his  measurements  of  the  activity  of  com- 
mercial thorium  preparations  that  the  period  of  radiothorium 
must  be  as  long  as  six  years.     This  result  was  communicated  to 

♦  Boltwood,  Amer.  Journ.  Sci.  21,  p.  416,  1906 ;  24,  p.  93,  1907 ;  Phys,  Zeit.  S, 
p.  556,  1907. 

+  McCoy  and  Ross,  Amer.  Journ.  Sci.  21,  p.  433,  1906;  Journ,  Amer.  Ckem. 
Sac.  29,  p.  1709,  1907. 

X  Dadourian,  Anier.  Journ.  Sci.  21,  p.  427,  1906. 

§  Eve,  Amer.  Journ.  Sci.  22,  p.  477,  1906. 


IVI]  THORIUM   AND  ITS   PRODUCTS  547 

Bahn,  who  had  found  at  this  time  by  direct  measurement  that 
the  radiothorium  discovered  by  him  had  a  period  of  transformation 
of  about  two  years. 

In  order  to  reconcile  these  apparent  diflFerences,  Hahn  suggested 
that  an  unknown  rayless  product  intervened  between  thorium  and 
radiothorium,  which  was  separated  from  the  thorium  during  the 
process  of  purification.  Hahn  *  was  soon  after  able  to  verify  this 
supposition  by  observations  of  the  relative  activity  of  commercial 
preparations  of  known  ages  supplied  by  Knofler  and  Co.  He 
found  that  the  activity  of  thorium  preparations  was  normal 
immediately  after  separation  but  gradually  decreased  with  age 
to  a  minimum  after  an  interval  of  4*6  years.  The  activity  then 
rose  again  slowly  towards  the  initial  normal  value.  The  variation 
of  activity  with  time  is  similar  to  curve  III,  Fig.  105,  Section  167. 
Taking  the  period  of  radiothorium  as  2  years,  he  deduced  from  the 
activity  curve  that  the  intermediate  substance  did  not  emit  a  rays 
and  was  half  transformed  in  about  5*5  years.  A  similar  value  was 
deduced  by  McCoy  and  Ross  {loc,  cit).  This  new  substance  was 
called  mesotkorium.  On  these  assumptions,  the  variation  of  a  ray 
activity  with  the  age  of  the  thorium  preparation  has  been  discussed 
in  detail  in  Section  167.  The  resultant  curve  there  given  is  in 
good  agreement  with  the  observed  curve. 

Boltwood  afterwards  showed  that  mesothorium  was  separated 
from  thorium  by  the  same  process  required  to  separate  thorium  X, 
viz.  by  precipitation  of  the  thorium  with  ammonia.  The  meso- 
thorium remains  in  the  filtrate.  The  activity  of  the  preparation 
of  thorium  X  was  found  to  decrease  slowly  to  a  small  fraction  of 
its  initial  value.  After  passing  through  a  minimum,  the  activity 
was  found  to  increase  slowly  but  steadily  with  time.  The  prepara- 
tion was  found  later  to  emit  freely  thorium  emanation.  The 
mesothorium  in  this  case  had  been  removed  with  the  thorium  X. 
It  at  once  commenced  to  form  radiothorium  and  the  latter  gave 
rise  to  the  successive  products,  viz.  thorium  X,  the  emanation, 
and  the  active  deposit.  This  method  affords  a  very  simple  means 
Df  obtaining  preparations  of  mesothorium  directly  from  thorium 
salts.     It  is  obviously  an  advantage  to  use  a  thorium  salt  as  old 

*  Hahn,  Ber,  d.  D.  Chem.  Qes,  40,  p.  I46t2,  1907 ;  Phyt,  Zeit.  8,  p.  277,  1907 ; 
I  p.  392,  190S. 

35—2 


548  THORIUM  AND   ITS   PRODUCTS  [CE 

as  possible  in  order  that  sufficient  time  shall  have  elapsed  for 
the  formation  of  a  considerable  fraction  of  the  equilibrium  amount 
of  mesothorium. 

Boltwood  also  observed  that  mesothorium  is  entrained  by  tie 
precipitation  of  barium  as  sulphate  in  a  thorium  solution,  and  b 
thus  removed  with  the  radium.  In  chemical  properties,  meso- 
thorium is  closely  allied  to  radium  and  is  always  separated  with  ik 

Soddy*  and  Marckwaldf  showed  that  no  separation  of  meso- 
thorium from  radium  can  be  eflfected  by  fractional  crystallisation 
of  a  preparation  containing  a  mixture  of  radium  and  mesothorium. 

223.  Mesothorium  2.  A  few  hours  after  preparation,  meso- 
thorium was  found  to  emit  y8  and  7  rays.  HahnJ,  however, 
showed  later  that  the  /9  and  7  rays  did  not  arise  directly  firom 
mesothorium  itself  but  from  a  successive  product  of  short  period, 
which  he  called  mesothorium  2.  The  latter  is  readily  separated 
from  mesothorium  1,  by  the  addition  of  a  trace  of  zirconium  or 
thorium  salt  to  the  active  solution  and  precipitating  with 
ammonia.  Mesothorium  2  is  precipitated  with  the  zirconium  or 
thorium  while  mesothorium  1  remains  in  the  filtrate. 

The  activity  of  mesothorium  2  whether  measured  by  the  )9  or 
7  rays  was  found  to  decay  exponentially  with  a  period  of  6*2  houre. 

No  doubt  mesothorium  2  is  transformed  directly  into  radio- 
thorium  although  no  definite  evidence  on  this  point  has  been 
published.  The  activity  of  the  radiothorium  formed  after  the 
decay  of  mesothorium  2  would  be  small  on  account  of  the  great 
difference  in  the  periods  of  the  two  substances. 

Hahn  and  Meitner  showed  that  the  /8  rays  fix)m  meso- 
thorium 2  were  not  absorbed  exponentially.  The  coefficient  of 
absorption  in  aluminium  was  found  to  vary  between  202  and 
38*5  (cms.)"^  The  complex  nature  of  the  yS  rays  from  meso- 
thorium 2  has  been  shown  in  Fig.  70,  and  the  velocity  of  the 
component  sets  of  rays  given  in  Section  95.  Soddy  and  Russell 
(Section  99)  found  that  the  7  rays  from  this  substance  were  some- 
what less  penetrating  than  those  frx)m  radium.     Mesothorium  1 

♦  Soddy,  Trans.  Chem.  Soc,  99,  p.  72,  1911. 

t  Marckwald,  Ber.  d.  D.  Chem.  Ges,  48,  p.  3420,  1910. 

X  Hahn,  Phys.  Zeit,  9,  p.  246,  1908. 


XTl]  THOBIUU   AND  ITS   PRODUCTS  549 

is  supposed  to  be  a  rayleas  product,  although  from  analogy 
vith  other  products  it  is  not  unlikely  that  it  may  emit  slow 
/9  raya, 

224.  Variation  of  activity  of  meiothorium  with  time. 
"With  the  data  already  given,  it  is  a  simple  matter  to  deduce  the 
Variation  of  activity  of  a  preparation  of  mesothorium  with  time. 
Since  mesothorium  1  and  2  are  in  equilibrium  two  days  after 
separation,  we  shall  take  for  simplicity  of  calculation  mesothorium  1 
SDrl  2  as  one  product,  which  is  half  transformed  in  5'5  years  and 
emits  ^  and  7  rays.  This  is  transformed  directly  into  radiothorium 
aod  its  series  of  products.     If  P,  he  the  amount  of  mesothorium 


.nitially  present,  the  amount  P  remaining  after  a  time  t  is  given 
by  PjP,=e'^^',  where  Xi  is  its  radio-active  constant.  The  curve 
)f  decay  of  mesothorium  is  shown  in  Fig.  123.  If  X,  be  the  con- 
stant of  radiothorium,  the  amount  Q  of  radiothorium  present  at  a 
.ime  t  is  given  by  equation  5,  Section  159,  viz. : 

The  variation  of  Q  with  time  is  shown  in  Fig.  123,  curve  A. 
The  value  of  Q  passes  through  a  maximum  afler  4'6  years  and 


550  THORIUM   AND   ITS  PRODUCTS  [CE 

ultimately  decays  exponentially  with  the  period  of  5*5  jem. 
Since  radiothorium  emits  a  rays  and  is  followed  by  four  a  ny 
products  of  relatively  short  period,  the  number  of  a  particles 
emitted  by  the  preparation  at  a  time  t  is  equal  to  5X,Q.  Conse- 
quently the  a  ray  activity  of  the  preparation  varies  nearly  according 
to  curve  A.  The  ^  or  7  ray  activity  at  any  time  t  is  proportional 
to  X,P-f  ArXjQ  when  ft  is  a  constant  which  depends  on  the  relative 
ionisation  under  the  experimental  conditions  due  to  the  fi  or 
7  rays  from  mesothorium  and  thorium  C  +  D.  Taking  it:  —  1,  the 
variation  of  7  ray  activity  with  time  is  shown  in  Fig.  123,  curve  B. 
The  activity  passes  through  a  maximum  after  2*3  years  and 
ultimately  decays  exponentially  with  the  period  of  mesothorium. 

226.  Separation  of  mesothorium  on  a  commercial  fcale. 
We  have  seen  that  mesothorium  after  separation  forms  radio- 
thorium.  The  y8  and  7  ray  activity  rises  at  first  to  a  maximum 
after  about  23  years,  and  ultimately  decays  with  time  with  a 
period  of  5o  years.  Since  mesothorium  has  a  comparatively  long 
life  and  can  be  readily  obtained  in  a  concentrated  state,  it  forms 
a  very  convenient  source  of  strong  activity.  Shortly  after  the 
discovery  of  mesothorium,  Knofler  and  Co.  in  conjunction  with 
Hahn  arranged  to  separate  the  mesothorium  on  a  commercial 
scale  from  thorium  minerals.  The  main  source  of  thorium  is 
monazite  sand.  The  latter  always  contains  uranium  and  con- 
sequently radium.  Since  mesothorium  has  similar  properties  to 
radium,  the  latter  is  always  separated  with  the  mesothorium. 
Commercial  preparations  of  mesothorium,  consequently,  contain 
radium,  and  generally  the  7  ray  activity  due  to  the  radium  in  the 
preparation  is  about  one-quarter  of  that  due  to  the  mesothorium. 
Such  preparations  of  mesothorium  are  now  sold  commercially.  The 
activity  of  the  product  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  7  ray  activity 
of  radium  in  equilibrium.  For  example,  5  milligrams  of  meso- 
thorium on  this  standard  indicates  that  the  7  ray  activity  of  the 
mesothorium  plus  the  radium  contained  in  it  one  month  after 
separation  gives  a  7  ray  activity  equal  to  that  of  5  milligrams 
of  pure  radium  bromide.  The  preparations  of  mesothorium 
are  usually  more  active  weight  for  weight  than  pure  radium 
bromide.     A  year  or  so  after  preparation  a  considerable  amount 


XVl]  THORIUM   AND  ITS   PRODUCTS  551 

of  radiothorium   has  been  formed  and  this  emits  the  thorium 
emanation  freely. 

The  radiothorium  might  at  any  time  be  separated  from  old 
mesothorium  preparations  by  the  addition  of  a  trace  of  thorium 
nitrate  and  precipitation  with  ammonia.  The  mesothorium  and 
thorium  X  remain  in  the  filtrate.  Using  active  preparations  of 
radiothorium,  the  rapid  emission  of  the  thorium  emanation  can 
be  simply  illustrated  by  a  number  of  striking  experiments.  By 
blowing  a  current  of  air  through  the  preparation  on  to  a  zinc 
sulphide  screen,  the  latter  becomes  very  luminous.  With  active 
preparations,  the  main  properties  of  the  emanation  can  be  easily 
demonstrated  on  a  large  scale. 

226.  Constants  of  thorium  series.  The  total  number  of 
o  particles  emitted  per  second  per  gram  of  thorium  in  equilibrium 
with  all  its  products  has  been  shown  by  Geiger  and  Rutherford* 
to  be  2  7  X  10*.  From  the  point  of  view  of  emission  of  o  particles, 
the  two  a  ray  products  included  under  thorium  C  are  equivalent 
to  one  successive  product.  There  are  consequently  six  a  particles 
emitted  by  thorium  and  its  series  of  products  compared  with  one 
from  thorium  itself 

From  the  method  of  calculation  already  given  in  Section  171 
for  uranium,  it  can  be  simply  shown  that  the  fraction  of  the 
thorium  transformed  per  year  is  4*2  x  10~".  The  half- value  period 
of  thorium  is  consequently  1*31  x  10^®  years. 

A  list  of  the  thorium  products  and  some  of  their  constants  are 
given  in  the  table  on  page  552.  The  atomic  weights  of  the  products 
are  deduced  from  that  of  thorium  by  assuming  that  the  expulsion 
of  one  a  particle  (helium  atom)  lowers  the  atomic  weight  by 
4  units.  No  sensible  change  of  atomic  weight  is  supposed  to 
occur  in  a  transformation  where  /3  rays  and  7  rays  are  emitted. 
The  weight  of  each  product  in  equilibrium  with  10®  grams  of 
thorium  is  also  given.  These  values  are  deduced  from  the 
equilibrium  relation  XiNi^T^N^^etc.  (Section  160),  taking  the 
period  of  thorium  as  1*3  x  10^®  years  and  correcting  for  changes  of 
atomic  weights  of  the  products. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  period  of  thorium  is  about  three  times 

*  Geiger  and  Batherford,  Phil.  Mag.  20,  p.  691,  1910. 


552 


THORIUM   AND   ITS   PRODUCTS 


[CH.  XVI 


longer  than  that  of  uranium.  In  1000  kilograms  of  thorium  in 
equilibrium,  less  than  half  a  milligram  of  mesothorium  is  present 
The  weight  of  thorium  X  per  gram  of  thorium  is  7*4  x  10~"  grani 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  final  or  end  products  of  both  branches 
of  the  thorium  series  should  have  an  atomic  weight  208 — a  value 
about  that  of  bismuth.  A  general  discussion  of  this  question  is 
given  in  Chapter  XVIII. 

Thorium  Series, 


Thorium 
Series 


Thorium 

^ . 

Mesothorium  1 
Mesothorium  2 
Radiotnorium 
Thorium  X  ... 
Th.  Emanation 
Thorium  A  ... 
Thorium  B  ... 
Thorium  C     ... 

Th.  Cj 
Thorium  D 


Atomic 

weight 


Weight  per     I    Half.Talue     I  ,,  ..  ,-       I     ^^'^^ 
10*  grams      :  V;  j         !  Radiation  '      a  rav* 


•232 

228 
228 


212 

208 


thorium 

10*  mg. 

0-42  mg. 

5*2xlO-'mg. 


228     ,  015 


224     17-4x10-* 
220     i  1-2x10-7 


216      3-lxlO->o 


212     1 8-5x10-* 


» 


i» 


»♦ 


>i 


»> 


period 

l-3xlOi0yr». ' 

5-5  jrs. 

6-2  hra. 

2yr8. 

3-65  days 

54  sees. 

0*14  sees. 

10-6  hrs. 


212     |7-9xlO-«    „   I      eOmins. 


1-3x10-7 


»»   I 


very  short  (?) 
3-1  mins. 


raylesH 
/8+y 

a 

a+/9 


/3+y 


15^  C. 


2-72  cmi 


3*87  .J 

4-3  ^ 

5-0  „ 

5-7  M 


I 


4-8 


8-6 


34-y 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND  EiMISSION  OF  HEAT. 

227.  Discovery  of  helium.  In  this  chapter  we  shall 
discuss  two  important  properties  of  active  matter  which  have 
been  shown  to  be  intimately  connected  with  the  emission  of 
a  rays,  viz.  the  production  of  helium  and  the  rapid  emission 
of  heat. 

The  history  of  the  discovery  of  helium  possesses  some  features 
of  unusual  dramatic  interest.  In  18()8,  Janssen  and  Lockyer  ob- 
served in  the  spectrum  of  the  sun  s  chromosphere  a  bright  yellow 
line,  which  could  not  be  identified  with  that  of  any  known  terres- 
trial substance.  Lockyer  gave  the  name  "helium"  to  this  supposed 
new  element.  Further  comparison  showed  that  certain  other 
spectral  lines  in  the  chromosphere  always  accompanied  the  yellow 
line  and  were  probably  characteristic  of  helium.  The  spectrum 
of  helium  was  observed  not  only  in  the  sun,  but  also  in  many  of 
the  stars ;  and  in  some  classes  of  stars  now  known  as  helium  stars 
the  spectrum  of  helium  predominates.  No  evidence  of  the  exis- 
tence of  helium  on  the  earth  was  discovered  until  1895.  Shortly 
after  the  discovery  of  argon  in  the  atmosphere,  by  Lord  Rayleigh 
and  Sir  William  Ramsay,  a  search  was  made  to  see  if  argon  could 
be  obtained  from  mineral  sources.  In  1895,  Miers  in  a  letter  to 
Nature,  drew  attention  to  some  results  obtained  by  Hillebrande 
of  the  United  States  Geological  Survey  in  1891.  In  the  course  of 
the  detailed  analysis  of  many  of  the  minerals  containing  uranium, 
a  considerable  quantity  of  gas  was  found  by  Hillebrande*  to  be 
given  oflF  on  solution  of  the  minerals.     At  the  time  he  thought 

*  Hillebrande,  Bull.  U.S.  Geolog.  Survey,  No.  78,  p.  43,  1891. 


554  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT        [CH. 

this  gas  was  nitrogen,  although  attention  was  drawn  to  somft 
peculiarities  of  its  behaviour  as  compared  with  ordinary  nitrogen. 
The  mineral  clevite  especially  gave  off  a  large  quantity  of  gas 
when  heated  or  dissolved.  Ramsay  procured  some  of  this  mineral 
in  order  to  see  whether  this  gas  might  prove  to  be  argon.  On 
introducing  the  gas  liberated  from  clevite  into  a  vacuum  tube> 
a  spectrum  was  observed  entirely  different  fix)m  that  of  argon*. 
The  spectrum  was  carefully  examined  by  Lockyerf  and  found  to 
be  identical  with  that  of  the  element  helium,  previously  observed 
by  him  in  the  sun.  After  a  lapse  of  thirty  years  since  its  dis- 
covery in  the  sun,  helium  had  at  last  been  found  to  exist  on  the 
earth.  An  examination  of  the  properties  of  helium  soon  followed. 
It  has  a  well-marked  complex  spectrum  of  bright  lines,  of  which 
the  most  noticeable  is  a  bright  yellow  line  D,  close  to  the  sodium 
D  lines. 

Helium  belongs  to  the  group  of  chemically  inert  gases.  The 
ratio  of  the  two  specific  heats  J  is  1*66,  indicating  that  helium  is 
monatomic.  On  the  latter  assumption,  the  atomic  weight  of  helium 
has  been  found  by  Watson§  to  be  3*994 

The  occurrence  of  helium  in  considerable  quantity  in  certain 
minerals  containing  uranium  and  thorium  was  renparkable,  for 
there  appeared  to  be  no  obvious  reason  why  an  inert  gaseous 
element  should  be  found  associated  with  minerals  which  in  many 
cases  are  impervious  to  the  passage  of  water  or  of  gases.  A  new 
light  was  thrown  on  this  subject  by  the  discovery  of  radio-activity. 
On  the  disintegration  theory  of  radio-activity,  it  was  to  be  expected 
that  the  final  or  inactive  products  of  the  transformation  of  the 
radio-elements  would  be  found  in  the  radio-active  minerals. 
Since  many  of  the  latter  are  of  extreme  antiquity,  it  was  reason- 
able to  suppose  that  the  inactive  products  of  the  transformation 
of  radio-active  substances,  provided  they  did  not  escape,  would  be 
found  associated  in  some  quantity  with  radio-active  matter  as  its 
invariable  companions.     In  looking  for  a  possible  disintegration 

*  Bamsay,  Proc,  Boy,  See.  A,  68,  p.  65,  1896. 
t  Lockyer,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  58,  p.  67,  1896. 

X  Bamsay,  GpUie  and  Travers,  Joum,  Chem.  Soe,  67,  p.  684,  1896.     Behn  And 
Geiger,  Verhd,  d.  D.  Phys.  Ges,  9,  p.  667,  1907. 
§  Watson,  Joum,  Chem,  Soc,  97,  p.  810,  1910. 


VII]        PBODUCTION   OF   HELIUM.  AND  EMISSION   OF  HEAT  555 

roduct,  the  presence  of  helium  in  all  radio-active  minerals  was 
ote worthy,  for  helium  is  mainly  found  in  quantity  in  minerals 
hich  contain  uranium  and  thorium. 

For  these  and  other  reasons,  Rutherford  and  Soddy*  suggested 
lat  helium  might  prove  to  be  a  disintegration  product  of  the 
kdio-elements.  Additional  weight  was  lent  to  this  suggestion 
y  the  discovery  by  the  writer  that  the  a  particle  expelled  from 
kdium  had  an  apparent  mass  about  twice  that  of  the  hydrogen 
iom  and  might  prove  to  be  an  atom  of  helium. 

The  time  was  opportune  to  test  the  validity  of  this  suggestion. 
1  1903,  preparations  of  nearly  pure  radium  bromide  were  placed 
1  the  market  by  Dr  Giesel  of  Braunschweig.  Using  30  milli- 
rams  of  this  material,  Ramsay  and  Soddy f  examined  the  gases 
t) eased  by  dissolving  the  radium  bromide  in  water.  A  consider- 
>le  quantity  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  was  released  by  the  solution 
Jection  16).  These  gases  were  removed  by  their  passage  over 
red  hot  spiral  of  partially  oxidised  copper  wire  and  the  resulting 
ater  vapour  absorbed  by  phosphorus  pentoxide.  The  residual 
IS  was  then  passed  into  a  small  vacuum  tube  in  connection  with 
small  U  tube  immersed  in  liquid  air  in  which  most  of  the  radium 
nanation  and  carbon  dioxide  present  were  condensed.  On  ex- 
nining  the  spectrum  of  the  residual  gas  in  the  vacuum  tube,  the 
laracteristic  line  Dj  of  helium  was  observed.  This  experiment 
as  confirmed  by  using  an  older  preparation  of  radium  salt.  In 
lis  case,  a  practically  complete  spectrum  of  helium  was  ob- 
jrved. 

In  later  experiments,  the  purified  emanation  from  about  50 
lilligrams  of  radium  bromide  was  introduced  into  a  small  spec- 
•um  tube.  No  helium  could  be  detected  spectroscopically  imme- 
iately  after  the  introduction  of  the  emanation,  but  after  standing 
>ur  days,  the  helium  spectrum  appeared  with  all  its  characteristic 
nes.  These  experiments  showed  that  not  only  was  helium  present 
1  old  preparations  of  radium  but  that  helium  was  produced  directly 
Y  the  transformation  of  the  radium  emanation. 

The  production  of  helium  by  radium  was  soon  confirmed  by  a 

♦  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag,  4,  p.  669,  1902;  6,  pp.  441,  661,  1903. 
t  Ramsay  and  Soddy,  Nature,  68,  p.  246,  1908;  Proe.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  72,  p.  204, 
K)d;   78,  p.  346,  1904. 


556  PRODUCTION  OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT        [i 

Dumber  of  investigators.     P.  Curie   and  Dewar*   placed  a1 

4fOO  milligrams  of  radium  bromide  in  a  quartz  tube.     The 

was  heated  to  fusion  and  the  tube  exhausted  to  a  low  pres 

and  then  sealed  oflF.     The  spectrum  of  the  gases  in  the  tube 

examined  20  days  later  by  Deslandres  and  gave  the  compli 

spectrum  of  helium.     This  experiment  showed  conclusively  tl 

the  presence  of  helium  in  old  radium  preparations  could  not 

due  to  its  absorption  from  the  air. 

The  discovery  of  the  production  of  helium  by  the  radii^ 

emanation  was  of  great  importance,  as  it  showed  in  a  striki»* 

manner   the   remarkable   nature   of  the   procer-^  *  occurr*      *■ 

radium  and  was  the  first  definite  evidence  »€: 

a  known   element    during    the    transformation    •  *    radios 

matter.  '     . 

( 
228.    Origin    and    rate    of   production   of   helium  l| 

radium.     Following  the  discovery  of  the  production  of  helim 

by  the  radium  emanation,  it  became  of  great  importance  to  ^ 

the  origin  of  helium  in  the  series  of  transfonnations  which  occn 

in  radium.     It  did  not  seem  probable  that  helium  could  be  tb 

final  product  of  disintegration  of  the  emanation,  for  the  latt^ 

after  its  rapid  initial  changes  is  transformed  into  a  long  perioj 

product  radium  D.     In  addition,  all  the  radio-active  products  c 

the  radium  series  appeared  to  be  of  high  atomic  weight.     It  wa 

early  pointed  out  by  the  writerf  that  the  production  of  heliuij 

observed  was  probably  due  to  the  accumulated  a  particles  expell 

from  the  radio-active  matter.     On  this  view,  the  a  particle  aii; 

losing  its  charge  became  an  atom  of  helium.     This  connect io; 

between  the  a  particle  and  the  helium  atom  was  difficult  to  prov 

with  certainty.     An  account  of  the  experiments  to  determine  th 

nature  of  the  a  particle  has  already  been  given  in  Sections  61  an* 

62.    It  was  finally  shown  conclusively  that  the  a  particles  from  a 

types  of  radio-active  matter  were  identical  and  consisted  of  heliui 

atoms  carrying  two  unit  positive  charges. 

On  this  view,  every  active  substance  which  emitted  a  particle 

during  its  transformation  must  give  rise  to  helium  in  amour 

*  P.  Curie  and  Dewar,  C.  R,  1S8,  p.  190,  1904. 
t  Rutherford,  Nature^  68,  p.  866,  1903. 


fll]       PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND  EMISSION   OF  HEAT  557 

lopprtional  to  the  rate  of  emission  of  a  particles.  This  has  been 
^ply  confirmed  by  numerous  subsequent  researches,  for  helium 
#  been  shown  to  be  produced  not  only  by  the  radium  emanation 
4t  by  polonium,  ionium,  and  uranium,  and  also  by  preparations 
t  thorium  and  actinium  in  equilibrium  with  their  products. 
I  The  rate  of  production  of  helium  from  radium  and  its  products 
ftn  be  readily  calculated  from  our  knowledge  of  the  number  of 

particles  expelled  per  second  from  one  gram  of  radium.  This 
umber  is  13'6  x  10^®  for  radium  in  equilibrium  with  its  three 

ray  products,  the  emanation,  radium  A,  and  radium  C.     Since 

are  2'^^  '  10^®  atoms  of  helium  in  one  cubic  centimetre  at 

^  nd  temperature,  it  can  be  simply  calculated 

uhe  raoc        the  production  of  helium  per  gram  of  radium 

id  be  158  cubic  millimetres  per  year.     Estimates  of  the  rate 

F  production  of  helium  by  radium  were  initially  made  by  spectro- 

5opic  methods  by  Ramsay  and  Soddy*,  and  later  by  Debiemef; 

lit  the  values  obtained  were  much  smaller  than  the  calculated 

alue  given  above.     The  first  definite  measurements  of  the  rate 

F  production  of  helium  from  a  pure  radium  salt  were  made  by 

ir  James  Dewar^.     The  radium  salt  contained  in  a  glass  tube 

as  connected  with  a  McLeod  gauge  and  the  whole  apparatus 

as  heated  from  time  to  time  to  liberate  the  helium  formed  in 

The   helium   was   purified   by   means   of  cocoanut   charcoal 

nmersed  in  liquid  air,  and  any  hydrogen  present  was  absorbed 

1  the  charcoal  by  cooling  it  with  liquid  hydrogen.     A  number  of 

periments  were  made  and  the  final  determination  showed  that 
ne  helium  was  produced  at  the  rate  of  0*463  cubic  millimetres 
er  gram  per  day.  This  corresponded  to  a  rate  of  production  of 
69  cubic  millimetres  per  gram  per  year. 

Another  determination  was  made  later  by  Boltwood  and 
Lutherford§.  Radium  chloride  containing  about  192  milligrams 
f  radium  was  used ;  the  polonium  and  radium  D  present  in  the 
reparation  were  removed  by  chemical  methods.     The  dry  radium 

•  Ramsay  and  Soddy,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc.  A,  78,  p.  346,  1904. 
t  Debierne,  C.  -R.  141,  p.  383,  1905. 

I  Dewar,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  280,  1908;  88,  p.  404,  1910. 
§  Boltwood  and  Rutherford,   Wien  Ber.  120,  p.  313,  1911;    Phil.  Mag.  22, 
.  686,  1911. 


558  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT         [CE 

chloride  was  placed  in  a  platinum  capsule  which  was  contained 
in  an  exhausted  Jena  glass  tube.  After  83  days  the  radium  was 
heated,  the  gases  liberated  were  collected  and  purified,  and  the 
volume  of  helium  measured.  In  order  to  be  sure  that  all  the 
helium  had  been  removed  by  the  heating,  the  radium  salt  was 
placed  in  an  exhausted  sealed  vessel  for  another  132  days.  At 
the  end  of  this  interval,  by  a  suitable  arrangement,  the  radium 
was  completely  dissolved  in  situ  and  the  gases  completely  pumped 
ofi*.  Special  precautions  were  taken  to  remove  the  last  traces  of 
hydrogen  from  the  liberated  gases.  The  amount  of  helium  formed 
in  the  first  determination  was  6*58  cubic  millimetres,  and  in  the 
second  10*38  cubic  millimetres.  In  each  of  these  experiments,  the 
radium  was  initially  completely  deprived  of  its  emanation. 

The  calculation  of  the  rate  of  production  of  helium  by  radium 
was  made  as  follows : — If  x  is  the  volume  of  helium  produced  per 
day  by  the  amount  of  radium  (element)  present  in  the  salt,  and 
y  is  the  volume  of  helium  produced  per  day  by  the  emanation  and 
the  two  a  ray  products  (radium  A  and  radium  C)  in  equilibrium 
with  the  radium ;  then  when  the  three  latter  products  are  present 
in  equilibrium  amounts  y  =  3ar,  or,  in  other  words,  the  amount  of 
helium  produced  by  the  three  a  products  will  be  three  times 
that  produced  by  the  radium  itself. 

At  the  beginning  of  each  period  of  accumulation,  however, 
all  emanation  had  been  removed  from  the  radium  salt.  The 
amount  of  helium  produced  during  a  subsequent  period  of  t  days 
would  be  therefore  equal  to 

wt  -f  yj\l  -  e-^)  dt^xt-hylt^^^  ^\^^'^]  > 

where  X  is  the  constant  of  change  of  the  radium  emanation,  the 
unit  of  time  being  taken  as  the  day;  for  a  value  of  t  greater  than 
40  djiys,  e~^^  is  very  small  and  may  be  neglected.  If  Q  is  the  total 
quantity  of  helium  produced  in  the  time  t,  and  the  value  of  Sxis 
substituted  for  y  in  the  above  expression,  we  obtain 


Q= 


t 


^<'-l) 


X, 


Substituting  the  known  values  of  Q,  t  and  \  the  value  of  x 
was  found  to  be  00209  cubic  millimetres  for  the  first  determination 


XVIl]       PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OP  HEAT  659 

and  0*0203  cubic  millimetres  for  the  second,  or  an  average  pro- 
duction of  0*0206  cubic  millimetres  of  helium  per  day  by  the 
radium  (element)  present  in  the  salt  used  for  these  experi- 
ments. 

The  quantity  of  radium  contained  in  the  salt  was  192  milli- 
grams. The  production  of  helium  per  gram  of  radium  was 
therefore  0107  cubic  millimetres  per  day  and  per  gram  of  radium 
in  equilibrium  with  its  first  disintegration  products  (the  emanation, 
radium  A  and  radium  C),  156  cubic  millimetres  per  year. 

By  the  kindness  of  Sir  James  Dewar,  Rutherford  and  Boltwood 
were  enabled  to  determine  the  amount  of  radium  chloride  used 
by  him  in  terms  of  their  standard.  On  the  latter  standard,  the 
rate  of  production  of  helium  found  by  Dewar  was  164  instead  of 
169  cubic  millimetres  per  year.  Considering  the  difficulty  of  the 
measurements,  the  two  values  are  in  good  accord. 

The  observed  rate  of  production  of  helium  is  in  very  close 
agreement  with  the  calculated  rate  of  production  (158  cubic  milli- 
metres per  year)  referred  to  earlier,  and  confirms  in  a  striking  way 
the  conclusions  on  which  the  calculations  were  based.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  the  a  particle  consists  of  a  helium  atom  carrying 
two  unit  positive  charges,  and  that  helium  itself  is  monatomic. 

Boltwood  and  Rutherford  also  determined  the  rate  of  production 
of  helium  from  a  known  quantity  of  emanation.  When  radium 
emanation  is  enclosed  in  a  glass  tube,  the  o  particles  or  helium 
atoms  expelled  from  it  penetrate  some  distance  into  the  walls  and 
some  of  them  gradually  diflFuse  back  into  the  evacuated  tube.  In 
order  to  avoid  this  difficulty,  the  walls  of  the  glass  tube  in  which 
the  radium  emanation  was  introduced  were  coated  with  a  thick 
layer  of  sulphur.  After  the  emanation  had  decayed  in  situ  the 
sulphur  was  melted  and  the  helium  fired  into  it  was  liberated  and 
its  volume  measured.  The  volume  of  the  helium  so  found  was  in 
fair  accord  with  the  calculated  value. 

229.  Production  of  helium  by  other  radio-active  lub- 
stancei.  If  the  a  particle  is  a  helium  atom,  each  radio-active 
substance  which  emits  a  rays  should  produce  helium  at  a  rate 
proportional  to  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted.     Debieme* 

*  Debierne,  C.  R,  141,  p.  3S3,  1905. 


560 


PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION  OF   HEAT 


[CE 


early  showed  that  actinium  in  equilibrium  with  its  products 
produced  helium.  Both  polonium  and  ionium  which  emit  a  ravs 
have  been  shown  to  produce  helium.  In  order  to  measure  the 
volume  of  helium  produced  in  a  reasonable  time,  active  prepara- 
tions of  these  substances  are  required.  Experiments  on  polonium 
have  been  made  by  Mme  Curie  and  Debieme*  and  Boltwood 
and  Rutherfordf .  Mme  Curie  determined  the  volume  of  helium 
produced  by  a  highly  concentrated  preparation  of  polonium  and 
found  it  to  agree  closely  with  the  volume  calculated  from  the 
number  of  a  particles  emitted. 

The  production  of  helium  by  ionium  was  measured  by  Bolt- 
wood  J  and  found  to  be  about  half  of  the  calculated  value.  This 
difference  was  no  doubt  due  to  the  fact  that  only  a  part  of  the 
helium  formed  was  released  from  the  ionium  preparation  undei 
the  experimental  conditions. 

The  rate  of  production  of  helium  by  uranium  and  thorium 
and  the  minerals  containing  them  can  be  readily  calculated  from 
a  knowledge  of  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted.  The  results 
are  included  in  the  following  table. 


Kadio-aotive  Babstance 


Total  number 

of  a  particles 

per  gnm.  per 

seoond 


UraDium 

Uranium  in    equilibrium 

with  its  products 
Thorium  in  eouilibrium 

with  its  products 
Radium  in  equilibrium    ... 


2-37  X 10* 

9-7  X  10* 

2-7  X  10* 
13-6  X  1010 


Production  of  helium 
per  gram  per  year 


2*76  X  10""*  cubic  mm. 


11-0x10-6 

31  X  10-* 
158 


»> 


V 
V 


The  number  of  o  particles  emitted  by  uranium  and  uranium 
minerals  and  by  thorium  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  have 
been  determined  by  Geiger  and  Rutherford§  by  the  scintillation 
method. 


*  Mme  Curie  and  Debieme,  C.  R.  160,  p.  386,  1909. 

t  Boltwood  and  Rutherford,  Phil  Mag.  33,  p.  586,  1911. 

:J:  Boltwood,  Proc.  Ray.  Soc.  A,  86,  p.  87,  1911. 

§  Geiger  and  Butherford,  Phil.  Mag.  80,  p.  691,  1910. 


XVIl]        PRODUCTION  OF  HELIUM   AND  EMISSION   OF  HEAT  561 

Since  a  uranium  mineral  in  equilibrium  contains  eight  suc- 
cessive a  ra,y  products,  the  rate  of  production  of  helium  by  each 
product  in  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  uranium  is  1*4  x  10~*  cubic 
millimetres  per  year.  Since  thorium  in  equilibrium  contains  the 
equivalent  of  six  successive  a  ray  products,  each  product  in 
equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  thorium  produces  5*2  x  10~*  cubic 
millimetres  per  year. 

The  rate  of  production  of  helium  by  thorium  and  uranium 
minerals  has  been  determined .  experimentally  by  Strutt  *  by 
measuring  the  volume  of  helium  produced  in  a  given  time  from 
a  solution  of  the  radio-active  mineral  from  which  all  the  helium 
had  been  initially  removed.  Special  methods  were  employed  to 
purify  the  small  amount  of  helium  to  be  measured. 


Mineral 

U3O8 
per 

cent. 

24-50 
13-10 
37-6 

Th  O2 

per 

cent. 

Helium  production  per  gram  per  annum 

Obgerved                      Calcniated 

Thorianite,    Galle 

District 
Ordinary  thorianite 
Pitchblende 

65-44 
72-65 
none 

3-70xl0-^(nim.)3 
2-79      „ 

316      „ 

4-lxlO-*(mm.)3 
3'2      „          „ 
3'5      „           ,, 

The  calculated  values  have  been  deduced  from  the  table  given 
above.  Considering  the  diflSculty  of  the  experiments,  the  agree- 
ment between  calculation  and  experiment  is  as  good  as  could  be 
expected. 

A  number  of  experiments  have  been  made  by  Soddyf  to 
estimate  the  rate  of  production  of  helium  in  commercial  pre- 
parations of  uranium  and  thorium  nitrate,  using  in  each  case 
«ibout  a  kilogram  of  material.  The  amount  of  helium  formed  in 
the  solution  in  a  given  time  was  estimated  by  the  spectroscopic 
method  after  all  other  gases  had  been  removed  by  absorption  by 
liot  calcium.  Evidence  of  the  production  of  helium  by  thorium 
>\'as  observed,  and  it  was  found  that  the  production  of  helium  by 
xiranium  was   certainly  not   greater  than    the   calculated  value. 


♦  Strutt,  Proc.  Boy.  Soc.  A,  84,  p.  379,  1911. 
t  Soddy,  Phil,  Mag.  16.  p.  513,  1908. 


R*  R.'A* 


36 


562  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT         [CE 

Experiments  of  this  kind  are  diflScult,  since  a  kilogram  of  uranium 
produces  only  2*76  x  10"'  cubic  millimetres  of  helium  per  year. 

230.     Estimate  of  the    age   of  radio-active   minerali. 

Helium  is  only  found  in  large  quantity  in  old  unaltered  radio- 
active minerals  which  are  rich  in  uranium  or  thorium  or  both. 
Since  it  is  known  that  both  uranium  and  thorium  produce  helium, 
it  is  thus  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  greater  part  of  the 
helium  found  in  uranium  and  thorium  minerals  is  due  to  the 
transformation  of  the  radio-active  matter  which  they  contain. 
Some  of  the  primary  radio-active  minerals  are  dense  and  compact 
and  impervious  to  the  passage  of  water.  In  these  cases,  it  is 
probable  that  a  considerable  fraction  of  the  helium  formed  in 
them  has  been  retained.  In  other  c^ses,  the  minerals  are  more 
porous  and  doubtless  a  large  part  of  the  helium  formed  has 
gradually  diffused  out.  It  is  also  to  be  expected  that  secondary 
minerals  like  the  uraninite  of  Joachimsthal  should  contain  rela- 
tively little  helium  compared  with  old  primary  minerals,  for  they 
are  much  more  recent  in  origin. 

Assuming  that  the  mineral  initially  contained  no  helium  and 
that  the  constant  of  transformation  of  uranium  and  thorium  has 
remained  unchanged  since  the  formation  of  the  mineral,  it  is  a 
simple  matter  to  calculate  the  interval  of  time  required  to  pro- 
duce the  amount  of  helium  observed  in  a  mineral.  This  will  give 
the  minimum  age  of  the  mineral,  for  no  correction  is  made  for  the 
probable  loss  of  some  of  the  helium  by  diflFusion  over  the  long 
interval  considered.  For  example,  a  specimen  of  thorianite  from 
Ceylon,  which  contained  11  per  cent,  of  uranium  and  68  per  cent, 
of  thorium,  yielded  8*9  c.c.  of  helium  per  gram  of  minenil*. 
Since  one  gram  of  uranium  in  equilibrium  in  a  mineral  produces 
1*10  X  10~^  cubic  millimetres  per  year  and  one  gi*am  of  thorium  in 
equilibrium  8*1  x  10~^  cubic  millimetres  per  year,  the  amount  of 
helium  formed  per  year  per  gram  of  mineral  is  3*3  x  10~*  cubic 
millimetres.  At  this  rate,  the  time  required  to  produce  8*9  c.c> 
is  270  million  yeai-s.  In  a  calculation  of  this  kind,  the  correction 
for  the  transformation  of  uranium  or  thorium  over  the  intenjJ 
considered   is   small   and    may   be   neglected.      The    crystals  of 

♦  See  Strutt,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  76,  p.  95,  1905. 


XVIl]      PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT  563 

thorianite  are  usually  very  dense  and  compact  and  no  doubt  a 
considerable  fraction  of  the  helium  has  been  retained.  This 
mineral  is  very  ancient,  and  probably  belongs  to  the  archaean 
period. 

Consider  next  a  primarj^  uraninite  from  Glastonbury,  Con- 
necticut, which  was  analysed  by  Hildebrande.  This  mineral  was 
'ver}'  compact  and  of  high  density  9*62.  It  contained  76  per  cent. 
of  uranium  and  2*41  per  cent,  of  a  gas  supposed  to  be  nitrogen, 
lut  which  in  the  light  of  later  knowledge  was  undoubtedly  helium. 
This  gave  a  percentage  of  helium  0'344,  corresponding  to  19  c.c. 
of  helium  per  gram.  The  age  of  the  mineral  comes  out  to  be 
230  million  years.  Examples  of  this  kind  may  be  easily  multi- 
plied. These  results  indicate  that  some  of  the  primary  uranium 
and  thorium  minerals  are  certainly  200  million  years  old  as  a 
mininmm  estimate  and  may  possibly  be  considerably  older. 

If  it  were  certain  that  no  helium  escaped,  this  method  would 
prove  very  reliable  for  the  estimate  of  the  age  of  minerals.  There 
is  no  doubt,  however,  that  a  part  of  the  helium  escapes  in  all  cases. 
Moss*  and  J.  A.  Grayf  have  shown  that  a  part  of  the  helium  in 
fchorianite  is  released  by  grinding  the  mineral.  StruttJ  examined 
the  loss  of  helium  from  crystals  of  thorianite  in  a  vacuum.  The 
rate  of  escape  of  helium  was  found  to  be  far  greater  than  the 
"ate  of  production.  The  comparatively  rapid  loss  of  helium  was 
iscribed  to  abrasion  and  weathering  of  the  surfaces  of  the  crystals, 
md  was  obviously  far  in  excess  of  the  possible  loss  of  helium  in 
;he  unaltered  mineral  in  the  earth. 

It  will  be  seen  in  the  next  chapter  that  there  is  very  strong 
jvidence  that  lead  is  the  final  product  of  the  transformation  of  the 
iranium-radium  series.  If  this  be  proved,  the  amount  of  lead  pre- 
lent  in  uranium  minerals  may  be  used,  with  suitable  restrictions, 
o  form  a  maximum  estimate  of  the  age  of  the  mineral. 

231.  Amount  of  helium  in  radio-active  minerals.  Strutt§ 
as  detennined  directly  the  content  of  radium  and  the  amount  of 

♦  Moss,  Proc.  Dublin  Soc.  8,  p.  153,  1904 
t  Gray,  Proc,  Roy.  Sue,  A,  82,  p.  301,  1909. 
X  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  82,  p.  168,  1909. 
§  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  76,  p.  88,  1905. 

3G  — 2 


564 


PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT 


[CH. 


helium  in  a  number  of  radio-active  minerals.  Some  of  these  are 
included  in  the  following  table,  the  percentage  of  uranium  and 
thorium  oxide  present  being  given. 

The  helium  content  of  a  number  of  minerals  found  in  the 
United  States  of  America  based  on  the  analyses  of  Hildebrande 
have  been  given  in  a  paper  by  Boltwood* 


1 

Mineral 

Pitchblende 

Locality 
Joachimsthal 

per 
cent. 

ThOj 

per 

cent. 

Heliam  per 
gram  mineral 

73-5 

0 

0*107  cubic  cuif*. 

Cupro-uranite 

Cornwall     ... 

60-6 

0 

010 

Pitchblende 

)>             ... 

2915 

0 

0-08            „ 

Thorianite  ... 

Ceylon 

13-0 

77 

8-9 

Aeacliyuite 

Hitteroe, 

Norway  ... 

9-42 

1-26 

1-09 

SauiarHkite 

X.  Carolina, 

u.o.A..      ... 

10-30 

1-46 

1-5 

Gadolinite  ... 

Ytterby 

2-94 

8-60 

2-43 

Aeschynite 

Ural  Mts.    ... 

250 

8-18 

0-98            „ 

Clyrtolite    ... 

Llano  Co., 

Texas 

3-67 

5-05 

115 

Sipilite 

Virginia 

2-86 

4-92 

0-59            „          1 

Euxenite     ... 

Arendal, 

Norway  ... 

2-84 

2-72 

0-73 

Orangite     . . . 

Brevig, 

! 

Norway  ... 

lO 

48-5 

oil 

Monazite     ... 

Norway 

1-0 

0-65 

1-54 

» 

Virginia 

01 

2-43 

1-57 

n           ... 

Brazil 

1-54 

0-81 

232.     Amount  of  helium  in  ordinary  substances.    It  L' 

of  great  interest  and  importance  to  determine  whether  the  araount 
of  radio-active  matter  in  ordinary  rocks  and  minerals  is  suflBcient 
to  account  for  the  amount  of  helium  found  in  them.  It  is  obvious 
that  experiments  of  this  kind  may  throw  light  on  the  question 
whether  helium  is  produced  from  ordinary  matter  which  does  not 
show  the  property  of  radio-activity  to  an  appreciable  degree.  In 
addition,  such  results  are  of  importance  in  forming  an  estimate  of 
the  age  of  ordinary  rocks  and  minerals.  This  problem  has  been 
attacked  by  Strutt,  who  has  published  a  number  of  important 


Boltwood,  Amer,  Journ,  Sci,  23,  p.  77,  1907. 


VIl]       PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  565 

apers  on  the  subject.  Special  methods  were  devised  of  releasing 
be  helium  formed  in  the  material  under  investigation,  and  of 
measuring  its  volume.  At  the  same  time,  the  amount  of  radium 
nd  consequently  of  uranium  in  the  substance  was  determined  by 
be  emanation  method.  In  some  cases,  the  amount  of  thorium 
resent  was  estimated  by  the  emanation  method  or  by  direct 
etermination  of  the  activity  of  the  substance. 

It  was  found,  in  general,  that  all  rocks  and  minerals  contained 
mall  quantities  of  radium  and  also  small  quantities  of  helium.  It 
5  to  be  expected  that  if  the  helium  is  formed  from  the  uranium 
nd  its  products,  that  the  amount  of  helium  per  gram  of  uranium 
hould  be  about  the  same  as  for  radio-active  minerals  of  the  same 
ge.  This  has  been  shown  by  Strutt  to  be  usually  the  case. 
)bservations  were  also  made  to  estimate  the  amount  of  neon  and 
rgon  present  compared  with  helium.  The  amounts  of  neon  and 
rgon  observed  were  in  general  very  small  and  negatived  the  idea 
hat  either  of  these  substances  could  be  regarded  as  a  trans- 
Drmation  product  of  the  uranium  or  thorium. 

Strutt*  drew  attention  to  some  cases  where  helium  was 
►resent  in  very  large  amount  compared  with  the  uranium  present, 
•"or  example,  Julius  Thomsen  had  observed  that  a  mineral  from 
vygut  in  Greenland  similar  to  fluorite  spar  gave  27  c.c.  of  helium 
►er  kilogram  of  mineral.  Strutt  found  that  this  mineral  contained 
ir  too  little  radium  to  account  for  the  helium  present,  but  con- 
ained  quite  detectable  quantities  of  thorium.  No  doubt  the 
lelium  observed  was  derived  from  the  transformation  of  the 
itter. 

A  striking  exception  was  the  mineral  beryl.  This  was  found 
0  contain  a  quantity  of  helium  far  in  excess  of  that  possible  of 
xplanation  by  the  small  trace  of  radio-active  matter  present. 
Ipecimens  of  beryl  from  various  parts  of  the  world  gave  similar 
esults.  There  seems  to  be  no  obvious  reason  why  beryl  should 
bsorb  helium  during  its  formation,  and  in  explanation  Strutt  has 
uggested  that  possibly  one  of  the  radio-active  products  of  life 
hort  compared  with  uranium  or  thorium  may  have  separated  out 
dth  the  mineral  and  decayed  in  situ  giving  rise  to  the  helium 
bserved. 

♦  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  80,  pp.  56,  572,  1907. 


666  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT         [CH. 

Strutt*  made  a  number  of  experiments  to  test  whether  the 
helium-radium  ratio  could  be  used  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  age 
of  geological  strata.  Unfortunately  many  of  the  materials  like  the 
limestones  most  suitable  for  this  purpose  contained  little  helium 
or  radium.  He  observed  that  the  phosphatic  nodules  foimd  in 
various  geological  strata  contained  easily  measurable  quantities  of 
helium  and  radium.  Assuming  that  the  uranium  was  deposited 
by  infiltration  when  the  nodules  were  formed  and  that  no  helium 
escaped,  minimum  estimates  were  fixed  of  the  age  of  the  strata 
containing  such  nodules.  Unfortunately  many  of  the  nodules  are 
comparatively  porous  and  undoubtedly  lose  part  of  their  helium. 
It  is  difiicult  in  such  cases  to  estimate  the  age  with  any  certainty. 

Strutti"  has  given  the  following  estimates  of  the  age  of  some 
minerals  and  the  geological  strata  in  which  they  were  found. 


Mineral 

Geological  horizon 

Minimum  age 

Spha^rosidenite  from    Rhine 
provinces 

Oligocene 

8  million  years 

Haematite,  Co.  Antrim 

Eocene 

31       „           ,, 

Haematite,  Forest  of  Dean  . . . 

Carboniferous  limestone 

150       „           ,, 

Sphene,  Renfrew  Co.,  Ontario 

Archaean 

710       „ 

In  order  to  throw  further  light  on  the  age  of  geological  strata, 
a  series  of  investigations  were  made  to  determine  the  amount  of 
helium  and  radio-active  matter  contained  in  specimens  of  zirconj 
found  in  igneous  rocks  of  different  geological  age.  This  mineral  is 
especially  suited  for  such  investigations,  for  it  contains  relatively 
large  quantities  of  radio-active  matter  and  helium,  and  is  so  dense 
and  refractory  in  nature  that  a  greater  part  of  the  helium  formed 
would  be  expected  to  be  retained.  The  results  obtained  by  Strutt 
are  included  in  the  following  table.  It  is  seen  that  many  of  the 
zircons  contain  a  considerable  amount  of  thorium  as  well  as  of 
uranium,  but  the  helium  supplied  by  the  thorium  is  calculated  in 
terms  of  uranium,  and  the  helium  ratio,  i.e.  the  number  of  cubic 
centimetres  of  helium  equivalent  to  one  gram  of  uranium  is 
included  in  the  last  column. 

♦  strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  272,  1908. 
+  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  84,  p.  379,  1911. 

*  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  83,  p.  298,  1910. 


VIl]       PRODUCTION  OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  567 


3^ 

^ 

cc 

o 

3    ^ 
"^  '"^ 

I-* 

fN 

§ 

t^ 

X 

-^ 

12  -3 

S2 

o 

-N 

o 

lit 

* 

05 

X 

-1< 

o 

'M 

X 

9 

1— 1 

;o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

CO 

—4 

•^1 

CO 

C5 

35 

05 

^ 

t^ 

CD 

PC 

V 

1—4 

1-^ 

1-^ 

»1 

1-^ 

(U 

iTi 

* 

•*a 

1 

1 

a 

o 

13 

V 

• 

o 

n 

1-i 

•Ti 

?M 

-t 

(N 

c 

eS 

> 

X 

• 

• 

1^ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

<? 

X 

• 

1-^ 
• 

CD 

• 

05 

• 

1-^ 

• 

P 

H 

D 
0) 

D 

a 

2 

w 

<>1 

1— 1 

CO 

I-- 

o 

•t 

3t 

•c 

^ 

1-^ 

O 

1— I 

X 

(M 

1 

u- 

I 

a 

•N 

»H 

.'N 

'N 

o 

O 

X 

I- 

'^ 

.I-* 

o 

CO 

X 

<? 

»': 

^ 

^ 

00 

X 

o 

o 

o 

'M 

,_■ 

o 

;o 

i-H 

05 

Tf 

X 

o 

N 

H 

s 

CO 

1-^ 

•  • 

i« 

I-- 

'N 

1 

«— 

h 

B 

£C 

1 

1 

SC 

o 

'^ 

00 

-^ 

1* 

<N 

-t 

-t 

!■«• 

CO 

>a^ 

c 

X 

o 

— 

1^ 

r- 

1— • 

CO 

X 

c: 

CO 

X 

if: 

F-* 

CO 

X 

— 

« 

9Q 

X 

CO 

(N 

CO 

p— 1 

CO 

(N 

(N 

;r 

^ 

«> 

o 

irs 

•— * 

U' 

a 

ea 

u 

CO 

^ 

l-M 

t— 

f-N 

" 

f-H 

t^ 

1 

1 

1 
1 

1 

3 

•  ^4 

o 

1-H 

1 

1 

1-- 

• 

i-H 

• 

'S'l 

m 

CO 

• 

X 

— 

• 

■■    - 

• 

—    1 

X 

O 

o 

»-^ 

Q^ 

-t* 

X 

CO 

u-^ 

^ 

CO 

o 

CO 

ift 

t 

• 

V 

C5 

Oi 

O 

q5 

f>i 

X 

I- 

o 

fM 

CO 

CO 

(N 

(M 

•c 

^M 

o 

1 

>> 

.5 

'J 

-4^ 

1 

1 

1 

^^ 

u 

c 

/-> 

5C 

'o 

1 

^ 
^ 

^ 
^ 

9S 

c««~ 

> 

N 

1 

«> 

r- 

r- 

*» 
^ 

1 

c 

^ 

i 

>:. 


eS 
O 

o 


•-    't:      s      3      5?     •''^.      .' 

—  ?^  <i    =    ^'^         «^ 


S 


>  -^  S  w  ><;  2;  '..   'J:  ^;  u^  o 


o 

OQ 


568  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND  EMISSION   OF   HEAT  [CH. 

Taking  a  general  survey  of  the  results,  it  is  clear  that  the 
amount  of  helium  in  the  zircon  is  obviously  connected  with  its 
age.  The  helium  ratios  observed  are  about  the  same  as  those  for 
uranium  and  thorium  minerals  of  about  the  same  age.  From  l 
number  of  results  of  this  kind,  it  should  be  possible  to  estimate 
approximately  the  age  of  the  igneous  rocks  provided  the  geological 
horizon  of  the  latter  could  be  fixed  with  certainty.  Strutt*  also 
made  a  systematic  examination  of  the  helium  ratio  in  saline 
minerals  from  Stassfurt.  The  helium  ratio  was  unusually  large, 
and  Strutt  suggested  that  this  may  be  connected  with  the  un- 
doubted radio-activity  of  potassium.  It  should,  however,  be 
pointed  out  that  potassium  emits  only  fi  rays  and  there  is  no 
certain  evidence  of  the  presence  of  a  rays. 

233.  Heat  emisBion  of  radium.  It  was  soon  recognised 
that  a  considerable  amount  of  energy  is  emitted  from  the  radio- 
active bodies  in  the  form  of  their  characteristic  radiations.  Most 
of  the  earlier  estimates  of  the  amount  of  this  energy  were  based 
on  the  number  and  energy  of  the  expelled  ^  particles  and  were 
much  too  small.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  greater 
part  of  the  energy  emitted  from  the  radio-active  bodies  is  in  the 
form  of  a  rays,  and  that  the  ^  rays  in  comparison  supply  only  a 
small  fraction.  An  estimate  of  the  energy  emitted  in  the  form  of 
a  rays  by  uranium,  thorium  and  radium  was  given  by  Rutherford 
and  McClungf  who  determined  the  number  of  ions  produced  and 
the  energy  required  to  produce  an  ion. 

The  first  definite  measure  of  the  amount  of  energy  radiated 
from  radium  was  given  by  P.  Curie  and  LabordeJ  in  1903.  They 
found  that  a  radium  compound  kept  itself  continuously  at  a  tem- 
perature several  degrees  higher  than  that  of  the  surrounding 
atmosphere.  The  rate  of  heat  emission  was  first  determined  by 
a  Bunsen  ice  calorimeter.  A  preparation  of  radium  containing 
about  1/6  gram  of  radium  enclosed  in  a  glass  tube  was  cooled 
in  melting  ice  and  then  introduced  into  the  calorimeter.  The 
mercury  column  was  found  to  move  at  a  regular  rate.    On  removing 

♦  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  81,  p.  278,  1908. 

t  Rutherford  and  McClung,  PhiL  Tram.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  196,  p.  25,  1901. 

:;:  P.  Curie  and  Laborde,  C.  R.  136,  p.  673,  1903. 


XVIl]       PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT  569 

the  radium,  the  movement  of  the  column  ceased.     In  the  other 

method,  the  difference  of  temperature  between  a  tube  containing 

one  gram  of  radiferous  barium  chloride  of  activity  about  1/6  of 

that  of  pure  radium  and  an  exactly  similar  tube  containing  barium 

chloride  was  determined  by  a  thermo-couple  and  found  to  be 

15"  C.     In  order  to  measure  the  rate  of  emission  of  heat,  a  coil  of 

wire  of  known  resistance  was  placed  in  the  pure  barium  compound 

and  the  strength  of  current  required  to  raise  the  temperature  to 

that  of  the  radium  tube  observed.     Both  these  methods  showed 

that  one  gram  of  radium  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  emitted 

heat  at  the  rate  of  about  100  gram  calories  per  hour,  or  in  other 

words,  radium  emits  heat  at  a  rate  sufficient  to  melt  more  than 

its  own  weight  of  ice  per  hour.     This  emission  of  heat  appeared 

to  be  continuous,  so  that  in  the  course  of  a  year,  one  gram  of 

radium  would  emit  about  876,000  gram  calories.     This  property 

of  radium  of  emitting  heat  at  a  rapid  and  uniform  rate  without 

apparent  change  in   the  radium  itself  naturally   excited   much 

attention,  and  several  hypotheses  were  put  forward  in  explanation. 

We  shall  see  later,  however,  that  the  emission  of  heat  from  radium 

and  other  radio-active  substances  is,  in  a  sense,  a  secondary  eflfect, 

for  it  is  a  measure  of  the  energy  of  the  radiations  expelled  from 

the  active  matter  ivhich  are  absorbed  by  the  active  matter  itself 

and  the  envelope  containing  it. 

The  heating  effects  of  radium  were  soon  confirmed  by  a  number 
of  experimenters,  amongst  others  by  Runge  and  Precht*  and  by 
Gieseli".  Using  one  gram  of  radium  bromide  and  a  mercury 
thermometer,  the  latter  found  that  the  radium  was  at  a  tem- 
perature 5°  higher  than  the  surrounding  air.  The  actual  rise  of 
temperature  will  obviously  depend  greatly  on  the  experimental 
conditions. 

By  the  use  of  a  special  method  P.  Curie  and  Dewar^  showed 
that  the  heating  effect  of  radium  was  unaltered  at  low  tem- 
peratures. The  method  employed  depended  on  the  amount  of 
gas  volatilised  when  the  radium  preparation  was  placed  inside  a 
tube  immersed  in  a  liquified  gas  at  its  boiling  point. 

•  Runge  and  Precht,  Sitz.  Ak.  Wiss,  Berlin,  p.  783,  1903. 

t  Giesel,  Chem.  Ber.  36,  p.  2868,  1903. 

t  P.  Curie  and  Dewar,  Proc.  Roy.  Inst,  1904. 


670  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND  EMISSION   OP  HEAT         [CH. 

The  small  closed  Dewar  flask  A  (Fig.  124)  contains  the  radium 
salt  in  a  j^lass  tube  R.  immersed  in  the 
liquid  to  be  employed.  The  flask  A 
is  surrounded  by  another  Dewar  bulb 
B,  containing  the  same  liquid,  so  that 
no  heat  is  comtnunicated  to  A  from 
the  outside.  The  gas  liberated  in  the 
tube  A  is  collected  in  the  usual  way 
over  water  or  mercury,  and  its  volume 
determined.  By  this  method,  the  rate 
of  heat  emission  of  the  radium  was 
found  to  be  about  the  same  in  boiling 
carbon  dioxide  and  oxygen,  and  also 
in  liquid  hydrogen.  Especial  interest 
attaches  to  the  result  obtained  with 
liquid  hydrogen,  for  at  such  alow  tem-  Fig.  124. 

perature  ordinary  chemical  activity  is 
suspended. 

The  use  of  liquid  hydrogen  is  very  convenient  for  demonstrating 
the  rate  of  heat  emission  from  a  small  amount  of  radium.  From 
07  gram  of  radium  bromide  (which  had  been  prepared  only  10  dara 
previously)  73  c.c.  of  gas  were  given  off  per  minute. 

In  later  experiments  P.  Curie  {loc.  cit)  found  that  the  rate  of 
emission  of  heat  from  a  given  quantity  of  radium  depended  upon 
the  time  which  had  elapsed  since  its  preparation.  The  emission 
of  heat  was  at  first  small,  but  after  a  month's  interval  practically 
attained  a  maximum.  If  a  radium  compound  is  dissolved  and 
placed  in  a  sealed  tube,  the  rate  of  heat  emission  rises  to  the  same 
maximum  as  that  of  an  equal  quantity  of  radium  salt  in  the  solid 
state.     This  effect  is  considered  in  detail  in  the  next  Section. 

Measurements  of  the  heating  effect  of  radium  in  radio-active 
equilibrium  have  been  made  later  by  a  number  of  observers  using 
different  methods,  but  it  is  difficult  to  compare  the  values  obtained 
on  account  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  purity  of  the  radium  pre- 
paration employed. 

Angstrom  •  determined  the  heating  effect  of  86'5  milligrams  of 
radium  bromide  enclosed  in  a  glass  tube  by  a  balance  method. 
•  AngBtrom,  Arku:  f.  Hut.  1904,  1905;  Phy>.  Ztit.  6,  p.  685,  1905. 


XVIl]      PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  571 

The  calorimeters  consisted  of  two  equal  hollow  metal  cylinders  of 

thick  wall,  in  one  of  which  was  placed  the  radium  salt  and  in  the 

other  an   insulated   resistance  coil   of  manganin.     The   cavities 

were  filled  with  petrol.     The  current  through  the  manganin  coil 

was  adjusted  until  there  was  no  difference  of  temperature  shown 

by  thermo-couples  embedded  in  the  walls  of  the  cylinders.     The 

Pate  of  emission  of  heat  by  the  radium  was  then  equal  to  the 

i^te  of  supply  of  heat  by  the  electric  current.     As  the  result  of  a 

series  of  experiments,  Angstrom  found  that  one  gram  of  radium 

emitted  117  gram  calories  per  hour. 

A  determination  by  a  similar  method  was  made  in  1908  by 
y.  Schweidler  and  Hess*  using  one  gram  of  radium  chloride  which 
gave  118  gram  calories  per  hour.     This  experiment  was  repeated 
by  St.  Meyer  and  Hessi*  in  1912  using  about  one  gram  of  radium 
chloride  which  had  been  carefully  purified  by  Honigschmid  for  the 
determination  of  the  atomic  weight  of  radium.    The  heating  etFect 
of  one  gram  of  radium  in  equilibrium  was  found  to  be  132  gram 
calories  per  hour.     Since  both  the  yS  and  7  rays  contribute  an 
appreciable  fraction  of  the  heating  effect,  it  is  of  importance  to 
define  the  exact  conditions  of  measurement.     In  these  measure- 
ments the  radium   was  surrounded  by  a  sufficient  thickness  of 
metal  to  absorb  all  the  a  and  /9  rays  and  about  15  per  cent,  of 
the  7  rays.     The  value  of  the  heating  effect  of  radium  found  by 
St.  Meyer  and  Hess  may  be  accepted  with  confidence,  for  the 
radium  salt  employed  was  pure  and  the  measurements  could  be 
made  with  precision. 

234.  Connection  of  the  heat  emission  with  the  radia- 
tions. The  observation  of  Curie  that  the  rate  of  heat  emission 
depended  upon  the  age  of  the  radium  preparation  pointed  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  phenomenon  of  heat  emission  of  radium  was 
closely  connected  with  the  radio-activity  of  that  element.  It  had 
long  been  known  that  radium  compounds  increased  in  activity  for 
about  a  month  after  their  preparation,  when  they  reached  a  steady 
state.  It  has  been  shown  (Section  186),  that  this  increase  of 
activity  is  due  to  the  continuous  production  by  the  radium  of  the 

•  V.  Schweidler  and  Hess,  Wien  Ber.  117,  p.  879,  1908. 
t  St.  Meyer  and  Hess,  Wien  Ber,  121,  p.  603,  1912. 


572  PRODUCTION  OF   HELIUM   AND  EMISSION  OF  HEAT        [CH. 


emanation,  which  is  occluded  in  the  radium  compound  and  adds itt 
radiation  to  that  of  the  radium  proper.  It  thus  seemed  probable 
that  the  heating  effect  was  in  some  way  connected  with  the 
presence  of  the  emanation.  Some  experiments  upon  this  point 
were  made  by  Rutherford  and  Barnes*.  In  order  to  measure 
the  small  amounts  of  heat  emitted,  a  form  of  differential  air 
calorimeter  shown  in  Fig.  125  was  employed.  Two  equal  glass 
flasks  of  about  500  c.c.  were  filled  with  dry  air  at  atmospheric 
pressure.  These  flasks  were  connected  through  a  glass  U-tube 
filled  with  xylene,  which  served  as  a  manometer  to  determine  any 


Fig.  126. 

variation  of  pressure  of  the  air  in  the  flasks.  A  small  glass  tube, 
closed  at  the  lower  end,  was  introduced  into  the  middle  of  each 
flask.  When  a  continuous  source  of  heat  was  introduced  into 
the  glass  tube,  the  air  surrounding  it  was  heated  and  the  pressure 
was  increased.  The  difference  of  pressure,  when  a  steady  state  was 
reached,  was  observed  on  the  manometer  by  means  of  a  microscope 
with  a  micrometer  scale  in  the  eye-piece.  On  placing  the  source 
of  heat  in  the  similar  tube  in  the  other  flask,  the  difference  in 
pressure  was  reversed.  In  order  to  keep  the  apparatus  at  a  constant 
temperature,  the  two  flasks  were  immersed  in  a  water-bath,  which 
wns  kept  well  stirred. 

Observations  were  first  made  of  the  heating  effect  of  30  milli- 
grams of  radium  bromide.  The  manometer  was  standardised  by 
placing  a  small  coil  of  wire  of  known  resistance  in  place  of  the 

*  Butherford  and  Barnes,  Phil,  Mag.  7,  p.  202,  1904. 


XVIl]       PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  573 

radium.  The  current  was  adjusted  to  give  the  same  difference  of 
pressure.  In  this  way,  it  was  found  that  the  heating  effect  of  one 
gram  of  radium  corresponded  to  110  gram  calories  per  hour. 

The  emanation  was  then  released  from  the  radium  salt  by 
heating  and  condensed  in  a  small  tube  surrounded  by  liquid  air 
which  was  then  sealed  off.  The  variations  of  the  heating  effect  of 
the  radium  and  the  emanation  tube  were  then  followed  by  means  of 
the  air  calorimeter.  The  results  obtained  are  shown  in  Fig.  126. 
The  heating  effect  of  the  radium  was  found  to  decrease  to  a 
minimum  (curve  ^)  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  and  then  slowly 


!>> 

5              ( 

1    1-6 

ja 

o 

1 

miiJi^ 



— 

r\ 

. 

K^ 

1^ 

\ 

x/ 

1/ 

N 

•^i 

^^ 

1 

3 

8 

0 

FiK 

>0 

Ilours 

.  12G. 

2A 

^0 

3S 

SO 

to  increase  with  time,  reaching  in  the  course  of  a  month  a  maximum 
which  corresponded  to  the  value  obtained  before  releasing  the 
emanation. 

On  the  other  hand  (curve  B)y  the  heating  effect  of  the 
emanation  tube  increased  with  time  for  several  hours, passed  through 
a  maximum  and  then  slowly  decayed  according  to  the  period  of 
transformation  of  the  emanation.  The  sum  of  the  heating  effects 
of  the  radium  and  of  the  emanation  tube  was  together  equal  at 
any  time  to  that  of  the  radium  in  equilibrium. 

It  was  clear  from  these  experiments  that  about  three  quarters 


574  PRODUCTJON   OF   HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT  [CH. 

of  the  heating  effect  of  radium  in  equilibrium  was  due  to  the 
emanation  and  its  transformation  products.  It  was  found  that 
the  initial  decrease  of  the  heating  effect  of  the  radium  and  the 
initial  rise  of  heating  effect  of  the  emanation  tube  were  connected 
with  the  decay  and  growth  respectively  of  the  active  deposit. 
This  was  shown  by  a  special  series  of  experiments  by  Rutherford 
and  Barnes  using  a  pair  of  differential  platinum  thermometers. 
Each  thermometer  consisted  of  35  cms.  of  fine  platinum  wire,  wound 
carefully  on  the  inside  of  a  thin  glass  tube  5  mms.  in  diameter, 


60  80  100 

Time  in  Miuuteg, 

Fig.  127. 

forming  a  coil  3  cms.  long.  The  glass  tube  containing  the  radium 
and  also  the  tube  containing  the  emanation  were  selected  to  slide 
easily  into  the  interior  of  the  coils,  the  wire  thus  being  in  direct 
contact  with  the  glass  envelope  containing  the  source  of  heat. 
The  change  in  resistance  of  the  platinum  thermometers,  when  the 
radium  or  emanation  tube  was  transferred  from  one  coil  to  the 
other,  was  readily  measured. 

By  this  method  the  more  rapid  initial  changes  in  the  heating 
effect  of  radium  and  of  the  emanation  could  be  followed.  In  one 
set  of  experiments,  the  emanation  was  introduced  into  a  small 
glass  tube  and  its  heating  effect  metisured  as  soon  as  possible. 


XVIl]       PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  575 

The  heating  effect  was  found  to  increase  with  time  (see  Curve  A, 
Fig.  127),  reaching  a  practical  maximum  in  three  hours.  The  tube 
containing  the  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  its  active  deposit 
was  then  opened  and  the  emanation  swept  out.  There  was  a 
sudden  drop  in  the  heating  effect  and  then  a  gradual  decay 
(Curve  B)  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  to  zero. 

Ten  minutes  after  the  removal  of  the  emanation,  the  heating 

effect  of  the  tube  had  dropped  to  48  per  cent,  of  its  initial  value. 

The  curve  of  decrease  of  the  heating  effect  after  20  minutes  shown 

in  Fig.  127  was  very  similar  to  the  curve  of  decay  of  the  a  ray 

activity  due  to  radium  C.     After  removal  of  the  emanation  the 

heating  eff'ect  is  due  to  the  active  deposit  consisting  of  radium 

A,  B,  C  which  remains  behind.     Since  radium  A  loses  its  activity 

according  to  a  three  minute  period,  the  heating  effect  due  to  it 

should  become  very  small  after  20  minutes.     The  residual  heating 

effect  must  then  be  due  to  radium  B  and  C.    It  was  deduced  from 

the  experiments  that  about  23  per  cent,  of  the  heating  effect  of 

radium  in  equilibrium  was  due  to  radium  alone,  32  to  radium  C, 

and  45  per  cent,  to  the  emanation  and  radium  A  together.     On 

account  of  the  rapid  transformation  of  radium  A,  its  heating  effect 

Was  difficult  to  distinguish  from  that  of  the  emanation. 

These  cxperimeuts  showed  clearly  that  each  a  ray  product 
present  in  radium  supplied  a  fraction  of  the  total  heating  eff'ect 
observed.  It  seemed  probable  that  the  heat  emission  observed 
Was  a  measure  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  expelled  ol  particles. 
On  account  of  their  small  penetrating  power,  the  a  particles  ex- 
pelled from  the  radium  and  its  products  were  absorbed  either  in 
the  active  matter  itself  or  in  the  envelope  surrounding  it,  and 
their  energy  of  motion  was  transformed  into  heat.  Experiments 
showed  that  the  yS  and  y  rays  under  ordinary  experimental  con- 
ditions supplied  only  a  few  per  cent,  of  the  total  heat  emission 
observed.  The  heating  effect  calculated  from  a  knowledge  of  the 
number  and  energy  of  the  expelled  a  particles  was  found  to  be 
in  good  accord  with  the  experimental  value.  The  question  is 
discussed  in  more  detail  later  (Section  235). 

The  relation  verified  by  (jleiger  and  Nuttall  in  1911  between 
:he  velocity  of  the  a  particles  emitted  from  a  product  and  its 
period  of  transformation  (Chapter  XVIII)  suggested  the  possibility 


576  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND  EMISSION   OF   HEAT        [CB. 

that  the  heating  effect  of  a  product  might  not  after  all  be  a 
measure  of  the  energy  of  the  expelled  particles.  It  might  be 
supposed,  for  example,  that  the  a  particle  gradually  lost  energy 
by  radiation  before  its  final  escape  from  the  atom.  Under  such 
conditions,  the  heating  effect  of  a  product  might  differ  from  tk 
energy  of  the  expelled  particles. 

In  order  to  test  this  question,  Rutherford  and  H.  Robinson* 
examined  carefully  the  relative  heating  effects  of  the  nvdium 
emanation  and  of  its  products,  radium  A,  B  and  C.  The  method 
adopted  Wiis  similar  to  that  originally  employed  by  Rutherford 
and  Barnes,  but  the  conditions  were  arranged  so  that  rapidly 
changing  heating  effects  could  be  followed  with  certainty.  About 
100  millicuries  of  radium  emanation  were  forced  into  a  thin  walled 
tube.  After  measurement  of  the  heating  effect,  the  emanation 
was  rapidly  expanded  into  an  exhausted  pump  and  the  variations 
of  the  heating  effect  of  the  tube  with  time  were  followed  for 
several  hours. 

It  was  found  possible  to  separate  the  heating  effects  of  the 
emanation  from  that  due  to  radium  A  and  to  show  that  the 
heating  effect  of  the  latter  decreased  at  the  same  rate  as  its 
activity.  The  variation  of  the  heating  effect  due  to  radium  B+C 
was  accurately  determined  in  order  to  throw  light  on  the  question 
whether  the  ^  ray  product  radium  B  supplied  a  measurable  fraction 
of  the  heating  effect.  The  curve  of  decrease  of  the  heating  effect 
was  in  close  agreement  with  the  curve  of  decay  of  radium  C  and 
showed  that  the  main  part  of  the  heating  effect  was  due  to  the 
rays  from  the  latter. 

The  percentage  heating  effects  of  the  emanation,  radium  A 
and  radium  C  in  equilibrium  were  found  to  be  29,  31  and  40 
respectively.  This  is  in  good  agreement  (Section  235)  with  the 
relative  heating  effects  measured  by  the  energy  of  the  a  particles, 
but  when  account  is  taken  of  the  heat  supplied  by  the  y9  rays 
from  radium  B  and  C,  the  heating  effect  found  for  radium  B  +  C 
is  slightly  less  than  would  be  expected  theoretically. 

235.  Calculated  heating  effect  of  radium  and  its  emana- 
tion.    The  heating  effect  of  radium  can  be  readily  calculated  on 

*  Batherford  and  Bobinson,  Wien  Ber.  (in  coarse  of  pablioaiion). 


XVIl]       PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  577 

the  assumption  that  it  is  due  entirely  to  the  energy  of  its  radiations. 
The  kinetic  energy  of  the  a  particles  expelled  from  one  gram  of 
radium  per  second  is  given  by  ^mnlp^  where  m  is  the  mass  of  the 
a  particle,  v  the  velocity  of  the  different  groups  of  a  rays  and 
71  the  number  emitted  per  second  by  each  group.  It  is  also 
necessary  to  add  the  energy  of  the  recoil  atoms  which  is  converted 
into  heat  in  situ.  Since  the  momentum  of  the  recoil  atom  is  equal 
and  opposite  to  that  of  the  a  particle,  the  energy  of  recoil  of  an 

atom  of  mass  M  is  equal  to  ^^.mi/^.     Consequently  the  total 

energy  E  of  the  radiations  is  given  by 


E^imn(l-\-~\'Zv'  +  E,, 


where  E^  is  the  energy  of  the  ^  and  7  rays  absorbed  under  the 
conditions  of  measurement. 

The  values  of  ^mi^  for  the  a  particles  from  radium  and  its 
products  are  given  in  Section  70.  The  value  of  m/M  is  4/222 
for  radium  and  4/218,  4/214,  4/210  for  the  emanation,  radium  A 
and  radium  C  respectively.  Taking  n  as  3*4  x  10*®,  the  emission 
of  energy  due  to  the  a  and  recoil  radiation  from  one  gram  of 
radium  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  is  1*38  x  10*  ergs  per 
second.  This  corresponds  to  a  heat  emission  of  118  gram  calories 
per  hour.  In  a  similar  way,  the  heating  effect  of  the  emanation 
in  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  radium  can  be  shown  to  be  94*5 
calories  per  hour. 

In  order  to  test  the  agreement  between  calculation  and  experi- 
ment, Rutherford  and  Robinson*  determined  accurately  the  heating 
effect  of  the  radium  emanation.  Under  conditions  where  about 
90  per  cent,  of  the  /9  rays  were  absorbed,  the  heat  emission  was 
found  to  be  97*95  gram  calories  per  hour,  or  in  round  numbers 
98  gram  calories.  This  result  is  in  terms  of  the  same  radium 
standard  for  which  the  value  of  n  was  determined.  It  will  be 
shown  in  the  next  Section  that  probably  about  4  per  cent,  of  the 
heating  effect  observed  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  energy  of  the 
absorbed  fi  rays  from  radium  B  and  radium  C.  The  observed 
and  calculated  heating  effects  of  one  curie  of  radium  emanation 

*  Batherford  and  BobinsoD,  Wien  Ber,  (in  coarse  of  publication). 
R.  R.-A.  57 


578  PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT  [Cfl. 

are  thus  94  and  94*5  calories  per  hour  respectively,  and  are  in 
good  accord. 

There  thus  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  heat  emission  of 
radium  can  be  accounted  for  by  taking  into  consideration  the 
energy  of  the  radiations  absorbed.  The  possible  absorption  or 
emission  of  energy  due  to  the  rearrangement  of  the  constituents 
of  the  atom  during  transformation  must  be  small  compared  with 
the  energy  of  the  expelled  a  particles. 

236.  The  heating  effect  of  /8  and  7  rays.  A  number 
of  investigators  have  observed  that  there  is  a  small  percentage 
increase  of  the  heating  effect  of  radium  when  surrounded  by  a 
sufficient  thickness  of  matter  to  absorb  all  the  ff  rays  and  some 
of  the  7  rays.  Such  results  indicated  that  the  emission  of  energ)' 
from  radium  in  the  form  of  0  and  7  rays  was  only  a  small  fraction 
of  the  energy  emitted  in  the  form  of  a  rays.  Some  early  experi- 
ments indicated  that  the  7  rays  gave  a  heating  effect  comparable 
with  the  a  rays;  but  this  was  disproved  by  Rutherford  and 
Barnes*,  who  found  that  the  7  rays  contributed  only  a  small 
percentage  of  the  total  heating  effect  of  radium.  Estimates  of 
the  energy  of  the  ff  rays  have  been  uncertain  on  account  of  the 
difficulty  of  estimating  the  energy  of  the  yS  rays  which  are 
absorbed  in  the  radium  itself  and  the  envelope  surrounding  it 
A  ver}"  careful  series  of  measurements  of  the  heating  effect  of 
the  13  rays  was  made  by  Pettersonf  using  the  balance  method 
developed  by  Angstrom.  He  found  that  when  the  radium  was 
surrounded  by  4  mms.  of  lead  the  heating  effect  was  116*4  calories 
per  hour  per  gram  of  radium,  and  114'5  when  the  lead  was  replaced 
by  aluminium  2  mms.  thick.  This  difference  was  ascribed  to  the 
heating  effect  of  the  y8  rays.  In  the  experiments,  however,  the 
rays  first  passed  through  absorbing  material  equivalent  to  4  mms.  of 
aluminium  before  entering  the  lead  or  aluminium  cylinder.  From 
later  measurements  of  the  ionisation  due  to  the  fi  rays  discussed 
later  in  this  Section,  it  is  clear  that  practically  all  the  energy  of 
the  /S  rjxys  wjis  absorbed  in  the  envelope  enclosing  the  radium, 


*  Rutherford  and  Barnes,  Phil.  Mag.  9,  p.  621,  1905. 
t  Petterson,  Arkiv.f.  Mat.  Fy^.  6,  July,  1910. 


VIl]       PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT  579 

id  that  the  difference  observed  by  Petterson  was  mainly  due  to 
le  energy  of  the  7  rays  absorbed  in  the  lead. 

The  question  of  the  relative  energy  supplied  by  a,  /9  and  7  rays 
as  attacked  by  Eve*  by  an  ionisation  method.  An  electroscope 
as  constructed  whose  walls  consisted  of  thin  sheets  of  aluminium, 
he  ionisation  in  the  electroscope  is  then  practically  unaffected  by 
le  material  of  the  walls  of  the  electroscope,  and  is  nearly  the 
ime  as  in  free  air.  The  ionisation  due  to  the  ^  and  7  rays  was 
3termined  for  different  distances  of  the  radium  preparation  bom. 
le  electroscope.  The  total  ionisation  due  to  the  ^  rays  could 
lus  be  directly  determined  without  any  assumption  of  the  ab- 
>rption  of  the  y3  ray  by  air.  The  total  ionisation  due  to  the 
rays  was  deduced  from  observation  of  the  ionisation  produced 

Y  the  radium  at  such  a  distance  that  all  the  &  rays  were  absorbed 
id  from  a  knowledge  of  the  absorption  coefficient  of  the  7  rays 

Y  air. 

We  have  seen  (Section  98)  that  Chadwick  found  by  direct 
cperiment  that  the  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  7  rays  by  air 
i  760  mm&  and  15°  C.  was  000059.  Taking  this  value  and  the 
large  carried  by  an  ion  as  4*65  x  10~^®  units,  the  total  number  of 
ns  found  by  Eve  corresponds  to  4*2  x  10^*  for  complete  absorption 

■  the  P  rays,  and  8*7  x  10"  for  the  7  rays.  In  Eve's  experiments, 
le  radium  was  contained  in  a  glass  tube  which  must  have  ab- 
►rbed  a  large  part  of  the  softer  ^  rays.  In  order  to  correct  for 
lis  absorption,  measurements  of  a  similar  method  were  undertaken 
I  the  laboratory  of  the  writer  by  Moseley  and  Robinson.  The 
)urce  of  )8  and  7  rajrs  was  a  thin  glass  tube  containing  radium 
nanation,  of  which  the  thickness  of  wall  corresponded  to  a  stopping 
iwer  of  only  2  cms.  of  air.    They  concluded  that  the  total  number 

■  ions  produced  by  complete  absorption  of  the  /8  rays  from  radium 
I  air  was  about  9  x  10",  and  for  the  7  rays  13  x  10".  The 
umber  for  the  /8  rays  is  much  higher  than  that  found  by  Eve, 
idicating  that  a  large  part  of  the  energy  of  the  ^  rays  in  his 
cperiments  was  absorbed  by  the  radium  and  the  envelope  sur- 
»unding  it.  The  total  number  of  ions  produced  by  the  a  rays 
om  one  gram  of  radium  in  radio-active  equilibrium  is  256  x  10^*. 
'  it  be  assumed  that  the  ionisation  produced  by  these  three  types 

*  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  551,  1911. 

37—2 


580  PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HSAT  [CH. 

of  rays  is  proportional  to  the  energies  of  the  radiations,  it  follows 
that  of  the  total  energy  emitted  by  radium  in  equilibrium  32 
per  cent,  is  emitted  in  the  form  of  )8  rays,  and  4*7  per  cent,  in  the 
form  of  7  rays. 

Measurements  of  the  heating  effect  of  the  /3  and  7  rays  from 
the  radium  emanation  were  made  by  Rutherford  and  Robinson, 
by  the  methods  described  in  Section  234.  By  direct  ionisatioD 
measurements,  it  was  found  that  about  90  per  cent,  of  the  energy 
of  the  /3  rays  was  absorbed  in  the  experimental  arrangement 
employed  to  measure  the  heating  effect  of  the  emanation.  The 
heating  effect  under  these  conditions  will,  for  convenience,  be 
taken  as  1.  When  the  emanation  tube  was  surrounded  by  a  lead 
tube  1"1  mm.  thick,  the  heating  effect  corresponded  to  1*02 ;  when 
surrounded  by  a  thickness  of  mercury  4*6  mms.  and  14*6  mms., 
the  observed  heating  effects  were  1"034  and  1*05  respectively. 
Since  the  thickness  of  14*6  mms.  of  mercury  absorbs  at  least 
70  per  cent,  of  the  energy  of  the  7  rays,  it  follows  that  the  energy 
of  the  7  rays  from  the  emanation  was  about  6  per  cent,  of  that 
due  to  the  a  rays.  This  number  is  of  about  the  magnitude  to 
be  expected  from  the  total  ionisation  produced  by  the  7  rays.  It 
seems  probable  that  the  estimates  of  the  heating  effect  of  the 
13  and  7  rays  based  on  the  ionisation  method  are  not  seriously 
in  error. 

237.  Distribution  of  the  heating  effect  of  radium 
amongst  its  products.  We  have  seen  (Section  234)  that  each 
of  the  products  of  the  radium  emanation  provides  a  heating  effect 
nearly  proportional  to  the  energy  of  the  expelled  a  particles.  The 
heating  effect  of  one  curie  of  emanation  has  been  shown  to  be 
98*5  calories  per  hour  in  terms  of  the  Rutherford-Boltwood  standard. 
Expressed  in  terms  of  the  Vienna  standard,  the  number  is  103*5. 
Of  this  about  4  per  cent,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  /3  rays  from 
radium  B  and  C,  so  that  the  energy  of  the  a  rays  and  recoil  atoms 
alone  corresponds  to  99*5.  Taking  account  of  the  energy  of  the 
expelled  a  particles,  the  heating  effect  due  to  the  a  rays  from  one 
gram  of  radium  itself  should  be  25  calories  per  hour.  The  following 
table  shows  the  most  probable  distribution  of  the  heating  effects 
amongst  the  radiations  and  products  of  radium. 


XVIl]       PRODUCTION   OF   HELIUM  AND  EMISSION   OF  HEAT  581 

It  is  seen  that  the  heating  eflfect  of  the  a  rays  and  recoil  atoms 
is  123'6  calories  per  hour  per  gram  of  radium ;  for  the  13  rays  4*3 ; 
for  the  7  rays  6*5.  The  total  emission  of  energy  from  radium 
comes  out  about  134*4  calories  per  hour  per  gram.  This  number 
is  based  on  the  Vienna  standard,  and  is  in  very  good  accoiti  with 
the  latest  experimental  value  found  by  Meyer  and  Hess,  viz. 
132  calories  per  hour  per  gram.  Under  the  conditions  of  their 
measurement,  the  heating  etfect  found  by  them  corresponds  to 
the  total  absorption  of  the  a  and  0  rays  and  about  15  per  cent. 


Heating  effect  in  gram  calories  per  hour 
corresponding  to  one  gram  of  radium 


Radium 
Emanation... 
Radium  A  ... 
Radium  Bl^ 
Radium  C  j^ 


Total 


251 
28-6 
30-5 

39-4 


43 


Totals 


123-6 


4-3 


6-5 


6-5 


251 
28-6 
30-5 

50-2 


134-4 


of  the  7  rays.      The  general  evidence  indicates  that  the  7  rays 
provide  a  greater  fraction  of  the  heating  effect  than  the  jS  rays. 


238.    Total  heat  emiMion  of  the  emanation.     It  is  of 

interest  to  calculate  the  total  emission  of  energy  during  the 
transformation  of  one  gram  of  emanation.  It  is  shown  in  Section 
237  that  the  heating  effect  of  one  curie  of  emanation  for  complete 
absorption  of  the  a,  jS  and  7  rays  emitted  is  109  gram  calories  per 
hour.  Now  the  volume  of  one  curie  of  emanation  is  0*6  cubic 
millimetres.  Taking  the  atomic  weight  of  the  emanation  as  222, 
the  rate  of  heat  emission  of  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  its 
products  is  1*82  x  10^  calories  per  hour  per  c.c.  and  1*83x10^ 
calories  per  hour  per  gram.  The  heat  emission  of  the  emanation 
decreases  at  the  same  rate  as  its  activity,  so  that  the  heat  emission 
E  after  a  time  t  is  given  by  E^E^e'^^  where  E^  is  the  value 


582  PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HEAT        [CE 

initially.     The  total  heat  emission  for  complete  transformatioa 
of  the  emanation  is  consequently 


/, 


00 

0 


Remembering  that  the  value  of  the  radio-active  constant  X  of  tie 
emanation  is  00075  (hours)~S  it  follows  that  the  total  energy 
liberated  during  the  transformation  of  the  emanation  is  2"43xl(F 
calories  per  c.c,  or  2*44  x  10®  calories  per  gram.  These  calculatiow 
are  based  on  experimental  data  which  have  been  determined  with 
considerable  precision. 

The  enormous  amount  of  energy  released  in  transformations 
accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  a  rays  is  clearly  brought  out  by 
these  calculations.  The  heat  emitted  during  the  combination  of 
1  C.C.  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  to  form  water  is  about  2  gram 
calories.  The  emanation  during  its  successive  transformatioDS 
thus  gives  out  more  than  10  million  times  as  much  energy  as 
the  combination  of  an  equal  volume  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  to 
form  water,  although  the  latter  reaction  is  accompanied  by  s 
larger  release  of  energy  than  any  other  known  to  chemistr}-. 

The  total  heat  emission  from  any  radio-active  substance  tor 
complete  transformation  can  be  simply  calculated  from  the  rate 
of  emission  and  energy  of  a  particles,  and  the  period  of  trans- 
formation of  the  substance.  On  the  average,  the  total  energy 
emitted  from  one  gram  of  radio-active  substance  considered  above 
is  about  one  quarter  of  that  due  to  the  emanation  and  its  products 
provided  that  it  emits  a  rays.  The  total  emission  of  energy  per 
gram  is  consequently  about  6  x  10*  gram  calories.  In  the  course 
of  its  life  one  gram  of  radium  with  its  transformation  products 
including  radium  F  emits  about  3*7  x  10®  calories. 

The  energy  emitted  by  radio-active  substances  is  manifested 
during  the  transformation  of  the  atoms,  and  is  derived  from  the 
internal  energy  of  the  atoms  themselves.  The  enormous  quantity 
of  energy  released  during  the  transformation  of  active  matter 
shows  unmistakeably  that  the  atoms  must  contain  a  great  store 
of  internal  energy.  Since  from  the  chemical  point  of  view,  the 
atoms  of  the  radio-elements  apart  from  their  high  atomic  weight 
show  no  special  chemical  characteristics,  it  appears  probable  that 


XTIl]      PRODUCTION   OF  HELIUM  AND  EMISSION  OF  HEAT  583 

^he  atoms  of  all  elements  contain  a  large  store  of  internal  energy. 
Tie  presence  of  this  energy  is  only  perceived  in  the  case  of  those 
elements  which  undergo  atomic  transformation. 

239.    Heating    effect  of   uranium   and  thorium.     The 

heating  eflFect  of  uranium  and  thorium  and  of  the  minerals  con- 
taining them  can  be  simply  calculated  on  the  assumption  that  it 
is  a  direct  measure  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  a  particles.  From 
the  data  given  in  Section  70  it  is  seen  that  the  average  energy  of 
the  two  o  particles  emitted  by  uranium  itself  is  6*8  x  10~*  ergs. 
Since  2*37  x  10*  a  particles  are  emitted  per  second  per  gram  of 
Uranium,  the  heating  effect  should  be  '161  ergs  per  second  or 
l'4x  10^  gram  calories  per  hour.  Uranium  in  equilibrium  with 
its  series  of  products  in  a  mineral  emits  8  groups  of  a  particles 
of  average  energy  8*8  x  10~^  ergs.  Since  9'6  x  10*  a  particles  are 
emitted  per  second  per  gram  of  uranium  in  a  mineral,  the  heating 
effect  of  one  gram  of  uranium  and  its  products  in  a  mineral  should 
be  7*2  x  10~^  calories  per  hour. 

In  a  similar  way,  the  heating  effect  of  thorium  in  equilibrium 
can  be  calculated.  Six  groups  of  a  particles  are  emitted  of  average 
energy  1"07  x  10"^  ergs.  In  this  deduction,  thorium  C,  which 
emits  two  sets  of  a  particles,  is  taken  as  one  product,  and  the 
average  energy  per  a  particle  is  deduced  from  the  known  data 
that  61  per  cent,  of  the  a  particles  have  a  range  8;6  cms.  and  the 
remainder  a  range  4*8  cms.  Since  thorium  in  complete  equili- 
brium  with  its  products  emits  2*7  x  10*  a  particles  per  gram  per 
second,  the  heating  effect  should  be  2*5  x  10""^  calories  per  hour 
per  gram.  In  both  cases,  the  heating  effect  to  be  expected  should 
be  increased  by  about  7  per  cent,  above  the  calculated  value  to 
include  the  energy  of  the  /8  and  y  rays. 

Measurements  of  the  heat  emission  of  thorium  were  made  by 
Pegram  and  Webb*.  About  4  kilograms  of  thorium  oxide  were 
contained  in  an  insulated  vessel  suspended  in  a  metallic  cylinder 
surrounded  externally  by  ice  and  water  and  exhausted  to  a  low 
pressure.  When  a  steady  state  was  reached,  the  difference  of  tem- 
perature between  the  vessel  containing  the  thorium  and  the  outer 

•  Pegram  and  Webb,  Phys.  Rev,  27,  p.  18,  1908. 


584  PRODUCTION  OF   HELIUM   AND   EMISSION   OF   HEAT         [Cl 

cylinder  was  measured  by  a  therraocouple.     The  emission  of  he^- 
was  standardised  by  sending  an  electric  current  through  a  resiat 
ance  coil  immersed  in  the  thorium  and  observing  the  correspondia 
rise  of  temperature.     In  this  way,  it  was  found  that  the  emissio 
of  heat  per  gram  of  oxide  was  96  x  10~^  calories  per  hour.     Tli 
thorium  employed  was  not  in  radio-active  equiiibriuiii  o'j 

products,  but  gave  only  46  per  cent,  of  the  activity  of  thoiidi.^ 
a  mineral.     Correcting  for  this,  the  heating  effect  of  one  grai 
thorium  in  equilibrium  with  its  products  is  about  2*4  x  10"*'^  calo» 
per  hour.      This   is   in   good   accord  with    the   calculi        and 
2*5  X  lO"*  calories. 

Poole*  made  a  series  of  experiments  of  the  heating  effect  » 
pitchblende.  About  500  grams  of  pitchblende  containing  04  p€ 
cent,  of  uranium  was  contained  inside  a  Dewar  flask,  which  w^ 
immersed  in  ice  and  water.  The  diflFerence  of  temperature  betwec 
the  inner  and  outer  surfaces  was  measured  by  a  thermocouple  an 
amounted  to  about  'OOT^C.  The  rate  of  evolution  of  heat  per  grai 
of  mineral  was  found  to  be  815  x  10~^  calories  per  hour  o 
12*8  X  10""^  per  gram  of  uranium  in  the  mineral.  This  numbe 
is  considerably  higher  than  the  calculated  value,  viz.  7*2  x  10' 
calories. 

Poole  f  found  that  the  heat  emission  of  the  thorium  niinera 
orangite  was  much  greater  than  the  calculated  value,  and  con 
eluded  that  a  large  part  of  the  observed  effect  was  to  be  ascribed 
to  the  heat  liberated  owing  to  some  slow  chemical  change  in  th< 
mineral. 

The  measurement  of  the  small  heating  effects  of  uranium  and 
thorium  is  diflScult  on  account  of  the  very  small  rise  of  temperature 
observed.  The  divergence  of  the  observed  heating  effect  from  th^ 
calculated  value  may  possibly  be  due  to  unsuspected  chemical 
changes  in  progress  in  the  large  mass  of  mineral  under  exam* 
ination. 

Measurements  of  the  heat  emission  of  an  active  preparatioi 
of  polonium  were  made  by  Duane  and  found  to  be  in  good  agree 
ment  with  the  value  to  be  expected  from  the  energy  of  the  expellee 
a  particles. 

♦  Poole,  Phil.  Mag.  19,  p.  314,  1910. 
+  Poole,  Phil.  May,  23,  p.  183,  1912. 


]        PRODUCTION   OF  HEUUM  AND   EMISSION   OF  HBAT  585 

!40.     Methods  of  meaaurement  of  imall  ratei  of  heat 

Bsion.  We  have  Been  that  a  variety  of  methods  have  been 
loytJd  to  determine  the  heat  emission  of  radium.  In  addition 
loae  already  mentioned,  a  sensitive  method  of  measuring  small 
ing  effects  has  been  designed  by  Callendar*.  The  heating 
uhe  mdio-active  substance  under  examination  is  neutral- 

by  the  Peltier  effect  due  to  the  passage  of  a  current  through 
urmo-j  unction.    The  active  substance  and  the  Peltier  junction 

■■nclosed  in  a  copper  cylinder  and  the  current  through  the 
jj^         adjusted  until  there  is  no  difference  of  temperature 


Fig.  128. 

-fen  the  inner  cylinder  and  an  outer  copper  sphere.  The 
nee  of  temperature  is  determined  by  means  of  a  series  of 
iiiocouples.  Callendar  measured  by  this  method  the  heating 
t  of  radium  and  its  emanation,  and  showed  that  the  heating 
;t  of  the  emanation  and  its  products  decayed  at  the  same  rate 
3  activity.  The  heat  emission  of  one  milligram  of  radium  can 
y  be  measured  by  this  method, 

!)uanet  has  designed  a  differential  gas  calorimeter  which  can 
ised  to  measure  small  rates  of  heat  emission.     The  general 

*  CftUendar,  Proc.  Phiii.  Soc.  S3,  p.  1,  1911. 

t  Daune,  Le  Radium,  T,  p.  2G0,  1910. 


586       PRODUCTION  OF  HELIUM  AND  EMISSION  OF  HEAT        [CH.  XVII 

arrangement  of  the  apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  128.  The  method 
depends  on  the  increase  of  vapour  pressure  of  a  volatile  liquid 
when  the  temperature  is  raised.  Two  similar  vessels  A  and  A' 
connected  with  a  capillary  tube  B  are  partly  filled  with  a  volatile 
liquid,  and  the  air  exhausted.  The  movements  of  a  short  column 
of  air  introduced  into  the  capillary  tube  B  serves  as  a  measure  of 
the  difference  of  pressure  between  A  and  A\  When  a  source  of 
heat  is  placed  in  S,  the  air  column  moves  towards  A\  The  heat- 
ing effect  may  be  measured  directly  by  following  the  movement  of 
the  air  column,  or  compensated  for  by  passing  a  known  current 
through  an  iron-nickel  junction  placed  in  S,  so  that  heat  is  ab- 
sorbed. With  this  apparatus,  a  quantity  of  heat  '0002  calorie 
gave  an  easily  measurable  deflection  of  the  index. 

By  this  method,  Duane*  measured  the  heating  effect  of  a  pre- 
paration of  polonium  and  showed  that  the  heating  effect  of  a  radium 
preparation  was  unaltered  by  mixing  it  with  any  one  of  the  phos- 
phorescent materials,  zinc  sulphide,  willemite,  or  barium  platino- 
cyanide.  These  experiments  showed  that  no  appreciable  amount 
of  energy  was  liberated  or  absorbed  in  the  chemical  changes 
produced  in  the  phosphorescent  material  by  the  rays. 

♦  Duane,  C.  R,  151,  p.  379,  1910. 


I 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

GENERAL   RESULTS  AND   RELATIONS. 

In  previous  chapters  the  series  of  transformations  occurring  in 
the  well-known  radio-elements  and  the  nature  of  the  radiations 
emitted  fix)m  them  have  been  discussed  in  detail.  The  present 
chapter  will  be  devoted  mainly  to  a  consideration  of  the  general 
properties  shown  in  common  by  all  radio-active  substances  and 
the  relations  and  analogies  existing  between  the  three  radio-active 
series  and  the  radiations  emitted  from  them.  A  brief  sketch  is 
given  of  the  information  gained  from  a  study  of  radio-activity  on 
the  fundamental  problem  of  the  constitution  of  the  atom.  Certain 
other  topics  are  dealt  with  which  could  not  be  conveniently  in- 
cluded in  the  preceding  chapters.  The  following  subjects  are 
considered : 

Radio-activity  of  potassium  and  rubidium ;  The  apparent  radio- 
activity of  ordinary  matter ;  Final  products  of  disintegration ; 
Chemistry  of  radio-active  bodies;  Analogy  between  the  radio- 
active series;  Relation  between  range  and  period  of  transformation; 
Relation  between  yS  and  7  rays  from  radio-active  substances; 
Constitution  of  the  atom ;  Structure  and  disintegration  of  the 
radio-active  atoms. 

241.     Radio-activity  of  potassium  and  rubidium.     We 

have  referred  in  Section  5  to  the  discovery  made  by  N.  Campbell 
and  Wood*  that  the  salts  of  potassium  and  rubidium  showed  a 
much  stronger  activity  than  any  of  the  known  elements  except 

♦  N.  Campbell  and  Wood,  Proc.  Cavib.  Phil.  Soc.  14,  p.  15,  1907;  Campbell, 
Proc.  Camh.  Phil.  Soc.  14,  p.  211,  1907. 


588  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND   RELATIONS  [CH. 

uranium  and  thorium  and  their  products.  The  investigation  of 
this  property  of  potassium  and  rubidium  is  difficult  on  account  of 
the  very  weak  activity  shown  by  the  preparations.  The  activity 
due  to  a  potassium  salt  is  not  more  than  -j^j^  of  the  activity  of 
the  P  rays  due  to  an  equal  weight  of  uranium.  The  ionisation 
produced  by  the  potassium  salts  under  ordinary  conditions  is  of 
the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  natural  ionisation  observed  in 
closed  vessels. 

Campbell  showed  that  the  potassium  salts  emitted  only  /8  rays, 
but  no  a  rays.  It  was  concluded  that  the  fi  rays  were  not  homo- 
geneous, as  they  were  not  absorbed  according  to  an  exponential 
law.  On  an  average,  the  ^  rays  from  potassium  were  less  pene- 
trating than  the  y8  rays  from  uranium  X.  Campbell,  Levin  and 
Ruer*,  Henriot"f,  StrongJ  and  Buchner§  have  shown  that  the  salts 
of  potassium  and  rubidium  emit  a  weak  radiation,  which  affects 
the  photographic  plate.  Campbell  showed  that  the  /8  rays  fix^m 
potassium  were  deflected  in  a  strong  electric  field  in  the  direction 
to  be  expected  if  they  consisted  of  negative  electrons. 

The  main  conclusions  of  Campbell  have  been  confirmed  by 
later  researches  of  McLennan  and  Kennedy  ||  and  Henriotf. 
A  number  of  investigations  have  been  made  to  determine  the 
absorption  of  the  /8  rays  by  matter.  Campbell  found  that  the 
value  of  /i/-D,  the  absorption  coefficient  divided  by  density,  varied 
between  27*2  and  106  for  tin.  On  the  other  hand,  Henriot,  by 
measuring  the  ionisation  due  to  layers  of  potassium  salt  of  different 
thicknesses,  concluded  that  the  rays  were  absorbed  nearly  accord- 
ing to  an  exponential  law,  and  deduced  the  value  /jl/D  =  11'S  for 
potassium  sulphate,  and  by  direct  absorption  experiments  /lc-/Z)  =  14 
for  tin.  These  results  may  be  compared  with  the  value  /A/i)  =  9*5 
found  for  tin  by  Crowther,  using  the  0  rays  of  uranium  X. 

Both  Campbell  and  Henriot  have  concluded  that  the  radio- 
activity of  potassium  is  an  atomic  property.  Preparations  of 
potassium  from   mineral  and  vegetable   sources  show  the   same 

♦  Levin  and  Ruer,  Phijs.  Zeit.  9,  p.  248,  1908. 

t  Henriot,  C.  R.  148,  p.  910,   1909;    150,  p.  1750,  1910;    152,  pp.  851,  1384, 
1911 ;  Le  Radium,  7,  pp.  40,  109,  1910. 
X  strong.  Phyg.  Rev.  29,  p.  170,  1909. 

§  Biichner,  Versl.  K.  Ak,  van  Wet.  18,  p.  91,  1909;  Proc.  Amst,  12,  p.  154, 1909. 
II  McLennan  and  Kennedy,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  p.  377,  1908. 


XVIIl]  GENERAL   RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  589 

«4ctivity.  It  has  been  found  that  variations  of  temperature  over 
a.  considerable  range  have  no  eflfect  on  the  activity.  It  might  be 
supposed  that  the  activity  was  connected  with  the  well-known 
property  of  potassium  and  rubidium  of  emitting  in  great  quantity 
slow  speed  electrons  when  exposed  to  ultra-violet  light,  but  ex- 
posure to  light  has  not  been  found  to  have  any  influence  on  the 
rates  of  emission  of  their  characteristic  radiations.  McLennan 
and  Kennedy  (loc.  cit)  showed  that  the  activity  of  potassium 
could  not  be  ascribed  to  a  copious  emission  of  /3  rays  from  the 
potassium  due  to  the  passage  through  it  of  the  penetrating  y  rays, 
vrhich  are  known  to  be  present  in  the  atmosphere.  Satterly* 
and  Elster  and  Geitelf  have  found  that  the  quantity  of  radium  in 
potassium  salts  is  much  too  small  to  account  for  the  activity 
observed.  Experiments  have  been  made  by  Campbell,  Elster  and 
Geitel  and  Henriot  to  separate  or  concentrate  a  possible  active 
constituent  from  potassium,  but  without  success.  The  absence  of 
3  rays  from  the  radiation  of  potassium  is  a  definite  proof  that  the 
8  radiation  cannot  arise  from  the  presence  of  a  known  0  ray 
product  which  is  separated  with  the  potassium ;  for  no  fi  ray 
product  of  long  period  is  known  which  is  not  transformed  into  an 
a  ray  product. 

The  general  evidence  shows  that  the  emission  of  fi  rays  is  a 
specific  property  of  the  potassium  atom,  and,  in  this  respect, 
potassium  resembles  a  radio-active  substance.  Apart  from  this, 
Qo  definite  evidence  has  been  obtained  to  show  that  potassium 
undergoes  atomic  transformation,  which  is  the  essential  criterion 
of  radio-activity. 

The  activity  of  rubidium  has  not  been  investigated  with  the 
same  detail  as  that  of  potassium,  but  according  to  Campbell  and 
Henriot  it  gives  about  the  same  amount  of  ionisation  as  potassium. 
Rubidium  resembles  potassium  in  emitting  0  rays  but  no  a  rays, 
but  the  /8  rays  from  it  have  only  about  -^  the  penetrating  power 
as  those  from  potassium.  Campbell  found  a  value  fi/D  =  8*23 
for  potassium  metal  and  fi/D  =  53*2  for  rubidium  metal.  Under 
the  experimental  conditions,  the  activity  of  potassium  metal 
measured  by  the  ionisation  produced  was  slightly  larger  than  that 

♦  Satterly,  Proc,  Camb.  Phil.  Soc,  16,  p.  67,  1910. 
t  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phys,  ZeiL  U,  p.  275,  1910. 


690  GENERAL   RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  [CH. 

of  rubidium  metal.  Taking  account  of  the  wide  diflFerence  in  the 
absorption  of  the  ^  rays  emitted  from  the  two  metals,  this  would 
indicate  that  nibidium  emits  considerably  more  fi  rays  per  gram 
than  potassium. 

The  emission  of  high  speed  /8  rays  from  elements  of  such  loi 
atomic  weight  as  potassium  and  rubidium  is  of  great  interest  and 
importance.  There  appears  to  be  no  explanation  why,  amongst 
all  the  light  elements,  potassium  and  rubidium  alone  should 
exhibit  this  property  in  a  relatively  marked  degree.  Caesium, 
which  is  chemically  closely  allied  to  rubidium,  does  not  show  an 
appreciable  activity.  With  the  exception  of  potassium  and  rubi- 
dium, the  expulsion  of  high  speed  /8  particles  has  only  been 
observed  in  the  transformations. of  some  of  the  well-known  radio- 
active elements  of  high  atomic  weight.  From  analogy  it  would 
appear  probable  that  potassium  and  rubidium  are  undergoing 
atomic  transformation  at  a  slow  rate  with  the  emission  of  /3  rays, 
but  there  is  as  yet  no  definite  evidence  in  support  of  such  a 
conclusion. 

242.     The  apparent  radio-activity  of  ordinary  matter. 

Schuster  in  1903  pointed  out  that  every  physical  property  hitherto 
discovered  for  one  element  has  been  found  to  be  shared  by  all  the 
others  in  vaiying  degrees.  For  example,  the  property  of  mag- 
netism is  most  strongly  marked  in  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt,  but  all 
other  substances  have  been  found  to  be  feebly  paramagnetic  or 
diamagnetic.  From  general  analogy,  it  might  thus  be  expected 
that  all  matter  should  exhibit  the  property  of  radio-activity  in 
varying  amounts.  According  to  present  views,  the  emission  of 
high  speed  a  and  yS  particles  is  a  definite  indication  of  atomic 
instability.  It  does  not,  however,  follow  that  because  the  atoms 
of  one  element  become  unstable  and  break  up  with  the  expulsion 
of  a  or  ^  particles  that  therefore  the  atoms  of  all  other  elements 
should  pass  through  similar  phases  of  instability. 

We  have  seen  that  besides  the  well-known  radio-active  elements, 
only  potassium  and  rubidium  show  a  well-marked  activity.  Every 
substance  that  has  so  far  been  examined  shows,  however,  a  very 
feeble  activity  which  can  be  detected  by  the  ionisation  method. 
We  shall  now  consider  the  development  of  our  knowledge  of  this 


LVIIl] 


GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS 


591 


subject,  and  the  interpretation  to  be  placed  on  the  experimental 
r^ults. 

Since  the  time  of  Coulomb  onwai-ds  several  investigators 
have  believed  that  a  charged  conductor  placed  inside  a  closed 
vessel  lost  its  charge  more  rapidly  than  could  be  explained  by  the 
conduction  leak  across  the  insulating  support.  Matteucci,  as 
«arly  as  1850,  observed  that  the  rate  of  loss  of  charge  was  inde- 
pendent of  the  potential.  Boys,  by  using  quartz  insulators  of 
different  lengths  and  diameters,  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the 


Earth 


Earth 


Fig.  129. 


leakage  must  in  part  take  place  through  the  air.  This  loss  of 
charge  in  a  closed  vessel  was  believed  to  be  due  in  some  way  to 
the  presence  of  dust  particles  in  the  air. 

After  the  discovery  that  gases  become  temporary  conductors  of 
electricity  under  the  influence  of  Rontgen  rays  and  the  rays  from 
radio-active  substances,  attention  was  again  drawn  to  this  question. 
Geitel*  and  C.  T.  R.  Wilson  f  independently  attacked  the  problem, 

*  Geitel,  Phys.  Zeit,  2,  p.  116,  1900. 

t  C.  T.  R  Wilson,  Proc.  Camb,  Phil  Soc.  11,  p.  32,  1900;  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A, 
68,  p.  151,  1901. 


592  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [d 

and  both  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  loss  of  charge  was  doe 
to  a  constant  ionisation  of  the  air  in  the  closed  vessel. 

Geitel  measured  the  loss  of  charge  of  an  insulated  conductor, 
attached  to  a  small  electroscope,  which  was  placed  in  a  large 
vessel  of  about  30  litres  capacity.  Wilson  on  the  other  haDd 
used  a  vessel  of  very  small  volume  in  order  to  work  with  air 
which  could  be  completely  freed  from  dust.  In  his  first  experi- 
ments, a  silvered  glass  vessel  of  volume  163  c.c.  was  used.  The 
experimental  arrangement  is  clearly  shown  in  Fig.  129.  J.  is  the 
vessel  in  which  there  is  an  insulated  gold  leaf  system  of  which  the 
loss  of  charge  is  to  be  measured.  In  order  to  prevent  the  loss  of 
electricity  by  leakage  over  the  sulphur  bead,  the  upper  rod  was 
always  kept  charged  to  a  slightly  higher  potential  than  the 
insulated  gold  leaf  system.  The  upper  rod  was  connected  to  a 
sulphur  condenser  with  an  Exner  electroscope  attached  to  measure 
its  potential.  The  method  employed  by  Wilson  in  these  experi- 
ments is  very  certain  and  definite  when  an  extremely  small  rate 
of  discharge  is  to  be  measured,  and  as  we  have  seen  (Section  35) 
has  come  into  general  use  as  a  means  of  measuring  minute  ionisa- 
tion currents. 

Both  Geitel  and  Wilson  found  that  the  rate  of  loss  of  charge 
was  independent  of  the  sign  of  the  charge  and  of  the  potential 
over  a  considerable  range.  These  observations  indicated  that  the 
loss  of  charge  was  due  to  a  minute  volume  ionisation  of  the  air. 
Wilson  also  showed  that  the  rate  of  loss  of  charge  was  approxi- 
mately proportional  to  the  pressure  of  the  gas,  and  for  different 
gases  varied  nearly  as  the  density  of  the  gas.  These  results 
indicated  that  the  ionisation  was  produced  by  a  radiation  pro- 
ceeding from  the  walls  of  the  ionisation  vessel.  This  point  of 
view  was  confirmed  by  the  experiments  of  Strutt*,  who  found 
that  the  rate  of  discharge  of  an  electroscope  depended  on  the 
material  of  which  it  was  composed.  By  placing  linings  of  various 
metals  in  an  electroscope,  he  found  that  the  rate  of  discharge 
varied  for  different  metals,  and  also  in  some  cases  was  markedly 
different  for  various  specimens  of  the  same  metal.  The  variation 
of  the  ionisation  due  to  the  same  metal  indicated  that  part  of 
the  effect  was  due  to  radio-active   impurities  present.     On   the 

♦  Strutt,  Phil,  Mag.  5,  p.  680,  1903. 


XVIIl]  GENERAL   RESULTS   AND   RELATIONS  593 

Other  hand,  Campbell*  as  a  result  of  an  extensive  series  of  mea- 
surements concluded  that  all  metals  showed  a  specific  radio-activity 
and  emitted  characteristic  radiations  of  the  a  ray  tjrpe. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  the  factors  that  influence  the 
rate  of  discharge  of  a  metal  electroscope  filled  with  air.  The 
ionisation  observed  may  be  due  to  one  or  more  of  the  following 
causes: 

(1)  the  presence  of  a  small  quantity  of  radium  emanation 

mixed  with  the  air ; 

(2)  a  superficial  activity  due  to  the  exposure  of  the  metal 

to   the   radio-active   matter  present  in  the  atmo- 
sphere ; 

(3)  the  presence  of  traces  of  known  types  of  radio-active 

matter  throughout  the  volume  of  the  metal ; 

(4)  the  escape  of  a  radio-active  emanation  from  the  metal 

into  the  gas ; 

(5)  the  effect  of  the  penetrating  7  rays  which  arise  from 

the  earth  and  atmosphere. 

The  effect  of  (1)  is  usually  small  and  does  not  amount  to  more 
than  1  or  2  ions  per  c.c.  per  second  in  the  air.  The  radium 
emanation,  if  necessary,  can  be  removed  entirely  by  passing  the 
air  in  the  vessel  through  a  charcoal  tube  immersed  in  liquid  air. 
The  effect  of  (2)  may  be  considerable,  for  the  surface  of  all  metals 
exposed  in  the  open  air  becomes  temporarily  active  due  to  the 
presence  of  radium  and  thorium  emanations  in  the  atmosphere. 
McLennan  and  Burton  f,  for  example,  have  observed  that  the 
ionisation  due  to  a  sheet  of  metal  exposed  in  the  open  air  always 
decreases  for  several  hours  after  its  introduction  into  a  closed 
vessel.  This  no  doubt  is  due  to  the  active  deposit  of  radium 
collected  fix)m  the  atmosphere.  In  addition,  if  the  plate  has  been 
exposed  long  in  the  open  air,  radium  D  -f  E  -h  F  collect  upon  it. 
It  is  thus  to  be  expected  that  a  metal  would  produce  less  ionisa- 
tion when  its  surface  is  removed  or  thoroughly  cleaned  to  get  rid 
of  the  active  matter.     This  has  been  shown  to  be  the  case  by 

•  Campbell,  Phil.  Mag.  9,  p.  531,  1905. 

t  McLeDnan  and  Burton,  Phil.  Mag,  6,  p.  343,  1903. 

R.  H.-A.  38 


594  GENERAL  RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  [CE 

Cooke,  who  found  that  a  brass  electroscope  showed  only  about  one- 
third  of  its  original  activity  after  thorough  cleaning.  McLennan 
also  found  that  the  ionisation  in  large  metal  vessels,  after  an 
initial  decrease,  gradually  rose  for  several  days.  The  activity  fell 
again  when  fresh  air  was  substituted.  This  no  doubt  was  due  to 
the  presence  of  a  trace  of  radium  in  the  metal  and  the  release  of 
a  small  quantity  of  radium  emanation  into  the  air  of  the  ionisation 
chamber.  It  will  be  seen  (Section  255)  that  Rutherford  and  C5ooke 
and  McLennan  observed  that  a  penetrating  radiation  of  the  7  ray 
type  is  present  ever3rwhere  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  This 
arises  from  the  presence  of  radio-active  matter  in  the  earth  and 
atmosphere.  Cooke  found  that  the  ionisation  in  a  well-cleaned 
brass  electroscope  was  reduced  about  30  per  cent,  by  surrounding 
it  by  a  large  thickness  of  lead.  A  similar  result  was  observed  by 
McLennan  when  an  ionisation  vessel  was  surrounded  by  a  large 
thickness  of  water. 

When  proper  precautions  are  taken,  the  residual  ionisation  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  metal  is  reduced  to  a  small  quantity.  For 
example,  Cooke*  found  that  in  a  brass  electroscope  of  about  one 
litre  volume  surrounded  by  lead,  the  rate  of  discharge  corresponded 
to  the  production  of  about  7  ions  per  second,  when  the  charge  on 
an  ion  is  taken  as  4*65  x  10"^®  units.  A  number  of  experiments 
have  been  made  by  McLennan  f  and  Wright  J  to  find  the  lowest 
value  of  the  ionisation  obtainable.  For  this  purpose,  the  latter 
made  measurements  on  the  surface  of  Lake  Ontario.  The  experi- 
ments showed  that  the  water  of  the  lake  completely  screened  off 
the  effect  of  the  7  rays  from  the  earth,  and  did  not  itself  contain 
sufficient  radium  to  provide  a  detectable  amount  of  7  rays.  In 
this  way,  the  ionisation  in  an  aluminium  vessel  was  reduced  to 
4*8  ions  per  c.c.  per  second  and  in  a  lead  vessel  to  6*3. 

It  is  difficult  to  decide  with  certainty  whether  this  residual 
ionisation  is  due  to  an  inherent  radio-activity  possessed  by  the 
metal  itself  or  to  the  presence  of  a  trace  of  known  radio-active 
matter.  Taking  into  consideration  the  wide  dissemination  of 
radio-active  matter  throughout  the  surface  of  the  earth,  it  is  to  be 

♦  Cooke,  Phil.  Mag.  6,  p.  403,  1903. 

t  McLennan,  Phil.  Mag.  14,  p.  760,  1907. 

X  Wright,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  p.  295,  1909. 


XVIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  595 

expected  that  traces  of  radio-active  matter  would  be  separated  with 
all  metals.  This  point  of  view  has  received  strong  support  by 
experiments  that  have  been  made  with  lead,  which  is  the  most 
active  of  all  the  ordinary  metals.  It  is  known  that  radium  D 
is  always  separated  with  the  lead  present  in  radio-active  minerals, 
and  no  method  has  yet  been  found  of  isolating  it  from  the  lead. 
It  would  thus  appear  certain  that  if  any  radium  is  present  in  lead 
ores  that  the  product  radium  D  would  be  separated  with  the  lead. 
Since  radium  D  changes  into  radium  F  (polonium),  which  emits 
a  rays,  the  activity  of  the  lead  should  be  mainly  due  to  the  latter. 
In  order  to  test  this  point,  Elster  and  Geitel  *  made  a  chemical 
examination  of  lead,  and  were  able  to  extract  a  small  quantity  of 
active  matter  which  they  considered  to  be  polonium.  If  the 
activity  of  lead  is  mainly  due  to  the  presence  of  radium  D  and  its 
products,  since  radium  D  loses  half  its  activity  in  16*5  years,  it  is 
to  be  expected  that  the  activity  shown  by  lead  would  decrease 
with  the  age  of  the  preparation.  This  was  tested  by  McLennan  f, 
who  found  that  a  lead  sheet  about  28  years  old  showed  an  activity 
much  less  than  a  sheet  of  lead  of  recent  date.  For  example,  the 
number  of  ions  produced  per  c.c.  per  second  by  recent  samples  of 
lead  from  diflFerent  works  varied  between  27  and  116,  while  the 
number  fix)m  the  sheet  of  old  lead  was  17 — a  number  not  much 
greater  than  that  shown  for  commercial  zinc  and  aluminium. 

After  taking  account  of  the  various  factors  which  make  up 
the  apparent  activity  of  metals,  the  residual  activity  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  metal  itself  produces  on  an  average  less  than 
6  ions  per  c.c.  per  second  in  air  at  standard  pressure.  As  we 
have  seen,  the  lowest  rate  of  production  of  ions  yet  observed  is  4. 
This  is  a  very  small  volume  ionisation  and  would  be  produced 
by  an  almost  infinitesimal  trace  of  radium  or  other  substance  of 
high  activity  separated  with  the  metal.  For  example,  suppose  a 
spherical  metal  vessel  is  taken  of  volume  one  litre.  The  area  of 
the  interior  surface  is  about  480  square  cms.  and  the  total  number 
of  ions  produced  per  second  in  the  chamber  due  to  the  metal  is 
ordinarily  less  than  10^  Now  it  has  been  shown  in  Section  70 
that  an  d  particle  from  uranium,  or  radium  itself,  produces  more 

*  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phys.  ZeiL  9,  p.  289,  1908. 
t  McLennan,  Phil  Mag.  14,  p.  760,  1907. 

38—2 


596  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [CE 

than  10*  ions  in  air  before  complete  absorption.  The  ionisation 
observed  thus  corresponds  to  the  expulsion  of  one  a  particle  in 
ten  seconds  from  the  surface  of  the  vessel,  or  about  one  a  particle 
per  hour  from  each  square  centimetre  of  surface  of  the  metal.  It 
can  easily  be  calculated  that  the  expulsion  of  one  a  particle  per 
hour  per  gram  of  metal  would  account  for  the  ionisation  observed 
The  presence  of  2  x  10~"  gr.  of  radium  per  gram  of  metal  as  an 
impurity  would  suffice  to  account  for  the  observed  activity. 

Suppose,  however,  the  ionisation  observed  is  ascribed  to  a 
weak  radio-activity  of  the  metal  itself  which  is  accompanied  by 
the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle.  One  gram  of  uranium  emits 
2*7  X  10*  a  particles  per  second  and  is  half  transformed  in  about 
5  X  10*  years.  Since  one  gram  of  the  metal  emits  one  a  particle 
per  hour,  it  follows  that  its  corresponding  rate  of  transformation 
is  only  10~'  of  that  of  uranium,  and  the  metal  would  be  half 
transformed  in  5  x  10*'  years. 

Considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  there  does  not  seem  to 
be  any  adequate  proof  that  ordinary  metals  possess  an  intrinsic 
activity  corresponding  to  the  well-known  radio-active  elements. 
The  very  weak  activity  actually  observed  is  in  all  probability  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  traces  of  radio-active  matter  as 
impurities. 

243.  Final  products  of  disintegration.  We  have  seen 
that  after  a  long  series  of  transformations,  each  of  the  elements, 
uranium,  thorium  and  actinium,  gives  rise  to  matter  which  is  either 
entirely  inactive  or  possesses  such  a  feeble  radio-activity  that  it 
cannot  be  detected  by  the  sensitive  methods  at  our  disposal.  If 
these  final  products  of  the  transformation  are  stable,  they  must 
accumulate  in  quantity  in  the  radio-active  minerals  and  after  the 
lapse  of  geological  ages  should  be  present  in  sufficient  quantity  to 
detect  by  ordinary  chemical  methods.  Since  the  final  products  of 
the  transformations  are  believed  to  be  solids,  the  amount  of  the 
final  product  in  an  unaltered  mineral  should  depend  on  the 
amount  of  the  parent  element  originally  present  and  on  the  age 
of  the  mineral. 

Let  us  first  consider  the  question  of  the  end  product  of  the 
uranium-radium  series.    It  has  been  shown  that  the  disintegration 


^VIIl]  GENERAL   RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  597 

of  uranium  results  in  the  expulsion  of  eight  atoms  of  helium. 
Since  the  atomic  weight  of  helium  is  3*994  and  of  uranium  238*5, 
the  atomic  weight  of  the  end  product  should  be  238*5  —  8  x  3*994 
or  206*6.  This  is  very  near  to  the  accepted  value  of  the  atomic 
weight  of  lead,  viz.  207.  In  this  calculation,  the  loss  of  mass 
is  supposed  to  be  inappreciable  in  a  product  which  does  not  emit 
a  rays. 

The  suggestion  that  lead  was  the  end  product  of  the  uranium 
series  was  first  made  by  Boltwood*,  and  has  .been  supported 
by  him  fix)m  consideration  of  the  relative  amounts  of  lead  and 
helium  in  old  unaltered  uranium  minerals.  He  showed  that  the 
ratio  Pb/U  was  nearly  constant  for  unaltered  minerals  obtained 
from  the  same  locality  and  presumably  of  the  same  geological  age, 
but  varied  with  the  locality.  For  example,  the  analysis  of  five 
specimens  of  uraninite  from  Glastonbury  (Conn.)  gave  a  ratio 
Fb/  U  =  '041 ;  five  specimens  of  uraninite  from  Branchville  '063 ; 
uraninite,  Llano  Co.,  Texas,  *170.  In  seventeen  minerals  fix)m 
Norway  and  Sweden  there  were  two  groups,  one  giving  a  ratio 
Pb/U  ='125  and  the  other  *155.  The  greatest  ratio  observed, 
0*20,  was  given  by  thorianite  from  Ceylon.  The  ratio  of  helium 
to  lead  was  always  less  than  the  theoretical  value  calculated  fix)m 
the  amount  of  lead,  but  varied  widely  in  diflFerent  minerals. 
This  variation  is  to  be  expected  since  the  amount  of  helium 
retained  will  depend  greatly  on  the  density  and  structure  of  the 
mineral. 

The  question  was  re-examined  by  Holmesf,  who  determined 
the  ratio  Pb/U  for  a  number  of  radio-active  minerals  found  in 
primary  rock  minerals  obtained  from  the  same  locality  in  Norway. 
With  one  or  two  exceptions,  the  ratios  Pb/U  were  in  good  agree- 
ment and  gave  an  average  value  *045.  The  ratio  Pb/  U  was  found 
to  be  unaffected  by  the  presence  of  thorium,  showing  that  the 
latter  element  could  not  give  rise  to  lead  as  a  final  product. 
Taking  into  account  the  probable  geological  age  of  the  various 
minerals,  the  ratio  Pb/U  is  found  to  vary  in  the  manner  to  be 
expected  if  lead  and  uranium  are  genetically  connected. 

The  evidence  obtained  from  examination  of  a  large  number  of 

♦  Boltwood,  Amer.  Joum.  of  Sci.  23,  p.  78,  1907. 
t  Holmes,  Proc.  Roy,  Soc,  A,  80,  p.  248,  1911. 


598 


GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS 


[CH. 


radio-active  minerals  undoubtedly  affords  very  strong  support  for 
the  view  that  uranium  is  ultimately  transformed  into  lead.  On 
this  assumption,  it  is  a  simple  matter  to  calculate  approximately 
the  age  of  the  radio-active  mineral  from  the  amount  of  lead 
present.  This  will  give  a  maximum  estimate  of  the  age,  for  there 
is  always  a  possibility  that  a  part  of  the  lead  was  deposited  during 
the  formation  of  the  mineral.  On  the  other  hand,  the  age  deter- 
mined from  the  helium  content  (Section  230)  gives  a  minimum 
estimate,  for  in  practically  all  cases  a  part  of  the  helium  formed 
must  have  escaped. 

We  have  seen  (Section  229)  that  the  calculated  rate  of  pro- 
duction of  helium  by  one  gram  of  uranium  in  equilibrium  with  its 
products  is  110  x  10"*^  cub.  mm.  per  year,  a  value  in  good  accord 
with  a  direct  determination  by  Strutt.  Since  eight  atoms  of  helium 
are  formed  for  one  of  lead,  it  follows  that  the  amount  of  lead 
formed  per  gram  of  uranium  per  year  is  1*25  x  10~^®  gram. 
Assuming  that  this  rate  of  production  has  remained  nearly  con- 
stant since  the  fonnation  of  the  mineral,  the  age  of  a  mineral  is 
given  by  8  X  10® .  Pb/  U  years. 

The  following  table  compiled  by  Holmes  gives  the  ratio  found 
for  a  number  of  radio-active  minerals,  of  which  the  probable 
geological  period  is  added.     The  age  in  millions  of  years  has  been 


Geological  period 


Carboniferous 

Devonian        

Pro-carboniferous 
Silurian  or  Ordovician 
Pre-Cambrian 

a.     Sweden 

h.     United  States 
c.     Ceylon 


PblU 


0-041 
0-046 
0-050 
0053 

0-125 
0155 
0-160 
0175 
0-20 


Age  in  millions 
of  years       . 


340 
370 
410 
430 

1025 
1270 
1310 
1435 
1640 


deduced  on  the  assumption  that  all  the  lead  observed  is  derived 
from  the  transformation  of  uranium.  As  is  to  be  expected,  the 
age  calculated  with  lead  as  an  index  is  several  times  greater  than 


-SVlIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  599 

"fthe  age  calculated  from  the  amount  of  helium  present  in  the 
xnineral  (see  Section  230). 

The  evidence  derived  from  a  study  of  uranium  minerals  sup- 
jported  by  the  indirect  calculation  of  the  atomic  weight  makes  it 
cdmost  certain  that  lead  is  the  final  product  of  uranium.  A  direct 
■proof  of  this  could  be  obtained  by  finding  whether  polonium,  the 
last  product  of  the  uranium  series,  is  transformed  into  lead. 
Xxperiments  to  test  this  point  are  being  carried  out  by  Mme  Curie 
«uid  Dr  Debieme. 

The  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  final  product  of  the  trans- 
formation of  thorium  is  far  less  definite  than  in  the  case  of 
■uranium.  Thorium  contains  in  all  six  a  ray  products.  The  atomic 
'weight  of  the  end  product  should  thus  be  232o  —  24  or  208*5. 
This  suggests  that  bismuth  (atomic  weight  2080)  is  the  end 
product,  but  such  a  view  is  not  supported  by  the  mineralogical 
evidence.  Remembering  that  thorium  is  transformed  at  about 
one-fifth  of  the  rate  of  uranium,  the  weight  of  the  end  product 
formed  per  gram  of  thorium  in  a  mineral  should  be  about  one- 
fifth  of  the  weight  of  lead  formed  by  the  uranium  in  the  same 
mineral.  Since  the  ratio  Pi/tr  for  thorianite  from  Ceylon  is  about 
0*20,  the  ratio  Bi/U  for  this  mineral  should  be  about  004.  The 
amount  of  bismuth  actually  observed  in  the  mineral  is  much  too 
small  compared  with  the  theoretical  value,  to  give  definite  support 
to  the  view  that  bismuth  is  the  end  product  of  thorium.  At  the 
same  time,  the  evidence  of  atomic  weight  based  on  considerations 
of  the  number  of  a  particles  emitted  does  not  suggest  any  other 
possibility  unless  it  be  supposed  that  one  or  more  of  the  trans- 
formations of  thorium  are  abnormal  in  character.  We  have 
already  seen  (Section  218)  that  the  product  thorium  B  or  thorium 
C  has  undoubtedly  two  distinct  modes  of  transformation.  The 
exact  nature  of  these  two  transformations  is  as  yet  imperfectly 
understood,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  there  may  be  two  end 
products  of  the  thorium  resulting  from  this  branching  of  the 
thorium  series.  The  radio-active  and  mineralogical  data,  at 
present  available,  are,  however,  too  imperfect  to  supply  any  definite 
information  on  this  point. 

No  evidence  has  yet  been  obtained  to  throw  light  on  the 
nature  of  the  end  product  of  the  actinium  series.     In  the  absence 


600  GENERAL   RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  [CE 

of  definite  knowledge  of  the  atomic  weight  of  actinium,  or  of  any 
of  its  products,  the  method  of  deduction  used  in  the  cases  o( 
uranium  and  thorium  is  inapplicable. 

244.     Chemistry  of  radio-actlTe  bodies.     We  have  seen 
that  a  variety  of  physical  and  chemical  methods  have  been  devised 
which  are  capable  of  isolating  a  given  radio-active  substance  from 
a  mixture  of  others.    These  methods  are  often  surprisingly  effective, 
even  though  the  quantity  of  matter  involved  is  far  too  small  to 
detect  except  by  radio-active  methods.     For  example,  radium  B 
can  be  separated  from  radium  C  and  thorium  B  from  thorium  C  by 
their  difference  in  volatility  when  deposited  on  a  clean  metal  surface. 
Again,  pure  radium  C  can  be  obtained  from  a  solution  of  radium 
B  -h  C  either  by  electrolysis  or  by  dipping  a  nickel  plate  in  the 
solution.    Uranium  X  can  be  separated  from  a  solution  of  uranium 
by  precipitating  barium  as  sulphate  in  the  solution  or  by  adding 
charcoal  to  the  solution.     Radium  D  is  separated  from  radium  by 
precipitating  lead  in  the  solution. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  whether  any  definite  informa- 
tion of  value  as  to  the  chemical  nature  of  a  radio-active  substance 
can  be  drawn  from  its  behaviour  when  present  in  exceedingly 
small  quantity.  The  general  methods  of  separation  employed  can 
be  conveniently  divided  into  four  groups  : 

(1)  Difference  in  volatility  of  products. 

(2)  Absorption  by  charcoal,  entrainment  by  barium  sulphate, 
etc. 

(3)  Precipitating  in  a  solution  a  substance  of  analogous 
chemical  properties. 

(4)  Separation  by  electrolysis  or  by  electrochemical  methoA*«. 

With  reference  to  (1),  we  have  seen  that  the  differences  of 
volatility  of  the  components  of  the  active  deposit  have  often  been 
employed  to  effect  a  partial  separation  of  one  or  more  products  of 
the  group.  There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  volatility  of  a 
given  product  depends  on  its  chemical  state.  For  example,  if  the 
active  deposit  of  radium  is  heated  in  the  presence  of  hydrogen, 
both  radium  B  and  radium  C  volatilise  at  much  lower  temperatures 
than  in  an  atmosphere  of  oxygen.     The  work  of  Schrader*  has 

♦  Schrader,  Phil.  Mag.  24,  p.  126,  1912. 


XVIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND   RELATIONS  601 

ahown  clearly  that  diflFerent  compounds  of  a  product  can  be  ob- 
tained by  suitable  chemical  treatment,  and  their  presence  shown 
V>y  their  change  in  volatility.  For  example,  in  the  presence  of 
liydrogen,  radium  B  probably  exists  as  a  metal,  but  in  the  presence 
^  oxygen  it  is  converted  into  an  oxide,  and  in  the  presence  of 
ohlorine  into  a  chloride.  The  change  of  volatility  or  the  change 
in  the  solubility  of  a  product  in  acids  is  one  of  the  few  methods 
^  present  available  of  studying  the  formation  of  compounds  of 
iradio-active  elements  present  in  infinitesimal  quantity. 

In  regard  to  (2),  it  appears  that  no  very  definite  evidence  of 
the  chemical  nature  of  a  product  can  be  drawn  fi*om  its  separation 
^ith  substances  like  charcoal,  barium  sulphate  or  ferric  hydroxide ; 
ibr  each  of  these  methods  is  effective  in  separating  not  only  one 
eubstance  but  a  number  of  substances  which  from  other  evidence 
4are  believed  to  difier  widely  in  chemical  properties.  In  these 
cases,  the  active  matter  is  entrained  or  absorbed  by  the  dense 
precipitate,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  similar  methods  of 
separation  would  be  effective  if  the  active  matter  could  be 
obtained  in  weighable  quantity.  Ritzel*  has  examined  carefully 
the  conditions  of  separation  of  uranium  X  firom  uranium  by 
charcoal  and  concluded  that  it  is  a  true  case  of  adsorption  of 
the  matter  by  the  charcoal.  The  adsorption  is,  however,  only 
appreciable  when  dealing  with  minute  traces  of  the  matter  involved. 
For  example,  Ritzel  has  shown  that  the  charcoal  method  fails  if  a 
small  quantity  of  thorium  salt  is  added  to  the  uranium  solution. 
The  explanation  of  this  effect  seems  clear  in  the  light  of  later 
knowledge.  Uranium  X  is  chemically  closely  analogous  to  thorium, 
and  is  separated  by  the  same  general  methods  as  the  latter.  In 
the  absence  of  thorium,  the  charcoal  is  able  to  absorb  completely 
the  minute  quantity  of  uranium  X  present,  but  with  the  addition 
of  a  relatively  large  quantity  of  thorium,  which  behaves  like  a  very 
large  quantity  of  uranium  X,  the  charcoal  is  able  to  adsorb  only  a 
minute  fi:'action  of  each  of  the  two  substances.  It  does  not  appear 
that  the  active  matter  forms  definite  chemical  compounds  in  such 
cases,  for  Uoydf  has  shown  that  the  radium  when  separated  by 
the  barium  sulphate  method  is  only  lightly  held  by  the  precipitate. 

•  Ritzel,  ZeiUchr.f.  phys.  Chem.  67,  p.  724,  1909. 
t  Lloyd,  Joum,  Phys.  Chem,  14,  p.  476,  1910. 


602  GENEBAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [CB. 

By  agitation  with  water,  the  greater  part  of  the  adsorbed  radium 
passes  into  solution  again. 

Without  further  study,  it  seems  doubtful  whether  the  method 
(3)  gives  a  definite  indication  of  the  chemical  character  of  Ae 
product.  For  example,  mesothorium  2  is  separated  from  meso- 
thorium  by  precipitating  a  zirconium  salt  in  the  solution.  Though  it 
may  possibly  belong  to  the  same  chemical  group  as  zirconium, 
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  mesothorium  2  if  present  in 
large  quantity  could  not  be  separated  from  zirconium  by  direct 
chemical  methods.  Again,  radium  D  is  always  associated  with  the 
lead  obtained  from  uranium  minerals  but  a  satisfeu^tory  method  of 
separating  the  two  elements  has  not  been  discovered.  This  diflBculty 
may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  one  substance  is  present  in  minute 
quantity  compared  with  the  other,  and  not  due  to  any  very  close 
similarity  in  their  chemical  properties  in  bulk.  Similarly  no  method 
has  yet  been  found  of  separating  ionium  from  thorium.  In  this 
case,  there  would  appear  to  be  a  close  similarity  of  chemical 
properties,  for  it  seems  probable  that  in  some  preparations  the 
ionium  is  present  in  quantity  comparable  with  the  thorium.  In 
a  similar  way,  mesothorium  cannot  be  separated  ftx)m  the  radium 
with  which  it  is  separated  from  a  mineral  containing  both  uranium 
and  thorium.  Soddy  has  shown  that  the  relative  concentration 
of  the  two  components  is  unaltered  by  fractional  crystallisation. 
There  is  a  number  of  products  known  which  appear  to  be  so 
analogous  in  chemical  properties  that  no  methods  of  separation 
have  yet  been  devised.  For  example,  thorium,  radio-thorium, 
ionium,  and  uranium  X  form  an  apparently  non-separable  group; 
radium,  mesothorium  and  thorium  X  another. 

The  electrochemical  properties  of  the  active  deposits  in  solution 
were  first  investigated  by  v.  Lerch*,  who  showed  that  one  or  more 
of  the  component  products  could  be  separated  by  electrolysis  under 
specific  conditions.  In  a  similar  way,  he  found  that  the  com- 
ponents of  the  active  deposit  in  solution  could  be  separated 
electrochemically  by  dipping  metal  plates  into  the  solution.  For 
example,  v.  Lerch*  found  that  radium  C  was  deposited  on  the 
cathode  by  electrolysis,  using  a  small  current  density,  and  was 

♦  V.  Lerch,  Ann.  d.  Phys.  12,  p.  745,  1903;  20,  p.  345,  1906. 


YIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  603 

flfeJbo  deposited  on  nickel  by  dipping  a  plate  of  the  latter  in  an  acid 
fiM)lQtion. 

A  detailed  study  of  the  conditions  of  separation  of  the  active 
substances  by  electrolysis  has  been  made  by  v.  Hevesy*.  He  has 
ttliown  that  the  following  groups  of  radio-active  substances  possess 
xmearly  the  same  electrochemical  properties. 

Radium,  Thorium  X,  Actinium  X. 
Radium  B,  Thorium  B,  Actinium  B. 
Radium  C,  Thorium  C,  Actinium  C. 
Thorium  D,  Actinium  D. 

The  experiments  were  carried  out  not  by  applying  a  difference 
of  potential  between  the  electrodes  but  by  dipping  a  metal  into  a 
solution  of  one  of  its  salts  containing  the  radio-active  substance 
lander  investigation.  For  instance,  the  action  of  zinc  on  the  active 
cJeposit  of  radium  was  investigated  by  dipping  a  zinc  plate  into  a 
solution  of  zinc  sulphate  containing  radium  B  and  radium  C  in 
solution.  By  using  electrochemically  definite  systems,  the  drop  of 
potential  between  the  solution  and  the  metal  could  be  determined 
'with  certainty. 

If  a  neutral  solution  containing  B  and  C  products  in  radio- 
active equilibrium  be  electrolysed,  the  smaller  the  potential  drop 
of  the  cathode  the  purer  is  the  C  product  obtained  on  it.  When 
tihis  potential  drop  has  a  value  Ejig  =  —  06  volts  with  a  calomel 
electrode,  B  and  C  are  deposited  in  equilibrium  ratio.  If  it 
exceeds  this  value,  however,  B  is  deposited  in  more  than  equilibrium 
amount.  V.  Hevesy  has  shown  that  the  separation  of  products  by 
clipping  a  metal  plate  into  a  solution  can  be  explained  in  a  similar 
^ay.  For  example,  if  a  silver  plate  be  dipped  into  normal  silver 
nitrate  containing  B  and  C  in  equilibrium,  pure  C  is  deposited  on 
it,  because  in  this  case  a  potential  drop  at  the  surface  of  the  metal 
is  Effg  =  4-  0*5  volts.  If  a  zinc  plate,  however,  be  dipped  into  a 
normal  zinc  sulphate  solution  B  is  deposited  in  great  excess  over  C 
because  the  potential  drop  of  the  electrode  is  here  Ejig  =  —  1  volt. 

Fig.  130  shows  the  relation  between  the  percentage  of  actinium 
B  or  C  of  the  total  B  and  C  deposited  on  the  plate  and  the 

♦  V.  Hevesy,  Phil  Mag,  23,  p.  628,  1912. 


604  aKNERAL  HESULTS   AND   BELATIONS  [Ct 

potential  drop  necessary,  measured  against  the  calomel  electiodt 
for  producing  this  deposition.  Fifty  per  cent,  represents  a  ilejKsl 
of  B  and  C  in  equilibrium  amount.  Active  bodies  are  depoaUJ 
also  on  DOD-metals  such  as  glass,  quartz,  etc,  though  in  smilW 
amount  than  on  metab.  The  active  matter  so  obtained  conn* 
chiefly  of  C  products.  The  deposit  of  the  active  matter  io  ^« 
cases  is  no  doubt  connected  with  the  double  layers  which  in 
always  present.  Although  the  capacity  of  these  double  layeR  mtj' 
be  very  small,  it  is  sutScient  to  bring  about  the  deposition  of  eoiw 
active   material.     This   type   of  deposition   is   best  shown  viA 


tO-5  tO-3  *0  1  -0-1  -0-3  -0  6  "0-7  -0-9    -11    -13   -1-5    -1-7  -1-9 
VoUt.  (E„,). 
Fig.  ISO. 

radiuni  F  (polonium).  This  substance  is  deposited  very  readily  "' 
glass  and  metallic  surfaces,  and  in  consequence  it  is  always  difficul 
to  separate  polonium  from  glass,  and  still  more  from  metalL' 
surfaces  by   treatment  with   acids,  as  part  of  the  polonium 

always  re-deposited  from  the  solution. 

24S.    Analogle*  between  radio-active  series.     In  co 

sidering  the  modes  of  transformation  of  uranium,  thorium  ai 
actinium,  and  the  chemical  properties  of  their  successive  produc 


XVIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  605 

it  is  at  once  obvious  that  there  are  several  striking  resemblances. 
Elach  element  gives  rise  to  a  radio-active  emanation  which  behaves 
like  a  monatomic  gas  of  the  helium-argon  group,  and  each  emana- 
tion  in  turn  gives  rise  to  a  similar  series  of  products  included 
under  the  name  "  active  deposit."     In  these  groups  of  products, 
the  similarity  is  very  close  not  only  in  the  nature  of  the  trans- 
formations but  also  in  the  chemical  characters  of  corresponding 
products.     Each  emanation  is  transformed  with  the  emission  of  an 
a  particle  and  gives  rise  to  a  non-volatile  product  of  short  life 
known  as  radium  A,  thorium  A  and  actinium  A  respectively. 
Each   of  the  A  products  breaks   up  with  the  expulsion  of  an 
a  particle  giving  rise  to  a  B  product.     Each  of  the  B  products  has 
the  longest  life  of  the  group,  and  is  transformed  into  a  C  product. 
There  is  evidence  that  in  all  three  cases  the  C  products  break  up 
in  an  abnormal  way.     Radium  C  emits  a,  y8,  and  7  rays  and  gives 
rise  to  radium  D  and  a  branch  product  called  radium  Cg  of  short 
life,  which  emits  j3  rays.     Thorium  C  also  breaks  up  in  a  com- 
plicated  way,  emitting  two  groups  of  a  rays  and  also  0  rays. 
There  is  also  some  evidence,  though  not  of  a  very  definite  character, 
which  indicates  that  the  transformation  of  actinium  C  is  abnormal. 
The  products  thorium  D  and  actinium  D  are  very  similar,  both 
emitting  fi  and  7  rays,  and  having  a  life  short  compared  with  the 
B  products.     Thorium  D  and  actinum  D  differ  in  some  respects 
from  radium  D.     It  seems  probable  that  the  product  of  radium 
analogous  to  thorium  D  is  included  under  radium  C,  for  it  is  quite 
possible  that  the  fi  and  7  rays  from  the  latter  do  not  accompany 
the  expulsion  of  a  rays. 

The  general  analogy  between  the  modes  of  disintegration  of 
the  first  four  products  of  the  emanation  is  thus  very  striking.  The 
similarity  extends  to  the  chemical  nature  of  the  products,  for  it 
has  been  shown  that  the  B  and  C  products  of  the  series  show 
almost  identical  chemical  behaviour.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
series  of  products  radium  D  -f  E  -f  F  has  no  counterpart  in  the 
thorium  or  actinium  series. 

Passing  backwards  in  the  series,  the  parent  products  of  the 
emanations,  viz.  radium,  thorium  X  and  actinium  X  show  again  a 
strong  similarity  both  in  chemical  properties  and  mode  of  disin- 
tegration.   The  corresponding  products  ionium,  radio-thorium  and 


606  GENERAL  RESULTS   AND   RELATIONS  [CH. 

radio-actiniuin  are  also  closely  allied  in  radio-active  and  chemical 
properties,  especially  the  two  former. 

As  we  approach  the  heads  of  the  three  series,  the  similarity 
becomes  less  marked.  Uranium  X  and  mesothorium  2  appear  to 
be  similar,  for  both  have  relatively  short  lives  and  emit  /8  and  7 
rays,  but  no  counterpart  is  known  in  the  actinium  series.  Meso- 
thorium is  analogous  in  some  respects  to  actinium,  for  both  suffer 
a  rayless  transformation,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  differ  some- 
what in  chemical  properties. 

It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  atomic  weights  of  the  thorium 
products  passing  from  mesothorium  2  to  thorium  D  is  in  each  case 
two  units  less  than  the  corresponding  product  of  the  uranium- 
radium  series.  The  comparison  cannot  be  extended  to  the  actinium 
series,  as  its  atomic  weight  is  unknown. 

It  is  of  interest  to  consider  the  changes  in  chemical  properties 
in  passing  from  one  element  of  the  series  to  the  next.  Soddy  has 
pointed  out  that  in  many  cases  where  the  transformation  is  accom- 
panied by  the  loss  of  a  helium  atom,  there  is  apparently  a  change 
of  two  in  the  valency.  For  example,  ionium,  which  has  properties 
80  similar  to  thorium  that  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  tetravalent,  gives 
rise  to  divalent  radium,  and  the  latter  to  non-valent  emanation. 
In  the  case  of  thorium,  the  valency  of  the  first  few  products 
appears  to  alternate.  Tetravalent  thorium  changes  into  divalent 
mesothorium,  which  then  undergoes  changes  of  valency  similar  to 
ionium.  The  change  of  two  in  the  valency  in  consequence  of  the 
loss  of  an  a  particle,  is  probably  connected  with  the  fact  that,  in 
order  to  remain  electrically  neutral,  the  atom  which  has  lost  an 
a  particle  which  carries  two  unit  positive  charges  must  also  lose 
two  unit  negative  charges  probably  in  the  form  of  electrons  from 
the  surface  of  the  atom. 

The  products  which  are  transformed  without  the  emission  of 
a  rays  are  of  especial  interest,  for  the  atomic  weight  is  not  ap- 
preciably changed  by  the  transformation.  Such  a  change,  however, 
often  results  in  a  marked  alteration  of  chemical  properties.  In 
such  cases,  it  is  possible  that  the  chemical  differences  observed 
may  be  due  mainly  to  a  change  of  valency,  rather  than  to  a  drastic 
re-arrangement  of  the  structure  of  the  atom. 

In  comparing  the  electrochemical  properties  of  radium  B,  C, 


XVIIl]  GENERAL   RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  607 

D,  E  and  F,  it  was  found  that  radium  C  was  more  readily 
deposited  electrochemically  than  radium  B,  radium  E  more  than 
radium  D,  and  radium  F  more  than  radium  E.  These  observa- 
tions led  to  a  generalisation,  kno^n  as  v.  Lerch's  or  Lucas*  rule, 
which  states  that  each  member  of  a  disintegration  series  is  nobler 
than  its  parent.  The  proof  that  a  relation  of  this  kind  existed 
would  be  of  great  importance,  for  it  would  indicate  a  connection 
between  the  chemical  properties  of  a  product  and  its  position  in 
the  series  of  transformations.  A  more  detailed  examination  of 
the  active  deposits  of  radium,  thorium  and  actinium  has  shown, 
however,  that  this  rule  does  not  hold  generally.  For  example, 
V.  Lerch  and  v.  Wartburg  found  that  thorium  D  is  less  easily 
deposited  than  thorium  C,  while  v.  Hevesy  showed  that  radium  A 
is  more  easily  deposited  than  radium  B,  but  less  easily  than 
radium  C,  while  radium  C  is  much  more  easily  deposited  than 
radium  D.  It  was  pointed  out  by  v.  Hevesy  that  the  products 
which  emit  a  rays  appear  to  be  more  easily  deposited  electro- 
lytically  than  the  products  which  emit  only  /3  rays.  Apart  from 
this,  no  definite  relation  appears  to  exist  between  the  properties 
of  successive  products  in  the  series  of  transformations  included 
under  the  active  deposits. 

246.  Relation  between  range  and  period  of  trans- 
formation. The  writer*  early  observed  that  there  appeared  to 
be  a  relation  between  the  period  of  transformation  of  a  product 
and  the  velocity  of  the  a  rays  expelled  from  it.  The  speed  of  the 
a  particle  appeared  to  be  greater  the  shorter  the  period  of  trans- 
formation. The  data  at  the  time  were  insuflBcient  to  more  than 
suggest  that  a  relation  existed,  and  there  were  several  apparent 
exceptions  to  the  general  rule.  Geiger  and  Nuttallf  made  a 
careful  study  of  the  ranges  of  the  o  particles  from  the  radio-active 
products  of  the  uranium,  thorium  and  actinium  series  and  showed 
that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  the  range  of  the  a  particle 
increased  with  decrease  of  the  period  of  transformation.  This 
relation  is  shown  in  its  simplest  form  by  plotting  the  logarithm 
of  the  range  of  the  a  particle  against  the  logarithm  of  the  constant 

♦  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  110,  1907. 

t  Geiger  and  Nuttall,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  618,  1911;  28,  p.  439,  1912. 


608  GENERAL  RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  [O. 

of  tTBnsfonuation.  Plotted  in  this  way,  it  is  seen  in  Fig.  131  tlul 
the  products  of  the  uranium  and  radium  series  lie  nearly  oai 
straight  line.  The  two  a  ray  products  of  the  uranium  aoiei 
whose  periods  are  unknown  are  ionium  and  radium  C.  Tfe 
former  fits  on  the  curve  if  the  period  of  transformation  Js  taken* 
about  200,000  years,  and  the  latter  if  its  period  is  taken  to  beti 
the  order  of  one-miliionth  of  a  second.  The  results  for  the  thorins 
and  actinium  series  are  shown  in  the  same  figure.  Here  agui 
most  of  the  products  lie  approximately  on  a  straight  line  panJId 
with  the  line  showing  the  relation  for  the  uranium-radium  sem 


Logariihin  ofntngt. 
Fig.  131. 

We  have  seen  that  in  the  case  of  thorium  C,  the  atom  breaks  up 
in  two  ways  with  the  emission  of  a  particles  of  range  48  and 
8'6  cms.  respectively.  In  order  to  fit  the  curve,  it  is  necessair  to 
assume  that  the  period  of  transformation  of  the  product  which 
emits  rays  of  range  86  cms.  is  exceedingly  short. 

The  only  exception  in  the  case  of  the  actinium  series  is  radio- 
actinium,  which  has  a  longer  period  thwi  actinium  X  but  emiU 
a  swifter  a  particle   than   the   latter.    It   is  possible   that  the 


XVIll]  GENERAL  RESULTS   AND  RELATIONS  609 

exception  is  more  apparent  than  real  and  that  a  closer  study  of  the 
transformations  may  remove  this  difficulty.  The  results  given  in 
Fig.  131  contain  the  final  results  of  an  examination  of  the  ranges 
of  all  the  a  ray  products  of  the  three  series.  Some  of  the  numbers 
given  in  the  table,  Section  70,  have  been  found  to  be  slightly  in 
error. 

The  relation  found  by  Geiger  is  of  exceptional  interest,  for  it 
supplies  undoubted  evidence  that  a  connection  exists  between  two 
of  the  fundamental  magnitudes  in  radio-active  transformations, 
viz.  the  velocity  of  expulsion  of  the  cr  particle  and  the  constant  of 
transformation  of  the  product.  It  is  not  difficult  to  find  several 
mathematical  relations  between  the  transformation  constant  X 
and  the  velocity  V  of  the  a  particle  which  approximately  express 
the  relation.  For  example,  the  relation  log\  =  a  +  6F"  where 
a  and  6  are  constants  and  n  =  1  or  2  has  been  suggested  by 
Swinne*.  The  ranges  of  the  a  particles  must  be  known  with 
great  accuracy  before  the  correctness  of  any  definite  formula  can 
be  adequately  tested. 

There  are  several  points  of  view  from  which  these  relations  may 
be  regarded.  It  might  be  supposed,  for  example,  that  the  lower 
velocity  of  expulsion  of  the  a  particle  from  a  long  period  product 
is  connected  with  a  gradual  drain  of  the  energy  of  the  a  particle 
by  radiation  before  it  escapes  the  atomic  system.  Under  these 
conditions,  it  would  be  expected  that  the  heating  effect  of  a  radio- 
active product  would  not  be  directly  proportional  to  the  energy  of 
the  expelled  a  particle.  This  point  has  been  discussed  earlier 
(Section  234)  and  it  has  been  shown  that  the  experimental 
evidence  is  not  yet  sufficiently  definite  to  decide  finally  the 
question.  The  simplest  point  of  view  of  regarding  the  relation 
is  to  suppose  that  the  chance  of  an  atom  breaking  up  is  greater, 
the  greater  the  surplus  energy  to  be  got  rid  of  to  form  the  next 
product  of  the  series.  It  is  quite  probable  fi-om  general  con- 
siderations that  the  rate  of  transformation  would  depend  on  the 
amount  of  the  energy  that  must  be  released  for  the  atom  to  form 
another  temporarily  stable  system.  On  the  assumption  that  the 
relation  between  period  of  transformation  and  range  of  a  particles 
holds  generally,  Qeiger  has  shown  that  in  order  that  a  radio-active 

♦  Swinne,  Phyt.  Ztit,  13,  p.  14,  1912. 
R.  R.-A.  39 


610  GENERAL   RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  |CE 

substance  may  emit  an  a  particle  of  short  range,  for  example/ 
the  period  of  transformation  would  be  so  long  that  the  aci 
of  the  product  would  be  too  small  to  detect  even  by  the  send 
electric  methods  at  our  disposal.  This  may  account  for  the  6to 
that  no  product  has  been  foand  which  emits  a  particles  of  short  rangei 
It  is  of  interest  to  n(^V  'J»at  a  relation  of  a  similar,  though  not, 
nearly  so  definite  a  cUj-acter  as  that  found  by  Geiger  for  thi^ 
a  rays,  appears  to  hold  between  the  velocity  of  expulsion  i\ 
0  particles  and  the  period  of  transformation  of  the  product  con- 
cerned. In  each  of  three  seiies,  the  fi  ray  prodjjicts  whick* 
emit  the  swiftest  y8  ^  ..^  have  a  short  period  of  transformation 
For  example,  radium  „^  ladium  E,  thorium  D,  and  actinium  D  airl 
have  short  periods  and  emit  swift  /8  rays.  On  the  other  hand,V 
radium  D,  which  emits  ^  rays  of  relatively  slow  speed,  has  a  long  I 
period  of  transformation. 

247.  Relation  between  /9  and  y  rayi  ftoxn  radio-acti¥e 
■ubstances.  Attention  has  previously  been  drawn  to  the  remark- 
able complexity  of  the  13  rays  emitted  from  most  of  the  radio- 
active products.  This  complexity  has  been  brought  out  most 
clearly  by  the  study  of  those  products  which  emit  13  rays  of  greats 
penetrating  power,  for  example,  radium  B  +  C,  thorium  D  and 
mesothorium  2.  On  the  other  hand,  products  which  emit  yS  par- 
ticles of  comparatively  slow  speed,  for  example,  radium  itself  and 
radium  D,  do  not  show  the  same  complexity,  for  in  each  of  thesje 
cases  only  two  groups  of  homogeneous  rays  are  emitted. 

We  have  seen  that  the  ^  rays  from  the  products  radium  B 
and  radium  C  together  are  remarkably  complex,  for  about  30, 
groups  of  homogeneous  rays  are  emitted  from  these  two  products, 
together.  Similarly  the  fi  rays  from  thorium  C  and  D  and  meso- 
thorium 2  consist  of  a  number  of  groups  of  homogeneous  ray& 
This  complexity  is  all  the  more  striking  when  it  is  remembered 
that,  with  the  exception  of  thorium  C,  no  product  is  known  which 
emits  more  than  one  group  of  a  rays. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  whether  any  explanation  can 
be  offered  of  the  complexity  of  the  /8  radiation  emitted  from 
a  single  product.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  definitely  established 
that  the  atom  of  each  a  ray  product  breaks  up  with  the  emission 


Ill]  GENERAL   RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  611 

•  one  a  particle.     The  number  of  13  particles  expelled  per 

is  not  known  with  the  same  definiteness,  but  the  work  of 

aey*   has  shown  clearly  that  in  the  case  of  radium  B  and 

iium    C,   each   atom   on   the   average   emits    only  about    one 

mrticle  during  disintegration  (Section  80).     In  order  to  account 

the  emission  of  groups  of  homc^  ous  rays  from  a  single 
Kluct,  it  is  thus  necessary  to  suppob  either  that  the  atom 
?aks  up  in  a  number  of  distinct  ways,  each  of  which  is 
u-acterised  by  the  emission  of  /3  particles  of  definite  velocity, 
that  th-^  /3  rays  are  altered  in  veloc'  "^^n  some  definite  way 
ring  their  escape  from  the  disintegra*"^"**'  atom.  On  the  first 
pothesis,  it  might  be  anticipated  that  tiie  different  modes  of 
msformation  of  a  y8  ray  product  would  give  rise  to  a  series 
new  products,  but  only  one  is  observed.  In  addition,  the  energy 
litted  during  transformation  from  one  definite  type  of  matter 
0  another  would  vary  widely  for  different  atoms  of  the  same 
bstance,  and  this  seems  improbable.  On  the  second  hypothesis, 
is  supposed  that  the  disintegration  of  each  atom  takes  place  in 
ictly  the  same  way  with  the  emission  of  the  same  amount  of 
?rgy,  but  that  the  energy  of  the  fi  particle  may  be  decreased  by 
finite  but  different  amounts  due  to  transformation  of  its  energy 
its  passage  through  the  atomic  system.  Since  it  is  known  that 
rays  in  escaping  from  an  atom  give  rise  to  y  rays,  it  is  natural 
suppose  that  the  loss  of  energy  of  the  fi  particle  in  escaping 
ra  the  atomic  system  is  in  some  way  connected  with  the 
citation  of  7  rays. 

The  work  of  Barkla  and  others  on  the  X  rays  has  brought 
b  clearly  that  under  suitable  conditions  of  excitation,  each 
ment  emits  one  or  more  definite  types  of  X  radiation  which  are 
iracteristic  of  the  element.  Barkla  has  determined  the  co- 
icient  of  absorption  in  aluminium  of  the  characteristic  X  rays 

elements  up  to  atomic  weight  140.  The  value  of  fju/D  for 
iminium  decreases  rapidly  with  the  atomic  weight  and  varies 
tween  435  for  calcium  of  atomic  weight  40*1  to  0*6  for  cerium 
atomic  weight  14025.  Plotting  the  logarithms  of  the  values 
fi/D  against  the  logarithms  of  the  corresponding  atomic  weights, 
)  points  for  the  heavier  elements  lie  nearly  on  a  straight  line. 

*  Moseley,  Proe,  Royi  Soc,  A,  87,  p.  2S0,  1912. 

39—2 


612  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [CH. 

If  this  straight  line  be  produced,  it  can  be  shown  that  an  element 
of  atomic  weight  214  should  emit  a  characteristic  radiation  whose 
value  of  fijD  =  '04  for  aluminium.  This  is  in  good  accord  with 
the  value  /i  =  '0406  for  aluminium  found  by  Soddy  and  Russell 
(Section  98)  for  the  penetrating  7  rays  from  radium  C.  It  would 
thus  appear  that  the  penetrating  7  radiation  from  radium  C  is  to 
be  regarded  as  the  characteristic  radiation  of  that  element  excited 
by  the  escape  of  yS  particles  from  the  atomic  system. 

This  conclusion  is  also  supported  by  evidence  of  another  kind. 
Whiddington  has  shown  that  the  )Sor  cathode  particle  incident 
on  matter  must  have  a  definite  minimum  speed  for  each  element 
before  the  characteristic  radiation  of  the  latter  is  excited.  Over 
the  range  examined,  this  velocity  is  equal  to  -4  x  10*  cms.  per 
second,  where  A  is  the  atomic  weight  of  the  element.  If  this 
law  holds  generally  for  all  the  elements,  the  velocity  of  the 
P  particle  required  to  excite  the  characteristic  radiation  of 
radium  C  of  atomic  weight  214  should  be  0*71  of  the  velocity 
of  light.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  energy  ^mu*  rather  than 
the  velocity  u  is  the  determining  factor  for  high  speed  fi  particles. 
Taking  this  into  consideration,  the  velocity  required  to  excite  the 

characttTistic  radiation  is  given  by  w  =  10* -4  a/  —  where 

the  mass  of  the  ^  particle  for  slow  speeds.  On  this  hypothesis 
u  =  "63  of  the  velocity  of  light.  The  mean  value  for  the  two 
methods  of  calculation  gives  u  =  '67.  The  corresponding  energy 
of  the  )8  particle  for  the  mean  value  of  u  is  1*5  x  10^' e  ergs  when 
e  is  the  charge  carried  by  the  yS  particle.  If  the  whole  energy  of 
the  yS  particle  is  converted  into  7  radiation,  the  energy  absorbed 
in  exciting  the  characteristic  7  ray  should  be  1*5  x  10"  e  ergs. 

It  is  of  interest  to  examine  whether  any  relation  exists  between 
the  energies  of  the  individual  y9  particles  comprising  the  difierent 
groups  of  homogeneous  rays  emitted  by  radium  B  and  C.  The 
velocities  of  the  different  groups  found  by  Danysz  have  been 
previously  given  on  page  255  and  each  group  of  homogeneous  rays 
is  marked  by  a  number. 

The  energy  of  the  /S  particles  =^mw'  =  4  ^Pi^Fig  where  the 
values  of  Hp  and  ^  are  given  in  the  table ;  V  is  the  velocity  of 
light,  and  e  the  charge  carried  by  the  fi  particle.     Starting  from 


m^  IS 


\ 


XVIll] 


GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS 


613 


group  No.  21,  the  diflferences  between  the  energies  of  the  in- 
dividual /?  particle  in  the  different  groups  is  shown  in  column  2  of 
the  following  table. 


Number 
of  group 

Difference 
in  energy 

pEi  -f  qK2 

Caloulated 

(21)-(20) 

•45x10"  6 

E, 

•456xl0"« 

»   -(19) 

1*37       „ 

ZEi 

1-37        „ 

«   -(18) 

1-56       „ 

^2 

1-56        „ 

,,   -(17) 

1  "84       „ 

AEx 

1-82        „ 

,        „   -(16) 

2-05       „ 

Ei-i-Eji 

2-01         „ 

!       „  -(15) 

311 

2£'2 

311         „ 

,         „   -(14) 

403       „ 

2Ei  +  2E^ 

402 

1        „   -(13) 

4-48       „ 

ZEi  +  2E2 

4-48         „ 

„   -(12) 

4-92       „ 

4Ei-¥2E2 

4-94         „ 

„   -(11) 

1 

6-03       „ 

3/^]  4*3^2 

6-03        „ 

On  examining  these  differences,  it  is  seen  that  they  can  be 
expressed  closely  by  the  relation  pEi  '¥qE^  where  E^  =  0*456  x  10"  e, 
and  E^  =  1'556  x  10"  e,  and  p  and  q  are  whole  numbers  which  may 
have  any  values  0,  1,  2,  3,  etc.  The  differences  calculated  on  this 
hypothesis  are  shown  in  the  last  column  and  are  observed  to  be  in 
close  agreement  for  the  whole  series  of  lines  from  No.  21  to  No.  11. 
This  relation  does  not  hold  below  line  No.  11,  but  in  all  probability 
most  of  the  lines  Nos.  1  to  10  belong  to  radium  B  and  not  to 
radium  C.  The  energy  of  the  ^8  particle  for  group  No.  21  is 
8*63  X  10"  c,  while  its  velocity  is  '962  of  the  velocity  of  light. 
Groups  22  and  23  are  not  included  in  the  calculation,  for  Danysz 
states  that  No.  22  includes  from  3  to  5  groups  of  )3  rays  of 
which  only  the  average  velocity  is  given;  similarly  No.  23  is  a 
complex  group. 

The  values  of  the  velocity  of  the  /8  particles  will  require  to  be 
known  with  great  accuracy  before  such  a  relation  as  is  indicated 
can  be  definitely  established;  but  it  does  not  appear  likely  that 
the  connection  is  accidental.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the 
value  of  ^2=  1*556  x  10"  e  is  in  fair  accord  with  the  calculated 
energy  of  the  P  particle,  viz.  1*5  x  10"  «,  which  should  be  required 
to  excite  the  characteristic  radiation  from  radium  C.  The  value 
of  Ex  may  in  a  similar  way  be  connected  with  the  energy  required 


614  OKNERiX   lUESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [CH. 

to  excite  the  second  type  of  characteristic  X  radiation  which  has 
been  observed  in  a  number  of  elements  by  Barkla. 

According  to  these  views,  the  same  total  energy  is  emitted 
during  the  disintegration  of  each  atom,  but  the  energy  is  divided 
between  /9  and  7  rays  in  varpng  proportions  for  diflFerent  atoms. 
In  some  atoms,  most  if  not  all  of  the  energy  is  emitted  in  the 
form  of  a  high  speed  0  particle,  in  others  the  energy  of  the 
fi  particles  is  reduced  by  definite  but  different  amounts  by  the 
conversion  of  part  of  its  energy  into  7  rays.  Suppose,  for  example, 
the  total  energy  liberated  in  the  form  of  /9  and  7  rays  during  the 
transformation  of  one  atom  is  Eq.  If  the  fi  particle  before  it 
escapes  from  the  atom  passes  through  two  regions  where  the 
energy  required  to  excite  a  7  ray  is  Ei  and  E^  respectivelv, 
the  resulting  energy  of  the  0  particle  is  Eo  —  (pEi  +  qE^)  where 
p  and  q  are  whole  numbers  corresponding  to  the  number  of  7  rays 
excited  in  each  region.  The  energy  emitted  in  the  form  of  7  rays 
is  pEi  -f  qEz  and  p  7  rays  of  energy  JFj  and  q  of  energy  E^  appear. 

According  to  this  view,  the  transformation  of  one  atom  gives 
rise  to  only  one  0  ray,  but  to  p  7  rays  of  one  kind  and  q  of 
another.  The  groups  of  homogeneous  13  rays  observed  are  the 
statistical  effect  due  to  a  large  number  of  disintegrating  atoms. 
The  relative  distribution  of  13  particles  amongst  the  numerous 
groups  of  homogeneous  rays  will  depend  on  the  probability  that 
one  or  more  of  the  units  of  energy  Ej  and  E2  are  abstracted  from 
the  /8  particle  in  traversing  the  atom. 

The  analysis  of  the  /8  rays  from  radium  C  suggests  that  the 
number  of  7  rays  emitted  from  radium  C  is  considerably  greater 
than  the  number  of  /8  rays.  Assuming  that  each  7  ray  from 
radium  C  was  converted  into  one  y8  ray,  Moseley  found  that  at 
least  two  7  rays  appeared  for  the  transformation  of  one  atom  of 
radium  C.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  this  is  a  minimum 
estimate,  and  that  the  actual  number  is  two  or  three  times 
greater. 

It  is  of  interest  to  calculate  the  energy  Eq  liberated  per  atom 
in  the  form  of  /8  and  7  rays  during  the  transformation  of  radium  C. 
It  has  been  shown  in  Section  236  that  the  heating  effect  of  the 
)8  and  7  rays  from  one  gram  of  radium  in  equilibrium  is  about 
11  gram  calories  per  hour.     Part  of  this  energy  arises  6rom  the 


^VIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND   RELATIONS  615 

teansformation  of  radium  B,  but  there  will  not  be  much  error  if  it 

be  supposed  that  the  energy  of  the  yS  and  7  rays  from  the  radium  C 

in  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  radium  is  about  8  calories  per 

hour.     Supposing,  as  Moseley  found,  that  one  fi  ray  is  on  the 

average  expelled  from  each  atom  of  radium  C,  the  energy  emitted 

I>er  atom  of  radium  C  in  the  form  of  fi  and  7  rays  is  3*1  x  10"*  ergs 

or  18  X  10"  e,  since  3'4  x  10*®  /8  particles  are  emitted  per  second 

from  radium  C  in  equilibrium  with  one  gram  of  radium.     This 

corresponds  to  the  emission  of  a  yS  particle  with  a  velocity  about 

"99  of  the  velocity  of  light.     This  approximately  corresponds  with 

the  average  energy  of  the  13  particle  included  in  group  No.  22  in 

the  table  given  on  page  255,  and  would  indicate  that  this  is  the 

head  of  the  /8  ray  series.     On  the  other  hand,  this  leaves  out  of 

account   the   swifter  0   rays   observed   by   Danysz.     Unless   the 

energy  of  the  7  rays  has  been  underestimated,  it  does  not  seem 

possible  to  suppose  that  the  swiftest  fi  ray,  which  has  an  energy 

27  X  10*'  e,  can  be  the  head  of  the  ff  ray  series.     The  existence  of 

such  a  swift  group  of  fi  rays  is,  however,  open  to  some  doubt,  as 

Danysz  expressly  states  in  his  paper.     The  photographic  effects  of 

such  swift  /8  rays  are  very  feeble  and  difficult  to  detect  in  the 

presence  of  a  strong  photographic  action  due  to  the  7  rays. 

We  have  so  far  confined  our  discussion  to  the  connection 
between  the  fi  and  7  rays  emitted  from  radium  0,  for  in  this  case 
the  necessary  data  are  far  more  definite  and  complete  than  for  any 
other  product.  It  seems  probable,  however,  that  the  same  general 
explanation  will  apply  to  the  emission  of  jS  and  7  rays  from  meso- 
thorium  2  and  thorium  D,  both  of  which  emit  a  number  of  groups 
of  homogeneous  fi  rays  and  also  penetrating  7  rays.  In  each  of 
these  three  products,  the  energy  emitted  in  the  form  of  7  rays  is 
of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  energy  emitted  in  the  form 
of  /3  rays. 

We  have  seen,  however,  that  in  the  case  of  certain  13  ray 
products  like  uranium  X,  radium  E,  and  actinium  D,  the  energy 
emitted  in  the  form  of  7  rays  is  small  compared  with  the  energy 
emitted  in  the  form  of  /8  rays.  The  poverty  of  7  rays  compared 
with  /3  rays  is  very  marked  in  the  case  of  radium  £.  The 
yS  rays  fix)m  the  latter  product  have  been  found  to  give  a 
continuous  spectrum,  and  in  this  respect  differ  from  the  products 


616  GENERAL   RESULTS  AND   RELATIONS  [CE 

like  radium  C  and  thorium  D,  which  emit  groups  of  homogeneoiB 
rays. 

On  the  views  which  have  been  discussed,  the  relative  poverty 
of  7  rays  may  be  explained  by  supposing  either  that  the  )8  rajs  |^ 
have  not  sufficient  energy  to  excite  penetrating  7  rays  or  that  the 
^  rays  in  escaping  from  the  atom  do  not  traverse  a  region  of  the 
j^tom  in  w^hich  7  rays  can  originate.  On  this  hypothesis,  however, 
the  complex  character  of  the  ^  rays  still  requires  explanation. 

Whatever  may  be  the  explanation  of  the  relation  between  the 
emission  of  ^  and  7  rays  from  radio-active  matter,  there  appears 
to  be  no  doubt  that  an  intimate  connection  exists  between  them 
and  that  the  /9  and  7  rays  appear  together  as  the  result  of  the 
same  atomic  explosion.  The  general  results  indicate  that  the 
complexity  of  the  fi  rays  is  coimected  with  the  property  of 
the  atom  of  tmnsforming  part  of  the  energy  of  a.  /3  ray  into  the 
form  of  a  7  ray,  and  vice  versa.  The  atomic  explosion  which 
results  in  the  loss  of  a  yS  particle  is  particularly  favourable  to  the 
excitation  of  7  rays,  and,  under  these  conditions,  it  would  appear 
that  more  than  half  of  the  total  energy  appears  as  7  rays.  The 
efficiency  of  the  conversion  of  /8  into  7  rays  is  far  greater  for 
a  disturbance  originating  within  the  atom  than  when  a  stream  of 
0  rays  falls  on  ordinary  matter.  It  is  known  that  in  the  latter 
case  less  than  one  per  cent,  of  the  energy  of  the  /3  rays  is  trans- 
formed into  7  rays. 

248.  Constitution  of  the  atom.  The  theory  that  the  atoms 
of  matter  are  all  built  up  of  some  simple  fundamental  imit  or 
protyle  has  been  advanced  at  various  times  by  prominent  chemists 
and  physicists.  One  of  the  earliest  hypotheses  of  this  kind  was 
that  due  to  Prout,  who  supposed  that  all  the  elements  were  built 
up  of  hydrogen.  This  general  point  of  view  has  received  strong 
support  from  observations  that  the  properties  of  elements  vary  in 
a  periodic  manner  with  their  atomic  weight.  This  is  exemplified 
by  the  classification  of  the  elements  according  to  the  well-known 
periodic  law.  In  order  to  explain  the  electrical  and  optical 
properties  of  matter,  it  was  generally  supposed  that  the  atom 
consisted  of  a  number  of  positively  and  negatively  charged 
particles,  held  in  equilibrium  by  electrical  forces.     The  properties 


S^VIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  617 

of  such  electrical  atoms  were  early  studied  by  Larmor  and 
Lorentz. 

The  proof  of  the  existence  in  all  kinds  of  matter  of  negative 
electrons  which  have  a  mass  small  compared  with  that  of  the 
hydrogen  atom,  gave  a  great  impetus  to  the  study  of  atomic 
constitution.  Lord  Kelvin  devised  a  model  atom  which  consisted 
of  a  uniform  sphere  of  positive  electrification  throughout  which 
a  number  of  negative  electrons  was  distributed.  The  properties 
of  this  type  of  atom  have  been  worked  out  in  great  detail  by 
J.J.  Thomson*.  He  investigated  the  possible  stable  arrangements 
of  a  number  of  electrons  moving  about  in  a  sphere  of  uniform 
positive  electrification.  In  order  to  produce  an  electrically  neutral 
atom,  the  distributed  positive  charge  must  be  equal  and  opposite 
to  the  charge  carried  by  the  electrons.  The  properties  of  such 
a  model  atom  are  very  striking,  and  indirectly  suggest  a  possible 
explanation  of  the  periodic  law  in  chemistry.  J.  J.  Thomson  has 
shown  that  the  electrons,  if  in  one  plane,  arrange  themselves  in  a 
number  of  concentric  rings;  and  generally,  if  they  are  not  con- 
strained to  move  in  one  plane,  in  a  number  of  concentric  shells 
like  the  coats  of  an  onion. 

The  mathematical  problem  is  much  simplified  if  the  electrons 
are  supposed  to  rotate  in  rings  in  one  plane,  the  electrons  in  each 
ring  being  arranged  at  equal  angular  intervals.  J.  J.  Thomson 
has  determined  the  number  of  rings  and  the  number  of  electrons 
in  each  ring  which  are  necessary  to  ensure  stability  of  the  atom. 

DiflFerent  arrangements  of  electrons  vary  widely  in  stability ; 
some  may  acquire  an  extra  electron  or  two  and  yet  remain  stable ; 
others  readily  lose  an  electron  without  disturbing  their  stability. 
The  former  would  correspond  to  the  electro-negative  atom,  the 
latter  to  the  electro-positive.  In  order  for  an  atom  to  remain 
stable,  it  is  necessary  that  the  radiation  of  energy  by  the  electrons 
in  the  atom  should  be  small.  A  single  electron  rotating  in  a 
circular  orbit  is  a  powerful  radiator  of  energy  and  would  soon 
lose  all  its  energy  in  the  form  of  electromagnetic  radiation. 
J.  J.  Thomson  showed,  however,  that  the  radiation  of  energy  from 
a  ring  of  electrons  diminishes  rapidly  with  the  number  of  electrons 
in  the  ring.      For  example,  he  found  that  the  radiation  from  a 

*  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil  Mag.  7,  p.  237,  1904. 


618  GBNERAL   RESULTS   AND   RELATIONS  [CH.! 

symmetrical  group  of  six  particles  moving  with  a  velocity  of  1;10 
of  the  velocity  of  light  is  less  than  one-millionth  part  of  the 
radiation  from  a  single  particle  describing  the  same  orbit  with  the|^' 
same  velocity.     When  the  velocity  is  1/100  of  that  of  light  the 
amount  of  mdiation  is  only  lO""**  that  of  a  single  particle  moving 
with  the  same  velocity  in  the  same  orbit. 

Results  of  this  kind  indicate  that  an  atom  consisting  of  a 
large  number  of  revolving  electrons  may  radiate  energy  extremely 
slowly,  and  yet,  finally,  this  minute  but  continuous  drain  of  energy 
from  the  atom  must  result  either  in  a  rearrangement  of  its  com- 
ponent parts  into  a  new  system,  or  in  an  expulsion  of  electrons,  or 
groups  of  electrons,  from  the  atom.  J.  J.  Thomson  suggested  that 
this  continuous  loss  of  energy  in  the  form  of  radiation  might  be 
the  cause  of  the  disintegration  of  the  radio-elements. 

Since  the  mass  of  the  electron  at  slow  speeds  is  about  1/1700 
of  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen  atom,  it  was  natural  at  first  to 
suppose  that  the  hydrogen  atom,  for  example,  was  composed  of  a 
large  number  of  electrons,  and  that  possibly  the  whole  mass  of 
the  atom  might  be  due  to  the  electrons  which  composed  it 
J.  J.  Thomson*  showed  later,  however,  from  several  lines  of 
argument,  that. the  number  of  electrons  comprising  an  atom  was 
about  three  times  its  atomic  weight.  If  this  were  the  case,  only 
a  minute  fraction  of  the  mass  of  the  atom  could  be  due  to  the 
electrons,  and  the  rest  presumably  was  associated  with  the  positive 
electricity. 

Simple  models  of  atoms  to  imitate  the  behaviour  of  polonium 
in  shooting  out  a  imrticles,  and  of  radium  in  shooting  out  fi 
particles,  have  been  discussed  by  Lord  Kelvin  f.  It  is  possible  to 
devise  certain  stable  arrangements  of  positively  and  negatively 
electrified  particles,  supposed  to  constitute  an  atom,  which,  on  the 
application  of  some  disturbing  force,  break  up  with  the  expulsion 
of  a  part  of  the  system  with  great  velocity. 

One  of  the  most  powerful  methods  of  obtaining  information  on 
the  internal  structure  of  the  atom  lies  in  the  study  of  the  scatter- 
ing of  high  speed  particles,  for  example,  of  a  and  fi  particles,  in 
their  passage   through   matter.     In  consequence   of  their  great 

*  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil.  Mag,  11,  p.  769,  1906. 

t  Kelvin,  Phil,  Mag,  8,  p.  52S,  1904 ;  10,  p.  695,  1905. 


XVI  ll]  GENERAL  RESULTS   AND   RELATIONS  619 

energy  of  motion,  a  high  speed  a  or  ^  particle  must  pass  through 
the  atom  which  lies  in  its  path.  The  deflection  of  the  charged 
particle  from  its  rectilinear  path  as  the  result  of  an  atomic 
encounter  throws  light  on  the  intensity  and  distribution  of  the 
electrical  forces  within  the  atom  to  which  these  deflections  are 
due.  One  of  the  most  noticeable  features  of  the  scattering  of 
a  particles  by  thin  films  of  matter  is  that  a  small  fraction  of  the 
a  particles  is  deflected  through  angles  of  more  than  90°.  There 
appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  large  deflection  sometimes 
sulBfered  by  an  a  particle  is  the  result  of  a  close  encounter  with 
only  one  atom  of  matter.  The  type  of  atom  devised  by  Kelvin 
and  J.  J.  Thomson,  in  which  the  positive  electricity  is  distributed 
throughout  a  sphere  of  radius  comparable  with  the  diameter  of 
the  atom,  does  not  seem  capable  without  modification  of  producing 
the  large  deviations  of  an  a  particle  which  are  observed. 

The  writer*  found,  however,  that  the  single  large  scattering  of 
a  particles  could  be  satisfactorily  explained  by  supposing  that  the 
atom  consisted  of  a  concentrated  positive  charge  at  its  centre  and 
surrounded  by  a  distribution  of  electrons  to  render  it  electrically 
neutral.  It  was  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  greater  part  of  the 
mass  of  the  atom  was  associated  with  the  positive  charge  which 
for  distances  up  to  3  x  10~^*  cms.  behaved  as  if  it  were  concen- 
trated at  a  point. 

The  large  angle  scattering  of  the  a  particle  is  then  almost 
entirely  due  to  the  passage  of  the  a  particle  through  the  intense 
electric  field  surrounding  the  central  charge.  Supposing  the 
electrical  force  to  vary  as  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  from 
the  central  charge,  the  i)ositively  charged  a  particle  in  passing 
close  to  the  centre  of  the  atom  describes  a  hyperbolic  orbit,  the 
angle  of  deflection  being  greater  the  nearer  the  a  particle  passes 
the  centre  of  the  atom.  The  laws  of  scattering  to  be  expect  on 
this  hypothesis  have  been  given  in  Section  74.  These  laws  of 
scattering  have  recently  been  verified  experimentally  by  Geiger 
and  Marsden  in  the  laboratory  of  the  writer.  They  found,  for 
example,  that  the  theoretical  relation  between  the  number  of  a 
particles  scattered  and  the  scattering  angle  held  within  the  limits 
of  experimental  error  over  an  enormous  range.     The  scattering  of 

♦  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  ai,  p.  669. 1911. 


620  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [CfL 

a  particles  by  thin  films  of  matter  can  be  completely  explained  on 
the  assumption  that  the  atom  contains  a  strong  central  charge 
concentrated  over  a  very  minute  volume.  The  comparison  of 
experiment  with  the  theory  shows  that  the  central  charge  in 
an  atom  corresponds  to  about  ^Ae,  where  A  is  the  atomic 
weight  of  the  element  and  e  the  charge  on  the  electron.  This 
relation  holds  closely  for  atoms  of  atomic  weight  between 
aluminium  and  gold.  The  theory  of  scattering  requires  a  slight 
modification  when  the  mass  of  the  scattering  atom  is  comparable 
with  the  mass  of  the  a  particle,  i,e.  with  the  mass  of  the  helium 
atom. 

On  these  views,  the  atom  of  gold,  for  example,  of  atomic 
weight  196,  is  supposed  to  contain  at  its  centre  a  concentrated 
charge  about  100«,  and  to  be  surrounded  by  a  distribution  of 
100  negative  electrons.  The  electrons  may  be  supposed  to  be 
distributed  throughout  a  spherical  volume  or  in  concentric  rings 
in  one  plane. 

On  this  theory  the  a  particle  in  rapid  motion  consists  of  two 
unit  positive  charges  concentrated  throughout  a  volume  minute 
compared  with  the  volume  of  the  atom,  as  ordinarily  understood. 
Since  it  does  not  seem  possible  that  the  a  particle  can  retain  anj 
of  its  constituent  electrons  in  escaping  from  the  radio-active  atom 
and  in  its  violent  encounters  with  the  atoms  of  matter  it  traverses 
in  its  path,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  neutral  helium 
atom  contains  two  unit  positive  charges  and  two  negative  electrons. 

This  type  of  "  Saturnian  "  atom  was  first  suggested  in  1904  by 
Nagaoka*,  who  investigated  mathematically  the  stability  of  an 
atom  composed  of  a  central  attracting  mass  surrounded  by  rings 
of  rotating  electrons.  He  showed  that  such  a  system  was  stable 
if  the  attractive  force  was  large,  and  the  electrons  in  rapid  motioa 

249.  Structure  and  mode  of  disintegration  of  the  radio- 
active atoms.  The  study  of  the  transformations  of  radio-active 
matter  has  brought  to  light  the  important  fact  that  helium  appears 
to  be  one  of  the  more  elementary  substances  from  which  the 
heavier  atoms  are  built  up.  For  example,  uranium  in  its  series  of 
transformations  expels  eight  helium  atoms  and  thorium  six. 

*  Nagaoka,  Phil,  Mag.  7,  p.  446,  1904. 


XVIIl]  GENERAL  RESULTS  AND   RELATIONS  621 

It  thus  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  heavier  atoms  are 
made  up  in  part  of  helium  atoms.  This  may  also  hold  for  the 
lighter  atoms,  for  it  is  significant  that  the  atomic  weights  of  a 
number  of  elements  differ  nearly  by  four,  the  atomic  weight  of 
helium,  or  by  an  integral  multiple  of  four.  No  doubt  hydrogen 
as  well  as  helium  is  one  of  the  fundamental  units  of  which  the 
heavier  atoms  are  composed.  The  view  that  the  heavier  atoms  are 
largely  built  up  of  helium  atoms  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
observation  (see  last  section)  that  the  central  charge  of  the  atom 
is  about  half  its  atomic  weight.  For  example,  the  uranium  atom 
of  atomic  weight  238  may  be  made  up  of  about  59  atoms  of  helium 
carrying  a  positive  charge  118  e. 

The  atom  of  uranium  may  be  supposed  to  consist  of  a  central 
charge  of  positive  electricity  surrounded  by  a  number  of  concentric 
rings  of  negative  electrons  in  rapid  motion,  the  outer  ring  being 
comparable  in  diameter  with  the  diameter  of  the  atom.  Prac- 
tically the  whole  charge  and  mass  of  the  atom  are  concentrated  at 
the  centre,  and  are  probably  confined  within  a  sphere  of  radius 
not  greater  than  10""  cm.  No  doubt  the  positively  charged 
centre  of  the  atom  is  a  complicated  system  in  movement,  consist- 
ing in  part  of  charged  helium  and  hydrogen  atoms.  It  would 
appear  as  if  the  positively  charged  atoms  of  matter  attract  one 
another  at  very  small  distances,  for  otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  see 
how  the  component  parts  at  the  centre  are  held  together. 

For  some  cause,  at  present  unknown,  the  central  system  of  the 
atom  of  uranium  becomes  unstable.  One  of  the  component  helium 
atoms  escapes  from  the  central  mass  and  increases  in  velocity  in 
passing  through  the  intense  electrical  field  due  to  the  atom.  It  is 
difficult  to  be  certain  how  much  of  the  energy  of  the  expelled  a 
particle  was  originally  possessed  by  the  particle  before  its  release 
fix)m  the  central  mass,  and  how  much  is  acquired  in  its  escape 
from  the  atom.  It  would  appear  likely  that  the  greater  part  of 
the  energy  of  the  a  particle  is  acquired  in  traversing  the  atomic 
field,  and  that  only  a  small  part  is  due  to  its  original  energy  of 
motion. 

The  escape  of  the  a  particle  carrying  two  positive  charges 
must  lead  to  the  expulsion  of  two  electrons  from  the  atom, 
probably  from  its  surface,  in  order  for  the  atom  to  be  electrically 


622  GENERAL   RESULTS  AND  RELATIONS  [CH. 

neutral.     The  fact  that  the  recoil  atoms  resulting  from  the  expul- 
sion of  an  a  particle,  always  carry  a  positive  charge  would  suggest 
that  at  least   three  electrons  are  emitted  in  most  cases.    The 
escape  of  an  a  particle  alters  the  system  of  forces  acting  on  the 
central  charge  and  on  the  rotating  electrons.     The  residual  atom 
is  now  more  unstable  than  before  and  ultimately  loses  another 
a  particle.     The  loss  of  two  a  particles  carrying  four  unit  charges 
must  alter  entirely  the  forces  holding  the  electrons  in  equilibrium 
One  of  these  rings  becomes  unstable  and  breaks  up.     Part  of  the 
surplus  energy  of  a  ring  of  electrons  is  released  in  the  form  of  a 
high  speed  /3  particle  and  part  in  the  form  of  7  rays,  the  divisicm 
between  the  two  forms  of  energy  depending  on  £Etctors  which  are 
not  at  present  imderstood.     On  the  point  of  view  here  outlined, 
it  is  seen  that  the  instability  of  the  atom  may  be  conveniently 
considered  to  be  due   to  two   causes,  although   these   are  not 
mutually  independent,  viz.  the  instability  of  the  central  mass  and 
the  instability  of  the  electronic  distribution.     The  former  type  of 
instability  leads  to  the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle,  the  latter  to  the 
appearance  of  fi  and  7  rays.     It  is  noteworthy  that  the  period  of 
transformation  of  /8  ray  products  is  on  the  whole  much  shorter 
than  for  the  a  ray  products.     This  suggests  that  any  want  of 
stability  of  the  electronic  distribution  leads  more  rapidly  to  a 
breaking  up  of  the  atom  than  a  want  of  stability  of  the  central 
mass. 

Since  the  centre  of  an  atom  is  positively  charged,  the  observed 
velocity  of  escape  of  a  ^  particle  from  the  atom  affords  no  definite 
information  as  to  the  velocity  of  the  13  particle  at  the  moment  of 
its  escape  from  its  original  position  within  the  atom.  Unless  the 
yS  particle  comes  from  the  surface  of  the  atom,  its  velocity  must 
be  much  reduced  in  passing  through  the  strong  central  field. 

It  has  not  so  far  been  found  possible  to  hasten  or  retard  the 
rate  of  transformation  of  radio-active  matter  by  the  ph}rsical  or 
chemical  forces  available  in  the  laboratory.  Even  the  exposure  of 
a  radio-active  substance  like  the  radium  emanation  to  an  intense 
bombardment  by  its  own  radiations  has  no  observable  effect  on  its 
rate  of  transformation.  For  these  reasons  it  is  difficult  to  offer 
any  explanation  of  the  causes  operating  which  lead  to  the  ultimate 
disintegration  of  the  atom.     It  was  at  first  suggested  that  the 


:VIIl]  GENERAL   RESULTS   AND   RELATIONS  623 

isintegration  might  be  a  result  of  the  instability  brought  about 
y  a  continuous  drain  of  energy  by  radiation.  Unless  the  atoms 
f  the  same  substance  at  the  moment  of  their  formation  have 
iflferent  degrees  of  stability,  it  is  difficult  to  account  on  this  view 
yr  the  exponential  law  of  transformation. 

In  the  absence  of  any  definite  information  of  the  causes  which 
►ring  about  the  disintegration  of  atoms,  it  appears  simplest,  as 
K^inted  out  in  Section  157,  to  regard  the  law  of  transformation  as 
n  expression  of  the  law  of  probability. 

No  evidence  has  yet  been  obtained  that  the  process  of  trans- 
i>rniation  taking  place  in  the  radio-elements  is  reversible.  It  is 
onceivable,  for  example,  that  a  trace  of  radium  might  appear  in 
he  course  of  the  transformation  of  the  radium  emanation.  The 
mter  tried  the  experiment  but  with  negative  results.  In  a 
imilar  way,  it  might  be  anticipated  that  lead  when  bombarded  by 
t  particles  might  give  rise  to  polonium,  but  no  detectable  effect 
vas  noted  in  experiments  made  by  the  writer.  No  evidence  has 
o  far  been  obtained  that  any  substance  can  be  made  radio-active 
)y  bombardment  with  a,  y8  or  7  rays.  It  seems  reasonable  to 
lUppose  that  under  some  conditions  of  the  earth's  history  the 
lonverse  process  took  place,  and  the  heavy  atoms  were  built  up 
rem  the  lighter  and  more  elementary  substances.  It  does  not 
bllow,  however,  that  the  process  of  transformation  as  shown  by 
he  radio-elements  is  completely  reversible.  The  stages  of  building 
ip  of  complex  atoms  out  of  simpler  forms  may  be  very  different  to 
he  stages  of  transformation  observed. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE  EARTH  AND  ATMOSPHERE. 

260.  Radio-active  matter  in  the  air.  In  this  chapter  a 
brief  account  will  be  given  of  experiments  that  have  been  made 
upon  the  distribution  and  nature  of  the  radio-active  matter 
observed  in  the  atmosphere  and  throughout  the  earth  s  crust. 
A  large  amount  of  work  has  been  done  in  this  interesting  field  of 
investigation,  but  it  is  only  possible  in  the  compass  of  a  single 
chapter  to  draw  attention  briefly  to  the  main  results  of  importance 
that  have  been  obtained. 

The  pioneers  in  this  important  field  of  enquiry  were  Professors 
Elster  and  Geitel,  and  no  investigators  have  contributed  more  to 
our  knowledge  of  the  radio-activity  of  the  earth  and  atmosphere. 
In  1901  Geitel*  and  C.  T.  R.  Wilsonf  had  shown  independently 
that  a  charged  conductor  placed  inside  a  closed  vessel  gradually 
lost  its  charge,  and  that  this  was  due  to  a  small  volume  ionisation 
of  the  air  inside  the  vessel.  Elster  and  Geitel  also  found  that 
a  charged  body  exposed  in  the  open  air  lost  its  charge  rapidly,  and 
that  the  rate  of  discharge  was  dependent  on  the  locality  and  on 
atmospheric  conditions.  It  occurred  to  Elster  and  Geitel  J  that 
the  ionisation  of  the  air  might  be  due  in  part  at  least  to  a 
distribution  of  radio-active  matter  in  the  atmosphere.  The  time 
was  opportune  to  test  this  hypothesis,  for  the  writer  had  shown 
in  1900  the  existence  of  the  thorium  emanation,  and  the  active 
deposit  to  which  it  gave  rise.     It  was  known  that  the  active 

•  Geitel,  Phys.  Zeit.  2,  p.  116,  1901. 

t  C.  T.  R.  Wnson,  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  A,  68,  p.  151,  1901. 

X  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phys,  Zeit,  2,  p.  690,  1901. 


H.  XIX]   RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHERE     625 

eposit  was  concentrated  on  a  negatively  charged  conductor 
xposed  in  the  presence  of  the  emanation.  In  the  first  experiment 
cylinder  of  wire-netting,  charged  negatively  to  600  volts,  was 
xposed  for  several  hours  in  the  open  air.  The  cylinder  was  then 
emoved,  and  quickly  placed  in  a  large  bell-jar,  inside  which  was 
►laced  an  electroscope  to  measure  the  rate  of  discharge.  It  was 
jund  that  the  rate  of  discharge  was  increased  to  a  slight  extent, 
n  order  to  multiply  the  eflfect,  a  wire  about  20  metres  in  length 
iras  exposed  at  some  height  from  the  ground,  and  was  kept 
barged  to  a  high  potential  by  connecting  it  to  the  negative 
erminal  of  an  influence  machine.  After  exposure  for  some  hours, 
his  wire  was  removed  and  placed  inside  the  ionisation  vessel. 
The  rate  of  discharge  was  found  to  be  increased  many  times  by 
he  presence  of  the  wire.  No  increase  was  observed  when  the 
irire  was  charged  positively  instead  of  negatively.  It  was  found 
hat  the  radio-active  matter  could  be  removed  from  the  wire  in 
he  same  way  as  from  a  wire  made  active  by  exposure  in  the 
presence  of  the  thorium  emanation.  A  piece  of  leather  moistened 
yith  ammonia  was  rubbed  over  the  active  wire.  On  testing  the 
eather,  it  was  found  to  be  strongly  radio-active.  When  a  long 
irire  was  used,  the  amount  of  activity  obtained  on  the  leather  was 
omparable  with  that  possessed  by  a  gram  of  uranium  oxide. 

The  activity  produced  on  the  wire  was  not  permanent,  but 
[isappeared  to  a  large  extent  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours.  The 
.mount  of  activity  produced  on  a  wire  of  given  size,  exposed  under 
imilar  conditions,  was  independent  of  the  material  of  the  wire, 
jead,  iron  and  copper  wires  gave  about  equal  effects. 

These  experiments  were  repeated  in  1902  by  Rutherford  and 
Lllen*  in  Montreal.  The  activity  obtained  on  a  negatively 
barged  wire  exposed  in  the  open  air  was  found  to  be  mainly  due 
o  a  rays  and  to  decay  to  half  value  in  about  45  minutes.  The 
ate  of  decay  was  found  to  be  independent  of  the  material  and 
K)tential  of  the  wire,  and  of  the  time  of  exposure  in  the  atmo- 
phere.  It  seemed  probable  that  the  active  matter  collected  on 
he  wire  was  derived  from  an  emanation  mixed  with  the  atino- 
phere,  and  it  was  of  importance  to  decide  whether  the  decay  of 
he  active  wire  could  be  explained  by  the  presence  in  the  air  of  the 

*  Butberford  and  Allen,  PhiL  Mag.  4,  p.  704,  1902. 
R.  R.-A.  40 


626         RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE  EARTH   AND   ATMOSPHERE        [CIL 

radium  or  thorium  emanation.  This  was  definitely  proved  to  be 
the  case  by  Bumstead*,  who  showed  that  the  greater  part  of  the 
activity  imparted  to  a  wire  exposed  for  several  hours  near  the 
surface  of  the  earth  decayed  at  a  rate  identical  with  that  of  the 
active  deposit  of  radium.  After  a  sufiicient  interval  had  elapsed 
to  allow  the  active  deposit  of  radium  to  disappear,  some  residual 
activity  was  always  observed,  which  decayed  slowly,  falling  to  h^ 
value  in  about  11  hours.  This  showed  that  the  active  deposit  of 
thorium  as  well  as  that  of  radium  was  present  in  the  atmosphere. 

If  it  be  supposed  that  the  atoms  of  the  active  deposit  are 
conveyed  at  a  constant  rate  to  the  charged  wire,  the  activity  due 
to  the  radium  active  deposit  will  reach  a  practical  maximum  after 
three  or  four  hours'  exposure.  On  account,  however,  of  the  long 
period  of  transformation  of  thorium  B  (about  11  hours),  an 
exposure  of  two  or  three  days  is  necessary  to  obtain  the  maximum 
activity  due  to  the  thorium  active  deposit.  From  the  results 
obtained  by  Bumstead  at  New  Haven,  it  followed  that  about  30  per 
cent,  of  the  maximum  activity  obtained  for  a  long  exposure  was 
due  to  the  thorium  active  deposit.  This  interesting  result  has 
been  confirmed  by  a  number  of  observers  in  different  countries. 
Blanc f  found  that  about  70  per  cent,  of  the  total  activity  obtained 
at  Rome  was  due  to  the  active  deposit  of  thorium ;  W.  WilsonJ  in 
Manchester,  and  S.  J.  Allen§  in  Pittsburg,  found  values  of  about 
60  per  cent.  These  results  show  that  the  emanations  of  radium 
and  of  thorium  are  everywhere  present  in  the  atmosphere  near  the 
surface  of  the  earth. 

It  will  be  seen  later  that  the  emanations  in  the  atmosphere 
undoubtedly  arise  from  the  presence  of  radium  and  thorium  in 
the  earth's  crust.  It  is  consequently  to  be  expected  that  the 
actinium  emanation  would  also  be  present  close  to  the  surfece 
of  the  earth.  On  account,  however,  of  the  rapidity  of  decay 
of  the  actinium  emanation,  the  activity  due  to  it  would  be 
small  and  difficult  to  distinguish  from  that  due  to  the  radium 
emanation. 

*  Bumstead,  Amer.  Joiim.  Set.  18,  p.  1,  1904. 
t  Blanc,  Phil.  Mag.  13,  p.  378,  1907. 
:  W.  Wilson,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  321,  1909. 
§  S.  J.  Allen,  Phy».  liev.  26,  p.  483,  1908. 


XIX]        RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND   ATMOSPUERE         627 

C.  T.  R.  Wilson*  found  that  freshly  fallen  rain  was  radio-active. 
In  order  to  test  this  point  about  50  c.c.  of  water  was  evaporated  in 
a  platinum  dish  and  the  activity  of  the  residue  examined  in  an 
electroscope.  The  activity  so  obtained  fell  to  half  value  in 
about  30  minutes,  and  disappeared  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours. 
C.  T.  R.  Wilson  f  in  England,  and  S.  J.  Allen  J  and  McLennan  §  in 
Canada,  showed  that  freshly  fallen  snow  was  also  radio-active,  and 
that  the  activity  decreased  to  half  value  in  about  30  minutes. 
The  activity  shown  by  rain  and  snow  is  to  be  expected  since  the 
drops  or  flakes  in  their  fall  pass  through  air  in  which  atoms  of 
the  active  deposit  of  radium  are  distributed.  Some  of  the  atoms 
of  active  matter  diflfuse  to  the  surface  of  the  falling  particles  and 
are  removed  with  them.  No  doubt  the  activity  obtained  would 
be  increased  if  the  falling  particles  carried  a  negative  charge,  for 
they  would  act  as  centres  for  collection  of  the  active  deposit  on 
account  of  the  electric  field  surrounding  them. 

McLennan II  determined  the  amount  of  active  matter  to  be 
derived  from  the  air  filled  with  fine  spray.  The  experiments  were 
made  at  the  foot  of  the  American  falls  at  Niagara.  The  amount 
of  activity  collected  on  a  wire  was  only  about  one-fifth  of  the 
amount  at  the  neighbouring  city  of  Toronto.  No.  doubt  the 
greater  part  of  the  active  matter  was  removed  from  the  air  by 
the  heavier  water  drops  which  were  not  collected  by  the  wire. 
The  falling  spray  was  found  to  be  negatively  charged,  for  it 
permanently  charged  the  wire  to  a  potential  of  about  —  7500  volts. 

261.  Theory  of  collection  of  active  matter.  We  have 
seen  (Section  148)  that  in  a  strong  electric  field,  the  active 
deposits  of  radium  and  thorium  are  concentrated  on  a  negatively 
charged  conductor.  The  radium  emanation  in  breaking  up  gives 
rise  to  positively  charged  atoms  of  radium  A,  which  travel  to  the 
negative  electrode.  In  a  similar  way,  the  atoms  of  the  thorium 
emanation  give  rise  to  positively  charged  atoms  of  thorium  A.  The 
charged  atoms  of  the  act'ive  deposit  in  the  absence  of  an  electric 

♦  C.  T.  R.  Wilson,  Proc.  Camb.  Phil,  Soc,  11,  p.  428,  1902;  12,  p.  17,  1903. 
t  C.  T.  R.  Wilson,  Proc.  Camb,  PhiL  Soc.  12,  p.  85,  1903. 
X  S.  J.  AUen,  Phy^t.  liev,  16,  p.  306,  1903. 
§  McLennan  and  Burton,  Phyif.  Rev.  16,  p.  184,  1903. 

II  McLennan  and  Burton,  Phy».  Rev.  16,  p.  184,  1903 ;  McLennan,  Phil.  Mag.  5, 
p.  419, 1903. 

40—2 


628         RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHERE         [CH. 

field  behave  like  positive  ions  and  recombine  with  the  negative 
ions  which  are  present  in  the  air,  and  become  electrically  neutral 
Consider  now  a  uniform  distribution  of  radium  emanation  in  the 
atmosphere  near  the  surface  of  the  earth.     In  the  absence  of  an 
electric  field  there  must  be  radio-active  equilibrium  between  the 
emanation  and  its  quick  period  products  radium  A,  B  and  C. 
Under  the  normal  potential  gradient  due  to  the  earth's  electric 
field,   there    is    a    steady    movement    of   positive    ions,  and  of 
positively  charged  atoms  of  active  matter  to  the  surface  of  the 
earth.     Since  the  earth  is  under  normal   conditions  negatively 
charged,  the  active  deposit  of  radium  must  be  deposited  on  its 
surface  by  the  action  of  the  electric  field.     There  will  be  a  local 
concentration  of  active  matter  on  projecting  surfaces,  and  it  is  to 
be  expected  that  a  projecting  peak  will  receive  more  activity  per 
unit  area  than  the  plain  below. 

When,  as  in  the  experiments  of  Elster  and  Geitel,  a  negatively 
charged  wire  is  suspended  horizontally  some  distance  above  the 
earth,  the  positively  charged  atoms  of  active  matter  travel  to  the 
charged  wire  and  are  deposited  on  its  surface.     Several  attempts 
have  been  made  to  determine  the  "average  collecting  distance"  of 
the  wire,  i,e.  the  radius  of  the  cylindrical  surface  with  the  wire  as 
axis  from  which  all  the  atoms  of  active  deposit  are  collected  by 
the  charged  wire*.     It  is  difficult,  however,  to  draw  very  definite 
conclusions  on  account  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  data  involved. 
It  has  been  generally  supposed  that  only  positively  charged  atoms 
of  radium  A  are  collected  on  the  wire,  and  that  they  travel  in  an 
electric  field  at  the  same  rate  as  positive  ions.     Account  has  to 
be  taken  of  the  rate  of  recombination  of  the  charged  atoms  of 
radium  A  with  the  negative  ions  of  the  air,  for  only  those  atoms 
reach  the  wire  which  retain  their  charge.     The  constant  of  recom- 
bination is  no  doubt  much  affected  by  atmospheric  conditions,  and 
the  number  of  dust  nuclei  present.     Since  the  atom  of  radium  A 
in  breaking  up  gives  rise  to  a  positively  charged  atom  of  radium  B, 
it  would  be  necessary  in  a  complete  theory  to  take  account  of  the 
number  of  charged  atoms  of  radium  B  as  well  as  of  radium  A 
which  reach  the  wire.     In   the  theory  advanced  by  Kinoshitaf, 

*  Mme  Curie,  liadio-activite,  2,  p.  486. 

t  Kinoshita,  S.  Nishikawa,  S.  Ono,  Phil.  Mag.  22,  p.  821,  1911. 


XIX]        RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHERE         629 

account  was  taken  of  the  effect  of  a  wind  of  a  constant  velocity 
blowing  at  right  angles  to  the  charged  wire,  and  the  shape  of  the 
collecting  boundary  was  determined.  It  appears  that  the  velocity 
of  the  wind  theoretically  has  little,  if  any,  effect  on  the  amount 
of  active  matter  collected  by  the  wire.  The  collecting  distance 
obviously  will  depend  on  the  potential  of  the  charged  wire.  By 
comparing  the  amount  of  activity  obtained  on  a  wire  exposed  in 
a  metal  cylinder  open  to  the  air  with  that  obtained  on  a  wire 
charged  to  the  same  potential  in  the  open  air,  Eve*  deduced  that 
the  collecting  distance  of  a  wire  charged  to  —  10,000  volts  was  from 
40  to  80  cms. 

262.     Effect  of  meteorological   conditions.      Elster  and 

Geitelf  made  a  detailed  examination  of  the  effect  of  meteorological 

conditions  on  the  amount  of  active  matter  to  be  derived  from  the 

atmosphere.     For  this  purpose  a  portable  apparatus  was  devised. 

The  active  matter  was  collected  on  a  wire  of  constant  diameter, 

which  was  always  kept  charged  to  the  same  potential,  and  the 

activity  of  the  wire  was  measured  in  a  standard   electroscope. 

Under  these   definite   conditions,  the   rate  of  discharge  of  the 

electroscope  served  as  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  active  matter 

collected  on  the  wire.     Elster  and  Geitel  found  that  the  amount 

of  active  matter  collected  was  subject  to  great  variations.     The 

extreme  values  obtained  varied  in  the  ratio  of  16  to  1.     Lowering 

of  the  temperature  increased  the  amount  of  active  matter;  for 

example,  the  average  activity  for  temperatures  below  O^C.  was 

1*44  times  the  average  value  for  temperatures  above  O'C.     The 

height   of  the   barometer  was  found  to  exert  a  marked  effect. 

A  lowering  of  the  pressure  was  always  accompanied  by  an  increase 

in  the  amount  of  active  matter.     An  effect  of  this  kind  is  to  be 

expected  if  the  emanation  in  the  atmosphere  is  derived  mainly 

from  diff'usion  through  the  soil.     A  lowering  of  pressure  would 

cause  the  air  rich  in  emanation  to  be  drawn  up  through  the 

capillaries  of  the  soil  into  the  atmosphere. 

No  definite  connection  was  found  to  exist  between  the  amount 
of  active  matter  and  the  volume  ionisation  of  the  air.    The  largest 

♦  Eve,  Phil,  Mag,  10,  p.  98,  1905. 

t  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phyt.  Zeit,  4,  pp.  138,  522,  1903. 


630      RADio-ACTivrrr  of  the  eahth  and  atmosphere     [ch. 

amount  of  active  matter  was  observed  daring  a  fog  when  the 
ionisation  was  apparently  very  small.  It  appears,  however,  fiairly 
certain  that  a  connection  must  exist  between  the  ionisation  and 
the  amount  of  emanation  in  the  air.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to 
prove  such  a  relation,  since  the  activity  collected  on  a  wire  and 
the  ionisation  measured  by  ordinary  methods  are  affected  to 
different  degrees  by  the  distribution  of  nuclei  in  the  atmosphere. 
The  ionisation  measured  during  a  fog  or  in  a  smoke-laden  atmo- 
sphere appears  to  be  small,  as  there  is  a  rapid  recombination 
between  the  ions  and  the  dust  nuclei.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
active  matter  would  deposit  on  the  water  drops  or  other  nuclei, 
and  be  collected  by  the  charged  wire  (see  p.  627), 

The  amount  of  active  matter  in  the  air  does  not  appear  to  be 
much  affected  by  moisture,  for  about  the  same  amount  is  obsened 
in  the  atmosphere  during  the  dry  winter  in  Canada  with  a  snow 
covered  soil  as  in  the  moist  air  of  summer. 

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  amount  of  activity  collected 
on  a  charged  wire  under  definite  conditions  is  not  necessarily 
proportional  to  the  amount  of  emanation  in  the  atmosphere.  The 
amount  of  activity  obtained  on  the  wire  undoubtedly  depends  on 
the  amount  of  nucleation  of  the  atmosphere  as  well  as  on  the 
amount  of  emanation  present. 

253.     Dittribution  of  active  matter  over  land  and  lea. 

Numerous  observations  made  in  various  parts  of  the  world  show 
that  the  radium  emanation  is  everywhere  present  in  the  atmo- 
sphere. The  thorium  emanation  is  also  observed  over  land  areas, 
but  is  either  absent  or  present  in  very  small  quantity  over  the  sea. 
There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  emanations  present  in  the 
atmosphere  must  be  liberated  from  the  surface  of  the  land.  The 
period  of  transformation  of  the  radium  emanation  is  sufficiently 
long  to  allow  the  emanation  to  be  transported  over  long  distances 
by  air  currents,  and  to  be  mixed  with  the  atmosphere  for  a  con- 
siderable height,  before  it  has  lost  much  of  its  activity.  For 
example,  Flemming*  from  balloon  observations  found  that  active 
matter  was  present  in  the  air  at  an  altitude  of  3000  metres.  At 
this  height  about  the  same  amount  was  collected  as  at  the  surface 

*  Flemming,  Phyg.  Zeit.  9,  p.  801,  1908. 


XIX]        RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE  631 

of  the  earth.  Saake*  and  Gockelf  found  that  the  amount  of 
active  matter  collected  at  high  altitudes  was  greater  than  at 
the  sea  level.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  air  at  great 
altitudes  contains  more  radium  or  thorium  emanation,  for  the 
amount  of  active  matter  collected  for  a  given  volume  distribution 
of  emanation  will  depend  on  the  pressure  of  the  air  and  the 
amount  of  dust  or  other  nuclei  in  the  atmosphere. 

When  we  take  into  account  the  quick  period  of  transformation 
of  the  thorium  emanation  (half  value  in  54  seconds),  it  at  first 
sight  appears  remarkable  that  the  active  deposit  should  be  present 
at  considerable  heights  in  the  atmosphere  above  the  land.  The 
emanation,  however,  is  converted  in  situ  into  thorium  B,  which 
has  the  comparatively  long  period  of  11  hours.  Some  of  the 
thorium  B,  like  the  radium  emanation,  lasts  sufficient  time  to  be 
transported  over  considerable  distances.  Taking  account  of  the 
difference  in  their  periods,  it  is  to  be  expected,  however,  that  the 
ratio  of  the  amount  of  thorium  to  radium*  emanation  should 
progressively  diminish  with  height  above  the  earth  level. 

The  amount  of  active  matter  in  the  air  does  not  appear  to 
depend  in  any  way  upon  the  sun.  SimpsonJ,  who  made  experi- 
ments at  Karasjoh  in  Norway,  found  that  the  amount  of  active 
matter  collected  on  a  charged  wire  was  about  the  same  in  summer 
as  in  winter,  when  the  sun  did  not  arise  above  the  level  of  the 
horizon.  The  amount  of  active  matter  in  the  air  was  considerably 
greater  than  the  normal  amount  observed  by  Elster  and  Geitel  in 
Germany,  although  the  ground  was  frozen  hard  and  covered  with 
snow.  Similar  observations  have  been  made  by  Allen  during  the 
Canadian  winter.  Since  it  does  not  seem  possible  that  much 
emanation  can  escape  from  a  frozen  soil  covered  with  snow,  it 
appears  probable  that  the  greater  part  of  the  emanation  observed 
must  have  been  transported  from  more  temperate  regions. 

If  the  radium  emanation  is  derived  from  the  surface  of  the 
land,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  amount  of  radium  emanation 
would  be  much  greater  over  the  land  than  over  the  sea,  especially 
at  great  distances  from  land.     It  will  be  seen  later  (Section  258) 

♦  Saake,  Phyit.  Zeit.  4,  p.  626,  1903. 

t  Gockel,  Phy$,  Zeit.  8,  p.  701,  1907. 

X  Simpson,  Phil.  Trans.  Boy.  Soc.  A,  206,  p.  61,  1906. 


632         RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHJERE       [CH. 

that  sea  water  contains  far  too  little  radium  to  provide  an  amoonk 
of  emanation  in  the  air  comparable  with  that  observed  over  the 
land.     This   appeared   probable   from   the   early  observations  of 
Elster  and  Geitel,  Simpson,  Linke,  and  Dike,  who  found  that  air 
from  the  sea  contained  much  less  emanation  than  air  from  the 
land.     This  conclusion,  however,  did  not  appear  to  be  suppoited 
by  the  observations  made  by  Eve*  in  crossing  the  Atlantic  from 
Montreal  to  England.     The  amount   of  activity  collected  on  a 
charged  wire  in  mid-ocean  was  about  the  same  as  that  collected 
on  land  in  Montreal.     These  results  were  only  explicable  on  the 
supposition  that  the  air  from  the  land  containing  the  radiam 
emanation  had  been  transported  to  mid-ocean  before  the  activity 
of  the  emanation  had  much  diminished.      This   explanation  i& 
entirely  borne  out  by  the  later  and  more  systematic  experiments 
of  Simpson  and  Wright f,  which  were  made  on  the  Antarctic  ship 
"  Terra  Nova  "  on  her  voyage  from  England  to  New  Zealand.    The 
mean  value  of  the  activity  obtained  on  a  negatively  charged  wire 
on  the  voyage  from  England  to  Melbourne  was  found  to  be  6  in 
terms  of  the  arbitrary  unit  adopted  by  Elster  and  Geitel,  the 
maximum  value  21  and  the  minimum   1.     The  mean  value  in 
terms  of  the  same  unit  found  by  Elster  and  Geitel  in  Wolfenbtittel 
(Germany)  was  19,  the  maximum  64  and  the  minimum  4.    The 
corresponding  values  found  by  Simpson  at  Earasjoh  in  Norway 
were  93,  432  and  20.     Special  interest  attaches  to  observations 
near  the  Cape.     The  mean  activity  at  Matjesfontein,  200  miles 
inland  and  2970  feet  above  sea  level,  was  124.     With  an  offshore 
breeze,  the  activity  observed  on  the  vessel  leaving  the  Cape  was 
130.     With  a  change  of  wind  to  the  south-west,  the  mean  activity 
fell  to  4.     It  was  thus  abundantly  clear  that  air  over  the  sea 
contained  much  less  emanation  than  on  land.     It  was  observed 
that   over   the   Atlantic    in    both    hemispheres,   the   amount  of 
emanation  increased  from  latitude  40°  towards  the  equator,  but 
within  10°  of  the  equator  the  amount  of  emanation  showed  a  low 
value.      The  amount  of  emanation  over  the   sea  was  found  to 
be  much  more  constant  than  over  the  land,  and  only  small  varia- 
tions were  observed  for  measurements  extending  over  several  days. 

•  Eve,  Phil,  Mag.  13,  p.  248,  1907 ;  Terr.  Mag,  March,  1909. 
t  Simpson  and  Wright,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A^  86,  p.  176,  1911. 


XIX]       RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         633 

.    264.    Amount  of  emanation  in  the  atmosphere.     The 

first  attempt  to  determine  the  actual  amount  of  radium  emanation 

present  per  cubic  metre  of  the  atmosphere  was  made  by  Eve*,  by 

comparing  the  activity  obtained  on  a  negatively  charged  wire  with 

the  amount  derived  from  a  known  quantity  of  radium  emanation. 

The  uncertainty,  however,  of  deduction  of  the  amount  of  mdium 

emanation   in   the  air  from  observations  of  this  kind  made  it 

desirable  to  measure  the  actual  amount   of  radium   emanation 

present  in  a  given  volume  by  a  method  which  was  independent 

of  meteorological  conditions.     This  was  accomplished  by  Evef 

and  SatterlyJ  by  using  the  property  of  charcoal,  and  especially  of 

oocoanut  charcoal,  of  absorbing  the  emanation  from  the  air  at 

atmospheric  temperature.     For  this  purpose,  a  known  constant 

current  of  air  was  drawn  through  tubes  of  cocoanut  charcoal  for 

some  hours  or  days.     The  charcoal  was  then  heated  to  drive  off 

the  radium  emanation  and  the  collected  gases  were  introduced 

into    an    emanation    electroscope,   which    had    been    previously 

standardised.     The  charcoal  was  found  to  absorb  only  a  part  of 

the  emanation  from  the  air.     The  eflSciency  of  the  absorption  was 

determined  by  aspirating  air  through  a  very  weak  radium  solution 

which  supplied  emanation  at  a  constant  rate.     The  amount  of 

emanation   per  cubic  metre   is   most   conveniently  expressed  in 

terms  of  the  weight   of  radium  which  would  be  in  equilibrium 

with  that  quantity  of  emanation.     The  following  average  results 

were  obtained  by  Eve  in  Montreal,  Satterly  in  Cambridge,  and 

Ashman  in  Chicago. 

Eve  60  X  10~*2  gr.  Ra  per  cubic  metre. 

Satterly  100      „  „  „ 

Ashman    89 


»  >«  »> 


The  amount  of  emanation  in  the  air  was  determined  by 
Ashman§  by  a  different  method.  Air  was  passed  for  some  time 
through  a  tube  immersed  in  liquid  air  and  the  amount  of  emana- 
tion condensed  in  the  tube  was  then  measured. 

•  Eve,  Phil,  Mag.  10,  p.  98,  1905. 

t  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  14,  p.  724,  1907;  16,  p.  622,  1908. 

t  Satterly,  Phil.  Mag.  16,  p.  684,  1908. 

§  Ashman,  Amer.  Journ.  Sci,  26,  p.  119,  1908. 


634         RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE  EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         [( 

The  mean  value  of  these  three  observers  is  83  x  10~"  gr.  1 
If  it  be  supposed  that  the  average  height  of  the  emanati 
atmosphere  is  10  kilometres,  the  quantity  of  radium  per  squi 
kilometre  of  the  earth's  surface  required  to  keep  up  this  supply 
emanation  is  about  one  gram.  Since  the  radium  emanation  c 
only  escape  from  a  small  depth  of  soil,  this  calculation  brings  c 
clearly  the  very  large  quantity  of  radium  in  the  aggregate  tl 
must  be  distributed  close  to  the  earth's  surface. 

Eve  and  Satterly  made  an  extensive  series  of  obser\'rtti( 
of  the  variation  in  the  amount  of  emanation  under  diffen 
meteorological  conditions.  It  doe«  not  seem  possible,  howev 
to  draw  any  definite  deductions  on  the  variation  of  amount 
emanation  with  meteorological  conditions  which  will  hold  for 
localities.  It  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  whether  1 
prevailing  winds  come  from  the  sea  or  have  crossed  over  lai 
areas  of  land.  For  example,  Eve  working  in  Montreal  found  i 
amount  of  emanation  greatest  during  the  approach  of  a  cycle 
accompanied  by  rain  or  a  rapid  thaw  of  the  snow.  On  the  otl 
hand,  Satterly  in  Cambridge  observed  that  the  amount 
emanation  was  least  during  cyclones  accompanied  by  wet  weatl 
These  conflicting  results  are  no  doubt  capable  of  explanation  wl 
geographical  considerations  are  taken  into  account.  It  is  obvi< 
that  systematic  observations  of  the  amount  of  emanation  over  h 
and  sea,  at  all  parts  of  the  world,  will  be  required  before  i 
very  definite  conclusions  can  be  reached.  The  results  as  a  wh- 
however,  strongly  support  the  original  suggestion  of  Elster  « 
Geitel  that  the  emanations  in  the  atmosphere  arise  mainly  ft 
the  soil. 

266.  Penetrating  radiation  Arom  the  earth.  It  will 
shown  later  that  both  uranium  and  thorium  are  distributed 
meiisurdble  quantity  throughout  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Si 
the  products  of  both  uranium  and  thorium  emit  7  rays  of  a  pt 
trating  character,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  7  rays  should 
detected  in  the  atmosphere  near  the  earth.  The  proof  of 
presence  of  such  a  penetrating  radiation  was  first  given  ii 
pendently  by  Rutherford  and  Cooke*  and  by  McLennan +. 

•  Rutherford  and  Cooke,  Amer.  Phy*.  Soc.  Deo.  1902. 
t  McLennan  and  Burton,  Phys,  Rev,  16,  p.  184, 1903. 


aUX]       RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE  635 

latter  measured  by  an  electrometer  the  natural  ionisation  in  a 
large  closed  metal  cylinder.  This  cylinder  was  then  placed  in 
■nother,  and  the  space  between  them  filled  with  water.  For 
■  thickness  of  water  of  25  cms.,  the  ionisation  was  decreased  by 
about  27  per  cent.  Rutherford  and  Cooke  observed  that  the  rate 
erf  discharge  of  a  sealed  brass  electroscope  was  diminished  by 
■Qnounding  the  electroscope  with  lead.  A  detailed  investigation 
"^rasmade  by  Cooke*  to  determine  the  decrease  of  the  ionisation 
in  the  electroscope  for  screens  of  different  material  and  thickness. 
-A  thickness  of  3  cms.  of  lead  round  the  electroscope  decreased  the 
aooisation  by  30  per  cent.  When  the  apparatus  was  surrounded 
Ty  5  tons  of  lead,  the  reduction  of  the  ionisation  was  no  greater 
than  for  a  screen  of  lead  3  cms.  thick.  An  iron  screen  was  also 
ibnnd  to  decrease  the  ionisation.  By  suitably  arranging  lead 
•creens,  it  appeared  as  if  the  radiation  at  the  basement  of  the 
l)ailding  came  equally  from  all  directions.  This  penetrating  radia- 
tion has  been  observed  in  about  equal  amounts  at  all  points  over 
the  surface  of  the  land.  From  considerations,  discussed  in  the 
next  section,  it  appears  that  in  the  open  air  the  radiation  comes 
almost  entirely  from  the  earth.  The  amount  of  7  radiation 
supplied  by  the  active  matter  in  suspension  in  the  atmosphere 
must  be  relatively  insignificant.  Cooke  observed  that  ordinary 
huilding  bricks  emitted  a  strong  fi  radiation,  and  no  doubt  also 
7  rays  of  a  penetrating  character. 

Wood  and  Campbell  f  state  that  the  ionisation  in  closed  vessels 
showed  a  double  diurnal  variation,  which  appeared  to  be  connected 
with  the  changes  of  the  potential  gradient  in  the  atmosphere. 
Such  a  diurnal  variation  was  not  observed  in  similar  experiments 
by  Wright  in  Toronto.  A  diurnal  variation  of  the  ionisation  in 
1  sealed  vessel  in  the  open  air  could  only  be  brought  about  by 
I  change  in  the  intensity  of  the  7  radiation  from  the  earth  and 
itmosphere.  Since  it  seems  improbable  that  the  7  radiation  from 
he  mass  of  the  soil  itself  can  be  subject  to  much  variation  in  the 
ourse  of  a  day,  a  diurnal  variation  can  only  be  explained  by 
upposing  that  the  active  matter  present  in  the  atmosphere  is 
leposited  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  at  very  different  rates  during 

•  Cooke,  Phil,  Mag,  6,  p.  403,  1903. 

t  Wood  and  CampbeU,  Phil  Mag,  13,  p.  265,  1907. 


636         RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE       [CH. 

the  course  of  the  day.  The  7  radiation  due  to  the  active  mattai 
suspended  in  the  atmosphere  is  too  small  to  produce  the  effect 
observed. 

If  the  7  radiation  arises  mainly  from  the  land  itself,  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  the  intensity  of  this  radiation  in  the  atmosphere 
will  diminish  rapidly  with  altitude  on  account  of  the  absorption  oi 
the  7  rays  by  air.  The  decrease  of  intensity  to  be  expected  witb 
altitude  has  been  calculated  by  Eve*,  and  he  has  shown  that  at 
a  height  of  100  metres,  the  intensity  should  be  only  0*32  at  th« 
surface.  For  a  height  of  1000  metres,  the  intensity  should  Ix 
•001.  This  decrease  of  intensity  with  altitude  is  to  some  exteni 
confirmed  by  the  observations  of  McLennan  and  Macallum'f*  am 
WulfJ.  The  latter  found  that  the  penetrating  radiation  from  thi 
earth  produced  about  6  ions  per  c.c.  in  a  closed  vessel  at  the  basi 
of  the  EiflFel  Tower  in  Paris,  and  only  3*5  at  the  top  at  a  heigh 
of  300  metres.  The  decrease  observed  is  smaller  than  that  to  b 
expected  theoretically,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  th 
active  matter  distributed  on  the  structure  may  contribute  som 
7  rays.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  the  7  radiation  should  b 
present  in  very  small  intensity  over  the  sea.  Wright  §  and  other 
have  found  that  the  7  radiation  is  not  detectable  on  the  surface  c 
a  lake ;  for  the  water  absorbs  the  7  radiation  from  the  soil  an« 
does  not  itself  contain  sufficient  active  matter  to  supply  7  rays  i 
measurable  quantity. 

It  is  of  interest  to  calculate  the  amount  of  radium,  suppose 
uniformly  distributed  in  the  surface  soil,  to  give  rise  to  th 
intensity  of  the  7  radiation  observed  at  the  earth's  surface.  Th 
number  N  of  ions  produced  per  c.c.  per  second  in  air  by  the  7  raj 
from  a  point  source  of  Q  grams  of  radium  after  traversing  a  thicl 

ness  r  cms.  of  soil  is  given  by  N  =  KQ/r^eT^  where  ^  is  a  constai 
and  fjL  the  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  7  rays  by  the  soil  1 
the  actual  case,  however,  the  radium  in  the  earth  is  not  distribute 
at  a  point  but  supposed  to  be  unifonnly  distributed  throughoi 
its  volume.     It  can  simply  be  shown  that  the  number  of  ions 

*  Eve,  Phil.  Mag,  21,  p.  26,  1911. 

t  McLennan  and  Macallum,  Phil.  Mag.  32,  p.  639,  1911. 

t  Wulf,  Phys.  Zeit.  10,  p.  997,  1909. 

§  Wright,  Phil.  Mag.  17,  p.  295,  1909. 


:iX]       RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         637 

produced  per  c.c.  per  second  in  a  cavity  deep  in  the  earth  is  given 
ly  iV  =  ^irKQ/fA  where  Q  is  the  amount  of  radium  per  c.c.  of  the 
oiL  It  is  easily  seen  that  the  value  of  N  at  the  surface  of  the 
arth  is  one  half  of  this,  or  27rKQ/fi. 

Measurements  at  various  points  of  the  earth's  surface  indicate 
hat  the  value  of  N  due  to  the  penetrating  radiation  varies 
etween  3  and  5  in  an  aluminium  vessel.  We  shall  not  be  far  in 
rror  in  taking  iV  =  3  in  the  air  close  to  the  earth.  The  value 
f  K  found  by  Eve  was  3*8  x  10"  (Section  105).  In  a  more  recent 
etermination  Moseley  and  Robinson  found  a  value  6  x  lO'. 
*aking  the  latter  value,  and  taking  fi/D  =  '04  where  i)  is  the 
ensity  of  the  soil,  the  amount  of  radium  per  gram  of  soil  to 
reduce  3  ions  per  c.c  close  to  the  earth  comes  out  to  be  3  x  10~" 
ram.  This  is  in  fair  accord  with  the  value  found  experimentally 
y  Strutt  and  Joly  in  representative  rocks  (see  Section  258).  No 
oubt  part  of  the  penetrating  radiation  is  supplied  by  the  thorium 
istributed  in  the  earth.  The  above  calculation  thus  shows  that 
he  7  radiation  from  the  thorium  and  radium  distributed  in  the 
arth  is  equivalent  to  that  emitted  by  3  x  10~*'  gr.  Ra  per  c.c. 

266.  lonisation  in  the  atmosphere.  Measurements  to 
letermine  the  relative  ionisation  of  the  air  at  different  localities 
md  for  varying  meteorological  conditions  were  first  made  by 
Sister  and  Geitel.  For  this  purpose,  a  charged  body  exposed  in 
he  open  air  was  attached  to  a  portable  electroscope  and  the  rate 
i{  loss  of  charge  was  observed  by  the  movement  of  the  gold  or 
iluminium  leaf.  This  apparatus,  while  very  convenient  for  com- 
Mirative  observations,  is  not  suitable  for  quantitative  measure- 
nents,  and  the  deductions  drawn  from  the  observations  are 
omewhat  indefinite.  Ebert  later  designed  a  portable  apparatus 
or  this  purpose  which  has  come  into  general  use.  A  constant 
jurrent  of  air  is  drawn  between  two  concentric  cylinders  by  means 
)f  a  fan  actuated  by  a  falling  weight.  The  inner  cylinder  is 
nsulated  and  connected  wdth  an  electroscope.  Knowing  the 
japacity  of  the  apparatus  and  the  velocity  of  the  current  of  air, 
ihe  rate  of  movement  of  the  aluminium  leaves  of  the  electroscope 
iffords  a  definite  measure  of  the  number  of  ions  present  per  c.c.  in 
ihe  air  which  are  drawn  into  the  electrodes.     Observations  made 


638         RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHERE       [ci 

in  various  localities  indicate  that  the  number  of  ions  n  per  cc.  i 
the  open  air  is  on  the  average  from  1000  to  2000.  The  value  < 
n^  obtained  when  the  inner  cylinder  is  negatively  charged  i 
usually  greater  than  the  value  n_  when  the  potential  is  reversec 
The  average  ratio  w+/r?__  is  about  11 7.  An  apparatus  for  a  simih 
purpose  has  been  devised  by  Gerdien. 

Many  of  the  ions  present  in  the  air  have  about  the  sam 
mobility  as  the  ions  produced  in  dust-free  air  by  X  rays  or  th 
rays  from  active  substances.  Mache  and  v.  Schweidler*  foun 
that  the  positive  ions  in  air  had  a  velocity  102  cms.  per  seconc 
and  the  negative  ions  125  cms.  for  a  potential  gradient  of  od 
volt  per  cm.  Ions  of  this  type  are  removed  to  the  electrodes  i 
passing  through  the  apparatus  of  Ebert.  Langevinf,  howev« 
observed  that  a  large  number  of  slow  moving  ions  were  present  ii 
the  air  which  were  not  removed  by  the  electric  field  in  Ebert' 
appai-atus.  A  very  much  stronger  field  or  a  much  slower  cuiren 
of  air  is  required  in  order  to  abstract  them  from  the  air.  Th 
mobility  of  these  large  ions  is  about  1/3000  cms.  per  second  fa 
one  volt  per  cm. 

Measurements  of  the  number  of  these  large  ions  at  dififeienl 
localities  have  been  made  by  Langevin,  GockelJ,  DaundeFer§  and 
Pollock ||.  The  latter  found  that  three  types  of  ions  were  preseol 
in  the  air,  which  may  for  convenience  be  called  small,  intermediate: 
and  large.  The  relative  numbers  of  these  three  types  of  ioM 
observed  at  Sydney  are  given  below. 

Type  Number  of  ions  per  cc.  Mobilitj  in  cniB.  per  second 

Small 0  to     157  about  1*0  to  IS 

Intermediate  ...  200  to  1000  about  1/15  to  1/150 

Large 600  to  5500  about  1/1280  to  1/3370 

From  the  numbers  given  it  would  appear  that  many  of  the 
"intermediate"  ions  must  be  normally  caught  in  the  apparatus 

*  Mache  and  v.  Schweidler,  Phyt,  Zeit.  6,  p.  71,  1906. 

t  Langevin,  C.  M.  140,  p.  232,  1905. 

X  Gockel,  Phys.  Zeit.  10,  p.  396,  1909. 

§  Daunderer,  Phys.  Zeit.  10,  p.  113,  1909. 

II  Pollock,  Science,  June  11,  1909;  Le  liadium,  6,  p.  129, 1909. 


fflX]       BAPIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE  EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         639 

of  Ebert.  Pollock  found  more  negative  large  ions  than  positive. 
"  This  is  the  reverse  to  what  is  observed  in  Ebert's  apparatus. 

The  conditions  existing  in  the  atmosphere  are  unusually 
'  fivoarable  for  the  formation  of  complex  ions.  The  number  of 
!^ioDS  present  per  c.c.  is  usually  so  small  that  on  the  average  the 

ions  have  a  comparatively  long  life  before  recombination  occurs. 
"  It  would  appear  that  the  large  ions  are  due  to  the  ordinary  ions 
l-$c\ing  as  nuclei  for  the  formation  of  minute  water  drops.  The 
^fresence  of  dust  and  other  nuclei  in  the  atmosphere  to  which  the 
r  ions  attach  themselves  no  doubt  is  also  an  important  factor  in 
^  producing  large  ions.  Eve*  has  investigated  the  effect  of  con- 
^  ditions  on  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  positive  to  negative  ions  in 

r  

'"ilie  air  measured  by  the  apparatus  of  Ebert.     The  ratio  is  very 
^"Variable,  depending  on  the  number  and  character  of  the  nuclei 

E  present  in  the  air.  The  excess  of  small  positive  ions  over  negative 
Ji  no  doubt  to  be  explained  mainly  by  the  greater  facility  with 
^  which  the  negative  ions  form  large  ions  which  are  not  caught  by 
t  the  apparatus.  Since  the  upper  atmosphere  is  usually  positively 
charged  with  regard  to  the  earth,  on  the  average  the  number  of 
positive  ions  in  the  air  should  be  slightly  in  excess  of  the  negative. 
^T!be  average  ratio,  1'17,  observed  in  the  apparatus  of  Ebert,  is  far 
f  larger  however  than  is  required  to  account  for  this  effect.  This 
lirge  excess  in  the  number  of  positive  small  ions  is  no  doubt 
sentralized  by  the  excess  in  the  number  of  negative  large  ions. 
Pollock  showed  that  for  the  large  ions  the  ratio  of  the  numbers  of 
positive  to  negative  was  less  than  unity. 

It  is  of  great  importance  and  interest  to  test  whether  the  rate 
of  production  of  ions  in  the  atmosphere  near  the  earth  can  be 
explained  by  the  radio-active  matter  present  in  the  earth  and 
titmosphere.  This  question  has  been  carefully  examined  by  Evef. 
The  rate  of  production  of  ions  is  in  part  due  to  (1)  the  radio- 
active matter  suspended  in  the  atmosphere,  and  (2)  to  the 
penetrating  rays  from  the  soil.  The  ionisation  due  to  (1)  is 
mainly  caused  by  the  a  rays  from  the  emanations  of  radium  and 
thorium  and  their  products.  The  calculated  rate  of  production 
of  ions  per  c.c.  due  to  the  known  amount  of  radium  emanation  in 

•  Eve.  Phil,  Mag.  19,  p.  657,  1910. 
+  Eve,  Phil.  Mag.  21,  p.  26,  1911. 


I 

T 

640         RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH  AND  ATMOSPHERE        [C^ 

the  air  is  1*7 ;  that  due  t/O  thorium  probably  about  1*0,  while  tha( 
due  to  the  penetrating  7  rays  from  the  soil  is  between  3  and  4 
close  to  the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  average  rate  of  productiol 
of  ions  probably  lies  between  5  and  6,  close  to  the  earth,  bui 
should  diminish  'with  altitude.  If  a  is  the  average  constant  d 
recombination  of  the  ions  in  the  atmosphere  q  =  on*  where  q  ii 
the  rate  of  production  and  n  the  equilibrium  number  per  c.r 
Taking  a  =  34006,  the  value  in  dust-free  air,  and  g  =  5,  n  =  1800 
This  is  of  the  same  order  as  the  value  of  n  observed  experi* 
mentally. 

267.  Radio-activity  of  the  soil.  Elster  and  Geitei  earlj 
observed  that  the  air  in  caves  and  cellars  was  in  most  casei 
abnormially  radio-active.  In  order  to  be  certain  that  the  emanation 
did  not  arise  from  the  stagnant  air  itself,  Elster  and  Geitei  shut 
up  the  air  in  a  large  boiler  for  several  weeks,  but  did  not  observe 
any  increase  of  the  activity  or  ionisation.  It  thus  seemed  probabk 
that  the  active  matter  diffused  from  the  soil  and  gnvdually  collects 
in  quantity  in  confined  spaces.  The  presence  of  radium  emanatioi 
in  the  soil  was  proved  by  placing  an  open  pipe  in  the  earth  anc 
sucking  the  air  into  a  large  electroscope  by  means  of  a  watei 
pump.  The  air  entering  the  electroscope  was  found  to  b 
markedly  active,  and  gave  rise  to  an  active  deposit  on  the  w^^ 
of  the  testing  vessel.  The  rate  of  decay  of  the  active  dep 
indicated  that  the  radium  emanation  was  mainly  responsible  fo 
the  activity  observed. 

Similar  observations  were  recorded  by  Ebert  and  Ewers*  ii 
Munich.  They  found  a  strongly  active  emanation  present  in  th( 
soil,  and  showed  that  the  rate  of  decay  of  this  emanation  in  j 
sealed  vessel  was  about  the  same  as  for  the  radium  emanation 
Later  Ebert  observed  that  the  radio-active  emanation  could  bi 
removed  from  the  air  by  passing  it  through  a  tube  surrounded  b; 
liquid  air.  This  property  of  condensation  of  the  radium  emanatioi 
was  independently  discovered  by  Ebert  f  before  he  was  aware  0 
the  direct  proof  of  the  condensation  of  the  emanations  of  thoriun 
and  radium  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy. 

♦  Ebert  and  Ewers,  Phys,  Zeit,  4,  p.  162,  1908. 

t  Ebert,  Ber.  d.  Bay.  Ak.  d,  Wiss.  MUnchen.  aS,  p.  133,  1903. 


:ix]        RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF   THE  EARTH  AND  ATMOSPHERE         641 

J.  J.  Thomson  found  that  air  bubbled  through  Cambridge 

p-water  showed  more  conductivity  than  ordinary  air.     This  was 

Itimately  traced  to  the  presence  of  radium  emanation  in  the 

p-water.      Adams  showed  that  a  trace  of  radium  was  present 

the  tap- water,  for  after  boiling  the  water  to  get  rid  of  the 

emanation,  and  leaving  it  for  some  time  in  a  closed  vessel,  it  was 

.-  found  to  yield  again  about  10  per  cent,  of  the  amount  of  emanation 

^t£rst  observed.     It  was  thus  obvious  that  the  water  contained 

'^Mome  radium  in  solution  and   an   initial  excess  of  the   radium 

I  emanation. 

..astead  and  Wheeler  showed  that  the  long  period  emanation 
btained  from  the  surface  water  and  soil  of  New  Haven,  Connecticut, 
"Was  identical  with  the  radium  emanation  in  all  respects.    Bumstead 
also  observed  that  a  considerable  quantity  of  thorium  emanation 
iras  present  in  the  atmosphere.    Dadourian*  examined  the  under- 
ground air  and  found  it  contained  an  easily  measurable  amount  of 
thorium  emanation.    For  this  purpose,  a  circular  hole  was  cut  into 
the  ground.     A  number  of  insulated  wires  were  placed  in  the  hole 
and  kept  negatively  charged  by  means  of  an  influence  machine, 
and  the  top  of  the  hole  covered  over.     Affcer  a  long  exposure,  the 
active  deposit  collected  on  the  wire  lost  its  activity  at  a  rate  that 
•howed  it  to  be  a  mixture  of  the  active  deposits  of  thorium  and 
radium. 

The  discovery  of  the  existence  of  the  radium  emanation  in 

soil  and  waters  led  to  systematic  measurements  of  the  amount 

:   of  radium  emanation  in  various  hot  and  mineral  springs.     A  very 

large  number  of  investigations  have  been  made  in  recent  years  on 

this  subject  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  it  is  not  possible  to 

mention  even  briefly  the  very  large  number  of  papers  dealing  with 

I    this  question.     Among  the  earlier  investigators  in  this  field  were 

*    H.  S.  Allen  and  Lord  Blythswood  and  Strutt,  who  examined  the 

hot   springs   of   Bath   and    Buxton   for   the   radium   emanation. 

Various  thermal  springs  in  Germany  were  tested  by  Himstedt, 

Elster  and  Geitel,  Dom,  Schenke  and  H.  Mache,  while  Curie  and 

Laborde  made  a  systematic  examination  of  the  amount  of  radium 

emanation  in  a  number  of  well-known  thermal  springs  in  France. 

Boltwood  extended  these  observations  to  a  number  of  springs  in 

*  Dadourian,  Amer.  Jour.  Sci.  19,  p.  16,  1905. 
R.  B.-A.  41 


1 


642         RADIO-ACTIVITT   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE       [CH. 

America.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases,  the  radium  emanation 
was  found  to  be  present,  often  in  considerable  quantity,  in  the 
issuing  waters.  In  some  cases  a  trace  of  radium  was  foond  in 
the  water,  and  in  the  sediment  deposited  by  the  spring  water. 

In  this  connection,  it  is  of  interest  to  refer  to  the  waters  of 
Salins-Moutiers.  Curie  and  Laborde  found  that  little  radium 
emanation  was  present,  but  Blanc*  later  found  that  the  sediment 
was  very  active.  A  closer  examination  showed  that  the  activity 
was  due  to  thorium  products,  for  the  sediment  emitted  freely  the 
thorium  emanation  and  gave  rise  to  the  characteristic  active 
deposit  of  thorium.  Blanc  later  separated  from  this  sediment 
a  very  active  constituent  which  we  now  know  to  be  identical  with 
radiothorium.  It  would  appear  that  mesothorium  was  deposited 
from  the  water  and  gave  rise  to  the  radiothorium  observed. 

A  number  of  different  methods  have  been  employed  to  compare 
the  amounts  of  radium  emanation  in  various  waters.  In  some  cases 
the  air  is  aspirated  through  the  liquid  and  the  ionisation  current 
due  to  the  released  emanation  is  measured  by  an  electroscope. 
A  very  satisfactory  and  definite  method  of  determining  the 
quantity  of  radium  emanation  in  water  was  first  used  by 
Boltwood.  The  emanation  released  fi-om  a  known  quantity  of 
water  by  vigorous  boiling  is  introduced  into  an  emanation 
electroscope.  The  readings  of  the  latter  are  standardised  by 
observing  the  efiect  due  to  a  quantity  of  emanation  released  from 
a  radium  solution  containing  a  known  quantity  of  radium.  In 
this  way  the  amount  of  radium  emanation  in  the  water  is  expressed 
in  terms  of  the  quantity  of  emanation  in  equilibrium  with  a  known 
weight  of  radium. 

The  radium  emanation  is  always  present  in  matter,  whether 
liquid  or  gaseous,  which  escapes  from  some  depth  of  the  earth's 
crust.  For  example,  Elster  and  Geitel  observed  that  the  carbonic 
acid  obtained  from  great  depths  of  volcanic  soil  was  radio-active, 
while  Burton  found  that  the  petroleum  from  a  deep  well  in  Canada 
contained  a  considerable  quantity  of  radium  emanation.  In  order 
to  explain  the  radio-activity  of  thermal  springs  it  does  not  appear 
necessary  to  suppose  that  the  waters  in  their  passage  from  the 
interior  pass  through  rich  uranium  deposits.     The  small  quantity 

*  Blanc,  Phil.  Mag,  9.  p.  148,  1906. 


k 


XIX]       RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHERE         643 

of  radium  which  is  found  distributed  in  the  earth's  materials 
(see  Section  258)  appears  sufficient  in  the  aggregate  to  account 
for  the  amount  of  radium  emanation  in  the  great  majority  of 
thermal  springs.  The  notable  quantity  of  helium  found  in  the 
water  of  many  hot  springs,  for  example  in  those  of  Bath,  is  no 
doubt  due  to  the  release  of  the  small  quantities  of  helium  formed 
in  the  rocks  by  the  disintegration  of  radio-active  matter  (see 
Section  232). 

Sanderson*  has  examined  the  amount  of  thorium  and  radium 
emanation  present  in  the  air  contained  in  the  soil  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  New  Haven,  U.S.A.     For  this  purpose,  a  constant  current 
of  air  was  drawn   through   a   small   iron  vessel   provided  with 
suitable  openings  which  was  buried  deep  in  the  soil.    The  current 
of  air  passed  through  a  suitable  electroscope  in  which  the  activity 
of  the  air  was  examined.    Both  the  radium  and  thorium  emanations 
were  present  in  considerable  quantity.     Elstimates  were  made  of 
the  amount  of  free  emanation  in  the  underground  air.     One  cubic 
centimetre  was  found  to  contain  radium  emanation  equal  to  the 
amount    in   equilibrium   with    2*4  x  10~"   gram   radium.     It   is 
seen  (Section  254)  that  this  is  about  4000  times  greater  than  the 
normal  amount  of  radium  emanation  per  c.c.  in  the  atmosphere. 
No  doubt  only  a  fraction  of  the  radium  or  thorium  emanation 
formed  is  released  from  the  radium  or  thorium  salts  in  the  soil, 
so  that  this  method  does  not  give  definite  information  of  the 
actual  amount  of  radium  or  of  thorium  present.      The  method, 
however,  should  prove  useful  in  comparing  the  amounts  of  thorium 
or  radium  emanation  present  in  soils  of  different  kinds  and  in 
diiFerent  localities,  and  thus  throw  light  on  the  amounts  of  these 
emanations  which  escape  into  the  atmosphere. 

268.     DiBtribution  of  radium  in  the  earth's  crust.     We 

have  seen  that  the  presence  of  radium  and  thorium  emanations  in 
the  atmosphere  indicated  the  widespread  existence  of  radio-active 
substances  in  the  surface  materials  of  the  earth.  This  was  con- 
firmed by  the  observations  of  Elster  and  Geitel  of  the  high  content 
of  radium  in  caverns  and  confined  places,  and  by  the  presence 
of  the  radium  emanation  in  air  sucked  from  the  soil.     Since  all 

*  Sanderson,  Amer.  Jour,  Sci.  82,  p.  1G9,  1911. 

41—2 


644         BADIO-ACTIYITT  OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE        [CH. 

radio-active  substances  emit  heat  in  amount  proportional  to  the 
energy  of  their  radiations,  it  thus  appeared  probable  that  the 
heating  effect  of  radio-active  matter  was  an  important  factor 
in  considerations  of  the  maintenance  of  the  internal  heat  of  the 
earth. 

It  had  been  ordinarily  assumed  that  the  earth  was  a  cooling 
body,  and  from  considerations  of  the  temperature  gradient 
observed  in  the  surface  of  the  earth,  Lord  Kelvin  (Appendix  D, 
Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy)  had  deduced*  that  not 
more  than  100  million  years  was  required  for  the  earth  to  cool 
down  from  a  molten  mass  to  its  present  state.  If,  however,  beat 
was  constantly  supplied  by  the  disintegration  of  active  matter, 
such  calculations  no  longer  rested  on  a  firm  basis.  On  the 
assumption  that  one  gram  of  radium  emitted  100  calories  per 
gram  per  hour,  the  writer*  deduced  that  the  presence  of  4*6  x  10"" 
gram  of  radium  per  gram  imiformly  distributed  throughout  the 
volume  of  the  earth  would  produce  as  much  heat  as  that  lost  from 
the  earth  by  conduction  to  the  surface.  In  other  words,  with 
such  a  distribution  of  radium,  the  temperature  gradient  of  the 
earth  would  remain  constant. 

It  was  thus  of  great  importance  to  determine  the  average 
radium   content   of    the   earth's  crust.      The   first  quantitative 
experiments    in    this    direction    were    made    by    Struttf,   who 
determined   the   quantity   of   radium   present  in   a  number  of 
representative  rocks.     For  this  purpose,  the  rock  was  obtained 
in  solution  by  suitable  methods  and  left  in  a  closed  flask  for 
the   emanation   to   accumulate.      After  a  definite   interval,  the 
solution  was  boiled  to  remove  the  emanation.      The  latter  was 
then  introduced  into  an  emanation  electroscope  which  had  been 
previously  standardized  by  observing  the  increased  rate  of  dis- 
charge due  to  the  introduction  of  the  emanation  released  from 
a  known  quantity  of  radium.      The  results  obtained  by  Strutt 
for  igneous  and  sedimentary  rocks,  corrected  by  Eve  J  for  an  error 
in  the  radium  standard,  are  given  below. 

*  Radio-activity y  '2nd  edition,  p.  494. 

t  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  77,  p.  472.  1906 ;  78,  p.  150,  1907. 

t  Eve,  Phil,  Mag.  14,  p.  231,  1907. 


l]       RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH  AND  ATMOSPHERE         646 


Igneous  Rocks. 


Radium  in 

grams  per  gram 

Granite 

•  •  • 

Rhodesia    ... 

•  •  • 

4-78  X  10-« 

»> 

•  •  ■ 

Cornwall     ... 

•  •  ■ 

4-67 

11 

Zircon  syenite 

•  •  • 

Norway 

•  •  • 

4-65 

i> 

Granite 

•  •  • 

Cornwall     ... 

•  •  • 

4-21 

)f 

n                        ••• 

•  •• 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

3-57 

>i 

» 

•  •  • 

Cornwall     ... 

•  •  • 

3-45 

» 

j» 

•  •  • 

Westmorland 

•  •  • 

3-31 

»» 

Syenite 

•  •  • 

Norway 

■  a  • 

2-44 

n 

Granite 

•  •  • 

Devon 

•  •  • 

1-84 

n 

Blue  ground    ... 

•  •  • 

Kimberley 

■  •  • 

1-68 

» 

Leucite  basanite 

•  •  • 

Vesuvius     . . . 

•  •  • 

1-66 

»i 

Hornblende  granite 

•  •  • 

Egypt 

•  •  • 

1-22 

» 

Pitchstone 

•  •  • 

Isle  of  Eigg 

•  •  • 

103 

»> 

Hornblende  diorite 

•  •  • 

Heidelberg 

•  •  • 

0-99 

» 

Augite  Hyenite 

•  •  • 

Norway 

•  •  • 

0-93 

n 

Peridotite 

•  ■  • 

Isle  of  Rum 

•  •  • 

0-68 

»> 

Olivine  basalt 

•  •  • 

Skye 

•  •  • 

0-66 

>» 

Olivine  euchrite 

• « • 

Isle  of  Rum 

•  •  • 

0-64 

» 

Basalt  ... 

•  •  • 

Victoria  Falls 

•  •  • 

0-63 

i» 

Hornblende  granite 

•  •  • 

Leicestershire 

•  •  • 

0-62 

»» 

Dolerite 

•  •  • 

Isle  of  Canua 

•  •  • 

0-62 

» 

Greenstone 

•  •  • 

Cornwall     ... 

•  •  • 

0-57 

>» 

Basalt 

•  •  • 

Antrim 

•  •  • 

0-52 

» 

Serpentine 

•  •  • 

Cornwall     ... 

•  •  • 

0-50 

»> 

Granite 

•  •  • 

Isle  of  Rum 

•  •  • 

0-36 

>» 

Olivine  Rock 

•  •  • 

»>           n 

0-34 

»» 

Dunite 

•  •  • 

•Lock  Scaivig 

•  •• 

0-33 

n 

Ba.salt 

•  •  • 

Greenland  ... 

•  •  • 

0-31 

n 

Sedimentary  Rocks, 

Radium  in 

grams  per  gram 

Oolite 

•  •  • 

Bath      '      ... 

•  ■  • 

2-92x10-" 

••               •••                  ••• 

•  •  • 

St  Alban's  Head 

•  •• 

2-02 

» 

Marble 

•  •  • 

East  Lothian 

•  •  • 

1-93 

n 

Kimmeridge  clay 

•  •  • 

Ely 

•  •  • 

1-88 

»} 

Oil-bearing  sandstone 

Galicia 

•  •  • 

1-62      , 

n 

Roofiug  slate  ... 

•  •  • 

Wales  (?)     ... 

•  •  ■ 

1-28      , 

n 

Gritty  slate     ... 

•  •  • 

Cornwall     ... 

•  •  • 

1-25      , 

» 

Gault  clay 

•  ■  • 

Cambridge 

•  •  • 

1-06      . 

>j 

v/lft JT         •  •  •             •  •  • 

•  •  • 

Essex 

•  •  • 

0-86      , 

►» 

646         RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE       [CH. 


Sedimentary  Rocks  (continued). 


Red  sandHtone 

East  Lothian 

Fine  gravel 

Essex 

Red  chalk 

Hunstanton 

Flint     

Essex 

White  marble 

India 

Marble 

Fiast  Lothian 

Chalk,  bottom  of 

pit 

Cambridge 

„        top  of  name  pit 

>» 

Radinxn  in 

grams  per  gram 

0-84  X 

10-" 

0-71 

»» 

0-53 

♦» 

0-53 

»» 

0-27 

»* 

0-26 

«» 

0-39 

»^ 

012 

%« 

It  is  seen  that  the  average  amount  of  radium  in  rocks  is  about 
20  times  greater  than  the  amount  calculated  by  Rutherford  to  be 
necessary  to  retain  the  temperature  gradient  unaltered.  Before 
considering  the  interpretation  to  be  placed  on  these  data,  it  is 
desirable  to  consider  the  results  of  later  experiments  on  the 
amount  of  thorium  and  radium  in  rocks  and  sea-water.  The 
results  of  Strutt  have  been  confirmed  by  the  experiments  of  Eve 
and  Mcintosh*  on  the  radium  content  of  typical  rocks  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Montreal ;  by  Farr  and  Florancef  on  the  sub- 
antarctic  rocks,  and  by  BUchnerJ  on  the  rocks  of  Sumatra  and 
Borneo.  Joly  has  made  a  systematic  examination  of  the  radium 
content  of  typical  igneous  and  sedimentary  rocks,  and  found 
values  in  general  agreement  with  Strutt,  but  in  many  cases 
obtained  a  value  several  times  greater  than  the  latter. 

An  accurate  determination  of  the  amount  of  radium  in  rocks 
by  the  solution  method  is  beset  with  many  difficulties.  Apart 
from  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  about  fifty  grams  of  rock  in 
complete  solution,  any  trace  of  a  precipitate  may  involve  the 
separation  of  the  minute  quantity  of  radium  present.  Under 
such  conditions,  only  a  fraction  of  the  emanation  formed  from 
the  radium  is  released  by  boiling.  The  chemical  operations  are 
so  long  and  tedious  that  only  a  few  rocks  can  be  properly  tested. 

In  order  to  avoid  some  of  these  difficulties,  Joly§  has  devised 

•  Eve  and  Mcintosh,  Phil.  Mag.  14,  p.  231,  1907. 
t  Farr  and  Florance,  Phil  Mag.  18,  p.  812,  1909. 

X  BuchDer,  Kon.  Akad.  v.  Weten.  Amsterdam,  18,  p.  359,  1910;   18,  p.  818, 
1911 ;  18,  p.  1063,  1912. 

§  Joly,  PhiL  Mag.  22,  p.  134,  1911. 


XIX]        RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE  EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         647 

a  fusion  method  which  is  far  more  rapid  and  more  reliable  than 
the  solution  method.  This  method  depends  on  the  release  of  the 
radium  emanation  in  a  rock  by  heating  it  with  a  suitable  flux  in 
a  closed  furnace  to  a  temperature  of  over  1000°  C.  The  rock  after 
grinding  was  generally  mixed  with  about  four  times  its  weight  of 
the  mixed  carbonates  of  sodium  and  potassium  and  introduced  into 
a  platinum  crucible,  which  was  heated  electrically  in  an  outer 
crucible  of  Berlin  porcelain.  The  liberated  radium  emanation, 
mixed  with  air  and  other  gases,  is  transferred  into  an  emanation 
electroscope  and  its  quantity  measured.  It  is  assumed  that  the 
rocks  in  the  cold  do  not  allow  more  than  a  small  percentage  of 
the  emanation  to  escape  into  the  air  even  after  grinding.  This 
seems  t<:>  be  borne  out  in  most  cases  by  direct  observation. 


Locality 


Killiney  Hill  .. 
Glencullen 
(rlciimaluce    .. 
Ballyellin 
Aughrim 
BlackHtairs  Mt. 


Same 


6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 


24 
24 
24 
24 
24 
24 
24 


Besalt 
by  solution 


Result 
by  fusion 


1-2         „ 

0-41 

2-08 

1-02 

2-41 

2-41 


2-9x10-" 
1-9 


»^ 


»» 


>» 


1-0 
2-2 
1-8 
30 
30 


a 


w 


)» 


»i 


Means  i     1*48 


jy 


213 


>» 


A  typical  comparison  of  the  results  obtained  by  the  two 
methods  on  Ijeinster  granite  is  shown  in  the  table.  The  solution 
results  were  obtained  by  Fletcher*. 

It  is  seen  that  the  fusion  method  gives  a  distinctly  higher 
lvalue  in  these  cases.  On  the  other  hand,  measurements  on  the 
3asalt  from  the  Deccan  gave  by  the  solution  method  an  average 
ralue  of  4-3  x  10""  and  by  the  fusion  method  2*2  x  10"". 

Jolyf  made  an  extensive  examination  of  the  rocks  of  the 
!>t.  Gothard  Tunnel  both  by  the  fusion  and  solution  methods. 
The  average  results  of  the  radium  content  found  by  the  fusion 
nethod  is  given  in  the  following  table.     The  amount  of  thorium 

*  Fletcher,  Phil.  Mag.  21,  p.  102,  1911. 
t  Joly,  PhiL  Mag.  as,  p.  201,  1912. 


648         RADlO-ACTIVlTr  OF  THE   EARTH   AND   ATMOSPHERE        [CH. 

in  the  rocks,  the  method  of  estimation  of  which  will  be  discussed 
later,  is  also  added. 


Rock  type 

1 

Ra  per  gram 

Th  per  gram 

Granite  aud  gneiss  of  the 

Finsteraarhorn  Massif 

6-0x10-" 

2-64x10-* 

Altered  sediments  of  the 

Usernmulde       

2-6       „ 

1-70      „ 

Schists,    etc.    of   the    St. 

Grothard  Massif 

2-8       „ 

110      „ 

Altered  sediments  of  the 

Tessinmulde      

2-0       „ 

1 

0-44      „ 

It  is  seen  that  there  is  twice  as  much  radio-active  matter  in 
the  granite  as  in  the  schists  of  the  St.  Gothard  Massif. 

Joly  and  Fletcher  have  carefully  examined  by  both  methods 
the  radium  content  of  secondary  rocks.  The  following  table  gives 
the  mean  results  of  various  types  of  sedimentary  rocks  given  by 
Fletcher*. 

Table  of  Mean  Results, 


i 

Rook  type 

• 

Number  of 

ezptB.  on 

which 

average 

is  based 

Radium  in 
grms.  per  gram 

Coarse  detri tal  sedi  men t» 

„           „               „         (Metamorphosed) 
Fine  detri  tal  sediments  (Argillaceous) 

„          „              „          (Schistose) 
Calcareous  sediments           

24 
9 

16 
9 

24 

l-5xl0-« 
1-5       ,, 
1-3       „ 

M       „ 
0-8       „ 

It  is  seen  from  the  results  both  of  Strutt  and  Fletcher  that 
the  radium  content  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  is  distinctly  lower 
than  for  the  igneous  rocks.  Fletcher  observed  that  all  types  of 
sedimentary  rocks  with  the  exception  of  the  calcareous  rocks  have 
nearly  the  same  radium  content. 

Jolyf  found  that  the  radium  content  of  lavas  from  Vesuvius 

♦  Fletcher,  Phil.  Mag.  23,  p.  279,  1912. 
t  Joly,  Phil  Mag.  18,  p.  677,  1909. 


XIX]        RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE   EARIH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         649 

was  abnormally  high,  the  mean  value  for  lavas  ejected  since  1631 
being  12  x  10""  gr.  Ra  per  gram. 

An  examination  of  the  amount  of  radium  in  sea-water  has  been 
made  by  Joly  and  Eve.  The  amount  of  radium  present  per  litre 
of  sea- water  is  so  small  that  accurate  measurement  is  difficult,  and 
the  results  obtained  by  these  two  authors  are  somewhat  conflicting. 
Eve*  found  an  average  of  0*94  x  10~*'^  gr.  per  kilogram  of  sea- water 
for  specimens  taken  in  a  voyage  across  the  North  Atlantic.  Jolyf 
has  examined  sea-water  from  a  number  of  localities  and  concludes 
that  there  is  a  marked  variation  in  the  radium  content,  and  on  an 
average  finds  much  higher  values  than  Eve — in  some  cases  more 
than  20  times.  The  results  of  both  observers  show  that  the 
radium  content  for  sea-water  is  very  small  compared  with  the 
radium  content  of  rocks.  It  seems  clear  that  the  active  matter 
carried  down  to  the  sea  by  denudation  must  rapidly  be  deposited 
in  the  bed  of  the  ocean.  This  seems  to  be  borne  out  by  the 
observations  of  Joly  on  the  high  radium  content  of  the  deep  sea 
deposits  obtained  in  the  Challenger  expedition.  The  amount  of 
radium  was  greatest  in  radiolarian  ooze  (36*7  x  10""")  and  least  in 
globigerina  ooze  (7*2  x  10"""). 

269.    Distribution    of  thorium    in    the    earth's    crust. 

The  evolution  of  the  thorium  emanation  from  the  soil  indicated 
that  thorium  was  widely  distributed  in  the  earth's  crust.  The 
first  measurements  of  the  thorium  contents  of  typical  rocks  were 
made  by  BlancJ  and  Joly§.  The  latter  has  made  a  systematic 
examination  of  the  thorium  content  of  igneous  and  sedimentary 
rocks.  The  rock  to  be  tested  is  obtained  in  solution  and 
vigorously  boiled  for  some  time  to  expel  all  traces  of  radium 
emanation.  The  thorium  emanation  which  is  released  at  a 
constant  rate  by  boiling  is  carried  by  a  known  current  of  air  into 
an  emanation  electroscope,  and  the  increased  rate  of  discharge 
determined.  The  readings  are  standardized  by  boiling  a  similar 
solution  containing  a  known  weight  of  thorium  in  radio-active 
equilibrium.     We   have   already   given   in  the   last   section   the 

♦  Eve,  Phil,  Mag.  18.  p.  102,  1909. 

t  Joly,  Phil.  Mail.  W,  P-  385,  1908;  18,  p.  896,  1909. 

t  Blanc,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  146,  1909. 

§  Joly,  Phil.  Mag.  18,  p.  140,  1909. 


650         RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE  EARTH  AND  ATMOSPHERE        [CH. 

thorium  content  of  the  rocks  obtained  from  the  St.  Gothard 
Tunnel.  Joly*  has  shown  that  the  amount  of  thorium  in  sedi- 
mentary rocks  depends  on  the  type  of  rocks.  In  calcareous  and 
dolomitic  rocks,  the  amount  of  thorium  is  so  small  that  it  is 
hardly  measurable.  In  the  arenaceous  and  argillaceous  rocks,  the 
average  thorium  content  is  1*3  x  10""*  gr.  per  gram  and  in  the 
calcareous  rocks  not  more  than  006  x  10"*  gr.  per  gram.  Since 
the  argillaceous  rocks  form  about  80  per  cent,  of  the  sedimentaries, 
the  avei-age  thorium  content  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  may  be 
taken  as  1*16  x  10"'  gr.  per  gram.  Thorium  is  found  to  be  as 
widely  distributed  as  radium  in  the  earth's  crust.  We  shall  see 
later  that  the  amount  of  thorium  in  rocks  is  on  the  average  aboat 
the  same  as  the  amount  of  uranium,  although  there  appears  to  be 
no  definite  connection  between  the  relative  amounts  in  any  given 
type  of  rock. 

260.  Earth'8  internal  heat.  We  shall  now  consider  the 
effect  of  radio-active  matter  on  the  maintenance  and  distribution 
of  the  earth's  internal  heat.  It  will  be  taken  that  on  the  average 
each  gram  of  the  earth's  surface  materials  contains  2  x  10""  gram 
radium  and  12  x  10~*  gram  thorium.  The  radium  itself  would 
soon  be  transformed,  but  it  is  supposed  that  it  is  in  equilibrium 
with  its  parent  uranium.  Since  3*4  x  10~'  gram  of  radium  is 
associated  with  one  gram  of  uranium,  the  average  amount  of 
uranium  in  one  gram  of  the  earth's  crust  is  0'6  x  10~*  gram. 
This  is  about  half  the  average  amount  of  thorium,  but  the  relative 
amount  of  these  two  elements  in  different  rocks  is  very  variable. 
Jolyf  and  Werner  found  by  direct  chemical  tests  that  uranium 
was  present  in  rocks  in  about  the  amount  calculated  from  the 
radium  content. 

We  have  seen  (Section  239)  that  in  radio-active  equilibrium, 
one  gram  of  uranium  emits  heat  at  a  rate  7'7  x  10~*  cals.  per  hour 
and  one  gram  of  thorium  2*7  x  10~*  cals.  per  hour.  Taking  the 
density  of  the  average  rock  as  2*7,  it  follows  that  the  heating 
eflect  of  the  uranium  present  in  one  c.c.  of  rock  is  11  x  10"*  cals. 
per  year  and  of  the  thorium  8  x  10~*  cals.  per  year.     The  total 

•  Joly,  Phil.  Mag.  20,  pp.  125,  353,  1910. 
t  Joly,  Phil.  Mag,  16.  p.  190,  1908. 


XIX]       RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE         651 

heating  effect  of  the  uranium  and  thorium  combined  is  1*9  x  10~* 
cals.  per  year  per  c.c.  Consequently  if  we  suppose  a  quantity  of 
rock  of  specific  heat  0*2  thermally  insulated  so  that  none  of  the 
heat  generated  was  lost,  its  temperature  would  rise  at  the  rate  of 
about  35°  C.  in  one  million  years. 

Consider  next  the  loss  of  heat  from  the  earth  s  surface  by 
conduction  through  the  earth's  crust.  On  an  average  the  tempera- 
ture rises  1°C.  for  each  32  metres.  The  temperature  gradient 
T  near  the  surface  is  consequently  00031°  C.  per  cm.  The 
amount  of  heat  Q  lost  by  conduction  per  sq.  cm.  of  surface  is 
given  by  Q  =  KT  where  K  is  the  average  conductivity,  taken  as 
•004,  and  T  is  the  observed  temperature  gradient.  The  quantity 
of  heat  conveyed  to  the  surface  by  conduction  per  sq.  cm.  is  thus 
39  cals.  per  year.  Since  the  amount  of  heat  generated  in  each 
C.C.  by  thorium  and  uranium  is  1*9  x  10~*  cals.  per  year,  the  escape 
of  heat  from  the  surface  is  equal  to  that  generated  by  a  uniform 
distribution  of  radio-active  matter  extending  to  a  depth  of  2  x  10* 
cms.  or  20  kilometres  of  the  earth  s  crust.  Consequently  if  the 
crust  of  the  earth  is  to  retain  its  thermal  gradient  unchanged,  the 
uniform  distribution  of  radio-active  matter  cannot  extend  for 
a  depth  of  more  than  20  kilometres.  In  this  calculation,  we  have 
left  out  of  account  the  decreasing  generation  of  heat  due  to  the 
gradual  transformation  of  uranium  and  thorium.  Since  the  time 
required  for  half  the  uranium  to  be  transformed  is  5  x  10*  years 
and  for  half  the  thorium  1*3  x  10^^  years,  it  is  obvious  that  not 
much  decrease  in  the  generation  of  heat  will  be  observed  over 
a  period  of  100  million  years. 

It   is   seen   that   if  the   radium   were   uniformly  distributed 

throughout  the  whole  volume  of  the  earth  in  the  same  amount  as 

at  the  surface,  the  heat  generated  by  radio-active  matter  is  about 

200  times  greater  than  the  amount  lost  by  conduction.     On  such 

a  view,  the  earth  as  a  whole  would  be  getting  steadily  hotter. 

As  this  does  not  seem  likely,  we  are  driven  to  the  suggestion, 

first  put  forward  by  Strutt,  that  the  radio-active  matter  is  mainly 

confined  to  a  thin  surface  shell  of  the  earth.     In  order  to  retain 

the  present  thermal  state  of  the  earth  unchanged,  the  depth  of  this 

shell  if  the  active  matter  is  uniformly  distributed  cannot  be  much 

more  than  20  kilometres. 


652         RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND   ATMOSPHERE       [CH 

It  is  of  interest  to  calculate  the  temperature  at  a  depth  x  frun 
the  surface  of  the  earth  on  these  assumptions.  It  is  suppoec* 
that  below  a  depth  D  (about  20  kilometres)  no  radio-activ 
matter  is  present,  and  that  the  inner  core  is  in  thermal  equilibriun 
It  is  easily  shown  that  when  a  steady  state  is  reached  th 
temperature  6  (the  outside  of  the  earth  being  supposed  to  b 

at  0")  at  a  depth  x  is  given  hy  6  =  -^  f  D  —  ^  J  where  h  is  the  he;i 

generated  per  unit  volume  per  second  and  K  the  conductivity.  K 
the  depth  D,e  =  hDy2K,  Substituting  the  value  D  =  2xWmi 
A  =  6  X  10~"  cals.  per  c.c.  per  sec,  K  =  '004,  the  value  of  th 
temperature  ^  =  300°.  This  maximum  temperature  seems  tc 
small  to  fit  in  with  the  facts,  for  there  is  reason  to  believe  th 
a  temperature  of  about  1300**  exists  some  distance  below  th 
surface.  It  is  of  interest  to  consider  the  distribution  of  activ 
matter  which  would  give  rise  to  such  a  maximum  temperatui 
consistent  with  the  observed  temperature  gradient  at  the  surfiic 
of  the  earth. 

If  the  heat  lost  by  conduction  balances  the  heat  generated  i 
a  shell  of  thickness  D,  Dh  =  KT,  and  as  we  have  seen  the  maximui 
temperature  0  ==  hD^I2K  =  Kiy/2h  in  terms  of  observed  quantitie 
It  is  seen  from  the  above  formula  for  0  that  the  greater  th 
amount  of  active  matter,  i.e,  the  greater  the  value  of  A,  th 
smaller  is  the  maximum  temperature  inside  the  earth,  consistei 
with  the  observed  temperature  gradient  at  the  surface.  Th 
result  at  first  sight  seems  paradoxical ;  but  it  is  a  necessary  coi 
sequence  of  the  assumptions  that  are  made.  Now  there  is  i 
reason  to  believe  that  the  value  of  h  is  too  large,  and  from  tl 
data  at  present  available  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  alt 
materially  the  values  assumed  for  K  and  T.  The  final  temperatu 
0,  however,  is  increased  if  the  total  quantity  of  active  matter 
assumed  to  be  the  same  but  instead  of  being  uniformly  distribut 
is  supposed  to  decrease  with  depth  from  the  surface.  For  exarop 
if  the    active    matter   falls    oflf    exi)onentially   with    the    dep 

according  to  the  equation  h/ho^e  ^,  where  D  is  the  avera 
depth  calculated  before,  it  is  easily  shown  that  the  maxinn 
temperature  0  =  KT^jh,  or  twice  the  maximum  found  for  a  unifo 
distribution.      On    the    data    at    present   available,    it    appe: 


XIX]       RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH  AND   ATMOSPHERE  653 

necessary  to  assume  that  the  amount  of  radio-active  matter 
decreases  with  depth  if  the  earth  is  to  retain  its  present  thermal 
condition.  The  distribution  of  active  matter  throughout  the 
volume  of  the  earth,  even  though  in  small  amount  per  unit 
volume  compared  with  that  observed  at  the  surface,  would  suffice 
to  give  a  high  temperature  to  the  inner  core  of  the  earth. 

While  the  distribution  of  active  matter  in  the  earth  is 
undoubtedly  a  very  important  factor  in  the  origin  and  maintenance 
of  the  earth's  internal  heat,  it  does  not  supply  any  definite 
evidence  ad  to  the  age  of  the  earth.  We  have  seen,  however,  that 
valuable  information  on  this  point  is  given  by  the  amount  of 
helium  and  of  lead  in  radio-active  minerals.  The  age  of  the  earth 
obtained  by  the  study  of  the  oldest  primary  radio-active  minerals 
is  distinctly  higher  than  that  deduced  from  direct  geological 
considerations.  This  question  has  been  very  fully  discussed  by 
Joly*.  An  interesting  account  of  the  distribution  of  radio-active 
matter  in  the  earth's  crust  and  its  possible  connection  with 
geological  changes  has  been  given  by  Joly  in  his  book  Radio- 
Qctivity  and  Geology  (Constable  and  Co.). 

261.     Coimical  radio-activity.     We  have  seen  that  radio- 
active matter  is  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  crust  of  the 
earth  and    throughout    the   atmosphere.     Struttf  examined   a 
number  of  meteorites  for  the  presence  of  radium.    Iron  meteorites 
did  not  contain  a  detectable   quantity,  but  a  stony  meteorite 
contained  about  as  much  radium  as  the  terrestrial  rock  which  it 
resembled  in  general  composition.     If  the  earth  originated  from 
the  same  material  as  the  sun,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
sun  should  contain  the  known  radio-active  elements.     The  large 
quantity  of  helium  observed  in  the  sun  indirectly  suggests  the 
existence    there   of   radio-active    matter.      Recently  some    very 
interesting  evidence  has  been  obtained  of  the  presence  of  radium 
and  its  emanation  in  the  sun  and  in  the  new  star,  Nova  Gemino- 
nim  2.     H.  GiebelerJ  observed  a  number  of  new  lines  in  the 
spectrum  of  the  latter  which  have  been  ascribed  to  uranium,  radium 

•  Joly,  Phil  Mag.  22,  p.  357,  1911. 

t  Strutt,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  77,  p.  472,  1906. 

t  Giebeler,  Astr.  Nachr.  191,  No.  4582,  June,  1912. 


654         RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE        [CH. 

and  the  radium  emanation.  A  definite  proof  of  the  existence  of 
radio-active  matter  in  the  new  star  is  spectroscopically  difficult 
on  account  of  the  displacement  of  the  spectral  lines  due  to  the 
movement  of  the  source.  Most  of  the  stronger  radium  lines 
appear  to  be  present,  although  their  relative  intensity  is  in  some 
cases  very  different  to  that  observed  in  the  spark  spectrum  of 
radium.  The  evidence  in  support  of  these  conclusions  has  been 
discussed  by  Kustner  and  Kayser*.  The  latter  has  suggested 
a  theory  in  explanation  of  new  stars  based  on  radio-active  processes 
occurring  in  them.  F.  W.  Dysonf  has  given  evidence  which 
indicates  the  existence  of  radium  and  of  radium  emanation  in 
the  sun  8  chromosphere.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  pos- 
sible amount  of  radium  present  in  the  sun  must  be  small — only 
about  three  parts  in  ten  million  of  uranium.  On  the  other  hand, 
radium  is  easily  detected  spectroscopically.  Further  confirmations 
of  these  conclusions  of  the  presence  of  radio-active  matter  in  the 
sun  and  stars  will  be  of  great  interest. 

It  was  suggested  by  BirkelandJ  in  1896  that  the  aurora  was 
caused  by  a  type  of  electric  radiation  emitted  from  the  sun. 
Following  the  discovery  of  the  corpuscular  nature  of  the  cathode 
rays,  it  was  generally  supposed  that  the  sun  emitted  swift 
/8  particles  which  penetrated  some  distance  into  our  atmosphere 
and  gave  rise  to  the  luminosity  observed  in  the  aurora.  The 
theoretical  question  of  the  orbits  of  the  /8  particles  in  the  earth's 
magnetic  field  has  been  worked  out  and  discussed  in  detail  by 
Stormer§.  Later  Vegard||  suggested  that  certain  peculiarities 
occasionally  observed  in  the  aurora,  for  example  the  curtain  or 
drapery  forms,  received  a  simple  explanation  if  it  were  supposed 
that  the  sun  emitted  radiations  of  the  a  ray  type.  We  have  seen 
that  the  a  rays  of  a  given  velocity  have  a  definite  range  in  air, 
and  this  offers  an  explanation  of  the  abrupt  termination  of 
the  Inininosity  observed  in  the  drapery  bands  of  the  aurora. 
The    indirect   evidence  obtained   from   the  study  of  the  aurora 

*  Kayser,  Astr.  Sachr.  191,  No.  4583,  June,  1912. 
t  Dyson,  Antr.  Sachr.  192,  No.  45H9,  July,  1912. 

X  Birkeland,    Arch.    d.    Sci.    Gnicva,    1896;     The    Norwegian    Aurora   Polaris 
Kxpedition,   1002-8. 

§  Storiner,  Arch.  d.  Sci.  Geneva,  24,  1907. 
i;  Vegard,  Phil.  Mag.  23,  p.  211,  1912. 


XIX]        RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE   EARTH  AND  ATMOSPHERE  655 

undoubtedly  suggests  that  the  sun  emits  rays  similar  in  type  to  the 
a  and  0  rays.  This  would  suggest  the  presence  of  considerable 
quantities  of  radio-active  matter  near  the  surface  of  the  sun.  So 
far  no  evidence  has  been  obtained  that  a  penetrating  radiation 
corresponding  to  the  7  rays  is  emitted  from  the  sun.  This,  how- 
ever, does  not  imply  the  absence  of  radio-active  matter,  for  even 
if  the  sun  were  composed  of  pure  radium  it  would  hardly  be 
expected  that  the  7  rays  emitted  would  be  detectable  at  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  since  the  rays  would  be  almost  completely 
absorbed  in  passing  through  the  atmosphere,  which  corresponds 
to  a  thickness  of  76  cms.  of  mercury. 

From  the  known  data  of 'the  absorption  of  the  7  rays  by  air 
(Section  98)  it  can  readily  be  shown  that  the  intensity  of  7  rays 
emitted  from  the  sun  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  would  only  be 
about  c"**  of  the  intensity  at  the  confines  of  the  earth's  atmosphere. 

The  origin  and  duration  of  the  sun's  heat  has  been  discussed 
in  detail  by  Lord  Kelvin  in  Appendix  E  of  Thomson  and  Tait  s 
Natural  Philosophy.  Kelvin  calculated  the  energy  lost  in  the 
concentration  of  the  sun  from  a  condition  of  infinite  dispersion, 
and  concluded  that  it  seems  "  on  the  whole  probable  that  the  sun 
has  not  illuminated  the  earth  for  100  million  years  and  almost 
certain  that  he  has  not  done  so  for  500  million  years.  As  for  the 
future  we  may  say,  with  equal  certainty,  that  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  cannot  continue  to  enjoy  the  light  and  heat  essential  to 
their  life  for  many  million  years  longer,  unless  sources  now 
unknown  to  us  are  prepared  in  the  great  storehouses  of  creation.*' 

The  discovery  of  the  enormous  amount  of  energy  emitted 
during  the  transfonnation  of  radio-active  matter  renders  it  possible 
that  this  estimate  of  the  age  of  the  sun  s  heat  may  be  much 
increased.  In  a  letter  to  Nature  Sir  George  Darwin*  drew 
attention  to  this  probability,  and  at  the  same  time  pointed  out 
that  on  Kelvin's  hypotheses,  his  estimate  of  the  duration  of  the 
sun's  heat  was  probably  much  too  high.  He  stated  that  "The 
lost  energy  of  the  sun,  supposed  to  be  a  homogeneous  sphere  of 
mass  M  and  radius  a,  is  ^fjuAP/a,  where  fj,  is  the  constant  of 
gravitation.  On  introducing  numerical  values  for  the  symbols  in 
this  formula,  I  find   the  lost  energy  to  be  2*7  x  10^  M  calories, 

*  Darwin,  Nature^  68,  p.  496,  1903. 


656     RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   EARTH   AND  ATMOSPHERE    [CH.  XIX 

where  M  is  expressed  in  grams.  If  we  adopt  Langley  s  value 
of  the  solar  constant,  this  heat  suffices  to  give  a  supply  for 
12  million  years.  Lord  Kelvin  used  PouiUet's  value  for  that 
constant,  but  if  he  had  been  able  to  use  Langley's,  his  100  million 
would  have  been  reduced  to  60  million.  The  discrepancy  between 
my  results  of  12  million  and  his  of  60  million  is  explained  by 
a  conjectural  augmentation  of  the  lost  energy  to  allow  for  the 
concentration  of  the  solar  mass  towards  its  central  parts." 

It  appears  that  the  heat  emission  of  the  sun  cannot  be 
seriously  influenced  by  the  presence  of  known  tjrpes  of  radio- 
active matter,  for  a  simple  calculation  shows  that  if  the  sun 
consisted  entirely  of  uranium  in  e(juilibrium  with  its  products, 
the  generation  of  heat  due  to  active  matter  would  only  be  about 
one-fourth  of  the  total  heat  lost  by  radiation.  There  is,  however, 
another  possible  factor  which  should  be  considered.  At  the 
enormous  temperature  of  the  sun,  it  appears  possible  that  a 
process  of  transformation  may  take  place  in  ordinary  elements 
analogous  to  that  observed  in  the  well-known  radio-elements. 
We  have  seen  that  the  total  emission  of  energy  for  the  complete 
transformation  of  one  gram  of  radium  is  about  3*7  x  10*  calories. 
There  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  a  similar  amount  of  energy 
is  resident  in  the  atoms  of  the  ordinary  elements.  If  the  atomic 
energy  of  the  atoms  is  available,  the  time  during  which  the  sun 
may  continue  to  emit  heat  at  the  present  rate  may  be  much 
longer  than  the  value  computed  from  ordinary  dynamical  data. 


APPENDIX  A 


COMPARISON  OF  QUANTITIES  OF  RADIUM 

In  consequence  of  the  extensive  use  of  radium  in  experimental 
searches,  an  account  will  be  given  of  the  methods  that  have  been 
vised  for  quantitatively  determining  the  amount  of  radium  present 

any  preparation.  Two  general  methods  have  been  utilised  (1)  the 
ray  method^  which  is  suitable  for  comparing  quantities  of  radium 
.rying  from  1/100  of  a  milligram  to  one  gram,  and  (2)  the  ema7iatio7i 
ethod  for  measuring  small  quantities  of  radium  of  the  order  of  one 
illionth  of  a  milligram. 

The  y  ray  method.  This  method  of  measurement  depends  on  the 
ct  that  the  radium  in  a  radium  salt  about  one  month  after  its  prepa- 
ition  is  in  equilibrium  with  its  products,  aud  emits  y  rays  of  great 
inetratiug  power,  the  intensity  of  which  is  propoi*tional  to  the  amount 
I  radium  present.  The  intensity  of  the  y  radiation  from  the  radium 
)  be  tested  is  compared  with  that  due  to  a  preparation  of  known 
idium  content  used  as  a  standaitl.  I  have  found  the  electroscopic 
tethod  very  suitable  for  such  a  comparison.  The  electroscope  em- 
loyed  is  similar  in  type  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  13  but  made  entirely  of 
■ad  about  3  mms.  thick,  and  of  volume  about  one  litre.  The  fi  rays 
i*e  completely  absorbed  by  the  lead  and  the  ionisation  inside  the 
ectroscope  is  a  measure  of  the  intensity  of  the  y  rays.  In  such  an 
ectroscope,  a  quantity  of  about  one  milligram  of  radium,  placed  about 
^  cms.  away,  gives  a  convenient  rate  of  leak. 

A  standard  radium  preparation  of  known  radium  content  in  a  thin 
ass  tube  is  placed  some  distance  from  the  electroscope  and  the  rate 

leak  measured.  The  radium  preparation  to  be  compared  with  the 
^ndard,  sealed  in  a  similar  tube,  is  placed  at  exactly  the  same 
stance  from  the  electroscope  and  the  rate  of  leak  again  observed. 
>r  accurate  measurements  it  is  essential  that  the  electric  field  should 

strong  enough  to  produce  saturation.  Under  these  conditions,  the 
te  of  discharge  is  a  measure  of  the  intensity  of  the  radiation.  The 
lisation  in  the  electroscope  is  due  to  the  y  rays  and  the  secondary 
rays,  to  which  they  give  rise,  and  saturation  is  much  more  easily 
>tained  than  in  the  ca«e  of  equal  ionisation  by  the  a  rays. 

B.  B.-A.  42 


658  APPENDIX   A 

The  quantity  of  radium  in  each  preparation  is  proportional  to  the 
rate  of  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  over  a  definite  part  of  the  scale 
corrected  for  the  natural  leak. 

If  a  number  of  observations  are  taken,  the  comparison  should  be 
accurate  to  within  one  per  cent.  It  is  obviously  more  difficult  to 
compare  by  this  method  quantities  of  radium  which  differ  largely  in 
amount.  For  example,  if  the  radium  standard  contains  one  milligram 
and  the  substance  to  be  compared  100  milligrams,  the  rates  of  leak 
observed,  corrected  for  the  natural  leak,  are  in  the  ratio  of  1  to  100. 
In  order  to  ensure  that  the  saturation  current  is  obtained  in  the 
electroscope  for  the  larger  (juantity,  it  has  to  be  placed  so  far  away 
from  the  electroscope  that  the  leak  due  to  the  standard  1  milligram  at 
the  same  distance  is  small,  and  comparable  with  the  natural  leak. 
The  probable  error  of  measurement  in  such  a  case  is  greater  than  when 
the  quantity  of  radium  under  comparison  is  not  very  different  from 
that  of  the  standard.  This  difficulty  may  be  overcome  by  employing  a 
graduated  series  of  standards,  whose  relative  values  are  accurately 
known.  For  example,  standards  of  about  1/10,  1  and  10  milligrams 
are  very  serviceable.  The  advantages  of  this  electroscopic  method 
of  comparison  depend  on  the  fact  that  the  P  rays  and  the  soft  y  rays 
are  absorbed  by  the  walls  of  the  electroscope,  and  that  the  correction 
for  the  absorption  of  the  y  rays  in  the  thin  tube  containing  the  radium 
and  in  the  radium  salt  itself  is  small,  and  can,  if  necessary,  easily  be 
estimated  by  calculation.  In  addition,  tlie  test  preparation  is  placed 
at  such  a  distance  from  the  electroscope  that  the  errors  due  to  distri- 
bution of  the  radium  in  the  tube  are  comparatively  unimportant  At 
the  same  time  it  is,  of  course,  preferable  that  the  radium  should  be 
contained  in  a  tube  of  as  small  dimensions  as  possible. 

A  balance  method  for  accurately  comparing  quantities  of  radium 
has  been  devised  by  Rutherford  and  Chad  wick*.  The  radium  prepa- 
ration is  placed  at  such  a  distance  from  a  lead  ionisation  chamber  that 
the  ionisation  current  in  the  latter  due  to  the  y  rays  from  the  radium 
is  balanced  against  an  equal  and  opposite  ionisation  current  supplied  by 
a  constant  source  of  radiation,  e.g.  uranium  oxide  in  anothei*  ionisation 
chanilxT.  The  balance  distances  are  determined  for  the  test  prepara- 
tion and  for  the  radium  standard  with  which  it  is  to  be  compared. 
From  these  distances  the  quantity  of  radium  in  the  test  preparation 
can  be  accurately  determined.  A  small  correction  is  necessary  for  the 
absorption  of  the  y  rays  by  the  air.  By  this  method  the  quantity  of 
radium  in  a  preparation  may  be  determined  to  about  1  part  in  400. 

Another  reliable  method  has  been  used  by  Mme  Curie.  The 
radium  is  placed  on  top  of  a  large  plate  condenser  consisting  of  two 
sheets  of  lead.  The  ioni.sation  current  between  the  lead  plates  when  a 
large  potential  difference  is  applied  is  balanced  by  the  use  of  the 
Quartz  piezo-electrique  (see  Section  45).  The  relative  saturation  cur- 
rents produced  by  the  test  and  standard  preparations  afford  a  definite 
measure  of  the  quantity  of  radium  present. 

*  Butherford  and  Chadwick,  Proc,  Phys.  Soc,  34,  p.  141,  1912. 


APPENDIX   A  659 

It  will  be  noted  that  in  these  methods  of  comparing  quantities  of 
radium,  it  is  not  necessary  to  open  the  tube  containing  the  radium. 
Such  a  method  of  estimation  is  only  possible  in  the  case  of  a  radio- 
active element  like  i*adium  which  emits  a  very  penetrating  radiation. 
It  is  important  that  the  tube  containing  the  radium  preparation  should 
be  hermetically  sealed  for  about  a  month  before  observations  are  made. 
In  this  way  the  possible  error  due  to  escape  of  emanation  and  conse- 
quent decrease  of  the  y  radiation  is  avoided. 

It  should,  however,  be  pointed  out  that  these  methods  of  comparing 
quantities  of  radium  are  only  applicable  when  the  preparation  does 
not  contain  radio-thorium  or  meso-thorium.  Both  of  these  latter 
substances  give  rise  to  y  rays  of  about  the  same  penetrating  power  as 
those  emitted  by  radium,  and  their  presence  can  only  be  detected  by 
further  examination  of  the  preparation. 

The  methods  above  outlined  can  be  used  not  only  for  comparing 
quantities  of  radium  but  also  for  comparing  quantities  of  radium 
eman^,tion  and  of  the  product  radium  C.  It  is  often  necessary  to 
obtain  a  measure  of  the  quantity  of  radium  emanation  contained  in  a 
sealed  tube.  About  four  hours  after  the  emanation  is  introduced,  the 
y  ray  effect  reaches  a  maximum,  and  thereafter  remains  very  nearly 
proportional  to  the  amount  of  emanation  in  the  tube.  The  y  ray  effect 
due  to  the  emanation  is  then  compared  with  that  due  to  the  standard 
quantity  of  radium,  and  expressed  in  terms  of  milligrams  of  radium. 

The  y  ray  activity  of  the  emanation  after  reaching  its  maximum 
decays  exponentially  with  the  time  with  a  half  value  period  of  3 '85 
days.  Consequently  the  amount  of  emanation  present  at  any  time 
can  be  calculated  from  observations  made  some  time  after  the  separa- 
tion of  the  emanation.  The  reason  that  the  y  ray  method  can  be 
used  both  for  radium  and  its  emanation  depends  on  the  fact  that  the 
penetrating  y  rays  arise  not  from  radium  itself  but  from  its  products 
radium  B  and  radium  C.  For  reasons  discussed  in  Section  197,  the 
quantity  of  emanation  is  about  0*8  per  cent,  less  than  that  determined 
by  direct  comparison  of  its  y  ray  effect  with  that  of  the  radium 
standard.  In  a  similar  way,  we  can  measure  by  the  y  ray  method  the 
amount  of  the  product  radium  0  in  terms  of  the  amount  in  equilibrium 
with  the  radium  standard.  In  this  case,  however,  it  is  desirable  to 
pass  the  rays  through  a  lead  screen  about  3  cms.  thick  in  order  to 
absorb  the  less  penetrating  y  rays  from  radium  B  (see  Section  197). 
It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  Hahn  has  utilised  the  y  ray  method  to 
standardise  very  active  preparations  of  meso-thonum  and  radio-thorium. 
Both  of  these  substances  give  rise  to  y  rays  of  approximately  the  same 
penetrating  power  as  those  from  radium.  Consequently  the  amount 
of  meso-thorium  present  may  conveniently  be  expressed  in  terms  of 
the  quantity  of  radium  which  would  give  the  same  y  ray  effect. 

Emariation  method.  The  accurate  determination  of  minute  quantities 
of  radium  is  often  of  such  importance  in  radio-active  work  that  it  is 
desirable  to  give  a  fairly  complete  account  of  the  most  suitable  methods 
adopted  for  this  purj)ose.     The  emanation  method  depends  on  the  feet 

42—2 


660  APPENDIX   A 

that  radium  produces  a  characteristic  emanation  of  a  comparatively 
long  period  of  transformation,  which  can  be  completely  separated  from 
radium  solutions.  If  a  radium  solution  is  contained  in  a  sealed  vessel, 
the  emanation  present  reaches  its  equilibrium  quantity  in  about  one 
month,  and  the  amount  present  is  then  proportional  to  the  content  of 
radium.  Since  bhe  emanation  can  be  completely  expelled  from  a 
solution  by  boiling,  the  amount  Q^  of  emanation  present  at  a  time  t 
after  boiling  the  solution  is  given  by  Qt/Q=  1  —  «'^',  whei-e  Q  is  the 
maximum  quantity  and  X=-180  (day)~^ ;  the  interval  of  collection 
being  expressed  in  days.  The  amount  of  emanation  in  the  specimen 
under  examination  can  be  compared  directly  with  the  amount  of 
emanation  from  a  standard  solution  by  introducing  the  emanation 
mixed  with  air  into  a  suitable  electroscope,  or  into  a  suitable  testing 
vessel  connected  with  an  electrometer.  Under  the  proper  conditions, 
the  saturation  currents  due  to  the  emanation  from  the  two  solutions 
are  proportional  to  the  quantities  of  radium  present.  For  comparisons 
of  this  kind,  it  is  necessary  to  prepai*e  a  standard  radium  solution. 
This  can  be  simply  done  in  the  following  way  : — a  quantity  of  radium 
salt  is  accurately  determined  by  the  y  ray  method  in  terms  of  the 
radium  standard.  Suppose,  for  exauiple,  the  radium  salt  contains  one 
milligram  of  radium.  This  radium  salt  is  dissolved  in  water  and 
hydrochloric  acid  added  to  ensure  complete  solution.  By  adding 
distilled  water,  the  volume  is  then  increased  to  a  known  amount, 
say  one  litre.  A  definite  fraction  of  this  solution,  about  1  c.c,  deter- 
mined by  weight  or  by  an  accurate  pipette  is  removed,  and  this  is 
again  diluted  to  one  litre.  Under  these  conditions  one  cubic  centi- 
metre of  the  last  solution  should  contain  1/1,000,000  of  a  milligram 
of  radium.  For  most  experimental  purposas,  this  will  serve  as  a 
convenient  standard  radium  solution,  for  it  gives  a  reasonable  rate  of 
leak  in  an  emanation  electroscope. 

This  method  of  solution  can  obviously  be  used  to  obtain  a  standard 
solution  of  any  strength  desired.    In  prejyaring  such  standard  solutions, 
it  is  essential  to  take  great  precautions  that  the  radium  is  initially  in 
solution,  and  that  the  solutions  are  thoroughly  mixed.     In  addition,  it 
is  necessary  to  add  hydrochloric  acid  to  the  solutions  to  ensure  that 
the  i-adiura  will  remain  permanently  dissolved.     The  importance  of 
this  procedure  is  exemplified  by  the  difficulties  that  arose  in  the  case 
of  the  first  standard  solutions  prepared  by  Rutherford,  where  no  acid 
was  added.     Eve*  found  some  years  later  that  a  large  part  of  the 
radium  had  been  precipitated  from  the  solution  in  a  non-emanating 
form  on  the  surface  of  the  glass  vessels.     The  amount  of  emanation 
to  be  obtained  from  such  solutions  was  consequently  much  less  than 
that  to  be  expected  from  the  amount  of  radium  present     The  method 
outlined  above  for  the  preparation  of  standard  solutions  was  used  by 
Bolt  wood  and  Rutherford  t.     These  solutions  are  now  over  five  years 
old,  and  some  recent  determinations  have  demonstrated  that  their 

*  Eve,  AtMT.  Joum.  Sei.  22,  p.  4,  1906. 

t  Rutherford  and  Boltwood,  Amer,  Joum,  Sci.  20,  p.  66,  1906;  22,  p.  1,  1906. 


APPENDIX  A  661 

strength  has  not  altered  during  this  interval,  showing  that  all  the 
radium  still  remains  in  solution. 

After  introduction  into  a  flask,  the  radium  solution  is  boiled  so  as 
to  expel  all  the  emanation  present ;  the  containing  flask  is  then  sealed 
before  the  solution  becomes  cold.  About  one  month  later  the  emana- 
tion approximately  reaches  its  equilibrium  amount,  and  is  then  removed. 
For  this  purpose  the  end  of  the  tube  is  opened  and  air  rushes  into  the 
partially  exhausted  vessel  so  that  no  emanation  can  escape.  The 
solution  is  boiled,  and  the  emanation  mixed  with  air  is  collected  over  a 
surface  of  boiling  water.  The  emanation  is  then  transferred  into  a 
partially  exhausted  electroscope.  Boltwood  has  shown  experimentally 
that  the  radium  emanation  is  completely  removed  from  a  solution  by 
rapid  boiling  for  several  minutes.  It  is  necessary  to  collect  the  emana- 
tion over  hot  water  in  order  to  prevent  its  partial  absorption  by  the 
water.  If  the  water  is  nearly  at  boiling  temperature,  the  absorption 
is  very  small  (see  Section  137).  The  rate  of  leak  due  to  the  emanation 
in  the  electroscope  increases  rapidly  at  first  and  then  more  slowly, 
reaching  a  maximum  at  about  three  hours  after  the  introduction  of  the 
emanation.  This  increase  is  due  to  the  production  by  the  emanation 
of  its  products,  radium  A,  B  and  C.  For  accurate  work,  it  is  desirable 
to  determine  the  rate  of  leak,  when  this  maximum  is  reached.  When 
the  measurements  are  completed,  the  electroscope  is  completely  freed 
from  emanation  by  aspiration  or  by  exhaustion,  and  the  instrument  is 
again  ready  for  use  when  the  active  deposit  has  decayed. 

This  emanation  method  is  a  very  certain  and  delicate  method  of 
determining  the  quantity  of  radium  in  a  solution.  The  emanation 
from  1/1,000,000  of  a  milligram  of  radium  gives  a  comparatively  rapid 
discharge,  and  with  care  1/100  of  this  quantity  can  be  measured  with 
certainty.  In  the  earlier  observations  of  the  amount  of  radium  in 
solutions,  it  was  usual  to  aspirate  air  through  the  solutions,  and  to 
measure  the  ionisation  produced  by  the  released  emanation  under 
definite  conditions  in  the  electroscope.  Unless  the  greatest  precautions 
are  taken  that  the  conditions  of  successive  experiments  are  identical, 
it  is  diflBcult  to  obtain  an  accurate  comparison  by  the  procedure.  The 
method  of  boiling  the  solution  is  undoubtedly  far  more  certain  and 
reliable. 


INTERNATIONAL  RADIUM  STANDARD 

A  number  of  magnitudes  connected  with  radium  are  capable  of 
measurement  with  considerable  accuracy,  for  example,  the  rate  of 
emission  of  a  particles,  the  production  of  helium,  the  volume  of  the 
emanation,  the  heating  effect,  and  the  total  ionisation.  The  values  of 
all  these  quantities  depend  on  the  purity  of  the  radium  standard  which 
is  employed.  In  order  to  compare  the  values  obtained  by  diflerent 
workers,  it  is  thus  of  great  importance  that  they  should  be  expressed 
in  terms  of  the  same  radium  standard.  In  order  to  meet  this  purpose, 
the  Congress  of  Radiology  and  Electricity  held  in  Brussels  in  1910 


662  APPENDIX  A 

appointed  a  Committee  to  make  arrangements  for  the  preparation  of 
an  International  Radium  Standard.  In  the  course  of  the  following 
year,  Mme  Curie  prepared  a  standard  containing  21*99  milligrams  of 
pure  radium  chloride  sealed  up  in  a  thin  glass  tube.  In  March  1912 
the  Committee  met  in  Paris  and  compared  the  standard  of  Mme  Curie 
with  similar  standards  prepared  by  Honigschmid  from  the  material 
in  the  possession  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  Vienna,  which  h«ui 
been  purified  for  atomic  weight  determinations  (see  page  472).  The 
Vienna  standard  consisted  of  three  tubes  containing  10  11,  31-7,  and 
40*43  milligrams  of  radium  chloride.  In  all  cases  the  preparations 
had  been  obtained  from  the  uraninite  at  Joachimsthal,  which  contains 
only  a  small  trace  of  thorium.  The  relative  quantities  of  radium  in 
the  standards  prepai'ed  in  Paris  and  Vienna  were  determined  by 
the  two  balance  methods  described  on  p.  658.  The  compai*i.son  showed 
that  the  standards  agreed  within  the  limits  of  error  of  measurement, 
and  certainly  within  1  part  in  300. 

The  standard  prepared  by  Mme  Curie  was  accepted  as  the  Inter- 
national Radium  Standard,  and  it  was  arranged  that  it  should  be 
preserved  in  the  Bureau  International  des  poids  et  mesures  at  Sevre 
near  Paris.  It  was  also  arranged  that  one  of  the  Vienna  preparations 
should  be  preserved  as  a  secondary  standard  in  Vienna. 

The  Committee  have  made  arrangements  for  the  preparation  of 
duplicate  standards  for  Oovernments  who  require  them.  The  cost  of 
the  radium  used  by  Mme  Curie  in  the  preparation  of  the  International 
Standard  has  been  generously  defrayed  by  Dr  and  Mrs  G.  T.  Beilby. 


APPENDIX  B 


THE  TRACKS  OF  IONISING  PARTICLES  IN  GASES 

We  have  referred  in  Section  60  to  the  method  devised  by  C.  T.  R. 
Wilson  of  rendering  visible  the  track  of  a  single  a  or  )8  particle  through 
air.  This  depends  on  the  fact  mentioned  in  Section  17  that  the  posi- 
tive and  negative  ions  become  centres  of  condensation  when  a  suitable 
supersaturation  of  the  water  vapour  is  produced  by  an  adiabatic  expan- 
sion. A  more  detailed  account  of  the  experimental  method  and  the 
results  obtained  have  been  communicated  in  a  recent  paper  to  the 
Royal  Society.     (Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  87,  p.  277,  1912.) 

By  a  timing  arrangement,  instantaneous  photographs  were  taken  of 
the  trails  of  particles  at  short  intervals  after  the  expansion.  These 
phot<^aphs  bring  out  in  a  striking  and  concrete  way  the  essential 
properties  of  ionising  agencies.  The  method  is  one  of  remarkable 
power,  and  promises  to  throw  much  light  on  the  distribution  and 
nature  of  the  ionisation  produced  by  the  radiations.  I  am  indebtecl  to 
Mr  C.  T.  R.  Wilson  for  the  photographs  shown  in  Figs.  1  and  2. 

Fig.  1  shows  the  magnified  trails  of  two  a  particles  expelled  from 
radium.  The  number  of  ions  produced  by  the  a  particle,  and  conse- 
quently the  number  of  drops,  is  so  large  that  the  trail  of  the  a  particle 
is  shown  by  a  continuous  line  and  the  individual  drops  are  not  visible. 
The  trail  on  the  left  is  seen  to  show  two  abrupt  bends,  the  first  through 
about  10-5",  the  second  through  about  43**.  These  are  undoubtedly 
due  to  the  "single"  scattering  of  the  a  particle,  the  explanation  of 
which  has  been  given  in  Section  74.  There  is  a  well-marked  spur  at 
the  second  bend,  which  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  ionisation  produced  by 
the  recoil  of  an  atom  in  consequence  of  the  collision  with  the  a  particle. 
This  velocity  of  recoil  has  been  calculated  in  certain  cases  by  the 
writer*. 

Wilson  found  that  the  great  majority  of  the  a  particles  showed  a 
characteristic  bend  or  hook  near  the  end  of  the  trail  The  chance  of 
a  "  single "  scattering  through  a  large  angle  increases  rapidly  with 
decrease  of  velocity  of  the  a  particle,  and  would  be  expected  to  be 
most  in  evidence  near  the  end  of  the  range  of  the  a  particle.     When 

*  Rutherford,  Phil,  Mag,  21,  p.  669,  1911. 


664  APPENDIX   D 

some  emanation  U  present    in  the  expansion  chamber,  the  complete 
track  of  the  a  particle  can  be  obtained.     The  beginning  of  the  Inil  ii 
market)  by  an  enlarged  head  in  which  the  cloud  is  of  gre 
than  elsewhere.     This  probably  represents  die  ionisatioD 
the  atom  from  which  the  a  particle  has  escaped. 

Fig.  2  showD  part  of  the  trail  of  two  fS  particles  libei 
passage  of  y  rays  through  the  expansion  chamber.  It  is  at 
ff  particle  follows  a  turtuous  path  due  to  scattering  by  the 
individual  ions  formed  in  the  gas  are  clearly  visible.  Th 
the  ionisation  along  the  pat.h  is  very  variable,  and  in  a 
cluster  of  iona  is  produced  showing  probably  that  a  ^  part 
speed  has  l>een  lil>erated  by  collision  with  the  atoms.  The 
of  Wilson  bring  out  clearly  that  the  ionisation  of  the  gaa  d  ' 

and  y  rays,  as  Bragg  tirst  supposed,  is  due  not  to  the  rayf 
bnt  tu  the  j8  particles  which  are  liberated  from  the  aton 
traversed  by  the  rays.  ! 

THE  COUNTING  OF  a  PAETICLES 

The  electrical  method  of  counting  a  particles  by  means  < 
meter  hac  been  descrilted  tn  Section  59.  Since  the  electroi 
responds  slowly  to  a  potential  difference  applied  to  it,  it  is 
to  count  accurately  by  this  method  when  more  than  ten 
enter  the  detecting  vessel  |>er  minute.  With  the  aid 
electrometer  (see  Section  42),  which  has  a  short  period 
and  rusjionds  rapidly  to  the  potential  difference  applied,  the  rapidi^ 
of  counting  is  much  increased*.  If  the  movements  of  the  quartz  fibre 
of  the  string  electrometer  are  photographically  recorded  on  a  moving 
him,  it  is  possible  to  detect  with  certainty  the  effect  of  each  individual 
a  puiticle  by  the  throw  of  the  tibre  even  when  1000  a  particles  enter 
the  detecting  vessel  per  minute. 

Fig.  3  shows  examples  of  the  photographic  record  of  the  electrical 
effect  of  the  a  particles  for  different  rates  of  entrance  of  the  a  particlei 
in  the  detecting  vessel.  The  upper  record  correspoads  to  the 
entrance  of  (iOO  a  particles  per  minute  into  the  detecting  vessel  and 
the  low(>r  record  to  900  per  minute.  The  film  was  moved  at  the  rate 
of  about  150  cms.  per  minute.  A  few  deflections  of  twice  the  nonnal 
length  are  clearly  seen.  These  repi'esent  the  entrance  of  two  a  partidM 
in  very  quick  succession.  The  entrance  of  a  particles  at  an  inteml  of 
1/100  second  is  easily  di.stinguished  on  the  record, 

*  See  Oeiger  and  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  94,  p.  618,  1913. 


Fig.  3. 
Track  of  p  particles 


Photographic  regietration  ot  a  p^rtialM  with  itring  eleotroiDatar 


APPENDIX  C 

Tables  of  decay  and  growth  of  radium  emanation, 

X= transformation  constant  of  emanation =*0075  (hr)"* 

=s -1800  (day)-*. 

e-^^= fraction  of  emanation  remaining  after  time  t. 

e-^'  =  fraction  of  equilibrium  amount  of  emanation  formed  in  t  days. 
The  value  of  «-^',  for  example  after  5  days  16  hours,  may  be 
obtained  by  multiplying  the  value  e-^^  for  ^  =  5  days  by  the 
value  e-^  for  ^  =  16  hours. 


Time  t 


0 
1  hr 


e-^t 


3 

4 
5 
6 

J) 
10 

11 

12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23  „ 

1  day 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 


TiXKX) 
•9925 
•9851 
•9777 
•9704 
•9632 
•95f;0 
•9489 
•9418 
•9347 
•9277 
•9208 
•9139 
•iK)71 
•9003 
•8936 
•8869 
•8803 
•8737 
•8672 
•8607 
•8543 
•8479 
•8416 
8353 
•6977 
•5827 
•4868 
•4066 
•3396 
•2837 


\-e-Kt 

Time  t 

•0000 

8  days 

•0075 

9 

•0149 

10 

•0223 

11 

•0296 

12 

•0368 

13 

•0440 

14 

•0511 

15 

•0582 

16 

•(K553 

17 

•0723 

18 

•0792 

19 

•0861 

20 

•0929 

21 

•0997 

22 

•1064 

23 

•1131 

24 

•1197 

25 

•1263 

26 

•1328 

27 

•1393 

28 

•1457 

29 

•1521 

30 

•1584 

40 

•1647 

50 

•3023 

60 

•4173 

70 

•5132 

80 

•5934 

90 

•6604 

100 

•7163 

e 


kf 


l-e-kf 


•2369 

•7631 

•1979 

•8021 

•1653 

•8347 

•13S1 

•8619 

•1153 

•8847 

•0963 

•9037 

•0S05 

•9195 

•0672 

•9328 

•0561 

•9439 

1    -0469 

•9531 

•0392 

•9608 

•0327 

•9673 

•0273 

•9727 

•0228 

•9772 

•0191 

•9809 

•0159 

•9841 

•0133 

•9867 

•0111 

•9889 

(2)  928 

•9907 

(2)  775 

•9923 

(2)  647 

•9935 

(2)  541 

•9946 

(2)452 

•9955 

(3)  747 

•9993 

(3)  123 

•9999 

(4)  204 

(5)  337 

(6)  558 

(7)  922 

— 

(7)  152 

The  numbers  in  brackets,  e.g,  (6)  refer  to  the  number  of  O's  before  the 
)t  significant  figure. 


666 


APPENDIX   C 


Exponential  Table. 

If  Pa  half- value  i)eriod  of  substaDce,  and  X=con8taut  of  transformation, 
average  life  Z = l/X » I'443P.  Taking  amount  of  matter  present  at  time  0  as 
1,  the  amount  remaining  after  a  time  Ma  c-^  or  fl-^Z-C-, 

As  an  example,  suppose  it  is  required  to  find  the  fraction  of  the  amount 
of  Ur.  X  which  remains  untransformed  after  55 '4  days.  The  period  is  24*6  dajs, 
average  life  L  is  35*5  days,  ;/Z-b55'4/35-5b:  1*560.  Amount  remaining  can  be 
deduced  by  interpolation  between  given  values  of  exponentials  in  table  for 
t/L^l'5  and  1*6,  or  more  simply,  since  e~^'^=e~^'^xe~'^y  by  multiplying 
value  for  //Z=l*5  by  value  for  f/Z  =  -06,  i.e.  amount  remaining  is  -223  X"^ 
or  -223  less  5*8  i)er  cent. 


.  _ 

■ 

— 

^   -  . 

^ 

\t  or 

ti  -A^  or 

\tor   , 

e-* 

^f   or 

\tot 

e- 

A'  or 

tIL 

e  -  f:L 

tIL 

e- 

■tIL 

tlL       . 

1 

e- 

-  f/L 

•00 

1-0000 

1-9 

•1496 

1 
4-7   ' 

(2) 

9(jy5 

•01 

•9900 

2-0 

•1353 

4-8   ' 

(2) 

82:iO 

•02 

•9802 

21 

•1225 

49   ' 

(2) 

7447 

•03 

•9704 

2-2  . 

•1108 

50 

(2) 

6738 

•04 

•9608 

2-3 

•1003 

51 

(2) 

6097 

•05 

•9512 

2-4 

(1) 

9072 

5-2   ! 

(2) 

5517 

•06 

•9418 

2-5 

8208 

5-3  ' 

(2) 

4992 

•07 

•9324 

2-6 

7427 

5-4   ' 

(2) 

4517 

•08 

•9231 

2-7 

6721 

5-5   ' 

(2) 

4087 

•09 

•9139 

2-8 

6081 

5-6   ' 

(2) 

3()98 

•1 

•9048 

2-9 

5502 

57   ' 

(2) 

3346 

•2 

•8187 

3-0 

4979 

5-8   ' 

(2) 

3028 

•3 

•7408 

3-1 

4506 

5-9   ' 

(2) 

2739 

•4 

•6703 

32  . 

4076 

60   ' 

1 

(2) 

2479 

•5 

•6065 

33 

3688 

7    ' 

(3) 

91 8H 

•6 

•5488 

34 

3337 

8    ' 

(3) 

3355 

•7 

•4966 

3-5 

3020 

^    1 

(3) 

1234 

•8 

•4493 

3-6 

2732 

10 

(4) 

4540 

•9 

•4066 

3-7 

2472 

11 

(4) 

1670 

1^0 

•3679 

3-8 

2237 

12    1 

(5) 

6144 

1-1 

.   3329 

3-9 

2024 

13    1 

(ft) 

2260 

1-2 

•3012 

40  ' 

1832 

14    1 

(6) 

8315 

13 

•2725 

41 

1 

1657 

15      ! 

(6) 

3059 

1-4 

•2466 

4-2  ; 

1500 

16 

(6) 

1125 

V5 

•2231 

43 

1357 

17    ' 

(.-) 

4140 

1-6 

!   ^2019 

4-4 

(1^ 

1228 

18    ' 

(7) 

1523 

1-7 

•1827 

4-5 

(1) 

nil 

19 

(») 

5603 

1-8 

•1653 

4-6  , 

/ 1  ^ 

1005 

20   i 

(8) 

2061 

The  numbers  in  brackets,  e.g.  (6),  refer  to  the  number  of  O's  before  tl 
first  significant  figure. 


APPENDIX   C 


667 


Tables  of  mass  of  electron, 

tno^mass  of  electron  at  alow  speeds. 

7n= transverse  mass  of  electron  at  any  speed. 

17= velocity  of  electron  in  cms.  per  sec. 
vle^ff,  p,  where  p  is  the  radius  of  curvatiu^  of  the  path  of  the  electron 
in  a  field  of  strength  H  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  projection. 

3= ratio  of  the  velocity  of  the  electron  to  the  velocity  of  light. 
7?n  is  taken  as  1*770x1(5^  electromagnetic  units. 


^ 

m/wo 
1-000 

,               mvje 

mv^le 

•01 

1-695x10 

1       5-oa5  X  io»        1 

•Of) 

1-001 

8'4a3     „ 

1-272x10" 

•10 

1-005 

l-703xK)5» 

5-109      „ 

•20 

1-020 

i         3-458     „ 

2-075  X  10»2 

•25 

1033 

4377     „ 

3-283      „ 

•30 

1  048 

!         5329     „ 

4-796      ,, 

•35 

;           1-067 

6-330     „ 

1         6-646      „ 

•40 

1  m\ 

•         7-397     „ 

8-876      ,, 

•45 

1120 

8^542     „ 

1-153  xlO'3 

•50 

1           1155 

9^7vS4     „ 

1         1-422      „ 

•55 

1197 

1         1-116x103 

!         1-841      „ 

•60 

1  -250 

1-271     „ 

2-288      „ 

•62 

1           1-274 

i         1-339     „ 

2-49^)      „ 

•64 

;           1301 

1-411     „ 

2-710     „ 

•66 

1-331 

1-489     „ 

2-948     „ 

•68 

1-364 

1-572     „ 

3-207      „ 

•70 

1400 

1661     „ 

3-488      „             1 

•72 

1-441 

1759     „ 

3-798      „             1 

•74 

1-487 

1  -865     „ 

4-140      „ 

•76 

1-538 

1-981     „ 

4-517      „ 

•78 

1  -598 

2-113     „ 

4-944      „ 

•80 

1-667 

2-260    „ 

5-424      „ 

•82 

1-747 

2-428     „ 

5-973      „ 

•84 

1  -843 

2-624     „ 

6-612      „ 

•86 

1  ^f  )0 

2-857     „ 

7-371      „ 

•88 

2105 

3-140     „ 

8-289      „ 

•90 

2^294 

3-499     „ 

9-448      „ 

•91 

2-412 

3-720     „ 

1-016x10" 

•92 

2-552 

3-979     „ 

1-098      „ 

•93 

2^721 

4-289     „ 

1-197      „ 

•f)4 

2-931 

4-670     „ 

1-317      „ 

•95 

3-203 

5-157     „ 

1-470      „ 

•96 

3-571 

5-810     „ 

1-673      „ 

•97 

4113 

6-762     „ 

1-968      „ 

•98 

5  025 

8-347     „ 

2-454      „ 

•99 

7  089 

1-190x10* 

3-533      „ 

•992 

7-922 

1-332     „ 

3-964      „             ; 

•J>94 

9142 

1-540     „ 

4-593      „ 

•996 

1119 

2072     „ 

6-190      „ 

•998 

15-82 

2-676     „ 

7-995      „ 

should  be  noted  that  the  energy  of  the  electron  for  velocities  comparable 
that  of  light  is  not  given  by  the  value  ^wt?*  (see  Planck,  Phy$.  Zeii,  7, 
},  1906). 


668  APPENDIX  C 

Radio-active  elements  and  their  constants. 

Abbreviations, 

A  =  atomic  weight. 

P  =  time  to  be  half  transformed  expressed  in  sees,  mins,  hours,  days 
or  years. 

L  =  average  life  =  1  '443  P. 

\=  1/Z  = '6931//*  =  transformation  constant  expressed  in  (sec)"', 
(min)-^,  etc. 

R  =  range  of  a  rays  in  air  at  760  mms.  and  15"*  C. 

fjL  =  absorption  coefficient  of  fi  rays  in  terms  of  cms.  of  aluminium. 

fii  =  absorption  coefficient  of  y  rays  in  terms  of  cms.  of  lead. 

fi  =  velocity  of  group  of  P  rays  in  terms  of  the  velocity  of  light. 

The  products  of  each  of  the  three  main  series  are  placed  in  their 
genetic  order.     A  branch  product  is  suitably  indicated. 

The  latest  data  for  ranges  of  a  rays  obtained  by  Dr  Geiger  have 
been  added.  Tlie  numbers  given  are  in  some  cases  diffi?rent  from 
those  given  in  the  main  body  of  the  book. 

Uranium — Badium  Series, 

Uranium  1.     ^  2385 ;  P5  x  10*  yrs;  Z7-2xlO»yrs;  A.  1-4x10-" 
TT  J  yrs ;  a  rays,  R  2-50. 

^  Uranium  2.     A  2345;  P  10«  yrs?;  a  rays,  Ji  290;  non-separable 
j   from  uranium  1. 

Uranium  Y.  A  230-5?;  P  1-5  dys;  L  2-16  dys;  X  -46  day;  pnys, 
fjL  300;  separated  from  uranium  with  ferric  hydroxide;  exists 
in  small  quantity,  probably  branch  product. 

IJranium  X.  A  2305  ;  P  24-6  dys ;  L  355  dys  ;  X  -0282  day; 
P  +  y  rays ;  P  rays  continuous  spectrum,  /a  510,  15  ;  y  rays  in 
small  quantity  fii*72 ;  soluble  in  water ;  separated  from 
uranium  with  ferric  hydroxide  and  barium  sulphate ;  chemical 
properties  allied  to  thorium. 

Ionium.  A  2305;  P2x  10*yrs?;  L  3-5  x  10»  yrs?;  a  rays,  i?  3*00; 
chemical  properties  of  thorium  from  which  it  is  non-separable. 

Radium.  A  226 ;  P  2000  yrs ;  L  2880  yrs ;  X  -000346  yr ;  o  +  jS 
rays,  /?  3-30;  weak  fi  rays  /a  200,  two  groups  fi  -52,  '65; 
chemical  properties  analogous  to  barium. 

Emanation.  A  222;  P3-85dys;  92-4  hrs;  Z  5-55  dys;  X -1800 day, 
•0075  hr,  2083  x  10"«  sees;  a  rays,  B  4-16;  inert  gas,  density 
1 11  H,  boiling  point  -  65"  C,  critical  point  104-5'  Q,  density 
solid  5  to  6,  condenses  at  low  pressures  about  — 150'  C.;  diffu- 
sion constant  in  air  0*1 ;  absorption  coefficient  in  water  at 
14'  C.  '303  ;  volume  from  one  gram  Ra  -59  cub.  mm. 

Radium  A.  A  218;  P  30  mins;  L  4*32  mins;  X  -231  min.;  orsys, 
B  4-75 ;  behaves  as  solid,  carries  positive  charge,  voUtile 
in  H  about  400',  in  O  about  550'. 


APPENDIX   C  669 

Radium  B.  A  214;  P  26*8  mins ;  L  387  mins ;  X  -0258  min. ; 
)8  +  y  rays;  )8  rays,  /tx  13-1,  80,  strongest  groups  ^  -36,  "41, 
•63,  -70,  '74 ;  y  rays  weak  in  intensity,  /aj  4  to  6 ;  metal 
volatile  about  400*  C.  in  H ;  separated  in  pure  state  by  recoil 
from  radium  A,  also  by  volatilisation  and  by  electrochemical 
methods,  precipitated  on  zinc. 

Radium  C.  A  214;  /^  19-6  mins;  L  28*1  mins;  X  -0355  min. ; 
a  +  )3  +  y  rays ;  i2  6*94 ;  fi  rays  complex  /a  13*2,  53,  strongest 
groups  ^  -786,  -862,  -949,  '957  ;  y  rays,  ^i  -50 ;  separated  from 
solution  of  active  deposit  on  nickel  plate,  volatile  in  H  about 
430^  in  O  about  1000". 
Radium  C,.  A  210?;  F  14  mins;  L  2-0  mins;  X  -495  min.; 
^  rays,  /tx  13 ;  obtained  by  recoil  from  pure  radium  C,  present 
in  small  quantity ;  probably  branch  product. 

Radium  D  (Radio-lead).  ^  210;  P  16-5  yrs;  L  238  yrs;  X  -042  yr; 
soft  ^  rays,  /tx  1 30,  groups  )8  '33,  '39  ;  alwa3's  separated  from 
uranium  minerals  with  lead,  no  methods  of  separation  from 
lead  yet  known. 

Radium  E.  ii  210  ;  PS-Odys;  Z7-2dys;  X -139  day;  )8  +  yray8; 
)3  rays  complex,  continuous  spectrum,  /a  43 ;  y  rays  very 
feeble  in  intensity  and  easily  absorbed  ;  separated  from  solu- 
tion of  radium  D  on  nickel  and  by  electrolysis. 

Radium  F  (Polonium).  A  210 ;  F  136  dys ;  L  196  dys ;  X  -00510 
day ;  a  rays,  R  3*77 ;  separated  from  mineral  with  bismuth, 
deposited  from  solution  on  bismuth  or  copper-plate  ami 
separable  by  electrolysis;  probably  converted  into  lead. 

Actinmm  Series, 

itinium  rayless ;  period  unknown  ;  probably  branch  product  at  some 

point  of  the  uranium  series ;   chemical  properties  allied  to  lan- 
thanum, 
idio-actinium.     F  19*5  dys;  L  28*1  dys;  X  '0355  day ;  a  + /S  rays; 

B  4  "60;  weak  fi  rays,  ft  140;  not  precipitated  by  ammonia  and 

adsorbed  by  finely  divided  sulphur. 
Jtmium  X.     F  10*2  dys;  L  147  dys;  X   068  day;  a  rays,  R  4-40; 

chemical  properties  analogous  to  radium, 
cianation.     /*  3-9  sees  ;  Z  5*6  sees  ;  X  '178  sec. ;  a  rays,  R  b'70 ;  inert 

gas,  condenses  between  -  120**  and  -  150^ 
Jtinium  A.     F  002  sec. ;  L  0029  sec.  ;  X  350  sees ;  a  rays,  R  6*50 

analogous  to  radium  A. 
itinium  B.     F  36  mins;  L  52  mins;  X   '0193  min.;  soft  p  rays 

analogous  to  radium  B. 
^tinium  C.     F  2-1  mins  ;  L  3*0  mins;  X  -33  min. ;  a  rays,  R  5*40 

analogous  to  radium  C. 
ttinium  D.      F  4*71  mins;   L  6-8  mins;   X  '147  min.;  ^  +  y  rays 

ft 28-5;  y  rays,  ftj -217  for  aluminium;  obtained  by  recoil  from 

actinium  C. 


670  APPENDIX   C 

Thorium  Series. 

Thorium.     A2S2:  P  1'3  x  lO^**  yrs;  L  1-9  x  10"»yrs;  Xn-S  x  10-"yl^ 

a  rays,  i?  272. 
Mesothorium  1.     A  228;  P  5-5  yrs;  L  79  yrs;  X  -126  yr;  rayless 

chemical  properties  analogous  to  radium  from  which  it  is  nou 

separable. 
Mesothorium  2.     ^4  228;  /'6-2hr8;  /:8-95hrs;  X-112hr;  /S+yrays 

P  rays,  /i  20  to  38-5,  groups  )3  -37,  "39,  -43,  -50,  -57,  -60,  -60 

y  rays   penetrating   /a,  -53 ;   separated   from   mesothorium    1    h\ 

precipitating  zirconium  in  solution  and  by  electrolysis. 
Radio-thorium.     -4  228 ;   P  2-0  yrs;  L  2-88  yrs;  X  -347  yr ;    a  rays 

R  3'87  ;  chemically  allied'    j  t .  "  '    *i,  ?       separable  from  it. 
Thorium  X.     A  22i;  P  3*65  dys;  L  5-27  uys;  X  -190  day;  a  ray> 

/^  4*30 ;  analogous  in  chemical  properties  to  radium. 
Emanation.    A  220 ;  P 54  sees ;  L  78 sees ;  X  -0128 sec. ;  a  rays,  P 5(K» 

inert   gas,    condenses   at   low   pressures   between   —  1 20'  C.   and 

Thorium  A.     A   216 ;   P  'li  sec;   L  '20  sec;  X  4*95  sees;   a  ray^ 

/?6-70;  positively  charged  and  collected  on  negative  electrode. 

Thorium  B.     A  212;  P  10-6  hrs;  L  15-3  hrs;   X    0654  hr;  fi  rays, 

/x  110,  groups  ^   *63,   *72 ;  analogous  in  chemical  properties  t< 

radium  B. 

(  Th.  Cj.     ii  212  ;  P  60  mins ;  L  846  mins ;  X  -01 18  min. 
a  +  P  rays;  P  4*80;  fi  rays  /i  15*6;  y  rays  weak 
analogous  in  chemical  properties  to  radium  C. 
[  Th.  Ca.     ^  212  ;  P  very  short? ;  a  rays,  P  8*60. 
Thorium  D.     A  208  ;  P  31  mins;  L  4*47  mins;   X  -224  min.;  fi-^y 
rays;  )8  rays  fx  24-8,  for  thorium  C  +  D  /a  18*8,  groups  for  Th. 
C  +  D,  )3 '29,  '36,  -93 — -95;   y  rays  /ii '46 ;' separated  by  recoil 
from  thorium  C ;  possibly  transformed  into  bismuth. 


Thorium  C.  - 


INDEX 


r^  .,,,j»jnf 


-    1 1 


a  ravs 

nature  of,  9 

difficulty  of  saturation  with,  32 
trails  of,  by  condensation  method,  49 
total  ionisation  by,  in  different  gases, 

65 
electroscope  for  measurement  of,  90 
use  of,  for  ionisation  standards.  111 
general  properties  of,  114  et  seq. 
discovery  of,  118 
magnetic   and  electric  deflection  of, 

120 
magnetic    and  electric  deflection    of 

homogeneous,  123  et  seq. 
counting  of,  by  electrical  methods, 

128  et  seq. 
counting  of,  by  scintillations,  133 
detection  of,  by  condensation  method, 

134 
charge  carried  by,  135 
chemical  nature  of,  137 
connection  of,  with  helium,  139,  556 
retardation  of,  141 
photographic    efifect    of,    from    thick 

layers,  143 
absorption  of,  146 
ionisation  curves  for  pencils  of,  148 
ionisation  due  to  one  a  particle,  153 
ionisation    curves    for,    in    different 

ganes,  155 
explanation  of  the  ionisation  curve 

for,  166 
energy  required  to  produce  an  ion  by, 

158 
decrease  of  ionisation  with  distance 

for,  159 
range  of,  161 

stopping  power  of,  in  different  sub- 
stances, 165 
secondary  radiations  from,  170 
delta  rays  from,  170 
recoil  radiation  from,  170,  174,  401 
nature  of  recoil  radiation  from,  174 


fr       the  pages 

a  rays  (cont.) 
ionisation  due  to  recoil  atom  from,  179 
scattering  of,  180 
theory  of  scattering  of,  in  thin  films, 

184 
probability  variations  in  emission  of, 

186 
double  scintillations  from,  191 
phosphorescence    produced    by,    296 

et  seq. 
scintillations  in    zino    sulphide    by, 

297 
effect  of  continued  bombardment  of, 

on  zinc  sulphide,  300 
luminosity  in  gases  produced  by,  302 
photographic  effect  of,  305 
effect  of,  in  producing  halos,  309 
distribution  of,  from  thin  films,  312 
decomposition  of  water  by,  317 
possible  transformation  of  matter  by, 

320 
complex  nature  of,  from  uranium,  448 
decay  of   active  deposit    of    radium 

measured  by,  487  et  seq. 
complex  nature  of,  from  thorium  C, 

539 
connection    of,    with    production    of 

helium,  556  et  seq. 
connection  of,  with  heat  emission,  571 
heating  effect  of,  577 
chauge  of  valency  due  to  expulsion 

of,  606 
relation  between  range  of,  and  period 

of  transformation,  607 
possible  origin  of,  621 
connection  of,  with  aurora,  654 
photograph  of  trails  of,  663 
photographic  record  of,  664 
Abraham 

electrical  mass  of  charged  particle,  71 
Absorption  of  a  rays 
by  solids  and  gases,  146 
theory  of,  by  matter,  148 


672 


INDEX 


Absorption  of  B  rays 

exponential  law  of,  211,  223 

effect  of  conditions  on  measurement 
of,  224 

table  of  coefficients  of,   for  /3  rays 
from  different  prodacts,  225 

connection  of,  for  fi  rays  with  chemical 
constitution,  ^6 

from  uranium  X  by  elements,  226, 
233 

by  liquids,  228 

by  radio-active  matter,  229 

from  radium  by  air,  229 

theories  of,  230 

of  homogeneous,  234 

variation  of,  with  speed,  238 
Absorption  of  emanations 

by  liquids,  375 

by  solids  and  charcoal,  378 
Absorption  of  7  rays 

from  radium,  258 

variation  of,  with  conditions,  261 

connection  of,  with  density,  263 

by  gases,  266 

table  of,  for  radio-active  products,  267 

variation  of,  with  temperature,  293 
Actinium 

discovery  of,  18  et  seq. 

emanation  from,  19 

connection  with  emanium,  19,  519 

spectrum  of  luminosity  of,  304 

activity  of,  in  uranium  minerals,  447 

history  of  discovery  of,  519 

chemical  properties  of,  520 

period  of,  521 

radiations  from,  521 

connection  of,  with  uranium  series, 
521 

origin  of,  as  branch  product,  522 

analysis  of  active  deposit  of,  523 

series  of  transformations  of,  533 

relation  between  range  of  a  rays  and 
period  of  transformation   for  pro- 
ducts of,  607 
Actinium  A 

discovery  and  properties  of,  396,  523 
Actinium  6 

period  and  properties  of,  524 

volatilisation  of,  526 

radiations  from,  532 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 
Actinium  C 

separation  and  properties  of,  525 

period  of,  526 

volatilisation  of,  526 

possible  complexity  of,  532 

electro- chemical  properties  of,  603 
Actinium  D 

separation  and  properties  of,  527 

volatility  of,  527 


Actinium  D  (cont.) 

radiations  from,  532 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  6(^ 
Actinium  emanation 

rapid  emission  of,  19 

decay  of,  351 

effect  of  conditions  on  escape  of,  359 

temperature  of  condensation  of,  371 

absorption  of,  by  liquids,  377 

absorption  of,  by  charcoal,  380 

diffusion  of,  387 

number  of  a  particles  expelled  by,  395 

transformation  of,  524 
Adams 

range  of  a  particles  in  gases,  166 

presence  of  radium  emanation  in  tap- 
water,  641 
Adams  and  Eve 

effect  of  pressure  on  7  ray  activity  of 
radium,  505 
Age 

of  radio-active  minerals,  562,  598 

of  geological  strata,  566 

of  earth,  644,  653 

of  sun,  655 
Allen  (S.  J.) 

compensation    method    of   measure- 
ment, 103 

absorption  of  /3  rays  by  liqaids,  228 

velocity  of  /3  rays  exdted  by  7  rays, 
274 

thorium   emanation  in   atmosphere, 
626 

activity  of  snow,  627 
Allen  (S.  J.)  and  Rutherford 

active  matter  in  the  atmosphere,  625 
Allen  (H.  S.)  and  Blythswood  (Lord) 

radium  emanation  in  hot  springSt  641 
Angerer 

on  the  energy  of  /3  rays  excited  by 
X  rays,  288 
Angstrom 

heating  effect  of  radium,  570 
Antonoff 

properties  of  uranium  T,  454 

period  of  radium  D,  513 

period  of  radium  £,  514 
Armstrong  and  Lowry 

theory  of  radio-activity,  413 
Aschkinass 

charge  carried  by  a  rays,  156 
Ashman 

amount    of    radium    emanation  io 
atmosphere,  633 
Atmosphere 

discovery  of  active  matter  in,  624 

theory  of  collection  of  active  matter 
in,  627 

effect  of  meteorological  conditions  on 
active  matter  in,  fiS& 


INDEX 


673 


Atmosphere  (eont.) 

distribation  of  active  matter  in,  630 

amount  of  radium  emanation  in,  633 

origin  of  penetrating  radiation  in,  634 

ionisation  of,  637 

absorption  of  7  rays  from  sun  in,  655 
Atoms 

number  of,  in  one  gram  of  H,  140 

constitution  of,  617 

structure  of,  to  explain  scattering,  619 

Saturnian  type  of,  620 

structure  and  mode  of  disintegration 
of,  620 
Aurora 

radio-active  origin  of,  654 
Autunite 

luminosity  of,  302 

y3  rays 

nature  of,  9 

general  properties  of,  114  et  seg, 
discovery  of,  193 

magnetic    deflection    of,    by    photo- 
graphic method,  194 
complexity  of,  196 
magnetic    deflection    of,    by  electric 

method,  197 
charge  carried  by,  198 
determination  of  elm  and  variation 

with  speed  for,  204 
passage  of,  through  matter,  209 
scattered  or  reflected,  212 
scattering  of  transmitted,  218 
scattering  of,  by  thin  sheets  of  matter, 

219 
absorption  of,  223 
connection    of   absorption    of,    with 

chemical  constitution,  226 
absorption  of,  by  air,  229 
total  ionisation  produced  by,  230,  579 
theories  of  absorption  of,  230 
absorption  of  homogeneous,  234 
variation  of  absorption  of,  with  speed, 

238 
retardation  of,  in  traversing  matter, 

240 
variation  of  ionisation  with  velocity 

of,  245 
distribution  of  velocity  of,  in  radium, 

250 
emission  of  homogeneous  groups  of, 

252 
connection  of  y  rays  with,  270 
excited  by  7  rays.  271 
incidence  and  emergence  (i  rays  excited 

by  7  rays,  273 
variation  of  amount  of,  excited  with 

material,  274,  278 
production  of  7  rays  by,  282 
origin  of  energy  of,  from  7  rays,  288 

R.  R.-A. 


p  rays  {cont.) 

phosphorescence    produced    by,    296 
et  seq. 

decay  of    luminosity    produced    by, 
301 

photographic  efiFect  of,  305 

distribution  of,  from  uranium,  313 

decomposition  of  water  by,  319 

decay  of   active  deposit    of    radium 
measured  by,  493 

variation  of  distribution  of,  with  tem- 
perature, 504 

heating  effect  of,  from  radium,  578 

origin  of,  in  transformations,  610 

relation    between    groups    of,    from 
radium,  613 

transformation  of  energy  of,  into  7 
rays,  613 

connection  of,  with  aurora,  654 

photographs  of  trails  of,  664 
V.  Baeyer 

retardation  of  /3  rays,  244 
V.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  Meitner 

homogeneous  groups  of  3  rays,  212, 
252 

velocity  of  /3  rays  from  radium,  474 
Balance  methods 

of  measuring  ionisation  currents,  103 

of  comparing  quantities  of  radium, 
658 
Barium  platinocyanide 

luminosity  of,  298,  299 
Barkla 

characteristic  Bontgen  rays,  85,  291 

absorption    of    characteristic    radia- 
tions, 611 
Barnes  and  Rutherford 

heating  effect  of  radium  and  its  pro- 
ducts, 672 

heating  effect  of  a,   /3  and  7   rays, 
578 
Barratt 

ranges  of  a  particles   from   thorium 
emanation,  164,  535 
Barratt  and  Marsden 

probability  distribution  of  a  particles, 
190 

absence  of  doubles   in   scintillations 
from  uranium,  448 

analysis  of  a  radiations  from  thorium 
C,  539 
Bary 

phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 
rays,  297 
Ba8ker\dlle  and  Kunz 

phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 
rays,  299 
Bateman 

theory   of   successive   changes,   418, 
422 


43 


674 


INDEX 


Bateman,  Geiger  and  Rutherford 
probability  variations  of  a  particles, 
188 
Beattie,  B. 

theory  of  electrometer,  97 
Beattie,  Kelvin  (Lord)  and  Smolan 

discharging  action  of  uranium  rays,  9 
Becker 

conductivity  of  dielectrics  under  ra- 
dium rays,  326 
Becquerel,  H. 
discovery  of   photographic  effect  of 

uranium,  7 
phosphorescence  of  uranium  salts,  7 
discharging  action  of  uranium,  8 
reflection,    refraction,    and   polarisa- 
tion of  uranium  rays,  9 
radiations,  types  of,  from  uranium,  9 
magnetic  deflection  of  a  rays,  122 
curvature  of  a  rays  in  magnetic  field, 

144 
magnetic  deflection  of  /9  rays,  193 
complexity  of  /3  rays  froih  radium, 

196 
deflection  of  p  rays  in  electric  field, 

204 
discovery  of  y  rays,  257 
phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 

rays,  296 
luminosity   of   crystals    of    uranium 

nitrate,  302 
action  of  radium  rays  on  phosphorus, 

315 
conductivity  of  dielectrics  under  ra- 
dium rays,  326 
separation  of  uranium  X,  331,  454 
structure  of  the  atom,  410 
Beilby 
phosphorescence  produced  by  j9  and 
7  rays,  299 
Bemont  (G.),  M.  and  Mme  Curie 

discovery  of  radium,  15 
Bergwitz 

decomposition  of  water  by  polonium, 
318 
Berry 

separation  of  uranium  X  by  barium, 
454 
Berthelot 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  quartz,  308 
Beryl 

origin  of  helium  in,  565 
Bestelmeyer 

determination    of    e/wt    for    cathode 
rays,  208 
Bialobjesky 

conductivity  of   hydrocarbons   under 
radium  rays,  326 
Birkeland 

theory  of  aurora,  654 


Bismuth 

separation  of  polonium  with,  20 
deposit  of  polonium  on,  21 
possible    end    product    of    thorium, 
599 
Blanc 

thorium  emanation    in  atmosphere, 

626 
active  sediment  containing  thoriam 

products,  642 
amount  of  thorium  in  rocks,  649 
Blanquies  (Mdlle) 

complex  nature  of  actinium  G,  532 
Blythswood  (Lord)  and  Allen  (H.  S.I 
radium   emanation    in   hot  springs, 
641 
Bohm-Wendt  and  v.  Schweidler 
conductivity    of    oils    under  radiom 
rays,  326 
Boiling  point 

of  radium  emanation,  483 
Boltwood 
discovery  of  ionium,  21,  456 
range  of  a  particles  from  ionium,  162 
activity  of  uranium  minerals,  446 
relative  proportion  of  uranium  and 

ionium,  457 
activity  of  ionium,  458 
life  of  radium,  459 
constancy  of  radium-uranium  ratio 

in  minerals,  460 
production  of  radium  by  uranium,  465 
properties  of  actinium,  520 
activity    of    actinium    in    uraniom 

minerals,  521 
activity  of  thorium  minerals,  546 
separation  of  meso-thorium,  547 
amount  of  helium  in  minerals,  564 
lead  as  end  product  of  radium,  597 
amount  of  lead  in  uranium  minerals, 

597 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs, 

641 
method  of  measurement  of  amoant 
of  radium  emanation  in  water,  642 
estimation    of    small    quantities  of 
radium,  660 
Boltwood  and  Rutherford 
amount  of  radium  in  uranium  mine- 
rals, 16,  462 
action  of  emanation  on  paraffin,  815 
rate  of  production  of  heUum  by  ra- 
dium, 557 
production  of   helium   by  poloniom 
and  ionium,  560 
Boyle 
effect    of    surface    condensation  of 

emanations,  373 
vapour  pressure  of  radium  emana- 
tion, 374 


INDEX 


675 


Boyle  (cont.) 

absorption  of  radium  emanation  by 
liquids,  376 

absorption  of  thorium  emanation  by 
charcoal,  379 
Bra«g 

total    ionisation    by   a    particles    in 
different  gases,  64 

corpuscular  theory  of  X  rays,  84 

emission  of  a  rays,  123 

curvature    of    a    rays    in    magnetic 
field,  144 

theory  of  absorption  of  a  rays,  147 

determination    of   range    of    a   rays 
from  uranium  and  thorium,  162 

stopping  power  of  combination  of  two 
plates,  168 

on  tlie  range  of  ^  particles,  230 

incidence  and  emergence  /3  radiation, 
275 

variation  of  y  ray   ionisation    with 
material  of  electroscope,  278 

corpuscular  theory  of  y  rays,  289 

origin  of  ionisation  by  X  rays,  293 
Bragg  and  Cooke 

ionisation  curve  for  a  rays  in  dif- 
ferent gaucs,  167 
Bragg  and  Kleeman 

difficulty  of  saturation  with  a  rays,  33 

absorption  of  a  rays,  147 

measurement  of  ranges  of  a  particle 
in  different  substances,  165 
Bragg  and  Madsen 

variation  of  emergence  /3  radiation 
with  atomic  weight,  275 
Bronson 

construction    of   radio-active    resist- 
ance, 102 

decay  of  thorium  emanation,  351 

number  of  a  particles   from  emana- 
tions, 395,  539 

effect   of   temperature   on   decay   of 
active  deposit  of  radium,  488 

decay    of    a   ray   activity    of   active 
deposit  of  radium,  490 

effect   of   temperature   on    decay   of 
products  of  radium,  503 

period  of  actinium  B,  525 

analysis  of    active  deposit    of   acti- 
nium, 525 
Bronson  and  Wellisch 

charge  on  active  deposit,  399 
Brooks  (Miss) 

apparent  volatilisation  of  radium  B, 
175 

decay  of  active  deposit  of  radium,  492 

analysis  of  active  deposit  of  actinium, 
525 

separation  of  actinium  C  by  electro- 
lysis, 526 


Brooks  (Miss)  and  Bntherford 
absorption  of  a  rays,  146 
diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  383 
decay  of  active  deposit  of   radium, 

487 
active  deposit  of  thorium,  536 
Bucherer 
variation  of  mass  of  electron   with 
speed,  71,  207 
Biichner 
activity  of  potassium,  588 
amount  of  radium  in  rocks,  646 
Bumstead 
emission  of  delta  rays,  173 
energy  of  p  rays  excited  by  X  rays, 

288 
radium   and  thorium  emanation  in 
atmosphere,  626,  641 
Bumstead  and  Wheeler 
decay  of  radium  emanation,  352 
diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  385 
Burton 
presence    of    radium    emanation    in 
petroleum,  642 
Burton  and  McLennan 
radio-activity  of  ordinary'  materials, 

593 
penetrating    7  rays  in   atmosphere, 
594,  634 

Callendar 

metliod  of  measuring  small  heating 

effects,  585 
Cameron  and  Bamsay 
decomposition   of    gases   by  a   rays, 

316 
rate  of  decomposition   of    water  by 

radium,  318 
transformation  of  matter  by  a  rays, 

320 
volume  of  radium  emanation,  480 
spectrum  of  radium  emanation,  482 
Campbell  (N.  R.) 
activity  of  rubidium  and  potassium, 

12 
construction  of  high  resistances,  102 
velocity  of  expulsion  of  delta  rays, 

171 
explanation  of  emission  of  delta  rays, 

173 
comparison  of  emergent  and  incident 

delta  radiation,  174 
theory  of  probability  variations  of  a 

particles,  188 
absorption  of  /3  rays  by  liquids,  228 
discontinuous  nature  of  y  rays,  291 
absorption  of  /3  ravs  from  potassium, 

588 
activity  of  potassium  as  atomic  pro- 
perty, 588 

43—2 


676 


INDEX 


Campbell  (N.  R.)  {cont,) 

activity  of  rubidium,  589 

radio-activity  of  ordinary  matter,  593 
Campbell  and  Wood 

activity  of  potassium  salts,  587 

diurnal   variation    of    ionisation    in 
closed  vessels,  635 
Canal  rays 

properties  of,  81  et  seq. 
Cathode  ray 

discovery  and  properties  of,  76  et  seq. 
Cermak  and  Schmidt  (H.  W.) 

effect   of   temperature    on   decay   of 
products  of  radium,  503 
Chad  wick 

absorption  of  y  rays  by  gases,  265 

production  of  7  rays  by  /3  rays,  282 
Chadwick  and  Butherford 

7  ray  activity  of  emanation,  498 

balance  method  of  comparing  radium 
standards,  658 
Changes 

(see  Transformations) 
Characteristic  radiations 

of  elements,  85,  611 
Charge 

carried  by  an  ion,  50  et  seq. 

value  of,  used  for  calculation,  53 

carried  by  a  particle,  135 

carried  by  /3  rays,  198 

carried  by  /3  rays  from    radium   B 
and  C,  202  et  seq, 

nature    and    origin    of,    carried    by 
active  deposit,  399 
Chaumont 

diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  384 
Chemical  action 

produced   by   a,  /3  and  7  rays,  314 
et  seq. 

produced   on   water   by   a,   /3  and  7 
rays,  317 

amount  of,  in  water,  319 
Chemistry 

of  radio-active  bodies,  600  et  seq. 
Cheveneau  and  P.  Curie 

magnetic  properties  of  radium,  474 
ChUd 

potential  gradient,  67 

variation  of  current  with  voltage  for 
surface  ionisation,  67 
Classen 

determination    of    ejm    for    cathode 
rays,  208 
Clock 

radium,  199 
Clouds 

formation    of,    by    condensation    of 
water  round  ions,  46  et  seq. 
Collie  and  Kamsay 

spectrum  of  radium  emanation,  482 


Collision 

ionisation  by,  36  et  seq. 

detection  of  a  particle  by  ionisatioD 
due  to,  129 
Colouration 

of  bodies  by  radium  rays,  307 

of  glass,  307,  311 

theoiy  of,  309 

of  mica  plates,  309 

of  bunsen  flame  by  radium,  471 
Concentration 

decay    of    radium    emanation   inde- 
pendent of,  355 

of   active    deposit   on    the   cathode, 
398 
Condensation 

of  water  on  ions,  46  et  seq. 

of  emanations,  366 

temperature  of,  for  emanations,  366 
Condensers 

use  of,  in  measurements  of  currents, 
108 

construction  of,  with  small  capacity. 
110 
Conductivity 

of    gases  produced  by   a,   /3  and  y 
rays,  62  et  seq. 

of  radium  solutions,  323 

of  dielectrics  under  radium  rays,  S24 
Constants 

values  of  atomic  and  radio-active,  140 

meaning  of  radio-active,  341 
Contamination 

by  radio-active  substances,  112 
Cooke 

natural  ionisation  in  electroscope,  594 

presence  of  7  rays  from  earth,  594, 63-5 
Cooke  and  Butherford 

penetrating  radiation  from  the  earth, 
594,  635 
Cosmical  radio-activity 

discussion  of,  653 
Counting  of  a  particles 

by  electric  method,  128 

by  scintillation  method,  133 

by  cloud  method,  134 

by  photographic  method,  306 

by  string  electrometer,  664 
Crookes  (Sir  William) 

cathode  rays,  76 

nature  of  a  rays,  119 

scintillations  due  to  a  rays  in  zinc 
sulpliide,  133 

change  of  colour  in  diamond  due  to 
radiations,  299 

discovery  of  uranium  X,  330 

origin  of  heat  energy  of  radium,  412 
Crookes  and  Dewar 

spectrum  of  phosphoresoent  light  of 
radium,  303 


INDEX 


677 


ring  of  /3  rays  from  nraniam, 

Ting  of  j3  rays  by  thin  screens, 

I  drop  in  absorption  onrve  for 

ays,  224 

ption  of  p  rays  from  traniom  X 

elements,  227 

ction  of  scattering  with  chemical 

stitation,  227 

ption   of  homogeneoQs  /3  rays, 

ization 

of  /3  rays  on,  317 
of,  on  activity  of  nraniam,  458 

tion  of,  479 

^) 

5tic  deflection  of  /3  rays,  193 

ctivity  of  liquids  under  radium 

3,  324 

of  radium  emanation,  352 
of    temperature    on  decay  of 

mation,  355 

)ution  of  active  deposit,  392 

e  of  the  emanation,  411 

lime) 

ery  of  activity  of  thorium,  10 

ty  of  minerals,  13 

ty  of  uranium  compounds,  13 

activity  an  atomic  property,  14 

i  of  a  rays,  119 

t^raphic  record  of  a  particles,  133 

)tion  of  a  rays  from  poloniom, 

1  of  radium  on  platinum,  315 
of  radium  emanation,  353 

of  gravity  on  active  deposit,  406 

(5  weight  of  radium,  471 

I  of  polonium,  515 
of  actinium,  521 

I.  and  Mme) 

itiun  and  purification  of  radium, 

t  neq. 

ery  of  polonium,  20 

itration  of  polonium,  20,  21 

}  carried  by  /3  rays,  199 

efl   of  colour  in  radium   salts, 

ation  by  radium  rays,  307 

ction  of  ozone  by  a  rays,  314 

of  radium  rays  on  spark,  322 

ery  of  induced  activity,  391 

es  of  radio-activity,  412 

.  and  P.) 

uction    of    quartz    piezo-elec- 

ae,  104 

'.)  and  Cheveneau 

ttic  properties  of  radium,  474 


Curie  (Mme)  and  Debieme 
decomposition  of  water  by  the  emana- 
tion, 317 
decomposition  of  water  by  polonium, 

318 
metallic  radium,  473 
isolation  of  polonium,  517 
production  of  helium  by  polonium, 

660 
Curie  (Mme)  and  Gleditsch  (Mdlle) 
transformation  of  copper  into  lithium, 

321 
Curie  (P.)  and  Danne 
absorption  of  emanations  by  solids, 

378 
distribution    of    radium    emanation 

with  temperature,  382 
diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  383 
decay  of  active  deposit  of  radium,  487, 

492 
effect   of   temperature    on   decay  of 

active  deposit  of  radium,  488 
Curie  (P.)  and  Dewar 
production  of  helium  by  radium,  556 
heating    effect    of    radium    at    low 

temperatures,  569 
Curie  (P.)  and  Laborde 
origin  of  heat  energy,  412 
heating  effect  of  radium,  568 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs. 

641 

Dadourian 

activity  of  thorium  minerals,  546 

thorium  emanation  from  the  soil,  641 
Danne 

radio-uranium,  455 

absence  of  uranium  in  pyromorphite, 
463 
Danne  and  Curie  (P.) 

see  Curie  and  Danne 
Danysz 

groups  of  (i  rays  from  radium,  254 
Darwin  (Sir  George) 

duration  of  sun's  heat,  655 
Darwin  (C.)  and  Marsden 

complexity  of  thorium  C,  540 
Daunderer 

large  ions  in  the  atmosphere,  638 
Davisson 

production  of  y  rays  by  /3  rays,  282 
Debieme 

discovery  of  actinium,  19,  519 

decay  of  actinium  emanation,  351 

distribution  of  active  deposit,  405 

volume  of  radium  emanation,  480 

rate    of    production    of    helium    by 
radium,  557 

production   of  helium   by  actinium, 
559 


678 


INDEX 


Debierne  and  Mme  Curie 
see  Curie  and  Debienie 

Decay 

radio-active,  meauing  of,  340 
effect  of  conditions  on,  342 

Deflection  of  ions 
in  magnetic  field,  72 
in  electric  field,  75  et  seq. 

Delta  rays 
170  et  seq, 

discovery  and  nature  of,  170 
number  produced  by  one  a  particle, 

173 
emission  of,  in  direction  of  a  particle, 

174 
set  free  by  /3  rays,  204 

Demarcay 

spectrum  of  radium,  471 

Density 
of  radium  emanation,  481 

Deposit  active 
distribution  of  radiations  from,  312 
discovery  of,  391 
connection  of,  with  the  emanations, 

392 
production  and  decay  of,  393 
of  very  rapid  rate  of  decay,  395 
concentration  of,  on  the  cathode,  398 
distribution  of,  in  electric  field,  400 
effect  of  pressure  on  distribution  of, 

401 
range  of  recoil  atoms  from,  403 
effect  of  gravity  on  distribution  of,  405 
velocity  of  carriers  of,  in  electric  field, 

407 
physical  and  chemical  properties  of, 

408 
collection  of,  in  atmosphere,  624 
theory  of  collection  of,  627 
effect  of  meteorological  conditions  on 

amount  of,  029 
diBtribution  of,  over  land  and  sea,  630 

Deposit  active  of  actinium 
decay  of,  894 

products  of  quick  decay  in,  395 
distribution  of,  in  electric  field,  399 
range  of  recoil  atoms  forming,  404 
analysis  of,  523 
rise  and  decay  curves  of,  524 
radiations  from,  531 

Deposit  active  of  radium 
(i  I  SCO  very  of,  391 
distribution  of,  392 
decay  of,  393 

distribution  of,  in  electric  field,  399 
distribution  of,  at  low  pressures,  401 
effect  of  gravity  on   distribution  of, 

405 
physical  and  chemical  properties  of, 
408 


Deposit  active  of  radium  {cont.) 
deduction   of  activity  curves  of,  for 

short  and  long  exposures,  437,  439 
analysis  of,  48(>  et  seq. 
rise  and  decay  curves  of,  by  a,  ^  and 

7  rays,  490  et  seq, 
total  ionisation  due  to,  502 
effect  of  temperature  on,  502 
volatility  of,  505 
heating  effect  of,  574 
distribution  of  heating  effect  amongst 

products  of,  580 
presence  of,  in  atmosphere,  625 
distribution   of,    over  land  and  sea, 

630 
Deposit  active  of  radium  of  slow  trans- 
formation 
analysis  of,  507  et  seq, 
variation  of  activity  of  measured,  br 

o,  p  rays,  608 
Deposit  active  of  thorium 
discovery  of,  391 
production  and  decay  of,  393 
product  of  quick  decay,  395 
distribution  of,  in  electric  field,  398 
distribution  of,  with  pressure,  401 
velocity  of  carriers  of,  407 
physical  and  chemical  properties  of, 

408 
deduction  of  riae  curves  of,  for  short 

and  long  exposures,  433 
analysis  of,  534  et  seq, 
volatility  of,  537 
mode  of  transformation  of,  541 
presence  of,  in  atmosphere,  626 
distribution  of,  over  land  and  sea,  630 
Des  Coudres 

value  of  ejm  of  a  particle,  122 
Dewar  (Sir  James) 
rate    of    production    of    heliam  by 

radium,  557 
Dewar  and  Crookea 

spectrum  of  luminosity  of  radinm,  303 
Dewar  and  Curie  (P.) 

see  Curie  (P.)  and  Dewar 
Diamond 

scintillations  in,  299 
changes  of  colour  in,  299 
Dielectrics 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  resistance  of, 

324 
Diffusion 

of  ions  in  gases,  53  et  seq, 

general  theory  of,  380 

methods  of  measuring,  383 

of  radium  emanation,  383 

of      emanations      through      porons 

materials,  385 
of  emanations  through  small  opening* 

386 


INDEX 


679 


DifTusion  {cont.) 
of  thorium  and  actinium  emanations, 

387 
vAriation  of,  with  pressure,  388 
of  emanation  into  liquids,  B90 
Disintegration  {see  Transformation) 
Dissociation 
of  molecules  during  ionisation,  58 
of  gases  by  radiations,  316 
of  water  by  radiations,  317 
Distribution 

of  a  particles  according  to  probability, 

186 
of  /3  rays  from  radium  with  velocity, 

250  t>t  seq. 
of  a  rays  from  thin  films,  312 
of  /3  rays  from  uranium,  313 
Doeltier 

colouration  by  radium  rays,  309 
Dorn 

bursting  of  radium  tubes,  200 
deflection  of  /3  rays  in  electric  field, 

204 
discovery  of  radium  emanation,  350 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs, 
641 
Doublet 

theory  of  y  rays,  289 
Dreyer  and  Salomonsen 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  quartz,  308 
Duane 

photographic  record  of  a  particles,  133 
number  of  delta  particles  emitted  for 

each  a  particle,  173 
total  ionisation  due  to  one  curie  of 

emanation,  502 
volatilisation  of  radium  A  and  B,  505 
apparatus  for  measuring  small  heating 

effects,  585 
heating  effect  of  polonium,  586 
heating  effect  of  radium  mixed  with 
phosphorescent  materials,  586 
Duane  and  Laborde 

total  ionisation  due  to  one  curio  of 
emanation,  502 
Durack 

ionisation  per  unit  path  by  cathode 
and  /3  rays,  245 
Dyson 

radium  in  the  sun,  654 

Efirth 

distribution  of  radium  in,  643 
heat  of,  ()44 

origin  of  internal  heat  of,  650. 
Ebert 

apparatus    for   measuring   ionisation 

in  atmosphere,  637 
condensation   of    radium   emanation 
from  air,  640 


Ebert  and  Ewers 
presence  of  radium  emanation  in  soil, 

640 
Ebler 
attempts  to  separate  metallic  radium, 

473 
Effusion 

determination  of  molecular  weight  of 

radium  emanation  by,  386 
Einstein 
variation   of  mass  of  electron   with 

speed,  71 
Electro-chemical 
methods  of  separation  of  products, 

600,  603 
Electrolysis 
of  active  deposits,  409 
separation  of  products  by,  600,  603 
Electrometers 
use  of,  in  radio-activity,  07  et  »eq. 
practical  details  in  use  of,  98  et  B^.q, 
string,  100 
capacity    of,    and    measurement    of 

capacity  of,  109  et  seq. 
Electron 
velocity  gained  by,  between  collisions, 

38 
radius  of,  72 
effect  of  magnetic  and  electric  field 

on,  72  et  seq. 
origin  of  name  of,  79 
mass  of,  and  variation  with   speed, 

204 
number  of,  in  atoms,  618,  621 
tables  of   mass  and  energy   of,   for 

different  speeds,  667 
Electroscopes 

description  of,  90  et  seq, 

practical  points  in   construction  of, 

94 
for  j8  and  y  rays,  94 
tilted,  95 

with  quartz  fibres,  96 
Elster  and  Geitel 
experiments  on  radio-lead,  21 
string  electrometer,  101 
scintillations  in  zinc  sulphide,  133 
magnetic  deflection  of  /3  rays,  193 
photo-electric  action,  309 
effect    of    radium    ra^'s    on     spark, 

322 
period  of  actinium  B,  525 
amount  of  radium  in  potassium  salts, 

589 
presence  of  polonium  in  lea<l,  595 
presence   of  active   matter  in  atmo- 
sphere, 624 
effect  of  meteorological  conditions  on 

collection   of   active  deposit    from 

atuiosphere,  629 


680 


INDEX 


ElBter  and  Geitel  (eont.) 
activity  of  air  in  caves  and  cellars, 

640 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs, 

641 
Emanations 

from  thorium,  10 

from  radium   used  as   a   source   of 

radiation,  18 
of  short  life  from  actinium,  19 
discovery  of,  348 
decay  of,  350 
decay  of  radium,  351 
radiations  from,  356 
effect  of  conditions  on  escape  of,  358 
effect  of  conditions  on  escape  of,  from 

radium,  361 
condensation  of,  364 
temperature  of  condensation  of,  366 
absorption  of,  by  liquids,  375 
absorption  of,  by  solids  and  charcoal, 

878 
diffusiom  of,  380 
methods  of  measuring  diffusion  of, 

382 
effusion  of,  386 
diffusion  of  thorium  and  actinium, 

387 
diffusion  of,  into  liquids,  390 
connection  of,  with  active  deposits, 

392 
number  of  a  particles  emitted  by,  395 
products  of  quick  decay  in,  395 
correction  for  measurement  of  amount 

of,  by  7  rays,  430 
methods  of  measuring  quantities  of 

radium  by,  659 
Emanation  of  actinium  {see  actinium 

emanation) 
Emanation    of    radium     {see     radium 

emanation) 
Emanation    of    thorium    {see    thorium 

emanation) 
Energy 
electro-magnetic,  of  moving  ion,  70 
required  to  produce  an  ion,  158 
of  a  particles,  164 
emitted  by  radium,  568  et  seq. 
of  /9  and  y  rays  from  radium,  578 
origin  and  amount  of,  in  transforma- 
tions, 581 
diviflion  of,   between  p  and  y  rays, 

614 
table  of  variation  of  mass  of  electron 

with  speed,  667 
Englor 

effect    of   temperature    on    decay   of 

products  of  radium,  503 
Equilibria 

secular  and  transient,  429 


Erikson 
effect  of  temperature  on  recombina- 
tion, 41 
Evans  and  Makower 
velocity  and  mass  of  recoil  atoms, 

177 
Eve 
conductivity  of  gases  for  penetrating 

X  rays,  64 
effect  of  electric  field  on  range  of  a 

particle,  165 
scattering  of  ^  rays,  213 
absorption  of  /3  rays  by  air,  229 
ionisation  of  /3  ravs  per  unit  path, 

246 
absorption  of  y  rays,  259 
absorption  of  y  rays  from  thoriom, 

267 
/3  rays  excited  by  y  rays,  272 
/3  rays  excited  by  y  rays  in  different 

materials,  273 
variation  of   emergence  /3  radiation 

with  atomic  weight,  275 
variation   of  y  ray  ionisation  vitb 

material  of  electroscope,  278 
scattered  7  rays,  279 
conductivity  of  gases  for  X  rays  and 

7  rays,  286 
total  ionisation  produced  by  7  ravs, 

294 
absorption  of  radium  emanation  bj 

charcoal,  380 
7  rays  from  commercial  preparation 

of  thorium,  546 
relative  energies  of  a,  /3  and  7  nys, 

579 
distance  of  collection  of  active  deposit 

in  atmosphere,  629 
amount  of  active  deposit  in  air  over 

the  sea,  632 
amount  of  radium  emanation  in  at- 
mosphere, 633 
decrease  of  intensity  of  7  rays  with 

height  of  atmosphere,  636 
origin  of  excess  of  positive  ions  in 

atmosphere,  639 
amoimt  of  ionisation  due  to  active 

matter  in  atmosphere,  639 
amount  of  radium  in  sea  water,  649 
Eve  and  Adams 

effect  of  pressure  on  7  ray  activity  of 

radium,  505 
Eve  and  Mcintosh 

amount  of  radium  in  rocks,  646 
Ewers 

velocity  of  expulsion  of  delta  rayfl, 

171 
Ewers  and  Ebert 
presence  of  radium  emanation  in  80U. 

640 


INDEX 


681 


Eye 

luminosity  produced  in,   by  radium 
rays,  328 

Tajans 

complex  nature  of  radium  C,  500 
recoil  of  radium  D  from  radium  C, 
511 
Tajans  and  Makower 

^  rays  from  radium  B,  488 

effect  of  /3  rays  from  radium  B  on  rise 

ouires,  494 
rise  curves  of  radium  C  from  radium 
B,  501 
Pajans  and  Moseley 

decay  of  thorium  A  and  actinium  A, 

397 
complex  nature  of  actinium  C,  532 
period  of  thorium  A,  535 
Parr  and  Florance 

amount  of  radium  in  rocks,  646 
Tehrle 

distribution  of  active  deposit  in  electric 
field,  407 
Plemming 

activity  of  atmosphere  at  high  alti- 
tudes, 630 
Pletcher 

amount  of  radium  in  granites,  647 
amount  of    radium    in    sedimentary 
rocks,  648 
Florance 

variation  of  absorption  of  y  rays  with 

arrangement,  263 
scattered  y  radiation,  279 
variation  of  scattering  of  y  rays  with 
material  and  angle,  281 
Florance  and  Farr 

amount  of  radium  in  rocks,  646 
Foch 

range  of  a  particles  from  uranium, 
448 
Franck 

mobility  of  heavy  ions,  57 
mobility  of  recoil  atoms,  407 
Franck  and  Pohl 

mobility  of  ions  in  helium,  45 
Friedmann 

range  of  a  particles  from  uranium, 
448 
Frischauer 

effect  of  /3  rays  on  crystallisation,  317 

7  rays 

nature  of,  9,  286 
general  properties  of,  115  et  seq. 
discovery  of,  257 
absorption  of,  from  radium,  258 
connection    of    absorption    of,    with 
density,  263 


7  rays  {cont,) 

absorption  of,  by  gases,  265 
absorption    of,   from    different    sub- 

stances,  267 
connection  of,  with  primary  /3  rays, 

270 
secondary  /3  rays  excited  by,  271 
amounts  of  incident  and  emergent  /3 

rays  excited  by,  274' 
theory  of  emission  of  fi  rays,  277 
variation  of  ionisation  in  vessels  pro- 
duced by,  278 
scattering  of,  279 
production  of,  by  fi  rays,  282 
theories  of  nature  of,  286 
discontinuous  nature  of,  291 
ionisation  and  absorption  of,  292 
total  ionisation  produced    by,   from 

radiam,  294,  579 
photographic  effect  of,  305 
decay  of   active   deposit   of   radium 

measured  by,  495 
rise  and  fall  of  activity  due  to  radium 

emanation  measured  by,  499 
heating  effect  of,  from  radium,  578 
connection  of,  with  /3  rays,  610 
theory  of  origin  of,  611 
number  and  energy  of,  614 
emission  of,  from  earth,  634 
decrease  of  intensity  of,  in  atmosphere 

with  height,  636 
use  of,   in  comparing  quantities  of 

radium,  657 
Gates  (Miss) 
effect  of  temperature  on  active  deposit, 

409 
Geiger 
decrease  of  velocity  of  a  particles  with 

range,  142 
ionisation  due  to  one  a  particle,  153 
decrease  of  number  of  a  particles  with 

distance,  157 
scattering  of  a  rays,  180 
laws  of  scattering  of  a  rays  by  thin 

films,  185 
probability  variation  of  a  particles, 

187 
complexity  of  emanations,  357 
a  pai tides  from  actinium  emanation, 

396 
properties  of  thorium  A,  535 
Geiger  and  Kovarik 
ionisation  by  jS  rays  per  unit  path, 

246 
ionisation  produced  by  /3  particles, 

from  a  number  of  active  substances, 

250 
Geiger  and  Marsden 

large    angle    scattering    of    a    rays, 

183 


682 


INDEX 


Geiger  and  Marsden  {cont.) 
double  Bcintillations,  191 
number  of  a  particles  from  the  ema- 
nations, 395 
Geiger  and  Nuttall 
range  of  a  particles,  162 
complex    nature    of    a    rays    from 

uranium,  448 
range   of  a  particles   from    thorium 

emanation  and  thorium  A,  535 
relation  between  range  and  period  of 

transformation,  607 
Oeiger  and  Rutherford 
charge    carried    by    a    particle,    52, 

136 
electrical    method     of     counting    a 

particles,  129 
atomic    and    radio-active    constants, 

140 
number  of  a  particles  from  uranium 

minerals,  447 
radio-active  nomenclature,  524 
properties  of  thorium  A,  535 
number  of  a  particles  from  thorium, 

551 
number   of   a  p/irticles   emitted    by 

uranium  and  thorium,  560 
Geiger,  Rutherford  and  Bateman 
probability  variations  of  a  particles, 

188 
Geitel 

natural  ionisation  of  air,  592,  624 
Geitel  and  Elster 

see  Elster  and  Geitel 
Gerdien 
apparatus  for  measuring   ionisation 

in  atmosphere,  038 
Giebeler 

radium  in  a  new  star,  653 
Giesel 
separation  of  radium  by  crystallisa- 
tion, 15 
preparation   of    commercial   salts  of 

radium,  17 
discovery  of  cmanium,  19 
experiments  on  radio-lead,  21 
phosphorescence  of  zinc  sulphide  by 

a  rays,  133,  297 
magnetic  deflection  of  /3  rays,  193 
spectrum  of  luminosity  of  actinium, 

304 
colouraticm  by  radium  rays,  308 
dissociation  of  water  by  radium,  317 
effect   of   radium   rays  on    the   eye, 

328 
flame  spectrum  of  radium,  471 
separation  of  radium  E,  515 
discovery  of  emanium,  519 
separation  of  actinium  X,  528 
heating  effect  of  radium,  569 


Giesel  and  Starke 
luminosity  of  air  due  to  rays  from 
polonium,  304 
Gimingham  and  Rossignol 

decay  of  thorium  emanation,  Sol 
Glasson 
ionisation  by  cathode  rays  per  onit 
path,  245 
Gleditsch  (MdUe) 
connection     between     lithium    and 
copper    in    radio-active    miner&ls, 
321 
ratio    of    radium    to    uraniom  in 
minerals,  463 
Glew 

scintillations  in  the  diamond,  299 
Gockel 
activity  of  atmosphere  at  high  alti- 
tudes, 631 
large  ions  in  the  atmosphere,  d3S 
Godlewski 
absorption  of  j8  rays,  225 
absorption  of  y  rays  from  actinioni, 

267 
solubility  of   uranium  X  in  water, 

453 
separation  of  actinium  X,  528 
Goldstein 
canal  rays,  81 
condensation  of  actinium  emanation, 

371 
Gonders,  Hofmann,  and  Wolfl 

constituents  of  radio-lead,  510 
Gradient  potential 

in  ionised  air,  65 
Grant  and  Steele 

micro-balance,  481 
Gray  (J.  A.) 
deflection  of  /3  rays  from  radium  E, 

212 
production  of  y  rays  by  ^  raya,  213 
production  of  y  rays  by  p  raya  from 

radium  E,  283 
distribution  of  y  rays  excited  by  ? 

rays,  285 
emission  of  characteristic  radiations 

by  7  rays,  286 
escape  of  helium  from  minerals  by 
grinding,  563 
Gray  (J.  A.)  and  Wilson  (W.) 

complex  nature  of  /3  rays  from  radium 
E,  238 
Gray  (R.  W.)  and  Ramsay 
atomic  weight  of  radium,  472 
volume  of  radium  emanation,  480 
density  of  radium  emanation,  481 
vapour  pressure,  484 
Gravity 
effect   of,  on   distribution  of  actite 
deposit,  405 


INDEX 


683 


Greinacher 

charge  carried  by  a  rays,  157 

distribution  of  /3  rays  from  uranium, 
313 

conductivity      of      dielectrics      with 
polonium  rays,  326 
Greinacher  and  Marckwald 

period  of  polonium,  515 
Griiner 

theory  of  successive  changes,  418 

Hackett 

variation  of   emergence  /3  radiation 
with  atomic  weight,  275 
Hahn 

discovery  of  meso-thorium  and  radio- 
thorium,  11,  544,  547 
range  of  a  particles,  162 
on  radio-active  recoil,  175 
separation  of  new  products  by  recoil, 

176 
recoil  of  radium  C  from  radium  B, 

177 
decay  of  thorium  emanation,  351 
growth  of  radium  in  thorium,  467 
radio-actinium,  520 
recoil  of  actinium  X  from  actinium, 

527 
separation  and  properties  of  radio- 
actinium,  529 
analysis  of  a  rays  from  thorium  G, 
539 
Hahn  and  Meitner 
exponential  law  of  absorption,  211 
coefficient  of  absorption  of  {i  rays,  225 
fi  radiations  from  radium,  474 
complex  nature  of  radium  C,  500 
/3  rays  from  radium  D,  514 
separation  of  actinium  C  by  volatili- 
sation, 526 
separation  of  actinium  D,  527 
radiations  from  actinium  D,  532 
analysis  of  thorium  G,  539 
complexity  of  thorium  G,  540 
separation  of  thorium  D,  542 
/3  radiation  from  thorium  D,  542 
/S  rays  from  meso-thorium  2,  548 
Hahn,  v.  Baeyer  and  Meitner 

see  V.  Baeyer,  llalni  and  Meitner 
Huhn  and  Rutherford 

velocity  and  mass  of  a  particles  from 
radio-thorium,  128 
Hahn  and  Sackur 
identity  of  emanations  from  actinium 

and  emanium,  351,  520 
period  of  actinium  B,  525 
Haitinger  and  Ulrich 

separation  of  radium,  16    • 
Halos 

origin  and  dimensions  of,  309 


Hardy  and  Anderson 

luminosity  of  eye  due  to  radium  rays, 

328 
Hard}'  and  Wilcock  (Miss) 
action  of  radium  rays  on  iodoform, 

315 
Hartmann 
spectrum  of  luminosity  of  actinium, 

304 
Hauser 
on  velocity  of  expulsion  of  delta  rays, 

171 
Heat 

emission  of,  by  radium,  568 
emission  of,  by  radium  at  low  tem- 
peratures, 570 
measurements  of  emission  of,  from 

radium,  571 
connection  of  emission  of,  with  the 

radiations,  571 
emission  of,  by  the  radium  emanation 

and  its  products,  573 
calculated   emission   of,    by  radium 

and  its  emanation,  576 
emission  of,  due  to  /3  and  y  rays,  578 
distribution  of  emission  of,  between 

radium  and  its  products,  580 
total  emission  of,  by  the  emanation, 

581 
emission  of,  by  uranium  and  thorium, 

583 
methods  of  measurement  of  emission 

of,  585 
emission  of,  by  radio-active  matter  in 

earth,  650 
origin  of  earth's  internal,  650 
origin  of  sun's,  655 
Heating  effect 

suggested  explanation  of,  for  radium, 

412 
importance  of,  in  radio-active  theories, 

415 
Heaviside 

electrical  mass  of  charged  body,  71 
Helium 

connection  of,  with  a  particles,  137 
calculated  rate  of  production  of,  by 

radium,  141 
discovery  of,  553 
production    of,    by  radium    and    its 

emanation.  555 
origin  and  rate  of  production  of,  by 

radium,  556 
production    of,   by  radio-active   sub- 
stances, 559 
connection  of,  with  age  of  minerals, 

562 
amount  of,  in  radio-active  minerals, 

563 
amount  of,  in  ordinary  substances,  564 


684 


INDEX 


Heliam  {conL) 
age  of  geological  strata  by  estimation 
of,  566 
Helmholtz  and  Bicharz 

action  of  ions  on  steam  jet,  47 
Hemptinne 
effect  of  radium  emanations  on  eleo- 
trodeless  discharge,  323 
Henning 
conductivity  of  barium  radium-sola- 

tion,  323 
radium  collector,  324 
recombination    of   ions    with    active 
deposit,  400 
Henning  and  Eohlrausch 
conductivity     of     radium     bromide 
solutions,  323 
Henriot 
condensation  of  actinium  emanation, 

371 
activity  of  potassium,  588 
Herrmann  and  Marckwald 
luminosity   of   air   due    to    a    rays, 
303 
Herschfinkel 
attempts  to  separate  metallic  radium, 

473 
concentration  of  radium  D,  511 
Hess 

absorption  of  y  rays  from  radium  by 
air,  267 
Hess  and  St  Meyer 

heating  effect  of  radium,  571 
Hess  and  v.  Schweidler 

heating  effect  of  radium,  571 
Hevesy 
absorption  of  actinium  emanation  by 

liquids,  377 
absorption  of  actinium  emanation  by 

charcoal,  380 
emanation      method     of     detecting 

actinium  in  minerals,  520 
electro-chemical  properties  of   active 
deposits,  603 
Hillebrande 

gases  in  radio-active  minerals,  553 
Himstedt 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  resistance  of 

selenium,  323 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs, 
641 
Himstedt  and  Meyer  (G.) 

luminosity  of  air  due  to  a  rays,  303 
Himstedt  and  Nagel 
effect  of   radium   radiations  on  the 
eye,  328 
Hofmann,  Gonder  and  Wolfl 

constituents  of  radio-lead,  510 
Hofmann  and  Strauss 

discovery  of  radio-lead,  21 


Hofmann  and  Wolfl 

concentration  of  radium  D,  511 
Holmes 

amount  of  lead  in  uranium  minenis, 
597 

age  of  uranium  minerals,  598 
Honigsohmid 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  quartz,  308 

atomic  weight  of  radium,  472 
Hopkinson  (J.) 

theory  of  electrometer,  97 
Huff 

value  of  elm  of  a  particle,  123 
Huggins  (Sir  William  and  Lady) 

spectrum  of  phosphorescent  light  of 
radium,  302 
Hnpka 

determination  of  e/m  for  electrons,  208 

Induction 

radio-active,  338 
Ions 

production  of,  by  radiations,  26  ft  i^{. 

velocity  of,  in  electric  field,  28,  31 

production  of,  by  collision,  86  et  ieq. 

recombination  of,  38 

mobility  of,  41  et  ieq. 

difference  between  positive  and  nega- 
tive, 42,  44 

effect  of  water  vapour  on  mobility  of, 
44 

variation  of  mobility  of,  with  temper- 
ature and  pressure,  46 

condensation  of  water  on,  46  et  teq. 

difference  between  positive  and  nega* 
tive,  49 

charge  carried  by,  50  et  ieq. 

diffusion  of,  53  et  seq. 

size  and  nature  of,  56  et  seq, 

number    and    distribution    of,   from 
active  substances,  58 

magnetic  field  produced  by  motioD  of, 
69 

electrical  mass  of,  70  et  seq, 

total  number  produced  by  a  partiele, 
153 

distribution  of,  along  path  of  a  particle, 
154 

effect  of  velocity  of  a  particle  on  pro- 
duction of,  157 

energy    required    to    produce,  by  a 
particle,  158 

total  number  of,  produced  by  fi  ray« 
from  radium,  230,  579 

number  of,  product  per  cm.  by  P 
particle,  245 

total  number  of,  produced  by  one  ^ 
ray,  .250 

total  number  of,  produced  by  absorp* 
tion  of  y  rays  from  radium,  294 


INDEX 


685 


•) 

prodnced  by  penetrating  rays 
earth,  637,  640 
',  in  the  atmosphere,  638 
)f  poBitive  over  negatiye,  in 
phere,  639 

iphic  record  of  trails  of,  pro- 
by  a  and  j3  rays,  663 

)f,  for  gases,  26  et  seq. 

Q  of,  with  pressure  and  nature 

J,  31 

y  of  saturation  of,  with  a  rays, 

<e(]. 

sion,  theory  of,  36  et  seq. 

ism  of,  56  et  seq. 

cion  of,  due  to  active  bodies, 

le  to  a  rays  in  different  gases. 

Is  of,  111 
produced  by  a,  /3  and  y  rays, 

n  of,  from  active  matter  with 

ice,  146,  159 

I  particle  along  its  path,  149, 

ue  to  one  a  particle,  153 
tides  iu  air  and  hydrogen,  154 
Dduccd  by  one  gram  of  radium, 

tion  of  variation  due  to  pencil 
rays,  156 

n  of,  with  velocity,  167 
required  for,  168 
ion  of,  by  recoil  atoms,  179 
roduced  by  fi  rays   from  one 
of  radium,  230,  579 
n  of,  with  velocity  of  /3  particle, 

decrease  of,  with  velocity,  249 

'd  per  cm.  by  /3  rays  from  active 

ances,  250 

n  of,  for  7  rays  with  material 

Kjtroscope,  278 

3f,  produced  by  y  rays,  293 

odnced  by  absorption  of  7  rays, 

571) 

,   in  sealed  v<;HHels,  5i)l 

m   of,  in   sealed   vessels  with 

md  pressure,  592 

of,   in  sealed  vessels,   593 

,  in  screened  vessels,  594 

ement  of,  in  atmosphere,  637 

er  of,  in  atmosphere,  63H 

ctive  origin  of,  in  atmospliere, 

1  cuirent 

of,  20 

)n  of,  with  voltage,  27 


lonisation  current  (cont.) 
difficulty  of  saturation  of,  with  a  rays, 

32 
increase  of,  by  collision,  36 
variation  of,  with  voltage  for  surface 

distribution,  67  et  seq. 
measurement  of,  93 
measurement  of,  by  steady  deflection 

method,  101 
by  balance  and  compensation  methods, 

103 
apparatus  for  measurement  of,  106 
direct  measurement  of,  108 
Ionium 

discovery  of,  21 

use  of,  as  potential  collector,  324 
connection  of,  with  uranium,  444 
activity  of,  in  uranium  minerals,  446 
method  of  discovery  of,  455 
growth  of  radium  from,  456 
radiation  from  and  chemical  proper- 
ties of,  457 
discussion  of  period  of,  458,  467 
amount  of,  in  certain  minerals,  464 
effect  of,  on  growth  of  uranium  in 

radium,  466 
attempt  to  determine   spectrum   of, 

467 
presence  of,  in  thorium,  467 

Jackson 

distribution  of  active  deposits  at  low 
pressures,  401 
Jaffe 
conductivity  of  liquids  under  radium 
rays,  325 
Janssen 

helium  in  the  sun,  553 
Joly 
pleochroic  halos,  309 
motion  of  radium   in  electric   field, 

326 
amount  of  radium  and  thorium  in 
rocks  of  St  Gothard  Tunnel,  647 
amount  of  radium  in  sea  water,  649 
amount  of  thorium  in  rocks,  649 
age  of  the  earth,  653 
Joly  and  Fletcher 

pleochroic  halos,  310 
Jorissen  and  Ringer 

action   of  /3  rays   on  hydrogen   and 
chlorine,  316 

Eaufmann 

variation   of   mass   of   electron   with 

speed,  71 
measurement  of  ejm  for  cathode  rays, 

78 
variation  of  ejm  of  /3  particle  with 

speed,  205 


686 


INDEX 


Kaye  and  Laby 
variation  of  ionisation  of  7  rays  with 
pressure,  293 
Kayser 

on  radio-aotive  origin  of  new  stars, 
G54 
Keetman 

properties  of  ionium,  457 
Kelvin  (Lord) 
origin  of  heat  energy  of  radium,  413 
structure  of  the  atom,  617,  618 
duration  of  earth's  heat,  644 
duration  of  sun's  heat,  65o 
Kelvin  (Lord),  Smolan  and  Beattie 

discharging  power  of  uranium  rays,  9 
Kennedy 
distribution    of    active    deposit    of 

actinium,  399 
distribution    of     active     deposit    of 
actinium  at  low  pressures,  402 
Kennedy  aud  McLennan 

activity  of  potassium,  588 
Kcmbaum 

rate  of   decomposition  of  water  by 
radium,  318 
Kinoshita 

photographic  effect    of    a    rays,   88, 

305 
counting    of   a   particles   by   photo- 
graphic method,  134 
condensation  of  actinium  emanation, 
371 
Kinoshita,  Kishikawa  and  Ono 
theory  of  collection  of  active  matter 
from  atmosphere,  628 
Klaus 
absorption  of  thorium  emanation  by 
liquids,  377 
Kleeman 

saturation  with  a  rays,  33 

conductivity  of  gases,  62 

total    ionisation    by    a    particle    in 

different  gases,  64 
comparison  of  emergent  and  incident 

delta  radiation,  174 
complex  character  of  7  rays,  262 
scattered  7  radiation,  279 
Kleeman  and  Bragg 

sef  Bragg  and  Kleeman 
Kofler 

absorption  of  emanation  by  liquids, 
376 
Kohlrausch 
probability  variation  of  a  particles, 

187 
effect  of  radium  rays  on  conductivity 
of  water,  323 
Kohlrausch  and  Henning 
conductivity     of     radium     bromide 
solution,  323 


Kolowrat 
effect  of   temperature  on  escape  of 

radium  emanation,  361 
/3  radiation  from  radium  itself,  474 
Kovarik 
effect  of  pressure  on  mobility  of  ions, 

46 
mobility  of  ions  at  high  pressures,  &S 
reflected  /3  rays,  216 
effect    of    scattering    of   ^  rays  on 

absorption  curve,  224 
j8  rays  from  radium  D,  514 
period  of  actinium  D,  527 
Kovarik  and  Geiger 

see  Oeiger  and  Kovarik 
Kovarik  and  Wilson  (W.) 
variation  of  scattering  of  ^  niys  with 
velocity,  217 
Kucera  and  Masek 

range  of  a  particle  from  poloninm.lfi'i 
variation    of    stopping    power  of  a 
particle  with  range,  168 
Kunz 
phosphorescence    of    willemite   aod 
kunzite,  298 
Kunz  and  Baskerville 
phosphorescence  produced  by  radiom 
rays,  299 
Knstner 
amount  of  radium  in  new  stars,  654 

Laborde 

effect  of  surface  on  condensation  of 
radium  emanation,  373 
Laborde  and  Curie 

see  Curie  and  Laborde 
Laby 

total  ionisation  in  different  gases,  C4 
string  electrometer,  101 
discontinuous  nature  of  7  rays,  291 
Laby  and  Kaye 
variation  of  ionisation  of  7  rays  with 
pressure,  293 
Langevin 
coefficient  of  recombination  of  ion^. 

40 
mobility  of  ions,  44 
effect  of  pressure  on  mobility  of  ions, 

46 
on  theory  of  movement  of  ions  in 

gases,  57 
large  ions  in  the  atmosphere,  63S 
Larmor  (Sir  J.) 
theory  of  radiation,  80 
radiation  of  energy  from  accelerated 

electron,  82 
electrical  structure  of  atom,  617 
Lattes 
velocity  of  expulsion  of  delta  n^ 
171 


INDEX 


687 


)f,  from  nranium  minerals,  21 
nation  prodaot  of  polonium, 

of  old,  595 

end  proJuct  of  radium,  597 
of,  in  uranium  minerals,  597 
3n    of    age   of    minerals   by 
it  of,  598 

e  by  quinine  sulphate,  6 
of  polarisation   in  uranium 
} 

^  of  cathode  rays,  1 
n  by  ultra-violet  light,  5 
of    cathode    rays    through 
:.  7C 
cuent  of  efm  for  cathode  rays, 

>n  of  cathode  rays,  209,  210 
m    of    ^    rays    in    different 
als,  22G 
I 
properties  of  active  deposit, 

sin  of  active  deposit,  409 
)n  of  radium  C,  488 
His     of     active     deposit     of 
m,  537 

m  of  thorium  C  on  nickel,  538 
f  thoiium  X,  543 
homiail  properties  of  active 
ts,  608 

1  and  Wartburg 
/  of  thorium  D,  542 
.s) 

.  of  tliorium  emanation,  388 
of  actinium  emanation,  389 

a  particles  from  polonium,  162 
of  a  rays  in  uranium  X,  452 
ition  of   actinium  B  and  C, 

of  actinium  deprived  of   its 

3ta,  531 

jn  of  thorium  C  by  carbon, 

f  thorium  X,  543 
Rucr 
iphic    action    of    potassium 

58H 

collector,  324 

product  of  transformation  of 

r,  321 

on  of  uranium  X,  454 

3n  of  radium  by  barium,  601 


Lockyer 

hehum  in  the  sun,  553 

spectrum  of  helium,  554 
Lodge  (Sir  OUver) 

electro-magnetic    energy    of    moving 
charge,  69 
Logeman 

on  velocity  of  expulsion  of  delta  ravs, 
171 
Lorentz 

variation  of  electron  with  speed,  71 

theory  of  radiation,  80 

electrical  structure  of  atom,  617 
Loschmidt 

theory  of  diffusion,  383 
Lotka 

radio-active  equilibrium,  431 
Lowry  and  Armstrong 

radio-activity    a    form    of    phospho- 
rescence, 413 
Luminosity 

of  substances  exposed  to  radium  rays, 
296  e.t  seq. 

decay  of,  in  zinc  sulphide  and  wille- 
mite,  301 

of  radium  compounds,  302 

spectrum  of,  in  radium  salts,  302 

spectrum  of,  in  actinium  salts,  304 

of  air  surrounding  polonium,  304 
Lutz 

string  electrometer,  101 

Macallum  and  McLennan 
variation    of    penetrating    radiation 
with  altitude,  636 
Mache 
absorption  of  radium  emanation  by 

hquids,  375 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs, 
641 
Maohe  and  Meyer  (St.) 
total  ionisatiou  due  to  one  curie  of 
emanation,  502 
Mache  and  v.  Schweidler 

velocity  of  ions  in  atmosphere,  638 
Mackenzie 
value  of  elm  for  a  particle,  122 
complex  nature  of  a  rays  from  radium, 

143 
on  emergence  and  incidence  /9  radia- 
tion, 274 
Madsen 
scattering  of  /3  rays  by  thin  screens, 

219 
scattered  y  radiation,  279 
Madsen  and  Bragg 
variation   of  emergence  0  radiation 
with  atomic  weight,  275 
Magnetic  field 
produced  by  an  ion  in  motion,  69 


688 


INDEX 


Makower 

charge  carried  by  p  rajs  of  radinm, 
202 

absorption  of  )9  rays,  203 

diffusion  of  radium  emanations,  385 

distribution  of  active  deposit  at  low 
pressures,  401 

effect   of    temperature   on   decay   of 
products  of  radium,  503 

volatilisation  of  radium  A,  B  and  G, 
605 
MakoAver  and  Evans 

see  Evans  and  Makower 
Makower  and  Fajans 

see  Fajans  and  Makower 
Makower  and  Moseley 

emission  of  7  rays  by  radium  B,  269,488 

effect  of  7  rays  from  radium  B  on 
rise  curve,  495 
Makower  and  Buss 

radio-active  recoil,  175 

absorption  of  recoil  atoms,  176 

recoil  of  radium  C  from  radium  B,  177 

range  of  recoil  atoms,  405 

effect   of    temperature   on   decay   of 
products  of  radium,  503 
Marckwald 

separation  of  radio-tellurium,  20 

identity  of  emanations  from  actinium 
and  emanium,  520 

separation    of    radium    and    meso- 
thorium,  548 
Marckwald  and  Oreinacher 

period  of  polonium,  515 
Marckwald  and  Herrmann 

luminosity  of  air  due  to  a  rays,  303 
Marckwald  and  Kussell 

ratio    of    radium    to    uranium    in 
minerals,  463 
Marsdeu 

effect  of  bombardment  on  scintilla* 
tions,  300 

decay  of  luminosity  produced  by,  300, 
801 
Marsden  and  Barratt 

»ee  Barratt  and  Marsden 
Marsden  and  Darwin 

complexity  of  thorium  G,  540 
Marsden  and  Geiger 

see  Geiger  and  Marsden 
Marx 

velocity  of  X  rays,  289 
Masek  and  Kucera 

nee  Kucera  and  Masek 
Mass 

electrical,  of  moving  ion,  70  et  seq, 

of  electron  at  slow  speeds,  79 

of  canal  rays,  81 

measurement  of,  for  a  particle,  121 
et  seq. 


Mass  (cont.) 

of  atom  of  H,  140 

of  electron  and  yariation  with  speed, 
204,  667 

origin  of,  618 

distribution  of,  in  stractore  of  atom, 
619 
Matter 

apparent  radio-activity  of  ordinan, 
590 
McGlelland 

distribution  of  scattered  /9  rays,  2U 

connection  of  scattering  with  chemical 
constitution,  215 

theory  of  absorption  of  /3  rays,  231 

absorption  of  7  rays,  259 
McGlung 

coefficient  of  recombination  of  ions,  40 

ionisation  curve  for  radium  C,  U9 
McGlung  and  Rutherford 

energy    emitted    from    active   sob- 
stances,  411,  568 
McGoy 

uranium  standards.  111 

relation  between  copper  and  lithiom 
in  radio-active  minerals,  321 

activity  of  uranium  minerals,  445 

constancy  of  radium  to  uraniam  Id 
minerals,  460 

surface    distribution    of   radium  in 
pyromorphite,  463 
McGoy  and  Boss 

activity  of  thorium  minerals,  546 
Mcintosh  and  Eve 

amount  of  radium  in  rocks,  646 
McLennan 

emission  of  delta  rays,  173 

penetrating  radiation  from  earth,  5d4, 
634 

activity  of  old  specimens  of  lead,  595 

activity  of  snow,  627 

effect  of  spray  on  collection  of  active 
matter,  627 
McLennan  and  Burton 

activity  of  ordinary  matter,  593 
McLennan  and  Kennedy 

see  Kennedy  and  McLennan 
McLennan  and  Macallum 

see  Macallum  and  McLennan 
Meitner 

separation  of  components  of  thohom 
G,  541 
Meitner  and  Hahn 

see  Hahn  and  Meitner 
Meitner,  v.  Baeyer  and  Hahn 

see  V.  Baeyer,  Hahn  and  Meitner 
Meso- thorium 

discovery  of,  11 

effect  of,  on  decay  of  thorium  X,  3S8 

separation  and  property  of,  546 


Meso- thorium  {cont.} 

variation  in  amount  of,  in  prepara- 
tions of  thorium,  546 
period  of,  547 

separation  with  thorium  X,  547 
chemical  properties  of,  548 
variation  of  activity  with  time,  549 
separation  of,  on  commercial  scale, 
550 
Meso-thorium  2 

absorption  of  y  rays  from,  268 
proportion  of  y  rays  to  fi  rays,  271 
separation  and  properties  of,  548 
radiations  from,  548 
Methods  of  measurement 
in  radio-activity,  87  et  seq. 
comparison     of     photographic     and 

electrical,  87 
description  of  electrical,  88  et  seq. 
Meyer  (E.) 

structure  of  y  rays,  291 
Meyer  (St.) 

phosphorescence  in  kunzite,  301 
Meyer  (St.)  and  Hess 

heating  effect  of  radium,  571 
Meyer  (St.)  and  Mache 

total  ionisation  due  to  one  curie  of 
emanation,  502 
Meyer  and  Begener 

probability  variation  of  a  particles, 
187 
Meyer  (St.)  and  v.  Schweidler 
absorption  of  a  rays,  146 
magnetic  deDection  of  /3  rays,  193 
changes  of  activity  in  uranium,  453 
analysis  of  radio-lead,  511 
period  of  radium  D,  512 
period  of  polonium,  515 
period  of  actinium  B,  525 
separation  of  actinium  C  by  volatili- 
sation, 526 
residual  activity  on  bodies  exposed  to 
actinium  emanation,  527 
Meyer  (G.)  and  Himstedt 

luminosity  of  air  due  to  a  rays,  803 
Millikan 

measurement  of  charge  on  ion, '52 
Minerals 
activity  of  uranium  and  thorium,  13 
separation  of  radium  from  uranium, 

14 
active  substances  present  in  uranium, 

444 
constancy    of    ratio    of    radium    to 

uranium  in,  446,  460 
deficiency  of  radium  in  some  uranium, 

463 
production  of  helium  by  uranium  and 

thorium,  560 
age  of  radio-active,  562,  598 


Minerals  (eont) 
amount  of  helium  in  uranium  and 

thorium,  564 
heating  effect  of  uranium,  583 
final     transformation     products    of 

radio-active,  596 
amount  of  lead  in  radio-active,  597 
Mitchell 

radio-active  equilibria,  431 
Mobility 

of  ions,  41  et  $eq, 

difference  in,  for  positive  and  negative 
ions,  42,  44 
Molecules 

number  of,  per  c.o.  of  gas,  140 
Moore  and  Schlundt 
methods  of  separation  of  uranium  X, 

453 
separation  of  thorium  X,  544 
Moseley 
charge  carried  by  /3  rays  from  radium, 

204    • 
number  of  /9  rays  from  radium  B  and 

radium  C,  611 
number  of  7  rays  per  j9  ray,  614 
Moseley  and  Fajans 

tee  Fajans  and  Moseley 
Moseley  and  Makower 

$ee  Makower  and  Moseley 
Moseley  and  Bobinson 
total  ionisation  produced  by  /3  and 
y  rays,  230,  295,  579 
Moss 
escape  of  helium  from  minerals  by 
grinding,  563 
Moulin 
saturation  with  a  rays,  33 
velocity  of  expulsion   of  delta  rays, 

171 
radium  collector,  324 

Nagaoka 

structure  of  the  atom,  620 
Neon 

possible    transformation    product  of 
radium  emanation,  321 
Nishikawa,  Kinoshita  and  Ono 

theory  of  collection  of  active  matter 
from  atmosphere,  628 
Nomenclature 

of  radio-active  substances,  23  et  teq, 

origin  of,  for  radiations,  115 

change  in,  for  active  deposits,  524, 
534 
Nuttall  and  G^ger 

tee  Geiger  and  Nuttall 

Occlusion 
of  emanation  in  thorium  and  radium, 
359,  861 


B«  fl«-A* 


44 


690 


INDEX 


Ono,  Kinoshita  and  Nisbikawa 
theory  of  collection  of  active  matter 
from  atmosphere,  628 

Owens 
effect  of  smoke  on  recombination,  41 
absorption  of  a  rays,  146 
on  thorium  emanation,  348 

Ozone 
production  of,  by  radium  rays,  314 

Pa8chen 
apparent  charge  carried  by  7  rays, 

272 
attempt  to  deflect  7  rays  by  a  mag- 
netic field,  286 
velocity  distribution  of  p  rays,  251 
Peck  and  Willows 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  spark,  322 
Pegram 
electrolysis  of  active  deposit,  409 
electrolysis    of    active     deposit     of 
thorium,  537 
Pegram  and  Webb 

heating  effect  of  thorium,  583 
Penetrating  power 

compariHon  of,  for  a,  /9  and  7  rays,  117 
of  ^  rays,  223 

variation  of,  with  energy  of  fi  par- 
ticle, 239 
of  7  rays,  258  et  $eq. 
Perkins 

diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  386 
Perrin 
measurement  of  charge  on  ion,  52 
charge  carried  by  cathode  rays,  76 
structure  of  the  atom,  410 
Petavel  and  Rutherford 
effect  of  high  temperature  and  pres- 
sure on  decay  of  emanation,  505 
Petterson 

heating  effect  of  /3  rays  from  radium, 
578 
Phillips 
effect  of  temperature  on  recombina- 
tion, 41 
effect  of  temperature  on  mobility  of 
ions,  46 
Phillips  (C.  E.) 

conducting  glass  fibres,  94 
Phosphorescence 
of  uranium  salts,  7 
due  to  radium  rays,  296 
of  zinc  Kulphide,  297 
of  barium   platinocyanide,  willemite 

and  kuuzite,  298 
of  diamond,  299 
effect  of  Ixombardment  of  a  particles 

on,  300 
decay  of,  for  willemite  and  zinc  sul- 
phide, 301 


Phosphorescence  {eont.) 

.  spectrum  of,  shown  by  radium,  302 

spectrum  of,  shown  by  actinium,  302 

production  of,  by  heat  (thermo-lomiD- 
escence),  304 
Phosphorus 

discharge  by,  5 
Photographic  action 

of  a  rays  from  thick  layers,  143 

of  a,  /3  and  7  rays,  305 

produced  by  one  a  particle,  306 
Photographic  method 

use  of,  in  radio-activity,  87 

application   of,    to    deflection   of  ^ 
rays,  194 

decrease  of  velocity  of  /S  rays  bj, 
244 

records  bv,  of  trails  of  a  and  /3  par- 
ticles, 663 

registration  of  a  particles  by,  664 
Physical  actions  of  radium  rays 

on  spark,  322 

on  electrodeless  discharge,  323 

on  resistance  of  selenium,  323 

on  conductivity  of  radium  solutioDs, 
323 

on   contact    difference  of  potential, 
323 

equalization  of  potential,  324 

on    resistance    of    liquid   and  solid 
dielectrics,  324 
Physiological  actions 

of  radium  rays,  327 
Piezo-electrique 

of  quartz,  104  et  iseq. 
Pirret  (Ruth)  and  Soddy 

ratio  of  radium  to  uranium  in  mine- 
rals, 463 
Pohl 

luminosity  of  air  due  to  a  rays,  303 
Pohl  and  Franck 

mobility  of  ions  in  helium,  43 
Pollock 

large  ions  in  the  atmosphere,  638 
Polonium 

discovery  and  properties  of,  14,  90 

connection  with  radio- tellurium,  20. 
515 

luminosity  of  air  surrounding,  304 

decomposition  of  water  by,  318 

connection  of,  with  radium  F,  515 

chemical  properties  of,  516 

amount  uf,  in  uranium  minerals,  517 

spectrum  of,  517 

possible  transformation  of,  into  lead, 
517 

heating  effect  of,  586 
Poole 

heating  effect  of  uranium  and  thorium 
minerals,  584 


INDEX 


691 


Polassinm 

diAcovery  of  activity  of,  12 
radio-aotivity  of,  5h7 
absorption  of  j9  rays  from,  588 
effect  of  conditions  on  activity  of,  589 
Precht  and  Kunge 
flame  spectrum  of  radium,  471 
heating  effect  of  radium,  569 
Pressure 
effect  of,  on  mobility  of  ion,  46 
effect  of,  on  current  through  gases, 

60 
effect  of,  on  ionisation  due  to  y  rays, 

293 
effect   of,   in    distribution    of  active 

deposit,  401 
vapour  for  radium  emanation,  484 
effect  of,  on  y  ray  activity  of  radium, 

505 
Probability  gL 

variations  in  emission  of  ^particles, 

186  et  seq.  ^ 

variation  in  number  emitted  in  given 

interval,  189 
variation  in  ionisation  due  to  y  rays, 

291 
bearing  of,  on  law  of  transformation, 

419 
Products 
final  products  of  disintegration,  596 
tables  and  properties  of,  668 
Przibram 
mobility  of  ions  in  vapours,  45 
condensation  of  vapours  round  ions, 

50 
Pulse 
theory  of  X  rays,  83 
connection  of,  with  y  rays,  287 
distribution  of  energy  in,  for  y  rays, 

288 

Quartz 

piezo-electrique,  104  et  aeq. 

effect  of  radium  rays  on,  308 
Quinine  sulphate 

discharge  by,  6 

Radiation 
discovery  of,  from  uranium,  7 
constancy  of,  from  uranium,  8 
theories  of,  80 

of  energy,  from  moving  electron,  82 
secondary,  accompanying  a  rays,  170 
recoil,  174  et  seq. 

secondary,  accompanying  j3  rays,  204 
from  uranium,  447 
from  uranium  X,  452 
from  uranium  Y,  455 
from  ionium,  457 
from  radium,  474 


Radiation  (cont.) 

from  radium  A,  B,  C,  489 
from  radium  D,  E,  F,  508 
from  actinium  products,  531 
penetrating    from   earth   and   atmo- 
sphere, 594,  634 
Radio-actinium 

discovery  and  properties  of,  529 
rise  and  decay  curves  due  to,  530 
chemical  properties  of,  533 
Radio-active 

definition  of  term,  4 
Radio-lead 
discovery  of,  21 

connection  with  ladium  D,  21,  511 
radio-active  constituents  of,  510 
Radio-tellurium 
separation  of,  20 
connection  with  polonium,  21 
connection  of,  with  radium  F,  515 
separation  of,  516 
Radio- thorium 
discovery  of,  11 

separation  and  properties  of,  544 
radiations  from,  545 
growth  of,  from  meso-thorium,  549 
separation  of,  from  meso-thorium,  551 
Radium 

discovery  of,  12  et  teq. 

separation  of,  14  et  seq, 

amount  of,  in  minerals,  16 

radiations  from,  17 

number  of  a  particles  emitted  by,  132 

groups  of  a  rays  present  in,  150 

clock,  199 

number  of  /3  particles  emitted   by, 

202  et  seq. 
absorption  of  /3  rays  from,  in  air, 

229 
distribution  with  velocity  of  /3  rays 

from,  251 
velocity  of  groups  of  /9  rays  from, 

254 
absorption  of  y  rays  from,  258 
luminosity  of  compounds  of,  302 
spectrum  of  light  emitted  by,  803 
chemical  actions  produced  by  radia- 
tions from,  314 
decomposition  of  water  by,  317 
effect  of  radiations  of,  on  spark,  322 
effect  of,  on  resistance  of  selenium, 

323 
use  of,  as  potential  equaliser,  324 
effect  of  radiations  from,  on  conduc* 

tivity  of  dielectrics,  324 
motion  of,  in  electric  field,  326 
physiological    actions    produced    by 

radiations  from,  327 
connection  of,  with  uranium,  444 
activity  of,  in  uranium  minerals,  446 


692 


INDEX 


Badium  (cont.) 

life  of,  459 

genetic  connection  of,  with  uranium, 
460 

poverty  of,  in  certain  minerals,  463 

production  of,  from  uranium,  465 

separation  of,  469 

spectrum  of,  470 

atomic  weight  of,  471 

production  of  metallic,  473 

general  properties  of,  473 

radiations  from,  474 

emanation  from,  475 

discovery  of  heUum  in,  555 

rate  of  production  of  helium  by,  556 

heating  effect  of,  568 

measurements  of  heating  effect  of, 
571 

connection  of  heating  effect  of,  with 
radiations  of,  571 

calculated  heating  effect  of,  576 

heating  effect  of  S  and  7  rays  from, 
578 

distribution  of  heating  effect  of, 
amongst  its  products,  580 

heating  effect  of,  mixed  with  phos- 
phorescent materials,  586 

end  product  of,  597 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 

relation  between  ranges  and  periods 
of  transformation  for  products  of, 
007 

distribution  of,  in  earth's  crust,  643 

amount  of,  in  igneous  and  sedimen- 
tary rocks,  645 

amount  of,  in  rocks  of  St  Gothard 
tunnel,  647 

amount  of,  in  sea  water,  649 

possible  presence  of,  in  sun  and  new 
stars,  653 

effect  on  beat  of  sun,  656 

comparison  of  quantities  of,  657 

balance  methods  from  comparison 
of,  658 

standard  solution  of,  660 

preparation   of  International    stand- 
ard of,  661 
Badium  emanation 

decay  of,  361 

effect  of  conditions  on  decay  of,  355 

radiation  from,  357 

effect  of  conditions  on  escape  of,  361 

condensation  of,  364 

temperature  of  condensation  of,  366 

effect  of  conditions  on  condensation 
of,  373 

vapour  pressure  of,  374 

absorption  of,  by  liquids,  375 

absorption  of,  by  solids  and  charcoal, 
378 


Badium  emanation  {cont,) 
diffusion  of,  383 
distribution  of  active  deposit  from, 

392 
general  properties  of,  475 
rise  of  activity  of  radium  due  to,  476 
separation  and  purification  of,  476 
volume  of,  479 
density  aof,  481 
spectrum  of,  482 
boiling  point    and   vapour   pressure 

of,  483 
rate  of  production  of  helium  by,  556 
heating  effect  of,  571 
calculated  heating  effect  of,  576 
total  heat  emission  of,  581 
amount  of,  in  the  atmosphere,  633 
effect    of   meteorological   conditioDs 

on  amount  of,  634 
presence  of,  in  soil,  640 
presence  of,  in  tap  water  and  under- 
ground air,  641 
presence    of,    in    hot    and   minenl 

springs,  641 
measurement  of  amount  of,  in  soil, 

643 
presence  of,  in  sun  and  new  stars, 

653 
tables  of  decay  and  growth  of,  665 
Badium  A 
decay  of,  487 

effect  of,  on  activity  curves,  490 
volatility  of,  505 
heating  effect  of,  576 
Badium  B 

value  of  e/m  for,  178 

discovery  of,  487 

volatility  of,  488,  505 

/3  rays  from,  488 

7  rays  from,  488 

separation  of,  by  recoil  from  radium 

A,  489 
effect  of    /3   rays   from,   on   acUnty 

curves,  493 
effect  of  7  rays    from,   on  activity 

curves,  495 
heating  effect  of,  576 
electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 
Badium  C 

absorption  of  7  rays  from,  264,  268 
proportion  of  7  rays  to  /3  rays  emitted 

by,  271 
discovery  of,  487 
separation  of,  by  nickel,  488 
volatiUty  of,  488 

effect  of,  on  a  ray  decay  curves,  489 
effect  of,  on  fi  ray  decay  curves,  493 
effect  of,  on  7  ray  decay  carves,  495 
maximum   amount    of,  in  decaying 

emanation,  498 


INDEX 


693 


Badinm  G  (cont.) 

decay  of,  measured  by  soft  and  hard 
7  rays,  499 

complex  nature  of,  500 

efifect   of  temperature   and   preesare 
on,  502 

volatility  of,  505 

efifect  of  gases  on  volatility  of,  506 

heating  effect  of,  576       • 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 
Radium  C2 

separation  and  properties  of,  500 

origin  of,  501 
Kadium  D 

calculation  of  growth  of,  from  radium, 
431 

period  and  properties  of,  607 

rise  of  a  and  ^  ray  activity  due  to, 
608 

separation  of,  by  recoil  from  radium 
C,  511 

separation  of,  from  uranium  minerals, 
511 

methods  of  obtaining  pure  prepara- 
tions of,  511 

period  of,  512 

radiations  from,  514 
Radium  £ 

production  of  7  rays  by  /3  rays  from, 
283 

period  and  properties  of,  507,  514 

rise  of  activity  due  to,  609 

separation  of,  from  radium  D,  514 

radiations  from,  515 
Radium  F 

period  and  properties  of,  507 

rise  of  activity  due  to,  508 

volatilisation  of,  509 

period  of,  515 

connection    of,  with  polonium    and 
radio- tellurium,  615 

chemical  properties  of,  516 

amount  of,  in  uranium  minerals,  517 

spectrum  of,  517 

possible  transformation  of,  into  lead, 
517 
Rain 

activity  of,  627 
Ramsay  (Sir  William) 

decomposition  of   gases  by  a  rays, 
316 

discovery  of  helium,  654 
Ramsay  and  Cameron 

see  Cameron  and  Ramsay 
Ramsay  and  Collie 

spectrum  of  radium  emanation,  482 
Ramsay  and  Gray 

see  Gray  and  Ramsay 
Ramsay  and  Soddy 

dissociation  of  water  by  radium,  317 


Ramsay  and  Soddy  {cont.) 

volume  of  radium  emanation,  480 
discovery  of  helium  in  radium,  555 
rate   of    production    of    helium    by 

radium,  557 
Ramsay  and  Usher 
on  production  of  carbon  dioxide  in 

thorium  solution,  322 
Bamstedt 
absorption  of  thorium  emanation  by 

liquids,  377 
Range 

of  recoil  atoms  in  gases,  176,  403 
Range  of  a  particles 
in  Air,  149 
from  radium,  150 
methods  of  determination  of,  161 
table  of,  164 

effect  of  strong  electric  field  on,  165 
variation  of.  with  nature  of  material, 

165 
in  mica  and  glass,  310 
from  uranium,  448 
connection  of  period  of  trausforma- 

tion  with,  607 
R6  (F.) 

theory  of  matter,  412 
Recoil 

radiation,  174  et  seq. 

velocity  of,  175 

separation  of  active  substances  by, 

176 
distance  traversed  in  gases  during, 

176 
velocity  and  mass  of  atoms  liberated 

by,  177 
use  of,  to  determine  atomic  weights, 

178 
ionisation  due  to  atoms  liberated  by, 

179 
range  of  atoms  liberated  by,  403 
Recombination 

of  atoms  of  active  deposit  with  ions, 

400 
Recombination  of  ions 
27,  38 

theory  of  initial  (Bragg),  33 
coefficient  of,  41 
effect  of  pressure  and  temperature  on, 

41 
effect  of  dust  on,  41 
Reflection 

apparent  for  /3  rays,  212 
Regener 

difficulty  of  saturation  with  a  rays,  35 
measurement  of  charge  on  a  particle, 

52,  137 
scintillations  produced  by  /3  particle, 

133 
counting  of  scintillations,  133 

44—3 


694 


INDEX 


Begener  (cont.) 

decrease  of  namber  of   a   partielefl 
with  distance,  156 

Bointillations  in  the  diamond,  299 

period  of  polonium,  bio 
Beinganum 

effect  of  electric  field  on  range  of  a 
particle,  165 

photographic  trail  of  a  particle,  d07 
Betardation 

of  a  particle,  141 

law  of,  142 

of  /3  particles  in  traversing  matter, 
240 
Bicharz  and  Helmholtz 

actions  of  ions  on  steam  jet,  47 
Bighi 

scattering  of  ^  rays,  215 
Binger  and  Jorissen 

action   of  /3  rays  on  hydrogen  and 
chlorine,  316 
Bitzel 

separation  of  uraniam  X  by  charooal, 
454,  601 
Bobin'ion  and  Moseley 

see  Moseley  and  Bobinson 
Bobiiison  (H.)  and  Kutberford 

heating  effect  of  radium  and  its  pro- 
ducts, 57r>,  577 

heating  eflTect  of  /3  and  y  rays  from 
radium,  580 
Bocks 

amount  of  radium  in,  644 

aniouiit  of  thorium  in,  649 
Bontgcn  rays 

discovery  of,  1 

theories  of  nature  of,  83  et  seq. 
Boss  and  McCoy 

activity  of  thorium  minerals,  546 
Bossi  and  Kussell 

spectrum  of  ionium,  467 
Bossignol  and  Gimiugham 

decay  of  thorium  emanation,  351 
Boyds 

spectrum  of   radium  emanation,  483 
Boyds  and  Kutberford 

nature  of  a  particle,  137 

action  of  emanation  on  water,  321 

spectrum  of  radium  emanation,  482 
Bubidium 

radio-activity  of,  12,  587 

absorption  of  {i  rays  from,  689 
Budge 

colouration  of  glass  by  radium  rays, 
307 
Buer  and  Levin 

photographic    action    of    potassium 
rays,  588 
Bumelin 

decay  of  radiam  emanation,  352 


Bonge  and  Precht 

see  Preoht  and  Booge 
Buss 
diffosion  of  thoriam  emanation,  388 
distribntion  of  active  deposit  of  acti- 

niam,  399 
distribution  of  aetive  deposit  at  low 
preasnree,  402 
Boss  and  Makower 

see  Blakower  and  Boss 
Bnssell 
effect   of   temperature  on   decav  of 

products  of  radium,  503 
effect  of  gases   on   volatilisation  of 
radium  C,  507 
Bussell  and  Marokwald 
ratio  of  radium  to  uraniam  in  mine- 
raU,  463 
Bussell  and  Bossi 

spectrum  of  ionium,  467 
BuAsell  and  Soddy 
absorption  of  y  rays  from  radium,  259 
correction  for  absorption  using  wide 

cone  of  y  rays,  261 
absorption    of    y   rays    from    radio- 
active substauces,  267 
period  of  uranium  X,  452 
separation  of  uranium  X,  453 
Bussell  and  Soddy  (Mr  and  Mrs  I 
absorption  of  y  rays  by  lead,  2(K) 

Saake 
activity  of  atmosphere  at  high  alti> 
tudes,  631 
Sackur 

decay  of  radium  emanation,  352 
Sackur  and  Hahn 

see  Hahn  and  Sackur 
Salomonsen  and  Dreyer 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  quartz,  308 
Sanderson 
amount  of  radium  and  thorium  ema- 
nation in  air  drawn  from  the  soil, 
643 
Satterly 
absorption  of  radium  emanation  by 

charcoal,  380 
amount  of  radium  in  potassiom  salts, 

589 
amount  of    radium    emanation    in 
atmosphere,  633 
Saturation  current  ^ 

meaning  of,  29 

difficulty  of  obtaining  with  a  rays, 
32  et  seq. 
Scattering  of  a  rays 
laws  of,  180  et  seq. 
through  large  angles,  183 
theory  of,  184 
single  and  oompoond,  186 


Scattering  of  /3  rays 

effect  of,  on  distribution,  216 
amount  of,  by  dififerent  materiala,  217 
variation  of,  with  velocity,  217 
by  transmission,  218 
by  thin  sheets  of  matter,  219 
theories  of,  220 
Scattering  of  y  rays,  279 
variation  of  amount  of,  with  material 
and  angle,  281 
Schenke 
radium  emanation  in  thermal  springs, 
C41 
Schluudt  and  Moore 

see  Moore  and  Schlundt 
Schmidt  (Q.  C.) 

discovery  of  activity  of  thorium,  10 
Schmidt  (H.  \V.) 

use  of  quartz  fibre  in  electroscope,  94 
reflected  /j  rays,  216 
absorption  of  /3  rays,  224 
coeflicients  of  absorption  of  j3  rays, 

225 
absorption  of  /3  rays  by  liquids,  228 
theory  of  absorption  of  /3  rays,  231 
velocity  of  (i  rays  from   radium  £ 

and  uranium  X,  238 
distribution  of  /3  rays,  314 
recombination    of    atoms    of    active 

deposit,  400 
fi  r&ys  from  radium  B,  488 
decay  of  active  deposit  of  radium,  492 
eiTect  of  j3  rays  from  radium  B  on 

rise  curve,  4*J3 
effect   of    temperature   on    decay   of 
products  of  radium,  503 
Schmidt  (H.  W.)  and  Cermak 
effect  of   temperature   on  decay  pro- 
ducts of  radium,  503 
Schrader 
effect   of  gases   on   volatilisation   of 
active  deposit,  506,  600 
Schuster 

measurement    of    ejm    for    cathode 

rays,  78 
pulse  theory  of  X  rays,  83 
effect  of  pressure  on  y  ray  activity 
of  radium,  505 
V.  Schweidler 

probability  variations,  in  transforma- 
tions, 1H7 
V.  Schweidler  aud  Bohm-Wendt 
conductivity    of    oils    under  radium 
rays,  326 
V.  Schweidler  and  Hess 

heating  effect  of  radium,  571 
V.  Schweidler  and  Mache 

velocity  of  ions  in  atmosphere,  638 
V.  Schweidler  and  Meyer  (St.) 
see  Meyer  and  Schweidler 


Scintillations 

,    discovery  of,  183 

method  of  counting  a  partioleg  by, 

134 
double,  191 
in  sine  sulphide,  297 
in  diamond,  299 

duration  of,  in  zinc  sulphide,  300 
effect  of  continued  bombardment  on, 
300 
Searle 

electrical  mass  of  a  charged  body,  71 
Sea-water 

amount  of  radium  in,  649 
Seitz 

absorption  of  /9  rays,  225 
Selenium 
effect  of  radium  rays  on  resistance 
of,  323 
Simon 
measurement  of  elm  for  cathode  rays, 
78,  206 
Simpson 
amount   of  active  matter  in  atmo- 
sphere, 631 
Simpson  and  Wright 

use  of  quartz  fibre  electroscope,  96 
ionium  collector,  324 
amount  of  active  deposit  in  air  over 
the  sea,  632 
Slater  (Miss) 
emission   of  delta  rays  from   active 

substances,  171 
volatilisation    of     thorium    B    and 
thorium  C,  537 
Smolan,  Kelvin  (Lordj,  and  Beattie 

discharging  power  by  uranium  rays,  9 
Snow 

activity  of,  627 
Soddy 
photographic  action  of  (i  rays,  307 
photographic  action  of  uranium,  452 
production   of  radium   by   uranium, 

465 
period  of  ionium,  467 
separation    of    radium    and    meso- 

thorium,  548 
rate    of    production    of    helium    by 
uranium,  561 
Soddy  (Mr  aud  Mrs)  and  liussell 

absorption  of  7  rays  by  lead,  260 
Soddy  and  Mackenzie 

production  of  radium  by  uranium,  466 
Soddy  and  Pirret  (Kuth) 
ratio    of    radium    to     uranium    in 
minerals,  463 
Soddy  and  Kamsay 

see  Bam  say  and  Soddy 
Soddy  and  Kussell 
see  liussell  and  Soddy 


696 


INDEX 


Soddy  and  Bntherford 

theory  of  transformation,  2, 335  et  seq, 

discovery  of  thorium  X,  332 

decay  of  thorium  X,  333 

decay  and  rise  of  uranium  X,  335 
.  decay  of  radium  emanation,  352 

effect    of    conditions   on    emanating 
power  of  thorium,  358 

condensation  of  thorium  and  radium 
emanations,  364 

temperature      of     condensation     of 
radium  emanation,  366 

development  of  disiutegration  theory, 
413 

period  of  uranium  X,  452 

origin    of    helium    in     radio-active 
substances,  555 
Soil 

radio-activity  of,  640 

presence    of    radium    and    thorium 
emanations  in,  643 
Spectrum 

of  ionium,  467 

of  radium,  470 

of  radium  emanation,  482 

of  polonium,  517 
Spinthariscope,  133 
Standards 

of  ionisation.  111 

of  radium,  660  et  seq. 
Stark  (J.) 

nature  of  7  rays,  290 

theory  of  successive  changes,  418 
Stark  and  Giesel 

luminosity  of  air  due  to  rays  from 
polonium,  304 
Starke  (H.) 

determination    of    ejm    for    cathode 
rays,  208 

production    of   7    rays    by    ^   rays, 
282 
Steele  and  Grant 

micro-balance,  481 
Stokes 

terminal  velocity  of  small  sphere  in 
air,  51 

pulse  theory  of  X  rays,  83 
Stoney  (Johnstone) 

origin  of  name  "electron,"  79 
Stopping  power 

detiuition  of,  for  a  particle,  165 

law  of,  165 

variation  of,  with  velocity,  168 
Stormer 

theory  of  aurora,  654 
Strauss  and  Hofmann 

discovery  of  radio-lead,  21 
Stromholm  and  Svedberg 

chemical    properties   of    thorium    X 
and  actinium  X,  533,  544 


Strong 

activity  of  potassiam,  588 
Strutt 
conductivity  of  gases,  62 
nature  of  a  rays,  119 
radium  clock,  199  '^•- 

absorption   of  /3  rays  from  radium, 

227 
luminosity  of  autunite,  302 
constancy  of   radium  to  uranium  in 

minerals,  460 
rate    of    production    of    helium  by 

uranium    and    thorium    minerals, 

561 
escape  of  helium  from  thorianite,  56S 
amount    of   helium    in    radio-actiTe 

minerals,  564 
origin  of  the  helium  in  beryl,  565 
age  of  geological  strata,  566 
amount  of  helium   in   specimens  of 

zircon,  566 
amount  of  helium  in  saline  minerals, 

568 
radio-activity  of  ordinary  materials, 

592 
radium  emanation    in    hot    springs, 

641 
amount  of  radium  in  rocks,  6^ 
radium  in  meteorites,  653 
Sun 
presence  of  radium  in,  654 
duration  of  heat  of,  655 
Svedberg  and  Str6mholm 

see  Stromholm  and  Svedberg 
Swinne 
relation  between  range  of  a  particle 

and  period  of  transformation,  609 
Szilard 
concentration  of  radium  D,  511 

Taylor 

ionisation  of  a  particle,  65 

variation   of   ionisation    with    range 
for  gases,  154 

variation    of    stopping    power    with 
velocity,  168 
Temperature 

effect  of,  on  decay  of  radium  ema- 
nation, 355 

effect  of,  on  escape  of  thorium  ema- 
nation, 359 

effect  of,   on  escape  of  radium  ema- 
nation, 361 

effect  of,  on  condensation  of  emana- 
tions, 366 

effect  of,  on  active  deposits,  409 

effect  of,  on  volatility  of  active  deposit 
of  radium,  503 

independence  of  rate  of  transforma- 
tion on,  503 


INDEX 


697 


Temperature  (cant.) 

of  volatilisation  of  radiam  prodaots 
in  different  gases,  506 
Thermo-luminescence,  304 
Thomson  (Sir  J.  J.) 

difference  between  positive  and  nega- 
tive ions,  49 

measnrement  of  charge  on  ion,  51 

electrical  mass  of  a  charged  body,  71 

charge  carried  by  cathode  rays,  76 

electrostatic    deflection    of    cathode 
rays,  77 

measure  of  elm  Tor  cathode  stream,  78 

canal  rays,  81 

pulse  theory  of  X  rays,  83 

distribution  of  energy  in  pulse  theory, 
84 

emission  of  delta  rays,  135 

properties  of  delta  rays,  170 

theory  of  scattering  of  ^  rays,  220 

origin  of  heat  energy  of  radium,  412 

structure  of  the  atom,  617 

number  of  electrons  in  atoms,  618 

radio-activity  of  tap  water,  641 
Thomson  (J.  J.^  and  Butherford 

theory  of  ionisation,  26 
Thorianite 

production  of  helium  by,  561 

age  of,  562 

escape  of  helium  from,  563 
Thorium 

discovery  of  activity  of,  10 

nature  of  radiations  from,  10 

emanation  from,  10 

changes  in  activity  of,  11 

calculation  of  variation  of  activity  of 
commercial  preparations,  440,  546 

transformations  of,  534  et  teq. 

number  of  a  particles  emitted  by,  551 

period  of,  551 

series  of  transformations  of,  552 

rate  of  production  of  helium  by,  560 

heating  effect  of,  583 

cud  product  of,  599 

relation  between  range  and  period  of 
transformations  of,  607 

distribution  of,  in  rocks,  649 
Thorium  emanation 

discovery  and  properties  of,  348 

decay  of,  350 

radiations  from,  357 

effect  of  conditions  on  escape  of,  358 

condensation  of,  364 

absorption  of,  by  liquids,  377 

absorption  of,  by  solids,  379 

diffusion  of,  387 

number  of  a  particles  expelled  by,  395 

transformation  of,  534 

presence  of,  in  aUnosphere,  626 

emission  of,  by  soil,  641 


Thorium  emanation  (cont.) 

emission  of,  by  sediment,  642 

measurement  of  amount  of,  in  soil, 
643 
Thorium  A 

discovery  and  properties  of,  396 

period  and  properties  of,  534 
Thorium  B 

period  and  properties  of,  535 

volatilisation  of,  537 

electrolysis,  537 

radiations  from,  538 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 
Thorium  C 

separation  and  properties  of,  535 

volatilisation  of,  537 

separation  of,  on  nickel  plate,  588 

analysis  of  a  radiations  from,  589 

complex  nature  of,  539 

modes  of  disintegration  of,  541 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 
Thorium  C] 

component  product  of  thorium  G,  540 
Thorium  C, 

component  product  of  thorium  C,  540 
Thorium  D 

absorption  of  y  rays  from,  268 

proportion  of  y  rays  to  /3  rays,  271 

separation  and  properties  of,  542 

radiations  from,  542 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  603 
Thorium  X 

discovery  of,  333 

decay  and  rise  of,  333 

separation  and  properties  of,  543 

radiations  from,  543 

chemical  properties  of,  544 

electro-chemical  properties  of,  608 
Thorpe  (Sir  T.  E.) 

atomic  weight  of  radium,  472 
Townsend 

ionisation  by  collision,  36 

coefficient  of  recombination  of  ions,  40 

diffusion  of  ions  in  gases,  53  et  $eq, 

proof  that  charge  on  ion  equals  charge 
carried  by  hydrogen  atom  in  elec- 
trolysis, 55 

compensation    method   of    measure- 
ment,  103 
Transformation 

products  of,  22  et  seq. 

decay  and  exponential  law  of,  22 

of  matter  by  radiations,  320 

meaning  of  exponential  law  o^  341 

theory  of,  344,  410  et  teq. 

development  of  theory  of,  413 

theory  for  one,  419 

theory  of  successive,  420 

rayless,  433 

analogies  between  series  of,  605 


698 


INDEX 


Transformation  {cont.) 

relation  between  range  and  period  of, 
607 

origin  of  /9  and  7  rajs  in,  611  et  $eq, 

mode  of,  620 

causes  of,  621 

irreversible  character  of,  623 
Tranbenberg 

abKorption  of  radinm  emanation  by 
liquids,  375 
Taomikoski 

absorption  of  7  rays,  259 

Ulrich  and  Haitinger 

separation  of  radium,  16 
Ultra-violet  light 
discharge  by,  5 
Uranium 
discovery  of  activity  of,  6 
phosphorescence  of  salts  of,  7 
activity  of  compounds  of,  13 
use  of,  as  ionisation  standard,  111 
absorption  of  a  rays  from,  146 
range  of  a  rays  from,  168 
absorption  of  /3  rays  in,  229 
absorption  of  7  rays  from,  264,  268 
proportion  of  7  rays  to  B  rays  from, 

271 
luminosity  of  nitrate  of,  802 
connection  with  ionium  and  radium, 

444 
activity  of  minerals  containing,  445 
relative  activity  of  products   of,   in 

minerals,  446 
complexity  of,  447 
presence  of  two  groups  of  a  rays  in, 

449 
period  of,  450 
effect  of  periods  of  two  components 

on  relative  activity  of,  451 
connection  between  radium  and,  460 
production  of  radium  in,  465 
series  of  products  of,  468 
rate  of  production  of  helium  by,  560 
heating  effect  of,  583 
end  product  of,  597 
relation  between  range  and  period  of 

transformation  of,  607 
amount  of,  in  earth,  650 
Uranium  1,  449,  468  (see  Uranium) 
Uranium  2,  449,  468  (see  Uranium) 
Uranium  X 
absorption  of  7  rays  from,  264,  268 
proportion  of  7  rays  to  fi  rays,  271 
discovery  of,  330 
methods  of  separation  of,  331 
decay  of,  331 
decay  and  rise  of,  835 
period  of,  452 
radiations  from,  452 


Uranium  X  {eont.) 

methods  of  separation  of,  453 

chemical  properties  of,  454,  60S 
Uranium  T 

discovery  and  properties  of,  454 
Usher 

action  of  a  rays  on   hydrogen  and 
nitrogen,  316 

rate  of    decomposition  of  water  by 
actinium  and  radium,  318 


Valency 

change  of,  in  a  ray  transformatioDB, 
606 
Varley  i 

discovery  of  cathode  rays,  76 
Vegard 

theory  of  aurora,  654 
Velocity 

of  ions,  27  et  seq. 

of  a  particles,  123,  128 

variation  of  absorption  of  p  rays  with,       { 
238 

decrease  of,  for  /3  rays  in  traversing 
matter,  240 

variation  of  ionisation  of  /3  rays  with, 
245 

distribution  with,  of  the  ^  rays,  250 

of  homogeneous  groups  of  /3  rajB,  2M 

of  atoms  of  active  deposit,  407 

of  ions  in  atmosphere,  638 
Villard 

discovery  of  7  rays,  257 
Volatilisation 

of  radium  products,  504,  505 

effect  of  gases  on,  506 
Volatility 

separation  of  products  by,  600 

Waklhoff 

production  of  bums  by  radinm,  327 
Wallstabe 

diffusion    of    radium    emanation   in 
liquids,  390 
Walter 

luminosity  of  air  due  to  a  rays,  803 
V.  Wartborg  and  v.  Lerch 

volatility  of  thorium  D,  542 
Water 

decomposition  of,  by  radiation,  317 
et  aeq, 
Watson 

spectrum  of  radium  emanation,  488 

atomic  weight  of  heliom,  554 
Webb  and  Pegram 

heating  effect  of  thorium,  583 
Wellisch 

mobility  of  ions,  45 

mobility  of  ions  in  gaseoas  mixtures, 
46 


INDEX 


699 


Wellisch  (cant.) 

theory  of  movement  of  ions  in  gases, 
57 
TVellisch  and  Bronson 

cbarge  on  active  deposit,  399 
TN'elsbach  (Auer  v.) 

attempts    to    separate    ioniam    and 

thorium,  457 
separation  of  actinium,  520 
"Wertenstein 

distance   traversed   by  recoil  atoms, 

176 
ionisation  due  to  recoil  atoms,  179 
range  of  recoil  atoms,  405 
^^heeler  and  Bumstead 

^v6  Bumstead  and  Wheeler 
Wheelock 

saturation  with  a  rays,  35 
'Wliiddington 

characteristic  X  rays,  85 

variation  of  absorption  of  /3  rays  with 

speed,  239 
retardation  of  cathode  rays,  244 
velocity  of  electron  to  excite  character- 
istic rays,  292 
Wiechert 

velocity  of  cathode  rays,  79 
pulse  theory  of  X  rays,  83 
Wiedemann 

thermo-luminescence  due  to  /3  rays, 
305 
Wiedemann  and  Schmidt 

tliermo-luminescence,  304 
W'ien 

canal  rays,  81 

charge  carried  by  /8  rays  of  radium, 
201 
Wigger 

absorption  of  y  rays,  259 
Willcmite 
luminosity  of,  298 
decay  of  luminosity  of,  300,  301 
Willows  and  Peck 

effect  of  radium  rays  on  spark,  322 
Wilson  (C.  T.  R.) 
condensation  of  water  on    ions,  47 

et  seq. 
difference      between      positive     and 

negative  ions,  49 
electroscope  constructed  by,  92 
tilted  electroscope,  95 
detection  of  single  a  particle,  134 
natural  ionisation  of  air,  591,  624 
variation  of  natural  ionisation  with 

pressure  and  nature  of  gas,  592 
activity  of  rain  and  snow,  627 
record  of  trails  of  a  and  k  particles, 
603 


Wilson  (H.  A.) 

measurement  of  charge  on  ion,  51 
Wilson  (W.) 
exponential  law  of  absorption  of  j3 

rays,  211 
absorption  of  homogeneous  /3  rays, 

235 
retardation  of  /3  rays  in  traversing 

matter,  241 
variation  of  ionisation  of  /3  particles 

with  speed,  248 
velocity  distribution  of  /3  rays,  251 
variation  of  absorption  of  y  rays  with 

temperature,  293 
variation  of  ionisation  of  y  rays  with 

pressure,  293 
thorium   emanation   in   atmosphere, 
626 
Wilson  (W.)  and  Gray  (J.  A.) 
complex  nature  of  fi  rays  from  radium 
E,  238 
Wilson  (W.)  and  Eovarik 
variation  of  scattering  of  /3  rays  with 
velocity,  217 
Wolfl,  Hofmann  and  Gonder 

constituents  of  radio-lead,  510 
Wolfl  and  Hofmann 

concentration  of  radium  D,  511 
Wood  (R.  W.) 

duration  of  scintillations,  300 
Wood  and  Campbell 

see  Campbell  and  Wood 
Wright 
rate  of  leak  of  screened  electroscope, 

594 
absence  of  penetrating  radiation  over 
water,  636 
Wright  and  Simpson 

see  Simpson  and  Wright 
Wulf 

quartz  fibre  electroscope,  96 
variation  of  penetrating  radiation  with 
altitude,  636 

Zeeman 

effect  of  magnetic  field  on  spectrum 
lines,  80 
Zeleny 

mobility  of  ions,  42,  44 

potential  gradient,  65 
Zinc  sulphide 

scintillating  property  of,  297 

duration  of  scintillations  in,  300 

effect  of  continued  bombardment  on, 
300 

theory  of  decay  of  luminosity  of,  301 
Zircon 

amount  of  helium  and  radium  in,  566 


N^  X>^  .^ 


Cambrtlige : 

PRINTED   BT  JOHN   CLAT,   M.A. 
AT   THE   UNIVERSITT  PRB88. 


