Radio-activity (Ernest Rutherford, 1904)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1904 first edition (Cambridge University Press) (https://archive.org/details/radioactivity00ruthrich). Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937) - the founding textbook of nuclear science, from the discoverer of the atomic nucleus.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CAMBRIDGE    PHYSICAL    SERIES. 

GENERAL  EDITORS: — F.  H.  NEVILLE,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 
AND  W.  C.  D.  WHETHAM,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 


EADIO-ACTIVITY 


C.  J.    CLAY   AND   SONS, 
CAMBRIDGE   UNIVEKSITY   PEESS   WAREHOUSE, 
AVE   MAEIA  LANE. 


H.    K.    LEWIS, 
136,   GOWEE   STEEET,   W.C. 


©lassgofo:   50,  WELLINGTON  STREET. 

Iripjig:    F.   A.   BROCKHAUS. 

$efo  lorfe:    THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY. 

Bombag  anti  Calcutta:  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD. 


[All  Rights  reserved \ 


RADIO-ACTIVITY 


BY 


E.   RUTHERFORD,   D.Sc.,   F.R.S.,   F.R.S.C. 

MACDONALD    PROFESSOR   OF   PHYSICS,    MCGILL   UNIVERSITY,   MONTREAL. 


CAMBRIDGE 

AT   THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS 
1904 


CambriUge : 

PRINTED    BY    J.    AND    C.    F.    CLAY, 
AT   THE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS. 


SENERAL 


J.   J.    THOMSON 

A   TKIBUTE    OF   MY  KESPECT   AND   ADMIRATION 


90ft     (I 

<-W  .*»  \J  S*  V/ 


PREFACE. 


TX  this  work,  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  a  complete  and 
*-  connected  account,  from  a  physical  standpoint,  of  the  properties 
possessed  by  the  naturally  radio-active  bodies.  Although  the 
subject  is  comparatively  a  new  one,  our  knowledge  of  the  pro- 
perties of  the  radio-active  substances  has  advanced  with  great 
rapidity,  and  there  is  now  a  very  large  amount  of  information  on 
the  subject  scattered  throughout  the  various  scientific  journals. 

The  phenomena  exhibited  by  the  -radio-active  bodies  are 
extremely  complicated,  and  some  form  of  theory  is  essential  in 
order  to  connect  in  an  intelligible  manner  the  mass  of  experi- 
mental facts  that  have  now  been  accumulated.  I  have  found  the 
theory  that  the  atoms  of  the  radio-active  bodies  are  undergoing 
spontaneous  disintegration,  extremely  serviceable  not  only  in 
correlating  the  known  phenomena,  but  also  in  suggesting  new 
lines  of  research. 

The  interpretation  of  the  results  has,  to  a  large  extent,  been 
based  on  the  disintegration  theory,  and  the  logical  deductions  to 
be  drawn  from  the  application  of  the  theory  to  radio-active 
phenomena  have  also  been  considered. 

The  rapid  advance  of  our  knowledge  of  radio-activity  has 
been  dependent  on  the  information  already  gained  by  research 
into  the  electric  properties  of  gases.  The  action  possessed  by  the 
radiations  from  radio-active  bodies  of  producing  charged  carriers 
or  ions  in  the  gas,  has  formed  the  basis  of  an  accurate  quantitative 
method  of  examination  of  the  properties  of  the  radiations  and  of 


vili  PREFACE 

radio-active  processes,  and  also  allows  us  to  determine  with  con- 
siderable certainty  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  different 
quantities  involved. 

For  these  reasons,  it  has  been  thought  advisable  to  give  a  brief 
account  of  the  electric  properties  of  gases,  to  the  extent  that  is 
necessary  for  the  interpretation  of  the  results  of  measurements 
in  radio-activity  by  the  electric  method.  The  chapter  on  the 
ionization  theory  of  gases  was  written  before  the  publication 
of  J.  J.  Thomson's  recent  book  on  "  Conduction  of  Electricity 
through  Gases,"  in  which  the  w_hole  subject  is  treated  in  a 
complete  and  connected  manner. 

A  short  chapter  has  been  added,  in  which  an  account  is  given 
of  the  methods  of  measurement  which,  in  the  experience  of  the 
writer  and  others,  are  most  suitable  for  accurate  work  in  radio- 
activity. It  is  hoped  that  such  an  account  may  be  of  some  service 
to  those  who  may  wish  to  obtain  a  practical  acquaintance  with  the 
methods  employed  in  radio-active  measurements. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Mr  W.  C.  Dampier  Whetham,  F.R.S., 
one  of  the  editors  of  the  Cambridge  Physical  Series,  for  many 
valuable  suggestions,  and  for  the  great  care  and  trouble  he  has 
taken  in  revising  the  proof  sheets.  I  am  also  much  indebted  to 
my  wife  and  Miss  H.  Brooks  for  their  kind  assistance  in  correcting 
the  proofs,  and  to  Mr  R.  K.  McClung  for  revising  the  index. 


MACDONALD  PHYSICS  BUILDINGS, 
MONTREAL, 

February,  1904. 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 


CHAP. 

PAGE 

I. 

Radio-  active  Substances  

1 

II. 

lonization  Theory  of  Gases    ....... 

28 

III. 

Methods  of  Measurement        

67 

IV. 

Nature  of  the  Radiations        ....... 

90 

V. 

Rate  of  Emission  of  Energy  ..'!.... 

149 

VI. 

Properties  of  the  Radiations  

166 

VII. 

Continuous  Production  of  Radio-active  Matter     . 

178 

VIII. 

Radio-active  Emanations         

197 

IX. 

Excited  Radio-activity     

250 

X. 

Radio-active  Processes     ........ 

293 

XI. 

Radio-activity  of  the  Atmosphere  and  of  Ordinary  Materials 

351 

Index                                  ........ 

383 

Plate  (Fig.  33) to  face  p.  169 


ABBREVIATIONS   OF   REFERENCES   TO    SOME   OF 
THE   JOURNALS. 

Ber.  d.   deutsch.    Chem.    Ges.      Berichte    der  deutschen   chernischen    Gesell- 
schaft.     Berlin. 

C.  R.     Comptes  Rendus  des  Seances  de  F  Academic  des  Sciences.     Paris. 
Chem.  News.     Chemical  News.     London. 
Drude's  Annal.     Annalen  der  Physik.     Leipzig. 
^9       Phil.  Mag.     Philosophical  Magazine  and  Journal  of  Science.     London. 

Phil.  Trans.     Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London. 
Phys.  Rev.     Physical  Review.     New  York. 
Phys.  Z&it.     Physikalische  Zeitschrift. 

Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.     Proceedings  of  the  Cambridge  Philosophical  Society. 
Cambridge. 

Proc.  Roy.  Soc.     Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London. 

Theses-Paris.     Theses  presentees  &  la  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  I'Universit^ 
de  Paris. 

Wied.  Annal.     Annalen  der  Physik.     Leipzig. 

ERRATA. 

page  10,  line  16;  for  "chapter  ix,"  read  "section  217." 

page  274,  last  line ;  for  "  36  minutes,"  read  "  21  minutes." 

page  326,  Radium,  Second  change,  for  "36  minutes,"  read  "21  minutes.'" 


CHAPTEK  I. 

RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES. 

1.  Introduction.  The  close  of  the  old  and  the  beginning  v 
of  the  new  century  have  been  marked  by  a  very  rapid  increase  of  ) 
our  knowledge  of  that  most  important  but  comparatively  little 
known  subject — the  connection  between  electricity  and  matter. 
No  study  has  been  more  fruitful  in  surprises  to  the  investigator, 
both  from  the  remarkable  nature  of  the  phenomena  exhibited  and 
from  the  laws  controlling  them.  The  more  the  subject  has  been 
examined,  the  more  complex  does  the  constitution  of  matter  appear 
which  can  give  rise  to  the  remarkable  effects  observed.  While 
the  experimental  results  have  led  to  the  view  that  the  constitution 
of  the  atom  itself  is  very  complex,  at  the  same  time  they  have 
strongly  confirmed  the  old  theory  of  the  discontinuous  or  atomic 
structure  of  matter.  The  study  of  the  radio-active  substances  and 
of  the  discharge  of  electricity  through  gases  has  supplied  very 
strong  experimental  evidence  in  support  of  the  fundamental  ideas 
of  the  existing  atomic  theory.  It  has  also  indicated  that  the 
atom  itself  is  not  the  smallest  unit  of  matter,  but  is  a  complicated 
structure  made  up  of  a  number  of  smaller  bodies. 

A  great  impetus  to  the  study  tof  this  subject  was  initially 
given  by  the  experiments  of  Lenard  on  the  cathode  rays,  and 
by  Rontgen's  discovery  of  the  X  rays.  An  examination  of  the 
conductivity  imparted  to  a  gas  by  the  X  rays  led  to  a  clear  view 
of  the  mechanism  of  the  transport  of  electricity  through  gases 
by  means  of  charged  ions.  This  ionization  theory  of  gases  has 
been  shown  to  afford  a  satisfactory  explanation  not  only  of  the 
passage  of  electricity  through  flames  and  vapours,  but  also  of  the 
R.  R.-A.  1 


2  KADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

complicated  phenomena  observed  when  a  discharge  of  electricity 
passes  through  a  vacuum  tube.  At  the  same  time,  a  further 
study  of  the  cathode  rays  showed  that  they  consisted  of  a  stream 
of  material  particles,  projected  with  great  velocity,  and  possessing 
an  apparent  mass  small  compared  with  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom. 
The  connection  between  the  cathode  and  Rontgen  rays  and  the 
nature  of  the  latter  were  also  elucidated.  Much  of  this  admirable 
experimental  work  on  the  nature  of  the  electric  discharge  has 
been  done  by  Professor  J.  J.  Thomson  and  his  students  in  the 
Cavendish  Laboratory,  Cambridge. 

An  examination  of  natural  substances,  in  order  to  see  if  they 
gave  out  dark  radiations  similar  to  X  rays,  led  to  the  discovery  of 
the  radio-active  bodies  which  possess  the  property  of  spontaneously 
emitting  radiations,  invisible  to  the  eye,  but  readily  detected  by 
their  action  on  photographic  plates  and  their  power  of  discharging 
electrified  bodies.  A  detailed  study  of  the  radio-active  bodies  has 
led  to  the  discovery  of  many  new  and  surprising  phenomena  which 
have  thrown  much  light,  not  only  on  the  nature  of  the  radiations 
themselves,  but  also  on  the  processes  occurring  in  those  substances. 
Notwithstanding  the  complex  nature  of  the  phenomena,  the  know- 
ledge of  the  subject  has  advanced  with  great  rapidity,  and  a  large 
amount  of  experimental  data  has  now  been  accumulated. 

In  order  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity,  a  theory 
has  been  put  forward  which  regards  the  atoms  of  the  radio-active 
elements  as  suffering  spontaneous  disintegration,  and  giving  rise 
to  a  series  of  radio-active  substances  which  differ  in  chemical 
properties  from  the  parent  elements.  The  radiations  accompany 
the  breaking-up  of  the  atoms,  and  afford  a  comparative  measure  of 
the  rate  at  which  the  disintegration  takes  place.  This  theory  is 
found  to  account  in  a  satisfactory  way  for  all  the  known  facts  of 
radio-activity,  and  welds  a  mass  of  disconnected  facts  into  one 
homogeneous  whole.  On  this  view,  the  continuous  emission  of 
energy  from  the  active  bodies  is  derived  from  the  internal  energy 
inherent  in  the  atom,  and  does  not  in  any  way  contradict  the  law 
of  the  conservation  of  energy.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it 
indicates  that  an  enormous  store  of  latent  energy  is  resident  in  the 
radio-atoms  themselves.  This  store  of  energy  has  previously  not 
been  observed,  on  account  of  the  impossibility  of  breaking  up  into 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  3 

simpler  forms  the  atoms  of  the  elements  by  the  action  of  the 
chemical  or  physical  forces  at  our  command. 

On  this  theory  we  are  witnessing  in  the  radio-active  bodies  a 
veritable  transformation  of  matter.  This  process  of  disintegration 
was  investigated,  not  by  direct  chemical  methods,  but  by  means 
of  the  property  possessed  by  the  radio-active  bodies  of  giving  out 
specific  types  of  radiation.  Except  in  the  case  of  a  very  active 
element  like  radium,  the  process  of  disintegration  takes  place  so 
slowly,  that  hundreds  if  not  thousands  of  years  would  be  required 
before  the  amount  transformed  would  come  within  the  range  of 
detection  of  the  balance  or  the  spectroscope.  In  radium,  however, 
the  process  of  disintegration  takes  place  at  such  a  rate  that  it 
should  be  possible  within  a  limited  space  of  time  to  obtain  definite 
chemical  evidence  on  this  question.  The  recent  discovery  that 
helium  can  be  obtained  from  radium  adds  strong  confirmation  to 
the  theory ;  for  helium  was  indicated  as  a  probable  disintegration 
product  of  the  radio-active  elements  before  this  experimental 
evidence  was  forthcoming.  If  the  production  of  helium  by  radium 
is  completely  substantiated,  the  further  study  of  radio-active  bodies 
promises  to  open  up  new  and  important  fields  of  chemical  enquiry. 

In  this  book  the  experimental  facts  of  radio-activity  and  the 
connection  between  them  are  interpreted  on  the  disintegration 
theory.  Many  of  the  phenomena  observed  can  be  investigated  in 
a  quantitative  manner,  and  prominence  has  been  given  to  work  of 
this  character,  for  the  agreement  of  any  theory  with  the  facts, 
which  it  attempts  to  explain,  must  ultimately  depend  upon  the 
results  of  accurate  measurement. 

The  value  of  any  working  theory  depends  upon  the  number  of 
experimental  facts  it  serves  to  correlate,  and  upon  its  power  of 
suggesting  new  lines  of  work.  In  these  respects  the  disintegration 
theory,  whether  or  not  it  may  ultimately  be  proved  to  be  correct, 
has  already  been  justified  by  its  results. 

2.  Radio-active  Substances.  The  term  "  radio-active  "  is 
now  generally  applied  to  a  class  of  substances,  such  as  uranium, 
thorium,  radium,  and  their  compounds,  which  possess  the  property 
of  spontaneously  emitting  radiations  capable  of  passing  through 
plates  of  metal  and  other  substances  opaque  to  ordinary  light. 

1—2 


4  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

The  characteristic  property  of  these  radiations,  besides  their 
penetrating  power,  is  their  action  on  a  photographic  plate  and 
their  power  of  discharging  electrified  bodies.  In  addition,  a 
strongly  radio-active  body  like  radium  is  able  to  cause  marked 
phosphorescence  and  fluorescence  on  some  substances  placed  near 
it.  In  the  above  respects  the  radiations  possess  properties 
analogous  to  Rontgen  rays,  but  it  will  be  shown  that,  for  the 
major  part  of  the  radiations  emitted,  the  resemblance  is  only 
superficial. 

The  most  remarkable  property  of  the  radio-active  bodies  is 
their  power  of  spontaneously  and  continuously  radiating  energy  at 
a  constant  rate,  without,  as  far  as  is  known,  the  action  upon  them 
of  any  external  exciting  cause.  The  phenomena  at  first  sight 
appear  to  be  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  law  of  conservation  of 
energy,, since  no  obvious  change  with  time  occurs  in  the  radiating 
material.  The  phenomena  appear  still  more  remarkable  when  it 
is  considered  that  the  radio-active  bodies  must  have  been  steadily 
radiating  energy  since  the  time  of  their  formation  in  the  earth's 
crust. 

Immediately  after  Rontgen's  discovery  of  the  production  of 
X  rays,  several  scientists  were  led  to  examine  if  any  natural 
bodies  possessed  the  property  of  giving  out  radiations  which  could 
penetrate  metals  and  other  substances  opaque  to  light.  As  the 
production  of  X  rays  seemed  to  be  in  some  way  connected  with 
cathode  rays,  which  cause  strong  fluorescent  and  phosphorescent 
effects  on  various  bodies,  the  substances  first  examined  were  those 
that  were  phosphorescent  when  exposed  to  light.  The  first  obser- 
vation in  this  direction  was  made  by  Niewenglowski1,  who  found 
that  sulphide  of  calcium  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  gave  out  some 
rays  which  were  able  to  pass  through  black  paper.  A  little  later 
a  similar  result  was  recorded  by  H.  Becquerel2  for  a  special 
calcium  sulphide  preparation,  and  by  Troost3  for  a  specimen  of 
hexagonal  blend.  These  results  were  confirmed  and  extended  in 
a  later  paper  by  Arnold4.  No  satisfactory  explanations  of  these 
somewhat  doubtful  results  have  yet  been  given,  except  on  the 
view  that  the  black  paper  was  transparent  to  some  of  the  light 

1  C.  R.  122,  p.  385,  1896.  2  C.  R.  122,  p.  559,  1896. 

3  C.  R.  122,  p.  564,  1896.  4  Wied.  Annal.  61,  p.  316,  1897. 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  5 

waves.  At  the  same  time  Le  Bon1  showed  that,  by  the  action  of 
sunlight  on  certain  bodies,  a  radiation  was  given  out,  invisible  to 
the  eye,  but  active  with  regard  to  a  photographic  plate.  These 
results  have  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion;  but  there  seems 
to  be  little  doubt  that  the  effects  are  due  to  short  ultra-violet  light 
waves,  capable  of  passing  through  certain  substances  opaque  to 
ordinary  light.  These  effects,  while  interesting  in  themselves,  are 
of  quite  a  distinct  character  from  those  shown  by  the  radio- 
active bodies  which  will  now  be  considered. 

3.  Uranium.  The  first  important  discovery  in  the  subject  of 
radio-activity  was  made  in  February,  1896,  by  M.  Henri  Becquerel2, 
who  found  that  a  maiiiiLm-~salt,  the  double  sulphate  of  uranium 
and  potassium,  emitted  some  rays  which  gave  an  impression  on  a 
photographic  plate  enveloped  in  black  paper.  These  rays  were 
also  able  to  pass  through  thin  plates  of  metals  and  other  substances 
opaque  to  light.  The  impressions  on  the  plate  could  not  have 
been  due  to  vapours  given  off  by  the  substances,  since  the  same 
effect  was  produced  whether  the  salt  was  placed  directly  on  the 
black  paper  or  on  a  thin  plate  of  glass  lying  upon  it. 

Becquerel  found  later  that  all  the  compounds  of  uranium  as 
well  as  the  metal  itself  possessed  the  same  property,  and,  although 
the  amount  of  action  varied  slightly  for  the  different  compounds, 
the  effects  in  all  cases  were  comparable.  It  was  at  first  natural  to 
suppose  that  the  emission  of  these  rays  was  in  some  way  connected 
with  the  power  of  phosphorescence,  but  later  observations  showed 
that  there  was  no  connection  whatever  between  them.  The  uranic 
salts  are  phosphorescent,  while  the  uranous  salts  are  not.  The  uranic 
salts,  when  exposed  to  ultra-violet  light  in  the  phosphoroscope, 
give  a  phosphorescent  light  lasting  about  "01  seconds.  When  the 
salts  are  dissolved  in  water,  the  duration  is  still  less.  The  amount 
of  action  on  the  photographic  plate  does  not  depend  on  the  par- 
ticular compound  of  uranium  employed,  but  only  on  the  amount  of 
uranium  present  in  the  compound.  The  non-phosphorescent  are 
equally  active  with  the  phosphorescent  compounds.  The  amount 
of  radiation  given  out  is  unaltered  if  the  active  body  is  kept 

1  C.  R.  122,  pp.  188,  233,  386,  462.     1896. 

2  C.  R.  122,  pp.  420,  501,  559,  689,  762,  1086.     1896. 


6  KADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

continuously  in  darkness.  The  rays  are  given  out  by  solutions, 
and  by  crystals  which  have  been  deposited  from  solutions  in  the 
dark  and  never  exposed  to  light.  This  shows  that  the  radiation 
cannot  be  due  in  any  way  to  the  gradual  emission  of  energy  stored 
up  in  the  crystal  in  consequence  of  exposure  to  a  source  of  light. 

4.  The  power  of  giving  out  penetrating  rays  thus  seems  to  be 
a  specific  property  of  the  element  uranium,  since  it  is  exhibited  by 
the  metal  as  well  as  by  all  its  compounds.     These  radiations  from 
uranium  are  persistent,  and,  as  far  as  observations  have  yet  gone, 
are  unchanged,  either  in  intensity  or  character,  with  lapse  of  time. 
Observations   to   test   the  constancy  of  the  radiations   for   long 
periods  of  time  have  been  made  by  Becquerel.     Samples  of  uranic 
and  uranous  salts  have  been  kept  in  a  double  box  of  thick  lead, 
and  the  whole  has  been  preserved  from  exposure  to  light.     By  a 
simple  arrangement,  a  photographic  plate  can  be  introduced  in  a 
definite  position  above  the  uranium  salts,  which  are  covered  with  a 
layer  of  black  paper.    The  plate  is  exposed  at  intervals  for  48  hours, 
and    the    impression    on   the   plate   compared.      No    perceptible 
weakening  of  the  radiation  has  been  observed  over  a  period  of 
four  years.    Mme  Curie1  has  made  determinations  of  the  activity  of 
uranium  over  a  space  of  five  years  by  an  electric  method  described 
later,  but  found  no  appreciable  variation  during  that  period. 

Since  the  uranium  is  thus  continuously  radiating  energy  from 
itself,  without  any  known  source  of  excitation,  the  question  arises 
whether  any  known  agent  is  able  to  affect  the  rate  of  its  emission. 
No  alteration  was  observed  when  the  body  was  exposed  to  ultra- 
violet light  or  to  ultra-red  light  or  to  X  rays.  Becquerel  states 
that  the  double  sulphate  of  uranium  and  potassium  showed  a 
slight  increase  of  action  when  exposed  to  the  arc  light  and  to 
sparks,  but  he  considers  that  the  feeble  effect  observed  was 
another  action  superimposed  on  the  constant  radiation  from 
uranium.  The  intensity  of  the  uranium  radiation  is  not  affected  by 
a  variation  of  temperature  between  200°  C.  and  the  temperature  of 
liquid  air.  This  question  is  discussed  in  more  detail  later. 

5.  In   addition   to   these   actions   on   a   photographic   plate, 
Becquerel  showed  that  uranium  rays,  like  Rontgen  rays,  possess  the 

1  These  presentee  a  la  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  1903. 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  7 

important  property  of  discharging  both  positively  and  negatively 
electrified  bodies.  These  results  were  confirmed  and  extended  by 
Lord  Kelvin,  Smolan  and  Beattie1.  The  writer  made  a  detailed 
comparison2  of  the  nature  of  the  discharge  produced  by  uranium 
with  that  produced  by  Rontgen  rays,  and  showed  that  the  dis- 
charging property  of  uranium  is  due  to  the  production  of  charged 
ions  by  the  radiation  throughout  the  volume  of  the  gas.  The 
property  has  been  made  the  basis  of  a  qualitative  and  quantitative 
examination  of  the  radiations  from  all  radio-active  bodies,  and  is 
discussed  in  detail  in  chapter  n. 

The  radiations  from  uranium  are  thus  analogous,  as  regards 
their  photographic  and  electrical  actions,  to  Rontgen  rays,  but, 
compared  with  the  rays  from  an  ordinary  X  ray  tube,  these 
actions  are  extremely  feeble.  While  with  Rontgen  rays  a  strong 
impression  is  produced  on  a  photographic  plate  in  a  few  minutes 
or  even  seconds,  several  days'  exposure  to  the  uranium  rays  is 
required  to  produce  a  well-marked  action,  even  though  the  uranium 
compound,  enveloped  in  black  paper,  is  placed  close  to  the  plate. 
The  discharging  action,  while  very  easily  measurable  by  suitable 
methods,  is  also  small  compared  with  that  produced  by  X  rays 
from  an  ordinary  tube. 

6.  The  rays  from  uranium  show  no  evidence  of  direct  re- 
flection, refraction,  or  polarization3.  While  there  is  no  direct 
reflection  of  the  rays,  there  is  apparently  a  diffuse  reflection  set 
up  where  the  rays  strike  a  solid  obstacle.  This  is  in  reality  due 
to  a  secondary  radiation  set  up  when  the  primary  rays  impinge 
upon  matter.  The  presence  of  this  secondary  radiation  at  first 
gave  rise  to  the  erroneous  view  that  the  rays  could  be  reflected 
and  refracted  like  ordinary  light.  The  absence  of  reflection,  re- 
fraction, or  polarization  in  the  penetrating  rays  from  uranium 
necessarily  follows  in  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge  of  the 
rays.  It  is  now  known  that  the  uranium  rays,  mainly  responsible 
for  the  photographic  action,  are  deviable  by  a  magnetic  field,  and 
are  similar  in  all  respects  to  cathode  rays,  i.e.  the  rays  are  composed 

1  Nature,  56,  1897 ;  Phil.  Mag.  43,  p.  418,  1897 ;  45,  p.  277,  1898. 

2  Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  1899. 

3  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  1899. 


8  KADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

of  small  particles  projected  at  great  velocities.     The  absence  of  the 
ordinary  properties  of  transverse  light  waves  is  thus  to  be  expected. 

7.  The  rays  from  uranium  are  complex  in  character,  and,  in 
addition  to  the  penetrating  deviable  rays,  there  is  also  given  off 
a  radiation  very  readily  absorbed  by  passing  through  thin  layers 
of  metal  foil,  or  by  traversing  a  few  centimetres  of  air.     The 
photographic  action  due  to  these  rays  is  very  feeble  in  comparison 
with    that    of  the   penetrating  rays,  although    the   discharge  of 
electrified  bodies  is  mainly  caused  by  them.     Besides  these  two 
types  of  rays,  some  rays  are  emitted  which  are  of  an  extremely 
penetrating  character  and  are  non-deviable  by  a  magnetic  field. 
These  rays  are  difficult   to  detect  photographically,  but  can  be 
readily  examined  by  the  electric  method. 

8.  The   question   naturally   arose   whether    the   property   of 
spontaneously  giving  out  penetrating  radiations  was  confined  to 
uranium  and  its  compounds,  or  whether  it  was  exhibited  to  any 
appreciable  extent  by  other  substances. 

By  the  electrical  method,  with  an  electrometer  of  ordinary 
sensitiveness,  any  body  which  possesses  an  activity  of  the  order  of 
1/100  of  that  of  uranium  can  be  detected.  With  an  electroscope  of 
special  construction,  such  as  has  been  designed  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson 
for  his  experiments  on  the  natural  ionization  of  air,  a  substance 
of  activity  1/10000  and  probably  1/100000  of  that  of  uranium  can 
be  detected. 

If  an  active  body  like  uranium  be  mixed  with  an  inactive  body, 
the  resulting  activity  in  the  mixture  is  generally  considerably  less 
than  that  due  to  the  active  substance  alone.  This  is  due  to  the 
absorption  of  the  radiation  by  the  inactive  matter  present.  The 
amount  of  decrease  largely  depends  on  the  thickness  of  the  layer 
from  which  the  activity  is  determined. 

Mme  Curie  made  a  detailed  examination  by  the  electrical 
method  of  the  great  majority  of  known  substances,  including  the 
very  rare  elements,  to  see  if  they  possessed  any  activity.  In  cases 
when  it  was  possible,  several  compounds  of  the  elements  were 
examined.  With  the  exception  of  thorium  and  phosphorus,  none 
of  the  other  substances  possessed  an  activity  even  of  the  order  of 
1/100  of  uranium. 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  9 

The  ionization  of  the  gas  by  phosphorus  does  not,  however, 
seem  to  be  due  to  a  penetrating  radiation  like  that  found  in  the 
case  of  uranium,  but  rather  to  a  chemical  action  taking  place  at 
its  surface.  The  compounds  of  phosphorus  do  not  show  any 
activity,  and  in  this  respect  differ  from  uranium  and  the  other 
active  bodies. 

Le  Bon1  has  also  observed  that  quinine  sulphate,  if  heated  and 
then  allowed  to  cool,  possesses  for  a  short  time  the  property  of 
discharging  both  positively  and  negatively  electrified  bodies.  It 
is  necessary,  however,  to  draw  a  sharp  line  of  distinction  between 
phenomena  of  this  kind  and  those  exhibited  by  the  naturally  radio- 
active bodies.  While  both,  under  special  conditions,  possess  the 
property  of  ionizing  the  gas,  the  laws  controlling  the  phenomena 
are  quite  distinct  in  the  two  cases.  For  example,  only  one  com- 
pound of  quinine  shows  the  property,  and  that  compound  only 
when  it  has  been  subjected  to  a  preliminary  heating.  The  action 
of  phosphorus  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  gas,  and  varies  with 
temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  the  activity  of  the  naturally 
radio-active  bodies  is  spontaneous  and  permanent.  It  is  exhibited 
by  all  compounds,  and  is  not,  as  far  as  is  yet  known,  altered  by 
change  in  the  chemical  or  physical  conditions. 

9.  The  discharging  and  photographic  action  alone  cannot  be 
taken  as -a  criterion  as  to  whether  a  substance  is  radio-active  or 
not.  It  is  necessary  in  addition  to  examine  the  radiations,  and  to 
test  whether  the  actions  take  place  through  appreciable  thicknesses 
of  all  kinds  of  matter  opaque  to  ordinary  light.  For  example,  a 
body  giving  out  short  waves  of  ultra-violet  light  can  be  made  to 
behave  in  many  respects  like  a  radio-active  body.  As  Lenard2  has 
shown,  short  waves  of  ultra-violet  light  will  ionize  the  gas  in  their 
path,  and  will  be  rapidly  absorbed  in  the  gas.  They  will  produce 
strong  photographic  action,  and  may  pass  through  some  substances 
opaque  to  ordinary  light.  The  similarity  to  a  radio-active  body  is 
thus  fairly  complete  as  regards  these  properties.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  emission  of  these  light  waves,  unlike  that  of  the  radiations 
from  an  active  body,  will  depend  largely  on  the  molecular  state 

1  C.  R.  130,  p.  891,  1900. 

2  Dnide's  AnnaL  1,  p.  498 ;  3,  p.  298,  1900. 


10  KADIO- ACTIVE  SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

of  the  compound,  or  on  temperature  and  other  physical  conditions. 
But  the  great  point  of  distinction  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  radia- 
tions from  the  bodies  in  question.  In  one  case  the  radiations  behave 
as  transverse  waves,  obeying  the  usual  laws  of  light  waves,  while  in 
the  case  of  a  naturally  active  body,  they  consist  for  the  most  part 
of  a  continuous  flight  of  material  particles  projected  from  the 
substance  with  great  velocity.  Before  any  substance  can  be  called 
"  radio-active  "  in  the  sense  in  which  the  term  is  used  to  describe 
the  properties  of  the  natural  radio-active  elements,  it  is  thus 
necessary  to  make  a  close  examination  of  its  radiations ;  for  it  is 
unadvisable  to  extend  the  use  of  the  term  "  radio-active "  to 
substances  which  do  not  possess  the  characteristic  radiating 
properties  of  the  radio-active  elements  which  we  have  described, 
and  the  active  products  which  can  be  obtained  from  them.  Some 
of  the  pseudo-active  bodies  will  however  be  considered  later  in 

10.  Thorium.  In  the  course  of  an  examination  of  a  large 
number  of  substances,  Schmidt1  found  that  thorium,  its  compounds, 
and  the  minerals  containing  thorium,  possessed  properties  similar 
to  those  of  uranium.  The  same  discovery  was  made  independently 
by  Mme  Curie2.  The  rays  from  thorium  compounds,  like  those 
from  uranium,  possess  the  properties  of  discharging  electrified 
bodies  and  acting  on  a  photographic  plate.  Under  the  same 
conditions  the  discharging  action  of  the  rays  is  about  equal  in 
amount  to  that  of  uranium,  but  the  photographic  effect  is 
distinctly  weaker. 

The  radiations  from  thorium  are  more  complicated  than  those 
from  uranium.  It  was  early  observed  by  several  experimenters 
that  the  radiation  from  thorium  compounds,  especially  the  oxide, 
when  tested  by  the  electrified  method,  was  very  variable  and 
uncertain.  A  detailed  investigation  of  the  radiations  from  thorium 
under  various  conditions  was  made  by  Owens3.  He  showed  that 
thorium  oxide,  especially  in  thick  layers,  was  able  to  produce 
conductivity  in  the  gas  when  covered  with  a  large  thickness  of 
paper,  and  that  the  amount  of  this  conductivity  ceuld  be  greatly 

1  Wied.  Annal.  65,  p.  141,  1898.*  2  C.  E.  126,  p.  1101,  1898. 

3  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.  1899. 


I]  RADIO- ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  11 

varied  by  blowing  a  current  of  air  over  the  gas.  In  the  course  of 
an  examination1  of  this  action  of  the  air  current,  the  writer 
showed  that  thorium  compounds  gave  out  a  material  emanation 
made  up  of  very  small  particles  themselves  radio-active.  The 
emanation  behaves  like  a  radio-active  gas;  it  diffuses  rapidly 
through  porous  substances  like  paper,  and  is  carried  away  by 
a  current  of  air.  The  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  emanation, 
and  its  properties,  is  considered  in  detail  later  in  chapter  vm.  In 
addition  to  giving  out  an  emanation,  thorium  behaves  like  uranium 
in  emitting  three  types  of  radiation,  each  of  which  is  similar  in 
properties  to  the  corresponding  radiation  from  uranium. 

11.  Radio-active  minerals.  Mme  Curie  has  examined 
the  radio-activity  of  a  large  number  of  minerals  containing 
uranium  and  thorium.  The  electrical  method  was  used,  and  the 
current  measured  between  two  parallel  plates  8  cms.  in  diameter 
and  3  cms.  apart,  when  one  plate  was  covered  with  a  uniform 
layer  of  the  active  matter.  The  following  numbers  give  the  order 
of  the  saturation  current  obtained  in  amperes. 

i 

Pitchblende  from  Johanngeorgenstadt  8-3  x  10  ~n 

„  Joachimstahl  ...         7'0      „ 

„  Pzibran          6'5      „ 

„  Cornwall        ...         ...         1*6      „ 

Clevite       1'4      „ 

Chalcolite 5-2      „ 

Autunite 2'7      „ 

Thorite      from  0'3  to  1-4      „ 

Orangite 2-0      „ 

Monazite   ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         0*5      „ 

Xenotine 0*03     „ 

Aeschynite  O7      „ 

Fergusonite  0*4      „ 

Samarskite  ...         ...         ...         ...         1*1       „ 

Niobite      0'3      „ 

Carnotite 6-2      „ 

Some  activity  is  to  be  expected  in  these  minerals,  since  they  all 
contain  either  thorium  or  uranium  or  a  mixture  of  both.  An 
examination  of  the  action  of  the  uranium  compounds  with  the 

i  Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  1900. 


12  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

same  apparatus  and  under  the  same  conditions  led  to  the  following 

results : 

i 

Uranium  (containing  a  little  carbon)  2*3  x  10  ~  n  amperes 

Black  oxide  of  uranium       ...         ...  2'6  „ 

Green        „  „  1-8  „ 

Acid  uranic  hydrate  0'6  „ 

Uranate  of  sodium ...  1-2  „ 

Uranate  of  potassium        1-2  ,, 

Uranate  of  ammonia  1*3  „ 

Uranous  sulphate     ...         ...         ...  0*7  „ 

Sulphate  of  uranium  and  potassium  0*7  „ 

Acetate          0'7  „ 

Phosphate  of  copper  and  uranium  O9  „ 

Oxysulphide  of  uranium      1'2  „ 

The  interesting  point  in  connection  with  these  results  is  that 
some  specimens  of  pitchblende  have  four  times  the  activity  of  the 
metal  uranium;  chalcolite,  the  crystallized  phosphate  of  copper 
and  uranium,  is  twice  as  active  as  uranium ;  and  autunite,  a 
phosphate  of  calcium  and  uranium,  is  as  active  as  uranium.  From 
the  previous  considerations,  none  of  the  substances  should  have 
shown  as  much  activity  as  uranium  or  thorium.  In  order  to  be 
sure  that  the  large  activity  was  not  due  to  the  particular  chemical 
combination,  Mine  Curie  prepared  chalcolite  artificially,  starting 
with  pure  products.  This  artificial  chalcolite  had  the  activity  to 
be  expected  from  its  composition,  viz.  about  0'4  of  the  activity  of 
the  uranium.  The  natural  mineral  chalcolite  is  thus  five  times  as 
active  as  the  artificial  mineral. 

It  thus  seemed  probable  that  the  large  activity  of  some  of 
these  minerals,  compared  with  uranium  and  thorium,  was  due  to 
the  presence  of  small  quantities  of  some  very  active  substance, 
which  was  different  from  the  known  bodies  thorium  and  uranium. 

This  supposition  was  completely  verified  by  the  work  of  M.  and 
Mme  Curie,  who  were  able  to  separate  from  pitchblende  by  purely 
chemical  methods  two  active  bodies,  one  of  which  in  the  pure  state 
is  over  a  million  times  more  active  than  the  metal  uranium. 

This  important  discovery  was  due  entirely  to  the  property 
of  radio-activity  possessed  by  the  new  bodies.  The  only  guide 
in  their  separation  was  the  activity  of  the  products  obtained.  In 


I]  KADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  13 

this  respect  the  discovery  of  these  bodies  is  quite  analogous  to  the 
discovery  of  rare  elements  by  the  methods  of  spectrum  analysis. 
The  method  employed  in  the  separation  consisted  in  examining 
the  relative  activity  of  the  products  after  chemical  treatment.  In 
this  way  it  was  seen  whether  the  radio-activity  was  confined  to  one 
or  another  of  the  products,  or  divided  between  both,  and  in  what 
ratio  such  division  occurred. 

The  activity  of  the  specimens  thus  served  as  a  basis  of  rough 
qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis,  analogous  in  some  respects 
to  the  indication  of  the  spectroscope.  To  obtain  comparative 
data  it  was  necessary  to  test  all  the .  products  in  the  dry  state. 
The  chief  difficulty  lay  in  the  fact  that  pitchblende  is  a  very 
complex  mineral,  and  contains  in  varying  quantities  nearly  all  the 
known  metals. 

12.  Radium.  The  analysis  of  pitchblende  by  chemical 
methods,  using  the  procedure  sketched  above,  led  to  the  discovery 
of  two  very  active  bodies,  polonium  and  radium.  The  nam^ejxjp- 
nium  was  given  to  the  first  substance  discovered  by  Mme  Curie 
in  honour  of  theTcountry  of  her  birth.  The  name  radium  was 
a  very  happy  inspiration  of  the  discoverers,  for  this  substance  in 
the  pure  state  possesses  the  property  of  radio-activity  to  an 
astonishing  degree. 

Radium  is  extracted  from  pitchblende  by  the  same  process 
necessary  to  separate  barium,  to  which  it  is  very  closely  allied  in 
chemical  properties1.  After  the  removal  of  other  substances,  the 
radium  remains  behind  mixed  with  barium.  It  can,  however,  be 
partially  separated  from  the  latter  by  the  difference  in  solubility  of 
the  chlorides  in  water,  alcohol,  or  hydrochloric  acid.  The  chloride 
of  radium  is  less  soluble  than  that  of  barium,  and  can  be  separated 
from  it  by  the  method  of  fractional  crystallization.  After  a  large 
number  of  precipitations  the  radium  can  be  almost  completely  freed 
from  the  barium. 

Both  polonium  and  radium  exist  in  infinitesimal  quantities  in 
pitchblende.  In  order  to  obtain  a  few  decigrammes  of  very  active 
radium,  it  is  necessary  to  use  several  tons  of  pitchblende,  or  the 
residues  obtained  from  the  treatment  of  uranium  minerals.  It  is 

1  M.  and  Mme  Curie  and  G.  Bemont,  C.  E.  127,  p.  1215,  1898. 


14  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

thus  obvious  that  the  expense  and  labour  involved  in  preparation 
of  a  minute  quantity  of  radium  are  very  great. 

M.  and  Mme  Curie  were  indebted  for  their  first  working 
material  to  the  Austrian  government,  who  generously  presented 
them  with  a  ton  of  the  treated  residue  of  uranium  materials  from 
the  State  manufactory  of  Joachimstahl  in  Bohemia.  With  the 
assistance  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  and  other  societies  in  France, 
funds  were  given  to  carry  out  the  laborious  work  of  separation. 
Later  the  Curies  were  presented  with  a  ton  of  residues  from  the 
treatment  of  pitchblende  by  the  Societe  Centrale  de  Produits 
Chimiques  of  Paris.  The  generous  assistance  afforded  in  thi& 
important  work  is  a  welcome  sign  of  the  active  interest  taken  in 
these  countries  in  the  furthering  of  purely  scientific  research. 

The  rough  concentration  and  separation  of  the  residues  was 
performed  in  the  chemical  works,  and  there  followed  a  large  amount 
of  labour  in  purification  and  concentration.  In  this  manner, 
the  Curies  were  able  to  obtain  a  small  quantity  of  radium  which 
was  enormously  active  compared  with  uranium.  No  definite  results 
have  yet  been  given  on  the  activity  of  pure  radium  but  the  Curies 
estimate  that  it  is  about  one  million  times  the  activity  of  uranium, 
and  may  possibly  be  still  higher.  The  difficulty  of  making  a 
numerical  estimate  for  such  an  intensely  active  body  is  very  great. 
In  the  electric  method,  the  activities  are  compared  by  noting  the 
relative  strength  of  the  maximum  or  saturation  current  between 
two  parallel  plates,  on  one  of  which  the  active  substance  is  spread. 
On  account  of  the  intense  ionization  of  the  gas  between  the  plates, 
it  is  not  possible  to  reach  the  saturation-  current  unless  very  high 
voltages  are  applied.  Approximate  comparisons  can  be  made  by 
the  use  of  metal  screens  to  cut  down  the  intensity  of  the  radiations, 
if  the  proportion  of  the  radiation  transmitted  by  such  a  screen  has 
been  determined  by  direct  experiment  on  impure  material  of  easily 
measurable  activity.  The  value  of  the  activity  of  radium  compared 
with  that  of  uranium  will  however  vary  to  some  extent  according  to 
which  of  the  three  types  of  rays  is  taken  as  a  basis  of  comparison. 

It  is  thus  difficult  to  control  the  final  stages  of  the  purification 
of  radium  by  measurements  of  its  activity  alone.  Moreover  the 
activity  of  radium  immediately  after  its  preparation  is  only  al^out 
one-fourth  of  its  final  value;  it  gradually  rises  to  a  maximum  after 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  15 

the  radium  salt  has  been  kept  in  the  dry  state  for  about  a  month. 
For  control  experiments  in  purification,  it  is  advisable  to  measure 
the  initial  rather  than  the  final  activity. 

Mme  Curie  has  utilized  the  coloration  of_the,_crystals  of  radi- 
ferous  barium  as  a  means  of  controlling  the  final  process  of  puri- 
ficatiori.  The  crystals  of  salts  of  radium  and  barium  deposited  from 
acid  solutions  are  indistinguishable.  The  crystals  of  radiferous 
barium  are  at  first  colourless,  but,  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours, 
become  yellow,  passing  to  orange  and  sometimes  to  a  beautiful  rose 
colour.  The  rapidity  of  this  coloration  depends  on  the  amount  of 
'barium  present.  Pure  radium  crystals  do  not  colour,  or  at  any  rate 
not  as  rapidly  as  those  containing  barium.  The  coloration  is  a 
maximum  for  a  definite  proportion  of  radium,  and  this  fact  can  be 
utilized  as  a  means  of  testing  the  amount  of  barium  present.  When 
the  crystals  are  dissolved  in  water  the  coloration  disappears. 

Giesel1  has  observed  that  pure  radium  bromide  gives  a  beautiful 
carmine  colour  to  the  Bunsen  flame.  If  barium  is  present  in  any 
quantity,  only  the  green  colour  due  to  barium  is  observed  and  a 
spectroscopic  examination  shows  only  the  barium  lines.  This 
carmine  coloration  of  the  Bunsen  flame  is  a  good  indication  of  the 
purity  of  the  radium. 

Since  the  preliminary  announcement  of  the  discovery  of 
radium,  Giesel2  has  devoted  a  great  deal  of  attention  to  the 
separation  of  radium,  polonium  and  other  active  bodies  from  pitch- 
blende. He  was  indebted  for  his  working  material  to  the  firm 
of  P.  de  Haen  of  Hanover,  who  presented  him  with  a  ton  of  pitch- 
blende residues.  Using  the  method  of  fractional  crystallization  of 
the  bromide  instead  of  the  chloride,  he  has  been  able  to  prepare 
considerable  quantities  of  pure  radium.  By  this  means  the  labour 
of  final  purification  of  radium  has  been  much  reduced.  He  states 
that  six  or  eight  crystallizations  with  the  bromide  are  sufficient  to 
almost  completely  free  the  radium  from  the  barium. 

13.  Spectrum  of  radium.  It  was  of  great  importance  to 
settle  as  soon  as  possible  whether  radium  was  in  reality  modified 
barium  or  a  new  element  with  a  definite  spectrum.  For  this 
purpose  the  Curies  prepared  some  specimens  of  radium  chloride, 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  3,  No.  24,  p.  578,  1902. 

2  Wied.  Annal.  69,  p.  91,  1890.     Beri-chte  d.  d.  chem.  Ges.  p.  3608,  1902. 


16  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

and  submitted  them  for  examination  of  their  spectrum  to 
Demar9ay,  an  authority  on  that  subject.  The  first  specimen  of 
radium  chloride  examined  by  Demar^ay1  was  not  very  active,  but 
showed,  besides  the  lines  due  to  barium,  a  very  strong  new  line  in 
the  ultra-violet.  In  another  sample  of  greater  activity,  the  line 
was  still  stronger  and  others  also  appeared,  while  the  intensity  of 
the  new  lines  was  comparable  with  those  present  due  to  barium. 
With  a  still  more  active  specimen  which  was  probably  nearly  pure, 
only  three  strong  lines  of  barium  appeared,  while  the  new  spectrum 
was  very  bright.  The  following  table  shows  the  wave-length  of 
the  new  lines  observed  for  radium.  The  wave  lengths  are  expressed 
in  Angstrom  units  and  the  intensity  of  each  ray  is  denoted  by  a 
number,  the  ray  of  maximum  intensity  being  16. 

Wave  length           Intensity          Wave  length  Intensity 

4826-3  10  4600-3  3 

4726-9  5  4533-5  9 

4099-6  3  4436-1  6 

4692-1  7  4340-6  12 

4683-0  14  38147  16 

4641-9  4  3649-6  12 

The  lines  are  all  sharply  defined,  and  three  or  four  of  them 
have  an  intensity  comparable  with  any  known  lines  of  other 
substances.  There  are  also  present  in  the  spectrum  two  strong 
nebulous  bands.  In  the  visible  part  of  the  spectrum,  which  has 
not  been  photographed,  the  only  noticeable  ray  has  a  wave 
length  5665,  which  is,  however,  very  feeble  compared  with  that  of 
wave  length  48 2 6 '3.  The  general  aspect  of  the  spectrum  is  similar 
to  that  of  the  alkaline  earths ;  it  is  known  that  these  metals  have 
strong  lines  accompanied  by  nebulous  bands. 

'  The  principal  line  due  to  radium  can  be  distinguished  in 
impure  radium  of  activity  50  times  that  of  uranium.  By  the 
electrical  method  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  the  presence  of  radium 
in  a  body  which  has  an  activity  only  1/100  of  uranium.  With  a 
more  sensitive  electrometer  1/10000  of  the  activity  of  uranium 
could  be  observed.  For  the  detection  of  radium,  the  examination 
of  the  radio-activity  is  thus  a  process  nearly  a  million  times  more 
sensitive  than  spectrum  analysis. 

1  C.  R.  127,  p.  1218,  1898 ;  129,  p.  716,  1899;  131,  p.  258,  1900. 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  17 

Later  observations  on  the  spectrum  of  radium  have  been  made  by 
Runge1,  Exner  and  Haschek2,  with  specimens  of  radium  prepared  by 
Giesel.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  bromide  of  radium 
gives  a  characteristic  pure  carmine-red  coloration  to  the  Bunsen 
flame.  The  flame  spectrum  shows  two  broad  bright  bands  in  the 
orange-red,  not  observed  in  Demarcay's  spectrum.  In  addition 
there  is  a  line  in  the  blue-green  and  two  feeble  lines  in  the  violet. 

14.  Atomic  weight  of  radium.  Mme  Curie  has  made 
successive  determinations  of  the  atomic  weight  of  the  new  element 
with  specimens  of  steadily  increasing  purity.  In  the  first  obser- 
vation the  radium  was  largely  mixed  with  barium,  and  the  atomic 
weight  obtained  was  the  same  as  that  of  barium,  137 '5.  In 
successive  observations  with  specimens  of  increasing  purity  the 
atomic  weights  of  the  mixture  were  146  and  175.  The  final  value 
obtained  recently  was  225,  wrhich  may  be  taken  as  the  atomic 
weight  of  radium  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  divalent. 

In  these  experiments  about  0*1  gram  of  pure  radium  chloride  has 
been  obtained  by  successive  fractionations.  The  difficulty  involved 
in  preparing  a  quantity  of  pure  radium  chloride  large  enough  to 
test  the  atomic  weight  may  be  gauged  from  the  fact  that  only  a 
few  centigrams  of  fairly  pure  radium,  or  a  few  decigrams  of  less 
concentrated  material,  are  obtained  from  treatment  of  about  2  tons 
of  the  mineral  from  which  it  is  derived. 

Runge  and  Precht8  have  examined  the  spectrum  of  radium  in 
a  magnetic  field,  and  have  shown  the  existence  of  series  analogous 
to  those  observed  for  calcium,  barium,  and  strontium.  These  series 
are  connected  with  the  atomic  weights  of  the  elements  in  question, 
and  Runge  and  Precht  have  calculated  by  these  means  that  the 
atomic  weight  of  radium  should  be  258 — a  number  considerably 
greater  than  the  number  225  obtained  by  Mme  Curie  by  means  of 
chemical  analysis.  Marshall  Watts4,  on  the  other  hand,  using  another 
relation  between  the  lines  of  the  spectrum5,  deduced  the  value 
obtained  by  Mme  Curie.  Considering  that  the  number  found 

1  Astrophys.  Journal,  p.  1,  1900.     Drude's  Annal.  No.  10,  p.  407,  1903. 
-  Sitz.  Ak.  TH**.  Wien,  July  4,  1901.  3  Phil  Mag.  April,  1903. 

4  Phil  Mag.  July,  1903. 

5  Runge  (Phil  Mag.  Dec.   1903)  has  criticised  the  method  of  deduction  em- 
ployed by  Marshall  Watts  on  the  ground  that  the  lines  used  for  comparison  in  the 
•different  spectra  were  not  homologous. 

R.   R.-A.  2 


18  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

by  Mme  Curie  agrees  with  that  required  by  the  periodic  system, 
it  is  advisable  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  to  accept  the 
experimental  number  rather  than  the  one  deduced  by  Runge  and 
Precht  from  spectroscopic  evidence. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  radium  is  a  new  element  possessing 
remarkable  physical  properties.  The  detection  and  separation  of 
this  substance,  existing  in  such  minute  proportions  in  pitchblende, 
has  been  due  entirely  to  the  characteristic  property  we  are  con- 
sidering, and  is  the  first  notable  triumph  of  the  study  of  radio- 
activity. As  we  shall  see  later  in  chapter  vn,  the  property  of  radio- 
activity can  be  used,  not  only  as  a  means  of  chemical  research,  but 
also  as  an  extraordinarily  delicate  method  of  detecting  chemical 
changes  of  a  very  special  kind. 

15.  Radiations  from  radium.  On  account  of  its  enormous 
activity  the  radiations  from  radium  are  very  intense :  a  screen 
of  zinc  sulphide,  brought  near  a  few  centigrams  of  radium 
bromide,  is  lighted  up  quite  brightly  in  a  dark  room,  while 
brilliant  fluorescence  is  produced  on  a  screen  of  platino-barium 
cyanide.  An  electroscope  brought  near  is  almost  instantly 
discharged,  while  a  photographic  plate  is  immediately  affected. 
At  a  distance  of  one  metre,  a  day's  exposure  to  the  radium 
rays  would  produce  a  strong  impression.  The  radiations  from 
radium  are  analogous  to  those  of  uranium,  and  consist  of  the  three 
types  of  rays :  easily  absorbed,  penetrating,  and  very  penetrating. 
Radium  also  gives  rise  to  an  emanation  similar  to  that  of  thorium, 
but  with  a  very  much  slower  rate  of  decay.  The  radium  emanation 
retains  its  activity  for  several  weeks,  while  that  of  thorium  lasts 
only  a  few  minutes.  The  emanation  obtained  from  a  few  centi- 
grams of  radium  illuminates  a  screen  of  zinc  sulphide  with 
great  brilliancy.  The  very  penetrating  rays  of  radium  are  able  to 
light  up  an  X  ray  screen  in  a  dark  room,  after  passage  through 
several  centimetres  of  lead  and  several  inches  of  iron. 

As  in  the  case  of  uranium  or  thorium,  the  photographic  action 
is  mainly  due  to  the  penetrating  or  cathodic  [rays.  The  radio- 
graphs obtained  with  radium  are  very  similar  to  those  obtained 
with  X  rays,  but  lack  the  sharpness  and  detail  of  the  latter.  The 
rays  are  unequally  absorbed  by  different  kinds  of  matter,  the 


l]  RADIO-ACTIVE    SUBSTANCES  19 

absorption  varying  approximately  as  the  density.     In  photographs 
of  the  hand  the  bones  do  not  show  out  as  in  X  ray  photographs. 

Curie  and  Laborde  have  shown  that  the  compounds  of  radium 
possess  the  remarkable  property  of  always  keeping  their  tempe- 
rature several  degrees  above  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding 
air.  Each  gram  of  radium  radiates  an  amount  of  energy  corre- 
sponding to  100  gram-calories  per  hour.  This  and  other  properties 
of  radium  are  discussed  in  detail  in  chapters  v  and  vi. 

16.  Compounds  of  radium.      When  first  prepared  in  the 
solid  state,  all  the  salts  of  radium — the  chloride,  bromide,  acetate, 
sulphate,  and  carbonate — are  very  similar  in  appearance  to  the 
corresponding  salts  of  barium,  but  in  time  they  gradually  become 
coloured.     In  chemical  properties  the  salts  of  radium  are  prac- 
tically the  same   as   those   of  barium,  with   the   exception  that 
the  chloride  and  bromide  of  radium   are  less  soluble  than  the 
corresponding  salts  of  barium.     All  the  salts  of  radium  are  natu- 
rally  phosphorescent.     The   phosphorescence   of  impure   radium 
preparations  is  in  some  cases  very  marked. 

All  the  radium  salts  possess  the  property  of  causing  rapid 
colorations  of  the  glass  vessel  which  contains  them.  For  feebly 
active  material  the  colour  is  usually  violet,  for  more  active  material 
a  yellowish-brown,  and  finally  black. 

17.  Polonium.     Polonium  was  the  first  of  the  active  sub- 
stances obtained  from  pitchblende.     It  has  been  investigated  in 
detail  by  its  discoverer  Mme  Curie1.    The  pitchblende  was  dissolved 
in    acid    and    sulphuretted    hydrogen   added.     The    precipitated 
sulphides  contained  an  active  substance,  which,  after  separation 
of  impurities,  was  found  associated   with   bismuth.     This  active 
substance,  which  has  been  named  polonium,  is  so  closely  allied  in 
chemical  properties  to  bismuth   that  it  has  so  far   been  found 
impossible  to  effect  a  complete  separation.     Partial^segaration  of 
polonium  can  be  made  by  successive  fractionations  based  on  one 
of  the  following  modes  of  procedure  : 

(1)     Sublimation  in  a  vacuum.     The  active  sulphide  is  more 
volatile  than  that  of  bismuth.     It  is  deposited  as  a  black  substance 
at  portions  of  the  tube,  where  the  temperature  is  between  250° 
1  C.  R.  127,  p.  175,  1898. 

2 2 


20  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

and  300°  C.     In  this  way  polonium  of  activity  700  times  that  of 
uranium  was  obtained. 

(2)  Precipitation   of   nitric   acid   solutions    by   water.      The 
precipitated  sub-nitrate  is  much  more  active  than  the  part  that 
remains  in  solution. 

(3)  Precipitation  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen  in  a  very  acid 
hydrochloric  acid  solution.     The  precipitated  sulphides  are  much 
more  active  than  the  salt  which  remains  in  solution. 

For  concentration  of  the  active  substance  Mme  Curie1  has  made 
use  of  method  (2).  The  process  is,  however,  very  slow  and  tedious, 
and  is  made  still  more  complicated  by  the  tendency  to  form 
precipitates  insoluble  either  in  strong  or  weak  acids.  After  a 
large  number  of  fractionations,  a  small  quantity  of  matter  was 
obtained,  enormously  active  compared  with  uranium.  On  exami- 
nation of  the  substance  spectroscopically,  only  the  bismuth  lines 
were  observed.  A  spectroscopic  examination  of  the  active  bismuth 
by  Demarcay  and  by  Runge  and  Exner  has  led  to  the  discovery 
of  no  new  lines.  On  the  other  hand  Sir  William  Crookes2  states  that 
he  found  one  new  line  in  the  ultra-violet,  while  Berndt3,  working 
with  polonium  of  activity  300,  observed  a  large  number  of  new 
lines  in  the  ultra-violet.  These  results  await  further  confirmation. 

The  polonium  prepared  by  Mme  Curie  differs  from  the  other 
radio-active  bodies  in  several  particulars.  In  the  first  place  the 
radiations  include  only  very  easily  absorbable  rays.  The  two 
penetrating  types  of  radiation  given  out  by  uranium,  thorium, 
and  radium  are  absent.  In  the  second  place  the  activity  does 
not  remain  constant,  but  diminishes  continuously  with  the  time. 
Mme  Curie  found  that  the  polonium  lost  half  its  original  activity 
in  the  course  of  eleven  months. 

18.  The  decay  of  the  activity  of  polonium  with  time  has  led 
to  the  view  that  polonium  is  not  a  new  active  substance,  but 
merely  active  bismuth,  i.e.  bismuth  which  in  some  way  had  been 
made  active  by  admixture  with  radio-active  bodies. 

The  activity  of  any  product  is  not  necessarily  a  proof  that 
a  radio-element  is  present,  for  it  has  been  shown  that  many 
inactive  elements  become  active  by  association  with  active  matter. 

1  Theses,  Paris,  1903.  2  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  May,  1900. 

3  Phys.  Zelt.  2,  p.  180,  1900. 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  21 

The  activity  of  these  substances,  when  removed  from  the  active 
element,  is  however  only  transient,  and  decays  gradually  with  the 
time.  This  activity  is  not  due  to  the  presence  of  the  radio-element 
itself.  For  example,  barium  separated  from  radium  is  strongly 
active,  although  the  spectroscopic  examination  shows  no  trace 
of  the  radium  lines. 

In  order  to  explain  this  temporary  activity  in  inactive  matter 
it  has  been  supposed  that  the  non-active  matter  is  made  active  by 
"induction"  during  its  mixture  with  the  active  material.  The 
underlying  idea  has  been  that  inactive  bodies  themselves  acquire 
the  property  of  radio-activity.  There  is  no  evidence  however  that 
such  is  the  case.  The  evidence  rather  points  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  activity  is  due,  not  to  any  alteration  of  the  inactive  body 
itself,  but  to  an  admixture  with  it  of  a  very  small  quantity  of 
intensely  active  matter.  The  active  matter  that  causes  this  so- 
called  "induced"  activity  is  itself  a  product  of  the  disintegration  of 
the  radio-element  and  differs  from  it  in  chemical  properties. 

The  subject  is  a  complicated  one,  and  it  cannot  be  discussed  with 
advantage  at  this  stage ;  it  will,  however,  be  considered  in  detail 
in  section  187.  On  the  above  view  the  active  bismuth  contains 
a  small  quantity  of  matter,  which  weight  for  weight  is  probably 
far  more  active  than  radium,  but  the  activity  of  which  decays 
with  time.  The  active  matter  is  allied  in  chemical  properties  to 
bismuth,  but  possesses  some  distinct  analytical  properties  which 
allow  of  a  partial  separation.  The  absence  of  any  new  lines  in  the 
spectrum  is  to  be  expected  if,  even  in  the  most  active  bismuth 
prepared,  the  active  matter  exists  in  very  small  quantity. 

19.  The  discussion  of  the  nature  of  polonium  was  renewed  by 
the  discovery  of  Marckwald1  that  a  substance  similar  to  polonium, 
of  which  the  activity  did  not  decay  with  time,  could  be  separated 
from  pitchblende.  The  method  of  separation  from  the  bismuth 
chloride  solution  obtained  from  uranium  residues  was  very  simple. 
A  rod  of  bismuth,  dipped  in  the  active  solution,  rapidly  became 
coated  with  a  black  deposit,  which  was  intensely  active.  This 
deposit  was  continued  until  the  whole  of  the  activity  was  removed 
from  the  solution.  From  850  grammes  of  bismuth  solution, 

1  Eer.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  p.  2285,  1902  ;  Phys.  Zeit.,  No.  1  b,  p.  51,  1902. 


22  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

0'6  gramme  of  active  substance  was  obtained  in  this  way.  The 
activity  of  the  matter  obtained  did  not  decay  appreciably  during 
nine  months.  A  full  chemical  examination  of  this  active  matter  has 
not  yet  been  made,  but  Marckwald  considers  that  the  substance  is 
more  allied  in  chemical  properties  to  tellurium  than  to  bismuth. 

The  radiations  from  Marckwald's  substance  are  similar  to  those 
of  polonium,  for  no  penetrating  rays  are  present.  The  radiations 
are  very  intense.  They  have  a  marked  photographic  action,  and 
cause  many  substances,  like  zinc  oxide  and  the  diamond,  to 
phosphoresce  brightly.  The  strong  luminosity  of  the  diamond 
under  these  rays  can  be  utilized  to  distinguish  the  diamond  from 
imitations,  for  glass  is  only  slightly  phosphorescent  in  comparison. 

The  identity  of  Marckwald's  preparation  with  the  polonium  of 
the  Curies  has  not  yet  been  settled,  but  from  the  method  of  pro- 
duction and  the  nature  of  the  radiations,  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  two  substances  probably  contain  the  same  active  constituent. 
Marckwald,  on  the  other  hand,  states  that  his  preparations  have 
preserved  their  activity  unchanged,  while  the  polonium  of  the 
Curies  undoubtedly  loses  its  activity  in  the  course  of  a  few  years. 

If  Marckwald's  preparation  retains  its  activity  unchanged  for  a 
long  period,  it  is  strong  evidence  in  support  of  the  presence  of 
a  new  radio-element.  If  the  activity  decays,  the  radio-tellurium 
probably  consists  of  the  admixture  with  the  tellurium  of  a  small 
quantity  of  active  matter,  produced  from  one  of  the  radio-elements 
present  in  pitchblende.  A  possible  origin  of  polonium  is  discussed 
in  section  188. 

20.  Other  products  from  radio-active  minerals.  Besides 
the  very  active  substances  radium  and  possibly  polonium,  it  seems 
extremely  probable  that  other  radio-active  elements  of  great  activity 
exist  in  minute  quantity  in  the  radio-active  minerals.  Although 
many  active  products  have  been  obtained  by  treatment  of  uranium 
residues  from  pitchblende  and  other  minerals  rich  in  uranium  and 
thorium,  none  of  these  products  have  so  far  been  sufficiently  purified 
to  obtain  a  definite  spectrum  as  in  the  case  of  radium. 

Actinium.  Debierne1  has  obtained  from  pitchblende  a  very 
active  substance  which  he  named  actinium.  This  active  substance 

1  G.  R.  129,  p.  593,  1899  ;  130,  p.  906,  1900. 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE    SUBSTANCES  23 

is  precipitated  with  the  iron  group,  and  appears  to  be  very  closely 
allied  in  chemical  properties  to  thorium,  though  it  is  many  thousand 
times  more  active.  It  is  very  difficult  to  separate  from  thorium 
and  the  rare  earths.  Debierne  has  made  use  of  the  following 
methods  for  partial  separation: 

(1)  Precipitation  in  hot   solutions,  slightly  acidulated  with 
hydrochloric  acid,  by  excess  of  hyposulphite  of  soda.     The  active 
matter  is  present  almost  entirely  in  the  precipitate. 

(2)  Action   of  hydrofluoric  acid   upon   the  hydrates  freshly 
precipitated,   and   held   in    suspension    in   water.      The    portion 
dissolved  is  only  slightly  active.     By  this  method  titanium  may 
be  separated. 

(3)  Precipitation  of  neutral  nitrate  solutions  by  oxygenated 
water.     The  precipitate  carries  down  the  active  body. 

(4)  Precipitation  of  insoluble  sulphates.     If  barium  sulphate, 
for  example,  is  precipitated  in  the  solution  containing  the  active 
body,  the  barium  carries  down  the  active  matter.     The  thorium 
and  actinium  are   freed  from   the   barium  by  conversion  of  the 
sulphate  into  the  chloride  and  precipitation  by  ammonia. 

In  this  way  Debierne  has  obtained  a  substance  comparable 
in  activity  with  radium.  The  separation,  which  is  difficult  and 
laborious,  has  so  far  not  been  carried  far  enough  to  bring  out 
any  new  lines  in  the  spectrum.  Actinium  gives  out  easily  ab- 
sorbed and  penetrating  deviable  rays  like  those  of  radium, 
and  also  a  radio-active  emanation1,  which  is  more  allied  to  the 
emanation  of  thorium  than  to  that  of  radium.  The  emanation 
has  a  distinctive  rate  of  decay ;  it  loses  its  activity  in  the  course 
of  a  few  seconds,  while  the  thorium  emanation  loses  half  its  activity 
in  one  minute.  The  distinctive  character  of  the  radiations  and 
emanations,  together  with  the  permanence  of  the  activity,  make 
it  very  probable  that  actinium  will  prove  to  be  a  new  element 
of  very  great  activity. 

21.  Giesel2  also  has  obtained  from  pitchblende  a  radio-active 
substance  which  in  many  respects  is  similar  to  the  actinium  of 
Debierne.  The  active  substance  belongs  to  the  group  of  cerium 

1  C.  It.  136,  p.  446,  1903. 

-  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.  p.  3608,  1902 ;  p.  342,  1903. 


24  RADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

earths,  and  is  precipitated  with  them.  The  method  of  preparation 
of  this  material  is  the  same  as  that  employed  for  the  separation 
of  the  rare  earths.  This  substance  is  similar  in  radio-active  be- 
haviour to  thorium,  but  intensely  active  in  comparison.  From 
the  method  of  separation,  thorium  itself  cannot  be  present  except 
in  minute  quantity. 

The  substance  gives  out  easily  absorbed  and  penetrating  rays 
and  also  an  emanation.  On  account  of  the  intensity  of  the 
emanation  which  it  emits,  Giesel  has  termed  this  active  material 
the  "  emanating  substance." 

If  a  piece  of  paper  is  placed  in  a  small  closed  vessel  containing 
the  active  material,  in  a  short  time  the  paper  itself  becomes  power- 
fully active.  This  is  especially  the  case  if  it  is  moistened  with  water. 
The  emanation  lights  up  a  zinc  sulphide  screen.  An  electric  field 
has  a  marked  action  on  the  luminosity  of  the  screen.  The  action 
is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  section  186. 

Giesel  found  that  the  activity  of  the  material  seemed  to  increase 
slightly  during  the  six  months'  interval  after  separation.  In  this 
respect  it  is  similar  to  radium  compounds,  of  which  the  activity 
increases  for  a  time  after  separation. 

Both  the  method  of  preparation  and  also  the  radiating  properties 
of  this  "  emanating  substance  "  indicate  that  it  is  the  same  as  the 
actinium  of  Debierne.  Neither  of  these  active  substances  has 
been  studied  in  the  same  detail  as  uranium,  thorium,  or  radium, 
and  further  comparative  data  on  the  nature  of  the  radiations  and 
emanations  are  necessary  before  any  definite  conclusion  can  be 
reached.  The  distinctive  character  of  the  radiations  and  ema- 
nations is  of  far  more  value  in  establishing  the  dissimilarity  of 
two  active  bodies  than  differences  in  their  chemical  behaviour. 
This  is  especially  the  case  where  the  active  substance  is  present 
only  in  small  quantity  in  inactive  material. 

22.  The  similarity  of  the  chemical  properties  of  actinium  and 
thorium  has  led  to  the  suggestion  at  different  times  that  the 
activity  of  thorium  is  not  due  to  thorium  itself  but  to  the  presence 
of  a  slight  trace  of  actinium.  In  view  of  the  difference  in  the  rate 
of  decay  of  activity  of  the  emanations  of  thorium  and  actinium, 
this  position  is  not  tenable.  If  the  activity  of  thorium  were  due 


l]  RADIO-ACTlVE   SUBSTANCES  25 

to  actinium,  the  two  emanations  should  have  identical  rates  of 
decay. 

Baskerville1,  working  with  thorium  minerals,  was  able  to  obtain 
thorium  less  active  to  the  photographic  plate  than  ordinary 
thorium.  He  put  forward  the  view  that  thorium  was  a  mixture 
of  two  elements,  one  of  which  was  active  and  the  other  inactive. 
These  results  were  probably  due  to  the  separation  of  the  active 
product  Th.  X  from  the  thorium  (see  section  119).  This  process 
would  temporarily  greatly  reduce  the  activity  as  tested  by  the 
photographic  method. 

Until  thorium  is  obtained  permanently  free  from  activity,  the 
question  whether  the  radio-activity  is  due  to  a  small  trace  of  very 
active  matter,  or  to  the  thorium  itself,  must  remain  in  doubt2.  The 
fact  that  ordinary  commercial  thorium  and  the  purest  chemical 
preparation  show  equal  activity  supports  the  view  that  the  effect 
is  not  due  to  a  radio-active  impurity,  but  to  the  element  itself. 
If  the  activity  of  thorium  is  due  to  a  small  trace  of  active  matter, 
this  active  substance  is  certainly  not  radium  or  actinium  or  any 
other  known  material. 

Hofmann  and  Zerban3  obtained  a  substance  from  pitchblende 
similar  in  radio-active  properties  to  thorium.  The  activity  of  this 
product  did  not  dimmish  much  in  four  months'  interval.  The 
substance  was  probably  the  same  as  Debierne's  actinium.  They 
also  examined  the  thorium  minerals  broggerite  and  clevite,  but 
obtained  only  some  active  residues  the  activity  of  which  decreased 
rapidly  with  the  time. 

23.  Radio-active  lead.  Elster  and  Geitel4  found  that  lead 
sulphate  obtained  from  pitchblende  was  very  active.  They  con- 
sidered that  the  activity  was  due  to  admixture  with  radium,  and 
by  suitable  treatment  the  lead  sulphate  was  obtained  in  an  inactive 
state. 

1  Jour.  Amer.  Chem.  Soc.  23,  p.  761,  1901. 

2  In   a  recent  paper  (Ber.   deutsch.   chem.   Ges.  p.    3093,   1903)   Hofmann  and 
Zerban  state  that  they  have  obtained  a  preparation  of  thorium  from  gadolinite 
which  was  almost  inactive  when  tested  by  the  electric  method  and  conclude  that 
pure  thorium  is  not  radio-active. 

3  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.  p.  531,  1902. 

4  Wied.  Annal.  69,  p.  83,  1899. 


26  KADIO-ACTIVE   SUBSTANCES  [CH. 

Hofmann  and  Strauss1  found  that  lead  sulphate  obtained  from 
pitchblende  was  active.  This  was  not  due  to  admixture  with  either 
uranium  or  radium  or  polonium.  They  gave  the  name  of  radio- 
active lead  to  the  substance.  This  radio-active  lead,  in  most  of 
its  reactions,  resembled  ordinary  lead,  but  showed  differences  in 
the  behaviour  of  the  sulphide  and  the  sulphate.  The  sulphate  was 
very  strongly  phosphorescent.  This  sulphate  apparently  lost  its 
activity  with  time,  but  recovered  it  in  a  few  minutes  after  exposure 
to  cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

Giesel2  also  was  able  to  obtain  radio-active  lead,  but  found  that 
the  activity  diminished  with  time,  while  Hofmann  states  that  his 
preparations  preserve  their  activity.  It  thus  appears  probable 
that  radio-active  lead  is  either  one  of  the  numerous  examples  of 
substances  made  active  for  the  time  by  solution  with  radio- 
elements,  or  lead  with  a  slight  admixture  of  a  radio-element.  The 
peculiar  action  of  the  cathode  rays  in  causing  an  increase  of  the 
photographic  and  electric  action  of  radio-lead  sulphate  has  ap- 
parently nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  activity  proper  of  the 
substance,  but  seems  to  be  an  additional  effect  due  to  the  strong 
phosphorescence  set  up.  The  sulphide  does  not  show  any  such 
action.  The  phosphorescent  light  probably  includes  some  short 
ultra-violet  light  waves  which  are  capable  of  ionizing  the  gas. 

24.  If  elements  heavier  than  uranium  exist,  it  is  probable  that 
they  will  be  radio-active.  The  extreme  delicacy  of  radio-activity 
as  a  means  of  chemical  analysis  would  enable  such  elements  to 
be  recognized  even  if  present  in  infinitesimal  quantities.  It  is 
probable  that  considerably  more  than  the  three  or  four  radio- 
elements  at  present  recognized  exist  in  minute  quantity,  and  that 
the  number  at  present  known  will  be  augmented  in  the  future. 
In  the  first  stage  of  the  search,  a  purely  chemical  examination  is 
of  little  value,  for  it  is  not  probable  that  the  new  element  should 
exist  in  sufficient  quantity  to  be  detected  by  chemical  or  spectro- 
scopic  analysis.  The  main  criteria  of  importance  are  the  existence 
or  absence  of  distinctive  radiations  or  emanations,  and  the  perman- 
ence of  the  radio-activity.  The  presence  of  a  radio-active  emanation 

1  Ber.  (leutsch.  chem.  Ges.  p.  3035,  1901. 

2  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.  p.  3775,  1901. 


I]  RADIO-ACTIVE   SURSTAXCES  27 

with  a  rate  of  decay  different  from  those  already  known  would 
afford  strong  evidence  that  a  new  radio-active  body  was  present. 
The  presence  of  either  thorium  or  radium  in  matter  can  very 
readily  be  detected  by  observing  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  emana- 
tions given  out  by  them.  When  once  the  presence  of  a  new 
radio-element  has  been  inferred  by  an  examination  of  its  radio- 
active properties,  chemical  methods  of  separation  can  be  devised, 
the  radiating  or  emanating  property  being  used  as  a  guide  in 
qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis. 


CHAPTER  II. 

IONIZATION  THEORY  OF   GASES. 

25.  lonization  of  gases  by  radiation.  The  mostimportant 
property  possessed  by  the  radiations  from  radio-active  bodies  is 
their  power  of  discharging  bodies  whether  positively  or  negatively 
electrified.  As  this  property  has  been  made  the  basis  of  a  method 
for  an  accurate  quantitative  analysis  and  comparison  of  the 
radiations,  the  variation  of  the  rate  of  discharge  under  different 
conditions  and  the  processes  underlying  it  will  be  considered  in 
some  detail. 

In  order  to  explain  the  similar  discharging  power  of  Rontgen 
rays,  the  theory1  has  been  put  ^r  Earth 

forward    that    the    rays    pro-  f 

duce  positively  and  negatively  * 

charged     carriers    throughout  + 

the   volume    of   the   gas   sur-  ^ 

rounding  the  charged  body,  and     >,J^E^&L- 

that  the  rate  of  production  is 

proportional  to   the   intensity 

of  the  radiation.  These  carriers,  Fl8-  l- 

or  ions2  as  they  have  been  termed,  move  with  a  uniform  velocity 

through  the  gas  under  a  constant  electric  field,  and  their  velocity 

varies  directly  as  the  strength  of  the  field. 

Suppose  we  have  a  gas  between  two  metal  plates  A  and  B 
(Fig.  1)  exposed  to  the  radiation,  and  that  the"  plates  are  kept 
at  a  constant  difference  of  potential.  A  definite  number  of  ions 
will  be  produced  per  second  by  the  radiation,  and  the  number 

1  J.  J.  Thomson  and  Eutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1896. 

2  The   word  ion   has   now    been  generally   adopted   in   the   literature   of  the 
subject.     In  the  use  of  this  word  no  assumption  is  made  that  the  ions  in  gases 
are  the  same  as  the  corresponding  ions  in  the  electrolysis  of  solutions. 


CH.  Il]  IOXIZATION   TflEORY   OF   GASES  29 

produced  will  in  general  depend  upon  the  nature  and  pressure  of 
the  gas.  In  the  electric  field  the  positive  ions  travel  towards  the 
negative  plate,  and  the  negative  ions  towards  the  other  plate,  and 
consequently  a  current  will  pass  through  the  gas.  Some  of  the 
ions  will  also  recombine,  the  rate  of  recombination  being  propor- 
tional to  the  square  of  the  number  present.  For  a  given  intensity 
of  radiation,  the  current  passing  through  the  gas  will  increase  at 
first  with  the  potential  difference  between  the  plates,  but  it  will 
finally  reach  a  maximum  when  all  the  ions  are  removed  by  the 
electric  field  before  any  recombination  occurs. 

This  theory  accounts  also  for  all  the  characteristic  properties  of 
gases  made  conducting  by  the  rays  from  active  substances,  though 
there  are  certain  differences  observed  between  the  conductivity 
phenomena  produced  by  active  substances  and  by  X  rays.  These 
differences  are  for  the  most  part  the  result  of  unequal  absorption 
of  the  two  types  of  rays.  Unlike  Rontgen  rays  a  large  proportion 
of  the  radiation  from  active  bodies  consists  of  rays  which  are 
absorbed  in  their  passage  through  a  few  centimetres  of  air.  The 
ionization  of  the  gas  is  thus  not  uniform,  but  falls  off  rapidly  with 
increase  of  distance  from  the  active  substance. 

26.  Variation  of  the  current  with  voltage.  Suppose  that 
a  layer  of  radio-active  matter  is  spread  uniformly  on  the  lower  of 
two  horizontal  plates  A  and  B  (Fig.  1).  The  lower  plate  A  is 
connected  with  one  pole  of  a  battery  of  cells  the  other  pole  of  which 
is  connected  with  earth.  The  plate  B  is  connected  with  one  pair  of 
quadrants  of  an  electrometer,  the  other  pair  being  connected  with 
earth. 

The  current1  between  the  plates,  determined  by  the  rate  of 
movement  of  the  electrometer  needle,  is  observed  at  first  to  in- 
crease rapidly  with  the  voltage,  then  more  slowly,  finally  reaching 
a  value  which  increases  very  slightly  with  a  large  increase  in  the 
voltage.  This,  as  we  have  indicated,  is  simply  explained  on  the 
ionization  theory. 

The  radiation  produces  ions  at  a  constant  rate,  and,  before  the 
electric  field  is  applied,  the  number  pe^  unit  volume  increases 

1  A  minute  current  is  observed  between  the  plates  even  if  no  radio-active  matter 
is  present.  This  has  been  found  to  be  due  mainly  to  a  slight  natural  radio-activity 
of  the  matter  composing  them.  (See  sections  218—220.) 


30  IONIZATION    THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

until  the  rate  of  production  of  fresh  ions  is  exactly  balanced  by  the 
recombination  of  the  ions  already  produced.  On  application  of  a 
small  electric  field,  the  positive  ions  travel  to  the  negative  electrode 
and  the  negative  to  the  positive. 

Since  the  velocity  of  the  ions  between  the  plates  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  electric  field,  in  a  weak  field 
the  ions  take  so  long  to  travel  between  the  electrodes  that  most  of 
them  recombine  on  the  way. 

The  current  observed  is  consequently  small.  With  increase  of 
the  voltage  there  is  an  increase  of  speed  of  the  ions  and  a  smaller 
number  recombine.  The  current  consequently  increases,  and  will 
reach  a  maximum  value  when  the  electric  field  is  sufficiently 
strong  to  remove  all  the  ions  before  appreciable  recombination  has 
occurred.  The  value  of  the  current  will  then  remain  constant  even 
though  the  voltage  is  largely  increased. 

This  maximum  current  will  be  called  the  "saturation x"  current, 
and  the  value  of  the  potential  difference  required  to  give  this 
maximum  current,  the  "  saturation  P.D." 

The  general  shape  of  the  current-voltage  curve  is  shown  in 
Fig.  2,  where  the  ordinates  represent  current  and  the  abscissae 
volts. 


Saturation  Curve 


Folk 
Fig.  2. 

1  This  nomenclature  has  arisen  from  the  similarity  of  the  shape  of  the  current- 
voltage  curves  to  the  magnetization  curves  for  iron.  Since,  on  the  ionization 
theory,  the  maximum  current  is  a  result  of  the  removal  of  all  the  ions  from  the  gas, 
before  recombination  occurs,  the  terms  are  not  very  suitable.  They  have  however 
now  come  into  general  use  and  will  be  retained  throughout  this  work. 


n] 


IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES 


31 


Although  the  variation  of  the  current  with  voltage  depends 
only  on  the  velocity  of  the  ions  and  their  rate  of  recombination, 
the  full  mathematical  analysis  is  intricate,  and  the  equations, 
expressing  the  relation  between  current  and  voltage,  are  only 
integrable  for  the  case  of  uniform  ionization.  The  question  is  com- 
plicated by  the  inequality  in  the  velocity  of  the  ions  and  by  the 
disturbance  of  the  potential  gradient  between  the  plates  by  the 
movement  of  the  ions.  J.  J.  Thomson1  has  worked  out  the  case 
for  uniform  production  of  ions  between  two  parallel  plates,  and  has 
found  that  the  relation  between  the  current  i  and  the  potential 
difference  V  applied  is  expressed  by 


where  A  and  B  are  constants  for  a  definite  intensity  of  radiation 
and  a  definite  distance  between  the  plates. 

In  certain  cases  of  unsymmetrical  ionization,  which  arise  in  the 
study  of  the  radiations  from  active  bodies,  the  relation  between 
current  and  voltage  is  very  different  from  that  expressed  by 


00 

M 
80 

70 

.-.  

_ 

^x 

X 

/ 

50 
40 
30 

/ 

/ 

/ 

Sat 

uration  Cu 
m,  activity 
es  4-5  cms. 

rve 

/ 

plat 

apart 

JU 
10 

/ 

/ 

0                     100                  200                   300                  400                  500                 600                70C 

Fig.  3. 

1  Phil.  Mag.  47,  p.  253,  1899.    J.  J.  Thomson,  Conduction  of  Electricity  through 
Gases,  p.  73,  1903. 


32  IONIZAT1ON   THEOKY    OF   GASES  [CH. 

the  above  equation.     Some  of  these  cases  will  be  considered  in 
section  47. 

27.  The  general  shape  of  the  current-voltage  curves  for  gases 
exposed  to  the  radiations  from  active  bodies  is  shown  in  Fig.  3. 

This  curve  was  obtained  for  '45  grams  of  impure  radium 
chloride,  of  activity  1000  times  that  of  uranium,  spread  over  an 
area  of  33  sq.  cms.  on  the  lower  of  two  large  parallel  plates, 
4'5  cms.  apart.  The  maximum  value  of  the  current  observed, 
which  is  taken  as  100,  was  1*2  x  10~8  amperes,  the  current  for  low 
voltages  was  nearly  proportional  to  the  voltage,  and  about  600 
volts  between  the  plates  was  required  to  ensure  approximate 
saturation. 

In  dealing  with  slightly  active  bodies  like  uranium  or  thorium, 
approximate  saturation  is  obtained  for  much  lower  voltages. 
Tables  I.  and  II.  show  the  results  for  the  current  between  two 
parallel  plates  distant  0'5  cms.  and  2*5  cms.  apart  respectively,  when 
one  plate  was  covered  with  a  thin  uniform  layer  of  uranium  oxide. 

TABLE  I.  TABLE  II. 

0-5  cms.  apart  2-5  cms.  apart 

Volts  Current  Volts  Current 

•125              18  -5                  7'3 

•25               36  1                   14 

•5                 55  2                  27 

1  67  4                  47 

2  72  8                  64 
4                    79  16                 73 
8                    85  37-5               81 

16  88  112  90 

100  94  375  97 

335  100  800  100 

The  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  4. 

From  the  above  tables  it  is  seen  that  the  current  at  first  in- 
creases nearly  in  proportion  to  the  voltage.  There  is  no  evidence 
of  complete  saturation,  although  the  current  increases  very  slowly 
for  large  increases  of  voltage.  For  example,  in  Table  I.  a  change  of 
voltage  from  '125  to  '25  volts  increases  the  current  from  18  to 
36  °/0  of  the  maximum,  while  a  change  of  voltage  from  100  to  335 
volts  increases  the  current  only  6°/0.  The  variation  of  the  current 
per  volt  (assumed  uniform  between  the  range  of  voltages  con- 
sidered) is  thus  about  5000  times  greater  for  the  former  change. 


IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES 


33 


Taking  into  consideration  the  early  part  of  the  curves,  the 
current  does  not  reach  a  practical  maximum  as  soon  as  would  be 
expected  on  the  simple  ionization  theory.  It  seems  probable  that 


100 


Saturation  Curves 

for 
Uranium  rays 


40  60 

Volts 


10 


Fig.  4. 

the  slow  increase  with  the  large  voltages  is  due  either  to  an  action 
of  the  electric  field  on  the  rate  of  production  of  ions,  or  to  the 
difficulty  of  removing  the  ions  produced  near  the  surface  of  the 
uranium  before  recombination.  It  is  possible  that  the  presence 
of  a  strong  electric  field  may  assist  in  the  separation  of  ions  which 
otherwise  would  not  initially  escape  from  the  sphere  of  one 
another's  attraction.  From  the  data  obtained  by  Townsend  for 
the  conditions  of  production  of  fresh  ions  at  low  pressures  by  the 
movement  of  ions  through  the  gas,  it  seems  that  the  increase  of 
current  cannot  be  ascribed  to  an  action  of  the  moving  ions  in  the 
further  ionization  of  the  gas. 

28.     The  equation  expressing  the  relation  between  the  current 
and  the  voltage  is  very  complicated  even  in  the  case  of  a  uniform 
rate  of  production  of  ions  between  the  plates.     An  approximate 
R.  R.-A.  -   3 


34  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF  GASES  [CH. 

theory,  which  is  of  utility  in  interpreting  the  experimental  results, 
can  however  be  simply  deduced  if  the  disturbance  of  the  potential 
gradient  is  disregarded,  and  the  ionization  assumed  uniform  be- 
tween the  plates. 

Suppose  that  the  ions  are  produced  at  a  constant  rate  q  per 
cubic  centimetre  per  second  in  the  gas  between  parallel  plates 
distant  I  cms.  from  each  other.  When  no  electric  field  is  applied, 
the  number  N  present  per  c.c.,  when  there  is  equilibrium  between 
the  rates  of  production  and  recombination,  is  given  by  q  ==•  aN2, 
where  a  is  a  constant. 

If  a  small  potential  difference  V  is  applied,  which  gives  only  a 
small  fraction  of  the  maximum  current,  and  consequently  has  not 
much  effect  on  the  value  of  N,  the  current  %  per  sq.  cm.  of  the 
plate,  is  given  by 

.NeuV 


where  u  is  the  sum  of  the  velocity  of  the  ions  for  unit  potential 

uV 

gradient,  and  e  is  the  charge  carried  by  an  ion.    -=-  is  the  velocity 

I 

y 

of  the  ions  in  the  electric  field  of  strength  y-  . 

The  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  in  a  prism  of  length  I 
and  unit  area  of  cross-section  is  ql.  The  maximum  or  saturation 
current  7  per  sq.  cm.  of  the  plate  is  obtained  when  all  of  these 
ions  are  removed  to  the  electrodes  before  any  recombination  has 
occurred. 

Thus  7  =  q  .1 .  e, 

i      NuV       uV 

and  —  = = 

7        ql2        I2  \fqa ' 

This  equation  expresses  the  fact  previously  noted  that,  for  small 
voltages,  the  current  i  is  proportional  to  F 

Let  j  =  0, 

then  F  = ' 

u 


II]  IONIZATION   THEOKY   OF   GASES  35 

Now  the  greater  the  value  of  V  required  to  obtain  a  given 
value  of  p  (supposed  small  compared  with  unity),  the  greater  the 
potential  required  to  produce  saturation. 

It  thus  follows  from  the  equation  that : 

(1)  For  a  given  intensity  of  radiation,  the  saturation  P.D. 
increases  with  the  distance  between  the  plates.     In  the  equation, 
for  small  values  of  p,  V  varies  as  I2.     This  is  found  to  be  the  case 
for  uniform  ionization,  but  it  only  holds  approximately  for  non- 
uniform  ionization. 

(2)  For  a  given  distance  between  the  plates,  the  saturation 
p.  D.  is  greater,  the  greater  the  intensity  of  ionization  between  the 
plates.     This  is  found  to  be  the  case  for  the  ionization  produced 
by  radio-active  substances.      With  a  very  active  substance  like 
radium,  the   ionization   produced   is   so   intense  that  very  large 
voltages  are  required  to  produce  approximate  saturation.     On  the 
other  hand,  only  a  fraction  of  a  volt  per  cm.  is  necessary  to  produce 
saturation  in  a  gas  where  the  ionization  is  very  slight,  for  example, 
in  the  case  of  the  natural  ionization  observed  in  a  closed  vessel, 
where  no  radio-active  substances  are  present. 

For  a  given  intensity  of  radiation,  the  saturation  P.  D.  decreases 
rapidly  with  the  lowering  of  the  pressure  of  the  gas.  This  is  due 
to  two  causes  operating  in  the  same  direction,  viz.  a  decrease  in 
the  intensity  of  the  ionization  and  an  increase  in  the  velocity  of 
the  ions.  The  ionization  varies  directly  as  the  pressure,  while  the 
velocity  varies  inversely  as  the  pressure.  This  will  obviously  have 
the  effect  of  causing  more  rapid  saturation,  since  the  rate  of 
recombination  is  slower  and  the  time  taken  for  the  ions  to  travel 
between  the  electrodes  is  less. 

The  saturation  curves  observed  for  the  gases  hydrogen  and 
carbon  dioxide1  are  very  similar  in  shape  to  those  obtained  for  air. 
For  a  given  intensity  of  radiation,  saturation  is  more  readily 
obtained  in  hydrogen  than  in  air,  since  the  ionization  is  less  than 
in  air  while  the  velocity  of  the  ions  is  greater.  Carbon  dioxide  on 
the  other  hand  requires  a  greater  p.  D.  to  produce  saturation  than 
does  air,  since  the  ionization  is  more  intense  and  the  velocity  of 
the  ions  less  than  in  air. 

1  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag,  Jan.  1899. 

3—2 


36 


IONIZATION   THEORY    OF   GASES 


[CH. 


29.  Townsend1  has  shown  that,  for  low  pressures,  the  variation 
of  the  current  with  the  voltage  is  very  different  from  that  observed 
at  atmospheric  pressure.  If  the  increase  of  current  with  the  voltage 
is  determined  for  gases,  exposed  to  Rontgen  rays,  at  a  pressure  of 
about  1  mm.  of  mercury,  it  is  found  that  for  small  voltages  the 
ordinary  saturation  curve  is  obtained ;  but  when  the  voltage 
applied  increases  beyond  a  certain  value,  depending  on  the  pressure 
and  nature  of  the  gas  and  the  distance  between  the  electrodes,  the 
current  commences  to  increase  slowly  at  first  but  very  rapidly  as 
the  voltage  is  raised  to  the  sparking  value.  The  general  shape  of 
the  current  curve  is  shown  in  Fig.  5. 


Volts 
Fig.  5. 

The  portion  OAB  of  the  curve  corresponds  to  the  ordinary 
saturation  curve.  At  the  point  B  the  current  commences  to 
increase.  This  increase  of  current  has  been  shown  to  be  due  to 
the  action  of  the  negative  ions  at  low  pressures  in  producing  fresh 
ions  by  collision  with  the  molecules  in  their  path.  The  increase  of 
current  is  not  observed  in  air  at  a  pressure  above  30  mms.  until  the 
P.D.  is  increased  nearly  to  the  value  required  to  produce  a  spark. 
This  production  of  ions  by  collision  is  considered  in  more  detail  in 
section  41. 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1901. 


II]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  37 

30.  Rate  of  recombination  of  the  ions.  A  gas  ionized 
by  the  radiation  preserves  its  conducting  power  for  some  time 
after  it  is  removed  from  the  presence  of  the  active  body.  A 
current  of  air  blown  over  an  active  body  will  thus  discharge  an 
electrified  body  some  distance  away.  The  duration  of  this  after 
conductivity  can  be  very  conveniently  examined  in  an  apparatus 
similar  to  Fig.  6. 


Uranium'] 


Fig.  6. 

A  dry  current  of  air  or  any  other  gas  is  passed  at  a  constant 
rate  through  a  long  metal  tube  TL.  The  current  of  air  after 
passing  through  a  quantity  of  cotton-wool  to  remove  dust  particles, 
passes  over  a  vessel  T  containing  a  radio-active  body  such  as 
uranium,  which  does  not  give  off  a  radio-active  emanation.  By 
means  of  insulated  electrodes  A  and  B,  charged  to  a  suitable 
potential,  the  current  through  the  gas  can  be  tested  at  various 
points  along  the  tube. 

A  gauze  screen,  placed  over  the  cross-section  of  the  tube  at  D, 
serves  to  prevent  any  direct  action  of  the  electric  field  in  abstracting 
ions  from  the  neighbourhood  of  T. 

If  the  electric  field  is  sufficiently  strong,  all  the  ions  travel 
in  to  the  electrodes  at  A,  and  no  current  is  observed  at  the  elec- 
trode B.  If  the  current  is  observed  successively  at  different  distances 
along  the  tube,  all  the  electrodes  except  the  one  under  consideration 
being  connected  to  earth,  it  is  found  that  the  current  diminishes 
with  the  distance  from  the  active  body.  If  the  tube  is  of  fairly 
wide  bore,  the  loss  of  the  ions  due  to  diffusion  is  small,  and  the 
decrease  in  conductivity  of  the  gas  is  due  to  recombination  of  the 
ions  alone. 

On  the  ionization  theory,  the  number  dn  of  ions  per  unit  volume 
which  recombine  in  the  time  dt  is  proportional  to  the  square  of 
the  number  present.  Thus 

dn 

where  a  is  a  constant. 


38  IONIZATION    THEORY    OF   GASES  [CH. 

Integrating  this  equation, 


if  N  is  the  initial  number  of  ions,  and  n  the  number  after  a  time  t 

The  experimental  results  obtained1  have  been  shown  to  agree 
very  well  with  this  equation. 

In  an  experiment  similar  to  that  illustrated  in  Fig.  6,  using 
uranium  oxide  as  a  source  of  ionization,  it  was  found  that  half  the 
number  of  ions  present  in  the  gas  recombined  in  2*4  seconds,  and 
that  at  the  end  of  8  seconds  one-fourth  of  the  ions  were  still 
uncombined. 

Since  the  rate  of  recombination  is  proportional  to  the  square  of 
the  number  present,  the  time  taken  for  half  of  the  ions  present  in 
the  gas  to  recombine  decreases  very  rapidly  with  the  intensity  of 
the  ionization.  If  radium  is  used,  the  ionization  is  so  intense  that 
the  rate  of  recombination  is  extremely  rapid.  It  is  on  account  of 
this  rapidity  of  recombination  that  large  voltages  are  necessary  to 
produce  saturation  in  the  gases  exposed  to  very  active  preparations 
of  radium. 

The  value  of  a,  which  may  be  termed  the  coejftdent_of_recom- 
l&LLation,  has  been  determined  in  absolute  measure  by  Townsend2, 
McClung3  and  Langevin4  by  different  experimental  methods  but 
with  very  concordant  results.  Suppose,  for  example,  with  the 
apparatus  of  Fig.  6,  the  time  T,  taken  for  half  the  ions  to  recombine 
after  passing  by  the  electrode  A,  has  been  determined  experi- 

mentally.    Then  -—  =  aT,  where  N  is  the  number  of  ions  per  c.c. 

present  at  A.  If  the  saturation  current  i  is  determined  at  the 
electrode  A,  i  =  NVe  where  e  is  the  charge  on  an  ion  and  V  is  the 
volume  of  uniformly  ionized  gas  carried  by  the  electrode  'A  per 

Ve 
second.     Then  a  =  .m  . 

11. 

The  following  table  shows  the  value  of  a  obtained  for  different 
gases. 

1  Eutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1897,  p.  144,  Jan.  1899. 

2  Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  A,  p.  157,  1899.  3  Phil.  Mag.  p.  283,  March,  1902. 
4  These  presentee  a  la  Faculte  des  Sciences,  p.  161,  Paris,  1902. 


II]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  39 

Value  of  a. 


Gas 

Air      

Carbon  Dioxide 
Hydrogen 

Town  send 

3420  x  e 
3500  x  e 
3020  x  e 

McClung 

3384  x  e 
3492  x  e 

Langevin 
3200  xe 
3400  xe 

The  latest  determination  of  the  value  of  e  (see  section  36)  is 
3-4  x  10-10  E.  s.  units ;  thus  a  =  Tl  x  lO"6. 

Using  this  value,  it  can  readily  be  shown  from  the  equation  of 
recombination  that,  if  106  ions  are  present  per  c.c.,  half  of  them 
recombine  in  about  0'9  sec.  and  99%  in  90  sees. 

MeClung  (loc.  tit.)  showed  that  the  value  of  a  was  approximately 
independent  of  the  pressure  between  '125  and  three  atmospheres. 
In  later  observations,  Langevin  has  found  that  the  value  of  a 
decreases  rapidly  when  the  pressure  is  lowered  below  the  limits 
used  by  McClung. 

31.  In  experiments  on  recombination  it  is  essential  that  the 
gas  should  be  free  from  dust  or  other  suspended  particles.     In 
dusty  air,  the  rate  of  recombination  is  much  more  rapid  than  in 
dust-free  air,  as  the  ions  diffuse  rapidly  to  the  comparatively  large 
dust  particles  distributed  throughout  the  gas.     The  effect  of  the 
suspension   of  small   particles  in  a  conducting  gas  is  very  .well 
illustrated  by  an   experiment   of  Owens1.     If  tobacco  smoke  is 
blown  between  two  parallel  plates  as  in  Fig.  1,  the  current  at  once 
diminishes  to  a  small  fraction  of  its  former  value,  although  a  P.D. 
is  applied  sufficient  to   produce  saturation  under  ordinary  con- 
ditions.    A   much   larger    voltage   is  then   necessary  to   produce 
saturation.     If  the  smoke  particles  are  removed  by  a  stream  of  air, 
the  current  at  once  returns  to  its  original  value. 

32.  Mobility  of  the  ions.     Determinations  of  the  mobility 
of  the  ions,  i.e.  the  velocity  of  the  ions  under  a  potential  gradient 
of  1  volt  per  cm.,  have  been  made  by  Rutherford2,  Zeleny3,  and 
Langevin4  for  gases  exposed  to  Rontgen  rays.     Although  widely 
different  methods  have  been  employed,  the  results  have  been  very 
concordant  and  fully  support  the  view  that  the  ions  move  with  a 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.   1899.  2  Phil.  Mag.  p.  429,  Nov.  1897. 

:i  Phil.  Trans.  A,  p.  193,  1901.  4  C.  R.  134,  p.  646,  19C2. 


40  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

velocity  proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  field.  On  the  appli- 
cation of  an  electric  field,  the  ions  almost  instantly  attain  the 
velocity  corresponding  to  the  field  and  then  move  with  a  uniform 
speed. 

Zeleny1  first  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  positive  and 
negative  ions  had  different  velocities.  The  velocity  of  the  negative 
ion  is  always  greater  than  that  of  the  positive,  and  varies  with  the 
amount  of  water  vapour  present  in  the  gas. 

The  results,  previously  discussed,  of  the  variation  of  the  current 
with  voltage  and  of  the  rate  of  recombination  of  the  ions  do  not  of 
themselves  imply  that  the  ions  produced  in  gases  by  the  radiations 
from  active  bodies  are  of  the  same  size  as  those  produced  by 
Rontgen  rays  under  similar  conditions.  They  merely  show  that 
the  conductivity  under  various  conditions  can  be  satisfactorily 
explained  by  the  view  that  charged  ions  are  produced  throughout 
the  volume  of  the  gas.  The  same  general  relations  would  be 
observed  if  the  ions  differed  considerably  in  size  and  velocity  from 
those  produced  by  Kontgen  rays.  The  most  satisfactory  method 
of  determining  whether  the  ions  are  identical  in  the  two  cases  is 
to  determine  the  velocity  of  the  ions  under  similar  conditions. 

In  order  to  compare  the  velocity  of  the  ions2,  the  writer  has 
used  an  apparatus  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  6  on  p.  37. 

The  ions  were  carried  with  a  rapid  constant  stream  of  air 
past  the  charged  electrode  A ,  and  the  conductivity  of  the  gas  tested 
immediately  afterwards  at  an  electrode  B,  which  was  placed  close 
to  A.  The  insulated  electrodes  A  and  B  were  fixed  centrally  in 
the  metal  tube  L,  which  was  connected  with  earth. 

For  convenience  of  calculation,  it  is  assumed  that  the  electric 
field  between  the  cylinders  is  the  same  as  if  the  cylinders  were 
infinitely  long. 

Let  a  and  b  be  the  radii  of  the  electrode  A,  and  of  the  tube  L 
respectively,  and  let  V  =  potential  of  A. 

The  electromotive  intensity  X  (without  regard  to  sign)  at  a 
distance  r  from  the  centre  of  the  tube  is  given  by 

v 


1  Phil.  Mag.  July,  1898.  2  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1899. 


H]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  41 

Let  HI  and  ^  be  the  velocities  of  the  positive  and  negative 
ions  for  a  potential  gradient  of  1  volt  per  cm.  If  the  velocity  is 
proportional  to  the  electric  force  at  any  point,  the  distance  dr 
traversed  by  the  negative  ion  in  the  time  dt  is  given  by 

dr  =  Xu^dt, 

b 
or  loge  -  r  dr 

dt  =  -  ^  -  . 

VUt 

Let  r.2  be  the  greatest  distance  measured  from  the  axis  of  the 
tube  from  which  the  negative  ion  can  just  reach  the  electrode  A 
in  the  time  t  taken  for  the  air  to  pass  along  the  electrode. 

'- 


If  p2  be  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  the  negative  ions  that  reach 
the  electrode  A  to  the  total  number  passing  by,  then 


Therefore 

/>2(62-a2)loge- 


Similarly  the  ratio  p±  of  the  number  of  positive  ions  that  give 
up  their  charge  to  the  external  cylinder  to  the  total  number  of 
positive  ions  is  given  by 


"'= 


2 


In  the  above  equations  it  is  assumed  that  the  current  of  air  is 
uniform  over  the  cross-section  of  the  tube,  and  that  the  ions  are 
uniformly  distributed  over  the  cross-section  ;  also,  that  the  move- 
ment of  the  ions  does  not  appreciably  disturb  the  electric  field. 
Since  the  value  of  t  can  be  calculated  from  the  velocity  of  the 
current  of  air  and  the  length  of  the  electrode,  the  values  of  the 
velocities  of  the  ions  under  unit  potential  gradient  can  at  once  be 
determined. 

The  equation  (1)  shows  that  p2  is  proportional  to  F,  —  i.e.  that 


42 


IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES 


[CH. 


fche  rate  of  discharge  of  the  electrode  A  varies  directly  as  the 
potential  of  A,  provided  that  the  value  of  V  is  not  large  enough  to 
remove  all  the  ions  from  the  gas  as  it  passes  by  the  electrode. 
This  was  found  experimentally  to  be  the  case. 

In  the  comparison  of  the  velocities,  the  potential  V  was  adjusted 
to  such  a  value  that  pz  was  about  one  half,  when  uranium  oxide 
was  placed  in  the  tube  at  L.  The  active  substance  was  then 
removed,  and  an  aluminium  cylinder  substituted  for  the  brass 
tube.  X  rays  were  allowed  to  fall  on  the  centre  of  this  aluminium 
cylinder,  and  the  strength  of  the  rays  adjusted  to  give  about  the 
same  conductivity  to  the  gas  as  the  uranium  had  done.  Under 
these  conditions  the  value  of  p.2  was  found  to  be  the  same  as  for, 
the  first  experiment. 

This  experiment  shows  conclusively  that  the  ions  produced 
by  Rontgen  rays  and  by  uranium  move  with  the  same  velocity 
and  are  probably  identical  in  all  respects.  The  method  described 
above  is  not  very  suitable  for  an  accurate  determination  of  the 
velocities,  but  gave  values  for  the  positive  ions  of  about  1*4  cms. 
per  second  per  volt  per  centimetre,  and  slightly  greater  values  for 
the  negative  ions. 

33.  The  most  accurate  determinations  of  the  mobility  of  the 
ions  produced  by  Rontgen  rays  have  been  made  by  Zeleny1  and 
Langevin2.  Zeleny  used  a  method  similar  in  principle  to  that 
explained  above.  His  results  are  shown  in  the  following  table, 
where  K^  is  the  mobility  of  the  positive  ion  and  Kz  that  of  the 
negative  ion. 


Gas 

K, 

K2 

K2 
KI 

Temperature 

Air.  dry       

1-36 

1-87 

1-375 

13°-5C. 

„    moist    

1-37 

1-51 

1-10 

14° 

Oxygen,  dry 

1-36 

1-80 

1-32 

17° 

„          moist 

1-29 

1-52 

1-18 

16° 

Carbon  dioxide,  dry 

0-76 

0-81 

1-07 

17°'5 

„        moist 

0-81 

0-75 

0-915 

17° 

Hydrogen,  dry 

6-70 

7-95 

1-15 

20° 

,,           moist    ... 

5-30 

5-60 

1-05 

20° 

1  Phil.  Trans.  195,  p.  193,  1900. 

2  C.  R.  134,  p.  646,  1902,  and  Thesis,  p.  191,  1902. 


II]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  43 

Langevin  determined  the  velocity  of  the  ions  by  a  direct  method 
in  which  the  time  taken  for  the  ion  to  travel  over  a  known  distance 
was  observed. 

The  following  table  shows  the  comparative  values  obtained  for 
air  and  carbon  dioxide. 

Air  CO2 

K,          K,  ^  Kl          K9         |» 

'  Direct  method  (Langevin)     1'40       1'70       1'22  O86      0-90       1'05 

Current  of  gas  (Zeleny)...     1'36       1'87       1-375          0*76      0'81       1*07 

These  results  show  that  for  all  gases  except  CO2,  there  is  a 
marked  increase  in  the  velocity  of  the  negative  ion  with  the  dry- 
ness  of  the  gas,  and  that,  even  in  moist  gases,  the  velocity  of  the 
negative  ions  is  always  greater  than  that  of  the  positive  ions.  The 
velocity  of  the  positive  ion  is  not  much  affected  by  the  presence 
of  moisture  in  the  gas. 

The  velocity  of  the  ions  varies  inversely  as  the  pressure  of  the 
gas.  This  has  been  shown  by  Rutherford1  for  the  negative  ions 
produced  by  ultra-violet  light  falling  on  a  negatively  charged  sur- 
face, and  later  by  Langevin2  for  both  the  positive  and  negative  ions 
produced  by  Rontgen  rays.  Langevin  has  shown  that  the  velocity 
of  the  positive  ion  increases  more  slowly  with  the  diminution  of 
pressure  than  that  of  the  negative  ion.  It  appears  as  if  the  nega- 
tive ion,  especially  at  pressures  of  about  10  mm.  of  mercury, 
begins  to  diminish  in  size. 

34.      Condensation  experiments.      Some  experiments  will\ 
now  be  described  which  have  verified  in  a  direct  way  the  theory    ] 
that   the   conductivity   produced   in   gases   by  the  various  types  / 
of  radiation  is  due  to  the  production  of  charged  ions  throughout^ 
the  volume  of  the  gas.     Under  certain  conditions,  the  ions  form 
nuclei  for  the  condensation  of  water,  and  this  property  allows  us 
to  show  the  presence  of  the  individual  ions  in  the  gas,  and  also  to 
count  the  number  present. 

It  has  long  been  known  that  if  air  saturated  with  water- vapour 
is  suddenly  expanded,  a  cloud  of  small  globules  of  water  is  formed. 
These  drops  are  formed  round  the  dust  particles  present  in  the  gas, 

1  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  9,  p.  410,  1898.  '-  Thesis,  p.  190,  1902. 


44  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

which  act  as  nuclei  for  the  condensation  of  water  around  them. 
The  experiments  of  R.  von  Helmholtz  and  Bicharz1  had  shown  that 
chemical  reactions,  for  example  the  combustion  of  flames,  taking 
place  in  the  neighbourhood,  affected  the  condensation  of  a  steam- 
jet.  Lenard  showed  that  a  similar  action  was  produced  when  ultra- 
violet light  fell  on  a  negatively  charged  zinc  surface  placed  near 
the  steam-jet.  These  results  suggested  that  the  presence  of  electric 
charges  in  the  gas  facilitated  condensation. 

A  very  complete  study  of  the  conditions  of  condensation  of 
water  on  nuclei  has  been  made  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson2.  An  apparatus 
was  constructed  which  allowed  a  very  sudden  expansion  of  the  air 
over  a  wide  range  of  pressure.  The  amount  of  condensation  was 
observed  in  a  small  glass  vessel.  A  beam  of  light  was  passed 
into  the  apparatus  which  allowed  the  drops  formed  to  be  readily 
observed  by  the  eye. 

Preliminary  small  expansions  caused  a  condensation  of  the 
water  round  the  dust  nuclei  present  in  the  air.  These  dust  nuclei 
were  removed  by  allowing  the  drops  to  settle.  After  a  number  of 
successive  small  expansions,  the  air  was  completely  freed  from 
dust,  so  that  no  condensation  was  produced. 

Let  Vi  =  initial  volume  of  the  gas  in  the  vessel, 
v2  =  volume  after  expansion. 

If  —  <1'25  no  condensation  is  produced  in  dust-free  air.     If 
#1 

however  —  >  1'25  and  <  T38,  a  few  drops  appear.     This  number  is 

roughly  constant  until  —  =  1'38,  when  the  number  suddenly  in- 
creases and  a  very  dense  cloud  of  fine  drops  is  produced. 

If  the  radiation  from  an  X  ray  tube  or  a  radio-active  substance 
is  now  passed  into  the  condensation  vessel,  a  new  series  of  phenomena 

is  observed.      As  before,  if  —  <1'25  no  drops  are  formed,  but  if 

^i 

-  =  T25  there  is  a  sudden  production  of  a  cloud.    The  water  drops 

of  which  this  cloud  is  formed  are  finer  and  more  numerous  the 

1  Wied.  Annul  40,  p.  161, 1890. 

-  Phil.  Trans,  p.  265,  1897;  p.  403,  1899;  p.  289,  1900. 


Il]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  45 

greater  the  intensity  of  the  rays.  This  point  at  which  condensa- 
tion begins  is  very  marked,  and  a  slight  variation  of  the  amount  of 
expansion  causes  either  a  dense  cloud  or  no  cloud  at  all. 

It  now  remains  to  be  shown  that  the  formation  of  a  cloud  by 
the  action  of  the  rays  is  due  to  the  productions  of  ions  in  the 
gas.  If  the  expansion  vessel  is  provided  with  two  parallel  plates 
between  which  an  electric  field  can  be  applied,  it  is  seen  that  the 
number  of  drops,  formed  by  the  expansion  with  the  rays  acting, 
decreases  with  increase  of  the  electric  field.  The  stronger  the 
field  the  smaller  the  number  of  drops  formed.  This  result  is  to  be 
expected  if  the  ions  are  the  centres  of  condensation  ;  for  in  a  strong 
electric  field  the  ions  are  at  once  carried  to  the  electrodes,  and  thus 
disappear  from  the  gas.  If  no  electric  field  is  acting,  a  cloud  can 
be  produced  some  time  after  the  rays  have  been  cut  off;  but  if  a 
strong  electric  field  is  applied,  under  the  same  conditions,  no  cloud 
is  formed.  This  is  in  agreement  with  experiments  showing  the 
time  required  for  the  ions  to  disappear  by  recombination.  In 
addition  it  can  be  shown  that  each  one  of  the  fine  drops  carries  an 
electric  charge  and  can  be  made  to  move  in  a  strong  uniform 
electric  field. 

The  small  number  of  drops  produced  without  the  action  of  the 

rays  when  —  >  1*25  is  due  to  a  very  slight  natural  ionization  of 

the  gas.  That  this  ionization  exists  has  been  clearly  shown  by 
electrical  methods  (section  218). 

The  evidence  is  thus  complete  that  the  ions  themselves  serve 
as  centres  for  the  condensation  of  water  around  them.  These  ex- 
periments show  conclusively  that  the  passage  of  electricity  through 
a  gas  is  due  to  the  production  of  charged  ions  distributed  through- 
out the  volume  of  the  gas,  and  verify  in  a  remarkable  way  the 
hypothesis  of  the  discontinuous  structure  of  the  electric  charges 
carried  by  matter. 

This  property  of  the  ions  of  acting  as  nuclei  of  condensation 
gives  a  very  delicate  method  of  detecting  the  presence  of  ions  in 
the  gas.  If  only  an  ion  or  two  is  present  per  c.c.,  their  presence 
after  expansion  is  at  once  observed  by  the  drops  formed.  In  this 
way  the  ionization  due  to  a  small  quantity  of  uranium  held  a  yard 
away  from  the  condensation  vessel  is  at  once  made  manifest. 


46 


IONIZATION   THEORY    OF   GASES 


[CH. 


35.     Difference  between  the  positive  and  negative  ions. 

In  the  course  of  experiments  to  determine  the  charge  carried  by 
an  ion,  J.  J.  Thomson1  observed  that  the  cloud  formed  under  the 
influence  of  X  rays  increased  in  density  when  the  expansion  was 
about  1*31  and  suggested  in  explanation  that  the  positive  and 
negative  ions  had  different  condensation  points. 

This  difference  in  behaviour  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions 
was  investigated  in  detail  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson2  in  the  following  way. 
X  rays  were  made  to  pass  in  a  narrow  beam  on  either  side  of  a 
plate  AB  (Fig.  7)  dividing  the  condensation  vessel  into  two  equal 


•Earth 


Fig.   7. 

parts.  The  opposite  poles  of  a  battery  of  cells  were  connected 
with  two  parallel  plates  C  and  D,  placed  symmetrically  with  regard 
to  A.  The  middle  point  of  the  battery  and  the  plate  A  were  con- 
nected with  earth.  If  the  plate  C  is  positively  charged,  the  ions  in 
the  space  CA  at  a  short  distance  from  A  are  all  negative  in  sign. 
Those  to  the  right  are  all  positive.  It  was  found  that  condensation 

occurred  only  for  the  negative  ions  in  AC  when  —  =  T25  but  did 

M 

not  occur  in  AD  for  the  positive  ions  until  —  =  1'31. 

»i 

1  Phil.  Mag.  p.  528,  Dec.  1898. 

2  Phif.  Trans.  193,  p.  289,  1899. 


Il]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  47 

The  negative  ion  thus  more  readily  acts  as  a  centre  of  conden- 
sation than  the  positive  ion.  The  greater  effect  of  the  negative 
ion  in  causing  condensation  has  been  suggested  as  an  explanation 
of  the  positive  charge  always  observed  in  the  upper  atmosphere. 
The  negative  ions  under  certain  conditions  become  centres  for  the 
formation  of  small  drops  of  water  and  are  removed  to  the  earth  by 
the  action  of  gravity,  while  the  positive  ions  remain  suspended. 

With  the  apparatus  described  above,  it  has  been  shown  that 
the  positive  and  negative  ions  are  equal  in  number.  If  the  ex- 
pansion is  large  enough,  to  ensure  condensation  on  both  ions,  the 
numbers  of  drops  formed  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  vessel  in 
Fig.  7  are  equal  in  number  and  fall  at  the  same  rate,  i.e.  are  equal 
in  size. 

Since  the  ions  are  produced  in  equal  numbers  from  a  gas 
electrically  neutral,  this  experiment  shows  that  the  charge  on 
positive  and  negative  ions  is  equal  in  value  but  opposite  in  sign. 

36.  Charge  carried  by  an  ion.  For  a  known  sudden  ex- 
pansion of  a  gas  saturated  with  water  vapour,  the  amount  of  water 
precipitated  on  the  ions  can  be  readily  calculated.  The  size  of  the 
drops  can  be  determined  by  observing  the  rate  at  which  the  cloud 
settles  under  the  action  of  gravity.  From  Stokes'  equation,  the 
terminal  velocity  u  of  a  small  sphere  of  radius  r  and  density  d  falling 
through  a  gas  of  which  the  coefficient  of  viscosity  is  /j,  is  given  by 


~  O   ~     ~I"» 
9      fM 

where  g  is  the  acceleration  due  to  gravity.  The  radius  of  the  drop 
and  consequently  the  weight  of  water  in  each  drop  can  thus  be 
determined.  Since  the  total  weight  of  water  precipitated  is  known, 
the  number  of  drops  present  is  at  once  obtained. 

This  method  has  been  used  by  J.  J.  Thomson1  to  determine  the 
charge  carried  by  an  ion.  If  the  expansion  exceeds  the  value  T31, 
both  positive  and  negative  ions  become  centres  of  condensation. 
From  the  rate  of  fall  it  can  be  shown  that  the  drops  are  approxi- 
mately all  of  the  same  size. 

1  Phil.  Mag.  p.  528,  Dec.  1898,  and  March,  1903.     Conduction  of  Electricity 
through  Gases,  p.  121. 


48  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

The  condensation  vessel  was  similar  to  that  employed  by 
C.  T.  R.  Wilson.  Two  parallel  horizontal  plates  were  fitted  in  the 
vessel  and  the  radiation  from  an  X  ray  tube  or  radio-active  substance 
ionized  the  gas  between  them.  A  difference  of  potential  V,  small 
compared  with  that  required  to  saturate  the  gas,  was  applied 
between  the  parallel  plates  distant  I  cms.  from  each  other.  The 
small  current  i  through  the  gas  is  given  (section  28)  by 

._NuVe 
I      ' 

where  N  =  number  of  ions  present  in  the  gas, 
e  =  charge  on  each  ion, 
u  —  sum  of  the  velocities  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions. 

Since  the  value  of  N  is  the  same  as  the  number  of  drops  and  the 
velocity  u  is  known,  the  value  of  e  can  be  determined. 
In  his  last  determination  J.  J.  Thomson  found  that 

e  =  3*4  x  10~10  electrostatic  units. 

A  very  concordant  value  of  3'1  x  10~10  has  been  obtained  by 
H.  A.  Wilson1,  using  a  modified  method  of  counting  the  drops. 
A  check  on  the  size  of  the  drops,  determined  by  their  rate  of  fall, 
was  made  by  observing  the  rate  at  which  the  drops  moved  in 
a  strong  electric  field,  arranged  so  as  to  act  with  or  against  gravity. 
J.  J.  Thomson  found  that  the  charge  on  the  ions  produced  in 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  is  the  same.  This  shows  that  the  nature 
of  the  ionization  in  gases  is  distinct  from  that  occurring  in  the 
electrolysis  of  solutions  where  the  oxygen  ion  always  carries  twice 
the  charge  of  the  hydrogen  ion. 

37.  Diffusion  of  the  ions.  Early  experiments  with  ionized 
gases  showed  that  the  conductivity  was  removed  from  the  gas  by 
passage  through  a  finely  divided  substance  like  cotton- wool,  or  by 
bubbling  through  water.  This  loss  of  conductivity  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  ions  in  passing  through  narrow  spaces  diffuse  to  the 
sides  of  the  boundary,  to  which  they  either  adhere  or  give  up  their 
charge. 

A  direct  determination  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  ions 

1  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1903. 


n] 


IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES 


49 


produced  in  gases  by  Rb'ntgen  rays  or  by  the  rays  from  active 
substances  has  been  made  by  Townsend1.  The  general  method 
employed  was  to  pass  a  stream  of  ionized  gas  through  a  diffusion 
vessel  made  up  of  a  number  of  fine  metal  tubes  arranged  in  parallel. 
Some  of  the  ions  in  their  passage  through  the  tubes  diffuse  to  the 
sides,  the  proportion  being  greater  the  slower  the  motion  of  the 
gas  and  the  narrower  the  tube.  Observations  were  made  of  the 
conductivity  of  the  gas  before  and  after  passage  through  the  tubes. 
In  this  way,  correcting  if  necessary  for  the  recombination  during 
the  time  taken  to  pass  through  the  tubes,  the  proportion  R  of 
either  positive  or  negative  ions  which  are  abstracted  can  be 
deduced.  The  value  of  R  can  be  mathematically  expressed  by 
the  following  equation  in  terms  of  K,  the  coefficient  of  diffusion 
of  the  ions  into  the  gas  with  which  they  are  mixed2, 

_3WKZ  _^KZ 

R  =  4<  (-195<?.    «2F  +  -0243e~~  ~*r  +  &c.), 
where  a  =  radius  of  the  tube, 

Z  =  length  of  the  tube, 
V  =  mean  velocity  of  the  gas  in  the  tube. 

Only  the  first  two  terms  of  the  series  need  be  taken  into 
account  when  narrow  tubes  are  used. 

In  this  equation  R,  V,  and  a  are  determined  experimentally, 
and  K  can  thus  be  deduced. 

The  following  table  shows  the  results  obtained  by  Townsend 
when  X  rays  were  used.  Almost  identical  results  were  obtained 
later,  when  the  radiations  from  active  substances  replaced  the 
X  rays. 

Coefficients  of  diffusion  of  ions  into  gases. 


Gas 

-K"for  +  ions 

K  for  -ions 

Mean  value 
of  K 

Eatio  of 
values  of  K 

Air,  dry 

•028 

•043 

•0347 

1-54 

„     moist  

•032 

•035 

•0335 

1-09 

Oxygen,  dry 

•025 

•0396             -0323 

1-58 

„         moist 
Carbonic  acid,  dry  .  .  . 

•0288 
•023 

•0358             -0323 
•026               -0245 

1-24 
1-13 

„          „      moist 

•0245 

•0255 

•025 

1-04 

Hydrogen,  dry 

•123 

•190               -156 

1-54 

„           moist    ... 

•128 

•142 

•135 

I'll 

1  Phil.  Trans,  p.  129,  1899. 
R.  R.-A. 


2  Townsend,  loc.  cit.  p.  139. 


50  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

The  moist  gases  were  saturated  with  water  vapour  at  a  tem- 
perature of  15°  C. 

It  is  seen  that  the  negative  ion  in  all  cases  diffuses  faster  than 
the  positive.  Theory  shows  that  the  coefficients  of  diffusion  should 
be  directly  proportional  to  the  velocities  of  the  ions,  so  that  this 
result  is  in  agreement  with  the  observations  on  the  greater  velocity 
of  the  negative  ion. 

This  difference  in  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  ions  at  once 
explains  an  interesting  experimental  result.  If  ionized  gases  are 
blown  through  a  metal  tube,  the  tube  gains  a  negative  charge 
while  the  gas  itself  retains  a  positive  charge.  The  number  of 
positive  and  negative  ions  present  in  the  gas  is  originally  the  same, 
but,  in  consequence  of  the  more  rapid  diffusion  of  the  negative  ions, 
more  of  the  negative  ions  than  of  the  positive  give  up  their  charges 
to  the  tube.  The  tube  consequently  gains  a  negative  charge  and 
the  gas  a  positive  charge. 

38.  A  very  important  result  can  at  once  be  deduced  when  the 
velocities  and  coefficients  of  diffusion  of  the  ions  are  known. 
Townsend  (loc.  cit.)  has  shown  that  the  equation  of  motion  of  the 
ions  is  expressed  by  the  formula 


where  e  is  the  charge  on  an  ion, 

n  =  number  of  ions  per  c.c., 
p  =  their  partial  pressure, 

and  u  the  velocity  due  to  the  electric  force  X  in  the  direction  of 
the  axis  of  x.     When  a  steady  state  is  reached, 

dp  nXeK 

-f-  —  0  and  u  =  —      —  . 
dx  p 

Let  N  be  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of 
gas  at  the  pressure  P  and  at  the  temperature  15°C.,  for  which 

N 
the  values  of  u  and  K  have  been  determined.     Then  —  may  be 

substituted  for  -  ,  and,  since  P  at  atmospheric  pressure  is  10", 


Il]  IONIZATIOX   THEORY   OF   GASES  51 

„         3X  108  .  M! 

Ne  —  --  „         electrostatic  units, 
J\. 

where  u^  is  the  velocity  for  1  volt  (i.e.  -^  E.  s.  unit)  per  cm. 

It  is  known  that  one  absolute  electro-magnetic  unit  of 
electricity  in  passing  through  water  liberates  1/23  c.c.  of  hydrogen 
at  a  temperature  of  15°  C.  and  standard  pressure.  The  number  of 
atoms  in  this  volume  is  2'46  N,  and,  if  e  is  the  charge  on  the 
hydrogen  atore  in  the  electrolysis  of  water, 

ion 

2-46  Ne  =  3  x  1010  E.  s.  units, 
Ne'  =  1-22  x  1010  E.  s.  units. 

Thus  4=2-46  x  10-2^. 

6  -TL 

For  example,  substituting  the  values  of  u^  and  K  determined 
for  moist  air  for  the  positive  ion, 

e      2-46     1-37 


Values  of  this  ratio^  not  very  different  from  unity,  are  obtained 
for  the  positive  and  negative  ions  of  the  gases  hydrogen,  oxygen, 
and  carbon  dioxide.  Taking  into  consideration  the  uncertainty  in 
the  experimental  values  of  u^  and  K,  these  results  indicate  that  the 
charge  carried  by  an  ion  in  all  gases  is  the  same  and  is  equal  to 
that  carried  by  the  hydrogen  ion  in  the  electrolysis  of  liquids. 

39.  Number  of  the  ions.  We  have  seen  that,  from  experi- 
mental data,  Townsend  has  found  that  N,  the  number  of  molecules 
present  in  1  c.c.  of  gas  at  15°  C.  and  standard  pressure,  is  given  by 

Are=  1-22x10™. 

Now  e,  the  charge  on  an  ion,  is  equal  to  3'4  x  10~10  E.  s.  units. 
Thus  JV=3-6xlOw. 

If  7  is  the  saturation  current  through  a  gas,  and  q  the  total 
rate  of  production  of  ions  in  the  gas, 


4—2 


52  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

The  saturation  current  through  air  was  found  to  be  1*2  x  10~8 
amperes,  i.e.  36  E.s.  units,  for  parallel  plates,  4'5  cms.  apart,  when  '45 
gramme  of  radium  of  activity  1000  times  that  of  uranium  was  spread 
over  an  area  of  33  sq.  cms.  of  the  lower  plate.  This  corresponds  to  a 
production  of  about  1011  ions  per  second.  Assuming,  for  the  purpose 
of  illustration,  that  the  ionization  was  uniform  between  the  plates, 
the  volume  of  air  acted  on  by  the  rays  was  about  148  c.c.,  and  the 
number  of  ions  produced  per  c.c.  per  second  about  7  x  108.  Since 
JV"  —  3-g  x  1019,  it  is  thus  seen  that,  if  one  molecule  produces  two 
ions,  the  proportion  of  the  gas  ionized  per  second  is  about  10~u  of  the 
whole.  For  uranium  the  fraction  is  about  10~14,  and  for  pure  radium, 
of  activity  one  million  times  that  of  uranium,  about  10~8.  Thus 
even  in  the  case  of  pure  radium,  only  about  one  molecule  of  gas  is 
acted  on  per  second  in  every  100  millions. 

The  electrical  methods  are  so  delicate  that  the  production  of 
one  ion  per  cubic  centimetre  per  second  can  readily  be  detected. 
This  corresponds  to  the  ionization  of  about  one  molecule  in  every 
1019  present  in  the  gas. 

40.  Size  and  nature  of  the  ions.  A}i  approximate  estimate 
of  the  mass  of  an  ion,  compared  with  the  m)ass  of  the  molecule  of 
the  gas  in  which  it  is  produced,  can  be  made  from  the  known  data 
of  the  coefficient  K  of  inter-diffusion  of  the  ions  into  gases.  The 
value  of  K  for  the  positive  ions  in  moist  carbon  dioxide  has  been 
shown  to  be  '0245,  while  the  value  of  K  for  the  inter-diffusion  of 
carbon  dioxide  with  air  is  '14.  The  value  of  K  for  different  gases 
has  been  found  to  be  approximately  inversely  proportional  to  the 
square  root  of  the  products  of  the  masses  of  the  molecules  of  the 
two  inter-diffusing  gases ;  thus,  the  positive  ion  in  carbon  dioxide 
behaves  as  if  its  mass  were  large  compared  with  that  of  the 
molecule.  Similar  results  hold  for  the  negative  as  well  as  for  the 
positive  ion,  and  for  other  gases  besides  carbon  dioxide. 

This  has  led  to  the  view  that  the  ion  consists  of  a  charged 
centre  surrounded  by  a  cluster  of  molecules  travelling  with  it, 
which  are  kept  in  position  round  the  charged  nucleus  by  electrical 
forces.  A  rough  estimate  shows  that  this  cluster  consists  of  about 
30  molecules  of  the  gas.  This  idea  is  supported  by  the  variation 
in  velocity,  i.e.  the  variation  of  the  size  of  the  negative  ion,  in  the 


Il]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  53 

presence  of  water  vapour ;  for  the  negative  ion  undoubtedly  has  a 
greater  mass  in  moist  than  in  dry  gases.  At  the  same  time  it  is 
possible  that  the  apparently  large  size  of  the  ion,  as  determined 
by  diffusion  methods,  may  be  in  part  a  result  of  the  charge  carried 
by  the  ion.  The  presence  of  a  charge  on  a  moving  body  would 
increase  the  frequency  of  collision  with  the  molecules  of  the  gas, 
and  consequently  diminish  the  rate  of  diffusion.  The  ion  on  this 
view  may  not  actually  be  of  greater  size  than  the  molecule  from 
which  it  is  produced. 

The  negative  and  positive  ions  certainly  differ  in  size,  and  this 
difference  becomes  very  pronounced  for  low  pressures  of  the  gas. 
At  atmospheric  pressure,  the  negative  ion,  produced  by  the  action 
of  ultra-violet  light  on  a  negatively  charged  body,  is  of  the 
same  size  as  the  ion  produced  by  X  rays,  but  at  low  pressures 
J.  J.  Thomson  has  shown  that  it  is  identical  with  the  corpuscle  or 
electron,  which  has  an  apparent  mass  of  about  1/1000  of  the  mass 
of  the  hydrogen  atom.  A  similar  result  has  been  shown  by 
Townsend  to  hold  for  the  negative  ion  produced  by  X  rays  at  a 
low  pressure.  It  appears  that  the  negative  ion  at  low  pressure 
sheds  its  attendant  cluster.  The  result  of  Langevin,  that  the 
velocity  of  the  negative  ion  increases  more  rapidly  with  the 
diminution  of  pressure  than  that  of  the  positive  ion,  shows  that 
this  process  of  removal  of  the  cluster  is  quite  appreciable  at  a 
pressure  of  10  mms.  of  mercury. 

It  must  thus  be  supposed  that  the  process  of  ionization  in 
gases  consists  in  a  removal  of  a  negative  corpuscle  or  electron  from 
the  molecule  of  the  gas.  At  atmospheric  pressure  this  corpuscle 
immediately  becomes  the  centre"  of  an  aggregation  of  molecules 
which  moves  with  it  and  is  the  negative  ion.  After  removal  of 
the  negative  ion  the  molecule  retains  a  positive  charge,  and  probably 
also  becomes  the  centre  of  a  cluster  of  new  molecules. 

The  terms  electron  and  ion  as  used  in  this  work  may  therefore 
be  denned  as  follows : — 

The  electron  or  corpuscle  is  the  body  of  smallest  mass  yet 
known  to  science.  It  carries  a  negative  charge  of  value  3*4  x  10~10 
electrostatic  units.  Its  presence  has  only  been  detected  when  in 
rapid  motion,  when  it  has,  for  speeds  up  to  about  1010  cms.  a  second, 
an  apparent  mass  m  given  by  e/m  =  T86  x  107  electromagnetic 


54  ION1ZATION   THEORY    OF   GASES  [CH. 

units.    This  apparent  mass  increases  with  the  speed  as  the  velocity 
of  light  is  approached  (see  section  76). 

The  ions  which  are  produced  in  gases  at  ordinary  pressure  have 
an  apparent  size,  as  determined  from  their  rates  of  diffusion,  large 
compared  with  the  molecule  of  the  gas  in  which  they  are  produced. 
The  negative  ion  consists  of  an  electron  with  a  cluster  of  molecules 
attached  to  and  moving  with  it.  The  positive  ion  consists  of  a 
molecule  from  which  an  electron  has  been  expelled,  with  a  cluster 
of  molecules  attached;  at  low  pressures  under  the  action  of  an 
electric  field  the  electron  does  not  form  a  cluster.  The  positive  ion 
is  always  atomic  in  size,  even  at  low  pressure  of  the  gas.  Each  of 
the  ions  carries  a  charge  of  value  3'4  x  10~10  electrostatic  units. 

41.  Ions  produced  by  collision.  The  greater  part  of  the 
radiation  from  the  radio-active  bodies  consists  of  a  stream  of  charged 
particles  travelling  with  great  velocity.  Of  this  radiation,  the  a 
particles,  which  cause  most  of  the  ionization  observed  in  the  gas, 
consist  of  positively  charged  bodies  projected  with  a  velocity  about 
one-tenth  the  velocity  of  light.  The  ft  rays  consist  of  negatively 
charged  particles,  which  are  identical  with  the  cathode  rays  pro- 
duced in  a  vacuum  tube  and  travel  with  a  speed  about  one-half 
the  velocity  of  light  (chapter  iv.).  Each  of  these  projected 
particles  possesses  such  great  kinetic  energy  that  it  is  able  to 
produce  a  large  number  of  ions  by  collision  with  the  gas  molecules 
in  its  path.  No  definite  experimental  evidence  has  yet  been 
obtained  of  the  number  of  ions  produced  by  a  single  particle,  or 
of  the  way  the  ionization  varies  with  the  speed,  but  there  is  no 
doubt  that  each  projected  body  produces  many  thousand  ions  in 
its  path  before  its  energy  of  motion  is  destroyed. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  (section  29)  that  at  low  pressures 
ions  moving  under  the  action  of  an  electric  field  are  able  to  pro- 
duce fresh  ions  by  collision  with  the  molecules  of  the  gas.  At  low 
pressures  the  negative  ion  is  identical  with  the  electron  produced 
in  a  vacuum  tube,  or  emitted  by  a  radio-active  substance. 

The  mean  free  path  of  the  ion  is  inversely  proportional  to  the 
pressure  of  the  gas.  Consequently,  if  an  ion  moves  in  an  electric 
field,  the  velocity  acquired  between  collisions  increases  with  diminu- 
tion of  the  pressure.  Townsend  has  shown  that  fresh  ions  are 


Il]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  55 

occasionally  produced  by  collision  when  the  negative  ion  moves 
freely  between  two  points  differing  in  potential  by  10  volts.  If 
the  difference  be  about  V  =  20  volts,  fresh  ions  are  produced  at 
each  collision1. 

Now  the  energy  W,  acquired  by  an  ion  of  charge  e  moving 
freely  between  two  points  at  a  difference  of  potential  V,  is  given  by 

W=Ve. 

Taking   F=20  volts  =  -^£r  E.s.   units,  and  e  =  3'4x!0-10,  the 
energy  W  required  to  produce  an  ion  by  collision  of  the  negative 

ion  is  given  by 

TF=2-3  xlO-uergs. 

The   velocity  u  acquired  by  the  ion  of  mass  m  just  before  a 
collision  is  given  by 

mu*  =  Ve, 


and  u  = 

v      m 

p 

Now  -  =  1'86  x  107  electromagnetic  units  for  the  electron  at 
slow  speeds  (section  76). 
Taking  F=  20  volts, 

m  =  2  '7  x  108  cms.  per  sec. 

This  is  a  velocity  very  great  compared  with  the  velocity  of 
agitation  of  the  molecules  of  the  gas. 

The  negative  ions  alone  are  able  to  produce  ions  by  collision 
in  a  weak  electric  field.  The  positive  ion,  whose  mass  is  at  least 
1000  times  greater  than  the  electron,  does  not  acquire  a  sufficient 
velocity  to  produce  ions  by  collision  until  an  electric  field  is  applied 
nearly  sufficient  to  cause  a  spark  through  the  gas. 

An  estimate  of  the  energy  required  to  produce  an  ion  by  X  rays 
has  been  made  by  Rutherford  and  McClung.  The  energy  of  the 
rays  was  measured  by  their  heating  effect,  and  the  total  number  of 
ions  produced  determined.  On  the  assumption  that  all  the  energy 
of  the  rays  is  used  up  in  producing  ions,  it  was  found  that  F=  175 

1  Some  difference  of  opinion  has  been  expressed  as  to  the  value  of  V  required 
to  produce  ions  at  each  collision.  Townsend  considers  it  to  be  about  20  volts  ; 
Langevin  60  volts  and  Stark  about  50  volts. 


56  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

volts — a  value  considerably  greater  than  that  observed  by  Town- 
send  from  data  of  ionization  by  collision.  The  ionization  in  the  two 
cases,  however,  is  produced  under  very  different  conditions,  and:  it 
is  impossible  to  estimate  how  much  of  the  energy  of  the  rays  is 
dissipated  in  the  form  of  heat. 

42.  Variations  are  found  in  the  saturation  current  through  gases, 
exposed  to  the  radiations  from  active  bodies,  when  the  pressure 
and  nature  of  the  gas  and  the  distance  between  the  electrodes  are 
varied.     Some  cases  which  are  of  special  importance  in  measure- 
ments will  now  be  considered.     With  unscreened  active  material 
the  ionization  of  the  gas  is,  to  a  large  extent,  due  to  the  a  rays,  which 
are  absorbed  in  their  passage  through  a  few  centimetres  of  air. 
In  consequence  of  this  rapid  absorption,  the  ionization  decreases 
rapidly  from  the  surface  of  the  active  body,  and  this  gives  rise  to 
conductivity  phenomena  different  in  character  from  those  observed 
with  Rontgen  rays,  where  the  ionization  is  in  most  cases  uniform. 

43.  Variation  of  the  current  with  distance  between  the 
plates.     It  has  been  found  experimentally1  that  the  intensity  of 
the  ionization,  due  to  a  large  plane  surface  of  active  matter,  falls 
off  approximately  in  an  exponential  law  with  the  distance  from  the 
plate.     On  the  assumption  that  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  at 
any  point  is  a  measure  of  the  intensity  /  of  the  radiation,  the 

value    of   /  at  that  point   is   given  by    ^  =  e~*x,  where  \  is  a 

-*o 

constant,  x  the  distance  from  the  plate,  and  70  the  intensity  of  the 
radiation  at  the  surface  of  the  plate.  This  result  can  be  deduced 
theoretically  on  the  assumption  that  the  ionization  at  any  point  is 
proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  radiation,  and  that  the  energy 
of  the  rays  is  used  up  in  producing  ions. 

With  an  infinite  plane  of  active  matter,  the  intensity  of  the 
radiation  would  be  constant  for  all  distances  from  the  plane  if 
there  were  no  absorption  of  the  radiation  in  the  gas. 

Let  q  be  the  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  per  unit 
volume  when  the  intensity  of  radiation  is  /. 

Let  I  =  Kq,  where  K  is  a  constant. 

If  &)  is  the  average  energy  required  to  produce  an  ion,  the 
1  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  1899. 


Il]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF    GASES  57 

energy  dl  absorbed  in  producing  ions  in  a  layer  of  unit  area  and 
thickness  dx  at  a  distance  x  from  the  plane  is  given  by 

dl=qa).  dx 


ay 

Integrating,  ioge  1  =  -~  .  x  +  A  , 

where  A  is  a  constant. 

Since  7  =  70  when  x  =  0,  A  =  loge  /0,  and 


/o 


-A* 


where  X  =  —  =  a  constant. 

K. 

\  will  be  called  the  absorption  constant  of  the  gas  for  the 
particular  kind  of  radiation  considered. 

If  q0  is  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  at  the  surface  of  the 

plate,  -£  =  er**, 

<?o 

Consider  two  parallel  plates  placed  as  in  Fig.  1,  one  of  which  is 
covered  with  a  uniform  layer  of  radio-active  matter.  If  the  distance 
d  between  the  plates  is  small  compared  with  the  dimensions  of  the 
plates,  the  ionization  near  the  centre  of  the  plates  will  be  sensibly 
uniform  over  any  plane  parallel  to  the  plates  and  lying  between 
them.  The  saturation  current  i  per  unit  area  is  given  by 

I'd 

i  =  I    qe'dx,  where  e'  is  the  charge  on  an  ion, 
Jo 


=  q.e'  (d  e-^dx  =  ^  (1  -  <r*d) ; 

JO  A, 


when  \d  is  small,  i.e.  when  the  ionization   between  the  plates  is 
nearly  constant, 

i  =  q0e'd. 

The  current  is  thus  proportional  to  the  distance  between  the 
plates.    When  \d  is  large,  the  saturation  current  iQ  is  equal  to  Q— , 

A/ 

and  is  independent  of  further  increase  in  the  value  of  d.     In  such 


58  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

a  case  the  radiation  is  completely  absorbed  in  producing  ions  be- 
tween the  plates,  and  -  =  1  —  e~*d. 

For  example,  in  the  case  of  a  thin  layer  of  uranium  oxide  spread 
over  a  large  plate,  the  ionization  is  mostly  produced  by  rays  the 
intensity  of  which  is  reduced  to  half  value  in  passing  through 
4'3  mms.  of  air;  i.e.  the  value  of  \  is  1'6.  The  following  table  is  an 
example  of  the  variation  of  i  with  the  distance  between  the  plates. 

Distance  Saturation  Current 

2-5  mms.  32 

5        „  55 

V5  „  72 

10  „  85 

12-5  „  96 

15  „  100 

Thus  the  increase  of  current  for  equal  increments  of  distance 
between  the  plates  decreases  rapidly  with  the  distance  traversed  by 
the  radiation. 

The  distance  of  15  mms.  was  not  sufficient  to  completely  absorb 
all  the  radiation,  so  that  the  current  had  not  reached  its  limiting 
value. 

When  more  than  one  type  of  radiation  is  present,  the  saturation 
current  between  parallel  plates  is  given  by 

A  1  -  e~^d  +  &c. 


where  A,  Al  are  constants  and  X,  \  the  absorption  constants  of 
the  radiations  in  the  gas. 

Since  the  radiations  are  unequally  absorbed  in  different  gases, 
the  variation  of  current  with  distance  depends  on  the  nature  of  the 
gas  between  the  plates. 

44.     Variation  of  the  current  with  pressure.     The  rate 

I  of  production  of  ions  by  the  radiations  from  active  substances  is 

\  directly  proportional  to  the  pressure  of  the  gas.    The  absorption  of 

the  radiation  in  the  gas  also  varies  directly  as  the  pressure.     The 

latter  result  necessarily  follows  if  the  energy  required  to  produce 

an  ion  is  independent  of  the  pressure. 

In  cases  where  the  ionization  is  uniform  between  two  parallel 
plates,  the  current  will  vary  directly  as  the  pressure;  when  however 


II]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  59 

the  ionization  is  not  uniform,  on  account  of  the  absorption  of  the 
radiation  in  the  gas,  the  current  does  not  decrease  directly  as  the 
pressure  until  the  pressure  is  reduced  so  far  that  the  ionization 
is  sensibly  uniform.  Consider  the  variation  with  pressure  of  the 
saturation  current  i  between  two  large  parallel  plates,  one  of  which 
is  covered  with  a  uniform  layer  of  active  matter. 

Let  \!  =  absorption  constant  of  the  radiation  in  the  gas  for 
unit  pressure. 

For  a  pressure  p,  the  intensity  /  at  any  point  x  is  given  by 

—  =  g-p*i*.     The  saturation  current  i  is  thus  proportional  to 

•*o 

[dpldx  =  I d  pl«e-^*.  dx  =  ^(l-  «PM). 
Jo  -'  o  *i 

If  r  be  the  ratio  of  the  saturation  currents  for  the  pressures  p^ 
and  p.2 


The  ratio  is  thus  dependent  on  the  distance  d  between  the 
plates  and  the  absorption  of  the  radiation  by  the  gas. 

The  difference  in  the  shape  of  the  pressure-current  curves1  is 
well  illustrated  in  Fig.  8,  where  curves  are  given  for  hydrogen,  air, 
and  carbonic  acid  for  plates  3*5  cms.  apart. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  the  current  at  atmospheric 
pressure  and  temperature  in  each  case  is  taken  as  unity.  The 
actual  value  of  the  current  was  greatest  in  carbonic  acid  and 
least  in  hydrogen.  In  hydrogen,  where  the  absorption  is  small, 
the  current  over  the  whole  range  is  nearly  proportional  to  the 
pressure.  In  carbonic  acid,  where  the  absorption  is  large,  the 
current  diminishes  at  first  slowly  with  the  pressure,  but  is  nearly 
proportional  to  it  below  the  pressure  of  235  mms.  of  mercury. 
The  curve  for  air  occupies  an  intermediate  position. 

In  cases  where  the  distance  between  the  plates  is  large,  the 
saturation  current  will  remain  constant  with  diminution  of  pres- 
sure until  the  absorption  is  so  reduced  that  the  radiation  reaches 
the  other  plate. 

1  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mat).  Jan.  1899. 


60 


IONIZATION   THEOKY   OF   GASES 


[CH. 


An  interesting  result  follows  from  the  rapid  absorption  of 
radiation  by  the  gas.  If  the  current  is  observed  between  two 
fixed  parallel  plates,  distant  d^  and  d2  respectively  from  a  large 
plane  surface  of  active  matter,  the  current  at  first  increases  with 
diminution  of  pressure,  passes  through  a  maximum  value,  and 
then  diminishes.  In  such  an  experimental  case  the  lower  plate 
through  which  the  radiations  pass  is  made  either  of  open  gauze  or 
of  thin  metal  foil  to  allow  the  radiation  to  pass  through  readily. 


I'rrxxun-  in  inms. 


150 


300  450 

Fig.  8. 


600 


750 


The  saturation  current  i  is  obviously  proportional  to 

?/0e-*>A'd,  i.e.  to  ~ 
This  is  a  function  of  the  pressure,  and  is  a  maximum  when 

1,-x.r,        ^  1  «,-\  f  J  J     \ 


II]  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  61 

For  example,  if  the  active  matter  is  uranium,  p\l=  T6  for  the 
a  rays  at  atmospheric  pressure.  If  c?2  =  3,  and  d^  =1,  the  saturation 
current  reaches  a  maximum  when  the  pressure  is  reduced  to  about 
1/3  of  an  atmosphere.  This  result  has  been  verified  experimentally. 

45.  Conductivity  of  different  gases  when  acted  on  by 
the  rays.  For  a  given  intensity  of  radiation,  the  rate  of  pro- 
duction of  ions  in  a  gas  varies  for  different  gases  and  increases 
with  the  density  of  the  gas.  Strutt1  has  made  a  very  complete 
examination  of  the  relative  conductivity  of  gases  exposed  to  the 
different  types  of  rays  emitted  by  active  substances.  To  avoid 
correction  for  any  difference  of  absorption  of  the  radiation  in  the 
various  gases,  the  pressure  of  the  gas  was  always  reduced  until 
the  ionization  was  directly  proportional  to  the  pressure,  when,  as 
we  have  seen  above,  the  ionization  must  everywhere  be  uniform 
throughout  the  gas.  For  each  type  of  rays,  the  ionization  of 
air  is  taken  as  unity.  The  currents  through  the  gases  were 
determined  at  different  pressures,  and  were  reduced  to  a  common 
pressure  by  assuming  that  the  ionization  was  proportional  to  the 
pressure. 

With  unscreened  active  material,  the  ionization  is  almost 
entirely  due  to  a  rays.  When  the  active  substance  is  covered  with 
a  layer  of  aluminium  '01  cms.  in  thickness,  the  ionization  is  mainly 
due  to  the  ft  or  cathodic  rays,  and  when  covered  with  1  cm.  of  lead 
the  ionization  is  solely  due  to  the  7  or  very  penetrating  rays. 
Experiments  on  the  7  rays  of  radium  were  made  by  observing  the 
rate  of  discharge  of  a  special  gold-leaf  electroscope  filled  with  the 
gas  under  examination  and  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  rays. 
The  following  table  gives  the  relative  conductivities  of  gases 
exposed  to  various  kinds  of  ionizing  radiations. 

With  the  exception  of  hydrogen,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  ioniza- 
tion of  gases  is  approximately  proportional  to  their  density  for  the 
a,  £,  7  rays  of  radium.  The  results  for  Rontgen  rays  are  quite 
different;  for  example,  the  conductivity  produced  by  them  in 
methyl  iodide  was  more  than  14  times  as  great  as  that  due  to 
the  rays  of  radium.  The  7  rays  of  radium  appear  to  be  more  allied 
to  the  @  rays  of  radium  than  to  Rontgen  rays. 

1  Phil.  Tram.  A,  p.  507,  1901  and  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  p.  208,  1903. 


62 


IONIZATION   THEORY    OF   GASES 


[CH. 


This  difference  of  conductivity  in   gases   is   due  to   unequal 
absorptions  of  the  radiations.     The  writer  has  shown1  that  the 


RELATIVE  CONDUCTIVITY 

rijio 

Eelative 

Density 

a  rays 

[3  rays 

7  rays 

Rontgen 
rays 

Hydrogen   
Air  ...         ...         ... 

0-0693 
1-00 

0-226 
1-00 

0-157 
1-00 

0-169 
1-00 

0-114 
1-00 

Oxygen 

1-11 

1-16 

1-21 

1-17            1-39 

Carbon  dioxide 

1-53 

1-54 

1-57 

1-53 

1-60 

Cyanogen    

1-86 

1-94 

1-86 

1-71 

1-05 

Sulphur  dioxide     ... 

2-19 

2-04 

2-31 

2-13           7-97 

Chloroform  

4-32 

4-44 

4-89 

4-88         31-9 

Methyl  iodide 

5-05 

3'51 

5-18 

4-80 

72-0 

Carbon  tetrachloride 

5-31 

5-34 

5-83 

5-67 

45-3 

total  number  of  ions  produced  by  the  a  rays  for  uranium,  when 
completely  absorbed  by  different  gases,  is  not  very  different.  The 
following  results  were  obtained : 

Gas 


Air 

Hydrogen 

Oxygen         

Carbonic  acid 
Hydrochloric  acid  gas 
Ammonia 


Total 
lonization 

100 

95 
106 

96 
102 
101 


The  numbers,  though  only  approximate  in  character,  seem  to 
show  that  the  energy  required  to  produce  an  ion  is  probably  not 
very  different  for  the  various  gases.  Assuming  that  the  energy 
required  to  produce  an  ion  in  different  gases  is  about  the  same,  it 
follows  that  the  relative  conductivities  are  proportional  to  the 
relative  absorption  of  the  radiations. 

A  similar  result  has  been  found  by  McLennan  for  cathode  rays. 
He  proved  that  the  ionization  was  directly  proportional  to  the 
absorption  of  the  rays  in  the  gas,  thus  showing  that  the  same 
energy  is  required  to  produce  an  ion  in  all  the  gases  examined. 

46.  Potential  Gradient.  The  normal  potential  gradient 
between  two  charged  electrodes  is  always  disturbed  when  the  gas 

1  Phil.  Mag.  p.  137,  Jan.  1899. 


II 


IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES 


63 


is  ionized  in  the  space  between  them.  If  the  gas  is  uniformly 
ionized  between  two  parallel  plates,  Child  and  Zeleny  have  shown 
that  there  is  a  sudden  drop  of  potential  near  the  surface  of  both 
plates,  and  that  the  electric  field  is  sensibly  uniform  for  the  inter- 
mediate space  between  them.  The  disturbance  of  the  potential 
gradient  depends  upon  the  difference  of  potential  applied,  and  is 
different  at  the  surface  of  the  two  plates. 

In  most  measurements  of  radio-activity  the  material  is  spread 
over  one  plate  only.  In  such  a  case  the  ionization  is  to  a  large 
extent  confined  to  the  volume  of  the  air  close  to  the  active  plate. 
The  potential  gradient  in  such  a  case  is  shown  in  Fig.  9.  The 
dotted  line  shows  the  variation  of  potential  at  any  point  between 
the  plates  when  no  ionization  is  produced  between  the  plates; 


Distance 


-V 


Fig.  9. 


curve  A  for  weak  ionization,  such  as  is  produced  by  uranium, 
curve  B  for  the  intense  ionization  produced  by  a  very  active 
substance.  In  both  cases  the  potential  gradient  is  least  near  the 
active  plate,  and  greatest  near  the  opposite  plate.  For  very 


64  IONIZATION   THEOKY   OF   GASES  [CH. 

intense  ionization  it  is  very  small  near  the  active  surface.  The 
potential  gradient  varies  slightly  according  as  the  active  plate  is 
charged  positively  or  negatively. 

47.  Variation  of  current  with  voltage  for  surface  ion- 
ization. Some  very  interesting  results,  giving  the  variation  of  the 
current  with  voltage,  are  observed  when  the  ionization  is  intense, 
and  confined  to  the  space  near  the  surface  of  one  of  two  parallel 
plates  between  which  the  current  is  measured. 

The  theory  of  this  subject  has  been  worked  out  independently 
by  Child1  and  Rutherford'2.  Let  V  be  the  potential  difference 
between  two  parallel  plates  at  a  distance  d  apart.  Suppose  that 
the  ionization  is  confined  to  a  thin  layer  near  the  surface  of  the 
plate  A  (see  Fig.  1)  which  is  charged  positively.  When  the  electric 
field  is  acting,  there  is  a  distribution  of  positive  ions  between  the 
plates  A  and  B. 

Let  nt  =  number  of  positive  ions  per  unit  volume  at  a  distance 
x  from  the  plate  A, 

Kl  =  mobility  of  the  positive  ions, 
e  —  charge  on  an  ion. 

The  current  iT  per  square  centimetre  through  the  gas  is 
constant  for  all  values  of  x,  and  is  given  by 


By  Poisson's  equation 

d*V 


K,  dV   S?V 

Then  tl  =  -  •  -=-  .  -j-  . 

4-7T  dx     dxz 

fd 
Integrating 


dV 
where  A  is  a  constant.     Now  A  is  equal  to  the  value  of  -v-    when 

1  Phys.  Rev.  Vol.  12,  1901. 

2  Phil.  Mag.  p.  210,  1901  ;  Phys.  Rev.  Vol.  13,  1901. 


II]  IONIZATIOX  THEORY  OF  GASES  65 

x  =  0.     By  making  the  ionization  very  intense,  the  value  of 

dx 
can  be  made  extremely  small. 

Putting  A  =  0, 

dV  ' 


This  gives  the  potential  gradient  between  the  plates  for  differ- 
ent values  of  x. 

Integrating  between  the  limits  0  and  d, 


9V2 


If  i2  is  the  value  of  the  current  when  the  electric  field  is 
reversed,  and  K*  the  velocity  of  the  negative  ion, 

9V'2 


?-£• 

*2      A2 

The  current  in  the  two  directions  is  thus  directly  proportional 
to  the  velocities  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions.  The  current 
should  vary  directly  as  the  square  of  the  potential  difference 
applied,  and  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  between  the 
plates. 

The  theoretical  condition  of  surface  ionization  cannot  be  fulfilled 
by  the  ionization  due  to  active  substances,  as  the  ionization  extends 
some  centimetres  from  the  active  plate.  If,  however,  the  distance 
between  the  plates  is  large  compared  with  the  distance  over  which 
the  ionization  extends,  the  results  will  be  in  rough  agreement  with 
the  theory.  Using  an  active  preparation  of  radium,  the  writer  has 
made1  some  experiments  on  the  variation  of  current  with  voltage 
between  parallel  plates  distant  about  10  cms.  from  each  other. 

1  Phil  Mag.  Aug.  1901. 
R.  R.-A.  5 


66  IONIZATION   THEORY   OF   GASES  [CH.  II 

The  results  showed 

(1)  That   the   current   through   the   gas  for   small   voltages 
increased  more  rapidly  than  the  potential  difference  applied,  but 
not  as  rapidly  as  the  square  of  that  potential  difference. 

(2)  The  current  through  the  gas  depended  on  the  direction  of 
the  electric  field ;  the  current  was  always  smaller  when  the  active 
plate  was  charged  positively  on  account  of  the  smaller  mobility  of 
the  positive  ion.     The  difference  between  ^  and  i2  was  greatest 
when  the  gas  was  dry,  which  is  the  condition  for  the  greatest 
difference  between  the  velocities  of  the  ions. 

An  interesting  result  follows  from  the  above  theory.  For  given 
values  of  V  and  d,  the  current  cannot  exceed  a  certain  definite 
value,  however  much  the  ionization  may  be  increased.  In  a 
similar  way,  when  an  active  preparation  of  radium  is  used  as  a 
source  of  surface  ionization,  it  is  found  that,  for  a  given  voltage 
and  distance  between  the  plates,  the  current  does  not  increase 
beyond  a  certain  value  however  much  the  activity  of  the  material 
is  increased. 

In  this  chapter  an  account  of  the  ionization  theory  of  gases  has 
been  given  to  the  extent  that  is  necessary  for  the  interpretation  of 
the  measurements  of  radio-activity  by  the  electric  method.  It 
would  be  out  of  place  here  £0  discuss  the  development  of  that 
theory  in  detail,  to  explain  the  passage  of  electricity  through 
flames  and  vapours,  the  discharge  of  electricity  from  hot  bodies, 
and  the  very  complicated  phenomena  observed  in  the  passage  of 
electricity  through  a  vacuum  tube.  This  chapter  was  written 
before  the  publication  of  J.  J.  Thomson's  recent  book  Conduction 
of  Electricity  through  Gases  (Cambridge  University  Press,  1903), 
to  which  the  reader  is  referred  for  further  information  on  this 
important  subject. 


CHAPTER  III. 

METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT. 

48.  Methods  of  Measurement.  Three  general  methods  \ 
have  been  employed  for  examination  of  the  radiations  from  radio-  / 
active  bodies,  depending  on 

(1)     The  action  of  the  rays  on  a  photographic  plate. 
^      (2)     The  ionizing  action  of  the  rays  on  the  surrounding  gas. 

(3)  The  fluorescence  produced  by  the  rays  on  a  screen  of 
platinocyanide  of  barium,  zinc  sulphide,  or  similar  substance. 

The  third  method  is  very  restricted  in  its  application,  and  can 
only  be  employed  for  intensely  active  substances  like  radium  or 
polonium. 

The  photographic  method  has  been  very  widely  used,  especially 
in  the  earlier  development  of  the  subject,  but  has  gradually  been 
displaced  by  the  electrical  method  as  a  quantitative  determination 
of  the  radiations  became  more  and  more  necessary.  In  certain 
directions,  however,  it  possesses  distinct  advantages  over  the  elec- 
trical method.  For  example,  it  has  proved  a  very  valuable  means 
of  investigating  the  curvature  of  the  path  of  the  rays,  when 
deflected  by  a  magnetic  or  electric  field,  and  has  allowed  us  to 
determine  the  constants  of  these  rays  with  considerable  accuracy. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  photographic  method  as  a  general 
method  of  study  of  the  radiations  is  open  to  many  objections.  A 
day's  exposure  is  generally  required  to  produce  an  appreciable 
darkening  of  the  sensitive  film  when  exposed  to  a  weak  source  of 
radiation  like  uranium  and  thorium.  It  cannot,  in  consequence,  be 
employed  to  investigate  the  radiations  of  those  active  products 

5—2 


68  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

which  rapidly  lose  their  activity.  Moreover,  W.  J.  Russell  has 
shown  that  the  darkening  of  a  photographic  plate  can  be  produced 
by  many  agents  which  do  not  give  out  rays  like  those  of  the  radio- 
active bodies.  This  darkening  of  the  plate  is  produced  under  very 
many  conditions,  and  very  special  precautions  are  necessary  when 
long  exposures  to  a  weak  source  of  radiation  are  required. 

The  main  objection  to  the  photographic  method,  however,  lies 
in  the  fact  that  the  radiations  which  produce  the  strongest  electrical 
effect  are  very  weak  photographically.  For  example,  Soddy1  has 
shown  that  the  photographic  action  of  uranium  is  due  almost 
entirely  to  the  more  penetrating  rays,  and  that  the  easily  absorbed 
rays  produce  in  comparison  very  little  effect.  Speaking  generally 
the  penetrating  rays  are  the  most  active  photographically,  and  the 
action  on  the  plate  under  ordinary  conditions  is  almost  entirely  due 
to  them. 

Most  of  the  energy  radiated  from  active  bodies  is  in  the  form 
of  easily  absorbed  rays  which  are  comparatively  inactive  photo- 
graphically. These  rays  are  difficult  to  study  by  the  photographic 
method,  as  the  layer  of  black  paper  which,  in  many  cases,  is 
necessary  to  absorb  the  phosphorescent  light  from  active  substances, 
cuts  off  at  the  same  time  most  of  the  rays  under  examination. 
These  rays  will  be  shown  to  play  a  far  more  important  part  in  the 
processes  occurring  in  radio-active  bodies  than  the  rays  which  are 
more  active  photographically. 

The  electrical  method,  on  the  other  hand,  offers  a  rapid  and 
accurate  method  of  quantitatively  examining  the  radiations.  It  can 
be  used  as  a  means  of  measurement  of  all  the  types  of  radiation 
emitted,  excluding  light  waves,  and  is  capable  of  accurate  measure- 
ment over  an  extremely  wide  range.  With  proper  precautions 
it  can  be  used  to  measure  effects  produced  by  radiations  of 
extremely  small  intensity. 

49.  Electrical  Methods.  The  electrical  methods  employed 
in  studying  radio-activity  are  all  based  on  the  property  of  the 
radiation  in  question  of  ionizing  the  gas,  i.e.  of  producing  positively 
and  negatively  charged  carriers  throughout  the  volume  of  the  gas. 
The  discussion  of  the  application  of  the  ionization  theory  of  gases  to 

1  Trans.  Chem.  Soc.  Vol.  81,  p.  860,  1902. 


m]  METHODS    OF    MEASUREMENT 


69 


measurements  of  radio-activity  has  been  given  in  the  last  chapter. 
It  has  there  been  shown  that  the  essential  condition  to  be  fulfilled 
for  comparative  measurements  of  the  intensity  of  the  radiations 
is  that  the  electrical  field  should  in  all  cases  be  strong  enough  to 
obtain  the  maximum  or  saturation  current  through  the  gas. 

The  electric  field  required  to  produce  practical  saturation 
varies  with  the  intensity  of  the  ionization  and  consequently  with 
the  activity  of  the  preparations  to  be  examined.  For  preparations 
which  have  an  activity  not  more  than  500  times  that  of  uranium, 
under  ordinary  conditions,  a  field  of  100  volts  per  cm.  is  sufficient  to 
produce  a  practical  saturation  current.  For  very  active  samples  of 
radium,  it  is  often  impossible  to  obtain  conveniently  a  high  enough 
electromotive  force  to  give  even  approximate  saturation.  Under 
such  conditions  comparative  measurement  could  be  made  by 
measuring  the  current  under  diminished  pressure  of  the  gas, 
when  saturation  is  more  readily  obtained. 

The  method  to  be  employed  in  the  measurement  of  this  ioniza- 
tion current  depends  largely  on  the  intensity  of  the  current  to  be 
measured.  If  some  very  active  radium  is  spread  on  the  lower  of 
two  insulated  plates  as  in  Fig.  1,  and  a  saturating  electric  field 
applied,  the  current  may  be  readily  measured  by  a  sensitive  gal- 
vanometer of  high  resistance.  For  example,  a  weight  of  '45  gr. 
of  radium  chloride  of  activity  1000  times  that  of  uranium  oxide, 
spread  over  a  plate  of  area  33  sq.  cms.  gave  a  maximum  current  of 
1*1  x  10~8  amperes  when  the  plates  were  4'5  cms.  apart.  In  this 
case  the  difference  of  potential  to  be  applied  to  produce  practical 
saturation  was  about  600  volts.  Since  most  of  the  ionization  is 
due  to  rays  which  are  absorbed  in  passing  through  a  few  centi- 
metres of  air,  the  current  is  not  much  increased  by  widening  the 
distance  between  the  two  plates.  In  cases  where  the  current  is 
not  quite  large  enough  for  direct  deflection,  the  current  may  be 
determined  by  connecting  the  upper  insulated  plate  with  a  well 
insulated  condenser.  After  charging  for  a  definite  time,  say  1  or 
more  minutes,  the  condenser  is  discharged  through  the  galvano- 
meter, and  the  current  can  be  readily  deduced. 

50.     In  most  cases,  however,  when  dealing  with  less  active 
substances  like  uranium  or  thorium,  or  with  small  amounts  of  active 


70 


METHODS   OF   MEASUEEMENT 


[CH. 


material,  it  is  necessary  io_emploj  methods  for  measuring  currents 
much  smaller  than  can  be  conveniently  detected  by  an  ordinary 
galvanometer.  The  most  convenient  apparatus  to  employ  for  this 
purpose  is  one  of  the  numerous  types  of  quadrant  electrometer  or 
an  electroscope  of  special  design.  For  many  observations,  especially 
where  the  activity  of  the  two  substances  is  to  be  compared  under 
constant  conditions,  an  electroscope  offers  a  very  certain  and  simple 
method  of  measurement.  As  an  example  of  a  simple  apparatus 
of  this  kind,  a  brief  description  will  be  given  of  the  electroscope 
used  by  M.  and  Mme  Curie  in  many  of  their  earlier  observations. 


I 


''Earth 


Fig.  10. 


The  connections  are  clearly  seen  from  Figure  10.  The  active 
material  is  placed  on  a  plate  laid  on  top  of  the  fixed  circular  plate 
P,  connected  with  the  case  of  the  instrument  and  to  earth.  The 
upper  insulated  plate  Pr  is  connected  to  the  insulated  gold-leaf 
system  LL'.  S  is  an  insulating  support  and  L  the  gold-leaf. 

The  system  is  first  charged  to  a  suitable  potential  by  means  of 
the  rod  C.  The  rate  of  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  observed  by 
means  of  a  microscope.  In  comparisons  of  the  activity  of  two 
specimens,  the  time  taken  to  pass  over  a  certain  number  of 
divisions  of  the  micrometer  scale  in  the  eyepiece  is  observed. 
Since  the  capacity  of  the  charged  system  is  constant,  the  average 
rate  of  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  directly  proportional  to  the 
ionization  current  between  P  and  P',  i.e.  to  the  intensity  of  the 


Ill] 


METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT 


71 


radiation  emitted  by  the  active  substance.  Unless  very  active 
material  is  being  examined,  the  difference  of  potential  between  P 
and  P'  can  easily  be  made  sufficient  to  produce  saturation. 

When  necessary,  a  correction  can  readily  be  made  for  the  rate 
of  leak  when  no  active  material  is  present.  In  order  to  avoid 
external  disturbances,  the  plates  PP  and  the  rod  6f,  are  surrounded 
by  metal  cylinders,  E  and  F,  connected  with  earth. 

til.  A  modified  form  of  the  gold-leaf  electroscope  can  be  used 
to  determine  extraordinarily  minute  cur- 
rents with  accuracy,  and  can  be  employed 
in  cases  where  a  sensitive  electrometer  is 
unable  to  detect  the  current.  A  special 
type  of  electroscope  has  been  used  by 
Elster  and  Geitel,  in  their  experiments  on 
the  natural  ionization  of  the  atmosphere. 
A  very  convenient  type  of  electroscope  to 
measure  the  current  due  to  minute  ioniza- 
tion of  the  gas  is  shown  in  Fig.  11. 

This  type  of  electroscope  was  first  used 
by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson1  in  his  experiments  of 
the  natural  ionization  of  air  in  closed 
vessels.  A  brass  cylindrical  vessel  is  taken 
of  about  1  litre  capacity.  The  gold-leaf 
system  consisting  of  a  narrow  strip  of  gold-leaf  L  attached  to  a  flat 
rod  R  is  insulated  inside  the  vessel  by  the  small  sulphur  bead  S, 
supported  from  the  rod  P.  In  a  dry  atmosphere  a  clean  sulphur 
bead  is  almost  a  perfect  insulator.  The  system  is  charged  by  a 
light  bent  rod  CO '  passing  through  the  ebonite  cork  D.  The  rod 
C  is  connected  to  one  terminal  of  a  battery  of  small  accumulators 
of  200  to  300  volts.  If  these  are  absent  the  system  can  be  charged 
by  means  of  a  rod  of  sealing-wax.  The  charging  rod  CO'  is  then 
removed  from  contact  with  the  gold-leaf  system.  The  rods  P  and 
C  and  the  cylinder  are  then  connected  with  earth. 

The  rate  of  movemejit_ofthe ^gold-leaf  is_pbserved  by  a  reading 
^g  ™  ***&  rlindfiT,  covered  with  thin 


Fig.  11. 


mica.     In  cases  where  the  natural  ionization  due  to  the  enclosed 
1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Vol.  68,  p.  152,  1901. 


72  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

air  in  the  cylinder  is  to  be  accurately  measured,  it  is  advisable  to 
enclose  the  supporting  and  charging  rod  and  sulphur  bead  inside  a 
small  metal  cylinder  M  connected  to  earth,  so  that  only  the  charged 
gold-leaf  system  is  exposed  in  the  main  volume  of  the  air. 

In  an  apparatus  of  this  kind  the  small  leakage  over  the  sulphur 
bead  can  be  almost  completely  eliminated  by  keeping  the  rod  P 
charged  to  the  average  potential  of  the  gold-leaf  system  during 
the  observation.  This  method  has  been  used  with  great  success  by 
C.  T.  R.  Wilson  (loc.  cit).  Such  refinements,  however,  are  generally 
unnecessary,  except  in  investigations  of  the  natural  ionization  of 
gases  at  low  pressures,  when  the  conduction  leak  over  the  sulphur 
bead  is  comparable  with  the  discharge  due  to  the  ionized  gas. 

52.  The  electric  capacity  C  of  a  gold-leaf  system  about  4  cms. 
long  is  usually  about  1  electrostatic  unit.  If  V  is  the  decrease  of 
potential  of  the  gold-leaf  system  in  volts  in  the  time  t  seconds,  the 
current  i  through  the  gas  is  given  by 

GV 
l  =  —  ' 

.  With  a  well  cleaned  brass  electroscope  of  volume  1  litre,  the 
fall  of  potential  due  to  the  natural  ionization  of  the  air  was  found 
to  be  about  6  volts  per  hour.  Since  the  capacity  of  the  gold-leaf 
system  was  about  1  electrostatic  unit 

OAA  =  5*6  x  10~6  E.s.  units  =  1'9  x  10~15  amperes. 


With  special  precautions  a  rate  of  discharge  of  1/10  or  even 
1/100'  of  this  amount  can  be  accurately  measured. 

The  number  of  ions  produced  in  the  gas  can  be  calculated  if 
the  charge  on  an  ion  is  known.  J.  J.  Thomson  has  shown  that  the 
charge  e  on  an  ion  is  equal  to  3'4  x  10~10  electrostatic  units  or 
1*13  x  10~19  coulombs. 

Let  q  =  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  per  cubic  centi- 

metre throughout  the  volume  of  the  electroscope, 
S  =  volume  of  electroscope  in  cubic  centimetres. 

If  the  ionization  is  uniform,  the  saturation  current  i  is  given  by 
i  =  qSe. 


Ill]  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  73 

Now  for  an  electroscope  with  a  volume  of  1000  c.c.,  i  was  equal 
to  about  1'9  x  10~15  amperes.  Substituting  the  values  given  above 
q  =  17  ions  per  cubic  centimetre  per  second. 

With  suitable  precautions  an  electroscope  can  thus  readily 
measure  an  ionization  current  corresponding  to  the  production  of 
1  ion  per  cubic  centimetre  per  second. 

The  great  advantage  of  an  apparatus  of  this  kind  lies  in  the 
fact  that  the  current  measured  is  due  to  the  ionization  inside  the 
vessel  and  is  not  influenced  by  the  ionization  of  the  external  air  or 
by  electrostatic  disturbances.  Such  an  apparatus  is  very  convenient 
for  investigating  the  very  penetrating  radiations  from  the  radio- 
elements,  since  these  rays  pass  readily  through  the  walls  of  the 
electroscope.  When  the  electroscope  is  placed  on  a  lead  plate  3  or 
4  mms.  thick,  the  ionization  in  the  electroscope,  due  to  a  radio- 
active body  placed  under  the  lead,  is  due  entirely  to  the  very 
penetrating  rays,  since  the  other  two  types  of  rays  are  completely 
absorbed  in  the  lead  plate. 

53.  A  modified  form  of  electroscope,  which  promises  to  be  of 
great  utility  for  measuring  currents  even  more  minute  than  those 
to  be  observed  with  the  type  of  instrument  already  described,  has 
recently  been  devised  by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson1.  The  construction  of  the 
apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  12. 


I 


Fig.  12. 
1  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  Vol.  12,  Part  n.  1903. 


74  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

The  case  consists  of  a  rectangular  brass  box  4  cms.  x  4  cms. 
x  3  cms.  A  narrow  gold-leaf  L  is  attached  to  a  rod  R  passing 
through  a  clean  sulphur  cork.  Opposite  the  gold-leaf  is  fixed  an 
insulated  brass  plate  P,  placed  about  1  mm.  from  the  wall  of  the 
box.  The  movement  of  the  gold-leaf  is  observed  through  two 
small  windows  by  means  of  a  microscope  provided  with  a  micrometer 
scale.  The  plate  P  is  maintained  at  a  constant  potential  (generally 
about  200  volts).  The  electrometer  case  is  placed  in  an  inclined 
position  as  shown  in  the  figure,  the  angle  of  inclination  and  the 
potential  of  the  plate  being  adjusted  to  give  the  desired  sensitive- 
ness. The  gold-leaf  is  initially  connected  to  the  case,  and  the 
microscope  adjusted  so  that  the  gold-leaf  is  seen  in  the  centre  of 
the  scale.  For  a  given  potential  of  the  plate,  the  sensitiveness 
depends  on  the  angle  of  tilt  of  the  case.  There  is  a  certain  critical 
inclination  below  which  the  gold-leaf  is  unstable.  The  most 
sensitive  position  lies  just  above  the  critical  angle.  In  a  particular 
experiment  Wilson  found  that  with  an  angle  of  tilt  of  30°  and  with 
the  plate  at  a  constant  potential  of  207  volts,  the  gold-leaf,  when 
raised  to  a  potential  of  one  volt  above  the  case,  moved  over  200 
scale  divisions  of  the  eyepiece,  54  divisions  corresponding  to  one 
millimetre. 

In  use,  the  rod  R  is  connected  with  the  external  insulated 
system  whose  rise  or  fall  of  potential  is  to  be  measured.  On 
account  of  the  small  capacity  of  the  system  and  the  large  movement 
of  the  gold-leaf  for  a  small  difference  of  potential,  the  electroscope 
is  able  to  measure  extraordinarily  minute  currents.  The  apparatus 
is  portable.  If  the  plate  P  is  connected  to  one  pole  of  a  dry  pile 
the  gold-leaf  is  stretched  out  towards  the  plate,  and  in  this  position 
can  be  carried  without  risk  of  injury. 

54.  Electrometers.  Although  the  electroscope  can  be  used 
with  advantage  in  special  cases,  it  is  limited  in  its  application. 
The  most  generally  convenient  apparatus  for  measurement  of 
ionization  currents  through  gases  is  one  of  the  numerous  types  of 
quadrant  electrometers.  With  the  use  of  auxiliary  capacities,  the 
electrometer  can  be  used  to  measure  currents  with  accuracy  over 
a  wide  range,  and  can  be  employed  for  practically  every  kind  of 
measurement  required  in  radio-activity. 

The  elementary  theory  of  the  symmetrical  quadrant  electrometer 


Ill]  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  75 

as  given  in  the  text-books  is  very  imperfect.  It  is  deduced  that 
the  sensibility  of  the  electrometer — measured  by  the  deflection  of 
the  needle  for  1  volt  P.D.  between  the  quadrants — varies  directly 
as  the  potential  of  the  charged  needle,  provided  that  this  potential 
is  high  compared  with  the  P.D.  between  the  quadrants.  In  most 
electrometers  however,  the  sensibility  rises  to  a  maximum,  and  then 
decreases  with  increase  of  potential  of  the  needle.  For  electrometers 
in  which  the  needle  lies  close  to  the  quadrants,  this  maximum 
sensibility  is  obtained  for  a  comparatively  low  potential  of  the 
needle.  A  theory  of  the  quadrant  electrometer,  accounting  for  this 
action,  has  been  recently  given  by  G.  W.  Walker1.  The  effect 
appears  to  be  due  to  the  presence  of  the  air  space  that  necessarily 
exists  between  adjoining  quadrants. 

Suppose  that  it  is  required  to  measure  with  an  electrometer 
the  ionization  current  between  two 
horizontal  metal  plates  A  and  B 
(Fig.  13)  on  the  lower  of  which  some 
active  material  has  been  spread.  If 
the  saturation  current  is  required, 
the  insulated  plate  A  is  connected 
with  one  pole  of  a  battery  of  sufficient 
E.M.F.  to  produce  saturation,  the 
other  pole  being  connected  to  earth. 
The  insulated  plate  B  is  connected 

with  one  pair  of  quadrants  of  the  T ll~~ *^  Earth 

electrometer,  the  other  pair  being 
earthed.    By  means  of  a  suitable  key 

K,  the  plate  B  and  the  pair  of  quadrants  connected  with  it  may  be 
either  insulated  or  connected  with  earth.  When  a  measurement 
is  to  be  taken  the  earth  connection  is  broken.  If  the  positive  pole 
of  the  battery  is  connected  with  A,  the  plate  B  and  the  electro- 
meter connections  immediately  begin  to  be  charged  positively,  and 
the  potential,  if  allowed,  will  steadily  rise  until  it  is  very  nearly 
equal  to  the  potential  of  A.  As  soon  as  the  potential  of  the 
electrometer  system  begins  to  rise,  the  electrometer  needle  com- 
mences to  move  at  a  uniform  rate.  Observations  of  the  angular 
movement  of  the  needle  are  made  either  by  the  telescope  and  scale 
1  Phil  Mag.  Aug.  1903. 


76  METHODS    OF    MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

or  by  the  movement  of  the  spot  of  light  on  a  scale  in  the  usual 
way.  If  the  needle  is  damped  so  as  to  give  a  uniform  motion 
over  the  scale,  the  rate  of  movement  of  the  needle,  i.e.  the  number 
of  divisions  of  the  scale  passed  over  per  second,  may  be  taken  as 
a  measure  of  the  current  through  the  gas.  The  rate  of  movement 
is  most  simply  obtained  by  observing  with  a  stop-watch  the  time 
taken  for  the  spot  of  light,  after  the  motion  has  become  steady,  to 
pass  over  100  divisions  of  the  scale.  As  soon  as  the  observation  is 
made,  the  plate  B  is  again  connected  with  earth,  and  the  electro- 
meter needle  returns  to  its  original  position. 

In  most  experiments  on  radio-activity  only  comparative  measures 
of  saturation  currents  are  required.  If  these  comparative  measures 
are  to  extend  over  weeks  or  months,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,  it  is 
necessary  to  adopt  some  method  of  standardizing  the  electrometer 
from  day  to  day,  so  as  to  correct  for  variation  in  its  sensibility. 
This  is  most  simply  done  by  comparing  the  current  to  be  measured 
with  that  due  to  a  standard  sample  of  uranium  oxide,  which  is 
placed  in  a  definite  position  in  a  small  testing  vessel,  always  kept 
in  connection  with  the  electrometer.  Uranium  oxide  is  a  very 
constant 'source  of  radiation,  and  the  saturation  current  due  to  it 
is  the  same  from  day  to  day.  By  this  method  of  comparison 
accurate  observations  may  be  made  on  the  variation  of  activity  of 
a  substance  over  long  intervals  of  time,  although  the  sensibility 
of  the  electrometer  may  vary  widely  between  successive  measure- 
ments. 

55.  Construction  of  electrometers.  As  the  quadrant 
electrometer  has  gained  the  reputation  of  being  a  difficult  and 
uncertain  instrument  for  accurate  measurements  of  current,  it  may 
be  of  value  to  give  some  particular  details  in  regard  to  the  best 
method  of  construction  and  insulation.  In  most  of  the  older  types 
of  quadrant  electrometers  the  needle  system  was  made  unneces- 
sarily heavy.  In  consequence  of  this,  if  a  sensibility  of  the  order 
of  100  mms.  deflection  for  1  volt  was  required,  it  was  necessary  to 
charge  the  Leyden  jar  connected  to  the  needle  to  a  fairly  high 
potential.  This  at  once  introduced  difficulties,  for  at  a  high 
potential  it  is  not  easy  to  insulate  the  Leyden  jar  satisfactorily,  or 
to  charge  it  to  the  same  potential  from  day  to  day.  This  drawback 


Ill]  METHODS    OF   MEASUREMENT  77 

is  to  a  large  extent  avoided  in  the  White  pattern  of  the  Kelvin 
electrometer,  which  is  provided  with  a  replenisher  and  attracted 
disc  for  keeping  the  potential  of  the  needle  at  a  definite  value.  If 
sufficient  trouble  is  taken  in  insulating  and  setting  up  this  type 
of  electrometer,  it  proves  a  very  useful  instrument  of  moderate 
sensibility,  and  will  continue  in  good  working  order  for  a  year  or 
more  without  much  attention. 

Simpler  types  of  electrometer  of  greater  sensibility  can  however 
be  readily  constructed  to  give  accurate  results.  The  old  type  of 
quadrant  electrometer,  to  be  found  in  every  laboratory,  can  readily 
be  modified  to  prove  a  useful  and  trustworthy  instrument.  A  light 
needle  can  be  simply  made  of  thin  aluminium,  of  silvered  paper  or 
of  a  thin  plate  of  mica,  covered  with  gold-leaf  to  make  it  conducting. 
The  aluminium  wire  and  mirror  attached  should  be  made  as  light 
as  possible.  The  needle  should  be  suspended  either  by  a  fine 
quartz  fibre  or  a  long  bifilar  suspension  of  silk.  A  very  fine 
phosphor  bronze  wire  of  some  length  is  also  very  satisfactory. 
A  magnetic  control  is  not  very  suitable,  as.it  is  disturbed  by  coils 
or  dynamos  working  in  the  neighbourhood.  In  addition,  the  zero 
point  of  the  needle  is  not  as  steady  as  with  the  quartz  or  bifilar 
suspension. 

When  an  electrometer  is  used  to  measure  a  current  by  noting 
the  rate  of  movement  of  the  needle,  it  is  essential  that  the  needle 
should  be  damped  sufficiently  to  give  a  uniform  motion  of  the  spot 
of  light  over  the  scale.  The  damping  requires  fairly  accurate 
adjustment.  If  it  is  too  little,  the  needle  has  an  oscillatory  move- 
ment superimposed  on  the  steady  motion;  if  it  is  too  great,  it 
moves  too  sluggishly  from  rest  and  takes  some  time  to  attain 
a  state  of  uniform  motion.  With  a  light  needle,  very  little,  if  any, 
extra  damping  is  required.  A  light  platinum  wire  with  a  single 
loop  dipping  in  sulphuric  acid  is  generally  sufficient  for  the  purpose. 
*  With  light  needle  systems  and  delicate  suspensions,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  charge  the  needle  to  a  potential  of  a  few  hundred  volts 
to  give  a  sensibility  of  several  thousand  divisions  for  a  volt.  With 
such  low  potentials,  the  difficulty  of  insulation  of  the  condenser, 
with  which  the  needle  is  in  electrical  connection,  is  much  reduced. 
It  is  convenient  to  use  a  condenser  such  that  the  potential  of  the 
needle  does  not  fall  more  than  a  few  per  cent,  per  day.  The 


78 


METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT 


[CH. 


ordinary  short  glass  jar  partly  filled  with  sulphuric  acid  is,  in  most 
cases,  not  easy  to  insulate  to  this  extent.  It  is  better  to  replace 
it  by  an  ebonite  (or  sulphur)  condenser1  such  as  is  shown  in 
Fig.  14. 

A  circular  plate  of  ebonite  about  1  cm.  thick  is  turned  down 
until  it  is  not  more  than  -J-  mm. 
thick  in  the  centre.     Into  this  i 

circular  recess  a  brass  plate  B  fits  /JLN 

loosely.  The  ebonite  plate  rests 
on  another  brass  plate  C  connect- 
ed with  earth.  The  condenser 
thus  formed  has  a  considerable 
capacity  and  retains  a  charge  for 
a  long  time.  In  order  to  make 
connection  with  the  needle,  a 
small  glass  vessel  D,  partly  filled 
with  sulphuric  acid,  is  placed  on 
the  plate  B  and  put  in  connec- 
tion with  the  needle  by  means  C 
of  a  fine  platinum  wire.  The 
platinum  wire  from  the  needle 

dips  into  the  acid,  and  serves  to  damp  the  needle.  In  a  dry  atmo- 
sphere, a  condenser  of  this  kind  will  not  lose  more  than  20  per  cent, 
of  its  charge  in  a  week.  If  the  insulation  deteriorates,  it  can 
readily  be  made  good  by  rubbing  the  edge  of  the  ebonite  A  with 
sand-paper,  or  removing  its  surface  in  a  lathe. 

If  a  sufficient  and  steady  E.M.F.  is  available,  it  is  much  better  to 
keep  it  constantly  connected  with  the  needle  and  to  avoid  the  use 
of  the  condenser  altogether.  If  a  battery  of  small  accumulators  is 
used,  their  potential  can  always  be  kept  at  a  constant  value,  and 
the  electrometer  always  has  a  constant  sensibility. 

56.  A  very  useful  electrometer  of  great  sensibility  has  recently 
been  devised  by  Dolezalek2.  It  is  of  the  ordinary  quadrant  type 
with  a  very  light  needle  of  silvered  paper,  spindle  shaped,  which 
lies  fairly  close  to  the  quadrants.  A  very  fine  quartz  suspension  is 

1  Strutt,  Phil.  Trans.  A,  p.  507,  1901. 

2  Instrumentenkunde,  p.  345,  Dec.  1901. 


Ill]  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  79 

employed.  In  consequence  of  the  lightness  of  the  needle  and  the 
nearness  to  the  quadrants  it  acts  as  its  own  damper.  This  is 
a  great  advantage,  for  difficulties  always  arise  with  the  wire  dipping 
into  sulphuric  acid,  on  account  of  the  thin  film  which  collects  after 
some  time  on  the  surface  of  the  acid.  This  film  obstructs  the 
motion  of  the  platinum  wire  dipping  into  the  acid,  and  has  to  be 
removed  at  regular  intervals.  These  instruments  can  be  readily 
made  to  give  a  sensibility  of  several  thousand  divisions  for  a  volt 
when  the  needle  is  charged  to  about  one  hundred  volts.  The 
sensibility  of  the  electrometer  passes  through  a  maximum  as  the 
potential  of  the  needle  is  increased.  It  is  always  advisable  to 
charge  the  needle  to  about  the  value  of  this  critical  potential.  The 
capacity  of  the  electrometer  is  in  general  high  (about  50  electro- 
static units)  but  the  increased  sensibility  more  than  compensates 
for  this.  The  needle  may  either  be  charged  by  lightly  touching 
it  with  one  terminal  of  a  battery,  or  it  may  be  kept  charged  to 
a  constant  potential  through  the  quartz  suspension.  The  quartz 
fibre  can  be  made  sufficiently  conducting  for  this  purpose  by 
dipping  it  into  a  dilute  solution  of  calcium  chloride.  In  addition 
to  its  great  sensibility,  the  advantages  of  this  instrument  lie  in  the 
steadiness  of  the  zero  and  in  the  self-damping. 

57.  Adjustment  and  screening.  In  adjusting  an  electro- 
meter, it  is  important  to  arrange  that  the  needle  lies  symmetrically 
with  regard  to  the  quadrants.  This  is  best  tested  by  observing 
whether  the  needle  is  deflected  on  charging,  the  quadrants  all 
being  earthed.  In  most  electrometers  there  is  an  adjustable 
quadrant,  the  position  of  which  may  be  altered  until  the  needle  is 
not  displaced  on  charging.  When  this  condition  is  fulfilled,  the 
zero  reading  of  the  electrometer  remains  unaltered  as  the  needle 
loses  its  charge,  and  the  deflection  on  both  sides  of  the  zero  should 
be  the  same  for  equal  and  opposite  quantities  of  electricity. 

The  supports  of  the  quadrants  require  to  be  well  insulated. 
Ebonite  rods  are  as  a  rule  more  satisfactory  for  this  purpose  than 
glass.  In  testing  for  the  insulation  of  the  quadrants  and  the 
connections  attached,  the  system  is  charged  to  give  a  deflection 
of  about  200  scale  divisions.  If  the  needle  does  not  move  more 
than  one  or  two  divisions  after  standing  for  one  minute,  the 


80  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

insulation  may  be  considered  quite  satisfactory.  When  a  suitable 
desiccator  is  placed  inside  the  tight-fitting  electrometer  case,  the 
insulation  of  the  quadrants  should  remain  good  for  months.  If  the 
insulation  of  the  ebonite  deteriorates,  it  can  easily  be  made  good 
by  removing  the  surface  of  the  ebonite  in  a  lathe. 

In  working  with  a  sensitive  instrument  like  the  Dolezalek 
electrometer,  it  is  essential  that  the  electrometer  and  the  testing 
apparatus  should  be  completely  enclosed  in  a  screen  of  wire-gauze 
connected  with  earth,  in  order  to  avoid  electrostatic  disturbances. 
If  an  apparatus  is  to  be  tested  at  some  distance  from  the  electro- 
meter, the  wires  leading  to  it  should  be  insulated  in  metal  cylinders 
connected  to  earth.  The  size  of  the  insulators  used  at  various 
points  should  be  made  as  small  as  possible  in  order  to  avoid 
disturbances  due  to  their  electrification.  In  damp  climates,  paraffin 
or  sulphur  insulates  better  than  ebonite.  The  objection  to  paraffin 
as  an  insulator  for  sensitive  electrometers  lies  in  the  difficulty  of 
getting  entirely  rid  of  any  electrification  on  its  surface.  When 
once  paraffin  has  been  charged,  the  residual  charge,  after  dis- 
electrifying  it  with  a  flame,  continues  to  leak  out  for  a  long  interval. 
All  insulators  should  be  diselectrified  by  means  of  a  spirit-lamp  or 
still  better  by  leaving  some  uranium  near  them.  Care  should  be 
taken  not  to  touch  the  insulation  when  once  diselectrified. 

In  accurate  work  it  is  advisable  to  avoid  the  use  of  gas  jets  or 
bunsen  flames  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  electrometer,  as  the 
flame  gases  are  strongly  ionized  and  take  some  time  to  lose  their 
conductivity.  If  radio-active  substances  are  present  in  the  room,  it 
is  necessary  to  enclose  the  wires  leading  to  the  electrometer  in 
fairly  narrow  tubes,  connected  with  earth.  If  this  is  not  done,  it  will 
be  found  that  the  needle  does  not  move  at  a  constant  rate,  but 
rapidly  approaches  a  steady  deflection  where  the  rate  of  loss  of 
charge  of  the  electrometer  and  connections,  due  to  the  ionization 
of  the  air  around  them,  is  balanced  by  the  current  to  be  measured. 
This  precaution  must  always  be  taken  when  observations  are  made 
on  the  very  penetrating  rays  from  active  substances.  These  rays 
readily  pass  through  ordinary  screens,  and  ionize  the  air  around 
the  electrometer  and  connecting  wires.  For  this  reason  it  is 
impossible  to  make  accurate  measurements  of  small  currents  in 
a  room  which  is  used  for  the  preparation  of  radio-active  material. 


Ill]  METHODS   OF    MEASUREMENT  81 

In  course  of  time  the  walls  of  the  room  become  radio-active  owing 
to  the  dissemination  of  dust  and  the  action  of  the  radio-active 
emanations. 

58.  Electrometer   key.      For  work  with   electrometers  of 
high  sensibility,  a  special  key  is 

necessary  to  make  and  break  from  , 

a  distance  the  connection  of  the 

quadrants   to   earth   in   order  to 

avoid  electrostatic  disturbances  at 

the  moment  the  current  is  to  be 

measured.    The  simple  key  shown 

in  Fig.  15  has  been  found  very 

satisfactory  for  this  purpose.     A 

small  brass  rod  BM,  to  which  a 

string  is  attached,  can  be  moved 

Vertically  Up  and  down  in  a  braSS         Etetrmneter    Tenting  Vessel 

tube  A,  which  is  rigidly  attached  Fig- 15- 

to  a  bent  metal  support  connected 

to  earth.  When  the  string  is  released  this  rod  makes  contact  with, 
the  mercury  M,  which  fills  a  hole  in  the  small  block  of  ebonite  P. 
The  electrometer  and  testing  vessel  are  connected  with  the  mercury. 
When  the  string  is  pulled  the  rod  BM  is  removed  from  the 
mercury  and  the  earth  connection  of  the  electrometer  system  is 
broken.  On  release  of  the  string,  the  rod  BM  falls  and  the  electro- 
meter is  again  earthed.  By  means  of  this  key,  which  may  be 
operated  at  any  distance  from  the  electrometer,  the  earth  con- 
nection may  be  made  and  broken  at  definite  intervals  without 
any  appreciable  disturbance  of  the  needle. 

59.  Testing  apparatus.     The  arrangement  shown  in  Fig.  16 
is  very  convenient  for  many  measurements  in  radio-activity.     Two 
parallel  insulated  metal  plates  A  and  B  are  placed  inside  a  metal 
vessel  V,  provided  with  a  side  door.    The  plate  A  is  connected  with 
one  terminal  of  a  battery  of  small  storage  cells,  the  other  pole  of 
which  is  earthed  ;  the  plate  B  with  the  electrometer,  and  the  vessel 
V  with  earth.    The  shaded  areas  in  the  figure  indicate  the  position 
of  ebonite  insulators.     The  active  material  to  be  tested  is  spread 
uniformly  in  a  shallow  groove  (about  5  cms.  square  and  2  mms. 

R.  R.-A.  6 


82 


METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT 


[CH. 


deep)   in   the   brass  plate  A.      In  order  to  avoid  breaking  the 
battery  connection  every  time  the  plate  A  is  removed,  the  wire 


XO  JOilCCl 

V. 

omctcr 
3 

j 

( 

1 

B 

Active  'Material 
\                       /A 

N 

I 

=? 

"To  Battery 


Fig.  16. 

from  the  battery  is  permanently  connected  to  the  metal  block  N 
resting  on  the  ebonite  support.  In  this  arrangement  there  is  no 
possibility  of  a  conduction  leak  from  the  plate  A  to  B,  since  the 
earth-connected  vessel  V  intervenes. 

An  apparatus  of  this  kind  is  very  convenient  for  testing  the 
absorption  of  the  radiations  by  solid  screens,  as  well  as  for  making- 
comparative  studies  of  the  activity  of  different  bodies.  Unless 
very  active  preparations  of  radium  are  employed,  a  battery  of 
300  volts  is  sufficient  to  ensure  saturation  when  the  plates  are  not 
more  than  5  centimetres  apart.  If  substances  are  being  tested  which 
give  off  a  radio-active  emanation,  the  effect  of  the  emanation  can 
be  eliminated  by  passing  a  steady  current  of  air  from  a  gas  bag 
between  the  plates.  This  removes  the  emanation  as  fast  as  it  is 
produced. 

If  a  clean  plate  is  put  in  the  place  of  A,  a  small  movement  of 
the  electrometer  needle  is  always  observed.  If  there  is  no  radio- 
active substance  in  the  neighbourhood,  this  effect  is  due  to  the 
small  natural  ionization  of  the  air.  We  can  always  correct  for  this 
natural  leak  when  necessary. 

60.  It  is  often  required  to  measure  the  activity  due  to  the 
emanations  of  thorium  or  radium  or  the  excited  activity  produced 


Ill]  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  83 

by  those  emanations  on  rods  or  wires.    A  convenient  apparatus  for 
this  purpose  is  shown  in  Fig.  17.    The  cylinder  B  is  connected  with 


Earth 


Earth 

Fig.  17. 

the  battery  in  the  usual  way,  and  the  central  conductor  A  with  the 
electrometer.  This  central  rod  is  insulated  from  the  external 
cylinder  by  an  ebonite  cork,  which  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  a 
metal  ring  CC'  connected  to  earth.  This  ring  acts  the  part  of  a 
guard-ring,  and  prevents  any  conduction  leak  between  B  and  A. 
The  ebonite  is  thus  only  required  to  insulate  satisfactorily  for  the 
small  rise  of  potential  produced  on  A  during  the  experiment.  In  all 
accurate  measurements  of  current  in  radio-activity  the  guard-ring 
principle  should  always  be  used  to  ensure  good  insulation.  This 
is  easily  secured  when  the  ebonite  is  only  required  to  insulate 
for  a  fraction  of  a  volt,  instead  of  for  several  hundred  volts,  as  is 
the  case  when  the  guard-ring  is  absent. 

61.  For  measurements  of  radio-activity  with  an  electrometer, 
a  steady  source  of  E.M.F.  of  at  least  300  volts  is  necessary.  This 
is  best  obtained  by  a  battery  of  small  cells  simply  made  by 
immersing  strips  of  lead  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  or  by  a  battery 
of  small  accumulators  of  the  usual  construction.  Small  accumu- 
lators of  capacity  about  one-half  ampere  hour  can  now  be  obtained 
at  a  moderate  price,  and  are  more  constant  and  require  less 
attention  than  simple  lead  cells. 

In  order  to  measure  currents  over  a  wide  range,  a  graduated 
series  of  capacities  is  required.  The  capacity  of  an  electrometer  and 
testing  apparatus  is  usually  about  50  electrostatic  units  or  "000056 
microfarads.  Subdivided  condensers  of  mica  are  constructed  in 
which  capacities  varying  from  '001  to  *2  microfarads  are  provided. 
With  such  a  condenser,  another  extra  capacity  is  required  to 

6—2 


84  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

bridge  over  the  gap  between  the  capacity  of  the  electrometer 
and  the  lowest  capacity  of  the  condenser.  This  capacity  of  value 
about  200  electrostatic  units  can  readily  be  made  of  parallel  plates 
or  still  better  of  concentric  cylinders.  With  this  series  of  capacities, 
currents  may  be  measured  between  3  x  10~14  and  3  x  10~8  amperes 
—  a  range  of  over  one  million  times.  Still  larger  currents  can  be 
measured  if  the  sensibility  of  the  electrometer  is  reduced,  or  if 
larger  capacities  are  available. 

In  a  room  devoted  to  electrometer  measurements  of  radio- 
activity, it  is  desirable  to  have  no  radio-active  matter  present 
except  that  to  be  tested.  The  room  should  also  be  as  free  from 
dust  as  possible.  The  presence  of  a  large  quantity  of  dust  in  the 
air  (see  section  31)  is  a  very  disturbing  factor  in  all  radio-active 
measurements.  A  larger  E.M.F.  is  required  to  produce  saturation 
on  account  of  the  diffusion  of  the  ions  to  the  dust  particles.  The 
presence  of  dust  in  the  air  also  leads  to  uncertainty  in  the  dis- 
tribution of  excited  activity  in  an  electric  field  (see  section  171). 

62.  Measurement  of  Current.  In  order  to  determine 
the  current  in  the  electrometer  circuit  by  measuring  the  rate  of 
movement  of  the  needle,  it  is  necessary  to  know  both  the  capacity 
of  the  circuit  and  the  sensibility  of  the  electrometer. 

Let  C  =  capacity  of  electrometer  and  its  connections  in  E.s.  units. 
d  =  number  of  divisions  of  the  scale  passed  over  per  second. 

D  =  sensibility  of  the  electrometer  measured  in  scale  divi- 
sions for  1  volt  P.D.  between  the  quadrants. 

The  current  i  is  given  by  the  product  of  the  capacity  of  the 
system  and  the  rate  of  rise  of  potential. 

ThUS  ;  =  .s.  units, 

Cd 


Suppose,  for  example, 

(7=50,     d  =  5,     D 
Then  i  =  2'8  x  10~13  amperes. 


Ill]  METHODS    OF    MEASUREMENT  85 

Since  the  electrometer  can  readily  measure  a  current  corre- 
sponding to  a  movement  of  half  a  scale  division  per  second, 
it  is  easily  seen  that  an  electrometer  can  measure  a  current  of 
3  x  10~14  amperes,  which  is  considerably  below  the  range  of  the 
most  sensitive  galvanometer. 

The  capacity  of  the  electrometer  itself  must  not  be  considered 
as  only  that  of  the  pair  of  quadrants  and  the  needle  when  in  a 
position  of  rest.  The  actual  capacity  is  very  much  larger  than  this, 
on  account  of  the  motion  of  the  charged  needle.  Suppose,  for 
example,  the  needle  is  charged  to  a  high  negative  potential,  and 
kept  at  the  zero  position  by  an  external  constraint.  If  a  quantity  Q 
of  positive  electricity  is  given  to  the  electrometer  and  its  connections, 
the  whole  system  is  raised  to  a  potential  V,  such  that  Q  =  CV, 
where  C  is  the  capacity  of  the  system.  When  however  the  needle 
is  allowed  to  move,  it  is  attracted  into  the  charged  pair  of  quad- 
rants. This  corresponds  to  the  introduction  of  a  negatively  charged 
body  between  the  quadrants,  and  in  consequence  the  potential  of 
the  system  is  lowered  to  V.  The  actual  capacity  C'  of  the  system 
when  the  needle  moves  is  thus  greater  than  (7,  and  is  given  by 


The  capacity  of  the  electrometer  is  thus  not  a  constant,  but 
depends  on  the  potential  of  the  needle,  i.e.  on  the  sensibility  of  the 
electrometer. 

An  interesting  result  of  practical  importance  follows  from  the 
variation  of  the  capacity  of  the  electrometer  with  the  potential  of 
the  needle.  If  the  external  capacity  attached  to  the  electrometer 
is  small  compared  with  that  of  the  electrometer  itself,  the  rate  of 
movement  of  the  needle  for  a  constant  current  is,  in  some  cases, 
independent  of  the  sensibility.  An  electrometer  may  be  used  for 
several  days  or  even  weeks  to  give  nearly  equal  deflections  for 
a  constant  current,  without  recharging  the  needle,  although  its 
potential  has  been  steadily  falling  during  the  interval.  In  such 
a  case  the  decrease  in  sensibility  is  nearly  proportional  to  the 
decrease  in  capacity  of  the  electrometer,  so  that  the  deflection  for 
a  given  current  is  not  much  altered.  The  theory  of  this  action  has 
been  given  by  J.  J.  Thomson1. 

1  Phil.  May.  46,  p.  537,  1898. 


86 


METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT 


[CH. 


63.  The  capacity  of  the  electrometer  and  its  connections 
cannot  be  measured  by  any  of  the  commutator  methods  used  for 
the  determination  of  small  capacities,  for  in  such  cases  the  needle 
does  not  move,  and  the  capacity  measured  is  not  that  of  the 
electrometer  system  when  in  actual  use.  The  value  of  the  capacity 
may,  however,  be  determined  by  the  method  of  mixtures. 

Let  G  =  capacity  of  electrometer  and  connections. 
Cl  =  capacity  of  a  standard  condenser. 

The  electrometer  and  its  connections  are  charged  to  a  potential 
Vl  by  a  battery,  and  the  deflection  dl  of  the  needle  is  noted.  By 
means  of  an  insulated  key,  the  capacity  of  the  standard  condenser 
is  added  in  parallel  with  the  electrometer  system.  Let  V2  be  the 
potential  of  the  system,  and  d2  the  new  deflection. 


Then 


C+C,      V, 


V9     d, 


and 


c= a 


dl  - 


A  simple  standard  capacity  for  this  purpose  can  be  constructed 
of  two  concentric  brass  tubes  the  diameters  of  which  can  be 
accurately  measured.  The  external  cylinder  D  (Fig.  18)  is  mounted 


Earth 


Battery 


Fig.   18. 


on  a  wooden  base,  which  is  covered  with  a  sheet  of  metal  or  tin-foil 
connected  to  earth.     The  tube  C  is  supported  centrally  on  ebonite 


Ill]  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  87 

rods  at  each  end.     The  capacity  is  given  approximately  by  the 
formula 


where  b  is  the  internal  diameter  of  7),  a  the  external  diameter  of  C, 
and  I  the  length  of  the  tubes. 

The  following  method  can  in  some  cases  be  used  with  advantage. 
While  a  testing  vessel  is  in  connection  with  the  electrometer,  a 
sample  of  uranium  is  placed  on  the  lower  plate  A.  Let  d^  and 
di  be  the  number  of  divisions  passed  over  per  second  by  the  needle 
with  and  without  the  standard  capacity  in  connection. 

Then  C+C!=|, 

and  C 


dl  —  c?2 

This  method  has  the  advantage  that  the  relative  capacities  are 
expressed  in  terms  of  the  motion  of  the  needle  under  the  actual 
conditions  of  measurement. 

64.  Quartz  piezo-electrique.  In  measurements  of  the 
strength  of  currents  by  electrometers,  it  is  always  necessary  to 
determine  the  sensibility  of  the  instrument  and  the  capacity  of  the 
electrometer  and  the  apparatus  attached  thereto.  By  means  of  the 
quartz  piezo-electrique  devised  by  the  brothers  MM.  J.  and  P.  Curie1, 
measurements  of  the  current  can  be  made  with  rapidity  and 
accuracy  over  a  wide  range.  These  measurements  are  quite  inde- 
pendent of  the  capacity  of  the  electrometer  and  external  circuit. 

The  essential  part  of  this  instrument  consists  of  a  plate  of 
quartz  which  is  cut  in  a  special  manner.  When  this  plate  is 
placed  under  tension,  there  is  a  liberation  of  electricity  equal  in 
amount  but  opposite  in  sign  on  the  two  sides  of  the  plate.  The 
plate  of  quartz  AB  (Fig.  19)  is  hung  vertically  and  weights  are 
added  to  the  lower  end.  The  plate  is  .cut  so  that  the  optic  axis  of 

1  C.  R.  91,  pp.  38  and  294,  1880.  See  also  Friedel  and  J.  Curie,  C.  R.  96, 
pp.  1262  and  1389,  1883,  and  Lord  Kelvin,  Phil.  Mag.  36,  pp.  331,  342,  384,  414, 
453,  1893. 


88  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  [CH. 

the  crystal  is  horizontal  and  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
paper. 

The  two  faces  A  and  B  are  normal  to  one  of  the  binary  axes 
(or  electrical  axes)  of  the  crystal.  The  tension  must  be  applied  in 
a  direction  normal  to  the  optic  and  electric  axes.  The  two  faces 
A  and  B  are  silvered,  but  the  main  portion  of  the  plate  is  electrically 


To  Support 


Earth 


Earth 

To  Weight 

Fig.   19. 

insulated  by  removing  a  narrow  strip  of  the  silvering  near  the  upper 
and  lower  ends  of  the  plate.  One  side  of  the  plate  is  connected  to 
the  electrometer  and  to  the  conductor,  the  rate  of  leak  of  which  is 
to  be  measured.  The  quantity  of  electricity  set  free  on  one  face  of 
the  plate  is  accurately  given  by 

Q  =  0-063  j .  F, 

where  L  is  the  length  of  the  insulated  portion  of  the  plate,  b  the 
thickness  AB,  and  F  the  weight  attached  in  kilogrammes.  Q  is 
then  given  in  electrostatic  units. 

Suppose,  for  example,  that  it  is  required  to  measure  the  current 
between  the  plates  CD  (Fig.  19),  due  to  some  radio-active  material 
on  the  plate  G,  for  a  given  difference  of  potential  between  C  and  D. 


Ill]  METHODS   OF   MEASUREMENT  89 

At  a  given  instant  the  connection  of  the  quadrants  of  the  electro- 
meter with  the  earth  is  broken.  The  weight  is  attached  to  the 
quartz  plate,  and  is  held  in  the  hand  so  as  to  gradually  apply  the 
tension.  This  causes  a  release  of  electricity  opposite  in  sign  to 
that  given  to  the  plate  D.  The  electrometer  needle  is  kept  at  the 
position  of  rest  as  nearly  as  possible  by  adjusting  the  tension  by 
hand.  The  tension  being  fully  applied,  the  moment  the  needle 
commences  to  move  steadily  from  zero  is  noted.  The  current 

between  the  plates  CD  is  then  given  by  -^  where  t  is  the  time  of 

t 

the  observation.  The  value  of  Q  is  known  from  the  weight  attached. 
In  this  method  the  electrometer  is  only  used  as  a  detector  to 
show  that  the  system  is  kept  at  zero  potential.  No  knowledge  of 
the  capacity  of  the  insulated  system  is  required.  With  practice, 
measurements  of  the  current  can  be  made  in  this  way  with  rapidity 
and  certainty. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

NATURE   OF  THE   RADIATIONS. 

PART   I. 

COMPARISON  OF  THE  RADIATIONS. 

65.  The  Three  Types  of  Radiation.  All  the  radio-active 
substances  possess  in  common  the  power  of  acting  on  a  photographic 
plate  and  of  ionizing  the  gas  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood. 
The  intensity  of  the  radiations  may  be  compared  by  means  of  their 
photographic  or  electrical  action ;  and,  in  the  case  of  the  strongly 
radio-active  substances,  by  the  power  they  possess  of  lighting  up 
a  phosphorescent  screen.  Such  comparisons,  however,  do  not  throw 
any  light  on  the  question  whether  the  radiations  are  of  the  same 
or  of  different  kinds,  for  it  is  well  known  that  such  different  types 
of  radiations  as  the  short  waves  of  ultra-violet  light,  Rontgen  and 
cathode  rays,  all  possess  the  property  of  producing  ions  throughout 
the  volume  of  a  gas,  lighting  up  a  fluorescent  screen,  and  acting 
on  a  photographic  plate.  Neither  can  the  ordinary  optical  methods 
be  employed  to  examine  the  radiations  under  consideration,  as 
they  show  no  trace  of  regular  reflection,  refraction,  or  polarization. 

Two  general  methods  can  be  used  to  distinguish  the  types  of 
the  radiations  given  out  by  the  same  body,  and  also  to  compare 
the  radiations  from  the  different  active  substances.  These  methods 
are  as  follows : 

:(1)  By  observing  whether  the  rays  are  .appreciably  deflected 
in  a  magnetic  field. 

(2)  By  comparing  the  relative  absorption  of  the  rays  by  solids 
and  gases. 


CH.  IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  91 

Examined  in  these  ways,  it  has  been  found  that  there  are  three 
different  types  of  radiation  emitted  from  radio-active  bodies,  which 
for  brevity  and  convenience  have  been  termed  the  a,  ft,  and  7  rays. 

(i)  The  a  rays  are  very  readily  absorbed  by  thin  metal  foil 
and  by  a  few  centimetres  of  air.  They  have  been  shown  to  consist 
of  positively  charged  bodies  projected  with  a  velocity  of  about 
1/10  the  velocity  of  light.  They  are  deflected  by  intense  mag- 
netic and  electric  fields,  but  the  amount  of  deviation  is  minute 
in  comparison  with  the  deviation,  under  the  same  conditions,  of 
the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

(ii)  The  ft  rays  are  far  more  penetrating  in  character  than  the 
a  rays,  and  consist  of  negatively  charged  bodies  projected  with 
velocities  of  the  same  order  as  the  velocity  of  light.  They  are  far 
more  readily  deflected  than  the  a  rays  and  are  in  fact  identical 
with  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

(iii)  The  7  rays  are  extremely  penetrating,  and  non-deviable 
by  a  magnetic  field.  Their  true  nature  is  not  yet  known,  but  they 
are  analogous  in  some  respects  to  very  penetrating  Rontgen  rays. 

The  three  best  known  radio-active  substances,  uranium,  thorium, 
and  radium,  all  give  out  these  three  types  of  rays,  each  in  an  amount 
approximately  proportional  to  its  relative  activity.  Polonium 
stands  alone  in  giving  only  the  a.  or  easily  absorbed  rays1. 

66.  Deflection  of  the  rays.  The  rays  emitted  from  the 
active  bodies  thus  present  a  very  close  analogy  with  the  rays  which 
are  produced  in  a  highly  exhausted  vacuum  tube  when  an  electric 

1  In  an  examination  of  uranium  the  writer  (Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  1899)  found  that 
the  rays  from  uranium  consist  of  two  kinds,  differing  greatly  in  penetrating  power, 
which  were  called  the  a  and  £  rays.  Later,  it  was  found  that  similar  types  of  rays 
were  emitted  by  thorium  and  radium.  On  the  discovery  of  very  penetrating  rays  from 
uranium  and  thorium  as  well  as  in  radium,  the  term  7  was  applied  to  them  by  the 
writer.  The  word  "ray  "  has  been  retained  in  this  work,  although  it  is  now  settled 
that  the  a  and  @  rays  consist  of  material  particles  projected  with  great  velocity.  The 
term  is  thus  used  in  the  same  sense  as  by  Newton,  who  applied  it  in  the  Principia 
to  the  stream  of  corpuscles  which  he  believed  to  be  responsible  for  the  phenomenon 
of  light.  In  some  recent  papers  the  o  and  {3  rays  have  been  called  the  a  and  /3 
"emanations."  This  nomenclature  cannot  fail  to  lead  to  confusion,  since  the 
term  "  radio-active  emanation "  has  already  been  generally  adopted  in  radio- 
activity as  applying  to  the  material  substance  which  gradually  diffuses  from  thorium 
and  radium  compounds,  and  itself  emits  rays. 


92 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


discharge  passes  through  it.  The  o_j;ays  correspond  to  the,  canal 
rays,  discovered  by  Goldstein,  which  have  been  shown  by  \^iBn  to 
consist  of  positively  charged  bodies  projectedjwith  great  velocity. 
The  ft  rays  aretKe  same  as  Lhe^cathoderays,  while  the  7  rays  in 
some  respects  resemble  the  Rontgen  rays.  In  a  vacuum  tube, 
a  large  amount  of  electric  energy  is  expended  to  produce  the  rays, 
but,  in  the  radio-active  bodies,  the  rays  are  emitted  spontaneously 
and  at  a  rate  uninfluenced  by  any  chemical  or  physical  agency. 
The  a  and  ft  rays  from  the  active  bodies  are  projected  with  much 
greater  velocity  than  the  corresponding  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube, 
while  the  7  rays  are  of  much  greater  penetrating  power  than 
Rontgen  rays. 

The  effect  of  a  magnetic  field  on  a  pencil  of  rays  from  a 
radio-active  substance  giving  out  the  three  kinds  of  rays  is  very  well 
illustrated  in  Fig.  201. 

Some  radium  is  placed  in  the  bottom  of  a  narrow  cylindrical 
lead  vessel  R.  A  narrow  pencil 
of  rays  consisting  of  a,  ft,  and 
7  rays  escapes  from  the  open- 
ing. If  a  strong  uniform 
magnetic  field  is  applied  at 
right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
the  paper,  and  directed  towards 
the  paper,  the  three  types  of 
rays  are  separated  from  one 
another.  The  7  rays  continue 
in  a  straight  line  without  any  .  A 
deviation.  The  ft  rays  are  Fig.  20. 

deflected  to  the  right,  describ- 
ing circular  orbits  the  radius  of  which  varies  within  wide  limits. 
If  the  photographic  plate  AC  is  placed  under  the  radium  vessel, 
ikerj3  rays  produce  a  diffuse  photographic  impression  on  the  right 
of  the  vessel  R.  The  a  rays  are  bent  in  the  direction  opposite  to 
that  of  the  ft  rays  and  describe  a  portion  of  the  arc  of  a  circle  of 
large  radius,  but  they  are  rapidly  absorbed  after  traversing  a 
distance  of  a  few  centimetres  from  the  vessel  R.  The  amount 


1  This  method  of  illustration  is  due  to  Mrae  Curie,  These  presentee  a  la  Faculte 
des  Sciences  de  Paris,  1903. 


IV] 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


93 


of  the  deviation  of  the  a  rays  compared  with  that  of  the  ft  rays  is 
much  exaggerated  in  the  figure. 

67.     Ionizing  and  penetrating  power  of  the  rays.    -Qf 

rays,  the  a  rayjy)roducej^ 


in  the  gas  and  the  7  rays  ^Ke'IeaSE  With  a  thin  layer  of  un- 
screened active  material  spread  on  the  lower  of  two  parallel  plates 
5  cms.  apart,  the  amount  of  ionization  due  to  the  a,  ft,  and  7  ravs 
is  of  the  relative  order  10,000,  100,  andjl.  These  numbers  are  only 
rough  approximations,  and  the  differences  become  less  marked 
as  the  thickness  of  the  radio-active  layer  increases. 

The  average  penetrating  power  of  the  rays  is  shown  below.  In 
the  first  column  is  given  the  thickness  of  the  aluminium,  which 
cuts  each  radiation  down  to  half  its  value,  and  in  the  second  the 
relative  power  of  penetration  of  the  rays. 


Thickness  of 

Radiation 

Aluminium  in  cms. 
which  cuts  off  half 

Relative  power 
of  penetration 

the  radiation 

a  rays 

0-0005  cms. 

1 

18    » 

0'05  cms. 

100 

7     » 

8       cms. 

10000 

rejative_powerof  jDenetration  is  thus  approximately  inversely 
proportional  to  the  relative  ionization.  These  numbers,  however, 
only  indicate  the  order  of  relative  penetrating  power.  This  power 
varies  considerably  for  the  different  active  bodies. 

The  a  rays  from  uranium  and  polonium  are  the  least  pene- 
trating, and  those  from  thorium  the  most.  The  ft  radiations  from 
thorium  and  radium  are  very  complex,  and  consist  of  rays  widely 
different  in  penetrating  power.  Some  of  the  ft  rays  from  these 
substances  are  much  less  and  others  much  more  penetrating  than 
those  from  uranium,  which  gives  out  fairly  homogeneous  rays. 

68.     Difficulties  of  comparative    measurements.     It   is 

difficult  to  make  quantitative  or  even  qualitative  measurements  of 
the  relative  intensity  of  the  three  types  of  rays  from  active  sub- 
stances. The  three  general  methods  employed  depend  upon  the 
action  of  the  rays  in  ionizing  the  gas,  in  acting  on  a  photographic 


94  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

plate,  and  in  causing  phosphorescent  or  fluorescent  effects  in  certain 
substances.  In  each  of  these  methods  the  fraction  of  the  rays  which 
is  absorbed  and  transformed  into  another  form  of  energy  is  different 
for  each  type  of  ray.  Even  when  one  specific  kind  of  ray  is  under 
observation,  comparative  measurements  are  rendered  difficult  by 
the  complexity  of  that  type  of  rays.  For  example,  the  /3  rays  from 
radium  consist  of  negatively  charged  particles  projected  with  a 
wide  range  of  velocity,  and,  in  consequence,  they  are  absorbed 
in  different  amounts  in  passing  through  a  definite  thickness  of 
matter.  In  each  case,  only  a  fraction  of  the  energy  absorbed 
is  transformed  into  the  particular  type  of  energy,  whether  ionic, 
chemical,  or  luminous,  which  serves  as  a  means  of  measurement. 

The  rayswhich  are  the  most  active  electrically  are  the  least 
r  active  photographically.  Under  ordinary  conditions  most  of  the 
photographic  action  of  uranium,  thorium,  and  radium,  is  due  to  the 
/3  or  cathodic  rays.  The  a.  rays  from  uranium  and  thorium,  on 
account  of  their  weak  action,  have  not  yet  been  detected  photo- 
graphically. With  active  substances  like  radium  and  polonium, 
the  a  rays  readily  produce  a  photographic  impression.  So  far  the 
7  rays  have  been  detected  photographically  from  radium  only. 
That  no  photographic  action  of  these  rays  has  yet  been  established 
for  uranium  and  thorium  is  probably  due  merely  to  the  fact  that 
the  effect  sought  for  is  very  small,  and  during  exposures  for  long 
intervals  it  is  very  difficult  to  avoid  fogging  of  the  plates  owing  to 
other  causes.  Considering  the  similarity  of  the  radiations  in  other 
respects,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  7  rays  do  produce  some 
photographic  action,  though  it  is  too  small  to  observe  with  certainty. 

These  differences  in  the  photographic  and  ionizing  properties 
of  the  radiations  must  always  be  taken  into  account  in  comparing 
results  obtained  by  the  two  methods.  The  apparent  contradiction 
of  results  obtained  by  different  observers  using  these  two  methods 
is  found  to  be  due  to  their  differences  in  relative  photographic 
and  ionizing  action.  For  example,  with  the  unscreened  active 
material,  the  ionization  observed  by  the  electrical  method  is  due 
almost  entirely  to  a  rays,  while  the  photographic  action  under  the 
same  condition  is  due  almost  entirely  to  the  (3  rays. 

It  is  often  convenient  to  know  what  thickness  of  matter  is 
sufficient  to  absorb  a  specific  type  of  radiation.  A  thickness  of 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  95 

aluminium  or  mica  of  '01  cms.  or  a  sheet  of  ordinary  writing-paper 
is  sufficient  to  completely  absorb  all  the  a  rays.  With  such  a 
screen  over  the  active  material,  the  effects  are  due  only  to  the 
ft  and  7  rays,  which  pass  through  with  a  very  slight  absorption. 
Most  of  the  /3  rays  are  absorbed  in  5  mms.  of  aluminium  or  2  mms. 
of  lead.  The  radiation  passing  through  such  screens  consists  very 
largely  of  the  7  rays.  As  a  rough  working  rule  it  may  be  taken 
that  a  thickness  of  matter  required  to  absorb  any  type  of  rays  is 
inversely  proportional  to  the  density  of  the  substance,  i.e.  the 
absorption  is  proportional  to  the  density.  This  rule  holds  ap- 
proximately for  light  substances,  but,  in  heavy  substances  like 
mercury  and  lead,  the  radiations  are  about  twice  as  readily  absorbed 
as  the  density  rule  would  lead  us  to  expect. 


PART  II. 
THE  ft  OR  CATHODIC  RAYS. 

69.  Discovery  of  the  /3  rays.  A  discovery  which  gave 
a  great  impetus  to  the  study  of  the  radiations  from  active  bodies 
was  made  in  1899,  almost  simultaneously  in  Germany,  France,  and 
Austria,  when  it  was  observed  that  preparations  of  radium  gave 
out  some  rays  deviable  by  a  magnetic  field,  and  very  similar  in 
character  to  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube.  The 
observation  of  Elster  and  Geitel  that  a  magnetic  field  altered 
the  conductivity  produced  in  air  by  radium  rays,  led  Giesel1  to 
examine  the  effect  of  a  magnetic  field  on  the  radiations.  In  his 
experiments,  the  radio-active  preparation  was  placed  in  a  small 
vessel  between  the  poles  of  an  electromagnet.  The  vessel  was 
arranged  to  give  a  pencil  of  rays  which  was  approximately  per- 
pendicular to  the  field.  The  rays  caused  a  small  fluorescent  patch 
on  the  screen.  On  exciting  the  electromagnet,  the  fluorescent 
zone  was  observed  to  broaden  out  on  one  side.  On  reversing  the 
field,  the  extension  of  the  zone  was  in  the  opposite  direction.  The 
deviation  of  the  rays  thus  indicated  was  in  the  same  direction  and 
of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  that  for  cathode  rays. 

S.  Meyer  and  Schweidler2  also  obtained  similar  results.     They 
1  Wied.  Annal.  69,  p.  831,  1899.  2  Phys.  Zeit.  1,  pp.  90,  113,  1899. 


96  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

showed,  in  addition,  the  deviation  of  the  rays  when  a  change 
occurred  in  the  conductivity ;  of  the  air  under  the  influence  of 
a  magnetic  field.  Becquerel1,  a  little  later,  showed  the  magnetic 
deflection  of  the  radium  rays?  by  using  the  photographic  method. 
P.  Curie2,  by  the  electrical  method,  showed  furthermore  that  the 
rays  from  radium  consisted  of  two  kinds,  one  apparently  non- 
deviable  and  easily  absorbed  (now  known  as  the  a  rays),  and  the 
other  penetrating  and  deviable  by  a  magnetic  field  (now  known 
as  the  ft  rays).  The  ionization  effect  due  to  the  (3  rays  was 
only  a  small  fraction  of  that  due  to  the  a  rays.  At  a  later  date 
Becquerel,  by  the  photographic  method,  showed  that  uranium  gave 
out  some  deflectable  rays.  It  had  been  shown  previously3  that  the 
rays  from  uranium  consisted  of  a  and  ft  rays.  The  deflected  rays 
in  Becquerel's  experiment  consisted  entirely  of  /3  rays,  as  the 
a  rays  from  uranium  produce  no  appreciable  photographic  action. 
Rutherford  and  Grier4,  using  the  electric  method,  showed  that 
compounds  of  thorium,  like  those  of  uranium,  gave  out  beside 
a  rays  some  penetrating  ft  rays,  deviable  in  a  magnetic  field.  As 
in  the  case  of  radium,  the  ionization  due  to  the  a.  rays  of  uranium 
and  thorium  is  large  compared  with  that  due  to  the  ft  rays. 

70.  Examination  of  the  magnetic  deviation  by  the 
photographic  method.  .  Becquerel  has  made  a  very  complete 
study,  by  the  photographic  method,  of  the  ft  rays  from  radium, 
and  has  shown  that  they  behave  in  all  respects  like  cathode  rays, 
which  are  known  to  be  negatively  charged  particles  moving  with 
a  high  velocity.  J.  J.  Thomson  (Recent  Researches,  p.  136)  has 
obtained  the  equation  for  the  path  of  a  charged  particle  moving 
in  a  uniform  magnetic  field.  If  a  particle  of  mass  m  and  charge 
e  is  projected  with  a  velocity  V,  at  an  angle  a  with  the  direction  of 
a  field  of  strength  H,  it  ^vill  describe  a  curved  path,  whose  radius 
R  of  curvature  is  given  by 

D     mV  . 
,R  =  -Tr    sva.  a. 
lie 

The  path  of  the  particle  is  a  helix  wound  on  a  cylinder  of  radius  R 
with  the  axis  parallel  to  the  field. 

1  C.  R.  129,  pp.  997,  1205.     1899.  -  C.  E,  130,  p.  73,  1900. 

3  Eutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  January,  1899.  4  Phil.  Mag.  September,  1902. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  97 


7T 


When  a=  -^  ,  i.e.  when  the  rays  are  projected  normally  to  the 
field,  the  particles  describe  circles  of  radius 


The  planes  of  these  circles  are  normal  to  the  field.  Thus  for 
a  particular  velocity  V  the  value  of  R  varies  inversely  as  the 
strength  of  the  field.  In  a  uniform  field  the  rays  projected  nor- 
mally to  the  field  describe  circles,  and  their  direction  of  projection 
is  a  tangent  at  the  origin. 

This  has  been  verified  experimentally  by  Becquerel  for  the 
ft  rays  of  radium,  by  an  arrangement  similar  to  that  shown  in 
Fig.  21. 


*x  ^— -7T1 P~ 

V;:::;>7 

Fig.  21. 

A  photographic  plate  P,  with  the  film  downwards,  is  enveloped 
in  black  paper  and  placed  horizontally  in  the  uniform  horizontal 
magnetic  field  of  an  electromagnet.  The  magnetic  field  is  sup- 
posed to  be  uniform  and,  in  the  figure,  is  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  of  the  paper.  The  plate  was  covered  with  a  sheet  of  lead, 
and  on  the  edge  of  the  plate,  in  the  centre  of  the  magnetic  field 
is  placed  a  small  lead  vessel  R  containing  the  radio-active  matter. 

On  exciting  the  magnet,  so  that  the  rays  are  bent  to  the  left 
of  the  figure,  it  is  observed  that  a  photographic  impression  is  pro- 
duced directly  below  the  source  of  the  rays,  which  have  been  bent 
round  by  the  magnetic  field.  The  active  matter  sends  out  rays 
equally  in  all  directions.  The  rays  perpendicular  to  the  field 
describe  circles,  which  strike  the  plate  immediately  under  the 
source.  A  few  of  these  rays,  Al}  A2,  A3,  are  shown  in  the  figure. 
The  rays,  normal  to  the  plate,  strike  the  plate  almost  normally, 
R.  R.-A.  7 


98  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

while  the  rays  nearly  parallel  to  the  plate  strike  the  plate  at 
nearly  grazing  incidence.  The  rays,  inclined  to  the  direction  of 
the  field,  describe  spirals  and  produce  effects  on  an  axis  parallel 
to  the  field  passing  through  the  source.  In  consequence  of  this, 
any  opaque  screen  placed  in  the  path  of  the  rays  has  its  shadow 
thrown  near  the  edge  of  the  photographic  plate. 

71.  Complexity  of  the  rays.  The  deviable  rays  from 
radium  are  complex,  i.e.  they  are  composed  of  a  flight  of  particles 
projected  with  a  wide  range  of  velocity.  In  a  magnetic  field  every 
ray  describes  a  path,  of  which  the  radius  of  curvature  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  velocity  of  projection.  The  complexity  of 
the  radiation  has  been  very  clearly  shown  by  Becquerel1  in  the 
following  way. 

An  uncovered  photographic  plate,  with  the  film  upwards,  was 
placed  horizontally  in  the  horizontal  uniform  magnetic  field  of 
an  electro-magnet.  A  small,  open,  lead  box,  containing  the 
radio-active  matter,  was  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  field,  on 
the  photographic  plate.  The  light,  due  to  the  phosphorescence 
of  the  radio-active  matter,  therefore,  could  not  reach  the  plate. 
The  whole  apparatus  was  placed  in  a  dark  room.  The  impression 
on  the  plate  takes  the  form  of  a  large,  diffuse,  but  continuous 
band,  elliptic  in  shape,  produced  on  one  side  of  the  plate. 

Such  an  impression  is  to  be  expected  if  the  rays  are  sent  out 
in  all  directions,  even  if  their  velocities  of  projection  are  the  same, 
for  it  can  readily  be  shown  theoretically,  that  the  path  of  the  rays 
is  confined  within  an  ellipse  whose  minor  axis,  which  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  field,  is  equal  to  2R,  and  whose  major  axis  is  equal 
to  TrR.  If,  however,  the  active  matter  is  placed  in  the  bottom  of  a 
deep  lead  cylinder  of  small  diameter,  the  rays  have  practically  all 
the  same  direction  of  projection,  and  in  that  case  each  part  of  the 
plate  is  acted  on  by  rays  of  a  definite  curvature. 

In  this  case  also,  a  diffuse  impression  is  observed  on  the  plate, 
giving,  so  to  speak,  a  continuous  spectrum  of  the  rays  and  showing 
that  the  radiation  is  composed  of  rays  of  widely  different  curvatures. 
Fig.  22  shows  a  photograph  of  this  kind,  obtained  by  Becquerel, 
with  strips  of  paper,  aluminium,  and  platinum  placed  on  the  plate. 

1  C.  R.  130,  pp.  206,  372,  810,  979.     1900. 


IV] 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


99 


If  screens  of  various  thickness  are  placed  on  the  plate,  it  is 
observed  that  the  plate  is  not  appreciably  affected  within  a  certain 


distance  from  the  active  matter,  and  that  this  distance  increases 
with  the  thickness  of  the  screen.  This  distance  is  obviously  equal 
to  twice  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  path  of  the  rays,  which  are 
just  able  to  produce  an  impression  through  the  screen. 

These  experiments  show  very  clearly  that  the  most  deviable 
rays  are  the  most  readily  absorbed  by  matter.  By  observations  of 
this  kind  Becquerel  has  determined  approximately  the  inferior 
limit  of  the  value  of  HR  for  rays  which  are  transmitted  through 
different  thicknesses  of  matter. 

The  results  are  given  in  the  table  below : 


Substance 

Thickness 
in  mms. 

Inferior  limit 
of  HR  for 
transmitted  rays 

Black  paper  ... 

0-065 

650 

Aluminium     .  .  . 

o-oio 

350 

„ 

o-ioo 

1000 

0-200 

1480 

Mica    ... 

0-025 

520 

Glass   

0-155 

1130 

Platinum 

0-030 

1310 

SST...    ::: 

0-085 
0-130 

1740 
2610 

I 

If  —  is  a  constant  for  all  the  rays,  the  value  of  HR  is  propor- 
tional to  the  velocity  of  the  rays,  and  it  follows  from  the  table  that 
the  velocity  of  the  rays  which  just  produce  an  effect  on  the  plate 
through  '13  mms.  of  lead  is  about  7  times  that  of  the  rays  which 

7—2 


100 


NATURE   OF  THE  RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


just  produce  an  impression  through  '01  mms.  of  aluminium.     It 

/> 

will  be  shown,  however,  in  section  76,  that  —  is  not  a  constant  for 

m 

all  speeds,  but  decreases  with  increase  of  velocity  of  the  rays.  The 
difference  in  velocity  between  the  rays  is  in  consequence  not  as 
great  as  this  calculation  would  indicate.  On  examination  of  the 
rays  from  uranium,  Becquerel  found  that  the  radiation  is  not  as 
complex  as  that  from  radium,  but  consists  wholly  of  rays  for 
which  the  value  of  HR  is  about  2000. 


Sattery 


"Electrometer 


72.     Examination  of  the  fi  rays  by  the  electric  method. 

The  presence  of  easily  deviable  rays  given  off  from  an  active 
substance  can  most  readily  be  shown  by  the  photographic  method, 
but  it  is  necessary,  in  addition,  to  show  that  the  penetrating  rays 
which  produce  the  ionization  in  the  gas  are  the  same  as  those 
which  cause  the  photographic  action.  This  can  be  conveniently 
tested  in  an  arrangement  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  23. 

The  radio-active  matter  A  is  placed  on  a  lead  block  E"  between 
the  two  parallel  lead  plates  BB '.  The 
rays  pass  between  the  parallel  plates  and 
ionize  the  gas  between  the^plates  PP'  of 
the  testing  vessel.  The  magnetic  field  is 
applied  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
the  paper.  The  dotted  rectangle  EEEE 
represents  the  position  of  the  pole  piece. 
If  a  compound  of  radium  or  thorium  is 
under  investigation,  a  stream  of  air  is 
required  to  prevent  the  diffusion  of  the 
radio-active  emanations  into  the  testing 
vessel.  When  a  layer  of  uranium,  thorium 
or  radium  compound  is  placed  at  A,  the 
ionization  in  the  testing  vessel  is  due 

mainly  to  the  action  of  the  a  and  /3  rays.  The  a  rays  are  cut 
off  by  adding  a  layer  of  aluminium  '01  cm.  thick  over  the  active 
material.  When  the  layer  of  active  matter  is  not  more  than  a  few 
millimetres  thick,  the  ionization  due  to  the  7  rays  is  small  com- 
pared with  that  produced  by  the  /9  rays,  and  may  be  neglected. 
On  the  application  of  a  magnetic  field  at  right  angles  to  the  mean 


Fig,  23. 


IV]  NATURE    OF   THE   RADIATIONS  101 

direction  of  the  rays,  the  ionization  in  the  testing  vessel  due  to 
the  rays  steadily  decreases  as  the  strength  of  the  field  increases, 
and  in  a  strong  field  it  is  reduced  to  a  very  small  fraction  of  its 
original  value.  In  this  case  the  rays  are  bent  so  that  none  of 
them  enter  the  testing  vessel. 

Examined  in  this  way  it  has  been  found  that  the  0  rays  of 
uranium,  thorium,  and  radium  consist  entirely  of  rays  readily 
deflected  by  a  magnetic  field.  The  rays  from  polonium  consist 
entirely  of  a  rays,  the  deviation  of  which  can  be  detected  only  in 
very  intense  magnetic  fields. 

When  the  screen  covering  the  active  material  is  removed,  in 
a  strong  magnetic  field,  the  ionization  in  the  vessel  is  mainly  due 
to  the  a.  rays.  On  account  of  the  slight  deviation  of  the  a  rays 
under  ordinary  experimental  conditions,  a  still  greater  increase  of 
the  magnetic  field  does  not  appreciably  alter  the  current  due  to 
them  in  the  testing  vessel. 

The  action  of  a  magnetic  field  on  a  very  active  substance  like 
radium  is  easily  shown  by  the  electrical  method,  as  the  ionization 
current  due  to  the  deviable  rays  is  large.  With  substances  of 
small  activity  like  uranium  and  thorium,  the  ionization  current 
due  to  the  deviable  rays  is  very  small,  and  a  sensitive  electrometer 
or  an  electroscope  is  required  to  determine  the  variation,  in  a 
magnetic  field,  of  the  very  small  current  involved.  This  is 
especially  the  case  for  thorium  oxide,  which  gives  out  only  about 
1/5  of  the  amount  of  deviable  rays  that  the  same  weight  of  uranium 
oxide  gives. 

73.     Experiments   with    a   fluorescent  screen.      The  ft 

rays  from  a  few  milligrams  of  pure  radium  bromide  produce 
intense  fluorescence  in  barium  platino-cyanide  and  other  substances 
which  can  be  made  luminous  under  the  influence  of  the  cathode 
rays.  Using  a  centigram  of  radium  bromide,  the  luminosity  on 
a  screen,  placed  upon  it,  is  bright  enough  to  be  observed  in 
daylight.  With  the  aid  of  such  a  screen  in  a  dark  room  many 
of  the  properties  of  the  0  rays  may  be  simply  illustrated  and  their 
complex  nature  clearly  shown.  A  small  quantity  of  radium  is 
placed  in  the  bottom  of  a  short,  narrow,  lead  tube  open  at  one  end. 
This  is  placed  between  the  pole  pieces  of  an  electro-magnet,  and 


102  NATURE   OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

the  screen  placed  below  it.  With  no  magnetic  field,  a  faint 
luminosity  of  the  screen  is  observed  due  to  the  very  penetrating 
7  rays  which  readily  pass  through  the  lead.  When  the  magnetic 
field  is  put  on,  the  screen  is  brightly  lighted  up  on  one  side  over 
an  area  elliptical  in  shape  (section  71).  The  direction  of  deviation 
is  reversed  by  reversal  of  the  field.  The  broad  extent  of  the 
illumination  shows  the  complex  nature  of  the  /3  rays.  On  placing 
a  metallic  object /at  various  points  above  the  screen,  the  trajectory 
of  the  rays  can  readily  be  traced  by  noticing  the  position  of  the 
shadow  cast  upon  the  screen.  By  observing  the  density  of  the 
shadow,  it  can  readily  be  seen  that  the  rays  most  easily  deviated 
are  the  least  penetrating. 


Comparison  of  the  /3  rays  with  cathode  rays. 

74.  Means  of  comparison.  In  order  to  prove  the  identity 
of  the  /3  rays  from  active  bodies  with  the  cathode  rays  produced 
in  a  vacuum  tube,  it  is  necessary  to  show 

(1)  That  the  rays  carry  with  them  a  negative  charge ; 

(2)  That  they  are  deviated  by  an  electric  as  well  as  by  a 
magnetic  field ; 

(3)  That  the  ratio  e/m  is  the  same  as  for  the  cathode  rays. 

Electric  charge  carried  by  the  /3  rays.  The  experiments 
of.  Perrin  and  J.  J.  Thomson  have  shown  that  the  cathode  rays 
carry  with  them  a  negative  charge.  In  addition,  Lenard  has  shown 
that  the  rays  still  carry  with  them  a  charge  after  traversing  thin 
layers  of  matter.  When  the  rays  are  absorbed,  they  give  up  their 
charge  to  the  body  which  absorbs  them.  The  total  amount  of 
charge  carried  by  the  (3  rays  from  even  a  very  active  preparation 
of  radium  is,  in  general,  small  compared  with  that  carried  by  the 
whole  of  the  cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube,  and  can  be  detected 
only  by  very  delicate  methods. 

Suppose  that  a  layer  of  very  active  radium  is  spread  on  a  metal 
plate  connected  to  earth,  and  that  the  0  rays  are  absorbed  by  a 
parallel  plate  connected  with  an  electrometer.  If  the  rays  are 
negatively  charged,  the  top  plate  should  receive  a  negative  charge 
increasing  with  the  time.  On  account,  however,  of  the  great 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  103 

ionization  produced  by  the  rays  between  the  plates,  any  charge 
given  to  one  of  them  is  almost  instantly  dissipated.  In  many 
cases  the  plate  does  become  charged  to  a  definite  positive  or 
negative  potential  depending  on  the  metal,  but  this  is  due  to  the 
contact  difference  of  potential  between  the  plates,  and  would  be 
produced  whether  the  rays  were  charged  or  not.  The  ionization  of 
the  gas  is  greatly  diminished  by  placing  over  the  active  material  a 
metal  screen  which  absorbs  the  a  rays,  but  allows  the  ft  rays  to 
pass  through  with  little  absorption. 

The  rapid  loss  of  any  charge  communicated  to  the  top  plate 
can  be  very  much  reduced,  either  by  diminishing  the  pressure 
of  the  gas  surrounding  it  or  by  enclosing  the  plate  with  suitable 
insulators.  In  their  experiments  to  determine  the  amount  of 
charge  carried  by  the  radium  rays,  M.  and  Mme  Curie1  used 
the  second  method/ 

A  metal  disc  MM  (Fig.  24)  is  connected  with  an  electrometer 
by  the  wire  T.  The  disc  and  wire  are  completely  surrounded  by 
insulating  matter  ^^.  The  whole  is  surrounded  by  a  metal  envelope 
EEEE  connected  with  earth.  On  the  lower  side  of  the  disc,  the 
insulator  and  the  metallic  covering  are  ,very  thin.  This  side  is 
exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  radium  R  placed  in  a  depression  in 
a  lead  plate  A  A. 


Fig.  24. 

The  rays  of  the  radium  pass  through  the  metal  cover  and 
insulator  with  little  absorption,  but  they  are  completely  absorbed 
by  the  disc  MM.  It  was  observed  that  the  disc  received  a  negative 
charge  which  increased  uniformly  with  the  time,  showing  that  the 
rays  carry  with  them  a  negative  charge.  The  current  observed 
was  very  small.  With  an  active  preparation  of  radium2,  forming  a 

1  C.  R.  130,  p.  647,  1900. 

2  The  activity  of  the  radium  preparation  was  not  stated  in  the  paper. 


104  NATURE  OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CH. 

layer  2*5  sq.  cms.  in  area  and  2  mms.  thick,  a  current  of  the  order 
of  10~n  amperes  was  observed  after  the  rays  had  traversed  a  layer 
of  aluminium  "01  mm.  thick  and  a  layer  of  ebonite  '3  mm.  thick. 
The  current  was  the  same  with  discs  of  lead,  copper,  and  zinc,  and 
also  when  the  ebonite  was  replaced  by  paraffin. 

Curie  also  observed  in  another  experiment  of  a  similar  character 
that  the  radium  itself  acquired  a  positive  charge.  This  necessarily 
follows  if  the  rays  carry  with  them  a  negative  charge.  If  the 
ft  rays  alone  carried  with  them  a  charge,  a  pellet  of  radium,  if* 
perfectly  insulated,  and  surrounded  by  a  non-conducting  medium, 
would  in  the  course  of  time  be  raised  to  a  high  positive  potential. 
Since,  however,  the  a  rays  carry  with  them  a  charge  opposite  in 
sign  to  the  ft  rays,  the  ratio  of  the  charge  carried  off  by  the  two 
types  of  rays  must  be  determined,  before  it  can  be  settled  whether 
the  radium  would  acquire  a  positive  or  a  negative  charge.  If, 
however,  the  radium  is  placed  in  an  insulated  metal  vessel  of  a 
thickness  sufficient  to  absorb  all  the  a  rays,  but  not  too  thick  to 
allow  most  of  the  ft  rays  to  escape,  the  vessel  will  acquire  a 
positive  charge  in  a  vacuum. 

An  interesting  experimental  result  bearing  upon  this  point 
has  been  described  by  Dorn1.  A  small  quantity  of  radium  was 
placed  in  a  sealed  glass  tube  and  left  for  several  months.  On 
opening  the  tube  with  a  file,  a  bright  electric  spark  was  observed 
at  the  moment  of  fracture,  showing  that  there  was  a  large  differ- 
ence of  potential  between  the  inside  of  the  tube  and  the  earth. 

In  this  case  the  a  rays  were  absorbed  in  the  walls  of  the  tube, 
but  a  large  proportion  of  the  ft  rays  escaped.  The  inside  of  the 
tube  thus  became  charged,  in  the  course  of  time,  to  a  high  positive 
potential ;  a  steady  state  would  be  reached  when  the  rate  of  escape 
of  negative  electricity  was  balanced  by  the  leakage  of  positive  elec- 
tricity through  the  walls  of  the  tube.  The  external  surface  of  the 
glass  would  be  always  practically  at  zero  potential,  on  account  of 
the  ionization  of  the  air  around  it. 

Strutt2  has  recently  described  a  simple  experiment  to  illus- 
trate still  more  clearly  that  a  radium  preparation  acquires  a 
positive  charge,  if  it  is  enclosed  in  an  envelope  thick  enough  to 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  18,  p.  507,  1903. 

2  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1903. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  105 

absorb  all  the  a  particles,  but  thin  enough  to  allow  most  of  the 
ft  particles  to  escape.  A  sealed  tube,  containing  the  radium,  was 
attached  at  one  end  to  a  pair  of  thin  gold  leaves  in  metallic 
connection  with  the  radium,  and  was  insulated  inside  a  larger 
tube  by  means  of  a  quartz  rod.  The  air  in  the  outer  tube  was 
exhausted  as  completely  as  possible  by  means  of  a  mercury  pump, 
in  order  to  reduce  as  much  as  possible  the  ionization  in  the  gas, 
and  consequently  the  loss  of  any  charge  gained  by  the  gold  leaves. 
After  an  interval  of  20  hours,  the  gold  leaves  were  observed  to 
diverge  to  their  full  extent,  indicating  that  they  had  acquired 
a  large  positive  charge.  In  this  experiment  Strutt  used  £  gram 
of  radiferous  barium  of  activity  only  100  times  that  of  uranium. 
It  can  readily  be  calculated  that  10  milligrams  of  pure  radium 
bromide  would  have  caused  an  equal  divergence  of  the  leaves 
in  a  few  minutes. 

A  determination  of  the  amount  of  the  charge  carried  off  by  the 
rays  of  radium  has  been  made  recently  by  Wien1.  A  small  quantity 
of  radium,  placed  in  a  sealed  platinum  vessel,  was  hung  by  an 
insulating  thread  inside  a  glass  cylinder  which  was  exhausted  to 
a  low  pressure.  A  connection  between  the  platinum  vessel  and  an 
electrode  sealed  on  the  external  glass  cylinder  could  be  made,  when 
required,  by  tilting  the  tube.  Wien  found  that  in  a  good  vacuum 
the  platinum  vessel  became  charged  to  about  100  volts.  The  rate 
of  escape  of  negative  electricity  from  the  platinum  vessel  containing 
4  milligrams  of  radium  bromide  corresponded  to  2'91  x  10~12  am- 
peres. If  the  charge  on  each  particle  is  taken  as  1*1  x  10"20  electro- 
magnetic units,  this  corresponds  to  an  escape  of  2*66  x  107  particles 
per  second.  From  1  gram  of  radium  bromide  the  corresponding 
number  would  be  6'6  x  109  per  second.  Since  some  of  the  ft  rays 
are  absorbed  in  their  passage  through  the  walls  of  the  containing 
vessel,  the  actual  number  projected  per  second  from  1  gram  of 
radium  bromide  must  be  greater  than  the  above  value. 

75.  Determination  of  e/m.  J.  J.  Thomson  has  shown  that 
in  their  passage  between  the  plates  of  a  condenser  the  cathode 
rays  are  deflected  towards  the  positive  plate.  Shortly  after  the 
discovery  of  the  magnetic  deviation  of  the  ft  rays  from  radium, 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  23,  p.  624,  1903. 


106  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

Dorn1  and  Becquerel2  showed  that  they  also  were  deflected  by  an 
electrostatic  field. 

By  observing  the  amount  of  the  electrostatic  and  magnetic 
deviation,  Becquerel  was  able  to  determine  the  ratio  of  e/m  and 
the  velocity  of  the  projected  particles.  Two  rectangular  copper 
plates,  3'45  cms.  high  and  1  cm.  apart,  were  placed  in  a  vertical 
plane  and  insulated  on  paraffin  blocks.  One  plate  was  charged  to 
a  high  potential  by  means  of  an  influence  machine,  and  the  other 
was  connected  to  earth.  The  active  matter  was  placed  in  a  narrow 
groove  cut  in  a  lead  plate  parallel  to  the  copper  plates  and  placed 
midway  between  them.  The  photographic  plate,  enveloped  in 
black  paper,  was  placed  horizontally  above  the  plate  containing 
the  active  substance.  The  large  and  diffuse  pencil  of  rays  thus 
obtained  was  deflected  by  the  electric  field,  but  the  deviation 
amounted  to  only  a  few  millimetres  and  was  difficult  to  measure. 
The  method  finally  adopted  was  to  place  vertically  above  the 
active  matter  a  thin  screen  of  mica,  which  cut  the  field  into  two 
equal  parts.  Thus,  in  the  absence  of  an  electric  field,  a  narrow 
rectangular  shadow  was  produced  on  the  plate. 

When  the  electric  field  was  applied,  the  rays  were  deflected  and 
a  part  of  the  pencil  of  rays  was  stopped  by  the  mica  screen.  A 

shadow  was  thus  cast  on  the  plate  which  showed  the  direction  of 

I 
deviation^  and  corresponded  to  the  least  deviable  rays  which  gave 

an  impression  through  the  black  paper. 

If  a  particle  of  mass  ra,  charge  e,  and  velocity  v,  is  projected 
normally  to  an  electric  field  of  strength  X,  the  acceleration  a  is  in 
the  direction  of  the  field,  and  is  given  by 

Xe 

a  —  — . 
ra 

Since  the  particle  moves  with  a  constant  acceleration  parallel  to 
the  field,  the  path  of  the  particle  is  the  same  as  that  of  a  body 
projected  horizontally  from  a  height  with  a  constant  velocity  and 
acted  on  by  gravity.  The  path  of  the  particle  is  thus  a  parabola, 
whose  axis  is  parallel  to  the  field  and  whose  apex  is  at  the  point 
where  the  particle  enters  the  electric  field.  The  linear  deviation 

1  C.  R.  130,  p.  1129,  1900.  2  C.  R.  130,  p.  809,  1900. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  107 

dt  of  the  ray  parallel  to  the  field  after  traversing  a  distance  I  is 
given  by 


On  leaving  the  electric  field,  the  particle  travels  in  the  direction  of 
the  tangent  to  the  path  at  that  point.  If  6  is  the  angular  deviation 
of  the  path  at  that  point 


a 
tan0=  --. 

mv2 

The  photographic  plate  was  a  distance  h  above  the  extremity  of 
the  field.  Thus  the  particles  struck  the  plate  at  a  distance  d.2  from 
the  original  path  given  by 

d2  =  h  tan  6  +  dl 


In  the  experimental  arrangement  the  values  were 
c/2  =  -4  cms.  ; 
Z  =  T02  x  1012; 
I  =  3-45  cms.  ; 
h  =  1*2  cms. 

If  the  radius  R  of  curvature  of  the  path  of  the  same  rays  is  ob- 
served in  a  magnetic  field  of  strength  H  perpendicular  to  the  rays, 

e_       V_ 
m     HR' 

Combining  these  two  equations  we  get 


H.R.da     ' 

A  difficulty  arose  in  identifying  the  radiations  for  which  the 
electric  and  magnetic  deviations  were  determined.  Becquerel 
estimated  that  the  value  of  HR  for  the  rays  deflected  by  the 
electric  field  was  about  1600  c.G.s.  units.  Thus 

v  =  1*6  x  1010  cms.  per  second, 

and  —  =  107. 

m 


108  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

Thus  these  rays  had  a  velocity  more  than  half  the  velocity  of  light, 
and  an  apparent  mass  about  the  same  as  the  cathode  ray  particles, 
i.e.  about  1/1000  of  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen  atom./  The  /3  ray  is 
therefore  analogous  in  all  respects  to  the  cathode  ray,  except  that 
it  differs  in  velocity/  In  a  vacuum  tube  the  cathode  rays  generally 
have  a  velocity  of  about  2  x  109  cms.  per  sec.  In  special  tubes 
with  strong  fields  the  velocity  may  be  increased  to  about  1010  cms. 
per  sec.  These  charged  particles  behave  like  isolated  units  of 
negative  electricity.  The  conception  of  such  disembodied  charges, 
known  as  electrons,  has  been  examined  mathematically  among 
others  by  Larmor,  who  sees  in  this  conception  the  ultimate  basis 
of  a  theory  of  matter.  The  /3  rays  from  radium  may  also  be 
considered  as  electrons,  but  when  obtained  from  this  source  have 
velocities  varying  from  about  1/3  V  to  at  least  *96F,  where  Fis  the 
velocity  of  light,  and  thus  have  an  average  velocity  considerably 
greater  than  that  of  the  electrons  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube. 
These  moving  electrons  are,  it  seems,  able  to  pass  through  much 
greater  thicknesses  of  matter  before  they  are  absorbed  than  the 
slower  electrons  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube,  but  the  difference 
is  one  merely  of  degree  and  not  of  kind.  Electrons  are  thus  con- 
tinuously and  spontaneously  expelled  from  radium  with  enormous 
velocities.  It  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion,  that  this  velocity 
has  not  been  suddenly  impressed  on  the  electron.  Such  a  sudden 
gain  of  velocity  would  mean  an  immense  and  sudden  concentration 
of  energy  on  a  small  particle,  and  it  is  more  probable  that  the 
electron  has  been  in  rapid  orbital  or  oscillatory  motion  in  the  atom, 
and,  by  some  means  or  other,  suddenly  escapes  from  its  orbit. 
According  to  this  view,  the  energy  of  the  electron  is  not  suddenly 
created,  but  is  only  made  obvious  by  its  escape  from  the  system  to 
which  it  belongs. 

76.    Variation  of  —  with  the  velocity  of  the  electron. 

ra 

The  fact  that  radium  throws  off  electrons  with  rates  of  speed 
varying  from  1/3  to  9/10  the  velocity  of  light  has  been  utilised  by 
Kaufmann1  to  examine  whether  the  ratio  e/m  of  the  electrons 
varies  with  the  speed.  It  has  been  shown  by  J.  J.  Thomson2, 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  1  b,  p.  54,  1902.  2  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1881. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  109 

Heaviside1,  and  Searle2  that,  according  to  the  electromagnetic 
theory,  a  charge  of  electricity  in  motion  behaves  as  if  it  had 
apparent  mass.  For  small  speeds  this  additional  electrical  mass 

202 

is  equal  to  ^—  where  a  is  the  radius  of  the  body,  but  it  increases 

rapidly  as  the  speed  of  light  is  approached.  It  is  very  im- 
portant to  settle  whether  the  mass  of  the  electron  is  due  partly 
to  mechanical  and  partly  to  electrical  mass,  or  whether  it  can  be 
explained  by  virtue  of  electricity  in  motion  independent  of  the 
usual  conception  of  mass. 

Slightly  different  formulae  expressing  the  variation  of  mass 
with  speed  have  been  developed  by  J.  J.  Thomson,  Heaviside, 
and  Searle.  To  interpret  his  results  Kauftnann  used  a  formula 
developed  by  M.  Abraham3. 

Let  m0  =  mass  of  electron  for  slow  speeds ; 

ra  =  apparent  mass  of  electron  at  any  speed ; 
u  =  velocity  of  electron ; 
V  =  velocity  of  light. 

Let  /8=£. 

Then  it  can  be  shown  that 

Mi 

- 8/4*  08) (1), 


i  ri + B-     i  +  & 

where  >/r  (ff)  =  —       - -^-  log  1 — g  —  1     (2). 

The  experimental  method  employed  to  determine  e/m  and  u  is 
similar  to  the  method  of  crossed  spectra.  Some  strongly  active 
radium  was  placed  at  the  bottom  of  a  brass  box.  The  rays  from 
this  passed  between  two  brass  plates  insulated  and  about  1*2  mm. 
apart.  These  rays  fell  on  a  platinum  diaphragm,  in  which  was 
a  small  tube  about  0'2  mm.  in  diameter,  which  allowed  a  narrow 
bundle  of  rays  to  pass.  The  rays  fell  on  a  photographic  plate 
enveloped  in  a  thin  layer  of  aluminium. 

In  the  experiments  the  diaphragm  was  about  2  cms.  from  the 
active  material  and  the  same  distance  from  the  photographic  plate. 

1  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  2,  p.  514.  2  Phil.  Mag.  October,  1897. 

3  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  1  b,  p.  57,  1902. 


110 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


When  the  whole  apparatus  was  placed  in  a  vacuum,  a  P.D.  of 
from  2000  to  5000  volts  could  be  applied  between  the  plates 
without  a  spark.  The  rays  were  deflected  in  their  passage  through 
the  electric  field  and  produced  what  may  be  termed  an  electric 
spectrum  on  the  plate. 

If  a  magnetic  field  is  superimposed  parallel  to  the  electric  field 
by  means  of  an  electromagnet,  a  magnetic  spectrum  is  obtained 
perpendicular  to  the  electric  spectrum.  The  combination  of  tha 
two  spectra  gives  rise  to  a  jcurved  line  on  the  plate.  Disregarding 
some  small  corrections,  it  can  readily  be  shown  that  if  y  and  z  are 
the  electric  and  magnetic  deviations  respectively, 


and 


e 

in 


•(3), 
.(4). 


From   these   two   equations,  combined  with  (1)  and  (2),  we 
obtain 

...(5), 


where  K,  /cI}  /c.2  are  constants. 

Equation  (5)  gives  the  curve  that  should  be  obtained  on  the 
plate  according  to  the  electromagnetic  theory.  This  is  compared 
by  trial  with  the  actual  curve  obtained  on  the  plate. 

In  this  way  Kaufmann1  found  that  the  value  of  e/m  decreased 
with  the  speed,  showing  that,  assuming  the  charge  constant,  the 
mass  of  the  electron  increased  with  the  speed. 

The  following  numbers  give  some  of  the  preliminary  results 
obtained  by  this  method. 


Velocity  of  electron 

± 

m 

2-36  x  1010  cms.  per  sec. 
2-48         „ 
2-59 
2-72          „ 
2-85          „ 

1-SlxlO7 
1-17  xlO7 
0-97  x  107 
0-77  x  107 
0-63  x  107 

1  Nachrichten  d.  Ges.  d.  Wiss.  zu  Gott.,  Nov.  8,  1901. 


IV] 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


111 


For  the  cathode  rays  S.  Simon1  obtained  a  value  of  e/m  of 
T86  x  107  for  an  average  speed  of  about  7  x  109cms.  per  second. 

In  a  later  paper2  with  some  very  active  radium,  more  satis- 
factory photographs  were  obtained  which  allowed  of  accurate 
measurement.  The  given  equation  of  the  curve  was  found  to 
agree  satisfactorily  with  experiment. 

The  following  table,  deduced  from  the  results  given  by 
Kaufmann,  shows  the  agreement  between  the  theoretical  and 
experimental  values,  u  being  the  velocity  of  the  electron  and  V 
that  of  light. 


Value  of 
u 
V 

Observed  value  of 

ni 
m0 

Percentage  difference 
from  theoretical 
values 

Small 

1 

:732 

1-34 

-1-5% 

•752 

1-37 

-0-9,, 

'111 

1-42 

-0-6,, 

•801 

1-47 

+0-5  „ 

•830 

1-545 

'    +0-5,, 

•860 

1-65 

0     „ 

•883 

1-73 

+2-8  „ 

•933 

2-05 

-7-8,,? 

•949 

2-145 

-1-2,, 

•963 

2-42 

+  0-4  „ 

The  average  percentage  error  between  the  observed  and  calcu- 
lated value  is  thus  not  much  more  than  one  per  cent.  It  is 
remarkable  how  nearly  the  velocity  of  the  electron  has  to  approach 

the  velocity  of  light  before  the  value  of  -  -  becomes  large.     This 

WQ 

is  shown  in  the  following  table  which  gives  the  calculated  values 

?72/ 

of  -  -  for  different  velocities  of  the  electron. 
ra0 


Value  of     ^.    small        *1 


•9         -99       '999       -9999         -999999 


Calculated  m 
•  value      m 


1-00     1-015     1-12     1-81     3-28       4-96       6'68 


10-1 


Thus  for  velocities  varying  from  0  .to  1/10  the  velocity  of  light, 

1  Wied.  AnnaL  p.  589,  1899. 

2  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  1  b,  p.  54,  1902. 


112  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

the  mass  of  the  electron  is  practically  constant.  The  increase  of 
mass  becomes  appreciable  at  about  half  the  velocity  of  light,  and 
increases  steadily  as  the  velocity  of  light  is  approached.  Theo- 
retically the  mass  becomes  infinite  at  the  velocity  of  light,  but 
even  when  the  velocity  of  the  electron  only  differs  from  that  of 
light  by  one  part  in  a  million,  its  mass  is  only  10  times  the  value 
for  slow  speeds. 

The  above  results  are  therefore  in  agreement  with  the  view 
that  the  mass  of  the  electron  is  altogether  electrical  in  origin  and 
can  be  explained  purely  by  electricity  in  motion.  The  value  of 
e/m0,  for  slow  speeds,  deduced  from  the  results  was  T84  x  107, 
which  is  in  very  close  agreement  with  the  value  obtained  by 
Simon  for  the  cathode  rays,  viz.  1'86  x  107. 

If  the  electricity  carried  by  the  electron  is  supposed  to  be 
distributed  uniformly  over  a  sphere  of  radius  a,  for  speeds  slow 

2  e2 
compared  with  the  velocity  of  light,  the  apparent  mass  ra0  =  ^  - . 

o  €L 

2  e 

Therefore  a  =  ~  —  .  e. 

3m0 

Taking  the  value  of  e  as  1'13  x  10~20,  a  is  I' 4s  x  10~13  cms. 
Thus  the  diameter  of  an  electron  is  minute  compared  with  the 
diameter  of  an  atom. 

77.  Absorption  of  the  $  rays  by  matter.  The  absorption 
of  the  /3  rays  by  matter  can  readily  be  investigated  by  noting  the 
variation  of  the  ionization  current  in  a  testing  vessel  when  the 
active  matter  is  covered  by  screens  differing  in  material  and  thick- 
ness. When  the  active  matter  is  covered  with  aluminium  foil  of 
thickness  '1  mm.,  the  current  in  a  testing  vessel  such  as  is  shown 
in  Fig.  16,  is  due  almost  entirely  to  the  @  rays.  If  a  uranium 
compound  is  used,  it  is  found  that  the  saturation  current  decreases 
with  the  thickness  of  matter  traversed  very  nearly  according  to  an 
exponential  law.  Taking  the  saturation  current  as  a  measure  of 
the  intensity  of  the  rays,  the  intensity  /  after  passing  through  a 
thickness  d  of  matter  is  given  by 

/ 

TQ~  e      ' 

where  X  is  the  constant  of  absorption  of  the  rays  in  unit  thickness 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  113 

of  matter,  and  /0  is  the  initial  intensity.  For  uranium  rays  the 
current  is  reduced  to  half  its  value  after  passing  through  about 
-5  mm.  of  aluminium. 

If  a  compound  of  thorium  or  radium  is  examined  in  the  same 
way,  it  is  found  that  the  current  does  not  decrease  regularly 
according  to  the  above  equation.  Results  of  this  kind  for  radium 
rays  have  been  given  by  Meyer  and  Schweidler1.  The  amount  of 
absorption  of  the  rays  by  a  certain  thickness  of  matter  decreases 
with  the  thickness  traversed.  This  is  exactly  opposite  to  what  is 
observed  for  the  a  rays.  This  variation  in  the  absorption  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  the  y9  rays  are  made  up  of  rays  which  vary  greatly  in 
penetrating  power.  The  rays  from  uranium  are  fairly  homogeneous 
in  character,  i.e.  they  consist  of  rays  projected  with  about  the  same 
velocity.  The  rays  from  radium  and  thorium  are  complex,  i.e.  they 
consist  of  rays  projected  with  a  wide  range  of  velocity  and  con- 
sequently with  a  wide  range  of  penetrating  power.  The  electrical 
examination  of  the  deviable  rays  thus  leads  to  the  same  results  as. 
their  examination  by  the  photographic  method. 

Results  on  the  absorption  of  cathode  rays  have  been  given  by 
Lenard2,  who  has  shown  that  the  absorption  of  cathode  rays  is- 
nearly  proportional  to  the  density  of  the  absorbing  matter,  and  is 
independent  of  its  chemical  state.  If  the  deviable  rays  from  active 
bodies  are  similar  to  cathode  rays,  a  similar  law  of  absorption  is  to- 
be  expected.  Strutt3,  working  with  radium  rays,  has  determined 
the  law  of  absorption  and  has  found  it  roughly  proportional  to  the 
density  of  matter  over  a  range  of  densities  varying  from  0'041  for 
sulphur  dioxide  to  21 '5  for  platinum.  In  the  case  of  mica  and 
cardboard,  the  values  of  X  divided  by  the  density  were  3*94  and 
3'84  respectively,  while  the  value  for  platinum  was  7 '34.  In  order 
to  deduce  the  absorption  coefficient,  he  assumed  that  the  radiation 
fell  off  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  distance  traversed. 
As  the  rays  from  radium  are  complex,  we  have  seen  that  this  is 
only  approximately  the  case. 

78.  Since  the  ft  rays  from  uranium  are  fairly  homogeneous, 
and  are  at  the  same  time  penetrating  in  character,  they  are  more 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  pp.  90,  113,  209,  1900. 

2  Wied.  Annal.  56,  p.  275,  1895. 

3  Nature,  p.  539,  1900. 

R.  R.-A.  8 


114 


NATURE   OF  THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


suitable  for  such  a  determination  than  the  complex  rays  of  radium. 
I  have  in  consequence  made  some  experiments  with  uranium  rays 
to  determine  the  dependence  of  absorption  on  the  density.  The 
results  obtained  are  given  in  the  following  table :  where  X,  is  the 
^coefficient  of  absorption. 


Substance 

X 

Density 

X 
Density 

Glass    ... 

14-0 

2-45 

5-7 

Mica    ... 

14-2 

2-78 

5-1 

Ebonite 

6-5 

1-14 

5-7 

Wood  ... 

2-16 

•40 

5-4 

Cardboard 

37 

•70 

5-3 

Iron     ... 

44 

7'8 

5-6 

Aluminium 

14-0 

2-60 

5-4 

Copper 

60 

8-6 

7-0 

Silver  ... 

75 

10-5 

7-1 

Lead    ... 

122 

11-5 

10-8 

Tin      ... 

96 

7-3 

13-2 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  value  of  the  absorption  constant 
divided  by  the  density  is  very  nearly  the  same  for  such  different 
substances  as  glass,  mica,  ebonite,  wood,  iron  and  aluminium.  The 
divergences  from  the  law  are  great,  however,  for  the  other  metals 
examined,  viz.  copper,  silver,  lead  and  tin.  In  tin  the  value  of  X 
divided  by  the  density  is  2*5  times  its  value  for  iron  and  aluminium. 
These  differences  show  that  a  law  for  the  absorption  of  the  (3  rays 
depending  only  on  the  density  does  not  hold  for  all  substances. 
With  an  exception  in  the  case  of  tin,  the  value  of  X  divided  by  the 
density  for  the  metals  increases  in  the  same  order  as  their  atomic 
weights. 

The  absorption  of  the  /3  rays  by  matter  decreases  very  rapidly 
with  increase  of  speed.  For  example,  the  absorption  of  cathode 
rays  in  Lenard's  experiment  (loc.  cit.)  is  about  500  times  as  great 
as  for  the  uranium  ft  rays.  The  velocity  of  the  ft  rays  of  uranium 
was  found  by  Becquerel  to  be  about  1*6  x  1010  cms.  per  sec.  The 
velocity  of  the  cathode  rays  used  in  Lenard's  experiment  was 
certainly  not  less  than  1/10  of  this,  so  that,  for  a  decrease  of 
speed  of  less  than  10  times,  the  absorption  has  increased  over 
500  times. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  115 

79.  Variation  of  the  amount  of  radiation  with  the 
thickness  of  the  layer  of  radiating  material.  The  radiations 
are  sent  out  equally  from  all  portions  of  the  active  mass,  but  the 
ionization  of  the  gas  which  is  measured  is  due  only  to  the  radiations 
which  escape  into  the  air.  The  depth  from  which  the  radiations 
can  reach  the  surface  depends  on  the  absorption  of  the  radiation 
by  the  active  matter  itself. 

Let  X  be  the  absorption  constant  of  the  homogeneous  radiation 
by  the  active  material.  It  can  readily  be  shown  that  the  intensity 
/  of  the  rays  issuing  from  a  layer  of  active  matter,  of  thickness  x, 
is  given  by 


where  70  is  the  intensity  at  the  surface  due  to  a  very  thick  layer. 

This  equation  has  been  confirmed  experimentally  by  observing 
the  current  due  to  the  ft  rays  for  different  thicknesses  of  uranium 
oxide.  In  this  case  /  =  £  /0  for  a  thickness  of  oxide  corresponding 
to  11  gr.  per  sq.  cm.  This  gives  a  value  of  \  divided  by  density  of 
6  '3.  This  is  a  value  slightly  greater  than  that  observed  for  the 
absorption  of  the  same  rays  in  aluminium.  Such  a  result  shows 
clearly  that  the  substance  which  gives  rise  to  the  ft  rays  does  not 
absorb  them  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  does  ordinary  matter 
of  the  same  density. 

The  value  of  \  will  vary,  not  only  for  the  different  active 
substances,  but  also  for  the  different  compounds  of  the  same 
substance. 


PART   III. 

THE  a  RAYS. 

80.  The  a  rays.  The  magnetic  deviation  of  the  ft  rays  was 
discovered  towards  the  end  of  1899,  at  a  comparatively  early  stage 
in  the  history  of  radio-activity,  but  it  was  not  until  three  years  later 
that  the  true  character  of  the  a  rays  was  disclosed.  It  was  natural 
that  great  prominence  should  have  been  given  in  the  early  stages 
of  the  subject  to  the  ft  rays,  on  account  of  their  great  penetrating 

8—2 


116  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

power  and  marked  action  in  causing  phosphorescence  in  many 
substances.  The  a  rays  were,  in  comparison,  very  little  studied, 
and  their  importance  was  not  generally  recognized.  It  will,  how- 
ever, be  shown  that  the  a  rays  play  a  far  more  important  part 
in  radio-active  processes  than  the  ft  rays,  and  that  the  greater 
portion  of  the  energy  emitted  in  the  form  of  ionizing  radiations 
is  due  to  them. 

81.  The  nature  of  the  a  rays.  The  nature  of  the  a  rays 
was  difficult  to  determine,  for  a  magnetic  field  sufficient  to  cause 
considerable  deviation  of  the  ft  rays  produced  no  appreciable  effect 
on  the  a  rays.  It  was  suggested  by  several  observers  that  they 
were,  in  reality,  secondary  rays  set  up  by  the  (3  or  cathode  rays  in 
the  active  matter  from  which  they  were  produced.  Such  a  view, 
however,  failed  to  explain  the  radio-activity  of  polonium,  which 
gave  out  a  rays  only.  Later  work  also  showed  that  the  matter, 
which  gave  rise  to  the  ft  rays  from  uranium,  could  be  chemically 
separated  from  the  uranium,  while  the  intensity  of  the  a  rays  was 
unaffected.  These  and  other  results  show  that  the  a  and  ft  rays 
are  produced  quite  independently  of  one  another.  The  view  that 
they  are  an  easily  absorbed  type  of  Rontgen  rays  fails  to  explain 
a  characteristic  property  of  the  a  rays,  viz.  that  the  absorption  of 
the  rays  in  a  given  thickness  of  matter,  determined  by  the  elec- 
trical method,  increases  with  the  thickness  of  matter  previously 
traversed.  It  does  not  seem  probable,  that  such  an  effect  could 
be  produced  by  a  radiation  like  X  rays,  but  the  result  is  to  be 
expected  if  the  rays  consist  of  projected  bodies,  which  fail  to 
ionize  the  gas  when  their  velocity  is  reduced  to  below  a  certain 
value.  From  observations  of  the  relative  ionization  produced  in 
gases  by  the  a  and  ft  rays,  Strutt1  suggested  in  1901  that  the  « 
rays  might  consist  of  positively  charged  bodies  projected  with 
great  velocity.  Sir  William  Crookes2,  in  1902,  advanced  the  same 
hypothesis.  From  a  study  of  the  a  rays  of  polonium  Mme  Curie3 
in  1900  suggested  the  probability  that  these  rays  consisted  of 
bodies,  projected  with  great  velocity,  which  lost  their  energy  by 
passing  through  matter. 

1  Phil.  Trans,  p.  507,  1901. 

2  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  1902.     Ghent.  News,  85,  p.  109,  1902. 

3  C.  E.  130,  p.  76,  1900. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  117 

The  writer  was  led  independently  to  the  same  view  by  a  mass 
of  indirect  evidence  which  received  an  explanation  only  on  the 
hypo  thesis  that  the  rays  consisted  of  matter  projected  with  great 
velocity.  Preliminary  experiments  with  radium  of  activity  1000 
showed  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  determine  the  magnetic  devia- 
tion of  the  a  rays.  When  the  rays  were  passed  through  slits 
sufficiently  narrow  to  enable  a  minute  deviation  of  the  rays  to  be 
detected,  the  ionizing  effect  of  the  issuing  rays  was  too  small  to 
measure  with  certainty.  It  was  not  until  radium  of  activity  19,000 
was  obtained  that  it  was  possible  to  detect  the  deviation  of  these 
rays  in  an  intense  magnetic  field.  How  small  the  magnetic  devia- 
tion is  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  the  a  rays,  projected  at 
right  angles  to  a  magnetic  field  of  10,000  C.G.S.  units,  describe  the 
arc  of  a  circle  of  about  39  cms.  radius,  while  under  the  same  con- 
ditions the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube  would  describe 
a  circle  of  about  '01  cm.  radius.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising 
that  the  a  rays  were  for  some  time  thought  to  be  non-deviable  in 
a  magnetic  field. 

82.  Magnetic  deviation  of  the  a  rays.  The  general 
method  employed1  to  detect  the  magnetic  deviation  of  the  a  rays 
was  to  allow  the  rays  to  pass  through  narrow  slits  and  to  observe 
whether  the  rate  of  discharge  of  an  electroscope,  due  to  the  issuing 
rays,  was  altered  by  the  application  of  a  strong  magnetic  field. 
Fig.  25  shows  the  general  arrangement  of  the  experiment.  The 
rays  from  a  thin  layer  of  radium  of  activity  19,000  passed  upwards 
through  a  number  of  narrow  slits  G,  in  parallel,  and  then  through 
a  thin  layer  of  aluminium  foil,  '00034  cm.  thick,  into  the  testing 
vessel  V.  The  ionization  produced  by  the  rays  in  the  testing 
vessel  was  measured  by  the  rate  of  movement  of  the  leaves  of  a 
gold-leaf  electroscope  B.  The  gold-leaf  system  was  insulated  inside 
the  vessel  by  a  sulphur  bead  C,  and  could  be  charged  by  means  of 
a  movable  wire  I),  which  was  afterwards  earthed.  The  rate  of 
movement  of  the  gold-leaf  was  observed  through  small  mica 
windows  in  the  testing  vessel  by  means  of  a  microscope  provided 
with  a  micrometer  eye-piece. 

In  order  to  increase  the  ionization  in  the  testing  vessel,  the 

1  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1903.     Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  235,  1902. 


118 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


rays  passed  through  20  to  25  slits  of  equal  width,  placed  side  by 
side.  This  was  arranged  by  cutting  grooves  at  regular  intervals  in 
side-plates  into  which  brass  plates  were  slipped.  The  width  of  the 
slit  varied  in  different  experiments  between  '042  cm.  and  '1  cm. 


mfTttflow  of  Hydrogen 


Earth 


Outflow  of  Hydrogen 
Fig.  25. 

The  magnetic  field  was  applied  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
paper,  and  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  slits.  The  rays  are  thus 
deflected  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  slits  and 
a  very  srnall  amount  of  deviation  is  sufficient  to  cause  the  rays  to 
impinge  on  the  sides  of  the  plate  where  they  are  absorbed. 

The  testing  vessel  and  system  of  plates  were  waxed  to  a  lead 
plate  P  so  that  the  rays  entered  the  vessel  V  only  through  the 
aluminium  foil.  It  is  necessary  in  these  experiments  to  have  a 
steady  stream  of  gas  passing  downwards  between  the  plates  in 
order  to  prevent  the  diffusion  of  the  emanation  from  the  radium 
upwards  into  the  testing  vessel.  The  presence  in  the  testing 
vessel  of  a  small  amount  of  this  emanation,  which  is  always  given 
out  by  radium,  would  produce  great  ionization  and  completely 
mask  the  effect  to  be  observed.  For  this  purpose,  a  steady 
current  of  dry  electrolytic  hydrogen  of  about  2  c.c.  per  second  was 
passed  into  the  testing  vessel,  streamed  through  the  porous  alu- 
minium foil,  and  passed  between  the  plates  carrying  the  emanation 
with  it  away  from  the  apparatus.  The  use  of  a  stream  of  hydrogen 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  119 

instead  of  air  greatly  simplifies  the  experiment,  for  it  increases  the 
ionization  current  due  to  the  a  rays  in  the  testing  vessel,  and  at 
the  same  time  greatly  diminishes  that  due  to  the  ft  and  7  rays. 
This  is  caused  by  the  fa^t^hatjLhe_gLrays.  are  much  more  readily 
absorbed  in  air  than  in  hydrogen,  while  the  rate  of  production  of 
ions  due  to  the  ft  and  7  rays  is  much  less  in  hydrogen  than  in  air. 
The  intensity  of  the  a  rays  after  passing  between  the  plates  is 
consequently  greater  when  hydrogen  is  used;  and  since  the  rays 
pass  through  a  sufficient  distance  of  hydrogen  in  the  testing  vessel 
to  be  largely  absorbed,  the  total  amount  of  ionization  produced  by 
them  is  greater  with  hydrogen  than  with  air. 

The  following  is  an  example  of  an  observation  on  the  magnetic 
deviation : — 

Pole-pieces  T90  x  2'50cms. 

Strength  of  field  between  pole-pieces  8370  units. 

Apparatus  of  25  parallel  plates  of  length  370  cms.,  width 

*70  cm.,  with   an   average   air-space   between   plates   of 

•042  cm. 
Distance  of  radium  below  plates  1'4  cm. 

Rate  of  discharge 
of  electroscope  in 
volts  per  minute 
'(1)     Without  magnetic  field 8-33 

(2)  With  magnetic  field         172 

(3)  Radium  covered  with  thin   layer  of  mica  to 

absorb  all  a  rays      0'93 

(4)  Radium  covered  with  mica  and  magnetic  field 

applied  0'92 

The  mica  plate,  '01  cm.  thick,  was  of  sufficient  thickness  to 
completely  absorb  all  the  a  rays,  but  allowed  the  ft  rays  and  7  rays 
to  pass  through  without  appreciable  absorption.  The  difference 
between  (1)  and  (3),  7*40  volts  per  minute,  gives  the  rate  of  dis- 
charge due  to  the  a  rays  alone ;  the  difference  between  (2)  and  (3), 
0'79  volts  per  minute,  that  due  to  the  a  rays  not  deviated  by  the 
magnetic  field  employed. 

The  amount  of  a  rays  not  deviated  by  the  field  is  thus  about 
11%  of  the  total.  The  small  difference  between  (3)  and  (4) 
measures  the  small  ionization  due  to  the  ft  rays,  for  they  would 


120  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

be  completely  deviated  by  the  magnetic  field.  (4)  comprises  the 
effect  of  the  <y  rays  together  with  the  natural  leak  of  the  electro- 
scope in  hydrogen. 

In  this  experiment  there  was  a  good  deal  of  stray  magnetic 
field  acting  on  the  rays  before  they  reached  the  pole-pieces.  The 
diminution  of  the  rate  of  discharge  due  to  the  a  rays  was  found  to 
be  proportional  to  the  strength  of  field  between  the  pole-pieces. 
With  a  more  powerful  magnetic  field,  the  whole  of  the  a  rays  were 
deviated,  showing  that  they  consisted  entirely  of  projected  charged 
particles. 

In  order  to  determine  the  direction  of  deviation  of  the  rays, 
the  rays  were  passed  through  slits  one  mm.  in  width,  each  of  which 
was  half  covered  with  a  brass  strip.  The  diminution  of  the  rate  of 
discharge  in  the  testing  vessel  for  a  given  magnetic  field  in  such  a 
case  depends  upon  the  direction  of  the  field.  In  this  way  it  was 
found  that  the  rays  were  deviated  in  the  opposite  sense  to  the 
•cathode  rays.  Since  the  latter  consist  of  negatively  charged 
particles,  the  a  rays  must  consist  of  positively  charged  particles. 

These  results  were  soon  after  confirmed  by  Becquerel1,  by  the 
photographic  method,  which  is  very  well  adapted  to  determine  the 
•character  of  the  path  of  the  rays  acted  on  by  a  magnetic  field. 
The  radium  was  placed  in  a  linear  groove  cut  in  a  small  block  of 
lead.  Above  this  source,  at  a  distance  of  about  1  centimetre,  was 
placed  a  metallic  screen,  formed  of  two  plates,  leaving  between  them 
a  narrow  opening  paralled  to  the  groove.-  Above  this  was  placed 
the  photographic  plate.  The  whole  apparatus  was  placed  in  a 
strong  magnetic  field  parallel  to  the  groove.  The  strength  of  the 
magnetic  field  was  sufficient  to  reflect  the  ft  rays  completely  away 
from  the  plate.  When  the  plate  was  parallel  to  the  opening, 
•there  was  produced  on  it  an  impression,  due  to  the  a  rays  alone, 
which  became  more  and  more  diffuse  as  the  distance  from  the 
opening  increased.  This  distance  should  not  exceed  1  or  2  centi- 
metres on  account  of  the  absorption  of  the  rays  in  air.  If,  during 
the  exposure,  the  magnetic  field  is  reversed  for  equal  lengths  of 
time,  on  developing  the  plate  two  images  of  the  a  rays  are 
observed  which  are  deflected  in  opposite  directions.  This  devia- 
tion, even  in  a  strong  field,  is  small  though  quite  appreciable  and 
1  C.  R.  136,  p.  199,  1903. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  121 

is  opposite  in  sense  to  the  deviation  observed  for  the  13  or  cathodic 
rays  from  the  same  material. 

M.  Becquerel1,  by  the  same  method,  found  that  the  a  rays  from 
polonium  were  deviated  in  the  same  direction  as  the  a  rays  from 
radium  ;  and  thus  that  they  also  consist  of  projected  positive  bodies. 
In  both  cases,  the  photographic  impressions  were  sharply  marked 
and  did  not  show  the  same  diffusion  which  always  appears  in 
photographs  of  the  0  rays. 

83.  Electrostatic  deviation  of  the  a  rays.     If  the  rays 
are  charged  bodies,  they  should  be  deflected  in  passing  through  a 
strong  electric  field.     This  was  found  by  the  writer  to  be  the  case, 
but  the  electric  deviation  is  still  more  difficult  to  detect  than  the 
magnetic  deviation,  as  the  intensity  of  the  electric  field  must  of 
necessity  be  less  than  that  required  to  produce  a  spark  in  the 
presence  of  radium.     The  apparatus  was  similar  to  that  employed 
for  the  magnetic  deviation  (Fig.  25)  with  this  exception,  that  the 
brass  sides  which  held  the  plates  in  position,  were  replaced  by 
ebonite.     Alternate  plates  were  connected  together  and  charged 
to  a  high  potential  by  means  of  a  battery  of  small  accumulators. 
The  discharge  in  the  electroscope,  due  to  the  a  rays,  was  found  to 
be  diminished  by  application  of  the  electric  field.     With  plates 
•055  cm.  apart  and  4*5  cms.  high,  the  diminution  was  only  7  °/0 
with  a  P.  D.  of  600  volts  between  the  slits.     With  a  special  arrange- 
ment of  plates,  with  slits  only  '01  cm.  apart,  the  discharge  was 
diminished  about  45  %  with  an  electric  field  corresponding  to 
10,000  volts  per  cm. 

84.  Determination  of  the  constants  of  the  rays.     If  the 

deviation  of  the  rays  in  both  an  electric  and  magnetic  field  is 
known,  the  values  of  the  velocity  of  the  rays,  and  the  ratio  e/m  of 
the  charge  of  the  particle  to  its  mass  can  be  determined  by  the 
method  first  used  by  J.  J.  Thomson  for  the  cathode  rays.  From 
the  equations  of  a  moving  charged  body,  the  radius  p  of  curva- 
ture of  the  path  of  the  rays  in  a  magnetic  field  of  strength  H 
perpendicular  to  the  path  of  the  rays  is  given  by 


1  C.  R.  136,  p.  431,  1903. 


122  NATUEE   OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CH. 

If  the  particle,  after  passing  through  a  uniform  magnetic  field  for 
a  distance  llt  is  deviated  through  a  small  distance  di  from  its 
original  direction, 

2pdl  =  Zj2 

,      /!2  e  H 
1-SmV  ..................  ........  (1)' 

If  the  rays  pass  through  a  uniform  electric  field  of  strength  X  and 
length  12  with  a  deviation  d», 


since  -  -  is  the  acceleration  of  the  particle,  at  right  angles  to  its 

direction,  and  ^  is  the  time  required  to  travel  through  the  electric 
field. 

From  equations  (1)  and  (2) 

L    <ft&3T 

~~d,tfH' 

e      24  V 

and  -  =  -  ~  -==.  . 

m      ff  H 

The  values  of  V  and  e/m  are  thus  completely  determined  from  the 
combined  results  of  the  electric  and  magnetic  deviation.  It  was 
found  that 

V  =  2'5  x  109  cms.  per  sec. 

-  =  6  x  103. 
m 

On  account  of  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  a  large  electrostatic  de- 
viation, these  values  are  only  approximate  in  character. 

The  results  on  the  magnetic  and  electric  deviation  of  the 
a  rays  of  radium  have  been  confirmed  by  Des  Coudres1,  by  the 
photographic  method.  Some  pure  radium  bromide  was  used  as  a 
source  of  radiation.  The  whole  apparatus  was  enclosed  in  a  vessel 
which  was  exhausted  to  a  low  vacuum.  In  this  way,  not  only 
was  he  able  to  determine  the  photographic  action  of  the  rays  at 
a  much  greater  distance  from  the  source,  but  he  was  also  able 
1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  17,  p.  483,  1903. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  123 

to  apply  a  stronger  electric  field  without  the  passage  of  a  spark. 
He  found  values  of  the  constants  given  by 

V=  1*65  x  109cms.  per  sec. 


These  values  are  in  very  good  agreement  with  the  numbers  found 
by  the  electric  method.  The  2  rays  from  radium  are  complex,  and 
probably  consist  of  a  stream  of  positively  charged  bodies  projected 
at  velocities  lying  between  certain  limits.  The  amount  of  devia- 
tion of  the  particles  in  a  magnetic  field  will  thus  differ  according 
to  the  velocity  of  the  particle.  The  photographic  results  of 
Becquerel  seem  to  indicate  that  the  velocity  of  the  rays  of  radium 
can  vary  only  within  fairly  narrow  limits,  since  the  trajectory  of 
the  rays  in  a  magnetic  field  is  sharply  marked  and  not  nearly  as 
diffuse  as  in  similar  experiments  with  the  ft  rays. 

85.  Becquerel1  has  examined  the  amount  of  magnetic  devia- 
tion of  the  a.  rays  at  different  distances  from  the  source  of  the  rays 
in  a  very  simple  way.  A  narrow  vertical  pencil  of  the  rays,  after 
its  passage  through  a  narrow  slit,  fell  on  a  photographic  plate, 
which  was  inclined  at  a  small  angle  to  the  vertical  and  had  its 
lower  edge  perpendicular  to  the  slit.  The  trajectory  of  the  rays 
is  shown  by  a  fine  line  traced  on  the  plate.  If  a  strong  magnetic 
field  is  applied  parallel  to  the  slit,  the  trajectory  of  the  rays  is 
displaced  to  the  right  or  left  according  to  the  direction  of  the 
field.  If  equal  times  of  exposure  are  given  for  the  magnetic  field 
in  the  two  directions,  on  developing  the  plate  two  fine  diverging 
lines  are  found  traced  on  the  plate.  The  distance  between  these 
lines  at  any  point  is  a  measure  of  twice  the  average  deviation 
at  that  point,  corresponding  to  the  value  of  the  magnetic  field. 
By  measuring  the  distance  between  the  trajectories  at  various 
points,  Becquerel  found  that  the  radius  of  curvature  of  -the  path  of 
the  rays  increased  with  the  distance  from  the  slit.  The  product 
Hp  of  the  strength  of  the  field  and  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the 
path  of  the  rays  is  shown  in  the  following  table. 

1  C.  R.  136,  p.  1517,  1903. 


124  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 


Distance  in  mms. 

from  the  slit 

Hp 

1 

2-91  x  105 

3 

2-99     „ 

5 

3-06     „ 

7 

3-15      „ 

8 

3-27      „ 

9 

3-41      „ 

The  writer  (loc.  cit.)  showed  that  the  maximum  value  of  Hp 
for  complete  deviation  of  the  a  rays  was  390,000.  The  results  are 

fty\ 

thus  in  good  agreement.     Since  Hp  —  —  V  these   results   show 

p 

that  the  values  either  of  V  or  of  —  for  the  projected  particles  vary 

at  different  distances  from  the  source.  Becquerel  considered  that 
the  rays  were  homogeneous,  and,  in  order  to  explain  the  results, 
has  suggested  that  the  charge  on  the  projected  particles  may 
gradually  decrease  with  the  distance  traversed,  so  that  the  radius 
of  curvature  of  the  path  steadily  increases  with  the  distance  from 
the  source.  It,  however,  seems  more  probable  that  the  rays  con- 
sist of  particles  projected  with  different  velocities,  and  that  the 
slower  particles  are  more  quickly  absorbed  in  the  gas.  In  conse- 
quence of  this,  only  the  swifter  particles  are  present  some  distance 
from  the  source.  Before  any  definite  conclusion  can  be  reached,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  determine  the  actual  values  of  e/m  and  V  for 
different  points  of  the  trajectory. 

Becquerel  states  that  the  amount?  of  deviation,  in  a  given 
magnetic  field,  was  the  same  for  the  a  rays  of  polonium  and  of 

radium.     This  shows  that  the  value  of       V  is  the  same  for  the 

e 

a  rays  from  the  two  substances.  Since  the  a  rays  from  polonium 
are  far  more  readily  absorbedj  than  the  a  rays  from  radium,  this 

result  would  indicate  that  the  value  of  —  is  greater  for  the  a  par- 
ticles of  polonium  than  of  radium.  Further  experimental  evidence 
is  required  on  this  important  point. 

86.  Mass  and  energy  of  the  a  particle.  It  has  been 
pointed  out  that  the  a  rays  from  radium  and  polonium  are 
analogous  to  the  Canal  rays  of^joT^stein,  for  both  carry  a  positive 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  125 


charge  and  are  difficult  to  H^fWt  hy  a.  Trmgnptip  field.  The  experi- 
ments of  Wien  have  shown  that  the  velocity  of  projection  of  the 
Canal  rays  varies  with  the  gas  in  the  tube  and  the  intensity  of  the 
electric  field  applied,  but  it  is  generally  about  1/10  of  the  velocity 
of  the  a.  particle  from  radium.  The  value  of  e/m  is  also  variable, 
depending  upon  the  gas  in  the  tube. 

It  has  been  shown  that  for  the  a.  rays  of  radium 

V=  2-5  x  109  and  e/m  =6  x  103. 

Now  the  value  of  e/m  for  the  hydrogen  atom,  liberated  in  the 
electrolysis  of  water,  is  104.  Assuming  the  charge  carried  by  the 
a  particle  to  be  the  same  as  that  carried  by  the  hydrogen  atom,  the 
mass  of  the  a  particle  ^s  about  twice_that  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  If 
the  a  particle  consists  of  any  known  kind  of  matter,  this  result 
indicates  that  it  consists  either  of  projected  helium  or  hydrogen. 
Further  evidence  on  this  important  question  is  given  in  section  202. 

The  a.  rays  from  all  the  radio-active  substances  and  their 
products,  such  as  the  radio-active  emanations  and  the  matter 
causing  excited  activity,  possess  the  same  general  properties  and 
do  not  vary  very  much  in  penetrating  power.  It  is  thus  probable 
that  in  all  cases  the  a  rays  from  the  different  radio-active  sub- 
stances consist  of  positively  charged  bodies  projected  with  great 
velocity.  Since  the  rays  from  radium  are  made  up  in  part  of  a 
rays  from  the  emanation  stored  in  the  radium,  and  from  the 
excited  activity  which  it  produces,  the  a  rays  from  each  of  these 
products  must  consist  of  positively  charged  bodies  ;  for  it  has  been 
shown  that  all  the  a  rays  from  radium  are  deviated  in  a  strong 
magnetic  field. 

The  kinetic  energy  of  each  projected  particle  is  enormous,  com- 
pared with  its  mass.  The  kinetic  energy  of  each  a  particle 

=  i  m  V*  =  i  ™  V*e  =  5'9  x  10~6  ergs. 

Taking  the  velocity  of  a  rifle  bullet  as  105  cms.  per  second,  it  is 
seen  that,  mass  for  mass,  the  energy  of  motion  of  the  a  rays  is 
6  x  108  times  as  great  as  that  of  the  rifle  bullet.  In  this  projection 
of  bodies  atomic  in  size  with  great  velocity  probably  lies  the 
principal  cause  of  the  heating  effects  produced  by  radium  (section 
106). 


126  NATURE   OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

87.  Atomic  disintegration.    The  radio-activity  of  the  radio- 
elements  is  an  atomic  and  not  a  molecular  property.     The  rate  of 
emission  of  the  radiations  depends  only  on  the  amount  of  the 
element  present  and  is  independent  of  its  combination  with  inactive 
substances.     In  addition,  it  will  be  shown  later  that  the  rate  of 
emission  is  not  affected  by  wide  variations  of  temperature,  or  by 
the  application  of  any  known  chemical  or  physical  forces.     Since 
the  power  of  radiating  is  a  property  of  the  radio-atoms,  and  the 
radiations  consist  for  the  most  part  of  positively  and  negatively 
charged  masses  projected  with  great  velocity,  it  is  necessary  to 
suppose  that  the  atoms  of  the  radio-elements  are  undergoing  dis- 
integration, in  the  course  of  which  parts  of  the  atom  escape  from 
the  atomic  system.     It  seems  very  improbable  that  the  a  and  0 
particles  can  suddenly  acquire  their  enormous  velocity  of  projection 
by  the  action  of  forces  existing  inside  or  outside  the  atom.     For 
example,  the  a  particle  would  have  to  travel  from  rest  between  two 
points  differing  in  potential  by  5*2  million  volts  in  order  to  acquire 
the  kinetic  energy  with  which  it  escapes.     Thus  it  seems  probable 
that  these  particles  are  not  set  suddenly  in  motion,  but  that  they 
escape  from  an  atomic  system  in  which   they  were   already  in 
rapid  oscillatory  or  orbital  motion.     On  this  view,  the  energy  is 
not  communicated  to  the  projected  particles,  but  exists  beforehand 
in  the  atoms  from  which  they  escape.     The  idea  that  the  atom  is 
a  complicated  structure  consisting  of  charged  parts  in  rapid  oscil- 
latory or  orbital  motion  has  been  developed  by  J.  J.  Thomson, 
Larmor  and  Lorentz.     Since  the  a  particle  is  atomic  in  size,  it  is 
natural  to  suppose  that  the  atoms  of  the  radio-active  elements 
consist  not  only  of  the  electrons  in  motion,  but  also  of  positively 
charged   particles  whose  mass  is  about  the  same  as  that  of  the 
hydrogen  or  helium  atom. 

It  will  be  shown  later  that  only  a  minute  fraction  of  the  atoms 
of  the  radio-element  need  break  up  per  second  in  order  to  account 
for  the  radiations  even  of  an  enormously  active  element  like 
radium.  The  question  of  the  possible  causes  which  lead  to  this 
atomic  disintegration  and  the  consequences  which  follow  from  it 
will  be  discussed  later  in  chapter  X. 

88.  Experiments  with  a  zinc  sulphide  screen.    A  screen 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  127 

of  Sidot's  hexagonal  bleiid_(phQspboi^aceiiL-aii^-^ulphidp)  lights 
up  brightly  under  the  action  of  the  a  rajs  of  radium  and  polonium. 
If  the  surface  of  the  screerLJs  examined  with  ajnagnifying  glass, 
the  light  from  the  screen  is  found  not  to  be  uniformly  distributed 
but  to  consist  of  a  number  of  scintillating  points  of  light.  No  two 
flashes  succeed  one  another  at  the  same  point,  but  they  are  scattered 
over  the  surface,  coming  and  going  rapidly  without  any  movement 
of  translation.  This  remarkable  action  of  the  radium  and  polonium 
rays  on  a  zinc  sulphide  screen  was  discovered  by  Sir  William 
Crookes1,  and  independently  by  Elster  and  Geitel2,  who  observed 
it  with  the  rays  given  out  from  a  wire  which  has  been  charged 
negatively  either  in  the  open  air  or  in  a  vessel  containing  the 
emanation  of  thorium. 

In  order  to  show  the  scintillations  of  radium  on  the  screen, 
Sir  William  Crookes  has  devised  a  simple  apparatus  which  he  has 
called  the  "  Spinthariscope."  A  small  piece_o£__m£tal,  which  has 
been  dipped  in  a  radium  solution,  is  fixed  several  millimetres #way 
from  a  small  zinc  sulphide  screen.  This  screen  is  fixed  at  one 
end  of  a  short  brass  tube  and  is  looked  at  through  a  lens  fixed  at 
the  other  end  of  the  tube.  Viewed  in  this  way,  the  surface  of  the 
screen  is  seen  as  a  dark  background,  dotted  with  brilliant  points 
of  light  which  come  and  go  with  great  rapidity.  The  number  of 
points  of  light  per  unit  area  to  be  seen  at  one  time  falls  off  rapidly 
as  the  distance  from  the  radium  increases,  and,  at  several  centi- 
metres distance,  only  an  occasional  one  is  seen.  The  experiment 
is  extremely  beautiful,  and  brings  vividly  before  the  observer  the 
fact  that  the  radium  is  shooting  out  a  stream  of  projectiles,  the 
impact  of  each  of  which  on  the  screen  is  marked  by  a  flash  of  light. 

The  scintillatingjgpints  of  light  on  the  screen  are  due  to  the 
impact  of  the  a  particles  on  its  surface.  If  the  radium  is  covered 
with  a  layer  of  foil  of  sufficient  thickness  to  absorb  all  the  a  rays 
the  scintillations  cease.  There  is  still  a  phosphorescence  to  be 
observed  on  the  screen  due  to  the  /3  and  7  rays,  but  this  luminosity 
is  not  marked  by  scintillations  to  any  appreciable  extent.  Sir 
William  Crookes  showed  that  the  number  of  scintillations  was 
about  the  same  in  vacuo  as  in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure.  If  the 

1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  81,  p.  405,  1903. 

2  Phys.  Zeit.  No.  15,  p.  437,  1903. 


128  NATUKE   OF  THE  RADIATIONS  [CH. 

screen  was  kept  at  a  constant  temperature,  but  the  radium  cooled 
down  to  the  temperature  of  liquid  air,  no  appreciable  difference  in 
the  number  of  scintillations  was  observed.  If,  however,  the  screen 
was  gradually  cooled  to  the  temperature  of  liquid  air,  the  scintilla- 
tions diminished  in  number  and  finally  ceased  altogether.  This  is 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  screen  loses  to  a  large  extent  its  power  of 
phosphorescence  at  such  a  low  temperature. 

The  scintillations  are  produced  not  only  by  radium  and 
polonium,  but  also  by  a  negatively  charged  wire  made  active  by 
exposure  in  the  open  air  or  in  a  vessel  containing  the  emanations 
of  thorium  or  radium.  As  far  as  observations  have  yet  gone,  jbhe 
production  of  scintillations  appears  to  be  a  general  property  of  the 
a  raysjrQm^all-radio-active  substances.  The  scintillations  are  best 
shown  with  a  zinc  sulphide  screen.  If  a  screen  of  barium  platino- 
cyanide  is  exposed  to  the  a  rays  from  radium,  the  scintillations  are 
difficult  to  observe,  and  the  luminosity  is  far  more  persistent  than 
for  a  zinc  sulphide  screen  exposed  under  the  same  conditions.  The 
duration  of  the  phosphorescence  probably  accounts  for  the  absence 
of  visible  scintillations. 

In  the  scintillations  of  zinc  sulphide,  we  are  actually  witnessing 
the  effect  produced  by  the  impact  on  the  screen  of  single  atoms  of 
matter  projected  with  enormous  velocity.  Each  of  the  particles 
carries  an  amount  of  energy  corresponding  to  5'9  x  10~6  ergs.  On 
account  of  the  ease  with  which  these  particles  are  stopped,  most  of 
this  energy  is  given  up  at  the  surface  of  the  screen,  and  a  portion 
of  the  energy  is  transformed  into  light.  Zinc  sulphide  is  very 
sensitive  to  mechanical  shocks.  Luminosity  is  observed  if  a  pen- 
knife is  drawn  across  the  screen,  or  if  a  current  of  air  is  directed  on 
to  the  screen.  The  disturbance  effected  by  the  impact  of  the  a 
particle  extends  over  a  distance  very  large  compared  with  the  size 
of  the  impinging  particle,  so  that  the  spots  of  light  produced  have 
an  appreciable  area.  Becquerel1  recently  has  made  an  examination 
of  the  scintillations  produced  by  different  substances  and  has 
concluded  that  the  scintillations  are  due  to  irregular  cleavages 
in  the  crystals  composing  the  screen,  produced  by  the  action 
of  the  a  rays.  Scintillations  can  be  mechanically  produced  by 
crushing  a  crystal.  Tomrnasina2  found  that  a  zinc  sulphide  screen 
1  C.  R.  137,  Oct.  27,  1903.  2  C.  E.  137,  Nov.  9,  1903. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  129 

removed  from  the  action  of  the  radium  rays  for  several  days, 
showed  the  scintillations  again  when  an  electrified  rod  was  brought 
near  it. 

Although  the  scintillations  from  a  particle  of  pure  radium 
bromide  are  very  numerous,  they  are  not  .too  numerous  to  be 
counted.  Close  to  the  radium,  the  luminosity  is  very  bright,  but, 
by  using  a  high  power  microscope,  the  luminosity  can  be  shown 
to  consist  of  scintillations.  This  use  of  the  microscope  would  offer 
a  very  convenient  means  of  actually  counting  the  number  of  the 
particles  projected  from  the  surface  of  the  radium,  if  each  particle 
gave  rise  to  a  flash  of  light.  It  is  not  likely,  however,  that  this 
would  be  the  case.  The  number  of  scintillations  from  a  given  mass 
of  radium  will  depend  upon  its  fineness  of  division,  but  on  account 
of  the  ease  with  which  the  projected  particles  are  absorbed,  only 
a  small  portion  of  the  total  number  projected  from  the  mass  of 
radium  will  escape  from  its  surface. 

89.  Absorption  of  the  a  rays  by  matter.  The  a  rays  from 
the  different  radio-active  substances  can— be-  distinguished  from 
each  other  by  the  relative  amounts  of  their  absorption  by  gases 
or  by  thin  screens  of  solid  substances.  When  examined  under 
the  same  conditions,  the  a  rays  from  the  active  substances  can  be 
arranged  in  a  definite  order  with  reference  to  the  amount  of 
absorption  in  a  given  thickness  of  matter. 

In  order  to  test  the  amount  of  absorption  of  the  a  rays  for 
different  thicknesses  of  matter,  an  apparatus  similar  to  that  shown 
in  Fig.  16,  p.  82  was  employed1.  A  thin  layer  of  the  active 
material  was  spread  uniformly  over  an  area  of  about  30  sq.  cms., 
and  the  saturation  current  observed  between  two  plates  3'5  cms. 
apart.  With  a  thin  layer2  of  active  material,  the  ionization  between 
the  plates  is  almost  entirely  due  to  the  a.  rays.  The  ionization 
due  to  the  0  and  7  rays  is  generally  less  than  1°/0  of  the  total. 

The  following  table  shows  the  variation  of  the  saturation  current 
between  the  plates  due  to  the  a  rays  from  radium  and  polonium, 

1  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks.     Phil.  Mag.  July  1902. 

2  In  order  to  obtain  a  very  thin  layer,  the  compound  to  be  tested  is  ground  to  a 
fine  powder  and  then  sifted  through  a  fine  gauge  uniformly  over  the  area,  so  that 
the  plate  is  only  partially  covered. 

R.  R.-A.  9 


130 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


with  successive  layers  of  aluminium  foil  interposed,  each  "00034  cm. 
in  thickness.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  the  ionization  due  to  the  0 
rays  from  radium,  the  radium  chloride  employed  was  dissolved  in 
water  and  evaporated.  This  renders  the  active  compound,  for  the 
time,  nearly  free  from  /3  rays. 

Polonium.  Radium. 


Layers  of 
aluminium 

Current 

Ratio  of 
decrease  for 
each  layer 

0 

100 

•41 

1 

41 

•31 

2 

12-6 

•17 

3 

2-1 

•067 

4 

•14 

5 

0 

Layers  of 
aluminium 

Current 

Ratio  of 
decrease  for 
each  layer 

0 

100 

•48 

1 

48 

•48 

2 

23 

•60 

3 

13-6 

•47 

4 

6-4 

•39 

5 

2-5 

•36 

6 

•9 

7 

0 

The  initial  current  with  1  layer  of  aluminium  over  the  active 
material  is  taken  as  100.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  current  due 
to  the  radium  rays  decreases  very  nearly  by  half  its  value  for  each 
additional  thickness  until  the  current  is  reduced  to  about  6  °/0  of 
the  maximum.  It  then  decays  more  rapidly  to  zero.  Thus,  for 
radium,  over  a  wide  range,  the  current  decreases  in  an  exponential 
law  with  the  thickness  of  the  screen, 

**  -  o-M 


or 


where  it  is  the  current  for  a  thickness  t,  and  i0  the  initial  current. 
In  the  case  of  polonium,  the  decrease  is  far  more  rapid  than  would 
be  indicated  by  the  exponential  law.  By  the  first  layer,  the 
current  is  reduced  to  the  ratio  '41.  The  addition  of  the  third 
layer  cuts  the  current  down  to  a  ratio  of  '17.  For  most  of  the 
active  bodies,  the  current  diminishes  slightly  faster  than  the 
exponential  law  would  lead  one  to  expect,  especially  when  the 
radiation  is  nearly  all  absorbed. 


IV] 


XATURE    OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


131 


Battery 


Electrometer 


Fig.  26. 


90.  The  increase  of  absorption  of  the  a  rays  of  polonium  with 
the  thickness  of  matter  tra- 
versed has  been  very  clearly 
shown  in  some  experiments 
made  by  Mme  Curie.  The 
apparatus  employed  is  shown 
in  Fig.  26. 

The  saturation  current  was 
measured  between  two  parallel 
plates  PP'  3  cms.  apart.  The 
polonium  A  was  placed  in  the 
metal  box  CO,  and  the  rays  from  it,  after  passing  through  an 
opening  in  the  lower  plate  P',  covered  with  a  layer  of  thin  foil  T, 
ionized  the  gas  between  the  plates.  For  a  certain  distance  AT,  of 
4  cms.  or  more,  no  appreciable  current  was  observed  between  P 
and  P.  As  the  distance  A  T  was  diminished,  the  current  increased 
in  a  very  sudden  manner,  so  that  for  a  small  variation  of  the  distance 
A  T  there  was  a  large  increase  of  current.  With  still  further  decrease 
of  distance  the  current  increases  in  a  more  regular  manner.  The 
results  are  shown  in  the  following  table,  where  the  screen  T  con- 
sisted of  one  and  two  layers  of  aluminium  foil  respectively.  The 
current  due  to  the  rays,  without  the  aluminium  screen,  is  in  each 
case  taken  as  100. 


Distance  AT  in  cms. 

3-5 

2-5 

1-9 

1-45 

0-5 

For  100  rays  transmitted  by  one  layer 

0 

0 

5 

10 

25 

For  100  rays  transmitted  by  two  layers 

0 

0 

0 

0 

07 

! 

The  metallic  screen  thus  cuts  off  a  greater  proportion  of 
the  rays  the  greater  the  distance  of  air  which  the  radiations 
traverse.  The  effects  are  still  more  marked  if  the  plates  PP  are 
close  together.  Results  similar  but  not  so  marked  are  found  if 
radium  is  substituted  for  the  polonium. 

It  follows  from  these  experiments  that  the  ionization  per  unit 
volume,  due  to  a  large  plate  uniformly  covered  with  the  radio- 
active matter,  falls  off  rapidly  with  the  distance  from  the  plate. 
At  a  distance  of  7  or  8  cms.  the  a  rays  from  uranium,  thorium,  or 

9—2 


132 


NATURE  OF  THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


radium  have  been  completely  absorbed  in  the  gas,  and  the  small 
ionization  then  observed  in  the  gas  is  due  to  the  more  penetrating 
/3  and  7  rays.  The  relative  amount  of  the  ionization  observed  at 
a  distance  from  the  source  will  increase  with  the  thickness  of  the 
layer  of  active  matter,  but  will  reach  a  maximum  for  a  layer  of  a 
certain  thickness.  The  greater  proportion  of  the  ionization,  due 
to  unscreened  active  matter,  is  thus  entirely  confined  to  a  shell  of 
air  surrounding  it  not  more  than  7  cms.  in  depth. 

91.  The  a  rays  from  different  compounds  of  the  same  active 
element,  although  differing  in  amount,  have  about  the  same  average 
penetrating  power.  Experiments  on  this  point  have  been  made  by 
the  writer1  and  by  Owens2.  For  the  purpose  of  comparison  of  the 
relative  power  of  penetration  of  the  a  rays  from  the  different  radio- 
elements,  it  is  thus  only  necessary  to  determine  the  penetrating 
power  for  one  compound  of  each  of  the  radio-elements.  Rutherford 


100 


Absorption  of  Radiation 
by  Aluminium  Poil 


1234 
Layers  of  Aluminium  Foil  ('00034  cms.  thick) 

Fig.  27. 


and  Miss  Brooks3  have  determined  the  amount  of  absorption  of 
the  a  rays  from  the  different  active  substances  in  their  passage 
through  successive  layers  of  aluminium  foil  '00034  cm.  thick.  The 

1  Phil  Mag.  Jan.  1899.        2  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.  1899.        3  Phil.  Mag.  July,  1900. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  133 

curves  of  absorption  are  given  in  Fig.  27.  For  the  purpose  of 
comparison  in  each  case,  the  initial  current  with  the  bare  active 
compound  is  taken  as  100.  A  very  thin  layer  of  the  active 
substance  was  used,  and,  in  the  case  of  thorium  and  radium,  the 
emanations  given  off  were  removed  by  a  slow  current  of  air  through 
the  testing  vessel.  A  potential  difference  of  300  volts  was  applied 
between  the  plates,  which  was  sufficient  to  give  the  maximum 
current  in  each  case. 

Curves  for  the  minerals  organite  and  thorite  were  very  nearly 
the  same  as  for  thoria. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  the  absorption  curves  of  the 
excited  radiations  of  thorium  and  radium  are  given,  as  well  as  the 
curve  for  the  radio-elements  uranium,  thorium,  radium,  and  polo- 
nium. The  a  radiations  may  be  arranged  in  the  following  order, 
as  regards  their  power  of  penetration,  beginning  with  the  most 
penetrating. 

Thorium ) 

-r,    ,.         }•  excited  radiartion. 

Kadium   1 

Thorium. 
Radium. 
Polonium. 
Uranium. 

The  same  order  is  observed  for  all  the  absorbing  substances 
examined,  viz.,  aluminium,  Dutch  metal,  tinfoil,  paper,  and  air  and 
other  gases.  The  differences  in  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  from 
the  active  bodies  are  thus  considerable,  and  must  be  ascribed  either 
to  a  difference  of  mass  or  of  velocity  of  the  a  particles  or  to  a 
variation  in  both  these  quantities. 

Since  the  a  rays  differ  either  in  mass  or  velocity,  it  follows 
that  they  cannot  be  ascribed  to  any  single  radio-active  impurity 
common  to  all  radio-active  bodies. 

92.  Absorption  of  the  a  rays  by  gases.  The  a  rays  from 
the  different  radio-active  substances  are  quickly  absorbed  in  their 
passage  through  a  few  centimetres  of  air  at  atmospheric  pressure 
and  temperature.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  ionization  of  the  air, 
due  to  the  a  rays,  is  greatest  near  the  surface  of  the  radiating  body 
and  falls  off  very  rapidly  with  the  distance  (see  section  90). 


134 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


TT  Electrometer 


^•Battery 


A  simple  method  of  determining  the  absorption  in  gases  is 
shown  in  Fig.  28.  The  maximum 
current  is  measured  between  two 
parallel  plates  A  and  B  kept  at  a 
fixed  distance  of  2  cms.  apart,  and 
then  moved  by  means  of  a  screw  to 
different  distances  from  the  radio- 
active surface.  The  radiation  from 
this  active  surface  passed  through  a 
circular  opening  in  the  plate  A, 
covered  with  thin  aluminium  foil, 
and  was  stopped  by  the  upper  plate. 
For  observations  on  other  gases  be- 
sides air,  and  for  examining  the  Fig.  28. 
effect  at  different  pressures,  the  apparatus  is  enclosed  in  an  air- 
tight cylinder. 

If  the  radius  of  the  active  surface  is  large  compared  with  the 
distance  of  the  plate  A  from  it,  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  is 
approximately  uniform  over  the  opening  in  the  plate  A,  and  falls 
off  with  the  distance  x  traversed  according  to  an  exponential  law. 
Thus 


where  A,  is  the  "  absorption  constant "  of  the  radiation  for  the  gas 
under  consideration1.     Let 

x  =  distance  of  lower  plate  from  active  material, 
I  =  distance  between  the  two  fixed  plates. 

The  energy  of  the  radiation  at  the  lower  plate  is  then  IQe~Kx, 
and  at  the  upper  plate  IQe~*(l+x].  The  total  number  of  ions  pro- 
duced between  the  parallel  plates  A  and  B  is  therefore  proportional 

to 

g— \x  _  e-\  d+x)  _  g— \x  / 1 e~*1} 

Since  the  factor  1  —  e~Kl  is  a  constant,  the  saturation  current 

1  Since  the  ionization  at  any  point  above  the  plate  is  the  resultant  effect  of  the 
a  particles  coming  from  all  points  of  the  large  radio-active  layer,  X  is  not  the  same  as 
the  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  rays  from  a  point  source.  It  will  however  be 
proportional  to  it.  For  this  reason  X  is  called  the  "  absorption  constant." 


IV] 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


135 


between  A  and  B  varies  as  e~**,  i.e.  it  decreases  according  to  an 
exponential  law  with  the  distance  traversed. 


\ 


0  5     Distance  in  mm*.      10  15 

Fig.  29. 

The  variation  of  the  current  between  A  and  B  with  the  distance 
from  a  thin  layer  of  uranium  oxide  is  shown  in  Fig.  29  for  different 
gases.  The  initial  measurements  were  taken  at  a  distance  of  about 
3'5  mms.  from  the  active  surface.  The  actual  values  of  this  initial 
current  were  different  for  the  different  gases,  but,  for  the  purposes 
of  comparison,  the  value  is  in  each  case  taken  as  unity. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  current  falls  off  with  the  distance 
approximately  in  a  geometrical  progression,  a  result  which  is  in 
agreement  with  the  simple  theory  given  above.  The  distance 
through  which  the  rays  pass  before  they  are  absorbed  is  given 
below  for  different  gases. 


Gas 

Carbonic  acid 

Air 

Coal-gas 
Hydrogen    . . . 


Distance  in  mms.  to 
absorb  half  of  radiation 

3 
4-3 

7-5 
16 


The  results  for  hydrogen  are  only  approximate,  as  the  absorp- 
tion is  small  over  the  distance  examined. 


136 


NATURE   OF  THE  RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


The  absorption  is  least  in  hydrogen  and  greatest  in  carbonic 
acid,  and  follows  the  same  order  as  the  densities  of  the  gases. 
In  the  case  of  air  and  carbonic  acid,  the  absorption  is  proportional 
to  the  density,  but  this  rule  is  widely  departed  from  in  the  case 
of  hydrogen.  Results  for  the  relative  absorption  by  air  of  the  a.  rays 
from  the  different  active  bodies  are  shown  in  Fig.  30. 


100 


90 


60 


\ 


Absorption  of  Radiation  by  Air 


10        12         14        16 
Distance  in  mms. 


18 


20        22 


24 


Fig.  30. 


The  initial  observation  was  made  about  2  mms.  from  the  active 
surface,  and  the  initial  current  is  in  each  case  taken  as  100.  The 
current,  as  in  the  case  of  uranium,  falls  off  at  first  approximately 
in  geometrical  progression  with  the  distance.  The  thickness  of 
air,  through  which  the  radiation  passes  before  the  intensity  is 
reduced  to  half  value,  is  given  below. 

Distance  in  mms. 
Uranium  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  4-3 

Radium  7-5 

Thorium  10 

Excited  radiation  from  Thorium  and  Radium    ...         16-5 

The  order  of  absorption  by  air  of  the  radiations  from  the  active 
substances  is  the  same  as  the  order  of  absorption  by  the  metals 
and  solid  substances  examined. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  137 

93.  Connection  between  absorption  and  density.  Since 
in  all  cases  the  radiations  first  diminish  approximately  according 
to  an  exponential  law  with  the  distance  traversed,  the  intensity  / 
after  passing  through  a  thickness  x  is  given  by  /  =  I0e~^  where  \ 
is  the  absorption  constant  and  I0  the  initial  intensity. 

The  following  table  shows  the  value  of  \  with  different  radia- 
tions for  air  and  aluminium. 

Radiation  X  for  aluminium      X  for  air 

Excited  radiation     ...  830                  -42 

Thorium        1250                  -69 

Radium         1600                  -90 

Uranium        2750  1'6 

Taking  the  density  of  air  at  20°  C.  and  760  mms.  as  0'00120 
compared  with  water  as  unity,  the  following  table  shows  the  value 
of  X  divided  by  density  for  the  different  radiations. 

Radiation  Aluminium        Air 

Excited  radiation  ...  320  350 

Thorium      480  "  550 

Radium        620  740 

Uranium      1060  1300 

Comparing  aluminium  and  air,  the  absorption  is  thus  roughly 
proportional  to  the  density  for  all  the  radiations.  The  divergence, 
however,  between  the  absorption-density  numbers  is  large  when 
two  metals  like  tin  and  aluminium  are  compared.  The  value  of  X 
for  tin  is  not  much  greater  than  for  aluminium,  although  the 
density  is  nearly  three  times  as  great. 

If  the  absorption  is  proportional  to  the  density,  the  absorption 
in  a  gas  should  vary  directly  as  the  pressure,  and  this  is  found  to 
be  the  case.  Some  results  on  this  subject  have  been  given  by  the 
writer  (loc.  cit.)  for  uranium  rays  between  pressures  of  1/4  and  1 
atmosphere.  Owens  (loc.  cit.)  examined  the  absorption  of  the  a 
radiation  in  air  from  thoria  between  the  pressures  of  0*5  to  3 
atmospheres  and  found  that  the  absorption  varied  directly  as  the 
pressure. 

The  variation  of  absorption  with  density  for  the  projected 
positive  particles  is  thus  very  similar  to  the  law  for  the  projected 
negative  particles  and  for  cathode  rays.  The  absorption,  in  both 
cases,  depends  mainly  on  the  density,  but  is  not  in  all  cases  directly 


138  NATURE   OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

proportional  to  it.  Since  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  in  gases  is 
probably  mainly  due  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  energy  of  the  rays 
by  the  production  of  ions  in  the  gas,  it  seems  probable  that  the 
absorption  in  metals  is  due  to  a  similar  cause. 

94.  Relation    between    ionization    and    absorption   in 
gases.     It  has  been  shown  (section  45)  that  if  the  a  rays  are 
completely  absorbed  in  a  gas,  the  total  ionization  produced  is  about 
the  same  for  all  the  gases  examined.    Since  the  rays  are  unequally 
absorbed  in  different  gases,  there  should  be  a  direct  connection 
between  the  relative  ionization  and  the  relative  absorption.     This 
is  seen  to  be  the  case  if  the  results  of  Strutt  (section  45)  are  com- 
pared with  the  relative  absorption  constants  (section  92). 

,<  Relative  Relative 

absorption          ionization 

Air      1  1 

Hydrogen       ...  -27  '226 

Carbon  dioxide  1-43  1'53 

Considering  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  accurate  determinations 
of  the  absorption,  the  relative  ionization  in  a  gas  is  seen  to  be 
directly  proportional  to  the  relative  absorption  within  the  limits  of 
experimental  error.  This  result  shows  that  the  energy  absorbed 
in  producing  an  ion  is  about  the  same  in  air,  hydrogen,  and  carbon 
dioxide. 

95.  Theory  of  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  by  matter. 

As  we  have  seen,  experiment  shows  that  the  ionization  of  the  gas 
due  to  the  a  rays  from  a  large  plane  surface  of  radio-active  matter 
falls  off  approximately  according  to  an  exponential  law  until  most 
of  the  rays  are  absorbed,  whereupon  the  ionization  decreases  at  a 
much  faster  rate.  The  ionization  of  the  gas  is  due_ta  the  collision 
of  the  positively^^r^edjmrticles  with  the  molecules  in  their  path. 
Each  projected  particle  carries  with  it  sufficient  energy  to  produce, 
on  an  average,  several  thousand  ions  in  its  path  before  its  velocity 
is  reduced  to  a  value  below  which  it  fails  to  ionize  the  gas.  This 
minimum  velocity  for  the  a  and  /3  particles  is  probably  about  108  cms. 
per  second.  More  experimental  data  are  required  on  the  variation  of 
the  amount  of  ionization  of  the  gas  with  the  speed  of  the  projected 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  139 

particles.  The  experiments  of  Townsend1  and  Durack2  point  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  amount  of  ionization  per  unit  distance  passes 
through  a  maximum  and  then  decreases  as  the  velocity  of  the 
particle  increases.  For  example,  Townsend  found  that  the  number 
of  ions  produced  by  an  electron  moving  in  an  electric  field  was 
small  at  first  for  weak  fields,  but  increased  with  the  strength  of 
the  electric  field  to  a  maximum  corresponding  to  the  production 
of  21  ions  per  cm.  in  air  at  a  pressure  of  1  mm.  of  mercury  ; 
while  for  a  much  higher  velocity  of  about  5  x  109  cms.  per  second 
Durack  found  that  the  electrons  only  produce  '4  ions  per  cm.  at 
1  mm.  pressure.  In  a  later  paper,  Durack3  showed  that  for  the 
electrons  from  radium,  which  are  projected  with  a  velocity  of 
about  half  the  velocity  of  light,  the  corresponding  number  of  ions 
per  cm.  of  path  is  '19  or  only  about  1/100  of  the  maximum  number 
observed  by  Townsend. 

It  has  been  shown  by  Des  Coudres  that  the  velocity  of  the 
cathode  rays  diminishes  when  the  rays  pass  through  thin  metal 
toil.  This  is  probably  also  true  of  the  a  and  /3  particles  produced 
by  the  active  substances. 

If  the  decrease  of  the  ionization  according  to  an  exponential 
law  with  the  distance  were  due  only  to  a  gradual  retardation  of 
the  speed  of  the  projected  particles,  it  follows  that  the  ionization 
per  unit  distance  for  both  the  a  and  /?  particles  must  vary  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity  of  the  particle.  For  suppose  that  in  passing 
through  a  distance  dx  a  particle  of  mass  in  decreases  in  speed  from 
v  to  v  —  dv.  The  loss  of  energy  of  the  particle  is  mvdv,  and 
this  should  be  proportional  to  the  number  of  ions  qdx  produced, 
where  q  is  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  per  unit  length  of  the 
path.  Since  the  ionization  is  assumed  to  fall  otf  in  an  exponential 
law  with  the  distance  x,  we  get  q  =  qQe~^  where  qQ  is  the  value  of  q 
when  x  =  0. 

Then  mvdv  = 

where  k  is  a  constant  and 


-  =  --  - 

A,  A,  A. 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1901.  2  Phil.  Mag.  July,  1902. 

3  Phil.  Ma0.  May,  1903. 


140  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

for  A  =  0,  since  q  =  0  when  v  =  0.  q  should  thus  be  proportional 
to  v2.  This  conclusion  is  contrary  to  the  experimental  results,  for 
it  has  been  shown,  at  any  rate  for  the  {3  particles,  that  the  ioniza- 
tion  per  unit  distance  decreases  with  increase  of  velocity. 

The  variation  of  ionization  with  distance  thus  cannot  be  due 
entirely  to  the  gradual  retardation  of  the  particles.  It  seems 
probable  that  it  is  due  to  one  of  the  following  causes : — 

(1)  absorption   of  the   projected   particles   in   their   passage 
through  matter ; 

(2)  neutralization  of  some  of  the  charges  carried  by  the  pro- 
jected particles. 

It  can  be  shown  that  the  number  of  a  particles  which  are  able 
to  produce  "  scintillations  "  on  a  zinc  sulphide  screen  is  diminished 
by  the  interposition  of  a  metal  screen.  The  hypothesis  (2)  seems 
more  probable  than  (1),  for  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  masses,  possess- 
ing such  an  amount  of  kinetic  energy  as  the  a  and  /3  particles  at 
the  moment  of  their  expulsion,  can  be  completely  stopped  by  a 
single  collision,  unless  the  velocity  of  the  particles  has  already  been 
greatly  reduced  by  their  passage  through  matter.  On  the  second 
hypothesis,  the  particles  after  losing  their  charges  may  still  keep 
moving  in  their  path  with  a  high  velocity,  but  it  is  to  be  expected 
that  they  would  not  be  nearly  as  efficient  in  ionizing  the  gas  as  a 
charged  particle  of  equal  mass  moving  with  the  same  velocity. 
Their  existence  would  not  be  recognized  by  ordinary  methods 
unless  they  produced  an  appreciable  ionization  by  collision  with 
the  molecules.  Thus,  it  is  possible  that,  in  addition  to  the  a  and 
/3  charged  particles,  there  may  be  a  stream  of  uncharged  particles 
moving  through  the  gas  with  great  velocity,  the  existence  of  which 
has  not  yet  been  detected. 

This  gradual  neutralization  of  the  charges  on  the  projected  a 
particles,  and  the  consequent  inability  of  the  particles  to  produce 
ions  in  their  path,  are  probably  responsible  for  most  of  the  so-called 
"  absorption  "  of  the  rays  in  traversing  matter  whether  solid,  liquid, 
or  gaseous.  If,  in  addition,  the  speed  of  the  projected  particles  is 
gradually  decreased  by  their  passage  through  matter,  as  the  mini- 
mum velocity  required  to  produce  ions  is  approached,  the  particles 
which  still  retain  their  charge  will  decrease  in  ionizing  power,  and, 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  141 

in  consequence,  the  number  of  ions  produced  per  unit  length  of 
path  will  diminish  far  more  rapidly  than  the  law  observed  for 
higher  velocities  would  lead  us  to  expect.  This  offers  an  explana- 
tion of  the  great  increase  of  absorption  of  the  a  rays  by  matter 
which  is  observed  when  the  rays  are  nearly  all  absorbed. 


PART   IV. 

THE   7   OR   VERY   PENETRATING    RAYS. 

96.  In  addition  to  the  a  and  /3  rays,  the  three  active  sub- 
stances, uranium,  thorium,  and  radium,  all  give  out  a  radiation  of 
an  extraordinarily  penetrating  character.  These  7  rays  are  con- 
siderably more  penetrating  than  the  X  rays  produced  in  a  "  hard  " 
vacuum  tube.  Their  presence  can  readily  be  observed  for  an  active 
substance  like  radium,  but  is  difficult  to  detect  for  uranium  and 
thorium  unless  a  large  quantity  of  active  material  is  used. 

Villard1,  using  the  photographic  method,  first  drew  attention 
to  the  fact  that  radium  gave  out  these  very  penetrating  rays,  and 
found  that  they  were  non-de viable  by  a  magnetic  field.  This  result 
was  confirmed  by  Becquerel*. 

Using  a  few  milligrams  of  radium  bromide,  the  7  rays,  can 
readily  be  detected  in  a  dark  room  by_the  luminosity  they  excite 
in  the  mineral  willemite  or  a  screen  of  ^platinocyanide  of  barium. 
The  a  and  {3  rays  are  completely  absorbed  by  placing  a  thickness 
of  1  centimetre  of  lead  over  the  radium,  and  the  rays  which  then 
pass  through  the  lead  consist  entirely  of  7  rays.  The  very  great 
penetrating  power  of  these  rays  is  readily  observed  by  noting  the 
slight  diminution  of  the  luminosity  of  the  screen  when  plates  of 
metal  several  centimetres  thick  are  placed  between  the  radium  and 
the  screen.  These  rays  also  produce  ionization  in  gases  and  are 
best  investigated  by  the  electrical  method.  The  presence  of  the 
7  rays  from  30  mgs.  of  radium  bromide  can  be  observed  in  an 
electroscope  after  passing  through  30  cms.  of  iron. 

1  C.  R.  130,  pp.  1110,  1178.  1900.         2  C.  R.  130,  p.  1154,  1900. 


142  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

97.  In  an  examination  of  the  active  substances  by  the  elec- 
trical method  the  writer1  found  that  both  uranium  and  thorium 
gave  out  7  rays  in  amount  roughly  proportional  to  their  activity. 
An  electroscope  of  the  type  shown  in  Fig.  11  was  employed.  This 
was  placed  on  a  large  lead  plate  '65  cm.  thick,  the  active  substance 
being  placed  in  a  closed  vessel  beneath. 

The  discharge  due  to  the  natural  ionization  of  the  air  in  the 
electroscope  was  first  observed.  The  additional  ionization  due  to 
the  active  substance  must  be  that  produced  by  rays  which  have 
passed  through  the  lead  plate  and  the  walls  of  the  electroscope. 
The  following  table  shows  that  the  discharge  due  to  these  rays 
decreases  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  thickness  of 
lead  traversed. 


Thickness  of  lead 

Kate  of  discharge 

•62  cms. 

100 

.  ,     -f-    o4  cms. 

67 

„     +2-86     „ 

23 

„     +5-08     „ 

8 

Using  100  gr.  of  uranium  and  thorium,  the  discharge  due  to 
the  rays  through  1  cm.  of  lead  was  quite  appreciable  and  readily 
measured.  The  results  showed  that  the  amount  of  y  rays  was 
about  the  same  for  equal  weights  of  thorium  and  uranium  oxides. 
The  penetrating  power  was  also  about  the  same  as  for  the  radium 
rays. 

Results  originally  obtained  with  an  electrometer  in  the  place  of 
an  electroscope  gave  results  indicating  about  20  per  cent,  less  pene- 
trating power.  The  electroscopic  results  are  probably  the  more 
accurate,  but  those  obtained  with  the  electrometer,  as  given  below, 
serve  for  the  purpose  of  comparison. 

M  ,  i  Thickness  of  metal  to 

absorb  half  of  the  rays 

Mercury  ...  -75  cms. 

Lead  ...  -9      „ 

Tin  ...  1-8      „ 

Copper  ...  2-2      „ 

Zinc  ...  2'5      „ 

Iron  ...  2-5      „ 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  p.  517,  No.  22,  1902. 


IV 


NATURE   OF   THE    RADIATIO1STS 


143 


98.     Connection  between  absorption  and  density.     The 

absorption    constant    X    of    the    rays    was    determined    from   the 

equation  T  =  e~Xx  for  screens  of  different  materials.     On  account 

__  *0 

of  the   small  absorption  in  water  and   glass  it  was  difficult  to 
determine  \  with  accuracy. 

The  results  are  included  in  the  following  table : — 


y  rays 

/3  rays  from 
uranium 

Substance 

x 

X 

\ 

\ 

density 

density 

Water 

•033 

•033 

Glass 

•086 

•035 

14-0 

5-7 

Iron  ... 

•28 

•036 

44 

5'6 

Zinc... 

•28 

•039 



Copper 
Tin  

•31 
•38 

•035 
•052 

60 
96 

7-7 
13-2 

Lead 

•77 

•068 

•1-22 

10-8 

Mercury 

•92 

•068 

— 

1 

On  the  right  is  added  a  comparison  table  for  the  ft  rays  given 
out  by  uranium.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  quotient  of  absorption 
by  density  is  in  neither  case  a  constant,  but  the  differences  are 
no  greater  for  the  non-deviable  penetrating  rays  than  for  the  devi- 
able  rays  of  uranium.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  value 
of  X  divided  by  the  density  is,  for  both  types  of  rays,  twice  as  great 
for  lead  as  for  glass  or  iron. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  table  that  the  penetrating  rays 
from  radium  compared  with  the  deviable  rays  of  uranium  pass 
through  a  thickness  of  glass  about  160  times  greater  for  the  same 
reduction  of  intensity. 

99.  Nature  of  the  rays.  In  addition  to  their  great  pene- 
trating power,  the  7  rays  differ  from  the  a  and  13  rays  in  riot  being 
deflected  to  an  appreciable  amount  by  a  magnetic  field. 

It  now  remains  to  consider  whether  the  rays  are  material  in 
nature  or  whether  they  are  a  type  of  ether-pulse  like  Rontgen 
rays.  In  some  respects  the  7  rays  seem  more  closely  allied  to 


144  NATURE   OF  THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

cathode  than  to  Rb'ntgen  rays.  It  is  well  known  that  Rontgen 
rays  produce  much  greater  ionization  in  gases  such  as  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  and  hydrochloric  acid  gas  than  in  air,  although  the 
differences  in  density  are  not  large.  For  example,  under  the 
influence  of  X  rays  sulphuretted  hydrogen  has  six  times  the  con- 
ductivity of  air,  but  under  the  cathode  rays  the  conductivity  is 
only  slightly  greater  than  that  of  air.  In  an  experiment  made 
by  the  writer,  in  which  the  testing  vessel  was  filled  with  sulphu- 
retted hydrogen,  it  was  found  that  the  current  for  the  7  rays 
from  radium  was  only  slightly  greater  than  it  was  when  the  vessel 
contained  air. 

Strutt1  has  recently  made  a  detailed  investigation  of  the  rela- 
tive conductivity  of  gases  exposed  to  the  7  rays  of  radium.  The 
results  have  already  been  given  in  the  table  in  section  45.  He  found 
that  the  relative  conductivities  of  different  gases  compared  with 
air  were  about  the  same  as  for  the  /3  rays  of  radium,  but  were  very 
different  from  the  conductivities  for  Rontgen  rays. 

The  variation  of  absorption  of  these  rays  with  density  is  also 
very  similar  to  that  of  the  cathode  rays.  On  the  other  hand, 
Benoist'2  has  shown  that  the  relative  absorption  of  Rontgen  rays 
by  matter  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  kind  of  rays  em- 
ployed. "  Hard  "  rays  give  ratios  quite  different  from  "  soft "  rays. 
For  penetrating  Rontgen  rays,  the  absorption  of  the  rays  by  a  given 
weight  of  material  is  a  continuous  and  increasing  function  of  the 
atomic  weight. 

The  7  rays  thus  show  properties  with  regard  to  absorption 
and  ionization  unlike  those  of  X  rays,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  the  7  rays  are  of  a  far  more  penetrating  character.  It  has 
not  yet  been  shown  that  the  properties  of  very  penetrating  X  rays 
with  regard  to  relative  absorption  and  ionization  are  the  same  as 
those  of  the  ordinary  rays  of  moderate  penetrating  power  which 
l^ave  so  far  been  examined. 

It  will  be  shown  later  (section  194)  that  the  7  rays,  like  the 
$  rays,  appear  only  in  the  last  stage  of  the  succession  of  chemical 
changes  occurring  in  active  bodies.  Active  products  which  give 
a  rays  and  no  ft  rays  do  not  give  rise  to  7  rays.  The  @  and  7  rays 

1  Proc.  Eoy.  Soc.  72,  p.  208,  1903. 

2  C.  E.  132,  p.  545,  1901. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  145 

appear  always  to  go  together  and  are  present  in  the  same  pro- 
portion. The  main  facts  known  about  the  7  rays  are  summarized 
below : — 

(1)  Great  penetrating  power. 

(2)  Non-deviation  in  an  intense  magnetic  field. 

(3)  A  law  of  absorption  similar  to  that  of  cathode  and  ft  rays. 

(4)  Occurrence  of  ft  and  7  rays  together  and  in  the  same 
proportion. 

Three  possible  hypotheses  may  thus  be  considered : — 

(1)  That  the  7  rays  are  very  penetrating  Rontgen  rays. 

(2)  That  they  consist  of  negatively  charged  particles  projected 
with  a  velocity  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of  light. 

(3)  That   they  consist  of  uncharged   bodies   projected  with 
great  velocity. 

Rontgen  rays  are  believed  to  be  electromagnetic  pulses  set  up 
by  the  sudden  stoppage  of  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum 
tube.  Thus  it  is  to  be  expected  that  Rontgen  rays  should  be 
produced  at  the  sudden  starting  as  well  as  at  the  sudden  stopping 
of  electrons.  Most  of  the  ft  particles  from  the  radio-elements  are 
projected  with  velocities  much  greater  than  those  of  the  cathode 
rays  in  a  vacuum  tube.  Thus  Rontgen  rays  of  a  very  penetrating 
character  should  be  set  up,  if  the  electron  is  very  suddenly  expelled 
with  great  velocity.  This  would  account  for  the  facts  (1),  (2)  and 
(4),  but  it  is  at  variance  with  (3)  unless  the  relative  conductivity 
of  gases  for  a  very  penetrating  type  of  X  rays  follows  the  law  of 
conductivity  of  the  ft  or  cathode  rays1.  Strutt  has  also  pointed 
out  that  the  proportion  of  7  rays  to  ft  rays  from  radium  is  much 
greater  than  the  proportion  of  X  rays  to  the  cathode  rays  produced 
in  a  vacuum  tube. 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  ft  rays  from  radium  are  complex 

1  (Added  Feb.  18,  1904.)  Mr  A.  S.  Eve  of  McGill  University,  Montreal,  lias 
recently  examined  the  relative  conductivity  of  some  gases  for  very  "hard"  X  rays 
after  their  passage  through  a  lead  screen  1-8  mms.  thick,  and  has  obtained  ratios 
very  different  from  those  observed  for  "soft"  rays,  but  approximating  closely  to 
those  obtained  for  the  y  rays.  These  observations  remove  the  most  serious  objec- 
tion which  has  been  urged  against  the  view  that  the  7  rays  are  in  reality  X  rays  of 
a  very  penetrating  type. 

R.  R.-A.  10 


146  NATUKE   OF'  THE    RADIATIONS  [CH. 

and  include  electrons  travelling  with  a  speed  of  more  than  95  per 
cent,  of  that  of  light.  The  apparent  mass  of  an  electron  would 
increase  rapidly  as  the  speed  of  light  is  approached,  and  for  the 
velocity  of  light  the  mass  should  be  infinite  and  the  path  unaffected 
by  a  magnetic  field.  It  does  not  seem  improbable  that  some  of 
the  /3  rays  of  radium  are  projected  with  a  velocity  very  nearly 
equal  to  that  of  light,  and  thus  it  is  possible  that  the  7  rays 
may  really  consist  of  electrons  expelled  with  velocities  which  still 
more  nearly  approach  that  of  light.  The  great  increase  of  pene- 
trating power  is  to  be  expected  on  account  of  the  rapidly  increasing- 
energy  of  the  electron  as  the  speed  of  light  is  approached.  An 
objection  to  this  hypothesis  lies  in  the  experimental  observation 
that  there  appears  to  be  no  gradual  passage  from  the  stage  of 
penetrating  deviable  rays  to  non-deviable  very  penetrating  rays. 
It  is  also  possible  that  the  <y  rays  may  consist  of  uncharged 
particles  projected  with  great  velocity.  Such  an  hypothesis  would 
account  for  the  relative  conductivity  of  gases  and  for  the  non- 
deviation  of  the  rays  in  a  magnetic  field.  It  would  also  account 
for  the  great  penetrating  power  of  the  rays,  since  a  small  uncharged 
particle  moving  through  matter  would  probably  not  be  absorbed 
as  rapidly  as  a  charged  particle  of  the  same  mass  and  velocity^- 
Nevertheless,  sufficient  experimental  data  are  not  yet  available  to 
distinguish  definitely  between  the  three  hypotheses  discussed  above. 


PART   V. 
SECONDARY  RAYS. 

100.  Production  of  secondary  rays.  It  has  long  been 
known  that  Rontgenjrays,  when  they  impinge  on  solid^^bstacles, 
produce  secondary  rays  of  much  less  penetrating  power  than  the 
incident  rays.  This  was  first  shown  by  Perrin  and  has  been 
investigated  in  detail  by  Sagnac,  Langevin,  Townsend  and  others. 
Thus  it  is  not  surprising  that  similar  phenomena  should  be 
observed  for  the  radiation  from  radio-active  substances.  By 
means  of  the  photographic  method,  Becquerel1  has  made  a  close 

1  C.  R.  132,  pp.  371,  734,  1286.    1901. 


IV]  NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  147 

study  of  the  secondary  radiations  produced  by  radio-active  sub- 
stances. In  his  earliest  observations  he  noticedJthat^adiographs 
of  metallic  objects  were  always  surrounded-  by  a  diffuse  border. 
This  effect  is  due  to  the  secondary  rays  set  up  by  the  incident 
rays  at  the  surface  of  the  screen. 

The  secondary  rays  produced  by  the  a  rays  are  very  feeble. 
They  are  best  shown  by  polonium,  which  gives  out  only  a  rays, 
when,  in  consequence,  the  results  are  not  complicated  by  the 
action  of  the  ft  rays.  Strong  secondary  rays  are  set  up  at  the 
point  of  impact -of  the  ft  or  cathodic  rays.  Becquerel  found  that 
the  magnitude  of  this  action  depended  greatly  on  the  velocity 
of  the  rays.  The  rays  of  lowest  velocity  gave  the  most  intense 
secondaiy  action,  while  the  penetrating  rays  gave,  in  comparison, 
scarcely  any  secondary  effect.  In  consequence  of  the  presence  of 
this  secondary  radiation,  the  photographic  impression  of  a  screen 
pierced  with  holes  is  not  clear  and  distinct.  In  each  case  there  is 
a  double  photographic  impression,  due  to  the  primary  rays  and  the 
secondary  rays  set  up  by  them. 

These  secondary  rays  are  de viable  by  a  magnetic  field,  and  in 
turn  produce  tertiary  rays  and  so  on.  The  secondary  rays  are  in  all 
cases  more  readily  deviated  and  absorbed  than  the  primary  rays, 
from  which  they_arise.  The  very  penetrating  7  rays  give  rise  to 
secondary  rays,  which  cause  intense  action  on  the  photographic 
plate.  When  some  radium  was  placed  in  a  cavity  inside  a  deep 
lead  block,  rectangular  in  shape,  besides  the  impression  due  to  the 
direct  rays  through  the  lead,  Becquerel  observed  that  there  was 
also  a  strong  impression  due  to  the  secondary  rays  emitted  from 
the  surface  of  the  lead.  The  action  of  these  secondary  rays  on 
the  plate  is  so  strong  that  the  effect  on  the  plate  is,  in  many  cases, 
increased  by  adding  a  metal  screen  between  the  active  material 
and  the  plate. 

The  comparative  photographic  action  of  the  primary  and 
secondary  rays  cannot  be  taken  as  a  relative  measure  of  the 
intensity  of  their  radiations.  For  example,  only  a  small  portion 
of  the  energy  of  the  ft  rays  is  in  general  absorbed  in  the  sensitive 
film.  Since  the  secondary  rays  are  far  more  easily  absorbed  than 
the  primary  rays,  a  far  greater  proportion  of  their  energy  is  ex- 
pended in  producing  photographic  action  than  in  the  case  of  the 

10—2 


148 


NATURE   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH.  IV 


primary  rays.  It  is  thus  not  surprising  that  the  secondary  rays 
set  up  by  the  ft  and  7  rays  may  in  some  cases  produce  a  photo- 
graphic impression  comparable  with,  if  not  greater  than,  the  effect 
of  the  incident  rays. 

On  account  of  these  secondary  rays,  radiographs  produced  by 
the  ft  rays  of  radium  in  general  show  a  diffuse  border  round  the 
shadow  of  the  object.  For  this  reason  radiographs  of  this  kind 
lack  the  sharpness  of  outline  of  X  ray  photographs. 

101.  Mme  Curie1  has  shown  by  the  electric  method  that  the 
a  rays  of  polonium  produce  secondary  rays.  The  method  adopted 
was  to  compare  the  ionization  current  between  two  parallel  plates, 
when  two  screens  of  different  material,  placed  over  the  polonium, 
were  interchanged. 


Screens  employed 

Thickness 
in  mms. 

Current 
observed 

Aluminium 
Cardboard 

o-oi 

0-005 

17-9 

Cardboard 
Aluminium 

0-005 

o-oi 

6-7 

Aluminium 
Tin          

o-oi 

0-005 

150 

Tin          

Aluminium 

0-005 

o-oi 

126 

Tin           

Cardboard 

0-005 
0-005 

13-9 

Cardboard 
Tin          

0-005 
0-005 

4-4 

These  results  show  that  the  a  rays  of  polonium  are  modified  in 
passing  through  matter,  and  that  the  amount  of  secondary  rays  set 
up  varies  with  screens  of  different  material.  Mme  Curie,  using  the 
same  method,  was  unable  to  observe  any  such  effect  for  the  ft  rays 
of  radium.  The  production  of  secondary  rays  by  the  ft  rays  of 
radium  is,  however,  readily  shown  by  the  photographic  method. 


These  presentee  a  la  Faculte  des  Science*,  Paris  1903,  p.  85. 


CHAPTER  V. 

RATE  OF  EMISSION  OF  ENERGY. 

102.  Comparison  of  the  ionization  produced  by  the  a 
and  /3  rays.  With  unscreened  active  material  the  ionization 
produced  between  two  parallel  plates,  placed  as  in  Fig.  16,  is  mainly 
due  to  the  a  rays.  On  account  of  the  slight  penetrating  power  of 
the  a  rays,  the  current  due  to  them  practically  reaches  a  maximum 
with  a  small  thickness  of  radio-active  material.  The  following 
saturation  currents  were  observed1  for  "different  thicknesses  of 
uranium  oxide  between  parallel  plates  sufficiently  far  apart  for  all 
the  a  rays  to  be  absorbed  in  the  gas  between  them. 

Surface  of  uranium  oxide  38  sq.  cms. 


Weight  of  uranium  oxide 

Saturation  current 

in  grammes  per  sq.  cm. 

in  amperes  per  sq.  cm. 

of  surface 

of  surface 

•0036 

1-7  x  10~13 

•0096 

3-2xlO~13 

•0189 

4-OxlO-13 

•0350 

4'4xlO-13 

•0955 

4-7xlO~13 

The  current  has  reached  about  half  its  maximum  value  for 
a  weight  of  oxide  '0055  gr.  per  sq.  cm.  If  the  a  rays  are  cut  off 
by  a  metallic  screen,  the  ionization  is  then  mainly  due  to  the 
y8  rays,  since  the  ionization  produced  by  the  7  rays  is  small  in 
comparison.  For  the  ft  rays  from  uranium  oxide  it  has  been 


1  Rutherford  and  McClung,  Phil.  Trans.  A.  p.  25,  1901. 


150 


KATE   OF   EMISSION   OF   ENERGY 


[CH. 


shown  (section   79)  that  the  current  reaches  half  its  maximum 
value  for  a  thickness  of  O'll  gr.  per  sq.  cm. 

On  account  of  the  difference  in  the  penetrating  power  of  the  a 
and  ft  rays,  the  ratio  of  the  ionization  currents  produced  by  them 
depends  on  the  thickness  of  the  radio-active  layer  under  examina- 
tion. The  following  comparative  values  of  the  current  due  to  the 
a  and  ft  rays  were  obtained  for  very  thin  layers  of  active  matter1.  A 
weight  of  1/10  gramme  of  fine  powder,  consisting  of  uranium  oxide, 
thorium  oxide,  or  radium  chloride  of  activity  2000,  was  spread  as 
uniformly  as  possible  over  an  area  of  80  sq.  cms.  The  saturation 
current  was  observed  between  parallel  plates  5'7  cms.  apart.  This 
distance  was  sufficient  to  absorb  most  of  the  a  rays  from  the  active 
substances.  A  layer  of  aluminium  '009  cm.  thick  absorbed  all 
the  a  rays. 


Current  due 
to  a  rays 

Current  due 
to  ]8  rays 

,q 

Katio  currents  - 
a 

Uranium     .  .  . 

1 

1 

•0074 

Thorium 

1 

•27 

•0020 

Eadium 

2000 

1350 

•0033 

In  the  above  table  the  saturation  current  due  to  the  a  and 
ft  rays  of  uranium  is,  in  each  case,  taken  as  unity.  The  third 
column  gives  the  ratio  of  the  currents  observed  for  equal  weights 
of  substance.  The  results  are  only  approximate  in  character,  for 
the  ionization  due  to  a  given  weight  of  substance  depends  on  its 
fineness  of  division.  In  all  cases,  the  current  due  to  the  ft  rays  is 
small  compared  with  that  due  to  the  a  rays,  being  greatest  for 
uranium  and  least  for  thorium.  As  the  thickness  of  layer  increases, 

/Q 
the  ratio  of  currents  —  steadily  increases  to  a  constant  value. 

103.  Comparison  of  the  energy  radiated  by  the  a  and 
ft  rays.  It  has  not  yet  been  found  possible  to  measure  directly 
the  energy  of  the  a  and  ft  rays.  A  comparison  of  the  energy 
radiated  in  the  two  forms  of  rays  can,  however,  be  made  indirectly 
by  two  distinct  methods. 

1  Rutherford  and  Grier,  Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  1902. 


V]  RATE   OF    EMISSION   OF   ENERGY  151 

If  it  is  assumed  that  the  same  amount  of  energy  is  required  to 
produce  an  ion  by  either  the  a  or  the  ft  ray,  and  that  the  same 
proportion  of  the  total  energy  is  used  up  in  producing  ions,  an 
approximate  estimate  can  be  made_oLJJie^Jcaticu  of  the  energy 
radiated  by  thp  a  and  ft  rays  by  measuring  the  ratio  of  the  total 
number  of  ions  produced  by  them.  If  X  is  the  coefficient  of 
absorption  of  the  ft  rays  in  air,  the  rate  of  production  of  ions 
per  unit  volume  at  a  distance  x  from  the  source  is  q0e~^  where  qQ 
is  the  rate  of  ionization  at  the  source. 

The  total  number  of  ions  produced  by  complete  absorption  of 
the  rays  is 

Jo    °  A, 

Now  X  is  difficult  to  measure  experimentally  for  air,  but  an 
approximate  estimate  can  be  made  of  its  value  from  the  known 
fact  that  the  absorption  of  ft  rays  is  approximately  proportional  to 
the  density  of  any  given  substance. 

For  ft  rays  from  uranium  the  value  of  X  for  aluminium  is  about 
14,  and  X  divided  by  the  density  is  5*4.  Taking  the  density  of  air 
as  '0012,  we  find  that 

X  for  air  =  '0065. 

The  total  number  of  ions  produced  in  air  is  thus  154  q0  when 
the  rays  are  completely  absorbed. 

Now  from  the  above  table  the  ionization  due  to  the  ft  rays 
is  '0074  of  that  produced  by  a  rays,  when  the  ft  rays  passed 
through  a  distance  of  5'7  cms.  of  air. 

Thus  we  have  approximately 

Total  number  of  ions  produced  by  ft  rays  _  '0074        _^  __  ~  ^ 
Total  number  of  ions  produced  by  a  rays        5'7 

Therefore  about  1/6  of  the  total  energy  radiated  into  air  by  a 
thin  layer  of  uranium  is  carried  by  the  ft  rays  or  electrons.  The 
ratio  for  thorium  is  about  1/22  and  for  radium  about  1/14,  assum- 
ing the  rays  to  have  about  the  same  average  value  of  X. 

This  calculation  takes  into  account  only  the  energy  which  is 
radiated  out  into  the  surrounding  gas ;  but  on  account  of  the  ease 
with  which  the  a  rays  are  absorbed,  even  with  a  thin  layer,  the 


152  RATE   OF   EMISSION   OF    ENERGY  [CH. 

greater  proportion  of  the  radiation  is  absorbed  by  the  radio-active 
substance  itself.  This  is  seen  to  be  the  case  when  it  is  recalled 
that  the  a  radiation  of  thorium  or  radium  is  reduced  to  half 
value  after  passing  through  a  thickness  of  about  0*0005  cm.  of 
aluminium.  Taking  into  consideration  the  great  density  of  the 
radio-active  substances,  it  is  probable  that  most  of  the  radiation 
which  escapes  into  the  air  is  due  to  a  thin  skin  of  the  powder  not 
much  more  than  '0001  cm.  in  thickness. 

An  estimate,  however,  of  the  relative  rate  of  emission  of 
energy  by  the  a  and  ft  rays  from  a  thick  layer  of  material  can  be 
made  in  the  following  way  :  —  For  simplicity  suppose  a  thick  layer 
of  radio-active  substance  spread  uniformly  over  a  large  plane  area. 
There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  radiations  are  emitted 
uniformly  from  each  portion  of  the  mass  ;  consequently  the 
radiation,  which  produces  the  ionizing  action  in  the  gas  above 
the  radio-active  layer,  is  the  sum  total  of  all  the  radiation  which 
reaches  the  surface  of  the  layer. 

Let  \!  be  the  average  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  a  rays  in 
the  radio-active  substance  itself  and  <r  the  specific  gravity  of  the 
substance.  Let  E^  be  the  total  energy  radiated  per  sec.  per  unit 
mass  of  the  substance  when  the  absorption  of  the  rays  in  the 
substance  itself  is  disregarded.  The  energy  per  sec.  radiated  to 
the  upper  surface  by  a  thickness  dx  of  a  layer  of  unit  area  at  a 
distance  x  from  the  surface  is  given  by 


The  total  energy  TFj  per  unit  area  radiated  to  the  surface  per 
sec.  by  a  thickness  d  is  given  by 


f 

/« 


if  \d  is  large. 

In  a  similar  way  it  may  be  shown  that  the  energy  TF2  of  the 

ET 

ft  rays  reaching  the  surface  is  given  by  W 2  =  -0~  where  E2  and  X> 


V]  RATE   OF    EMISSION   OF   EXERGY  153 

are  the  values  for  the  ft  rays  corresponding  to  El  and  Xj  for  the 
OL  ras.     It  thus  follows  that 


Xj  and  X2  are  difficult  to  determine  directly  for  the  radio-active 
substance  itself,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  ratio  Xj/X*,  is  not  very 
different  from  the  ratio  for  the  absorption  coefficients  for  another 
substance  like  aluminium.  This  follows  from  the  general  result 
that  the  absorption  of  both  a  and  ft  rays  is  proportional  to  the 
density  of  the  substance;  for  it  has  already  been  shown  in  the 
case  of  the  ft  rays  from  uranium  that  the  absorption  of  the  rays  in 
the  radio-active  material  is  about  the  same  as  for  non-radio-active 
matter  of  the  same  density. 

With  a  thick  layer  of  uranium  oxide  spread  over  an  area  of 
22  sq.  cms.,  it  was  found  that  the  saturation  current  between 
parallel  plates  6*1  cms.  apart,  due  to  the  a  rays,  was  12'7  times 
as  great  as  the  current  due  to  the  ft  rays.  Since  the  a  rays  were 
entirely  absorbed  between  the  plates  and  the  total  ionization 
produced  by  the  ft  rays  is  154  times  the  value  at  the  surface  of  the 
plates, 

W1     total  number  of  ions  due  to  a  rays 
W2     total  number  of  ions  due  to  ft  rays 

12-7  x  6-1 
=  —  =-*j  —  =  0*5  approximately. 

Now  the  value  of  Xj  for  aluminium  is  2740  and  of  \%  for  the 
same  metal  14,  thus 

=100  approximately. 


This  shows  that  the  energy  radiated  from  a  thick  layer  of 
material  by  the  ft  rays  is  only  about  1  per  cent,  of  the  energy 
radiated  in  the  form  of  a  rays. 

This  estimate  is  confirmed  by  calculations  based  on  indepen- 
dent data.  Let  mlf  ra2  be  the  masses  of  the  a  and  ft  particles 
respectively.  Let  vl}  v2  be  their  velocities. 

* 
Energy  of  one  a  particle  _ 


Energy  of  one  ft  particle      m2v<?     in<t 

e 


154  RATE  OF  EMISSION  OF  ENERGY  [CH. 

Now  it  has  been  shown  that  for  the  a  rays  of  radium 
v1  =  2-5  x  109, 

—  =     6  x  10s. 
m^ 

The  velocity  of  the  ft  rays  of  radium  varies  between  wide 
limits.  Taking  for  an  average  value 

ws=ro  x  1010, 

—  =  1-8  x  107, 
ra2 

it  follows  that  the  energy  of  the  a  particle  from  radium  is  almost 
83  times  the  energy  of  the  {3  particle.  If  equal  numbers  of  a  and 
/3  particles  are  projected  per  second,  the  total  energy  radiated  in 
the  form  of  a  rays  is  about  83  times  the  amount  in  the  form  of 
/3  rays. 

Evidence  will  be  given  later  to  show  that  the  number  of 
a  particles  projected  is  probably  several  times  greater  than  the 
number  of  /3  particles ;  so  that  a  still  greater  proportion  of  the 
energy  is  emitted  in  the  form  of  a  rays.  These  results  thus  lead 
to  the  conclusion  that,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  energy 
emitted,  the  a  rays  are  far  more  important  than  the  /?  rays. 
This  conclusion  is  supported  "by  other  evidence  which  is  discussed 
in  chapter  X,  where  it  will  be  shown  that  the  a  rays  play  by  far 
the  most  important  part  in  the  changes  occurring  in  radio-active 
bodies,  and  that  the  (3  rays  only  appear  in  the  last  stage  of  the 
radio-active  processes.  From  data  based  on  the  relative  absorption 
and  ionization  of  the  /£  and  7  rays  in  air,  it  can  be  shown  that  the 
7  rays  carry  off  about  the  same  amount  of  energy  as  the  ft  rays. 

104.     Number  and  Energy  of  the   a  particles.     It   has 

been  shown  that  the  greater  part  of  the  energy  emitted  from 
the  radio-elements  in  the  form  of  ionizing  radiations  is  due  to 
the  a  rays.  Rutherford  and  McClung  (loc.  cit.)  made  an  estimate 
of  the  energy  of  the  a  rays,  radiated  into  the  gas  from  a  thin 
layer  of  active  matter,  by  determining  the  total  number  of  ions 
produced  by  the  complete  absorption  of  the  a  rays.  Taking 
as  the  value  for  the  energy  required  to  produce  an  ion  in  a  gas 


v> 

V]  RATE   OF    EMISSION   OF   ENERGY  155 

1*90  x  10~10  ergs,  it  was  calculated  that  the  amount  of  energy, 
radiated  into  the  gas,  from  1  gram  of  uranium  oxide,  spread  over 
a  plate  in  a  thin  layer,  corresponded  to  0'032  gram-calories  per 
year.  Taking  the  activity  of  pure  radium  chloride  as  1,500,000 
times  that  of  uranium,  the  corresponding  rate  of  emission  of  energy 
from  radium  is  48,000  gram-calories  per  year.  This  is  an  under- 
estimate, for  it  includes  only  the  energy  radiated  into  the  gas. 
The  actual  amount  of  energy  released  in  the  form  of  a  rays  is 
evidently  much  greater  than  this  on  account  of  the  absorption  of 
the  a  rays  in  the  active  matter  itself. 

It  is  very  important  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  total  energy 
emitted  in  the  form  of  a  rays,  and  also  of  the  number  of  a  particles 
expelled  per  second  from  a  known  weight  of  an  active  substance. 

Three  different  methods  of  estimating  these  quantities  will  now 
be  considered. 

Method  1.  It  can  be  deduced  from  the  results  of  Wien 
(section  74)  that  the  number  of  ft  particles  projected  from 
1  gram  of  radium  bromide  is  6 '6  x  109  per  second.  In  this  calcu- 
lation no  correction  has  been  made  for  the  ft  rays  absorbed  in 
the  envelope  of  the  active  matter  and  in  the  surrounding  glass 
tube.  Assuming  that  about  half  of  the  ft  particles  escape,  it 
follows  that  the  number  of  ft  particles  projected  per  second  from 
1  gram  of  radium  is  about  2  x  1010  per  second.  Now  it  will  be 
shown  later,  in  chapter  X,  that  probably  four  a  particles  are  pro- 
jected from  radium  for  each  ft  particle.  The  number  of  a  particles 
projected  per  second  is  thus  about  8  x  1010.  Taking  the  energy  of 
each  a  particle  (section  86)  as  5*9  x  10~6  ergs,  this  corresponds  to 
a  rate  of  emission  of  energy  from  1  gram  of  radium  of  40  gram- 
calories  per  hour. 

Method  2.  In  the  case  of  an  active  substance  in  the  solid 
or  liquid  state,  most  of  the  a  rays  emitted  are  absorbed  in  the 
active  material.  The  total  ionization  produced  by  all  the  a  rays 
from  1  gram  of  radium,  when  there  is  no  absorption  in  the 
active  substance  itself,  was  experimentally  deduced  in  the  follow- 
ing way.  A  weight  of  0*26  milligrams  of  pure  radium  bromide  was 
dissolved  in  water  and  the  solution,  spread  uniformly  over  a  plate 
about  100  sq.  cms.  in  area,  was  evaporated  to  dry  ness.  A  few 


156  RATE  OF   EMISSION   OF   ENERGY  [CH. 

hours  afterwards  the  activity,  measured  by  the  a  rays,  reached  a 
minimum  corresponding  to  25°/0  of  its  maximum  value  when  in  a 
state  of  radio-active  equilibrium  (see  section  191).  The  saturation 
current  between  parallel  plates,  sufficiently  far  apart  to  absorb  all 
the  a  rays  in  the  gas  between  them,  was  measured  by  a  galvano- 
meter and  found  to  be  2 '6  x  10~8  amperes.  In  this  case  the  film 
of  radium  bromide  was  so  thin  that  the  absorption  of  the  a  rays  by 
the  radium  itself  was  very  small.  Taking  into  account  that  half  of 
the  a  radiation  from  the  radium  was  absorbed  in  the  plate,  it  can 
readily  be  deduced  that  the  total  current  corresponding  to  1  gram 
of  radium  when  in  a  state  of  radio-active  equilibrium  is  equal  to 
1*2  x  10~4  electromagnetic  units.  Taking  the  charge  on  each  ion 
as  1*13  x  10"20  electromagnetic  units,  this  corresponds  to  the  pro- 
duction of  1016  ions  per  second  per  gram1. 

Langevin2  has  deduced  from  the  results  of  Townsend  on  ioniza- 
tion  by  collision,  that  the  energy  required  to  produce  fresh  ions  at 
every  collision  is  equal  to  the  energy  acquired  by  an  ion  moving 
freely  between  two  points,  which  differ  in  potential  by  about  60 
volts.  This  corresponds  to  an  amount  of  energy  of  6'8  x  10~u  ergs. 
The  total  rate  of  emission  of  energy  on  the  production  of  1016  ions 
per  second  is  thus  7  x  105  ergs  per  second  or  about  60  gram- 
calories  per  hour. 

Method  3.  The  ionization  produced  in  the  gas  by  the  pro- 
jected a  particles  is  due  to  collision  with  the  neutral  molecules. 
The  maximum  number  of  ions  produced  per  unit  length  of  path 
will  be  reached  when  each  collision  results  in  the  production  of 
fresh  ions.  Now  Townsend3  has  shown  that  the  maximum  number 
of  ions  produced  by  a  moving  electron  per  cm.  of  its  path  in  air  at 
the  pressure  of  1  mm.  of  mercury  is  21.  On  the  kinetic  theory  of 
gases,  it  can  be  deduced  from  this  result  (Langevin,  loc.  cit.)  that 
the  electron  ionizes  every  molecule  in  a  circular  cylinder  whose 
axis  is  the  direction  of  movement  and  whose  diameter  is  equal  to 
the  diameter  of  the  molecule.  It  follows  that  the  electron  must 
be  of  dimensions  small  compared  with  the  molecule — a  result  which 
is  in  accordance  with  the  experimental  data.  In  the  case  of  the 

1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  May  1903. 

2  These  presentee  a  la  Faculte  des  Sciences,  Paris  1902,  p.  85. 

3  Phil.  Mag.  p.  19a,  Feb.  1901. 


V]  RATE   OF   EMISSION    OF    ENERGY  157 

a  particles,  the  ionization  is  produced  by  a  charged  body  atomic 
in  size.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  maximum  number 
of  ions  produced  by  the  a  particles  per  cm.  of  their  path  cannot  be 
greater  than  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  cylinder  of  twice  the 
diameter  of  the  molecule.  The  maximum  number  of  ions  produced 
per  cm.  of  path  in  air  at  1  mm.  pressure  cannot  in  consequence  be 
greater  than  84.  The  number  per  cm.  at  atmospheric  pressure 
and  temperature  will  be  63,800. 

Now  half  the  a  rays  from  radium  are  absorbed  in  traversing 
075  cm.  of  air  (section  92).  The  total  number  of  ions  produced 
by  the  rays  is  about  the  same  as  if  the  ionization  at  the  surface 
of  the  active  matter  extended  uniformly  for  a  distance  of  1*09  cms. 
The  number  of  ions  produced  on  an  average  by  each  a  particle  of 
radium  cannot  in  consequence  be  greater  than  70,000. 

The  total  number  of  ions  produced  for  1  gram  of  radium  is 
1016.  This  corresponds  to  an  emission  of  1*4  x  1011  a  particles  from 
1  gram  of  radium  per  second  and  an  emission  of  energy  of  70  gram- 
calories  per  hour. 

The  approximate  estimates  by  the  three  methods  of  the 
number  of  a  particles  and  the  rate  of  emission  of  energy  from 
1  gram  of  radium  are  in  good  agreement.  It  may  be  concluded 
that  from  1  gram  of  radium  : — 

(1)  about  1011  a  particles  are  projected  per  second ; 

(2)  the  rate  of  emission  of  energy  in  the  form  of  a  particles  is 

probably  equal  to  about  50  gram-calories  per  hour. 

These  results  will  be  found  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  deduc- 
tions drawn  from  the  observed  heat  emission  of  radium  discussed 
in  the  next  section. 

Since  radium  bromide  has  an  activity  (measured  by  the  a  rays) 
of  about  1,500,000  times  uranium,  it  follows  that  the  number  of 
i  particles  projected  from  1  gram  of  thorium  or  uranium  is  only 
7  x  10~7  of  the  number  from  radium. 

In  the  following  table  are  given  the  probable  number  of  a 
particles  projected  per  second  and  the  rate  of  emission  of  energy 
in  the  form  of  a  particles  from  1  gram  of  each  of  the  three  radio- 
elements. 


158 


RATE   OF   EMISSION   OF   ENERGY 


[CH. 


Number  of 
a  particles 
per  sec. 

Emission  of  energy 
in  form  of  a  rays 
per  hour 

Emission  of  energy 
per  year 

Uranium 
Thorium      ... 
Radium 

70000 
70000 
1011 

3'5  x  10~6  gram-cal. 
3-5  x  10~5          „ 
50 

•3  gram-cal. 
•3 
4  '4  x  10°  gram-cal. 

The  rate  of  emission  of  energy  in  the  form  of  0  and  7  rays  is 
probably  about  1  per  cent,  of  the  above  values.  For  a  thin  layer 
of  a  radio-element  the  amount  of  energy  radiated  into  the  air  in 
the  form  of  rays  is  for  most  cases  about  10  per  cent,  of  the  above 
values. 

105.  Heat  emission  of  radium.  P.  Curie  and  Laborde1 
first  drew  attention  to  the  striking  result  that  a  radium  compound 
kept  itself  continuously  at  a  temperature  several  degrees  higher 
than  that  of  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  Thus  the  energy 
emitted  from  radium  can  be  demonstrated  by  its  direct  heating 
effect  as  well  as  by  photographic  and  electric  means.  Curie 
and  Laborde  determined  the  rate  of  the  emission  of  heat  in 
two  different  ways.  In  one  method  the  difference  of  tempera- 
ture was  observed  by  means  of  an  iron-constantin  thermo-couple 
between  a  tube  containing  one  gram  of  radiferous  chloride 
of  barium,  of  activity  about  1/6  of  pure  radium,  and  an  ex- 
actly similar  tube  containing  one  gram  of  pure  barium  chloride. 
The  difference  of  temperature  observed  was  1*5°  C.  In  order  to 
measure  the  rate  of  emission  of  heat,  a  coil  of  wire  of  known 
resistance  was  placed  in  the  pure  barium  chloride,  and  the  strength 
of  the  electric  current  required  in  order  to  raise  the  barium  to  the 
same  temperature  as  the  radiferous  barium  was  observed.  In  the 
other  method,  the  active  barium,  enclosed  in  a  glass  tube,  was 
placed  inside  a  Bunsen  calorimeter.  Before  the  radium  was  intro- 
duced, it  was  observed  that  the  level  of  the  mercury  in  the  stem 
remained  steady.  As  soon  as  the  radium,  which  had  previously 
been  cooled  in  melting  ice,  was  placed  in  the  calorimeter,  the 
mercury  column  began  to  move  at  a  regular  rate.  If  the  radium 
tube  was  removed,  the  movement  of  the  mercury  ceased.  It  was 


1  C.  R.  136,  p.  673,  1903. 


RATE   OF    EMISSION    OF    ENERGY 


159 


found  from  these  experiments  that  the  heat  emission  from  the 
1  gram  of  radiferous  barium,  containing  about  1/6  of  its  weight  of 
pure  radium  chloride,  was  14  gram-calories  per  hour.  Measure- 
ments were  also  made  with  O08  gram  of  pure  radium  chloride. 
Curie  and  Laborde  deduced  from  these  results  that  1  gram  of  pure 
radium  emits  a  quantity  of  heat  of  about  100  gram-calories  per 
hour.  This  result  was  confirmed  by  the  experiments  of  Runge  and 
Precht1  and  others.  As  far  as  observation  has  at  present  gone, 
this  rate  of  emission  of  heat  is  continuous  and  unchanged  with 
lapse  of  time.  Therefore,  1  gram  of  radium  emits  in  the  course  of 
a  day  2400,  and  in  the  course  of  a  year,  876,000  gram-calories. 
The  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  the  union  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
to  form  1  gram  of  water  is  3900  gram-calories.  It  is  thus  seen 
that  1  gram  of  radium  emits  per  day  nearly  as  much  energy  as  is 
required  to  dissociate  1  gram  of  water. 

In  some  later  experiments  using  0'7  gram  of  pure  radium 
bromide,  P.  Curie2  found  that  the  temperature  of  the  radium 
indicated  by  a  mercury  thermometer  was*  3°  C.  above  that  of  the 
surrounding  air.  This  result  was  confirmed  by  Giesel  who  obtained 
a  difference  of  temperature  of  5°  C.  with  1  gram  of  radium  bromide. 
The  actual  rise  of  temperature  observed  will  obviously  depend  upon 
the  size  and  nature  of  the  vessel  con- 
taining the  radium. 

During  their  visit  to  England  in 
1903  to  lecture  at  the  Royal  Insti- 
tution, M.  and  Mme  Curie  performed 
some  experiments  with  Professor 
Dewar,  to  test  by  another  method  the 
rate  of  emission  of  heat  from  radium 
at  very  low  temperatures.  This  method 
depended  on  the  measurement  of  the 
amount  of  gas  volatilized  when  a 
radium  preparation  was  placed  inside 
a  tube  immersed  in  a  liquefied  gas 
at  its  boiling  point.  The  arrange- 
ment of  the  calorimeter  is  shown  in 
Fig.  31. 

1  Sitz.  Ak.  Wiss.  Berlin,  No.  38,  1903. 


Fig.  31. 


2  Societe  de  Physique,  1903. 


160  RATE   OF   EMISSION   OF   ENERGY  [CH. 

The  small  closed  Dewar  flask  A  contains  the  radium  in  a  glass 
tube  R,  immersed  in  the  liquid  to  be  employed.  The  flask  A  is 
surrounded  by  another  Dewar  bulb  B,  containing  the  same  liquid, 
so  that  no  heat  is  communicated  to  A  from  the  outside.  The  gas, 
liberated  in  the  tube  A,  is  collected  in  the  usual  way  over  water  or 
mercury  and  its  volume  determined.  By  this  method,  measurements 
were  made  with  liquid  carbon  dioxide,  oxygen,  and  liquid  hydrogen. 
Especial  interest  attaches  to  the  results  with  liquid  hydrogen. 
The  rate  of  heat  emission  of  the  radium  was  found  to  be  about 
the  same  in  boiling  carbon  dioxide  and  oxygen,  but  Dewar1  states 
that  it  was  distinctly  greater  in  liquid  hydrogen.  This  result,  if 
confirmed,  is  of  great  interest,  for  it  shows  that  while  the  rate  of 
heat  emission  is  practically  unchanged  between  the  range  of  tem- 
perature of  liquid  oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide,  the  great  relative 
drop  in  absolute  temperature  between  liquid  oxygen  and  hydrogen 
causes  an  increase  in  the  heat  emission.  It  will  be  shown  in  the 
next  section  that  the  heat  emission  of  radium  is  directly  connected 
with  the  radio-activity  of  that  element.  A  change  in  the  rate  of 
heat  emission  must  then  involve  a  change  in  the  radio-activity  of 
radium.  The  conclusion  that  the  heat  emission  of  radium  is  greater 
in  liquid  hydrogen  than  at  ordinary  temperatures  thus  requires 
confirmation  by  direct  measurements  of  the  radio-activity. 

The  use  of  liquid  hydrogen  is  very  convenient  for  demonstrat- 
ing the  rate  of  heat  emission  from  a  small  amount  of  radium. 
From  0*7  grams  of  radium  bromide  (which  had  been  prepared  only 
10  days  previously)  73  c.c.  of  gas  was  given  off  per  minute. 

In  later  experiments  P.  Curie  (loc.  cit.)  found  that  the  rate  of 
emission  of  heat  from  a  given  quantity  of  radium  depended  upon 
the  time  which  had  elapsed  since  its  preparation.  The  emission 
of  heat  was  at  first  small,  but  after  a  month's  interval  practically 
attained  a  maximum.  If  a  radium  compound  is  dissolved  and 
placed  in  a  sealed  tube,  the  rate  of  heat  emission  rises  to  the  same 
maximum  as  that  of  an  equal  quantity  of  radium  in  the  solid 
state. 

106.  Connection  of  the  heat  emission  with  the  radia- 
tions. The  observations  of  Curie  that  the  rate  of  heat  emission 

1  Dewar,  British  Association,  1903. 


V]  RATE   OF   EMISSION   OF   ENERGY  161 

depended  upon  the  age  of  the  radium  preparation  pointed  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  phenomenon  of  heat  emission  of  radium  was 
connected  with  the  radio-activity  of  that  element.  It  had  long 
been  known  that  radium  compounds  increased  in  activity  for  about 
a  month  after  their  preparation,  when  they  reached  a  steady  state. 
This  increase  of  activity  is  due  to  the  continuous  production  by  the 
radium  of  the  radio-active  emanation  or  gas,  which  is  occluded  in 
the  radium  compound  and  adds  its  radiation  to  that  of  the  radium 
proper.  It  thus  seemed  probable  that  the  heating  effect  was  in 
some  way  connected  with  the  presence  of  the  emanation.  Some 
experiments  upon  this  point  have  been  made  recently  by  Ruther- 
ford and  Barnes1.  In  order  to  measure  the  small  amounts  of  heat 
emitted,  a  form  of  differential  air  calorimeter  was  employed.  Two 
equal  glass  flasks  of  about  500  c.c.  were  filled  with  dry  air  at 
atmospheric  pressure.  These  flasks  were  connected  through  a 
glass  U-tube  filled  with  xylene,  which  served  as  a  manometer 
to  determine  any  variation  of  pressure  of  the  air  in  the  flasks. 
A  small  glass  tube,  closed  at  the  lower  end,  was  introduced  into 
the  middle  of  each  of  the  flasks.  When  a  continuous  source  of 
heat  was  introduced  into  the  glass  tube,  the  air  surrounding  it  was 
heated  and  the  pressure  was  increased.  The  difference  of  pressure, 
when  a  steady  state  was  reached,  was  observed  on  the  manometer 
by  means  of  a  microscope  with  a  micrometer  scale  in  the  eye- 
piece. On  placing  the  source  of  heat  in  the  similar  tube  in  the 
other  flask,  the  difference  in  pressure  was  reversed.  In  order  to 
keep  the  apparatus  at  a  constant  temperature,  the  two  flasks  were 
immersed  in  a  water  bath,  which  was  kept  well  stirred. 

Observations  were  first  made  on  the  heat  emission  from  30 
milligrams  of  radium  bromide.  The  difference  in  pressure  observed 
on  the  manometer  was  standardized  by  placing  a  small  coil  of  wire 
of  known  resistance  in  the  place  of  the  radium.  The  strength  of 
the  current  through  the  wire  was  adjusted  to  give  the  same  differ- 
ence of  pressure  on  the  manometer.  In  this  way  it  was  found  that 
the  heat  emission  per  gram  of  radium  bromide  corresponded  to 
65  gram-calories  per  hour.  Taking  the  atomic  weight  of  radium 
as  225,  this  is  equivalent  to  a  rate  of  emission  of  heat  from  one 
gram  of  metallic  radium  of  110  gram-calories  per  hour. 

1  Nature,  Oct.  29,  1903.     Phil.  Mag,  Feb.  1904. 
R.  R.-A.  11 


162 


RATE   OF    EMISSION   OF   ENERGY 


[CH. 


The  emanation  from  the  30  milligrams  of  radium  bromide  was 
then  removed  by  heating  the  radium  (section  141).  By  passing  the 
emanation  through  a  small  glass  tube  immersed  in  liquid  air,  the 
emanation  was  condensed.  The  tube  was  sealed  off  while  the 
emanation  was  still  condensed  in  the  tube.  In  this  way  the 
emanation  was  concentrated  in  a  small  glass  tube  about  4  cms. 
long.  The  heating  effects  of  the  "de-emanated"  radium  and  of  the 
emanation  tube  were  then  determined  at  intervals.  It  was  found 
that,  after  removal  of  the  emanation,  the  heating  effect  of  the 
radium  decayed  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  to  a  minimum, 
corresponding  to  about  30  per  cent,  of  the  original  heat  emission, 
and  then  gradually  increased  again,  reaching  its  original  value  after 
about  a  month's  interval.  The  heating  effect  of  the  emanation 
tube  was  found  to  increase  for  the  first  few  hours  after  separation 
to  a  maximum,  and  then  to  decay  regularly  with  the  time  according 
to  an  exponential  law,  falling  to  half  its  maximum  value  in  about 
four  days.  The  actual  heat  emission  of  the  emanation  tube  was 
determined  by  sending  a  current  through  a  coil  of  wire  occupying 
the  same  length  and  position  as  the  emanation  tube. 

The  variation  with  time  of  the  heating  effect  from  30  milli- 
grams of  radium  and  the  emanation  from  it  is  shown  in  Fig.  32. 


1-6 


80 


160  240 

Ho  urn 


320 


Fig.  32. 


V]  RATE   OF    EMISSION   OF    ENERGY  163 

Curve  A  shows  the  variation  of  the  heat  emission  of  the  radium 
and  curve  B  of  the  emanation.  The  sum  total  of  the  rate  of  heat 
emission  of  the  radium  and  the  emanation  together,  was  at  any 
time  found  to  be  equal  to  that  of  the  original  radium.  The  maxi- 
mum heating  effect  of  the  tube  containing  the  emanation  from  30 
milligrams  of  radium  bromide  was  1*26  gram-calories  per  hour. 
The  emanation  together  with  the  secondary  products  which  arise 
from  it,  obtained  from  one  gram  of  radium,  would  thus  give  out  42 
gram-calories  per  hour.  The  emanation  stored  up  in  the  radium 
is  thus  responsible  for  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  heat  emission 
from  radium. 

After  removal  of  the  emanation  from  radium,  the  activity, 
measured  by  the  a  rays,  decays  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  to  a 
minimum  of  about  25  °/0  and  then  increases  to  its  original  value 
after  about  a  month's  interval.  At  the  same  time,  the  apparent 
activity  of  the  emanation  in  a  closed  vessel  increases  to  a  maximum 
in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  and  then  decays  with  time  according 
to  an  exponential  law,  falling  to  half  value 'in  about  four  days.  The 
gradual  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  radium,  after  removal  of  the 
emanation,  is  due  to  the  decay  of  the  "  excited  activity  "  on  the 
radium  itself.  The  increase  of  the  apparent  activity  of  the  emana- 
tion is  due  to  the  production  of  "  excited  activity  "  on  the  walls  of 
the  containing  vessel.  The  variation  in  heat  emission  of  the  radium 
and  the  emanation  in  both  cases  is  approximately  proportional  to 
the  activity  measured  by  the  a.  rays.  It  is  not  proportional  to  the 
activity  measured  by  the  $  or  7  rays,  for  the  intensity  of  the  0 
and  7  rays  falls  nearly  to  zero  when  the  a  radiation  of  the  radium 
is  at  the  minimum  of  25  per  cent.  These  results  are  thus 
in  accordance  with  the  view  that  the  heat  emission  of  ^adium 
accompanies  the  expulsion  of  a  particles,  and  is  approximately 
proportional  to  the  number  expelled. 

107.  Source  of  the  energy.  On  the  theory  of  atomic  dis- 
integration advanced  in  section  87,  this  heat  is  derived,  not  from 
external  sources,  but  from  the  internal  energy  of  the  radium  atom. 
The  atom  is  supposed  to  be  a  complex  system  consisting  of  charged 
parts  in  very  rapid  motion,  and,  in  consequence,  contains  a  large 

11—2 


164  RATE   OF   EMISSION   OF   ENERGY  [CH. 

store  of  latent  energy,  which  can  only  be  manifested  when  the 
atom  breaks  up.  For  some  reason,  the  atomic  system  becomes 
unstable,  and  an  a  particle,  of  mass  about  twice  that  of  the  hydro- 
gen atom,  escapes,  carrying  with  it  its  energy  of  motion.  Since 
the  a.  particles  would  be  practically  absorbed  in  a  thickness  of 
radium  of  less  than  "001  cm.,  the  greater  proportion  of  the  a 
particles,  expelled  from  a  mass  of  radium,  would  be  stoppe'd  in  the 
radium  itself  and  their  energy  of  motion  would  be  manifested  in 
the  form  of  heat.  The  radium  would  thus  be  heated  by  its  own 
bombardment  above  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding  air.  The 
suggestion  that  the  heat  emission  of  radium  was  connected  with 
the  expulsion  of  the  a.  rays  was  first  given  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge1. 
The  energy  of  the  expelled  a  particles  does  not  account  for  the 
whole  emission  of  heat  by  radium.  It  is  evident  that  the  violent 
expulsion  of  a  part  of  the  atom  must  result  in  intense  electrical 
disturbances  in  the  atom.  At  the  same  time,  the  residual  parts  of 
the  disintegrated  atom  rearrange  themselves  to  form  a  permanently 
or  temporarily  stable  system.  During  this  process  also,  energy  is 
emitted,  which  is  manifested  in  the  form  of  heat  in  the  radium 
itself. 

It  has  already  been  calculated  (section  104)  that  the  emission 
of  energy  in  the  form  of  a  particles,  probably  corresponds  to  about 
50  gram-calories  per  hour  for  one  gram  of  radium.  The  observed 
heat  emission  of  radium,  under  conditions  when  the  a  rays  are 
nearly  all  absorbed  in  the  radium  itself,  is  100  gram-calories  per 
hour  per  gram.  On  account  of  the  uncertainty  attaching  to  the 
estimate  of  the  energy  of  the  a  rays,  it  is  not  possible  to  deduce 
with  accuracy  how  much  of  the  total  energy  emitted  is  due  to 
them.  The  evidence,  taken  as  a  whole,  points  to  the  conclusion 
that  a  considerable  fraction  of  the  total  emission  of  energy  is  due 
to  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  a  rays. 

Runge  and  Precht  (loc.  cit.)  determined  the  heat  emission  of 
radium  by  means  of  a  thermometer,  (1)  when  the  radium  was  in  a 
thin  tube,  and  (2)  when  it  was  surrounded  by  a  lead  screen  several 
millimetres  in  thickness.  Within  the  limit  of  accuracy  of  the 

1  Nature,  April  2,  1903. 


V]  RATE   OF   EMISSION   OF    ENERGY  165 

experiments  (about  5  °/0),  no  difference  in  the  heat  emission  was 
observed  in  the  two  cases.  The  only  difference  between  the 
experiments  (1)  and  (2)  is  that  in  the  latter  the  ft  rays  are  absorbed 
in  the  lead  and  add  their  heating  effect  to  the  radium.  Since, 
however,  the  energy  of  the  ft  rays  is  probably  not  more  than  1  °/0 
of  that  due  to  the  a  rays  (section  103),  no  appreciable  difference  is 
to  be  expected.  The  experiments  of  Runge  and  Precht  are  quite 
consistent  with  the  view  that  the  heating  effect  largely  depends  on 
the  energy  of  the  a  rays. 

A  further  discussion  of  the  heating  effect  of  the  emanation  and 
of  its  secondary  products  is  given  in  sections  163  and  181. 


r 


CHAPTER  VI. 

PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS. 

108.  BESIDES  their  power  of  acting  on  a  photographic  plate, 
and  of  ionizing  gases,  the  radiations  from  active  bodies  are  able 
to  produce  marked  chemical  and  physical  actions  in  various  sub- 
stances. Most  of  these  effects  are  due  either  to  the.  a  or  /3  rays. 
The  y  rays  produce  little  effect  in  comparison.  Since  the  ft  rays 
are  similar  in  all  respects  to  high  velocity  cathode  rays,  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  they  will  produce  effects  similar  in  character  to 
those  produced  by  the  cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

/ 

Phosphorescent  action. 

Becquerel1  has  studied  the  action  of  radium  rays  in  producing 
phosphorescence  in  various  bodies.  The  substance  to  be  tested 
was  placed  above  the  radium  in  the  form  of  powder  on  a  very  thin 
mica  plate.  Examination  was  made  of  the  sulphides  of  calcium 
and  strontium,  ruby,  diamond,  varieties  of  spar,  phosphorus  and 
hexagonal  blende.  Substances  like  the  ruby  and  spar,  which  phos- 
phoresce under  luminous  rays,  did  not  phosphoresce  under  the 
radium  rays.  On  the  other  hand,  those  which  were  made  luminous 
by  ultra-violet  light  were  also  luminous  under  the  action  of  radium 
rays.  The  radium  rays  show  distinct  differences  from  X  rays.  For 
example,  a  diamond  which  was  very  luminous  with  radium  rays 
was  unaffected  by  X  rays.  It  has  been  mentioned  previously  that 
the  a  rays  from  Marckwald's  preparation  of  polonium  produce 
marked  phosphorescence  in  the  diamond.  The  double  sulphate  of 

1  C.  R.  129,  p.  912,  1899. 


CH.  VI]  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  167 

uranium  and  potassium  is  more  luminous  than  hexagonal  blende 
under  X  rays,  but  the  reverse  is  true  for  radium  rays ;  under  the 
influence  of  these  rays,  sulphide  of  calcium  gave  a  blue  luminosity 
but  was  hardly  affected  by  X  rays. 

The  following  table  shows  the  relative  phosphorescence  excited 
in  various  bodies. 


, 

Without  screen. 
Substance                                            Intensity 

Across  screen 
of  black 
paper 

Hexagonal  blende                          .   .             ...             .  .  .    : 

13-36 
1-99 
1-14 
1-00 
•30 

•04 
•05 

•01 

•31 

•02 

Platino-cyanide  of  barium   

Double  sulphate  of  Uranium  and  Potassium 
Calcium  Fluoride                               ...         ...  1 

! 

In  the  last  column  the  intensity  without  the  screen  is  in  each 
case  taken  as  unity.  The  great  diminution  of  intensity  after  the 
rays  have  passed  through  black  paper  shows  that  most  of  the  phos- 
phorescence developed  without  the  screen  is,  in  the  majority  of 
cases,  due  to  the  a  rays. 

Bary1  has  made  a  very  complete  examination  of  the  class  of 
substances  which  become  luminous  under  radium  rays.  He  found 
that  the  great  majority  of  substances  belong  to  the  alkali  metals 
and  alkaline  earths.  All  these  substances  were  also  phosphorescent 
under  the  action  of  X  rays. 

Zinc  sulphide  (Sidot's  blende)  phosphoresces  very  brightly 
under  the  influence  of  the  rays  from  radium  and  other  very  active 
substances.  This  was  observed  by  Curie  and  Debierne  in  their 
study  of  the  radium  emanation  and  the  excited  activity  produced 
by  it.  It  has  also  been  largely  used  by  Giesel  as  an  optical  means 
of  detecting  the  presence  of  emanations  from  very  active  sub- 
stances. It  is  an  especially  sensitive  means  of  detecting  the 
presence  of  a  rays,  when  it  exhibits  the  "  scintillating "  property 
already  discussed  in  section  88.  In  order  to  show  the  luminosity 
due  to  the  a  rays,  the  screen  should  be  held  close  to  the  active 
substance,  as  the  rays  are  absorbed  in  their  passage  through  a  few 

1  C.  R.  130,  p.  776,  1900. 


168  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

centimetres  of  air.  Zinc  sulphide  is  also  luminous  under  the  action 
of  the  /3  rays,  but  the  phosphorescence  is  far  more  persistent  than 
when  produced  by  the  a  rays. 

Platino-cyanide  of  barium  fluoresces  under  the  action  of  all 
three  kinds  of  rays,  but  is  especially  suitable  for  a  study  of  the 
0  and  7  rays.  With  a  decigram  of  radium,  the  luminosity  on  the 
screen  can  be  seen  at  a  distance  of  a  metre  from  the  radium.  The 
rays  produce  quite  an  appreciable  luminosity  on  the  screen  after 
their  passage  through  the  human  body.  The  mineral  willemite  (zinc 
silicate)  was  recently  found  by  Kunz  to  be  an  even  more  sensitive 
means  of  detecting  the  presence  of  the  radiations  than  platino- 
cyanide  of  barium.  It  fluoresces  a  beautiful  greenish  colour,  and 
a  piece  of  the  mineral  appears  quite  translucent  under  the  action 
of  the  rays.  Baskerville1  has  recently  shown  that  kunzite,  a  new 
variety  of  mineral  spodumene  discovered  by  Kunz2,  becomes 
luminous  when  exposed  to  the  action  of  radium  rays  and  retains 
its  luminosity  for  some  time. 

Both  zinc  sulphide  and  platino-cyanide  of  barium  diminish  in 
luminosity  after  exposure  for  some  time  to  the  action  of  the  rays. 
To  regenerate  a  screen  of  the  latter,  exposure  to  solar  light  is 
necessary.  A  similar  phenomenon  has  been  observed  by  Villard 
for  a  screen  exposed  to  Rontgen  rays.  Giesel  made  a  screen  of 
platino-cyanide  of  radio-active  barium.  The  screen,  very  luminous 
at  first,  gradually  turned  brown  in  colour,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  crystals  became  dichroic.  In  this  condition  the  luminosity 
was  much  less,  although  the  active  substance  had  increased  in 
activity  after  preparation.  Many  of  the  substances  which  are 
luminous  under  the  rays  from  active  substances  lose  this  property 
to  a  large  extent  at  low  temperatures. 

109.  Luminosity  of  radium  compounds.  All  radium 
compounds  are  spontaneously  luminous.  This  luminosity  is  es- 
pecially brilliant  in  the  dry  haloid  salts,  and  persists  for  long 
intervals  of  time.  In  damp  air  the  salts  lose  a  large  amount  of 
their  luminosity,  but  they  recover  it  on  drying.  With  very  active 
radium  chloride,  the  Curies  have  observed  that  the  light  changes 

1  Science,  Sept.  4,  1903. 

2  Science,  Aug.  28,  1903. 


f 

I 

4 


0091 U 


Vl]  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  169 

in  colour  and  intensity  with  time.  The  original  luminosity  is 
recovered  if  the  salt  is  dissolved  and  dried.  Many  inactive  pre- 
parations of  radiferous  barium  are  strongly  luminous.  The  writer 
has  seen  a  preparation  of  impure  radium  bromide  which  gave  out 
a  light  sufficient  to  read  by  in  a  dark  room.  The  luminosity  of 
radium  persists  over  a  wide  range  of  temperature  and  is  as  bright 
at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  as  at  ordinary  temperatures.  A 
slight  luminosity  is  observed  in  a  solution  of  radium,  and  if  crystals 
are  being  formed  in  the  solution,  they  can  be  clearly  distinguished 
in  the  liquid  by  their  greater  luminosity. 

110.     Spectrum  of  the  phosphorescent  light  of  radium. 

Compounds  of  radium,  with  a  large  admixture  of  barium,  are 
usually  strongly  self-luminous.  This  luminosity  decreases  with 
increasing  purity,  and  pure  radium  bromide  is  only  very  feebly 
self-luminous.  A  spectroscopic  examination  of  the  slight  phos- 
phorescent light  of  pure  radium  bromide  has  been  made  by  Sir 
William  and  Lady  Huggins1.  On  viewing 'the  light  with  a  direct 
vision  spectroscope,  there  were  faint  indications  of  a  variation  of 
luminosity  at  different  points  along  the  spectrum.  In  order  to  get 
a  photograph  of  the  spectrum  within  a  reasonable  time,  they  made 
use  of  a  quartz  spectroscope  of  special  design  which  had  been 
previously  employed  in  a  spectroscopic  examination  of  faint  celestial 
objects.  After  three  days'  exposure  with  a  slit  of  1/450  of  an  inch 
in  width,  a  negative  was  obtained  which  showed  a  number  of 
bright  lines.  The  magnified  spectrum  is  shown  in  Fig.  33.  The 
lines  of  this  spectrum  were  found  to  agree  not  only  in  position  but 
also  in  relative  intensity  with  the  band  spectrum  of  nitrogen.  The 
band  spectrum  of  nitrogen  and  also  the  spark  spectrum2  of  radium 
are  shown  in  the  same  figure. 

Some  time  afterwards  Sir  William  Crookes  and  Prof.  Dewar3 
showed  that  this  spectrum  of  nitrogen  was  not  obtained  if  the 
radium  was  contained  in  a  highly  exhausted  tube.  Thus  it 

1  Proc.  Ray.  Soc.  72,  pp.  196  and  409,  1903. 

2  The  spark  spectrum  of  the  radium  bromide  showed  the  H  and  K  lines  of 
calcium  and  also  faintly  some  of  the  strong  lines  of  barium.     The  characteristic 
lines  of  radium  of  wave-lengths  3814-59,   3649'7,   4340-6   and  2708-6,   as   shown 
by  Demarcay  and  others  are  clearly  shown  in  the  figure.     The  strong  line  of  wave- 
length about  2814  is  due  to  radium. 

3  British  Assoc.  1903. 


170  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

appears  that  the  spectrum  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  radium  rays 
either  on  occluded  nitrogen  or  the  nitrogen  in  the  atmosphere 
surrounding  the  radium. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  a  phosphorescent  light,  like  that  of 
radium  bromide,  should  show  a  bright  line  spectrum  of  nitrogen. 
It  shows  that  radium  at  ordinary  temperatures  is  able  to  set  up 
radiations  which  are  produced  only  by  the  electric  discharge  under 
special  conditions. 

Sir  William  and  Lady  Huggins  were  led  to  examine  the 
spectrum  of  the  natural  phosphorescent  light  of  radium  with  the 
hope  that  some  indications  might  thereby  be  obtained  of  the 
processes  occurring  in  the  radium  atom.  Since  the  main  radiation 
from  radium  consists  of  positively  charged  atoms  projected  with 
great  velocity,  radiations  must  be  set  up  both  in  the  expelled  body 
and  in  the  system  from  which  it  escapes.  Further  experiments  in 
this  direction  are  much  to  be  desired  at  the  present  time. 

111.  Thermo-luminescence.  E.  Wiedemann  and  Schmidt1 
have  shown  that  certain  bodies  after  exposure  to  .the  cathode  rays 
or  the  electric  spark  become  luminous  when  they  are  heated  to 
a  temperature  much  below  that  required  to  cause  incandescence. 
This  property  of  thermo-luminescence  is  most  strikingly  exhibited 
in  certain  cases  where  two  salts,  one  of  which  is  much  in  excess  of 
the  other,  are  precipitated  together.  It  is  to  be  expected  that 
such  bodies  would  also  acquire  the  property  when  exposed  to  the 
/3  or  cathodic  rays  of  radium.  This  has  been  found  to  be  the  case 
by  Wiedemann2.  Becquerel  showed  that  fluor-spar,  exposed  to  the 
radium  rays,  was  luminous  when  heated.  The  glass  tubes  in  which 
radium  is  kept  are  rapidly  blackened.  On  heating  the  tube,  a 
strong  luminosity  is  observed,  and  the  coloration  to  a  large  extent 
disappears.  The  peculiarity  of  many  of  these  bodies  lies  in  the 
fact  that  the  property  of  becoming  luminous  when  heated  is  retained 
for  a  long  interval  of  time  after  the  body  is  removed  from  the 
influence  of  the  exciting  cause.  It  appears  probable  that  the  rays 
cause  chemical  changes  in  these  bodies,  which  are  permanent  until 
heat  is  applied.  A  portion  of  the  chemical  energy  is  then  released 
in  the  form  of  visible  light. 

1  Wied.  Annal  59,  p.  604,  1895.  2  Phys.  Zeit.  2,  p.  269,  1901. 


VI]  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  171 


Physical  actions. 

112.  Some  electric  effects.  Radium  rays  have  the  same 
effect  as  ultra-violet  light  and  Rontgen  rays  in.  increasing  the 
facility  with  which  a  spark  passes  between  electrodes.  Elster  and 
Geitel1  showed  thatTf  two  electrodes  were  separated  by  a  distance 
such  that  the  spark  just  refused  to  pass,  on  bringing  near  a  specimen 
of  radium  the  spark  at  once  passes.  This  effect  is  best  shown  with 
short  sparks  from  a  small  induction  coil.  The  Curies  have  ob- 
served that  radium  completely  enveloped  by  a  lead  screen  1  cm. 
thick  produces  a  similar  action.  The  effect  in  that  case  is  due  to 
the  7  rays  alone.  This  action  of  the  rays  can  be  very  simply 
illustrated  by  connecting  two  spark-gaps  with  the  induction  coil  in 
parallel.  The  spark-gap  of  one  circuit  is  adjusted  so  that  the 
discharge  just  refuses  to  pass  across  it,  but  passes  by  the  other. 
When  some  radium  is  brought  near  the  silent  spark-gap,  the  spark 
at  once  passes  and  ceases  in  the  other. 

Hemptinne2  found  that  the  electrodeless  discharge  in  a  vacuum 
tube  began  at  a  higher  pressure  when  a  strong  preparation  of 
radium  was  brought  near  the  tube.  In  one  experiment  the  dis- 
charge without  the  rays  began  at  51  mms.  but  with  the  radium 
rays  at  68  mms.  The  colour  of  the  discharge  was  also  altered. 

Himstedt3  found  that  the  resistance  of  selenium  was  diminished 
by  the  action  of  radium  rays  in  the  same  way  as  by  ordinary  light. 

F.  Henning4  examined  the  electrical  resistance  of  a  barium 
chloride  solution  containing  radium  of  activity  1000,  but  could 
observe  no  appreciable  difference  between  it  and  a  similar  pure 
solution  of  barium  chloride.  This  experiment  shows  that  the 
action  of  the  rays  from  the  radium  does  not  produce  any  appreciable 
change  in  the  conductivity  of  the  barium  solution.  The  amount 
of  radium  present  was  too  small  to  obtain  the  relative  conductivity 
of  the  radium  and  barium  solution. 

Specimens  of  strongly  active  material  have  been  employed  to 
obtain  the  potential  at  any  point  of  the  atmosphere.  The  ionization 
due  to  the  active  substance  is  so  intense  that  the  body  to  which  it 

1  Wied.  Annal  69,  p.  673,  1899.  -  C.  R.  133,  p.  934,  1901. 

3  Phys.  Zeit.  p.  476,  1900.  *  Wied.  Annal.  p.  562,  1902. 


172 


PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS 


[CH. 


is  attached  rapidly  takes  up  the  potential  of  the  air  surrounding 
the  active  substance.  In  this  respect  it  is  more  convenient  and 
rapid  in  its  action  than  the  ordinary  taper  or  water  dropper,  but  on 
account  of  the  disturbance  of  the  electric  field  by  the  strong 
ionization  produced,  it  is  probably  not  so  accurate  a  method  as 
the  water  dropper. 

113.  Effect  on  liquid  and  solid  dielectrics.  P.  Curie1 
made  the  very  important  observation  that  liquid  dielectrics  became 
partial  conductors  under  the  influence  of  radium  rays.  In  these 
experiments  the  radium,  contained  in  a  glass  tube,  was  placed  in 
an  inner  thin  cylinder  of  copper.  This  was  surrounded  by  a  con- 
centric copper  cylinder,  and  the  liquid  to  be  examined  filled  the 
space  between.  A  strong  electric  field  was  applied,  and  the  current 
through  the  liquid  measured  by  means  of  an  electrometer. 

The  following  numbers  illustrate  the  results  obtained : 


Substance 

Conductivity  iu 
megohms  per  1  cm.3 

Carbon  bisulphide 

20xlO~14 

Petroleum  ether 

15 

Amyline 

14 

Carbon  chloride 

8 

Benzene 

4 

Liquid  air 

1-3 

Vaseline  oil    ... 

• 

1-6 

Liquid  air,  vaseline  oil,  petroleum  ether,  amyline,  are  normally 
nearly  perfect  insulators.  The  conductivity  of  amyline  and  petro- 
leum ether  due  to  the  rays  at  -17°C.  was  only  1/10  of  its 
value  at  0°  C.  There  is  thus  a  marked  action  of  temperature  on 
the  conductivity.  For  very  active  material  the  current  was  pro- 
portional to  the  voltage.  With  material  of  only  1/500  of  the 
activity,  it  was  found  that  Ohm's  law  was  not  obeyed. 

The  following  numbers  were  obtained : 


Volts 

50 
100 
200 
400 


Current 
109 
185 
255 
335 


1  C.  E.  134,  p.  420,  1902. 


VI]  PROPERTIES   OF   THE    RADIATIONS  173 

For  an  increase  of  voltage  of  8  times,  the  current  only  increases 
about  3  times.  The  current  in  the  liquid  thus  tends  to  become 
"  saturated  "  as  does  the  ordinary  ionization  current  through  a  gas. 
These  results  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  ionization  theory, 
and  show  that  the  radiation  probably  produces  ions  in  the  liquid  as 
well  as  in  the  gas.  It  was  also  found  that  X  rays  increased  the 
conductivity  to  about  the  same  extent  as  the  radium  rays. 

Becquerel1  has  recently  shown  that  solid  paraffin  exposed  to 
the  0  and  7  rays  of  radium  acquires  the  property  of  conducting 
electricity  to  a  slight  extent.  After  removal  of  the  radium  the 
conductivity  diminishes  with  time  according  to  the  same  law  as  for 
an  ionized  gas.  These  results  show  that  a  solid  as  well  as  a  liquid 
and  gaseous  dielectric  is  ionized  under  the  influence  of  radium 
rays. 

114.  Effect  of  temperature  on  the  radiations.  Becquerel2, 
by  the  electric  method,  determined  the  activity  of  uranium  at  the 
temperature  of  liquid  air,  and  found  that  it  did  not  differ  more 
than  1  per  cent,  from  the  activity  at  ordinary  temperatures.  In 
his  experiments,  the  a  rays  from  the  uranium  were  absorbed  before 
reaching  the  testing  vessel,  and  the  electric  current  measured  was 
due  to  the  ft  rays  alone.  P.  Curie3  found  that  the  luminosity  of 
radium  and  its  power  of  exciting  fluorescence  in  bodies  were 
retained  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air.  Observations  by  the 
electric  method  showed  that  the  activity  of  radium  was  unaltered 
at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air.  If  a  radium  compound  is  heated 
in  an  open  vessel,  it  is  found  that  the  activity,  measured  by  the 
a  rays,  falls  to  about  25  per  cent,  of  its  original  value.  This  is 
however  not  due  to  a  change  in  the  radio-activity,  but  to  the 
release  of  the  radio-active  emanation,  which  is  stored  in  the 
radium.  No  alteration  is  observed  if  the  radium  is  heated  in 
a  closed  vessel  where  none  of  the  radio-active  products  are  able 
to  escape. 

J  C.  R.  136,  p.  1173,  1903. 

2  C.  R.  133,  p.  199,  1901. 

3  Societe  de  Physique,  March  2,  1900. 


174  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  [CH. 

Chemical  actions. 

115.  Rays  from  active  radium  preparations  change  oxygen 
into  ozone1'2.  Its  presence  can  be  detected  by  the  smell  or  by  the 
action  on  iodide  of  potassium  paper.  This  effect  is.  due  to  the 
a  and  ft  rays  from  the  radium,  and  not  to  the  luminous  rays  from 
it.  Since  energy  is  required  to  produce  ozone  from  oxygen,  this 
must  be  derived  from  the  energy  of  the  radiations. 

The  Curies  found  that  radium  compounds  rapidly  produced 
coloration  in  glass.  For  moderately  active  material  the  colour 
is  violet,  for  more  active  material  it  is  yellow.  Long  continued 
action  blackens  the  glass,  although  the  glass  may  have  no  lead  in 
its  composition.  This  coloration  gradually  extends  through  the 
glass,  and  is  dependent  to  some  extent  on  the  kind  of  glass  used. 

Giesel2  found  that  he  could  obtain  as  much  coloration  in  rock- 
salt  and  fluor-spar  by  radium  rays,  as  by  exposure  to  the  action  of 
cathode  rays  in  a  vacuum  tube.  The  coloration,  however,  extended 
much  deeper  than  that  produced  by  the  cathode  rays.  This  is  to 
be  expected,  since  the  radium  rays  have  a  higher  velocity,  and 
consequently  greater  penetrating  power,  than  the  cathode  rays 
produced  in  an  ordinary  vacuum  tube.  Goldstein  observed  that 
the  coloration  is  far  more  intense  and  rapid  when  the  salts  are 
melted  or  heated  to  a  red  heat.  Melted  potassium  sulphate, 
under  the  action  of  a  very  active  preparation  of  radium,  was 
rapidly  coloured  a  strong  greenish  blue  which  gradually  changed 
into  a  dark  green. 

The  cause  of  these  colorations  by  cathode  and  radium  rays 
has  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion.  Elster  and  Geitel3 
observed  that  a  specimen  of  potassium  sulphate,  coloured  green  by 
radium  rays,  showed  a  strong  photo-electric  action,  i.e.  it  rapidly 
lost  a  negative  charge  of  electricity  when  exposed  to  the  action  of 
ultra-violet  light.  All  substances  coloured  by  cathode  rays  show 
a  strong  photo-electric  action,  and,  since  the  metals  sodium  and 
potassium  themselves  show  photo-electric  action  to  a  very  remark- 
able degree,  Elster  and  Geitel  have  suggested  that  the  colorations 
are  caused  by  a  solid  solution  of  the  metal  in  the  salt. 

1  S.  and  P.  Curie,  G.  R.  129,  p.  823,  1899. 

2  Giesel,  Verhandlg.  d.  d.  phys.  Ge».  Jan.  5,  1900. 

3  Phys.  Zeit.  p.  113,  No.  3,  1902. 


VI]  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  175 

Although  the  coloration  due  to  radium  rays  extends  deeper 
than  that  due  to  the  cathode  rays,  when  exposed  to  light  the 
colour  fades  away  at  about  the  same  rate  in  the  two  cases. 

BecquereJ1  found  that  white  phosphorus  is  changed  into  the 
red  variety  by  the  action  of  radium  rays.  This  action  was  shown 
to  be  due  mainly  to  the  /8  rays.  The  secondary  radiation  set  up 
by  the  primary  rays  also  produced  a  marked  effect.  Radium  rays, 
like  ordinary  light  rays,  also  caused  a  precipitate  of  calomel  in  the 
presence  of  oxalic  acid. 

Hardy  and  Miss  Willcock2  found  that  a  solution  of  iodoform  in 
chloroform  turned  purple  after  exposure  for  5  minutes  to  the  rays 
from  5  milligrams  of  radium  bromide.  This  action  is  due  to  the 
liberation  of  iodine.  By  testing  the  effect  of  screens  of  different 
thicknesses,  over  the  radium,  this  action  was  found  to  be  mainly 
due  to  the  ft  rays  from  the  radium.  Rontgen  rays  produce  a 
similar  coloration. 

Hardy3  also  observed  an  action  of  the  radium  rays  on  the 
coagulation  of  globulin.  Two  solutions  of  globulin  from  ox  serum 
were  used,  one  made  electro-positive  by  adding  acetic  acid,  and  the 
other  electro-negative  by  adding  ammonia.  When  the  globulin 
was  exposed  close  to  the  radium  in  naked  drops,  the  opalescence  of 
the  electro-positive  solution  rapidly  diminished,  showing  that  the 
solution  became  more  complete.  The  electro-negative  solution  was 
rapidly  turned  to  a  jelly  and  became  opaque.  These  actions  were 
found  to  be  due  to  the  a  rays  of  radium  alone. 

This  is  further  evidence  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  a  rays 
consist  of  projected  positively  charged  bodies  of  atomic  dimensions, 
for  a  similar  coagulation  effect  is  produced  by  the  metallic  ions  of 
liquid  electrolytes,  and  has  been  shown  by  W.  C.  D.  Whetham4  to 
be  due  to  the  electric  charges  carried  by  the  ions. 

116.  Gases  evolved  from  radium.  Curie  and  Debierne5 
observed  that  radium  preparations  placed  in  a  vacuum  tube  con- 
tinually lowered  the  vacuum.  The  gas  evolved  was  always  accom- 

1  C.  R.  133,  p.  709,  1901. 

2  Proc.  Ruy.  Soc.  72,  p.  200,  1903. 

3  Proc.  Physiolog.  Soc.  May  16,  1903. 

4  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1899 ;  Theory  of  Solution,  Camb.  1902,  p.  396. 

5  C.  R.  132,  p.  768,  1901. 


176  PROPERTIES    OF   THE    RADIATIONS  [CH. 

panied  by  the  emanation,  but  no  new  lines  were  observed  in  its 
spectrum.  Giesel1  has  observed  a  similar  evolution  of  gas  from 
solutions  of  radium  bromide.  Giesel  forwarded  some  active  material 
to  Runge  and  Bodlander,  in  order  that  they  might  test  the  gas 
spectroscopically.  From  1  gram  of  a  5  per  cent,  radium  prepara- 
tion they  obtained  3'5  c.c.  of  gas  in  16  days.  This  gas  was  found, 
however,  to  be  mainly  hydrogen,  with  12  per  cent,  of  oxygen.  In 
later  experiments  Ramsay  and  Soddy2  found  that  50  milligrams  of 
radium  bromide  evolved  gases  at  the  rate  of  about  0'5  c.c.  per  day. 
This  is  a  rate  of  evolution  about  twice  that  observed  by  Runge  and 
Bodlander.  On  analysing  the  gases  about  28*9  per  cent,  was  found 
to  consist  of  oxygen,  and  the  rest  was  hydrogen.  The  slight  excess 
of  hydrogen  over  that  attained  in  the  decomposition  of  water,  they 
consider  to  be  due  to  the  action  of  oxygen  on  the  grease  of  the 
stop-cocks.  The  radio-active  emanation  from  radium  has  a  strong 
oxidizing  action  and  rapidly  produces  carbon  dioxide,  if  carbonaceous 
matter  is  present.  The  production  of  gas  is  probably  due  to  the 
action  of  the  radiations  in  decomposing  water.  The  amount  of 
energy  required  to  produce  the  rate  of  decomposition  observed  by 
Ramsay  and  Soddy — about  10  c.c.  per  day  for  1  gram  of  radium 
bromide — corresponds  to  about  30  gram -calories  per  day.  This 
amount  of  energy  is  about  two  per  cent,  of  the  total  energy  emitted 
in  the  form  of  heat. 

Ramsay  and  Soddy  (loc.  cit.)  have  also  observed  the  presence  of 
helium  in  the  gases  evolved  by  solution  of  radium  bromide.  This 
important  result  is  considered  in  detail  in  section  201. 

Physiological  actions. 

117.  Walkhoff  first  observed  that  radium  rays  produce  burns 
of  much  the  same  character  as  those  caused  by  Rontgen  rays. 
Experiments  in  this  direction  have  been  made  by  Giesel,  Curie  and 
Becquerel,  and  others,  with  very  similar  results.  There  is  at  first 
a  painful  irritation,  then  inflammation  sets  in,  which  lasts  from  10 
to  20  days.  This  effect  is  produced  by  all  preparations  of  radium, 
and  appears  to  be  due  mainly  to  the  a  and  /3  rays. 

J  Ber.  d.  d.  Chem.  Ges.  35,  p.  3605,  1902. 
2  Proc.  Boy.  Soc.  72,  p.  204,  1903. 


VI]  PROPERTIES   OF   THE   RADIATIONS  177 

Care  has  to  be  taken  in  handling  radium  on  account  of  the 
painful  inflammation  set  up  by  the  rays.  If  a  finger  is  held  for 
some  minutes  at  the  base  of  a  capsule  containing  a  radium  prepara- 
tion, the  skin  becomes  inflamed  for  about  15  days  and  then  peels 
off.  The  painful  feeling  does  not  disappear  for  two  months. 

Danysz1  found  that  this  action  is  mainly  confined  to  the  skin, 
and  does  not  extend  to  the  underlying  tissue.  Caterpillars  sub- 
jected to  the  action  of  the  rays  lost  their  power  of  motion  in 
several  days  and  finally  died. 

Radium  rays  have  been  found  beneficial  in  certain  cases  of 
cancer.  The  effect  is  apparently  similar  to  that  produced  by 
Rontgen  rays,  but  the  use  of  radium  possesses  the  great  advantage 
that  the  radiating  source  can  be  enclosed  in  a  fine  tube  and  intro- 
duced at  the  particular  point  at  which  the  action  of  the  rays  is 
required.  The  rays  have  also  been  found  to  hinder  or  stop  the 
development  of  microbes8. 

Another  interesting  action  of  the  radium  rays  has  "been  ob- 
served by  Giesel.  On  bringing  up  a  radium  preparation  to  the 
closed  eye,  in  a  dark  room,  a  sensation  of  diffuse  light  is  observed. 
This  effect  has  been  examined  by  Himstedt  and  Nagel3  who  have 
shown  that  it  is  due  to  a  fluorescence  produced  by  the  rays  in  the 
eye_Jtself.  The  blind  are  able  to  perceive  this  luminosity  if  the 
retina  is  intact,  but  do  not  do  so  if  the  retina  is  diseased.  Hardy 
and  Anderson4  have  recently  examined  this  effect  in  some  detail. 
The  sensation  of  light  is  produced  both  by  the  $  and  7  rays.  The 
eyelid  practically  absorbs  all  the  ft  rays,  so  that  the  luminosity 
observed  with  a  closed  eye  is  due  to  the  7  rays  alone.  The  lens 
and  retina  of  the  eye  are  strongly  phosphorescent  under  the  action 
of  the  ft  and  7  rays.  Hardy  and  Anderson  consider  that  the 
luminosity  observed  in  a  dark  room  with  the  open  eye  (the  phos- 
phorescent light  of  the  radium  itself  being  stopped  by  black  paper) 
is  to  a  large  extent  due  to  the  phosphorescence  set  up  in  the 
eyeball.  The  7  rays,  for  the  most  part,  produce  the  sensation  of 
light  when  they  strike  the  retina. 

1  C.  R.  136,  p.  461,  1903. 

2  Aschkinass  and  Caspar!,  Arch.  d.  Ges.  Physiologie,  86,  p.  603,  1901. 

3  Drude's  AnnaL  4,  p.  537,  1901. 

4  Proc.  Ray.  Soc.  72,  p.  393,  1903. 

R.  R.-A.  12 


CHAPTER  VII.  ^ 

CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER. 

118.  Uranium  X.  The  experiments  of  Mme  Curie  show 
that  the  radio-activity  of  uranium  and  radium  is  an  atomic  pheno- 
menon. The  activity  of  any  uranium  compound  depends  only  on 
the  amount  of  that  element  present,  and  is  unaffected  by  its 
chemical  combination  with  other  substances,  and  is  not  appreciably 
affected  by  wide  variations  of  temperature.  It  would  thus  seem 
probable,  since  the  activity  of  uranium  is  a  specific  property  of 
the  element,  that  the  activity  could  not  be  separated  from  it  by 
chemical  agencies. 

In  1900,  however,  Sir  William  Crookes1  showed  that,  by  a  single 
chemical  operation,  uranium  could  be  obtained  photographically 
inactive  while  the  whole  of  the  activity  could  be  concentrated 
in  a  small  residue  free  from  uranium.  This  residue,  to  which 
he  gave  the  name  UrX,  was  many  hundred  times  more  active 
photographically,  weight  for  weight,  than  the  uranium  from  which 
it  had  been  separated.  The  method  employed  for  this  separation 
was  to  precipitate  a  solution  of  the  uranium  with  ammonium  car- 
bonate. On  dissolving  the  precipitate  in  an  excess  of  the  reagent,  a 
light  precipitate  remained  behind.  This  was  filtered,  and  constituted 
the  Ur  X.  The  active  substance  Ur  X  was  probably  present  in 
very  small  quantity,  mixed  with  impurities  derived  from  the 
uranium.  No  new  lines  were  observed  in  its  spectrum.  A  par- 
tial separation  of  the  activity  of  uranium  was  also  effected  by 
another  method.  Crystallized  uranium  nitrate  was  dissolved  in 
ether,  when  it  was  found  that  the  uranium  divided  itself  between 
the  ether  and  water  present  in  two  unequal  fractions.  The  small 
part  dissolved  in  the  water  layer  was  found  to  contain  practically 
1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  66,  p.  409,  1900. 


CH.  VII]    CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER      179 

all  the  activity  when  examined  by  the  photographic  method,  while 
the  other  fraction  was  almost  inactive.  These  results,  taken  by 
themselves,  pointed  very  strongly  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
activity  of  uranium  was  not  due  to  the  element  itself,  but  to 
some  other  substance,  associated  with  it,  which  had  distinct 
chemical  properties. 

Results  of  a  similar  character  were  observed  by  Becquerel1. 
It  was  found  that  barium  could  be  made  photographically  very 
active  by  adding  barium  chloride  to  the  uranium  solution  and 
precipitating  the  barium  as  sulphate.  By  a  succession  of  precipi- 
tations the  uranium  was  rendered  photographically  almost  inactive,, 
while  the  barium  was  strongly  active. 

The  inactive  uranium  and  the  active  barium  were  laid  aside; 
but,  on  examining  them  a  year  later,  it  was  found  that  the  uranium 
had  completely  regained  its  activity,  while  that  of  the  barium  had 
completely  disappeared.  The  loss  of  activity  of  uranium  was  thus 
only  temporary  in  character. 

In  the  above  experiments,  the  activity  of  uranium  was  examined 
by  the  photographic  method.  The  photographic  action  produced 
by  uranium  is  due  almost  entirely  to  the  ft  rays.  The  a  rays,  in 
comparison,  have  little  if  any  effect.  Now  the  radiation  from  Ur  X 
consists  entirely  of  ft  rays,  and  is  consequently  photographically 
very  active.  If  the  activity  of  uranium  had  been  measured 
electrically  without  any  screen  over  it,  the  current  observed  would 
have  been  due  very  largely  to  the  a  rays,  and  little  change  would 
have  been  observed  after  the  removal  of  Ur  X,  since  only  the  con- 
stituent responsible  for  the  ft  rays  was  removed.  This  important 
point  is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  section  189. 

119.  Thorium  X.  Rutherford  and  Soddy2,  working  with 
thorium  compounds,  found  that  an  intensely  active  constituent 
could  be  separated  from  thorium  by  a  single  chemical  operation. 
If  ammonia  is  added  to  a  thorium  solution,  the  thorium  is  precipi- 
tated, but  a  large  amount  of  the  activity  is  left  behind  in  the 
nitrate,  which  is  chemically  free  from  thorium.  This  filtrate  was 
evaporated  to  dry  ness,  and  the  ammonium  salts  driven  off  by 

1  C.  R.  131,  p.  137,  1900;  133,  p.  977,  1901. 

2  Phil.  Mag.  Sep.  and  Nov.  1902.     Trans.  Chem.  Soc.  81,  pp.  321  and  837,  1902. 

12—2 


180        CONTINUOUS    PRODUCTION   OF   KADIO- ACTIVE   M 


ATTER        [ 


CH. 


ignition.  A  small  residue  was  obtained  which,  weight  for  weight,  was 
in  some  cases  several  thousand  times  more  active  than  the  thorium 
from  which  it  was  obtained,  while  the  activity  of  the  precipitated 
thorium  was  reduced  to  less  than  one  half  of  its  original  value. 
This  active  constituent  was  named  Th  X  from  analogy  to  Crookes' 
UrX. 


120 


100 


8  12 

Time  in  Dayt- 

Fig.  34. 


The  active  residue  was  found  to  consist  mainly  of  impurities 
from  the  thorium ;  the  Th  X  could  not  be  examined  chemically, 
and  probably  was  present  only  in  minute  quantity.  It  was  also 
found  that  an  active  constituent  could  be  partly  separated  from 
thorium  oxide  by  shaking  it  with  water  for  some  time.  On 


VII]        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF  RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        181 


filtering  the  water,  and  evaporating  down,  a  very  active  residue 
was  obtained  which  was  analogous  in  all  respects  to  Th  X. 

On  examining  the  products  a  month  later,  it  was  found  that 
the  Th  X  was  no  longer  active,  ivhile  the  thorium  had  completely 
regained  its  activity.  A  long  series  of  measurements  was  then 
undertaken  to  examine  the  time-rate  of  these  processes  of  decay 
and  recovery  of  activity. 

The  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  34,  where  the  final 
activity  of  the  thorium  and  the  initial  activity  of  the  Th  X  are  in 
each  case  taken  as  100.  The  ordinates  represent  the  activities 


iooc 


60 


60 


\ 


¥ 


40 


\ 


20 


20 


24- 


04  8  12  16 

Time  in  Days 

Fig.  35. 

determined  by  means  of  the  ionization  current,  and  the  abscissae 
represent  the  time  in  days.  It  will  be  observed  that  both  curves 
are  irregular  for  the  first  two  days.  The  activity  of  the  Th  X 
increased  at  first,  while  the  activity  of  the  thorium  diminished. 
Disregarding  these  initial  irregularities  of  the  curves,  which  will  be 
explained  in  detail  in  section  190,  it  will  be  seen  that,  after  the 
first  two  days,  the  time  taken  for  the  thorium  to  recover  half  its 
lost  activity  is  about  equal  to  the  time  taken  by  the  Th  X  to  lose 


182         CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER       [CH. 

half  its  activity.  This  time  in  each  case  is  about  four  days.  The 
percentage  proportion  of  the  activity  regained  by  the  thorium,  over 
any  given  interval,  is  approximately  equal  to  the  precentage  pro- 
portion of  the  activity  lost  by  the  Th  X  during  the  same  interval. 

If  the  recovery  curve  is  produced  backwards  in  the  normal 
direction  to  meet  the  vertical  axis,  it  does  so  at  a  minimum  of 
25  per  cent.,  and  the  above  conclusions  hold  more  accurately,  if  the 
recovery  is  assumed  to  start  from  this  minimum.  This  is  clearly 
shown  by  Fig.  35,  where  the  percentages  of  activity  recovered, 
reckoned  from  the  25  per  cent,  minimum,  are  plotted  as  ordinates. 
In  the  same  figure  the  decay  curve,  after  the  second  day,  is  shown 
on  the  same  scale.  The  activity  of  the  Th  X  decays  with  the  time 
according  to  an  exponential  law,  falling  to  half  value  in  about 
four  days.  If  70  is  the  initial  activity  and  It  is  the  activity  after 
a  time  t,  then 

*-"••        -V          :     ft 

where  X  is  a  constant  and  e  the  natural  base  of  logarithms.  The 
experimental  curve  of  the  rise  of  activity  from  a  minimum  to  a 
maximum  value  is  therefore  expressed  by  the  equation 

r(= i-«-«, 

•*o 

where  /0  is  the  amount  of  activity  recovered  when  the  state  of 
constant  activity  is  reached,  and  It  the  activity  recovered  after 
a  time  t,  and  A,  is  the  same  constant  as  before. 

120.  Uranium  X.  Similar  results  were  obtained  when 
uranium  was  examined.  The  UrX  was  separated  by  Becquerel's 
method  of  successive  precipitations  with  barium.  The  decay  of 
the  separated  activity  and  the  recovery  of  the  lost  activity  are 
shown  graphically  in  Fig.  36.  A  more  detailed  discussion  of  this 
experiment  is  given  in  section  189. 

The  curves  of  decay  and  recovery  exhibit  the  same  peculiarities 
and  can  be  expressed  by  the  same  equations  as  in  the  case  of 
thorium.  The  time-rate  of  decay  and  recovery  is,  however,  much 
slower  than  for  thorium,  the  activity  of  the  Ur  X  falling  to  half  its 
value  in  about  ,£2  days. 


VIl]        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        183 

A  large  number  of  results  of  a  similar  character  have  been 
obtained   from   other   radio-active   products,   separated   from   the 


too 


0  20 


60 


80  100  120 

Time  in  Days 


Fig.  36. 

radio-elements,  but  the  cases  of  thorium  and  uranium  will  suffice 
for  the  present  to  form  a  basis  for  the  discussion  of  the  processes 
that  are  taking  place  in  radio-active  bodies. 

121.  Theory  of  the  phenomena.  These  processes  of  decay 
and  recovery  go  on  at  exactly  the  same  rate  if  the  substances  are 
removed  from  the  neighbourhood  of  one  another,  or  enclosed  in 
lead,  or  placed  in  a  vacuum  tube.  It  is  at  first  sight  a  remark- 
able phenomenon  that  the  processes  of  decay  and  recovery  should 
be  so  intimately  connected,  although  there  is  no  possibility  of 
mutual  interaction  between  them.  These  results,  however,  receive 
a  complete  explanation  on  the  following  hypotheses : — 

(1)  That  there  is  a  constant  rate  of  production  of  fresh 

radio-active  matter  by  the  radio-active  body. 

(2)  That  the  activity  of  the  matter  decreases  according  to 

an  exponential  law  with  the  time  from  the  moment 
of  its  formation. 

Suppose  that  qQ  particles  of  new  matter  are  produced  per  second 
from  a  given  mass  of  matter.  The  rate  of  emission  of  energy  due 


184        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER       [CH. 

to  the  particles  produced  in  the  time  dt,  is,  at  the  moment  of  their 
formation,  equal  to  Kq0dt  where  K  is  a  constant. 

It  is  required  to  find  the  activity  due  to  the  whole  matter 
produced  after  the  process  has  continued  for  a  time  T. 

The  activity  dl,  due  to  the  matter  produced  during  the  time  dt 
at  the  time  t,  decays  according  to  an  exponential  law  during  the 
time  T  —  t  that  elapses  before  its  activity  is  estimated,  and  in 
consequence  is  given  by 


where  X  is  the  constant  of  decay  of  activity  of  the  active  matter. 
The  activity  It  due  to  the  whole  matter  produced  in  the  time  T  is 
thus  given  by 


The  activity  reaches  a  maximum  value  J0  when  T  is  very  great, 
and  is  then  given  by 


Thus 


This  equation  agrees  with  the  experimental  results  for  the 
recovery  of  lost  activity. 

A  state  of  equilibrium  is  reached  when  the  rate  of  loss  of 
activity  of  the  matter  already  produced  is  balanced  by  the  activity 
supplied  by  the  production  of  new  active  matter.  According  to 
this  view  the  radio-active  bodies  are  undergoing  change,  but  the 
activity  remains  constant  owing  to  the  action  of  two  opposing 
processes.  Now  if  this  active  matter  can  at  any  time  be  sepa- 
rated from  the  substance  in  which  it  is  produced,  the  decay  of 
its  activity,  as  a  whole,  should  follow  an  exponential  law  with 
the  time,  since  each  portion  of  the  matter  decreases  in  activity 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  whatever  its  age 


VII]        CONTINUOUS    PRODUCTION   OF    RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        185 

may  be.     If  /0  is  the  initial  activity  of  the  separated  product,  the 
activity  It  after  an  interval  t  is  given  by 


Thus,  the  two  assumptions  of  uniform  production  of  active 
matter  and  the  decay  of  its  activity  in  an  exponential  law  from 
the  moment  of  its  formation  satisfactorily  explain  the  relation 
between  the  curves  of  decay  and  recovery  of  activity. 

122.  Experimental  evidence.  It  now  remains  to  consider 
further  experimental  evidence  in  support  of  these  hypotheses.  The 
primary  conception  is  that  the  radio-active-bodies  are  able  to 
produce  from  themselves  matter  of  chemical  properties  different 
from  those  of  the  surjstance~that  produces  it,  and  that  this  process 
goes  on  at  a  constant  rate.  This  new  matter  initially  possesses 
the  property  of  activity,  and  loses  it  according  to  a  definite  law. 
The  fact  that  a  proportion  of  the  activity  of  radium  and  thorium 
can  be  concentrated  in  small  amounts  of  active  matter  like  Th  X 
or  Ur  X  does  not,  of  itself,  prove  directly  that  a  material  con- 
stituent responsible  for  the  activity  has  been  chemically  separated. 
For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  separation  of  Th  X  from  thorium, 
it  might  be  supposed  that  the  non-thorium  part  of  the  solution  is 
rendered  temporarily  active  by  its  association  with  thorium,  and 
that  this  property  is  retained  through  the  processes  of  precipita- 
tion, evaporation,  and  ignition,  and  finally  manifests  itself  in  the 
residue  remaining.  According  to  this  view  it  is  to  be  expected 
that  any  precipitate  capable  of  removing  the  thorium  completely 
from  its  solution  should  yield  active  residues  similar  to  those  ob- 
tained from  ammonia.  No  such  case  has  however  been  observed. 
For  example,  when  thorium  nitrate  is  precipitated  by  sodium  or 
ammonium  carbonate,  the  residue  from  the  filtrate  after  evapora- 
tion and  ignition  is  free  from  activity  and  the  thorium  carbonate 
obtained  has  the  normal  amount  of  activity.  In  fact,  ammonia  is 
the  only  reagent  yet  found  capable  of  completely  separating  Th  X 
from  thorium.  A  partial  separation  of  the  Th  X  can  be  made  by 
shaking  thorium  oxide  with  water  owing  to  the  greater  solubility 
of  Th  X  in  water. 

Thorium  and  uranium  behave  quite  differently  with  regard  to 


186        CONTINUOUS   PKODUCTION   OF   KADIO- ACTIVE   MATTER       [CH. 

the  action  of  ammonia  and  ammonium  carbonate.  Ur  X  is  com- 
pletely precipitated  with  the  uranium  in  an  ammonia  solution 
and  the  nitrate  is  inactive.  Ur  X  is  separated  by  ammonium 
carbonate,  while  Th  X  under  the  same  conditions  is  completely 
precipitated  with  the  thorium.  The  Ur  X  and  the  Th  X  thus 
behave  like  distinct  types  of  matter  with  well-marked  chemical 
properties  quite  distinct  from  those  of  the  substances  in  which 
they  are  produced.  The  removal  of  Ur  X  by  the  precipitation 
of  barium  is  probably  not  directly  connected  with  the  chemical 
properties  of  Ur  X.  The  separation  is  probably  due  to  the 
dragging  down  of  the  Ur  X  with  the  dense  barium  precipitate. 
Sir  William  Crookes  found  that  the  Ur  X  was  dragged  down  by 
precipitates  when  no  question  of  insolubility  was  involved,  and 
such  a  result  is  to  be  expected  if  the  Ur  X  exists  in  extremely 
minute  quantity.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  actual 
amount  of  the  active  constituents  Th  X  and  Ur  X,  separated  from 
thorium  and  uranium,  is  probably  infinitesimal,  and  that  the 
greater  proportion  of  the  residues  is  due  to  impurities  present 
in  the  salt  and  the  reagents,  a  very  small  amount  of  active  matter 
being  mixed  with  them. 

123.  Rate  of  production  of  Th  X.  If  the  recovery  of 
the  activity  of  uranium  or  thorium  is  due  to  the  continuous 
production  of  new  active  matter,  it  should  be  possible  to  obtain 
experimental  evidence  of  the  process.  As  the  case  of  thorium 
has  been  most  fully  investigated,  a  brief  account  will  be  given  of 
some  experiments  made  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy1  to  show  that 
Th  X  is  produced  continuously  at  a  constant  rate.  Preliminary 
experiments  showed  that  three  successive  precipitations  were  suf- 
ficient to  remove  the  Th  X  almost  completely  from  the  thorium. 
The  general  method  employed  was  to  precipitate  a  solution  of 
5  grams  of  thorium-nitrate  with  ammonia.  The  precipitate  was 
then  redissolved  in  nitric  acid  and  the  thorium  again  precipitated 
as  before,  as  rapidly  as  possible,  so  that  the  Th  X  produced  in  the 
time  between  successive  precipitations  should  not  appreciably 
affect  the  results.  The  removal  of  the  Th  X  was  followed  by 
measurements  of  the  activity  of  the  residues  obtained  from  suc- 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  1902. 


VII]        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        187 

cessive  filtrates.  In  three  successive  precipitations  the  activities  of 
the  residues  were  proportional  to  100,  8,  T6  respectively.  Thus  two 
precipitations  are  nearly  sufficient  to  free  the  thorium  from  Th  X. 
The  thorium  freed  from  Th  X  was  then  allowed  to  stand  for 
a  definite  time,  and  the  amount  of  Th  X  formed  during  that  time 
found  by  precipitating  it,  and  measuring  its  radio-activity.  Ac- 
cording to  the  theory,  the  activity  It  of  the  thorium  formed  in  the 
time  t  is  given  by 


where  /0  is  the  total  activity  of  Th  X,  when  there  is  radio-active 
equilibrium. 

If  \t  is  small, 


Since  the  activity  of  Th  X  falls  to  half  value  in  4  days,  the 
value  of  \  expressed  in  hours  =  '0072.  After  standing  a  period 
of  1  hour  about  1/140,  after  1  day  1/6,  after  4  days  1/2  of  the 
maximum  should  be  obtained.  The  experimental  results  obtained 
showed  an  agreement  as  good  as  could  be  expected,  with  the  equa- 
tion expressing  the  result  that  the  Th  X  was  being  produced  at 
a  constant  rate. 

The  thorium-nitrate  which  had  been  freed  from  Th  X  was 
allowed  to  stand  for  one  month,  and  then  it  was  again  subjected 
to  the  same  process.  The  activity  of  the  Th  X  was  found  to  be 
the  same  as  that  obtained  from  an  equal  amount  of  the  original 
thorium-nitrate.  In  one  month,  therefore,  the  Th  X  had  been 
regenerated,  and  had  reached  a  maximum  value.  By  leaving  the 
thorium  time  to  fully  recover  its  activity,  this  process  can  be  re- 
peated indefinitely,  and  equal  amounts  of  Th  X  are  obtained  at 
each  precipitation.  Ordinary  commercial  thorium-nitrate  and  the 
purest  nitrate  obtainable  showed  exactly  the  same  action,  and 
equal  amounts  of  Th  X  could  be  obtained  from  equal  weights. 
These  processes  thus  appear  to  be  independent  of  the  chemical 
purity  of  the  substance1. 

1  The  general  method  of  regarding  the  subject  would  be  unchanged,  even  if  it 
were  proved  that  the  radio-activity  of  thorium  is  not  due  to  thorium  at  all  but  to  a 
small  constant  amount  of  a  radio-active  impurity  mixed  with  it. 


188        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE    MATTER       [CH. 

The  process  of  the  production  of  Th  X  is  continuous,  and  no 
alteration  has  been  observed  in  the  amount  produced  in  the  given 
time  after  repeated  separations.  After  23  precipitations  extending 
over  9  days,  the  amount  produced  in  a  given  interval  was  about 
the  same  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  process. 

These  results  are  all  in  agreement  with  the  view  that  the 
Th  X  is  being  continuously  produced  from  the  thorium  compound 
at  a  constant  rate.  The  amount  of  active  matter  produced  from 
1  gram  of  thorium  is  probably  extremely  minute,  but  the  elec- 
trical effects  due  to  its  activity  are  so  large  that  the  process  of 
production  can  be  followed  after  extremely  short  intervals.  With 
a  sensitive  electrometer  the  amount  of  Th  X  produced  per  minute 
in  10  grams  of  thorium-nitrate  gives  a  rapid  movement  to  the 
electrometer  needle.  For  larger  intervals  it  is  necessary  to  add 
additional  capacity  to  the  system  to  bring  the  effects  within  range 
of  the  instrument. 

124.  Rate  of  decay  of  activity.  It  has  been  shown  that 
the  activity  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X  decays  according  to  an  exponential 
law  with  the  time.  This,  we  shall  see  later,  is  the  general  law  of 
decay  of  activity  in  any  type  of  active  matter,  obtained  by  itself, 
and  freed  from  any  secondary  active  products  which  it  may,  itself, 
produce.  In  any  case,  when  this  law  is  not  fulfilled,  it  can  be 
shown  that  the  activity  is  due  to  the  superposition  of  two  or 
more  effects,  each  of  which  decays  in  an  exponential  law  with 
the  time.  The  physical  interpretation  of  this  law  still  remains 
to  be  discussed. 

It  has  been  shown  that  in  uranium  and  thorium  compounds 
there  is  a  continuous  production  of  active  matter  which  keeps  the 
compound  in  radio-active  equilibrium.  The  changes  by  which 
the  active  matter  is  produced  must  be  chemical  in  nature,  since 
the  products  of  the  action  are  different  in  chemical  properties 
from  the  matter  in  which  the  changes  take  place.  The  activity 
of  the  products  has  afforded  the  means  of  following  the  changes 
occurring  in  them.  It  now  remains  to  consider  the  connection 
between  the  activity  at  any  time,  and  the  amount  of  chemical 
change  taking  place  at  that  time. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  found  experimentally  that  the  saturation 


VI  I]        CONTINUOUS    PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        189 

ionization  current  it,  after  the  active  product  has  been  allowed  to 
decay  for  a  time  t,  is  given  by 


where  i0  is  the  initial  saturation  current  and  \  the  constant  of 
decay. 

Now  the  saturation  current  is  a  measure  of  the  total  number 
of  ions  produced  per  second  in  the  testing  vessel.  It  has  already 
been  shown  that  the  a  rays,  which  produce  the  greater  proportion 
of  ionization  in  the  gas,  consist  of  positively  charged  particles 
projected  with  great  velocity.  Suppose  for  simplicity  that  each 
atom  of  active  matter,  in  the  course  of  its  change,  gives  rise  to 
one  projected  a  particle.  Each  a  particle  will  produce  a  certain 
average  number  of  ions  in  its  path  before  it  strikes  the  boundaries 
or  is  absorbed  in  the  gas.  Since  the  number  of  projected  particles 
per  second  is  equal  to  the  number  of  atoms  changing  per  second, 
the  number  of  atoms  nt  which  change  per  second  at  the  time  t  is 
given  by 


where  nQ  is  the  initial  number  which  change  per  second.  On  this 
view,  then,  the  law  of  decay  expresses  the  result  that  the  number 
of  atoms  changing  in  unit  time,  diminishes  according  to  an  ex- 
ponential law  with  the  time.  The  number  of  atoms  Nt  which 
remain  unchanged  after  an  interval  t  is  given  by 


Nt=( 

J  t 


. 

A, 

If  N0  is  the  number  of  atoms  at  the  beginning, 


Thus  =e~ 


or  the  law  of  decay  expresses  the  fact  that  the  activity  of  a  pro- 


J90        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        [CH. 

duct  at  any  time  is  proportional  to  the  number  of  atoms  which 
remain  unchanged  at  that  time. 

This  is  the  same  as  the  law  of  mono-molecular  change  in 
chemistry,  and  expresses  the  fact  that  there  is  only  one  changing 
system.  If  the  change  depended  on  the  mutual  action  of  two 
systems,  the  law  of  decay  would  be  different,  since  the  rate  of 
decay  in  that  case  would  depend  on  the  relative  concentration 
of  the  two  reacting  substances.  This  is  not  so,  for  there  is  not 
a  single  case  yet  observed  in  which  the  law  of  decay  was  affected 
by  the  amount  of  active  matter  present. 

From  the  above  equation  (1) 


or  the  number  of  systems  changing  in  unit  time  is  proportional  to 
the  number  unchanged  at  that  time. 

In  the  case  of  recovery  of  activity,  after  an  active  product  has 
been  removed,  the  number  of  systems  changing  in  unit  time,  when 
radio-active  equilibrium  is  produced,  is  equal  to  \N0.  This  must 
be  equal  to  the  number  q0  of  new  systems  supplied  in  unit  time,  or 


and  x-;  • 

X  has  thus  a  distinct  physical  meaning,  and  may  be  denned  as 
the  proportion  of  the  total  number  of  systems  present  which 
change  per  second.  It  has  a  different  value  for  each  type  of 
active  matter,  but  is  invariable  for  that  particular  type  of  matter. 
For  this  reason,  X  will  be  termed  the  "  radio-active  constant  "  of 
the  product. 

125.     Influence   of  conditions   on    the   rate   of   decay. 

Since  the  activity  of  any  product,  at  any  time,  may  be  taken  as 
a  measure  of  the  rate  at  which  chemical  change  takes  place,  it 
may  be  used  as  a  means  of  determining  the  effect  of  conditions 
on  the  changes  occurring  in  radio-active  matter.  If  the  rate  of 
change  should  be  accelerated  or  retarded,  it  is  to  be  expected 
that  the  value  of  the  radio-active  constant  X  would  be  increased  or 


VII]        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        191 

decreased,  i.e.  that   the   decay  curve   would   be   different   under 
different  conditions. 

No  such  effect,  however,  has  yet  been  observed  in  any  case  of 
radio-active  change,  where  none  of  the  active  products  produced 
are  allowed  to  escape  from  the  system.  The  rate  of  decay  is 
unaltered  by  any  chemical  or  physical  agency,  and  in  this  respect 
the  changes  in  radio-active  matter  are  sharply  distinguished  from 
ordinary  chemical  change.  For  example,  the  rate  of  decay  of 
activity  from  any  product  takes  place  at  the  same  rate  when  the 
substance  is  exposed  to  light  as  when  it  is  kept  in  the  dark,  at 
the  same  rate  in  a  vacuum  as  in  air  or  any  other  gas  at  atmo- 
spheric pressure.  Its  rate  of  decay  is  unaltered  by  surrounding 
the  active  matter  by  a  thick  layer  of  lead  under  conditions  where 
no  ordinary  radiation  from  outside  can  affect  it.  The  activity  of 
the  matter  is  unaffected  by  ignition  or  chemical  treatment.  The 
material  giving  rise  to  the  activity  can  be  dissolved  in  acid  and 
re-obtained  by  evaporation  of  the  solution  without  altering  the 
activity.  The  rate  of  decay  is  the  same  whether  the  active 
matter  is  retained  in  the  solid  state  or  kept  in  solution.  When 
a  product  has  lost  its  activity,  resolution  or  heat  does  not  re- 
generate it,  and  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  rate  of  decay  of  the 
active  products,  so  far  examined,  is  the  same  at  a  red  heat  as  at 
the  temperature  of  liquid  air.  In  fact,  no  variation  of  physical  or 
chemical  conditions  has  led  to  any  observable  difference  in  the 
decay  of  activity  of  any  of  the  numerous  types  of  active  matter 
which  have  been  examined. 

126.  Effect  of  conditions  on  the  rate  of  recovery  of 
activity.  The  recover}7  of  the  activity  of  a  radio-element  with 
time,  when  an  active  product  is  separated  from  it,  is  governed  by 
the  rate  of  production  of  fresh  active  matter  and  by  the  decay  of 
activity  of  that  already  produced.  Since  the  rate  of  decay  of  the 
activity  of  the  separated  product  is  independent  of  conditions,  the 
rate  of  recovery  of  activity  can  be  modified  only  by  a  change  of 
the  rate  of  production  of  fresh  active  matter.  As  far  as  experi- 
ments have  gone,  the  rate  of  production,  like  the  rate  of  decay,  is 
independent  of  chemical  or  physical  conditions.  There  are  indeed 
certain  cases  which  are  apparent  exceptions  to  this  rule.  For 


192        CONTINUOUS    PRODUCTION    OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        [CH. 

example,  the  escape  of  the  radio-active  emanations  from  thorium 
and  radium  is  readily  affected  by  heat,  moisture  and  solution. 
A  more  thorough  investigation,  however,  shows  that  the  excep- 
tion is  only  apparent  and  not  real.  These  cases  will  be  discussed 
more  in  detail  in  chapter  vm,  but  it  may  be  stated  here  that 
the  differences  observed  are  due  to  differences  in  the  rate  of  escape 
of  the  emanations  into  the  surrounding  gas,  and  not  to  differences 
in  the  rate  of  production.  For  this  reason  it  is  difficult  to  test  the 
question  at  issue  in  the  case  of  the  thorium  compounds,  which 
in  most  cases  readily  allow  the  emanation  produced  by  them  to 
escape  into  the  air. 

In  order  to  show  that  the  rate  of  production  is  independent 
of  molecular  state,  temperature,  etc.,  it  is  necessary  in  such  a 
case  to  undertake  a  long  series  of  measurements  extending 
over  the  whole  time  of  recovery.  It  is  impossible  to  make  accu- 
rate relative  comparisons  to  see  if  the  activity  is  altered  by  the 
conversion  of  one  compound  into  another.  The  relative  activity 
in  such  a  case,  when  measured  by  spreading  a  definite  weight  of 
material  uniformly  on  a  metal  plate,  varies  greatly  with  the  physical 
conditions  of  the  precipitate,  although  the  total  activity  of  two 
compounds  may  be  the  same. 

The  following  method1  offers  an  accurate  and  simple  means 
of  studying  whether  the  rate  of  production  of  active  matter  is 
influenced  by  molecular  state.  The  substance  is  chemically  con- 
verted into  any  compound  required,  care  being  taken  that  active 
products  are  recovered  during  the  process.  The  new  compound  is 
then  spread  on  a  metal  plate  and  compared  with  a  standard  ,d,mple 
of  uranium  for  several  days  or  weeks  as  required.  If  the  rate  of 
production  of  active  matter  is  altered  by  the  conversion,  there 
should  be  an  increase  or  decrease  of  activity  to  a  new  steady  value, 
where  the  production  of  active  matter  is  again  balanced  by  the 
rate  of  decay.  This  method  has  the  great  advantage  of  being  in- 
dependent of  the  physical  condition  of  the  precipitate.  It  can  be 
applied  satisfactorily  to  a  compound  of  thorium  like  the  nitrate 
and  the  oxide  which  has  been  heated  to  a  white  heat,  after  which 
treatment  only  a  slight  amount  of  emanation  escapes.  The  nitrate 
was  converted  into  the  oxide  in  a  platinum  crucible  by  treatment 
1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  1902. 


VII]        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-A 


with  sulphuric  acid  and  ignition  to  a  white  heat.  The  oxide  so 
obtained  was  spread  on  a  plate,  but  no  change  of  its  activity  was 
observed  with  time,  showing  that  in  this  case  the  rate  of  produc- 
tion was  independent  of  molecular  state.  This  method,  which  is 
limited  in  the  case  of  thorium,  may  be  applied  generally  to  the 
uranium  compounds  where  the  results  are  not  complicated  by  the 
presence  of  an  emanation. 

No  differences  have  yet  been  observed  in  the  recovery  curves 
of  different  thorium  compounds  after  the  removal  of  Th  X.  For 
example,  the  rate  of  recovery  is  the  same  whether  the  precipitated 
hydroxide  is  converted  into  the  oxide  or  into  the  sulphate. 

127.  Disintegration  hypothesis.  In  the  discussion  of  the 
changes  in  radio-active  bodies,  only  the  active  products  Ur  X 
and  Th  X  have  been  considered.  It  will,  however,  be  shown  later 
that  these  two  products  are  only  examples  of  many  other  types  of 
active  matter  which  are  produced  by  the  radio-elements,  and  that 
each  of  these  types  of  active  matter  has  definite  chemical  as  well 
as  radio-active  properties,  which  distinguish  it,  not  only  from  the 
other  active  products,  but  also  from  the  substance  from  which  it 
is  produced. 

The  full  investigation  of  these  changes  will  be  shown  to  verify- 
in  every  particular  the  hypothesis  that  radio-activity  is  the  ac- 
companiment of  chemical  changes  of  a  special  kind  occurring  in 
matter,  and  that  the  constant  activity  of  the  radio-elements  is 
due  f^  an  equilibrium  process,  in  which  the  rate  of  production  of 
fresi.  ive  matter  balances  the  rate  of  change  of  that  already 
formed. 

The  nature  of  the  process  taking  place  in  the  radio-elements, 
in  order  to  give  rise  to  the  production  at  a  constant  rate  of  new 
kinds  of  active  matter,  will  now  be  considered.  Since  in  thorium 
or  uranium  compounds  there  is  a  continuous  production  of  radio- 
active matter,  which  differs  in  chemical  properties  from  the  parent 
substance,  some  kind  of  change  must  be  taking  place  in  the  radio- 
element.  This  change,  by  which  new  matter  is  produced,  is  very 
different  in  character  from  the  molecular  changes  dealt  with  in 
chemistry,  for  no  chemical  change  is  known  which  proceeds  at  the 
same  rate  at  the  temperatures  corresponding  to  a  red  heat  and 
R.  R.-A.  13 


194        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION    OF   RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER        [CH. 

to  liquid  air,  and  is  independent  of  all  physical  and  chemical 
actions.  If,  however,  the  production  of  active  matter  is  supposed 
to  be  the  result  of  changes,  not  in  the  molecule,  but  in  the  atom 
itself,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  temperature  would  exert 
much  influence.  The  general  experience  of  chemistry  in  failing 
to  transform  the  elements  by  the  action  of  temperature  is  itself 
strong  evidence  that  wide  ranges  of  temperature  have  not  much 
effect  in  altering  the  stability  of  the  chemical  atom. 

The  view  that  the  atoms  of  the  radio-elements  are  undergoing 
-spontaneous  disintegration  was  put  forward  by  Mr  Soddy  and  the 
writer  as  a  result  of  evidence  of  this  character.  The  discovery  of 
the  material  nature  of  the  a  rays  added  strong  confirmation  to 
the  hypothesis ;  for  it  has  been  pointed  out  (section  87)  that  the 
expulsion  of  a  particles  must  be  the  result  of  a  disintegration 
of  the  atoms  of  the  radio-element.  Taking  the  case  of  thorium 
as  an  example,  the  processes  occurring  in  the  atom  may  be 
pictured  in  the  following  way.  It  must  be  supposed  that  the 
thorium  atoms  are  not  permanently  stable  systems,  but,  on  an 
average,  a  constant  small  proportion  of  them — about  one  atom  in 
every  1016  will  suffice — breaks  up  per  second.  The  disintegration 
consists  in  the  expulsion  from  the  atom  of  one  or  more  a  particles 
with  great  velocity.  For  simplicity,  it  will  be  supposed  that  each 
atom  expels  one  a  particle.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  a  particle 
of  radium  has  a  mass  about  twice  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom. 
From  the  similarity  of  the  a  rays  from  thorium  and  radium,  it  is 
probable  that  the  a  particle  of  thorium  does  not  differ  much  in 
mass  from  that  of  radium,  and  may  be  equal  to  it.  After  the 
escape  of  an  a  particle,  the  part  of  the  atom  left  behind,  which 
has  a  mass  slightly  less  than  that  of  the  thorium  atom,  tends  to 
rearrange  its  components  to  form  a  temporarily  stable  system.  It 
is  to  be  expected  that  it  will  differ  in  chemical  properties  from 
the  thorium  atom  from  which  it  was  derived.  The  atom  of  the 
substance  Th  X  is,  on  this  view,  the  thorium  atom  minus  one  a 
particle.  The  atoms  of  Th  X  are  far  more  unstable  than  the  atoms 
of  thorium,  and  one  after  the  other  they  break  up,  each  atom  ex- 
pelling one  a  particle  as  before.  These  projected  a  particles  give  rise 
to  the  radiation  from  the  Th  X.  Since  the  activity  of  Th  X  falls  to 
half  its  original  value  in  about  four  days,  on  an  average  half  of  the 


VIl]        CONTINUOUS   PRODUCTION   OF   RADIO-ACTIVE   MATTER        195 

atoms  of  Th  X  break  up  in  four  days,  the  number  breaking  up 
per  second  being  always  proportional  to  the  number  present. 
After  an  atom  of  Th  X  has  expelled  an  a  particle,  the  mass  of  the 
system  is  again  reduced  and  its  chemical  properties  are  changed. 
It  will  be  shown  (section  145)  that  the  Th  X  gives  rise  to  the 
thorium  emanation,  which  exists  as  a  gas,  and  that  this  in  turn 
gives  rise  to  matter  which  is  deposited  on  solid  bodies  and  gives 
rise  to  the  phenomena  of  excited  activity. 

As  a  result  of  the  disintegration  of  the  thorium  atom,  there  is 
thus  a  series  of  chemical  substances  produced,  each  of  which  has 
distinctive  chemical  properties.  Each  of  these  products  is  radio- 
active, and  loses  its  activity  according  to  a  definite  law.  Since 
thorium  has  an  atomic  weight  of  237,  and  the  weight  of  the 
a  particle  is  about  2,  it  is  evident  that,  if  only  one  a.  particle 
is  expelled  at  each  change,  the  process  of  disintegration  could 
pass  through  a  number  of  successive  stages  and  yet  leave  behind, 
at  the  end  of  the  process,  a  mass  comparable  with  that  of  the 
parent  atom. 

It  will  be  shown  in  chapter  x  that  a  process  of  disintegration, 
very  similar  to  that  already  described  for  thorium,  must  be  sup- 
posed to  take  place  also  in  uranium  and  radium.  The  full 
discussion  of  this  subject  cannot  be  given  with  advantage  until 
two  of  the  most  important  products  of  thorium  and  radium,  viz. 
the  radio-active  emanations  and  the  matter  which  causes  excited 
activity,  have  been  considered  in  detail. 

128.  Magnitude  of  the  changes.  It  can  be  calculated 
by  several  independent  methods  that,  in  order  to  account  for  the 
changes  occurring  in  thorium,  probably  not  more  than  10s  and 
not  less  than  104  atoms  in  each  gram  of  thorium  suffer  disintegra- 
tion per  second.  It  is  well  known  (section  39)  that  1  cubic  centi- 
metre of  hydrogen  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  temperature  contains 
about  2  x  1019  molecules.  From  this  it  follows  that  one  gram  of 
thorium  contains  about  1021  atoms.  The  fraction  which  breaks 
up  per  second  thus  lies  between  10~17  and  10~16.  This  is  an 
extremely  small  ratio,  and  it  is  evident  that  the  process  could 
continue  for  long  intervals  of  time,  before  the  amount  of  matter 
changed  would  be  capable  of  detection  by  the  spectroscope  or 

13—2 


196      CONTINUOUS  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIO-ACTIVE  MATTER     [CH.  VII 

by  the  balance.  With  the  electroscope  it  is  possible  to  detect 
the  radiation  from  10~5  gram  of  thorium,  i.e.  the  electroscope  is 
capable  of  detecting  the  ionization  which  accompanies  the  disin- 
tegration of  a  single  thorium  atom  per  second.  The  electroscope 
is  thus  an  extraordinarily  delicate  means  for  detection  of  minute 
changes  in  matter,  which  are  accompanied,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
radio-elements,  by  the  expulsion  of  charged  particles  with  great 
velocity.  It  is  possible  to  detect  by  its  radiation  the  amount  of 
Th  X  produced  in  a  second  from  1  gram  of  thorium,  although 
the  process  would  probably  need  to  continue  thousands  of  years 
before  it  could  be  detected  by  the  balance  or  the  spectroscope.  It 
is  thus  evident  that  the  changes  occurring  in  thorium  are  of  an 
order  of  magnitude  quite  different  from  that  of  ordinary  chemical 
changes,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  have  never  been  ob- 
served by  direct  chemical  methods. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

KADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS. 

129.  Introduction.     A  most  important  and  striking  property 
possessed  by  radium,  thorium,  and  actinium,  but  not  by  uranium  or 
polonium,  is  the  power  of  continuously  emitting  into  the  surround- 
ing space  joaatm'al  emanation,  which  has  all  the  ^properties  of  a 
radio-active^s.    This  emanation  is  able  to  diffuse  rapidly  through 
gases^anch  through  por^us^  substances,  and  may  be  separated  from 
the  gas  with  which  it  is  mixed  by  condensation  by  the  action  of 
extreme  cold.     This  emanation  forms  a  connecting  link  between 
the  activity  of  the  radio-elements  themselves  and  their  power  of 
exciting  activity  on  surrounding  objects,  and  has  been  studied  more 
closely  than  the  other  active  products  on  account  of  its  existence  in 
the  gaseous  state.    The  emanations  from  the  three  active  bodies  all 
possess  similar  radio-active  properties,  but  the  effects  are  more 
marked  in  the  case  of  the  emanation  from  radium,  on  account  of 
the  very  great  activity  of  that  element. 

Thorium  Emanation. 

130.  Discovery    of  the    emanation.      In   the   course   of 
examination  of  the  radiations  of  thorium,  several  observers  had 
noted  that  some   of  the  thorium  compounds,  and  especially  the 
oxide,  were  very  inconstant  sources  of  radiation,  when  examined  in 
open  vessels  by  the  electrical  method.     Owens1  found  that  this 
inconstancy  was  due  to  the  presence  of  air  currents.     When  a 
closed  vessel  was  used,  the  current,  immediately  after  the  intro- 
duction of  the  active  matter,  increased  with  the  time,  and  finally 

1  Phil.  Mag.  p.  360,  Oct.  1899. 


198  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

reached  a  constant  value.  By  drawing  a  steady  stream  of  air 
through  the  vessel  the  value  of  the  current  was  much  reduced.  It 
was  also  observed  that  the  radiations  could  apparently  pass  through 
large  thicknesses  of  paper,  which  completely  absorbed  the  ordinary 
a  radiation. 

In  an  investigation  of  these  peculiar  properties  of  thorium 
compounds,  the  writer1  found  that  the  effects  were  due  to  an 
emission  of  radio-active  particles  of  some  kind  from  the  thorium 
compounds.  This  "  emanation,"  as  it  was  termed  for  convenience, 
possesses  the  properties  of  ionizing  the  gas  and  acting  on  a  photo- 
graphic plate,  and  is  able  to  diffuse  rapidly  through  porous 
substances  like  paper  and  thin  metal  foil. 

The  emanation,  like  a  gas,  is  completely  prevented  from  escap- 
ing by  covering  the  active  matter  with  a  thin  plate  of  mica.  The 
emanation  can  be  carried  away  by  a  current  of  air;  it  passes 
through  a  plug  of  cotton-wool  and  can  be  bubbled  through  solutions 
without  any  loss  of  activity.  In  these  respects,  it  behaves  very 
differently  from  the  ions  produced  in  the  gas  by  the  rays  from 
active  substances,  for  these  give  up  their  charge  completely  under 
the  same  conditions. 

Since  the  emanation  passes  readily  through  large  thicknesses 
of  cardboard,  and  through  niters  of  tightly  packed  cotton-wool,  it 
does  not  seem  likely  that  the  emanation  consists  of  particles  of 
dust  given  off  by  the  active  matter.  This  point  was  tested  still 
further  by  the  method  used  by  Aitken  and  Wilson,  for  detecting 
the  presence  of  dust  particles  in  the  air.  The  oxide,  enclosed  in 
a  paper  cylinder,  was  placed  in  a  glass  vessel,  and  the  dust  was 
removed  by  repeated  small  expansions  of  the  air  over  a  water 
surface.  The  dust  particles  act  as  nuclei  for  the  formation  of 
small  drops  and  are  then  removed  from  the  air  by  the  action  of 
gravity.  After  repeated  expansions,  no  cloud  was  formed,  and  the 
dust  was  considered  to  be  removed.  After  waiting  for  some  time 
to  allow  the  thorium  emanation  to  collect,  further  expansions  were 
made  but  no  cloud  resulted,  showing  that  for  the  small  expansions 
used,  the  particles  were  too  small  to  become  centres  of  condensa- 
tion. The  emanation  then  could  not  be  regarded  as  dust  emitted 
from  thorium. 

1  Phil  Mag.  p.  1,  Jan.  1SOO. 


VIII] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


199 


Since  the  power  of  diffusing  rapidly  through  porous  substances, 
and  acting  on  a  photographic  plate,  is  also  possessed  by  a  chemical 
substance  like  hydrogen  peroxide,  some  experiments  were  made 
to  see  if  the  emanation  could  be  an  agent  of  that  character.  It  was 
found,  however,  that  hydrogen  peroxide  is  not  radio-active,  and 
that  its  action  on  the  plate  is  a  purely  chemical  one,  while  it  is 
the  radiation  from  the  emanation  and  not  the  emanation  itself  that 
produces  ionizing  and  photographic  effects. 

131.  Experimental  arrangements.  The  emanation  from 
thorium  is  given  off  in  minute  quantity.  No  appreciable  lowering 
of  the  vacuum  is  observed  when  an  emanating  compound  is  placed 
in  a  vacuum  tube  and  no  new  spectrum  lines  are  observed. 

For  an  examination  of  the  emanation,  an  apparatus  similar  in 
principle  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  37  is  convenient. 

The  thorium  compound  either  bare  or  enclosed  in  a  paper 
envelope  was  placed  in  a  glass  tube  C.  A  current  of  air  from  a 
gasometer,  after  passing  through  a  tube  containing  cotton-wool  to 
remove  dust  particles,  bubbled  through  sulphuric  acid  in  the  vessel 
A.  It  then  passed  through  a  bulb  containing  tightly  packed 
cotton-wool  to  prevent  any  spray  being  carried  over.  The  emana- 


To  Electrometer 


Fig.  37. 

tion,  mixed  with  air,  was  carried  from  the  vessel  C  through  a  plug 
of  cotton-wool  D,  which  completely  removed  all  the  ions  carried  with 
the  emanation.  The  latter  then  passed  into  a  long  brass  cylinder, 
75  cm.  in  length  and  6  cm.  in  diameter.  The  insulated  cylinder 
was  connected  with  a  battery  in  the  usual  way.  Three  insulated 
electrodes,  E,  F,  H,  of  equal  lengths,  were  placed  along  the  axis  of 
the  cylinder,  supported  by  brass  rods  passing  through  ebonite 
corks  in  the  side  of  the  cylinder.  The  current  through  the  gas, 
due  to  the  presence  of  the  emanation,  was  measured  by  means  of 


200  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

an  electrometer.  An  insulating  key  was  arranged  so  that  any  one 
of  the  electrodes  E,  F,  H  could  be  rapidly  connected  with  one  pair 
of  quadrants  of  the  electrometer,  the  other  two  being  always  con- 
nected with  earth.  The  current  observed  in  the  testing  cylinder 
vessel  was  due  entirely  to  the  ions  produced  by  the  emanation 
carried  into  the  vessel  by  the  current  of  air.  On  substituting  a 
uranium  compound  for  the  thorium,  not  the  slightest  current  was 
observed.  After  a  constant  flow  has  passed  for  about  10  minutes, 
the  current  due  to  the  emanation  reaches  a  constant  value. 

The  variation  of  the  ionization  current  with  the  voltage  is 
similar  to  that  observed  for  the  gas  ionized  by  the  radiations  from 
the  active  bodies.  The  current  at  first  increases  with  the  voltage, 
but  finally  reaches  a  saturation  value. 

132.     Duration  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation.     The 

emanation  rapidly  loses  its  activity  with  time.  This  is  very  readily 
shown  with  the  apparatus  of  Fig.  37.  The  current  is  found  to 
diminish  progressively  along  the  cylinder,  and  the  variation  from 
electrode  to  electrode  depends  on  the  velocity  of  the  flow  of  air. 

If  the  velocity  of  the  air  current  is  known,  the  decay  of  activity 
of  the  emanation  with  time  can  be  deduced.  If  the  flow  of  air  is 
stopped,  and  the  openings  of  the  cylinder  closed,  the  current 
steadily  diminishes  with  time.  The  following  numbers  illustrate 
the  variation  with  time  of  the  saturation  current,  due  to  the 
emanation  in  a  closed  vessel.  The  observations  were  taken  suc- 
cessively, and  as  rapidly  as  possible  after  the  current  of  air  was 
stopped. 

Time  in  seconds  Current 

0  100 

28  69 

62  51 

118  25 

155  14 

210  67 

272  4'1 

360  1-8 

Curve  A,  Fig.  38,  shows  the  relation  existing  between  the 
current  through  the  gas  and  the  time.  The  current  just  before 
the  flow  of  air  was  stopped  is  taken  as  unity.  The  current  through 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  201 

the  gas,  which  is  a  measure  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation, 
diminishes  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time  like  the 
activity  of  the  products  Ur  X  and  Th  X.  The  rate  of  decay  is, 
however,  much  more  rapid,  the  activity  of  the  emanation  decreas- 
ing to  half  value  in  about  one  minute.  According  to  the  view 
developed  in  section  124,  this  expresses  the  result  that  half  of  the 


4  5 

Time  in  Minutes 

Fig.  38. 

emanation  particles  have  undergone  change  in  one  minute.  After 
an  interval  of  10  minutes,  the  current  due  to  the  emanation  is 
very  small,  showing  that  practically  all  the  emanation  particles 
present  have  undergone  change. 

The  decrease  of  the  current  with  time  is  an  actual  measure  of 
the  decrease  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation,  and  is  not  in  any 
way  influenced  by  the  time  taken  for  the  ions  produced  to  reach 
the  electrodes.  If  the  ions  had  been  produced  from  a  uranium 
compound,  the  duration  of  the  conductivity  for  a  saturation  voltage 
would  only  have  been  a  fraction  of  a  second. 

The  rate  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation  is  independ- 
ent of  the  electromotive  force  acting  on  the  gas.  This  shows  that 


202  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  [CH. 

the  radio-active  particles  are  not  destroyed  by  the  electric  field. 
The  current  through  the  gas  at  any  particular  instant,  after 
stoppage  of  the  flow  of  air,  was  found  to  be  the  same  whether  the 
electromotive  force  had  been  acting  the  whole  time  or  had  been 
just  applied  for  the  time  of  the  test. 

The  emanation  itself  is  unaffected  by  a  strong  electric  field  and 
so  cannot  be  charged.  By  testing  the  activity  of  the  emanation 
after  passing  through  long  concentric  cylinders,  charged  to  a  high 
potential,  it  was  found  that  the  emanation  certainly  did  not  move 
with  a  velocity  greater  than  '00001  cm.  per  second,  for  a  gradient 
of  1  volt  per  cm.,  and  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  it  moved 
at  all. 

The  rate  at  which  the  emanation  is  produced  is  independent 
of  the  gas  surrounding  the  active  matter.  If  in  the  apparatus  of 
Fig.  37,  air  is  replaced  by  hydrogen,  oxygen,  or  carbonic  acid, 
similar  results  are  obtained,  though  the  current  observed  in  the 
testing  vessel  varies  for  the  different  gases  on  account  of  the 
unequal  absorption  by  them  of  the  radiation  from  the  emanation. 

If  a  thorium  compound,  enclosed  in  paper  to  absorb  the  a 
radiation,  is  placed  in  a  closed  vessel,  the  saturation  current  due  to 
the  emanation  is  found  to  vary  directly  as  the  pressure.  Since 
the  rate  of  ionization  is  proportional  to  the  pressure  for  a  constant 
source  of  radiation,  this  experiment  shows  that  the  rate  of  emission 
of  the  emanation  is  independent  of  the  pressure  of  the  gas.  The 
effect  of  pressure  on  the  rate  of  production  of  the  emanation  is 
discussed  in  more  detail  later  in  section  148. 

133.  Effect  of  thickness  of  layer.  The  amount  of  emana- 
tion emitted  by  a  given  area  of  thorium  compound  depends  on 
the  thickness  of  the  layer.  With  a  very  thin  layer,  the  current 
between  two  parallel  plates,  placed  in  a  closed  vessel  as  in  Fig.  16, 
is  due  very  largely  to  the  a  rays.  Since  the  a  radiation  is  very 
readily  absorbed,  the  current  due  to  it  practically  reaches  a  maximum 
when  the  surface  of  the  plate  is  completely  covered  by  a  thin  layer 
of  the  active  material.  On  the  other  hand  the  current  produced 
by  the  emanation  increases  until  the  layer  is  several  millimetres  in 
thickness,  and  then  is  not  much  altered  by  adding  fresh  active 
matter.  This  falling  off  of  the  current  after  a  certain  thickness 


VIII] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


203 


has  been  reached  is  to  be  expected,  since  the  emanation,  which 
takes  several  minutes  to  diffuse  through  the  layer  above  it,  has 
already  lost  a  large  proportion  of  its  activity. 

With  a  thick  layer  of  thorium  oxide  in  a  closed  vessel,  the 
current  between  the  plates  is  largely  due  to  the  radiation  from  the 
emanation  lying  between  the  plates.  The  following  tables  illus- 
trate the  way  in  which  the  current  varies  with  the  thickness  of 
paper  for  both  a  thin  and  a  thick  layer. 


TABLE  I.     Thin  Layer. 
Thickness  of  sheets  of  paper  O027. 


TABLE  II.     Thick  Layer 
Thickness  of  paper  '008  cm. 


No.  of  layers 
of  paper 

Current 

i 

0                 1 

1                   -37 

2 

•16 

3 

•08 

No.  of  layers 
of  paper 

Current 

0 

1 

1 

•74 

2 

•74 

5 

•72 

10 

•67 

•20 

•55 

The  initial  current  with  the  unscreened  compound  is  taken  as 
unity.  In  Table  I.,  for  a  thin  layer  of  thorium  oxide,  the  current 
diminished  rapidly  with  additional  layers  of  thin  paper.  In  this 
case  the  current  is  due  almost  entirely  to  the  a  rays.  In  Table  II. 
the  current  falls  to  '74  for  the  first  layer.  In  this  case  about  26  % 
of  the  current  is  due  to  the  a  rays,  which  are  practically  absorbed 
by  the  layer  '008  cm.  in  thickness.  The  slow  decrease  with 
additional  layers  shows  that  the  emanation  diffuses  so  rapidly 
through  a  few  layers  of  paper  that  there  is  little  loss  of  activity 
during  the  passage.  The  time  taken  to  diffuse  through  20  layers 
is  however  appreciable,  and  the  current  consequently  has  decreased. 
After  passing  through  a  layer  of  cardboard  1'6  mms.  in  thickness 
the  current  is  reduced  to  about  one-fifth  of  its  original  value.  In 
closed  vessels  the  proportion  of  the  total  current,  due  to  the  emana- 
tion, varies  with  the  distance  between  the  plates  as  well  as  with  the 
thickness  of  the  layer  of  active  material.  It  also  varies  greatly 
with  the  compound  examined.  In  the  nitrate,  which  gives  off  only 
a  small  amount  of  emanation,  the  proportion  is  very  much  smaller 
than  in  the  hydroxide  which  gives  off  a  large  amount  of  emanation. 


204  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

134.  Increase  of  current  with  time.  The  current  due  to 
the  emanation  does  not  reach  its  final  value  for  some  time  after 
the  active  matter  has  been  introduced  into  the  closed  vessel.  The 
variation  with  time  is  shown  in  the  following  table.  The  satura- 
tion current  due  to  thorium  oxide,  covered  with  paper,  was  observed 
between  concentric  cylinders  of  5'5  cms.  and  *8  cm.  diameter. 

Immediately  before  observations  on  the  current  were  made,  a 
rapid  stream  of  air  was  blown  through  the  apparatus.  This  removed 
most  of  the  emanation.  However,  the  current  due  to  the  ionization 
of  the  gas  by  the  emanation,  as  it  was  carried  along  by  the  current 
of  air,  was  still  appreciable.  The  current  consequently  does  not 
start  from  zero. 

Time  in  seconds  Current 

0  9 

23  25 

53  49 

96  67 

125  76 

194  88 

244  98 

304  99 

484  100 

The  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  38  Curve  B.  The 
decay  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation  with  time,  and  the  rate  of 
increase  of  the  activity,  due  to  the  emanation  in  a  closed  space,  are 
connected  in  the  same  way  as  the  decay  and  recovery  curves  of 
ThXandUrX. 

With  the  previous  notation,  the  decay  curve  is  given  by 


and  the  recovery  curve  by 


where  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation. 

This  relation  is  to  be  expected,  since  the  decay  and  recovery 
curves  of  the  emanation  are  determined  by  exactly  the  same  con- 
ditions as  the  decay  and  recovery  curves  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X.  In 
both  cases  there  is : 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  205 

(1)  A  supply  of  fresh  radio-active  particles  produced  at  a 
constant  rate. 

(2)  A  loss  of  activity  of  the  particles  following  an  exponential 
law  with  the  time. 

In  the  case  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X,  the  active  matter  produced 
manifests  its  activity  in  the  position  in  which  it  is  formed  ;  in  this 
new  phenomenon,  a  proportion  of  the  active  matter  in  the  form  of 
the  emanation  escapes  into  the  surrounding  gas.  The  activity  of 
the  emanation,  due  to  a  thorium  compound  kept  in  a  closed  vessel, 
thus  reaches  a  maximum  when  the  rate  of  supply  of  fresh  emana- 
tion particles  from  the  compound  is  balanced  by  the  rate  of  change 
of  those  already  present.  The  time  for  recovery  of  half  the  final 
activity  is  about  1  minute,  the  same  as  the  time  taken  for  the 
emanation,  when  left  to  itself,  to  lose  half  its  activity. 

If  q0  is  the  number  of  emanation  particles  escaping  into  the 
gas  per  second,  and  N0  the  final  number  when  radio-active  equi- 
librium is  reached,  then  (section  124), 


Since  the  activity  of  the  emanation  falls  to  half  value  in  1  minute 

X  =  l/87, 

and  NO  =  87<?0,  or  the  number  of  emanation  particles  present  when 
a  steady  state  is  reached  is  87  times  the  number  produced  per 
second. 

Radium   Emanation. 

135.  Discovery  of  the  emanation.  Shortly  after  the 
discovery  of  the  thorium  emanation,  Dorn1  repeated  the  results 
and,  in  addition,  showed  that  radium  compounds  also  gave  off 
radio-active  emanations  and  that  the  amount  given  off  was  much 
increased  by  heating  the  compound.  The  radium  emanation  differs 
from  the  thorium  emanation  in  the  rate  at  which  it  loses  its 
activity.  It  decays  far  more  slowly,  but  in  other  respects,  the 
emanations  of  thorium  and  radium  have  much  the  same  properties. 
Both  prr>pma.t.inn^  inm'gp  the  gas  with  which  they  are  mixed,  and 
affect  a  photographic  plate.  Both  diffuse  readily  through  porous 
1  Abh.  der  naturfortch.  Ges.  fiir  Halle-a-S.,  1900. 


206  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

substancesJbttt  are  unable  to  pass  through  a  thin  plate  of  mica; 
both  behave  like  a  temporarily  radio-active  gas,  mixed  in  minute 
quantity  with  the  air  or  other  gas  in  which  they  are  conveyed. 

136.  Decay  of  activity  of  the  emanation.  Very  little 
emanation  escapes  from  radium  chloride  in  the  solid  state,  but 
the  amount  is  largely  increased  by  heating,  or  by  dissolving  the 
compound  in  water.  By  bubbling  air  through  a  radium  chloride 
solution,  or  passing  air  over  a  heated  radium  compound,  a  large 
amount  of  emanation  may  be  obtained  which  can  be  collected, 
mixed  with  air,  in  a  suitable  vessel. 

Experiments  to  determine  accurately  the  rate  of  decay  of 
activity  of  the  emanation  have  been  made  by  P.  Curie1,  and 
Rutherford  and  Soddy2.  In  the  experiments  of  the  latter,  the 
emanation  mixed  with  air  was  stored  over  mercury  in  an  ordinary 
gas  holder.  From  time  to  time,  equal  quantities  of  air  mixed  with 
the  emanation  were  measured  off  by  a  gas  pipette  and  delivered 
into  a  testing  vessel.  The  latter  consisted  of  an  air-tight  brass 
cylinder  carrying  a  central  insulated  electrode.  A  saturation  voltage 
was  applied  to  the  cylinder,  and  the  inner  electrode  was  connected 
to  the  electrometer  with  a  suitable  capacity  in  parallel.  The 
saturation  current  was  observed  immediately  after  the  introduction 
of  the  active  gas  into  the  testing  vessel,  and  was  taken  as  a  measure 
of  the  activity  of  the  emanation  present.  The  current  increased 
rapidly  with  the  time  owing  to  the  production  of  excited  activity 
on  the  walls  of  the  containing  vessel.  This  effect  is  described  in 
detail  in  chapter  IX. 

The  measurements  were  made  at  suitable  intervals  over  a  period 
of  33  days.  The  following  table  expresses  the  results,  the  initial 
activity  being  taken  as  100. 

Time  in  hours  Kelative  Activity 

0  100 

20-8  85-7 

187-6  24-0 

354-9  6-9 

521-9  1-5 

786-9  0-19 

1  C.  R.  135,  p.  857,  1902.  2  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1903. 


VIII] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


207 


The  activity  falls  off  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the 
time,  and  decays  to  half  value  in  3*71  days.  With  the  usual 
notation 


-^-Battery 

E 


the  mean  value  of  \  deduced  from  the  results  is  given  by 
X  =  2-16  xlO-6=  1/463000. 

P.  Curie  determined  the  rate  of  decay  of  activity  of  the  emana- 
tion by  another  method.  The  active  matter  was  placed  at  one  end 
of  a  sealed  tube.  After  sufficient  time  had  elapsed,  the  portion  of 
the  tube  containing  the  radium  compound  was  removed.  The  loss 
of  activity  of  the  emanation,  stored  in  the  other  part,  was  tested  at 
regular  intervals  by  observing  the  ionization  current  due  to  the 
rays  which  passed  through  the 
walls  of  the  glass  vessel.  The 
testing  apparatus  and  the  con- 
nections are  shown  clearly  in 
Fig.  39.  The  ionization  current 
is  observed  between  the  vessels 
BE  and  CC.  The  glass  tube 
A  contains  the  emanation. 

Now  it  will  be  shown  later 
that  the  emanation  itself  gives 
off  only  a  rays,  and  these  rays 
are  completely  absorbed  by  the 
glass  envelope,  unless  it  is  made 
extremely  thin.  The  rays  pro- 
ducing ionization  in  the  testing 


A 

A 


Electrometer 


vessel  were  thus  not  due  to  the 

a  rays  from  the  emanation  at  lg' 

all,  but  to  the  ft  and  7  rays  due  to  the  excited  activity  produced 

on  the  walls  of  the  glass  tube  by  the  emanation  inside  it.     What 

was  actually  measured  was  thus  the  decay  of  the  excited  activity 

derived  from  the  emanation,  and  not  the  decay  of  activity  of  the 

emanation  itself.     Since,  however,  when  a  steady  state  is  reached, 

the  amount  of  excited  activity  is  nearly  proportional  at  any  time 

to  the  activity  of  the  emanation,  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  excited 


208  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

activity  on  the  walls  of  the  vessel  indirectly  furnishes  a  measure 
of  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  emanation  itself.  This  is  only  true  if 
the  emanation  is  placed  for  four  or  five  hours  in  the  tube  before 
observations  begin,  in  order  to  allow  the  excited  activity  time  to 
reach  a  maximum  value. 

Using  this  method  P.  Curie  obtained  results  similar  to  those 
obtained  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy  by  the  direct  method.  The 
activity  decayed  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time 
falling  to  half  value  in  3'99  days. 

The  experiments  were  performed  under  the  most  varied  con- 
ditions but  the  rate  of  decay  was  found  to  remain  unaltered.  The 
rate  of  decay  did  not  depend  on  the  material  of  the  vessel  contain- 
ing the  emanation  or  on  the  nature  or  pressure  of  the  gas  with 
which  the  emanation  was  mixed.  It  was  unaffected  by  the  amount 
of  emanation  present,  or  by  the  time  of  exposure  to  the  radium, 
provided  sufficient  time  had  elapsed  to  allow  the  excited  activity 
to  reach  a  maximum  value  before  the  observations  were  begun. 
P.  Curie1  found  that  the  rate  of  decay  of  activity  was  unaffected 
by  exposing  the  vessel  containing  the  emanation  to  different 
temperatures  ranging  from  +  450°  to  —  180°  C. 

In  this  respect,  the  emanations  of  thorium  and  radium  are 
quite  analogous.  The  rate  of  decay  seems  to  be  unaffected  by 
any  physical  or  chemical  agency,  and  the  emanations  behave  in 
exactly  the  same  way  as  the  radio-active  products  Th  X  and  Ur  X, 
already  referred  to.  The  radio-active  constant  \  is  thus  a  fixed 
and  unalterable  quantity  for  both  emanations,  although  in  one 
case  its  value  is  about  5000  times  greater  than  in  the  other. 

Emanations  from  Actinium. 

137.  Debierne2  found  that  actinium  gives  out  an  emanation 
similar  to  the  emanations  of  thorium  and  radium.  The  loss 
of  activity  of  the  emanation  is  even  more  rapid  than  for  the 
thorium  emanation,  for  its  activity  falls  to  half  value  in  a  few 
seconds.  In  consequence  of  the  rapid  decay  of  activity,  the 
emanation  is  able  to  diffuse  through  the  air  only  a  short  distance 
from  the  active  matter  before  it  loses  the  greater  proportion  of  its 

1  C.  R.  136,  p.  223,  1903.  2  C.  R.  136,  p.  146,  1903. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  209 

activity.  Giesel  has  obtained  an  intensely  active  emanation  from 
the  "  emanating  substance."  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  (sec- 
tion 21)  that  this  "  emanating  substance  "  is  probably  the  same  as 
the  actinium  of  Debierne.  The  emanation  from  actinium,  like  those 
from  thorium  and  radium,  possesses  the  property  of  exciting  activity 
on  inactive  bodies.  However  it  has  not  yet  been  studied  as  com- 
pletely as  the  better  known  emanations  of  thorium  and  radium. 

Experiments  with  large  amounts  of  Radium  Emanation. 


138.  With  very  active  speoimeTF  nf-ja/lirmn,  a  larg-P  amount 
of  emanation  can  ba  obtained,  and  the  electricaijmd  photographic 
actions  are  correspondingly  intense.  On  account  of  the  small 
activity  of  thorium  and  the  rapid  decay  of  its  emanation,  the 
effects  due  to  it  are  weak,  and  can  be  studied  only  for  a  few 
minutes  after  its  production.  The  emanation  from  radium,  on  the 
other  hand,  in  consequence  of  the  slow  decay  of  its  activity,  may 
be  stored  mixed  with  air  in  an  ordinary  gas  holder,  and  its  photo- 
graphic and  electrical  actions  may  be  examined  several  days  or 
even  weeks  after,  quite  apart  from  those  of  the  radium  from  which 
it  was  obtained. 

It  is,  in  general,  difficult  to  study  the  radiation  due  to  the 
emanation  alone,  on  account  of  the  fact  that  the  emanation  is 
continually  producing  a  secondary  type  of  activity  on  the  surface 
of  the  vessel  in  which  the  emanation  is  enclosed.  This  excited 
activity  reaches  a  maximum  value  several  hours  after  the  intro- 
duction of  the  emanation,  and,  as  long  as  it  is  kept  in  the  vessel, 
this  excited  activity  on  the  walls  decays  at  the  same  rate  as  the 
emanation  itself,  i.e.  it  falls  to  half  its  initial  value  in  about  4  days. 
If,  however,  the  emanation  is  blown  out,  the  excited  activity 
remains  behind  on  the  surface,  but  rapidly  loses  its  activity  in  the 
course  of  a  few  hours.  After  several  hours,  the  intensity  of  the 
residual  radiation  is  very  small. 

These  effects  and  their  connection  with  the  emanation  are 
discussed  more  fully  in  chapter  IX. 

Giesel1  has  recorded  some  interesting  observations  of  the  effect  of 
the  radium  emanation  on  a  screen  of  phosphorescent  zinc  sulphide. 

1  Ber.  der  deutsch.  Chem.  Ges.  p.  3608,  1902. 
R.   R.-A.  14 


210  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  [CH. 

When  a  few  centigrams  of  moist  radium  bromide  were  placed  on  a 
screen,  any  slight  motion  of  the  air  caused  the  luminosity  to  move 
to  and  fro  on  the  screen.  The  direction  of  phosphorescence  could 
be  altered  at  will,  by  a  slow  current  of  air.  The  effect  was  still 
further  increased  by  placing  the  active  material  in  a  tube  and 
blowing  the  air  through  it  towards  the  screen.  A  screen  of  barium 
platino-cyanide  or  of  Balmain's  paint  failed  to  give  any  visible 
light  under  the  same  conditions.  The  luminosity  was  not  altered 
by  a  magnetic  field,  but  it  was  affected  by  an  electric  field.  If  the 
screen  were  charged  the  luminosity  was  more  marked  when  it  was 
negative  than  when  it  was  positive. 

Giesel  states  that  the  luminosity  was  not  equally  distributed, 
but  was  concentrated  in  a  peculiar  ring-shaped  manner  over  the 
surface  of  the  screen.  The  concentration  of  luminosity  on  the 
negative,  rather  than  on  the  positive,  electrode  is  probably  due  to 
the  excited  activity,  caused  by  the  emanation,  and  not  to  the 
emanation  itself.  This  excited  activity  (see  chap,  ix}  in  an  electric 
field  is  concentrated  chiefly  on  the  negative  electrode.  The 
electric  field,  probably,  does  not  act  on  the  emanation  itself  but 
concentrates  the  excited  activity,  due  to  the  emanation  present,  on 
to  the  negative  electrode. 

An  experiment  to  illustrate  the  phosphorescence  produced  in 
some  substances  by  the  rays  from  a  large  amount  of  emanation  is 
described  in  section  160. 

139.  Curie  and  Debierne1  have  made  an  examination  of  the 
emanation  from  radium,  and  the  excited  activity  produced  by  it. 
They  have  examined  the  emanation  given  off  from  radium  under 
very  low  pressures.  The  tube  containing  the  emanation  was  ex- 
hausted to  a  good  vacuum  by  a  mercury  pump.  It  was  observed 
that  a  gas  was  given  off  from  the  radium  which  produced  excited 
activity  on  the  glass  walls.  This  gas  was  extremely  active,  and 
rapidly  affected  a  photographic  plate  through  the  glass.  It  caused 
fluorescence  on  the  surface  of  the  glass  and  rapidly  blackened  it, 
and  was  still  active  after  standing  ten  days.  When  spectroscopi- 
cally  examined,  this  gas  did  not  show  any  new  lines,  but  gene- 
rally those  of  the  spectra  of  carbonic  acid,  hydrogen,  and  mercury. 

1  C.  R.  132,  pp.  548  and  768,  1901. 


VIIl]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  211 

In  the  light  of  the  results  described  in  section  116,  the  gas,  given 
off  by  the  radium,  was  probably  the  non-active  gases,  hydrogen 
and  oxygen,  in  which  the  active  emanation  was  mixed  in  minute 
quantity.  It  will  be  shown  later  (section  163)  that  the  energy 
radiated  from  the  emanation  is  enormous  compared  with  the 
amount  of  matter  involved,  and  that  the  effects  observed,  in  most 
cases,  are  produced  by  an  almost  infinitesimal  amount  of  the 
emanation. 

In  further  experiments,  Curie  and  Debierne1  found  that  many 
substances  were  phosphorescent  under  the  action  of  the  emanation 
and  the  excited  activity  produced  by  it.  In  their  experiments,  two 


Active  Material 

Fig.  40. 

glass  bulbs  A  and  B  (Fig.  40)  were  connected  with  a  glass  tube. 
The  active  material  was  placed  in  the  bulb  A  and  the  substance 
to  be  examined  in  the  other. 

They  found  that,  in  general,  substances  that  were  phosphores- 
cent in  ordinary  light  became  luminous.  The  sulphide  of  zinc  was 
especially  brilliant  and  became  as  luminous  as  if  exposed  to  a 
strong  light.  After  sufficient  time  had  elapsed,  the.  luminosity 
reached  a  constant  value.  The  phosphorescence  is  partly  due  to 
the  excited  activity  produced  by  the  emanation  on  its  surface,  and 
partly  to  the  direct  radiation  from  the  emanation. 

Phosphorescencewas  alsoj^roduced  in  glass.  Thuringian  glass 
showed  the  most  marked  effects!  The  luminosity  of  the  glass  was 
found  to  be  about  the  same  in  the  two  bulbs,  but  was  more  marked 
in  the  connecting  tube.  The  effect  in  the  two  bulbs  was  the  same 
even  if  connected  by  a  very  narrow  tube. 

Some  experiments  were  also  made  with  a  series  of  phosphores- 
cent plates  placed  in  the  vessel  at  varying  distances  apart.     With 
the  plates  1  mm.  apart,  the  effect  was  very  feeble  but  increased 
directly  as  the  distance  and  was  large  for  a  distance  of  3  cms. 
1  C.  E.  133,  p.  931,  1901. 

14—2 


212  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

These  effects  receive  a  general  explanation  on  the  views  already 
put  forward.  When  the  radium  is  placed  in  the  closed  vessel,  the 
emanation  is  given  off  at  a  constant  rate  and  gradually  diffuses 
throughout  the  enclosure.  Since  the  time  taken  for  diffusion  of 
the  emanation  through  tubes  of  ordinary  size  is  small  compared 
with  the  time  required  for  the  activity  to  be  appreciably  reduced, 
the  emanation,  and  also  the  excited  activity  due  to  it,  will  be 
nearly  equally  distributed  throughout  the  vessel. 

The  luminosity  due  to  it  should  thus  be  equal  at  each  end  of 
the  tube.  Even  with  a  capillary  tube  connecting  the  two  bulbs,  the 
gas  continuously  given  off  by  the  radium  will  always  carry  the 
emanation  with  it  and  cause  a  practically  uniform  distribution. 

The  gradual  increase-of-4he-amount  of  emanation  throughout 
the  tube  will  be  given  by___the-£quation 


where  Nt  is  the  number  of  emanation  particles  present  at  the 
time  t,  NQ  the  number  present  when  radio-active  equilibrium  is 
reached,  and  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation.  The 
phosphorescent  action,  which  is  due  partly  to  the  radiations  from 
the  emanation  and  partly  to  the  excited  activity  on  the  walls, 
should  thus  reach  half  the  maximum  value  in  four  days  and  should 
practically  reach  its  limit  after  three  weeks  interval. 

The  variation  of  luminosity  with  different  distances  between 
the  screens  is  to  be  expected.  The  amount  of  excited  activity 
deposited  on  the  boundaries  is  proportional  to  the  amount  of 
emanation  present.  Since  the  emanation  is  equally  distributed, 
the  amount  of  excited  activity  deposited  on  the  screens,  due  to  the 
emanation  between  them,  varies  directly  as  the  distance,  provided 
the  distance  between  the  screens  is  small  compared  with  their 
dimensions.  Such  a  result  would  also  follow  if  the  phosphorescence 
were  due  to  the  radiation  from  the  emanation  itself,  provided  that 
the  pressure  of  the  gas  was  low  enough  to  prevent  absorption  of 
the  radiation  from  the  emanation  in  the  gas  itself  between  the 
screens. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  213 

Measurements  of  Emanating  Power. 

140.  Emanating  power.  The  compounds  of  thorium  in  the 
solid  state  vary  very  widely  in  the  amount  of  emanation  they  emit 
under  ordinary  conditions.  It  is  convenient  to  use  the  term 
emanating  power  to  express  the  amount  of  emanation  given  off  per 
second  by  one  gram  of  the  compound.  Since,  however,  we  have 
no  means  of  determining  absolutely  the  amount  of  emanation 
present,  all  measurements  of  emanating  power  are  of  necessity 
comparative.  In  most  cases,  it  is  convenient  to  take  a  given  weight 
of  a  thorium  compound  kept  under  conditions  as  nearly  as  possible 
constant,  and  to  compare  the  amount  of  emanation  of  the  compound 
to  be  examined  with  this  standard. 

In  this  way  comparisons  of  the  emanating  power  of  thorium 
compounds  have  been  made  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy1,  using  an 
apparatus  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  37  on  page  199. 

A  known  weight  of  the  substance  to  be  tested  was  spread  on  a 
shallow  dish,  placed  in  the  glass  tube  C.  A  stream  of  dry  dust-free 
air,  kept  constant  during  all  the  experiments,  was  passed  over  the 
compound  and  carried  the  emanation  into  the  testing  vessel.  After 
ten  minutes  interval,  the  current  due  to  the  emanation  in  the 
testing  vessel  reached  a  constant  value.  The  compound  was  then 
removed,  and  the  standard  comparison  sample  of  equal  weight 
substituted;  the  saturation  current  was  observed  when  a  steady 
state  was  again  reached.  The  ratio  of  these  two  currents  gives 
the  ratio  of  the  emanating  power  of  the  two  samples. 

It  was  found  experimentally,  that,  for  the  velocities  of  air 
current  employed,  the  saturation  current  in  the  testing  vessel  was 
directly  proportional  to  the  weight  of  thorium,  for  weights  up  to 
20  grams.  This  is  explained  by  the  supposition  that  the  emanation 
is  removed  by  the  current  of  air  from  the  mass  of  the  compound, 
as  fast  as  it  is  formed. 

Let  i\  =  saturation  current  due  to  a  weight  &>!  of  the  standard, 
i2  =          „  „  „  „       o>2  of  the  sample  to 

be  tested. 


,™  emanating  power  of  specimen  _  ^  &> 

emanating  power  of  standard      i\  o> 


i 

2 

1  Trans.  Chem.  Soc.,  p.  321,  1902.     Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  1902. 


214  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

By  means  of  this  relation  the  emanating  power  of  compounds 
which  are  not  of  equal  weight  can  be  compared. 

It  was  found  that  thorium  compounds  varied  enormously  in 
emanating  power,  although  the  percentage  proportion  of  thorium 
present  in  the  compound  was  not  very  different.  For  example, 
the  emanating  power  of  thorium  hydroxide  was  generally  3  to  4 
times  greater  than  that  of  ordinary  thoria,  obtained  from  the  manu- 
facturer. Thorium  nitrate,  in  the  solid  state,  had  only  1/200  of  the 
emanating  power  of  ordinary  thoria,  while  preparations  of  the 
carbonate  were  found  to  vary  widely  among  themselves  in  emanat- 
ing power,  which  depended  upon  slight  variations  in  the  method 
of  preparation. 

141.     Effect  of  condition^  on  emanating  power.     The 

emanating  power  of  different  compounds  of  thorium  ahd  radrfmi  is 
much  affected  by  the  alteration  of  chemical  and  physical  conditions. 
In  this  respect  the  emanating  power,  which  is  a  measure  of  the 
rate  of  escape  of  the  emanation  into  the  surrounding  gas,  must  not 
be  confused  with  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  emanations 
themselves,  which  has  already  been  shown  to  be  unaffected  by 
external  conditions. 

Dorn  (loc.  cit.)  first  observed  that  the  emanating  power  of 
thorium  and  radium  compounds  was  much  affected  by  moisture. 
In  a  fuller  investigation  of  this  point  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  it 
was  found  that  the  emanating  power  of  thoria  is  from  two  to  three 
times  greater  in  a  moist  than  in  a  dry  gas.  Continued  desiccation 
of  the  thoria  in  a  glass  tube,  containing  phosphorus  pentoxide,  did 
not  reduce  the  emanating  power  much  below  that  observed  in 
ordinary  dry  air.  In  the  same  way  radium  chloride  in  the  solid 
state  gives  off  very  little  emanation  when  in  a  dry  gas,  but  the 
amount  is  much  increased  in  a  moist  gas. 

The  rate  of  escape  of  emanation  is  much  increased  by  solution 
of  the  compound.  For  example,  thorium  nitrate,  which  has  an 
emanating  power  of  only  1/200  that  of  thoria  in  the  solid  state, 
has  in  solution  an  emanating  power  of  3  to  4  times  that  of  thoria. 
P.  Curie  and  Debierne  observed  that  the  emanating  power  of 
radium  was  also  much  increased  by  solution. 

Temperature  has  a  very  marked  effect  on  the  emanating  power. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  215 

The  writer1  showed  that  the  emanating  power  of  ordinary  thoria 
was  increased  three  to  four  times  by  heating  the  substance  to  a  dull 
red  heat  in  a  platinum  tube.  If  the  temperature  was  kept  con- 
stant, the  emanation  continued  to  escape  at  the  increased  rate, 
but  returned  to  its  original  value  on  cooling.  If,  however,  the 
compound  was  heated  to  a  white  heat,  the  emanating  power  was 
greatly  reduced,  and  it  returned  on  cooling  to  about  10°/0  of  the 
original  value.  Such  a  compound  is  said  to  be  "de-emanated" 
The  emanating  power  of  radium  compounds  varies  in  a  still  more 
striking  manner  with  rise  of  temperature.  The  rate  of  escape 
of  the  emanation  is  momentarily  increased  even  10,000  times  by 
heating  to  a  dull  red  heat.  This  effect  does  not  continue,  for  the 
large  escape  of  the  emanation  by  heating  is  in  reality  due  to  the 
release  of  the  emanation  stored  up  in  the  radium  compound.  Like 
thoria,  when  the  compound  has  once  been  heated  to  a  very  high 
temperature,  it  loses  its  emanating  power  and  does  not  regain  it. 

A  further  examination  of  the  effect  of  temperature  was  made 
by  Rutherford  and  Soddy2.  The  emanating  power  of  thoria  decreases 
very  rapidly  with  lowering  of  temperature,  and  at  the  temperature 
of  solid  carbonic  acid  it  is  only  about  10°/c  of  its  ordinary  value. 
It  rapidly  returns  to  its  original  value  when  the  cooling  agent  is 
removed. 

Increase  of  temperature  from  80°  C.  to  a  dull  red  heat  of  plati- 
num thus  increases  the  emanating  power  about  40  times,  and  the 
effects  can  be  repeated  again  and  again,  with  the  same  compound, 
provided  the  temperature  is  not  raised  to  the  temperature  at  which 
de-emanation  begins.  De-emanation  sets  in  above  a  red  heat,  and 
the  emanating  power  is  then  permanently  diminished,  but  even 
long  continued  heating  at  a  white  heat  never  entirely  destroys  the 
emanating  power. 

142.  Regeneration  of  emanating  power.  An  interesting 
question  arises  whether  the  de-emanation  of  thorium  and  radium  is 
due  to  a  removal  or  alteration  of  the  substance  which  produces  the 
emanation,  or  whether  intense  ignition  merely  changes  the  rate 
of  escape  of  the  emanation  from  the  solid  into  the  surrounding 
atmosphere. 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  2,  p.  429,  1901.  2  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1902. 


216  KADIO- ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

It  is  evident  that  the  physical  properties  of  the  thoria  are 
much  altered  by  intense  ignition.  The  compound  changes  in 
colour  from  white  to  pink ;  it  becomes  denser  and  also  far  less  readily 
soluble  in  acids.  In  order  to  see  if  the  emanating  power  could  be 
regenerated  by  a  cyclic  chemical  process,  the  de-emanated  thoria 
was  dissolved,  precipitated  as  hydroxide  and  again  converted  into 
oxide.  At  the  same  time  a  specimen  of  the  ordinary  oxide  was 
subjected  to  an  exactly  parallel  process.  The  emanating  power  of 
both  these  compounds  was  the  same  and  was  from  two  to  three 
times  greater  than  that  of  ordinary  thoria. 

Thus  de-emanation  does  not  permanently  destroy  the  power 
of  thorium  of  giving  out  an  emanation,  but  merely  produces  an 
alteration  of  the  amount  of  the  emanation  which  escapes  from  the 
compound. 

143.  Rate  of  production  of  the  emanation.  The  eman- 
ating power  of  thorium  compounds,  then,  is  a  very  variable  quantity, 
much  affected  by  moisture,  heat,  and  solution.  Speaking  generally, 
increased  temperatures  and  solution  greatly  increase  the  emanating 
power  of  both  thorium  and  radium. 

The  wide  differences  between  the  emanating  powers  of  these 
substances  in  the  solid  state  and  in  solution  pointed  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  differences  were  probably  due  to  the  rate  of  escape  of 
the  emanation  into  the  surrounding  gas,  and  not  to  a  variation  of 
the  rate  of  reaction  which  gave  rise  to  the  emanation.  It  is 
obvious  that  a  very  slight  retardation  in  the  rate  of  escape  of  the 
thorium  emanation  from  the  compound  into  the  gas,  will,  on  account 
of  the  rapid  decay  of  activity  of  the  emanation,  produce  great 
changes  in  emanating  power.  The  regeneration  of  the  emanating 
power  of  de-emanated  thoria  and  radium  by  solution  and  chemical 
treatment  made  it  evident  that  the  original  power  of  thorium  and 
radium  of  producing  the  emanation  still  persisted  in  an  unaltered 
degree. 

The  question  whether  the  emanation  was  produced  at  the  same 
rate  in  emanating  as  in  non-emanating  compounds  can  be  put  to  a 
sharp  quantitative  test.  If  the  rate  of  production  of  emanation 
goes  on  at  the  same  rate  in  the  solid  compound,  where  very 
little  escapes,  as  in  the  solution,  where  probably  all  escapes,  the 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  217 

emanation  must  be  occluded  in  the  compound,  and  there  must  in 
consequence  be  a  sudden  release  of  this  emanation  on  solution  of 
the  compound.  On  account  of  the  very  slow  decay  of  the  activity 
of  the  emanation  of  radium,  the  effects  should  be  far  more  marked 
in  that  compound  than  in  thorium. 

From  the  point  of  view  developed  in  section  124,  the  expo- 
nential law  of  decay  of  the  emanation  expresses  the  result  that  Nt 
the  number  of  particles  remaining  unchanged  at  a  time  t  is  given 
by 

'*-<-• 

where  N0  is  the  initial  number  of  particles  present.  When  a 
steady  state  is  reached,  the  rate  of  production  q0  of  fresh  emanation 
particles  is  exactly  balanced  by  the  rate  of  change  of  the  particles 
N0  already  present,  i.e. 

q0  =  \N0, 

NQ  in  this  case  represents  the  amount  of  emanation  "  occluded  "  in 
the  compound.  Substituting  the  value  of  X  found  for  the  radium 
emanation  in  section  136, 

^°=  *  =  463,000. 

<?o        X 

The  amount  of  emanation  stored  in  a  non-emanating  radium 
compound  should  therefore  be  nearly  500,000  times  the  amount 
produced  per  second  by  the  compound.  This  result  was  tested  in 
the  following  way1 : 

A  weight  of  '03  gr.  of  radium  chloride  of  activity  1000  times  that 
of  uranium  was  placed  in  a  Drechsel  bottle  and  a  sufficient  amount  of 
water  drawn  in  to  dissolve  it.  The  released  emanation  was  swept 
out  by  a  current  of  air  into  a  small  gas  holder  and  then  into  a  testing 
cylinder.  The  initial  saturation  current  was  proportional  to  N0.  A 
rapid  current  of  air  was  then  passed  through  the  radium  solution 
for  some  time  in  order  to  remove  any  slight  amount  of  emanation 
which  had  not  been  removed  initially.  The  Drechsel  bottle  was 
closed  air-tight,  and  allowed  to  stand  undisturbed  for  a  definite 
time  t.  The  accumulated  emanation  was  then  swept  out  as  before 
into  the  testing  vessel.  The  new  ionization  current  represents 
1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1903. 


218  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  [CH. 

the  value  of  Nt  the  amount  of  emanation  formed  in  the  compound 
during  the  interval  t. 

In  the  experiment        t  —  105  minutes, 
and  observed  value 

J  =  -0131. 

^0 

Assuming  that  there  is  no  decay  during  the  interval, 
#,=  105xt>0xgo. 

Thus  ^  =  480,000. 

ft 

Making  flhe  small  correction  for  the  decay  of  activity  during 
the  interval 


We  have  previously  shown  that  from  the  theory 

—0  =  i  =  463,000. 

q0      \ 

The  agreement  between  theory  and  experiment  is  thus  as  close 
as  could  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the  experiments.  This 
experiment  proves  conclusively  that  the  rate  of  production  of 
emanation  in  the  solid  compound  is  the  same  as  in  the  solution. 
In  the  former  case  it  is  occluded,  in  the  latter  it  escapes  as  fast  as 
it  is  produced. 

It  is  remarkable  how  little  emanation,  compared  with  the 
amount  stored  up  in  the  compound,  escapes  from  solid  radium 
chloride  in  a  dry  atmosphere.  One  experiment  showed  that  the 
emanating  power  in  the  dry  solid  state  was  less  than  ^  °/0  of  the 
emanating  power  of  the  solution.  Since  nearly  500,000  times  as 
much  emanation  is  stored  up  as  is  produced  per  second,  this  result 
showed  that  the  amount  of  emanation  which  escaped  per  second  was 
less  than  10~8  of  that  occluded  in  the  compound. 

If  a  solid  radium  chloride  compound  is  kept  in  a  moist  atmo- 
sphere, the  emanating  power  becomes  comparable  with  the  amount 
produced  per  second  in  the  solution.  In  such  a  case,  since  the  rate 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  219 

of  escape  is  continuous,  the  amount  occluded  will  be  much  less  than 
the  amount  for  the  non-emanating  material. 

The  phenomenon  of  occlusion  of  the  radium  emanation  is  prob- 
ably not  connected  in  any  way  with  its  radio-activity,  although  this 
property  has  in  this  case  served  to  measure  it.  The  occlusion  of 
helium  by  minerals  presents  almost  a  complete  analogy  to  the 
occlusion  of  the  radium  emanation.  The  helium  is  given  off  by 
fergusonite,  for  example,  in  part  when  it  is  heated  and  completely 
on  dissolving  the  mineral. 

144.  Similar  results  hold  for  thorium,  but,  on  account  of  the 
rapid  loss  of  activity  of  the  emanation,  the  amount  of  emanation 
occluded  in  a  non-emanating  compound  is  very  small  compared 
with  that  observed  for  radium.  If  the  production  of  the  thorium 
emanation  proceeds  at  the  same  rate  under  all  conditions,  the 
solution  of  a  solid  non-emanating  compound  should  be  accompanied 
by  a  rush  of  emanation  greater  than  that  subsequently  produced. 
With  the  same  notation  as  before  we  have  for  the  thorium  emana- 
tion, 

X       1 


This  result  was  tested  as  follows :  a  quantity  of  finely  powdered 
thorium  nitrate,  of  emanating  power  1/200  of  ordinary  thoria, 
was  dropped  into  a  Drechsel  bottle  containing  hot  water  and  the 
emanation  rapidly  swept  out  into  the  testing  vessel  by  a  current  of 
air.  The  ionization  current  rose  quickly  to  a  maximum,  but  soon 
fell  again  to  a  steady  value ;  showing  that  the  amount  of  emanation 
released  when  the  nitrate  dissolves,  is  greater  than  the  subsequent 
amount  produced  from  the  solution. 

The  rapid  loss  of  the  activity  of  the  thorium  emanation  makes 
a  quantitative  comparison  like  that  made  for  radium  very  difficult. 
By  slightly  altering  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  however,  a 
definite  proof  was  obtained  that  the  rate  of  production  of  emana- 
tion is  the  same  in  the  solid  compound  as  in  the  solution.  After 
dropping  in  the  nitrate,  a  rapid  air  stream  was  blown  through  the 
solution  for  25  seconds  into  the  testing  vessel.  The  air  stream  was 
stopped  and  the  ionization  current  immediately  measured.  The 
solution  was  then  allowed  to  stand  undisturbed  for  10  minutes. 


220  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

In  that*  time  the  accumulation  of  the  emanation  again  attained  a 
practical  maximum  and  again  represented  a  steady  state.  The 
stream  of  air  was  blown  through,  as  before,  for  25  seconds,  stopped 
and  the  current  again  measured.  In  both  cases,  the  electrometer 
recorded  a  movement  of  14'6  divisions  per  second.  By  blowing 
the  same  stream  of  air  continuously  through  the  solution  the  final 
current  corresponded  to  7-9  divisions  per  second  or  about  one-half 
of  that  observed  after  the  first  rush. 

Thus  the  rate  of  production  of  emanation  is  the  same  in  the 
solid  nitrate  as  in  the  solution,  although  the  emanating  power,  i.e. 
the  rate  of  escape  of  the  emanation,  is  over  600  times  greater  in 
the  solution  than  in  the  solid. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  rate  of  production  of  emanation 
by  thorium,  like  the  rate  of  production  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X,  is  inde- 
pendent of  conditions.  The  changes  of  emanating  power  of  the 
various  compounds  by  moisture,  heat,  and  solution  must  therefore 
be  ascribed  solely  to  an  alteration  in  the  rate  of  escape  of  the 
emanation  into  the  surrounding  gas  and  not  to  an  alteration  in 
the  rate  of  its  production  in  the  compound. 

On  this  view,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  slight  changes  in  the  mode 
of  preparation  of  a  thorium  compound  may  produce  large  changes 
in  emanating  power.  Such  effects  have  been  often  observed,  and 
must  be  ascribed  to  slight  physical  changes  in  the  precipitate. 
The  fact  that  the  rate  of  production  of  the  emanation  is  indepen- 
dent of  the  physical  or  chemical  conditions  of  the  thorium,  in  which 
it  is  produced,  is  thus  in  harmony  with  what  had  previously  been 
observed  for  the  radio-active  products  Ur  X  and  Th  X. 


Source  of  the  Thorium  Emanation. 

145.  Some  experiments  of  Rutherford  and  Soddy1  will  now 
be  considered,  which  show  that  the  thorium  emanation  is  pro- 
duced, not  directly  by  the  thorium  itself,  but  by  the  active 
product  ThX. 

When  the  Th  X,  by  precipitation  with  ammonia,  is  removed  from 
a  quantity  of  thorium  nitrate,  the  precipitated  thorium  hydroxide 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1902. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  221 

does  not  at  first  possess  appreciable  emanating  power.  This  loss 
of  emanating  power  is  not  due,  as  in  the  case  of  the  de-emanated 
oxide,  to  a  retardation  in  the  rate  of  escape  of  the  emanation 
produced ;  for  the  hydroxide,  when  dissolved  in  acid,  still  gives 
off  no  emanation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  solution,  containing 
the  Th  X,  possesses  emanating  power  to  a  marked  degree. 
On  leaving  the  precipitated  hydroxide  and  the  Th  X  for  some 
time,  it  is  found  that  the  Th  X  decreases  in  emanating  power, 
while  the  hydroxide  gradually  regains  its  emanating  power.  After 
about  a  month's  interval,  the  emanating  power  of  the  hydroxide 
has  nearly  reached  a  maximum,  while  the  emanating  power  of 
the  Th  X  has  almost  disappeared. 

The  curves  of  decay  and  recovery  of  emanating  power  with 
time  are  found  to  be  exactly  the  same  as  the  curves  of  decay 
and  recovery  of  activity  of  Th  X  and  the  precipitated  hydroxide 
respectively,  shown  in  Fig.  35.  The  emanating  power  of  Th  X, 
as  well  as  its  activity,  falls  to  half  value  in  four  days,  while  the 
hydroxide  regains  half  its  final  emanating  power  as  well  as  half  its 
lost  activity  in  the  same  interval. 

It  follows  from  these  results  that  the  emanating  power  of  Th  X 
is  directly  proportional  to  its  activity,  i.e.  that  the  rate  of  produc- 
tion of  emanating  particles  is  always  proportional  to  the  number 
of  a  particles,  projected  from  the  Th  X  per  second.  The  radiation 
from  Th  X  thus  accompanies  the  change  of  the  Th  X  into  the 
emanation.  Since  the  emanation  has  chemical  properties  distinct 
from  those  of  the  Th  X,  and  also  a  distinctive  rate  of  decay,  it 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  vapour  of  Th  X,  but  it  is  a  distinct 
chemical  substance,  produced  by  the  changes  occurring  in  Th  X. 
On  the  view  advanced  in  section  127,  the  atom  of  the  emanation 
consists  of  the  part  of  the  atom  of  Th  X  left  behind  after  the 
expulsion  of  one  or  more  a  particles.  The  atoms  of  the  emana- 
tion are  unstable,  and  in  turn  expel  a  particles.  This  projection 
of  a  particles  constitutes  the  radiation  from  the  emanation,  which 
serves  as  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  emanation  present.  Since 
the  activity  of  the  emanation  falls  to  half  value  in  one  minute 
while  that  of  Th  X  falls  to  half  value  in  four  days,  the  emanation 
consists  of  atoms,  which  disintegrate  at  intervals  nearly  6000  times 
shorter  than  do  the  atoms  of  Th  X. 


222  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  [CH. 

Source  of  the  Radium  Emanation. 

146.  No   intermediate   stage — Radium   X — between   radium 
and  its  emanation,  corresponding   to  the  Th  X  for  thorium,  has 
so  far  been  observed.     The  emanation  from  radium  is  probably 
produced  directly  from  that  element.     In  this  respect,  the  radium 
emanation  holds  the  same  position  in  regard  to  radium  as  Th  X 
does  to  thorium,  and  its  production  from  radium  can  be  explained 
on  exactly  similar  lines. 

Radiations  from  the  Emanations. 

147.  Special  methods  are  necessary  to  examine  the  nature  of 
the  radiation  from  the  emanations,  for  the  radiations  arise  from 
the  volume  of  the  gas  in  which  the  emanations  are  distributed. 
Some  experiments  to  examine  the  radiations  from  the  thorium 
emanation  were  made  by  the  writer  in  the  following  way. 

A  highly  emanating  thorium  compound  wrapped  in  paper  was 
placed  inside  a  lead  box  B  about  1  cm.  deep,  shown  in  Fig.  41. 
There  was  an  opening  cut  in  ^  TO  Electrometer 

the  top  of  the  box,  over  which  ' 

a  very  thin  sheet  of  mica  was 

waxed.     The  emanation  rapidly  ^j/-/(V, 

diffused  through  the  paper  into          ||g         Emanation        igl  V 
the  vessel,  and  after  ten  minutes  ^"~ 

reached  a  state  of  radio-active  Flg-  4L 

equilibrium.  The  penetrating  power  of  the  radiation  from  the 
emanation  which  passed  through  the  thin  mica  window  was 
examined  by  the  electrical  method  in  the  usual  way  by  adding 
screens  of  thin  aluminium  foil.  The  results  are  expressed  in  the 
following  table : 

Thickness  of  mica  window     -0015  cm. 
Thickness  of  aluminium  foil  -00034  cm. 
Layers  of  foil  Current 

0  100 

1  59 

2  30 

3  10 

4  3-2 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  223 

The  greater  proportion  of  the  conductivity  is  thus  due  to 
a  rays,  as  in  the  case  of  the  radio-active  elements.  The  amount 
of  absorption  of  these  a  rays  by  aluminium  foil  is  about  the  same 
as  that  of  the  rays  from  the  active  bodies.  No  direct  comparison 
can  be  made,  for  the  a.  rays  from  the  emanation  show  the  charac- 
teristic property  of  increased  rate  of  absorption  with  thickness 
of  matter  traversed.  Before  testing,  the  rays  have  been  largely 
absorbed  by  the  mica  window,  and  the  penetrating  power  has 
consequently  decreased. 

No  alteration  in  the  radiation  from  the  emanation  was  ob- 
served on  placing  an  insulated  wire  inside  the  emanation  vessel, 
and  charging  it  to  a  high  positive  or  negative  potential.  When 
a  stream  of  air  through  the  vessel  carried  away  the  emanation  as 
fast  as  it  was  produced,  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  fell  to  a  small 
fraction  of  its  former  value. 

N<>  evidence  of  any  0  rays  in  the  radiations  was  found  in 
these  experiments,  although  a  very  small  effect  would  have  been 
detected.  After  standing  some  hours,  however,  &  rays  began  to 
appear.  These  were  due  to  the  excited  activity  deposited  on  the 
walls  of  the  vessel  from  the  emanation,  and  not  directly  to  the 
emanation  itself. 

The  radium  emanation,  like  that  of  thorium,  only  gives  rise  to 
a.  rays.  This  was  tested  in  the  following  way1: 

A  large  amount  of  emanation  was  introduced  into  a  cylinder 
made  of  sheet  copper  '005  cm.  thick,  which  absorbed  all  the 
a  rav^s  but  allowed  the  /3  and  7  rays,  if  present,  to  pass  through 
with  but  little  loss.  The  external  radiation  from  the  cylinder 
was  determined  at  intervals,  commencing  about  two  minutes  after 
the  introduction  of  the  emanation.  The  amount  observed  at  first 
was  extremely  small,  but  increased  rapidly  and  practically  reached 
a  maximum  in  three  or  four  hours.  Thus  the  radium  emanation 
only  gives  a  rays,  the  ft  rays  appearing  as  the  excited  activity  is 
produced  on  the  walls  of  the  vessel.  On  sweeping  out  the  emana- 
tion by  a  current  of  air,  there  was  no  immediately  appreciable 
decrease  of  the  radiation.  This  is  another  proof  that  the  emanation 
does  not  give  out  any  /9  rays.  In  a  similar  way  it  can  be  shown 

1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1903. 


224  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

that  the  emanation  does  not  give  rise  to  7  rays ;  these  rays  always 
make  their  appearance  at  the  same  time  as  the  /3  rays. 

The  method  of  examination  of  the  radiations  from  the 
emanations  has  been  given  in  some  detail,  as  the  results  are  of 
considerable  importance  in  the  discussion,  which  will  be  given 
later  in  chapter  x,  of  the  connection  between  the  changes  oc- 
curring in  radio-active  products  and  the  radiations  they  emit. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  emanations,  apart  from  the  excited 
activity  to  which  they  give  rise,  only  give  out  a  rays,  consisting 
most  probably  of  positively  charged  bodies  projected  with  great 
velocity. 


Effect  of  Pressure  on  the  rate  of  production  of  the  Emanation. 

148.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  conductivity 
due  to  the  thorium  emanation  is  proportional  to  the  pressure  of 
the  gas,  pointing  to  the  conclusion  that  the  rate  of  production 
of  the  emanation  is  independent  of  the  pressure,  as  well  as  of  the 
nature  of  the  surrounding  gas.  This  result  was  directly  confirmed 
with  the  apparatus  of  Fig.  41.  When  the  pressure  of  the  gas 
under  the  vessel  was  slowly  reduced,  the  radiation,  tested  outside 
the  window,  increased  to  a  limit,  and  then  remained  constant 
over  a  wide  range  of  pressure.  This  increase,  which  was  far  more 
marked  in  air  than  in  hydrogen,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  a  rays 
from  the  emanation  were  partially  absorbed  in  the  gas  inside  the 
vessel  when  at  atmospheric  pressure.  At  pressures  of  the  order 
of  1  millimetre  of  mercury  the  external  radiation  decreased,  but 
experiment  showed  that  this  must  be  ascribed  to  a  removal  of  the 
emanation  by  the  pump,  and  not  to  a  change  in  the  rate  of  pro- 
duction. The  thorium  compounds  very  readily  absorb  water- vapour, 
which  is  slowly  given  off  at  low  pressures,  and  in  consequence 
some  of  the  emanation  is  carried  out  of  the  vessel  with  the  water- 
vapour. 

Curie  and  Debierne1  found  that  both  the  amount  of  excited 
activity  produced  in  a  closed  vessel  containing  active  samples  of 
radium,  and  also  the  time  taken  to  reach  a  maximum  value,  were 

1  C.  R.  133,  p.  931,  1901. 


VIIl]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  225 

independent  of  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the  gas.  This  was  true 
in  the  case  of  a  solution  down  to  the  pressure  of  the  saturated 
vapour,  and  in  the  case  of  solid  salts  to  very  low  pressures.  When 
the  pump  was  kept  going  at  pressures  of  the  order  of  '001  mm.  of 
mercury,  the  amount  of  excited  activity  was  much  diminished. 
This  was  probably  not  due  to  any  alteration  of  the  rate  of  escape 
of  the  emanation,  but  to  the  removal  of  the  emanation  by  the 
action  of  the  pump  as  fast  as  it  was  formed. 

Since  the  amount  of  excited  activity,  when  in  a  state  of 
radio-active  equilibrium,  is  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  emana- 
tion producing  it,  these  results  show  that  the  amount  of  emanation 
present  when  the  rate  of  production  balances  the  rate  of  decay  is 
independent  of  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the  gas.  It  was  also 
found  that  the  time  taken  to  reach  the  point  of  radio-active  equi- 
librium was  independent  of  the  size  of  the  vessel  or  the  amount 
of  active  matter  present.  These  results  show  that  the  state  of 
equilibrium  cannot  in  any  way  be  ascribed  to  the  possession  by  the 
emanation  of  any  appreciable  vapour  pressure ;  for  if  such  were  the 
case,  the  time  taken  to  reach  the  equilibrium  value  should  depend 
on  the  size  of  the  vessel  and  the  amount  of  active  matter  present. 
The  results  are,  however,  in  agreement  with  the  view  that  the 
emanation  is  present  in  minute  quantity  in  the  tube,  and  that  the 
equilibrium  is  governed  purely  by  the  radio-active  constant  X,  the 
constant  of  decay  of  activity  of  the  emanation.  This  has  been  seen 
to  be  the  same  under  all  conditions  of  concentration,  pressure  and 
temperature,  and,  provided  the  rate  of  supply  of  the  emanation 
from  the  active  compound  is  not  changed,  the  time-rate  of  increase 
of  activity  to  the  equilibrium  value  will  always  be  the  same, 
whatever  the  size  of  the  vessel  or  the  nature  and  pressure  of  the 
surrounding  gas. 

Chemical  Nature  of  the  Emanations. 

149.  Earlier  experiments.  We  shall  now  consider  some 
experiments  on  the  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  emana- 
tions themselves,  without  reference  to  the  material  producing  them, 
in  order  to  see  if  they  possess  any  properties  which  identify  them 
with  any  known  kind  of  matter. 

R.  R.-A.  15 


226  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

It  was  soon  observed  that  the  thorium  emanation  passed 
unchanged  through  acid  solutions,  and  later  the  same  result  was 
shown  to  hold  true  in  the  case  of  both  emanations  for  every 
reagent  that  was  tried.  Preliminary  observations1  showed  that  the 
thorium  emanation,  obtained  in  the  usual  way  by  passing  air  over 
thoria,  passed  unchanged  in  amount  through  a  platinum  tube 
heated  electrically  to  the  highest  temperature  obtainable.  The 
tube  was  then  filled  with  platinum-black,  and  the  emanation  passed 
through  it  in  the  cold,  and  with  gradually  increasing  temperatures, 
until  the  limit  was  reached.  In  another  experiment,  the  emana- 
tion was  passed  through  a  layer  of  red-hot  lead-chromate  in  a 
glass  tube.  The  current  of  air  was  replaced  by  a  current  of 
hydrogen,  and  the  emanation  was  sent  through  red-hot  magnesium- 
powder  and  red-hot  palladium-black,  and,  by  using  a  current  of 
carbon  dioxide,  through  red-hot  zinc-dust.  In  every  case  the 
emanation  passed  through  without  sensible  change  in  the  amount. 
If  anything,  a  slight  increase  occurred,  owing  to  the  time  taken  for 
the  gas-current  to  pass  through  the  tubes  when  hot  being  slightly 
less  than  when  cold,  the  decay  en  route  being  consequently  less. 
The  only  known  gases  capable  of  passing  in  unchanged  amount 
through  all  the  reagents  employed  are  the  recently  discovered 
members  of  the  argon  family. 

But  another  possible  interpretation  might  be  put  upon  the 
results.  If  the  emanation  were  the  manifestation  of  a  type  of 
excited  radio-activity  on  the  surrounding  atmosphere,  then,  since 
from  the  nature  of  the  experiments  it  was  necessary  to  employ  in 
each  case  as  the  atmosphere,  a  gas  not  acted  on  by  the  reagent 
employed,  the  result  obtained  might  be  expected.  Red-hot  mag- 
nesium would  not  retain  an  emanation  consisting  of  radio-active 
hydrogen,  or  red-hot  zinc-dust,  an  emanation  consisting  of  radio- 
active carbon  dioxide.  The  incorrectness  of  this  explanation  was 
shown  in  the  following  way.  Carbon  dioxide  was  passed  over 
thoria,  then  through  a  T-tube,  where  a  current  of  air  met  and 
mixed  with  it,  both  passing  on  to  the  testing-cylinder.  But 
between  this  and  the  T-tube  a  large  soda-lime  tube  was  intro- 
duced, and  the  current  of  gas  was  thus  freed  from  its  admixed 
carbon  dioxide,  before  being  tested  in  the  cylinder  for  the  emana- 

1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1902. 


VI II]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  227 

tion.  The  amount  of  emanation  found  was  quite  unchanged, 
whether  carbon  dioxide  was  sent  over  thoria  in  the  manner  de- 
scribed, or  whether,  keeping  the  other  arrangements  as  before, 
an  equally  rapid  current  of  air  was  substituted  for  it.  The  theory 
that  the  emanation  is  an  effect  of  the  excited  activity  on  the 
surrounding  medium  is  thus  excluded. 

Experiments  of  a  similar  kind  on  the  radium  emanation  were 
made  later.  A  steady  stream  of  gas  was  passed  through  a  radium 
chloride  solution  and  then  through  the  reagent  to  be  employed, 
into  a  testing-vessel  of  small  volume,  so  that  any  change  in  the 
amount  of  emanation  passing  through  could  readily  be  detected. 
The  radium  emanation,  like  that  of  thorium,  passed  unchanged  in 
amount  through  every  reagent  used. 

Later  experiments.  In  later  experiments  by  Sir  William 
Ramsay  and  Mr  Soddy1,  the  emanation  from  radium  was  exposed  to 
still  more  drastic  treatment.  The  emanation  in  a  glass  tube  was 
sparked  for  several  hours  with  oxygen  over  alkali.  The  oxygen 
was  then  removed  by  ignited  phosphorus  and  no  visible  residue  was 
left.  When,  however,  another  gas  was  introduced,  mixed  with 
the  minute  amount  of  emanation  in  the  tube  and  withdrawn, 
the  activity  of  emanation  was  found  to  be  unaltered.  In  another 
experiment,  the  emanation  was  introduced  into  a  magnesium  lime 
tube,  which  was  heated  for  three  hours  at  a  red  heat.  The 
emanation  was  then  removed  and  tested,  but  no  diminution  in  its 
discharging  power  was  observed. 

The  emanations  of  thorium  and  radium  thus  withstand  chemical 
treatment  in  a  manner  hitherto  unobserved  except  in  gases  of  the 
argon  family. 

150.  Ramsay  and  Soddy  (loc.  cit.)  record  an  interesting 
experiment  to  illustrate  the  gaseous  nature  of  the  emanation. 
A  large  amount  of  the  radium  emanation  was  collected  in  a 
small  glass  tube.  This  tube  phosphoresced  brightly  under  the 
influence  of  the  rays  from  the  emanation.  The  passage  of  the 
emanation  from  point  to  point  was  observed  in  a  darkened 
room  by  the  luminosity  excited  in  the  glass.  On  opening  the 
stop-cock  connecting  with  the  Topler  pump,  the  slow  flow  through 

1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  72,  p.  204,  1903. 

15—2 


228  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

the  capillary  tube  was  noticed,  the  rapid  passage  along  the  wider 
tubes,  the  delay  in  passing  through  a  plug  of  phosphorous  pent- 
oxide,  and  the  rapid  expansion  into  the  reservoir  of  the  pump. 
When  compressed,  the  luminosity  of  the  emanation  increased,  and 
became  very  bright  as  the  small  bubble  containing  the  emanation 
was  expelled  through  the  fine  capillary  tube. 


Diffusion  of  the  Emanations. 

151.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  emanations  of  thorium  and 
radium  behave  like  radio-active  gases,  distributed  in  minute  amount 
in  the  air  or  other  gas  in  which  they  are  tested.  With  the  small 
quantities  of  active  material  so  far  investigated,  the  emanations 
have  not  yet  been  collected  in  sufficient  amount  to  allow  the 
examination  of  their  spectrum  or  to  detect  them  by  the  balance. 
Although  the  molecular  weight  of  the  emanations  cannot  yet  be 
obtained  by  direct  chemical  methods,  an  indirect  estimate  of  it 
can  be  made  by  determining  the  rate  of  their  inter-diffusion  into 
air  or  other  gases.  The  coefficients  of  inter-diffusion  of  various 
gases  have  long  been  known,  and  the  results  show  that  the 
coefficient  of  diffusion  of  one  gas  into  another  is,  for  the  simpler 
gases,  approximately  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of 
the  product  of  their  molecular  weights.  If,  therefore,  the  coefficient 
of  diffusion  of  the  emanation  into  air  is  found  to  have  a  value, 
lying  between  that  of  two  known  gases  A  and  B,  it  is  probable 
that  the  molecular  weight  of  the  emanation  lies  between  that  of 
A  and  B. 

Although  the  amount  of  emanation  given  off  from  radium  is 
too  small  to  be  detected  by  volume1,  the  electrical  conductivity 
produced  by  the  emanation  in  the  gas,  with  which  it  is  mixed, 
is  often  very  large,  and  offers  a  ready  means  of  measuring  the 
emanation  present. 

Some  experiments  have  been  made  by  Miss  Brooks  and  the 
writer2  to  determine  the  rate  of  the  diffusion  of  the  radium  emana- 
tion into  air,  by  a  method  similar  to  that  employed  by  Loschmidt3 

1  See,  however,  p.  313  (Feb.  1904). 

2  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Canada  1901,  Chem.  News  1902. 

3  Sitzungsber.  d.  Wiener  Akad.  61,  n.  p.  367,  1871. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  229 

in  1871,  in  his  investigations  of  the  coefficient  of  inter-diffusion 
of  gases. 

Fig.  42  shows  the  general  arrangement.     A  long  brass  cylinder 
AB,  of  length  73  cms.,  and  diameter  6  cms.,  was  divided  into  two 


From    

Gasometer     - 

Radium 


Fig.  42. 


equal  parts  by  a  moveable  metal  slide  S.  The  ends  of  the  cylinder 
were  closed  with  ebonite  stoppers.  Two  insulated  brass  rods,  a 
and  b,  each  half  the  length  of  the  tube,  passed  through  the  ebonite 
stoppers  and  were  supported  centrally  in  the  tube.  The  cylinder 
was  insulated  and  connected  with  one  pole  of  a  battery  of  300 
volts,  the  other  pole  of  which  was  earthed.  The  central  rods  could 
be  connected  with  a  sensitive  quadrant  electrometer.  The  cylinder 
was  covered  with  a  thick  layer  of  felt,  and  placed  inside  a  metal 
box  filled  with  cotton-wool  in  order  to  keep  temperature  con- 
ditions as  steady  as  possible. 

In  order  to  convey  a  sufficient  quantity  of  emanation  into 
the  half-cylinder  A,  it  was  necessary  to  heat  the  radium  slightly. 
The  slide  S  was  closed  and  the  side  tubes  opened.  A  slow 
current  of  dry  air  from  a  gasometer  was  passed  through  a  platinum 
tube,  in  which  a  small  quantity  of  a  radium  compound  was  placed. 
The  emanation  was  carried  with  the  air  into  the  cylinder  A.  When 
a  sufficient  quantity  had  been  introduced,  the  stream  of  air  was 
stopped.  The  side  tubes  were  closed  by  fine  capillary  tubes. 
These  prevented  any  appreciable  loss  of  gas  due  to  the  diffusion, 
but  served  to  keep  the  pressure  of  the  gas  inside  A  at  the  pressure 
of  the  outside  air.  The  three  entrance  tubes  into  the  cylinder, 
shown  in  the  figure,  were  for  the  purpose  of  initially  mixing  the 
emanation  and  gas  as  uniformly  as  possible. 

After  standing  several  hours  to  make  temperature  conditions 
steady,  the  slide  was  opened,  and  the  emanation  began  to  diffuse 


230  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

into  the  tube  B.  The  current  through  the  tubes  A  and  B  was 
measured  at  regular  intervals  by  an  electrometer,  with  a  suitable 
capacity  in  parallel.  Initially  there  is  no  current  in  B,  but  after 
the  opening  of  the  slide,  the  amount  in  A  decreased  and  the 
amount  in  B  steadily  increased.  After  several  hours  the  amount 
in  each  half  is  nearly  the  same,  showing  that  the  emanation  is 
nearly  uniformly  diffused  throughout  the  cylinder. 
It  can  readily  be  shown1  that  if 

K  —  coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  emanation  into  air, 
t  =  duration  of  diffusion  experiments  in  sees., 
a  =  total  length  of  cylinder, 

Si  =  partial  pressure  of  emanation  in  tube  A  at  end  of  diffusion, 
$2  =  partial  pressure  of  emanation  in  tube  B  at  end  of  diffusion, 
then 


*&*."* 


Now  the  values  of  S1  and  $2  are  proportional  to  the  saturation 
ionization  currents  due  to  the  emanations  in  the  two  halves  of  the 
cylinder.  From  this  equation  K  can  be  determined,  if  the  relative 
values  of  Si  and  $2  are  observed  after  diffusion  has  been  in  progress 
for  a  definite  interval  t. 

The  determination  of  Si  and  $2  is  complicated  by  the  excited 
activity  produced  on  the  walls  of  the  vessel.  The  ionization  due 
to  this  must  be  subtracted  from  the  total  ionization  observed  in 
each  half  of  the  cylinder,  for  the  excited  activity  is  produced  from 
the  material  composing  the  emanation,  and  is  removed  to  the 
electrodes  in  an  electric  field.  The  ratio  of  the  current  due  to 
excited  activity  to  the  current  due  to  the  emanation  depends  on 
the  time  of  exposure  to  the  emanation,  and  is  only  proportional  to 
it  for  exposures  of  several  hours. 

The  method  generally  adopted  in  the  experiments  was  to  open 
the  slide  for  a  definite  interval,  ranging  in  the  experiments  from 
15  to  120  minutes.  The  slide  was  then  closed  and  the  currents 
in  each  half  determined  at  once.  The  central  rods,  which  had 

1  See  Stefan,  Sitzungsber.  d.  Wien.  Akad.  63,  n.  p.  82,  1871. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  231 

been  kept  negatively  charged  during  the  experiments,  had  most 
of  the  excited  activity  concentrated  on  their  surfaces.  These 
were  removed,  new  rods  substituted  and  the  current  immediately 
determined.  The  ratio  of  the  currents  in  the  half  cylinders  under 
these  conditions  was  proportional  to  S^  and  $2,  the  amounts  of 
emanation  present  in  the  two  halves  of  the  cylinder. 

The  values  of  K,  deduced  from  different  values  of  t,  were  found 
to  be  in  good  agreement.  In  the  earlier  experiments  the  values 
of  K  were  found  to  vary  between  '08  and  '12.  In  some  later 
experiments,  where  great  care  was  taken  to  ensure  that  tempera- 
ture conditions  were  very  constant,  the  values  of  K  were  found  to 
vary  between  '07  and  '09.  The  lower  value  '07  is  most  likely 
nearer  the  true  value,  as  temperature  disturbances  tend  to  give 
too  large  a  value  of  K.  No  certain  differences  were  observed  in 
the  value  of  K  whether  the  air  was  dry  or  damp,  or  whether  an 
electric  field  was  acting  or  not. 

152.  Some  experiments  on  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  radium 
emanation  into  air  were  made  at  a  later  date  by  P.  Curie  and  Danne1. 
If  the  emanation  is  contained  in  a  closed  reservoir,  it  has  been  shown 
that  its  activity,  which  is  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  emanation 
present,  decreases  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time. 
If  the  reservoir  is  put  in  communication  with  the  outside  air 
through  a  capillary  tube,  the  emanation  slowly  diffuses  out,  and 
the  amount  of  emanation  in  the  reservoir  is  found  to  decrease 
according  to  the  same  law  as  before,  but  at  a  faster  rate.  Using 
tubes  of  different  lengths  and  diameters,  the  rate  of  diffusion  was 
found  to  obey  the  same  laws  as  a  gas.  The  value  of  K  was  found 
to  be  O'lOO.  This  is  a  slightly  greater  value  of  K  than  the  lowest 
value  0'07  found  by  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks.  No  mention 
is  made  by  Curie  and  Danne  of  having  taken  any  special  precau- 
tions against  temperature  disturbances,  and  this  may  account  for 
the  higher  value  of  K  obtained  by  them. 

They  also  found  that  the  emanation,  like  a  gas,  always  divided 
itself  between  two  reservoirs,  put  in  connection  with  one  another, 
in  the  proportion  of  their  volumes.  In  one  experiment  one  reser- 
voir was  kept  at  a  temperature  of  10°  C.  and  the  other  at  350°  C. 

1  C.  E.  136,  p.  1314,  1903. 


232 


KADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS 


[CH. 


The  emanation  divided  itself  between  the. two  reservoirs  in  the 
same  proportion  as  a  gas  under  the  same  conditions. 

153.  For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  a  few  of  the  coefficients 
of  interdiffusion  of  gases,  compiled  from  Landolt  and  Bernstein's 
tables,  are  given  below. 


Gas  or  vapour 

Coefficient  of 
diffusion  into  air 

Molecular  weight 

Water  vapour 

0-198 

18 

Carbonic  acid  gas 

0-142 

44 

Alcohol  vapour 

0-101 

46 

Ether  vapour 

0-077 

74 

Radium  emanation  ... 

0-07 

? 

The  tables,  although  not  very  satisfactory  for  the  purpose  of 
comparison,  show  that  the  coefficient  of  interdiffusion  follows  the 
inverse  order  of  the  molecular  weights.  The  value  of  K  for  the 
radium  emanation  is  slightly  less  than  for  ether  vapour,  of  which 
the  molecular  weight  is  74.  We  may  thus  conclude  that  the 
emanation  is  of  greater  molecular  weight  than  74.  It  seems 
likely  that  the  emanation  has  a  molecular  weight  somewhere  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  100,  and  is  probably  greater  than  this, 
for  the  vapours  of  ether  and  alcohol  have  higher  diffusion 
coefficients  compared  with  carbonic  acid  than  the  theory  would 
lead  us  to  anticipate.  Comparing  the  diffusion  coefficients  of  the 
emanation  and  carbonic  acid  into  air,  the  value  of  the  molecular 
weight  of  the  emanation  should  be  about  176  if  the  result 
observed  for  the  simple  gases,  viz.  that  the  coefficient  of  diffusion 
is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  molecular 
weights,  holds  true  in  the  present  case.  On  the  disintegration 
theory  developed  in  chapter  x,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the 
atomic  weight  of  the  emanation  should  be  slightly  less  than  225, 
the  atomic  weight  of  radium. 

It  is  of  interest  to  compare  the  value  of  K  =  '07  with  the  value 
of  K  determined  by  Townsend  (section  37)  for  the  gaseous  ions 
produced  in  air  at  ordinary  pressure  and  temperature,  by  Rontgen 
rays  or  by  the  radiations  from  active  substances.  Townsend  found 
that  the  value  of  K  in  dry  air  was  *028  for  the  positive  ions 


VIII] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


233 


and  '043  for  the  negative  ions.  The  radium  emanation  thus 
diffuses  more  rapidly  than  the  ions  produced  by  its  radiation  in 
the  gas,  and  behaves  as  if  its  mass  were  smaller  than  that  of 
the  ions  produced  in  air,  but  considerably  greater  than  that  of 
the  air  molecules  with  which  it  is  mixed. 

It  is  not  possible  to  regard  the  emanation  as  a  temporarily 
modified  condition  of  the  gas  originally  in  contact  with  the  active 
body.  Under  such  conditions  a  much  larger  value  of  K  would  be 
expected.  The  evidence  derived  from  the  experiments  on  diffusion 
strongly  supports  the  view  that  the  emanation  is  a  gas  of  heavy 
molecular  weight. 

Diffusion  of  the  Thorium  Emanation. 

154.  On  account  of  the  rapid  decay  of  the  activity  of  the 
thorium  emanation,  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  value  of  K 
its  coefficient  of  diffusion  into  air  by  the  methods  employed  for  the 
radium  emanation.  The  value  of  K  has  been  determined  by  the 
writer  in  the  following  way.  A  plate  C, 
Fig.  43,  covered  with  thorium  hydroxide,  was 
placed  horizontally  near  the  base  of  a  long 
vertical  brass  cylinder  P.  The  emanation 
released  from  the  thorium  compound  diffuses 
upwards  in  the  cylinder. 

Let  p  be  the  partial  pressure  of  the  emana- 
tion at  a  distance  x  from  the  source  C.  This 
will  be  approximately  uniform  over  the  cross 
section  of  the  cylinder.  From  the  general 
principles  of  diffusion  we  get  the  equation 

„  d?p     dp 

da:2      dt 

Fig.  43. 
The  emanation  is  continuously  breaking 

up  and  expelling  a  particles.  The  emanation-residue  gains  a  posi- 
tive charge,  and,  in  an  electric  field,  is  at  once  removed  from  the 
gas  to  the  negative  electrode. 

Since  the  activity  of  the  emanation  at  any  time  is  always 
proportional  to  the  number  of  particles  which  have  not  broken  up, 
and  since  the  activity  decays  with  the  time  according  to  an 


234  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  [CH. 

exponential  law,  p  —  pjerM  where  pl  is  the  value  of  p  when  t  =  0 
and  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation. 


, 

and  8=-^-;;      ;  ;     ;;  .i':;;i;rKlli, 

Thus  p=Ae~Y/^'x+B. 

Since  p  =  0  when  x  =  oo  ,  £  =  0. 
If  p  =  p0  when  x  =  0,  ^L  =  p0  . 

\/I 
Thus  p=p0e     '  K  -x. 

It  was  not  found  convenient  in  the  experiments  to  determine 
the  activity  of  the  emanation  along  the  cylinder,  but  an  equivalent 
method  was  used  which  depends  upon  measuring  the  distribution 
of  "excited  activity,"  produced  along  a  central  rod  AB,  which  is 
charged  negatively. 

It  will  be  shown  later  (section  167)  that  the  amount  of  excited 
activity  at  any  point  is  always  proportional  to  the  amount  of 
emanation  at  that  point.  The  distribution  of  "  excited  activity  " 
along  the  central  rod  from  the  plate  C  upwards  thus  gives  the 
variation  of  p  for  the  emanation  along  the  tube. 

In  the  experiments,  the  cylinder  was  filled  with  dry  air  at 
atmospheric  pressure  and  was  kept  at  a  constant  temperature. 
The  central  rod  was  charged  negatively  and  exposed  from  one  to 
two  days  in  the  presence  of  the  emanation.  The  rod  was  then 
removed,  and  the  distribution  of  the  excited  activity  along  it 
determined  by  the  electric  method.  It  was  found  that  the  amount 
of  excited  activity  fell  off  with  the  distance  x  according  to  an 
exponential  law,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  1*9  cms.  This  is  in 
agreement  with  the  above  theory. 

Since  the  activity  of  the  emanation  falls  to  half  value  in 
1  minute,  X  =  '0115.  The  value  ^  =  '09  was  deduced  from  the 
average  of  a  number  of  experiments.  This  is  a  slightly  greater 
value  than  K  =  '07,  obtained  for  the  radium  emanation,  but  the 
results  show  that  the  two  emanations  do  not  differ  much  from 
one  another  in  molecular  weight. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  235 

Diffusion  of  the  Emanation  into  Liquids. 

155.  Experiments  have  been  made  by  Wallstabe1  on  the 
coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  radium  emanation  into  various  liquids. 
The  radium  emanation  was  allowed  to  diffuse  into  a  closed  reservoir, 
containing  a  cylinder  of  the  liquid  under  observation.  The  cylinder 
was  provided  with  a  tube  and  a  stop-cock  extending  beyond  the 
closed  vessel,  so  that  different  layers  of  the  liquid  could  be  removed. 
The  liquid  was  then  placed  in  a  closed  testing  vessel,  where  the 
ionization  current  due  to  the  escape  of  the  emanation  from  the 
liquid  was  observed  to  rise  to  a  maximum  after  several  hours,  and 
then  to  decay.  This  maximum  value  of  the  current  was  taken  as 
a  measure  of  the  amount  of  emanation  absorbed  in  the  liquid. 

The  coefficient  of  diffusion  K  of  the  emanation  into  the  liquid 
can  be  obtained  from  the  same  equation  used  to  determine  the 
diffusion  of  the  thorium  emanation  into  air, 

/T 
p=p0e   V,JT* 

where  X  is  the  constant  of  decay  of  activity  of  the  radium  emana- 
tion and  x  the  depth  of  the  layer  of  water  from  the  surface. 

Putting  a  =  A/ g ,  it  was  found  that 

for  water     a  =  1/6, 
for  toluol     a  =  *75. 

The  value  of  X  expressed  in  terms  of  a  day  as  the  unit  of  time 
is  about  17. 

Thus  the  value  of  K  for  the  diffusion  of  the  radium  emanation 

cm " 
into  water  =  '066  , 

day 

The  value  of  K  found  by  Stefan2  for  the  diffusion  of  carbon 

dioxide  into  water  was  T36  --,  These  results  are  thus  in  har- 

day 

mony  with  the  conclusion  drawn  from  the  diffusion  of  the  radium 
emanation  into  air,  and  show  that  the  radium  emanation  behaves 
as  a  gas  of  high  molecular  weight. 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  721,  1903. 

2  Wien.  Sitzungsber.  2,  p.  371,  1878. 


236  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

Condensation  of  the  Emanations. 

156.  Condensation  of  the  emanations.  During  an  in- 
vestigation of  the  effect  of  physical  and  chemical  agencies  on 
the  thorium  emanation,  Rutherford  and  Soddy1  found  that  the 
emanation  passed  unchanged  in  amount  through  a  white-hot 
platinum  tube  and  through  a  tube  cooled  to  the  temperature 
of  solid  carbon  dioxide.  In  later  experiments,  the  effects  of  still 
lower  temperatures  were  examined,  and  it  was  then  found  that  at 
the  temperature  of  liquid  air  both  emanations  were  condensed2. 

If  either  emanation  is  conveyed  by  a  slow  stream  of  hydrogen, 
oxygen  or  air  through  a  metal  spiral  immersed  in  liquid  air,  and 
placed  in  connection  with  a  testing  vessel  as  in  Fig.  37,  no  trace 
of  emanation  escapes  in  the  issuing  gas.  When  the  liquid  air  is 
removed  and  the  spiral  plunged  into  cotton-wool,  several  minutes 
elapse  before  any  deflection  of  the  electrometer  needle  is  observed, 
and  then  the  condensed  emanation  volatilizes  rapidly,  and  the 
movement  of  the  electrometer  needle  is  very  sudden,  especially 
in  the  case  of  radium.  With  a  fairly  large  amount  of  radium 
emanation,  under  the  conditions  mentioned,  a  very  few  seconds 
elapse  after  the  first  sign  of  movement  before  the  electrometer 
needle  indicates  a  deflection  of  several  hundred  divisions  per 
second.  It  is  not  necessary  in  either  case  that  the  emanating 
compound  should  be  retained  in  the  gas  stream.  After  the 
emanation  is  condensed  in  the  spiral,  the  thorium  or  radium 
compound  may  be  removed  and  the  gas  stream  sent  directly 
into  the  spiral.  But  in  the  case  of  thorium  under  these  condi- 
tions, the  effects  observed  are  naturally  small  owing  to  the  rapid 
loss  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation  with  time,  which  proceeds  at 
the  same  rate  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  as  at  ordinary 
temperatures.  •  ' 

If  a  large  amount  of  radium  emanation  is  condensed  in  a  glass 
U  tube,  the  progress  of  the  condensation  can  be  followed  by  the 
eye,  by  means  of  the  phosphorescence  which  the  radiations  excite 
in  the  glass.  If  the  ends  of  the  tube  are  sealed  and  the  tempera- 
ture allowed  to  rise,  the  glow  diffuses  uniformly  throughout  the 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1902. 

2  Phil.  Mag.  May  1903. 


VIII] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


237 


tube,  and  can  be  concentrated  at  any  point  to  some  extent  by 
local  cooling  of  the  tube  with  liquid  air. 

157.  Experimental  arrangements.  A  simple  experimental 
arrangement  to  illustrate  the  condensation  and  volatilization  of  the 
emanation  and  some  of  its  charac- 
teristic properties  is  shown  in  Fig. 
44.  The  emanation  obtained  by 
solution  or  heating,  from  a  few  milli- 
grams of  radium  bromide,  is  con- 
densed in  the  glass  U  tube  T  im- 
mersed in  liquid  air.  This  U  tube 
is  then  put  into  connection  with  a 
larger  glass  tube  V,  in  the  upper 
part  of  which  is  placed  a  piece  of 
zinc  sulphide  screen  Z,  and  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  tube  a  piece  of  the 
mineral  willemite.  The  stop-cock 
A  is  closed  and  the  U  tube  and 
the  vessel  V  are  partially  exhausted 


w 


Fig.  44. 


by  a  pump  through  the  stop-cock  B.  This  lowering  of  the  pressure 
causes  a  more  rapid  diffusion  of  the  emanation  when  released.  The 
emanation  does  not  escape  if  the  tube  T  is  kept  immersed  in  liquid 
air.  The  stop-cock  B  is  then  closed,  and  the  liquid  air  removed. 
No  luminosity  of  the  screen  or  the  willemite  in  the  tube  V  is 
observed  for  several  minutes,  until  the  temperature  of  T  rises 
above  the  point  of  volatilization  of  the  emanation.  The  emana- 
tion is  then  rapidly  carried  into  the  vessel  F,  partly  by  expansion 
of  the  gas  in  the  tube  T  with  rising  temperature,  and  partly  by 
the  process  of  diffusion.  The  screen  Z  and  the  willemite  are 
caused  to  phosphoresce  brilliantly  under  the  influence  of  the  rays 
from  the  emanation  surrounding  them. 

If  the  end  of  the  vessel  V  is  then  plunged  into  liquid  air,  the 
emanation  is  again  condensed  in  the  lower  end  of  the  tube,  and  the 
willemite  phosphoresces  much  more  brightly  than  before.  This  is 
not  due  to  an  increase  of  the  phosphorescence  of  willemite  at  the 
temperature  of  the  liquid  air,  but  to  the  effect  of  the  rays  from 
the  emanation  condensed  around  it.  At  the  same  time  the  lumin- 


238  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

osity  of  the  zinc  sulphide  gradually  diminishes,  and  practically 
disappears  after  several  hours  if  the  end  of  the  tube  is  kept  in 
the  liquid  air.  If  the  tube  is  removed  from  the  liquid  air, 
the  emanation  again  volatilizes  and  lights  up  the  screen  Z.  The 
luminosity  of  the  willemite  returns  to  its  original  value  after  the 
lapse  of  several  hours.  This  slow  change  of  the  luminosity  of 
the  zinc  sulphide  screen  and  of  the  willemite  is  due  to  the  gradual 
decay  of  the  "excited  activity"  produced  by  the  emanation  on 
the  surface  of  all  bodies  exposed  to  its  action  (chapter  vm). 
The  luminosity  of  the  screen  is  thus  due  partly  to  the  radiation 
from  the  emanation  and  partly  to  the  excited  radiation  caused 
by  it.  As  soon  as  the  emanation  is  removed  from  the  upper 
to  the  lower  part  of  the  tube,  the  "  excited  "  radiation  gradually 
diminishes  in  the  upper  and  increases  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
tube. 

The  luminosity  of  the  screen  gradually  diminishes  with  the 
time  as  the  enclosed  emanation  loses  its  activity,  but  is  still 
appreciable  after  several  weeks  interval. 

An  apparatus  of  a  similar  character  to  illustrate  the  condensa- 
tion of  the  radium  emanation  has  been  described  by  P.  Curie1. 

158.  Determination  of  the  temperature  of  condensa- 
tion. A  detailed  investigation  was  made  by  Rutherford  and 
Soddy  (loc.  cit.)  of  the  temperatures  at  which  condensation  and 
volatilization  commenced  for  the  two  emanations.  The  experi- 
mental arrangement  of  the  first  method  is  shown  clearly  in  Fig.  45. 
A  slow  constant  stream  of  gas,  entering  at  A,  was  passed  through 
a  copper  spiral  S,  over  3  metres  in  length,  immersed  in  a  bath 
of  liquid  ethylene.  The  copper  spiral  was  made  to  act  as  its 
own  thermometer  by  determining  its  electrical  resistance.  The 
resistance  temperature  curve  was  obtained  by  observation  of  the 
resistances  at  0°,  the  boiling  point  of  liquid  ethylene  —  103'5°, 
the  solidification  point  of  ethylene  — 169°  and  in  liquid  air.  The 
temperature  of  the  liquid  air  was  deduced  from  the  tables  given 
by  Baly  for  the  boiling  point  of  liquid  air  for  different  percentages 
of  oxygen.  The  resistance  temperature  curve,  for  the  particular 
spiral  employed,  was  found  to  be  nearly  a  straight  line  between 

1  Societe  de  Physique,  1903. 


VIIl] 


RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS 


239 


0°  and  — 192°  C.,  cutting  the  temperature  axis  if  produced  nearly 
at  the  absolute  zero.     The  resistance  of  the  spiral,  deduced  from 


Ammeter 


To  Earth 


Fig.  45. 


readings  on  an  accurately  calibrated  Weston  millivoltmeter,  with 
a  constant  current  through  the  spiral,  was  thus  very  approximately 
proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature.  The  liquid  ethylene  was 
kept  vigorously  stirred  by  an  electric  motor,  and  was  cooled  to  any 
desirable  temperature  by  surrounding  the  vessel  with  liquid  air. 

The  general  method  employed  for  the  radium  emanation  was 
to  pass  a  suitable  amount  of  emanation,  mixed  with  the  gas  to  be 
employed,  from  the  gas  holder  B  into  the  spiral,  cooled  below  the 
temperature  of  condensation.  After  the  emanation  was  condensed 
in  the  spiral,  a  current  of  electrolytic  hydrogen  or  oxygen  was 
passed  through  the  spiral.  The  temperature  was  allowed  to 
rise  gradually,  and  was  noted  at  the  instant  when  a  deflection  of 
the  electrometer,  due  to  the  presence  of  emanation  in  the  testing 
vessel  T,  was  observed.  The  resistance,  subject  to  a  slight  correc- 
tion due  to  the  time  taken  for  the  emanation  to  be  carried  into 
the  testing  vessel,  gave  the  temperature  at  which  some  of  the 
emanation  commenced  to  volatilize.  The  ionization  current  in 
the  testing  vessel  rose  rapidly  to  a  maximum  value,  showing  that, 
for  a  small  increase  of  temperature,  the  whole  of  the  radium 
emanation  was  volatilized.  The  following  table  gives  an  illustration 


240 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


[CH. 


of  the  results  obtained  for  a  current  of  hydrogen  of  T38  cubic 
centimetres  per  second. 


Temperature 

Divisions  per  second 
of  the  electrometer 

-160° 

0 

-156° 

0 

-  154°  '3 

1 

-  153°-8 

21 

-152°  -5 

24 

The  following  table  shows  the  results  obtained  for  different 
currents  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen. 


Current  of  Gas 

Z\ 

T* 

Hydrogen    .  .  . 

•25  c.c.  per  sec. 

-151-3 

-150 

>» 

•32 

-  1537 

-151 

,, 

•92 

-152 

-151 

,, 

1-38 

-154 

-153 

)5                     ... 

2-3 

-  162-5 

-162 

Oxygen 

•34 

-152-5 

-151-5 

5? 

•58 

-155 

-153 

The  temperature  Tl  in  the  above  table  gives  the  temperature 
of  initial  volatilization,  jT2  the  temperature  for  which  half  of  the 
condensed  emanation  had  been  released.  For  slow  currents  of 
hydrogen  and  oxygen,  the  values  of  7\  and  T^  are  in  good  agree- 
ment. For  a  stream  of  gas  as  rapid  as  2*3  cubic  centimetres  per 
second  the  value  of  Tl  is  much  lower.  Such  a  result  is  to  be 
expected,  for,  in  too  rapid  a  stream,  the  gas  is  not  cooled  to  the 
temperature  of  the  spiral,  and,  in  consequence,  the  inside  surface 
of  the  spiral  is  above  the  mean  temperature,  and  some  of  the 
emanation  escapes  at  a  temperature  apparently  much  lower.  In 
the  case  of  oxygen,  this  effect  appears  for  a  gas  stream  of  0'58  cubic 
centimetres  per  second. 

In  the  experiments  on  the  thorium  emanation,  a  slightly  dif- 
ferent method  was  necessary,  on  account  of  the  rapid  loss  of  its 
activity.  The  steady  stream  of  gas  was  passed  over  the  thorium 


VIII] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


241 


compound,  and  the  temperature  was  observed  at  the  instant  an 
appreciable  movement  of  the  electrometer  was  observed.  This 
gave  the  temperature  at  which  a  small  fraction  of  the  thorium 
emanation  escaped  condensation,  and  not  the  value  T^  observed 
for  the  radium  emanation,  which  gave  the  temperature  for  which 
a  small  fraction  of  the  previously  condensed  emanation  was 
volatilized. 

The  following  table  illustrates  the  results  obtained. 


Current  of  Gas 

Temperature 

Hydrogen 

n 

Oxygen 

•71  c.c.  per  sec. 
1-38      „         „ 
•58      „         „ 

-155°C. 
-159°  C. 
-155°C. 

On  comparing  these  results  with  the  values  obtained  for  the 
radium  emanation,  it  will  be  observed  that  with  equal  gas  streams 
the  temperatures  are  nearly  the  same. 

A  closer  examination  of  the  thorium  emanation  showed,  how- 
ever, that  this  apparent  agreement  was  only  accidental,  and  that 
there  was,  in  reality,  a  very  marked  difference  in  the  effect  of  tem- 
perature in  the  two  emanations.  It  was  found  experimentally  that 
the  radium  emanation  was  condensed  very  near  the  temperature 
at  which  volatilization  commenced,  and  that  the  points  of  conden- 
sation and  volatilization  were  fairly  sharply  defined. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  thorium  emanation  required  a  range 
of  over  30°  C.  after  condensation  had  started  in  order  to  ensure 
complete  condensation.  Fig.  46  is  an  example  of  the  results 
obtained  with  a  steady  gas  stream  of  1*38  c.c.  per  sec.  of  oxygen. 
The  ordinates  represent  the  percentage  proportion  of  the  emana- 
tion uncondensed  at  different  temperatures.  It  will  be  observed 
that  condensation  commences  about  —120°,  and  very  little  of  the 
emanation  escapes  condensation  at  —  155°  C. 

To  investigate  this  difference  of  behaviour  in  the  two  emana- 
tions, a  static  method  was  employed,  which  allowed  determinations 
of  the  two  emanations  to  be  made  under  comparable  conditions. 
The  emanation,  mixed  with  a  small  amount  of  the  gas  to  be  used, 
was  introduced  into  the  cool  spiral,  which  had  previously  been 

16 


R.  R.-A. 


242 


RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS 


[CH. 


exhausted  by  means  of  a  mercury  pump.  The  amount  of  emana- 
tion remaining  uncondensed  after  definite  intervals  was  rapidly 
removed  by  means  of  the  pump,  and  was  carried  with  a  constant 
auxiliary  stream  of  gas  into  the  testing  vessel. 


! 

t 


90 

^N 

\ 

\ 

70 

J  60 

1 

|  50 

* 

:  40 
30 
20 
10 
0 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

Condensation  Curve 
Thorium  Emanation 

\ 

\ 

V 

\ 

-100 


-160 


-110  -120  -130  -140  -150 

Temperature  Centigrade 

Fig.  46. 

Tested  in  this  way,  it  was  found  that  the  volatilization  point 
of  the  radium  emanation  was  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  ob- 
tained by  the  blowing  method,  viz.  — 150°  C.  With  thorium,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  condensation  started  at  about  —120°  C.,  and, 
as  in  the  blowing  method,  continued  over  a  range  of  about  30°  C. 
The  proportion  of  the  emanation  condensed  at  any  temperature 
was  found  to  depend  on  a  variety  of  conditions,  although  the  point 
at  which  condensation  commenced,  viz.  — 120°  C.,  was  about  the 
same  in  each  case.  It  depended  on  the  pressure  and  nature  of  the 
gas,  on  the  concentration  of  the  emanation,  and  on  the  time  for 
which  it  was  left  in  the  spiral.  For  a  given  temperature  a  greater 
proportion  of  the  emanation  was  condensed,  the  lower  the  pressure 
and  the  longer  the  time  it  was  left  in  the  spiral.  Under  the 
same  conditions,  the  emanation  was  more  rapidly  condensed  in 
hydrogen  than  in  oxygen. 


VIII]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  243 

159.  Thus  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  thorium  emanation 
begins  to  condense  at  a  temperature  higher  than  that  at  which 
the  radium  emanation  condenses.  The  explanation  of  the  pecu- 
liar behaviour  of  the  thorium  emanation  is  clear  when  the  small 
number  of  emanation  particles  present  in  the  gas  are  taken  into 
consideration.  It  has  been  shown  that  both  emanations  give 
out  only  a  rays.  It  is  probable  that  the  a  particles  from  the 
two  emanations  are  similar  in  character  and  produce  about  the 
same  number  of  ions  in  their  passage  through  the  gas.  The 
number  of  ions  produced  by  each  a  particle  before  its  energy 
is  dissipated  is  probably  about  70,000.  (See  section  104.) 

Now  in  the  experiment  the  electrometer  readily  measured 
a  current  of  10~3  electrostatic  units.  Taking  the  charge  on  an  ion 
as  3*4  x  10~10  electrostatic  units,  this  corresponds  to  a  production  in 
the  testing  vessel  of  about  3  x  106  ions  per  sec.,  which  would  be 
produced  by  about  40  expelled  a.  particles  per  second.  Each 
radiating  particle  cannot  expel  less  than  one  a  particle  and  may 
expel  more,  but  it  is  likely  that  the  number  expelled  by  an  atom 
of  the  thorium  emanation  is  not  greatly  different  from  the  number 
by  an  atom  of  the  radium  emanation. 

In  section  124  it  has  been  shown  that,  according  to  the  law  of 
decay,  \N  particles  change  per  second  when  N  are  present.  Thus 
to  produce  40  a  particles,  \N  cannot  be  greater  than  40.  Since  for 
the  thorium  emanation  X  is  1/87,  it  follows  that  N  cannot  be  greater 
than  3500.  The  electrometer  thus  detected  the  presence  of  3500 
particles  of  the  thorium  emanation,  and  since  in  the  static  method 
the  volume  of  the  condensing  spiral  was  about  15  c.c.,  this  corre- 
sponds to  a  concentration  of  about  230  particles  per  c.c.  An 
ordinary  gas  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  temperature  probably 
contains  about  3'6  x  1019  molecules  per  c.c.  Thus  the  emanation 
would  have  been  detected  on  the  spiral  if  it  possessed  a  partial 
pressure  of  less  than  10~17  of  an  atmosphere. 

It  is  thus  not  surprising  that  the  condensation  point  of  the 
thorium  emanation  is  not  sharply  defined.  It  is  rather  a  matter 
of  remark  that  condensation  should  occur  so  readily  with  so  sparse 
a  distribution  of  emanation  particles  in  the  gas ;  for,  in .  order 
that  condensation  may  take  place,  it  is  probable  that  the  particles 
must  approach  within  one  another's  sphere  of  influence. 

16—2 


244  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

Now  in  the  case  of  the  radium  emanation,  the  rate  of  decay 
is  about  5000  times  slower  than  that  of  the  thorium  emanation, 
and  consequently  the  actual  number  of  particles  that  must  be 
present  to  produce  the  same  number  of  rays  per  second  in  the  two 
cases  must  be  about  5000  times  greater  in  the  case  of  radium 
than  in  the  case  of  thorium.  This  conclusion  involves  only  the 
assumption  that  the  same  number  of  rays  is  produced  by  a 
particle  of  emanation  in  each  case,  and  that  the  expelled  particles 
produce  in  their  passage  through  the  gas  the  same  number  of 
ions.  The  number  of  particles  present,  in  order  to  be  detected 
by  the  electrometer,  in  this  experiment,  must  therefore  have 
been  about  5000  x  3500,  i.e.  about  2  x  107.  The  difference  of 
behaviour  in  the  two  cases  is  well  explained  by  the  view 
that,  for  equal  electrical  effects,  the  number  of  radium  emana- 
tion particles  must  be  far  larger  than  the  number  of  thorium 
emanation  particles.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  the  probability 
of  the  particles  coming  into  each  other's  sphere  of  influence  will 
increase  very  rapidly  as  the  concentration  of  the  particles  in- 
creases, and  that,  in  the  case  of  the  radium  emanation,  once  the 
temperature  of  condensation  is  attained,  all  but  a  small  proportion 
of  the  total  number  of  particles  present  will  condense  in  a  very 
short  time.  In  the  case  of  the  thorium  emanation,  however,  the 
temperature  might  be  far  below  that  of  condensation,  and  yet 
a  considerable  portion  remain  uncondensed  for  comparatively  long 
intervals.  On  this  view  the  experimental  results  obtained  are 
^exactly  what  is  to  be  expected.  A  greater  proportion  "condenses, 
Ibhe  longer  the  time  allowed  for  condensation  under  the  same  con- 
ditions. The  condensation  occurs  more  rapidly  in  hydrogen  than 
in  oxygen,  as  the  diffusion  is  greater  in  the  former  gas.  For  the 
same  reason  the  condensation  occurs  faster  the  lower  the  pressure 
of  the  gas  present.  Finally,  when  the  emanation  is  carried  by 
a  steady  gas  stream,  a  smaller  proportion  condenses  than  in  the 
other  cases,  because  the  concentration  of  emanation  particles  per 
unit  volume  of  gas  is  less  in  these  conditions. 

It  is  possible  that  the  condensation  of  the  emanations  may  not 
occur  in  the  gas  itself  but  at  the  surface  of  the  containing  vessel. 
Accurate  observations  of  the  temperature  of  condensation  have  so 
far  only  been  made  in  a  copper  spiral,  but  condensation  certainly 


VIII]  EADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  245 

occurs  in  tubes  of  lead  or  glass  at  about  the  same  temperature  as 
in  tubes  of  copper. 

160.  In  experiments  that  were  made  by  the  static  method 
with  a  very  large  quantity  of  radium  emanation,  a  slight  amount 
of  escape  of  the  condensed  emanation  was  observed  several  degrees 
below  the  temperature  at  which  most  of  the  emanation  was  released. 
This  is  to  be  expected,  since  under  such  conditions  the  electrometer 
is  able  to  detect  a  very  minute  proportion  of  the  whole  quantity  of 
the  emanation  condensed. 

Special  experiments,  with  a  large  quantity  of  emanation,  that 
were  made  with  the  spiral  immersed  in  a  bath  of  rapidly  boiling 
nitric  oxide,  showed  this  effect  very  clearly.  For  example,  the  con- 
densed emanation  began  to  volatilize  at  -155°C.  In  4  minutes 
the  temperature  had  risen  to  — 153'5°,  and  the  amount  volatilized 
was  four  times  as  great  as  at  — 155°.  In  the  next  5£  minutes  the 
temperature  had  increased  to  152'3°  and  practically  the  whole 
quantity,  which  was  at  least  fifty  times  the  amount  at  the 
temperature  of  — 153*5°,  had  volatilized. 

It  thus  seems  probable  that,  if  the  temperature  were  kept 
steady  at  the  point  at  which  volatilization  was  first  observed, 
and  the  released  emanation  removed  at  intervals,  the  whole  of 
the  emanation  would  in  course  of  time  be  liberated  at  that  tem- 
perature. These  results  also  point  to  the  probability  that  the 
condensed  emanation  possesses  a  true  vapour  pressure,  but  great 
refinements  in  experimental  methods  would  be  necessary  before 
such  a  conclusion  could  be  definitely  established. 

The  true  temperature  of  condensation  of  the  thorium  emana- 
tion is  probably  about  — 120°  C.,  and  that  of  radium  about 
— 150°  C.  Thus  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  two  emanations  are 
quite  distinct  from  each  other  in  this  respect,  and  also  with  regard 
to  their  radio-activity,  although  they  both  possess  the  property 
of  chemical  inertness.  These  results  on  the  temperatures  of 
condensation  do  not  allow  us  to  make  any  comparison  of  the 
condensation  points  of  the  emanations  with  those  of  known  gases, 
since  the  lowering  of  the  condensation  point  of  gases  with  diminu- 
tion of  pressure  has  not  been  studied  at  such  extremely  minute 
pressures. 


246  RADIO-ACTIVE    EMANATIONS  [CH. 

161.  It  was  found1  that  the  activity  of  the  thorium  emanation 
decayed  at  the  same  rate,  when  condensed  in  the  spiral  at  the 
temperature  of  liquid  air,  as  at  ordinary  temperatures.     This  is  in 
accord  with  results  of  a  similar  kind  obtained  by  P.  Curie  for  the 
radium  emanation  (section  136),  and  shows  that  the  value  of  the 
radio-active  constant  is  unaffected  by  wide  variations  of  tempera- 
ture. 

Amount  of  Emanation  from  Radium  and  Thorium. 

162.  It  has  been  shown  in  section  104,  that  1  gram  of  radium 
emits  about  1011  a  particles  per  second.     Since  the  activity  due  to 
the  emanation  stored  up  in  radium,  when  in  a  state  of  radio-active 
equilibrium,  is  about  one  quarter  of  the  whole,  the  number  of  a 
particles  projected  per  second  by  the  emanation  from  1  gram  of 
radium  is  about  2'5  x  1010.     It  has  been  shown  in  section  143, 
that  463,000  times  the  amount  of  emanation  produced  per  second 
is  stored  up  in  the  radium.     But  in  a  state  of  radio-active  equi- 
librium, the  number  of  emanation  particles  breaking  up  per  second 
is  equal  to  the  number  produced  per  second.     Assuming  that  each 
emanation  particle  in  breaking  up  expels  one  a  particle,  it  follows 
that  the  number  of  emanation  particles,  present  in   1   gram   of 
radium  in  radio-active  equilibrium,    is    463,000  x  2'5  x  1010,  i.e. 
1*2  x  1016.    Taking  the  number  of  hydrogen  molecules  in  1  c.c.  of  gas 
at  atmospheric  pressure  and  temperature  as  3'6  x  1019  (section  39), 
the  volume  of  the  emanation  from  1  gram  of  radium  is  3'3  x  10~4 
cubic  centimetre  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  temperature.     Quite 
independently  of  any  method  of  calculation,  it  is  evident  that  the 
volume  of  the  emanation  is   very   small,   for   attempts  made   to 
detect  its  presence  by  its  volume  have  so  far  failed.    It  is  probable, 
however,  from  the  above  calculation,  that,  when  larger  quantities 
of  radium  are  available   for  experiment,   the  emanation  will  be 
collected  in  volume  sufficiently  large  to  measure. 

In  the  case  of  thorium,  the  maximum  quantity  of  emanation  to 

be  obtained  from  1  gram  of  the  solid  is  very  minute,  both  on  account 

of  the  small  activity  of  thorium  and  of  the  rapid  break  up  of  the 

emanation  after  its  production.     Since  the  amount  of  emanation, 

1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  May,  1903. 


VIIl]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  247 

stored  in  a  non-emanating  thorium  compound,  is  only  87  times 
the  rate  of  production,  while  in  radium  it  is  463,000  times,  and  the 
rate  of  production  of  the  emanation  by  radium  is  about  1  million 
times  faster  than  by  thorium,  it  follows  that  the  amount  of  emana- 
tion to  be  obtained  from  1  gram  of  thorium  is  not  greater  than 
10~10  of  the  amount  from  an  equal  weight  of  radium,  i.e.  its  volume 
is  not  greater  than  5  x  10~14  c.c.  at  the  ordinary  pressure  and 
temperature.  Even  with  large  quantities  of  thorium,  the  amount 
of  emanation  is  too  small  ever  to  be  detected  by  its  volume. 

Heal  Emission  of  the  Radium  Emanation. 

163.  It  has  been  shown  in  section  106,  that  the  radium 
emanation  emitsjieatjat  a  rapid  rate  and  is  responsible  for  about 
70  :  ,  of  the  heating  effect  of  radium.  The  emanation  from  1  gram 
of  radium,  together  wiflT  the  heat  effect  due  to  the  excited  activity 
on  the  walls  of  the  containing  vessel,  thus  gives  rise  to  an  emission 
of  heat  of  about  70  gram-calories  per  hour.  This  rate  of  heat 
emission  decays  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time, 
decreasing  to  half  value  in  about  four  days.  The  total  quantity  of 

heat  given  out  during  the  life  of  the  emanation  is  — ,  where  q  is 

X 

the  initial  rate  of  heat  production  and  X  is  the  radio-active 
constant  of  the  emanation.  Since  the  value  of  X  expressed  in 
hours  (section  136)  is  1/128  and  q  is  70,  the  total  quantity  of 
heat  emitted  from  the  emanation  from  1  gram  of  radium  is  about 
10,000  gram-calories.  But  the  volume  of  this  emanation  is  about 
3'3  x  10~4  c.c.  Thus  the  total  heat  emitted  from  one  cubic  centi- 
metre of  the  emanation  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature 
would  be  about  3  x  107  gram-calories.  The  initial  rate  of  emission 
of  heat  is  2  x  105  gram-calories  per  hour  or  60  gram-calories  per 
second.  This  rapid  emission  of  heat  would  be  sufficient  to  heat 
to  redness  if  not  to  melt  down  the  tube  which  contains  the 
emanation. 

If  the  atomic  weight  of  the  emanation  is  taken  to  be  about  200, 
it  can  be  calculated  that  1  pound  weight  of  the  emanation  would 
initially  radiate  heat  at  the  rate  of  about  8000  horse-power,  and  in 
the  whole  course  of  its  heat  emission  would  radiate  an  amount  of 


248  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  [CH. 

energy  corresponding  to  40,000  horse-power  days.  In  order  to 
obtain  such  an  amount  of  emanation  about  70  tons  of  radium 
would  be  required. 


Summary  of  Results. 

164.  The  investigations  into  the  nature  of  the  radio-active 
emanations  have  thus  led  to  the  folio  wing  conclusions: — The  radio- 
elements  thorium  and  radium  continuously  produce  from  themselves 
radio-active  emanations  at  a  rate  which  is  constant  under  all  con- 
ditions. In  some  cases,  the  emanations  continuously  diffuse  from 
the  radio-active  compounds  into  the  surrounding  gas;  in  other 
cases,  the  emanations  are  unable  to  escape  from  the  material  in 
which  they  are  produced  but  are  occluded,  and  can  only  be  released 
by  the  action  of  solution  or  heat. 

The  emanations  possess  all  the  properties  of  radio-active  gases. 
They  diffuse  through  gases,  liquids,  and  porous  substances,  and  can 
be  occluded  in  some  solids.  Under  varying  conditions  of  pressure, 
volume,  and  temperature,  the  emanations  distribute  themselves  in 
the-  same  way  and  according  to  the  same  laws  as  does  a  gas. 

The  emanations  possess  the  important  property  of  condensation 
under  the  influence  of  extreme  cold,  and  by  that  means  can  be 
separated  from  the  gases  with  which  they  are  mixed.  The  radia- 
tion from  the  emanation  is  material  in  nature,  and  consists  of  a 
stream  of  positively  charged  particles  projected  with  great  velocity. 

Taking  all  these  properties  into  consideration,  it  is  difficult  to 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  the  emanations  are  material  and  exist 
in  the  gaseous  state.  The  emanations  possess  the  property  of 
chemical  inertness,  and  in  this  respect  resemble  the  gases  of  the 
argon  family.  The  emanations  are  produced  in  minute  amount; 
sufficient  quantity  has  not  yet  been  obtained  to  examine  by 
ordinary  chemical  methods.  With  regard  to  their  rates  of  dif- 
fusion, the  emanations  of  both  thorium  and  radium  behave  like 
gases  of  high  molecular  weight. 

These  emanations  have  been  detected  and  their  properties 
investigated  by  the  property  they  possess  of  emitting  radiations  of 
a  special  character.  These  radiations  consist  entirely  of  a  rays, 
i.e.  particles,  projected  with  great  velocity,  which  carry  a  positive 


VIIl]  RADIO-ACTIVE   EMANATIONS  249 

charge  and  have  a  mass  about  twice  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom. 
The  emanations  do  not  possess  the  property  of  permanently  radiat- 
ing, but  the  intensity  of  the  radiations  diminishes  according  to  an 
exponential  law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value,  in  the  case  of 
thorium  in  one  minute,  and  in  case  of  radium  in  about  four  days. 
The  law  of  decay  of  activity  does  not  seem  to  be  influenced  by 
any  physical  or  chemical  agency. 

The  emanation  particles  gradually  break  up,  each  particle  as  it 
breaks  up  expelling  a  charged  body.  The  emanation  after  it  has 
radiated  ceases  to  exist  as  such,  but  is  transformed  into  a  new 
kind  of  matter,  which  is  deposited  on  the  surface  of  bodies  and 
gives  rise  to  the  phenomena  of  excited  activity.  This  last  property, 
and  the  connection  of  the  emanation  with  it,  is  discussed  in  detail 
in  the  succeeding  chapter. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY. 

165.  Excited  radio-activity.  One  of  the  most  interesting 
and  remarkable  properties  of  thorium  and  radium  is  their  power  of 
"  exciting  "  or  "  inducing  "  temporary  activity  on  all  bodies  in  their 
neighbourhood.  A  substance  which  has  been  exposed  for  some 
time  in  the  presence  of  radium  or  thorium,  behaves  as  if  its  surface 
were  covered  with  an  invisible  deposit  of  intensely  radio-active 
material.  The  "  excited"  body  emits  radiations  capable  of  affecting 
a  photographic  plate  and  of  ionizing  a  gas.  Unlike  the  radio- 
elements  themselves  however,  the  activity  of  the  body  does  not 
remain  constant  after  it  has  been  removed  from  the  influence  of 
the  exciting  active  material,  but  decays  with  the  time.  The 
activity  lasts  for  several  hours  when  due  to  radium  and  several 
days  when  due  to  thorium. 

This  property  was  first  observed  by  M.  and  Mme  Curie1  for 
radium,  and  independently  by  the  writer2  for  thorium3. 

1  C.  R.  129,  p.  714,  1899.  2  Phil,  Mag.  Jan.  and  Feb.  1900. 

3  As  regards  date  of  publication,  the  priority  of  the  discovery  of  "excited 
activity  "  belongs  to  M.  and  Mme  Curie.  A  short  paper  on  this  subject,  entitled 
"  Sur  la  radioactivite  provoquee.  par  les  rayons  de  Becquerel,"  was  communicated 
by  them  to  the  Comptes  Rendus,  Nov.  6,  1899.  A  shor*t  note  was  added  to  the 
paper  by  Becquerel  in  which  the  phenomena  of  excited  activity  were  ascribed  to  a 
type  of  phosphorescence.  On  my  part,  I  had  simultaneously  discovered  the 
emission  of  an  emanation  from  thorium  compounds  and  the  excited  activity 
produced  by  it,  in  July,  1899.  I,  however,  delayed  publication  in  order  to  work 
out  in  some  detail  the  properties  of  the  emanation  and  of  the  excited  activity  and 
the  connection  between  them.  The  results  were  published  in  two  papers  in  the 
Philosophical  Magazine  (Jan.  and  Feb.  1900)  entitled  "  A  radio-active  substance 
emitted  from  thorium  compounds"  and  "  Kadio-activity  produced  in  substances  by 
the  action  of  thorium  compounds." 


CH.  IX] 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


251 


If  any  solid  body  is  placed  inside  a  closed  vessel  containing  an 
emanating  compound  of  thorium  or  radium,  its  surface  becomes 
radio-active.  For  thorium  compounds  the  amount  of  excited  ac- 
tivity on  a  body  is  in  general  greater  the  nearer  it  is  to  the  active 
material.  In  the  case  of  radium,  however,  provided  the  body  has 
been  exposed  for  several  hours,  the  amount  of  excited  activity  is  to 
a  large  extent  independent  of  the  position  of  the  body  in  the  vessel 
containing  the  active  material.  Bodies  are  made  active  whether 
exposed  directly  to  the  action  of  the  radio-active  substance  or 
screened  from  the  action  of  the  direct  rays.  This  has  been  clearly 
shown  in  some  experiments  of  P.  Curie.  A  small  open  vessel  a 
(Fig.  47)  containing  a  solution  of  radium  is  placed  inside  a  larger 
closed  vessel  V. 


Fig.  47. 

Plates  A,  B,  C,  D,  E  are  placed  in  various  positions  in  the 
enclosure.  After  exposure  for  a  day,  the  plates  after  removal  are 
found  to  be  radio-active  even  in  positions  completely  shielded  from 
the  action  of  the  direct  rays.  For  example,  the  plate  D  shielded 
from  the  direct  radiation  by  the  lead  plate  P  is  as  active  as  the 
plate  E,  exposed  to  the  direct  radiation.  The  amount  of  activity 
produced  in  a  given  time  on  a  plate  of  given  area  in  a  definite 
position  is  independent  of  the  material  of  the  plate.  Plates  of 
mica,  copper,  cardboard,  ebonite,  all  show  equal  amounts  of  activity. 
The  amount  of  activity  depends  on  the  area  of  the  plate  and  on 


252 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


the  amount  of  free  space  in  its  neighbourhood.  Excited  radio- 
activity is  also  produced  in  water  if  exposed  to  the  action  of  an 
emanating  compound. 

166.  Concentration  of  excited  radio-activity  on  the 
negative  electrode.  When  thorium  or  radium  is  placed  in  a 
closed  vessel,  the  whole  interior  surface  becomes  strongly  active. 
In  a  strong  electric  field,  on  the  other  hand,  the  writer  found  that 
the  activity  was  confined  entirely  to  the  negative  electrode.  By 
suitable  arrangements,  the  whole  of  the  excited  activity,  which 
was  previously  distributed  over  the  surface  of  the  vessel,  can  be 
concentrated  on  a  small  negative  electrode  placed  inside  the  vessel. 
An  experimental  arrangement  for  this  purpose  is  shown  in  Fig.  48. 


The  metal  vessel  V  containing  a  large  amount  of  thoria  is  con- 
nected to  the  positive  pole  of  a  battery  of  about  300  volts.  The 
wire  AB  to  be  made  active  is  fastened  to  a  stouter  rod  BC,  passing 
through  an  ebonite  cork  inside  a  short  cylinder  D,  fixed  in  the  side 
of  the  vessel.  This  rod  is  connected  with  the  negative  pole  of  the 
battery.  In  this  way  the  wire  AB  is  the  only  conductor  exposed 
in  the  field  with  a  negative  charge,  and  it  is  found  that  the  whole 
of  the  excited  activity  is  concentrated  upon  it. 

In  this  way  it  is  possible  to  make  a  short  thin  metal  wire  over 
10,000  times  as  active  per  unit  surface  as  the  thoria  from  which 
the  excited  activity  is  derived.  In  the  same  way,  the  excited 
activity  due  to  radium  can  be  concentrated  mainly  on  the  negative 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  253 

electrode.  In  the  case  of  thorium,  if  the  central  wire  is  charged 
positively,  it  shows  no  appreciable  activity.  With  radium,  however, 
a  positively  charged  body  becomes  slightly  active.  In  most  cases, 
the  amount  of  activity  produced  on  the  positive  electrode  is  not 
more  than  5%  °f  ^ne  corresponding  amount  when  the  body  is 
negatively  charged.  For  both  thorium  and  radium,  the  amount  of 
excited  activity  on  electrodes  of  the  same  size  is  independent  of 
their  material. 

All  metals  are  made  active  to  equal  extents  for  equal  times  of 
exposure.  When  no  electric  field  is  acting,  the  same  amount 
of  activity  is  produced  on  insulators  like  mica  and  glass  as  on 
conductors  of  equal  dimensions. 

167.  Connection  between  the  emanations  and  excited 
activity.  An  examination  of  the  conditions  under  which  excited 
activity  is  produced  shows  that  there  is  a  very  close  connection 
between  the  emanation  and  the  excited  activity.  If  a  thorium 
compound  is  covered  with  several  sheets  of  paper,  which  cut  off  the 
a  rays  but  allow  the  emanation  to  pass  through,  excited  activity  is 
still  produced  in  the  space  above  it.  If  a  thin  sheet  of  mica  is 
waxed  down  over  the  active  material,  thus  preventing  the  escape  of 
the  emanation,  no  excited  activity  is  produced  outside  it.  Uranium 
and  polonium  which  do  not  give  off  an  emanation  are  not  able  to 
produce  excited  activity  on  bodies.  Not  only  is  the  presence  of 
the  emanation  necessary  to  cause  excited  activity,  but  the  amount 
of  excited  activity  is  always  proportional  to  the  amount  of  emana- 
tion present.  For  example,  de-emanated  thoria  produces  very 
little  excited  activity  compared  with  ordinary  thoria.  In  all  cases 
the  amount  of  excited  activity  produced  is  proportional  to  the 
emanating  power.  The  emanation  when  passing  through  an 
electric  field  loses  its  property  of  exciting  activity  at  the  same 
rate  as  the  radiating  power  diminishes.  This  was  shown  by  the 
following  experiment. 

A  slow  constant  current  of  air  from  a  gasometer,  freed  from 
dust  by  its  passage  through  cotton-wool,  passed  through  a  rectangu- 
lar wooden  tube  70  cms.  long.  Four  equal  insulated  metal  plates 
A,  B,  C,  D,  were  placed  at  regular  intervals  along  the  tube.  The 
positive  pole  of  a  battery  of  300  volts  was  connected  to  a  metal 


254 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


plate  placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  tube,  while  the  negative  pole 
was  connected  with  the  four  plates.  A  mass  of  thoria  was  placed 
in  the  bottom  of  the  tube  under  the  plate  A ,  and  the  current  due 
to  the  emanation  determined  at  each  of  the  four  plates.  After 
passing  a  current  of  air  of  0'2  cm.  per  second,  for  7  hours  along  the 
tube,  the  plates  were  removed  and  the  amount  of  excited  activity 
produced  on  them  was  tested  by  the  electric  method.  The  follow- 
ing results  were  obtained. 


Eelative  current 

Eelative  excited 

due  to  emanation 

activity 

Plate  A   ... 

1 

1 

„     B    ... 

•55 

•43 

,,   o  ... 

•18 

•16 

„     D   ... 

•072 

•061 

Within  the  errors  of  measurement,  the  amount  of  excited 
activity  is  thus  proportional  to  the  radiation  from  the  emanation, 
i.e.  to  the  amount  of  emanation  present.  The  same  considerations 
hold  for  the  radium  emanation.  The  emanation  in  this  case,  on 
account  of  the  slow  loss  of  its  activity,  can  be  stored  mixed  with 
air  for  long  periods  in  a  gasometer,  and  its  effects  tested  quite 
independently  of  the  active  matter  from  which  it  is  produced. 
The  ionization  current  due  to  the  excited  activity  produced  by  the 
emanation  is  always  proportional  to  the  current  due  to  the  emana- 
tion for  the  period  of  one  month  or  more  that  its  activity  is  large 
enough  to  be  conveniently  measured  by  an  electrometer. 

If  at  any  time  during  the  interval,  some  of  the  emanation  is 
removed  and  introduced  into  a  new  testing  vessel,  the  ionization 
current  will  immediately  commence  to  increase,  rising  in  the  course 
of  four  or  five  hours  to  about  twice  its  original  value.  This  increase 
of  the  current  is  due  to  the  excited  activity  produced  on  the  walls 
of  the  containing  vessel.  On  blowing  out  the  emanation,  the 
excited  activity  is  left  behind,  and  at  once  begins  to  decay. 
Whatever  its  age,  the  emanation  still  possesses  the  property  of 
causing  excited  activity,  and  in  amount  always  proportional  to  its 
activity,  i.e.  to  the  amount  of  emanation  present. 

These   results   show  that  the  power  of  exciting  activity  on 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  255 

inactive  substances  is  a  property  of  the  radio-active  emanations, 
and  is  proportional  to  the  amount  of  emanation  present. 

The  phenomenon  of  excited  activity  cannot  be  ascribed  to  a 
type  of  phosphorescence  produced  by  the  rays  from  the  emanation 
on  bodies ;  for  it  has  been  shown  that  the  activity  can  be  concen- 
trated on  the  negative  electrode  in  a  strong  electric  field,  even  if 
the  electrode  is  shielded  from  the  direct  radiation  from  the  active 
substance  which  gives  off  the  emanation.  The  amount  of  excited 
activity  does  not  seem  in  any  way  connected  with  the  ionization 
produced  by  the  emanation  in  the  gas  with  which  it  is  mixed. 
For  example,  if  a  closed  vessel  is  constructed  with  two  large 
parallel  insulated  metal  plates  on  the  lower  of  which  a  layer  of 
thoria  is  spread,  the  amount  of  the  excited  activity  on  the  upper 
plate  when  charged  negatively,  is  independent  of  the  distance 
between  the  plates  when  that  distance  is  varied  from  1  millimetre 
to  2  centimetres.  This  experiment  shows  that  the  amount  of 
excited  activity  depends  only  on  the  amount  of  emanation,  emitted 
from  the  thoria;  for  the  ionization  produced  with  a  distance  of 
2  centimetres  between  the  plates  is  about  ten  times  as  great  as 
with  a  distance  of  1  millimetre. 

168.  If  a  platinum  wire  is  made  active  by  exposure  to  the 
emanation  of  thoria,  its  activity1  can  be  removed  by  treating  the 
wire  with  certain  acids.  For  example,  the  activity  is  not  much 
altered  by  immersing  the  wire  in  hot  or  cold  water  or  nitric  acid, 
but  more  than  80%  of  it  is  removed  by  dilute  or  concentrated 
solutions  of  sulphuric  or  hydrochloric  acid.  The  activity  has  not 
been  destroyed  by  this  treatment  but  is  manifested  in  the  solution. 
If  the  solution  is  evaporated,  the  activity  remains  behind  on  the 
dish. 

These  results  show  that  the  excited  activity  is  due  to  a  deposit 
on  the  surface  of  bodies  of  radio-active  matter  which  has  definite 
properties  as  regards  solution  in  acids.  This  active  matter  is 
dissolved  in  some  acids,  but,  when  the  solvent  is  evaporated,  the 
active  matter  is  left  behind.  This  active  matter  is  deposited  on 
the  surface  of  bodies,  for  it  can  be  partly  removed  by  rubbing  the 
body  with  a  cloth,  and  almost  completely  by  scouring  the  plate 

1  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1900. 


256  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

with  sand  or  emery  paper.  The  amount  of  active  matter  deposited 
is  extremely  small,  for  no  difference  of  weight  has  been  detected 
in  a  platinum  wire  when  made  extremely  active.  On  examining 
the  wire  under  a  microscope,  no  trace  of  foreign  matter  is  observed. 
It  follows  from  these  results  that  the  matter  which  causes  excited 
activity  is  many  thousand  times  more  active,  weight  for  weight, 
than  radium  itself. 

It  is  convenient  to  have  a  definite  name  for  this  radio-active 
matter,  for  the  term  "  excited  activity  "  only  refers  to  the  radiation 
from  the  active  matter  and  not  to  the  matter  itself.  Since  the 
matter  which  produces  the  phenomena  of  excited  radio-activity  is 
derived  from  the  emanation  of  thorium  and  of  radium,  the  name 
emanation  X  will  be  given  to  it.  This  is  chosen  from  analogy  to  the 
active  products  Ur  X  and  Th  X  which  are  continuously  produced 
from  uranium  and  thorium  respectively.  The  emanation  X  from 
thorium  is  different  in  chemical  and  other  properties  from  the 
emanation  X  from  radium.  For  example,  each  type  of  matter  has 
a  distinctive  rate  of  decay  of  activity,  as  well  as  some  differences 
in  solubility  by  acids. 

On  the  view  developed  in  section  127,  the  emanation  X  is  the 
residue  left  behind  from  each  atom  of  the  emanation  of  thorium 
or  of  radium  after  one  or  more  a  particles  have  been  expelled.  The 
emanation  X  is  an  unstable  substance,  and  its  atoms  again  break 
up,  giving  rise  to  "excited  activity,"  i.e.  to  the  radiation  from 
"  emanation  X." 

The  emanation  X  is  quite  distinct  in  chemical  and  physical 
properties  from  the  emanation  which  produces  it.  For  example, 
emanation  X  behaves  as  a  solid,  which  is  deposited  on  the  surface 
of  bodies,  while  the  emanation  exists  in  the  gaseous  state.  The 
emanation  is  insoluble  in  hydrochloric  or  sulphuric  acids,  while 
emanation  X  is  readily  soluble  in  both. 

169.     Decay  of  the  excited  activity  produced  by  thorium. 

The  excited  activity  produced  in  a  body  after  a  long  exposure  to 
the  emanations  of  thorium,  decays  in  an  exponential  law  with  the 
time,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  11  hours.  The  following  table 
shows  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity  produced  on  a  brass 
rod. 


IX] 


EXCITED  RADIO-ACTIVITY 


257 


Time  in  hours 
0 

7-9 
11-8 
23-4 
29-2 
32-6 
49-2 
62-1 
71-4 


Current 

100 
64 
47-4 
19-6 
13-8 
10-3 
3-7 
1-86 
0-86 


The  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  49,  Curve  A. 


100 


40        60        8O       100 
Time  in  Hours 
Fig.  49. 

The  intensity  of  the  radiation  /  after  any  time  t  is  given  by 
—  =  e~u  where  \  is  the  radio-active  constant. 

The  rate  of  decay  of  excited  activity,  like  that  of  the  activity  of 
other  radio-active  products,  is  not  appreciably  affected  by  change  of 
conditions.  The  rate  of  decay  is  independent  of  the  concentration  of 
the  excited  activity,  and  of  the  material  of  the  body  in  which  it  is 
produced.  It  is  independent  also  of  the  nature  and  pressure  of  the 


R.  R.-A. 


17 


258  EXCITED   KADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH 

gas  in  which  it  decays.  The  rate  of  decay  is  unchanged  whether 
the  excited  activity  is  produced  on  the  body  with  or  without  an 
electric  field. 

The  amount  of  excited  activity  produced  on  a  body  increases 
at  first  with  the  time,  but  reaches  a  maximum  after  an  exposure 
of  several  days.  An  example  of  the  results  is  given  in  the  following 
table.  In  this  experiment,  a  rod  was  made  the  cathode  in  a  closed 
vessel  containing  thoria.  It  was  removed  at  intervals  for  the  short 
time  necessary  to  test  its  activity  and  then  replaced. 

Time  in  hours  Current 

1-58  6'3 

3'25  10-5 

5-83  29 

9-83  40 

14-00  59 

23-41  77 

29-83  83 

47-00  90 

72-50  95 

96-00  100 

These  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Curve  B,  Fig.  49.  It  is 
seen  that  the  decay  and  recovery  curves  may  be  represented 
approximately  by  the  following  equations. 

For  the  decay  curve  A,          -=-  =  e~xt. 

^o 

For  the  recovery  curve  B,      ^  =  1  —  e~^. 

J-Q 

The  two  curves  are  thus  complementary  to  one  another ;  they 
are  connected  in  the  same  way  as  the  decay  and  recovery  curves  of 
Ur  X,  and  are  susceptible  of  a  similar  explanation. 

The  amount  of  excited  radio-activity  reaches  a  maximum  value 
when  the  rate  of  supply  of  fresh  radio-active  particles  balances  the 
rate  of  change  of  those  already  deposited. 

170.  Excited  radio-activity  produced  by  a  short  ex- 
posure. The  initial  portion  of  the  recovery  curve  B,  Fig.  49,  is 
not  accurately  represented  by  the  above  equation.  The  activity 
for  the  first  few  hours  increases  more  slowly  than  would  be 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  259 

expected  from  the  equation.  This  result,  however,  is  completely 
explained  in  the  light  of  later  results.  The  writer1  found  that,  for 
a  short  exposure  of  a  body  to  the  thorium  emanation,  the  excited 
activity  upon  it  after  removal,  instead  of  at  once  decaying  at  the 
normal  rate,  increased  for  several  hours.  In  some  cases  the  activity 
of  the  body  increased  three  to  four  times  its  original  value  in  the 
course  of  a  few  hours  and  then  decayed  with  the  time. 

Some  of  the  results  obtained  are  shown  in  the  following  tables. 
Table  I.  is  for  a  platinum  wire  exposed  as  cathode  for  15  minutes; 
Table  II.  for  aluminium  foil  with  41  minutes'  exposure  to  the 
emanation.  About  5  minutes  elapsed  between  removal  and  the 
first  observation. 

TABLE  I.  TABLE  II. 

Time  Current  Time  Current 

01  01 

7*5  minutes  1-5  21  minutes  T6 

24  „  2-1  31         „         1-8 

43  „  2-4  57         „         2-0 

58          „  2-7  70         „         2-2 

78  „  3-1  91         „         2-5 

99          „  3-4  120         „         2-9 

160         „         2-9 
180         „         2-9 
22     hours     1*0 
49         „  -21 

The  initial  current  is,  in  each  case,  taken  as  unity.  In  Table  II. 
the  activity  after  increasing  nearly  to  three  times  its  original  value 
decreases  again  at  about  the  normal  rate,  falling  to  half  value  in 
about  11  hours. 

With  a  longer  time  of  exposure  to  the  emanation,  the  ratio  of 
the  increase  after  removal  is  much  less  marked.  For  a  long 
interval  of  exposure,  the  activity  after  removal  begins  at  once  to 
diminish.  In  this  case,  the  increase  of  activity  of  the  matter 
deposited  in  the  last  few  hours  does  not  compensate  for  the 
decrease  of  activity  of  the  active  matter  as  a  whole,  and  conse- 
quently the  activity  at  once  commences  to  decay.  This  increase  of 
activity  with  time  explains  the  initial  irregularity  in  the  recovery 
1  Phys.  Zeit.  3,  No.  12,  p.  254,  1902.  Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  1903. 

17—2 


260 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


curve,  for  the  active  matter  deposited  during  the  first  few  hours 
takes  some  time  to  reach  its  maximum  activity,  and  the  initial 
activity  is,  in  consequence,  smaller  than  would  be  expected  from 
the  equation. 

The  increase  of  activity  on  a  rod  exposed  for  a  short  interval  in 
the  presence  of  the  thorium  emanation  has  been  further  investigated 
by  Miss  Brooks.  The  curve  C  in  Fig.  50  shows  the  variation  with 
time  of  the  activity  of  a  brass  rod  exposed  for  10  minutes  in  the 
emanation  vessel  rilled  with  dust-free  air.  The  excited  activity 
after  removal  increased  in  the  course  of  3'7  hours  to  five  times  its 
initial  value,  and  afterwards  decayed  at  the  normal  rate. 


IOC 


80 


7 


20 


0   E      40        80        120       160       200       240       280      320 

Time  in  Minutes 
Fig.  50. 

171.    Effect  of  dust  on  the  distribution  of  excited  activity. 

Miss  Brooks,  working  in  the  Cavendish  Laboratory,  observed  that 
the  excited  activity  due  to  the  thorium  emanation  appeared  in 
some  cases  on  the  anode  in  an  electric  field,  and  that  the  distribu- 
tion of  excited  activity  varied  in  an  apparently  capricious  manner. 
This  effect  was  finally  traced  to  the  presence  of  dust  in  the  air  of 
the  emanation  vessel.  For  example,  with  an  exposure  of  5  minutes 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  261 

the  amount  of  excited  activity  to  be  observed  on  a  rod  depended 
on  the  time  that  the  air  had  been  allowed  to  remain  undisturbed 
in  the  emanation  vessel  beforehand.  The  effect  increased  with  the 
time  of  standing,  and  was  a  maximum  after  about  18  hours.  The 
amount  of  excited  activity  obtained  on  the  rod  was  then  about 
20  times  as  great  as  the  amount  observed  for  air  freshly  introduced. 
The  activity  of  this  rod  did  not  increase  after  removal,  but  with 
fresh  air,  the  excited  activity,  for  a  5  minutes'  exposure,  increased 
to  five  or  six  times  its  initial  value. 

This  anomalous  behaviour  was  found  to  be  due  to  the  presence 
of  dust  particles  in  the  air  of  the  vessel,  in  which  the  bodies  were 
made  radio-active.  These  particles  of  dust,  when  shut  up  in  the 
presence  of  the  emanation,  become  radio-active.  When  a  nega- 
tively charged  rod  is  introduced  into  the  vessel,  a  part  of  the 
radio-active  dust  is  concentrated  on  the  rod  and  its  activity  is 
added  to  the  normal  activity  produced  on  the  wire.  After  the  air 
in  the  vessel  has  been  left  undisturbed  for  an  interval  sufficiently 
long  to  allow  each  of  the  particles  of  dust  to  reach  a  state  of  radio- 
active equilibrium,  on  the  application  of  an  electric  field,  all  the 
positively  charged  dust  particles  will  at  once  be  carried  to  the 
negative  electrode.  The  activity  of  the  electrode  at  once  com- 
mences to  decay,  since  the  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  dust  particles 
on  the  wire  quite  masks  the  initial  rise  of  the  normal  activity 
produced  on  the  wire. 

Part  of  the  radio-active  dust  is  also  carried  to  the  anode,  and 
the  proportion  increases  with  the  length  of  time  during  which  the 
air  has  been  undisturbed.  The  greatest  amount  obtained  on  the 
anode  was  about  60°/0  of  that  on  the  cathode. 

These  anomalous  effects  were  found  to  disappear  if  the  air  was 
made  dust-free  by  passing  through  a  plug  of  glass  wool,  or  by 
application  for  some  time  of  a  strong  electric  field. 

172.  Decay  of  excited  activity  from  radium.  The  excited 
activity  produced  on  bodies  by  exposure  to  the  radium  emanation 
decays  much  more  rapidly  than  the  thorium  excited  activity.  For 
short  times  of  exposure1  to  the  emanation  the  decay  curve  is  very 
irregular.  This  is  shown  in  Fig.  51. 

1  Rutherford  and  Miss  Brooks,  Phil.  Mag.  July,  1902. 


262 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


It  was  found  that  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  decreased 
rapidly  for  the  first  10  minutes  after  removal,  but  about  15  minutes 
after  removal  reached  a  value  which  is  maintained  nearly  constant 
for  an  interval  of  about  20  minutes.  It  then  decays,  following  an 


40 


120 


140 


60      80     100 
Time  in  Minutes 

Fig.  51. 

exponential  law  to  zero,  the  intensity  falling  to  half  value  in  about 
30  minutes.  With  longer  times  of  exposure,  the  irregularities 
in  the  curve  are  not  so  marked. 

Later,  P.  Curie  and  Danne1  made  a  detailed  investigation  of  the 
decay  of  excited  activity  for  times  of  exposure  to  the  emanation 
from  10  seconds  to  6  days.  The  results  are  shown  graphically 
in  Fig.  52,  where  the  ordinates  represent  the  logarithm  of  the 
intensity  of  the  radiation,  and  the  abscissae  time  in  hours.  Curve 
A  represents  the  decay  for  a  long  time  of  exposure.  This  decay 

1  C.  R.  136,  p.  364,  1903. 


IX] 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


263 


curve  is  unaltered  for  all  times  of  exposure  to  the  emanation  greater 
than  24  hours. 

After  an  interval  of  2*5  hours,  the  logarithmic  decay  curve  for 
long  times  of  exposure  is  a  straight  line,  i.e.  the  activity  falls  off 
in  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in 
28  minutes.  P.  Curie  and  Danne  found  that  for  any  time  t 


Time  in  Hourg 
Fig.  52. 


after  removal  the  intensity  It  was  given  by  the  difference  of  two 
exponentials,  viz. 


where  Xj  =  ^^  and  X2  =  y^.  with  the  second  as  the  unit  of  time. 
The  numerical  constant  a  =  4*20.  The  explanation  of  this  law  of 
decay  is  given  in  section  177. 

The  decay  curve  varies  greatly  with  the  time  of  exposure.    For 
example,  in  an  exposure  of  5  minutes,  the  activity  at  first  decreases 


264  EXCITED  KADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

very  rapidly,  then  passes  through  a  minimum  after  8  minutes,  and 
increases  to  a  maximum  after  40  minutes,  and  after  2'5  hours 
decays  in  an  exponential  law  to  zero1.  As  in  the  case  of  the  excited 
activity  from  thorium,  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity 
from  radium  is  for  the  most  part  independent  of  the  nature  of  the 
body  made  active.  Curie  and  Danne  (loc.  cit.)  observed  that  the 
active  bodies  gave  off  an  emanation  itself  capable  of  exciting 
activity  in  neighbouring  bodies.  This  property  rapidly  disappeared 
and  was  inappreciable  2  hours  after  removal.  In  certain  substances 
like  celluloid  and  caoutchouc,  the  decay  of  activity  is  very  much 
slower  than  for  the  metals.  This  effect  becomes  more  marked 
with  increase  of  time  of  exposure  to  the  emanation.  A  similar 
effect  is  exhibited  by  lead,  but  to  a  less  marked  degree.  During 
the  time  the  activity  lasts,  these  substances  continue  to  give  off 
an  emanation. 

It  is  probable  that  these  divergencies  from  the  general  law  are 
not  due  to  an  actual  change  in  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  true  excited 
activity  but  to  an  occlusion  of  the  emanation  by  these  substances 
during  the  interval  of  exposure.  After  exposure  the  emanation 
gradually  diffuses  out,  and  thus  the  activity  due  to  this  occluded 
emanation  and  the  excited  activity  produced  by  it  decays  very 
slowly  with  the  time. 

173.     Excited  radio-activity  of  very  slow  decay.    M.  and 

Mme  Curie2  have  observed  that  bodies  which  have  been  exposed 
for  a  long  interval  in  the  presence  of  the  radium  emanation  do  not 
lose  all  their  activity.  The  excited  activity  at  first  decays  rapidly 
at  the  normal  rate,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  30  minutes,  but  a 
residual  activity  always  remains  of  the  order  of  1/20,000  of  the 
initial  activity.  This  residual  activity  either  does  not  diminish 
at  all,  or  so  slowly  that  the  decrease  is  not  appreciable  after 
an  interval  of  six  months. 

1  The  writer  has  not  observed  the  rise  to  a  maximum  found  by  Curie  and 
Danne  for  the  decay  curves  of  the  excited  activity  due  to  radium  (see  Fig.  52),  but 
has  always  obtained  curves  of  decay,  for  short  exposures,  similar  to  that  shown  in 
Fig.  51.     This  has  been  the  case  whether  the  excited  activity  has  been  produced  on 
a  body  by  the  action  of  an  electric  field  or  not.    In  the  experiments,  a  slow  current 
of  air  was  always  passed  through  the  testing  apparatus  to  remove  any  emanation 
from  the  body  made  active. 

2  Thesis,  Paris,  1903,  p.  116. 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  265 

Giesel1  has  also  observed  that  a  platinum  wire  which  has  been 
exposed  in  the  presence  of  the  radium  emanation  possesses  residual 
activity,  and  he  has  shown  that  the  radiation  consists  entirely  of 
a  rays.  A  further  discussion  of  this  residual  activity  and  its 
possible  connection  with  polonium  is  given  later  in  section  188. 

174.  Connection  between  decay  curves  for  different 
times  of  exposure.  The  decay  of  excited  activity,  in  cases 
where  there  is  no  occlusion  of  the  emanation  by  the  substance 
made  active,  is  a  function  only  of  the  time  of  exposure.  The 
decay  curves  are  all  intimately  connected  with  each  other,  and  can 
be  theoretically  deduced  provided  the  decay  curve  for  a  very  short 
exposure  is  accurately  known. 

It  is  supposed  that  the  excited  activity  produced  on  a  body  is 
due  to  a  deposit  of  radio-active  particles.  On  an  average  a  certain 
number  of  these  particles  will  break  up  per  second,  giving  rise 
to  rays  which  ionize  the  gas.  If  a  large  number  of  particles  is 
deposited,  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  iff  the  gas  by  the  rays  will 
be  practically  a  continuous  function  of  the  time.  The  rate  of  pro- 
duction of  ions,  at  any  time,  divided  by  the  total  number  of  radio- 
active particles  deposited,  will  be  called  the  average  number  of 
ions  produced  by  each  particle  at  that  time. 

Suppose  the  radio-active  particles  which  cause  excited  activity 
are  deposited  at  a  uniform  rate  of  q  per  second.  The  number 
deposited  in  a  short  time  dt  =  qdt. 

Let  n0  =  the  average  number  of  ions  produced  in  the  gas  per 
second  by  each  particle,  at  the  instant  of  removal. 

n  =  the  average  number  of  ions  per  particle  per  second 
after  an  interval  t. 

Suppose  n  =  w0/(0  where  f(t)  is  a  function  of  t  such  that 
f(t)  =  1  when  t  =  0, 
f(t)  =  0  when  £  =  oo  , 

f(t)  may  in  some  cases  pass  through  a  maximum  value  greater 
than  unity.     The  variation  of  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  with 

1  Ber.  deutsch.  Chem.  Ges.  p.  2368,  1903.     Chem.  News,  Aug.  7,  1903. 


266  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

time  is  supposed  to  include  the  effects  of  different  kinds  of 
radiation  emitted  during  the  succession  of  changes  which  may 
occur. 

The  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  after  a  time  t  by  the 
active  particles  deposited  for  the  first  short  interval  of  exposure  is 
given  by  qn0f(t)dt. 

The  number  Nt  of  ions  produced  per  second  at  the  time  t  by 
the  radio-active  matter  deposited  during  the  interval  t  is  given  by 

y(0  «fc 

o 

A  steady  state  is  reached  when  the  rate  of  supply  of  fresh  ions 
per  second  by  the  addition  of  the  radio-active  material  is  balanced 
by  the  rate  of  diminution  of  the  production  of  ions  by  the  excited 
radiation  as  a  whole.  This  steady  state  is  reached  after  a  long 
interval  of  exposure,  and  the  maximum  rate  of  production  of  ions 
N0  is  given  by 


f(t)dt, 

o 

and 

'      '"     V   Nt  />* 
~ 


r°7 

J  0 


If  the  curve  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity  for  a  very  short 
exposure  is  plotted  with  the  ionization  current  as  ordinate  and 
time  as  abscissa,  as  in  Fig.  51,  the  values  of  these  integrals  are  at 
once  determined  from  the  experimental  curve  by  measuring  the 
area  included  between  the  curve  and  the  ordinates  erected  at  the 
points  corresponding  to  the  time  limits  of  the  integrals. 

The  curve  of  rise  of  excited  activity  can  thus  be  deduced  from 
the  decay  curve  and  vice  versd. 

Nl}  the  rate  of  production  of  ions  due  to  the  excited  radiation, 
after  removal  from  the  emanation  for  a  time  tl}  is  given  by 


f(t)dt, 

.*, 

if  t  is  the  time  of  exposure. 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  267 

If  N  is  the  number  of  ions  produced  immediately  after  removal, 


. 

('f(t)dt 

.'0 


The  decay  curve  for  any  time  of  exposure  can  thus  also  be 
deduced  from  the  curve  of  decay  for  a  short  exposure.  For  a  very 
long  interval  of  exposure  the  value  J^  at  a  time  t  after  removal  is 
given  by 


AT 
° 


rx 
f(f)dt 

JO 


Now  the  curve  of  rise  -^  is  given  by 

Nt     j'f(t)dt 

N°     /"/(*)*' 

Jo 

Thus  *  ~  F  =  F  ' 

Thus   the   decay  and  rise  curves  are  very  simply  connected, 
whatever  the  law  of  decay  of  the  radiations.     This  relation  may 
be  expressed  as  follows :  For  a  long  exposure,  the  percentage  activity     Y 
lost  after  removal  for  a  time  t  is  equal  to  the  percentage  of  the  final 
activity  gained  by  a  body  exposed  during  the  same  interval. 

This  result,  which  has  already  been  shown  to  apply  to  the 
decay  and  recovery  curves  of  Ur  X,  Th  X,  and  other  radio-active 
products,  is  of  general  application  to  all  cases  of  radio-active 
change  when  the  rate  of  supply  is  a  constant.  The  connection 
between  the  decay  curves  of  radium  and  thorium  excited  activity, 
for  different  times  of  exposure,  can  also  be  shown  to  hold  equally 
for  all  types  of  active  products. 

The  relation  that  holds  between  the  decay  and  recovery  curves 
can  easily  be  deduced  from  a  priori  considerations. 


268  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  a  body  has  been  exposed  for 
a  long  interval  in  a  vessel  containing  a  constant  quantity  of  the 
radium  emanation.  The  excited  activity  in  the  body  will  have 
reached  a  maximum  value  when  the  rate  of  supply  is  balanced  by 
the  rate  of  change.  Suppose  this  body  is  removed  and  an  exactly 
similar  body  immediately  substituted.  The  sum  of  the  excited 
activity  on  these  two  bodies  will  at  any  time  be  the  same  as  on 
the  single  body  before  removal.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  there 
would  be  a  change  in  energy  of  the  radiations  from  the  radio- 
active system,  as  a  whole,  purely  by  removal  of  one  body  and 
substitution  of  another.  This  is  contrary  to  the  general  experi- 
mental fact  that  the  processes  occurring  in  radio-activity  are 
independent  of  control,  and  that  the  radiation  from  a  system  in 
radio-active  equilibrium  remains  constant. 

Thus  if  It  =  intensity  of  radiation  from  the  excited  body  at  any 
time  t  after  removal. 

It  =  intensity  of  radiation  from  the  new  body  exposed 
under  the  same  conditions  for  a  time  t. 

Then  It  +  //  =  /0  where  /0  is  the  initial  activity  on  the  removed 
body. 

Thus  1  — j-  ~  ~f  >  which  is  the  same  relation  that  has  been 

*0  ^0 

developed  from  other  considerations. 

These  results  are  particular  cases  of  what  may  be  termed  the 
"  conservation  of  radio-activity,"  which  is  discussed  in  detail  in 
section  196. 

175.  Theory  of  successive  changes.  It  has  been  pointed 
out  that  the  excited  activity  produced  in  a  body  exposed  for  a  very 
short  interval  in  the  presence  of  the  thorium  or  radium  emana- 
tions does  not  decay  according  to  a  simple  exponential  law.  In 
the  case  of  a^ody^^dJgdJcgLJ^  activity 

increases  for  a  few  hours,  passes  through  a  maximum  where  the 
activity  is  five  to  six  times  the  initial  value,  and  then  slowly  decays 
in  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  after 
a  further  interval  of  11  hours.  After  the  maximum  is  reached, 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  269 

the  activity  decays  at  the  normal  rate  observed  for  bodies  exposed 
for  a  long  interval  in  the  presence  of  the  thorium  emanation. 

The  increase  of  activity  with  time  cannot  be  ascribed  to  a 
possible  occlusion  of  the  radio-active  matter  in  the  pores  of  the 
substance  and  a  gradual  passage  to  the  surface  after  removal; 
for  it  has  been  found  that  a  very  thin  sheet  of  aluminium  foil, 
which  absorbs  very  little  of  the  radiation,  exhibits  the  same  effect 
as  a  solid  plate.  The  effect  is,  however,  similar  in  some  respects 
to  the  increase  of  activity  with  time  observed  in  a  closed  vessel  in 
which  the  radium  emanation  has  been  introduced.  This  is  known 
to  be  due  to  the  production  from  the  emanation  of  radio-active 
matter,  which  is  deposited  on  the  walls  of  the  vessel  and  adds  its 
radiation  to  that  of  the  emanation  proper.  In  a  similar  way  the 
activity  of  Th  X  increases  for  the  first  day  after  separation  from 
the  thorium,  and  this  is  ascribed  (see  section  190)  to  the  produc- 
tion of  excited  activity  in  the  mass  of  the  Th  X. 

The  most  probable  explanation  of  the  initial  increase  of  activity 
with  time,  observed  for  the  excited  activity  produced  by  the  thorium 
emanation,  is  that  there  are  two  successive  changes  occurring  in 
the  emanation  X  of  thorium  after  the  deposit  of  the  active  matter 
on  the  surface  of  the  body. 

The  theory  of  these  secondary  changes  will  now  be  considered. 
Let  n0  be  the  number  of  radio-active  particles  deposited  on  the 
body  during  the  exposure  to  the  emanation.  The  exposure  is 
supposed  to  be  so  short  that  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the 
particles  have  undergone  change  during  the  time  of  exposure. 
These  particles  are  supposed  to  undergo  change  in  an  exponen- 
tial law  with  the  time,  and  the  product  of  the  first  change  to 
break  up  again  according  to  the  same  law,  but  at  a  different  rate. 
Let  X,,  A  2  be  the  constants  of  the  first  and  second  changes  respec- 
tively. After  removal  for  a  time  t,  the  number  n  of  particles 
remaining  unchanged  is  given  by 

the  number  which  change  in  the  time  dt  at  the  time  t  is  given  by 


Some  of  this  number  at  once  begin  to  go  through  the  second 


270  EXCITED    RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

change,  but  the  number  which  has  undergone  the  first  but  not  the 
second  change  at  the  time  T  after  removal  is  given  by 

~V  dt. 


The  number  q  of  particles  which  have  undergone  the  first  of 
the  two  changes  at  a  time  T  after  removal  is  thus  given  by 


r 

1^0     e~' 
Jo 


^-V 

Now  the  number  of  these  particles  breaking  up  in  unit  time  is 
proportional  to  A^,  and  is  a  measure  of  the  radiation  accompany- 
ing the  change  (section  124). 

If  K  is  the  ratio  of  the  ionization  produced  in  the  second 
change  to  that  produced  in  the  first  change,  the  saturation  current 
It  resulting  from  the  two  successive  changes  is  given  by 

It  _  AjJlo* 

T,- 


where  /0  is  the  initial  value  of  the  saturation  current. 

This  equation  will  be  applied  later  with  satisfactory  results 
in  section  190,  to  explain  the  rise  of  activity  of  Th  X  after  its 
separation. 

176.  On  examination  of  the  curve  shown  in  Fig.  50,  which 
shows  the  rise  of  activity  of  a  rod  exposed  for  ten  minutes  in  the 
presence  of  the  thorium  emanation,  it  is  seen  that  the  curve  C, 
showing  a  rise  to  a  maximum,  is  roughly  similar  to  the  curves  of 
recovery  of  uranium  and  thorium  when  the  Ur  X  and  Th  X 
respectively  have  been  removed.  If  the  curve  is  produced  back- 
wards, it  is  seen  to  pass  very  nearly  through  the  origin.  The 
abscissae  measure  the  time  from  the  moment  the  rod  was  intro- 
duced into  the  emanation  vessel. 

If  the  increase  of  activity  with  time  is  due  to  a  secondary 
change  of  the  type  already  considered,  it  follows  at  once  that  the 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  271 

total  number  of  ions  produced  during  the  first  change  is  not  much 
more  than  one  per  cent,  of  that  produced  in  the  second  change. 
If,  for  example,  the  initial  activity  be  taken  as  due  to  the  radia- 
tion from  the  first  change,  the  activity  due  to  the  first  change 
alone  should  fall  off  in  an  exponential  law  with  the  time, 
following  the  dotted  curve  D  shown  in  Fig.  50.  The  area 
EABE  serves  as  a  comparative  measure  of  the  total  number 
of  ions  produced  by  the  first  change,  and  this  area  is  seen  to 
be  small  compared  to  the  corresponding  area  included  by  the 
main  curve  C. 

There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  first  change  is 
accompanied  by  any  ionizing  radiation  at  all.  The  initial  activity 
observed  is  due  to  the  fact  that  some  of  the  deposited  matter  has 
undergone  change  before  the  rod  is  tested  ;  for  it  will  be  shown 
that  the  experimental  curve  obtained  can  be  completely  deduced 
if  the  first  change  is  supposed  to  take  place  without  any  emission 
of  ionizing  rays,  but  that  ionizing  rays  are  emitted  in  the  second 
change. 

It  has  been  shown  that  after  removal  of  the  body  for  a  time  T 
the  number  of  particles  q  which  have  undergone  the  first  change 
but  not  the  second  change  is  given  by 


where  Xx  is  the  constant  of  decay  in  the  first  change  and  Xj  for  the 
second  change. 

Since  it  is  supposed  that  only  the  second  change  gives  rise  to 
a  radiation,  the  activity  at  any  time  T  after  removal  is  propor- 
tional to  q.  The  value  of  q  passes  through  a  maximum  when 


i.e.  when  —  =  e~^~^T. 

A,! 

Now  it  is  known,  from  experiments  for  a  long  interval  of  ex- 
posure, that  in  the  second  change  the  activity  falls  to  half  value 
in  11  hours,  i.e.  X^'063,  when  the  time  is  expressed  in  hours. 
Since  the  maximum  activity  is  reached  when  T  =  220  minutes 
approximately,  the  value  of  AJ  =  '75.  Substituting  the  values  of 


272 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


Xj,  Xa  in  the  equation  for  q,  the  theoretical  value  of  the  activity  for 
any  time  T  after  exposure  is  shown  in  the  following  table.  The 
observed  experimental  values  are  also  shown.  The  maximum 
activity  is  taken  as  unity. 


Time  in 
minutes 

Theoretical  value 
of  activity 

Observed  value 
of  activity 

15 

•22 

•23 

30 

•38 

•37 

60 

•64 

•63 

120 

•90 

•91 

220 

1-00 

1-00 

305 

•97 

•96 

The  curve  drawn  from  zero  is  thus  almost  in  exact  agreement 
with  the  equation,  taking  \  —  '75. 

It  may  thus  be  concluded  that  the  matter  emanation  X  under- 
goes at  least  two  changes : — 

(1)  A  change  which  is  not  accompanied  by  ionizing  radia- 
tions,  but   in   which   the   amount   of   matter   undergoes   change 
according  to  an  exponential   law  with   the  time,  falling  to  half 
value  in  55  minutes. 

(2)  A  second  change,  accompanied  by  the  emission  of  rays,  in 
which  half  the  matter  undergoes  change  in  11  hours. 

The  existence  of  such  a  well-marked  change  in  the  matter 
emanation  X  of  thorium,  not  accompanied  by  the  emission  of 
ionizing  rays,  is  very  interesting.  It  will  be  shown  later  that 
there  is  strong  evidence  of  a  change  of  a  similar  character  in  the 
emanation  X  of  radium.  It  may  be  supposed  that  the  change 
consists  in  a  rearrangement  of  the  components  of  the  atom 
which  is  not  of  such  a  violent  character  as  to  cause  a  portion  of 
the  atom  to  be  expelled.  Since  there  is  only  one  changing  system 
involved,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  law  of  change  would  be  the 
same  as  for  a  monomolecular  change  in  chemistry. 

177.  Secondary  changes  in  emanation  X  of  radium. 
The  decay  curves  of  the  activity  produced  on  a  rod  by  a  short 
exposure  to  the  radium  emanation  are  of  a  very  different  character 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  273 

from  those  observed  from  thorium.  In  the  first  place,  there  is 
a  rapid  decay  of  the  activity  to  less  than  1/8  of  the  initial  value, 
then  a  very  slow  variation  for  about  20  minutes,  and  then  a  gradual 
decay  according  to  an  exponential  law.  It  is  not  possible  to  explain 
this  variation  of  the  activity  on  the  assumption  of  two  changes.  It 
is  necessary  to  suppose  that  there  are  three,  the  second  of  which  is 
a  change  not  accompanied  by  ionizing  rays. 

Some  evidence  will  first  be  considered  of  the  decay  of  activity 
of  a  body  exposed  for  several  days  in  the  presence  of  the  radium 
emanation.  P.  Curie  and  Danne  (loc.  cit.)  state  that  the  law  of 
decay  of  the  activity  of  such  a  body  is  expressed  accurately  by 
the  equation 


where  ^i  =  x^  =  Ts>     an(i  a  =  4'20. 


Curie  and  Danne  do  not  state  definitely  whether  the  law  of 
decay  holds  for  the  first  ten  minutes  after  'removal.  The  shape  of 
the  decay  curve  for  short  exposure  suggests  from  theoretical  con- 
siderations that  there  should  be  in  addition  a  small  but  rapid 
initial  drop  of  activity  during  the  first  ten  minutes  after  removal. 
Such  a  rapid  initial  drop  of  activity  has  been  experimentally 
observed  by  the  writer. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  equation  of  P.  Curie  and  Danne 
applies  for  the  decay  of  excited  activity  starting  from  a  time  about 
ten  minutes  after  removal.  During  that  short  interval  the  un- 
changed deposited  matter  rapidly  passes  through  the  first  change, 
for  half  the  matter  is  changed  in  about  three  minutes.  At  the 
time  at  which  the  measurements  of  Curie  and  Danne  began, 
probably  nearly  all  of  the  deposited  matter  had  gone  through  the 
first  change. 

Since  the  decay  of  activity  after  that  time  can  be  expressed  by 
two  exponentials,  it  is  probable  that  there  are  two  farther  changes 
occurring.  The  view  that  the.  first  of  these  changes  is  a  change 
unaccompanied  by  ionizing  rays,  followed  by  another  change  with 
the  emission  of  rays,  will  be  found  to  be  in  very  close  agreement 
with  the  results  of  P.  Curie  and  Danne.  It  has  been  shown 
that,  after  a  short  exposure  for  a  time  dt  to  the  emanation,  during 
R.  R.-A.  18 


274  EXCITED   KA DIG- ACTIVITY  [CH. 

which  n0  particles  were  deposited  on  the  body,  the  number  q  of 
particles  which  have  passed  through  the  first  change  but  not  the 
second  is  at  any  time  T  given  by 


=«./(«). 

(See  section  174.) 

But,  since  only  the  second  change  is  accompanied  by  rays,  the 
intensity  of  the  radiation  is  always  proportional  to  q  the  number 
unchanged,  i.e.  to  n0f(t). 

It  has  been  shown  in  section  174  that,  for  a  very  long  exposure, 
the  activity  7f,  after  removal  for  a  time  t,  is  given  by 

dt 


1    n0f(t)dt 
o 


where  70  is  the  initial  intensity  after  removal.     Substituting  the 
value  of  f(t)  and  integrating 


This  is  of  the  same  form  as  the  equation  of  the  decay  curve 
found  by  Curie  and  Danne.  Substituting  the  values  Xj  =  1/2420, 

\2=  1/1860,  which  were  found  by  them,  the  value  of  --  -  —  is  4'3 

Xj  —  X,2 

and  of  --  —  is  3'3. 

A!  —  \2 

The  experimental  value  found  by  Curie  and  Danne  for  these 
constants  was  4'2  and  3'2  respectively.  The  agreement  between 
the  theory  and  the  experiment  is  as  close  as  could  be  expected. 

There  are  thus  three  distinct  changes  in  the  emanation  X  of 
radium,  viz. 

(1)  A  very  rapid  initial  change.     Half  of  the  matter  changes 
in  about  three  minutes  and  is  accompanied  by  ionizing  rays. 

(2)  A  slower  change,  which  is  not  accompanied  by  ionizing 
rays.     Half  of  the  matter  undergoes  change  in  1*£  minutes. 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  275 

(3)  A  third  change,  which  is  faster  than  the  second,  and 
is  accompanied  by  ionizing  rays.  Half  the  matter  changes  in 
about  28  minutes. 

178.  Physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  active 
matter.  On  account  of  the  slow  decay  of  the  activity  of  emana- 
tion X  of  thorium,  its  physical  and  chemical  properties  have  been 
more  closely  examined  than  the  emanation  X  of  radium.  It  has 
already  been  mentioned  that  the  emanation  X  of  thorium  is 
soluble  in  some  acids.  The  writer1  found  that  the  active  matter 
was  dissolved  off  the  wire  by  strong  or  dilute  solutions  of  sul- 
phuric, hydrochloric  and  hydrofluoric  acids,  but  was  only  slightly 
soluble  in  water  or  nitric  acid.  The  active  matter  was  left  behind 
when  the  solvent  was  evaporated.  The  rate  of  decay  of  activity 
was  unaltered  by  dissolving  the  active  matter  in  sulphuric  acid, 
and  allowing  it  to  decay  in  the  solution.  In  the  experiment,  the 
active  matter  was  dissolved  off  an  active  platinum  wire  and  then 
equal  portions  of  the  solutions  were  taken  at  definite  intervals, 
evaporated  down  in  a  platinum  dish,  and  the  activity  of  the  residue 
tested  by  the  electric  method.  The  rate  of  decay  was  found  to  be 
exactly  the  same  as  if  the  active  matter  had  been  left  on  the  wire. 
In  another  experiment,  an  active  platinum  wire  was  made  the 
cathode  in  a  copper  sulphate  solution,  and  a  thin  film  of  copper 
deposited  on  it.  The  rate  of  decay  of  the  activity  was  unchanged 
by  the  process. 

A  detailed  examination  of  the  physical  and  chemical  properties 
of  the  emanation  X  of  thorium  has  been  recently  made  by  F.  von 
Lerch2,  and  some  important  and  interesting  results  have  been 
obtained.  A  solution  of  emanation  X  was  prepared  by  dissolving 
the  metal  which  had  been  exposed  for  some  time  in  the  presence 
of  the  thorium  emanation.  In  most  cases  the  active  matter  was 
precipitated  with  the  metal.  For  example,  an  active  copper  wire 
was  dissolved  in  nitric  acid  and  then  precipitated  by  caustic  potash. 
The  precipitate  was  strongly  active.  An  active  magnesium  wire, 
dissolved  in  hydrochloric  acid  and  then  (precipitated  as  phosphate, 
also  gave  an  active  precipitate.  The  activity  of  the  precipitates 


1  Phys.  Zeit.  3,  No.  12,  p.  254,  1902. 

2  Dnide's  Annal.  Nov.  1903. 


18—2 


276  EXCITED   RADIO- ACTIVITY  [CH. 

decayed  at  the  normal  rate,  i.e.  the  activity  fell  to  half  value  in 
about  11  hours. 

Experiments  were  also  made  on  the  solubility  of  emanation  X 
in  different  substances.  A  platinum  plate  was  made  active  and 
then  placed  in  different  solutions,  and  the  decrease  of  the  activity 
observed.  In  addition  to  the  acids  already  mentioned,  a  large 
number  of  substances  were  found  to  dissolve  the  emanation  X  to 
some  extent.  The  active  matter  was  however  not  dissolved  to  an 
appreciable  extent  in  ether  or  alcohol.  Many  substances  became 
active  if  added  to  the  active  solution  of  emanation  X  and  then 
precipitated.  For  example,  an  active  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid 
was  obtained  by  dissolving  the  emanation  X  from  an  active 
platinum  wire.  Barium  chloride  was  then  added  and  precipitated 
as  sulphate.  The  precipitate  was  strongly  active,  thus  suggesting 
that  the  emanation  X  was  carried  down  by  the  barium. 

179.  Electrolysis  of  solutions.  Dorn  showed  that,  if  solu- 
tions of  radiferous  barium  chloride  were  electrolysed,  both  electrodes 
became  temporarily  active,  but  the  anode  to  a  greater  degree  than 
the  cathode.  F.  von  Lerch  (loc.  cit.)  has  made  a  detailed  examina- 
tion of  the  action  of  electrolysis  on  an  active  solution  of  emanation 
X  of  thorium.  The  active  matter  was  dissolved  off  an  active 
platinum  plate  by  hydrochloric  acid  and  then  electrolysed  between 
platinum  electrodes.  The  cathode  was  very  active,  but  there  was 
no  trace  of  activity  on  the  anode.  The  cathode  lost  its  activity  at 
a  rate  much  faster  than  the  normal.  With  an  amalgamated  zinc 
cathode  on  the  other  hand,  the  rate  of  decay  was  normal.  When 
an  active  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  was  electrolysed  with  an 
electromotive  force  smaller  than  that  required  to  decompose  water, 
the  platinum  became  active  and  the  activity  decayed  to  half  value 
in  4*75  hours  while  the  normal  fall  is  to  half  value  in  11  hours. 
These  results  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  matter  emanation  X 
is  complex  and  consists  of  two  parts  which  have  different  rates  of 
decay  of  activity,  and  can  be  separated  by  electrolysis. 

Under  special  conditions  it  was  found  possible  to  make  the 
anode  active.  This  was  the  case  if  the  anion  attached  itself  to 
the  anode.  For  example,  if  an  active  hydrochloric  solution  was 
electrolysed  with  a  silver  anode,  the  chloride  of  silver  formed  was 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  277 

strongly  active  and  its  activity  decayed  at  a  normal  rate.  Von 
Lerch  found  that  the  amount  of  activity  obtained  by  placing 
different  metals  in  active  solutions  for  equal  times  varied  greatly 
with  the  metal.  For  example,  he  found  that  if  a  zinc  plate  and 
an  amalgamated  zinc  plate,  which  show  equal  potential  differences 
with  regard  to  hydrochloric  acid,  were  dipped  for  equal  times  in 
two  solutions  of  equal  activity,  the  zinc  plate  was  seven  times  as 
active  as  the  other.  The  activity  was  almost  removed  from  the 
solution  in  a  few  minutes  by  dipping  a  zinc  plate  into  it.  Some 
metals  became  active  when  dipped  into  an  active  solution  while 
others  did  not.  Platinum,  palladium,  and  silver  remained  inactive, 
while  copper,  tin,  lead,  nickel,  iron,  zinc,  cadmium,  magnesium, 
and  aluminium  became  active.  These  results  strongly  confirm  the 
view  that  excited  activity  is  due  to  a  deposit  of  active  matter 
which  has  distinctive  chemical  behaviour. 

G.  B.  Pegram1  has  made  a  detailed  study  of  the  active  deposits 
obtained  by  electrolysis  of  pure  and  commercial  thorium  salts. 
The  commercial  thorium  nitrate  obtained  from  P.  de  Haen  gave, 
when  electrolysed,  a  deposit  of  lead  peroxide  on  the  anode.  This 
deposit  was  radio-active,  and  its  activity  decayed  at  the  normal 
rate  of  the  excited  activity  due  to  thorium.  From  solutions  of 
pure  thorium  nitrate,  no  visible  deposit  was  obtained  on  the  anode, 
but  it  was,  however,  found  to  be  radio-active.  The  activity 
decayed  rapidly,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  one  hour.  Some 
experiments  were  also  made  on  the  effect  of  adding  metallic  salts 
to  thorium  solutions  and  then  electrolysing  them.  Anode  and 
cathode  deposits  of  the  oxides  or  metals  obtained  in  this  way  were 
found  to  be  radio-active,  but  the  activity  fell  to  half  value  in  a  few 
minutes.  The  gases  produced  by  electrolysis  were  radio-active, 
but  this  was  due  to  the  presence  of  the  thorium  emanation.  The 
results  of  Pegram  and  von  Lerch  would  seem  to  indicate  that, 
besides  those  already  known,  other  radio-active  products  with 
a  distinctive  rate  of  decay  are  produced  during  the  changes 
occurring  in  thorium. 

180.  Effect  of  temperature.  The  activity  of  a  platinum 
wire  which  has  been  exposed  in  the  presence  of  the  thorium 

1  Phys.  Review,  p.  424,  Dec.  1903. 


278 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


emanation  is  almost  completely  lost  by  heating  the  wire  to  a  white 
heat.  Miss  F.  Gates1  found  that  the  activity  was  not  destroyed 
by  the  intense  heat,  but  manifested  itself  on  neighbouring  bodies. 
When  the  active  wire  was  heated  electrically  in  a  closed  cylinder, 
the  activity  was  transferred  from  the  wire  to  the  interior  surface 
of  the  cylinder  in  unaltered  amount.  The  rate  of  decay  of  the 
activity  was  not  altered  by  the  process.  By  blowing  a  current  of 
air  through  the  cylinder  during  the  heating,  a  part  of  the  active 
matter  was  removed  from  the  cylinder.  Similar  results  were  found 
for  the  excited  activity  due  to  radium. 

F.  von  Lerch  (loc.  cit.)  determined  the  amount  of  activity 
removed  at  different  temperatures.  The  results  are  shown  in  the 
following  table  for  a  platinum  wire  excited  by  the  thorium  ema- 
nation. 


Temperature 

Percentage  of 
activity  removed 

Heated  2  minutes     
then        „      i  minute  more 
»           j>       "%       >»          »»           ••• 

55                      55            U              ?)                   55 

800°  C. 
1020°  C. 
1260°  C. 
1460°  C. 

0 
16 
52 
99 

It  is  not  possible  to  settle  definitely  from  these  experiments 
whether  the  active  matter  is  actually  volatilized  at  a  high  tempe- 
rature or  is  removed  by  disintegration  of  the  surface  of  the  wire. 
All  the  metals  so  far  tried  apparently  lose  their  activity  at  about 
the  same  temperature. 

181.  Emission  of  heat.  It  has  been  shown  in  sections  105, 
106,  and  163,  that  the  radium  emanation,  together  with  the 
secondary  products  which  arise  from  it,  is  responsible  for  about 
75  per  cent,  of  the  total  heat  emission  observed  for  radium. 
The  gradual  decay  to  a  minimum  of  the  heat  emission  of  the 
radium  for  the  first  few  hours  after  the  emanation  is  removed 
is  due  to  the  gradual  decay  of  the  excited  activity  produced  by 
the  occluded  emanation  in  the  radium  itself.  In  a  similar  way,  the 
gradual  increase  of  the  heating  effect  of  the  separated  emanation 

1  Phys.  Review,  p.  300,  1903. 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  279 

for  the  first  few  hours  after  removal,  is  due  to  the  excited  activity 
produced  by  the  emanation  on  the  walls  of  the  containing  vessel. 

Some  experiments  were  recently  made  by  H.  T.  Barnes  and 
the  writer1  on  the  division  of  the  heating  effect  of  radium  between 
the  successive  products  of  radium.  For  measurement  of  the 
heating  effects,  a  pair  of  differential  platinum  thermometers, 
wound  spirally  in  the  inside  of  a  glass  tube,  were  used.  The 
radium  or  its  emanation,  enclosed  in  a  fine  glass  tube,  was 
placed  inside  the  platinum  spiral  and  the  rise  of  temperature 
observed. 

The  heating  effect  of  30  milligrams  of  radium  bromide  was 
first  determined.  The  emanation  was  then  removed  from  it  by 
heating,  and  condensed  in  a  small  glass  tube.  The  heating  effect 
of  the  de-emanated  radium  was  determined  ten  minutes  after  the 
removal  of  the  emanation,  and  was  found  to  have  diminished  to 
59  per  cent,  of  its  original  value.  It  then  diminished  more  slowly 
with  time  to  a  minimum  corresponding  to  25  per  cent,  of  its 
original  value  (see  section  106). 

The  curve  of  diminution  with  time  of  the  heating  effect  of 
radium  to  the  minimum  of  25  per  cent,  should  be  identical  with 
the  corresponding  curve  of  diminution  with  time  of  the  heating 
effect  of  the  emanation  tube  to  zero  after  removal  of  the  emanation. 
This  was  found  to  be  the  case.  The  emanation  was  allowed  to 
remain  for  several  hours  in  a  small  glass  tube  in  order  that  the 
excited  activity  should  reach  a  maximum  value.  The  emanation 
was  then  rapidly  withdrawn  from  the  tube,  and  the  heating  effect 
of  the  tube  determined  at  regular  intervals.  There  was  a  similar 
initial  drop  within  the  first  10  minutes,  then  a  slower  variation, 
and  finally  a  decrease  to  zero  according  to  an  exponential  law  with 
the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  30  minutes. 

The  curve  of  increase  of  the  heating  effect  of  the  emanation 
tube  to  a  maximum  after  the  introduction  of  the  emanation  was 
found  to  be  complementary  to  the  curve  of  decrease  of  the  heating 
effect  to  zero  after  withdrawal  of  the  emanation.  It  was  not  found 
possible  to  separate  the  heating  effect  of  the  emanation  itself 
from  the  first  rapid  change  in  emanation  X,  since  temperature 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1904. 


280 


EXCITED   KADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


conditions  did  not  become  steady  until  an  interval  of  10  minutes 
after  introducing  or  withdrawing  the  emanation,  and  in  that  time, 
the  first  change  in  emanation  X  was  nearly  completed. 

The  division  of  the  heating  effect  amongst  the  radio-active 
products  of  radium  is  given  in  the  following  table.  The  activity 
of  each  product  measured  by  the  a  rays  is  also  given  for  com- 
parison : 


Active  products 

Nature  of 
rays 

Percentage 
proportion  of 
total  activity 
measured  by 

Percentage 
proportion  of 
total  heating 
effect 

the  rays 

i 

Radium 

a  rays 

25 

25 

(freed  from  active  products) 

Emanation 

a  rays 

18   } 

t 

\  33 

41 

Emanation  X  (first  change) 

a  rays 

15  j 

t 

„             (second  change) 

No  a  rays 

0  \ 

1 

I  42 

34 

„             (third  change) 

a,  /3,  and  y  rays 

42  ) 

The  heating  effect  of  the  active  products  is  approximately 
proportional  to  their  activity  measured  by  the  a.  rays.  There  can 
be  very  little  doubt  that  the  emanation  supplies  an  amount  of  the 
heating  effect  proportional  to  its  activity. 

The  decay  curve  of  the  activity  of  radium  to  a  minimum  of 
25  per  cent,  after  removal  of  the  emanation  is  approximately  the 
same  as  the  corresponding  decay  curve  of  the  activity  of  radium 
measured  by  the  a.  rays. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  heating  effect  of  radium  is  a  result 
of  the  succession  of  radio-active  changes  occurring  in  it.  The 
heating  effect  accompanies  the  expulsion  of  a  particles,  and  is 
approximately  proportional  to  the  number  expelled.  The  time- 
variation  of  the  heating  effect  of  the  radio-active  products  is 
the  same  as  the  time-variation  of  their  activity  measured  by 
the  a  rays. 

182.  Effect  of  variation  of  E.  M.  F.  on  amount  of 
excited  activity  from  thorium.  It  has  been  shown  that  the 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  281 

excited  activity  is  confined  to  the  cathode  in  a  strong  electric  field. 
In  weaker  fields  the  activity  is  divided  between  the  cathode  and 
the  walls  of  the  vessel.  This  was  tested  in  an  apparatus1  shown  in 
Fig.  53. 


Electrometer  -^  Battery 

f     a ^— 

C         R8°  B 


Fig.  53. 

A  is  a  cylindrical  vessel  of  5*5  cms.  diameter,  B  the  negative 
electrode  passing  through  insulating  ends  C,  D.  For  a  potential 
difference  of  50  volts,  most  of  the  excited  activity  was  deposited 
on  the  electrode  B.  For  about  3  volts,  half  of  the  total  excited 
activity  was  produced  on  the  rod  B,  and  half  on  the  walls  of  the 
vessel.  Whatever  the  voltage  applied,  the  sum  of  the  activities 
on  the  central  rod  and  the  walls  of  the*  cylinder  was  found  to 
be  a  constant  when  a  steady  state  was  reached. 

When  no  voltage  was  applied,  diffusion  alone  was  operative, 
and  in  that  case  about  13  per  cent,  of  the  total  activity  was  on  the 
rod  B.  The  application  of  an  electric  field  has  thus  no  influence 
on  the  sum  total  of  excited  activity,  but  merely  controls  the  pro- 
portion concentrated  on  the  negative  electrode. 

A  more  detailed  examination  of  the  variation  with  strength  of 
field  of  the  amount  on  the  negative  electrode  was  made  in  a  similar 
manner  by  F.  Henning2.  He  found  that  in  a  strong  electric  field 
the  amount  of  excited  activity  was  practically  independent  of  the 
diameter  of  the  rod  B,  although  the  diameter  varied  between 
'59  mm.  and  6'0  mms.  With  a  small  voltage,  the  amount  on  the 
negative  electrode  varied  with  its  diameter.  The  curves  showing 
the  relation  between  the  amount  of  excited  activity  and  voltage 
are  very  similar  in  character  to  those  obtained  for  the  variation  of 
the  current  through  an  ionized  gas  with  the  voltage  applied. 

The  amount  of  excited  activity  reaches  a  maximum  when  all 
the  emanation  X  is  removed  from  the  gas  as  rapidly  as  it  is 

1  Rutherford,  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1900. 
-  Drude's  Annal.  p.  562,  1902. 


282  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

formed.     With  weaker  fields,  a  portion  diffuses  to  the  sides  of  the 
vessel,  and  produces  excited  activity  on  the  positive  electrode. 

183.  Effect    of   pressure    on    distribution    of    excited 
activity.    In  a  strong  electric  field,  the  amount  of  excited  activity 
produced  on  the  cathode  is  independent  of  the  pressure  down  to  a 
pressure  of  about  10  mms.  of  mercury.     In  some  experiments  made 
by   the  writer1,   the   emanating   thorium   compound   was   placed 
inside  a  closed  cylinder  about  4  cms.  in  diameter,  through  which 
passed  an  insulated  central  rod.     The  central  rod  was  connected  to 
the  negative  pole  of  a  battery  of  50  volts.     When  the  pressure  was 
reduced  below  10  mms.  of  mercury,  the  amount  of  excited  activity 
produced  on  the  negative  electrode  diminished,  and  was  a  very 
small  fraction  of  its  original  value  at  a  pressure  of  -^  mm.     Some 
excited  activity  was  in  this  case  found  to  be  distributed  over  the 
interior  surface  of  the  cylinder.     It  may  thus  be  concluded  that  at 
low  pressures   the   excited   activity   appears  on  both  anode  and 
cathode,  even  in  a  strong  electric  field. 

Curie  and  Debierne2  observed  that,  if  a  vessel  containing  an 
emanating  radium  compound  was  kept  pumped  down  to  a  low 
pressure,  the  amount  of  excited  activity  produced  on  the  vessel 
was  much  reduced.  In  this  case  the  emanation  given  off  by  the 
radium  was  removed  by  the  pump  with  the  other  gases  con- 
tinuously evolved  from  the  radium  compound.  On  account  of  the 
very  slow  decay  of  activity  of  the  emanation,  the  amount  of  excited 
activity  produced  on  the  walls  of  the  vessel,  in  the  passage  of  the 
emanation  through  it,  was  only  a  minute  fraction  of  the  amount 
produced  when  all  the  emanation  given  off  was  not  allowed  to 
escape. 

184.  Transmission  of  excited  activity.     The  characteristic 
property  of  excited  radio-activity  is  that  it  can  be  confined  to  the 
cathode  in  a  strong  electric  field.     Since  the  activity  is  due  to  a 
deposit  of  radio-active  matter  on  the  electrified  surface,  the  matter 
must  be  transported  by  positively  charged  carriers.     The  experi- 
ments of  Fehrle3  showed  that  the  carriers  of  excited  activity  travel 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  190Q.  2  Cm  R   132>  p.  768?  190i. 

:J  Phys.  Zeit.  3,  No.  7,  p.  130,  1902. 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  283 

along  the  lines  of  force  in  an  electric  field.  For  example,  if  a  small 
negatively  charged  metal  plate  was  placed  in  the  centre  of  a  metal 
vessel  containing  an  emanating  thorium  compound,  more  excited 
activity  was  produced  on  the  sides  and  corners  of  the  plate  than  at 
the  central  part. 

A  difficulty  however  arises  in  connection  with  the  positive 
charge  of  the  carrier.  According  to  the  view  developed  in  sec- 
tion 127  and  later  in  section  200,  the  matter  emanation  X,  which 
is  deposited  on  bodies  and  gives  rise  to  excited  activity,  is  itself 
derived  from  the  emanation.  The  emanations  of  thorium  and 
radium  emit  only  a  rays,  i.e.  positively  charged  particles.  After 
the  expulsion  of  an  a  particle,  the  residue,  which  is  supposed  to 
constitute  the  emanation  X,  should  retain  a  negative  charge,  and 
be  carried  to  the  anode  in  an  electric  field.  The  exact  opposite  is 
however  observed  to  be  the  case.  The  experimental  evidence  does 
not  support  the  view  that  the  positively  charged  a  particles, 
expelled  from  the  emanation,  are  directly  responsible  for  the 
phenomena  of  excited  activity ;  for  no  excited  activity  is  produced 
in  a  body  exposed  to  the  a  rays  of  the  emanation,  provided  the 
emanation  itself  does  not  come  in  contact  with  it.  It  may  be 
supposed  that  in  gases  the  matter  emanation  X,  immediately  after 
its  production,  attaches  itself  to  the  positive  ions,  produced  in 
the  gas  by  the  radiation,  on  the  same  sort  of  principle  that  water 
vapour  condenses  round  the  negative  ion.  The  active  matter  is 
then  transported  by  these  positive  carriers  to  the  cathode.  In  the 
case  of  radium,  there  is  evidence  that  some  of  the  carriers  of 
excited  activity  do  not  acquire  a  positive  charge  until  they  have 
been  present  in  the  gas  for  some  time. 

Whatever  view  is  taken  of  the  process  by  which  these  carriers 
obtain  a  positive  charge,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  expul- 
sion of  an  a  particle  with  great  velocity  from  the  atom  of  the 
emanation  must  set  the  residue  in  motion.  On  account  of  the 
comparatively  large  mass  of  this  residue,  which  constitutes  the 
emanation  X,  the  velocity  acquired  will  be  small  compared  with 
that  of  the  expelled  a  particle,  and  the  moving  mass  will  be 
rapidly  brought  to  rest  at  atmospheric  pressure  by  collision  with 
the  gas  molecules  in  its  path.  At  low  pressures,  however,  the 
collisions  will  be  so  few  that  it  will  not  be  brought  to  rest  until  it 


284 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


strikes  the  boundaries  of  the  vessel.  A  strong  electric  field  would 
have  very  little  effect  in  controlling  the  motion  of  such  a  heavy 
mass,  unless  it  has  been  initially  brought  to  rest  by  collision  with 
the  gas  molecules.  This  would  explain  why  the  active  matter  is 
not  deposited  on  the  cathode  at  low  pressures  in  an  electric  field. 
Some  direct  evidence  of  a  process  of  this  character,  obtained  by 
Debierne  on  examination  of  the  excited  activity  produced  by 
actinium,  is  discussed  in  section  186. 

185.  The  following  method  has  been  employed  by  the  writer  to 
determine  the  velocity  of  the  positive  carriers  of  excited  activity  of 
radium  and  thorium  in  an  electric  field.  Suppose  A  and  B  (Fig.  54) 


B    ' 


I E,_  _ 


Emanation 
A 


Fig.  54. 

are  two  parallel  plates  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the  emanation, 
which  is  uniformly  distributed  between  them.  If  an  alternating 
E.M.F.  E0  is  applied  between  the  plates,  the  same  amount  of 
excited  activity  is  produced  on  each  electrode.  If  in  series  with 
the  source  of  the  alternating  E.M.F.  a  battery  is  placed  of  E.M.F. 
El  less  than  E0,  the  positive  carrier  moves  in  a  stronger  electric 
field  in  one  half  alternation  than  in  the  other.  A  carrier  con- 
sequently moves  over  unequal  distances  during  the  two  half 
alternations,  since  the  velocity  of  the  carrier  is  proportional  to  the 
strength  of  the  electric  field  in  which  it  moves.  The  excited 
activity  will  in  consequence  be  unequally  distributed  over  the  two 
electrodes.  If  the  frequency  of  alternation  is  sufficiently  great, 
only  the  positive  carriers  within  a  certain  small  distance  of  one 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  285 

plate  can  be  conveyed  to  it,  and  the  rest,  in  the  course  of  several 
succeeding  alternations,  are  carried  to  the  other  plate. 

When  the  plate  B  is  negatively  charged,  the  E.M.F.  between 
the  plates  is  E0—El,  when  B  is  positive  the  E.M.F.  is  E0  +  E+. 
Let  d  =  distance  between  the  plates, 
T  —  time  of  a  half  alternation, 
p  =  ratio  of  the  excited  radio-activity  on  the  plate  B  to  the 

sum  of  the  radio-activities  on  the  plates  A  and  B, 
K  =  velocity  of  the  positive  carriers  for  a  potential-gradient 
of  1  volt  per  centimetre. 

On  the  assumption  that  the  electric  field  between  the  plates  is 
uniform,  and  that  the  velocity  of  the  carrier  is  proportional  to  the 
electric  field,  the  velocity  of  the  positive  carrier  towards  B  is 

EO-   El      TT 

~~~ 


and  in  the  course  of  the  next  half  alternation 


towards  the  plate  A. 

If  xl  is  less  than  d,  the  greatest  distances  xl,  xz  passed  over  by 
the  positive  carrier  during  two  succeeding  half  alternations  is  thus 
given  by 

EQ  —  EI    vrp  ,  E0  +  E!    ^T 

#!  =  --  =  —  &-JL,     and     #2  =  --  j  —  JK.J.. 
a  a 

Suppose  that  the  positive  carriers  are  produced  at  a  uniform 
rate  of  q  per  second  for  unit  distance  between  the  plates.  The 
number  of  positive  carriers  which  reach  B  during  a  half  alter- 
nation consists  of  two  parts  : 

(1)  One  half  of  those  carriers  which  are  produced  within  the 
distance  x±  of  the  plate  B.  This  number  is  equal  to 


(2)  All  the  carriers  which  are  left  within  the  distance  x^  from 
B  at  the  end  of  the  previous  half  alternation.  The  number  of 
these  can  readily  be  shown  to  be 


286 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


The  remainder  of  the  carriers,  produced  between  A  and  B 
during  a  complete  alternation,  will  reach  the  other  plate  A  in  the 
course  of  succeeding  alternations,  provided  no  appreciable  recombi- 
nation takes  place.  This  must  obviously  be  the  case,  since  the 
positive  carriers  travel  further  in  a  half  alternation  towards  A  than 
they  return  towards  B  during  the  next  half  alternation.  The 
carriers  thus  move  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  changing  electric 
field,  but  on  the  whole  move  towards  the  plate  A. 

The  total  number  of  positive  carriers  produced  between  the 
plates  during  a  complete  alternation  is  2dqT.  The  ratio  p  of  the 
number  which  reach  B  to  the  total  number  produced  is  thus 
given  by 


Substituting  the  values  of  x-^  and  #2 


#2 

obtain 


In  the  experiments  the  values  of  E0,  El}  d,  and  T  were  varied, 
and  the  results  obtained  were  in  general  agreement  with  the  above 
equation. 

The  following  results  were  obtained  for  thorium  : 
Plates  T30  cms.  apart. 


Alternations 

EO+EI 

%0      EI 

per  second 

P 

K 

152 

101 

57 

•27 

1-25 

225 

150 

57 

•38 

1-17 

300 

200 

57 

•44 

1-24 

Plates  2  cms.  apart. 


Alternations 

Eo  +  El 

E0     El 

per  second 

P 

K 

273 

207 

44 

•37 

1-47 

300 

200 

53 

•286 

1-45 

JX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  287 

The  average  mobility  K  deduced  from  a  large  number  of 
experiments  was  1*3  cms.  per  sec.  per  volt  per  cm.  for  atmospheric 
pressure  and  temperature.  This  velocity  is  about  the  same  as 
the  velocity  of  the  positive  ion  produced  by  Rontgen  rays  in  air, 
viz.  1 '37  cms.  per  sec.  The  results  obtained  with  the  radium 
emanation  were  more  uncertain  than  those  for  thorium  on  account 
of  the  distribution  of  some  excited  activity  on  the  positive  elec- 
trode. The  values  of  the  velocities  of  the  carriers  were  however 
found  to  be  roughly  the  same  for  radium  as  for  thorium. 

These  results  show  that  the  carriers  of  the  emanation  X  travel 
in  the  gas  with  about  the  same  velocity  as  the  positive  or  negative 
ions  produced  by  the  radiations  in  the  gas.  This  shows  either  that 
the  emanation  X  becomes  attached  to  positive  ions,  or  that  the 
emanation  X  itself,  acquiring  in  some  way  a  positive  charge,  forms 
a  cluster  of  neutral  molecules  which  travel  with  it. 

186.  Excited  activity  from  actinium  and  "  emanation 
substance."  Giesel1  observed  that  the  "  emanating  substance  " 
gave  off  a  large  quantity  of  emanation,  and  that  this  emanation 
gave  rise  to  a  type  of  radiation  which  he  termed  the  E  rays. 
A  narrow  metal  cylinder  containing  the  active  substance  was 
placed  with  the  open  end  downwards,  about  5  cms.  above  the 
surface  of  a  zinc  sulphide  screen.  The  screen  was  charged  nega- 
tively to  a  high  potential  by  an  electric  machine,  and  the  cylinder 
connected  with  earth.  A  luminous  spot  of  light  was  observed  on 
the  screen,  which  was  brighter  at  the  edge  than  at  the  centre.  A 
conductor,  connected  with  earth,  brought  near  the  luminous  spot 
apparently  repelled  it.  An  insulator  did  not  show  such  a  marked 
effect.  On  removal  of  the  active  substance,  the  luminosity  of  the 
screen  persisted  for  some  time.  This  was  probably  due  to  the 
excited  activity  produced  on  the  screen. 

The  results  obtained  by  Giesel  support  the  view  that  the 
carriers  of  excited  activity  of  the  "  emanation  substance  "  have  a 
positive  charge.  In  a  strong  electric  field  the  carriers  travel  along 
the  lines  of  force  to  the  cathode,  and  there  cause  excited  activity 
on  the  screen.  The  movement  of  the  luminous  zone  on  the  ap- 
proach of  a  conductor  is  due  to  the  disturbance  of  the  electric  field. 

1  Ber.  deutscli.  Chem.  GeselL  36,  p.  342,  1903. 


288 


EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY 


[CH. 


Debierne1  found  that  actinium  also  gave  off  a  large  amount  of 
emanation,  the  activity  of  which  decayed  very  rapidly  with  the 
time.  At  some  distance  from  the  source,  the  activity  of  the  emana- 
tion fell  to  half  value  in  one-and-a-half  minutes.  This  is  not  very- 
different  from  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  thorium 
emanation,  which  falls  to  half  value  in  about  one  minute. 

This  emanation  produces  excited  activity  on  surrounding  objects, 
and  at  diminished  pressure  the  emanation  produces  a  uniform 
distribution  of  excited  activity  in  the  enclosure  containing  the 
emanation.  No  data  have  yet  been  published  of  the  rate  of  decay 
of  the  excited  activity  produced  by  the  emanation  of  actinium. 

Debierne  observed  that  the  distribution  of  excited  activity  was 
altered  by  a  strong  magnetic  field.  The  experi- 
mental arrangement  is  shown  in  Fig.  55.  The 
active  matter  was  placed  at  M,  and  two  plates 
A  and  B  were  placed  symmetrically  with  regard 
to  the  source.  On  the  application  of  a  strong 
magnetic  field  normal  to  the  plane  of  the  paper, 
the  excited  activity  was  unequally  distributed 
between  the  plates  A  and  B.  The  results  showed 
that  the  carriers  of  excited  activity  were  deviated 
by  a  magnetic  field  in  the  opposite  sense  to  the 
cathode  rays,  i.e.  the  carriers  were  positively 
charged.  In  some  cases,  however,  the  opposite 
effect  was  obtained.  Debierne  considers  that  the  excited  activity 
of  actinium  is  due  to  "  ions  activants,"  the  motion  of  which  is 
altered  by  a  magnetic  field.  Other  experiments  showed  that  the 
magnetic  field  acted  on  the  "ions  activants"  and  not  on  the 
emanation. 

The  results  of  Debierne  thus  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
carriers  of  excited  activity  are  derived  from  the  emanation  and  are 
projected  with  considerable  velocity.  This  result  supports  the 
view  advanced  in  section  184  that  the  expulsion  of  a  particles 
from  the  emanation  must  set  the  part  of  the  system  left  behind  in 
rapid  motion.  A  close  examination  of  the  mode  of  transference  of 
the  excited  activity  by  actinium  and  the  emanation  substance  is 


Fig.  55. 


1  C.  R.  136,  pp.  446  and  671,  1903. 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  289 

likely  to  throw  further  light  on  the  processes  which  give  rise  to 
the  deposit  of  active  matter  on  electrodes. 

187.  Radio-active  induction.  In  carrying  out  experiments 
on  the  separation  of  radium  from  pitchblende,  M.  and  Mme  Curie1 
observed  that  the  separation  of  the  active  substance  is  fairly  com- 
plete, if  the  stage  of  purification  is  not  far  advanced.  Copper, 
antimony,  and  arsenic  can  be  separated  practically  inactive,  but 
other  bodies,  like  lead  and  iron,  always  show  slight  activity.  When 
the  stage  of  purification  is  more  advanced,  every  body  separated 
from  the  active  solution  exhibits  activity. 

Debierne2  showed  that  barium  was  made  active  by  solution 
with  actinium.  The  active  barium  removed  from  the  actinium 
still  preserved  its  activity  after  chemical  treatment.  In  this  way 
Debierne  obtained  barium  chloride  6000  times  as  active  as  uranium. 
Although  the  activity  of  the  barium  chloride  could  be  concentrated 
in  the  same  way  as  the  activity  of  radiferous  barium  chloride,  it 
did  not  show  any  of  the  spectroscopic  lines  of  radium.  The  activity 
however  of  the  barium  was  not  permanent,  but  decayed  to  about 
one-third  of  its  value  in  three  months. 

Giesel  showed  in  1900  that  bismuth  could  be  made  active  by 
placing  it  in  a  radium  solution,  and  suggested  that  polonium  was 
in  reality  bismuth  made  active  by  its  mixture  with  the  radium  in 
pitchblende.  Mme  Curie  also  found  that  bismuth  was  made  active 
by  solution  with  a  radium  compound,  and  succeeded  in  fractionat- 
ing the  above  bismuth  in  the  same  way  as  polonium.  In  this  way 
bismuth  was  obtained  2000  times  as  active  as  uranium,  but  the 
activity  decreased  with  time.  These  experiments  are  rendered 
very  uncertain  by  the  difficulty  of  completely  separating  the  radium 
from  the  bismuth. 

Giesel3  in  1903  showed  that  a  bismuth  plate  dipped  in  a  radium 
solution  remained  active  after  every  care  had  been  taken  to  remove 
all  traces  of  radium.  This  active  bismuth  gave  out  only  a  rays, 
and  in  this  respect  was  analogous  to  polonium  or  Marckwald's 
radio-active  tellurium.  The  absence  of  the  a  rays  in  the  bismuth 
indicates  that  no  radium  adhered  to  the  bismuth.  The  activity  of 

1  Thesis,  Paris,  1903,  p.  117.  2  C.  R.  131,  p.  137,  1900. 

3  Ber.  deutsch.  Chem.  Ges.  p.  2368,  1903. 

R.  R.-A.  19 


290  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH. 

the  bismuth  did  not  decay  over  the  period  of  examination,  but 
observations  were  not  made  over  sufficient  lengths  of  time  to  make 
certain  of  this.  There  are  two  points  of  view  that  have  been  taken 
in  regard  to  radio-active  induction.  Some  have  supposed  that  the 
inactive  molecules  of  the  substance  themselves  temporarily  acquire 
the  property  of  radio-activity,  after  admixture  with  a  very  active 
substance  like  radium  or  actinium.  On  this  view  the  radio-active 
bismuth  is  in  reality  bismuth,  some  of  the  matter  of  which  has 
temporarily  acquired  radio-active  property. 

On  the  other  point  of  view,  production  of  activity  in  inactive 
bodies  is  either  due  to  a  slight  admixture  of  the  active  element, 
or  to  a  removal  with  the  substance  of  a  radio-active  product 
of  the  element.  In  the  former  case,  the  activity  of  the  body  is 
permanent ;  in  the  latter,  it  decays  with  the  time,  according  to  the 
same  law  as  the  decay  of  activity  of  the  separated  product.  For 
example,  if  barium  is  precipitated  in  an  uranium  solution,  the 
barium  is  active,  and  its  activity  decays  at  the  same  rate  as  the 
separated  Ur  X.  In  fact,  the  barium  precipitate  carried  down  with 
it  the  matter  Ur  X. 

So  far,  however,  no  case  has  yet  been  observed  when  any  body 
has  acquired  the  property  of  radio-activity  by  exposure  to  the 
radiations  alone  of  the  radio-elements.  The  evidence  at  present 
supports  the  view  that  the  activity  produced  in  inactive  bodies  is 
due  to  a  separation  with  it  of  an  active  product.  The  experiments 
of  F.  von  Lerch,  described  in  sections  178,  179,  show  that  many 
metals  are  able  to  become  active  when  placed  in  a  solution  of 
the  emanation  X  of  thorium.  This  activity  is  due  to  a  deposit 
of  the  emanation  X  on  the  metal.  The  activity  is  removable  by 
precipitation  and  also  in  some  cases  by  electrolysis.  In  the  case  of 
solutions  obtained  from  pitchblende,  it  is  thus  not  surprising  that 
a  similar  action  occurs,  and  that  many  substances  possess  some 
temporary  activity  at  the  time  of  their  separation.  One  or  more 
of  the  numerous  active  products  in  pitchblende  is  precipitated 
with  the  substance,  and  the  activity  then  decays  with  the  time. 

188.  Possible  origin  of  polonium.  Mme  Curie  has  not 
yet  been  able  to  purify  polonium  sufficiently  to  obtain  any  spectro- 
scopic  evidence  of  a  new  element.  Giesel  has  consistently  taken 


IX]  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  291 

the  view,  that  polonium  is  in  reality  "  induced  "  bismuth.  At  the 
same  time,  it  has  not  yet  been  definitely  settled  whether  Marck- 
wald's  radio-active  tellurium  contains  the  same  active  constituent 
as  polonium  or  not.  Taking  the  view  that  every  case  of  induction 
is  due  to  a  removal  with  the  inactive  element  of  an  active  product 
of  the  radio-elements,  some  evidence  will  now  be  considered  which 
points  to  the  probability  that  polonium  is  a  disintegration  product 
of  the  element  radium. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  Mme  Curie  was  able  to  fractionate 
bismuth,  made  active  in  a  radium  solution,  in  the  same  way  as 
polonium,  i.e.  that  the  active  matter  in  the  bismuth  had  chemical 
properties  similar  to  polonium.  Giesel,  in  addition,  showed  that  a 
platinum  or  bismuth  plate  placed  in  a  radium  solution  acquired 
strong  activity,  and,  like  polonium,  gave  rise  to  a  rays  only.  If 
the  active  bismuth  or  platinum  decays  at  the  same  rate  as 
polonium,  it  would  be  very  strong  evidence  that  polonium  was  a 
product  of  radium.  Further  experiments  are,  however,  required 
on  this  point. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  bodies  exposed  for  a  long  interval 
in  the  presence  of  the  radium  emanation,  always  retain  about 
1/20,000  of  their  original  activity.  Giesel  found  that  the  residual 
activity  of  a  platinum  wire  exposed  in  the  presence  of  the  radium 
emanation,  gave  out  only  a.  rays,  and  in  that  respect  resembled 
polonium. 

The  writer  has  recently  found  that  active  matter  can  be  dis- 
solved by  sulphuric  acid  from  the  inside  of  a  glass  tube,  which 
has  at  one  time  contained  the  radium  emanation.  On  evapora- 
ting the  acid,  an  active  deposit  was  left  behind  which  gave  out 
a  and  /3  rays.  The  activity  of  this  deposit,  as  far  as  observations 
have  yet  gone,  has  not  decayed  with  the  time.  This  active  sub- 
stance gives  out  a  far  greater  proportion  of  /9  rays  than  either 
radium  or  thorium.  The  a  rays  showed  about  the  same  amount  of 
absorption  in  aluminium  foil  as  the  a  rays  from  polonium,  and 
possessed  also  the  characteristic  property  exhibited  by  the 
polonium  rays  (section  90)  of  rapidly  increasing  absorption  with 
thickness  of  matter  traversed.  It  is  thus  possible  that  this 
active  matter  may  contain  polonium  with  another  product  giving 
rise  to  ft  rays.  If  it  be  assumed  that  the  a  rays,  which  are  given 

19—2 


292  EXCITED   RADIO-ACTIVITY  [CH.  IX 

out  by  the  active  residue,  accompany  another  very  slow  change 
occurring  in  the  matter  emanation  X,  the  time  taken  for  the 
activity  of  this  product  to  decay  to  half  value  can  be  deduced 
from  general  considerations.  It  will  be  shown  later,  in  section 
195,  that  each  of  the  successive  changes  in  radium  or  thorium, 
which  is  accompanied  by  a  rays,  gives  rise  to  about  the  same 
total  amount  of  ionization.  This  is  merely  an  expression  of  the 
fact  that  the  same  number  of  systems  must  undergo  change  in 
each  successive  product,  and  that  each  system  probably  expels 
the  same  number  of  a  particles  with  about  the  same  velocity. 
Now  it  was  found  experimentally  that  the  ionization  current  due 
to  the  active  residue  was  about  1/20,000  of  the  initial  ionization 
due  to  the  emanation,  which  in  its  further  changes  had  given 
rise  to  the  slowly  decaying  active  matter.  Since  the  ionization 
current  due  to  the  emanation  was  20,000  times  that  due  to  the 
active  matter,  its  rate  of  change  was  20,000  times  faster.  But  the 
activity  of  the  emanation  decays  to  half  value  in  four  days,  so  that 
the  activity  of  this  other  active  matter  would  decay  to  half  value 
in  about  80,000  days  or  about  200  years. 

The  existence  of  such  a  slow  change  in  the  emanation  X  of 
radium  probably  accounts  in  part  for  the  radio-activity  which  is 
produced  on  the  walls  of  the  laboratory  in  which  radium  prepara- 
tions have  been  kept  in  open  vessels.  The  emanation  diffuses  into 
the  air  and  produces  emanation  X,  which  is  deposited  on  the  walls 
of  the  room,  and  there  gives  rise  to  a  deposit  of  very  slowly  decay- 
ing matter.  This  activity  persists  in  a  room  even  though  no 
radio-active  matter  has  been  kept  in  it  for  some  time. 


CHAPTER   X. 

RADIO- ACTIVE  PROCESSES. 

189.  Radio-activity  of  uranium.  It  has  already  been 
shown  in  section  118  that  a  radio-active  constituent  Ur  X  can 
be  separated  from  uranium  by  several  different  processes.  The 
activity  of  the  separated  Ur  X  decays  with  the  time,  falling  to  half 
value  in  about  22  days.  At  the  same  time  the  uranium,  from 
which  the  Ur  X  has  been  separated,  gradually  regains  its  lost 
activity.  The  law  of  decay  of  Ur  X  and  the  recovery  of  the  lost 
activity  of  the  uranium  are  expressed  by  the  equations 

^  =  e-**  and  ^=l-e-^, 

-*0  -*0 

where  X  is  the  radio-active  constant  of  Ur  X.  The  constant  radio- 
activity of  uranium  thus  represents  a  state  of  equilibrium,  where 
the  rate  of  production  of  new  active  matter  is  balanced  by  the  rate 
of  change  of  the  Ur  X  already  produced. 

The  radio-active  processes  occurring  in  uranium  present  several 
points  of  difference  from  the  processes  occurring  in  thorium  and 
radium.  In  the  first  place,  uranium  does  not  give  off  an  emanation, 
and  in  consequence  does  not  produce  any  excited  activity  on  bodies. 
So  far  only  one  active  product  Ur  X  has  been  observed  in  uranium. 
This  active  product  UrX  differs  from  ThX  and  the  emanations, 
inasmuch  as  the  radiation  from  it  consists  almost  entirely  of  /8  rays. 
This  peculiarity  of  the  radiations  from  Ur  X  initially  led  to  some 
confusion  in  the  interpretation  of  observations  on  Ur  X  and  the 
uranium  from  which  it  had  been  separated.  When  examined  by 
the  photographic  method,  the  uranium  freed  from  Ur  X  showed  no 
photographic  action,  while  the  Ur  X  possessed  it  to  an  intense 


294  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

degree.  With  the  electric  method,  on  the  other  hand,  the  results 
obtained  were  exactly  the  reverse.  The  uranium  freed  from  Ur  X 
showed  very  little  loss  of  activity  while  the  activity  of  the  Ur  X 
was  very  small.  The  explanation  of  these  results  was  given  by 
Soddy1  and  by  Rutherford  and  Grier2.  The  a  rays  of  uranium  are 
photographically  almost  inactive  but  produce  most  of  the  ioniza- 
tion  in  the  gas.  The  ft  rays,  on  the  other  hand,  produce  a  strong 
photographic  action,  but  very  little  ionization  compared  with  the  a 
rays.  When  the  Ur  X  is  separated  from  the  uranium,  the  uranium 
does  not  at  first  give  out  any  {3  rays.  In  the  course  of  time,  fresh 
Ur  X  is  produced  from  the  uranium,  and  ft  rays  begin  to  appear, 
gradually  increasing  in  intensity  until  they  reach  the  original  value 
shown  before  the  separation  of  the  Ur  X. 

In  order  to  determine  the  recovery  curves  of  uranium  after  the 
separation  of  Ur  X,  it  was  thus  necessary  to  measure  the  rate  of 
increase  of  the  ft  rays.  This  was  done  by  covering  the  uranium 
with  a  layer  of  aluminium  of  sufficient  thickness  to  absorb  all  the 
a  rays,  and  then  measuring  the  ionization  due  to  the  rays  in  an 
apparatus  similar  to  Fig.  16. 

Uranium  has  not  yet  been  obtained  inactive  when  tested  by 
the  electric  method.  Becquerel3  has  stated  that  he  was  able  to 
obtain  inactive  uranium,  but  in  his  experiments  the  uranium  was 
covered  with  a  layer  of  black  paper,  which  would  entirely  absorb 
the  a  rays.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  a  radiation  of  uranium 
has  been  altered  either  in  character  or  amount  by  any  chemical 
treatment.  The  a  rays  appear  to  be  inseparable  from  the  uranium, 
and  it  will  be  shown  later  that  the  other  radio-active  elements  as 
well  as  uranium  also  possess  a  non-separable  activity  consisting 
entirely  of  a  rays.  The  changes  occurring  in  uranium  must  then 
be  considered  to  be  of  two  kinds,  (1)  the  change  which  gives  rise 
to  the  a  rays  and  the  product  Ur  X,  (2)  the  change  which  gives 
rise  to  the  ft  rays  from  Ur  X. 

The  possibility  of  separating  the  Ur  X,  which  gives  rise  to  the 
ft  rays  of  uranium,  shows  that  the  a  and  ft  rays  are  produced  quite 
independently  of  one  another,  and  by  matter  of  different  chemical 
properties. 

1  Tram.  Chem.  Soc.  81,  p.  460,  1902.  2  Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  1902. 

3  C.  R.  131,  p.  137,  1900. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  295 

190.  Radio-activity  of  thorium.  The  radio-active  pro- 
cesses occurring  in  thorium  are  far  more  complicated  than  those 
in  uranium.  It  has  been  shown  that  a  radio-active  product 
Th  X  is  continuously  produced  from  the  thorium.  This  Th  X 
breaks  up,  giving  rise  to  the  radio-active  emanation.  This  radio- 
active emanation,  in  turn,  produces  from  itself  the  active  matter, 
emanation  X,  which  is  responsible  for  the  phenomenon  of  excited 
radio-activity.  It  has  also  been  shown  (section  176)  that  there  is 
very  strong  evidence  that  the  emanation  X  of  thorium  goes  through 
two  further  changes,  before  the  radio-active  processes  are  at  an 
end. 

The  peculiarities  of  the  initial  portions  of  the  decay  and  recovery 
curves  of  Th  X  and  thorium  respectively  (Curves  A  and  B,  Fig.  34, 
p.  180),  will  now  be  considered.  It  was  shown  that  when  the 
Th  X  was  removed  from  the  thorium  by  precipitation  with  ammonia, 
the  radiation  increased  about  15  per  cent,  during  the  first  day,  passed 
through  a  maximum,  and  then  fell  off  according  to  an  exponential 
law,  decreasing  to  half  value  in  four  days.  >  At  the  same  time  the 
activity  of  the  separated  hydroxide  decreased  for  the  first  day, 
passed  through  a  minimum,  and  then  slowly  increased  again,  rising 
to  its  original  value  after  the  lapse  of  about  one  month. 

When  a  thorium  compound  is  in  a  state  of  radio-active  equi- 
librium, the  series  of  changes  in  which  Th  X,  the  emanation,  and 
emanation  X  are  produced  go  on  simultaneously.  Since  a  state  of 
equilibrium  has  been  reached  for  each  of  these  products,  the 
amount  of  each  product  changing  in  unit  time  is  equal  to  the 
amount  of  that  product  supplied  from  the  preceding  change  in 
unit  time.  Now  the  matter  Th  X  is  soluble  in  ammonia,  while 
the  matter  emanation  X  is  not.  The  Th  X  is  thus  removed  from 
the  thorium  by  precipitation  with  ammonia,  but  the  emanation  X 
is  left  behind  with  the  thorium.  Since  the  emanation  X  is  pro- 
duced from  the  emanation,  which  in  turn  arises  from  Th  X,  on  the 
removal  of  the  exciting  cause  Th  X,  the  radiation  due  to  this 
emanation  X  will  decay,  since  the  rate  of  production  of  fresh 
emanation  X  no  longer  balances  its  own  rate  of  change.  Disregard- 
ing the  initial  irregularity  in  the  decay  curve  of  emanation  X 
(section  170),  the  activity  of  the  emanation  X  will  have  decayed 
to  half  value  in  about  11  hours  and  to  one  quarter  value  at  the 


296  KADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

end  of  22  hours.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  Th  X  has  been  separated, 
new  Th  X  is  produced  in  the  thorium  compound.  The  activity  of 
this  new  Th  X  is  not,  however,  sufficient  to  compensate  at  first  for 
the  loss  of  activity  due  to  the  change  in  emanation  X,  so  that,  as 
a  whole,  the  activity  will  at  first  decrease,  then  pass  through  a 
minimum,  then  increase  again. 

The  correctness  of  this  point  of  view  has  been  tested  by  Ruther- 
ford and  Soddy1  as  follows :  If  the  precipitated  thorium  hydroxide 
after  the  removal  of  Th  X  is  put  through  a  series  of  precipitations 
with  ammonia  at  short  intervals,  the  Th  X  is  removed  almost  as 
fast  as  it  is  formed,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  activity  of  the 
emanation  X  decays. 

The  following  table  indicates  the  results  obtained.  A  portion 
of  the  precipitated  hydroxide  was  removed  after  each  series  of 
precipitations  and  its  activity  tested  in  the  usual  way. 

Activity  of 
hydroxide  per  cent. 

After  1  precipitation  46 

After  3  precipitations  at  intervals  of  24  hours  ...  39 

After  3  more  precipitations  at  intervals  of  24  hours  and 

3  at  intervals  of  8  hours  22 

After  3  more  each  of  8  hours       24 

After  6  more  each  of  4  hours       ...         ...         ...         ...  25 

The  differences  in  the  last  three  numbers  are  not  significant, 
for  it  is  difficult  to  make  accurate  comparisons  of  the  activity  of 
thorium  compounds,  which  have  been  precipitated  under  slightly 
different  conditions.  It  is  thus  seen  that  as  a  result  of  successive 
precipitations,  the  activity  is  reduced  to  a  minimum  of  about  25  per 
cent.  The  recovery  curve  of  the  activity  of  this  23  times  precipitated 
hydroxide  is  shown  in  Fig.  56.  The  initial  drop  in  the  curve  is 
quite  absent,  and  the  curve,  starting  from  the  minimum,  is  practi- 
cally identical  with  the  curve  shown  in  Fig.  35,  which  gives  the 
recovery  curve  of  thorium  hydroxide  after  the  first  two  days.  This 
residual  activity — about  25  per  cent,  of  the  maximum — is  non- 
separable  from  the  thorium  by  any  chemical  process  that  has  been 
tried. 

The  initial  rise  of  activity  of  Th  X,  after  it  has  been  separated, 
will  now  be  considered.  In  all  cases,  it  was  found  that  the  activity 

1  Tram.  Chem.  Soc.  81,  p.  837,  1902.     Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1902. 


KADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES 


297 


of  the  separated  Th  X  had  increased  about  15  per  cent,  at  the 
end  of  24  hours,  and  then  steadily  decayed,  falling  to  half  value  in 
about  four  days. 

This  peculiarity  of  the  Th  X  curve  follows,  of  necessity,  from  the 
considerations  already  advanced  to  explain  the  drop  in  the  recovery 
curve.  As  soon  as  the  Th  X  is  separated,  it  at  once  produces  from 
itself  the  emanation,  and  this  in  turn  produces  the  emanation  X.  The 
activity  due  to  the  emanation  X  at  first  more  than  compensates 
for  the  decay  of  activity  of  the  Th  X  itself.  The  total  activity 


100 


80 


40 


20 


12 


16 


20 


Time  in 


Fig.  56. 

thus  increases  to  a  maximum,  and  then  slowly  decays  to  zero 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time.  The  curve  ex- 
pressing the  variation  of  the  activity  of  the  separated  Tb  X  with 
time  can  be  deduced  from  the  theory  of  successive  changes  already 
considered  in  section  175.  In  the  present  case  there  are  three 
successive  changes  occurring  at  the  same  time,  viz.  the  change  of 
Th  X  into  the  emanation,  of  the  emanation  into  emanation  X,  and 
the  final  changes  giving  rise  to  the  activity  of  emanation  X.  Since, 
however,  the  change  of  the  emanation  into  emanation  X  (about 
half  changed  in  one  minute)  is  far  more  rapid  than  the  changes 
occurring  in  Th  X  or  emanation  X,  for  the  purposes  of  calculation 
it  may  be  assumed  without  serious  error  that  the  Th  X  changes  at 


298 


RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES 


[CH. 


once  into  emanation  X.  The  initial  change  of  emanation  X — 
about  half  changed  in  55  minutes — will  also  .be  disregarded  for 
the  same  reason. 

Let  \i  and  X2  be  the  constants  of  decay  of  activity  of  Th  X 
and  emanation  X  respectively.  Since  the  activity  of  Th  X  and 
of  emanation  X  falls  to  half  value  in  4  days  and  11  hours  respec- 
tively, the  value  of  \  =  '0072  and  of  X2  =  '063  where  1  hour  is 
taken  as  the  unit  of  time. 

It  has  already  been  shown  (section  175)  that  after  a  time  t 
the  activity  It,  of  a  product  in  which  there  is  a  secondary  change, 
is  given  by 


where  70  is  the  intensity  of  the  radiation  immediately  after  separa- 
tion and  K  the  ratio  of  the  ionization  produced  in  the  secondary 
change  to  that  produced  in  the  primary  change.  By  comparison 
of  this  equation  with  the  curve  of  variation  of  the  activity  of  Th  X 
with  time  shown  in  Fig.  57,  Curve  A,  it  is  found  that  the  value 
of  K  is  about  '44. 

The  calculated  values  of  -=*  for  different  values  of  t  are  shown 

••• 

in  the  second  column  of  the  following  table,  and  the  observed  values 
in  the  third  column. 


; 

Time 

Theoretical 
value 

Observed 
value 

0 

1-00 

1-00 

•25  days 

1-09 

— 

•5       „ 

1-16 

— 

1 

'1-15 

1-17 

1-5       „ 

1-11 

— 

2 

1-04 

— 

3 

•875 

•88 

•* 

•75 

•72 

6         „ 

•53 

•53 

9 

•315 

•295 

13 

•157 

•152 

1 

The  theoretical  and   observed  values  thus  agree  within  the 
limit  of  error  in  the   measurements.      The    theoretical  curve  is 


RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES 


299 


shown  in  Curve  A,  Fig.  57  (with  the  observed  points  marked,  for 
comparison).  The  curve  B  shows  the  theoretical  curve  of  the  decay 
of  the  activity  of  Th  X  and  the  emanation,  supposing  there  is  no 
secondary  change  into  emanation  X.  Curve  C  shows  the  differ- 
ence curve  between  the  curves  A  and  B,  i.e.  the  proportion  of  the 
activity  at  different  times  due  to  the  emanation  X.  The  activity 
due  to  emanation  X  thus  rises  to  a  maximum  about  two  days  after 
removal  of  the  Th  X,  and  then  decays  with  the  time  at  the  same 


Time  in  Days. 
Fig.  57. 

rate  as  the  Th  X  itself,  i.e.  the  activity  falls  to  half  amount  every 
four  days.     When  the  value  of  t  exceeds  four  days,  the  value  of 
0-^-W  m  the  theoretical  equation  is  very  small. 
The  equation  of  decay  is  thus  expressed  by 


i.e.  the  curve  decays  in  an  exponential  law  with  the  time. 


300  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

191.  Radio-activity  of  radium.  Notwithstanding  the 
enormous  difference  in  their  relative  activities,  the  radio-activity 
of  radium  presents  many  close  analogies  to  that  of  thorium.  Both 
substances  give  rise  to  emanations  which  in  turn  produce  "  excited 
activity"  on  bodies  in  their  neighbourhood.  Radium,  however, 
does  not  give  rise  to  any  intermediate  product  between  the 
element  itself  and  the  emanation  it  produces,  or  in  other  words 
there  is  no  product  in  radium  corresponding  to  Th  X  in  thorium. 

Giesel  first  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  radium  compound 
gradually  increased  in  activity  after  preparation,  and  only  reached 
a  constant  value  after  a  month's  interval.  If  a  radium  compound 
is  dissolved  in  water  and  boiled  for  some  time,  or  a  current  of  air 
drawn  through  the  solution,  on  evaporation  it  is  found  that  the 
activity  has  been  diminished.  The  same  result  is  observed  if 
a  solid  radium  compound  is  heated  in  the  open  air.  This  loss 
of  activity  is  due  to  the  removal  of  the  emanation  by  the  process 
of  solution  or  heating.  Consider  the  case  of  a  radium  compound 
which  has  been  kept  for  some  time  in  solution  in  a  shallow  vessel, 
exposed  to  the  open  air,  and  then  evaporated  to  dryness.  The 
emanation  which,  in  the  state  of  solution,  was  removed  as  fast  as 
it  was  formed,  is  now  occluded,  and,  together  with  the  emana- 
tion X  which  it  produces,  adds  its  radiations  to  that  of  the  original 
radium.  The  activity  will  increase  to  a  maximum  value  where  the 
rate  of  production  of  fresh  emanation  balances  the  rate  of  change 
of  that  already  produced. 

If  now  the  compound  is  dissolved  or  heated,  the  emanation 
escapes.  Since  the  emanation  X  is  not  volatile  and  is  insoluble 
in  water,  it  is  not  removed  by  the  process  of  solution  or  heating. 
Since,  however,  the  exciting  cause  is  removed,  its  activity  will 
immediately  begin  to  decay,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours 
will  have  almost  disappeared.  The  activity  of  the  radium  mea- 
sured by  the  rays  is  then  found  to  be  about  25  per  cent,  of  its 
original  value.  This  residual  activity  of  radium,  consisting  entirely 
of  a  rays,  is  non-separable,  and  has  not  been  further  diminished  by 
chemical  or  physical  means.  Rutherford  and  Soddy1  examined  the 
effect  of  aspiration  for  long  intervals  through  a  radium  chloride 
solution.  After  the  first  few  hours  the  activity  was  found  to  be 

1  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1903. 


x] 


RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES 


301 


reduced  to  25  per  cent.,  and  further  aspiration  for  three  weeks 
did  not  produce  any  further  diminution.  The  radium  was  then 
evaporated  to  dryness,  and  the  rise  of  its  activity  with  time 
determined.  The  results  are  shown  in  the  following  table.  The 
final  activity  in  the  second  column  is  taken  as  one  hundred.  In 
column  3  is  given  the  percentage  proportion  of  the  activity  re- 
covered. 


Time  in  days 

Activity 

Percentage 
Activity  recovered 

0 

250 

0 

0-70 

33-7 

11-7 

1-77 

42-7 

23-7 

4-75 

68-5 

58-0 

7-83 

83-5 

78-0 

16-0 

96-0 

95-0 

21-0 

100-0 

100-0 

The  results  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  58. 


100 


Fig.  58. 

The  decay  curve  of  the  radium  emanation  is  shown  in  the 
same  figure.     The  curve  of  recovery  of  the  lost  activity  of  radium 


302  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

is  thus  analogous  to  the  curves  of  recovery  of  uranium  and  thorium 
which  have  been  freed  from  the  active  products  Ur  X  and  Th  X 
respectively.  The  intensity  It  of  the  recovered  activity  at  any 

time  is  given  by  -j-  =  1  —  e~Kt,  where  /0  is  the  final  value,  and  \  is 

•M 

the  radio-active  constant  of  the  emanation.  The  decay  and  recovery 
curves  are  complementary  to  one  another. 

Knowing  the  rate  of  decay  of  activity  of  the  radium  emanation, 
the  recovery  curve  of  the  activity  of  radium  can  thus  at  once  be 
deduced,  provided  all  of  the  emanation  formed  is  occluded  in  the 
radium  compound. 

When  the  emanation  is  removed  from  a  radium  compound  by 
solution  or  heating,  the  activity  measured  by  the  (3  rays  falls 
almost  to  zero,  but  increases  in  the  course  of  a  month  to  its 
original  value.  The  curve  showing  the  rise  of  0  rays  with  time 
is  practically  identical  with  the  curve,  Fig.  58,  showing  the  re- 
covery of  the  lost  activity  of  radium  measured  by  the  a.  rays.  The 
explanation  of  this  result  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  ft  rays  from 
radium  only  arise  from  emanation  X,  and  that  the  non-separable 
activity  of  radium  gives  out  only  a  rays.  On  removal  of  the 
emanation,  the  activity  of  the  emanation  X  decays  nearly  to 
zero,  and  in  consequence  the  ft  rays  almost  disappear.  When 
the  radium  is  allowed  to  stand,  the  emanation  begins  to  ac- 
cumulate, and  produces  in  turn  emanation  X,  which  gives  rise  to 
ft  rays.  The  amount  of  ft  rays  (allowing  for  a  period  of  retarda- 
tion of  a  few  hours)  will  then  increase  at  the  same  rate  as  the 
activity  of  the  emanation,  which  is  continuously  produced  from 
the  radium. 

192.  If  the  radium  allows  some  of  the  emanation  produced  to 
escape  into  the  air,  the  curves  of  recovery  will  be  different  from 
that  shown  in  Fig.  58.  For  example,  suppose  that  the  radium 
compound  allows  a  constant  fraction  a  of  the  amount  of  emana- 
tion, present  in  the  compound  at  any  time,  to  escape  per  second. 
If  n  is  the  number  of  emanation  particles  present  in  the  com- 
pound at  the  time  t,  the  number  of  emanation  particles  changing 
in  the  time  dt  is  \ndt,  where  X  is  the  constant  of  decay  of  activity 
of  the  emanation.  If  q  is  the  rate  of  production  of  emanation 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  303 

particles  per  second,  the  increase  of  the  number  dn  in  the  time  dt 
is  given  by 

dn  —  qdt  —  \ndt  —  andt, 

or  -jj  =  q  -  (X  +  a)  n. 

The  same  equation  is  obtained  when  no  emanation  escapes, 
with   the   difference   that   the   constant  X  +  a  is  replaced   by  \. 

fj  (Yl 

When  a  steady  state  is  reached,  -j-  is  zero,  and  the  maximum  value 
of  n  is  equal  to  i—  *  —  . 


If  no  escape  takes  place,  the  maximum  value  of  n  is  equal  to  ^  . 

A 

The  escape  of  emanation  will  thus  lower  the  amount  of  activity 
recovered  in  the  proportion  -  --  .  If  r?0  is  the  final  number  of 

A»  T*  tt 

emanation  particles  stored  up  in  the  compound,  the  integration  of 
the  above  equation  gives  —  =  1  —  e~(K+a)t  . 

The  curve  of  recovery  of  activity  is  thus  of  the  same  general 
form  as  the  curve  when  no  emanation  escapes,  but  the  constant 
\  is  replaced  by  X  -I-  a. 

For  example,  if  a  =  X  =  1/463000,  the  equation  of  rise  of  activity 

is  given  by  —  =  1  —  e~2M,  and,  in  consequence,  the   increase   of 

activity  to  the  maximum  will  be  far  more  rapid  than  in  the 
case  of  no  escape  of  emanation. 

A  very  slight  escape  of  emanation  will  thus  produce  large  altera- 
tions both  in  the  final  maximum  and  in  the  curve  of  recovery  of 
activity. 

A  large  number  of  experiments  have  been  described  by  Mme  Curie 
in  her  These  pt'esentee  d  la  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris  on  the 
effect  of  solution  and  of  heat  in  diminishing  the  activity  of  radium. 
The  results  obtained  are  in  general  agreement  with  the  above  view, 
that  75  per  cent,  of  the  activity  of  radium  is  due  to  the  emana- 
tion and  the  excited  activity  it  produces.  If  the  emanation  is 
wholly  or  partly  removed  by  solution  or  heating,  the  activity  of 


304  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

the  radium  is  correspondingly  diminished,  but  the  activity  of 
the  radium  compound  is  spontaneously  recovered  owing  to  the 
production  of  fresh  emanation.  A  state  of  radio-active  equi- 
librium is  reached,  when  the  rate  of  production  of  fresh  emanation 
balances  the  rate  of  change  in  the  emanation  stored  up  in  the 
compound.  The  differences  observed  in  the  rate  of  recovery  of 
radium  under  different  conditions  were  probably  due  to  variations 
in  the  rate  of  escape  of  the  emanation. 

193.  Non-separable  activity.     It  has  been  shown  that,  for 
all  three  radio-elements,  uranium,  thorium,  and  radium,  there  is 
a  non-separable  activity  consisting    entirely  of  a.  rays.      In   the 
case  of  uranium  the  activity  is  the  same  as  the  activity  of  the 
uranium,  measured  by  the  a  rays,  before  the  product  Ur  X,  which 
gives  rise  only  to  ft  rays,  is  removed.     In  the  case  of  thorium 
and  radium,  where  the  active  products  produced  give  out  a.  rays, 
the  non-separable  activity  is  about  25  per  cent,  of  the  maximum 
activity  measured  by  the  a  rays. 

The  existence  of  a  non-separable  activity  follows  from  the 
point  of  view  of  regarding  radio-active  processes  which  has  been 
advanced  in  sections  87  and  127.  The  three  radio-elements 
are  supposed  to  be  undergoing  atomic  disintegration,  which  is 
accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  a  rays.  If  the  number  of  atoms 
which  break  up  per  second  is  almost  infinitesimal  compared  with 
the  total  number  present,  the  same  number,  on  an  average,  will 
break  up  per  second.  The  number  of  a  particles  expelled  per 
second  will  thus  be  a  constant  for  each  radio-element.  There 
will  thus  always  be  a  non-separable  activity  of  the  radio-elements, 
which  is  an  inherent  property  of  the  elements  and  cannot  be 
removed  from  them  by  any  chemical  or  physical  process. 

194.  Radiations  from  the  active  products.     Most  of  the 

changes  occurring  in  the  different  radio-active  products  are  accom- 
panied by  the  emission  of  a  rays  alone.  The  0  and  7  rays  appear 
only  in  the  final  stages  of  the  radio-active  changes. 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  non-separable  activity  of  the  three 
radio-elements  consists  entirely  of  a  rays.  The  two  emanations  give 
rise  only  to  a  rays  (section  147).  It  also  seems  probable  that  the 
product  Th  X,  if  the  emanation  X  which  it  produces  is  completely 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  305 

separated  from  it,  would  give  rise  only  to  a  rays.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  activity  of  Ur  X  consists  only  of  ft  rays.  The  changes 
in  the  matter  emanation  X  of  thorium  and  radium  give  rise  to 
both  a  and  ft  rays.  It  has  been  shown  (section  176)  that  the 
emanation  X  of  thorium  goes  through  two  changes,  the  first  of 
which  does  not  give  rise  to  rays  at  all,  and  the  second  of  which 
gives  rise  to  a.  and  ft  rays.  The  first  change  occurring  in  emana- 
tion X  of  radium  gives  rise  to  a.  rays  but  not  to  ft  rays;  the 
second  change  probably  does  not  give  rise  to  rays  at  all,  while 
the  third  change  again  includes  all  three  kinds  of  rays.  The 
absence  of  ft  rays  in  the  first  change,  taking  place  in  the  emana- 
tion X  of  radium,  can  readily  be  shown  by  exposing  a  negatively 
charged  wire  in  the  presence  of  the  radium  emanation  for  a  few 
minutes.  The  activity  on  removal,  measured  by  the  a  rays,  falls 
rapidly,  as  is  shown  in  Fig.  51,  p.  262 ;  but  the  activity  measured 
by  the  ft  rays  alone  is  at  first  small,  and  increases  for  some  time 
instead  of  diminishing.  If  a  and  ft  rays  had  been  both  given  out 
in  the  first  change,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  amount  of  the  ft 
radiation  would  initially  decay  at  the  same  rate|.as  the  a  radiation, 
but  no  such  effect  is  observed. 

The  ft  and  probably  also  the  7  rays  of  the  three  radio-elements 
thus  only  appear  in  the  last  of  the  series  of  radio-active  changes. 
It  is  remarkable  that  the  last  change,  which  is  readily  detected 
by  the  radio-active  property,  should  in  each  of  the  three  radio- 
elements  be  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  a  single  electron 
with  great  velocity,  and  that  all  the  other  changes,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  two  that  probably  give  rise  to  no  rays  at  all,  should 
be  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  a  rays,  i.e.  of  material  particles 
atomic  in  size. 

The  polonium  of  Mme  Curie  and  the  radio-tellurium  of 
Marckwald  emit  only  a  rays.  Becquerel1  states  that  he  has 
detected  some  rays  of  a  penetrating  character  from  polonium 
by  the  photographic  method.  The  writer  has  examined  by  the 
electric  method  the  radiations  from  the  active  preparation  of 
radio- tellurium,  but  was  unable  to  detect  any  trace  of  7  rays. 
The  evidence  so  far  obtained  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the 

1  C.  R.  pp.  136,  977.   1903. 
R.  R.-A.  20 


306  KADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

7  rays  appear  at  the  same  time  as  the  ft  rays,  and  in  an  amount 
proportional  to  them. 

The  character  of  the  radiations  from  each  of  the  radio-active 
products  must  always  be  taken  into  consideration  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  results  obtained  by  different  methods  of  measurement. 
For  example,  a  radium  compound,  which  has  been  heated  in  an 
open  glass  tube,  after  a  few  hours  practically  loses  its  power  of 
exciting  fluorescence  on  a  screen  of  platino-cyanide  of  barium 
placed  near  it.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  already  mentioned,  that 
the  ft  and  7  rays  practically  disappear  from  radium  for  several 
hours  after  the  emanation  is  removed.  For  the  same  reason  the 
radium,  with  a  screen  placed  over  it  of  sufficient  thickness  to 
absorb  all  the  a  rays,  would  appear,  when  measured  by  the  electric 
method,  to  be  almost  inactive. 

Since  the  a  rays  are  photographically  very  inactive  compared 
with  the  /3  rays,  the  non-separable  activity  of  uranium,  thorium, 
and  radium,  although  producing  marked  ionization,  would  be 
almost  inappreciable  if  tested  by  the  photographic  method.  It  has 
been  stated  by  some  observers  that  uranium  and  thorium  have  been 
obtained  which  showed  no  trace  of  activity.  On  examination  of  the 
results,  however,  it  is  found  that  the  methods  employed  were  not 
suitable  to  definitely  settle  the  question.  It  is  true  that,  by  certain 
chemical  processes,  uranium  and  thorium  can  be  obtained  tempo- 
rarily inactive,  when  tested  by  the  photographic  method,  or  by  the 
electric  method  if  the  compound  is  covered  by  a  screen  of  sufficient 
thickness  to  absorb  all  the  a.  rays.  If  however  the  activity  is  tested 
electrically  with  unscreened  active  matter,  there  is  always  found  to  be 
a  residual  activity.  In  the  course  of  time,  the  uranium  and  thorium 
compounds  spontaneously  regain  the  whole  of  their  lost  activity. 

195.     Division   of  the   activity  amongst   the   products. 

It  has  been  shown  in  section  190  that  the  activity  of  thorium 
hydroxide,  after  the  removal  of  Th  X,  falls  to  46  per  cent,  of  its 
original  value.  When  the  Th  X  is  removed  from  the  thorium  at 
short  intervals,  in  order  to  allow  the  activity  of  the  emanation  X 
left  behind  to  decay,  there  is  a  residual  activity  of  25  per  cent,  of 
the  maximum.  About  21  per  cent,  of  the  total  activity  is  thus 
due  to  the  emanation  X. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  307 

This  result  is  confirmed  by  observations  on  the  increase  of 
activity  of  Th  X  after  removal.  It  has  been  shown  in  section 
190  that  the  activity  due  to  the  emanation  X,  produced  from 
the  Th  X,  is  equal  to  '44  when  the  activity  of  the  Th  X,  together 
with  the  emanation  it  produces,  is  taken  as  unity.  Now  the 
activity  of  the  separated  Th  X  and  the  emanation  is  equal  to  '54 
of  the  total.  The  proportion  of  the  total  activity  due  to  emana- 
tion X  is  thus  24  per  cent.,  a  result  which  is  not  very  different 
from  the  value  of  21  per  cent,  obtained  previously.  It  is  difficult 
to  make  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation, 
compared  with  that  due  to  the  emanation  X.  An  approximate 
estimate  was  however  made  in  the  following  way. 

Some  thorium  hydroxide  enclosed  in  a  paper  envelope  was 
placed  inside  a  closed  cylinder  with  an  insulated  central  electrode 
kept  charged  negatively.  After  an  interval  of  several  days,  a  state 
of  radio-active  equilibrium  was  reached,  and  the  ionization  was 
measured : 

(1)  with  the  thorium  inside  the  cylinder,  and 

(2)  with  the  thorium  removed. 

(1)  gave  the  ionization  current  due  to  the  emanation  and  the 
emanation  X  on  the  central  electrode,  and  (2)  gave  the  current  due 
to  the  emanation  X.  Taking  into  consideration  that  half  of  the 
radiation  from  the  emanation  X  was  absorbed  in  the  central  elec- 
trode, it  was  deduced  that  the  amount  of  ionization  produced  by  the 
emanation  in  the  gas  was  not  very  different  from  that  produced  by 
the  emanation  X.  This  result  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
emanation  and  emanation  X  in  a  thorium  compound  supply  about 
an  equal  proportion  of  the  total  activity.  The  relative  activities 
of  the  different  products  are  shown  in  the  following  table.  The 
numbers  must  only  be  considered  as  approximate. 

Residual  activity  of  thorium 25% 

Activity  of  ThX  alone              21  °/0 

„         „     emanation  alone     ...         ...         ...         ...  24  °/0 

„         due  to  first  change  emanation  X    ...         ...  0  °/0 

„               „      second         „             „         „     24  % 

Leaving  out  of  account  the  first  change  in  emanation  X,  which 
is  of  a  character  quite  distinct  from  the  others,  it  is  seen  that  the 
activity  is  approximately  equally  divided  amongst  the  products. 

20—2 


308  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

Similar  results  hold  in  the  case  of  radium.  The  emanation 
and  the  residual  activity  of  radium  supply  about  18  and  25  per  cent, 
respectively  of  the  total  activity,  and  the  rest  is  supplied  by  the 
changes  in  emanation  X.  These  results  are  thus  also  in  rough 
agreement  with  those  obtained  for  thorium,  and  indicate  that  each 
change  which  gives  rise  to  a  rays  supplies  about  an  equal  fraction 
of  the  total  activity.  This  is  an  important  result,  for  it  indicates 
that  about  the  same  number  of  a  particles  is  expelled  at  each 
change,  which  gives  rise  to  a  rays.  This  deduction  is  based  on  the 
observed  fact  that  the  penetrating  power  and  consequently  the 
ionization  produced  by  such  a  particles  is  not  very  different.  It 
therefore  seems  probable  that,  when  a  compound  of  thorium  or  of 
radium  is  in  radio-active  equilibrium,  the  same  number  of  systems 
change  per  second  in  each  of  the  products,  and  that  the  change  in 
all  cases  but  one  is  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  about  the 
same  number  of  a  particles. 

196.  Conservation  of  radio-activity.  The  early  observa- 
tions on  uranium  and  thorium  had  shown  that  their  radio-activity 
remained  constant  over  the  period  of  several  years  during  which 
they  were  examined.  The  possibility  of  separating  from  uranium 
and  thorium  the  active  products  Ur  X  and  Th  X  respectively,  the 
activity  of  which  decayed  with  the  time,  seemed  at  first  sight  to  be 
contradictory  to  this  point  of  view.  Further  observation,  however, 
showed  that  the  total  radio-activity  of  these  bodies  was  not  altered 
by  the  chemical  processes,  for  it  was  found  that  the  uranium 
and  thorium  from  which  the  active  products  were  removed,  spon- 
taneously regained  their  radio-activity.  At  any  time  after  removal 
of  the  active  product,  the  sum  total  of  the  radio-activity  of  the 
separated  product  together  with  that  of  the  substance  from  which 
it  has  been  separated  is  always  equal  to  that  of  the  original  com- 
pound before  separation.  In  cases  where  the  active  products,  like 
Ur  X  and  the  radium  emanation,  decay  with  time  according  to  an 
exponential  law,  this  follows  at  once  from  the  experimental  results. 
If  it  is  the  activity  of  the  product  at  any  time  t  after  separation, 

and  /0  the  initial  value,  we  know  that  j  =e~^.     At  the  same 

•*o 

time  the  activity  It  recovered  during  the  interval  t  is  given  by 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  309 

y  =  1  —  e~M,  where  \  is  the  same  constant  as  before.     It  thus 

•*o 

follows  that  it  +  It  =  /0,  which  is  an  expression  of  the  above  result. 
The  same  is  also  true  whatever  the  law  of  decay  of  activity  of  the 
separated  product  (see  section  174).  For  example,  the  activity  of 
Th  X  after  separation  from  thorium  at  first  increases  with  the 
time.  At  the'  same  time,  the  activity  of  the  residual  thorium 
compound  at  first  decreases,  and  at  such  a  rate,  that  the  sum  of 
the  activities  of  the  thorium  and  its  separated  product  is  always 
equal  to  that  of  the  original  thorium. 

This  principle  of  "  conseivatior^p^^dioj-actiyity1,''  as  it  may  be 
termed,  follows  from  the  general  result  that  the  radio-active  pro- 
cesses cannot  in  any  way  be  changed  by  the  action  of  known 
forces.  It  may  be  recalled  that  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  activity  of 
a  radio-active  product  cannot  be  altered  by  any  known  agency. 
The  rate  of  decay  is  independent  of  the  concentration  of  the  active 
matter,  of  the  pressure  and  of  the  nature  of  the  gas  in  which  it  is 
placed,  and  is  not  affected  by  wide  ranges  of  temperature.  In  the 
same  way,  it  has  not  been  found  possible  to  alter  the  rate  of 
production  of  active  matter  from  the  radio- elements.  In  addition, 
there  is  not  a  single  case  yet  observed  where  radio-activity  has 
been  altered  or  destroyed  in  any  active  body  or  created  in  an 
inactive  element. 

Certain  cases  have  been  observed,  which  at  first  sight  seem  to 
indicate  a  destruction  of  radio-activity.  For  example,  the  excited 
radio-activity  is  removed  from  a  platinum  wire  when  heated  above 
a  red  heat.  It  has  been  shown,  however,  by  Miss  Gates  (sec- 
tion 180)  that  the  radio^agtiviiby^  is  jiot  destroyed,  but  is  deposited 
in  unaltered  amount  on  the  colder  bodies  surrounding  it.  Thorium 
oxide  has  beeTT  shown  to  lose  its  power  in  emanating  to  a  large 
extent  by  ignition  to  a  white  heat.  But  a  close  examination  shows 
that  the  emanation  is  still  being  produced  at  the  samejrate,  but  is 
occluded  in  the  compound. 

The  total  radio-activity  of  a  given  mass  of  a  radio-element, 
measured  by  the  peculiar  radiations  emitted,  is  a  quantity  which 
can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished,  although  it  may  be  mani- 
fested in  a  series  of  products  which  are  capable  of  separation  from 
1  Rutherford  and  Soddy,  Phil.  Mag.  May,  1903. 


310  KADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

the  radio-element.  The  term  "conservation  of  radio-activity"  is 
thus  a  convenient  expression  of  the  facts  known  at  the  present 
time.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  further  experiments  at 
very  high  or  very  low  temperatures  may  show  that  the  radio- 
activity does  vary.  For  example,  Dewar  states  that  the  heat 
emission  of  radium  seems  to  be  rather  greater  in  liquid  hydrogen 
than  in  liquid  oxygen.  An  increase  of  heat  emission  would 
probably  entail  an  increase  of  the  radio-activity  of  the  radium 
immersed  in  liquid  hydrogen.  Accurate  experiments  have  not, 
however,  yet  been  made  on  the  radio-activity  of  radium  at  such 
low  temperatures. 

Although  no  difference  has  been  observed  in  the  radio-activity 
of  uranium  over  an  interval  of  five  years,  it  will  be  shown  (sec- 
tion 203)  that  on  theoretical  grounds  the  radio-activity  of  a  given 
quantity  of  a  radio-element  should  decrease  with  the  time.  The 
change  will,  however,  be  so  slow  in  uranium  and  thorium,  that 
probably  thousands  if  not  millions  of  years  must  elapse  before  a 
measurable  change  would  have  taken  place.  In  radium,  however, 
the  change  takes  place  about  one  million  times  faster,  so  that  a 
measurable  alteration  should  be  detected  in  the  course  of  a  few 
years1.  The  total  radio-activity  of  a  given  quantity  of  matter  left 
to  itself  should  thus  decrease,  but  it  should  be  constant  for  a 
constant  mass  of  the  radio-element.  It  is  only  in  this  restricted 
sense  that  the  principle  can  be  employed. 

The  conservation  of  radio-activity  applies  not  only  to  the 
radiations  taken  as  a  whole,  but  also  to  each  specific  type  of 
radiation.  If  the  emanation  is  removed  from  a  radium  compound, 
the  amount  of  (3  radiation  of  the  radium  at  once  commences  to 
decrease,  but  this  is  compensated  by  the  appearance  of  /3  rays 
in  the  radiations  from  the  vessel  in  which  the  separated  emanation 
is  stored.  At  any  time  the  sum  total  of  the  ft  radiations  from  the 
radium  and  the  emanation  vessel  is  always  the  same  as  that  from 
the  radium  compound  before  the  emanation  was  removed. 

1  It  seems  probable  however  that  the  radio-activity  of  radium,  measured  by  the 
a  rays,  will  increase  rather  than  diminish  for  several  hundred  years  after  its 
separation.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  increase  of  the  activity  due  to  the  last 
slow  change  of  radium  (about  half  changed  in  200  years)  will  probably  more  than 
compensate  for  the  change  in  the  radium  itself.  Ultimately,  however,  the  radio- 
activity of  the  radium  must  decrease  with  time. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  311 

Similar  results  have  also  been  found  to  hold  for  the  7  rays. 
This  was  tested  by  the  writer  in  the  following  way.  The  emana- 
tion from  some  solid  radium  bromide  was  released  by  heat, 
and  condensed  in  a  small  glass  tube  which  was  then  sealed  off. 
The  radium  so  treated,  and  the  emanation  tube,  were  placed 
together  under  an  electroscope,  with  a  screen  of  lead  1  cm.  thick 
interposed  in  order  to  let  through  only  the  7  rays.  The  experi- 
ments were  continued  over  three  weeks,  but  the  sum  total  of  the 
7  rays  from  the  radium  and  the  emanation  tube  was,  over  the 
whole  interval,  equal  to  that  of  the  original  radium.  During  this 
period  the  amount  of  7  rays  from  the  radium  at  first  decreased  to 
only  a  few  per  cent,  of  the  original  value,  and  then  slowly  increased 
again,  until  at  the  end  of  the  three  weeks  it  had  nearly  regained 
its  original  value,  before  the  emanation  was  removed.  At  the  same 
time  the  amount  of  7  rays  from  the  emanation  tube  rose  from  zero 
to  a  maximum  and  then  slowly  decreased  again  at  the  same  rate 
as  the  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  emanation  in  the  tube.  This 
result  shows  that  the  amount  of  7  rays  from  radium  was  a  constant 
quantity  over  the  interval  of  observation,  although  the  amount  of 
7  rays  from  the  radium  and  emanation  tube  had  passed  through  a 
cycle  of  changes. 

197.  Resume  of  results.  Before  discussing  the  general 
theory  advanced  to  account  for  the  processes  occurring  in  the  radio- 
element,  a  brief  resume  will  be  given  of  the  more  important  results 
already  described  in  detail  in  previous  chapters. 

The  radio-activity  of  uranium,  thorium,  and  radium  has  been 
shown  to  be  maintained  by  the  production  at  a  constant  rate  of  new 
kinds  of  matter,  which  possess  temporary  activity.  The  constant 
activity  of  the  radio-elements  is  due  to  a  state  of  equilibrium  where 
the  rate  of  production  of  new  active  matter  compensates  for  the 
change  in  that  already  produced.  In  some  cases,  the  active  products 
possess  well-defined  chemical  properties  different  from  those  of  the 
parent  elements  and  can  be  separated  from  them  by  chemical 
means.  The  separation  of  Ur  X  and  Th  X  from  uranium  and 
thorium  are  good  examples  of  this  process.  In  other  cases,  the 
new  products,  as  in  the  case  of  the  thorium  and  radium  emana- 
tions, are  gaseous  in  character  and  are  released  from  the  radio- 


312  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

elements  by  the  process  of  diffusion.  These  emanations  have  been 
shown  to  possess  the  properties  of  gases.  The  radium  emanation 
diffuses  and  distributes  itself  between  two  reservoirs  kept  at 
different  temperatures  according  to  the  laws  of  gases.  Both  the 
emanations  can  be  condensed  by  cold,  and  by  that  means  can  be 
removed  from  the  other  gases  with  which  they  are  mixed.  The 
emanations  possess  the  property  of  being  occluded  in  some  bodies, 
including  the  radio-elements  themselves,  and  can  be  liberated  by 
heating  or  solution.  They  diffuse  through  porous  partitions,  and 
in  general  behave  like  chemically  inert  gases  of  high  molecular 
weight.  Other  radio-active  products,  for  example  the  emanations 
X  of  radium  and  of  thorium,  are  not  gaseous,  but  attach  themselves 
to  the  surface  of  bodies  and  can  be  removed  from  them  by  solution 
or  heating.  The  emanation  X  of  thorium,  for  example,  possesses 
some  chemical  properties  which  distinguish  it  not  only  from  the 
emanation  from  which  it  is  derived,  but  also  from  the  other  active 
product  Th  X.  It  is  soluble  in  some  acids  and  not  in  others.  If 
the  emanation  X  of  thorium  is  removed  from  an  active  wire  by 
solution  in  hydrochloric  acid,  the  active  matter  attaches  itself  to 
some  metals  dipped  in  the  acid  but  not  to  others,  and  in  general 
possesses  the  properties  of  matter  of  definite  chemical  behaviour. 
The  differences  in  the  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  the 
different  products  of  a  radio-element  can  be  well  illustrated  in  the 
case  of  thorium.  Thorium  X  is  soluble  in  ammonia,  while  thorium 
is  not.  Thorium  X  produces  the  emanation  which  is  a  gas,  in- 
soluble in  acids  but  condensed  by  cold.  This,  in  turn,  produces 
the  matter  emanation  X,  which  is  insoluble  in  ammonia  but  soluble 
in  hydrochloric  and  sulphuric  acids.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  these  active  products  are  material  in  nature.  They  differ 
from  ordinary  matter  in  their  power  of  emitting  rays  of  a  special 
character,  and  by  the  fact  that  they  exist  in  the  radio-elements  in 
minute  quantities  which  are,  in  most  cases,  too  small  to  be  detected 
by  the  balance  or  the  spectroscope.  Approximate  estimates  (sec- 
tion 162)  can  be  made  of  the  amount  of  these  active  products  that 
are  present  in  a  radio-element  when  in  radio-active  equilibrium, 
and  it  has  been  shown  that,  except  in  the  case  of  a  very  active 
body  like  radium,  the  amount  is  too  small  to  be  detected  by 
ordinary  chemical  means. 


OF  TH: 
UNIVERSITY 

c          OF 
RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES 

The  case  of  the  radium  emanation  however  is  different.  It 
can  be  shown  (section  162)  that  probably  the  emanation  exists  in 
greater  proportion  in  radium  than  radium  does  in  pitchblende. 
Yet  radium  was  detected  in  pitchblende  by  the  property  of  radiat- 
ing which  it  possesses,  and  has  been  isolated  from  it  and  found  to 
be  an  element  of  well-marked  chemical  and  physical  properties. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  1  gram  of  radium  in  a  state  of  radio- 
active equilibrium  probably  contains  a  volume  of  about  0'3  cubic 
millimetre  of  the  emanation,  measured  at  standard  pressure  and 
temperature.  From  a  kilogram  of  radium  0'3  cubic  centimetre 
would  be  produced.  When  larger  quantities  of  radium  are  available 
for  experiments,  there  can  thus  be  little  doubt  that  a  sufficient 
amount  of  the  radium  emanation  will  be  obtained  to  examine 
chemically.  In  fact,  as  will  be  shown  in  section  201,  even  with 
the  small  quantities  of  radium  now  available,  some  very  important 
spectroscopic  evidence  has  already  been  obtained,  in  regard  to  the 
processes  occurring  in  the  emanation. 

[Volume  of  the  Emanation1. 

Sir  William  Ramsay  and  Mr  Soddy  have  kindly  placed  at  my 
disposal  some  preliminary  results  of  a  recent  investigation  by  them 
on  the  volume  of  the  emanation  released  from  radium.  In  these 
experiments,  60  milligrams  of  pure  radium  bromide  were  used,  in 
which  the  emanation  had  been  allowed  to  collect  for  8  days.  This 
emanation,  freed  as  far  as  possible  from  all  other  gases,  was  forced 
into  a  capillary  tube  in  which  its  volume  was  measured.  The 
following  table  shows  the  results  obtained. 

Initial  volume  0*124  cubic  millimetre. 
Volume  after     1  day  0*027 
„          „         3  days  O'Oll 
„          „         6     „     0-0063 
„         9     „     0-0041 

„  12     „     0-0011 

Final  volume  0-0004 

The  volume  of  the  gas  obtained  shrank  rapidly  during  the  first 
day,  then  more  slowly,  and  after  the  third  day  decreased  approxi- 
mately according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  decreasing 
1  Added  Feb.  1,  1904. 


314  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

to  half  value  in  about  four  days.  According  to  the  views  already 
advanced,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  volume  of  the  emanation 
itself  should  decrease  according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the 
time,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  3*7  days.  This  is  a  result  of  the 
theory  that  half  of  the  emanation  at  the  end  of  3'7  days  has  been 
transformed  into  the  substance  emanation  X,  which  behaves  as  a 
solid  and  is  deposited  on  the  surface  of  the  containing  vessel.  It 
seems  not  improbable  that  the  rapid  decrease,  observed  during  the 
first  day,  may  have  been  due  to  the  presence,  with  the  emanation, 
of  another  gas  which  was  quickly  absorbed  either  by  the  walls  of 
the  capillary  tube  or  by  the  mercury. 

It  can  readily  be  deduced  that  the  volume  of  the  emanation  at 
the  end  of  the  first  day  is  equivalent  to  the  amount  derived  from 
0'022  gram  of  pure  radium  in  radio-active  equilibrium.  Taking 
the  volume  of  the  gas,  0'027  cubic  millimetre,  at  the  end  of  the 
first  day  as  the  true  volume  of  emanation,  it  follows  that  the 
volume  of  the  emanation  to  be  obtained  from  1  gram  of  radium 
in  radio-active  equilibrium  is  1*2  cubic  millimetres.  Taking  the 
volume  observed  on  the  third  day,  the  corresponding  value  is 
0*9  cubic  millimetre.  The  calculated  value  of  the  volume  of  the 
emanation  to  be  derived  from  1  gram  of  radium  is  0*3  cubic 
millimetre.  The  calculated  value  is  thus  of  the  right  order  of 
magnitude.  This  is  an  indication  of  the  general  correctness  of 
the  different  methods  of  calculation  (see  sections  104  and  162)  on 
which  the  theoretical  determination  of  the  volume  of  the  emanation 
has  been  based. 

It  will  be  shown  later,  in  section  201,  that  the  emanation  of 
radium  produces  helium  from  itself.  The  shrinkage  of  the  volume 
to  a  very  small  fraction  of  its  original  value  indicates  that  the 
helium  produced  was  buried  in  the  walls  of  the  tube.  This  is  to 
be  expected  if  the  helium  consists  in  reality  of  the  a  particles 
expelled  from  the  emanation  and  its  products.  The  a.  particle  is 
projected  with  sufficient  velocity  to  penetrate  a  distance  of  about 
•02  millimetre  into  the  walls  of  the  capillary  tube.  It  is  to  be 
expected  that  a  portion,  at  least,  of  the  buried  helium  should  be 
released  when  the  tube  is  strongly  heated.] 

Of  the  three  types  of  rays  from  the  active  bodies,  the  a  and  ft 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  315 

rays  are  material  in  nature.  The  mass  and  velocity  of  the  a 
particles,  projected  from  radium,  have  been  measured.  They  have 
been  shown  to  be  positively  charged  particles  projected  with  a 
velocity  of  about  1/10  the  velocity  of  light,  and  a  mass  about 
twice  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  The  0  particles  carry  a  negative 
charge,  and  have  an  apparent  mass  about  1/1000  the  mass  of  the 
hydrogen  atom.  They  are  identical  in  character  with  the  cathode 
ray  particle  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube.  The  nature  of  the  7  rays 
has  not  yet  been  determined. 

The  a  rays  play  by  far  the  most  important  part  in  radio-active 
processes.  Most  of  the  energy  radiated  in  the  form  of  ionizing  rays 
is  due  to  them.  In  addition,  most  of  the  active  products  emit  only 
a  rays.  The  0  and  7  rays  in  most  cases  only  appear  in  the  last 
stage  of  the  radio-active  processes. 

The  activity  of  most  of  the  products  decays  according  to  an 
exponential  law  with  the  time.  In  cases  where  this  does  not  hold, 
the  activity  can  be  shown  to  be  due  to  several  successive  changes, 
the  rate  of  each  of  which  decays  according  to  an  exponential  law 
but  with  a  different  radio-active  constant.  The  rate  of  decay  of 
activity  has  not  yet  been  found  to  be  in  any  way  influenced  by 
wide  variation  in  chemical  and  physical  conditions. 

The  activity  of  any  product  at  any  time  (section  124),  is 
proportional  to  the  rate  of  change  of  the  product,  and  is  also  pro- 
portional to  the  amount  of  matter  left  unchanged.  In  cases  where 
one  active  product  gives  rise  to  another,  the  activity  of  the  first 
product  is,  at  any  time,  a  measure  of  the  rate  of  production  of  the 
second  product.  In  other  words,  the  radiations  accompany  the 
change  of  one  product  into  another,  and  serve  as  a  measure  of  the 
rate  of  change.  This  point  of  view  at  once  follows  if  the  expulsion 
of  rays  is  taken  to  be  the  cause  of  the  change  from  one  product 
into  another.  The  rate  of  emission  of  a.  particles  is  a  measure  of 
the  rate  of  change  of  the  first  product,  i.e.  it  is  proportional  to  the 
rate  at  which  the  second  product  is  produced.  For  example,  the 
amount  of  emanation  X  of  thorium  produced  in  a  given  time  by 
the  thorium  emanation  is  proportional  to  the  activity  of  the  ema- 
nation. In  cases  where  the  rate  of  change  of  the  second  product  is 
rapid  compared  with  that  of  the  first,  after  sufficient  interval  has 
elapsed  in  order  to  reach  a  state  of  approximate  radio-active  equi- 


316  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

librium,  the  activity  of  the  second  product  is  always  found  to  vary 
at  the  same  rate  as  that  of  the  parent  product.  For  example,  the 
amount  of  the  emanation  produced  by  Th  X  is  always  proportional 
to  the  activity  of  the  Th  X,  and  decays  at  the  same  rate,  i.e.  it 
falls  to  half  value  in  about  four  days.  In  the  same  way,  the  activity 
of  the  emanation  X,  produced  by  the  radium  emanation,  after  some 
hours  have  elapsed  for  conditions  to  become  steady,  is  always  found 
to  be  proportional  to  the  activity  of  the  emanation.  In  other 
words,  the  activity  of  the  emanation  X  decays  according  to  the 
same  law,  and  at  the  same  rate,  as  the  radium  emanation  which 
produces  it,  i.e.  to  half  value  in  a  little  less  than  four  days. 

The  rapid  rate  of  heat  emission  of  radium  is  connected  with 
the  radio-activity  of  that  element.  More  than  two-thirds  of  the 
heat  emission  of  radium  is  due  to  the  radium  emanation  and  the 
secondary  products  to  which  the  emanation  gives  rise.  The  heat 
emission  seems  to  be  for  the  most  part  connected  with  the  emission 
of  a.  rays. 

The  total  energy  which  would  be  given  out  by  a  given  quantity 
of  radium  is  of  quite  a  different  order  of  magnitude  to  that  ob- 
served in  ordinary  chemical  reactions. 

198.  Theories  of  radio-activity.  A  brief  review  will  now 
be  given  of  the  working  hypotheses  which  have  served  as  a  guide 
to  the  investigators  in  the  field  of  radio-activity.  These  working 
theories  have  in  many  cases  been  modified  or  extended  with  the 
growth  of  experimental  knowledge. 

The  early  experiments  of  Mme  Curie  had  indicated  that  radio- 
activity was  an  atomic  and  not  a  molecular  phenomenon.  This 
was  still  further  substantiated  by  later  work,  and  the  detection  and 
isolation  of  radium  from  pitchblende  was  a  brilliant  verification  of 
the  truth  of  this  hypothesis. 

The  discovery  that  the  /3  rays  of  the  radio-elements  were 
similar  to  the  cathode  rays  produced  in  a  vacuum  tube  was  an 
important  advance,  and  has  formed  a  basis  of  several  subsequent 
theories.  J.  Perrin1,  in  1901,  following  the  views  of  J.  J.  Thomson 
and  others,  suggested  that  the  atoms  of  bodies  consisted  of  parts 
and  might  be  likened  to  a  miniature  planetary  system.  In  the 

1  Revue  Scientifique,  April  13,  1901. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  317 

atoms  of  the  radio-elements,  the  parts  composing  the  atoms  more 
distant  from  the  centre  might  be  able  to  escape  from  the  central 
attraction  and  thus  give  rise  to  the  radiation  of  energy  observed. 
In  December  1901,  Becquerel1  put  forward  the  following  hypo- 
thesis, which  he  stated  had  served  him  as  a  guide  in  his  investi- 
gations. According  to  the  view  of  J.  J.  Thomson,  radio-active 
matter  consists  of  negatively  and  positively  charged  particles.  The 
former  have  a  mass  about  1/1000  of  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen 
atom,  while  the  latter  have  a  mass  about  one  thousand  times 
greater  than  the  negative  particle.  The  negatively  charged  par- 
ticles (the  /9  rays)  would  be  projected  with  great  velocity,  but 
the  larger  positive  particles  would  have  much  lower  velocity  and 
would  form  as  a  sort  of  gas  (the  emanation)  which  would  deposit 
itself  on  the  surface  of  bodies.  This  in  turn  would  subdivide 
giving  rise  to  rays  (excited  activity). 

In  a  paper  communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  in  June  1900, 
Rutherford  and  McClung2  showed  that  the  energy,  radiated  in 
the  form  of  ionizing  rays  into  the  gas,  was-  3000  gram-calories  per 
year  for  radium  of  activity  100,000  times  that  of  uranium.  Taking 
the  latest  estimate  1,500,000  of  the  activity  of  a  pure  radium  com- 
pound, this  would  correspond  to  an  emission  of  energy  into  the 
gas  in  the  form  of  a  rays  of  about  45,000  gram-calories  per  gram 
per  year.  The  suggestion  was  put  forward  that  this  energy  might 
be  derived  from  a  re-grouping  of  the  constituents  of  the  atom  of 
the  radio-elements,  and  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  possible  energy 
to  be  derived  from  a  greater  concentration  of  the  components  of 
the  atom  was  large  compared  with  that  given  out  in  molecular 
reactions. 

In  the  original  papers3  giving  an  account  of  the  discovery  of  the 
emanation  of  thorium  and  the  excited  radio-activity  produced  by 
it,  the  writer  took  the  view  that  both  of  these  manifestations  were 
due  to  radio-active  material.  The  emanation  behaved  like  a  gas, 
while  the  matter  which  caused  excited  activity  attached  itself  to 
solids  and  could  be  dissolved  in  some  acids  but  not  in  others.  In 
conjunction  with  Miss  Brooks,  it  was  shown  that  the  radium 
emanation  diffused  through  air  like  a  gas  of  heavy  molecular 

1  C.  R.  133,  p.  979,  1901.  2  Phil.  Trans.  A,  p.  25,  1901. 

3  Phil.  Mag.  Jan.  and  Feb.  1900. 


318  RADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  [CH. 

weight.  At  a  later  date  Mr  Soddy  and  the  writer  showed  that  the 
radium  and  thorium  emanations  behaved  like  chemically  inert 
gases,  since  they  were  unaffected  by  the  most  drastic  physical 
and  chemical  treatment. 

On  the  other  hand,  P.  Curie,  who,  in  conjunction  with  Debierne, 
had  made  a  series  of  researches  on  the  radium  emanation,  expressed 
dissent  from  this  view.  P.  Curie1  did  not  consider  that  there  was 
sufficient  evidence  that  the  emanation  was  material  in  nature,  and 
pointed  out  that  no  spectroscopic  evidence  of  its  presence  had  yet 
been  obtained,  and  also  that  the  emanation  disappeared  when 
contained  in  a  sealed  vessel.  It  was  pointed  out  by  the  writer2 
that  the  failure  to  detect  spectroscopic  lines  was  probably  a  conse- 
quence of  the  minute  quantity  of  the  emanation  present,  under 
ordinary  conditions,  although  the  electrical  and  phosphorescent 
actions  produced  by  this  small  quantity  are  very  marked.  This 
contention  is  borne  out  by  calculations  of  the  probable  amount  of 
the  emanation  released  from  1  gram  of  radium  given  in  section  162. 
P.  Curie  took  the  view  that  the  emanation  was  not  material, 
but  consisted  of  centres  of  condensation  of  energy  attached  to  the 
gas  molecules  and  moving  with  them. 

M.  and  Mme  Curie  have  throughout  taken  a  very  general  view 
of  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity,  and  have  not  put  forward  any 
definite  theory.  In  Jan.  1902,  they  gave  an  account  of  the  general 
working  theory3  which  had  guided  them  in  their  researches. 
Radio-activity  is  an  atomic  property,  and  the  recognition  of  this 
fact  had  created  their  methods  of  research.  Each  atom  acts  as  a 
constant  source  of  emission  of  energy.  This  energy  may  either 
be  derived  from  the  potential  energy  of  the  atom  itself,  or  each 
atom  may  act  as  a  mechanism  which  instantly  regains  the  energy 
which  is  lost.  They  suggested  that  this  energy  may  be  borrowed 
from  the  surrounding  air  in  some  way  not  contemplated  by  the 
principle  of  Carnot. 

In  the  course  of  a  detailed  study  of  the  radio-activity  of  thorium, 
Mr  Soddy  and  the  writer4  found  that  it  was  necessary  to  suppose 
that  thorium  was  continuously  producing  from  itself  new  kinds  of 

1  C.  R.  136,  p.  223,  1903.  2  PhiL  Mag^  April>  19Q3 

3  C.  R.  134,  p.  85,  1902. 

4  Trans.  Chem.  Soc.  81,  pp.  321,  837,  1902.     Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  and  Nov.  1902. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  319 

active  matter,  which  possess  temporary  activity  and  differ  in 
chemical  properties  from  the  thorium.  The  constant  radio-activity 
of  thorium  was  shown  to  be  the  result  of  equilibrium  between  the 
processes  of  production  of  active  matter  and  the  change  of  that 
already  produced.  At  the  same  time,  the  theory  was  advanced 
that  the  production  of  active  matter  was  a  consequence  of  the  dis- 
integration of  the  atom.  The  work  of  the  following  year  was 
devoted  to  an  examination  of  the  radio-activity  of  uranium  and 
radium  on  similar  lines,  and  it  was  found  that  the  conclusions 
already  advanced  for  thorium  held  equally  for  uranium  and  radium1. 
The  discovery  of  a  condensation  of  the  radio-active  emanations2 
gave  additional  support  to  the  view  that  the  emanations  were 
gaseous  in  character.  In  the  meantime,  the  writer3  had  found  that 
the  rays  consisted  of  positively  charged  bodies  atomic  in  size, 
projected  with  great  velocity.  The  discovery  of  the  material 
nature  of  these  rays  served  to  strengthen  the  theory  of  atomic 
disintegration,  and  at  the  same  time  to  offer  an  explanation  of 
the  connection  between  the  a  rays  and  the  changes  occurring  in 
the  radio-elements.  In  a  paper  entitled  "Radio-active  Change," 
Mr  Soddy  and  the  writer4  put  forward  in  some  detail  the  theory 
of  atomic  disintegration  as  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of 
radio-activity,  and  at  the  same  time  some  of  the  more  important 
consequences  which  follow  from  the  theory  were  discussed. 

In  a  paper  announcing  the  discovery  of  the  heat  emission  of 
radium,  P.  Curie  and  Laborde8  state  that  the  heat  energy  may  be 
equally  well  supposed  to  be  derived  from  a  breaking  up  of  the 
radium  atom  or  from  energy  absorbed  by  the  radium  from  some 
external  source. 

J.  J.  Thomson  in  an  article  on  "Radium,"  communicated  to 
Nature*,  put  forward  the  view  that  the  emission  of  energy  from 
radium  is  probably  due  to  some  change  within  of  the  atom,  and 
pointed  out  that  a  large  store  of  energy  would  be  released  by  a 
contraction  of  the  atom. 

Sir  William  Crookes7,  in  1899,  proposed  the  theory  that  the 

1  Phil.  Mag.  April,  1903.  2  Phil.  Mag.  May,  1903. 

»  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  235,  1902.  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1903. 
4  Phil.  Mag.  May,  1903.  5  C.  R.  136,  p.  673,  1903. 

6  Nature,  p.  601,  1903.  7  C.  R.  128,  p.  176,  1899. 


320  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

radio-active  elements  possess  the  property  of  abstracting  energy 
from  the  gas.  If  the  moving  molecules,  impinging  more  swiftly 
on  the  substance,  were  released  from  the  active  substance  at  a 
much  lower  velocity,  the  energy  released  from  the  radio-elements 
might  be  derived  from  the  atmosphere.  This  theory  was  advanced 
again  later  to  account  for  the  large  heat  emission  of  radium, 
discovered  by  P.  Curie  and  Laborde. 

Fillipo  Re1  recently  advanced  a  very  general  theory  of  matter 
with  a  special  application  to  radio-active  bodies.  He  supposes 
that  the  parts  of  the  atom  were  originally  free,  constituting  a 
nebula  of  extreme  tenuity.  These  parts  have  gradually  become 
united  round  centres  of  condensation,  and  have  thus  formed  the 
atoms  of  the  elements.  On  this  view  an  atom  may  be  likened 
to  an  extinct  sun.  The  radio-active  atoms  occupy  a  transition 
stage  between  the  original  nebula  and  the  more  stable  chemical 
atoms,  and  in  the  course  of  their  contraction  give  rise  to  the 
heat  emission  observed. 

Lord  Kelvin  in  a  paper  to  the  British  Association,  1903,  has 
suggested  that  radium  may  obtain  its  energy  from  external  sources. 
If  a  piece  of  white  paper  is  put  into  one  vessel  and  a  piece  of  black 
paper  into  an  exactly  similar  vessel,  on  exposure  of  both  vessels  to 
the  light  the  vessel  containing  the  black  paper  is  found  to  be  at  a 
higher  temperature.  He  suggests  that  radium  in  a  similar  manner 
may  keep  its  temperature  above  the  surrounding  air  by  its  power 
of  absorption  of  unknown  radiations. 

199.  Discussion  of  Theories.  From  the  survey  of  the 
general  hypotheses  advanced  as  possible  explanations  of  radio- 
activity, it  is  seen  that  they  may  be  broadly  divided  into  two 
classes^one  of  which  assumes  that  the  energy  emitted  from  the 
radio-elements  is  derived  at  the  expense  of  the  internal  energy  of 
the  atom,  and  the  other  that  the  energy  is  derived  from  external 
sources,  but  that  the  radio-elements  act  as  mechanisms  capaBleT  of 
transforming  this  borrowed  energy  into  the  special  forms  manifested 
in  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity.  Of  these  two  sets  of  hypo- 
theses the  first  appears  to  be  the  most  probable,  and  to  be  best 
supported  by  the  experimental  evidence.  Up  to  the  present  not 
1  C.  R.  p.  136,  p.  1393,  1903. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  321 

the  slightest  experimental  evidence  has  been  adduced  to  show 
that  the  energy  of  radium  is  derived  from  external  sources. 

J.  J.  Thomson  (loc.  cit.)  has  discussed  the  question  in  the 
following  way : — 

"  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  radium  derives  its  energy  from 
the  air  surrounding  it,  that  the  atoms  of  radium  possess  the  faculty 
of  abstracting  the  kinetic  energy  from  the  more  rapidly  moving  air 
molecules  while  they  are  able  to  retain  their  own  energy  when  in 
collision  with  the  slowly  moving  molecules  of  air.  I  cannot  see, 
however,  that  even  the  possession  of  this  property  would  explain 
the  behaviour  of  radium ;  for  imagine  a  portion  of  radium  placed 
in  a  cavity  in  a  block  of  ice ;  the  ice  around  the  radium  gets 
melted ;  where  does  the  energy  for  this  come  from  ?  By  the  hypo- 
theses there  is  no  change  in  the  air-radium  system  in  the  cavity, 
for  the  energy  gained  by  the  radium  is  lost  by  the  air,  while  heat 
cannot  flow  into  the  cavity  from  the  outside,  for  the  melted  ice 
round  the  cavity  is  hotter  than  the  ice  surrounding  it." 

The  writer  has  recently  found  that  the  activity  of  radium  is 
not  altered  by  surrounding  it  with  a  large  mass  of  lead.  A  cylinder 
of  lead  was  cast  10  cms.  in  diameter  and  10  cms.  high.  A  hole 
was  bored  in  one  end  of  the  cylinder  to  the  centre,  and  the  radium, 
enclosed  in  a  small  glass  tube,  was  placed  in  the  cavity.  The 
opening  was  then  hermetically  closed.  The  activity  was  measured 
by  the  rate  of  discharge  of  an  electroscope  by  the  7  rays  trans- 
mitted through  the  lead,  but  no  appreciable  change  was  observed 
during  a  period  of  one  month. 

M.  and  Mme  Curie  early  made  the  suggestion  that  the  radiation 
of  energy  from  the  radio-active  bodies  might  be  accounted  for  by 
supposing  that  space  is  traversed  by  a  type  of  Rontgen  rays,  and 
that  the  radio-elements  possess  the  property  of  absorbing  them. 
Recent  experiments  (section  215)  have  shown  that  there  is  present 
at  the  surface  of  the  earth  a  very  penetrating  type  of  rays,  similar 
to  the  7  rays  of  radium.  Even  if  it  were  supposed  that  the  radio- 
elements  possessed  the  power  of  absorbing  this  radiation,  the 
energy  of  the  rays  is  far  too  minute  to  account  even  for  the  energy 
radiated  from  an  element  of  small  activity  like  uranium.  In 
addition,  all  the  evidence  so  far  obtained  points  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  radio-active  bodies  do  not  absorb  the  type  of  rays  they 
R.  R.-A.  21 


322  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

emit  to  any  greater  extent  than  would  be  expected  from  their 
density.  It  has  been  shown  (section  79)  that  this  is  true  in  the 
case  of  uranium.  Even  if  it  were  supposed  that  the  radio-elements 
possess  the  property  of  absorbing  the  energy  of  some  unknown 
type  of  radiation,  which  is  able  to  pass  through  ordinary  matter 
with  little  absorption,  there  still  remains  the  fundamental  difficulty 
of  accounting  for  the  peculiar  radiations  from  the  radio-elements, 
and  the  series  of  changes  that  occur  in  them.  It  is  not  sufficient 
to  account  for  the  heat  emission  only,  for  it  has  been  shown  (section 
106)  that  the  emission  of  heat  is  directly  connected  with  the  radio- 
activity. 

In  addition,  the  distribution  of  the  heat  emission  of  radium 
amongst  the  radio-active  products  which  arise  from  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  explain  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  energy  emitted 
is  borrowed  from  external  sources.  It  has  been  shown  that  more 
than  two-thirds  of  the  heat  emitted  by  radium  is  due  to  the 
emanation  together  with  the  matter  emanation  X,  which  is  pro- 
duced by  the  emanation.  When  the  emanation  is  separated  from 
the  radium,  its  power  of  emitting  heat,  after  reaching  a  maximum, 
decreases  with  the  time  according  to  an  exponential  law.  It 
would  thus  be  necessary  on  the  absorption  hypothesis  to  postulate 
that  most  of  the  heat  emission  of  radium,  observed  under  ordinary 
conditions,  is  not  due  to  the  radium  itself  but  to  something  pro- 
duced by  the  radium,  the  power  of  which  of  absorbing  energy  from 
external  sources  diminishes  with  time. 

The  strongest  evidence  against  the  hypothesis  of  absorption  of 
external  energy  is  that  such  a  theory  ignores  the  fact,  that,  when- 
ever radio-activity  is  observed,  it  is  always  accompanied  by  some 
change  which  can  be-  detected  by  the  appearance  of  new  products 
having  chemical  properties  distinct  from  those  of  the  original 
substances.  This  leads  to  some  form  of  "  chemical "  theory,  and 
other  results  show  that  the  change  is  atomic  and  not  molecular. 

200.  Theory  of  radio-active  change.  The  processes  occur- 
ring in  the  radio-elements  are  of  a  character  quite  distinct  from  any 
previously  observed  in  chemistry.  Although  it  has  been  shown 
that  the  radio-activity  is  due  to  the  spontaneous  and  continuous 
production  of  new  types  of  active  matter,  the  laws  which  control 


X]  KADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  323 

this  production  are  different  from  the  laws  of  ordinary  chemical 
reactions.  It  has  not  been  found  possible  in  any  way  to  alter 
either  the_j-ate  at  which  the  matter  is  produced  or  its  rate  of 
change  when  produced.  Temperature,  which  is  such  an  important 
factor  in  altering  the  rate  of  chemical  reactions,  is,  in  these  cases, 
entirely  without  influence.  In  addition,  no  ordinary  chemical 
change  is  known  which  is  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  charged 
atoms  with  great  velocity.  It  has  been  suggested  by  Armstrong 
and  Lowry1  that  radio-activity  may  be  an  exaggerated  form  of 
fluorescence  or  phosphorescence  with  a  very  slow  rate  of  decay. 
But  no  form  of  phosphorescence  has  yet  been  shown  to  be  accom- 
panied by  radiations  of  the  character  of  those  emitted  by  the 
radio-elements.  Whatever  hypothesis  is  put  forward  to  explain 
radio-activity  must  account  not  only  for  the  production  of  a  series 
of  active  products,  which  differ  in  chemical  and  physical  properties 
from  each  other  and  from  the  parent  element,  but  also  for  the 
emission  of  rays  of  a  special  character.  Besides  this,  it  is  necessary 
to  account  for  the  large  amount  of  energy  continuously  radiated 
from  the  radio-elements. 

The  radio-elements,  besides  their  high  atomic  weights,  do  not 
possess  in  common  any  special  chemical  characteristics  which  differ- 
entiate them  from  the  elements,  which  do  not  possess  the  property 
of  radio-activity  to  an  appreciable  degree.  Of  all  the  known  ele- 
ments, uranium,  thorium,  and  radium  possess  the  heaviest  atomic 
weights,  viz.:  radium  225,  thorium  232*5,  and  uranium  240. 

If  a  high  atomic  weight  is  taken  as  evidence  of  a  complicated 
structure  of  the  atom,  it  might  be  expected  that  disintegration 
might  occur  more  readily  in  heavy  than  in  light  atoms.  At  the 
same  time,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  elements  of  the 
highest  atomic  weight  should  be  the  most  radio-active;  in  fact, 
radium  is  far  more  active  than  uranium,  although  its  atomic  weight 
is  less.  This  is  seen  to  be  the  case  also  in  the  radio-active  pro- 
ducts; for  example,  the  radium  emanation  is  enormously  more 
active  weight  for  weight  than  the  radium  itself,  and  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  emanation  has  an  atom  lighter 
than  that  of  radium. 

1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  1903. 

21—2 


\324 
Un 


EADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  [CH. 


order  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  radio-activity,  Rutherford 
aVi  Soddy  have  advanced  the  theory  that  jJn»-ftk)ms  of  the  radio- 
el\inents  suffer  spontaneous  disintegration,  and  that  each  disinte- 
grated atom  passes  through  a  succession  of  well-marked  changes, 
accompanied  in  most  cases  by  the  emission  of  a  rays. 

A  preliminary  account  of  this  hypothesis  to  explain  special 
phenomena  has  already  been  given  in  sections  87  and  127.  It 
will  now  be  applied  generally  to  the  radio-elements,  and  the  con- 
sequences, which  follow  from  it,  will  be  considered.  It  is  supposed 
that,  on  an  average,  a  definite  small  proportion  of  the  atoms  of  each 
radio- element  becomes  unstable  at  a  given  time.  As  a  result  of 
this  instability,  an  a.  particle  is  expelled  with  great  velocity.  The 
continuous  expulsion  of  these  a  particles  gives  rise  to  the  non- 
separable  activity  of  the  radio-elements,  which  has  been  shown  to 
consist  entirely  of  a  rays  (section  193).  The  expulsion  of  an  2  par- 
ticle, of  mass  about  twice  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom,  leaves  behind  it 
a  new  system  lighter  than  the  original  one,  and  possessing  chemical 
and  physical  properties  quite  different  from  those  of  the  original 
element.  This  new  system  again  becomes  unstable,  and  expels 
another  a  particle.  The  process  of  disintegration,  once  started, 
proceeds  from  stage  to  stage  at  a  definite  measurable  rate  in  each 
case.  At  each  stage,  with  the  exception  of  one  change  in  thorium 
and  one  in  radium  which  are  not  accompanied  by  rays  at  all,  one 
or  more  a  particles  are  projected,  until  the  last  stages  are  reached, 
when  the  ft  and  7  rays  appear.  The  term  metabolon  has  been 
suggested  as  a  convenient  expression  for  each  of  these  changing 
atoms,  derived  from  the  successive  disintegration  of  the  atoms  of 
the  radio-elements.  Each  metabolon,  on  an  average,  exists  only 
for  a  limited  time.  In  a  collection  of  metabolons  of  the  same  kind 
the  number  N,  which  are  unchanged  at  a  time  t  after  production, 
is  given  by  N  =  N0e~M  where  NQ  is  the  original  number.  Now 

,    =  —  \N,  or  the  fraction  of  the  metabolons  present,  which  change 

in  unit  time,  is  equal  to  X.     The  value  l/\  may  thus  be  taken  as 
the  average  life  of  each  metabolon. 

The  various  metabolons  from  the  radio-elements  are  distin- 
guished from  ordinary  matter  by  their  great  instability  and  conse- 
quently rapid  rate  of  change.  Since  a  body  which  is  radio-active 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  325 

must  ipso  facto  be  undergoing  change,  it  follows  that  none  of  the 
active  products,  for  example,  the  emanations  and  Th  X,  can  consist 
of  any  known  kind  of  matter;  for  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that 
inactive  matter  can  be  made  radio-active,  or  that  two  forms  of  the 
same  element  can  exist,  one  radio-active  and  the  other  not.  For 
example,  half  of  the  matter  constituting  the  radium  emanation 
has  undergone  change  after  an  interval  of  four  days.  After  the 
lapse  of  about  one  month  the  emanation  as  such  has  nearly 
disappeared,  having  been  transformed  through  several  stages  into 
other  and  more  stable  types  of  matter,  which  are  in  consequence 
difficult  to  detect  by  their  radio-activity. 

The  following  table  gives  the  list  of  the  active  products  or 
metabolons  known  to  result  from  the  disintegration  of  the  three 
radio-elements.  In  the  second  column  is  given  the  value  of  the 
radio-active  constant  X  for  each  active  product,  i.e.  the  proportion 
of  the  active  matter  undergoing  change  per  second ;  in  the  third 
column,  the  time  r  required  for  the  activity  to  fall  to  one-half,  i.e. 
the  time  taken  for  half  the  active  product  to  undergo  change ;  in 
the  third  column,  the  nature  of  the  rays  from  each  active  product, 
not  including  the  rays  from  the  products  which  result  from  it ;  in 
the  fourth  column,  a  few  of  the  more  marked  physical  and  chemical 
properties  of  each  metabolon. 

There  are  two  well-marked  changes  in  uranium,  five  in 
thorium,  and  six  in  radium.  It  is  quite  probable  that  a  closer 
examination  of  the  active  products  may  lead  to  the  discovery  of 
still  further  changes.  For  example,  the  evidence  obtained  by 
von  Lerch  (section  179)  from  the  electrolysis  of  a  solution  of 
emanation  X  of  thorium  points  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  an 
additional  change  occurring  in  emanation  X,  for  which  the  value 
of  T  is  3  or  4  hours.  The  experiments  of  Pegram  (section  179) 
also  suggest  that  another  radio-active  product,  of  which  the  value 
of  r  is  about  3  minutes,  is  present  in  thorium.  The  change  of 
thorium  X  into  the  emanation  would  have  been  difficult  to  detect 
if  the  product  of  the  change  had  not  been  gaseous  in  character. 
Besides  the  changes  mentioned  above,  it  is  thus  quite  possible 
that  other  and  more  rapid  changes  may  be  taking  place  which 
have  not  yet  been  detected. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  in  section  188  that  the  fourth  change 


326 


RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES 


[CH. 


Radio-active                     -v 

Nature  of      Chemical  and  Physical 

Products 

A 

T 

the  Rays                   Properties 

URANIUM 

a            Soluble  in  excess  of  ammo- 

1 

nium  carbonate 

Uranium  X               3*6  x  W~7 

22  days 

j8  (and  7?)    Insoluble  in  excess  of  am- 

1 

monium  carbonate 

Final  product 

THORIUM                 ,.   fu.- 

a 

Insoluble  in  ammonia 

Thorium  X               2-OxlO-« 

4  days 

a  (and  /3?) 

Soluble  in  ammonia 

Thorium  Emanation     1-15  x  10~2 

1  minute 

a 

Behaves  like  a  chemically 

inert  gas  of  heavy  mole- 

i 

cular  weight.  Condenses 

at  -  120°  C. 

Emanation  X 

\  Attaches  itself  to  the  sur- 

(first change)             2-2  x  10~4 

55  minutes 

no  rays 

face  of  bodies  concen- 

trated on  the  cathode 

i 

in  an  electric  field 

t 
Second  change          1'74  x  10~5 

11  hours 

a,  /3,  7 

[Soluble  in  some  acids  and 
)      not  in  others.  Possesses 

well-marked   chemical 

1 

properties  in  solution 

Final  product 

... 

RADIUM 

a 

I 

Radium  Emanation 

i 

2-14xlO~6to 
2-00  x  10~6 

3-7  to  4  days            a 

Behaves  like  a  chemically 
inert  gas  of  heavy  mole- 

1 

cular  weight 

Emanation  X 

Condenses  at  -  150°  C. 

(first  change)           about  4  x  10~3 

about  3                a 

Attaches  itself  to  the  sur- 

minutes 

face  of  bodies  ;  mainly 

t 

41 

concentrated     on     the 

Second  change         3-18  x  10~4 

•S&  minutes 

no  rays 

cathode  in  an  electric 

i 

T    field 

Third  change            4-1  x  10~4 

28  minutes 

a,  j8,  7     ;  1  Soluble  in  some  acids  and 

L                          1     ' 

1      not  in  others;    volati- 

t 

. 

'      lized  at  a  white  heat 

Fourth  change 

200  years  (?) 

a,  jS          Soluble  in  sulphuric  acid 

1 

Final  product 

... 

in  emanation  X  of  radium  may  possibly  be  the  radio-active  con- 
stituent present  in  the  polonium  of  Mme  Curie  or  the  radio-tellu- 
rium of  Marckwald.  After  the  disintegrated  radio-atoms  have 
undergone  the  succession  of  changes  mentioned  above,  a  final 
stage  will  be  reached  where  the  atoms  are  either  permanently 
stable  or  change  so  slowly  that  it  is  difficult  to  detect  their 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  327 

presence  by  the  property  of  radio-activity.  Consequently,  there 
will  always  be  a  residual  inactive  product  or  products  of  the 
changes  occurring  in  each  of  the  radio-elements.  In  addition, 
since  the  a  particles,  projected  from  the  radio-elements,  are 
material  in  nature  and  are  not  radio-active,  they  must  also  be 
considered  as  a  residual  product. 

The  value  of  r,  which  may  be  taken  as  a  comparative  measure 
of  the  stability  of  the  different  metabolons,  varies  over  a  very  wide 
range.  The  thorium  emanation  is  the  most  unstable  of  the  meta- 
bolons. and  (leaving  out  of  account  the  fourth  change  in  emanation 
X  of  radium)  uranium  X  the  least  unstable.  The  metabolons 
constituting  uranium  X  are  about  30,000  times  as  stable  as  the 
metabolons  constituting  the  thorium  emanation. 

The  only  two  metabolons  of  about  the  same  stability  are  the 
metabolons  constituting  thorium  X  and  the  radium  emanation. 
In  each  case  the  activity  falls  to  half  value  in  about  four  days.  I 
consider  that  the  approximate  agreement  of  the  numbers  is  a  mere 
coincidence,  and  that  the  two  types  of  matter  are  quite  distinct 
from  one  another ;  for,  if  the  metabolons  were  identical,  it  would 
be  expected  that  the  changes  which  follow  would  take  place  in  the 
same  way  and  at  the  same  rate,  but  such  is  not  the  case.  More- 
over Th  X  and  the  radium  emanation  have  chemical  and  physical 
properties  quite  distinct  from  one  another. 

201.  Production  of  helium  from  radium  and  the  radium 
emanation.  Since  the  final  products,  resulting  from  a  disinte- 
gration of  the  radio-elements,  are  not  radio-active,  they  should  in 
the  course  of  geologic  ages  collect  in  some  quantity,  and  should 
always  be  found  associated  with  the  radio-elements.  Now  the 
inactive  products  resulting  from  the  radio-active  changes  are  the  a 
particles  expelled  at  each  stage,  and  the  final  inactive  product  or 
products  which  remain,  when  the  process  of  disintegration  can  no 
longer  be  traced  by  the  property  of  radio-activity. 

Pitchblende,  in  which  the  radio-elements  are  mostly  found, 
contains  in  small  quantity  a  large  proportion  of  all  the  known 
elements.  In  searching  for  a  possible  disintegration  product 
common  to  all  the  radio-elements,  the  presence  of  helium  in  the 
radio-active  minerals  is  noteworthy;  for  helium  is  only  found  in 


328  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

the  radio-active  minerals  and  is  an  invariable  companion  of  the 
radio-elements.  In  addition  the  presence  of  a  light,  inert  gas  like 
helium  in  minerals  had  always  been  a  matter  of  surprise.  The 
production  by  radium  and  thorium  of  the  radio-active  emanations, 
which  behaved  like  chemically  inert  gases  of  the  helium-argon 
family,  suggested  the  possibility  that  one  of  the  final  inactive 
products  of  the  disintegration  of  the  radio-elements  might  prove 
to  be  a  chemically  inert  gas.  The  discovery  later  of  the  material 
nature  of  the  a  rays  added  weight  to  the  suggestion;  for  the 
measurement  of  the  ratio  e/m  of  the  a  particle  indicated  that  if 
the  a  particle  consisted  of  any  known  kind  of  matter,  it  must  either 
be  hydrogen  or  helium.  For  these  reasons,  it  was  suggested  in 
1902  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy1  that  helium  might  be  a  product 
of  the  disintegration  of  the  radio-elements. 

Sir  William  Ramsay  and  Mr  Soddy  in  1903  undertook  an  in- 
vestigation of  the  radium  emanation,  with  the  purpose  of  seeing  if 
it  were  possible  to  obtain  any  spectroscopic  evidence  of  the  presence 
of  a  new  substance.  First  of  all,  they  exposed  the  emanation  to 
very  drastic  treatment  (section  149),  and  confirmed  and  extended 
the  results  previously  noted  by  Rutherford  and  Soddy  that  the 
emanation  behaved  like  a  chemically  inert  gas,  and  in  this  respect 
possessed  properties  analogous  to  the  gases  of  the  helium-argon 
group. 

On  obtaining  30  milligrams  of  pure  radium  bromide  (pre- 
pared about  three  months  previously)  Ramsay  and  Soddy2  ex- 
amined the  gases,  liberated  by  solution  of  the  radium  bromide  in 
water,  for  the  presence  of  helium.  A  considerable  quantity  of 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  was  released  by  the  solution  (see  section 
116).  The  hydrogen  and  oxygen  were  removed  by  passing  the 
liberated  gases  over  a  red-hot  spiral  of  partially  oxidized  copper- 
wire  and  the  resulting  water  vapour  by  a  phosphorous  pentoxide 
tube. 

The  gas  was  then  passed  into  a  small  vacuum  tube  which  was 
in  connection  with  a  small  U  tube.  By  placing  the  U  tube  in 
liquid  air,  most  of  the  emanation  present  was  condensed,  and  also 
most  of  the  CO2  present  in  the  gas.  On  examining  the  spectrum 

1  Phil  Mag.  p.  582,  1902  ;  pp.  453  and  579,  1903. 

2  Nature,  July  16,  p.  246,  1903.     Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  72,  p.  204,  1903. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  329 

of  the  gas  in  the  vacuum  tube  the  characteristic  line  D3  of  helium 
was  observed. 

This  experiment  was  repeated  with  30  milligrams  of  radium 
bromide  about  four  months  old,  lent  for  the  purpose  by  the  writer. 
The  emanation  and  CO2  were  removed  by  passing  them  through  a 
U  tube  immersed  in  liquid  air.  A  practically  complete  spectrum 
of  helium  was  observed,  including  the  lines  of  wave-length  6677, 
5876,  5016,  4972,  4713  and  4472.  There  were  also  present  three 
other  lines  of  wave-length  about  6180,  5695,  5455  which  have  not 
yet  been  identified. 

In  later  experiments  the  emanation  from  50  milligrams  of  the 
radium  bromide  was  conveyed  with  oxygen  into  a  small  U  tube, 
cooled  in  liquid  air,  in  which  the  emanation  was  condensed.  Fresh 
oxygen  was  added  and  the  U  tube  again  pumped  out.  The  small 
vacuum  tube,  connected  with  the  U  tube,  showed  at  first  no 
helium  lines  when  the  liquid  air  was  removed.  The  spectrum 
obtained  was  a  new  one,  and  Ramsay  and  Soddy  considered  it 
to  be  probably  that  of  the  emanation  itself.  After  allowing  the 
emanation  tube  to  stand  for  four  days,  the  helium  spectrum  appeared 
with  all  the  characteristic  lines,  and  in  addition,  three  new  lines 
present  in  the  helium  obtained  by  solution  of  the  radium.  These 
results  have  since  been  confirmed.  The  experiments,  which  have 
led  to  such  striking  and  important  results,  were  by  no  means  easy 
of  performance,  for  the  quantity  of  helium  and  of  emanation  released 
from  50  mgrs.  of  radium  bromide  is  extremely  small.  It  was 
necessary,  in  all  cases,  to  remove  almost  completely  the  other  gases, 
which  were  present  in  sufficient  quantity  to  mask  the  spectrum  of 
the  substance  under  examination.  The  success  of  the  experiments 
has  been  largely  due  to  the  application  to  the  investigation  of  the 
refined  methods  of  gas  analysis,  which  had  been  previously  employed 
by  Sir  William  Ramsay  with  so  much  success  in  the  separation  of 
the  rare  gases  xenon  and  krypton,  which  exist  in  minute  pro- 
portions in  the  atmosphere.  The  fact  that  the  helium  spectrum 
was  not  present  at  first,  but  appeared  after  tHe  emanation  had 
remainecfm  theliuBerfbr  some  days,  shows  that  the  helium  must 
have  been  produced  from  the  emanation.  The  emanation  cannot 
be  helium  itself,  for  in  the  first  place,  helium  is  not  radio-active, 
and  in  the  second  place,  the  helium  spectrum  was  not  present  at 


330  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

first,  when  the  quantity  of  emanation  in  the  tube  was  at  its 
maximum.  In  addition,  the  diffusion  experiments,  already  dis- 
cussed, point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  emanation  is  of  high 
molecular  weight.  There  can  thus  be  no  doubt  that  the  helium  is 
derived  from  the  emanation  of  radium  in  consequence  of  changes 
or*  some  kind  occurring  in  it. 

In  order  to  explain  the  presence  of  helium  in  radium  on  ordi- 
nary chemical  lines,  it  has  been  suggested  that  radium  is  not 
a  true  element,  but  a  molecular  compound  of  helium  with  some 
substance  known  or  unknown.  The  helium  compound  gradually 
breaks  down,  giving  rise  to  the  helium  observed.  It  is  at  once 
obvious  that  this  postulated  helium  compound  is  of  an  entirely 
different  character  to  any  other  compound  previously  observed 
in  chemistry.  Weight  for  weight,  it  emits  during  its  change  an 
amount  of  energy  at  least  one  million  times  greater  than  any 
molecular  compound  known  (see  section  205).  In  addition,  it  must 
be  supposed  that  the  rate  of  breaking  up  of  the  helium  compound 
is  independent  of  great  ranges  of  temperature — a  result  never 
before  observed  in  any  molecular  change.  The  helium  compound 
in  its  breaking  up  must  give  rise  to  the  peculiar  radiations  and 
also  pass  through  the  successive  radio-active  changes  observed  in 
radium. 

In  order  to  explain  the  production  of  helium  and  radio-activity 
on  this  view,  a  unique  kind  of  molecule  must  thus  be  postulated— 
a  molecule,  in  fact,  which  is  endowed  with  every  single  property 
which  on  the  disintegration  theory  is  ascribed  to  the  atom  of  the 
radio-elements.  On  the  other  hand,  radium  as  far  as  it  has  been 
examined,  has  fulfilled  every  test  required  for  an  element.  It  has 
a  well-marked  and  characteristic  spectrum,  and  there  is  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  it  is  not  an  element  in  the  ordinarily  accepted 
sense  of  the  term. 

On  the  theory  that  the  radio-elements  are  undergoing  atomic 
disintegration,  the  helium  must  either  be  considered  to  exist 
within  the  radium  atom,  or  else  to  be  formed  from  its  constituent 
corpuscles  during  the  process  of  disintegration.  The  theory  that 
the  heavy  atoms  are  all  built  up  of  some  simple  fundamental 
unit  of  matter  or  protyle  has  been  advanced  at  various  times  by 
many  prominent  chemists  and  physicists.  Prout's  hypothesis, 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  331 

that  all  elements  are  built  up  out  of  hydrogen,  is  an  example  of 
this  point  of  view  of  regarding  the  subject. 

On  the  disintegration  theory,  the  changes  occurring  in  the 
radio-atoms  involve  an  actual  transformation  of  the  atoms  through 
successive  changes.  This  change  is  so  slow  in  uranium  and  thorium 
that  at  least  a  million  years  would  be  required  before  the  amourft 
of  change  is  measurable  by  the  balance.  In  radium  it  is  a  million 
times  faster,  but  even  in  that  case  it  is  doubtful  whether  any 
appreciable  change  would  be  observed  by  ordinary  chemical  methods 
for  many  years,  if  the  possibility  of  such  a  change  had  not  been 
suggested  from  other  lines  of  research. 

202.     Amount  of  helium  from  radium.    The  appearance  of 
helium  in  a  tube  containing  the  radium  emanation  may  indicate 
either  that  the  helium  is  one  of  the  final  products,  which  appear 
at  the  end  of  .the  series  of  radio-active  changes,  or  that^the  Jielium 
is  in  realjty  tho    expelled  a  particle      The  evidence  at  present 
points  to  the  latter  as  being  the  more  probable  explanation.     In 
the  first  place,  the  emanation  diffuses  like  a  gas  of  heavy  molecular  \ 
weight,  and  it  appears  probable  that,  after  the  expulsion  of  a  few  \ 
fji  particles,  the  atomic  weight  of  the  final  product  is  comparable 
with  that  of  the  emanation.     On  the  other  hand,  the  value  of  e/m  I 
determined  for  the  projected  OL  particle  points  to  the  conclusion  / 
that,  if  it  consists  of  any  known  kind   of  matter,  it  is   either  * 
hydrogen  or  helium. 

If  the  a.  particles,  when  released,  can  exist  in  the  gaseous  state, 
an  estimate  can  readily  be  made  of  the  volume  of  the  total  number 
of  particles  liberated  per  year.  It  has  been  calculated  that  one 
gram  of  radium  expels  about  1011  a.  particles  per  second.  Since 
there  are  3'6  x  1019  molecules  in  one  cubic  centimetre  of  any  gas 
at  standard  pressure  and  temperature,  the  volume  of  the  a  particles 
released  per  second  from  1  gram  of  radium  is  2'8  x  10"9  c.c.  and 
per  year  90  cubic  millimetres. 

It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  emanation  released  from 
1  gram  of  radium  in  a  state  of  radio-active  equilibrium  is  probably 
about  3  x  10~4  c.c.  Since  the  emanation  passes  through  at  least 
three  stages,  each  of  which  gives  rise  to  a  rays,  the  volume  of  the 
a.  particles  from  the  emanation,  released  from  1  gram  of  radium,  is 
about  one  cubic  millimetre. 


332  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

Ramsay  and  Soddy  state  that  the  amount  of  helium,  present 
in  the  gases  from  radium,  was  very  minute.  From  the  above 
estimates,  it  can  readily  be  shown  that  the  amount  of  helium 
liberated  in  the  experiments  described  in  section  201  was  about 
0'5  cubic  millimetres.  If  the  a.  particles  are  helium,  it  is  to  be 
expected  that  the  greater  portion  of  the  helium,  which  is  produced 
in  a  tube  containing  the  radium  emanation,  would  be  buried  in 
the  walls  of  the  glass  tube ;  for  the  a  particles  are  projected  with 
sufficient  velocity  to  penetrate  some  distance  into  the  glass. 

203.  Rate  of  change  of  the  radio-elements.  Since  the 
atoms  of  the  radio-elements  themselves  are  continuously  breaking 
up,  they  must  also  be  considered  to  be  metabolons,  the  only  dif- 
ference between  them  and  the  metabolons  such  as  the  emanations, 
Th  X  and  others,  being  their  comparatively  great  stability  and  con- 
sequent very  slow  rate  of  change.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the 
process  of  disintegration,  traced  above,  is  reversible,  and,  in  the 
course  of  time,  a  quantity  of  radium,  uranium  or  thorium,  left 
to  itself  must  gradually  be  transformed  into  inactive  matter  of 
different  kinds. 

An  approximate  estimate  of  the  rate  of  change  of  radio-elements 
can  be  deduced  from  the  number  of  atoms  breaking  up  per  second. 
It  has  been  calculated  from  several  lines  of  evidence  (section  104) 
that  from  1  gram  of  radium  about  1011  a  particles  are  expelled 
per  second.  The  number  for  uranium  and  thorium  is  about 
7  x  104. 

Now  it  has  been  shown  that  there  are  at  least  four  rapid  changes 
in  radium,  each  of  which  gives  rise  to  a.  rays.  In  the  absence  of 
evidence  of  the  number  of  a  particles  expelled  at  each  change,  the 
assumption,  which  seems  most  probable,  will  be  made,  viz.,  that 
each  metabolon  expels  only  one  a.  particle.  Since  there  are  four 
changes  in  radium,  the  number  of  atoms  in  one  gram  of  radium 
breaking  up  per  second  is  2'5  x  1010.  Now  it  has  been  shown,  from 
data  based  on  experimental  evidence,  that  one  cubic  centimetre  of 
hydrogen,  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature,  contains  about 
3'6  x  1019  molecules.  Taking  the  atomic  weight  of  radium  as  225, 
there  will  be  T8  x  1021  atoms  in  1  gram  of  radium.  The  fraction 
\  of  one  gram  of  radium  which  changes  is  thus  1*4  x  10~n  per 
second  and  4'4x  10~4  per  year.  It  thus  follows  that,  in  each  gram 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  333 

of  radium,  about  half  a  milligram  disintegrates  per  year.  Since 
the  amount  of  radium  which  is  unchanged  will  diminish  according 
to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  half  of  a  given  weight  of 
radium  will  be  transformed  in  about  1500  years.  Only  one  per 
cent,  will  remain  unchanged  after  a  lapse  of  about  10,000  years. 
In  a  gram  of  uranium  or  thorium,  where  the  change  takes  place 
at  about  one-millionth  the  rate,  about  a  million  years  would  be 
required  before  half  a  milligram  would  be  changed.  All  but  one 
per  cent,  of  the  uranium  and  thorium  would  be  transformed  in 
about  1010  years. 

This  is  the  minimum  estimate  of  the  life  of  radio-elements  on 
the  assumption  that  one  a  particle  is  expelled  at  each  change.  A 
maximum  limit  to  the  life  of  the  radio-elements  can  be  deduced 
by  supposing  that  the  radium  is  completely  disintegrated  into  a 
particles.  Since  the  mass  of  the  a  particle  is  about  twice  that  of 
the  hydrogen  atom  there  cannot  be  many  more  than  100  a  particles 
produced  from  each  atom  of  the  radio-elements.  The  'maximum 
estimate  of  the  life  of  radium  is  thus  about  5'0  times  greater 
than  the  minimum  estimate.  The  minimum  estimate  is  however 
probably  nearer  the  truth :  for  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that 
more  than  one  a  particle  is  expelled  at  each  change.  The  agree- 
ment between  the  calculated  and  experimental  values  of  the 
volume  of  the  emanation  (see  section  197)  is  strong  evidence  in 
support  of  the  minimum  estimate ;  for  in  the  calculation  only  one 
a  particle  was  supposed  to  be  expelled  at  each  change. 

The  changes  in  radium  are  thus  fairly  rapid,  and  a  mass  of 
radium  if  left  to  itself  should  in  the  course  of  a  few  thousand  years 
have  lost  a  large  proportion  of  its  radio-activity.  Taking  the 
minimum  estimate  of  the  life  of  radium,  the  value  of  X  is  4'4  x  10~4, 
with  a  year  as  the  unit  of  time.  A  mass  of  radium  left  to  itself 
should  thus  be  half  transformed  in  1500  years  and  only  one- 
millionth  part  would  remain  after  30,000  years.  Thus  supposing, 
for  illustration,  that  the  earth  was  originally  composed  of  pure 
radium,  its  activity  per  gram  30,000  years  later  would  not  be 
greater  than  the  activity  observed  to-day  in  a  good  specimen  of 
pitchblende.  Even  taking  the  maximum  estimate  of  the  life  of 
radium,  the  time  required  for  the  radium  to  practically  disappear 
is  short  compared  with  the  probable  age  of  the  earth.  We  are 


334  RADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  [CH. 

thus  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  radium  is  being  continuously 
produced  in  the  earth,  unless  the  very  improbable  assumption  is 
made,  that  radium  was  in  some  way  suddenly  formed  at  a  date 
recent  in  comparison  with  the  age  of  the  earth.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  radium  may  be  a  disintegration  product  of  one 
of  the  radio-elements  found  in  pitchblende.  Both  uranium  and 
thorium  fulfil  the  conditions  required  in  a  possible  source  of 
production  of  radium.  Both  are  present  in  pitchblende,  have 
atomic  weights  greater  than  that  of  radium,  and  have  rates  of 
change  which  are  slow  compared  with  that  of  radium.  In  some 
respects,  uranium  filfils  the  conditions  required  better  than  thorium ; 
for  it  has  not  been  observed  that  minerals  rich  in  thorium  contain 
much  radium,  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  pitchblendes  contain- 
ing the  most  radium  contain  a  large  proportion  of  uranium. 

If  radium   is  not  produced    from   uranium,  it  is  certainly  a 
remarkable  coincidence  that  the  greatest  activity  of  pitchblende 
yet  observed  is  about  five  or  six  times  that  of  uranium.     Since 
radium    has   a   life   short   compared  with    that   of  uranium,  the 
amount  of  radium  produced  should  reach  a  maximum  value  after 
a  few  thousand  years,  when  the  rate  of  production  of  fresh  radium 
— which  is  also  a  measure  of  the  rate  of  change  of  uranium — 
balances  the  rate  of  change  of  that  product.     In  this  respect  the 
process   would   be   exactly  analogous   to   the   production   of  the 
emanation  by  radium,  with  the  difference  that  the  radium  changes 
much  more  slowly  than  the  emanation.     But  since  radium  itself 
in  its  disintegration  gives  rise  to  at  least  four  changes  with  the 
corresponding  production  of  a  rays,  the  activity  due  to  the  radium 
(measured  by  the  a  rays),  when  in  a  state  of  radio-active  equili- 
brium with    uranium,  should   be  about  four  times   that   of  the 
uranium  that  produces  it ;  for  it  has  been  shown  that  only  one 
change  has  so  far  been  observed  in  uranium  in  which  a  rays  are 
expelled.     Taking   into   account   the   presence   of  polonium   and 
actinium  in  pitchblende,  the  activity  in  the  best  pitchblende  is 
about  the  same  as  would  be  expected  if  the  radium  were  a  dis- 
integration product  of  uranium.     If  this  hypothesis  is  correct,  the 
amount  of  radium  in  any  pitchblende  should  be  proportional  to 
the   amount   of   uranium   present,   provided   the   radium   is   not 
removed  from  the  mineral  by  percolating  water.     On  the  other 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  335 

hand  it  should  be  noticed  that  while  the  greatest  amount  of 
radium  has  been  observed  in  a  pitchblende  rich  in  uranium,  some 
pitchblendes  rich  in  uranium  contain  very  little  radium. 

The  general  evidence,  which  has  been  advanced  to  show  that 
radium  must  continually  be  produced  from  some  other  substance, 
applies  also  to  actinium,  which  has  an  activity  of  the  same  order 
of  magnitude  as  that  of  radium.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the 
three  radio-active  substances,  radium,  thorium  and  actinium,  should 
exhibit  such  a  close  similarity  in  the  succession  of  changes  which 
occur  in  them.  Each  of  them  at  one  stage  of  its  disintegration 
emits  a  radio-active  gas,  and  in  each  case  this  gas  is  transformed 
into  a  solid  which  is  deposited  upon  the  surface  of  bodies.  It 
would  appear  that,  after  disintegration  of  an  atom  of  any  of  these 
has  once  begun,  there  is  a  similar  succession  of  changes,  in  which 
the  resulting  systems  have  allied  chemical  and  physical  properties. 
Such  a  connection  is  of  interest  as  indicating  a  possible  origin 
of  the  recurrence  of  properties  in  the  atoms  of  the  elements,  as 
exemplified  by  the  periodic  law. 

204.  Loss  of  weight  of  the  radio-element.  Since  the 
radio-elements  are  continuously  throwing  off  a  particles  atomic 
in  size,  an  active  substance,  enclosed  in  a  vessel  sufficiently  thin  to 
allow  the  a  particles  to  escape,  must  gradually  lose  in  weight. 
This  loss  of  weight  wrill  be  small  under  ordinary  conditions,  since 
the  greater  proportion  of  the  a  rays  produced  are  absorbed  in  the 
mass  of  the  substance.  If  a  very  thin  layer  of  a  radium  compound 
were  spread  on  a  very  thin  sheet  of  substance,  which  did  not 
appreciably  absorb  the  a  particles,  a  loss  of  weight  due  to  the 
expulsion  of  a  particles  might  be  detectable.  Since  e/m  =  6  x  103 
for  the  a.  particle,  and  e=l'l  x  10"20  electro-magnetic  units,  and 
10n  a  particles  are  expelled  per  second  per  gram  of  radium,  the 
fraction  of  the  mass  expelled  is  1*8  x  10~13  per  second  and 
6  x  10~6  per  year.  There  is  one  condition,  however,  under  which 
the  radium  should  lose  in  weight  fairly  rapidly.  If  a  current  of 
air  is  slowly  passed  over  a  radium  solution,  the  emanation  produced 
would  be  removed  as  fast  as  it  was  formed.  Since  the  atom  of 
the  emanation  has  a  mass  probably  not  much  smaller  than  the 
radium  atom,  the  fraction  of  the  mass  removed  per  year  should 


336  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

be  nearly  equal  to  the  fraction  of  the  radium  which  changes  per 
year,  i.e.  one  gram  of  radium  should  diminish  in  weight  half  a 
milligram  (section  203)  per  year  on  a  maximum  estimate  and 
1/100  of  a  milligram  on  a  minimum  estimate. 

If  it  is  supposed  that  the  /3  particles  have  weight,  the  loss  of 
weight  due  to  their  expulsion  is  very  small  compared  with  that 
due  to  the  emission  of  a  particles.  Taking  the  estimate  deduced 
from  the  observation  of  Wien  (section  104),  that  6 '6  x  109  ft  particles 
are  projected  per  second  from  1  gram  of  radium  bromide,  the  loss 
of  weight  would  only  be  about  1'2  x  10~10  gram  per  year. 

Except  under  very  special  experimental  conditions,  it  would 
thus  be  very  difficult  to  detect  the  loss  of  weight  of  radium  due  to 
the  expulsion  of  {3  particles  from  its  mass.  There  is,  however,  a 
possibility  that  radium  might  change  in  weight  even  though  none 
of  the  radio-active  products  were  allowed  to  escape.  For  example, 
if  the  view  is  taken  that  gravitation  is  the  result  of  forces  having 
their  origin  in  the  atom,  it  is  possible  that,  if  the  atom  were 
disintegrated,  the  weight  of  the  parts  might  not  be  equal  to  that 
of  the  original  atom. 

A  large  number  of  experiments  have  been  made  to  see  if 
radium  preparations,  kept  in  a  sealed  tube,  alter  in  weight.  With 
the  small  quantities  of  radium  available  to  the  experimenter,  no 
difference  of  weight  of  radium  preparations  with  time  has  yet 
been  established  with  certainty.  Heydweiller  stated  that  he  had 
observed  a  loss  of  weight  of  radium,  and  Dorn  also  obtained  a 
slight  indication  of  change  in  weight.  These  results  have  not, 
however,  been  confirmed.  Forch,  later,  was  unable  to  observe  any 
appreciable  change. 

205.     Total  emission  of  energy  from  the  radio-element. 

It  has  been  shown  that  1  gram  of  radium  emits  energy  at  the 
rate  of  100  gram-calories  per  hour  or  876,000  gram-calories  per 
year.  If  1  gram  of  radium  were  set  apart,  its  radio-activity  and 
consequent  heat  emission  at  a  time  t  is  given  by  qe~M,  where  \  is 
the  constant  of  decay  of  activity  of  radium.  Thus  the  total  heat 

/OC 
qe~M  =  -  . 
)  ^ 

Now  on  the  minimum  estimate  of  the  life  of  radium,  the  value 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  337 

of  X  is  4'4  x  10~4,  and  on  the  maximum  estimate  1*76  x  10~5  when 
1  year  is  taken  as  the  unit  of  time.  The  total  heat  emission  from 
1  gram  of  radium  during  its  life  thus  lies  between  2  x  109  and 
5  x  1010  gram-calories.  The  minimum  estimate  is  probably  nearer 
the  truth  than  the  maximum.  The  heat  emitted  in  the  union  of 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  to  form  1  gram  of  water  is  about  4  x  103 
gram-calories,  and  in  this  reaction  more  heat  is  given  out  for 
equal  weights  than  in  any  other  chemical  reaction  known.  It  is 
thus  seen  that  the  total  energy  emitted  from  1  gram  of  radium 
during  its  changes  is  about  one  million  times  greater  than  that  in- 
volved in  any  known  molecular  change.  That  matter  is  able,  under 
special  conditions,  to  emit  an  enormous  amount  of  energy,  is  well 
exemplified  by  the  case  of  the  radium  emanation.  The  total  heat 
emission  from  the  emanation  released  from  1  gram  of  radium, 
and  from  the  secondary  products,  corresponds  to  about  104 
gram-calories,  and  this  amount  of  heat  is  given  out  as  a  conse- 
quence of  changes  in  a  minute  volume  of  gas.  Taking  the 
estimate  that  the  volume  of  the  emanation  is  3  x  10~4  cubic 
centimetres  at  standard  pressure  and  temperature,  and  its  atomic 
weight  about  200,  it  can  be  calculated  that  1  gram  of  emanation 
gives  out  during  its  life  about  109  gram-calories.  Quite  inde- 
pendently of  any  theory,  a  result  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude 
can  be  deduced  from  the  experiments. 

Since  the  other  radio-elements  only  differ  from  radium  in  the 
slowness  of  their  change,  the  total  heat  emission  from  uranium 
and  thorium  must  be  of  a  similar  high  order  of  magnitude.  There 
is  thus  reason  to  believe  that  an  enormous  store  of  latent  energy 
is  resident  in  the  atoms  of  the  radio-elements.  This  store  of 
energy  could  not  have  been  recognized  if  the  atoms  were  not 
undergoing  a  slow  process  of  disintegration.  The  energy  emitted 
in  radio-active  changes  may  thus  be  supposed  to  be  derived  from 
the  internal  energy  of  the  atoms.  The  emission  of  this  energy 
does  not  disobey  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  for  it  is 
only  necessary  to  suppose  that,  when  the  radio-active  changes 
have  ceased,  the  energy  stored  up  in  the  atoms  of  the  final 
products  is  less  than  that  in  the  original  atoms  of  the  radio- 
elements.  The  difference  between  the  energy  originally  possessed 
by  the  matter,  which  has  undergone  the  change,  and  the  final 

R.  R.-A.  22 


338  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

inactive  products  which  arise,  is  a  measure  of  the  total  amount  of 
energy  released. 

There  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  atomic  energy 
of  all  the  elements  is  not  of  a  similar  high  order  of  magnitude. 
With  the  exception  of  their  high  atomic  weights,  the  radio- 
elements  do  not  possess  any  special  chemical  characteristics  which 
differentiate  them  from  the  inactive  elements.  The  existence  of 
a  latent  store  of  energy  in  the  atoms  is  a  necessary  consequence 
of  the  modern  view  developed  by  J.  J.  Thomson,  Larmor,  and 
Lorentz,  of  regarding  the  atom  as  a  complicated  structure  consisting 
of  charged  parts  in  rapid  oscillatory  or  orbital  motion  in  regard  to 
one  another.  The  energy  may  be  partly  kinetic  and  partly  potential, 
but  the  mere  arrangement  of  the  charged  particles,  which  probably 
constitute  the  atom,  in  itself  implies  a  large  store  of  internal 
atomic  energy. 

It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  existence  of  this  store  of 
latent  energy  would  have  ordinarily  manifested  itself,  since  the 
atoms  cannot  be  broken  up  into  simpler  forms  by  the  physical  or 
chemical  agencies  at  our  disposal.  Its  existence  at  once  explains 
the  failure  of  chemistry  to  transform  the  atoms,  and  also  accounts 
for  the  independence  of  the  rate  of  change  of  the  radio-active 
processes  of  all  external  agencies.  It  has  not  so  far  been  found 
possible  to  alter  in  any  way  the  rate  of  emission  of  energy  from 
the  radio-elements.  If  it  were  ever  found  possible  to  control  at 
will  the  rate  of  disintegration  of  the  radio-elements,  an  enormous 
amount  of  energy  could  be  obtained  from  a  small  quantity  of 
matter. 

206.  Possible  causes  of  disintegration.  In  order  to  ex- 
plain the  phenomena  of  radio-activity,  it  has  been  supposed  that  a 
certain  small  fraction  of  the  radio-atoms  undergoes  disintegration 
per  second,  but  no  assumptions  have  been  made  as  to  the  cause 
which  produces  the  instability  and  consequent  disintegration. 
The  instability  of  the  atoms  may  be  supposed  to  be  brought  about 
either  by  the  action  of  external  forces  or  of  forces  inherent  in  the 
atoms  themselves.  It  is  conceivable,  for  example,  that  the  appli- 
cation of  some  slight  external  force  might  cause  instability  and 
consequent  disintegration,  accompanied  by  the  liberation  of  a  large 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  339 

amount  of  energy,  on  the  same  principle  that  a  detonator  is 
necessary  to  start  some  explosives.  It  has  been  shown  that  the 
number  of  atoms  of  any  radio-active  product  which  break  up  per 
second  is  always  proportional  to  the  number  present.  This  law 
of  change  does  not  throw  any  light  on  the  question,  for  it  would 
be  expected  equally  on  either  hypothesis.  It  has  not  been  found 
possible  to  alter  the  rate  of  change  of  any  product  by  the  appli- 
cation of  any  known  physical  or  chemical  forces,  unless  possibly  it 
is  assumed  that  the  force  of  gravitation  which  is  not  under  our 
control  may  influence  in  some  way  the  stability  of  the  radio-atoms. 

It  has  been  suggested  by  J.  J.  Thomson1  that  the  rate  of  dis- 
integration of  radium  may  be  influenced  by  its  own  radiations. 
This,  at  first  sight,  appears  very  probable,  for  a  small  mass  of  pure 
radium  compound  is  subjected  to  an  intense  bombardment  by  the 
radiations  arising  from  it,  and  the  radiations  are  of  such  a  character 
that  they  might  be  expected  to  produce  a  breaking  up  of  the 
atoms  of  matter  which  they  traverse.  If  this  is  the  case  the 
radio-activity  of  a  given  quantity  of  radium  should  be  a  function 
of  its  concentration,  and  should  be  greater  in  the  solid  state  than 
when  disseminated  through  a  large  mass  of  matter. 

I  have  recently  tried  an  experiment  to  see  if  this  were  the 
case.  Two  glass  tubes  were  taken,  in  one  of  which  was  placed  a 
few  milligrams  of  pure  radium  bromide  in  a  state  of  radio-active 
equilibrium,  and  in  the  other  a  solution  of  barium  chloride.  The 
two  tubes  were  connected  near  the  top  by  a  short  cross  tube  and 
the  open  ends  sealed  off.  The  activity  of  the  radium  in  the  solid 
state  was  tested  immediately  after  its  introduction  by  placing  it 
in  a  definite  position  near  an  electroscope  made  of  thin  metal  of 
the  type  shown  in  Fig.  11.  The  increased  rate  of  discharge  of  the 
electroscope  was  observed.  This  rate  of  discharge  was  due  to  the 
ft  and  7  rays  from  the  radium.  By  placing  a  lead  plate  6  mms. 
in  thickness  between  the  radium  and  the  electroscope,  the  rate  of 
discharge  observed  was  then  due  to  the  7  rays  alone.  By  slightly 
tilting  the  apparatus,  the  barium  solution  flowed  into  the  radium 
tube  and  dissolved  the  radium.  The  tube  was  well  shaken  so  as 
to  distribute  the  radium  uniformly  throughout  the  solution.  No 
appreciable  change  of  the  activity  measured  by  the  7  rays  was 

1  Nature,  April  30,  p.  601,  1903. 

22—2 


340  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

observed  over  the  period  of  one  month.  The  activity  measured 
by  the  ft  and  7  rays  was  somewhat  reduced,  but  this  was  not  due 
to  a  decrease  of  the  radio-activity,  but  to  an  increased  absorption 
of  the  /3  rays  in  their  passage  through  the  solution.  The  volume 
of  the  solution  was  at  least  1000  times  greater  than  that  of  the 
solid  radium  bromide,  and,  in  consequence,  the  radium  was  sub- 
jected to  the  action  of  a  much  weaker  radiation.  I  think  we  may 
conclude  from  this  experiment  that  the  radiations  emitted  by 
radium  have  little  if  any  influence  in  causing  the  disintegration 
of  the  radium  atoms. 

This  result  is  in  general  agreement  with  other  observations; 
for  it  has  not  been  observed  that  the  decay  of  activity  of  any 
product  is  influenced  by  the  degree  of  concentration  of  that 
product. 

It  thus  seems  likely  that  the  cause  of  the  disruption  of  the 
toms  of  the  radio-elements  and  their  products  is  resident  in  the 
toms  themselves.    "According  to  the  modern  views  of  the  consti- 
ution  of  the  atom,  it  is  not  so  much  a  matter  of  surprise  that 
3me  atoms  disintegrate  as  that  the  atoms  of  the  elements  are  so 
ermanent  as  they  appear  to  be.    In  accordance  with  the  hypothesis 
of  J.  J.  Thomson,  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  atoms  consist  of  a 
number  of  small  positively  and  negatively  charged  particles  in 
rapid  internal  movement,  and  held  in  equilibrium  by  their  mutual 
forces.     In  a  complex  atom,  where  the  possible  variations  in  the 
relative  motion  of  the  parts  are  very  great,  the  atom  may  arrive 
at  such  a  phase  that  one  part  acquires  sufficient  kinetic  energy 
to  escape  from  the  system,  or  that  the  constraining  forces  are 
momentarily  neutralised,  so  that  the  part  escapes  from  the  system 
with  the  velocity  possessed  by  it  at  the  instant  of  its  release. 

Sir  Oliver  Lodge1  has  advanced  the  view  that  the  instability  of 
the  atom  may  be  a  result  of  radiation  of  energy  by  the  atom.  Larmor 
has  shown  that  an  electron,  subject  to  acceleration,  radiates  energy 
at  a  rate  proportional  to  the  square  of  its  acceleration.  An  electron 
moving  uniformly  in  a  straight  line  does  not  radiate  energy,  but 
an  electron,  constrained  to  move  in  a  circular  orbit  with  constant 
velocity,  is  a  powerful  radiator,  for  in  such  a  case  the  electron  is 
continuously  accelerated  towards  the  centre.  Lodge  considered 

1  Lodge,  Nature,  June  11,  p.  129,  1903. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  341 

the  simple  case  of  a  negatively  charged  electron  revolving  round 
an  atom  of  mass  relatively  large  but  having  an  equal  positive 
charge  and  held  in  equilibrium  by  electrical  forces.  This  system 
will  radiate  energy,  and  since  the  radiation  of  energy  is  equivalent 
to  motion  in  a  resisting  medium,  the  particle  tends  to  move 
towards  the  centre,  and  its  speed  consequently  increases.  The 
rate  of  radiation  of  energy  will  increase  rapidly  with  the  speed 
of  the  electron.  When  the  speed  of  the  electron  becomes  very 
nearly  equal  to  the  velocity  of  light,  according  to  Lodge,  another 
effect  supervenes.  It  has  been  shown  (section  76)  that  the 
apparent  mass  of  an  electron  increases  very  rapidly  as  the  speed 
of  light  is  approached,  and  is  theoretically  infinite  at  the  speed 
of  light.  There  will  be  at  this  stage  a  sudden  increase  of  the 
mass  of  the  revolving  atom  and,  on  the  supposition  that  this  stage 
can  be  reached,  a  consequent  disturbance  of  the  balance  of  forces 
holding  the  system  together.  Lodge  considers  it  probable  that, 
under  these  conditions,  the  parts  of  the  system  will  break  asunder 
and  escape  from  the  sphere  of  one  another's  influence. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  primary  cause  of  the  disintegration 
of  the  atom  must  be  looked  for  in  the  loss  of  energy  of  the  atomic 
system  due  to  electro-magnetic  radiation.  Larmor1  has  shown 
that  the  condition  to  be  fulfilled  in  order  that  a  system  of  rapidly 
moving  electrons  may  persist  without  loss  of  energy  is  that  the 
vector  sum  of  the  accelerations  towards  the  centre  should  be 
permanently  null.  While  a  single  electron  moving  in  a  circular 
orbit  is  a  powerful  radiator  of  energy,  it  is  remarkable  how  rapidly 
the  radiation  of  energy  diminishes  if  several  electrons  are  revolv- 
ing in  a  ring.  This  has  recently  been  shown  by  J.  J.  Thomson2, 
who  examined  mathematically  the  case  of  a  system  of  negatively 
electrified  corpuscles,  situated  at  equal  intervals  round  the  circum- 
ference of  a  circle,  and  rotating  in  one  plane  with  uniform  velocity 
round  its  centre.  For  example,  he  found  that  the  radiation  from 
a  group  of  six  particles  moving  with  a  velocity  of  ^  of  the  velocity 
of  light  is  less  than  one-millionth  part  of  the  radiation  from  a 
single  particle  describing  the  same  orbit  with  the  same  velocity. 
When  the  velocity  is  TJ^  of  that  of  light  the  amount  of  radiation 

1  Larmor,  Aether  and  Matter,  p.  233. 

2  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil.  May.  p.  681,  Dec.  1903. 


342  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

is  only  10~16  of  that  of  the  single  particle  moving  with  the  same 
velocity  in  the  same  orbit. 

Results  of  this  kind  indicate  that  an  atom  consisting  of  a  large 
number  of  revolving  electrons  may  radiate  energy  extremely  slowly, 
and  yet,  finally,  this  minute  but  continuous  drain  of  energy  from 
the  atom  must  result  either  in  a  rearrangement  of  its  component 
parts  into  a  new  system,  or  of  an  expulsion  of  electrons  or  groups 
of  electrons  from  the  atom. 

A  suggestion,  due  to  J.  J.  Thomson1,  of  a  possible  mechanism 
to  account  for  the  expulsion  from  the  radio-atoms  of  an  a  particle, 
i.e.  of  a  connected  group  of  electrons,  has  recently  been  explained 
by  Whetham2  as  follows : — "  The  sub-atomic  corpuscles,  when  their 
velocity  is  changing,  must  radiate  ethereal  waves.  Their  energy 
is  thus  gradually  diminished  ;  and  systems  of  revolving  corpuscles, 
permanent  while  moving  fast,  may  become  unstable.  As  a  simple 
example,  six  bodies  at  the  corners  of  a  plane  hexagon  under  the 
influence  of  mutual  forces  may  continue,  while  their  velocity 
exceeds  a  certain  limit,  to  revolve  about  a  central  point  while 
keeping  their  relative  positions.  When  there  is  no  motion,  how- 
ever, this  arrangement  is  impossible,  and  the  six  bodies  must  place 
themselves,  five  at  the  corners  of  a  pentagon  and  one  at  the  centre. 
Thus,  as  the  velocity  falls  to  a  certain  value,  a  sudden  and  ex- 
plosive rearrangement  occurs,  during  which,  in  the  complex 
system  constituting  an  atom,  the  ejection  of  parts  of  the  system 
becomes  possible." 

207.     Radio-activity  and  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  earth. 

It  was  pointed  out  by  Mr  Soddy  and  the  writer3  that  the 
maintenance  of  the  sun's  heat  for  long  intervals  of  time  did  not 
present  any  fundamental  difficulty  if  a  process  of  disintegration, 
such  as  occurs  in  the  radio-elements,  were  supposed  to  be  taking 
place  in  the  sun.  In  a  letter  to  Nature  (July  9,  1903)  W.  E. 
Wilson  showed  that  the  presence  of  3'6  grams  of  radium  in  each 
cubic  metre  of  the  sun's  mass  was  sufficient  to  account  for  the 
present  rate  of  emission  of  energy  by  the  sun.  This  calculation 
was  based  on  the  estimate  of  Curie  and  Laborde,  that  one  gram 

1  Prof.  Thomson's  paper  has  just  appeared.     Phil.  May.  March,  1904. 

2  Quarterly  Review,  p.  123,  Jan.  1904.  3  Phil.  Mag.  May,  1903. 


X]  RADIO- ACTIVE   PROCESSES  343 

of  radium  emits  100  gram-calories  per  hour,  and  on  the  observa- 
tion of  Langley  that  each  square  centimetre  of  the  sun's  surface 
emits  8-28  x  106  gram-calories  per  hour.  Since  the  average  density 
of  the  sun  is  1'44,  the  presence  of  radium  in  the  sun,  to  the 
extent  of  2'5  parts  by  weight  in  a  million,  would  account  for  its 
present  rate  of  emission  of  energy. 

An  examination  of  the  spectrum  of  the  sun  has  not  so  far 
revealed  any  of  the  radium  lines.  It  is  known,  however,  from 
spectroscopic  evidence  that  helium  is  present,  and  this  indirectly 
suggests  the  existence  of  radio-active  matter  also.  It  can  readily 
be  shown1  that  the  absence  of  penetrating  rays  from  the  sun  at 
the  surface  of  the  earth  does  not  imply  that  the  radio-elements 
are  not  present  in  the  sun.  Even  if  the  sun  were  composed  of 
pure  radium,  it  would  hardly  be  expected  that  the  7  rays  emitted 
would  be  appreciable  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  since  the  rays 
would  be  almost  completely  absorbed  in  passing  through  the 
atmosphere,  which  corresponds  to  a  thickness  of  76  centimetres  of 
mercury. 

In  the  Appendix  E  of  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy, 
Lord  Kelvin  has  calculated  the  energy  lost  in  the  concentration  of 
the  sun  from  a  condition  of  infinite  dispersion,  and  concludes  that 
it  seems  "  on  the  whole  probable  that  the  sun  has  not  illuminated 
the  earth  for  100,000,000  years  and  almost  certain  that  he  has  not 
done  so  for  500,000,000  years.  As  for  the  future  we  may  say,  with 
equal  certainty,  that  inhabitants  of  the  earth  cannot  continue  to 
enjoy  the  light  and  heat  essential  to  their  life  for  many  million 
years  longer,  unless  sources  now  unknown  to  us  are  prepared  in 
the  great  storehouses  of  creation." 

The  discovery  that  a  small  mass  of  a  substance  like  radium 
can  emit  spontaneously  an  enormous  quantity  of  heat  renders 
it  possible  that  this  estimate  of  the  age  of  the  sun's  heat 
may  be  much  increased.  In  a  letter  to  Nature  (Sept.  24,  1903) 
G.  H.  Darwin  drew  attention  to  this  probability,  and  stated  that, 
"  The  lost  energy  of  the  sun,  supposed  to  be  a  homogeneous  sphere 
of  mass  M  and  radius  a,  is  f/i3/2/a  where  p  is  the  constant  of 
gravitation.  On  introducing  numerical  values  for  the  symbols  in 
this  formula,  I  find  the  lost  energy  to  be  2*7  x  107  M  calories  where 

1  See  Strutt  and  Joly,  Xature,  Oct.  15,  1903. 


344  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

M  is  expressed  in  grams.  If  we  adopt  Langley's  value  of  the  solar 
constant,  this  heat  suffices  to  give  a  supply  for  12  million  years. 
Lord  Kelvin  used  Pouillet's  value  for  that  constant,  but  if  he  had 
been  able  to  use  Langley's,  his  100  million  would  have  been 
reduced  to  60  million.  The  discrepancy  between  my  results  of 
12  million  and  his  of  60  million  is  explained  by  a  conjectural 
augmentation  of  the  lost  energy  to  allow  for  the  concentration 
of  the  solar  mass  towards  its  central  parts."  Now  it  has  been 
shown  (section  205)  that  one  gram  of  radium  emits  during  its 
life  an  amount  of  heat  which  probably  lies  between  2  x  109  and 
5  x  1010  gram-calories.  It  has  also  been  pointed  out  that  there  is 
every  reason  to  suppose  that  a  similar  amount  of  energy  is  resident 
in  the  chemical  atoms  of  the  inactive  elements.  It  is  not  impro- 
bable that,  at  the  enormous  temperature  of  the  sun,  the  breaking 
up  of  the  elements  into  simpler  forms  may  be  taking  place  at 
a  more  rapid  rate  than  on  the  earth.  If  the  energy  resident 
in  the  atoms  of  the  elements  is  thus  available,  the  time  during 
which  the  sun  may  continue  to  emit  heat  at  the  present  rate  may 
be  from  50  to  500  times  longer  than  was  computed  by  Lord  Kelvin 
from  dynamical  data. 

Similar  considerations  apply  to  the  question  of  the  probable 
age  of  the  earth.  A  full  discussion  of  the  probable  age  of  the 
earth,  computed  from  its  secular  cooling  from  a  molten  mass,  is 
given  by  Lord  Kelvin  in  Appendix  D  of  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural 
Philosophy.  He  has  there  shown  that  about  100  million  years 
after  the  earth  was  a  molten  mass,  the  gradual  cooling  due  to 
radiation  from  its  surface  would  account  for  the  average  tempera- 
ture gradient  of  1/50°  F.  per  foot,  observed  to-day  near  the  earth's 
surface. 

Some  considerations  will  now  be  discussed  which  point  to  the 
probability  that  the  present  temperature  gradient  observed  in  the 
earth  cannot  be  used  as  a  guide  to  estimate  the  length  of  time 
that  has  elapsed  since  the  earth  has  been  at  a  temperature  capable 
of  supporting  animal  and  vegetable  life ;  for  it  will  be  shown  that 
probably  there  is  sufficient  radio-active  matter  on  the  earth  to 
supply  as  much  heat  to  the  earth  as  is  lost  by  radiation  from  its 
surface.  Taking  the  average  conductivity  K  of  the  materials  of 
the  earth  as  '004  (C.G.S.  units)  and  the  temperature  gradient  T  near 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE    PROCESSES  345 

the   surface  as   "00037°  C.  per  cm.,  the   heat  Q  in  gram-calories 
conducted  to  the  surface  of  the  earth  per  second  is  given  by 


where  R  is  the  radius  of  the  earth. 

Let  X  be  the  average  amount  of  heat  liberated  per  second  per 
cubic  centimetre  of  the  earth's  volume  owing  to  the  presence  of 
radio-active  matter.  If  the  heat  Q  radiated  from  the  earth  is 
equal  to  the  heat  supplied  by  the  radio-active  matter  on  the 
earth, 


3KT 

Z  =  -7T- 

Substituting  the  values  of  these  constants, 

X  =  7  x  10~15  gram-calorie  per  second 
=  2'2  x  10~7  gram-calorie  per  year. 

Since  1  gram  of  radium  emits  864,000  gram-calories  per  year, 
the  presence  of  2'6  x  10~13  gram  of  radium  per  unit  volume  or 
4'6  x  10~14  gram  per  unit  mass,  would  compensate  for  the  heat  lost 
from  the  earth  by  conduction. 

Now  it  will  be  shown  in  the  following  chapter  that  radio-active 
matter  seems  to  be  distributed  fairly  uniformly  through  the  earth 
and  atmosphere.  In  addition  it  has  been  found  that  all  substances 
are  radio-active  to  a  feeble  degree,  although  it  is  not  yet  settled 
whether  this  radio-activity  may  not  be  due  mainly  to  the  presence 
of  a  radio-element  as  an  impurity.  For  example,  Strutt1  observed 
that  a  platinum  plate  was  about  1/3000  as  active  as  a  crystal  of 
uranium  nitrate,  or  about  2  x  10~10  as  active  as  radium.  This  cor- 
responds to  a  far  greater  activity  than  is  necessary  to  compensate 
for  the  loss  of  heat  of  the  earth.  A  more  accurate  deduction, 
however,  can  be  made  from  data  of  the  radio-activity  exhibited  by 
matter  dug  out  from  the  earth.  Elster  and  Geitel2  filled  a  dish  of 
volume  3'3  x  103  c.c.  with  clay  dug  up  from  the  garden,  and  placed 
it  in  a  vessel  of  30  litres  capacity  in  which  was  placed  an  electro- 

1  Strutt,  Phil.  Mag.  June,  1903. 

-  Elster  and  Geitel,  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  19,  p.  522,  1903.      Chem.  Xeicg,  July  17, 
p.  30,  1903. 


346  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CEL 

scope  to  determine  the  conductivity  of  the  enclosed  gas.  After 
standing  for  several  days,  he  found  that  the  conductivity  of  the  air 
reached  a  constant  maximum  value,  corresponding  to  three  times 
the  normal.  It  will  be  shown  later  (section  218)  that  the  normal 
conductivity  observed  in  sealed  vessels  corresponds  to  the  produc- 
tion of  about  30  ions  per  c.c.  per  second.  The  number  of  ions 
produced  per  second  in  the  vessel  by  the  radio-active  earth  was 
thus  about  2  x  106.  This  would  give  a  saturation  current  through 
the  gas  of  2'2  x  10~14  electro-magnetic  units.  Now  the  emanation 
from  1  gram  of  radium  stored  in  a  metal  cylinder  gives  a  satura- 
tion current  of  about  3'2  x  10~3  electro-magnetic  units.  Elster  and 
Geitel  considered  that  most  of  the  conductivity  observed  in  the 
gas  was  due  to  a  radio-active  emanation,  which  gradually  diffused 
from  the  clay  into  the  air  in  the  vessel.  The  increased  conduc- 
tivity in  the  gas  observed  by  Elster  and  Geitel  would  thus  be 
produced  by  the  emanation  from  7  x  10~10  gram  of  radium. 
Taking  the  density  of  clay  as  2,  this  corresponds  to  about  10~13 
gram  of  radium  per  gram  of  clay.  But  it  has  been  shown  that  if 
4*6  x  10~u  gram  of  radium  was  present  in  each  gram  of  earth,  the 
heat  emitted  would  compensate  for  the  loss  of  heat  of  the  earth  by 
conduction  and  radiation.  The  amount  of  activity  observed  in  the 
earth  is  thus  about  the  right  order  of  magnitude  to  account  for  the 
heat  emission  required.  In  the  above  estimate,  the  presence  of 
uranium  and  thorium  minerals  in  the  earth  has  not  been  con- 
sidered. In  addition,  it  is  probable  that  the  total  amount  of  radio- 
activity in  clay  was  considerably  greater  than  that  calculated,  for  it 
is  likely  that  other  radio-active  matter  was  present  which  did  not 
give  off  an  emanation. 

I  think  we  may  conclude  that  the  present  rate  of  loss  of  heat 
of  the  earth  might  have  continued  unchanged  for  long  periods  of 
time  in  consequence  of  the  supply  of  heat  from  radio-active  matter 
in  the  earth.  It  thus  seems  probable  that  the  earth  may  have 
remained  for  very  long  intervals  of  time  at  a  temperature  not  very 
different  from  that  observed  to-day,  and  that  in  consequence  the 
time  during  which  the  earth  has  been  at  a  temperature  capable  of 
supporting  the  presence  of  animal  and  vegetable  life  may  be  very 
much  longer  than  the  estimate  made  by  Lord  Kelvin  from  other 
data. 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  347 

208.  Evolution  of  matter.  Although  the  hypothesis  that 
all  matter  is  composed  of  some  elementary  unit  of  matter  or  pro- 
tyle  has  been  advanced  as  a  speculation  at  various  times  by  many 
prominent  physicists  and  chemists,  the  first  definite  experimental 
evidence  showing  that  the  chemical  atom  was  not  the  smallest 
unit  of  matter  was  obtained  in  1897  by  J.  J.  Thomson  in  his  classic 
research  on  the  nature  of  the  cathode  rays  produced  by  an  electric 
discharge  in  a  vacuum  tube.  Sir  William  Crookes,  who  was  the  first 
to  demonstrate  the  remarkable  properties  of  these  rays,  had  sug- 
gested that  they  consisted  of  streams  of  projected  charged  matter 
and  represented — as  he  termed  it — a  new  or  "fourth  state  of  matter." 

J.  J.  Thomson  showed  by  two  distinct  methods  that  the  cathode 
rays  consisted  of  a  stream  of  negatively  charged  particles  projected 
with  great  velocity.  The  particles  behaved  as  if  their  mass  was 
only  about  1/1000  of  the  mass  of  the  atom  of  hydrogen,  which  is 
the  lightest  atom  known.  These  corpuscles,  as  they  were  termed  by 
Thomson,  were  found  at  a  later  date  to  be  produced  from  a  glowing 
carbon  filament  and  from  a  zinc  plate  exposed  to  the  action  of 
ultra-violet  light.  They  acted  as  isolated  units  of  negative  elec- 
tricity, and,  as  we  have  seen,  may  be  identified  with  the  electrons 
studied  mathematically  by  Larmor  and  Lorentz.  Not  only  were 
these  electrons  produced  by  the  action  of  light,  heat,  and  the 
electric  discharge,  but  they  were  also  found  to  be  spontaneously 
emitted  from  the  radio-elements  with  a  velocity  far  greater  than 
that  observed  for  the  electrons  in  a  vacuum  tube. 

The  electrons  produced  in  these  different  ways  were  all  found  to 
carry  a  negative  charge  and  to  be  apparently  identical ;  for  the 
ratio  e/m  of  the  charge  of  the  electron  to  its  mass  was  in  all  cases 
the  same  within  the  limit  of  experimental  errors.  Since  elec- 
trons, produced  from  different  kinds  of  matter  and  under  different 
conditions,  were  in  all  cases  identical,  it  seemed  probable  that  they 
were  a  constituent  part  of  all  matter.  J.  J.  Thomson  suggested 
that  the  atom  is  built  up  of  a  number  of  these  negatively  charged 
electrons  combined  in  some  way  with  corresponding  positively 
charged  bodies. 

On  this  view  the  atoms  of  the  chemical  elements  differ  from 
one  another  only  in  the  number  and  arrangement  of  the  component 
electrons. 


348  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH. 

The  removal  of  an  electron  from  the  atom  does  not  appear  to 
permanently  affect  the  stability  of  the  system,  for  no  evidence  has 
so  far  been  obtained  to  show  that  the  passage  of  an  intense  electric 
discharge  through  a  gas  results  in  a  permanent  alteration  of  the 
structure  of  the  atom.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  the 
radio-active  bodies,  a  positively  charged  particle  of  mass  about 
twice  that  of  the  hydrogen  atom  escapes  from  the  heavy  radio- 
atom.  This  appears  to  result  at  once  in  a  permanent  alteration  of 
the  atom,  and  causes  a  marked  change  in  its  physical  and  chemical 
properties.  In  addition  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  process  is 
reversible. 

The  only  direct  experimental  evidence  of  the  transformation 
of  matter  has  been  derived  from  a  study  of  the  radio-active 
bodies.  If  the  disintegration  theory,  advanced  to  account  for  the 
phenomena  of  radio-activity,  is  correct  in  the  main  essentials,  then 
the  radio-elements  are  undergoing  a  spontaneous  and  continu- 
ous process  of  transformation  into  other  and  different  kinds  of 
matter.  The  rate  of  transformation  is  slow  in  uranium  and  thorium, 
but  is  fairly  rapid  in  radium.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  fraction 
of  a  mass  of  radium  which  is  transformed  per  year  lies  between 
1/2000  and  1/10000  of  the  total  amount  present.  In  the  case  of 
uranium  and  thorium  probably  a  million  years  would  be  required 
to  produce  a  similar  amount  of  change.  The  process  of  trans- 
formation in  uranium  and  thorium  is  thus  far  too  slow  to  be 
detected  within  a  reasonable  time  by  the  use  of  the  balance  or 
spectroscope,  but  the  radiations  which  accompany  the  transforma- 
tion can  readily  be  detected.  Although  the  process  of  change  is 
slow  it  is  continuous,  and  in  the  course  of  ages  the  uranium  and 
thorium  present  in  the  earth  must  be  transformed  into  other  and 
simpler  types  of  matter. 

Those  who  have  considered  the  possibility  of  atoms  undergoing 
a  process  of  transformation,  have  generally  thought  that  the 
matter  as  a  whole  would  undergo  a  progressive  change,  with  a 
gradual  alteration  of  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  whole 
mass  of  substance.  On  the  theory  of  disintegration  this  is  not  the 
case.  Only  a  minute  fraction  of  the  matter  present  breaks  up  in 
unit  time,  and  in  each  of  the  succession  of  stages  through  which 
the  disintegrated  atoms  pass,  there  is  in  most  cases  a  marked 


X]  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  349 

alteration  in  the  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  the  matter. 
The  transformation  of  the  radio-elements  is  thus  a  transformation 
of  a  part  per  saltum,  and  not  a  progressive  change  of  the  whole. 
At  any  time  after  the  process  of  transformation  has  been  in 
progress  there  will  thus  remain  a  part  of  the  matter  which  is 
unchanged,  and,  mixed  with  it,  the  products  which  have  resulted 
from  the  transformation  of  the  remainder. 

The  question  naturally  arises  whether  the  process  of  degrada- 
tion of  matter  is  confined  to  the  radio-elements  or  is  a  universal 
property  of  matter.  It  will  be  shown  in  chapter  xi.  that  all 
matter,  so  far  examined,  exhibits  the  property  of  radio-activity  to 
a  slight  degree.  It  still  remains  to  be  shown,  however,  that  the 
observed  radio-activity  is  not  due  to  the  presence  in  the  matter  of 
a  slight  trace  of  a  radio-element.  If  ordinary  matter  is  radio- 
active, it  is  certain  that  its  activity  is  not  greater  than  that  of 
uranium,  and  consequently  that  its  rate  of  transformation  must 
be  excessively  slow.  There  is,  however,  another  possibility  to  be 
considered.  The  changes  occurring  in  the  radio-elements  would 
probably  never  have  been  detected  if  the  change  had  not  been 
accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  charged  particles  with  great 
velocity.  It  does  not  seem  unlikely  that  an  atom  may  undergo 
disintegration  without  projecting  a  part  of  its  system  with  great 
velocity.  In  fact,  we  have  seen  that,  even  in  the  radio-elements, 
one  of  the  series  of  changes  in  both  thorium  and  radium  is  unac- 
companied by  ionizing  rays.  It  may  thus  be  possible  that  all 
matter  is  undergoing  a  slow  process  of  transformation,  which  has 
so  far  only  been  detected  in  the  radio-elements  on  account  of  the 
expulsion  of  charged  particles  during  the  change.  This  process  of 
degradation  of  matter  continuing  for  ages  must  reduce  the  con- 
stituents of  the  earth  to  the  simpler  and  more  stable  forms  of 
matter. 

The  idea  that  helium  is  a  transformation  product  of  radium, 
suggests  the  probability  that  helium  is  one  of  the  more  elementary 
substances  of  which  the  heavier  atoms  are  composed.  Sir  Norman 
Lockyer,  in  his  interesting  book  on  "Inorganic  Evolution,"  has 
pointed  out  that  the  spectrum  of  helium  and  of  hydrogen  pre- 
dominates in  the  hottest  stars.  In  the  cooler  stars  the  more 
complex  types  of  matter  appear.  Sir  Norman  Lockyer  has  based 


350  RADIO-ACTIVE   PROCESSES  [CH.  X 

his  theory  of  evolution  of  matter  on  evidence  of  a  spectroscopic 
examination  of  the  stars,  and  considers  that  temperature  is  the 
main  factor  in  breaking  up  matter  into  its  simpler  forms.  The 
transformation  of  matter  occurring  in  the  radio-elements  is  on  the 
other  hand  spontaneous,  and  independent  of  temperature  over  the 
range  examined. 


CHAPTER  XL 

RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE  ATMOSPHERE   AND   OF 
ORDINARY   MATERIALS. 

209.  Radio -activity  of  the  atmosphere.  The  experiments 
of  Geitel1  and  C.  T.  R  Wilson2  in  1900  had  shown  that  a  positively 
or  negatively  charged  conductor  placed  inside  a  closed  vessel  gradu- 
ally lost  its  charge.  This  loss  of  charge  was  shown  to  be  due  to  a 
small  ionization  of  the  air  inside  the  vessel.  In  addition,  Elster 
and  Geitel  had  found  that  a  charged  body  exposed  in  the  open 
air  lost  its  charge  rapidly,  and  that  the  rate  of  discharge  was 
dependent  on  the  locality  and  on  atmospheric  conditions.  A  more 
detailed  description  and  discussion  of  these  results  will  be  given 
later  in  section  218. 

In  the  course  of  these  experiments  Geitel  had  observed  that 
the  rate  of  discharge  increased  slightly  for  some  time  after  the 
vessel  had  been  closed.  He  considered  that  this  might  possibly 
be  due  to  the  existence  of  some  radio-active  substances  in  the  air, 
which  produced  excited  activity  in  the  walls  of  the  vessel  and  so 
increased  the  rate  of  dissipation  of  the  charge.  In  1901  Elster 
and  Geitel3  tried  the  bold  experiment  of  seeing  if  it  were  possible 
to  extract  a  radio-active  substance  from  the  air.  The  experiments 
of  the  writer  had  shown  that  the  excited  radio-activity  from  the 
thorium  emanation  could  be  concentrated  on  the  negative  electrode 
in  a  strong  electric  field.  This  result  indicated  that  the  carriers 
of  the  radio-activity  had  a  positive  charge  of  electricity.  Elster 
and  Geitel  therefore  tried  an  experiment  to  see  if  positively  charged 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  2,  p.  116,  1900. 

2  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  11,  p.  32,  1900.     Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  68,  p.  151,  1901. 

3  Phys.  Zeit.  2,  p.  590,  1901. 


352  RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

carriers,  possessing  a  similar  property,  were  present  in  the  atmo- 
sphere. For  this  purpose  a  cylinder  of  wire-netting,  charged  nega- 
tively to  600  volts,  was  exposed  for  several  hours  in  the  open  air. 
This  was  then  removed  and  quickly  placed  in  a  large  bell-jar,  inside 
which  was  placed  an  electroscope  to  detect  the  rate  of  discharge. 
They  found  that  the  rate  of  discharge  was  increased  to  a  slight 
extent.  In  order  to  multiply  the  effect,  a  wire  of  about  20  metres 
long  was  exposed  at  some  height  from  the  ground,  and  was  kept 
charged  to  a  high  potential  by  connecting  it  to  the  negative 
terminal  of  an  influence  machine.  After  exposure  for  some  hours, 
this  wire  was  removed  and  placed  inside  the  dissipation  vessel. 
The  rate  of  discharge  was  found  to  be  increased  many  times  by  the 
presence  of  the  wire.  No  increase  was  observed  if  the  wire  had 
been  charged  positively  instead  of  negatively.  The  results  also 
showed  that  the  radio-active  matter  could  be  removed  from  the 
wire  in  the  same  way  as  from  a  wire  made  active  by  exposure  in  the 
presence  of  the  thorium  emanation.  A  piece  of  leather  moistened 
with  ammonia  was  rubbed  over  the  active  wire.  On  testing  the 
leather  it  was  found  to  be  strongly  radio-active.  If  a  long  wire 
were  used,  the  amount  of  activity  obtained  on  the  leather  was 
comparable  to  that  possessed  by  a  gram  of  uranium  oxide. 

The  activity  produced  on  the  wire  was  not  permanent,  but 
disappeared  to  a  large  extent  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours.  The 
amount  of  activity  produced  on  a  wire  of  given  size,  exposed  under 
similar  conditions,  was  independent  of  the  material  of  the  wire. 
Lead,  iron  and  copper  wires  gave  about  equal  effects. 

The  amount  of  activity  obtained  was  greatly  increased  by  ex- 
posing a  negatively  charged  wire  in  a  mass  of  air  which  had  been 
undisturbed  for  a  long  time.  Experiments  were  made  in  the  great 
cave  of  Wolfenbiittel,  and  a  very  large  amount  of  activity  was 
observed.  By  transferring  the  activity  to  a  piece  of  leather  it 
was  found1  that  the  rays  could  appreciably  light  up  a  screen  of 
barium  platinocyanide  in  the  dark.  The  rays  also  darkened  a 
photographic  plate  through  a  piece  of  aluminium  O'l  mm.  in 
thickness. 

These  remarkable  experiments  show  that  the  excited  radio- 
activity obtained  from  the  atmosphere  is  very  similar  in  character 
1  Phys.  Zeit.  3,  p.  76,  1901. 


XI]  AXD   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  353 

to  the  excited  activity  produced  by  the  emanations  of  radium  and 
thorium.  No  investigators  have  contributed  more  to  our  know- 
ledge of  the  radio-activity  and  ionization  of  the  atmosphere  than 
Elster  and  Geitel.  The  experiments  here  described  have  been  the 
starting-point  of  a  series  of  researches  by  Elster  and  Geitel  and 
others  on  the  radio-active  properties  of  the  atmosphere  which  have 
led  to  a  great  extension  of  our  knowledge  of  that  important  subject. 

Eutherford  and  Allan1  determined  the  rate  of  decay  of  the 
excited  activity  produced  on  a  negatively  charged  wire  exposed  in 
the  open  air.  A  wire  about  15  metres  long  was  exposed  in  the 
open  air,  and  kept  charged  by  an  influence  machine  to  a  potential 
of  about  -10000  volts.  An  hour's  exposure  was  sufficient  to  obtain 
a  large  amount  of  excited  activity  on  the  wire.  The  wire  was 
then  rapidly  removed  and  wound  on  a  framework  which  formed 
the  central  electrode  in  a  large  cylindrical  metal  vessel.  The 
ionization  current  for  a  saturation  voltage  was  measured  by 
means  of  a  sensitive  Dolezalek  electrometer.  The  current,  which 
is  a  measure  of  the  activity  of  the  wire,  was  found  to  diminish 
according  to  an  exponential  law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value 
in  about  45  minutes.  The  rate  of  decay  was  independent  of  the 
material  of  the  wire,  of  the  time  of  exposure,  and  of  the  potential 
of  the  wire. 

An  examination  was  also  made  of  the  nature  of  the  rays  emitted 
by  the  radio-active  wire.  For  this  purpose  a  lead  wire  was  made 
radio-active  in  the  manner  described,  and  then  rapidly  wound  into 
the  form  of  a  flat  spiral.  The  penetrating  power  of  the  rays  was 
tested  in  a  vessel  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  16.  Most  of  the 
ionization  was  found  to  be  due  to  some  very  easily  absorbed  rays, 
which  were  of  a  slightly  more  penetrating  character  than  the  a 
rays  emitted  from  a  wire  made  active  by  the  radium  or  thorium 
emanations.  The  intensity  of  the  rays  was  cut  down  to  half  value 
by  about  O'OOl  cm.  of  aluminium.  The  photographic  action  ob- 
served by  Elster  and  Geitel  through  O'l  mm.  of  aluminium  showed 
that  some  penetrating  rays  were  also  present.  This  was  afterwards 
confirmed  by  Allan,  using  the  electric  method.  These  penetrating 
rays  are  probably  similar  in  character  to  the  (3  rays  from  the 
radio-elements. 

1  Phil  Mag.  Dec.  1902. 
R.   R.-A.  23 


354  RADIO-ACTIVITY    OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

210.  The  excited  activity  produced  on  the  negatively  charged 
wire  cannot  be  due  to  an  action  of  the  strong  electric  field  on  the 
surface  of  the  wire ;  for  very  little  excited  activity  is  produced  if 
the  wire  is  charged  to  the  same  potential  inside  a  closed  cylinder. 

We  have  seen  that  the  excited  activity  produced  on  the  wire 
can  be  partially  removed  by  rubbing,  and  by  solution  in  acids,  and, 
in  this  respect,  it  is  similar  to  the  excited  activity  produced  in 
bodies  by  the  emanations  of  radium  and  thorium.  The  very  close 
similarity  of  the  excited  activity  obtained  from  the  atmosphere 
to  that  obtained  from  the  radium  and  thorium  emanations  sug- 
gests the  probability  that  a  radio-active  emanation  exists  in  the 
atmosphere.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  a  large  amount  of  indirect 
evidence  discussed  in  sections  212  and  213. 

Assuming  the  presence  of  a  radio-active  emanation  in  the 
atmosphere,  the  radio-active  effects  observed  receive  a  simple 
explanation.  The  emanation  in  the  air  gradually  breaks  up, 
giving  rise  in  some  way  to  positively  charged  radio-active  carriers. 
These  are  driven  to  the  negative  electrode  in  the  electric  field, 
and  there  undergo  a  further  change,  giving  rise  to  the  radiations 
observed  at  the  surface  of  the  wire.  The  matter  which  causes 
excited  activity  will  thus  be  analogous  to  the  emanation  X  of 
radium  and  thorium. 

Since  the  earth  is  negatively  electrified  with  regard  to  the 
upper  atmosphere,  these  positive  radio-active  carriers  produced  in 
the  air  are  continuously  deposited  on  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
Everything  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  including  the  external 
surface  of  buildings,  the  grass,  and  leaves  of  trees,  must  be  covered 
with  an  invisible  deposit  of  radio-active  material.  A  hill  or 
mountain  peak,  or  any  high  mass  of  rock  or  land,  concentrates  the 
earth's  electric  field  at  that  point  and  consequently  will  receive 
more  excited  radio-activity  per  unit  area  than  the  plain.  Elster 
and  Geitel  have  pointed  out  that  the  greater  ionization  of  the  air 
observed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  projecting  peaks  receives  a 
satisfactory  explanation  on  this  view. 

If  the  radio-active  carriers  are  produced  at  a  uniform  rate  in 
the  atmosphere,  the  amount  of  excited  activity  It,  produced  on 
a  wire  exposed  under  given  conditions,  will,  after  exposure  for  a 
time  t,  be  given  by  It  =  I0(l  -e~u)  where  /0  is  the  maximum 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  355 

activity  on  the  wire  and  X  is  the  constant  of  decay  of  the  excited 
activity.  Since  the  activity  of  a  wire  after  removal  falls  to  half 
value  in  about  45  minutes,  the  value  of  X  is  0'92  with  one  hour  as 
the  unit  of  time.  Some  experiments  made  by  Allan  are  in  rough 
agreement  with  the  above  equation.  Accurate  comparative  results 
are  difficult  to  obtain  on  account  of  the  inconstancy  of  the  radio- 
activity of  the  open  air.  After  an  exposure  of  a  wire  for  several 
hours,  the  activity  reached  a  practical  maximum,  and  was  not 
much  increased  by  continued  exposure. 

A  wire  charged  to  a  high  potential  in  the  open  air  abstracts 
the  positive  radio-active  carriers  from  a  large  volume  of  air.  Very 
little  excited  activity,  in  comparison,  is  produced  in  a  closed  vessel 
or  by  drawing  a  rapid  current  of  the  outside  air  through  a  cylinder 
in  the  centre  of  which  a  negatively  charged  rod  is  placed.  In  one 
experiment  a  current  of  air  of  500  cms.  per  second  was  drawn 
through  a  cylinder  of  141  litres  capacity.  The  amount  of  activity 
produced  on  the  negative  electrode  was  only  a  few  per  cent,  of  the 
amount  observed  on  the  same  electrode  charged  to  the  same 
potential  in  the  open  air. 

The  amount  of  excited  activity  produced  on  a  wire,  supported 
some  distance  from  the  surface  of  the  earth,  should  increase  steadily 
with  the  voltage,  for  the  greater  the  potential,  the  greater  the 
volume  of  air  from  which  the  radio-active  carriers  are  abstracted. 

The  presence  of  radio-active  matter  in  the  atmosphere  will 
account  for  a  portion  of  the  ionization  of  the  air  observed  near 
the  earth.  It  seems  unlikely,  however,  that  the  whole  of  the 
ionization  observed  in  the  air  is  due  to  this  cause  alone. 

211.     Radio-activity  of  freshly  fallen   rain    and  snow. 

C.  T.  R.  Wilson1  tried  experiments  to  see  if  any  of  the  radio- 
active material  from  the  air  was  carried  down  by  rain.  For  this 
purpose  a  quantity  of  freshly  fallen  rain  was  collected,  rapidly 
evaporated  to  dryness  in  a  platinum  vessel,  and  the  activity  of  the 
residue  tested  by  placing  the  vessel  in  an  electroscope.  In  all 
cases,  the  rate  of  discharge  of  the  electroscope  was  considerably 
increased.  From  about  50  c.c.  of  rain  water,  an  amount  of  activity 
was  obtained  sufficient  to  increase  the  rate  of  discharge  of  the 

1  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  11,  Pt.  vi.  p.  428,  1902. 

23—2 


356  KADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE   ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

electroscope  four  or  five  times,  after  the  rays  had  traversed  a  thin 
layer  of  aluminium  or  gold  leaf.  The  activity  disappeared  in  the 
course  of  a  few  hours,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  30  minutes. 
Bain  water,  which  had  stood  for  some  hours,  showed  no  trace  of 
activity.  Tap  water,  when  evaporated,  left  no  active  residue. 

The  amounts  of  activity  obtained  from  a  given  quantity  of  rain 
water  were  all  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude,  whether  the  rain 
was  precipitated  in  fine  or  in  large  drops,  by  night  or  by  day,  or 
whether  the  rain  was  tested  at  the  beginning  or  at  the  end  of  a 
heavy  rainfall  lasting  several  hours. 

The  activity  obtained  from  rain  is  not  destroyed  by  heating 
the  platinum  vessel  to  a  red  heat.  In  this  and  other  respects  it 
resembles  the  excited  activity  obtained  on  negatively  charged 
wires  exposed  in  the  open  air. 

C.  T.  R.  Wilson1  obtained  a  radio-active  precipitate  from  rain 
water  by  adding  a  little  barium  chloride  and  precipitating  the 
barium  with  sulphuric  acid.  An  active  precipitate  was  also 
obtained  if  alum  was  added  to  the  water,  and  the  aluminium 
precipitated  by  ammonia.  The  precipitates  obtained  in  this  way 
showed  a  large  activity.  The  filtrate  when  boiled  down  was  quite 
inactive,  showing  that  the  active  matter  had  been  completely 
removed  by  precipitation.  The  production  of  active  precipitates 
from  rain  water  is  quite  analogous  to  the  production  of  active 
precipitates  from  a  solution  containing  the  emanation  X  of  thorium 
(see  section  178). 

The  radio-activity  of  freshly  fallen  snow  was  independently  ob- 
served by  C.  T.  R.  Wilson2  in  England,  and  Allan3  and  McLennan4 
in  Canada.  In  order  to  obtain  a  large  amount  of  activity,  the 
surface  layer  of  snow  was  removed,  and  evaporated  to  dry  ness 
in  a  metal  vessel.  An  active  residue  was  obtained  with  radio- 
active properties  similar  to  those  observed  for  freshly  fallen  rain. 
Both  Wilson  and  Allan  found  that  the  activity  of  rain  and  snow 
decayed  at  about  the  same  rate,  the  activity  falling  to  half  value 
in  about  30  minutes.  McLennan  states  that  he  found  a  smaller 
amount  of  radio-activity  in  the  air  after  a  prolonged  fall  of  snow. 

1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Vol.  12,  1902. 

2  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  12,  p.  85,  1903. 

3  Phys.  Rev.  16,  p.  106,  1903.  *  Phys.  Rev.  16,  p.  184,  1903. 


XI]  AXD   OF   ORDINARY   MATERIALS  357 

Schmauss1  has  observed  that  drops  of  water  falling  through  air 
ionized  by  Rb'ntgen  rays  acquire  a  negative  charge.  This  effect  is 
ascribed  to  the  fact  that  the  negative  ions  in  air  diffuse  faster 
than  the  positive.  On  this  view  the  drops  of  rain  and  flakes  of 
snow  would  acquire  a  negative  charge  in  falling  through  the  air. 
They  would  in  consequence  act  as  collectors  of  the  positive  radio- 
active carriers  from  the  air.  On  evaporation  of  the  water  the 
radio-active  matter  would  be  left  behind. 

212.  Radio-active  emanations  from  the  earth.  Elster 
and  Geitel  observed  that  the  air  in  caves  and  cellars  was,  in  most 
cases,  abnormally  radio-active,  and  showed  very  strong  ionization. 
This  action  might  possibly  be  due  to  an  effect  of  stagnant  air,  by 
which  it  produced  a  radio-active  emanation  from  itself,  or  to  a 
diffusion  of  a  radio-active  emanation  from  the  soil.  In  order  to 
test  if  this  emanation  was  produced  by  the  air  itself,  Elster  and 
Geitel  shut  up  the  air  for  several  weeks  in  a  large  boiler,  but  no 
appreciable  increase  of  the  activity  or  ionization  was  observed.  In 
order  to  test  if  the  air  imprisoned  in  the  capillaries  of  the  soil  was 
radio-active  Elster  and  Geitel2  put  a  pipe  into  the  earth  and  sucked 
up  the  air  into  a  testing  vessel  by  means  of  a  water  pump. 

The  apparatus  employed  to  test  the  ionization  of  the  air  is 
shown  in  Fig.  59.  C  is  an  electroscope  connected  with  a  wire  net, 
Z.  The  active  air  was  introduced  into  the  large  bell-jar  of  27  litres 
capacity,  the  inside  of  which  was  covered  with  wire  netting,  MM'. 
The  bell-jar  rested  on  an  iron  plate  AB.  The  electroscope  could 
be  charged  by  the  rod  S.  The  rate  of  discharge  of  the  electro- 
scope, before  the  active  air  was  introduced,  was  noted.  On  allowing 
the  active  air  to  enter,  the  rate  of  discharge  increased  rapidly, 
rising  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  in  one  experiment  to  30  times 
the  original  value.  They  found  that  the  emanation  produced 
excited  activity  on  the  walls  of  the  containing  vessel.  The  air 
sucked  up  from  the  earth  was  even  more  active  than  that  observed 
in  caves  and  cellars.  There  can  thus  be  little  doubt  that  the 
abnormal  activity  observed  in  caves  and  cellars  is  due  to  a  radio- 
active emanation,  present  in  the  earth,  which  gradually  diffuses  to 
the  surface  and  collects  in  places  where  the  air  is  not  disturbed. 

1  Drude's  Annal.  9,  p.  224,  1902.  2  Phys.  Zeit.  3;  p.  574,  1902. 


358 


RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE 


[CH. 


The  results  obtained  by  Elster  and  Geitel  for  the  air  removed 
from  the  earth  at  Wolfenbiittel  were  also  obtained  later  by  Ebert 
and  Ewers1  at  Munich.  They  found  a  strongly  active  emanation 
in  the  soil,  and,  in  addition,  examined  the  variation  with  time  of 
the  activity  due  to  the  emanation  in  a  sealed  vessel.  After  the 
introduction  of  the  active  air  into  the  testing  vessel,  the  activity 
was  observed  to  increase  for  several  hours,  and  then  to  decay, 
according  to  an  exponential  law,  with  the  time,  falling  to  half 
value  in  about  3 '2  days.  This  rate  of  decay  is  more  rapid  than 
that  observed  for  the  radium  emanation,  which  decays  to  half 


H  c= 


M 


M1 


V 


Fig.  59. 

value  in  a  little  less  than  four  days.  The  increase  of  activity  with 
time  is  probably  due  to  the  production  of  excited  activity  on  the 
walls  of  the  vessel  by  the  emanation.  In  this  respect  it  is  analogous 
to  the  increase  of  activity  observed  when  the  radium  emanation 
is  introduced  into  a  closed  vessel.  No  definite  experiments  were 
made  by  Ebert  and  Ewers  on  the  rate  of  decay  of  this  excited 
activity.  In  one  experiment  the  active  emanation,  after  standing 
in  the  vessel  for  140  hours,  was  removed  by  sucking  ordinary  air 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  162,  1902. 


Xl]  AND   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  359 

of  small  activity  through  the  apparatus.  The  activity  rapidly  fell 
to  about  half  value,  and  this  was  followed  by  a  very  slow  decrease 
of  the  activity  with  time.  This  result  indicates  that  about  half 
the  rate  of  discharge  observed  was  due  to  the  radiation  from  the 
emanation  and  the  other  half  to  the  excited  activity  produced  by  it. 

The  apparatus  employed  by  Ebert  and  Ewers  in  these  experi- 
ments was  very  similar  to  that  employed  by  Elster  and  Geitel, 
shown  in  Fig.  59.  Ebert  and  Ewers  observed  that  when  the  wire 
net  attached  to  the  electroscope  was  charged  negatively  the  rate 
of  discharge  observed  was  always  greater  than  when  it  was  charged 
positively.  The  differences  observed  between  the  two  rates  of 
discharge  varied  between  10  and  20  per  cent.  This  difference  in 
the  rates  of  discharge  for  positive  and  negative  electricity  is 
probably  connected  with  the  presence  of  particles  of  dust  or  small 
water  globules  suspended  in  the  gas.  The  experiments  of  Miss 
Brooks  (section  171)  have  shown  that  the  particles  of  dust  present 
in  the  air  containing  the  thorium  emanation  become  radio-active. 
A  large  proportion  of  these  dust  particles  acquire  a  positive  charge 
and  are  carried  to  the  negative  electrode  in  an  electric  field.  This 
effect  would  increase  the  rate  of  discharge  of  the  electroscope  when 
charged  negatively.  In  later  experiments,  Ebert  and  Ewers 
observed  that,  in  some  cases,  if  the  air  had  been  kept  in  the  vessel 
for  several  days,  the  effect  was  reversed,  and  the  electroscope 
showed  a  great  rate  of  discharge  when  charged  positively. 

J.  J.  Thomson1  has  observed  that  the  magnitude  of  the  ioniza- 
tion  current  depends  on  the  direction  of  the  electric  field,  if  fine 
water  globules  are  suspended  in  the  ionized  gas. 

In  later  experiments,  Ebert2  found  that  the  radio-active  emana- 
tion could  be  removed  from  the  air  by  condensation  in  liquid  air. 
This  property  of  the  emanation  was  independently  discovered  by 
Ebert  before  he  was  aware  of  the  results  of  Rutherford  and  Soddy 
on  the  condensation  of  the  emanations  of  radium  and  thorium.  In 
order  to  increase  the  amount  of  radio-active  emanation  in  a  given 
volume  of  air,  a  quantity  of  the  active  air,  obtained  by  sucking  the 
air  from  the  soil,  was  condensed  by  a  liquid  air  machine.  The  air 
was  then  allowed  to  partially  evaporate,  but  the  process  was  stopped 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  1902. 

2  Site.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  Munich,  33,  p.  133,  1903. 


360  RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

before  the  point  of  volatilization  of  the  emanation  was  reached. 
This  process  was  repeated  with  another  quantity  of  air  and  the 
residues  added  together.  Proceeding  in  this  way,  he  was  able  to 
concentrate  the  emanation  in  a  small  volume  of  air.  On  allowing 
the  air  to  evaporate,  the  ionization  of  the  air  in  the  testing  vessel 
increased  rapidly  for  a  time  and  then  slowly  diminished.  Ebert 
states  that  the  maximum  was  reached  earlier  for  the  emanation 
which  had  been  liquefied  for  some  time  than  for  fresh  air.  The  rate 
of  decay  of  activity  of  the  emanation  was  not  altered  by  keeping 
it  at  the  temperature  of  liquid  air  for  some  time.  In  this  respect 
it  behaves  like  the  emanations  of  radium  and  thorium. 

J.  J.  Thomson1  found  that  air  bubbled  through  Cambridge  tap 
water  showed  much  greater  conductivity  than  ordinary  air.  The 
air  was  drawn  through  the  water  by  means  of  a  water  pump  into  a 
large  gasometer,  when  the  ionization  current  was  tested  with  a 
sensitive  electrometer.  When  a  rod  charged  negatively  was  intro- 
duced into  this  conducting  air  it  became  active.  After  an  exposure 
for  a  period  of  15  to  30  minutes  in  the  conducting  gas,  the  rod, 
when  introduced  into  a  second  testing  vessel,  increased  the  saturation 
current  in  the  vessel  to  about  five  times  the  normal  amount.  Very 
little  effect  was  produced  if  the  rod  was  uncharged  or  charged 
positively  for  the  same  time.  The  activity  of  the  rod  decayed 
with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  40  minutes.  The 
amount  of  activity  produced  in  a  wire  under  constant  conditions 
was  independent  of  the  material  of  the  wire.  The  rays  from  the 
rod  were  readily  absorbed  in  a  few  centimetres  of  air. 

These  effects  were,  at  first,  thought  to  be  due  to  the  action  of 
the  small  water  drops  suspended  in  the  gas,  for  it  was  well  known 
that  air  rapidly  drawn  through  water  causes  a  temporary  increase 
in  its  conductivity.  Later  results,  however,  showed  that  there 
was  a  radio-active  emanation  present  in  Cambridge  tap  water. 
This  led  to  an  examination  of  the  waters  from  deep  wells  in 
various  parts  of  England,  and  J.  J.  Thomson  found  that,  in  some 
cases,  a  large  amount  of  emanation  could  be  obtained  from  the 
well  water.  The  emanation  was  released  either  by  bubbling  air 
through  the  water  or  by  boiling  the  water.  The  gases  obtained  by 
boiling  the  water  were  found  to  be  strongly  active.  A  sample  of 

1  Phil.  Hag.  Sept.  1902. 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  361 

air  mixed  with  the  radio-active  emanation  was  condensed.  The 
liquefied  gas  was  allowed  to  evaporate,  and  the  earlier  and  last 
portions  of  the  gas  were  collected  in  separate  vessels.  The  final 
portion  was  found  to  be  about  30  times  as  active  as  the  first  portion. 

An  examination  of  the  radio-active  properties  of  the  active 
gases  so  obtained  has  been  made  by  Adams1.  He  found  that  the 
activity  of  the  emanation  decayed  in  an  exponential  law  with  the 
time,  falling  to  half  value  in  about  3'4  days.  This  is  not  very 
different  from  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  radium 
emanation,  which  falls  to  half  value  in  a  little  less  than  four  days. 
The  excited  activity  produced  by  the  emanation  decayed  to  half 
value  in  about  35  minutes.  The  decay  of  the  excited  activity 
from  radium  is  at  first  irregular,  but  after  some  time  falls  off  in  an 
exponential  law,  diminishing  to  half  value  in  28  minutes.  Taking 
into  account  the  uncertainty  attaching  to  measurements  of  the 
very  small  ionization  observed  in  these  experiments,  the  results 
indicate  that  the  emanation  obtained  from  well  water  in  England 
is  similar  to,  if  not  identical  with,  the  radium  emanation.  Adams 
observed  that  the  emanation  was  slightly  soluble  in  water.  After 
well  water  had  been  boiled  for  some  time  and  then  put  aside,  it 
was  found  to  recover  its  power  of  giving  off  an  emanation  with 
time.  The  amount  obtained  after  standing  for  some  time  was 
never  more  than  10  per  cent,  of  the  amount  first  obtained.  Thus 
it  is  probable  that  the  well  water,  in  addition  to  the  emanations 
mixed  with  it,  has  also  a  slight  amount  of  a  permanent  radio-active 
substance  dissolved  in  it.  Ordinary  rain  water  or  distilled  water 
does  not  give  off  an  emanation. 

Bumstead  and  Wheeler2  have  recently  made  a  very  careful 
examination  of  the  radio-activity  of  the  emanation  obtained  from 
the  surface  water  and  soil  at  New  Haven,  Connecticut.  The 
emanation,  obtained  from  the  water  by  boiling,  was  passed  into 
a  large  testing  cylinder,  and  measurements  of  the  current  were 
made  by  means  of  a  sensitive  electrometer.  The  current  gradually 
rose  to  a  maximum  after  the  introduction  of  the  emanation,  in 
exactly  the  same  way  as  the  current  increases  in  a  vessel  after  the 
introduction  of  the  radium  emanation.  The  decay  of  activity  of 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Nov.  1903. 

-  Amer.  Journ.  Science,  17,  p.  97,  Feb.  1904. 


362  RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE   ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

the  emanations  obtained  from  the  water  and  soil  was  carefully 
measured,  and  within  the  limit  of  experimental  error  agreed  with 
the  decay  of  activity  observed  with  the  radium  emanation.  The 
identity  of  the  emanations  from  the  water  and  soil  with  the 
radium  emanation  was  still  further  established  by  experiments 
on  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the  emanation  through  a  porous  plate. 
By  comparative  tests  it  was  found  that  the  coefficient  of  diffusion 
of  the  emanations  from  the  water  and  soil  was  the  same  as  for 
the  radium  emanation.  In  addition,  by  comparison  of  the  rate  of 
diffusion  of  carbonic  acid,  it  was  found  that  the  density  of  the 
emanation  was  about  four  times  that  of  carbonic  acid,  a  result  in 
good  accord  with  that  found  for  the  radium  emanation  (section 
153). 

213.  Radio-activity  of  constituents  of  the  earth.  Elster 
and  Geitel1  observed  that,  although  in  many  cases  the  conductivity 
of  the  air  was  abnormally  high  in  underground  enclosures,  the 
conductivity  varied  greatly  for  different  places.  In  the  Baumann 
Cave,  for  example,  the  conductivity  of  the  air  was  nine  times  the 
normal,  but  in  the  Iberg  Cave  only  three  times  the  normal.  In  a 
cellar  at  Clausthal  the  conductivity  was  only  slightly  greater  than 
the  normal,  but  the  excited  radio-activity  obtained  on  a  negatively 
charged  wire  exposed  in  it  was  only  1/11  of  the  excited  radio- 
activity obtained  when  the  wire  was  exposed  in  the  free  air.  It 
was  concluded  from  these  experiments  that  the  amount  of  radio- 
activity in  the  different  places  probably  varied  with  the  nature 
of  the  soil.  Observations  were  then  made  on  the  conductivity  of 
the  air  sucked  up  from  the  earth  at  different  parts  of  the  country. 
The  clayey  and  limestone  soils  at  Wolfenbiittel  were  found  to  be 
strongly  active,  the  conductivity  varying  from  four  to  sixteen  times 
the  normal  amount.  A  sample  of  air  from  the  shell  limestone  of 
Wiirzburg  and  from  the  basalt  of  Wilhelmshohe  showed  very  little 
activity. 

Experiments  were  made  to  see  if  any  radio-active  substance 
could  be  detected  in  the  soil  itself.  For  this  purpose  some  earth 
was  placed  on  a  dish  and  introduced  under  a  bell-jar,  similar  to  that 
shown  in  Fig.  59.  The  conductivity  of  the  air  in  the  bell-jar 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  522,  1903. 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  363 

increased  with  the  time,  rising  to  three  times  the  normal  value 
after  several  days.  Little  difference  was  observed  whether  the 
earth  was  dry  or  moist.  The  activity  of  the  soil  seemed  to  be 
permanent,  for  no  change  in  the  activity  was  observed  after  the 
earth  had  been  laid  aside  for  eight  months. 

Attempts  were  then  made  to  separate  the  radio-active  con- 
stituent from  the  soil  by  chemical  treatment.  For  this  purpose 
a  sample  of  clay  was  tested.  By  extraction  with  hydrochloric 
acid  all  the  calcium  carbonate  was  removed.  On  drying  the 
clay,  the  activity  was  found  to  be  reduced,  but  it  spontaneously 
regained  its  original  activity  in  the  course  of  a  few  days.  It  thus 
seems  probable  that  an  active  product  had  been  separated  from 
the  soil  by  the  acid.  Elster  and  Geitel  consider  that  an  active 
substance  was  present  in  the  clay,  which  formed  a  product  more 
readily  soluble  in  hydrochloric  acid  than  the  active  material  itself. 
There  seemed  to  be  a  process  analogous  to  the  separation  of  Th  X 
from  thorium  by  precipitation  with  ammonia. 

Experiments  were  also  made  to  see  if  substances  placed  in  the 
earth  acquired  any  radio-activity.  For  this  purpose  samples  of 
potter's  clay,  whitening,  and  heavy  spar,  wrapped  in  linen,  were 
placed  in  the  earth  50  cms.  below  the  surface.  After  an  interval 
of  a  month,  these  were  dug  up  and  their  activity  examined.  The 
clay  was  the  only  substance  which  showed  any  activity.  The 
activity  of  the  clay  diminished  with  the  time,  showing  that  activity 
had  been  excited  in  it  by  the  emanations  present  in  the  soil. 

Elster  and  Geitel1  have  recently  found  that  a  large  quantity  of 
the  radio-active  emanation  can  be  obtained  by  sucking  air  through 
clay.  In  some  cases,  the  conductivity  of  the  air  in  the  testing 
vessel  was  increased  over  100  times.  They  have  also  found  that 
"  fango " — a  fine  mud  obtained  from  hot  springs  in  Battaglia, 
Northern  Italy — gives  off  three  or  four  times  as  much  emanation 
as  clay.  By  treating  the  fango  with  acid,  the  active  substance 
present  was  dissolved.  On  adding  some  barium  chloride  to  the 
solution,  and  precipitating  the  barium  as  sulphate,  the  active 
substance  was  removed,  and  in  this  way  a  precipitate  was  obtained 
over  100  times  as  active,  weight  for  weight,  as  the  original  fango. 
Comparisons  were  made  of  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity, 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  5,  No.  1,  p.  11,  1903. 


364  RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

due  to  the  emanation  from  fango,  with  that  due  to  the  radium 
emanation,  and  within  the  limit  of  error,  the  decay  curves  obtained 
were  found  to  be  identical.  There  can  thus  be  little  doubt  that 
the  activity  observed  in  fango  is  due  to  the  presence  of  a  small 
quantity  of  radium.  Elster  and  Geitel  calculate  that  .the  amount 
of  radium,  contained  in  it,  is  only  about  one  thousandth  of  the 
amount  to  be  obtained  from  an  equal  weight  of  pitchblende  from 
Joachimstahl. 

The  natural  carbonic  acid  arising  from  great  depths  of  old 
volcanic  soil  was  also  tested.  The  carbon  dioxide  was  obtained 
from  the  works  in  the  liquid  state.  The  gas  was  found  to  show 
distinct  activity,  and  was  able  to  produce  excited  activity  on  the 
surface  of  the  vessel.  After  an  interval  of  16  days  the  gas  was 
again  tested  and  found  to  be  inactive. 

These  results  are  similar  to  those  of  J.  J.  Thomson,  who  found 
an  active  emanation  in  the  water  obtained  from  deep  wells. 

f 

214.  Effect  of  meteorological  conditions  upon*  the 
radio-activity  of  the  atmosphere.  The  original  experiments 
of  Elster  and  Geitel  on  the  excited  radio-activity  derived  from 
the  atmosphere  were  repeated  by  Rutherford  and  Allan1  in 
Canada.  It  was  found  that  a  large  amount  of  excited  radio- 
activity could  be  derived  from  the  air,  and  that  the  effects  were 
similar  to  those  observed  by  Elster  and  Geitel  in  Germany.  This 
was  the  case  even  on  the  coldest  day  in  winter,  when  the  ground 
was  covered  deeply  with  snow  and  the  wind  was  blowing  from  the 
north  over  snow-covered  lands.  The  results  showed  that  the 
radio-activity  present  in  the  air  was  not  much  affected  by  the 
presence  of  moisture,  for  the  air  during  a  Canadian  winter  is 
extremely  dry.  The  greatest  amount  of  excited  activity  on  a 
negatively  charged  wire  was  obtained  in  a  strong  wind.  In  some 
cases  the  amount  produced  for  a  given  time  of  exposure  was  ten 
to  twenty  times  the  normal  amount.  A  cold  bright  day  of  winter 
usually  gave  more  effect  than  a  warm  dull  day  in  summer. 

Elster  and  Geitel2  have  made  a  detailed  examination  of  the 
effect  of  meteorological  conditions  on  the  amount  of  excited  radio- 
activity to  be  derived  from  the  atmosphere.  For  this  purpose  a 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Dec.  1902.  ->  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  pp.  137,  138.     1902. 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY   MATERIALS  365 

simple  portable  apparatus1  was  devised  by  them  and  used  for  the 
whole  series  of  experiments.  A  large  number  of  observations  were 
taken,  extending  over  a  period  of  twelve  months.  They  found 
that  the  amount  of  excited  activity  obtained  was  subject  to  great 
variations.  The  extreme  values  obtained  varied  in  the  ratio  of 
16  to  1.  No  direct  connection  could  be  traced  between  the  amount 
of  ionization  in  the  atmosphere  and  the  amount  of  excited  activity 
produced.  They  found  that  the  greatest  amount  of  excited  activity 
was  obtained  during  a  fog,  while  the  amount  of  ionization  in  the 
air  is  then  small.  This  result,  however,  is  not  necessarily  contra- 
dictory to  the  view  that  the  ionization  and  activity  of  the  air 
are  to  a  certain  extent  connected.  From  the  experiments  of 
Miss  Brooks  on  the  effect  of  dust  in  acting  as  carriers  of  excited 
activity,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  more  excited  activity  would  be 
obtained  during  a  fog  than  in  clear  air.  The  particles  of  water 
become  centres  for  the  deposit  of  radio-active  matter.  The 
positive  carriers  are  thus  anchored  and  are  not  removed  from 
the  air  by  the  earth's  field.  In  a  strong  electric  field,  these 
small  drops  will  be  carried  to  the  negative  electrode  and  manifest 
their  activity  on  the  surface  of  the  wire.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
distribution  of  water  globules  throughout  the  air  causes  the  ions 
in  the  air  to  disappear  rapidly  in  consequence  of  their  diffusion  to 
the  surface  of  the  drops  (see  section  31).  For  this  reason  the 
denser  the  fog,  the  smaller  will  be  the  conductivity  observed  in 
the  air. 

Lowering  the  temperature  of  the  air  had  a  decided  influence. 
The  average  activity  observed  below  0°C.  was  T44  times  the 
activity  observed  above  0°  C.  The  height  of  the  barometer  was 
found  to  exert  a  marked  influence  on  the  amount  of  excited  activity 
to  be  derived  from  the  air.  The  lower  the  barometer  the  greater 
was  the  amount  of  excited  activity  in  the  air.  The  effect  of 
variation  of  the  height  of  the  barometer  is  intelligible,  when  it  is 
considered  that  probably  a  large  proportion  of  the  radio-activity 
observed  in  the  air  is  due  to  the  radio-active  emanations-  which 
are  continuously  diffusing  from  the  earth  into  the  atmosphere. 
Elster  and  Geitel  have  suggested  that  a  lowering  of  the  pressure 
of  the  air  would  cause  the  air  from  the  ground  to  be  drawn  up 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  p.  522,  1903. 


366  KADIO- ACTIVITY   OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

from  the  capillaries  of  the  earth  into  the  atmosphere.  This,  how- 
ever, need  not  necessarily  be  the  case  if  the  conditions  of  the  escape 
of  the  emanation  into  the  atmosphere  are  altered  by  the  variation 
of  the  position  of  underground  water  or  by  a  heavy  fall  of  rain. 

The  amount  of  excited  activity  to  be  derived  from  the  air  on 
the  Baltic  Coast  was  only  one-third  of  that  observed  inland  at 
Wolfenblittel.  Experiments  on  the  radio-activity  of  the  air  in 
mid-ocean  would  be  of  great  importance  in  order  to  settle  whether 
the  radio-activity  observed  in  the  air  is  due  to  the  emanations 
from  the  soil  alone.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  the  radio-activity 
of  the  air  at  different  points  of  the  earth  would  vary  widely,  and 
would  largely  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  soil. 

Some  interesting  experiments  have  been  made  by  McLennan1 
on  the  amount  of  excited  radio-activity  to  be  derived  from  the  air 
when  filled  with  fine  spray.  The  experiments  were  made  at  the 
foot  of  the  American  Fall  at  Niagara.  An  insulated  wire  was 
suspended  near  the  foot  of  the  Fall,  and  the  amount  of  excited 
activity  on  the  wire  compared  with  the  amount  to  be  obtained  on 
the  same  wire  for  the  same  exposure  in  Toronto.  The  amount  of 
activity  obtained  from  the  air  at  Toronto  was  generally  five  or  six 
times  that  obtained  from  the  air  at  the  Falls.  In  these  experi- 
ments it  was  not  necessary  to  use  an  electric  machine  to  charge 
the  wire  negatively,  for  the  falling  spray  kept  the  insulated  wire 
permanently  charged  to  a  potential  of  about  —  7500  volts.  These 
results  indicate  that  the  falling  spray  had  a  negative  charge  and 
electrified  the  wire.  The  small  amount  of  the  excited  radio- 
activity at  the  Falls  was  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
negatively  charged  drops  abstracted  the  positively  charged  radio- 
active carriers  from  the  atmosphere,  and  in  falling  carried  them 
to  the  river  below.  On  collecting  the  spray  and  evaporating  it, 
no  active  residue  was  obtained.  Such  a  result  is,  however,  to  be 
expected  on  account  of  the  minute  proportion  of  the  spray  tested 
compared  with  that  present  in  the  air. 

215.     A   very   penetrating   radiation   firom  the  earth's 
surface.     McLennan2,  and  Rutherford  and  Cooke3  independently 

1  Phys.  Rev.  16,  p.  184,  1903,  and  Phil.  Mag.  5,  p.  419,  1903. 

2  Phys.  Rev.  No.  4,  1903.  3  Americ.  Phys.  Soc.  Dec.  1902. 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  367 

observed  the  presence  of  a  very  penetrating  radiation  inside  build- 
ings. McLennan  measured  the  natural  conductivity  of  the  air  in 
a  large  closed  metal  cylinder  by  means  of  a  sensitive  electrometer. 
The  cylinder  was  then  placed  inside  another  and  the  space  between 
filled  with  water.  For  a  thickness  of  water  between  the  cylinders 
of  25  cms.  the  conductivity  of  the  air  in  the  inner  cylinder  fell  to 
about  63  per  cent,  of  its  initial  value.  This  result  shows  that  part 
of  the  ionization  in  the  inner  cylinder  was  due  to  a  penetrating 
radiation  from  an  external  source,  which  radiation  was  partially  or 
wholly  absorbed  in  water. 

Rutherford  and  Cooke  observed  that  the  rate  of  discharge  of  a 
sealed  brass  electroscope  was  diminished  by  placing  a  lead  screen 
around  the  electroscope.  A  detailed  investigation  of  the  decrease 
of  the  rate  of  discharge  in  the  electroscope,  when  surrounded  by 
metal  screens,  was  made  later  by  Cooke1.  A  thickness  of  5  cms.  of 
lead  round  the  electroscope  decreased  the  rate  of  discharge  about 
30  per  cent.  Further  increase  of  the  thickness  of  the  screen  had 
no  effect.  When  the  apparatus  was  surrounded  by  5  tons  of  pig- 
lead  the  rate  of  discharge  was  about  the  same  as  when  surrounded 
by  a  plate  about  3  cms.  thick.  An  iron  screen  also  diminished  the 
rate  of  discharge  to  about  the  same  extent  as  the  lead.  By  suitably 
arranging  lead  screens  it  was  found  that  the  radiation  came  equally 
from  all  directions.  It  was  of  the  same  intensity  by  night  as  by 
day.  In  order  to  be  sure  that  this  penetrating  radiation  did  not 
arise  from  the  presence  of  radio-active  substances  in  the  laboratory, 
the  experiments  were  repeated  in  buildings  in  which  radio-active 
substances  had  never  been  introduced,  and  also  on  the  open  ground 
far  removed  from  any  building.  In  all  cases  a  diminution  of  the  rate 
of  discharge  of  the  electroscope,  when  surrounded  by  lead  screens, 
was  observed.  These  results  show  that  a  penetrating  radiation  is 
present  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  arising  partly  from  the  earth 
itself  and  partly  from  the  atmosphere. 

This  result  is  not  unexpected,  when  the  radio-activity  of  the 
earth  and  atmosphere  is  taken  into  account.  The  writer  has 
found  that  bodies  made  active  by  exposure  to  the  emanations  from 
thorium  and  radium  give  out  7  rays.  It  is  then  to  be  expected 
that  the  very  similar  excited  radio-activity  which  is  present  in 
1  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.  1903. 


368  RADIO-ACTIVITY    OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

the  earth  and   atmosphere   should   also   give   rise   to  7  rays   of 
a  similar  character. 

216.  Comparison  of  the  radio-activity  of  the  atmo- 
sphere with  that  produced  by  the  radio-elements.  The 

radio-active  phenomena  observed  in  the  earth  and  atmosphere  are 
very  similar  in  character  to  those  produced  by  thorium  and  radium. 
Radio-active  emanations  are  present  in  the  air  of  caves  and  cellars, 
in  natural  carbonic  acid,  and  in  deep  well  water,  and  these  emana- 
tions produce  excited  radio-activity  on  all  bodies  in  contact  with 
them.  The  question  now  arises  whether  these  effects  are  due  to 
known  radio-elements  present  in  the  earth  or  to  unknown  kinds 
of  radio-active  matter  ?  The  simplest  method  of  testing  this  point 
is  to  compare  the  rates  of  decay  of  the  radio-active  products  in 
the  atmosphere  with  those  of  the  known  radio-active  products  of 
thorium  and  radium.  A  cursory  examination  of  the  facts  at  once 
shows  that  the  radio-activity  of  the  atmosphere  is  much  more 
closely  allied  to  effects  produced  by  radium  than  to  those  due  to 
thorium.  The  activity  of  the  emanation  released  from  well  water, 
and  also  that  sucked  up  from  the  earth,  decays  to  half  value  in 
about  3'3  days,  while  the  activity  of  the  radium  emanation  decays 
to  half  value  in  an  interval  of  3'7  to  4  days.  Considering  the 
difficulty  of  making  accurate  determinations  of  these  quantities, 
the  rates  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  emanations  from  the  earth 
and  from  radium  agree  within  the  limits  of  experimental  error. 
Bumstead  and  Wheeler  have  shown  that  the  emanation  from  the 
soil  and  surface  water  of  New  Haven  is  identical  with  the  radium 
emanation.  If  the  emanation  from  the  earth  is  the  same  as  that 
from  radium,  the  excited  activity  produced  should  have  the  same 
rate  of  decay  as  that  from  radium.  The  emanation  from  well 
water  in  England  approximately  fulfils  this  condition  (section  212), 
but  an  observation  recorded  by  Ebert  and  Ewers  (section  212) 
seems  to  show  that  the  excited  activity  due  to  the  emanation 
sucked  up  from  the  earth  decays  at  a  very  slow  rate  compared 
with  that  due  to  radium. 

On  comparing  the  rates  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity  derived 
from  the  atmosphere  and  of  that  produced  by  radium,  the  evidence 
is  to  some  extent  conflicting.  The  activity  of  a  negatively  charged 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY   MATERIALS  369 

wire,  exposed  in  the  open  air,  decays  according  to  an  exponential 
law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in  45  minutes.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  activity  of  freshly  fallen  rain  and  snow  falls  to 
half  value  in  about  30  minutes.  Now  the  activity  of  a  wire,  made 
active  by  exposure  to  the  radium  emanation,  is  at  first  irregular, 
but  about  an  hour  after  removal  it  decays  according  to  an  expo- 
nential law  with  the  time,  falling  to  half  value  in  28  minutes. 
The  agreement  between  the  rates  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the 
emanation  in  the  air  and  the  excited  activity  produced  on  rain  and 
snow,  with  the  similar  effects  produced  by  radium,  strongly  sup- 
ports the  view  that  the  radium  emanation  is  present  in  the  soil 
and  atmosphere.  Allan1  has  also  obtained  evidence  to  show  that 
the  rate  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity  produced  on  a  negatively 
charged  wire  is  the  resultant  of  the  rates  of  decay  of  several  types 
of  matter  which  have  different  rates  of  decay.  For  example,  the 
activity  transferred  from  the  active  wire  to  a  piece  of  leather 
moistened  with  ammonia,  fell  to  half  value  in  38  minutes,  while  on 
a  piece  of  absorbent  felt  treated  similarly  the  activity  fell  to  half 
value  in  60  minutes.  Thus  it  seems  probable  that  different  types 
of  active  matter  are  collected  by  the  negatively  charged  wire, 
which  are  soluble  in  ammonia  in  different  degrees.  An  accurate 
determination  of  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  excited  activity  from 
actinium  would  be  of  interest,  in  order  to  see  if  the  activity  derived 
from  the  air  may  be  due  in  part  to  the  presence  of  the  actinium 
emanation. 

Considering  the  results  as  a  whole,  there  is  evidence  that  other 
radio-active  substances  besides  radium  and  thorium  are  present  in 
the  earth.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that  part  of  the 
radio-activity  of  the  atmosphere  is  due  to  the  radium  emanation,, 
which  is  continually  diffusing  into  the  atmosphere  from  the  pores 
of  the  earth.  Since  radio-activity  has  been  observed  in  the 
atmosphere  at  all  points  at  which  observations  have,  so  far,  been 
made,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  radio-active  matter  is  dis- 
tributed in  minute  quantities  throughout  the  soil  of  the  earth. 
The  volatile  emanations  escape  into  the  atmosphere  by  diffusion, 
or  are  carried  to  the  surface  in  spring  water  or  by  the  escape  of 
underground  gases,  and  cause  the  radio-active  phenomena  observed 

1  Phys.  Rev.  16,  p.  306,  1903. 
R.  B.-A.  24 


370  KADIO- ACTIVITY   OF   THE    ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

in  the  atmosphere.  The  observation  of  Elster  and  Geitel  that  the 
radio-activity  of  the  air  is  much  less  near  the  sea  than  inland  is 
at  once  explained,  if  the  radio-activity  of  the  atmosphere  is  due 
mainly  to  the  diffusion  of  emanations  from  the  soil  into  the  air 
above  it. 

The  rare  gases  helium  and  xenon  which  exist  in  the  atmosphere 
have  been  tested  and  found  to  be  non-radio-active.  The  radio- 
activity of  the  air  cannot  be  ascribed  to  a  slight  radio-activity 
possessed  by  either  of  these  gases. 

In  order  to  account  for  the  effect  observed,  it  is  only  necessary 
to  suppose  that  the  radio-active  substance  is  present  in  minute 
quantity  mixed  with  the  soil.  Suppose,  for  the  purpose  of  illustra- 
tion, that  the  radio-activity  of  the  atmosphere  is  due  to  the  radium 
emanation  escaping  from  the  earth's  surface.  The  air  sucked  from 
the  soil  in  many  cases  shows  20  times  the  conductivity  of  ordinary 
air.  Now  it  will  be  shown  (section  218)  that  the  natural 
conductivity  of  air  observed  in  closed  vessels  corresponds  to  a 
production  of  about  30  ions  per  c.c.  per  second.  The  active  air  of 
20  times  the  normal  conductivity  thus  gives  rise  to  about  600  ions 
per  c.c.  per  second.  In  100  litres  of  this  active  air  the  number  of 
ions  produced  per  second  is  therefore  6  x  107.  Now  it  has  been 
found  that  the  saturation  current  in  a  sealed  vessel,  due  to  the 
emanation  from  one  gram  of  radium  chloride,  corresponds  to  a 
current  of  2'5  x  10~8  electro-magnetic  units.  Taking  the  charge  of 
an  ion  as  I'l  x  10~20  electro-magnetic  units,  this  corresponds  to  a 
production  of  2*3  x  1015  ions  in  the  gas  per  second.  The  emanation 
present  in  100  litres  of  air,  of  activity  20  times  the  normal  activity, 
would  thus  correspond  to  the  amount  released  by  solution  of 
3  x  10~8  of  a  gram  of  radium  chloride.  A  very  minute  amount  of 
radium  per  cubic  foot  of  soil  would  account  for  the  radio-active 
effects  observed. 

217.  Radio-activity  of  ordinary  materials.  It  has  been 
shown  that  radio-active  matter  seems  to  be  distributed  fairly 
uniformly  over  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  in  the  atmosphere. 
The  very  important  question  arises  whether  the  small  radio-activity 
observed  is  due  to  known  or  unknown  radio-elements  present  in 
the  earth  and  atmosphere,  or  to  a  feeble  radio-activity  of  matter 


XI]  AND   OF  ORDINARY  MATERIALS  371 

in  general,  which  is  only  readily  detectable  when  large  quantities 
of  matter  are  present.  The  experimental  evidence  is  not  yet 
sufficient  to  answer  this  question,  but  undoubted  proof  has  been 
obtained  that  many  of  the  metals  show  a  very  feeble  radio-activity. 
Whether  this  radio-activity  is  due  to  the  presence  of  a  slight  trace 
of  the  radio-elements  or  is  an  actual  property  of  the  metals  them- 
selves still  remains  in  doubt.  This  point  will  be  discussed  in 
more  detail  later  in  section  220. 

Schuster1  has  pointed  out  that  every  physical  property  hitherto 
discovered  for  one  element  has  been  found  to  be  shared  by  all 
the  others  in  varying  degrees.  For  example,  the  property  of 
magnetism  is  most  strongly  marked  in  iron,  nickel,  and  cobalt,  but 
all  other  substances  are  found  to  be  either  feebly  magnetic  or 
diamagnetic.  It  might  thus  be  expected  on  general  principles 
that  all  matter  should  exhibit  the  property  of  radio-activity  in 
varying  degrees.  On  the  view  developed  in  chapter  x.  the 
presence  of  this  property  is  an  indication  that  the  matter  is 
undergoing  change  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  charged 
particles.  It  does  not,  however,  by  any  means  follow  that  because 
the  atom  of  one  element  in  the  course  of  time  becomes  unstable 
and  breaks  up,  that,  therefore,  the  atoms  of  all  the  other  elements 
pass  through  similar  phases  of  instability. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  (section  8),  that  Mme  Curie 
made  a  very  extensive  examination  of  most  of  the  elements  and 
their  compounds  for  radio-activity.  The  electric  method  was 
used,  and  any  substance  possessing  an  activity  of  1/100  of  that  of 
uranium  would  certainly  have  been  detected.  With  the  exception 
of  the  known  radio-elements  and  the  minerals  containing  uranium 
and  thorium,  no  other  substances  were  found  to  be  radio-active 
even  to  that  degree. 

Certain  substances  like  phosphorus2  possess  the  property  of 
ionizing  a  gas  under  special  conditions.  The  air  which  is  drawn 
over  the  phosphorus  is  conducting,  but  it  has  not  yet  been  settled 
whether  this  conductivity  is  due  merely  to  ions  formed  at  the 
surface  of  the  phosphorus  or  to  ions  produced  by  the  phosphorus 
nuclei  or  emanations,  as  they  have  been  termed,  which  are  carried 

1  British  Assoc.  1903. 

2  J.  J.  Thomson,  Conduction  of  Electricity  through  Gases,  p.  324,  1903. 

24—2 


372  RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF  THE  ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

along  with  the  current  of  air.  It  does  not  however  appear  that 
the  ionization  of  the  gas  is  in  any  way  due  to  the  presence  of  a 
penetrating  type  of  radiation  such  as  is  emitted  by  the  radio- 
active bodies.  Le  Bon  (section  8)  observed  that  quinine  sulphate, 
after  being  heated  to  a  temperature  below  the  melting  point  and 
then  allowed  to  cool,  showed  for  a  time  strong  phosphorescence 
and  was  able  rapidly  to  discharge  an  electroscope.  The  discharging 
action  of  quinine  sulphate  under  varying  conditions  has  been  very 
carefully  examined  by  Miss  Gates1.  The  ionization  could  not  be 
observed  through  thin  aluminium  foil  or  gold-leaf  but  appeared 
to  be  confined  to  the  surface.  The  current  observed  by  an  electro- 
meter was  found  to  vary  with  the  direction  of  the  electric  field, 
indicating  that  the  positive  and  negative  ions  had  very  different 
mobilities.  The  discharging  action  appears  to  be  due  either  to  an 
ionization  of  the  gas  very  close  to  the  surface  by  some  short  ultra- 
violet light  waves,  accompanying  the  phosphorescence,  or  to  a 
chemical  action  taking  place  at  the  surface. 

Thus,  neither  phosphorus  nor  quinine  sulphate  can  be  con- 
sidered to  be  radio-active,  even  under  the  special  conditions  when 
they  are  able  to  discharge  an  electrified  body.  No  evidence  in 
either  case  has  been  found  that  the  ionization  is  due  to  the 
emission  of  a  penetrating  radiation. 

No  certain  evidence  has  yet  been  obtained  that  any  body  can 
be  made  radio-active  by  exposure  to  Rontgen  or  cathode  rays. 
A  metal  exposed  to  the  action  of  Rontgen  rays  gives  rise  to  a 
secondary  radiation  which  is  very  readily  absorbed  in  a  few 
centimetres  of  air.  It  is  possible  that  this  secondary  radiation 
may  prove  to  be  analogous  in  some  respects  to  the  a  rays  from 
the  radio-elements.  The  secondary  radiation,  however,  ceases 
immediately  the  Rontgen  rays  are  cut  off.  Villard2  observed  that 
a  piece  of  bismuth  produced  a  feeble  photographic  action  after  it 
had  been  exposed  for  some  time  to  the  action  of  the  cathode 
rays  in  a  vacuum.  It  has  not  however  been  shown  that  the 
bismuth  gives  out  rays  of  a  character  similar  to  those  of  the 
radio-active  bodies. 

The  existence  of  a  very  feeble  radio-activity  of  ordinary  matter 

1  Amer.  Phys.  Soc.  Oct.  1903. 

2  Societe  de  Physique,  July,  1900. 


Xl]  AXD   OF   ORDINARY   MATERIALS  373 

has  been  deduced  from  the  study  of  the  conductivity  of  gases  in 
closed  vessels.  The  conductivity  is  extremely  minute,  and  special 
methods  are  required  to  determine  it  with  accuracy.  A  brief 
account  will  now  be  given  of  the  gradual  growth  of  our  knowledge 
on  this  important  question. 

218.  Conductivity  of  air  in  closed  vessels.  Since  the 
time  of  Coulomb  onwards  several  investigators  have  believed  that 
a  charged  conductor  placed  inside  a  closed  vessel  lost  its  charge 
more  rapidly  than  could  be  explained  by  the  conduction  leak 
across  the  insulating  support.  Matte ucci,  as  early  as  1850,  observed 
that  the  rate  of  loss  of  charge  wras  independent  of  the  potential. 
Boys,  by  using  quartz  insulators  of  different  lengths  and  diameters, 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  leakage  must  in  part  take  place 
through  the  air.  This  loss  of  charge  in  a  closed  vessel  was  believed 
to  be  due  in  some  way  to  the  presence  of  dust  particles  in  the  air. 

On  the  discovery  that  gases  became  temporary  conductors  of 
electricity  under  the  influence  of  Rontgen  rays  and  the  rays  from 
radio-active  substances,  attention  was  again  drawn  to  this  question. 
Geitel1  and  C.  T.  R.  Wilson-  independently  attacked  the  problem 
and  both  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  loss  of  charge  was  due 
to  a  constant  ionization  of  the  air  in  the  closed  vessel.  Geitel 
employed  in  his  experiments  an  apparatus  similar  to  that  shown 
in  Fig.  59.  The  loss  of  charge  of  an  Exner  electroscope,  with  the 
cylinder  of  wire  netting  Z  attached,  was  observed  in  a  closed  vessel 
containing  about  30  litres  of  air.  The  electroscope  system  was 
found  to  diminish  in  potential  at  the  rate  of  about  40  volts  per 
hour,  and  this  leakage  was  shown  not  to  be  due  to  a  want  of 
insulation  of  the  supports. 

Wilson,  on  the  other  hand,  used  a  vessel  of  very  small  volume, 
in  order  to  work  with  air  which  could  be  completely  freed  from 
dust.  In  the  first  experiments  a  silvered  glass  vessel  with  a 
volume  of  only  163  c.c.  was  employed.  The  experimental  arrange- 
ment is  shown  in  Fig.  60. 

The  conductor,  of  which  the  loss  of  charge  was  to  be  measured, 
was  placed  near  the  centre  of  the  vessel  A.  It  consisted  of  a 

1  Phys.  Zeit.  2,  p.  116,  1900. 

2  Proc.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  11,  p.  52,  1900.     Proc.  Boy.  Soc.  68,  p.  152,  1901. 


374 


KADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE   ATMOSPHERE 


[CH. 


narrow  strip  of  metal  with  a  gold-leaf  attached.  The  strip  of 
metal  was  fixed  to  the  upper  rod  by  means  of  a  small  sulphur  bead. 
The  upper  rod  was  connected  to  a  sulphur  condenser  with  an 
Exner  electroscope  B  attached  to  indicate  its  potential.  The 
gold-leaf  system  was  initially  charged  to  the  same  potential  as 
the  upper  rod  and  condenser  by  means  of  a  fine  steel  wire  which 
was  caused  to  touch  the  gold-leaf  system  by  the  attraction  of  a 
magnet  brought  near  it.  The  rate  of  movement  of  the  gold-leaf 


Earth 


Earth 


Fig.  60. 


was  measured  by  means  of  a  microscope  provided  with  a  micro- 
meter eye-piece.  By  keeping  the  upper  rod  at  a  slightly  higher 
potential  than  the  gold-leaf  system,  it  was  ensured  that  the  loss 
of  charge  of  the  gold-leaf  system  was  not  in  any  way  due  to  a 
conduction  leakage  across  the  sulphur  bead. 

The  method  employed  by  Wilson  in  these  experiments  is 
very  certain  and  convenient  when  an  extremely  small  rate  of 
discharge  is  to  be  observed.  In  this  respect  the  electroscope  is 
able  to  measure  with  certainty  a  rate  of  loss  of  charge  much 
smaller  than  can  be  measured  by  a  sensitive  electrometer. 


XI]  AND   OF   ORDINARY    MATERIALS  375 

Both  Geitel  and  Wilson  found  that  the  leakage  of  the  insulated 
system  in  dust-free  air  was  the  same  for  a  positive  as  for  a  negative 
charge,  and  was  independent  of  the  potential  over  a  considerable 
range.  The  leakage  was  the  same  in  the  dark  as  in  diffuse 
daylight.  The  independence  of  leakage  of  the  potential  is  strong 
evidence  that  the  loss  of  charge  is  due  to  a  constant  ionization  of 
the  air.  When  the  electric  field  acting  on  the  gas  exceeds  a 
certain  value  all  the  ions  are  carried  to  the  electrodes  before  re- 
combination occurs.  A  saturation  current  is  reached,  and  it  will 
be  independent  of  further  increase  of  the  electric  field,  provided, 
of  course,  a  potential  sufficiently  high  to  cause  a  spark  to  pass  is 
not  applied. 

C.  T.  R.  Wilson  has  recently  devised  a  striking  experiment  to 
show  the  presence  of  ions  in  dust-free  air  which  is  not  exposed  to 
any  external  ionizing  agency.  Two  large  metal  plates  are  placed 
in  a  glass  vessel  connected  to  an  expansion  apparatus  similar  to 
that  described  in  section  34.  On  expanding  the  air  the  presence 
of  the  ions  is  shown  by  the  appearance  of  a  slight  cloud  between 
the  plates.  These  condensation  nuclei  carry  an  electric  charge 
and  are  apparently  similar  in  all  respects  to  the  ions  produced 
in  gases  by  X  rays  or  by  the  rays  from  active  substances. 

Wilson  found  that  the  loss  of  charge  of  the  insulated  system 
was  independent  of  the  locality.  The  rate  of  discharge  was  un- 
altered when  the  apparatus  was  placed  in  a  deep  tunnel,  so  that 
it  did  not  appear  that  the  loss  of  charge  was  due  to  an  external 
radiation.  From  experiments  already  described,  however  (section 
215),  it  is  probable  that  about  30  per  cent,  of  the  rate  of  discharge 
observed  was  due  to  a  very  penetrating  radiation.  This  experiment 
of  Wilson's  indicates  that  the  intensity  of  the  penetrating  radiation 
was  the  same  in  the  tunnel  as  at  the  earth's  surface.  Wilson 
found  that  the  ionization  of  the  air  was  about  the  same  in  a  brass 
vessel  as  in  one  of  glass,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
air  was  spontaneously  ionized. 

Using  a  brass  vessel  of  volume  about  471  c.c.,  Wilson  de- 
termined the  number  of  ions  that  must  be  produced  in  air 
per  unit  volume  per  second,  in  order  to  account  for  the  loss  of 
charge  of  the  insulated  system.  The  leakage  system  was  found 
to  have  a  capacity  of  about  I'l  electrostatic  units,  and  lost  its 


376 


RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF   THE   ATMOSPHERE 


[CH. 


charge  at  the  rate  of  4*1  volts  per  hour  for  a  potential  of  210  volts, 
and  4'0  volts  per  hour  for  a  potential  of  120  volts.  Taking  the 
charge  on  an  ion  as  3*4  x  10~10  electrostatic  units,  this  corresponds 
to  a  production  of  26  ions  per  second. 

Rutherford  and  Allan1  repeated  the  results  of  Geitel  and 
Wilson,  using  an  electrometer  method.  The  saturation  current 
was  observed  between  two  concentric  zinc  cylinders  of  diameter 
25'5  and  7*5  cms.  respectively  and  length  154  cms.  It  was  found 
that  the  saturation  current  could  practically  be  obtained  with  a 
potential  of  a  few  volts.  Saturation  was  however  obtained  with 
a  lower  voltage  after  the  air  had  remained  undisturbed  in  the 
cylinders  for  several  days.  This  was  probably  due  to  the  gradual 
settling  of  the  dust  originally  present  in  the  air. 

Later  observations  of  the  number  of  ions  produced  in  air  in 
sealed  vessels  have  been  made  by  Patterson2,  by  Harms3,  and  by 
Cooke4.  The  results  obtained  by  different  observers  are  shown 
in  the  following  table.  The  value  of  the  charge  on  an  ion  is  taken 
as  3*4  x  10~10  electrostatic  units  : 


Number  of  ions 

Material  of  vessel 

produced  per  c.c. 

Observer 

per  second 

Silvered  glass     .  . 

36 

C.  T.  R  Wilson 

Brass       

26 

Zinc 

27 

Rutherford  and  Allan 

Glass       

53  to  63 

Harms 

Iron         

61 

Patterson 

Cleaned  brass     .  . 

10 

Cooke 

It  will  be  shown  later  that  the  differences  in  these  results  are 
probably  due  to  differences  in  the  radio-activity  of  the  containing 
vessel. 

219.  Effect  of  pressure  and  nature  of  gas.  C.  T.  R.  Wilson 
(loc.  cit.)  found  that  the  rate  of  leakage  of  a  charged  conductor 
varied  approximately  as  the  pressure  of  the  air  between  the  pres- 
sures examined,  viz.  43  mms.  and  743  mms.  of  mercury.  These 
results  point  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  a  good  vacuum,  a  charged 

1  Phil.  Mag.  Dec.  1902.  .      2  PhiL  Mag^  August,  1903. 

3  Phys.  Zeit.  4,  No.  1,  p.  11,  1902  4  PhiL  Magm  Oct   1903 


XI] 


AND   OF   ORDINARY   MATERIALS 


377 


body  would  lose  its  charge  extremely  slowly.  This  is  in  agreement 
with  an  observation  of  Crookes,  who  found  that  a  pair  of  gold- 
leaves  retained  their  charge  for  several  months  in  a  high  vacuum. 
Wilson1  at  a  later  date  investigated  the  leakage  for  different 
gases.  The  results  are  included  in  the  following  table,  where  the 
ionization  produced  in  air  is  taken  as  unity: 


(TOO 

Relative 

Relative  ionization 

ionization 

density 

Air          

1-00 

1-00 

Hydrogen           .  . 

0-184 

2-7 

Carbon  dioxide  .  . 

1-69 

MO 

Sulphur  dioxide.  . 

2-64 

1-21 

Chloroform         .  . 

4-7 

1-09 

With  the  exception  of  hydrogen,  the  ionization  produced  in 
different  gases  is  approximately  proportional  to  the  density.  The 
relative  ionization  is  very  similar  to  that  observed  by  Strutt 
(section  45)  for  gases  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the  a  and  @  rays 
from  radio-active  substances,  and  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
ionization  observed  may  be  due  either  to  a  radiation  from  the 
walls  of  the  vessel  or  from  external  sources. 

Patterson2  examined  the  variation  of  the  ionization  of  air 
with  pressure  in  a  large  iron  vessel  of  diameter  30  cms.  and  length 
20  cms.  The  current  between  a  central  electrode  and  the  cylinder 
was  measured  by  means  of  a  sensitive  Dolezalek  electrometer. 
He  found  that  the  saturation  current  was  practically  independent 
of  the  pressure  for  pressures  greater  than  300  mms.  of  mercury. 
Below  a  pressure  of  80  mms.  the  current  varied  directly  as  the 
pressure.  For  air  at  atmospheric  pressure,  the  current  was  inde- 
pendent of  the  temperature  up  to  450°  C.  With  further  increase 
of  temperature,  the  current  began  to  increase,  and  the  increase 
was  more  rapid  when  the  central  electrode  was  charged  negatively 
than  when  it  was  charged  positively.  This  difference  was  ascribed 
to  the  production  of  positive  ions  at  the  surface  of  the  iron  vessel. 
The  results  obtained  by  Patterson  render  it  very  improbable  that 
the  ionization  observed  in  air  is  due  to  a  spontaneous  ionization  of 
the  enclosed  air:  for  it  would  be  expected  that  the  amount  of 
this  ionization  would  depend  on  the  temperature  of  the  gas.  On 
1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  69,  p.  277,  1901.  2  Phil.  Hag.  Aug.  1903. 


378 


RADIO-ACTIVITY   OF   THE   ATMOSPHERE 


[CH. 


the  other  hand,  the  results  are  to  be  expected  if  the  ionization 
of  the  enclosed  air  is  mainly  due  to  an  easily  absorbed  radiation 
from  the  walls  of  the  vessel.  If  this  radiation  had  a  penetrating 
power  about  equal  to  that  observed  for  the  a  rays  of  the  radio- 
elements,  the  radiation  would  be  absorbed  in  a  few  centimetres  of 
air.  With  diminution  of  pressure,  the  radiations  would  traverse 
a  greater  distance  of  air  before  complete  absorption,  but  the  total 
ionization  produced  by  the  rays  would  still  remain  about  the  same, 
until  the  pressure  was  reduced  sufficiently  to  allow  the  radiation 
to  traverse  the  air  space  in  the  vessel  without  complete  absorption. 
With  still  further  diminution  of  pressure,  the  total  ionization 
produced  by  the  radiation,  and  in  consequence  the  current  observed, 
will  vary  directly  as  the  pressure. 

220.     Examination  of  ordinary  matter  for  radio-activity. 

Strutt1,  McLennan  and  Burton2,  and  Cooke3,  independently  ob- 
served about  the  same  time  that  ordinary  matter  is  radio-active 
to  a  slight  degree.  Strutt,  by  means  of  an  electroscope,  observed 
that  the  ionization  produced  in  a  closed  vessel  varied  with  the 
material  of  the  vessel.  A  glass  vessel  with  a  removeable  base 
was  employed  and  the  vessel  was  lined  with  the  material  to  be 
examined.  The  following  table  shows  the  relative  results  obtained. 
The  amount  of  leakage  observed  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
number  of  scale  divisions  of  the  eye-piece  passed  over  per  hour 
by  the  gold-leaf: 


Material  of  lining  of  vessel 

Leakage  in  scale 
divisions  per  hour 

Tinfoil  

3-3 

„       another  sample 
Glass  coated  with  phosphoric  acid 
Silver  chemically  deposited  on  glass 
Zinc     ... 

2-3 
1-3 

1-6 
1*2 

Lead    

2  -2 

Copper  (clean)           
„        (oxidized)      
Platinum  (various  samples) 
Aluminium    ... 

2-3 
1-7 
2-0,  2-9,  3-9 
1*4 

1  Phil.  Mag.  June,  1903.    Nature,  Feb.  19,  1903. 

2  Phys.  Rev.  No.  4,  1903.     J.  J.  Thomson,  Nature,  Feb.  26,  1903. 

3  Phil.  Mag.  Aug.  6,  1903.     Eutherford,  Nature,  April  2,  1903. 


XI]  AND  OF  ORDINARY   MATERIALS  379 

There  are  thus  marked  differences  in  the  leakage  observed  for 
different  materials  and  also  considerable  differences  in  different 
samples  of  the  same  metal.  For  example,  one  specimen  of  platinum 
caused  nearly  twice  the  leakage  of  another  sample  from  a  different 
stock. 

McLennan  and  Burton,  on  the  other  hand,  measured  by  means 
of  a  sensitive  electrometer  the  ionization  current  produced  in  the 
air  in  a  closed  iron  cylinder  25  cms.  in  diameter  and  130  cms.  in 
length,  in  which  an  insulated  central  electrode  was  placed.  The 
open  cylinder  was  first  exposed  for  some  time  at  the  open  window 
of  the  laboratory.  It  was  then  removed,  the  top  and  bottom 
closed,  and  the  saturation  current  through  the  gas  determined  as 
soon  as  possible.  In  all  cases  it  was  observed  that  the  current 
diminished  for  two  or  three  hours  to  a  minimum  and  then  very 
slowly  increased  again.  In  one  experiment,  for  example,  the  initial 
current  observed  corresponded  to  30  on  an  arbitrary  scale.  In  the 
course  of  four  hours  the  current  fell  to  a  minimum  of  6'6,  and 
44  hours  later  had  risen  to  a  practical  maximum  of  24.  The 
initial  decrease  observed  is  probably  due  to  a  radio-activity  of 
the  enclosed  air  or  walls  of  the  vessel,  which  decayed  rapidly 
with  the  time.  The  decay  of  the  excited  activity  produced  on 
the  interior  surface  of  the  cylinder  when  exposed  to  the  air  was 
probably  responsible  for  a  part  of  the  decrease  observed.  McLennan 
ascribes  the  increase  of  current  with  time  to  a  radio-active  ema- 
nation which  is  given  off  from  the  cylinder,  and  ionizes  the  enclosed 
air.  On  placing  linings  of  lead,  tin,  and  zinc  in  the  iron  cylinder, 
considerable  differences  were  observed  both  of  the  minimum  current 
and  also  of  the  final  maximum.  Lead  gave  about  twice  the  cur- 
rent due  to  zinc,  while  tin  gave  an  intermediate  value.  These 
results  are  similar  in  character  to  those  obtained  by  Strutt. 

McLennan  and  Burton  also  investigated  the  effect  of  dimi- 
nution of  pressure  on  the  current.  The  cylinder  was  filled  with 
air  to  a  pressure  of  7  atmospheres,  and  allowed  to  stand  until 
the  current  reached  a  constant  value.  The  air  was  then  allowed 
to  escape  and  the  pressure  reduced  to  44  mms.  of  mercury.  The 
current  was  found  to  vary  approximately  as  the  pressure  over  the 
whole  range.  These  results  are  not  in  agreement  with  the  results 
of  Patterson  already  described,  nor  with  some  later  experiments 


380  KADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   ATMOSPHERE  [CH. 

of  Strutt.  McLennan's  results  however  point  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  ionization  was  mainly  due  to  an  emanation  emitted  from 
the  metal.  Since  the  air  was  rapidly  removed,  a  proportionate 
amount  of  the  emanation  would  be  removed  also,  and  it  might 
thus  be  expected  that  the  current  would  vary  directly  as  the 
pressure.  If  this  is  the  case  the  current  through  the  gas  at  low 
pressures  should  increase  again  to  a  maximum  if  time  is  allowed 
for  a  fresh  emanation  to  form. 

H.  L.  Cooke,  using  an  electroscopic  method,  obtained  results 
very  similar  to  those  given  by  Strutt.  Cooke  observed  that  a  pene- 
trating radiation  was  given  out  from  brick.  When  «-a  brass  vessel 
containing  the  gold-leaf  system  was  surrounded  by  brick,  the 
discharge  of  the  electroscope  was  increased  by  40  to  50  per  cent. 
This  radiation  was  of  about  the  same  penetrating  power  as  the 
rays  from  radio-active  substances.  The  rays  were  completely 
absorbed  by  surrounding  the  electroscope  by  a  sheet  of  lead  2  mms. 
in  thickness.  This  result  is  in  agreement  with  the  observation 
of  Elster  and  Geitel,  already  mentioned,  that  radio-active  matter 
was  present  in  clay  freshly  dug  up  from  the  earth. 

Cooke  also  observed  that  the  ionization  of  the  air  in  a  brass 
electroscope  could  be  reduced  to  about  one-third  of  its  usual 
value  if  the  interior  surface  of  the  brass  was  carefully  cleaned.  By 
removing  the  interior  surface  of  the  brass  he  was  able  to  reduce 
the  ionization  of  the  enclosed  air  from  30  to  10  ions  per  c.c.  per 
second.  This  is  an  important  observation,  and  indicates  that  a 
large  proportion  of  the  radio-activity  observed  in  ordinary  matter 
is  (fiie  to  a  deposit  of  radio-active  matter  on  its  surface.  It  has 
already  been  shown  (sections  173  and  188)  that  bodies  which 
have  been  exposed  in  the  presence  of  the  radium  emanation 
retain  a  residual  activity  which  decays  extremely  slowly.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  radium  emanation  is  present  in  the 
atmosphere,  and  the  exposed  surface  of  matter,  in  consequence, 
will  become  coated  with  an  invisible  film  of  radio-active  matter, 
deposited  from  the  atmosphere.  On  account  of  the  slow  decay  of 
this  activity  it  is  probable  that  the  activity  of  matter  exposed  in 
the  open  air  would  steadily  increase  for  a  long  interval.  Metals, 
even  if  they  are  originally  inactive,  would  thus  acquire  a  fairly 
permanent  activity,  but  it  should  be  possible  to  get  rid  of  this 


Xl]  AND  OF   ORDINARY  MATERIALS  381 

by  removing  the  surface  of  the  metal  or  by  chemical  treat- 
ment. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  activity  observed  in  ordinary 
matter  is  excessively  minute.  The  lowest  rate  of  production  of 
ions  yet  observed  is  10  per  cubic  centimetre  per  second  in  a 
brass  vessel.  Suppose  a  spherical  brass  vessel  is  taken  of  capacity 
1  litre.  The  area  of  the  interior  surface  would  be  about  480  sq. 
cms.  and  the  total  number  of  ions  produced  per  second  would  be 
about  104.  Now  it  has  been  shown  in  section  104  that  an  a 
particle  projected  from  radium  probably  gives  rise  to  7  x  104  ions 
before  it  is  absorbed  in  the  gas.  An  expulsion  of  one  a  particle 
every  7  seconds  from  the  whole  vessel,  or  of  one  a  particle  from 
each  square  centimetre  of  surface  per  hour  would  thus  account  for 
the  minute  conductivity  observed.  Even  if  it  were  supposed  that 
this  activity  is  the  result  of  a  breaking  up  of  the  matter  com- 
posing the  vessel,  the  disintegration  of  one  atom  per  second  per 
gram,  provided  it  was  accompanied  by  the  expulsion  of  an  a 
particle,  would  fully  account  for  the  conductivity  observed. 

Strutt1  has  recently  observed  that  a  radio-active  emanation  can 
be  obtained  by  bubbling  air  through  mercury.  The  emanation 
appears  to  be  very  similar  in  character  to  that  emitted  by  radium 
emanation,  for  its  activity  decays  to  half  value  in  318  days  and 
the  excited  activity  to  half  value  in  20  minutes.  An  emanation 
was  also  obtained  by  drawing  air  over  red-hot  copper. 

Bumstead  and  Wheeler2  have  repeated  the  experiments  of 
Strutt  of  bubbling  air  through  mercury,  but  were  unable  to 
detect  any  increase  of  the  conductivity  of  air,  which  had  been 
circulated  through  hot  mercury  for  fourteen  hours,  although  an 
increase  of  10  per  cent,  of  the  natural  conductivity  could  have 
been  detected.  These  results  indicate  that  the  emanation  from 
mercury  obtained  in  the  experiments  of  Strutt  was  probably  due 
to  the  presence  of  a  minute  amount  of  radium  as  an  impurity. 

There  is  not  yet  sufficient  evidence  to  decide  with  certainty 
whether  ordinary  matter  possesses  the  property  of  radio-activity. 
There  is  no  doubt  that,  if  matter  possesses  the  property  at  all, 
it  does  so  to  a  minute  extent.  The  extreme  minuteness  of  the 

1  Phil  Mag.  July,  1903. 

2  Amer.  Jour.  Science,  17,  p.  110,  Feb.  1904. 


382  RADIO-ACTIVITY  OF  THE   ATMOSPHERE,   ETC.          [CH.  XI 

radio-activity  observed,  and  the  distribution  of  radio-active  matter 
throughout  the  constituents  of  the  earth,  render  it  difficult  to  be 
certain  that  any  substance,  however  carefully  prepared,  is  freed 
from  possible  radio-active  impurities.  A  careful  comparison  of 
the  rates  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  emanations  obtained  from 
ordinary  matter,  and  of  the  excited  activity,  with  the  corresponding 
rates  of  decay  of  the  activity  of  the  products  of  the  known  radio- 
active substances,  may  throw  some  light  on  the  question. 


or  THE 
UNIVERSITY 

OF 


INDEX. 


The  numbers  refer  to  the  pages. 


a  rays 

discovery  of,   115  et  seq. 

nature  of,   115  et  seq. 

magnetic  deviation  of,   117  et  seq. 

electrostatic  deviation  of,  121 

velocity  of,  122  et  seq. 

value  of  e/m  for,  122 

mass  and  energy  of,  125  et  seq. 

origin  of,  in  atomic  disintegration,  126 

scintillations  produced  by,  127 

absorption  of,  by  matter,  129  et  seq. 

increase  of  absorption  with  thickness 
of  matter  traversed,  129  et  seq. 

relative  absorption  of  a  rays  from 
radio -elements,  132 

absorption  of,  by  gases,  133 

connection  between  absorption  and 
density,  137 

relation  between  ionization  and  ab- 
sorption, 138 

theory  of  absorption  'of,   138 

effect  of  thickness  of  layer  of  radiating 
matter  on  emission  of,  149 

relative  ionization  produced  by  a  and 
/3  rays,  149 

relative  energy  emitted  in  form  of  a 
and  ft  rays,  150  et  seq. 

number  and  energy  of  a  particles 
from  radio-elements,  154 

emission  of  energy  from  radio-ele- 
ments in  form  of  a  rays,  154 

connection  of  heat  emission  of  radium 
with  a  rays,  160  et  seq. 

connection  of,  with  radio-active 
changes,  193,  322 

from  the  emanations,  222 

absence  of,  in  change  in  emanation 
X  of  thorium,  270  et  seq. 

absence  of,  in  change  in  emanation 
X  of  radium,  273 

non-separable  activity  of  radio-ele- 
ments consists  of,  304 

emission  from  all  active  products 
except  last  change,  304 

a  particles  consist  of  helium,  331 

loss  of  weight  due  to  expulsion  of,  335 


Abraham 

apparent    mass    of   moving    charged 

body,  109 
Absorption 

law  of,  .in  gases,  56  et  seq. 

relative  absorption  of  a,  ft  and  7  rays 

by  matter,  93 

of  ft  rays  by  solids,  112  et  seq. 
of  a  rays  by  solids,  129  et  seq. 
of  7  rays  by  solids,  142 
connection    between    absorption    and 

density  for  ft  rays,  113  et  seq. 
connection    between    absorption    and 

density  for  a  rays,  137 
connection    between    absorption   and 

density  for  7  rays,  143 
of  ft  rays  in  radio-active  matter,  115 
of  a  rays  in  gases,   133  et  seq. 
connection   between   absorption    and 

ionization,  138 
theory  of,  138 
of  a  rays  by  radium,  164 
of  rays  from  the  emanations,  222 
of  penetrating  rays  from  the  earth,  367 
Actinium 

methods  of  separation  of,  22  et  seq. 

properties  of,  23 

similarity  to  "emanating  substance" 

of  Giesel,  24 
possible  connection  with  radio-activity 

of  thorium,  25 
emanation  from,  208 
excited  activity  produced  by,  288 
effect    of  magnetic   field   on    excited 

activity  from,  288 
Adams 

decay  of  activity  of  emanation  from 

well  water,  361 
decay    of  excited   activity   from   the 

emanation,  361 
Age 

of  radium,  333 
of  sun  and  earth,  343 
Allan 

increase  with  time  of  excited  activity 

from  atmosphere,  355 


384 


INDEX 


Allan  (cont.) 

radio-activity  of  snow,  356 
effect  of  conditions  on  decay  of  ac- 
tivity from  air,  369 
Allan  and  Eutherford 

decay  of  excited  activity  from  atmo- 
sphere, 353 

ionization  of  air  in  closed  vessels,  376 
Anderson  and  Hardy 

action  of  radium  rays  on  eye,  177 
Armstrong  and  Lowry 

radio-activity    and    phosphorescence, 

323 
Arnold 

rays  from  phosphorescent  substances, 

4 
Aschkinass  and  Caspar! 

action  of  radium  rays  on  eye,  177 
Atmosphere 

excited  radio-activity  from,  351  et  seq. 
radio-activity  of,  due  to  emanations, 

354 
diffusion   of   emanations  into,    from 

earth,  357 
effect  of  temperature,  pressure,  &c.  on 

radio-activity  of,  364 
presence  of  very  penetrating  radiation 

in,  366 
comparison  of  radio-activity  of,  with 

radio-elements,  368 
Atom 

number  of,  per  c.c.,  51 

complex  nature  of,  126 

disintegration  of,  126 

number  of,  transformed  per  second, 

332 

changing  atoms,  322  et  seq. 
possible  causes  of  disintegration  of, 

338  et  seq. 

evolution  of,  347  et  seq. 
Atomic  weight 

of  radium  by  chemical  methods,  17 
from  spectroscopic  evidence,  18 
of  emanations,  232 
of  radio-elements  and  connection  with 
radio-activity,  323  et  seq. 

B  rays 

discovery  of,  95 

magnetic  deflection  of,  95  et  seq. 
complexity  of,  98  et  seq. 
examination  by  the  electrical  method, 

100 

effect  of,  on  a  fluorescent  screen,  101 
charge  carried  by  the,  102  et  seq. 
electrostatic  deviation  of,  106 
velocity  of,  and  value  of  elm  for,  106 

et  seq. 
variation  of  ejm  with  velocity  of,  108 

et  seq. 


j8  rays  (cont.) 

absorption  of,  112 

variation  of  absorption  with  density, 
113  et  seq. 

variation  of  intensity  of,  with  thick- 
ness of  layer,  115 

relative  ionizatiou  produced  by  a  and 
/3  rays,  149 

relative   energy   emitted    in   form   of 
a  and  /3  rays,  150  et  seq. 

phosphorescent  action  of,  166 

physical  action  produced  by,  171  et  seq. 

chemical  action  of,   174 

physiological  action  of,  176 

from  UrX,  293 

from  emanation  X  of  radium,  302 

appearance  of,  only  in  last  of  radio- 
active changes,  304 

change  of  weight  due  to  expulsion  of, 

336 
Barium  platinocyanide 

phosphorescence    of,    under    radium 
rays,  167 

change  of  colour  due  to  radium  rays, 

168 
Barnes  and  Eutherford 

heating  effect  of  radium  emanation, 
161 

connection  of  heating  effect  with  radio- 
activity, 160  et  seq. 

heating  effect  of  emanation,  247 

heating  effect  of  excited  activity,  279 

division  of  heating  effect  among  active 

products,  279 
Baskerville 

activity  of  thorium,  25 

phosphorescence  of  kunzite  under  ra- 
dium rays,  168 

phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 

rays,  168 
Beattie,  Smolan  and  Kelvin 

discharging  power  of  uranium  rays,  7 
Becquerel 

rays  from  calcium  sulphide,  4 

rays  from  uranium,  5  et  seq. 

permanence  of  uranium  rays,  6 

discharging  power  of  uranium  rays,  6 

magnetic  deflection  of  radium  rays  by 
photographic  method,  96 

curvature  of  radium  rays  in  a  mag- 
netic field,  96  et  seq. 

complexity  of  radium  rays,  98  et  seq. 

electrostatic   deflection   of  /3  rays  of 
radium,  106 

value  of  elm  for  8  rays  of  radium, 
107 

magnetic  deviation  of  a  rays  of  radium 
and  polonium,  120 

trajectory  of  rays  of  radium  in  mag- 
netic field,  123  et  seq. 


INDEX 


385 


Becquerel  (con*.) 

scintillations  due  to  cleavage  of  crys- 
tals, 128 

7  rays  from  radium,  141 
secondary  rays    produced    by    active 

substances,  146 
phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 

rays,  166 
conductivity  of  paraffin  under  radium 

radiation,  173 
effect  of  temperature' on  uranium  rays, 

173 

chemical  action  of  radium  rays,  175 
removal  of  activity  from  uranium  by 

precipitation  with  barium,  179 
recovery  of  activity  of  uranium  after 

precipitation  with  barium,  179 
penetrating  rays  from  polonium,  305 
theory  of  radio-activity,  317 
Bemont  et  M.  et  Mme  Curie 

discovery  of  radium,  13 
Benoist 

variation   of  absorption    of  Rontgen 

rays  in  matter,  144 
Berndt 

spectrum  of  polonium,  20 
Bodlander  and  Runge 

evolution  of  gases  from  radium,  176 
Boys 

rate  of  dissipation  of  charge,  373 
Brooks,  Miss 

variation     of    excited    activity    from 

thorium  for  short  exposures,  260 
effect   of  dust  on  distribution  of  ex- 
cited activity,  260 
Brooks  and  Rutherford 

absorption  of  a  rays  by  matter,  129 
comparison  of  absorption  of  a  rays 

from  radio-elements.   132  et  seq. 
diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  228 
decay  of  excited  activity  from  radium, 

261 
Bumstead  and  Wheeler 

emanation  from  surface  water  and  the 

soil,  361,  368 
identity  of  emanation  from  soil  with 

radium  emanation,  361 
absence  of  emanation  in  mercury,  381 
Burton  and  McLennan 

penetrating  radiation  from  the  earth, 

366 
radio-activity  of  ordinary  materials, 

378 
emanation  from  ordinary  matter,  379 

Canal  rays 

similarity  of  to  a  rays,  92 
Capacity 

of  electroscopes,  72 

of  electrometers,  79,  85 

R.  E.-A. 


Capacity  (cont.) 

standards  of,  86 
Carbonic  acid 

radio-activity  of  natural,  364 
Caspari  and  Aschkinass 

action  of  radium  rays  on  eye,  177 
Cathode  rays 

comparison  of,  with  p  rays,  102  et  seq. 
absorption  of,  by  matter,  113 
see  also  £  rays,  95  et  seq.     ' 
Caves 

radio-active  matter  present  in  air  of, 

357 

radio-activity  of  air  of,  due  to  emana- 
tion from  the  soil,  357 
Charge 

carried  by  the  ions,  47  et  seq. 
negative  charge  carried  by  /S  rays,  102 

et  seq. 
measurement  of  charge  carried  by  /3 

rays,  104  et  seq. 

positive  charge  carried  by  a  rays,  120 
Chemical  nature 
of  emanation,  225 
of  emanation  X,  275 
Chemical  actions  of  radium  rays 
production  of  ozone,  174 
coloration  of  glass  and  rock  salt,  174 
on  phosphorus,  175 
on  iodoform,  175 
on  globulin,  175 
evolution  of  hydrogen   and  oxygen, 

176* 
Child 

potential  gradient  between  electrodes, 

63 
variation  of  current  with  voltage  for 

surface  ionization,  64 
Clouds 
formation  by  condensation  of  water 

round  ions,  43  et  seq. 
difference  between  positive  and  nega- 
tive ions  in  formation  of,  46 
Collision 

ionization  by,  54 

number  of  ions  produced  by  £  rays 

per  cm.  of  path,  139 
total    number   of  ions   produced   by 

collisions  of  a  particles,  156 
Coloration 

of  crystals  of  radiferous  barium,  15 
of  bunsen  flame  by  radium,  17 
of  glass  by  radium  rays,  174 
of  rock  salt,  fluor  spar' and  potassium 

sulphate  by  radium  rays,  174 
Concentration 

of  excited  activity  on  negative  elec- 
trode, 252 

activity  of    radium   independent   of, 
339 

25 


386 


INDEX 


Condensation 

of  water  round  the  ions,  43  et  seq. 
of  emanations,  236  et  seq. 
experimental  illustration  of,  237 
temperature  of,  238 
difference  between  point  of,  for  eman- 
ations of  thorium  and  radium,  243 
from  air  sucked  up  from  the  earth, 

357 
Conductivity 

of    gases    exposed  to   radiations,    28 

et  seq. 

variation  of,  with  pressure,  58  et  seq. 
variation  of,  with  nature  of  gas,  61 
comparison  of,  for  gases  exposed  to 

a,  /3  and  7  rays,  61  et  seq. 
of  insulators,  172 
of  air  in  closed  vessels,  351,  373 
increase  of,  with  time,  in   a   closed 

vessel,  351 

of  air  in  caves  and  cellars,  357 
variation    of    in  closed   vessels   with 

pressure  and  nature  of  gas,  376 
variation  of  with  temperature  for  air 

in  closed  vessels,  377 
Conservation  of  radio-activity 

examples  of,  308 
Cooke,  H.  L. 

penetrating  rays  from  the  earth,  366 
number  of  ions  per  c.c.  in  closed 

vessels,  376 
radio-activity  from   ordinary  matter, 

378 
Corpuscle 

(see  Electron) 
Crookes  (Sir  W.) 
spectrum  of  polonium,  20 
separation  of  Ur  X,  178 
nature  of  a  rays,  116 
scintillations  produced  by  radium,  127 
spinthariscope,  127 
number  of  scintillations  independent 

of  pressure  and  temperature,  128 
theory  of  radio-activity,  319 
cathode  rays,  347 
Crookes  and  Dewar 

absence  of  nitrogen  spectrum  in  phos- 
phorescent light  of  radium  at  low 
pressures,   169 
Curie,  Mme 

permanence  of  uranium  rays,  6 
discovery  of  radio-activity  of  thorium, 

10 
radio-activity  of  uranium  and  thorium 

minerals,  11 

relative  activity  of  compounds  of  ura- 
nium, 12 

coloration  of  radium  crystals,  15 
spectrum  of  radium,  15 
nature  of  a  rays,  116 


Curie,  Mme  (cont.) 

absorption  of  a  rays  from  polonium, 

131 

secondary  radiation  tested  by  electric 
method,  148 

slowly  decaying  excited  activity  from 
radium,  264 

bismuth  made  active  by  solution  of 
barium,  289 

recovery  of  activity  of  radium,  303 
Curie,  P. 

magnetic  deviation  of  radium  rays  by 
electric  method,  96 

heat  emission  of  radium  at  low  tem- 
perature and  variation  of  heat  emis- 
sion with  age  of  radium,  159,  160 

conductivity  of  dielectrics  under 
radium  rays,  172 

radio-activity  of  radium  unaffected  by 
temperature,  173 

decay  of  activity  of  radium  emana- 
tion, 206  et  seq. 

discovery  of  excited  radio-activity 
from  radium,  250 

nature  of  the  emanation,  318 
Curie,  M.  et  Mme 

discovery  of  radium,  13 

charge  carried  by  radium  rays,  102 

luminosity  of  radium  compounds,  168 

production  of  ozona  by  radium  rays, 
174 

coloration  of  glass  by  radium  rays,  174 

theory  of  radio-activity,  318 

possible  absorption  by  radio-elements 

of  unknown  radiations,  321 
Curie,  J.  et  P. 

quartz  piezo-electrique,  87  et  seq. 
Curie,  P.  et  Danne 

diffusion  of  radio-active  emanation, 
231 

decay  of  excited  activity  from  radium, 
262 

occlusion    of    radium    emanation    in 

solids,  264 
Curie,  P.  and  Debierne 

active  gases  evolved  from  radium,  210 

phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 
emanation,  211 

distribution  of  luminosity,  211 

rate  of  production  of  emanation  inde- 
pendent of  pressure,  224 

effect  of  pressure  on  amount  of  ex- 
cited activity,  282 
Curie,  P.  and  Laborde 

heat  emission  of  radium,  158 

origin  of  heat  from  radium,  319 
Current 

through  gases,  28  et  seq. 

variation  of  with  distance  between 
the  plates,  56  et  seq. 


INDEX 


387 


Current  (cont.) 

variation   of    with   pressure   of   gas, 

58  et  seq. 

variation  of,  with  nature  of  gas,  61 
measurement  of,  by  galvanometer,  69 
measurement  of,  by  electroscope,  70 

et  seq. 

measurement  of,  by  electrometer,  84 
measurement    of,    by    quartz    piezo- 

electrique,  87 
magnitude  of,  for  one  gram  of  radium, 

156 

Danne  and  Curie,  P. 

diffusion  of  radium  emanation,  231 
decay  of  excited  activity  from  radium, 

262 
occlusion   of    radium    emanation    in 

solids,  264 
Danysz 

action  of  radium  rays  on  skin,  177 
Darwin,  G.  H. 

age  of  sun,  343 
Debierne 

actinium,  22 

emanation  from  actinium,  208 

effect   of    magnetic   field   on   activity 

excited  from  actinium,  288 
barium  made  active  by  actinium,  289 
Debierne  and  Curie 

evolution  of  gas  from  radium,  175 
active  gas  evolved  from  radium,  210 
phosphorescence  produced  by  radium 

emanation,  211 

distribution  of  luminosity,  211 
rate  of  production  of  emanation  inde- 
pendent of  pressure,  224 
effect  of  pressure  on  excited  activity, 

282 
Decay 

of  heating  effect  of  emanation,  162 
of  activity  of  Th  X,  180 
of  activity  of  UrX,  182 
significance  of  law  of,  189 
effect  of  conditions  on  the  rate  of,  190 
of  activity  of  thorium  emanation,  200 
of  activity  of  radium  emanation,  206 
excited   activity  due   to   thorium  for 

long  exposure,  256 
excited   activity  due   to   thorium   for 

short  exposure,  258 
excited  activity  due  to  radium,  261 
excited  activity  of  slow  decay  due  to 

radium,  264,  291 
excited  activity  from  atmosphere,  351 

et  seq. 

of  activity  of  rain  and  snow,  356 
of  emanation  from  earth,  358 
differences  in,  of  excited  activity  from 

atmosphere,  368 


Deflection 

of  rays  in  a  magnetic  field,  92  - 
of  /3  rays  in  a  magnetic  field,  95  et  seq. 
of  /3  rays  in  an  electrostatic  field,  106 
of  a  rays  in  a  magnetic  field,  117  et  seq. 
of  a  rays  in  an  electrostatic  field,  121 
of  "ions  activants"  in  a  magnetic 

field,  288 
Demarcay 

spectrum  of  radium,  16 
Des  Coudres 

magnetic  and  electric  deviation  of  a 

rays  of  radium,  122 
determination  of  elm  for  a  rays,  122 
velocity  of  cathode  rays  diminished  in 

passage  through  matter,  139> 
Dewar 

emission  of  heat  from  radium  in  liquid 

hydrogen,  160 
Dewar  and  Crookes 

absence  of  nitrogen  spectrum  in  phos- 
phorescent light  of  radium  at  low 
pressures,  169 
Dielectrics 

conduction  of,  under  radium  rays,  172 
Diffusion 
of  ions,  49 
of  radium  emanation  into  gases,  228 

et  seq. 

of  thorium  emanation  into  gases,  233 
of  radium  emanation  into  liquids,  235 
Discharge 

action  of  rays  on  spark  and  electrode- 
less,  171 
Disintegration 

account  of  theory  of,  126,  193,  323  et 

seq. 

list  of  products  of,  326 
helium  a  product  of,  327  et  seq. 
rate  of,  in  radio-elements,  332  et  seq. 
emission  of  energy  in  consequence  of, 

336  et  seq. 

possible  causes  of,  338  et  seq. 
of  matter  in  general,  347  et  seq. 
Dissipation  of  charge 
in  closed  vessels,  351,  373 
in  caves  and  cellars,  357 
effect  of  pressure  and  nature  of  gas 

on,  376  et  seq. 

effect  of  material  of  vessel  on,  378  et  seq . 
Dolezalek 

electrometer,  construction  of,  78  et  seq. 
Dorn 

charge  carried  by  radium  rays,  104 
electrostatic  deflection  of  ft  rays  from 

radium,  106 

discovery  of  radium  emanation,  205 
effect  of  moisture  on  emanating  power 

of  thorium,  214 
electrolysis  of  radium  solution,  276 

25—2 


388 


INDEX 


Dorn  (cont.) 

loss  of  weight  of  radium,  336 
Durack 

ionization  by  collision  of  electrons  of 

great  velocity,  139 
Dust 

effect  of,  in  recombination  of  ions,  39 
effect   of,   on  distribution  of  excited 
activity,  260 

Earth 

amount  of  radium  in,  344 

age  of,  344 

excited  activity  deposited  on,  354 

activity  concentrated  on  peaks  of,  354 

emanation  from,  363 

very  penetrating  radiation  from,  366 
Ebert 

condensation  of  emanation  from  the 

earth,  359 
Ebert  and  Ewers 

emanation  from  the  earth,  358 
Electric  field 

deflection  of  j8  rays  by,  106 

deflection  of  a  rays  by,  121 

movement  in,  of  carriers  of  excited 
activity,  282  et  seq. 

action  on,  of  carriers  of  excited  ac- 
tivity from  "emanating  substance," 
287 
Electrolysis 

separation  of  radio-tellurium  by,  21 

of  solutions  of  emanation  X,  276 

of  thorium  solutions,  277 

of  radium  solutions,  276 
Electrometer 

description  of,  74  et  seq. 

use  of,  in  measurements,  74 

construction  of,  76  et  seq. 

Dolezalek,  78 

adjustment  and  screening  of,  79 

special  key  for,  81 

application  of,   to  measurements   of 
radio-activity,  81  et  seq. 

measurement  of  current  by,  84 

capacity  of,  85 

use  with  quartz  piezo-electrique,  87 
Electron 

definition  of,  53 

identity  of  /3  rays  with  electrons,  102 
et  seq.,  107 

variation  of  apparent  mass  of  electron 
with  velocity,  108  et  seq. 

evidence    that    mass   of   electron   is 
electro-magnetic,  112 

diameter  of,  112 

production  of,  under  different  condi- 
tions, 347 
Electroscope 

description  of,  used  by  Curie,  70 


Electroscope  (cont.) 

construction  of,  for  accurate  measure- 
ments, 71 
use  of,   in  measurements  of  minute 

currents,  71 
of  C.  T.  E.  Wilson,  73 
use  of,  in  measuring  conductivity  of 

air  in  closed  vessels,  373  et  seq. 
use  of,  for  determining  radio-activity 

of  ordinary  matter,  378,  380 
Elster  and  Geitel 
radio-active  lead,  25 
effect  of  magnetic  field  on  conductivity 

produced  in  air  by  radium  rays,  95 
scintillations  produced  by  active  sub- 
stances, 127 

action  of  radium  rays  on  spark,  171 
photo-electric  action  of  body,  coloured 

by  radium  rays,  174 
radio-active  matter  in  earth,  345 
discovery  of  excited  activity  in  atmo- 
sphere, 351 

emanations  from  the  earth,  357 
radio-activity  of  air  in  caves,  362 
radio-activity  of  the  earth,  362 
radio-activity  of  natural  carbonic  acid, 

364 

variation   of  radio-activity  in   atmo- 
sphere  with   meteorological   condi- 
tions, 364  et  seq. 
effect  of  temperature  and  pressure  on 

atmospheric  radio-activity,  365 
Emanation 

«*  rate  of  heat  emission  by,  158 
A  variation  of  heat  emission  with  time, 

160 
of  thorium,  discovery  and  properties, 

197 

methods  of  measurement  of,  199 
decay  of  activity  of,  200 
effect    of    thickness    of    layer,    on 

amount  of,  202 

increase  of,  with  time,  to  a  maxi- 
mum, 204 
of  radium,  205 

decay  of  activity  of,  206 
of  actinium,  properties  of,  208 
of  radium,  phosphorescence  produced 

by,  209  et  seq. 
rate  of  emission  of,  213 
effect  of  conditions,  on  rate  of  emis- 
sion of,  214 

regeneration  of  emanating  power,  215 
continuous  rate  of  production  of,  216 

et  seq. 

source  of  thorium  emanation,  220 
source  of  radium  emanation,  222 
radiations  from,  222 
effect  of  pressure  on  production  of,  224 
chemical  nature  of,  225 


INDEX 


389 


Emanation  (cont.) 

experiments  to  illustrate  gaseous  na- 
ture of,  227 

rate  of  diffusion  of  radium  emanation, 
228  et  seq. 

rate  of  diffusion  of  thorium  emana- 
tion, 233 

diffusion  of,  into  liquids,  235 

condensation  of,  236  et  seq. 

temperature  of  condensation  of,  238 
et  seq. 

volume  of,  from  1  gram  of  radium, 
and  thorium,  246 

heat  emission  of,  247 

connection   between   emanations  and 
excited  activity,  253  et  seq. 

effect  of  removal  of,  on   activity  of 
radium,  300 

effect  of  rate  of  escape  of,  on  activity 
of  radium,  302 

fraction  of  activity  of  radium,  due  to, 
304 

experimental  separation,  and  volume 
of,  311  et  seq. 

decrease  of  volume  of,  with  time,  313 

radio-activity  of  atmosphere,   due  to 
emanations,  354 

sucked  up  from  the  earth,  357 

rate  of  decay  of  activity  of,  from  the 
earth,  358 

condensation  of,  from  atmosphere,  359 

in  caves,  357 

in  well-water,  and  springs,  360 

in  natural  carbonic  acid  gas,  364 

from  "  fango,"  363 

effect  of  meteorological  conditions  on 
amount  of,  in  atmosphere,  364 

from  metals,  378 
Emanation  X  (see  Excited  radio-activity) 

definition  of,  256 

chemical  and  physical  properties  of, 
275 

electrolysis  of,  276 

effect  of  temperature  on,  277 

emission  of  heat  by,  278 

transmission    of,    to    negative    elec- 
trode, 282  et  seq. 

irregularities  in  decay  of  activity  of 
ThX  due  to,  295 

removal   of,  by  successive  precipita- 
tions, 296 

theory  of  effect  of  production  of,  on 

activity  of  ThX,  295  et  seq. 
Emanating  power 

measurement  of,  213 

effect  of  conditions  on,  214 

regeneration  of,  215 
"  Emanating  substance  "  of  Giesel 

separation  and  properties  of,  23  et  seq. 

similarity  of,  to  actinium,  24 


"Emanating  substance"  of  Giesel  (cont.) 

emanation  from,  209 

excited  activity  produced  by,  287 

action  of  an  electric  field  on,  287 
Energy 

of  a  particle,  125 

of  /9  particle,  151 

comparison  of,  for  a  and  /3  particles, 
150 

emitted  from  radio-elements,  in  form 
of  a  rays,  154 

emitted  from  radium  in  form  of  heat, 
158  et  seq. 

emission  of,  from  the  emanation,  161 
et  seq.,  247 

emission   of,   from  radio-active  pro- 
ducts of  radium,  278 

total   emission   of,   from    1    gram  of 
radio-elements,  336 

latent  store  of,  in  matter,  337 
Eve 

conductivity  of  gases  for  very  pene- 
trating Rontgen  rays,  145 
Evolution  of  matter 

evidence  of,  348 
Ewers  and  Ebert 

emanation  from  the  earth,  358 
Excited  radio-activity 

heat  emission  due  to,  161  et  seq. 

discovery  and  properties  of,  250 

concentration    of,    on   negative   elec- 
trode, 252 

connection  of,  with  the  emanations, 
253 

removal  of,  by  acids,  255 

decay  of,  due  to  thorium,  256 

decay  of,  for  short  exposurgTo  thorium, 
259 

effect  of  dust  on  distribution  of,  260 

decay  of,  from  radium,  261 

of  radium,  of  very  slow  decay,  264 

connection  between  decay  curves  of, 
and  times  of  exposure,  265 

theory  of  successive  changes  to  give 
rise  to,  268 

changes  in  emanation  X  of  thorium, 
270  et  seq. 

changes  in  emanation  X  of  radium, 
272 

physical   and  chemical  properties  of 
emanation  X,  275 

electrolysis  of  active  solutions,  276 

effect  of  temperature  on,  277 

emission  of  heat,  due  to,  278 

variation  with  electric  field,  of  amount 
of,  280 

effect  of  pressure  on  distribution  of,  282 

transmission  of,  282  et  seq. 

from  actinium,  and  "  emanating  sub- 
stance," 287 


390 


INDEX 


Excited  radio-activity  (cont.) 

possible  connection  of  polonium  and 
radio-tellurium  with,  290  et  seq. 

from  the  atmosphere,  351  et  seq. 

concentration    of,   on   negative    elec- 
trode, 351 

decay  of,  353 

due    to    emanation    in    atmosphere, 
354 

distribution  of,  on  surface  of  earth, 
354 

concentration  of,  on  prominences  of 
the  earth,  354 

of  rain  and  snow,  356 

decay  of,  on  rain  and  snow,  356 

due  to  emanation  from  earth,  357 

produced    by    emanation    from    tap 
water,  360 

effect  of  meteorological  conditions  on 
amount  of,  364 

amount  of,  at  Niagara  Falls,  366 

rate  of  decay  of,  dependent  on  con- 
ditions, 368 
Exner  and  Haschek 

spectrum  of  radium,  17 
Eye 

action  of  radium  rays  on,  177 

Fehrle 

distribution  of  excited  activity  on  a 

plate,  in  electric  field,  282 
Fluorescence 

produced   in   substances   by   radium 

rays,  18 
produced   in    substances   by   radium 

and  polonium  rays,  166 
Fog 

large    amount    of    excited    activity, 

during,  365 
Forch 
loss  of  weight  of  radium,  336 

7  rays 

discovery  of,  141 

absorption  of,  by  matter,  142 

connection  between  absorption  of,  and 
density,  143 

discussion  of  nature  of  rays,  143  et  seq. 

conservation    of  radio-activity    mea- 
sured by,  311 

measurement     of     radio-activity    by 

means  of,  321,  339 
Gases 

evolved  by  radium,  175 

presence    of    helium    in    gases    from 

radium,  176,  327  et  seq. 
Gates,  Miss  F. 

effect  of  temperature  on  excited  ac- 
tivity, 278 

discharge  of  quinine  sulphate,  372 


Geitel 

natural  conductivity  of  air  in  closed 

vessels,  351,  373 
Geitel  and  Elster 

radio-active  lead,  25 

effect  of  magnetic  field  on  conducti- 
vity produced  by  radium  rays,  95 

scintillations  produced  by  active  sub- 
stances, 127 

action  of  radium  rays  on  spark,  171 

photo-electric    action    of    bodies    co- 
loured by  radium  rays,  174 

radio-active  matter  in  earth,  345 

discovery   of  radio-active    matter   in 
atmosphere,  351 

emanations  from  the  earth,  357 

radio-activity  of  air  in  caves,  362 

radio-activity  of  the  soil,  362 

radio-activity  of  natural  carbonic  acid, 
364 

variation  of  radio-activity  of  air,  with 
meteorological  conditions,  364  et  seq. 

effect  of  temperature  and  pressure  on 

radio-activity  in  atmosphere,  365 
Giesel 

coloration  of  bunsen  flame  by  radium, 
15 

separation  of  radium  by  crystallization 
of  bromide,  15 

emanating  substance,  23 

radio-active  lead,  26 

magnetic  deviation  of  ft  rays,  95 

temperature  of  radium  bromide  above 
air,  159 

decrease  with  time  of  luminosity  of 
radio-active  screen,  168 

coloration  of  bodies  by  radium  rays, 
174 

evolution  of  gases  from  radium,  176 

action  of  radium  rays  on  eye,   177 

emanation  from  the  emanating  sub- 
stance, 209 

luminosity  produced  by  radium  ema- 
nation, 209 

excited     activity     from      emanating 
substance,  287 

bismuth  made  active  by  radio-active 
solution,  289 

activity  of  radium  dependent  on  age, 

300 
Glass 

coloration   produced   in,    by   radium 
rays,  174 

phosphorescence  produced  by  emana- 
tion, 210 
Globulin 

action  of  radium  rays  on,  175 
Goldstein 

canal  strahlen,  92 

coloration  of  bodies  by  radium  rays,  174 


INDEX 


391 


Grier  and  Kutherford 

magnetic    deviation    of    /3    rays    of 

thorium,  96 

relative  current  due  to  a  and  /3  rays,  150 
nature  of  rays  from  Ur  X,  294 

Hardy 

coagulation    of   globulin    by   radium 

rays,  175 
Hardy  and  Miss  Willcock 

coloration  of  iodoform   solutions   by 

radium  rays,  175 
Hardy  and  Anderson 

action  of  radium  rays  on  the  eye,  177 
Harms 
number  of  ions   per  c.c.,  in    closed 

vessel,  376 
Haschek  and  Exner 

spectrum  of  radium,  17 
Heat 

rate  of  emission  of,  from  radium,  158 
emission    of,    from    radium    at    low 

temperatures,  159 
rate  of  emission  of,  after  removal  of 

the  emanation,  162 
rate  of  emission  of,  by  the  emanation, 

162 

variation  with  time  of  heat  emission 

of  radium,  and  of  its  emanation,  162  • 

connection  of  heat  emission  with  the 

radio-activity,  161 
source  of  heat  energy,  163 
heating  effect  of  the  emanation,  247 
heating  effect  of  emanation  X,  278 

et  seq. 
proportion  of  heating  effect,   due  to 

radio-active  products,  280 
total    heat    emission    during    life    of 

radio -elements,   336 
heating     of     earth     by     radio-active 

matter,    344 
Heaviside 

apparent   mass    of    moving    charged 

body,  109 
Helium 

produced  by  radium  and  its  emana- 
tion, 327 

amount  of,  from  radium,  331 
origin  of,  331 
Helmholtz  and  Kicharz 

action  of  ions  on  steam  jet,  44 
Hemptinne 

action  of  rays  on  spark,  and  electrode- 
less  discharge,  171 
Henning 

resistance  of  radium  solutions,  171 
effect  of  voltage   on   amount   of  ex- 
cited activity,  281 
Heydweiler 

loss  of  weight  of  radium,  336 


Himstedt 

action  of  radium  rays  on  selenium,  171 
Himstedt  and  Nagel 

action  of  radium  rays  on  eye,  177 
Hofmann  and  Strauss 

radio-active  lead,  26 
Hofmann  and  Zerban 

active  substance  from  pitchblende,  25 
Huggius,  Sir  W.  and  Lady 

spectrum  of  phosphorescent  light  of 

radium  bromide,  169 
Hydrogen 

production  of,  by  radium  rays,  176 

Induced     radio-activity     (see     Excited 

radio-activity) 
Induction 

radio-active,  21 

meaning,  and  examples  of,  289 
Insulators 

conduction  of,  under  radium  rays,  172 
Iodoform 

coloration   produced    in,    by   radium 

rays,  175 
lonization 

theory  of,  to  explain  conductivity  of 
gases,  28  et  seq. 

by  collision,  36,  54 

variation  of,  with  pressure  of  gas,  58 
et  seq. 

variation  of,  with  nature  of  gas,  62 

comparison  of,  produced  by  rays,  93, 
149 

total,  produced  by  1  gram  radium,  154 

production  of,  in  insulators,  172 

natural  ionization  of  gases,  373  et  seq. 
Ions 

in  explanation  of  conductivity  of  gases, 
28  et  seq. 

rate  of  recombination  of,  37  et  seq. 

mobility  of,  39  et  seq. 

difference  between  mobility  of  positive 
and  negative,  42,  43 

condensation  of  water  around,  43  et 
seq. 

difference  between  positive  and  nega- 
tive, 46 

charges  carried  by,  47 

diffusion  of,  48  et  seq. 

charge  on  ion  same  as  on  hydrogen 
atom,  51 

number  of,  produced  per  c.c.,  52 

size  and  nature  of,  52  et  seq. 

definition  of,  52  et  seq. 

production  of,  by  collision,  36,  54 

velocity  acquired  by,  between  colli- 
sions, 55 

energy  required  to  produce,  55 

comparative  number  of,  produced  in 
gases,  62 


392 


INDEX 


Ions  (cont.) 

disturbance  of  potential  gradient  by 

movement  of,  63 

number  of,  produced  by  a  particle,  155 
production  of,  in  insulators,  172 
number  produced  per  c.c.,  in  closed 

vessels,  375 

Joly 

absorption   of    radium    rays    by   at- 
mosphere, 343  (see  foot-note) 

Kauffmann 

variation    of   ejm    with    velocity    of 

electron,  108  et  seq. 
Kelvin 

theory  of  radio-activity,  320 
age  of  sun  and  earth,  343,  344 
Kelvin,  Smolan  and  Beattie 

discharging  power  of  uranium  rays,  7 
Kunz 

phosphorescence    of    willemite,    and 

kunzite,  168 
Kunzite 

phosphorescence    of,    under    radium 
rays,  168 

Laborde  and  Curie 

heat  emission  of  radium,  19,  158 
origin  of  heat  from  radium,  319 
Langevin 

coefficient  of  recombination  of  ions,  38 
velocity  of  ions,  39  et  seq. 
energy  required  to  produce  an  ion,  55 
secondary  radiation  produced  by  X- 

rays,  146 
Larmor 

electrons  and  matter,  108 
structure  of  the  atom,  126 
radiation  from  accelerated  electrons, 

340 

Lead,  radio-active 
preparation  of,  26 
radiations  from,  26 
Le  Bon 

rays  from  bodies  exposed  to  sunlight, 

5 
discharging  power  of  quinine  sulphate, 

9,  372 
Lenard 

ionization    of    gases    by    ultra-violet 

light,  9 

action  of  ions  on  a  steam  jet,  44 
negative  charge    carried    by  Lenard 

rays,  102 

absorption   of   cathode  rays  propor- 
tional to  the  density,  113 
Lerch,  von 

chemical  properties  of  emanation  X, 
275 


Lerch,  von  (cont.) 

electrolysis  of  solution  of  emanation 

X,  276 

effect  of  temperature  on  excited  act- 
ivity, 278 
Lockyer 

inorganic  evolution,  349 
Lodge 

connection  of  heat  emission  with  a 

rays,  164 

instability  of  atoms,  340 
Lorentz 

structure  of  atoms,  126 
Lowry  and  Armstrong 

radio-activity   and    phosphorescence, 

323 
Luminosity 

of  radium  compounds,  168 

change  of,  in  radium  compounds  with 

time,  168 
spectrum  of  phosphorescent  light  from 

radium  bromide,  169 
of  radium  compounds  unaffected  by 
temperature,  173 

Magnetic  field 

effect  of  on  rays,  92 
deflection  of  /3  rays  by,  95  et  seq. 
,,          ,,   a  rays  by,  117  et  seq. 
,,          ,,   "ionsactivants"by,  288 
Marckwald 

preparation  of  radio-tellurium,  21 


apparent  mass  of  electron,  107  et  seq. 
variation  of   mass  of    electron   with 

speed,  108  et  seq. 
of  a  particle,  122,  125 
Materials 

radio-activity  of  ordinary,  370,  378 
Matteucci 

rate  of  dissipation  of  charge  in  closed 

vessels,  373 
McClung 

coefficient  of  recombination  of  ions, 

38 
McClung  and  Eutherford 

energy  required  to  produce  an  ion,  55 
variation  of  current  with  thickness  of 

layer  of  uranium,  149 
estimate  of  energy  radiated  from  radio- 
elements,  154 

radiation  of  energy  from  radium,  317 
McLennan 

absorption  of  cathode  rays,  62 

radio-activity  of  snow,  356 

excited  radio-activity  at  Niagara  Falls, 

366 
McLennan  and  Burton 

penetrating  radiation  from  the  earth, 
366 


INDEX 


393 


McLennan  and  Burton  (cont.) 

radio-activitv  of  ordinary  materials, 
378 

emanation  from  ordinary  matter,  379 
Mercury 

emanation  from,  381 
Metabolon 

definition  of,  324 

table  of  metabolons,  326 

radio-elements  as  metabolons,  332 
Meteorological  conditions 

effect  of,  on  radio-activity  of  atmo- 
sphere, 364 
Methods  of  measurement 

in  radio-activity,  67  et  seq. 

comparison  of  photographic  and  elec- 
trical, 67  et  seq. 

description  of  electrical,  68  et  seq. 
Meyer  and  Schweidler 

magnetic  deviation  of  £  rays  by  elec- 
trical method,  95 

absorption  of  ft  rays  of  radium  by 

matter,  113 
Mobility 

of  ions,  39  et  seq. 
Moisture 

effect  of,  on  velocity  of  ions,  40,  42 

effect  of,  on  emanating  power,  214 
Molecule 

number  of,  in  1  c.c.  of  hydrogen,  51 

molecular  weight  of  radium  emana- 
tion, 232 

molecular  weight  of  thorium  emana- 
tion, 234 
Molecular  weight 

of  radium  emanation,  232 

of  thorium  emanation,  234 

Nagel  and  Himstedt 

action  of  radium  rays  on  eye,  177 
Niewenglowski 

rays  from  sulphide  of  calcium,  4 
Number 

of  molecules  per  c.c.  of  hydrogen,  51 
of   ions   produced  in   gas   by  active 

substances,  52 
of  a  particles  emitted  per  gram   of 

radium,  155 

of  ions,  produced  per  c.c.  in  closed 
vessels,  375 

Occlusion 

of  emanation  in  thorium  and  radium, 

217 

of  radium  emanation  by  solids,  264 
Owens 

saturation  current   affected  by  dust, 

39 

effect  of  air  currents  on  conductivity 
produced  by  thorium,  197 


Owens  (cont.) 

penetrating  power  of  rays  independent 

of  compound,  132 
absorption  of  a  rays  varies  directly  as 

pressure  of  gas,  137 
Oxygen 

change  into  ozone,  by  radium  rays,  174 
production  of  from  radium  solutions, 

176 
Ozone 

production  of,  by  radium  rays,  174 

Paraffin 

objection  to  as  an  insulator,  80 

conductivity  of,  under  radium  rays, 

173 
Patterson 

number  of    ions  per  c.c.   in    closed 
vessel,  376 

natural  conductivity  of  air  due  to  an 
easily  absorbed  radiation,  377 

effect  of  temperature  on  natural  con- 
ductivity of  air,  377 
Pegram 

electrolysis  of  thorium  solutions,  277 
Penetrating  power 

comparison  of  for  a,  ft  and,  y  rays,  93 

variation  in,  of  ft  rays,  98  et  seq. 

comparison  of,  for  a  rays  from  radio- 
elements,  136 

variation  of,  with  density  for  ft  rays, 
112  et  seq. 

variation  of,  with  density  for  a  rays, 
137 

variation  of,  with  density  for  y  rays, 

143 
Penetrating  radiation 

from  the  earth  and  atmosphere,  366 
Perrin 

negative  charge  of  cathode  rays,  102 

theory  of  radio-activity,  316 
Phosphorescence 

production  of,  by  radium,  18 

production  of,  by  radium  and  polon- 
ium rays,  166 

comparison  of,  produced  by  a  and  ft 
rays,  168 

of  zinc  sulphide,  167 

of  barium  platino-cyanide,  168 

of  willemite  and  kunzite,  168 

diminution  of,  with  time,  168 

of  radium  compounds,  168 

spectrum  of  phosphorescent  light  of 
radium  bromide,  169 

production  of  by  heat  (thermo-lumin- 
escence),  170 

produced    by  radium    emanation    in 
substances,  210,  227 

use  of,  to  illustrate  condensation  of 
emanations,  237 


394 


INDEX 


Phosphorus 

action  of  radium  rays  on,  175 

ionization  produced  by,  371 
Photo-electric  action 

produced  by  radium  rays  in  certain 

substances,  174 
Photographic 

method,    advantages    and    disadvan- 
tages of,  67 

relative  photographic  action  of  rays, 

68 
Physical  action  of  radium  rays 

on  sparks,  171 

on  electrodeless  discharge,  171 

on  selenium,  171 

on  conductivity  of  insulators,  172 
Physical  properties 

of  emanation  X,  275 
Physiological  action  of  radium  rays 

production  of  burns,  176 

effect  on  bacteria,  177 

effect  on  cancer,  177 

effect  on  eye,  177 
Piezo-electrique  of  quartz 

description  of,  87 
Pitchblendes 

comparison  of  radio-activity  of,  11 

radio-elements  separated  from,  13  et 
seq. 

radium   continually  produced    from, 

334 
Polarization  of  uranium  rays 

absence  of,  7 
Polonium 

methods  of  separation  of,  19 

rays  from,  20 

decay  of  activity  of,  20 

discussion  of  nature  of,  21 

similarity  to  radio-tellurium,  22 

magnetic  deviation  of   a  rays  from, 
121 

increase  of  absorption  with  thickness 
of  matter  traversed,  131 

phosphorescent  action  of  rays  from, 
166 

possible  origin  of  polonium  and  con- 
nection with  radium,  290  et  seq. 

penetrating  rays  from,  305 
Potential 

required  to   produce    saturation,   30 
et  seq. 

fall  of  potential,  to  produce  ions  each 
collision,  55 

gradient,  due  to  movement  of  ions, 

63 
Precht  and  Eunge 

atomic  weight  of  radium,  17 

heating  effect  of  radium,  164 
Pressure 

effect  of,  on  velocity  of  ions,  43 


Pressure  (cont.) 
effect  of,  on  current  through  gases, 

58  et  seq. 
production  of  emanation,  independent 

of,  224 
effect   of,  on   distribution  of  excited 

activity,  282 
effect  of,  on  natural  conductivity  of 

air  in  closed  vessels,  376 
Products,  radio-active  ' 
radiations  from,  304 
division  of  activity  amongst,  306 
list  of  from  radio-elements,  326 

Quartz  piezo-electrique 

use  of,  in  measurement  of  current,  37 
Quinine  sulphate 

discharging  power  of,  9,  372 

phosphorescence  of,  372 

Kadiations 

emitted  by  uranium,  8 

emitted  by  thorium,  10 

emitted  by  radium,  18 

emitted  by  polonium,  20 

emitted  by  actinium,  23 

methods  of  measurement  of,  67  et  seq. 

methods  of  comparison  of,  90 

three  kinds  of,  91 

analogy  to  rays  from  a  Crookes  tube, 
92    * 

relative    ionizing    and     penetrating 
power  of,  93 

difficulties   of  comparative  measure- 
ment of,  93  et  seq. 

/3  rays,  95  et  seq. 

a  rays,  115  et  seq. 

7  rays,  141  et  seq. 

secondary  rays,  146 

comparison  of  ionization  of  a  and  /5 
rays,  149  et  seq. 

connection   of,    with  heat    emission, 
160 

phosphorescent  effect  of,  166 

physical  actions  of,  171  et  seq. 

chemical  actions  of,   174  et  seq. 

physiological  actions  of,  176 

from  the  emanation,  222 

from  Ur  X,  293 

non-separable    activity   of   radio-ele- 
ments consists  of  a  rays,  304 

from  different  active  products,  304 

conservation  of  energy  of  each  specific 

type  of,  308 
Kadium 

discovery  of,  13 

separation  of,  13 

spectrum  of,  15 

atomic  weight  of,  17 

radiations  from,  18 


INDEX 


395 


Radium  (cont.) 
compounds  of,  19 

nature  of  radiations  from,  90  et  seq. 
/3  rays  from,  95  et  seq. 
a  rays  from,  115  et  seq. 
y  rays  from,  141  et  seq. 
secondary  rays  from,  147 
heat  emission  of,   158  et  seq. 
production    of    phosphorescence    by, 

166  et  seq. 
spectrum  of  phosphorescent  light  of, 

169 

physical  actions  of,  171  et  seq. 
chemical  actions  of,  174 
physiological  actions  of,  176 
emanation  from,  205  et  seq. 
properties  of  emanation  from,  205  et 

seq. 
chemical  nature  of  emanation  from, 

225  et  seq. 

diffusion  of  emanation  from,  228  et  seq. 
condensation  of  emanation  from,  236 

et  seq. 

amount  of  emanation  from,  246,  312 
heat  emission  of  emanation  from,  247, 

278 

excited  radio-activity  from,  251  et  seq. 
decay  of  excited  activity  from,   261 

et  seq. 
successive  changes  in  emanation  X  of, 

272 

properties  of  emanation  X  of,  275 
heating  effect  due  to  products  of,  278 
radio-active  induction  due  to,  289 
connection  of,  with  polonium,  291 
alteration  of  activity  of,  by  removal 

of  emanation,  300 
recovery  of  activity  of,  after  removal 

of  emanation,  301 

effect    of   escape    of    emanation    on 
.  recovery  of  activity  of,  302 
non-separable  acthity  of.  302,  304 
radiations  from  active  products  of,  304 
division   of    activity  amongst    active 

products  of,  306 

conservation  of  radio-activity  of,  308 
determination  of  volume  of  emanation 

of  and  diminution  with  time,  313 

et  seq. 

theories  of  radio-activity  of,  316 
discussions  of  theories  of  radio-activity 

of,  320 
energy  of  radiations,  not  derived  from 

external  source,  321 
theory  of  radio-active  change,  322 
list  of  active  products  of,  326 
polonium  possible  product  of,  326 
production  of  helium  from,  327 
helium  disintegration  product  of,  327 
amount  of  helium  from,  331 


Radium  (cont.) 

rate  of  change  of,  332 

life  of,  333 

origin  of,  333 

possible  production   of,  by  uranium, 
334 

loss  of  weight  of,  335 

experiments    to    determine    loss    of 
weight  of,  336 

total  emission  of  energy  from  1  gram 
of,  336 

possible  causes  of  disintegration  of,  338 

amount  of,  to  account  for  heat  of  sun, 
342 

possible  connection  of  with   heat   of 
sun,  342 

probable  amount  of,  in  earth,  345 

possible  connection  with  heat  of  earth, 

344 
Rain 

radio-activity  of,  355 

decay  of  activity  of,  356 
Ramsay  and  Soddy 

evolution  of  gas  from  radium,  176 

chemical  nature  of    the   emanation, 
227 

gaseous  nature  of  the  emanation,  227 

volume   of    emanation,    and    change 
witfi  time,  313 

helium  from  radium  emanation,  328 
Re,  Filippo 

theory  of  radio-activity,  320 
Recombination 

of  ions,  37  et  seq. 

constant  of,  39 
Recovery 

of  heating  effect  of  radium,  162 

of  activity  of  thorium  after  removal 
of  Th  X,  181 

of  activity  of  uranium  after  removal 
of  Ur  X,  182 

significance  of  law  of,  185 

effect  of  conditions  on  rate  of,  191 

of  activity  of  radium,  after  removal 

of  emanation,  301 
Reflection 

no  evidence   of  direct  reflection   for 
uranium  rays,  7 

diffuse  reflection  of  rays,  7 
Refraction 

no  evidence  of,  for  uranium  rays,  7 
Regeneration 

of  emanating  power,  215 
Richarz  and  von  Helmholtz 

action  of  ions  on  steam  jet,  44 
Runge 

spectrum  of  radium,  17 
Runge  and  Precht 

atomic  weight  of  radium,  17 

heating  effect  of  radium,  164 


396 


INDEX 


Eunge  and  Bodlander 

evolution  of  gas  from  radium,  176 
Kussell 

photographic  action  of  substances,  68 

Saturation  current 

meaning  of,  30  et  seq. 

application    of,  to  measurements    of 
radio-activity,  69 

measurement  of,  82  et  seq. 
Schmidt 

discovery  of  radio-activity  of  thorium, 

10 
Schmidt  and  Wiedemann 

thermo-luminescence,  170 
Schuster 

radio-activity  of  matter,  371 
Schweidler  and  Meyer 

magnetic  deviation  of  /3  rays  by  electric 
method,  95 

absorption  of  /3  rays  of  radium,  113 
Scintillations 

discovery  of  in  zinc  sulphide  screen, 
127 

connection  of,  with  a  rays,  127 

illustration  of  by  spinthariscope,  127 

cause  of,  128 

production  of,   by  action  of  electric 

field,  128 
Searle 

apparent    mass    of    moving    charged 

body,  109 
Secondary  rays 

examination     of,     by     photographic 
method,  146 

examination  of,  by  electrical  method, 

148 
Selenium 

action  of  radium  rays  on,  171 
Simon 

value  of  e/m  for  cathode  rays,  111 
Smolan,  Beattie  and  Kelvin 

discharging  power  of  uranium  rays,  7 
Snow 

radio-activity  of,  356 

decay  of  activity  of,  356 
Soddy 

comparison  of  photographic  and  elec- 
trical action  of  uranium  rays,  68 

nature  of  rays  from  Ur  X,  294 
Soddy  and  Kamsay 

evolution  of  gas  from  radium,  176 

chemical  nature   of  the   emanation, 
227 

gaseous  nature  of  the  emanation,  227 

volume  of  the  emanation,  and  change 
with  time,  313 

helium  from  radium  emanation,  320 
Soddy  and  Rutherford 

separation  of  ThX,  179 


Soddy  and  Rutherford  (cont.) 
decay  of  activity  of  Th  X,  181 
recovery  of  activity  of  thorium,  freed 

from  Th  X,  181 

decay  of  activity  of  UrX,  182 
recovery  of  activity  of  uranium,  freed 

from  Ur  X,  182 
explanation   of    decay  and    recovery 

curves,  183 

rate  of  production  of  ThX,  186 
theory  of  decay  of  activity,  188 
influence    of   conditions  on   rate    of 
decay  and  recovery  of  activity,  190 
et  seq. 

disintegration  hypothesis,  194,  324 
decay  of  activity  of  radium  emanation, 

206 
measurements   of   emanating  power, 

213 

effect  of  temperature,  moisture,  and 
solution,  on  emanating  power,  214 
regeneration  of  emanating  power,  215 
constant  rate  of  production  of  emana- 
tion of  radium  and  thorium,   216 
et  seq. 

source  of  thorium  emanation,  220 
radiations  from  the  emanation,  222 
chemical  nature  of  emanation,  226 
condensation  of  emanations  of  radium 

and  thorium,  236  et  seq. 
temperature  of  condensation  of  emana- 
tion, 238  et  seq. 
effect  of  successive  precipitations  on 

activity  of  thorium,  2J6 
recovery  of  activity  of  radium,  300 
conservation  of  radio-activity,  309 
theory  of  radio-activity,  318 
theory  of  radio-active  change,  324 
Soil 

radio-activity  of,  362 
difference  in  activity  of,  362 
Solution 

coloration  of,  by  radium,  15 
of  emanation  X  in  acids,  275 
electrolysis  of  active,  276 
Source 

of  the  thorium  emanation,  220 
of  radium  emanation,  222 
Spark 

action  of  radium  rays  on,  171 
Spectrum 

spark  spectrum  of  radium,  15,  16 
flame  spectrum  of  radium,  17 
effect  of  a  magnetic  field  on  spectrum 

of  radium,  17 
of  polonium,  20 
of    phosphorescent    light   of    radium 

bromide,  169 

of  helium  in  radium  gases  and  emana- 
tion, 329 


INDEX 


397 


Spectrum  (cont.) 

of  emanation,  329 
Spinthariscope 

description  of,  127 
Springs 

emanation  from  water  of,  360 
Stark 

energy  to  produce  an  ion,  55 
Strauss  and  Hofmann 

radio-active  lead,  25 
Strutt 

conductivity  of  gases  for  radiation, 
61,  62 

negative    charge    carried    by  radium 
rays,  104 

absorption  of  /3  rays  proportional  to 
density,  113 

nature  of  a  rays,   116 

conductivity    of    gases    produced    by 
7  rays,  62,  144 

absorption  of  radium  rays  from  sun 
by  atmosphere,  343 

radio-activity  of  ordinary  matter,  378 

emanation  from  mercury,  381 
Sun 

effect  of  radium  in,  342 

age  of,  343 

Temperature 

of  radium  above  surrounding  space, 

158 
effect   of,  on   intensity  of  radiations 

from  uranium  and  radium,  173 
effect  of,  on  luminosity,  173 
rate  of  decay  of  radium  emanation 

unaffected  by,  208 
of  condensation   of  emanations,  238 

et  seq. 
rate  of  decay  of  thorium  emanation 

unaffected  by,  246 
effect  of,  on  excited  activity,  277 
effect  of,  on  amount  of  excited  activity 

in  atmosphere,  364  et  seq. 
effect  of,  on  natural  ionizationofair,377 
Theories 

of  radio-activity,  review  of,  316 
discussion  of,  320 
disintegration  theory,  324 
Thermo-luminescence,  170 
Thomson,  J.  J. 

relation  between  current  and  voltage 

for  ionized  gases,  31 
difference  between  ions  as  condensa- 
tion nuclei,  46 
charge  on  ion,  47 
theory  of  electrometers,  85 
path  of  charged  particle  in  uniform 

magnetic  field,  96 
apparent    mass    of    moving    charged 

body,  108 


Thomson,  J.  J.  (cont.) 

structure  of  atom,  126,  347 
theory  of  radio-activity,  319 
cause  of  heat  emission  from  radium, 

321 
possible   causes   of    disintegration  of 

radium,  342 
nature  of  electrons,  347 
emanation  from  tap-water  and  deep 

wells,  360 
Thomson,  J.  J.,  and  Kutherford 

ionization  theory  of  gases,  28  et  seq. 
Thorium 

discovery  of  radio-activity  of,  10 
emanation  from,  11 
preparation   of  non-radio-active  tho- 
rium, 25 

nature  of  radiations  from,  90  et  seq. 
)3  rays  from,  95  et  seq. 
a  rays  from,  115  et  seq. 
7  rays  from,  141  et  seq. 
rate  of  emission  of  energy  by,  154 
separation  of  Th  X  from,  179 
recovery  of  activity  of,  181 
disintegration  of  thorium,  193 
emanation  from,  197 
properties  of  emanation  from,  198  et 

seq.f 

diffusion  of  emanation  from,  233 
condensation  of  emanation  from,  236 

et  seq. 

excited  radio-activity  from,  250  et  seq. 
successive  changes  in  emanation  X  of, 

272 
explanation  of  initial  portion  of  decay 

curve,  295  et  seq. 

explanation  of  initial  portion  of  re- 
covery curve,  295  et  seq. 
effect  of  successive  precipitations  on, 

296 
recovery  curve  after  large  number  of 

precipitations,  297 
theory  of  decay  curve  of  Th  X,  298 
non- separable  activity  of,  296,  304 
radiations    from   active   products   of, 

304  et  seq. 
division    of    activity  amongst    active 

products  of,  306  et  seq. 
conservation  of  radio-activity  of,  308 

et  seq. 

resume  of  results,  311  et  seq. 
theories  of  radio-activity  of,  316  et  seq. 
discussion  of  theories  of  radio-activity, 

320  et  seq. 
source  of  energy  of  radiations,  320  et 

seq. 
theory  of  radio-active  change,  322  et 

seq. 

table  of  radio-active  products  of,  326 
rate  of  change  of,  332  et  seq.  % 


398 


INDEX 


Thorium  (cont.) 
life  of,  333 
total  emission  of  energy  from  1  gram 

of,  337 
possible  causes  of  disintegration  of, 

338  et  seq. 
Thorium  X 

methods  of  separation  of,  179 
law  of  decay  of  activity  of,  182 
law  of  recovery  of  activity  of,  182 
theory  to  explain  production  of,  183 
material  nature  of,  185 
continuous  production  of,  186 
explanation   of  decay  of  activity  of, 

188  et  seq. 
effect   of   conditions  on   the  rate   of 

change  of,  190  et  seq. 
disintegration  hypothesis   to  explain 

production  of,  193  et  seq. 
minute  amount  of,  produced,  195 
effect  of  successive  separations  of,  on 

activity  of  thorium,  296 
theory  of  decay  curve  of,  296  et  seq. 
Tommasina 

scintillations  produced  by  electrifica- 
tion, 128 
Townsend 

ions  by  collision,  36,  54 
coefficient  of  recombination,  38 
diffusion  of  ions,  49  et  seq. 
comparison  of  charge  on  ion  with  that 

on  hydrogen  atom  in  electrolysis,  51 
number  of  molecules  per  c.c.  of  gas,  51 
ionization  by  collision  for  different 

speeds,  139 
Transmission 

of   excited   radio-activity  of   radium 

and  thorium,  282  et  seq. 
of  excited  radio-activity  of  actinium, 

287 
Troost 

rays  from  hexagonal  blende,  4 

Uranium 

discovery  of  radio-activity  of,  5 
persistence  of  radiations  of,  6 
discharging  power  of  rays,  7 
absence  of  reflection,  refraction  and 

polarization,  7 
examination  of  uranium  minerals,  11 

et  seq. 
relative    activity    of    compounds    of 

uranium,  12 

nature  of  radiation  from,  90  et  seq. 
/3  rays  from,  95  et  seq. 
a  rays  from,  115  et  seq. 
y  rays  from,  142  et  seq. 
emission  of  energy  by,  154 
separation  of  Ur  X  from,  179 
recovery  of  activity  of,  182 


Uranium  (cont.) 

non-separable  activity  of,  294,  304 

radiations  from  Ur  X,  293 

method  of  measurement  of   activity 

of  Ur  X,  294 
changes  in,  294 
conservation  of  radio-activity  of,  308 

et  seq. 

resume  of  results,  311  et  seq. 
theories  of  radio-activity,  316  et  seq. 
discussion     of     theories     of     radio- 
activity, 320  et  seq. 
source  of  energy  of  radiation,  320  et 

seq. 
theory  of  radio-active  change,  322  et 

seq. 

table  of  active  products,  326 
rate  of  change  of,  332  et  seq. 
life  of,  333 

radium  possible  product  of,  334 
total  emission  of  energy  from  1  gram 

of,  337 
possible  causes  of   disintegration  of, 

338  et  seq. 
Uranium  X 

separation  of,  by  Crookes,  178 
separation  of,  by  Becquerel,  179 
decay  of  activity  of,   182 
recovery  of  activity  of,  182 
theory  to  explain  production  of,  183 
material  nature  of,  185 
explanation  of  decay  of  activity  of, 

188  et  seq. 

radiations  from,  293 
method  of  measurement  of  radiations 

from,  294 
changes  in,  294 

Velocity 

of  ions  in  electric  field,  39  et  seq. 
difference  between,   of   positive    and 

negative  ions,  42  et  seq. 
of  [3  particle  or  electron,  107  et  seq., 

110  et  seq. 
variation  of  mass   of  electron  with, 

108  et  seq. 

of  a  particle,   122  et  seq. 
of  transmission  of  carriers  of  excited 

activity,  284 
Villard 

discovery  of  7  rays  from  radium,  141 
alteration  of  X  ray  screen  with  time, 

168 

activity  produced  by  cathode  rays,  372 
Volume 

of  radium  emanation,  calculation  of, 

246 

of  emanation,  determination  of,  313 
decrease    of,    of    radium    emanation, 

313 


INDEX 


399 


Walker,  G.  W. 

theory  of  electrometer,  75 
Walkhoff 

action  of  radium  rays  on  skin,  176 
Wallstabe 

diffusion   of  radium   emanation  into 

liquids,  235 
Water 

emanation  from,  360 

decay  of  activity  of  emanation  from, 

361 
Water-falls 

amount  of  excited  activity  produced 

at  Niagara,  366 

electrification  produced  near,  366 
Watts,  Marshall 

atomic  weight  of  radium,  17 
Weight 

loss  of  by  radio-elements,  335 
attempts    to    measure    loss    of,    in 

radium,  336 
Wheeler  and  Bumstead 

emanation    from   surface    water   and 

the  soil,  361,  368 
identity  of  emanation  from  soil  with 

radium  emanation,  361 
absence    of    emanation    in    mercury, 

381 
Whetham 

effect  of  valency  of  ion  on  colloidal 

solutions,  175 
possible    cause    of    disintegration    of 

atom,  342 
Wiedemann  and  Schmidt 

thermo-luminescence,  170 
Wiedemann 

thermo-luminescence      produced     by 

radium  rays,  170 
Wien 

amount  of  charge  carried  by  radium 

rays,  105 
positive  charge  of  canal  rays,  125 


Willcock,  Miss,  and  Hardy 

coloration    of  iodoform   solution   by 

radium  rays,  175 
Willemite 

phosphorescence    of    under    radium 

rays,  168 

use  to  show  condensation  of  emana- 
tion, 237 
Wilson,  W.  E. 

radium  in  sun,  342 
Wilson,  H.  A. 

charge  on  ion,  48 
Wilson,  C.  T.  E. 

ions    as  nuclei  of  condensation,   44 

et  seq. 

difference  between  positive  and  nega- 
tive ions  as  condensation  nuclei,  46 
equality  of  charges  carried  by  positive 

and  negative  ions,  47 
construction  of  electroscope,  73 
natural  ionization  of  air  in  vessels,  351 
radio-activity  of  rain  and  snow,355,356 
loss  of  charge  in  closed  vessels,  373 
presence  of  ions  in  free  air  shown  by 

condensation,  375 

number  of  ions  produced  per  c.c.,  375 

effect  of  pressure  and  nature  of  gas 

on.  ionization  in  sealed  vessels,  376 

Zeleny 

velocity  of  ions,  39  et  seq. 
difference  of  velocity  of  ions,  40,  42 
potential  gradient  between  electrodes, 

63 
Zerban  and  Hofmann 

active  substances  from  pitchblende,  25 
Zinc  Sulphide 

scintillations  produced  in  by  a  rays, 

127 

cause  of  luminosity  of,  127  et  seq. 
scintillations     due     to     cleavage    of 
crystals,  128 


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  j.  AND  c.  F.  CLAY,  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


14  DAY  USE 

RETURN  TO  DESK  FROM  WHICH 


This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below,  or 

on  the  date  to  which  renewed. 
Kenewed  books  are  subject  to  immediate  recall 


LD21-35m-8  '72 
(Q4189slO)476 — A-32 


General  Library 

University  of  California 

Berkeley
