The Gulistan; or, Flower-Garden of Sa'di (Saadi, trans. James Ross, 1823)
==========================================================
James Ross's 1823 translation of Sa'di's Gulistan — the FIRST English translation of the most famous Persian prose classic, here in the 1890 Camelot reprint. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

THE  I

sm

LOS


THE  LIBRARY

OF

THE  UNIVERSITY

OF  CALIFORNIA

LOS  ANGELES


GULISTAN  OR  FLOWER-
GARDEN  :  TRANSLATED,
WITH  AN  ESSAY,  BY
JAMES  ROSS  :  AND  A  NOTE

UPON  THE  TRANSLATOR  BY
CHARLES  SAYLE.


LONDON  :
WALTER    SCOTT,

24  WARWICK  LANE.


'  Be  thou  ware  where  Sadi  dwells ;
Wisdom  of  the  gods  is  he, —
Entertain  it  reverently.
Gladly  round  that  golden  lamp
Sylvan  deities  encamp,
And  simple  maids  and  noble  youth
Are  welcome  to  the  man  of  truth.
Most  welcome  they  who  need  him  most,
They  feed  the  spring  which  they  exhaust :
For  greater  need
Draws  better  deed: —
But,  critic,  spare  thy  vanity,
Nor  show  thy  pompous  parts,
To  vex  with  odious  subtlety
The  cheerer  of  men's  hearts. "

— Emerson.


College


CONTENTS.


PAGE

SHAIKH   SADI I

TRANSLATOR'S  NOTF.  ^


FOR  FULL  LIST  of  the  Volumes  in
this  series,  see  Catalogue  at  end  of
book.


CHAP.  V. — OF    LOVE   AND   YOUTH      ....       208

CHAP.  VI. — OF   IMBECILITY   AND   OLD   AGE           .            .       234

CHAP.  VII. — OF   THE   IMPRESSIONS   OF    EDUCATION       .       244

CHAP.  VIII. — OF   THE   DUTIES   OF   SOCIETY  .            .            .272


1656654


"  Be  thou  ware  where  Sadi  dwells;
Wisdom  of  the  gods  is  he, —


— Emerson.


College


CONTENTS.


PAGE

SHAIKH  SADI     ........         I

TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE          ......       59

THE    MOCADDAMAH  ;     OR,    INTRODUCTION    TO    THE

GULISTAN  OF  SHAIKH  SADI         .         ,         .  6 1

CHAP.       I. — OF  THE  CUSTOMS  OF  KINGS  .        .        .       77
CHAP.      II. — OF  THE  MORALS  OF  DARWESHES    .        .126
CHAP.    III. — OF  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CONTENTMENT     167
CHAP.     IV. — OF  THE  BENEFIT  OF  BEING  SILENT        .     2OO
CHAP.      V. — OF  LOVE  AND  YOUTH    .         .         .         .     208

CHAP.  VI. — OF  IMBECILITY  AND  OLD  AGE  .  .  234
CHAP.  VII. — OF  THE  IMPRESSIONS  OF  EDUCATION  .  244
CHAP.  VIII. — OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  SOCIETY  .  .  .272


NOTE  UPON  THE  TRANSLATOR,


JAMES  Ross,  son  of  Alexander  Ross,  a  burgess  of  Aber-
deen, was  born  in  that  city,  2ist  June  1759.  He  was
a  student  at  Marischal  College  from  1774  to  1777,  in
which  year  he  graduated  as  Master  of  Arts.  After  studying
medicine  he  was  appointed  successively  to  the  Vesuvius  in
1782;  acting-surgeon  to  the  Enterprise  at  Woolwich  till
the  return  of  the  Galatea;  assistant  surgeon  to  the
Bountiful;  and  in  1783  proceeded  to  Fort  St.  George
and  Calcutta;  in  1784-5  to  Barrackpur  and  Burhampur;
and  in  1785  to  Lucknow.  In  1786  he  marched  from
Lucknow  to  Midnapur,  and  in  1789  was  stationed  at
Dinajepur,  on  the  Bengal  Establishment.  In  1797  he
returned  to  England  on  furlough,  the  voyage  taking  eleven
months.  In  1801  he  was  acting-surgeon  to  the  i8th
Regiment  of  Native  Infantry,  and  afterwards  senior  surgeon
to  one  detachment.  From  the  year  1802  up  to  the  time  of
his  death,  he  was  a  member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.
He  retired,  owing  to  ill-health,  in  1804,  and  returned  to
England,  residing  at  various  places  in  the  South  of  England
before  he  finally  settled,  in  1810,  at  Exeter,  where,  at  his
residence  in  Summerland  Place  (now  2  Higher  Summer-
lands),  he  died,  2  2nd  July  1831.


viii         NOTE  UPON  THE  TRANSLATOR.

The  translation  of  the  Gulistan  was  dedicated  to  the
Chairman  and  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company;  and
was  published  in  1823.  In  a  memorandum  prefixed  to  it,
the  translator  stated  his  intention  of  supplementing  his
work  by  (i)  a  rendering  of  the  Bustan;  (2)  a  volume
containing  one  of  the  Heroic  Poems  of  Firdusi,  and
selections  from  Nizami,  Anwari,  Hafiz,  etc. ;  (3)  a  volume
of  Introductory  matter,  and  a  rendering  of  the  two  first
books  of  Anwari  Sohaili,  with  an  essay  on  the  Persian
Apologue  and  Bidpai's  Fables ;  (4)  a  Dictionary  of  pure
Persian  words.  Of  these,  the  first  was  advertised,  in  1832,
as  among  the  forthcoming  publications  under  the  Oriental
Translation  Fund,  but  the  work  now  reprinted  was  the  only
one  which  eventually  was  produced.

A  fine  medallion  portrait  of  James  Ross  is  in  existence,
in  the  possession  of  his  niece,  Miss  Bridget  Ross  Ross,  of
Hope  House,  Topsham,  near  Exeter;  to  whom  I  am
indebted  for  the  greater  part  of  the  foregoing  facts.

c.  s.


SHAIKH    SADI.


THIRTY  years  ago,  when  I  first  devoted  myself  to  the
study  of  the  Oriental  languages,  it  was  my  custom  to
translate  into  English  any  classic  which  my  Munshi
had  recommended  for  my  perusal ;  and,  among  other
Persian  books,  I  had  in  this  way  made  translations  of
the  Gulistan  and  Bustan  of  Sadi :  and  now,  with
much  diffidence,  publish  that  of  the  Gulistan,  with  an
abridgment  of  a  larger  work,  being  an  Essay  on  the
Life  and  Genius  of  the  Author,  intending  to  follow
this  up  next  year  with  my  translation  of  the  Bustan,
with  a  prefatory  critique  on  Sadi's  works,  and  making
a  volume  equal  in  size  to  this  ;  but  each  will  otherwise
be  a  distinct  work.

Sadi  has  ever  been  with  me  a  favourite  Persian
classic ;  and  after  many  and  diligent  perusals  of  his
Kulliat,  or  works,  I  flatter  myself  with  having  not
only  mastered  the  comparatively  easy  task  of  fully-
appreciating  his  intellectual  faculties,  but  also  the
more  difficult  one  of  portraying  the  features  and
passions  of  his  mind.  In  this  sketch  of  Sadi's  life  I
shall  duly  avail  myself  of  my  Asiatic  authorities  ;  as,
however,  Oriental  notions  of  biography  differ  so
essentially  from  ours  that  little  is  to  be  gleaned  from
them  that  can  interest  the  European  reader,  I  am

743*


2  SHAIKH  SADL

fortunate  in  finding  that  anecdotes  of  the  temper,
manners,  and  habits  of  so  excellent  a  moralist  and
writer  are  constantly  occurring  in  his  own  works ;
and  I  have  only  to  quote  them  to  give  a  perfect
insight  into  his  character.

Silghur,  a  Turkish  officer  in  the  service  of  the
Saljuc  Sultans,  usurped  the  government  of  Pars,  and
was  the  origin  of  that  dynasty  of  Atabaks,  or
Attabegs,  who  reigned  there  A.H.  543,  668.  And
of  them  Atabak  Toklah,  or  Toglah,  reigned  A.H.
57 !>  591)  an<3  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Atabak
Saad-bin-Zungi,  who  reigned  A.H.  591,  623,  and  was
succeeded  by  his  son  Atabak  Abubakr,  A.H.  623,
658,  and  he  again  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Saad-bin-
Abibakr,  who  died  within  a  twelvemonth,  and  after  a
few  and  feverish  reigns  of  women  and  infants,  con-
sisting altogether  of  nine  years,  the  dynasty  became
extinct  A.H.  668  ;  all  these  reigns  are  included  within
the  first  three-fourths  of  Sadi's  life  ;  but  Dowlat  Shah
must  mistake  in  dating  Sadi's  death  under  one  of
this  Silghur,  or  Silaghur  dynasty,  or  there  must  have
been  a  second  dynasty  of  them.

Dowlat  Shah,  in  his  Tuzkirrah-ashshaara,  or  Lives
of  the  Persian  Poets,  says  that  Sadi's  father  held
some  office  at  the  Shiraz  court,  and  from  what  Sadi
himself  says,  in  a  Kitah,  or  fragment  of  his  book  of
Sahibayah,  more  immediately  under  the  Diwan,  or
prime  minister,  speaking  in  eulogy  of  him — "My
father  was  thy  old  domestic ;  he  passed  his  whole  life
in  thy  service.  Thy  born  slave,  when  he  first  saw  the
light,  naturally  cast  his  eyes  up  to  thy  countenance,


SHAIKH  SADI.  3

I  can  never  seek  the  patronage  of  another,  who  have
been  the  nurtured  child  of  thy  bounty."

In  the  first  year  of  Atabak  Toklah's  reign,  or  A.H.
571,  A.D.  1194,  Sadi  was  born  at  Shiraz,  the  capital
of  Pars,  or  Persia  proper  ;  and  the  epithet  of  Shirazi
applies  equally  to  him  and  Hafiz,  as  much  honoured
natives  of  that  Dar  u'lilom,  or  seat  of  learning.
Dowlat  Shah  says  that  his  proper  name  was  Moslih
u'd-din,  or  the  Umpire  of  the  faith  ;  but  he  was  better
known  afterwards  by  that  of  Shaikh  Sadi  Shirazi :
Shaikh  properly  signifying  the  head  of  an  Arabian
tribe ;  and  among  Mussulmans  it  was  anywhere  con-
ferred upon  a  senior,  who  commanded  the  love  and
esteem  of  his  neighbours  from  authority,  age,  genius,
or  piety ;  and,  on  account  of  the  two  last  virtues,  is
among  the  Persians  more  especially  applied  to
Nizami  and  Sadi ;  and  it  is  no  small  compliment  that
though  the  former  is  the  senior  and,  next  to  Firdausi,
the  best  Persian  heroic  poet,  yet  Sadi  is  appropriately
called  the  Shaikh  !

Again  Sadi,  or  Saadi,  signifying  felicity,  is  his
Tokhullus,  or  poetical  name,  and  was,  according  to
Dowlat  Shah,  given  to  him  by  Atabak  Saad-bin-
Zungi.  This  is  probable  ;  but  he  is  wrong  in  saying
that  Sadi  was  born  in  that  prince's  reign.  This  mode
of  appellation  a  writer  in  the  East  does  not  affect  till
he  has  established  his  character  as  a  poet,  when,  after
being  confirmed  to  him,  like  a  title  of  nobility,  by
some  sovereign  prince,  he  takes  the  first  opportunity
of  introducing  his  Tokhullus  into  the  Shah-bayit,
or  last  stanza  of  a  ghazal,  or  other  poem,  and


4  SHAIKH  SADI.

seldom  omits  to  use  it  thus  afterwards ;  and  Cowley
among  ourselves  has  happily  adopted  this  Oriental
custom —

"  The  wise  example  of  the  heavenly  lark,
Thy  fellow-poet,  Cowley,  mark  ;
Above  the  clouds  let  thy  proud  music  sound,
Thy  humble  nest  build  on  the  ground  ! "

Jami  calls  Sadi  Sharf-u'd-din  Mislah,  son  of
Abdullah  ;  and  an  Alowi,  or  descendant  of  Ali.

Sadi's  father  and  mother  were  alive  within  his  own
recollection,  for  he  often  mentions  the  first  (Bust.
ii.  2;  ix.  13,  15,  etc.);  and  his  mother,  very  feelingly
(Gul.  vi.  6) ;  but,  from  his  calling  himself  an
orphan,  both  must  have  died  while  our  Shaikh  was
yet  a  stripling,  for  he  says  (Bust.  ii.  2) — "  If  the
orphan  come  to  cry,  who  will  soothe  him  ?  if  he  be
pettish,  who  will  put  up  with  his  ill-humours?  take
heed,  that  he  weep  not ;  for  the  throne  of  the
Almighty  is  shaken  to  and  fro  when  the  orphan  sets
a  crying.  Once  my  head  was  lofty,  as  that  which
wears  a  crown,  for  then  I  could  lay  it  upon  the  bosom
of  a  father  ;  had  a  fly  but  dared  to  settle  on  my  body,
it  would  have  been  enough  to  alarm  a  whole  family  ;
but  were  my  enemies  ready  to  make  me  now  their
captive,  none  of  my  friends  would  come  to  my
rescue :  I  can  feel  a  sympathy  for  the  helplessness
of  infancy,  because  in  my  childhood  I  lost  my
father"

In  his  Nafhat-u'1-ans,  or  Memoirs  of  the  Sufis,
Jami  says  that  he  was  descended  from  the  Sharif,  or


SHAIKH  SADL  5

noble  house  of  Abdullah  Hafaif ;  but  however  dignified
his  birth,  or  lucrative  his  station  at  court,  both  advan-
tages must  have  died  with  the  father;  otherwise  we
should  not  find  Sadi  using  his  interest  with  Shamsud-
din  to  exempt   his  brother  from  some  extortion  in
his  mean  occupation  of  retailing   figs.      This  prime
minister,  then,  it  would  seem,  viceroy  on  the  part  of
Abaca-an,  at  Shiraz,  acted  handsomely  on  the  occa-
sion by  laying  a  thousand  gold  dinars  at  Sadi's  feet,
as  a  compensation  to  his  brother,  but  would  not,  as  the
story  adds,  think  of  offering  any  money-compliment
to  a  darwesh  like  himself.     In  the  Risallah,  or  tract
on    the    questions   of   the    Lord    Diwan,   this   same
generous  friend  sends  him  five  hundred  dinars  under
the  pretence  of  supplying  food  for  his  birds,  of  which
the  servant,  considering  himself  as  one  of  Sadi's  birds,
purloins  a  hundred  and  fifty,  being,  like  the  Irishman,
not  aware  that  the  letter,  which  accompanied  this  gift,
and  its  answer,  would  detect  him.     On  ascertaining
this  knavery,  the  messenger  is  forthwith  sent  back
with   an   order  for  Sadi  on  the  Shiraz  treasury  for
10,000  gold  dinars  !    And  on  another  occasion  he  and
his  brother  Ula-ud-din,  joint  ministers  of  that  son  and
successor  of  the  Tartar  emperor,  Halaku  Khan,  sent
Sadi,  then  an  old  resident  in  his  hermitage  at  Shiraz,
a  bag   of   50,000   dinars,   or   about   £24,000   of  our
money,   which   he   was   to   lay    out    in    building    a
Caravan-saray  under  the  citadel  of  Cohindar,   near
Shiraz,  and  which  Sadi  had  much  at  heart  in  com-
pleting.    By  the  mother's  side  Sadi's  relations  were
some  of  them  eminent  for  learning,  and  Mola  Cut'b


6  SHAIKH  SADI.

Alamah,  his  maternal  uncle,  is  noticed  as  his  first
master  in  science.

Jami  says  that  Sadi  was  a  Sufi  of  profound  learning,
or  master  in  every  branch  of  science,  and  accomplished
in  the  polite  arts,  for,  according  to  Dowlat  Shah,  "he
commenced  his  studies  at  the  Nizamiah  college  of
Baghdad,"  which,  during  five  centuries,  had  been  the
chief  seat  of  Oriental  learning,  and  the  magnificent
residence  of  the  Khalifs  ;  and  there  he  held  an  Idrar,
or  fellowship"  (Bust  vii.  14),  having  had  for  his
tutor  in  science  the  learned  Ab'ul  Firah-ibin-Jozi  (Gul.
ii.  21),  and  in  theology  Abd-u'1-cadir  the  Gilani ;  and
with  the  last  he  made  his  first  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,
which  he  repeated  fourteen  times,  and  chiefly  on  foot ;
and  he  often  makes  his  adventures  on  such  occasions
the  subject  of  an  apologue  (Gul.  ii.  25,  26,  etc.).

Being  a  classical,  as  well  as  a  spoken  idiom  and
court  dialect,  the  Tazi,  or  modern  Arabic,  under  the
illustrious  patronage  of  the  Khalifs,  reached  as  great
perfection  as  has  ever  been  the  lot  of  any  human
tongue.  Sadi  knew  and  wrote  it  well,  and  carried  the
practice  of  deluging  the  Persian  language  with  it  to  a
greater  length  than  any  of  his  predecessors  had  done.
In  his  Gulistan  v.  21  he  refers  with  fondness  to  it?
currency  in  A.D.  1256,  at  Baghdad,  little  thinking
that  in  the  course  of  two  years  he  should  have  occa-
sion to  pen  it  in  a  casidah,  or  elegy,  on  its  being  sacked
by  Halaku  the  Tartar,  its  palaces  and  colleges  plun-
dered, and  the  Khalif  Mustasim,  the  last  of  the
Abissites,  and  all  that  were  dignified  and  learned,
with  a  million  and  a  Jialf  of  its  inhabitants  barbarously


SHAIKH  SADI.  7

murdered.  Sadi  wrote  a  book  of  Tazi  elegies ;  but
that  city  and  its  university  were  his  alma  mater,
the  seat  of  the  religion  he  revered,  and  the  muses  he
adored  ;  and  he  consequently  felt  a  pathos  on  this
horrible  event ;  and  all  that  understand  it  must  relish
its  propriety  and  elegance,

Sadi  mentions  himself  to  have  been  twice  married.
Of  his  first  marriage,  at  Aleppo,  he  tells  a  pleasant
story,  to  which  (Gul.  ii.  30)  I  beg  to  refer  the  reader,
desiring  him  to  recollect  that  though  Sadi,  as  a
Mussulman,  had  like  the  Jews  a  legal  right  to
repudiate  his  troublesome  wife,  yet,  in  that  case,  he
must  have  repaid  her  dowry,  and  he  was  all  his  life
too  improvident,  if  not  poor,  to  do  that ;  besides,  a
sense  of  family  honour  will  deter  one  of  the  orthodox
from  idly  parting  with  the  woman  of  his  former
affections  ;  also  he  is  obliged  to  give  three  notices  of
his  intention  to  the  Cazy ;  and  though  during  the
heat  of  passion  instances  occur  of  a  first,  and  perhaps
a  second,  notice,  after  twenty  years'  intercourse  with
them  I  never  heard  of  a  third,  which  was  to  complete
it.  Of  his  other  wife  at  Sanaa,  the  capital  of  Yamin,
he  makes  no  mention,  but  in  Bustan  ix.  25  laments
their  loss  of  an  only  son  with  the  feelings  of  a  parent
— "  If  despair  overwhelm  thee  in  this  abode  of  gloom,
be  wise  and  prepare  for  thyself  a  place  of  greater
cheerfulness ;  wishest  thou  the  night  of  the  grave  to
be  luminous  as  day,  carry  along  with  thee  ready
trimmed  the  lamp  of  good  works."  Thus  could  Sadi
reconcile  himself  to  a  heavy  loss;  the  duties  of  his
religion  inculcating  the  sin  of  complaining,  and  his


8  SHAIKH  SADI.

philosophy  teaching  him  that  it  were  fruitless  to
repine  for  what  he  could  not  recall.  Two  such  trials
terrified  a  man  of  Sadi's  disposition  from  another
such  connection.  He  thought,  perhaps,  like  Cicero,
who  being,  after  his  divorce  from  Tullia,  invited  to  a
second  marriage,  replied  he  could  not — "  simul  amare
et  sapare — be  wise  and  in  love  at  the  same  time  !  "  or,
as  Sadi's  old  friend  answered,  "  I  do  not  like  to  marry
an  old  woman  ! "  "  Why,"  said  his  adviser,  "  do
you  not,  now  you  are  rich,  choose  a  young  one?"
"  Because,"  he  replied,  "  when  I  was  young  myself,
I  did  not  love  old  women,  and  cannot  hope,  that  now
I  am  old,  a  young  woman  can  love  me  "  (Gul.  vi.  8).

Instead  of  the  comforts  of  a  family  circle  Sadi  was
doomed  to  pass  the  sixty  or  seventy  last  years  of  his
extreme  long  life  in  the  cell  of  a  hermit,  and  latterly
seems  to  have  imbibed  a  reprehensible  portion  of  that
ancient  Grecian,  as  well  as  Oriental  contempt  for  the
fair  sex,  and  to  have  entertained  a  prejudiced  and
strange  notion  about  our  posterity  and  the  marriage
duty  (Gul.  vi.  5)-  1°  Gulistan  viii.  55  he  says —
"  Consilium  fceminis  invalidum :  it  be  bad  to  hold
counsel  with  women,"  or,  as  he  adds  on  another
occasion,  "  take  your  wife's  opinion,  and  act  opposite
to  it ! "  And  again  (Bust.  vi.  24),  "  Choose  a  fresh
wife  every  spring  or  new  year's  day,  for  the  almanack
of  last  year  is  good  for  nothing!"  According  to  the
Mussulman  creed,  prayers  five  times  a  day  bring  the
good  believer  half-way  towards  the  Deity,  and  in
this,  as  absolutely  necessary  to  corporal  purification,
ablution  is  each  time  included,  but  with  women  certain


SHAIKH  SADL  g

physical  impurities  (Bust  ix.  13),  prevent  this
ceremonial  for  some  days  monthly ;  yet  Sadi  adds
those  do  not,  according  to  our  European  vulgar
notion,  exclude  women  from  Paradise.  Nor,  though
he  recommends  selfishness  (Bust.  ii.  7) — "  Because
the  property  of  my  father  descended  to  me,  it  needs
not  be  left  to  descend  to  my  children.  Eat  and  drink,
spend  and  enjoy  it  thyself,  for  why  shouldst  thou
trouble  thyself  about  those  who  are  to  succeed
thee ; "  yet  he  carries  not  this  misanthrophy  so
far  as  our  prince  of  existing  fashionable  poets  has
done.


"  But  amidst  the  crowd,  the  hum,  and  shock  of  men,
To  hear,  to  see,  to  feel,  and  to  possess,
And  roam  along  the  world's  tir'd  denizen,
With  none  who  biess  us,  none  whom  we  can  bless ;
None  with  kindred  consciousness  endued :
This  is  to  be  alone,  and  my  lov'd  solitude ! " —


That  he  was  not  a  domestic  man  and  had  no
surviving  family,  was  no  fault  of  Sadi.  Like  Socrates
he  put  wedlock  to  the  double  ordeal  of  a  trial ;  and  if
he  enjoyed  not  the  social  retirement  of  a  Solon,  he
felt  not  the  misanthropic  celibacy  of  a  Thales.  After
those  experiments  he  prided  him  in  his  tempered
kinaat  or  contentment,  and  supported  himself,  with
unaffected  indifference,  on  the  casual  charity  of  his
admirers  during  the  two  last  third  parts  of  his  life,
either  as  a  wandering  mendicant  or  solitary  recluse.
"  Never,"  does  .  he  honestly  exclaim  (Gul.  iii.  19),


io  SHAIKH  SADL

"  did  I  complain  of  my  forlorn  condition  but  on  one
occasion  when  my  feet  were  bare  and  I  had  not
wherewithal  to  shoe  them.  Soon  after  meeting  a
man  without  feet,  I  was  thankful  for  the  bounty  of
Providence  to  myself,  and  with  perfect  resignation
submitted  to  my  want  of  shoes."

Many  such  anecdotes,  incidents,  and  adventures,
that  occurred  to  him  during  his  travels,  we  meet  in
his  works,  and,  whether  creditable  or  not,  told  with  the
same  ingenuousness.  Crimes,  vices,  and  misfortunes
chiefly  occupy  the  narratives  of  such  adventurers
among  ourselves,  but  even  in  romance  the  hero's  life
generally  concludes  in  his  first  wedlock.  Our  rigid  law
would  construe  Sadi's  adventure  with  the  Brahmin  at
Sumnaat  (Bust.  viii.  15),  and  Moses'  slaughter  of
the  Egyptian  into  murder ;  otherwise,  however  unfor-
tunate, his  personal  adventures  seldom  have  the  stain
of  crime,  or  even  vice.  Nay,  after  he  had  ceased  to
be  a  married  man  and  enterprising  traveller,  his  life
continues  to  interest  and  himself  to  be  useful,  for,  as
an  Ascetic,  he  was  visited  by  the  first  characters  of
his  time,  and  consulted  by  his  contemporary  princes
and  kings.

Dowlat  Shah  says  "that  the  first  thirty  years  of
Sadi's  long  life  was  devoted  to  study  and  laying  up  a
stock  of  knowledge ;  the  next  thirty,  or  perhaps
forty,  in  treasuring  up  experience  and  disseminating
that  knowledge  during  his  wide-extending  travels ;
and  that  some  portion  should  intervene  between  the
business  of  life  and  hour  of  death,  -and  that  with  him
chanced  to  be  the  largest  share  of  it,  he  spent  the


SHAIKH  SADL  u

remainder  of  his  life,  or  seventy  years,  in  the  retire-
ment of  a  recluse,  when  he  was  exemplary  in  his
temperance  and  edifying  in  his  piety."  Even  when
a  boy  he  confesses  himself  to  have  been  overmuch
religious  (Gul.  ii.  7),  and  ingenuously  mentions  this
reproof  of  his  father — "You  had  better,"  said  that
sensible  parent,  "  have  been  yourself  asleep  than  to
be  thus  calumniating  your  neighbours."  In  Gul.  v.
1 8  he  says  "  that  on  the  death  of  a  young  friend,
and  himself  still  a  young  man,  he  had  vowed  to  pass
a  life  of  retirement,  and  to  fold  up  the  carpet  of
enjoyment"  And  in  the  preface  of  the  Gulistan
he  is  enticed  by  another  friend  to  quit  such  a  state
of  abstraction  and  retirement.  He  would  seem  to
have  been  sincere  and  affectionate  in  his  friendships ;
and  many  such  disappointments,  and  an  habitual
love  of  seclusion,  had  often  disgusted  him  with  social
life,  and  early  inured  him  to  the  habits  of  a  hermit
(Gul.  ii.  30).  However,  real  want,  I  fear,  had  often
brought  him  back  into  the  busy  world,  for  he
positively  tells  us,

"  Paupertas  impulit  audax
Ut  verses  facerem,"

that  he  wrote  for  his  bread.  Bustan  vi.  $  : — "  The
belly  puts  manacles  upon  the  wrists,  and  fetters
upon  the  ankles ;  the  bounden  slave  of  the  belly
is  constrained  in  his  devotions ;  had  Sadi's  belly
in  any  shape  resembled  his  back — that  is,  been
tolerant  of  its  load,  nobody  would  at  this  day  have


12  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

been  criticising  his  writings."  And,  in  Bustan  vii.
6,  he  alludes  to  his  having  commenced  to  write  at
a  late  period,  and  that  having  once  begun,  he  had
no  alternative  but  that  of  proceeding.

Jami  relates  "that  Sadi  had  travelled  much  and
far,  and  visited  many  strange  countries.  He  had
often  made  the  pilgrimage  of  Mecca  on  foot,
and  once  penetrated  so  far  as  the  pagoda,  or  bot-
kadah,  image-temple,  at  Sumnaat,  on  the  Malabar
coast,  were  he  overthrew,  and  broke  in  pieces,  the
great  idol.  He  had  much  religious  and  moral  inter-
course with  Shaikh  Shohab-ud-din  and  other  reverend
gentlemen.  For  a  length  of  time  he  led  the  life  of  a
sacayi,  or  water-drawer,  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  was
thus  administering  to  the  thirsty  traveller,  till  found
worthy  of  an  introduction  to  the  prophet  Khizr,  Elias
or  the  Syrian  and  Greek  Hermes,  who  moistened  his
mouth  with  the  water  of  immortality.  A  descendant
of  Ali  disputed  the  truth  of  this  with  Sadi,  and  got
reproved  in  a  dream  by  the  prophet  for  his  incredu-
lity. Another  gentleman  had  also  doubted  it,  and
next  night  had  a  dream,  or  rather  vision ;  for  it
seemed  to  him  as  if  the  gates  of  heaven  were  thrown
open,  and  a  host  of  angels  descending  with  salvers  of
glory  in  their  hands.  On  asking  one  of  them  for
whom  those  were  intended,  he  answered  for  Shaikh
Sadi  of  Shiraz,  who  has  written  a  stanza  of  poetry
that  has  met  the  approbation  of  God  Almighty,"  as
follows  : — "  To  the  eye  of  the  intelligent  the  foliage  of
the  grove  displays,  in  every  leaf,  a  volume  of  the
Creator's  works  " —


SHAIKH  SADI.  13

"  The  meanest  floweret  of  the  vale,
The  simplest  note  that  swells  the  gale,
The  common  sun,  the  air,  and  skies,
To  him  are  opening  paradise  ! " —

"On  recovering  from  his  reverie,  that  holy  man
forthwith  proceeded  to  the  door  of  Sadi's  cell,  in
order  to  apologise  for  his  incredulity,  and  to  con-
gratulate him  upon  this  auspicious  vision.  He  found
the  Shaikh  sitting  up,  with  a  lighted  taper  before
him,  and  chanting  to  himself;  and,  on  listening
attentively,  found  that  he  was  singing  the  above
stanza."  Incredible  as  this  is,  one  of  the  fathers
of  our  church,  St  Chrysostom,  tells  us  "  that,  on
consecrating  the  element  of  bread  and  wine,  he  has
instantaneously  seen  a  multitude  of  white-robed
angels  surrounding  the  altar,  and  bowing  their  heads,
as  soldiers  do  in  making  their  homage  to  the
sovereign  ! "

In  his  Life  of  Khosraw  of  Delhi,  Jami  tells  us
that  this  poet  also  asked  Khizr  for  a  mouthful  of
this  inspiring  beverage ;  but  he  told  him  that  Sadi
had  got  the  last  of  it  Yet  Hafiz,  who  is  on  this
account  called  Sadie  sani,  or  a  second  Sadi,  tells  us
in  one  of  his  ghazals — "  Yesterday,  at  dawn,  God
delivered  me  from  all  worldly  affliction  ;  and  amidst
the  gloom  of  night  presented  me  with  the  water  of
immortality  ! "

Sadi  states  himself  to  be  at  Delhi  during  the  Patan
Aglamish's  time,  who,  after  a  reign  of  twenty-six
years,  died  A.H.  633,  or  in  Sadi's  sixty-second  year;
and  if  Amir  Khosraw,  descended  from  the  Amirs,  or


i4  SHAIKH  SADL

princes,  of  the  noble  tribe  of  Lachin  in  the  province  of
Balkh,  was,  as  Jami  says  and  is  generally  believed,  the
youth  Sadi,  in  Gulistan  v.  17,  got  so  much  enraptured
with  at  Cashghur,  and  who  died  at  Delhi,  A.H.  715,
in  his  seventy-fourth  year ;  allowing  Khosraw  to
have  been  fourteen  when  they  met,  Sadi  was  still  a
traveller  in  A.H.  641,  or  his  seventieth  year  I

In  the  course  of  reading  his  works,  I  have  re-
marked that  he  mentions  himself  to  have  visited
in  person  Europe,  Barbary,  Abyssinia,  Egypt,  Syria,
Palestine,  Armenia,  Asia  Minor,  the  three  grand
divisions  of  Arabia,  and  every  province  of  Iran  and
many  parts  of  Turan,  or  of  Persia  and  Tartary,  from
Busrah  and  Baghdad  to  the  Scythian  Wall,  and  at
Rudbar,  Deilman  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  Cashghur
beyond  the  Jihun,  or  Oxus,  across  the  Sind'h,  or
Indus,  and  into  many  parts  of  Hindustan,  etc.  ;  and,
from  a  poem  in  his  book  of  Fragments,  it  appears
that  he  had  a  practical  knowledge,  for  he  quotes
a  line  in  each,  of  eighteen  idioms,  dialects,  and
languages,  as  spoken  in  the  many  regions  into
which  he  had  thus  travelled.

Engelbert  Kcempfer,  who  visited  Shiraz  A.D.  1686,
says  of  Sadi,  "  that  videt  Egyptiam  et  Italiam  ;  and
that  he  was  much  skilled  in  the  Oriental  languages  ;
nay,  that  he  had  studied  the  Latin  tongue,  and  had
diligently  perused  the  works  of  Seneca  ! "  But  any
partiality  for  the  blemishes  of  this  Roman  meta-
physician would  better  apply  to  Jami  than  to  Sadi.

A  man  of  Sadi's  character  and  fame  was  recol-
lected with  fondness  and  veneration  in  the  many


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  15

regions  he  thus  visited ;  and  few  of  them,  especially
those  under  Mussulman  governments,  but  retain
some  local  memorial  of  him ;  and  in  their  collec-
tions of  Persian  anecdotes,  and  these,  like  our  Joe
Miller's  jests,  abound  all  over  the  East,  their  writers
accommodate  him  with  a  niche,  as  he  had  himself
complimented  an  ^Esop  or  Lucman,  Socrates  or
Plato,  Hippocrates  or  Galen,  and  even  St.  John  the
Baptist  and  our  blessed  Saviour !  Two  examples
I  shall  here  translate  from  his  Badaya,  or  book  of
rhetorical  ghazals ;  and  first — "  No  man  can  in  this
world  listen  to  the  lamentations  of  Sadi  that  must
not  bear  testimony  to  his  complaints,  as  originating
in  the  very  extremity  of  pain.  If  Plato  in  his  wisdom
is  mysterious  in  defining  love,  the  veil  shall  ultimately
be  withdrawn  from  the  face  of  his  hidden  secret"

This  alludes  of  course  to  the  Platonic  love,  which
was  not  so  much  a  doctrine  of  Plato  as  of  his  refining
followers,  and  which  the  followers  of  Sadi  construed
into  downright  sufiasm  and  mystery  1  Again — "  It
is  the  vernal  season ;  for  the  heart  is  every  moment
longing  to  walk  in  the  garden,  and  every  bird  of  the
grove  is  melodious  in  its  carols  as  the  nightingale.
Thou  wilt  fancy  it  the  dawning  zephyr  of  an  early
spring,  or  new  year's  day  morning;  but  it  is  the
breath  of  Isa,  or  Jesus ;  for  in  that  fresh  breath  and
verdure  the  dead  earth  is  reviving ! "

Of  our  blessed  Saviour  Sadi  and  all  the  best
Persian  poets  often  speak,  and  always  with  respect
and  reverence  ;  and  here,  as  on  many  other  occasions,
he  admits  of  his  power  of  working  miracles,  if  not  his


1 6  SHAIKH  SADI.

divinity ;  and  I  wish  I  could  speak  as  well  in  the
converse  of  our  Christian  missionaries  in  the  East !
And  in  Gulistan  ii.  10  we  find  Sadi  praying  at  St.  John
the  Baptist's  tomb  at  Damascus,  and  asked  by  the
prince  of  that  province  to  intercede  for  him  in  his
supplications.

In  fact,  Sadi  was  not  only  inspired  by  Khizr  with
the  faculty  of  poetry,  but  also  with  that  of  working
miracles ;  for  Dowlat  Shah  tells  us  "  that,  when
finally  settled  as  an  Ascetic,  the  middling  and
common  orders  of  his  neighbours  supplied  him  with
a  daily  and  plenteous  stock  of  dressed  provisions,
the  only  charity  he  would  receive,  of  which  he  would
himself  sparingly  partake  ;  but  the  best  part  he  hung
in  a  basket  from  the  balcony  of  his  cell,  that  the  poor
wood-cutters  might  take  it  home  on  returning  with
their  faggots  from  the  wilderness.  One  day  a  thief,
disguised  like  a  wood-cutter,  made  free  with  the
basket,  when  his  arm  became  instantly  blasted,  and,
with  a  lamentable  noise,  he  called  on  the  Shaikh
to  relieve  him.  He  answered  him  in  reproach :
1  If  you  are  a  wood-cutter,  where  are  the  callousness
and  scars  of  your  business ;  and  if  a  robber,  where
that  hardihood  that  would  deaden  your  feelings
to  sp  trifling  a  wound?'  He  then  prayed  for,  and
healed  him,  and  dismissed  him  with  a  portion  of  his
provisions."

Nor  was  he  on  all  occasions  an  idle  traveller,
for  he  had  fought  against  the  enemies  of  his  faith ;
and,  in  the  holy  wars  with  the  Christians  and  Hindus
added  to  the  name  of  Haji,  or  a  pilgrim  to  Mecca,


SHAIKH  SADL  17

the  epithet  of  Ghazi,  or  a  holy  warrior.  Dastards
are  scurrilous ;  but  the  generous  speak  well  even
of  their  foes.  In  Bustan  vii.  18,  Sadi  asks  a  brother
recluse,  who  was  railing  at  the  Christians,  "  whether
he  had  ever  been  engaged  in  the  holy  wars  with
the  Franks  ? "  Yet  he  can  confess  that,  any  more
than  Horace  or  Otway,  he  was  no  warrior  by  pro-
fession, for  he  and  another  gay  youth,  tricked  out
in  all  the  habiliments  of  war,  submitted  to  be
plundered  of  them  by  two  Hindu  robbers  in  the
territory  of  Balkh,  rather  than  risk  their  lives  in
defending  them  (Gul.  vii.  13).

Ibrahim  Khan  of  Banares,  in  his  Sohofi  Ibrahim,
says : — "  A  few  of  the  illustrious  results  of  Sadi's
extensive  travels  were  the  sight  of  strange  cities
and  territories,  the  detail  of  marvellous  adventures,
the  vicissitudes  of  life,  conversation  of  enlightened
sages,  the  acquisition  of  science  and  knowledge,  and,
above  all,  a  mouthful  of  the  prophet  Khizr's  water
of  immortality ! "  Or,  as  he  says  himself,  in  his
Bustan  vi.  16 : — "  Was  not  this  globe  shaken  to  its
centre  before  it  came  to  rest  ?  Was  not  Sadi  obliged
to  travel  before  he  obtained  science  and  knowledge,
the  objects  of  his  heart  ? "  On  his  worldly  experi-
ence I  refer  the  reader  to  Gul.  iii.  28,  where  a  father
dissuades  his  able-bodied  son  from  roaming  from
home,  and  anticipates  his  disappointments  abroad.
And  of  his  own  unsettled  state,  whether  from  neces-
sity or  habit,  he  speaks  with  his  usual  philosophy
(Bust  v.  2) : — "  Fortune  so  ordained  that  I  should
leave  Ispahan,  for  I  had  no  means  of  subsisting  any

744


i8  SHAIKH  SADL

longer  at  that  place  :  my  destiny  removed  me  from
Irac  into  Syria,  and  in  this  happy  land  I  made  a
pleasant  sojourn  :  the  cup  of  my  allotted  abode  in
Syria  again  overflowed,  and  a  longing  desire  to  see
home  drew  me  thence ;  and  chance  again  ordained
that,  on  my  return,  I  should  pass  through  the  pro-
vince of  Irac."

The  following  story  must  be  familiar  with  the
Persian  tyro  of  Bengal,  being  an  extract  of  the
Travels  of  Hatim  Tayi,  and  the  first  Persian  book
put  into  his  hands,  and  is  no  doubt  the  prototype
of  that  wonderful  German  romance  of  Leonora,
which  some  twenty  years  ago  was  popular  in  two
or  three  able  translations  into  English.

"  On  one  occasion  Sadi  had  made  a  long  enough
stay  in  Armenia  to  unite  himself  in  the  bonds  of
friendship  with  a  youth  of  his  own  age.  In  that
country  people  then  died  not  the  natural  death  they
died  elsewhere,  but  on  a  particular  day,  once  a  year,
they  met  on  a  plain  by  their  chief  cities,  where  they
occupied  themselves  in  recreation  and  amusement ;
in  the  midst  of  which  individuals  of  every  age  and
rank  would  suddenly  stop,  make  a  reverence  to  the
west,  gird  up  their  loins,  and,  setting  out  full  speed
towards  that  quarter  of  the  desert,  were  no  more
seen  nor  heard  of.  Sadi  had  often  remarked  that
this  was  the  lot  of  many  who  were  fathers,  mothers,
brothers,  and  sisters  of  some  or  other  of  his  acquaint-
ance ;  but  these  seemed  indifferent  to  the  event,
and  were  reserved  in  explaining  it.  At  last,  on  such
an  anniversary,  he  saw  that  friend  of  his  affection


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  19

preparing  to  set  off,  when  he  seized  upon  his  girdle,
and  insisted  upon  knowing  what  it  meant  The
youth  solemnly  enjoined  him  to  let  him  go,  for  that
the  Malic-al-mo-at,  or  Angel  of  Death,  had  already
called  dn  him  twice,  and  on  the  third  call  his  destiny
would  drag  him  on,  whether  he  would  or  not.  Yet
Sadi  kept  his  hold,  and  found  himself  carried  along
with  such  a  velocity  as  soon  deprived  him  of  all
power  of  knowing  whither  they  went.  At  last  they
stopped  at  a  verdant  plain  in  the  midst  of  the  desert,
when  the  youth  stretched  himself  upon  the  earth,
and  the  turf  opened  like  a  grave  and  swallowed  him
up  ! "  After  throwing  dust  over  his  body,  Sadi  sat
for  some  days  by  the  head  of  the  grave ;  and  of  his
manifold  lamentations  the  following  is  one : — "  On
the  day  when  thy  foot  was  pierced  with  the  thorn
of  death,  would  to  God  that  the  hand  of  fortune
had  clove  my  head  with  the  sword  of  annihilation !
that  my  eyes  might  not  this  day  have  seen  the  world
without  thee ;  such  am  I  seated  at  the  head  of  thy
dust,  as  the  ashes  are  on  my  own  head  ! "  After  this
he  had  his  way  to  find  back  over  rivers  of  molten
gold,  silver,  and  copper,  through  deserts  and  wilder-
nesses, and  over  mountains  of  snow,  which  he  accom-
plishes after  many  other  adventures.

During  his  many  years  of  travel  Sadi  had  to
traverse  a  sufficiency  of  clime,  and  encountered  a
diversity  of  adventure  without  driving  us  to  the
shift  of  carrying  him  thus  into  fairyland,  and  making
him  the  hero  of  one  of  his  own  fables ;  and  amidst
the  real  distress  of  poverty,  and  the  dissipation  of


20  SHAIKH  SADL

a  wandering  and  unsettled  life,  he  rose  to  eminence
in  wisdom  and  learning ;  for,  ill  supplied  with  the
gifts  of  fortune,  the  most  precious  part  of  that  life
was  a  continued  sojourn  from  city  to  city,  and  from
kingdom  to  kingdom,  first  perhaps  led  by  a  hope  of
patronage  and  preferment,  and  afterwards  through
choice  and  habit.  During  this  period,  though  he
began  them  late  in  life,  his  Kulliat,  or  works,  were
composed ;  and  amidst  a  roving  activity  he  contrived
to  write  more  than  another  might,  in  a  like  condition,
have  managed  to  read.

Dowlat  Shah  says — "  The  learning  and  wit  of
Sadi  have  been  the  continued  theme  of  the  eloquent
ever  since  his  time  :  his  works  contain  much  variety
of  poetry  and  prose,  and  of  the  former  there  are
nearly  twenty  thousand  verses."  Dowlat  Shah  lived
two  hundred  years  after  Sadi,  when  Persian  literature
was  upon  its  decline,  and  speaks  of  his  fame  in  Asia ;
and  in  the  course  of  480  years  more,  Europe  is
getting  a  relish  for  him.  Kcempfer,  speaking  of  Sadi
and  Hafiz,  says  "that  both  are  held  in  such  esteem
throughout  the  East  that  he  can  scarce  be  considered
as  a  respectable  character  who  has  not  read  their
works,  and  treasured  up  their  wisdom,  so  as  to  make
them  the  rules  of  his  future  life."  And  Jami  and
Ibrahim  Khan  both  tell  us  "  that  men  of  genius
have  called  the  Diwan,  or  poetical  works  of  Sadi,
the  Namakdan,  or  Salt-cellar  of  Poets  ;  and  reputable
writers  have  declared  that  Sadi  was  inspired,"  in
confirmation  of  which,  Molana  Hatifa,  the  nephew  of
Jami,  and  his  superior  in  genius,  penned  the  follow-


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  21

ing  stanza  : — "  Notwithstanding  what  the  prophet
Mohammed  has  said,  that  after  me  no  prophet  can
come,  yet  there  are  among  the  poets  three  men
endowed  with  divine  inspiration — namely,  Firdausi
in  heroics,  Anwari  in  elegy,  and  Sadi  in  the  ghazal
or  ode."

Mulowi  Mohammed  Rashid,  the  able  and  learned
collator  of  the  printed  Calcutta  edition,  in  two  folio
volumes,  A.D.  1791-2,  says  in  his  Persian  introduc-
tion : — "  It  must  not  be  omitted  that  the  original
collector  and  editor  of  Shaikh  Sadi's  Kulliat,  or
Works,  was  Aliben- Ahmad  of  Bisitun  ;  and  in  the
preface,  which  he  composed  at  the  same  time,  and
which  has  ever  since  been  the  constant  antecedent
of  the  Works,  he  accounts  for  the  occasion  of  this
compilation,  and  gives  the  date  of  A.I-I.  726  and  734,
or  33  and  41  years  after  Sadi's  demise."  Bisitun,  the
birthplace  of  this  friend  of  Sadi,  and  the  site  of  the
statuary  Farhad's  operations,  lies  in  the  southern
part  of  Irac  Ajim,  and  on  the  high  road  from  the
city  of  Ramadan  to  Gilanac  and  Baghdad.

D'Herbelot,   as   in   many    of   his    other    Oriental
statements,  leads  Sir  W.  Jones  astray  in  making  the
Works   of  Sadi   to   consist   of  only   three   books —
namely,  the  Gulistan,  Bustan,  and   Mulumaat ;   and
even  Major  Stewart,  in  his  late  catalogue  of  Tippoo
Sultan's    library,    makes    them    to    consist    only    of
seventeen  books ;  but  Ali-ben- Ahmad  more  correctly
enumerates  twenty-two  ;  to  wit —
ist,  Rasallah,  or  Tract.
2nd,  Rasallah,  or  Tract


22  SHAIKH  SAD  I,

3rd,  Rasallah,  or  Tract.
4th,  Rasallah,  or  Tract
5th,  Rasallah,  or  Tract
6th,  Rasallah,  or  Tract
7th,  Gulistan,  or  Flower-garden.
8th,  Bustan,  or  Fruit-garden.
9th,  Arabian  Casaids,  or  Elegies,
roth,  Persian  Casaids,  or  Elegies.
nth,  Mirazi,  or  Dirges.

1 2th,  Mulumaat,  or  mixed  poems  of  Persian  and
Arabic.

1 3th,  Turjiyat,  or  poems  with  burthens.
1 4th,  Taybaat,  or  plain  and  less  mystical  ghazals.
1 5th,   Badaya,   or   rhetorical    and    more    mystical
ghazals.

1 6th,  Khowatim,  or  what  Sadi  wrote  in  his  old
age.

1 7th,  Kudim,  or  what  he  wrote  in  his  younger
days.

1 8th,  Sahibiyah,  or  poems  of  eulogy  and  admoni-
tion, chiefly  addressed  to  his  patron  Shams-ud-
din.

I9th,  Macaittaat,  or  fragments.
2Oth,  Khubisaat,  or  prose  and  poetry  on  impure
and  ludicrous  subjects.

2 1st,  Robiayat,  or  tetrastics  with  regular  rhymes.
22nd,  Muffridaat,  or  distiches  with  regular  rhymes.
Of  these  two-and-twenty  books,  the  six  books  of
Rasallahs,  the  Gulistan,  and  part  of  the  Khubisaat,
are  prose,  and  all  the  rest  poetry :  the  Bustan  con-
sists of  couplets,  or  the  heroic  line  of  Firdausi  and


SHAIKH  SADI.  23

Nizami,  of  ten  and  eleven  syllables,  and  correspond-
ing with  that  of  Pope  and  Addison  in  English :  the
rest  are  chiefly  casaids,  or  elegies,  and  ghazals,  or
odes,  the  first  two  lines  forming  a  couplet  of  eleven
to  seventeen  syllables,  and  the  alternate  lines
throughout  the  poem  rhyming  to  this,  and  in  a
manner  peculiar  to  Persian  and  Arabic  poetry.  The
fourteenth  book,  or  that  of  Taybaat,  forms  of  itself
nearly  a  Diwan,  or  collection  of  ghazals  ;  the  two
first  lines  of  the  first  four  of  them  terminate  in  an
Alif,  and  the  others  in  succession  in  each  letter  of  the
alphabet  Ibrahim  Khan  says — "That  it  must  not
be  concealed  from  the  decorators  of  the  poetical
grove  that  the  ghazal  bower  was  first  reared  by
Sadi ! "  But  in  this  he  was  mistaken  ;  for  Khacani,
Jabali,  and  many  others,  his  seniors,  write  ghazals  ;
and  indeed  the  word  Chamah  in  old  Persian  has  the
same  signification  as  the  Arabic  word  ghazal,  as
Chaghanah  has  of  Casidah ;  and  poems  of  these  two
forms,  of  the  ode  and  elegy  respectively,  must  have
been  common  with  the  Persians  from  time  im-
memorial. Now,  whatever  Hafiz  may  be,  can  I
subscribe  to  Dowlat  Shah's  opinion  "of  Amir
Khosraw  being  superior  to  Sadi  in  the  ghazal."

In  the  library  at  the  India  House,  London,  there  is
a  curious  copy  of  Sadi's  Kulliat,  of  a  date  previous  to
the  collated  copy  of  Ali-bin-Ahmad :  it  had  been
deposited  there  by  my  old  shipmate,  Sir  Harford
Jones,  who  had  received  it,  I  think,  as  a  present
during  his  last  embassy  to  Persia.  I  had  it  for  a  few
minutes  in  my  hand  in  1814;  and,  from  the  little  I


24  SHAIKH  SADI.

could  thus  see  of  it,  should  esteem  it  a  valuable
reference  to  any  future  publisher  of  Sadi's  text.

I  had  myself  a  personal  knowledge  of  the  Calcutta
printed  edition  of  Sadi's  works,  in  two  small  folio
volumes,  being  collated  with  much  skill  and  diligence
by  Mulowi  Mohammed  Rashid,  from  four  valuable
MS.  copies,  some  of  which  I  also  recognised  in  that
library ;  but  the  text  one,  once  honoured  with  a  place
in  the  library  of  the  mighty  and  great  Moghul  Shah
Jihan,  is  now  in  my  possession.  Of  that  printed  copy
the  text  of  the  Gulistan  occupies  nearly  a  third  of  the
first  volume,  or  a  sixth  of  the  whole,  and  from  that  I
made  my  collated  translation,  and  should  still  prefer
it;  but  Mr.  Gladwin  chose,  as  the  basis  of  his
Calcutta  edition,  the  text  of  Gentius ;  and  a  reprint
of  that  having  been  made  in  London,  1809,  under  the
superintendance  of  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  and  patronised
by  the  professors  of  the  East  India  Company's
colleges,  and  my  chief  view  in  this  translation  being
to  facilitate  the  studies  of  their  Persian  pupils,  I  was
under  the  necessity  of  modelling  it  to  their  taste.
Any  particulars  I  shall  specify  in  a  memorandum  at
the  conclusion  of  this  Essay.

Sadi  had  a  personal  acquaintance  with  some  of  the
principal  poets  and  literary  characters  of  his  time :
some,  however,  and  particularly  he  and  Jilal-ud-din
Rumi,  commonly  known  as  the  Mulowi  Manowi,  or
mystical  doctor,  and  equally  patronised  by  Shums-
ud-din,  the  prime  minister  of  Abaca-an,  make  no
mention  of  each  other.  Hakim  Nizari  and  Sadi
meeting  accidentally  in  the  market-place  at  Shiraz,


SHAIKH  SADL  25

and  having  some  conversation,  each  soon  recognised
a  mutual  poet  in  his  wit ;  and  Sadi  having  of  course
invited  him  to  his  dwelling,  and  happening  to  be  flush
of  cash,  most  sumptuously  entertained  him.  Some
time  after  they  met  in  Khorasan,  where  Nizari  in  turn
received  Sadi  as  his  guest ;  and,  as  a  satire  on  his
prodigality,  the  first  day  treated  him  with  a  pot  of
boiled  milk  and  bread,  the  second  day  with  a  dish  of
fish,  and  the  third  with  a  joint  of  roast  meat,  observing
to  him  at  the  same  time — "  I  can  afford  to  entertain
you  thus  for  years  ;  but  the  expensive  style  in  which
you  entertained  me  could  not  have  lasted  many
days."  Yet  Nizari  was  in  fact  an  epicure,  drunkard,
and  debauchee ;  whereas  Sadi  was  habitually  tem-
perate, sober,  and  chaste.  When  Sadi  met  him  at
Shiraz,  he  asked  whether  he  recollected  any  of
Nizari's  verses  ;  and  he  answers  him  by  quoting  the
Motla,  or  first  stanza,  of  one  or  his  own  ghazals —
"  It  was  rumoured  abroad  that  I  was  penitent,  and
had  forsaken  wine ;  but  this  is  a  gross  calumny,  for
what  have  I  to  do  with  repentance  ?  "

Swift,  Sterne,  and  other  wits  of  our  last  and  the
preceding  age,  could  relish  indecency  and  nastiness  ;
and  it  is  creditable  perhaps  to  the  present  generation
that  it  has  no  taste  for  such  grossnesses.  This  was
not,  however,  the  case  in  the  age  and  country  in
which  Sadi  flourished,  any  more  than  it  was  in  the
early  and  best  parts  of  our  own  literary  history.  The
works,  not  only  of  Sadi,  but  of  many  other  Persian
poets  and  moralists,  afford  too  many  examples  of
coarseness  and  indelicacy,  both  of  thought  and


26  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

expression ;  and,  what  is  singular,  Firdausi,  Nizami,
Khacani,  and  all  their  best  heroic  poets  have  scarcely
any  of  them.  Nor  is  it  in  his  Khubisaat,  or  book  of
professed  impurities,  that  Sadi  thus  violates  decency ;
for  even  the  morality  of  the  Gulistan  and  Bustan  is
occasionally  tarnished  with  such  indecorus  allusions :
but,  in  this  way,  of  all  the  Persians  Sozni,  a  vigorous
writer  otherwise,  is  the  greatest  culprit !

On  my  way  to  Europe,  having  occasion  to  pass  the
months  of  December  and  January  1796-7  in  Cal-
cutta, I  put  my  translation  of  the  Gulistan  into  the
hands  of  my  friend  Mr.  Gladwin,  wishing  to  have  his
opinion  of  it ;  when  he  told  me  he  had  also  projected
a  translation  of  it,  and  meant  to  obviate  another
indelicate  allusion,  particularly  in  the  fifth  chapter,  by
changing  the  male  for  the  female  character.  That  I
see  he  has  done  ;  and  he  has  otherwise  endeavoured,
by  castrating  the  English  of  it,  to  purify  Gentius's
text.  But  he  has  overlooked  the  occasional  instances
of  grossness  and  indelicacy  of  sentiment  and  expres-
sion to  which  I  allude  above;  and  which  I  have
obviated  by  the  simpler  process  of  leaving  out  the
translation  of  a  few  words  of  the  Persian  text,  the
first  example  of  this  occurring  in  Gulistan  i.  40.
However,  in  all  such  instances,  it  has  been  my  en-
deavour to  preserve,  as  much  as  common  decency  will
permit  of  it,  the  English  of  Sadi's  text,  that  the
college  student  may  not  be  disappointed  ;  particularly
as  the  author  would  seem  here  alone  to  indulge  in
obscurity.  For  such  passages — "  Nudi  enim  sunt,
recti,  et  venusti,  omne  ornatn  orationis  tanquam  veste


SHAIKH  SADL  27

detracto" — the  best  apology  I  would  offer  is  the
simplicity  of  heart  and  nakedness  of  diction  of
Oriental  writers,  examples  of  which  occasionally
occur  in  our  Old  Testament ;  and  them  the  profound
scholars  of  James's  reign,  conscious  of  purity  them-
selves, translated  into  downright  and  intelligible
English ;  and,  if  I  am  in  any  instance,  with  the  view
of  being  intelligible  in  like  manner,  coarse,  let  the
reader  skip  over  it,  as  some  of  our  queasy  clergy  do
in  reading  the  morning  and  evening  lessons.  Yet —
horresco  referens — I  must  not  overlook  another  pro-
pensity to  which  Sadi  is  accused  of  alluding  with  a
reprehensible  levity.  An  example  of  this  nature
occurs  in  Gulistan  v.  20,  where  the  Cazi  of  Ramadan,
a  character  in  the  East  equally  venerable  and  sanc-
tified as  a  Judge  or  Bishop  with  us,  is  in  the  first
instance  sentenced  to  condign  death  and  annihilation,
but  afterwards  his  abomination  is  made  the  subject
of  wit  and  repartee.  But  whatever  levity  he  may
sport,  it  in  no  instance  appears  that  he  criminally
countenanced,  and  still  less,  as  some,  who  have
slightly  inspected  his  works,  suspect,  practised  this
vice ;  for  on  other  occasions  he  speaks  of  it,  and  its
abettors,  with  all  due  scorn  and  abhorrence — a  notable
example  of  which  occurs  Gulistan  iii.  14.

In  the  Kholasah-u'1-Ashaar,  from  which  I  also
copied  the  above  story  of  Nizari,  it  is  related  "that
Kh'ajah  Humam-ud-din  of  Tabreiz,  or  Tauris,  had  a
son  exquisitely  handsome ;  and  that  Sadi,  who  was  a
great  admirer  of  human  beauty,  travelled  to  Tabriez
that  he  might  see  him.  He  was  one  day  in  the


28  SHAIKH  SADI.

public  bathing-room  at  Tabriez,  when  the  Kh'ajah
entered,  accompanied  by  this  son  ;  and  as  he  always
concealed  him  from  public  view,  he  was  offended  at
meeting  Sadi,  and  asked  him,  "  Whence  come  you  ?  "
Sadi  answered,  "  From  Shiraz  ! "  "  It  is  singular,"
said  Humam,  "  that  in  my  city  the  Shirazians  should
be  more  than  the  dogs  and  cats ! "  "  In  my  city,"
replied  Sadi,  "  it  is  the  reverse  ;  for  there  the  Tabrie-
zians  are  less  /"  Like  many  of  his  townsmen,  Sadi
was  bald.  Humam  turning  the  ewer  he  was  using,  as
is  customary  in  Oriental  ablution,  upside  down,  asked
Sadi,  "  How  comes  it  that  the  head  of  a  Shirazian
should  resemble  this  utensil  ? "  Sadi  promptly
answered  him  by  presenting  his  own  ewer  with  the
empty  mouth  upwards,  and  saying,  "  Why  is  the  head
of  a  Tabriezian  so  very  like  this?"  The  Kh'ajah,
who  was  himself  a  poet,  and  gentleman  of  consider-
able eminence  and  fortune,  was  vexed  at  these  two
smart  replies  ;  and,  making  his  son  sit  down  behind
him,  asked  Sadi,  "  Have  you  ever  heard  of  any
of  Kh'ajah  Humam's  poetry  at  Shiraz?"  Sadi
answered,  "  Yes ; "  and  repeated  this  fragment —
"  Humam  is  a  veil  between  me  and  my  beloved  ;  but
the  hour  is  fast  approaching  when  that  too  shall  be
removed."  The  Kh'ajah  was  now  made  aware  that
this  could  only  be  Sadi ;  and,  having  made  him  the
usual  compliments  of  marked  respect,  took  him  home
to  his  mansion,  where  he  continued  for  a  length
of  time  absorbed  in  contemplating  the  charms  of
the  son.  D'Herbelot,  in  his  Bibliotheque  Orientals,
414,  quotes  Lamai's  Duftar-u'1-Lataif,  or  record  of


SHAIKH  SADL  29

witticisms  in  the  Turkish  language,  as  his  authority
for  one  of  the  above  repartees,  and  says — "  The  veil
here  alluded  to  is  the  human  body,  which  prevents
our  seeing  God  ;  and  that  by  this  verse  he — namely,
Humam — intimated  his  approaching  death."  And
in  Ibrahim  Khan's  relation  of  it  there  is  a  play  upon
the  word  Kun,  no  uncommon  thing  among  modern
Persian  scribblers,  but  which  decency  again  forbids
me  to  translate.

We  are  told  in  the  Sayr-u'1-mota-kharin,  or  modern
history,  of  Gholam  Hosain — "  That  among  other  men
of  rank  and  education  who  fled  from  Persia  in  Sadi's
days,  in  order  to  escape  the  rapacity  and  cruelty  of
the  illiterate  Jinghiz  Khan  and  his  Tartar  successors,
were  Amir  Khosraw  and  Amir  Hasan,  both  poets  of
genius  and  learning ;  when  they  found  an  elegant  and
literary  retirement  with  that  accomplished  prince
Sultan  Mohammed,  the  son  of  Giyath-ud-din  Boltan,
the  Guri  King  of  Delhi,  who  in  his  father's  life-time
held  a  sort  of  sovereign  authority  over  Multan,  and
other  Hindustani  provinces  bordering  on  Persia ;  in
defence  of  which  he  afterwards,  A.H.  683,  A.D.  1284,
fell  fighting  gloriously  in  battle.  One  day  those
noble  exiles  were  holding  forth,  in  the  presence  of  their
munificent  patron,  on  the  wit  and  erudition  of  Shaikh
Sadi  of  Shiraz,  which  both  were  so  liberal  in  praising,
as  to  induce  the  Shahzadah,  or  heir  apparent,  to
depute  a  special  messenger  with  many  valuable  gifts
to  the  Shaikh,  and  an  invitation  to  come  and  reside
at  Multan,  where  he  engaged  to  build  him  a  monas-
tery, and  endow  it  with  villages  and  lands ;  but  Sadi,


30  SHAIKH  SADL

because  of  his  extreme  age  and  feeble  frame,  being
then  in  his  ninty-second  year,  declined  this  friendly
offer.  However,  in  return  for  the  prince's  handsome
attention,  he  sent  him  a  volume  of  pleasant  and  elegant
verses,  and  the  Bustan  and  Gulistan  copied  with  his
own  hand  ;  and  like  a  man  of  real  learning  himself,
he  had  the  generosity  of  availing  himself  of  this
opportunity,  '  to  recommend  Amir  Khosraw  to  the
prince,  and  bestow  a  candid  approbation  on  his
works,'  which,  by-the-bye,  are  very  voluminous,  for  his
poetry  alone  consists  of  between  400,000  and  500,000
verses ! "

I  shall  quote  one  more  instance  of  the  respect  in
which  Sadi  was  held  from  the  sixth  Rasallah  of  his
own  works,  where  it  is  called  his  interview  with
Sultan  Abaca-an,  then  king  of  Persia.

Sadi  tells  us,  saying — "  When  on  my  return  from  a
pilgrimage  to  the  holy  Mecca,  I  arrived  at  that  seat
of  sovereignty  Tabriez,  and  had  enjoyed  an  inter-
course with  some  learned  and  pious  men,  whose
society  did  me  much  honour,  I  got  desirous  of  seeing
those  two  illustrious  noblemen,  Kh'ajahs  Ula-ud-din
and  Shums-ud-din,  as  many  claims  of  friendship  had
of  old  subsisted  between  us  ;  and  having  set  out  one
day  with  the  view  of  calling  on  them,  I  chanced  to
meet  them  on  my  way,  riding  on  horseback,  in  com-
pany with  Abaca-an,  the  sovereign  of  the  universe.
Seeing  them  so  engaged,  I  did  not  judge  it  proper  to
intrude  upon  them  with  a  friendly  visit ;  and  was  in
the  act  of  taking  myself  aside,  when  they  both  dis-
mounted, and,  following  me  on  foot,  bowed  themselves


SHAIKH  SADI.  31

to  the  earth ;  and,  on  coming  close  up  to  me,  kissed
my  hands  and  feet ;  and,  congratulating  this  wretched
creature  on  his  safe  arrival,  said  this  was  not  just
that  we  had  not  been  apprised  of  the  auspicious
approach  of  our  august  and  venerable  father !  After
attending  to  this  ceremony,  Sultan  Abaca-an  re-
marked— '  How  many  years  has  Shums-ud-din  been
in  my  service,  and  has  known  me  as  the  sovereign  of
the  universe,  yet  he  never  made  me  such  homage  and
respect,  as  he  has  shown  this  man  ? '  And  on  the  two
brothers  rejoining  him,  and  remounting  their  horses,
he  turned  round  to  Shums-ud-din  and  said,  '  Who  is
that  person  whom  you  accosted  so  humbly,  and
received  so  civilly  ? '  Shums-ud-din  answered,  '  O
Sire !  this  was  our  father ! '  Then  the  Sultan  said,
'  Oftentimes  have  I  asked  after  your  father,  and  you
were  answering  me,  he  is  dead  ;  and  now  you  said,
this  was  our  father ! '  He  replied, '  He  is  our  father
and  our  Shaikh ;  possibly  the  renowned  name  of
Shaikh  Sadi  of  Shiraz  may  have  reached  his  royal
highness's  ear,  for  his  sayings  are  celebrated  all  over
the  world.'  Abaca-an  commanded  them,  saying,
'  You  must  introduce  me  to  him.'  They  replied,
'  We  have  heard  and  shall  obey.' "  Accordingly,  after
associating  with  the  Shaikh  for  some  days,  they
asked  him  to  attend  the  king ;  but  he  was  declining
their  invitation  and  saying,  "  Relieve  me  from  this
ceremony,  and  make  my  excuses,"  They  said,  "  You
will  assuredly  go  for  our  sakes,  and  shall  be  your  own
master  in  every  matter  else."  The  Shaikh  adds, "  For
their  satisfaction  I  agreed  to  accompany  them ;  and


32  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

having  attended  at  court,  and  had  an  audience  of  the
king,  when  about  to  take  my  leave,  his  majesty  was
pleased  to  say,  '  Give  me  a  maxim  of  advice.'  I
replied,  'You  can  take  along  with  you,  from  this
world  into  the  next,  nothing  but  reward  or  punish-
ment ;  now,  or  in  this  world,  be  thou  charitable
and  righteous  ! ' ';  Abaca-an  said,  "  Put  the  purport  of
this  sentiment  into  verse;"  and  the  Shaikh  uttered
this  extemporary  fragment  on  Equity  and  Justice —
"  That  king  who  is  the  pastor  of  the  people,  let  his
revenue  be  sacred,  for  it  is  the  hire  of  the  shepherd  ;
but  if  not  the  people's  guardian,  let  it  be  his  deadly
poison,  for  whatever  he  exacts  is  an  imposition  on  the
faithful."  Abaca-an  wept,  and  repeatedly  asked,  "Am
I  that  pastor  or  not?"  And  the  Shaikh  each  time
answered,  "  If  you  are,  the  first  couplet  is  in  favour  of
your  case,  otherwise  the  second  literally  applies  to  it"
The  Shaikh  adds  that,  "On  taking  my  final  leave,
I  repeated  these  few  verses  : — '  A  king  is  the  shadow
of  God,  and  a  shadow  should  be  the  image  of  its
principal ;  the  disposition  of  the  subject  is  not  capable
of  good  unless  it  be  restrained  by  the  sword  of  the
sovereign.  Any  peaceable  demeanour  that  is  found
in  this  world  originates  in  the  justice  of  its  princes.
That  sovereign's  government  never  can  be  just  whose
entire  judgment  is  founded  in  wickedness.' "  Which
met  Abaca-an's  fullest  concurrence.  Ali-bin-Ahmad
adds,  "  That  in  his  days  pious  and  learned  men  would
not  venture  to  admonish  even  a  common  shopkeeper
after  this  manner,  and  that  in  matters  of  right  the
times  had  degenerated  to  what  they  then  were."


SHAIKH  SADL  33

Thus  have  moralists  in  all  ages  complained  of  the
degeneracy  of  their  own  days ;  and  occasionally
ventured  on  such  advice. — Agatho,  the  poet  and
friend  of  Euripides,  admonished  Archelaus,  king  of
Macedon,  saying — "  A  prince  should  keep  in  mind
three  maxims :  ist,  that  he  rules  over  men  ;  2nd,
that  he  ought  to  rule  according  to  law ;  and,  3rd,
that  he  cannot  rule  for  ever ! "  Also,  it  is  proper  to
warn  the  reader  that  there  must  have  been  two
Shums-ud-dins — one  the  minister  of  a  king  of  the
Atabak  Dynasty,  who  reigned  at  Shiraz,  and
patronised  Sadi's  father,  and  another  the  Diwan,  or
prime  minister  of  Abaca-an  A.H.  663,  680,  by  whom
he  was  employed  in  offices  of  great  trust,  but  was  put
to  death,  A.H.  683,  by  the  son  and  successor,  Sultan
Arghun  Khan,  on  the  strange  charge  of  having
poisoned  his  father  Abaca-an,  and  such  a  circumstance
must  have  tended  to  embitter  the  latter  days  of  Sadi.

Yet  why  should  he  regret  the  death  of  his  illustrious
friend  and  patron,  who  if  a  good  man  only  went
before  him  to  be  happy,  where  he,  as  a  good  man
himself,  and  long  dead  to  life's  enjoyments,  might
hope,  nay,  wish,  soon  to  join  him.  Early  or  late  we
must  all  go  ;  and  the  heartiest  and  most  sanguine  of
us  is  as  much  dead  to  that  part  of  his  life  that  is  gone
as  that  friend  then  was,  and  must  soon  be  to  what
remains  of  it.  Sadi's  life  was  unusually  long,  but  the
latter  part  of  it  was,  I  fear,  too  unhappy  for  him,  like
the  old  Persian  (Gul.  vi.  i)  he  was  called  upon  to  visit
at  Damascus,  to  regret  his  at  last  parting  with  it.

And,  at  its  best,  the  longest  life  is  but  a  drop  of

745


34  SHAIKH  SADL

rain  falling  from  a  cloud  into  the  ocean  of  eternity,
where  it  is  swallowed  up  and  lost  in  this  immensity,
unless  it  find  the  body  of  a  Sadi  to  nurture  it  into
that  pearl  the  Gulistan  in  its  original  classical  Persian.
This  I  have  attempted  to  translate  into  English;  but
it  is  a  translation,  and,  in  order  to  make  it  useful,
necessarily  a  literal  one  ;  therefore  the  reader  must
not  be  disappointed  if  he  find  the  bright  water  of
Sadi's  pearl  again  evaporated  into  the  clouds,  and
little  else  left  but  the  shell  that  once  contained  it
Yet  will  my  object  be  obtained  if  this  translation  shall
enable  the  young  student  to  understand  Sadi's  Persian
text,  and,  by  relishing  such  a  classic,  recover  that
pearl  which  I  was  forced  to  drop.

However  much  his  biographers  vary  in  the  specific
number,  they  all  agree  in  making  him  above  a
hundred  ;  and  Dowlat  Shah  and  Ibrahim  Khan  say
that  Sadi  lived  a  hundred  and  two  years.  But  Jami,
who  was  Dowlat  Shah's  contemporary,  and  as  a
brother  poet  more  interested  in  the  exact  truth,  states
him  as  having  been  born  at  Shiraz,  A.H.  571,  or  A.D.
1194,  and  as  having  died  at  the  same  place,  A.H.  690;
by  which  it  would  appear  that  he  reached  the  very
advanced  age  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  lunar,  or  one
hundred  and  sixteen  solar  years !  This  date  of  his
death  Dowlat  Shah  also  confirms;  for  he  says  "that
Sadi  departed  this  life  at  Shiraz,  in  the  reign  of
Atabak  Mohammed  Shah,  the  son  of  Muzuffar
Silaghur  Shah-bin-Saad-bin-Zungi,  and  that  a  dear
friend  records  the  date  of  that  noble  personage's
demise  as  follows  : — It  was  on  the  evening  of  Friday,


SHAIKH  SADL  35

or  the  Mohammedan  Sabbath,  in  the  month  Showal,
of  the  Arabian  year  690,  that  the  eagle  of  the
immaterial  soul  of  Shaikh  Sadi  shook  from  his
plumage  the  dust  of  his  body."  This  sublime  senti-
ment was  no  doubt  borrowed  from  the  following
two  lofty  couplets  of  Sadi's  own  (Bust.  vi.  i): — "  Now
that  the  falcon  of  his  soul  would  tower  into  the  zenith
of  the  sky,  why  hast  thou  burthened  his  pinion  with
a  load  of  covetousness  ?  Hadst  thou  released  his
skirt  from  the  talons  of  carnal  desires  he  would  have
soared  on  high  into  the  angel  Gabriel's  abode."  In
fact,  a  dozen  equally  appropriate  and  beautiful
epitaphs  might  be  selected  from  his  works.  As  in
some  parts  of  Scotland,  it  is  customary  with  the
people  in  the  East  to  plant  rose-bushes  and  other
flowering  shrubs  round  the  plain  graves  of  their
defunct  friends,  in  allusion  to  which  Sadi  says  (Gul.  vii.
1 6): — "  'Alas  ! '  I  said,  '  how  grateful  didst  thou  prove
to  my  heart  so  long  as  the  verdure  of  thy  existence
flourished  in  the  garden.'  '  Have  patience,'  he  replied,
'  O  my  friend !  till  the  return  of  the  spring,  and  thou
mayst  again  see  verdure  and  flowers  shooting  from
my  bosom.'"  Or,  as  my  own  master  in  rhetoric,
Doctor  Beattie,  beautifully  expresses  it —

"  Nor  yet  for  the  ravage  of  winter  I  mourn,

Kind  nature  the  embryo  blossoms  will  save  ;
The  roses  shall  bloom  round  my  mouldering  urn,
And  spring  again  dawn  on  the  night  of  my  grave."

But  these  last  couplets  of  Bustan,  iv.  16,  are  still  more
appropriate — "  Take  heed  ye  that  tread  on  my


36  SHAIKH  SADL

ashes ;  by  the  dust  of  the  generous  I  crave  your
remembrance,  that  though  Sadi  be  mouldered  into
dust,  what  has  he  to  apprehend  who  during  his  life-
time had  also  been  humble  as  the  dust?  In  helpless-
ness he  laid  his  body  prostrate  on  the  earth,  and  then
he  encompassed  the  globe  like  the  wind  (by  travelling
over  it).  It  may  soon  happen  that  the  earth  shall
consume  him,  and  the  wind  may  again  whirl  him  like
dust  round  the  universe!  Behold,  while  the  rose-
bower  of  mysticism  blossomed  in  it  no  nightingale
warbled  so  melodiously ;  now  it  were  strange,  when
that  nightingale  is  dead,  if  roses  did  not  spring  from
its  bones."

Dowlat  Shah  says  that  Sadi's  tomb  is  situated  in  a
charming  spot,  in  the  midst  of  fountains  and  buildings,
and  is  held  in  much  estimation  as  a  place  of  pilgrimage;
and  Ibrahim  Khan  speaks  of  it  under  the  name  of
Sadiyah,  but  he  means,  I  fancy,  that  gate  of  Shiraz
which  formerly  led  to  it.  Kcempfer  mentions  those
buildings  to  be  the  numerous  cemeteries  of  other
great  and  learned  men,  and  among  them  that  of
Hafiz ;  but  the  whole  was  in  his  time,  A.D.  1686,
rather  neglected  and  dilapidated.  My  friend,  Colonel
W.  Franklin,  found  it,  in  A.D.  1787,  "just  in  the  state
it  was  in  when  Sadi  was  buried,"  and  as  Kcempfer
had  found  it,  with  the  sides  engraved  with  many
sentences  in  the  old  Noskhi  character,  which  neither
of  those  gentlemen  thought  of  copying.  The  Colonel
visited  it  in  Karim  Khan's  time,  a  great  adorner  of
Shiraz  and  that  neighbourhood,  who  built  a  new
monument  for  Hafiz,  but  left  Sadi's  as  it  was ;  how-


SHAIKH  SADL  37

ever,  he  needs  no  such  frail  support,  for  in  his  literary
works  he  erected  a  monument  which,  like  that  of
Horace,  must  outlast  the  pyramids !

With  respect  to  the  externals  of  Sadi's  person,
from  some  pictures  of  him  in  a  richly-emblazed
copy  of  his  works,  now  in  the  library  at  the  India
House,  and  one  of  the  four  I  mentioned  above,  his
head  is  represented  as  bald,  and  illuminated  with
rays  of  glory.  From  different  passages  of  his
Bustan  and  Gulistan  we  may  judge  that  his  stature
was  low,  and  habit  of  body  spare  and  slim  ;  and
from  a  carelessness  of  dress,  too  common  with
literary  men,  a  person  naturally  compact,  carried,
from  its  smallness,  a  mean  and  perhaps  shabby  look
(Bust.  iv.  6).  In  order  to  cover  such  defects  with  the
least  trouble  to  himself,  he  wore  over  his  inner
garments  the  Kharcah-moshayakh,  or  long  blue
gown  of  the  Darweshes  (Gul.  iv.  19) ;  and,  in  the
picture  adjoining  to  his  tomb,  Colonel  F.  found  him
represented  in  this  dress,  with  a  pastoral  staff  in
his  hand,  another  emblem  of  a  pilgrim  and  hermit.

Like  the  Menippian  and  Varronean  satire,  of  which
Petronius,  Seneca,  and  Boetius  were  the  chief  Latin
composers,  and  Colonel  Forrester's  Polite  Philosopher
is  an  example  in  English,  the  Gulistan  is  written
partly  in  prose  and  partly  in  poetry.  Better  than
twenty  years  ago  I  sent  to  our  Asiatic  Society  at
Calcutta  an  Essay  on  the  Coincidences  of  the
Oriental  and  European  Apologue,  the  former  chiefly
extracts  of  Sadi's  works,  and  particularly  of  the
Gulistan.  To  the  Apologues  of  this  I  give  a  more


38  SHAIKH  SADL

epigrammatic  form  by  leaving  out  the  poetry,  which
is  in  fact  only  a  repetition  in  most  instances  of  the
sentiment  as  expressed  before  in  prose.  Part  of
that  Essay  appears  in  the  Asiatic  Annual  Register,
xii.  403,  416 ;  part,  or  the  whole  majlis  and  fifth
sermon  in  the  Bombay  Literary  Transactions,  i.
146,  158;  and  part  in  the  Asiatic  Journals  of  April
and  June  1817,  April  and  June  1818,  and  December
1821.

The  MS.  copies  of  the  Gulistan,  used  throughout
the  East  India  Company's  Empire  of  Hindustan
as  a  common  school  book,  three  of  which  I  have
in  my  possession,  are  perhaps  a  sixth  part  larger
than  what  is  there  called  the  Balaat,  or  the  Calcutta
printed  text  of  1791  ;  partly  in  consequence  of
absurd  insertions  of  many  corresponding  passages
of  Sadi's  other  works,  and  partly  from  foreign
interpolations.

The  Rosarium  Politicum  of  Georgius  Gentius,
published  at  Amsterdam  A.D.  1651,  with  a  Latin
translation,  I  had  in  my  possession  for  some  years,
and  found  its  Persian  text  agree  more  with  the
Calcutta  printed  copy  than  with  any  of  the  common
Bengal  manuscripts.  A  few  small  additions  and
corrections,  which  indeed  I  have  made  in  the  margin
of  my  own  copy  of  it,  would  improve  it  much ;  and
if  there  should  be  a  demand  soon  for  a  reprint  of
this  text-book,  as  used  in  the  Company's  colleges,
I  am  also  ready  to  superintend  it,  and  prevent  such
frequent  errors  as  the  two  last  lines  of  the  first  page,
or  a  fitrat  of  prose  being  mistaken  and  written  as


SHAIKH  SADL  39

poetry ;  and  the  second  line  of  the  next  bayit,  or
couplet,  having  three  feet  of  its  text  omitted!  The
Persianischer  Rosenthal  of  Olearius  (Schleswig,  1654)
I  never  saw.

Commentaries  and  keys  of  the  Gulistan,  after  the
plan  of  our  Clavis  Homerica,  have  been  composed
both  in  Persian  and  Arabic.  One  of  them,  called
the  Sharahi-Gulistan,  I  also  had  once  in  my  pos-
session, and  Mr.  Gladwin  showed  me  one  in  Arabic ;
likewise  he  gave  me  a  MS.  copy  of  the  notes,  as
numbered  for  Gentius's  Rosarium,  but  omitted  in
my  copy ;  all  of  them,  however,  seemed  to  me  equally
bald  and  uninteresting.

Few  authors  are  more  original  in  their  composi-
tions, more  just  in  their  conception  of  a  subject,
or  more  fortunate  in  their  choice  of  an  expression
than  Sadi.  Yet  he  is  a  mannerist  sui  generis  ;  not  as
implying  a  servile  imitation  of  any  preceding  admired
model  in  Persian,  but  as  constantly  recurring  to  a
manner  of  deliverance  peculiarly  his  own.  Perhaps
Firdausi  is  the  only  Persian  author  exempt  from  this
charge  of  either  copying  others  in  his  characters,  or  of
being  the  mannerist  of  himself.  He  has  as  many
distinct  warriors,  for  example,  as  Homer  and  Virgil
have  put  together  ;  yet  his  Zal-zar  and  Rostam,  his
Sohrab  and  Ispindiyar,  have  their  appropriate  charac-
teristics and  epithets,  and  are  distinguished  from  the
warriors  of  all  other  poets,  and  from  each  other  ;  and
so  it  is  with  his  females,  for  no  critic  would  think
of  confounding  Rudabah,  Tahiminah,  the  Gord-afrid,
or  Shirin  with  each  other ;  and  in  expressing  himself,


40  SHAIKH  SADL

his  favourite  mode  is  either  pathos  or  sublimity,  with
an  unaffected  hardness,  the  special  gift  of  real  inspira-
tion, whereas  Nizami,  whose  favourite  mode  is  energy
and  strength,  combines  withal  a  brevity  and  obscurity
which  act  as  a  constant  drawback  otherwise  on  the
vigour  of  his  language  and  philosophic  justness  of
his  reflections  ;  and  Mulowi  Manowi,  whose  favourite
mode  again  is  enthusiasm  and  rapture,  has  such  a
perpetual  medley  of  carnal  and  divine  love,  and  ten-
dency to  a  re-union  with  the  Deity,  as  resolves
everything  into  sufiasm  and  mystery.  On  the  other
hand,  Sadi's  favourite  mode  is  a  simplicity  and
tenderness  of  heart,  a  delicacy  of  feeling  and  judg-
ment, and  that  exquisitely  natural  vein  in  which  he
relates  his  many  apologues  and  parables  with  a  sort
of  sententious  and  epigrammic  turn.  Where,  how-
ever, like  the  Greek  epigram,  the  point  is  so  very
fine  that,  in  order  that  his  European  reader  may
perceive  and  feel  it,  his  translator  must  give  it  some
substance,  otherwise  this  manner,  constituting  the
very  essence  of  his  original,  shall  entirely  escape
him.  This  I  have  in  my  translation  endeavoured
to  catch ;  and  if  I  have  transgressed  in  one  part  of
it  more  than  in  another,  it  is  in  making  my  author
appear  more  sententious  than  he  really  is.

Engaged  in  such  a  task,  a  translator  finds  consider-
able difficulty  in  transferring  this  real  manner  of
his  author  with  spirit  and  fidelity,  even  from  one
language  of  Europe  into  another,  and  still  more
from  an  Oriental  language,  having  the  additional
obstacles  of  a  change  of  manners,  customs,  laws,  and


SHAIKH  SADL  41

religion  to  encounter  by  the  way.  There  are  two
ways  of  turning  the  sentiments  of  an  author  from
one  language  into  another — namely,  translation  and
imitation,  and  Pope  with  ourselves  tried  both ;  and,
in  his  imitations  of  Horace's  Satires  and  Epistles,
is  thought  to  have  succeeded  ;  but,  as  Bentley  told
himself,  his  translation  of  Homer,  though  a  very
pretty  poem,  can,  to  a  person  that  does  not  under-
stand the  original  Greek,  give  no  idea  of  Homer.
Cowper  says  it  is  impossible  to  give  in  rhyme  a
just  translation  of  any  ancient  poetry  of  Greece  or
Rome  ;  and  still  more  of  Arabic  and  Persian.  Cowper
tried  his  hand  at  Homer  in  blank  verse,  and  was
still  more  unfortunate  than  Pope.  A  translation,
to  succeed,  must  not  violate  simplicity  on  the  one
hand,  nor  sink  into  tameness  on  the  other ;  and,  for
this  purpose,  a  prose  translation,  even  of  poetry,  is
preferable  either  to  rhyme  or  blank  verse.

But  a  perfect  idea  of  any  author  can  be  formed
only  by  understanding  him  in  his  original,  and  for
this  purpose  all  such  translations  and  imitations  as
those  of  Pope,  and  we  have  an  abundance  of  them
done  out  of  all  foreign  languages  into  English,  are
of  little  or  no  use ;  and  as  my  chief  object  is  to
assist  the  young  student  at  the  East  India  Company's
colleges  in  his  translations,  this  translation  of  the
Gulistan  is  rendered  as  literal  as  the  idioms  of  the
English  and  Persian  language  will  admit ;  and,  for-
tunately, I  have  found  a  greater  similarity  in  their
idioms  than  our  European  critics  are  aware  of.  I
shall  not  say  how  many  translations  I  have  made


42  SHAIKH  SADL

of  the  Gulistan,  but  I  have  now  five  lying  by  me,
each  done  at  a  distant  interval  from  another,  and
I  am  surprised  how  little  they  differ.  True  trans-
lation is  in  composition  what  expression  is  in
painting ;  and  by  thus  seizing  the  various  attitudes,
gestures,  and  looks  of  my  Persian  text,  I  think  I
have  embodied  them  into  an  uniform  and  general
design,  and  after  frequent  inspections  am  not  dis-
pleased with  my  English  result.

During  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  Christian
centuries,  with  the  view  of  translating  the  Scriptures,
our  English  doctors  turned  their  minds  to  Oriental
learning,  many  of  them  became  proficients  in  the
sister  dialects  of  Hebrew,  Syriac,  and  Arabic ;  but,
finding  the  Persian  so  different  from  those  three  in
idiom,  though  otherwise  much  the  simpler  and  easier
language,  they  had  little  or  no  knowledge  of  it.
Accordingly,  Bishop  Walton's  first  edition  of  the
polyglot  scriptures,  which  he  dedicated  to  Cromwell,
has  no  Persian  text,  the  four  Ingil,  or  Evangelists,  in
this  dialect  having  been  added  afterwards  to  the
edition  dedicated  to  Charles  the  Second.  When
the  great  Moghul  Acbar,  A.D.  1580-90,  applied  to
the  Pope  for  a  copy  of  our  Scriptures,  he  asked  only
for  the  Tawrit,  or  Pentateuch,  having  already,  he
said,  copies  of  the  Psalms  and  Evangelists  in
Persian,  and  this  last  was  what  Bishop  W.  or  some
of  his  coadjutors  had  got  through  the  Germans.
But  it  is  not  so  well  known  in  Europe  that  copies
of  the  Zabur,  or  Psalms,  were  also  common  at  that
time  in  the  East,  in  the  Pahlowi  dialect,  in  which


SHAIKH  SADI.  43

Nizami   specifically   states    David    to    have    written
them  !

Nor  is  it  generally  known  among  us  that  no  two
languages  differ  more  in  idiom  and  words  than  the
Persian  and  Arabic  ;  yet  when  Persia  was  subdued  by
the  immediate  successors  of  Mohammed,  they  made
a  special  point  of  forcing  their  language,  as  well  as
religion,  upon  their  new  subjects ;  but  after  three
centuries  of  this  unnatural  tyranny,  on  the  decline  of
the  Khalifat,  the  Persians,  under  native  princes,  re-
covered not  the  Pahlowi,  which  had  been  the  court
dialect  during  the  Sasan  dynasty,  but  the  Parsi,  which
had  been  the  dialect  of  the  Kayan  dynasty,  and  I
fancy  all  along  the  current  dialect  of  Persia ;  and,
in  the  Gulistan,  Baharistan,  Nagaristan,  and  other
popular  prose  Persian  classics,  the  Parsi  and  Arabic
are,  as  Sir  W.  Jones  observes,  so  blended  "  that  one
period  often  contains  both  languages,  wholly  distinct
from  each  other  in  expression  and  idiom,  but  per-
fectly united  in  sense  and  construction,  not  as  Roman
and  Saxon  words  are  in  this  sentence : "  "  The  true
law  is  right  reason,  conformable  to  the  nature  of
things,  which  calls  us  to  the  duty  by  commanding,
deters  us  from  sin  by  forbidding ; "  but  as  the  Latin
and  English  are  in  this :  "  The  true  lex  is  recta  ratio,
conformable  natures,  which  by  commanding  vocat  ad
officium,  by  forbidding  a  fraude  deterreat."

And  a  striking  instance  of  this  occurs  in  Sadi's
panegyric  of  the  prophet  in  the  preface  of  his
Gulistan,  the  three  last  lines  of  the  second  page  of  the
Persian  text  being  a  prose  medley  of  Persian  and


44  SHAIKH  SADL

Arabic ;  the  next  two  lines  at  the  top  of  the  third
page  a  couplet  of  pure  Arabic ;  the  next  two  lines  a
couplet  of  pure  Persian  ;  and  the  next  four  lines  a
tetrastic  of  pure  Arabic !

Mr.  Gladwin,  in  his  occasionally  idle  way,  makes
four  distinct  sentences  in  his  English  of  this  passage  ;
but  it  is  all  one  sentence,  or,  more  properly,  only  part
of  one;  for  the  same  sentence  also  includes  the
parable,  of  which  I  recognise  that  of  the  importunate
widow  (Luke  xviii.  2-8)  as  the  prototype.

Every  classic  scholar  admires  the  address  with
which  Virgil  introduces  his  apostrophe  of — "  tu  Mar-
cellus  eris ;"  and  this  is  a  happy  example  of  the
same  figure  of  rhetoric  :  indeed  his  commencement  of
this  graceful  preface  with  a  thanksgiving  to  the  Deity,
this  praise  of  his  prophet,  his  panegyric  of  the  King,
his  encomium  on  the  heir-apparent,  and  eulogy  of  the
prime  minister,  are  all  felicitous  instances  of  that
manner  which  I  have  noted  as  characteristic  of  Sadi
in  his  Persian  and  Arabian  compositions.

The  chief  difficulty  in  translating  any  such  Arabian
quotation  is  its  being  in  common  a  text  of  the  Koran,
or  a  tradition  of  the  prophet,  which  though  ready  in
the  memory  of  a  pious  Mohammedan  gentleman —
and  however  much  our  flippant  travellers  and  even
learned  doctors  choose  to  declaim  on  his  ignorance,  a
believer  in  the  Koran  can  applicably  quote  it  as  the
record  of  his  law  and  the  guide  of  his  morals — yet,
to  a  translator  like  myself,  such  a  passage  is  often
obscure  even  when  complete,  and  still  more  so  when
only  a  portion  of  it  is  thus  noticed,  as,  for  example,


SHAIKH  SAD1.  45

in  the  Gulistan,  i.  I,  where  the  well-disposed  Vizier
says — "  suck  as  are  restraining  their  anger,  and  for-
giving- their  felloiv-creatures  :  and  God  will  befriend
the  benevolent',1  without  using  the  explanatory  pre-
liminary of — " Paradise  is  for  such  as  are"  which  I
am,  I  fancy,  the  first  who  has  correctly  supplied  by  a
reference  to  the  whole  in  the  Koran ;  and  there  we
see  a  striking  imitation  of  Matthew  v.  3-11,  where  are
enumerated  the  successive  orders  of  good  doers,  for
whom  paradise  is  designed,  as  their  ultimate  and
blessed  place  of  residence !

And  another  constant  source  of  trouble  to  a  trans-
lator is  the  ambiguity  of  the  Arabian  moods  and
tenses ;  for  not  only  the  same  tense,  for  example,
answers  for  the  present  and  future,  but  he  is  often
obliged  to  give  the  preterite  tense  a  present  significa-
tion: and,  if  he  had  its  immediate  context,  this  might
be  managed  ;  but  with  such  fragments  of  sentences
as  that  I  have  quoted,  if  I  am  obliged  to  adapt  the
Arabian  quotation  to  the  Persian  context,  the
scholar  who  is  capable  of  detecting  this  will  I
doubt  not  be  also  liberal  enough  in  overlooking  or
admitting  the  necessity  of  it

What  our  travellers  and  doctors  thus  assert  of
Mussulmans  considering  Marafat,  or  the  divinity  of
the  Koran,  as  comprehending  all  necessary  know-
ledge, might  have  been  true,  as  far  as  respected
Mohammed  himself,  and  his  four  immediate  suc-
cessors, as  residents  at  Madainah ;  for  we  can  all
recollect  the  Khalif  Omar's  reply,  when  Amru,  the
conqueror  of  Egypt,  asked  him  what  was  to  be  done


46  SHAIKH  SADL

with  the  library  at  Alexandria,  he  answered —
"  What  is  contained  in  these  books  you  mention  is
either  agreeable  to  what  is  written  in  the  Koran,  or
book  of  God,  or  it  is  not ;  if  it  be,  then  the  Koran  is
sufficient  without  them  ;  if  otherwise,  it  is  fit  they
should  be  destroyed."  But  on  the  establishment  of
the  Khalifat  at  Damascus,  and  still  more  of  the
Abassi  dynasty  at  Baghdad,  the  Tazi,  or  modern
Arabic,  was  gradually  enriched  with  words,  so  as  to
admit  of  its  technically  expressing  the  terms  of  the
arts  and  sciences,  which  a  Harun  Rashid  had  trans-
lated into  it  from  the  Persian,  Coptic,  and  Greek  ;
and  modern  Europe  owes  chief  part  of  what  it
derived  from  the  first  two,  and  even  more  of  its
Greek  knowledge,  to  translations  through  the  Arabic,
than  immediately  from  the  originals  of  them,  or  the
Greek.

Whereas  the  more  ancient  Greeks,  as,  for  instance,
Hippocrates  in  physic,  we  now  find  copied  their
knowledge  direct  from  the  Persians,  for  all  his
medicines  have  pure  Persian  names ;  and  down  to
the  times  of  Galen  and  Dioscorides,  those  Greeks  and
their  copyists,  the  Romans,  were  content  with  simples,
which  are  hence  called  Galenicals.  Kimiya,  signify-
ing art,  trick,  imposture,  chemistry,  etc.,  is  also  a  pure
Persian  word,  which  the  Arabs  borrowed  with  the
art  from  the  Persians ;  and  the  manufacture  and  use
of  chemical  medicines  and  drugs,  as  applied  to  physic
and  the  other  arts,  modern  Europeans  owe  imme-
diately to  the  Arabs.  Nay,  the  chemical  preparations
of  quicksilver,  now  found  so  serviceable  in  all  visceral


SHAIKH  SADI.  47

obstructions,  was  first  adopted  into  European  practice,
within  my  recollection,  by  Dr.  Peasely,  of  Madras,  in
the  case  of  Lord  Pigot ;  and  as  a  simple,  meadow
saffron  root  has  been  used  lately  and  successfully  for
the  gout ;  and  I  could  mention  a  dozen  other  articles,
each  of  the  most  active  and  best  medicines,  either  for
internal  or  external  use,  that  have  of  late  been  intro-
duced into  our  physical  and  surgical  practice  from
that  of  the  Hakims  and  Cub-rajes  of  our  English
empire  in  the  East.

In  the  writings  of  Michael  Servetus,  who  lived  a
century  before  Harvey,  there  is  a  hint  respecting  his
curious  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood ;  but
the  following  distich  of  Sadi's  Bustan,  viii.  3,  contains
one  more  pertinent — "  The  venal  system  of  thy  body,
O  well-disposed  man !  is  a  meadow  through  which
are  flowing  three  hundred  and  sixty  rivulets."  And
the  two  distichs,  Bustan  viii.  14,  contain  our  most
correct,  and  what  we  fancied  modern,  theory  of
respiration  and  digestion — "  Were  not  the  fresh  air  to
pass  by  respiration  into  the  lungs,  the  intestine  heat
would  throw  the  body  into  a  ferment ;  and  did  not  the
pot  of  the  stomach  duly  concoct  the  food,  the  fair
and  plump  form  of  the  body  would  get  shrunk  and
withered."  The  Persian  word  Khun,  or  blood,  has
also  the  idiomatic  signification  of  the  soul  and  life,
as  existing  in  the  blood ;  did  the  ingenious  John
Hunter  borrow  his  idea  of  the  life  of  the  blood  from
this?

On  the  subject  of  aerostatics,  I  offer  the  following
curious  extract  of  my  copy  of  the  Persian  dictionary,


48  SHAIKH  SADL

the  Farhangi  Jihangiri,  the  manuscript  being  itself
upwards  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  old  :  it  is  in
explanation  of  the  compound  idiomatic  word — "Tasht-
wo-Khayah,  the  basin  and  egg,  or  the  exhibition  of
filling  the  membraneous  coat  of  an  animal's  testicle
with  Shobnim,  or  night-dew,  and  after  tying  up  the
vent,  placing  it  on  a  brass  vessel  heated  in  the  sun,  or
over  the  fire  ;  and  as  the  air  within  it  gets  warm,  the
vapour  will  rarify  and  expand  it ;  when,  raising  itself
on  one  end,  it  will  hop  up  and  down  for  a  while,  as  if
dancing,  and  at  last  mount  into  the  air,  and  fly  out  of
sight!"  I  remember  the  late  Doctor  Black,  in  his
Chemical  Lectures  at  Edinburgh,  1777-78,  when  on  the
subject  of  factitious  air,  suggesting  this  precise  experi-
ment ;  but  the  French  some  years  afterwards  had  the
credit  of  putting  it  in  practice  on  the  large  scale  of
balloons.  Also,  Sadi  alludes  to  this  same  pheno-
menon in  his  Bustan,  iv.  14.  "  Why  should  that
befall  you,  which  befalls  the  fierce-burning  torch  ;  that
you  should  fly  from  yourself,  as  the  bubble  flies  up
from  the  water."

Likewise,  in  the  Farhangi  Jihangiri,  in  its  idiomatic
sense,  the  Fanus-khiyat,  another  supposed  modern
invention,  is  mentioned — namely,  "  A  magic  lantern,
with  which  they  show  off  images  and  figures,  and
with  a  sort  of  phosphorus,  or  artificial  fire,  give  them
the  appearance  of  being  in  a  flame;"  and  a  couplet
of  the  Persian  poet  Ghazali  is  quoted,  signifying  as
follows — "  The  celestial  sky  is  a  magic  lantern  ;  and
this  globe  is  on  its  progress  moving  through  it,  while
mankind  are  wandering  over  the  globe,  like  the


SHAIKH  SADI.  49

figures  of  a  magic  lantern."  And  would  not  the  bulk
exceed  all  reasonable  bounds,  I  could  quote  many
such  sound,  and  what  we  in  Europe  consider  as
modern,  hints  of  philosophy  immediately  from  Sadi.

The  detailed  minutiae  of  the  arts  and  sciences  are
lost  in  the  changes  and  translations  of  languages,  and
in  such  revolutions  of  government  as  Persia  has  been
specially  subject  to ;  yet  its  remaining  monuments
are  sufficient  to  prove,  to  the  latest  posterity  of
Adam,  the  originality  and  superiority  of  Persian
knowledge;  and  the  value  in  this  sense  of  such  books
as  the  Gulistan,  in  which  glimpses  remain  of  that
knowledge.

Of  the  sublime  and  stupendous,  we  have  in  Europe
no  monuments  of  human  structure  that  can  compare
with  the  Chihl-minar,  or  palace  of  many  columns,  at
Istikhar,  the  Persepolis  of  the  Greeks  ;  the  statues  of
Khosraw  and  Shirin,  and  other  massy  works  of  the
statuary  Farhad  at  Bisitun,  in  Irac  Ajem  ;  the  still
more  ancient  images  of  the  Sorkh-bot  and  Khing-bot,
so  called  from  being  one  of  a  red  and  the  other  of  a
grey-coloured  stone,  and  said  to  be  each  fifty-two
gaz,  or  yards,  high,  and  believed  by  the  Persians  to
represent  their  first  King  Gayumars  and  his  wife  at
Bamiyan,  near  the  city  of  Balkh,  and  in  that  part  of
Cabul  bordering  on  Badakhshan ;  and  the  many
sculptures  and  excavations  in  the  contiguous  rocks
and  mountains ;  the  tower  of  Babel ;  the  aqueducts
of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates ;  the  wall  of  the
Darband,  supposed  to  be  built  by  Alexander,  and

repaired  by  Nushirowan :  but  above  all  in  that  mode

746


So  SHAIKH  SADL

of  subterraneous  irrigation  peculiar  to  Persia,  and
managed  most  ingeniously  by  sinking  Karezes,  or
shafts,  and  connecting  these  with  Mings,  or  under-
ground canals,  where  springs  are  found  at  the  foot  of
mountains,  and  extending  for  fifty  or  sixty  miles  over
the  contiguous  champagne  country.

In  mechanism  the  ancient  Persians  no  doubt  ex-
celled us  ;  for  even  now  we  are  at  a  loss  to  explain
how  such  massy  buildings  were  reared,  otherwise
than  like  our  forefathers,  when  they  first  discovered
many  of  them  during  the  dark  ages,  and  ascribed
them  to  Kimiya,  or  magic.  In  the  modern  and  more
comparative  architecture  of  the  East  I  would  refer  to
the  mausoleum  of  Taj-Mahal,  the  favourite  Sultana
of  the  great  Moghul  Shah  Jihan,  at  Agra,  a  building
equal  in  extent  to  Saint  Paul's,  London,  including  the
churchyard ;  and  the  meanest  material  which  enters
its  composition  is  the  purest  white  marble.  Had  that
magnificent  sovereign  concluded  his  reign  in  peace,
he  had  projected  a  similar  one  for  himself  on  the
opposite  side  of  that  noble  river  the  Jumma ;  and  to
unite  the  two  with  a  bridge  of  the  same  valuable
materials : —

"  Her  bed  is  India  ;  there  she  lies — a  pearl;"

but  the  last  seven  years  of  his  life  he  was,  by  that
hypocrite  Aurangzib,  his  son,  doomed  to  pass  in
honorary  confinement ;  and  having,  in  1803,  visited
the  apartments  he  had  in  that  durance  occupied  in
the  palace  of  Agra,  I  had  some  of  the  plaster  chipped


SHAIKH  SADL  51

off,  and  found  the  walls  richly  gilded ;  for,  as  his
memoirs  tell  us,  he  had  them  done  over  with  common
mortar,  as  more  suitable  to  his  humbled  condition.
The  centre  dome  had  some  years  before  been  injured
by  a  cannon-ball,  and  a  peepil  tree,  one  of  the  most
destructive  for  such  buildings,  was  growing  out  of  it ;
but  Marquis  Hastings  has,  with  much  taste  and  at  a
great  expense,  had  it  since  repaired,  and  it  is  now  as
fresh  as  the  day,  one  hundred  and  eighty  years  ago,
it  was  built.  Also,  the  Jamai  Masjid,  at  Delhi,  is
another  specimen  of  the  many  elegant  and  modern
Oriental  structures  which,  even  in  the  present  de-
generacy of  the  arts,  rival  any  buildings  of  modern,
and  perhaps  ancient  Europe,  whether  we  regard  the
symmetry  of  the  parts  or  sublimity  of  the  whole.
Recent  from  viewing  those,  before  I  took  my  last
passage  to  Europe,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  com-
paring the  Governor-General's  palace  at  Calcutta,
then  finished,  at  an  enormous  expense,  by  Marquis
Wellesley,  which,  notwithstanding  its  marble  hall
and  other  pompous  apartments,  I  found  a  heavy  and
clumsy  mass  of  brick  and  mortar !

In  their  taste  for  gardening,  specimens  of  which
often  occur  in  the  beautiful  descriptions  of  their
poets,  the  Persians  much  excelled  us.  Milton,  who
travelled  over  the  East  in  books,  and  had  a  judgment
which  qualified  what  he  read,  availed  himself  of  those
descriptions  in  laying  out  his  Paradise ;  and  Addison
gave  the  English  nation  a  taste  for  Milton,  nature,
and  good  gardening  which  modern  Europe  has  since
been  endeavouring  to  copy.


52  SHAIKH  SADL

The  Persians  have  a  saying,  that  it  was  as  absurd
for  a  person  ignorant  of  geography  to  write  history,
or  for  a  person  ignorant  of  algebra  to  write  upon
astronomy,  as  for  one  ignorant  of  grammar  to  write
poetry.  In  moral  philosophy  they  excel,  and  par-
ticularly in  what  we  call  polite  literature ;  no  bad
specimens  of  which  are  the  two  works  of  Sadi,  which
I  have  undertaken  to  translate — namely,  the  Gulistan
and  Bustan,  and  Pilpay's  Fables,  which  are  ready  to
follow.  And  as  I  have  said,  in  this  favourite  depart-
ment of  literature  we  have  frequent  glimpses  of  their
skill  in  the  more  abstruse  branches  of  natural  and
experimental  philosophy,  of  mathematics,  algebra,
decimal  notation,  and  ciphering  in  arithmetic,  of
whose  characters '  the  ancient  Persians  were  no  doubt
the  inventors ;  of  the  phenomena  of  light  and
colours ;  of  electricity,  of  which  they  specify  many
facts  besides  the  attractive  power  of  amber  as  it  is
detailed  by  our  European  ancients ;  of  printing  ;  of
gunpowder  and  fireworks  (the  last  is  noticed  by  Sadi,
Gul.  vii.  14) ;  of  gems,  of  which  they  give  the  most
rational  classification  we  yet  have,  and  detail  some
particulars  in  their  composition  of  which  Sir  H.  Davy
has  lately  availed  himself,  and  of  their  treatise  on  this
last  we  have  lately  recovered  a  copy ;  and  however
vague  their  hints  may  seem  at  knowledge  which  we
have  not  yet  attained,  we  are  from  time  to  time
obliged  to  give  them  credit  for  things  that  once
appeared  incredible,  and  which  they  certainly  derived
from  sources  still  more  ancient  than  themselves,  and
perhaps  antediluvian.  It  is  curious  that  what  happened


SHAIKH  SADL  53

to  the  Israelites,  in  their  conquest  of  the  Holy
Land,  and  the  idolatrous  nations  they  dispossessed  of
it,  also  happened  to  the  Persians  under  Gayumars
when  they  descended  from  the  Kordistan  mountains
and  dispossessed  the  Dives  of  Persia ;  and  Firdausi
tells  us  that  those  Dives  taught  the  arts  to  their
conquerors;  but  what  is  still  more  curious,  the
Brahmins  of  India  admit  themselves  to  be  those
Dives,  and  that  they  came  into  India  from  Persia.

Among  the  smaller  articles  of  Persian  taste  I  would
mention  three  in  particular:  ist  The  wool,  or  rather
hair,  of  a  species  of  goat  found  in  many  parts  of
Persia,  as  well  as  in  Tibet,  from  which  they  have  from
time  immemorial  manufactured  that  beautiful  fabric
the  shawl ;  and  to  which  our  best  staple  broad  cloth  is
so  much  inferior.  2nd.  The  murrhine  vase  so  highly
esteemed  by  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  xxxvii.  2,  and  which,  as
he  correctly  supposes  it  to  be,  is  also  the  produce  of
Persia,  and  what  is  called  with  us  the  Portland  vase
is  a  specimen  of  it ;  and  of  this  the  late  ingenious
porcelain  wareman,  Mr.  Wedgewood,  energetically
remarked — "  that  the  composition  of  it  implied  a
knowledge  of  chemistry,  of  which  modern  Europe  has
not  yet  reached  the  elements."  Indeed  our  boasted
chemical  improvements  can  neither  produce  the
materials  of  those  sculptured  and  coloured  vases,
cups,  gems,  and  rings,  now  collected  by  our  curious
travellers  in  Persia,  nor  supply  any  instruments  of  a
sufficiently  hard  temper  to  cut  and  carve  them.  And,
3rd,  the  Sohaili,  or  what  Europeans  call  Morocco
leather,  which  forms  the  binding  of  most  of  the  old


54  SHAIKH  SADL

Persian  MSS.,  and  has  a  fragrance  and  quality  in  it
that  preserves  them  from  being  destroyed  by  insects.
This  is  a  distinct  article  from  the  Kaimakht,  another
preparation  of  the  hides  of  animals  made  in  Persia
into  a  sort  of  shagrin,  and  used  for  the  handles  of
swords,  dirks,  etc.  To  prove  that  all  those  three
articles  are  indigenous  to  Persia,  in  the  Persian
dictionaries  they  have  each  perhaps  a  dozen  of  names,
all  of  them  pure  Persian  words.

And  besides  them  I  may  mention  the  glossy
smoothness  of  the  Yizd  silks,  the  delicacy  of  the
fabric  of  cotton  into  Tuz  muslin  and  flax  into  Tattah
cambric ;  their  embroidery  on  satin,  leather,  and
other  stuffs,  at  Ispahan ;  their  glass  of  Shiraz,  or
cutlery  of  that  place  and  of  Khorasan  ;  their  Nisham-
pur  filigree  of  gold  and  silver;  their  penmanship  of
manuscripts ;  the  animalism  at  Hirat  of  coloured
silk  and  cotton  stuffs ;  the  carpets  of  that  city ;  the
richness  of  their  dies,  and  the  freshness  and  durability
of  their  paints,  a  bright  and  beautiful  azure  specimen
of  which  I  have  often  admired,  while,  in  1803,
ascending  into  the  fort  of  Gwalior,  where  it  has
remained  on  the  face  of  the  palace  for  centuries
exposed  to  the  open  air.

Persian  horsemanship  and  archery  have  been  pro-
verbial from  time  immemorial ;  and  the  breed  of
horses,  camels,  asses,  mules,  sheep,  and  other  domestic
animals,  are  superior  to  any  other.  Sadi,  in  his
Bustan  i.  I,  says  he  met  a  person  riding  on  a  lion  and
using  a  snake  as  a  whip !  But,  seriously,  who  ever
thought  of  taming  elephants,  rhinoceroses,  lions,


SHAIKH  SADL  55

tigers,  and  serpents,  but  the  patient  and  ingenious
Asiatic  ?

But  the  best  use  of  education  is  that  of  instructing
a  fellow-being,  which  gives  dignity  to  the  creature,
and  enables  him  properly  to  know  and  respect  his
Creator !  And  what  is  more  simple  than  that  useful
system  of  educating  the  poor  which  Dr.  Bell  has  the
credit  of  adopting  from  the  Asiatics  and  applying
to  the  European  charity  schools  at  Madras,  and  Mr.
Lancaster  of  bringing  into  practice  for  the  cheap  and
easy  instruction  of  the  illiterate  of  all  denominations
in  England,  and  since  that  very  generally  over  the
continent  of  Europe.  (See  Gulistan  vii.,  passim?)

These  are  a  few  of  many  positive  facts  which
readily  suggest  themselves  to  any  Oriental  scholar,
and  which  I,  who  passed  twenty  of  the  most  precious
years  of  my  life  in  India  and  in  familiar  and  daily
intercourse  with  all  descriptions  of  natives,  and  am
well  read  in  their  books,  set  in  opposition  to  the
trifling  remarks  of  idle  sojourners  and  the  dogmatical
censures  of  some  superficial  travellers  who  have  lately
visited  the  East  and  have  presumed  to  disgorge  their
ill-digested  opinions  upon  the  European  world,  with-
out possessing  either  language  or  intuition  to  instruct
it  in  the  history  and  antiquities,  in  the  laws,  manners,
customs,  and  religions,  or  in  the  literature  and  arts  of
past  or  present  Asia.

Mankind,  emerging  from  barbarity,  fall  into  some
regularity  of  government,  and,  getting  ashamed  of
their  ignorance,  feel  desirous  of  literary  information
and  improvement  in  the  arts ;  but  before  they  reach


56  SHAIKH  SADL

any  superior  excellence  they  too  often  exchange  the
elegance  of  nature  for  the  gorgeousness  of  art.  Nor
could  Persia,  in  its  many  revolutions,  escape  such
transitions ;  but  though  it  suffered  temporary  eclipses
from  the  barbarity  and  envy  of  such  conquerors  as
Zohhac,  Afrasiyab,  Alexander,  Omar,  Jingiz  Khan,
Timur,  Nadir  Shah,  and  Mohammed  Aga,  yet  the
basis  was  so  broad  that  the  column  of  true  taste  has
never  been  totally  overthrown,  and  has  during  such
reigns  of  barbarity  stood  amidst  a  waste  of  apathy  a
monument  of  what  had  been  magnificent,  and  served
as  a  copy  for  the  native  dynasties  of  a  Firedown,  Kai-
cobad,  Ardishir  Babigan,  Saboctagin,  Alap  Arselan,
the  Atabaks  of  Syria  and  Faristan,  a  Shah  Abbas,
Acbar,  and  Shah  Jihan,  and  a  Karim  Khan,  and
Fatah-Ali  Shah-shahan,  to  patronise  and  imitate.

We  should  recollect  that  the  Persian  is  not  only
the  sole  language  of  the  many  and  extensive  pro-
vinces of  Persia,  but  the  medium  of  official  and  polite
intercourse  of  the  rich  and  populous  regions  of
Hindustan,  Turkey,  and  the  wide  domains  of  Tartary.

Versed  as  many  Oriental  scholars  among  ourselves
now  are  in  the  literature  and  poetry  of  Persia,  and
some  of  them  inclined  like  myself  to  communicate
their  knowledge,  we  cannot  but  lament  that  obstinacy
in  our  English  critics  of  taking  every  direct  and
collateral  occasion  of  peremptorily  degrading  its
language,  as  that  only  of  conceit  and  false  thoughts,
and  of  rating  us  as  admirers  of  tinsel  instead  of  gold.
In  charity  to  their  knowledge  and  their  judgment,
we  must  conclude  that  they  speak  rather  of  Jami


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  57

and  his  imitators  than  the  host  of  Persian  poets  who
adorned  the  long  period  of  500  years  previous  to  his
time.  If  Athens  had  its  Periclesan,  and  Rome  its
Augustan,  Persia  also  had  its  classic  age,  not  ter-
minating in  a  solitary  or  short  reign,  nor  confined  to
the  narrow  limits  of  one  city  or  province,  but  extend-
ing to  ten  ages,  and  embracing  places  within  herself
a  thousand  miles  apart.

The  taste,  words,  and  style  of  the  language  of
every  polished  nation  must  suffer  in  the  vicissitudes
of  time  and  fortune,  and  bad  poetry  will  be  engen-
dered. But  is  Persia  alone  to  be  called  to  so  rigid
an  account  for  the  extravagance  and  folly  of  the
dregs  of  her  poets  ?  Nay,  I  will  admit  that  examples
of  hyperbole  may  be  quoted  from  the  pages  of
Firdausi,  Nizami,  Jabali,  Khacani,  Jilal-u'd-din  Rumi,
and  Sadi ;  but  if  thus  nice  in  marking  every  devia-
tion from  propriety  of  sentiment  and  metaphor,  what
would  become  of  Shakespeare  and  Milton  among
ourselves,  of  Dante  and  Ariosto  with  the  Italians,  or
perhaps  of  even  Homer  and  Virgil  ?

A  company  of  British  merchants  have  established
an  empire  of  the  finest  provinces  of  Asia,  nearly  equal
in  population  and  extent  to  all  Europe,  where  Persian
is  the  language  of  law,  religion,  commerce,  and  in  fact
of  all  civilised  usages  ;  and  instead  of  falsifying  and
abusing  this  language,  our  duty,  as  well  as  interest,
as  Englishmen,  point  out  the  justice  of  righting  and
supporting  it ;  and  let  our  scholars,  now  brought  up
to  a  classical  knowledge  of  it  at  the  East  India  Com-
pany's colleges,  endeavour  to  weed  what  they  will


58  SHAIKH  SADL

find  the  current  language  of  Hindustan  of  its  vicious
metaphors,  immoderate  hyperboles,  silly  conceits,
prettinesses,  bombast,  and  idle  verbiage  of  the  last
three  centuries,  or  since  A.D.  1450,  and  restore  it  to
the  sublime  and  pathetic  imagery,  and  the  just  diction
of  its  golden  age  from  Dakiki  and  Rodaki,  A.D.  950,
to  Jami  and  Hatifa ;  and  rescue  it  from  being
mangled  by  men  learned  and  respectable  in  their
knowledge  of  Greek  and  Latin,  but  vulgar  and
illiberal  in  their  ignorance  and  prejudices  in  what-
ever respects  the  languages  and  literature  of  the  East,
and  in  particular  of  this  scientific,  diplomatic,  financial,
legislative,  and  commercial  dialect  of  a  hundred  millions
of  our  fellow-subjects !  With  some  diffidence,  I
repeat  that  I  offer  the  following  translation  of  a
prose  Persian  classic,  who  flourished  in  the  era  of
its  greatest  purity;  and  if  there  is  anything  for-
bidding in  the  baldness  of  its  literality,  it  will  thus,
at  all  events,  enable  perhaps  the  student  more  per-
fectly to  understand  the  original ;  and  it  is  only  by
reading  that  with  a  knowledge,  that  he  can  relish
and  enjoy  it

JAMES  ROSS,

1st  January  1823.


TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE.


I.  In  the  following  Translation  of  the  Gulistan,  the
poetical  passages  of  the  original  text,  whether  Persian
or  Arabic,  are  distinguished  from  the  prose  by  being
included  within  inverted  commas.

II.  And  as  the  sentiment  of  the  poetry  is  often
only  a  repetition  of  that  of  the  prose,  in  order  to
enforce   and   give  it  a  more   marked   emphasis,  the
personal  pronoun  and  verb  are  used  in  the  singular
number  in  the  poetical  passages.

III.  Pure  passages  of  Arabic,  whether  poetry  or
prose,   are    distinguished   by   being    printed    in    the
Italian  character.

IV.  Any  additional  words  that  are  not  warranted
by  the  Persian  text,  but  are  necessary  in  the  English
translation,  are   enclosed  in  crotchets,  unless  where
so    evident    an    interpolation    that   they    cannot    be
mistaken.


THE

MOCADDAMAH;

OR,

INTRODUCTION   TO   THE  GULISTAN

OF

SHAIKH  SADI.


In  the  Name  of  God  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful  I

THANKSGIVING  be  to  a  Deity  of  majesty  and  glory ;
for  submission  [in  prayer]  conciliates  his  presence,
and  a  sense  of  gratitude  towards  him  increases  his
munificence.  Every  breath  that  is  inhaled  is  an
elongation  of  life,  and  when  it  is  exhaled  it  exhilarates
the  spirits ;  accordingly,  in  every  single  breathing
two  benefits  are  forthcoming,  and  for  each  benefit
a  thanksgiving  is  owing — "Whose  hand  and  tongue
can  so  enact  that  he  shall  acquit  himself  of  this
obligation  of  gratitude" — be  zealous,  ye  sons  of  David!
with  thanksgiving,  for  small  is  the  grateful  portion
of  my  servants — "  that  servant  is  approved  who,
conscious  of  his  fault,  sues  for  mercy  at  the  threshold
of  God  ;  otherwise  no  person  can  presume  to  offer
anything  as  worthy  his  supreme  presence."


62  SHAIKH  SADL

The  shower  of  his  infinite  mercy  has  been  sprinkled
upon  all,  and  the  table  of  his  all-comprehensive
bounty  is  spread  forth  everywhere.  He  will  not
remove  the  veil  from  the  reputation  of  his  servants
because  of  their  egregious  iniquities,  nor  withdraw
the  daily  bread  of  the  poor  on  account  of  their
impious  idolatries — "All-gracious  Providence!  who
from  a  secret  hoard  art  supplying  the  Guebre  and
Infidel  with  food,  how  canst  thou  exclude  thy  friends
[the  orthodox],  thou  1  who  wilt  look  with  compassion
on  thy  foes  ?  "

He  directed  his  chamberlain,  the  breeze  of  dawn,
to  spread  abroad  an  emerald  carpet ;  and  he  ordered
his  handmaid,  the  vernal  cloud,  to  nurse  the  daughters
of  vegetation  [or  young  herbage]  in  the  cradle  of  the
earth.  As  a  new  year's  day  garment  he  covered
the  bosoms  of  the  trees  with  mantles  of  verdant
foliage ;  and  on  the  approach  of  the  spring  season
he  crowned  the  infant  twigs  with  garlands  of  smiling
flowers ;  through  his  mighty  power  the  juice  of  the
sugar-cane  reed  waxed  sweet  as  virgin  honey ;  and
by  his  fostering  care  the  kernel  of  the  date  grew  into
a  stately  palm — "The  clouds,  wind,  moon,  sun,  and
sky  act  in  co-operation  ;  that  thou  mayst  get  thy
daily  bread,  and  not  eat  it  with  indifference :  all
revolve  for  thy  sake,  and  are  obedient  to  command ;
it  must  be  an  equitable  condition  that  thou  shalt  be
obedient"

It  is  in  tradition  [or  a  saying]  of  the  prince  of  the
universe,  glory  of  creatures,  mediator  of  both  worlds,
most  immaculate  of  men,  the  consummation  of


SHAIKH  SADI.  63

revolving  time  [or  last  of  the  prophets],  Mohammed
Mostafa,  upon  whom  and  his  be  God's  blessing  and
peace — "  accepted  intercessor,  and  liberal-minded  pro-
phet, gracious,  portly,  smiling,  and  sealed ;  " — "  how  can
the  rampart  of  that  faith  totter  which  has  thee  for
its  prop?  What  can  he  fear  from  the  billows  of
the  sea  who  has  Noah  for  his  pilot?" — "he  reached
the  pinnacle  of  glory  {during  his  Mara/]  through  his
perfections ;  he  illuminated  the  gloom  of  chaos  by  his
splendour ;  all  his  habits  were  elegant ;  peace  be  upon
him  and  his  followers  !  " — that,  at  any  time,  when  a
sinful  and  distressed  servant  shall  raise  the  hand  of
repentance  with  the  hope  of  forgiveness  before  the
tribunal  of  a  just,  glorious,  and  sublime  being,  the
most  high  God  will  not  notice  him  :  he  will  reiterate
his  suit,  and  be  a  second  time  disregarded  ;  he  will
again  supplicate  with  mortification  and  humility ;
then  will  the  glorified  and  sublime  judge  deign  to  say
—  Verily,  my  angels  !  I  was  abashed  on  account  of  my
servant,  who  had  no  Providence  but  me  ;  therefore  did
I  pardon  him — I  granted  his  prayer  and  satisfied
his  desire ;  for  I  am  ashamed  of  the  importunate
supplication  and  complaint  of  a  dependant — "  behold
the  benevolence  and  condescension  of  the  Lord
[Paramount] ;  the  servant  was  in  fault,  and  he  the
master  is  ashamed  ! "

The  assiduous  residents  at  the  fane  of  his  glory
[or  temple  at  Mecca]  confess  a  negligence  of  piety,
and  say,  We  did  not  worship  thee  commensurately
with  the  worship  of  thee;  and  the  mystical  encomiasts
of  the  attributes  of  his  charms,  rapt  in  an  ecstasy,  cry,


64  SHAIKH  SADL

We  knew  thee  not  suitably  to  the  knowledge  of  thee  !
"  Were  any  person  to  ask  me  to  detail  his  attributes,
helpless  as  I  am,  how  shall  I  describe  what  is  without  a
parallel  ?  Lovers  fell  the  devoted  victims  of  the  mistress
[God],  but  no  tidings  are  returned  of  such  victims."

A  good  and  pious  man  reclined  his  head  on  the
bosom  of  contemplation,  and  was  immersed  in  the
ocean  of  reverie.  At  the  instant  when  he  awaked
from  this  vision,  one  of  his  friends  by  way  of  pleasantry
said,  What  rare  gift  have  you  brought  us  from  that
garden  where  you  have  been  recreating?  He
replied,  I  fancied  to  myself  and  said,  when  I  can
reach  the  rose-bower  I  will  fill  my  lap  with  the
flowers,  and  bring  them  as  a  present  to  my  friends  ;
but  when  I  got  there  the  fragrance  of  the  roses  so
intoxicated  me  that  the  skirt  dropped  from  my
hands.  "  O  bird  of  dawn !  learn  the  warmth  of
affection  from  the  moth,  for  that  scorched  creature
gave  up  the  ghost  and  uttered  not  a  groan ;  these
vain  pretenders  are  ignorant  of  him  they  seek  after,
for  of  him  that  knew  him  we  never  heard  again.  O
thou  !  who  towerest  above  the  flights  of  conjecture,
opinion,  and  comprehension,  whatever  has  been
reported  of  thee  we  have  heard  and  read  ;  the  con-
gregation is  dismissed,  and  life  drawn  to  a  close ;  and
we  still  rest  at  our  first  encomium  of  thee  ! "

The  Panegyric  of  the  Prince  of  Islamisni,  or  Reigning

King ;  may  God  perpetuate  his  Reign.
The  handsome  mention  of  Sadi,  which  is  current  in
every  mouth;   the  fame  of  his   sayings,  which   has


SHAIKH  SADL  65

spread  all  over  the  wide  extent  of  the  earth ;  the
amicable  writing  reed  of  his  narrations,  which  man-
kind are  devouring  as  they  would  sugar-cane;  and
his  newest  literary  fragments,  which  have  the  credit
of  bills  of  exchange  [and  bank-notes] — all  this  cannot
be  ascribed  to  any  superiority  of  his  learning  and  wit;
but  that  the  Lord  Paramount,  Axis  of  revolving
Time,  confirmed  Successor  of  Solomon,  Defender  of
the  Faithful,  mighty  King  and  potent  Sovereign,
Mozuffar-u'd-din  Abubakr,  son  of  Saad,  son  of  Zungi,
the  Shadow  of  the  most  high  God  on  earth,  approve
of  him,  O  Providence,  and  gratify  his  wishes !  has
regarded  with  him  an  eye  of  patronage,  has  bestowed
upon  him  his  exalted  commendation,  and  has  shown
him  unfeigned  attachment ;  consequently,  everybody,
for  his  sake,  whether  noble  or  plebeian,  is  well
inclined,  for  mankind  readily  adopt  the  faith  of
their  princes  : — "  Ever  since  thou  didst  deign  to  look
graciously  on  wretched  me,  my  merits  are  become
manifest  as  the  sun.  Verily,  were  this  servant  covered
all  over  with  blemishes,  every  vice  that  the  King
might  approve  of  would  become  a  virtue. — Engaged
one  day  in  the  public  bath,  I  had  a  piece  of  scented
clay  handed  me  by  my  mistress.  I  addressed  it,
saying :  Art  thou  ambergris  or  musk,  for  I  am
charmed  with  thy  grateful  odour?  It  replied,  I
was  a  worthless  piece  of  clay;  but  for  a  while
associated  with  the  rose:  thence  I  partook  of  the
sweetness  of  my  companion  ;  otherwise  I  am  that
vile  piece  of  earth  I  seem.  " —

My   God !  benefit  Mussulmans,  or  the  faithful,  by

747


66  SHAIKH  SADL

prolonging  his  life  ;  augment  the  reward  of  his  virtues
and  perfections;  exalt  the  states  of  his  friends  and
allies;  and  confound  his  foes  and  ill-wishers,  according
to  the  texts,  as  recorded  in  the  Koran.  My  God  !  protect
his  domain,  and  be  the  guardian  of  his  son : — "  as,  in
truth,  the  happiness  of  this  world  originates  with  him,
let  his  happiness  last  for  ever;  and  succour  him,  0  thou
most  high  !  with  the  ensigns  of  victory.  In  like  manner
let  the  seedling,  or  son,  flourish,  of  which  he,  tJie  king,  is
the  root;  for  the  excellence  of  the  earths  produce  sources
in  generous  seed'' — Let  the  most  high  and  mighty
God  preserve  till  the  day  of  judgment  the  pure
territory  of  Shiraz  in  secure  peace  through  a  dread
of  a  righteous  magistracy  and  a  deference  for  an
industrious  people. — "  Know  ye  not  why  I  went
abroad  and  stayed  some  time  in  a  foreign  country?
I  left  home  because  of  the  anarchy  I  saw  occasioned
by  the  Turks,  for  the  world  was  fallen  into  disorder,
like  the  hair  of  an  Ethiopian  ;  they  were  all  human
beings,  but  had  sharp  claws  smeared  with  blood,  like
those  of  wolves :  within  the  city  walls  a  people  well-
disposed  as  angels  ;  without  a  host  of  warlike  tygers.
When  I  returned  I  found  the  country  at  peace  ;  the
tygers  had  laid  aside  their  tygerish  dispositions  ;  such
it  was  when  I  first  saw  it,  a  country  overrun  with
contention,  anarchy,  and  famine  ;  and  thus  it  became
during  the  reign  of  a  just  sovereign,  Atabak  Abubakr
bin-saad  Zungi." — "  The  Persian  territory  has  nothing
to  apprehend  from  the  buffetings  of  fortune,  so  long
as  its  head  can  find  the  shelter  of  such  a  godlike
shadow  as  thou  art.  Throughout  the  expanse  of  the


SHAIKH  SADJ.  67

globe  none  in  these  days  can  afford  such  an  asylum  of
resignation  as  that  at  the  threshold  at  thy  gate : — it  is
thine  to  comfort  the  afflicted  ;  our  duty  to  be  grate-
ful ;  and  it  rests  with  God  the  Creator  to  notice  and
reward  us.  So  long,  O  Providence  !  as  earth  and  sky
shall  endure,  preserve  the  land  of  Persia  from  the
storm  of  anarchy  and  mischief ! " —


Sadi's  Reason  for  writing  the  Gulistan.

One  night  I  was  thinking  upon  my  past  time ;
reflecting  with  regret  upon  my  prodigal  use  of  life ;
boring  the  flinty  mansion  of  my  heart  with  the
diamond  of  my  tears  ;  and  repeating  these  verses,  as
applicable  to  the  state  of  my  affairs : —

"  Every  moment  a  breath  is  expiring  of  my  life ;
when  I  curiously  inspect  it,  I  find  that  only  a  little  is
left.  O  man !  fifty  years  of  thy  life  are  gone,  and
thou  art  still  in  a  dream  ;  perhaps  thou  mayest  avail
thyself  of  the  remaining  five  days.  Shame  on  him
who  departed,  and  had  not  finished  his  task  ;  the
call  of  march  was  beaten,  and  he  had  not  made  up
his  baggage  ;  the  fascinating  drowsiness  of  the  morning
of  departure  arrests  the  traveller  from  setting  out  on
his  journey. — Every  man  that  came,  projected  for
himself  a  new  house  ;  he  went  and  left  his  dwelling  to
another,  and  that  other  in  like  manner  gratified  his
vanity;  but  none  of  them  put  a  finishing  hand  to  this
building. — Set  not  thy  affections  on  so  fickle  a  mis-
tress ;  a  being  so  capricious  merits  not  thy  attachment.


68  SHAIKH  SADI.

Since  the  good  and  bad  are  alike  doomed  to  die,
happy  is  he  who  carried  off  the  prize  of  virtue !  Let
the  means  of  future  enjoyment  proceed  thee  to  the
grave;  dispatch  them  before,  for  nobody  can  send
them  after  thee ;  life  is  like  snow,  and  the  sun  is
burning  hot ;  the  vanities,  O  sir !  of  the  present  day
soon  melt  away ! — The  four  contending  and  refractory
temperaments  may  chime  harmoniously  for  some  few
days ;  but  let  one  of  them  once  get  the  upper  hand
and  it  will  thrust  the  sweet  soul  from  its  dwelling ;
consequently  a  prudent  and  upright  man  sets  not  his
heart  on  the  life  of  this  world. — Yes !  thou  hast  gone
empty-handed  to  market ;  I  fear  of  thee  that  thou
wilt  not  bring  thy  turban  back ;  that  man  who  can
eat  up  his  crop  of  unripe  wheat  must  be  content  at
harvest  to  glean  his  neighbour's  field. — Listen  with  a
willing  ear  to  the  admonition  of  Sadi ;  such  is  the
path,  be  resolute  and  follow  it." —

After  pondering  on  this  mystery  I  saw  its  policy,
and  said,  I  will  betake  myself  to  the  cell  of  retire-
ment, withdraw  my  skirt  from  social  enjoyment,  erase
from  my  tablets  all  vain  compositions,  and  henceforth
refrain  from  idle  confabulations: — "To  have  the  tongue
cut  out  and  to  be  seated  deaf  and  dumb  in  a  corner
were  preferable  to  his  condition  who  cannot  govern
his  tongue": — till  at  length  one  of  my  friends  who  had
been  the  litter-companion  of  my  travels  and  the
chamber-chum  of  my  studies  entered  my  cell  with
his  usual  familiarity;  but  however  much  he  indulged
in  pleasantry  and  mirth  and  spread  abroad  the  carpet
of  social  intercourse,  I  made  him  no  return,  nor  raised


SHAIKH  SADI.  69

my  head  from  the  knee  of  pious  abstraction.  Offended
at  my  behaviour,  he  looked  wistfully  at  me  and  said : —
"  Now  that  thou  hast  the  faculty  of  speech,  converse,
O  brother !  with  cheerfulness  and  joy,  for  to-morrow
that  the  messenger  of  death  shall  present  himself  thou
must  of  necessity  restrain  thy  tongue." — One  of  my
comrades  made  him  aware  of  these  events,  saying,
Such  a  person  has  firmly  resolved  and  fully  deter-
mined to  pass  his  remaining  life  in  this  world  in
contemplative  devotion  and  to  observe  silence ;  do
thou  also,  if  thou  art  able,  keep  thine  own  counsel  and
take  thyself  aside.  He  replied  and  swore,  By  our
glorious  faith  and  ancient  friendship,  I  will  neither
breathe  nor  stir  till  he  shall  have  answered  me  with
his  accustomed  freedom  and  in  his  usual  frank  man-
ner ;  for  it  were  savage  to  grate  the  hearts  of  friends,
and  it  is  easy  to  compromise  an  oath.  Moreover,  it  is
repugnant  to  good  sense  and  an  infringement  on  the
policy  of  the  wise  that  Ali's  sword  should  rest  in  its
scabbard  and  that  Sadi's  tongue  should  cleave  to  his
palate. — "  What,  O  wise  man,  is  the  tongue  in  the
mouth?  It  is  a  key  to  the  casket  of  the  intellectual
treasurer  ;  so  long  as  the  lid  remains  shut  how  can
any  person  say  whether  he  be  a  dealer  in  gems  or  in
pedlery  ? — Though  in  the  estimation  of  the  wise
silence  be  mannerly,  at  the  season  of  giving  advice
it  were  better  to  be  explicit.  Two  circumstances  cast
a  shade  over  the  understanding — that  of  silence  when
we  should  speak,  and  that  of  speech  when  we  should
be  silent"

In   short,   I   could    no    longer    reserve    myself  in


70  SHAIKH  SADL

answering  him,  nor  see  it  generous  to  withhold  being
familiar,  for  he  had  ever  been  a  most  companionable
and  sincere  friend. — "  If  forced  into  a  combat,  with  him
be  the  fight  whom  thou  hast  strength  to  cope  with  or
legs  to  escape  from."

As  a  matter  of  necessity  I  spoke,  and  went  joyfully
abroad  during  the  spring,  when  the  cold  of  winter  was
meliorated  and  the  auspicious  season  of  the  roses  had
arrived : — "  The  leafy  vestments  of  the  trees  (from  being
green)  resembled  the  holyday  apparel  of  the  orthodox
or  happy.  On  the  ist  of  Ardebihist,  or  April,  that
charming  month,  the  nightingales  were  carolling  on
their  pulpits,  the  tree  boughs,  and  the  dew-fallen
pearl  on  the  damask  rose  rivalled  the  perspired  drop
on  the  cheek  of  our  chiding  mistress."

I  happened  one  night  to  fall  into  a  nocturnal  con-
versation in  a  garden  with  a  friend,  a  lovely  and
refreshing  spot,  and  its  heart-gladdening  groves
intertwining  overhead ;  its  walks  you  might  say
were  strewed  with  spangles  of  crystal,  and  clusters
of  fruit  like  the  pleiades  hung  aloft  from  its  boughs: —
"  Meadows,  the  water  of  whose  rivulets  meandered  like
the  links  of  a  chain  ;  bowers,  the  melodies  of  whose
aviaries  were  harmonious :  those  studded  with  flowers
of  various  colours,  and  these  loaded  with  fruits  of
divers  kinds ;  while  the  zephyrs  in  the  moving
(moonlight  and)  shade  of  the  trees  were  spreading
a  carpet  of  variegated  hues." —

At  dawn,  when  the  thought  of  going  home  over-
came a  wish  for  sitting  still,  I  remarked  that  my
companion  had  filled  his  skirt  with  roses,  hyacinths,


SHAIKH  SADL  71

spikenards,  and  sweet-basils,  and  was  desirous  of
returning  to  the  city.  I  said,  As  you  well  know,  the
flower  of  the  garden  has  no  continuance,  nor  can  we
confide  in  the  promise  of  the  rose-bower,  and  philo-
sophers have  told  us  whatever  is  not  lasting  merits  not
our  affection.  He  asked,  What  is  our  alternative  ?  I
replied,  For  the  gratification  of  beholders  and  recrea-
tion of  spectators  I  can  write  such  a  Kitabi  Gulistan,
or  book  of  a  Flower-garden,  as  neither  the  rude  storm
of  autumn  shall  be  able  to  lay  the  hand  of  usurpation
upon  its  leaves,  nor  the  revolution  of  the  season
convert  the  serenity  of  its  summer  into  the  gloom  of
winter. — "  What  can  a  basket  (or  nosegay)  of  flowers
avail  thee?  Pluck  but  one  leaf  from  my  Flower-
garden  ;  a  rose  can  thus  continue  five  or  six  days,  but
this  rose-bower  must  bloom  to  all  eternity  !  " —

So  soon  as  I  uttered  these  words  he  let  the  flowers
drop  from  his  lap  and  seized  upon  my  skirt,  saying :
As  the  generous  man  promised,  so  he  performed!
That  same  day  two  chapters  (vii.  and  viii.),  one  of
them  on  the  Accomplishments  of  Education,  and  the
other  on  the  Rules  for  Conversation,  were  recorded  in
my  note-book  in  such  a  clothing  as  may  come  in
practice  with  orators,  and  decorate  the  style  of  letter-
writers.  In  short,  roses  yet  continued  to  flourish
in  the  garden  when  the  book  of  the  Gulistan  was
finished.

And  it  really  will  be  complete  when  it  shall  have
met  a  favourable  reception  at  court  and  obtained
the  indulgent  perusal  of  that  prince,  the  asylum  of
the  world,  shadow  of  omnipotence,  ray  of  gracious


72  SHAIKH  SADL

providence,  treasury  of  the  age,  refuge  of  the  faith,
fortified  from  above,  victorious  over  his  foes,  arm  of
triumphant  fortune,  luminary  of  resplendent  religion,
most  illustrious  of  mankind,  glory  of  orthodoxy,  Saad
the  son  of  the  mighty  Atabak,  all-powerful  emperor,
ruler  over  the  necks  of  the  people,  lord-paramount
of  Arabia  and  Persia,  monarch  of  the  sea  and  land,
successor  of  the  throne  of  Solomon,  Mozuffar-zu'd-din,
may  God  on  high  perpetuate  the  dominion  of  both
father  and  son,  augment  their  dignified  state,  and
favour  all  their  charitable  enterprises. — "If  graced
with  the  favour  of  his  majesty  the  king,  it  will  become
the  portrait  gallery  of  China  and  picture  portfolio  of
Mani ;  none  will,  we  trust,  inspect  it  with  dissatisfac-
tion, for  this  reason,  that  a  Gulistan,  or  flower-garden,
is  not  the  seat  of  chagrin,  more  especially  as  its
auspicious  preface  is  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Saad
Abu-bakr  Saad-bin  Zungi."

The  Panegyric  of  the  mighty  Lord,  Fakhr-u' d-din
Abu-bakr-bin-Abu  Nasr.

Again  the  bride  of  my  intellect,  conscious  of  her
defective  charms,  dares  not  lift  her  head  or  raise  the
eye  of  solicitude  from  musing  on  the  back  of  the  foot
of  bashfulness,  nor  dares  she  come  forward  with  all
her  glory  into  the  assembly  of  the  lovely  till  she  can
deck  herself  with  that  gem,  the  approbation  of  the
mighty  lord,  intelligent,  just,  succoured  from  above,
victorious  over  foes,  prop  of  the  imperial  throne,
counsellor  of  state,  asylum  of  the  indigent,  resort  of
the  stranger,  patron  of  the  learned,  friend  of  the  pious,


SHAIKH  SADL  73

glory  of  the  Persian  race,  right  hand  of  the  empire,
prince  of  favourites,  glory  of  church  and  state,  support
of  the  faith  and  faithful,  confidant  of  kings  and
sovereigns,  Abu-bakr-bin-Abu  Nasr.  Prolong,  O
God  !  his  life,  increase  his  power,  exhilarate  his  heart,
and  multiply  his  rewards ;  for  he  is  celebrated  among
the  grandees  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  a
compendium  of  laudable  qualifications. —  "  Whoever
finds  a  shelter  under  the  shadow  of  his  patronage,
his  contumacy  becomes  obedience,  and  his  foe  a
friend."—

Of  the  retinue  of  servants  and  dependants  each
has  a  special  duty,  and  if  in  the  discharge  of  their
offices  they  may  in  any  trifle  be  negligent  and  idle,
they  will  somehow  incur  reprehension,  and  be  taken
to  task,  all  except  this  tribe  of  Darweshes  (like  Sadi),
whom  it  behoves  to  be  grateful  for  the  bounty  of  the
great,  and  to  offer  in  return  a  panegyric  on  their
virtue  and  a  blessing  on  their  charity.  However,  the
performance  of  this  service  is  more  commendable  in
private  than  in  public,  for  this  might  border  on  the
fulsome  and  specious,  and  that  were  less  adulatory
and  ceremonious  : — "  The  crooked  back  of  the  sky  (or
fortune)  became  straight  through  joy  that  she  gave  a
son  like  thee  to  the  mother  of  the  times.  It  is  a
choice  instance  of  wisdom  when  the  benevolence  of
the  Creator  selects  a  servant  for  the  instruction  of
the  people  ;  he  obtained  immortal  fortune  whose
good  fame  survived  him ;  for  after  he  is  dead  the
report  of  his  virtue  makes  his  name  live  for  ever ;  it
matters  not  whether  the  eloquent  praise  thee  or  not ;


74  SHAIKH  SADL

for  the   soul-deluding  cheek   requires  not   the   tire-
woman's art."

The  excuse  for  neglect  in  making  court,  and  the  reason

for  preferring  retirement.

Any  backwardness  and  neglect  that  take  place
in  my  paying  court  at  the  levee  of  my  lord  (the
prime  minister)  have  this  precedent :  that  a  body  of
the  sages  of  Hind  were  discussing  the  qualifications
of  Buzarchamahar,  and  could  after  all  discover  only
this  defect — namely,  that  there  is  a  slowness  in  his
utterance;  that  is  to  say,  he  is  making  some  consider-
able hesitation,  and  it  behoves  his  hearer  to  suspend
his  judgment  till  he  can  explain  himself.  Buzar-
chamahar heard  this  and  answered,  It  is  better  to
deliberate  what  I  am  to  say  than  to  be  ashamed
of  what  I  have  said ! — "  The  well-instructed  orator,
experienced  from  age,  ponders  over  his  words,  and
then  gives  them  utterance.  Waste  not  thy  breath
in  speaking  without  thought,  speak  to  the  purpose,
and  what  harm  is  there  though  thou  may  deliberate  ?
Arrange  thy  speech,  and  then  deliver  it ;  but  bring  it
to  an  end  before  they  tell  thee  to  have  done.  In  the
faculty  of  speech  man  excels  the  brute ;  but  if  thou
utterest  what  is  improper,  the  brute  is  thy  superior : "
— more  especially  in  the  sight  of  the  eyes  (or
grandees)  of  his  excellency  the  prime  minister,
dignified  .in  his  service,  as  they  are  a  compendium  of
the  generous  and  pious,  and  a  rallying  point  of  the
profoundly  learned,  for  if  I  could  make  bold,  I  might
have  presumptuously  intruded,  and  brought  base


SHAIKH  SADI.  75

merchandise  into  his  highness  the  Vizier's  presence;
and  a  glass  bead  were  not  worth  a  barley-corn  in  the
mart  of  jewellers,  a  torch  would  glimmer  in  giving
light  before  the  face  of  the  sun,  and  a  lofty  minaret
would  loom  small  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Alwand. —
"  Whoever  may  exalt  his  neck  with  arrogance,  a  foe
will  beset  him  on  every  side ;  the  generous-minded
Sadi  is  humble  and  prostrate,  no  person  will  combat
with  him  that  is  fallen  (and  asking  for  quarter).
First  use  deliberation,  then  speech ;  the  foundation
was  laid,  and  then  the  wall  raised.  I  am  a  gardener,
but  not  in  a  garden.  I  am  a  charmer,  but  not  such
as  Joseph  was  in  Canaan."

They  asked  Lucman,  Of  whom  didst  thou  learn
wisdom  ?  He  replied,  Of  the  blind,  who  put  not  their
feet  forward  till  they  feel  their  ground.  The  Arabs
say,  Secure  a  retreat  before  you  step  forward  to  the
assault: — prove  your  virility,  then  venture  on  a  wife !
— "  Though  the  cock  be  eager  for  the  fight,  what  can
he  effect  when  opposed  to  the  brazen-taloped  falcon  ?
At  seizing  a  mouse  a  cat  is  as  bold  as  a  lion  ;  but  is
herself  a  mouse  when  pitted  with  a  tiger."

Nevertheless,  relying  on  the  liberal  disposition  of
the  great,  who  will  wink  at  the  faults  of  the  humble,
and  refrain  from  exposing  the  defects  of  their
inferiors,  I  passed  a  portion  of  my  precious  life  in
reducing  into  a  summary  form,  and  comprising  in
this  volume,  the  rare  adventures,  maxims,  sciences,
apophthegms,  and  customs  of  passed  kings,  on  whom
be  God's  mercy !  and  such  were  my  reasons  for
writing  the  Gulistan,  or  Flower-garden. — "This


76  SHAIKH  SADL

arrangement  and  plan  may  endure  for  ages  after
every  atom  of  my  body  is  whirled  into  dust  The
design  is  a  picture,  which  may  remain  as  a  memorial
of  me,  for  I  cannot  foresee  any  long  continuance  of
this  existence  unless  some  good  soul  may,  one  day,
in  compassion,  offer  a  blessing  upon  the  work  of
a  poor  man."

After  mature  consideration  in  planning  this  book,
and  arranging  its  chapters,  I  deemed  it  expedient  to
abridge  its  detail,  that  I  might  reduce  this  bower
of  resignation  and  sublime  enclosure  into  eight
mansions  like  those  of  paradise  ;  and  it  was  thus
made  short  of  that  it  might  not  fatigue.

A  Schedule  of  the  Chapters.

Chapter  I.  Of  the  Customs  of  Kings.

Chapter  2.  Of  the  Morals  of  Darweshes.

Chapter  3.  Of  the  Preciousness  of  Contentment.

Chapter  4.  Of  the  Benefit  of  Silence.

Chapter  5.  Of  Love  and  Youth.

Chapter  6.  Of  Imbecility  and  Old  Age.

Chapter  7.  Of  the  Impressions  of  Education.

Chapter  8.  Of  the  Duties  of  Society.

The  daU  of  publishing  the  book  of  the  Gulistan.
"  At  that  season  (the  period  between  the  two
Eeds)  which  is  with  us  Mohammedans  a  time  of
rejoicing,  in  the  year  six  hundred  and  fifty-six  after
the  Hijrah  (A.D.  1258),  my  object  was  to  give  advice,
which  having  offered,  I  left  its  fulfilment  with  God,
and  took  my  leave."


CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE  CUSTOMS  OF  KINGS.


I  HAVE  heard  of  a  king  who  made  the  sign  to  put
a  captive  to  death.  The  poor  wretch,  in  that  state  of
desperation,  began  to  abuse  the  king  in  the  dialect
which  he  spoke,  and  to  revile  him  with  asperity,  as
has  been  said ;  whoever  shall  wash  his  hands  of  life
will  utter  whatever  he  may  harbour  in  his  heart: —
"  When  a  man  is  desperate  he  will  give  a  latitude
to  his  tongue,  like  as  a  cat  at  bay  will  fly  at  a  dog  " : —
"  at  the  moment  of  compulsion  when  it  is  impossible
to  fly,  the  hand  will  grasp  the  sharp  edge  of  a  sword."
— The  king  asked,  saying,  What  does  he  say?  One
of  the  Viziers  (or  nobles  in  attendance),  and  a  well-
disposed  man,  made  answer,  O  my  lord !  he  is
expressing  himself  and  saying,  (paradise  is  for  such}
as  are  restraining  their  anger  and  forgiving  their
fellow-creatures ;  and  God  will  befriend  the  bene-
volent. The  king  felt  compassion  for  him,  and
desisted  from  shedding  his  blood.  Another  noble-
man, and  the  rival  of  that  former,  said,  It  is  inde-
corous for  such  peers,  as  we  are,  to  use  any  language
but  that  of  truth  in  the  presence  of  kings  j  this  man


78  SHAIKH  SADL

abused  his  majesty,  and  spoke  what  was  unworthy
of  him.  The  king  turned  away  indignant  at  this
remark,  and  replied,  I  was  better  pleased  with  his
falsehood  than  with  this  truth  that  you  have  told  ;
for  that  bore  the  face  of  good  policy,  and  this  was
founded  in  malignity ;  and  the  intelligent  have  said,
A  peace-mingling  falsehood  is  preferable  to  a  mis-
chief-stirring truth : — "  Whatever  prince  may  do  that
which  he  (his  counsellor)  will  recommend,  it  must
be  a  subject  of  regret  if  he  shall  advise  ought  but
good."

They  had  written  over  the  portico  of  King  Firedowtts
palace: — "This  world,  O  brother!  abides  with  none.
Set  thy  heart  upon  its  maker,  and  let  him  suffice
thee.  Rest  not  thy  pillow  and  support  on  a  worldly
domain  which  has  fostered  and  slain  many  such  as
thou  art  Since  the  precious  soul  must  resolve  on
going,  what  matters  it  whether  it  departs  from  a
throne  or  the  ground."

II.

One  of  the  kings  of  Khorasan  saw,  in  a  dream,
Sultan  Mahmud,  the  son  of  Saboktagin,  an  hundred
years  after  his  death,  when  his  body  was  decayed  and
fallen  into  dust,  all  but  his  eyes,  which  as  heretofore
were  moving  in  their  sockets  and  looking  about  them.
All  the  learned  were  at  a  stand  for  its  interpretation,
excepting  one  darwesh,  who  made  his  obeisance,  and
said: — He  is  still  looking  about  him,  because  his
kingdom  and  wealth  are  possessed  by  others ! —
"  Many  are  the  heroes  whom  they  have  buried  under


SHAIKH  SADL  79

ground,  of  whose  existence  above  it  not  one  vestige
is  left ;  and  of  that  old  carcase  which  they  committed
to  the  earth,  the  earth  has  so  consumed  it  that  not
one  bone  is  left  Though'  many  ages  are  gone  since
Nushirowan  was  in  being,  yet  in  the  remembrance  of
his  munificence  is  his  fair  renown  left.  Be  generous,
O  my  friend  !  and  avail  thyself  of  life,  before  that  they
proclaim  it  as  an  event  that  such  a  person  is  not  left."

III.

I  have  heard  of  a  king's  son  who  was  short  and
mean,  and  his  other  brothers  were  lofty  in  stature  and
handsome.  On  one  occasion  the  king,  his  father,
looked  at  him  with  disparagement  and  scorn.  The
son,  in  his  sagacity,  understood  him,  and  said,  O
father !  a  short  wise  man  is  preferable  to  a  tall  block-
head ;  it  is  not  everything  that  is  mightier  in  stature
that  is  superior  in  value : — a  sheep's  flesh  is  wholesome,
that  of  an  elephant  carrion. — "  Of  the  mountains  of  this
earth  Sinai  is  one  of  the  least,  yet  is  it  most  mighty
before  God  in  state  and  dignity" — "  Heard  st  thou  not
what  an  intelligent  lean  man  said  one  day  to  a  sleek
fat  dolt?  An  Arab  horse,  notwithstanding  his  slim
make,  is  more  prized  thus  than  a  herd  of  asses." — The
father  smiled  ;  the  pillars  of  the  state,  or  courtiers,
nodded  their  assent,  and  the  other  brothers  were
mortified  to  the  quick. — "  Till  a  man  has  declared  his
mind,  his  virtue  and  vice  may  have  lain  hidden  ;  do
not  conclude  that  the  thicket  is  unoccupied,  per-
adventure  the  tiger  is  gone  asleep  !  " —


8o  SHAIKH  SADL

I  have  heard  that  about  that  time  a  formidable
antagonist  appeared  against  the  king.  Now  that  an
army  was  levied  in  each  side,  the  first  person  that
mounted  his  horse  and  sallied  upon  the  plain  was
that  son,  and  he  exclaimed :  "  I  cannot  be  that  man
whose  back  thou  mayest  see  on  the  day  of  battle,  but
am  him  thou  mayest  descry  amidst  the  thick  of  it,
with  my  head  covered  with  dust  and  blood ;  for  he
that  engages  in  the  contest  sports  with  his  own  blood,
but  he  who  flees  from  it  sports  with  the  blood  of  an
army  on  the  day  of  fight."  He  so  spoke,  assaulting
the  enemy's  cavalry,  and  overthrew  some  renowned
warriors.  When  he  came  before  the  king  he  kissed
the  earth  of  obeisance,  and  said,  "  O  thou,  who  didst
view  my  body  with  scorn,  whilst  not  aware  of  valour's
rough  exterior,  it  is  the  lean  steed  that  will  prove  of
service,  and  not  the  fatted  ox,  or)  the  day  of  battle."

They  have  reported  that  the  enemy's  cavalry  was
immense,  and  those  of  the  king  few  in  number;  a
body  of  them  was  inclined  to  fly,  when  the  youth
called  aloud,  and  said,  Be  resolute,  my  brave  men,
that  you  may  not  have  to  wear  the  apparel  of  women  !
The  troops  were  more  courageous  on  this  speech,  and
attacked  altogether.  I  have  heard  that  on  that  day
they  obtained  a  complete  victory  over  the  enemy.
The  king  kissed  his  face  and  eyes,  and  folded  him  in
his  arms,  and  became  daily  more  attached  to  him,  till
he  declared  him  heir-apparent  to  the  throne.  The
brothers  bore  him  a  grudge,  and  put  poison  into  his
food.  His  sister  saw  this  from  a  window,  and  flapped
to  the  shutter ;  and  the  boy  understood  the  sign,  and


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  81

withdrew  his  hand  from  the  dish,  and  said,  It  is
hard  that  the  virtuous  should  perish  and  that  the
vicious  should  occupy  their  places. — "Were  the
homayi,  or  phoenix,  to  be  extinct  in  the  world,  none
would  take  refuge  under  the  shadow  of  an  owl." —
They  informed  the  father  of  this  event ;  he  sent  for
the  brothers  and  rebuked  them,  as  they  deserved.
Then  he  made  a  division  of  his  domains,  and  gave  a
suitable  portion  to  each,  that  discontent  might  cease ;
but  the  ferment  was  increased,  as  they  have  said:
Ten  darweshes  can  sleep  on  one  rug,  but  two  kings
cannot  be  accommodated  in  a  whole  kingdom. —
"  When  a  man  after  God's  heart  can  eat  the  moiety  of
his  loaf,  the  other  moiety  he  will  give  in  alms  to  the
poor.  A  king  may  acquire  the  sovereignty  of  one
climate  or  empire ;  and  he  will  in  like  manner  covet
the  possession  of  another."

IV.

A  horde  of  Arab  robbers  had  possessed  themselves
of  the  fastness  of  a  mountain,  and  waylaid  the  track
of  the  caravan.  The  yeomanry  of  the  villages  were
frightened  at  their  stratagems,  and  the  king's  troops
alarmed,  inasmuch  as  they  had  secured  an  im-
pregnable fortress  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain,
and  made  this  stronghold  their  retreat  and  dwelling.

The  superintendents  of  the  adjacent  districts  con-
sulted together  about  obviating  their  mischief,  saying:
If  they  are  in  this  way  left  to  improve  their  fortune,
any  opposition  to  them  may  prove  impracticable. —

748


82  SHAIKH  SADL

"The  tree  that  has  just  taken  root,  the  strength  of
one  man  may  be  able  to  extract ;  but  leave  it  to
remain  thus  for  a  time,  and  the  machinery  of  a  pur-
chase may  fail  to  eradicate  it :  the  leak  at  the  dam-
head  might  have  been  stopped  with  a  plug,  which
now  it  has  a  vent  we  cannot  ford  its  current  on  an
elephant."

Finally  it  was  determined  that  they  should  set  a
spy  over  them,  and  watch  an  opportunity  when  they
had  made  a  sally  upon  another  tribe,  and  left  their
citadel  unguarded.  Some  companies  of  able  warriors
and  experienced  troops  were  sent,  that  they  might
conceal  themselves  in  the  recesses  of  the  mountain.
At  night,  when  the  robbers  were  returned,  jaded  with
their  march  and  laden  with  spoil,  and  had  stript
themselves  of  their  armour,  and  deposited  their
plunder,  the  foremost  enemy  they  had  to  encounter
was  sleep.  Now  that  the  first  watch  of  night  was
gone : — "  the  disc  of  the  sun  was  withdrawn  into  a
shade,  and  Jonas  had  stepped  into  the  fish's  mouth :"
— the  bold-hearted  warriors  sprang  from  their  ambush
and  secured  the  robbers  by  pinioning  them  one  after
another.

In  the  morning  they  presented  them  at  the  royal
tribunal,  and  the  king  gave  an  order  to  put  the  whole
to  death.  There  happened  to  be  among  them  a
stripling,  the  fruit  of  whose  early  spring  was  ripening
in  its  bloom,  and  the  flower-garden  of  his  cheek
shooting  into  blossom.  One  of  the  viziers  kissed  the
foot  of  the  imperial  throne,  and  laid  the  face  of
intercession  on  the  ground,  and  said,  This  boy  has


SHAIKH  SAJDL  83

not  yet  tasted  the  fruit  of  the  garden  of  life,  nor
enjoyed  the  fragrance  of  the  flowers  of  youth :  such
is  my  confidence  in  the  generous  disposition  of  his
majesty  that  it  will  favour  a  devoted  servant  by
sparing  his  blood.  The  king  turned  his  face  away
from  this  speech ;  as  it  did  not  accord  with  his  lofty
way  of  thinking,  he  replied  : — "  The  rays  of  the  vir-
tuous cannot  illuminate  such  as  are  radically  vicious  ;
to  give  education  to  the  worthless  is  like  throwing
walnuts  upon  a  dome:" — it  were  wiser  to  eradi-
cate the  tree  of  their  wickedness,  and  annihilate  their
tribe  ;  for  to  put  out  a  fire  and  leave  the  embers,  and
to  kill  a  viper  and  foster  its  young,  would  not  be  the
acts  of  rational  beings. — "  Though  the  clouds  pour
down  the  water  of  vegetation,  thou  canst  never  gather
fruit  from  a  willow  twig.  Exalt  not  the  fortune  of  the
abject,  for  thou  canst  never  extract  sugar  from  a  mat
or  common  cane."

The  vizier  listened  to  this  speech  ;  willingly  or  not
he  approved  of  it,  and  applauded  the  good  sense  of
the  king,  and  said  :  What  his  majesty,  whose  dominion
is  eternal,  is  pleased  to  remark  is  the  mirror  of  probity
and  essence  of  good  policy,  for  had  he  been  brought
up  in  the  society  of  those  vagabonds,  and  confined  to
their  service,  he  would  have  followed  their  vicious
courses.  Your  servant,  however,  trusts  that  he  may  be
instructed  to  associate  with  the  virtuous,  and  take  to
the  habits  of  the  prudent ;  for  he  is  still  a  child,  and
the  lawless  and  refractory  principles  of  that  gang
cannot  have  yet  tainted  his  mind  ;  and  it  is  in  tradi-
tion that — Whatever  child  is  born,  and  he  is  verily


84  SHAIKH  SADL

born  after  the  right  way  of  orthodoxy ',  namely  Islamism,
afterwards  his  father  and  his  mother  bring  him  up  as  a
Jew,  Christian,  or  Guebre. — "  The  wife  of  Lot  asso-
ciated with  the  wicked,  and  her  posterity  failed  in
the  gift  of  prophecy;  the  dog  of  the  seven  sleepers
[at  Ephesus]  for  some  time  took  the  path  of  the
righteous,  and  became  a  rational  being."

He  said  this,  and  a  body  of  the  courtiers  joined
him  in  intercession,  till  the  king  acceded  to  the
youth's  pardon,  and  answered  :  I  gave  him  up,  though
I  saw  not  the  good  of  it. — "  Knowest  thou  what  Zal
said  to  the  heroic  Rostam :  Thou  must  not  consider
thy  foe  as  abject  and  helpless.  I  have  often  found
a  small  stream  at  the  fountain-head,  which,  when
followed  up,  carried  away  the  camel  and  its  load."

In  short,  the  vizier  took  the  boy  home,  and  edu-
cated him  with  kindness  and  liberality.  And  he
appointed  him  masters  and  tutors,  who  taught  him
the  graces  of  logic  and  rhetoric,  and  all  manner  of
courtier  accomplishments,  so  that  he  met  general
approbation.  On  one  occasion  the  vizier  was  de-
tailing some  instances  of  his  proficiency  and  talents
in  the  royal  presence,  and  saying :  The  instruction  of
the  wise  has  made  an  impression  upon  him,  and  his
former  savageness  is  obliterated  from  his  mind.  The
king  smiled  at  this  speech,  and  replied : — "  The  whelp
of  a  wolf  must  prove  a  wolf  at  last,  notwithstanding
he  may  be  brought  up  by  a  man."

Two  years  after  this  a  gang  of  city  vagabonds  got
about  him,  and  joined  in  league,  till  on  an  oppor-
tunity he  murdered  the  vizier  and  his  two  sons ;  and,


SHAIKH  SADL  85

carrying  off  an  immense  booty,  he  took  up  the  station
of  his  father  in  the  den  of  thieves,  and  became  a
hardened  villain.  The  king  was  apprised  of  this
event ;  and,  seizing  the  hand  of  amazement  with  the
teeth  of  regret,  said  : — "  How  can  any  person  manu-
facture a  tempered  sabre  from  base  iron ;  nor  can  a
base-born  man,  O  wiseacre,  be  made  a  gentleman  by
any  education !  Rain,  in  the  purity  of  whose  nature
there  is  no  anomaly,  cherishes  the  tulip  in  the  garden
and  common  weed  in  the  salt  marsh.  Waste  not  thy
labour  in  scattered  seed  upon  a  briny  soil,  for  it  can
never  be  made  to  yield  spikenard ;  to  confer  a  favour
on  the  wicked  is  of  a  like  import,  as  if  thou  didst  an
injury  to  the  good."

V.

At  the  gate  of  Oghlamish  Patan,  King  of  Delhi,  I
[namely  Sadi]  saw  an  officer's  son,  who,  in  his  wit
and  learning,  wisdom  and  understanding,  surpassed
all  manner  of  encomium.  In  the  prime  of  youth,  he
at  the  same  time  bore  on  his  forehead  the  traces  of
ripe  age,  and  exhibited  on  his  cheek  the  features  of
good  fortune  : — "  above  his  head,  from  his  prudent
conduct,  the  star  of  superiority  shone  conspicuous."

In  short,  it  was  noticed  with  approbation  by  the
king  that  he  possessed  bodily  accomplishments  and
mental  endowments.  And  sages  have  remarked  that
worth  rests  not  on  riches,  but  on  talents ;  and  the
discretion  of  age,  not  in  years,  but  on  good  sense.  His
comrades  envied  his  good  fortune,  charged  him  with
disaffection,  and  vainly  attempted  to  have  him  put  to


86  SHAIKH  SADI.

death : — "  but  what  can  the  rival  effect  so  long  as  the
charmer  is  our  friend  ?  "

The  king  asked,  saying,  Why  do  they  show  such
a  disinclination  to  do  you  justice  ?  He  replied :  Under
the  shadow  of  his  majesty's  good  fortune  I  have
pleased  everybody,  excepting  the  envious  man,  who
is  not  to  be  satisfied  but  with  a  decline  of  my  success ;
and  let  the  prosperity  and  dominion  of  my  lord  the
king  be  perpetual ! — "  I  can  so  manage  as  to  give
umbrage  to  no  man's  heart ;  but  what  can  I  do  with
the  envious  man,  who  harbours  within  himself  the
cause  of  his  own  chagrin  ?  Die,  O  ye  envious,  that  ye
may  get  a  deliverance  ;  for  this  is  such  an  evil  that
you  can  get  rid  of  it  only  by  death. — Men  soured  by
misfortune  anxiously  desire  that  the  state  and  fortune
of  the  prosperous  may  decline ;  if  the  eye  of  the  bat
is  not  suited  for  seeing  by  day,  how  can  the  fountain
of  the  sun  be  to  blame?  Dost  thou  require  the
truth?  It  were  better  a  thousand  such  eyes  should
suffer,  rather  than  that  the  light  of  the  sun  were
obscured."

VI.

They  tell  a  story  of  a  Persian  king  who  had
stretched  forth  the  arm  of  oppression  over  the  sub-
jects' property,  and  commenced  a  system  of  violence
and  rapacity  to  such  a  degree  that  the  people
emigrated  to  avoid  the  vexatiousness  of  his  tyranny,
and  took  the  road  of  exile  to  escape  the  annoyance
of  his  extortions.  Now  that  the  population  was
diminished  and  the  resources  of  the  state  had  failed,


SHAIKH  SADL  87

the  treasury  remained  empty,  and  enemies  gathered
strength  on  all  sides. — "  Whoever  may  expect  a
comforter  on  the  day  of  adversity,  say,  let  him
practise  humanity  during  the  season  of  prosperity ;
if  not  treated  cordially,  thy  devoted  slave  will  forsake
thee ;  show  him  kindness  and  affection,  and  the
stranger  may  become  the  slave  of  thy  devo-
tion."

One  day  they  were  reading,  in  his  presence,  from
the  Shahnamah,  of  the  tyrant  Zohhak's  declining
dominion  and  the  succession  of  Firedown.  The
vizier  asked  the  king,  saying :  Can  you  so  far  com-
prehend that  Firedown  had  no  revenue,  domain,  or
army,  and  how  the  kingdom  came  to  be  confirmed
with  him  ?  He  answered  :  As  you  have  heard,  a  body
of  people  collected  about  him  from  attachment,  and
gave  their  assistance  till  he  acquired  a  kingdom.  The
vizier  said :  Since,  O  sire,  a  gathering  of  the  people  is
the  means  of  forming  a  kingdom,  how  come  you  in
fact  to  cause  their  dispersion  unless  it  be  that  you
covet  not  a  sovereignty  ? — "  So  far  were  good  that
thou  wouldst  patronise  the  army  with  all  thy  heart,
for  a  king  with  an  army  constitutes  a  principality."
The  king  asked :  What  are  the  best  means  of  collecting
an  army  and  yeomanry  ?  He  replied  :  Munificence  is
the  duty  of  a  king,  that  the  people  may  assemble
around  him,  and  clemency,  that  they  may  rest  secure
under  the  asylum  of  his  dominion  and  fortune,  neither
of  which  you  have. — "  A  tyrant  cannot  govern  a  king-
dom, for  the  duty  of  a  shepherd  is  not  expected  from
the  wolf.  A  king  that  can  anyhow  be  accessory


88  SHAIKH  SADL

to  tyranny   will   undermine    the    wall    of   his    own
sovereignty."

The  advice  of  the  prudent  minister  did  not  accord
with  the  disposition  of  the  king.  He  ordered  him  to
be  confined,  and  immured  him  in  a  dungeon.  It  soon
came  to  pass  that  the  sons  of  the  king's  uncle  rose  in
opposition,  levied  an  army  in  support  of  their  preten-
sions, and  claimed  the  sovereignty  of  their  father.  A
host  of  the  people,  who  had  cruelly  suffered  under  the
arm  of  his  extortion  and  were  dispersed,  gathered
around  and  succoured  them  till  they  dispossessed  him
of  his  kingdom  and  established  them  in  his  stead. —
"  That  king  who  can  approve  of  tyrannising  over  the
weak  will  find  his  friend  a  bitter  foe  in  the  day  of
hardship.  Deal  fairly  with  thy  subjects,  and  rest
easy  about  the  warfare  of  thine  enemies,  for  with  an
upright  prince  his  yeomanry  is  an  army."

VII.

A  king  was  embarked  along  with  a  Persian  slave  on
board  a  ship.  The  boy  had  never  been  at  sea,  nor
experienced  the  inconvenience  of  a  ship.  He  set  up
a  weeping  and  wailing,  and  all  his  limbs  were  in  a
state  of  trepidation  ;  and,  however  much  they  soothed
him,  he  was  not  to  be  pacified.  The  king's  pleasure-
party  was  disconcerted  by  him  ;  but  they  had  no  help.
On  board  that  ship  there  was  a  physician.  He  said  to
the  king,  If  you  will  order  it,  I  can  manage  to  silence
him.  The  king  replied :  It  will  be  an  act  of  great
favour.  The  physician  so  directed  that  they  threw


SHAIKH  SADL  89

the  boy  into  the  sea,  and  after  he  had  plunged
repeatedly,  they  seized  him  by  the  hair  of  the  head
and  drew  him  close  to  the  ship,  when  he  clung  with
both  hands  by  the  rudder,  and,  scrambling  upon  the
deck,  slunk  into  a  corner  and  sat  down  quiet.  The
king,  pleased  with  what  he  saw,  said :  What  art  is
there  in  this  ?  He  replied  :  Originally  he  had  not
experienced  the  danger  of  being  drowned,  and  under-
valued the  safety  of  being  in  a  ship ;  in  like  manner,
as  a  person  is  aware  of  the  preciousness  of  health  when
he  is  overtaken  with  the  calamity  of  sickness. — "  A
barley  loaf  of  bread  has,  O  epicure,  no  relish  for  thee.
That  is  my  mistress  who  appears  so  ugly  to  thy  eye. —
To  the  huris,  or  nymphs  of  paradise,  Iraf,  or  purgatory,
would  be  a  hell  ;  ask  the  inmates  of  hell  whether
purgatory  is  not  paradise. — There  is  a  distinction
between  the  man  that  folds  his  mistress  in  his  arms
and  him  whose  two  eyes  are  fixed  on  the  door
expecting  her."

VIII.

They  asked  Hormuz,  son  of  Nushirowan,  What
fault  did  you  find  with  your  father's  ministers  that
you  ordered  them  into  confinement  ?  He  replied  :  I
saw  no  fault  that  might  deserve  imprisonment ;  yet  I
perceived  that  any  reverence  for  me  makes  a  slight
impression  on  their  minds,  and  that  they  put  no
implicit  reliance  on  my  promise.  I  feared  lest  from
an  apprehension  of  their  own  safety  they  might  con-
spire my  ruin  ;  therefore,  put  in  practice  that  maxim


90  SHAIKH  SADL

of  philosophers  who  have  told  us. — "Stand  in  awe,  O
wise  man,  of  him  who  stands  in  awe  of  thee,  notwith-
standing thou  canst  cope  with  a  hundred  such  as  he.
Therefore  will  the  snake  bite  the  herdsman's  foot,
because  it  fears  that  he  will  bruise  its  head  with  a
stone.  Seest  thou  not  that  now  that  the  cat  is
desperate  it  will  tear  out  the  tiger's  eyes  with  its
claws."

IX.

In  his  old  age  an  Arab  king  was  grievously  sick,
and  had  no  hopes  of  recovery,  when,  lo  !  a  messenger
on  horseback  presented  himself  at  the  palace-gate,  and
joyfully  announced,  saying  :  Under  his  majesty's  good
fortune  we  have  taken  such  a  stronghold,  made  the
enemy  prisoners  of  war,  and  reduced  all  the  land-
holders and  vassals  of  that  quarter  to  obedience  as
subjects.  On  hearing  this  news  the  king  fetched  a
cold  sigh,  and  answered :  These  glad  tidings  are  not
intended  for  me  but  for  my  rivals,  namely,  the  heirs
of  the  sovereignty. — "  My  precious  life  has,  alas  !  been
wasted  in  the  hope  that  what  my  heart  chiefly  coveted
might  enter  at  my  gate.  My  bounden  hope  was
gratified  ;  yet  what  do  I  benefit  by  that  ?  There  is
no  hope  that  my  passed  life  can  return." — "  The  hand
of  death  beat  the  drum  of  departure.  Yes,  my  two
eyes,  you  must  bid  adieu  to  my  head.  Yes,  palm  of
my  hand,  wrist,  and  arm,  all  of  you  say  farewell,  and
each  take  leave  of  the  other.  Death  has  overtaken
me  to  the  gratification  of  my  foes ;  and  you,  O  my
friends,  must  at  last  be  going.  My  days  were  blazed


SHAIKH  SADL  91

away  in  folly ;  what  I  did  not  do  let  you  take  warning
[and  do]."

X.

At  the  metropolitan  mosque  of  Damascus  I  was
one  year  fervent  in  prayer  over  the  tomb  of  Yahiya,
or  John  the  Baptist  and  prophet,  on  whom  be  God's
blessing,  when  one  of  the  Arab  princes,  who  was
notorious  for  his  injustice,  chanced  to  arrive  on  a
pilgrimage,  and  he  put  up  his  supplication,  asked  a
benediction,  and  craved  his  wants. — "The  rich  and
poor  are  equally  the  devoted  slaves  of  this  shrine,  and
the  richer  they  are  the  more  they  stand  in  need  of
succour." — Then  he  spoke  to  me,  saying:  In  conformity
with  the  generous  resolution  of  darweshes  and  their
sincere  zeal,  you  will,  I  trust,  unite  with  me  in  prayer,
for  I  have  much  to  fear  from  a  powerful  enemy.  I
answered  him,  Have  compassion  on  your  own  weak
subjects,  that  you  may  not  see  disquiet  from  a  strong
foe. — "With  a  mighty  arm  and  heavy  hand  it  is
dastardly  to  wrench  the  wrists  of  poor  and  helpless.
Is  he  not  afraid  who  is  hard-hearted  with  the  fallen
that  if  he  slip  his  foot  nobody  will  take  him  by  the
hand  ? — Whoever  sowed  the  seed  of  vice  and  expected
a  virtuous  produce,  pampered  a  vain  brain  and
encouraged  an  idle  whim.  Take  the  cotton  from  thy
ear  and  do  mankind  justice,  for  if  thou  refusest  them
justice  there  is  a  day  of  retribution." — The  sons  of
Adam  are  members  one  of  another,  for  in  their  crea-
tion they  have  a  common  origin.  If  the  vicissitudes
of  fortune  involve  one  member  in  pain,  all  the  other


92  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

members  will  feel  a  sympathy.  Thou,  who  art  indif-
ferent to  other  men's  affliction,  if  they  call  thee  a  man
art  unworthy  of  the  name."

XI.

A  darwesh,  whose  prayers  had  a  ready  acceptance
[with  God],  made  his  appearance  at  Baghdad.  Hojaj
Yusuf  [a  great  tyrant]  sent  for  him  and  said  :  Put  up
a  good  prayer  for  me.  He  prayed,  O  God !  take
from  him  his  life !  Hojaj  said,  For  God's  sake,  what
manner  of  prayer  is  this  ?  He  answered :  It  is  a
salutary  prayer  for  you,  and  for  the  whole  sect  of
Mussulmans. — "  O  mighty  sir,  thou  oppressor  of  the
feeble,  how  long  can  this  violence  remain  marketable  ?
For  what  purpose  came  the  sovereignty  to  thee?
Thy  death  were  preferable  to  thy  tyrannising  over
mankind."

XII.

An  unjust  king  asked  a  holy  man,  saying,  What
is  more  excellent  than  prayers  ?  He  answered  :  For
you  to  remain  asleep  till  mid-day,  that  for  this  one
interval  you  might  not  afflict  mankind. — "  I  saw  a
tyrant  lying  dormant  at  noon,  and  said,  This  is
mischief,  and  is  best  lulled  to  sleep.  It  were  better
that  such  a  reprobate  were  dead  whose  state  of  sleep
is  preferable  to  his  being  awake."

XIII.

I  have  heard  of  a  king  who  had  turned  night  into
day  in  the  midst  of  conviviality,  and  in  the  gaiety  of


SHAIKH  SADL  93

intoxication  was  exclaiming, — "  I  never  was  in  this
life  happier  than  at  this  present  moment,  for  I  have
no  thought  of  evil  or  good,  and  care  for  nobody  !  " —
A  naked  darvvesh,  who  had  taken  up  his  rest  in  the
cold  outside,  answered, — "  O  thou  who  in  good  fortune
hast  not  thy  equal  in  the  world,  I  admit  that  thou
hast  no  cause  of  care  for  thyself,  but  hast  thou  none
for  us  ?  " — The  king  was  pleased  at  this  speech.  He
put  a  purse  of  a  thousand  dinars  out  at  the  window,
and  said  :  O  darwesh !  hold  up  your  skirt  He
replied,  Where  can  1  find  a  skirt,  who  have  not  a
garment.  The  king  was  still  more  touched  at  the
hardship  of  his  condition,  and  adding  an  honorary
dress  to  that  donation,  sent  them  out  to  him.

The  darwesh  squandered  all  that  ready  cash  within
a  few  days,  and  falling  again  into  distress,  returned. —
"  Money  makes  no  stay  in  the  hand  of  a  religious
independent ;  neither  does  patience  in  a  lover's  heart,
nor  water  in  a  sieve." — At  a  time  when  the  king  had
no  thought  about  him  they  obtruded  his  case,  and  he
took  offence  and  turned  away  his  face.  And  it  is  on
such  an  occasion  that  men  of  prudence  and  experi-
ence have  remarked  that  it  behoves  us  to  guard
against  the  wrath  and  fury  of  kings,  whose  noble
thoughts  are  chiefly  occupied  with  important  affairs
of  state,  and  cannot  endure  the  importunate  clamours
of  the  vulgar. — "  The  bounty  of  the  sovereign  is
forbid  to  him  who  does  not  watch  a  proper  oppor-
tunity. Till  thou  canst  perceive  a  convenient  time
for  obtruding  an  opinion,  undermine  not  thy  con-
sequence by  idle  talk." — The  king  said,  Let  this


94  SHAIKH  SADL

impudent  beggar  and  spendthrift  be  beaten  and  driven
away,  who  in  a  short  time  dissipated  such  a  sum  of
money,  for  the  treasury  of  the  Beat-al-mal,  or  charity
fund,  is  intended  to  afford  mouthfuls  to  the  poor,  and
not  bellyfuls  to  the  imps  of  the  devil. — "  That  fool
who  can  illuminate  the  day  with  a  camphorated
taper,  must  soon  feel  a  want  of  oil  for  his  lamp  at
night."

One  of  his  discreet  ministers  said :  O  king,  it  were
expedient  to  supply  such  people  with  their  means
of  subsistence  by  instalments,  that  they  may  not
squander  their  absolute  necessaries  ;  but,  with  respect
to  what  your  majesty  commanded  as  to  coercion  and
prohibition,  though  it  be  correct,  a  party  might
impute  it  to  parsimony.  Nor  does  it  moreover  accord
with  the  principles  of  the  generous  to  encourage  a
man  to  hope  for  kindness  and  then  overwhelm  him
with  heart-breaking  distrust : — "  Thou  must  not  open
upon  thyself  the  door  of  covetousness ;  and  when
opened,  thou  must  not  shut  it  with  harshness. — No-
body will  see  the  thirsty  pilgrims  crowding  towards
the  shore  of  the  briny  ocean  ;  but  men,  birds,  and
reptiles  will  flock  together  wherever  they  can  meet
a  fresh  water  fountain."


XIV.

One  of  the  ancient  kings  was  easy  with  the
yeomanry  in  collecting  his  revenue,  but  hard  on  the
soldiery  in  his  issue  of  pay;  and  when  a  formidable
enemy  showed  its  face,  these  all  turned  their  backs. —


SHAIKH  SADL  95

"  Whenever  the  king  is  remiss  in  paying  his  troops,
the  troops  will  relax  in  handling  their  arms.  What
bravery  can  he  display  in  the  ranks  of  battle  whose
hand  is  destitute  of  the  means  of  living."

One  of  those  who  had  excused  themselves  was
in  some  sort  my  intimate.  I  reproached  him  and
said,  He  is  base  and  ungrateful,  mean  and  disreput-
able who,  on  a  trifling  change  of  circumstances,  can
desert  his  old  master  and  forget  his  obligation  of
many  years'  employment.  He  replied  :  Were  I  to
speak  out,  I  swear  by  generosity  you  would  excuse
me.  Peradventure,  my  horse  was  without  corn,  and
the  housings  of  his  saddle  in  pawn. — And  the  prince
who,  through  parsimony,  withholds  his  army's  pay
cannot  expect  it  to  enter  heartily  upon  his  service. —
"  Give  money  to  the  gallant  soldier  that  he  may  be
zealous  in  thy  cause,  for  if  he  is  stinted  of  his  due  he
will  go  abroad  for  service. — So  long  as  a  warrior  is
replenished  with  food  he  will  fight  valiantly,  and  when
his  belly  is  empty  lie  will  run  away  sturdily?

XV.

One  of  the  viziers  was  displaced,  and  withdrew
into  a  fraternity  of  darweshes,  whose  blessed  society
made  its  impression  upon  him  and  afforded  consola-
tion to  his  mind.  .  The  king  was  again  favourably
disposed  towards  him,  and  offered  his  reinstatement
in  office;  but  he  consented  not,  and  said,  With  the
wise  it  is  deemed  preferable  to  be  out  of  office  than  to
remain  in  place. — "  Such  as  sat  within  the  cell  of


96  SHAIKH  SADL

retirement  blunted  the  teeth  of  dogs,  and  shut  the
mouths  of  mankind  ;  they  destroyed  their  writings,
and  broke  their  writing  reeds,  and  escaped  the  lash
and  venom  of  the  critics." — The  king  answered:  At
all  events  I  require  a  prudent  and  able  man,  who  is
capable  of  managing  the  state  affairs  of  my  kingdom.
The  ex-minister  said:  The  criterion,  O  sire,  of  a  wise
and  competent  man  is  that  he  will  not  meddle  with
such  like  matters. — "  The  homayi,  or  phoenix,  is  hon-
oured above  all  other  birds  because  it  feeds  on  bones,
and  injures  no  living  creature."

A  Tamsil,  or  application  in  point.  —  They  asked
a  Siyah-gosh,  or  lion-provider,  Why  do  you  choose
the  service  of  the  lion?  He  answered:  Because  I
subsist  on  the  leavings  of  his  prey,  and  am  secure
from  the  ill-will  of  my  enemies  under  the  asylum  of
his  valour.  They  said :  Now  you  have  got  within  the
shadow  of  his  protection  and  admit  a  grateful  sense  of
his  bounty,  why  do  you  not  approach  more  closely,
that  he  may  include  you  within  the  circle  of  select
courtiers  and  number  you  among  his  chosen  servants?
He  replied,  I  should  not  thus  be  safe  from  his  violence.
— "Though  a  Guebre  may  keep  his  fire  alight  for  a
hundred  years,  if  he  fall  once  within  its  flame  it  will
burn  him. — Procul  d  Jove,  procul  d  fulmine.  It  on  one
occasion  may  chance  that  the  courtier  of  the  king's
presence  shall  pick  up  a  purse  of  gold,  and  the  next
that  he  shall  lie  shorter  by  the  head.  And  philoso-
phers have  remarked,  saying,  It  is  incumbent  on  us  to
be  constantly  aware  of  the  fickle  dispositions  of  kings,
who  will  one  moment  take  offence  at  a  salutation,  and


SHAIKH  SADL  97

at  another  make  an  honorary  dress  the  return  for  an
act  of  rudeness  ;  and  they  have  said,  That  to  be  over
much  facetious  is  the  accomplishment  of  courtiers  and
blemish  of  the  wise. — "  Be  wary,  and  preserve  the  state
of  thine  own  character,  and  leave  sport  and  buffoonery
to  jesters  and  courtiers."

XVI.

One  of  my  associates  brought  me  a  complaint  of
his  perverse  fortune,  saying,  I  have  small  means  and  a
large  family,  and  cannot  bear  up  with  my  load  of
poverty.  Often  has  a  thought  crossed  my  mind,
suggesting,  Let  me  remove  into  another  country,  that
in  whatever  way  I  can  manage  a  livelihood  none  may
be  informed  of  my  good  or  bad  luck. — "  Often  he  went
asleep  hungry,  and  nobody  was  aware,  saying,  Who
is  he  ?  Often  did  his  life  hang  upon  his  lip,  and  none
lamented  over  him." — On  the  other  hand,  I  reflect  on
the  exultation  of  my  rivals,  saying,  They  will  scoff-
ingly  sneer  behind  my  back,  and  impute  my  zeal  in
behalf  of  my  family  to  a  want  of  humanity. — "  Do  but
behold  that  graceless  vagabond  who  can  never  witness
the  face  of  good  fortune.  He  will  consult  the  ease  of
his  own  person  and  abandon  to  distress  his  wife  and
children." — And,  as  is  known,  I  have  some  small  skill
in  the  science  of  accounts.  If,  through  your  respected
interest,  any  office  can  be  obtained  that  may  be  the
means  of  quieting  my  mind,  I  shall  not,  during  the
remainder  of  life,  be  able  to  express  my  sense  of
its  gratitude.

749


98  SHAIKH  SADL

I  replied,  O  brother,  the  service  of  kings  offers  a
twofold  prospect — a  hope  of  maintenance  and  a  fear
for  existence  ;  and  it  accords  not  with  the  counsel  of
the  wise,  under  that  expectation,  to  incur  this  risk. —
"No  tax-gatherer  will  enter  the  darwesh's  abode,
saying,  Pay  me  the  rent  of  a  field  and  orchard  ;  either
put  up  with  trouble  and  chagrin,  or  give  thy  heart-
strings to  the  crows  to  pluck."

He  said,  This  speech  is  not  made  as  applicable  to
my  case,  nor  have  you  given  me  a  categorical  answer.
Have  you  not  heard  what  has  been  remarked,  His
hand  will  tremble  on  rendering  his  account  who  has
been  accessory  to  a  dishonest  act. — "  Righteousness
will  insure  the  divine  favour  ;  I  never  met  him  going
astray  who  took  the  righteous  path." — And  philoso-
phers have  said,  Four  orders  of  people  are  mortally
afraid  of  four  others — the  revenue  embezzler,  of  the
king ;  the  thief,  of  the  watchman  ;  the  fornicator,  of
the  eavesdropper ;  and  the  adulteress,  of  the  censor.
But  what  has  he  to  fear  from  the  comptroller  who  has
a  fair  set  of  account-books? — "Be  not  extravagant
and  corrupt  while  in  office  if  thou  wishest  that  the
malice  of  thy  rival  may  be  circumscribed  on  settling
thy  accounts.  Be  undefiled,  O  brother,  in  thy  in-
tegrity, and  fear  nobody ;  washermen  will  beat  only
dirty  clothes  against  a  stone."

I  replied,  The  story  of  that  fox  suits  your  case,
which  they  saw  running  away,  stumbling  and  getting
up.  Somebody  asked  him,  What  calamity  has  hap-
pened to  put  you  in  such  a  state  of  trepidation  ?  He
said,  I  have  heard  that  they  are  putting  a  camel  in


SHAIKH  SADL  99

requisition.  The  other  answered,  O  silly  animal !
what  connection  has  a  camel  with  you,  or  what
resemblance  is  there  between  you  and  it  ?  He  said,
Be  silent ;  for  were  the  envious  from  malevolence  to
insist  that  this  is  a  camel,  and  I  should  be  seized  for
one,  who  would  be  so  solicitous  about  me  as  to  inquire
into  my  case  ?  And  before  they  can  bring  the  anti-
dote from  Irac  the  person  bitten  by  the  snake  may  be
dead.  In  like  manner,  you  possess  knowledge  and
integrity,  discrimination  and  probity,  yet  spies  lie  in
ambush,  and  informers  lurk  in  corners,  who,  notwith-
standing your  moral  rectitude,  will  note  down  the
opposite ;  and  should  you  anyhow  stand  arraigned
before  the  king,  and  occupy  the  place  of  his  reprehen-
sion, who  in  that  state  would  step  forward  in  your
defence?  Accordingly,  I  would  advise  that  you
should  secure  the  kingdom  of  contentment,  and  give
up  all  thoughts  of  preferment.  As  the  wise  have  said :
— "  The  benefits  of  a  sea  voyage  are  innumerable ;
but  if  thou  seekest  for  safety,  it  is  to  be  found  only
on  shore."

My  friend  listened  to  this  speech  ;  he  got  into  a
passion,  cavilled  at  my  fable,  and  began  to  question  it
with  warmth  and  asperity,  saying,  What  wisdom  or
propriety,  good  sense  or  morality,  is  there  in  this?
Here  is  verified  that  maxim  of  the  sage,  which  tells
us  they  are  friends  alone  that  can  serve  us  in  a  jail,
for  all  our  enemies  may  pretend  friendship  at  our
own  table. — "  Esteem  him  not  a  friend  who  during
thy  prosperity  will  brag  of  his  love  and  brotherly
affection.  I  account  him  a  friend  who  will  take  his


ioo  SHAIKH  SADL

friend  by  the  hand  when  struggling  with  despair,  and
overwhelmed  with  misfortune."

I  perceived  within  myself,  saying,  He  is  disturbed,
and  listens  to  my  advice  with  impatience ;  and,
having  called  upon  the  sahib  diwan,  or  lord  high
treasurer,  in  virtue  of  a  former  intimacy  that  subsisted
between  us,  I  stated  his  case  and  spoke  so  fully  upon
his  skill  and  merits,  that  he  put  him  in  nomination
for  a  trifling  office.  After  some  time,  having  adverted
to  his  kindly  disposition  and  approved  of  his  good
management,  his  promotion  was  in  train,  and  he  got
confirmed  in  a  much  higher  station.  Thus  was  the
star  of  his  good  fortune  in  ascension,  till  it  rose  into
the  zenith  of  ambition  ;  and  he  became  the  favourite
of  his  majesty  the  king,  towards  whom  all  turned  for
counsel,  and  upon  whom  all  eyes  rested  their  hopes !
I  rejoiced  at  this  prosperous  change  of  his  affairs,  and
said: — "Repine  not  at  thy  bankrupt  circumstances,  nor
let  thy  heart  despond,  for  the  fountain  of  immortality
has  its  source  of  chaos. — Take  heed,  O  brother  in
affliction  /  and  be  not  disheartened,  for  God  has  in
store  many  hidden  mercies. — Sit  not  down  soured  at
the  revolutions  of  the  times,  for  patience  is  bitter,  yet
it  will  yield  sweet  fruit."

At  that  juncture  I  happened  to  accompany  a  party
of  friends  on  a  journey  to  Hijaz,  or  Arabia  Petraea.
On  my  return  from  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  he  came
out  two  stages  to  meet  me.  I  perceived  that  his
outward  plight  was  wretched,  and  his  garb  that  of
darweshes.  I  asked,  How  is  this  ?  He  replied,  Just
as  you  said,  a  faction  bore  me  a  grudge  and  charged


SHAIKH  SADI.  101

me  with  malpractices  ;  and  the  king,  be  his  reign
eternal,  would  not  investigate  the  truth  of  that  charge,
and  my  old  and  best  friends  stood  aloof  from  my
defence,  and  overlooked  my  claims  on  our  former
acquaintance. — "  When,  through  an  act  of  God,  a  man
has  fallen,  the  whole  world  will  put  their  feet  upon
his  neck ;  when  they  see  that  fortune  has  taken  him
by  the  hand,  they  will  put  their  hands  upon  their
breasts,  and  be  loud  in  his  praise." — In  short,  I  under-
went all  manner  of  persecution  till  within  this  week,
that  the  tidings  of  the  safe  return  of  the  pilgrims
reached  us,  when  I  got  a  release  from  my  heavy
durance  and  a  confiscation  of  my  hereditary  tene-
ments. I  said,  At  that  time  you  did  not  listen  to  my
admonition,  when  I  warned  you  that  the  service  of
princes  is,  like  a  voyage  at  sea,  profitable  but  hazard-
ous :  you  either  get  a  treasure  or  perish  miserably. —
"  The  merchant  gains  the  shore  with  gold  in  both  his
hands,  or  a  wave  will  one  day  leave  him  dead  on  its
beach." — Not  deeming  it  generous  any  further  to
irritate  a  poor  man's  wound  with  the  asperity  of
reproach,  or  to  sprinkle  his  sore  with  the  salt  of  harsh
words,  I  made  a  summary  conclusion  in  these  two
verses,  and  said : — "  Wert  thou  not  aware  that  thou
shouldst  find  fetters  on  thy  feet  when  thou  wouldst  not
listen  to  the  generous  man's  counsel.  Thrust  not  again
thy  finger  into  a  scorpion's  hole  till  thou  canst  endure
the  pain  of  its  sting."

XVII.

I  was  the  companion  of  a  holy  fraternity,  whose


loa  SHAIKH  SADI.

manners  were  correct  from  piety,  and  minds  dis-
ciplined from  probity.  An  eminent  prince  entertained
a  high  and  respectful  opinion  of  the  worth  of  this
brotherhood,  and  had  assigned  it  an  endowment
Perhaps  one  of  them  committed  an  act  unworthy  of
the  character  of  darweshes ;  for  the  good  opinion  of
that  personage  was  forfeited,  and  the  market  of  their
support  shut  I  wished  that  I  could  by  any  means
re-establish  the  maintenance  of  my  friends,  and
attempted  to  wait  on  the  great  man  ;  but  his  porter
opposed  my  entrance,  and  turned  me  away  with
rudeness.  I  excused  him  conformably  with  what  the
witty  have  said : — "  Till  thou  canst  take  an  introduc-
tion along  with  thee  approach  not  the  gate  of  a
prince,  vizier,  or  lord ;  for  the  dog  and  the  door-
keeper, on  espying  a  beggar,  will  the  one  seize  his
skirt  and  the  other  his  collar." —

When  the  favourite  attendants  of  that  great  man
were  aware  of  my  situation,  they  ushered  me  into  his
presence  with  respect,  and  offered  me  the  highest  seat ;
but  in  humility  I  took  the  lowest,  and  said  : — "  Per-
mit that  I,  the  slave  of  the  abject,  should  seat  myself
on  a  level  with  servants." — The  great  man  answered,
My  God,  my  God !  what  room  is  there  for  this
speech  ?  "  Wert  thou  to  seat  thyself  upon  the  pupil
of  mine  eye,  I  would  court  thy  dalliance,  for  thou  art
lovely."—

In  short,  I  took  my  seat,  and  entered  upon  a  variety
of  topics,  till  the  indiscretion  of  my  friends  was
brought  upon  the  carpet,  when  I  said : — "  What  fault
did  the  lord  of  past  munificence  remark,  that  his


SHAIKH  SADL  103

servant  should  seem  so  contemptible  in  his  sight
Individually  with  God  is  the  perfection  of  majesty
and  goodness,  who  can  discern  our  failings  and  con-
tinue to  us  his  support." — When  the  prince  heard  this
sentiment  he  subscribed  to  its  omnipotence;  and,
with  regard  to  the  stipendiary  allowance  of  my
friends,  he  ordered  its  continuance  as  heretofore,  and
a  faithful  discharge  of  all  arrears.  I  thanked  him  for
his  generosity,  kissed  the  dust  of  obeisance,  apologised
for  my  boldness,  and  at  the  moment  of  taking  my
leave,  added:  "When  the  fane  of  the  Cablah,  at
Mecca,  became  their  object  from  a  far-distant  land,
pilgrims  would  hurry  on  to  visit  it  for  many  farsangs.
It  behoves  thee  to  put  up  with  such  as  we  are,  for
nobody  will  throw  a  stone  at  a  tree  that  bears  no
fruit."

XVIII.

A  prince  inherited  immense  riches  by  succeeding
to  his  father.  He  opened  the  hand  of  liberality,
displayed  his  munificence,  and  bestowed  innumerable
gifts  upon  his  troops  and  people.  "  The  brain  will
not  be  perfumed  by  a  censer  of  green  aloes  wood,
place  it  over  the  fire  that  it  may  diffuse  fragrance  like
ambergris.  If  ambitious  of  a  great  name,  make  a
practice  of  munificence,  for  the  crop  will  not  shoot  till
thou  shalt  sow  the  seed." —

A  narrow-minded  courtier  began  to  admonish  him,
saying,  Verily,  former  sovereigns  have  collected  this
wealth  with  scrupulosity  and  stored  it  advisedly.
Check  your  hand  in  this  waste,  for  accidents  wait


io4  SHAIKH  SADL

ahead,  and  foes  lurk  behind.  God  forbid  that  you
should  want  it  on  a  day  of  need. — "  Wert  thou  to
distribute  the  contents  of  a  granary  among  the
people,  every  master  of  a  family  might  receive  a  grain
of  rice  ;  why  not  exact  a  grain  of  silver  from  each,
that  thou  mightest  daily  hoard  a  chamber  full  of
treasure  ?  "

The  prince  turned  his  face  aside  from  this  speech,
so  contrary  to  his  own  lofty  sentiments,  and  harshly
reprimanded  him,  saying,  A  great  and  glorious  God
made  me  sovereign  of  this  property,  that  I  might
enjoy  and  spend  it ;  and  posted  me  not  a  sentinel,  to
hoard  and  watch  over  it. — "  Carown  perished,  who
possessed  forty  magazines  of  treasure ;  Nushirowan
died  not,  who  left  behind  him  a  fair  reputation."

XIX.

They  have  related  that  at  a  hunting  seat  they  were
roasting  some  game  for  Nushirowan,  and  as  there
was  no  salt  they  were  despatching  a  servant  to  the
village  to  fetch  some.  Nushirowan  called  to  him,
saying,  Take  it  at  its  fair  price,  and  not  by  force,
lest  a  bad  precedent  be  established  and  the  village
desolated.  They  asked,  What  damage  can  ensue
from  this  trifle?  He  answered,  Originally,  the  basis
of  oppression  in  this  world  was  small,  and  every  new-
comer added  to  it,  till  it  reached  to  its  present  extent :
— "Let  the  monarch  eat  but  one  apple  from  a  peasant's
orchard,  and  his  guards,  or  slaves,  will  pull  up  the
tree  by  its  root  From  the  plunder  of  five  eggs,  that


SHAIKH  SADI.  105

the    king    shall    sanction,    his    troops   will    stick    a
thousand  fowls  on  their  spits."


XX.

I  have  heard  of  a  revenue-collector  who  would
distrain  the  huts  of  the  peasantry,  that  he  might
enrich  the  treasury  of  the  sovereign,  regardless  of  that
maxim  of  the  wise,  who  have  said,  Whoever  can
offend  the  Most  High,  that  he  may  gain  the  heart
of  a  fellow-creature,  God  on  high  will  instigate  that
creature  against  him,  till  he  dig  out  the  foundation  of
his  fortune : — "  That  crackling  in  the  flame  is  not
caused  by  burning  rue,  but  it  is  the  sigh  of  the
afflicted  that  occasions  it"

They  say,  Of  all  animals  the  lion  is  the  chief;  and
of  beasts  the  ass  is  the  meanest ;  yet,  with  the  con-
currence of  the  wise,  the  burthen-bearing  ass  is
preferable  to  the  man-devouring  lion. — "  The  poor
ass,  though  devoid  of  understanding,  will  be  held
precious  when  carrying  a  burthen ;  oxen  and  asses
that  carry  loads  are  preferable  to  men  that  injure
their  fellow-creatures."

The  king  had  reported  to  him  a  part  of  his
nefarious  conduct  He  put  him  to  the  rack,  and
tortured  him  to  death. — "  Thou  canst  not  obtain  the
sovereign's  approbation  till  thou  make  sure  of  the
good-will  of  his  people.  Wishest  thou  that  God
shall  be  bountiful  to  thee,  be  thou  good  thyself  to
the  creatures  of  God." —

One  who  had  suffered  from  his  oppression  passed


106  SHAIKH  SADL

him  at  the  time  of  his  execution,  and  said : — "  It  is  not
every  man  that  may  have  the  strong  arm  of  high
station,  that  can  in  his  government  take  an  im-
moderate freedom  with  the  subjects'  property.  It  is
possible  to  cram  a  bone  down  the  throat,  but  when  it
sticks  at  the  navel  it  will  burst  open  the  belly."


XXI.


They  tell  a  story  of  an  evil-disposed  person  who
struck  a  pious  good  man  on  the  head  with  a  stone.
Having  no  power  of  revenge,  the  darwesh  was
keeping  the  stone  by  him  till  an  occasion  when  the
sovereign  let  loose  the  army  of  his  wrath,  and  cast
him  into  a  dungeon.  The  poor  man  went  up  and
flung  that  stone  at  his  head.  The  person  spoke  to
him,  saying,  Who  are  you,  and  why  did  you  throw
this  stone  at  my  head  ?  He  answered,  I  am  that
poor  man,  and  this  is  the  same  stone  that  you  on  a
certain  occasion  flung  at  my  head.  He  said,  Where
have  you  been  all  this  time  ?  The  poor  man
answered,  I  stood  in  awe  of  your  high  station,  but
now  that  I  found  you  in  a  dungeon,  I  availed  myself
of  the  opportunity,  as  they  have  said — "  Whilst  they
saw  the  worthless  man  in  prosperity,  the  wise  thought
proper  to  show  him  respect.  Now  thou  hast  not
sharp  and  tearing  nails,  it  is  prudent  for  thee  to  defer
to  engage  with  the  wicked.  Whoever  grappled  with
a  steel-armed  wrist  exposed  his  own  silver  arm  to
torture.  Wait  till  fortune  can  manacle  his  hands,


SHAIKH  SADL  107

then  beat  out  his  brains  to  the  satisfaction  of  thy
friends."

XXII.

A  king  of  Khorasan  was  afflicted  with  so  shocking
a  distemper  that  it  is  better  not  to  enter  upon  its
pathology.  A  body  of  Greek  physicians  agreed  that
there  was  in  fact  no  other  remedy  for  this  disease  but
the  gall  of  a  person  whom  they  identified  under  a
certain  temperament.  The  king  ordered  that  they
would  make  inquiry,  and  they  discovered  a  peasant's
son  who  answered  that  description  which  the  faculty
had  specified.  He  called  his  father  and  mother,  and
secured  their  consent  by  giving  them  a  large  present.
The  Cazy  issued  a  death-warrant,  stating,  It  is  lawful
to  shed  a  subject's  blood  in  order  to  restore  health  to
the  sovereign ;  and  the  executioner  stood  ready  to
carry  the  sentence  into  effect  The  youth  cast  his
eyes  up  to  heaven,  and,  smiling  the  while,  was  mutter-
ing something  between  his  teeth.  The  king  asked,
saying,  In  this  situation  what  room  is  there  for
smiling  ?  He  replied,  Children  look  to  their  parents
to  caress  them  ;  their  wrongs  they  refer  to  the  Cazy
to  redress  them,  and  from  the  sovereign  they  expect
justice.  Now  that  my  father  and  mother,  for  vain
and  worldly  considerations,  have  consigned  me  to
death,  the  judge,  by  his  warrant,  has  sanctioned  my
•execution,  and  the  king  looks  for  his  own  safety  in
my  destruction,  I  can  have  no  refuge  but  with  God
on  high. — "  Before  whom  can  I  raise  the  hand  of


io8  SHAIKH  SADL

complaint  against  thee;    at  thy  hand  am  I  to  seek
justice  against  thee  ?  " —

The  king's  heart  was  touched  at  this  speech,  and
the  tears  stood  collected  in  his  eyes.  He  said,  My
death  were  preferable  to  shedding  the  blood  of  one  so
innocent  Then  he  kissed  his  head  and  eyes,  took
him  in  his  arms,  gave  him  immense  presents,  and  set
him  at  liberty.  They  have  related  that  within  that
week  the  king  was  cured  of  his  complaint. — "As
applicable  to  which  is  that  stanza  of  mine,  which  an
elephant-driver  rehearsed  on  the  bank  of  the  river
Nile.  If  thou  knowest  not  the  ant's  state  under  thy
foot,  it  is  like  thine  own  as  trampled  on  by  an
elephant." —

XXIII.

One  of  King  Umraw-layas's  slaves  had  absconded,
and  people  that  went  after  him  brought  him  back.
The  vizier,  who  had  a  dislike  to  him,  used  his  interest
to  have  him  put  to  death,  that  the  other  slaves  [as
he  pretended]  might  not  commit  the  same  offence.
The  poor  slave  fell  at  Umraw-layas's  feet,  and  said :
"  Whatever  may  befall  me,  if  thou  approve  of  it,  it  is
so  far  proper.  What  plea  can  a  vassal  offer  against  his
lord  and  master's  decree  ?  " — Nevertheless,  inasmuch
as  I  am  the  nurtured  gift  of  this  house,  I  could  not
wish  that  on  the  last  day's  reckoning  my  blood  should
stand  charged  to  your  account.  If,  at  all  events,  you
are  resolved  to  put  this  your  slave  to  death,  let  it  be
done  with  a  plea  of  legality,  that  you  may  not  be
censured  at  the  day  of  resurrection.  The  king  asked,


SHAIKH  SADL  109

How  can  I  set  up  a  legal  plea  ?  He  replied,  Issue
your  command  that  I  may  kill  the  vizier,  then  give
an  order  to  put  me  to  death  in  retaliation  for  him,
that  you  may  kill  me  according  to  law  !  The  king
smiled  and  asked  the  vizier,  What  is  your  advice  in
this  case  ?  The  vizier  said,  O  sovereign  of  the  world  !
I  beg,  for  the  sake  of  God,  that  you  will  manumit  this
audacious  fellow  as  a  propitiation  at  the  tomb  of  your
forefathers,  lest  he  also  involve  me  in  calamity.  The
fault  was  on  my  side,  in  not  doing  justice  to  the
saying  of  the  wise,  who  have  warned  us : — "  When
thou  didst  enter  the  lists  with  a  practised  slinger,
in  thy  want  of  skill  thou  exposedst  thine  own  head
to  be  broken.  When  thou  didst  discharge  thine
arrow  at  thy  antagonist's  face  thou  shouldst  have
been  upon  thy  guard,  for  thou  hadst  become  his
butt."—

XXIV.

King  Zuzan  had  a  minister  of  a  generous  spirit  and
kindly  disposition,  who  was  polite  to  all  persons  while
present,  and  spoke  well  of  them  when  absent  One
of  his  acts  happened  to  displease  the  king,  who  put
him  under  stoppages,  and  in  rigorous  confinement.
The  officers  of  the  crown  were  sensible  of  his  former
benefits,  and  pledged  to  show  their  gratitude  of  them.
Accordingly,  whilst  under  their  charge,  they  treated
him  with  courtesy  and  benevolence,  and  would  not
use  any  coercion  or  violence: — "If  thou  desirest  to
remain  at  peace  with  a  rival,  whenever  he  slanders
thee  behind  thy  back  speak  well  of  him  to  his  face.


no  SHAIKH  SADL

The  perverse  man  cavils  for  the  last  word  ;  unless
thou  preferest  his  bitter  remarks,  make  his  mouth
sweet." —

Of  the  charge  against  him  at  the  king's  exchequer
part  had  been  adjusted  according  to  its  settlement,
and  he  remained  in  durance  for  the  balance.  A
bordering  prince  sent  him  underhand  a  letter,  stating,
The  sovereign  of  that  quarter  has  not  appreciated
such  worth,  nay,  has  dishonoured  it,  and  with  us  it
bore  a  heavy  price.  If  the  precious  mind  of  a  certain
personage,  may  God  facilitate  his  deliverance,  will
incline  favourably  towards  us,  every  possible  exertion
shall  be  made  to  conciliate  his  good-will,  and  the
cabinet  ministers  of  this  kingdom  are  exulting  in  the
prospect  of  seeing  him,  and  anxious  for  the  answer  of
this  letter.  The  minister  made  himself  master  of  the
contents.  He  pondered  on  the  danger,  wrote  such
a  brief  answer  as  seemed  discreet  upon  the  back  of
the  letter,  and  returned  it.  One  of  the  hangers-on  at
court  had  notice  of  this  circumstance.  He  apprised
the  king,  saying,  A  certain  person  whom  you  have
put  in  confinement  is  corresponding  with  a  neigh-
bouring prince.  The  king  was  wroth,  and  ordered
an  investigation  of  this  intelligence.  The  messenger
was  seized,  and  letter  read.  On  the  back  of  it  he  had
written,  stating,  The  good  opinion  of  his  majesty
exceeds  the  merits  of  this  slave  ;  but  the  honoured
approbation  he  has  bestowed  upon  a  servant  cannot
possibly  have  his  consent,  for  he  is  the  fostered  gift
of  this  house,  and  he  cannot  on  a  trifling  change  of
affection  betray  his  ancient  benefactor  and  patron.


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  in

— "  Though  once  in  his  life  he  may  grate  thee  with
harshness,  excuse  him  who  on  every  occasion  else
has  soothed  thee  with  kindness." — The  king  com-
mended his  fidelity,  bestowed  on  him  an  honorary
dress  and  largess,  and  made  his  excuses,  saying,  I
was  to  blame,  that  could  do  you  an  injury.  He
replied,  In  this  instance,  my  lord,  your  servant  sees
no  blame  that  attaches  to  you  ;  but  such  was  the
ordination  of  God,  ivhose  name  was  glorified,  that  this
your  devoted  slave  should  verily  be  overtaken  with  a
calamity.  Accordingly,  it  is  more  tolerable  at  the
hand  of  you,  who  possess  the  rights  of  past  good,  and
have  claims  of  gratitude  on  this  servant: — "Be  not
offended  with  mankind  should  any  mischief  assail
thee,  for  neither  pleasure  nor  pain  originate  with  thy
fellow-being.  Know  that  the  contrariety  of  foe  and
friend  proceeds  from  God,  and  that  the  hearts  of
both  are  at  his  disposal.  Though  the  arrow  may
seem  to  issue  from  the  bow,  the  intelligent  can  see
that  the  archer  gave  it  its  aim." —

XXV.

I  have  heard  that  one  of  the  kings  of  Arabia
directed  the  officers  of  his  treasury,  saying,  You
will  double  a  certain  person's  salary,  whatever  it  may
be,  for  he  is  constant  in  attendance  and  ready  for
orders,  while  the  other  courtiers  are  diverted  by  play,
and  negligent  of  their  duty.  A  good  and  holy  man
overheard  this,  and  heaved  a  sigh  and  groan  from  the
bottom  of  his  bosom.  They  asked,  saying,  What


ii2  SHAIKH  SADL

vision  did  you  see?  He  replied,  The  exalted  man-
sions of  his  devoted  servants  will  be  after  this  manner
portioned  out  at  the  judgment-seat  of  a  Most  High
and  Mighty  Deity  ! — "  If  for  two  mornings  a  person
is  assiduous  about  the  person  of  the  king,  on  the  third
he  will  in  some  shape  regard  him  with  affection.
The  sincerely  devout  exist  in  the  hope  that  they  shall
not  depart  disappointed  from  God's  threshold.  The
rank  of  a  prince  is  the  reward  of  obedience.  Dis-
obedience to  command  is  a  proof  of  rejection.
Whoever  has  the  aspect  of  the  upright  and  good
will  lay  the  face  of  duty  at  this  threshold."

XXVI.

They  tell  a  story  of  a  tyrant  who  bought  fire-wood
from  the  poor  at  a  low  price,  and  sold  it  to  the  rich  at
an  advance.  A  good  and  holy  man  went  up  to  him
and  said,  "  Thou  art  a  snake,  who  bitest  everybody
thou  seest ;  or  an  owl,  who  diggest  up  and  makest  a
ruin  of  the  place  where  thou  sittest : — Although  thy
injustice  may  pass  unpunished  among  us,  it  cannot
escape  God,  the  knower  of  secrets.  Be  not  unjust
with  the  people  of  this  earth,  that  their  complaints
may  not  rise  up  to  heaven." —

They  say  the  unjust  man  was  offended  at  his
words,  turned  aside  his  face,  and  showed  him  no
civility,  as  they  have  expressed  it  [in  the  Koran]  : — He,
the  glorified  God,  overtook  him  amidst  his  sins  : — till  one
night,  when  the  fire  of  his  kitchen  fell  upon  the  stack
of  wood,  consumed  all  his  property,  and  laid  him


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  113

from  the  bed  of  voluptuousness  upon  the  ashes  of  hell
torments.  That  good  and  holy  man  happened  to  be
passing  and  observed  him  that  he  was  remarking  to
his  friends,  I  cannot  fancy  whence  this  fire  fell  upon
my  dwelling.  He  said,  From  the  smoke  of  the  hearts
of  the  poor  ! — "  Guard  against  the  smoke  of  the  sore-
afflicted  heart,  for  an  inside  sore  will  at  last  gather
into  a  head.  Give  nobody's  heart  pain  so  long  as
thou  canst  avoid  it,  for  one  sigh  may  set  a  whole
world  into  a  flame."

They  have  related  that  tJiese  verses  were  inscribed  in
golden  letters  upon  Kai-khosraw 's  crown : — "  How  many
years,  and  what  a  continuance  of  ages,  that  mankind
shall  on  this  earth  walk  over  my  head.  As  the
kingdom  came  to  me  from  hand  to  hand,  so  it  shall
pass  into  the  hands  of  others." —

XXVII.

A  person  had  become  a  master  in  the  art  of  wrest-
ling ;  he  knew  three  hundred  and  sixty  sleights  in
this  art,  and  could  exhibit  a  fresh  trick  for  every  day
throughout  the  year.  Perhaps  owing  to  a  liking  that
a  corner  of  his  heart  took  for  the  handsome  person  of
one  of  his  scholars,  he  taught  him  three  hundred  and
fifty-nine  of  those  feats,  but  he  was  putting  off  the
instruction  of  one,  and  under  some  pretence  deferring
it.

In  short  the  youth  became  such  a  proficient  in  the
art  and  talent  of  wrestling  that  none  of  his  contem-
poraries had  ability  to  cope  with  him,  till  he  at  length

75°


ii4  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

had  one  day  boasted  before  the  reigning  sovereign,
saying,  To  any  superiority  my  master  possesses  over
me,  he  is  beholden  to  my  reverence  of  his  seniority,
and  in  virtue  of  his  tutorage ;  otherwise  I  am  not
inferior  in  power,  and  am  his  equal  in  skill.  This
want  of  respect  displeased  the  king.  He  ordered  a
wrestling  match  to  be  held,  and  a  spacious  field  to  be
fenced  in  for  the  occasion.  The  ministers  of  state,
nobles  of  the  court,  and  gallant  men  of  the  realm
were  assembled,  and  the  ceremonials  of  the  combat
marshalled.  Like  a  huge  and  lusty  elephant,  the
youth  rushed  into  the  ring  with  such  a  crash  that  had
a  brazen  mountain  opposed  him  he  would  have  moved
it  from  its  base.  The  master  being  aware  that  the
youth  was  his  superior  in  strength,  engaged  him  in
that  strange  feat  of  which  he  had  kept  him  ignorant.
The  youth  was  unacquainted  with  its  guard.  Advanc-
ing, nevertheless,  the  master  seized  him  with  both
hands,  and,  lifting  him  bodily  from  the  ground,  raised
him  above  his  head  and  flung  him  on  the  earth.  The
crowd  set  up  a  shout  The  king  ordered  them  to  give
the  master  an  honorary  dress  and  handsome  largess,
and  the  youth  he  addressed  with  reproach  and
asperity,  saying,  You  played  the  traitor  with  your
own  patron,  and  failed  in  your  presumption  of  oppos-
ing him.  He  replied,  O  sire !  my  master  did  not
overcome  me  by  strength  and  ability,  but  one  cunning
trick  in  the  art  of  wrestling  was  left  which  he  was
reserved  in  teaching  me,  and  by  that  little  feat  had  to-
day the  upper  hand  of  me.  The  master  said,  I  reserved
myself  for  such  a  day  as  this.  As  the  wise  have  told


SHAIKH  SADL  115

us,  Put  it  not  so  much  into  a  friend's  power  that,  if
hostilely  disposed,  he  can  do  you  an  injury.  Have
you  not  heard  what  that  man  said  who  was  treacher-
ously dealt  with  by  his  own  pupil : — "  Either  in  fact
there  was  no  good  faith  in  this  world,  or  nobody  has
perhaps  practised  it  in  our  days.  No  person  learned
the  art  of  archery  from  me  who  did  not  in  the  end
make  me  his  butt"

XXVIII.

A  solitary  darwesh  had  taken  up  his  station  at  the
corner  of  a  desert  A  king  was  passing  by  him.
Inasmuch  as  contentment  is  the  enjoyment  of  a
kingdom,  the  darwesh  did  not  raise  his  head,  nor
show  him  the  least  mark  of  attention  ;  and,  inasmuch
as  sovereignty  is  regal  pomp,  the  king  took  offence,
and  said,  The  tribe  of  ragged  mendicants  resemble
brute  beasts,  and  have  neither  grace  nor  good  man-
ners. The  vizier  stepped  up  to  him,  and  said :  O
generous  man !  the  sovereign  of  the  universe  has
passed  by  you  ;  why  did  you  not  do  him  homage,  and
discharge  the  duty  of  obeisance  ?  He  answered  and
said,  Speak  to  your  sovereign,  saying :  Expect  service
from  that  person  who  will  court  your  favour  ;  let  him
moreover  know  that  kings  are  meant  for  the  protection
of  the  people,  and  not  the  people  for  the  subjects  of
kings. — "  Though  it  be  for  their  benefit  that  his  glory
is  exalted,  yet  is  the  king  but  the  shepherd  of  the
poor.  The  sheep  are  not  intended  for  the  service  of
the  shepherd,  but  the  shepherd  is  appointed  to  tend
the  sheep. — To-day  thou  mayest  observe  one  man


n6  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

proud  from  prosperity,  another  with  a  heart  sore  from
adversity ;  have  patience  for  a  few  days  till  the  dust
of  the  grave  can  consume  the  brain  of  that  vain  and
foolish  head.  When  the  record  of  destiny  came  to
take  effect,  the  distinction  of  liege  and  subject  dis-
appeared. Were  a  person  to  turn  up  the  dust  of  the
defunct,  he  could  not  distinguish  that  of  the  rich  man
from  the  poor."

These  sayings  made  a  strong  impression  upon  the
king  ;  he  said  :  Ask  me  for  something.  He  replied  :
What  I  desire  is,  that  you  will  not  trouble  me  again !
The  king  said,  Favour  me  with  a  piece  of  advice.  He
answered : — "  Attend  to  them  now  that  the  good  things
of  this  life  are  in  thy  hands  ;  for  wealth  and  dominion
are  passing  from  one  hand  into  another."


XXIX.

One  of  the  king's  ministers  went  to  Zu-an-nun
(Jonah),  the  Egyptian,  and  asked  his  blessing,  saying,
Day  and  night  I  am  occupied  in  the  service  of  my
prince,  hoping  for  his  favour  and  dreading  his  dis-
pleasure. Zu-an-nun  wept  and  answered:  Had  I
feared  the  most  high  God  as  you  have  feared  the  king,
I  should  have  been  among  the  number  of  elect! —
"  Were  there  not  the  hope  of  reward  and  punishment
hereafter,  the  foot  of  the  darwesh  had  stept  into  the
celestial  sphere.  Had  the  vizier  stood  in  the  same
awe  of  God  that  he  did  of  the  king,  he  might  have
been  an  angel  of  heaven."


SHAIKH  SADL  1 1 7


XXX.

A  king  ordered  an  innocent  person  to  be  put  to
death.  The  man  said,  Seek  not  your  own  hurt  by
venting  any  anger  you  may  entertain  against  me.
The  king  asked,  How  ?  He  replied,  The  pain  of  this
punishment  will  continue  with  me  for  a  moment,  but
the  sin  of  it  will  endure  with  you  for  ever. — "  The
period  of  this  life  passes  by  like  the  wind  of  the
desert.  Joy  and  sorrow,  beauty  and  deformity,
equally  pass  away.  The  tyrant  vainly  thought  that
he  did  me  an  injury,  but  round  his  neck  it  clung  and
passed  over  me."

The  king  profited  by  this  advice,  spared  his  life,
and  asked  his  forgiveness.

XXXI.

The  cabinet  ministers  of  Nushirowan  were  debating
an  important  affair  of  state,  and  each  delivered  his
opinion  according  to  the  best  of  his  judgment.  In
like  manner  the  king  also  delivered  his  sentiments,
and  Abu-zarchamahr,  the  prime  minister,  accorded  in
opinion  with  him.  The  other  ministers  whispered
him,  saying,  What  did  you  see  superior  in  the  king's
opinion  that  you  preferred  it  to  the  judgment  of  so
many  wise  heads  ?  He  replied  :  Because  the  event  is
doubtful,  and  the  opinion  of  all  rests  in  the  pleasure  of
the  most  high  God  whether  it  shall  be  right  or  wrong.
Accordingly  it  is  safer  to  conform  with  the  judgment


n8  SHAIKH  SADI.

of  the  king,  because  if  that  shall  prove  wrong,  our
obsequiousness  to  his  will  shall  secure  us  from  his
displeasure. — "  To  sport  an  opinion  contrary  to  the
judgment  of  the  king  were  to  wash  our  hands  in  our
own  blood.  Were  he  verily  to  say  this  day  is  night,
it  would  behove  us  to  reply :  Lo !  there  are  the  moon
and  seven  stars." —

XXXII.

An  impostor  plaited  his  hair  and  spake,  saying,  I
am  a  descendant  of  AH  ;  and  he  entered  the  city
along  with  the  caravan  from  Hijaz,  saying,  I  come  a
pilgrim  from  Mecca ;  and  he  presented  a  Casidah  or
elegy  to  the  king,  saying,  I  have  composed  it !  The
king  gave  him  money,  treated  him  with  respect,  and
ordered  him  to  be  shown  much  flattering  attention ;
till  one  of  the  courtiers,  who  had  that  day  returned
from  a  voyage  at  sea,  said,  I  saw  him  on  the  Eeduzha,
or  anniversary  of  sacrifice  at  Busrah;  how  then  can
he  be  a  Haji,  or  pilgrim?  Another  said,  Now  I
recollect  him,  his  father  was  a  Christian  at  Malatiyah
(Malta) ;  how  then  can  he  be  a  descendant  of  AH  ?
And  they  discovered  his  verses  in  the  diwan  of
Anwari.  The  king  ordered  that  they  should  beat
and  drive  him  away,  saying,  How  came  you  to  utter
so  many  falsehoods  ?  He  replied,  O  sovereign  of  the
universe !  I  will  utter  one  speech  more,  and  if  that
may  not  prove  true,  I  shall  deserve  whatever  punish-
ment you  may  command.  The  king  asked,  What
may  that  be  ?  He  said : — "  If  a  peasant  bring  thee  a
cup  of  junket,  two  measures  of  it  will  be  water  and


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  119

one  spoonful  of  it  buttermilk.  If  thy  slave  spake  idly
be  not  offended,  for  great  travellers  deal  most  in  the
marvellous !  " — The  king  smiled  and  replied,  You
never  in  your  life  spake  a  truer  word.  He  directed
them  to  gratify  his  expectations,  and  he  departed
happy  and  content

XXXIII.

They  have  related  that  one  of  the  viziers  would
compassionate  the  weak  and  meditate  the  good  of
everybody.  He  happened  to  fall  under  the  royal
displeasure,  and  they  all  strove  to  obtain  his  release.
Such  as  had  him  in  custody  were  indulgent  in  their
restraint,  and  his  fellow-grandees  were  loud  in  pro-
claiming his  virtues,  till  the  king  pardoned  his  fault.
A  good  and  holy  man  was  apprised  of  these  events,
and  said : — "  In  order  to  conciliate  the  good-will  of
friends,  it  were  better  to  sell  our  patrimonial  garden ;
in  order  to  boil  the  pot  of  well-wishers,  it  were  good
to  convert  our  household  furniture  into  fire- wood.
Do  good  even  to  the  wicked  ;  it  is  as  well  to  shut  a
dog's  mouth  with  a  crumb." —

XXXIV.

One  of  Harun-ar-rashid's  children  went  up  to  his
father  in  a  passion,  saying,  A  certain  officer's  son  has
abused  me  in  my  mother's  name.  Harun  asked  his
ministers,  What  ought  to  be  such  a  person's  punish-
ment ?  One  made  a  sign  to  have  him  put  to  death ;
another  to  have  his  tongue  cut  out ;  and  a  third,  to


120  SHAIKH  SADL

have  him  fined  and  banished.  Harun  said  :  O  my
child  !  it  were  generous  to  forgive  him  ;  but  if  you
have  not  resolution  to  do  that,  do  you  abuse  his
mother  in  return,  yet  not  to  such  a  degree  as  to
exceed  the  bounds  of  retaliation,  for  in  that  case  the
injury  would  be  on  our  part,  and  the  complaint  on
that  of  the  antagonist. — "  In  the  opinion  of  the
prudent  he  is  no  hero  that  can  dare  to  combat  a
furious  elephant ;  but  that  man  is  in  truth  a  hero  who,
when  provoked  to  anger,  will  not  speak  intern  per  ately.
— A  cross-grained  fellow  abused  a  certain  person  ;  he
bore  it  patiently,  and  said,  O  well-disposed  man  !  I
am  still  more  wicked  than  thou  art  calling  me  ;  for
1  know  my  defects  better  than  thou  canst  know
them."—

XXXV.

I  was  seated  in  a  vessel  along  with  some  persons  of
distinction,  when  a  boat  sunk  astern  of  us  and  two
brothers  were  drawn  into  the  whirlpool.  One  of  our
gentlemen  called  to  the  pilot,  saying,  Save  those  two
drowning  men  and  I  will  give  you  a  hundred  dinars.
The  pilot  went  and  rescued  one  of  them,  but  the
other  perished.  I  observed,  That  man's  time  was
come,  therefore  you  were  tardy  in  assisting  him,  and
alert  in  saving  this  other.  The  pilot  smiled,  and
replied,  What  you  say  is  the  essence  of  inevitable
necessity;  yet  was  my  zeal  more  hearty  in  rescuing
this  one,  because  on  an  occasion  when  I  was  tired  in
the  desert  he  set  me  on  a  camel ;  whereas,  when  a
boy,  I  had  received  a  horsewhipping  from  that  other.


SHAIKH  SADL  121

— God  Almighty  was  all  justice  and  equity:  whoever
laboured  imto  good  experienced  good  in  himself  ;  and  Jie
who  toiled  unto  evil  experienced  evil. — "  So  long  as
thou  art  able  grate  nobody's  heart,  for  in  this  path
there  must  be  thorns.  Expedite  the  concerns  of  the
poor  and  needy ;  for  thy  own  concerns  may  need  to
be  expedited."

XXXVI.

There  were  two  brothers  in  Egypt,  one  of  whom
served  the  king,  and  the  other  ate  the  bread  of  his  own
industry.  On  one  occasion  the  rich  man  said  to  his
poor  brother,  Why  do  you  not  serve  the  king,  that
you  may  relieve  yourself  from  the  hardship  of  labour?
He  replied,  Why  do  you  not  engage  in  business,  that
you  may  release  yourself  from  the  ignominy  of
service  ?  As  philosophers  have  said  : — To  eat  barley-
bread  and  sit  at  our  own  ease,  is  more  creditable  than
to  wear  a  golden  girdle  and  stand  up  in  service. — "  To
use  the  hands  in  making  quicklime  into  mortar  is
better  than  to  cross  them  on  the  breast  in  attendance
on  a  prince. — My  precious  life  was  wasted  in  the
thought  of  what  I  must  eat  in  the  summer,  and  wear
in  the  winter.  Be  content,  O  ignoble  belly !  with  a
crust  of  bread,  that  thou  mayest  not  bend  thy  back
double  in  servitude."

XXXVII.

A  person  announced  to  Nushirowan  the  Just,
saying,  I  have  heard  that  God,  glorious  and  great,
has  removed  from  this  world  a  certain  man  who  was


122  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

your  enemy.  He  said,  Have  you  had  any  intelli-
gence that  he  has  overlooked  me  ? — "  In  the  death  of
a  rival  I  have  no  room  for  exultation,  since  my  life
also  is  not  to  last  for  ever."


XXXVIII.

At  the  court  of  Kisra,  or  Nushirowan,  a  cabinet
council  were  debating  some  state  affair.  Abuzar-
chamahr,  who  sat  as  president,  was  silent  They
asked  him,  Why  do  you  not  join  us  in  this  discussion  ?
He  replied,  Such  ministers  of  state  are  like  physicians,
and  a  physician  will  prescribe  a  medicine  only  to  a
sick  man  ;  accordingly,  so  long  as  I  see  that  your
opinions  are  judicious,  it  were  ill-judged  in  me  to
obtrude  a  word. — "  While  business  can  proceed  with-
out my  interference,  it  does  not  behove  me  to  speak
on  the  subject ;  but  were  I  to  see  a  blind  man
walking  into  a  pit,  I  would  be  much  to  blame  if  I
remained  silent"

XXXIX.

When  he  reduced  the  kingdom  of  Misr,  or  Egypt,
to  obedience,  Harun-ar-rashid  said,  In  contempt  of
that  impious  rebel  [Pharaoh],  who,  in  his  pride  of
the  sovereignty  of  Egypt,  boasted  a  divinity,  I  will
bestow  its  government  only  on  the  vilest  of  my
slaves.  He  had  a  negro  bondsman,  called  Khosayib,
preciously  stupid,  and  him  he  appointed  to  rule  over
Egypt.  They  tell  us  that  his  judgment  and  under-
standing were  such,  that  when  a  body  of  farmers


SHAIKH  SADL  123

complained  to  him,  saying,  We  had  planted  some
cotton  shrubs  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  and  the  rains
came  unseasonably,  and  swept  them  all  away ; — he
replied,  You  ought  to  sow  wool,  that  it  might  not  be
swept  away  !  A  good  and  holy  man  heard  this,  and
said : — "  Were  our  fortune  to  be  increased  in  proportion
to  our  knowledge,  none  could  be  scantier  than  the
share  of  the  fool ;  but  fortune  will  bestow  such  wealth
upon  the  ignorant  as  shall  astonish  a  hundred  of  the
learned.  Power  and  fortune  depend  not  on  know-
ledge, they  are  obtained  only  through  the  aid  of
heaven  ;  for  it  has  often  happened  in  this  world  that
the  illiterate  are  honoured,  and  the  wise  held  in
scorn.  The  fool  in  his  idleness  found  a  treasure  under
a  ruin ;  the  chemist,  or  projector,  fell  the  victim  of
disappointment  and  chagrin."

XI*

[This  Apologue  is  partly  omitted.}

They  took  a  damsel  of  China  to  a  king.  In  a  state
of  intoxication  .  .  .  and  passion  he  forced  her  upon  a
negro,  whose  upper  lip  projected  along  the  sides  of
his  nose,  and  the  lower  one  doubled  down  upon  his
chin.  He  had  such  a  hideous  appearance  that  the
demon  Sakhr  would  have  been  terrified  at  seeing
him,  and  fountains  of  liquid  pitch  trickled  from  his
arm-pits. — "  Thou  mayest  affirm  that,  till  the  end  of
time,  beauty  and  deformity  had  their  extreme  in
Joseph  and  him.  He  was  not  a  person  who  had  such


124  SHAIKH  SADL

a  sort  of  forbidding  aspect  that  any  words  could
describe  his  ugliness.  God  deliver  us  from  the
noisomeness  of  his  arm-pits ;  it  was  a  carcase  welter-
ing in  a  dog-day  sun."

The  negro  was  at  that  juncture  the  slave  of  his
libidinous  and  carnal  appetites :  he  gave  way  to  his
lust,  and  deflowered  the  damsel.  In  the  morning
the  king  sought  after  but  did  not  find  her.  They
informed  him  what  had  happened.  He  got  furious,
and  ordered  that  they  should  bind  the  negro  and
damsel  hand  and  foot,  and  precipitate  them  together
from  the  pinnacle  of  the  castle  to  the  bottom  of  the
moat.  One  of  his  ministers,  and  a  man  of  benevo-
lence, laid  the  face  of  intercession  on  the  earth,  and
said  :  Let  the  universe  accord  with  the  wishes  of  his
majesty,  and  let  fortune  and  dominion  be  his  hand-
maids. In  this  instance,  the  negro  was  not  in  fault ;
for  all  the  servants  and  dependants  about  the  court
are  accustomed  to  the  bounty  and  munificence  of  his
highness.  He  replied  :  Had  he  restrained  his  passion
for  one  night,  what  would  have  been  his  loss,  for  I
would  in  her  room  have  given  him  a  more  precious
bondswoman  ?  He  said :  O  my  lord  !  have  you  not
heard  what  the  witty  have  remarked — "  When  a
person  parched  with  thirst  reaches  a  clear  and  limpid
fountain,  fancy  not  that  he  would  regard  a  furious
elephant.  A  hungry  infidel,  or  hypocrite,  alone  in
a  house  replenished  with  food,  would  not  have  the
grace  to  think  that  it  was  Ramazan,  or  the  Moham-
medan month  of  Lent."

The  king  was  pleased  at  this  jest.     He  replied,  The


SHATKH  SAD  I.  125

V

negro  I  bestow  upon  you  ;  now  what  am  I  to  do  with
the  damsel  ?  He  said,  Give  her  to  the  negro,  for  it  is
meet  that  a  dog  should  eat  the  leavings  of  a  dog. —
"  Never  approve  of  her  as  a  mistress  who  can  go  a
wandering  into  forbidden  places.  The  heart  of  the
thirsty  can  never  be  brought  to  relish  sweet  water
that  has  passed  the  lip  of  a  stinkard.  Now  the
orange  is  soiled  by  having  fallen  in  the  mire,  how  can
it  again  grace  the  hand  of  a  king  ?  how  can  the  heart
of  the  parched  wish  for  the  drink  where  the  cup
has  been  in  contact  with  a  mouth  offensive  in  its
breath  ?  "

XLI.

They  asked  Sikander  Rumi,  or  Alexander  the
Greek,  saying,  How  came  you  to  conquer  the  regions
of  the  east  and  west,  when  former  monarchs  exceeded
you  in  years  and  treasures,  in  dominion  and  power,
and  none  of  them  gained  such  easy  victories?  He
answered,  Whatever  kingdom  I  subdued,  through  the
grace  of  a  most  high  God,  I  never  oppressed  its
people,  nor  took  the  names  of  its  kings,  unless  in
good  part — "  Men  of  sense  esteem  him  not  magnani-
mous who  can  speak  disrespectfully  of  the  mighty
and  great  A  throne  and  dominion,  command  and
prohibition,  conquest  and  triumph,  all  these  are
vanity  and  folly  once  they  are  gone  by.  Traduce
not  the  fame  of  such  as  went  before,  that  thy  fair
name  may  remain  as  a  memorial  of  thee."


CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  MORALS  OF  DARWESHES.


A  PERSON  of  distinction  asked  a  parsa,  or  devout
and  holy  man,  saying,  What  do  you  offer  in  justi-
fication of  a  certain  abid,  another  species  of  Moham-
medan monk,  whose  character  others  have  been  so
ready  to  question  ?  He  replied :  In  his  outward
behaviour  I  see  nothing  to  blame,  and  with  the
secrets  of  his  heart  I  claim  no  acquaintance. —
"  Whomsoever  thou  seest  in  a  parsa's  habit,  con-
sider him  a  parsa,  or  holy,  and  esteem  him  as  a
good  man  ;  and  if  thou  knowest  not  what  is  passing
in  his  mind,  what  business  has  the  mohtasib,  or
censor,  with  the  inside  of  the  house  ?  "

II.

I  saw  a  darwesh  who,  having  laid  his  head  at  the
fane  of  the  Cabah  of  Mecca,  was  complaining  and
saying,  O  gracious,  O  merciful  God  !  thou  knowest
what  can  proceed  from  the  sinful  and  ignorant  that
may  be  worthy  of  thy  acceptance  ! — "  I  brought  my


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  127

excuse  of  imperfect  performance,  for  I  have  no  claim
on  the  score  of  obedience.  The  wicked  repent  them
of  their  sins;  such  as  know  God  confess  a  deficiency
of  worship."

Abids,  or  the  pious,  seek  a  reward  of  their  devo-
tion, merchants  a  profit  on  their  traffic.  I,  a  devoted
servant,  have  brought  hope,  not  obedience,  and  have
come  as  a  beggar,  and  not  for  lucre ! — Do  unto  me
vvhat  is  worthy  of  thyself ;  but  deal  not  with  me  as  I
myself  have  deserved. — "  Whether  thou  wilt  slay  me
or  pardon  my  offence,  my  head  and  face  are  prostrate
at  thy  threshold.  Thy  servant  has  no  will  of  his  own  ;
whatever  thou  commandest,  that  he  will  perform. —
At  the  door  of  the  Cabah  I  saw  a  petitioner,  who  was
praying  and  weeping  bitterly.  I  ask  not,  saying,
Approve  of  my  obedience,  but  draw  the  pen  of
forgiveness  across  my  sins,"

III.

Within  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabah,  at  Mecca,  I
saw  Abd-u'1-cadur  the  Gilani,  who  having  laid  his
face  upon  the  Hasa,  or  black  stone,  was  saying,
Spare  and  pardon  me,  O  God !  and  if,  at  all  events,  I
am  doomed  to  punishment,  raise  me  up  at  the  day
of  resurrection  blindfolded,  that  I  may  not  be  put  to
shame  in  the  eyes  of  the  righteous. — "  Every  morning
when  the  day  begins  to  dawn,  with  my  face  in  the
dust  of  humility,  I  am  saying,  O  thou,  whom  I
never  can  forget,  dost  thou  ever  bestow  a  thought
on  thy  servant  ? "


128  SHAIKH  SAD  I.


IV.

A  thief  got  into  a  holy  man's  cell ;  but  however
much  he  searched,  he  could  find  nothing  to  steal,
and  was  going  away  disappointed.  The  good  soul
was  aware  of  what  was  passing,  and  taking  up  the
rug  on  which  he  had  slept,  he  put  it  in  his  way  that
he  might  not  miss  his  object. — "  I  have  heard  that
the  heroes  on  the  path  of  God  will  not  distress  the
hearts  of  their  enemies.  How  canst  thou  attain  this
dignified  station  who  art  at  strife  and  warfare  with
thy  friends  ?  "

The  loving-kindness  of  the  righteous,  whether
before  your  face  or  behind  your  back,  is  not  such
that  they  will  censure  you  when  absent,  and  offer  to
die  for  you  when  present. — "  Face  to  face  meek  as  a
lamb,  behind  your  back  like  a  man-devouring  wolf.
Whoever  brings  you,  and  sums  up  the  faults  of
others,  will  doubtless  expose  your  defects  to  them."

V.

Some  travelling  mendicants  had  agreed  to  club
in  a  body  and  participate  in  the  cares  and  comforts
of  society.  I  expressed  a  wish  that  I  might  be  one
of  the  party,  but  they  refused  to  admit  me.  I  said :
It  is  rare  and  inconsistent  with  the  generous  disposi-
tions of  darweshes  to  turn  their  faces  from  a  good-
fellowship  with  the  poor,  and  to  deny  them  its
benefits,  for  on  my  part  I  feel  such  a  zeal  and


SHAIKH  SADL  129

good-will,  that  in  the  service  of  the  liberal  I  am  likely
to  prove  rather  an  active  associate  than  a  grievous
load. — "  Though  not  one  of  those  who  are  mounted
on  the  camels,  I  will  do  my  best,  tfiat  I  may  carry  their
saddle-cloths" —

One  of  them  answered  and  said  :  Be  not  offended
at  what  you  have  heard,  for  some  days  back  a  thief
joined  us  in  the  garb  of  a  darwesh,  and  strung  him-
self upon  the  cord  of  our  acquaintance. — "  How  can
people  know  what  he  is  that  wears  that  dress.  The
writer  can  alone  tell  the  contents  of  the  letter." — In
consequence  of  that  reverence  in  which  the  darwesh
character  is  held,  they  did  not  think  of  his  profligacy,
and  admitted  him  into  their  society. — "  The  outward
character  of  the  holy  is  a  patched  cloak ;  this  much
is  sufficient,  that  it  has  a  threadbare  hood.  Be
industrious  in  thy  calling,  and  wear  whatever  dress
thou  choosest  Put  a  diadem  on  thy  head,  and  bear
a  standard  on  thy  shoulder.  Holiness  does  not
consist  in  a  coarse  frock.  Let  a  zahid,  or  holy  man,
be  truly  pious,  and  he  may  dress  in  satin.  Sanctity
is  not  merely  a  change  of  dress ;  it  is  an  abandon-
ment of  the  world,  its  pomp  and  vanity.  It  requires
a  hero  to  wear  a  coat  of  mail,  for  what  would  it  profit
to  dress  an  hermaphrodite,  or  coward,  in  a  suit  of
armour  ?  "

In  short  we  had  one  day  travelled  till  dark,  and
at  night  composed  ourselves  for  sleep  under  the  wall
of  a  castle.  That  graceless  thief  took  up  his  neigh-
bour's ewer,  saying,  I  am  going  to  my  ablutions  ;
and  he  was  setting  out  for  plunder. — "  Behold  a

751


130  SHAIKH  SADL

religious  man,  who  threw  a  patched  cloak  over  his
shoulders  ;  he  made  the  covering  of  the  Cabah  the
housing  of  an  ass." — So  soon  as  he  got  out  of  the
sight  of  the  darweshes,  he  scaled  a  bastion  of  the  fort
and  stole  a  casket.  Before  break  of  day  that  gloomy-
minded  robber  had  got  a  great  way  off,  and  left  his
innocent  companions  asleep.  In  the  morning  they
were  all  carried  into  the  citadel,  and  thrown  into  a
dungeon.  From  that  time  we  have  declined  any
addition  to  our  party,  and  kept  apart  to  ourselves,
for  there  is  safety  in  unity,  but  danger  in  duality  or  a
multitude. — "  When  an  individual  of  a  sect  committed
an  act  of  folly,  the  high  and  the  low  sunk  in  their
dignity.  Dost  thou  not  see  that  one  ox  in  a
pasturage  will  cast  a  slur  upon  all  the  oxen  of  the
village  ?  "

I  said:  Let  there  be  thanksgiving  to  a  Deity  of
majesty  and  glory  that  I  am  not  forbid  the  benefits
of  darweshes,  notwithstanding  I  am  in  appearance
excluded  from  their  society ;  and  I  am  instructed  by
this  narration,  and  others  like  me  may  profit  by  its
moral  during  their  remaining  lives. — "  From  one
indiscreet  person  in  an  assembly  a  host  of  the
prudent  may  get  hurt  If  they  fill  a  cistern  to  the
brim  with  rose-water,  and  let  a  dog  fall  into  it,  the
whole  will  be  contaminated."

VI.

A  Zahid  was  the  guest  of  a  king.     When  he  sat
down  at  table  he  ate  more  sparingly  from  that  than


SHAIKH  SADL  131

his  appetite  inclined  him,  and  when  he  stood  up  at
prayers  he  continued  longer  at  them  than  it  was  his
custom  ;  that  they  might  form  a  high  opinion  of  his
sanctity. — "  I  fear,  O  Arab  !  that  thou  wilt  not  reach
the  Cabah ;  for  the  road  that  thou  art  taking  leads
to  Turkistan,  or  the  region  of  infidels."

When  he  returned  home  he  ordered  the  table  to  be
spread  that  he  might  eat.  His  son  was  a  youth  of  a
shrewd  understanding.  He  said :  O  father,  perhaps
you  ate  little  or  nothing  at  the  feast  of  the  king?
He  answered,  In  his  presence  I  ate  scarce  anything
that  could  answer  its  purpose !  Then  retorted  the
boy,  Repeat  also  your  prayers,  that  nothing  be
omitted  that  can  serve  a  purpose. — "  Yes,  thy  virtues
thou  hast  exposed  in  the  palm  of  thy  hand,  thy  vices
thou  hast  hid  under  thy  arm-pit  Take  heed,  O
hypocrite,  what  thou  wilt  be  able  to  purchase  with
this  base  money  on  the  day  of  need  or  day  of
judgment."

VII.

I  remember  that  in  my  early  youth  I  was  overmuch
religious  and  vigilant,  and  scrupulously  pious  and
abstinent.  One  night  I  sat  up  in  attendance  on  my
father,  on  whom  be  God's  mercy,  never  once  closed  my
eyes  during  the  whole  night,  and  held  the  precious
Koran  open  on  my  lap,  while  the  company  around  us
were  fast  asleep.  I  said  to  my  father :  Not  an  indi-
vidual of  these  will  raise  his  head  that  he  may  perform
his  genuflections,  or  ritual  of  prayer ;  but  they  are  all
so  sound  asleep,  that  you  might  conclude  they  were


1 3  2  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

dead.  He  replied  :  O  emanation  of  your  father,  you
had  also  better  have  slept  than  that  you  should  thus
calumniate  the  failings  of  mankind. — "  The  braggart
can  discern  only  his  own  precious  person  ;  he  will
draw  the  veil  of  conceit  all  around  him.  Were  fortune
to  bestow  upon  him  God's  all-searching  eye,  he  would
find  nobody  weaker  than  himself."

VIII.

In  a  company  they  were  extolling  a  gentleman  of
distinction  and  magnifying  his  splendid  virtues.  He
raised  his  head,  and  said,  I  am  such  as  I  know  I  am !
— "It  suffices  with  thee,  O  sir,  that  summest  up  my
good  works,  as  they  appear  outwardly,  but  thou  knowest
not  the  secrets  of  my  heart" — "  In  the  eyes  of  mankind
my  outward  person  is  a  goodly  object ;  but  my  head
hung  down  in  shame  at  the  deformity  of  my  mind.
People  are  crying  up  the  rich  and  variegated  plumage
of  the  peacock,  and  he  is  himself  blushing  at  the
sight  of  his  ugly  feet."

IX.

One  of  the  holy  men  of  Mount  Lebanon,  whose
discourses  were  esteemed,  and  his  miracles  renowned
throughout  the  regions  of  Arabia,  entered  the  metro-
politan mosque  at  Damascus ;  and  was  performing
his  ablutions  by  the  reservoir  at  the  well,  when,  his
foot  slipping,  he  fell  into  the  cistern,  and  extricated
himself  from  it  with  considerable  difficulty.  After
they  had  finished  their  prayers  one  of  his  companions


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  133

said  :  A  point  of  some  perplexity  offers  itself,  which
with  your  leave,  I  will  state.  The  holy  man  asked,
What  is  it  ?  He  said :  I  can  recollect  that  the  Shaikh,
or  his  reverence,  would  walk  on  the  surface  of  the
western  ocean,  and  not  wet  his  foot.  How  came  it
to-day  that,  in  this  scarcely  a  man's  depth  of  water,
you  were  all  but  drowned  ?  what  does  this  mean  ?
The  holy  man  dropped  his  'head  on  the  bosom  of
reflection,  and  after  some  profound  thought  raised
it,  and  answered,  Have  you  not  heard  what  that
prince  of  the  universe,  Mohammed  Mustofa,  upon
whom  be  God's  blessing  and 'peace \  said  : — There  is  a  time
when  I  am  with  God;  and  he  will  not  show  the  favour
he  does  me  to  the  angels  of  his  affection  and  prophets  of
his  revelation. — But  he  did  not  say  it  is  always  so.
On  one  occasion  that  he  described,  he  would  not
converse  with  Gabriel  and  Michael  ;  and  on  another,
he  could  hold  an  intercourse  with  Hofzah  and  Zynob
[two  of  his  wives]. — The  visions  of  the  inspired  are
revelation  and  tenabrosity ;  he  is  directing  and  be-
wildering them. — "  Thou  unveilest  thine  eyes  and
preachest  up  continence  ;  thou  givest  an  activity  to  the
mart  where  they  are  sold,  and  inflamest  our  desires.
/  behold  him  [God]  whom  my  heart  desires  with-
out the  veil  of  intervention,  therefore  I  become  like  him
who  loses  his  way,  he  stirs  up  a  flame  and  then  quenches
it  by  sprinkling  water,  on  which  account  thou  seest  me  at
one  moment  burning  and  the  next  drowning. — A  person
questioned  Jacob,  or  him  who  had  lost  Joseph,  his
son,  saying,  O  illustrious  and  intelligent  old  man,
thou  didst  smell  the  perfume  of  his  garment  at  the


i34  SHAIKH  SADI.

distance  of  Egypt,  how  earnest  thou  not  to  discover
him  when  hid  in  the  well  of  Canaan  ?  "  He  replied  :
My  condition  is  that  of  lightning ;  as  at  one  moment
seen  in  a  flash,  and  the  next  disappearing.  This
instant  I  can  aspire  to  the  highest  mansion  of  heaven,
and  the  next  I  cannot  discern  the  instep  of  my  foot
Could  the  darwesh's  mind  remain  fixed  on  its  object
(namely,  the  contemplation  and  adoration  of  the
Deity),  he  might  wash  his  hands  of  this  world  and  the
next  (that  is,  attain  his  re-union  with  God).


X.


On  one  occasion,  at  the  metropolitan  mosque  of
Balbuk,  I  was  holding  forth,  by  way  of  admonition,  to
a  congregation  cold  and  dead  at  heart,  and  not  to  be
moved  from  the  materialism  of  this  world  into  the
paths  of  mysticism.  I  perceived  that  the  spirit  of  my
discourse  was  making  no  impression,  nor  were  the
sparks  of  my  enthusiasm  likely  to  strike  fire  into  their
humid  wood.  I  grew  weary  of  instructing  brutes,  and
of  holding  up  a  mirror  to  an  assembly  of  the  blind ;
but  the  door  of  exposition  was  thrown  open,  and  the
chain  of  argument  extended ;  and  in  explanation  of
this  text  in  the  Koran, —  We.  are  nearer  to  him
[God]  than  the  vein  of  his  neck. — I  had  reached  that
passage  of  my  sermon  where  I  thus  express  myself: —
"  Such  a  mistress  as  is  closer  to  me  in  her  affection
than  I  am  to  myself,  but  this  is  marvellous  that  I  am
estranged  from  her.  What  shall  I  say,  and  to  whom


SHAIKH  SADI.  135

can    I  tell  it,  that  she  lies  on  my  bosom  and  I  am
alienated  from  her." —

The  intoxicating  spirit  of  this  discourse  ran  into
my  head,  and  the  dregs  of  the  cup  still  rested  in  my
hand,  when  a  traveller,  as  passing  by,  entered  the
outer  circle  of  the  congregation,  and  its  expiring
undulation  lit  upon  him.  He  sent  forth  such  a  groan
that  the  others  in  sympathy  with  him  joined  in
lamentation,  and  the  rawest  of  the  assembly  bubbled
in  unison.  I  exclaimed,  Praise  be  to  God  !  those  far
off  are  present  in  their  knowledge,  and  those  near  by
are  distant  from  their  ignorance. — "  If  the  hearer  has
not  the  faculty  of  comprehending  the  sermon,  expect
not  the  vigour  of  genius  in  the  preacher.  Give  a
scope  to  the  field  of  inclination,  that  the  orator  may
have  room  to  strike  the  ball  of  eloquence  over  it."

XL

One  night  in  the  desert  of  Mecca,  from  an  excess
cf  drowsiness,  I  had  not  a  foot  to  enable  me  to  pro-
ceed ;  and,  laying  my  head  on  the  earth,  I  gave
myself  up  for  lost,  and  desired  the  camel-driver  to
leave  me  to  my  fate. — "  How  could  the  foot  of  the
poor  jaded  pedestrian  go  on,  now  that  the  Bactrian
dromedary  got  impatient  of  its  burden.  While  the
body  of  a  fat  man  is  getting  lean,  a  lean  man  must
fall  the  victim  of  a  hardship."

The  camel-driver  replied :  O  brother,  holy  Mecca  is
ahead,  and  the  profane  robber  behind  ;  if  you  come
forward  you  escape,  but  if  you  stay  here  you  die ! —


136  SHAIKH  SADT.

"  During  the  night  journey  of  the  caravan,  and  in  the
track  of  the  desert,  it  is  fascinating  to  dose  under  the
acacia-thorn  tree ;  but,  on  this  indulgence,  we  must
resign  all  thoughts  of  surviving  it."

XII.

I  saw  on  the  sea-shore  a  holy  man  who  had  been
torn  by  a  tyger,  and  could  get  no  salve  to  heal  his
wound.  For  a  length  of  time  he  suffered  much  pain,
and  was  all  along  offering  thanks  to  the  Most  High.
They  asked  him,  saying,  Why  are  you  so  grateful  ?
He  answered,  God  be  praised  that  I  am  overtaken
with  misfortune  and  not  with  sin ! — "  Were  that
beloved  friend,  God,  to  give  me  over  to  death,  take
heed,  and  think  not  that  I  should  be  solicitous  about
life.  I  would  ask,  What  hast  thou  seen  amiss  in  thy
poor  servant  that  thy  heart  should  take  offence  at
me?  for  that  could  alone  give  me  a  moment's
uneasiness."

XIII.

Having  some  pressing  occasion,  a  darwesh  stole  a
rug  from  the  hut  of  a  friend.  The  judge  ordered
that  they  should  cut  off  his  hand.  The  owner  of
the  rug  made  intercession  for  him,  saying,  I  have
forgiven  him.  The  judge  replied,  At  your  instance
I  cannot  relax  the  extreme  sentence  of  the  law.
He  said :  In  what  you  ordered  you  spoke  justly.
Nevertheless,  whoever  steals  a  portion  of  any  pro-
perty dedicated  to  alms  must  not  suffer  the  forfeiture


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  137

of  his  hand,  for  a  religious  mendicant  is  not  the
proprietor  of  anything;  and  whatever  appertains  to
darweshes  is  devoted  to  the  necessitous.  The  judge
withdrew  his  hand  from  punishing  him,  and  by  way
of  reprimand  asked,  Had  the  world  become  so  cir-
cumscribed that  you  could  not  commit  a  theft  but
in  the  dwelling  of  such  a  friend?  He  answered,
Have  you  not  heard  what  they  have  said,  Sweep
everything  away  from  the  houses  of  your  friends,
but  knock  not  at  the  doors  of  your  enemies. — "  When
overwhelmed  with  calamity  let  not  thy  body  pine
in  misery.  Strip  thy  foes  of  their  skins,  and  thy
friends  of  their  jackets." —


XIV.

A  king  said  to  a  holy  man,  Are  you  ever  thinking
of  me  ?  Yes,  replied  he,  at  such  time  as  I  am  for-
getting God  Almighty  ! — "  He  will  wander  all  around
whom  God  shall  drive  from  his  gate ;  and  he  will
not  let  him  go  to  another  door  whom  he  shall
direct  into  his  own."

XV.

One  of  the  righteous  in  a  dream  saw  a  king  in
paradise,  and  a  parsa,  or  holy  man,  in  hell.  He
questioned  himself,  saying,  What  is  the  cause  of  the
exaltation  of  this,  and  the  degradation  of  that,  for
we  have  fancied  their  converse  ?  A  voice  came  from
above,  answering,  This  king  is  in  heaven  because


138  SHAIKH  SADJ.

of  his  affection  for  the  holy,  and  that  parsa  is  in
hell  because  of  his  connection  with  the  kingly. —
"  What  can  a  coarse  frock,  rosary,  and  patched  cloak
avail  ?  Abstain  from  such  evil  works  as  may  defile
thee.  There  is  no  occasion  to  put  a  felt  cowl  upon
thy  head.  Be  a  darwesh  in  thy  actions,  and  wear  a
Tartarian  coronet."

XVI.

A  pedestrian,  naked  from  head  to  foot,  left  Cufah
with  the  caravan  of  pilgrims  for  Hijaj,  or  Mecca,  and
came  along  with  us.  I  looked  at  and  saw  him
destitute  of  every  necessary  for  the  journey  ;  yet
he  was  cheerfully  pushing  on,  and  bravely  remark-
ing : — "  I  am  neither  mounted  on  a  camel  nor  a
mule  under  a  burden.  I  am  neither  the  lord  of
vassals  nor  the  vassal  of  a  lord.  I  think  not  of
present  sorrows  or  past  vanities,  but  breathe  the
breath  of  ease  and  live  the  life  of  freedom  ! "

A  gentleman  mounted  on  a  camel  said  to  him,  O
darwesh,  whither  are  you  going?  return,  or  you
must  perish  miserably.  He  did  not  heed  what  he
said,  but  entered  the  desert  on  foot  and  proceeded.
On  our  reaching  the  palm  plantation  of  Mahmud,
fate  overtook  the  rich  man,  and  he  died.  The
darwesh  went  up  to  his  bier  and  said,  I  did  not
perish  amidst  hardship  on  foot,  and  you  expired  on
a  camel's  back. — "A  person  sat  all  night  weeping
by  the  side  of  a  sick  friend.  Next  day  he  died,  and
the  invalid  recovered ! — Yes !  many  a  fleet  horse
perished  by  the  way,  and  that  lame  ass  reached  the


SHAIKH  SADJ.  139

end  of  the  journey.  How  many  of  the  vigorous  and
hale  did  they  put  underground,  and  that  wounded
man  recovered  ! "

XVII.

A  king  invited  an  abid,  or  holy  man,  to  a  feast.
He  pondered  within  himself,  saying :  I  will  take  a
medicine  that  shall  weaken  me ;  peradventure  that
respect  which  the  king  entertains  for  my  sanctity
may  be  increased.  They  say  it  was  a  deadly  poison.
He  swallowed  it,  and  died. — "  That  fellow  who
seemed  to  me  full  of  meat  as  a  pistachio  nut,  his
brain  was  all  fold  over  fold  like  an  onion.  Such
holy  men  are  at  their  prayers,  turning  their  backs
upon  the  Cabah  and  their  faces  towards  mankind;
whilst  thus  the  zahids,  or  hermits,  of  Omar,  Bakar,
and  Zayid  [fictitious  names]  pretend  not  to  any
godliness,  for  you  are  hypocrites.  When  a  person
calls  himself  the  servant  of  God,  it  behoves  him  to
know  God,  and  him  only."


XVIII.

In  the  territory  of  the  Greeks  a  caravan  was
attacked  by  robbers,  and  plundered  of  much  pro-
perty. The  merchants  set  up  a  lamentation  and
complaint,  and  besought  the  intercession  of  God
and  the  prophet ;  but  all  to  no  purpose. — "  When
the  gloomy-minded  robber  is  flushed  with  victory,
what  will  he  feel  for  the  traveller's  despair."


MO  SHAIKH  SADI.

Lucman,  the  fabulist  and  philosopher,  happened  to
be  among  them.  One  of  the  travellers  spoke  to  him,
saying,  Direct  some  maxims  of  wisdom  and  admoni-
tion to  them  ;  perhaps  they  may  restore  a  part  of  our
goods  ;  for  it  were  a  pity  that  articles  of  such  value
should  be  cast  away.  He  answered :  It  were  a  pity
to  cast  away  the  admonitions  of  wisdom  upon  them  !
— "  From  that  iron  which  the  rust  has  corroded  thou
canst  not  eradicate  the  canker  with  a  file.  What
purpose  will  it  answer  to  preach  to  the  gloomy-
minded  infidel  ?  A  nail  of  iron  cannot  penetrate  into
a  piece  of  flint"

Perhaps  the  fault  has  been  on  our  part  [in  not
being  charitable],  as  they  have  said  : — "  On  the  day  of
thy  prosperity  remember  the  bankrupt  and  needy,
for  by  visiting  the  hearts  of  the  poor  with  charity
thou  shalt  divert  calamity.  When  the  beggar  solicits
alms  from  thee,  bestow  it  with  a  good  grace ;
otherwise  the  tyrant  may  come  and  take  it  by  force."

XIX.

However  much  my  ghostly  tutor,  Shaikh  Shums-
u'd-din  Abu'1-firah-bin-Juzi,  of  Baghdad,  might  incul-
cate my  relinquishment  of  the  darwesh's  dance  and
song,  and  recommend  a  life  of  monastic  privacy  and
retirement,  he  could  not  reach  the  ear  of  my  assent,
the  spring-tide  of  youth  would  overflow,  and  vigour  of
sensuality  prevail.  Wretch  as  I  was,  in  opposition  to
that  preceptor's  good  sense,  I  would  let  my  feet  lead
me  astray,  and  give  way  to  the  enjoyment  of  music


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  141

and  conviviality;  and  whenever  the  advice  of  that
sage  might  cross  my  thought,  I  would  whisk  me  a
circular  dance,  and  cry, — "  Were  the  crazy  to  sit  down
in  our  party,  he  would  clap  his  hands  from  joy;  were
the  censor  to  drink  wine,  he  would  overlook  those  that
get  intoxicated  : " — till  one  night  that  I  got  into  a
mixed  company,  and  met  among  them  a  minstrel. —
"  Thou  mayest  say,  the  bow  of  his  violin  is  breaking
the  cat-gut  string  of  existence,  and  his  voice  is  more
harsh  than  that  of  a  man  howling  on  the  death  of  his
father." — One  moment  the  fingers  of  the  auditors  are
on  his  account  in  their  ears,  and  the  next  moment
on  their  lips,  motioning  silence ! — "  The  heart  may  be
charmed  by  the  voice  of  sweet  melody ;  but  such  a  singer
as  thou  art  can  only  please  by  being  silent. — Nobody  can
feel  any  delight  in  thy  singing  till  the  hour  of  thy
departure,  when  it  will  cease.  When  that  lute-player
began  his  song,  I  said  to  our  landlord,  For  God's  sake,
either  pour  quicksilver  into  my  ear,  that  I  may  not
hear,  or  open  the  door  for  me,  that  I  may  run  out." —
In  short,  out  of  regard  for  my  companions,  I  accom-
modated myself  to  their  wishes,  and  turned  night  into
day  after  manifold  vexations. — "The  mouzzin,  or
crier  at  the  mosque,  gives  his  notices  of  prayer  out  of
all  season  ;  he  is  not  aware  how  much  of  the  night  is
gone.  Ask  the  length  of  the  night  from  my  eye-lids,
for  my  eyes  have  not  been  indulged  with  one  wink  of
sleep." — At  dawn,  by  way  of  benediction,  I  took  the
turban  from  my  head,  and  a  diram  from  my  girdle,
and,  laying  them  at  his  feet,  folded  him  in  my
arms,  and  returned  him  many  thanks.  My  friends


142  SHAIKH  SADI.

considered  my  endeavours  to  do  him  justice  as  contrary
to  what  was  usual,  imputed  it  to  a  weakness  of  under-
standing, and  turned  it  into  ridicule  behind  my  back.
One  of  them  let  loose  the  tongue  of  animadversion,
and  began  to  admonish  me,  saying,  In  this  instance
you  did  not  act  as  became  a  prudent  man,  for  you
bestowed  the  distinguishing  garment  of  a  Shaikh
upon  this  singer,  who  has  not  during  his  whole  life  had
a  diram  in  the  palm  of  his  hand,  or  a  particle  of  gold
on  the  head  of  his  tambourine. — "  Such  a  minstrel,  far
let  him  remain  from  this  happy  mansion,  nobody  has
seen  twice  in  the  same  place.  Truly,  when  his  voice
issued  from  his  mouth,  it  made  people's  hair  stand  on
end  on  their  bodies  :  the  bird  on  the  house-top  is
frightened  away  by  the  howl ;  it  distracts  our  brains,
and  tears  open  our  windpipe." — I  replied  :  It  were  as
well  to  restrain  the  tongue  of  animadversion,  in  as
much  as  his  faculty  of  working  miracles  is  hereby
made  manifest  He  said  :  Let  us  also  benefit  by  this
discovery,  that  we  may  all  unite  and  apologise  for  the
rudeness  we  committed.  I  answered,  on  this  account,
that  my  reverend  Shaikh  had  repeatedly  forbid  my
frequenting  the  darwesh's  dance  and  song,  and  often
warned  me  against  them  ;  but  I  never  thought  of  his
advice  till  this  night,  that  my  propitious  stars  and
good  fortune  directed  me  to  this  house  ;  and  I  vowed,
on  the  hand  of  this  minstrel,  that  I  would  not
again  engage  in  the  circular  dance  or  convivial  song: —
"  When  sweet  melody  escapes  from  a  lovely  throat,
mouth,  and  lip,  whether  harmonious  or  not,  it  must
fascinate  ;  but  were  it  the  musical  mode  of  Oshshac,


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  143

Ispahan,  or  Hijaz,  it  would  disgust,  if  proceeding  from
the  pipe  of  so  vile  a  minstrel."


XX.

They  asked  Lucman,  the  fabulist,  from  whom  did
you  learn  manners  ?  He  answered,  From  the  un-
mannerly, for  I  was  careful  to  avoid  whatever  part  of
their  behaviour  seemed  to  me  bad. — "  They  will  not
speak  a  word  in  joke  from  which  the  wise  cannot
derive  instruction  ;  let  them  read  a  hundred  chapters
of  wisdom  to  a  fool,  and  they  will  all  seem  but  a  jest
to  him."

XXI.

They  tell  a  story  of  an  abid,  who  in  the  course  of  a
night  would  eat  ten  mans,  or  pounds,  of  food,  and  in
his  devotions  repeat  the  whole  Koran  before  morning.
A  good  and  holy  man  heard  this,  and  said,  Had  he
eaten  half  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  gone  to  sleep,  he  would
have  done  a  more  meritorious  act — "  Keep  thy  inside
unencumbered  with  victuals,  that  the  light  of  good
works  may  shine  within  thee  ;  but  thou  art  void  of
wisdom  and  knowledge,  because  thou  art  filled  up  to
the  nose  with  food."


XXIL

The   divine  favour  had  placed  the  lamp  of  grace
in  the  path  of  a  wanderer  in  forbidden  ways,  till  it


144  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

directed  him  into  the  circle  of  the  righteous,  and  the
blessed  society  of  darweshes  ;  and  their  spiritual
co-operation  enabled  him  to  convert  his  wicked
propensities  into  praiseworthy  deeds,  and  to  restrain
himself  in  sensual  indulgences  ;  yet  were  the  tongues
of  calumniators  questioning  his  sincerity,  and  saying,
He  retains  his  original  habits,  and  there  is  no  trusting
to  his  piety  and  goodness. — "  By  the  means  of  repent-
ance thou  mayest  get  delivered  from  the  wrath  of
God,  but  there  is  no  escape  from  the  slanderous
tongue  of  man." — He  was  unable  to  put  up  with  the
virulence  of  their  remarks,  and  took  his  complaint  to
his  ghostly  father,  saying,  I  am  much  troubled  by  the
tongues  of  mankind.  The  holy  man  wept,  and
answered,  How  can  you  be  sufficiently  grateful  for  this
blessing,  that  you  are  better  than  they  represent  you  ?
— "  How  often  wilt  thou  call  aloud  saying,  The  malig-
nant and  envious  are  calumniating  wretched  me,  that
they  rise  up  to  shed  my  blood,  and  that  they  sit  down
to  devise  me  mischief.  Be  thou  good  thyself,  and  let
people  speak  evil  of  thee ;  it  is  better  than  to  be
wicked,  and  that  they  should  consider  thee  as  good." —
But,  on  the  other  hand,  behold  me,  of  whose  perfect-
ness  all  entertain  the  best  opinion,  while  I  am  the
mirror  of  imperfection. — "  Had  I  done  what  they  have
said,  I  should  have  been  a  pious  and  moral  man." —
"  Verily,  I  may  conceal  myself  from  the  sight  of  my
neighbour,  but  God  knows  what  is  secret  and  what  is
open. — There  is  a  shut  door  between  me  and  mankind,
that  they  may  not  pry  into  my  sins  ;  but  what,  O
Omniscience !  can  a  closed  door  avail  against  thee,


SHAIKH  SADI.  145

who   art   equally  informed   of  what   is   manifest   or
concealed  ?  "

XXIIL

I  lodged  a  complaint  with  one  of  our  reverend
Shaikhs,  saying:  A  certain  person  has  borne  testimony
against  my  character  on  the  score  of  lasciviousness.
He  answered,  Shame  him  by  your  continence. — "  Be
thou  virtuously  disposed,  that  the  detractor  may  not
have  it  in  his  power  to  indulge  his  malignity.  So
long  as  the  harp  is  in  tune,  how  can  it  have  its  ear
pulled  [or  suffer  correction  by  being  put  in  tune]  by
the  minstrel  ?  "

XXIV.

They  asked  one  of  the  Shaikhs  of  Sham,  or  Syria,
saying :  What  is  the  condition  of  the  Sufi  sect  ?
He  answered,  Formerly  they  were  in  this  world  a
fraternity  dispersed  in  the  flesh,  but  united  in  the
spirit ;  but  now  they  are  a  body  well  clothed  carnally,
and  ragged  in  divine  mystery. — "Whilst  thy  heart
will  be  every  moment  wandering  into  a  different  place,
in  thy  recluse  state  thou  canst  not  see  purity  ;  but
though  thou  possesses!  rank  and  wealth,  lands  and
chattels,  if  thy  heart  be  fixed  on  God,  thou  art  a
hermit."

XXV.

On  one  occasion  we  had  marched,  I  recollect,  all
the  night  along  with  the  caravan,  and  halted  towards

752


146  SHAIKH  SADL

morning  on  the  skirts  of  the  wilderness.  One
mystically  distracted,  who  accompanied  us  on  that
journey,  set  up  a  loud  lamentation  at  dawn,  went
a-wandering  into  the  desert,  and  did  not  take  a
moment's  rest  Next  day  I  said  to  him,  What
condition  was  that  ?  He  replied,  I  remarked  the
nightingales  that  they  had  come  to  carol  in  the
groves,  the  pheasants  to  prattle  on  the  mountains,
the  frogs  to  croak  in  the  pools,  and  the  wild  beasts  to
roar  in  the  forests,  and  thought  with  myself,  saying,  It
cannot  be  generous  that  all  are  awake  in  God's  praise
and  I  am  wrapt  up  in  the  sleep  of  forgetfulness ! —
"  Last  night  a  bird  was  carolling  towards  the  morn-
ing ;  it  stole  my  patience  and  reason,  my  fortitude
and  understanding.  My  lamentation  had  perhaps
reached  the  ear  of  one  of  my  dearly-beloved  friends.
He  said,  I  did  not  believe  that  the  singing  of  a  bird
could  so  distract  thee !  I  answered,  This  is  not  the
duty  of  the  human  species,  that  the  birds  are  singing
God's  praise  and  that  I  am  silent"

XXVI.

Once,  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Hijaz,  I  was  the  fellow-
traveller  of  some  piously-disposed  young  men,  and
on  a  footing  of  familiarity  and  intimacy  with  them.
From  time  to  time  we  were  humming  a  tune  and
chanting  a  spiritual  hymn,  and  an  abid,  who  bore
us  company,  kept  disparaging  the  morals  of  the
darweshes,  and  was  callous  to  their  sufferings,  till
we  reached  the  palm  plantation  of  the  tribe  of  Hulal,


SHAIKH  SADL  147

when  a  boy  of  a  tawny  complexion  issued  from  the
Arab  horde  and  sung  such  a  plaintive  melody  as
would  arrest  the  bird  in  its  flight  through  the  air.  I
remarked  the  abid's  camel  that  it  kicked  up  and
pranced,  and,  throwing  the  abid,  danced  into  the
wilderness.  I  said  :  O  reverend  Shaikh  !  that  spiritual
strain  threw  a  brute  into  an  ecstasy,  and  it  is  not  in
like  manner  working  a  change  in  you  ! — "  Knowest
thou  what  that  nightingale  of  the  dawn  whispered  to
me.  What  sort  of  man  art  thou,  indeed,  who  art
ignorant  of  love  ? — The  camel  is  in  an  ecstasy  of
delight  from  the  Arab's  song.  If  thou  hast  no  taste
to  relish  this,  thou  art  a  cross-grained  brute. — Now
that  the  camel  is  elated  with  rapture  and  delight,  if  a
man  is  insensible  to  these  he  is  an  ass. —  Tlie  zephyr,
gliding  through  the  verdure  on  the  earth,  shakes  the  twig
of  the  ban-tree,  but  moves  not  the  solid  rock. — Whatever
thou  beholdest  is  loud  in  extolling  him.  That  heart
which  has  an  ear  is  full  of  the  divine  mystery.  It  is
not  the  nightingale  that  alone  serenades  his  rose ;  for
every  thorn  on  the  rose-bush  is  a  tongue  in  his  or
God's  praise ! "

XXVII.

A  king  had  reached  the  end  of  his  days  and  had  no
heir  to  succeed  him.  He  made  his  will,  stating,  You
will  place  the  crown  of  sovereignty  upon  the  head  of
whatever  person  first  enters  the  city  gate  in  the
morning,  and  commit  the  kingdom  to  his  charge.  It
happened  that  the  first  man  that  presented  himself  at
the  city  gate  was  a  beggar,  who  had  passed  his  whole


148  SHAIKH  SADL

life  in  scraping  broken  meat  and  in  patching  rags.
The  ministers  of  state  and  nobles  of  the  court  fulfilled
the  conditions  of  the  king's  will,  and  laid  the  keys  of
the  treasury  and  citadel  at  his  feet.

For  a  time  the  darwesh  governed  the  kingdom,  till
some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  empire  swerved  from  their
allegiance,  and  the  princes  of  the  territories  on  every
side  rose  in  opposition  to  him,  and  levied  armies  for
the  contest  In  short,  his  troops  and  subjects  were
routed  and  subdued,  and  several  of  his  provinces  taken
from  him.

The  darwesh  was  hurt  to  the  soul  at  these  events,
when  one  of  his  old  friends,  who  had  been  the
companion  of  his  state  of  poverty,  returned  from
a  journey  and  found  him  in  such  dignity.  He
exclaimed  :  Thanksgiving  be  to  a  Deity  of  majesty
and  glory  that  lofty  fortune  succoured  you  and  pros-
perity was  your  guide,  till  roses  issued  from  your
thorns  and  the  thorns  were  extracted  from  your  feet,
and  till  you  arrived  at  this  elevated  rank ! — Along  with
hardship  there  is  ease ;  or,  to  sorrow  succeeds  joy. —
"  The  plant  is  at  one  season  in  flower  and  at  another
withered  ;  the  tree  is  at  one  time  naked  and  at  another
clothed  with  leaves." — He  said:  O,  my  dear  friend,
offer  me  condolence,  for  here  is  no  place  for  congratula-
tion. When  you  last  saw  me  I  had  to  think  of  getting
a  crumb  of  bread  ;  now  I  have  the  cares  of  a  whole
kingdom  on  my  head. — "  If  the  world  be  adverse,  we
are  the  victims  of  pain  ;  if  prosperous,  the  fettered
slaves  of  affection  for  it  Amidst  this  life  no  calamity
is  more  afflicting  than  that,  whether  fortunate  or  not,


SHAIKH  SADL  149

the  mind  is  equally  disquieted.  If  thou  covetest
riches,  ask  not  but  for  contentment,  which  is  an
immense  treasure.  Should  a  rich  man  throw  money
into  thy  lap,  take  heed,  and  do  not  look  upon  it  as  a
benefit ;  for  I  have  often  heard  from  the  great  and
good  that  the  patience  of  the  poor  is  more  meritorious
than  the  gift  of  the  rich.  Were  King  Bahram  Ghor  to
distribute  a  whole  roasted  elk,  it  would  not  be  equal  to
the  gift  of  a  locust's  leg  from  an  ant."

xxvm.

A  person  had  a  friend  who  was  holding  the  office  of
king's  diwan,  or  prime  minister,  and  it  happened  that
he  had  not  seen  him  for  some  time.  Somebody
remarked,  saying,  It  is  some  time  since  you  saw  such
a  gentleman.  He  answered,  I  am  no  ways  anxious
about  seeing  him.  One  of  the  diwan's  people  chanced
to  be  present.  He  asked,  What  has  happened  amiss
that  you  should  dislike  to  visit  him?  He  replied,
There  is  no  dislike ;  but  my  friend,  the  diwan,  can  be
seen  at  a  time  when  he  is  out  of  office,  and  my  idle
intrusion  might  not  come  amiss. — "  Amidst  the  state
patronage  and  authority  of  office  they  might  take
umbrage  at  their  acquaintance ;  but  on  the  day  of
vexation  and  loss  of  place  they  would  impart  their
mental  disquietudes  to  their  friends."

XXIX.

Abu-Horairah  was  making  a  daily  visit  to  the
prophet  Mustafa  Mohammed,  on  whom  be  God's


ISO  SHAIKH  SADL

blessing  and  peace.  He  said  :  O  Abu-Horairah  I  let
me  alone  every  other  day,  that  so  affection  may  increase;
that  is,  come  not  every  day,  that  we  may  get  more
loving !

They  said  to  a  good  and  holy  man,  Notwith-
standing all  these  charms  which  the  sun  commands,
we  have  never  heard  of  anybody  that  has  fallen
in  love  with  him !  He  answered,  It  is  because  he
is  seen  every  day,  unless  during  the  winter,  when
he  is  veiled  [in  the  clouds],  and  thus  much  coveted
and  loved. — "  To  visit  mankind  has  no  blame  in
it,  but  not  to  such  a  degree  as  to  let  them  say,
Enough  of  it.  If  we  see  occasion  to  interrogate
ourselves,  we  need  not  listen  to  the  reprehension
of  others."

XXX.

Having  taken  offence  with  the  society  of  my
friends  at  Damascus,  I  retired  into  the  wilderness
of  the  Holy  Land,  or  Jerusalem,  and  sought  the
company  of  brutes  till  such  time  as  I  was  made  a
prisoner  by  the  Franks,  and  employed  by  them,
along  with  some  Jews,  in  digging  earth  in  the  ditches
of  Tripoli.  At  length  one  of  the  chiefs  of  Aleppo,
between  whom  and  me  an  intimacy  had  of  old  sub-
sisted, happening  to  pass  that  way,  recognised  me,
and  said,  How  is  this?  and  how  came  you  to  be
thus  occupied  ?  I  replied  :  What  can  I  say  ? — "  I
was  flying  from  mankind  into  the  forests  and  moun-
tains, for  my  resource  was  in  God  and  in  none


SHAIKH  SADL  151

else.  Fancy  to  thyself  what  my  condition  must
now  be,  when  forced  to  associate  with  a  tribe  scarcely
human  ? — To  be  linked  in  a  chain  with  a  company
of  acquaintance  were  pleasanter  than  to  walk  in  a
garden  with  strangers."

He  took  pity  on  my  situation ;  and,  having  for
ten  dinars  redeemed  me  from  captivity  with  the
Franks,  carried  me  along  with  him  to  Aleppo.  Here
he  had  a  daughter,  and  her  he  gave  me  in  marriage,
with  a  dower  of  a  hundred  dinars.  Soon  after  this
damsel  turned  out  a  termagant  and  vixen,  and  dis-
covered such  a  perverse  spirit  and  virulent  tongue
as  quite  unhinged  all  my  domestic  comfort. — "  A
scolding  wife  in  the  dwelling  of  a  peaceable
man  is  his  hell  even  in  this  world.  Protect  and
guard  us  against  a  wicked  inmate.  Save  us,  O
Lord,  and  preserve  us  from  the  fiery,  or  hell,
torture."

Having  on  one  occasion  given  a  liberty  to  the
tongue  of  reproach,  she  was  saying,  Are  you  not
the  fellow  whom  my  father  redeemed  from  the
captivity  of  the  Franks  for  ten  dinars?  I  replied,
Yes,  I  am  that  same  he  delivered  from  captivity
for  ten  dinars,  and  enslaved  me  with  you  for  a
hundred ! — "  I  have  heard  that  a  reverend  and
mighty  man  released  a  sheep  from  the  paws  and
jaws  of  a  wolf.  That  same  night  he  was  sticking
a  knife  into  its  throat,  when  the  spirit  of  the  sheep
reproached  him,  saying,  Thou  didst  deliver  me  from
the  clutches  of  a  wolf,  when  I  at  length  saw  that
thou  didst  prove  a  wolf  to  me  thyself."


J52  SHAIKH  SADL

XXXI.
Omitted.

XXXII.

A  king  asked  an  abid,  or  holy  man,  who  had  a
family,  how  he  managed  his  precious  time.  He
answered,  My  whole  night  I  pass  in  communing
with  God,  my  morning  in  supplicating  his  blessing
and  support,  and  my  entire  day  in  earning  the  means
of  a  livelihood.  Comprehending  from  this  state-
ment the  good  man's  drift,  the  king  commanded  that
they  should  provide  his  subsistence  daily,  and  relieve
his  mind  from  the  cares  of  a  family. — "  Thou  must
not  again  fancy  thyself  free  who  art  bound  by  the
foot  with  the  thoughts  of  a  family.  The  care  of
children,  their  bread,  raiment,  and  meat,  incapacitate
thee  from  soaring  into  the  angelic  abode. — The  live-
long day  I  am  occupied  with  thinking  how  I  can
devote  my  night  to  God.  At  night,  when  settling
myself  at  prayer,  I  reflect  what  my  babes  are  to
eat  next  morning."

XXXIII.

One  of  the  holy  men  of  Syria  had  passed  many
years  of  devotion  in  the  wilderness,  and  was  feeding
on  the  leaves  of  trees.  The  king  of  that  country,
in  the  way  of  a  pilgrimage,  visited  him,  and  said,  If
you  can  see  the  propriety  of  removing  into  my  capital
I  will  prepare  an  abode,  where  you  may  perform  your


SHAIKH  SADL  153

devotions  more  at  ease  than  in  this  place,  and  others
may  benefit  by  the  blessing  of  your  spiritual  com-
munion, and  be  edified  by  the  example  of  your  pious
labours.  The  hermit  was  adverse  to  this  advice,  and
turned  away  his  face.  One  of  the  king's  ministers
spoke  to  him,  saying :  For  the  satisfaction  of  his
majesty,  it  were  proper  that  you  would  for  a  few
days  remove  into  the  city,  and  ascertain  the  nature  of
the  place ;  when,  if  it  should  prove  that  your  purity
might  be  tarnished  by 'coming  in  contact  with  the
wicked,  you  have  still  the  option  left  of  moving
back.

It  is  reported  that  they  prevailed  on  the  hermit  to
accompany  them  into  the  city  ;  and,  in  a  garden  near
the  sacred  residence  of  the  king,  prepared  for  him  a
dwelling,  which,  like  the  mansions  of  paradise,  was
rejoicing  the  heart,  and  exhilarating  the  soul. — "  Its
damask  roses  were  blooming  as  the  cheeks  of  the
lovely,  and  its  tufted  spikenard  like  the  ringlets  of
our  mistresses.  It  had  as  much  to  fear  from  the  angry
blasts  of  winter  as  the  babe  who  has  not  yet  tasted  its
nurse's  milk  :  boughs  of  trees  on  which  hung  crimson
flowers,  that  gleamed  like  a  flame  amidst  their  dusky
foliage"

Forthwith  the  king  sent  him  a  moon-faced  damsel.
— "  Such  was  this  delicate  crescent  of  the  moon,  and
fascination  of  the  holy,  this  form  of  an  angel,  and
decoration  of  a  peacock,  that  let  them  once  behold
her,  and  continence  must  cease  to  exist  in  the  con-
stitutions of  the  chaste."

And,  in  like  manner,  there  followed  her  a  youth  of


154  SHAIKH  SADI.

such  rare  beauty  and  exquisite  symmetry,  that  the
powerful  grasp  of  his  charms  had  broken  the  wrists  of
the  pious,  and  tied  up  behind  their  backs  the  arms  of
the  upright. — "  Mankind  stand  around  him  parched
with  thirst,  whilst  he,  who  seems  thy  cup-bearer,  will
give  thee  no  drink. — The  eye  could  not  be  satiated  by
beholding  him,  like  the  dropsical  man  with  water  by
looking  at  the  river  Euphrates."

The  hermit  began  to  relish  dainty  food,  and  to  wear
sumptuous  apparel ;  to  regale  himself  with  fruits,
perfumes,  and  sweetmeats;  and  to  behold  with  delight
the  charms  of  the  handmaid  and  bondsman.  And
the  wise  have  said,  The  ringlets  of  the  lovely  are  a
chain  on  the  feet  of  reason,  and  a  snare  for  the  bird  of
wisdom. — "  To  the  mystery  of  thy  service  I  devoted
my  heart,  religion,  and  all  my  mental  faculties ;
verily,  I  am  now  the  bird  of  reason,  and  thou  art  the
lure  and  bait."

In  short,  the  good  fortune  of  his  many  years  of
sanctity  ran  to  waste,  as  has  been  said : — "  Whatever
he  had  laid  up  from  theologician,  sage,  or  saint,  or  of
recondite  knowledge  from  the  eloquent  and  pure  of
spirit,  now  that  he  had  stooped  to  mix  with  a  vile
world,  like  the  foot  of  a  fly  he  got  entangled  in  its
honey."

The  king  had  the  curiosity  of  making  him  another
visit,  and  found  the  hermit  much  altered  from  what
he  first  saw  of  him.  His  face  had  become  fair  and
ruddy,  and  his  body  plump  and  jolly ;  and  he  was
reclining  at  his  ease  on  cushions  of  brocade,  and  had
the  Hoori-like  damsel  lolling  by  his  side,  and  the


SHAIKH  SADL  155

fairy-formed  youth  holding  a  fly-flap  of  peacock's
feathers  in  his  hand,  and  standing  by  him  in  attend-
ance. The  king  congratulated  him  upon  his  portly
appearance,  and  they  entered  together  upon  a  variety
of  topics,  till  his  majesty  concluded  by  observing,  In
this  world  I  have  an  affection  for  these  two  orders  of
mankind,  the  learned  and  the  recluse.  A  philosophic
vizier,  and  man  of  much  worldly  experience,  happened
to  be  present.  He  said  :  O  sire !  such  is  the  canon  of
affection  that  you  should  confer  a  benefit  on  each.
Give  money  to  the  learned  man,  that  he  may  teach
others  ;  and  give  nothing  to  the  hermit,  that  he  may
remain  an  anchorite. — "  A  zahid,  or  hermit,  stands  in
need  of  neither  diram  nor  dinar ;  when  an  anchorite
takes  either,  look  out  for  another. — Whoever  is  vir-
tuously disposed,  and  holds  a  mystical  communication
with  God,  is  sufficient  of  a  hermit  without  requiring
the  bread  of  charity,  or  the  crumbs  of  mendicity.
The  tapering  finger  of  the  lovely,  and  her  soul-delud-
ing ear-lobe,  are  decoration  enough  without  a  turkois-
ring  or  ear-jewel. — Tell  that  piously-disposed  and
serene-minded  darwesh  that  he  needs  not  the  bread
of  consecration  or  scraping  of  beggary ;  tell  that
handsome  and  fair-faced  matron  that  she  does  not
require  paint,  colouring,  or  jewellery. — When  I  have
of  my  own,  and  covet  what  is  another's,  if  they  esteem
me  not  a  hermit  they  treat  me  as  I  merit."

XXXIV.

Conformably  with  the  above  apologue,  a  king  had
a  business  of  importance  in  hand.     He  said  :  If  this


156  SHAIKH  SADL

affair  prosper  to  my  wish  I  will  distribute  among  the
recluse  a  certain  sum  in  dirams.  Now  his  object  was
accomplished,  and  mind  made  easy,  he  thought  it
incumbent  to  fulfil  the  condition  of  his  eleemosynary
vow,  and  gave  a  bag  of  dinars  to  a  favourite  servant,
that  he  might  distribute  them  among  the  anchorites.
This  was  a  discreet  and  considerate  young  man.  He
wandered  about  for  the  whole  day  ;  and,  returning  in
the  evening,  kissed  the  bag  of  money,  and  laid  it
before  the  king,  saying,  However  much  I  sought  after,
I  have  met  with  no  recluses !  The  king  answered,
What  a  story  is  this.?  for  I  myself  know  four  hundred
recluses  within  this  city.  He  said,  O  sovereign  of  the
universe !  such  as  are  recluses  do  not  take  money  ;
and  such  as  take  money  are  not  anchorites !  The
king  smiled,  and  observed  to  his  courtiers,  However
much  I  reverence  and  favour  this  tribe  of  God's  wor-
shippers, this  saucy  fellow  expresses  for  them  a  spite
and  ill-will ;  and,  if  you  desire  the  truth,  he  has
justice  on  his  side. — "  Instead  of  that  hermit  who
took  dirams  and  dinars,  get  hold  of  one  who  is  more
an  anchorite."

XXXV.

They  asked  a  profoundly-learned  man,  saying,
What  is  your  opinion  of  consecrated  bread,  or  alms-
taking  ?  He  answered,  If  with  the  view  of  composing
their  minds,  and  promoting  their  devotions,  it  is  law-
ful to  take  it;  but  if  monks  collect  for  the  sake  of  an
endowment,  it  is  forbidden. — "  Good  and  holy  men
have  received  the  bread  of  consecration  for  the  sake


SHAIKH  SADI.  157

of  religious    retirement;   and  are  not   recluses,  that
they  may  receive  such  bread."

xxxvi.

A  darwesh  came  to  put  up  at  a  place  where  the
master  of  the  house  was  a  gentleman  of  an  hospitable
disposition.  He  had  as  his  guests  an  assembly  of
learned  and  witty  men,  each  of  whom  was  repeating
such  a  jest,  or  anecdote,  as  is  usual  with  the  facetious.
Having  travelled  across  a  desert,  the  darwesh  was
much  fatigued,  and  well-nigh  famished.  One  of  the
company  observed,  in  the  way  of  pleasantry,  You
must  also  repeat  something.  The  darwesh  answered,
lam  not,  like  the  others,  overstocked  with  learning
and  wit,  nor  am  I  much  read  in  books  ;  and  you  must
be  satisfied  with  my  reciting  one  distich.  One  and  all
eagerly  cried,  Let  us  hear  it  He  said,  "  Hungry  as  I
am,  I  sit  by  a  table  spread  with  food,  like  a  bachelor
at  the  entrance  of  a  bath  full  of  women  ! "

They  applauded  what  he  said,  and  ordered  the  tray
to  be  placed  before  him.  The  lord  of  the  feast  said,
Stay  your  appetite,  my  friend !  till  my  handmaids  can
prepare  for  you  some  forced  meat  He  raised  his
head  from  the  tray,  and  answered,  "  Say  there  is  no
need  for  forced  meet  on  my  tray,  for  a  crust  of  plain
bread  is  sufficient  for  one  baked  as  I  have  been  in  the
desert."

XXXVII.

A  disciple  complained  to  his  ghostly  father,  saying,
What  can  I  do,  for  I  am  much  annoyed  by  the  people,


158  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

who  are  interrupting  me  with  their  frequent  visits,  and
break  in  upon  my  precious  hours  with  their  imper-
tinent intrusions.  He  replied,  To  such  of  them  as  are
poor  lend  money,  and  from  such  as  are  rich  ask
some  in  loan ;  and  neither  of  them  will  trouble  you
again.  "  Let  a  beggar  be  the  harbinger  of  an  army
of  Islam,  or  the  orthodox,  and  the  infidel  will  fly  his
importunity  as  far  as  the  wall  of  China."

XXXVIII.

A  young  divine  observed  to  his  spiritual  preceptor,
saying,  The  hypothetical  and  florid  sermons  of  our
theological  declaimers  make  no  impression  upon  me,
for  I  do  not  observe  that  their  works  correspond  with
their  precepts. — "  They  hold  forth  to  mankind  to
abandon  the  world,  and  are  themselves  hoarding
money  and  corn.  That  doctor  who  can  fancy  his
word  enough  will  prevail  with  nobody,  whatever  he
may  teach.  That  is  a  wise  man  who  does  no  evil ;
not  he  who  will  forbid  the  people,  and  is  himself  a
sinner. — The  learned  man,  who  may  consult  his  own
indulgences  and  gratifications,  is  gone  astray  himself,
how  can  he  guide  another  ?  "

The  ghostly  father  replied :  O !  my  son,  solely
misled  by  this  fallacious  reasoning,  you  should  not
reject  the  instruction  of  the  preachers  ;  nor  choose
for  yourself  the  path  of  refractoriousness  ;  nor  con-
sider the  learned  as  tainted  with  error  ;  nor,  in  the
pursuit  of  an  immaculate  teacher,  remain  yourself
excluded  from  the  benefits  of  knowledge,  like  that


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  159

blind  man  who  fell  one  night  into  a  slough,  and  cried
aloud,  O  ye  faithful !  will  ye  at  last  place  a  light  in
my  way  ?  A  courtesan  heard  him,  and  replied,  You,
who  cannot  see  a  light,  what  can  you  do  with  a  light  ?
In  like  manner  the  sermon  of  a  preacher  is  like  a
market-place,  where  until  you  take  ready  money  you
can  get  no  ware  ;  and  here,  until  you  bring  a  hearty
zeal,  you  cannot  secure  the  felicity  of  hereafter. —
"  Listen  to  his  doctrine  with  the  ear  of  the  soul,
notwithstanding  the  learned  man's  actions  may  not
correspond  with  his  precepts.  Vain  is  that  objection
of  the  caviller,  How  can  he  who  is  asleep  awake  his
sleeping  neighbour  ?  It  behoves  a  man  to  attend  to
instruction,  notwithstanding  the  maxim  be  written  on
a  wall. — A  good  and  holy  man  left  a  monastery  for  a
college ;  he  broke  the  vow  of  his  monkish  fraternity.
I  asked,  What  is  the  difference  between  a  philosopher
and  abid,  that  thou  shouldst  prefer  that  sect  to  this  ?
He  replied,  This  would  rescue  a  brother  monk
from  the  waves,  and  that,  or  the  philosopher,  would
endeavour  to  save  any  drowning  person."

XXXIX.

A  drunken  fellow  had  lain  down  to  sleep  on  the
highway,  and  was  quite  overcome  with  the  fumes  of
intoxication.  An  abid  was  passing  close  by,  and  look-
ing at  him  with  scorn.  The  youth  raised  his  head,  and
said,  W/ienever  they  pass  anything  shameful  they  pass  it
with  compassion. — "  Whenever  thou  beholdest  a  sinner,
hide  and  bear  with  his  transgressions :  thou,  who  art


160  SHAIKH  SADI.

aware  of  them,  why  not  overlook  my  sins  with  pity? —
Turn  not  away,  O  reverend  sir!  from  a  sinner;  but
look  upon  him  with  compassion.  Though  in  my
actions  I  am  not  a  hero,  do  thou  pass  by  as  the
heroic  would  pass  me."

XL.

A  gang  of  dissolute  vagabonds  broke  in  upon  a
darwesh,  used  opprobrious  language,  and  beat  and
ill-used  him.  In  his  helplessness  he  carried  his  com-
plaint before  his  ghostly  father,  and  said,  Thus  it  has
befallen  me.  He  replied  :  O  my  son !  the  patched
cloak  of  darweshes  is  the  garment  of  resignation ;
whosoever  wears  this  garb,  and  cannot  bear  with
disappointment,  is  a  hypocrite,  and  to  him  our  cloth
is  forbidden. — "  A  vast  and  deep  river  is  not  rendered
turbid  by  throwing  into  it  a  stone.  That  religious  man
who  can  be  vexed  at  an  injury  is  as  yet  a  shallow
brook. — If  thou  art  subjected  to  trouble,  bear  with  it ;
for  by  forgiveness  thou  art  purified  from  sin.  Seeing,
O  brother!  that  we  are  ultimately  to  become  dust,
be  humble  as  the  dust,  before  thou  moulderest  into
dust."

XLI.

"  Hear  what  occurred  once  at  Baghdad  in  a  dis-
pute that  took  place  between  a  roll-up  curtain  and
standard.  Covered  with  the  road-dust,  and  jaded
with  a  march,  the  standard,  in  reproach,  observed  to
the  curtain  :  Thou  and  I  are  gentlemen  in  livery ;  we


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  161

are  fellow-servants  at  the  court  of  his  majesty.  I
never  enjoy  a  moment's  relief  from  duty ;  early  and
late  I  am  equally  marching.  Thou  hast  never
experienced  any  peril  or  a  siege,  the  heavy  sand  of
the  desert  or  dust  of  a  whirlwind  ;  my  foot  is  most
forward  in  any  enterprise.  Then  why  art  thou  my
superior  in  dignity?  Thou  art  cared  for  by  youths
with  faces  splendid  as  the  moon,  and  handled  by
damsels  scenting  like  jasmine  ;  while  I  am  fallen  into
the  hands  of  raw  recruits,  am  rolled  up  on  our  march,
and  turned  upside  down.  The  curtain  answered  :  I
lay  my  head  humble  at  the  threshold,  and  hold  it  not
up  like  thine,  flaring  in  the  face  of  heaven  !  Who-
ever is  thus  vainly  rearing  his  crest  exalts  himself
only  to  be  humbled."

XLII.

A  good  and  holy  man  saw  a  huge  and  strong
fellow,  who,  having  got  much  enraged,  was  storming
with  passion  and  foaming  at  the  mouth.  He  asked,
What  has  happened  to  this  man?  Somebody
answered,  Such  a  one  has  given  him  bad  names !
He  said,  This  paltry  wretch  is  able  to  carry  a
thousand-weight  of  stone,  and  cannot  bear  with  one
light  word  ! — "  Cease  to  boast  of  thy  strong  arm  and
pretended  manhood,  infirm  as  thou  art  in  mind,  and
mean  in  spirit.  What  difference  is  there  between  such
a  man  and  a  woman?  Though  thou  art  strong  of
arm,  let  thy  mouth  utter  sweet  words  ;  it  is  no  proof
of  courage  to  thrust  thy  fist  into  another  man's  face  : —
Though  thou  art  able  to  tear  the  scalp  off  an  elephant,

753


1 62  SHAIKH  SADL

if  deficient  in  humanity,  thou  art  no  hero.  The  sons
of  Adam  are  formed  from  dust ;  if  not  humble  as  the
dust,  they  fall  short  of  being  men."

XLIII.

I  questioned  a  respectable  divine  upon  the  quali-
fications of  the  sufi  brotherhood.  He  answered:
The  meanest  of  them  is  that  they  will  consult
the  gratification  of  their  friends  in  preference  to
attending  to  their  own  special  concerns.  As  philo-
sophers have  said:  A  brother  who  is  solely  devoted
to  himself  is  neither  a  brother  nor  a  kinsman. — "  If  a
fellow-traveller  hurries  on,  he  is  not  the  companion  of
thy  journey ;  fix  thy  affections  on  him  who  feels  a
mutual  affection.  If  a  relation  be  not  of  the  same
faith  and  ritual,  to  dissolve  such  a  connection  is  better
than  to  court  its  kindred  affection."

I  recollect  that  a  caviller  objected  to  the  sentiment
contained  in  the  above  distich,  and  said,  The  mighty
and  supreme  judge  has  in  the  glorious  Koran  forbid
a  separation  of  kindred,  and  enjoined  the  tie  of
consanguinity ;  and  what  you  have  inculcated  is
repugnant  to  this  precept.  I  replied,  You  are  mis-
taken ;  for  it  accords  with  the  Koran  xxxi.,  as  the
Most  High  God  has  expressed  it : — "  Were  your  two
parents  to  command  you  to  give  me  such  partners  as
you  could  not  acknowledge,  then  would  you  not  obey
them;" — "A  thousand  relatives  who  are  strangers
to  God  are  the  sacrifice  of  one  stranger  who  is  his
friend."


SHAIKH  SADJ.  163


XLIV.

"A  facetious  old  gentleman  of  Baghdad  gave  his
daughter  in  marriage  to  a  shoemaker.  The  flint-
hearted  fellow  bit  so  deeply  into  the  damsel's  lip  that
the  blood  trickled  from  the  wound.  Next  morning
the  father  found  her  in  this  plight,  he  went  up  to  his
son-in-law,  and  asked  him,  saying  :  Low-born  wretch  !
what  sort  of  teeth  are  these  that  thou  shouldst  chew
her  lips  as  if  they  were  a  piece  of  leather?  I  speak
not  in  play  what  I  have  to  say.  Lay  jesting  aside,
and  take  with  her  thy  legal  enjoyment. — When  once
a  vicious  disposition  has  taken  root  in  the  habit,  the
hand  of  death  can  only  eradicate  it."

XLV.

A  doctor  of  laws  had  a  daughter  preciously  ugly,
and  she  had  reached  the  age  of  womanhood ;  but,
notwithstanding  her  dowry  and  fortune,  nobody
seemed  inclined  to  ask  her  in  marriage  : — "  Damask
or  brocade  but  add  to  her  deformity  when  put  upon
a  bride  void  of  symmetry."

In  short,  they  were  under  the  necessity  of  uniting
her  in  the  bands  of  wedlock  to  a  blind  man.  They
add,  that  soon  after  there  arrived  from  Sirandip,  or
Ceylon,  a  physician  that  could  restore  sight  to  the
blind.  They  spoke  to  the  law  doctor,  saying,  Why
do  you  not  get  him  to  prescribe  for  your  son-in-law  ?
He  answered:  Because  I  am  afraid  he  may  recover


1 64  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

his   sight,   and   repudiate    my  daughter ;    for — "  the
husband  of  an  ugly  woman  should  be  blind."


XLVI.

A  king  was  regarding  with  a  scornful  eye  a  com-
pany of  darweshes.  One  of  them,  from  sagacity,
penetrated  his  thoughts,  and  said :  O  sire !  in  the
pomp  of  this  world  we  are  your  inferiors,  in  its  enjoy-
ments happier,  in  death  your  equals,  and  at  the  day
of  judgment,  if  it  please  the  Most  High  God,  our
future  state  shall  be  preferable: — "Though  a  con-
queror of  regions  has  every  indulgence,  and  the
darwesh  is  in  want  of  his  daily  bread,  when  this  and
that  are  alike  doomed  to  die,  each  can  take  from  this
world  only  his  winding-sheet.  When  thou  shalt  pack
up  the  baggage  of  quitting  thy  present  possessions,
the  beggar  will  depart  lighter  and  happier  than  the
king."

The  outward  tokens  of  a  darwesh.  are  a  patched
garment  and  a  shaven  head,  and  the  inward  signs
those  of  being  alive  in  the  spirit  and  dead  in  the
flesh : — "  Not  he  who  will  sit  apart  from  his  fellow-
creatures  at  the  door  of  supplication  with  God,  and  if
he  shall  reject  his  prayer  will  stand  up  in  disobedi-
ence. Or  if  a  mill-stone  come  rolling  down  a
mountain,  he  is  not  intelligent  in  the  ways  of  pro-
vidence that  would  rise  to  avoid  it."

The  ritual  of  darweshes  is  gratitude  and  praise,
worship  and  obedience,  contentment  and  charity,
and  a  belief  in  the  unity  and  providence  of  God,


SHAIKH  SADL  165

having  a  reliance  on  and  being  resigned  to  his  will,
confident  of  his  favour,  and  forbearant  with  all.
Whoever  is  endowed  with  these  qualifications  is  in
truth  a  darwesh,  notwithstanding  he  be  arrayed  in
gorgeous  apparel.  Whereas  the  irreligious  and  hypo-
critical vain  -  boaster,  sensualist,  and  whoremonger,
who  turns  days  into  nights  in  his  slavish  indulgences,
and  converts  nights  into  days  in  his  dreams  of  forget-
fulness ;  who  eats  whatever  falls  in  his  way,  and
speaks  whatever  comes  uppermost,  is  a  profligate,
though  clothed  in  the  sackcloth  of  a  saint : — "  Many
a  believer  is  tricked  out  in  vainglory,  and  many  an
infidel  wears  the  garb  of  piety: — yes !  thy  inside  is
stark  naked  of  piety,  though  thou  mayst  adorn  thy
exterior  with  the  robe  of  hypocrisy.  Thou,  who  hast
only  a  reed  mat  for  thy  floor,  do  not  display  a
gorgeous  curtain  before  thy  door."

XLVII.

"  I  noticed  some  nosegays  of  fresh-blown  roses  tied
on  a  dome  with  fastenings  of  grass.  I  said :  What
bewitched  such  a  weed  as  grass,  that  it  too  should
sit  on  a  level  with  the  rose  ?  The  grass  wept,  and
exclaimed :  Silence !  the  generous  forget  not  an  old
associate.  Though  I  have  no  claim  to  its  loveliness,
bloom,  and  fragrance,  after  all  am  I  not  grass  from  its
garden  ?  I  am  the  servant  of  a  munificent  master
— the  fostered  offspring  of  his  ancient  goodness.
Whether  I  am  precious,  or  whether  I  am  worthless,  I
trust,  nevertheless,  to  the  mercy  of  God.  Although  I


1 66  SHAIKH  SADL

possess  no  store  of  merchandise,  nor  claim  from  a
stock  of  duty  and  obedience,  he  can  retrieve  the
affairs  of  his  servant,  now  he  has  no  other  mediator
left  him.  It  is  the  custom  of  masters  who  practise
manumission  to  liberate  such  slaves  as  are  grown  old
in  their  service.  O  Lord  God,  the  embellisher  of  this
world,  bestow  liberty  upon  thine  ancient  servant. —
Take,  O  Sadi !  the  path  leading  to  the  temple  of
resignation.  O  man  of  God,  follow  the  ways  of  God.
Unhappy  is  he  who  will  turn  his  face  from  this  gate,
for  he  shall  never  find  another  to  enter  at."

XLVIII.

They  asked  a  wise  man  which  was  preferable,
munificence  or  courage  ?  He  answered,  Whoever  has
munificence  has  no  need  of  courage. — "  On  the  tomb-
stone of  Bahram-gor  was  inscribed :  The  hand  of
liberality  is  stronger  than  the  arm  of  power. — Hatim
Tayi  remains  not,  yet  will  his  exalted  name  live
renowned  for  generosity  to  all  eternity.  Distribute
the  tithe  of  thy  wealth  in  alms,  for  the  more  the
gardener  prunes  his  vine  the  more  he  adds  to  his
crop  of  grapes."


CHAPTER  III.

ON  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CONTENTMENT.
I.

A  mendicant  from  the  west  of  Africa  had  taken
his  station  amidst  a  group  of  shopkeepers  at  Aleppo,
and  was  saying:  O  lords  of  plenty  !  had  ye  a  just
sense  of  equity,  and  we  of  contentment,  all  manner  of
importunity  would  cease  in  this  world  ! — "  O  content-
ment !  do  thou  make  me  rich,  for  without  thee  there
is  no  wealth.  The  treasure  of  patience  was  the  choice
of  Lucman.  Whoever  has  no  patience  has  no
wisdom."

II.

There  dwelt  in  Egypt  two  youths  of  noble  birth,
one  of  whom  applied  himself  to  study  knowledge,  and
the  other  to  accumulate  wealth.  In  process  of  time
that  became  the  wisest  man  of  his  age,  and  this  king
of  Egypt  Then  was  the  rich  man  casting  an  eye  of
scorn  upon  his  philosophic  brother,  and  saying,  I
have  reached  a  sovereignty,  and  you  remain  thus  in
a  state  of  poverty.  He  replied:  O  brother!  I  am  all
the  more  grateful  for  the  bounty  of  a  Most  High  God,


j 68  SHAIKH  SADL

whose  name  was  glorified,  that  I  have  found  the
heritage  of  the  prophets — namely,  wisdom  ;  and  you
have  got  the  estate  of  Pharaoh  and  Haman — that
is,  the  kingdom  of  Egypt. — "  I  am  an  emmet,  that
mankind  shall  tread  under  foot ;  not  a  hornet,  that
they  shall  complain  of  my  sting.  How  can  I  suffi-
ciently express  my  grateful  sense  of  this  blessing,
that  I  possess  not  the  means  of  injuring  my  fellow-
creatures  ?  "

III.

I  heard  of  a  darwesh  who  was  consuming  in  the
flame  of  want,  tacking  patch  after  patch  upon  his
ragged  garment,  and  solacing  his  mind  with  this
couplet : — "  I  can  rest  content  with  a  dry  crust  of
bread  and  a  coarse  woollen  frock,  for  the  burden  of
my  own  exertion  bears  lighter  than  laying  myself
under  obligation  to  another." — Somebody  observed  to
him,  Why  do  you  sit  quiet,  while  a  certain  gentleman
of  this  city  is  so  nobly  disposed  and  universally
benevolent,  that  he  has  girt  up  his  loins  in  the  service
of  the  religious  independents,  and  seated  himself  by
the  door  of  their  hearts  ?  Were  he  apprised  of  your
condition,  he  would  esteem  himself  obliged,  and  be
happy  in  the  opportunity  of  relieving  it.  He  said  :
Be  silent ;  for  it  is  better  to  die  of  want  than  to
expose  our  necessities  before  another,  as  they  have
remarked  : — "  Patching  a  tattered  cloak,  and  the
consequent  treasure  of  content,  is  more  commend-
able than  petitioning  the  great  for  every  new  gar-
ment By  my  troth,  I  swear  it  were  equal  to  the


SHAIKH  SADL  169

torments  of  hell  to  enter  into  paradise  through  the
interest  of  a  neighbour."


IV.

One  of  the  Persian  kings  sent  a  skilful  physician  to
attend  Mohammed  Mustufa,  on  whom  be  salutation.
He  remained  some  years  in  the  territory  of  the
Arabs  ;  but  nobody  went  to  try  his  skill,  or  asked
him  for  any  medicine.  One  day  he  presented  himself
before  the  blessed  prince  of  prophets,  and  complained,
saying,  The  king  had  sent  me  to  dispense  medicine
to  your  companions  ;  but,  till  this  moment,  nobody
has  been  so  good  as  to  enable  me  to  practise  any  skill
that  this  your  servant  may  possess.  The  blessed
messenger  of  God  was  pleased  to  answer,  saying,  It  is
a  rule  with  this  tribe  never  to  eat  till  hard  pressed  by
hunger,  and  to  discontinue  their  repast  while  they
have  yet  an  appetite.  The  physician  said,  This
accounts  for  their  health.  Then  he  kissed  the  earth
of  respect  and  took  his  leave. — "  The  physician  will
then  begin  to  inculcate  temperance,  or  to  extend  the
finger  of  indulgence,  when  from  silence  his  patient
might  suffer  by  excess,  or  his  life  be  endangered  by
abstinence  :  of  course,  the  skill  of  the  physician  is
advice,  and  the  patient's  regimen  and  diet  yield  the
fruits  of  health  I "

V.

A  certain  person  would  be  making  vows  of
abstinence  and  breaking  them.  At  last  a  reverend


1 70  SHAIKH  SADI.

gentleman  observed  to  him,  So  I  understand  that
you  make  a  practice  of  eating  to  excess  ;  and  that
any  restraint  on  your  appetite,  namely,  this  vow,  is
weaker  than  a  hair,  and  this  voraciousness,  as  you
indulge  it,  would  break  an  iron  chain  ;  but  the  day
must  come  when  it  will  destroy  you. — "  A  man  was
rearing  the  whelp  of  a  wolf ;  when  full  grown  it  tore
its  patron  and  master."

VI.

In  the  annals  of  Ardishir  Babagan  it  is  recorded
that  he  asked  an  Arabian  physician,  saying,  What
quantity  of  food  ought  to  be  eaten  daily  ?  He
replied,  A  hundred  dirams'  weight  were  sufficient
The  king  said,  What  strength  can  a  man  derive
from  so  small  a  quantity  ?  The  physician  replied :
So  much  can  support  you;  but  in  whatever  you  exceed
that  you  must  support  it. — "  Eating  is  for  the  purpose
of  living,  and  speaking  in  praise  of  God  ;  but  thou
believest  that  we  live  only  to  eat."

VII.

Two  darweshes  of  Khorasan  were  fellow-com-
panions on  a  journey.  One  was  so  spare  and
moderate  that  he  would  break  his  fast  only  every
other  night,  and  the  other  so  robust  and  intemperate
that  he  ate  three  meals  a  day.  It  happened  that
they  were  taken  up  at  the  gate  of  .a  city  on  suspicion
of  being  spies,  and  both  together  put  into  a  place,
the  entrance  of  which  was  built  up  with  mud.  After


SHAIKH  SADI.  171

a  fortnight  it  was  discovered  that  they  were  inno-
cent, when,  on  breaking  open  the  door,  they  found
the  strong  man  dead,  and  the  weak  one  alive  and
well.  They  were  astonished  at  this  circumstance.
A  wise  man  said,  The  contrary  of  this  had  been
strange,  for  this  one  was  a  voracious  eater,  and  not
having  strength  to  support  a  want  of  food,  perished ;
and  that  other  was  abstemious,  and  being  patient,
according  to  his  habitual  practice,  survived  it. —
"When  a  person  is  habitually  temperate,  and  a
hardship  shall  cross  him,  he  will  get  over  it  with
ease;  but  if  he  has  pampered  his  body  and  lived
in  luxury,  and  shall  get  into  straitened  circum-
stances, he  must  perish."

VIII.

A  certain  philosopher  admonished  his  son  against
eating  to  an  excess,  because  repletion  made  a  man
sick.  The  boy  answered,  O  father,  hunger  will  kill.
Have  you  not  heard  what  the  wits  have  remarked,
To  die  of  a  surfeit  were  better  than  to  bear  with  a
craving  appetite  ?  The  father  said,  Study  modera-
tion, for  the  Most  High  God  has  told  us  in  the
Koran  : — Eat  ye  and  drink  ye,  but  not  to  an  excess : —
"eat  not  so  voraciously  that  the  food  shall  be  re-
gorged from  thy  mouth,  nor  so  abstemiously  that
from  depletion  life  shall  desert  thee : — though  food
be  the  means  of  preserving  breath  in  the  body.  Yet,
if  taken  to  excess,  it  will  prove  noxious.  If  conserve
of  roses  be  frequently  indulged  in  it  will  cause  a


172  SHAIKH  SADL

surfeit,  whereas  a  crust  of  bread,  eaten  after  a  long
interval,  will  relish  like  conserve  of  roses."


IX.

They  asked  a  sick  man :  What  does  your  heart
covet  ?  He  replied :  Only  this,  that  my  heart  may
covet  nothing ! — "  When  the  stomach  is  oppressed,
and  the  belly  suffering  from  a  cholic,  it  cannot  benefit
though  everything  else  be  right."

X.

In  the  city  of  Wasit  a  dealer  in  corn  had  allowed
some  sufis  to  run  up  a  score  with  him,  and  was  daily
dunning  them  for  payment,  and  making  use  of  very
coarse  language.  The  brotherhood  were  hurt  to  the
soul  by  his  low  abuse ;  but  they  had  no  remedy
besides  patience.  A  good  and  holy  man  among
them  said,  It  is  easier  to  satisfy  the  appetite  with  a
promise  of  nourishment  than  to  put  off  the  grain
merchant  with  an  assurance  of  future  payment : — "  It
were  preferable  to  forego  the  beneficence  of  a  patron
than  to  submit  to  the  rudeness  of  his  door-keepers.
It  is  better  to  perish  of  a  craving  for  meat  than  bear
with  the  execrable  dunning  of  butchers."

XL

In  a  battle  with  the  Tartars,  a  gallant  young  man
was  grievously  wounded.  Somebody  said  to  him,  A


SHAIKH  SADL  173

certain  merchant  has  a  stock  of  the  mummy  antidote ;
if  you  would  ask  him,  he  might  perhaps  accom-
modate you  with  a  portion  of  it.  They  say  that
merchant  was  so  notorious  for  his  stinginess,  that — "  If,
in  the  place  of  his  loaf  of  bread,  the  orb  of  the  sun
had  been  in  his  wallet,  nobody  would  have  seen  day-
light in  the  world  till  the  day  of  judgment."

The  spirited  youth  replied  :  Were  I  to  ask  him  for
this  antidote,  he  might  give  it,  or  he  might  not ;  and  if
he  did  it  might  cure  me,  or  it  might  not ;  at  any  rate,
to  ask  such  a  man  were  itself  a  deadly  poison ! —
"  Whatever  thou  wouldst  ask  of  the  mean,  in  obliga-
tion, might  add  to  the  body,  but  would  take  from  the
soul." — And  philosophers  have  observed,  that  were
the  water  of  immortality,  for  example,  to  be  sold  at
the  price  of  the  reputation,  a  wise  man  would  not  buy
it,  for  an  honourable  death  is  preferable  to  a  life  of
infamy. — "  Wert  thou  to  eat  colocynth  from  the  hand
of  the  kind-hearted,  it  would  relish  better  than  a
sweetmeat  from  that  of  the  crabbed."


XII.


One  of  the  learned  had  a  large  family  and  small
means.  He  stated  his  case  to  a  great  man,  who
entertained  a  favourable  opinion  of  his  character.
This  turned  away  from  his  solicitation,  and  viewed
this  prostitution  of  begging  as  discreditable  with  a
gentleman  of  education. — "  If  soured  by  misfortune,
present  not  thyself  before  a  dear  friend,  for  thou


174  SHAIKH  SADL

mayst  also  imbitter  his  pleasure.  When  thou  bringest
forward  a  distress,  do  it  with  a  cheerful  and  smiling
face,  for  an  openness  of  countenance  can  never  retard
business." — They  have  related  that  he  rose  a  little  in
the  pension,  but  sunk  much  in  the  estimation  of  the
great  man.  After  some  days,  when  he  perceived  this
falling  off  in  his  affection, he  said  : — "Miserable  is  that
supply  of  food  which  thou  obtainest  in  the  hour  of  need;
the  pot  is  put  to  boil,  but  my  reputation  is  bubbled
into  vapour. — He  added  to  my  means  of  subsistence,
but  took  from  my  reputation  ;  absolute  starving  were
better  than  the  disgrace  of  begging."


XIII.


A  darwesh  had  a  pressing  call  for  money.  Some-
body told  him  a  certain  person  is  inconceivably  rich  ;
were  he  made  aware  of  your  want,  he  would  somehow
manage  to  accommodate  it.  He  said,  I  do  not  know
him.  The  other  answered,  I  will  introduce  you  ;  and
having  taken  his  hand,  he  brought  him  to  that
person's  dwelling.  The  darwesh  beheld  a  man  with
a  hanging  lip,  and  sitting  in  sullen  discontent  He
said  nothing,  and  returned  home.  His  friend  asked,
What  have  you  done?  He  replied,  His  gift  I  gave
in  exchange  for  his  look  : — "  Lay  not  thy  words
before  a  man  with  a  sour  face,  otherwise  thou  mayst
be  ruffled  by  his  ill-nature.  If  thou  tellest  the  sorrows
of  thy  heart,  let  it  be  to  him  in  whose  countenance
thou  mayst  be  assured  of  prompt  consolation."


SHAIKH  SADL  175


XIV.

One  year  there  had  occurred  such  a  drought  at
Alexandria  that  the  reins  of  patience  dropped  from
the  hands  of  the  people  ;  the  flood-gates  of  the  skies
were  shut  against  the  earth,  and  the  lamentations  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  mingled  with  the  skies  : —
"  There  was  not  an  animal  among  the  beasts,  birds,
fish,  and  reptiles  whose  lamentation  in  its  distress  did
not  rise  up  to  heaven  :  strange  that  the  heart-felt
sighs  of  creatures  were  not  gathering  so  as  to  become
clouds,  and  the  torrents  of  their  eyes  to  fall  into  rain."

During  such  a  season  there  was  a  hermaphrodite
— be  he  far  apart  from  our  friends,  for  a  speech  in
description  of  him  were  a  breach  of  politeness,  more
especially  in  the  presence  of  the  great  and  good  ;  yet
we  must  not  from  a  motive  of  contempt  altogether
overlook  him,  lest  certain  people  might  charge  the
narrator  with  incapacity ;  therefore  it  was  briefly
stated  in  these  two  verses,  where  a  little  was  a  proof
of  much,  and  a  handful  the  sample  of  an  ass-load  : —
"  Were  a  Tartar  to  kill  that  hermaphrodite,  we  would
not  demand  retaliation  upon  the  Tartar.  How  long
must  he  continue  like  the  bridge  at  Baghdad,  with
water  underneath,  and  people  on  his  back."

Such  a  person  as  I  have  summarily  described  was
that  year  possessed  of  immense  wealth ;  and  was
distributing  gold  and  silver  among  the  needy,  and
keeping  an  open  table  for  the  traveller.  A  company
of  darweshes,  who,  in  their  extreme  want,  had  well


176  SHAIKH  SADL

nigh  perished,  were  inclined  to  accept  his  invitation,
and  came  to  consult  me  on  the  subject.  I  turned
away  indignant,  and  said  : — "  Were  he  dying  of
hunger  in  his  den,  the  lion  would  not  eat  the  leavings
of  a  dog ;  let  thy  body  suffer  hunger  and  hardship,
but  raise  not  the  hand  of  petition  before  the  mean  ;
were  he  another  Firedown  in  wealth  and  dominion,
account  the  dishonourable  man  as  nothing ;  silk  and
embroidery  on  a  worthless  man's  back  is  like  daub-
ing a  mud  wall  over  with  azure  and  gold."

XV.

They  asked  Hatim  Tayi :  Have  you  ever  met,  or
heard  of,  a  person  of  a  more  independent  spirit  than
yourself?  He  answered :  Yes,  one  day  I  had  made
a  sacrifice  of  forty  camels,  and  invited  the  chief  of
every  Arab  tribe  to  a  feast.  Then  I  repaired  to  the
border  of  the  desert,  where  I  met  a  wood-cutter,  who
had  tied  up  his  faggot  to  carry  it  into  the  city.  I
said,  Why  do  you  not  go  to  the  feast  of  Hatim,
where  a  crowd  have  assembled  round  his  carpet?
He  replied  :-?— "  Whoever  can  eat  the  bread  of  his  own
industry  will  not  lay  himself  under  obligation  to
Hatim  Tayi : — and  in  him  I  met  my  superior  in  spirit
and  independence."

XVI.

The  Prophet  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  saw  a
darwesh  who  had  buried  his  body,  in  his  want  of
clothes  to  cover  it,  in  the  sand.  He  said  :  O  Moses,


SHAIKH  SADL  177

put  up  a  prayer,  that  the  most  high  God  would
bestow  a  subsistence  upon  me,  for  I  am  perishing  in
distress.  The  blessed  Moses  prayed  accordingly,  that
God  on  high  would  succour  him.

Some  days  afterwards,  as  he  was  returning  from  a
conference  with  God  on  Mount  Sinai,  he  met  that
darwesh  in  the  hands  of  justice,  and  a  mob  following
him.  He  asked :  What  has  befallen  this  man  ?  They
answered:  He  had  drunk  wine  and  got  into  a  quarrel,
and  having  killed  somebody,  they  are  now  going  to
exact  retaliation. — "  The  God  who  set  forth  the  seven
climates  of  this  world  assigned  to  every  creature  its
appropriate  lot.  Had  that  wretched  cat  been  gifted
with  wings,  she  would  not  have  left  one  sparrow's  egg
on  the  earth.  It  might  happen  that  were  a  weak
man  to  get  the  ability,  he  would  rise  and  domineer
over  his  weak  brethren."

The  blessed  Moses  acknowledged  the  wisdom  of
the  creator  of  the  universe,  and,  confessing  his  own
presumption,  repeated  this  verse  of  the  Koran  : —
Were  God  to  spread  abroad  his  stores  of  subsistence  to
servants,  verily  they  would  rebel  all  over  the  earth  : —
"  What  happened,  O  vain  man  !  that  thou  didst  pre-
cipitate thyself  into  destruction  ?  Would  that  the  ant
might  not  have  tJie  means  of  flying  !  " — "  A  mean
person,  when  he  has  got  rank  and  wealth,  will  bring  a
storm  of  blows  upon  his  head.  Was  not  this  at  last
the  adage  of  a  philosopher,  That  ant  is  best  disposed
of  that  has  no  wings." — The  father  is  a  man  of  much
sweetness  of  disposition,  but  the  son  is  full  of  heat
and  passions : — "  That  Being,  God,  who  would  not

754


178  SHAIKH  SADL

make  thee  rich,  must  have  known  thy  good  better
than  thou  couldst  thyself  know  it"


XVII.

I  saw  an  Arab,  who  was  standing  amidst  a  circle
of  jewellers  at  Busrah,  and  saying  :  On  one  occasion  I
had  missed  my  way  in  the  desert,  and  having  no
road-provision  left,  I  had  given  myself  up  for  lost,
when  all  at  once  I  found  a  bag  of  pearls.  Never
shall  I  forget  that  relish  and  delight,  so  long  as  I
mistook  them  for  parched  wheat ;  nor  that  bitterness
and  disappointment,  when  I  discovered  that  they
were  real  pearls. — "  In  the  mouth  of  the  thirsty
traveller,  amidst  parched  deserts  and  moving  sands,
pearl,  or  mother-of-pearl,  were  equally  distasteful.
To  a  man  without  provision,  and  knocked  up  in  the
desert,  a  piece  of  stone  or  of  gold,  in  his  scrip,  is  all
one."

XVIII.

An  Arab,  suffering  under  all  the  extremity  of  thirst
in  the  desert,  was  saying  : — "  Would  to  God  that  yet,
before  I  perish,  I  could  but  for  one  day  gratify  my
^vish  :  that  a  stream  of  water  might  dash  against  my
knees,  and  I  could  Jill  my  leathern  flask  or  stomach
with  if

In  like  manner  a  traveller  had  got  bewildered  in
the  great  desert,  and  had  neither  provisions  nor
strength  left,  yet  a  few  dirams  remained  with  him  in
his  scrip.  He  kept  wandering  about,  but  could  not


SHAIKH  SADL  179

find  the  path,  and  sunk  under  his  fatigue.  A  party  of
travellers  arrived  where  his  body  lay ;  they  saw  the
dirams  spread  before  him,  and  these  verses  written  in
the  sand  : — "  Were  he  possessed  of  all  the  gold  of
Jafier  [a  famous  gold  refiner],  a  man  without  food
could  not  satisfy  his  appetite.  To  a  wretched  mendi-
cant, parched  in  the  desert,  a  boiled  turnip  would
relish  better  than  an  ingot  of  virgin  silver."

XIX.

I  had  never  complained  of  the  vicissitudes  of
fortune,  nor  murmured  at  the  ordinances  of  heaven,
excepting  on  one  occasion,  that  my  feet  were  bare,
and  I  had  not  wherewithal  to  shoe  them.  In  this
desponding  state  I  entered  the  metropolitan  mosque
at  Cufah,  and  there  I  beheld  a  man  that  had  no  feet.
I  offered  up  praise  and  thanksgiving  for  God's  good-
ness to  myself,  and  submitted  with  patience  to  my
want  of  shoes. — "  In  the  eye  of  one  satiated  with
meat  a  roast  fowl  is  less  esteemed  at  his  table  than
a  salad ;  but  to  him  who  is  stinted  of  food  a  boiled
turnip  will  relish  like  a  roast  fowl."

XX.

A  king,  attended  by  a  select  retinue,  had,  on  a
sporting  excursion  during  the  winter,  got  at  a  distance
from  any  of  his  hunting  seats,  and  the  evening  was
closing  fast,  when  they  espied  from  afar  a  peasant's
cottage.  The  king  said:  Let  us  repair  thither  for


i8o  SHAIKH  SADL

the  night,  that  we  may  shelter  ourselves  from  the
inclemency  of  the  weather.  One  of  the  courtiers
replied :  It  would  not  become  the  dignity  of  the
sovereign  to  take  refuge  in  the  cottage  of  a  low
peasant ;  we  can  pitch  a  tent  here  and  kindle  a  fire.
The  peasant  saw  what  was  passing  ;  he  came  forward
with  what  refreshments  he  had  at  hand,  and,  laying
them  before  the  king,  kissed  the  earth  of  subserviency,
and  said  :  The  lofty  dignity  of  the  king  would  not  be
lowered  by  this  condescension  ;  but  these  gentlemen
did  not  choose  that  the  condition  of  a  peasant  should
be  exalted.  The  king  was  pleased  with  this  speech  ;
and  they  passed  the  night  at  his  cottage.  In  the
morning  he  bestowed  an  honorary  dress  and  hand-
some largess  upon  him.  I  have  heard  that  the  peasant
was  resting  his  hand  for  some  paces  upon  the  king's
stirrup,  and  saying :  "  The  state  and  pomp  of  the
sovereign  suffered  no  degradation  by  his  condescen-
sion in  becoming  a  guest  at  the  cottage  of  a  peasant ;
but  the  corner  of  the  peasant's  cap  rose  to  a  level  with
the  sun  when  the  shadow  of  such  a  monarch  as
thou  art  fell  upon  his  head."


XXI.

They  tell  a  story  of  an  importunate  mendicant  who
had  amassed  much  riches.  A  certain  king  said :  It
seems  that  you  possess  immense  wealth,  and  I  have  a
business  of  some  consequence  in  hand.  If  you  will
assist  me  with  a  little  of  it,  by  way  of  a  loan,  when
the  public  revenue  is  realised  I  will  repay  it  and


SHAIKH  SADL  181

thank  you  to  the  bargain.  He  replied  :  O  sire,  it
would  ill  become  the  sublime  majesty  of  the  sovereign
of  the  universe  to  soil  the  hand  of  lofty  enterprise  with
the  property  of  such  a  mendicant  as  I  am,  which  I
have  scraped  together  grain  by  grain.  He  said :
There  is  no  occasion  to  vex  yourself,  for  I  mean  it
for  the  Tartars,  as  impurities  are  suiting  for  the
impure : — "  They  said,  The  compost  of  a  dunghill  is
unclean.  We  replied,  That  with  it  we  will  fill  up  the
chinks  of  a  necessary : — If  the  water  of  a  Christian's
well  is  defiled,  and  we  wash  a  Jew's  corpse  in  it,  there
is  no  sin." — I  have  heard  that  he  disobeyed  the  royal
command,  questioned  its  justice,  and  resisted  it  with
insolence.  The  king  ordered  that  the  exchequer
stipulations  should  be  put  in  force  with  rigidness  and
violence. — "  When  a  business  cannot  be  settled  with
fair  words,  we  must  of  necessity  make  use  of  foul.
When  a  man  will  not  contribute  of  his  own  free  will,
if  another  enforces  him  he  meets  his  desert."

XXII.

I  knew  a  merchant  who  had  a  hundred  and  fifty
camels  of  burthen  and  forty  bondsmen  and  servants
in  his  train.  One  night  he  entertained  me  at  his
lodgings  in  the  island  of  Keish,  in  the  Persian  Gulf,
and  continued  for  the  whole  night  talking  idly,  and
saying:  Such  a  store  of  goods  I  have  in  Turkistan,  and
such  an  assortment  of  merchandise  in  Hindustan ;
this  is  the  mortgage-deed  of  a  certain  estate,  and  this
the  security-bond  of  a  certain  individual's  concern.


1 82  SUAIKFf  SADL

Then  he  would  say :  I  have  a  mind  to  visit  Alexandria,
the  air  of  which  is  salubrious ;  but  that  cannot  be,  for
the  Mediterranean  Sea  is  boisterous.  O  Sadi !  I  have
one  more  journey  in  view,  and,  that  once  accom-
plished, I  will  pass  my  remaining  life  in  retirement
and  leave  off  trade.  I  asked  :  What  journey  is  that  ?
He  replied  :  I  will  carry  the  sulphur  of  Persia  to  Chin,
where,  I  have  heard,  it  will  fetch  a  high  price ;  thence
I  will  take  China  porcelain  to  Greece ;  the  brocade  of
Greece  or  Venice  I  will  carry  to  India ;  and  Indian
steel  I  will  bring  to  Aleppo  ;  the  glass-ware  of  Aleppo
I  will  take  to  Yamin ;  and  with  the  bardimani,  or
striped  stuffs,  of  Yamin  I  will  return  to  Persia.  After
that  I  will  give  up  foreign  commerce  and  settle  myself
in  a  warehouse.  He  went  on  in  this  melancholy  strain
till  he  was  quite  exhausted  with  speaking.  He  said  :
O  Sadi !  do  you  too  relate  what  you  have  seen  and
heard.  I  replied  : — "  Hast  thou  not  heard  that  in  the
desert  of  Ghor  as  the  body  of  a  chief  merchant  fell
exhausted  from  his  camel,  he  said,  Either  contentment
or  the  dust  of  the  grave  will  fill  the  stingy  eye  of
the  worldly-minded."

XXIII.

I  have  heard  of  a  wealthy  man  who  was  as  notori-
ous for  parsimony  as  Hatim  Tayi  was  famous  for
liberality.  His  outward  form  was  adorned  with
worldly  pelf ;  but  the  vice  of  innate  avarice  was  so
constitutionally  rooted  in  his  heart  that  he  would  not
part  with  a  crumb  of  bread  to  save  the  life  of  a  fellow-
creature,  indulge  Abu-harairah's  cat  with  a  mouthful


SHAIKH  SADI.  183

of  meat,  or  throw  a  bone  to  the  dog  of  the  seven
sleepers  at  Ephesus.  In  short,  nobody  had  ever  seen
the  door  of  his  mansion  open,  or  his  table  spread
for  dinner  : — "  unless  from  the  smell  of  it  the  poor
darwesh  had  no  intimation  of  his  dinner,  and  the  bird
could  not  pick  up  any  crumbs  from  the  shakings  of  his
table-cloth."

I  have  heard  that  he  had  embarked  on  the  Mediter-
ranean Sea  on  a  voyage  for  Egypt,  and  harboured  in
his  head  the  vain  imagination  of  Pharaoh ;  as  the
Most  High  hds  said  :  Until  the  instant  that  he  was
droivned : — when  the  ship  all  at  once  encountered  a
contrary  wind  and  was  overwhelmed.  As  has  been
remarked  : — "  With  thy  ill-conditioned  disposition,
what  will  not  the  heart  do  that  it  may  be  accom-
modated ;  but  the  ship  is  not  at  all  times  indulged
with  a  favourable  wind." — He  raised  his  hand  in
prayer,  and  made  much  useless  supplication,  as  God
expressed  it : —  WJien  embarked  on  board  a  skip,  ye  will
pray  to  the  Lord: — "What  can  the  hands  of  sincere
supplication  avail  that  needy  servant  who  opens  them
at  the  time  of  praying  to  God,  but  folds  them  under
his  arms  when  he  should  open  them  in  charity : —
Bestow  comfort  upon  others  in  dealing  forth  thy  gold
and  silver,  and  also  partake  thyself  of  their  benefit ;
and  that  this  edifice,  or  the  world,  may  endure  tothee
hereafter,  take  [in  building  it]  one  brick  of  gold  and
one  brick  of  silver."

They  have  related  that  he  had  poor  relations  in  Egypt
who  were  enriched  with  his  remaining  property.  On
his  death  they  tore  their  old  garments  in  pieces,  and


1 84  SHAIKH  SADL

decked  themselves  in  silks  and  Damiyati  or  Egyptian
fine  linens.  Within  a  week  I  met  one  of  them  ambling
along  on  a  wind-fleet  charger,  with  an  angel-faced
bondsman  running  by  him  on  foot.  I  remarked  to
myself : — "  Were  it  possible,  alas  !  that  the  dead  man
could  return  and  make  his  appearance  amidst  his
tribe  and  family,  a  restitution  of  the  heritage  would
be  more  afflicting  to  his  heirs  than  had  been  the  death
of  their  kinsman."  In  virtue  of  an  intimacy  of  old
date,  I  took  him  familiarly  by  the  sleeve,  and  said  : —
"  Enjoy,  my  good  and  honest  friend,  what  that  ill-
fated  wretch  hoarded,  but  enjoyed  not."

XXIV.

A  weak  fisherman  got  a  strong  fish  into  his  net,
but  not  having  the  power  of  mastering  it,  the  fish  got
the  better  of  him,  and,  dragging  the  net  from  his  hand,
escaped  : — "  A  bondsman  went  that  he  might  take
water  from  the  brook  ;  the  brook  came  to  rise  and
carried  off  the  bondsman.  On  most  occasions  the
net  would  bring  out  the  fish  ;  on  this  occasion  the  fish
escaped,  and  took  away  the  net."  The  other  fishermen
expressed  their  vexation,  and  reproached  him,  saying,
Such  a  fish  came  into  your  net,  and  you  were  not  able
to  master  it  He  replied  :  Alas !  my  brethren,  what
could  be  done  ?  It  was  not  my  day  of  fortune,  and
the  fish  had  in  this  way  another  day  left  it  And  they
have  said  :  Unless  it  be  his  lot,  the  fisherman  cannot
catch  a  fish  in  the  Tigris  ;  and,  except  it  be  its  fate,
the  fish  will  not  die  on  the  dry  shore.


SHAIKH  SADL  185

XXV.

A  person  without  hands  or  feet  killed  a  millepede.
A  good  and  holy  man  passed  by  him  at  the  time,  and
said :  Glory  be  to  God  !  notwithstanding  the  thousand
feet  he  had  when  his  destiny  overtook  him,  he  was
unable  to  escape  from  one  destitute  of  hand  or  foot.
— "  When  the  life-plundering  foe  comes  up  behind,
fate  arrests  the  speed  of  the  swift-going  warrior.  At
the  moment  when  the  enemy  might  approach  step
by  step  it  were  useless  to  bend  the  kayani,  or
Parthian  bow."

XXVI.

I  met  a  fat  blockhead  decked  in  rich  apparel,  and
mounted  on  an  Arab  horse,  with  a  turban  of  fine
Egyptian  linen  on  his  head.  A  person  said  :  O  Sadi,
how  comes  it  that  you  see  these  garments  of  the
learned  on  this  ignorant  beast  ?  I  replied :  It  is  a  vile
epistle  which  has  been  written  in  golden  letters : —
"  Verily  this  ass,  with  the  resemblance  of  a  man,  has
the  carcase  of  a  calf,  and  the  voice  or  bleating  of  a  calf.
— Thou  canst  not  say  that  this  brute  appears  like
a  man,  unless  in  his  garments,  turban,  and  outward
form.  Examine  into  all  the  ways  and  means  of  his
existence,  and  thou  shalt  find  nothing  lawful  but  the
shedding  of  his  blood : — though  a  man  of  noble  birth
be  reduced  to  poverty,  imagine  not  that  his  lofty
dignity  can  be  lowered  ;  and  though  he  may  secure
his  silver  threshold  with  a  hasp  of  gold,  conclude  not
that  a  Jew  can  be  thereby  ennobled."


1 86  SHAIKH  SADL


XXVII.

A  thief  said  to  a  mendicant :  Are  you  not  ashamed
when  you  hold  forth  your  hand  to  every  mean  fellow
for  a  barley-corn  of  silver  ?  He  replied :  "  It  is  better
to  hold  forth  the  hand  for  one  grain  of  silver  than  to
have  it  cut  off  for  one  and  a  half  dang."

XXVIII.

They  tell  a  story  of  an  able-bodied  youth  who
had,  from  adverse  fortune,  fallen  into  great  affliction,
and  from  an  inordinate  appetite  and  a  narrowness
of  means  to  satisfy  it,  had  reason  to  complain.  He
stated  his  grievances  to  his  father,  and  craved  his
permission,  saying:  I  wish  to  travel,  that  perad venture
I  may,  by  the  strength  of  my  arm,  lay  hands  upon
the  skirt  of  my  object : — "  Science  and  knowledge
are  useless  till  put  in  practice.  Aloes-wood  they
place  upon  the  fire,  and  musk  they  rub,  in  order  to
extract  their  fragrance."

The  father  replied  :  O  my  son,  put  this  absurd
fancy  out  of  your  head,  and  draw  the  foot  of  con-
tentment within  the  mantle  of  safety,  for  philosophers
have  said,  Fortune  is  not  to  be  secured  by  exertion,
but  its  want  is  to  be  obviated  by  moderation  : —
"  Nobody  can  seize  on  the  skirt  of  fortune  by  force.
Exertion  is  here  as  useless  as  putting  antimony  on
a  blind  man's  eyebrows  [that  it  may  give  a  lustre  to
the  eyesight].  -Were  two  hundred  accomplishments


SHAIKH  SADL  187

appending  to  every  hair  of  thy  head,  skill  is  of  no
practical  use  where  bad  luck  prevails.  What  can  a
powerful  but  unlucky  man  do  ?  The  hand  of  fortune
is  more  effective  than  the  arm  of  strength."

The  son  said  :  O  father,  the  advantages  of  travelling
are  manifold  ;  from  the  enjoyments  of  the  mind,  and
allurements  of  kind  acts ;  from  beholding  strange
sights,  and  hearing  wonderful  adventures  ;  from  the
recreation  of  cities,  and  recognisance  of  former  places;
from  the  acquisition  of  dignity  and  urbanity,  and  the
augmentation  of  wealth  and  property ;  and  from  a
renovation  of  old  acquaintance,  and  an  experience  of
the  times  ;  as  our  guides  in  the  paths  of  righteousness
have  pointed  out — "  Whilst  thou  loiterest  at  home
and  in  thy  shop,  like  a  pledge  in  pawn,  never,  O  raw
youth,  canst  thou  arrive  at  man's  estate ;  roam
abroad  in  the  world,  and  take  thy  fill  of  its  enjoy-
ments before  the  day  shall  come  when  thou  must
quit  it  for  good."

The  father  replied  :  O  my  son,  such  as  you  have
stated  them,  the  advantages  of  travelling  are  numer-
ous ;  nevertheless,  they  are  the  special  lot  of  five
orders  of  mankind: — First,  a  merchant,  who,  in
consequence  of  his  wealth  and  property,  has  soul-
alluring  bondsmen  and  handmaids,  and  active  menials
about  him  in  his  service ;  and  has  every  day  a
different  city,  and  every  night  a  change  of  stage,  and
at  all  times  a  place  of  recreation,  where  he  can  indulge
in  worldly  luxury: — "Amidst  mountains,  wildernesses,
or  deserts,  the  rich  man  is  no  stranger ;  wherever  he
may  go  he  can  pitch  himself  a  tent,  and  take  up  his


188  SHAIKH  SADI.

abode  ;  but  he  who  has  not  at  command  the  comforts
and  enjoyments  of  life,  is  alike  unknown  and  an  alien
even  at  his  own  home."

Secondly,  the  man  of  learning,  who,  in  his  melli-
fluous eloquence  and  attic  wit,  in  his  profound  science
and  recondite  knowledge,  wherever  he  may  go  is
generally  sought  for,  and  respected  : — "  The  presence
of  a  wise  man  is  like  pure  gold,  which  is  of  the  same
price  and  value  wherever  it  is  found ;  but  the  ignorant
son  of  a  nobleman  is  like  paper  or  leather  currency,
which,  in  a  strange  place,  will  go  for  nothing."

Thirdly,  a  handsome  young  man,  whose  society  the
hearts  of  the  good  and  holy  will  piously  covet,  as
they  have  said  :  A  little  beauty  is  preferable  to  much
wealth ;  and  they  tell  us,  a  lovely  face  is  the  solace
of  wounded  hearts  and  the  key  of  locked-up  gates ;
consequently,  all  will  court  its  society,  and  esteem  its
, service  as  a  courtesy: — "Wherever  a  lovely  person
shall  roam  he  will  meet  honour  and  respect,  notwith-
standing his  father  and  mother  may  have  driven  him
in  anger  from  his  home. — I  found  a  peacock's  feather
within  the  leaves  of  a  Koran,  and  said  to  it,  This
station  is  above  thy  condition.  It  replied  :  Be  silent;
for  that  person  who  possesses  the  charms  of  loveli-
ness, wherever  he  puts  his  foot,  finds  no  hand  held  up
to  oppose  him." — "Where  there  is  a  fondness  and
partiality  for  the  son,  it  costs  us  not  a  thought  that
the  father  is  estranged  from  him  ;  he  is  a  jewel,  let
him  not  make  the  world  his  casket,  for  everybody  is
the  purchaser  of  such  a  nonpareil  pearl."

Fourthly,  the  charming  songster,  who,  with  the  pipe


SHAIKH  SADL  189

of  David  and  the  fascination  of  his  melody,  can  arrest
the  river  in  its  current,  and  the  bird  in  its  flight ;  con-
sequently, through  the  means  of  this  perfection  he
can  captivate  the  hearts  of  his  admirers,  and  the  lords
of  mystical  knowledge  will  fondly  court  his  society,
and  be  assiduous  in  serving  him. — "  How  grateful  is
the  soft  and  plaintive  voice,  vibrating  on  the  ears  of
lovers  giddy  from  a  morning  debauch  ;  a  melodious
pipe  will  fascinate  more  than  a  lovely  face,  for  this
can  seduce  the  sensual  appetite,  but  that  must  enrap-
ture the  soul."

Fifthly,  a  common  mechanic,  who  can  earn  a  sub-
sistence by  the  industry  of  his  hand,  and  shall  not
have  to  stake  his  reputation  for  every  morsel  of  bread,
as  philosophers  have  said : — "  Though  obliged  to
wander  a  stranger  from  his  country,  the  cobbler  or
botcher  would  not  suffer  inconvenience  or  trouble ;
but  were  he,  from  anarchy,  deposed  from  his  throne,
Mumruz  the  king  would  perish  of  hunger."

Such  qualities,  as  I  have  detailed  them,  are,  O  my
son,  the  solace  of  the  heart,  and  the  means  of  sweet
enjoyment  during  a  journey ;  but  for  any  man  that
does  not  possess  one  of  them  to  travel  abroad  were  an
idle  undertaking,  and  none  would  ask  his  character,  or
inquire  after  him. — "  That  man  whom  the  revolutions
of  the  skies  regard  with  a  malignant  aspect,  fortune
will  conduct  to  anything  but  his  good.  The  pigeon
that  is  ordained  never  to  revisit  its  nest,  destiny  is
enticing  towards  the  bait  and  snare."

The  son  said  :  O  father,  why  should  I  act  in  contra-
diction to  the  maxim  of  the  wise,  who  have  told  us


IQO  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

that  though  our  lot  be  apportioned,  yet  there  is  a
condition  appending  to  it ;  and  though  misfortune  be
ordained,  yet  we  are  to  turn  aside  from  the  door  that
leads  to  it: — "Though  our  daily  bread  will  come  to  us
without  our  thought,  it  is  the  duty  of  reason  to  look
for  its  approaches:  although  none  will  die  till  their
predestined  time,  there  is  no  occasion  to  walk  into
the  mouth  of  a  dragon." — And  circumstanced  as  I
feel  myself,  I  could  assail  a  formidable  elephant  and
grapple  with  a  ferocious  lion.  Accordingly,  it  were
advisable  that  I  should  travel,  for  I  am  not  able  to
put  up  any  longer  with  indigence. — "  When  a  man
falls  in  his  rank  and  station,  what  can  he  apprehend
that  is  worse?  the  world  at  large  is  his  place  of
residence.  The  rich  man  at  night  repairs  to  his
mansion  ;  the  poor  man  makes  that  place  his  inn
where  the  night  overtakes  him.  But  what  need  has
he  of  inn,  resting-place,  or  abode  ?  Wherever  he  may
wander,  all  is  the  dwelling  of  his  God."

He  so  spoke,  took  leave  of  his  father,  asked  his
blessing,  and  departed.  And  as  he  went  along  they
heard  him  that  he  was  saying : — "  When  fortune  may
not  accord  to  his  wish,  the  man  of  skill  will  travel
where  his  name  is  not  known."

He  was  thus  proceeding,  till  he  reached  a  sea-shore,
where  rocks  were  heaved  upon  rocks  by  the  force  of
its  waves,  and  the  roaring  of  its  billows  was  heard  for
many  furlongs : — "  Such  was  the  awfulness  of  the
deep,  that  the  water-fowl  found  it  not  safe  to  rest  on
its  bosom  ;  and  its  smallest  wave  would  roll  mill-
stones along  its  strand."


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  191

Here  he  saw  a  number  of  people,  each  of  whom
had  for  a  small  piece  of  gold  taken  a  passage  in  the
ferry-boat,  and  had  his  luggage  stowed  by  him.  The
young  man,  having  no  money,  opened  the  mouth  of
entreaty ;  but  however  much  he  supplicated  them  they
showed  him  no  favour,  and  said  : — "  Without  money
thou  canst  not  commit  violence  upon  and  force  any-
body ;  and  if  thou  hast  money,  there  is  no  occasion
for  force." — And  the  ungenerous  master  of  the  vessel
turned  towards  him,  as  he  pushed  off  his  boat,  and
with  a  sneer,  added  : — "  Thou  hast  no  gold,  and  thou
canst  not  cross  the  sea  by  main  strength ;  what  can
the  prowess  of  ten  heroes  avail  thee  ?  Bring  me  the
passage  money  of  one  man."

The  youth  was  much  hurt  at  this  sarcasm  of  the
boatman,  and  wished  that  he  could  revenge  it ;  but
the  boat  had  put  off.  He  called  •  aloud,  and  said,  If
this  garment  which  I  am  wearing  will  satisfy,  I  am
ready  to  give  it  you.  The  boatman  was  avaricious,
and  brought  his  vessel  back : — "  Covetousness  will  sew
up  the  eyes  of  the  wary,  and  greediness  decoy  the  bird
and  fish  into  the  net" — So  soon  as  the  young  man
could  lay  hands  on  the  boatman's  beard  and  collar,
he  dragged  him  from  his  vessel  and  belaboured  him
most  unmercifully : — "  Whenever  thy  hand  can  reach
it,  tear  out  thy  foe's  brain,  for  such  an  opportunity
washes  anger  from  the  mind." — His  comrade  disem-
barked, that  he  might  back  him ;  but  meeting  the
same  rough  treatment,  he  turned  his  back.  They
saw  it  advisable  to  make  their  peace  with  him,  and
compromise  for  his  passage  money : — "  When  thou


192  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

witnesses!  a  dispute,  show  a  forbearance,  for  mild-
ness will  shut  the  door  of  contention  ;  where  thou
seest  a  perseverance,  oppose  it  with  kindness,  for  a
sharp  sword  cannot  cut  into  a  silk-quilted  corselet
Use  a  sweet  tongue,  courtesy,  and  gentleness,  and
thou  mayst  manage  to  guide  an  elephant  with  a
hair."

After  excusing  what  had  passed,  they  fell  at  his
feet,  and,  after  kissing  with  hypocrisy  his  head  and
face,  they  ushered  him  on  board  the  boat,  and  pro-
ceeded on  their  voyage,  till  they  came  to  the  pillar
which  rises  in  the  sea  out  of  some  Grecian  ruins.
The  boatman  said:  The  vessel  is  here  in  some  danger;
it  will  be  necessary  for  one  of  the  heartiest,  most
heroic,  and  strongest  of  you  to  get  upon  this  pillar
and  hold  a  hawser  in  his  hand  till  we  can  swing
her  head  round.  The  youth,  in  the  pride  of  that
courage  which  was  uppermost  in  his  thoughts,  neither
regarded  the  rancour  of  an  injured  rival,  nor  put  in
practice  that  maxim  of  the  wise,  who  have  said,  if
you  have  given  a  person  serious  cause  of  offence,  and
should  afterwards  do  him  a  hundred  kind  offices,  rest
not  secure  against  his  revenge  of  that  one  offence ;
for  the  dart  may  be  extracted  from  the  wound,  yet
the  smart  of  it  will  rankle  in  the  heart : — "  How  well
did  the  captain  remark  to  his  troop :  When  thou  hast
made  a  cut  at  thy  antagonist,  expect  a  thrust  in
return.  Now  that  another  is  suffering  pain  at  thy
hand,  trust  not  that  thy  heart  shall  be  exempt  from
affliction.  Throw  not  a  stone  upon  the  turret  of  the
citadel,  for  a  stone  may  perhaps  be  returned  from  the


SHAIKH  SADL  193

castle : " — So  soon  as  the  youth  had  put  the  hawser
over  his  arm,  and  seated  himself  on  the  top  of  the
pillar,  the  boatman  dragged  it  from  his  hand  and
pushed  off  the  vessel.

The  deserted  wretch  stood  aghast.  For  two  days
he  suffered  calamity  and  distress,  and  underwent
much  hardship.  On  the  third  day  sleep  overpowered
and  precipitated  him  into  the  sea.  After  another
day  and  night  he  reached  the  shore,  when  well-nigh
reduced  to  his  last  gasp.  Here  he  began  to  eat  the
leaves  of  trees  and  roots  of  grass,  till,  getting  a  little
refreshed,  he  was  able  to  set  forward  in  the  desert,
and  was  proceeding  when,  overcome  with  hunger,
thirst,  and  fatigue,  he  arrived  at  a  well,  where  a  crowd
of  people  sat  in  a  circle  around  it,  and  each  had  a
draught  of  water  presented  to  him  in  his  turn,  on
paying  a  pashiz  or  small  species  of  coin.  The  youth
had  no  money  ;  he  begged  a  little  water  gratis,  but
this  they  refused  ;  he  attempted  to  reach  it  by  force,
but  to  no  good  purpose.  Some  few  he  of  course
knocked  down,  but  they  overpowered  him  with
numbers,  and  beat  him  unmercifully,  and  maimed
him  sadly : — "  Notwithstanding  his  huge  and  formid-
able aspect,  when  gnats  act  in  concert  they  will  bring
down  an  elephant ;  when  ants  set  to  work  and
move  in  a  body,  they  can  strip  a  fierce  lion  of  his
hide."

Jaded  and  maimed,  but  impelled  by  necessity,  he
got  up  with  the  rear  of  a  caravan,  and  made  a  shift
to  follow  it.  In  the  evening  they  arrived  at  a  place
much  infested  with  robbers.  He  beheld  the  people

755


194  SHAIKH  SADL

of  the  caravan  with  bodies  trembling  in  fear,  and
minds  occupied  with  their  danger.  He  said  :  Be  not
alarmed,  for  I  am  one  among  you  that  can  of  myself
encounter  any  fifty,  and  the  other  youths  will  assist
me.  The  people  were  encouraged  by  his  boasting,
and,  overjoyed  with  his  company,  they  supplied  him
with  food  and  drink.  The  fire  of  the  youth's  stomach
had  blazed  into  a  flame,  and  the  rein  of  temperance
dropped  from  his  hand.  He  devoured  many  mouth-
fuls  of  the  victuals,  and  gulped  down  several  draughts
of  water,  before  he  could  appease  the  demon  of  his
belly,  when  sleep  seized  him  and  laid  him  at  rest

Belonging  to  that  caravan  there  was  an  experienced
old  man,  who  had  seen  much  of  the  world.  He  said  :
O  my  friends,  I  am  more  afraid  of  this  your  guard
than  of  all  the  thieves  beside,  as  they  tell  a  story,
that  an  Arab  had  hoarded  a  sum  of  money,  and
could  not  sleep  by  himself  at  home  from  a  dread  of
the  Luriyans,  a  tribe  of  notorious  robbers.  He  got
one  of  his  neighbours  to  abide  with  him,  that  in  his
society  he  might  dispel  the  gloom  of  solitude.  In
this  way  they  passed  some  nights  together,  till  the
friend  found  out  where  he  kept  his  money,  when  he
stole  and  made  off  with  it.  In  the  morning  they
found  the  Arab  weeping  and  bewailing,  and  asked :
How  comes  this  ?  Perhaps  the  thief  has  made  free
with  that  money.  He  replied  :  Not  he,  by  God  !  but
my  friend  and  guard  has  stolen  it : — "  I  can  never  sit
down  secure  of  my  companion  till  I  ascertain  what
may  be  his  disposition.  The  bite  of  a  foe's  tooth
must  prove  more  cutting  where  it  is  given  under  the


SHAIKH  SADL  195

semblance  of  a  friend." — Who  can  say  but  this  may
also  be  one  of  the  thieves,  who  has  introduced  himself
by  a  stratagem  among  us,  that  he  may  watch  his
opportunity  of  giving  intelligence  to  his  comrades.
Accordingly,  I  see  it  advisable  that  we  should  leave
him  asleep  and  depart.

This  counsel  of  the  old  man  made  a  strong  impres-
sion on  his  juvenile  companions  ;  and,  as  they  stood
.in  awe  of  his  athletic  power,  they  packed  up  their
baggage  and  left  the  youth  asleep.  He  did  not  get
awake  till  the  sun  shone  bright  on  his  shoulders,
when,  raising  his  head,  he  found  that  the  caravan  was
gone.  In  this  forlorn  state  he  wandered  to  some
distance,  and  lost  all  trace  of  the  path.  Overcome
with  thirst  and  fatigue,  he  threw  himself  up  for  lost.
He  was  saying : — "  Who  will  converse  with  me,  now  the
camels  are  departed ;  the  stranger  has  no  friend,  unless
it  be  a  stranger : — he  will  deal  harshly  by  a  stranger
who  has  not  been  himself  often  a  traveller  and
stranger."

The  desponding  youth  was  uttering  this  speech
while  a  king's  son,  who  had  dropped  his  retinue  in  the
pursuit  of  hunting  sport,  was  standing  over  him.  He
listened  to  these  words,  and,  looking  at  his  aspect,
beheld  a  graceful  figure,  but  a  mind  in  much  affliction.
He  asked  him,  saying :  Whence  are  you,  and  how  came
you  into  this  place  ?  He  made  a  short  statement  of
the  adventures  which  had  befallen  him.  The  prince
took  compassion  on  him,  gave  him  a  dress  and  largess,
and  sent  a  confidential  servant  to  take  him  home.

His  father  was  rejoiced  at  seeing  him,  and  thanked


196  SHAIKH  SADL

God  for  his  safe  return.  At  night  he  entered  in
detail  of  what  befell  him  in  the  affair  of  the  ferry-
boat, the  insolence  of  the  boatman,  the  violence  of
the  peasants  at  the  well,  and  treachery  of  the  caravan
people  on  the  road.  The  father  said  :  O  my  son,  did
not  I  warn  you,  at  the  time  of  your  departure,  that
the  courageous  wrist  of  the  empty-handed  was
manacled  and  his  lion-like  arm  broken  : — "  How
happily  did  that  empty-handed  man  of  war  remark,
A  barley-corn  of  gold  is  worth  more  than  fifty  mans',
or  pounds',  weight  of  strength."

The  son  replied  :  O  father !  till  you  may  somehow
undergo  trouble,  you  cannot  acquire  treasure  ;  till
you  put  your  life  in  jeopardy  you  cannot  subdue
your  enemy  ;  and  until  you  may  sow  the  seed  you
cannot  reap  the  harvest.  Do  you  not  perceive  that,
in  return  for  the  little  fatigue  I  underwent,  what  a
store  of  wealth  I  acquired  ;  and  for  the  sting  I
endured,  what  a  stock  of  honey  I  secured  : — "  Though
we  cannot  get  more  than  our  predestined  portion,  it
behoves  us  not  to  be  idle  in  looking  after  it.  Were
the  diver  to  think  on  the  jaws  of  the  shark  he  would
never  lay  hands  on  the  precious  pearl : — the  lower
mill-stone  takes  not  its  turn  in  circulation,  and  sustains
in  consequence  the  brunt  of  the  burthen  : — what  would
the  ravenous  lion  have  to  eat  if  he  remained  a  sluggard
in  the  corner  of  his  den,  or  what  power  of  soaring
after  game  has  the  broken-winged  falcon?  Wert
thou  to  expect  sport  by  staying  at  home  thou  wouldst
become  all  legs  and  arms,  like  a  spider ! "

The  father  said  :  O  my  son,  on  this  occasion  the


SHAIKH  SADL  197

skies  co-operated,  and  fortune  was  your  guide,  so
as  to  enable  you  to  pluck  a  rose  from  your  thorn  and
to  extract  the  thorn  from  your  foot.  Moreover,  an
opulent  gentleman  met  you  and  generously  investi-
gated your  condition  and  redressed  your  broken
fortune ;  otherwise,  such  instances  are  rare,  and  we
ought  not  to  expect  and  trust  to  wonders.  Take
heed  that,  led  away  by  this  greediness,  you  do  not
again  enter  the  circle  of  desire,  or  spread  the  carpet  of
covetousness  : — "  The  sportsman  does  not  every  day
make  sure  of  his  game.  It  may  happen  that  the  tyger
shall  one  day  tear  him."

In  like  manner  as  a  certain  king  of  Persia  had  a
precious  gem  set  in  a  ring.  For  the  sake  of  recreation,
he  went  on  one  occasion  with  a  select  retinue  to  the
Mussala,  near  Shiraz,  and  ordered  that  they  should
fix  the  ring  on  the  dome  of  Azud,  with  a  proclamation
that  whoever  might  shoot  an  arrow  through  its  hoop
should  have  the  ring  as  a  present.  It  happened  that
four  hundred  professed  archers  who  were  in  the  royal
train  took  their  aim,  but  all  of  them  missed  it.  A  boy
at  play  on  the  terrace  roof  of  a  public  building  was
shooting  from  his  bow  at  random,  and  lo !  the  morn-
ing breeze  took  his  arrow  and  carried  it  through  the
circlet  of  the  ring.  They  complimented  him  with  the
gem  and  ring,  and  made  him  many  presents.  After
this  the  boy  burnt  his  bow  and  arrows.  They  asked  :
Why  did  you  do  so  ?  He  replied :  That  my  first
instance  of  reputation  may  be  lasting. — "It  at  one
time  may  chance  that  the  clear-headed  sage  shall  be
mistaken  in  the  counsel  he  will  offer  ;  at  another  time


198  SHAIKH  SADL

we  find  that  an  unskilful  boy  shall,  through  mistake,
hit  the  target  with  his  arrow."


XXIX.

I  saw  a  darwesh  who  had  withdrawn  into  a  cave,
shut  the  door  of  communication  between  the  world
and  himself,  and  with  his  lofty  and  independent  eye
viewed  emperors  and  kings  without  awe  or  reverence:
— "  Whoever  opens  to  himself  the  door  of  mendicity,
must  continue  a  beggar  till  the  day  of  his  death.
Put  covetousness  aside,  and  be  independent  as  a
prince ;  the  neck  of  contentment  can  raise  its  head
erect"

One  of  the  sovereigns  of  those  parts  sent  a  message
to  him,  stating :  So  far  I  can  rely  on  the  generous
disposition  of  his  reverence,  that  he  will  one  day
favour  me  by  partaking  of  my  bread  and  salt,  by
becoming  my  guest.  The  shaikh,  or  holy  man,  con-
sented ;  for  the  acceptance  of  such  an  invitation
accorded  with  the  sunnat,  or  law  and  tradition  of
the  prophet.  Next  day  the  king  went  to  apologise
for  the  trouble  he  had  caused  him.  The  abid  rose
from  his  place,  took  the  king  in  his  arms,  showed
him  much  kindness,  and  was  full  of  his  compliments.
After  he  was  gone,  one  of  the  shaikh's  companions
asked  him,  saying :  Was  not  such  condescending  kind-
ness as  you  this  day  showed  the  king  contrary  to
what  is  usual ;  what  does  this  mean  ?  He  answered  :
Have  you  not  heard  what  they  have  said: — "It  is


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  199

proper  to  stand  up  and  administer  to  him  whom  thou
hast  seated  on  thy  carpet,  or  made  thy  guest"

"  He  could  so  manage  that,  during  his  whole  life,  his
ear  should  not  indulge  in  the  music  of  the  tabor,
cymbal,  and  pipe.  He  could  restrain  his  eyes  from
enjoying  the  garden,  and  gratify  his  sense  of  smell
without  the  rose  or  narcissus.  Though  he  had  not
a  pillow  stuffed  with  down,  he  could  compose  himself
to  rest  with  a  stone  under  his  head  ;  though  he  had
no  heart-solacer  as  the  partner  of  his  bed,  he  could
hug  himself  to  sleep  with  his  arms  across  his  breast.
If  he  could  not  ride  an  ambling  nag,  he  was  content
to  take  his  walk  on  foot ;  only  this  grumbling  and
vile  belly  he  could  not  keep  under,  without  stuffing  it
with  food."


CHAPTER  IV.

ON   THE   BENEFIT  OF  BEING  SILENT.


I  SPOKE  to  one  of  my  friends,  saying :  A  prudent
restraint  on  my  words  is  on  that  account  advisable,
because  in  conversation  there  on  most  occasions
occur  good  and  bad  ;  and  the  eyes  of  rivals  only  note
what  is  bad.  He  replied  :  O  brother !  that  is  our  best
rival  who  does  not,  or  will  not,  see  our  good  ! — "  The
malignant  brotherhood  pass  not  by  the  virtuous  man
without  imputing  to  him  what  is  infamous: — To  the
eye  of  enmity  virtue  appears  the  ugliest  blemish;  it  is
a  rose,  O  Sadi!  which  to  the  eyes  of  our  rivals  seems  a
thorn.  The  world-illuminating  brilliancy  of  the  foun-
tain of  the  sun,  in  like  manner,  appears  dim  to  the
eye  of  the  purblind  mole."

II.

A  merchant  happened  to  lose  a  thousand  dinars.
He  said  to  his  son  :  It  will  be  prudent  not  to  mention
this  loss  to  anybody.  The  son  answered  :  O  father,
it  is  your  orders,  and  I  shall  riot  mention  it ;  but


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  201

communicate  the  benefit  so  far,  as  what  the  policy
may  be  in  keeping  it  a  secret.  He  said  :  That  I  may
not  suffer  two  evils :  one,  the  loss  of  my  money;
another,  the  reproach  of  my  neighbour: — "Impart
not  thy  grievances  to  rivals,  for  they  are  glad  at
heart,  while  praying,  God  preserve  us ;  or  there  is
neither  strength  nor  power,  unless  it  be  from  God/"

III.

A  sensible  youth  made  vast  progress  in  the  arts
and  sciences,  and  was  of  a  docile  disposition ;  but
however  much  he  frequented  the  societies  of  the
learned,  they  never  could  get  him  to  utter  a  word.
On  one  occasion  his  father  said  :  O  my  son,  why  do
not  you  also  say  what  you  know  on  this  subject?
He  replied :  I  am  afraid  lest  they  question  me  upon
what  I  know  not,  and  put  me  to  shame  : — "  Hast  thou
not  heard  of  a  sufi  who  was  hammering  some  nails
into  the  sole  of  his  sandal  An  officer  of  cavalry
took  him  by  the  sleeve,  saying,  Come  along,  and  shoe
my  horse  : — So  long  as  thou  art  silent  and  quiet,
nobody  will  meddle  with  thy  business ;  but  once
thou  divulgest  it,  be  ready  with  thy  proofs."

IV.

A  man,  respectable  for  his  learning,  got  into  a
discussion  with  an  atheist ;  but,  failing  to  convince
him,  he  threw  down  his  shield  and  fled.  A  person
asked  him,  With  all  your  wisdom  and  address,


202  SHAIKH  SADI.

learning  and  science,  how  came  you  not  to  con-
trovert an  infidel?  He  replied:  My  learning  is  the
Koran,  and  the  traditions  and  sayings  of  our  holy
fathers ;  but  he  puts  no  faith  in  the  articles  of  our
belief,  and  what  good  could  it  do  to  listen  to  his
blasphemy  ? — "  To  him  whom  thou  canst  not  convince
by  revelation  or  tradition,  the  best  answer  is  that
thou  shalt  not  answer  him."


V.

The  physician  Galen  saw  a  blockhead  of  a  fellow
who  had  laid  hold  of  a  learned  man  by  the  collar,
and  was  treating  him  most  disrespectfully.  He  said  :
Had  this  been  a  wise  man  he  would  never  have
permitted  his  concerns  with  an  ignoramus  to  come
to  this  pass. — "  Strife  and  malignity  occur  not
between  two  men  of  sense.  A  wise  man  will  not
dispute  with  one  that  is  hasty.  If  an  ignoramus
is  harsh  in  his  rude  brutality,  a  prudent  man  will
soothe  him  with  mild  urbanity.  A  hair  can  keep
two  good  and  holy  men  together,  notwithstanding
they  are  arguing  a  difference  of  opinion  ;  but  if  on
both  sides  contentious  and  brutal,  though  it  were
an  iron  chain,  they  would  tear  it  asunder."

VI.

They  have  esteemed  Sahban  Wabil  as  unrivalled
in  eloquence,  insomuch  that  he  could  speak  for  a
year  before  an  assembly,  and  would  not  use  the


SHAIKH  SADL  203

same  word  twice ;  or  should  he  chance  to  repeat  it,
he  would  give  it  a  different  signification  ;  and  this
is  one  of  the  special  accomplishments  of  a  courtier : —
"  Though  a  speech  be  captivating  and  sweet,  worthy
of  belief,  and  meriting  applause,  yet  what  thou  hast
once  delivered  thou  must  not  repeat,  for  if  they  eat
a  sweetmeat  once  they  find  that  enough."

VII.

I  overheard  a  sage,  who  was  remarking :  Never  has
anybody  acknowledged  his  own  ignorance,  excepting
that  person  who,  while  another  may  be  talking,  and
has  not  finished  what  he  has  to  say,  will  begin
speaking: — "A  speech,  O  wiseacre!  has  a  beginning
and  an  end  ;  bring  not  one  speech  into  the  middle  of
another.  A  man  of  judgment,  discretion,  and  pru-
dence, delivers  not  his  speech  till  he  find  an  interval
of  silence."

VIII.

Some  of  the  courtiers  of  Sultan  Mahmud  asked
Husan  Maimandi,  saying  :  What  did  the  king  whisper
to  you  to-day  on  a  certain  state  affair  ?  He  said :
You  are  also  acquainted  with  it  They  replied :  You
are  the  prime  minister :  what  the  king  tells  you,  he
does  not  think  proper  to  communicate  to  such  as  we
are.  He  replied  :  He  communicates  with  me  in  the
confidence  that  I  will  not  divulge  to  anybody ;  then
why  do  you  ask  me  ? — "  A  man  of  sense  blabs  not,
whatever  he  may  come  to  know ;  he  should  not  make
his  own  head  the  forfeit  of  the  king's  secret."


204  SHAIKH  SADL


IX.

I  was  hesitating  about  the  purchase  of  a  dwelling-
house.  A  Jew  said  :  I  am  an  old  housekeeper  in  this
street :  ask  the  character  of  this  house  from  me  and
buy  it,  for  it  has  no  fault.  I  replied  :  True !  only  that
you  are  its  neighbour : — "  Any  such  house  as  has  thee
for  its  neighbour  could  scarce  be  worth  ten  dirams  of
silver ;  yet  it  should  behove  us  to  hope  that  after
thy  death  it  may  fetch  a  thousand."

x.

A  certain  poet  presented  himself  before  the  chief
of  a  gang  of  robbers,  and  recited  a  casidah,  or  elegy,
in  his  praise.  He  ordered  that  they  should  strip  off
his  clothes,  and  thrust  him  from  the  village.  The
naked  wretch  was  going  away  shivering  in  the  cold,
and  the  village  dogs  were  barking  at  his  heels.  He
stooped  to  pick  up  a  stone,  in  order  to  shy  at  the
dogs,  but  found  the  earth  frost-bound,  and  was
disappointed.  He  exclaimed :  What  rogues  these
villagers  are,  for  they  let  loose  their  dogs,  and  tie
up  their  stones !  The  chief  robber  saw  and  over-
heard him  from  a  window.  He  smiled  at  his  wit,
and,  calling  him  near,  said :  O  learned  sir !  ask  me  for
a  boon.  He  replied,  I  ask  for  my  own  garments,  if
you  will  vouchsafe  to  give  them : — /  shall  have  enough
of  boons  in  your  suffering  me  to  depart, — "  Mankind
expect  charity  from  others ;  I  expect  no  chanty  from


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  205

thee,  only  do  me  no  injury." — The  chief  robber  felt
compassion  for  him.  He  ordered  his  clothes  to  be
restored,  and  added  to  them  a  robe  of  fur  and  sum  of
money.

XI.

An  astrologer  returned  home,  and  found  a  stranger
seated  with  his  wife.  He  abused  and  assailed  him
with  violence,  and  riot  and  uproar  took  place  between
them.  A  goodly  and  holy  man  was  apprised  of  this,
and  said  : — "  How  canst  thou  tell  what  passes  in  the
celestial  sphere,  who  art  ignorant  of  an  intrigue
carrying  on  at  thine  own  dwelling  ?  "

XII.

A  preacher  of  a  harsh  tone  of  voice  fancied
himself  a  fine-spoken  man,  and  would  hold  forth
at  the  mosque  to  a  very  idle  purpose.  You  might
say  that  the  croaking  of  the  raven  of  the  desert  was
the  burthen  of  his  chant,  and  this  text  of  the  Koran
expressive  of  his  manner: — The  most  abominable  of
noises  is  the  braying  of  an  ass : — "  Whenever  this  ass
of  a  preacher  sets  up  a  braying,  his  voice  will  make  the
city  of  Istikhar,  or  Persepolis,  shake  to  its  base"

In  reverence  of  his  rank  his  townsmen  indulged
this  defect,  and  would  not  distress  him  by  remarking
on  it,  till  another  preacher  of  those  parts,  actuated
by  a  private  pique,  came  on  one  occasion  to  tantalise
him,  and  said,  I  have  seen  you  in  a  dream  ;  may  it
prove  fortunate !  He  asked  :  What  have  you  seen  ?


206  SHAIKH  SADI.

He  replied  :  So  it  seemed  in  my  vision  that  your  voice
had  become  harmonious,  and  mankind  were  charmed
with  your  melodious  cadences.  For  a  while  the
preacher  bowed  his  head  in  thought,  then  raised  it,
and  said  :  What  a  fortunate  vision  is  it  that  you  had,
that  has  made  me  sensible  of  my  weakness !  I  am
now  aware  that  I  have  an  unpleasant  voice,  and  that
the  people  are  distressed  at  my  delivery.  I  have
vowed  that  I  will  henceforth  preach  only  in  a  soft
tone  of  voice. — "  I  am  distressed  with  the  society
of  friends  who  extol  my  vices  into  virtues,  my
blemishes  they  view  as  excellences  and  perfections,
my  thorns  they  regard  as  roses  and  jassmines.
Where  is  that  rude  and  bold  rival  who  will  expose
all  my  deformities  ?  "

XIII.

At  a  mosque  in  the  city  of  Sanjar,  the  capital  of
Khorasan,  a  person  was  volunteering  to  chant  forth
the  call  to  prayers  with  so  discordant  a  note  as  to
drive  all  that  heard  him  away  in  disgust.  The
intendant  of  that  mosque  was  a  just  and  well-dis-
posed gentleman,  who  was  averse  to  giving  offence
to  anybody.  He  said :  O  generous  youth,  there
belong  to  this  mosque  some  mowuzzins,  or  criers,
of  long  standing,  to  each  of  whom  I  allow  a  monthly
stipend  of  five  dinars ;  now  I  will  give  you  ten  to  go
elsewhere.  To  this  he  agreed,  and  took  himself  off.
After  a  while  he  came  to  the  nobleman,  and  said :  O
my  lord  !  you  did  me  an  injury  when  for  ten  dinars
you  prevailed  upon  me  to  quit  this  station,  for


SHAIKH  SADL  207

where  I  went  they  offered  me  twenty  to  remove  to
another  place,  but  I  would  not  consent.  The  noble-
man smiled  and  replied  :  Take  heed,  and  do  not
accept  them,  for  they  may  be  content  to  give  you
fifty ! — "  No  person  can  with  a  mattock  scrape  off  the
clay  from  the  face  of  a  hard  rock  in  so  grating  a
manner  as  thy  harsh  voice  is  harrowing  up  my  soul."

XIV.

A  person  with  a  harsh  voice  was  reciting  the  Koran
in  a  loud  tone.  A  good  and  holy  man  went  up  to
him,  and  asked :  What  is  your  monthly  stipend  ?
He  answered,  Nothing.  Then,  added  he,  why  give
yourself  so  much  trouble  ?  He  said  :  I  am  reading
for  the  sake  of  God.  The  good  and  holy  man
replied  :  For  God's  sake  do  not  read: — "for  if  thou
chantest  the  Koran  after  this  manner,  thou  must  cast
a  shade  over  the  glory  of  Islamism  or  Mussulman
orthodoxy,"


CHAPTER  V.

ON  LOVE  AND  YOUTH.


THEY  asked  Husan  Maimandi :  How  comes  it  that
Sultan  Mahmud,  who  has  so  many  handsome  bonds-
women, each  of  whom  is  the  wonder  of  the  world  and
most  select  of  the  age,  entertains  not  such  fondness
and  affection  for  any  of  them  as  he  does  for  Ayaz,
who  can  boast  of  no  superiority  of  charms  ?  He
replied  :  Whatever  makes  an  impression  on  the  heart
seems  lovely  in  the  eye. — "  That  person  of  whom  the
sultan  makes  choice  must  be  altogether  good,  though
a  compendium  of  vice ;  but  where  he  is  estranged  from
the  favour  of  the  king  none  of  the  household  will  think
of  courting  him." — "  Were  a  person  to  view  it  with  a
fastidious  eye,  the  form  of  a  Joseph  might  seem  a
deformity ;  but  let  him  look  with  desire  on  a  demon,
and  he  will  appear  like  an  angel  and  cherub."

II.

They  tell  a  story  of  a  gentleman  who  had  a  slave
singularly  handsome ;  and  her  he  regarded  with  an
eye  of  fondness  and  affection.  He  observed  to  one  of


SHAIKH  SADL  209

his  friends :  What  a  pity  that  this  slave,  with  the
beauty  and  grace  which  she  possesses,  should  be  a
termagant  and  vixen.  He  replied:  O  brother,  now
you  have  made  her  your  companion,  expect  not  the
service  of  a  waiting  woman  ;  for  where  the  lover  and
mistress  come  in  play,  the  distinction  of  master  and
slave  is  done  away: — "  When  the  gentleman  begins  to
.joke  and  toy  with  his  angel-faced  and  handsome  hand-
maid, it  should  not  surprise  if  she  order  like  a  master,
and  he  bear  the  burthen  of  coquetry  like  a  bonds-
woman. It  becomes  the  bondswoman  to  be  a  water-
carrier  and  brickmaker.  Let  her  be  a  charmer  and
she  becomes  a  boxer  and  bruiser."


III.     .     -

I  saw  a  parsa,  or  holy  man,  so  enamoured  of  a
lovely  person  that  he  had  neither  fortitude  to  bear
with,  nor  resolution  to  declare,  his  passion ;  and,
however  much  he  was  the  object  of  remark  and
censure,  he  would  not  forego  this  infatuation,  and  was
saying : — "  I  quit  not  my  hold  on  the  skirt  of  thy
garment,  though  thou  mayst  verily  smite  me  with  a
sharp  sword.  Besides  thee  I  have  neither  asylum
nor  defence  ;  if  I  am  to  flee,  I  must  take  refuge  with
thee."

On  one  occasion  I  reproached  him,  and  said:  What
is  become  of  your  precious  reason,  that  a  vile  passion
should  thus  master  you?  He  made  a  short  pause,
and  replied  : — "  Wherever  the  king  of  love  came,  he
left  no  room  for  the  strong  arm  of  chastity.  How

756


2  TO  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

can  that  wretch  live  undefiled  who  has  fallen  in  a
quagmire  up  to  the  neck  ?  "


IV.


A  certain  person  had  lost  his  heart  and  abandoned
himself  to  despair.  The  object  of  his  desire  was  not
such  a  dainty  that  he  could  gratify  his  palate  with  it,
or  a  bird  that  he  could  lure  it  into  his  net,  but  a
frightful  precipice  and  overwhelming  whirlpool : —
"  When  thy  gold  attracts  not  the  charmer's  eye,  dust
or  gold  is  of  equal  value  with  thee."

His  friends  admonished  him,  saying:  Put  aside  this
vain  fancy,  for  multitudes  are  in  the  durance  and
chains  of  this  same  passion  which  you  are  cherishing.
He  sighed  aloud,  and  replied  : — "  Say  to  my  friends,
Do  not  admonish  me,  for  my  eye  is  fixed  on  the  wish
of  her.  With  strength  of  wrist  and  power  of  shoulders
warriors  overwhelm  their  antagonists  and  charmers
their  lovers." — Nor  can  it  be  consistent  with  the
condition  of  love  that  any  thought  of  life  should
divert  the  heart  from  affection  for  its  mistress : —
"  Thou,  who  art  the  slave  of  thine  own  precious  self,
playest  false  in  the  affairs  of  love.  If  thou  canst  not
make  good  a  passage  to  thy  mistress,  it  is  the  duty  of
a  lover  to  perish  in  the  attempt. — I  persist  when
policy  is  no  longer  left  me,  though  the  enemy  may
cover  me  all  over  with  the  wounds  of  swords  and
arrows.  If  I  can  reach  her  I  will  seize  her  sleeve,  or
at  all  events  proceed  and  die  at  her  threshold."


SHAIKH  SADL  211

His  kindred,  whose  business  it  was  to  watch  over
his  concerns,  and  to  pity  his  misfortunes,  gave  him
advice,  and  put  upon  him  restraints,  but  all  to  no
good  purpose  : — "  The  physician  is,  alas  !  prescribing
bitter  aloes,  and  his  depraved  appetite  is  craving
sweetmeats  ! — Heardest  thou  what  a  charmer  was
saying  in  a  whisper  to  one  who  had  lost  his  heart
to  her :  So  long  as  thou  maintainest  thine  own
dignity,  of  what  value  can  my  dignity  appear  in
thine  eye  ?  "

They  informed  the  princess  who  was  the  object  of
his  infatuation,  saying:  A  youth  of  an  amiable  disposi-
tion and  sweet  flow  of  tongue  is  frequent  in  his
attendance  at  the  top  of  this  plain  ;  and  we  hear  him
delivering  brilliant  speeches  and  wonderful  sallies  of
wit ;  it  would  seem  that  he  has  a  mystery  in  his
head  and  a  flame  in  his  heart,  for  he  appears  to  be
distractedly  in  love.  The  princess  was  aware  that
she  had  become  the  object  of  his  attachment,
and  that  this  whirlwind  of  calamity  was  raised  by
himself,  and  spurred  her  horse  toward  him.  Now
that  the  youth  saw  that  it  was  the  princess's  inten-
tion to  approach  him,  he  wept,  and  said  : — "  That
personage  who  inflicted  upon  me  a  mortal  wound
again  presented  herself  before  me  ;  perhaps  she  took
compassion  upon  her  own  victim." — However  kindly
she  spoke,  and  asked,  saying:  Who  are  you,  and
whence  come  you  ?  what  is  your  name,  and  what
your  calling?  the  youth  was  so  entirely  over-
whelmed in  the  ocean  of  love  and  passion  that  he
absolutely  could  not  utter  a  word  : — "  Couldst  thou


212  SHAIKH  SADL

in  fact  repeat  the  seven  Saba,  or  whole  Koran  by
heart,  if  distracted  with  love,  thou  wouldst  forget
thy  alphabet:" — the  princess  continued:  Why  do
you  not  answer  me  ?  for  I  too  am  one  of  the  sect
of  darweshes,  niy,  I  am  their  most  devoted  slave.
On  the  strength  of  this  sympathising  encouragement
of  his  beloved,  the  youth  raised  his  head  amidst
the  buffeting  waves  of  tempestuous  passion,  and
answered  : — "  It  is  strange  that  with  thee  present  I
should  remain  in  existence  ;  that  after  thou  earnest
to  talk,  I  should  have  speech  left  me." — This  he  said,
and,  uttering  a  loud  groan,  surrendered  his  soul  up  to
God  : — "  No  wonder  if  he  died  by  the  door  of  his
beloved's  tent ;  the  wonder  was,  if  alive,  how  he  could
have  brought  his  life  back  in  safety."

V.

A  boy  at  school  possessed  much  loveliness  of  per-
son and  sweetness  of  conversation  ;  and  the  master,
from  the  frailty  of  human  nature,  was  enamoured  of
his  blooming  skin.  Like  his  other  scholars,  he  would
not  admonish  and  correct  him,  but  when  he  found
him  in  a  corner  he  would  whisper  in  his  ear : — "  I
am  not,  O  celestial  creature  !  so  occupied  with  thee,
that  I  am  harbouring  in  my  mind  a  thought  of
myself.  Were  I  to  perceive  an  arrow  coming  right
into  it,  I  could  not  shut  my  eye  from  contemplating
thee."

On  one  occasion  the  boy  said :  Tn  like  manner,
as  you  inspect  my  studies,  also  animadvert  on  my


SHAIKH  SADL  213

tendency  to  vice,  in  order  that  if  you  discern  any
immorality  in  my  behaviour,  which  has  met  my  own
approbation,  you  can  warn  me  against  it,  that  I  may
correct  it.  He  replied:  O  my  child  !  propose  this
task  to  somebody  else  ;  for  the  light  in  which  I  view
you  reflects  nothing  but  virtue. — "  That  malignant
eye,  let  it  be  plucked  out  in  whose  sight  his  virtue
.can  seem  vice.  Hadst  thou  but  one  perfection  and
seventy  faults,  the  lover  could  discern  only  that  one
perfection."

VI.

One  night,  I  recollect,  a  beloved  friend  entered  my
chamber-door.  I  rose  so  heedlessly  from  my  seat
that  the  lamp  was  extinguished  by  my  sleeve  : — "  A
vision  made  its  appearance,  ^vhicll  in  its  splendour
illumined  chaos.  I  was  surprised  at  my  good  fortune,
exclaiming :  Whence  came  this  treasure  ?  "

She  took  a  seat,  and  began  to  chide  me,  saying,
Why  did  you  put  out  the  light  at  the  instant  of
seeing  me  ?  I  answered :  The  sun,  I  fancied,  was
getting  up  !  Also  men  of  wit  have  said  : — "  If  an
austere  person  should  intrude  upon  the  light,  rise  and
drive  him  with  blows  from  the  assembly;  but  if  a
dimpling  smiler  and  sugar-lipped  charmer,  take  her
round  the  waist  and  put  out  the  taper."

VII.

A  person  who  had  not  seen  his  friend  for  a  length
of  time,  said  to  him :  Where  were  you  ?  for  I  have


214  SHAIKH  SADL

been  very  solicitous  about  you.  He  replied,  It  is
better  to  be  sought  after  than  loathed. — "  Thou  hast
come  late,  O  intoxicating  idol !  I  shall  not  in  a  hurry
quit  my  hold  on  thy  skirt : — that  mistress  whom  they
see  but  seldom  is  at  last  more  desired  than  she  is
whom  they  are  cloyed  with  seeing."

The  charmer  that  can  bring  companions  along  with
her  has  come  to  quarrel  ;  for  she  cannot  be  void  of
jealousy  and  discontent : — "  Whenever  thou  contest  to
visit  me  attended  with  comrades  or  rivals,  though  thou
comest  in  peace,  yet  thy  object  is  hostile  : — for  one  single
moment  that  my  mistress  associated  with  a  rival,  it
went  well-nigh  to  slay  me  with  jealousy.  Smiling,  she
replied:  O  Sadi !  I  am  the  torch  of  the  assembly;
what  is  it  to  me  if  the  moth  consume  itself?  "

VIII.

In  former  times,  I  recollect,  a  friend  and  I  were
associating  together  like  two  kernels  within  one
almond  shell.  I  happened  unexpectedly  to  go  on  a
journey.  After  some  time,  when  I  was  returned,  he
began  to  chide  me,  saying:  During  this  long  interval
you  never  sent  me  a  messenger.  I  replied  :  It  vexed
me  to  think  that  the  eyes  of  a  courier  should  be
enlightened  by  your  countenance,  whilst  I  was
debarred  that  happiness : — Tell  my  old  charmer  not
to  impose  a  vow  upon  me  with  her  tongue ;  for  I
would  not  repent,  were  she  to  attempt  it  with  a
sword.  Envy  stings  me  to  the  quick,  lest  another
should  be  satiated  with  beholding  thee,  till  I  recollect


SHAIKH  SADL  215

myself,   and    say :    Nobody   can    have    a   satiety   of
that!"

IX.

I  saw  a  learned  gentleman  the  captive  of  attach-
ment for  a  certain  person,  and  the  victim  of  his
reproach ;  and  he  would  suffer  much  violence,  and
bear  it  with  great  patience.  On  one  occasion  I  said,
by  way  of  admonition :  I  know  that  in  your  attach-
ment for  this  person  you  have  no  bad  object,  and  that
this  friendship  rests  not  on  any  criminal  design  ;  yet,
under  this  interpretation,  it  accords  not  with  the
dignity  of  the  learned  to  expose  yourself  to  calumny,
and  put  up  with  the  rudeness  of  the  rabble.  He
replied:  O  my  friend,  withdraw  the  hand  of  reproach
from  the  skirt  of  my  fatality,  for  I  have  frequently
reflected  on  this  advice  which  you  offer  me,  and  find
it  easier  to  suffer  contumely  on  his  account  than  to
forego  his  company ;  and  philosophers  have  said :  It  is
less  arduous  to  persist  in  the  labour  of  courting  than
to  restrain  the  eye  from  contemplating  a  beloved
object : — "  Whoever  devotes  his  heart  to  a  soul
deluder  puts  his  beard  or  reputation  into  the  hands
of  another.  That  person,  without  whom  thou  canst
not  exist,  if  he  do  thee  a  violence,  thou  must  bear
with  it.  The  antelope,  that  is  led  by  a  string  cannot
bound  from  this  side  to  that. — One  day  I  asked  a
compact  of  my  mistress ;  how  often  have  I  since  that
day  craved  her  forgiveness !  A  lover  exacts  not
terms  of  his  charmer  ;  I  relinquished  my  heart  to
whatever  she  desired  me,  whether  to  call  me  up  to


216  SHAIKH  SADL

her  with  kindness,  or  drive  me  from  her  with  harsh-
ness she  knows  best,  or  it  is  her  pleasure."

X.

In  my  early  youth  such  an  event  (as  you  know)
will  come  to  pass.  I  held  a  mystery  and  intercourse
with  a  young  person,,  because  he  had  a  pipe  of
exquisite  melody,  and  a  form  silver  bright  as  the  full
moon  : — "  He  is  sipping  the  fountain  of  immortality,
who  may  taste  the  down  of  his  cheek  ;  and  he  is
eating  a  sweetmeat,  who  can  fancy  the  sugar  of  his
lips."

It  happened  that  something  in  his  behaviour  having
displeased  me,  I  withdrew  the  skirt  of  communica-
tion, and  removed  the  seal  of  my  affection  from  him,
and  said : — "  Go,  and  take  what  course  best  suits
thee ;  thou  regardest  not  my  counsel,  follow  thine
own." — I  overheard  him  as  he  was  going,  and
saying  : — "  If  the  bat  does  not  relish  the  company  of
the  sun,  the  all-current  brilliancy  of  that  luminary
can  suffer  no  diminution." — He  so  expressed  himself
and  departed,  and  his  vagabond  condition  much  dis-
tressed me : — the  opportunity  of  enjoyment  was  lost,
and  a  man  is  insensible  to  the  relish  of  prosperity  till
he  has  tasted  adversity : — return  and  slay  me,  for  to
die  before  thy  face  were  far  more  pleasant  than  to
survive  in  thy  absence."

But,  thanksgiving  and  praise  to  the  Almighty,  he
did  not  return  till  after  some  interval,  when  that
melodious  pipe  of  David  was  cracked,  and  that


SHAIKH  SADL  217

handsome  form  of  Joseph  in  its  wane  ;  when  that
apple  his  chin  was  overgrown  with  hair  like  a  quince,
and  the  all-current  lustre  of  his  charms  tarnished.
He  expected  me  to  fold  him  in  my  arms  ;  but  I  took
myself  aside  and  said  : — "  When  the  down  of  loveliness
flourished  on  thy  cheek,  thou  drovest  the  lord  of  thy
attractions  from  thy  sight ;  now  thou  hast  come  to
court  his  peace  when  thy  face  is  thick  set  with
fathahs  and  zammahs,  or  the  bristles  of  a  beard  : —
The  verdant  foliage  of  thy  spring  is  turned  yellow ;
place  not  thy  kettle  on  my  grate,  for  its  fire  is  cooled.
How  long  wilt  thou  display  this  pomp  and  vanity  ;
hopest  thou  to  regain  thy  former  dominion  ?  Make
thy  court  to  such  as  desire  thee,  sport  thy  airs  on  such
as  will  hire  thee : — The  verdure  of  the  garden,  they
have  told  us,  is  charming ;  that  person  (Sadi)  knows  it
who  is  relating  that  story  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the
fresh-shooting  down  on  their  charmers'  cheeks  is
what  the  hearts  of  their  admirers  chiefly  covet : — Thy
garden  is  like  a  bed  of  chives :  the  more  thou  croppest
it,  the  more  it  will  shoot : — Last  year  thou  didst
depart  smooth  as  an  antelope,  to-day  thou  art
returned  bearded  like  a  pard.  Sadi  admires  the
fresh-shooting  down,  not  when  each  hair  is  stiff
as  a  packing-needle : — Whether  thou  hast  patience
with  thy  beard,  or  weed  it  from  thy  face,  this  happy
season  of  youth  must  come  to  a  conclusion.  Had  I
the  same  command  of  life  as  thou  hast  of  beard,  it
should  not  escape  me  till  doomsday. — I  asked  him
and  said:  What  has  become  of  the  beauty  of  thy
countenance,  that  a  beard  has  sprung  up  round  the


2i8  SHAIKH  SADL

orb  of  the  moon  ?  He  answered :  I  know  not  what
has  befallen  my  face,  unless  it  has  put  on  black  to
mourn  its  departed  charms."

XL

They  asked  a  doctor  of  laws,  saying:  Were  a  man
seated  in  a  private  chamber  with  a  moon-faced
damsel,  the  doors  shut,  her  attendants  gone  to  sleep,
his  appetite  craving  and  lust  domineering,  as  the
Arabs  say  : — The  dates  rife,  and  the  gardener  inviting
us  to  eat, — might  it  be  possible  by  the  virtue  of  his
chastity  to  escape  her  temptations  ?  He  answered :
If  he  might  resist  dalliance  with  the  damsel,  he  would
not  escape  the  scandal  of  the  slanderer  : — "For  though
a  man  be  safe  from  the  mischief  of  his  own  lust,  yet  he
is  not  secure  from  the  evil  report  of  his  rivals. — It  is
possible  to  restrain  thy  own  passion  ;  but  thou  canst
not  curb  the  tongue  of  man.  By  repentance  he  may
deprecate  the  wrath  of  God  ;  but  he  cannot  escape
the  slander  of  his  fellow-creature."

XII.

They  shut  up  a  parrot  in  the  same  cage  with  a
crow.  The  parrot  was  affronted  at  his  ugly  look,
and  said:  What  an  odious  visage  is  this,  a  hideous
figure  ;  what  an  accursed  appearance,  and  ungracious
demeanour ! — "  Would  to  God,  O  raven  of  the  desert !
we  were  wide  apart  as  the  east  is  from  the  west: — The
serenity  of  his  peaceful  day  would  change  into  the
gloom  of  night,  who  on  issuing  forth  in  the  morning


SHAIKH  SADL  219

might  cross  thy  aspect  An  ill-conditioned  wretch
like  thyself  should  be  thy  companion  ;  but  where
could  we  find  such  another  in  the  world  ?  "

But  what  is  more  strange,  the  crow  was  also  out  of
all  patience,  and  vexed  to  the  soul  at  the  society  of
the  parrot.  Bewailing  his  misfortune,  he  was  railing
at  the  revolutions  of  the  skies  ;  and,  wringing  the
hands  of  chagrin,  was  lamenting  his  condition,  and
saying :  What  an  unpropitious  fate  is  this ;  what
ill-luck,  and  untoward  fortune !  Could  they  any
way  suit  the  dignity  of  me,  who  would  in  my
day  strut  with  my  fellow-crows  along  the  wall  of  a
garden: — "It  were  durance  sufficient  for  a  good  and
holy  man  that  he  should  be  made  the  companion  of
the  wicked:" — What  sin  have  I  committed  that  my
stars  in  retribution  of  it  have  linked  me  in  the  chain
of  companionshfp,  and  immured  me  in  the  dungeon
of  calamity,  with  a  conceited  blockhead,  and  good-for-
nothing  babbler : — "  Nobody  will  approach  the  foot  of
a  wall  on  which  they  have  painted  thy  portrait ;  wert
thou  to  get  a  residence  in  paradise,  others  would  go
in  preference  to  hell."

I  have  introduced  this  parable  to  show  that  how-
ever much  learned  men  despise  the  ignorant,  these
are  a  hundredfold  more  scornful  of  the  learned  : —
"  A  zahid,  or  holy  man,  fell  in  company  with  some
wandering  minstrels.  One  of  them,  a  charmer  of
Balkh,  said  to  him  :  If  thou  art  displeased  with  us,  do
not  look  sour,  for  thou  art  already  sufficiently  offen-
sive.— An  assemblage  is  formed  of  roses  and  tulips,
and  thou  art  stuck  up  amidst  them  like  a  withered


220  SHAIKH  SADI.

stalk ;  like  an  opposing  storm,  and  a  chilling  winter
blast ;  like  a  ball  of  snow,  or  lump  of  ice."


XIII.

I  had  an  associate,  who  was  for  years  the  com-
panion of  my  travels,  partook  of  the  same  bread  and
salt,  and  enjoyed  the  many  rights  of  a  confirmed
friendship.  At  last  on  some  trifling  advantage  he
gave  me  cause  of  umbrage,  and  our  intimacy  ceased.
And  notwithstanding  all  this,  there  was  a  hankering
of  good-will  on  both  sides  ;  in  consequence  of  which
I  heard  that  he  was  one  day  reciting  in  a  certain
assembly  these  two  couplets  of  my  writings : — "  When
my  idol,  or  mistress,  is  approaching  me  with  her
tantalising  smiles,  she  is  sprinkling  more  salt  upon
my  smarting  sores.  How  fortunate  were  the  tips  of
her  ringlets  to  come  into  my  hand,  like  the  sleeve  of
the  generous  in  the  hands  of  darweshes." — This
society  of  his  friends  bore  testimony,  and  gave
applause,  not  to  the  beauty  of  this  sentiment,  but  to
the  liberality  of  his  own  disposition  in  quoting  it ;
while  he  had  himself  been  extravagant  in  his
encomiums,  regretted  the  demise  of  our  former
attachment,  and  confessed  how  much  he  was  to
blame.  I  was  made  aware  that  he  too  was  desirous
of  a  reconciliation ;  and,  having  sent  him  these
couplets,  made  my  peace  : — "  Was  there  not  a  treaty
of  good  faith  between  us,  and  didst  not  thou  com-
mence hostilities,  and  violate  the  compact  ?  I  relin-
quished all  manner  of  society,  and  plighted  my  heart


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  221

to  thee  ;  for  I  did  not  suspect  that  thou  wouldst
have  so  readily  changed.  If  it  still  be  thy  wish  to
renew  our  peace,  return,  and  be  more  dear  to  me  than
ever."

XIV.

A  man  had  a  beautiful  wife,  who  died  ;  but  the
mother,  a  decrepid  old  dotard,  remained  a  fixture  in
his  house,  because  of  the  dowry.  He  was  teased  to
death  by  her  company ;  but,  from  the  circumstance
of  the  dower,  he  had  no  remedy.  In  the  meantime
some  of  his  friends  having  come  to  comfort  him,  one
of  them  asked :  How  is  it  with  you,  since  the  loss
of  that  dear  friend  ?  He  answered :  The  absence  of
my  wife  is  not  so  intolerable  as  the  presence  of
her  mother : — "  They  plucked  the  rose,  and  left  me
the  thorn  ;  they  plundered  the  treasure,  and  let  the
snake  remain.  To  have  our  eye  pierced  with  a  spear
were  more  tolerable  than  to  see  the  face  of  an  enemy.
It  were  better  to  break  with  a  thousand  friends  than
to  put  up  with  one  rival."

XV.

In  my  youth  I  recollect  I  was  passing  through  a
street,  and  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  moon-like  charmer
during  the  dog-days,  when  their  heat  was  drying  up
the  moisture  of  the  mouth,  and  the  Samum,  or  desert
hot-wind,  melting  the  marrow  of  the  bones.  From
the  weakness  of  human  nature  I  was  unable  to
withstand  the  darting  rays  of  a  noon-tide  sun,  and


222  SHAIKH  SADL

took  refuge  under  the  shadow  of  a  wall,  hopeful  that
somebody  would  relieve  me  from  the  oppressive  heat
of  summer,  and  quench  the  fire  of  my  thirst  with  a
draught  of  water.  All  at  once  I  beheld  a  luminary
in  the  shadowed  portico  of  a  mansion,  so  splendid  an
object  that  the  tongue  of  eloquence  falls  short  in
summing  up  its  loveliness ;  such  as  the  day  dawning
upon  a  dark  night,  or  the  fountain  of  immortality
issuing  from  chaos.  She  held  in  her  hand  a  goblet  of
snow-cooled  water,  into  which  she  dropt  some  sugar,
and  tempered  it  with  spirit  of  wine ;  but  I  know  not
whether  she  scented  it  with  attar,  or  sprinkled  it  with
a  few  blossoms  from  her  own  rosy  cheek.  In  short,  I
received  the  beverage  from  her  idol-fair  hand  ;  and,
having  drunk  it  off,  found  myself  restored  to  a  new
life. — "  Such  is  not  my  parching  thirst  that  it  is  to  be
quenched  with  the  limpid  element  of  water,  were  I  to
swallow  it  in  oceans: — Joy  to  that  happy  aspect
whose  eye  can  every  morning  contemplate  such  a
countenance  as  thine.  A  person  intoxicated  with
wine  lies  giddy  and  awake  half  the  night ;  but  if
intoxicated  with  the  cup-bearer  [God],  the  day  of
judgment  must  be  his  dawn  or  morning."

XVI.

In  the  year  that  Sultan  Mohammed  Khowarazm-
Shah  had  for  some  political  reason  chosen  to  make
peace  with  the  king  of  Khota,  I  entered  the  metro-
politan mosque  at  Kashghar,  and  met  a  youth
incomparably  lovely,  and  exquisitely  handsome ;


SHAIKH  SADL  223

such  as  they  have  mentioned  in  resemblance  of  him  :
— "  Thy  master  instructed  thee  in  every  bold  and
captivating  grace ;  he  taught  thee  coquetry  and
confidence,  tyranny  and  violence.  I  have  seen  no
mortal  with  such  a  form  and  temper,  stateliness  and
manner;  perhaps  he  learned  these  fascinating  ways
from  an  angel."

He  held  the  introduction  of  the  Zamakhshari
Arabic  grammar  in  his  hand,  and  was  repeating : —
Zaraba  Zaidun  Amranwa — Zaid  beat  Amru  and
is  the  assailant  of  Amru.  I  said:  O  my  son!  the
Khowarazm  and  Khatayi  sovereigns  have  made  peace,
and  does  war  thus  subsist  between  Zaid  and  Amru  ?
He  smiled,  and  asked  me  the  place  of  my  nativity.
I  answered :  The  territory  of  Shiraz.  He  said  :  Do
you  recollect  any  of  Sadi's  compositions  ?  I  replied  :
— "/  am  enamoured  ^vith  the  reader  of  the  syntax,
who,  taking  offence,  assails  me  in  like  manner  as  Zaid
does  Amru.  And  Zaid,  when  read  Zaidin,  cannot
raise  his  head ;  and  how  canst  thou  give  a  zammah  to
a  word  accented  with  a  kasrah  ?  "

He  reflected  a  little  within  himself,  and  said :  In
these  parts  we  have  much  of  Sadi's  compositions  in
the  Persian  language  ;  if  you  will  speak  in  that  dialect
we  shall  more  readily  comprehend  you,  for  you  should
address  mankind  according  to  their  capacities.

I  replied  : — "  Whilst  thy  passion  was  that  of
studying  grammar,  all  trace  of  reason  was  erased
from  our  hearts.  Yes !  the  lover's  heart  is  fallen  a
prey  to  thy  snare :  we  are  occupied  about  thee,  and
thou  art  taken  up  with  Amru  and  Zaid."


224  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

On  the  morrow,  which  had  been  fixed  on  as  the
period  of  our  stay,  some  of  my  fellow-travellers  had
perhaps  told  him  such  a  one  is  Sadi ;  for  I  saw  that
he  came  running  up,  and  expressed  his  affection  and
regret,  saying:  Why  did  you  not  during  all  this  time
tell  us  that  a  certain  person  is  Sadi,  that  I  might
have  shown  my  gratitude  by  offering  my  service  to
your  reverence.  I  answered : — "  In  thy  presence  I
cannot  even  say  that  I  am  I ! " — He  said  :  "  How  good
it  were  if  you  would  tarry  here  for  a  few  days,  that
we  might  devote  ourselves  to  your  service."  I
replied :  That  cannot  be,  as  this  adventure  will  explain
to  you  : — "  In  the  hilly  region  I  saw  a  great  and  holy
man,  who  was  content  in  living  retired  from  the
world  in  a  cavern.  I  said:  Why  dost  thou  not  come
into  the  city,  that  thy  heart  might  be  relieved  from  a
load  of  servitude?  He  replied:  In  it  there  dwell
some  wonderful  and  angel-faced  charmers,  and  where
the  path  is  miry,  elephants  may  find  it  slippery."-
Having  delivered  this  speech,  we  kissed  each  other's
head  and  face,  and  took  our  leaves  : — "  What  profits
it  to  kiss  our  mistress's  cheek,  and  with  the  same
breath  to  bid  her  adieu.  Thou  mightest  say  that  the
apple  had  taken  leave  of  its  friends  by  having  this
cheek  red  and  that  cheek  yellow : —  Were  I  not  to
die  of  grief  on  that  day  I  say  farewell,  tJiou  ivouldst
charge  me  with  being  insincere  in  my  attachments"

XVII.

A  ragged  darwesh  accompanied  us  along  with  the
caravan  for  Hijaz,  and  a  certain  Arab  prince  presented


SHAIKH  SADJ.  225

him  with  a  hundred  dinars  for  the  support  of  his
family.  Suddenly  a  gang  of  Khafachah  robbers
attacked  the  caravan,  and  completely  stripped  it.
The  merchants  set  up  a  weeping  and  wailing,  and
made  much  useless  lamentation  and  complaint : —
"  Whether  thou  supplicatest  them,  or  whether  thou
complainest,  the  robbers  will  not  return  thee  their
plunder : " — all  but  that  ragged  wretch,  who  stood
collected  within  himself,  and  unmoved  by  this  adven-
ture. I  said:  Perhaps  they  did  not  plunder  you  of
that  money  ?  He  replied :  Yes,  they  took  it ;  but  I
was  not  so  fond  of  my  pet  as  to  break  my  heart  at
parting  with  it — "  We  should  not  fix  our  heart  so
on  any  thing  or  being  as  to  find  any  difficulty  in
removing  it"

I  said:  What  you  have  remarked  corresponds
precisely  with  what  once  befell  myself;  for  in  my
juvenile  days  I  took  a  liking  to  a  young  man,  and
so  sincere  was  my  attachment  that  the  Cablah,  or
fane,  of  my  eye  was  his  perfect  beauty,  and  the
profit  of  this  life's  traffic  his  much-coveted  society : —
"  Perhaps  the  angels  might  in  paradise,  otherwise  no
living  form  can  on  this  earth  display  such  a  love-
liness of  person.  By  friendship  I  swear  that  after
his  demise  all  loving  intercourse  is  forbidden  ;  for  no
human  emanation  can  stand  a  comparison  with  him."

All  at  once  the  foot  of  his  existence  stumbled  at
the  grave  of  annihilation ;  and  the  sigh  of  separation
burst  from  the  dwelling  of  his  family.  For  many
days  I  sat  a  fixture  at  his  tomb,  and,  of  the  many
dirges  I  composed  upon  his  demise,  this  is  one : — •

757


226  SHAIKH  SADL

"On  that  day,  when  thy  foot  was  pierced  with  the
thorn  of  death,  would  to  God  the  hand  of  fate  had
cloven  my  head  with  the  sword  of  destruction,  that
my  eyes  might  not  this  day  have  witnessed  the  world
without  thee.  Such  am  I,  seated  at  the  head  of  thy
dust,  as  the  ashes  are  seated  on  my  own  : — whoever
could  not  take  his  rest  and  sleep  till  they  first  had
spread  a  bed  of  roses  and  narcissuses  for  him :  the
whirlwind  of  the  sky  has  scattered  the  roses  of  his
cheek,  and  brambles  and  thorns  are  shooting  from  his
grave."

After  my  separation  from  him  I  came  to  a  steady
and  firm  determination,  that  during  my  remaining
life  I  would  fold  up  the  carpet  of  enjoyment,  and
never  re-enter  the  gay  circle  of  society : — "  Were  it
not  for  the  dread  of  its  waves,  much  would  be  the
profits  of  a  voyage  at  sea ;  were  it  not  for  the
vexation  of  the  thorn,  charming  might  be  the  society
of  the  rose.  Yesterday  I  was  walking  stately  as  a
peacock  in  the  garden  of  enjoyment ;  to-day  I  am
writhing  like  a  snake  from  the  absence  of  my
mistress."

XVIII.

To  a  certain  king  of  Arabia  they  were  relating
the  story  of  Laila  and  Mujnun,  and  his  insane
state,  saying:  Notwithstanding  his  knowledge  and
wisdom,  he  has  turned  his  face  towards  the  desert,
and  abandoned  himself  to  distraction.  The  king
ordered  that  they  brought  him  into  his  presence ;
and  he  reproved  him,  and  spoke,  saying  :  What  have


SHAIKH  SADI.  227

you  seen  unworthy  in  the  noble  nature  of  man  that
you  should  assume  the  manners  of  a  brute,  and  for-
sake the  enjoyment  of  human  society  ?

Mujnun  wept  and  answered  : — "Many  of  my  friends
reproach  me  for  my  love  of  for,  namely  Laila.  Alas  !
that  they  could  one  day  see  her,  that  my  excuse  might
be  manifest  for  me!" — "Would  to  God  that  such  as
blame  me  could  behold  thy  face,  O  thou  ravisher  of
hearts  !  that  at  the  sight  of  thee  they  might,  from
inadvertency,  cut  their  own  fingers  instead  of  the
orange  in  their  hands  : " — Then  might  the  truth  of  the
reality  bear  testimony  against  the  semblance  of  fiction,
what  manner  of  person  that  was  for  whose  sake  you
were  upbraiding  me.

The  king  resolved  within  himself,  on  viewing  in
person  the  charms  of  Laila,  that  he  migl.;.  be  able  to
judge  what  her  form  could  be  which  had  caused  all
this  misery,  and  ordered  her  to  be  produced  in  his
presence.  Having  searched  through  the  Arab  tribes,
they  discovered  and  presented  her  before  the  king  in
the  courtyard  of  his  seraglio.  He  viewed  her  figure,
and  beheld  a  person  of  a  tawny  complexion  and
feeble  frame  of  body.  She  appeared  to  him  in  a
contemptible  light,  inasmuch  as  the  lowest  menial  in
his  harem,  or  seraglio,  surpassed  her  in  beauty  and
excelled  her  in  elegance.  Mujnun,  in  his  sagacity,
penetrated  what  was  passing  in  the  royal  mind,  and
said  :  It  would  behove  you,  O  king,  to  contemplate  the
charms  of  Laila  through  the  wicket  of  a  Muj nun's  eye,
in  order  that  the  miracle  of  such  a  spectacle  might  be
illustrated  to  you. — "  Thou  canst  have  no  fellow-feeling


228  SHAIKH  SADL

for  my  disorder ;  a  companion  to  suit  me  must  have
the  self-same  malady,  that  I  may  sit  by  him  the  live-
long day  repeating  my  tale  ;  for  by  rubbing  two  pieces
of  dry  firewood  one  upon  another  they  will  burn  all  the
brighter : — had  that  grove  of  verdant  reeds  heard  the
murmurings  of  love  ^vhich  in  detail  of  my  mistress's
story  have  passed  through  my  ear,  it  would  somehow
have  sympathised  in  my  pain.  Tell  it,  O  my  friends,  to
such  as  are  ignorant  of  love  ;  would  ye  could  be  aware
of  what  wrings  me  to  the  soul: — the  anguish  of  a
wound  is  not  known  to  the  hale  and  sound  ;  we  must
detail  our  aches  only  to  a  fellow-sufferer.  It  were  idle
to  talk  of  a  hornet  to  him  who  has  never  during  his
life  smarted  from  its  sting.  Till  thy  condition  may
in  some  sort  resemble  mine,  my  state  will  seem  to
thee  an  idle  fable.  Compare  not  my  pain  with  that
of  another  man  ;  he  holds  salt  in  his  hand,  but  I  hold
it  on  a  wounded  limb."

XIX.

They  tell  a  story  of  the  cazy  of  the  city  of  Ramadan,
that  he  was  enamoured  of  a  farrier's  daughter,  and  had
the  horse-shoe  of  his  heart  made  glowing  hot  in  the
fire  of  a  forge.  For  a  time  he  was  wavering  and
unsettled,  desiring  and  expectant,  and  repeating,  as
applicable  to  what  was  passing  : — "  This  straight  and
lofty  cypress  marched  graceful  before  my  eyes  ;  she
took  the  heart  from  my  hand  and  trod  it  under  her
foot.  This  bold  and  lascivious  eye  was  luring  my
heart  into  a  snare.  If  thou  wishest  not  to  resign  thy
heart  to  anybody  thou  must  shut  thy  eyes."


SHAIKH  SADI.  229

I  have  heard  that  she  met  the  cazy  on  the  highway.
Something  of  this  business  had  reached  her  ears,  and
she  was  beyond  measure  offended.  She  abused  him
vilely,  spoke  to  him  harshly,  took  up  stones  to  throw
at  him,  and  showed  him  all  manner  of  rudeness.  The
cazy  observed  to  a  respectable  learned  man  who
attended  him  on  horseback  : — "  Behold  that  charmer,
how  overwhelmed  she  is  with  anger ;  attend  to  that
frown  on  her  sour  and  sweet  eyebrow : " — as  the
Arabs  say :  the  blow  of  our  beloved  has  the  relish  of
raisins : — "  to  receive  a  slap  on  the  mouth  from  thy
hand  is  more  sweet  than  to  fill  it  with  bread  from  my
own  : " — Thus  does  her  outrageous  violence  give  out
the  fragrance  of  courtesy  ;  like  kings  who  will  de-
nounce hostilities  when  they  perhaps  in  their  hearts
are  courting  peace. — "Unripe  grapes  have  a  tart
taste ;  have  patience  for  a  few  days,  that  they  may
become  sweet"

He  thus  delivered  himself,  and  returned  into  the
cazy's  court  Several  well-disposed  and  respectable
persons,  who  held  offices  under  him,  kissed  the
earth  of  obeisance,  saying  :  With  submission,  and  as  in
duty  bound,  we  would  make  a  representation  to  your
lordship,  that  although  "  it  might  be  deemed  unpolite,
as  the  sage  have  remarked  : —  it  is  not  proper  to
argue  every  point ;  to  find  fault  with  great  men  is
itself  a  fault :" — yet,  conscious  that  the  past  munifi-
cence of  our  lord  and  master  was  the  cause  of  the  good
fortune  of  his  servants,  it  were  a  species  of  treachery
in  us  to  be  aware  of  what  is  right,  and  not  to  notice
it.  And  this  is  the  path  of  rectitude,  that  you  should


230  SHAIKH  SADL

shun  the  circle  of  delusion,  and  fold  up  the  carpet  of
criminal  conversation  with  this  damsel ;  for  the  station
of  a  judge  is  of  such  high  dignity  that  you  should  not
contaminate  it  with  an  abominable  sin.  This  object,
which  you  have  in  contemplation,  you  should  consider
as  your  bane,  and  her  story  such  as  you  have  heard  it :
— "A  person  has  committed  many  disreputable  crimes ;
what  regard  has  she  for  the  reputation  of  another.
Many  is  the  good  character  of  fifty  years'  stand-
ing which  one  shameless  act  will  tread  under  foot."

The  cazy  approved  of  the  unanimous  advice  of  his
friends,  and  commended  their  good  sense  and  watch-
ful fidelity,  and  said  :  The  light  in  which  my  beloved
friends  view  the  policy  of  my  situation  is  the  mirror
of  what  is  right,  and  argument  unanswerable  : — "  Of
a  truth,  were  friendship  to  be  forfeited  on  our  offering
admonition,  then  might  the  righteous  be  accused  of
falsehood:" — nevertheless, — "admonish  me  as  much
as  thou  choosest,  thou  never  canst  wash  a  blackamoor
white.  I  never  can  be  made  by  anybody  to  forget
thee ;  I  am  a  snake  with  my  head  bruised,  and  cannot
twist  myself  away."

Having  thus  delivered  himself,  he  deputed  certain
people  to  ascertain  the  damsel's  circumstances,  and
was  lavish  of  his  cash,  as  has  been  remarked  :  Who-
ever has  gold  in  the  scales  commands  the  arms  of  the
balance  ;  and  he  who  cannot  corrupt  the  world  has
not  a  friend  all  throughout  the  world  : — "  Whoever
sees  gold  lowers  his  head,  though,  like  the  scales  of
Justice,  he  has  iron-bound  shoulders."

In   short,  he  one  evening  accomplished   a  private


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  231

interview ;  and  that  same  night  it  was  reported  to  the
superintendent  of  the  police  that  the  cazy  had  all  the
evening  had  wine  in  his  head,  and  his  mistress  in  his
arms  ;  that  he  had  lain  awake  in  ecstasy,  and  was
singing  incessantly  : — "  Perhaps  this  cock  does  not
to-night  crow  at  his  proper  hour ;  the  lover  is  not  yet
done  with  his  dalliance.  The  temple  of  his  mistress,
lucidly  fair  within  her  curling  ringlet,  resembles  the
ivory-ball  inlaid  upon  the  ebony  chowgong  club.  Be
constantly  on  the  watch,  lest  that  lover  of  mischief  fall
into  a  doze,  and  the  opportunity  of  enjoyment  pass
away  in  regret.  Till  thou  hearest  the  call  for  morn-
ing prayer  at  the  metropolitan  mosque,  or  the  beat  of
the  kettle-drum  over  the  palace-gate  of  the  King
Atabak,  let  lips  be  sealed  to  lips,  like  the  eyelids  of
the  salacious  cock,  and  let  them  be  removed  only
on  the  real  crow  of  that  silly  bird !  "

Such  was  the  state  of  the  cazy,  when  one  of  his
servants  burst  into  his  chamber,  and  called  aloud :
Why  do  you  loiter  in  bed  ?  get  up,  and  fly,  now  it  is
possible ;  for  your  rivals  have  calumniated  you,  nay,
they  have  reported  what  is  true.  Perhaps  with  the
water  of  prudence  we  may  quench  the  fire  of  mischief,
which  is  yet  low.  God  forbid  that  to-morrow,  when
risen  into  a  flame,  it  should  involve  a  whole  world.
The  cazy  turned  towards  him  with  a  smile,  and
replied  : — "  The  lion  has  laid  his  paw  on  the  game,
what  cares  he  for  the  yelping  of  a  dog?  Face  to  face
enjoy  thy  mistress,  and  leave  thy  rival  to  gnaw  the
hand  of  jealousy."

That  same  night  they  informed  the  king,  saying :


232  SHAIKH  SADL

Such  an  act  of  wickedness  has  been  perpetrated  with-
in your  realm  ;  what  would  your  majesty  order  upon
the  occasion  ?  The  king  answered :  I  know  him  to  be
one  of  the  most  learned  of  the  time,  and  the  nonpareil
of  his  age.  Possibly  his  rivals,  from  envy  of  his  worth,
have  laid  this  plot,  but  till  convinced  by  seeing  it  1
cannot  give  ear  to  the  fact : — "  Hastily  to  lay  a  hand
on  the  sword  of  anger  must  lead  to  gnaw  that  hand
with  the  teeth  of  regret."

I  have  heard  that  at  break  of  day  next  morning,
the  king,  accompanied  with  a  select  train,  entered
the  cazy's  bed-chamber.  He  saw  that  the  tapers
were  alight,  the  charmer  seated  on  the  bed,  the
goblet  broken,  and  the  wine  spilled,  while  the  cazy
lay  stupefied  in  a  dream  of  drunkenness,  and  alto-
gether unconscious  of  the  royal  presence.  The  king
kindly  waked  him,  and  said :  Get  up,  for  the  sun  is
risen.  The  cazy  recollected  how  matters  stood,  and
asked :  From  what  quarter  has  he  risen  ?  The  king
was  taken  by  surprise,  and  answered :  From  the  east,
as  is  usual !  The  cazy  said :  Praised  be  God  !  that
the  door  of  repentance  is  still  open,  according  to
the  tradition  : — "  The  gate  of  repentance  is  not,  nor
shall  it  be,  shut  upon  his  [God's]  servants,  till  the  sun
shall  rise  in  the  west : — and  he  added  : — /  ask  pardon
of  God,  and  vow  to  him  that  I  will  repent : — these
two  circumstances  involved  me  in  sin,  my  inauspicious
fortune,  and  a  weak  understanding.  If  thou  over-
takest  me  with  punishment,  I  am  deserving  of  it ;
but  if  thou  wilt  forgive  me,  pardon  is  more  desirable
than  chastisement." — The  king  replied:  It  is  too  late


SHAIKH  SADL  233

to  repent,  now  that  you  know  sentence  of  death  is
passed  upon  you  : — The  Most  High  has  said  : — Then
were  it  impossible  their  faith  could  avail,  when  they
became  ^vitnesses  of  my  commencing  wrath  : — "  How
can  it  benefit  the  thief  to  repent  at  that  time,  when
he  cannot  again  throw  his  noose  [by  which  he  climbs
up]  into  the  balcony  ?  Warn  the  tall  man  to  with-
hold his  hand  from  the  fruit,  for  the  dwarf  cannot
of  himself  reach  the  branch." — When  you  fancied  to
yourself  such  a  crime  as  has  been  proved,  you  could
not  have  figured  any  path  of  escape.

Having  thus  expressed  himself,  the  king  ordered
the  executioners  of  the  law  to  lay  hands  on  the
cazy.  He  said:  I  have  one  plea  more  to  submit  to
his  majesty.  The  king  asked:  What  may  that  be?
He  replied  : — "  Notwithstanding  thou  spurnest  me
with  the  sleeve  of  thy  displeasure,  think  not  that
I  will  quit  the  skirt  of  thy  garment.  Though  im-
possible to  fancy  a  deliverance  from  this  sin  that
I  am  charged  with,  I  can  trust  in  that  clemency
which  thou  possessest."

The  king  said :  You  have  spoken  with  much  genius,
and  an  admirable  flow  of  wit ;  yet  is  it  repugnant
to  reason,  and  contrary  to  law,  for  me  to  permit
eloquence  and  wisdom  to  rescue  you  this  day  from
the  hands  of  justice.  I  deem  it  wise  to  have  you
thrown  headlong  from  the  battlements  of  the  citadel
into  the  ditch,  as  an  example  for  others.  The  cazy
replied:  O  sovereign  lord  of  the  universe!  I  am  the
fostered  child  of  this  royal  house,  and  have  not
been  singular  in  the  commission  of  this  crime  ;  let


234  SHAIKH  SADL

some  person  else  be  precipitated  from  the  battle-
ments, that  I  may  take  example  by  him.  The  king
smiled  at  this  remark,  and  was  pleased  to  signify
his  pardon  ;  and  he  reproved  his  accusers,  who  ex-
pected his  execution,  and  added : — "  All  of  you  are
laden  with  your  own  sins ;  do  not  reproach  others
with  their  failings.  Whoever  is  aware  of  his  own
failing  will  not  find  fault  with  the  failings  of  other
men."

XX.

"  There  was  a  handsome  and  well-disposed  young
man,  who  was  embarked  in  a  vessel  with  a  lovely
damsel.  I  have  read  that,  sailing  on  the  mighty  deep,
they  fell  together  into  a  whirlpool.  When  the  pilot
came  to  offer  him  assistance,  saying :  God  forbid
that  he  should  perish  in  that  distress,  he  was  answer-
ing from  the  midst  of  that  overwhelming  vortex  :
Leave  me,  and  take  the  hand  of  my  beloved !  The
whole  world  admired  him  for  this  speech  which,
as  he  was  expiring,  he  was  heard  to  make.  Learn
not  the  tale  of  love  from  that  faithless  wretch  who
can  neglect  his  mistress  when  exposed  to  danger.
In  this  manner  ended  the  lives  of  those  lovers.
Listen  to  what  has  happened,  that  you  may  under-
stand ;  for  Sadi  knows  the  ways  and  forms  of
courtship  as  well  as  the  Tazi,  or  modern  Arabic,  is
understood  at  Baghdad.  Devote  your  whole  heart
to  the  heart-consoler  you  have  chosen  [namely,  God],
and  let  your  eyes  be  shut  to  the  whole  world  beside.
Were  Laila  and  Mujnun  to  return  into  life,  they
might  read  the  history  of  love  in  this  chapter."


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  IMBECILITY  AND  OLD  AGE.

I.

IN  the  metropolitan  mosque  at  Damascus  I  was
engaged  in  a  disputation  with  some  learned  men,
when  a  youth  suddenly  entered  the  door,  and  said:
Does  any  of  you  understand  the  Persian  language  ?
They  directed  him  to  me,  and  I  answered:  It  is  true.
He  continued  :  An  old  man  of  a  hundred  and  fifty
years  of  age  is  in  the  agonies  of  death,  and  is  uttering
something  in  the  Persian  language,  which  we  do  not
understand.  If  you  will  have  the  goodness  to  go  to
him  you  may  get  rewarded  ;  for  he  possibly  may  be
dictating  his  will.  When  I  sat  down  by  his  bedside  I
heard  him  reciting : — "  I  said,  I  will  enjoy  myself  for
a  few  moments.  Alas !  that  my  soul  took  the  path
of  departure.  Alas !  at  the  variegated  table  of  life  I
partook  a  few  mouthfuls,  and  the  fates  said,  enough!"
I  explained  the  signification  of  these  lines  in  Arabic
to  the  Syrians.  They  were  astonished  that,  at  his
advanced  time  of  life,  he  should  express  himself  so
solicitous  about  a  worldly  existence.  I  asked  him  :
How  do  you  now  find  yourself?  He  replied  :  What


236  SHAIKH  SADL

shall  I  say? — "Hast  thou  never  witnessed  what  torture
that  man  suffers  from  whose  jaw  they  are  extracting
a  tooth  ?  Fancy  to  thyself  how  excruciating  is  his
pain  from  whose  precious  body  they  are  tearing  an
existence  !"

I  said:  Banish  all  thoughts  of  death  from  your
mind,  and  let  not  doubt  undermine  your  constitu-
tion ;  for  the  Greek  philosophers  have  remarked  that
although  our  temperaments  are  vigorous,  that  is  no
proof  of  a  long  life ;  and  that  although  our  sickness
is  dangerous,  that  is  no  positive  sign  of  immediate
dissolution.  If  you  will  give  me  leave,  I  will  call  in  a
physician  to  prescribe  some  medicine  that  may  cure
you.  He  replied :  Alas  !  alas  ! — "  The  landlord  thinks
of  refreshing  the  paintings  of  his  hall,  and  the  house
is  tottering  to  its  foundation.  The  physician  smites
the  hands  of  despair  when  he  sees  the  aged  fallen  in
pieces  like  a  potsherd  ;  the  old  man  bemoans  himself
in  the  agony  of  death  while  the  old  attendant  nurse
is  anointing  him  with  sandal-wood.  When  the
equipoise  of  the  temperament  is  overset,  neither
amulets  nor  medicaments  can  do  any  good."

II.

An  old  man  was  telling  a  story,  saying:  I  had
married  a  young  virgin,  adorned  the  bridal  chamber
with  flowers,  seated  myself  with  her  in  private,  and
riveted  my  heart  and  eyes  upon  her.  Many  a
long  night  I  would  lie  awake,  and  indulge  in
pleasantries  and  jests,  in  order  to  remove  any


SHAIKH  SADL  237

coyness  on  her  part,  and  encourage  familiarity.  One
of  those  nights  I  was  addressing  her,  and  saying :
Lofty  fortune  was  your  friend,  and  the  eye  of  your
prosperity  broad  awake,  when  you  fell  into  the
society  of  such  an  old  gentleman  as  I  am,  being  of
mature  judgment,  well-bred,  worldly  experienced,
inured  to  the  vicissitudes  of  heat  and  cold,  and
.practised  in  the  goods  and  evils  of  life  ;  who  can
appreciate  the  rights  of  good-fellowship,  and  fulfil  the
duties  of  loving  attachment ;  and  is  kind  and  affable,
sweet-spoken  and  cheerful : — "  I  will  treat  thee  with
affection,  as  far  as  I  can,  and  if  thou  dealest  with  me
unkindly,  I  cannot  be  unkind  in  return.  If,  like  a
parrot,  thy  food  be  sugar,  I  will  devote  my  sweet  life
for  thy  nourishment : " — and  you  did  not  become  the
victim  of  a  rude,  conceited,  rash,  and  headstrong
youth,  who  one  moment  gratifies  his  lust,  and  the
next  has  a  fresh  object ;  who  every  night  shifts  his
abode,  and  every  day  changes  his  mistress  : — "  young
men  are  lively  and  handsome,  but  they  keep  good  faith
with  nobody.  Expect  not  constancy  from  nightingales,
who  will  every  moment  serenade  a  fresh  rose :  "-
whereas  my  class  of  seniors  regulate  their  lives  by
good  breeding  and  sense,  and  are  not  deluded  by
youthful  ignorance. — "  Court  the  society  of  a  superior,
and  make  much  of  the  opportunity  ;  for  in  the
company  of  an  equal  thy  good  fortune  must  decline."
The  old  man  continued :  I  spoke  a  great  deal  in
this  style,  and  thought  that  I  had  caught  her  heart  in
my  snare,  and  made  sure  of  her  as  my  prey ;  when
she  suddenly  drew  a  cold  sigh  from  the  bottom  of  a


238  SHAIKH  SADI.

much  afflicted  bosom,  and  answered  :  All  this  speech
which  you  have  delivered  has  not,  in  the  scale  of  my
judgment,  the  weight  of  that  one  sentence  which  I
have  heard  of  my  nurse :  that  it  were  better  to  plant
a  spear  in  a  young  maiden's  side  than  to  lay  her  by
an  old  man  in  bed  ! — "  Much  contention  and  strife
will  arise  in  that  house  where  the  wife  shall  get  up
dissatisfied  with  her  husband.  Unable  to  rise  without
the  help  of  a  staff,  how  can  an  old  man  stir  the  staff
of  life  ?  "

In  short,  there  being  no  prospect  of  concord,  they
agreed  to  separate.  After  the  period  prescribed  by
the  law,  they  united  her  in  wedlock  with  a  young
man  of  an  ill-tempered  and  sullen  disposition,  and  in
very  narrow  circumstances,  so  that  she  endured  much
tyranny  and  violence,  penury  and  hardship ;  yet  she
was  thus  offering  up  thanksgivings  for  the  Almighty's
goodness,  and  saying :  Praised  be  God  that  I  have
escaped  from  such  hell-torment,  and  secured  a
blessing  so  permanent : — "  With  all  this  violence  and
impetuosity  of  temper,  I  bear  with  thy  caprice,  because
thou  art  lovely : — It  were  better  for  me  to  burn  with
thee  in  hell-fire  than  to  dwell  in  paradise  with  another.
The  smell  of  an  onion  from  the  mouth  of  the  lovely
is  sweeter  than  a  rose  in  the  hand  of  the  ugly."

III.

In  the  territory  of  Diarbekr,  or  Mesopotamia,  I  was
the  guest  of  an  old  man,  who  was  very  rich,  and  had
a  handsome  son.  One  night  he  told  a  story,  saying :


SHAIKH  SADL  239

During  my  whole  life  I  never  had  any  child  but  this
boy.  And  in  this  valley  a  certain  tree  is  a  place  of
pilgrimage,  where  people  go  to  supplicate  their  wants;
and  many  was  the  night  that  I  have  besought  God  at
the  foot  of  that  tree  before  he  would  bestow  upon
me  this  boy.  I  have  heard  that  the  son  was  also
whispering  his  companions,  and  saying  :  How  happy  I
-should  be  if  I  could  discover  the  site  of  that  tree,  in
order  that  I  might  pray  for  the  death  of  my  father.
The  gentleman  was  rejoicing  and  saying :  What  a
sensible  youth  is  my  son !  and  the  boy  was  complain-
ing and  crying :  What  a  tedious  old  dotard  is  my
father! — "Many  years  are  passing  over  thy  head,
during  which  thou  didst  not  visit  thy  father's  tomb.
What  pious  oblation  didst  thou  make  to  the  manes
of  a  parent  that  thou  shouldst  expect  so  much  from
thy  son  ?  "

IV.

Urged  one  day  by  the  pride  of  youthful  vanity,
I  had  made  a  forced  march,  and  in  the  evening  found
myself  exhausted  at  the  bottom  of  an  acclivity.  A
feeble  old  man,  who  had  deliberately  followed  the
pace  of  the  caravan,  came  up  to  me  and  said  :  How
come  you  to  lie  down  here  ?  Get  up,  this  is  no  fit
place  for  rest.  I  replied  :  How  can  I  proceed,  who
have  not  a  foot  to  stand  on.?  He  said :  Have  you  not
heard  what  the  prudent  have  remarked  ?  Going  on,
and  halting,  is  better  than  running  ahead  and
breaking  down  ! — "  Ye  who  wish  to  reach  the  end
of  your  journey,  hurry  not  on ;  practise  my  advice,


24o  SHAIKH  SADL

and  learn  deliberation.  The  Arab  horse  makes  a  few
stretches  at  full  speed,  and  is  broken  down ;  while  the
camel,  at  its  deliberate  pace,  travels  on  night  and
day  [and  gets  to  the  end  of  his  journey]."

V.

An  active,  merry,  cheerful,  and  sweet-spoken  youth
was  for  a  length  of  time  in  the  circle  of  my  society,
whose  heart  had  never  known  sorrow,  nor  his  lip
ceased  from  being  on  a  smile.  An  age  had  passed,
during  which  we  had  not  chanced  to  meet.  When
I  next  saw  him  he  had  taken  to  himself  a  wife,  and
got  a  family ;  and  the  root  of  his  enjoyment  was
torn  up,  and  the  rose  of  his  mirth  blasted.  I  asked
him:  How  is  this?  He  replied:  Since  I  became  a
father  of  children,  I  ceased  to  play  the  child  : — "  Now
thou  art  old,  relinquish  childishness,  and  leave  it  to
the  young  to  indulge  in  play  and  merriment.  Expect
not  the  sprightliness  of  youth  from  the  aged;  for
the  stream  that  ran  by  can  never  return.  Now  that
the  corn  is  ripe  for  the  sickle,  it  rears  not  its  head
as  when  green  and  shooting. — The  season  of  youth
has  slipt  through  my  hands ;  alas !  when  I  think
on  those  heart-exhilarating  days !  The  lion  has  lost
the  sturdy  grasp  of  his  paw :  I  must  now  put  up,
like  a  lynx,  with  a  bit  of  cheese. — An  old  woman  had
stained  her  grey  locks  black.  I  said  to  her:  O,  my
antiquated  dame!  thy  hair  I  admit  thou  canst  turn
dark  by  art,  but  thou  never  canst  make  thy  crooked
back  straight"


SHAIKH  SADI.  241


VI.

One  day,  in  the  perverseness  of  youth,  I  spoke
with  asperity  to  my  mother.  Vexed  at  heart,  she
sat  down  in  a  corner,  and  with  tears  in  her  eyes
was  saying  :  You  have  perhaps  forgot  the  days  of
infancy,  that  you  are  speaking  to  me  thus  harshly.
— -"  How  well  did  an  old  woman  observe  to  her  own
son,  when  she  saw  him  powerful  as  a  tyger,  and
formidable  as  an  elephant :  Couldst  thou  call  to
mind  those  days  of  thy  infancy  when  helpless  thou
wouldst  cling  to  this  my  bosom,  thou  wouldst  not
thus  assail  me  with  savage  fury,  now  thou  art  a
lion-like  hero,  and  I  am  a  poor  old  woman."

VIL

A  rich  miser  had  a  son  who  was  grievously  sick.
His  well-wishers  and  friends  spoke  to  him,  saying :
It  were  proper  that  you  either  read  the  Koran
throughout  or  offer  an  animal  in  sacrifice,  in  order
that  the  most  high  God  may  restore  him  to  health.
After  a  short  reflection  within  himself  he  answered,
It  is  better  to  read  the  Koran,  which  is  ready  at
hand  ;  and  my  herds  are  at  a  distance.  A  good
and  holy  man  heard  this  and  remarked  :  He  makes
choice  of  the  reading  part  because  the  Koran  slips
glibly  over  the  tongue,  but  his  money  is  to  be  wrung
from  the  soul  of  him. — "Fy  upon  that  readiness  to
bow  the  head  in  prayer ;  would  that  the  hand  of

758


242  SHAIKH  SADL

charity  could  accompany  it!  In  bestowing  a  dinar
he  will  stickle  like  an  ass  in  the  mire ;  but  ask  him
to  read  the  Al-hamdi,  or  first  chapter  of  the  Koran,
and  he  will  recite  it  a  hundred  times."


VIII.

They  asked  an  old  man  why  he  did  not  marry.
He  answered  :  I  feel  no  affection  for  an  old  woman.
They  said  :  Now  you  are  rich  make  choice  of  a  young
one.  He  replied  :  Since  I,  who  am  an  old  man,  have
no  affection  for  old  women,  then  how  can  she,  as  a
young  woman,  have  any  love  for  me,  who  am  old  ?

— "  Robur  requiritur,  non  aurum  ;  quia  Herae
Gratior  est  Venus,  quam  Croesi  opes." —


IX.

"  I  have  heard  that  in  these  times  a  weak  old  man
took  a  fancy  in  his  dotage  to  choose  himself  a  wife.
He  wedded  a  beautiful  virgin  of  the  name  of  Gawhar,
or  the  pearl,  and  shut  her  up  from  the  sight  of  men
like  a  gem  in  a  casket.  He  made  the  usual  display  in
celebrating  his  nuptials  ;  but  on  the  very  first  onset  the
old  gentleman's  staff  went  asleep.  He  drew  his  bow,
but  did  not  hit  the  target,  for  brocade  can  be  stitched
only  with  a  steel  needle.  He  set  forth  a  complaint
to  his  friends,  and  offered  proof  that  this  impudent
slut  had  dishonoured  his  house  and  family.  Such
contention  and  strife  blazed  forth  between  the  man  and


SHAIKH  SADL  243

wife  that  the  flame  reached  the  superintendent  of  the
police  and  cazi,  or  judge,  and  made  Sadi  remark :
After  all  this  altercation  and  recrimination,  in  what
is  the  damsel  to  blame.  It  is  thy  hand  that  shakes,
and  how  canst  thou  bore  a  pearl  ?  "


CHAPTER  VII.

OF  THE  IMPRESSIONS  OF  EDUCATION.


A  CERTAIN  nobleman  had  a  dunce  of  a  son.  He
sent  him  to  a  learned  man,  saying :  Verily  you  will
give  instruction  to  this  youth,  peradventure  he  may
become  a  rational  being.  He  continued  to  give  him
lessons  for  some  time,  but  they  made  no  impression
upon  him,  when  he  sent  a  message  to  the  father
saying:  This  son  is  not  getting  wise,  and  he  has  well-
nigh  made  me  a  fool ! — "  Where  the  innate  capacity
is  good,  education  may  make  an  impression  upon  it ;
but  no  furbisher  knows  how  to  give  a  polish  to  iron
which  is  of  a  bad  temper.  Wash  a  dog  seven  times  in
the  ocean,  and  so  long  as  he  is  wet  he  is  all  the
filthier.  Were  they  to  take  the  ass  of  Jesus  to  Mecca,
on  his  return  from  that  pilgrimage  he  would  still  be
an  ass."

II.

A  philosopher  was  exhorting  his  children  and
saying:  O  emanations  of  my  soul,  acquire  knowledge,
as  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  worldly  riches  and


SHAIKH  SADI.  245

possessions,  for  once  you  leave  home  rank  is  of  no
use,  and  gold  and  silver  on  a  journey  are  exposed  to
the  risk  either  of  thieves  plundering  them  at  once,  or
of  the  owner  wasting  them  by  degrees  ;  but  know-
ledge is  a  perennial  spring  and  ever-during  fortune.
Were  a  professional  man  to  lose  his  fortune,  he  need
not  feel  regret,  for  his  knowledge  is  of  itself  a  mine
of  wealth.  Wherever  he  may  sojourn  the  learned
man  will  meet  respect,  and  be  ushered  into  the  upper
seat,  whilst  the  ignorant  man  must  put  up  with
offal  and  suffer  want : — "  If  thou  covet  the  paternal
heritage,  acquire  thy  father's  knowledge,  for  this  thy
father's  wealth  thou  mayst  squander  in  ten  days.
After  having  been  in  authority,  it  is  hard  to  obey ;
after  having  been  fondled  with  caresses,  to  put  up
with  men's  violence  : — There  once  occurred  an  insur-
rection in  Syria,  and  everybody  forsook  his  former
peaceful  abode.  The  sons  of  peasants,  who  were  men
of  learning,  came  to  be  employed  as  the  ministers  of
kings  ;  and  the  children  of  noblemen,  of  bankrupt
understandings,  went  a  begging  from  village  to
village."

III.

A  certain  learned  man  was  superintending  the
education  of  a  king's  son;  and  he  was  chastising  him
without  mercy,  and  reproving  him  with  asperity.
The  boy,  out  of  all  patience,  complained  to  the  king
his  father,  and  laid  bare  before  him  his  much-bruised
body.  The  king  was  much  offended,  and  sending  for
the  master,  said  :  You  do  not  treat  the  children  of  my


246  SHAIKH  SADL

meanest  subject  with  the  harshness  and  cruelty  you
do  my  boy;  what  do  you  mean  by  this  ?  He  replied:
To  think  before  they  speak,  and  to  deliberate  before
they  act,  are  duties  incumbent  upon  all  mankind,  and
more  immediately  upon  kings ;  because  whatever
may  drop  from  their  hands  and  tongue,  the  special
deed  or  word  will  somehow  become  the  subject  of
public  animadversion  ;  whereas  any  act  or  remark  of
the  commonalty  attracts  not  such  notice: — "Let  a
darwesh,  or  poor  man,  commit  a  hundred  indis-
cretions, and  his  companions  will  not  notice  one  out
of  the  hundred  ;  and  let  a  king  but  utter  one  foolish
word,  and  it  will  be  echoed  from  kingdom  to  king-
dom : " — therefore  in  forming  the  morals  of  young
princes,  more  pains  are  to  be  taken  than  with  the
sons  of  the  vulgar. — "  Whoever  was  not  taught  good
manners  in  his  boyhood,  fortune  will  forsake  him
when  he  becomes  a  man.  Thou  mayst  bend  the
green  bough  as  thou  likest ;  but  let  it  once  get  dry,
and  it  will  require  heat  to  straighten  it : — "  Verily  thou
'mayst  bend  the  tender  branch,  but  it  were  labour  lost  to
attempt  making  straight  a  crooked  billet"

The  king  greatly  approved  of  this  ingenious  detail,
and  the  wholesome  course  of  discipline  of  the  learned
doctor ;  and,  bestowing  upon  him  a  dress  and  largess,
raised  him  one  step  in  his  rank  as  a  nobleman  !

IV.

In  the  west  of  Africa  I  saw  a  schoolmaster  of  a
sour  aspect  and  bitter  speech,  crabbed,  misanthropic,


SHAIKH  SADL  247

beggarly,  and  intemperate,  insomuch  that  the  sight
of  him  would  derange  the  ecstasies  of  the  orthodox;
and  his  manner  of  reading  the  Koran  cast  a  gloom
over  the  minds  of  the  pious.  A  number  of  hand-
some boys  and  lovely  virgins  were  subject  to  his
despotic  sway,  who  had  neither  the  permission  of
a  smile  nor  the  option  of  a  word,  for  this  moment
he  would  smite  the  silver  cheek  of  one  of  them  with
his  hand,  and  the  next  put  the  crystalline  legs  of
another  in  the  stocks.  In  short  their  parents,  I
heard,  were  made  aware  of  a  part  of  his  disloyal
violence,  and  beat  and  drove  him  from  his  charge.
And  they  made  over  his  school  to  a  peaceable
creature,  so  pious,  meek,  simple,  and  good-natured
that  he  never  spoke  till  forced  to  do  so,  nor  would
he  utter  a  word  that  could  offend  anybody.  The
children  forgot  that  awe  in  which  they  had  held
their  first  master,  and  remarking  the  angelic  disposi-
tion of  their  second  master,  they  became  one  after
another  as  wicked  as  devils ;  and  relying  on  his
clemency,  they  would  so  neglect  their  studies  as  to
pass  most  part  of  their  time  at  play,  and  break  the
tablets  of  their  unfinished  tasks  over  each  other's
heads  : — "  When  the  schoolmaster  relaxes  in  his  dis-
cipline, the  children  will  stop  to  play  at  marbles
in  the  market-place."

A  fortnight  after  I  passed  by  the  gate  of  that
mosque  and  saw  the  first  schoolmaster,  with  whom
they  had  been  obliged  to  make  friends,  and  to
restore  him  to  his  place.  I  was  in  truth  offended,
and  calling  on  God  to  witness,  asked,  saying:  Why


248  SHAIKH  SADL

have  they  again  made  a  devil  the  preceptor  of
angels?  A  facetious  old  gentleman,  who  had  seen
much  of  life,  listened  to  me  and  replied:  Have  you
not  heard  what  they  have  said  : — "  A  king  sent  his
son  to  school,  and  hung  a  tablet  of  silver  round  his
neck.  On  the  face  of  that  tablet  he  had  written  in
golden  letters  :  The  severity  of  the  master  is  more
useful  than  the  indulgence  of  the  father."

V.

A  religious  man's  son  succeeded  to  considerable
property  through  the  bequest  of  his  uncles,  and
began  a  life  of  debauchery  and  vice,  and  plunged
into  all  manner  of  profligate  dissipation,  insomuch
that  there  was  no  sin  he  did  not  commit,  nor  any
intoxicating  drug  he  did  not  indulge  in.  On  one
occasion  I  said  to  him  in  admonition  :  O  my  son,
income  is  the  current  of  a  dam-sluice,  and  expendi-
ture a  revolving  mill-stone;  that  is  to  say,  a  profuse
expense  can  suit  only  him  who  has  an  adequate
and  certain  income  : — "  If  thou  hast  no  income,  be
frugal  in  thy  expense,  for  the  mariners  are  chanting
in  their  songs.  Were  no  rain  to  fall  in  Kowhistan
or  the  hilly  region,  the  Tygris  would  become  a  bed
of  dry  sand  within  the  year." — Listen  to  instruction
and  reason,  and  forego  foolery  and  idleness,  for
when  your  means  are  wasted  you  will  suffer  distress,
and  be  put  to  shame.

Seduced  by  a  taste  for  conviviality  and  music,
the  young  man  disregarded  my  remarks,  and  in


SHAIKH  SADL  249

despite  of  my  advice  replied :  It  is  repugnant  to
the  good  sense  of  the  wise  to  disturb  our  present
fleeting  enjoyments  with  the  gloomy  thoughts  of
hereafter  : — "  Why  should  the  lords  of  voluptuous-
ness and  good  fortune  let  an  apprehension  of  distress
involve  them  in  trouble  ?  Go  and  enjoy  thyself,
O  my  heart-cheering  charmer ;  let  us  not  to-day
anticipate  the  sorrow  of  to-morrow :" — And  it  would
more  especially  unsuit  me,  who  am  placed  in  the
president's  chair  of  liberality,  am  under  a  contract
with  generosity,  and  the  fame  of  my  munificence
is  in  everybody's  mouth  : — "  Whoever  has  reared
the  standard  of  munificence  must  not  again  put  a
check  upon  his  expenses.  Once  thy  fame  has  got
abroad  in  the  street,  thou  canst  not  again  shut  thy
door  in  the  face  of  it."

I  perceived  that  admonition  had  no  effect,  and
that  my  warm  breath  made  no  impression  upon  his
cold  iron.  I  ceased  to  advise  him,  quitted  his  society,
and  withdrew  into  the  corner  of  safety.  Conformably
with  the  sayings  of  the  wise : — Exhort  and  admonish,
as  in  duty  bound ;  and  if  they  will  not  listen,  it  can
no  further  concern  you  : — "  Although  thou  art  aware
that  they  will  not  hear,  inculcate  what  thou  knowest
of  admonition  and  instruction.  It  must  soon  come
to  pass,  in  their  desperate  plight,  that  thou  shalt  see
them  with  their  feet  fast  bound  and  in  durance,
wringing  their  hands,  and  crying :  Alas !  that  we
did  not  listen  to  the  good  man's  advice ! " — After
a  time,  what  I  had  predicted  of  his  dissolute  conduct
came  to  be  verified  ;  for  I  saw  him  putting  patch


250  SHAIKH   SADL

over  patch  on  his  ragged  clothes,  and  wandering
from  door  to  door  begging  crumbs.  I  felt  in  my
heart  for  his  distressed  state ;  but  deeming  it  un-
generous to  hurt  his  feelings  with  reproach,  or  in
such  a  case  to  sprinkle  a  poor  man's  sore  with  salt,
I  whispered  to  myself: — "The  idle  profligate  in  his
intoxication  of  prosperity  never  reflects  on  the  day
of  adversity.  The  tree  is  in  summer  profuse  of  its
fruit,  and  is  in  consequence  stript  of  its  leaves  in
the  winter." —

VI.

A  king  gave  his  son  into  the  charge  of  a  pre-
ceptor, and  said :  This  is  your  child,  educate  him
as  you  would  one  of  your  own.  For  some  years  he
laboured  in  teaching  him,  but  to  no  good  purpose ;
whilst  the  sons  of  the  preceptor  excelled  in  eloquence
and  knowledge.  The  king  blamed  the  learned  man,
and  remonstrated  with  him,  saying :  You  have
violated  your  trust,  and  infringed  the  terms  of  your
engagement  He  replied :  O  king,  the  education  is
the  same,  but  their  capacities  are  different ! —
"  Though  silver  and  gold  are  extracted  from  stones,
yet  it  is  not  in  every  stone  that  gold  and  silver
are  found.  The  Sohail,  or  star  Canopus,  is  shedding
his  rays  all  over  the  globe.  In  one  place  he  produces
common  leather,  in  another,  or  in  Yamin,  that  called
Adim,  or  perfumed." —

VII.

I  heard  a  certain  learned  senior  observing  to  a
disciple :  If  the  sons  of  Adam  were  as  solicitous


SHAIKH  SADI.  251

after  Providence,  or  God,  as  they  are  after  their
means  of  sustenance,  their  places  in  Paradise  would
surpass  those  of  the  angels. — "  God  did  not  overlook
thee  in  that  state  when  thou  wert  a  senseless  embryo
in  thy  mother's  womb.  He  bestowed  upon  thee  a
soul,  reason,  temper,  intellect,  symmetry,  speech,
judgment,  understanding,  and  reflection.  He  accom-
modated thy  hands  with  ten  fingers,  and  suspended
two  arms  from  thy  shoulders.  Canst  thou  now
suppose,  O  good-for-nothing  wretch,  that  he  will
forget  to  provide  thy  daily  bread  ?  "

VIII.

I  observed  an  Arab  who  was  informing  his  son: —
O  my  child,  God  will  ask  thee  on  the  day  of  judgment :
What  hast  thou  done  in  this  life  ?  but  he  will  not
inquire  of  thee  :  Whence  didst  thou  derive  thy  origin  ?
— That  is,  they  [or  God]  will  ask,  saying :  What  are
your  works  ?  But  he  will  not  question  you,  saying :
Who  is  your  father  ? — "  The  covering  of  the  Kaabah
at  Mecca,  which  the  pilgrims  kiss  from  devotion,  is
not  prized  from  its  being  the  fabric  of  a  silk-worm  ;
for  a  while  it  associated  with  a  venerable  friend,  and
became,  in  consequence,  venerable  like  him."

IX.

They  have  related  in  the  books  of  philosophers  that
scorpions  are  not  brought  forth  according  to  the
common  course  of  nature,  as  other  animals  are,  but
that  they  eat  their  way  through  their  mothers'  wombs,


252  SHAIKH  SADL

tear  open  their  bellies,  and  thus  make  themselves  a
passage  into  the  world  ;  and  that  the  fragments  of  skin
which  we  find  in  scorpions'  holes  corroborate  this  fact.
On  one  occasion  I  was  stating  this  strange  event  to  a
good  and  great  man,  when  he  answered  :  My  heart  is
bearing  testimony  to  the  truth  of  this  remark ;  nor
can  it  be  otherwise,  for  as  they  have  thus  behaved
towards  their  parents  in  their  youth,  so  they  are
approved  and  beloved  in  their  riper  years  : — "  On
his  death-bed  a  father  exhorted  his  son,  saying:  O
generous  youth,  keep  in  mind  this  maxim :  Whoever
is  ungrateful  to  his  own  kindred  cannot  hope  that
fortune  shall  befriend  him."

x.

They  asked  a  scorpion:  Why  do  you  not  make
your  appearance  during  the  winter  ?  It  answered :
What  is  my  character  in  the  summer  that  I  should
come  abroad  also  in  the  winter  ?

XI.

The  wife  of  a  darwesh  was  pregnant,  and  the  term
of  her  gestation  completed.  During  his  whole  life  the
darwesh  had  never  had  a  son.  He  said  :  If  a  great
and  glorious  Deity  will  bestow  upon  me  a  son,  I  will
distribute  in  charity  to  the  poor  all  the  property  I  have,
excepting  this  ragged  garment  I  am  now  wearing.  It
came  to  pass  that  his  wife  bore  a  son,  at  which  he
rejoiced,  and  made  an  entertainment  for  his  brethren
in  performance  of  his  vow.  Some  years  after,  as  I  was


SHAIKH  SADI.  253

returning  from  a  journey  into  Syria,  I  passed  by  that
friend's  dwelling,  and  made  inquiry  after  him.  They
said  :  He  is  in  the  superintendent  of  the  police's  jail.
I  asked :  How  comes  that  ?  They  said  :  His  son  got
drunk,  had  a  quarrel,  killed  a  man,  and  fled  from  the
city;  and  on  his  account  the  father  has  chains  on  his
legs  and  an  iron  collar  round  his  neck.  I  replied  :  He
brought  this  misfortune  upon  himself  by  praying  to
God  for  it. — "  Were  thy  pregnant  wife,  O  prudent
man,  to  bring  forth  a  snake  at  her  time  of  lying-in,
that  would  suit  better  with  the  good  opinion  of  the
wise  than  if  she  might  bear  thee  an  undutiful  son."

XII,

When  a  boy  I  asked  a  great  and  holy  man  what
were  the  signs  of  puberty  ?  He  answered  :  In  books
of  science  three  signs  are  noticed — first,  the  age  of
fifteen  ;  second,  nocturnal  emission  ;  and  third,  the
growth  of  hair  about  the  pubes.  But  in  truth  there  is
only  one  sign — namely,  that  you  are  more  the  devoted
servant  of  the  Most  High  than  the  bounden  slave  of
your  own  vile  appetites ;  and  whoever  possesses  not
this  one  qualification,  the  good  and  pious  do  not
consider  him  as  arrived  at  years  of  discretion : —
"After  it  had  remained  forty  days  in  the  womb,  a
drop  of  water  took  the  human  form  ;  but  if  after  forty
years  he  has  not  reason  and  discretion,  thou  couldst
not  in  truth  consider  him  a  man:" — "Imagine  not
that  manhood  is  a  mere  material  form  ;  for  generosity
of  disposition  and  urbanity  of  manners  are  constituent


254  SHAIKH  SAD1.

parts  of  it.  Virtue  is  also  necessary ;  for  the  figure  of
a  human  body  can  be  painted  with  vermilion  and
verdigris  upon  the  wall  of  a  palace.  Where  a  man  is
deficient  in  virtue  and  benevolence,  what  difference  is
there  between  him  and  such  a  picture  on  a  wall  ?  It
is  not  in  subduing  a  whole  world  that  thou  showest
thy  knowledge.  Make  a  conquest,  if  thou  art  able,  of
the  mind  of  one  human  being  [that  is,  of  thyself]."

XIII.

One  year  a  dissension  arose  among  the  foot-
travellers  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and  the  author
[Sadi]  was  also  a  pedestrian  among  them.  In  truth,
we  fell  head  and  ears  together,  and  accusation  and
recrimination  were  bandied  from  all  sides.  I  over-
heard a  kajawah,  or  gentleman,  riding  on  one  side  of
a  camel-litter,  observing  to  his  adil,  or  opposite  com-
panion :  How  strange  that  the  ivory  piyadah,  or
pawns,  on  reaching  the  top  of  the  shatranj,  or  chess-
board, become  fazzin,  or  queens ;  that  is,  they  get
rank,  or  become  better  than  they  were ;  and  the
piyadah,  or  pawns  of  the  pilgrimage — that  is,  our
foot-pilgrims — have  crossed  the  desert  and  become
worse. — "  Say  from  me  to  that  haji,  or  pilgrim,  the
pest  of  his  fellow-pilgrims,  that  he  lacerates  the  skin
of  mankind  by  his  contention.  Thou  art  not  a  real
pilgrim,  but  that  meek  camel  is  one  who  is  feeding  on
thorns  and  patient  under  its  burthen."

XIV.

A  Hindu,  or  Indian,  was  teaching  the  art  of  playing
off  fireworks.  A  philosopher  observed  to  him  :  This


SHAIKH  SADL  255

is  an  unfit  sport  for  you,  whose  dwelling  is  made  of
straw. — "  Utter  not  a  word  till  thou  knowest  that  it  is
the  mirror  of  what  is  correct  ;  and  do  not  put  a  ques-
tion where  thou  knowest  that  the  answer  must  be
unfavourable."

XV.

A  fellow  had  a  complaint  in  his  eyes,  and  went
to  a  horse-doctor,  saying :  Prescribe  something  for
me  ?  The  doctor  of  horses  applied  to  his  eyes  what
he  was  in  the  habit  of  applying  to  the  eyes  of
quadrupeds,  and  the  man  got  blind.  They  carried
their  complaint  before  the  hakim,  or  judge.  He
decreed  :  This  man  has  no  redress,  for  had  he  not
been  an  ass  he  would  not  have  applied  to  a  horse
or  ass  doctor ! — The  moral  of  this  apologue  is,  that
whoever  can  employ  an  inexperienced  person  on  an
affair  of  importance,  besides  being  brought  to  shame,
he  will  incur  from  the  wise  the  imputation  of  a  weak
mind. — "A  prudent  man,  with  an  enlightened  under-
standing, entrusts  not  affairs  of  consequence  to  one  of
mean  capacity.  The  plaiter  of  mats,  notwithstanding
he  be  a  weaver,  they  would  not  employ  in  a  silk
manufactory."

XVI.

A  certain  great  Imaan  had  a  worthy  son,  and
he  died.  They  asked  him,  saying:  What  shall  we
inscribe  upon  the  urn  at  his  tomb.  He  replied :
Verses  of  the  holy  Koran  are  of  such  superior
reverence  and  dignity  that  they  should  not  be  written


256  SHAIKH  SADI.

in  places  where  time  might  efface,  mankind  tread
upon,  or  dogs  defile  them  ;  yet,  if  an  epitaph  be
necessary,  let  these  two  couplets  suffice  : — "  I  said :
Alas!  how  grateful  it  was  proving  to  my  heart,  so
long  as  the  verdure  of  thy  existence  might  flourish  in
the  garden.  He  replied  :  O  my  friend,  have  patience
till  the  return  of  the  spring,  and  thou  mayst  again  see
rose  blossoming  on  my  bosom,  or  shooting  from  my
dust"

XVII.

A  holy  man  was  passing  by  a  wealthy  personage's
mansion,  and  saw  him  with  a  slave  tied  up  by  the
hands  and  feet,  and  giving  him  chastisement.  He  said  :
O  my  son !  God  Almighty  has  made  a  creature  like
yourself  subject  to  your  command,  and  has  given  you
a  superiority  over  him.  Render  thanksgiving  to  the
Most  High  Judge,  and  deal  not  with  him  so  savagely;
lest  hereafter,  on  the  day  of  judgment,  he  may  prove
the  more  worthy  of  the  two,  and  you  be  put  to
shame : — "  Be  not  so  enraged  with  thy  bondsman  ;
torture  not  his  body,  nor  harrow  up  his  heart.  Thou
mightest  buy  him  for  ten  dinars,  but  hadst  not  after
all  the  power  of  creating  him  : — To  what  length  will
this  authority,  pride,  and  insolence  hurry  thee ;  there
is  a  Master  mightier  than  thou  art.  Yes,  thou  art  a
lord  of  slaves  and  vassals,  but  do  not  forget  thine  own
Lord  Paramount — namely,  God  ! " — There  is  a  tradi-
tion of  the  prophet  Mohammed,  on  whom  be  blessing,
announcing  : — On  the  day  of  resurrection,  that  will  be
the  most  mortifying  event  when  the  good  slave  will


SHAIKH  SAD1.  257

be  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  the  wicked  master  sent
down  to  hell : — "  Upon  the  bondsman,  who  is  sub-
servient to  thy  command,  wreak  not  thy  rage  and
boundless  displeasure.  For  it  must  be  disgraceful  on
the  day  of  reckoning  to  find  the  slave  at  liberty  and
the  master  in  bondage."

XVIII.

One  year  I  was  on  a  journey  with  some  Syrians
from  Balkh,  and  the  road  was  infested  with  robbers.
One  of  our  escort  was  a  youth  expert  at  wielding
his  shield  and  brandishing  his  spear,  mighty  as  an
elephant,  and  cased  in  armour,  so  strong  that  ten  of
the  most  powerful  of  us  could  not  string  his  bow,  or
the  ablest  wrestler  on  the  face  of  the  earth  throw  him
on  his  back.  Yet,  as  you  must  know,  he  had  been
brought  up  in  luxury  and  reared  in  a  shade,  was
inexperienced  of  the  world,  and  had  never  travelled.
The  thunder  of  the  great  war-drum  had  never  rattled
in  his  ears,  nor  had  the  lightning  of  the  trooper's
scimitar  ever  flashed  across  his  eyes : — "  He  had
never  fallen  a  captive  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy,
nor  been  overwhelmed  amidst  a  shower  of  their
arrows."

It  happened  that  this  young  man  and  I  kept
running  on  together  ;  and  any  venerable  ruin  that
might  come  in  our  way  he  would  overthrow  with  the
strength  of  his  shoulder  ;  and  any  huge  tree  that  we
might  see  he  would  wrench  from  its  root  with  his
lion-seizing  wrist,  and  boastfully  cry  : — "  Where  is  the

759


258  SHAIKH  SADL

elephant,  that  he  may  behold  the  shoulder  and  arm
of  warriors  ?  Where  the  lion,  that  he  may  feel  the
wrist  and  gripe  of  heroes  ?  "

Such  was  our  situation  when  two  Hindus  darted
from  behind  a  rock  and  prepared  to  cut  us  off,  one
of  them  holding  a  bludgeon  in  his  hand,  and  the
other  having  a  mallet  under  his  arm.  I  called  to  the
young  man,  Why  do  you  stop  ? — "  Display  whatever
strength  and  courage  thou  hast,  for  the  foe  came  on
his  own  feet  up  to  his  grave  : " — I  perceived  that  the
youth's  bow  and  arrows  had  dropped  from  his  hands,
and  that  a  tremor  had  fallen  upon  his  limbs  : — "  It
is  not  he  that  can  split  a  hair  with  a  coat-of-mail
cleaving  arrow  that  is  able  to  withstand  an  assault
from  the  formidable  : " — No  alternative  was  left  us
but  that  of  surrendering  our  arms,  accoutrements,  and
clothes,  and  escaping  with  our  lives. — "  On  an  affair
of  importance  employ  a  man  experienced  in  business,
who  can  bring  the  fierce  lion  within  the  noose  of  his
halter  ;  though  the  youth  be  strong  of  arm  and  has
the  body  of  an  elephant,  in  his  encounter  with  a  foe
every  limb  will  quake  with  fear.  A  man  of  experi-
ence is  best  qualified  to  explore  a  field  of  battle,  as
one  of  the  learned  is  to  expound  a  point  of  law."

XIX.

I  saw  a  rich  man's  son  seated  by  his  father's  tomb,
and  in  a  disputation  with  that  of  a  darwesh  holding
forth  and  saying :  My  father's  mausoleum  is  built  of
granite,  the  epitaph  inscribed  with  letters  of  gold,  the


SHAIKH  SADL  259

pavement  and  lining  marble,  and  tessellated  with
slabs  of  turkois;  and  what  is  there  left  of  your  father's
tomb  but  two  or  three  bricks  cemented  together  with
a  few  handfuls  of  mortar?  The  poor  man's  son
heard  this,  and  answered :  I  pray  you  peace !  for
before  your  father  can  stir  himself  under  this  heavy
load  of  stone  mine  shall  have  risen  up  to  heaven  !
And  there  is  a  tradition  of  the  prophet,  that  death  to
the  poor  is  a  state  of  rest — "  That  ass  proceeds  all  the
lighter  on  his  journey  on  whom  they  load  the  lightest
burthen  : — the  poor  darwesh,  who  suffers  under  a  load
of  indigence,  will  in  like  sort  enter  the  gates  of  death
with  an  easy  burthen ;  but  with  him  who  luxuriates  in
peace,  plenty,  and  affluence,  it  must  be  a  real  hard-
ship to  die  amidst  all  these  comforts.  At  all  events
consider  the  prisoner,  who  is  released  from  his  thral-
dom, as  better  off  than  the  prince  who  is  just  fallen  a
captive."

XX.

I  asked  a  learned  man  the  meaning  of  this  tradi-
tion, that  the  -most  hostile  of  your  enemies  is  your
passion  of  lust,  which  has  its  seat  in  the  loins.  He
replied  :  Any  foe  whom  you  treat  courteously  will
become  a  friend  excepting  lust,  which,  the  more
civilly  you  use  it,  will  get  the  more  perverse. — "  By
temperance  a  man  may  acquire  an  angelic  disposi-
tion ;  but  if  he-indulge  like  a  beast,  he  will  sink  into
a  mineral.  Whatever  appetite  thou  mightest  favour
would  obey  thy  order,  unless  lust,  which,  now  it  had
its  will,  would  rebel."


260  SHAIKH  SAD1.


XXI.

I  saw  a  certain  person  in  the  garb  of  danveshes,
but  not  with  their  meekness,  seated  in  a  company,
and  full  of  his  abuse.  Having  opened  the  volume
of  reproach,  and  begun  to  calumniate  the  rich,  his
discourse  had  reached  this  place,  stating :  The  hand
of  the  poor  man's  ability  is  tied  up,  and  the  foot
of  the  rich  man's  inclination  crippled  : — "  Men  of
liberality  have  no  command  of  money,  nor  have
the  opulent  and  worldly-minded  a  spirit  of  liberality."

Owing,  as  I  am,  my  support  to  the  bounty  of  the
great,  I  considered  this  animadversion  as  unmerited,
and  replied :  O  my  friend !  the  rich  are  the  treasury
of  the  indigent,  the  granary  of  the  hermit,  the  fane
of  the  pilgrim,  resting-place  of  the  traveller,  and  the
carriers  of  heavy  burthens  for  the  relief  of  their  fellow-
creatures.  They  put  forth  their  hand  to  eat  when
their  servants  and  dependants  are  ready  to  partake
with  them  ;  and  the  bounteous  fragments  of  their
tables  they  distribute  among  widows  and  the  aged,
their  neighbours  and  kindred  : — "  The  rich  have  their
consecrated  foundations,  charitable  endowments  and
rites  of  hospitality;  their  alms,  oblations,  manu-
missions, peace-offerings,  and  sacrifices.  How  shalt
thou  rise  to  this  pomp  of  fortune  who  canst  per-
form only  these  two  genuflexions,  and  them  after
manifold  difficulties  ?  " — Whether  it  respect  their
moral  dignity  or  religious  duty,  the  rich  are  at  ease
within  themselves ;  for  their  property  is  sanctified  by


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  261

giving  tithes,  and  their  apparel  hallowed  by  clean-
liness, their  reputations  unblemished,  and  minds
content.  The  intelligent  are  aware  that  the  zeal  of
devotion  is  warmed  by  good  fare,  and  the  sincerity
of  piety  rendered  more  serene  in  a  nicety  of  vesture  ;
for  it  is  evident  what  ardour  there  can  be  in  a
hungry  stomach  ;  what  generosity  in  squalid  penury ;
what  ability  of  travelling  with  a  bare  foot ;  and
what  alacrity  at  bestowing  from  an  empty  hand  : —
"  Uneasy  must  be  the  night-slumbers  of  him  whose
provision  for  to-morrow  is  not  forthcoming  :  the  ant
is  laying  by  a  store  in  summer  that  she  may  enjoy
an  abundance  in  winter." — It  is  clear  that  indigence
and  tranquillity  can  never  go  together,  nor  have
fruition  and  want  the  same  aspect :  the  one  had
composed  himself  for  prayer,  and  the  other  sat
anxious,  and  thinking  on  his  supper;  how  then  could
this  ever  come  in  competition  with  that  ? — "  The
lord  of  plenty  has  his  mind  fixed  on  God  ;  when  a
man's  fortune  is  bankrupt,  so  is  his  heart : " — accord-
ingly, the  devotion  of  the  rich  is  more  acceptable
at  the  temple  of  God,  because  their  thoughts  are
present  and  collected,  and  their  minds  not  absent
and  distracted;  for  they  have  laid  up  the  conveniences
of  good  living,  and  digested  at  their  leisure  their
scriptural  quotations  [for  prayer].  The  Arabs  say:
God  preserve  us  from  overwhelming  poverty ;  and  from
the  company  of  him  whom  he  loves  not,  namely,  tJie
infidel: — And  there  is  a  tradition  of  the  prophet, —
ftak  poverty  has  a  gloomy  aspect  in  this  world  and  in
the  next !


262  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

My  antagonist  said:  Have  you  not  heard  what
the  blessed  prophet  has  declared  ? — poverty  is  my
glory  ! — I  replied  :  Be  silent,  for  the  allusion  of  the
Lord  of  both  worlds  applies  to  such  as  are
heroes  in  the  field  of  resignation,  and  the  devoted
victims  of  their  fate,  and  not  to  those  who  put  on  the
garb  of  piety,  that  they  may  entitle  themselves  to  the
bread  of  charity. — "  O  noisy  drum  !  thou  art  nothing
but  an  empty  sound  ;  unprovided  with  the  means,
what  canst  thou  effect  on  the  last  day  of  account?
If  thou  art  a  man  of  spirit,  turn  thy  face  away  from
begging  charity  from  thy  fellow-creature ;  and  keep
not  repeating  thy  rosary  of  a  thousand  beads." —
Being  without  divine  knowledge,  a  darwesh,  or  poor
man,  rests  not  till  his  poverty  settles  into  infidelity;
for  he  that  is  poor  is  well-nigh  being  an  infidel : — nor
is  it  practicable,  unless  through  the  agency  of  wealth,
to  clothe  the  naked,  and  to  liberate  the  prisoner
from  jail :  how  then  can  such  mendicants  as  we  are
aspire  to  their  dignity ;  or  what  comparison  is  there
between  the  arm  of  the  lofty  and  the  hand  of  the
abject  ?  Do  you  not  perceive  that  the  glorious  and
great  God  announces,  in  the  holy  book  of  the  Koran,
xxviii.,  the  enjoyments  of  the  blessed  in  Paradise  ? —
that  to  this  community,  namely,  the  orthodox  Mussul-
mans, a  provision  is  allotted ; — in  order  that  you  may
understand  that  such  as  are  solely  occupied  in
looking  after  their  daily  subsistence  are  excluded
from  this  portion  of  the  blessed ;  and  that  the
property  of  present  enjoyment  is  sanctioned  under
the  seal  of  providence  : — "  to  the  thirsty  it  will  seem


SHAIKH  SAD 7.  263

in  their  dreams  as  if  the  face  of  the  earth  were
wholly  a  fountain." — You  may  everywhere  observe
that,  instigated  by  his  appetites,  a  person  who  has
suffered  hardship  and  tasted  bitterness  will  engage
in  dangerous  enterprises ;  and,  indifferent  to  the
consequences,  and  unawed  by  future  punishments,  he
will  not  discriminate  between  what  is  lawful  and  what
is  forbid : — "  Should  a  clod  of  earth  be  thrown  at  the
head  of  a  dog,  he  would  jump  up  in  joy,  and  take  it
for  a  bone  ;  or  were  two  people  carrying  a  corpse  on
a  bier,  a  greedy  man  would  fancy  it  a  tray  of
victuals." — Whereas  the  worldly  opulent  are  regarded
with  the  benevolent  eye  of  Providence,  and  in  their
enjoyments  of  what  is  lawful  are  preserved  from
things  illegal.  Having  thus  detailed  my  arguments
and  adduced  my  proofs,  I  rely  on  your  justice  for  an
equitable  decree ;  whether  you  ever  saw  a  felon  with
his  arms  pinioned  ;  a  bankrupt  immured  in  a  jail ;
the  veil  of  innocency  rent,  or  the  arm  mutilated  for
theft,  unless  in  consequence  of  poverty  :  for  lion-like
heroes,  instigated  by  want,  have  been  caught  under-
mining walls,  and  breaking  into  houses,  and  have  got
themselves  suspended  by  the  heels.  It  is  moreover
possible  that  a  poor  man,  urged  to  it  by  an  inordinate
appetite,  may  feel  desirous  of  gratifying  his  lust;  and,
unable  to  get  himself  a  woman,  he  may  fall  the  victim
of  some  accursed  sin  :  for  the  bally  and  privities  are
twin  brothers,  that  is,  two  children  of  the  same  birth  ;
and  whenever  that  is  pampered  with  food,  these  get
rampant :  as  I  have  heard  of  a  certain  darwesh
who  was  surprised  in  an  act  of  abomination ;  in


264  SHAIKH  SADI.

consequence  of  the  shame  that  he  was  put  to,  and  the
dread  of  being  stoned  to  death,  he  called  aloud  :  O
Mussulmans  !  I  have  no  money  to  buy  myself  a  wife,
nor  sufficient  forbearance  to  restrain  my  appetite ;
what  can  I  do,  for  the  monastic  celibacy  of  Christians  is
not  a  rite  oflslamism!  And  of  the  manifold  means  of
mental  tranquillity  and  corporeal  enjoyment  which  are
the  special  lots  of  the  opulent,  one  is  that  every  night
they  can  command  a  fresh  mistress,  and  every  day
possess  a  new  charmer,  such  as  must  excite  the  envy
of  the  glorious  dawn,  and  stick  the  foot  of  the  stately
cypress  in  the  mire  of  shame : — "  She  had  dipped  her
hands  in  the  blood  of  her  lovers,  and  tinged  the  tips
of  her  fingers  with  jejubs:" — so  that  it  were  impossible,
with  such  lovely  objects  before  their  eyes,  for  them  to
desire  what  is  forbidden  or  to  wish  to  commit  sin  : —
"  Why  should  such  a  heart  as  the  huries,  or  nymphs
of  Paradise,  have  captivated  and  plundered,  show  any
way  partial  to  the  idols  of  Yaghma "  [or  a  city  in
Turkistan  famous  for  its  beauties]  ? — "  He  who  has
in  both  his  hands  such  dates  as  he  can  relish,  will  not
think  of  throwing  stones  at  the  bunches  of  dates  on  their
trees"  In  common,  such  as  are  in  indigent  circum-
stances will  contaminate  the  skirt  of  innocency  with
sin  ;  and  such  as  are  suffering  from  hunger  will  steal
bread  : — "  When  a  ravenous  dog  has  found  a  piece  of
meat,  he  asks  not,  saying :  Is  this  the  flesh  of  the
prophet  Salah's  camel  or  Antichrist's  ass  ?  " — Many
are  the  chaste  who,  because  of  their  poverty,  have
fallen  into  the  sink  of  wickedness,  and  given  their  fair
reputations  to  the  blast  of  infamy  : — "  The  virtue


SHAIKH  SAD  I  265

of  temperance  remains  not  with  a  state  of  being
famished  ;  and  bankrupt  circumstances  will  snatch
the  rein  from  the  hand  of  abstemiousness."

The  moment  I  had  finished  this  speech,  the
danvesh,  my  antagonist,  let  the  rein  of  forbearance
drop  from  the  hand  of  moderation  ;  unsheathed  the
sabre  of  his  tongue ;  set  the  steed  of  eloquence  at
full  speed  over  the  plain  of  arrogance  ;  and,  galloping
up  to  me,  said  :  You  have  so  exaggerated  in  their
praise,  and  amplified  with  such  extravagance,  that
we  might  fancy  them  an  antidote  to  the  poison
of  poverty  and  a  key  to  the  store-house  of  Pro-
vidence ;  yet  they  are  a  proud,  self-conceited,  fasti-
dious, and  overbearing  set,  insatiate  after  wealth  and
property,  and  ambitious  of  rank  and  dignity ;  who
exchange  not  a  word  but  to  express  insolence,  or
deign  a  look  but  to  show  contempt  Men  of  science
they  call  beggars,  and  the  indigent  they  reproach  for
their  wretched  raggedness.  Proud  of  the  property
they  possess,  and  vain  of  the  rank  they  claim,  they
take  the  upper  hand  of  all,  and  deem  themselves
everybody's  superior.  Nor  do  they  ever  condescend
to  return  any  person's  salutation,  unmindful  of  the
maxim  of  the  wise  :  That  whoever  is  inferior  to  others
in  humility,  and  is  their  superior  in  opulence,  though
in  appearance  he  be  rich,  yet  in  reality  he  is  a
beggar : — "  If  a  worthless  fellow,  because  of  his
wealth,  treats  a  learned  man  with  insolence,  reckon
him  the  podex  of  an  ass,  although  he  be  the  amber-
grise  ox."

T  replied :  Do  not  calumniate  the  rich,  for  they  are


266  SHAIKH  SADI.

the  lords  of  munificence.  He  said :  You  mistake
them,  for  they  are  the  slaves  of  dinars  and  dirams,  or
their  gold  and  silver  coins.  For  example,  what  profits
it  though  they  be  the  clouds  of  the  spring,  if  they
may  not  send  us  rain  ;  or  the  fountain  of  the  sun,  and
shine  upon  no  one ;  or  though  they  be  mounted  on
the  steed  of  capability,  and  advance  not  towards  any-
body ?  They  will  not  move  a  step  for  the  sake  of
God,  nor  bestow  their  charity  without  laying  you
under  obligation  and  thanks.  They  hoard  their
money  with  solicitude,  watch  it  while  they  live  with
sordid  meanness,  and  leave  it  behind  them  with
deadening  regret,  verifying  the  saying  of  the  wise:
That  the  money  of  the  miser  is  coming  out  of  the
earth  when  he  is  himself  going  into  it : — "  One
man  hoards  a  treasure  with  pain  and  tribulation,
another  comes  and  spends  it  without  tribulation  or
pain."

I  replied  :  You  could  have  ascertained  the  parsi-
mony of  the  wealthy  only  through  the  medium  of
your  own  beggary ;  otherwise  to  him  who  lays
covetousness  aside  the  generous  man  and  miser  seem
all  one.  The  touchstone  can  prove  which  is  pure
gold,  and  the  beggar  can  say  which  is  the  niggard.
He  said :  I  speak  of  them  from  experience  ;  for  they
station  dependants  by  their  doors,  and  plant  surly
porters  at  their  gates,  to  deny  admittance  to  the
worthy,  and  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  the  collars  of
the  elect,  and  say :  There  is  nobody  at  home ;  and
verily  they  tell  what  is  true : — "  When  the  master
has  not  reason  or  judgment,  understanding  or


SHAIKH  SAD 7.  267

discernment,  the  porter  reported  right  of  him,  saying  :
There  is  nobody  in  the  house."

I  replied  :  They  are  excusable,  inasmuch  as  they
are  worried  out  of  their  lives  by  importunate
memorialists,  and  jaded  to  their  hearts  by  indigent
solicitors ;  and  it  might  be  reasonably  doubted
whether  it  would  satisfy  the  eye  of  the  covetous  if
the  sands  of  the  desert  could  be  turned  into  pearls :
— "The  eye  of  the  greedy  is  not  to  be  filled  with
worldly  riches,  any  more  than  a  well  can  be  replen-
ished from  the  dew  of  night." — And  had  Hatim  Tayi,
who  d  \velt  in  the  desert,  come  to  live  in  a  city,  he
would  have  been  overwhelmed  with  the  importunities
of  mendicants,  and  they  would  have  torn  the  clothes
from  his  back : — "  Look  not  towards  me,  lest  thou
should  draw  the  eyes  of  others,  for  at  the  mendi-
cant's hand  no  good  can  be  expected."

He  said  :  I  pity  their  condition.  I  replied  :  Not
so ;  but  you  envy  them  their  property.  We  were
thus  warm  in  argument,  and  both  of  us  close  engaged.
Whatever  chess  pawn  he  might  advance  I  would  set
one  in  opposition  to  it;  and  whenever  he  put  my
king  in  check,  I  would  relieve  him  with  my  queen;
till  he  had  exhausted  all  the  coin  in  the  purse  of  his
resolution,  and  expended  all  the  arrows  of  the  quiver
of  his  argument. — "  Take  heed  and  retreat  not  from
the  orator's  attack,  for  nothing  is  left  him  but
metaphor  and  hyperbole.  Wield  thy  polemics  and
law  citations,  for  the  wordy  rhetorician  makes  a  show
of  arms  over  his  gate,  but  has  not  a  soldier  within  his
fort :" — At  length,  having  no  syllogism  left,  I  made


268  SHAIKH  SADI.

him  crouch  in  mental  submission.  He  stretched  forth
the  arm  of  violence,  and  began  with  vain  abuse.  As
is  the  case  with  the  ignorant,  when  beaten  by  their
antagonist  in  fair  argument,  they  shake  the  chain  of
rancour ;  like  Azor,  the  idol-maker,  when  he  could  no
longer  contend  with  his  son  Abraham  in  words  he
fell  upon  him  with  blows,  as  God  has  said  in  the
Koran — If  thou  wilt  not  yield  this  point,  I  will  over-
w/telm  thee  ivith  stones: — He  gave  me  abuse,  and  I
retorted  upon  him  with  asperity ;  he  tore  my  collar,
and  I  plucked  his  beard  : — "  He  had  fallen  upon  me
and  I  upon  him,  and  a  crowd  had  gathered  round  us
enjoying  the  sport.  A  whole  world  gnawed  the
ringer  of  astonishment  when  it  heard  and  understood
what  had  taken  place  between  us."

In  short,  we  referred  our  dispute  to  the  cazi,  and
agreed  to  abide  by  his  equitable  decree  :  That  the
judge  of  the  Mussulmans,  or  faithful,  might  bring
about  a  peace,  and  discriminate  for  us  between  the
poor  and  rich.  After  having  noted  our  physiog-
nomies, and  listened  to  our  statements,  the  cazi  rested
his  chin  on  the  breast  of  deliberation  ;  and,  after  due
consideration,  raised  it,  and  said  :  Be  it  known  to  you,
who  were  lavish  in  your  praise  of  the  rich,  and  spoke
disparagingly  of  the  poor,  that  there  is  no  rose  with-
out its  thorn  ;  intoxication  from  wine  is  followed  by
a  qualm  ;  hidden  treasure  has  its  guardian  dragon  ;
where  the  imperial  pearl  is  found,  there  swims  the
man-devouring  shark ;  the  honey  of  worldly  enjoy-
ment has  the  sting  of  death  in  its  rear;  and  between
us  and  the  felicity  of  paradise  stands  a  frightful


SHAIKH  SADL  269

demon,  namely,  Satan. — "So  long  as  the  charmer
slew  not  her  admirer,  what  could  the  rival's  malice
avail  him  ?  The  rose  and  thorn,  the  treasure  and
dragon,  joy  and  sorrow,  all  mingle  into  one." — Do
you  not  observe  that  in  the  garden  there  are  the
sweet-scented  willows  and  the  withered  trunks  ;  so
among  the  classes  of  the  rich  some  are  grateful  and
some  thankless ;  and  among  the  orders  of  the  poor
some  are  resigned  and  some  impatient : — "  Were
every  drop  of  dew  to  turn  into  a  pearl,  in  the  market
pearls  would  be  as  common  as  shells."  Near  by  the
throne  of  a  great  and  glorious  Judge  are  the  rich
meek  in  spirit,  and  the  poor  rich  in  resolution.  And
the  chief  of  the  opulent  is  he  who  sympathises  with
the  sorrows  of  the  indigent ;  and  the  most  virtuous  of
the  indigent  is  he  who  covets  not  the  society  of  the
opulent : — God  is  all-sufficient  for  him  who  trusts  in
God.

Then  the  cazi  turned  the  face  of  animadversion
from  me  towards  the  darwesh,  and  said  :  O  you  who
have  charged  the  rich  with  being  active  in  sin,  and
intoxicated  with  things  forbidden,  verily  there  is
such  a  tribe  as  you  have  described  them,  illiberal  in
their  bigotry,  and  stingy  of  God's  bounty  ;  who  are
collecting  and  hoarding  money,  but  will  neither  use
nor  bestow  it.  If,  for  example,  there  was  a  drought,
or  if  the  whole  earth  was  deluged  with  a  flood,
confident  of  their  own  abundance,  they  would  not
inquire  after  the  poor  man's  distress,  and,  fearless  of
the  divine  wrath,  exclaim  : — "  If,  in  his  want  of  every-
thing, another  person  be  annihilated,  I  have  plenty ;


270  SHAIKH  SADL

and  what  does  a  goose  care  for  a  deluge  ?  Such  as  are
lolling  in  their  litters,  and  indulging  in  the  easy  pace  of
a  female  camel,  feel  not  for  the  foot-traveller  perish-
ing amidst  overwhelming  sands : — The  mean-spirited,
when  they  could  escape  with  their  own  rugs,  would
cry  :  What  care  we  should  the  whole  world  die."

Such  as  you  have  stated  them,  there  is  a  tribe
of  rich  men  ;  but  there  is  another  class,  who,  having
spread  the  table  of  abundance,  and  made  a  public
declaration  of  their  munificence,  and  smoothed  the
brow  of  their  humility,  are  solicitous  of  a  reputation
and  forgiveness,  and  desirous  of  enjoying  this  world
and  the  next ;  like  unto  the  servants  of  his  majesty
the  sovereign  of  the  universe,  just,  confirmed,  vic-
torious, lord  paramount  and  conqueror  of  nations,
defender  of  the  stronghold  of  Islamism,  successor  of
Solomon,  most  equitable  of  contemporary  kings,
Mozuffar-ud-din  Atabak-Abubakr-Saad,  may  God
give  him  a  long  life,  and  grant  victory  to  his
standards ! — "  A  father  could  never  show  such
benevolence  to  his  son  as  thy  liberal  hand  has
bestowed  upon  the  race  of  Adam.  The  Deity  was
desirous  of  conferring  a  kindness  upon  man,  and  in
his  special  mercy  made  thee  sovereign  of  the  world."

Now  that  the  cazi  had  carried  his  harangue  to  this
extreme,  and  had  galloped  the  steed  of  metaphor
beyond  our  expectation,  we  of  necessity  acquiesced
in  the  absolute  decree  of  being  satisfied,  and
apologised  for  what  had  passed  between  us ;  and
after  altercation  we  returned  into  the  path  of
reconciliation,  laid  the  heads  of  reparation  at  each


SHAIKH  SADL  271

other's  feet,  mutually  kissed  and  embraced,  and,  let-
ting mischief  fall  asleep,  and  war  lull  itself  into  peace,
concluded  the  whole  in  these  two  verses  : — "  O  poor
man !  complain  not  of  the  revolutions  of  fortune,  for
gloomy  might  be  thy  lot  wert  thou  to  die  in  such
sentiments.  And  now,  O  rich  man  !  that  thy  hand
and  heart  administer  to  thy  pleasures,  spend  and  give
away,  that  thou  mayst  enjoy  this  world  and  the
next"


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  SOCIETY.

L

RICHES  are  intended  for  the  comfort  of  life,  and  not
life  for  the  purpose  of  hoarding  riches.  I  asked  a
wise  man,  saying :  Who  is  the  fortunate  man,  and
who  is  the  unfortunate  ?  He  said :  That  man  was
fortunate  who  spent  and  gave  away,  and  that  man  un-
fortunate who  died  and  left  behind : — "Pray  not  for  that
good-for-nothing  man  who  did  nothing,  for  he  passed
his  life  in  hoarding  riches,  and  did  not  spend  them."

II.

The  prophet  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  admonished
Carum,  saying:  Be  bounteous  in  like  manner  as  God
has  been  bounteous  to  tliee: — but  he  listened  not,  and  you
have  heard  the  end  of  him. — "  Whoever  did  not  an  act
of  charity  with  his  silver  and  gold,  sacrificed  his  future
prospects  on  his  hoard  of  gold  and  silver.  If  desirous
that  thou  shouldst  benefit  by  the  wealth  of  this  world,
be  generous  with  thy  fellow-creature,  as  God  has  been
generous  with  thee."

The  Arabs  say  : — Show  thy  generosity,  but  make  it


SHAIKH  SAD  I  273

not  obligatory,  that  the  benefit  of  it  may  redound  to
thee : — that  is,  bestow  and  make  presents,  but  do
not  exact  an  obligation  that  the  profit  of  that  act
may  be  returned  to  you. — "  Wherever  the  tree  of
generosity  strikes  root  it  sends  forth  its  boughs,  and
they  shoot  above  the  skies.  If  thou  cherishest  a  hope
of  enjoying  its  fruit,  by  gratitude  I  entreat  of  thee
not  to  lay  a  saw  upon  its  trunk." — "  Render  thanks  to
God,  that  thou  wert  found  worthy  of  his  divine  grace,
that  he  has  not  excluded  thee  from  the  riches  of  his
bounty.  Esteem  it  no  obligation  that  thou  art
serving  the  king,  but  show  thy  gratitude  to  him,
namely  God,  who  has  placed  thee  in  this  service."

III.

Two  persons  laboured  to  a  vain,  and  studied  to  an
unprofitable  end  :  he  who  hoarded  wealth  and  did  not
spend  it,  and  he  who  acquired  science  and  did  not
practise  it : — "  However  much  thou  art  read  in  theory,
if  thou  hast  no  practice  thou  art  ignorant.  He  is
neither  a  sage  philosopher  nor  an  acute  divine,  but  a
beast  of  burthen  with  a  load  of  books.  How  can  that
brainless  head  know  or  comprehend  whether  he  carries
on  his  back  a  library  or  bundle  of  fagots  ?  "

IV.     -

Learning  is  intended  to  fortify  religious  practice,
and  not  to  gratify  worldly  traffic : — Whoever  prosti-
tuted his  temperance,  piety,  and  science,  gathered  his
harvest  into  a  heap  and  set  fire  to  it"

760


274  SHAIKH  SAD  I.


V.

An  intemperate  man  of  learning  is  like  a  blind
link-boy : — He  shows  the  road  to  others,  but  sees  it  not
himself : — "  whoever  ventured  his  life  on  an  unpro-
ductive hazard  gained  nothing  by  the  risk,  and  lost
his  own  stake."

VI.

A  kingdom  is  embellished  by  the  wise,  and
religion  rendered  illustrious  by  the  pious.  Kings
stand  more  in  need  of  the  company  of  the  intelligent
than  the  intelligent  do  of  the  society  of  kings  : —
"If,  O  king !  thou  wilt  listen  to  my  advice,  in  all
thy  archives  thou  canst  not  find  a  wiser  maxim
than  this  :  entrust  thy  concerns  only  to  the  learned,
notwithstanding  business  is  not  a  learned  man's
concern."

VII.

Three  things  have  no  durability  without  their
concomitants :  property  without  trade,  knowledge
without  debate,  or  a  sovereignty  without  government.

VIII.

To  compassionate  the  wicked  is  to  tyrannise  over
the  good  ;  and  to  pardon  the  oppressor  is  to  deal
harshly  with  the  oppressed: — "  When  thou  patronisest
and  succourest  the  base-born  man,  he  looks  to  be
made  the  partner  of  thy  fortune."


SHAIKH  SADL  275


IX.

No  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  friendship  of
kings,  nor  vain  hope  put  in  the  melodious  voice  of
boys ;  for  that  passes  away  like  a  vision,  and  this
vanishes  like  a  dream  : — "  Bestow  not  thy  affections
upon  a  mistress  who  has  a  thousand  lovers ;  or,  if
thou  bestowest  them  upon  her,  be  prepared  for  a
separation."

x.

Reveal  not  every  secret  you  have  to  a  friend,  for
how  can  you  tell  but  that  friend  may  hereafter
become  an  enemy.  And  bring  not  all  the  mischief
you  are  able  to  do  upon  an  enemy,  for  he  may  one
day  become  your  friend.  And  any  private  affair  that
you  wish  to  keep  secret,  do  not  divulge  to  anybody;
for,  though  such  a  person  has  your  confidence,  none
can  be  so  true  to  your  secret  as  yourself: — "  Silence  is
safer  than  to  communicate  the  thought  of  thy  mind
to  anybody,  and  to  warn  him,  saying :  Do  not  divulge
it,  O  silly  man !  confine  the  water  at  the  dam-head,
for  once  it  has  a  vent  thou  canst  not  stop  it.  Thou
shouldst  not  utter  a  word  in  secret  which  thou
wouldst  not  have  spoken  in  the  face  of  the  public."

XI.

A  reduced  foe,  who  offers  his  submission  and  courts
your  amity,  can  only  have  in  view  to  become  a  strong


276  SHAIKH  SADL

enemy,  as  they  have  said :  You  cannot  trust  the
sincerity  of  friends,  then  what  are  you  to  expect  from
the  cajoling  of  foes  ?  Whoever  despises  a  weak
enemy  resembles  him  who  neglects  a  spark  of  fire :
— "  To-day  that  thou  canst  quench  it,  put  it  out ;
for  let  fire  rise  into  a  flame,  and  it  may  consume  a
whole  world.  Now  that  thou  canst  transfix  him  with
thy  arrow,  permit  not  thy  antagonist  to  string  his
bow."

XII.

Let  your  verbal  intercourse  between  two  rivals  be
such  that  if  they  should  hereafter  compromise  their
difference,  you  may  not  be  put  to  shame  : — "  Between
two  persons  dissension  rages  like  a  fire,  and  the
ill-conditioned  tell-tale  is  the  bearer  of  its  fuel.  This
and  that  are  again  of  the  same  way  of  thinking,  and
the  luckless  go-between  stands  the  object  of  both
their  execration.  It  is  not  prudent  to  kindle  a  fire
between  two  people,  and  to  thrust  thyself  into  the
midst  of  its  flames." — "  Speak  in  an  under-voice  with
thy  friends,  lest  thy  bloodthirsty  foe  may  overhear
what  thou  mayst  say.  Be  cautious  in  what  thou
utterest  before  a  wall,  lest  an  ear  be  listening  behind
the  wall."

XIII.

Whoever  is  making  a  league  with  their  enemies  has
it  in  his  mind  to  do  his  friends  an  ill  turn  : — "  O  wise
man !  wash  thy  hands  of  that  friend  who  is  in  con-
federacy with  thy  foes."


SHAIKH  SADL  277


XIV.

When  irresolute  in  the  despatch  of  business,  incline
to  that  side  which  is  the  least  offensive  : — "  Answer  not
with  harshness  a  mild-spoken  man,  nor  force  him  into
war  who  knocks  at  the  gate  of  peace."

XV.

So  long  as  money  can  answer,  it  were  wrong  in  any
business  to  put  the  life  in  danger: — as  the  Arabs
say  : — let  the  sword  decide  after  stratagem  has  failed:
— "When  the  hand  is  balked  in  every  crafty  en-
deavour, it  is  lawful  to  lay  it  upon  the  hilt  of  the
sabre."

XVI.

Show  no  mercy  to  a  subdued  foe,  for  if  he  recover
himself  he  will  show  you  no  mercy  : — "  When  thou
seest  thy  antagonist  in  a  reduced  state,  curl  not  thy
whiskers  at  him  in  contempt,  for  in  every  bone  there
is  marrow,  and  within  every  jacket  there  is  a  man."

XVII.

Whoever  puts  a  wicked  man  to  death  delivers
mankind  from  his  mischief,  and  the  wretch  himself
from  God's  vengeance  : — "  Beneficence  is  praise-
worthy; yet  thou  shouldst  not  administer  a  balsam
to  the  wound  of  the  wicked.  Knew  he  not  who  took
compassion  on  a  snake,  that  it  is  the  pest  of  the  sons
of  Adam."


278  SHAIKH  SADL

XVIII.

It  is  wrong  to  follow  the  advice  of  an  adversary;
nevertheless  it  is  right  to  hear  it,  that  you  may  do  the
contrary ;  and  this  is  the  essence  of  good  policy : —
"  Sedulously  shun  whatever  thy  foe  may  recommend,
otherwise  thou  mayst  wring  the  hands  of  repentance
on  thy  knees.  Should  he  show  thee  to  the  right  a
path  straight  as  an  arrow,  turn  aside  from  that,  and
take  the  path  to  the  left."

XIX.

Excessive  anger  deters  people  from  coming  near
you,  and  ill-timed  lenity  weakens  your  authority.  Be
not  so  severe  as  to  cause  shyness,  nor  so  clement  as  to
encourage  boldness : — "  If  thou  art  harsh,  they  will
fight  shy  of  thee  ;  if  lenient,  the  foe  will  be  audacious
and  forward.  It  is  best  to  temper  severity  with  mild-
ness, like  the  surgeon  who  scarifies  a  sore,  and  then
applies  a  balsam.  A  wise  man  will  not  exceed  in
austerity,  nor  permit  his  clemency  to  lessen  his  dignity;
he  will  not  overrate  himself  by  over-much  loftiness,
nor  lower  himself  by  abject  meanness." — "A  shepherd
addressed  his  father, saying :  O  wise  man!  teach  me  a
sage  maxim.  He  replied  :  Be  so  far  benevolent  as
not  to  allow  the  sharp-fanged  wolf  to  get  insolent"

XX.

Two  orders  of  mankind  are  the  enemies  of  church
and  state ;  the  king  without  clemency,  and  the  holy


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  279

man  without  learning : — "  Let  not  that  prince  have
rule  over  the  state  who  is  not  himself  obedient  to  the
will  of  God."


XXI.


It  behoves  a  king  so  to  regulate  his  anger  towards
his  enemies  as  not  to  alarm  the  confidence  of  his
friends  ;  for  the  fire  of  passion  falls  first  on  the  angry
man  ;  afterwards  its  sparks  will  dart  forth  towards
the  foe,  and  him  they  may  reach,  or  they  may  not. —
"  It  ill  becomes  the  children  of  Adam,  formed  of  dust,
to  harbour  in  their  heads  such  pride,  arrogance,  and
passion.  I  cannot  fancy  all  this  thy  warmth  and
obstinacy  to  be  created  from  earth,  but  from  fire. — I
went  to  a  holy  man  in  the  land  of  Bailcan,  and  said :
Cleanse  me  of  ignorance  by  thy  instruction  ?  He
replied  :  O  fakih,  or  theologician  !  go  and  bear  things
patiently  like  the  earth;  or  whatever  thou  hast  read
let  it  all  be  buried  under  the  earth."


XXII.

An  evil-disposed  man  is  a  captive  in  the  hands  of
an  enemy  [namely,  himself]  ;  for  wherever  he  may  go
he  cannot  escape  from  the  grasp  of  that  enemy's
vengeance  : — "  Let  a  wicked  man  ascend  up  to  heaven,
that  he  may  escape  from  the  grasp  of  calamity ;  even
thither  would  the  hand  of  his  own  evil  heart  follow
him  with  misfortune."


2  So  SHAIKH  SAD  I.


XXIII.

When  you  see  discord  raging  among  the  troops  of
your  enemy,  be  on  your  side  quiet ;  but  if  you  see
them  united,  think  of  your  own  dispersed  state : —
"  When  thou  beholdest  war  among  thy  foes,  go  and
enjoy  peace  with  thy  friends  ;  but  if  thou  findest  them
of  one  soul  and  mind,  string  thy  bow,  and  range
stones  around  thy  battlements."

XXIV.

A  foe  will  shake  the  chain  of  peace  when  he  has
failed  in  all  his  stratagems.  Then  he  attempts  to
effect  by  amity  what  he  cannot  compass  as  an  open
adversary.

XXV.

Bruise  the  serpent's  head  with  the  hand  of  an
antagonist,  that  of  two  things  you  may  make  sure  of
one  ;  for  if  the  adversary  succeed,  you  kill  the  reptile  ;
and  if  this  prevail,  you  get  rid  of  a  rival. — "  Make  not
sure  of  a  weak  enemy  on  the  day  of  battle  ;  for,  on
finding  himself  desperate,  he  will  tear  out  the  brain  of
a  lion."

XXVI.

Keep  to  yourself  any  intelligence  that  may  prove
unpleasant,  till  some  person  else  has  disclosed  it. —
"  Bring,  O  nightingale  !  the  glad  tidings  of  the  spring,
and  leave  to  the  owl  to  be  the  harbinger  of  evil."


SHAIKH  SADL  281

XXVII.

Do  not  inform  the  king  of  a  person's  treachery  till
fully  informed  of  it  yourself ;  otherwise  you  may  labour
to  your  own  disgrace. — "  Open  thy  exordium  and  lay
thy  accusation  when  satisfied  thy  proofs  must  carry
conviction."

XXVIII.

Whoever  is  counselling  a  self-sufficient  man  stands
himself  in  need  of  a  counsellor.

XXIX.

Swallow  not  the  wheedling  of  a  rival,  nor  pay  for
the  sycophancy  of  a  parasite ;  for  that  has  laid  the
snare  of  treachery,  and  this  whetted  the  palate  of
gluttony. — The  fool  is  puffed  up  with  his  own  praise,
like  a  dead  body,  which  on  being  stretched  upon  a
bier  shows  a  momentary  corpulency  : — "  Take  heed
and  listen  not  to  the  sycophant's  blandishments,  who
expects  in  return  some  small  compensation ;  for
shouldst  thou  any  day  disappoint  his  object  he  would
in  like  style  sum  up  two  hundred  of  thy  defects."

XXX.

Till  some  person  may  show  its  defects,  the  speech
of  the  orator  will  fail  of  correctness  : — "  Be  not  vain
of  the  eloquence  of  thy  discourse  because  it  has  the
fool's  good  opinion,  and  thine  own  approbation."


282  SHAIKH  SADI.


XXXI.

Every  person  thinks  his  own  intellect  perfect,  and
his  own  child  handsome  : — "A  Mussulman  and  a  Jew
were  warm  in  argument  to  such  a  degree  that  I
smiled  at  their  subject.  The  Mussulman  said  in
wrath:  If  this  deed  of  conveyance  be  not  authentic
may  I,  O  God,  die  a  Jew !  The  Jew  replied  :  On  the
Pentateuch  I  swear,  if  what  I  say  be 'false,  I  am  a
Mussulman  like  you !  Were  intellect  to  be  annihi-
lated from  the  face  of  the  earth,  nobody  could  be
brought  to  say  :  I  am  ignorant."


XXXII.

Ten  people  will  partake  of  the  same  joint  of  meat,
and  two  dogs  will  snarl  over  a  whole  carcase.  The
greedy  man  is  incontinent  with  a  whole  world  set
before  him  ;  the  temperate  man  is  content  with  his
crust  of  bread  : — "  A  loaf  of  brown  bread  may  fill  an
empty  stomach,  but  the  produce  of  the  whole  globe
cannot  satisfy  a  greedy  eye  :" — "  My  father,  when  the
sun  of  his  life  was  going  down,  gave  me  this  sage
advice,  and  it  set  for  good,  saying :  Lust  is  a  fire ;
refrain  from  indulging  it,  and  do  not  involve  thyself  in
the  flames  of  hell.  Since  thou  hast  not  the  strength
of  burning  in  those  flames  [as  a  punishment  in  the
next  world],  pour  in  this  world  the  water  of  continence
upon  this  fire — namely,  lust."


SHAIKH  SADL  283

XXXIII.

Whoever  does  not  do  good,  when  he  has  the  means
of  doing  it,  will  suffer  hardship  when  he  has  not  the
means  : — "  None  is  more  unlucky  than  the  misan-
thrope, for  on  the  day  of  adversity  he  has  not  a  single
friend."

XXXIV.

Life  stands  on  the  verge  of  a  single  breath ;  and
this  world  is  an  existence  between  two  nonentities.
Such  as  truck  their  deen,  or  religious  practice,  for
worldly  pelf  are  asses.  They  sold  Joseph,  and  what
got  they  by  their  bargain  ? — Did  I  not  covenant  with
you,  O  ye  sons  of  Adam,  that  you  should  not  serve
Satan;  for  verily  lie  is  your  avowed  enemy: — "  By  the
advice  of  a  foe  you  broke  your  faith  with  a  friend  ;
behold  from  whom  you  separated,  and  with  whom  you
united  yourselves."

XXXV.

Satan  does  not  prevail  over  the  elect ;  nor  does  the
king  over  the  poor  and  bankrupt : — "  Trust  not  him
who  neglects  his  prayers  to  God,  though  his  mouth
may  verily  gape  wide  from  hunger ;  for  whoever
discharges  not  his  duty  to  the  Deity  will  equally
neglect  his  debt  to  thee."

XXXVL

Whatever  is  produced  in  haste  goes  hastily  to
waste  : — "  I  have  heard  that,  after  a  process  of  forty


234  SHAIKH  SADL

years,  they  convert  the  clay  of  the  East  into  a  China
porcelain  cup.  At  Baghdad  they  can  make  an
hundred  cups  in  a  day,  and  thou  mayst  of  course
conceive  their  respective  value." — "A  chicken  walks
forth  from  its  shell,  and  goes  in  quest  of  its  food  ;
the  young  of  man  possesses  not  that  instinct  of
prudence  and  discrimination.  That  which  was  at
once  something  comes  to  nothing  ;  and  this  surpasses
all  creatures  in  dignity  and  wisdom.  A  piece  of
crystal  or  glass  is  found  everywhere,  and  held  of  no
value ;  a  ruby  is  obtained  with  difficulty,  and  there-
fore inestimable."

XXXVII.

Patience  accomplishes  its  object,  while  hurry  speeds
to  its  ruin  : — "  With  my  own  eyes  I  saw  in  the  desert
that  the  deliberate  man  outstript  him  that  had  hurried
on.  The  wind-footed  steed  is  broken  down  in  his
speed,  whilst  the  camel-driver  jogs  on  with  his  beast
to  the  end  of  his  journey."

XXXVIII.

Nothing  is  so  good  for  an  ignorant  man  as  silence,
and  if  he  knew  this  he  would  no  longer  be  ignorant :
— "When  unadorned  with  the  grace  of  eloquence  it  is
wise  to  keep  watch  over  the  tongue  in  the  mouth.
The  tongue,  by  abu.-e,  renders  a  man  contemptible ;
levity  in  a  nut  is  a  sign  of  its  being  empty. — A  fool
was  undertaking  the  instruction  of  an  ass,  and  had


SHA1KPI SADI.  285

devoted  his  whole  time  to  this  occupation.  A  wise
man  said  to  him  :  What  art  thou  endeavouring  to  do?
In  this  vain  attempt  dread  the  reproof  of  the  censori-
ous !  A  brute  can  never  learn  speech  from  thee  ;  do
thou  learn  silence  from  him  : — That  man  who  reflects
not  before  he  speaks  will  only  make  all  the  more
improper  answer.  Either  like  a  man  arrange  thy
speech  with  judgment,  or  like  a  brute  sit  silent."

XXXIX.

Whoever  shall  argue  with  one  more  learned  than
himself  that  others  may  take  him  for  a  wise  man,
only  confirms  them  in  his  being  a  fool  : — "  When  a
person  superior  to  what  thou  art  engages  thee  in
conversation  do  not  contradict  him,  though  thou
mayst  know  better."

XL.

He  can  see  no  good  who  will  associate  with  the
wicked  : — "  Were  an  angel  from  heaven  to  associate
with  a  demon,  he  would  learn  his  brutality,  perfidy,
and  hypocrisy.  Virtue  thou  never  canst  learn  of
the  vicious ;  it  is  not  the  wolfs  occupation  to  mend
skins  "  [but  to  tear  them].

XLI.

Expose  not  the  secret  failings  of  mankind,  other-
wise you  must  verily  bring  scandal  upon  them  and
distrust  upon  yourself.


286  SHAIKH  SADI.

XLIL

Whoever  acquires  knowledge  and  does  not  practise
it  resembles  him  who  ploughs  his  land  and  leaves  it
unsown.

XLIIL

Expect  no  religious  zeal  from  the  heartless,  nor
profit  from  a  nut-shell  without  a  kernel.

XLIV.

It  is  not  every  man  that  is  apt  at  argument  that
is  expert  in  business : — "  Many  is  the  gracious  form
that  is  covered  with  a  veil ;  but  on  withdrawing  this
thou  discoverest  a  grandmother."

XLV.

Were  every  night  a  night  of  might,  or  the  four-
teenth night  of  the  Mohammedan  month  Ramazan,
then  would  the  night  of  might  become  of  little
might : — "  Were  every  pebble  a  ruby  of  Badakhstan,
pebbles  and  rubies  would  get  of  the  same  value."

XLVI.

It  is  not  every  man  that  has  a  handsome  physical
exterior  that  has  a  good  moral  character ;  for  the
faculty  of  business  or  virtue  resides  in  the  heart  and
not  in  the  skin. — "  Thou  canst  in  one  day  ascertain
the  intellectual  faculties  of  a  man,  and  what  pro-
ficiency he  has  made  in  his  degrees  of  knowledge ;


SHAIKH  SADI.  287

but  be  not  secure  of  his  mind,  nor  foolishly  sure,
for  it  may  take  years  to  detect  the  innate  baseness
of  the  heart."

XLVII.

Whoever  contends  with  the  great  sheds  his  own
blood  : — "  Thou  contemplatest  thyself  as  a  mighty
great  man  ;  and  they  have  truly  remarked  that  the
squinter  sees  double.  Thou,  who  canst  in  play  butt
with  a  ram,  must  soon  find  thyself  with  a  broken
pate."

XLVIII.

To  grapple  with  a  lion,  or  to  box  against  a  naked
scimitar,  are  not  the  acts  of  the  prudent: — "Brave
not  the  furious  with  war  and  opposition  before
their  arms  of  strength  cross  thy  hands  of  submission."

XLIX.

A  weak  man,  who  tries  his  courage  against  the
strong,  leagues  with  the  foe  to  his  own  destruction :
— "  Nurtured  in  a  shade,  what  strength  can  he
have  that  he  should  engage  with  the  warlike  in
battle ;  impotent  of  arm,  he  was  falling  the  victim
of  folly  when  he  set  his  wrist  in  opposition  to  a
wrist  of  iron."

L.

Whoever  will  not  listen  to  admonition  harbours
the  fancy  of  hearing  reprehension  : — "  When  advice
gains  not  an  admission  into  the  ear,  if  I  give  thee
reproof,  hear  it  in  silence."


288  SHAIKH  SADL

LI.

The  idle  cannot  endure  the  industrious  any  more
than  the  curs  of  the  market-place,  who,  on  meeting
dogs  employed  for  sporting,  will  snarl  at  and  prevent
them  passing.

LII.

A  mean  wretch,  that  cannot  vie  with  another  in
virtue,  will  assail  him  with  malignity  : — "  The  narrow-
minded  envier  will  somehow  manage  to  revile  thee,
who  in  thy  presence  might  have  the  tongue  of  his
utterance  struck  dumb."

LIU.

Were  it  not  from  the  cravings  of  the  belly,  not  a
bird  would  fall  into  the  snare ;  nay,  the  fowler  would
find  it  of  no  use  to  spread  his  net. — "  The  belly  forges
manacles  for  the  wrists,  and  fetters  for  the  legs  ;  the
slave  of  the  belly  neglects  his  worship  of  the  Deity."

LIV.

Philosophers  eat  their  meals  after  long  intervals ;
abids,  or  monks,  take  half  a  bellyful ;  zahids,  or
hermits,  what  is  sufficient  to  sustain  life ;  young
men,  all  that  is  in  the  dish ;  the  old  eat  till  they
sweat  again  ;  but  kalandars  gorge  to  such  a  degree
as  not  to  leave  inside  of  them  room  enough  to  breathe,
or  on  the  dish  what  might  satisfy  a  fly  : — "  For  two
nights  the  glutton  cannot  sleep  for  thinking,  first  on
an  empty,  and  next  on  a  sated  stomach."


SHAIKH  SADL  289

LV.

To  hold  counsel  with  women  is  bad,  and  to  deal
generously  with  prodigals  a  fault : — "  Showing  mercy
upon  the  sharp-fanged  pard  must  prove  an  injustice
to  the  harmless  sheep."

LVI.

Whoever  has  his  foe  at  his  mercy,  and  does  not
kill  him,  is  his  own  enemy : — "  With  a  stone  in  his
hand,  and  the  snake's  head  convenient,  a  wise  man
hesitates  not  in  crushing  it"

Certain  people  have  seen  this  maxim  in  an  opposite
point  of  view,  saying :  It  were  wiser  to  delay  the
execution  of  captives,  inasmuch  as  the  option  is  left
so  that  you  can  slay,  or  you  can  release  them  ;  but
if  you  shall  have  heedlessly  put  them  to  death,  the
policy  is  defunct,  for  the  opportunity  of  repairing  it
is  lost : — "  There  is  no  great  difficulty  to  separate
the  soul  from  the  body,  but  it  is  not  so  easy  to
restore  life  to  the  dead  :  prudence  dictates  patience
in  giving  the  arrow  flight,  for  let  it  quit  the  bow  and
it  never  can  be  recalled."

LVII.

A  learned  man  who  has  got  into  an  argument  with
the  ignorant  can  have  no  hopes  of  supporting  his
own  dignity ;  and  if  an  ignoramus  by  his  loquacity
gets  the  upper  hand  it  should  not  surprise  us,  for  he
is  a  stone  and  can  bruise  a  gem  : — "  No  wonder  if

761


29o  SHAIKH  SADL

his  spirit  flag ;  the  nightingale  is  cooped  up  in  the
same  cage  with  the  crow : — If  the  man  of  sense  is
coarsely  treated  by  the  vulgar,  let  it  not  excite  our
wrath  and  indignation  ;  if  a  piece  of  worthless  stone
can  bruise  a  cup  of  gold,  its  worth  is  not  increased,
nor  that  of  the  gold  diminished."

LVIIL

No  wonder  that  a  wise  man  is  not  listened  to  in
a  company  of  low  people,  for  the  sound  of  the  barbut
is  lost  amidst  the  rattling  of  the  great  drum,  and  the
odour  of  ambergris  overcome  by  the  fcetor  of  garlic : —
"The  loud  bawling  of  the  ignorant  reared  its  crest,
because  it  was  brow-beating  the  learned  by  its
effrontery  :  art  thou  not  aware  that  the  musical  mode
of  Hijaz  is  confounded  by  the  noise  of  the  warlike
drum  ?  "

Lix.

Let  a  gem  fall  into  the  mire,  and  it  remains  the
same  precious  stone  it  was ;  and  let  dust  be  whirled
up  to  heaven,  and  it  retains  its  base  origin.

LX.

Genius  without  education  is  the  subject  of  our
regret,  and  education  without  genius  is  labour  lost.
Although  embers  have  a  lofty  origin  (fire  being  of  a
noble  nature),  yet,  as  having  no  intrinsic  worth,  they
fall  upon  a  level  with  common  dust ;  on  the  other


SHAIKH  SADL  291

hand,  sugar  does  not  derive  its  value  from  the  cane,
but  from  its  own  innate  quality  : — "  Inasmuch  as  the
disposition  of  Canaan  was  bad,  his  descent  from  the
prophet  Noah  stood  him  in  no  stead.  Pride  thyself
on  what  virtue  thou  hast,  and  not  on  thy  parentage ;
the  rose  springs  from  a  thorn-bush,  and  Abraham
from  Azor  "  [either  his  father's  name,  or  fire].

LXL

That  is  musk  which  discloses  itself  by  its  smell,
and  not  what  the  perfumers  impose  upon  us  : — "  If  a
man  be  expert  in  any  art  he  needs  not  tell  it,  for  his
own  skill  will  show  it"

LXIL

A  wise  man  is,  like  a  vase  in  a  druggist's  shop,
silent,  but  full  of  virtues ;  and  the  ignorant  man
resembles  the  drum  of  the  warrior,  being  full  of
noise,  and  an  empty  babbler  : — "  The  sincerely  devout
have  remarked  that  a  learned  man,  beset  by  the
illiterate,  is  like  one  of  the  lovely  in  a  circle  of  the
blind,  or  the  holy  Koran  in  the  dwelling  of  the
infidel."

LXIII.

A  friend  whom  they  take  an  age  to  conciliate,
it  were  wrong  all  at  once  to  alienate : — "  In  a  series
of  years  a  stone  changes  into  a  ruby ;  take  heed,
and  destroy  it  not  at  once  by  dashing  it  against
another  stone."


292  SHAIKH  SADI.

LXIV.

Reason  is  in  like  manner  enthralled  by  passion,
as  an  uxorious  man  is  in  the  hands  of  an  artful
woman. — "Thou  mayst  shut  the  door  of  joy  upon
that  dwelling  where  thou  nearest  resounding  the
scolding  voice  of  a  woman."

LXV.

Intellect,  without  firmness,  is  craft  and  chicanery;
and  firmness,  without  intellect,  perverseness  and
obstinacy : — "  First,  prudence,  good  sense,  and  dis-
crimination, and  then  dominion;  for  the  dominion
and  good  fortune  of  the  ignorant  are  the  armour  of
rebellion  against  God."

LXVI.

The  sinner  who  spends  and  gives  away  is  better
than  the  devotee  who  begs  and  lays  by.

LXVII,

Whoever  foregoes  carnal  indulgence  in  order  to  get
the  good  opinion  of  mankind,  has  forsaken  a  lawful
passion  and  involved  himself  in  what  is  forbidden  : —
"  What,  wretched  creature !  can  that  hermit  see  in  his
own  tarnished  mirror,  or  heart,  who  retires  to  a  cell,
but  not  for  the  sake  of  God  ?  "


SHAIKH  SADI.  293

LXVIII.

Little  upon  little  makes  a  muckle,  and  drop  upon
drop  gathers  into  a  torrent : — "  A  little  and  a  little
becomes  a  great  deal,  and  grain  upon  grain  a  barnful
of  corn."

LXIX.

A  wise  man  should  not  through  clemency  overlook
the  insolence  of  the  vulgar,  otherwise  both  sustain  a
loss,  for  their  respect  for  him  is  lessened  and  their
own  brutality  confirmed: — "When  thou  addressest
the  low  with  urbanity  and  kindness,  it  only  adds  to
their  pride  and  arrogance."

LXX.

Sin  is  reprehensible,  whoever  the  transgressor  may
be,  and  more  so  with  men  of  learning,  for  knowledge
is  the  weapon  for  contending  with  Satan  ;  and  when
an  armed  man  is  taken  prisoner,  the  stain  of  his
disgrace  is  all  the  deeper : — "  An  ignorant  and  low
man,  of  dissolute  morals,  is  preferable  to  a  learned
man  without  temperance ;  for  that  lost  his  way  from
a  defect  of  sight,  but  this  with  both  eyes  open  walked
into  a  pit."

LXXI.

Such  as  ate  not  his  bread  during  life  will  not  praise
him  now  he  is  dead.


294  SHAIKH  SAD  I.


LXXII.


The  poor  widow  relishes  the  grapes,  and  not  the
great  man  that  owns  the  fruit


LXXIII.

The  benevolent  Joseph,  on  whom  be  blessing,  would
not,  during  the  scarcity  in  Egypt,  eat  his  fill,  that  he
might  keep  the  hungry  in  remembrance  : — "  Who-
ever may  indulge  in  ease  and  plenty,  what  can  he  feel
for  the  condition  of  the  hungry?  That  man  can
judge  of  the  state  of  the  distressed,  who  amidst  his
abundance  is  temperate  and  frugal : — Be  aware,  O
thou !  who  art  mounted  upon  a  prancing  steed,  that
the  poor  thorn-bearing  ass  sticks  in  the  flood  and
mire.  Conclude  not  that  there  is  a  fire  in  the  hovel
of  thy  indigent  neighbour,  the  smoke  that  thou  seest
issuing  from  his  chimney  is  the  sigh  of  his  heart."


LXXIV.

In  a  season  of  drought  and  scarcity  ask  not  the
distressed  danvesh,  saying:  How  are  you?  Unless
on  the  condition  that  you  apply  a  balm  to  his  wound,
and  supply  him  with  the  means  of  subsistence : —
"  The  ass  which  thou  seest  stuck  in  the  slough  with
his  rider,  compassionate  from  thy  heart,  otherwise
do  not  go  near  him.  Now  that  thou  wentest  and


SHAIKH  SADL  295

askedest  him  how  he  fell,  like  a  sturdy  fellow  bind  up
thy  loins,  and  take  his  ass  by  the  tail."


LXXV.

Two  things  are  repugnant  to  reason  :  to  expend
more  than  what  Providence  has  allotted  for  us,  and  to
die  before  our  ordained  time. — "  Whether  offered  up
in  gratitude,  or  uttered  in  complaint,  destiny  cannot
be  altered  by  a  thousand  sighs  and  lamentations.
The  angel  who  presides  over  the  store-house  of  the
winds  feels  no  compunction,  though  he  extinguish  the
old  woman's  lamp."

LXXVI.

O  you  that  are  going  in  quest  of  food,  sit  down,
that  you  may  have  to  eat.  And,  O  you  that  death
is  in  quest  of,  go  not  on,  for  you  cannot  carry  life
along  with  you. — "In  search  of  thy  daily  bread,
whether  thou  exertest  thyself,  or  whether  thou  dost
not,  the  God  of  Majesty  and  Glory  will  equally
provide  it.  Wert  thou  to  walk  into  the  mouth  of  a
tiger  or  lion,  he  could  not  devour  thee,  unless  by  the
ordinance  of  thy  destiny."

LXXVII.

Whatever  was  not  designed,  the  hand  cannot
reach  ;  and  whatever  was  ordained,  it  can  attain  in
any  situation : — "  Thou  hast  heard  that  Alexander  got


296  SHAIKH  SADI.

as  far  as  chaos ;  but  after  all  this  toil  he  drank  not
the  water  of  immortality."

LXXVIII.

The  fisherman,  unless  it  be  his  lot,  catches  no  fish
in  the  Tigris  ;  and  the  fish,  unless  it  be  its  fate,  does
not  die  on  the  dry  land. — "  The  wretched  miser  is
prowling  all  over  the  world,  he  in  quest  of  pelf,  and
death  in  quest  of  him."

LXXIX.

The  sinful  rich  man  is  a  piece  of  gilded  earth ;  and
the  holy  darwesh  a  soil-tarnished  charmer.  This  the
patched  cloak  of  Moses,  and  that  the  embroidered
mantle  of  Pharaoh.

LXXX.

The  bad  fortune  of  the  good  turns  their  faces  up  to
heaven,  and  the  good  fortune  of  the  bad  bows  their
heads  down  to  the  earth. — "Whoever  possesses  power
and  dominion,  and  shows  not  withal  a  meek  disposi-
tion, tell  him  he  shall  not,  in  the  kingdom  to  come,
meet  with  either  power  or  dominion."

LXXXI.

The  envious  man  is  niggard  of  the  gifts  of  Provi-
dence, and  an  enemy  of  the  innocent  : — "  I  met  a  dry-
brained  fellow  of  this  sort,  tricked  forth  in  the  robe


SHAIKH  SADL  297

of  a  dignified  person.  I  said :  O  sir  !  if  thou  art
unfortunate  in  having  this  disposition,  in  what  have
the  fortunate  been  to  blame  ? — Take  heed,  and  wish
not  misfortune  to  the  misanthrope,  for  his  own  ill-
conditioned  lot  is  calamity  sufficient.  What  need  is
there  of  showing  ill-will  to  him,  who  has  such  an
enemy  close  at  his  heels."

LXXXII.

A  scholar  without  diligence  is  a  lover  without
money ;  a  traveller  without  knowledge  is  a  bird
without  wings  ;  a  theorist  without  practice  is  a  tree
without  fruit ;  and  a  devotee  without  learning  is  a
house  without  an  entrance.

LXXXIII.

The  object  of  sending  the  Koran  down  from
heaven  was  that  mankind  might  make  it  a  manual  of
morals,  and  not  that  they  should  recite  it  by  sections.

LXXXIV.

The  sincere  publican  has  proceeded  on  foot ;  the
slothful  Pharisee  is  mounted  and  gone  asleep.

LXXXV.

The  sinner  who  humbles  himself  in  prayer  is  more
acceptable  than  the  devotee  who  is  puffed  up  with


298  SHAIKH  SADL

pride. — "  The  courteous  and  kind-hearted  soldier  of
fortune  is  better  than  the  misanthropic  and  learned
divine."

LXXXVI.

A  learned  man  without  works  is  a  bee  without
honey ; — "  Tell  that  harsh  and  ungenerous  hornet :  As
thou  yieldest  no  honey,  wound  not  with  thy  sting."


LXXXVII.

A  man  without  humanity  is  a  woman  ;  and  an
avaricious  devotee  a  highway  robber. — "Thou  who,
to  get  a  name  in  the  opinion  of  mankind,  hast  put  on
a  white  robe,  thy  reputation  is  black.  Whether  thy
sleeve  be  short  or  long,  it  behoves  thee  to  contract
thy  intercourse  with  the  world."

LXXXVIII.

Two  orders  of  mankind  cannot  let  regret  quit  their
thoughts,  nor  withdraw  their  feet  from  the  slough
of  self-delusion  :  the  merchant  who  has  suffered  ship-
wreck, and  the  heir  who  associates  with  kalandars. —
"  Unless  thy  property  be  given  for  their  special
endowment,  shedding  thy  blood  were  a  matter  of
indifference  with  monks.  Either  go  not  to  associate
with  the  blue-frocked  gentry,  or  draw  the  finger  of
a  blot  over  thy  property  and  family.  Either  make
not  companions  of  elephant-drivers,  or  build  thyself
a  house  fit  to  accommodate  an  elephant"


SHAIKH  SADI.  299

LXXXIX.

Though  a  dress  presented  by  the  sovereign  be
honourable,  yet  is  our  own  tattered  garment  prefer-
able ;  and  though  the  viands  at  a  great  man's  table  be
delicate,  yet  is  our  own  homely  fare  more  sweet : —
"  A  salad  and  vinegar,  the  produce  of  our  own
industry,  are  sweeter  than  the  lamb  and  bread  sauce
at  the  table  of  our  village  chief."

xc.

It  is  contrary  to  sound  judgment,  and  repugnant
to  the  maxims  of  the  prudent,  to  take  a  medicine  on
conjecture,  or  to  follow  a  road  but  in  the  track  of  the
caravan.

XCI.

They  asked  Imaam  Mursheed  Mohammed-bin-
Mohammed  Ghazali,  on  whom  be  God's  mercy,  how
he  had  reached  such  a  pitch  of  knowledge.  He
replied  :  Whatever  I  was  ignorant  of  myself,  I  felt  no
shame  in  asking  of  others  : — "  Thy  prospect  of  health
conforms  with  reason,  when  thy  pulse  is  in  charge  of
a  skilled  physician.  Ask  whatever  thou  knowest  not;
for  the  condescension  of  inquiring  is  a  guide  on  thy
road  in  the  excellence  of  learning."

XCII.

Anything  you  foresee  that  you  may  somehow
come  to  know,  be  not  hasty  in  questioning,  lest  your


300  SHAIKH  SADI.

consequence  and  respectability  may  suffer : — "  When
Lucman  perceived  that  in  the  hands  of  David  iron
was  miraculously  moulded  like  wax,  he  asked  him
not,  How  didst  thou  do  it?  for  he  was  aware  that
he  should  know  it,  through  his  own  wisdom,  without
asking."

XCIII.

It  is  one  of  the  laws  of  good  breeding  that  you
should  forego  an  engagement,  or  accommodate  your-
self to  the  master  of  the  entertainment : — "  If  thou
knowest  that  the  inclination  is  reciprocal,  accommo-
date thy  story  to  the  temper  of  the  hearer.  Any
discreet  man  that  was  in  Mujnun's  company  would
entertain  him  only  with  encomiums  on  Laila."

XCIV.

Whoever  associates  with  the  profligate,  though  he
may  not  be  impressed  with  their  bad  habits,  will
be  charged  with  following  their  evil  ways  ;  in  like
manner  as  if  a  person  withdrew  into  a  dram-shop,  for
the  purpose  of  saying  his  prayers,  they  would  suspect
him  of  having  gone  to  tipple  : — "  Thou  hast  incurred
upon  thyself  the  character  of  ignorance,  because  thou
choosest  to  associate  with  the  ignorant. — I  asked  a
learned  man  to  give  me  his  advice ;  he  enjoined  me
not  to  keep  company  with  the  ignorant ;  for  if  the
oracle  of  the  age  in  learning,  I  should  become  an  ass ;
and,  if  naturally  weak,  an  absolute  idiot"


SHAIKH  SADL  301


XCV.

Such  is  the  acknowledged  docility  of  a  camel,  that
were  a  child  to  take  it  by  the  halter,  and  lead  it  for  a
hundred  parasangs,  it  would  not  disobey  him  ;  but
should  such  a  dangerous  precipice  come  in  the  way
as  might  put  his  life  in  jeopardy,  and  the  child,  in  his
ignorance,  persist  in  pushing  it  on,  it  would  tear  the
rein  from  his  hand  and  refuse  any  longer  to  obey
him ;  for  at  the  instant  of  a  difficulty  it  were  repre-
hensible to  stand  on  ceremony.  On  the  other  hand,
it  has  been  remarked  that  an  enemy  is  not  a  whit  the
more  friendly  from  any  courtesy;  nay,  he  is  still  the
more  unreasonable. — "  Be  submissive  with  him  who
treats  thee  with  kindness  ;  but  if  he  resists,  close
both  his  eyes  up  with  mud.  Waste  not  urbanity  and
mildness  upon  the  perverse,  for  rusty  iron  is  not  to  be
polished  with  a  smooth  file."


XCVI.

Whoever  interrupts  the  conversation  of  others  to
make  a  display  of  his  fund  of  knowledge,  makes
notorious  his  own  stock  of  ignorance.  Philosophers
have  said : — "  A  prudent  man  will  not  obtrude  his
answer  till  he  has  the  question  stated  to  him  in  form.
Notwithstanding  the  proposition  may  have  its  right
demonstration,  the  cavil  of  the  fastidious  will  construe
it  wrong."


302  SHAIKH  SADL

XCVII.

I  had  a  sore  under  my  clothes.  My  preceptor —
be  God's  mercy  upon  him — would  daily  ask,  saying :
How  is  it?  But  he  would  not  question  me  about
where  it  was,  being  so  far  cautious  as  to  avoid  the
mention  of  every  member  of  the  body.  And  the  sage
have  remarked :  Whoever  shall  not  ponder  his  ques-
tion may  be  vexed  at  its  answer  : — "  It  behoves  thee
not  to  open  thy  mouth  to  speak  till  full  well  aware
that  thy  words  are  the  essence  of  what  are  proper.  If
thou  tellest  the  truth,  and  remainest  in  durance,  it  is
better  than  by  a  lie  to  work  out  thy  deliverance."

XCVIII.

To  tell  a  falsehood  is  like  the  cut  of  a  sabre ;  for
though  the  wound  may  heal,  the  scar  of  it  will
remain.  In  like  manner  as  the  brothers  of  the
blessed  Joseph,  who,  being  notorious  for  a  lie,  had  no
credit  afterwards  when  they  spoke  the  truth : — God
on  high  has  said — Jacob  is  supposed  to  speak —
Koran  xii.  (Sale  ii.  35)  : — Nay,  but  rather  ye  have  con-
trived this  to  gratify  your  own  passion  ;  yet  it  behoves
me  to  be  patient : — "  If  a  man  who  is  in  the  habit  of
speaking  trnth  lets  a  mistake  escape  him,  we  can
overlook  it ;  but  if  he  be  notorious  for  uttering  false-
hoods, and  tell  a  truth,  thou  wilt  call  it  a  lie."

XCIX.

The  noblest  of  creatures  is  man,  and  the  vilest  of
animals  is  no  doubt  a  dog;  yet,  in  the  concurring


SHAIKH  SADL  303

opinion  of  the  wise,  a  dog,  thankful  for  his  food,  is
more  worthy  than  a  human  being  who  is  void  of
gratitude  : — "A  dog  will  never  forget  the  crumb  thou
gavest  him,  though  thou  mayst  afterwards  throw  a
hundred  stones  at  his  head  ;  but  foster  with  thy
kindness  a  low  man  for  an  age,  and  on  the  smallest
provocation  he  will  be  up  against  thee  in  arms."

C.

No  virtue  is  to  be  expected  from  the  sensualist,  and
high  station  is  not  fitting  for  the  illiterate  and  worth-
less : — "  Show  no  mercy  to  the  fatted  ox,  for  whatever
is  gluttonous  must  be  given  to  sloth.  If  desirous  of
getting  fat  and  sleek  as  an  ox,  submit  thy  carcase  to
others  to  beat  it  like  that  of  an  ass."

CI.

It  is  written  in  the  Injeel,  or  Gospel,  stating:  O
son  of  man,  if  I  bestow  riches  upon  you  you  will  be
more  intent  upon  your  property  than  upon  me,  and  if
I  leave  you  in  poverty  you  will  sit  down  dejected  ;
how  then  can  you  feel  a  relish  to  praise  or  a  zeal  to
worship  me  ?  (Proverbs  xxx.  7,  8,  9)  : — "  In  the  day
of  plenty  thou  art  proud  and  negligent ;  in  the  time  of
want,  full  of  sorrow  and  dejected ;  since  in  prosperity
and  adversity  such  is  thy  condition,  it  were  difficult  to
state  when  thou  wouldst  voluntarily  do  thy  duty."

CII.

The  pleasure  of  Him,  or  God,  who  has  no  equal,
hurls  one  man  from  a  throne  of  sovereignty,  and


304  SHAIKH  SADL

another  he  preserves  in  a  fish's  belly : — "  Happy  pro-
ceeds his  time  who  is  enraptured  with  thy  praise,
though,  like  Jonas,  he  even  may  pass  it  in  the  belly
of  a  fish  ! "

CHI.

Were  the  Almighty  to  unsheath  the  sword  of  his
wrath,  prophets  and  patriarchs  would  draw  in  their
heads  ;  and  were  he  to  deign  a  glimpse  of  his
benevolence,  it  would  reach  the  wicked  along  with
the  good  : — "  Were  he  on  the  day  of  judgment  to
call  us  to  a  strict  account,  even  the  prophets  would
have  no  room  for  excuse.  Say,  withdraw  the  veil
from  the  face  of  thy  compassion,  that  sinners  may
entertain  hopes  of  pardon."

CIV.

Whoever  is  not  to  be  brought  into  the  path  of
righteousness  by  the  punishments  of  this  life  shall  be
overtaken  with  the  punishments  of  that  to  come  : —
Verily ',  /  will  cause  them  to  taste  the  lesser  punishment
over  and  above  the  greater  punishment: — Koran
xxxii.  (Sale  ii.  258)  : — "  Princes,  in  chastising,  ad-
monish, and  then  confine  ;  when  they  admonish,  and
thou  listenest  not,  they  throw  thee  into  prison."

CV.

Men  of  auspicious  fortune  would  rather  take
warning  from  the  precepts  and  examples  of  their
predecessors  than  that  the  rising  generation  should


SHAIKH  SAJDI.  305

take  warning  from  their  acts : — "  The  bird  will  not
approach  the  grain  that  is  spread  about,  where  it  sees
another  bird  a  captive  in  the  snare.  Take  warning
by  the  mischance  of  others,  that  others  may  not  take
warning  by  thine."

CVI.

How  can  he  help  himself  who  was  born  deaf,  if  he
cannot  hear ;  and  what  can  he  do  whose  thread  of
fortune  is  dragging  him  on  that  he  may  not  proceed  :
— "  The  dark  night  of  such  as  are  beloved  of  God
is  serene  and  light  as  the  bright  day ;  but  this  good
fortune  results  not  from  thine  own  strength  of  arm,
till  God  in  his  mercy  deign  to  bestow  it. — To  whom
shall  I  complain  of  thee?  for  there  is  no  judge  else,
nor  is  any  arm  mightier  than  thine.  Him  whom
thou  directest  none  can  lead  astray,  and  him  whom
thou  bewilderest  none  can  direct  upon  his  way."

CVII.

The  beggar  whose  end  is  good  is  better  off  than
the  king  whose  end  is  evil : — "  That  sorrow  which
is  the  harbinger  of  joy  is  preferable  to  the  joy  which
is  followed  by  sorrow."

CVIIL

The  sky  enriches  the  earth  with  rain,  and  the
earth  gives  it  dust  in  return.  As  the  Arabs  say :
What  the  vessels  have,  that  they  give, — "  If  my  moral
character  strike  thee  as  improper,  do  not  renounce
thine  own  good  character."

762


3o6  SHAIKH   SADI.

CIX.

The  Most  High  God  discerns  and  hides  what
is  improper ;  my  neighbour  sees  not,  and  is  loud
in  his  clamour  : — "  God  preserve  us  !  if  man  knew
what  is  hidden,  none  could  be  safe  from  the  animad-
version of  his  neighbour."

ex.

Gold  is  got  from  the  mine  by  digging  into  the
earth ;  and  from  the  grasp  of  the  miser  by  taking
away  his  life : — "  Misers  spend  not,  but  watch  with
solicitude :  expectation,  they  say,  is  preferable  to
waste.  Next  day  observe  to  the  joy  of  their
enemies,  the  gold  remains,  and  they  are  dead  without
the  enjoyment  of  that  hope."

CXI.

Such  as  deal  hard  with  the  weak  will  suffer  from
the  extortion  of  the  strong  : — "  It  is  not  every  arm  in
which  there  is  strength  that  can  wrench  the  hand  of
a  weak  man.  Bring  not  affliction  upon  the  hearts  of
the  feeble,  lest  thou  mayst  fall  under  the  lash  of  the
strong."

CXII.

A  wise  man,  where  he  meets  opposition,  labours  to
get  through  it,  and  where  he  finds  quiet  he  drops  his
anchor,  for  there  safety  is  on  one  side,  and  here
enjoyment  in  the  middle  of  it.


SHAIKH  SAD  I.  307


CXIII.


The  gamester  wants  three  sixes,  but  he  throws  only
three  aces : — "  The  pasture  meadow  is  a  thousand
times  richer  than  the  common,  but  the  horse  has  not
his  tether  at  command."


CXIV.

The  darwesh  in  his  prayer  is  saying :  O  God,  have
compassion  on  the  wicked,  for  to  the  good  thou  hast
been  abundantly  kind,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  made
them  virtuous.

CXV.

Jamshid  was  the  first  person  who  put  an  edging
round  his  garment,  and  a  ring  upon  his  finger.  They
asked  him  :  Why  did  you  bestow  all  the  decoration
and  ornament  on  the  left  hand,  whilst  the  right  is
the  superior  ?  He  answered  :  Sufficient  for  the  right
is  the  ornament  of  being  right. — "  Firedown  com-
manded the  gilders  of  China  that  they  would  inscribe
upon  the  front  of  his  palace  :  Strive,  O  wise  man,  to
make  the  wicked  good,  for  the  good  are  of  themselves
great  and  fortunate."

CXVI.

They  said  to  a  great  and  holy  man  :  Notwithstand-
ing the  superiority  that  the  right  hand  commands,
why  do  they  wear  the  ring  on  the  left  hand?  He
replied  :  Arc  you  not  aware  that  the  best  are  most


3o8  SHAIKH  SADL

neglected ! — "  He  who  casts  our  horoscope,  provision,
and  fortune,  bestows  upon  us  either  good  luck  or
wisdom."

CXVII.

It  is  proper  for  him  to  offer  counsel  to  kings  who
dreads  not  to  lose  his  head,  nor  looks  for  a  reward. —
"  Whether  thou  strewest  heaps  of  gold  at  his  feet,
or  brandishest  an  Indian  sword  over  the  Unitarian's
head,  to  hope  or  fear  he  is  alike  indifferent ;  and  in
this  the  divine  unity  alone  he  is  resolved  and  firm."

CXVIIL

It  belongs  to  the  king  to  displace  extortioners,
to  the  superintendent  of  the  police  to  guard  against
murderers,  and  to  the  cazi  to  decide  in  quarrels
and  disputes.  No  two  complainants  ever  referred
to  the  cazi  content  to  abide  by  justice. — "  When  thou
ktiowest  that  in  right  the  claim  is  just,  better  pay
with  a  grace  than  by  distress  and  force.  If  a  man
is  refractory  in  discharging  his  revenue,  the  collector
must  necessarily  coerce  him  to  pay  it."

CXIX.

Every  man's  teeth  are  blunted  by  acids  excepting
the  cazi's,  and  they  require  sweets : — "  That  cazi,
or  judge,  that  can  accept  of  five  cucumbers  as  a
bribe,  will  confirm  thee  in  a  right  to  ten  fields  of
melons."


SHAIKH  SADI.  309

cxx.

The  superannuated  bawd  feels  no  hesitation  in
forswearing  fornication,  nor  the  displaced  police
magistrate  in  foregoing  oppression. — "  A  young  man
becoming  a  recluse  is  a  lion-like  hero  devoting
himself  to  the  service  of  God.  Not  so  decrepid  age,
.which  cannot  of  itself  stir  from  the  corner  of  its
cell."

CXXI.

They  asked  a  wise  man,  saying :  Of  the  many
celebrated  trees  which  the  Most  High  God  has
created  lofty  and  umbrageous,  they  call  none  azad  or
free  excepting  the  cypress,  which  bears  no  fruit;
what  mystery  is  there  in  this  ?  He  replied :  Each
has  its  appropriate  produce  and  appointed  season,
during  the  continuance  of  which  it  is  fresh  and
blooming,  and  during  their  absence  dry  and  withered ;
to  neither  of  which  states  is  the  cypress  exposed,
being  always  flourishing ;  and  of  this  nature  are  the
azads,  or  religious  independents  : — "  Fix  not  thy  heart
on  what  is  transitory ;  for  the  Dijlah  or  Tygris  will
continue  to  flow  through  Baghdad  after  the  race  of
Khalifs  is  extinct.  If  thy  hand  has  plenty,  be  liberal
as  the  date-tree ;  but  if  it  affords  nothing  to  give
away,  be  an  azad,  or  free  man,  like  the  cypress."

CXXII.

Two  orders  of  mankind  died,  and  carried  with  them
regret :  such  as  had  and  did  not  spend,  and  such  as


3 1  o  SHAIKH  SAD  I.

knew  and  did  not  practise : — "  None  can  see  that
wretched  mortal  a  miser  who  will  not  endeavour  to
point  out  his  faults ;  but  were  the  generous  man  to
have  a  hundred  defects,  his  liberality  would  cover  all
his  blemishes."


THE  CONCLUSION   OF  THE  BOOK.

The  book  of  the  Gulistan,  or  Flower-Garden,  was
completed  through  the  assistance  and  grace  of  God.
Throughout  the  whole  of  this  work  I  have  not  fol-
lowed the  custom  of  writers  by  inserting  verses  of
poetry  borrowed  from  former  authors : — "  It  is  more
decorous  to  wear  our  own  patched  and  old  cloak
than  to  ask  in  loan  another  man's  garment"

Most  of  Sadi's  sayings  have  a  dash  of  hilarity  and
an  odour  of  gaiety  about  them,  in  consequence  of
which  short-sighted  critics  extend  the  tongue  of
animadversion,  saying :  It  is  not  the  occupation  of
sensible  men  to  solicit  marrow  from  a  shrivelled
brain,  or  to  digest  the  smoke  of  a  profitless  lamp.
Nevertheless  it  cannot  be  concealed  from  the  en-
lightened judgment  of  the  holy  and  good,  to  whom
these  discourses  are  specially  addressed,  that  the
pearls  of  salutary  admonition  are  threaded  on  the
cord  of  an  elegance  of  language,  and  the  bitter
potion  of  instruction  sweetened  with  the  honey  of
facetiousness,  that  the  taste  of  the  reader  may  not
take  disgust,  and  himself  be  debarred  from  the
pleasure  of  approving  of  them  : — "  On  our  part  we
offered  some  good  advice3  and  spent  an  age  in


SHAIKH  SADL  311

bringing  it  to  perfection.  If  that  should  not  meet
the  ear  of  anybody's  good-will,  prophets  deliver
their  messages,  or  warn  mankind ;  and  that  is
enough."

"  O  thou  who  perusest  this  book,  ask  tJie  mercy  of
God  on  the  author  of  it,  his  forgiveness  on  tJie  tran-
scriber. Petition  for  whatever  charitable  gift  thou
mayst  require  for  thyself,  and  implore  pardon  on
the  owner"  May  I  crave  thy  prayer  on  the  English
translator  ?  The  book  is  finished  through  the  favour
of  the  Lord  God  Paramount  and  the  bestower  of  all
good!


THE  END.


Printed  by  WALTER  SCOTT,  Felling,  Neiccaxtle-on-Tyne,


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY.

Cloth,  Uncut  Edges,  Gilt  Top.      Trice  is.  6d.  per  Volume.


VOLUMES    ALREADY   ISSUED-

1  MALORY'S   ROMANCE   OF   KING    ARTHUR  AND  THE

Quest  of  the  Holy  Grail.    Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.

2  THOREAU'S  WALDEN.     WITH  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE

by  Will  H.  Dircks.

3  THOREAU'S    "WEEK."      WITH  PREFATORY  NOTE  BY

Will  H.  Dircks.

4  THOREAU'S     ESSAYS.       EDITED,    WITH    AN     INTRO-

duction,  by  Will  H.  Dircks.

5  CONFESSIONS  OF  AN   ENGLISH   OPIUM-EATER,   ETC.

By  Thomas  De  Quincey.    With  Introductory  Note  by  William  Sharp.

6  LANDOR'S  IMAGINARY  CONVERSATIONS.    SELECTED,

with  Introduction,  by  Havelock  Ellis.

7  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES    (LANGHORNE).      WITH     INTRO-

ductory  Note  by  B.  J.  Snell,  M.A.

8  BROWNE'S     RELIGIO    MEDICI,    ETC.      WITH    INTRO-

duction  by  J.  Addington  Symonds.

9  SHELLEY'S    ESSAYS    AND   LETTERS.     EDITED,  WITH

Introductory  Note,  by  Ernest  Rhys.

10  SWIFT'S  PROSE  WRITINGS.   CHOSEN  AND  ARRANGED,

with  Introduction,  by  Walter  Lewin.

1 1  MY  STUDY  WINDOWS.     BY  TAMES  RUSSELL  LOWELL.

With  Introduction  by  R.  Garnett,  LL  D.

12  LOWELL'S  ESSAYS  ON  THE  ENGLISH   POETS.     WITH

a  new  Introduction  by  Mr.  Lowell.

13  THE  BIGLOW  PAPERS.     BY  JAMES  RUSSELL  LOWELL.

With  a  Prefatory  Note  by  Ernest  Rhys.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  L.vne.


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY-continued.

14  GREAT    ENGLISH    PAINTERS.      SELECTED    FROM

Cunningham's  Lives.    Edited  by  William  Sharp.

15  BYRON'S     LETTERS     AND     JOURNALS.       SELECTED,

with  Introduction,  by  Mathilde  Blind.

16  LEIGH  HUNT'S  ESSAYS.     WITH  INTRODUCTION  AND

Notes  by  Arthur  Symons.

17  LONGFELLOW'S     "HYPERION,"     "  KAVANAH,"     AND

"  The  Trouveres."    With  Introduction  by  W.  Tirebuck.

18  GREAT    MUSICAL    COMPOSERS.      BY    G.    F.    FERRIS.

Edited,  with  Introduction,- by  Mrs.  William  Sharp.

19  THE  MEDITATIONS  OF  MARCUS  AURELIUS.     EDITED

by  Alice  Zimmern.

20  THE  TEACHING  OF  EPICTETUS.    TRANSLATED  FROM

the  Greek,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  T.  W.  Rolleston.

21  SELECTIONS  FROM  SENECA.     WITH  INTRODUCTION

by  Walter  Clode.

22  SPECIMEN  DAYS  IN  AMERICA.     BY  WALT  WHITMAN.

Revised  by  the  Author,  with  fresh  Preface.

23  DEMOCRATIC    VISTAS,     AND     OTHER     PAPERS.      BY

Walt  Whitman.    (Published  by  arrangement  with  the  Author.)

24  WHITE'S  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  SELBORNE.     WITH

a  Preface  by  Richard  Jeff eries.

25  DEFOE'S     CAPTAIN      SINGLETON.       EDITED,      WITH

Introduction,  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling.

26  MAZZINI'S     ESSAYS :     LITERARY,      POLITICAL,     AND

Religious.    With  Introduction  by  William  Clarke.

7  PROSE  WRITINGS  OF  HEINE.     WITH  INTRODUCTION
by  Havelock  Ellis.

28  REYNOLDS'S    DISCOURSES.       WITH    INTRODUCTION

by  Helen  Zimmern.

29  PAPERS    OF    STEELE    AND    ADDISON.       EDITED    BY

Walter  Lewin,

30  BURNS'S     LETTERS.       SELECTED     AND    ARRANGED,

with  Introduction,  by  J.  Logie  Robertson,  M.A.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY-continued.

31  VOLSUNGA    SAGA.      WILLIAM  MORRIS.      WITH    INTRO-

duction  by  H.  n.  Sparling.

32  SARTOR   RESARTUS.     BY  THOMAS   CARLYLE.     WITH

Introduction  by  Ernest  Rhys.

33  SELECT    WRITINGS    OF    EMERSON.      WITH    INTRO-

duction  by  Percival  Chubb.

34  AUTOBIOGRAPHY    OF    LORD     HERBERT.        EDITED,

with  an  Introduction,  by  Will  H.  Dirckg.

35  ENGLISH     PROSE,     FROM     MAUNDEVILLE     TO

Thackeray.    Chosen  and  Edited  by  Arthur  Galton.

36  THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY,  AND  OTHER  PLAYS.     BY

Henrik  Ibsen.    Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Havelock  Ellis.

37  IRISH     FAIRY     AND     FOLK    TALES.        EDITED     AND

Selected  by  W.  B.  Yeats.

38  ESSAYS    OF    DR.    JOHNSON,    WITH     BIOGRAPHICAL

Introduction  and  Notes  by  Stuart  J.  Reid.

39  ESSAYS    OF    WILLIAM    HAZLITT.      SELECTED    AND

Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Frank  Carr.

40  LANDOR'S    PENTAMERON,    AND   OTHER  IMAGINARY

Conversations.    Edited,  with  a  Preface,  by  H.  Ellis.

41  POE'S   TALES   AND   ESSAYS.     EDITED,  WITH   INTRO-

duction,  by  Ernest  Rhys.

42  VICAR   OF    WAKEFIELD.      BY    OLIVER    GOLDSMITH.

Edited,  with  Preface,  by  Ernest  Rhys.

43  POLITICAL     ORATIONS,      FROM     WENTWORTH     TO

Macaulay.    Edited,  with  Introduction,  by  William  Clarke.

44  THE  AUTOCRAT  OF  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE.   BY

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.

45  THE  POET  AT  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE.     BY  OLIVER

Wendell  Holmes.

46  THE   PROFESSOR   AT   THE    BREAKFAST- TABLE.      BY

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.

47  LORD     CHESTERFIELD'S     LETTERS     TO    HIS    SON.

Selected,  with  Introduction,  by  Charles  Sayle.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY— continued.

48  STORIES  FROM  CARLETON.    SELECTED,  WITH  INTRO-

duction,  by  W.  Yeats.

49  JANE  EYRE.  BY  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE.  EDITED  BY

Clement  K.  Shorter.

50  ELIZABETHAN     ENGLAND.      EDITED     BY     LOTHROP

Withington,  with  a  Preface  by  Dr.  FurnivalL

51  THE  PROSE  WRITINGS  OF  THOMAS  DAVIS.     EDITED

by  T.  W.  Rolleston.

52  SPENCE'S     ANECDOTES.       A     SELECTION.       EDITED,

with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  John  Underbill.

53  MORE'S  UTOPIA,  AND  LIFE  OF  EDWARD  V.     EDITED,

with  an  Introduction,  by  Maurice  Adams.

54  S ADI'S    GULISTAN,    OR    FLOWER    GARDEN.     TRANS-

lated,  with  an  Essay,  by  James  Ross.

55  ENGLISH     FAIRY    AND    FOLK    TALES.      EDITED    BY

B.  Sidney  Hartland.

56  NORTHERN    STUDIES.     BY   EDMUND    GOSSE.     WITH

a  Note  by  Ernest  Rhys.

57  EARLY  REVIEWS   OF   GREAT  WRITERS.     EDITED  BY

E.  Stevenson.

58  ARISTOTLE'S      ETHICS.        WITH      GEORGE      HENRY

Lewes's  Essay  on  Aristotle  prefixed.

59  LANDOR'S  PERICLES  AND  ASPASIA.      EDITED,  WITH

an  Introduction,  by  Havelock  Ellis.

60  ANNALS   OF  TACITUS.     THOMAS   GORDON'S    TRANS-

lation.    Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Arthur  Gallon.

61  ESSAYS    OF    ELIA.      BY    CHARLES    LAMB.      EDITED,

with  an  Introduction,  by  Ernest  Rhys.

62  BALZAC'S     SHORTER     STORIES.       TRANSLATED     BY

William  Wilson  and  the  Count  Stenbock.

63  COMEDIES     OF    DE     MUSSET.      EDITED,     WITH     AN

Introductory  Note,  by  S.  L.  Gwynn.

64  CORAL    REEFS.      BY    CHARLES     DARWIN.      EDITED,

with  an  Introduction,  by  Dr.  J.  W.  Williams.


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


TEE  SCOTT  LIBRARY-continued.

65  SHERIDAN'S     PLAYS.       EDITED,     WITH    AN     INTRO-

dnction,  by  Rudolf  Dircks.

66  OUR  VILLAGE.     BY  MISS   MITFORD.     EDITED,  WITH

an  Introduction,  by  Ernest  Rhys.

67  MASTER  HUMPHREY'S  CLOCK,  AND  OTHER  STORIES.

By  Charles  Dickens.    With  Introduction  by  Frank  T.  Marzials.

68  TALES    FROM    WONDERLAND.     BY    RUDOLPH

Baumbach.    Translated  by  Helen  B.  Dole.

69  ESSAYS  AND  PAPERS  BY  DOUGLAS  JERROLD.   EDITED

by  Walter  Jerrold.

70  VINDICATION    OF    THE     RIGHTS    OF    WOMAN.      BY

Mary  Wollstonecraft.    Introduction  by  Mrs.  E.  Robins  Pennell.

71  "THE  ATHENIAN  ORACLE."     A  SELECTION.     EDITED

by  John  Underbill,  with  Prefatory  Note  by  Walter  Besant.

72  ESSAYS     OF     SAINTE-BEUVE.       TRANSLATED     AND

Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Elizabeth  Lee.

73  SELECTIONS     FROM     PLATO.       FROM     THE     TRANS-

lation  of  Sydenham  and  Taylor.    Edited  by  T.  W.  Rolleston.

74  HEINE'S  ITALIAN  TRAVEL  SKETCHES,  ETC.     TRANS-

lated  by  Elizabeth  A.  Sharp.    With  an  Introduction  from  the  French  of
Theophile  Gautier.

75  SCHILLER'S     MAID     OF     ORLEANS.       TRANSLATED,

with  an  Introduction,  by  Major-General  Patrick  Maxwell.

76  SELECTIONS  FROM  SYDNEY  SMITH.     EDITED    WITH

an  Introduction,  by  Ernest  Rhys.


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY  may  be  had  in  the  following  Bindings  :—
Cloth,  uncut  edges,  gilt  top,  is.  6d.  ;  Half-Morocco,  gilt  top,  antique;
Red  Roan,  gilt  edges,  etc.


:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


GREAT    WRITERS.


A  NEW   SERIES    OF   CRITICAL   BIOGRAPHIES.
Edited  by  Prof.  E.  S.  ROBERTSON  and  FRANK  T.  MARZIALS.

A  Complete  Bibliography  to  each  Volume,  by  J.  P.  ANDERSON,
British  Museum,  London.


Cloth,  Uncut  Edges,  Gilt  Top.     Price  1/6.


VOLUMES  ALREADY  ISSUED —

LIFE  OF  LONGFELLOW.    By  PROF.  ERIC  S.  ROBERTSON.
"A  most  readable  little  work." — Liverpool  Mercury.

LIFE  OF  COLERIDGE.    By  HALL  CAINE.

"Brief  and  vigorous,  written  throughout  with  spirit  and  great  literary
skill." — Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  DICKEN  5.     By  FRANK  T.  MARZIALS.

"Notwithstanding  the  mass  of  matter  that  has  been  printed  relating
to  Dickens  and  his  works  ...  we  should,  until  we  came  across  this  volume,
have  been  at  a  loss  to  recommend  any  popular  life  of  England's  most  popular
novelist  as  being  really  satisfactory.  The  difficulty  is  removed  by  Mr.
Marzials's  little  book." — Atheiiceum.

LIFE  OF  DANTE  GABRIEL  ROSSETTI.    By  J.  KNIGHT.

"Mr.  Knight's  picture  of  the  great  poet  and  painter  is  the  fullest  and
best  yet  presented  to  the  public."— The  Graphic.

LIFE  OF  SAMUEL  JOHNSON.    By  COLONEL  F.  GRANT.

"Colonel  Grant  has  performed  his  task  with  diligence,  sound  judgment,
good  taste,  and  accuracy." — Illustrated  London  Sews.

LIFE  OF  DARWIN.    By  G.  T.  BETTANT.

"  Mr.  G.  T.  Bettany's  Life  of  Darwin  is  a  sound  and  conscientious  work.-
— Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE.    By  A.  BIRRELL.

"  Those  who  know  much  of  Charlotte  Bronte  will  learn  more,  and  those
who  know  nothing  about  her  will  find  all  that  is  best  worth  learning  in  Mr.
Birrell's  pleasant  book."— St.  James"  Gazette.

LIFE  OF  THOMAS  CARLYLE.     By  R.  GARNETT,  LL.D.

"This  is  an  admirable  book.  Nothing  could  be  more  felicitous  and
fairer  than  the  way  in  which  he  takes  us  through  Carlyle's  life  and
works."— Pali  Mall  Gazette.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


GREAT    WRITERS— continued.

LIFE  OF  ADAM  SMITH.     By  R.  B.  HALDANE,  M.P.

"Written  with  a  perspicuity  seldom  exemplified  when  dealing  with
economic  science." — Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  KEATS.     By  W.  M.  ROBSBTTI.

"Valuable  for  the  ample  information  which  it  contains." — Cambridge
Independent.

LIFE  OF  SHELLEY.    By  WILLIAM  SHARP.

"The  criticisms  .  .  .  entitle  this  capital  monograph  to  be  ranked  with
the  best  biographies  of  Shelley."—  Wettminster  Review.

LIFE  OF  SMOLLETT.    By  DAVID  HANNAY.

"  A  capable  record  of  a  writer  who  still  remains  one  of  the  great  masters
of  the  English  novel."— Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  GOLDSMITH.    By  AUSTIN  DOBSON.

11  The  story  of  bis  literary  and  social  life  in  London,  with  all  its  humorous
and  pathetic  vicissitudes,  is  here  retold,  as  none  could  tell  it  better."— Daily
A'ewt.

LIFE  OF  SCOTT.    By  PROFESSOR  YONQE.

"This  is  a  most  enjoyable  book." — Aberdeen  Free  Presi.

LIFE  OF  BURNS.    By  PROFESSOR  BLACKIB.

"  The  editor  certainly  made  a  hit  when  he  persuaded  Blackie  to  write
about  Bums."— Pall  Mall  Gazette.

LIFE  OF  VICTOR  HUGO.    By  FRANK  T.  MARZIALS.

"Mr.  Marzials's  volume  presents  to  us,  in  a  more  handy  form  than  any
English  or  even  French  handbook  gives,  the  summary  of  what  is  known
about  the  life  of  the  great  poet." — Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  EMERSON.    By  RICHARD  GARXBTT,  LL.D.

"  No  record  of  Emerson's  life  could  be  more  desirable." — Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  GOETHE.    By  JAMES  SIMB.

"Mr.  James  Sime's  competence  as  a  biographer  of  Goethe  is  beyond
question." — ilanehener  Guardian.

LIFE  OF  CONGP,EVK    By  EDMUND  GOSSE.

"  Mr.  Qosse  has  written  an  admirable  biography."— Academy.

LIFE  OF  BUNT  AN.    By  CANON  VENABLES.

"A  most,  intelligent,  appreciative,  and  valuable  memoir." — Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  CRABBE.     By  T.  E.  KEBBEL.

"  No  English  poet  since  Shakespeare  has  observed  certain  aspects  of
nature  and  of  human  life  more  closely." — Athenaeum,

LIFE  OF  HEINE.    By  WILLIAM  SHARP.

"  An  admirable  monograph  .  .  .  more  fully  written  up  to  the  level  of
recent  knowledge  and  criticism  than  any  other  English  work."—  Scotunan.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


GREAT    WRITERS— continued.

LIFE  OP  MILL.    By  W.  L.  COURTNEY.

"  A  most  sympathetic  and  discriminating  memoir." — Glasgow  Herald.

LIFE  OF  SCHILLER.    By  HBNBT  W.  NEVINSON.

"  Presents  the  poet's  life  in  a  neatly  rounded  picture." — Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  CAPTAIN  MARRYAT.    By  DAVID  HANNA*.

"We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Hannay  ha*
done  justice  to  him."— Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  LESSING.    By  T.  W.  ROLLESTON.

"  One  of  the  best  books  of  the  series." — Manchester  Guardian.

LIFE  OF  MILTON.     By  RICHAKD  GARNETT,  LL.D.

"  Has  never  been  more  charmingly  or  adequately  told." — Scottish  Leader.

LIFE  OF  BALZAC.    By  FREDERICK  WBDMORB.

"  Mr.  Wedmore's  monograph  on  the  greatest  of  French  writers  of  fiction,
whose  greatness  is  to  be  measured  by  comparison  with  his  successors,  is  a,
piece  of  careful  and  critical  composition,  neat  and  nice  in  style." — Daily
News.

LIFE  OF  GEORGE  ELIOT.    By  OSOAB  BROWNING.

"A  book  of  the  character  of  Mr.  Browning's,  to  stand  midway  be
tween  the  bulky  work  of  Mr.  Cross  and  the  very  slight  sketch  of  Mi-r.
Blind,  was  much  to  be  desired,  and  Mr.  Browning  has  done  his  work  witt,
rivacity,  and  not  without  skill." — Manchester  Guardian.

LIFE  OF  JANE  AUSTEN.     By  GOLDWIN  SMITH.

"Mr.  Ooldwin  Smith  has  added  another  to  the  not  inconsiderable  roll
of  eminent  men  who  have  found  their  delight  in  Miss  Austen.  .  .  .  His
little  book  upon  her,  just  published  by  Walter  Scott,  is  certainly  a  fas-
cinating book  to  those  who  already  know  her  and  love  her  well :  and  we
hare  little  doubt  that  it  will  prove  also  a  fascinating  book  to  those  who
have  still  to  make  her  acquaintance."— Spectator.

LIFE  OF  BROWNING.     By  WILLIAM  SHARP.

"This  little  volume  is  a  model  of  excellent  English,  and  in  every  respect
it  seems  to  us  what  a  biography  should  be." — Public  Opinion.

LIFE  OF  BYRON.     By  HON.  RODBN  NOEL.

"  The  Hon.  Roden  Noel's  volume  on  Byron  is  decidedly  one  of  the  most
readable  in  the  excellent '  Great  Writers '  series." — Scottish  Leader.

LIFE  OF  HAWTHORNE.    By  MONCURB  CONWAT.

"  It  is  a  delightful  causerie— -pleasant,  genial  talk  about  a  most  interest-
ing man.  Easy  and  conversational  as  the  tone  is  throughout,  no  important
fact  is  omitted,  no  valueless  fact  is  recalled ;  and  it  is  entirely  exempt  from
platitude  and  conventionality." — The  Speaker.

LIFE  OF  SCHOPENHAUER.    By  PROFESSOR  WALLACE.

"We  can  speak  very  highly  of  this  little  book  of  Mr.  Wallace's.  It
is,  perhaps,  excessively  lenient  in  dealing  with  the  man,  and  it  cannot
be  said  to  be  at  all  ferociously  critical  in  dealing  with  the  philosophy." —
Saturday  Review.


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


GREAT    WRITERS— continued.
LIFE  OF  SHERIDAN.    By  LLOYD  SANDERS.

"To  say  that  Mr.  Lloyd  Sanders,  in  this  little  volume,  has  produced  the
best  existing  memoir  of  Sheridan,  is  really  to  award  much  fainter  praise
than  the  work  deserres." — Manchester  Examiner.

LIFE  OF  THACKERAY.    By  HERMAN  MERIVALE  and  F.  T.  MARZIALS.
"The  monograph  just  published  is  well  worth  reading,  .  .  .  and  the  book,
with  its  excellent  bibliography,  is  one  which  neither  the  student  nor  the
general  reader  can  well  afford  to  miss." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

LIFE  OF  CERVANTES.     By  W.  E.  WATTS.

"  We  can  commend  this  book  as  a  worthy  addition  to  the  useful  series
to  which  it  belongs." — London  Daily  Chronicle.

LIFE  OF  VOLTAIRE.    By  FRANCIS  ESMNASSE.


LIBRARY  EDITION  OF  "  GREAT  WRITERS,"  Demy  Svo,  2s.  64


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


THE  NOVELTY  OF  THE  SEASON.


SELECTED  THREE-VOL.  SETS

IN    NEW   BROCADE    BINDING.

6s.  per  Set,  in  Shell  Case  to  match.


THE  FOLLOWING  SETS  CAN  BE  OBTAINED—
POEMS    OF


WORDSWORTH.
KEATS.
SHELLEY.

COLERIDGE.
SOUTHEY.
COWPER.

EARLY   ENGLISH
POETRY.
CHAUCER.

SPENSER.

LONGFELLOW.
WHITTIER.
EMERSON.

HOGG.
ALLAN  RAMSAY.
SCOTTISH    MINOR
POETS.

BORDER  BALLADS.
JACOBITE  SONGS.
OSSIAN.

HORACE.
GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.
LANDOR.

CAVALIER  POETS.
LOVE  LYRICS.
HERRICK.

GOLDSMITH.
MOORE.
IRISH  MINSTRELSY.

SHAKESPEARE.
BEN  JONSON.
MARLOWE.

CHRISTIAN  YEAR.
IMITATION    OF
CHRIST.
HERBERT.

WOMEN  POETS.
CHILDREN  OF  POET&
SEA  MUSIC.

SONNETS    OF   THIS
CENTURY.
SONNETS  OF  EUROPE.
AMERICAN  SONNETS.

PRAED.
HUNT  AND  HOOD.
DOBELL.

MEREDITH.
MARSTON.
LOVE  LETTERS.

AMERICAN    HUMOR-
OUS VERSE.
ENGLISH  HUMOROUS
VERSE.
BALLADES    AND
RONDEAUS.

HEINE.
GOETHE.
HUGO.

SELECTED  TWO-VOLUME  SETS

IN  NEW  BROCADE  BINDING.
45,  per   Set,  in   Shell    Case  to   match.


SCOTT  (Lady  of  the  Lake,  etc.).
SCOTT  (Marmion,  etc.).

BURNS  (Songs).
BURNS  (Poems).


BYRON  (Don  Juan,  etc.}.
BYRON  (Miscellaneous).

MILTON  (Paradise  Lost).
MILTON  (Paradise  Regained,  etc.).


London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


SELECTED  THREE-VOL.  SETS


IN    NEW    BROCADE    BINDING.
6s.  per  Sef,  in  Shell  Case  to  match.


0,  W,  HOLMES  SERIES-

Autocrat    of   the    Breakfast-
Table.

The  Professor  at  the   Break-

fast-Table.
The  Poet  at   the   Breakfast

Table.


LANDQR  SERIES-

Lander's   Imaginary   Conver-
sations.

Pentameron.
Pericles  and  Aspasia.

THREE  ENGLISH  ESSAYISTS-

Essays  of  Elia.
Essays  of  Leigh  Hunt.
Essays  of  William  Hazlitt


THREE  CLASSICAL  MORALISTS-

Meditations    of    Marcus

Aurelius.

Teaching  of  Epictetus.
Morals  of  Seneca.


WALDEN  SERIES-

Thoreau's  Walden.
Thoreau's  Week.
Thoreau's  Essays.

FAMOUS  LETTERS-

Letters  of  Burns.
Letters  of  Byron.
Letters  of  Shelley.

LOWELL  SERIES-

My  Study  Windows.
The  English  Poets.
The  Biglow  Papers.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


Crown  2>vo,  about  350  //.  each,  Ctoth  Cover,  zs.  6d.  per  vol.
Half-polished  Morocco,  gilt  top,  $s.


COUNT  TOLSTOI'S  WORKS,


The  following  Volumes  are  already  issued —

A  RUSSIAN   PROPRIETOR.

THE   COSSACKS.

IVAN   ILYITCH,  AND  OTHER  STORIES.

THE   INVADERS,  AND  OTHER  STORIES.

MY  RELIGION.

LIFE.

MY  CONFESSION.
CHILDHOOD,    BOYHOOD,    YOUTH.

THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  WAR.
ANNA    KARENINA.     (2  VOLS.)

WHAT  TO   DO?

WAR  AND   PEACE.     (4  VOLS.)

THE  LONG  EXILE,  AND  OTHER  STORIES  FOR  CHILDREN.

SEVASTOPOL.

THE  KREUTZER  SONATA,  AND  FAMILY
HAPPINESS.

Uniform  with  the  above.

IMPRESSIONS    OF    RUSSIA.

BY  DR.  GEORG  BRANDES.

London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,   Paternoster  Row.


IBSEN'S   FAMOUS   PROSE   DRAMAS.

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  ARCHER.

Complete  in  Five  Vols.     Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  Price  3/6  each.
Set  of  Five  Vols.,  in  Case,  17/6;  in  Half  Morocco,  in  Case,  32/6.

"  We  seem  at  last  to  be  shown  men  and  women  as  they  are  ;  and  at  first  it
is  more  than  we  can  endure.  .  .  All  Ibsen's  characters  speak  and  act  as  if
they  -were  hypnotised,  and  under  their  creator's  imperious  demand  to  reveal
themselves.  There  never  was  such  a  mirror  held  up  to  nature  before :  it  is
too  terrible.  .  .  .  Yet  we  must  return  to  Ibsen,  with  his  remorseless  surgery,
his  remorseless  electric-light,  until  we,  too,  have  grown  strong  and  learned  to
face  the  naked — if  necessary,  the  flayed  and  bleeding — reality." — SPEAKER
(London),

VOL.  I.  "A  DOLL'S  HOUSE,"  "THE  LEAGUE  OF
YOUTH,"  and  "THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY."  With
Portrait  cf  the  Author,  and  Biographical  Introduction  by
WlLLIAMARCHER.

VOL.  II.     "GHOSTS,"  "AN  ENEMY  OF  THE  PEOPLE,"

and  "THE  WILD  DUCK."     With  an  Introductory  Note.

VOL.  III.  "LADY  INGER  OF  OSTRAT,"  "THE  VIKINGS
AT  HELGELAND,"  "THE  PRETENDERS."  With  an
Introductory  Note  and  Portrait  of  Ibsen.

VOL.  IV.  "EMPEROR  AND  GALILEAN."  With  an
Introductory  Note  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER.

VOL.  V.  "  ROSMERSHOLM,"  "THE  LADY  FROM  THE
SEA,"  "HEDDA  GABLER."  Translated  by  WILLIAM
ARCHER.  With  an  Introductory  Note.

The  sequence  of  the  plays  in  each  volume  is  chronological ;  the  complete
set  of  volumes  comprising  the  dramas  thus  presents  them  in  chronological
order.

"The  art  of  prose  translation  does  not  perhaps  enjoy  a  very  high  literary
status  in  England,  but  we  have  no  hesitation  in  numbering  the  present
version  of  Ibsen,  so  far  as  it  has  gone  (Vols.  I.  and  II.),  among  the  very
best  achievements,  in  that  kind,  of  our  generation." — Academy.

"We  have  seldom,  if  ever,  met  with  a  translation  so  absolutely
idiomatic. " —  Glasgoiu  Herald.


LONDON:  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  WARWICK  LANE.


THE   CANTERBURY   POETS.

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  SHARP.    IN  I/-  MONTHLY  VOLUMES.


Cloth,  Red  Edges       .        Is.
Cloth,  Uncut  Edges  -        Is.


Red  Roan,  Gilt  Edges,  2s.  6d.
Pad.  Morocco,  Gilt  Edges,   5s.


THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR   „ By  the  ROY.  John  Kebl«

COLERIDGE Edited  by  Joseph  Skipaey.

LONGFELLOW   ~ Edited  by  E?a  Hop*.

CAMPBELL Edited  by  John  Hogben.

SHELLEY Edited  by  Joseph  Skipsey.

WORDSWORTH Edited  by  A.  J.  Symington.

BLAKE   ........ .... Edited  by  Joseph  Skipsey.

WJUJ.TT1ER    „.. Edited  by  Bra  Hope.

POE    ....... ...... Edited  by  Jo»eph  SMpsey.

CHATTERTON .._, . ............ Edited  by  John  Richmond.

BURNS.    Poems .,_ .„. « Edited  by  Joseph  Skipsay.

BURNS.    Songa Edited  by  Joseph  Skipsey.

MARLOWE „- Edited  by  Percy  B.  Pinkerton,

KEATS ».................__ Edited  by  John  Hogben,

HERBERT „ Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.

HUGO Translated  by  Dean  Carrington.

OOWPER ^ Edited  by  Bra  Hope.

SHAKESPEARE'S  POEMS,  Etc. Edited  by  William  Sharp.

EMERSON  _„ Edited  by  Walter  Lewin.

SONNETS  OF  THIS  CENTURY Edited  by  William  Sharp.

WHITMAN Jtdited  by  Ernest  Rhys.

SCOTT.    Marmion,  etc.  Edited  by  William  Sharp.

SCOTT.    Lady  of  the  Lake,  etc.    Edited  by  Wflliam  Sharp.

PRAED Edited  by  Frederick  Cooper.

HOGG    _ — . — Edited  by  his  Daughter,  Mrs.  Garden.

GOLDSMITH Edited  by  William  Tirebuck.

LOVE  LETTERS.  Etc. By  Eric  Mackay.

SPENSER . Edited  by  Hon.  Roden  Noel

CHILDREN  OF  THE  POETS Edited  by  Eric  S.  Robertson.

JONSON EditedbyJ.  Addington  Symonds.

BYRON  (2  Vola.) Edited  by  Mathilde  Blind.

THE  SONNETS  OF  EUROPE  ...... Edited  by  S.  Waddington.

RAMSAY   .......  EditedbyJ.  Logie  Robertson.

DOBELL    .. . Edited  by  Mrs.  DobelL


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


THE   CANTERBURY   POETS-continued.

DAYS  OF  THE  YEAR With  Introduction  by  William  Sharp

POPE Edited  by  John  Hogben.

HEINE    ~ Edited  by  Mrs.  Kroeker.

BEAUMONT  AND  FLETCHER  „ Edited  by  John  S.  Fletcher.

BOWLES,  LAMB,  Ac.  Edited  by  William  Tirebuck.

EARLY  ENGLISH  POETRY Edited  by  H.  Macaulay  Fitigibbon.

SKA  MUSIC    Edited  by  Mrs  Sharp-

HERRICK . -...- Edited  by  Erneit Rhys.

BALLADES  AND  RONDEAUS Edited  by  J.  Gleeson  White.

IRISH  MINSTRELSY    Edited  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling.

HILTON'S  PARADISE  LOST Edited  by  J.  Bradshaw,  M.A.,  LL.D.

JACOBITE  BALLADS Edited  by  O.  S.  Macquoid.

AUSTRALIAN  BALLADS Edited  by  D.  B.  W.  Sladen,  B.A.

MOORE   „ M Edited  by  John  Dorrian.

BORDER  BALLADS Edited  by  Graham  H.  Tomaon.

SONQ-TIDE  ..~ By  Philip  Bourke  Marrton.

ODES   OF   HORACE Translation!  by  Sir  Stephen  de  Vere,  Bt.

OSSIAN Edited  by  George  Eyre-Todd.

ELFIN  MUSIC    Edited  by  Arthur  Edward  Waite.

SOUTHEY . . Edited  by  Sidney  E.  Thompson.

CHAUCER  „ Edited  by  Frederick  Noel  Paton.

POEMS  OF  WILD  LIFE Edited  by  Charles  O.  D.  Roberta,  M.A.

PARADISE  REGAINED Edited  by  J.  Bradshaw,  M.  A.,  LL.D.

CRABBE „.....„.. Edited  by  E.  Lamplough.

DORA  GREENWELL Edited  by  William  Dorling.

FAUST Edited  by  Elizabeth  Craigmyle.

AMERICAN  SONNETS   Edited  by  William  Sharp.

LANDOR'S  POEMS  Edited  by  Ernest  Badford.

GREEK  ANTHOLOGY Edited  by  Graham  B.  Tomson.

HUNT  AND  HOOD Edited  by  J.  Harwood  Panting.

HUMOROUS  POEMS  Edited  by  Ralph  H.  Caine.

LYTTON'S  FLAYS Edited  by  R,  Farquharson  Sharp.

GREAT  ODES Edited  by  William  Sharp.

MEREDITH'S  POEMS Edited  by  M.  Betham-Edwards.

PAINTER-POETS Edited  by  Kineton  Parkes.

WOMEN  POETS  » Edited  by  Mrs.  Sharp.

LOVE  LYRICS Edited  by  Percy  Hulburd.

AMERICAN  HUMOROUS  VERSE  Edited  by  James  Ban.

MINOR  SCOTCH  LYRICS Edited  by  Sir  George  Douglas.

CAVALIER  LYRISTS Edited  by  Will  H.  Dircks.

GERMAN  BALLADS Edited  by  Elizabeth  Craigmyle.

SONGS  OF  BERANGER Translated  by  William  Toynbee.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane.


Quarto,  cloth  elegant,  gilt  edges,  emblematic  design  on

cover,  6s.     May  also  be  had  in  a  variety

of  Fancy  Bindings.


A  MUSICIANS'  BIRTHDAY  BOOK.

EDITED  BY  ELEONORE   D'ESTERRE   KEELING.


THIS  is  a  unique  Birthday  Book.  Against  each  date  are
given  the  names  of  musicians  whose  birthday  it  is,  together
with  a  verse-quotation  appropriate  to  the  character  of  their
different  compositions  or  performances.  A  special  feature  of
the  book  consists  in  the  reproduction  in  fac-simile  of  auto-
graphs, and  autographic  music,  of  living  composers.  Three
sonnets  by  Mr.  Theodore  Watts,  on  the  "Fausts"  of  Berlioz,
Schumann,  and  Gounod,  have  been  written  specially  for  this
volume.  It  is  illustrated  with  designs  of  various  musical
instruments,  etc.;  autographs  of  Rubenstein,  Dvorak,  Grieg,
Mackenzie,  Villiers  Stanford,  etc.,  etc.


"  To  musical  amateurs  this  will  certainly  prove  the  most  at-
tractive birthday  book  ever  published."—  Manchester  Guardian.

"  One  of  those  happy  ideas  that  seems  to  have  been  yearning
for  fulfilment.  .  .  .  The  book  ought  to  have  a  place  on  every
music  stand." — Scottish  Leader.

London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


«


A    001  431  370    4


L  005


76  7


COLLEGE
L  IB.

PK


G9R7
1890
