The Bustan of Sadi (Saadi, trans. A. Hart Edwards, 1911)
==========================================================
Edwards's 1911 English rendering of Sa'di's Bustan (The Orchard), the great Persian didactic epic of ethics and statecraft, companion to the Gulistan. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

tbc tKaiabom of tbe Setfed I

Edited by

L. CRANMER-BYNG
Dr. S. A. KAPADIA


THE BUSTAN of SADI


WISDOM OF THE EAST


THE BUSTAN of SADI


TRANSLATED FROM THE PERSIAN
WITH AN INTRODUCTION

BY A. HART EDWARDS


LONDON

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

1911


PRINTED BY

HAZKLL, WATSON AND VINZY, LD.,
LONDON AND AYLESBURY.


CENTPv


2-icrcrC.

S-^/- SSl/i>«L^;.


CONTENTS


PAGE


iNTEODirOTIOK

In the Name ol God, the Compassionate, the

Merciful

On the Reason for the Writing of the Book
Concerning Atabak Abu Bakr, Son of Sid.


CHAP.

I.


II.


III.


Concerning Justice, Counsel, and
THE Administration of Government :

Nushira van’s Counsel to his Son . , . •

Discourse concerning Travellers
Story illustrating the Need for Deliberation
Story of the King whose Coat was Coarse .
Story of Darius and the Herdsman .

Story of Abdul Aziz and the Pearl .

Story of how Tukla was rebuked by a Devotee
Discourse concerning Riches and Poverty .
StoiA' of Qazal Arsalan and the Fort

A Story of Damascus

Story of a Bully

Concerning Benevolence:

story illustrative of doing good to the Evil
Story concerning Fasting . . * .

Story illustrative of Practical Charity
Story of a Man and a Thirsty Dog
Story Apropos of Nemesis . ,

Story of a Fool and a Fox ' . '

Story of a Devout Miser .

Story of Hatim Tai''. # . C , .

Story of Hatim and the Messenger sent to kill him
Discourse "^toAeernini^IiindAess to^rphans

Concerning Love:

Discourse concerning Constancy

Story of a Dancer ......

Story illustrating the Reality of Love
Story Illustrative of Patience • , •

Story of One who was Assiduous in Prayer _ .
Story of Sultan Mahmud and his Love for Ayaz

Story of a Village Chief

Story of a Fire-fly

Story of a Moth and a Candle . .

Another Story on the same Subject ,

5


19

21

22


24

24

25
28

29

30

31

31

32
32
34


36

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43
47


49

50

50

51

52

52

53

54

54

55


CONTENTS


CHAP.


PAGISI


IV. CoNOBENiiirG Htjmility:

story of a Raindrop ...... 56

Story Illustrative of Pious Men regarding them-
selves with Contempt . ^ . . . .57

Story of Sultan Bayasad Bnstami . . 57

Discourse on Conceat 58

Story of the Darwesh and the Proud Cadi . 59

Story of the Honey-seller 62

Story illustrating the Forbearance of Good Men 63
Story illustrating the Noble-mindedness of Men 64
Story of a Kind Master and his Disobedient
Slave ........ 64

Story of Maruf Karchl and the Sick Traveller . 65

Storv illustrating the Folly of the Ignoble . 67

Story of One who had a Little Knowledge . 68
Story illustrating the Humility of the Pious . 68

Story illustrating the Value of Soft Words . 69

Story illustrating the Wisdom of feigning

Deafness . 70

Story illustrating Forbearance for the Sake of

Friends 71

Story of Luqman, the Sage . . . .72

V. Concerning Resignation:

story of a Soldier of Isfahan . . . .73

Story of the Doctor and the Villager . . 75

Story of the Villager and his Ass . . .76

Story Illustrating Luck 76

Story of One who blamed his Destiny . . 76

Story of a Darwesh and his Wife . . .77

Story of a Vulture and a Kite. . . .77

Story of a Camel 78

Discomse concerning Hypocrisy . . .79

VI. Concerning Contentment:

story of the King of Khwarazm . . .81

Concerning the Evils of Over-eating . . 81

Story of a Glutton 82

Story of a Recluse 82

Story illustrating the Evils of Avarice . . 83

Story of an Ambitious Gat . . . .83

Story of a Short-sighted Man and his High-

minded Wife 84

Story of a Holy Man who built a House . 85
Story of a Sheikh who became King , . 85

Discourse concerning Riches . . . .86

Vn. Concerning Education:

Discourse concerning the Excellence of Taci-

• tumity 89

Story concerning the keeping of Secrets . , 90


CONTENTS


7

CHAP. PASB

Vn. CoHOEBNiNG Eduoation [cordirmed) :

story illustrating the Fact that Silence is Best

for Fools 90

Story illustrating the Folly of Impertinence . 91

Discourse on Slander 92

Story concerning the same Subtect ... 92

Why Thieving is better than Slandering. . 92

Sadi and his Envious Class-friend ... 93

Story of Sa^'s Childhood .... 93

Story of a Sufi's Rebuke. .... 94

Concerning Absent Friends .... 94

Where Slander is Lawful". .... 95

Tale-bearers worse than Back-biters . . 95

Faridun and his Wise Vazier .... 96

Discourse concerning Wives .... 97

Discourse on the Training of Sons ... 98

Sadi rebuked for his Fault-finding . . .98

VIII. Concerning Gratittede:

A Mother’s Warning to her Son . . . 101

Discourse concerning the Art of the Most

High God 102

Discourse concerning the Condition of the

Weak 103

Story of Tughral, King of Shiraz, and the

Hindu Watchman . . . . .103

Story of a Thief ...... 104

Story of One who was not what he seemed . 105

Story of a Sage Donkey 105

Story illustrating the Evils Of Pride . . 106

Story of Sadi and the Idolaters . . .106

IX. Concerning Repentance:

An Old Man’s Lament 110

Advice and Warning ..... Ill
Sadi’s Rebuke from a Camel-driver . . . 112

Story concerning Sorrow for the Dead . . 113

Story of a Pious Man and a Gold Brick . .114

Admonition . . . . . . .115

Moral from an Incident in Sadi’s Childhood . 116
Story of a Man who reared a Wolf . . 117

Story of a Cheat 117

A Recollection of Childhood . . . . 118

Story of One who burned his Harvest . . 118

Discourse on Repentance 119

X. Concerning Prayer:

A Worshipper’s Lament ..... 121

Story of an Idolater 121


Notes


123


EDITORIAL NOTE


T he object of the Editors of this series is a
very definite one. They desire above all
things that, in their humble way, these books
shall be the ambassadors of good-will and under-
standing between East and West — ^the old world
of Thought and the new of Action. In this
endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are
but followers of the highest example in the
land. They are confident that a deeper know-
ledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy
of Oriental thought may help to a revival of
that true spirit of Charity which neither despises
nor fears the nations of another creed and colour.
Finally, in thanking press and public for the
very cordial reception given to the “ Wisdom
of the East ” Series, they wish to state that
no pains have been spared to secure the best
specialists for the treatment of the various
subjects at hand.

, L. CRANMER-BYNG.

S. A. KAPADIA.


Nobthbrook Society,

21 Cromwell Road,

Kensington, S.W,

8


INTRODUCTION


If among the twenty-two works with which
Sadi enriched the literature of his country the
Oulistdn rank first in popularity, the Bustm, (ht.
“ Garden ”) may justly claim equal precedence
in point of interest and merit.

No comprehensive translation of this important
classical work has hitherto been placed before
the reading public, but it cannot be doubted that
the character of its contents is such as to fully
justify the attempt now made to familiarize
English readers with the entertaining anecdotes
and devotional wisdom which the Sage of Shiraz
embodied in his Palace of Wealth. This is the
name which he apphes to the Bustdn in an in-
troductory chapter, and it is one which springs
from something more than a poet’s fancy, for the
ten doors, or chapters, with which the edifice is fur-
nished lead into a garden that is indeed rich in the
fruits of knowledge gained by a wide experience
of life in many lands, and earnest thought.

The Bustdn is written in verse — a fact which
adds considerably to the difficulties of trans-
lation, since the invariable rule of Sadi, like that
of every other Pemian poet we have read, is to
sacrifice sense to the exigencies of rhyme and


10


INTRODUCTION


metre. In not a few cases the meaning is so
confused on this acconnt that even the native
commentators, who possess a fund of ingenuity
in explaining what they do not properly imder-
stand, have been compelled to pass over numerous
couplets through sheer inability to unravel their
intricacies and the abstruse ideas of the poet.

Probably in no other language in the world is
poetic license so freely permitted and indulged
in as in Persian. The construction of sentences
follows no rule ; the order of words is just that
which the individual poet chooses to adopt, and
the idea of time — ^past, present, and future — ^is
ignored in the use of tenses, that part of a verb
being alone employed which rhymes the best.

Notwithstanding idiosyncrasies of this kind,
the Bustdn is written in a style that is delightfully
pure and admirably adapted to the su'bjeot.
The devout spirit by which Sadi was characterized
throughout his chequered life is revealed in every
page of the book. In the Chdistan he gave free
rein to the quaint humour which for many cen-
turies has been the delight of the Eastern peoples,
and which an ever-increasing body of English
readers is learning to appreciate and admire.
In the Bmtan the humour is more restrained ;
its place is taken by a more sober reasoning of
the duties of mankind towards the Deity and
towards their feUow-men. Devotion to God and
the inflexibility of Fate are the underlying texts


rnTRODUCTION


11


of every poem, and the ideality of the one and
the stem reality of the other are portrayed in
language the beauty of which, it is to be feared,
the English rendering does not always adequately
convey.

The poems abound in metaphor, a figure of
style which Eastern writers employ to a degree
that is always exaggerated, and sometimes
tedious ; but for the purpose of this translation,
which aims at a happy medium between literal
accuracy and the freedom requisite in order to
render Oriental phraseology into polite English,
numerous of the more far-fetched allusions have
been discarded, to the benefit of the text.

Although a memoir of Sadi’s life is included
in another volume of this series, it may not be
out of place to give here a brief outline of the
poet’s career, especially as the Bustan contains
several references to his childhood and travels.

Sheikh Muslih-ud-din Sadi was born in Shiraz,
in Persia, a.d. 1176; that is to say, 671 years
after the flight of Muhammad from Mecca to
Medina. He was the son of one Abdu’llah
(servant of God), who held a Government office
under the Diwan of that time. Sadi was a child
when his father died, as is made clear from the
pathetic poem in the second chapter, ending with
these words :

Well do I know tiie orphan’s sorrow.

For my father departed in my childhood.


12


INTRODtrCTION


But poorly endowed with earthly riches, Sadi
endured many hardships in consequence of this
bereavement, and was eventually obliged to live,
together with his mother, imder the protection
of a Saracen chief. How long he remained there
it is impossible to say, for the reason that his
biographers are the reverse of informing. This
much is, however, known, that being imbued from
early childhood with an insatiable thirst for
knowledge, he eventually journeyed to Baghdad,
then at the zenith of its intellectual fame, and
was enabled to enter a private school there
through the generosity of a wealthy native
gentleman. Making full use of the opportunity
so favourably presented, the young aspirant pro-
gressed rapi^y along the path of learning, and
at the age of twenty-one made his first essays in
authorship. Some fragmentary poems which he
submitted with a long dedication to Shams-ud-
din, the Professor of Literature at the Nizamiah
College of Baghdad, so pleased that able and dis-
cerning man that he at once fixed upon Sadi a
liberal allowance from his own private purse, with
the promise of every further assistance in his
power. Soon after this, Sadi was admitted into
the college, and ultimately gained an Idrar, or
fellowship. In the seventh chapter of the Bustan
he narrates an instructive story reminiscent of his
studies at Nizamiah, and, prone to conceit though
he often is, he teUs the story against himself,


iNMODUCTlOlsr


u


His soliolastic life did not terminate until he
had reached the age of thirty. Of the value of
this prolonged period of study he himself was
fully cognisant. “ Dost thou not know,” he
asks in the seventh chapter, “ how Sadi attained
to rank ? Neither did he traverse the plains nor \
journey across the seas. In his youth he hved under
the yoke of the wise : God granted him distinction
in after-life. And it is not long before he who is
submissive in obedience exercises command.” No
better example of the truth of this passage could
be cited than that afforded by his own case.

On leaving Baghdad, he went in company with
his tutor, Abdul Qadir Gilani, on a pHgrimage to
Mecca. This was the first of many travels ex-
tending over a period of thirty years, in the
course of which he visited Europe, India, and
practically every part of what are known as the
Near and Middle East. A trip through Syria
and Turkey is specifically mentioned in this
book as inspiring the composition of the Bustan.
Not wishing, as he tells us, to return empty-
handed to his friends at Shiraz, he built the
Palace of Wealth, and offered it to them as a gift.
He does not conceal the high opinion which he
himself placed upon this product of his gifted
pen. The gracefully worded phrases with which
he predicted the undying popularity of the
Oulistdn finds a parallel in the dedication of the
Bustan to Atabak Abu Bakr-bin-S4d, the illus-


14


INTEODUCTION


trious monarch, of Persia beneath whose pro-
tection Sadi spent the latter half of his life.

“Although not wishing to sing the praises of
kings,” he writes, “ I have dedicated this book
to one so that perhaps the pious will say that
Sadi, who surpassed all in eloquence, lived in the
time of Abu Bakr Sad.” Then, addressing the
king, he adds : “ Happy is thy fortune that
Sadi’s date coincides with thine, for as long as
the moon and sun are in the skies thy memory wiU
remain eternal in this book.” This conceit is par-
donable, since it has been amply justified by time.

After the thirty years of travel, Sadi, becoming
elderly, settled down in Persia, where, as has
been said, he gained the favour of the ruhng
prince, from whom he derived not only the
dignity and the more tangible advantages of the
post of Poet Laureate, but his takhallus, or
titular name, of Sadi. He died at the ripe age
of 116, and was buried in his native city.

If the Bustan were the only monument that
remained of his genius, his name would assuredly
still be inscribed in the roll of the Immortals.
One feature of his great intellectual faculties
needs to be emphasized, and aU the more so
because it is apt to be overlooked. That is the
increasing power which they assumed as he
advanced in years, the truth of which can be
understood when it is stated that he composed
the Bmtan at the age of 82, the Qulistdn appear-


iNTRODtJOTIOK


16


ing twelve montlia later. Few, if any, instances
of such sustained mental activity are to be found
elsewhere in the entire world’s history of letters.

Under the several headings of the various
chapters a wide range of ethical subjects is dis-
cussed, the whole forming a compendium of
moral philosophy the broad principles of which
must remain for all time as irrefutable as the
precepts of Scriptural teaching.

Sadi’s spiritual message is not that of a
visionary. His religion was an eminently practical
one — ^he had no sympathies with the recluse and
the ascetic. To fulfil one’s duties towards one’s
fellow-men is to fulfil one’s duty towards the
Deity. That is the root-idea of his teachings.
“ Religion,” he observes, “ consists only in the
service of the people : it does not lie in the
rosary, or prayer-rug, or mendicant’s habit.”

This couplet, occurring in the opening chapter, is
put into the mouth of a certain pious man whom
one of the kings of Persia is said to have visited
in a repentant mood for the purpose of seeking
counsel. The story, like many others in the
book, may or may not have any foundation in
fact, “ the histories of ancient kings,” which the
poetfrequently quotes as his authority, being rather
too vague to be convincing. At the same time, the
historical allusions form an interesting and instruc-
tive background to the legends and the moral
precepts so abundantly interwoven among them.


16


miiODuc^ioji


Although Persia is only yet in the process of
readjusting her ideas of government and the
prerogatives of rulers, principles more advanced
than seem compatible vdth despotism have been
for many centuries current among her people, in
theory, at least, if not in practice. Muhammad
said that a little practice with much knowledge
was better than much practice with little know-
ledge. On that ground Persia has defence, for the
knowledge certainly was there. What could better
describe the true relationship between king and
people than Sadi’s thirteenth-century epigram ? —

Subjects are as the root and the king is as the tree,

And the tree, 0 son, gains strength from the root.

Not many months ago the autocratic tree at
Teheran was rudely severed from its root ; per-
chance the successors of Abu Bakr were not of
those to whom “ the words of Sadi are agreeable.”

The saving grace of benevolence is illustrated
in the second chapter by means of some enter-
taining anecdotes, of two of which the hero is
Hatim Tai, the famous Arabian chief, whose
generosity was such that he preferred to die
rather than disappoint the messenger sent by
a jealous king to slay him. The story of the
Darwesh and the Fox is noteworthy inasmuch
as it throws a much-needed light upon the
Eastern interpretation of all that is implied by
“ qismat.” It is commonly supposed that the


INTEODUCTION


17


sense of inevitability removes from the Eastern’s
mind the necessity for individual effort. This
view is distinctly erroneous. No such pernicious
doctrine is, at any rate, subscribed to by the edu-
cated classes ; to the lazy and ne’er-do-well who
plead Eate as their excuse, Sadi points the moral.

After demonstrating in the two succeeding
chapters the powerlessness of man to avert the
decrees of Eate, and the virtues of content-
ment, the poet passes on to discuss the cultiva-
tion of the mind. The comparison here drawn
between the human mind and a city “ full of
good and evil desires,” of which the Ego is the
Sultan and Reason the Vazier, is original and
full of meaning. Despite his own much-vaunted
eloquence and facility of speech, Sadi condemns
in scathing terms the man of many words, re-
marking poignantly that “ a grain of musk is
better than a heap of mud.” So, too, in his
opinion, is a thief better than a back-biter, and,
apropos of the gentler sex, a woman of good
nature better than one of beauty. The advice to
take a new wife every year cannot be regarded
seriously, even though it be true that last year’s
almanac has lost its usefulness. More worthy of
the poet is the discourse on the trainmg of children.
Nothing truer than the sentiments expressed in
this poem did he ever utter, and in England to-
day there can be few who would dispute them.

Excessive charm pervades the three concluding

2


18


lOTBODUOTION


chapters. If that bigotry and spirit of intoler-
ance of which the Mussulman, no less than the
followers of other creeds, is guilty is revealed in
no small measure, criticism on that score must give
place to wonder and admiration for the sincere and
perfervid homage which the poet renders to the
Deity whom, in the essence, all nations worship.

The narrative, in the eighth chapter, of Sadi’s
adventure with the idolaters in Guzerat will be
found amusing as well as enlightening.

Nothing now remains for the translator but to
join with Sadi in his plea for indulgent criticism :

Never have I heard it said

The wise found fault with what they read.

Though of Chinese cloth a robe be made,

Inside must a cotton lining be laid.

If thou wouldst but the cloth, seek not to condemn —
Gloss over the cotton with acumen.

On the Day of Judgment the wicked will be
Forgiven, through them that have purity.

If in my words thou evil find,

Do likewise, forgive, for more is behind.

If a word in a thousand suit thy taste, .

Do not denounce the rest in haste.

Tbe poet goes on to remark that his composi-
tions are esteemed in Persia as is the choicest
musk of Tartary : the translator is less fortunate
and more modest.


A. H. E.


THE BUSTAif OF SADI


PROLOGUE

In the Name of God, the Compassionate,
THE MeECIFTJL

In the name of Him who created and sustains
the world, the Sage who endowed tongue with
speech.

He attains no honour who turns the face from
the door of His mercy.

The kings of the earth prostrate themselves
before Him in supplication.

He seizes not in haste the disobedient, nor
drives away the penitent with violence. The
two worlds are as a drop of water in the ocean
of His knowledge.

He withholds not His bounty though His
servants sin ; upon the surface of the earth has
He spread a feast, in which both friend and foo
may share.

X9


20


iPl^OLOGOT


Peerless He is, and His kingdom is eternal.
Upon the head of one He placeth a crown ; another
he hurleth from the throne to the ground.

The fire of His friend He turneth into a flower-
garden ; through the waters of the Nile He
sendeth His foes to perdition.

Behmd the veil He seeth all, and concealeth
our faults with His own goodness.

He is near to them that are downcast, and
accepteth the prayers of them that lament.

He knoweth of the things that exist not, of
secrets that are untold.

He causeth the moon and the sun to revolve,
and spreadeth water upon the earth.

In the heart of a stone hath He placed a jewel ;
from nothing hath He created all that is.

Who can reveal the secret of His qualities ;
what eye can see the limits of His beauty ?

The bird of thought cannot soar to the height
of His presence, nor the hand of understandhig
reach to the skirt of His praise.

Think not, 0 Sadi, that one can walk in the
road of purity except in the footsteps of Muham-
mad.

He is the patriarch of the prophets, the guide
of the path of salvation ; the mediator of
mankind, and the chief of the Court of Judg-
ment. What of thy praises can Sadi utter ?
The mercy of God be upon thee, 0 Prophet,
and peace.


PBOLOGUE


n


Osr THE Reason eqr the Writing oe the
Book

I travelled in many regions of the globe and
passed the days in the company of many men.
I reaped advantages in every corner, and gleaned
an ear of com from every harvest. But I saw
none like the pious and devout men of Shiraz —
upon which land be the grace of God — my
attachment with whom drew away my heart
from Syria and Turkey.

I regretted that I should go from the garden
of the world empty-handed to my friends, and
reflected : “ Travellers bring sugar-candy from
Egypt as a present to their friends. Although I
have no candy, yet have I words that are sweeter.
The sugar that I bring is not that which is eaten,
but what knowers of truth take away with
respect.”

When I built this Palace of Wealth,’^ I
furnished it with ten doors of instraction.®

It was in the year 656 that this famous treasury
became full of the pearls of eloquence. A
quilted robe of silk, or of Chinese embroidery,
must of necessity be padded with cotton ; if
thou obtain aught of the silk, fret not — be
generous and conceal the cotton. I have
heard that in the day of Hope and Fear
the Merciful One will pardon the evil for the
sake of the good. If thou see evil in my


22


PEOLOGUE


words, do thou likewise. If one couplet among
a thousand please thee, generously withhold thy
fault-finding.

Assuredly, my compositions are esteemed in
Persia as the priceless musk of Khutan. Sadi
brings roses to the garden with mirth. His
verses are like dates encrusted with sugar —
when opened, a stone ’ is revealed inside.

CONCEBNING AtAbAK AbIT BaKB, SoiT OS’
Sai)‘

Although not desiring to write in praise of
kings, I have inscribed this book to the name
of a certain one so that perhaps the pious may
say : “ Sadi, who surpassed all in eloquence,
lived in the time of Abu Bakr, the son of Sad.”
Thus, in this book will his memory remain so
long as the moon and sun are in the skies. Be-
yond count are his virtues — may the world fulfil
his desires, the heavens be his friend, and the
Creator be his guardian.


CHAPTER I

OONOEEinNa JUSTICE, COUNSEL, AND THE
ADMINISTEATION OE GOVERNMENT

The goodness of God surpasseth imagination ;
what service can the tongue of praise perform 1
Keep, O God, this king,® Abu Bakr, beneath
whose shadow is the protection of the people,
long estabhshed upon his throne, and make
his heart to live in obedience to Thee. Render
fruitful his tree of hope ; prolong his youth,
and adorn his face with mercy.

O King ! deck not thyself in royal garments
when thou comest to worship : make thy sup-
plications hke a darwesh, saying : “ O God !
powerful and strong Thou art. I am no monarch,
but a beggar in Thy court. Unless Thy help
sustain me, what can issue from my hand ?
Succour me, and give me the means of virtue,
or else how can I benefit my people ? ”

If thou rule by day, pray fervently by night.
The great among thy servants wait upon thee
at thy door ; thus shouldest thou serve, with
thy head in worship upon God’s threshold.

23


24 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT


NushIeavIn’s ‘ Counsel to His" Son

Thus, when at the point of death, did Nu-
shiravan counsel his son Hurmuz :

“ Cherish the poor, and seek not thine own
comfort. The shepherd should not sleep while
the wolf is among the sheep. Protect the needy,
for a king wears his crown for the sake of his
subjects. The people are as the root and the
king is as the tree ; and the tree, 0 son, gains
strength from the root. He should not oppress
the people who has fear of injury to his kingdom.
Seek not plenteousness in that land where the
people are afflicted by the king. Fear them
that are proud and them that fear not God.”

Disoouese conoeening Teavbllees

The king who deals harshly with merchants
who come from afar closes the door of well-
being upon the whole of his subjects. When
do the wise return to the land of which they
hear rumours of bad custom ?

If thou desire a good name, hold merchants
and travellers in high esteem, for they cany
thy reputation through the world. Be cautious
also lest, being enemies in the guise of friends, they
seek thy injury.

Advance the digmties of old friends, for
treacheiy comes not from them that are cherished*


BEWARE THE FAIR


25


When thy servant becomes stricken in years,
be not unmindful of thy obligations towards
him. If old age binds his hand from service,
the hand of generosity yet remains to thee.

Stoby illtjsteatifg the Need eoe Delibeba-

TIOH

There once landed at a seaport of Arabia a
man who had widely travelled and was versed in
many sciences. He presented himself at the
palace of the king, who was so captivated by his
wisdom and knowledge that he appointed the
traveller to the vaziership.

With such skill did he perform the duties of
that office that he offended none, and brought the
kingdom completely beneath his sway. He
closed the mouths of slanderers, because nothing
evil issued from his hand ; and the envious, who
could detect no fault in him, bemoaned their
lack of opportunity to do him injury.

At the court, however, there were two beauti-
ful young slaves towards whom the vazier dis-
played no small measure of affection. (If thou
wouldst that thy rank endure, incline not thy
heart towards the fair ; and though thy love be
innocent, have care, for there is fear of loss.)

The former vazier, who had been dismissed to
make room for the newcomer, maliciously carried
the story to the king.


26 ADMINISTRATION^ OF GOVERNMENT


“ I know not,” he said, “ who this new minister
may be, but he lives not chastely in this land.
I have heard that he intrigues with two of thy
slaves — he is a perfidious man, and lustful. It
is not right that one such as he should bring
ill-fame upon, the court. I am not so unmindful
of the favours that I have received at thy hands
that I should see these things and remain silent.”

Angered by what he heard, the king stealthily
watched the new vazier, and when, later, he ob-
served the latter glance towards one of the slaves,
who returned a covert smile, his suspicions of
evil became at once confirmed.

Summoning the minister to his side, he said :
“ I did not know thee to be shameless and un-
worthy. ^uch lofty station is not thy proper
place. But the fault is mine. If I cherish one
who is of evil nature, assuredly do I sanction
disloyalty in my house.”

“ Since my skirt is free from guilt,” the vazier
replied, “ I fear not the malignity of the evil-
wisher, I know not who has accused me of
what I have not done.”

“This was told me by the old vazier,” ex-
plained the king.

The vazier smiled and said, “ Whatever he said
is no cause for wonder. WTiat would the envious
man say when he saw me in his former place ?
Him I knew to be my enemy that day when
Khasrav appointed him to lower rank than


MALICE AND ENVY


27


me. Never till Doomsday will he accept me as
a friend when in my promotion he sees his own
decline. If thou wilt give ear to thy slave I will
narrate a story that is apropos.

‘*In a dream some one saw the Prince of Evil,
whose figure was as erect as a fir-tree, and whose
face was as fair as the sun. Regarding him, the
sleeper said : ‘ O splendid being ! Mankind

knows not of thy beauty. Eearful of countenance
do they imagine thee, and hideous have they
depicted thee on the walls of the public baths.’
The Prince of Evil smiled : ‘ Such is not my
figure,’ he replied ; ‘ but the pencil was in the
hand of an enemy ! The root of their stock did
I throw out of Paradise ; now in malice do they
paint me ugly.’

“In the same way,” continued the vazier,
“ although my fame is good, the envious speak
ill of me. Those who are guiltless are brave in
speech ; only he who gives false weight has fear
of the inspector.”

“ Forsooth,” the Idng exclaimed, his anger
rising, “ I heard this not only from thine enemy.
Have I not seen with my own eyes that among
the assemblage of this court thou regardest none
but those two slaves ? ”

“ That is true,” the vazier said, “ but I will
explain this matter if thou wilt listen. Dost
thou not know that the beggar eyes the rich
with envy ? Once, like those slaves, did I possess


28 ADMINISTRATIOISr OF GOVERNMENT


both grace and beauty. Two rows of teeth
were set behind my lips, erect like a wall of
ivory ® bricks. One by one, like ancient
bridges, have they fallen — regard me now as
here I stand ! Why may I not glance with envy
at those slaves when they recall to me the past ? ”

When the wise man had pierced this pearl of
lustrous truth, the king exclaimed : “ Better
than this it would be impossible to speak. Per-
missible it is to look toward the fair in one who
can thus excuse himself. Had I not in wisdom
acted with deliberation, I should have wronged
him through the speech of an enemy.”

To carry the hand quickly to the sword in
anger is to carry the back of the hand to the
teeth in regret. Heed not the words of the
envious ; if thou actest upon them, remorseful
wilt thou be;

Admonishing the slanderer for his evil words,
the king further increased the dignity of the
vazier, who directed the affairs of the State for
many years with justice and benevolence, and
was long remembered for his virtues.

Stoey of the King whose Coat was Coaesb

A certain just king habitually wore a coat of
coarse material. Some one said to him : “0
happy king ! Make for thyself a coat of Chinese
brocade,”


A MAXIM Ol’


“ That which I wear,” the king repKed, “ affords
both covering and comfort ; anything beyond
that is luxury. I collect not tribute that I
may adorn my person and my throne. If,
like a woman, I ornament my body, how, like
a man, can I repulse the enemy? The royal
treasuries are not for me alone — they are filled
for the sake of the army, not for the purchase
of ornaments and jewellery.”

StOEY of DaEITJS * AND THE HeBDSMAN

Darius, king of Persia, became separated from
his retinue while hunting. A herdsman came
running towards him, and the king, assuming
the man to be an enemy, adjusted his bow.
Thereupon the herdsman cried : “I am no
enemy ; seek not to kill me. I am he who.
tends the king’s horses, and in this meadow am
thus engaged.”

Becoming again composed, the king smiled
and said : “ Heaven has befriended thee ; other-
wise would I have drawn the bowstring to my
ear.”

“ It showeth neither wise administration nor
good judgment,” replied the herdsman, “ when
the king knows not an enemy from a friend.
Those who are greatest should know those who
are least. Many times hast thou seen me in thy
presence, and asked of me concerning the horses


so ADMINISTEATION OE GOVEEMENT

and tlie grazing-fields. Now that I come again
before thee thou takest me for an enemy. More
skilled am I, 0 king, for I can distinguish one
horse out of a hundred thousand. Tend thou
thy people as I, with sense and judgment, tend
my horses.”

Ruin brings sorrow to that kingdom where
the wisdom of the shepherd exceeds that of the
king.

Story op Abditl Aziz and the Pearl

The story is told of Abdul Aziz that he had a
pearl of great beauty and value set in a ring.
Shortly after, a severe drought occurred, causing
distress among the people. Moved by compas-
sion, the king ordered the pearl to be sold and
the money that it fetched to be given to the poor.

Some one chided him for doing this, saying :
“ Never again will such a stone come into thy
hands.”

Weeping, the king replied : “ Ugly is an orna-
ment upon the person of a king when the hearts
of his people are distressed by want. Better for
me is a stoneless ring than a sorrowing people.”

Happy is he who sets the ease of others above
his own. The virtuous desire not their own
pleasure at the expense of others. When the
king sleeps neglectfully upon his couch, I trow
not that the beggar finds enviable repose.


EITXJAL NOT RELIGION


31


Stoey of how Titkla was kbbttkbd by a
Devotee

Tukla, king of Persia, once visited a devotee
and said : “ Eruitless have been my years. None
but the beggar carries riches from the world
when earthly dignities are passed. Hence, would
I now sit in the corner of devotion that I might
usefuUy employ the few short days that yet
remain to me.”

The devotee was angered at these words.

‘‘ Enough ! ’* he cried. “ Religion consists alone
in the service of the people ; it finds no place in
the rosary, or prayer-rug, or tattered garment.
Be a king in sovereignty and a devotee in purity
of morals. Action, not words, is demanded by
religion, for words without action are void of
substance.”

DiSCOUESB 002TCEEEIITG RiOHES AND POVEETY

Say not that no dignity excels that of
sovereignty, for no kingdom is more free from
care than that of the darwesh.

They that are the most lightly burdened
reach the destination first.

The poor man is afflicted by lack of bread ;
the king by the cares of his kingdom.

Though one may rule and another may serve,
though the one be exalted to the height of Saturn


3^ ADMINISTRATION OP OOVERNMENT


and the other languish in a prison, when death
has claimed them it will not be possible to dis-
tinguish between the two.

Story of Qazal Arsalan and the Port

Qazal Arsalan possessed a fort, which raised .
its head to the height of Alwand.“ Secure
from all were those within its walls, for its roads
were a labyrinth, like the curls of a bride.

Prom a learned traveller Qazal once in-
quired ; “ Didst thou ever, in thy wanderings,
see a fort as strong as this ? ”

“ Splendid it is,” was the reply, “ but me-
thinks not it confers much strength. Before
thee, did not other kings possess it for a while,
then pass away ? After thee, will not other
kings assume control, and eat the fruits of the
tree of thy hope ? ”

In the estimation of the wise, the world is a
false gem that passes each moment from one
hand to another.

A Story of Damasotjs

Such famine was there once in Damascus that
lovers forgot their love. So miserly was the
sky toward the earth that the sown fields and
the date-trees moistened not their lips. Pountains
dried up, and no water remained but the tears in


SYMPAI^HY AND MLlOW-PjElLlNa 3.^


tlie eyes of the orphans. If smoke issued from
a chimney, nought was it but the sighs of the
widows. Like beggars, the trees stood leafless,
and the mountains lost their verdure. The
locusts devoured the gardens, and men devoured
the locusts.

At that time came to me a friend on whose
hones skin alone remained. I was astonished,
since he was of lofty rank and rich. “ 0
friend ! ” said I, “ what misfortune has befallen
thee ? ”

“ Where is thy sense ? ” he answered. “ Seest
thou not that the severities of famine have
reached their limit ? Rain comes not from the
sky, neither do the lamentations of the suffering
reach to heaven.”

“ Thou, at least,” I urged, “ hast nought to
fear ; poison kills only where there is no antidote.”

Regarding me with indignation, as a learned
man regards a fool, my friend replied: “Al-
though a man be safely on the shore, he stands
not supine while his friends are drowning. My
face is not pale through want ; the sorrows of the
poor have wounded my heart. Although, praise
be to Allah, I am free from wounds, I tremble
when I see the wounds of others,”

Bitter are the pleasures of him who is in health
when a sick man is at his side. When the beggar
has not eaten, poisonous and baneful is one’s
food.


3


34 ABMINISTEATION OE GOVERNMENT


Story or a Bully

A bully feU down a weU and passed the night
in wailing and lamenting. Some one threw a
stone down on to his head, and said : “ Didst
thou ever go to any one’s assistance that thou
shouldst to-day cry out for help ? Didst thou
ever sow the seeds of virtue ? Who would place
a salve upon thy wounds when the hearts of all
cry out by reason of thy tyrannies ? Across
our path thou didst dig a pit, into which, per-
force, hast thou now fallen.”

If thou do evil expect not goodness ; never
does the withered grape-vine bring forth fruit ;

0 thou who soweth the seed in autumn ! I
think not that thou wilt reap the corn at harvest-
time.

If thou nourish the thorn-tree of the desert,
think not that thou wilt ever eat its fruit.

Green dates come not from the poisonous
colocynth ; when thou sowest seed, hope only
for the fruit of that very seed.


CHAPTER II


CONCERNING BENEVOLENCE

If thou art wise, incline towards the essential
truth, for that remains, while the things that
are external pass away.

He who has neither knowledge, generosity,
nor piety resembles a man in form alone.

He sleeps at peace beneath the ground who
made tranquil the hearts of men.

Give now of thy gold and bounty, for eventually
will it pass from thy grasp. Open the door of
thy treasure to-day, for to-morrow the key will
not be in thy hands.

If thou would not be distressed on the Day
of Judgment, forget not them that are distressed.

Drive not the poor man empty from thy door,
lest thou should wander before the doors of
strangers.

He protects the needy who fears that he
himself may become needful of the help of others.

Art not thou, too, a supplicant ? Be grateful,
and turn not away them that supplicate thee.

36


36 CONCERNING BENEVOLENCE


Stoby Illustrative of Doiyg Good to
THE Evil

A woman said to her husband : “Do not
again buy bread from the baker in this street.
Make thy purchases in the market, for this man
shows wheat and sells barley, and he has no
customers but a swarm of flies.”

“ 0 light of my life,” the husband answered,
“ pay no heed to his trickery. In the hope of
our custom has he settled in this place, and not
humane would it be to deprive him of his profits.”

EoUow the path of the righteous, and, if thou
stand upon thy feet, stretch out thy hand to
them that are fallen.

Story coNOERNma Fasting

The wife of an officer of a king said to her
husband : “ Arise, and go to the royal palace,
that they may give thee food, for thy children
are in want.”

“ The kitchen is closed to-day,” he answered ;
“ last night the Sultan resolved to fast awhile.”

In the despair of hunger, the woman bowed her
head and murmured : “ What does the Sultan
seek from his fasting when his breaking the fast
means a festival of joy for our children ? ”

One who eats that good may follow is better
than a Mammon-worshipper who continually


ABNEGATION GE SELF


37


fasts. Proper it is to fast with him who feeds
the needy in the morning.

Stoey Illusteative op Peaotical Chaeity

A certain man had generosity without the
means of displaying it ; his pittance was unequal
to his benevolence. (May riches never fall to
the mean, nor poverty be the lot of the generous !)
His charities exceeding the depth of his pocket,
therefore was he always short of money.

One day a poor man wrote to him saying :
“ 0 thou of happy nature ! Assist me with
funds, since for some time have I languished in
prison.”

The generous man would have willingly acceded
to the request, but he possessed not so much as
the smallest piece of money. But he sent some-
one to the creditors of the prisoner with the
message : “ Free this man for a few days, and
I will be his security.”

Then did he visit the prisoner in his cell and
say : “ Arise, and fly with haste from the city.”

When a sparrow sees open the door of its cage,
it tarries not a moment. Like the morning
breeze, the prisoner flew from the land. There-
upon, they seized his benefactor, saying : “Pro-
duce either the man or the money,”

Powerless to do either, he went to prison, for
a bird escaped is ne’er recaught. Long there


38 CONCERNING BENEVOLENCE


did he remain, invoking help from none, nor
complaining, though he slept not at nights
through restlessness.

A pious man came to him and said : ‘‘I did
not think that thou wert dishonest ; why art
thou here imprisoned ? ”

“No villainy have I committed,” he replied.
“ I saw a helpless man in bonds and his freedom
only in my own confinement. I did not deem
it right that I should live in comfort while another
was fettered by the legs.”

Eventually he died, leaving a good name behind.

Happy is he whose name dies not ! He who
sleeps beneath the earth with a heart that lives
is better than he who lives with a soul that is
dead, for the former remains for ever.

Story of a Maist and a Thirsty Dog

In a desert a man found a dog that was dying
from thirst. Using his hat as a bucket, he
fetched water from a well and gave it to the
helpless animal. The prophet of the time stated
that God had forgiven the man his sins because
of his kindly act.

Reflect, if thou be a tyrant, and make a
profession of benevolence.

He who shows kindness to a dog will not do
less towards the good among his fellows.

Be generous to the extent of thy power. If


TIME’S VENGEANCE


39


thou hast not dug a well in the desert, at least
place a lamp in a shrine.”

Charity distributed from an ox’s skin that is
filled with treasure counts for less than a dinar
given from the wages of toil.

Every man’s burden is suited to his strength —
heavy to the ant is the foot of the locust.

Do good to others so that on the morrow God
may not deal harshly with thee.

Be lenient with thy slave, for he may one day
become a king, like a pawn that becomes a queen.

Stoby Apropos op Nemesis

A poor man complained of his distressed con-
dition to one who was rich as well as iU-dis-
positioned. The latter refused to help him, and
turned roughly upon him in anger.

The beggar’s heart bled by reason of this
violence : “ Strange ! ” he reflected, “ that

this rich man should be of such forbidding
countenance ! Perhaps he fears not the bitter-
ness of begging.”

The rich man ordered his slave to drive the
beggar away. As a result of his ingratitude for
the blessings that he enjoyed. Fortune forsook him,
and he lost all that he possessed. His slave passed
into the hands of a generous man of enlightened
mind, who was as gladdened at the sight of a
beggar as the latter is at the sight of riches,”


40 CONCmNING BENEVOLENCE


One night a beggar asked alms of the latter,
and he commanded his slave to give the man to
eat. When the slave took food to the suppHcant
he involuntarily uttered a cry, and went back
weeping.

“ Why these tears ? ” his master asked.

“ My heart is grieved at the plight of this un-
fortunate old man,” the slave replied. “ Once
was he the owner of much wealth, and I his
slave.”

The master smiled and said : “ This is not
cause for gr;ef, 0 son. Time, in its revolutions,
is not unjust. Was not that indigent man
formerly a merchant who carried his head high in
the air through pride ? I am he whom that
day he drove from his door. Eate has now put
him in the place that I then occupied. Heaven
befriended me and washed the dust of sorrow
from my face. Though God, in His wisdom,
closed one door, another, in His mercy, did He
open.”

Many a needy one has become filled, and many
a Plutos has gone empty.

Story of a Fool and a Fox

Some one saw a fox that was bereft of the
use of its legs. He was wondering how the
animal managed to live in this condition when
a tiger drew nes^fi with a jackal in its olaws. The


FATE AND SELF-RELIANCE


41


tiger ate the jackal, and the fox finished the
remains. The next day also did the Omnipotent
Provider send the fox its daily meal.

The eyes of the man were thus opened to the
light of true knowledge. “ After this,” he re-
flected, “ I wiU sit in a comer like an ant, for
the elephant’s portion is not gained by reason of
its strength.”

So did he sit in silence, waiting for his daily
food to come from the Invisible. No one heeded
him, and soon was he reduced to skin and bones.
When, at last, his senses had almost gone through
weakness, a voice came out from the wall of a
mosque, saying ;

“ Go, 0 false one ! Be the rending tiger, and
pose not as a paralytic fox. Exert thyself like
the tiger, so that something may remain from
thy spoil. Why, like the fox, appease thy hunger
with leavings ? Eat of the fruits of thine own
endeavours ; strive like a man, and relieve the
wants of the needy.”

Seize, 0 youth, the hand of the aged ; fall
not thyself, saying, “ Hold my hand.” In the
two worlds does he obtain reward who does good
to the people of God.

Stoey of a Devout Misee

In the remote regions of Turkey there lived
a good and pious man, whom I and some fellow-


42 CONCERNING BENEVOLENCE


travellers once visited. He received us cordially,
and seated us with respect. He had vineyards,
and wheat-fields, slaves and gold, but was as
miserly as a leafless tree. His feelings were
warm, but his fireplace was cold. He passed the
night awake in prayer, and we in hunger. In
the morning he girt his loins and recommenced
the same politeness of the previous night.

One of our party was of merry wit and temper.
“ Come, give us food in change for a kiss,”
he said, “for that is better to a hungry man.
In serving me, place not thy hand upon my
shoe, but give me bread and strike thy shoe
upon my head.”

Excellence is attained by generosity, not by
vigils in the night.

Idle words are a hollow drum ; invocations
without merit are a weak support.

Story of Hatim Tai^®

Hatim Tai possessed a horse whose fleetness
was as that of the morning breeze. Of this was
the Sultan of Turkey informed.

“ Like Hatim Tai,” he was told, “ none is equal
in generosity ; like his horse, nothing is equal in
speed and gait. As a ship in the sea it traverses
the desert, while the eagle, exhausted, lags
behind.”

“ From Hatim will I request that horsCj” th^


LEGEND OF HATIM TAI


43


king replied. “ If he be generous and give it
to me, then shall I know that his fame is true ;
if not, that it is but the sound of a hollow drum.”

So he despatched a messenger with ten followers
to Hatim. They alighted at the house of the
Arab chief, who prepared a feast and kiUed a
horse in their honour.

On the following day, when the messenger
explained the object of his mission, Hatim be-
came as one mad with grief. “ Why,” he cried,
“ didst thou not give me before thy message ?
That swift-paced horse did I roast last night for
thee to eat. No other means had I to entertain
thee ; that horse alone stood by my tent, and
I would not that my guests should sleep
fasting.”

To the men he gave money and splendid robes,
and when the news of his generosity reached to
Turkey, the king showered a thousand praises
upon his nature.

Story of Hatim and the Messenger sent to
KILL Him

One of the kings of Yaman was renowned for
his liberality, yet the name of Hatim was never
mentioned in his presence without his falling
into a rage. “ How long,” he would ask, “ wilt
thou speak of that vain man, who possesses
neither a kingdom, nor power, nor wealth ? ”


44 CONCERNING BENEVOLENCE


On one occasion lie prepared a royal feast,
wMoti the people were invited to attend. Some-
one began to speak of Hatim, .and another to
praise him. Envious, the king despatched a
man to slay the Arabian chief, reflecting ; “So
long as Hatim lives, my name will never become
famous.”

The messenger departed, and travelled far
seeking for Hatim that he might kill him. As
he went along the road a youth came out to
meet him. He was handsome and wise, and
showed friendliness toward the messenger, whom
he took to his house to pass the night. Such
liberality did he shower upon his guest that
the heart of the evil-minded one was turned to
goodness.

In the morning the generous youth kissed his
hand and said ; “ Remain with me for a few
days.”

“ I am unable to tarry hero,” replied the
messenger, “ for urgent business is before me.”

“ If thou wilt entrust me with thy secret,”
said the youth, “ to aid thee will I spare no
effort.”

“0 generous man ! ” was the reply, “ give
ear to me, for I know that the generous are con-
cealers of secrets. Perhaps in this country thou
knowest Hatim, who is of lofty mind and noble
qualities. The king of Yaman desires his head,
though I know not what enmity has arisen


HATIM OJBTERS HIS LIFE


45


between them. Grateful shall I be if thou wilt
direct me to where he is. This hope from thy
kindness do T entertain, 0 friend.”

The youth laughed and said : “I am Hatim ;
see here my head ! strike it from my body with
thy sword. I would not that harm should
befall thee, or that thou shouldst fail in thy
endeavour.”

Throwing aside his sword, the man fell on the
ground and kissed the dust of Hatim’s feet.
“ If I injured a hair on thy body,” he cried, “ I
should no longer be a man.” So saying, he
clasped Hatim to his breast and took his way
back to Yaman.

“ Come,” said the king as the man approached,
“ what news hast thou ? Why didst thou not
tie his head to thy saddle-straps ? Perhaps
that famous one attacked thee and thou wert
too weak to engage in combat,”

The messenger kissed the ground and said :
“ 0 wise and just king ! I found Hatim, and
saw him to be generous and full of wisdom,
and in courage superior to myself. My back
was bent by the burden of his favours ; with
the sword of kindness and bounty he killed
me.”

When he had related all that he had seen of
Hatim’s generosity, the king uttered praises upon
the family of the Arab chief and rewarded the
messenger with gold.


46 CONCERISrrNa BENEVOLENCE


Stoey Illtjsteative op Mjsdiebcted Kjndeess

A certain man, in the ceiling of whose house
some bees had built their hives, asked his wife
for a butchers’ knife so that he might destroy
them. “ Do not so,” the woman said, “ for the
poor creatures will be greatly distressed when
turned out of their homes.”

Accordingly, the foolish man left the bees in
peace.

One day the woman was stung by one of the
insects and stood wailing on the doorstep. Hear-
ing her cries, the husband left his shop and
hurried towards the house. Angered, he said :
“ 0 wife ! show not such a bitter face to the
world ; remember thou didst say to me, ‘ Kill
not the poor bees.’ ”

How can one do good to the evil ? Forbear-
ance with the wicked but increases their iniquity.

What is a dog that a dish of viands should be
set before him ? Command that they should
give him bones. A kicking animal is best well-
burdened.

If the night-watchman display humanity, no
one sleeps at night for fear of thieves.

In the battle-field, the spear-shaft is worth
more than a hundred thousand sugar-canes.

When thou rearest a cat, she destroys thy
pigeons ; when thou makest fat a wolf, he rgmds
one who is dear to thee.


THE POET’S LAMENT


47


Raise not a building that has not a strong
foundation ; if thou dost, beware.

Bisoofese conoerning Kindness to Orphans

Protect him whose father is dead ; remove the
dust from his raiment, and injure him not. Thou
knowest not how hard is his condition ; no
foliage is there on a rootless tree. Give not a
kiss to a child of thine own in the sight of a
helpless orphan. If the latter weep, who wiU.
assuage his grief ? If he be angered, who will
bear his burden ? See that he weeps not, for
the throne of God trembles at the orphan’s
lament. With pity, wipe the tears from his
eyes and the dust from his face. If the pro-
tecting shadow of his father’s care be gone,
cherish him beneath the shadow of thy care.

Upon my head was a kingly crown when it
reposed upon the bosom of my father. Then, if
a fly settled upon my body, many were distressed
on my behalf. Now, should I be taken in cap-
tivity, not one among my friends would come
to aid me. WeU do I know the orphan’s sorrow,
for my father departed in my childhood.


CHAPTER III


CONOERNIlSrG LOVE

Happy are the days of them that are infatuated
by love for Him, whether they be sorrowed by
separation from Him or made joyous by His
presence.

They are mendicants who fly from worldly
sovereignty ; in the hope of meeting Him they
are patient in their mendicity. Oft have they
drunk of the wine of anguish ; be it bitter, they
remain silent. In the remembrance of Him
patience is not bitter, for wormwood is sweet from
the hand of a friend.

They that are captive in the coils of His love,
seek not to escape ; they suffer reproach, but are
monarchs in the seclusion of their meditation,
and their way is not known. They are like the
temple of Jerusalem, splendid of which is the
interior, but whose outer wall is left in ruin.

Like moths, they bum themselves in the Are
of love. Their beloved is in their breasts, yet do
they seek Him ; though near a fountain, their
lips are parched.^®


48


TRUE LOVE’S DEVOTION


49


Disootjrsb concerning* Constancy

Thy love renders thee impatient and disturbed.
With such sincerity hast thou placed thy head
at her feet that thou art oblivious to the world.

When in the eyes of thy beloved riches count
not, gold and dust are as one to thee.

Thou sayest that she dwelleth in thine eyes —
if they be closed, she is in thy mind.

If she demand thy life, thou dost place it in
her hand ; if she place a sword upon thy head,
thou boldest it forward.

When earthly love produces such confusion
and such obedience demands, dost thou wonder
if travellers of the road of God remain enguKed
in the Ocean of Reality ?

In the remembrance of their Friend they have
turned their backs upon the world ; they are
so fascinated by the Cup-bearer that they have
spilled the wine.

No medicine can cure them, for no one has
knowledge of their pains.

With their cries of longing do they root up a
mountain ; with their sighs they dismember a
kingdom.

Such is their weeping at dawn that the tears
wash the coUyrium of sleep from their eyes.
Night and day are they immersed in the sea of
love ; so distracted are they that they know not
night from day.


4


60


CONCEENJNa LOVE


So enamoured are they of the beauty of the
Painter that they care not for the beauty of His
designs.

He drinks of the pure wine of Unity who is
forgetful of both this world and the next.


Stoey op a jDanoee

I have heard that, at the singing of a musician,
one of fairy-face began to dance. Surrounded
by distracted hearts, the flame of a candle caught
her skirt. She was distressed and angered.

One of her lovers said, “ Why agitate thyself ?
The fire has burned thy skirts — it has entirely
consumed the harvest of my life.”

Story iLLusTRATma the Reality of Love

One who loved God set his face towards the
desert. His father, being grieved at his absence,
neither ate nor slept.

Some one admonished the son, who said : “ Since
my Friend has claimed me as His own, no
other friendship do I own. When He revealed
to me His beauty, all else that I saw appeared
unreal.”

They that love Him care for no one else ; their
senses are confused and their ears are deaf to
the words of them that reproach.


CONSTANCY’S REWARD


51


They wander through the desert of Divine
Knowledge without a caravan.

They have no hope of approbation from their
fellow-men, for they are the chosen of the elect
of God.

Story Illustrative of Patience

An old man begged at the door of a mosque.
Some one said to him : “ This is not the place
to beg ; stand not here with impudence.”

“ What house is this,” the man inquired,
“ from which no pity comes upon the condition
of the poor ? ”

“ Silence ! ” was the reply. “ What foolish words
are these ? This is the house of our Master 1 ”

The beggar raised a cry : “ Alas,” he said,
“ that I should be disappointed at this door.
I have not gone hopeless from any street ; why
should I go thus from the door of God ? Here
will I stretch forth my hand of want, for I know
that I shall not depart empty-handed.”

For a year he remained devoutly employed
in the mosque. One night, through weakness,
his heart began to palpitate, and at daybreak his
last breath flickered like a morning lamp. Thus
did he exclaim with Joy : ‘‘ And whoever knocked
at the door of the Bounteous One, it opened.”

He who seeks God should be patient and en-
during ; I have not heard of an alchemist being
sad. Much gold he reduces to ashes so that he


62


CONCEBNINa LOVE


may one day turn copper into gold. Gold is
good with which to buy — and what couldst thou
wish to buy better than the face of thy Eriend ?

Story of One who was Assiduous ih Prayer

An old man spent the night in worship and
the morning in prayer. A guardian angel
whispered to him : “ Go, take thy way, for thy
prayers are not acceptable at this door.”

The next night again he passed the night in
devotion ; and a disciple, being informed of his
circumstances, said: “When thou seest that the
door is shut, why dost thou thus exert thyself ? ”

Weeping, he replied : -'0 my son ! Dost

thou suppose that although He has torn my
reins I shall keep my hands from off his saddle-
straps ? When a supplicant is repelled at one
door, what is his fear if he know of another ? ”

While thus he spoke, with his head upon the
ground, the angel uttered this message in his ear :
“ Although there is no merit in him, his prayers
are accepted, for except Me he has no refuge.”

Story oe Sultan Mahmud and his Love for
Ayaz

Some one found fault with the king of Ghazni,
saying ; “ Ayaz, his favourite slave, possesses no
beauty. It is strange that a nightingale should
love a rose that has neither colour nor perfume.”


SINGLE-MINDEDNESS IN SERYICE 63


TLis was told to Maliinud, who said: “My
love, 0 sir, is for his virtues, not for his form
and stature.”

I have heard that in a narrow pass a camel fell
and a chest of pearls was broken. The king
gave the signal for plunder, and urged on his horse
with speed. The horsemen did likewise, and,
leaving the king behind, gathered up the pearls.
Not one of them remained near the king but
Ayaz.

“ 0 thou of curly locks ! ” said Mahmud, what
hast thou gained of the plunder ? ”

“Nothing,” he replied. “I walked in haste
behind thee : I do not occupy myself with riches
away from thy service.”

If an honourable place in the court be thine,
be not neglectful of the king on account of gain
elsewhere.


Stoey of a Village Chief

A village chief passed with his son through the
centre of the imperial army. In the presence
of such pomp and splendour the man dis-
played humility and fled, through fear, into a
comer.

“ After aU,” observed his son, “ thou art a
village chief, and in chieftaincy greater than the
nobles. Why dost thpu tremble like a willow
tree ? ”


54


OONCEENING LOVE


“ True,” replied his father. “ I am a chief and
a ruler, but my honour lies as far as my village.”

Thus are the saints overwhelmed with fear
when they stand in the court of their King.

Story or a Firb-rly

Perhaps thou mayest have seen the fire-fly shine
like a lamp in the garden at night.

“ 0 night-illuminating moth ! ” some one said,
“why comest thou not out in the day-time ? ”

The fly gave an answer full of wisdom ; “ Be-
cause I am not visible before the sun.”

Story or a Moth and a Candle

Some one said to a moth : “ Go, thou contemp-
tible creature, and make friendship with one
worthy of thyself ; go where thou seest the path
of hope. How different is thy love from that of
the candle ! Thou art not a salamander — ^hover
not around the fire, for bravery is necessary before
combat. It is not compatible with reason that
thou shouldst acknowledge as a friend one whom
thou knowest to be thine enemy.”

“ What does it matter if I burn ? ” the moth
replied. “ I have love in my heart, and this
flame is as a flower to me. Not of my own accord
do I throw myself into the fire ; the chain of her
love is upon my neck. Who is it that finds
fault with my friendship for my friend ? I am


LOVE’S SACRIFICE


56


content to be slain at her feet. I burn because she
is dear to me, and because my destruction may
affect her. Say not to the helpless man from whose
hands the reins have fallen, ‘ Drive slowly.’ ”

Another Story on the Same Subject

One night, as I lay awake, I heard a moth say
to a candle : “I am thy lover ; if I bum, it is
proper. Why dost thou weep ? ”

The candle replied : “0 my poor friend !

Love is not thy business. Thou fliest from
before a flame ; I stand erect until I am entirely
consumed. If the fire of love has burned thy
wings, regard me, who from head to foot must
be destroyed.”

Before the night had passed, some one put the
candle out, exclaiming : “ Such is the end of
love ! ”

Grieve not over the grave of one who lost his
life for his friend ; be glad of heart, for he was
the chosen of Him.

If thou art a lover, wash not thy head of the
sickness of love ; like Sadi, wash thy hands of
selfishness.

A devoted lover holds not back his hand from
the object of his affections though arrows and
stones may rain upon his head.

Be cautious ; if thou goest down to the sea,
give thyself up to the storm.


CHAPTER IV

CONCERliriN’a HUmLITY

Thotj, 0 creature of God, wast created of the
dust ; therefore, be humble as the dust. Be not
covetous, nor oppressive, nor headstrong. Thou
art from the dust; be not like fire. When the
terrible fire raised his head in pride, the dust
prostrated itself in humility.

And since the fire was arrogant and the dust
was meek, from the former were the demons
formed, and from the latter mankind.

Story op a Raindrop

A raindrop fell from a spring cloud, and,
seeing the wide expanse of the sea, was shamed.
“ Wliere the sea is,” it reflected, “where
am I ? Compared with that, forsooth, I am
extinct.”

While thus regarding itself with an eye of
contempt, an oyster took it to its bosom, and
Fate so shaped its course that eventually the
raindrop became a famous royal pearl.

It was exalted, for it was humble. Knocking
at the door of extinction, it became e^steijt,

m


HtIMILITY THE PATH TO GREATNESS 67


Stoey Illtjsteative of Piotrs Men ebgaed-

ING T.HEMSELVES WITH CONTEMPT

A sagacious youth of noble family landed at a
seaport of Turkey, and, as he displayed piety and
wisdom, his baggage was deposited in a mosque.

One day the priest said to him : “ Sweep
away the dust and rubbish from the mosque.”

Immediately, the young man went away and
no one saw him there again. Thus, did the elder
and his followers suppose he did not care to serve.

The next day, a servant of the mosque met
him on the road and said : ‘ Thou didst act
wrongly in thy perverse judgment. Knowest
thou not, 0 conceited youth, that men are dig-
nified by service ? ”

Sorrowfully, the youth began to weep. “ 0
soul-cherishing and heart-illuminating friend ! ”
he answered ; “I saw no dirt or rubbish in that
holy place but mine own corrupt self. There-
fore, I retraced my steps, for a mosque is better
cleansed from such.”

Humility is the only ritual for a devotee.
If thou desire greatness, be humble ; no other
ladder is there by which to climb.

Stoey of Sultan Bayazii) Bustami*^

When Bayazid was coming from his bath one
piprning during the Id festival, some ope up.-


68


COKOERNING HUMILITY


wittingly emptied a tray of ashes from a window
upon his head. With his face and turban all
bespattered, he rubbed his hands in gratitude
and said ; “ I am in truth worthy of the fires
of hell; why should I be angered by a few
ashes ? ”

The great do not regard themselves ; look not
for godliness in a self-conceited man. Eminence
does not consist in outward show and vaunting
words, nor dignity in hauteur and pretension.

On the Day of Judgment thou wilt see in
Paradise him who sought truth and rejected vain
pretension.

He who is headstrong and obdurate falleth
headlong ; if thou desire greatness, abandon
pride.


Discouesb oisr Conceit

Expect not him who is possessed of worldly
vanities to follow the path of religion, nor look
for godliness in him who wallows in conceit.

If thou desire dignity, do not, like the mean,
regard thy fellows with contemptuous eyes.

Seek no position more honourable than that of
being known to the world as a man of laudable
character.

Thou deemest him not great who, being of
equal rank, is haughty towards thee ; when thou
makest a similar display before others, dost


SABI’S BILEMIiCA


59


thou not appear before them as the arrogant
appear before thee ?

If thou art eminent, laugh not, if thou art wise,
at them that are lowly. Many have fallen from
high whose places have been taken by the fallen.

Though thou be free from defect, revile not
me who am full of blemishes..

One holds the chain of the Kaba temple in his
hands ; another lies drunken in the tavern. If
God call the latter, who can drive him away ?
If He expel the former, who can bring him back ?
The one cannot implore the divine help by reason
of his good deeds, nor is the door of repentance
closed upon the other.

Story of the Barwesh and the Proud
C lDI

A poorly-clad doctor of law and divinity sat
one day in the front row of seats in a Cadi’s court.
The Cadi gave him a sharp look, whereupon the
usher took the man by the arm and said : “ Get
up ; dost thou not know that the best place is
not for such as thee ? Either take a lower seat,
or remain standing, or leave the court altogether.
Be not so bold as to occupy the seat of the great.
If thou art humble, pose not as a lion. Hot
every one is worthy of the chief seat ; honour is
proportionate to rank, and rank to merit.”

He who sits with honour in a place lower than


60


CONCERNING HUMILITY


that of which he is worthy falls not with ignominy
from eminence.

Earning with anger, the doctor moved to a
lower seat. Two advocates in the court then
entered into a spirited discussion, and flew at
each other with their tongues like fighting-cocks
with beak and claw. They were involved in a
complicated knot which neither could unravel.
From the last row of seats the tattered doctor
roared out with the voice of a lion in the
forest.

“It is not the veins of the neck that should
stand out in argument,’’ he said, “ but the proofs,
which should be full of meaning. I, too, have
the faculty of argument.”

“ Speak on,” they answered.

With the quill of eloquence that he possessed,
the doctor engraved his words upon the minds of
his listeners like inscriptions on a signet-ring ;
and, drawing his pen through the letters of
pretension, he invoked applause from every
comer. So hard did he drive the steed of speech
that the Cadi lagged behind like an ass in
the mire. Removing his cloak and turban, the
latter sent them to the doctor as a token of his
respect.

“ Alas ! ” he said, “ I did not discern thy merit,
nor welcome thee on thy arrival. I regret to
see thee in this condition with such a stock of


THE ESSENTIALS OE WORTH 61

The usher then approached the stranger
courteously in order that he might place the
Cadi’s turban upon his head. But the doctor
repelled him with his hands and tongue, saying :

“ Place not upon my head the fetters of pride,
for to-morrow this fifty-yarded turban would
turn my head from those in jaded garb. Those
who called me ‘ lord ’ and ‘ chief ’ would then
appear insignificant in mine eyes. Is pure water
different whether it be contained in a goblet
of gold or an earthen ewer ? A man’s head
requires brain and intellect, not an imposing
turban like thine. A big head does not make
one worthy ; it is like the gourd, void of kernel,
Be not proud because of thy turban and beard,
for the one is cotton and the other grass. One
should aim at the degree of eminence that is
conformable with one’s merit. With all this
intellect, I will not call thee man, though a
hundred slaves walk behind thee. How well
spoke the shell when a greedy fool picked it out
of the mire : ‘ None will buy me for the smallest
price : be not so insane as to wap me up in silk.’
A man is not better than his fellows by reason of
his wealth, for an ass, though covered with a satin
cloth, is still an ass.”

In this way the clever doctor washed the
rancour from his heart with the water of words.
Thus do those who are aggrieved speak harshly.
Be not idle when thine enemy has fallen. Dash


65


OOJ^CERNIN'G HUMILITY


out Ms brains when thou art able, for delay will
efface the grudge from thy mind.

So overcome was the Cadi by his vehemence
that he exclaimed, “ Verily, this day is a hard
one.” He bit his fingers in amazement, and his
eyes stared at the doctor like the two stars near
the pole of the lesser bear. As for the latter,
he went abruptly out and was never seen there
again. They in the court clamoured to know
whence such an impertinent fellow had come.
An official went in search of him, and ran in all
directions, asking whether a man of that descrip-
tion had been seen. Some one said : “ We

know no one in this city so eloquent as Sadi.”

A hundred thousand praises to him who said
so ; see how sweetly he uttered the bitter truth !

Story of the Hohey-seller

A man of smiling countenance sold honey,
captivating the hearts of all by his pleasant
manner. His customers were as numerous as
flies around the sugar-cane — if he had sold poison
people would have bought it for honey.

A forbidding-looking man regarded him with
envy, being jealous of the way his business pros-
pered. One day he paraded the town with a
tray of honey on his head and a scowl on his face.
He wandered about crying his wares, but no
one evinced desire to buy. At nightfall, having


PATIENCE UNDER OPPRESSION 63


earned no money, he went and sat dejectedly
in a corner, with a face as bitter as that of a
sinner fearful of retribution.

The wife of one of his neighbours jokingly re-
marked : “ Honey is bitter to one of sour temper.”

It is wrong to eat bread at the table of one
whose face is as wrinkled with frowns as the
cloth on which it is served.

0 sir ! add not to thine own burdens, for an
evil temper brings disaster in its train.

If thou hast not a sweet tongue like Sadi, thou
hast neither gold nor silver.

Story illustrating the Eorbearancb of
Good Men

1 have heard that a debased drunkard caught a
pious man by the collar. The latter received his
blows in silence, and in forbearance lifted not his
head.

A passer-by remarked : “ Art thou not a man ?
It is a pity to be patient with this ignorant
fellow.”

The pious man replied : “ Speak not thus to
me. A foolish drunkard collars one by the neck
in the thought that he is fighting with a lion ;
there is no fear that a learned man will contend
with an inebriated fool.”

The virtuous follow this rule in life — when they
suffer oppression they display kindness.


u


CONCERNING HUMILITY


Story illitstratinq the Noble-mindedness
OP Men

A dog bit the leg of a hermit with such violence
that venom dropped from its teeth, and the
poor man could not sleep all night through pain.

His little daughter chided him, saying : “ Hast
thou not teeth as well ? ”

The unfortunate parent wept, and then
smilingly replied : “ Dear child ! Although I

was stronger than the dog, I restrained my
anger. Should I receive a sword-blow on the
head, I could not apply my teeth to the legs of
a dog.”

One can revenge oneself upon the mean, but a
man cannot act like a dog.

Story op a Kind Master and his Disobedient
Slave

An eminent man, famous for his many virtues,
possessed a slave of evil disposition, who in
ugliness of feature surpassed every one in the
city. He closely attended his master at meal-
times, but he would not have given a drop of
water to a dying man. Neither reproof nor the
rod influenced him ; the house was in a constant
state of disorder through him. Sometimes, in
his bad temper, would he litter the paths with
thorns and rubbish; at other times, throw the
chickens down the weU. His unhappy tempera-


GOOD COMES EilOM EVIL 66


ment was written on his face, and never did he
perform a task successfully-

Some one asked his master : “ What is there
that thou likest in this slave — ^his agreeable
manners, or his skill, or beauty ? Surely, it is not
worth while to keep such an unruly knave and
burden thyself with such an affliction. I will
procure for thee a slave of handsome appearance
and good character. Take this one to the slave-
market and sell him. If a pice is offered for him,
do not refuse it, for he would be dear at that.”

The good-natured man smiled and said : “ O
friend ! Although the character of my slave is
certainly bad, my character is improved by him,
for when I have learned to tolerate his manner I
shall be able to put up with anything at the hands
of others. It were not humane to sell him and
thus make known his faults. And it is better to
endure his affliction myself than to pass him on
to others.”

Accept for thyself what thou wouldst accept for
others. If distressedthyself, involve not thy fellows.

Forbearance is at first like poison, but when
engrained in the nature it becomes like honey.

Stoey oe Maeuf Kaechi” and the Siok
Teavellee

No one follows the path of Maruf Karehi who
does not first banish the idea of fame from his head.

6


66


CONCERNING HUMILITY


A traveller once came to Maruf’s Louse at the
point of death — ^his life was joined to his body by
a single hair. He passed the night in wailing
and lamentation, sleeping not himself nor
permitting any one else to sleep by reason of his
groans. His mind was distressed and his temper
was vile ; though he died not himself, he killed
many by his fretting. Such was his restlessness
that every one flew from him. Maruf Karchi
alone remained. He, like a brave man, girt his «
loins and sat up many nights in attendance at the
sick man’s bedside. But one night Maruf was
attacked by sleep — ^how long can a sleepless man
keep up ?

As soon as the invalid saw him asleep he
began to rave : “ Cursed be thy abominable
race ! ” he cried : “ what knows this glutton,
intoxicated with sleep, of the helpless man who
has not closed his eyes ? ”

Maruf took no notice of these words, but one
of the women of the harem, overhearing them,
remarked : “ Didst thou not hear what that
wailing beggar said ? Turn him out, and teU bim
to take his abuse with him and die elsewhere.
Kindness and compassion have their occasions,
but to do good to the evil is evil ; only a fool
plants trees in barren soil. A grateful dog is
better than an ungrateful man.”

Maruf laughed : “ Dear woman,” he replied,

“ be not offended at his ungracious words. If he


HOW TO TREAT CALUMNY


67


rave at me through sickness, I am not angered.
When thou art strong and well thyself, hear
gratefully the burdens of the weak. If thou
cherish the tree of kindness, thou wilt assuredly
eat of the fruits of a good name.”

They attain to dignity who rid themselves of
arrogance.

He who worships grandeur is the slave of
pride; he knows not that greatness consists in
meekness,

Stort illustrating the Eolly of the Ignoble

An impudent fellow begged of a pious man,
but the latter had no money in his house. Other-
wise, would he have showered gold upon him
like dust. The infamous rascal, therefore, went
out and began to abuse him in the street.

The eye of the fault-finder sees no merits.
What regard has he who has acted dishonourably
for the honour of another ?

Being informed of his words, the pious man
smiled and said : “ It is well ; this man has
enumerated only a few of my bad qualities —
only one out of a hundred that are known to me.
The evil that he has supposed in me I know for
certain that I possess. Only one year has he been
acquainted with me ; how can he know the faults
of seventy years ? None but the Omniscient
knows my faults better than myself. Never


68


CONCERNING HUMILITY


Lave I known one who has attributed to me so
few defects If he bear witness against me in the
Day of Judgment, I shall have no fear. If he
who thinks ill of me seek to reveal my faults, teU
him to come and take the record from me.”

Be humble when the veil is torn from off thy
character. If a pitcher were made of the dust
of men, the calumnious would shatter it with
stones.

Story or One who had a Little Knowledge

A certain man knew something of astronomy
and his head, in consequence, was filled with pride.
Journeying far, he visited Kushyar,** the sage,
who turned his eyes from him and would teach
him nothing. "When the disappointed traveller
was on the point of leaving, Kushyar addressed
him with these words ;

“ Thou imaginest that thou art fuU of know-
ledge. How can a vessel that is full receive of
more ? Rid thyself of thy pretensions, so
that thou mayest be filled. Being full of vanity,
thou goest empty.”

Story illustrating the Humility of the
Pious

Some one heard the barking of a dog in the
ruined hut of a pious man. Reflecting upon the
strangeness of the fact, he went and searched,


THE SUMMIT OF LOWLINESS 69


but found no traces of a dog. In truth, the devotee
alone was in the house.

Not wishing his curiosity to be revealed, the
man was departing, when the owner of the house
cried out : “ Come in ; why standest thou upon
the door ? Knowest thou not, 0 friend, that I
it was who barked ? When I discerned that
humility was acceptable to God, I banished
pride and vanity from my heart, and clamoured
with barks at the door of God, for I saw none
more lowly than a dog.”

If thou desire to attain to dignity, let humility
be thy path.

Behold, when the dew lies low upon the earth,
the sun doth raise it to the skies,

Stoby illustrating the Value of Soft Words

The slave of a king escaped, and, though a
search was made, was not discovered. Later,
when the fugitive returned, the king, in anger,
ordered that he should be put to death.

When the executioner brought out his scimi-
tar, like the tongue of a thirsty man, the despondent
slave cried out :

“ 0 God ! I forgive the king the shedding
of my blood, for I have ever enjoyed his bounty
and shared in his prosperity. Let him not suffer
for this deed on the Day of Judgment, to the
deUght of his enemies/’


70


CONCEENING HUMILITY


Wlien the king heard these words his anger was
appeased, and he appointed the slave to be an
oflfieer of the standard.

The moral of this story is that soft speech acts
like water on the fires of wrath. Do not the
soldiers on the battle-field wear armour con-
sisting of a hundred folds of silk ?

0 friend ! be humble when thou dealest with a
fierce foe, for gentleness will blunt the sharpest
sword.

Story illustrating the Wisdom of feigning
Deafness

Many writers affirm the falsity of the idea that
Hatim was deaf.

One morning his attention was attracted by
the buzzing of a fly, which had become ensnared
in a spider’s web. “ 0 thou,” he observed,
who art fettered by thine own avarice, be patient.
Wherever there be a tempting bait, huntsman
and snare are close at hand,”

One of his disciples remarked : “ Strange it is
that thou couldst hear the buzzing of a fly that
hardly reached our ears. No longer can they
call thee deaf.”

The Sheikh replied : “ Deafness is better than
the hearing of idle words. Those that sit with
me in private are prone to conceal my faults
and parade my virtues ; thus, do they make me


THE UTILITY OF SLANDER 71

vain. I feign deafness that I may be spared
their flattery. When my assumed affliction has
become known to them they will speak freely of
that which is good and bad in me ; then, being
grieved at the recital of my faults, I shall abstain
from evil,”

Go not down a weU by a rope of praise. Be
deaf, like Hatim, and listen to the words of them
that slander thee.

Stoby illustbatibg Fobbbabancb bob the
Sake oe Fbibhds

A certain man, whose heart was as pure
as Sadi’s, fell in love. Although taunted by
his enemies in consequence, he showed no
anger.

Some one asked him : “ Hast thou no sense of
shame ? Art thou not sensible to these indigni-
ties ? It is abject to expose oneself to ridicule,
and weak to endure patiently the scoffs of enemies.
To overlook the errors of the ignorant is wrong,
lest it be said that thou hast neither strength nor
courage.”

How elegantly did the distracted lover make
reply ! His words are worthy to be writ in lettem
of gold :

“Alone in my heart there dweUeth affection
for my loved one ; thus, it contains nq room foy
msfelice,”


75


OONCEBNINC HUMILITF
Story of Luoman,** the Sage

I have heard that Luqman was of dark com-
plexion and careless of his appearance. Some one
mistook^ for him a slave, and employed him in
digging trenches at Baghdad. Thus he continued
for a year, no one suspecting who he was. When
the truth was known the master was afeared,
and fell at Luqman’s feet, offering excuses.

The sage smiled and said : “Of what use are
these apologies ? For a year my heart has
bled through thine oppression. How can I
forget that in one hour ? But I forgive thee,
good man, for thy gain has caused to me no loss.
Thou hast built thy house ; my wisdom and
knowledge have increased. I, too, possess a
slave, and frequently set him to arduous labour.
Nevermore, when I remember the hardships of
my toil, will I afflict him.”

He who has not suffered at the hands of the
strong grieves not at the frailness of the weak.

If thou be sorrowed by those above thee, be
not harsh with thine inferiors.


CHAPTER V


cosTOBEKnra eesignation

Happiness comes from the favour of God, not
from the might of the powerful.

If the heavens bestow not fortune, by no
valour can it be obtained.

The ant suffers not by reason of its weakness ;
the tiger eats not by virtue of its strength.

Since the hand reaches not to the skies, accept
as inevitable the fortune that it brings.

If thy life is destined to be long, no snake nor
sword will harm thee ; when the fated day of death
arrives, the antidote will kill thee no less than the
poison.

Story of a Soldier of Isfahan

In Isfahan I had a friend who was warlike,
spirited, and shrewd. His hands and dagger
were for ever stained with blood. The hearts of
his enemies were consumed by fear of him ; even
the tigers stood in awe of him. In battle he was
like a sparrow among locusts ; in combat,
sparrows and men were alike to him. Had he
made an attack upon Faridun, he would not have
given the latter time to draw his sword. Neither
in bravery nor magnanimity had he an e^ual.

73


74 CONCERNINa RESIGNATION


This warrior formed a liking for my company ;
bnt as I was not destined to remain in Isfahan,
Eate transferred me from Iraq to Syria, in which
holy land my staying was agreeable. After some
time the desire for my home attracted me, so
I returned to Iraq.

One night, the memory of the sepoy passed
through my mind ; the salt of his friendship
opened the wounds of my gratitude, for I had eaten
salt from his hand. To meet him, I went to
Isfahan, and inquired as to where he lived.

I chanced upon him. He who had been a
youth had become old ; his form, once erect as
an arrow, had become as a bow. Like a hoary
mountain, his head was covered with snowy hair ;
Time had conquered him and twisted the wrist
of his bravery. The pride of his strength had
gone ; the head of weakness was upon his knees.

“ 0 tiger-seizer ! ” I exclaimed, “ what has
made thee decrepit like an old fox ? ”

He laughed and said ; “ Since the day of the
battle of Tartary, I have expelled the thoughts
of fighting from my head. Then did I see the
earth arrayed with spears like a forest of reeds.
I raised like smoke the dust of conflict; but
when Fortune does not favour, of what avail
is fury ? I am one who, in combat, could take
with a spear a ring from the palm of the hand ;
but, as my star did not befriend me, they en-
oiroled me as with a ring. I seized the opportunity


BESIGNATION TO FATE


75


of flight, for only a fool strives with Fate. How
could my helmet and cuirass aid me when my
bright star favoured me not ? When the key
of victory is not in the hand, no one can break
open the door of conquest with his arms.

“ The enemy were a pack of leopards, and as
strong as elephants. The heads of the heroes were
encased in iron, as were also the hoofs of the
horse®. We urged on our Arab steeds like a cloud,
and when the two armies encountered each other
thou wouldst have said they had struck the sky
down to the earth. From the raining of arrows,
that descended like hail, the storm of death arose
in every corner. Hot one of our troops came out
of the battle but his cuirass was soaked with
blood. Not that our swords were blunt — it was
the vengeance of stars of ill fortune. Over-
powered, we surrendered, like a fish which, though
protected by scales, is caught by the hook in the
bait. Since Fortune averted her face, useless
was our shield against the arrows of Fate.”

Stoey of the Doctor and the Villager

One night a villager could not sleep owing to
a pain in his side. A doctor said : “ This pain is
caused by his having eaten the leaves of the vine.
I shall be astonished if he lasts through the night,
for the arrows of a Tartar in his breast were better
for him than the eating of such indigestible food.”


76 CONCERNING RESIGNATION


That night the doctor died ; forty years have
since passed, and the villager yet lives.

Stoby of the Villages and his Ass

The ass of a villager died, so he set the head
upon a vine in his garden in order that it might
ward off the Evil Eye.

A sage old man passed by and laughingly re-
marked : “ Dost thmk, O friend, this will effect
thy purpose ? In life, the ass could not protect
itself from blows ; so, in weakness, did it die.”

What knows the physician of the condition of
the sick, when, helpless, he himself will die
through illness ?

Stoby illhsteating Luck

A poor man dropped a dinar in the road. He
searched much, but at last, despairing, abandoned
the attempt.

Some one came along and found the coin by
chance.

Good and ill fortune are predestined. Our
daily portion depends not upon our strength and
efforts, for those who are strongest and strive the
most stand often in the direst need.

Stoby of One who blamed his Destiny

There was once a rich and prosperous man
named Bakhtyar. The wife of one of his neigh-
bours, who was in the other extreme of poverty,


THE IMPOTENCE OP MAN


77


upbraided ber husband one night when he
went to her empty-handed, saying ; “ No one is
so poor and unfortunate as thee. Take a lesson
from thy neighbours, who are well-to-do. Why
art thou not fortunate, like them ? ”

The man replied ; “I am incapable of aught ;
quarrel not with Fate. I have not been endowed
with the power to make myself a Bakhtyar.’’

Story of a Darwbsh and ms Wifb

A darwesh remarked to his wife, who was of
ill-favoured countenance : “ Since Pate has made
thee ugly, do not encrust thy face with cosmetic.”

Who can attain good fortune by force ? Who,
with collyrium, can make the blind to see ?

Not one among the philosophers of Greece
or Home could produce honey from the thorn.

Wild beasts cannot become men ; education is
wasted upon them.

A mirror can be freed from stain, but it cannot
be made from a stone.

Roses do not blossom on the branches of the
willow ; hot baths never yet made an Ethiop white.

Since one cannot escape the arrows of Fate,
resignation is the only shield.

Story op a Vttlturb and a Kite

A vulture said to a kite : “ No one can see so far
as 1.”


78 CONCERNING RESIGNATION


“ Possibly/’ replied the kite ; “ but what

canst thdu see across the desert ? ”

Gazing down, the vulture exclaimed : “ Yonder
do I see a grain of wheat.”

Thereupon, they flew to the ground. When the
vulture settled upon the wheat he became caught
in a trap. He had not known that, through his
eating the grain, Fate would ensnare him % the
neck.

Not every oyster contains a pearl ; not every
archer hits the target.

“ Of what use,” the kite inquired, “ was it to
see the grain when thou couldst not discern the
trap of thine enemy ? ”

“ Caution,” said the captive vulture, “ availeth
not with Destiny.”

When the decrees of past eternity are brought to
action, the keenest eyes are rendered blind by Fate.

In the ocean, where no shore-line appears, the
swimmer strives in vain.

Story op a Camel

A young camel said to its mother ; “ After
thou hast made a journey, rest awhile.”

*‘If the bridle were in my hands,” was the
reply, “ no one would ever see me in the string
of camels with a load upon my back.”

Fate is the helmsman of the ship of life, no
matter though the owner rend his clothes.


SPECIOUS PIETY


79


0 Sadi ! look not for aid from any man.
God is the giver, and He alone. If thou worship
Him, the door of His mercy sufficeth thee ; if He
drive thee away, no one will ease thee. If He
make thee to wear a crown, raise thy head ; if
not, how thy head in despair.

Discotjrsb concerning Hypocrisy

Who knows that thou art not pledged to God
even though thou standest in prayer without
ablution ?

That prayer is the key to hell which thou per-
formest only before the eyes of men.

If the high-road of thy life lead to aught but
God, thy prayer-mat will be thrown into the fire.

He whose heart is good and makes no outward
show of piety is better than one of outward
sanctity whose heart is false.

A night-prowling robber is better than a sinner
in the tunic of a saint.

Expect not wages from Omar, 0 son, when thou
workest in the house of Zaid.

If in private I am bad and mean, of what avail
is it to pose before the world with honour ? How
much will the bag of hypocrisy weigh in the
Scales of Justice ?

The outside of the hypocrite’s coat is neater
than the lining, for the one is seen and the other is
hidden.


CHAPTER VI


CONCBENING CONTENTMENT

He knows not God nor performs His worship who
is not contented with his lot.

Contentment maketh a man rich — ^tell this to
the avaricious,

0 irresolute one ! be tranquil, for grass grows
not upon revolving stones.

Pamper not thy body if thou be a man of sense,
for in so doing dost thou seek thine own de-
struction.

The wise acquire virtue, and they that pamper
their bodies are devoid of merit.

Eating and sleeping is the creed of animals ;
to adopt it is the manner of fools.

Happy is that fortunate man who, in medita-
tion, prepares for the last journey by means of
the knowledge of God.

To him who knows not the darkness from the
light the face of a demon is as that of a Houri.*®

How can the falcon fly to the sky when the
stone of avarice is tied to its wing ?

If thou pay less attention to thy food than to
worship thou mayest become an angel. First

80


THE SNARES OE AVARICE 81


cultivate the qualities of a man, then reflect upon
the character of angels.

Eat in proportion to thy hunger ; how can he
give praises who scarce can breathe by reason of
his gluttony ?

He whose stomach is full is void of wisdom. The
prey is entrapped in the snare because of its greed.

Story or the King of Khwarazm"

A covetous man paid an early morning visit
to the king of Khwarazm, and twice prostrated
himself to the ground before him.

Tell me, O father,” his son inquired, “ didst
thou not say that Mecca was thy place of worship ?
Why didst thou to-day repeat thy prayers before
the king ? ”

Contentment exalteth the head ; that which
is full of avarice comes no higher than the shoulder.

He who has wrapped up the volume of his
avarice needs not to write to any one, “ I am thy
slave and servant.”

By begging wilt thou be driven from every
assembly ; drive it from thyself, so that no one
may drive thee away.

Concerning the Evils of Over-eating

Some said to a pious man who was stricken
with fever : “ Ask for some conserve of roses from
such a one.”


82 CONCERNING CONTENTMENT


“ Oh, friend,” he repUed, “ it were better to
die in bitterness than to endure the affliction of
his sour face.”

A wise man does not eat conserve of roses from
the hand of one whose face has been soured by
pride.

Pursue not that which thy heart desires, for the
pampering of the body destroys the fires of life.

The gluttonous man bears the weight of his
corpulence ; if he obtain not food, he bears the
weight of grief. It is better that the stomach
should be empty than the mind.

Stoey oy a Glutton

In company with some religious mendicants
I entered a date-grove in Busra. One of the party
was a glutton. He, having girt his loins,, climbed
up a tree, and, falling headlong, died.

The headsman of the village asked, “ Who
killed this man ? ”

“ Go softly, friend,” I answered ; “ he fell from
a branch — ’twas the weight of his stomach.”

Stoey of a Recluse

The Amir of Tartary presented a silken robe
to an elderly recluse, who, putting it on, kissed
the hand of the messenger, and said : “A thou-
sand praises to the king ! Excellent is this
splendid robe, but I prefer my own patched habit.”


THE PITFALLS OF AMBITION


If tLon hast relinquished the world, sleep upon
the bare ground — ^kiss it not before any one for
the sake of a costly carpet.

Stout iLLXJSTEATrpra the Evils oe Avarice

To a poor man who had naught to eat but
bread and onions, a foolish man remarked : “ Go,
wretched man, and bring some cooked meat
from the public feast. Ask boldly and be not
afraid of any one, for he who is modest must go
without his share.”

Acting on this advice, the beggar put on his
cloak and started off. . The servants of the feast
tore off his clothes and broke his arm.

Weeping, he cried : “Oh my soul ! What
remedy is there for one’s own actions ? One
seized by avarice becomes the seeker of his own
misfortunes. After -this, the bread and onions
are good enough for me.”

A barley loaf procured by the exertions of
one’s own arm is better than a loaf of flour from
the table of the liberal.”

Story oe an Ambitious Cat

A cat who lived in the house of an old woman
of humble circumstances wandered to the palace
of a noble, whose slaves repulsed the animal
with arrows.


Bi OOWBUmm COMENTto]NT

Bleeding from many wounds, the cat ran oif
in terror, thus reflecting : “ Since I have escaped
from the hands of those slaves, the mice in the
ruined hut of the old woman are good enough
for me.”

Honey is not worth the price of a sting ; better
it is to be content with the syrup of dates than
expose oneself to that.

God is not pleased with him who is not con-
tented with his lot.

Stoey of a Shoet-siqhted Man and his High-
minded Wife

A certain child having cut its teeth, the father
bent his head in anxious thought and said :
“ How can I obtain the bread and food of which
the child will now have need ? ”

“ Be not alarmed,” his wife replied, “ for, until
our child shall die, He who gave him teeth will
send him bread. A rich man provides for his
slave ; why should not He who created the
slave do likewise ? Thou hast not the trust
in God that the purchased slave reposes in his
master.”

I have heard that in olden times stones became
silver in the hands of saints. Think not that
this is contrary to reason — ^when thou hast be-
come contented, silver and stones will be as one
to thee.


THE TREASUEE OE POVERTY aS


Say to the devotee who worships kings that a
king is poorer than a darwesh.

A dinar satisfies a beggar ; Earidun was but half
content with the whole of the kingdom of Persia.

A beggar free from care is better off than a
troubled king.

The villager and his wife sleep more happily
than the king ever did in his palace.

Though one be a king and the other a cotton-
carder, when they sleep in death the night of
both becomes day.

When thou seest a rich man filled with pride,
go and give thanks, 0 thou who art poor, that
thou, praise be to God ! hast not the power to
inflict injury upon any one.

Story op a Holy Man who built a House

A holy man built a house as high as his own
stature. Some one said to him : “I know thee
able to erect a better house than this.”

“ Enough,” he cried, “ what need have I of a
lofty roof ? This that I have built is high enough
for a dwelling which I must leave at death.”

Set not thy house in the path of a flood,** O
slave, for never will it be perfected.

Story op a Sheikh who became King

A certain king died, and, having no heir, be-
queathed the throne to a venerable sheikh.


86 OOJSrCEBNING CONTENTMENT


When the recluse heard the roar of the drums of
empire, he desired no longer the corner of seclu-
sion, He led the army to left and right, and
became so strong and valiant that he filled the
hearts of the brave with fear.

After he had slain a number of his enemies,
some others combined together against him and
reduced him to such straits in his fortified town
that he sent a message to a pious man, saying :
“ Aid me with thy prayers, for the sword and
arrow do not avail.”

The devotee laughed and said : “ Why did he
liot content himself with half a loaf and his vigils ?
Did not the wealth-worshipping Korah®“ know
that the treasure of safety lies in the corner of
retirement ? ”

Discourse cojtoeening Riches

The generous man may attain to perfection
although he possess not gold.

Dost think that if a mean man became a Korah
his sordid nature would be changed ?

If he who trades in liberality obtain not bread,
his nature remains yet rich.

Generosity is the soil, and riches the seed that
is sown ; give, that the root may not be destitute
of a branch.

Exert not thyself in the amassing of wealth,
for evil is the smell of stagnant water ; strive,


VIRTUE ITS OWN REWARD 87


rather, to be generous, for running water be-
comes a flood.

The miser who falls from position and wealth
but seldom stands a second time upon his feet.

If thou be a precious jewel,’® grieve not, for Time
wfll not pass thee by ; it is the brickbat by the
wayside that goes unheeded. Shavings of gold
that fall from the scissors are searched for with
a candle.


CHAPTEB VII


OOKOEENING EDUOATION

Those who turn the reins of their desires from
unlawful things have surpassed Bustam*^ and
Sam ” in valour.

None is so fearful of the enemy as thou, slave
of thine own passions.

Thy earthly body is a city, containing both
good and evil ; thou art the King, and Beason
is thy wise minister.

In this city, the headstrong men pursue their
trades of avarice and greed ; Besignation and
Temperance are the citizens of fame and virtue ;
Lust and Wantonness the thieves and pick-pockets.

When the king shows favour to the wicked,
how can the wise remain in peace ?

The passions of evil, envy, and hatred are in-
herent in thee as is the blood of thy veins. If
these thine enemies gained in strength they would
turn their heads from thy rule and counsel ; no
resistance do they offer when they see the mailed
fist of Beason.

Night-thieves and vagabonds wander not in
the places where the patrols guard.

88


THE WISDOM OF SILENCE S9

’ The chief who punishes not his enemy is bereft
of power by the strength of the latter.

More on this point I wiU not speak — a word
suffices to him who puts into practice what hereads.

Discourse concerning the Excellence op
Taciturnity

Be silent, 0 thou who knowest many things !
for he that speaketh little will be free from re-
proach on the Day of Judgment.

The man of many words is deaf ; no counsel
does he heed like silence.

When thou desirest continually to speak thou
findest no sweetness in the speech of others.

Those who reflect upon right and wrong are
better than triflers with ready answers.

He that speakslittle thou dost neversee ashamed;
a grain of musk is better than a heap of mud.

Beware of the fool whose volume of words is
as that of ten men — a hundred arrows shot and
each one wide of the target. If thou art wise,
shoot one, and that one straight.

Utter not slander before a wall — oft may it
happen that behind are listening ears.

Enclose thy secrets within the city wafls of
thy mind, and beware that none may find the
gates of thy city open.

A wise man sews up his mouth : the candle
is burned by means of its wick.


90


COKCEBNING EDUCATION


Story ooNCEEmRG the Keeping oe Seoeets

Takash, king of Persia, imparted a secret to kis
slaves, adding, “ Tell it not to any one.” For a
year they kept the secret in their hearts ; in one
day it became diffused throughout the world.

The king ordered the slaves to be executed.
One among them begged for mercy, saying :
“ KiE not thy slaves, for the fault was thine.
Thou didst not dam up that secret when it was
a spring : why seek to arrest its course now that
it has become a flood ? ”

Entrust jewels to treasurers, but be the keeper
of thine own secrets. Thou hast the power until
the word be spoken ; then, does it gain mastery
over thee. .

Speech is a demon confined in the well of the
mind : leave it not free on thy palate and tongue.
When the genii has escaped from the cage, no
stratagem will bring him back.

Story illustrating the Pact that Silence
IS Best eob Fools

There was once in Egypt a religious mendicant
who never opened his mouth in speech. Wise
men assembled around him from far and near,
like moths around a candle.

One night, he reflected : “ Merit is concealed
beneath a silent tongue. If I remain thus sileut,
how will men know that I am leafimed ? ”


IDLE TALKERS— A COMPARISON 91


Therefore he indulged in speech, and his friends
and enemies alike found him to he the most
ignorant man in Egypt. His followers dispersed
and his glory vanished. So he went on a journey
and wrote on the wall of a mosque : “ Had I but
seen myself in the mirror of understanding I
should not imprudently have torn the veil from
off my mind. Although deformed, I exposed
my figure in the thought that I was handsome.”

A little-talker has a high reputation.

Silence is dignity, and the concealer of blemishes.

Express not in haste the thoughts of thy mind,
for thou canst reveal them when thou wilt.

The beasts are silent, and men are endowed
with speech — ^idle talkers are worse than the
beasts.

Story illustrating the Folly op
Impertinence

In the course of a dispute some one uttered
improper words and was, in consequence, seized
and nearly throttled.

“ 0 thou conceited fellow ! ” said an ex-
perienced man, “ if thy mouth had been closed
like a bud, thou wouldst not have seen thy skirt
torn like a flower.”

Dost thou not see that fire is nothing but a
flame, which at any moment can be quenched
with water ?


92


CONCERNING EDUCATION


If a man possess merit, the merit speaks for
itself, not the owner of the merit.

If thou hast not the purest musk, claim not to
possess it ; if thou hast, it makes itself known by
its perfume.

Discouese on Slandee

Speak no evil concerning the good or the
wicked, for thus thou wrongest the former and
makest an enemy of the latter.

Know that he who defames another revealeth
his own faults.

If thou speak evil of any one, thou art sinful,
even though what thou sayest be true.

Stoey oonoeening the same Subject

To one who stretched his tongue in slander,
a wise man said : “ Speak not evil of any one
before me, so that I may not think ill of thee.
Although his dignity is lowered, thine own
honour is not increased thereby.”

Why Thieving is Bettbe than Slandeeing

Some one said : “ Thieving is better than back-
biting.”

I replied : That is strange to me. What
good seest thou in thieving that thou givest it
preference to slander ? ”

“ Thieves,” he explained, “ live by virtue of


A LEggOlSr m FASMO 93

their strength and daring. The slanderer sins
and reaps nothing.*’

Sadi ahd his Ejtvioxjs Class-i’Biehd

A fellow-student at Nezamiah displayed male-
volence towards me, and I informed my tutor,
saying : “ Whenever I give more proper answers
than he the envious fellow becomes offended.”

The professor replied : “ The envy of thy friend
is not agreeable to thee, but I know not who told
thee that back-biting was commendable. If he
seek perdition through the path of envy, thou
wilt join him by the path of slander.”

Stoey oe Sadi’s Childhood

When a child, unable to distinguish between
right and wrong, I once resolved to fast, and a
certain devout man thus taught me to perform
my ablutions and devotions : “ First,” he said,
“ repeat the name of God, according to the law
of the Prophet ; secondly, make a vow ; and
thirdly, wash the palms of the hands. Then
wash thy nose and mouth three times and rub thy
front teeth with thy forefinger, for a tooth-brush
is forbidden when fasting. After that, throw
three handfuls of water upon thy face ; then wash
thy hands and arms up to the elbows and repeat
thy prayers by the telling of beads and the
recital of the attributes and praises of God.


u


CONCERNING EDtrCATlON


Lastly, wipe again thy head and wash thy feet —
thus end in the name of God.”

“ No one,” added the old man, “ knows the
form of ablution better than myself. Dost thou
not see that the elder of the village has become
decrepit ? ”

Hearing these words, the elder cried : “ 0
impious wretch ! Didst thou not say that the
use of a tooth-brush was unlawful in fasting ? —
I suppose, then, that slander is lawful ? Before
thou settest about a fast, wash first thy mouth
of improper words.”

Stoey of a Sufi’s Rebuke

Some Sufis were sitting together in private,
when one of them opened his mouth in slander.

“ Didst thou ever make a crusade in Europe ? ”
he was asked.

“ Beyond the four walls of my house,” he replied,
“ I have never placed my feet.”

“ Never have I met so unfortunate a man,”
observed the questioner. “ The infidel remains
safe from his enmity, yet a Mussulman escapes
not the violence of his tongue.”

CONOEENIKG AbSEKT FeIENDS

In relation to an absent friend, two things are
unlawful. The fibrst is to squander his posses-
sions ; the second, to speak evil of his name.


EVIL-SPEAKING


05


Look not for good words from him who montions
the names of men with scorn, for behind thybackhe
says those things which he said to thee of others.

He only is wise who concerns himself with
his own affairs and is indifferent to the world.

Where Slander is Lawful

Three persons only is it permissible to slander.
The first is a tyrannical king who oppresses his
subjects ; it is lawful to speak of his misdeeds so
that people may beware of him. The second is he
who is shameless ; deem it not a sin to speak ill of
such a one, for by his own actions are his faults re-
vealed. Thethirdis he that gives false weight andis
a cheat ; say what thou knowest of his evil ways.

Tale-bearers worse than Back-biters

Some one said to a pious man, “ Knowest thou
what such a one said concerning thee ? ”

“ Silence ! ” he replied ; “ it is best not to know
Vhat an enemy said. Those who carry the words
of an enemy are assuredly worse than the enemy
himself. Only they convey the speech of an
enemy to a friend who are in agreement with
the enemy. Thou art worse than an enemy, for
thou revealest what he said in private.”

A tale-bearer makes an old strife new ; fly as
far as thou art able from one who stirs up a dor-
mant quarrel.


CONClRNlNG EDUCATION


To be tied by tbe feet in a gloomy pit is better
than to carry mischief from place to place.

A quarrel is like a fire which the tale-bearer
feeds with fuel.

Paeidijn” and his Wise Vazier

Faridun had a vazier who was discerning and
of enlightened mind.

Some one went to the king one day and said :
“ The vazier is thy secret enemy. There is not
a person in the kingdom to whom he has not
lent out gold and silver on the condition that at
thy death the loans shall be repaid.”

Regarding the vazier with threatening mien,
the l^g exclaimed :

“ Thou appearest before me in the guise of a
friend ; why art thou my enemy at heart ? ”

The vazier kissed the ground as he replied :
“ I desire, 0 renowned king, that all the people
should be thy well-wishers. Since at thy death
they must repay me, they will pray for thy long
life from fear of me.”

Approving of this explanation, the king
increased the dignities of the vazier, while no
one was more ill-fated and changed in fortune
than the tale-bearer.

It is not compatible with reason to kindle
between two men the fire of strife and burn one-
self in the flames.


DOMESTIC HAPPIKTESS


97


Discourse oostobrntno Wives

That poor man is a king whose wife is obedient
and chaste. Grieve not over the troubles of the
day when at night the dispeller of thy sorrows
is by thy side.

He has obtained his heart’s desire whose be-
loved is of the same mind as himself.

If a woman be pure and of kindly speech,
regard neither her beauty nor her homeliness.

A woman of good nature is more to be desired
than one of beauty, for amiability conceals a
multitude of flaws. Beware the ill-tempered fairy.
May heaven grant protection from a bad woman !

Prison is preferable to a house full of frowns ;
travelling is a joy to him whose house contains
a woman of ugly mind.

Close the door of happiness upon that house
whence the woman’s voice comes louder than her
husband’s.

If thy wife take the road to the bazar, beat
her, or sit thyself like a woman in thy house.
Let her eyes be blind in the presence of
strangers ; when she goeth from thy house, let
it be to the grave.

Take a new wife each Spring, 0 friend, for last
year’s almanac serves no purpose.

To walk bare-footed is better than to wear
tight shoes ; the hardships of a journey are
better than discord at home.


7


98


CONCERNING EDtJCAT:'ION


Discourse on the Tbainino of Sons

If thou desire that thy name should remain,
train thy son in^ knowledge and wisdom, for
if he possess not these thou diest obscure, with
no one to commemorate thy name.

Teach him a handicraft, though thou be as
rich as Korah. Place no hope in the power that
thou hast — ^riches may go from thee.

A bag of silver and gold is emptied ; the purse
of an artisan remains filled.

Dost thou not know how Sadi attained to rank ?
He journeyed not over the plains, nor crossed the
seas. In his youth he served under the yoke of
the learned : God granted him distinction in
after-life. And it is not long before he who
serves obtains command.

A boy who suffers not at the hands of his
teacher suffers at the hands of Time.

Make thy son good and independent, so that
he may not be beholden to any man.

Protect him from evil associates ; and pity
him not if he bring ruin and destruction upon
himself, for it is better that a vicious son should
die before his father.

Sadi rebuked for his Eault-finding

There was a certain young preacher who was
learned and intelligent, a man of sanctity and
a true worshipper. He was forcible in eloquence


PETTINESS OE EAULT-EINDING 99


and correct in grammar, but his articulation was
so faulty that he could not properly repeat the
letters of the alphabet.

I said to a holy man : “ The youth has not got
his front teeth ! ”

“ Speak not thus,” he replied. “ Thou hast
discerned his fault, but thine eyes are closed to
his many virtues. Thoms and roses grow to-
gether ; why regardest thou only the thorns ?
He who is of bad nature sees nothing in the
peacock but its ugly feet.”

Expose not the faults of others, for thereby art
thou forgetful of thine own failings.

Whether I be good or evil, keep thou silent,
for I am the bearer of my own profit and loss,
and God is better acquainted with my character
than thou.

I seek no reward from thee for my virtues so
that I may not be afflicted by thee by reason of
my sins.

For every good act God will bestow, not one,
but ten rewards. If thou see one virtue in a
man, do thou pass over the ten faults that he
hath.

Are not all things created the product of the
art of God ? — ^black they are and white, hand-
some and deformed. Not every eye and eyebrow
that thou seest is good : eat the kernel of the
nut and throw the husk away.


CHAPTER VIII


CONOEENma GEATITUDE

I CANNOT give thanks to that Eriend, for I
know of none that are worthy. Every hair of my
body is a gift from Him ; how could I thank
Him for every hair ?

Praise be to the munificent Lord, Who from
non-existence brought His creatures into being.
Who can describe His goodness ? All praises are
encompassed by His glory.

See how from childhood to old age he has
endowed thee with a splendid robe !

He made thee pure ; therefore, be pure — ^un-
worthy it is to die impured by sin.

Let not the dust remain upon the mirror, for
once grown dull it never again will polish.

When thou dost seek to gain the means of
life, rely not upon the strength of thine own
arms.

0 self -worshipper I why lookest thou not to
God, Who giveth power to thy hand ?

100


FILIAL AFFECTION


101


If by thy striving thou doest aught of good,
take not the credit to thyself ; know it to be by
the grace of God.

Thou standest not by thine own strength —
from the Invisible art thou sustained each
moment.

A Mother’s Warning to her Son

Sorrowed at the conduct of her son, who gave
no ear to her advice, a woman brought to him
the cradle in which once he slept, and said :
“ 0 weak in love and forgetful of the past !
Wast thou not a weeping and helpless child, for
whom through many nights I sacrificed my
sleep ? Thou hadst not then the strength thou
hast to-day ; thou couldst not ward the flies
from off thy body. A tiny insect gave thee pain ;
to-day thou excellest amidst the strong. In the
grave wilt thou again bo thus, unable to repel
the onslaughts of an ant. How, when the grave-
worms eat the marrow of thy brain, wilt thou
relight the Lamp of Intellect ? Thou art as a blind
man who seeth not the way, and knoweth not
that a well lies in his path. If thou be grateful
for thy sight, ’tis well ; if not, then surely art
thou blind. Thy tutor gave thee not the power of
wisdom ; by God was it implanted in thy nature.
Had He withheld this gift from thee, truth would
have appeared to thee as falsehood,”


102 CONCERNING GRATITUDE


DiSOOTJBSE OOKOERirrN-G THE AbT OE THE MoST

High God

For thee is set the bright moon in the sky by
night, the world-illuminating sun by day.

Like a chamberlain, the heavens spread for
thee the carpet of the Spring.

The wind and snow, the clouds and rain, the
roaring thunder and the lightning glittering as
a sword — all are His agents, obedient to His word,
nourishing the seed that thou hast planted in
the soil.

If thou be athirst, fret not ; the clouds bear
water upon their shoulders.

From the bee He giveth thee honey, and
manna from the wind ; fresh dates from the
date-tree and the date-tree from a seed.

For thee are the sun and moon and the Pleiades ;
they are as lanterns upon the roof of thy house.

He bringeth roses from the thorn and musk
from a pod ; gold from the mine and green leaves
from a withered stick.

With His own hands did He paint thine eye
and eyebrows — one cannot leave one’s bosom
friends to strangers.

Omnipotent is He, nourishing the delicate with
His many bounties.

Render thanks each moment from thy heart,
for gratitude is not the work of the tongue
alone.


THE LESSONS OP AFFLICTION 103


0 God, my heart is blood, mine eyes are sore
when I behold Thy indescribable gifts.

DlSOOimSE OONCEENING THE CONDITION OF

THE Weak

He knows not the value of a day of pleasure
who has not seen adversity. Hard is the winter
for the beggar — ^the rich man heeds it not. If
thou art swift of foot, be thankful when thou
lookest upon the lame.

What know they of the value of water who
dwell upon the banks of the Jayhun ? Ask it of
them who are parched in the heat of the sun.
What cares the Arab by the Tigris for the thirsty
ones of the desert ?

He knows the value of health who lost, his
strength in fever. How can the night be long
to ihee reclining in ease upon thy bed ? Think
of him who is racked with fever — ^the sick man
knows the tediousness of the night.

At the sound of the drum the master awakens
— ^what knows he how the watchman passed the
night ?

Stoey of Titoheal, Kjeg of Shibaz, and the
Hindu Watchman

One night in winter Tughral passed by a
Hindu sentinel, who was shivering like the star


104 CONCERNING GRATITUDE


Canopus in the icy rain. Moved to pity, he said :
“ Thou shalt have my fur coat. Wait by the
terrace and I will send it by the hand of a slave.”

On entering his palace he was met by a beautiful
slave, at the sight of whom the poor sentinel
passedfrom his mind. Thefur coat slipped through
the latter’s ears ; through his ill-luck it never
reached his shoulders.

The king slept through the night devoid of
care ; but what said the chief watchman to him
in the morning ? —

“ Perhaps thou didst forget that ‘ lucky man ’
when thy hand was upon the bosom of thy slave.
By thee the night was spent in tranquillity and
joy ; what knowest thou how the night has
gone with us ? ”

They with the caravan bend their heads over
the cauldron ; what care they for them that toil
on foot through the desert sand ?

Tarry, 0 active youths, for old and feeble men
are with the caravan. Well hast thou slept in
the litter while the driver held the nose-string of
the camel. What of the desert and mountains ?
what of the stones and the sand ? Ask how it
fares with them that lag behind.

Stoby of a Thief

A thief was arrested by a night-watchman
-Bud bound b^ the hands. ThuSj crestfallen and


THINGS THAT MIGHT BE WORSE 105


afflicted, he remained. During the night he
heard some one cry out in want.

“ How long wilt thou bewail thy lot ? ” he
asked. “ Go, sleep, 0 wretched man ! give
thanks to God that the watchman has not tied
thee by the hands.”

Bemoan not thine own misfortune when thou
seest another more wretched than thyself.

Stoey of One who was hot what he seemed

Some one passed by a pious man whom he
took for a Jew, and, therefore, struck him on the
neck. The latter bestowed his robe upon the
aggressor, who, becoming ashamed, remarked ;

“ I acted wrongly and thou hast forgiven me.
But what occasion is this for a gift ? ”

“ I stood not up in anger,” was the reply,
“ being thankful that I was not a Jew, as thou
didst suppose.”

Story of a Sage Dohkby

One left behind on tiie road wept, saying,
“ Wlio in this desert is more distressed than I ? ”

A pack-donkey answered : “0 senseless man !
how long wilt thou bewail the tyranny of Fate ?
Go, and give thanks that, though thou ridest not
upon a donkey, thou art not a donkey upon
which men ride,”


106 CONCERNING GRATITUDE


Stoey illusteattn-g the Evils op Petde

A theologian passed by a drunkard who had
fallen by the wayside. Filled with pride at his
own piety, he disdained even to regard him.

The young man raised his head and said :
“Go, old man, and give thanks that thou art in
the Divine favour — ^misfortune comes from pride.
Laugh not when thou seest one in bonds lest
thou likewise became involved. After all, is
it not within the bounds of possibility that
to-morrow thou mayest fall, like me, by the
roadside ? ”

If with a mosque the heavens have befriended
thee, revile not them that worship in the fire-
temple.

0 Mussulman ! fold thy hands and render
thanks that He has not bound the idolater’s thread
about thy waist.

Turn to Him who guides the hand of Fate ;
blindness it is to look for help elsewhere.

Stoey op Sadi and the Idolatbes

At Sumanat ** I saw an ivory idol. It was set
with jewels like the Manat, and nothing more
beautfiul could have been devised. Caravans
from every country brought travellers to its side ;
the eloquent from every clime made supplication
h^fqre its lifeless figure,


SABI DENOUNCES THE IBOL 107


“ Why,” I pondered, “ does a living being
worship an inanimate object ? ”

To a fire-worshipper, who was a fellow-lodger
and friend of mine, I said with gentleness : 0

Brahmin ! I am astonished at the doings of this
place. AH are infatuated with this feeble form ;
they are imprisoned in the well of superstition.
No power has the idol to move its hands or feet ;
if thou throw it down, it cannot rise from its
place. Dost thou not see that its eyes are of
amber ? — ^it were folly to seek faithfulness from
the stony-eyed.”

The Brahmin was angered at my words ; he
became my enemy, and informed the idolaters
of what I had said. Since to them the crooked
road appeared straight, they saw the straight
one crooked. Though a man be wise and intelli-
gent, he is a fool in the eyes of the ignorant.

Like a drowning man, I was destitute of help ;
save in politeness, I saw no remedy. When the
fool bears malice towards thee, safety lies in
gentleness and resignation.

Therefore, I praised aloud the chief of the
, Brahmins, saying : “0 old man ! expounder

of the Asta and Zend ! I, too, am pleased with
the figure of this idol. Its appearance was
strange in my sight — of its nature I have no
knowledge. Only recently have I arrived in this
place, and a stranger can seldom distinguish be-
tween the evil and the good. Devotion b^ imita-


108 CONCERNING GRATITUDE


tion is superstition : what reality is there in the
form of this idol, for I am foremost among the
worshippers ? ”

The face of the Brahmin glowed with joy as
he said : “ Thy question is reasonable and thy
actions are good — ^whoever seeks for proofs
arrives at his destination. Who but this idol can
raise his hands to God ? If thou wilt, tarry here
to-night, so that to-morrow the mystery of- this
may become known to thee.”

The night was as long as the Day of Judgment ;
the fire-worshippers around me prayed without
ablution. In the morning, they came again
into the temple, and I was sick with anger and
confused from lack of sleep. Suddenly, the idol
raised its arm ; and later, when the crowd had
left, the Brahmin looked smilingly towards me,
saying :

“ I know that now thou wilt have no doubts ;
truth has become manifest, falsehood remaineth
not.”

Seeing his ignorance thus increased, I shed
hypocritical tears and cried : “ I am sony for
what I said.”

At the sight of my tears the hearts of the
infidels were softened ; they ran towards me in
service, and led me by the arms to the ivory
idol, which was seated upon a golden chair set on
a throne of teak. I kissed the hand of the little
god — curses upon it and upon its worshippers !


THE TRICK REVEALED


109


Eor a few days I posed as an infidel and dis-
cussed tlie Zend, like a Bralimin. When I became
a guardian of the temple my joy was such that I
could scarce control my feelings.

One night, I closed fast the door of the temple
and, searching, discovered a screen of jewels and
gold that went from the top of the throne to the
bottom. . Behind this screen the Brahmin high
priest was devoutly engaged with the end of a
rope in his hand. Then did it become known to
me that when the rope was pulled the idol of
necessity raised its arm.

Greatly confused at my presence, the Brahmin
ran away in haste : I followed in hot pursuit
and threw him headlong down a well, for I knew
that, if he remained alive, he would seek to shed
my blood. When the purpose of an evil man is
revealed to thee, pull him up by the roots, other-
wise will he not desire that thou shouldst live.
The alarm being raised, I fled quickly from the
land. When thou settest fire to a forest of
canes, beware of the tigers, if thou art wise.

Whenever I supplicate at the shrine of the
Knower of Secrets, the Indian puppet comes into
my recollection — ^it throws dust on the pride of
mine eyes. I know that I raise my hand, but not
by virtue of mine own strength. Men of sanctity
stretch not out their hands themselves : the
Fates invisibly pull the strings.


CHAPTER IX


CONCEEKI^TG REPENTANCE

0 THOU of wliose life seventy years have passed,
perhaps thou hast slept in negligence that thy days
have been thrown to the winds. Worldly aims
hast thou well pursued ; no preparations hast thou
made for the departure to that world to come.

On the Judgment Day, when the bazar of
Paradise will be arrayed, rank will be assigned
in accordance with one’s deeds.

If thou shouldst take a goodly stock of virtues,
in proportion will be thy profit ; if thou be
bankrupt, thou wilt be ashamed.

If fifty years of thy life have passed, esteem
as a precious boon the few that yet remain.

While stiU thou hast the power of speech, close
not thy lips like the dead from the praise of
God.

An Old Man’s Lament

One night, in the season of youth, several of us
young men sat together; we sang like bulbuls
and raised a tumult in the street by our mirth.

An (fid man sat silent, apart ; like a filbert-
no


OLD AGD AKD YOOTH


111


nut, his tongue was closed from speech. A youth
approached him and said : “0 old man ! why
sittest thou so mournfully in this comer ? Come,
raise thy head from the collar of grief and join us
in our festivity.”

Thus did the old man reply : “ When the
morning breeze blows over the rose-garden, the
young trees proudly wave their branches. It
becomes not me to mingle in thy company, for
the dawn of old age has spread over my cheeks.
Thy turn it is to sit at this table of youth ; I
have washed my hands of youthful pleasures.
Time has showered snow upon my crow-like
wings ; like the bulbul, I could not sport in the
garden. Soon will the harvest of my life be
reaped ; for thee, the new green leaves are
bursting. The bloom has faded from my garden ;
who makes a nosegay from withered flowers ?
I must weep, like a child, in shame for my sins, but
cannot emulate his pleasures.”

Well has Luqman said : “ It is better not to live
at all than to live many years in sinfulness.”
Better, too, may it be to close the shop in the
morning than to sell the stock at a loss.

Advice aitd Wabninq

To-day, 0 youth, take the path of worship, for
to-morrow comes old age. Leisure thou hast, and
strength — strike the ball when the field is wide.*®


m CONCEBNING REPENTANCE


I knew not the value of life’s day till now that
I have lost it.

How can an old ass strive beneath its burden ? —
go thy way, for thou ridest a swift-paced horse.

A broken cup that is mended — ^what will
its value be ? Now that in carelessness the cup
of life has fallen from thy hand, naught remains
but to join the pieces.

Negligently hast thou let the pure water go ;
how canst thou now perform thy ablutions, ex-
cept with sand ? ”

Sadi’s Rebuke erom a Camel-driver

One night in the desert of Paid” my feet became
fettered with sleep. A camel-driver awoke me,
saying “ Arise ; since thou heedest not the
sound of the bell, perhaps thou desirest to be
left behind ! I, like thee, would sleep awhile,
but the desert stretches ahead. How wilt thou
reach the journey’s end if thou sleepest when
the drum of departure beats ? ”

Happy are they who have prepared their
baggage before the beat of the drum ! The
sleepers by the wayside raise not their heads and
the caravan has passed out of sight.

He who was early awake surpassed all on the
road ; what availed it to awaken when the caravan
had gone ?

This is the time to sow the seeds of the harvest
thou wouldst reap.


NO TIME LIKE THE PKESENT 113


Go not bankrupt to tbe Resurrection, for it
availetb not to sit in regret. By means of the
stock that thou hast, O son, profit can be
acquired ; what profit accrueth to him who
consumeth his stock himself ?

Strive now, when the water reacheth not beyond
thy waist ; delay not until the flood has passed
over thy head.

Heed the counsel of the wise to-day, for to-
morrow will Nakir ** question thee with sternness.
Esteem as a privilege thy precious soul, for a
cage without a bird has no value. Waste not thy
time in sorrow and regret, for opportunity is
precious and Time is a sword.

Story conoeenijtg Sorrow ror the Dead

A certain man died and another rent his clothes
in grief. Hearing his cries, a sage exclaimed :
“ If the dead man possessed the power he would
tear his shroud by reason of thy wailing and
would say : ‘ Do not torment thyself on account
of my affliction, since a day or two before thee
I made ready for the journey. Perhaps thou
hast forgotten thine own death, that my decease
has made thee so distressed.’ ”

When he whose eyes are open to the truth
scatters flowers over the dead, his heart bums
not for the dead but for himself.

Why dost thou weep over the death of a
child ? He came pure, and he departed pure.

8


114 GONCEENING EEPENTANCE


Tie now the feet of the bird of the soul ; tarry
not till it has borne the rope from thy hand.

Long hast thou sat in the place of another ;
soon will another sit in thy place.

Though thou be a hero or a swordsman, thou
wilt carry away nothing but the shroud.

If the wild ass break its halter and wander
into the desert its feet became ensnared in the
sand. Thou, too, hast strength till thy feet go
into the dust of the grave.

Since yesterday has gone and to-morrow has not
come, take account of this one moment that now is.

In this garden of the world there is not a cypress
that has grown which the wind of death has not
uprooted.

Story op a Pious Man and a Gold Brick

A gold brick fell into the hands of a pious man
and so turned his head that his enlightened mind
became gloomy. He passed the whole night in
anxious thought, reflecting : “ This treasure will
suffice me till the end of my life ; no longer shall
I have to bend my back before any one in begging.
A house wiU I build, the foundation of which
shall be of marble ; the rafters of the ceiling shall
be of aloe-wood. A special room will I have
for my friends, and its door shall lead into a
garden-house. Servants shall cook my food, and
in ease wiU I nourish my soul. This coarse


?ANItY OB' WOJ^LBLY DEgltlBlg lU


woollen bed-cloth has killed me by its roughness ;
now will I go and spread a carpet.”

His imaginings made him crazy ; the crab had
pierced its claws into his brain. He forsook his
prayers and devotions, and neither ate nor slept.

Unable to rest tranquil in one place, he wandered
to a plain, with his head confused with the charms
of his vain fancies. An old man was kneading mud
upon a grave for the purpose of making bricks.
Absorbed in thought for a while, the old man said:

“ 0 foolish soul ! hearken to my counsel. Why
hast thou attached thy mind to that goldbrickwhen
one day they will make bricks from thy dust ? The
mouth of a covetous man is too widely open that it
can be closed again by one morsel. Take, 0 base
man, thy hand from off that brick, for the river of
thy avarice cannot be dammed up with a brick.

“ So negligent hast thou been in the thought
of gain and riches that the stock of thy life has
become trodden underfoot. The dust of lust
has blinded the eyes of thy reason— the simoon of
desire has burned the harvest of thy life.”

Wipe the antimony of neglect from off thine
eyes, for to-morrow wilt thou be reduced to
antimony under the dust.

Admonition

Thy life is a bird, and its name is Breath. When
the bird has flown from its cage it cometh not
back to captivity.


116 CONCERNING REPENTANCE


Be watchful, for the world lasts but a moment,
and a moment spent with wisdom is better than
an age with folly.

Why fix we thus our minds upon this caravan-
serai ? Our friends have departed and we are
on the road. After us, the same flowers will
bloom in the garden, together will friends still sit.

When thou comest to Shiraz,*® dost thou not
cleanse thyself from the dust of the road ?

Soon, 0 thou polluted with the dust of sin,
wilt thou journey to a strange city. Weep, and
wash with thy tears thy impurities away.

Moral from ait Iitcidei!Tt iit Sadi’s Child-
hood

I remember that, in the time of my childhood,
my father (may God’s mercy be upon him every
moment I), bought me a gold ring. Soon after,
a hawker took the ring from my hand in exchange
for a date-fruit.

When a child knows not the value of a ring
he will part with it for a sweetmeat. Thou, too,
didst not recognise the value of life, but indulged
thyself ia vain pleasures.

In the Day of Judgment, when the good will
attain to the highest cfignity and mount from the
bottommost depths of the earth to the Pleiades,
thy head will hang forward in shame, for thy
deeds wiU gather around thee.


ALLIANCE WITH THE EVIL 117


0 brother ! be ashamed of the works of the
evil, for ashamed wilt thou be at the Resurrection
in the presence of the good.

Stoey OS’ A Maw who eeabbd a Wolf

Some one reared a wolf-cub, which, when grown
in strength, tore its master to pieces. When
the man was on the point of death a sage
passed by and said : “ Didst thou not know

that thou wouldest suffer injury from an enemy
thus carefully reared ? ”

How can we raise our heads from shame when
we are at peace with Satan and at war with God ?

Thy friend regards thee not when thou turnest
thy face towards the enemy.

He who lives in the house of an enemy deems
right estrangement from a friend.

Story of a Cheat

Some one robbed the people of their money by
cheating, and whenever ho had accomplished one
of his nefarious acts ho cursed the Evil One, who
said :

“ Never have I seen such a fool ! Thou hast
intrigued vdth me secretly ; why, therefore, dost
thou raise the sword of enmity against me 7 ”

Alas ! that the angels should record against
thee iniquities committed by the order of the
Evil One I


118 CONCERNING REPENTANCE


Go forward when thou seest that the door of
peace is open, for suddenly the door of repentance
will be closed.

March not under a load of sin, 0 son, for a
porter becomes exhausted on the journey.

The Prophet is the Mediator of him who follows
the highway of his laws.

A Rbcolleotiok OB Childhood

In the time of my childhood I went out with
my father during the Id Festival, and in the
tumult of the mob got lost. I cried in fear, when
my father suddenly pulled my ear, and said :
“ Several times did I tell thee not to take thy
hand from the skirt of my robe.”

A child knows not how to go alone ; it is diffi-
cult to travel on any road unseen.

Thou, poor man, art as a child in thine endea-
vours ; go, hold the skirt of the virtuous. Sit
not with the base, but fasten thy hand to the
saddle-straps of the pious.

Go, like Sadi, glean the com of wisdom so that
thou mayest store a harvest of divine knowledge.

Story of Ohe who burned hts Harvest

In the month of July, a certain man stored
his grain and set his mind at ease concerning it.
One night, he became intoxicated and lighted a
fire, which destroyed his harvest.


THE HARVEST OF LIFE


119


The next day he sat down to glean the ears
of com, but not a single grain remained in his
possession. Seeing him thus afflicted, some one
remarked : “If thou didst not wish for this
misfortune, thou shouldst not in folly have
burned thy harvest.”

Thou, whose years have been wasted in iniquity,
art he who burns the harvest of his life.

Do not so, 0 my life ! Sow the seeds of re-
ligion and justice, and throw not to the winds
the harvest of a good name.

Knock at the door of forgiveness before thy
punishment arrives, for lamentation beneath the
lash is of no avail.

Discourse on Repentance

p

He who supplicates the Deity by night will
not be shamed on the Day of Judgment.

If thou art wise, pray for forgiveness in the
night for the sins that thou hast committed in
the day.

What is thy fear if thou hast made thy peace
with God ? He closes not the door of forgive-
ness upon them that supplicate Him.

If thou art a servant of God, raise thy hands
in prayer ; and if thou be ashamed, weep in
sorrow.

No one has stood upon His threshold whose sins
the tears of repentance have not washed away.


CHAPTER X


OONCEENING PRAYER

Comb, let us raise our hands in prayer, for to-
morrow they will he powerless in the dust.

Think not that he who supphoates before the
Door of Mercy, which is never shut, will turn
away in hopelessness.

0 Lord, regard us with compassion, for sin
has entered among thy servants.

0 gracious God ! by Thy bounty have we
been sustained ; to Thy gifts and lovingkindness
have we become habituated.

Since in this life Thou hast ennobled us above
all things created, hope of similar glory have
we in the world to come.

0 God, humihate me not by reason of Thy
greatness ; make me not ashamed by reason of
my sins.

Let no one prevail over me, for it is better
that I should suffer punishment from Thy hand.

Let it suffice that I am ashamed in Thy pre-
sence ; make me not ashamed before my fellow-
men.


120


THE MUSSULMAN’S PRAYER 121


If the shadow of Thy mercy fall upon me,
mean is the dignity of the sky before mine eyes.

If Thou give to me a crown, I will raise my
head : exalt me, so that no one may cast me
down.


A Wobshippee’s Lament

I tremble when I recall the prayer of one
distracted in the temple of Mecca. Thus did
he lament :

“ Throw me not down, for no one will hold my
hand to succour me. YTiether Thou call me or
drive me away, my head has no resting-place
but Thy threshold. Thou knowest that I am
poor and helpless ; I am oppressed by my evil
passions. Keep me from pollution, and forgive
my sins. Close not mine eyes from the face of
happiness ; bind not my tongue when I recite
the creed. Place the lamp of Faith before my
way ; make my hand short from doing evil.
From the sun of Thy goodness one ray suffices,
for except in Thy rays I am not seen. Why
should I weep because of my condition ? If I
am weak, my refuge is strong.”


Stoey of an Idolatee

A fire-worshipper turned his back upon the
world and girt up his loins in the service of an


122


CONCERNING PRAYER


idol. After some years lie was overtaken by
misfortune and wept at the feet of the idol,
saying : “I am afflicted — ^help me, O idol ! I
am weary — ^have pity upon me.”

Long did he continue in his lamentation, but
no benefit did he derive. How can an idol ac-
complish the desires of a man when of itself it
cannot drive away a fly ?

The idolater frowned and said : “0 thou,
whose feet are bound to error! with folly have
I worshipped thee for years. Help me to fulfil
my wishes, or I will ask them of God.”

While his face was yet besmeared with the’
dust of the idol’s feet, the Almighty fulfilled his
object.

A pious man was astonished when he heard
this. Then did a voice from heaven speak into
his ear, saying : “ This old man prayed before
the idol, but his prayer was not heard. If at the
shrine of God he were likewise spurned, what
difference would there be between an idol and
Him Who is eternal ? ’*


NOTES


^ I.e. the Bustdn.

2 I.e. its ten chapters.

® Lit. “ bone ” ; used metaphorically in the sense of ** a
truth.”

* One of the kings of Persia in whose reign Sadi flourished.
His full name was Atabak Muzaflar-ud-Din Abu Bakr-hin-
Sa’d-hin-zangi.

® I.e. Abu Bakr.

“ Naushiravan the Just was the twentieth king of the fourth
dynasty of Persia, and contemporary with the Roman Emperor
Justinian. The Prophet Muhammad was born in his reign.

A title of the kings of Persia. It was originally applied
to Naushiravan.

® Lit. “ silver.”

® Darius Codomanus was the last king of Persia. He
waged many wars with Alexander the Great, who finally
defeated him at Arbela. The unfortunate king was after-
wards killed by one Bessus, governor of Baotriana, 331 b.o.

10 One of the kings of Persia. He was called Qazal because
of the redness of his hair. Arsalan means “a Hon.”

11 Name of a lofty mountain situated in Hamdan, north-
west of Isfahan.

12 I.e. shows one thing and sells another of inferior quality.
The expression is commonly used to denote a hypocrite.

10 To do either is considered an act of virtue among Mu-
hammadans.

1* By reason of the opportunity it presented to bestow his
charity.

1® It is impossible to convey the beauty of this line in
English. The Persian words here used to express “food”
and “ kiss ” are written alike, except for one diacritical mark,
and the word “ change ” literally mee^ns “ making an error
in writing and changing the diacritical points.”

10 Hatim Tai was an Arabian chief who was renowned
for his generosity. He was born in Yaman, in Arabia Felix,
and lived some time before Muhammeid in the sixth century.
Many legends have been woven roxind his life and character.

11 Horse-flesh was formerly eaten in parts of the East.

123


124


NOTES


18 J.6. their love for God is insatiable.

19 I.e. the fire of love.

20 “ Gold ” refers to “ Ufe,” and “ Friend ” to “ God.”
The meaning is that one should devote one’s life to religion,
and thus gain an entrance to the presence of the Deity.

21 Bayazid Bastami was a celebrated saint of Bustan, in
Persia. He died a.d. 261.

22 Abul Mahfuz, surmamed Mariif, was a celebrated saint
of Kareh, a village in Baghdad. He was the son of a fire-
worshipper, and was born a.d. 813, during the reign of Caliph
Mamun, son of the celebrated Harun-ar-Kashid.

20 Abu-al-Hasan Kushyar was a celebrated astronomer
and the tutor of Anicenna.

2^ Luqman was a famous Greek philosopher, and is sup-
posed by some to have been the author of j^sop^a Fables.

25 Bakhtyar literally means “ fortunate ” j the play on
the word is, therefore, obvious.

28 “ Darkness ” and “ light ” are used metaphorically in
the sense of “ falseness ” and “ truth.”

27 Elhwarazm is situated to the east of the Caspian Sea,
near the mouth of the Oxus.

28 J.e. in this transient and fleeting world.

29 Korah, the cousin of Moses and the proverbial miser
of the Easterns.

29 J.e. if you possess merit.

31 A famous hero ; the Hercules of the Persians.

32 Tl;c grandfather of Rustam, and, like him, acelebratedhero.

33 FaricJim was t,hc seventh king of Persia, his reign com-
mencing about 750 B.o. He was the boast of the Persians
and a model of every virtue.

31 A celebrated temple in Guzerat demolished by Sultan
Mahmud of Ghazni in a.d. 1024.

35 J.e. engage in good works while you still have time.

38 Muhamrnad commanded that sand should be used for
ablution before prayer when water was unobtainable, as is
more often than not the case in the desert.

37 Name of a village on the road to Mecca.

38 The angel who examines the dead in their graves.

39 J.e. your native land.


Frinttd by Mcutll, WaUon & Tinty, Id., londm and Ayletbury.


THE WISDOM OF THE EAST
SERIES

Edited by L. CRANMER-BVNO and Br. S. A. KAPADIA


THE SERIES AND ITS PURPOSE

T he object of the Editors of this Series is a very definite one>
They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these
books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding
between East and West — the old world of Thought and the new of
Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but

followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident

that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of
Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity
which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and
colour. Finally, in thanking press and public for the very cordial

reception given to the “Wisdom of the East” Series, they wish to

state that no pains have been spared to secure the best specialists
for the treatment of the various subjects at hand.


NEW VOLUMES
In the Press

THE RUBA’IYAT OF HAFIZ. Translated with Introduction
by Syed Abdul Majid, LL.D. Rendered into English Verse by
L Cranmer-Byng. i/' net.

A. CHINESE QUIETIST. From the Mystical Philosophy of
Liehtsze. Translated by Lionel Giles, M.A. a/- net.


iCmtinHtd over


Just Out

tilE BUSTAN OF SADI. From the Persian. Translated

with Introduction by A. Hart Edwards, a/- net.

THE ALCHEMY OF HAPPINESS. By Al Ghazzali.
Rendered into English by Claud Field, a/- net.

THE SINGING CARAVAN. Some Echoes of Arabian Poetry.

By Henry Baerlein. a/- net.

THE WISDOM OF THE APOCRYPHA. With an Intro-

duction by C. E. Lawrence, Author of “Pilgrimage,” etc. a/- net.

THE BURDEN OF ISIS. Being the Laments of Isis and
Nephthya. Translated from the Egyptian with an Introduction by James
Teackle Dennis, i/- net.


THE MASTER-SINGERS OF JAPAN. Being Verse Trans-

lations from the Japanese Poets, By Clara A. Walsh, a/- net.

THE PATH OF LIGHT. Rendered for the first time into
English from the Bodhi-charvavatara of Santi-Deva. A Manual of
Maha-Y 5 na Buddhism. By L. D. Barnett, M.A. Litt.D. 2/- net.

THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD. Being Extracts from the Sacred

Writings of the Bahais. With Introduction by Eric Hammond, a/- net.

A LUTE OF JADE. Being Selections from the Classical Poets of

China. Rendered with an Introduction by L. Cranmer-Byng. a/- net.

THE CONFESSIONS OF AL GHAZZALI. Translated for

the first time into English by Claud Field, M.A. 1/- net.

THE HEART OF INDIA. Sketches in the Plistory of Hindu
Religion and Morals, By L. D. Barnett, M.A., Litt.D., Professor of
Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

THE BOOK OF FILIAL DUTY. Translated from the Chinese
of the Hsiao Ching by Ivan CkSn, first Secretary to the Chinese
Legation, i/- net.

THE DIWAN OF ABU’L-ALA. By Henry Baerlein.

i/- net.

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE: An Outline of the Philosophy of
the Vedanta. As set forth by the Upanishads and by Sankara.
ByL. D. Barnett, M.A., Litt.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University
College, London. 2/- net.

THE CONDUCT OF LIFE; or, The Universal Order of
Confucius. A translation of one of the four Confucian Books,
hitherto known as the Doctrine of the Mean. By Ku Hung Ming, M.A.
(Edin.). i/- net.


i.


THE TEACHINGS OP ZOROASTER. Translated wiU
Introduction by Dr. S, A. Kapaixa, Lecturer, University Coll«*»,
London, a/- net.

THE PERSIAN MYSTICS.

I. Jalalu’d-dm Rumf. By F, HAci-ANb Davis, a/- net.

II. Janii. By F, Hadland Davis, a/- net.

THE WAY OF THE BUDDHA. Selections from the Buddhist

texts, together with the original Pali, with Introduction by Herbkrt
Baynes, M.R.A.S. a/- net.

THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS. A new Translation of the
greater part of the Confucian Analects, with Introduction and Notc.s by
Lionel Giles, M.A. (Oxon,), Assistant in the Department of Oriental
Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum, a/- net.

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC. Selections from the
Philosophy of Chuang Tzd. With Introduction by Lionel Giles, M.A.
(Oxon,), Assistant at the British Museum, a/- net,

THE AWAKENING OF THE SOUL. From the Arabic of
Ibn Tufail. Translated with Introduction by Paul BRdNNLE, Ph.D.
1/5 net.

THE RELIGION OF THE KORAN, With Introduction by

Sir Arthur N. Wollaston, K.C.I.E. i/- net,

THE WISDOM OF ISRAEL: Being Extracts from the
Babylonian Talmud and Midrash Rabboth. Translated
from the Aramaic with an Introduction by Edwin Collins, i/- net.

SA’DI’S SCROLL OP WISDOM. By Shaikh Sa’di. With

Introduction by Sir Arthur N. Wollaston, K.C.I.E. r/- net.

With Persian Script added, a/- net,

THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAH-HOTEP AND THE
INSTRUCTION OF KE’GEMNI. The Oldest Books in
the World. Translated from the Egyptian with Introduction and
Appendix by Battiscombe G. Gunn, j/- net.

THE ROSE GARDEN OF SA’DI. Selected and Rendered
from the Persian with Introduction by L. Cranmer-Byng, i/- net.

THE CLASSICS OF CONFUCIUS.

I. The Book of History (Shu-King),

By W. Gorn Old. i/- net.

II. The Book of Odes (Shi-King).

By L. Cranmer-Byng. i/- net.


tHE SAYINGS OF LAO Tzd. From the Chinese. Trans-

lated with Introduction bj Lionki, Giuis, of the British Musiuin. i/- net,

WOMEN AND WISDOM OP JAPAN. With Introduction

by S. Takaishi. i/- net.

ARABIAN WISDOM. Selections and Translations from the

Arabic by John Wortabkt, M.D. i/- net.

THE DUTIES OF THE HEART. By Rabbi Bachye.
Translated from the Hebrew with Introduction by Edwin Collins.
Hollier Hebrew Scholar, U.C.X.. i/- net.


ROMANCE OF THE EAST SERIES

Edited by L. Cranmer-Byng
Crown 6vo, as, 6d. nei each

I N this series the great store-houses of Oriental romance will be opened for
the first time to the public. Tales from the Sanskrit, from the Chinese,
from every language of the East possessing a great literature will appear
in due course. From these vivid narratives of old-world romance it will be
possible for the reader to glean much information concerning the lives and
manners and customs of vanished races, and the greatness of Empires that
have passed away.

TALES OF THE CALIPHS, From the Arabic
Translated by Claud Field

TALES WITHIN TALES. From the Fables of Pilpai
Translated by Sir Arthur Wollaston, K.C.I.E.

THE GOLDEN TOWN. From the Sanskrit of Soma Deva
Translated by Dr. L. D. Barnett

fVorhs added (o the Series will be announced in due course


LONDON

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
