The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, Vol. 2 (SBE 14)
=============================================
The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, Vol. 2 (Sacred Books of the East 14), translated by Georg Buhler (Oxford, 1882), public domain. Buhler's rendering of the Vasishtha and Baudhayana Dharma Sutras. Scan via Internet Archive.

r


THE


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST


[14]


Honfcon

HENRY     FROWDE


OXPOED     UNIVEBSITY    PBESS     WAEEHOUSE
7    PATERNOSTER   ROW


THE


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST


TRANSLATED


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS


AND     EDITED    BY


F.   MAX    MULLER


VOL.    XIV


AT      THE     CLARENDON      PRESS
1882

\_All  rights  reserved]


-H


i,


THE

SACRED   LAWS  OF  THE  ARYAS

AS  TAUGHT  IN  THE  SCHOOLS  OF

APASTAMBA,    GAUTAMA,   VkSlSETHA,
AND   BAUDHAYANA

TRANSLATED   BY

GEORG     BUHLER


PART     II
VASISH77/A     AND     BAUDHAYANA


AT  THE   CLARENDON  PRESS

1882


[  All  rights  reserved ']


ft.  a


€


CONTENTS.


Introduction  to  Vasish77/a
Introduction  to  Baudhayana  .


PAGE

xi
xxix


VASISH7V7A   DHARMASASTRA.

General  Rules  . i

Four  Castes . .         .  9

Lawful  Occupations n

Duty  of  Studying  the  Veda        .         .         .         .         .         .  17

Definitions 19

Purification        .         .         .         -         .         .         .         .         .21

Origin  of  Castes 25

Impurity 27

Women     .         .         .         , 31

Rule  of  Conduct      . 34

Studentship  .  •  .         ,         .         .         .         .40

Householder 42

Hermit 45

Ascetic 46

Guests .49

*Sraddhas 51

Sacrifices 56

Initiation 57

Snataka 59

Study  of  the  Veda 63

Saluting 67

Lawful  and  Forbidden  Food 69

Adoption 75

Excommunication 77

Legal  Procedure 79


Vlll  CONTENTS.


PAGE

Inheritance        .         .         . '       .         .         .  .         .84

Mixed  Castes 93

Duties  of  a  King 96

Penances 102

Secret  Penances 124

Gifts 136


BAUDHAYANA    DHARMASASTRA.

Sources  of  the  Law 143

Different  Customs 146

Studentship 149

Snataka 158

Waterpot .         .  160

Purification        .         . 164

Lawful  Livelihood 175

Impurity 177

Inheritance 178

Impurity 180

Forbidden  Food .         .184

Sacrifices  . 186

Castes 196

The  King .199

Criminal  Law    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  201

Witnesses 202

Marriage .  205

Veda-Study 208

Penances 211

Inheritance 224

Women 231

Householder 237

Snataka 238

The  Twilight  Devotions 245

Bathing 249

Tarpawa 252

Mahay  a^ilas 256


CONTENTS.


IX


The  Four  Orders

The  Offering  to  the  Vital  Airs

Eating       .....

-Sraddhas

The  Procreation  of  Sons

Ascetic

Ways  of  Living  for  Householders

Hermits

Penances  for  a  Student  .
Aghamarshawa  ....
Prasrztiyavaka  ....
Kushma7z</as  ....
^Tandrayawa  ....
Ana-matparayawa

Penances

Secret  Penances
Rites  securing  Success
Parmsh/a  on  Adoption

Index  to  Parts  I  and  II  (Vols.  II  and  XIV)

Additions  and  Corrections  ....


PAGE
258
262
264
266
271

273
284
291
294
296
297
300
303

3°7
310
320
322
334

337

355


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Trans-
lations of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  .         .         •     357


INTRODUCTION

TO

VASISH7WA.


The  Vasish/Zza  Dharmasastra  is,  like  that  of  Gautama,
the  last  remnant  of  the  Sutras  of  a  Vedic  school,  which,  as
far  as  our  knowledge  goes  at  present,  has  perished,  together
with  the  greater  part  of  its  writings.  We  owe  the  preserva-
tion of  its  Dharma-sutra  probably  to  the  special  law  schools
of  India,  which,  attracted  as  it  would  seem  by  its  title  and
the  legend  connecting  it  withVasish/^a  Maitravarum,  one  of
the  most  famous  it'zshis  of  the  Rig-veda  and  a  redoubtable
champion  of  Brahmanism,  made  it  one  of  their  standard
authorities.  The  early  existence  of  a  legend  according  to
which  the  Vasish//za  Dharma-sutra  was  considered  either
to  be  a  work  composed  by  the  Rishi  Vasish^a,  or  at  least
to  contain  the  sum  of  his  teaching  on  the  duty  of  man,  is
indicated  by  several  passages  of  the  work  itself.  For  the
Dharma-sutra  names  Vasish^a,  or  appeals  to  his  authority
on  no  less  than  three  occasions.  First,  we  find  a  rule  on
lawful  interest,  which  is  emphatically  ascribed  to  Vasish/^a1.
'Learn  the  interest  for  a  money  lender,'  the  Sutra  says,
'  declared  by  the  word  of  Vasish/^a ;  five  mashas  (may  be
taken)  for  twenty  (karshapa/zas  every  month).'  Again,  at  the
end  of  a  long  string  of  rules  2  which  contain  the  observances
to  be  kept  by  sinners  who  undergo  Krzkk/zra  penances,  Va-
sish^a's  name  is  brought  forward  as  the  authority  for  them,
and  the  last  words  are,  '  Thus  speaks  the  divine  Vasish//za.'
Finally,  the  concluding  Sutra   of  the  whole  work3  gives

1  Vasish/Aa  Dharmasastra  II,  51.

2  Vasish/Aa  Dharmasastra  XXIV,  5.

3  Vasish^a  Dharmasastra  XXX,  II.  Similar  invocations  of  teachers  at  the
end  of  Sutras  occur  frequently,  e.g.  Asvalayana  Srauta-sutra  XII,  15,  14;  Rig-
vidhana  V,  3,  4;  Yaska,  Nirukta,  Roth,  p.  216.


Xll  VASISHTHA.

expression  to  the  devotion  felt  by  the  author  for  the  ^z'shi,
'Adoration  to  Vasish/Zza,  Satayatu,  the  son   of  Mitra  and
Varu«a  and  of  Urva.ri.'    The  epithets  used  in  this  last  pas-
sage conclusively  show  that  the  VasishZ/za  after  whom  the
Dharma-sutra  is  named,  is  the  individual  who,  according  to
the  Brahmanical  tradition,  is  the  Rishi  of  a  large  portion  of
the  seventh  Mandate  of  the  Rig-veda  and  the  progenitor  of
the  Vasish^a  clan  of  Brahmans,  and  who  in  some  hymns
of  the  Rig-veda  appears  as  the  purohita  or  domestic  priest
of  king  Sudas  and  the  rival  of  Vuvamitra,  and  in  other
Suktas  as  a  half  mythical  being.     For  the  verses  Rig-veda
VII,  33,  11-14  trace  the  origin  of  this  Vasishz^a  to  the  two
sons  of  Aditi,  Mitra  and  Varu«a,  and  to  the  Apsaras  Urva^i,
and  contain  the  outline  of  the  curious,  but  disgusting  story
of  his  marvellous  birth,  which  Saya/za-  narrates  more  cir-
cumstantially in  the  commentary  on  verse  11.     Moreover,
the  word  5atayatu,  which  in  the  Dharma-sutra  is  used  as  an
epithet  of  VasishzVfo,  occurs  Rig-veda  VII,  18,  21  in  close
connexion  with  the  ^z'shi's  name.     Saya/za  explains  it  in
his  commentary  on  the  latter  passage  as  f  the  destroyer  of
many  demons,'  or, '  he  whom  many  demons  seek  to  destroy,'
and  takes  it  as  an  epithet  of  the  sage  Para^ara,  who  is  named
together  with  VasishzVza.     It  would,  however,  seem  that,  if
the  verse  is  construed  on  strictly  philological  principles,
neither  Saya/za's  interpretation,  nor  that  suggested  by  the
Dharma-sutra  can  be  accepted,  and  that  5atayatu  has  to
be  taken  as  a  proper  name  *.    But,  however  that  may  be,  it
is  not  doubtful  that  we  may  safely  infer  from  the  expressions
used  in  the  last  sentence  of  the  Dharma-sutra,  that  the
Vasishz^a  to  whom  the  invocation  is  addressed  and  the
composition  of  the  work  is  ascribed,  either  immediately  or
through  the  medium  of  pupils,  is  the  individual  named  in
the  Rig-veda.     The  connexion  of  the  Dharma-sutra  with
one  of  the  i^zshis  of  the  Rig-veda  which  is  thus  established,
possesses  a  particular  interest  and  importance,  because  it
corroborates  the  statement  of  Govindasvamin,  the  commen-
tator of  Baudhayana,  that  the  Institutes  of  Vasishz^a  were

1  See  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.  v.  satayatu.


INTRODUCTION.


Xlll


originally  studied  by  and  authoritative  for  the  Bahvrzka.s,
the  Rigvedins  alone,  and  afterwards  became  an  authority
for  all  Brahmans  *.  In  the  introduction  to  Gautama  it  has
been  shown  that  a  similar  assertion  which  Govinda  makes
with  regard  to  the  Gautama  Dharma-sutra  can  be  corrobo-
rated by  a  considerable  amount  of  external  and  internal
evidence.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  not  only  the  fact
that  the  spiritual  pedigrees  of  the  KAandoga,  schools  enu-
merate several  Gautamas,  but  also  the  partiality  for  texts
of  the  Sama-veda,  which  the  Institutes  of  Gautama  show
on  several  occasions,  strongly  support  the  tradition  that
the  Gautamiya  Dharmajastra  originally  was  the  exclusive
property  of  a  school  of  Samavedins.  In  the  case  of  the
Vasish//za  Dharma^astra  indications  of  the  latter  kind  are,
if  not  entirely  wanting,  at  least  very  faint.  The  number  of
Vedic  passages  quoted  is,  no  doubt,  large ;  but  few  among
them  belong  to  the  class  of  Mantras  which  are  recited
during  the  performance  of  grthya,  rites,  and  must  be  taken
from  the  particular  recension  of  the  Veda  to  which  the  per-
former belongs.  Besides,  the  texts  of  this  description  which
actually  occur,  do  not  bear  the  mark  of  a  particular  Veda  or
.Sakha.  The  numerous  texts,  on  the  other  hand,  which  are
quoted  in  support  or  explanation  of  the  rules,  are  taken  im-
partially from  all  the  three  ancient  Vedas.  For  this  reason  it
would  be  dangerous  to  use  the  references  to  a  dozen  Rikas
in  chapters  XVII  and  XXVI,  as  well  as  to  the  legend  of
Suna^sepa,  which  is  told  only  in  works  belonging  to  the  Rig-


1  See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlix,  note  2.  As  Govindasvamin's
statements  possess  a  considerable  importance,  I  give  here  the  whole  com-
mentary on  Baudhayana  I,  1,  2,  6,  according  to  my  two  MSS.,  CI.  and  C.T. :

^  fafafw  ^ren  wmn  *^^»rbn*fa$TTO  w*mb  *m  ^fcs^a-
sftai  *ro  ^t  sftvnRH  v^t*^  $fta^r  ^^ptr  fffiiwt  H^rfa  thst
ntofhmtfaosr^  ^^Tre  -q^TT  [ W7*  c.  I. ;  w*  c.  t.]  ^rffr?  3
^%:  [1]  ^n*  ^  *^v^mftr[i]xRT  ^t  Tansn^TftT  sfTfwTrfri
w^jqrfrw?T  tf^  HljHi^farftr  *RRTfa  [^swiftr  c.  1. ;  ^rs?Tfa
c.  t.]  H^jftmT^r|SfTi  n  irer  *<?  ^wnm^m^  ott^  n  i  u  tht  *mf&-


XIV  VASISHTtfA.


veda,  as  a  proof  that  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma^astra  is  the  work
of  a  Rzgved'm.  Under  these  circumstances  the  three  pas-
sages, mentioning  Vasish//za's  name,  and  especially  the  last
which  identifies  him  with  the  Rzshi  of  the  Rig-veda,  have  a
particularly  great  importance,  as  they  are  the  only  pieces  of
internal  evidence  which  can  be  brought  forward  in  favour
of  Govindasvamin's  valuable  statement.  But  the  latter  is,
even  without  any  further  corroboration,  credible  enough,
because  no  reason  is  apparent  why  Govinda  should  have
invented  such  a  story,  and  because  his  assertion  fully
agrees  with  the  well-established  facts  known  about  the
other  existing  Dharma-sutras,  which  all  were  composed
not  for  the  benefit  of  the  Aryans  in  general,  but  in  order
to  regulate  the  conduct  of  particular  sections  of  the  Brah-
manical  community.

There  is,  however,  one  point  in  Govindasvamin's  state-
ment which  requires  further  elucidation.  He  says  that  the
Bahvrifcas,  i.e.  the  Rigvedins  in  general,  formerly  studied
the  Vasish^a  Dharma^astra.  It  might,  therefore,  be  in-
ferred that  the  work  possessed  equal  authority  among  the
A^valayaniyas,  the  vSahkhayaniyas,  the  Ma/z^ukayanas,  and
all  the  other  schools  of  the  Rig-veda,  and  that  it  belonged
to  the  most  ancient  heirlooms  of  its  adherents.  That  is,
however,  improbable  for  several  reasons.  For,  first,  neither
the  Ajvalayaniyas  nor  the  vSankhayaniyas  of  the  present
day  study  or  attach  any  special  importance  to  the  Vasish-
tka.  Dharmajastra.  Secondly,  if  the  Vasish^a  Dharma-
jastra  had  ever  been  the  common  authority  on  Dharma  in
all  the  different  schools  of  the  Rig-veda,  it  would  be  neces-
sary to  ascribe  to  it  an  antiquity  which  it  clearly  does  not
possess.  All  Sutras  were  originally  composed  for  a  single
school  only.  Where  we  find  that  the  same  Sutra  is  adopted
by  several  ^Tara^as,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Dharma-sutra,
which  both  the  Apastambiyas  and  the  Haira^yake^as  study,
and  with  the  iTayana-sutra,  which  the  Bharadva^as  and  the
Haira^yakcras  have  in  common,  it  is  evident  that  the  later
school  did  not  care  to  compose  a  treatise  of  its  own  on
a  certain  subject,  but  preferred  to  take  over  the  composi-
tion of  an  earlier  teacher.     If,  now,  a  Sutra  on  a  certain


INTRODUCTION.  XV


subject  were  acknowledged  by  all  the  schools  of  one  Veda,
it  would  follow  that  it  must  belong  to  the  most  ancient
books  of  that  Veda,  and  must  have  been  adopted  succes-
sively by  all  its  later  schools.  In  such  a  case  the  Sutra
must  certainly  show  signs  of  its  great  antiquity.  But  if
we  look  for  the  latter  in  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma-sutra,  the
trouble  will  be  in  vain.  Though  that  work  contains  a
good  deal  that  is  archaic,  yet,  as  will  be  shown  presently,
its  numerous  quotations  from  Vedic  writings  and  older
Dharma-sutras  clearly  prove  that  it  does  not  belong  to
the  oldest  productions  of  its  class,  but  takes  even  among
the  still  existing  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law  only  a
secondary  rank.  Under  these  circumstances  the  correct
interpretation  of  Govindasvamin's  words  will  be,  that  ac-
cording to  the  Brahmanical  tradition,  known  to  him,  some
school  of  iv^gvedins,  the  name  of  which  he  did  not  know,
or  did  not  care  to  give,  originally  possessed  the  Vasish/^a
Dharmajastra  as  its  exclusive  property,  and  that  the  work
later,  through  the  action  of  the  special  law  schools,  acquired
general  authority  for  all  Brahmans.  It  is  a  pity  that  no
authentic  information  regarding  the  name  of  that  school
of  Rtgved'ms  has  been  handed  down.  But,  considering  the
fact  that  Vedic  schools  are  frequently  named  after  Vedic
Rzshis,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  it  was  called  after  the
Vasish/^a  whose  authority  the  Dharma-sutra  invokes,  and
that  we  may  assume  the  former  existence  of  a  Vasish^a
school,  a  Sutra-£ara/za,  of  the  Rig-veda  \  founded  perhaps
by  a  teacher  of  the  Vasish/^a  gotra.  This  conjecture,
which,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  not  supported  by  any  cor-
roborative evidence  from  the  Brahmanical  tradition,  will
explain  why  the  title-pages  of  this  and  of  the  first  part
speak  of  a  school  of  Vasish^a.

The  position  of  the  Vasish^fo.  Dharma-sutra  in  Vedic
literature  can  be  defined,  to  a  certain  extent,  by  an  analysis

1  A  school  of  Vasish^as,  belonging  to  the  Sama-veda,  certainly  existed  in
ancient  times.  I  have  formerly  put  forward  a  conjecture  that  the  Vasish^Aa
Dharmasastra  might  belong  to  that  school  (Digest  of  Hindu  Law  Cases,  p.  xxii,
first  edition).  But  Govindasvamin's  explicit  statement  makes  it  evident  that
it  has  to  be  abandoned.


XVI  VASISUTHA.


of  its  numerous  quotations  from  the  Sawhitas,  Brahmawas,
and  the  older  Sutras.  By  this  means  it  will  become
evident  that  the  work  belongs  to  a  period  when  the  chief
schools  of  the  three  ancient  Vedas  had  been  formed  and
some  of  the  still  existing  Dharma-sutras  had  been  composed.
Faint  indications  will  be  found  which  make  it  probable
that  the  home  of  the  school  to  which  it  belonged,  lay  in
the  northern  half  of  India,  north  of  the  Narmada  and  of  the
Vindhyas.  As  regards  the  quotations  from  the  5ruti,  the
revealed  texts  of  the  Hindus,  they  are  chiefly  taken  from
the  Rig-veda  and  from  three  recensions  of  the  Ya^ur-veda.
Passages  from  the  Rig-veda-sawhita  are  quoted  IV,  21 ;
XVII,  3-4;  and  XXVI,  5-7.  With  respect  to  the  quota-
tions in  the  latter  chapter  it  must,  however,  be  noted  that
its  genuineness  is,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel,  not  above
suspicion.  A  Brahma^a  of  the  Rig-veda  seems  to  be
referred  to  in  XVII,  2,  32,  55.  But  the  extracts,  given
there,  agree  only  in  part  with  the  text  of  the  Aitareya,  and
it  is  probable  that  they  are  taken  from  some  lost  composi-
tion of  the  same  class.  A  curious  Sutra,  II,  3$,  shows  a
great  resemblance  to  the  explanations  of  Vedic  passages
given  by  Yaska  in  the  Nirukta1.  The  passage  points
either  to  a  connexion  of  the  author  with  the  school  of  the
Nairuktas  or,  at  least,  to  an  acquaintance  with  its  princi-
ples. Among  the  schools  of  the  Ya^ur-veda,  that  of  the
Ka//&as  is  twice  referred  to  by  name,  XII,  29 ;  XXX,  5.
But  Professor  Weber,  who  kindly  looked  for  the  quotations
in  the  Berlin  MS.  of  the  Kanaka,  has  not  been  able  to  find
them.  A  third  passage,  I,  37,  said  to  be  taken  from  the
ATaturmasyas,  i.  e.  the  portion  of  a  Sa^hita  which  treats  of
the  isfaturmasya  sacrifices,  actually  occurs  in  the  Kanaka.
But,  as  it  is  likewise  found  in  the  i$faturmasya-ka;^a  of  the
Maitraya/ziyas,  it  must  remain  uncertain  from  which  of  the
two  recensions  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda  it  has  been  quoted.
The  chapter  on  the  duties  of  women,  vers.  6-8,  contains  a

1  This  resemblance  has  not  escaped  Knshnaparaafita,  who  says  in  his  com-
mentary, fH^Huro  m$w  3$tfl  »  WTlfFjfaWTf^  II  ^WtJOTfa  f^-

^f*frj^Tfwu


INTRODUCTION.  XV11


long  quotation  which,  in  spite  of  some  small  discrepancies,
seems  to  have  been  taken  from  the  Taittiriya-sa//zhita  of
the  Black  Ya^ur-veda.  Passages  of  the  Taittiriya  Ara/zyaka
are  quoted  or  referred  to  X,  $$  and  XXIII,  23.  The
White  Ya^ur-veda  is  mentioned  several  times  as  the  Va^a-
saneyi-j-akha  or  the  Va^asaneyaka.  The  former  expression
occurs  III,  19  and  XXIII,  13.  The  quotations,  marked
as  taken  from  the  Va^asaneyaka,  XII,  31,  XIV,  46  are
found  in  the  5atapatha-brahma«a,  and  another  passage
of  the  same  work  is  quoted  I,  45,  without  a  specification  of
the  source.  A  very  clear  proof  that  the  author  of  the
Dharma-sutra  knew  the  Va^asaneyi-sa/^hita  is  furnished
by  the  Mantra,  given  II,  34.  The  text,  quoted  there,
occurs  in  three  different  5akhas,  that  of  the  Va^asaneyins,
that  of  the  Taittiriyas  and  the  Atharva-veda,  and  in  each
shows  a  few  variae  lectiones.  Its  wording  in  the  Va^asaneyi-
sa/^hita  literally  agrees  with  the  version,  given  in  the
Sutra.  The  Sama-veda  is  referred  to  III,  19,  and  par-
ticular Samans  are  mentioned  in  the  borrowed  chapter
XXII,  9.  A  passage  from  the  Nidana,  probably  a  work  on
Stomas  and  metres,  which  belonged  to  the  Bhallavins,  an
ancient  school  of  Samavedins,  occurs  I,  14-16.  An  Upani-
shad,  connected  with  the  Atharva-veda,  the  Atharva^iras,  is
mentioned  in  the  borrowed  chapter  XXII,  9,  and  the
existence  of  the  Atharva-veda  is  pre-supposed,  also,  by  '  the
vows  called  Siras,'  which  are  alluded  to  in  the  suspicious
chapter  XXVI,  11,  and  are  said  to  be  peculiar  to  the
Atharvavedins  \  The  chapters,  which  are  undoubtedly
genuine,  contain  no  allusion  to  the  fourth  Veda.

As  regards  the  older  works  on  Dharma,  the  author  of  the
Institutes  of  Vasish^/za  certainly  knew  and  used  a  treatise,
attributed  to  Yama,  the  Dharma-sutras  of  Manu,  Harita
and  Gautama,  and  perhaps  that  of  Baudhayana.  With
respect  to  two  verses,  which,  as  the  Sutra  says,  were  pro-
claimed by  Pra^-apati,  XIV,  24,  30,  it  is  somewhat  doubtful,
if  it  is  meant  that  they  have  been  taken  from  a  work,
attributed  to  Pra^apati,  or  that  they  are  merely  utterances,
supposed  to  have  been  made  by  that  deity  for  the  benefit

1  See  Baudhayana  Dharma-sutra  II,  8,  14,  2,  note.

[14]  b


XV111  VASISHTtfA.


of  mankind.     The  latter  view  seems,  however,  the  more

likely  one,  as  it  is  customary  in  the  Smn'tis  to  ascribe  the

revelation  of  social  institutions,  ceremonies,  and  penances  to

Pra^-apati,  who,  in  the  older  works,  occupies  much  the  same

position  as  Brahma,  the  creator,  in  the  later  religious  systems.

It  is  not  impossible  that  some  of  the  references  to  Yama,

e.  g.  XI,  20,  have  to  be  explained  in  the  same  manner.

But  other  passages,  attributed  to  Yama,  e.g.  XVIII,  13-16,

seem  to  have  been  taken  from  a  work  which  was  considered

the  production  of  the  Dharmara^a.    Of  course,  none  of  the

Yamasmrztis,  which  exist  in  the  present  day,  can  be  meant.

The  quotations  from  Manu  are  numerous1.     They  have

all  been  taken  from  a  book  attributed  to  a  Manu,  and

possess  a  very  high  interest  for  the  history  of  the  present

metrical   ManusmWti.     For   the   prose   passage   from  the

Manava,  given  IV,  5,  furnishes  the  proof  that  the  author  of

the  Vasish///a  Dharma^astra  quotes  from  a  Dharma-sutra

attributed  to  a  Manu,  while  other  quotations  show  that  the

Manava  Dharma-sutra  contained,  also,  verses,  some  of  which,

e.  g.  XIX,  3J,  were  Trish/ubhs,  and  that  a  large  proportion

of  these  verses  has  been  embodied  in  Bhrzgu's  version  of

the  Manusm^/ti.    Fifteen  years  ago 2  I  first  called  attention

to   Vasish/^a's    prose   quotation    from    the    Manava,   and

pointed  out  that,  if  the  MSS.  of  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma-

jastra  were  to  be  trusted,  a  small  piece  of  the  lost  Manava

Dharma-sutra,  on  which  the  present  Manusmrzti  is  based,

had  been  found.   The  incorrectness  and  the  defective  state  of

the  materials  which  I  then  had  at  my  disposal  did  not  allow

me  to  go  further.    Since  that  time  several,  comparatively

speaking,  good  MSS.  of  the  Institutes  of  Vasish^a  and

many  inferior  ones  have  been  found,  and  all,  at  least  all

those  which  I  have  examined,  give  the  quotation  in  prose

exactly  in  the  same  form.     The  fact  that  Vasish///a  gives,

in  IV,  5,  a  prose  quotation  from  Manu  may,  therefore,  be

considered  as  certain  3.    Moreover  several  of  the  best  MSS.

1  They  occur  Vasish^a  Dharmasastra  I,  17;  III,  2  ;  IV,  5-8;  XI,  23  ;  XII,
16  ;  XIII,  16;  XIX,  37;  XX,  18;  XXIII,  43;  XXVI,  8.

2  Digest  of  Hindu  Law  Cases,  p.  xxxi,  note,  first  edition.

3  Such,  I  suppose,  will  be  the  opinion  of  all  European  scholars.  Those  Hindus


INTRODUCTION.  XIX


show,  by  adding  the  particle  'iti'  at  the  end  of  Sutra  8,
that  the  quotation  from  the  Manava  is  not  finished  with
Sutra  5,  but  includes  the  two  verses  given  in  Sutras  6  and
7  and  the  second  prose  passage  in  Sutra  8.  Among  the
verses  the  first  is  found  entire  in  the  metrical  Manusmnti,
and  the  second  has  likewise  a  representative  in  that  work,
though  its  concluding  portion  has  been  altered  in  such  a
manner  that  the  permission  to  slaughter  animals  at  sacri-
fices has  been  converted  into  an  absolute  prohibition  to
take  animal  life.  Sutra  8,  which  again  is  in  prose,  has  no
counterpart  in  the  metrical  Manusmrzti,  as  might  be  ex-
pected from  its  allowing  '  a  full-grown  ox '  or  '  a  full-grown
he-goat'  to  be  killed  in  honour  of  a  distinguished  Brah-
ma/za  or  Kshatriya  guest.  A  closely  corresponding  passage
is  found  in  the  5atapatha-brahma;/a,  and  a  verse  expressing
the  same  opinion  in  the  Ya^vtavalkya  Smritl,  the  versifica-
tion of  a  Dharma-sutra  of  the  White  Ya^ur-veda.  As
the  last  part  of  the  quotation  resembles  the  text  of  the
Brahma/za  and  its  language  is  very  archaic,  it  is  quite
possible  that,  though  belonging  to  the  passage  from  the
Manava-sutra,  it  contains  a  Vedic  text,  taken  from  some
hitherto  unknown  Brahma/za  which  Manu  adduced  in
support  of  his  opinion.  On  this  supposition  the  arrange-
ment of  tlfe  whole  quotation  would  be  as  follows.  Sutra  5
would  give  the  original  rule  of  the  author  of  the  Manava
in  an  aphoristic  form ;  Sutras  6-J  would  repeat  the  same
opinion  in  verse,  the  latter  being  probably  .Slokas  current
among  the  Brahmanical  community ;  and  Sutra  8  would
give  the  Vedic  authority  for  the  preceding  sentences.  This
arrangement  would  be  in  strict  conformity  with  the  plan
usually  followed  by  the  authors  of  Dharma-sutras.  But
whether  Sutra  8  contains  a  second  original  aphorism  of  the
Manava  Dharma-sutra  or  a  Vedic  passage,  it  seems  in-
disputable that  the  author  of  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma-sutra
knew  a  treatise  attributed  to  a  teacher  called  Manu,  which,
like  all  other  Dharma-sutras,  was  partly  written  in  apho-

who  allow  their  religious  convictions  to  get  the  better  of  their  reason,  will
perhaps  prefer  Knshrcapararfita's  ingenious,  but  unsound  explanation  of  the
words  iti  manavam,  by  iti  manumatam, '  such  is  the  opinion  of  Manu.'

b  2


XX  VASISHTHA.


ristic  prose  and  partly  in  verse.  The  passage  furnishes,
therefore,  the  proof  for  Professor  Max  M tiller's  conjecture
that  our  metrical  Manusmrzti,  like  all  the  older  works  of
the  same  class,  is  based  on  the  Dharma-sutra  of  a  Vedic
Sutra-£ara/za.  In  connexion  with  this  subject  it  may  be  men-
tioned that  the  Institutes  of  Vasish^a  contain,  besides  the
above-mentioned  passages,  no  less  than  thirty-nine  verses 1,
which  are  not  marked  as  quotations,  but  occur  in  Bhrzgu's
metrical  Manusawhita.  Some  of  them  present  more  or  less
important  variae  lectiones.  Moreover,  there  are  four  verses
which,  though  Vasish/^a  attributes  them  to  Harita  and
Yama2,  are  included  in  our  Manusmrz'ti  and  treated  as
utterances  of  the  father  of  mankind.  The  bearing  of  both
these  facts  on  the  history  of  the  Manusmrzti  is  obvious.
But  the  frequency  of  the  references  to  or  quotations  from
Manu  which  Vasish^a  makes,  teaches  another  important
lesson.  Like  the  fact  that  Manu  is  the  only  individual
author  to  whom  Gautama  refers 3,  it  shows  that  in  ancient
times  Manu's  name  had  as  great  a  charm  for  the  Brahman
teachers  as  it  has  for  those  of  the  present  day,  and  that
the  old  Manava  Dharma-sutra  was  one  of  the  leading
works  on  the  subject,  or,  perhaps,  even  held  that  dominant
position  which  the  metrical  Manusmrzti  actually  occupied
in  the  Middle  Ages  and  theoretically  occupies  in  our  days.
It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  precisely  the  same  inference
can  be  drawn  from  the  early  Sanskrit  inscriptions.  If  these
speak  of  individual  authors  of  Smrztis,  they  invariably  place
Manu's  name  first 4.

Vasish/yfca  gives  only  one  quotation  from  Harita,  II,  6\
Harita  was  one  of  the  ancient  Sutrakaras  of  the  Black
Ya^ur-veda,  who  is  known  also  to  Baudhayana.  From  a
passage  which   K>zsh/zapa?z^ita   quotes    in    elucidation   of

1  Vasish^a  Dharmasastra  I,  22  ;  II,  3, 10,  27, 48 ;  III,  5, 11,  60 ;  V,  2  ;  VI,  6,
8,11,13,19;  VIII,  7,  15;  X,  21-22;  XI,  27-28,32,  35;  XIII,  48;  XIV,  13,
16,  18;  XVI,  18,  33-34;  XVII,  5,  8;  XVIII,  14,  15;  XIX,  48;  XX,  18;
XXV,  4-5,  7;  XXVII,  3.

8  Vasish^a  Dharmasastra  II,  6;  XVIII,  14-15;  XIX,  48.

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  lvii.

*  See  e.g.  the  grant  of  Dhruvasena  I,  dated  Samvat,  i.e.  Guptasamvat  207,
PI.  i,  1.  7;  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  iv,  p.  105.


INTRODUCTION.  "  XXI


Vasish^a  XXIV,  6,  I  conclude  that  Harita  was  a  Maitra-
ya^iya1.  The  relation  of  the  Vasish^a  Dharma-sutra  to
Gautama  and  Baudhayana  has  already  been  discussed  in  the
introduction  to  the  translation  of  the  former  work2.  To  the
remarks  on  its  connexion  with  Baudhayana  it  must  be  added
that  the  third  Pra^na  of  the  Baudhayana  Dharma-sutra,
from  which  Vasish/Z/a's  twenty-second  chapter  seems  to  have
been  borrowed,  perhaps  does  not  belong  to  the  original  work,
but  is  a  later,  though  presumably  a  very  ancient,  addition  to
the  composition  of  the  founder  of  the  Baudhayana  school.
The  reasons  for  this  opinion  will  be  given  below.  If
Baudhayana's  third  Pra^na  is  not  genuine,  but  has  been
added  by  a  later  teacher  of  that  school,  the  interval  be-
tween Baudhayana  and  the  author  of  the  Vasish^a  Dharma-
j-astra  must  be  a  very  considerable  one.  I  have,  however,
to  point  out  that  the  inference  regarding  the  priority  of
Baudhayana  to  Vasish^a  is  permissible  only  on  the  sup-
position that  Vasish//£a's  twenty-second  chapter  is  not  a
later  addition  to  the  latter  work,  and  that,  though  it  is
found  in  all  our  MSS.,  this  fact  is  not  sufficient  to  silence
all  doubts  which  might  be  raised  with  respect  to  its  genuine-
ness ;  for  we  shall  see  presently  that  other  chapters  in  the
section  on  penances  have  been  tampered  with  by  a  later
hand.  It  will,  therefore,  be  advisable  not  to  insist  too
strongly  on  the  certainty  of  the  conclusion  that  Vasish#za
knew  and  used  Baudhayana's  work.

In  the  introduction  to  his  translation  of  the  Vish/zusmrzti3,
Professor  Jolly  has  pointed  out  two  passages  of  Vasish^a
which,  as  he  thinks,  have  been  borrowed  from  Vish/zu,  and
prove  the  posteriority  of  the  Vasish^/za  Dharmai-astra,  if  not
to  the  Vish?zusmrzti,  at  least  to  its  original,  the  Kanaka
Dharma-sutra.  He  contends  that  the  passage  Vasishz/za
XXVIII,  10-15  is  a  versification  of  the  Sutras  of  Vish/zu
LVI,  which,  besides    being   clumsy,   shows   a   number   of

1  He  says :  TTOT  ^  ^tcIh:  I  r^TTfRTO:  gWTO  [°*lft  ^JeTTO  ?]  ^1%^^

2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  pp.  liii-lv.

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  vii,  p.  xviii.


XXU  VASISHFffA.


corruptions  and  grammatical  mistakes,  and  that  Vasish///a
XXVIII,  18-33  has  been  borrowed  from  Vishmi  LXXXVII.
Professor  Jolly's  assertion  regarding  the  second  passage  in-
volves, however,  a  little  mistake.  For  the  first  two  51okas,
Vasish///a  XXVIII,  18-19,  describe  not  the  gift  of  the  skin
of  a  black  antelope,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  first  six
Sutras  of  Vishnu  LXXXVII,  but  the  rite  of  feeding
Brahmans  with  honey  and  sesamum  grains,  which  occurs
Vishmi  XC,  10.  The  three  verses,  Vasish/^a  XXVIII,
20-22,  on  the  other  hand,  really  are  the  same  as  those
given  by  Vishnu  LXXXVII,  8-10.  It  is,  however,  expressly
stated  in  the  Visb.7iusmrzti  that  they  contain  a  quotation,
and  are  not  the  original  composition  of  the  author  of
the  Dharma-sutra.  Hence  no  inference  can  be  drawn
from  the  recurrence  of  the  same  stanzas  in  the  Vasish//za
Dharma-sutra.  As  regards  the  other  passage,  Vasish/^a
XXVIII,  10-15,  Professor  Jolly  is  quite  right  in  saying  that
it  is  a  clumsy  versification  of  Vishnu's  Sutras,  and  it  is  not
at  all  improbable  that  Vasish^a's  verses  may  have  been  im-
mediately derived  from  the  Kanaka.  The  further  inference
as  to  the  priority  of  the  ancient  Ka//zaka-sutra  to  Vasish^a,
which  Professor  Jolly  draws  from  the  comparison  of  the  two
passages,  would  also  be  unimpeachable,  if  the  genuineness  of
Vasish//za's  twenty-eighth  chapter  were  certain.  But  that
is  unfortunately  not  the  case.  Not  only  that  chapter,  but
the  preceding  ones,  XXV-XXVII,  in  fact  the  whole  section
on  secret  penances,  are,  in  my  opinion,  not  only  suspicious,
but  certainly  betray  the  hand  of  a  later  restorer  and  cor-
rector. Everybody  who  carefully  reads  the  Sanskrit  text  of
the  Dharma-sutra  will  be  struck  by  the  change  of  the  style  and
the  difference  in  the  language  which  the  four  chapters  on
secret  penances  show,  as  compared  with  the  preceding  and
following  sections.  Throughout  the  whole  of  the  first
twenty-four  chapters  and  in  the  last  two  chapters  we  find
a  mixture  of  prose  and  verse.  With  one  exception  in  the
sixth  chapter,  where  thirty-one  verses  form  the  beginning
of  the  section  on  the  rule  of  conduct,  the  author  follows
always  one  and  the  same  plan  in  arranging  his  materials.  His
own  rules  are  given  first  in  the  form  of  aphorisms,  and  after


INTRODUCTION.  XX111


these  follow  the  authorities  for  his  doctrines,  which  consist
either  ofVedic  passages  or  of  verses,  the  latter  being  partly
quotations  taken  from  individual  authors  or  works,  partly
specimens  of  the  versified  maxims  current  among  the
Brahmans,  and  sometimes  memorial  verses  composed  by
the  author  himself.  But  chapters  XXV-XXVIII  contain
not  a  single  Sutra.  They  are  made  up  entirely  of  Anush/ubh
vSlokas,  and  the  phrases * '  I  will  now  declare,' '  Listen  to  my
words,'  which  are  so  characteristic  of  the  style  of  the  later
metrical  Smrztis  and  of  the  Pura;zas,  occur  more  frequently
than  is  absolutely  necessary.  Again,  in  the  first  twenty-four
and  the  last  two  chapters  the  language  is  archaic  Sanskrit,
interspersed  here  and  there  with  Vedic  anomalous  forms.
But  in  the  four  chapters  on  secret  penances  we  have  the
common  Sanskrit  of  the  metrical  Smr/tis  and  Pura/zas,  with
its  incorrect  forms,  adopted  in  order  to  fit  inconvenient
words  into  the  metre.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  contents  of  a
portion  of  this  suspicious  section  are  merely  useless  repe-
titions of  matters  dealt  with  already  in  the  preceding
chapters,  while  some  verses  contain  fragmentary  rules  on
a  subject  which  is  treated  more  fully  further  on.  Thus  the
description  of  the  Krzkk/ira.  and  TTandraya/za  penances,
which  has  been  given  XXI,  20  and  XXIV,  45,  is  repeated
XXVII,  16,  21.  Further,  the  enumeration  of  the  purificatory
texts  XXVIII,  10-15  is  merely  an  enlargement  of  XXII,  9.
Finally,  the  verses  XXVIII,  16-22  contain  detached  rules
on  gifts,  and  in  the  next  chapter,  XXIX,  the  subject  is
begun  once  more  and  treated  at  considerable  length.
Though  it  would  be  unwise  to  assume  that  all  genuine
productions  of  the  old  Sutrakaras  must,  throughout,  show
regularity  and  consistency,  the  differences  between  the  four
chapters  and  the  remainder  of  the  work,  just  pointed  out,
are,  it  seems  to  me,  sufficient  to  warrant  the  conclusion  that
they  do  not  belong  to  the  author  of  the  Institutes.  Under
these  circumstances  it  might  be  assumed  that  the  whole
section  is  simply  an  interpolation.  But  that  would  be  going
too  far.  For,  as  other  Dharma-sutras  show,  one  or  even
several  chapters  on  secret  penances  belonged  to  such  works.

1  See  XXV,  1 ;  XXVII,  10  j  XXVIII,  io,  20.


XXIV  VASISHFffA.


Moreover,  in  the  section  on  women,  Vasish/^a  V,  3-4,  the
author  makes  a  cross-reference  to  the  rahasyas,  the  section
on  secret  penances,  and  quotes  by  anticipation  half  a  51oka
which  is  actually  found  in  chapter  XXVIII.    The  inference
to  be  drawn  from  these  facts  is,  that  the  section  on  secret
penances  is  not  simply  a  later  addition  intended  to  supply
an  omission  of  the  first  writer,  but  that,  for  some  reason  or
other,  it  has  been  remodelled.     The  answer  to  the  question
why  this  was  done  is  suggested,  it  seems  to  me,  partly  by
the  state  of  the  MSS.  of  the  Vasish//za  Dharma^astra,  and
partly  by  the  facts  connected  with  the  treatment  of  ancient
works  by  the  "Pandits,  which  my  examination  of  the  libraries
of  Northern  India  has  brought  to  light1.     MSS.  of  the
Vasish/^a  Dharma^astra  are  very  rare,  and  among  those
found  only  three  are  complete.    Some  stop  with  chapter  X,
others  with  chapter  XXI,  and  a  few  in  the  middle  of  the
thirtieth  Adhyaya.     Moreover,  most  of  them  are  very  cor-
rupt, and  even  the  best  exhibit  some  Sutras  which  are
hopeless.     These  circumstances  show  clearly  that  after  the
extinction  of  the  Vedic  school,  with  which  the  work  origi-
nated, the  Sutra  was  for  some  time  neglected,  and  existed
in  a  few  copies  only,  perhaps  even  in  a  single  MS.     The
materials  on  which  the  ancient  Hindus  wrote,  the  birch  bark
and  the  palm  leaves,  are  so  frail  that  especially  the  first  and
last  leaves  of  a  Pothi  are  easily  lost  or  badly  damaged.
Instances  of  this  kind  are  common  enough  in  the  £aina  and
Ka^-mir  libraries,  where  the  beginning  and  still  more  fre-
quently the  end  of  many  works  have  been  irretrievably  lost.
The  fate  of  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma^astra,  it  would  seem,  has
been  similar.    The  facts  related  above  make  it  probable
that  the  MS.  or  MSS.  which  came  into  the  hands  of  the
Pa^its  of  the  special  law  schools,  who  revived  the  study  of
the  work,  was   defective.     Pieces  of  the  last  leaves  which
remained,  probably  showed  the  extent  of  the  damage  done,
and  the  Pandits  set  to  work  at  the  restoration  of  the  lost
portions,  just  as  the  Ka^mirian  Sahebram  Pa/^it  restored
the  Nilamata-pura/za  for  Maharaja  Ra^avira^iwha.    They,

1  See  Report  on  a  Tour  in  Kasmir,  Journal  of  the  Bombay  Branch  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  xii,  p.  33.


INTRODUCTION.


XXV


of  course,  used  the  verses  which  they  still  found  on  the
fragments,  and  cleverly  supplied  the  remainder  from  their
knowledge  of  Manu  and  other  Sm/'ztis,  of  the  Mahabharata
and  the  Pura/zas.  This  theory,  I  think,  explains  all  the
difficulties  which  the  present  state  of  the  section  on  secret
penances  raises.  Perhaps  it  may  be  used  also  to  account  for
some  incongruities  observable  in  chapter  XXX.  The  last  two
verses,  XXX,  9-10,  are  common-places  which  are  frequently
quoted  in  the  Mahabharata,  the  Harivaz^a,  the  Pa/?£atantra,
and  modern  anthologies.  With  their  baldness  of  expression
and  sentiment  they  present  a  strong  contrast  to  the  pre-
ceding solemn  passages  from  the  Veda,  and  look  very  much
like  an  unlucky  attempt  at  filling  up  a  break  at  the  end  of
the  MS.  In  connexion  with  this  subject  it  ought,  however,
to  be  mentioned  that  this  restoration  of  the  last  part  of  the
Vasish/f/za  Dharma^astra  must  have  happened  in  early  times,
at  least  more  than  a  thousand  years  ago.  For  the  oldest
commentators  and  compilers  of  digests  on  law,  such  as
Vigvaancrvara  \  who  lived  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century
A.  D.,  quote  passages  from  the  section  on  secret  penances
as  the  genuine  utterances  of  VasishzV/a.  These  details
will  suffice  to  show  why  I  differ  from  Professor  Jolly  with
respect  to  his  conclusion  from  the  agreement  of  the  verses
of  Vasish^a  XXVIII,  10-15  with  the  Sutras  of  Vish/zu  LVL
With  the  exception  of  the  quotations,  the  Vasish/^a
Dharma.yastra  contains  no  data  which  could  be  used  either
to  define  its  relative  position  in  Sanskrit  literature  or  to
connect  it  with  the  historical  period  of  India.  The  occur-
rence of  the  word  Romaka,  XVIII,  4,  in  some  MSS.,
as  the  name  of  a  degraded  caste  of  mixed  origin,  proves
nothing,  as  other  MSS.  read  Ramaka,  and  tribes  called
Rama  and  Rama/^a  are  mentioned  in  the  Pura/zas.  It
would  be  wrong  to  assert  on  such  evidence  that  the  Sutra
belonged  to  the  time  when  the  Romans,  or  rather  the
Byzantines  (Romaioi),  had  political  relations  with  India.
Nor  will  it  be  advisable  to  adduce  the  fact  that  VasishMa


1  Thus  Vasish^a  XXVIII,  7  is  quoted  in  the  Mitakshara  on  Yag-iiavalkya
III,  298;  XXVIII,  10-15  on  Ya^/lavalkya  III,  309;  and  XXVIII,  18-19,  22
on  Yagvlavalkya  III,  310,


XXVI  VASISH77/A.


XVI,  io,  14, 15  mentions  written  documents  as  a  means  of
legal  proof,  in  order  to  establish  the  *  comparatively  late '
date  of  the  Sutra.    For   though  the  other  Dharma-sutras
do  not  give  any  hint  that  the  art  of  writing  was  known  or
in  common  use  in  their  times,  still  the  state  of  society  which
they  describe  is  so  advanced  that  people  could  not  have  got
on  without  writing,  and  the  proofs  for  the  antiquity  of  the
Indian  alphabets  are  now  much  stronger  than  they  were
even  a  short  time  ago.     The  silence  of  Apastamba  and  the
other  Sutrakaras  regarding  written  documents  is  probably
due  to  their  strict  adherence  to  a  general  principle  under-
lying the  composition  of  the  Dharma-sutras.   Those  points
only  fall  primarily  within  the  scope  of  the  Dharma-sutras
which   have   some   immediate,    close   connexion  with   the
Dharma,  the  acquisition  of  spiritual  merit.     Hence  it  suf-
ficed for  them  to  give  some  general  maxims  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  the  gu^adharma  of  kings,  the  impartial  adminis-
tration of  justice,  and  to  give  fuller  rules  regarding  the
half-religious  ceremony  of  the  swearing  in  and  the  examin-
ation of  witnesses.     Judicial  technicalities,  like  the  deter-
mination  of  the  legal  value  of  written    documents,   had
less  importance  in  their  eyes,  and  were  left  either  to  the
dei-aHra,  the   custom   of  the  country,  or  to  the  Niti  and
Artha-^astras,  the  Institutes  of  Polity  and  of  the  Arts  of
common  life.     It  would,  also,  be  easy  to  rebut  attempts
at    assigning    the   Vasish^a    Dharma-sutra    to    what    is
usually    '  a    comparatively   late    period '   by   other   pieces
of  so-called  internal  evidence  tending  to  show  that  it  is
an   ancient  work.     Some   of  the   doctrines   of  the  Sutra
undoubtedly  belong  to  an  ancient  order  of  ideas.     This  is
particularly  observable  in  the  rules  regarding  the  subsidiary
sons,  which  place  the  offspring  even  of  illicit  unions  in  the
class  of  heirs  and  members  of  the  family,  while  adopted
sons  are  relegated  to  the  division  of  members  of  the  family
excluded  from  inheritance.     The  same  remark  applies  to
the  exclusion  of  all  females,  with  the  exception  of  putrikas
or  appointed  daughters,  from  the  succession  to  the  property
of  males,  to  the  permission  to  re-marry  infant  widows,  and
to  the  law  of  the  Niyoga  or  the  appointment  of  adult


INTRODUCTION.


XXV11


widows,  which  Vasish///a  allows  without  hesitation,  and
even  extends  to  the  wives  of  emigrants.  But  as  most  of
these  opinions  occur  also  in  some  of  the  decidedly  later
metrical  Smrz'tis,  and  disputes  on  these  subjects  seem  to
have  existed  among  the  various  Brahmanical  schools  down
to  a  late  period,  it  would  be  hazardous  to  use  them  as
arguments  for  the  antiquity  of  the  Sutra.

The  following  points  bear  on  the  question  where  the
original  home  of  the  Vedic  school,  which  produced  the
Dharma-sutra,  was  situated.  First,  the  author  declares
India  north  of  the  Vindhyas,  and  especially  those  portions
now  included  in  the  North-western  Provinces,  to  be  the
country  where  holy  men  and  pure  customs  are  to  be  found,
I,  8-16.  Secondly,  he  shows  a  predilection  for  those  redac-
tions of  the  Veda  and  those  Sutras  which  belong  to  the
northern  half  of  India,  viz.  for  the  Kanaka,  the  Va^asaneyi-
•s-akha,  and  the  Sutras  of  Manu  and  Harita.  Faint  as  these
indications  are,  I  think,  they  permit  us  to  conclude  that  the
Sutra  belongs  to  a  Ka.ra.nd.  settled  in  the  north.

As  regards  the  materials  on  which  the  subjoined
translation  is  based,  I  have  chiefly  relied  on  the  Benares
edition  of  the  text,  with  the  commentary  of  Krzshzza-
pa.ndita,  Dharmadhikari,  and  on  a  rough  edition  with  the
varietas  lectionum  from  the  two  MSS.  of  the  Bombay
Government  Collection  of  1 874-75 \  B.  no.  29  and  Bh.  no.
30,  a  MS.  of  the  Elphinstone  College  Collection  of  1867-68,
E.  no.  23  of  Class  VI,  and  an  imperfect  apograph  F.  in
my  own  collection,  which  was  made  in  1864  at  Bombay.
The  rough  edition  was  prepared  under  my  superintendence
by  VamanaHrya  £//alkikar,  now  teacher  of  Sanskrit  in  the
Dekhan  College,  Pima.  When  I  wrote  the  translation,  the
Bombay  Government  MSS.  were  not  accessible  to  me.  I
could  only  use  my  own  MS.  and,  thanks  to  the  kindness  of
Dr.  Rost,  Colebrooke's  MS.,  I.  O.  no.  913,  from  which  the
now  worthless  Calcutta  editions  have  been  derived  either
immediately  or  mediately.  These  materials  belong  to  two
groups.  The  Bombay  MS.  B.,  which  comes  from  Benares,
closely  agrees  with  Krzsh/zapaWita's  text ;  and  E.,  though

1  See  Report  on  Sanskrit  MSS.  1874-75,  p.  11.


XXV1U  VASISHTffA.


purchased  at  Pu//a,  does  not  differ  much  from  the  two.  Bh.,
which  comes  from  Bhuj  in  Kafck,  and  my  own  MS.  F.  form
a  second  group,  towards  which  Colebrooke's  MS.,  I.  O.
no.  913,  also  leans.  Ultimately  both  groups  are  derived
from  one  codex  archetypus.

The  first  group  of  MSS.  gives  a  fuller  and  in  general  a
correcter  text  than  the  second.  But  it  seems  to  me  that
the  text  of  B.,  and  still  more  Kr/sh/zapa^ita's,  has  in  many
places  been  conjecturally  restored,  and  that  the  real  diffi-
culties have  been  rather  veiled  than  solved.  I  have,  there-
fore, frequently  preferred  the  readings  offered  by  the  second
group,  or  based  on  them  my  conjectural  emendations,  which
have  all  been  given  in  the  notes.  To  give  a  translation
without  having  recourse  to  conjectural  emendations  was  im-
possible, as  a  European  philologist  is  unable  to  avail  himself
of  those  wonderful  tricks  of  interpretation  which  permit  an
Indian  Pa;^it  to  extract  some  kind  of  meaning  from  the
most  desperate  passages.  In  a  few  cases,  where  even  the
best  MSS.  contain  nothing  but  a  conglomerate  of  meaning-
less syllables  or  unconnected  words,  I  have  thought  it
advisable  to  refrain  from  all  attempts  at  a  restoration  of
the  text,  and  at  a  translation.  A  critical  edition  of  the
Vasish^a  Dharma^astra  is  very  desirable,  and  I  trust  that
Dr.  A.  Fiihrer,  of  St.  Xavier's  College,  Bombay,  will  soon
supply  this  want.  Krz'sh?zapa?z^ita's  commentary,  for  which
he  had  not  the  aid  of  older  vrittis,  shows  considerable
learning,  and  has  been  of  great  value  to  me.  I  have
followed  him  mostly  in  the  division  of  the  Sutras,  and  have
frequently  given  his  opinions  in  the  notes,  both  in  cases
where  I  agree  with  him  and  in  those  where  I  differ  from
him,  but  think  his  opinion  worthy  of  consideration.

In  conclusion,  I  have  to  thank  Professors  R.  von  Roth,
Weber,  and  Jolly,  as  well  as  Dr.  L.  von  Schroder,  for  the
verification  of  a  number  of  Vedic  quotations,  which  they
kindly  undertook  for  me,  as  I  was  unable  to  use  my  own
books  of  reference  during  the  translation  of  the  work.


INTRODUCTION

TO

BAUDHAYANA.


THE  case  of  the  Baudhayana  Dharma-sutra  is  in  many-
respects  analogous  to  that  of  the  Institutes  of  the  Sacred
Law,  current  in  the  schools  of  Apastamba  and  Hira^ya-
ke^-in.  Like  the  latter,  it  is  the  work  of  a  teacher  of  the
Black  Ya^ur-veda,  who  composed  manuals  on  all  the  various
subdivisions  of  the  Kalpa,  and  founded  a  Sutra-^ara^a,
which  is  said  to  exist  to  the  present  day1.  The  Brahma-
nical  tradition,  too,  acknowledges  these  facts,  and,  instead
of  surrounding  Baudhayana's  work  with  a  halo  of  myths,
simply  states  that  it  was  originally  studied  by  and  autho-
ritative for  the  followers  of  the  Taittiriya-veda  alone,  and
later  only  became  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Sacred  Law
for  all  Brahmans2.  Moreover,  the  position  of  Baudhayana
among  the  teachers  of  the  Ya^ur-veda  is  well  defined,  and
his  home,  or  at  least  the  home  of  his  school,  is  known.
But  here  the  resemblance  stops.  For  while  the  Sutras  of
Apastamba  and  Hira/zyakcrin  have  been  preserved  in  care-
fully and  methodically  arranged  collections,  where  a  certain
place  is  assigned  to  each  section  of  the  Kalpa,  no  complete
set  of  the  Sutras  of  Baudhayana's  school  has,  as  yet,  been
found,  and  the  original  position  of  the  detached  portions
which  are  obtainable  is  not  quite  certain.  Again,  while  the
works  of  Apastamba  and  Hira^yakej-in  seem  to  have  been
kept  free  from   extensive   interpolations,  several  parts  of

1  I  must  here  state  that  during  my  residence  in  India  I  have  never  met  with
a  follower  of  Baudhayana's  school,  and  cannot  personally  vouch  for  its  existence.
But  many  Pawofits  have  assured  me  that  many  Baudhayanlyas  are  to  be  found
among  the  Telingana  and  Kar«a7aka  Brahmans.

2  See  Govinda's  statement,  quoted  above,  p.  xiii.


xxx  baudhAyana.


Baudhayana's  Sutras   have   clearly  received   considerable
additions  from  later  hands.

According  to  the  researches  of  Dr.  A.  Burnell1,  whose
long  residence  in  Southern  India  and  intimate  acquaint-
ance with  its  Brahmanical  libraries  have  made  him  the
first  authority  on  the  literature  of  the  schools  of  the  Tait-
tiriya-veda,  the  Sutras  of  Baudhayana  consist  of  six
sections,  viz.  I.  the  Srauta-sutras,  probably  in  nineteen
Pra^nas ;  %.  The  Karmanta-sutra  in  twenty  Adhyayas ;  3.
The  Dvaidha-sutra  in  four  Pra.mas  ;  4.  The  Grzhya-sutra
in  four  Pra^nas ;  5.  The  Dharma-sutra  in  four  Praj-nas ;
6.  The  5ulva-sutra  in  three  Adhyayas.  The  results  of
the  search  for  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  other  parts  of  India,  and
especially  in  Western  India,  do  not  differ  materially  from
those  obtained  by  Dr.  Burnell.  The  Grzhya-sutra,  which
in  Western  India  occasionally  bears  the  title  Smarta-sutra2,
contains,  however,  nine  instead  of  four  Pra^nas.  The  MSS.
of  the  Baudhayana-sutras,  which  contain  the  text  alone,
are  all  incomplete,  mostly  very  corrupt  and  in  bad  order,
and  rarely  give  more  than  a  small  number  of  Pra^nas  on
detached  subjects.  The  copies  in  which  the  text  is  accom-
panied by  a  commentary  are  in  a  better  condition.  Thus
the  Kalpavivara^a  of  Bhavasvamin  3  extends  over  the  whole
of  the  vSrauta-sutra,  and  over  the  Karmanta  and  the  Dvaidha-
sutras.  It  shows  the  proper  sequence  of  the  Pra^nas  on
Srauta  sacrifices,  and  that  probably  the  Karmanta  and  the
Dvaidha  immediately  followed  the  5rauta-sutra.  But  there
is  no  hint  in  the  MSS.  or  in  the  commentaries  how  the
Grz'hya,  Dharma,  and  vSulva-sutras  were  originally  placed.
With  respect  to  these  sections,  it  is  only  possible  to  judge
from  the  analogy  of  the  other  extant  sets  of  Kalpa-sutras

1  See  Burnell,  Catalogue  of  a  Collection  of  Sanskrit  MS.,  pp.  24-26,  28,  34-
35,  andTanjore  Catalogue,  pp.  i8a-2ob,  and  especially  his  remarks  at  pp.  18b
and  20  a.

2  This  title  is  found  in  the  best  copy  known  to  me,  Elphinstone  College  Col-
lection of  1867-68,  Class  B.  I,  no.  5,  which  has  been  prepared  from  the  MS.  of
Mr.  Limaye  at  Ashte.  The  other  copies  of  the  work,  found  in  Western  India,
e.  g.  no.  4  of  the  same  collection  and  my  own  copy,  are  in  a  bad  state,  as  they
are  derived  from  a  MS.  the  leaves  of  which  were  out  of  order.

3  Burnell,  Catalogue  of  a  Collection  of  Sanskrit  MSS.,  no.  LXXXVIII,  and
Tanjore  Catalogue,  no.  CXVII.


INTRODUCTION.


XXXI


and  from  internal  evidence.  On  these  grounds  it  may  be
shown  that  the  order,  adopted  by  Dr.  Burnell,  is  probably
the  correct  one.  For  the  beginning  of  the  Grzhya-sutra1
shows  by  its  wording  that  it  was  not  a  separate  treatise,
but  was  immediately  connected  with  some  preceding  Pra.ma.
The  analogy  of  the  collections  of  the  Apastambiyas,  the
Haira^yakeras,  the  Ka^as,  and  other  schools  permits  us
to  infer  that  it  stood  after  the  5rauta-sutra.  It  is  further
clear  that,  in  its  turn,  it  was  succeeded  by  the  Dharma-
sutra.  For  two  passages  of  the  latter  work,  I,  2,  3,  15,
and  II,  8,  15,  9,  clearly  contain  references  to  the  Grzhya-
sutra.  In  the  former,  the  author  gives  the  rule  regarding
the  length  of  the  staff  to  be  carried  by  a  student,  as  well  as
the  general  principle  that  the  staff  must  be  cut  from  a  tree
fit  for  sacrificial  purposes.  With  respect  to  the  latter  clause
he  adds  that '  the  details  have  been  given  above.'  As  the
Dharma-sutra  contains  nothing  more  on  this  subject,  it
follows  that  the  expression  '  above '  must  refer  to  Grihya-
sutra  II,  7,  where  the  usual  detailed  rules  regarding  the
employment  of  particular  woods  for  the  several  var/zas  are
given.  In  the  second  passage  Baudhayana  says  that  the
rules  for  the  performance  of  funeral  sacrifices  have  been
fully  explained  in  the  section  on  the  Ash/akahoma,  which
occurs  Grz'hya-sutra  II,  17-18.  It  is,  therefore,  perfectly
certain  that  Baudhayana,  just  like  Apastamba,  placed  the
Pra^nas  on  the  Sacred  Law  after  those  on  the  domestic
ceremonies,  and  that  the  Dharma-sutra  was  not  a  separate
work.  Under  these  circumstances  it  becomes  highly  pro-
bable that  the  vSulva-sutra  formed,  as  is  the  case  in  other
sets  of  Kalpa-sutras,  the  conclusion  of  the  whole.  Thus
the  only  treatise,  whose  position  remains  doubtful,  is  the
Pravarakha^a,  the  list  of  the  Brahmanical  gotras  and  of
their  deified  ancestors2.  Possibly  it  may  have  stood  at  the
end  of  the  Srauta-sutra.


1  According  to  the  Elph.  Coll.  MS.,  CI.  I,  B.  5,  and  my  copy,  it  runs  thus:

TOT  XlT^^feT  j^TT  mil  HT  ^g^TWT^rT??:  II *ll

2  Burnell,  Catalogue  of  a  Collection  of  Sanskrit  MSS.,  no.  CXVIII.


XXxil  BAUDHAYANA.


The  destruction  of  the  continuity  of  Baudhayana's  Kalpa-
sutra  has  had  the  consequence  which  is  commonly  ob-
servable in  other  dismembered  works,  that  several  of  its
detached  portions  have  received  considerable  additions
from  later  and,  as  it  would  seem,  from  several  hands.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  small  portion  only  of  the
nine  Prasnas,  found  in  the  Western  copies  of  the  Grzhya-
sutra,  really  belongs  to  Baudhayana.  For  the  description
of  the  Grzhya  rites,  which  strictly  follows  the  general  plan
laid  down  in  the  first  Sutra,  is  completed  in  two  or  three
Pra-mas1.  Next  follows  a  Pra^na  on  the  anukrztis,  rites
resembling  those  comprised  in  the  subdivisions  treated
before,  and  then  a  Pra^na  on  praya^ittas,  or  expiations
of  mistakes  committed  during,  and  of  the  neglect  of,  the
performance  of  the  Grzhya-karmam.  The  remaining  Pra-
snas are  filled  with  a  medley  of  paribhashas,  general  rules,
and  of  full  descriptions  of  ceremonies,  some  of  which  have
been  given  before,  while  others  are  added  afresh.  Many
of  the  newly-added  rites  do  not  belong  to  the  ancient
Brahmanical  worship,  but  to  the  Pauranic  religions,  the
service  of  Siva,,  Skanda,  Naraya/za,  and  other  deities,  and
some  show  an  admixture  of  Tantric  elements.  In  some  of
the  later  Prajnas,  especially  IV  and  V,  the  language  closely
resembles  that  of  the  first  three,  and  shows  the  same  stereo-
typed phrases  and  the  same  Vedic  anomalous  forms.  But
in  other  sections,  particularly  VI-IX,  we  find,  instead  of
Sutras,  the  common  Anush/ubh  51oka  throughout,  and  ex-
pressions peculiar  to  the  metrical  Smrttis  and  the  Pura/zas.
At  the  end  of  most  Adhyayas  we  read  the  phrase,  ity  aha
Baudhayana^,  or  bhagavan  Baudhayana^, f  thus  speaks  Bau-
dhayana, or  the  divine  Baudhayana.'  Finally,  while  the  first
three  Prajnas  are  divided  into  Ka^ikas  or  Khandas,  the  fol-
lowing ones  consist  of  Adhyayas  or  chapters.  These  differ-
ences, as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  most  important  Grzhya
rites,  arranged  according  to  a  special  plan,  are  done  with  in  the


1  Elphinstone  College  Collection,  no.  5,  according  to  which  all  quotations
have  been  made,  gives  three  Prasnas,  my  own  MS.  two  Prasnas.  The  number
of  the  KhanJas  is,  however,  the  same.


INTRODUCTION.  XXX111


first  three  Pra.mas,  necessarily  lead  to  the  conclusion  that
the  whole  remainder  does  not  belong  to  Baudhayana,  but
consists  of  so-called  ParLsish/as,  which  were  composed  by
the  adherents  of  his  school.  Further,  the  fact  that  the  last
six  Prai-nas  do  not  show  everywhere  the  same  style  and
language,  makes  it  probable  that  the  additions  were  made
at  different  times  and  by  different  persons.

The  Dharma-sutra  seems  to  have  undergone  exactly  the
same  fate  as  the  Grzhya-sutra.  It  will  be  obvious  even  to
the  readers  of  the  translation  that  its  fourth  Prajna  is  a  later
addition.  It  consists  of  two  parts.  The  first,  which  ends
with  the  fourth  Adhyaya,  treats  of  penances,  both  public  and
secret  ones.  The  second,  Adhyayas  5-8,  describes  the
means  of  obtaining  siddhi,  the  fulfilment  of  one's  desires,
and  recommends  for  this  purpose  the  offering  of  the
Ga/zahomas  after  a  previous  sanctification  of  the  wor-
shipper by  means  of  a  course  of  austerities.  The  first  part
is  perfectly  superfluous,  as  the  subject  of  penances  has
already  been  discussed  in  the  first  sections  of  the  second
Pra.ma,  and  again  in  chapters  4-10  of  the  third  Pra^na.
Its  rules  sometimes  contradict  those  given  before,  and  in
other  cases,  e.g.  IV,  2,  10-12,  are  mere  repetitions  of  pre-
vious statements.  The  introduction  of  the  means  of  gain-
ing siddhi,  on  the  other  hand,  is  without  a  parallel  in
other  Dharma-sutras,  and  the  subject  is  entirely  foreign  to
the  scope  of  such  works.  Its  treatment,  too,  shows  that
chapters  5-8  do  not  belong  to  the  author  of  the  bulk  of
the  Dharma-sutra.  For  the  description  of  the  preparatory
'  restraints '  or  austerities  contains  somewhat  more  detailed
rules  for  a  number  of  penances,  e.g.  the  Krikkkras  and
the  isfandraya/za,  which  have  already  been  described  in  the
preceding  Pra^nas.  Moreover,  the  style  and  the  language
of  the  whole  fourth  Pra.ma  are  very  different  from  those  of
the  three  preceding  ones,  and  the  differences  observable  are
exactly  the  same  as  those  between  the  first  five  and  the  last
four  Pra^nas  of  the  GWhya-sutra.  The  epic  61oka  nearly
throughout  replaces  the  aphoristic  prose,  and  the  common
slipshod  Sanskrit  of  the  Pura/zas  appears  instead  of  the
archaic  forms.  Finally,  the  fourth  Pra.ma  is  divided  into
[14]  c


XXXIV  BAUDHAYANA.


Adhyayas,  not  into  the  Ka^afikas  or  Kha^as  and  Adhyayas
which  are  found  in  the  first  two  Prajnas.

This  latter  peculiarity  is  also  observable  in  the  third
Pra^na,  and  raises  a  suspicion  against  the  genuineness  of
that  part  also.  For,  though  the  third  Pra^na  in  style  and
language  resembles  the  first  two,  it  is  hard  to  believe  that
the  author  should,  for  no  apparent  reason,  suddenly  have
changed  the  manner  of  dividing  his  work  towards  its  end.
This  suspicion  is  further  strengthened  by  two  other  circum-
stances. First,  Pra^nas  I— II  really  exhaust  the  discussion
of  the  whole  Dharma,  and  the  third  offers  supplementary
information  only  on  some  points  which  have  been  touched
upon  previously.  Secondly,  several  Adhyayas  of  Praj-na
III  seem  to  have  been  borrowed  from  other  works,  or  to
be  abstracts  from  them.  Thus  the  tenth  chapter  has  cer-
tainly been  taken  from  the  Gautamiya  Dharma^astra,  the
sixth  bears  a  very  close  and  suspicious  resemblance  to
Vishnu  XLVIII1,  and  the  third  looks  very  much  like  a
short  summary  of  the  doctrine  of  Vikhanas,  whose  lost
Sutra  contained  the  original  rule  of  the  order  of  the
Vaikhanasas  or  hermits,  living  in  the  forest.  These  cir-
cumstances justify,  it  seems  to  me,  the  assumption  that
Baudhayana's  original  Dharma-sutra  consisted,  like  Apa-
stamba's,  of  two  Pra^nas  only,  and  that  it  received,  through
followers  of  his  school,  two  separate  additions,  first  in
very  ancient  times  Pra^na  III,  where  the  style  of  the
master  is  strictly  followed,  and  later  Pra^na  IV,  where  the
language  and  phraseology  of  the  metrical  Smrztis  are
adopted.  It  ought  to  be  noted  that  Govindasvamin,  too,
does  not  take  the  whole  of  the  four  Praj-nas  for  Baudha*
yana's  composition.  With  respect  to  several  passages2
where  Baudhayana's  name  is  introduced  in  order  to  give
weight  to  the  rules,  he  says  that  the  Sutras  may  belong  to
*  a  pupil.'  I  do  not  think  that  the  criterion  which  he  uses
can  be  relied  on  in  every  case,  because  oriental  authors
without  doubt  occasionally  speak  of  themselves  as  of  third


1  See  also  Jolly,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  vii,  p.  xix.

2  E.g.  Dharma-sutra  III,  5,  7.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV


persons.  But  the  fact  that  the  commentator,  though  an
orthodox  Hindu,  had  misgivings  as  to  the  genuineness  of
portions  of  the  work,  is  not  without  significance.  It  seems
also  that  even  the  first  two  Pra^nas  are  not  quite  free  from
interpolations.  Thus  the  Ka/zafikas  on  the  Tarpa/za1  are  cer-
tainly much  enlarged  by  additions,  the  verse  at  I,  5,  u,  $6,
a  repetition  of  I,  5,  9,  5,  and  some  prose  quotations  which
are  introduced  by  the  words  athapy  udaharanti, '  now  they
quote  also,'  standing  usually  before  verses  only,  are  at  least
suspicious.  That  the  genuineness  of  many  single  passages
should  be  doubtful,  is  no  more  than  might  be  expected,  not
only  on  account  of  the  separation  of  the  Dharma-sutra
from  the  other  parts  of  the  Kalpa,  but  also  because  the
work,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  remained  for  a  long  time
without  the  protection  of  a  commentary.  The  practical
conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  state  of  things  is  that
the  greatest  caution  must  be  observed  in  using  the  Baudha-
yana  Dharma-sutra  for  historical  purposes,  and  that  it  will
be  advisable  to  draw  no  inferences  regarding  Baudhayana's
relation  to  other  teachers  and  schools  from  the  last  two
Prajnas,  and  not  to  trust  too  much  to  historical  inferences
drawn  from  single  passages  of  the  first  two.

The  position  which  Baudhayana  occupies  among  the
teachers  of  the  Taittiriya-veda  has  already  been  discussed
in  the  Introduction  to  Apastamba.  It  has  been  shown
that  according  to  the  Brahmanical  tradition  preserved  by
Mahadeva,  the  commentator  of  the  Hira/zyakcri-sutras,  he
composed  the  first  Sutra  for  the  followers  of  his  6akha.
Internal  and  external  evidence  has  also  been  adduced,
proving  that  he  certainly  was  more  ancient  than  Apa-
stamba and  Hira/zyakcsin.  It  is  now  possible  to  bring
forward  some  further  facts  bearing  on  these  points.  First,
in  the  section  on  the  Tarpa/za,  the  libations  of  water  offered
to  various  deities,  i^zshis,  and  the  manes,  II,  5,  9, 14,  Ka/zva
Baudhayana  receives  his  share  immediately  after  the  i^zshis
of  the  Veda   and   before  Apastamba,   the  Sutrakara,  and

1  Baudhayana  Dharma-sutra  II,  5,  8-9.
C  2


XXXVI  BAUDHAYANA.


Satyashaa^a  Hira?zyake.rin.  The  same  order  is  observed  in
the  distribution  of  the  offerings  at  the  Sarpabali,  described  in
the  Grzhya-sutra1,  where  the  following  teachers  of  the  Ya^ur-
veda  are  specially  named,  viz.  VaLyampayana,  Phulingu,
Tittiri,  Ukha,  Aukhya,  Atreya  the  author  of  the  Pada-text,
Kaundmya.  the  author  of  the  commentary,  Ka/zva  Baudha-
yana  the  author  of  the  Prava^ana,  Apastamba  the  author
of  the  Sutra,  and  Satyashad%a  Hira^yake^in.  Neither  of
these  two  passages  belongs  to  Baudhayana.  They  are  both
clearly  interpolations.  But  they  show  that  Mahadeva's
statement,  which  makes  Baudhayana  the  first  expounder
of  the  Kalpa  among  the  Taittiriyavedins,  agrees  with  the
tradition  of  the  Baudhayaniyas  themselves.  For  not  only
the  place  allotted  to  Baudhayana's  name,  but  still  more  the
title  Prava^anakara  which  he  receives,  show  that  the  fol-
lowers of  his  school  placed  him  before  and  above  all  other
teachers  of  the  ritual.  The  term  prava^ana,  which  literally
means '  proclaiming  or  recitation,'  has  frequently  the  technical
sense  of  { oral  instruction,'  and  is  applied  both  to  the  tradi-
tional lore  contained  in  the  Brahma^as,  and  to  the  more
systematic  teaching  of  the  Ahgas  2.  If,  therefore,  a  teacher
is  called  the  author  of  the  Prava^ana  of  a  6akha,  that  can
only  mean  that  he  is  something  more  than  a  common
Sutrakara,  and  is  considered  to  be  the  originator  of  the
whole  system  of  instruction  among  its  followers.  The
epithet  Ka^va,  which  Baudhayana  receives  in  both  the
passages  quoted  above,  indicates  that  he  belonged  to  the
Vedic  Gotra  of  the  Ka/zvas.  It  deserves  to  be  noted  that
Govindasvamin,  too,  on  I,  3,  5,  13,  explains  the  name
Baudhayana  by  Ka/zvayana  3.

1  Baudhayana  Gn'hya-sutra  IV,  8  (fol.  29,  B.  5,  Elph.  Coll.  copy,  no.  5),  ^TSJ

wm  Torero  ^f^^ni  ^f%gircre  ^tuft*?  -sfHnw**  Tre^raro-
itw^to  *^rcni  swTtnsTir  f^iw^re  (?)  ^n^fqwi  ^slbftwft

3%OT*I  S^^t«K  Sfi^TTITJrtffT  ||  See  also  Weber,  Hist.  Ind.  Lit.,  p.  91
note;  Max  Muller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  223;  Burnell,  Catalogue  of  a
Collection  of  Sanskrit  MSS.,  p.  14,  no.  LIII.

2  See  Max  Muller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  109.

3  The  discovery  that  Baudhayana  bore  also  the  name  Ka«va  makes  it  possible


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVli


The  style  of  Baudhayana's  works  furnishes,  as  Dr.
Burnell  has  pointed  out1,  another  argument  for  their  high
antiquity.  Compared  with  the  Sutras  of  Apastamba  and
Hira/zyakcrin  they  are  much  simpler  in  their  arrangement,
and  the  complete  absence  of  that  anxiety  to  save  '  half  a
vowel '  which  characterises  the  fully  developed  Sutra-style
is  very  remarkable.  The  last  point  has  been  noticed  by
Govindasvamin  also.  In  commenting  on  I,  2,  3,  17-18,
where  Baudhayana  first  permits  students  to  beg  food  of
men  of  all  castes,  and  afterwards  explains  that  he  means
Aryans  who  follow  their  lawful  occupations,  he  says2,  '(If
anybody  should  ask),  "Why  give  two  Sutras,  while  one
Sutra,  ('A  student  shall  ask)  Aryans  who  follow  their
lawful  occupations,'  would  have  sufficed?"  (his  objection
will  be)  correct.  For  this  teacher  is  not  particularly
anxious  to  make  his  book  short.'  In  other  cases  we  find
a  certain  awkwardness  in  the  distribution  of  the  subject
matter,  which  probably  finds  its  explanation  through  the
fact  that  Baudhayana  first  attempted  to  bring  the  teaching
of  the  Taittiriyas  on  the  Dharma  into  a  systematic  form.
Thus  the  rules  on  the  law  of  inheritance  are  given  without
any  apparent  necessity  and  against  the  custom  of  the  other
Sutrakaras  in  two  different  chapters,  I,  5,  11,  9-16  and  II,
2,  3,  1-44.  The  section  on  purification,  too,  is  divided  into
two  separate  portions,  I,  4,  6-10  and  I,  6,  13-15,  and  the
second,  which  treats  of  the  purification  of  the  vessels  at
sacrifices,  properly  ought  to  have  been  placed  into  the
Srauta-sutra,  not  into  the  Dharma-sutra.  Again,  the  dis-
cussion of  several  topics  is  repeatedly  interrupted  by  the
introduction  of  rules  belonging  to  different  subjects,  and
Govindasvamin's  ingenuity  is  often  taxed  to  the  utmost  in
order  to  find  the  reason  why  certain  Sutras  which  appa-


to  refer  Apastamba's  quotation  of  an  opinion  of  a  Ka«va,  I,  6, 19,  7,  to  Baudha-
yana, instead  of  to  a  teacher  of  the  White  Yag-ur-veda,  Sacred  Books  of  the
East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.

1  Tanjore  Catalogue,  p.  20  b.

\5  O  Cs  Cv  \


XXXV111  BAUDHAYANA.


rently  are  unconnected  with  the  main  subject  have  been
inserted.  A  third  argument  for  the  great  antiquity  of
Baudhayana's  Sutras,  derived  from  the  archaic  character
of  some  of  his  doctrines,  has  been  discussed  in  the  Intro-
duction to  Apastamba1.  The  number  of  instances  where
Baudhayana's  rules  are  based  on  a  more  ancient  order  of
ideas  than  Apastamba's  might  be  increased  very  con-
siderably. But,  as  now  the  comparison  of  the  two  works
is  open  to  all  students,  I  omit  the  cases  contained  in  the
two  Dharma-sutras,  and  content  myself  with  adducing  one
more  from  the  less  accessible  Grzhya-sutras.  It  is  a  well-
known  fact  that  the  ancient  Vedic  ritual  in  certain  cases
admitted  5udras,  and  particularly  the  Rathakara  or  car-
penter, who,  according  to  all  accounts,  has  Sudra  blood  in
his  veins,  to  a  participation  in  the  vSrauta  rites.  The
Taittiriya-brahma^a  even  gives  certain  Mantras  to  be  re-
cited by  the  Rathakara  at  the  Agnyadhana  sacrifice 2.
Now  Baudhayana,  who,  Dh.  S.  I,  9,  17,  6,  derives  the
origin  of  the  Rathakaras  from  a  VaLsya  male  and  5udra
female,  apparently  reckons  him  amongst  the  twice-born,
and  explicitly  allows  him  to  receive  the  sacrament  of  the
initiation.  He  says,  Grzhya-sutra  II,  5,  8-9,  'Let  him
initiate  a  Brahma^a  in  spring,  a  Kshatriya  in  summer,  a
Vaisya  in  autumn,  a  Rathakara  in  the  rainy  season ;  or  all
of  them  in  spring3/  But  Apastamba,  who  shows  great
hostility  against  the  mixed  castes,  and  emphatically  denies
the  right  of  vSudras  to  be  initiated,  gives  the  same  rule
regarding  the  seasons  for  the  initiation  both  in  his  Grihya.
and  Dharma-sutras  4.  He,  however,  omits  the  Rathakara  in
both  cases.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Apastamba's
exclusion  of  the  carpenter,  which  agrees  with  the  senti-
ments prevailing  in  modern  Brahmanical  society,  is  an  off-
shoot of  a  later  doctrine,  and  as  both  he  and  Baudhayana


1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xviii-xx.

2  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien  X,  12.

3^^r  srrercrgwftfl  #**  ***** **"? ^  ^T?  T^FRfffir  lib »

*  Grzhya-sutra  II,  4, 10,  5  ;  Dharma-sutra  1, 1, 1, 18.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX


belong  to  the  same  vidyavamsa.,  or  spiritual  family,  this
difference  may  be  used  as  an  argument  for  his  posteriority
to  Baudhayana.  In  connexion  with  this  rule  of  Baudhayana's
it  ought  to  be  mentioned  that  even  in  the  present  day  certain
subdivisions  of  the  modern  Sutars  or  carpenters  actually
wear  the  Brahmanical  thread,  and,  in  spite  of  the  adverse
teaching  of  the  wSastras,  find  Brahmans  willing  to  perform
the  ceremony  of  investiture  for  them.

While  it  thus  appears  not  incredible  that  Baudhayana
really  was  the  first  Sutrakara  of  the  Taittiriyas,  the
numerous  quotations  which  his  works  contain,  permit  us
to  form  an  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  Vedic  and  profane
literature  known  to  him.  Among  the  Vedic  works  which
he  adduces  as  authorities,  or  otherwise  refers  to,  the  three
sections  of  the  Taittiriya-veda,  the  Sa/^hita,  the  Brahma/za,
and  the  Ara^yaka,  naturally  take  the  first  place.  For  the
Arawyaka  he  seems  to  have  used  the  Andhra  version,  as
Dh.  S.  II,  10,  1 8,  7,  ii  references  to  the  seventy-first
Anuvaka  of  the  tenth  Prapa//£aka  occur.  Two  long  pas-
sages, Dh.  S.  I,  2,  4,  3-8  ;  II,  6,  1 1,  1-8,  which  apparently
have  been  taken  from  the  vSatapatha-brahma;za,  testify  to  his
acquaintance  with  the  White  Ya^ur-veda.  Baudhayana  does
not  say  expressly  that  he  quotes  from  the  Brahma/za  of  the
Va^asaneyins,  but  Govinda  has  no  hesitation  in  pointing  to
the  vSatapatha  as  their  source.  It  is  remarkable  that  the
fact  noticeable  in  Apastamba's  quotation  from  the  6ata-
patha  reappears  here,  ancl  that  the  wording  of  the  two
quotations  does  not  fully  agree  with  the  printed  text  of
the  Brahma^a.  The  differences  in  the  first  passage  are,
no  doubt,  partly  owing  to  corruptions  and  interpolations
in  Baudhayana's  text ;  but  that  cannot  be  said  of  the
second1.  References  to  the  Sama-veda  and  the  Samans
occur  repeatedly,  and  the  passage  from  the  Nidana  of
Bhallavins  regarding  the  geographical  extent  of  true  Brah-


1  Professor  Eggeling  has  lately  discussed  the  question  of  the  discrepancies
between  Apastamba's  quotations  from  the  Brahmana  of  the  Vag-asaneyins  and
the  existing  text.  I  can  only  agree  with  him  that  we  must  wait  for  a  comparison
of  all  those  quoted,  with  both  the  recensions  of  the  Satapatha,  before  we  draw
further  inferences  from  the  fact.    See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xii,  p.  xl.


xl  BAUDHAYANA.


manical  learning,  which  Vasish^a  adduces,  is  given  I,  i,  2,
11-12.  From  the  Rig-veda  a  few  expiatory  hymns  and
verses,  such  as  the  Aghamarsha^a  and  the  Taratsamandis,
are  quoted.  The  Atharva-veda  is  not  referred  to  by  name,
but  the  existence  of  Atharva/^a  schools  may  be  inferred
from  the  mention  made  of  the  vows  called  5iras,  II,  8, 14,  2.
Among  the  authorities  on  the  Sacred  Law,  mentioned  in
the  Dharma-sutra,  Katya  I,  2,  3,  46,  Maudgalya  II,  2,  4,  8,
and  Aupa^-andhani  II,  2,  3,  ^  do  not  occur  in  other  works
of  the  same  class1.  Harita,  who  is  mentioned  II,  I,  2,  21,
and  who  probably  was  a  teacher  of  the  Maitrayamya
school,  is  named  by  Vasish^a  and  Apastamba  also.  The
Gautama  who  is  quoted  I,  1,  2,  7  and  II,  2,  4,  17,  is,  as  has
been  shown  in  the  Introduction  to  Gautama,  most  probably
the  author  of  the  still  existing  Institutes  of  Gautama.  To
the  arguments  for  the  latter  view,  adduced  there,  I  may
add  that  two  other  passages  of  the  Dharma-sutra,  II,  6,  11,
15  and  26,  point  to  a  close  connexion  between  Baudhayana's
and  Gautama's  works.  The  former  of  the  two  Sutras
contains,  with  the  exception  of  one  small  clause  in  the
beginning,  exactly  the  same  description  of  the  duties  of  a
hermit  in  the  forest  as  that  given  by  Gautama  III,  26-35.
The  second  Sutra  states,  just  as  Gautama's  rule  III,  36,
that  the  venerable  teacher  (a/£arya/z)  prescribes  one  order
only,  that  of  the  householders.  The  reason  given  for  this
opinion  differs,  however,  according  to  Baudhayana,  from  that
adduced  in  Gautama's  text.  The  almost  literal  identity
of  the  first  long  passage  makes  it  not  improbable  that
Baudhayana  borrowed  in  this  instance  also  from  Gautama
without  noting  the  source  from  which  he  drew.  On  the
other  hand,  the  argument  drawn  from  the  fact  that  the
tenth  Adhyaya  of  Pra^na  III  has  been  taken  from  Gautama's
Sutra  loses  its  force  since,  as  I  have  shown  above,  it  is
improbable  that  the  third  Pra^na  formed  part  of  Baudha-


1  Possibly  Kasyapa,  whose  name  occurs  in  a  Si  oka,  I,  n,  21,  2,  may  also  be
an  ancient  teacher  to  whom  Baudhayana  refers.  In  the  Gnhya-sutra  a  teacher
called  Saliki  is  repeatedly  quoted,  and  once,  1, 11  (end),  his  opinion  is  contrasted
with  that  of  Baudhayana  and  of  AHrya,  i.e.  Baudhayana's  teacher.  The
GWhya-sutra  refers  also  to  Atreya,  Kasakr/tsna,  and  Badari.


INTRODUCTION.


xli


yana's  original  work.  A  metrical  work  on  the  Sacred  Law
seems  to  be  quoted  II,  2,  4,  14-15.  For,  as  the  second
verse,  adduced  there,  says  that  the  penance  for  one  who
violated  his  Guru's  bed  has  been  declared  above,  it  seems
impossible  to  assume  that  the  two  51okas  belonged  to  the
versified  maxims  of  the  Dharma  current  among  the  learned
Brahmans.  If  this  quotation  is  not  an  interpolation,  it
proves  that,  side  by  side  with  the  Dharma-sutras,  metrical
treatises  on  the  Sacred  Law  existed  in  very  early  times 1.
One  quotation,  finally,  which  gives  a  verse  from  the  dialogue
of  the  daughters  of  U^anas  and  Wzshaparvan  seems  to
have  been  taken  from  an  epic  poem.  The  verse  is  actually
found  in  the  Mahabharata  I,  78,  10,  and  again  34,  where
the  altercation  between  Warmish  tkk  and  Devayani  forms
part  of  the  Yayatyupakhyana.  Considering  what  has  been
said  above  regarding  the  state  of  the  text  of  the  Dharma-
sutra,  and  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the
Mahabharata,  it  would  be  hazardous  to  assert  that  the
verse  proves  Baudhayana's  acquaintance  with  Vyasa's  great
epic.  It  will  be  safer  to  wait  for  further  proofs  that  it  was
known  to  the  Sutrakaras,  before  one  bases  far-going  specu-
lations on  this  hitherto  solitary  quotation.

The  arguments  which  maybe  brought  forward  to  show  that
Baudhayana's  home  lay  in  Southern  India  are  not  as  strong
as  those  which  permit  us  to  determine  the  native  country
of  Apastamba.  The  portions  of  the  Sutras,  known  to  me,
contain  no  direct  mention  of  the  south  except  in  the  de^a-
nir/zaya  or  disquisition  on  the  countries,  Dharma-sutra  I,  I,  a,
where  certain  peculiar  customs  of  the  southern  Brahmans
are  enumerated,  and  some  districts  of  Southern  India,  e.g.
Kalihga,  are  referred  to  as  barbarous  countries  which  must
not  be  visited  by  Aryans.  These  utterances  show  an
acquaintance  with  the  south,  but  by  no  means  prove  that
Baudhayana  lived  there.  A  more  significant  fact  is  that
Baudhayana  declares,  I,  1,  2,  4,  'going  to  sea'  to  be  a
custom  prevailing  among  the  northern  Brahmans,  and  after-
wards, II,  i,  22,  places  that  act  at  the  head  of  the  Pata-


See  also  West  and  Buhler,  Digest  of  Hindu  Law  Cases,  p.  xxvii,  2nd  ed.


xlii  BAUDHAYANA.


niyas,  the  more  serious  offences  causing  loss  of  caste.  It  is
probable  that  by  the  latter  rule  he  wished  to  show  his  stand-
point as  a  southerner.  But  the  most  conclusive  argument
in  favour  of  the  southern  origin  of  the  Baudhayaniyas  is
that  they,  like  the  Apastambiyas  and  all  other  adherents
of  the  Taittiriya  schools,  are  entirely  confined  to  the  Dekhan,
and  are  not  found  among  the  indigenous  subdivisions  of  the
Brahmans  in  Central  and  Northern  India.  This  fact  is,  if  not
explicitly  stated,  at  least  implied  by  the  passage  of  the
Mahar/zava  quoted  in  the  Introduction  to  Apastamba1.  It
is  proved  by  the  present  state  of  things,  and  by  the  evidence
of  the  land  grants  of  the  southern  dynasties,  several  of  which
have  been  made  in  favour  of  Baudhayaniyas.  Thus  we  find
a  grant  of  Bukkaraya,  the  well-known  ruler  of  Vi£*ayana-
gara2,  dated  Sakasa^vat  1276  or  1354-5  A.D.,  in  which  a
Brahma^a,  studying  the  Baudhayaniya-sutra,  is  mentioned
as  the  donee  of  a  village  in  Maisur.  Again,  in  an  inscrip-
tion of  Nandivarman  Pallavamalla,  which  its  editor,  the
Rev.  Mr.  Foulkes,  places  in  the  ninth  century  A.D.3,  a  con-
siderable number  of  Brahma^as  of  the  Prava^ana-sutra
are  named  as  recipients  of  the  royal  bounty,  together  with
some  followers  of  the  Apastambha4  school.  As  we  have
seen  that  Baudhayana  is  called  in  the  Grzhya-sutra  the
Prava&makara,  it  is  not  doubtful  that  the  Prava/£ana-
sutra  of  this  inscription  is  the  Sutra  of  his  school.  The
villages  which  the  grantees  received  from  Nandivarman
were  situated  on  the  Palar  river  in  the  ^Tittur  districts
of  the  Madras  Presidency.  Besides,  the  interesting  tradi-
tion which  asserts  that  Madhava-Saya/za,  the  great  com-
mentator of  the  Vedas,  was  a  Baudhayaniya5  is  another
point  which  may  be  brought  forward  as  evidence  for
the  location   of  the  school   in  Southern  India.     Further,


1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxx;  see  also  L.  von  Schroder,  Maitra-
yaatya  Samhita,  p.  xxvii.

2  Journal  of  the  Bombay  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  XII,  349-351.

3  Indian  Antiquary,  VIII,  273-284.

*  As  all  the  older  inscriptions  hitherto  published  give  Apastambha  instead  of
Apastamba,  I  am  now  inclined  to  consider  the  former  as  the  original  form
of  the  name.

3  Buraell,  Tanjore  Catalogue,  p.  20  b,  remarks  on  no.  CCXXVI.


INTRODUCTION.  xliil


it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  most  and  the  best  MSS.  of
Baudhayana's  Sutras  are  found  in  Southern  India.  There
are  also  some  faint  indications  that  the  Andhra  country  is
the  particular  district  to  which  Baudhayana  belonged.  For
his  repeated  references  to  voyages  by  sea  and  his  rule
regarding  the  duty  payable  on  goods  imported  by  sea
show  that  he  must  have  lived  in  a  coast  district  where
sea-borne  trade  flourished,  and  the  fact  that  he  uses  the
Andhra  recension  of  the  Taittiriya  Ara^yaka  makes  it
probable  that  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  the  eastern  coast.

My  estimate  of  the  distance  between  Baudhayana  and
Apastamba  and  of  that  between  the  latter  and  the  historical
period  of  India  has  been  given  in  the  Introduction  to  Apa-
stamba, pp.  xxii  and  xliii,  and  I  have  nothing  further  to
add  on  that  subject.  The  oldest  witness  for  the  existence
of  the  wSrauta-sutra  of  Baudhayana  is  its  commentator  Bha-
vasvamin,  whom  Dr.  Burnell  places  in  the  eighth  century
A.  D.  The  Dharma-sutra  is  first  quoted  by  Vi^ane^vara,
circiter  1080 -1100  A.D.  Several  of  the  passages  adduced
by  him  are,  however,  not  traceable  in  the  MSS.

As  regards  the  materials  on  which  the  translation  is  based,
I  had  at  my  disposal  six  MSS.  of  the  text  and  two  copies
of  Govindasvamin's  commentary,  the  Bodhayaniya-dhar-
mavivara/za1,  one  of  which  (C.  I.)  gives  the  text  also.  These
MSS.  belong  to  two  chief  groups,  a  northern  and  a  southern
one.  The  northern  group  contains  two  subdivisions.  The
first  comprises  (1)  D.,  a  MS.  bought  by  me  for  the  Govern-
ment of  Bombay  at  Ahmadabad  (no.  6  of  the  Dekhan  Col-
lege collection  of  1868-69),  and  about  one  hundred  or  one
hundred  and  fifty  years  old ;  (2)  P.,  an  old  MS.  of  my  own
collection,  bought  in  1865  at  Pu//a;  (3,  4)  B.  and  Bh.,  two
modern  transcripts,  made  for  me  in  Baroda  and  Bombay.
Among  these,  D.  alone  is  of  real  value,  as  P.,  B.,  and  Bh.
faithfully  reproduce  all  its  clerical  errors  and  add  a  good
many  new  ones.  The  second  subdivision  of  the  northern
group  is  represented  by  K.,  a  modern  transcript,  made  for

1  It  ought  to  be  noted  that  in  the  south  of  India  the  forms  Bodhayana  and
Bodhayaniya  are*  invariably  used  for  Baudhayana  and  Baudhayaniya.  But  it
seems  to  me  that  the  southerners  are  in  error,  as  the  affix  ayana  requires
vn'ddhi  in  the  first  syllable.


xliv  BAUDHAYANA.


the  Government  of  Bombay  at  Kolhapur  in  the  southern
Mara/^a  country  (Elphinstone  College  collection  of  1 867-
68,  Class  VI,  no.  2).  The  MSS.  of  the  northern  group,  which
give  the  vulgata  current  since  the  times  ofNilaka/z///a  (1650
A.D.)  and  Mitramura  (circiter  1700  A.D.)  in  Western  and
Central  India,  can  be  easily  recognised  by  the  omission  of
the  third  Adhyaya  of  Pra^na  IV,  and  by  their  placing  IV,
5,  1  b-25  after  IV,  7,  7.  One  of  the  chief  differences  between
K.  and  the  other  MSS.  of  the  northern  group  is  the  omis-
sion of  II,  5,  8,  4-II,  6,  11,  15  in  the  latter.  The  southern
group  of  MSS.  is  formed  by  M.,  a  slovenly  Devanagari  tran-
script of  a  Grantha  MS.,  no.  xWV  °f tne  Madras  Government
collection1,  and  by  the  text  of  C.  I.,  a  Devanagari  copy  of
the  MS.  of  Govindasvamin's  commentary,  presented  by
Dr.  Burnell  to  the  India  Office  library2.  The  second  copy  of
the  commentary,  C.  T.,  a  Telugu  paper  MS.  from  Tanjore,
I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Burnell.

As  might  be  expected,  on  account  of  the  southern  origin
of  the  Baudhayaniya  school,  M.  gives  on  the  whole  the  best
form  of  the  text.  It  also  carefully  marks  the  Ka;^ikas3  in
the  first  two  Pra^nas,  ignoring  the  Adhyayas  altogether,  and
contains  at  the  end  of  each  Pra^na  the  first  words  of  each
Ka/z^ika,  beginning  with  the  last  and  ending  with  the  first,
after  the  fashion  which  prevails  in  the  MSS.  of  the  Taittiriya
Sawhita,  Brahma7^a,  and  Ara^yaka.  Very  close  to  M.  comes
Govinda's  copy,  where,  however,  as  in  most  northern  MSS.,
the  Adhyayas  alone  are  marked.  It  is,  however,  perfectly  cer-
tain that  in  some  very  difficult  passages,  which  are  disfigured
by  ancient  corruptions,  he  corrected  the  text  conjecturally4.
In  a  certain  number  of  cases  the  northern  MSS.  present
better  and  older  readings  than  M.  and  C.  I.5     Under  these


1  Taylor,  Catalogue  Raisonnee  (!),  I,  p.  190.  The  clerical  errors  in  my  tran-
script are  exceedingly  numerous,  and  mostly  owing  to  the  faulty  rendering  of
the  value  of  the  Grantha  characters,  which  seem  not  to  have  been  familiar  to
the  copyist.   There  are  also  some  small  lacunae,  and  the  last  leaf  has  been  lost.

2  See  Burnell,  Catalogue  of  a  Collection  of  MSS.,  p.  35,  no.  CXVII.

3  I  alone  am  responsible  for  the  title  Ka/zJika,  given  to  the  small  sections.
M.  marks  only  the  figures.  D.  and  the  better  northern  MSS.  show  only  breaks
at  the  end  of  the  Karcrfikas  and  their  first  words  at  the  end  of  the  Prasnas.

*  See  e.g.  Dharma-sutra  I,  2,  3,  35,  note.

5  See  e.g.  Dharma-sutra  I,  5, 11,  35  ;  II,  1,  2,  36;  II,  2,  3,  3  ;  II,  2,  4, 10;
II,  3,  6;  3;  11,7,12,5;  111,9,2.


INTRODUCTION.  xlv


circumstances  it  has  not  been  possible  to  follow  the  commen-
tary or  M.  throughout.  Though  they  had  to  be  made  the
basis,  they  had  in  many  passages  to  be  set  aside  in  favour  of
readings  of  the  northern  group.  In  some  cases  I  have  also
been  obliged  to  make  conjectural  emendations,  which  have
all  been  mentioned  in  the  notes.  Three  Sutras,  I,  8,  16,
13-15,  have  been  left  untranslated,  because  the  MSS.  offer  no
safe  basis  for  a  conjectural  restoration,  and  the  commentary
is  defective.

Govinda,  who,  as  Dr.  Burnell  informs  me,  is  said  to  be  a
modern  writer,  seems  to  have  composed  his  vivara/za  with-
out the  aid  of  older  vrzttis.  Though  he  apparently  was
well  acquainted  with  the  writings  belonging  to  the  Taitti-
riya-veda,  with  the  ritual  and  with  the  common  law-books,
he  has  not  succeeded  in  explaining  all  the  really  difficult  pas-
sages. Sometimes  he  is  clearly  mistaken,  and  frequently
he  passes  by  in  silence  words  or  whole  Sutras,  the  sense  or
the  general  bearing  of  which  is  by  no  means  certain.  Though
it  would  be  ungrateful  on  my  part  to  underrate  the  import-
ance of  his  work  for  my  translation,  I  cannot  place  him  in
the  same  rank  with  Haradatta,  the  commentator  of  Apa-
stamba  and  Gautama,  and  can  only  regret  that  no  older
commentary  based  on  the  living  tradition  of  the  Baudha-
yaniyas  has  been  available.  If  such  a  work  were  found,
better  readings  and  better  explanations  of  many  difficult
passages  would  probably  come  to  light.  With  the  materials
at  my  disposal  the  translation  has  been  a  work  of  some
difficulty,  and  in  trying  to  settle  the  text  I  have  often  expe-
rienced the  feeling  of  insecurity  which  comes  over  the
decipherer  of  a  difficult  inscription  when  the  facsimiles  are
bad.  The  short  Adhyaya  on  adoption,  given  in  the  appendix
to  the  Dharma-sutra,  has  been  taken  from  the  Smarta  or
Gnhya-sutra.  It  does  not  belong  to  Baudhayana,  but  is
frequently  quoted  by  the  writers  on  civil  law,  who  wrote  in
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  of  our  era*


V  A  S  I  S  H  THK.


VAS I S  H  TH K


Chapter  I.

i.    Now,  therefore,  the  desire  to  know  the  sacred
law  for  their  welfare  (should  arise)  in  (initiated)  men.

2.  He  who  knows  and  follows  the  (sacred  law  is
called)  a  righteous  man.

3.  He   becomes   most  worthy  of  praise    in  this
world  and  after  death  gains  heaven.

4.  The  sacred  law  has  been  settled  by  the  re-
vealed texts  and  by  the  tradition  (of  the  sages).

5.  On    failure    of    (rules    given    in)    these    (two
sources)  the  practice  of  the  ^ish/as  (has)  authority.

6.  But  he  whose  heart   is  free  from  desire  (is
called)  a  .5ish/a.

7.  (Acts  sanctioned  by)  the  sacred  law  (are  those)
for  which  no  (worldly)  cause  is  perceptible.

I.  1.  The  word  'now'  serves,  in  this  as  in  analogous  cases,
various  purposes.  It  marks  the  beginning  of  the  book,  serves  as
an  auspicious  invocation  (mahgala),  and  indicates  that  something
else,  the  initiation,  must  precede  the  study  of  the  sacred  law.
'  Therefore '  means  '  because,  after  initiation,  the  neophyte  is  to  be
taught  the  prescribed  rules  regarding  personal  purification.' —
KWsh»apa«dlta.  For  the  wording  of  the  Sutra  compare  the  be-
ginning of  Gaimini's  Mima^zsa-sutras.

3-6.    Gautama  I,  1-4 ;  XXVIII,  48.

7.  The  Sutra  contains  a  limitation  of  Sutra  5.  It  indicates  that
the  customs  of  the  -Slsh/as,  for  which  worldly  motives  are  per-
ceptible, have  no  authority,  and  are  not  to  be  followed.  The
principle  enunciated  is  one  inculcated  by  the  Mimawsakas  (P.  M.  S.
[14]  B


VASISHTHA.  I,  8.


8.  The  country  of  the  Aryas  (Aryavarta)  lies  to
the  east  of  the  region  where  (the  river  Sarasvati)
disappears,  to  the  west  of  the  Black-forest,  to  the
north  of  the  Paripatra  (mountains),  to  the  south  of
the  Himalaya.

9.  (According  to  others  it  lies  to  the  south  of  the
Himalaya)  and  to  the  north  of  the  Vindhya  range
(being  limited  east  and  west  by  the  two  oceans).

10.  Acts  productive  of  spiritual  merit,  and  customs
which  (are  approved  of)  in  that  country,  must  be
everywhere  acknowledged  (as  authoritative) ;

t  1 .  But  not  different  ones,  (i.e.  those)  of  (countries
where)  laws  opposed  (to  those  of  Aryavarta  prevail).

Ij  3>  3-4)-  See  also  Apastamba  I,  1,  4,  5-10;  I,  4,  12,  8;  and
Introduction,  p.  xxvii.  Krzshrcapa^ita  has  misunderstood  the
Sutra.  He  reads,  against  the  MSS.,  agr/hyamawakarawo  'dharma^,
« unlawful  acts  are  those  for  which  no  motive,  i.e.  no  sacred  source
such  as  the  Vedas,  is  perceptible/

8.  The  region  where  the  river  Sarasvati  disappears  is  the  Pat-
tiala  district  in  the  Pawg-ab.  The  Paripatra  mountains  belong  to
the  great  Vindhya  range,  and  are  probably  the  hills  in  Malva.  The
position  of  the  Kalakavana  or  Black-forest  is  not  accurately  known.
But  it  must  probably  be  sought  in  Bihar.  All  the  MSS.  as  well  as
Knsh#apa«tfTita  read  in  this  Sutra  pragadar^anat  instead  of  pra-
gadarjanat,  'to  the  east  of  the  region  where  the  river  Sarasvati
disappears.'  This  circumstance  gains  some  importance  by  the  fact
that  the  Mahabhashya  on  Pamni  II,  4,  10,  quotes  the  same  defini-
tion of  the  Aryavarta,  giving,  however,  instead  of  adan-anat  pra-
gadar^at,  'to  the  east  of  Adan-a,  i.e.  the  Adarca  mountains.'  It  seems
to  me  not  improbable  that  our  Sutra,  too,  had  originally  pragadarrat,
and  that  some  Pandit  who  knew  nothing  about  the  Adarsa  hills,
but  remembered  Manu  II,  21,  and  Baudhayana  I,  1,  25,  where  the
word  vinajanat,  '  the  disappearance  of  the  Sarasvati,'  undoubtedly
occurs,  added  the  syllable  na  and  forgot  to  correct  the  &,  after
prag.

9.  The  translation  follows  Krzshwapa«^ita's  commentary,  which
recommends  itself  on  account  of  the  analogous  definition  of  Arya-
varta given  by  Manu  II,  22.

11.  My  translation  follows  the  text  given  by  Knshwapawdlta  and


I,  15.  GENERAL  RULES.


12.  Some  (declare  the  country  of  the  Aryas  to  be
situated)  between  the  (rivers)  Ganga  and  Yamuna.

13.  Others  (state  as)  an  alternative,  that  spiritual
pre-eminence  (is  found)  as  far  as  the  black  antelope
grazes.

14.  Now  the  Bhallavins  quote  also  (the  following)
verse  in  the  Nidana :

15.  'In  the  west  the  boundary-river,  in  the  east

B.,  and  the  explanation  of  the  former,  because  it  seems  to  me
that  the  general  sense  which  they  give,  is  the  correct  one.  I  feel,
however,  not  certain  that  the  word  pratilomakadharmawam,  '  of
those  countries  where  opposite  laws  prevail,'  is  more  than  a  care-
less correction.  The  majority  of  the  MSS.  read  pratilomakaksha-
dharmawa^  (kalpadharma^a^),  which  by  itself  is  difficult  of  expla-
nation. But,  as  the  text  of  the  next  Sutra  contains  an  apparently
superfluous  phrase,  I  fear,  we  shall  have  to  admit  that  the  text  is
here  disfigured  by  corruptions,  which  with  our  present  MSS.  it
is  impossible  to  remove  with  certainty.

12.  K/7sh»apa«^ita  reads  this  Sutra  '  etad  aryavartam  itya-^a-
kshate  garigayamunayor  antaretyeke/  and  takes  it  as  one  sentence,
the  subject  of  which  is  { eke.'  I  feel  no  doubt  that  this  explanation
is  utterly  untenable,  and  that  the  first  four  words  have  nothing  to  do
with  this  Sutra,  the  second  part  of  which  occurs  also  in  the  Bau-
dhayana  Dharma-sutra  I,  1,  27.  My  opinion  is  that  they  originally
belonged  to  Sutra  11,  though  the  state  of  the  MSS.  at  my  disposal
does  not  allow  me  to  say  how  Sutra  1 1  has  to  be  corrected.  The
general  sense  of  Sutra  1 2  is,  however,  perfectly  certain.

13.  Manu  II,  23;  Yagwavalkya  I,  2.  It  deserves  to  be  noted
that  the  black  antelope  (black-buck),  Oryx  cervicapra,  selects  for
its  home  the  well-cultivated,  rich  plains  of  India  only,  and  is  entirely
wanting  in  the  sandy,  mountainous  or  forest  districts,  which  are  now,
just  as  in  ancient  times,  the  portion  of  the  aboriginal  tribes.

14.  Regarding  the  Bhallavins,  see  Max  Miiller,  History  of
Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  pp.  193,  364.  Krzshwapaw/ita  thinks
that  Nidana  means  de^anirwaya, '  the  disquisition  on  the  countries,'
which  is  the  title  of  a  section  which  occurs  in  most  modern  com-
pilations on  law.  But  it  will  be  safer  to  take  it  as  the  name  of  a
Vedic  work,  identical  with  or  similar  to  that  quoted  in  -Saunaka's
Brz"haddevata,  Weber,  Hist.  Ind.  Lit.,  p.  81.

15.  Sindhur   vidhara«i   or   vidharam,  as  B.  reads,  cannot  be

B    2


VASISH7V7A.  I,  16.


the  region  where  the  sun  rises, — as  far  as  the  black
antelope  wanders  (between  these  two  limits),  so  far
spiritual  pre-eminence  (is  found).'

1 6.  '  Those  religious  acts  which  men,  deeply
versed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  three  Vedas  and
acquainted  with  the  sacred  law,  declare  to  be  lawful,
(are  efficient)  for  purifying  oneself  and  others.'

1 7.  Manu  has  declared  that  the  (peculiar)  laws  of
countries,  castes,  and  families  (may  be  followed)  in
the  absence  of  (rules  of)  the  revealed  texts.

18.  Sinful  men  are,  he  who  sleeps  at  sunrise  or
at  sunset,  he  who  has  deformed  nails  or  black  teeth,
he  whose  younger  brother  was  married  first,  he  who
married  before  his  elder  brother,  the  husband  of  a
younger  sister  married  before  the  elder,  the  husband
of  an  elder  sister  whose  younger  sister  was  married
first,  he  who  extinguishes  the  sacred  fires,  (and)  he
who  forgets  the  Veda  through  neglect  of  the  daily
recitation.


taken  with  Krzshwapa^ita,  as  'the  ocean,'  because  in  the  latter
sense  sindhu  is  a  masculine.  It  must  be  a  boundary-river,  pro-
bably the  Sarasvati.  By  suryasyodana,  'the  region  where  the
sun  rises,'  the  udayagiri  or  'mountain  of  the  east'  may  possibly
be  meant.

1 6.  This  verse,  too,  is  marked  as  a  quotation  by  the  concluding
word  iti,  though  it  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  be  taken  as  a
quotation  from  the  Nidana.  Here,  and  in  the  sequel  verses  ending
in  iti  are  marked  as  quotations  by  hyphens.

17.  Manu  VII,  203  ;  VIII,  41 ;  Gautama  XI,  20.  £ati, '  castes,'
which  sometimes,  and  perhaps  as  appropriately,  has  been  translated
by  '  tribes,'  denotes  in  my  opinion  those  numerous  subdivisions  of
the  four  great  vanzas,  which  we  now  find  all  over  India,  and  which
can  be  shown  to  have  existed  for  a  very  long  time.  Usually  the
word  '  caste '  is  also  applied  to  them.

18.  Kn'shwapa^ita  explains  viraha,  'he  who  extinguishes  the
sacred  fires,'  by  '  the  destroyer  of  his  sons  or  of  his  spiritual  clients '


1,  24.  GENERAL    RULES.  5

19.  They  state  that  there  are  five  mortal  sins
(mahapataka),

20.  (Viz.  violating)  a  Guru's  bed,  drinking  (the
spirituous  liquor  called)  sura,  slaying  a  learned
Brahma/za,  stealing  the  gold  of  a  Brahma^a,  and
associating  with  outcasts,

21.  Either  by  (entering  into)  spiritual  or  matri-
monial (connexion  with  them).

2  2.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) : '  He
who  during  a  year  associates  with  an  outcast  becomes
(likewise)  an  outcast ;  not  by  sacrificing  for  him,  by
teaching  him  or  by  (forming)  a  matrimonial  (alliance
with  him),  but  by  using  the  same  carriage  or  seat.'

23.  A  minor  offence  causing  loss  of  caste  (upa-
pataka,  is  committed  by  him)  who  (after  beginning
an  Agnihotra  sacrifice)  forsakes  the  sacred  fires,  and
by  him  who  offends  a  Guru,  by  an  atheist,  by  him
who  takes  his  livelihood  from  atheists,  and  by  him
who  sells  the  Soma  (plant).

24.  Three  wives  (are  permitted)  to  a  Brahma^a
according  to  the  order  of  the  castes,  two  to  a
Kshatriya,  one  to  a  VaLsya  and  to  a  6udra.

(ya^amana) ;  but  the  rules  given  below,  XX,  1 1,  and  XXI,  27,  in  the
section  on  penances,  confirm  the  explanation  given  above.

20.  Vishmi  XXXV,  1-2.  Guru  means  here  the  father,  see
below,  XX,  15.

21.  Vishmi  XXXV,  3-5.  Spiritual  connexion,  i.e.  becoming
the  teacher  or  priest  of  an  outcast,  or  his  pupil  or  spiritual  client
(ya^amana).

22.  Identical  with  Manu  XI,  181.  It  must  be  understood  that
spiritual  or  matrimonial  connexion  with  an  outcast  causes  immediate
degradation,  as  Vishmi  states  expressly.

23.  Vishmi  XXXVII,  6,  31 ;  Gautama  XXI,  n.  Regarding  the
precise  meaning  of  prati^ahnuyat,  'offends,'  see  below,  XXI,  27.

24-25.  Manu  111,13;  Ya^navalkya  I,  57;  Paraskara  Gn'hya-
sutra  I,  4,  8-1 1.


VASISH777A.  I,  25.


25.  Some  declare  (that  twice-born  men  may
marry)  even  a  female  of  the  6udra  caste,  like
those  (other  wives),  without  (the  recitation  of)
Vedic  texts.

26.  Let  him  not  act  thus.

2  7.  For  in  consequence  of  such  (a  marriage)  the
degradation  of  the  family  certainly  ensues,  and  after
death  the  loss  of  heaven.

28.  There  are  six  marriage-rites,

29.  (Viz.)  that  of  Brahman  (brahma),  that  of  the
gods  (daiva),  that  of  the  iv'z'shis  (arsha),  that  of  the
Gandharvas  (gandharva),  that  of  the  Kshatriyas
(kshatra),  and  that  of  men  (manusha).

30.  If  the  father,  pouring  out  a  libation  of  water,
gives  his  (daughter)  to  a  suitor,  that  (is  called)  the
Brahma-rite.

31.  If  (the  father)  gives  his  daughter,  decking  her
with  ornaments,  to  an  officiating  priest,  whilst  a  sacri-
fice is  being  performed,  that  is  called  the  Daiva-rite.

32.  And  (if  the  father  gives  his  daughter)  for  a
cow  and  a  bull,  (that  is  called)  the  Arsha-rite.

^^.  If  a  lover  takes  a  loving  female  of  equal
caste,  that  (is  called)  the  Gandharva-rite.

34.  If  they  forcibly  abduct  (a  damsel),  destroying
(her  relatives)  by  strength  (of  arms),  that  (is  called)
the  Kshatra-rite.

35.  If,  after  making  a  bargain  (with  the  father,  a


26-27.  ManuIII,  14-19.         28.  Apastamba  11,5,  11,  17-20.

30.  Vishmi  XXIV,  19;  Awalayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  6,  1.

31.  Vishmi  XXIV,  20;  A^valayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  6,  2.

32.  Vishmi  XXIV,  21;  A?valayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  6,  3.

33.  Vishmi  XXIV,  23 ;  Awalayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  6,  5.

34.  Vishmi  XXIV,  25  ;  Arvalayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  6,  8.

35.  Vishmi  XXIV,  24 ;  Arvalayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  6,  6.


I,  39.  GENERAL    RULES.


suitor)  marries  (a  damsel)  purchased  for  money,  that
(is  called)  the  Manusha-rite.

36.  The  purchase  (of  a  wife)  is  mentioned  in  the
following  passage  of  the  Veda,  '  Therefore  one
hundred  (cows)  besides  a  chariot  should  be  given
to  the  father  of  the  bride.'

37 '.  (It  is  stated)  in  (the  following  passage  of)  the
A'aturmasyas,  'She  (forsooth)  who  has  been  bought
by  her  husband  (commits  sin,  as)  afterwards  she
unites  herself  with  strangers.'

38.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  Lost  learning  comes  back  ;  when  the  family  is  lost
all  is  lost.  Even  a  horse  becomes  estimable  on
account  of  its  pedigree ;  therefore  men  marry  wives
descended  from  an  (unblemished)  family.

39.  The  three  (lower)  castes  shall  live  according
to  the  teaching  of  the  Brahma/za.

36.  -Sahkhayana  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  14;  Paraskara  Grz'hya-sutra
I,  8,  18  *  Apastamba  II,  6,  13,  12.  Though  Vasish/^a's  quotation  is
less  complete  than  Apastamba's,  still  the  following  Sutras  show
that  he  knew  the  conclusion  of  the  passage,  and  does  not  take  it  as
an  authority  for  the  sale  of  a  daughter.

37.  KrVsh»apa#</ita  makes  a  mistake  by  connecting  the  word
'  /fcaturmasyeshu '  with  the  next  Sutra.  He  is  right  in  saying  that
1  the  A^aturmasyas '  is  the  name  of  a  book.  It  is,  however,  not  a
separate  work,  but  the  kam/a  or  section  of  a  Vedic  work  treating
of  the  A^aturmasya  sacrifices  (see  Max  Miiller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.
Lit.,  p.  355).  The  particular  work  from  which  our  quotation  has
been  taken,  is  either  the  Maitrayamya  Sa/zzhita,  or  the  Kanaka.
For,  as  Dr.  von  Schroeder  informs  me,  Maitrayamya  Sa#zhita  I,
10,  11  reads  'anrz'taw  va  esha  karoti  ya  patyu^z  krita  satyathanyau
£arati,'  and  the  title  of  the  kanda.  is  ATaturmasyani.  Professor
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  V,  407,  has  found  the  same  words  in  the  A'atur-
masya  section  of  the  Ka//zaka  XXXVI,  5.  In  the  translation  I  have
added  the  beginning  of  the  passage  which  Vasish/^a  omits,  accord-
ing to  the  Maitrayamya  Sa#zhita\

39-41.   Gautama  XI,  25-27.


8  VASISHTtfA.  I,  40.

40.  The  Brahma^a  shall  declare  their  duties,

41.  And  the  king  shall  govern  them  accordingly.

42.  But  a  king  who  rules  in  accordance  with  the
sacred  law,  may  take  the  sixth  part  of  the  wealth  (of
his  subjects),

43.  Except  from  Brahma/zas.

44.  It  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  But  he
obtains  the  sixth  part  of  (the  merit  which  Brahma/zas
gain  by)  sacrifices  and  charitable  works.'

45.  (It  is  further  stated  in  the  Veda),  *  The  Brah-
ma^a  makes  the  Veda  rich ;  the  Brahma^a  saves
from  misfortune ;  therefore  the  Brahma^a  shall  not
be  made  a  source  of  subsistence.  Soma  is  his  king.'

46.  Further  (another  passage  says),  'After  death
bliss  (awaits  the  king  who  does  not  oppress  Brah-
ma/zas).'


42.  Vishmi  III,  22-25.  Though  the  ambiguous  word  dhana,
'  wealth/  is  used  in  the  text,  it  seems  not  doubtful  that  VasishMa
alludes  to  the  land-tax,  which  generally  consists  of  one  sixth  of  the
produce.

43.  Vishmi  III,  26.

44.  Vishmi  III,  27-28.  Piirta, 'the  merit  gained  by  charitable
works,'  i.  e.  by  planting  trees,  digging  wells,  and  so  forth.  The
words  '  iti  ha,'  placed  at  the  end  of  the  Sutra,  indicate  that  it  is  a
quotation,  and  that  vi^ayate,  '  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,'  has  to
be  understood  from  Sutra  46.  Gautama  XI,  11,  too,  alleges  that
the  rule  is  based  on  a  Vedic  passage.

45.  -Satapatha-brahmawa  V,  4,  2,  3.  K/Yshwaparc^ita's  division
of  the  quotation  into  several  Sutras  is  unnecessary.  His  explana-
tion of  an&dya,  which  he  takes  to  mean  '  the  first  of  all,'  is  wrong.
He  asserts  that  the  Brahmawa  is  said  'to  make  the  Veda  rich/
because  by  sacrificing  and  so  forth  he  fulfils  its  object  and  protects
it.  But  the  phrase  is  probably  corrupt.  If  it  is  said  that  Soma  is
the  king  of  the  Brahmawas,  the  object  is  to  indicate  that  an  earthly
king  is  not  their  master,  see  Gautama  XI,  1.


II,  f.  THE    FOUR    CASTES.


Chapter  II.

i.  There  are  four  castes  (vama),  Brahma/zas,
Kshatriyas,  Vaisyas,  and  6udras.

2.  Three  castes,  Brahma^as,  Kshatriyas,  and
Vaisyas,  (are  called)  twice-born.

3.  Their  first  birth  is  from  their  mother ;  the
second  from  the  investiture  with  the  sacred  girdle.
In  that  (second  birth)  the  Savitrl  is  the  mother,  but
the  teacher  is  said  to  be  the  father.

4.  They  call  the  teacher  father,  because  he  gives
instruction  in  the  Veda.

5.  They  quote  also  (the  following  passage  from
the  Veda)  to  the  same  (effect) :  '  Of  two  kinds,
forsooth,  is  the  virile  energy  of  a  man  learned  in
the  Vedas,  that  which  (resides)  above  the  navel  and
the  other  which  below  (the  navel)  descends  down-
wards. Through  that  which  (resides)  above  the
navel,  his  offspring  is  produced,  when  he  initiates
Brahma/zas,  when  he  teaches  them,  when  he  causes
them  to  offer  oblations,  when  he  makes  them  holy.
By  that  which  resides  below  the  navel  the  children
of  his  body  are  produced.  Therefore  they  never
say  to  a  6rotriya,  who  teaches  the  Veda,  "Thou  art
destitute  of  offspring." '

II.   1-2.    Vishrcu  II,  1-2 ;  Maim  X,  4.

3.  Identical  with  Manu  II,  169a,  170*,  and  Vishmi  XXVIII,  37-
38.  The  Savitri  or  the  verse  addressed  to  Savitrz'  is  found  Rig-veda
III,  62,  10.

4.  Gautama  1, 10;  Manu  II,  171.

5.  The  reading  tathapyudaharanti,  which  several  of  my  MSS.
give,  seems  to  me  preferable  to  Krzsh/zapaTz^ita's  udaharati.
Krzsrmapa«iita  explains  sadhu  karoti,  'makes  them  holy/  by
adhyatmam  upadbati,  'teaches  them  transcendental  knowledge.'


IO  VASISUTHA.  II,  6.

6.  Harita  also  quotes  (the  following  verse):  '  No
religious  rite  can  be  performed  by  a  (child)  before
he  has  been  girt  with  the  sacred  girdle,  since  he  is
on  a  level  with  a  6"udra  before  his  (new)  birth  from
the  Veda/

7.  (The  above  prohibition  refers  to  all  rites)  except
those  connected  with  libations  of  water,  (the  excla-
mation) Svadha,  and  the  manes.

8.  Sacred  learning  approached  a  Brahma^a  (and
said  to  him), '  Preserve  me,  I  am  thy  treasure,  reveal
me  not  to  a  scorner,  nor  to  a  wicked  man,  nor  to  one
of  uncontrolled  passions  :  so  (preserved)  I  shall  be-
come strong.'

9.  ■  Reveal  me,  O  Brahma^a,  as  to  the  keeper  of
thy  treasure,  to  him  whom  thou  shalt  know  to  be
pure,  attentive,  intelligent,  and  chaste,  who  will  not
offend  thee  nor  revile  thee.'

10.  '(That  man)  who  fills  his  ears  with  truth,  who
frees  him  from  pain  and  confers  immortality  upon
him, (the  pupil) shall  consider  as  his  father  and  mother;
him  he  must  never  grieve  nor  revile/

11.  '  As  those  Brahma^as  who,  after  receiving  in-
struction, do  not  honour  their  teacher  by  their  speech,
in  their  hearts  or  by  their  acts,  will  not  be  profitable
to  their  teacher,  even  so  that  sacred  learning  (which
they  acquired)  will  not  profit  them/


6.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  40.  Instead  of  Krzshmtpam/itaVyavadvedo
na  ^ayate/  'yavadvede  na  ^-ayate,'  which  occurs  in  several
MSS.  and  in  the  parallel  passages  of  Manu  II,  172  and  other
Smrz'tis,  must  be  read.

7.  Gautama  II,  5.     The  rites  referred  to  are  the  funeral  rites.
8-9.   Vishmi  XXIX,  9-10,  and  introduction,  p.  xxiii  j  Nirukta

11,4-

10.   Vishmi  XXX,  47.


II,  21.      THE    FOUR    CASTES  ;    LAWFUL    OCCUPATIONS.       I  I

12.  'As  fire  consumes  dry  grass,  even  so  the
Veda,  asked  for,  (but)  not  honoured,  (destroys  the  en-
quirer). Let  him  not  proclaim  the  Veda  to  that  man,
who  does  not  show  him  honour  according  to  his
ability/

1 3.  The  (lawful)  occupations  of  a  Brahma^a  are  six,

14.  Studying  the  Veda,  teaching,  sacrificing  for
himself,  sacrificing  for  others,  giving  alms,  and  ac-
cepting gifts.

15.  (The  lawful  occupations)  of  a  Kshatriya  are
three,

16.  Studying,  sacrificing  for  himself,  and  bestow-
ing gifts ;

1 7.  And  his  peculiar  duty  is  to  protect  the  people
with  his  weapons  ;  let  him  gain  his  livelihood  thereby.

18.  (The  lawful  occupations)  of  a  Vaiiya  are  the
same  (as  those  mentioned  above,  Sutra  16),

1 9.  Besides,  agriculture,  trading,  tending  cattle,  and
lending  money  at  interest,

20.  To  serve  those  (superior  castes)  has  been  fixed
as  the  means  of  livelihood  for  a  .5udra.

21.  (Men  of)  all  (castes)  may  wear  their  hair
arranged  according  to  the  customs  fixed  (for  their
family),  or  allow  it  to  hang  down  excepting  the  lock
on  the  crown  of  the  head.

13.  Krzsh«apa«</ita  wrongly  connects  the  word  brahmawasya
with  the  next  Sutra.  For  this  and  the  next  seven  Sutras,  compare
Vishmi  II,  4-14.

14.  Kr/sh#apa«dita  by  mistake  leaves  out  the  word  'danam.'

20.  I  read  'tesham  pari/£arya/  with  the  majority  of  the  MSS.,
instead  of  Knshwapa/^ita's  '  teshaw  £a  pari/foryaV

21.  In  illustration  of  this  Sutra  Krzshraap audita  quotes  a  verse
of  Laugakshi,  which  states  that  Brahmawas  belonging  to  the
Vasish//£a  family  wore  the  top-lock  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,
and  the  members  of  the  Atri  family  allowed  it  to  hang  down  on


12  VASISUTHA.  11,22.

22.  Those  who  are  unable  to  live  by  their  own
lawful  occupation  may  adopt  (that  of)  the  next  in-
ferior (caste),

23.  But  never  (that  of  a)  higher  (caste).

24.  (A  Brahma^a  and  a  Kshatriya)  who  have  re-
sorted to  a  Valrya's  mode  of  living  and  maintain
themselves  by  trade  (shall  not  sell)  stones,  salt,
hempen  (cloth),  silk,  linen  (cloth),  and  skins,

25.  Nor  any  kind  of  dyed  cloth,

26.  Nor  prepared  food,  flowers,  fruit,  roots,  per-
fumes, substances  (used  for)  flavouring  (food) ;  nor
water,  the  juice  extracted  from  plants ;  nor  Soma,
weapons,  poison;  nor  flesh,  nor  milk,  nor  prepara-
tions from  it,  iron,  tin,  lac,  and  lead,

27.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  By  (selling)  flesh,  lac,  and  salt  a  Brahma^a  at  once
becomes  an  outcast;  by  selling  milk  he  becomes
(equal  to)  a  6udra  after  three  days.'

28.  Among  tame  animals  those  with  uncloven
hoofs,  and  those  that  have  an  abundance  of  hair,
(must  not  be  sold),  nor  any  wild  animals,  (nor)  birds,
nor  beasts  that  have  tusks  (or  fangs).

29.  Among  the  various  kinds  of  grain  they  men-
tion sesamum  (as  forbidden).

both  sides,  while  the  Bhrzgus  shaved  their  heads,  and  the  Ahgi-
rasas  wore  five  locks  (kuda)  on  the  crown  of  the  head.  Cf.  Max
Muller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  53.

22.  Vishmi  II,  15.

24.  For  this  and  the  following  four  Sutras,  see  Gautama  VII,  8-2 1 .

26.  Rasa^,  'substances  used  for  flavouring/  i.e.  'molasses,
sugar-cane,  sugar,  and  the  like/ — Krzshraapa#</ita.  See  also  note
on  Gautama  VII,  9.

27.  Identical  with  Manu  X,  92.

29.  Vishmi  LIV,  18;  Apastamba  I,  7,  20,  13.  Kn'sh«apa«/ita
wrongly  connects  this  Sutra  wiih  the  preceding  one.


II,  36.      THE    FOUR    CASTES;     LAWFUL    OCCUPATIONS.      1 3

30.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  If  he  applies  sesamum  to  any  other  purpose,  but
food,  anointing,  and  charitable  gifts,  he  will  be  born
again  as  a  worm  and,  together  with  his  ancestors,
be  plunged  into  his  own  ordure.'

31.  Or,  at  pleasure,  they  may  sell  (sesamum),  if
they  themselves  have  produced  it  by  tillage.

32.  For  that  purpose  he  shall  plough  before
breakfast  with  two  bulls  whose  noses  have  not
been  pierced.

33.  (If  he  ploughs)  in  the  hot  season,  he  shall
water  (his  beasts  even  in  the  morning).

34.  The  plough  is  attended  by  strong  males,  pro-
vided with  a  useful  share  and  with  a  handle  (to  be
held)  by  the  drinker  of  Soma ;  that  raises  (for  him)
a  cow,  a  sheep,  a  stout  damsel,  and  a  swift  horse  for
the  chariot.

35.  The  plough  is  attended  by  strong  males,  i.e.
is  attended  by  strong  men  and  bullocks,  provided
with  a  useful  share — for  its  share  is  useful  (because)
with  the  share  it  raises,  i.  e.  pierces  deep — and  pro-
vided with  a  handle  for  the  drinker  of  Soma, — for
Soma  reaches  him, — possessing  a  handle  for  him.
That  raises  a  cow,  a  sheep,  goats,  horses,  mules,
donkeys  and  camels,  and  a  stout  damsel,  i.  e.  a  beau-
tiful, useful  maiden  in  the  flower  of  her  youth.

36.  For  how  could  the  plough  raise  (anything  for
him)  if  he  did  not  sell  grain  ?


30.    Manu  X,  91.  31.    Manu  X,  90.

34.  Vag-asaneyi-sawzhita  XII,  71.  The  translation  follows  the
explanation  given  in  the  next  Sutra  as  closely  as  possible,  though
the  latter  is  without  doubt  erroneous.  The  purpose  for  which
Vasish/^a  introduces  it,  is  to  show  that  a  Vedic  text  permits  agri-
culture to  a  Brahma^a  who  offers  Soma-sacrifices.


14  VASISHTHA.  11,37.

37.  Substances  used  for  flavouring  may  be  bar-
tered for  (other)  substances  of  the  same  kind,  be  it
for  one  more  valuable  or  for  one  worth  less.

38.  But  salt  must  never  (be  exchanged)  for  (other)
substances  used  for  flavouring  (food).

39.  It  is  permitted  to  barter  sesamum,  rice,  cooked
food,  learning,  and  slaves  (each  for  its  own  kind  and
the  one  for  the  other).

40.  A  Brahma^a  and  a  Kshatriya  shall  not  lend
(anything  at  interest  acting  like)  usurers.

41.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
'  He  who  acquiring  property  cheap,  gives  it  for  a
high  price,  is  called  a  usurer  and  blamed  among
those  who  recite  the  Veda.'

42.  '  (Brahman)  weighed  in  the  scales  the  crime
of  killing  a  learned  Brahma;za  against  (the  crime  of)
usury ;  the  slayer  of  the  Brahmam  remained  at  the
top,  the  usurer  sank  downwards/

43.  Or,  at  pleasure,  they  may  lend  to  a  person
who  entirely  neglects  his  sacred  duties,  and  is  ex-
ceedingly wicked,

44.  Gold  (taking)  double  (its  value  on  repayment,
and)  grain  trebling  (the  original  price).

37""39*   Gautama  VII,  16-21.

40.  Maim  X,  117.  Kr/sh«apa«fiTita  reads  with  MS.  B.,  vardhu-
shim  na  dadyatam,  and  explains  it  by  vriddhim  naiva  prayqgu-
yetam,  '  they  shall  not  take  interest/  I  read  with  the  other  MSS.
vardhushi,  and  translate  that  term  by  'usurers/  Below,  Sutra 42,
vardhushi  is  used  likewise  in  this  its  usual  sense.

43.    Manu  X,  117.

44-47.  Vishmi  VI,  11-17;  Colebrooke  I,  Dig.  LXVI,  where
'  silver  and  gems '  have  been  added  after  gold,  and  rasa^,  'flavour-
ing substances/  been  translated  by  '  fluids/  The  translation  differs
also  in  other  respects,  because  there  the  Sutras  stand  by  them-
selves, while  here  the  nouns  in  Sutras  44  and  47  are  governed  by
the  preceding  dadyatam,  '  they  may  lend.'    They,  i.  e.  a  Brahma/;a


11,50.      THE    FOUR    CASTES;     LAWFUL    OCCUPATIONS.      1 5


45.  (The  case  of)  flavouring  substances  has  been
explained  by  (the  rule  regarding)  grain,

46.  As  well  as  (the  case  of)  flowers,  roots,  and  fruit.

47.  (They  may  lend)  what  is  sold  by  weight,  (taking)
eight  times  (the  original  value  on  repayment).

48.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
*  Two  in  the  hundred,  three  and  four  and  five,  as  has
been  declared  in  the  Smrzti,  he  may  take  as  interest
by  the  month  according  to  the  order  of  the  castes.'

49.  '  But  the  king's  death  shall  stop  the  interest
on  money  (lent) ; '

50.  '  And  after  the  coronation  of  (a  new)  king  the
capital  grows  again.'

and  a  Kshatriya.  The  rule,  of  course,  refers  to  other  castes  also,
and  to  those  cases  where  no  periodical  interest  is  taken,  but  the
loan  returned  in  kind.

47.  The  Ratnakara  quoted  by  Colebrooke  loc.  cit.  takes  'what
is  sold  by  weight '  to  be  '  camphor  and  the  like.'  Knshwapaw^ita
thinks  that  '  clarified  butter,  honey,  spirituous  liquor,  oil,  molasses,
and  salt'  are  meant.  But  most  of  these  substances  fall  under  the
term  rasa/$,  'flavouring  substances.'  The  proper  explanation  of
the  words  seems  to  be,  '  any  other  substance  not  included  among
those  mentioned  previously,  which  is  sold  by  weight.'

48.  Vishmi  VI,  2,  and  especially  ManuVIII,  142.  The  lowest
rate  of  interest  is  to  be  taken  from  the  highest  caste,  and  it  becomes
greater  with  decreasing  respectability.  According  to  Krz'srma-
pawdita  and  the  commentators  on  the  parallel  passage  of  Vishmi,
Manu,  and  other  Smrztis,  this  rule  applies  only  to  loans  for  which
no  security  is  given — a  statement  which  is  doubtlessly  correct.

49-50.  Both  the  reading  and  the  sense  of  this  verse,  which  in
some  MSS.  is  wanting,  are  somewhat  doubtful.  I  read  with  my
best  MSS.,

ra^a  tu  mntabhavena  dravyavrz'ddhiffz  vina^ayet  1
puna  ra^abhishekerca  dravyamulaw  ka,  vardhate  it
and  consider  that  it  gives  a  rule,  ordering  all  money  transactions
to  be  stopped  during  the  period  which  intervenes  between  the
death  of  a  king  and  the  coronation  of  his  successor.     I  am,  how-
ever, unable  to  point  out  any  parallel  passages  confirming  this


1 6  VASISHFtfA.  H,5i.

51.  '  Hear  the  interest  for  a  money-lender  declared
by  the  words  of  Vasish/^a,  five  mashas  for  twenty
(karshapa^as  may  be  taken  every  month) ;  thus  the
law  is  not  violated.'

Chapter  III.

1.  (Brahma^as)  who  neither  study  nor  teach  the
Veda  nor  keep  sacred  fires  become  equal  to  .Sudras ;

2.  And  they  quote  a  verse  of  Manu  on  this  (sub-
ject), 'A  twice-born  man,  who  not  having  studied  the
Veda  applies  himself  to  other  (and  worldly  study),
soon  falls,  even  while  living,  to  the  condition  of  a
^Vudra,  and  his  descendants  after  him.'

3.  '  (A  twice-born  man)  who  does  not  know  the

view.  KrzshwapaTwfita's  text  shows  two  important  various  readings,
'  bhrz'tibhavena '  and  "  ra^abhishikena/  which  I  think  are  merely
conjectures,  unsupported  by  the  authority  of  MSS.  He  explains
the  verse  as  follows  :  '  The  king  shall  destroy,  i.e.  himself  not  take,
the  interest  on  money  by  giving  [it  away]  as  a  salary.  But,  after
thus  giving  away  interest  received,  he  may  increase  his  capital  by
[an  extra  tax  imposed  on]  the  cultivators,  i.  e.  take  from  them  the
highest  rate,  consisting  of  one-fourth  of  the  produce/

51.  Gautama  XII,  29;  Colebrooke  I,  Dig.  XXIV.  The  rule
given  in  this  Sutra  refers,  as  Krz'srmapa^ita  correctly  states,  to
loans,  for  which  security  is  given.  The  rate  is  1^  per  cent  for  the
month,  or  15  per  annum ;  see  the  note  to  Gautama  loc.  cit.  Manu,
VIII,  140,  especially  mentions  that  this  rate  is  prescribed  by
Vasish/^a.

III.  1.  I  read  <Sudrasadharma#a^,  'equal  to  -Sudras/  instead
of  judrakarma^a^,  which  occurs  in  MS.  B.  only.  Krzsh«apa«(fita
explains  the  latter  reading  by  judravatkarma  yeshu  te  judravatte-
shva£ara«iyamityartha/$,  '  shall  be  treated  like  -Sudras/  But  the
verses  quoted  in  the  following  Sutras  show  that  the  former  reading
is  the  better  one.

2.  Identical  with  Manu  II,  168.

3.  This  and  the  following  nine  verses  are,  as  the  word  'iti/
which  the   best  MSS.  give  at  the  end  of  Sutra  12,  quotations.


IH,  8.    THE  DUTY  OF  STUDYING  THE  VEDA.       1 7

Veda  (can)not  be  (called)  a  Brahma^a,  nor  he  who
lives  by  trade,  nor  he  who  (lives  as)  an  actor,  nor  he
who  obeys  a  6udra's  commands,  nor  (he  who  like)  a
thief  (takes  the  property  of  others),  nor  he  who  makes
his  living  by  the  practice  of  medicine.'

4.  '  The  king  shall  punish  that  village  where
Brahma^as,  unobservant  of  their  sacred  duties  and
ignorant  of  the  Veda,  subsist  by  begging ;  for  it
feeds  robbers.'

5.  '  Many  thousands  (of  Brahma^as)  cannot  form
a  (legal)  assembly  (for  declaring  the  sacred  law),  if
they  have  not  fulfilled  their  sacred  duties,  are  unac-
quainted with  the  Veda,  and  subsist  only  by  the  name
of  their  caste.'

6.  '  That  sin  which  dunces,  perplexed  by  ignorance
and  unacquainted  with  the  sacred  law,  declare  (to  be
duty)  shall  fall,  increased  a  hundredfold,  on  those
who  propound  it/

7.  '  What  four  or  (even)  three  (Brahma^as)  who
have  completely  studied  the  Vedas  proclaim,  that
must  be  distinctly  recognised  as  the  sacred  law,  not
(the  decision)  of  a  thousand  fools.'

8.  '  Offerings  to  the  gods  and  to  the  manes  must
always  be  given    to  a   6rotriya  alone.     For   gifts

Anr/k,  « who  does  not  know  the  Veda,'  means,  literally,  '  unac-
quainted with  the  7?zg-veda.'

5.  This  verse,  which  is  identical  with  Manu  XII,  114,  and
the  next  two  are  intended  to  show  that  a  Brahmawa  who  neglects
the  study  of  the  Veda,  is  unfit  to  decide  points  of  the  sacred  law,
which  are  not  settled  either  by  the  Smrzti  or  the  6"ruti,  and  become
a  member  of  a  parishad  or '  Pani.'

6.  The  verse  contains  a  better  version  of  Manu  XII,  115.

7.  Regarding  the  term  Vedaparaga,  see  Gautama  V,  20,  note.
Itaresham,  'fools/  means  literally,  'different  from  (those  who
have  mastered  the  Vedas).'

[14]  C


l8  VASISH77JA.  111,9.

bestowed   on  a    man   unacquainted  with  the  Veda,
reach  neither  the  ancestors  nor  the  gods/

9.  '  If  a  fool  lives  even  in  one's  house  and  a  (Brah-
mawa)  deeply  learned  in  the  Veda  lives  at  a  great
distance,  the  learned  man  shall  receive  the  gift.  The
sin  of  neglecting  (a  Brahma^a  is  not  incurred)  in  (the
case  of)  a  fool.'

10.  '  The  offence  of  neglecting  a  Brahma^a  cannot
be  committed  against  a  twice-born  man  who  is  igno-
rant of  the  Veda.  For  (in  offering  sacrifices)  one
does  not  pass  by  a  brilliant  fire  and  throw  the  obla-
tions into  ashes/

1 1.  '  An  elephant  made  of  wood,  an  antelope  made
of  leather,  and  a  Brahma^a  ignorant  of  the  Veda,  those
three  have  nothing  but  the  name  (of  their  kind)/

12.  'Those  kingdoms,  where  ignorant  men  eat
the  food  of  the  learned,  will  be  visited  by  drought ;
or  (some  other)  great  evil  will  befall  (them)/

13.  If  anybody  finds  treasure  (the  owner  of)  which
is  not  known,  the  king  shall  take  it,  giving  one  sixth
to  the  finder.

14.  If  a  Brahma^a  who  follows  the  six  (lawful)
occupations,  finds  it,  the  king  shall  not  take  it.

9-10.  Regarding  the  crime  of  'neglecting  a  Brahmawa/  see
Manu  VIII,  39,2-393,  where  fines  are  prescribed  for  neglecting
to  invite  to  dinner  worthy  neighbours  and  «S*rotriyas.

10.  A  learned  Brahmawa  resembles  a  sacrificial  fire,  see  e.g.
below,  XXX,  2-3;  Apastamba  I,  1,  3,  44.

n.  Manu  II,  157.  Krz'sh«apa«^ita  and  MS.  B.  give  the  un-
grammatical  construction  which  occurs  in  Manu  and  other  Dhar-
nmastras,  while  the  other  MSS.  read  more  correctly,  'yaska.
kash/^amayo  h.  yasfa  £armamayo  m.'  &c.

13-14.  This  rule  agrees  exactly  with  Gautama  X,  45;  see  also
Vishmi  III,  56-61.  The  matter  is  introduced  here  in  order  to  show
the  prerogative  of  a  learned  Brahma^a.  Regarding  the  six  lawful
occupations,  see  above,  II,  13-14.


Ill,  19.  DEFINITIONS.  1 9

15.  They  declare  that  the  slayer  commits  no
crime  by  killing  an  assassin.

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
1  An  incendiary,  likewise  a  poisoner,  one  who  holds  a
weapon  in  his  hand  (ready  to  kill),  a  robber,  he  who
takes  away  land,  and  he  who  abducts  (another  man's)
wife,  these  six  are  called  assassins  (atatayin).'

17.  'He  may  slay  an  assassin  who  comes  with  the
intention  of  slaying,  even  though  he  knows  the  whole
Veda  together  with  the  Upanishads ;  by  that  (act)
he  (does)  not  (incur  the  guilt  of)  the  slayer  of  a
Brahma^a.'

1 8.  '  He  who  slays  an  assassin  learned  in  the  Veda
and  belonging  to  a  noble  family,  does  not  incur  by
that  act  the  guilt  of  the  murderer  of  a  learned  Brah-
ma/za;  (in)  that  (case)  fury  recoils  upon  fury.'

19.  Persons  who  sanctify  the  company  are,  a  Tri-
/za/£iketa,  one  who  keeps  five  fires,  a  Trisupama,  one
who  (knows  the  texts  required  for)  the  four  sacrifices
(called  Arvamedha,  Purushamedha,  Sarvamedha,  and
Pitrzmedha),  one  who  knows  the  Va^asaneyi-sakha
of  the  White  Ya^ur-veda,  one  who  knows  the  six
Angas,  the  son  of  a  female  married  according  to  the
Brahma-rite,  one  who  knows  the  first  part  of  the
Sama-veda  Sawhita,  one  who  sings  the  (^yeshzvza-
saman,  one  who  knows  the  Sawhita  and  the  Brah-
ma/za,  one  who  studies  (the  treatises  on)  the  sacred
law,  one  whose  ancestors  to  the  ninth  degree,  both

15.  Vishnu  V,  189-192.  The  connexion  of  this  subject  with
the  main  topic  consists  therein  that  it  furnishes  an  instance  where
learning  does  not  protect  a  Brahmawa.

17.  I  read  with  the  majority  of  the  MSS., '  api  vedantaparagam,'
instead  of '  vedantagaw  ra«e/  as  Krzsh#apa;z</ita  has.

19.   For  the  explanations  of  the  terms  left  untranslated,  see  the

C    2


20  VASISHTV/A.  Ill,  20.

on  the  mother's  and  on  the  father's  side,  are  dis-
tinctly known  to  have  been  6rotriyas,  and  learned
men  and  Snatakas.

20.  (Four  students  of)  the  four  Vedas,  one  who
knows  the  Mimawsa,  one  who  knows  the  Angas,
a  teacher  of  the  sacred  law,  and  three  eminent  men
who  are  in  three  (different)  orders,  (compose)  a  (legal)
assembly  consisting  at  least  of  ten  (members).

21.  He  who  initiates  (a  pupil)  and  teaches  him
the  whole  Veda  is  called  the  teacher  (a/£arya).

22.  But  he  who  (teaches)  a  portion  (of  the  Veda
only  is  called)  the  sub-teacher  (upadhy&ya) ;

23.  So  is  he  who  (teaches)  the  Angas  of  the  Veda.

24.  A  Brahma/za  and  a  Vai^ya  may  take  up  arms
in  self-defence,  and  in  (order  to  prevent)  a  confusion
of  the  castes.

25.  But  that  (trade  of  arms)  is  the  constant  (duty)
of  a  Kshatriya,  because  he  is  appointed  to  protect
(the  people).

26.  Having  washed  his  feet  and  his  hands  up  to

note  on  Apastamba  II,  8, 17,  22  ;  Gautama  XV,  28;  and  the  notes
on  Vishmi  LXXXIII,  2-21.  Regarding  the  meaning  of  .Oandoga,
'  one  who  knows  the  first  part  of  the  Sama-veda  Sa^hita/  see
Weber,  Hist.  Ind.  Lit.,  p.  63,  note  59.  *  One  who  knows  the
Saffzhita  and  the  Brahmawa,  i.  e.  of  the  Rig-veda.' — Krzsh;zapam/ita.
Regarding  the  various  classes  of  Snatakas,  see  Apastamba  I,  1 1,

3°,  i-3-

20.  Manu  XII,  in.  Krzsh/zapa#flTita  reads  Mturvidyas
trikalpi/^a,  'one  who  knows  the  four  Vedas  and  one  who  knows
three  different  Kalpa-sutras/  My  translation  follows  the  reading
of  the  MSS.,  Mturvidyaw  vikalpi  £a,  which  is  corroborated
by  the  parallel  passage  of  Baudhayana  I,  1,  8,  '  Mturvaidyaw
vikalpi  £a/  The  explanation  of  the  latter  word  is  derived  from
Govindasvamin.  '  Men  who  are  in  three  orders,  i.  e.  a  student,
a  householder,  and  ascetic/  see  Gautama  XXVIII,  49.

21-23.  Vishmi  XXIX,  1-2.  24.    Gautama  VII,  25.

25.  Vishmi  II,  6.  26-34.  Vishmi  LXII,  1-9.


111,36.  PURIFICATION.  2  1

the  wrist,  and  sitting  with  his  face  turned  towards
the  east  or  towards  the  north,  he  shall  thrice  sip
water  out  of  the  Tirtha  sacred  to  Brahman,  (i.e.)
the  part  of  the  hand  above  the  root  of  the  thumb,
without  uttering  any  sound ;

27.  He  shall  twice  wipe  (his  mouth  with  the  root
of  the  thumb);

28.  He  shall  touch  the  cavities  (of  the  head)
with  water ;

29.  He  shall  pour  water  on  his  head  and  on  the
left  hand ;

30.  He  shall  not  sip  water  while  walking,  standing,
lying  down  or  bending  forward.

31.  A  Brahma/za  (becomes  pure)  by  (sipping)  water,
free  from  bubbles  and  foam,  that  reaches  his  heart,

32.  ButaKshatriyaby  (sipping  water)  that  reaches
his  throat,

33.  A  Vaisya  by  (sipping  water)  that  wets  his
palate,

34.  A  woman  and  a  6udra  by  merely  touching
water  (with  the  lips).

35.  Water  (for  sipping  may)  even  (be  taken)  out
of  a  hole  in  the  ground,  if  it  is  fit  to  slake  the  thirst
of  cows.

36.  (He  shall  not  purify  himself  with  water)  which
has  been  defiled  with  colours,  perfumes,  or  flavouring
substances,  nor  with  such  as  is  collected  in  unclean
places.

30.  Krzshwapa^ita  is  probably  right  in  thinking  that  the  word
va,  'or,'  inserted  before  'bending  forward/  is  intended  to  forbid
other  improper  acts,  gestures  or  postures,  which  are  reprehended  in
other  Smrztis.

35.  Vistom  XXIII,  43;  Manu  V,  128.

36.  'Collected  in  unclean  places,  e.g.  in  a  burial-ground.' —
Kr/sh«apa«^ita.


2  2  VASISHFtfA.  Ill,  37.

37.  Drops  (of  saliva)  falling  from  the  mouth,  which
do  not  touch  a  limb  of  the  body,  do  not  make  (a  man)
impure.

38.  If,  after  having  sipped  water,  he  sleeps,  eats,
sneezes,  drinks,  weeps  or  bathes,  or  puts  on  a  dress,
he  must  again  sip  water,

39.  Likewise,  if  he  touches  (that  part  of)  the  lips
on  which  no  hair  grows.

40.  No  defilement  is  caused  by  the  hair  of  the
moustache  (entering  the  mouth).

41.  If  (remnants  of  food)  adhere  to  the  teeth,  (they
are  pure)  like  the  teeth,  and  he  is  purified  by
swallowing  those  which  (become  detached)  in  the
mouth.

42.  He  is  not  defiled  by  the  drops  which  fall  on
his  feet,  while  somebody  gives  to  others  water  for
sipping;  they  are  stated  to  be  equally  (clean)  as
the  ground.

43.  If,  while  occupied  with  eatables,  he  touches
any  impure  substance,  then  he  shall  place  that  thing
(which  he  holds  in  his  hand)  on  the  ground,  sip
water  and  afterwards  again  use  it.

44.  Let  him  sprinkle  with  water  all  objects  (the
purity  of)  which  may  be  doubtful.

45.  '  Both  wild  animals  killed  by  dogs,  and  fruit
thrown  by  birds  (from  the  tree),  what  has  been  spoilt
by  children,  and  what  has  been  handled  by  women,'

37.   Gautama  I,  41.  38.   Gautama  I,  37.

39.   Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  10.  40.   Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  n.

41.    Gautama  I,  38-40.  42.    Manu  V,  142.

43.  Vishnu  XXIII,  55.  <  Occupied  with  eatables/  i.  e. '  eating.' —
Kr/sh«apa;ftfita.

45.  Vishmi  XXIII,  50.  This  and  the  following  two  Sutras  are
a  quotation,  as  appears  from  the  use  of  the  particle  iti  at  the  end
of  Sutra  47.


111,55-  PURIFICATION.  23

46.  '  A  vendible  commodity  tendered  for  sale
and  what  is  not  ^dirtied  by  gnats  and  flies  that  have
settled  on  it/

47.  '  Likewise  water  collected  on  the  ground  that
quenches  the  thirst  of  cows, — enumerating  all  these
things,  the  Lord  of  created  beings  has  declared  them
to  be  pure.'

48.  Anything  defiled  by  unclean  (substances)  be-
comes pure  when  the  stains  and  the  smell  have
been  removed  by  water  and  earth.

49.  (Objects)  made  of  metal  must  be  scoured
with  ashes,  those  made  of  clay  should  be  thoroughly
heated  by  fire,  those  made  of  wood  should  be  planed,
and  (cloth)  made  of  thread  should  be  washed.

50.  Stones  and  gems  (should  be  treated)  like  ob-
jects made  of  metal,

5:1.    Conch-shells  and  pearl-shells  like  gems,

52.  (Objects  made  of)  bone  like  wood,

53.  Ropes,  chips  (of  bamboo),  and  leather  be-
come pure  (if  treated)  like  clothes,

54.  (Objects)  made  of  fruits,  (if  rubbed)  with  (a
brush  of)  cow-hair,

55.  Linen  cloth,  (if  smeared)  with  a  paste  of  yellow
mustard  (and  washed  afterwards  with  water).


46.  TManuV,  129.  47.   Vishmi  "XXIII,  43.

48.  Gautama  I,  42.  For  the  explanation  of  the  term  amedhya,
'unclean  substances/  see  Manu  V,  135,  and  the  passage  from
Devala  translated  in  Professor  Jolly's  note  on  "Vishmi  XXIII,  38.

49..  Gautama  I,  29;  Vishmi  XXIII,  26,  33,  27,  18.

50-51.    Gautama  I,  30.

52.  Gautama  I,  31  and  note;  Vishmi  XXIII,  4.

53.  Gautama  I,  33.

54.  Vishmi  XXIII,  28.  Cups  and  bottles  made  of  the  shell  of  the
cocoa-nut  or  of  the  Bilva  (Bel)  fruit  and  of  bottle-gourds  are  meant,

55.  Vishmi  XXIII,  22.


24  VASISHTHA.  Ill,  56.

56.  But  land  becomes  pure,  according  to  the  de-
gree of  defilement,  by  sweeping  (the  defiled  spot),  by
smearing  it  with  cowdung,  by  scraping  it,  by  sprink-
ling (water)  or  by  heaping  (pure  earth)  on  (it).

57.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :

■  Land  is  purified  by  these  four  methods,  by  digging,
burning,  scraping,  being  trodden  on  by  cows,  and
fifthly  by  being  smeared  with  cowdung.'

58.  '  A  woman  is  purified  by  her  monthly  dis-
charge, a  river  by  its  current,  brass  by  (being
scoured  with)  ashes,  and  an  earthen  pot  by  another
burning.'

5.9.  '  But  an  earthen  vessel  which  has  been  de-
filed by  spirituous  liquor,  urine,  ordure,  phlegm,  pus,
tears,  or  blood  cannot  be  purified  even  by  another
burning.'

60.  '  The  body  is  purified  by  water,  the  internal
organ  by  truth,  the  soul  by  sacred  learning  and
austerities,  and  the  understanding  by  knowledge.'

61.  Gold  is  purified  by  water  alone,

62.  Likewise  silver,

56.  Vishnu  XXIII,  56-57.     KrzshwapaTZtffita  takes  upakarawa,

■  heaping  (pure  earth)  on  (the  defiled  spot),'  to  mean  '  lighting  a
fire  on  it '  or  '  digging  it  up/  The  translation  given  above  rests  on
the  parallel  passages  of  Gautama  I,  32,  and  of  Baudhayana  I,  5,  52,
bhumes  tu  sawmar^anaprokshawopalepanavastaraTzopalekhanair-
yarhasthanaffz  doshavijeshat  prayatyam,  'land  becomes  pure,  ac-
cording to  the  degree  of  the  defilement,  by  sweeping  the  (defiled)
spot,  by  sprinkling  it,  by  smearing  it  with  cowdung,  by  scattering
(pure  earth)  on  it,  or  by  scraping  it.'  Bhumi, '  land,'  includes  also
the  mud-floor  of  a  house  or  of  a  verandah,

57.  Some  MSS.  have  instead  of  gharshat, '  by  scraping/  varshat,
'by  rain;'  see  also  note  on  Gautama  I,  32.

58.  Vishmi  XXII,  91.  59.  Vishmi  XXIII,  5.
60.   Identical  with  Manu  VY109,  and  Vishmi  XXII,  92.
61-62.  Vishmi  XXIII,  7.     Knsh#apa.»dita.  points  out  that  these


IV,  3-  ORIGIN    OF    THE    CASTES.  25

63.  Copper  is  cleansed  by  acids.

64.  The  Tirtha  sacred  to  the  Gods  lies  at  the
root  of  the  little  finger,

65.  That  sacred  to  the  jRishis  in  the  middle  of
the  fingers,

66.  That  sacred  to  Men  at  the  tips  of  the  fingers,

67.  That  sacred  to  Agni  (fire)  in  the  middle  of
the  hand,

68.  That  sacred  to  the  Manes  between  the  fore-
finger and  the  thumb.

69.  He  shall  honour  (his  food  at)  the  evening
and  morning  meals  (saying),  c  It  pleases  me,'

70.  At  meals  in  honour  of  the  Manes  (saying),
'  I   have  dined  well,'

71.  At  (a  dinner  given  on  the  occasion  of)  rites
procuring  prosperity  (saying),  '  It  is  perfect/

Chapter  IV.

1.  The  four  castes  are  distinguished  by  their
origin  and  by  particular  sacraments.

2.  There  is  also  the  following  passage  of  the
Veda,  '  The  Brahrna^a  was  his  mouth,  the  Ksha-
triya  formed  his  arms,  the  Vai^ya  his  thighs ;  the
.Sudra  was  born  from  his  feet.'

3.  It  has  been  declared  in  (the  following  passage

two  rules  and  that  given  in  the  next  Sutra  refer  to  cases  in  which  gold,
silver,  and  copper  have  not  been  stained  by  impure  substances.

63.   Vishmi  XXIII,  25.

64-68.   Vishmi  LXII,  1-4;  Apastamba  II,  2,  3,  11.

69.  Vishmi  LXVIII,  42.  The  Sutra  is  also  intended  to  prescribe
that  the  number  of  the  daily  meals  is  two  only.

70.  Manu  III,  251.

71.  The  rites  referred  to  are,  according  to  K^sh«apa«</ita,
marriages,  feeding  Brahmawas,  Nandijraddhas,  and  the  like.

IV.  1.   Manu  I,  87.  2.   Rig-veda  X,  90,  12.


26  VASISRTHA.  IV,  4.

of)  the  Veda  that  (a  .Stidra)  shall  not  receive  the
sacraments,  '  He  created  the  Brahmawa  with  the
Gayatrt  (metre),  the  Kshatriya  with  the  Trish/ubh,
the  Vaisya  with  the  (^agati,  the  .Sudra  without  any
metre.'

4.  Truthfulness,  suppression  of  anger,  liberality,
abstention  from  injuring  living  beings,  and  the  pro-
creation of  offspring  (are  duties  common  to)  all
(castes).

5.  The  Manava  (Sutra  states),  *  Only  when  he
worships  the  manes  and  the  gods,  or  honours  guests,
he  may  certainly  do  injury  to  animals.'

6.  'On  offering  a  Madhuparka  (to  a  guest),  at  a
sacrifice,  and  at  the  rites  in  honour  of  the  manes,
but  on  these  occasions  only  may  an  animal  be  slain  ;
that  (rule)  Manu  proclaimed.'

4.  Vishmi  II,  17.

5.  Manavam,  '  the  Manava  (Sutra),'  means  literally  '  a  work  pro-
claimed by  Manu'  (mamma  proktam).  It  is  probable  that  the
work  referred  to  by  Vasish//$a  is  the  lost  Dharma-sutra  of  the
Manava  Sakha,  which  is  a  subdivision  of  the  Maitrayamyas,  and
on  which  the  famous  metrical  Manava  .Dharma^astra  is  based.
The  words  of  the  Sutra  may  either  be  a  direct  quotation  or
a  summary  of  the  opinion  given  in  the  Manava-sutra.  I  think
the  former  supposition  the  more  probable  one,  and  believe  that
not  only  Sutra  5,  but  also  Sutras  6-8  have  been  taken  bodily
from  the  ancient  Dharma-sutra.  For  Sutra  6  agrees  literally  with
a  verse  of  the  metrical  Manusmrz'ti,  and  at  the  end  of  Sutra  8
several  MSS.  have  the  word  iti,  the  characteristic  mark  that  a
quotation  is  finished,  while  the  language  of  Sutra  8  is  more  anti-
quated than  Vasish//&a's  usual  style.  If  my  view  is  correct,  it
follows  that  the  lost  Manava  Dharma-sutra  consisted,  like  nearly  all
the  known  works  of  this  class,  partly  of  prose  and  partly  of  verse.

6.  Identical  with  Manu  V,  41  ;  Vishmi  LI,  64;  and  -Sahkha-
yana  Gn'hya-sutra  II,  16,  1.  I  take  pitn'daivata,  against  Kul-
luka's  and  Krz'shwapaw^ita's  view,  as  a  bahuvrihi  compound,  and
dissolve  it  by  pitaro  daivataw  ya^mi^stat,  literally  '  such  (a  rite)
where  the  manes  are  the  deities.'    The  other  explanation,  '  (rites)


IV,  12.  IMPURITY.  27

7.  '  Meat  can  never  be  obtained  without  injuring
living  beings,  and  to  injure  living  beings  does  not
procure  heavenly  bliss ;  therefore  the  (sages  declare)
the  slaughter  (of  beasts)  at  a  sacrifice  not  to  be
slaughter  (in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word).'

8.  'Now  he  may  also  cook  a  full-grown  ox  or
a  full-grown  he-goat  for  a  Brahma^a  or  Kshatriya
guest ;  in  this  manner  they  offer  hospitality  to  such
(a  man)/

9.  Libations  of  water  (must  be  poured  out)  for
all  (deceased  relatives)  who  completed  the  second
year  and  (their  death  causes)  impurity.

10.  Some  declare  that  (this  rule  applies  also  to
children)  that  died  after  teething.

1 1.  After  having  burnt  the  body  (of  the  deceased,
the  relatives)  enter  the  water  without  looking  at  (the
place  of  cremation),

1 2.  Facing  the  south,  they  shall  pour  out  water
with  both  hands  on  (those  days  of  the  period  of
impurity)  which  are  marked  by  odd  numbers.

to  the  manes  or  to  the  gods,'  which  is  also  grammatically  correct,
recommends  itself  less,  because  the  rites  to  the  gods  are  already
included  by  the  word  yagne,  '  at  a  sacrifice/  As  to  the  Madhu-
parka,  see  Apastamba  II,  4,  8,  8-9,  and  below  XI,  1.

7.  Manu  V,  48,  and  Vishmi  LI,  71,  where,  however,  the  conclu-
sion of  the  verse  has  been  altered  to  suit  the  ahi#zsa-doctrines  of  the
compilers  of  the  metrical  Smrz'tis.  The  reason  why  slaughter  at  a
sacrifice  is  not  slaughter  in  the  ordinary  sense  may  be  gathered
from  Vishmi  LI,  61,  63.

8.  Satapatha-brahmaTza  III,  4,  1,  2  ;  Ya^avalkya  I,  109.
9-10.    Vishmi  XIX,  7;  Manu  V,  58.     Regarding  the  length  of

the  period  of  impurity,  see  below,  Sutras  16,  26-29.

11.  Vishmi  XIX,  6.

12.  Vishmi  XIX,  7;  Gautama  XIV,  40.  '  On  those  days  of  the
period  of  impurity  which  are  marked  by  odd  numbers,'  i.  e.  'on  the
first,  third,  fifth,  seventh,  and  ninth,  as  has  been  declared  by  Gau-
tama.'— KrzshTzapa^ta.


28  VASISHTtfA.  IV,  13.

13.  The  south,  forsooth,  is  the  region  sacred  to
the  manes.

14.  After  they  have  gone  home,  they  shall  sit
during  three  days  on  mats,  fasting.

15.  If  they  are  unable  (to  fast  so  long),  they  shall
subsist  on  food  bought  in  the  market  or  given
unasked.

16.  It  is  ordered  that  impurity  caused  by  a  death
shall  last  ten  days  in  the  case  of  Sapi#da  relations.

17.  It  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda  that  Sa-
pi/z</a  relationship  extends  to  the  seventh  person  (in
the  ascending  or  descending  line).

18.  It  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda  that  for
married  females  it  extends  to  the  third  person  (in
the  ascending  or  descending  line)..

19.  Others  (than  the  blood-relations)  shall  per-
form (the  obsequies)  of  married  females,

20.  (The  rule  regarding  impurity)  should  be
exactly  the  same  on  the  birth  of  a  child  for  those
men  who  desire  complete  purity,

21.  Or  for  the  mother  and  the  father  (of  the
child  alone) ;   some  (declare  that  it  applies)  to  the


14.  Vishwu  XIX,  16;  Gautama  XIV,  37.

15.  Vishmi  XIX,  14.  17.  Vishmi  XXII,  5.

19.  Gautama  XIV,  36;  Paraskara  Gn'hya-sutra  III,  10,42.
1  Others  than  the  blood-relations/  i.  e.  '  the  husband  and  his  rela-
tives.' The  MSS.  have  another  Sutra  following  this,  which  Kri'sh-
wapa/^/ita  leaves  out.  Ta^a  tesham,  'and  they  (the  married
females  shall  perform  the  obsequies)  of  those  (i.  e.  their  husbands
and  his  Sapiw^as).'  It  seems  to  me  very  probable  that  the  passage
is  genuine,  especially  as  Paraskara,  Gn'hya-sutra  III,  10,  43,  has  the
same  words.

20.  Vishmi  XXII,  i.

21.  Gautama  XIV,  15-16.  The  Sutra  ought  to  have  been
divided  into  two.


IV,  30.  IMPURITY.  29

mother  (only),  because  she  is  the  immediate  cause
of  that  (event).

22.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse)  :
*  On  the  birth  (of  a  child)  the  male  does  not  become
impure  if  he  does  not  touch  (the  female) ;  on  that
(occasion)  the  menstrual  excretion  must  be  known
to  be  impure,  and  that  is  not  found  in  males.'

23.  If  during  (a  period  of  impurity)  another
(death  or  birth)  happens,  (the  relatives)  shall  be
pure  after  (the  expiration  of)  the  remainder  of  that
(first  period) ;

24.  (But)  if  one  night  (and  day  only  of  the  first
period  of  impurity)  remain,  (they  shall  be  pure)  after
two  (days  and  nights) ;

25.  (If  the  second  death  or  birth  happens)  on  the
morning  (of  the  day  on  which  the  first  period  of
impurity  expires,  they  shall  be  purified)  after  three
(days  and  nights).

26.  A  Brahma/za  is  freed  from  impurity  (caused
by  a  death  or  a  birth)  after  ten  days,

27.  A  Kshatriya  after  fifteen  days,

28.  A  VaLsya  after  twenty  days,

29.  A  .Sudra  after  a  month.

30.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
'  But  (a  twice-born  man)  who  has  eaten  (the  food)
of  a  .Sudra  during  impurity  caused  by  a  death  or  a


23.  Vistoiu  XXII,  35.  24.  Vishmi  XXII,  36.

25.  Vishmi  XXII,  37.  Knsh«apa«^ita  explains  prabhate,  'on
the'  morning  (of  the  day  on  which  the  first  period  of  impurity
expires)/  in  accordance  with  Nandapaw^ita's  explanation  of  Vishmi' s
text  by  'during  the  last  watch  (of  the  last  night  of  the  period
of  impurity).'  See  also  the  slightly  different  explanation  of  the
identical  words  by  Haradatta,  Gautama  XIV,  8.

26.  Vishau  XXII,  1.  29.  Vishmi  XXII,  4.


30  VASISH77TA.  IV,  31.

birth,  will  suffer  dreadful  (punishment  in)  hell  and
be  born  again  in  the  womb  of  an  animal.'

31.  'A  twice-born  man  who  eats  by  appointment
in  the  house  of  a  stranger  whose  ten  days  of  impurity,
caused  by  a  death,  have  not  expired,  after  death  will
become  a  worm  and  feed  on  the  ordure  of  that  (man
who  fed  him).'

32.  It  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  (Such  a
sinner)  becomes  pure  by  reciting  the  Sa^hita.  of
the  Veda  for  twelve  months  or  for  twelve  half-
months  while  fasting.'

33.  On  the  death  of  a  child  of  less  than  two  years
or  on  a  miscarriage,  the  impurity  of  the  Sapi/zdas
lasts  three  (days  and)  nights.

34.  Gautama  (declares  that  on  the  former  occa-
sion they  become)  pure  at  once.

35.  If  (a  person)  dies  in  a  foreign  country  and  (his
Sapi#das)  hear  (of  his  death)  after  ten  days  (or  a  longer
period),  the  impurity  lasts  for  one  (day  and)  night.

36.  Gautama  (declares  that)  if  a  person  who  has
kindled  the  sacred  fire  dies  on  a  journey,  (his  Sa-
p'mdas  shall)  again  celebrate  his  obsequies,  (burning
a  dummy  made  of  leaves  or  straw),  and  remain  im-
pure (during  ten  days)  as  if  (they  had  actually  buried)
his  corpse.

37.  When  he  has  touched  a  sacrificial  post,  a  pyre,
a  burial-ground,  a  menstruating  or  a  lately  confined
woman,  impure  men  or  (A"a^alas  and  so  forth),  he
shall  bathe,  submerging  both  his  body  and  his  head.

32.  Regarding  the  penance  prescribed  here,  the  so-called  ana-
jnatparayawa,  see  below  XX,  46,  and  Baudhayana  III,  9.

33.  Vishmi  XXII,  27-30.

34.  Gautama  XIV,  44,  and  introduction  to  Gautama,  p.  liii.
36.   Introduction  to  Gautama,  pp.  liii  and  liv.

3J.  Vishmi  XXII,  69.    Kr?sh»apa«^ita  and  MS.  B.  read  puya,


V,  3-  WOMEN.  ^  I


Chapter  V.

i.  A  woman  is  not  independent,  the  males  are
her  masters.  It  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda,  c  A
female  who  neither  goes  naked  nor  is  temporarily
unclean  is  paradise.'

2.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse)  :
1  Their  fathers  protect  them  in  childhood,  their  hus-
bands protect  them  in  youth,  and  their  sons  protect
them  in  age  ;  a  woman  is  never  fit  for  independence.'

3.  The  penance  (to  be  performed)  by  a  (wife)  for
being  unfaithful  to  her  husband  has  been  declared  in
the  (section  on)  secret  penances.

'pus/  instead  of  yiipa,  'a  sacrificial  post.'  The  reading  is,  how-
ever, wrong,  because  the  parallel  passages  of  most  Smn'tis  enjoin
that  a  man  who  has  touched  a  sacrificial  post  shall  bathe.  The
cause  of  the  mistake  is  probably  a  mere  clerical  error.  The  MSS.
repeat  the  last  word  of  this  chapter,  apa  ityapa^.  The  reason
is  not,  as  Kn'shwapa^dTita  imagines,  that  the  author  wishes  to  indi-
cate the  necessity  of  bathing  when  one  touches  a  person  who  has
touched  some  impure  thing  or  person.  It  is  the  universal  practice
of  the  ancient  authors  to  repeat  the  last  word  of  a  chapter  in  order
to  mark  its  end,  see  e.g.  Gautama  note  on  I,  61.  If  it  is  neg-
lected in  the  earlier  chapters  of  the  VasishMa  Dharma-sutra,  the
badness  of  the  MSS.  is  the  cause.

V.  1.  Vishmi  XXV,  12.  The  second  clause  ought  to  have  been
given  as  a  separate  Sutra.  'A  female  who  no  longer  goes  naked/
i.  e.  one  who  has  reached  the  age  of  puberty.  Amrz'tam,  '  is  para-
dise/ i.  e.  procures  bliss  in  this  life  and  heaven  after  death  through
her  children.

2.  Vishmi  XXV,  13.    Identical  with  Manu  IX,  3.

3.  'The  penance  which  has  been  ordained  in  case  a  wife  is
unfaithful  to  her  husband,  i.  e.  goes  to  a  lover  and  so  forth,  must  be
performed  in  secret,  i.  e.  in  solitary  places.' — Krzsrmapa/z^ita.  The
explanation  is  clearly  erroneous.  Rahasyeshu  cannot  mean  'in
secret '  or  'in  secret  places.'  It  might  refer  either  to  a  work
or  works  called  Rahasyani  or  to  the  rahasyani  praya^ittani.     As


32  VASISHTOA.  V,  4.

4.  For  month  by  month  the  menstrual  excretion
takes  away  her  sins.

5.  A  woman  in  her  courses  is  impure  during  three
(days  and)  nights.

6.  (During  that  period)  she  shall  not  apply  colly-
rium  to  her  eyes,  nor  anoint  (her  body),  nor  bathe  in
water ;  she  shall  sleep  on  the  ground ;  she  shall  not
sleep  in  the  day-time,  nor  touch  the  fire,  nor  make  a
rope,  nor  clean  her  teeth,  nor  eat  meat,  nor  look  at
the  planets,  nor  smile,  nor  busy  herself  with  (house-
hold affairs),  nor  run ;  she  shall  drink  out  of  a  large
vessel,  or  out  of  her  joined  hands,  or  out  of  a  copper
vessel.

7.  For  it  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda,  *  When
Indra  had  slain  (Wz'tra)  the  three-headed  son  of
Tvash/rz,  he  was  seized  by  Sin,  and  he  considered
himself  to  be  tainted  with  exceedingly  great  guilt.
All   beings  cried  out  against  him  (saying  to  him),

the  next  Sutra  contains  a  half-verse  taken  from  the  section  on  secret
penances,  XXVIII,  4,  it  is  evident  that  Vasish//$a  here  makes  a
cross-reference.     Similar  cross-references  occur  further  on.

4.  Yag-fiavalkya  I,  72,  and  below,  XXVIII,  4.

5.  Vishmi  XXII,  72.

6.  Taitt.  Sa#m.  II,  5,  1,  6-7.  I  read  with  the  majority  of  the
MSS.,  grahanna  niriksheta  instead  of  grz'han  na  niriksheta,
which  latter  phrase  KrzshwapaT^Tita  renders  by  '  she  shall  not  look
out  of  the  house/  My  reading  is  confirmed  by  his  quotation  from
the  Smrz'tima?!g-ari,  where  grahawaw  nirikshawam,  '  looking  at  the
planets,  i.  e.  the  sun,  moon,'  &c,  is  forbidden.  'A  large  vessel/  i.  e.
an  earthen  jar. — Krzsrmapa?z^ita.

7.  Taitt.  Sawh.  II,  5,  1,  2-5.  The  name  'slayer  of  a  learned
Brahmawa '  is  applied  to  Indra,  because  Vntra  is  said  to  have  been
deeply  versed  in  the  Vedas.  Regarding  the  'proper  season  of
women,'  see  Manu  III,  46-48.  In  the  clause  '  That  guilt  of
Brahmawa-murder  appears,'  &c,  I  read  avir  bhavati  with  the
majority  of  the  MSS.  For  the  prohibition  to  accept  food  from
a  ra^asvala,  see  Vish;m  LI,  16-17.


V,  9-  WOMEN.  33

1 0  thou  slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma/za !  O  thou
slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma^aF  He  ran  to  the  wo-
men for  protection  (and  said  to  them),  '  Take  upon
yourselves  the  third  part  of  this  my  guilt  (caused  by)
the  murder  of  a  learned  Brahma/za/  They  answered,
'  What  shall  we  have  (for  doing  thy  wish)  ?'  He  re-
plied, '  Choose  a  boon/  They  said,  '  Let  us  obtain  off-
spring (if  our  husbands  approach  us)  during  the  proper
season,  at  pleasure  let  us  dwell  (with  our  husbands)
until  (our  children)  are  born/  He  answered,  '  So  be
it/  (Then)  they  took  upon  themselves  (the  third
part  of  his  guilt).  That  guilt  of  Brahma^a-murder
appears  every  month  as  the  menstrual  flow.  There-
fore let  him  not  eat  the  food  of  a  woman  in  her
courses ;  (for)  such  a  one  has  put  on  the  shape  of
the  guilt  of  Brahma^a-murder.

8.  (Those  who  recite  the  Veda)  proclaim  the  fol-
lowing (rule) :  '  Collyrium  and  ointment  must  not  be
accepted  from  her ;  for  that  is  the  food  of  women.
Therefore  they  feel  a  loathing  for  her  (while  she  is)
in  that  (condition,  saying),  "  She  shall  not  approach/' ]

9.  '  Those  (Brahma^as  in)  whose  (houses)  men-
struating women  sit,  those  who  keep  no  sacred  fire,


8.  Taitt.  Sawh.  II,  5,  1,  6.  I  read  the  text  of  this  Sutra  as
follows:  'Tadahti/$ — a^anabhya^anam  evasya  na  pratigrahyaw
taddhi  striya  annam  iti — tasmat  tasyai  ka,  tatra  ka.  bibhatsante  rae-
yam  upagad  iti/  The  MSS.  give  the  following  readings  in  the
second  clause :  tasmat  tasmai  ka.  (B.  Bh.  E.  F.),  tatra  na  (F.),  me-
dhamupagad  (Bh.  F.),  medha  upagad  (E.),  seyamupagad  (B.)
Kr*sh»apa»dita  follows  as  usually  MS.  B.  His  explanation  of  the
whole  Sutra  is  erroneous.  '  That  is  the  food  of  women/  i.  e.  that  is
as  necessary  to  women  as  their  food,  because  to  beautify  themselves
is  one  of  their  duties.

9.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is  that  a  Brahmanical  beggar  must
not  accept  any  alms  from  Brahmawas  whose  wives  are  in  their

[14]  D


34  VASISUTHA.  VI,  I.

and  those  in  whose  family  there  is  no  .Srotriya, — all
these  are  equal  to  .Sudras/


Chapter  VI.

i.  (To  live  according  to)  the  rule  of  conduct  is
doubtlessly  the  highest  duty  of  all  men.  He  whose
soul  is  defiled  by  vile  conduct  perishes  in  this  world
and  in  the  next.

2.  Neither  austerities,  nor  (the  study  of)  the  Veda,
nor  (the  performance  of)  the  Agnihotra,  nor  lavish
liberality  can  ever  save  him  whose  conduct  is  vile
and  who  has  strayed  from  this  (path  of  duty).

3.  The  Vedas  do  not  purify  him  who  is  deficient
in  good  conduct,  though  he  may  have  learnt  them
all  together  with  the  six  Aiigas  ;  the  sacred  texts  de-
part from  such  a  man  at  death,  even  as  birds,  when
full-fledged,  leave  their  nest.

4.  As  the  beauty  of  a  wife  causes  no  joy  to  a
blind  man,  even  so  all  the  four  Vedas  together  with
the  six  Angas  and  sacrifices  give  no  happiness  to
him  who  is  deficient  in  good  conduct.

courses,  who  keep  no  sacred  fire,  and  do  not  attend  to  the  duty  of
Veda-study.  Regarding  sinners  of  the  latter  two  kinds,  see  also
Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  32-33.

VI.  i.  Manu  IV,  155.  The  word  aHra,  which  has  been  vari-
ously translated  by  '  conduct,'  '  rule  of  conduct/  and  '  good  con-
duct/ includes  the  observance  of  all  the  various  rules  for  every-day
life,  taught  in  the  Smrztis,  and  the  performance  of  the  prescribed
ceremonies  and  rites.

4.  I  read  with  MSS.  Bh.  and  E.,  sha^ahgastvakhila^  saya^ila^.
The  reading  of  MS.  B.,  which  Knshwaparadita  adopts,  sha^/ahga^
sakhila^  means,  'together  with  the  six  Ahgas,  (and)  the  Khila
(spurious)  portions  of  the  Veda.'


VI,  8.  RULE    OF    CONDUCT.  35

5.  The  sacred  texts  do  not  save  from  sin  the
deceitful  man  who  behaves  deceitfully.  But  that
Veda,  two  syllables  of  which  are  studied  in  the
right  manner,  purifies,  just  as  the  clouds  (give  be-
neficent rain)  in  the  month  of  Isha.

6.  A  man  of  bad  conduct  is  blamed  among  men,
evils  befal  him  constantly,  he  is  afflicted  with  disease
and  short-lived.

7.  Through  good  conduct  man  gains  spiritual  merit,
through  good  conduct  he  gains  wealth,  through  good
conduct  he  obtains  beauty,  good  conduct  obviates  the
effect  of  evil  marks.

8.  A  man  who  follows  the  rule  of  conduct  esta-
blished among  the  virtuous,  who  has  faith  and  is
free  from  envy,  lives  a  hundred  years,  though  he
be  destitute  of  all  auspicious  marks.

5.  Isha  is  another  name  for  Arvina,  the  month  September-
October.  Though  the  rainy  season,  properly  so  called,  is  over  in
September,  still  heavy  rain  falls  in  many  parts  of  India,  chiefly
under  the  influence  of  the  beginning  north-east  monsoon,  and  is
particularly  important  for  the  Rabi  or  winter  crops.  I  think,
therefore,  that  it  is  not  advisable  to  take,  as  Krzsh/zapaTZfiTita  does,
yatha  ishe  'bdsU  both  with  the  first  and  the  second  halves  of  the
verse,  and  to  translate,  '  As  the  clouds  (in  general  remain  barren)
in  the  month  of  Isha,  even  so  the  texts  of  the  Veda  do  not  save
from  evil  the  deceitful  man  who  behaves  deceitfully.  But  that
Veda,  two  syllables  of  which  have  been  studied  in  the  right  manner,
sanctifies,  just  as  the  clouds  in  the  month  of  Isha,  (which  shed  a
few  drops  of  rain  on  the  day  of  the  Svati  conjunction,  produce
pearls)/  '  In  the  right  manner/  i.  e.  with  the  due  observance  of
the  rules  of  studentship.

6.  Identical  with  Manu  IV,  157.

7.  Manu  IV,  156.  By  the  'inauspicious  marks'  mentioned  in
this  verse,  and  the  '  auspicious  marks '  occurring  in  the  next,  the
various  lines  on  the  hands  and  feet  &c.  are  meant,  the  explanation
of  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  Samudrika  -Sastra.

8.  Identical  with  Manu  IV,  158;  Vish«u  LXXI,  92.

D    2


$6  VASISHTtf  A.  VI,  9.

9.  But  a  man  who  knows  the  sacred  law  shall
perform  in  secret  all  acts  connected  with  eating,  the
natural  evacuations  and  dalliance  with  (his  wife) ;
business  to  be  accomplished  by  speech  or  intellect,
likewise  austerities,  wealth,  and  age,  must  be  most
carefully  concealed.

10.  And  a  man  shall  void  both  urine  and  faeces,
facing  the  north,  in  the  day-time,  but  at  night  he
shall  do  it  turning  towards  the  south;  for  (if  he
acts)  thus,  his  life  will  not  be  injured.

1 1.  The  intellect  of  that  man  perishes  who  voids
urine  against  a  fire,  the  sun,  a  cow,  a  Brahma/za,  the
moon,  water,  and  the  morning  or  evening  twilights.

12.  Let  him  not  void  urine  in  a  river,  nor  on
a  path,  nor  on  ashes,  nor  on  cowdung,  nor  on  a
ploughed  field,  nor  on  one  which  has  been  sown,
nor  on  a  grass-plot,  nor  in  the  shade  (of  trees)  that
afford  protection  (to  travellers).

1 3.  Standing  in  the  shade  (of  houses,  clouds,  and
so  forth),  when  it  is  quite  dark,  and  when  he  fears
for  his  life,  a  Brabma;za  may  void  urine,  by  day  and
by  night,  in  any  position  he  pleases.

14.  (Afterwards)  he  shall  perform  the  necessary
(purification)  with  water  fetched  for  the  purpose
(from  a  tank  or  river,  and  with  earth).

15.  For  a  bath  water  not  fetched  for  the  purpose
(may  also  be  used).

16.  (For  the  purpose  of  purification)  a  Brahma^a

10.  Vish/m  LX,  2.  I  read  with  the  majority  of  the  MSS.,  na
rishyati.

11.  Identical  with  Manu  IV,  52.

12.  Vishmi  LX,  3-22.

13.  Identical  with  Manu  IV,  51.  14.   Vishmi  LX,  24.
15.   I.  e.  one  may  bathe  albo  in  a  tank  or  river.


VI,  22.  RULE    OF    CONDUCT.  37

shall  take  earth  that  is  mixed  with  gravel,  from  the
bank  (of  a  river).

17.  Five  kinds  of  earth  must  not  be  used,  viz.
such  as  is  covered  by  water,  such  as  lies  in  a  temple,
on  an  ant-hill,  on  a  hillock  thrown  up  by  rats,  and  that
which  has  been  left  by  one  who  cleaned  himself.

18.  The  organ  (must  be  cleaned  by)  one  (appli-
cation of)  earth,  the  (right)  hand  by  three,  but
both  (feet)  by  two,  the  anus  by  five,  the  one  (i.  e.  the
left  hand)  by  ten,  and  both  (hands  and  feet)  by  seven
(applications  of  earth).

19.  Such  is  the  purification  ordained  for  house-
holders ;  it  is  double  for  students,  treble  for  hermits,
but  quadruple  for  ascetics.

20.  Eight  mouthfuls  are  the  meal  of  an  ascetic,
sixteen  that  of  a  hermit,  but  thirty-two  that  of  a
householder,  and  an  unlimited  quantity  that  of  a
student

21.  An  Agnihotrin,  a  draught-ox,  and  a  student,
those  three  can  do  their  work  only  if  they  eat  (well) ;
without  eating  (much),  they  cannot  do  it.

22.  (The  above  rule  regarding  limited  allowances
of  food  holds  good)  in  the  case  of  penances,  of  self-
imposed  restraint,  of  sacrifices,  of  the  recitation  of
the  Veda,  and  of  (the  performance  of  other)  sacred
duties.

18.  Vishmi  LX,  25.

19.  Identical  with  Vishmi  LX,  26,  and  Manu  V,  137.

20-21.  Identical  with  Apastamba  II,  5,  9,  13,  and  S.  21,  with
.Sahkhayana  Gnriya-sutra  II,  1 6,  5.

22.  'Penances  (vrata),  i.e.  the  Krikk/ir&s  and  the  rest;  self-
imposed  restraint  (niyama),  i.  e.  eating  certain  food  in  accordance
with  a  vow,  and  so  forth,  during  a  month  or  any  other  fixed  period
.  .  .  .  sacred  duties  (dharma),  i.e.  giving  gifts  and  the  like.' —
Kr/sh«apaw^ita.


38  VASISHTtf  A.  VI,  23.

23.  The  qualities  by  which  a  (true)  Brahma/za
may  be  recognised  are,  the  concentration  of  the
mind,  austerities,  the  subjugation  of  the  senses,  libe-
rality, truthfulness,  purity,  sacred  learning,  compas-
sion, worldly  learning,  intelligence,  and  the  belief  (in
the  existence  of  the  deity  and  of  a  future  life).

24.  One  may  know  that  bearing  grudges,  envy,
speaking  untruths,  speaking  evil  of  Brahma^as,
backbiting,  and  cruelty  are  the  characteristics  of  a
Sudra.

25.  Those  Brahma/zas  can  save  (from  evil)  who
are  free  from  passion,  and  patient  of  austerities,
whose  ears  have  been  filled  with  the  texts  of  the
Veda,  who  have  subdued  the  organs  of  sensation
and  action,  who  have  ceased  to  injure  animated
beings,  and  who  close  their  hands  when  gifts  are
offered.

264  Some  become  worthy  receptacles  of  gifts
through  sacred  learning,  and  some  through  the
practice  of  austerities.  But  that  Brahma^a  whose
stomach  does  not  contain  the  food  of  a  .Sudra,  is  even
the  worthiest  receptacle  of  alL

27.  If  a  Brahma/za  dies  with  the  food  of  a  .Sudra
in  his  stomach,  he  will  become  a  village  pig  (in  his
next  life)  or  be  born  in  the  family  of  that  (.Sudra).

28.  For  though  a  (Brahma^a)  whose  body  is
nourished  by  the  essence  of  a  .Sudra's  food    may

24.  Krzshttapatfdita  connects  brahmawadusha^am,  translated
above  by  '  speaking  eviL  of  Brahma^as,'  with  judralakshawam,  and
renders  the  two  words  thus,  '  the  characteristics  of  a  -Sudra  which
degrade  a  Brahma^a/

25.  •  Close  their  hands/  i.  e.  are  reluctant  to  accept.

26.  Krishnapandita.  takes  kirft,  translated  by  '  some,'  to  mean
'  somewhat/  '  to  a  certain,  degree,'  i.  e.  neither  very  distinguished,  nor
very  despicable.


VI,  40.  RULE    OF    CONDUCT.  39

daily  recite  the  Veda,  though  he  may  offer  (an
Agnihotra)  or  mutter  (prayers,  nevertheless)  he  will
not  find  the  path  that  leads  upwards.

29.  But  if,  after  eating  the  food  of  a  .5udra,  he
has  conjugal  intercourse,  his  sons  will  belong  to  the
giver  of  the  food,  and  he  shall  not  ascend  to  heaven.

30.  They  declare  that  he  is  worthy  to  receive
gifts,  who  (daily)  rises  to  recite  the  Veda,  who  is
of  good  family,  and  perfectly  free  from  passion,  who
constantly  offers  sacrifices  in  the  three  sacred  fires,
who  fears  sin,  and  knows  much,  who  is  beloved  among
the  females  (of  his  family),  who  is  righteous,  protects
cows,  and  reduces  himself  by  austerities.

31.  Just  as  milk,  sour  milk,  clarified  butter,  and
honey  poured  into  an  unburnt  earthen  vessel,  perish,
owing  to  the  weakness  of  the  vessel,  and  neither  the
vessel  nor  those  liquids  (remain),

32.  Even  so  a  man  destitute  of  sacred  learning,
who  accepts  cows  or  gold,  clothes,  a  horse,  land,  (or)
sesamum,  becomes  ashes,  as  (if  he  were  dry)  wood.

33.  He  shall  not  make  his  joints  or  his  nails  crack,

34.  Nor  shall  he  make  a  vessel  ring  with  his  nails.

35.  Let  him  not  drink  water  out  of  his  joined  hands.

36.  Let  him  not  strike  the  water  with  his  foot
or  his  hand,

3  j.  Nor  (pour)  water  into  (other)  water.

38.  Let  him  not  gather  fruit  by  throwing  brick-
bats,

39.  Nor  by  throwing  another  fruit  at  it.

40.  He  shall  not  become  a  hypocrite  or  deceitful.

32.  Manu  IV,  188.  Read  in  the  text  'evaw  ga  va'  instead  of
'eva/w  gave'

33.  Gautama  IX,  51.  .35.  Gautama  IX,  9.
40.   Manu  IV,  177.


40  VASISHTWA.  VI,  41-

41.  Let  him  not  learn  a  language  spoken  by  bar-
barians.

42.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  The  opinion  of  the  •Sishfes  is,  that  a  man  shall
not  be  uselessly  active,  neither  with  his  hands  and
his  feet,  nor  with  his  eyes,  nor  with  his  tongue  and
his  body.'

43.  'Those  Brahma^as,  in  whose  families  the
study  of  the  Veda  and  of  its  supplements  is  heredi-
tary, and  who  are  able  to  adduce  proofs  perceptible
by  the  senses  from  the  revealed  texts,  must  be  known
to  be  •Sish/as.'

44.  '  He  is  a  (true)  Brdhma^a  regarding  whom  no
one  knows  if  he  be  good  or  bad,  if  he  be  ignorant
or  deeply  learned,  if  be  be  of  good  or  of  bad  conduct/

Chapter  VII.

1.  There  are  four  orders,

2.  Viz.  (that  of)  the  student,  (that  of)  the  house-
holder, (that  of)  the  hermit,  and  (that  of)  the  ascetic.

3.  A  man  who  has  studied  one,  two,  or  three
Vedas  without  violating  the  rules  of  studentship,
may  enter  any  of  these  (orders),  whichsoever  he
pleases.

4.  A  (professed)  student  shall  serve  his  teacher
until  death;

5.  And  in  case  the  teacher  dies,  he  shall  serve  the
sacred  fire.

42.  Manu  IV,  177  ;  Gautama  IX,  50-51.

43.  Manu  XII,  109.

VII.  1-2.    Gautama  III,  2.  3.   Gautama  III,  1.

4.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  43.

5.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  46.  I  agree  with  Kr/sh«apa«</ita  in  thinking
that  the  apparently  purposeless  particle  'and/  which  is  used  in


VII,  14-  STUDENTSHIP.  4 1

6.  For  it  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  The
fire  is  thy  teacher/

7.  (A  student,  whether  professed  or  temporary),
shall  bridle  his  tongue ;

8.  He  shall  eat  in  the  fourth,  sixth,  or  eighth
hour  of  the  day.

9.  He  shall  go  out  in  order  to  beg.

10.  He  shall  obey  his  teacher.

11.  He  either  (may  wear  all  his  hair)  tied  in  a
knot  or  (keep  merely)  a  lock  on  the  crown  of  his
head  tied  in  a  knot,  (shaving  the  other  parts  of  the
head.)

12.  If  the  teacher  walks,  he  shall  attend  him
walking  after  him  ;  if  the  teacher  is  seated,  standing  ;
if  the  teacher  lies  down,  seated.

13.  He  shall  study  after  having  been  called  (by
the  teacher,  and  not  request  the  latter  to  begin  the
lesson).

14.  Let  him  announce  (to  the  teacher)  all  that  he
has  received  (when  begging),  and  eat  after  permission
(has  been  given  to  him).

this  Sutra,  indicates  Vasish/fca's  approval  of  the  rules  given  in
other  Smn'tis,  according  to  which  the  student,  on  the  death  of
the  teacher,  shall  serve  the  teacher's  son,  a  fellow-student,  or  the
teacher's  wife,  and  the  service  of  the  sacred  fire  is  the  last  resource
only.     See  Vishnu  XXVIII,  44-45 ;  Gautama  III,  7-8.

6.  These  words  form  part  of  one  of  the  Mantras  which  the
teacher  recites  at  the  initiation  of  the  student ;  see  e.  g.  -Sahkha-
yana  Gnhya-sutra.

7.  Gautama  II,  13,  22.

8.  According  to  Krz'sh/zapawdita  a  kala,  'hour,'  is  the  eighth
part  of  a  day.

9.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  9.  10.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  7.

11.  Gautama  I,  27;  Vishmi  XXVIII,  41.

12.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  18-22.  13.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  6.
14.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  10;  Apastamba  I,  1,  3,  25.


42  VASISHTtfA.  VII,  15.

15.  Let  him  avoid  to  sleep  on  a  cot,  to  clean
his  teeth,  to  wash  (his  body  for  pleasure),  to  apply
collyrium  (to  his  eyes),  to  anoint  (his  body),  and  to
wear  shoes  or  a  parasol.

16.  (While  reciting  his  prayers)  he  shall  stand  in
the  day-time  and  sit  down  at  night.

1 7.  Let  him  bathe  three  times  a  day.


Chapter  VIII.

1.  (A  student  who  desires  to  become)  a  house-
holder shall  bathe,  free  from  anger  and  elation,
with  the  permission  of  his  teacher,  and  take  for  a
wife  a  young  female  of  his  own  caste,  who  does
neither  belong  to  the  same  Gotra  nor  has  the
same  Pravara,  who  has  not  had  intercourse  (with
another  man),

2.  Who  is  not  related  within  four  degrees  on  the
mother's  side,  nor  within  six  degrees  on  the  father  s
side.

3.  Let  him  kindle  the  nuptial  fire.

15.  Gautama  II,  13.

16.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  2-3.  The  prayers  intended  are  the  so-
called  Sandhyas,  which  are  recited  at  daybreak  and  in  the  evening.

17.  Gautama  II,  8.  'Three  times  a  day/ i.  e.  morning,  noon,
and  evening.  Krz'sh#apa«</ita  thinks  that  he  shall  perform  three
ablutions  at  midday.

VIII.  1.  Vishmi  XXIV,  9;  Gautama  IV,  1-2.  Regarding  the
bath  at  the  end  of  the  studentship,  see  Vishnu  XXVIII,  42,  and
Professor  Jolly's  note.

2.  Vishmi  XXIV,  10 ;  Gautama  IV,  2.

3.  Vishmi  LIX,  1,  and  Professor  Jolly's  note.  The  fire  intended
is  the  grzhya  or  smarta,  the  sacred  household  fire,  which  according
to  this  Sutra  must  be  kindled  on  the  occasion  of  the  marriage  cere-
mony, while  other  Smn'tis  permit  of  its  being  lighted  on  the  division
of  the  paternal  estate.


HOUSEHOLDER.  43


4.  Let  him  not  turn  away  a  guest  who  comes  in
the  evening.

5.  (A  guest)  shall  not  dwell  in  his  house  without
receiving  food.

6.  If  a  Brahma^a  who  has  come  for  shelter  to
the  house  of  a  (householder)  receives  no  food,  on
departure  he  will  take  with  him  all  the  spiritual
merit  of  that  (churlish  host).

7.  But  a  Brahma/za  who  stays  for  one  night  only
is  called  a  guest.  For  (the  etymological  import  of
the  word)  atithi  (a  guest)  is  '  he  who  stays  for  a
short  while  only.'

8.  A  Brahma^a  who  lives  in  the  same  village
(with  his  host)  and  a  visitor  on  business  or  pleasure
(are)  not  (called  guests.  But  a  guest),  whether  he
arrives  at  the  moment  (of  dinner)  or  at  an  inop-
portune time,  must  not  stay  in  the  house  of  a
(householder)  without  receiving  food.

9.  (A  householder)  who  has  faith,  is  free  from
covetousness,  and  (possesses  wealth)  sufficient  for
(performing)  the  Agnyadheya-sacrifice,  must  become
an  Agnihotrin.

10.  He  (who  possesses  wealth)  sufficient  for  (the
expenses  of)  a  Soma-sacrifice  shall  not  abstain  from
offering  it.


4.   Vishmi  LXVII,  28-29.  5-  Vishmi  LXVII,  30.

6.    Vishmi  LXVII,  33.

7..  Identical  with  Vishmi  LXVII,  34;  Manu  III,  102.

8.  Vishmi  LXVII,  35  ;  Manu  III,  105.

9.  Vishmi  LIX,  2.  The  Agnihotra  which  is  here  intended  is,  of
course,  the  -SVauta  Agnihotra,  to  be  performed  with  three  fires.  The
Agnyadheya  is  one  of  the  Havirya^was  with  which  the  »Srautagni-
hotrin  has  to  begin  his  rites.

10.  Vishmi  LIX,  8.


44  VASISH777A.  VIII,  II.

ii.  (A  householder)  shall  be  industrious  in  reciting
the  Veda,  offering  sacrifices,  begetting  children,  and
(performing  his  other  duties).

12.  Let  him  honour  visitors  (who  come)  to  his
house  by  rising  to  meet  them,  by  (offering  them)
seats,  by  speaking  to  them  kindly  and  extolling
their  virtues,

13.  And  all  creatures  by  (giving  them)  food  ac-
cording to  his  ability.

14.  A  householder  alone  performs  sacrifices,  a
householder  alone  performs  austerities,  and  (there-
fore) the  order  of  householders  is  the  most  distin-
guished among  the  four.

15.  As  all  rivers,  both  great  and  small,  find  a
resting-place  in  the  ocean,  even  so  men  of  all  orders
find  protection  with  householders.

16.  As  all  creatures  exist  through  the  protection
afforded  by  their  mothers,  even  so  all  mendicants  sub-
sist through  the  protection  afforded  by  householders.

1 7.  A  Brahma/za  who  always  carries  water  (in  his
gourd),  who  always  wears  the  sacred  thread,  who
daily  recites  the  Veda,  who  avoids  the  food  of
outcasts,  who  approaches  (his  wife)  in  the  proper
season,  and  offers  sacrifices  in  accordance  with  the

11.  I  agree  with  Kn'shwaparaaTita  that  the  word  'and'  used  in
this  enumeration  serves  the  purpose  of  calling  to  mind  that  there
are  other  minor  duties.  The  three  named  specially  are  the  so-
called  'three  debts  ;'  see  below,  XI,  48.

12.  Vishmi  LXVII,  45;  Gautama  V,  38-41.

13.  Vishmi  LXVII,  26.

14-17.  Vishmi  LIX,  27-30;  Manu  VI,  89.

15.   Identical  with  Manu  VI,  90.

17.  'Who  always  carries  water  (in  his  gourd)'  (nityodaki)  may
also  be  translated,  'who  always  keeps  water  (in  his  house);'  see
Apastamba  II,  1,  1,  15.     'Who  always  wears  the  sacred  thread'


IX,  II.  HERMIT.  45

rules  (of  the  Veda,  after  death)  never   falls   from
Brahman's  heaven.


Chapter  IX.

i.  A  hermit  shall  wear  (his  hair  in)  braids,  and
dress  (in  garments  made  of)  bark  and  skins ;

2.  And  he  shall  not  enter  a  village.

3.  He  shall  not  step  on  ploughed  (land).

4.  He  shall  gather  wild  growing  roots  and  fruit
(only).

5.  He  shall  remain  chaste.

6.  His  heart  shall  be  full  of  meekness.

7.  He  shall  honour  guests  coming  to  his  hermi-
tage with  alms  (consisting  of)  roots  and  fruit.

8.  He  shall  only  give,  not  receive  (presents).

9.  He  shall  bathe  at  morn,  noon,  and  eve.

10.  Kindling  a  fire  according  to  the  (rule  of  the)
KSrama^aka  (Sutra),  he  shall  offer  the  Agnihotra.

1 1 .  After  (living  in  this  manner  during)  six  months,

may  also  mean  '  who  always  wears  his  upper  in  the  manner  re-
quired at  a  sacrifice/  i.  e.  passes  it  over  the  left  and  under  the
right  arm.

IX.  1.  Vishmi  XCIV,  8-9;  Gautama  III,  34.  Knsrmapawdita
takes  /fcira,  '  bark,'  to  mean  '  (made  of)  grass/  e.  g.  of  Murcgu  or
Balva^a.

2.  Gautama  III,  33.  The  particle  'and'  probably  indicates
that  the  hermit  is  not  to  enter  any  other  inhabited  place.

3.  Gautama  III,  32.  4.   Vishmi  XCV,  5.
5. ,  Vishmi  XCV,  7.  6.    ManuVI,  8.

7.    Gautama  III,  30.  9.   Vishmi  XCV,  10.

10.  Gautama  III,  27.  Knsh;*apa#dita  and  MSS.  B.  F.  read
jravawakena,  and  the  rest  avarrcakena.  I  read  jrama/zakena,  '  ac-
cording to  the  rule  of  the  -Sramawaka  Sutra/  in  accordance  with
Gautama's  text.     Baudhayana,  too,  uses  the  same  word.

11.  Manu  VI,  25.


46  VASISH7V7  A.  IX,  12.

he  shall  dwell  at  the  root  of  a  tree,  keeping  no  fire
and  having  no  house.

12.  He  (who  in  this  manner)  gives  (their  due)  to
gods,  manes,  and  men,  will  attain  endless  (bliss  in)
heaven.

Chapter  X.

1.  Let  an  ascetic  depart  from  his  house,  giving  a
promise  of  safety  from  injury  to  all  animated  beings.

2.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
1  That  ascetic  who  wanders  about  at  peace  with  all
creatures,  forsooth,  has  nothing  to  fear  from  any
living  being.'

3.  '  But  he  who  becomes  an  ascetic  and  does  not
promise  safety  from  injury  to  all  beings,  destroys  the
born  and  the  unborn ;  and  (so  does  an  ascetic)  who
accepts  presents.'

4.  '  Let  him  discontinue  the  performance  of  all
religious  ceremonies,  but  let  him  never  discontinue  the
recitation  of  the  Veda.  By  neglecting  the  Veda  he
becomes  a  »Sudra ;  therefore  he  shall  not  neglect  it.'

5.  '(To  pronounce)  the  one  syllable  (Om)  is  the
best  (mode  of  reciting  the)  Veda,  to  suppress  the
breath  is  the  highest  (form  of)  austerity ;  (to  subsist
on)  alms  is  better  than  fasting ;  compassion  is  pre-
ferable to  liberality.'

6.  (Let  the  ascetic)  shave  (his  head);  let  him  have
no  property  and  no  home.

X.  1.    ManuVI,  39;  Ya^avalkya  III,  61.

2.  ManuVI,  40.

3.  '  The  born  and  the  unborn/  i.  e.  his  ancestors  who  lose
heaven,  and  his  descendants  who  lose  their  caste.

4.  Manu  VI,  39.  5.   Manu  II,  83.

6.  Gautama  III,  11,  22.  The  term  parigraha,  'home,'  includes
the  wife,  the  family,  attendants,  and  a  house.


X,  20.  ASCETIC.  47

7.  Let  him  beg  food  at  seven  houses  which  he
has  not  selected  (beforehand),

8.  (At  the  time)  when  the  smoke  (of  the  kitchen-
fire)  has  ceased  and  the  pestle  lies  motionless.

9.  Let  him  wear  a  single  garment,

10.  Or  cover  his  body  with  a  skin  or  with  grass
that  has  been  nibbled  at  by  a  cow.

11.  Let  him  sleep  on  the  bare  ground.

12.  Let  him  frequently  change  his  residence,

1 3.  (Dwelling)  at  the  extremity  of  the  village,  in  a
temple,  or  in  an  empty  house,  or  at  the  root  of  a  tree.

14.  Let  him  (constantly)  seek  in  his  heart  the
knowledge  (of  the  universal  soul).

1 5.  (An  ascetic)  who  lives  constantly  in  the  forest,

16.  Shall  not  wander  about  within  sight  of  the
village-cattle.

1 7.  '  Freedom  from  future  births  is  certain  for
him  who  constantly  dwells  in  the  forest,  who  has
subdued  his  organs  of  sensation  and  action,  who  has
renounced  all  sensual  gratification,  whose  mind  is
fixed  in  meditation  on  the  Supreme  Spirit,  and  who
is  (wholly)  indifferent  (to  pleasure  and  pain).'

18.  (Let  him)  not  (wear)  any  visible  mark  (of  his
order),  nor  (follow)  any  visible  rule  of  conduct.

19.  Let  him,  though  not  mad,  appear  like  one  out
of  his  mind.

20.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
1  There  is  no  salvation  for  him  who  is  addicted  to

7.,  Vishmi  XCVI,  3.

8.  Vishmi  XCVI,  6  ;  Manu  VI,  56.

9.  Vishmi  XCVI,  13.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  single  gar-
ment mentioned  in  the  Sutra  is,  as  Kr«sh»apa»^ita  thinks,  a  small
strip  of  cloth  to  cover  the  ascetic's  nakedness.

12-13.   Vishmi  XCVI,  10-12.  14.   Manu  VI,  43,  65.

20.   I  read  'ramyavasathapriyasya,'  with  the  majority  of  the  MSS.


4-8  VASISHTHA.  X,  21.

the  pursuit  of  the  science  of  words,  nor  for  him  who
rejoices  in  captivating  men,  nor  for  him  who  is  fond
of  (good)  eating  and  (fine)  clothing,  nor  for  him  who
loves  a  pleasant  dwelling.'

21.  '  Neither  by  (explaining)  prodigies  and  omens,
nor  by  skill  in  astrology  and  palmistry,  nor  by  casuistry
and  expositions  (of  the  .Sastras),  let  him  ever  seek  to
obtain  alms/

22.  *  Let  him  not  be  dejected  when  he  obtains
nothing,  nor  glad  when  he  receives  something.  Let
him  only  seek  as  much  as  will  sustain  life,  without
caring  for  household  property/

'23.  '  But  he,  forsooth,  knows  (the  road  to)  salva-
tion who  cares  neither  for  a  hut,  nor  for  water,  nor
for  clothes,  nor  for  the  three  Pushkaras  (holy  tanks),
nor  for  a  house,  nor  for  a  seat,  nor  for  food/

24.  In  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  he  may
eat  as  much  (food)  as  he  obtains  in  the  house  of  one
BrahmaTza,  excepting  honey  and  meat,

25.  And  he  shall  not  (eat  so  much  that  he  is
quite)  satiated.

26.  At  his  option  (an  ascetic)  may  (also)  dwell  in
a  village.

27.  Let  him  not  be  crooked  (in  his  ways) ;  (let
him)  not  (observe  the  rules  of)  impurity  on  account

21.  Identical  with  Manu  VI,  50.

22.  Vish/m  XCVI,  4.     Identical  with  Manu  VI,  57.

23.  There  are  three  Tirthas  called  Pushkara ;  see  Professor
Jolly's  note  on  Vish/m  LXXXV,  1.

24.  Krzshraapawdita  thinks  that  this  rule  is  a  concession  to  those
ascetics  who  are  unable  to  subsist  on  one  meal  a  day,  as  Manu
VI,  55  prescribes.

25.  Manu  VI,  59.  26.   Manu  VI,  94-95.

27.  The  text  is  here  probably  corrupt.  But  I  follow  Krishna-
pawdita.  Several  MSS.  read  a^aMo,  '  he  shall  not  be  a  rogue,'  for
a^avo,  '  he  shall  not  observe  the  rules  of  impurity.*


XI,  3-  RECEPTION    OF   GUESTS.  49

of  deaths  (or  births) ;  let  him  not  have  a  house ;  let
him  be  of  concentrated  mind.

28.  Let  him  not  enjoy  any  object  of  sensual
gratification.

29.  Let  him  be  (utterly)  indifferent,  avoiding  to
do  injury  or  to  show  kindness  to  any  living  being.

30.  To  avoid  backbiting,  jealousy,  pride,  self-con-
sciousness, unbelief,  dishonesty,  self-praise,  blaming
others,  deceit,  covetousness,  delusion,  anger,  and  envy
is  considered  to  be  the  duty  of  (men  of)  all  orders.

31.  A  Brahma^a  who  wears  the  sacred  thread,
who  holds  in  his  hand  a  gourd  filled  with  water,
who  is  pure  and  avoids  the  food  of  6iidras  will  not
fail  (to  gain)  the  world  of  Brahman.

Chapter  XI.

1.  Six  persons  are  (particularly)  worthy  to  receive
the  honey-mixture  (madhuparka),

2 .  (Viz.)  an  officiating  priest,  the  bridegroom  of  one's
daughter,  a  king,  a  paternal  uncle,  a  Snataka,  a  mater-
nal uncle,  as  well  as  (others  enumerated  elsewhere).

3.  (A  householder)  shall  offer,  both  at  the  morning
and  the  evening  (meals,  a  portion)  of  the  prepared
(food)  to  the  Visve  Devas  in  the  (sacred)  domestic  fire.

30.  Vishnu  II,  16-17.

31.  Krz'srmapa^ita  believes  that  this  Sutra  again  refers  to  ascetics.
But  that  is  hardly  possible,  as  ascetics  are  not  allowed  to  wear  a
sacrificial  thread  (see  above,  Sutra  18).  I  think  that  it  is  meant  to
emphatically  assert  that  a  Brahmawa  who  is  free  from  the  short-
comings enumerated  in  the  preceding  Sutra,  and  who  follows  the
rule  of  conduct,  will  obtain  salvation,  whether  he  passes  through
the  order  of  Sawnyasins  or  not.

XL  1-2.  Gautama  V,  27-30.  The  persons  enumerated  else-
where are  the  teacher,  the  father-in-law,  and  so  forth.  Regarding
the  Snataka,  see  Apastamba  1, 11,  30, 1-4.

3.   Vishmi  LXVII,  1-3.

[14]  E


50  VASISHFtfA.  XI,  4.

4.  Let  him  give  a  Bali-offering  to  the  (guardian)
deities  of  the  house,

5.  (Thereafter)  let  him  give  a  portion,  one  Pala
in  weight,  to  a  .Srotriya  or  to  a  student,  (and  after-
wards an  offering)  to  the  manes.

6.  Next  let  him  feed  his  guests  in  due  order,  the
worthiest  first,

7.  (Thereafter)  the  maidens,  the  infants,  the  aged,
the  half-grown  members  of  his  family,  and  pradatas,

8.  Then  the  other  members  of  his  family.

9.  (Outside  the  house)  he  shall  throw  (some  food)
on  the  ground  for  the  dogs,  AaWalas,  outcasts,  and
crows.

10.  He  may  give  to  a  .Sudra  either  the  fragments
(of  the  meal)  or  (a  portion  of)  fresh  (food).

11.  The  master  of  the  house  and  his  wife  may
eat  what  remains.


4.  Vishmi  LXVII,  4-22.

5.  Vishmi  LIX,  14;  LXVII,  23,  27.  Krzsh«apa«^ita  does  not
take  'agrabhaga'  as  a  technical  term,  but  explains  it  by  'a  first  por-
tion, sufficient  for  a  dinner,  or  as  much  as  one  is  able  to  spare/

6.  Vishmi  LXVII,  28,  36-38.

7.  Vishmi  LXVII,  39.  The  majority  of  the  MSS.  read  balavrz'd-
dhataru«apradatas  [tato].  Knsh^apa^^ita  corrects  the  last  word
to  pradata,  while  the  editor  of  the  Calcutta  edition  writes  prabhri-
tims  [tato].  Both  conjectures  are  inadmissible.  As  the  same
phrase  occurs  once  more,  below,  XIX,  23  (where  Krishnapmdita,
writes  pradatara^),  I  think  that  it  is  not  permissible  to  change  the
text.  Pradata^  must  be  the  correct  reading,  and  a  technical
name  for  a  class  of  female  relatives.  Etymologically  it  may  mean
'  those  who  have  been  perfectly  cleansed.'  But  I  am  unable  to
trace  its  precise  technical  import,  and  have  left  it  untranslated.

8.  Vishmi  LXVII,  41.  9.  Vishmi  LXVII,  26.

10.  Gautama V,  25,  and  note.  'A  -Sudra,  i.e.  one  who  is  his
servant.' — Krzsh/zapa/wfta.  It  is,  however,  possible,  that  a  visitor
of  the  -Sudra  caste  is  meant;  see  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  19-20.

11.  Vishmi  LXVII,  41.


XI,  ip.  RECEPTION    OF   GUESTS.  5 1

12.  A  fresh  meal  for  which  all  (the  same  mate-
rials as  for  the  first)  are  used  (may  be  prepared),  if
a  guest  comes  after  the  VaLsvadeva  has  been  offered.
For  such  a  (guest)  he  shall  cause  to  be  prepared
food  (of  a)  particularly  (good  quality).

13.  For  it  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda,  'A
Brahma^a  guest  enters  the  house  resembling  the
VaLsvanara  fire.  Through  him  they  obtain  rain,
and  food  through  rain.  Therefore  people  know
that  the  (hospitable  reception  of  a  guest)  is  a
ceremony  averting  evil/

14.  Having  fed  the  (guest),  he  shall  honour  him.

15.  He  shall  accompany  him  to  the  boundary  (of  the
village)  or  until  he  receives  permission  (to  return).

16.  Let  him  present  (funeral  offerings)  to  the
manes  during  the  dark  half  of  the  month  (on  any
day)  after  the  fourth.

17.  After  issuing  an  invitation  on  the  day  pre-
ceding (the  .5raddha,  he  shall  feed  on  that  occasion)
three  ascetics  or  three  virtuous  householders,  who  are
^rotriyas,  who  are  not  very  aged,  who  do  not  follow
forbidden  occupations,  and  neither  (have  been  his)
pupils,  nor  are  (living  as)  pupils  in  his  house.

18.  He  may  also  feed  pupils  who  are  endowed
with  good  qualities.

19.  Let  him  avoid  men  neglecting  their  duties,

12.  Apastamba  II,  3,  6,  16;  Gautama  V,  32,  33.  A  guest,  i.e.
one  to  whom  the  definition  given  above,  VIII,  6,  7,  applies.  I  read
according  to  my  MSS.  puna/^pako  instead  of  puna^pake.

14-15.    Gautama  V,  38.

16.  Vishmi  LXXVI,  1-2  ;  Gautama  XV,  3.

17.  VishmiLXXIII,i;  LXXXII,  2-4  ;  LXXXIII,  5,  19  ;  Gau-
tama XV,  10;  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  4.

18.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  6.

19.  Gautama  XV,  16,  18.    The  explanation  of  the  word  nagna,

E    2


52  VASISIir#A.  XI,  20.

those  afflicted  with  white  leprosy,  eunuchs,  blind  men,
those  who  have  black  teeth,  those  who  suffer  from
black  leprosy,  (and)  those  who  have  deformed  nails.

20.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
'  Now,  if  a  (Brahma^a)  versed  in  the  Vedas  is
afflicted  with  bodily  (defects)  which  exclude  him
from  the  company,  Yama  declares  him  to  be  irre-
proachable.    Such  (a  man)  sanctifies  the  company.'

21.  'At  a  funeral  sacrifice  the  fragments  (of  the
meal)  must  not  be  swept  away  until  the  end  of  the
day.  For  streams  of  nectar  flow  (from  them,  and
the  manes  of)  those  who  have  received  no  libations
of  water  drink  (them).'

22.  '  But  let  him  not  sweep  up  the  fragments  (of
the  meal)  before  the  sun  has  set.  Thence  issue  rich
streams  of  milk  for  those  who  obtain  a  share  with
difficulty.'

2  3.  '  Manu  declares  that  both  the  remainder  (in
the  vessels)  and  the  fragments  (of  the  meal)  cer-
tainly are  the  portion  of  those  members  of  the
family  who  died  before  receiving  the  sacraments/

24.  ■  Let  him  give  the  fragments  that  have  fallen
on  the  ground  and  the  portion  scattered  (on  the
blades  of  Kiua  grass),  which  consists  of  the  wipings

'  neglecting  their  duties/  is  doubtful.  I  have  followed  Kr/sh»a-
pattdita,  who  quotes  the  Marka«</eya  Purawa  in  support  of  his  view.
The  word  occurs  in  the  same  connexion,  Visrmu  LXXXII,  27,
where  it  is  rendered  by  '  naked/  Possibly  it  may  refer  to  ascetics
who  go  entirely  naked.

20.  The  Sutra  gives  an  exception  to  the  preceding  rule.

21.  I  read  '  skyot&nte  hi '  instead  of  '  j/fyotante  vai.'

22.  '  Those  who  receive  a  share  with  difficulty/  i.  e.  the  manes
of  uninitiated  children,  mentioned  in  the  next  verses.

23-24.  Vishmi  LXXXII,  22;  Manu  III,  245-246.  These  rules,
however,  do  not  fully  agree  with  the  teaching  of  our  Manu-smrz'ti,


XI,  29.  SRADDHAS.  53

and  water,  as  their  food,  to  the  manes  of  those  who
died  without  offspring  and  of  those  who  died  young.'

25.  '  The  malevolent  Asuras  seek  an  opportunity
(to  snatch  away)  that  food  intended  for  the  manes,
which  is  not  supported  with  both  hands;'

26.  '  Therefore  let  him  not  offer  it  (to  the  Brah-
ma^as)  without  holding  (a  spoon)  in  his  hand ;  or
let  him  stand,  holding  the  dish  (with  both  hands,
until)  leavings  of  both  kinds  (have  been  produced).'

27.  '"He  shall  feed  two  (Brahma^as)  at  the
offering  to  the  gods,  and  three  at  the  offering  to
the  manes,  or  a  single  man  on  either  occasion ;  even
a  very  wealthy  man  shall  not  be  anxious  (to  enter-
tain) a  large  company.'

28.  'A  large  company  destroys  these  five  (advan-
tages), the  respectful  treatment  (of  the  invited
guests,  the  propriety  of)  time  and  place,  purity  and
(the  selection  of)  virtuous  Brahma/za  (guests) ;  there-
fore he  shall  not  (invite  a  large  number)/

29.  'Or  he  may  entertain  (at  a  6raddha)  even  a
single  Brahma/za  who  has  studied  the  whole  Veda,
who  is  distinguished  by  learning  and  virtue,  and  is
free  from  all  evil  marks  (on  his  body).'


as  the  latter  assigns  the  fragments  on  the  ground  to  honest  and
upright  servants.  Sutra  24  I  read  with  the  majority  of  the
MSS.  '  lepanodakam '  for  *  lepamodakam,'  and  'annaw  preteshu'
for  '  anupreteshu.'

25.   Manu  III,  225.

26..  Manu  III,  224.  The  meaning  of  the  last  clause  seems  to
be  that  the  sacrificer  shall  stand  before  the  Brahmawas  until  they
have  done  eating.

27.  Identical  with  Manu  III,  125  ;  see  also  Vishmi  LXXIII,  3.
The  offering  to  the  gods  is  the  Vawvadeva  offering  which  pre-
cedes the  Sraddha.

28.  Identical  with  Manu  III,  126.  29.   Manu  III,  129.


54  VASISHTTf  A.  XI,  30.

30.  '(But)  how  can  the  oblation  to  the  gods  be
made  if  he  feeds  a  single  Brahma/za  at  a  funeral
sacrifice  ?  Let  him  take  (a  portion)  of  each  (kind
of)  food  that  has  been  prepared  (and  put  it)  into  a
vessel ; '

31.  'Let  him  place  it  in  the  sanctuary  of  a  god
and  afterwards  continue  (the  performance  of)  the
funeral  sacrifice.  Let  him  offer  that  food  in  the
fire  or  give  it  (as  alms)  to  a  student'

32.  '  As  long  as  the  food  continues  warm,  as  long
as  they  eat  in  silence,  as  long  as  the  qualities  of  the
food  are  not  declared  (by  them),  so  long  the  manes
feast  on  it.'

^^.  '  The  qualities  of  the  food  must  not  be  de-
clared as  long  as  the  (Brahma^as  who  represent  the)
manes  are  not  satiated.  Afterwards  when  they  are
satisfied,  they  may  say,  M  Beautiful  is  the  sacrificial
food." '

34.  '  But  an  ascetic  who,  invited  to  dine  at  a
sacrifice  of  the  manes  or  of  the  gods,  rejects  meat,
shall  go  to  hell  for  as  many  years  as  the  slaughtered
beast  has  hairs.'

35.  '  Three  (things  are  held  to)  sanctify  a  funeral
sacrifice,  a  daughter's  son,  the  midday,  and  sesamum
grains  ;  and  they  recommend  three  (other  things)  for
it,  purity,  freedom  from  anger  and  from  precipitation.'

36.  '  The  eighth  division  of  the  day,  during  which
the  sun's  (progress  in  the  heavens)  becomes  slow,
one  must  know  to  be  midday ;  what  is  (then)  given
to  the  manes  lasts  (them)  for  a  very  long  time.'

37.  'The  ancestors  of  that  man  who  has  inter-

32.   Identical  with  Vishmi  LXXXII.  20,  and  Manu  III,  237.
34.   Manu  V,  35.  35.   Identical  with  Manu  III,  235.

37.    Vishmi  LXIX,  2-4.


XI,  43-  SACRIFICES.  55

course  with  a  woman  after  offering  or  having  dined
at  a  .Sraddha,  feed  during  a  month  from  that  (day)
on  his  semen.'

38.  '  A  child  that  is  born  from  (intercourse  im-
mediately) after  offering  a  .Sraddha  or  partaking  of
a  funeral  repast,  is  unable  to  acquire  sacred  learning
and  becomes  short-lived.'

39.  '  The  father  and  the  grandfather,  likewise  the
great-grandfather,  beset  a  descendant  who  is  born  to
them,  just  as  birds  (fly  to)  a  fig  tree ;'

40.  '  (Saying),  "  He  will  offer  to  us  funeral  repasts
with  honey  and  meat,  with  vegetables,  with  milk
and  with  messes  made  of  milk,  both  in  the  rainy
season  and  under  the  constellation  Magha^." '

41.  '  The  ancestors  always  rejoice  at  a  descendant
who  lengthens  the  line,  who  is  zealous  in  performing
funeral  sacrifices,  and  who  is  rich  in  (images  of  the)
gods  and  (virtuous)  Brahma^a  (guests).'

42.  '  The  manes  consider  him  to  be  their  (true)
descendant  who  offers  (to  them)  food  at  Gaya,  and
(by  the  virtue  of  that  gift)  they  grant  him  (blessings),
just  as  husbandmen  (produce  grain)  on  well-ploughed
(fields).'

43.  He  shall  offer  (a  6raddha)  both  on  the  full
moon  days  of  the  months  .5rava/za  and  Agrahaya^a
and  on  the  Anvash^aki.

39-40.    Vishmi  LXXVIII,  51-53.

41.  'Who  lengthens  the  line,'  i.  e.  who  himself  begets  sons.
Read  instead  of  nuyantaw  pit/Ykarma«i  (v.  1.  muyantaw  and  tri-
panta^),  '  udyata/rc/

42.  Vish/m  LXXXV,  4,  66-67.

43.  Srava/za,  i.  e.  July-August ;  Agrahaya^a,  i.  e.  Margajirsha
or  November-December.  Anvash/akt  means  the  day  following
the  Ash/aka,  or  eighth  day,  i.  e.  the  ninth  day  of  the  dark  halves  of
Margajirsha,  Pausha,  Magna,  and  Phalguna.  The  form  of  the
word  is  usually  anvash/aka.


56  VASISllTHA.  XI,  44.

44.  There  is  no  restriction  as  to  time,  if  (par-
ticularly suitable)  materials  and  (particularly  holy)
Brahma^as  are  at  hand,  or  (if  the  sacrificer  is)  near
(a  particularly  sacred)  place.

45.  A  Brahma/za  must  necessarily  kindle  the  three
sacred  fires.

46.  He  shall  offer  (in  them)  the  full  and  new
moon  sacrifices,  the  (half-yearly)  Agraya/za  Ish/i,
the  i^aturmasya-sacrifice,  the  (half-yearly)  sacrifices
at  which  animals  are  slain,  and  the  (annual)  Soma-
sacrifices.

47.  For  all  this  is  (particularly)  enjoined  (in  the
Veda),  and  called  by  way  of  laudation  '  a  debt.'

48.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  A  Brahma^a
is  born,  loaded  with  three  debts,' (and  further,  'He
owes)  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  a  son  to  the  manes,  the
study  of  the  Veda  to  the  i?/shis ;  therefore  he  is  free
from  debt  who  has  offered  sacrifices,  who  has  be-
gotten a  son,  and  who  has  lived  as  a  student  (with  a
teacher).'

49.  Let  him  (ordinarily)  initiate  a  Brahma^a  in
the  eighth  (year)  after  conception,

50.  A  Kshatriya  in  the  eleventh  year  after  con-
ception,

51.  A  VaLsya  in  the  twelfth  year  after  conception.

52.  The  staff  of  a  Brahma^a  (student  may)  option-
ally (be  made)  of  Palara  wood,

44.   Gautama  XV,  5.  45.  Vishmi  LIX,  2.

46.  Vishmi  LIX,  4-9.

47.  Manu  IV,  257.     I  read  rinasamstutam  with  MS.  E.

48.  Taitt.  Sawh.VI,  3,  10,  5;  -Satapatha-brahmawa  I,  7,  2,  n.
49-51.  Vishmi  XXVII,  15-17.

52-54.  Vishmi  XXVII,  29.  Regarding  other  kinds  of  sticks,
see  Gautama  I,  22-24.


XI,  68.  INITIATION.  57

53.  (That)  of  a  Kshatriya  optionally  of  the  wood
of  the  Banyan  tree,

54.  (That)  of  a  VaLrya  optionally  of  Udumbara
wood.

55.  (The  staff)  of  a  Brahma^a  shall  (be  of  such
a  length  as  to)  reach  the  hair,

56.  (That)  of  a  Kshatriya  the  forehead,

57.  (That)  of  a  Vai^ya  the  (tip  of  the)  nose.

58.  The  girdle  of  a  Brahma/za  shall  be  -made  of
Mu^a  grass,

59.  A  bowstring  (shall  be  that)  of  a  Kshatriya,

60.  (That)  of  a  Vairya  shall  be  made  of  hempen
threads.

61.  The  upper  garment  of  a  Brahma/za  (shall  be)
the  skin  of  a  black  antelope,

62.  (That)  of  a  Kshatriya  the  skin  of  a  spotted
deer,

63.  (That)  of  a  VaLsya  a  cow-skin  or  the  hide  of
a  he-goat.

64.  The  (lower)  garment  of  a  Brahma^a  (shall  be)
white  (and)  unblemished,

65.  (That)  of  a  Kshatriya  dyed  with  madder,

66.  (That)  of  a  Vauya  dyed  with  turmeric,  or
made  of  (raw)  silk  ;

67.  Or  (a  dress  made  of)  undyed  (cotton)  cloth
may  be  worn  by  (students  of)  all  (castes).

68.  A  Brahma/za  shall  ask  for  alms  placing  (the
word)  '  Lady '  first,

55-57.  Vishmi  XXVII,  22.  58-60.  Vishmi  XXVII,  18.

61-63.  Vishnu  XXVII,  20.

64-67.  Vishmi  XXVII,  19;  Gautama  I,  17-21.  'Unblemished,'
i.  e.  new,  without  holes  and  seams.

68-70.  Vishmi  XXVII,  25.  I.e.  'Lady,  give  alms;'  'Give,  0
lady,  alms;'   and  ' Give  alms,  lady.'


58  VASISH77/A.  XI,  69-

69.  A  Kshatriya  placing  (the  word)  *  Lady '  in  the
middle,

70.  A  Vaisya  placing  (the  word)  '  Lady '  at  the
end  (of  the  formula).

7 1 .  The  time  (for  the  initiation)  of  a  Brahma^a  has
not  passed  until  the  completion  of  the  sixteenth  year,

72.  (For  that)  of  a  Kshatriya  until  the  completion
of  the  twenty-second,

73.  (For  that)  of  a  Vaisya  until  the  completion  of
the  twenty-fourth.

74.  After  that  they  become  '  men  whose  Savitri
has  been  neglected.'

75.  Let  him  not  initiate  such  men,  nor  teach
them,  nor  sacrifice  for  them ;  let  them  not  form
matrimonial  alliances  (with  such  outcasts).

76.  A  man  whose  Savitri  has  not  been  performed,
may  undergo  the  Uddalaka-penance.

yy.  Let  him  subsist  during  two  months  on  barley-
gruel,  during  one  month  on  milk,  during  half  a
month  on  curds  of  two-milk  whey,  during  eight  days
on  clarified  butter,  during  six  days  on  alms  given
without  asking,  (and)  during  three  days  on  water,
and  let  him  fast  for  one  day  and  one  night.

78.  (Or)  he  may  go  to  bathe  (with  the  priests)  at
the  end  of  an  Asvamedha  (horse-sacrifice).

79.  Or  he  may  offer  a  Vratya-stoma.

71-73.  Vishmi  XXVII,  26.

74.  Vish/m  XXVII,  27.  Savitri,  literally  'the  Rik  sacred  to
Savitr/'  (Rig-veda  III,  62,  10),  means  here  'the  initiation,'  see
Gautama  I,  12  note.

75.  Apastamba  I,  1,  1,  28.  The  plural  vivahayeyu^,  'let  them
(not)  form  matrimonial  alliances/  indicates  that  orthodox  Brah-
mawas  must  neither  give  their  daughters  to  Patitasavitrikas  nor
take  the  daughters  of  such  persons.

78.    Gautama  XIX,  9.  79.   Gautama  XIX,  8.


XII,  8.  DUTIES    OF    A    SNATAKA.  59


Chapter  XII.

1.  Now,  therefore,  the  duties  of  a  Snataka  (will
be  explained).

2.  Let  him  not  beg  from  anybody  except  from  a
king  and  a  pupil.

3.  But  let  him  ask,  if  pressed  by  hunger,  for
some  (small  gift)  only,  a  cultivated  or  uncultivated
field,  a  cow,  a  goat  or  a  sheep,  (or)  at  the  last
extremity,  for  gold,  grain  or  food.

4.  But  the  injunction  (given  by  those  who  know
the  law)  is,  'A  Snataka  shall  not  be  faint  with
hunger.'

5.  Let  him  not  dwell  together  with  a  person
whose  clothes  are  foul ;

6.  (Let  him  not  cohabit)  with  a  woman  during
her  courses,

7.  Nor  with  an  unfit  one.

8.  Let  him  not  be  a  stay-at-home.

XII.  1.  'Now'  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  topic.  '  There-
fore/ i.  e.  because  the  duties  of  a  Snataka  have  to  be  taught  after
those  of  a  student.

2.  Manu  IV,  33  ;  Gautama  IX,  63.

3.  Manu  X,  11 3-1 14.  4.    Manu  IV,  34;  Vishmi  III,  79.

5.  Krzshwapa^ita,  whom  I  have  followed  in  the  translation  of
this  Sutra,  thinks  that  it  indicates  the  obligation  of  wearing  clean
clothes,  see  e.  g.  Vishmi  LXXI,  9.  It  seems  to  me,  however,
probable  that  its  real  sense  is,  '  Let  him  not  cohabit  with  a  woman
during  her  courses,'  and  that  the  next  Sutra  has  to  be  read  nara^a-
svalaya,  ■  Nor  with  one  of  immature  age.'

7.  'An  unfit  one,'  i.e.  '  one  of  low  caste'  (hina). — Knsh^apaw-
<fita.  '  Probably  a  sick  wife  is  meant,  Gautama  IX,  28.

8.  Gautama  IX,  53.  Krzshwapaw^ita  gives  besides  the  above
interpretation  of  the  Sutra  from  Haradatta's  Gautamiya  Mitakshara,
another  one,  according  to  which  it  means,  '  Let  him  not  forsake  his
own  family  and  enter  another  one  (by  adoption  and  so  forth).'  A  third


60  VASISHTff  A.  XII,  9.

9.  Let  him  not  step  over  a  stretched  rope  to
which  a  calf  (or  cow)  is  tied.

10.  Let  him  not  look  at  the  sun  when  he  rises  or
sets.

11.  Let  him  not  void  excrements  or  urine  in
water,

12.  Nor  spit  into  it.

13.  Let  him  ease  himself,  after  wrapping  up  his
head  and  covering  the  ground  with  grass  that  is  not
fit  to  be  used  at  a  sacrifice,  and  turning  towards  the
north  in  the  day-time,  turning  towards  the  south  at
night,  sitting  with  his  face  towards  the  north  in  the
twilight.

14.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  But  Snatakas  shall  always  wear  a  lower  garment
and  an  upper  one,  two  sacrificial  threads,  (shall  carry)
a  staff  and  a  vessel  filled  with  water/

15.  '  It  is  declared,  that  (a  vessel  becomes)  pure
(if  cleaned)  with  water,  or  with  the  hand,  or  with  a
stick,  or  with  fire.  Therefore  he  shall  clean  (his)
vessel  with  water  and  with  his  (right)  hand/

1 6.  '  For  Manu,  the  lord  of  created  beings,  calls
(this  mode  of  cleaning)  encircling  it  with  fire/

17.  'He  who  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  (the
rules  of)  purification  shall  sip  water  (out  of  this
vessel),  after  he  has  relieved  the  necessities  of
nature/

18.  Let  him  eat  his  food  facing  the  east.

explanation  is  given  by  Nardyawa  on  -Sarikhayana  Grzhya-sutra  IV,
12,  11,  who  takes  it  to  mean,  'Let  him  not  go  from  one  house
to  the  other/

9.  Gautama  IX,  52  ;  Vishmi  LXIII,  42.

10.  Vishmi  LXXI,  17-18.  11-12.  Vishmi  LXXI,  35.

13.  Gautama  IX,  37-38,  41-43;  Vish/zu  LX,  2-3.

14.  Vishmi  LXXI,  13-15.  18.  Vishmi  LXVIII,  40.


XII,  3i.  DUTIES    OF    A    SNATAKA.  6 1

19.  Silently  let  him  swallow  the  entire  mouthful,
(introducing  it  into  the  mouth)  with  the  four  fingers
and  with  the  thumb  ;

20.  And  let  him  not  make  a  noise  (while  eating).

21.  Let  him  approach  his  wife  in  the  proper
season,  except  on  the  Parva  days.

22.  Let  him  not  commit  a  crime  against  nature
(with  her).

23.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  The  ancestors  of  a  man  who  commits  an  unnatural
crime  with  a  wedded  wife,  feed  during  that  month
on  his  semen.  All  unnatural  intercourse  is  against
the  sacred  law/

24.  It  is  also  declared  in  the  Kanaka,  '  (When)
the  women  (asked)  Indra,  "  May  even  those  among
us,  who  are  soon  to  be  mothers,  (be  allowed  to)
cohabit  with  their  husbands,"  he  granted  that  wish/

25.  Let  him  not  ascend  a  tree.

26.  Let  him  not  descend  into  a  well.

27.  Let  him  not  blow  the  fire  with  his  mouth.

28.  Let  him  not  pass  between  a  fire  and  a  Brah-
ma^a,

29.  Nor  between  two  fires  ;

30.  Nor  between  two  Brahma^as  ;  or  (he  may  do
it)  after  having  asked  for  permission.

31.  Let  him  not  dine  together  with  his  wife.  For
it  is  declared  in  the  Va^asaneyaka,  '  His  children
will  be  destitute  of  manly  vigour.'

19.  Kr/"sh«apa«rfita  thinks  that  this  rule  refers  to  the  first  five
mouthfuls  only.

21.  Vishnu  LXIX,  1.  The  Parva  days  are  the  eighth,  four-
teenth, and  fifteenth  of  each  half-month.

25-27.    Gautama  IX,  32.  28.   Apastamba  II,  5,  12,  6.

30.  Apastamba  II,  5,  12,  7-8.

31.  Satapatha-brahmawa  X,  5,  2,  9;  Vishnu  LXVIII,  46.


62  VASISHFiZA.  XII,  32.

32.  Let  him  not  point  out  (a  rainbow  calling  it)
by  (its  proper)  name,  '  Indra's  bow.'

33.  Let  him  call  it  'the  jewelled  bow'  (mam-
dhanu£).

34.  Let  him  avoid  seats,  clogs,  sticks  for  cleaning
the  teeth,  (and  other  implements)  made  of  Pala^a
wood.

35.  Let  him  not  eat  (food  placed)  in  his  lap.

36.  Let  him  not  eat  (food  placed)  on  a  chair.
$J.    Let  him  carry  a  staff  of  bamboo,

38.  And  (wear)  two  golden  earrings.

39.  Let  him  not  wear  any  visible  wreath  except-
ing a  golden  one ;

40.  And  let  him  disdain  assemblies  and  crowds.

41.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse)  :
'  To  deny  the  authority  of  the  Vedas,  to  carp  at  the
teaching  of  the  iv'zshis,  to  waver  with  respect  to  any
(matter  of  duty),  that  is  to  destroy  ones  soul/

42.  Let  him  not  go  to  a  sacrifice  except  if  he  is
chosen  (to  be  an  officiating  priest.  But)  if  he  goes,
he  must,  on  returning  home,  turn  his  right  hand
(towards  the  place).

43.  Let  him  not  set  out  on  a  journey  when  the
sun  stands  over  the  trees.

32-33.    Gautama  IX;  22.  34.    Gautama  IX,  44.

35.  Vishmi  LXVIII,  21.  36.    Gautama  IX,  32.

37.  Vishmi  LXXI,  13.  -     38.   Vishmi  LXXI,  16.

39.  Gautama  IX,  32.

40.  I  read  sabhasamavayam&iva^ayeta.  The  corrupt  read-
ings of  Bh.  samavaya\sv£a  ^aviyan  and  of  F.  samavayaw^a  vakshi-
yanna  point  to  this  version,  the  sense  of  which  agrees  with  the
parallel  passages  of  other  Smrz'tis,  see  e.  g.  Apastamba  1, 1 1,  32, 19.

41.  Vishmi  LXXI,  83.  42.   Gautama  IX,  54-55,  66.
43.  Vishnu  LXIII,  9.     According  to  Kr/shwapa^ita  the  time

intended  is  midday.


XIII,  5*  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  6$

44.  Let  him  not  ascend  an  unsafe  boat,  or  (any
unsafe  conveyance).

45.  Let  him  not  cross  a  river,  swimming.

46.  When  he  has  risen  in  the  last  watch  (of  the
night)  and  has  recited  (the  Veda)  he  shall  not  lie
down  again.

47.  In  the  Muhurta  sacred  to  Pra^apati  a
Brahma/za  shall  fulfil  some  sacred  duties.


Chapter  XIII.

1.  Now,  therefore,  the  Upakarman  (or  the  rite
preparatory  to  the  study)  of  the  Veda  (must  be  per-
formed) on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  month  6rava^a
or  Praush^apada.

2.  Having  kindled  the  sacred  fire,  he  offers
(therein)  unground  (rice)  grains,

3.  To  the  gods,  to  the  /izshis,  and  to  the
A^andas.

4.  Let  them  begin  to  study  the  Vedas,  after
having  made  Brahma/zas  (invited  for  the  purpose)
wish  'welfare'  (svasti),  and  after  having  fed  them
with  sour  milk,

5.  (And  continue   the  Veda -study)  during  four

44.  Vishmi  LXIII,  47.

45.  Vishmi  LXIII,  46.  Krzsh/zapa?zfiTita  omits  this  Sutra  which
is  found  in  the  majority  of  the  MSS.

46.  Apastamba  1, 11,  32,  15;  Vishmi  XXX,  27.

47.  Manu  IV,  92;  Vishmi  LX,  1.  The  Muhurta  sacred  to
Pra^apati  is  the  same  as  the  Brahma-muhurta,  and  falls  in  the  last
watch  of  the  night.

XIII.  1.  Vishmi  XXX,  1.  Sravarca,  July-August.  PraushMa-
pada,  i.  e.  Bhadrapada,  August-September.  Kn'stmapam/ita  im-
properly combines  this  Sutra  with  the  next.

5.   Gautama  XVI,  2.


64  VASISHFtfA.  XIII,  6.

months  and  a  half  or   during  five  months    and   a
half.

6.  After  (the  expiration  of)  that  (period),  he  may
study  (the  Vedas)  during  the  bright  half  of  each
month,

7.  But  the  supplementary  treatises  (Ahgas)  of
the  Veda  at  pleasure  (both  during  the  bright  and
the  dark  halves  of  each  month).

8.  Interruptions  of  the  (Veda-study  shall  take
place),

9.  If  it  thunders  during  the  twilight,

10.  During  (both)  the  twilights  (of  each  day),

11.  In  towns  where  a  corpse  (lies)  or  A^dalas
(stay).

12.  At  pleasure  (he  may  study  seated)  in  (a  place)
which  has  been  smeared  with  cowdung  and  around
which  a  line  has  been  drawn.

13.  (Let  him  not  study)  near  a  burial-ground,

14.  (Nor)  lying  down,

15.  Nor  when  he  has  eaten  or  received  a  gift  at
a  funeral  sacrifice ;

16.  And  with  reference  to  this  (subject)  they
quote  a  verse  of  Manu,  '  Be  it  fruit,  or  water,  or

6-7.   Manu  IV,  98.

9.   Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  20.  10.   Gautama  XVI,  12.

11.  Gautama  XVI,  19;  Vishmi  XXX,  10.  The  above  transla-
tion follows  Krzsh7*apa^ita's  gloss.  But  the  Sutra  may  also  be
taken  differently  :  '  In  (villages)  where  a  corpse  lies  or  a  iTa^ala
stays  (and)  in  towns.'  For  the  prohibition  to  study  in  towns  is
mentioned  by  Gautama  XVI,  45  ;  Manu  IV,  116;  and  Apastamba

I,  3>  9>  4-

12.  Apastamba  1,3,  9,  5.  The  rule  refers  to  places,  such  as
high-roads,  where  studying  is  ordinarily  forbidden.

13.  Vishmi  XXX,  15;  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  6.

14.  Gautama  XVI,  17.  15.   Gautama  XVI,  34.
16.   Manu  IV,  117  somewhat  resembles  the  verse  quoted.    But


XIII,  26.  THE    STUDY    OF    THE   VEDA.  65

sesamum,  or  food,  or  whatever  be  the  (gift)  at  a
6raddha,  let  him  not,  having  just  accepted  it,  recite
the  Veda ;  for  it  is  declared  in  the  Smrzti,  that  the
hand  of  a  Brahma^a  is  his  mouth.'

1 7.  (Let  him  not  recite  the  Veda)  while  he  runs,
(nor)  while  a  foul  smell  and  the  like  (are  perceptible,
nor)  on  barren  ground,

18.  (Nor)  when  he  has  ascended  a  tree,

19.  (Nor)  in  a  boat  or  in  a  camp,

20.  Nor  after  meals  while  his  hands  are  moist,

21.  (Nor)  while  the  sound  of  aVka  (is  heard),

22.  (Nor)  on  the  fourteenth  day  (of  each  half-
month,  nor)  on  the  new  moon  day,  (nor)  on  the  eighth
day  (of  each  half-month,  nor)  on  an  Ash/aka,

23.  (Nor)  while  he  stretches  his  feet  out,  (nor)
while  he  makes  a  lap,  (nor)  while  he  leans  against
(something),  nor  (in  any  other  unbecoming  posture),

24.  (Nor)  close  to  his  Gurus,

25.  (Nor)  during  that  night  in  which  he  has  had
conjugal  intercourse,

26.  (Nor)  dressed  in  that  garment  which  he  had
on  during  conjugal  intercourse,  except  if  it  has  been
washed,

its  altered  form  shows  clearly  that  the  Manava  Dharnmastra
known  to  Vasish/Aa  differed  from  the  work  which  at  present  goes
by  that  name.    Compare  also  -Sahkhayana  Grztiya-sutra  IV,  7,  55.

17.  Yag-navalkya  I,  150;  Gautama  XVI,  19;  Manu  IV,  120.

18.  Apastamba  I,  3, 11,  16.

19.  Vishmi  XXX,  18;  Manu  IV,  121.

20.  Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  25.

21.  Gautama  XVI,  7,  and  note.

22.  Vishmi  XXX,  4  ;  Gautama  XVI,  37-38.  The  Ash/akas  are
the  eighth  days  of  the  dark  halves  of  the  winter  months,  Marga-
jirsha,  Pausha,  Magna,  and  Phalguwa.

23.  Vishmi  XXX,  17  ;  Manu  IV,  112.         26.  Manu  IV,  116.

[14]  F


66  vASisHrs-A.  xm,  27.

27.  (Nor)  at  the  extremity  of  a  village,

28.  (Nor)  after  (an  attack  of)  vomiting,

29.  (Nor)  while  voiding  urine  or  faeces.

30.  (Let  him  not  recite)  the  Rig-veda,  the  Ya^ur-
veda,  and  (the  Atharva-veda)  while  the  sound  of  the
Saman  melodies  (is  audible),  nor  (the  Saman  while
the  other  Vedas  are  being  recited).

31.  (Let  him  not  study)  before  (his  food  is)
digested,

32.  (Nor)  when  a  thunderbolt  falls,

33.  (Nor)  when  an  earthquake  happens,

34.  Nor  when  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  eclipsed.

35.  When  a  preternaturally  loud  sound  is  heard
in  the  sky,  when  a  mountain  falls,  (and)  when  showers
of  stones,  blood  or  sand  (fall  from  the  sky,  the  Veda
must  not  be  read)  during  the  twenty-four  hours  (im-
mediately succeeding  the  event).

36.  If  meteors  and  lightning  appear  together,  (the
interruption  shall  last)  three  (days  and)  nights.

37.  A  meteor  (alone  and)  a  flash  of  lightning
(alone  cause  an  interruption  lasting)  as  long  as  the
sun  shines  (on  that  or  the  next  day).

38.  (If  rain  or  other  celestial  phenomena  come)
out  of  season,  (the  Veda  must  not  be  read)  during
the  twenty-four  hours  (immediately  succeeding  the
event).

27.    Gautama -XVI,  18.  28.  Vishmi  XXX,  19.

29.  Gautama  XVI,  11.  Krzshwapawdita  improperly  divides  the
Sutra  into  two.

30.  Vishmi  XXX,  26.  31.  Vishmi  XXX,  21.
32-34.  Vishmi  XXX,  5  ;  Gautama  XVI,  22.

35.  Gautama  XVI,  22;  Manu  IV,  105,  115.  Kr*sh«apa#</ita
mentions  digdaha,  '  when  the  sky  appears  preternaturally  red/  as
a  various  reading  for  '  dignada.'

38.   Apastamba  I,  3, 11,  29.


XIII,  48.  SALUTING.  6  J

39.  If  the  teacher  has  died,  (he  shall  not  study
the  Veda)  during  three  (days  and)  nights.

40.  If  the  teacher's  son,  a  pupil,  or  a  wife  (have
died,  he  shall  not  study)  during  a  day  and  a  night.

41.  Let  him  honour  an  officiating  priest,  a  father-
in-law,  paternal  and  maternal  uncles,  (though  they
may  be)  younger  than  himself,  by  rising  and  saluting
them,

42.  Likewise  the  wives  of  those  persons  whose
feet  must  be  embraced,  and  the  teacher's  (wives),

43.  And  his  parents.

44.  Let  him  say  to  one  acquainted  with  (the
meaning  of)  a  salute,  '  I  N.  N.  ho!  (salute  thee);'

45.  But  him  who  does  not  know  it  (he  shall
address  with  the  same  formula,  omitting  his  name).

46.  When  a  salute  is  returned,  the  last  vowel  (of
the  noun  standing)  in  the  vocative  is  produced  to
the  length  of  three  moras,  and  if  it  is  a  diphthong
(e  or  o)  changeable  according  to  the  Sandhi  rules,  it
becomes  ay  or  av,  e.  g.  bho,  bhav.

47.  A  father  who  has  committed  a  crime  causing
loss  of  caste  must  be  cast  off.  But  a  mother  does
not  become  an  outcast  for  her  son.

48.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :

39.   Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  2-4.  40.  Vishnu  XXXII,  4.

42.  The  persons  intended  are,  the  teacher  and  so  forth.  See
Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  7,  note.

44.  Gautama  VI,  5.

45.  Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  23.  Kn'shwapa^^ita  combines  this
Sutra  with  the  preceding.

46.  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  18.  In  returning  a  salute,  the  name  of
the  person  addressed  is  pronounced,  and  if  it  ends  in  a,  the  vowel
is  made  pluta,  while  e  and  o  are  changed  to  aya  and  ava,  e.  g.  Hare
to  Haraya.

47.  Gautama  XX,  1 ;  XXI,  15  ;  Apastamba  I,  10,  28,  9.

48.  Manu  II,  145.

F    2


68  VASISH77TA.  XIII,  49-

*  The  teacher  (a/£arya)  is  ten  times  more  venerable
than  a  sub- teacher  (upadhyaya),  the  father  a  hundred
times  more  than  the  teacher,  and  the  mother  a
thousand  times  more  than  the  father.'

49.  '  A  wife,  sons,  and  pupils  who  are  denied  by
sinful  deeds,  must  first  be  reproved,  and  (if  they  do  not
amend,  then)  be  cast  off.  He  who  forsakes  them
in  any  other  way,  becomes  (himself)  an  outcast.'

50.  An  officiating  priest  and  a  teacher  who  neglect
to  teach  the  recitation  of  the  Veda,  or  to  sacrifice,
shall  be  cast  off.  If  he  does  not  forsake  them,  he
becomes  an  outcast.

51.  They  declare  that  the  male  offspring  of  out-
casts are  (also)  outcasts,  but  not  the  females.

52.  For  a  female  enters  (the  family  of)  a  stranger.

53.  He  may  marry  such  a  (female)  without  a
dowry.

54.  'If  the  teacher's  teacher  is  near,  he  must  be
treated  like  the  teacher  (himself).  The  Veda  declares
that  one  must  behave  towards  the  teacher's  son  just
as  towards  the  teacher.'

55.  A  Brahma/za  shall  not  accept  (as  gifts)
weapons,  poison,  and  spirituous  liquor.

56.  Learning,  wealth,  age,  relationship,  and  occupa-
tion must  be  honoured.

57.  (But)  each  earlier  named  (quality)  is  more
venerable  than  (the  succeeding  ones).

58.  If  he  meets  aged  men,  infants,  sick  men,  load-
carriers,  women,  and  persons  riding  in  chariots,  he

49.   Apastamba  I,  2,  8,  29-30.  50.    Gautama  XXI,  12.

51.   Apastamba  I,  10,  29,  14.

53.  Manu  II,  238;  Ya^navalkya  III,  261.

54.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  29,  31.    '  56.   Vishmi  XXXII,  16.
58-59.    Vishmi  LXIII,  51.


XIV,  6.  LAWFUL    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  69

must  make  way  (for  them,  i.e.)  for  each  later  (named
before  those  enumerated  earlier).

59.  If  a  king  and  a  Snataka  meet,  the  king  must
make  (way)  for  the  Snataka.

60.  All  (must  make  way)  for  a  bride  who  is  being
conveyed  (to  her  husband's  house).

6 1 .  Grass,  room  (for  resting),  fire,  water,  a  welcome,
and  kind  words  never  fail  in  the  houses  of  good  men.

Chapter  XIV.

1.  Now,  therefore,  we  will  declare  what  may  be
eaten  and  what  may  not  be  eaten.

2.  Food  given  by  a  physician,  a  hunter,  a  woman
of  bad  character,  a  mace-bearer,  a  thief,  an  AbhLrasta,
a  eunuch,  (or)  an  outcast  must  not  be  eaten,

3.  (Nor  that  given)  by  a  miser,  one  who  has  per-
formed the  initiatory  ceremony  of  a  6rauta-sacrifice,
a  prisoner,  a  sick  person,  a  seller  of  the  Soma-plant,  a
carpenter,  a  washerman,  a  dealer  in  spirituous  liquor,
a  spy,  a  usurer,  (or)  a  cobbler,

4.  Nor  (that  given)  by  a  .Sftdra,

5.  Nor  (that  given)  by  one  who  lives  by  his
weapons,

6.  Nor  (that  given)  by  the  (kept)  paramour  of  a


61.    Apastamba  II,  2,  4, 14;  Gautama  V,  35-36.

XIV.  2.  Vishmi  LI,  7,  10-11.  Dam/ika,  'a  mace-bearer/  may
mean  '  a  police  officer '  or  '  a  messenger.'  I  read  with  MSS.  Bh.
and  F.  sham2%a,  *  a  eunuch,'  instead  of  jaMa, '  a  rogue,'  the  reading
of  the  other  MSS.  and  of  Kr/sh»apa»</ita.

3.  Vishmi  LI,  8-9,  12,  19  ;  Gautama  XVII,  17.  I  write  su^aka,
1  a  spy/  instead  of  sMika, '  a  tailor,'  according  to  the  other  Smr/tis,
e.  g.  Vishmi  LI,  12  ;  Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  30

4.  Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  13.  5.   Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  19.

6.   Vishmi  LI,  16 ;  Gautama  XVII,  18.    I  read  with  the  majority


70  VASISHFtfA.  XIV,  7.

married   woman,   or   by   a   husband   who    allows    a
paramour  (to  his  wife),

7.  Nor  (that  given)  by  an  incendiary,

8.  Nor  (that  given)  by  (a  ruler)  who  does  not  slay
those  worthy  of  capital  punishment,

9.  Nor  (food)  offered  publicly  with  these  words,
1  Who  is  willing  to  eat  ?'

10.  Nor  food  given  by  a  multitude  of  givers,  or
by  harlots,  and  so  forth.

11.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  The  gods  do  not  eat  (the  offerings)  of  a  man  who
keeps  dogs,  nor  of  him  whose  (only)  wife  is  of  the
•Sudra  caste,  nor  of  him  who  lives  in  subjection  to
his  wife,  nor  of  (a  husband)  who  (permits)  a  paramour
(of  his  wife  to  reside)  in  his  house.'

12.  He  may  accept  (the  following  presents  even)
from  such  (people,  viz.)  firewood,  water,  fodder,
Kusa  grass,  parched  grain,  (food)  given  without
asking,  a  vehicle,  (shelter  in)  the  house,  small  fish,
millet,  a  garland,  perfumes,  honey,  and  meat.

13.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  For  the  sake  of  a  Guru,  when  he  desires  to  save
his  wife  (and  family  from  starvation),  when  he  wishes
to  honour  the  gods  or  guests,  he  may  accept  (presents)
from  anybody;  but  let  him  not  satisfy  his  (own  hunger)
with  such  (gifts).'


of  the  MSS.  ya^opapati/ra  [patti/rc  F.]  manyate,  instead  of  B.'s  and
Krz'shflapaTz^ita's  ya^opari  manyate.

9.  Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  17.

10.  Vishmi  LI,  7.     'And  so  forth  (iti),  i.e.  by  cruel  men  and
the  like.' — Krzshwapaw^ita.

11.  Vishmi  LI,  15.

12.  Gautama  XVII,  3;  Vishmi  LVII,  10.

13.  Vishmi  LVII,  13;  Manu  IV,  251.


XIV,  21.  LAWFUL   AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  7 1

14.  Food  given  by  a  hunter  who  uses  the  bow
must  not  be  rejected.

15.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda, '  At  a  sacrificial
session  (sattra),  which  lasted  one  thousand  years,
Agastya  went  out  to  hunt.  He  had  sacrificial  cakes
prepared  with  the  meat  of  beasts  and  fowls  good
(to  eat).'

16.  With  reference  to  this  (subject)  they  quote
also  some  verses  proclaimed  by  Pra^apati,  '  Pra^a-
pati  (the  Lord  of  created  beings)  has  declared  that
food  freely  offered  and  brought  (by  the  giver  himself)
may  be  eaten,  though  (the  giver)  be  a  sinful  man,  pro-
vided the  gift  has  not  been  asked  for  beforehand.'

1 7.  '  Food  offered  by  a  man  who  has  faith  must
certainly  be  eaten,  even  though  (the  giver)  be  a
thief,  but  not  that  given  by  (a  Brahma/za)  who  sacri-
fices for  many  and  who  initiates  many.'

1 8.  '  The  manes  do  not  eat  during  fifteen  years
(the  food)  of  that  man  who  disdains  a  (freely  offered
gift),  nor  does  the  fire  carry  his  offerings  (to  the
gods).'

19.  '  But  alms,  though  offered  without  asking,  must
not  be  accepted  from  a  physician,  from  a  hunter,  from
a  surgeon  or  a  (very)  wicked  man,  from  a  eunuch,  and
from  a  faithless  wife.'

20.  Fragments  of  food  left  by  other  persons  than
the  teacher  must  not  be  eaten,

21.  Nor  remnants  of  one's  own  (meal)  and  food
touched  by  leavings,

15.  Manu  V,  22-23.  I  connect  vi^Myate  with  this  Sutra,  instead
of  with  the  preceding  one,  as  Knsh;zapa«</ita  does.

16.  Vishmi  LVII,  11 ;  Manu  IV,  248 ;  Apastamba  I,  6,  19,  14.

18.  Vishwu  LVII,  12  ;  Manu  IV,  249  j  Apastamba  I,  6,  19,  14.

19.  Apastamba  I,  6,  19,  15.  20.   Vishmi  XXVIII,  n.


J2  VASISHrtfA.  XIV,  22.

22.  Nor  (food)  defiled  by  contact  with  a  garment,
hair,  or  insects.

23.  But  at  pleasure  he  may  use  (such  food)  after
taking  out  the  hair  and  the  insects,  sprinkling  it  with
water,  dropping  ashes  on  it,  and  (after  it  has  been
declared)  fit  for  use  by  the  word  (of  a  Brahma^a).

24.  With  reference  to  this  (subject)  they  quote
also  some  verses  proclaimed  by  Pra^apati, '  The  gods
created  for  Brahma^as  three  means  of  purifying
(defiled  substances),  viz.  ignorance  (of  defilement),
sprinkling  (them)  with  water,  and  commending  (them)
by  word  of  mouth.'

25.  \  Let  him  not  throw  away  that  food  which,  at  a
procession  with  images  of  the  gods,  at  weddings,  and
at  sacrifices,  is  touched  by  crows  or  dogs.'

26.  'After  the  (defiled)  portion  has  been  removed,
the  remainder  shall  be  purified,  liquids  by  straining
them,  but  solid  food  by  sprinkling  it  with  water.'

2  7.  '  What  has  been  touched  by  the  mouth  of  a
cat  is  even  pure.'

28.  (Cooked  food  which  has  become)  stale  (by
being  kept),  what  is  naturally  bad,  what  has  been
placed  once  only  in  the  dish,  what  has  been  cooked
more  than  once,  raw  (food),  and  (food)  insufficiently
cooked  (must  not  be  eaten).

29.  But  at  pleasure  he  may  use  (such  food)  after
pouring  over  it  sour  milk  or  clarified  butter.

22.  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  28;  Gautama  XVII,  9.

23.  Vishmi  XXIII,  38;  Ya^avalkya  1, 189.

24.  Ya^Tiavalkya  I,  191.

26.  Vishnu  XXIII,  30.  Krz'shTzapaTwTita  thinks  that  plavanena,
1  by  straining  them  (through  a  cloth),'  may  also  mean  '  by  heating
them  on  the  fire/

28.  Gautama  XVII,  13,  and  note,  15-16.

29.  ManuV,  24.


XIV,  37*  LAWFUL    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  7 3


30.  With  reference  to  this  (subject)  they  quote
also  some  verses  proclaimed  by  Pra^apati,  'A  Brah-
ma^a  shall  not  eat  clarified  butter  or  oil  which  drips
from  the  nails  (of  the  giver).  Yama  has  declared
such  (food  to  be)  impure ;  (to  eat  it  is  as  sinful)  as
to  partake  of  cow's  flesh.'

31.  'But  fatty  substances,  salt,  and  condiments
proffered  with  the  hand  do  not  benefit  the  giver,  and
he  who  partakes  of  them  will  eat  sin.'

32.  '  Let  him  give,  therefore,  such  substances
placed  on  a  leaf  or  on  grass,  but  never  with  his
hands  or  in  an  iron  vessel.'

33.  For  eating  garlic,  onions,  mushrooms,  turnips,
.Sleshmantaka,  exudations  from  trees,  the  red  sap  flow-
ing from  incisions  (in  trees  or  plants),  food  pecked  at  by
crows  or  worried  by  dogs,  or  the  leavings  of  a  .Sudra,
an  Atikrt^Ara.  (penance  must  be  performed).

34.  (Let  him  not  drink)  the  milk  of  a  cow  that  is
in  heat,  nor  of  one  whose  calf  has  died,

35.  Nor  that  which  cows,  buffalo-cows,  and  goats
give  during  the  first  ten  days  (after  giving  birth  to
young  ones),

36.  Nor  water  collected  at  the  bottom  of  a  boat.

3  J.  Let  him  avoid  wheat-cakes,  (fried)  grain,
porridge,  barley-meal,  pulse -cakes,  oil,  rice  boiled
in  milk,  and  vegetables  that  have  turned  sour  (by
standing),

33.  Vish/zu  LI,  34,  36;  Gautama  XVII,  32-33.  Regarding
the  At'ikrikkkra.  penance,  see  below,  XXIV,  1.

34.  Vishnu  LI,  40.  For  other  explanations  of  the  term  san-
dhini,  '  a  cow  that  is  in  heat,'  see  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  23 ;  Vishmi
LI,  40.

35.  Vishmi  LI,  39.  The  Sutra  implies  that  the  milk  of  other
animals  must  not  be  drunk  under  any  circumstances.

37-38.  Vishmi  LI,  35,  42.


74  VASISHTHA.  XIV,  38.

38.  Likewise  other  kinds  of  (sour)  food  prepared
with  milk  and  barley-flour.

39.  Among  five-toed  animals,  the  porcupine,  the
hedgehog,  the  hare,  the  tortoise,  and  the  iguana  may
be  eaten,

40.  Among  (domestic)  animals  those  having  teeth
in  one  jaw  only,  excepting  camels.

41.  And  among  fishes,  the  long-nosed  crocodile,
the  Gavaya,  the  porpoise,  the  alligator,  and  the  crab
(must  not  be  eaten),

42.  Nor  those  which  are  misshaped  or  have  heads
like  snakes,

43.  Nor  the  bos  Gaurus,  the  Gayal,  and  the
.Sarabha,

44.  Nor  those  that  have  not  been  (specially  men-
tioned (as  fit  for  food),

45.  Nor  milch-cows,  draught-oxen,  and  animals
whose  milk  teeth  have  not  dropped  out.

46.  It  is  declared  in  the  Va^asaneyaka,  that  (the
flesh  of)  milch-cows  and  oxen  is  fit  for  offerings.

47.  But  regarding  the  rhinoceros  and  the  wild
boar  they  make  conflicting  statements.

48.  And  among  birds,  those  who  seek  their  food
by  scratching  with  their  feet,  the  web-footed  ones,
the    Kalavihka,  the    water-hen,    the    flamingo,  the


39.  Gautama  XVII,  27.  Haradatta  on  Apastamba  and  Gau-
tama explain  jvavidh,  '  the  porcupine,'  to  be  a  kind  of  boar,  and
jalyaka,  '  the  hedgehog,'  to  be  '  the  porcupine.'

40.  Visrmu  LI,  30;  ManuV,  18.

41-42.    Gautama  XVII,  36  ;  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  38-39.
43.    Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  29.  44.    ManuV,  11,17.

45.    Gautama  XVII,  30-31.         46.    Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  31.
48.    Gautama  XVII,  34-35;  Vishmi  LI,  28-31.     I  read   man-
dhala,  '  the  flying  fox/   while  Krzsh«apa«/ita  gives  maghara,  a


XV,  6.  ADOPTION.  jc


Brahma;d  duck,  the  Bhasa,  the  crow,  the  blue  pigeon,
the  osprey,  the  A^ataka,  the  dove,  the  crane,  the
black  partridge,  the  grey  heron,  the  vulture,  the
falcon,  the  white  egret,  the  ibis,  the  cormorant,  the
peewit,  the  flying-fox,  those  flying  about  at  night,
the  woodpecker,  the  sparrow,  the  Railataka,  the
green  pigeon,  the  wagtail,  the  village-cock,  the  parrot,
the  starling,  the  cuckoo,  those  feeding  on  flesh,  and
those  living  about  villages  (must  not  be  eaten).


Chapter  XV.

i.  Man  formed  of  uterine  blood  and  virile  seed
proceeds  from  his  mother  and  his  father  (as  an  effect)
from  its  cause.

2.  (Therefore)  the  father  and  the  mother  have
power  to  give,  to  sell,  and  to  abandon  their  (son).

3.  But  let  him  not  give  or  receive  (in  adoption)
an  only  son ;

4.  For  he  (must  remain)  to  continue  the  line  of
the  ancestors.

5.  Let  a  woman  neither  give  nor  receive  a  son
except  with  her  husband's  permission.

6.  He  who  desires  to  adopt  a  son,  shall  assemble

reading  which  he  cannot  explain.  The  MSS.  read  as  follows :
B.  E.  maghara,  Bh.  F.  madhaw,  I.  O.  913  (/i/Abh) andha  (naktaw).
Haradatta  on  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  33  explains  plava,  'the  water-
hen,'  to  be  a  kind  of  heron,  called  also  jaka/abila.

XV.  1-9.  Vyavaharamayukha  IV,  5, 16;  Colebrooke  V,  Digest
CCLXXIII;  Dattakamimawsa  IV,  14;  V,  31-40.

3.  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  I,  1 1,  1 1 ;  Dattakamima/rcsa  IV,  2-3.

4.  Dattakamimawsa  IV,  4.  I.  e.  to  offer  funeral  sacrifices  to
his  ancestors  and  to  have  sons  who  do  it  after  him.

5.  Dattakamima^sa  I,  15  ;  IV,  9.

6.  Colebrooke,    Mitakshara  I,  n,  13,    and   note;    Dattakami-


76  VASiSHrcr a.  xv,  7.

his  kinsmen,  announce  his  intention  to  the  king,  make
burnt-offerings  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  reciting
the  Vyahrztis,  and  take  (as  a  son)  a  not  remote  kins-
man, just  the  nearest  among  his  relatives.

7.  But  if  a  doubt  arises  (with  respect  to  an  adopted
son  who  is)  a  remote  kinsman,  (the  adopter)  shall  set
him  apart  like  a  .Sudra.

8.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda, '  Through  one
he  saves  many.'

9.  If,  after  an  adoption  has  been  made,  a  legiti-
mate son  be  born,  (the  adopted  son)  shall  obtain  a
fourth  part,

10.  Provided  he  be  not  engaged  in  (rites)  pro-
curing prosperity.


ma/?zsa  II,  51  ;  Dattaka>£andrika  II,  11.  'To  the  king/  i.e.  to  the
person  who  holds  the  village,  either  to  the  king  of  the  country  or
to  the  feudal  chief  (Thakor)  who  holds  it  under  the  sovereign.
*  Reciting  the  Vyahrztis/  i.  e.  saying  with  the  first  oblation  Om
bhvU  svaha,  with  the  second  Om  bhuva^  svaha,  with  the  third  Om
sva^  svaha,  and  with  the  fourth  Om  bh.,  bh.,  sv.  svaha;  see
Vyavaharamayukha  IV,  5,  42.  'A  not  remote  kinsman,  just  the
nearest  among  his  relatives/  i.  e.  a  boy  as  nearly  related  as  possible,
in  the  first  instance  a  Sapi/wfa,  on  failure  of  such  a  one,  a  Sama-
nodaka  or  a  Sagotra.

7.  Dattakamimawsa  II,  18  ;  Dattaka/fcandrika  II,  11.  'If  a  doubt
arises/  i.  e.  if  the  adopter  afterwards  feels  uncertain  regarding  the
caste  or  other  qualifications  of  his  adopted  son.  '  Set  him  apart
like  a  -Sudra/  i.  e.  shall  neither  have  him  initiated  nor  employ  him
for  any  sacred  rites.

8.  Dattaka&mdrika'  II,  11.

9.  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  I,  11,  24.  Dattakamimawsa  X,  1;
Dattaka&tndrika  II,  n  j  V,  17.  For  the  explanation  of  the  term
1  a  fourth  part/  see  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  I,  77.

10.  'Rites  procuring  prosperity/  i.e.  »Sraddhas,  expiatory  rites,
&c.  See  also  above,  III,  71,  and  Gautama  XI,  17.  According  to
KrzshwapaTzaTita  the  estate  is  in  this  case  to  be  divided  equally
between  the  legitimate  son  and  the  adopted  son.     An  entirely


[V,  18.        EXCOMMUNICATION   AND    READMISSION.  J  J

ii.  He  who  divulges  the  Veda  (to  persons  not
authorised  to  study  it),  he  who  sacrifices  for  ^udras,
(and  all  those)  who  have  fallen  from  the  rank  of
the  highest  caste  (shall  be  excommunicated  by  the
ceremony  of)  emptying  the  water-vessel.

12.  A  slave  or  the  son  of  a  wife  of  a  lower  caste,
or  a  relative  not  belonging  to  the  same  caste,  who
is  destitute  of  good  qualities,  shall  fetch  a  broken
pot  from  a  heap  of  vessels  unfit  for  use,  place  Kusa
grass,  the  tops  of  which  have  been  cut  off,  or  Lohita
grass  (on  the  ground),  and  empty  the  pot  for  the
(outcast,  overturning  it)  with  his  left  foot ;

13.  And  the  relatives  of  the  (outcast),  allowing
their  hair  to  hang  down,  shall  touch  him  who
empties  (the  pot).

14.  Turning  (when  they  leave)  their  left  hands
towards  (that  spot),  they  may  go  home  at  pleasure.

15.  Let  them  not  afterwards  admit  the  (excom-
municated person)  to  sacred  rites.

16.  Those  who  admit  him  to  sacred  rites  become
his  equals.

17.  But  outcasts  who  have  performed  (the  pre-
scribed) penance  (may  be)  readmitted.

18.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):


different  explanation,  'Provided  (the  estate)  may  not  have  been
expended  in  acts  of  merit,'  is  given  Dattaka/fcandrika  V,  17-18.
It  is  doubtlessly  erroneous,  for  '  the  estate '  is  nowhere  mentioned  in
the  preceding  Sutras.

11.  Gautama  XX,  1.

12.  Gautama  XX,  4.  'For  the  (outcast)/  i.  e.  pronouncing  his
name,  and  saying, '  I  deprive  N.  N.  of  water.'

13.  Gautama  XX,  5.  Krzsrmapara^ita  takes  the  Sutra  differently,
but  his  explanation  is  refuted  by  the  parallel  passage  of  Gautama
and  Haradatta's  commentary  thereon.

14.  Gautama  XX,  7.  15.   Gautama  XX,  8-9.


78  VASISHTHA.  XV,  19.

'  Let  him  walk  before  those  who  readmit  him,  like
one  gamboling  and  laughing.  Let  him  walk  behind
those  who  excommunicate  him,  like  one  weeping
and  sorrowing.'

19.  Those  who  strike  their  teacher,  their  mother,
or  their  father  may  be  readmitted  in  the  following
manner,  either  after  being  pardoned  by  the  (persons
offended)  or  after  expiating  their  sin.

20.  Having  filled  a  golden  or  an  earthen  vessel
(with  water  taken)  from  a  sacred  lake  or  river,  they
pour  (the  water)  over  him,  (reciting  the  three  verses)
1  Ye  waters  are '  &c.

21.  All  the  (other  ceremonies  to  be  performed  on
the)  readmission  of  one  who  has  bathed  (in  this
manner)  have  been  explained  by  (those  ordained  on)
the  birth  of  a  son.

Chapter  XVI.

1.  Now  (follow  the  rules  regarding)  legal  pro-
ceedings.

2.  Let  the  king  (or)  his  minister  transact  the
business  on  the  bench.

3.  When  two  (parties)  have  a  dispute,  let  him
not  be  partial  to  one  of  them.


20.  Gautama  XX,  10-14.  I  read  '  puwyahradat/  instead  of
'  purwahradat,'  as  the  MSS.  and  Knsh«apa«^ita  have.  The  passage
of  the  Veda  referred  to  occurs  Rig-veda  X,  9, 1.

21.  I.  e.  the  person  readmitted  shall  receive  all  the  various
sacraments  just  like  a  new-born  child.

XVI.  2.  Vishmilll,  72-73.  Kr2*sh«apa«</ita  gives  a  second  expla-
nation of  the  Sutra,  which  also  appears  admissible,  '  Let  the  king
transact  the  business  on  the  bench,  taking  counsel  (with  learned
Brahma«as  as  assessors);'  see  Vishmi  III,  72.

3.  Translated  as  above  the  Sutra  is  nearly  equivalent  to  Gautama


XVI,  7-  LEGAL    PROCEDURE.  79

4.  Let  him  reason  properly  regarding  an  offence ;
finally  the  offence  (will  become  evident  thereby).

5.  He  who  properly  reasons  regarding  an  offence,
in  accordance  with  the  sum  of  the  science  of  the
first  two  castes,  is  equitable  towards  all  created
beings.

6.  And  let  him  protect  what  has  been  gained ;

7.  (Likewise)  the  property  of  infants  (of  the)  royal
(race).

XI,  5.  But  the  phrase  'when  two  parties  have  a  dispute'  may
also  indicate,  as  Kr/sh«apa«^ita  suggests,  that  the  king  or  judge
shall  not  promote  litigation,  see  Gautama  XIII,  27.  As  Krz'srma-
pa/zdTita  states,  the  Sutra  may,  however,  mean  also, '  When  one  case
is  being  argued,  let  him  not  begin  another  (without  finishing  the
first);'  see  Manu  VIII,  43.  Owing  to  the  particular  nature  of  the
Sutra  style  and  the  inclination  of  the  Brahmanical  mind  to  double-
entendres,  I  do  not  think  it  improbable  that  the  author  may  have
intended,  both  in  this  and  in  the  preceding  Sutras,  that  his  words
should  be  interpreted  in  two  ways.

4.  Gautama  XI,  23-24.  I  divide  the  words  of  the  text,  as
follows,  'yathasanam  (i.  e.  yatha-asanam)  aparadhohi;  antena
aparadha^,'  and  interpolate  syat  at  the  end  of  the  first  clause.

5.  Kr*'sh#apa7z^ita  wrongly  divides  this  Sutra  into  two,  and
wrongly  adopts  the  reading  of  MSS.  B.  and  E.,  consequently  he
obtains  a  sense  only  by  the  most  astonishing  tricks  of  interpreta-
tion. I  read  with  MSS.  Bh.  and  F.,  yathasanam  aparadhohyadya-
varwayor  vidyantata^,  to  which  the  reading  of  I.  O.  913  adya-
varwayor  vidhanata^  points  also.  The  meaning  of  the  expression,
1  according  to  the  sum  of  the  science  of  the  first  two  castes,'  I  take
to  be  according  to  the  rules  of  sacred  learning  and  of  the  mimawsa,
which  is  peculiar  to  the  Brahma/zas  and  of  logic  (anvikshiki)  and
polity  (da^^aniti),  which  are  peculiar  to  or  at  least  recommended
to  the  particular  attention  of  the  Kshatriyas.

.  6.  I  read  with  MSS.  Bh.  and  F.,  sa^pannaw  ka.  rakshayet.  I  con-
sider this  Sutra  to  contain  an  admonition  addressed  to  the  king  for
himself;  see  Manu  VII,  99.  Krz'sh^apaw^ita  and  B.  read  sapattraw
£a  rakshayet,  '  Let  him  protect  that  which  is  attested  by  writings,'
i.  e.  the  donations  of  former  kings,  attested  by  writings ;  see  Vish/m
III,  83.

7.   Knsh»apaMta  thinks  that  the  rule  refers  to  the  property  of


80  VASISHTtfA.  XVI,  8.

8.  (Likewise  the  property)  of  persons  unfit  to
transact  legal  business  (minors,  widows,  and  so
forth).

9.  But  if  (a  minor)  comes  of  age,  his  property
must  be  made  over  to  him.

10.  *  It  is  declared  in  the  Smnti  that  there  are
three  kinds  of  proof  which  give  a  title  to  (property,
viz.)  documents,  witnesses,  and  possession ;  (thereby)
an  owner  may  recover  property  which  formerly  be-
longed to  him  (but  was  lost)/

11.  From  fields  through  which  (there  is  a  right
of)  road  (a  space  sufficient  for  the  road)  must  be  set
apart,  likewise  a  space  for  turning  (a  cart).

12.  Near  new-built  houses  (and)  other  things  (of
the  same  description  there  shall  be)  a  passage  three
feet  broad.

13.  In  a  dispute  about  a  house  or  a  field,  reliance
(may  be  placed  on  the  depositions  of)  neighbours.

14.  If  the  statements  of  the  neighbours  disagree,
documents  (may  be  taken  as)  proof.


the  infant  children  of  a  hostile  king  who  has  been  conquered  and
slain.   It  is,  however,  not  improbable  that  it  has  a  wider  sense,  and
exhorts  the  king  to  look  after  the  property  of  the  children  of  his
predecessor  and  of  deceased  feudal  barons.
8-9.   Gautama  X,  48 ;  Vishmi  III,  65.

10.  YagTiavalkya  II,  22.

1 1.  Kr*sh7zapa#dita  quotes  in  illustration  of  this  Sutra  the  follow-
ing passage  of  -Sarikha  and  Likhita:  'In  a  field  through  which
(there  is  a  right  of)  road,  (space)  for  the  road  must  be  set  apart,  and
on  the  king's  high-road  a  space  sufficient  for  turning  a  chariot.'

12.  Arthantareshu,  'near  other  things  (of  the  same  descrip-
tion),' means,  according  to  Kr/sh#apa«dita, '  near  pleasure-gardens
and  the  like.'  No  doubt,  buildings  of  all  kinds,  fenced  or  walled
gardens,  and  so  forth  are  meant.     I  read  tripadamatram.

13.  Manu  VIII,  258,  262  ;  Yag-ftavalkya  II,  150,  152,  154.


XVI,  20.  LEGAL    PROCEDURE.  8 1


15.  If  conflicting  documents  are  produced,  reliance
(may  be  placed)  on  (the  statements  of)  aged  (inhabi-
tants) of  the  village  or  town,  and  on  (those  of)  guilds
and  corporations  (of  artisans  or  traders).

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  Property  inherited  from  a  father,  a  thing  bought,
a  pledge,  property  given  to  a  wife  after  marriage  by
her  husband's  family,  a  gift,  property  obtained  for
performing  a  sacrifice,  the  property  of  reunited  co-
parceners, and  wages  as  the  eighth.'

17.  Whatever  belonging  to  these  (eight  kinds  of
property)  has  been  enjoyed  (by  another  person)  for
ten  years  continuously  (is  lost  to  the  owner).

18.  They  quote  also  (a  verse)  on  the  other  side:
'A  pledge,  a  boundary,  and  the  property  of  minors,  an
(open)  deposit,  a  sealed  deposit,  women,  the  property
of  a  king,  (and)  the  wealth  of  a  .Srotriya  are  not  lost
by  being  enjoyed  (by  others)/

1 9.  Property  entirely  given  up  (by  its  owner)  goes
to  the  king.

20.  If  it  be  otherwise,  the  king  with  his  ministers
and  the  citizens  shall  administer  it.


15.  Manu  VIII,  259.

16.  In  translating  anvadheya  by  'property  given  to  a  wife  by
her  husband  or  his  family  after  marriage/  I  have  followed  Krishna.-
pa^ita's  explanation.  It  may,  however,  mean  also  'a  deposit  to  be
delivered  to  a  third  person'  (anvahita  or  anvadhi).  Pratigraha,
'a  gift/  is  elsewhere  explained  as  'property  promised,  but  not
actually  given.'

17.  Ya^-navalkya  II,  24 ;  see  also  Vishmi  V,  187;  Manu  VIII,  148.

18.  Identical  with  Manu  VIII,  149  ;  Ya^avalkya  II,  25.

19.  Manu  VIII,  30.

20.  '  If  it  be  otherwise/  i.  e.  if  the  owner  gave  his  property
up  temporarily  only,  e.  g.  went  on  a  journey  or  a  pilgrimage,  leaving
it  without  anybody  to  take  care  of.

[14]  G


82  VASISHFtfA.  XVI,  2i.

21.  A  king  will,  be  superior  even  to  Brahman  if
he  lives  surrounded  by  servants  (who  are  keen-eyed)
like  vultures.

22.  But  a  king  will  not  be  exalted  if  he  lives  sur-
rounded by  servants  (who  are  greedy)  like  vultures.

23.  Let  him  live  surrounded  by  servants  (who  are
keen-eyed)  like  vultures,  let  him  not  be  a  vulture
surrounded  by  vultures.

24.  For  through  his  servants  blemishes  become
manifest  (in  his  kingdom),

25.  (Such  as)  theft,  robbery,  oppression,  and  (so
forth).

26.  Therefore  let  him  question  his  servants  before-
hand.

27.  Now  (follow  the  rules  regarding)  witnesses :

28.  .Srotriyas,  men  of  unblemished  form,  of  good
character,  men  who  are  holy  and  love  truth  (are  fit
to  be)  witnesses,

29.  Or  (men  of)  any  (caste  may  give  evidence)
regarding  (men  of)  any  (other  caste).

30.  Let  him  make  women  witnesses  regarding
women ;  for  twice-born  men  twice-born  men  of  the
same  caste  (shall  be  witnesses),  and  good  .Sttdras  for
•Sudras,  and  men  of  low  birth  for  low-caste  men.

31.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'A  son  need  not  pay  money  due  by  a  surety,  any-
thing idly  promised,  money  due  for  losses  at  play
or  for  spirituous  liquor,  nor  what  remains  unpaid  of
a  fine  or  a  toll/

32.  'Depose,  O  witness,  according  to  the  truth;
expecting  thy  answer,  thy  ancestors  hang  in  suspense ;

28.  Vishnu  VIII,  8  ;  Ya^navalkya  II,  68  ;  Manu  VIII,  62-63.

29.  Ya^ftavalkya  II,  69.  30.   Manu  VIII,  68.
31.  VishmiVI,  41;  Manu  VIII,  159;  Ya^avalkya  II,  47.


XVI,  36.  LEGAL    PROCEDURE.  8$


(in  accordance  with  its  truth  or  falsehood)  they  will
rise  (to  heaven)  or  fall  (into  hell).'

33.  '  Naked  and  shorn,  tormented  with  hunger
and  thirst,  and  deprived  of  sight  shall  the  man  who
gives  false  evidence  go  with  a  potsherd  to  beg  food
at  the  door  of  his  enemy.'

34.  'He  kills  five  by  false  testimony  regarding  a
maiden ;  he  kills  ten  by  false  testimony  regarding
kine ;  he  kills  a  hundred  by  false  evidence  regarding
a  horse,  and  a  thousand  by  false  evidence  regarding
a  man.'

35.  (Men)  may  speak  an  untruth  at  the  time  of
marriage,  during  dalliance,  when  their  lives  are  in
danger  or  the  loss  of  their  whole  property  is  immi-
nent, and  for  the  sake  of  a  Brahma/za ;  they  declare
that  an  untruth  spoken  in  these  five  cases  does  not
make  (the  speaker)  an  outcast.

36.  Those  who  give  partial  evidence  in  a  judicial
proceeding  for  the  sake  of  a  relative  or  for  money,
deprive  the  ancestors  of  their  spiritual  family  and
those  of  their  natural  family  of  their  place  in  heaven.

33.  Identical  with  Manu  VIII,  93.

34.  Identical  with  Manu  VIII,  98.  Regarding  the  explanation
of  the  words  'he  kills/  see  Manu  VIII,  97,  and  Haradatta  on
Gautama  XIII,  14.

35.  Gautama  XXIII,  29.  Between  this  and  the  preceding
Sutras  the  MSS.  as  well  as  Krz'shwapa^ita  insert  another  one,
which  is  so  corrupt  that  I  am  unable  to  translate  it.  Krishnapan-
dita's  explanation  is  opposed  to  all  rules  of  interpretation,  and  not
worth  giving.

36.  This  verse,  too,  is  corrupt,  though  the  general  sense  is  not
doubtful.  I  read  sva^anasy^rthe  yadi  varthaheto^  paksharrayewaiva
vadanti  karyam — te  jabdavawjasya  kulasya  purvan  svargasthitaw-
st^napi  patayanti.  ■  The  ancestors  of  their  spiritual  family,'  i.  e.  the
teacher,  the  teacher's  teacher,  and  so  forth.


G    2


84  VASISHTtfA.  XVII,  t.


Chapter  XVII.

i.  The  father  throws  his  debts  on  the  (son)  and
obtains  immortality  if  he  sees  the  face  of  a  living
son.

2.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  'Endless  are  the
worlds  of  those  who  have  sons  ;  there  is  no  place  for
the  man  who  is  destitute  of  male  offspring/

3.  There  is  a  curse  (in  the  Veda),  '  May  our
enemies  be  destitute  of  offspring.'

4.  There  is  also  (the  following)  passage  of  the
Veda,  '  May  I  obtain,  O  Agni,  immortality  by
offspring.'

5.  '  Through  a  son  he  conquers  the  worlds,  through
a  grandson  he  obtains  immortality,  but  through  his
son's  grandson  he  gains  the  world  of  the  sun/

6.  There  is  a  dispute  (among  the  wise ;  some
say),  'The  son  belongs  to  the  husband  of  the  wife;'
(and  some  say),  '  The  son  belongs  to  the  begetter/

7.  With  respect  to  this  (matter)  they  quote  also
on  both  sides  verses  like  the  following :

8.  (Some  say),  Tf  (one  man's)  bull  were  to  beget
a  hundred  calves  on  another  man's  cows,  they  would
belong  to  the  owner  of  the  cows ;  in  vain  would  the
bull  have  spent  his  strength.'

XVII.  1.  Identical  with  Vishmi  XV,  45  ;  Manu  IX,  107  ;  Cole-
brooke  V,  Dig.  CCCIV.

2.  The  latter  part  of  the  quotation  occurs  Aitareya-brahmawa
VII,  3,  9-

3.  Rig-vedal,  21,5.

4.  Rig-veda  V,  4,  10;  Taittiriya-satfzhita  I,  4,  46,  1.

5.  Identical  with  Manu  IX,  137,  and  Vishmi  XV,  46.

6.  The  same  point  is  argued  Manu  IX,  31-56.
8.   Identical  with  Manu  IX,  50.


XVII,  Ig.  INHERITANCE.  85

9.  (Others  say), 'Carefully  watch  the  procreation
of  your  offspring,  lest  strangers  sow  seed  on  your
soil;  in  the  next  world  the  son  belongs  to  the
begetter;  (by  carelessness)  a  husband  makes  (the
possession  of)  offspring  in  vain.'

10.  If  amongst  many  brothers  who  are  begotten
by  one  father,  one  have  a  son,  they  all  have  offspring
through  that  son  ;  thus  says  the  Veda.

11.  If  among  many  wives  of  one  husband,  one
have  a  son,  they  all  have  offspring  through  that  son;
thus  says  the  Veda.

12.  Twelve  (kinds  of)  sons  only  are  noticed  by
the  ancients.

13.  The  first  (among  these  is  the  son)  begotten
by  the  husband  himself  on  his  legally  married  wife.

14.  The  second  is  the  son  of  a  wife  (who  is  be-
gotten) on  failure  of  the  (first)  on  a  (wife  or  widow
duly)  authorised  (thereto,  by  a  kinsman).

15.  The  third  is  an  appointed  daughter.

9.  Apastamba  II,  6,  13,  7.

10.  Vishmi  XV,  42.  11.  Vishmi  XV,  41.

12.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CXCIII;  Vishnu  XV,  1.  Elsewhere
the  expression  pura«adrish/a^, '  noticed  by  the  ancients/  has  been
taken  to  mean  '  seen  in  the  Purarca '  ('  the  holy  writ,'  Colebrooke).

13.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CXCIII ;  Vishmi  XV,  2.

14.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCXXX;  Vishmi  XV,  3.

15.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCIII ;  Mitakshara  I,  11,  3;  Vyava-
h&ra  Mayukha  IV,  4,  43.  The  curious  fact  that  VasishMa  here
calls  the  appointed  daughter  a  son  may  perhaps  be  explained  by
a  custom  which,  though  rarely  practised,  still  occurs  in  Ka^mir,
and  by  which  a  brotherless  maiden  is  given  a  male  name.  A  his-
torical instance  of  this  kind  is  mentioned  in  the  Ra^atararigim,
where  it  is  stated  that  Kalyawadevi,  princess  of  Gau</a  and  wife
of  king  Gayapi^a,  was  called  by  her  father  Kalyawamalla.  When
I  collated  this  passage  with  the  help  of  a  Ka^mirian,  I  was  told
that  a  certain  Brahmawa,  still  living  in  Srinagar,  had  changed  the


86  vasishtha.  xvii,  16.

1 6.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  'A  maiden  who
has  no  brothers  comes  back  to  the  male  ancestors
(of  her  own  family) ;  returning  she  becomes  their  son.'

1 7.  With  reference  to  this  (matter  there  is)  a  verse
(to  be  spoken  by  the  father  when  appointing  his
daughter),  '  I  shall  give  thee  a  brotherless  damseL
decked  with  ornaments  ;  the  son  whom  she  may
bear,  shall  be  my  son.'

18.  The  fourth  is  the  son  of  a  remarried  woman.

19.  She  is  called  remarried  (punarbhu)who  leaving
the  husband  of  her  youth,  and  having  lived  with
others,  re-enters  his  family;

20.  And  she  is  called  remarried  who  leaving  an
impotent,  outcast  or  mad  husband,  or  after  the  death
of  her  husband  takes  another  lord.

21.  The  fifth  is  the  son  of  an  unmarried  damsel.

22.  They  declare  that  the  son  whom  an  unmarried
damsel  produces  through  lust  in  her  father's  house,
is  the  son  of  his  maternal  grandfather.


name  of  his  only  child,  a  daughter  called  Amri,  to  the  corresponding
masculine  form,  Amar^u,  in  order  to  secure  to  himself  through  her
the  same  spiritual  benefits  as  if  he  had  a  son.  It  seems  to  me  not
improbable  that  Vasish/^a's  Sutra  alludes  to  the  same  legal  fiction,
and  that  he  recommends  in  the  first  instance  that  the l  father  is  to
make  his  daughter  a  son  by  changing  her  name,  and  next  to  secure
for  himself  her  son,  by  the  verse  quoted  Sutra  17.

16.  ColebrookeV,  Dig.  CCIII,  where  the  preceding  Sutra  has
been  placed  after  this.     Compare  Rig-veda  I,  124,  5.

17.  ColebrookeV,  Dig.  CCXVI ;  Mitakshara  I,  11,  3;  Daya-
bhaga  X,  4;  Vyavahara  Mayukha  IV,  4,  43;  Vishmi  XV,  5.

1 8.  Vishmi  XV,  7.

19.  Narada  XII,  48  (Jolly),  where,  however,  kaumara/fl  patim
has  been  wrongly  translated  by  '  an  infant  husband.'

20.  Manu  IX,  175.

21.  ColebrookeV,  Dig.  CCLIX;  Vishmi  XV,  10.

22.  ColebrookeV,  Dig.  CCLIX;  Vishmi  XV,  11.


XVII,  33-  INHERITANCE.  87

23.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  If  an  unmarried  daughter  bear  a  son  begotten  by
a  man  of  equal  caste,  the  maternal  grandfather  has
a  son  through  him ;  he  shall  offer  the  funeral  cake,
and  take  the  wealth  (of  his  grandfather).'

24.  (A  male  child)  secretly  born  in  the  house  is
the  sixth.

25.  They  declare  that  these  (six)  are  heirs  and
kinsmen,  preservers  from  a  great  danger.

26.  Now  among  those  (sons)  who  are  not  heirs,
but  kinsmen,  the  first  is  he  who  is  received  with
a  pregnant  bride.

27.  (The  son  of  a  damsel)  who  is  married  pregnant
(is  called)  a  son  received  with  the  bride  (sahod/fca).

28.  The  second  is  the  adopted  son,

29.  (He)  whom  his  father  and  his  mother  give
(in  adoption).

30.  (The  son)  bought  is  the  third.

31.  That  is  explained  by  (the  story  of)  5una^-
sepa.

32.  '  Hari^andra,  forsooth,  was  a  king.  He
bought  the  son  of  A^igarta  Sauyavasi.

33.  The  fourth  is  (the  son)  self-given.

24.  Vishmi  XV,  13.

25.  'From  a  great  danger/  i.e.  'from  the  danger  of  losing
heaven  through  failure  of  the  funeral  oblations.'

26.  Vishmi  XV,  15.  28.  Vishmi  XV,  18.
29.   Vishmi  XV,  19.                                    30.  Vishmi  XV,  20.

32.  The  MSS.  and  editions  read  the  last  word  of  the  Sutra  as
follows :  B.  vikriyya ;  Ben.  ed.  vikriya ;  Bh.  E.  F.  vikradya ;  Calc.
ed.  and  I.  O.  913  vikrayya  svayaw  kritavan.  I  believe  that,  as
the  letters  £a  and  va  are  constantly  mistaken  by  the  copyists  the
one  for  the  other,  the  original  reading  was  £ikraya.  Regarding
the  story  told  in  this  Sutra  and  continued  below,  Sutra  35,  see
Max  Miiller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  pp.  408-416
and  573-588.

33.  Vishmi  XV,  22.


8$  VASISHFtfA.  XVII,  34.

34.  That  is  (likewise)  explained  by  (the  story  of)
6una^epa.

35.  '  vSunaAs-epa,  forsooth,  when  tied  to  the  sacri-
ficial stake,  praised  the  gods ;  there  the  gods  loosened
his  bonds.  To  him  spoke  (each  of)  the  officiating
priests,  "He  shall  be  my  son."  He  did  not  agree
to  their  (request.  Then)  they  made  him  make  (this)
agreement,  "He  shall  be  the  son  of  him  whom  he
chooses."  Vii-vamitra  was  the  Hotrz  priest  at  that
(sacrifice).     He  became  his  son/

36.  The  son  cast  off  is  the  fifth.

37.  (He  is  called  so)  who,  cast  off  by  his  father
and  his  mother,  is  received  (as  a  son).

38.  They  declare  that  the  son  of  a  woman  of  the
6udra  caste  is  the  sixth.  These  (six)  are  kinsmen,
not  heirs.

39.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  rule) :
'  These  (last-mentioned)  six  (sons)  shall  take  the
heritage  of  him  who  has  no  heir  belonging  to  the
first-mentioned  six  (classes).

40.  Now  (follow  the  rules  regarding)  the  partition
of  the  (paternal)  estate  among  brothers  :

41.  And  (let  it  be  delayed)  until  those  (widows)
who  have  no  offspring,  (but  are  supposed  to  be
pregnant),  bear  sons.

42.  Let  the  eldest  take  a  double  share,

43.  And  a  tithe  of  the  kine  and  horses.

36-37.   ColebrookeV,  Dig.  CCXC;  Vishmi  XV,  24-25.
38.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCXCII;  Dattaka&indrika  V,  14 ;  Vishmi
XVII,  27;  Manu  IX,  178-179;  Gautama  XXVIII,  39.

40.  ColebrookeV,  Dig.  L;  Vyavah&ra  Mayukha  IV,  4,  37.

41.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CXVII ;  Vyavahara  Mayukha  IV,  4,  37.
42-45.    ColebrookeV,  Dig.  L;    Dayabhaga  II,  41;    Gautama

XXVIII,  9  and  5-7.


XVII,  55-  INHERITANCE.  89


44.  The  goats,  the  sheep,  and  the  house  belong
to  the  youngest,

45.  Black  iron,  the  utensils,  and  the  furniture  to
the  middlemost.

46.  Let  the  daughters  divide  the  nuptial  present
of  their  mother.

47.  If  a  Brahma^a  has  issue  by  wives  belonging
to  the  Brahma^a,  Kshatriya,  and  Vaiiya  classes
respectively,

48.  The  son  of  the  Brahma^a  wife  shall  receive
three  shares,

49.  The  son  of  the  Kshatriya  wife  two  shares,

50.  The  other  (sons)  shall  inherit  equal  shares.

51.  And  if  one  of  the  (brothers)  has  gained
something  by  his  own  (effort),  he  shall  receive  a
double  share.

52.  But  those  who  have  entered  a  different  order
receive  no  share,

53.  Nor  (those  who  are)  eunuchs,  madmen,  or
outcasts.

54.  Eunuchs  and  madmen  (have  a  claim  to)
maintenance.

55.  The  widow  of  a  deceased  person  shall  sleep

46.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCCCXCII;  Dayabhaga  IV,  2,  15;
Vishnu  XVII,  21.

47-50.    Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CLIV;  Vishnu  XVIII,  1-5.

51.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  LXXV,  CXXXVIII,  CCCLVI;  Daya-
bhaga II,  41 ;  Vyavahara  Mayukha  IV,  7,  8.  '  By  his  own  effort/  i.e.
by  learning  or  disputations  with  learned  men,  by  bravery  in  battle,  &c.
.  52.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCCXXXVIII ;  Mitakshara  II,  8,  7;
IO>  3  ;  Vyavahara  Mayukha  IV,  11,  5.  The  persons  intended  are
a  perpetual  student,  a  hermit,  and  ascetic.

53.  Vyavahara  Mayukha  IV,  11,  10.

54.  Vyavahara  Mayukha  IV,  11,  10  ;  Vishmi  XV,  33.

55.  'Practising  religious  vows,'  i.e.  'eating  only  once  a  day,
and  so  forth.' — Krzshnapandita.


90  VASISHTtfA.  XVII,  56.

on  the  ground  during  six  months,  practising  religious
vows  and  abstaining  from  pungent  condiments  and
salt.

56.  After  the  completion  of  six  months  she  shall
bathe,  and  offer  a  funeral  oblation  to  her  husband.
(Then)  her  father  or  her  brother  shall  assemble  the
Gurus  who  taught  or  sacrificed  (for  the  deceased)
and  his  relatives,  and  shall  appoint  her  (to  raise  issue
to  her  deceased  husband).

57.  Let  him  not  appoint  a  (widow  who  is)  mad,
ill-conducted,  or  diseased,

58.  Nor  one  who  is  very  aged.

59.  Sixteen  years  (after  maturity  is  the  period
for  appointing  a  widow)  ;

60.  Nor  (shall  an  appointment  be  made)  if  the
(male  entitled  to  approach  the  widow)  is  sickly.

61.  Let  him  approach  (the  widow)  in  the  muhurta
sacred  to  Pra^apati,  (behaving)  like  a  husband,  without
(amorously)  dallying  with  her,  and  without  abusing
or  ill-treating  her.

62.  Let  her  obtain  (the  expenses  for)  food,  raiment,
baths,  and  unguents  from  (the  estate  of)  her  former
(husband).

63.  They  declare  that  a  son  begotten  on  (a  widow
who  has)  not  been  (duly)  appointed,  belongs  to  the
begetter.


56.  Gautama  XVIII,  4-7.  The  Gurus  intended  are  the  teacher,
sub-teachers  (upadhyaya),  and  officiating  priests.

57.  Ava^am,  'ill-conducted/  may  also  mean  'out  of  her  mind
through  grief  or  any  other  passion.'  The  former  explanation  has
been  adopted  by  KrzshTzaparcdita,  whom  I  have  followed  above.

61.  Manu  IX,  60.  Regarding  the  muhurta  sacred  to  Pra^apati,
see  above,  XII,  47.

63.   Gautama  XVIII,  9-12.


XVII,  7©.  INHERITANCE.  9 1


64.  If  she  was  (appointed,  the  child  belongs)  to
both  the  males  connected  with  the.  appointment.

65.  No  appointment  (shall  be  made)  through  a
desire  to  obtain  the  estate.

66.  Some  say,  'Or,  one  may  appoint  (a  widow  out
of  covetousness),  after  imposing  a  penance.'

6  J.  A  maiden  who  has  attained  puberty  shall
wait  for  three  years.

68.  After  three  years  (have  passed),  she  may  take
a  husband  of  equal  caste.

69.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  But  if  through  a  father's  negligence  a  maiden  is
here  given  away  after  the  suitable  age  has  passed,
she  who  was  waiting  (for  a  husband)  destroys  him
who  gives  her  away,  just  as  the  fee  which  is  paid
too  late  to  the  teacher  (destroys  the  pupil).'

70.  '  Out  of  fear  of  the  appearance  of  the  menses
let  the  father  marry  his  daughter  while  she  still  runs
about  naked.  For  if  she  stays  (in  the  house)  after
the  age  of  puberty,  sin  falls  on  the  father.'


64.  Gautama  XVIII,  13.  'To  both  the  males  connected  with
the  appointment/  i.e.  to  the  deceased  husband  for  whose  sake
the  appointment  is  made,  and  to  the  natural  father  of  the  child,  to
whom  the  widow  is  made  over.

65.  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  II,  1,  11.  K/Ysrmaparc<fita  thinks
that  the  Sutra  forbids  an  appointment  which  is  made  with  the  inten-
tion to  secure  the  estate  or  a  share  of  the  estate  of  the  natural
father,  from  whom  the  kshetra^-a  son  inherits  also  (Ya^avalkya
II,  127).  But  it  seems  equally  probable  that  it  is  intended  to  pre-
vent a  widow  from  agreeing  to  an  appointment  in  order  to  obtain
control  over  her  husband's  estate.

66.  Krzsh;*apa^ita  thinks  that  the  rule  refers  to  all  cases  of
appointment.

67-68.   Vishmi  XXIV,  40,  and  note.
70.   Gautama  XVIII,  23.


92  VASISHFtfA.  XVII,  71.

71.  'As  often  as  the  courses  of  a  maiden,  who  is
filled  with  desire,  and  demanded  in  marriage  by  men
of  equal  caste,  recur,  so  often  her  father  and  her
mother  are  guilty  of  (the  crime  of)  slaying  an  embryo;
that  is  a  rule  of  the  sacred  law.'

72.  '  If  the  betrothed  of  a  maiden  die  after  she
has  been  promised  to  him  verbally,  and  by  (a  libation
of)  water,  but  before  she  was  married  with  (the  reci-
tation of)  sacred  texts,  she  belongs  to  her  father
alone.'

J3.  *  If  a  damsel  has  been  abducted  by  force,  and
not  been  wedded  with  sacred  texts,  she  may  lawfully
be  given  to  another  man  ;  she  is  even  like  a  maiden.'

74.  '  If  a  damsel  at  the  death  of  her  husband  had
been  merely  wedded  by  (the  recitation  of)  sacred
texts,  and  if  the  marriage  had  not  been  consummated,
she  may  be  married  again.'

75.  The  wife  of  an  emigrant  shall  wait  for  five  years.

76.  After  five  years  (have  passed),  she  may  go
(to  seek)  her  husband.

yy.  If  for  reasons  connected  with  spiritual  or  with
money  matters  she  be  unwilling  to  leave  her  home,
she  must  act  in  the  same  manner  as  if  (her  husband
were)  dead.

78.  In  this  manner  a  wife  of  the  Brahma^a  caste
who  has  issue  (shall  wait)  five  years,  and  one  who
has  no  issue,  four  years ;  a  wife  of  the  Kshatriya
caste  who  has  issue,  five  years,  and  one  who  has  no
issue,  three  years ;   a  wife  of  the  Vai^ya  caste  who

71.  Colebrooke  IV,  Dig.  XVI;  Dayabhaga  XI,  2,  6;  Ya^a-
valkya  I,  64.

72.  Colebrooke  IV,  Dig.  CLXXIV.

75-76.  Colebrooke  IV,  Dig.  CLVI,  where  the  Sutras  have  been
altered  intentionally;  Gautama  XVIII,  15-12.


XVII,  86.  INHERITANCE.  93

has  issue,  four  years,  and  one  who  has  no  issue,  two
years  ;  a  wife  of  the  6Mra  caste  who  has  issue,  three
years,  and  one  who  has  no  issue,  one  year.

79.  After  that  among  those  who  are  united  (with
her  husband)  in  interest,  or  by  birth,  or  by  the
funeral  cake,  or  by  libations  of  water,  or  by  descent
from  the  same  family,  each  earlier  named  person  is
more  venerable  than  the  following  ones.

80.  But  while  a  member  of  her  family  is  living,
she  shall  certainly  not  go  to  a  stranger.

81.  Let  the  Sapmafas  or  the  subsidiary  sons  divide
the  heritage  of  him  who  has  no  heir  of  the  first-
mentioned  six  kinds.

82.  On  failure  of  them  the  spiritual  teacher  and
a  pupil  shall  take  the  inheritance.

83.  On  failure  of  those  two  the  king  inherits.

84.  But  let  the  king  not  take  (the  estate)  of  a
Brahma^a.

85.  For  the  property  of  a  Brahma^a  is  a  terrible
poison.

86.  '  Poison  they  do  not  call  the  (worst)  poison;
the  property  of  a  Brahma/za  is  said  to  be  the  (most
destructive)  poison.  Poison  destroys  only  one  person,
but  the  property  of  a  Brahma^a  (him  who  takes  it)
together  with  sons  and  grandsons.'

79.  The  persons  intended  are,  (1)  brothers  united  in  interest
with  her  husband  and  other  coparceners,  (2)  separated  brothers  of
the  husband,  (3)  separated  blood-relations  of  the  husband  within
six  degrees,  (4)  separated  blood-relations  of  the  husband  within
fourteen  degrees,  and  (5)  persons  bearing  the  same  family  name
or,  in  the  case  of  Brahma^as,  descended  from  the  same  IZishi.

81.  Gautama  XXVIII,  21  ;  Vishmi  XVII,  10.  The  subsidiary
sons  are  those  mentioned  above,  26-38,  who  under  ordinary  cir-
cumstances do  not  inherit ;  see  also  above,  Sutra  39,  and  Gautama
XXVIII,  34.

82.  Apastamba  IT,  6, 14,  3.  83-84.   Vishmi  XVII,  13.


94  VASISHTHA.  XVII,  87.

8  J.    He  should  give  it  to  men  who  are  well  versed
in  the  three  Vedas.


Chapter  XVIII.

1 .  They  declare  that  the  offspring  of  a  .Sttdra  and  of
a  female  of  the  Brahma^a  caste  becomes  a  Kandala,

2.  (That  of  a  .Sudra  and)  of  a  female  of  the  Ksha-
triya  caste,  a  Varna,

3.  (That  of  a  S&dra.  and)  of  a  female  of  the  Vai^ya
caste,  an  Antyavasayin.

4.  They  declare  that  the  (son)  begotten  by  a
Vai^ya  on  a  female  of  the  Brahma^a  caste  becomes
a  Ramaka,

5.  (The  son  begotten  by  the  same)  on  a  female  of
the  Kshatriya  caste,  a  Pulkasa.

6.  They  declare  that  the  (son)  begotten  by  a
Kshatriya  on  a  female  of  the  Brahma^a  caste  becomes
a  Suta.

7.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
1  One  may  know  by  their  deeds  those  who  have  been
begotten  secretly,  and  to  whom  the  stigma  of  springing
from  unions  in  the  inverse  order  of  the  castes  attaches,
because  they  are  destitute  of  virtue  and  good  conduct.'

87.  Vishmi  XVII,  14.

XVIII.  1.  Vishnu  XVI,  6.

4.  Krzsh#apa«/ita  reads  Romaka,  'a  Roman,'  for  Ramaka,
and  the  B.  MS.  supports  him.  The  other  MSS.,  including  I.  O.
913,  give  the  reading  adopted  above.  I  prefer  it,  as  there  is  no
reason  to  assume  that  the  Vasish/^a  Dharnmastra  belongs  to  the
late  period  when  the  Hindus  had  become  aware  of  the  existence  of
the  Roman  empire.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged  that
Romaka  is  a  correction  which  would  easily  suggest  itself  to  a
Pandit,  who  was  unable  to  find  a  parallel  passage  in  which  the
word  Ramaka  occurs.

6.  Vish/m  XVI,  6.  7.   Manu  X,  40.


95


XVIII,  16.  MIXED   CASTES.

8.  (Children)  begotten  by  Brahma^as,  Kshatriyas,
and  Vai^yas  on  females  of  the  next  lower,  second
lower,  and  third  lower  castes  become  (respectively)
Ambash^as,  Ugras,  and  Nishadas.

9.  (The  son  of  a  Brahma^a  and)  of  a  ^udra
woman  (is)  a  Parasava.

10.  They  declare  that  the  condition  of  a  Parana va
is  that  of  one  who,  though  living,  is  (as  impure)  as
a  corpse.

11.  Some  call  that  ^udra  race  a  burial-ground.

12.  Therefore  (the  Veda)  must  not  be  recited  in
the  presence  of  a  £udra.

13.  Now  they  quote  also  the  (following)  verses,
which  Yama  proclaimed :

'  The  wicked  .5udra-race  is  manifestly  a  burial-
ground.  Therefore  (the  Veda)  must  never  be  recited
in  the  presence  of  a  .Sudra/

14.  '  Let  him  not  give  advice  to  a  .Sudra,  nor  what
remains  from  his  table,  nor  (remnants  of)  offerings
(to  the  gods) ;  nor  let  him  explain  the  holy  law  to
such  a  man,  nor  order  him  (to  perform)  a  penance/

15.  'He  who  declares  the  law  to  such  a  man,  and
he  who  instructs  him  in  (the  mode  of)  expiating  (sin),
sinks  together  with  that  very  man  into  the  dreadful
hell,  (called)  Asawvrzta/

16.  'If  ever  a  worm  is  produced  in  an  open  wound
(on  his  body),  he  shall  purify  himself  by  the  Pra/a-
patya  penance,  and  give  gold,  a  cow,  (and)  a  garment
as  presents  (to  Brahma^as)/

8.   Gautama  IV,  16.

10.  I  omit  the  words  Java  iti  mn'takhyS,  'a  corpse  is  another
name  for  one  who  has  died/  as  an  interpolation.

11.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  9.  12.  Vishmi  XXX,  14.
14-15.   Identical  with  Manu  IV,  80-81.

16.   A  Pr%apatya  penance,  i.  e.  a  YLrikkhxa,  see  below,  XXI,  20.


96  VASISHTHA.  XVIII,  17.

17.  Let  him  not  approach  a  wife  of  the  Lucira
caste  after  he  has  built  the  fire-altar  for  a  6rauta-
sacrifice.

18.  For  a  6*udra-wife  who  belongs  to  the  black
race,  (is  espoused)  for  pleasure,  not  in  order  to  fulfil
the  law.

Chapter  XIX.

1 .  The  particular  duty  of  a  king  is  to  protect  (all)
beings ;  by  fulfilling  it  (he  obtains)  success  (in  this
world  and  in  the  next).

2.  Those  learned  (in  the  sacred  law)  declare  that
to  be  free  from  fear  and  pity  is,  indeed,  a  life-long
sacrificial  session  (sattra,  to  be  performed  by  the
king).

3.  Therefore  let  him  appoint  a  domestic  priest
to  (perform  the  rites)  obligatory  on  the  order  of
householders.

4.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  A  realm  where  a
Brahma^a  is  appointed  domestic  priest,  prospers ; '

5.  For  thus  both  (the  special  duties  of  a  king  and
those  of  a  householder)  will  be  fulfilled,

6.  And  (the  king  alone  is)  unable  (to  do  both).

7.  Let  the  king,  paying  attention  to  all  the  laws
of  countries,  (subdivisions  of)  castes  (^ati)  and
families,  make  the  four  castes  (var/za)  fulfil  their
(respective)  particular  duties.

The  verse  belongs  rather  to  the  section  on  penances,  and  seems  to
have  been  entered  here  merely  because  it  stood  in  Yama's  text
with  the  other  two,  and  the  author,  to  use  a  homely  Indian  com-
parison, '  did  not  disdain  to  catch  a  fish,  though  he  went  to  fetch
water.'

XIX.  1.  Vishmilll,  2.  2.    ManuVIII,  306.

3.  Vishmi  III,  70.  4.    Gautama  XI,  14.

7.   Vishwu  III,  3 ;  Gautama  XI,  20.


XIX,  15-  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  97


8.  Let  him  punish  those  who  stray  from  (the  path
of  duty).

9.  But  punishment  must  be  awarded  in  cases  of
assault  and  abuse  after  (due  consideration  of)  the
particular  place  and  time  (where  and  when  the
offence  was  committed),  of  the  duties,  age,  learning
(of  the  parties),  and  the  seat  (of  the  injury),

10.  In  accordance  with  (the  precepts  of)  the
(sacred)  records  and  with  precedents.

11.  Let  him  not  injure  trees  that  bear  fruit  or
flowers.

12.  (But)  he  may  injure  them  in  order  to  extend
cultivation  and  (for  sacrifices).

1 3.  The  measures  and  weights  of  objects  necessary
for  households  must  be  guarded  (against  falsification).

14.  Let  him  not  take  property  for  his  own  use
from  (the  inhabitants  of)  his  realm.

15.  The  measures  and  price  (of  sudh  property)
only  shall  be  liable  to  deductions  (in  the  shape  of
taxes).

8.  Vishmi  III,  37.

9.  Gautama  XII,  51.  Kri'shnapandita.  has  two  Sutras  instead  of
one,  and  reads  the  second  himsokrosayoh  kalpa^.  The  majority  of
the  MSS.  have,  however,  kalpa(^),  which  I  consider  to  be  a  mistake
for  kalpya^,  'must  be  awarded.'

11.  Vishmi  V,  55-56.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is  that  the
king  is  to  punish  those  who  commit  such  acts.

12.  The  explicit  permission  to  cut  down  trees  for  sacrificial
purposes  is  given  Vishmi  LI,  63.

13.  Manu  VIII,  403.

14-15.  The  translation  of  these  two  Sutras  is  not  certain,
because  the  words  nihara  and  naiharika  are  not  found  elsewhere  in
the  sense  which  has  been  attributed  to  them  here.  Still  I  think  it
very  probable  that  Krzsrmapam/ita's  explanation  nirhara  and  nirhare
sadhu  is  right,  and  that  the  king  is  exhorted  not  to  take  the  property
of  his  subjects  by  force,  but  to  levy  taxes  according  to  the  value  or
the  measure  of  the  articles  sold.
[14]  H


98  VASISHTHA.  XIX,  16.

16

17.  On  the  march  against  the  enemy  the  army
which  consists  of  companies  of  ten,  shall  be  able  to
perform  a  double  (duty).

18.  In  every  (camp)  there  shall  be  places  where
water  is  distributed.

19.  Let  him  make  one  hundred  men  at  the  least
engage  in  battle.

20.  The  wives  (of  slain  soldiers)  shall  be  pro-
vided for.

21

22.  A  ferry  shall  be  taken  away  (from  a  river)  in
which  there  is  no  water.

23.  A  6rotriya  is  free  from  taxes,  (and  so  are)
a  servant  of  the  king,  one  who  has  no  protector,


1 6.  The  Sutra  has  been  left  out,  as  the  text  is  corrupt,  and  I  am
unable  to  suggest  any  emendation.  Krzsrmapaw^ita's  explanation
is  not  worth  giving.

17.  'The  army  which  consists  of  companies  of  ten,'  i.e.  the
lowest  subdivision  of  which  consists  of  ten  parts,  viz.  one  elephant,
one  chariot,  two  horsemen,  and  three  foot  soldiers.  Such  a  body  is
called  a  patti.  The  larger  divisions,  like  the  senamukha, 'battalion,'
&c,  are  formed  by  three,  nine,  or  twenty-seven  pattis.  Though  I
am  unable  to  adduce  any  positive  proof  for  it,  vaha  must,  according
to  the  connexion  in  which  it  stands,  be  a  synonym  of  patti.  '  The
double  duty '  of  the  army  is,  according  to  Krishnapandita.,  marching
and  fighting.

2 1 .  The  Sutra  is  utterly  corrupt,  and  cannot  be  restored  with  the
help  of  the  MSS.  at  my  disposal.  It  probably  referred  to  the
amount  of  duties  to  be  levied  on  goods  sold  in  the  market.

22.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  seems  to  be,  that  on  those  rivers,
where  the  water  either  runs  off  or  is  very  low  during  the  dry  season,
the  ferrymen  must  not  be  allowed  to  exact  a  toll  from  people  cross-
ing without  their  help.  Such  a  rule  would  not  be  superfluous,  as
most  Indian  rivers  are  perfectly  fordable  between  December  and
June,  but  impassable  without  boats  in  the  other  five  months.

23.  Apastamba  II,  10,  26, 10, 12-17 ;  Manu  VIII,  394.   Krishna,-


XIX,  29.  DUTIES    OF   A   KING.  99

one  who  has  left  (the  order  of  householders),  an
infant,  a  very  aged  man,  a  young  man  (who  studies),
and  pradatas ;

24.  (Moreover  widows)  who  return  to  their
former  (family),  unmarried  maidens,  and  the  wives
of  servants,

25.  He  who  swims  with  his  arms  (across  a  river
in  order  to  escape  payment  of  a  toll  at  a  ferry)  shall
pay  one  hundred  times  (the  amount  due).

26.  No  taxes  (shall  be  paid)  on  the  usufruct  of
rivers,  dry  grass,  forests,  (places  of)  combustion,  and
mountains  ;

27.  Or  those  who  draw  their  subsistence  from
them  may  pay  (something),

28.  But  he  shall  take  a  monthly  tax  from  artisans.

29.  And  when  a  king  has  died,  let  him  give  what
is  required  for  the  occasion.

pandita,  correctly  points  out  that,  though  according  to  I,  43,  all  Brah-
mawas  are  to  be  free  from  taxes,  the  <Srotriya  or  Vaidik  is  mentioned
once  more  in  order  to  show  that  a  king,  however  distressed,  must
not  take  anything  from  him  (Manu  VII,  133).  Krzsh«apa«<fita
reads  instead  of  pradatas,  pradataraA,  '  very  liberal  men/  Manu
loc.  cit.  exempts  'those  who  confer  great  benefits  on  priests  of
eminent  learning'  from  paying  taxes.  His  emendation  would,  there-
fore, be  acceptable  if  the  word  pradatsU  did  not  occur  in  the  same
connexion  above,  XI,  7.

24.  Apastamba  II,  10,  26, 11.

25.  I  read  with  the  majority  of  the  MSS.  bahubhyamuttaraw^a-
tagunaw  dadyat.

26.  Kmrmaparcdita  explains  daha, '  (places  of)  combustion/ by
agni, '  fire.'  I  am  not  certain  what  he  means  thereby.  To  me  it
seems  most  probable  that  Vasish^a  intends  '  a  place  of  cremation '
(dahasthala),  though  it  is  just  possible  to  refer  the  expression  to  the
jungle  fires,  which  the  aboriginal  tribes  light  in  the  forests,  in  order
to  sow  their  Nagli  in  the  ground  manured  by  the  ashes.

28.  Gautama  X,  31.

29.  Knsh^apaw^ita  refers  this  and  the  following  five  Sutras  to

H   2


IOO  VASISHTtfA.  XIX,  30.

30.  It  is  hereby  explained  that  (his)  mother  (must
receive)  maintenance.

31.  Let  the  king  maintain  the  paternal  and
maternal  uncles  of  the  chief-queen,

32.  As  well  as  her  other  relatives.

33.  The  wives  of  the  (deceased)  king  shall  receive
food  and  raiment,

34.  Or  if  they  are  unwilling,  they  may  depart.

35.  Let  the  king  maintain  eunuchs  and  madmeji,

36.  Since  their  property  goes  to  him.

37.  Now  they  quote  also  a  verse  proclaimed  by
Manu,  which  refers  to  duties  and  taxes,  '  No  duty
(is  paid)  on  a  sum  less  than  a  Karshapa^a,  there
is  no  tax  on  a  livelihood  gained  by  art,  nor  on  an
infant,  nor  on  a  messenger,  nor  on  what  has  been
received  as  alms,  nor  on  the  remnants  of  property
left  after  a  robbery,  nor  on  a  .Srotriya,  nor  on  an
ascetic,  nor  on  a  sacrifice/


the  case  where  a  king  has  conquered  a  foreign  country ;  compare
also  Vishmi  III,  47-48.  I  think  that  Sutras  30-31  conclusively
show  that  these  rules  are  intended  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  a
king  on  the  death  of  his  predecessor  and  his  own  accession  to  the
throne.

34.  Knsh«apa#dfita  thinks  that  the  queens  unwilling  to  accept  a
bare  subsistence  may  go  wherever  they  like.  I  think  the  word  used
in  the  text  points  rather  to  their  becoming  ascetics.

35.  This  rule  refers  apparently  to  eunuchs  and  insane  persons
left  with  money,  but  without  near  relatives,  with  whom  they  are
united  in  interest.    Vishmi  III,  65.

37.  I  translate  the  one  word  julka  by  '  duties  and  taxes.'  The
term  has  a  great  many  different  meanings  in  the  law  books,  and  is  in
this  verse  apparently  used  in  two  senses.  Knsh;zapa#</ita  is  of  a
different  opinion,  and  thinks  that  the  persons  named  are  free  from
paying  a  julka  in  case  they  trade.  The  chief  objection  is  that
trading  ascetics  and  £rotriyas  are  not  known  to  the  ancient  writers,
though  they  are  common  enough  in  modern  India.


XIX,  46.  DUTIES   OF   A   KING.


IOI


38.  A  thief  becomes  free  from  guilt  by  entering
(the  royal  presence)  after  (his  deed  and  asking  to  be
punished).

39.  But  according  to  some  (lawyers)  he  (who  is
caught)  with  weapons  in  his  hands,  with  stolen  goods
in  his  possession,  or  covered  with  wounds  is  proved
(to  be  a  criminal).

40.  In  case  (a  criminal)  worthy  of  punishment  is
allowed  to  go  free,  the  king  shall  fast  during  one
(day  and  one)  night ;

41.  (And)  his  domestic  priest  during  three  (days
and)  nights.

42.  If  an  innocent  man  is  punished,  the  domestic
priest  (shall  perform)  a  Ys.rikkhr2.  penance ;

43.  (And)  the  king  (shall  fast)  during  three  (days
and)  nights.

44.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  The  slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma/za  casts  his  guilt
on  him  who  eats  his  food ;  an  adulterous  wife  on
her  (negligent)  husband ;  a  student  and  a  sacrificer
on  an  (ignorant)  teacher  (and  officiating  priest);  and
a  thief  on  the  king  (who  pardons  him).'

45.  '  But  men  who  have  committed  offences  and
have  received  from  kings  the  punishment  (due  to
them),  go  pure  to  heaven,  and  (become)  as  holy  as
the  virtuous/

46.  '  The  guilt  falls  on  the  king  who  pardons  an


38.  This  Sutra  apparently  alludes  to  a  penitent  thief  who  con-
fesses his  crime  and  asks  for  punishment;  see  below,  XX,  41.

39.  Manu  IX,  270;  Narada  V,  29-33  (Jolly).  As  given  in  the
MSS.  and  by  Kr«sh«apa»<Ata,  the  Sutra  is  doubtlessly  corrupt.
I  read  vra^asampanno  vyapadish/a>^.

44.  Identical  with  Manu  VIII,  317.

45.  Identical  with  Manu  VIII,  318.


102  VASISHFtfA.  XIX,  47.

offender.     If  he  causes  him  to  be  slain,  he  destroys
sin  in  accordance  with  the  sacred  law/

47.  '  It  is  ordained  that  kings  become  at  once
pure  (by  bathing)  when  they  have  done  acts  causing
death.  They  are  likewise  (pure  while  engaged  in
business)  not  causing  death.  Time  is  the  reason
for  that.'

48.  And  with  reference  to  this  (matter)  they
quote  a  verse  proclaimed  by  Yama,  '  No  taint  of
impurity,  forsooth,  falls  on  kings,  on  those  engaged
in  practising  vows,  or  on  those  engaged  in  the  per-
formance of  sacrificial  session  (sattra) ;  for  (the  first)
are  seated  on  the  throne  of  Indra,  (and  the  others)
are  always  equal  to  Brahman.'

Chapter  XX.

1.  A  penance  (shall  be  performed)  for  an  offence
committed  unintentionally.

2.  Some  (declare  that  it  shall  be  performed)  also
for  (a  fault)  committed  intentionally.

3.  '  The  spiritual  teacher  corrects  the  learned  ;
the  king  corrects  the  evil-minded ;  but  Yama,  the
son  of  Vivasvat,  forsooth,  punishes  those  who  offend
secretly/

4.  And  among  those  (sinful  persons),  let  him  who
slept  at  sunrise  stand  during  the  (following)  day  and
recite  the  verse  sacred  to  Savitrz.

47.  Vishmi  XXII,  48 ;  ManuV,  94.

48.  Identical  with  Manu  V,  93.  ■  Those  engaged  in  practising
vows'  are,  according  to  Kulluka  and  Knshwapawafita,  students
learning  the  Veda.

XX.  1-2.   Manu  XI,  45;  Ya^wavalkya  III,  226.
4.   ■  Among  those/  i.  e.  the  sinful  men  (enasvina^)  enumerated
above,  1, 18  ;  Vishmi  LIV,  11.


XX,  io.  PENANCES.  io^


5.  Let  him  who  slept  at  sunset  remain  in  a  sitting
posture  during  the  (next)  night,  likewise  (reciting
the  Gayatrl).

6.  But  let  a  man  with  deformed  nails  or  black
teeth  perform  a  Krikkhra,  penance  of  twelve  days'
duration.

7.  He  whose  younger  brother  married  first  shall
perform  a  Krikkkra.  penance  during  twelve  days,
marry  and  take  to  himself  even  that  (woman  whom
his  brother  wedded).

8.  Now  he  who  has  taken  a  wife  before  his  elder
brother  shall  perform  a  Krikkkvdi  penance  and  an
Atikrikkhrdi  penance,  give  (his  wife)  to  that  (elder
brother),  marry  again,  and  take  (back)  the  same
(woman  whom  he  wedded  first).

9.  The  husband  of  a  younger  sister  married
before  her  elder  sister  shall*  perform  a  Krikkkvdi
penance  during  twelve  days,  marry  and  take  to  him
that  (elder  sister).

10.  The  husband  of  an  elder  sister  married  after
the  younger  one  shall  perform  a  Y^rikkhra  penance
and  an  Axfarikkkxa.  penance,  give  (his  wife)  to  that
(husband  of  the  younger  sister  and  marry  again).

5-10.    Manu  XI,  201.

6.    Regarding  the  Krikkkra.  penance,  see  below,  XXI,  20.

7-8.  Vishmi  LIV,  16.  According  to  Krz'sh«apa^ita  both  brothers
shall  perform  penances.  The  elder  brother  shall  marry  after  his
penance  is  finished.  The  younger  one  shall  offer  his  wife  to  the
elder,  in  order  to  atone  for  the  slur  put  upon  the  elder.  The  latter
shall  accept  her  for  form's  sake  and  return  her  to  the  younger
brother,  who  must  once  more  wed  her.  Regarding  the  Atikrik&faa.
penance,  see  below,  XXIV,  2.

10.  Vishrcu  LIV,  1 6.  Kr**sh«apa»<fita  thinks  that  he  should  marry
another  wife,  but  adds  that  others  say  that,  after  offering  his  wife
to  the  husband  of  the  younger  sister  and  receiving  his  permission,
he  should  wed  her  once  more.


104  VASISHTTfA.  XX,  it,

ii.  We  shall  declare  below  (the  penance  pre-
scribed for)  him  who  extinguishes  the  sacred  fire.

12.  He  who  has  forgot  the  Veda  (by  neglecting
to  recite  it  daily),  shall  perform  a  KriJii&ra,  penance
of  twelve  days'  duration,  and  again  learn  it  from  his
teacher.

13.  He  who  violates  a  Guru's  bed  shall  cut  off
his  organ,  together  with  the  testicles,  take  them
into  his  joined  hands  and  walk  towards  the  south  ;
wherever  he  meets  with  an  obstacle  (to  further  pro-
gress), there  he  shall  stand  until  he  dies.

14.  Or,  having  shaved  all  his  hair  and  smeared
his  body  with  clarified  butter,  he  shall  embrace  the
heated  (iron)  image  (of  a  woman).  It  is  declared  in
the  Veda  that  he  is  purified  after  death,

15.  The  same  (expiation  is  prescribed  if  the
offence  was  committed)  with  the  wife  of  the  teacher,
of  a  son,  and  of  a  pupil.

16.  If  he  has  had  intercourse  with  a  female  (who
is  considered)  venerable  in  the  family,  with  a  female
friend,  with  the  female  friend  of  a  Guru,  with  an
Apapatra  female,  or  with  an  outcast,  he  shall  per-
form a  Y^rikkkrdi  penance  during  three  months.

17.  The  same  (penance  must  be  performed)  for
eating  food  given  by  a  K&ndSla.  or  by  an  outcast.
Afterwards  the  initiation  (must  be  performed)  once
more;  but  the  tonsure  and  the  rest  may  be  omitted.


n.    See  below,  XXI,  27.  12.  Vishmi  LIV,  13.

13.    Gautama  XXIII,  10.  14.    Gautama  XXIII,  9,  11.

15-16.    Gautama  XXIII,  12.

1 6.  Krzsrmapa^ita  explains  sakhim,  '  a  female  friend,'  by
'  a  woman  who  has  affection  (for  the  offender),  i.  e.  a  sister  and
so  forth.'  Apapatras  are  low-caste  people,  whose  vessels  must  not
be  used ;  see  Apastamba  I,  1,  3,  25,  note.


XX,  24.  PENANCES.


105


18.  And  with  reference  to  this  (matter)  they  quote
a  verse  proclaimed  by  Manu,  '  The  tonsure,  (the
tying  on  of)  the  sacred  girdle,  (the  wearing  of)  a  staff,
and  the  begging  of  alms,  these  acts  may  be  omitted
on  a  second  initiation.'

19.  If  (a  Brahma^a)  intentionally  (drinks)  other
spirituous  liquor  than  that  distilled  from  rice,  or  if
he  unintentionally  (drinks)  spirituous  liquor  extracted
from  rice  (sura),  he  (must  perform)  a  Krikkhva.  and
an  Atikrikkhra.,  and,  after  eating  clarified  butter,  be
initiated  again.

20.  The  same  (expiation  is  prescribed)  for  swal-
lowing ordure,  urine,  and  semen.

21.  If  a  Brahma^a  drinks  water  which  has  stood
in  a  vessel  used  for  (keeping)  spirituous  liquor,  he
becomes  pure  by  drinking,  during  three  days,  water
(mixed  with  a  decoction)  of  lotus,  Udumbara,  Bilva,
and  Pala^a  (leaves).

22.  But  a  Brahma/za  who  repeatedly  (and  in-
tentionally partakes)  of  liquor  extracted  from  rice,
shall  drink  (liquor  of)  the  same  (kind)  boiling  hot.
'  He  becomes  pure  after  death.'

23.  We  will  declare  (who  must  be  considered)  the
slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma/za  (bhni/zahan).  He  is
called  Bhru/zahan  who  kills  a  Brahma/za  or  destroys
an  embryo  (the  sex  of)  which  is  unknown.

24.  '  For  embryos  (the  sex  of)  which  is  unknown

18.   Identical  with  Manu  XI,  152,  and  Vishmi  LI,  5.
19-20.    Manu  XI,  151 ;  Vishwu  LI,  2.     Regarding  the  other  of
liquors,  see  Manu  XI,  95-96.

81.   Manu  XI,  148.  22.   Gautama  XXIII,  1.

23.  Gautama  XXII,  13.  It  must  be  understood  a  real  Brah-
ma«a  who  knows  the  Veda  is  meant.

24.  '  Therefore  they  offer  burnt-oblations  for  the  production  of
males/  i.  e.  they  perform  the  Puwsavana,  one  of  the  sacraments ;


106  vAsisnrffA.  xx,  25.

become  males ;  therefore  they  offer  burnt-oblations
for  the  production  of  males.'

25.  Let  the  slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma/za  kindle
a  fire  and  offer  (therein  the  following  eight  oblations,
consisting  of  portions  of  his  own  body),

26.  The  first  (saying),  '  I  offer  my  hair  to  Death,
I  feed  Death  with  my  hair;'  the  second  (saying),
1  I  offer  my  skin  to  Death,  I  feed  Death  with  my
skin  f  the  third  (saying),  '  I  offer  my  blood  to  Death,
I  feed  Death  with  my  blood;'  the  fourth  (saying),
1  I  offer  my  flesh  to  Death,  I  feed  Death  with  my
flesh ;'  the  fifth  (saying),  '  I  offer  my  sinews  to
Death,  I  feed  Death  with  my  sinews ;'  the  sixth
(saying),  '  I  offer  my  fat  to  Death,  I  feed  Death  with
my  fat ; '  the  seventh  (saying),  '  I  offer  my  bones  to
Death,  I  feed  Death  with  my  bones;*  the  eighth
(saying),  '  I  offer  my  marrow  to  Death,  I  feed  Death
with  my  marrow.'

27.  (Or)  let  him  (fight)  for  the  sake  of  the  king,
or  for  the  sake  of  Brahma^as,  and  let  him  die  in
battle  with  his  face  turned  (to  the  foe).

28.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '(A  murderer)  who
remains  thrice  unvanquished  or  is  thrice  defeated
(in  battle)  becomes  pure.'

29.  'A  sin  which  is  openly  proclaimed  becomes
smaller.'

see  e.g.  Awalayana  I,  13.     The  Sutra  is  marked  as  a  quotation,
and  probably  belongs  to  some  Vedic  work.

25.   Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  12.  27.   Gautama  XXII,  8.

28.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  21.

29.  Taken  by  itself  the  Sutra  would  seem  to  refer  to  the  maxim
that  a  free  confession  reduces  the  guilt  of  the  offender  (Manu  XI,
228).  But  on  account  of  the  next  Sutra  it  is  necessary  to  assume,
with  Knsh«apa«^ita,  that  half  the  guilt  of  a  crime,  of  which  another
man  justly  accuses  an  offender,  falls  on  the  accuser,  while  the


XX,  36.  PENANCES.  IO7

30.  To  this  (effect)  they  quote  also  (the  following
verse):  '  By  saying  to  an  outcast,  "O  thou  outcast!"
or  to  a  thief,  "O  thou  thief!"  a  man  incurs  a  guilt
as  great  as  (that  of  the  offender).  (If  he)  falsely
(accuses  anybody  of  such  offences),  his  guilt  will  be
twice  as  great.'

31.  In  like  manner  having  slain  a  Kshatriya,  he
shall  perform  (a  penance)  during  eight  years,

32.  For  (killing)  a  Vaisya  during  six  (years),
2,3.    For  (killing)  a  6udra,  during  three  (years),

34.  For  killing  a  female  of  the  Brahma^a  caste
who  is  an  Atreyi,  and  a  Kshatriya  or  a  Vaisya,
engaged  in  a  sacrifice  (the  same  penance  must  be
performed  as  for  killing  a  learned  Brahma^a).

35.  We  will  explain  (the  term)  Atreyt.  They
declare  that  she  who  has  bathed  after  temporary
uncleanness  is  an  Atreyi.

36.  '  For  if  (the  husband)  approaches  her  at  that
(time),  he  will  have  offspring.'


offender's  guilt  becomes  less  by  the  publication  of  his  misdeed.
It  is,  however,  not  improbable  that  the  text  is  here  defective,  and
one  or  several  Sutras  have  been  left  out.

30.  Gautama  XXI,  17-18.

31.  Vishmi  L,  12.  The  text  is  here  evidently  defective.  The
Sutra  or  Sutras  left  out  must  have  contained  the  description  of
another  penance  for  the  murder  of  a  Brahmawa,  which  is  mentioned
in  nearly  all  the  Smrz'tis  (see  Vishmi  L,  1-6,  15,  and  the  parallel
passages).  Its  chief  conditions  are,  that  the  murderer  is  to  live
separate  for  twelve  years,  and  to  subsist  on  alms  given  by  people
who  are  acquainted  with  his  crime.  Without  such  an  additional
rule  this  and  the  following  Sutras  are  utterly  unintelligible.

32.  Vishmi  L,  13.  33.  Vishmi  L,  14.
34.   Vishmi  L,  7,  9.

36.  The  author  means  to  say  that  the  word  atreyt  is  derived
from  atra,  '  at  that  time/  and  the  verb  i, '  to  approach.'  The  ety-
mology is  worthy  of  the  Nirukta.


108  VASISHTOA.  XX,  37.

37.  (For  killing  a  female  of  the  Brahma^a  caste)
who  is  not  an  Atreyl,  (the  penance  prescribed)  for
the  murder  of  a  Kshatriya  (must  be  performed),

38.  (For  killing)  a  female  of  the  Kshatriya  caste,
(the  penance  prescribed)  for  the  murder  of  a  Vaisya,

39.  (For  killing)  a  female  of  the  Vai^ya  caste,  (the
penance  prescribed)  for  the  murder  of  a  .5udra.

40.  (For  killing)  a  female  of  the  ^udra  caste  (let
him  perform)  during  one  year  (the  penance  prescribed
for  the  murder  of  a  Brahma/za).

41.  If  a  man  has  stolen  gold  belonging  to  a
Brahma^a,  he  shall  run,  with  flying  hair,  to  the
king,  (exclaiming)  'Ho,  I  am  a  thief;  sir,  punish
me ! '  The  king  shall  give  him  a  weapon  made  of
Udumbara  wood ;  with  that  he  shall  kill  himself.
It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  he  becomes  pure
after  death.

42.  Or  (such  a  thief)  may  shave  off  all  his  hair,
anoint  his  body  with  clarified  butter,  and  cause
himself  to  be  burnt  from  the  feet  upwards,  in  a  fire
of  dry  cowdung.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  he
becomes  pure  after  death.

43.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
*  Hear,  (how)  the  bodies  of  those  who  having  com-
mitted various  crimes  died  a  long  time  ago,  and
were  (afterwards)  born  again,  are  (marked);'


37-40.   Gautama  XXII,  17.

41.  Vishmi  LII,  1-2.  Krz'shttapawdita  remarks  that  ^ulapam
explains  audumbaram,  '  made  of  Udumbara  wood/  by  '  made  of
copper,'  and  that  the  weapon  intended  is  a  club.  The  last  remark
is  probably  true,  as  the  parallel  passages  of  the  other  Smn'tis
state  that  the  thief  is  to  take  a  club  to  the  king,  with  which  he  is
to  be  struck.

42.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  6.


XXI,  I.  PENANCES.  109

44.  '  A  thief  will  have  deformed  nails,  the  mur-
derer of  a  Brahma/za  will  be  afflicted  with  white
leprosy,  but  he  who  has  drunk  spirituous  liquor  will
have  black  teeth,  and  the  violator  of  his  Guru's  bed
will  suffer  from  skin  diseases.'

45.  Property  received  from  outcasts,  after  forming
alliances  with  them  either  by  (teaching)  the  Veda
(and  by  sacrificing)  or  by  marriage,  must  be  relin-
quished.    Let  him  not  associate  with  such  (men).

46.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  (he  who  has
associated  with  outcasts)  becomes  pure  by  reciting
the  Sawhita  (of  his  Veda),  proceeding  in  a  northerly
direction  and  fasting.

47.  They  quote  also  (a  verse)  to  this  (effect),  'A
sinner  is  liberated  from  guilt  by  tormenting  his  body,
by  austerities,  and  by  reciting  the  Veda  ;  he  becomes
also  free  by  bestowing  gifts.  That  has  been  declared
in  the  Veda.'

Chapter  XXI.

1.  If  a  .Stidra  approaches  a  female  of  the  Brah-
ma^a  caste,  (the  king)  shall  cause  the  .Sudra  to  be
tied  up  in  Virata  grass  and  shall  throw  him  into  a
fire.  He  shall  cause  the  head  of  the  Brahma^i  to  be
shaved,  and  her  body  to  be  anointed  with  butter;
placing  her  naked  on  a  black  donkey,  he  shall  cause
her  to  be  conducted  along  the  highroad.  It  is  de-
clared that  she  becomes  pure  (thereby).

44.  Manu  XI,  49 ;  Vishnu  XLV,  4,  5,  6.

45.  Vishmi  LIV,  28.  46.   Manu  XI,  194.

XXL  1-5.  Gautama  XXIII,  15.  Krzshtfapa^ita  reads,  instead
of  pr&syet,  '  he  shall  throw/  prajyet,  and  explains  it  by  dahayet,
4  he  shall  cause  to  be  burnt.'     It  must  be  understood  that  these


IIO  VASISHTTfA.  XXI,  2.

2.  If  a  VaLsya  approaches  a  female  of  the  Brah-
ma^a  caste,  (the  king)  shall  cause  the  Vai^ya  to  be
tied  up  in  Lohita  grass  and  shall  throw  him  into  a
fire.  He  shall  cause  the  head  of  the  Brahma/zi  to  be
shaved,  and  her  body  to  be  anointed  with  butter ;
placing  her  naked  on  a  yellowish  donkey,  he  shall
cause  her  to  be  conducted  along  the  highroad.  It
is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  she  becomes  pure
(thereby).

3.  If  a  Kshatriya  approaches  a  female  of  the
Brahma/za  caste,  (the  king)  shall  cause  the  Ksha-
triya to  be  tied  up  in  leaves  of  .Sara  grass  and  shall
throw  him  into  a  fire.  He  shall  cause  the  head  of
the  Brahma^l  to  be  shaved,  and  her  body  to  be
anointed  with  butter ;  placing  her  naked  on  a  white
donkey,  he  shall  cause  her  to  be  conducted  along
the  highroad.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  she
becomes  pure  (thereby).

4.  A  Vaisya  who  offends)  with  a  female  of  the  Ksha-
triya class  (shall  be  treated)  in  the  same  manner,

5.  And  a  .Sudra  (who  offends)  with  females  of  the
Kshatriya  or  VaLsya  castes.

6.  If  (a  wife)  has  been  mentally  unfaithful  to
her  husband,  she  shall  live  on  barley  or  rice  boiled
in  milk  during  three  days,  and  sleep  on  the  bare
ground.  After  the  three  days  (have  expired),  the
(husband)  shall  offer  eight  hundred  burnt-oblations,
(reciting)  the  Savitri  (and  the  Mantra  called)  Siras,
while  she  is  immersed  in  water.  It  is  declared  in
the  Veda  that  she  becomes  pure  (thereby).

extreme  punishments  are  to  be  inflicted  in  particularly  bad  cases
only.

6.  •  Afterwards  in  order  to  purify  her  who  is  immersed  in  water,
i.  e.  has  plunged  into  water,  he  shall  offer  eight  hundred,  i.  e.  (such)


XXI,  io.  PENANCES.  1 1  j

7.  If  (a  wife)  has  held  an  (improper)  conversation
(with  another  man),  she  must  perform  the  same
penance  during  a  month.  After  (the  expiration  of)
the  month,  (the  husband)  shall  offer  four  times  eight
hundred  burnt-oblations,  (reciting)  the  Savitri  (and
the  Mantra  called)  6nas,  while  she  is  immersed  in
water.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  she  becomes
pure  (thereby).

8.  But  if  (a  wife)  has  actually  committed  adultery,
she  shall  wear  during  a  year  a  garment  smeared
with  clarified  butter,  and  sleep  on  a  mat  of  Kara
grass,  or  in  a  pit  filled  with  cowdung.  After  (the  ex-
piration of)  the  year,  (the  husband)  shall  offer  eight
hundred  burnt-oblations,  (reciting)  the  Savitri  (and
the  Mantra  called)  .Siras,  while  she  is  immersed  in
water.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  she  becomes
pure  (thereby).

9.  But  if  she  commits  adultery  with  a  Guru,  she
is  forbidden  (to  assist  her  husband)  in  (the  fulfil-
ment of)  his  sacred  duties.

10.  But  (these)  four  (wives)  must  be  abandoned,
(viz.)  one  who  yields  herself  to  (her  husband's)  pupil
or  to  (his)  Guru,  and  especially  one  who  attempts


a  number  of  burnt-oblations  with  the  -Siras,  i.  e.  (the  words)  "  Om,
ye  waters,  who  are  splendour,  juice,  and  ambrosia,"  &c.,  which
are  joined  to  the  Gayatri.' — K/Yshrcapaw^ita.  The  -Siras,  or  'head,'
is  again  mentioned  below,  XXV,  13 ;  see  also  Vish/zu  LV,  9.  This
and  the  following  two  rules  refer  to  offences  committed  with
males  of  equal  caste.

9.  Ya^wavalkya  I,  70.  Colebrooke  IV,  Dig.  LXXVI,  where
a  different  reading,  vyavayatirthagamanadharmebhya^,  has
been  adopted,  and  the  Sutra  has  been  combined  with  the  next.  The
first  clause  may  also  be  translated,  '  If  she  actually  commits  adul-
tery, (and  especially)  if  she  converses  with  a  Guru/

10.  Colebrooke  loc.  cit. ;  Manu  IX,  80;  Ya^lavalkya  I,  72.


112  VASISHFtfA.  XXI,  ii.

the  life  of  her  lord,  or  who  commits  adultery  with
a  man  of  a  degraded  caste.

ii.  That  woman  of  the  Brahma/za  caste  who
drinks  spirituous  liquor,  the  gods  will  not  admit
(after  death)  to  the  same  abode  with  her  husband  ;
losing  all  spiritual  merit  she  wanders  about  in  this
world  and  is  born  again  as  a  leech  or  a  pearl-oyster.

12.  The  wives  of  Brahma^as,  Kshatriyas,  and
Vaisyas  who  commit  adultery  with  a  .5udra  may  be
purified  by  a  penance  in  case  no  child  is  born  (from
their  adulterous  intercourse),  not  otherwise.

13.  (Those  who  have  committed  adultery)  with  a
man  of  lower  caste  shall  perform  a  KrzMkra.  penance,
succeeded  by  one,  two,  or  three  A'andraya/zas.

14.  Faithful  wives  who  are  constantly  pure  and
truthful  (reside  after  death)  in  the  same  abodes  with
their  husbands ;  those  who  are  unfaithful  are  born  as
jackals.

15.  Half  the  body  of  the  husband  falls  if  his  wife

11.  Colebrooke  IV,  Dig.  CXIII,  where  jukari,  'a  sow,'  is  read
instead  of  juktika,  '  a  pearl-oyster/

13.  Manu  XI,  178.  Kn'shwapaw^ita  states  correctly  that  Hn-
drayawottaram,  'succeeded  by  one,  two,  or  three  ^andrayawas/
may  also  mean  '  following  one,  two,  or  three  A'andrayawas/  and
that  the  number  of  A'andrayaTzas  to  be  performed  depends  on  the
caste  of  the  person  with  whom  the  adultery  was  committed.  Thus
a  Brahmawl  must  perform  one  YLrikkhra.  and  one  A'andrayawa  for
adultery  with  a  Kshatriya,  one  Krtkkkra.  and  two  A^andraya^as  for
adultery  with  a  Vaijya,  and  one  KrikMra.  and  three  Aandrayawas
for  adultery  with  a  *Sudra.  His  view  that  the  rule  refers  to  wives
who  commit  the  sin  without  intent  or  against  their  will,  is  open  to
doubt.  It  is  probably  an  alternative,  to  be  adopted  in  lighter  cases,
for  the  public  punishment  prescribed  above,  XXI,  1-3.  Regarding
the  A^andrayawa,  see  below,  XXIV,  44.

14.  Colebrooke  IV,  Dig.  CVIII;  Manu  V,  164-165.

15.  Manu  IX,  80;  Ya^Tiavalkya  I,  73.


XXI,  23.  PENANCES.  1 1 3

drinks    spirituous    liquor.       No   purification   is  pre-
scribed for  the  half  which  has  fallen.

16.  If  a  Brahma^a  unintentionally  commits  adul-
tery with  the  wife  of  a  Brahma^a,  (he  shall  perform)
a  Krikkhrdi  penance  in  case  (the  husband)  fulfils  the
religious  duties  (of  his  caste),  and  an  Atikr^^ra
penance  in  case  (the  husband)  does  not  fulfil  his
religious  duties.

17.  The  same  (penances  are  prescribed)  for
Kshatriyas  and  Vai^yas  (for  adultery  with  women
of  their  respective  castes).

18.  If  he  kills  a  cow,  let  him  perform,  during  six
months,  a  l&rikkkra.  or  a  Taptakr^^ra,  dressed  in
the  raw  hide  of  that  (cow).

1 9.  The  rule  for  these  two  (penances  is  as  follows) :

20.  '  During  three  days  he  eats  in  the  day-time
(only),  and  during  the  (next)  three  days  at  night
(only),  he  subsists  during  (another)  period  of  three
days  on  food  offered  without  asking,  and  (finally)  he
fasts  during  three  days.'  That  is  a  Y^rikkhrz.  penance.

21.  '  Let  him  drink  hot  water  during  three  days  ;
let  him  drink  hot  milk  during  the  (next)  three  days ;
after  drinking  during  (another)  period  of  three  days
hot  clarified  butter,  he  shall  subsist  on  air  during
the  (last)  three  days/  That  is  a  Taptak^^ra
penance.

22.  And  he  shall  give  (to  a  Br&hma/za)  a  bull
and  a  cow.

23.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  Through  killing  a  spotted   deer,  a   he-goat,    and

16.   Vishmi  LIII,  2.

18.   Vishmi  L,  16-24 ;  Gautama  XXII,  1 8.

20.   Vishau  XLVI,  10.  21.   Vishwu  XLVI,  11.

23.   The  above  translation  follows  the  commentary  of  Kn'shwa-

[14]  I


114  YASISUTHA.  XXI,  24.

a  bird  three  maladies  (befal  men),  viz.  jealousy,
hunger,  and  old  age ;  (therefore)  let  him  (who  is
guilty  of  such  an  offence)  perform  (a  penance)  during
ninety-eight  (days).'

24.  Having  slain  a  dog,  a  cat,  an  ichneumon,
a  snake,  a  frog,  or  a  rat,  let  him  perform  a  Krz&Mra.
penance  of  twelve  days'  duration,  and  give  something
(to  a  Brahma^a).

25.  But  having  slain  a  quantity  of  boneless  ani-
mals, equal  to  the  weight  of  a  cow,  let  him  perform
a  YLrikkhxa.  penance  of  twelve  days'  duration,  and
give  something  (to  a  Brahma/za).

26.  But  (the  same  penance  must  be  performed)  for
each  single  (slain  animal)  that  possesses  bones.

27.  He  who  extinguishes  the  (sacred)  fires  shall
perform  a  }Lrikkhra.  penance  of  twelve  days,  and
cause  them  to  be  kindled  again  (by  priests  engaged
for  the  occasion).

28.  He  who  falsely  accuses  a  Guru  shall  bathe,
dressed  in  his  clothes,  and  ask  his  Guru's  pardon.
It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  he  becomes  pure  by
the  Guru's  forgiving  him.

29.  An  atheist  shall  perform  a  YLrikkkYa.  penance
of  twelve  days'  duration,  and  give  up  his  infidelity.

paw^ita,  who  further  states  that  the  penance  to  be  performed  shall
consist  of  a  diet  of  barley  gruel.  I  feel  by  no  means  certain  that
his  interpretation,  especially  that  of  the  last  clause,  is  correct.
Possibly  ash/anavatim  aharet  may  mean  'he  shall  offer  ninety-eight
oblations.'

24.  Vish/m  L,  30,  31.

25.  Gautama  XXII,  21.   'Something'  means  eight  handfuls  of
grain.  26.   Gautama  XXII,  22.

27.  Vishnu  LIV,  13  ;  Gautama  XXII,  34.

28.  Vishnu  LIV,  14;  Yag-navalkya  III,  283.
29-30.  Vishmu  LIV,  15.


XXII,  i.  PENANCES.


US


30.  But  he  who  receives  subsistence  from  infidels
(shall  perform)  an  Atikrikkkva.  penance  (and  not
repeat  his  offence).

31.  (The  rule  applicable  to)  a  seller  of  Soma  has
been  explained  hereby.

32.  A  hermit,  on  violating  the  rules  of  his  order,
shall  perform  a  Krikkkra  penance  of  twelve  days'
duration,  and  continue  (the  observances  obligatory
on  him)  in  a  great  forest.

S3.  Ascetics,  (offending  in  the  same  manner)  as
hermits,  shall  perform  for  a  protracted  period  (the
vow  of  regulating  the  quantity  of  their  food  according
to)  the  growth  of  the  moon,  and  shall  again  be
initiated,  in  accordance  with  (the  rules  of)  the  Insti-
tutes applicable  to  them.

Chapter  XXII.

1.  Now,  indeed,  man  (in)  this  (world)  speaks  an
untruth,  or  sacrifices  for  men  unworthy  to  offer  a
sacrifice,  or  accepts  what  ought  not  to  be  accepted,
or  eats  forbidden  food,  or  practises  what  ought  not
to  be  practised.

31.  Vishmi  LIV,  17.

33.  The  penance  prescribed  appears  to  be  similar  to  the  Kan-
drayawa.  The  offender  must  eat  one  mouthful  on  the  first  lunar
day,  two  on  the  second,  and  so  forth.  But  it  is  not  clear  for  how
long  a  period  the  rule  is  to  be  observed.  The  Sutra  is  interesting
as  it  furnishes  corroborative  evidence  for  Pacini's  statement  (IV,
3,  no)  that  Bhikshu-sutras  which  contained  the  rules  applicable  to
Bhikshus  formerly  existed.

XXII.  1.  As  this  chapter  is  almost  identical  with  and  probably
copied  from  Baudhayana  III,  10,  and  Gautama  XIX,  the  division
of  the  Sutras  has  not  been  made  in  accordance  with  Krishna-
pa^ita's  commentary,  but  agrees  with  that  of  the  chapter  in
Gautama's  Dharmasastra.     The  notes  to  the  translation  of  the

I    2


Il6  VASISUTHA.  XXII,  2.

2.  They  are  in  doubt  if  he  shall  perform  a  penance
for  such  (a  deed),  or  if  he  shall  not  do  it.

3.  (Some)  declare  that  he  shall  not  do  it,

4.  Because  the  deed  does  not  perish.

5.  (The  correct  view  is,  that)  he  shall  perform
(a  penance),  because  it  is  enjoined  in  the  revealed
texts,

6.  '  He  who  offers  a  horse-sacrifice  conquers  all
sin,  he  destroys  the  guilt  of  the  murder  of  a
Brahma^a/

7.  (Moreover),  '  Let  an  AbhLrasta  offer  a  Gosava
or  an  Agnish/ut-sacrince.'

8.  Reciting  the  Veda,  austerity,  a  sacrifice,  fasting,
giving  gifts  are  the  means  for  expiating  such  a
(blamable  act).

9.  (The  purificatory  texts  are)  the  Upanishads,
the  Vedantas,  the  Sa^hita-text  of  all  the  Vedas,  the
(Anuvakas  called)  Madhu,  the  (hymn  of)  Aghamar-


latter  work  must  be  consulted  for  the  explanation  of  the  more
difficult  passages.

5-7.  The  text  appears  here  to  be  corrupt.  After  Sutra  5,
BaudMyana  III,  10,  6  (Gautama  XIX,  7),  Puna^  stomena  ya^-eta
puna^  savanamayantiti  vi^ayate, '  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  "  Let
him  offer  a  Puna^stoma-sacrifice,  (those  who  offer  it)  again  come
to  partake  of  (the  libations  of)  Soma," '  has  been  left  out.  This
omission  caused  the  insertion  of  the  words  tasmaMrutinidar.ranat
[dawanat,  Bh.  F.],  ('  because  it  is  enjoined  in  the  revealed  texts,')
at  the  end  of  Sutra  5.  The  proof  that  the  sixth  Sutra  of  Baudha-
yana  has  been  accidentally  omitted  is  furnished  by  the  fact  that
several  MSS.  of  Vasish/^a  read  iti  ka.  after  yo  'jvamedhena  ya^ate
(Vas.  XXII,  6).  This  ka  has  no  meaning,  except  if  another  Vedic
passage  preceded  Sutra  6.  In  order  to  escape  this  difficulty,
Krzsrmapa«</ita  writes  yo  '^vamedhena  ya^ata  iti,  and  begins  the
next  Sutra  with  iti  kz.}  which  he  explains  by  'moreover.'

9.  Kmrmapa/zdita  gives  before  'Vedantas'  another  word  veda-
daya/5,  which  he  explains  by  ( the  Vedas,  Smrz'tis,  and  Purawas.'


XXIII,  r.


PENANCES,


117


sha#a,the  Atharvasiras,the  (Anuvakas  called)  Rudras,
the  Purusha-hymn,  the  two  Samans  called  Ra^a^a
and  Rauhmeya,  the  Kushma/zdas,  the  Pavamanis,
and  the  Savitrl.

10.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
*  He  who  performs  once  in  each  season  the  offerings
to  Vaiivanara  and  Vratapati  and  the  Pavitresh/i
sanctifies  ten  ancestors.'

1 1.  To  live  on  milk  alone,  as  if  one  were  fasting,
to  eat  fruit  only,  (to  live  on)  barley  gruel  prepared
of  a  handful  of  grain,  to  eat  gold,  to  drink  Soma  (are
modes  of  subsistence  which)  purify.

12.  All  mountains,  all  rivers,  holy  lakes,  places
of  pilgrimage,  the  dwellings  of  /sushis,  cowpens,  and
temples  of  the  gods  (are)  places  (which  destroy  sin).

13.  A  year,  a  month,  twenty-four  days,  twelve
days,  six  days,  three  days,  a  day  and  a  night  are  the
periods  (for  penances).

14.  These  (acts)  may  be  optionally  performed
when  no  (particular  penance)  has  been  prescribed,

15.  (Viz.)  for  great  sins  difficult  (penances),  and
for  trivial  faults  easy  ones.

1 6.  The  Krikkkrdi  and  the  Atikrikkhrz  (as  well  as)
the  Aandraya/za  are  penances  for  all  (offences).


Chapter  XXIII.
1.    If  a  student  has  approached  a  woman,  he  shall
slay  in  the  forest,  in  a  place  where  four  roads  meet,


10.  Krzshwapa^ita  takes  the  last  word  dajapurusham  to  mean
ten  ancestors  and  ten  descendants.

11.  '  As  if  one  were  fasting/  i.  e.  in  small  quantities. — Kr/'sh«a-
pa«</ita.

XXIII.  1.   Gautama  XXIII,  17.


Il8  VASISHFtfA.  XXIII,  2.

(kindling)  a  common  fire,  an  ass  for  the   Rakshas
(the  goblins),

2.  Or  he  may  offer  an  oblation  of  rice  (/£aru)  to
Nirrzti  (the  goddess  of  hell).

3.  Let  him  throw  into  the  fire  (four  oblations
consisting)  of  that  (sacrificial  food,  saying),  'To  Lust
svaha;  to  him  who  follows  his  lust  svaha;  to  Nir-
rttl  svaha ;  to  the  divine  Rakshas  svaha.'

4.  If,  before  returning  home  (from  his  teacher,
a  student)  voluntarily  defiles  himself,  sleeps  in  the
day-time,  or  practises  any  other  vow  (than  that  of
studentship),  the  same  (penance  must  be  performed).

5.  If  he  has  committed  a  bestial  crime,  he  shall
give  a  white  bull  (to  a  Brahma/za).

6.  The  guilt  incurred  by  a  bestial  crime  with  a
cow,  has  been  explained  by  the  (rule  regarding)  the
killing  of  a  female  of  the  ^udra  caste.

7.  A  student  breaks  his  vow  by  performing
funeral  rites,

8.  Excepting  those  of  his  mother  and  his  father.

9.  If  a  (student)  is  sick,  he  may  eat,  at  his  pleasure,
all  that  is  left  by  his  teacher  as  medicine.

10.  If  (a  student)  who  is  employed  by  his  teacher
(to  perform  some  duty),  meets  with  his  death,  (the
teacher)  shall  perform  three  Kri&Mra.  penances.

4.  Manu  XI,  121.

5.  Visrmu  LIII,  7 ;  Gautama  XXII,  36.

6.  Vishmi  LIII,  3;  Gautama  XXIII,  12.

7.  Manu  V,  88.  8.   Manu  V,  91.

9.  The  object  of  the  Sutra  is  to  permit  during  sickness  a  relax-
ation of  the  rules  regarding  forbidden  food.  Hence  a  sick  student
may  eat  honey,  meat,  &c.

10.  Ya§7iavalkya  III,  283.  'Meets  with  his  death,'  e.g.  is
killed  by  a  wild  animal  or  a  snake,  while  collecting  fuel  in  the
forest.


XXIII,  i8.  PENANCES.  119

11.  If  a  student  eats  meat  which  has  been  given
to  him  as  leavings  (by  his  teacher),  he  shall  perform
a  KrzM/zra  penance  of  twelve  days'  duration,  and
afterwards  finish  his  vow.

12.  The  same  (penance  must  be  performed)  if  he
eats  food  given  at  a  6raddha  or  by  a  person  who  is
impure  on  account  of  a  recent  death  or  birth.

13.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  that  honey  given
without  asking  does  not  defile  (a  student)  of  the
Va^asaneyi-^akha.

14.  For  him  who  committing  suicide  becomes  an
Abhi^asta,  his  blood-relations  (sapi/z^a)  shall  not
perform  the  funeral  rites.

15.  He  is  called  a  suicide  who  destroys  himself
by  means  of  wood,  water,  clods  of  earth,  stones,
weapons,  poison,  or  a  rope.

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  The  twice-born  man  who  out  of  affection  performs
the  last  rites  for  a  suicide,  shall  perform  a  iTandra-
ya/za  penance  together  with  a  Taptakrz/cVt^ra.'

1 7.  We  shall  describe  the  ATandraya/za  below.

18.  A  fast  of  three  days  (must  be  performed)  for
resolving  to  die  by  one's  own  hand.

1 1 .  Manu  XI,  159  ;  Ya^Tavalkya  III,  282  ;  see  also  Apastamba's
discussion  on  the  subject,  I,  1,  4,  5.

12.  Manu  XI,  158.

13.  This  Sutra  may  also  mean,  'It  is  declared  that,  according
to  the  Vag-asaneyaka,  honey  given  (to  a  student)  without  his  asking
for  it  does  not  defile  him.'  But  a  parallel  passage  of  Devala,  which
Kr/sh/zapa/z^ita  quotes,  makes,  I  think,  the  version  given  above
appear  preferable.  In  either  case  the  passage  is  explained  by  the
fact  that,  according  to  the  -Satapatha-brahma/za,  .SVetaketu,  one  of
the  great  teachers  of  the  White  Ya^ur-veda,  strongly  pleaded  for  the
use  of  honey;  see  Weber,  Indische  Studien  X,  123  seq.

14.  Vishmi  XXII,  56  ;  Gautama  XIV,  12.

16.  Visrmu  XXII,  58-59.  17.    See  below,  Sutra  45.


120  VASISUTHA.  XXIII,  19.

19.  'He  who  attempts  suicide,  but  remains  alive,
shall  perform  a  KriJk&Ara.  penance  during  twelve
days.  (Afterwards)  he  shall  fast  for  three  (days  and)
nights,  being  dressed  constantly  in  a  garment  smeared
(with  clarified  butter),  and  suppressing  his  breath,  he
shall  thrice  recite  the  Aghamarsha^a ;'

20.  Or,  following  the  same  rule,  he  may  also
frequently  recite  the  Gayatri ;

21.  Or,  having  kindled  a  fire,  he  may  offer  clarified
butter  with  the  Kushma;/das.

22.  'And  the  guilt  (of)  all  (offences)  excepting
mortal  sins  is  removed  thereby.'

23.  Now  he  may  also  sip  water  in  the  morning,
thinking  of  (the  Mantra),  '  May  fire  and  wrath  and
the  lords  of  wrath  protect  me/  &c,  and  meditating
on  his  sin ;  (then)  he  may  mutter  the  Vyahrztis  that
end  with  satya  (truth),  prefixing  (the  syllable)  Om
(to  each),  or  he  may  recite  the  Aghamarsha^a.

24.  If  he  touches  a  human  bone  to  which  fat  still
adheres,  he  becomes  impure  during  three  (days  and)
nights ;

25.  But  (on  touching  a  bone)  to  which  no  fat
adheres,  a  day  and  a  night,

26.  Likewise  if  he  has  followed  a  corpse  (to  the
burial-ground).

27.  If  he  passes  between  men  reciting  the  Veda,
he  shall  fast  during  a  day  and  a  night.

28.  (Those  who  recite  the  Veda)  shall  sprinkle
each  other  with  water  and  stay  away  (from  their
houses)  during  three  (days  and)  nights.

22.  Regarding  the  efficacy  of  the  KushmaWa  texts,  see  above,
XXII,  9.

23.  The  text  occurs  Taitt.  Ar.  X,  24,  1.
24-25.    ManuV,  87;  Vishmi  XXII,  75.

26.   ManuV,  10 1.  -  28.  Gautama  I,  58.


XXIII,  34-  PENANCES.  1 2 1

29.  (The  same  penance  must  be  performed)  for
a  day  and  night,  if  a  dog,  a  cat,  or  an  ichneumon
pass  quickly  (between  those  who  recite  the  Veda).

30.  If  he  has  swallowed  the  flesh  of  a  dog,  a  cock,
a  village  pig,  a  grey  heron,  a  vulture,  a  Bhasa,  a
pigeon,  a  man,  a  crow  or  an  owl,  (he  must)  fast
during  seven  days,  (and  thus)  empty  his  entrails  ;
(afterwards  he  must)  eat  clarified  butter,  and  be
initiated  again.

31.  'But  a  Brahma^a  who  has  been  bitten  by  a
dog,  becomes  pure,  if  he  goes  to  a  river  that  flows
into  the  ocean,  (bathes  there),  suppresses  his  breath
one  hundred  times,  and  eats  clarified  butter.'

32.  'Time,  fire,  purity  of  mind,  water,  looking  at
the  sun,  and  ignorance  (of  defilement)  are  the  six
means  by  which  created  beings  are  purified.'

33.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that,  on  touching
a  dog,  a  i£a^ala,  or  an  outcast,  he  becomes  at  once
pure,  if  he  bathes,  dressed  in  his  clothes.

34.  If  (while  reciting  the  Veda)  they  hear  noises

29.  Gautama  I,  59.

30.  Vishmi  LI,  3-4;  Gautama  XXIII,  4-5;  Manu  XI,  157.
The  Sutra  is  badly  corrupted  in  Krishnapanditas  edition.  I  read
kahka  instead  of  vanka,  leave  out  vayasa  after  bhasa,  and  change
kakolukanaw  sadane  to  kakolukamawsadane.  The  latter  change
is  absolutely  necessary ;  firstly,  because  the  penances  for  killing  dogs
and  men  have  been  given  above  ;  secondly,  because  the  word  manu-
sha  requires  a  noun  which  it  qualifies  at  the  end  of  the  compound  ;
thirdly,  because  the  penance  which  is  prescribed,  fasting  until  the
entrails  are  empty,  is  absurd  for  murder,  but  appropriate  for  eating
forbidden  food;  and  fourthly,  because  the  parallel  passages  of  other
Smntis  actually  do  prescribe  it  for  eating  the  flesh  of  excessively
impure  animals  and  for  cannibalism.  The  change  of  am  a.  to  ana
is  a  very  common  mistake  in  Devanagari  MSS.

31.  Vishmi  LIV,  12.  32.  Vishmi  XXII,  88.
33.   Apastamba  I,  5, 15, 16.


I  2  2  VASISH77TA.  XXIIT,  35.

made  by  outcasts  or  iTaWalas,  they  shall  sit  silent
and  fasting  during  three  days  ;

35.  Or  if  they  repeat  that  (text  of  the  Gayatrl)
at  least  one  thousand  times,  they  become  pure  ;  thus
it  is  stated  in  the  Veda.

36.  By  this  rule  (the  penance  to  be  performed  by)
those  who  teach  or  sacrifice  for  vile  men  has  been
explained.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  they
become  pure  by  also  relinquishing  the  fees  (which
they  received).

37.  By  this  same  (rule  the  penance  prescribed
for)  an  Abhi^asta,  (one  accused  of  a  heinous  crime,)
has  been  explained.

38.  (If  he  has  been  accused  of)  killing  a  learned
Brahma/za,  let  him  subsist  during  twelve  days  on
water  (only),  and  fast  during  (another)  twelve  days.

39.  If  he  has  falsely  accused  a  Brahma^a  of  a
crime  which  causes  loss  of  caste,  or  of  a  minor
offence  which  does  not  cause  loss  of  caste,  he  shall
subsist  during  a  month  on  water  (only),  and  con-
stantly repeat  the  (Rikas  called)  ,5uddhavatls ;

40.  Or  he  may  go  to  bathe  (with  the  priests)  at
(the  conclusion  of)  a  horse-sacrifice.

41.  By  this  (rule  the  penance  for)  intercourse  with
a  female  of  the  A"a^ala  caste  has  been  declared.

42.  Now  (follows  the  description  of)  another
Krikkkrdi  penance,  applicable  to  all  (men),  where  (the
rule  given  above)  has  been  altered.

43.  On  one  day  (let  him  eat)  in  the  morning  (only),
on  the  (following)  day  at  night  (only),  on  the  (next)
day  food  given  without  asking,  and  on  the  (fourth)
day  (let  him)  fast ;  the  succeeding  (three)  periods  of

36.  Vishmi  LIV,  25,  28.  38.   Ya^avalkya  III,  287.

39.  Ya^lavalkya  III,  286.  41.   Vishmi  LIII,  5,  6.


PENANCES.  123


four  days  (must  be  passed)  in  the  same  manner.
Wishing  to  show  favour  to  the  Brahma/zas,  Manu,
the  chief  among  the  pillars  of  the  law,  has  thus
described  the  Sisukrz&Mra  (the  hard  penance  of
children)  for  infants,  aged,  and  sick  men.

44.  Now  follows  the  rule  for  (the  performance  of)
the  Aandraya/za  (lunar  penance).

45.  On  the  first  day  of  the  dark  half  (of  the  month)
let  him  eat  fourteen  (mouthfuls),  let  him  diminish  the
(number  of)  mouthfuls  (each  day  by  one),  and  conti-
nue in  this  manner  until  the  end  of  the  fortnight.  In
like  manner  let  him  eat  one  mouthful  on  the  first  day
of  the  bright  half,  and  (daily)  increasing  (the  number
of)  mouthfuls,  continue  until  the  end  of  the  fortnight.

46.  Meanwhile  let  him  sing  Samans,  or  mutter
the  Vyahmis.

47.  A  month  during  which  he  thus  performs  a
A^andraya^a,  the  ifo'shis  have  called  by  way  of
laudation,  'a  means  of  purification '  (pavitra).  It  is
prescribed  as  an  expiation  of  all  (offences)  for  which
no  (special  penance)  has  been  mentioned.

Chapter  XXIV.

1.  Now  (follows  the  description  of)  an  Atikrik-
khxz.  penance.

2.  Let  him  eat  as  much  as  he  can  take  at  one
(mouthful,  and  follow  the  rules  given)  above  for  a
Kri&Mra.,  (viz.)  to  eat  during  three  days  in  the
morning,  (during  another  three  days)  in  the  evening,
(during   further    three    days)    food    given    without

44-47.  Vish/zu  XL VII.  It  must  be  understood  that  during  the
bright  half  of  the  month  the  number  of  mouthfuls  must  be  increased
every  day  by  one.

XXIV.  1-2.   Gautama  XXVI,  18-19.     '  Above/  i.  e.  XXI,  20.


124  VASISUTHA.  XXIV,  3.

asking,  and  to  fast  during  the  last  three  days.    That
is  an  Atikrz/£/£/£ra.

--3,  A  KrztiMra,  penance  (during  the  performance
of  which  one)  subsists  on  water  (only  is  called)  a
K  rikkkr&XAkrikkhra. .

4.  The  peculiar  observances  (prescribed  during  the
performance)  of  ULrikkhva.  penances  (are  as  follows) :

5.-  -Having  cut  his  nails,  (the  performer)  shall
cause  hfs  beard  and  all  his  hair  to  be  shaved  off,
excepting  the  ey^jprows,  the  eyelashes,  and  the  lock
at  the  top  of  the  head% (wear)  one  garment  only ;  he
shall  eat  blameless  food ;  what  one  obtains  by  going
to  beg  once  (is  called)  blameless  food  ;  he  shall  bathe
in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening ;  he  shall
carry  a  stick  (and)  a  waterpot ;  he  shall  avoid  to
speak  to  women  and  6udras ;  carefully  keeping
himself  in  an  upright  or  sitting  posture,  he  shall
stand  during  the  day,  and  remain  seated  during
the  night.'     Thus  speaks  the  divine  VasishMa.

6.  Let  him  not  instruct  in  these  Institutes  of  the
sacred  law  anybody  but  Jiis  son  or  a  pupil  who
stays  (in  his  house  at  least)  for  a  year.

7.  The  fee  (for  teaching  it)  is  one  thousand  (pa^as),
(or)  ten  cows  and  a  bull,  or  the  worship  of  the  teacher.

Chapter  XXV.
1.    I  will  completely  explain  the  purification  of
those  whose  guilt  has  hot  been  made  public,  both
from  great  crimes  and  for  minor  offences.

3.   Gautama  XXVI,  20;  see  also  Vishmi  XLVI,  13-14.
4-5.    Gautama  XXVI,  6,  8  j  Vishmi  XLVII,  24-25.

6.  The  MSS.  read  in  the  beginning  of  this  Sutra,  satayanudeti
or  satayatudeta,  while  Krz'srmapa;zdlta,  probably  as  a  guess,  writes
satapa  nudati.  I  do  not  think  that  his  correction  is  satisfactory,
and  propose  in  its  stead,  sa  tadyadetad  (dharma^astram).


XXV,  8.  SECRET   PENANCES.  1 25

2.  A  penance  prescribed  in  (the  section  on)  secret
(penances)  is  for  an  Agnihotrin,  an  aged  and  a  learned
man,  who  have  subdued  their  senses  ;  but  other  men
(must  perform  the  expiations)  described  above.

3.  Those  constantly  engaged  in  suppressing  their
breath,  reciting  purificatory  texts,  giving  gifts,  making
burnt-oblations,  and  muttering  (sacred  texts)  will,
undoubtedly,  be  freed  from  (the  guilt  of)  crimes
causing  loss  of  caste.

4.  Seated  with  Kusa,  grass  in  his  hands,  let  him
repeatedly  suppress  his  breath,  and  again  and  again
recite  purificatory  texts,  the  Vyahrztis,  the  syllable
Om,  and  the  daily  portion  of  the  Veda.

5.  Always  intent  on  the  practice  of  Yoga,  let  him
again  and  again  suppress  his  breath.  Up  to  the
ends  of  his  hair  and  up  to  the  ends  of  his  nails  let
him  perform  highest  austerity.

6.  Through  the  obstruction  (of  the  expiration)
air  is  generated,  through  air  fire  is  produced,  then
through  heat  water  is  formed ;  hence  he  is  internally
purified  by  (these)  three.

7.  Neither  through  severe  austerities,  nor  through
the  daily  recitation  of  the  Veda,  nor  through  offering
sacrifices  can  the  twice-born  reach  that  condition
which  they  attain  by  the  practice  of  Yoga.

8.  Through  the  practice  of  Yoga  (true)  knowledge
is  obtained,  Yoga  is  the  sum  of  the  sacred  law,  the
practice  of  Yoga  is  the  highest  and  eternal  austerity ;
therefore  let  him  always  be  absorbed  in  the  practice
of  Yoga.

XXV.  4.   Read  prawayaman  in  the  text.

5.  The  MSS.  read  at  the  end  of  this  verse,  tapas  tapyatam  utta-
mam, while  Kmrmapa«<fita  gives  tapas  tapyat  tu  uttamam.  The
correct  reading  is  probably  tapas  tapyatu  uttamam.


1 2  6  VASISHFffA.  XXV,  9.

9.  For  him  who  is  constantly  engaged  in  (reciting
the  syllable)  Om,  the  seven  Vyahrztis,  and  the  three-
footed  Gayatri  no  danger  exists  anywhere.

10.  The  Vedas  likewise  begin  with  the  syllable
Om,  and  they  end  with  the  syllable  Om,  the  syllable
Om  is  the  sum  of  all  speech ;  therefore  let  him
repeat  it  constantly.

11.  The  most  excellent  (portion  of  the)  Veda,
which  consists  of  one  syllable,  is  declared  to  be  the
best  purificatory  text.

12.  If  the  guilt  of  all  sins  did  fall  on  one  man,
to  repeat  the  Gayatri  ten  thousand  times  (would  be)
an  efficient  means  of  purification.

13.  If,  suppressing  his  breath,  he  thrice  recites
the  Gayatri  together  with  the  Vyahmis  together
with  the  syllable  Om  and  with  the  (text  called)  ^iras,
that  is  called  one  suppression  of  breath.


Chapter  XXVI.

1.  If,  untired,  he  performs  three  suppressions  of
his  breath  according  to  the  rule,  the  sins  which  he
committed  during  a  day  and  a  night  are  instantly
destroyed.

2.  Seated  during  the  evening  prayer,  he  removes
by  (three)  suppressions  of  his  breath  all  guilt  which

9.  I  read  with  the  MSS.  bhayaw  for  bhave.

10.  Manu  II,  74.

13.  Identical  with  Vish/m  LV,  9.  Regarding  the  text  called
.Siras,  see  above,  XXI,  6.

XXVI.  1.  The  verb  dharayet,  'performs/  seems  to  be  used  in
order  to  indicate  that,  according  to  the  Yogasastra,  three  Prawa-
ydmas  make  one  Dharawd;  see  Yag-navalkya  III,  201.

2-3.  Regarding  the  position  at  the  Sandhya  prayers,  see  also
above.


XXVI,  8.  SECRET   PENANCES.  1 2  7

he  incurred  during  the  day  by  deeds,  thoughts,  or
speeches.

3.  But  standing  during  the  morning  prayer,  he  re-
moves by  (three)  suppressions  of  his  breath  all  guilt
which  he  incurred  during  the  night  by  deeds,  thoughts,
or  speeches.

4.  But  sixteen  suppressions  of  breath,  accompanied
by  (the  recitation  of)  the  Vy&hrztis  and  the  syllable
Om,  repeated  daily,  purify  after  a  month  even  the
slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma^a.

5.  Even  a  drinker  of  spirituous  liquor  becomes
pure,  if  he  mutters  the  (hymn  seen)  by  Kutsa,  '  Apa
na/£  sosukad  agham,'  and  (the  hymn  seen)  by  Vasish-
tkdi  (which  begins  with  the  word)  '  Prati,'  the  Mahitra
(hymn),  and  the  ,5uddhavat!s.

6.  Even  he  who  has  stolen  gold  becomes  instantly
free  from  guilt,  if  he  once  mutters  (the  hymn  begin-
ning with  the  words)  'Asya  vamasya'  and  the
•Sivasa^kalpa.

7.  The  violator  of  a  Gurus  bed  is  freed  (from  sin)
if  he  repeatedly  recites  the  (hymn  beginning)  '  Havish
pantam  a^aram '  and  that  (beginning) '  Na  tarn  awha^'
and  mutters  the  hymn  addressed  to  Purusha.

8.  Or  plunging  into  water  he  may  thrice  mutter
the  Aghamarsha^a.  Manu  has  declared  that  the
(effect  is  the)  same  as  if  he  had  gone  to  bathe  at
a  horse-sacrifice.

4.   Identical  with  Manu  XI,  249;  see  also  Vishmi  LV,  2.
-5.   Identical  with  Manu  XI,  250.     The  Vedic  texts  mentioned
are  Rig-veda  I,  97,  1 ;  VII,  80;  X,  185;  VIII,  84,  7-9.

6.  Manu  LI,  251.  The  Vedic  texts  alluded  to  are  Rig-veda  I,
164  ;  and  an  Upanishad.

7.  Identical  with  Manu  XI,  252.  The  Vedic  texts  mentioned
are  Rig-veda  X,  88;  X,  126;  X,  90.

8.  Manu  XI,  260-261 ;  Vishmi  LV,  7.


128  VASISHrfl" A.  XXVI,  9.

9.  An  offering  consisting  of  muttered  prayers  is
ten  times  more  efficacious  than  a  sacrifice  at  which
animals  are  killed ;  a  (prayer)  which  is  inaudible  (to
others)  surpasses  it  a  hundred  times,  and  the  mental
(recitation  of  sacred  texts)  one  thousand  times.

10.  The  four  Pakaya^las  and  those  sacrifices
which  are  enjoined  by  the  rules  of  the  Veda  are  all
together  not  equal  in  value  to  the  sixteenth  part  of
a  sacrifice  consisting  of  muttered  prayers.

11.  But,  undoubtedly,  a  Brahma^a  reaches  the
highest  goal  by  muttering  prayers  only ;  whether  he
perform  other  (rites)  or  neglect  them,  he  is  called  a
Brahma^a  who  befriends  all  creatures  (maitra).

12.  The  sins  of  those  who  are  intent  on  muttering
prayers,  of  those  who  offer  burnt-oblations,  of  those
who  are  given  to  meditation,  of  those  who  reside  in
sacred  places,  and  of  those  who  have  bathed  after
performing  the  vows  called  .Slras,  do  not  remain.

13.  As  a  fire,  fanned  by  wind,  burns  brighter,  and
(as  its  flame  grows)  through  offerings  (of  butter),
even    so    a    Brahma^a   who    is    daily   engaged    in

9.  Manu  II,  85;  Vish/m  LV,  19.  The  term  arambhaya^wa,
translated  by  '  an  offering  at  which  animals  are  slain/  is  taken  by
Knshwapa/wflta  to  mean  pa/^aya^a,  '  an  offering  consisting  of
Vedic  mantras  recited  aloud.'  The  word  may  be  taken  in  several
ways,  but  the  various  reading  vidhiya^tla  in  Manu's  verse  induces
me  to  adopt  the  translation  given  above.

10.  Identical  with  Manu  II,  86,  and  Vishmi  LV,  20.  Regarding
the  four  Pakaya^as,  see  Professor  Jolly's  note  on  Vishnu.  In
my  opinion  the  four  classes  of  rites  huta,  ahuta,  prahuta,  and  pra-
jita  are  meant.

n.    Identical  with  Manu  II,  87.

12.  'After  performing  the  vows  (called)  -Siras/  i.e.  those  which
are  known  in  the  Upanishads,  which  are  called  agnidharazza  and
so  forth,  and  whose  head  (jiras)  consists  in  the  worship  of  the
teacher. — Knsh/zapaMta.     Mu«</aka  Upanishad  III,  2, 10.


XXVII,  i.  SECRET   PENANCES.  1 29

muttering    sacred    texts    shines    with    a    brilliant
lustre.

14.  The  destruction  of  those  who  fulfil  the  duty
of  daily  study,  who  constantly  restrain  themselves,
who  mutter  prayers  and  offer  sacrifices  has  never
been  known  (to  happen).

15.  Let  him  who  is  desirous  of  purification  repeat,
though  he  be  charged  with  all  sins,  the  divine  (Gaya-
tri),  at  the  most  one  thousand  times,  or  one  hundred
times  as  a  medium  (penance),  or  at  least  ten  times
(for  trivial  faults).

16.  A  Kshatriya  shall  pass  through  misfortunes
which  have  befallen  him  by  the  strength  of  his  arms,
a  Vaiiya  and  £ildra  by  their  wealth,  the  highest
among  twice-born  men  by  muttered  prayers  and
burnt-oblations.

1 7.  As  horses  (are  useless)  without  a  chariot,  as
chariots  (are  useless)  without  horses,  even  so  austerity
(is  useless)  to  him  who  is  destitute  of  sacred  learn-
ing, and  sacred  learning  to  him  who  practises  no
austerities.

18.  As  food  mixed  with  honey,  or  honey  mixed
with  food,  even  so  are  austerities  and  learning,  joined
together,  a  powerful  medicine.

19.  No  guilt  taints  a  Brihma^a  who  possesses
learning,  practises  austerities,  and  daily  mutters  sacred
texts,  though  he  may  constantly  commit  sinful  acts.

Chapter  XXVII.

1.  If  a  hundred  improper  acts,  and  even  more,
have  been  committed,  and  the  (knowledge  of  the)

14.   Manu  IV,  146.
XXVII.  1-2.   Manu  XI,  247.
[14]  K


I 30  VASISKTHA.  XXVII,  2.

Veda  is  retained,  the  fire  of  the  Veda  destroys  all
(the  guilt)  of  that  man  just  as  a  (common)  fire  con-
sumes fuel.

2.  As  a  fire  that  burns  strongly  consumes  even
green  trees,  even  so  the  fire  of  the  Veda  destroys
one's  guilt  caused  by  (evil)  deeds.

3.  A  Brahma/za  who  remembers  the  Rig-veda  is
not  tainted  by  any  guilt,  though  he  has  destroyed
these  (three)  worlds  and  has  eaten  the  food  of  all,
(even  of  the  most  sinful)  men.

4.  If  (a  Brahma^a)  relies  on  the  power  of  the
Veda,  he  cannot  find  pleasure  in  sinful  acts.  Guilt
(incurred)  through  ignorance  and  negligence  is  de-
stroyed, not  (that  of)  other  (intentional  offences).

5.  If  a  hermit  subsisting  on  roots  and  fruit  prac-
tises austerities  in  a  forest,  and  (a  householder)
recites  a  single  Rik,  the  merit  of  the  acts  of  the  one
and  of  the  other  is  equal.

6.  Let  him  strengthen  the  Veda  by  (studying)
the  Itihasas  and  Pura^as.  For  the  Veda  fears  a  man
of  little  learning,  (thinking)  '  He  will  destroy  me/

7.  The  daily  recitation  of  the  Veda  and  the  per-
formance, according  to  one's  ability,  of  the  series
of  Mahaya^as  quickly  destroy  guilt,  even  that  of
mortal  sins.

8.  Let  him  daily  perform,  without  tiring,  his  par-
ticular rites  which  the  Veda  enjoins.  For  if  he  does
that  according  to  his  ability,  he  will  reach  the  most
blessed  state.

9.  Through  sacrificing  for  wicked  people,  through
teaching  them,  through  intermarrying  with  them,
and  through  receiving  gifts   from   them,  (learned)

3.   Identical  with  Manu  XI,  262.

8.    '  The  most  blessed  state,'  i.  e.  final  liberation,  or  moksha.


XXVII,  16.  SECRET    PENANCES.


Brahma^as  do  not  contract  guilt,  for  (a  learned
Brahma^a)  resembles  a  fire  and  the  sun.

10.  I  will  now  declare  the  purification  prescribed
for  (eating)  food,  regarding  which  doubts  have  arisen,
whether  it  may  be  called  fit  to  be  eaten  or  not.
Listen  to  my  words !

ii.  Let  a  Brahma/za  drink  during  three  days  the
astringent  decoction  of  the  Brahmasuvar^ala  plant,
unmixed  with  salt  or  pungent  condiments,  and  (a  de-
coction of)  the  6ankhapushpi  plant,  together  with  milk.

12.  Let  him  drink  water,  after  boiling  in  it  Palasa
and  Bilva  leaves,  Kusa  grass,  and  (leaves  of)  lotuses
and  Udumbara  trees ;  after  three  days  and  no  more
he  becomes  pure.

13.  (Subsisting)  during  one  day  on  each  (of  the
following  substances),  cow's  urine,  cowdung,  milk,
sour  milk,  butter,  and  water  in  which  Kusa  grass  has
been  boiled,  and  fasting  on  the  seventh  day  purify
even  (him  who  fears  that  he  has  partaken  of  the
food  of)  a  .Svapaka.

14.  He  who  lives  during  five  days  on  cow's  urine,
cowdung,  milk,  sour  milk,  and  clarified  butter,  is
purified  by  means  of  (that)  Pa#/£agavya,  (the  five
products  of  the  cow.)

15.  He  who,  in  accordance  with  the  rule,  uses
barley  (for  his  food),  becomes  pure  even  by  ocular
proof.  (For)  if  he  is  pure,  those  (barley  grains)  will
be  white,  if  he  is  impure  they  will  be  discoloured.

16.  (If  he  makes)  three  morning  meals  of  food

12.  Vishmi  XLVI,  23.     I  read  abho^yabho^yasa^nake.

13.  Vishmi  XLVI,  19.

15.  The  rule  is  described  by  Vish/m  XLVIII.

16.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is  that  each  mode  of  subsistence
is  to  be  continued  during  three  days.

K   2


T32  VASISUTHA.  XXVII,  17.

fit  for  a  sacrifice  and  three  evening  meals  in  like
manner,  and  if  food  given  without  asking  (is  his
subsistence)  in  the  same  manner,  (he  will  thus  per-
form) three  fasts.

1 7.  Now  if  he  is  in  haste  to  make  (himself  pure),
(let  him)  subsist  on  air  during  a  day,  and  pass  the
night  standing  in  water;  (that  penance)  is  equal  to
a  Pra^apatya  (KrtJb&Ara).

18.  But  if  at  sunrise  he  mutters  the  Gayatrl  eight
thousand  times,  he  will  be  freed  from  all  mortal  sins,
provided  he  be  not  the  slayer  of  a  Brahma^a.

19.  He,  forsooth,  who  has  stolen  (the  gold  of
a  Brahma^a),  has  drunk  spirituous  liquor,  has  slain
a  learned  Brahma/za,  or  has  violated  his  Guru's
bed,  will  become  free  from  all  (these)  mortal  sins
if  he  studies  the  Institutes  of  the  sacred  law.

20.  For  unlawful  acts,  for  unlawful  sacrifices,  and
for  great  sins  (let  him  perform)  a  Krz&Mra.  and
a  ATandraya^a,  which  destroy  all  guilt.

21.  Let  him  add  daily  one  mouthful  (to  his  food)
during  the  bright  (half  of  the  month),  let  him  dimi-
nish it  (daily  by  one  mouthful)  during  the  dark  (half),
and  let  him  fast  on  the  new-moon  day ;  that  is  the
rule  for  the  A"andraya/2a  (or  lunar  penance).

Chapter  XXVIII.
1.    A  woman  is  not  defiled  by  a  lover,  nor  a  Brah-
mawa  by  Vedic  rites,  nor  water  by  urine  and  ordure,
nor  fire  by  consuming  (impure  substances).

18.  Ash/asahasram, '  eight  thousand  times/  may  also  mean  '  one
thousand  and  eight  times/

21.    See  above,  XXIII,  44-47.

XXVIII.  1.  'Is  not  defiled  by  a  lover/  i.e.  does  not  become
irrevocably  an  outcast,  but  may  be  restored  to  her  position  after


XXVIII,  9-  SECRET   PENANCES.  I  33

2-3.  A  wife,  (though)  tainted  by  sin,  whether  she
be  quarrelsome,  or  have  left  the  house,  or  have  suf-
fered criminal  force,  or  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of
thieves,  must  not  be  abandoned ;  to  forsake  her  is
not  prescribed  (by  the  sacred  law).  Let  him  wait
for  the  time  of  her  courses;  by  her  temporary
uncleanness  she  becomes  pure.

4.  Women  (possess)  an  unequalled  means  of
purification ;  they  never  become  (entirely)  foul.
For  month  by  month  their  temporary  uncleanness
removes  their  sins.

5.  Women  belong  first  to  three  gods,  Soma  (the
moon),  the  Gandharva,  and  Fire,  and  come  after-
wards into  the  possession  of  men ;  according  to  the
law  they  cannot  be  contaminated.

6.  Soma  gave  them  cleanliness,  the  Gandharva
their  melodious  voice,  and  Fire  purity  of  all  (limbs);
therefore  women  are  free  from  stains.

7.  Those  versed  in  the  sacred  law  state  that  there
are  three  acts  (only)  which  make  women  outcasts,  (viz.)
the  murder  of  the  husband,  slaying  a  learned  Brah-
ma/za,  and  the  destruction  of  the  fruit  of  their  womb.

8.  A  calf  is  pure  when  the  milk  flows,  a  bird  when
it  causes  fruit  to  fall,  women  during  dalliance,  and
a  dog  when  he  catches  a  deer.

9.  Pure  is  the  mouth  of  a  goat  and  of  a  horse,
pure  is  the  back  of  a  cow,  pure  are  the  feet  of  a  Brah-
ma^a,  but  women  are  pure  in  all  (limbs).

performing  a  penance,  provided  her  lover  was  a  man  of  equal
caste. — Krz*sh«apa«^/ita.

2-3.   For  the  last  clause  compare  Y%navalkya  I,  72.

4.  See  above,  V,  3-4.

5.  Paraskara  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  4,  16.

6.  Ya^avalkya  I,  71.  7.   Y%wavalkya  I,  72.
8.   Vishmi  XXIII,  49.  9.  Vish«u  XXIII,  40.


134  VASISHFtfA.  XXVIII,  10.

10.  I  will  now  declare  the  purificatory  texts  (which
are  found)  in  each  Veda ;  by  muttering  them  or  re-
citing them  at  a  burnt-oblation  (men)  are  doubtlessly
cleansed  (from  sin).

1 1.  (They  are)  the  Aghamarsha^a,  the  Devakrzta,
the  .Suddhavatls,  the  Taratsamas,  the  Kushma/zafas,
the  Pavaminis,  and  the  Durg&savitrl ;

12.  The  Atishahgas,  the  Padastobhas,  and  the
Samans  (called)  Vyahrzti,  the  Bharu/z^a  Sctmans,
the  Gayatra  (Siman),  and  the  Raivata  ;

13.  The  Purushavrata  and  the  Bhasa,  and  like-
wise the  Devavrata  (Samans),  the  Ablinga,  the  Bir-
haspatya,  the  hymn  addressed  to  Va/£,  likewise  the
RikdiS  (called)  Madhu ;

14.  The  .Satarudriya,  the  Atharvasiras,  the  Tri-
supar/za,  the  Mahavrata,  the  Gosukta,  and  the  Asva-
sukta,  and  the  two  Samans  (called)  6uddhasuddhiya.

15.  The  three  (Samans  called)  A^yadohas,  the
Rathantara,  the  Agnervrata,  the  Vamadevya,  and
the  Brzhat,  being  muttered,  purify  (all)  living  beings.
(He  who  sings  them)  may  obtain  the  recollection  of
former  existences,  if  he  desires  it.

16.  Gold  is  the  firstborn  of  Fire,  through  Vish/zu
exists  the  earth,  and  the  cows  are  children  of  the


10-15.  Vishmi  LVI,  and  preface,  p.  xviii.  The  explanation  of
the  various  terms  used  will  be  found  in  the  notes  to  Professor
Jolly's  translation  of  Vishmi.

12.  MSS.  and  Kmhwapaw^ita,  Abhishahga^.  Krzsh;zapa;writa
and  MS.  B.  bharada^ani ;  E.  bha^/ani ;  Bh.  and  F.  omit  vv.  1 2
and  13  a.

1 3.  Knsh«apa#dTita  and  B.  artvigam ;  Bh.  E.  F.  as  above.  The
Bhasa  begins,  according  to  Krzsh«apa#<fita,  agne  vratapate.

14.  Krz'srwapa/fcfita  and  B.  indra^uddhe ;  Bh.  E.  F.  juddhaw-
.mddhena.


XXVIII,  22.  GIFTS.  135

Sun ;  he  who  bestows  as  gifts  gold,  a  cow,  and  land
will  obtain  rewards  without  end  for  them.

17.  A  cow,  a  horse,  gold,  (and)  land,  bestowed
on  an  unlearned  Brahmawa  who  neglects  his  sacred
duties,  prevent  the  giver  (from  attaining  heaven).

18-19.  (If  he  presents),  on  the  full  moon  of  the
month  of  Vaisakha,  (to)  seven  or  five  Brahma/zas,
black  or  white  sesamum  grains  (mixed)  with  honey,
(saying),  '  May  the  king  of  justice  (Yama)  rejoice!'
or  (expressing)  some  other  (wish)  which  he  may  have
in  his  mind,  the  guilt  which  he  has  incurred  during
his  (whole)  life  will  instantly  vanish.

20.  But  hear  (now)  the  reward  of  the  merit
acquired  by  that  man  who  gives  the  skin  of  a  black
antelope,  to  which  the  hoofs  are  (still)  attached  and
the  navel  of  which  is  adorned  with  gold,  covering  it
with  sesamum  grains.

21.  'Without  doubt  he  has  bestowed  (through
that  gift)  the  four-faced  earth,  together  with  its
caves  filled  with  gold,  and  together  with  its  moun-
tains, groves,  and  forests.'

22.  'He  who,  placing  on  the  skin  of  a  black  ante-
lope, sesamum,  gold,  honey,  and  butter,  gives  it  to
a  Brahma^a,  overcomes  all  sin/


17.   Manu  IV,  190, 193-194.    Krz'sh«apa«<fita  and  MSS.  B.  and
E.  read  uparudanti  dataraw,  MSS.  Bh.  and  F.  uparundanti.   I  change
the  latter  reading  to  uparundhanti.
-  18-19.  Vishmi  XC,  10.

20-22.  Vishmi  LXXXVII,  8-10,  and  Professor  Jolly's  preface,
p.  xviii.

21.    'The  four-faced  earth,'  i.e.  the  earth  which  is  surrounded
by  the  four  oceans.


136  VASISHTtfA.  XXIX,  i,


Chapter  XXIX.

1.  Through  liberality  (man)  obtains  all  his  desires,

2.  (Even)  longevity,  (and  he  is  born  again  as)
a  student  of  the  Veda,  possessed  of  beauty.

3.  He  who  abstains  from  injuring  (sentient  beings)
obtains  heaven.

4.  By  entering  a  fire  the  world  of  Brahman  (is
gained).

5.  By  (a  vow  of)  silence  (he  obtains)  happiness.

6.  By  staying  (constantly)  in  water  he  becomes
a  lord  of  elephants.

7.  He  who  expends  his  hoard  (in  gifts)  becomes
free  from  disease.

8.  A  giver  of  water  (becomes)  rich  by  (the  fulfil-
ment of)  all  his  desires.

9.  A  giver  of  food  (will  have)  beautiful  eyes  and
a  good  memory.

10.  He  who  gives  a  promise  to  protect  (some-
body) from  all  dangers  (becomes)  wise.

11.  (To  bestow  gifts)  for  the  use  of  cows  (is  equal
to)  bathing  at  all  sacred  places.

12.  By   giving   a   couch   and   a   seat   (the  giver
becomes)  master  of  a  harem.

*3-    By  giving   an  (umbrella^ (the  giver)  obtains
a  house.


XXIX.  4.  This  Sutra,  which  recommends  self-cremation,  is  of
some  importance,  as  it  confirms  the  teaching  of  the  Purawas  and
explains  the  accounts  of  the  Greeks  regarding  the  self-immolation
of  Brahmawas  who  visited  Europe.

9.  VishmiXCII,  21.

i2.  Vishmi  XCII,  27;  Manu  IV,  232.  'Master  of  a  harem,'
i.  e.  the  possessor  of  many  beautiful  wives  and  concubines.


XXIX,  21.  GIFTS.  I37

14.  He  who  gives  a  house  obtains  a  town.

15.  He  who  gives  a  pair  of  shoes  obtains  a  vehicle.

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  Whatever  sin  a  man  distressed  for  livelihood  com-
mits, (from  that)  he  is  purified  by  giving  land,  (be
it)  even  "  a  bull's  hide."  '

17.  '  He  who  gives  to  a  Brahma^a  a  vessel  filled
with  water  for  sipping,  will  obtain  after  death  com-
plete freedom  from  thirst  and  be  born  again  as  a
drinker  of  Soma/

18.  '  If  a  gift  of  one  thousand  oxen  fit  to  draw
a  carriage  (has  been  bestowed)  according  to  the  rule
on  a  perfectly  worthy  man,  that  is  equal  to  giving
a  maiden/

19.  '  They  declare  that  cows,  land,  and  learning
are  the  three  most  excellent  gifts.  For  to  give
learning  is  (to  bestow)  the  greatest  of  all  gifts,  and
it  surpasses  those  (other  gifts)/

20.  'A  learned  man  who,  free  from  envy,  follows
this  rule  of  conduct  which  procures  endless  rewards,
and  which  through  final  liberation  frees  him  from
transmigration ;'

21.  '  Or  who,  full  of  faith,  pure,  and  subduing  his


14.  Vishnu  XCII,  31.  15.  Vishmi  XCII,  28.

16.  Vishmi  XCII,  4.  Kr/sh»apa«^ita  quotes  a  passage  of  the
Matsya-purawa  according  to  which  '  a  bull's  hide '  is  a  measure
equal  to  1 40  square  hastas ;  see,  however,  notes  to  Vishmi  loc.  cit.
and  V,  183.

17.  Manu  IV,  229.

18.  Read  in  the  text  vidhivaddanam  kanyadanena  tatsamam.

19.  Kr*sh«apa«aTita  wrongly  makes  two  Sutras  out  of  this  verse.

20.  Kr2sh»apa»rfta  and  MS.  B.  read,  against  the  metre  and
sense,  yoginaw  sampuritam  vidvan,  another  reading  yoginazrc  saw-
matam  vidvan.  F.  reads  £onasa#zyurimaw  vidvan.  I  read  yo  'na-
suyurimaffz  vidvan.


138  VASISHFtfA.  XXX,  1.

senses,  remembers  or  even  hears  it,  will,  freed  from
all  sin,  be  exalted  in  the  highest  heaven.'


Chapter  XXX.

1.  Practise  righteousness,  not  unrighteousness;
speak  truth,  not  untruth ;  look  far,  not  near ;  look
towards  the  Highest,  not  towards  that  which  is  not
the  Highest.

2.  A  Brahma^a  is  a  fire.

3.  For  the  Veda  (says),  '  Agni,  forsooth,  is  a
Brahma^a.'

4.  And  how  is  that  ?

5.  And  it  is  also  declared  in  the  Kanaka,  'On
that  (occasion)  the  body  of  the  Brahma^a  who  repre-
sents the  sacrificial  seat  is  the  altar,  the  vow  to  per-
form the  rite  is  the  sacrifice,  the  soul  is  the  animal
to  be  slain,  the  intellect  the  rope  (with  which  the
animal  is  bound),  the  mouth  of  (the  Brahma^a)  who
represents  the  seat  is  the  Ahavaniya  fire,  in  his
navel  (is  the  Dakshma  fire),  the  fire  in  his  abdomen
is  the  Garhapatya  fire,  the  Pra^a  is  the  Adhvaryu
priest,  the  Apana  the  Hotrt  priest,  the  Vyana  the
Brahman,  the  Samana  the  Udgatrz  priest,  the  organs
of  sensation  the  sacrificial  vessels.  He  who  knowing
this  offers  a  sacrifice  to  the  organs  through  the
organs/  .  .   .

6.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  An  offering  placed  in  the  mouth-fire  of  a  Brah-

XXX.  2.  See  above,  III,  10.

3.  -Satapatha-brahmaTza  I,  4,  22.

5.  Kn'sh«apa«^ita  divides  the  passage  into  thirteen  Sutras,  and
connects  tatra,  '  on  that  occasion,'  with  the  preceding  Sutra.  *  On
that  (occasion),'  i.  e.  if  a  Brahmawa  is  fed.


XXX,  p.  GIFTS.  139

ma»a  which  is  rich  in  Veda-fuel,  protects  and  saves
the  giver  and  (the  eater)  himself  from  sin.'

7.  -  But  the  offering  made  through  the  mouth  of  a
Brahma^a,  which  is  neither  spilt  nor  causes  pain  (to
sentient  creatures),  nor  assails  him  (who  makes  it),  is
far  more  excellent  than  an  Agnihotra.'

8.  After  performing  a  mental  sacrifice  at  which
meditation  (takes  the  place  of  the  sacred)  fire,  truth-
fulness (the  place  of)  the  sacred  fuel,  patience  (the
place  of)  the  oblation,  modesty  (the  place  of)  the
sacrificial  spoon,  abstention  from  injuring  living
beings  (the  place  of  the)  sacrificial  cake,  contentment
(the  place  of)  the  sacrificial  post,  (and  a  promise
of)  safety  given  to  all  beings  which  is  hard  to  keep
(the  place  of)  the  reward  given  to  the  priests,  a  wise
man  goes  to  his  (eternal)  home.

9.  The  hair  of  an  aging  man  shows  signs  of  age,
(and)  the  teeth  of  an  aging  man  show  signs  of  age,
(but)  the  desire  to  live  and  the  desire  for  wealth  do
not  decay  even  in  an  aging  man.

7.  Manu  VII,  84  ;  Ya^iiavalkya  I,  315.  Kn'sh«apa«^ita's  read-
ing, nainam  adhya^ate  ka,  y&h,  which  occurs  also  in  B.,  is  nonsense.
I  read  with  Bh.  nainamadhyapate^a  yat,  and  take  adhyapatet,
'  assails  (the  giver)/  in  the  sense  of  '  troubles  him  by  causing  the
performance  of  penances,  on  account  of  mistakes  committed.
Manu's  version,  na  vinajyati  karhi&t,  '  and  never  perishes/  is  of
course  an  easier  one,  but  it  seems  to  me  doubtful  whether  it  is
older  than  Vasish/M's.

8.  The  passage,  which  is  probably  a  quotation  from  an  Upani-
shad,  is  very  corrupt  in  the  MSS.  and  Kr/sh»apa»</ita's  text.  I  cor-
rect it  as  follows :

Dhyanagni^  satyopa^ayanaw  kshantyahuti^
sruva/rchrU  puro</asamahi»zsa  sa/ratosho
yupa^  krikkhr&m  bhutebhyo  'bhayadakshiwyam  iti
krz'tva  kratum  manasaw  yati  kshayam  budha^.
But  I  am  not  confident  that  all  the  difficulties  have  been  removed.


140  VASISKTHA.  XXX,  io.

10.  Happiness  (is  the  portion)  of  that  man  who
relinquishes  (all)  desire,  which  fools  give  up  with
difficulty,  which  does  not  diminish  with  age,  and
which  is  a  life-long  disease.

ii.  Adoration  to  Vasish/^a  6atayatu,  the  son  of
Mitra  and  Vanwa  and  Urva^l !


BAUDHAYANA,


BAUDHAYANA.


Prasna   I,  Adhyaya  1,  KAiVDIKA  1.

i.  The  sacred  law  is  taught  in  each  Veda.

2.  We  will  explain  (it)  in  accordance  with  that.

3.  (The  sacred  law),  taught  in  the  Tradition
(Smrzti,  stands)  second.

4.  The  practice  of  the  vSlsh/as  (stands)  third.

5.  •S'ishfes,  forsooth,  (are  those)  who  are  free
from  envy,  free  from  pride,  contented  with  a  store
of  grain  sufficient  for  ten  days,  free  from  covetous-
ness,  and  free  from  hypocrisy,  arrogance,  greed,
perplexity,  and  anger.

6.  '(Those  are  called)  .5"ish/as  who,  in  accordance
with  the  sacred  law,  have  studied  the  Veda  together.

1.  1.  Vasish/#a  I,  4.  Each  Veda,  i.e.  each  jakha  or  redaction
of  the  Veda. — Govinda.

3.  Vasish/^a  I,  4.  Govinda  takes  smrz'ti,  '  the  tradition,'  in  the
sense  of  works  (grantha)  explaining  the  recollections  of  the
ifo'shis,  and   is  no  doubt  right  in  doing  so.

4.  VasishZ/za  I,  5.  The  explanation  of  agama  by  'practice'  rests
on  the  authority  of  Govinda  and  the  parallel  passages  where  sila.
and  aHra, '  conduct,'  are  used.

5.  Apastamba  I,  7,  20,  8;  Gautama  XXVIII,  48.  Kumbhidhanya,
translated  according  to  Govinda  by  *  contented  with  a  store  of  grain
sufficient  for  ten  days,'  means,  according  to  others, '  contented  with
a  store  of  grain  sufficient  for  six  days  or  for  a  year.'

6.  VasishMa  VI,  43.    Govinda  omits  the  word  'iti,'  given  by  the


144  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  I,  i.

with  its  appendages,  know  how  to  draw  inferences
from  that,  (and)  are  able  to  adduce  proofs  perceptible
by  the  senses  from  the  revealed  texts.'

7.  On  failure  of  them,  an  assembly  consisting  at
least  of  ten  members  (shall  decide  disputed  points
of  law).

8.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  Four  men,  who  each  know  one  of  the  four  Vedas,
a  Mimawsaka,  one  who  knows  the  Aiigas,  one  who
recites  (the  works  on)  the  sacred  law,  and  three
Brahma^as  belonging  to  (three  different)  orders,
(constitute)  an  assembly  consisting,  at  least,  of  ten
members/

9.  'There  may  be  five,  or  there  may  be  three,  or
there  may  be  one  blameless  man,  who  decides  (ques-
tions regarding)  the  sacred  law.  But  a  thousand
fools  (can)not  (do  it)/

10.  'As  an  elephant  made  of  wood,  as  an  antelope
made  of  leather,  such  is  an  unlearned  Brahma;za :
those  three  having  nothing  but  the  name  (of  their
kind)/

MSS.  after  the  verse,  whereby  it  is  marked  as  a  quotation.  '  The
appendages/  i.  e.  the  Itihasas  and  Pura^as. — Govinda.

8.  Vasish/^a  III,  20.  Govinda,  quoting  Gautama  XXVIII,  49,
says  that  Vanaprasthas  cannot  serve  as  members  of  Parishads,  be-
cause they  live  in  the  forest.  He  also  notices  a  different  reading,
not  found  in  my  MSS.,  'Ajramasthas  trayo  mukhya^/  He  asserts
that  thereby  professed  students  are  intended,  because  professed
students  are  declared  to  be  particularly  holy  in  the  Dharmaskandha-
brahmazza.

9.  Vasish//$a  III,  7.  Itare,  translated  by  '  fools/  means  literally,
'those  different  from  the  persons  enumerated  in  the  preceding
verse.'  Govinda  remarks  that  according  to  Sutra  12  one  learned
Brahmawa  must  be  taken  only  in  cases  of  the  most  pressing
necessity.

10.  Vasish/#a  III,  11.


I,  I,  t.  SOURCES    OF    THE    LAW.  145

11.  'That  sin  which  dunces,  perplexed  by  ignor-
ance and  unacquainted  with  the  sacred  law,  declare
(to  be  duty),  falls,  increased  a  hundredfold,  on  those
who  propound  it.'

1 2.  '  Narrow  and  difficult  to  find  is  the  path  of  the
sacred  law,  towards  which  many  gates  lead.  Hence,
if  there  is  a  doubt,  it  must  not  be  propounded  by
one  man  (only),  however  learned  he  may  be.'

13.  'What  Brahma/zas,  riding  in  the  chariot  of
the  law  (and)  wielding  the  sword  of  the  Veda,  pro-
pound even  in  jest,  that  is  declared  to  be  the  highest
law.'

14.  'As  wind  and  sun  will  make  water,  collected
on  a  stone,  disappear,  even  so  the  sin  that  (cleaves)
to  an  offender  completely  vanishes  like  water.'

15.  'He  who  knows  the  sacred  law  shall  fix  the
penances  with  discernment,  taking  into  consideration
the  constitution,  the  strength,  the  knowledge,  and  the
age  (of  the  offender),  as  well  as  the  time  and  the
deed.'


11.  Vasish/$a  III,  6.

12.  The  '  gates'  of  the  sacred  law  are  the  Vedas,  the  Smrz'tis,  and
the  practice  of  the  -Sish/as.  They  are  many,  because  the  redactions
of  the  Vedas  and  Sm/Ytis  are  numerous  and  the  practices  vary  in
different  countries.

14.  I.  e.  provided  the  offender  performs  the  penance  imposed  by
learned  and  virtuous  Brahmawas.  Prawlrayet, '  will  make  disappear,'
is  ungrammatical,  as  the  subject  stands  in  the  dual.  Grammatical
accuracy  has  probably  been  sacrificed  to  the  exigencies  of  the
metre.

15.  VasishMa  XIX,  9.  Sariram,  literally  'the  body/  means  here
the  constitution,  which  may  be  bilious, '  windy,'  and  so  forth.  Ayu>#,
literally  '  life '  or  '  long  life/  has  been  translated  by  '  knowledge/
in  accordance  with  Govinda's  explanation,  ^lanam.  As  the  word
vaya^,  '  age/  also  occurs  in  this  verse,  it  is  clear  that  ayu^  cannot
have  its  usual  meaning.

[14]  L


I46  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  1,  1.

1 6.  '  Many  thousands  (of  Brahma^as)  cannot  form
a  (legal)  assembly  (for  declaring  the  sacred  law),  if
they  have  not  fulfilled  their  sacred  duties,  are  unac-
quainted with  the  Veda,  and  subsist  only  by  the
name  of  their  caste/


PRASNA    I,    ADHYAYA    1,    KA2VDIKA   2.

1.  There  is  a  dispute  regarding  five  (practices)
both  in  the  south  and  in  the  north.

2.  We  will  explain  those  (peculiar)  to  the  south.

3.  They  are,  to  eat  in  the  company  of  an  uniniti-
ated person,  to  eat  in  the  company  of  one's  wife,  to
eat  stale  food,  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a  maternal
uncle  or  of  a  paternal  aunt.

4.  Now  (the  customs  peculiar)  to  the  north  are,
to  deal  in  wool,  to  drink  rum,  to  sell  animals  that
have  teeth  in  the  upper  and  in  the  lower  jaws,  to
follow  the  trade  of  arms,  to  go  to  sea.

16.  Vasish//fca  III,  5.  The  two  copies  of  the  commentary  omit
this  Sutra,  though  it  is  quoted  in  the  explanation  of  Sutra  9.  The
best  MSS.  repeat  the  last  words  of  the  Sutra  in  order  to  show  that
the  K&ndika  ends  here.  The  same  practice  is  observed,  though
not  quite  regularly,  in  the  sequel.

2.  1 .  The  boundary  between  the  north  and  south  of  India  is,  as
Govinda  also  points  out,  the  river  Narmada.

3.  Some  of  the  customs  mentioned  here  still  prevail  in  parts  of
southern  India.  Thus  the  marriages  between  cousins  occur  among
the  Derastha  and  Karh^a  Brahmawas  of  the  Dekhan.

4.  The  first  two  customs  mentioned  still  prevail  in  the  north,
especially  in  Ka^mir,  where  Brahmaraas  commonly  deal  in  wool
and  woollen  cloth.  Spirituous  liquor  is  not  now  drunk  openly,  but
its  use  is  sanctioned  in  the  Ka^mirian  Nilamata-purawa.  Many
Brahmanical  families  in  the  north,  especially  in  the  North-western
Provinces,  subsist  by  enlisting  as  soldiers  in  the  British  and  native
armies.  \


I,  I,  2.        DIFFERENT    CUSTOMS   AND   COUNTRIES.  I47

5.  He  who  follows  (these  practices)  in  any  other
country  than  where  they  prevail,  commits  sin.

6.  For  each  (of  these  customs)  the  (rule  of  the)
country  should  be  (considered)  the  authority.

7.  Gautama  declares  that  that  is  false.

8.  And  one  should  not  take  heed  of  either  (set  of
practices)  because  they  are  opposed  to  the  tradition
of  the  .Slsh/as.

9.  The  country  of  the  Aryas  (Aryavarta)  lies  to
the  east  of  the  region  where  (the  river  Sarasvati)
disappears,  to  the  west  of  the  Black-forest  (Kala-
kavana),  to  the  north  of  the  Paripatra  (mountains),
to  the  south  of  the  Himalaya.  The  rule  of  conduct
which  (prevails)  there,  is  authoritative.

10.  Some  (declare)  the  country  between  the
(rivers)  Yamuna  and  Ganges  (to  be  the  Aryavarta).

11.  Now  the  Bhallavins  quote  also  the  (following)
verse :

12.  'In  the  west  the  boundary-river,  in  the  east
the  region  where  the  sun  rises, — as  far  as  the  black
antelopes  wander  (between  these  two  limits),  so  far
spiritual  pre-eminence  (is  found).'


5-6.  A  similar  argument  is  given  by  the  Ka.nnirians  for  the
lawfulness  of  the  consumption  of  meat,  which  they  justify  by  a
dcfaguwa  or  '  virtue  of  their  country.'

7.  Gautama  XI,  20.

9.  Vasish/^a  I,  8,  10.  Many  MSS.,  and  among  them  the  Telugu
copy  of  the  commentary,  read  Pariyatra  instead  of  Paripatra,  which
latter  I  consider  to  be  the  correct  form  of  the  word.

10.  Vasish/^a  1, 12.

11.  Vasish/^a  1, 14.  Govinda  remarks  that  the  Bhallavins  are
a  school  studying  the  Sama-veda.  See  also  Max  Mtiller,  Hist.
Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  pp.  193,  364.

12.  VasishMa  1, 15.  There  is  a  great  uncertainty  in  the  MSS.
about  the  word  following  sindhu/^.     I  have  adopted  the  reading  of

L    2


I48  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  1,  2.

13.  The  inhabitants  of  Avanti,  of  Anga,  of  Maga-
dha,  of  Surashfra,  of  the  Dekhan,  of  Upavrzt,  of
Sindh,  and  the  Sauviras  are  of  mixed  origin.

14.  He  who  has  visited  the  (countries  of  the)
Ara//as,  Karaskaras,  PuWras,  Sauviras,  Vangas,  Ka-
lingas,  (or)  Pranunas  shall  offer  a  Punastoma  or  a
Sarvaprzsh^a  (ish/i).

15.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  He  commits  sin  through  his  feet,  who  travels  to
the  (country  of  the)  Kalifigas.  The  sages  declare
the  Vaisvanari  ish/i  to  be  a  purification  for  him.'

M.,  sindhur  vidharawi,  '  the  boundary-river/  which  occurs  also  in
the  parallel  passage  of  Vasish//$a.  The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.
read  vi£ara#i  or  vl£ara«a,  and  the  two  copies  of  the  commentary
visarawi.  The  sense  of  these  various  readings  appears  to  be  '  the
river  that  vanishes  or  looses  itself,'  i.  e.  the  Sarasvatr.

13.  This  and  the  following  two  Sutras  are  intended  to  show
that  the  customs  prevailing  in  the  countries  named  have  no  autho-
rity and  must  not  be  followed.  Avanti  corresponds  to  western
Malva,  Ahga  to  western  Bengal,  Magadha  to  Bihar,  and  Surash/ra
to  southern  Ka7$iava</.  The  Sauviras,  who  are  always  associated
with  the  Sindhians,  probably  dwelt  in  the  south-west  of  the  Pa^ab,
near  Mult&n.  The  Upavrz'ts  probably  are  the  same  as  the  Up&-
vn'ttas  mentioned  Mahabharata  VI,  49.  But  I  am  unable  to  deter-
mine their  seats.

14.  The  Ara//as  dwelt  in  the  Pa%ab  (Lassen,  Ind.  Alth.  I,  p.  973,
sec.  ed.),  and  are  greatly  blamed,  Mahabharata  VIII,  44,  36  seq.
The  Karaskaras  are  named  in  the  same  chapter  of  the  Maha-
bharata as  a  degraded  tribe,  but  seem  to  belong  to  the  south  of
India.  The  Kalifigas  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  eastern  coast  of
India,  between  Orissa  and  the  mouth  of  the  Kn'shwa  river.  The
Tundras,  who  are  mentioned  as  a  degraded  tribe  in  the  Aitareya-
brahma«a  VII,  1 8,  and  occur  frequently  in  the  Mahabharata,  and
the  Vangas  belong  to  Bengal  (see  Lassen,  Ind.  Alth.  I,  669,  sec.
ed. ;  Cunningham,  Anc.  Geog.  p.  480).  Regarding  the  Puna-
stoma, see  Gautama  XIX,  7  note ;  and  regarding  the  Sarvapn'sh/M
ish/i,  Taittiriya-sawhita  II,  3,  7, 1-2.

15.  Apastamba  I,  11,  32,  t8.


I,  2,  3.  STUDENTSHIP.  149

16.  'Even  if  many  offences  have  been  committed,
they  recommend  for  the  removal  of  the  sin  the
Pavitresh/i.  For  that  (sacrifice)  is  a  most  excellent
means  of  purification/

17.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  He  who  performs  (by  turns)  in  each  season  the
VaLsvanari  (ish/i),  the  Vratapatl  (ish/i),  and  the
Pavitresh/i  is  freed  from  (all)  sins.'

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  2,  Kajvdika  3.

i.  The  (term  of  the)  studentship  for  (learning
the)  Veda,  as  kept  by  the  ancients,  (is)  forty-eight
years,

2.  (Or)  twenty-four  (years),  or  twelve  for  each
Veda,

3.  Or  at  the  least  one  year  for  each  K&nda,

4.  Or  until  (the  Veda  has  been)  learned ;  for  life
is  uncertain.

5.  A  passage  of  the  revealed  texts  declares, '  Let
him  kindle  the  sacred  fires  while  his  hair  is  (still)
black.'

17.  Vasish/zfoi  XXII,  10.  The  meaning  is  that  in  each  of  the
three  seasons  of  the  year,  Grishma,  Varsha,  Hemanta,  one  of  the
three  sacrifices  is  to  be  offered.

3.  1.  Apastamba  I,  1,  2, 12.  Govindasvamin  gives  four  explana-
tions of  the  adjective  paurawam,  'kept  by  the  ancients/  viz.  1.  old,
i.  e.  kept  by  the  men  of  the  Krz'ta  or  Golden  age ;  2.  revealed  to
and  kept  by  the  ancients,  such  as  Manu ;  3.  found  in  the  ancient,
i.  e.  eternal  Veda ;  4.  found  in  the  known  Itihasas  and  Pura«as.

2.  Apastamba  1, 1,  2,  14-16.

3.  Each  Ka«</a,  i.  e.  each  of  the  seven  books  of  the  Taittiriya-
sawhita.

4.  Manu  III,  1.

5.  The  object  of  the  Sutra  is  to  prove  that  the  period  of  student-
ship must  not  be  protracted  too  long,  lest  the  duty  of  offering  the
Srauta  Agnihotra  be  neglected.


I50  BAUDHAYANA.  1,2,3.

6.  They  do  not  put  any  (religious)  restrictions  on
the  acts  of  a  (child)  before  the  investiture  with  the
girdle  (is  performed).  For  he  is  on  a  level  with  a
^udra  before  (his  second)  birth  through  the  Veda.

7.  The  number  of  years  (must  be  calculated)  from
the  conception.  Let  him  initiate  a  Brahma/za  in  the
eighth  (year)  after  that,

8.  A  Kshatriya  three  (years)  later  (than  a  Brah-
ma^a),

9.  A  VaLrya  one  year  later  than  a  (Kshatriya).

10.  Spring,  summer,  and  autumn  are  the  seasons
(for  the  initiation)  according  to  the  order  of  the
castes.

1 1 .  (Let  him  perform  the  initiation  reciting),  ac-
cording to  the  order  (of  the  castes),  a  Gayatrl,  a
Trish^ubh,  (or)  a  £agati  (verse).

12.  Up  to  the  sixteenth,  the  twenty-second,  and
the  twenty-fourth  (years)  respectively  (the  time  for
the  initiation)  has  not  passed.

13.  The  girdles  (shall  consist  of  a  rope)  made  of
Mu^a  grass,  a  bow-string,  (or  a  rope)  made  of
hemp.

14.  The  skins  (shall  be)  those  of  a  black  antelope,
of  a  spotted  deer,  (or)  of  a  he-goat.

15.  The  staff  shall  reach  the  crown  of  the  head,
the  forehead,  (or)  the  tip  of  the  nose,  (and  be  made)
of  a  tree  fit  for  a  sacrifice.  The  details  have  been
stated  above.

6.  Vasish//$a  II,  6;  Gautama  II,  1.

7-9.  VasishMa  XI,  49-51.

10.  Apastamba  I,  1,  1,  18.  12.  Vasish//$a  XI,  71-73.

13.  Vasish//$a  XI,  58-60.  With  this  and  the  next  two  Sutras
the  words '  according  to  the  order  of  the  castes'  must  be  understood.

14.  VasishMa  XI,  61-63.

15.  Vasish/^a  XI,  55-57.     The  details  referred  to  are  to  be


1,2,3-  STUDENTSHIP.  151

1 6.  Let  him  beg,  (employing  a  formula)  consisting
of  seven  syllables,  with  the  word  b  ha  vat  in  the
beginning,  with  the  word  bhiksha  in  the  middle,
and  with  the  (verb  expressing)  the  request  at  the
end ;  and  let  him  not  pronounce  loudly  (the  sylla-
bles) ksha  and  hi.

17.  A  Brahma^a  (student)  shall  ask  for  alms,
placing  (the  word)  '  Lady '  first,  a  Kshatriya  placing


found  in  the  Baudhayana  Gr/hya-sutra  II,  7,  where  the  various
kinds  of  trees  from  which  the  staff  may  be  taken  are  specified.
The  Sutra  shows  that  the  G/Yhya-siitra  preceded  the  Dharma-sutra
in  the  collection.

1 6.  The  text  of  this  Sutra  is  corrupt.  I  read,  '  bhavatpurvaw
bhikshamadhyan  yaknantam  >£aret  saptaksharan  bhikshan  kshan
ka.  him  ka.  na  vardhayet.'  The  various  readings  of  the  MSS.  are,
bhikshan  madhyan  ya.kkha.mtam  £aret  saptaksharan  bhim  ka  na
vardhayet,  C.  T. ; — yaknamtam  £aret  saptaksharanm  kshan  ka  bhim
ka  narvyayet,  D. ; — yaknamtam  £aret  saptaksharanstin  rksha  ba  him
na  vardhayet,  K.; — yaknamtam  tikshan  <£aret  saptaksharan  kshan  ka
him  ka  na  vardhayan,  M. ; — yakanaskamtam  ^aret  saptaksharan  bhik-
shan  ka  him  ka  na  vardhayet,  C.  I.  The  most  serious  corruption  lies
in  the  syllables  following  saptaksharan,  and  I  am  not  certain  that
my  emendation  bhiksh&n  is  correct.  The  commentary  on  the
first  half  of  the  Sutra  runs  as  follows :  bhikshamantran  vyaktam
evo^aret  bhava^^abdapurvam  bhiksha\rabdamadhyan  yaMaprati-
pa[pa]daka.rabdantan  jabdaksharan  [saptaksharan]  ka  evan  hi
bhavati  bhikshan  dehi  sanpanno  bhavati,  '  let  him  pronounce  dis-
tinctly the  formula  employed  in  begging,  beginning  with  the  word
bhavat,  having  the  word  bhiksha  in  the  middle,  and  ending  with
the  word  conveying  the  sense  of  giving,  and  containing  seven
syllables.  For  thus  (the  formula),  "  Lady,  give  alms,"  becomes  com-
plete.' It  is  curious  that  Govinda  says  nothing  about  the  form
saptaksharam  and  the  feminine  terminations  of  the  other  adjectives,
which  do  not  agree  with  mantram,  a  masculine.

17.  VasishMa  XI,  68-70;  Gautama  II,  35.  Govinda  thinks
that  a  student  should,  if  possible,  beg  from  people  of  his  own
caste.  Three  castes  only  are  intended  by  the  term  'from  all
castes.'     But  see  Apastamba  1, 1,  3,  25  ;  Gautama  VII,  1  seqq.


I52  BAUDHAYANA.  1,2,3.

it  in  the   middle,  (and)  a  Vaisya  placing  it  at  the
end  (of  the  formula),  from  (men  of)  all  castes.

18.  The  (persons  fit  to  be  asked)  are  Brahma^as
and  so  forth,  who  follow  (their  lawful)  occupations.

19.  Let  him  daily  fetch  fuel  out  of  the  forest  and
offer  (it  in  the  sacred  fire).

20.  (A  student  shall  be)  truthful,  modest,  and
devoid  of  pride.

21.  He  shall  rise  before  (his  teacher  in  the
morning)  and  go  to  rest  after  (him  in  the  evening).

22.  He  shall  never  disobey  the  words  of  his
teacher  except  (when  he  is  ordered  to  commit)  a
crime  causing  loss  of  caste.

23.  Let  him  converse  with  women  so  much  (only)
as  his  purpose  requires.

24.  Let  him  avoid  dancing,  singing,  playing
musical  instruments,  the  use  of  perfumes,  garlands,
shoes,  (or)  a  parasol,  applying  collyrium  (to  his
eyes),  and  anointing  (his  body).

25.  Let  him  take  hold  (of  his  teacher's)  right
(foot)  with  the  right  (hand),  and .  of  the  left  (foot)
with  the  left  hand.

26.  If  he  desires  long  life  and  (bliss  in)  heaven,


19.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  4.

20.  Gautama  II,  8  ;  Apastamba  I,  1,  3,  20.

21.  yishmi  XXVIII,  13.

22.  Apastamba  I,  1,  2,  19;  Vasish/^aVII,  10.

23.  Apastamba  I,  1,  3,  16.

24.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  11 ;  Vasish/^aVII,  15.

25.  Vishmi  XXVIII,  15.  The  details  regarding  the  times  when
this  kind  of  salutation  is  to  be  performed  are  found  Apastamba  I,
2,5,  2iseqq.

26.  The  two  copies  of  the  commentary  connect  the  clause,  'if
he  is  desirous  of  long  life  and  (bliss  in)  heaven,'  with  the  preceding
Sutra.     But  see  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  15,  where  the  identical  words


1,2,3-  STUDENTSHIP.  1 53

(he  may  act)  at  his  pleasure  (in  the  same  manner)
towards  other  holy  (men),  after  having  received
permission  from  his  teacher.

27.  (Let  him  say),  'I  N.  N.,  ho!  (salute  thee),'
touching  his  ears,  in  order  to  compose  the  internal
organ.

28.  (Let  him  embrace  his  teachers  leg)  below  the
knee  down  to  the  feet.

29.  (A  student  shall  not  embrace  his  teacher)
when  he  (himself)  is  seated,  or  lying  down,  or  im-
pure, nor  when  (his  teacher)  is  seated,  lying  down,
or  impure.

30.  If  he  can  (find  water  to  sip),  he  shall  not
remain  impure  even  during  a  muhurta.

31.  If  he  carries  a  load  of  fuel  or  holds  a  pot,
flowers,  or  food  in  his  hands,  he  shall  not  salute  ;
nor  (shall  he  do  it)  on  similar  occasions.

32.  Let  him  not  salute  (the  teacher)  standing  too
close,

33.  Nor,  if  he  has  reached  the  age  of  puberty,
the  young  wives  of  brothers  and  the  young  wives
of  the  teacher.

occur.  The  commentary  omits  the  remainder  of  the  Sutra,  which
all  my  MSS.  give  here,  and  inserts  it  below,  after  Sutra  29.

27.  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  12  ;  Vasish//$a  XIII,  44.  Regarding  the
phrase, '  in  order  to  compose  his  internal  organ,'  see  Manu  II,  120.

28.  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  22.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the
pupil  is  first  to  stroke  his  teacher's  legs  from  the  knee  downwards,
and  then  to  take  hold  of  it  at  the  ankle.

29.  Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  14-20.         30.  Apastamba  I,  5,  15,  8.
31.  Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  22.     'On  similar  occasions/  i.e.  when

he  himself  is  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  manes,  of  the  gods,  or
of  the  fire,  or  when  his  teacher  is  occupied  in  that  way.

33.  The  salutation  which  is  meant,  is  probably  the  embrace  of
the  feet;  see  also  Gautama II,  32.  Govinda  thinks  that  the  words
samavaye  'tyantya^,  '  standing  too  close,'  must  be  understood.


154  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  2,  3.

34.  To  sit  together  with  (these  persons)  in  a  boat,
on  a  rock,  on  a  plank,  on  an  elephant,  on  the  roof  of  a
house,  on  a  mat,  or  in  wheeled  vehicles  is  permissible.

35.  (The  pupil)  must  assist  his  teacher  in  making
his  toilet,  shampoo  him,  attend  him  while  bathing,
eat  his  leavings,  and  so  forth.

36.  (But  he)  should  avoid  the  remnants  of  food
left  by  his  (teacher's)  son,  though  he  may  know  the
Veda  together  with  the  Angas,

3  J.  And  to  assist  at  the  toilet  of,  to  shampoo,  to
attend  in  the  bath,  and  to  eat  the  remnants  of  food
left  by  a  young  wife  of  his  (teacher).

38.  Let  him  run  after  (his  teacher)  when  he  runs,
walk  after  him  when  he  walks,  attend  him  standing
when  he  stands.

39.  Let  him  not  sport  in  the  water  while  bathing.

40.  Let  him  swim  (motionless)  like  a  stick.

41.  To  study  under  a  non-Brahmanical  teacher
(is  permitted)  in  times  of  distress.

34.  Govinda  adds  that  to  sit  with  young  wives  of  his  teachers
on  other  occasions  is  sinful.

35.  I  read  utsadana,  c  to  shampoo/  while  the  MSS.  have  either
a  lacuna  or  read  u£/£Mdana,  and  the  commentary  a/£Madana,  which
is  explained  by  ^attradharawa,  '  to  hold  a  parasol,'  or  malapa-
karshawa, '  to  clean/  The  kkha.  is,  however,  merely  owing  to  a  very
common  faulty  pronunciation  of  tsa.  Govinda  remarks  correctly
that  the  word  '  iti/  which  follows  the  enumeration  of  the  services  to
be  performed  by  the  pupil,  has  the  force  of  '  and  so  forth/

36-37.  The  meaning  of  the  two  Sutras  is  that  the  pupil  shall
serve  the  son  of  his  teacher,  especially  if  he  is  learned,  and  aged
wives  of  his  teacher,  but  not  eat  their  leavings.  The  explanation
of  aniUana,  'who  knows  the  Angas/  is  given  by  Baudhayana,
Gnhya-sutra  I,  11,  4.

38.  Apastamba  I,  2,  6,  7-9  j  VasishMaVII,  12.

39-40.  Apastamba  I,  1,  2,  30 ;  Vishnu  XXVIII,  5.

41.  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  25.  Govinda  combines  this  Sutra  with
the  next  two  and  makes  one  of  the  three.


STUDENTSHIP.  1 55


42.  (The  pupil  shall)  obey  and  walk  after  him  as
long  as  the  instruction  (lasts).

43.  (According  to  some  this  is  improper,  because)
just  that  (mutual  relation)  sanctifies  both  of  them.

44.  And  (the  behaviour)  towards  brothers,  sons,
and  (other)  pupils  (of  the  teacher  shall  be  regulated)
in  the  same  manner.

45.  But  officiating  priests,  a  father-in-law,  paternal
and  maternal  uncles  who  are  younger  than  (oneself
must  be  honoured  by)  rising  and  (by  being)  addressed.

46.  Katya  (declares  that)  the  salutation  shall  be
returned.

47.  For  (the  propriety  of  that  rule)  is  apparent
(from  the  story)  about  Sisu  Angirasa.

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  2,   Kajvdika  4.

i.  If  merit  and  wealth  are  not  (obtained  by  teach-
ing), nor  (at  least)  the  due  obedience,  one  should
die  with  one's  learning;  one  should  not  sow  it  on
barren  soil.

42.  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  26;  Gautama  VII,  2-3.

43.  The  words  between  brackets  belong  to  Govinda.

44.  I.  e.  if  they  are  younger  than  oneself.

45.  Instead  of  pratyutthayabhibhashawam,  *  (shall  be  honoured
by)  rising  and  being  addressed,'  which  is  the  reading  of  the  two
copies  of  the  commentary  and  of  M.,  the  MSS.  from  the  Dekhan
and  Gujarat  read,  pratyutthayabhivadanam.  The  latter  reading
might  be  translated  by  'shall  be  saluted  by  rising ;'  see  Gautama
VI,  9.  Govinda  says,  in  explanation  of  this  rule :  '  This  restrictive
rule  also  (refers)  to  teachers  only,  officiating  priests,  and  the  rest  ;
to  address  (means)  to  use  words  such  as  "  welcome." '

46.  'Katya,  i.e.  a  descendant  of  the  JRi'shi  Kata.  He  was  of
opinion  that  officiating  priests  and  the  rest  must  return  the  salute.
As  the  return  of  a  salute  is  prescribed  for  them,  it  is  understood
that  the  other  (party)  must  salute/ — Govinda.

47.  The  story  of  Sisu.  Angirasa  is  told,  Manu  II,  151- 15 3.
4.  1.  Manu  II,  112.


I56  BAUDHAYANA.  1,2,4.

2.  As  fire  consumes  dry  grass,  even  so  the  Veda,
asked  for,  (but)  not  honoured,  (destroys  the  en-
quirer). Therefore  let  him  not  proclaim  the  Veda
to  those  who  do  not  show  him  honour  according
to  their  ability.

3.  They  proclaim  to  him  a  command  to  the  fol-
lowing effect ;

4.  '  Brahman,  forsooth,  made  the  created  beings
over  to  Death.  The  student  alone  it  did  not  .make
over  to  him.'  He  (Death)  spake,  '  Let  me  have
a  share  in  him.'  (Brahman  answered),  '  That  night
in  which  he  may  neglect  to  offer  a  piece  of  sacred
fuel  (shall  belong  to  thee).'

5.  '  Therefore  a  student  who  passes  a  night  with-
out offering  a  piece  of  sacred  fuel,  cuts  it  off  from
the  length  of  his  life.  Therefore  let  the  student
offer  a  piece  of  sacred  fuel,  lest  he  spend  a  night,
shortening  his  life.'

6.  '  A  long  sacrificial  session  begins  he  who  com-
mences his  studentship.  That  (night)  in  which,
after  being  initiated,  he  (first)  offers  a  piece  of  sacred
fuel  corresponds  to  the  Praya^iya  (Atiratra  of  a
sacrificial  session) ;  that  night  in  which  (he  offers  it
last),  intending  to  take  the  final  bath,  corresponds
to  the  Udayanlya  (Atiratra).  Those  nights  which
(lie)  between  (these  two  terms  correspond)  just  to
the  nights  of  his  sacrificial  session/


2.  Vasish//$a  II,  12.

3.  '  They,  i.  e.  the  Vag-asaneyins ;  to  him,  i.  e.  to  the  student.' —
Govinda.

4.  The  quotation,  which  begins  here  and  ends  with  the  end  of
the  section,  is  taken  from  Satapatha-brahmawa  XI,  2,  6.  In  the
text  the  word  Brahman  is  a  neuter.

6.  MSS.  M.  and  K.,  as  well  as  the  commentary,  read  dirghasat-


1,2,4-  STUDENTSHIP.  1 57

7.  'A  Brahma;za  who  becomes  a  student  of  the
Veda,  enters  existent  beings  in  a  fourfold  manner,
(viz.)  with  one  quarter  (he  enters)  Fire,  with  one
quarter  Death,  with  one  quarter  the  Teacher,  the
fourth  quarter  remains  in  the  Soul.  When  he  offers
to  Fire  a  piece  of  sacred  fuel,  he  thereby  buys  back
even  that  quarter  which  (resides)  in  Fire,  hallowing
it,  he  places  it  in  himself;  that  enters  into  him.
Now  when  making  himself  poor  and,  becoming
shameless,  he  asks  for  alms  (and)  lives  as  a  student
of  the  Veda,  he  thereby  buys  back  the  quarter
which  (resides)  in  Death ;  hallowing  it,  he  places  it
in  himself;  that  enters  into  him.  Now  when  he
obeys  the  orders  of  his  Teacher,  he  thereby  buys
back  that  quarter  which  (resides)  in  the  Teacher ;
hallowing  it,  he  places  it  in  himself;  that  enters  into
him.  [Now  when  he  recites  the  Veda,  he  thereby
buys  back  the  quarter  which  resides  in  the  Soul.
Hallowing  it,  he  places  it  in  himself;  that  enters
into  him.]  Let  him  not  go  to  beg,  after  he  has
bathed  (on  finishing  his  studentship).  ...  If  he  does
not  find  another  woman  whom  he  can  ask  for  alms,
let  him  beg  even  from  his  own  teacher's  wife  or
from  his  own  mother.  The  seventh  (night)  shall
not  pass  without  his  asking  for  alms.  [(He  com-
mits) sin  if  he  does  not  go  out  to  ask  for  alms  and
does  not  place  fuel  on  the  fire.  If  he  neglects  that
during  seven  (days  and)  nights,  he  must  perform  the


tram  ha  va  esha  upaiti,  while  the  MSS.  from  the  Dekhan  and  Gujarat,
like  the  printed  edition  of  the  «Sat.  Br.,  omit  the  particle  'ha/  Pra-
yawiya  means,  literally,  'initial/  and  udayaniya,  'final.'  Each  sattra
or  sacrificial  session  begins  and  ends  with  an  Atiratra  sacrifice.

7.  This  portion  of  the  quotation  shows,  besides  some  minor
deviations  from  the  published  text  of  the  Madhyandinas,  several


1 58  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  2,  4.

penance  prescribed  for  one  who  has  broken  the
vow  of  studentship.]  All  the  Vedas  come  to  him
who  knows  that  and  acts  thus.'

8.  'As  a  blazing  fire  shines,  even  so  shines  he
who,  knowing  this,  thus  fulfils  the  duties  of  student-
ship, after  he  has  bathed  (on  leaving  his  teacher)/
Thus  speaks  the  Brahma^a.

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  3,   Kandika  5.
i.   Now  (follow  the  duties)  of  a  Snataka.

interpolations  and  corruptions.  The  minor  discrepancies  are,
'  brahmawo  vai  brahma^aryam  upayan '  (upaya^^an,  C.  I.  and  T.)  ;
padatmanyeva  ^aturtha^  pada^;  yadagnaye  samidham  adadhati;
atha  yad  atmanaw  daridrikrztyahrir  bhutva  bhikshate  brahma^aryaw
£arati ;  atha  yad  &Mryava£a>£  karoti  ya  ev&sy&Mrye.  In  the  second
passage  the  Dekhan  MSS.  read,  however,  like  the  printed  text.
The  interpolations  are,  '  Now  when  he  recites  the  Veda,'  &c,  and
the  verse,  '  He  commits  sin  if  he  neglects,'  &c.  The  former
passage  entirely  destroys  the  sense  of  the  whole  and  the  con-
nexion of  the  parts.  Both  have,  however,  been  retained,  as  they
occur  in  all  the  MSS.  and  the  two  copies  of  the  commentary,  and
have  been  enclosed  in  brackets.  The  corrupt  passage  is  so  bad
that  it  makes  no  sense  at  all.  The  best  MSS.  read  as  follows :
'  api  hi  vai  snatva  bhikshaw  ^aratyavi^ananajanayaya  pitrizza-
manyabhya^  kriyabhya/V  sa  yadanyam,  &c, D. ;  'api  ha  vai  snatv^
bhish/aw  ^arasapi  gn&ni  na\ranaya  ya  [vsl  sec.  m.]  pitrzlraam  anya-
bhyah  kriyabhya/z/  K. ;  api  ha  vai  snatva  bhikshaw  >£arati — pa^nati
— nam  janayapi  pitrz/zam  anyabhya^  kriyasas,  M. ;  api  ha  vai
snatva  bhiksha/zz  /^aratyavi^watinamayanayapi  pitrz/zam  anyabhya
kriyabhya^,  C.  I.  As  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  Baudhayana's
reading  agreed  with  that  of  the  printed  text,  I  have  left  the
passage  out.

5.  i.  Regarding  the  term  Snataka,  see  Apastamba  I,  n,  30,  1-4.
Govinda  thinks  that  the  following  rules  are  intended  to  apply  in
the  first  instance  to  a  student  who  has  performed  the  Samavartana
on  completion  of  his  studentship  and  lives  unmarried  at  home.
For  though  the  Smrz'ti  declares  it  necessary  for  a  student  to  enter,
on  completing  his  term,  at  once  into  one  of  the  remaining  three


1,3,5-  UNMARRIED    SNATAKA.  1 59

2.  He  shall  wear  a  lower  garment  and  upper
garment.

3.  Let  him  carry  a  staff  made  of  bamboo,

4.  And  a  pot  filled  with  water.

5.  Let  him  wear  two  sacrificial  threads.

6.  (He  shall  possess)  a  turban,  an  upper  garment
(consisting  of)  a  skin,  shoes,  and  a  parasol.  (He
shall  keep)  a  sacred  fire  and  (offer)  the  new  and
full  moon  (Sthalipakas).

7.  He  shall  cause  the  hair  of  his  head,  of  his
beard,  and  of  his  body,  and  his  nails  to  be  cut
on  the  Parva  days.

8.  His  livelihood  (he  shall  obtain  in  the  following
manner) :

9.  Let  him  beg  uncooked  (food)  from  Brahma^as,
Kshatriyas,  Vaisyas,  or  carpenters,

10.  Or  (cooked)  food  (even  from  many).

11.  Let  him  remain  silent  (when  he  goes  to  beg).

12.  Let  him  perform  with  that  all  Pakaya^/zas,
offered  to  the  gods  and  manes,  and  the  rites,
securing  welfare.

orders,  it  may  happen,  as  the  commentator  observes,  that  the  Sna-
taka's  marriage  cannot  take  place  immediately.  The  correctness  of
this  view  is  proved  by  Apastamba  I,  2,  8,  and  by  the  fact  that  below,
II,  3,  5,  the  rules  for  a  married  Snataka  are  given  separately.
2-5.  Vasish/^a  XII,  14.  6.  Apastamba  I,  2,  8,  2.

7.  Regarding  the  Parva  days,  see  Vasish/^a  XII,  21  note.

8.  Vasish/^a  XII,  2-4.  '  Though  the  Snataka  is  the  subject  of
the  discussion,  the  word  "  his  "  is  used  (in  this  Sutra)  in  order  to
introduce  the  remaining  duties  of  a  householder  also.' — Govinda.

9.  The  carpenter  (rathakara)  is  a  -Sudra,  but  connected  with  the
Vedic  sacrifices.

10.  tu  Food"  (bhaiksham),  i.  e.  a  quantity  of  begged  food.  The
meaning  is  that  in  times  of  distress  he  may  beg  from  many.' —
Govinda.

12.  With  that,  i.  e.  with  the  food  obtained  by  begging.    Regarding


l6o  BAUDHAYANA.  1, 3,  5-

13.  Baudhayana  declares  that  by  (following)  this
rule  the  most  excellent  sages  reach  the  highest
abode  of  Pra^apati  Paramesh/^in.

Prasna  I,   Adhyaya  4,    KA2VDIKA  6.

1.  Now  (those  who  know  the  law)  prescribe  the
carrying  of  a  waterpot.

2.  It  is  declared  (in  the  Vedas)  that  fire  (resides)
in  the  right  ear  of  a  goat,  in  the  right  hand  of  a
Brahma^a,  likewise  in  water  (and)  in  a  bundle  of
Kara  grass.  Therefore  after  personal  purification
let  him  wipe  (his  water-vessel)  on  all  sides  with  his
(right)  hand,  (reciting  the  mantra),  '  Blaze  up,  O
fire ;'  for  that  (is  called)  encircling  it  with  fire  and
is  preferable  to  heating  (the  pot  on  the  fire).

3.  With  reference  to  this  matter  they  prescribe
also  (the  following  rules) :  '  If  he  thinks  in  his
heart  that  (the  pot)  has  been  slightly  defiled,  let  him
light  Ku^a  or  (other)  grass  and  heat  (the  pot)  on  all
sides,  keeping  his  right  hand  turned  towards  it.'

4.  'If  (pots)  have  been  touched  by  crows,  dogs,  or

the  Pakaya^-ftas,  see  Gautama  VIII,  18.  Govinda  gives  as  an
instance  of  the  rites  securing  welfare  (bhutikarmam)  the  ayushya-
£aru,  a  rice-offering  intended  to  procure  long  life.

13.  Govinda  explains  Baudhayana  by  Kawvayana,  and  adds
that  either  the  author  speaks  of  himself  in  the  third  person  or
a  pupil  must  have  compiled  the  book.

6.  1.  As  Govinda  observes,  the  rules  regarding  the  waterpot  (ka-
ma«dalu)  are  introduced  here  in  connexion  with  I,  3,  5,  4.

2.  Vasish//&a  XII,  15-16.  The  mantra  is  found,  Taittiiiya-Ara-
«yaka  X,  1,  4.

3.  The  word  upadi-ranti,  '  they  prescribe/  stands  at  the  end  of
Sutra  4,  as  it  refers  to  both  rules.

4.  Vasish//$a  III,  59.  The  paryagnikarawa  is  the  rite  prescribed
in  Sutra  2.


1,4,6.  THE   WATERPOT.  1 6 1

other  (unclean  animals,  they  shall  be  heated,  until
they  are  of)  the  colour  of  fire,  after  the  (paryagni-
kara/za  has  been  performed).'

5.  (Pots)  which  have  been  defiled  by  urine,
ordure,  blood,  semen,  and  the  like  must  be  thrown
away.

6.  If  his  waterpot  has  been  broken,  let  him  offer
one  hundred  (oblations)  reciting  the  Vyahrztis,  or
mutter  (the  Vyahrztis  as  often).

7.  (Reciting  the  text),  '  Earth  went  to  earth,  the
mother  joined  the  mother ;  may  we  have  sons  and
cattle ;  may  he  who  hates  us  be  destroyed/  he  shall
collect  the  fragments,  throw  them  into  water,  repeat
the  Gayatrl  at  least  ten  times  and  take  again  another
(pot).

8.  Taking  refuge  with  Vanma,  (he  shall  recite
the  mantra), '  That  (belongs)  to  thee,  Varu/za  ;  again
to  me,  Om/  (and)  meditate  on  the  indestructible.


5.  Vasish//$a  III,  59.

6.  Regarding  the  Vyahrz'tis,  see  Gautama  I,  51.

7.  Govinda  says  that  Vamadeva  is  the  i?zshi  of  the  mantra.
The  fragments  of  the  pot  are  to  be  thrown  into  a  river  or  tank,
in  order  to  preserve  them  from  defilement.  See  also  Journ.  Bo.
Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  No.  XXXIV  A,  p.  55  note.

8.  *  Taking  refuge  with  Varuwa,  i.  e.  saying,  "  I  flee  for  safety  to
Varu^a."  (The  words),  "  That  for  thee,  Varu#a,  again  to  me,  Om,"
(are)  the  mantras  (to  be  recited)  on  taking  (a  new  vessel).  Its
meaning  is  this :  "  Those  fragments  which  I  have  thrown  into  the
water  shall  belong  to  thee,  VaniTza."  (Saying),  "  Come,  thou  (who
art)  a  lord  of  water- vessels,  again  to  me,  Om,"  he  shall  meditate  on
another  visible  pot  as  indestructible,  i.  e.  at  the  end  of  the  Vedic
(word)  "  Om,"  let  him  meditate,  (i.  e.)  recollect,  that  not  everything
will  be  turned  topsy-turvy,  (but  that  some  things  are)  also  inde-
structible, i.  e.  that  that  is  not  destroyed,  does  not  perish.' — Go-
vinda. The  explanation  of  the  last  clause  of  our  Sutra  seems  to
be  that,  on  pronouncing  the  syllable  (akshara)  Om,  the  reciter  is

['4l  M


1 62  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  4,  6.

9.  '  If  he  has  received  (the  new  vessel)  from  a
•Sudra,  let  him  recite  (the  Gayatrl)  one  hundred
(times).  (If  he  has  received  it)  from  a  Vaiiya,  fifty
(repetitions  of  the  Gayatrl)  are  prescribed,  but  (on
receiving  it)  from  a  Kshatriya  twenty-five,  (and  on
taking  it)  from  a  Brahma^a  ten/

10.  Those  who  recite  the  Veda  are  doubtful
whether  he  shall  fetch  water  after  the  sun  has  set
or  shall  not  fetch  it.

11.  The  most  excellent  (opinion  is)  that  he  may
fetch  it.

12.  Let  him  restrain  his  breath,  while  he  fetches
water.

13.  Fire,  forsooth,  takes  up  water.

14.  It  is  declared  (in  the  Veda),  'When  he  has
washed  his  hands  and  feet  with  water  from  his
water-vessel,  he  is  impure  for  others,  as  long  as  the
moisture  (remains).  He  purifies  himself  only.  Let
him  not  perform  other  religious  rites  (with  water
from  his  pot)/

to  recollect  the  etymological  import  of  the  word  akshara,  '  inde-
structible/ and  thus  to  guard  the  new  vessel  against  the  mishap
which  befell  the  rid  one.

9.  According  to  Govinda,  either  the  prawava,  the  syllable  Om,
or  the  Gayatri  are  the  mantras  to  be  recited,  and  the  recitation  is
a  penance  to  be  performed  when  the  vessel  is  received.  The
MSS.  of  the  text  mark  the  verse  as  a  quotation  by  adding  the
word  '  iti/  which  the  commentary  omits.

13.  According  to  Govinda,  a  Brahmawa  who  goes  to  fetch
water  at  night,  which  he  may  want  for  personal  purification,  is
ordered  to  restrain  his  breath,  because  thereby  the  air  in  the  body
becomes  strong,  and  fire  or  heat  (agni)  is  produced.  Now  as  at
night  the  sun  is  stated  to  enter  the  fire  and  to  become  subject  to
it,  a  Brahmawa,  who  by  restraining  his  breath  has  produced  fire,
has  secured  the  presence  of  the  sun,  when  he  goes  to  fetch  water.
14.  Govinda  expressly  states  that  the  word  vi^?layate/it  is  declared/


1,4,7-  THE   WATERPOT.  1 63

15.  Baudhayana  (says),  'Or  if  on  the  occasion
of  each  personal  purification  (he  washes  himself
with  other  water)  up  to  the  wrist,  (he  will  become)
pure.'

1 6.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  4,  Ka2vdika  7.

t.  '  Formerly  (the  use  of)  a  waterpot  has  been
prescribed  by  Brahman  and  the  chief  sages  for  the
purification  of  twice-born  men.  Therefore  he  shall
always  carry  one/

'  He  who  desires  his  own  welfare,  shall  use  it
without  hesitation,  for  purifying  (his  person),  for
drinking,  and  for  performing  his  twilight  devotions.'

2.  Let  him  do  it  with  a  believing  heart ;  a  wise
man  must  not  corrupt  his  mind.     The  self-existent


literally,  '  it  is  distinctly  known/  always  indicates  that  the  passage
quoted  is  taken  from  the  Veda.  The  rites  for  which  water  from
the  waterpot  is  not  to  be  used,  are  libations  to  the  manes,  the
gods,  and  the  fire.     See  also  below,  I,  4,  7,  5.

15.  The  words  enclosed  between  parentheses  are  Govinda's.

7.  1.  The  division  of  this  chapter  into  two  sections  occurs
in  the  M.  manuscript  only.  The  Dekhan  MSS.,  which  give  the
division  into  Ka«</ikas,  do  not  note  it,  and  have  at  the  end  of  the
Pra^na  the  figure  20,  while  M.  has  21  and  in  words  ekaviwjatiA
after  the  enumeration  of  the  Pratikas.

2.  '  A  wise  man  must  not  corrupt  his  mind,'  i.  e.  must  not  doubt
or  adopt  erroneous  views  regarding  the  teaching  of  the  -Sastras
with  respect  to  the  waterpot.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  passage
indicates  the  existence  of  an  opposition  to  the  constant  carrying
of  the  waterpot  in  Baudhayana's  times.  This  is  so  much  more
probable,  as  the  custom  is  now  obsolete,  and  is  mentioned  in
some  Purawas  and  versified  Smrz'tis  as  one  of  the  practices  for-
bidden in  the  Kali  age ;  see  e.  g.  the  general  note  appended  to
Sir  W.  Jones'  translation  of  Manu.

M    2


1 64  BAUDHAYANA.  1,4,7-

(Brahman)  came  into  existence  with  a  water- vessel.
Therefore  let  him  perform  (his  rites)  with  a  water-
vessel.

3.  Let  him  hold  it  in  his  right  hand  when  he
voids  urine  and  excrements,  in  the  left  when
he  sips  water.  That  is  (a)  settled  (rule)  for  all  good
men.

4.  For  as  the  sacrificial  cup  (&amasa)  is  declared
to  be  pure  on  account  of  its  contact  with  the  Soma-
juice,  even  so  the  water- vessel  is  constantly  pure
through  its  contact  with  water.

5.  Therefore  let  him  avoid  (to  use)  it  for  the
worship  of  the  manes,  the  gods,  and  the  fire.

6.  Therefore  let  him  not  go  on  a  journey  without
a  waterpot,  nor  to  the  boundary  of  the  village,  nor
from  one  house  to  the  other.

7.  Some  (declare  that  he  must  not  go  without  it)
a  step  further  than  the  length  of  an  arrow.

8.  Baudhayana  (says  that  he  shall  not  go  without
it)  if  he  wishes  to  fulfil  his  duties  constantly.

9.  (The  divine)  Word  declares  that  (this  is  con-
firmed) by  a  ./^'k-shaped  (passage).

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  5,  Ka2v\dika  8.

i.  Now  (follows  the  description  of)  the  means  of
purification.

5.  According  to  Govinda  the  word  '  therefore '  refers  back  to
Sutra  I,  4,  6,  14.

9.  *  i?zgvidham,  "  a  i?zk-shaped  (passage),"  means  i?zgvidhanam,
"a  prescription  consisting  of  a  Rik."  The  Brahma«a  is  indi-
cated by  (the  word)  vak,  ("  the  goddess  of)  speech."  The  meaning
is,  "  The  Brahmawa  says  that  there  is  also  a  ifo'k-verse  to  this
effect.  That  is  as  follows,  tasyaisha  bhavati  yat  te  jilpam  ity&di '
(Taittiriya-Arawyaka  I,  7,  1). — Govinda.


1,5,8.  PURIFICATION.  1 65

2.  The  body  is  purified  by  water,  the  understand-
ing by  knowledge,  the  soul  by  abstention  from
injuring  living  beings,  the  internal  organ  by  truth.

3.  Purifying  the  internal  organ  (is  called)  internal
purification.

4.  We  will  explain  (the  rules  of)  external  purifi-
cation.

5.  The  sacrificial  thread  (shall  be  made)  of
Kun  grass,  or  cotton,  (and  consist)  of  thrice  three
strings.

6.  (It  shall  hang  down)  to  the  navel.

7.  (In  putting  it  on)  he  shall  raise  the  right  arm,
lower  the  left,  and  lower  the  head.

8.  The  contrary  (is  done  at  sacrifices)  to  the
manes.

9.  (If  the  thread  is)  suspended  round  the  neck,
(it  is  called)  nivita.

10.  (If  it  is)  suspended  below  (the  navel,  it  is
called)  adhopavita.

11.  Let  him  perform  (the  rite  of  personal)  puri-
fication, facing  the  east  or  the  north,  (and)  seated
in  a  pure  place ;  (let  him)  place  his  right  arm  be-
tween his  knees  and  wash  both  hands  up  to  the
wrist  and  both  feet  (up  to  the  ankles).

12.  Let  him  not  use  for  sipping  the  remainder
of  the  water  with  which  he  has  washed  his  feet.

13.  But  if  he  uses  (that)  for  sipping,  let  him  do
it,  after  pouring  (a  portion  of  it)  on  the  ground.

8.  2.  Vasish//&a  III,  60.  7-9.  Manu  II,  63.

11.  Vasish/^a  III,  26.  Govinda  points  out  that  the  word  jau-
/6am,  '  (rite  of)  purification/  has  here  the  meaning  of  a/£amanam,
*  sipping  water.'  He  thinks  that  the  ka,  '  and/  which  stands  after
padau,  'both  feet/  indicates  that  other  portions  of  the  body  which
have  been  defiled  must  be  washed  also.


1 66  BAUDHAYANA.  1,5,8.

14.  He  shall  sip  out  of  the  Tlrtha  sacred  to
Brahman.

15.  The  part  (of  the  hand)  at  the  root  of  the
thumb  (is  called)  the  Ttrtha  sacred  to  Brahman.

16.  The  part  above  the  thumb  (is  called  the
Tirtha)  sacred  to  the  manes,  the  part  at  the  tips
of  the  fingers  that  sacred  to  the  gods,  the  part  at
the  root  of  the  fingers  that  sacred  to  the  ifo'shis.

1 7.  (Let  him  not  use  for  sipping  water  that  has
trickled)  from  the  fingers,  nor  (water)  that  is
covered  with  bubbles  or  foam,  nor  (water  that  is)
hot,  or  alkaline,  or  salt,  or  muddy,  or  discoloured,
or  has  a  bad  smell  or  taste.

18.  (Let  him  not  sip  water)  laughing,  nor  talking,
nor  standing,  nor  looking  about,  nor  bending  his
head  or  his  body  forward,  nor  while  the  lock  on
his  crown  is  untied,  nor  while  his  throat  is  wrapped
up,  nor  while  his  head  is  covered,  nor  when  he  is
in  a  hurry,  nor  without  wearing  the  sacrificial  thread,
nor  stretching  his  feet  out,  nor  while  his  loins  are
girt  (with  a  cloth),  nor  without  holding  his  right
arm  between  his  knees,  nor  making  a  sound.

19.  Let  him  thrice  drink  water  that  reaches  his
heart.

20.  Let  him  wipe  (his  lips)  thrice.

21.  Some  (declare  that  he  shall  do  it)  twice.


14.  Vasish//$a  III,  26.

16.  Vishmi  LXII,  3-4.  All  the  MSS.  except  M.  place  the
Tirtha  sacred  to  the  gods  at  the  root  of  the  fingers,  and  that  sacred
to  the  i?zshis  at  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  Govinda  has  the  same
erroneous  reading.

17.  Vasish/6a  III,  36.  18.  Vasish/^a  III,  30.
19-20.  VasishMa  III,  26;  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  3.

21.  Vasish/^a  III,  27 ;  Apastamba  I,  5, 16,  4.


I,  5,  8.  PURIFICATION.  1 6  7

22.  A  woman  and  a  6udra  (shall  perform)  both
(acts)  once  (only).

23.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  A  Brahma^a  is  purified  by  water  that  reaches  his
heart,  a  Kshatriya  by  (water)  reaching  his  throat,
a  VaLsya  by  (water  barely)  taken  into  the  mouth,
a  woman  and  a  £udra  by  touching  (it)  with  the
extremity  (of  the  lips).

24.  '  If  (drops)  adhere  to  his  teeth,  (they  must
be  considered  pure)  like  the  teeth,  because  they  are
fixed  (in  the  mouth)  like  the  teeth.  Let  him  not
sip  water  on  their  account  in  case  they  fall.  If  they
flow  out,  he  will  be  pure.'

25.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  If  anything  adheres  to  the  teeth,  (it  is  pure)  like
the  teeth ;  and  if  he  swallows  (it  or)  whatever  else
may  be  in  the  mouth  (or)  may  remain  after  sipping
water,  (he  will  become)  pure.'

26.  (After  sipping)  he  shall  touch  the  cavities  (of
the  head)  with  water,  the  feet,  the  navel,  the  head,
(and)  lastly  the  left  hand.

27.  If  he  becomes  impure  while  holding  (a  vessel)
made  of  metal,  he  shall  put  it  down,  sip  water  and
sprinkle  it,  when  he  is  going  to  take  it  up.

28.  Now  if  he  becomes  impure  (while  he  is
occupied)  with  food,  he  shall  put  it  down,  sip  water
and  sprinkle  it,  when  he  is  going  to  take  it  up.

29.  Now  if  he  becomes  impure  (while  occupied)

23.  Vasish/^a  III,  31-34.

24.  The  MSS.  read  in  the  last  pada  of  this  verse,  tesha/rc  saw-
sraye  [ya  or  va]-£/6u&/iti.  I  think  sawsravawa^Mu^ir  iti  is  the
correct  reading.

25.  Vasish//$a  III,  41.  26.  Vasish//$a  III,  28-29.
28.  Vasish//$a  III,  43-44.


1 68  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  5,  8.

with  water,  he   shall   put   it   down,  sip  water   and
sprinkle  it,  when  he  is  going  to  take  it  up.

30.  That  is  contrary  (to  the  rule)  in  (the  case  of
an  earthen)  vessel.

31.  In  (the  case  of  a  vessel)  made  of  wood  there
is  an  option.

32.  Defiled  (objects)  made  of  metal  must  be
scoured  with  cowdung,  earth,  and  ashes,  or  with  one
of  these  (three).

33.  Copper,  silver,  and  gold  (must  be  cleaned)
with  acids.

34.  Earthen  vessels  must  be  heated.

35.  (Objects)  made  of  wood  must  be  planed.

36.  (Objects)  made  of  bamboo  (must  be  cleaned)
with  cowdung,

37.  (Objects)  made  of  fruits  with  a  rope  of  cow-
hair,

38.  Skins  of  black  deer  with  (ground)  Bel  nut
and  rice,

39.  Blankets  (of  the  hair  of  the  mountain  goat)
with  Areka  nuts,

40.  (Cloth)  made  of  (sheep's)  wool  by  the  (rays  of
the)  sun,

41.  Linen  (cloth)  with  a  paste  of  yellow  mustard,

30.  '  (The  word)  amatram,  literally  "  a  vessel,"  denotes  here  an
earthen  vessel.  The  meaning  is  that  such  a  one,  if  it  is  very
much  denied,  shall  only  be  put  down  and  not  be  taken  back.
Any  other  (earthen  vessel)  shall  be  heated.' — Govinda.

32.  Vasish/^a  III,  49.

33.  ManuV,  114;  Vasish/^a  III,  63.

34~35-  Vasish//&a  III,  49.  36.  Vasish/^a  III,  53.

37.  Vasish/z&a  III,  54.  Govinda  thinks  that  the  word  raggu,
'a  rope,'  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of 'a  conglomeration/  and
merely  indicates  that  a  quantity  of  cowhair  must  be  used.

39.  ManuV,  120.  41.  Vasish/#a  III,  55.


T,  5,  8.  PURIFICATION.  1 69

42.  Cotton  cloth  with  earth,

43.  Skins  (other  than  deer-skins  shall  be  treated)
like  cotton  cloth,

44.  Stones  and  gems  like  (objects)  made  of  metal,

45.  Bones  like  wood,

46.  Conch-shells,  horn,  pearl-shells,  and  ivory  like
linen  cloth.

47.  Or  (they  may  be  cleaned)  with  milk.

48.  (Objects)  which  have  been  denied  by  urine,
ordure,  blood,  semen,  or  a  dead  body,  (but)  are
agreeable  to  the  eye  and  the  nose,  shall  be  rubbed
seven  times  with  one  of  the  substances  mentioned
above.

49.  (Objects)  not  made  of  metal  which  are  in  the
same  condition  must  be  thrown  away.

50.  The  cups  and  vessels  (used)  at  a  sacrifice
(must  be  cleaned)  according  to  the  injunction  (of
the  Veda).

51.  The  Veda  (declares),  '  They  do  not  become
impure  through  Soma/

52.  '  Time,  fire,  purity  of  mind,  water  and  the  like
(fluids),  smearing  with  cowdung  and  ignorance  (of
defilement)  are  declared  to  be  the  sixfold  (means  of)
purification  for  created  beings/

53.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):

42.  Vasish//$a  III,  49.  43.  Vasish/$a  III,  53.

44.  Vasish//£a  III,  50.  45.  Vasish//£a  III,  52.

46.  Vasish/^a  III,  51.  49.  Vasish/^a  III,  59.

50.  Govinda  explains  this  Sutra  differently.  He  says  :  •  The  fault
of  defilement  by  remnants  does  not  affect  sacrificial  cups  and
vessels.  This  must  be  understood.  If  they  are  defiled  by  urine
and  the  like,  they  must  be  thrown  away.'  My  explanation  is
based  on  the  parallel  passage  of  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  13.  See  also
below,  1,6,  13, 11  seq.

52.  Visrmu  XXII,  88.


1 70  baudhAyana.  I,  5,  9.

'  A  clever  man,  who  knows  (the  rules  of)  purification
and  is  desirous  of  righteousness,  shall  perform  (the
rites  of)  purification,  after  having  fully  considered
the  time,  and  the  place  (of  the  defilement),  likewise
himself,  (as  well  as)  the  object  (to  be  cleaned)  and
the  substance  (to  be  employed),  the  purpose  of  the
object,  the  cause  (of  the  defilement),  and  the  con-
dition (of  the  thing  or  person  defiled).'


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  5,  Ka2vdika  9.

1.  The  Veda  declares  that  the  hand  of  an  artisan
is  always  pure,  so  is  every  vendible  commodity
exposed  for  sale  and  food  obtained  by  begging,
which  a  student  holds  in  his  hand.

2.  A  calf  is  pure  on  the  flowing  (of  the  milk),
a  bird  on  the  fall  of  the  fruit,  women  at  the  time
of  dalliance,  and  a  dog  when  he  catches  a  deer.

3.  All  mines  and  places  of  manufacture  are  pure
excepting  distilleries  of  spirituous  liquor ;  con-
tinuously flowing  streams  of  water  and  dust  raised
by  the  wind  cannot  be  contaminated.

4.  The  flowers  and  fruit  of  flowering  and  fruit-
bearing  trees  which  grow  in  unclean  places  are
likewise  not  impure.

9.  1.  Vishnu  XXIII,  48.

2.  Vishmi  XXIII,  49.

3.  Vishmi  XXIII,  48.  The  term  akara,  translated  by  'mines
and  places  of  manufacture,'  is  explained  in  the  commentary  by
'  places  of  production,  i.  e.  of  sugar  and  honey.'  It  is  no  doubt
intended  to  apply  to  any  place  where  articles  of  consumption  or
use  are  produced.  Govinda  adds  that  as  '  continuous  streams  of
water'  are  always  pure,  one  must  take  care  that  the  water  for
sipping  flows  out  of  the  vessel  in  an  unbroken  stream.


I,  5,  9.  PURIFICATION.  I  7 1

5.  On  touching  a  tree  standing  on  a  sacred  spot,
a  funeral  pile,  a  sacrificial  post,  a  Aa/z^ala  or  a
person  who  sells  the  Veda,  a  Brahma^a  shall  bathe
dressed  in  his  clothes.

6.  One's  own  couch,  seat,  clothes,  wife,  child,  and
waterpot  are  pure  for  oneself;  but  for  strangers
they  are  impure.

7.  A  seat,  a  couch,  a  vehicle,  ships  (and  boats),
the  road  and  grass  are  purified  by  the  wind,  if  they
have  been  touched  by  i£a#</alas  or  outcasts.

8.  Grain  on  the  threshing-floor,  water  in  wells
and  reservoirs,  and  milk  in  the  cowpen  are  fit  for
use  even  (if  they  come)  from  a  person  whose  food
must  not  be  eaten.

9.  The  gods  created  for  Brahma/zas  three  means
of  purification,  (viz.)  ignorance  of  defilement,  sprink-
ling with  water,  and  commending  by  word  of  mouth.

10.  Water  collected  on  the   ground  with  which

5.  Vasish/^a  IV,  37.  Aaityav/Vksha,  '  a  tree  standing  on  sacred
ground/  means  literally,  '  a  memorial-tree/

7.  Govinda  points  out  that  couches  and  seats  and  the  like,  on
which  Aa«</alas  and  outcasts  have  lain  or  sat  down,  must  be
purified.

8.  '  That  must  be  referred  to  grain  on  a  threshing-floor,  and  so
forth,  which  has  been  produced  by  men  whose  food  must  not  be
eaten,  and  again  is  considered  to  be  common  to  all.  In  this  case,
too,  what  has  been  received  from  outcasts  and  JZandal&s,  that  is
defiled.  Milk  which  has  been  received  just  at  milking-time  may
be  drunk  out  of  a  vessel  that  stands  in  the  cowpen.' — Govinda.
As  regards  the  grain  produced  by  low-caste  people,  the  rule
probably  refers  to  cases  where  the  land  of  an  Agrahara  or  other
village  is  cultivated  by  men  of  the  lowest  castes.  The  author
means  to  say  that  in  such  cases  a  Brahmawa  may  take  his  share
from  the  threshing-floor,  where  the  whole  produce  of  the  village-
land  is  stored,  without  hesitation.

9.  Vasish^a  XIV,  24;  ManuV,  127.

10.  VasishMa  III,  35-36.


172  BAUDHAYANA.  1,5,9*

cows  slake  their  thirst  is  a  means  of  purification,
provided  it  is  not  strongly  mixed  with  unclean
(substances),  nor  has  a  (bad)  smell,  nor  is  dis-
coloured, nor  has  a  (bad)  taste.

11.  But  land  becomes  pure,  according  to  the
degree  of  the  defilement,  by  sweeping  the  (defiled)
spot,  by  sprinkling  it  with  water,  by  smearing  it
with  cowdung,  by  scattering  (pure  earth)  on  it,  or
by  scraping  it.

12.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  5,  Kandika  10.

i .  '  A  drop  of  water  which  is  allowed  to  fall  (on
the  ground)  purifies  a  bull's  hide  of  land,  whether
(the  land)  has  been  (previously)  swept  or  not,  pro-
vided no  impure  substance  is  visible  on  it.'

2.  Food  which  is  cooked  out  of  sight  must  be
illuminated  (with  fire)  and  be  sprinkled  with  water,

3.  Likewise  eatables  bought  in  the  market.

4.  For  the  Veda  (declares),  '  For  the  gods  who
are  (easily)  disgusted  and  desirous  of  purity  do  not

11.  Vasish/^a  III,  56.

10.  1.  Regarding  the  term  'a  bull's  hide'  of  land,  see  Vish«u
V,  181-183,  XCII,  4.

2.  Apastamba  II,  2,  3,  9.  'Out  of  sight,'  i.e.  not  before  the
eyes  of  him  who  eats  it.' — Govinda.  It  would,  however,  seem  that
this  rule  refers  to  food  prepared  by  -Sudras,  without  the  super-
visions of  Aryans.  For  Apastamba's  Sutra,  which  contains  the
same  word,  paroksham,  'out  of  sight,'  certainly  has  reference  to
that  case  only,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  food  prepared  by
Brahman  cooks  should  be  purified  before  it  is  eaten.

3.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  19.  The  eatables  here  intended  are,
according  to  Govinda,  La</us  and  other  sweet-meats  which  are
frequently  bought  ready  made.


1, 5, 10.  PURIFICATION.  1 73

enjoy  the   offerings   made   by  a  man   destitute   of
faith.'

5.  After  reflecting  (for  a  long  time  on  the  re-
spective value  of)  the  (food)  of  a  pure  man  destitute
of  faith  and  of  an  impure  person  who  has  faith,
the  gods  declared  both  to  be  equal.  But  the  Lord
of  created  beings  said  to  them,  '  That  is  not  equal,
it  is  unequal.  The  food  of  a  man  destitute  of  faith
is  worthless,  that  which  is  purified  by  faith  is
preferable/

6.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
1  Want  of  faith  is  the  greatest  sin ;  for  faith  is  the
highest  austerity.  Therefore  the  gods  do  not  eat
offerings  given  without  faith.'

7.  '  A  foolish  man  does  not  reach  heaven,  though
he  may  offer  (sacrifices)  or  give  (gifts)/

8.  'He  is  called  a  foolish  man  whose  conduct
is  blemished  by  doubts,  and  who,  clinging  to
his  own  fancies,  transgresses  (the  rules  of)  the
vSastras,  because  he  opposes  the  fulfilment  of  the
sacred  law/

9.  But  pot-herbs,  flowers,  fruit,  roots,  and  annual
plants  (must  be)  sprinkled  (with  water).

10.  Having  placed  dry  grass,  wood  of  trees  unfit
for  sacrifices  or  a  clod  of  earth  (on  the  ground),  let
him  void  faeces  or  urine,  turning  his  face  during  the
day  towards  the  north  and  at  night  towards  the
south  and  wrapping  up  his  head.

8.  Dharmatantra,  translated  '  the  fulfilment  of  the  sacred  law/
is  explained  in  the  commentary  by  dharmasya  tantram  anush///anam,
by  *  the  performance  of  the  sacred  duties.'  It  may  also  mean  '  the
doctrine  of  or  the  treatises  on  the  sacred  law.'  The  -Sastras  are
the  Vedas  and  the  whole  body  of  the  sacred  literature.

9.  Vishmi  XXIII,  15.  10.  Vasish/^aVI,  10.


1 74  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  5,  10.

11.  (After  voiding)  urine  he  shall  clean  (the
organ  once)  with  earth  and  water,

12.  The  hand  three  times.

13.  In  like  manner  (he  shall  clean  himself  with
earth  and  water  after  voiding)  faeces.

14.  The  number  (of  the  applications  of  both  is)
thrice  three  for  both  feet  and  the  hand.

15.  After  an  effusion  of  semen  (he  shall  purify
himself)  in  the  same  manner  as  after  voiding  urine.

16.  He  shall  wash  himself,  after  he  has  untied
or  put  on  the  cloth  round  his  loins,

17.  Or  he  may  touch  moist  grass,  cowdung,  or
earth.

18.  While  he  is  engaged  in  (the  performance  of)
religious  rites,  he  shall  avoid  to  touch  (the  part  of
his  body)  below  the  navel.

19.  The  Veda  (declares),  'A  man's  (body)  is  pure
above  the  navel,  it  is  impure  below  the  navel.'

20.  .Sudras  living  in  the  service  of  Aryans  shall
trim  (their  hair  and  nails)  every  month ;  their  mode


n-12.  Vasish//$a  VI,  14,  18.  According  to  Govinda  one
application  of  water  suffices  for  the  left  hand  and  two  for  both
together.

13-14.  Vasish//&a  VI,  18.  Govinda  reads  in  Sutra  14,  against
the  authority  of  all  the  MSS.,  payo^,  'for  the  anus/  instead  of
padayo^,  '  for  both  feet.'

15.  Apastamba  I,  5, 15,  23.

16.  Apastamba  I,  5, 16, 14.  17.  Apastamba  I,  5, 16, 15.

18.  Vishmi  XXIII,  51.

19.  Taittinya  Sawhita  VI,  1,  3,  4.

20.  Apastamba  II,  1,  2,  4-5.  The  above  translation  follows
Govinda's  explanation.  But  aryadhishMita^, '  living  in  the  service
of  Aryans,'  may  also  mean  *  superintended  by  Aryans,'  and  the
rule  be  taken  to  refer  to  the  special  case  of  *S*udra  cooks,  as  in  the
parallel  passage  of  Apastamba.


1,5,10.  LAWFUL   LIVELIHOOD.  1 75

of  sipping  water  (shall   be)  the   same  as   that   of
Aryans.

21.  A  Vaisya  may  live  by  usury.

22.  But  (a  sum  of)  twenty-five  (karshapa^as  shall
bear  an  interest)  of  five  mashas  (per  mensem).

23.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  He  who,  acquiring  property  cheap,  employs  (it  so
that  it  yields)  a  higher  price,  is  called  a  usurer,  and
blamed  in  all  (treatises  on)  the  sacred  law.'  '  (Brah-
man) weighed  in  the  scales  the  crime  of  killing  a
learned  Brahma^a  against  (the  crime  of)  usury ;  the
slayer  of  the  Brahma^a  remained  at  the  top,  the
usurer  sank  downwards.'

24.  '  Let  him  treat  Brahma^as  who  tend  cattle,
those  who  live  by  trade,  (and)  those  who  are  artisans,
actors  (and  bards),  servants  or  usurers,  like  •5udras.'

25.  But  men  of  the  first  two  castes  may,  at  their
pleasure,  lend  (money  at  interest)  to  one  who
neglects  his  sacred  duties,  to  a  miser,  to  an  atheist,
or  to  a  very  wicked  man.

26.  Through  the  neglect  of  sacrifices,  of  (lawful)
marriages,  of  the  study  df  the  Veda,  and  of  (learned)
Brahma/zas,  (noble)  families  (even)  are  degraded.

27.  The  offence  of  neglecting  a  Brahma^a  cannot
be  committed  against  a  fool  who  is  unacquainted

21.  Vasish//$a  II,  19.  22.  VasishMa  II,  5 1 .

23.  VasishMa  II,  41-42.  24.  VasishMa  III,  3.

25.  Vasish/^a  11,43-  M.  reads  na  dadyatam,  'shall  not  lend/
According  to  Govinda,  'a  very  wicked  man'  is  equivalent  to  'a
Sudra.'

26.  Manu  III,  63.  Govinda  says  that  this  Sutra  is  introduced
in  connexion  with  the  expression,  '  one  who  neglects  his  sacred
duties,'  which  occurs  in  Sutra  25.

27.  Vasish/^a  III,  9  note,  10.  This  Sutra  is  added  in  explana-
tion of  the  term  '  the  offence  of  neglecting  a  Brahmawa.'


1 76  BAUDHAYANA.  1, 5,  10.

with  the  Veda.  For  (in  offering  sacrifices)  one  does
not  pass  by  a  brilliant  fire  and  throw  the  oblations
into  ashes.

28.  Families  which  are  deficient  in  (the  know-
ledge of)  the  Veda,  are  degraded  by  (keeping)  cows,
horses  and  vehicles,  by  agriculture  and  by  serving
the  king.

29.  But  even  poor  families  which  are  rich  in  (the
knowledge  of)  the  Veda  obtain  rank  among  the
(noble)  families  and  gain  great  fame.

30.  The  (study  of)  the  Veda  impedes  (the  pursuit
of)  agriculture,  (the  pursuit  of)  agriculture  impedes
(the  study  of)  the  Veda.  He  who  is  able  (to  do
it),  may  attend  to  both ;  but  he  who  is  unable  (to
attend  to  both),  shall  give  up  agriculture.

31.  A  fat,  bellowing,  raging  humped  bull,  who
does  not  restrain  himself,  who  hurts  living  creatures
and  speaks  according  to  his  pleasure,  forsooth,  does
not  reach  the  (abode  of)  the  gods ;  (but)  those  who
are  small  like  atoms,  (being)  emaciated  (by  austerities
and  fasts),  go  thither.

32.  If,  erring,  in  his  youth  he  commits  at  any
time  good  or  evil  acts  of  any  kind,  (they  will  all
remain  without  result).  (For)  if  in  his  later  age  he
lives  righteously,  he  will  obtain  (the  reward  of)  that
(virtuous  conduct)  alone,  not  (the  punishments  of
his  former)  crimes.

33.  Let  him  always  be  sorrowing  in  his  heart,
when  he  thinks  of  his  sins,  (let  him)  practise
austerities  and  be  careful;  thus  he  will  be  freed
from  sin.

34.  '  Where  drops  of  water  touch  the  feet  of  a

28-29.  Manu  III,  64,  66.  34.  VasishMa  III,  42.


1,5,  II.  IMPURITY.  177

man  who  offers  water  for  sipping  to  others,  no
defilement  is  caused  by  them.  They  are  equally
(pure)  as  (water)  collected  on  the  ground.'


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  5,  Kandika  11.

1.  Referring  to  deaths  and  births,  they  declare
that  the  impurity  of  Sapi/zafas  lasts  ten  days ;  ex-
cepting officiating  priests,  men  who  have  performed
the  initiatory  ceremony  of  a  Soma-sacrifice,  and
students  of  the  Veda.

2.  But  amongst  Sapi/z^as  Sapi^a-relationship
(extends)  to  the  seventh  person.

3.  (If  children  die)  before  the  completion  of  the
seventh  month  or  before  teething,  (the  relatives)
shall  bathe.

4.  In  (the  case  of  a  child)  that  dies  before  the
completion  of  its  third  year  or  before  teething,  offer-
ings of  funeral  cakes  and  water  are  not  prescribed,
and  one  should  not  burn  its  (body) ;

5.  Nor  when  unmarried  maidens  die.

6.  Some  do  it  in  the  case  of  married  daughters.

7.  That  (is  done)  in  order  to  gain  the  good-will


11.  1.  Vasish/foi  IV,  16.  Officiating  priests,  Soma-sacrificers,
and  students  do  not  become  impure  by  deaths  or  births  occurring
among  their  relatives;  see  Vasish/^a  XIX,  48  ;  Gautama  XIV,  1.

2.  VasishMa  IV,  17.  For  the  specification  of  the  extent  of  the
Sapiw^a-relationsbip,  see  below,  Sutra  9.

3.  Vishmi  XXII,  27.

4.  Vishmi  XXII,  28  ;  Gautama  XIV,  34,43.

6.  Gautama  XIV,  36.  'That  refers  to  the  Sapi«^as  on  the
father's  side/ — Govinda.

7.  Manu  IX,  18.

[14]  N


178  BAUDHAYANA.  1,5,11.

of  the  people.     Women  are  considered  to  have  no
business  with  the  sacred  texts.

8.  '  The  relatives  of  unmarried  women  become
pure  after  three  days.  But  the  uterine  brothers
become  pure  by  (following)  the  rule  mentioned
before.'

9.  Moreover,  the  great-grandfather,  the  grand-
father, the  father,  oneself,  the  uterine  brothers,  the
son  by  a  wife  of  equal  caste,  the  grandson,  (and)  the
great-grandson — these  they  call  Sapi/zafas,  but  not
the  (great-grandsons)  son; — and  amongst  these  a
son  and  a  son  s  son  (together  with  their  father  are)
sharers  of  an  undivided  oblation.

10.  The  sharers  of  divided  oblations  they  call
Sakulyas.

8.  This  verse,  which  occurs  in  all  my  MSS.  of  the  text,  is  left
out  in  the  two  copies  of  Govinda's  commentary.

9.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  XI,  1,  37  ;  V.  Digest  CCCXCVII.
The  text  on  which  Colebrooke's  two  versions  are  based  differs  from
that  of  my  MSS.  and  of  Govinda  by  reading  avibhaktadayadan
instead  of  teshaw  ka,  putrapautram  [v.  1.  °pautrakam]  avibhakta-
dayam.  The  meaning  of  the  latter  clause,  which  is  placed  paren-
thetically before  sapi/z</an  a/£akshate,  '  (these)  they  call  Sapi«^as/
seems  to  be  that  a  father  with  his  son  and  grandson  share  the
cakes  offered  at  one  funeral  sacrifice  by  the  fourth  descendant.
Its  object  is  to  show  that  the  group  called  Sa'pi^as  consists  of  two
such  subdivisions,  between  whom  the  middlemost  forms  the  con-
necting link.  For  the  middlemost,  the  svayam,  '  oneself/  of  the
text,  first  offers  the  cakes  to  his  three  ancestors  and  later  receives
the  cakes,  together  with  his  first  two  descendants,  from  his  great-
grandson.  Govinda  gives  no  help.  He  merely  remarks  that  the
Sutra  contains  a  paribhasha  or  technical  rule  of  interpretation,  and
that  the  words  api  £a, '  moreover,'  indicate  that  it  is  an  expansion
of  Sutra  2.

10.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit.  According  to  (jimutavahana  the  Saku-
lyas are  the  three  ascendants  beyond  the  great-grandfather  and  the
three   descendants   beyond  the   great-grandson.     Others,  among


I,5,n.  INHERITANCE.  1 79

11.  If  no  other  (relations)  are  living,  the  property
(of  a  deceased  male)  descends  to  them  (the  Sa-
pindas).

12.  On  failure  of  Sapi^as,  the  Sakulyas  (inherit).

13.  On  failure  of  them,  the  teacher  who  (holds
the  place  of  a  spiritual)  father,  a  pupil,  or  an
officiating  priest  shall  take  it,

14.  On  failure  of  them,  the  king.  Let  him  give
that  property  to  persons  well-versed  in  the  three
Vedas.

15.  But  the  king  should  never  take  for  himself
the  property  of  a  Brahma^a.

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  The  property  of  a  Brahma/za  destroys  (him  who


whom  Govinda  takes  his  place,  explain  the  word  sakulya  to  mean
1  members  of  one  family '  in  general.  Govinda  says,  sambandha-
vijeshagTiane  sati  sapiwe/a  u/£yante  1  sambandhamatra^nane  sakulya^  11
A  tar  ka.  sapi«</a  api  sakulya^ II  'If  a  particular  relationship  is  known,
they  are  called  Sapiwdas;  and  if  (the  fact)  only  is  known  that
relationship  exists,  Sakulyas.  Hence  the  Sapi«</as  are  also
Sakulyas/

11.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit.  Both  the  Dayabhaga  and  the  Digest
read  satsvanga^eshu,  '  when  there  is  male  issue/  and  the  Virami-
trodaya,  fol.  218,  p.  2,  1.  7,  agrees  with  them.  The  MSS.  read  all
satsv  anyeshu,  which  may,  however,  be  taken  with  Govinda  for
asatsv  anyeshu,  because  the  preceding  word  ends  in  e.  Govinda
explains  anyeshu,  '  others/  by  aurasadishu, '  legitimate  sons  of  the
body,  and  so  forth.'

12.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga,  loc.  cit.  The  digest  omits  this
Sutra.

13.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit.  Gimutavahana  wrongly  reads  pita
k&kaxy&h,  '  the  father  and  the  teacher.'  Govinda  gives  the  expla-
nation adopted  above.  Regarding  the  spiritual  fatherhood  of  the
teacher,  see  e.  g.  VasishMa  II,  4.

14.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit.  Govinda  reads  satsvam,  'the  property
of  a  holy  man/  instead  of  tatsvam,  *  that  property.'

15.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCCCXLIV;  Vasish/^a  XVII,  86.

N    2


l8o  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  5,  it.

takes  it),  together  with  sons  and  grandsons ;  poison
kills  one  man  only.  (Therefore)  they  do  not  declare
poison  to  be  (the  worst)  poison.  The  property  of
a  Brahma^a  is  called  (the  worst)  poison.'

17.  If  a  birth  and  a  death  occur  together,  one
and  the  same  period  of  ten  (days  and)  nights  (shall
serve  for  both).

18.  Now  if  (other  deaths  or  births)  happen  be-
fore the  completion  of  the  ten  (days  and)  nights  (of
impurity),  the  first  period  of  ten  (days  and)  nights
(shall  suffice,  provided  the  new  cause  of  impurity
occurs)  before  the  end  of  the  ninth  day.

19.  On  a  birth,  indeed,  the  parents  (alone)  become
impure  during  ten  days.

20.  Some  (declare  that)  the  mother  (alone  be-
comes impure),  because  (people)  avoid  (lying-in
women    alone).

21.  Others  (say  that)  the  father  (alone  becomes
impure)  because  the  semen  is  the  chief  cause  (of
the  generation).

22.  For  sons  who  were  born  without  mothers,
are  mentioned  in  the  revealed  texts.

23.  But  (the  correct  opinion  is  that)  both  the
parents  (become  impure)  because  they  are  equally
connected  (with  the  event).


18.  Vasish/^a  IV,  23-25.  Govinda  points  out  that  in  case  the
second  birth  or  death  happens  after  the  completion  of  the  ninth
day,  the  rule  given  (Gautama  XIV,  7)  applies.

19.  Vasish/^a  IV,  20-21.

20.  VasishMa  IV,  21-22.  TatpariharawSt,  literally,  'because
she  is  avoided,  i.e.  because  people  avoid  newly-confined  women
(not  their  husbands)/ — Govinda.

21.  E.  g.  Agastya  and  Vasish/^a.  See  Rig-veda  VII,  33, 1 1,  and
Saya/za's  commentary  thereon.


1,5,  I'.  IMPURITY.  l8l

24.  But  when  a  death  (has  happened,  the  relatives
of  the  deceased),  allowing  the  youngest  to  begin,
shall  pass  their  sacrificial  threads  over  the  right
shoulder  and  under  the  left  arm,  descend  into  the
water  at  a  bathing-place,  submerge  (their  bodies),
emerge  (out  of  the  water),  ascend  the  bank,  sip
water,  pour  out  libations  for  the  (deceased,  repeat-
ing the  last  four  acts)  severally  three  times  there-
after, ascend  the  bank,  sip  water,  touch  a  coal,  water
or  the  like  at  the  door  of  their  house,  and  sit  during
ten  days  on  mats,  eating  food  that  does  not  contain
pungent  condiments  or  salt.

25.  (Let  him  perform)  a  funeral  sacrifice  on  the
eleventh  or  the  twelfth  (day).

26.  In  (performing)  the  remaining  rites  (one
should)  conform  to  (the  customs  of)  the  people.

27.  In  case  of  a  (death)  let  him  also  keep  (a
period  of  impurity)  for  (persons  who  are)  not  (his)
SapiWas,  according  to  the  degree  of  nearness,
three  (days  and)  nights,  a  day  and  a  night,  one  day
and  so  forth,

24.  Vasish/fo  IV,  9-15.  When  the  libations  of  water  are
poured  out,  the  name  of  the  deceased  must  be  pronounced.
Govinda  correctly  states  that  iti,  '  or  the  like,'  which  stands  after
*  a  coal,  water/  is  intended  to  include  '  cowdung,  and  yellow
mustard  seed/  which  are  mentioned  by  Ya^wavalkya  III,  13.
Regarding  the  clause  sakro'ttri^,  '(repeating  these  last  four  acts)
severally  three  times,'  see  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  10.

25.  Vishwu  XXI,  2  seq.,  and  especially  19.

26.  Govinda,  in  explanation  of  this  Sutra,  refers  to  the  last
words  of  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  10,  where  it  is  said  that  relatives
<  shall  perform  those  rites  for  the  dead  which  the  women  declare
to  be  necessary,'  and  to  Apastamba  II,  n,  29,  15.

27.  Gautama  XIV,  20.  Govinda  is  of  opinion  that  the  duration
of  the  impurity  shall  depend  on  the  good  qualities,  learning,  &c.  of
the  deceased.


I  8  2  BAUDH AYANA.  I,  5,  1 1.

28.  For  a  teacher,  a  sub-teacher  (upadhyaya),  and
their  sons,  three  (days  and)  nights,

29.  Likewise  for  officiating  priests,

30.  Let  him  keep  on  account  of  a  pupil,  for  one
who  has  the  same  spiritual  guide,  for  a  fellow-student
(sabrahmaiarin)  three  (days  and)  nights,  one  day
and  a  night,  one  day  and  so  forth  (as  periods  of
impurity).

31.  On  a  miscarriage  females  (remain  impure)  as
many  (days  and)  nights  as  months  (elapsed  after
conception).

32.  If  he  unintentionally  touches  the  corpse  of
a  stranger,  he  becomes  at  once  pure  after  bathing
dressed  in  his  clothes.

33.  (If  he  does  it)  intentionally,  (he  will  remain
impure)  during  three  (days  and)  nights.

34.  And  (the  same  rules  apply  if  he  touches  a
woman)  during  her  courses.

35.  A  son  who  is  born  from  (intercourse  with  a
temporarily  unclean  woman)  becomes  an  Abhii-asta.
Thereby  the  penances  (to  be  performed)  by  him
have  been  explained.


28.  Vishmi  XXII,  42,  44.  Govinda  asserts  that  the  impurity
on  account  of  an  Upadhyaya  lasts  one  night,  together  with  the
preceding  and  following  days,  and  on  account  of  a  teacher's  or
Upadhyaya's  sons  one  day  only.  It  looks  as  if  he  had  read  the
words  pakshwyekaham  in  his  text.

29.  Govinda  asserts  that  £a,  'likewise/  indicates  that  the  rule
applies  also  on  the  death  of  persons  for  whom  one  sacrifices.

30.  Vishmi  XXII,  44.  Govinda  explains  satirthya  to  mean  '  one
who  has  the  same  guru  or  spiritual  guide,'  while  according  to
others  it  means  '  one  who  studies  under  the  same  sub-teacher'
(upadhyaya).    See  also  the  Karika  on  Pacini  IV,  4,  117,  and  note.

31.  Vishmi  XXII,  25.  32-33-  Gautama  XIV,  27.
34.  Vishmi  XXII,  69.


IMPURITY.  183


36.  On  touching  one  who  sells  the  Veda,  a  sacri-
ficial post,  an  outcast,  a  funeral  pile,  a  dog,  or  a
Kandala.  he  shall  bathe.

37.  Now  if  a  worm  is  produced  in  an  open  wound
that  is  filled  with  pus  and  sanies,  how  shall,  in  that
case,  a  penance  be  performed  ?

38.  He  who  is  bitten  by  a  worm  will  become  pure
on  bathing  (daily)  during  three  days  and  drinking  (a
mixture  of)  cow's  urine,  cowdung,  milk,  sour  milk,
butter,  and  water  boiled  with  Kusa.  grass.

39.  He  who  has  been  touched  by  a  dog  shall
bathe  dressed  in  his  clothes ;

40.  Or  he  becomes  pure  by  washing  that  spot
(where  he  has  been  touched),  by  touching  it  with
fire,  by  (afterwards)  again  washing  it  and  his  feet,
and  by  sipping  water.

41.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  But  a  Brahma^a  who  has  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  is
purified  if  he  goes  to  a  river  that  flows  into  the
ocean,  (bathes  there  and)  suppresses  his  breath  one
hundred  times  and  (afterwards)  eats  clarified  butter.
He  will  (also)  become  pure  at  once  on  bathing  (in
water  brought)  in  golden  or  silver  (vessels),  or  in
a  cow's  horn,  or  in  new  (earthen  pots).'


36.  This  verse,  which  is  another  version  of  I,   5,  9,  5,  is  left
out  in  the  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.;  I  consider  its  genuineness
very  doubtful.
'  37.  VasishMa  XVIII,  16.

39-40.  Apastamba  I,  5,  15,  16-17.  Govinda,  too,  states  that
the  second  mode  of  purification  is  to  be  adopted,  if  the  dog  touches
any  part  of  the  body  below  the  navel.

41.  VasishMa  XXIII,  31.


184  BAUDHAYANA.  T,  5,  12.

Prasna    I,    ADHYAYA   5,    KajVDIKA    12.

i.    Tame  animals  must  not  be  eaten,

2.  Nor  carnivorous  and  (tame)  birds,

3.  Nor  (tame)  cocks  and  pigs ;

4.  Goats  and  sheep  (are)  excepted  (from  the
above  prohibition).

5.  Five  five-toed  animals  may  be  eaten,  (viz.)
the  porcupine,  the  iguana,  the  hare,  the  hedgehog,
the  tortoise  and  the  rhinoceros,  excepting  the  rhi-
noceros,

6.  Likewise  five  animals  with  cloven  hoofs,  (viz.)
the  white-footed  antelope  (Nll-gai),  the  (common
ravine)  deer,  the  spotted  deer,  the  buffalo,  the  (wild)
boar  and  the  black  antelope,  excepting  the  black
antelope,

7.  (Likewise)  five  (kinds  of)  birds  that  feed  scratch-
ing with  their  feet,  (viz.)  the  partridge,  the  blue  rock-
pigeon,  the  francoline  partridge,  the  (crane  called)
Vardhra/zasa,  the  peacock  and  the  Vara/za,  except-
ing the  Vara/za,


12.i.  Vasish/Aa  XIV,  40.

2.  Vasish//$a  XIV,  48.  Govinda  says  that  the  particle  ka.,  'and/
is  used  in  order  to  indicate  that  the  word  'tame'  must  be  understood.

3.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  29,  32.

5.  VasishMa  XIV,  39.  Another  explanation  of  the  word  jvavi/,
1  the  porcupine'  (see  also  Gautama  XVII,  27),  is  given  in  the  com-
mentary, which  says  that  it  is  a  wild  animal  resembling  a  dog,  and
belonging  to  the  boar  species.  Govinda  points  out  that  there  is
a  dispute  among  the  learned  regarding  the  rhinoceros  (VasishMa
XV,  47),  and  that  the  peculiar  wording  of  the  Sutra  is  intended  to
indicate  that.

6.  The  permissibility  of  the  last-named  animal  is  again  doubtful.

7.  Gautama  XVII,  35.  The  case  of  the  last-mentioned  bird,
the  Varawa,  is  again  doubtful.     From  the  first  rock-edict  of  A^oka


I,  5,  12.  FORBIDDEN  FOOD.  185

8.  (And  the  following)  fishes,  (viz.)  the  Silurus
Pelorius  (Sahasrada^sh/rin),  the  ^fili/^ima,  the  Var-
mi,  the  Brzha/£/£/£iras,  the  Masakari(?),  the  Cyprinus
Rohita,  and  the  Ra^i.

9.  The  milk  of  a  (female  animal)  whose  offspring
is  not  ten  days  old,  and  of  one  that  gives  milk  while
big  with  a  young  one,  must  not  be  drunk,

10.  Nor  that  of  a  (cow)  that  has  no  calf  or  that
(suckles)  a  strange  calf.

11.  (The  milk)  of  sheep,  camels,  and  one-hoofed
animals  must  not  be  drunk.

12.  If  (he  has)  drunk  (milk)  which  ought  not  to
be  drunk,  excepting  cow's  milk,  (he  must  perform)  a
Kri&Mra  (penance).

1 3.  But  if  (he  has  drunk)  cow's  milk  (that  is  unfit
for  use,  he  shall)  fast  during  three  (days  and)  nights.

14.  Stale  (food  must  not  be  eaten  or  drunk)
excepting  pot-herbs,  broths,  meat,  clarified  butter,
cooked  grain,  molasses,  sour  milk,  and  barley-meal,

15.  Nor  (substances)  which  have  turned  sour,  nor
molasses  which  have  come  into  that  state.

16.  After  performing  the  ceremony  preparatory


it  appears  that  peacocks,  now  considered  inviolable,  were  actually
eaten  in  the  third  century  a.  d.

8.  Vasish//$a  XIV,  41-42.  The  names  are  much  corrupted  in  the
MSS.,  and  for  Ma^akari,  which  I  do  not  find  in  the  dictionaries,
Sama^akari  or  Samasakari  is  also  read.  The  Brz'ha^/^iras  is
probably  the  Indian  salmon,  the  Mahsir.

-9-10.  Vasish/#a  XIV,  34-35;  Gautama  XVII,  22.  The  meaning
of  sandhini, '  a  female  animal  that  gives  milk  while  big  with  young,'
is  uncertain.     See  also  Vishnu  LI,  40;  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  23.

11.  Gautama  XVII,  24.  12.  Vishmi  LI,  38-41.

14.  Gautama  XVII,  16.  15.  Vasish/^a  XIV,  37-38.

16.  VasishMa  XIII,  1-5.  Govinda  states  that  this  Sutra  has
been  introduced  here,  because   the  purity  of  one's  food  ensures


1 36  BAUDHAYANA.  1,6,13.

to  the  beginning  of  the  Veda-study  (upakarman)  on
the  (full  moon  of  the  month)  of  Sr&vana.  or  of
Asha<2%a,  they  shall  close  the  term  on  the  full  moon
of  Taisha  or  Magna.

Prasna  I,   Adhyaya  6,   Ka^dika  13.

i.  The  gods  enjoy  a  pure  sacrifice  (only) ;

2.  For  the  gods  are  desirous  of  purity  and  (them-
selves) pure.

3.  The  following  (Rik)  declares  that,  'To  you,  O
Maruts,  the  pure  ones,  pure  viands  ;  to  you,  the  pure
ones,  I  offer  a  pure  sacrifice.  They  who  love  the
pious  rites,  who  are  of  pure  origin,  (themselves)  pure
and  purifiers  (of  others),  came  duly  to  the  truthful
(worshipper).'

4.  (He  will  be)  pure  (if  there  is)  no  blemish  on
his  clothes,  therefore  let  him  perform  all  (acts)  that
are  connected  with  sacrificing,  (dressed)  in  unblem-
ished clothes.

5.  The  sacrificcr  and  his  wife  as  well  as  the  officiat-
ing priests  shall  put  on  dresses  which  have  been
washed,  and  dried  by  the  wind,  and  which  are  not
in  a  bad  condition.


purity  of  one's  soul,  and  purity  of  soul  gives  strength  of  memory,
and  thereby  makes  one  fit  to  study  the  Veda.

13.  1-2.  See  also  above,  I,  5,  10,  4.  This  Adhyaya  and  the  next
ought  to  have  been  given  in  the  -Srauta  Sutra.

3.  Rig-vedaVII,  56,  12;  Taittiriya-brahmawa  II,  8,  5,5.  The
meaning  of  the  last  portion  of  the  verse  is  somewhat  doubtful.
Sayaraa  gives  two  different  explanations  and  Govinda  a  third.

4.  Govinda  points  out  that  the  dresses  of  the  sacrificer  and  of
his  priests  must  be  white,  because  farther  on  (Sutras  9-10)  other
colours  are  specially  prescribed.

5.  Govinda  thinks  that  the  word  £a,  '  as  well  as/  is  intended  to
include  the  lookers-on.


1,6,13.  DRESSES    AT    SACRIFICES.  1 87

6.  (It  shall  be)  thus  from  the  (beginning  of  the)
Prakrama,

7.  And  thus  at  the  long  Soma-sacrifices  and  the
Sattras ;

8.  And  (on  other  occasions  other  dresses  must
be  used)  in  accordance  with  the  injunction  (of  the
Veda),

9.  Thus  at  (all)  Ish/is,  animal  sacrifices,  and
Soma-sacrifices  which  may  be  used  as  spells  (against
enemies),  the  priests  shall  perform  (the  sacred
rites),  wearing  red  turbans  and  red  dresses ;  (when
reciting  the  hymn  seen  by)  Wzshakapi  (he  shall)
wear  a  dress  and  a  mantle  of  many  colours  and
so  forth.

10.  At  the  Agnyadhana  (sacrifice)  the  clothes
(shall  be  made)  of  flax  ;  on  failure  of  such,  (dresses)
made  of  cotton  or  of  wool  are  used.

11.  Clothes  defiled  by  urine,  ordure,  blood,  semen
and  the  like  (shall  be)  cleaned  with  earth,  water
and  the  like.

12.  (Dresses)  made  of  Trzpa-bark  and  vrzkala
(shall  be  treated)  like  cotton-cloth,

6.  Regarding  the  ceremony  called  Prakrama,  literally  '  stepping
forward  from  the  Garhapatya  fire/  see  Saya/za  on  Taitt.  Br.  I,  1,
4,  1.     It  opens  the  Agnyadhana  rite.

9.  Govinda  states  that  the  words  iti  ka,,  '  and  so  forth,'  are  in-
tended to  include  other  incantations.  The  Wzshakapi  hymn  is
found  Rig-veda  X,  86.

-11.  Govinda  states  that  the  word  iti,  'and  the  like,'  is  intended
to  include  cowdung,  cow's  urine,  and  other  substances  used  for
purification.

12.  Govinda  states  that  there  is  a  tree  called  Trrpa,  the  bark  of
which  is  used  for  dresses.  Vrz'kala,  which  has  been  left  untrans-
lated, is  explained  by  j-akama,  a  word  which  is  not  found  in  our
dictionaries.


1 88  baudhAyana.  i,  6, 13.

1 3.  Deer-skins  like  (dresses)  made  of  bark.

14.  (Let  him)  not  (use)  a  mantle  which  has  been
wrapped  (round  the  loins,  or)  on  which  he  has  been
lying  (in  his  bed),  without  washing  it.

15.  Let  him  not  employ  for  the  gods  anything
used  by  men  without  beating  it  on  a  stone.

16.  If  solid  earth  is  denied,  (it  must  be)  smeared
with  cowdung.

1 7.  Loose  (earth  must  be  cleansed  by)  ploughing,

18.  Moist  (earth)  by  bringing  pure  (earth)  and
covering  (it  with  that).

19.  Land  is  purified  in  four  (ways),  by  being  trod
on  by  cows,  by  digging,  by  lighting  a  fire  on  it,  by
rain  falling  on  it,

20.  Fifthly  by  smearing  it  with  cowdung,  and
sixthly  through  (the  lapse  of)  time.

21.  Grass  placed  on  unconsecrated  ground  (must
be)  washed.

22.  (Grass)  defiled  out  of  one's  sight,  (shall  be)
sprinkled  (with  water).

23.  Small  pieces  of  sacred  fuel  (shall  be  purified)
in  the  same  manner.

24.  Large  pieces  of  wood  (must  be)  washed  and
dried.

13.  Govinda  says  that,  as  the  treatment  of  valkala, '  bark-dresses/
has  not  been  prescribed,  the  meaning  of  the  Sutra  can  only  be,
that  bark-dresses  and  black-buck  skins  are  to  be  treated  alike,
i.  e.  that  they  are  to  be  cleaned  with  Bel-nut  and  rice ;  see  above.

15.  Govinda  explains  apalpulitam  by  'without  beating  it  with
the  hand  on  a  stone.'  He  mentions  as  an  instance  the  skin  which
is  used  in  preparing  the  Soma.

16.  According  to  Govinda,  solid  earth  is  such  on  which  the  fire-
altars  are  built.

21.  E.  g.  grass  intended  for  the  barhis,  if  it  has  been  placed  on
a  spot  which  has  not  been  sprinkled  with  water.

22.  'Defiled  out  of  one's  sight,'  i.e.  brought  by  .Sudras.


I,  6,  T3.  PURIFICATION    AT    SACRIFICES.  1 89

25.  But  a  great  quantity  (of  wood  shall  be)
sprinkled  (with  water).

26.  Wooden  vessels  which  have  been  touched  by
impure  men  (shall  be)  scraped ;

27.  (And)  those  which  are  defiled  by  stains  of
remnants  (shall  be)  planed.

28.  (Wooden  vessels)  defiled  by  urine,  ordure,
blood,  semen,  and  the  like  (very  impure  substances
shall  be)  thrown  away.

29.  These  (rules  must  be  followed)  except  in  case
a  (special)  injunction  (is  given);

30.  Thus,  for  instance,  (purification  by)  washing
with  Ku^a  grass  and  water  (is  prescribed)  on  all  the
following  (occasions,  viz.)  at  the  Agnihotra,  the
Gharmo/£/£/£ish/a,  the  Dadhigharma,  the  Ku/z^apa-
yinam  Ay  ana,  the  Utsargi/zam  Ayana,  the  Daksha-
ya/za  sacrifice,  the  Ardhodaya,  the  Aatu^akra,  and
the  Brahmaudanas,

31.  (Again)  at  all  Soma-sacrifices  (the  cups  must
be)  cleaned  with  water  only  on  (the  heap  of  earth
called)  the  Mar^aliya  ;

32.  If  these  same  (cups  are  defiled)  by  urine,  ordure,


27.  Govinda  says  that  this  rule  is  optional.

28.  Govinda  adds  that  fuel,  Kuja  grass,  and  the  like,  which  have
been  denied  in  this  manner,  must  also  be  thrown  away.

30.  Regarding  the  Dadhigharma,  a  homa,  see  Vaitana  Sutra
21,18;  regarding  the  Ku#</apayinam  Ayana,  Ajvalayana  «S"rauta
Sutra  XII,  4  ;  and  regarding  the  Dakshayawa  sacrifice,  a  variety  of
the  new  and  full-moon  offering,  Ajvalayana  II,  14.  The  Ardho-
daya is  possibly  the  vrata  of  that  name  mentioned  in  the  Purawas.
According  to  Govinda,  the  J5Tatuj£akra,  which  is  otherwise  known
as  a  Tantric  rite,  is  a  sacrifice,  ish/akakosh/a  (?)  madhyavasanto
ya^ante  tathetaradaya^  (?).  Regarding  the  Brahmaudana,  see  Awa-
layana  -Srauta  Sutra  I,  4.

32.  Govinda  says  that   the  injunction  to  throw  away  defiled


190  baudhAyana.  1,6,14.

blood,  semen,  and  the  like  (they  must  be)  thrown
away.

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  6,  KandikX  14.

1.  Earthen  vessels  that  have  been  touched  by
impure  persons  (must  be)  exposed  to  (the  flame  of)
a  fire  of  Kusa.  grass.

2.  Those  which  have  been  defiled  by  stains  of
remnants  (of  food  must  be)  exposed  to  another
burning.

3.  Those  which  have  been  defiled  by  urine,
ordure,  blood,  semen,  and  the  like  (must  be)  thrown
away.

4.  (Vessels)  made  of  metal  (must  be)  washed,
after  having  been  scrubbed  as  (directed)  above.

5.  The  materials  (to  be  used)  for  scrubbing  (are)
cowdung,  earth,  ashes,  and  so  forth.

6.  Those  which  have  been  defiled  by  urine,
ordure,  blood,  semen,  and  the  like  (must  be)  recast,

7.  Or  (they  must)  be  kept  during  seven  (days
and)  nights  completely  immersed  in  cow's  urine,

8.  Or  in  a  great  river  for  as  long  (a  period).

9.  (Vessels)  made  of  stone  or  of  fruits,  (i.  e.)
gourds,  Bel-fruit,  and  Vina/as,  (shall  be)  brushed
with  (a  brush  of)  cow's  hair.

vessels  has  been  repeated,  in  order  to  prevent  a  misconception.
For  as  Soma  is  said  to  be  a  great  means  of  purification,  it  might
be  supposed  that  it  was  powerful  enough  to  prevent  the  defile-
ment of  vessels  into  which  it  is  poured  at  a  sacrifice.  But  com-
pare the  next  Sutras.

14.  8.  A  great  river,  i.e.  one  which  directly  flows  into  the
ocean. —  Govinda.

9.  A  Vina/a,  i.  e.  (a  vessel)  made  of  bamboo  or  Vidagdha#a/a ;  it
is  called  a  '  long  vessel'  (dirghabha^anam),  and  is  used  for  carrying
the  Pramta  water  and  the  like  purposes. — Govinda.     The  vessel


I,  6,  14.  PURIFICATION    AT    SACRIFICES.  191

10.  (Sacrificial  implements  made  of)  plaited  Na/a-
reeds,  bamboo,  or  6ara-reeds  (shall  be)  washed  with
cowdung,  water,  and  the  like.

11.  If  unhusked  rice  has  been  defiled,  (it  must
be)  washed  (and  afterwards  be)  dried.

12.  But  a  great  quantity  (of  unhusked  rice  must
be)  sprinkled.

13.  Husked  rice  (which  has  been  defiled  must  be)
thrown  away.

14.  The  same  (rule  applies)  to  cooked  sacrificial
viands.

15.  But  if  a  great  quantity  has  been  defiled  by
(the  touch  of)  dogs,  crows,  and  the  like  (unclean
beings),  one  must  throw  away  that  portion  (as)  food
for  men,  and  sprinkle  (the  rest  with  water),  reciting
the  Anuvaka,  '  Pavamana/k  suvar^ana/L'

16.  Hydromel  and  preparations  of  milk  (are)
purified  by  pouring  them  from  one  vessel  into
another.


intended  is  no  doubt  the  flask  made  of  a  bamboo  which  is  cut
below  the  joint,  and  is  commonly  used  as  a  bottle  for  oil.  Govinda
adds  that  this  mode  of  purification  is  to  be  adopted  in  case  the
vessels  have  been  touched  by  impure  persons.

1  o.  Na/a-reeds,  i.  e.  Amphidonax  Karka ;  -Sara,  i.  e.  Saccharum
Sara.  Govinda  says  that  the  rule  applies  to  cases  where  such
implements  have  been  defiled  by  remnants  of  food  (u^^ish/a-
lepa).

n.  'Defiled,  i.e.  touched  by  a  A^a^ala.'  (The  rule)  refers  to
a  quantity  less  than  a  Dro^a  (66  or  132  lbs.). — Govinda.

13.  'If  it  has  been  defiled  by  urine  and  the  like  and  the  quan-
tity is  small ; '  this  must  be  understood,  because  he  will  declare
(below,  Sutra  15)  that  if  there  is  a  great  quantity  (the  defiled)
portion  only  shall  be  thrown  away. — Govinda.

14.  This,  too,  refers  to  small  quantities  only.

15.  The  Anuvaka  referred  to  is  Taittinya-brahmawa  I,  4,  8.

16.  '  Hydromel,  i.e.  sour  milk,  honey,  clarified  butter,  water,  and


I92  BAUDHAYANA.  1,6,14-

1 7.  In  like  manner  let  him  pour  oil  and  clarified
butter  which  have  been  touched  by  an  impure
(person)  into  water,  and  (afterwards)  use  them.

18.  If  (any)  impure  (substance)  is  thrown  (into
the  sacrificial  fire)  let  him  place  (the  two  Arams
one)  on  (the  other),  produce  fire  by  friction,  (and
offer)  a  Pavamanesh/i.

19.  If  (the  rules  regarding)  purity,  the  proper
place,  the  mantras,  the  series  of  actions,  the  object,
the  materials,  (their)  consecration,  and  the  proper
time  are  conflicting,  each  earlier-named  (point)  is
more  important  (than  the  following  ones).


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  7,  Ka2vdika  15.

1.  The  sacred  fires  (shall  be)  approached  from
the  north,

2.  (And  be)  left  in  the  same  manner.

3.  The  contrary  (proceeding  should  be  adopted
at  sacrifices  offered)  to  the  manes.

grain ;  a  preparation  of  milk,  i.  e.  curd  of  two-milk  whey  (amiksha),
if  these  are  blemished  by  the  fault  of  men,  and  that  (blemish  must
have  been  caused  by)  the  touch  of  an  impure  (person,  ukMishta)
only.' — Govinda.

17.  'And  that  must  be  done  in  such  a  manner  that  the  oil  and
the  clarified  butter  are  not  lost/ — Govinda.

18.  'Any  impure  substance,  i.e.  urine,  ordure,  and  the  like.' —
Govinda.

19.  Avr/t, 'the  series  of  actions,'  i.e.  the  growth  (pramubhava)
of  the  ceremonial  (prayoga). — Govinda.

15.  1.  Manava  *SVauta  Sutra  1, 1,  1,  and  Kumarila  thereon  in
Professor  Goldstiicker's  lithographed  copy  and  Katyayana  -SYauta
Sutra  I,  8,  24.  See  also  Professor  Haug's  map  of 'the  sacrificial
compound/  Aitareya-brahmawa,  vol.  i.

3.  I.  e.  the  entrance  and  exit  are  to  be  made  to  the  south  of  the
fires.


1,7,15-  PURIFICATION   AT   SACRIFICES.  1 93

4.  Let  him  wash  that  which  has  been  touched  with
(his)  foot.

5.  Let  him  touch  water,  in  case  he  touches  his
body  or  the  hem  (of  his  garment).

6.  Likewise  (let  him  touch  water)  after  cutting,
splitting,  digging  or  removing  (anything,  or  offering
oblations)  to  the  manes,  to  the  Rakshasas,  to
Nirr/ti,  to  Rudra,  (and  after  performing  sacrifices)
intended  as  spells  (against  enemies).

7.  Let  him  not  turn  round  himself  a  sacrificial
implement  (the  use  of)  which  is  accompanied  by  the
recitation  of  mantras.

8.  (For)  the  sacrificial  implements  (are)  more
nearly  (connected  with  the  sacrifice),

9.  The  priests,  more  remotely.

10.  The  sacrificer  and  his  wife  are  even  nearer
than  the  priests.

11.  After  the  sacrificial  implements  (follows)  the
clarified  butter,  after  the  clarified  butter  the  sacri-
ficial viands,  after  the  sacrificial  viands  the  animal
to  be  slain,  after  the  animal  the  Soma,  after  the
Soma  the  sacred  fires.


5.  Govinda  explains  si£,  'the  hem  of  the  garment,'  by  the
garment  wrapped  round  the  loins  (parihitaw  vasa^).

7.  The  meaning  is  that  the  priest  must  hold  the  sacrificial  imple-
ments, such  as  the  sru£  and  sruva  ladles,  between  himself  and  the
fires,  and  not  place  himself  between  them  and  the  fires  (atmano
bahir  na  kuryat  agner  antara^  svaya^a  na  bhaved  iti  yavat).

8;  'He  gives  the  reason  for  that  (rule),  "For  the  sacrificial
implements  (are)  nearer"  than  the  priests,  that  must  be  under-
stood.'— Govinda.

10.  'For  they  obtain  the  reward  of  the  sacrifice.  The  instances
(referring)  to  those  two  are  the  Vaisar^anas  and  the  Dakshi/zas.' —
Govinda.

11.  Katyayana  *SVauta  Sutra  I,  8,  31.     'If  the    space   on  the

[14]  O


194  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  7,  15.

12.  If  there  is  work  for  them,  the  priests  shall
not  turn  away  from  the  sacred  fires.

13.  If  he  faces  the  east,  let  him  turn  towards  his
right  shoulder,

14.  If  he  faces  the  west,  towards  the  left.

15.  The  entrance  to  the  sacrificial  (enclosure  lies)
between  the  -ATatvala  and  the  Utkara,

16.  (When  one  comes)  from  the  isfatvala,  (it  lies
between)  the  AhavanJya  fire  and  the  Utkara.

1 7.  The  officiating  (priests),  the  sacrificer,  and  his
wife  shall  enter  by  that  (road),

18.  As  long  as  the  sacrificial  rite  is  not  completed.

19.  When  it  has  been  finished  (they  shall)  pass  to
and  fro  on  the  side  where  there  is  no  Utkara  (i.e.
on  the  western  side  of  the  enclosure).


Uttaravedi  and  the  rest  is  confined,  the  Soma  is  made  ready  imme-
diately after  the  fire,  after  that  the  meat  and  so  forth,  after  that  the
grain  for  the  sacrificial  cakes,  then  the  clarified  butter,  and  after
that  the  spoons  called  sruva,  srui,  and  so  forth.' — Govinda.

12.  'It  is  indicated  hereby  that,  if  there  is  work  (to  be  done)
there,  they  shall  not  turn  away  from  the  sacred  fires  except  in
cases  of  absolute  necessity/ — Govinda.

13.  'This  rule  (refers  to  the  case)  when  he  walks  with  the
sacred  fires.  It  must  be  understood  that  he  shall  not  turn  his
back  on  the  fires.' — Govinda.

14.  'This  rule  (is  to  be  interpreted)  in  the  same  manner  (as
the  preceding  one).  Or  it  is  prescribed  by  these  two  Sutras  that
the  men  engaged  (in  the  sacrifice)  shall  go  out,  turning  their  right
hand  towards  (the  fires).' — Govinda.

15.  Katyayana  -SVauta  Sutra  V,  1,  11.

16.  I  read  with  the  MSS.  of  the  text  'Mtvalad  ahavaniyotkarau.'
The  two  copies  of  the  commentary  give  £atvala/fc  ahavaniyotkarau.
Govinda  says  that  the  words  antarewa  tirtham  must  be  understood.
For  the  position  of  the  ^Tatvala  and  the  Utkara,  see  Professor
Haug's  map,  where  the  road  of  the  priests  is  also  marked,  though
somewhat  differently.


I,7,i5-  PURIFICATION   AT   SACRIFICES.  1 95

20.  Let  him  not  put  on  the  fire  logs  or  Samidhs
which  have  not  been  sprinkled  (with  water),

21.  The  Brahman  (priest)  and  the  sacrificer  shall
enter  in  front  of  the  Ahavaniya  fire.

22.  Some  (declare  that  they  shall  enter)  behind
the  Ahavaniya  fire.

23.  The  seat  of  the  Brahman  (priest  is  situated)
to  the  south  of  the  Ahavaniya  fire,  (that)  of  the
sacrificer  to  the  west  of  him.

24.  (The  seat)  of  the  Hotri  (priest  is  situated)  to
the  north  of  the  northern  Sron'i  (of  the  Vedi),

25.  (That)  of  the  Agnidhra  priest  near  the
Utkara,

26.  (That)  of  the  (sacrificer's)  wife  behind  the
Garhapatya  fire.

27.  He  scatters  Darbha  grass  on  these  (seats)
as  often  as  (they  are  used).

28.  A  vessel  filled  with  water,  for  the  purpose  of
sipping,  shall  be  appropriated  to  (the  use  of)  each
(person).

29.  He  who  has  been  initiated  (to  the  performance
of  a  sacrifice  shall)  keep  the  (following)  vows  :

30.  Let  him  not  proclaim  the  guilt  of  other  men ;
let  him  not  become  angry ;  let  him  not  weep ;  let
him  not  look  at  urine  and  ordure.

31.  If  he  has  looked  at  any  unclean  (substance),
he  mutters  (the  verse), '  Unrestrained  is  the  internal

23.  For  the  seats  of  the  priests  and  the  other  persons  named
in  this  and  the  following  rules,  see  Professor  Haug's  plan,  and
Dr.  Hillebrandt's  Altindische  Neu  und  Vollmondopfer,  p.  190.

24.  'The  northern  Sroni  of  the  Vedi,  i.e.  the  north-western
corner  of  the  Vedi.' — Govinda.

31.  Taittiriya  Sawhita  III,  1,  1,2,  where  the  rule  also  is  given.
M.  alone  adds  another  Sutra,  the  text  of  which  is  corrupt.  But  it
ended  with  the  mantra  undatir  bala#z  dhatta,  &c.    Taitt.  S.  ibid.  3.

O    2


I96  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  8,  16.

organ,  wretched  (my)  eye-sight ;  the  sun  is  the  chief
of  the  (heavenly)  lights ;  O  Dikshi,  do  not  forsake

me!'

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  8,  Kaa^ika  16.

i.  There  are  four  castes  (vama,  viz.)  Brahma^as,
Kshatriyas,  VaLsyas,  and  £itdras.

2.  (Males)  belonging  to  them  (may  take)  wives
according  to  the  order  of  the  castes,  (viz.)  a  Brah-
ma^a  four,

3.  A  Kshatriya  three,

4.  A  Vaiiya  two,

5.  A  vSudra  one.

6.  Sons  begotten  on  (wives)  of  equal  or  of  the
next  lower  castes  (are  called)  Savar/zas  (of  equal
caste).

7.  (Those  born)  of  (wives)  of  the  second  or  third
lower  castes  (become)  Ambash/^as,  Ugras,  and
Nishadas.

8.  Of  females  wedded  in  the  inverse  order  of  the
castes  (are  born)  Ayogavas,  Magadhas,  Vai/zas,
Kshattrzs,  Pulkasas,  Kukku^akas,  Vaidehakas,  and
Aa^alas.

9.  An  Ambash/^a  (begets)  on  a  female  of  the
first  (caste)  a  6Vapaka,

10.  An  Ugra  on  a  female  of  the  second  (caste)
a  Vai^a,

11.  A  Nishada  on  a  female  of  the  third  (caste)
a  Pulkasa.

16.  1.  Vasish/^a  II,  1.  2-5.  Vasish/^a  I,  24-25.

6.  Gautama  IV,  16.  7.  Vasish/^a  XVIII,  8.

8-12.  Vasish/^a  XVIII,  1-6  ;  Gautama  IV,  17-21.  In  the  I.  O.
copy  of  the  commentary  there  is  a  break,  which  extends  from
Sfitra  8  to  the  beginning  of  Adhyaya  10.


T,  9,  17.  CASTES.  I97

12.  In  the  contrary  case  a  Kukku/aka  (is  pro-
duced).

13

14 i

15

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
*  But  those  sons  whom  an  uninitiated  man  begets,
the  wise  call  Vratyas,  who  are  excluded  from  the
Savitri ;  (that  is  a  rule  which  refers)  in  an  equal
manner  to  the  three  (highest)  castes.'

Pras-na  I,  Adhyaya  9,  KaathkA  17.

1.  The  Rathakara  (carpenter),  the  Ambash//£a,
the  Suta  (charioteer),  the  Ugra,  the  Magadha,  the
Ayogava,  the  Varna,  the  Kshattrz,  the  Pulkasa,  the
Kukku/a,  the  Vaidehaka,  the  Aa^dala,  and  so  forth,

2.  Among  these,  sons  of  equal  caste  (spring)  from
women  of  equal  caste.

3.  A  Brahma/za  (begets)  on  a  female  of  the  Ksha-
triya  caste  a  Brahma^a,  on  a  female  of  the  Vawya
caste  an  Ambash//£a,  on  a  female  of  the  6udra  caste
a  Nishada,

4.  (According  to)  some  a  Parasava.

13-15.  The  text  of  the  three  Sutras  is  exceedingly  corrupt,  and
the  Telugu  copy  of  the  commentary  affords  no  help.  It  is,  how-
ever, clear  that  the  passage  left  out  contained  something  which
corresponded  to  Gautama  IV,  22-23,  and  treated  of  the  possibility
of  raising  persons  of  a  lower  caste  to  a  higher  one  by  intermarriages
continued  for  five  or  seven  generations.  The  reading  of  K.,  which
perhaps  is  the  best,  will  show  this :  '  nishadena  nishadyad  a  paw-
/fcamag^ata  bhavanti  tarn  upanayet  shash//^aw  ya^ayet  saptamo  'vi-
krzta^isamaz^ito  saptamau^gisama  ity  ekeshaw  sawg^la  kramewa
nipatanti.'

16.  Manu  X,  20.

17.  1-2.  Manu  X,  26-27.  3-6.  See  above,  I,  8,  16,6-7.


I98  "BAUDHAYANA.  I,  9,  17.

5.  A  Kshatriya  (begets)  on  a  female  of  the  Vaisya
caste  a  Kshatriya,  on  a  female  of  the  .5udra  caste  an
Ugra.

6.  A  VaLsya  (begets)  on  a  female  of  the  ^udra
caste  a  Rathakara.

7.  A  ^udra  begets  on  a  female  of  theVaisya  caste
a  Magadha,  on  a  female  of  the  Kshatriya  caste  a
Kshattrz,  but  on  a  female  of  the  Brahma/za  caste
a  Kdinddldi.

8.  A  VaLsya  begets  on  a  female  of  the  Kshatriya
caste  an  Ayogava,  on  a  female  of  the  Brahma^a
caste  a  Suta.

9.  If  among  these  an  Ambash/^a  (male)  and  an
Ugra  (female)  unite,  (their  son)  will  be  born  in  the
direct  order  of  the  castes  (Anuloma).

10.  If  a  Kshattrz  (male)  and  a  Vaidehaka  (female)
unite,  (their  son  will  be)  born  against  the  order  of
the  castes  (Pratiloma).

11.  An  Ugra  (begets)  on  a  female  of  the  Kshattrz
caste  a  .Svapaka,

12.  A  Vaidehaka  on  a  female  of  the  Ambash^a
caste  a  Vai^a,

13.  A  Nishada  on  a  female  of  the  .Sudra  caste
a  Pulkasa,

14.  A  .Sudra  on  a  female  of  the  Nishada  caste
a  Kukku^aka.

15.  The  wise  declare  those  sprung  from  an  inter-
mixture of  the  castes  to  be  Vratyas.

7-8.  See  above,  I,  8, 16,  8.

9-10.  I.e.  the  offspring  of  individuals  of  different  Anuloma
castes  again  become  Anulomas,  and  the  offspring  of  individuals  of
different  Pratiloma  castes,  Pratilomas.

11-12.  Manu  X,  19.

13-14.  See  above,  I,  8, 16,  n-12.  15.  Gautama  IV,  25.


I,  io,  18.  THE   KING.  I99


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  10,  Kawdika  18.

1.  Let  the  king  protect  (his)  subjects,  receiving  as
his  pay  a  sixth  part  (of  their  incomes  or  spiritual
merit).

2.  Brahman,  forsooth,  placed  its  majesty  in  the
Brahma^as,  together  with  (the  duties  and  privileges
of)  studying,  teaching,  sacrificing  for  themselves,
sacrificing  for  others,  liberality,  and  accepting  (gifts),
for  the  protection  of  the  Vedas  ;

3.  In  the  Kshatriyas  (it  placed)  strength,  together
with  (the  duties  and  privileges  of)  studying,  sacri-
ficing, liberality,  (using)  weapons,  and  protecting  the
treasure  (and  the  life  of)  created  beings,  for  the
growth  of  (good)  government ;

4.  In  the  Vaisyas  (it  placed  the  power  of  work),
together  with  (the  duties  of)  studying,  sacrificing,
liberality,  cultivating  (the  soil),  trading,  and  tending
cattle,  for  the  growth  of  (productive)  labour.

5.  On  the  .Sudras  (it  imposed  the  duty  of)  serving
the  three  higher  (castes).

6.  For  (the  Veda  states), '  they  were  created  from
the  feet  (of  Brahman)/


18.  1.  Vasish/^a  I,  42-44.  Learned  Brahma#as  do  not  pay
taxes,  but  the  king  obtains  a  sixth  part  of  the  spiritual  merit  which
they  acquire.  Hence  Baudhayana  uses  the  general  term, '  a  sixth
share/

2.  Vasish//5a  II,  13-14.  3.  VasishMa  II,  15-17.

4.  VasishMa  II,  18-19.  The  words  'the  power  of  work' are
inserted  by  Govinda.

5.  VasishMa  II,  20.

6.  Rig-veda  X,  90, 1 2  ;  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  III,  1 2,  6.


200  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  10,  18.

7.  Let  (the  king)  choose  a  domestic  priest  (who
shall  be)  foremost  in  all  (transactions).

8.  Let  him  act  according  to  his  instructions.

9.  Let  him  not  turn  back  in  battle.

10.  Let  him  not  strike  with  barbed  or  poisoned
(weapons).

1 1.  Let  him  not  fight  with  those  who  are  in  fear,
intoxicated,  insane  or  out  of  their  minds,  (nor  with
those)  who  have  lost  their  armour,  (nor  with)  women,
infants,  aged  men,  and  Brahma/zas,

1 2.  Excepting  assassins  (atatayin).

13.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
*  He  who  slays  an  assassin,  able  to  teach  (the  Veda)
and  born  in  a  (noble)  family,  does  not  (incur)  by
that  (act  the  guilt  of)  the  murderer  of  a  learned
Brahma/za ;  (in)  that  (case)  fury  recoils  upon  fury.'

14.  The  duty  on  goods  imported  by  sea  is,  after
deducting  a  choice  article,  ten  Pa/zas  in  the  hundred.

15.  Let  him  also  lay  just  (duties)  on  other
(marketable  goods)  according  to  their  intrinsic  value
without  oppressing  (the  traders).


7.  VasishMa  XIX,  3-6.  Govinda  explains  sarvatodhuram,  'fore-
most in  all/  by  sarva^am, '  omniscient.'

8.  Vasish//&a  I,  40-41.  The  rule,  of  course,  refers  primarily  to
advice  in  spiritual  matters.

9.  Gautama  X,  16.  10.  ManuVII,  90.
11.  Gautama  X,  18.     The  meaning  is  that  such  persons  shall

not  be  slain  in  battle.

12-13.  VasishMa  III,  18.

14.  I  take  this  to  mean  that  the  king  may  take  one  article  which
particularly  pleases  him  out  of  each  consignment,  and  impose  on
the  rest  an  ad  valorem  duty  of  ten  per  cent.  Regarding  the  tribute
in  kind  to  be  paid  to  Indian  kings  by  foreign  merchants,  see  Peri-
plus  maris  Erythraei,  par.  49.

15.  VishwuIII,  29-30.    Govinda  interprets  anupahatya, 'without


I,  to,  19.  THE   KING  ;     CRIMINAL   LAW.  20t

16.  Let  the  king  guard  the  property  of  men
belonging  to  a  non-Brahmanical  caste,  the  owner
of  which  has  disappeared,  during  a  year,  and  after-
wards take  it  (for  himself).

17.  A  Brihma^a,  forsooth,  shall  not  suffer  cor-
poral punishment  for  any  offence.

18.  In  case  (a  Brahma^a)  has  slain  a  Brahma^a,
has  violated  his  Gurus  bed,  has  stolen  the  gold
(of  a  Brahma^a),  or  has  drunk  (the  spirituous  liquor
called)  Sura,  (the  king)  shall  cause  to  be  impressed
with  a  heated  iron  the  mark  of  a  headless  trunk,
a  female  part,  a  jackal,  (or)  the  sign  of  a  tavern
on  the  forehead  (of  the  offender)  and  banish  him
from  his  realm.

19.  If  a  Kshatriya  or  (a  man  of  any)  other  (lower
caste)  has  murdered  a  Brahma^a,  death  and  the
confiscation  of  all  his  property  (shall  be  his  punish-
ment).

20.  If  those  same  (persons)  slay  men  of  equal  or
lower  castes,  (the  king)  shall  fix  suitable  punishments
in  accordance  with  their  ability.

Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  10,  Ka;vdika  19.
1.  For  slaying  a  Kshatriya  (the  offender)  shall

oppressing  the  traders,'  by  'without  deducting  (anuddhrz'tya)  a
choice  article.'

16.  Vasish/^a  XVI,  19-20.  As  stated  above,  I,  5,  11,  15,  the
king  must  not  take  the  property  of  a  Brahmawa.

17.  VishmiV,  2.  'Corporal  punishment,'  i.e.  capital  punish-
ment, mutilation,  &c,  except  branding.

18.  Vishmi  V,  3-7.  19.  Apastamba  II,  10,  27, 16.
20.  Vasish//$a  XIX,  9.     '  Those  same  persons,'  i.  e.  Kshatriyas,

Vaisyas,  or  -Sudras.

19.  1.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  1.     Govinda  explains  vairaniryata-


202  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  10,  19.

give  to  the  king  one  thousand  cows  and  besides
a  bull  in  expiation  of  his  sin,

2.  For  (slaying)  a  Vaisya  one  hundred  cows,  for
(slaying)  a  6udra  ten ;  and  a  bull  (must  be)  added
(in  each  case).

3.  (The  punishment  for)  the  murder  of  a  woman
■ — excepting  a  (Brahma^l)  who  had  bathed  after
temporary  uncleanness — and  for  the  destruction  of
a  cow  have  been  explained  by  the  (rule  regarding
the)  murder  of  a  .5udra.

4.  If  he  has  slain  a  milch-cow  or  a  draught-ox,
he  shall  perform  a  A^andraya^a  (lunar  penance)  after
(paying  the  prescribed  fine).

5.  The  (punishment  for  the)  murder  of  a  (Brah-
ma;d)  who  had  bathed  after  temporary  uncleanness
has  been  explained  by  (the  rule  regarding)  the
murder  of  a  Kshatriya.

6.  For  killing  a  flamingo,  a  Bhasa,  a  peacock,
a  Brahma/zi  duck,  a  Pra^alaka,  a  crow,  an  owl,  a
frog,  a  musk-rat,  a  dog,  (the  large  ichneumon  called)
Babhru,  a  common  ichneumon,  and  so  forth,  (the
offender  shall  pay)  the  same  (fine)  as  (for  the  murder
of)  a  .Sudra.

7.  In  order  to  gain  the  good  opinion  of  men,
a  witness  shall  give  evidence  in  accordance  with
what  he  has  seen  or  heard.

nartham  in  two  ways:  1.  in  expiation  of  his  sin;  2.  in  order  to
remove  the  enmity  of  the  relatives  of  the  murdered  man.  He  adds
all  these  punishments  are  really  penances  (prayajv&ttas)  to  be
imposed  .by  the  king.  Apastamba  has  these  Sutras  in  the  section
on  penances.

2.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  2-4.

3.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  5  ;  I,  9,  36, 1.

5.  Vasish/^a  XX,  34,  37.  6.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  13.

7 .  Vishnu  VIII,  13-14.


T,  10,  19.  WITNESSES.  203

8.  Of  injustice  (in  decisions)  one  quarter  falls  on
the  party  in  the  cause,  one  quarter  on  his  witnesses,
one  quarter  on  all  the  judges,  and  one  quarter  on
the  king.

But  where  he  who  deserves  condemnation  is  con-
demned, the  king  is  guiltless  and  the  judges  free
from  blame ;  the  guilt  falls  on  the  offender  (alone).

9.  (Therefore)  a  wise  man  should  ask  an  appointed
witness  in  the  following  manner :

10.  'The  merit  which  thou  hast  acquired  in  the
interval  between  the  night  in  which  thou  wast  born
and  that  in  which  thou  wilt  die,  all  that  will  go  to
the  king,  if  thou  speakest  an  untruth.'

11.  'A  witness  who  speaks  falsely,  slays  three
fathers  and  three  grandfathers  and  seven  (descend-
ants), both  the  born  and  the  unborn.'

12.  'By  false  testimony  concerning  gold  he  kills
three  ancestors  ;  by  false  testimony  regarding  (small)
cattle  he  kills  five ;  by  false  testimony  concerning
kine  he  kills  ten/

1  He  kills  a  hundred  by  false  evidence  regarding
horses,  (and)  a  thousand  by  false  evidence  con-
cerning a  man.  A  witness  who  speaks  falsely,
destroys  the  whole  (world)  by  false  evidence  con-
cerning land.'

8.  ManuVIII,  18-19.

9.  I  read,  with  the  Telugu  copy  of  the  commentary,  sakshmaw
tvevam  uddish/am.  All  the  MSS.  of  the  text  and  C.  I.  read  sak-
shiwaw  daivam  uddish/am.  Govinda's  explanation,  adhuna  nir-
dish/an  sakshma  evam  iprt'kMed  iti  padanvaya^,  '  the  construction
of  the  words  is, "  let  him  now  ask  the  appointed  witnesses  in  the
following  manner," '  agrees  with  the  reading  adopted.

10.  VasishMa  XVI,  32-33.

11.  '  Three  fathers  and  three  grandfathers,'  i.e.  seven  ancestors.

12.  Vasish/fa   XVI,   34.      Regarding   the   explanation   of  the


204  baudhAyana.  I,  io,  19.

13.  (Men  of)  the  four  castes  (varaa)  who  have
sons  may  be  witnesses  excepting  .Srotriyas,  the  king,
ascetics,  and  those  who  are  destitute  of  human
(intellect).

14.  If  (the  witness  rightly)  recollects  (the  facts  of)
the  case  (he  will  receive)  commendation  from  the
most  eminent  men.

15.  In  the  contrary  case  (he  will)  fall  into  hell,

16.  Let  him  (who  has  given  false  evidence),  drink
hot  milk  during  twelve  (days  and)  nights  or  offer
burnt  oblations  (reciting)  the  Kushma^a  (texts).

words  'he  kills/  see  ManuVIII,  97,  and  Haradatta  on  Gautama
XIII,  14.

13.  Vasish/^a  XVI,  28-30.  The  text  has  ra^anya,  'members
of  the  royal  family/  But  the  parallel  passages  of  other  Dharma-
sutras,  e.  g.  Vishmi  VIII,  2,  make  it  probable  that  the  king  is
meant.

14.  Apastamba  II,  n,  29,  10.  Govinda  takes  the  Sutra  dif-
ferently. His  commentary  runs  as  follows  :  sakshidvaye  sati  ra^ria
tatpurushalr  ka.  kim  kartavyam  ity  ata  aha  U  smrz'tau  pradhanata^
pratipatti/fc  II  pradhanyatas  taponirdish/avidyadibhi^  I  tadva&inat  pra-
tipattir  nij^aya^  karya  ityadhyahara^  karya^  II  'What  shall  the
king  and  his  officers  do;  if  there  are  two  witnesses  ?  In  order  to
answer  this  question  he  says  :  "  On  recollection,  according  to  pre-
eminence, reliance."  According  to  pre-eminence,  i.  e.  on  account
of  austerities,  (being)  appointed  (as  a  witness),  learning  and  the
like  ;  in  accordance  with  the  evidence  of  such  person's  conviction,
i.  e.  the  decision  must  be  made.  The  latter  word  has  to  be  under-
stood/    Govinda  then  goes  on  to  quote  Manu  VIII,  73.

15.  Apastamba  II,  1 1,  29,  9.  Govinda  and  M.  read  kartrzpatyam
for  kartapatyam,  the  reading  of  the  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.
The  explanation  of  the  former  term  is  said  to  be  dosha^,  '  sin/
Regarding  the  ancient  word  kartapatya,  which  Govinda  and  the
writer  of  M.  have  not  understood,  see  Haradatta  on  Apastamba

I,  2,  5,  3-

16.  In  accordance  with  his  explanation  of  Sutra  14,  Govinda
thinks  that  this  penance  is  to  be  performed  by  the  king  and  the
judges  in   case  they  fail  to  weigh   the  evidence  properly.     But


I,  II,  20.  MARRIAGE.  205


PRASNA    I,    ADHYAYA  11,    KANDIKX   20.

1.  (There  are)  eight  marriage-rites.

2.  If  (the  father)  gives  (his  daughter)  to  a  student
(who  has  not  broken  his  vow  of  chastity  and)  who
asks  for  her,  after  fully  enquiring  into  his  learn-
ing and  character,  that  (is)  the  rite  of  Brahman
(brahma).

3.  If  (the  father  gives  his  daughter  away)  after
clothing  her  and  decking  her  with  ornaments,  (say-
ing) '  That  (is  thy  wife),  fulfil  the  law  (with  her)/
that  (is)  the  rite  of  Pra^apati  (pra^apatya).

4.  If  (the  bridegroom)  after  offering  the  first  burnt
oblation  of  parched  grain  (receives  the  maiden)
for  a  bull  and  a  cow,  that  is  the  rite  of  the  i?zshis
(arsha).

5.  If  (a  maiden  is  given)  to  an  officiating  priest
within  the  sacrificial  enclosure,  while  the  presents
are  being  taken  away,  that  (is)  the  rite  of  the  gods
(daiva).

according  to  ManuVIII,  106,  Vish/mVIII,  16,  the  oblations  with
the  Kushmafldas  (Taitt.  Ar.  X,  3-5)  are  to  be  offered  for  uttering
in  evidence  a  venial  falsehood.  That  is,  no  doubt,  here,  too,  the
real  meaning.

20.  1.  VishmiXXIV,  17.

2.  VasishMa  I,  30.  The  word  brahmaMrin  has,  no  doubt,  as
Govinda  too  contends,  been  used  in  the  double  sense  of '  a  student
of  the  Veda '  and  '■  chaste.'

3.  VishmiXXIV,  22.

4.  Vasish//£a  I,  32.  'After  the  first  of  the  burnt  oblations  of
parched  grain,  which  are  prescribed  for  weddings,  has  been  offered,
the  bridegroom  shall  give  to  him  who  has  power  over  the  maiden
a  bull  and  a  cow,  and  receive  them  back  together  with  the  (bride).' —
Govinda.

5.  Vasish//$a  I,  31.     According  to  this  rule  the  damsel  is  given


206  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  n,  20.

6.  The  union  of  a  lover  with  a  loving  damsel  (is
called)  the  rite  of  the  Gandharvas  (gandharva).

7.  (If  the  bridegroom  receives  the  maiden)  after
gladdening  (the  parents)  by  money,  (that  is)  the  rite
of  the  Asuras  (asura).

8.  (If  the  maiden  is  wedded)  after  being  forcibly
abducted,  (that  is)  the  rite  of  the  Rakshasas
(rakshasa).

9.  If  one  has  intercourse  with  (a  maiden)  who  is
sleeping,  intoxicated,  or  out  of  her  senses  (with  fear
or  passion  and  weds  her  afterwards,  that  is)  the  rite
of  the  Pi^aias  (paisa^a).

10.  Among  these  (eight  rites)  the  four  first  (named)
are  (lawful)  for  a  Brahma^a.  Among  these  also  each
earlier  named  is  preferable.

11.  Among  the  (four)  later  (named  rites)  each
succeeding  one  is  more  sinful  (than  the  preceding
ones).

12.  Among  these  the  sixth  and  the  seventh  agree
with  the  law  of  the  Kshatriyas.  For  power  is  their
attribute.


as  part  of  the  sacrificial  fee  (dakshirca)  to  one  of  the  priests  after
a  sacrifice  has  been  completed.  Govinda  adds  that  the  recipient
has  to  accept  the  gift  with  the  six  mantras,  '  pra^apati  striyaw
yaja^/  Taitt.  Brahmawa  II,  4,  6,  5.  In  his  commentary  on  the
passage  Saya/za  makes  the  same  statement.  Govinda  adds  that  in
this  case  as  well  as  in  those  mentioned  in  the  following  Sutras  the
regular  marriage  ceremony  must  be  performed  later.

6.  Vasish//$a  I,  33.  7.  Vasish//&a  I,  35.

8.  Vasish^a  I,  34.  9.  Vishmi  XXIV,  26.

10.  Vish/m  XXIV,  27.

12.  Vishmi  XXIV,  28;  Vasish/^a  I,  29,  34.  The  meaning  of
the  last  clause  is  that  as,  according  to  I,  10,  18,  3,  Brahman  placed
power  in  the  Kshatriyas,  they  may  adopt  marriage  rites  by  which
a  disregard  of  conventionalities  or  strength  is  displayed.


MARRIAGE.  207


13.  The   fifth   and   the    eighth    (are   lawful)   for
Vai^yas  and  .Sudras.

14.  For  Vaisyas  and  .Sudras  are   not  particular
about  their  wives,

15.  Because  they  are  allowed  (to  subsist  by  such
low  occupations  as)  husbandry  and  service.

16.  Some  recommend  the  Gandharva  rite  for  all
(castes),  because  it  is  based  on  (mutual)  affection.


Prasna  I,  Adhyaya  11,  Katoika  21.

i.  The  Veda  declares, '  The  quality  of  the  offspring
depends  on  the  quality  of  the  marriage  rite.'

2.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  It  is  declared  that  a  female  who  has  been  pur-
chased for  money  is  not  a  wife.  She  cannot  (assist)
at  sacrifices  offered  to  the  gods  or  the  manes.
Kaiyapa  has  stated  that  she  is  a  slave/

13.  'I.e.  the  fifth  for  Vaisyas  and  the  eighth  for  Sudras.' —
Govinda.

14.  'Those  whose  spouse,  i.e.  wife,  is  not  restrained,  i.e.  not
fixed  by  rule,  are  called  not  particular  about  their  wives.  The
meaning  is  that  there  is  oneness  (dareshvaikyam)  with  respect  to
wives,  that  fixed  rules  regarding  them  there  are  none  (niyamas
teshaw  na  bhavati).' — Govinda.

15.  '"Husbandry"  includes  also  trade  and  the  like.  Because
those  two  (castes)  are  permitted  to  pursue  low  occupations,  there-
fore their  marriage  rites  are  of  the  same  description.  That  is
what  the  author  intends  to  say.' — Govinda.

-  21.  1.  Apastamba  II,  5, 12,  4.
2.  Vasish/^a  I,  36-38.  Govinda  inserts  after  the  words  'Now
they  quote  also/  two  Sutras  in  prose :  1 . '  Ten  virtuous  sons  and
daughters  (spring)  from  a  Daiva  marriage,  ten  from  a  Pra^apatya
marriage.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  the  son  of  a  wife  wedded
according  to  the  Brahma  rite  (sanctifies)  ten  ancestors,  ten  de-
scendants, and  oneself.'     2.  '  The  power  of  learning  the  Veda  also


208  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  ii,  21.

3.  '  Those  wicked  men  who,  seduced  by  greed,
give  away  a  daughter  for  a  fee,  who  (thus)  sell
themselves  and  commit  a  great  crime,  fall  (after
death)  into  a  dreadful  place  of  punishment  and
destroy  their  family  down  to  the  seventh  (genera-
tion). Moreover  they  will  repeatedly  die  and  be
born  again.  All  (this)  is  declared  (to  happen),  if
a  fee  (is  taken).'

4.  On  the  day  of  the  full  moon,  on  the  eighth  day
(of  each  half  month),  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon,
on  the  appearance  of  a  meteor,  on  the  occasion  of
an  earthquake,  on  visiting  a  burial-ground,  and  on
the  death  of  the  king  of  the  country,  of  a  6Votriya
or  of  one  who  has  the  same  Guru  (sattrthya),  the
study  of  the  Veda  must  be  discontinued  for  a  day
and  a  night.

5.  (The  study  of  the  Veda  must  be  interrupted)
while  (a  strong)  wind  (blows),  a  foul  smell  (is  per-
ceptible), or  hoar-frost  (lies  on  the  ground),  when
dancing  (is  going  on),  and  while  the  sounds  of
singing,  musical  instruments,  weeping,  or  of  the
Saman  (melodies  are  audible).

6.  When  thunder,  lightning,  and  rain  come  toge-
ther, (the  interruption  shall  last)  three  days  except
in  the  rainy  season.

belongs  to  such  sons.'  None  of  my  MSS.  of  the  text  has  these
words,  and  they  are  suspicious,  because  the  phrase  '  Now  they
quote  also'  usually  precedes  verses  only.  The  Dekhan  and
Gujarat  MSS.,  except  K.,  omit  these  and  the  next  Sutra  too.

4.  VasishMa  XIII,  22,  32-35;  Vishmi  XXX,  23.  Govinda  ex-
plains agnyutpata,  '  on  the  appearance  of  meteor/  by  '  if  a  fire
breaks  out  in  the  village.'

5.  Vasish/^a  XIII,  17,  30;  Vishmi  XXX,  7,  13  ;  Apastamba  I,
3,11,31;  I,  3,10,  17.

6.  Gautama  XVI,  41.


I,  it,  21.  VEDA-STUDY.  209


7.  In  the  rainy  season,  too,  (the  reading  must  be
interrupted)  until  the  same  hour  of  the  (next)  day
or  night,  (if  thunder  and  lightning  come  together),
not  on  account  of  rain.

8.  If  (he  has)  received  anything  or  dined  on  the
occasion  of  a  sacrifice  in  honour  of  the  manes,  (he
shall  not  read)  during  the  remainder  of  the  day,

9.  (Nor)  after  meals  until  (the  food)  has  been
digested.

10.  For  the  hand  of  a  Brahma/za  is  his  mouth.

11.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
f  According  to  the  revealed  texts  there  is  no  differ-
ence whether  one  has  eaten  or  received  (a  present
at  a  ^raddha)/

12.  (A  student  shall  discontinue  the  study  of  the
Veda)  during  three  days  in  case  his  father  has  died.

13.  '  Of  two  kinds,  forsooth,  is  the  virile  energy
of  a  famous  Brahma^a  who  is  learned  in  the  Vedas,
(that  which  resides)  above  the  navel  and  the  other
(that  resides)  below  the  navel.    Through  that  which


7.  Govinda  takes  ahoratrayar  ka.  tatkalam  to  mean  until  the  end
of  the  day  or  night.

8.  Vasish/^a  XIII,  15.  Govinda  adds  that  the  recitation  must
be  stopped  as  soon  as  the  invitation  to  a  .Sraddha  is  received.

9.  Vasish//$a  XIII,  31.

10.  Vasish/^a  XIII,  16.  The  word  'for'  used  in  this  Sutra
gives  the  reason  for  the  rule  in  Sutra  8.

12.  '  This  (rule)  refers  to  a  student  who  has  not  returned  home.
But  on  one  who  has  returned  home  it  is  obligatory  to  interrupt
the  Veda-study  until  he  becomes  pure.  Here  he  calls  the  sub-
teacher  (upadhyaya)  "  father,"  because  he  gives  the  Veda.  For  (an
interruption  of)  twelve  days'  duration  is  prescribed  on  (the  death  of)
a  real  father  (by  the  Sutra);  "  on  the  death  of  the  mother,  the  father,
and  the  teacher  twelve  days." ' — Govinda.

13.  Vasish/^a  II,  5.     This  Sutra  is  intended  to  show  how  the


2IO  BAUDHAYANA.  I,  II,  21.

(resides)  above  the  navel,  his  offspring  is  produced
when  he  initiates  Brahma^as,  when  he  teaches  them,
when  he  causes  them  to  offer  sacrifices,  when  he
makes  them  holy.  All  these  are  his  children.  But
through  that  which  resides  below  the  navel  the
children  of  his  body  are  produced.  Therefore  they
never  say  to  a  .Srotriya  who  is  versed  in  the  Vedas,
>  Thou  art  destitute  of  offspring/

14.  *  Therefore  a  Brahma^a  has  two  names,  two
mouths,  two  kinds  of  virile  energy,  and  two  births.'

15.  (Let  him  discontinue  the  recitation  of  the
Veda)  as  long  as  he  is  within  hearing  or  sight  of
•Sudras  and  Apapatras.

16.  When  at  night  the  howl  of  a  solitary  jackal
is  heard,  he  shall  not  study  until  he  has  slept.

1 7.  Let  him  not  study  in  the  evening  and  morn-
ing twilights  nor  on  the  Parva-days.

18.  He  shall  not  eat  meat  nor  approach  his  wife
(on  those  days).

19.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  For  on  the
Parva-days  the  Rakshasas  and  the  Pii-a^as  roam
about  (in  order  to  injure  men)/

20.  And  on  (the  appearance  of)  other  omens  and
portents  (he  shall  not  repeat  the  Veda),  except
mentally,  during  a  day  and  a  night.

Upadhyaya  can  be  called  a  father.  Govinda  states  that  the  pre-
cise meaning  of  anu^ana,  '  versed  or  learned  in  the  Veda,'  is  '  one
who  knows  the  Veda,  its  meaning,  and  the  Ahgas.'  See  also
Baudhayana  Grzlrya-sutra  1, 10,  5.

15.  Vasish//$a  XVIII,  12.  Regarding  the  term  Apapatras,  see
Apastamba  1, 1,  3,  25  note.

16.  Apastamba  I,  3, 10,  17.

17.  Vasish//5a  XIII,  22.  The  explanation  of  the  term  Parva-
day  is  given  below,  Sutra  22.

18.  Vishmi  LXIX,  1.


II,  i,  i.  PENANCES.  211


21.  The  mental  recitation  of  the  Veda  must  also
be  interrupted  on  births  and  deaths  (occurring  in
the  family).

22.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  The  eighth  day  destroys  the  teacher,  the  four-
teenth destroys  the  pupil,  the  fifteenth  destroys
learning ;  therefore  let  him  avoid  {studying  the  Veda)
on  the  Parva-days.'


PRASNA  II,    ADHYAYA  1,    KAiVDIKA  1.

i.  Now,  therefore,  the  penances  (will  be  de-
scribed).

2.  The  murderer  of  a  learned  Brahma^a  (shall
practise  the  following  vow)  during  twelve  years :

3.  Carrying  a  skull  (instead  of  a  dish)  and  the
foot  of  a  bedstead  (instead  of  a  staff),  dressed  in  the
hide  of  an  ass,  staying  in  the  forest,  making  a  dead
mans  skull  his  flag,  he  shall  cause  a  hut  to  be  built
in  a  burial-ground  and  reside  there ;  going  to  seven
houses  in  order  to  beg  food,  while  proclaiming  his
deed,  he  shall  support  life  with  what  (he  gets  there),
and  shall  fast  if  he  obtains  nothing ;

4.  Or  he  may  offer  a  horse-sacrifice,  a  Gosava,  or
an  Agnish/ut ;

22.  Vishnu  XXX,  29-30.  In  accordance  with  the  practice
usual  in  Vedic  works  the  best  MSS.  of  the  text  repeat  the  begin-
ning of  each  Kandika  at  the  end  of  the  Pragma,  giving  the  last  first.

1.  2-3.  Gautama  XXII,  4-6;  Vishmi  L,  1-3,  15.  The  ex-
pression '  staying  in  the  forest '  means  that  the  sinner  shall  not
stop  in  the  village  or  the  fields  during  the  day-time,  but  live  in  some
uncultivated  tract  in  the  neighbourhood.

4.  Gautama  XIX,  9-10.  The  Gosava  sacrifice  is  an  Ekaha;
see  Katyayana  -Srauta  Sutra  XXII,  n,  3.

P  2


212  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  i,  i.

5.  Or  he  may  bathe  (with  the  priests)  on  the
completion  of  a  horse-sacrifice  (offered  by  somebody
else).

6.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  : '  He
who  unintentionally  slays  a  Brahma^a  becomes  sinful
according  to  the  sacred  law.  The  sages  declare
that  he  may  be  purified  (if  he  did  it)  unintentionally.
But  no  expiation  is  found  for  a  wilful  murderer.'

7.  'He  who  has  raised  his  hand  (against  a  Brah-
ma/za),  shall  perform  a  Y^rikkhxz.  penance,  an  htikrik-
khra.  penance  if  he  strikes,  a  K>z'/£/£hra  and  a  Aan-
draya^a  if  blood  flows.  Therefore  let  him  neither
raise  his  hand  nor  cause  blood  to  flow.'

8.  (For  killing)  a  Kshatriya  (he  shall  keep  the
normal  vow  of  continence)  during  nine  years,

9.  (For  killing)  a  VaLsya  during  three  (years),

10.  (For  killing)  a  ^udra  during  one  year,

11.  Likewise  for  killing  a  woman.

12.  (The  penance  for  killing)  a  woman  who  has
bathed  after  temporary  uncleanness  (is)  the  same
(as  that)  for  (the  murder  of)  a  Brahma/za.

5.  Gautama  XXII,  9.  6.  Manu  XI,  90.

7.  Yagmvalkya  III,  293.  Regarding  the  penances  named,  see
VasishMa  XXI,  20,  XXIV,  1-2,  XXIII,  45,  and  below,  II,  1,  2,  38,
IV,  5,  6.

8-10.  VasishMa  XX,  31-33.  The  words  '  shall  keep  the  normal
vow  of  continence '  have  been  inserted  in  accordance  with  Go-
vinda's  explanation,  which  apparently  is  based  on  Gautama  XXII,
14.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  Baudhayana,  like  Vishmi  (L,  15)
and  others,  may  have  intended  murderers  of  Kshatriyas,  Vawyas,
&c,  too,  to  perform  the  penance  prescribed  above,  Sutra  4,  only
for  shorter  periods.

11.  Gautama  XXII,  17.  Govinda  is  of  opinion  that  the  word
kdi,  'likewise/  is  intended  to  include  'worthless'  Kshatriyas  and
Vai-syas.

12.  Vasish/^a  XX,  34-35.


II,  I,  I.  PENANCES.  213


13.  He  who  has  defiled  the  bed  of  a  Guru  shall
place  himself  on  a  heated  iron  bed,

14.  Or  embrace  a  red  hot  image  (of  a  woman),

15.  Or  cutting  off  his  organ  together  with  the
testicles  and  holding  them  in  his  joined  hands,  he
shall  walk  towards  the  south-west  until  he  falls  down
(dead).

16.  A  thief  shall  go  to  the  king  with  flying  hair,
carrying  on  his  shoulder  a  club  of  Sindhraka  wood
(and  say),  'Strike  me  with  that.'  (Then  the  king)
shall  strike  him.

17.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses).;
'  A  thief  shall  go  to  the  king  carrying  a  club  on  his
shoulder  (and  say  to  him),  '  Punish  me  with  that,
O  king,  remembering  the  duty  of  Kshatriyas.'

'  Whether  he  be  punished  or  be  pardoned,  the
thief  is  freed  from  his  guilt.  But  if  the  king  does
not  punish  him,  that  guilt  of  the  thief  falls  on  him/

18.  If  he  has  drunk  (the  spirituous  liquor  called)
Sura,  he  shall  scald  himself  to  death  with  hot
(liquor  of  the)  same  (kind).

19.  For  unintentionally  drinking  (Sura),  he  shall
perform  Y^rikkhxz.  penances  during  three  months  and
be  initiated  again,

20.  And  (on  this  second  initiation)  the  cutting  (of

13-15.  Gautama  XXIII,  8-10;  VasishMa  XX,  13, 14.
16.  Vasish//£a  XX,  41.     'A  thief,'  i.e.  one  who  has  stolen  gold
from  a  Brahmawa.

A

-17.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  4-5.

18.  Vasish//£a  XX,  22.  Sura,  i.  e.  the  spirituous  liquor  extracted
from  rice,  to  drink  which  is  considered  a  particularly  heinous
crime.     Vasish/$a  XX,  19,  and  loc.  cit.

19.  VasishMa  XX,  19.

20.  Vishmi  LI,  5.  The  vows  and  restrictive  rules,  i.  e.  the
Savitrya  vow,  begging,  &c.


214  BAUDHAYANA.  H,  1, I«

the  hair  and  nails),  the  vows,  and  (the  observance
of  the)  restrictive  rules  may  be  omitted.

21.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
*  A  Br&hma^a,  Kshatriya,  or  Vai^ya  who  has  un-
intentionally drunk  (the  spirituous  liquor  called)
Varu;zi  or  has  swallowed  urine  or  faeces  must  be
initiated  a  second  time.'

22.  ■  But  he  who  drinks  water  which  has  stood
in  a  vessel,  used  for  keeping  Sura,  shall  live  six
days  on  milk  in  which  (leaves  of)  the  6ankhapushpl
plant  have  been  boiled.'

23.  If  (a  pupil)  who  is  employed  by  his  teacher
(on  some  errand)  meets  with  his  death,  (the  teacher)
shall  perform  three  Y^rikkhrz,  penances.

24.  The  same  (penance)  is  prescribed  for  not
finishing  (the  education  of  the  pupil).

25.  If  a  student  assists  at  the  burial  of  anybody
except  (at  that  of  his)  mother,  of  his  father,  or  of
his  teacher,  he  must  begin  his  vow  afresh.

26.  If  a  (student)  is  sick,  he  may,  at  his  pleasure,
eat  all  the  fragments  of  his  teachers  meal  as
medicine.

27.  He  may  physic  himself  with  any  (medicine)
which  he  may  desire.

2T.  Vishmi  LI,  2-4.  22.  Vishmi  LI,  23.

23.  Vasish/^a  XXIII,  10.

24.  'Finishing  (the  education  of  the  pupil,  sawskrz'tam),  i.e.
teaching  him  the  ruies  of  purification,  of  conduct,  and  so  forth ;
failing  (to  do)  that  (is  called)  not  finishing  (the  education  of  the
pupil).  For  that  (omission)  the  same  (penance),  i.  e.  three  Krikkfa&s
(are  to  be)  performed.' — Govinda.

25.  Vasish//5a  XXIII,  7-8.  '  Assists  at  a  burial  (j-avakarma),  i.  e.
lays  out  a  corpse,  and  so  forth  (alawkara«adi),  or  carries  it  out,
and  so  forth.' — Govinda.

26.  VasishMa  XXIII,  9,  and  note.

27.  '  The  meaning  is  that  he  may  cure  himself  even  with  such


IT,  I,  i.  PENANCES.


215


28.  When  he  is  unable  to  move,  he  may  worship
the  sun,  after  he  has  risen,  reciting  this  (Rik  verse) :
1  A  swan,  dwelling  in  purity.'

29.  When  he  has  spent  his  manly  strength  in  the
day-time,  let  him  thrice  drink  water  that  reaches  his
heart,  reciting  the  verses  which  contain  the  word
retas.

30.  A  student  who  approaches  a  woman  (is  called)
an  Avakir/zin,

31.  Let  him  offer  an  ass  (in  the  place  of)  a  sacri-
ficial animal.

32.  The  sacrificial  meat-cake  (purodasa  shall  be
offered)  to  Nirrzti,  or  to  the  Rakshasas,  or  to
Yama.

33.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  The  piece  to  be
eaten  by  the  sacrificer  (pra^itra,  shall  be  taken)
from  the  organ  (of  the  animal) ;  and  the  (other)  por-
tions shall  be  offered  in  water.'

34.  '  Or  he  may  also  heap  (fuel)  on  the  fire  in  the
night  of  the  new  moon,  perform  the  preparatory
rites   required  for   the   Darvihoma,   and    offer   two

(substances)  which  are  forbidden  even  to  his  teacher,  e.  g.  garlic,
and  so  forth.'  For  a  Smriti  declares, '  He  shall  protect  himself  by
every  means.' — Govinda.

28.  'Unable  to  move,'  i.e.  sick.  This  is  a  penance  to  be  per-
formed by  a  sick  student  when  he  is  unable  to  fulfil  the  rules
enjoining  the  morning  and  evening  prayers,  and  the  like ;  and  it
applies  to  other  men  also  because  there  is  no  objection.  Regarding
the  Mantra,  see  Taittiriya  Sawhita  I,  8, 15,  2.

.29.  The  rule  refers  to  intercourse  with  a  wife  in  the  day-time ;  see
Vishwu  LIII,  4.     The  Retasyas  occur  Taittiriya  Ara^yaka  I,  30.

30.  Vasish/^a  XXIII,  1.

33.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  102  ;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra  I,  1, 15.

34.  Taitt.Arawyakall,  18.  The  Arawyaka  has, more  appropriately,
pramya, '  having  taken  out/  before  upasamadhaya, '  may  heap  (fuel)
upon.'     The  Dekhan  and  Gu^ardt  MSS.  insert  the  words  '  amr/'taw


216  baudhAyana.  n,  i,  i.

oblations  of  clarified  butter  (reciting  these  two  sacred
texts)  :  "  O  Lust,  I  have  broken  my  vow ;  my  vow
have  I  broken,  O  Lust;  to  Lust  Svaha;"  "  O  Lust,
I  have  done  evil ;  evil  have  I  done,  O  Lust ;  to
Lust  Svaha/' '

35.  '  After  he  has  made  the  offering,  he  shall
address  the  fire,  closely  joining  his  hands,  turning
sideways  (with  the  following  texts) :  "  May  the  Maruts
grant  me,  may  Indra,  may  Brzhaspati,  may  this  fire
grant  me  long  life  and  strength,  may  it  make  me
long-lived ! " '

36.  Now  the  relatives  shall  empty  (the  water-pot)
of  a  (grievous  offender)  at  a  (solemn)  meeting  (and
he  shall  confess), '  I  N.  N.  am  (the  perpetrator  of)
such  and  such  (a  deed).'  After  (the  outcast)  has
performed  (his  penance)  the  Brahma^as  shall  ask
him  who  has  touched  water,  milk,  clarified  butter,
honey,  and  salt/  Hast  thou  performed  (thy  penance)?'
The  other  (person)  shall  answer, '  Om '  (yes) !  They
shall  admit  him  who  has  performed  (a  penance)  to  all
sacrificial  rites,  making  no  difference  (between  him
and  others).

37.  If  he  unintentionally  marries  a  female  who
belongs  to  his  own  family  (gotra),  he  shall  support
her,  (treating  her)  like  his  mother.

va  a^yam  amrztam  evatman  dhatte/  which  occur  also  in  the  Ara-
/zyaka,  after  the  Mantra.  According  to  Govinda  pari^esh/a,  '  pre-
paratory rites/  refers  to  the  consecration  of  the  clarified  butter,
and  so  forth.  The  special  rules  regarding  the  Darvihomas  are
given  Katyayana  -SVauta  Sutra  VI,  10,  17  seq.

36.  Vasish//5a  XV,  12-21.  Govinda  thinks  that  nirvbeshaw
savaniya/rc  kuryu^,  '  they  shall  admit  him  to  all  sacrificial  rites,
making  no  difference/  may  also  be  interpreted  by  'they  shall
perform  for  him  the  sacraments  just  as  for  a  new-born  child/

37.  ColebrookeV,  Dig.  CCCXL.


II,  I,  2.  PENANCES.  2  I  7

38.  If  (such  a  woman)  has  borne  a  child,  he  shall
perform  K>z/£vMra  penances  during  three  months  and
offer  (two  burnt  oblations  reciting)  the  two  (Mantras),
*  That  which  is  the  blemish  of  my  soul '  (and)  '  Fire
restored  my  sight.'

39.  'An  elder  brother  whose  younger  brother
marries  first,  the  younger  brother  who  marries  first,
the  damsel  wedded  (by  the  latter),  he  who  gives  her
away,  and  fifthly  he  who  sacrifices  for  them  (at  the
wedding),  all  sink  to  a  region  of  torment.'

40.  '  The  unmarried  elder  brother  and  the  married
younger  brother,  the  giver  (of  the  maiden)  and  the
performer  of  the  sacrifices  become  pure  by  under-
going a  Krz&Mra  penance  of  twelve  days,  the  female
(who  has  been  wedded  to  the  younger  brother)  by
(fasting  during)  three  days.'

PRASNA    II,    ADHYAYA    1,     KA2V7)IKA    2.

1.  Now  (follow  the  offences)  causing  loss  of  caste
(pataniya),

2.  (Viz.)  making  voyages  by  sea,

38.  The  Mantras  are  found,  Taittiriya  Sawhita  III,  2,  5,  4.

39.  VasisMa  XX,  7-8.  The  MSS.  read  parivitti/^  parivetta
yas  kainam  [nam]  parivindati.  But  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to
adopt  either  the  various  reading  given  Manu  III,  172,  yaya  ka.
parividyate,  or  to  read  ya  iainaw  parivindati.

40.  The  MSS.  all  read  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  tristriratrewa  or
dvistriratreraa.  The  correct  reading  appears,  however,  to  be  stri
triratrewa ;  for  Govinda  says,  yaya  saha  parivetta  bhutas  [bhuttasya
C.  I.,  bhutassastri  C.  T.]  tasyas  triratrewopavasena  juddhi^,  'the
purification  of  that  female  with  whom  he  has  become  a  parivettr*'
takes  place  through  three  days,  i.  e.  through  fasting  (three  days)/

2.  1.  Apastamba  I,  7,  21,  7-1 1.

2.  Govinda  explains  samudrasawyanam,  'making  voyages  by
sea/  by  'voyaging  by  means  of  ships  to  another  continent  (dvipa).'


2 1 8  baudhAyana.  II,  i,  2.

3.  Stealing  the  property  of  a  Brihma^a  or  a
deposit,

4.  Giving  false  evidence  regarding  land,

5.  Trading  with  merchandise  of  any  description
(whether  forbidden  or  not),

6.  Serving  6udras,

7.  Begetting  a  son  on  a  female  of  the  .Sudra  caste,

8.  And  becoming  thereby  her  son.

9.  (For  those  who  have)  committed  one  of  these
(offences  the  following  penance  is  prescribed)  :

10.  '  They  shall  eat  every  fourth  meal-time  a  little
food,  bathe  at  the  time  of  the  three  libations  (morn-
ing, noon,  and  evening),  passing  (the  day)  standing
and  (the  night)  sitting.  After  the  lapse  of  three
years  they  throw  off  their  guilt.'

11.  'A  Brahma;za  removes  the  sin  which  he  com-
mitted by  serving  the  black  race  during  one  day  and
one  night,  if  he  bathes  during  three  years  at  every
fourth  meal-time.'


7.  The  MSS.  from  Gujarat  and  the  Dekhan  read  instead  of
this  and  the  next  Sutras,  ya^a  judrayam  abhipra^ayate  tadapatyaw
k&  bhavati,  '  and  he  who  begets  (offspring)  on  a  -Sudra  female,  and
thereby  becomes  her  son/

8.  Govinda  explains  the  Sutra  as  a  prohibition  against  allowing
oneself  to  be  adopted  by  a  -Sudra  (j-udraputrabhava^  I  tavaham
putro  'smity  upagivanam).

9.  The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.  again  have  a  different
reading,  teshazrc  tu  nisvesha^,  '  but  the  atonement  of  these  offences
(is  as  follows)/

10.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  10.  All  the  MSS.  read  in  the  last
pada  '  tribhir  varshais  tad  apahanti  papam/  The  correct  reading
is  that  given  by  Apastamba  loc.  cit.,  '  tribhir  varshair  apa  papaw
nudante/

11.  Apastamba  I,  9,  27,  11.  Govinda  explains  the  Sutra  as
referring  to  cohabitation  with  a  female  of  the  '  black  race/  By
the  latter  term  he  understands  a  Kendall,  adding  that  others  believe


IT,  1,2.  PENANCES.  219

12.  Now  (follow)  the  minor  offences,  entailing
loss  of  caste  (upapataka),

13.  (Viz.)  intercourse  with  females  who  must  not
be  approached  (agamya,  e.  g.)  cohabitation  with  the
female  friend  of  a  female  Guru,  with  the  female
friend  of  a  male  Guru,  with  an  Apapatra  woman,  and
a  female  outcast,  following  the  profession  of  medi-
cine, sacrificing  for  many,  living  by  (performances
on)  the  stage,  following  the  profession  of  a  teacher
of  dancing,  singing  and  acting,  tending  cows  and
buffalos,  and  similar  (low  occupations,  as  well  as)
fornication.

14.  The  expiation  (prescribed)  for  these  (offences
is)  to  live  as  an  outcast  during  two  years.

a  iSudra  female  to  be  intended.  It  is,  however,  more  probable
that  Baudhayana  took  the  verse  to  forbid  twice -born  men  to  serve
-Sudras.

12.  Apastamba  I,  7,  ax,  9.

13.  Gautama  XXI,  11.  In  explanation  of  the  term  agamya,
'  a  female  who  must  not  be  approached/  Govinda  quotes  Narada
XII,  73-74,  and  he  takes  the  four  classes  of  females,  who  are
specially  mentioned,  not  as  examples  illustrating  the  term  agamya,
but  as  not  included  in  and  additional  to  the  latter.  Physicians  and
the  other  professional  men  enumerated  are  usually  not  mentioned
among  the  upapatakins,  but  occur  in  the  lists  of  those  whose  gifts
must  not  be  accepted,  and  of  those  who  defile  the  company  at
a  funeral  dinner,  e.g.  Vasish/^a  III,  3;  XIV,  2,  3,  11.  The  ex-
pression 'sacrificing  for  many'  (gramaya^anam)  appears  to  be
a  description  of  the  so-called  Ya^amana  Vrz'tti,  by  which  the
modern  Bha//a£is,  or  priests  who  officiate  for  hire,  subsist.  In
explanation  of  the  term  na/ya^aryata,  '  following  the  profession  of
teaching  dancing,  music,  and  acting,'  Govinda  says  that  '  instruc-
tion in  the  works  of  Bharata,  VLrakhila,  and  others'  is  intended.
Baudhayana  no  doubt  intends  to  forbid  the  instruction  of  profes-
sional dancers  and  actors  in  actual  works  on  their  art,  such  as
the  na/ya-sutras  mentioned  by  Pamni.

14.  'To  live  as  an  outcast,  i.e.  to  subsist  by  begging/ — Govinda.


220  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  I,  2.

15.  Now  (follow  the  offences)  which  make  men
impure  (asu/^ikara),

16.  (Viz.)  gambling,  performing  incantations,  sub-
sisting by  gleaning  corn  though  one  does  not  per-
form an  Agnihotra,  subsisting  by  alms  after  one  has
finished  one's  studentship,  living,  after  that  has  been
finished,  longer  than  four  months  in  the  house  of
one's  teacher,  and  teaching  such  a  (person  who  has
finished  his  studentship),  gaining  one's  livelihood  by
astrology  and  so  forth.

1 7.  But  the  expiation  of  these  (offences  is  to  per-
form penances)  during  twelve  months,  during  twelve
fortnights,  during  twelve  times  ten  days,  during
twelve  se'nnights,  during  twelve  times  three  days,
during  twelve  days,  during  six  days,  during  three
days,  during  a  day  and  a  night,  during  one  day,  in
proportion  to  the  offence  committed.

18.  Now  outcasts  shall  live  together  and  (toge-
ther) fulfil  their  duties,  sacrificing  for  each  other,  teach-
ing each  other,  and  marrying  amongst  each  other.  If
they  have  begot  sons,  they  shall  say  to  them, '  Depart
from  among  us  ;  thus  you  will  again  reach  the  Aryas.'

19.  For  the  organs  do  not  become  impure  toge-
ther with  the  man.

20.  (The  truth  of)  that  may  be  learned  from  this
(parallel  case);  a  man  deficient  in  limbs  begets  a  son
who  has  the  full  number  of  limbs.

21.  Harita  declares  that  this  is  wrong.

22.  For  wives  may  be  (considered)  similar  to  the

15.  Apastamba  I,  7,  21,  12-19  >  *i  10>  29>  I5-

16.  Govinda  is  probably  right  in  asserting  that  the  word  £a, '  and
(so  forth)/  is  intended  to  include  other  not-named  offences.

17.  Apastamba  1, 10,29,  i7-l8«
18-23.  Apastamba  I,  10,  29,  8-14.


11,1,2.  PENANCES.  221

vessel  which  contains  the  curds  (for  the  sacrifice).
If  one  makes  impure  milk  curdle  in  a  milk- vessel
and  stirs  it,  the  ^ish/as  do  not  use  the  (curds  thus
produced)  for  sacred  rites.

23.  In  like  manner  no  intercourse  can  be  held
with  that  (offspring)  which  is  produced  from  impure
seed.

24.  If  they  desire  it,  (they  may  perform)  a  penance,

25.  (Viz.  in  the  case  of  males)  the  third  part  (of
the  penance  prescribed)  for  crimes  causing  loss  of
caste  (pataniya) ;  for  females  the  third  part  (of  that).

26.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  If  he  applies  sesamum  to  any  other  purpose,  but
food,  anointing,  and  charitable  gifts,  he  will  be  born
again  as  a  worm  and,  together  with  his  ancestors,
be  plunged  into  the  ordure  of  dogs/

27.  He  who  sells  sesamum,  forsooth,  sells  his
ancestors ;  he  who  sells  rice,  forsooth,  sells  his  life ;
he  who  gives  away  his  daughter,  making  a  bargain,
forsooth,  sells  portions  of  his  spiritual  merit.

28.  Grass  and  wood,  in  its  natural  state,  may
be  sold.

29.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
4  Animals  that  have  teeth  in  one  jaw  only,  as  well  as
minerals  excepting  salt,  and  undyed  thread,  these,
O  Brahma/za,  are  the  goods  which  thou  art  permitted
to  sell.'

30.  (If  he  has  committed)  any  offence  excepting  a

25.  I.  e.  males  shall  live,  according  to  the  rules  given  above  in
Sutras  10-11,  during  one  year,  and  females  during  four  months.

26.  Vasish/^a  II,  30.  28.  Apastamba  I,  7,  21,  2.

29.  The  permission  to  sell  'stones'  or  minerals  contradicts
Vasish//&a  II,  24.

30.  Regarding  the  definition  of  the  term  'anu/fcana,'  see  above,
1,11,21,13.


222  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  I,  2.

mortal  sin  (pataka)  he  may  either  give  to  a  learned
Brahma/za  (anuMna)  a  hairy  cow  of  brown  or  red-
dish colour,  after  sprinkling  her  with  clarified  butter
and  scattering  black  sesamum  seeds  over  her ;

31.  Or  (he  may  offer  burnt  oblations),  reciting
the  Kushma^as,  during  twelve  days.

32.  '(Thus)  he  will  be  freed  from  the  guilt  (of
any  crime  that  is)  less  (heinous)  than  the  murder
of  a  learned  Brahma^a.'

^^.  If  one  is  accused  of  a  mortal  sin  (pataka),
a  Kri&Mra,  (penance  must  be  performed  by  the
accused).

34.  The  accuser  (shall  perform)  that  (Krz/£v£/£ra
penance  during)  a  year.

35.  'He  who  during  a  year  associates  with  an
outcast,  becomes  (likewise)  an  outcast ;  not  by  sacri-
ficing for  him,  by  teaching  him  or  by  (forming)  a
matrimonial  (alliance  with  him),  but  by  using  the
same  carriage  or  seat.'

36.  The  penance  for  eating  impure  substances
is  to  fast  until  the  entrails  are  empty.  That  is
attained  in  seven  (days  and)  nights.

31.  Regarding  the  efficacy  of  the  Kushma«</a  texts,  see  e.g.
Gautama  XIX,  12  ;  XXII,  36.

33.  Vasish/^a  XXIII,  37-38.  34.  Vasish/^a  XXIII,  39.

35.  Vasish/^a  I,  22.

36.  Apastamba  I,  9,  27,  3-4;  Vasish/^a  XXIII,  30.  I  follow-
here  the  Gujarat  and  Dekhan  MSS.,  which  read  amedhyapra\rane
prayaj&ttir  naishpurishyaw  tat  saptaratrewavapyate.  M.  and  the
two  MSS.  of  the  commentary  give  amedhyapnLrane  praya^ittam
and  leave  the  remainder  out.  The  commentary  states  that  the
penance  intended  is  the  TaptakrzH^ra,  described  in  the  next
Sutra.  The  parallel  passages  of  Apastamba  and  others  leave  no
doubt  that  the  northern  MSS.  in  this  case  have  preserved  the
older  form  of  the  text.


11,1,2.  PENANCES.  223

3J.  (Subsisting  on)  water,  milk,  clarified  butter,
(and)  fasting, — each  for  three  days, — (and  taking  the
three  fluids)  hot,  that  is  a  Taptakrz/£^ra  penance.

38.  (Eating)  during  three  days  in  the  morning
only,  during  the  (next)  three  days  in  the  evening
only,  (subsisting)  during  (another)  three  days  (on)
food  given  unasked,  and  fasting  during  three  days,
(that  is)  a  Krz&Mra.  penance.

39.  (If  the  period  of  twelve  days  is  divided  into)
three  (periods  of)  four  days,  that  is  the  Krt&Mra.
penance  of  women,  children,  and  aged  men.

40.  If  (observing  the  rule  given)  above  one  eats
(at  each  meal)  so  much  only  as  one  can  take  at  one
(mouthful),  that  is  an  Atikrt&Mra,  penance.

41.  (If  one)  subsists  on  water  only,  that  is  a
Krz&Mra.tiki'z&Mra,  the  third  (in  the  order  of  the
YLrikkhva.  penances).

42.  During  a  Krz'M/ira.  penance  (the  following
rules  must  be  followed,  viz.)  to  bathe  at  morn,
noon,  and  evening,

43.  To  sleep  on  the  ground,

44.  To  wear  one  garment  only,  to  shave  the  hair
of  the  head,  of  the  beard,  and  of  the  body,  and  to
clip  the  nails.

45.  The  same  (rules  apply)  to  women  except
(that  referring  to)  shaving  the  head.


,37.  Vasish/^a  XXI,  21.

38.  Vasish/^a  XXI,  20.     M.  and  the  two  MSS.  of  the  com-
mentary omit  the  word  '  YrikkMzh'  at  the  end  of  the  Sutra.

39.  Vasish/^a  XXIII,  43.  40.  Vasish/^a  XXIV,  2.
41.  Vasish//£a  XXIV,  3.     Govinda  gives  another  explanation  of

the  word  trz'tiya^,  '  the  third,'  according  to  which  it  is  to  refer  to
the  third  tryaha^,  or  '  period  of  three  days/
42-44.  VasishMa  XXIV,  4-5.


224  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  2,  3.


Prasna  II,   Adhyaya  2,   Ka2ydika  3.

i.  A  Brahma/za  who  always  carries  water  (in  his
pot),  who  always  wears  the  sacred  thread,  who  daily
recites  the  Veda,  who  avoids  the  food  of  .Sudras,  who
approaches  (his  wife)  in  the  proper  season,  and  offers
sacrifices  in  accordance  with  the  rules  (of  the  Veda,
after  death)  never  falls  from  Brahman's  heaven.

2.  The  Veda  (says),  '  Manu  divided  his  estate
among  his  sons.'

3.  (A  father  may,  therefore,  divide  his  property)
equally  among  all,  without  (making  any)  difference  ;

4.  Or  the  eldest  may  receive  the  most  excellent
chattel.

5.  (For)  the  Veda  says,  '  Therefore,  they  dis-
tinguish the  eldest  by  (an  additional  share  of  the)
property.

6.  Or  the  eldest  may  receive  (in  excess)  one  part
out  of  ten  ;

7.  (And)  the  other  (sons)  shall  receive  equal
shares.

8.  While  the  father  lives,  the  division  of  the
estate  takes  place  (only)  with  the  permission  of  the
father.

3.  i.  Vasish/^aVIII,  17.

2.  Taittiriya  Sawhita  III,  1,  9,  4.

3.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  XL.  Govinda  points  out  that  this  rule
refers  to  sons  equal  by  caste,  origin,  and  virtue.

4.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit. ;  Vishmi  XVIII,  37.

5.  Taittiriya  Sa/rchita  II,  5,  2,  7.  See  also  the  discussion  on
this  text,  Apastamba  II,  6,  14, 10-13.

6.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit.;  Vasish/#a  XVII,  43.

7.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit. ;  Gautama  XXVIII,  8.

8.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  XXII ;  Dayabhaga  II,  8.     In  C.'s  Digest


11,2,3-  INHERITANCE.  225

9.  The  (additional)  share  of  the  eldest  is,  (accord-
ing to  the  order)  of  the  four  castes,  a  cow,  a  horse,
a  goat,  and  a  sheep.

10.  If  there  are  sons  born  of  wives  of  different
castes  (vanza),  they  should  make  ten  portions  of  the
ancestral  property  and  take  four  (shares),  three,  two,
(and)  one,  according  to  the  order  (of  the  castes).

11.  But  if  a  legitimate  son  of  the  body  (aurasa)
is  born,  the  (other)  sons  of  equal  caste  shall  obtain
one  third  share  (of  the  estate).

12.  If  there  is  a  son  of  equal  caste  and  a  son  of

the  first  clause  is  omitted  and  connected  with  the  following  Sutra.
Govinda  agrees  with  (rimutavahana.

9.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  XLIX.  The  rule  is  an  explanation  of
the  term  varaw  rupam,  '  the  most  excellent  chattel,'  in  Sutra  4.
The  meaning  probably  is,  as  the  Digest  states,  that  among  Brah-
marcas  it  is  usual  to  give  to  the  eldest  a  bull,  among  Kshatriyas  a
horse,  and  so  forth.

10.  Vasish/^a  XVII,  48-50;  Vishmi  XVIII,  2-40;  where  the
several  cases  that  can  arise  have  been  fully  worked  out.

11.  I  translate  according  to  the  reading  of  K.,  M.,  and  the  two
MSS.  of  the  commentary,  aurase  tutpanne  savanzas  [°/zas,  M.,  K.]
trz"tiya/zz.?ariara^  [°yams2Lm  haret,  K.]  The  other  MSS.  omit  the
last  two  words  of  the  Sutra.  The  sense  of  the  Sutra  seems  to  be,
that  subsidiary  sons  of  equal  caste  obtain  a  third  of  the  estate
when  a  legitimate  son  of  the  body  is  born  to  their  father ;  see  also
Katyayana  V,  Dig.  CCXVIIL  Govinda  gives  the  following  expla-
nation :  aurasa^  savamaputra^  ka,  vakshyante  1  aurasa^  savar/zayazzz
sazzzskrztayazzz  svayam  utpMta^  [Sutra  14]  I  tasminnutpanne  savar-
Tzas  tmiyaz/zjahara  bhaveyu-^  I  sarva/?z  dhana^ataz/z  tredha  vibha^ya
tesham  ekaw  shodasa,  sazzzpadya  trin  dvavekam  iti  kalpayet  11  '  The
legitimate  son  and  the  sons  of  equal  caste  will  be  described  (below).
He  is  called  a  legitimate  son  who  is  begotten  by  the  husband  him-
self on  a  wedded  wife  of  equal  caste.  When  such  a  one  is  born,
the  (other)  sons  of  equal  caste  shall  obtain  one  third  share.  Divid-
ing the  whole  property  into  three  parts,  and  making  one  of  them
sixteen  (?),  he  shall  give  three,  two,  one.' — Govinda.

12.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig,  CLVII;  Dayabhaga  IX,  15.

[m]  Q


226  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  2,  3.

a  wife  of  the  next  lower  caste,  the  son  born  of  the
wife  of  the  next  lower  caste  may  take  the  share
of  the  eldest,  provided  he  be  endowed  with  good
qualities.

13.  (A  son)  who  possesses  good  qualities  becomes
the  protector  of  the  rest.

14.  One  must  know  a  son  begotten  by  (the  hus-
band) himself  on  a  wedded  wife  of  equal  caste  (to  be)
a  legitimate  son  of  the  body  (aurasa).

Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :  '  From
the  several  limbs  (of  my  body)  art  thou  pro-
duced, from  my  heart  art  thou  born;  thou  art
"self"  called  a  son;  mayest  thou  live  a  hundred
autumns.'

15.  The  (male  child)  born  of  a  daughter,  after  an
agreement  has  been  made,  (one  must  know  to  be)
the  son  of  an  appointed  daughter  (putrikaputra) ;
any  other  (male  offspring  of  a  daughter  they  call)
a  daughters  son  (dauhitra).

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  The  son  of  an  appointed  daughter  should  offer  the
first  funeral  cake  to  his  mother,  the  second  to  her
father,  and  the  third  to  his  fathers  father.'

17.  He  who  is  begotten,  by  another  man,  on  the
wife  of  a  deceased  man,  of  a  eunuch,  or  of  one
(incurably)  diseased,  after  permission  (has  been
given),  is  called  the  son  begotten  on  a  wife
(kshetra^a).

13.  Colebrooke,  loc.  cit.

14.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CXCVI;    Vasish/^a  XVII,  13.     The
verse  is  found  in  the  Mahabharata  and  elsewhere.

15.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCXIII ;  Vasish/^a  XVII,  15-17.

17.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCXXXVII;  Dayabhaga  II,  60;  Va-
sish/^aXVII,  14.


11,2,3-  INHERITANCE.  227

18.  Such  a  (son  begotten  on  a  wife)  has  two
fathers  and  belongs  to  two  families ;  he  has  a  right
to  perform  the  funeral  oblations,  and  to  inherit  the
property  of  (his)  two  (fathers).

19.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  The  son  of  two  fathers  shall  give  the  funeral  cakes
(to  his  two  fathers,  and  pronounce)  two  names  with
each  oblation,  and  three  cakes  shall  serve  for  six
persons ;  he  who  acts  thus  will  not  err.'

20.  He  (is  called)  an  adopted  son  (datta)  who,
being  given  by  his  father  and  his  mother,  or  by
either  of  the  two,  is  received  in  the  place  of  a
child.

21.  He  (is  called)  a  son  made  (krztrima)  whom
(a  man)  himself  makes  (his  son),  with  the  (adoptee's)
consent  (only),  and  who  belongs  to  the  same  caste
(as  the  adopter).

22.  He  is  called  a  son  born  secretly  (gtWAa^a)
who  is  secretly  born  in  the  house  and  whose  (origin
is)  afterwards  (only)  recognised.

23.  He  is  called  a  son  cast  off  (apaviddha)  who,
being  cast  off  by  his  father  and  his  mother,  or
by  either  (of  them),  is  received  in  the  place  of
a  child.

24.  If  anybody  approaches  an  unmarried  girl
without  the  permission  (of  her  father  or  guardian),
the  son  born  by  such  (a  woman  is  called)  the  son  of
an  unmarried  damsel  (kanina).

18.  Colebrooke  Dig.,  loc.  cit.  20.  VasishMa  XVII,  28.

21.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCLXXXIV;  Gautama  XXVIII,  32.

22.  VasishMa  XVII,  24.  23.  Vishmi  XV,  24-25.
24.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCLXI;  VasishMa  XVII,  21-23.     It

must  be  understood  that  the  father  must  belong  to  the  same  caste
as  the  girl.

Q  2


228  baudhayana.  11,2,3.

25.  If  one  marries  either  knowingly  or  unknow-
ingly a  pregnant  bride,  the  child  which  is  born  of
her  is  called  (a  son)  taken  with  the  bride  (saho<2%a).

26.  He  (is  called  a  son)  bought  (krtta)  who,  being
purchased  from  his  father  and  his  mother,  or  from
either  of  them,  is  received  in  the  place  of  a  child.

27.  He  (is  called  the  son)  of  a  twice-married
woman  (paunarbhava)  who  is  born  of  a  re-married
female,  (i.  e.)  of  one  who,  having  left  an  impotent
man,  has  taken  a  second  husband.

28.  He  (is  called)  a  self- given  (son,  svaya^-
datta)  who,  abandoned  by  his  father  and  his  mother,
gives  himself  (to  a  stranger).

29.  He  who  is  begotten  by  (a  man  of)  the  first
twice-born  (caste)  on  a  female  of  the  .Sudra  caste
(is  called)  a  Nishada.

30.  (He  who  was  begotten  by  the  same  parents)
through  lust  (is  called)  a  Parasava.  Thus  (the
various  kinds  of)  sons  (have  been  enumerated).

31.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
'  They  declare  the  legitimate  son,  the  son  of  an
appointed  daughter,  the  son  begotten  on  a  wife,  the
adopted  son  and  the  son  made,  the  son  born  secretly
and  the  son  cast  off,  (to  be  entitled)  to  share  the
inheritance/

32.  '  They  declare  the  son  of  an  unmarried  damsel
and  the  son  received  with  the  bride,  the  son  bought,

25.  VasishMa  XVII,  27.

26.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCLXXXI;  Vasish/^a  XVII,  30-32.

27.  Vasish/zfe  XVII,  18-20.  28.  VasishMa  XVII,  33-35.

30.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCXCIII.  Govinda  points  out  that  the
Pararava  is,  according  to  Baudhayana,  the  offspring  of  a  *Sudra
concubine,  not  of  a  -Sudra  wife.     But  see  also  above,  I,  9,  1 7,  4.

31.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CLXXX;  VasishMa  XVII,  25.

32.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CLXXIX;  Vasish/^a  XVII,  26.


IT,  2,  3.  INHERITANCE.  229

likewise  the  son  of  a  twice-married  female,  the  son
self-given  and  the  Nishada,  to  be  members  of  the
family.'

S3.  Aupa^andhani  (declares  that)  the  first  among
them  alone  (is  entitled  to  inherit,  and  a  member  of
his  father's  family).

34.  '  Now,  O  kanaka,  I  jealously  watch  my  wives,
(though  I  did)  not  (do  it)  formerly;  for  they  have
declared  in  Yama's  court  that  the  son  belongs  to
the  begetter.  The  giver  of  the  seed  carries  off  the
son,  after  death,  in  Yama's  hall.  Therefore  they
carefully  protect  their  wives,  fearing  the  seed  of
strangers.'

35.  '  Carefully  watch  (the  procreation  of  your)
offspring,  lest  strange  seed  fall  on  your  soil.  After
death  the  son  belongs  to  the  begetter ;  through
carelessness  a  husband  makes  (the  procreation  of)
a  son  useless.'

36.  Let   them   carefully   protect   the    shares   of

33-34.  Aupa^-andhani  is  one  of  the  ancient  teachers  of  the
White  Ya^ur-veda,  mentioned  in  the  lists  incorporated  in  the  Sata-
patha-brahmawa  XIV,  5,  5,  21;  7,  3,  26.  The  legends  of  the  White
Ya^nr-veda  frequently  mention  king  kanaka  of  Videha,  and  assert
that  that  philosopher  king  had  frequent  and  intimate  intercourse
with  Ya§™avalkya  and  other  teachers  of  the  Veda  which  Aditya
revealed.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  highly  probable  that  Govinda
is  right  in  taking  the  vocative  ^anaka  in  Sutra  34  as  a  proper
name,  and  in  asserting  that  the  verse  belongs  to  a  conversation
between  Aupa^-andhani  and  Ganaka.  This  explanation,  which  pos-
sibly may  be  based  on  an  ancient  tradition  of  Baudhayana's  school,
is  certainly  preferable  to  Haradatta's  statement  on  Apastamba  II,
6,  13,  7,  that  these  verses  express  the  sentiments  of  a  husband  who
had  neglected  to  watch  his  wives,  and  later  learned  that  he  would
not  derive  any  spiritual  benefit  from  their  offspring.  In  the  text  of
Sutra  34  I  read  with  the  Dekhan  MSS.  and  Apastamba,  loc.  cit.,
irshyami,  instead  of  ishyami,  which  M.  and  the  commentary  give.

36.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCCCLII ;  Vasish/fta  XVI,  8,  9.    '  The


2$Q  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  2,  3.

those  who  are  minors,  as  well  as   the   increments
(thereon).

3  j.  Granting  food,  clothes,  (and  shelter),  they
shall  support  those  who  are  incapable  of  transacting
legal  business,

38.  (Viz.)  the  blind,  idiots,  those  immersed  in  vice,
the  incurably  diseased,  and  so  forth,

39.  Those  who  neglect  their  duties  and  occu-
pations ;

40.  But  not  the  outcast  nor  his  offspring.

41.  Intercourse  with  outcasts  shall  not  take
place.

42.  But  he  shall  support  an  outcast  mother,  with-
out speaking  to  her.

43.  The  daughters  shall  obtain  the  ornaments
of  their  mother,  (as  many  as  are)  presented  accord-
ing to  the  custom  (of  the  caste),  or  anything  else
(that  may  be  given  according  to  custom).

increments,  i.  e.  the  proper  interest.     Thus  the  money  of  minors
shall  bear  interest.' — Govinda.

37.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CCCXXVIII;  Dayabhaga  V,  12  ;  Vya-
vah&ramayukha  IV,  11,  10  ;  Vasish/^a  XVII,  52-54.

38.  Colebrooke  and  Mayukha,  loc.  cit.  '  The  expression  "  and
so  forth  "  includes  hunchbacks  and  other  (disabled)  persons.' — Go-
vinda. Vyasanin,  '  immersed  in  vice,'  may  also  mean  '  afflicted  by
calamities,'  and  is  perhaps  intended  to  be  taken  both  ways.

39.  Colebrooke  and  Mayukha,  loc.  cit.  Akarmiwas, '  those  who
neglect  their  duties  and  occupations/  i.  e.  those  who  though  able
(to  fulfil  their  duties  are)  indolent. — Govinda.

40.  Colebrooke  and  Mayukha,  loc.  cit. ;  Burnell,  Dayabhaga  49.

42.  Gautama  XXI,  15,  and  note.

43.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CXXX;  Vasish/Aa  XVII,  46.  '  Sam-
pradayikam (literally  "  customary")  qualifies  (the  word)  ornaments ;
sampradayikam  (means)  what  is  obtained  according  to  custom;
what  is  given  to  their  mother  by  the  maternal  grandfather  and
grandmother,  that  (is  called)  sampradayikam.  "  Or  anything  else/'
(viz.)  presented  according  to  custom,  (e.g.)  a  bedstead  and  the


II,  2,  q.  INHERITANCE.


44.  Women  do  not  possess  independence.

45.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  Their  father  protects  (them)  in  childhood,  their
husband  protects  (them)  in  youth,  and  their  sons
protect  (them)  in  old  age ;  a  woman  is  never  fit
for  independence.'

46.  The  Veda  declares,  '  Therefore  women  are
considered  to  be  destitute  of  strength  and  of  a
portion.'

like,  a  couch,  and  an  outer  garment,  and  the  like.     So  much  and
nothing  else  shall  the  daughters  receive/ — Govinda.

44.  Vasish/z&aV,  1.  All  the  MSS.  of  the  text  read  na  strisvi-
tantryawz  vidyate,  while  the  text  given  by  the  two  copies  of  the
commentary  has  na  stri  svatantrya#z  vindate.  Govinda  asserts  that
the  Sutra  is  intended  to  forbid  the  independent  action  of  women
with  respect  to  things  inherited.  The  correct  view  probably  is
that  with  this  Sutra  the  topic  of  the  duties  and  rights  of  women
begins,  and  that  the  rule  contains  a  general  maxim.

45.  Vasish//$aV,  2.

46.  Colebrooke  V,  Dig.  CXXXI.  The  text  is  in  great  confusion.
The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.,  except  K.,  read,  na  dayaw  ni-
rindriya  hyadayay  kz.  striyo  mata  iti  sruti^;  K.  has,  tasmat[n]-
nirindriya  hy.  st.  m.  i.  sxm.  II  tasmat  striyo  nirindriya  adayadir  api
papat ;  while  M.  and  the  I.  O.  copy  of  the  commentary  have,  tasman-
nirindriya  adayaj  £a  striyo  mata  iti  jruti^  [suti>£,  M.]  The  Telugu
copy  is  mutilated,  and  reads  nadayantiriti  jruti^.  Though  the
reading  of  the  Dekhan  MSS.  is  supported  by  MitramLsra  Virami-
trodaya,  fol.  209,  p.  1,  1.  3,  it  is  certainly  not  the  original  one,  for
there  is  no  verb  by  which  the  accusative  'dayam'is  governed.
Mitramura's  attempt  to  make  it  depend  on  'arhati'  in  the  verse
quoted  in  Sutra  45  is  futile,  because,  according  to  the  usage  of
the  Sutrakaras,  a  Sutra  may  be  completed  by  a  verb  taken  from
another  original  aphorism  of  the  author,  but  cannot  be  connected
with  a  portion  of  a  quotation  taken  from  some  other  work.  This
same  principle,  of  course,  applies  not  only  to  Sutras,  but  to  the
writings  of  all  other  authors,  whether  Indian  or  European.  The
reading  of  K.,  M.,  and  of  the  I.  O.  copy  of  the  commentary  is
not  open  to  the  objection  just  mentioned,  and  therefore  preferable.
But  it  seems  to  me  highly  probable  that,  nevertheless,  it  is  not


2  32  BAUDHAYANA.  ■      II,  2,  3-

47.  Those  (women)  who  strive  (to  do  what  is)
agreeable  to  their  husbands  will  gain  heaven.

48.  But  for  a  violation  (of  their  duty  towards  the
husband)  a  Krikkhra,  penance  (must  be  performed).

49.  (For  violating  it)  with  a  .Sudra  (a  woman)
shall  perform  a  lunar  penance  (Mndraya/za)  ;

50.  (For  violating  it)  against  the  order  of  the
castes  with  a  VaLsya  and  so  forth,  she  shall  per-
form a  Krikkhrz  or  an  (AtikrzM^ra)  penance.

51.  For  male  (offenders,  i.e.)  Brahma/zas  and  so
forth,  a  years  chastity  (is  prescribed).


quite  genuine  ;  for  the  word  '  tasmat,'  with  which  it  begins,  is  not
required,  because  its  sense  is  already  expressed  by  the  following
1  hi/  and  because  the  Sutra  apparently  contains  half  an  Anush/ubh
Sloka,  which  the  insertion  of  tasmat  destroys.  It  is  also  easy  to
see  how  it  came  to  be  inserted.  Every  Ya^urvedf  who  read  the
passage  would  be  reminded  of  the  analogous  passage  of  the  Taitti-
riya  SawhitaVI,  5,  8,  9,  *  tasmat  striyo  nirindriya  adayadir  api  papat
ipumsa/i  upastitaram,'  which  in  K.  has  actually  been  inserted  after
our  Sutra.  In  the  Vedic  Mantra  '  tasmat '  is  required,  and  is  cer-
tainly the  genuine  reading.  Hence  it  seems  to  have  been  trans-
ferred into  Baudhayana's  text,  possibly  by  the  mistake  of  some
scribe  who,  according  to  the  habit  of  his  kind,  took  a  marginal
reference  to  the  beginning  of  the  Vedic  passage  for  a  correction  of
the  text.  In  my  opinion  it  must  be  thrown  out.  The  sense  of
the  half  verse  remains  exactly  the  same.  It  corresponds  to  Manu
IX,  18.  According  to  Govindasvamin  and  others  its  object  is  to
show  that  women  are  incapable  of  inheriting,  and  the  word  daya,
'  portion,'  must  be  taken  in  the  sense  of '  a  share  of  the  inheritance.'
For  a  full  discussion  of  this  point,  I  refer  to  the  Introductory  Note
on  Book  I,  Chapter  II,  Sect.  14  of  West  and  Biihler's  Digest  of
H.  L.  C,  third  edition.

47.  Vishmi  XXV,  15, 17;  Vasish/^a  XXI,  14.

48-50.  VasishMa  XXI,  6-13.

51.  Govinda  points  out  that  this  rule  refers  to  adultery  with
women  of  equal  caste,  and  thinks  that  the  word  '  chastity'  indi-
cates that  KriMkra.  penances  are  to  be  performed ;  Vasish/^a  XXI,
16,  17  ;  Vishmi  LIII,  2.     But  see  Gautama  XXII,  29.


11,2,4-  WOMEN.  233

52.  Let  him  burn  a  6ildra  (who  commits  adultery
with  an  Aryan)  in  a  straw-fire.

53.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  2,  Ka^dika  4.

1.  '  Anybody  but  a  Brahma^a  shall  suffer  corporal
punishment  for  adultery/

2.  '  The  wives  (of  men)  of  all  castes  must  be
guarded  more  carefully  than  wealth/

3.  '  But  corporal  punishment  (shall)  not  (be  in-
flicted) for  (adultery  with)  the  wives  of  minstrels
and  with  those  who  appear  on  the  stage.  For  (the
husbands)  carry  them  (to  other  men),  or,  lying
concealed  (at  home),  permit  them  to  hold  culpable
intercourse/

4.  '  Women  (possess)  an  unrivalled  means  of
purification  ;  they  never  become  (entirely)  foul.  For
month  by  month  their  temporary  uncleanness  re-
moves their  sins/

5.  'Soma  gave  them  cleanliness,  the  Gandharva
their  melodious  voice,  and  Fire  purity  of  all  (limbs)  ;
therefore  women  are  free  frpm  stains/

52.  VasishMa  XXI,  1,  5.

4.  1.  Apastamba  II,  10,  26,  20;  10,  27,  11.  Govinda  thinks  that
non-Brahmanical  offenders  should  be  burned,  in  accordance  with
Vasish//fo  XXI,  2-3.  But  mutilation  may  also  be  intended.  Saw-
grahawa,  'adultery,'  probably  includes  all  those  acts  mentioned
Manu  VIII,  354-358.
'  2.  Manu  VIII,  359.

3.  Manu  VIII,  362.  I  read  conjecturally, '  sazrcsarg-ayanti  te  hyeta
niguptl?  ^alayantyapi/  basing  my  emendations  on  Manu's  text.
The  MSS.  and  Govinda  have,  sa^sar^ayanti  ta  hyetan  niguptaw.f
Mlayanty  api,  which  gives  no  good  sense.  Govinda  explains  £ara«a-
dara^, '  the  wives  of  minstrels/  by  devadasya^, '  temple-slaves.'

4.  VasishMa  XXVIII,  4.  5-  VasishMa  XXVIII,  6.


234  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  2,  4.

6.  '  Let  him  abandon  a  barren  (wife)  in  the  tenth
year,  one  who  bears  daughters  (only)  in  the  twelfth,
one  whose  children  (all)  die  in  the  fifteenth,  but  her
who  is  quarrelsome  without  delay.'

7.  A  widow  shall  avoid  during  a  year  (the  use  of)
honey,  meat,  spirituous  liquor,  and  salt,  and  sleep  on
the  ground.

8.  Maudgalya  (declares  that  she  shall  do  so)
during  six  months.

9.  After  (the  expiration  of)  that  (time)  she  may,
with  the  permission  of  her  Gurus,  bear  a  son  to  her
brother-in-law,  in  case  she  has  no  son.

10.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
*  One  whose  appointment  can  have  no  result,  (viz.)
a  barren  woman,  one  who  has  borne  sons,  one  who
is  past  child-bearing,  one  whose  children  are  (all)
dead,  and  one  who  is  unwilling  must  not  be
appointed.'

11.  The  sister  of  a  maternal  uncle  and  of  the
father,  a  sister,  a  sister's  daughter,  a  daughter-in-
law,   a   maternal    uncle's   wife,  and   the   wife    of  a

6.  Manu  IX,  8r.

7-8.  Vasish/#a  XVII,  55.  The  word  madya, '  spirituous  liquor,'
occurs  in  M.  and  the  I.  O.  copy  of  the  commentary.  The  MSS.
from  the  Dekhan  and  Gujarat,  including  K.,  read  ma^ana  or
ma^ana,  the  compound  letter  being  very  indistinct.

9.  VasishMa  XVII,  56,  where  the  term  '  Gurus '  is  fully  ex-
plained.

10.  Vasish/^a  XVII,  57-59.  M.  and  the  two  copies  of  the
commentary  read  pLra/£otpannaputra  ka.  instead  of  vasa  ^otpanna-
putra  ka, '  a  barren  woman  and  one  who  has  borne  sons.'  I  follow
the  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.,  which  undoubtedly  give  the  genuine
reading.  Perhaps  the  term  ava^am,  Vasish/^a  XVII,  57,  should  be
corrected  to  va^am.

11-12.  These  two  Sutras  are  additions  to  II,  1,  2,  13.  See  also
Narada  XII,  73-74  ;  Vasish/^a  XXI,  16.


11,2,4-  WOMEN.  235

friend  are  females  who  must  never  be  approached
(agamya).

12.  For  intercourse  with  females  who  must  not
be  approached  (agamya),  a  Y^rikkhx*  and  an  Ati-
Vrikkhr-dL  (and)  a  A'andraya/za  are  the  penances
prescribed  for  all.

13.  Thereby  (the  rule  regarding)  intercourse  with
a  female  of  the  Kandala,  caste  has  been  declared.

14.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
'A  Brahma^a  who  unintentionally  approaches  a
female  of  the  Kandala.  caste,  eats  (food  given  by
a  Kanddila)  or  receives  (presents  from  him),  becomes
an  outcast;  but  (if  he  does  it)  intentionally,  he
becomes  equal  (to  a  Jfandala).

15.  ■  He  who  approaches  his  father's,  his  teachers,
or  a  king's  wife,  is  guilty  of  the  crime  of  violating  a
Guru's  bed ;  the  penance  ordained  for  him  has  been
declared  above/

16.  (A  Brahma^a)  who  is  unable  (to  subsist)  by
teaching,  sacrificing  for  others,  or  the  acceptance  of
gifts,  shall  maintain  himself  by  following  the  duties
of  Kshatriyas,  because  that  is  the  next  following
(caste).

13.  VasishMa  XXIII,  41 ;  Vishnu  LIII,  5-6.

14.  Manu  XI,  176.

15.  Govinda  thinks  that  the  penance  intended  is  that  mentioned
in  Sutra  12.  Probably  a  severer  one  is  meant.  The  verse  is  inter-
esting, as  it  clearly  is  a  quotation  from  some  metrical  work  on  law,
not  merely  of  traditional  detached  jlokas.

16.  VasishMa  II,  22.  The  Sutra  '  adhyapanaya^anapratigra-
hair  a^akta^  kshatradharme/za  givet  pratyanantaratvat '  occurs  in  the
two  copies  of  the  commentary  only.  The  I.  O.  copy  of  the  commen-
tary has,  however,  before  it  the  following  words :  [dharmya]  svadhya-
yaprava^ane  evety  adhikanaw  [karaw]  danrayati  pratigrz'hita  tadrz'k
pratigrahitaraw  gn'dhnuvanti  [tara  rz'dhnu0]  ntvigya^amana  y%inau


236  BAUDHAYANA.  11,2,4-

17.  Gautama  (declares  that  one  shall)  not  (act
thus).  For  the  duties  of  Kshatriyas  are  too  cruel
for  a  Brahma^a.

18.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  Out  of  regard  for  the  sacred  law  a  Brahma^a  and
a  Vai^ya  may  take  up  arms  for  (the  protection  of)
cows  or  Brahma^as,  or  when  a  confusion  of  the
castes  (threatens  to  take  place).

19.  (Or)  the  livelihood  of  a  Vaiiya  should  be
adopted,  because  that  is  the  one  following  (next).

20.  (If  he  lives  by  agriculture)  he  shall  plough
before  breakfast,

21.  With  two  bulls  whose  noses  have  not  been
pierced,  not  striking  them  with  the  goad,  (but)
frequently  coaxing  them.

22.  The  (sacred  domestic)  fire  (shall  be  kindled)
at  the  wedding ;  the  religious  ceremonies  up  to  the
Agnyadheya  (shall  be)  performed  in  that.


[°£-ane]  tada^aktau  kshatradharmau.  M.  reads,  dharmanasvadhya-
yaprava&ina  [ne]  ityadhikaraw  dawayati  pratigrahMdrz'k  pratigra-
hitara  r/dhnuvanti  ntvigya^amana  ya^anau  tada^aktau  svadhya-
yadhyd  [°yadhya]  panaya^aya^anapratigrahair  ajaktama  [ta^]
kshatradharmmewa  ^ivet.  The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.  read,
dharmye  svadhyayaprava^ane  ityadhikaraw  darrayati  I  pratigrahe
data  pratigrahita[ra]  rz'dhnuvanti  1  rz'tvigya^-amana  ya^ane  1  tada^ak-
tau  kshatradharmewa  givayet,  or  have  corruptions  of  this  passage.
I  cannot  come  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  the  passage
which  precedes  the  words  translated  by  me  are  a  very  ancient
interpolation,  caused  by  the  embodiment  of  a  portion  of  an  old
Bhashya  with  the  text,  and  that  all  our  MSS.,  however  much  they
may  differ,  go  back  to  one  codex  archetypus.

17.  Gautama  Introduction,  p.  Hi.

18.  Gautama  VII,  25.  19.  Vasish/^a  II,  24.
20-21.  Vasish/^a  II,  32.

22.  Vasish//$a  VIII,  3.   The  religious  ceremonies  to  be  performed
with  the  sacred  domestic  fire,  which,  according  to  Baudhayana,


11,2,4-  HOUSEHOLDER.  237

23.  Now,  beginning  with  the  Agnyadheya,  follow
these  (rites  in  an)  uninterrupted  (series),  as,  for
instance,  the  Agnyadheya,  the  Agnihotra,  the  new
and  full  moon  sacrifices,  the  Agraya^a  at  the  winter
and  summer  solstices,  the  animal  sacrifice,  the"
A^aturmasyas  at  the  beginning  of  each  season,  the
ShadMotri  in  spring,  the  Agnish/oma.  Thus  the
attainment  of  bliss  (is  secured).

24.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  Neither  he  who  is  accustomed  to  sleep  in  the  day-
time, nor  he  who  eats  the  food  of  anybody,  nor
he  who  falls  from  a  height  to  which  he  has  climbed,
can  reach  heaven  as  he  desires.'

25.  Let  him  avoid  meanness,  hard-heartedness,
and  crookedness.

26.  Now  they  quote  also  with  reference  to  this
(subject  the  following)  verse  in  the  dialogue  between
the  daughters  of  U^anas  and  Wzshaparvan  :  'Thou,
forsooth,  art  the  daughter  of  one  who  praises
(others),  who  begs  and  accepts  (gifts);  but  I  am
the  child  of  one  who  is  praised,  who  gives  gifts  and
does  not  accept  them/

should  be  kindled  at  the  wedding,  not  on  the  division  of  the  paternal
estate  (Gautama  V,  7),  are  the  so-called  Gnhya  ceremonies  (Gau-
tama V,  8-9).

23.  Vasish/^a  XI,  46.  The  sacrifices  enumerated  in  this  Sutra
require  three  fires,  and  belong  to  the  jrauta  or  vaitanika  ya^was.
The  ShaddAotri  mentioned  here  seems  to  be  the  animal  sacrifice
mentioned  in  the  commentary  on  Katyayana  *Srauta-sutra  VI,  1,  36.

24.  An  arik%apatita,  '  he  who  falls  from  a  height  to  which  he
has  climbed/  is,  according  to  Govinda,  an  ascetic  who  slides  back
into  civil  life.

25.  Vasish/^a  VI,  40;  X,  30.  Govinda  explains  ja//^yam, '  hard-
heartedness/  by  jaktau  satyam  api  paropakarakarawam, '  not  doing
a  kindness  to  others  though  one  is  able  to  do  so.'

26.  The  dialogue  mentioned  is  that  between  *Sarmish//$a  and


238  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  3,  5.


Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  3,  Ka^vdika  5.
i.  Bathing  is  suitable  for  (the    practice  of)   au-
sterity.

2.  The  libation  to  the  manes  (is  offered)  after  the
gods  have  been  satisfied  (with  water).

3.  They  pour  out  water  which  gives  strength,
from  one  Tirtha  after  the  other.

4.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
*  With  flowing,  unconfined  water  twice-born  men  of
the  three  castes  shall  satisfy  the  gods,  i^shis,  and
manes,  when  they  have  risen  in  the  morning.'

5.  '  They  shall  not  offer  (libations  of  water)  con-
fined (in  tanks  and  wells).  (If  they  do  it),  he  who
made  the  embankment,  will  obtain  a  share  (of  the
merit  of  their  devotion).'

6.  '  Therefore  let  him  avoid  embankments  (around
tanks)  and  wells  made  by  others/

7.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'  Or,  in  times  of  distress — not  as  a  rule — he  may
bathe  in  (water)  confined  (in  tanks),  after  taking  out
three  lumps  (of  earth) ;  from  a  well  (let  him  take
three)  lumps  of  clay  and  three  jars  of  water/

Devayani,  which  occurs  Mahabharata  I,  78.  The  verse  quoted  is
the  tenth  of  that  Adhyaya,  and  agrees  with  ours,  except  that
sutaham  is  read  for  athaham  in  the  beginning  of  the  second  half
verse.

5.  3.  As  to  the  Tirthas,  see  above,  I,  5,  8,  15-16.

5.  Manu  IV,  201.  6.  Vishmi  LXIV,  1.

7.  Vishmi  LXIV,  2.  I  read  the  verse  as  follows:  uddhn'tya
vapi  trin  pi«<fan  kuryad  apatsu  no  sada  1  niruddhasu  ka.  nWtpiw^an
kupat  trin  abgha/awstatheti  II  The  Dekhan  MSS.  read  at  the  end
of  the  second  half  verse,  kupawstrinava/awzstatha ;  M.  has  kupa-
trinabapa/anstatha ;  while  C.  I.  gives  kupat  trin  gha/awstatha.
Nandapa^ita  on  Vishmi,  loc.  cit.,  seems  to  have  had  the  latter


11,3,5-  DUTIES    OF    A    SNATAKA.  239


8.  If  he  has  accepted  presents  from  one  who  is
able  to  give  presents  to  many,  or  from  one  whose
presents  ought  not  to  be  accepted,  or  if  he  has
sacrificed  for  one  for  whom  he  ought  not  to  have
sacrificed,  or  if  he  has  eaten  food  (given  by  a  person)
whose  food  must  not  be  eaten,  he  shall  mutter  the
Taratsamandiya.

9.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  Those  who  improperly  associate  with  (an  outcast)
teacher,  those  who  improperly  associate  with  (out-
cast) pupils,  and  those  who  improperly  associate  (with
outcasts)  by  (accepting  their)  food  or  by  (reciting)
Mantras  (for  them),  enter  into  deep  darkness.'

10.  Now  (follow)  the  duties  of  a  Snataka.

11.  After  offering  at  the  morning  and  at  the
evening  (meals)  with  (a  portion  of)  the  food  which
he  may  have,  the  Vaisvadeva  and  the  Bali-offerings,
he  shall  honour,  according  to  his  ability,  Brahma^as,
Kshatriyas,  Vaisyas,  and  .5udras  (who  may  come  to
his  house  as)  guests.

12.  If  he  cannot  (afford  to  give  food)  to  many,  let
him  give  (something)  to  one  who  possesses  good
qualities,

1 3.  Or  to  him  who  has  come  first.

14.  If  a  6udra  (has  come  as)  a  guest,  he  shall
order  him  (to  do  some)  work,  (and  feed  him  after-
wards) ;

reading,  and  to  have  changed  it  to  '  kupat  tu  trin  gha/awstatha/  in
order  to  save  the  metre.     The  sense  remains  the  same.

8.  Manu  XI,  254.  The  text  is  found  Rig-veda  IX,  58.  Govinda
explains  bahupratigrahya,  '  one  who  is  able  to  give  presents  to
many,'  by  bahubhr/tyabhara«akshama, '  one  who  is  able  to  support
many  servants/

10.  Vasish/fta  XII,  1.  n.  VasishMa  XI,  3-9.

14.  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  19.


24O  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  3,  5.

15.  Or  (if  he  cannot  spare  much),  he  may  give  a
first  portion  (agrya)  to  a  .SVotriya.

16.  It  is  prescribed  that  the  division  (of  the  food)
shall  be  made  without  detriment  to  (the  interests
of)  those  who  daily  receive  a  portion.

17.  But  he  shall  never  eat  without  having  given
away  (some  small  portion  of  the  food).

18.  Now  they  quote  also  two  verses  which  have
been  proclaimed  by  (the  goddess  of)  food :  '  Him
who,  without  giving  me  to  the  gods,  the  manes,  his
servants,  his  guests  and  friends,  consumes  what  has
been  prepared  and  (thus),  in  his  exceeding  folly,
swallows  poison,  I  consume,  and  I  am  his  death.
But  for  him  who,  offering  the  Agnihotra,  performing
the  Vaiwadeva,  and  honouring  guests,  eats,  full  of
contentment,  purity,  and  faith,  what  remains  after
feeding  those  whom  he  must  support,  I  become
ambrosia,  and  he  (really)  enjoys  me.'

19.  Presents  of  money  must  be  given,  according
to  one's  ability,  to  good  Brahma/zas,  .Srotriyas,  and
Vedaparagas,  when  they  beg  outside  the  Vedi,  for  the
sake  of  Gurus,  in  order  to  defray  (the  expenses  of)
their  marriages,  or  of  medicine,  or  when  they  are
distressed  for  a  livelihood,  or  desirous  to  offer  a
sacrifice,  or  engaged  in  studying,  or  on  a  journey,
or  have  performed  a  Viiva^it  sacrifice.


15.  Vasish/^a  XI,  5.  Govinda  quotes  a  verse,  according  to
which  an  agrya, '  first  portion,'  is  equal  to  sixteen  mouthfuls,  each
of  the  size  of  a  peahen's  egg.

16.  Apastamba  II,  4,  9,10-11.  'Those  who  daily  receive  a
portion'  (nityabhaktika),  i.  e.  sons,  wives,  and  so  forth. — Govinda.
But  see  also  Apastamba,  loc.  cit.

19.  Gautama  V,  20-2 1,  and  notes.  '  A  good  Brahmawa,  i.  e.  one
who  follows  the  rule  of  conduct/ — Govinda.


11,3,6.  DUTIES    OF    A    SNATAKA.  241


20.  Cooked  food  (must  be  given)  to  other
(beggars).

21.  Let  him  eat  (seated)  in  a  pure,  enclosed  place,
after  having  well  washed  his  hands  and  feet  and
after  having  sipped  water,  respectfully  receiving  the
food  which  is  brought  to  him,  keeping  himself  free
from  lust,  anger,  hatred,  greed,  and  perplexity,  (con-
veying the  food  into  his  mouth)  with  all  his  fingers
and  making  no  noise  (during  mastication).

Prasna  II,   Adhyaya  3,  Kaathka  6.

i.  Let  him  not  put  back  into  the  dish  a  remnant
of  food.

2.  If  he  eats  (food),  containing  meat,  fish,  or  sesa-
mum,  he  shall  (afterwards)  wash  and  touch  fire,

3.  And  bathe  after  sunset.

4.  Let  him  avoid  a  seat,  clogs,  sticks  for  cleaning
the  teeth,  and  other  (implements)  made  of  Pala^a
wood.

20.  Gautama  V,  22.

21.  Vasish/#a  XII,  19-20;  Vishmi  LXVIII,  46.  'This  is  the
rule  for  him  who  makes  an  offering  to  Atman  (i.  e.  performs  the
Prawagnihotra  at  his  meal).' — Govinda.     See  also  below,  II,  7,  12.

6.  1.  'I.e.  he  shall  take  up  as  much  food  only  as  he  can
swallow  at  one  mouthful.' — Govinda.

2.  The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.,  including  K.,  add  madhu,
'honey,'  after  sesamum.

3.  This  and  the  following  six  Sutras  are  left  out  in  M.  and  the
two  copies  of  the  commentary.  If  they  have,  nevertheless,  been
received  into  the  text,  the  reason  is  that  similar  rules  occur  in  all
Dharmasutras,  and  that  Sutra  3  begins  with  astamite,  while  asta-
maye  occurs  in  Sutra  10.  It  seems  therefore  probable  that  the
writer  of  the  MS.  from  which  M.  and  Govinda's  copies  are  derived,
skipped  over  a  line  by  mistake.

4-7.  Vasish//fo  XII,  34-38.

[14]  R


242  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  3, 6.

5.  Let  him  not  eat  (food  placed)  in  his  lap,

6.  Nor  on  a  chair.

7.  He  shall  carry  a  staff,  made  of  bamboo,  and
golden  earrings.

8.  Let  him  not  rub  one  foot  with  the  other  while
bathing,  nor  place  the  one  on  the  other  while
standing,

9.  Let  him  not  wear  a  visible  garland.

10.  Let  him  not  look  at  the  sun  when  he  rises  or
sets.

11.  Let  him  not  announce  (the  appearance  of  a
rainbow)  to  another  (man,  saying),  'There  is  Indra's
bow.'

1 2.  If  he  points  it  out,  he  shall  call  it  'the  jewelled
bow.'

13.  Let  him  not  pass  between  the  prakilaka  and
the  beam  at  the  town  gate,

14.  Nor  let  him  pass  between  the  two  posts  of  a
swing.

15.  Let  him  not  step  over  a  rope  to  which  a  calf
is  tied.

16.  Let  him  not  step  on  ashes,  bones,  hair,  chaff,
potsherds,  nor  on  a  bathing-place  (moist  with)
water.

8.  Vishmi  LXXI,  40.  9.  Vasish/^a  XII,  39.

10.  Vasish//$a  XII,  10.
11-12.  Vasish/^a  XII,  32-33.

13.  Govinda  explains  prakilaka  by  *a  piece  of  wood  fastened  at
the  town  gate.'  Etymologically  it  would  mean  'a  strong  bolt.'
Possibly  the  rule  may  be  equivalent  to  Apastamba  I,  n,  31,  23,  and
mean  that  a  Snataka  is  not  to  creep  through  the  small  door
which  is  found  in  all  Indian  town  gates,  and  left  open  after  the
gates  have  been  shut.

14.  Apastamba  1, 11,  31, 16.  15.  Vasish/^a  XII,  9.
16.  Gautama  IX,  15;  Manu  IV,  132.


II,  3>  6.  DUTIES    OF   A   SNATAKA.  243

1 7.  Let  him  not  announce  it  to  another  (man  if)  a
cow  suckles  (her  calf).

18.  Let  him  not  say  of  (a  cow  which  is)  not  a
milch-cow,  '  She  is  not  a  milch-cow/

19.  If  he  speaks  (of  such  a  one),  let  him  say, '  It  is
one  which  will  become  a  milch-cow.'

20.  Let  him  not  make  empty,  ill-sounding,  or
harsh  speeches.

21.  Let  him  not  go  alone  on  a  journey,

22.  Nor  with  outcasts,  nor  with  a  woman,  nor
with  a  ^udra.

23.  Let  him  not  set  out  (on  a  journey)  towards
evening.

24.  Let  him  not  bathe  (entirely)  naked.

25.  Let  him  not  bathe  at  night.

26.  Let  him  not  cross  a  river  swimming.
2j.  Let  him  not  look  down  into  a  well.

28.  Let  him  not  look  down  into  a  pit

29.  Let  him  not  sit  down  there,  where  another
person  may  order  him  to  rise.

30.  Way  must  be  made  for  a  Brahma^a,  a  cow,  a
king,  a  blind  man,  an  aged  man,  one  who  is  suffering
under  a  burden,  a  pregnant  woman,  and  a  weak
man.

31.  A  righteous  man  shall  seek  to  dwell  in  a
village  where  fuel,  water,  fodder,  sacred  fuel,  Kiua
grass,  and  garlands  are  plentiful,  access  to  which  is


17.  Vishmi  LXXI,  62.  18-19.  Gautama  IX,  19.

20.  Manu  IV,  177  j  Vishmi  LXXI,  57,  72,  74.
21-23.  Manu  IV,  140.  24.  Gautama  IX,  61.

26.  Vasish/y^a  XII,  45.

29.  E.g.  in  the  palace  of  a  king,  whence  the  attendants  may
drive  him.

30.  VasishMa  XIII,  58.  31.  Gautama  IX,  65.

R    2


244  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  3,  6.

easy,  where  many  rich  people  dwell,  which  abounds  in
industrious  people,  where  Aryans  form  the  majority,
and  which  is  not  easily  entered  by  robbers.

32.  'A  Brahma/za  who,  having  wedded  a  wife  of
the  6*udra  caste  and  dwells  during  twelve  years  in  a
village  where  water  (is  obtainable)  from  wells  only,
becomes  equal  to  a  •Sudra/

33.  (If  you  say  that)  he  who  lives  in  a  town  and
whose  body  is  covered  with  the  dust,  (raised)  by
others,  and  whose  eyes  and  mouth  are  filled  with  it,
will  obtain  salvation,  if  he  restrains  himself,  (I  de-
clare that)  that  is  impossible.

34.  '  The  dust  raised  by  carriages,  horses,  "ele-
phants, and  cows,  and  (that  which  comes)  from  grain
is  pure,  blamed  is  (that  raised)  by  a  broom,  goats,
sheep,  donkeys,  and  garments.'

35.  Let  him  honour  those  who  are  worthy  of
honour.

36.  ■  A  Rish\,  a  learned  man,  a  king,  a  bride-
groom, a  maternal  uncle,  a  father-in-law,  and  an
officiating  priest  are  mentioned  in  the  Smrzti  as
worthy  of  the  honey-mixture  at  certain  times  and
occasions.'

3  j.  'A  JZishi,  a  learned  man,  and  a  king  must  be

33.  Apastamba  I,  n,  32,  21.

36.  Vasish/Aa  XI,  1-2.  A  JRishx  is,  according  to  Govinda,  a
man  who  knows  not  only  the  text  of  the  Mantras,  but  also  their
sense.  But  Baudhayana,  Grzrrya-sutra  I,  11,  4,  says  that  a  man
who  knows,  besides  the  -Sakha  and  its  Ahgas,  the  Kalpa  also,  is
called  ifoshikalpa,  i.  e.  one  almost  a  7?*shi.  See  also  Apastamba
I,  2,  5,  5.  A  learned  man  (vidvas)  is  probably  a  student  who  has
finished  not  only  his  vow,  but  learned  the  Veda,  a  so-called  vidya-
snataka,  Apastamba  I,  n,  30,  3.  Regarding  the  arghya  ormadhu-
parka,  the  honey-mixture,  see  Apastamba  II,  4,  8,  7-9.

37.  Gautama  V,  27-30.     I  read  kriyarambhe  varartvi^au.    The


11,4,7-  THE    TWILIGHT   DEVOTIONS.  245


honoured  whenever  they  come,  a  bridegroom  and
a  priest  at  the  beginning  of  the  religious  rites,  a
maternal  uncle  and  a  father-in-law  when  a  year  has
elapsed  since  their  last  visit.'

38.  '  Let  him  raise  his  right  arm  on  (entering)  the
place  where  the  sacred  fire  is  kept,  in  the  midst  of  a
herd  of  cows,  in  the  presence  of  Brahma^as,  at  the
daily  recitation  of  the  Veda,  and  at  dinner.'

39.  '  An  upper  garment  must  be  worn  on  the  fol-
lowing five  occasions :  during  the  daily  study,  during
the  evacuation  (of  excrements),  when  one  bestows
gifts,  at  dinner,  and  while  one  sips  water.'

40.  '  While  one  offers  oblations  in  the  fire,  while
one  dines,  bestows  gifts,  offers  (food  to  deities  or
Gurus),  and  accepts  presents,  (the  right  hand)  must
be  placed  between  the  knees.'

41.  'The  revealed  texts  declare,  that  the  creatures
depend  on  food,  food  is  life ;  therefore  gifts  of
food  must  be  made.  Food  is  the  most  excellent  of
sacrificial  viands.'

42.  '  Sin  is  removed  by  burnt  offerings,  burnt
oblations  are  surpassed  by  (gifts  of)  food,  and  gifts
of  food  by  kind  speeches.  That  (is  declared)  to  us
in  the  revealed  texts.'

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  4,  Ka2vdika  7.

1.  Now,  therefore,  we  will  declare  the  rule  for
(performing)  the  twilight  devotions.

meaning  is  that  a  bridegroom  is  to  receive  the  honey-mixture  when
he  comes  to  his  father-in-law's  house  for  his  wedding,  and  an  offi-
ciating priest  when  he  comes  to  perform  a  sacrifice.

38.  Vishmi  LXXI,  60.  Govinda  adds  that  the  act  is  performed
as  a  salutation.

41.  See  e.  g,  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  VIII,  2.


246  baudhAyana.  II,  4,  7.

2.  Going  to  a  (sacred)  bathing- place,  he  shall
bathe,  in  case  he  is  impure ;  in  case  he  is  pure,  he
may,  optionally,  omit  the  bath.  (But  in  either  case)
he  shall  wash  his  feet  and  hands.  Sipping  water
and  sprinkling  himself,  while  he  recites  the  [Rtk-
verses)  containing  the  word  Surabhi,  the  Ablirigas,
those  addressed  to  Varu^a,  the  Hira/zyavamas,  the
Pavamanis,  the  (sacred  syllables  called)  Vyahrztis,
and  other  purificatory  (texts),  he  becomes  pure  (and
fit  to  perform  the  twilight  devotions).

3.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'Submersion  in  water  (and)  bathing  are  prescribed  for
all  the  (four)  castes.  But  sprinkling  (water  over  the
body),  while  Mantras  (are  being  recited),  is  the  par-
ticular (duty)  of  the  twice-born.'

4.  He  who  sprinkles  himself  (with  water)  at  the
beginning  of  any  sacred  rite, — before  the  time  of
the  twilight  devotions, — while  reciting  that  same
collection  of  purificatory  (texts),  becomes  pure.

5.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  rules) :
Seated,  with  his  face  to  the  west,  on  Darbha  grass
and  holding  Darbha  blades  in  his  (right)  hand,  which


7.  2.  'A  sacred  bathing-place,  i.e.  a  river  or  pond  outside  the
village/ — Govinda.  The  same  author  adds  that  the  hands  must
be  washed  as  far  as  the  wrist,  that  while  sipping  water  the  wor-
shipper is  to  repeat  in  the  evening,  Taittiriya  Ara/zyaka  X,  31,  and
in  the  morning  X,  32,  and  that  if  he  bathes,  Taittiriya  Ara«yaka
X,  1,  12,  and  other  texts  must  be  recited.  The  Rib  containing
the  word  Surabhi  is  found  Taittiriya  Sa^hita  I,  5,  1 1,  4,  7  ;  the  three
Ablihgas,  Taittiriya  Ara/zyaka  X,  1,  n;  the  four  verses  addressed
to  Varuwa,  Taittiriya  Sawhita  III,  4,  11,  4,  and  Taittiriya  Arawyaka
II,  4,  4.  By  the  term  Pavamanis  the  Pavamananuvaka,  Taittiriya
Brahmawa  I,  4,  8,  is  meant.

5.  The  injunction  to  turn  the  face  to  the  west  refers  to  the
evening  prayer;  see  also  below,  Sutra  10.


11,4,7-  THE    TWILIGHT    DEVOTIONS.  247

is  filled  with  water,  he  shall  repeat  the  Savitri  one
thousand  times ;

6.  Or  (he  may  recite  the  verse)  one  hundred
times,  suppressing  his  breath ;

7.  Or  mentally  ten  times,  adding  the  syllable
Om  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  and  the  seven
Vyahmis.

8.  And  if  he  is  tired  by  three  suppressions  of
his  breath  (performed)  with  (the  recitation  of)  the
(Anuvaka  called)  Brahmahrzdaya  (the  heart  of
Brahman,  then  let  him  repeat  the  Savitri).

9.  In  the  evening  he  worships  (the  sun)  with  the
two  (verses)  addressed  to  Varu^a,  '  Hear  this  my
call,  O  Varima,'  and  '  Therefore  I  go  to  thee/

10.  The  same  (rules  apply  to  the  twilight  devo-
tion) in  the  morning,  (but  the  worshipper)  shall  face
the  east  and  stand  upright.

11.  In  the  day-time  he  worships  (the  sun)  with  the
two  (verses)  addressed  to  Mitra,  'The  glory  of  Mitra,
who  supports  men/  and  '  Mitra  causes  men  to  join/

12.  Let  him  begin  (the  twilight  devotion)  in  the

6.  Govinda  states  that  prawayamaja^,  '  suppressing  his  breath/
has  in  this  Sutra  no  technical  meaning.

7.  Govinda  says  that  the  order  to  be  observed  in  this  case  is  as
follows  :  First  the  syllable  Om  is  to  be  recited,  next  the  seven
Vyahrz'tis,  beginning  with  Bhu#  and  ending  with  Satyam,  then  the
Savitri,  and  finally  again  the  syllable  Om.

8.  The  Brahmahndaya  is  Taittiriya  Araayaka  X,  28.  This
Anuvaka  may  be  repeated  three  times  for  each  Prarcayama  (see
Va'sish//fo  XXV,  13),  or  altogether  nine  times,  and,  if  the  wor-
shipper is  then  tired,  he  may  go  on  repeating  the  Savitri  without
suppressing  his  breath.

9.  Taittiriya  Sawhita  II,  1,  11,  6.  10.  Gautama  II,  11.

11.  Taittiriya  Sawhita  III,  4,  11,  5.

12.  Very  early,  i.e.  when  the  stars  are  still  visible;  see  also
Gautama  II,  n,  and  note.


248  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  4,  7.

morning  very  early,  and  finish  it  when  the  sun  has
risen.

13.  Let  him  begin  (the  twilight  devotion)  in  the
evening,  when  (the  sun)  has  set,  (and  finish  it)  very
soon  after  (the  appearance  of  the  stars) ;

14.  And  the  complete  observance  of  the  twilight
devotions  (produces  as  its  reward)  an  uninterrupted
succession  of  days  and  nights.

15.  Now  they  quote  with  reference  to  this  (sub-
ject) also  the  following  two  verses,  which  have  been
proclaimed  by  the  Lord  of  created  beings  (Pra^a-
pati):  'How  can  those  twice-born  men  be  called
Brahma^as  who  do  not  perform  their  twilight  devo-
tions, in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  at  the
proper  time  ?  At  his  pleasure  a  righteous  king  may
appoint  those  Brahma^as  who  neglect  to  daily  per-
form the  twilight  devotions,  both  at  morn  and  at
eve,  to  do  the  work  of  ^udras/

16.  If  the  time  for  the  (twilight  devotion)  is
allowed  to  pass  in  the  evening,  (the  offender  shall)
fast  during  the  night ;  and  if  it  is  neglected  in  the
morning,  he  shall  fast  during  the  (next)  day.

17.  He  obtains  (thereby)  the  (same)  reward  as
if  he  had  remained  standing  and  sitting  (in  the
twilight).

18.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses):
1  Whatever  sin  (a  man)  may  have  committed  with
his  organ,  with  his  feet,  with  his  arms,  by  thoughts
or  by  speech,  from  (all)  that  he  is  freed  by  per-
forming the  twilight  devotion  in  the  evening.'

19.  (The   worshipper)   becomes    also    connected


14.  The  day  and  night  will  not  be  cut  off  from  his  existence.
16.  VasishMa  XX,  4-5.  18.  Vasishtfa  XXVI,  2.


II,  5,  8.  BATHING.  249

(thereby)  with   the   (next)  night,   and  Varima   will
not  seize  him.

20.  In  like  manner  he  becomes  free  from  the  sin
committed  during  the  night  by  worshipping  in  the
morning.

21.  He  is  also  connected  with  the  (next)  day,
Mitra  protects  him  and  Aditya  leads  him  up  to
heaven.

22.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  'A  Brahma^a
who  in  this  same  manner  daily  worships  in  the  twi-
light, both  at  morn  and  at  eve  and,  being  sanctified
by  the  Brahman,  becoming  one  with  the  Brahman,
and  resplendent  through  the  Brahman,  follows  the
rules  of  the  6astra,  gains  the  heaven  of  Brahman.'

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  5,  Ka;vx>ika  8.

1.  Now,  after  washing  his  hands,  he  shall  take
his  waterpot  and  a  clod  of  earth,  go  to  a  (sacred)
bathing-place  and  thrice  clean  his  feet  (with  earth
and  water)  and  thrice  his  body.

2.  Now  some  say,  '  One  must  not  enter  a  burial-
ground,  water,  a  temple,  a  cowpen,  nor  a  place
where  Brahma/zas  (sit)  without  having  cleaned
one's  feet/


20.  Vasish/^a  XXVI,  3.

22.  Brahman  means  here  the  Veda,  the  Savitri,  and  the  uni-
versal soul.

8.  1.  Vishmi  LXIV,  18.  This  Adhyaya  contains  the  rules  for
bathing,  and  the  subject  is  introduced,  as  Govinda  observes,
because  in  the  preceding  chapter  II,  4,  7,  2,  it  has  been  said  that
an  impure  person  must  bathe  before  he  performs  the  twilight  devo-
tions. Govinda  also  states  that  the  word  £a,  '  and/  which  stands
after  mritpind&m,  *  a  clod,'  indicates  that  gomaya, '  cowdung,'  must
also  be  employed.


250  BAUDHAYANA.  11,5,8.

3.  Then  he  enters  the  water,  (reciting  the  follow-
ing verse) :  '  I  take  refuge  with  gold-horned  Varu/za,
give  me  at  my  request  (O  Varu/za)  a  purifying  bathing-
place.  May  Indra,  Varu/za,  Brzhaspati,  and  Savitrz
again  and  again  cleanse  me  from  all  sin  which  I  have
committed  by  eating  the  food  of  unholy  men,  by
receiving  gifts  from  the  wicked,  and  from  all  evil
which  I  have  done  by  thoughts,  speeches,  or  deeds/

4.  Then  he  takes  up  water  in  his  joined  hands,
(saying),  '  May  the  waters  and  the  herbs  be  pro-
pitious to  us.'

5.  (Next)  he  pours  (the  water)  out  in  that  direc-
tion in  which  an  enemy  of  his  dwells,  (saying),
1  May  they  work  woe  to  him  who  hates  us  and
whom  we  hate.'

6.  Then  he  sips  water,  and  thrice  makes  the  water
eddy  around  himself  turning  from  the  left  to  the
right  (and  saying),  'May  that  which  is  hurtful,  which
is  impure,  and  which  is  inauspicious  in  the  water  be
removed/

7.  After  having  submerged  himself  and  having
emerged  from  the  water,

8.  (Acts  of)  personal  purification,  washing  the
clothes  by  beating  them    on  a  stone   and   sipping

3.  The  verse  is  found  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  1,  12.

4.  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  1, 11.

5.  Taittiriya  Ara^yaka,  loc.  cit.  This  and  the  following  Sutras,
down  to  II,  6,  11, 15,  are  wanting  in  the  Gujarat  and  Dekhan  MSS.
except  in  K.

6.  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  1,  13.

7.  Govinda  points  out  that  the  completion  of  this  Sutra  is  to  be
found  in  Sutra  10.  He  adds  that  Baudhayana  inserted  Sutras  8-9
in  the  middle,  because  he  was  afraid  to  forget  the  rules  contained
in  them.

8.  VishmiLXIV,  10,  n.


11,5,8.  BATHING.  25 1

water    are    not  (permitted   to   the   worshipper)  as
long  as  he  is  in  the  water.

9.  If  (the  water  used  for  bathing)  has  been  (taken
from  a)  confined  (place,  such  as  a  well),  he  worships
it  with  the  following  (Mantra):  *  Adoration  to  Agni,
the  lord  of  the  waters ;  adoration  to  Indra ;  adora-
tion to  Vanma ;  adoration  to  Vkrunl ;  adoration  to
the  waters/

10.  After  having  ascended  the  bank  and  having
sipped  water,  let  him  again  sip  water,  though  he  has
done  so  before,  (and  recite  the  following  Mantras) :
1  May  water  purify  the  earth,  may  the  purified  earth
purify  me,  may  Brahma/zaspati  (and)  Brahman  purify,
may  the  purified  (earth)  purify  me.  May  water  purify
me,  (taking  away)  all  (the  guilt  which  I  incurred  by
eating)  remnants  of  food,  and  forbidden  food,  (by
committing)  evil  deeds,  (by)  receiving  gifts  from
wicked  men,  Svaha!'

11.  Making  two  Pavitras  he  rubs  (his  body)  with
water.  Having  rubbed  himself,  (reciting  the)  three
(verses), '  Ye  waters  are,'  &c.,  the  four  (verses), '  The
golden-coloured,  pure,  purifying,'  &c,  (and)  the  Anu-
vaka,  '  He  who  purifies/  &c.,  he  performs,  stepping
back  into  the  water,  three  Pra/zayamas  with  the
Aghamarsha/za  (hymn) ;  then  he  ascends  the  bank,
squeezes  (the  water)  out  of  his  dress,  puts  on  gar-
ments which  have  been  washed  and  dried  in  the  air
and  which  are  not  the  worse  for  wear,  sips  water,

9.  Taittiriya  Ara«yaka  X,  1, 12.

10.  Taittiriya  Ararcyaka  X,  23.  Govinda  says  that  the  rule  is
intended  to  indicate  also  that  a  person  who  recites  sacred  texts
while  sipping  water,  must  do  so  only  after  having  taken  water  once
before.     K.  inserts  before  this  Mantra,  also  Anuvaka  22.

11.  VishmiLXIV,  13-14;  18-19.   The  Vedic  passages  intended


252  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  5,  8.

sits  down  on  Darbha  grass,  and,  holding  Darbha
grass  (in  his  hands),  recites,  facing  the  east,  the
Gayatrl  one  thousand  times,  (or)  one  hundred  times,
or  any  number  of  times,  or  at  least  twelve  times.

12.  Then  he  worships  the  sun  (reciting  the  follow-
ing Mantras):  'Out  of  darkness  we,'  &c.,  'Up  that
bright,'  &c.,  'That  eye  which  is  beneficial  to  the  gods,'
&c,  (and) '  He  who  rose,'  &c.

13.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  maxim)  :
1  The  syllable  Om,  the  Vyahmis,  and  the  Savitrl,
these  five  Veda-offerings  daily  cleanse  the  Brahma^a
from  guilt/

14.  Being  purified  by  the  five  Veda-offerings,  he
next  satiates  the  gods  (with  water,  saying),

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  5,  Kandika  9.

i.  'I  satiate  the  deities  of  the  eastern  gate,  Agni,
Pra^iapati,  Soma,  Rudra,  Aditi,  Brzhaspati,  together
with  the  lunar  mansions,  with  the  planets,  with  the
days  and  nights,  and  with  the  Muhurtas  ;  Om,  I  also
satiate  the  Vasus ;


are  found  Taitt.  Sa/^hita  IV,  i,  5,  i ;  V,  6,  i,  i ;  and  Taitt.  Brah-
ma«a  I,  4,  8.  Pavitras,  i.  e.  blades  of  Kara  grass.  '  He  performs
three  Pra«ayamas  with  the  Aghamarsha#a  hymn  (Rig-veda  X,  190)/
i.  e.  he  thrice  suppresses  his  breath  (pra^ayama)  and  recites  during
each  suppression  the  Aghamarshawa  three  times,  just  as  on  other
occasions  the  Gayatri  is  recited  three  times.

12.  The  first  Mantra  is  found  Taitt.  Sawhita  IV,  1,  7,  4;  the
third  and  the  fourth  Taitt.  Arawyaka  IV,  42,  32-33.

14.  Vishmi  XLIV,  24.  The  ceremony  is  the  so-called  Tarpawa,
which  is  usually  described  in  the  GrzTrya-sutras,  e.  g.  -Sarikhayana
IV,  9-10,  and  the  quotations  in  Professor  Oldenberg's  notes,
Indische  Studien  XV,  152.

9.  1.  This  and  the  next  Ka«d5kas  are  given  in  full  by  K.  only.
M.  gives  the  first  and  last  words  of  both,  the  commentary  the


II,  5,9*  TARPAiVA.  253


2.  '  Om,  I  satiate  the  deities  of  the  southern  gate,
the  Pitrzs,  Yama,  Bhaga,  Savitrz,  Tvash/rz,  Vayu,
Indragni,  together  with  the  lunar  mansions,  with
the  planets,  with  the  days  and  nights,  and  with  the
Muhurtas ;  Om,  I  also  satiate  the  Rudras.

3.  '  Om,  I  satiate  the  deities  of  the  western  gate,
Mitra,  Indra,  the  Mahapitrzs,  the  Waters,  all  the  gods,
Brahman,  Vish/m,  together  with  the  lunar  mansions,
with  the  planets,  with  the  days  and  nights,  and  with
the  Muhurtas ;  Om,  I  also  satiate  the  Adityas.

4.  '  Om,  I  satiate  the  deities  of  the  northern  gate,
the  Vasus,  Varu^a,  A^a-ekapad,  Ahibudhnya,  Ushas,
the  two  Asvins,  Yama,  together  with

5.  'Om,  I  satiate  all  the  gods  ;  the  Sadhyas  ;  Brah-
man ;  Pra^apati;  the  four-faced  god ;  Hira^yagarbha;
Svayambhu ;  the  male  attendants  of  Brahman  ;  Para-
mesh^in ;  the  female  attendants  of  Brahman  ;  Agni ;
Vayu  ;  Varu/za  ;  Surya ;  the  moon  ;  the  lunar  man-
sions ;  Sadyo^ata ;  BhM-purusha  ;  Bhuva^-purusha  ;
Suva/z-purusha  ;  BhM  ;  Bhuva/£  ;  Suva/£  ;  Maha^  ;
6ana/£ ;  Tapa/z  ;  Satya.

6.  '  Om,  I  satiate  the  god  Bhava  ;  .Sarva  ;  l^ana ;
Pasupati ;  Rudra  ;  Ugra ;  Bhlmadeva ;  Mahadeva  ;
the  wife  of  the  god  Bhava ;  of  the  god  6arva  ;  of  the
god  f  j-ana  ;  of  the  god  Pasupati ;  of  the  god  Rudra  ;
of  the  god  Ugra  ;  of  Bhlmadeva  ;  of  Mahadeva ;  the
son  of  Bhava  ;  of  .Sarva  ;  of  lsana ;  of  Pasupati ;  of


beginning  of  9  and  the  end  of  10  only.  The  text  of  K.  is  probably
interpolated,  as  it  seems  impossible  that  Baudhayana  could  have
mentioned  his  successors,  Apastamba  and  Satyashafl^a  Hira^ya-
kes'm,  whose  names  occur  below,  II,  5,  9, 14.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  not  doubtful  that  the  number  of  Mantras  must  nevertheless
have  been  very  large,  as  the  numeration  in  M.  shows  that  they
filled  two  entire  Ka«</ikas.


254  BAUDHAYANA.  11,5,9.

Rudra  ;  of  Ugra ;  of  Bhimadeva ;  of  Mahadeva  ;  Om,
I  also  satiate  the  Rudras ;  the  attendants  of  Rudra.

7.  'Om,  I  satiate  Vighna;  Vinayaka  ;  Vlra  ;  Sthula  ;
Varada  ;  Hastimukha  ;  Vakratu^a  ;  Ekadanta  ;
Lambodara ;  the  male  attendants  of  Vighna ;  the
female  attendants  of  Vighna.

8.  'Om,  I  satiate  Sanatkumara;  Skanda;  Indra  ;
Shash//£i;  Sha^mukha  ;  Visakha ;  Mahasena ;  Su-
brahma/zya ;  the  male  attendants  of  Skanda ;  the
female  attendants  of  Skanda.

9.  '  Om,  I  satiate  Aditya  ;  Soma ;  Arigaraka  ;
Budha ;  Brzhaspati ;  .Sukra  ;  ^anai^ara  ;  Rahu  ;
Ketu.

10.  'Om,  I  satiate  Kemva ;  Naraya^a  ;  Madhava  ;
Govinda  ;  Vishnu  ;  Madhusudana  ;  Trivikrama  ;
Vamana;  .Sridhara;  Hr/shikesa  ;  Padmanabha ;
Damodara ;  the  goddess  .Sri ;  the  goddess  Sara-
svati ;  Pushtf  ;  Tush^i ;  Vishnu  ;  Garutmat ;  the  male
attendants  of  Vish/m ;  the  female  attendants  of
Vishmi.

11.  'Om,  I  satiate  Yama  ;  Yamara^a;  Dharma ;
Dharmara^a ;  Kala  ;  Nila ;  Mr/tyu ;  Mrztyu^aya  ;
Vaivasvata ;  TTitragupta ;  Audumbara ;  the  male
attendants  of  Vaivasvata  ;  the  female  attendants  of
Vaivasvata.

12.  'Om,  I  satiate  the  gods  of  the  earth  ;  Karyapa;
Antariksha ;  Vidya ;  Dhanvantari ;  the  male  atten-
dants of  Dhanvantari;  the  female  attendants  of
Dhanvantari.'

13.  Next,  passing  the  sacrificial  thread  round  the
neck,  (he  offers  the  following  libations) :

14.  '  Om,  I  satiate  the  ifoshis;  the  great  iv'zshis;
the  best  7^'shis;  the  Brahmarshis;  the  divine  ifo'shis  ;
the  royal  i?zshis ;  the  .SYutarshis  ;  the  Seven  i?zshis  ;


11,5,10-  TARPAtfA.  255


the  ftzsh'is  of  the  Ka^as  (of  the  Yafur-veda) ;  the
7?/shikas ;  the  wives  of  the  j^z'shis  ;  the  sons  of  the
7^/shis;  Ka?zva  Baudhayana;  Apastamba,  the  author
of  the  Sutra ;  Satyasha^a  Hira/zyakcrin ;  Va^ara-
neyin  Ya^Tzavalkya  ;  Asvalayana  .5aunaka ;  Vyasa  ;
the  syllable  Om ;  the  Vyahrztis  j  the  Savitri ;  the
Gayatri ;  the  A^andas  ;  the  i^g-veda  ;  the  Ya^ur-
veda;  the  Sama-veda ;  the  Atharvangirasa ;  the
Itihasa  and  Pura/za ;  all  the  Vedas  ;  the  servants  of
all  gods  ;  all  beings/

15.  Then,  passing  the  sacrificial  string  over  the
right  shoulder,  (he  offers  the  following  libations) :

Prasna  II,  Adhaya  5,   Ka^vdika  10.

1.  *  Om,  I  satiate  the  fathers,  Svadha,  adoration!
the  grandfathers  ;  the  great-grandfathers  ;  the
mothers  ;  the  grandmothers  ;  the  great  -  grand-
mothers ;  the  maternal  grandfathers ;  the  maternal
grandmother  ;  the  mother's  grandmother  ;  the
mother's  great-grandmother.

2.  'Om,  I  satiate  the  teacher  (a^arya),  Svadha,
adoration  !  the  wife  of  the  teacher ;  the  friends  ;  the
wives  of  the  friends ;  the  relatives  ;  the  wives  of  the
relatives ;  the  inmates  of  the  house  (amatya) ;  the
wives  of  the  inmates  of  the  house  ;  all ;  the  wives
of  all/

3.  He  pours  the  water  out  from  the  several
Tlrthas  (of  the  hand  sacred  to  the  several  deities).

4.  (He  recites  at  the  end  of  the  rite  the  following

3.  I.  e.  the  water  must  be  poured  out  in  accordance  with  the
rule  given  above.

4.  Va^asaneyi  Sawhita  II,  34.  The  translation  of  the  Mantra
follows  Govinda's  explanation.


256  BAUDHAYANA.  IT,  5,  to.

Mantra) :  '  (Ye  waters),  who  bring  food,  ambrosia,
clarified  butter,  milk,  and  barley-gruel,  are  food  for
the  manes ;  satiate  my  ancestors !  May  you  be
satiated,  may  you  be  satiated ! '

5.  Let  him  not  perform  ceremonies  in  honour  of
the  gods  while  his  clothes  are  wet,  or  while  he  is
dressed  in  one  garment  only  ;

6.  Nor  those  connected  with  the  manes.  That  ^is
the  opinion)  of  some  (teachers).

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  6,  Kandika  11.

i .  Now  these  five  great  sacrifices,  which  are  also
called  the  great  sacrificial  sessions,  are  the  sacrifice
to  be  offered  to  the  gods,  the  sacrifice  to  be  offered
to  the  manes,  the  sacrifice  to  be  offered  to  all  beings,
the  sacrifice  to  be  offered  to  men,  (and)  the  sacrifice
to  be  offered  to  Brahman,

2.  Let  him  daily  offer  (something  to  the  gods
with  the  exclamation)  Svaha,  be  it  only  a  piece  of
fuel.  Thereby  he  performs  that  sacrifice  to  the
gods.

3.  Let  him  daily  offer  (something  to  the  manes
with  the  exclamation)  Svadha,  be  it  only  a  vessel
filled  with  water.  Thereby  he  performs  that  sacrifice
to  the  manes.

4.  Let  him  daily  pay  reverence  to  (all  beings)
endowed  with  life.  Thereby  he  performs  that
sacrifice  to  the  beings.

11.  1.  This  and  the  next  four  Sutras  agree  almost  literally  with
iS'atapatha-brahmawa  XI,  5,  6, 1.  See  also  Taitt.  Ara/zyaka  II,  10;
Apastamba  I,  4,  12,  15-13,  1.

4.  Govinda  says  that  the  Mantra  is  to  be  '  bhutebhyo  nama^,
adoration  to  all  beings/  and  adds  that  some  consider  the  first  three


II,6,n.  MAHAYAGiVAS.  257

5.  Let  him  daily  give  food  to  Brahma/zas,  be  it
only  roots,  fruit,  or  vegetables.  Thereby  he  per-
forms that  sacrifice  to  men.

6.  Let  him  daily  recite  the  Veda  privately,  be  it
only  the  syllable  Om  or  the  Vyahmis.  Thereby  he
performs  that  sacrifice  to  be  offered  to  Brahman.

7.  '  The  private  recitation  of  the  Veda  is,  indeed,
the  sacrifice  to  Brahman.  At  that  sacrifice  to  Brah-
man speech,  forsooth,  (takes  the  place  of)  the
(Sural,  the  internal  organ  (that  of)  the  Upabhrzt,
the  eye  (that  of)  the  Dhruva,  the  understanding
(that  of)  the  Sruva,  truth  (that  of)  the  final  bath,
heaven  (is)  the  conclusion  of  the  sacrifice.  He  who,
knowing  this,  daily  recites  the  Veda  to  himself,  gains
as  much  heavenly  bliss  as,  and  more  than,  he  who
gives  away  this  whole  earth  that  is  filled  with
wealth,  and  imperishable  (beatitude),  and  conquers
death.  Therefore  the  Veda  should  be  recited  in
private.     Thus  speaks  the  Brahma^a.'

8.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  passage)  :
'  If,  well  anointed,„well  fed,  and  lying  on  a  comfortable
couch,  one  recites  (the  portion  of  the  Veda  referring
to)  any  sacrifice,  one  has  offered  it  thereby.'


Mahaya^fias  to  be  performed  by  the  Vauvadeva  and  the  Bali-
offering,  while  others  enjoin  their  separate  performance.

7.  »Satapatha-brahma?za  XI,  5,  6,  2.  See  also  Taitt.  Arawyaka
II,  17.  K.  reads  dhrz'tir  dhruva, '  the  firm  resolve  (takes  the  place
of)  the  Dhruva,'  which  is  apparently  a  correction  made  according
to  the  Arawyaka.  According  to  the  commentary  the  text  of  the
last  portion  of  the  quotation  runs  thus,  'yavantaw  ha  va  imam
vittasya  purwaw  dadat  svargaw  lokazft  ^ayati  tavantaw  lokaw  ^ayati
bhuyawsaffz  Mkshayyaw  £apa  mrz'tyum  g-ayati  ya  evam  vidvan,'  &c.
M.  and  K.  do  not  give  the  whole  passage.  The  published  text  of
the  *Satapatha-brahma«a  slightly  differs  from  Govinda's  version.

8.  -Satapatha-brahma;za  XI,  5,  7,  3-4.

[14]  s


258  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  6,  11.

9.  Some  (teachers)  declare  (that  there  is  a  text)
which  teaches  a  fourfold  division  of  these  sacred
duties.  (But)  as  no  (other  meaning  is)  perceptible,
(the  text)  'Four  paths/  &c,  refers  to  sacrificial  rites.

10.  (Viz.)  to  Ish/is,  animal  sacrifices,  Soma  sacri-
fices, and  Darvihomas.

11.  The  following  (Rik)  declares  that,  'Four
paths,  leading  to  the  world  of  the  gods,  go  severally
from  the  earth  to  heaven.  All  ye  gods,  place  us  on
that  among  them  which  will  gain  us  undecaying
prosperity/

12.  The  student,  the  householder,  the  hermit  in
the  woods,  the  ascetic  (constitute  the  four  orders).

1 3.  A  student  (shall)  obey  his  teacher  until  death.

9.  I  read  the  text  as  follows,  '  tasya  ha  va  etasya  dharmasya
£aturdha  bhedam  eka  ahu^.'  M.  has  bhedakam,  the  I.  O.  copy
of  the  commentary  bhedajankam,  and  K.  tasya  ha  va  etasya
ya^wasya/fcaturdha  bhutam  eka  ahu^.  Below  in  the  commentary
on  Sutra  27,  Govinda  repeats  the  latter  part  of  this  Sutra  in  the
form  which  I  have  adopted.  The  discussion  which  begins  here  is
the  same  as  that  which  occurs  Apastamba  II,  9,  23,  3-24,  15.

11.  Taittinya  Sa^hita  V,  7,  2,  3.  m

12.  K.  omits  this  Sutra.  After  it  M.  and  K.  have  the  following
passage :  '  brahma^ariwo  'tyantam  atmanam  upasa/ragrz'hya  'Mryan
bruvate  vane  jramyantyeke  [yazrctyete,  K.]  savaneshvapa  upasprz-
.ranto  vanyenannenaikagniw  [nyenannena  naikagniw,  K. ;  vanye-
naikanari,  M.]  ^uhvana^  [gnhvas,  M.]  satyasyaike  karmawi
[karmam,  M.]  anagnayo  'niketana^  [tvjU  kaw,  K.]  kaupina&£M-
dana  varshasv  ekastha  uddhrztapariputabhir  adbhi^  karyaw  [apa-
karyaw,  M.]  kurvawa^  [kurvawas  tatrodaharanti,  K.]  sannamusale
vyangare  nivrz'ttajaravasampate  bhikshanta^  sarvata^  parimoksham
[parimeke,  M.]  apavidhya  vaidikani  karma/zy  abhayata^  pari^/zinna
madhyamam  padam  upajlishyamaha  iti  vadanto.'  The  commentary
gives  a  few  portions  of  this  passage  further  on.  Irrespective  of
minor  corruptions,  it  gives  no  sense  in  the  place  where  it  stands,
and  it  seems  probable  that  we  have  to  deal  with  a  confused  and
badly  corrupted  text,  which  Govinda  arranged  either  as  seemed
good  to  him,  or  on  the  authority  of  better  MSS.


II,  6,  ir.  THE    FOUR    ORDERS.  259

14.  A  hermit  is  he  who  regulates  his  conduct
entirely  according  to  the  Institutes  proclaimed  by
Vikhanas.

15.  A  Vaikhanasa  (shall  live)  in  the  forest,  sub-
sisting on  roots  and  fruit,  practising  austerities  and
bathing  at  morn,  noon,  and  eve ;  he  shall  kindle  a
fire  according  to  the  6rama;2aka  (rule) ;  he  shall  eat
wild-growing  (vegetables  and  grain)  only;  he  shall
worship  gods,  manes,  Bhutas,  men,  and  Ashis ;  he
shall  receive  hospitably  (men  of)  all  (castes)  except
those  (with  whom  intercourse  is)  forbidden ;  he  may
even  use  the  flesh  of  animals  killed  by  carnivorous
beasts ;  he  shall  not  step  on  ploughed  (land) ;  and
he  shall  not  enter  a  village ;  he  shall  wear  his  hair
in  braids,  and  dress  in  (garments  made  of)  bark  or
skins ;  he  shall  not  eat  anything  that  has  been
hoarded  for  more  than  a  year.

16.  An  ascetic  shall  leave  his  relatives  and,  not
attended  by  any  one  nor  procuring  any  property,
depart  (from  his  house  performing  the  customary
ceremony)  according  to  the  rule.

17.  He  shall  go  into  the  forest  (and  live  there).

18.  He  shall  shave  his  hair  excepting  the  top-lock.

15.  This  passage,  which  Govinda  gives  as  one  Sutra,  agrees
word  for  word  with  Gautama  III,  26-35,  except  in  the  beginning,
where  Gautama  omits  '  bathing  at  morn,  noon,  and  eve.'  The
MSS.  all  read  bhaiksham,  'begged  food,'  instead  of  baishkam,
1  the  flesh  of  animals  slain  by  carnivorous  beasts.'  But  Govinda's
explanation  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  latter
reading.  The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.,  including  K.,  read
agramyabho^i  II  agramyabhqgi.

16.  I  adopt  the  readings  of  the  Dekhan  MSS.,  aparigraha^  (for
apratigraha^)  and  pravra^et  (for  parivra^et).  The  rule  for  the  cere-
mony is  given  below,  II,  10, 17.

18.  This  is  Govinda's  explanation  of  sikh&munda/i,  the  reading
of  all  MSS.

S    2


260  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  6,  n.

19.  He  shall  wear  a  cloth  to  cover  his  nakedness.

20.  He  shall  reside  in  one  place  during  the  rainy
season.

21.  He  shall  wear  a  dress  dyed  yellowish-red.

22.  He  shall  go  to  beg  when  the  pestle  lies
motionless,  when  the  embers  have  been  extin-
guished, and  when  the  cleaning  of  the  dishes  has
been  finished.

23.  With  the  three  means  of  punishment,  (viz.)
words,  thoughts,  and  acts,  he  shall  not  injure  created
beings.

24.  He  shall  carry  a  cloth  for  straining  water  for
the  sake  of  purification.

25.  He  shall  perform  the  necessary  purifications
with  water  which  has  been  taken  out  (of  a  well  or
tank)  and  has  been  strained.

26.  (Ascetics  shall)  say,  '  Renouncing  the  works
taught  in  the  Veda,  cut  off  from  both  (worlds),  we
attach  ourselves  to  the  central  sphere  (Brahman)/

27.  But  the  venerable  teacher  (declares)  that
there  is  one  order  only,  because  the  others  do  not
beget  offspring.

28.  With  reference  to  this  matter  they  quote  also
(the  following  passage) :  '  There  was,  forsooth,  an
Asura,    Kapila    by  name,    the    son    of    Prahlada.

20  and  22.  These  two  Sutras  are  omitted  in  K.  and  M.,  which
give  them  in  the  passage  following  Sutra  12,  as  well  as  in  the
Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.

24.  See  below,  II,  10,  17,  11.  Govinda  explains  pavitra,  'a  cloth
for  straining  water/  by  'a  bunch  of  Kura  grass  for  removing
insects  from  the  road.'

25.  According  to  Govinda  such  water  is  to  be  used  for  washing
off  the  stains  of  urine  &c,  not  for  drinking.

26.  This  Sutra  is  again  omitted  in  the  MSS.  of  the  text.  M.  and
K.  give  it  in  the  passage  following  Sutra  12.

27.  Gautama  III,  36.


11,6,11.  THE   FOUR    ORDERS.  261

Striving  with   the  gods,  he    made   these   divisions.
A  wise  man  should  not  take  heed  of  them.'

29.  Because  no  (other  meaning  is)  perceptible,
(the  text)  '  Four  paths/  &c.,  refers  to  sacrificial  rites,
(viz.)  to  Ish/is,  animal  sacrifices,  Soma  sacrifices,
Darvihomas.

30.  With  respect  to  this  (question  the  following
verse  also)  is  quoted :  'That  eternal  greatness  of  the
Brahma;za  is  neither  increased  by  works,  nor  dimi-
nished. The  soul  knows  the  nature  of  that  (great-
ness) ;  knowing  that,  he  is  not  stained  by  evil  deeds.'

31.  If  he  says  that,  (let  him  reflect  on  the  fol-
lowing verse):  '  He  who  knows  not  the  Veda,  does
not  at  death  think  of  that  great,  all-perceiving  soul,
through  which  the  sun,  resplendent  with  brilliancy,
gives  warmth,  and  the  father  has  a  father  through
the  son  at  his  birth  from  the  womb.'

2,2.  (Moreover),  'Those  who,  being  neither  true
Brahma/zas  nor  performers  of  Soma  sacrifices,  work
not  for  that  which  is  near,  nor  for  that  which  is  far,
take  hold  of  the  word  and  with  sinful  (speech)
ignorantly  perform  the  rites/

33.  There  are  innumerable  (passages  in  the
Veda)  which  refer  to  the  debts  (to  be  paid  by  a
Brahma;za),  such  as,  '  May  I  obtain,  O  Agni,  immor-

30-31.  Taitt.  Brahmawa  III,  12,  9,  7.

32.  Rig-veda  X,  71,  9.  My  rendering  of  the  difficult  verse  is
merely  tentative,  and  I  have  left  out  the  word  siri^,  for  which  I
am  as  little  able  as  other  Sanskritists  to  offer  a  safe  explanation.
The  general  meaning  of  the  verse,  I  think,  has  been  rightly  under-
stood by  Sayawa  and  Govinda,  who  both  say  that  it  contains  a
reproach,  addressed  to  those  Brahmawas  who,  contented  with  the
letter  of  the  Veda,  do  not  master  its  meaning.

33-34.  The  commentary  omits  these  two  Sutras,  which,  bow-
ever,  seem  necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  discussion.     The


262  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  6,  it.

tality  through  offspring ;'  '  A  Brahmazza  on  being
born,  (owes)  a  son  to  his  ancestors/  &c.

34.  '  Those  dwell  with  us,  who  fulfil  the  following
(duties),  the  study  of  the  three  Vedas,  the  student-
ship, the  procreation  of  offspring,  faith,  austerity,
sacrificing,  and  giving  gifts ;  he  who  praises  other
(duties)  becomes  dust  and  perishes.'

PRASNA    II,     ADHYAYA    7,    KAiVDiKA    12.

1.  Now  we  will  explain  the  oblations  (offered)  to
the  vital  air  (pra^a)  by  .Salinas  (householders)  and
Yayavaras  (vagrants),  who  sacrifice  to  the  soul.

2.  At  the  end  of  all  the  necessary  (daily  rites),  let
him  sit  down,  facing  the  east,  in  a  place  that  has
been  well  cleaned  and  smeared  with  cowdung ;  next
let  him  worship  that  prepared  (food)  which  is  being
brought,  (saying),  '  BhM,  Bhuva/z,  Sva/z,  Om,'  (and
then)  remain  silent.

3.  (Next)  he  pours  water  round  the  food  which
has  been  placed  (before  him),  turning  his  right  hand
towards  it,  and  reciting  the  Mahavyahr/tis ;  (after-
wards), continuing  to  hold  (the  dish)  with  his  left
hand,  he  first  drinks  water,  (saying),  '  Thou  art  a
substratum  for  ambrosia,'  and  (finally)  offers  five
oblations  of  food    to    the   vital   airs,   (reciting    the

second  occurs  also  Apastamba  II,  9,  24,  8.  Though  Baudha-
yana  does  not  express  himself  as  clearly  as  Apastamba,  he  dis-
approves, as  it  would  seem,  like  the  latter,  of  the  opinion  Of  those
who  gave  an  undue  preference  to  asceticism  at  the  expense  of
married  life,  the  order  of  the  householders.

12.  1.  The  Prawagnihotra  is  alluded  toby  Apastamba  II,  7, 17,  16.
Regarding  the  terms  £alina  and  Yayavara,  see  below,  III,  1,  3-4.

3.  The  Mahavyahrz'tis  are  the  Mantras  given  Taittiriya  Arawyaka
X,  2.  The  second  Mantra  is  found  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  32,  and


IT,  7,  12.         THE    OFFERING    TO    THE   VITAL    AIRS.  263

texts),  'Full  of  reverence,  I  offer  ambrosia  to  Pra/za;
mayest  thou  propitiously  enter  me,  not  in  order  to
burn  me.     To  Pra/za,  Svaha  V  &c.

4.  After  offering  the  five  oblations  of  food  to  the
vital  airs,  let  him  finish  his  meal  silently.  Medi-
tating in  his  heart  on  the  lord  of  created  beings,  let
him  not  emit  speech  while  (eating).

5.  If  he  emits  speech,  he  shall  mutter  '  BhM,
Bhuva/£,  Sva/£,  Om,'  and  afterwards  continue  to  eat.

6.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  rule) :  '  If  he
sees  (bits  of)  skin,  hair,  nail-(parings),  insects,  or  the
dung  of  rats  (in  his  food),  he  shall  take  out  a  lump,
sprinkle  that  spot  with  water,  scatter  ashes  on  it,  again
sprinkle  it  with  water,  and  use  (the  remainder  of  the
food),  after  it  has  been  declared  fit  (for  use).'

7.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :  'He
shall  eat,  seated  with  his  face  towards  the  east,  silent,
not  despising  his  food,  not  scattering  (fragments  on
the  ground),  and  solely  attend  (to  his  dinner) ;  and,
after  he  has  eaten,  he  shall  touch  fire.'

8.  He  shall  not  cut  off  with  his  teeth  (pieces
from)  eatables  (that  must  be  swallowed)  entire,  (such
as)  cakes,  bulbs,  roots,  fruit,  and  flesh.

9.  (Let  him)  not  (eat)  to  repletion.

10.  After  (dinner)  he  shall  drink  water,  (reciting
the  text),  *  Thou  art  a  covering  for  ambrosia,'  and
stroke  (the  region  of)  the  heart,  (saying), '  Thou  art
the  bond  that  connects   the  vital   airs  ;    (thou   art)

the  third  ibid.  X,  34.  The  translation  of  the  Mantras  follows
Govinda,  who  somewhat  differs  from  Sayawa.

6.  VasishMa  XIV,  23.  7.  Vishmi  LXVIII,  40-43-

9.  Vishmi  LXVIII,  47.

10.  The  first  text  is  found  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  35,  and  the
second  ibid.  X,  37.     I  translate  the  first  according  to  Govinda.


264  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  7,  12.

Rudra  and  Death  ;    enter  me ;    mayest  thou  grow
through  this  food.'

1 1 .  After  sipping  water  a  second  time,  he  allows
(the  drops  from)  the  hand  to  flow  on  the  big  toe
of  his  right  foot  (and  recites  the  following  text):
■  May  the  male  be  pleased,  he  who  is  of  the  size
of  a  thumb,  who  occupies  (a  space  of  the  size  of)  a
thumb,  who  is  the  lord  of  the  whole  world,  masterful,
and  the  enjoyer  of  the  universe.'

12.  Let  him  perform  the  subsequent  consecration
(anumantra/za)  of  the  (food  which  has  been)  offered,
with  raised  arms,  (and  let  him  recite)  the  five  (texts
beginning),  'With  faith,  worshipping  Pra^a,  (I  have)
offered  ambrosia ;  mayest  thou  increase  Pra/za
through  this  food/

13.  (And  let  him  address  the  soul  with  the  last
text  of  the  Anuvaka),  '  (May)  my  soul  (gain)  immor-
tality in  the  universal  soul/

14.  And  let  him  (meditate  on  his)  soul  (as)  united
with  the  imperishable  (syllable  Om).

15.  He  who  sacrifices  to  the  soul,  surpasses  him
who  offers  all  sacrifices.


Prasna  II,   Adhyaya  7,   KandikA  13.

i.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
'As  cotton  and  reeds,  thrown  into  a  fire,  blaze  up,
even  so  all  the  guilt  of  him  who  sacrifices  to  the
soul  is  consumed/

ii.  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  38,  The  individual  soul  which  re-
sides in  the  heart  is  here  identified  with  the  universal  soul;  see
also  Kanaka  Upanishad  IV,  12.

12-13.  Taittinya  Ararayaka  X,  36.

14.  The  syllable  Om  is  Brahman,  the  universal  soul.


II,  7,  i3-  EATING.  265

2.  (Moreover),  '  He  who  eats  merely  (in  order  to
satisfy  his  own  hunger)  reaps  only  guilt.  In  vain
(the  fool)  takes  food/

3.  Let  him  daily,  both  in  the  morning  and  in  the
evening,  sacrifice  in  this  manner  ;

4.  Or  (he  may  offer)  water  in  the  evening.

5.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  Let  him  first  feed  his  guests,  next  the  pregnant
women,  then  the  infants  and  the  aged,  thereafter  the
distressed  and  particularly  the  diseased.  But  he
who  eats  first,  without  having  given  (food)  to  those
(persons)  according  to  the  rule,  does  not  know  that
he  is  being  eaten.  He  does  not  eat,  (but)  he  is
eaten.'

6.  '  Let  him  eat  silently  what  remains,  (after  he
has  given  their  portions)  to  the  manes,  the  gods,  the
servants,  his  parents,  and  his  Gurus;  that  is  declared
to  be  the  rule  of  the  sacred  law.'

7.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses) :
*  Eight  mouthfuls  are  the  meal  of  an  ascetic,  sixteen
that  of  a  hermit  in  the  woods,  thirty-two  that  of  a
householder,  and  an  unlimited  (quantity)  that  of  a
student.'

8.  /An  Agnihotrin,  a  draught-ox,  and  a  student,
those  three  can  do  their  work  only  if  they  eat
(much) ;  without  eating  (much)  they  cannot  do  it/

9.  'A    householder,  or   a  student  who   practises

.    13.  2.  Rig-veda  X,  117,  6,  and  Taittiriya  Brahma/za  II,  8,  8,  3.
The  words  have  been  transposed.

5.  Vasish/Aa  XI,  6-8;  Manu  III,  n  4-1 15.  I  write,  with  the
Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.,  na  sa  bhunkte,  sa  bhu^yate,  instead  of
the  senseless  reading  of  M.  and  the  commentary,  na  sa  bhunkte  na
bhugyate.

6.  Vasish/$a  XI,  11.  7-8.  Apastamba  II,  4,  9,  13.
9-10.  Apastamba  II,  4,  9, 12,  and  note  on  II,  1, 1,  2.


266  BAUDIIAYANA.  II,  7,  13.

austerity  by  fasting,  becomes  an  Avakimin  through
the  omission  of  the  sacrifice  to  the  vital  airs ;'

10.  Except  when  he  performs  a  penance.  In  the
case  of  a  penance  that  (fasting)  is  the  rule.

11.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  He  who  never  eats  between  the  morning  and  the
evening  meals,  (obtains  the  same  reward  as  he  who)
constantly  fasts/

12.  'As  in  case  one  obtains  no  materials  (for  the
sacrifice),  one  must  mutter  the  sacred  texts  to  be
recited  at  the  Agnihotra,  offered  in  the  three  fires,
even  so  one  should  mutter  the  texts  to  be  recited
at  the  Pra/zagnihotra,  when  one  is  prevented  from
dining/

13.  'He  who  acts  thus,  will  become  one  with
Brahman/  Thus  spake  Pra^apati  (the  lord  of
created  beings).

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  8,   Kaatdika  14.

i.  The  offering  to  the  manes  secures  long  life
and  heaven,  is  worthy  of  praise  and  a  rite  ensuring
prosperity.

2.  Persons  who  sanctify  the  company  are,  a  Tri-
madhu,  a  Tri/za/£iketa,  a  Trisupama,  one  who  keeps
five  fires,  and  one  who  knows  the  six  Ahgas,  one
who  performs  the  vow  called  .Siras,  one  who  knows
the  (^yesh/^asaman,  (and)  a  Snataka ;

3.  On  failure  of  these,  one  who  knows  the  (texts
called)  Rahasya.

14.  1.  Apastamba  II,  7,  16,  1-2.

2.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  22;  Vasish/^a  III,  19.  Govinda  states
that  the  Atharvavedins  know  the  vow  called  .Slras;  see  also
Vasish/$a  XXVI,  12,  and  note.

3.  Govinda  says  that  persons  acquainted  with  the  Rahasyas  or


IT,8,i4.  SRADDHAS.  267

4.  The  ifr'k-verses,  the  Ya^us-formulas,  and  the
Samans  (give)  lustre  to  a  funeral  offering.  There-
fore he  may  feed  (on  that  occasion)  even  a  Sapi/^a
relation  who  (knows)  those  (texts).

5.  Let  him  who  feeds  (Brahma^as  at  a  funeral
sacrifice)  cause  them  to  hear  successively  the  Raksho-
ghna  Samans,  the  Ya^us-formulas  (called)  Svadha-
vat,  the  7?zk-verses  (called)  Madhu,  and  the  (texts
called)  Pavitras.

6.  Having  invited  on  the  day  before  (the  6Yaddha),
or  Justin  the  morning,  virtuous,  pure  (men),  such  as
Trimadhus,  who  know  the  Vedaiigas  and  the  sacred
texts,  who  are  not  related  by  marriage,  nor  members
of  the  same  family,  nor  connected  through  the  Veda,
at  least  three,  (but  always)  an  odd  number,  the  (sa-
crificer)  makes  them  sit  down  on  prepared  seats,
covered  with  Darbha  grass,  facing  the  east  or  the
north.

7.  Then  he  offers  to  them  water  mixed  with  sesa-
mum  seed,  adorns  them  with  scents  and  garlands
(and   says),  *  I  wish   to   offer  oblations  in  the   fire.'


Ara«yakas  are  preferable  to  those    mentioned  in  the  preceding
Sutra,  and  thus  the  order  must  be  reversed.

4.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  5.

5.  The  texts  on  which  the  Rakshoghna  Samans  are  based
occur  Sama-veda  I,  1,  1,  3,  4-6  ;  the  Svadhavat  Ya^us,  Taitt.  Brah-
ma«a  I,  3,  10,  2 ;  the  Madhu  JZi'kas,  Rig-veda  I,  90,  6  ;  and  the
three  Pavitras,  Taitt.  Brahmawa  I,  4,  8,  2.

6.  Apastamba  II,  7, 14,  5.  All  the  MSS.,  including  those  of
the  commentary,  read  yonigotramantrasambandhan  instead  of  yoni-
gotramantrasambandhan. But  the  explanation  of  gotrasambandha/^
by  asagotra/^  shows  still  a  faint  trace  of  the  former  existence  of
the  reading  which  I  have  restored  conjecturally  and  translated.
Its  correctness  is  proved  by  the  parallel  passage  of  Apastamba.

7.  Vishmi  LXXIII;  12-13;  ManuIII,  208-211.  The  Agnimukha


268  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  8,  14.

When  he  has  received  permission  (to  do  so),  he
heaps  fuel  on  the  sacred  fire,  scatters  Kusa  grass
around  it,  performs  (all  the  ceremonies)  up  to
the  end  of  the  Agnimukha,  and  offers  three  burnt
oblations  of  food  only,  (reciting  the  following  texts) :
'To  Soma,  accompanied  by  the  manes,  Svaha!'  '  To
Yama,  accompanied  by  the  Angiras  and  by  the
manes,  Svaha  !'  '  To  Agni,  who  carries  the  offerings
to  the  manes,  who  causes  sacrifices  to  be  well  per-
formed, Svaha !'

8.  He  shall  make  these  three  oblations  with  food
only  which  has  been  sprinkled  with  the  remainder
of  the  (clarified  butter).

9.  Let  him  give  a  cake  of  food  to  the  birds.

10.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  'The  manes
roam  about  in  the  shape  of  birds.'

11.  Next  he  touches  the  (other  food)  with  his
hand  and  with  the  thumb,

12.  (And  recites  the  following  texts):  'Fire  sees
thee,  who  art  co-extensive  with  the  earth,  the  in-
verses are  thy  greatness,  lest  the  gift  be  in  vain  ;  the
earth  is  the  vessel  for  thee,  the  sky  the  cover  ;  I
offer  thee  in  the  mouth  of  Brahman,  I  offer  thee  in
the  Pra/za  and  the  Apana  of  learned  Brahma^as;  thou
art  imperishable,  mayest  thou  never  fail  to  (the  manes
of  our)  fathers  yonder,  in  the  other  world.'  'Air  hears
thee,  who  art  co-extensive  with  the  middle  sphere,


is  a  term  denoting  all  the  preliminaries  which  precede  the  Pra-
dhanahoma  of  a  ceremony.  The  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.
read  a^yasya  instead  of  annasyaiva.

8.  Clarified  butter  is  necessary  for  the  rites  included  in  the
Agnimukha.

12.  The  Mantras  are  addressed  to  the  food  which  is  to  be
offered.


II,  8,  15-  SRADDHAS.  269

the  Ya^us-formulas  are  thy  greatness,  lest  the  gift
be  in  vain ;  the  earth  is  the  vessel  for  thee,  the  sky
the  cover ;  .  .  .  .  mayest  thou  never  fail  to  the
(manes  of  our)  grandfathers  yonder,  in  the  other
world.'  'The  sun  reveals  thee,  who  art  co-extensive
with  the  sky,  the  Samans  are  thy  greatness,  lest  the
gift  be  in  vain ;  .  .  .  .  mayest  thou  never  fail  to
the  (manes  of  our)  great-grandfathers  yonder,  in  the
other  world.'


Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  8,  Kajvdika  15.

i.  Now  indeed  (that)  happens  (also  which  the  fol-
lowing verses  teach) :

2.  '  Let  him  sprinkle  that  food  with  the  remainder
of  the  burnt  oblations.  But  what  is  given  without
(touching  it  with)  the  thumb  does  not  gladden  the
manes.'

3.  '  The  malevolent  Asuras  seek  an  opportunity
(to  snatch  away)  that  food  intended  for  the  manes,
which  is  not  supported  with  both  hands.'

4.  '  The  Yatudhanas  and  Piia^as,  who  receive  no
share,  steal  the  food  if  sesamum  grains  are  not
scattered  (on  the  seats  of  the  guests),  and  the  Asuras
(take  it)  if  (the  host)  is  under  the  sway  of  anger.'

5.  '  If  a  person  dressed  in  reddish  clothes  mutters
prayers,  offers  burnt  oblations,  or  receives  gifts,  the
sacrificial  viands,  offered  at  sacrifices  to  the  gods  or
to  the  manes,  do  not  reach  the  deities.'

15.  2.  Manu  III,  215.     See  also  above,  II,  8,  14,  10.

3.  VasishMa  XI,  25.

4.  Vishmi  LXXIII,  11 ;  Manu  III,  229.

5.  Govinda  states  that  the  rule  is  intended  to  teach  that  the
sacrificer  and  the  guests  at  a  *Sraddha  must  be  dressed  in  white,


270  BAUDHAYANA.  11,8,15-

6.  '  If  gifts  are  given  or  received  without  (touch-
ing them  with)  the  thumb  and,  if  one  sips  water
standing,  (the  performer  of  the  act)  is  not  benefited
thereby.'

7.  At  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  (of  a  6raddha)
water  must  be  given  (to  the  guests).

8.  In  every  case  the  muttering  (of  sacred  texts)
and  the  other  (necessary  acts  must  be  performed)
according  to  the  rule.

9.  The  remaining  (rules)  have  been  prescribed
(in  the  section)  on  the  burnt  oblations  on  Ash/aka
(days).

10.  '  He  shall  feed  two  (Brahma^as)  at  the  offering
to  the  gods  and  three  at  the  offering  to  the  manes,
or  a  single  man  on  either  occasion.  Even  a  very
wealthy  man  shall  not  be  anxious  (to  entertain)  a
large  company/

11.  'A  large  company  destroys  these  five  (advan-
tages), the  respectful  treatment  (of  the  invited  guests,
the  propriety  of)  time  and  place,  purity  and  (the
selection  of)  virtuous  Brahma^a  (guests) ;  therefore
he  shall  not  invite  (a  large  number)/

12.  'In  front  (feed)  the  fathers  of  the  (sacrificer),
to  the  left  the  grandfathers,  to  the  right  the  great-
grandfathers, and  at  the  back  those  who  pare  off
(portions)  from  the  cakes/

and  that  ascetics  are  not  to  be  invited.     But  see  Vasish/^a  XI,

17,  34-

7.  Vishmi  LXXIII,  12,  27,  and  above,  II,  8,  14,  6.

9.  Baudhayana  Gr/hya-sutra  II,  17, 18.

io-ii.  Vasish/^a  XI,  27-28.

12.  In  the  beginning  of  the  verse  I  read  with  M.  and  the  I.  O.
copy  of  the  commentary  urasta^  pitaras  tasya,  and  in  the  end  with
the  Dekhan  and  Gujarat  MSS.  pi«^atakshaka/^.  M.  reads  pi#</a-
tarkya,  and  the  copies  of  the  commentary  pindodak&k.    Both  these


II,  9,  i6.  THE   PROCREATION    OF    SONS.  27 1


Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  9,  Ka^vdika  16.

i.  (Now  follows  some)  advice  for  him  who  is
desirous  of  offspring.

2.  The  two  Arvins  have  declared,  that  fame  is
gained  by  the  procreation  (of  sons) ;

3.  '  Performing  acts  which  tend  to  prolong  life
and  austerities,  intent  on  the  performance  of  the
private  recitation  and  of  sacrifices,  and  keeping  his
organs  in  subjection,  let  him  carefully  beget  offspring
in  his  own  caste.'

4.  '  From  his  birth  a  Brahma/za  is  loaded  with
three  debts ;  these  let  him  pay.  A  prudent  man  is
free  from  doubts  regarding  the  sacred  law.'

5.  '  If  he  worships  the  sages  through  the  study  of
the  Veda,  Indra  with  Soma  sacrifices,  and  the  manes
of  his  ancestors  through  (the  procreation  of)  children,
he  will  rejoice  in  heaven,  free  from  debt/

6.  '  Through  a  son  he  conquers  the  worlds,  through
a  grandson  he  obtains  immortality,  but  through  his
son's  grandson  he  ascends  to  the  (highest)  heaven.'
(All  that)  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda.

7.  The  Veda  shows  the  existence  of  the  three
debts  in  the  following  (passage) :  '  A  Brahma^a  is
born  loaded  with  three  debts ;  (he  owes)  the
studentship  to  the  sages,  sacrifices  to  the  gods,
and  a  son  to  the  manes ;'

readings  are  clearly  corrupt,  and  so  is  the  var.  lect.  of  the  Grzrrya-
sawgraha,  quoted  in  the  Petersburg  Dictionary,  pi^atarkuka^.
Piw^atakshaka^, '  the  cutters  or  parers  of  the  cakes/  is  appropriate,
because  the  remoter  ancestors,  who,  as  Govinda  too  declares,  are
meant  by  the  term,  obtain  the  fragments  of  the  funeral  cakes.

6.  VasishMa  XVII,  5.

7.  Vasish/fta  XI,  48.     After  this   Sutra   the   MSS.  of  the  text


2  72  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  9, 16.

8.  Through  the  procreation  of  a  virtuous  son  he
saves  himself.

9.  He  who  obtains  a  virtuous  son  saves  from  the
fear  of  sin  seven  in  the  descending  line  and  seven
in  the  ascending  line,  (viz.)  six  others  (in  each),
himself  being  the  seventh.

10.  Therefore  he  obtains  a  reward  if  he  begets
issue.

11.  Therefore  he  should  sedulously  beget  off-
spring,


insert  the  following  corrupt  passage  :  bandham  ri^amoksham  pra-
gayas  Myattam  Tpi/rin&m  Mnukarshajabda.?  ka.  pra^ayaw  daraayati  I
anutsanna^  pra^avan  bhavati  1  ya  vad  enaw  prag-anugrzrimte  tavad
akshayaw  lokaw  ^ayati.  The  commentary  does  not  notice  it,  and
it  seems  to  me  that  it  needlessly  interrupts  the  context.

11.  M.  and  K.  add  to  this  Sutra,  atmana^  phalalabhaya,  *  in
order  to  gain  a  reward  for  himself/  The  same  two  MSS.,  further,
insert  the  following  Sutras  :  tasmat  putraw  ^otpadyatmanam  evot-
padayatiti  l  vigwayate  Mtma  vai  putranamasiti  I  eva.m  dvitiya  atmd
^ivata  drash/avyo  yah  putram  utpadayati  I  sa  tatha  bhavati  I  tas-
man  natma  kva&d  akshetra  utsrash/avya^  1  atmanam  avamanyate  hi  l
yathatmanam  utpadayati  sa  tatha  bhavati  I  tasmad  adita  eva  kshetram
anvikMet  sarvavar/ze  samskritam  upadcrena  I  tasmin  darasawyoge
prag-am  utpadayed  II  '  Therefore  (they  say)  that  he  who  begets  a
son  produces  even  his  own  self;  and  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,
"  Thou  art  self,  called  a  son."  Thus  he  who  begets  a  son  will
see,  during  his  lifetime,  a  second  self.  He  becomes  like  him.
Therefore  one's  own  self  must  not  be  begotten  on  an  unworthy
female.  For  (he  who  does  that)  despises  himself.  He  becomes
even  so,  as  he  produces  himself.  Therefore  (every  man),  each  in
his  own  caste,  should  first  look  out  for  a  female  who  has  been
sanctified  according  to  the  injunction  (of  the  sacred  texts).  Taking
her  to  be  his  wedded  wife,  he  shall  beget  a  son.'  It  is  possible
that  this  passage  really  belongs  to  Baudhayana,  for  it  is  written
in  the  usual  style  of  our  Sutra,  and  the  last  word  of  this  passage  as
well  as  of  Sutra  II,  as  given  in  the  Dekhan  MSS.,  is  utpadayet.
But  it  is  not  absolutely  required  by  the  context,  and  the  com-
mentary too  omits  it.


II,io,i7.    RULES  FOR  ENTERING  ORDER  OF  ASCETICS.    273

12.  Through  the  application  of  medicines  and
sacred  texts.

13.  The  advice  to  him  (who  is  intent  on  the
procreation  of  children)  is  given  in  agreement  with
the  revealed  texts.

14.  For  it  produces  results  in  the  case  of  all
the  castes.

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  10,  Kaatdika  17.

i.  Now  we  will  explain  the  rule  for  entering  the
order  of  ascetics  (sa^nyasa).

2.  Some  (teachers  say), '  He  who  has  finished  his
studentship  may  become  an  ascetic  immediately  on
(the  completion  of)  that.'

3.  But  (according  to  others,  asceticism  is  befitting)
for  6alinas  and  Yayavaras  who  are  childless ;

4.  Or  a  widower  (may  become  an  ascetic).

5.  (In  general)  they  prescribe  the  profession  of
asceticism  after  the  completion  of  the  seventieth
year  and  after  the  children  have  been  firmly  settled
in  (the  performance  of)  their  sacred  duties.

6.  Or  a  hermit  in  the  woods  (may  become  an

13.  I  read  with  M.,  whose  reading  is  confirmed  by  the  explana-
tion given  in  the  commentary,  tasyopadcra^  jrutisamanyenopadi-
jyate.  The  other  MS.  reads  tasyopade^ena,  and  in  the  text  of  the
commentary  the  first  word  is  left  out.

17.  2.  Gautama  III,  1.    *

3.  Regarding  the  two  terms  .Salina  and  Yayavara,  see  below,

HI,  i,  3-4.

4.  Vidhura,  translated,  according  to  Govinda's  explanation,  by
1  widower/  perhaps  includes  all  persons  who  have  been  separated
from  their  families.

6.  Regarding  the  ceremonies  to  be  performed  by  hermits  in  the
wood,  see  above,  II,  6,  11,  15,  and  below,  III,  3.

[14]  T


2  74  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  10,  17.

ascetic)  on  finishing  the  (special)  ceremonies  (pre-
scribed for  him).

7.  '  That  eternal  greatness  of  the  Brahma^a  is
neither  increased  nor  diminished  by  works.  The
soul  knows  the  nature  of  that  (greatness).  He  who
knows  that,  is  not  stained  by  evil  deeds.'

8.  '  It  leads  to  the  cessation  of  births/

9.  '  The  eternal  one  leads  (him)  to  glory.'  The
greatness  (of  asceticism  is  declared  by  these  pas-
sages).

10.  After  having  caused  the  hair  of  his  head,  his
beard,  the  hair  on  his  body,  and  his  nails  to  be  cut,
he  prepares

1 1 .  Sticks,  a  rope,  a  cloth  for  straining  water,  a
water  vessel,  and  an  alms-bowl.

12.  Taking  these  (implements,  let  him  go)  to  the
extremity  of  the  village,  or  to  the  extremity  of  the
boundary  (of  the  village),  or  to  the  house  where  the
sacred  fires  are  kept,  partake  of  a  threefold  (mixture
of)  clarified  butter,  milk,  (and)  sour  milk,  and  (after-
wards) fast;

13.  Or  (he  may  partake  of)  water.

14.  (Saying),  '  Om,  BhM,  I  enter  the  Savitri,  tat
savitur  vare/zyam ;  Om,  Bhuva/£,  I  enter  the  Savitri,
bhargo  devasya  dhimahi ;  Om,  I  enter  the  Savitri,
dhiyo  yo  na/z  pra/£odayat ; '  (he  shall  recite  the
Savitri)  foot  by  foot,  half-verse  by  half-verse,  (and
finish  by  repeating)  the  whole  or  the  parts  (of  the
verse).

7.  See  above,  II,  6,  11,  30.  11.  Ya^avalkya  III,  58-60.

14.  This  part  of  the  ceremony  is  called  Savitripravesa, '  entering
the  Savitri.'  According  to  the  Dharmasindhu,  fol.  84  a,  1.  8,  the
last  Mantra  is  '  Om,  Bhuk,  Bhuva^,  Sva^,  I  enter  the  Savitri ;  we
meditate  on  that  adorable  light  of  divine  SaviW,  who  may  impel
our  thoughts/


IT,  10, 17.    RULES  FOR  ENTERING  ORDER  OF  ASCETICS.     275

15.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  Entering  order
after  order,  (man)  becomes  (one  with)  Brahman.'

16.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
*  He  who  has  passed  from  order  to  order,  has  offered
burnt  oblations  and  kept  his  organs  in  subjection,
becomes  afterwards,  tired  with  (giving)  alms  and
(making)  offerings,  an  ascetic.'

17.  Such  an  ascetic  (becomes  one  with)  the  in-
finite (Brahman).

18.  Before  the  sun  sets,  he  heaps  fuel  on  the
Garhapatya  fire,  brings  the  Anvaharyapa^ana  fire  (to
the  spot),  takes  the  naming  Ahavaniya  fire  out  (of
the  Garhapatya),  melts  butter  on  the  Garhapatya  fire,
cleanses  it  (with  Kara  grass),  takes  four  times  (por-
tions of  it)  in  the  sacrificial  spoon  (called  Sru/£),  and
offers  in  the  Ahavaniya  fire  on  which  sacred  fuel
has  been  heaped,  (four  times)  a  full  oblation,  (say-
ing), '  Om,  Svaria!'

19.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  this  (offering
is)  the  Brahmanvadhana  (putting  fuel  on  the  sacred
fires  for  the  sake  of  the  universal  soul).

20.  Now  in  the  evening,  after  the  Agnihotra  has
been  offered,  he  scatters  grass  to  the  north  of  the
Garhapatya  fire,  places  the  sacrificial  vessels  in  pairs,
the  upper  part  turned  downwards,  on  it,  strews
Darbha  grass  to  the  south  of  the  Ahavaniya  fire
on  the  seat  destined  for  the  Brahman  priest,  covers

16.  Manu  VI,  34.

18.  Anvaharyapa/£ana  is  another  name  of  the  so-called  Dakshi-
wagni,  in  which  the  sacrificial  viands  are  cooked.  The  cleansing
of  the  butter  (utpavana)  is  performed  by  taking  hold  of  the  ends  of
blades  of  Kara  grass  and  dipping  the  bent  middle  part  into  the
melted  butter  and  then  drawing  it  upwards.  A  full  burnt  oblation
(purwahuti)  consists  of  a  whole  spoonful.  As  four  spoonfuls  are  to
be  taken  out,  it  follows  that  four  oblations  are  to  be  offered.

T  2


276  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  10,  17.

it  with  the  skin  of  a  black  antelope,  and  remains
awake  during  that  night.

21.  A  Brahma/za  who,  knowing  this,  dies  after
fasting  during  the  night  of  Brahman  and  repositing
within  himself  the  sacred  fires,  conquers  all  guilt,
even  (that  of)  killing  a  Brahma/za.

22.  Then  he  rises  in  the  muhurta  sacred  to
Brahman,  and  offers  the  early  Agnihotra  just  at  the
(appointed)  time.

23.  Next,  after  covering  the  (part  of  the  altar
called)  Yrishtkya.  and  bringing  water,  he  prepares
(an  offering)  to  (Agni)  VaLsvanara  (which  is  cooked)
in  twelve  potsherds.  That  (well-)known  Ish/i  is
the  last  (which  he  performs).

24.  Afterwards  he  throws  the  sacrificial  vessels,
which  are  neither  made  of  earth  nor  of  stone,  into
the  Ahavaniya  fire,

25.  (And)  throwing  the  two  Arams  into  the
Garhapatya  fire  (with  the  words),  '  May  ye  be  of
one  mind  with  us,'  he  reposits  the  sacred  fires  in
himself.

26.  (Reciting  the  sacred  text), '  O  Fire,  that  body
of  thine,  which  is  fit  for  the  sacrifice/  he  inhales
the  smell  of  (the  smoke  of)  each  fire  thrice  three
times.

2  7.  Then,  standing  within  the  sacrificial  enclosure,
(he  says)  thrice  in  a  low  voice  and  thrice  aloud,  'Om,
BhM,  Bhuva/z,  Sva/£,  I  have  entered  the  order  of
ascetics,  I  have  entered  the  order  of  ascetics,  I  have
entered  the  order  of  ascetics.'

21.  The  night  during  which  the  ascetic  keeps  watch  near  the
fires  is  called  '  the  night  of  Brahman.'

25.  The  Arams  are  the  two  pieces  of  wood  used  for  producing
fire  by  friction,  Taittiriya  Sawhita  I,  3,  7,  1-2.


II,  io,  17.    RULES  FOR  ENTERING  ORDER  OF  ASCETICS.     277

28.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  *  The  gods  are
trebly  true.'

29.  (Finally)  he  pours  out  as  much  water  as  will
fill  his  joined  hands,  (saying),  '  I  promise  not  to
injure  any  living  being.'

30.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
*  An  ascetic  who  roams  about  after  having  given  a
promise  of  safety  to  all  living  beings,  is  not  threat-
ened with  danger  by  any  creature/

31.  (Henceforth)  he  must  restrain  his  speech.

32.  He  grasps  his  staff,  (saying),  '(Thou  art  my)
friend,  protect  me.'

33.  He  takes  the  rope,  (reciting  the  verse),  '  The
brilliant  light,'  &c.

34.  He  takes  the  cloth  for  straining  water,  (re-
citing the  text),  '  With  which  means  of  purification
the  gods,'  &c.

35.  He  takes  the  waterpot,  (reciting  the  verse),
'  Through  that  light,  by  which  the  gods  rose  on
high,'  &c.

36.  He  takes  the  alms-bowl,  (reciting  the  Vya-
hrztis).

^y.   Taking  with  him  the  staves,  the  rope,   the

28.  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  II,  18,  6.

29.  All  gifts  must  be  confirmed  by  a  libation  of  water,  which  in
other  cases  is  poured  into  the  hand  of  the  recipient.  The  cere-
mony proves  more  clearly  even  than  the  numerous  other  passages
of  the  Smrz'tis,  in  which  ascetics  are  exhorted  to  abstain  from
injuring  living  beings,  that  the  so-called  ahiwsa  doctrine  is  not  of
Buddhistic,  but  of  Brahmanical  origin.

30.  Vasish/^a  X,  1-2.  31.  Gautama  III,  17.
33.  Taittiriya  Brahmawa  III,  7,  8,  1.

35.  Taittiriya  Sa^hitaV,  7,  2,  2.

37.  The  Surabhimati  occurs  Taittiriya  Brahma/za  III,  9,  7,  5.
For  the  other  texts  named,  see  above,  II,  4,  7,  2.  The  Tarpa/za
has  been  fully  described  above,  II,  5,  9-10.


2J&  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  10,  17.

cloth  for  straining  water,  the  waterpot,  (and)  the
alms-bowl,  he  goes  where  water  (is  to  be  obtained),
bathes,  sips  water,  (and)  washes  himself,  (reciting  the
verses  called)  Surabhimati,  Ablingas,  Varimis,  Hira-
/zyavar/zas,  and  Pavamanis.  Entering  the  water,  he
performs  sixteen  suppressions  of  the  breath,  (mentally
repeating)  the  Aghamarsha^a  hymn,  ascends  the
bank,  wrings  out  his  dress,  puts  on  another  pure
dress,  sips  water,  takes  the  cloth  for  straining,
(saying),  '  Om,  Bhu/z,  Bhuva^,  Sva//,'  and  performs
the  Tarpa;za  (with  the  following  texts),  '  Om,  BhM,
I  satiate/  '  Om,  Bhuva/£  — ,  Om,  Sva/£  — ,  Om,
Maha^  — ,  Om,  Gzx&h  — ,  Om,  Tapa/z  — ,  Om,
Satyam  — .'

38.  He  takes  up  as  much  water  as  his  joined
hands  will  hold  for  the  manes,  (and  satiates  them
with  it)  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  the  gods,
(saying),  •  Om,  BhM  Svadha,  Om,  Bhuva^  Sva-
dha/  &c.

39.  Then  he  worships  the  sun,  (reciting)  the  two
verses  (which  begin),  '  Ud  u  tyaw  /£itram,'  &c.

40.  (Saying), '  Om,  this  (syllable  Om),  forsooth,  is
Brahman  ;  this  (syllable)  which  sheds  warmth  is
light ;  this  which  gives  warmth  is  the  Veda ;  this
must  be  known  as  that  which  sheds  warmth  ; '  he
thus  satiates  the  soul  (and  afterwards)  worships
the  soul  (with  these  texts), '  The  soul  (is)  Brahman,

(is)  light.'


38.  '  In  the  same  manner  as  the  gods,'  i.  e.  without  passing  the
sacred  string  over  the  right  shoulder. — Govinda.

40.  The  Gujarat  and  Dekhan  MSS.,  including  K.,  place  after  the
first  Om  two  additional  Mantras,  'Brahman  (is)  Om;  this  universe
(is)  Om.'  The  object  of  the  Mantras  given  in  the  Madras  MSS.  is  to
identify  the  Pra«ava  with  the  Brahman,  the  sun,  and  the  Veda.


II,  io,  i8.  RULES    FOR    AN    ASCETIC.  279


41.  Let  him  repeat  the  Savitri  one  thousand
times,  or  one  hundred  times,  or  an  unlimited  number
of  times.

42.  (Saying), '  BhM,  Bhuva^,  Suva^,'  he  takes  up
the  cloth  for  straining,  (and)  fetches  water.

43.  Let  him  not,  (at  any  period)  after  that
(moment),  sip  water  which  has  not  been  drawn  up
(from  a  well  and  the  like),  which  has  not  been
strained,  and  which  has  not  been  completely
cleansed.

44.  Let  him  not  wear  any  longer  a  white  dress.

45.  (He  may  carry)  one  staff  or  three  staves.

Prasna  II,  Adhyaya  10,  Ka2vz>ika  18.

1.  Now  the  following  vows  are  (to  be  kept  by
an  ascetic)  :

2.  Abstention  from  injuring  living  beings,  truth-
fulness, abstention  from  appropriating  the  property
of  others,  continence,  (and)  liberality.

3.  There  are  five  minor  vows,  (viz.)  abstention
from  anger,  obedience  towards  the  Guru,  avoidance
of  rashness,  cleanliness  and  purity  in  eating.

4.  Now  (follows  the  rule  for)  begging.     Let  him

43.  ManuVI,  46.  Apariputabhi/^,  'which  has  not  been  com-
pletely cleansed/  probably  refers  to  the  so-called  drzsh/ya  pari-
pavana,  '  carefully  looking  at  it  in  order  to  see  if  any  living  being
remains  in  it.'

J  8.  2.  The  five  vows  (vratas)  named  here  are  the  principal  ones.
As  to  the  vow  of '  liberality '  Govinda  remarks  that  though  the
ascetic  possesses  no  '  store '  and  no  property  in  the  ordinary  sense
of  the  word,  still  he  can  have  books  and  give  those  away.

3.  '  Avoidance  of  rashness/  i.  e.  committing  any  act  which  might
destroy  life.

4.  ■  When  the  Vawvadeva  offering  has  been  finished/  i.  e.  when
people  have  had  their  dinner ;  see  also  Vasish/#a  X,  7.


280  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  10,  18.

ask  Brahma/zas,  both  those  who  have  houses  (salina)
and  those  who  lead  a  wandering  life  (yayavara),
for  alms,  when  the  Vaisvadeva  offering  has  been
finished.

5.  Let  him  ask  (for  it),  prefacing  (his  request  with
the  word)  Bhavat

6.  Let  him  stand  begging  no  longer  than  the
time  required  for  milking  a  cow.

7.  When  he  returns  from  begging,  he  lays  (the
alms)  down  in  a  pure  place,  washes  his  hands  and
feet,  and  announces  (what  he  obtained)  to  the  sun,
(reciting  the  text),  'Ud  u  tyam  &tram,'  &c.  He
(also)  announces  it  to  Brahman  (with  the  text), '  The
first-born  Brahman,'  &c.

8.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda, '  After  the  Brah-
madhana  the  sacrificer  himself  (contains)  the  sacri-
ficial fires.  His  respiration  (pra/za,  represents)  the
Garhapatya  fire,  the  air  that  goes  downwards
(apana,  represents)  the  Anvaharyapa^ana  (or  Dak-
shma)  fire,  the  circulation  in  the  body  (vyana,  repre-
sents) the  Ahavanlya  fire,  the  cerebral  circulation
(udana)  and  the  abdominal  circulation  (samana,
represent)  the  Sabhya  and  Avasathya  fires.  These
five  fires  are  abiding  in  the  soul.  He  (therefore)
offers  (the  oblations)  in  the  soul  alone/

9.  '  This  sacrifice,  offered  in  the  soul,  which  is
located  in  and  based  on  the  soul,  leads  the  soul  to
happiness.'

10.  Giving,  compassionately,  portions  (of  his
food)  to  the  living  beings,  and  sprinkling  the  re-


7.  The  second  text  occurs  repeatedly  in   the  Taittiriya-veda,
e.g.  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  1,  10.

8.  Regarding  the  Brahmadhana,  see  above,  II,  10, 17,  19.


II,  io,  18.  RULES    FOR    AN    ASCETIC.  281

mainder  with  water,  he  shall  eat  it  as   if  it  were
a  medicine.

11.  After  he  has  eaten  and  sipped  water,  he
mutters  (the  texts), '  Out  of  darkness  we,'  &c.,  (and),
1  My  speech  resides  in  the  mouth,'  &c.,  and  worships
the  sun  with  the  (verse  called)  6yotishmati.

12.  Let  him  eat  food,  given  without  asking,
regarding  which  nothing  has  been  settled  before-
hand and  which  has  reached  him  accidentally,  so
much  only  as  is  sufficient  to  sustain  life.

1 3.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
1  Eight  mouthfuls  (make)  the  meal  of  an  ascetic,
sixteen  (that)  of  a  hermit  in  the  woods,  thirty-two
(that)  of  a  householder,  an  unlimited  (quantity  that)
of  a  student/

14.  'Alms  (may)  either  (be  obtained)  from  (men
of)  the  three  castes,  or  the  food  (given)  by  a  single
Brahma^a  (may  be  eaten) ;  or  (he  may  obtain  food)
from  (men  of)  all  castes,  and  not  (eat)  that  given  by
a  single  Brahma;za.'

15.  Now  they  quote  (the  following  special  rules)
for  the  case  that  the  teachers  explain  (the  doctrine)
of  the  Upanishads  :  '  Diligently  standing  (in  the
day-time),  keeping  silence,  sitting  (at  night)  with
crossed  legs,  bathing  three  times  a  day,  and  eating

11.  The  first  text  occurs  frequently  in  the  Taittiriya-veda,  e.g.
Taittiriya  Sawhita  IV,  1,  7,  4;  the  second,  Taittiriya  Ara/zyaka  X,
72.  The  Gyotishmati  is,  according  to  Govinda,  the  first  of  the
two  Mantras  quoted.

12.  According  to  Govinda  this  verse  gives  the  opinion  of '  some'
teachers,  not  the  author's.  Asawzk/iptam, '  regarding  which  nothing
has  been  settled  beforehand/  indicates,  according  to  Govinda,  that
the  ascetic  must  not  even  mentally  determine  what  he  is  going
to  eat.

13.  See  above,  11,7,  !3>  7-


282  BAUDHAYANA.  II,  10,  18.

at  the  fourth,  sixth,  or  eighth  (meal-time  only),  he
shall  subsist  entirely  on  (rice)  grains,  oil-cake,  food
prepared  from  barley,  sour  milk,  (and)  milk.'

16.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  'On  that  (occasion)
he  shall  rigidly  keep  silence ;  pressing  the  teeth
together  he  may  converse,  without  opening  his
mouth,  as  much  as  is  necessary  with  teachers  deeply
versed  in  the  three  Vedas  (and)  with  ascetics  pos-
sessing a  great  knowledge  of  the  scriptures,  not  with
women,  nor  when  he  would  break  (his  vow).'

1 7.  (Let  him  keep)  only  one  of  (the  rules  which
enjoin)  standing  (in  the  day-time),  rigid  silence,  and
sitting  (at  night)  with  crossed  legs  ;  let  him  not  keep
all  three  together.

18.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda, '  And  he  who  has
gone  there  may  eat,  in  times  of  distress,  a  small
quantity  of  the  food  prescribed  by  his  vow  after
(having  partaken  of  other  dishes),  provided  he  does
not  break  (his  vow).'

19.  '  Eight  (things)  do  not  cause  him  who  is  intent
on  standing  (in  the  day-time),  keeping  rigid  silence,
sitting  (at  night)  with  crossed  legs,  bathing  three
times  a  day,  and  (eating)  at  the  fourth,  sixth,  or
eighth  meal-time  only,  to  break  his  vow,  (viz.)
water,  roots,  clarified  butter,  milk,  sacrificial  food,
the  wish  of  a  Brahma/^a,  an  order  of  his  teacher,
and  medicine/

20.  Let  him  mutter  the  (Mantras  which  must  be

18.  'The  meaning  is,  that  in  times  of  distress,  having  partaken
at  his  pleasure  (of  other  food),  he  may  afterwards  eat  of  one  (of
the  substances  mentioned  above,  viz.)  rice-grains  and  the  rest.' —
Govinda.

19.  All  the  MSS.  except  M.  have  snana,  '  bathing/  instead  of
sthana,  '  standing  (in  the  day-time)/  though  the  reading  is  clearly
wrong.


II,  io,  18.  RULES    FOR   AN    ASCETIC.  283

recited  at  the)  Agnihotra,  in  the  evening  and  in  the
morning,

21.  After  performing  his  evening  devotions  by
(reciting  the  verses  called)  Varimis,  and  his  morning
devotions  by  (reciting  the  verses  called)  Maitrls.

22.  'An  ascetic  shall  keep  no  fire,  have  no  house,
no  home,  and  no  protector.  He  may  enter  a  village
in  order  to  collect  alms,  and  emit  speech  at  the
private  recitation  of  the  Veda.'

23.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda, '  Limited  in  number
are  the  /fck- verses,  limited  in  number  are  the  Samans,
limited  is  the  answer  (of  the  Adhvaryu  priest)/

24.  '  Thus  (an  ascetic)  shall  not  give  up  the  Veda,
(but  live),  until  he  is  liberated  from  the  body,  at  the
root  of  the  tree.'

25.  'The  tree  (is)  the  Veda;  the  syllable  Om  is
its  root ;  the  syllable  Om  is  the  essence  of  the
Veda.'

26.  '  Meditating  on  the  syllable  Om,  he  becomes

21.  The  Maitris  occur  Taitt.  Sa^mita  III,  4,  n,  5,  and  the
Varu;zis  follow  them  immediately.

22.  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  10.

23.  This  and  the  next  Sutras  are  intended  to  teach  that  ascetics
may  limit  their  private  recitation  to  the  repetition  of  the  prawava,
'  the  syllable  Om.'  According  to  Govinda  the  passage  of  the  Veda
quoted  refers  originally  to  the  iTaturhotara^,  which  the  Taittinya
Brahmawa  II,  2,  1,  4,  and  III,  12,  5,  1  identifies  with  the  Brahman,
and  where  the  pratigara,  the  answer  of  the  Adhvaryu  priest,  is  '  Om
hota/^'  (Aitareya  Brahma/zaV,  25).

24.  I  have  taken  vnkshamulikovedasa#myasi  to  stand  for  vri-
kshamuliko  avedasawnyasi.  For  the  vedasa;?myasa,  'giving  up
the  Veda/  is  not  permitted  to  an  ascetic ;  see  e.  g.  Vasish/^a  X,  4.
But  even  without  the  negative  particle  vedasa^nyasi  may  convey
a  sense  not  opposed  to  the  general  teaching  of  the  Smrztis.  For
it  may  be  taken  to  mean  'abandoning  (the  recitation  of  other
portions  of)  the  Veda.'


284  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  1.

fit  (to  be  united  with)  Brahman.'     Thus  spake  the
lord  of  created  beings.

27.  Let  him  cleanse  the  vessel  of  Brahman  with
the  seven  Vyahrztis.

Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  1.

1.  Now,  therefore,  (we  will  speak)  of  those  who
desire  (to  fulfil)  the  duties  of  .Salinas  (dwellers  in
houses),  Yayavaras  (wanderers),  and  A'akraiaras
(circle-goers),  who  subsist  by  nine  (different)  means
of  livelihood.

2.  The  term  'livelihood'  (yrztti)  is  used  because
they  subsist  thereby  (tadvartanat).

3.  The  word  .Salina  (is  used)  because  they  dwell
in  houses  (sals,).

4.  To  be  a  Yayavara  (means  that  one)  goes  on
by  means  of  a  most  excellent  livelihood  (vrzttya
varaya  yati).

5.  The  term  Aakra/£ara  is  derived  from  going  by
turns  (to  the  houses  of  rich  men).

6.  We  will  explain  those  (above-mentioned  means
of  livelihood)  in  their  proper  order.

7.  They  are  nine,  (viz.)  Sha^mvartani,  Kauddali,
Dhruva,  Samprakshalani,  Samuha,  Palani,  SilonMa.,
Kapota,  and  Siddho^M.

27.  Govinda  is  uncertain  if  the  term  brahmabha^ana, '  the  vessel
of  Brahman,'  refers  to  the  alms-bowl  or  to  the  body  of  the  ascetic.
Probably  both  are  meant,  and  the  Sutra  is  intended  to  prescribe
the  frequent  recitation  of  the  Vyahrztis  in  addition  to  the  syl-
lable Om.

1.  5.  Govinda  says  that  -#akra/£ara  is  another  name  for  Yayavara,
and  that  anukrama^arawa, '  going  by  turns,'  means  going  successively
to  the  houses  of  Brahmawas,  Kshatriyas,  and  VaLsyas.

7.  The  terms  left  untranslated  are  fully  explained  in  the  next


Ill,  I.         WAYS    OF    LIVING    FOR    HOUSEHOLDERS.  285

8.  (In  addition)  to  these  there  is  a  tenth  way  of
living,  viz.  forest-life.

9.  (If  he  desires  to  adopt)  any  of  the  nine  ways
of  living,

10.  He  causes  the  hair  of  his  head,  his  beard,  the
hair  on  his  body,  and  his  nails  to  be  cut,  and  besides
gets  ready  (the  following  objects),

11.  (Viz.)  the  skin  of  a  black  antelope,  a  water-
pot,  a  staff,  a  yoke  for  carrying  burdens,  (and)
a  sickle.

12.  He  desires  to  go  forth,  after  having  offered
a  Traidhataviya  (offering)  or  a  Vaisvanarf  (ish/i).

13.  Now  on  the  (following)  morning,  after  the
sun  has  risen,  he  makes  the  sacred  fires  burn
brightly,  melts  butter  on  the  Garhapatya  fire,
cleanses  it  (with  Kara  grass),  heats  the  (spoons
called)  Sru£  and  Sruva,  cleans  (them),  takes  out
four  (spoonfuls  of  butter)  in  the  Sru/£,  and  offers
the  Vastoshpatiya  (oblation)  in  the  Ahavaniya  fire
according  to  (the  rules  of  his)  Sutra.


chapter.     All  the  MSS.  read  kauntali  for  kauddali,  which  occurs
in  the  commentary  alone.

11.  The  vivadha,  'a  yoke  for  carrying  burdens/  consists  usually
of  a  bamboo  pole,  to  the  ends  of  which  two  ropes  are  attached  for
fastening  the  loads.  Kuthahari, '  a  sickle/  seems  to  be  the  name
of  a  particular  kind  of  sickle,  since  Govinda  explains  it  by  vasa-
va^asanadatram.  He  adds  that  the  term  includes  '  a  spade '  (kud-
dala)  and  other  implements.

12.  The  meaning  is  that  on  the  evening  before  his  departure
from  the  old  home  he  is  to  offer  the  Traidhataviya-homa.  Accord-
ing to  the  -Srauta-sutras  (see  the  Petersb.  Diet.  s.  v.  traidhatavi)  the
latter  offering  always  occurs  at  the  end  of  a  great  sacrifice.  Hence
it  is  appropriate  for  a  person  who  wishes  to  begin  a  new  mode
of  life.

13.  This  is  the  leave-taking  from  the  old  dwelling.


286  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  i.

14.  Having  recited  the  Puronuvakya  (verse),  'O
lord  of  the  dwelling,  permit  us,'  &c.,  he  offers  (the
oblation)  with  the  Ya^ya  verse,  '  O  lord  of  the
dwelling,  with  thy  kind  company/  &c.

15.  Some  (declare  that)  every  person  who  has
kindled  the  sacred  fires  (shall  offer  these  Homas).

16.  Others  (say  that)  a  Yayavara  alone  (shall
do  it).

1 7.  After  departing  (from  his  house),  he  stops  at
the  extremity  of  the  village,  or  at  the  extremity  of
the  boundary  of  the  village,  builds  there  a  hut  or
a  cottage,  and  enters  that.

18.  Let  him  use  the  skin  of  the  black  antelope
and  the  other  (objects)  which  he  has  prepared  for
the  several  purposes  which  they  are  intended  to
serve.

19.  Known  (is)  the  (duty  of)  serving  the  fires;
known  (is)  the  (duty  of)  offering  the  new  and  full
moon  sacrifices ;  known  (is)  the  successive  perform-
ance of  the  five  Mahaya^as;  it  is  seen  that  the
vegetables,  which  have  been  produced,  are  offered.

20.  He  hallows  those  (vegetables),  either  (reciting
the  text)/  I  offer  what  is  agreeable  to  all  the  gods,'
or  silently,  and  cooks  (them).


14.  The  two  verses  occur  Taittiriya  Sa^hita  III,  4,  10, 1.  It  is
specially  mentioned  by  Sayawa  that  the  two  verses  have  to  be
recited  by  an  Agnihotrin  on  departing  from  his  home.

17.  Ma/Aa, '  a  cottage,'  is,  according  to  Govinda,  a  house  resting
on  many  posts  or  pillars,  while  ku/i  is  the  simple  shed  with  four
posts  and  a  roof  of  leaves.

19.  The  last  clause,  probably,  is  meant  to  prescribe  a  simpler
form  of  the  Vauvadeva.

20.  Govinda  adds  that  the  meaning  is  that  the  sacrificer  shall
eat  the  boiled  rice  in  silence.


111,2.     MODES  OF  SUBSISTENCE  FOR  HOUSEHOLDERS.     287

21.  For  such  (a  man  the  duty  of)  teaching,  sacri-
ficing for  others,  accepting  gifts,  and  (performing)
other  sacrifices  (than  those  mentioned)  ceases.

22.  (The  use  of)  sacrificial  food  fit  to  be  eaten
during  the  performance  of  a  vow  is  seen  ;

23.  That  is  as  follows  :  (his  food  may  be)  mixed
with  clarified  butter  or  sour  milk,  (it  must)  not
(contain)  pungent  condiments  or  salt,  nor  meat,
nor  (be)  stale.

24.  (He  shall  remain)  chaste,  or  approach  (his
wife)  in  season.

25.  (It  is  necessary)  to  have  the  hair  of  his  head,
his  beard,  the  hair  on  his  body,  and  his  nails  cut  on
each  Parva  day,  and  the  rules  of  purification  (are
obligatory  on  him).

26.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verses)  :
'  Two  kinds  of  purification,  which  the  .Sish/as  reve-
rentially practise,  are  mentioned  in  the  Veda, —
external  (purification),  which  consists  in  the  removal
of  impure  stains  and  foul  smells,  and  internal  (purifi-
cation), which  consists  in  the  abstention  from  injuring
live  creatures.'

2  7.  '  The  body  is  purified  by  water,  the  under-
standing by  knowledge,  the  soul  of  beings  by  ab-
stention from  injuring,  (and)  the  internal  organ  by
truth.'

Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  2.

1.  As  regards  (the  mode  of  subsistence  called)
Sha/^ivartani,  (that)  is  (as  follows) :

2 1 .  Govinda  adds  that  the  obligation  of  performing  other  merito-
rious deeds,  such  as  digging  wells  and  tanks  (purta),  also  ceases.

27.  Vasish//£a  III,  60.


288  BAUDHAYANA.  111,2.

2.  He  cultivates  six  Nivartanas  (of)  fallow  (land)  ;
he  gives  a  share  to  the  owner  (of  the  soil),  or  solicits
his  permission  (to  keep  the  whole  produce).

3.  Let  him  plough  before  breakfast  with  two
bulls  whose  noses  have  not  been  pierced,  not
striking  (them)  with  the  goad,  (but)  frequently
coaxing  (them).

4.  If  he  cultivates  six  Nivartanas  in  this  manner
(and  subsists  thereby),  that  is  (the  mode  of  living
called)  Sha/mivartani  (subsistence  on  six  Nivar-
tan'as).

5.  (As  regards  the  mode  of  subsistence  called)
Kauddali,  he  digs  up  (the  soil)  near  a  water(-course
or  tank)  with  a  spade,  a  ploughshare,  or  a  pointed
piece  of  wood,  sows  seed,  (and)  grows  bulbs,  roots,
fruit,  pot-herbs,  and  vegetables.

6.  (If  he  thus)  cultivates  (land)  with  a  spade  (and
lives  on  its  produce),  that  is  the  (mode  of  life  called)
Kauddali  (subsistence  by  the  spade).

7.  He  who  lives  by  the  (mode  of  subsistence
called)  Dhruva,  wraps  up  his  head  in  a  white  dress
(saying),  '  For  the  sake  of  welfare  I  wrap  thee  up,
O  head,'  (and)  takes  the  skin  of  a  black  antelope
(with  the  words), '  (Thou  art)  spiritual  pre-eminence,
(I  take  thee)  for  the  sake  of  spiritual  pre-eminence ;'
the  Pavitra  (reciting)  the  Ablinga  texts ;  the  water-
pot  (saying),  '  Thou  art  strength,  (I  take)  thee  for


2.  2.  ANivartana  is  a  measure  of  4000  square  hastas,  the  ancient
equivalent  of  the  modern  Bigha.

3.  Identical  with  II,  2,  4,  21.

6.  Govinda  says  that  according  to  some  the  following  cere-
monies need  only  be  performed  when  one  goes  out  begging  for
the  first  time,  while  others  insist  on  their  being  performed  daily.

7.  The  Manastokiya,  i.e.  the  text  beginning  'ma   nas  toke,'


111,2.        MODES    OF    LIVING    FOR    HOUSEHOLDERS.  289

the  sake  of  strength ; '  the  yoke  for  carrying  burdens
(saying), '  Thou  art  grain,  (I  take)  thee  for  the  sake
of  prosperity;'  the  staff  (saying), '  (Thou  art)  a  friend,
protect  me.'

8.  On  leaving  (his  hut),  he  mutters  the  Vyahrztis,
and  (afterwards  the  verse  used  for)  hallowing  the
quarters  of  the  horizon, '  May  the  earth,  the  middle
sphere,  the  sky,  the  constellations,  and  all  the
quarters  of  the  horizon,  fire,  air,  and  sun,  (may  all
these)  deities  protect  me  on  my  road/

9.  Because,  after  muttering  the  Manastokiya  (text)
and  entering  the  village,  he  shows  himself  with  the
yoke  (on  his  shoulder)  at  the  door  of  each  house,
they  call  it '  showing  oneself.'

10.  Because,  if  every  (other)  livelihood  fails,  he
persistently  (dhruvam)  supports  himself  by  this
(mode  of  living),  it  is  called  Dhruva  (the  un-
changeable).

1 1 .  (As  regards  the  mode  of  life  called)  Sampra-
kshalani,  (if,  in  order  to  show  that)  there  is  no
waste  of  the  vegetable  (substances)    obtained   nor

occurs  repeatedly  in  the  Taittiriya-veda,  e.  g.  Taitt.  Sazwhita*  III,  4,
11,  2.  Govinda  adds  that  the  beggar  must  remain  silent,  and  not
stop  longer  at  each  door  than  the  time  required  for  milking  a  cow.

10.  Both  the  text  and  the  scanty  commentary  on  this  Sutra  are
corrupt.  K.  reads,  vrz'tter  vrz'ttair  avartayaz/z  tayaiva  tasya  dhruvam
varttayatiti  dhruveti  parikirtita ;  D.  vrz'tte  vrz'ttair  avarttatha,  &c. ;
M.  vrz'tte  vrz'tter  avrz'ttayam  avrz'ttaya/zz  tathaiva  tasya/fc  ddhrzvazzz
varttamanad  iti,  &c. ;  C.  I.  vrz'tter  vrz'tter  avartayam  avartayam
tathaiva  tasyazzz  dhruvazzz  vartanad  iti,  &c.  The  Telugu  copy  omits
the  text.  From  the  commentary  it  is  clear  that  Govinda  read  at
the  beginning  of  the  Sutra  {  vrz'tter  vrz'tter/  and  the  Telugu  copy
proves  that  l  tayaiva '  is  the  correct  reading.  I  restore  the  Sutra
conjecturally,  as  follows,  vrz'tter  vrz'tter  avarttayazzz  tayaiva  tasya
dhruva/zz  vartanad  iti  dhruveti  parikirtita.

11.  I  read,  samprakshalaniti  I  utpannanam  oshadhinam  prakshe-

[14]  V


29O  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  2.


any  hoarding,  he  turns  the  dishes,  after  washing
them,  upside  down,  (that  is  the  livelihood  called)
Samprakshalani  (living  by  washing).

12.  As  to  the  (mode  of  subsistence  called)  Sa-
muha,  (if)  he  sweeps  up  (grain)  with  a  broom  in
permitted  places  where  (grain-bearing)  plants  are
found,  either  on  a  road  or  in  fields  the  access  to
which  is  not  obstructed  (by  hedges),  and  lives  on
(what  he  has  thus  obtained),  that  (livelihood  is  called)
Samuha  (living  by  sweeping).

13.  As  to  the  (mode  of  life  called)  Palani,  it  is
also  named  Ahiwsaka  (not  hurting),  and  the  follow-
ing (definition)  is  given.  (If)  he  tries  to  obtain
from  virtuous  men  husked  rice  or  seeds,  and  main-
tains (himself)  thereby,  that  (is  the  mode  of  subsist-
ence called)  Palani.

14.  As  to  the  (mode  of  life  called)  SilonMa,  (if)
he  gleans  single  ears  in  permitted  places  where
(grain-bearing)  plants  grow,  on  a  road  or  in  fields
the  access  to  which  is  not  obstructed,  and  supports
himself  by  (these)  gleanings,  (collected)  from  time

pawaw  nastiti  ni£ayo  V&  bha^anani  sa/rcprakshalya  nyub§-ayatiti
samprakshalani  11  M.  has  nasti  ni/fcayo  va,  and  C.  I.  reads  also
ni/£ayo  and  omits  '  va.'  The  Dekhan  MSS.  have  nastiti  £ayo  va\
The  description  is  not  very  clear ;  but  it  seems  that  a  person  who
lives  by  the  Samprakshalani  vrz'tti  must  obtain  grain  and  vegetables
by  begging  in  such  quantities  as  will  suffice  for  one  meal,  and
prove  by  the  way  in  which  he  treats  his  dishes  that  he  has  neither
wasted  his  food  nor  any  store  remaining.

13.  The  translation  of  this  Sutra  is  merely  tentative,  as  the  two
MSS.  of  the  commentary  omit  the  text,  and  contain  only  a  frag-
ment of  Govinda's  explanation.  The  latter  seems  to  have  differed
from  my  interpretation.  The  text,  as  given  by  the  other  MSS.,  runs
as  follows:  palanity  [pali°,  MSS.]  ahiwsakety  evedam  uktam  bhavati
[°titi,  M.]  tushavihina#zs  taw^/ulan  i^/^ati  sa^anebhyo  bi^ani  va
\ka.,  D.]  palayatiti  palani  [phala°,  phalani,  M. ;  palino,  K.  D.]


111,3-  HERMITS    IN    THE   WOOD.  29 1

to  time,  that  (is   the   mode   of  subsistence  called)
Silonkka.  (gleaning).

15.  As  to  the  (livelihood  called)  Kapota,  (if)  he
picks  up  with  two  fingers  single  grains  in  permitted
places,  where  (grain-bearing)  plants  grow,  either
on  the  road  or  in  fields  the  access  to  which  is  not
obstructed,  that  (is  called),  because  he  acts  like  a
pigeon,  Kapota  (pigeon-life).

16.  As  to  (the  mode  of  life  called)  Siddho^M,  (if)
tired  with  the  (other)  ways  of  subsistence,  he  asks,
because  he  has  become  old  or  diseased,  virtuous
men  for  cooked  food,  that  (is  the  livelihood  called)
Siddho^/Ma  (gleaning  cooked  food).

17.  If  (he  adopts)  the  latter,  he  must  reposit  (the
sacred  fires)  in  his  soul  and  behave  like  an  ascetic,
except  (in  using)  the  cloth  for  straining  water  and
(wearing)  a  reddish-brown  dress.

18.  If  he  subsists  on  the  produce  of  the  forest,
(the  fruits)  of  trees,  creepers,  and  lianas,  and  of
grasses,  such  as  wild  millet  (^yamaka)  and  wild
sesamum,  that  (is  called)  forest-life.

19.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
1  Moving  about  with  the  beasts,  dwelling  together
with  them,  and  maintaining  oneself  in  a  manner
similar  to  theirs,  that  is  clearly  the  road  to  heaven.'

Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  3.

1.  Now  the  hermits  in  the  wood  belong  to  two
classes,

15.  Govinda  mentions  a  varia  lectio  not  found  in  our  MSS.,  kapo-
tavatsa/rcdamini, '  because  he  pecks  like  a  pigeon/

16.  Here  as  well  as  above,  III,  1,  7,  the  Dekhan  MSS.  read
siddhe^Ma, '  begging  cooked  food/  instead  of  siddhonkM.

3.  1.  Compare  for  the  whole  Adhyaya,  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,
20-23,  2.

U    2


292  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  3.

2.  Those  who  cook  (their  food),  and  those  who
do  not  cook  it.

3.  Among  them,  those  who  cook  (their  food  are
divided)  into  five  subdivisions,  (viz.)  those  who  eat
everything  which  the  forest  contains,  those  who  live
on  unhusked  (wild-growing  grain),  those  who  eat
bulbs  and  roots,  those  who  eat  fruit,  and  those  who
eat  pot-herbs.

4.  Those  who  eat  everything  which  the  forest
produces  are,  again,  of  two  kinds :  they  either  sub-
sist on  forest-produce  generated  by  Indra,  or  on  that
which  has  been  generated  from  semen.

5.  Among  these,  that  which  has  been  generated
by  Indra  (is  the  produce)  of  lianas,  shrubs,  creepers,
and  trees.  Fetching  (that)  and  cooking  it,  they  offer
the  Agnihotra  in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning,
give  (food)  to  ascetics,  guests,  and  students,  and  eat
the  remainder.

6.  That  which  is  generated  from  semen  is  the
flesh  (of  animals)  slain  by  tigers,  wolves,  falcons,
and  other  (carnivorous  beasts),  or  by  one  of  them.
Fetching  (that)  and  cooking  it,  they  offer  the  Agni-
hotra in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning,  give
(shares)  to  ascetics,  guests,  and  students,  and  eat
the  remainder.

7.  Those  who  eat  unhusked  grain  only,  fetch  rice,
avoiding  (husked)  corn,  boil  it,  offer  the  Agnihotra
both  in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning,  give
(food)  to  ascetics,  guests,  and  students,  and  eat  the
remainder.

8.  Those  who  eat  bulbs  and  roots,  or  fruit,  or
pot-herbs,  (act)  exactly  in  the  same  manner.

9.  Those  (hermits)  who  do  not  cook  (their  food
are  divided  into)  five   (classes),  Unma^akas,  Pra-


Ill,  3.  HERMITS    IN    THE   FOREST.  293

vr/ttclrins,    Mukhenadayins,  Toyaharas,   and  Vayu-
bhakshas.

10.  Among  these,  the  Unma^akas  (collect  and
prepare  their  food),  avoiding  (the  use  of)  iron  and
stone  implements,

11.  The  Pravr/ttasins  take  it  with  the  hand,

12.  The  Mukhenadayins  take  it  with  the  mouth
(only,  like  beasts),

1 3.  The  Toyaharas  subsist  on  water  only,

14.  And  the  Vayubhakshas  (air- eaters)  eat  no-
thing.

15.  In  this  manner  ten  (different)  initiations  are
prescribed  for  hermits  who  follow  the  rule  of  Vi-
khanas  (vaikhanasa).

16.  He  who  has  agreed  (to  obey)  the  Institutes
of  his  (order,  shall  wear)  a  staff,  (shall  keep)  rigid
silence,  and  (shall)  abstain  from  rash  acts.

17.  Hermits  following  the  rule  of  Vikhanas  (vai-
khanasa) are  purified  (from  sin),  and  (especially)
those  who  abstain  from  food.

1 8.  The  sum  of  the  rules  applicable  to  all  Brahma-
Vaikhanasas  (is  as  follows)  :

19.  'Let  him  not  injure  (even)  gadflies  or  gnats  ;
let  him  bear  cold  and  perform  austerities ;  let  him
constantly  reside  in  the  forest,  be  contented,  and

11.  Prav/7'tta.rin,  i.  e.  he  who  eats  food  only  which  comes  to  him
accidentally.

15-17.  These  three  Sutras  are  omitted  in  the  commentary,  but
found  in  all  the  MSS.  of  the  text.

18.  Govinda  proposes  two  explanations  for  the  term  brahma-
vaikhanasa ;  he  thinks  that  it  may  mean  either  brahmawa  drzsh/a
vaikhanasa^,  ■  hermits  seen  by  Brahman/  i.  e.  whose  duties  have
been  revealed  by  Brahman,  or  '  hermits  who  are  Brahma^as  by
caste.'  The  true  sense,  however,  is  probably  'a  hermit  (who
strives)  to  (become  one  with)  Brahman'  (brahmarthaw  vaikhanasa).


294  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  3.

delight  in  (dresses  made  of)  bark  and  skins,  (and  in
carrying)  water  (in  his  pot).'

20.  'A  devotee  shall  first  honour  the  guests
who  have  come  to  his  hermitage  at  (dinner)  time  ;
he  shall  be  sedulous  in  (worshipping)  gods  and
Brahma^as,  in  (offering)  the  Agnihotra,  and  in
practising  austerities.'

21.  'A  Brahma^a  who  has  taken  to  forest-life,  and
who  has  adopted  this  difficult  (but)  pure  mode  of
existence,  which  keeps  him  apart  from  wicked  men,
which  must  never  be  given  up,  which  is  similar  to
(that  of  the)  beasts  and  birds,  which  allows  the
collection  of  the  necessaries  of  life  for  one  day  only,
and  which  necessitates  the  consumption  of  astringent
and  bitter  (food),  never  sinks  low.'

22.  'Moving  about  with  the  beasts,  dwelling
together  with  them,  and  maintaining  oneself  in  a
manner  similar  to  theirs,  that  is  clearly  the  road  to
heaven.'

Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  4.

1.  Now  if  a  student  commits  any  act  against  his
vow,  eats  meat,  or  approaches  a  woman,  whenever
any  evil  befals  him,

2.  He  heaps  fuel  on  the  fire  in  the  interior  of  the
house,  scatters  (Kun  grass)  around  it,  and  performs
the  ceremonies  up  to  the  end  of  the  Agnimukha ;
then  he  offers  oblations  of  clarified  butter,  (reciting
the  following  texts) :  'It  was  done  by  lust,  lust  does

22.  See  above,  III,  2,  19.

4.  1.  The  clause  striya/rc  vopeyat,  '  or  approaches  a  woman,'  is
omitted  by  Govinda.  The  whole  chapter  is  a  supplement  to  the
rules  given  above,  II,  1,1,  30-35,  where  some  of  the  Vedic  pas-
sages mentioned  here  have  already  been  given.


Til,  4.        PENANCES  FOR  A  STUDENT.  295

it,  to  lust  (belongs)  all  this,  to  him  who  draws  me  on,
Svaha;'  'It  was  done  by  the  internal  organ,  the
internal  organ  does  it,  to  the  internal  organ  (belongs)
all  this,  to  him  who  draws  me  on,  Svaha ;'  '  It  was
done  by  passion,  passion  does  it,  to  passion  (belongs)
all  this,  to  him  who  draws  me  on,  Svaha;'  'It  was
done  by  ignorance,  ignorance  does  it,  to  ignorance
(belongs)  all  this,  to  him  who  draws  me  on,  Svaha;'
'  It  was  done  by  sin,  sin  does  it,  to  sin  (belongs)
all  this,  to  him  who  draws  me  on,  Svaha;'  '  It  was
done  by  wrath,  wrath  does  it,  to  wrath  (belongs)  all
this,  to  him  who  draws  me  on,  Svaha.'

3.  That  which  begins  with  the  muttering  (of  the
Vedic  texts)  and  ends  with  the  gift  of  a  fee  (con-
sisting of)  a  cow  is  known,

4.  (Afterwards)  he  stays  (during  the  night)  behind
(i.  e.  to  the  west  of)  the  fire,  wrapping  himself  in  the
skin  of  a  black  antelope,  the  neck  of  which  is  turned
towards  the  east  and  the  hair  of  which  is  turned
outside.

5.  When  the  day  dawns,  he  drags  himself  away
from  the  hinder  part  (of  the  skin),  goes  to  a  bathing-
place,  bathes  (there)  in  the  manner  which  is  known,
(but)  performs,  while  in  the  water,  sixteen  sup-
pressions of  breath  with  the  Aghamarsha^a  hymn ;
next  he  performs  the  known  (ceremonies)  up  to  the
worship  of  the  sun,  and  afterwards  goes  to  the  house
of  his  teacher.

6.  Let  him  know  for  certain  that  that  is  equally
(effective)  as  bathing  (with  the  priests)  at  the  end  of
a  horse-sacrifice.

5.  Govinda  says  that  this  manner  of  crawling  out  of  the  skin  is
symbolical  of  a  new  birth.


296  baudhAyana.  hi,  5.


Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  5.

1.  Now  we  will  explain  the  rule  of  the  most  holy
Aghamarsha/za.

2.  He  goes  to  a  bathing-place  and  bathes  (there).
Dressed  in  a  pure  dress  let  him  raise,  close  to  the
water,  an  altar,  and  moistening  his  clothes  by  one
(application  of  water),  and  filling  his  hand  once  (with
water),  let  him  recite  the  Aghamarsha/za  hymn  (in
the  manner  of  his  daily)  private  recitation.

3.  (Let  him  repeat  it)  one  hundred  times  in  the
morning,  one  hundred  times  at  midday,  and  one
hundred  times  or  an  unlimited  number  of  times  in
the  afternoon.

4.  When  the  stars  have  risen,  let  him  partake  of
gruel  prepared  of  one  handful  of  barley.

5.  After  seven  (days  and)  nights  he  is  freed  from
all  minor  sins  (upapataka),  whether  they  have  been
committed  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  after
twelve  (days  and)  nights  (from  all  other  sins)  ex-
cepting the  murder  of  a  learned  Brahma^a,  the
violation  of  a  Guru's  bed,  stealing  gold,  and  drink-
ing Sura.

6.  After  twenty-one  (days  and)  nights  he  over-
comes even  those  (crimes)  and  conquers  them.

5.  1.  VasisMa  XXVI,  8.

2.  SthawaTila,  '  an  altar/  is  a  slightly  raised  mound  of  earth,
which,  according  to  Govinda,  in  this  case  must  have  the  shape  of
the  sun's  disc.  According  to  the  same  authority  the  hand  of  the
performer  must  remain  filled  with  water  as  long  as  the  recitation
lasts,  and  the  performer  stands  behind  the  altar  facing  the  east.

5.  Regarding  the  prasrz'tiyavaka,  '(subsisting  on)  gruel  prepared
from  a  handful  of  barley,'  see  below,  III,  6.


in,  6.  prask/tiyAvak  a.  297

7.  He  overcomes  everything,  he  conquers  all,  he
obtains  the  reward  of  all  sacrifices,  he  has  bathed  at
all  sacred  bathing-places,  he  has  performed  the  vows
required  for  (the  study  of)  all  the  Vedas,  he  becomes
known  to  all  the  gods,  he  sanctifies  a  company  (of
Brahma^as)  by  merely  looking  (at  them),  and  his
undertakings  are  successful.  Thus  speaks  Baudha-
yana.

Prasna  III,  AdhyAya  6.

1.  Now  if  a  man  feels  his  conscience  charged
with  (evil)  actions  committed  by  himself,  let  him  boil
for  himself  (alone),  when  the  stars  have  risen,  a
handful  of  barley,  (and  prepare)  gruel  (with  that).

2.  Let  him  not  perform  the  Vaisvadeva  oblation
with  (a  portion  of)  that,

3.  Nor  (shall)  a  Bali  offering  (be  performed)  on
that  (occasion).

4.  Let  him  consecrate  the  barley  before  it  is
boiled,  while  it  is  being  boiled,  and  after  it  has  been
boiled,  with  the  (following)  Mantras :

5.  'Thou  art  barley,  thou  art  the  king  of  grains,
thou  art  sacred  to  Varu^a  and  mixed  with  honey,
the  sages  have  proclaimed  thee  an  expeller  of  all
guilt  and  a  means  of  purification.'

7.  Govinda  is  of  opinion  that  the  words,  'thus  speaks  Baudha-
yana/  indicate  that  this  part  of  the  work  has  been  composed  by
a  pupil  or  some  other  person.

6.  1 .  For  the  whole  Adhyaya  compare  Vishmi  XLVIII.

5.  According  to  Govinda,  Vamadeva  is  the  Tfo'shi  of  these  Man-
tras. The  phrase,  'Thou  art  sacred  to  Varuraa,'  is  to  be  explained,
according  to  Govinda,  by  the  fact  that  offerings  presented  to  Varuwa
frequently  consist  of  barley.  '  Honey '  means,  according  to  some,
4  sweet  butter/  with  which  the  dish  is  seasoned.


298  BAUDIIAYANA.


'Ye  barley-grains  are  clarified  butter  and  honey,
ye  barley-grains  are  water  and  ambrosia.  May  you
remove  my  guilt  and  all  my  sins  : '

1  Those  committed  by  words,  by  acts,  and  by  evil
thoughts ;  ill-fortune  and  the  night  of  all-destroying
time, — all  that  avert  from  me,  ye  barley-grains.'

'  (From  the  sin  of  eating)  food  which  had  been
worried  by  dogs  or  pigs,  or  which  had  been  defiled
by  crows  and  impure  men,  from  the  sin  of  disobedi-
ence towards  mother  and  father, — from  all  that  purify
me,  ye  barley-grains.'

'  From  the  dreadful  (guilt  of)  mortal  sins  and  of
the  crime  (of  serving)  a  king,  from  the  wrong  done
to  infants  or  aged  men,  from  (the  guilt)  of  stealing
gold,  of  breaking  my  vows,  of  sacrificing  for  an  un-
worthy man,  of  speaking  evil  of  Brahma/zas, — from
all  that  purify  me,  ye  barley-grains.'

1  From  (the  sin  of  eating)  the  food  of  many  men,
of  harlots  and  of  6udras,  of  (partaking  of)  funeral
dinners  and  of  (the  food  given  by)  persons  who  are
unclean  on  account  of  a  death  or  a  birth,  of  that
given  by  thieves,  or  at  a  funeral  sacrifice  offered  to
one  who  lately  died, — from  all  that  purify  me,  ye
barley-grains.'

6.  (While  the  barley)  is  being  boiled,  he  must
protect  it  (and  recite  the  text),  'Adoration  to  Rudra,
the  lord  of  created  beings;  pacified  is  the  sky;'
the  Anuvaka  (beginning),  '  Give  strength  ; '  the  five
sentences  (beginning),  *  The  gods  who  are  seated  in
front,  led  by  Agni ;'  the  two  (texts),  '  Do  not  hurt


6.  The  Anuvaka  meant  is  Taitt.  Sawhita  I,  2,  14.  The  five
sentences  are  found,  ibid.  I,  8,7,  1.  Regarding  the  text  ma  na-
stoke,  '  do  not  hurt  our  offspring,'  see  above,  III,  2,  9.     The  last


Ill,  6.  PRAStf/TIYAVAKA.  299

our  offspring,'  (and)  'The  Brahman -priest  among
the  gods.'

7.  Having  purified  himself  (by  sipping  water,  &c),
he  shall  eat  a  little  of  the  boiled  (mess),  after  pouring
it  into  (another)  vessel.

8.  Let  him  offer  it  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  soul,
(reciting  the  text),  ■  May  the  gods,  who  are  born
from  the  internal  organ  and  joined  to  the  internal
organ,  who  are  very  strong,  whose  father  is  Daksha,
protect  us  (and)  guard  us ;  adoration  to  them,  to
them  Svaha.'

9.  Let  him  who  desires  intelligence  (subsist  on
such  food)  during  three  (days  and)  nights.

10.  A  sinner  who  drinks  it  during  six  (days  and)
nights  becomes  pure.

11.  He  who  drinks  it  during  seven  (days  and)
nights  is  purified  from  (the  guilt  of)  the  murder  of
a  learned  Brahma^a,  of  violating  a  Guru's  bed,  of
stealing  gold,  and  of  drinking  Sura.

12.  He  who  drinks  it  during  eleven  (days  and)
nights,  removes  even  the  sins  committed  by  his
ancestors.

1 3.  '  But  he  who  during  twenty-one  days  (drinks
gruel  made)  of  barley-grains  which  have  passed
through  a  cow,  sees  the  Ga/zas  and  the  lord  of  the
Ga/zas,  sees  the  goddess  of  learning  and  the  lord  of
learning.'   Thus  speaks  the  venerable  Baudhayana.

Mantra  occurs  Taitt.  Sawhita  III,  4,  11,  1.  Govinda  says  that
material  protection,  too,  in  the  shape  of  an  iron  platter  or  cover  is
to  be  given  to  the  boiling  barley.

8.  The  text  occurs  Taitt.  Sawhita  I,  2,  3,  1.  It  consists  of  five
sentences,  and  is  addressed  to  the  five  vital  airs,  to  each  of  which
the  eater  offers  one  oblation.


300  BAUDHAYANA.  111,7-


PrASNA    III,    AUHYAYA    7.

i.  'Let  him  who  considers  himself  impure  offer
(burnt  oblations),  reciting  the  Kushma/z^as.'

2.  'He  who  has  had  forbidden  intercourse,  or
has  committed  a  crime  against  nature,  becomes
even  like  a  thief,  even  like  the  slayer  of  a  learned
Brahma^a.'

3.  'He  is  freed  from  any  sin  which  is  less  than
the  crime  of  slaying  a  learned  Brahma^a.'

4.  If,  after  wasting  his  strength  except  in  his
sleep,  he  desires  to  become  free  from  the  stain
and  holy,

5.  He  causes  the  hair  of  his  head,  his  beard,  the
hair  on  his  body,  and  his  nails  to  be  cut  on  the  day
of  the  new  moon  or  of  the  full  moon,  and  takes  upon
himself  a  vow  according  to  the  rule  prescribed  for
students,

6.  (To  be  kept)  during  a  year,  or  a  month,  or
twenty-four  days,  or  twelve  nights,  or  six  or  three
nights.

7.  Let  him  not  eat  meat,  nor  approach  a  woman,
not  sit  on  (a  couch  or  seat,  and)  beware  of  (speaking
an)  untruth.

8.  To  subsist  on  milk  (alone  is)  the  most  excel-
lent mode  of  living ;  or,  using  barley-gruel  (as  his
food),  he  may  perform  a  Krz&Mra.  (penance)  of
twelve  days,  or  he  may  (maintain  himself  by)
begging.

7.  1-3.  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  II,  8,  1-3.

6.  Taitt.  Arawyaka  II,  8,  5-6.  7.  Taitt.  Ararcyaka  II,  8,  7.

8.  Taitt.  Arawyaka  II,  8,  8.  As  the  next  Sutra  shows,  these  rules
refer  to  Brahmawas.    Regarding  the  Kn'^Mra,  see  below,  IV,  57.


HI,  7.  K<JSHMAiv7)AS.  30I

9.  On  such  (occasions)  a  Kshatriya  (shall  subsist
on)  barley-gruel,  a  Varsya  on  curds  of  two-milk
whey.

10.  Having  kindled  the  sacred  fire  in  the  morning
according  to  the  rule  for  Pakaya^as,  having  scat-
tered (Kara  grass)  around  it,  and  having  performed
(the  preliminary  ceremonies)  up  to  the  end  of  the
Agnimukha,  he  next  offers  in  addition  burnt  obla-
tions, reciting  the  three  Anuvakas  (beginning),
1  What  cause  of  anger  to  the  gods,  ye  gods/  '  The
debts  which  I  contracted,'  (and)  '  May  worshipful
Agni  give  thee  by  every  means  long  life.'

11.  Let  him  offer  with  each  Rzk-verse  a  portion
of  clarified  butter.

1 2.  After  having  offered  four  oblations  with  (the
spoon  called)  Sruva,  reciting  (the  texts),  '  That
strength  which  lies  in  the  lion,  in  the  tiger,  and  in
the  panther,'  &c,  and  the  four  Abhyavartinis  (i.e.
the  texts),  '  Thou,  O  fire,  who  turnest  back,'  &c,
'O  Aiigiras,'  &c,  'Again  with  strength,'  &c.,  (and)
1  With  wealth,'  &c,  after  having  taken  his  position,
with  sacred  fuel  in  his  hands,  in  the  place  allotted  to
the  sacrificer,  he  worships  (the  fire)  with  the  hymn
which  contains  twelve  verses  (and  begins),  '  To
Vaisvanara  we  announce.'

13.  Having  placed  the  piece  of  sacred  fuel  (on
the  fire  with  the  text),  *  Whatever  sin  I  ever  com-

10.  For  the  rule,  see  Taitt.  Ara^yaka  II,  7,  4.  The  three
Anuvakas  mentioned  are  Taitt.  Arawyaka  II,  3-5.

12.  Taitt.  Arawyaka  II,  7,  4.  The  first  four  texts  occur  Taitt.
Brahmawa  II,  7,  7,  1-2,  the  next  four  Taitt.  Sawhita  IV,  2, 1,  2-3,
and  the  hymn  Taitt.  Arawyaka  II,  6.  The  place  of  the  sacrificer
to  the  south  of  the  fire.

13.  Taitt.  Ararcyaka  II,  6,  2  (13).


302  BAUDHAYANA.  Til,  7.

mitted  by  thoughts  or  words,  from  all  that  free  me
(O  fire,  being  duly)  praised,  for  thou  knowest  the
truth,  Svaha,'  he  gives  a  fee.

14.  (The  ceremonies)  which  begin  with  the  mut-
tering (of  the  texts)  and  end  with  the  gift  of  a  cow
as  a  fee  are  known.

15.  One  (person)  only  (shall)  perform  the  service
of  the  fire.

16.  Now  (let  him  offer)  at  the  Agnyadheya  full
oblations  (pur/zah uti,  with  the  texts),  '  Whatever
cause  of  anger  to  the  gods,  ye  gods;'  'The  debts
which  I  contracted;'  '  May  worshipful  Agni  give  thee
by  every  means  long  life/

17.  Having  offered  (it),  he  who  is  about  to  per-
form the  Agnihotra,  (worships)  with  the  Da^ahotrz
(texts) ;  having  offered  (it),  he  who  is  about  to  per-
form the  new  and  full  moon  sacrifices  (worships)  with
the  A"aturhotrz  (texts);  having  offered  (it),  he  who  is
about  to  offer  the  A^aturmasya  sacrifices  (worships)
with  the  Pa&£ahotrz  (texts);  having  offered  it,  (he
worships)  at  an  animal  sacrifice  with  the  Shaa^/zotrz
(texts),  at  a  Soma-sacrifice  with  the  Saptahotrz
(texts).

18.  And  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  Let  him
sacrifice  (with  the  Kushma;^a  texts)  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  rites  ;  purified  (thereby)  he  gains  the
world  of  the  gods.'     Thus  (speaks)  the  Brahma/za.

16.  From  this  and  the  next  Sutras  it  must  be  understood  that
the  KushmaWahoma  is  not  only  to  be  used  as  a  penance,  but  may
be  offered  at  the  beginning  of  the  great  -Srauta  sacrifices,  in  order
to  sanctify  the  performer  and  to  secure  special  benefits.

17.  The  Saptahotrz*  and  the  other  texts  mentioned  occur  Taitt.
Ararcyaka  III,  1-5.  I  understand  the  verb  '  worship '  on  account
of  La/yayana  X,  12, 10.

18.  Taitt.  Arawyaka  II,  7,  5.


Ill,  8.  -STANDRAYAJVA.  303


Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  8.

1.  Now,  therefore,  we  will  explain  the  rule  of  the
iTandraya^a  (lunar  penance).

2.  Let  him  fast  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the
bright  half  of  the  month.

3.  Having  had  the  hair  on  his  head,  his  beard,
the  hair  on  his  body,  and  his  nails,  or  his  beard
alone,  cut,  let  him  enter,  dressed  in  new  clothes  and
speaking  the  truth,  the  place  where  the  sacrificial
fire  is  preserved.

4.  There  a  (common)  fire,  (which  may  be)  fetched
once  (only,  shall  serve)  him  ;  or  (the  fire)  must  be
produced  by  friction  with  the  Arams.

5.  Let  a  student,  who  is  a  friend  (of  the  per-
former), be  ready  at  hand  to  (carry  out  his)  direc-
tions ;

6.  And  sacrificial  viands  (shall  be  his)  food  during
the  performance  of  the  vow.

7.  Having  heaped  fuel  on  the  fire,  scattered
(Kiua  grass)  around  it,  and  performed  (the  cere-
monies) up  to  the  end  of  the  Agnimukha,  he  offers
burnt  oblations,  (cutting  off  portions)  from  the
cooked  food,

8.  (The  first)  to  Agni,  (the  second)  to  the  lunar
day  whichever  it  may  be,  (the  third  and  the  fourth)

-8.  1.  For  this  chapter  compare  Gautama  XXVII.

4.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is  that  the  fire  which  has  been
carried  into  the  avasatha  must  be  kept  burning  during  the  whole
month  which  the  .Sfandrayarca  lasts.  For  a  burnt  oblation  has  to
be  performed  at  the  end  of  the  penance.  Should  it  be  extinguished,
it  must  be  rekindled  by  friction.

8.  The  text  quoted  occurs  Taitt.  Brahma/za  I,  5,  8,  1.


304  baudhAyana,


to  the  lunar  mansion  together  with  its  guardian
deity,  the  fifth  to  the  moon  (with  the  verse), '  Atraha
gor  amanvata,'  the  sixth  to  the  sky  and  the  earth,  the
seventh  to  day  and  night,  the  eighth  to  Rudra,  the
ninth  to  the  sun,  the  tenth  to  Vanma,  the  eleventh
to  Indra,  and  the  twelfth  to  all  the  gods.

9.  Now  they  mention  (the  following)  other  (obla-
tions which  are  to  be  offered)  to  the  points  of  the
horizon  and  to  their  (guardian)  deities,  to  the  wide
middle  sphere  and  to  its  (guardian)  deity.

10.  Having  offered  (the  oblation)  to  Agni  Svi-
sh^akr/t  (with  the  verse),  '  Ever  new,'  &c,  he  then
places  the  remainder  of  the  sacrificial  viands  into  a
goblet  (kawsa)  or  a  cup  (iamasa),  pours  seasoning,
that  is  fit  for  sacrifices,  over  them,  and  eats  fifteen
morsels  of  ordinary  size,

11.  The  first  (saying,  'I  offer)  thee  to  Pra^a,'  the
second  (saying, '  I  offer)  thee  to  Apana,'  the  third
(saying, '  I  offer)  thee  to  Vyana,'  the  fourth  (saying,
I  offer)  thee  to  Udana,'  the  fifth  (saying,  '  I  offer)
thee  to  Samana.'  If  there  are  only  four  (mouthfuls,
he  eats)  the  first  reciting  two  (texts) ;  if  there  are
three,  (he  eats)  the  first  two  reciting  two  (texts)  with
each ;  if  there  are  two,  (he  eats)  the  first  reciting
two  (texts  and)  the  second  reciting  three  texts ;  (if
there  is  only)  one,  (he  recites)  all  (the  five  texts)
together.

12.  Having   drunk  water  (with  the  text),  'Thou

10.  Taitt.  Sawhita  II,  3,  5,  3.

11.  This  is  an  imitation  of  the  Prawagnihotra  described  above,

11,7,12.

12.  Taitt.  Sawhita  III,  1,8,  1.  The  seven  Anuvakas  are  Taitt.
Ararcyaka  X,  51-57.  One  oblation  is  to  be  offered  with  each
Anuvaka.


Ill,  8.  tfANDRAYAJVA.  305

art  water  used  for  moistening  Soma/  &c,  he  then
offers  the  (following)  additional  oblations  of  clarified
butter,  with  the  seven  Anuvakas  (beginning),  '  May
my  Pra/za,  Apana,  Vyana,  Udana,  and  Samana  be
purified;'  'May  my  voice,  mind,  eye,  ear/  &c;  'May
my  head,  hands,  feet;'  'May  my  skin;'  'May  the
sense  of  hearing,  touch  ;'  '  May  earth,  water ;'  'May
that  which  consists  of  food.'

13.  (The  ceremonies)  beginning  with  the  mut-
tering (of  sacred  texts)  and  ending  with  the  gift  of  a
cow  as  a  fee  are  known.

14.  He  worships  the  sun  with  (three  verses)  ad-
dressed to  Surya  and  the  moon  with  (three  verses)
addressed  to  ATandramas.

15.  When  he  goes  to  rest,  he  mutters  (the  verse),
'  O  fire,  keep  thou  good  watch/

16.  When  he  awakes  (in  the  morning,  the  verse),
'O  fire,  thou  art  the  protector  of  vows/

17.  Let  him  not  talk  with  women  and  vSudras
addressing  them  first ;  let  him  not  look  at  urine  and
ordure.

18.  If  he  has  seen  any  impure  substance,  he
mutters  (the  text),  '  Unrestrained  (was)  the  internal
organ,   wretched    my   eye;    the    sun    is    the   most


13.  Govinda  here  mentions  that  the  whole  of  the  ceremonies
alluded  to  are  the  uttaraw  darvihomikaw  tantram.

14.  As  Govinda  states,  the  former  verses  are  cud  vayazra  tamasas
pari,'  Taitt.  Sa/rchita"  IV,  1,  7,  4  ;  'udu  tyam  ^atavedasaw,'  ibid.  I,
1,  8,  4  y  *  &tram  devanam,'  ibid.  I,  4,  43,  1 ;  while  the  verses
addressed  to  the  moon  are  '  navo  navo,'  ibid.  II,  4,  14,  1 ;  '  sa  kitra.-
&tram/  Rig-veda  VI,  6,  7 ;  and  '  atraha  gor,'  Taitt.  Brahmawa
I,  5,  8,  1.

15.  Taitt.  Sawhita  I,  2,  3, 1.  16.  Taitt.  Sawhit£,  loc.  cit.
18.  Taitt.  Sawhita  III,  1,  1,  2.

[r4]  X


306  BAUDHAYANA.  Til,  8.

excellent  among  the  lights  of  heaven;  O  initiation,
mayest  thou  not  forsake  me.'

19.  On  the  first  day  of  the  latter  half  (of  the
month  he  eats)  fourteen  mouthfuls.

20.  Thus  (he  takes  every  day)  one  (mouthful)
less  up  to  the  day  of  the  new  moon.

21.  On  the  day  of  the  new  moon  there  is  not
(even)  one  mouthful  (left  to  take).

22.  On  the  first  day  of  the  first  half  (of  the
month)  one  (mouthful  may  be  eaten),  on  the  second
two.

23.  Thus  he  daily  increases  (his  meal)  by  one
(mouthful)  up  to  the  day  of  the  full  moon.

24.  On  the  day  of  the  full  moon  he  offers  a
Sthalipaka  to  Agni,  to  the  lunar  day  whichever  it
may  be,  and  to  the  lunar  mansions  as  well  as  to
their  (guardian)  deities.

25.  Having  offered  a  burnt  oblation  to  (the  lunar
mansion)  Abhi^it  (which  stands)  before  Srona.,  and
to  its  (guardian)  deity,  he  must  give  a  cow  to  the
BrahmaTzas.

26.  That  is  the  ant-shaped  lunar  penance ;  (that
which  is  performed  in  the)  inverted  (order  is  called)
the  barleycorn-shaped  (lunar  penance).

2  7.  A  sinner  who  has  performed  either  of  these
two  (penances)  becomes  free  from  all  mortal  sins
(pataka).

28.  They  declare  that  the  (^andraya^a)  shall  be
performed  for  the  sake  of  the  fulfilment  of  wishes  of
all  kinds.

29.  '  Thereby  man  obtains  every  wish  which  he
may  conceive.'

26.  Vishmi  XLVII,  3-5.


TIT,  9-  ANASNATPARAYAiVA.  307

30.  '  Thereby  the  sages  formerly  purified  them-
selves and  accomplished  their  objects.  That  (rite)
procures  wealth,  spiritual  merit,  sons,  cattle,  long
life,  heavenly  bliss,  and  fame ;  it  secures  the  fulfil-
ment of  all  desires.'

31.  'He  who  studies  this,  becomes  the  companion
of  the  lunar  constellations,  of  sun  and  moon,  and
dwells  in  their  world.'

Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  9.

1.  Now,  therefore,  we  will  explain  the  rule  of
the  Ana^natparaya^a  (recitation  of  the  whole  Veda
during  a  fast).

2.  Let  him  wear  a  clean  garment  or  a  dress  made
of  bark  (or  grass).

3.  Let  him  desire  food,  fit  for  a  sacrifice,  or  water
and  fruit.

4.  Going  forth  from  the  village  in  an  easterly
or  northerly  direction,  smearing  a  quadrangular
sthandila,  '  a  bull's  hide '  in  size,  with  cowdung,
sprinkling  it,  drawing  the  marks  on  it,  sprinkling  it
with  water,  heaping  fuel  on  the  fire  and  scattering
(Kara  grass)  around  it,  he  offers  burnt  oblations  to
the  following  deities,  to  Agni  Svaha,  to  Pra^apati

9.  2.  M.  and  the  MSS.  of  the  commentary  read  ^iravasa^  instead
of  ^iravasa^, ■  clad  with  a  garment  of  bark  or  grass/  and  Govinda
explains  the  var.  lect.  by  '  dressed  in  old  clothes.'

3.  This  rule  refers  to  the  case  only  where  the  performer  of  the
vow  is  unable  to  bear  the  prolonged  fasting.

4.  A  sthaw^ila  is  the  raised  mound,  four  fingers  high,  which  is
used  as  the  altar  for  the  Grzrrya  ceremonies.  Regarding  the  term,
*  a  bull's  hide,'  see  Vishmi  XCII,  2.  The  marks  (lakshawa)  are
the  lines  which  must  be  drawn  on  the  altar ;  see  e.  g.  Ajvalayana
Grz'hya-sutra  I,  3, 1.

X    2


308  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  9,

Svaha,  to  Soma  Svaha,  to  all  the  gods  Svaha,  to
Svaya^bhu,  to  the  Rikas,  to  the  Ya^us,  to  the  Sa-
mans,  to  the  Atharvans,  to  faith,  to  right  knowledge,
to  wisdom,  to  fortune,  to  modesty,  to  Savitrz,  to  the
Savitri  (verse),  to  Sadasaspati,  and  to  Anumati.

5.  Having  offered  (these  oblations),  he  must
begin  with  the  beginning  of  the  Veda  and  continu-
ously recite  (it).

6.  Let  him  not  interrupt  (the  recitation)  by
talking,  nor  by  stopping,

7.  Now  if  he  converses  in  between  or  stops,  let
him  thrice  suppress  his  breath,  and  begin  just
there  where  he  left  off.

8.  If  he  has  forgotten  (a  passage),  he  shall  recite
for  as  long  a  time  as  he  does  not  recollect  it,  what
(he  may  know,  Tfo'k-verses)  for  ifo'k-verses,  (Ya^us-
formulas)  for  Ya^us-formulas,  (Samans)  for  Samans.

9.  He  may  (also)  recite  the  Brahma^a  of  that
(forgotten  passage)  or  (the  passage  from  the  Anu-
krama^i  regarding)  its  metre  and  its  deities.

10.  Let  him  recite  the  Sawhita  of  (his)  Veda
twelve  (times).  He  thereby  removes  (faults  com-
mitted by)  studying  on  forbidden  (days,  by)  anger-
ing his  teacher,  (and  through)  improper  acts.  His
(knowledge  of  the)  Veda  is  sanctified,  is  purified.

11.  (If  he  reads)  more  than  that,  a  cumulation  (of
rewards  will  be  the  result).

12.  If  he  recites  the  Sa^hita  of  the  Veda  another
twelve  (times),  he  gains  thereby  the  world  of
Usanas.

13.  If  he  recites  the  Sa^hita  of  the  Veda  another


6.  'By  talking,  i.e.  by  uttering  words  not  connected  with  the
Veda/ — Govinda.


Ill,  9.  ANASNATPARAYAtfA.  309

twelve  (times),  he  gains  thereby  the  world  of  Brz-
haspati.

14.  If  he  recites  the  Sa^hita  of  the  Veda  another
twelve  (times),  he  gains  thereby  the  world  of  Pra-
^apati.

15.  If,  fasting,  he  recites  the  Sa^hita  one  thou-
sand (times),  he  becomes  one  with  Brahman,  re-
splendent like  Brahman  (and)  Brahman  (itself).

16.  If  he  subsists  during  a  year  on  food  obtained
by  begging,  he  gains  (the  power  of)  supernatural
vision.

17.  If  during  six  months  he  subsists  on  barley-
gruel,  during  four  months  on  water  and  barley-flour,
during  two  months  on  fruit,  (and)  during  one  month
on  water,  or  performs  Y^rikkhxz.  penances  of  twelve
days,  he  (obtains  the  power  of)  suddenly  disap-
pearing, and  sanctifies  seven  descendants,  seven
ancestors,  and  himself  as  the  fifteenth,  and  (any)
company  (of  Brahma^as)  which  he  may  enter.

18.  They  call  that  the  ladder  of  the  gods.

19.  By  means  of  that  the  gods  reached  their
divine  station  and  the  sages  the  position  of  7?zshis.

20.  The  periods  for  beginning  this  sacrifice,  for-
sooth, are  three,  the  time  of  the  morning  libation,
the  time  of  the  midday  libation,  and  the  last  part  of
the  night,  (the  Muhurta)  sacred  to  Brahman.

21.  Pra^apati,  forsooth,  proclaimed  this  (rite)  to
the  seven  7?/shis,  the  seven  Tfoshis  to  Maha^a^/m,
and  Maha^a^vm  to  the  Brahma^as.

18.  Govinda  explains  ni/isremm,  'the  ladder,'  by  ni-foreyasa-
hetum,  '  a  cause  of  supreme  bliss.'

2 1 .  The  name  of  the  i?*shi  who  proclaimed  it  to  the  Brahmans
is  not  certain.  The  Dekhan  MSS.  read  Maha^agru  and  Maha-
^agnu,  M.  Maha^a^nu,  the  I.  O.  copy  of  the  commentary  Maha-
ya^lu  and  Maha^a^ilu,  and  the  Telugu  copy  Mah&gagnu.


3IO  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  10.


Prasna  III,  Adhyaya  10.

i.  The  law  of  castes  and  of  orders  has  been
declared.

2.  Now,  indeed,  man  (in)  this  (world  is  polluted)
by  a  vile  action  or  acts  wrongly,  (e.  g.)  sacrifices  for
men  unworthy  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  accepts  presents
from  those  whose  gifts  ought  not  to  be  accepted,
eats  the  food  of  those  whose  food  ought  not  to  be
eaten,  (and)  practises  what  is  forbidden.

3.  They  are  in  doubt  if  he  shall  perform  a  penance
for  such  (a  deed)  or  if  he  shall  not  do  it.

4.  (They  declare  that  he  shall  not  do  it)  because
the  deed  does  not  perish.

5.  (The  correct  opinion  is)  that  he  shall  perform
(a  penance).

6.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '  Let  him  offer  a
Punastoma ;  (those  who  offer  it,  may)  again  come  to
(partake  of)  the  libations  of  Soma/

7.  '  He  who  offers  a  horse-sacrifice  conquers  all  sin,
he  effaces  the  guilt  of  the  murder  of  a  Brahma^a.'

10.  1.  As  stated  formerly,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  li,
this  chapter  is  borrowed  from  Gautama  XIX.  I  have  therefore
adopted  the  same  division  of  the  Sutras  as  in  the  translation  of
the  latter  work.

2.  I  read,  with  the  MSS.  of  the  commentary,  atha  khalvayaw
purusho  yapyena  karmawa  mithyd  va^araty  ayagyaw  va  yag-ayaty
apratigrahyasya  va  pratign'hwaty  anajyannasya  vannam  a^naty  a£a-
ramyena  va^arati.  M.  reads  ya^-ayitva,  and  the  Dekhan  MSS.
y%ayitva  and  pratign'hya.

5.  The  Dekhan  MSS.  read  kuryad  ity  eva,  M.  kuryad  eva,  and
Govinda  kuryat  tv  eva.

6.  All  the  MSS.  of  the  text  omit  the  word  vi^ayate,  'it  is
declared  in  the  Veda/  which  is  given  by  Govinda.

7.  All  the  MSS.  of  the  text  give  at  the  beginning  of  this  Sutra


Ill,  io.  PENANCES.  3 1 1

8.  Moreover,  '  He  who  is  being  accused  (of  a
heinous  crime)  shall  perform  an  Agnish/ut  sacrifice.'

9.  Reciting  the  Veda,  austerity,  a  sacrifice,  fast-
ing, giving  gifts  are  the  means  for  expiating  such
(a  blamable  act).

10.  The  purificatory  (texts  are),  the  Upanishads,
the  initial  (verses)  of  the  Vedas,  the  ends  of  the
Vedas  (vedantas),  the  Sawhitas  of  all  the  Vedas,
(the  Anuvakas  called)  Madhu,  (the  hymn  of)  Agha-
marsha?za,  the  Atharva^iras,  (the  Anuvakas  called
the)  Rudras,  the  Purusha  hymn,  the  two  Samans
(called)  Ra^ina  and  Rauhmeya,  the  Brzhat  (Saman)
and  the  Rathantara,  the  Purushagati  (Saman),  the
Mahanamnis,  the  Mahavaira^a  (Saman),  the  Maha-
divakirtya  (Saman),  any  of  the  £ryesh^a  Samans,  the
Bahishpavamana  Saman,  the  Kushma/^is,  the  Pava-
manis,  and  the  Savitri.

11.  To  live  on  milk  alone,  as  if  one  were  fasting,
to  eat  vegetables  only,  to  eat  fruit  only,  (to  live  on)
gruel  prepared  of  a  handful  of  barley-grains,  to  eat
gold,  to  eat  clarified  butter  (are  the  modes  of  subsist-
ence) which  purify.

12.  All  mountains,  all  rivers,  holy  lakes,  bathing-
places,  the  dwellings  of  iv'zshis,  cowpens,  (holy)  plains
and  temples  of  the  gods  (are)  places  (which  destroy
sin).

athapy  udaharanti,  '  now  they  quote  also,'  which  Govinda  omits,
and  which  is  inappropriate,  because  the  following  passages  are
taken  from  the  Veda.

10.  The  word  vedadaya^,  which  occurs  also  in  some  MSS.  of
VasishMa  (XXII,  9),  must  be  explained,  according  to  the  analogy
of  karmadi,  'the  beginning  of  the  sacrifices'  (Saya/za  on  Taitt.  Ar.
II,  7 ?  5),  by  '  the  initial  verses  of  the  Vedas.'  The  Pavamanis  are
added  on  the  authority  of  Govinda  alone.

12.  'Kshetra,  (holy)  plains,  e.g.  the  Kurukshetra/ — Govinda.


312  BAUDHAYANA.  Ill,  10.

13.  Abstention  from  injuring  living  beings,  truth-
fulness, abstention  from  theft  (or  unrighteously  ap-
propriating anything),  bathing  in  the  morning,  at
noon,  and  in  the  evening,  obedience  towards  Gurus,
continence,  sleeping  on  the  ground,  dressing  in  one
garment  only,  and  abstaining  from  food  (are  the
various  kinds  of)  austerity.

14.  Gold,  a  cow,  a  dress,  a  horse,  land,  sesamum,
clarified  butter,  and  food  (are)  the  gifts.

15.  A  year,  six  months,  four  (months),  three
(months),  two  (months),  one  (month),  twenty-four
days,  twelve  days,  six  days,  three  days,  a  day  and  a
night,  (and)  one  day  are  the  periods  (for  penances),

16.  These  (acts)  may  be  optionally  performed  if
no  (particular  penance)  has  been  prescribed,

1 7.  (Viz.)  for  great  crimes  difficult  (penances)  and
for  trivial  faults  easy  ones.

18.  The  Krz&Mra  and  the  Atikrt&Mra,,  as  well  as
the  .A'andraya/za,  are  penances  for  all  (offences).

Prasna  IV,   Adhyaya  1.

1.  We  will  separately  explain  the  various  penances
for  the  several  offences,  both  heavier  and  lighter  ones.

2.  Let  him  prescribe  whatever  may  be  befitting
for  each  (case), — heavier  (penances)  for  great  (crimes)
and  easier  ones  for  trivial  (faults).

3.  Let  him  perform  the  penances  according  to
the  rule  given  in  the  Institutes  (of  the  Sacred  Law  in
cases)  where  an  offence  has  been  committed  with
the  organ  or  with  the  feet  (and)  the  arms,  through

3.  The  construction  is  certainly  elliptical.  I  understand  tatra
with  the  first  half-verse.  Govinda  separates  the  two  half-verses,
yad  upasthakn'tam  papaw,  &c,  from  the  first,  and  reads  at  the  end


IV,  I.  PENANCES.  313

thoughts  or  speech,  through  the  ear,  the  skin,  the
nose  or  the  eye.

4.  Or,  in  (the  case  of)  transgressions  committed
through  the  organ  of  vision,  of  hearing,  of  sensation,
of  smelling,  and  through  thoughts,  he  also  becomes
pure  by  three  suppressions  of  the  breath.

5.  In  case  (he  commits  the  offences)  of  eating  the
food  of  a  6udra  or  of  cohabiting  with  a  6udra  female,
severally,  he  must  perform,  during  seven  days,  seven
suppressions  of  the  breath  on  each  day.

6.  For  partaking  of  food  unfit  for  eating  or
drinking,  and  for  selling  forbidden  merchandise,  ex-
cepting honey,  meat,  clarified  butter,  oil,  pungent
condiments  and  bad  food,  and  for  similar  (offences),
he  must  perform,  during  twelve  days,  twelve  sup-
pressions of  the  breath  on  each  day.

7.  For  other  transgressions  excepting  mortal  sins
(pataka),  crimes  causing  loss  of  caste  (pataniya),  and
the  minor  faults  (called  upapataka),  he  must  perform,
during  half  a  month,  twelve  suppressions  of  the
breath  on  each  day.

8.  For  other  transgressions  excepting  mortal  sins

of  the  half-verse  prawayaman  sama^aret, '  one  should  perform  sup-
pressions of  the  breath  (in  even  or  equal  numbers).'

5.  Govinda  tries  to  reconcile  this  rule  with  the  one  given  above,
I,  1,  2,  7,  by  assuming  that  the  word  *Sudra  denotes  here  a  Brah-
mawa  who  lives  like  a  -Sudra  and  neglects  his  sacred  duties.

6.  I  read,  conjecturally,  dv&dasaham,  'twelve  days.'  The  MSS.
of  the  text  have  dvada^a  dvadasaham,  or  corruptions  pointing  to
this  reading,  and  C.  I.  reads  ardhamasam.  Regarding  avaranna,
'  bad  food/  see  note  on  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  16.

7.  I  read,  conjecturally,  ardhamasaw,  'half  a  month;'  D.  has
ardhamasan ;  K.  dvada^ahaw ;  M.  dvada^ardhamasam  ;  C.  I.  dvada-
jardhamasan,  which  is  explained  by  shawmasan.

8.  I  read  with  M.  dvadaja  dvada^ahan.  D.  K.  have  dvada^aham.
The  commentary  omits  the  Sutra  altogether.


314  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  I.

and  crimes  causing  loss  of  caste,  he  must  perform,
during  twelve  periods  of  twelve  days,  twelve  sup-
pressions of  the  breath  on  each  day.

9.  For  other  transgressions  excepting  mortal  sins
he  must  perform,  during  twelve  half-months,  twelve
suppressions  of  the  breath  on  each  day.

10.  But  for  mortal  sins  he  must  perform,  during  a
year,  twelve  suppressions  of  the  breath  on  each  day.

11.  Let  him  give  his  daughter,  while  she  still
goes  naked,  to  a  man  who  has  not  broken  the  vow
of  chastity  and  who  possesses  good  qualities,  or  even
to  one  destitute  of  good  qualities  ;  let  him  not  keep
(the  maiden)  in  (his  house)  after  she  has  reached  the
age  of  puberty.

12.  He  who  does  not  give  away  a  marriageable
daughter  during  three  years  doubtlessly  contracts
a  guilt  equal  to  (that  of)  destroying  an  embryo.

13.  Such  will  be  the  case  if  anybody  asks  her  in
marriage,  and  also  if  nobody  demands  her.  Manu
has  declared  that  at  each  appearance  of  the  menses
(the  father  incurs  the  guilt  of)  a  mortal  sin.

14.  Three  years  let  a  marriageable  damsel  wait
for  the  order  of  her  father.  But  after  (that)  time  let
her  choose  for  herself  in  the  fourth  year  a  husband
(of)  equal  (rank).  If  no  man  (of)  equal  (rank)  be  found,
she  may  take  even  one  destitute  of  good  qualities.

15.  If  a  damsel  has  been  abducted  by  force,  and
has  not  been  wedded  with  sacred  texts,  she  may
lawfully  be  given  to  another  man ;  she  is  even  like
a  maiden.

9.  I  read  with  D.,  K.,  and  M.,  dvada^ardhamasan.    The  com-
mentary omits  also  this  Sutra.

11.  Vasish/^a  XVII,  67-71,  and  above.
15.  Vasish/^a  XVII,  73.


IV,  I.  PENANCES.  315

16.  If,  after  (a  damsel)  has  been  given  away,  or
even  after  (the  nuptial  sacrifices)  have  been  offered,
the  husband  dies,  she  who  (thus)  has  left  (her  father's
house)  and  has  returned,  may  be  again  wedded
according  to  the  rule  applicable  to  second  weddings,
provided  the  marriage  had  not  been  consummated.

17.  He  who  does  not  approach,  during  three
years,  a  wife  who  is  marriageable,  incurs,  without
doubt,  a  guilt  equal  to  that  of  destroying  an
embryo.

18.  But  the  ancestors  of  that  man  who  does  not
approach  his  wife  who  bathed  after  her  temporary
uncleanness,  though  he  dwells  near  her,  lie  during
that  month  in  the  menstrual  excretions  (of  the
wife).

19.  They  declare  that  the  guilt  of  the  husband
who  does  not  approach  his  wife  in  due  season,  of
him  who  approaches  her  during  her  temporary  un-
cleanness, and  of  him  who  commits  an  unnatural
crime  (with  her),  is  equally  (great).

20.  Let  him  proclaim  in  the  village  a  wife  who,
being  obdurate  against  her  husband,  makes  herself
sterile,  as  one  who  destroys  embryos,  and  drive  her
from  his  house.

21.  But  for  the  transgression  of  that  husband
who  does  not  approach  a  wife  who  bathed  after
temporary  uncleanness,  (the  performance  of)  one
hundred  suppressions  of  the  breath  is  prescribed
(as  a  penance).

16.  Vasish/^a  XVII,  74.

2i.  The  MSS.  of  the  text  read,  rz'tusnataw  tu  yo  bharyam  niya-
ta,m  brahmaHrimm  1  niyamatikrame  tasya  pra/zayamajataw  smr/tam.
The  commentary  omits  the  first  half  of  the  verse  altogether.  The
latter,  as  read  in  the  MSS.,  gives  no  sense.     It  seems  to  me  that


3l6  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  I.

22.  Seated  with  Kusa.  grass  in  his  hands,  let  him
repeatedly  suppress  his  breath,  and  again  and  again
recite  purificatory  texts,  the  Vyah/Vtis,  the  syllable
Om,  and  the  daily  portion  of  the  Veda.

23.  Always  intent  on  the  practice  of  Yoga,  let
him  again  and  again  suppress  his  breath.  (Thus)
he  performs  the  highest  austerity  up  to  the  ends  of
his  hair  and  up  to  the  ends  of  his  nails.

24.  Through  the  obstruction  (of  the  respiration)
air  is  generated,  through  air  fire  is  produced,  then
through  heat  water  is  formed  ;  hence  he  is  internally
purified  by  (those)  three.

25.  Through  the  practice  of  Yoga  (true)  know-
ledge is  obtained,  Yoga  is  the  sum  of  the  sacred
law,  all  good  qualities  are  gained  through  Yoga ;
therefore  let  him  always  be  absorbed  in  the  practice
of  Yoga.

26.  The  Vedas  likewise  begin  with  the  syllable
Om,  and  they  end  with  the  syllable  Om.  The
syllable  Om  and  the  Vyahrztis  are  the  eternal,
everlasting  Brahman.

27.  For  him  who  is  constantly  engaged  in  (re-
citing) the  syllable  Om,  the  seven  Vyahrztis,  and
the  three-footed  Gayatri,  no  danger  exists  anywhere.

28.  If,  restraining  his  breath,  he  thrice  recites  the
Gayatri  together  with  the  syllable  Om  and  with  the
(text  called)  vS'iras,  that  is  called  one  suppression  of
breath.

29.  But  sixteen  suppressions  of  breath,    accom-

either  its  end  must  have   been  sawnidhau   nopaga^/zati  (as   in
Sutra  1 7),  or  that  a  whole  half- verse  has  been  lost.

22-24.  Vasish/^a  XXV,  4-6.  25.  Vasish/^a  XXV,  8.

26.  Vasish/^a  XXV,  10.  27.  VasishMa  XXV,  9.

28.  Vasish/^a  XXV,  13.  29.  Vasish/^a  XXVI,  4.


IV,  2.  PENANCES.  3 1  7

panied  by  (the  recitation  of)  the  Vyahrztis  and  of
the  syllable  Om,  repeated  daily,  purify  after  a  month
even  the  slayer  of  a  learned  Brahma/za.

30.  That  is  the  highest  austerity,  that  is  the  best
description  of  the  sacred  law.  That,  indeed,  is  the
best  means  of  removing  all  sin.


Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  2.

1.  We  will  separately  explain  the  various  penances
for  the  several  offences,  both  heavier  and  lighter  ones.

2.  Let  him  prescribe  whatever  may  be  befitting  for
each  (case), — heavier  penances  for  great  (crimes),
and  lighter  ones  for  trivial  (faults).

3.  Let  him  perform  the  penances  according  to  the
rule  given  in  the  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law.

4.  He  who  is  about  to  accept  gifts,  or  he  who  has
accepted  gifts,  must  repeatedly  recite  the  four  Rik-
verses  (called)  Taratsamandis.

5.  But  in  case  one  has  eaten  any  kind  of  for-
bidden food,  or  that  given  by  a  person  whose  food
must  not  be  eaten,  the  means  of  removing  the  guilt
is  to  sprinkle  water  (over  one's  head)  while  one
recites  the  Taratsamandi  7?zkas.

6.  But  we  will,  hereafter,  declare  another  rule  for
(the  expiation  of)  the  murder  of  a  learned  Brahma/za,
whereby  (men)  are  freed  also  from  mortal  sins  of  all
(kinds).

7.  Let  him  (perform),  during  twelve  nights,  sup-


4.  Gautama  XXIV,  2.    The  gift  is,  of  course,  one  which  ought
not  to  be  accepted.

5.  Rig-veda   IX,   58.      Mar^anam,   literally   'rubbing,'   means
sprinkling  the  head  with  a  handful  of  water. — Govinda.


3  1 8  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  2.

pressions  of  the  breath  (and)  mutter  purificatory
texts,  the  Vyahmis,  the  syllable  Om,  (and)  the
Aghamarsha/za  hymn,  (living)  on  milk;

8.  Or  (he  becomes)  pure  if  he  bathes,  and  during
three  (days  and)  nights  subsists  on  air  and  (remains
dressed)  in  wet  clothes.

9.  But  if  he  has  repeatedly  committed  for-
bidden acts  of  all  kinds,  and  has  (afterwards)
worshipped  reciting  the  Vanmi  (texts),  he  is  freed
from  all  sin.

10.  Now  a  student  who  has  broken  his  vow
(avakir^in)  shall  heap  fuel  on  the  fire  on  the  night
of  the  new  moon,  perform  the  preparatory  cere-
monies required  for  a  Darvlhoma,  and  offer  two
oblations  of  clarified  butter  (reciting  the  following
texts)  :  ■  O  Lust,  I  have  broken  my  vow,  my  vow
I  have  broken,  O  Lust,  to  Lust  Svaha;'  'O  Lust,
I  have  done  evil,  I  have  done  evil,  O  Lust,  to  Lust
Svaha.'

ii.  After  he  has  made  the  offering,  he  shall
address  the  fire,  closely  joining  his  hands  and
turning  sideways,  (with  the  following  texts) :  '  May
the  Maruts  grant  me,  may  Indra,  may  Brzhaspati,
may  this  fire  grant  me  long  life  and  strength,  make
me  long-lived.'  The  Maruts,  forsooth,  give  back
to  him  the  vital  airs,  Indra  gives  back  to  him
strength,  Brzhaspati  the  lustre  of  Brahman,  Fire  all
the  remainder.  (Thus)  his  body  is  made  whole,  and
he  attains  the  full  length  of  life.  Let  him  next  ad-
dress (the  gods)  with  three  (repetitions  of  the  texts).

9.  '  Upasthana,  "  worshipping,"  i.  e.  sprinkling  one's  head  with
a  handful  of  water.' — Govinda.

10.  A  repetition  of  the  rule  given  above,  II,  1, 1,34;  see  also
HI,  4.


IV,  2.  PENANCES.  319

For  the  gods  are  trebly  true.     (All  that)  has  been
declared  in  the  Veda.

12.  He  who  considers  himself  defiled  by  minor
offences  (upapataka),  will  be  freed  from  all  guilt  if
he  offers  burnt  oblations  according  to  this  same
rule ;

13.  Or  if  he  has  partaken  of  food  unfit  to  be
eaten  or  to  be  drunk  or  of  forbidden  food,  and  if  he
has  committed  sinful  acts  or  performed  sinful  rites
either  unintentionally  or  intentionally,  and  if  he  has
had  connexion  with  a  female  of  the  .5udra  caste  or
committed  an  unnatural  crime,  he  becomes  pure  by
bathing  (and  reciting)  the  Abliriga  (verses)  and
(those  called)  Vanmis,

14.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) :
f  If  he  has  partaken  of  food  unfit  to  be  eaten  or  to
be  drunk,  or  of  forbidden  food,  and  if  he  has  com-
mitted forbidden  acts  or  performed  forbidden  rites,
he  will,  nevertheless,  be  freed  from  (crimes)  com-
mitted intentionally  which  are  similar  to  mortal  sins,
nay,  even  from  mortal  sins  (pataka).'

15.  Or  let  him  fast  during  three  (days  and)  nights,
bathe  thrice  a  day,  and,  suppressing  his  breath,  thrice
recite  the  Aghamarsha/za.  Manu  has  declared  that
that  is  equal  (in  efficacy)  to  the  final  bath  at  a
horse-sacrifice.


12.  Gautama  XXV,  6.

13.  Govinda  gives,  like  Haradatta  on  Gautama  XXV,  7,  as  an
instance  of  a  doshavat  karma,  *  a  sinful  rite,'  the  abhiMra  or  '  magic
rite  in  order  to  harm  enemies.'  The  expression  has,  however,  in
our  Sutra,  a  wider  sense.

14.  I.  e.  if  he  performs  the  penance  prescribed  in  the  preceding
Sutra.

15.  VasishMa  XXVI,  8  j  Gautama  XXIV,  10.


320  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  2.

16.  And  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  '(That  is)  the
ancient  purificatory  rite,  which  is  widely  known  (in
the  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law) ;  purified  thereby
man  conquers  sin.  May  we,  sanctified  by  this  holy
means  of  purification,  conquer  our  enemy,  sin/

Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  3.

1.  We  will  explain  the  (secret)  penances  which
are  not  prescribed  (by  others,  but  by  the  offender
himself,  and)  particularly  what  shall  be  done  in
(case)  faults  (have  been  committed)  by  men  who,
with  concentrated  minds,  (are)  intent  (on  the  per-
formance of  their  duties).

2.  (Such  a  man)  may  sip  water,  (in  order  to  atone)
for  all  mortal  sins,  reciting  the  syllable  Om  and  all
the  Vyahrztis.

3.  When  he  sips  water  the  first  time,  he  gladdens
the  7v%-veda,  the  second  time  the  Ya^ur-veda,  the
third  time  the  Sama-veda.

4.  When  he  wipes  (his  lips)  the  first  time,  he
gladdens  the  Atharva-veda,  the  second  time  the
Itihasas  and  Purazzas.

5.  When  he  sprinkles  water  on  the  right  hand,
the  feet,  the  head,  the  heart,  the  nostrils,  the  eyes,
the  ears,  and  the  navel,  he  gladdens  the  trees  and
herbs  and  all  deities.  Therefore  he  is  freed  from  all
sin  by  sipping  water.

3.  1.  Vasish//ia  XXV,  1-2.  The  whole  Adhyaya  is  left  out  in
the  Dekhan  MSS.,  including  K.  The  omission  may  have  been
caused  by  the  circumstance  that  the  initial  verses  of  Adhyayas  3
and  4  are  identical.

2.  Gautama  XXV,  9 ;  Vasish/^a  XXV,  4.

3-5.  See  the  rules  for  sipping  water,  given  above,  I,  5,  8,  19-26.


IV,  4.  SECRET   PENANCES.  32 1

6.  Or  let  him  offer  in  the  fire  eight  pieces  of
sacred  fuel,  reciting  (the  following)  eight  (texts)  :
'  Thou  art  the  expiation  of  sin  committed  by  the
gods,  Svaha;'  (  Thou  art  the  expiation  of  sin  com-
mitted by  men,  Svaha;'  'Thou  art  the  expiation  of
sin  committed  by  the  manes,  Svaha  ;'  '  Thou  art  the
expiation  of  sin  committed  by  myself,  SvahS.;'
'  Thou  art  the  expiation  of  the  sin  which  we  have
committed  either  by  day  or  by  night,  Svaha;'  'Thou
art  the  expiation  of  the  sin  which  we  have  com-
mitted either  sleeping  or  waking,  Svaha;'  'Thou
art  the  expiation  of  the  sin  which  we  have  com-
mitted either  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  Svaha;'
'  Thou  art  the  expiation  of  every  sin,  SvahaV

7.  When  he  has  offered  (these  eight  oblations)  he
will  be  freed  from  all  guilt.

8.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse):
'  The  Aghamarsha/za,  the  Devakrzta,  the  Suddha-
vatis,  the  Taratsamas,  the  Kushma^is,  the  Pava-
manis,  the  Vira^as,  the  Mrztyulangala,  the  Durga
(Savitri),  the  Vyahrztis,  and  the  Rudras  (are  texts)
which  are  very  efficacious  for  effacing  sin.'

Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  4.

1.  We  will  explain  the  (secret)  penances  which
are  not  prescribed  (by  others,  but  by  the  offender
himself,  and)  particularly  what  shall  be  done  in
(case)  faults  (have  been  committed)  by  men  who,
with  concentrated  minds,  (are)  intent  (on  the  per-
formance of  their  duties).

6.  Gautama  XXV,  10.  The  Mantras  occur  Taitt.  Ara#yaka
X,  59-

8.  Vishmi  LVI,  3,  and  note;  VasishMa  XXVIII,  10-15.

[14]  Y


322  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  4.

2.  He  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites  that
(hymn  of)  Aghamarsha^a  (which  begins), '  Both  right
and  truth/  will  be  freed  from  all  guilt.

3.  He  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites  the
verse,  *  This  spotted  bull,'  &c,  will  be  freed  from
all  guilt ;

4.  He  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites  the
verse,  '  Freed  from  the  post  as  it  were/  will  be
freed  from  all  guilt.

5.  He  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites  the
verse,  'A  swan  dwelling  in  purity/  will  be  freed
from  all  guilt ;

6.  Or,  he  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites
the  Savitri,  foot  by  foot,  half  verse  by  half  verse,
and  afterwards  entire,  will  be  freed  from  all  guilt ;

7.  Or,  he  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites
the  Vyahrztis,  both  separately  and  altogether,  will
be  freed  from  all  guilt ;

8.  Or,  he  who,  standing  in  water,  thrice  recites  the
syllable  Om  alone,  will  be  freed  from  all  guilt.

9.  Let  him  not  teach  these  Institutes  of  the
Sacred  Law  to  one  who  is  neither  his  son  nor  his
pupil,  nor  has  resided  (in  his  house)  less  than  a  year.

10.  The  fee  (for  teaching  it)  is  one  thousand
(pa^as,  or)  ten  cows  and  a  bull,  or  the  worship  of
the  teacher.

Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  5.

1.  Now,  therefore,  I  will  proclaim  by  what  rites,
connected  with  the  Saman,  Rik,  Ya^us,  and  Atharva-

4.  2.  Taitt.  Arawyaka  X,  1,  13.         3.  Taitt.  Ara«yakal,  5,  3, 1.

4.  Taitt.  Brahma«a  II,  4,  4,  9.

5.  Taitt.  Sawhita  I,  8, 15,  2.  9.  Vasish^a  XXIV,  6-7.

5.  1.  All  the  Dekhan  MSS.,  including  K.,  have  been  copied  from


IV,  5*  RITES   SECURING   SUCCESS.  323

vedas,  (man)  quickly  attains  the  wishes  of  his
heart.

2.  Having  purified  his  body  by  muttered  prayers,
burnt  oblations,  Ish/is,  restraints,  and  the  like,  he
will  accomplish  all  his  objects.  He  will  not  attain
success  in  any  other  way.

3.  A  Brahma^a,  who  is  going  to  mutter  prayers,
to  offer  burnt  oblations  or  Ish/is,  or  to  practise
restraints,  shall,  first,  during  the  bright  half  of  the
month,  on  a  lucky  day  and  under  a  lucky  constella-
tion, cause  his  hair  and  beard  to  be  cut.

4.  Let  him  bathe  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in
the  evening ;  let  him  beware  of  anger  and  untruth  ;
let  him  not  address  women  and  6*udras ;  let  him  be
continent,  and  subsist  solely  on  food  fit  for  offerings.

5.  Avoiding  to  sleep  in  the  day-time,  let  him  wor-
ship cows,  Brahma^as,  manes,  and  gods.  As  long  as
he  is  engaged  in  muttering  prayers,  offering  Homas
and  Ish/is,  and  practising  restraints,  let  him  stand
during  the  day  and  sit  during  the  night.

6.  The  'KrikkkrdL  (penance)  revealed  by  Pra^a-
pati  lasts  twelve  days,  (which  are  divided  into  four
separate)  periods  of  three  days ;  (during  the  first
period  of  three  days  he  eats)  in  the  day-time  (only,
during  the  second)  at  night  (only,  during  the  third
he  subsists  on)  food  given  without  asking,  (and
during  the  fourth)  finally  (he  lives  on)  air.

a  MS.  the  leaves  of  which  were  out  of  order.  After  the  first  words
of  ver.  1 ,  they  have  kshiram  dadhisarpi^  kurodakam,  which  belongs
to  ver.  26,  and  they  go  on  with  the  text  down  to  IV,  7,  7,  after  which
the  end  of  IV,  5,  1  and  2-25  are  given. — 'Yantra, "restraints," i.e.
Krikk/iras  and  the  like,  (which  are  called  so)  on  account  of  the
restraint  of  the  senses  (required  for  them).' — Govinda.

3-5.  Vasish/tfa  XXIV,  5.

6.  Vasish/Aa  XXI,  20.     Repeated,  see  above,  II,  1,  2,  38.

Y  2


324  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  $.

7.  (If  one  eats  on)  one  (day  in)  the  morning
(only),  and  (on  the  following  day)  at  night  (only,  on
the  next  day  food)  given  without  asking,  (and  on
the  fourth  day)  subsists  on  air,  and  repeats  this
three  times,  that  is  called  the  Krz&Mra.  (penance)
of  children.

8.  (If)  one  eats  one  mouthful  only  at  each  (meal),
following,  during  (three)  periods  of  three  days,  the
rules  given  above,  and  subsists  during  another
period  of  three  days  on  air,  that  is  called  the
Atikrt^Ara.  penance.

9.  (If)  during  those  (first)  three  periods  of  three
days  one  partakes  of  water  only,  and  subsists  after-
wards (during  three  days)  on  air,  that  third  (variety)
must  be  known  to  be  the  most  efficacious  YJrik-
khr§tikrikkhx2,  penance.

10.  If  one  drinks  hot  milk,  (hot)  clarified  butter,
(and  a  hot)  decoction  of  Kusa  grass,  each  during
three  days,  and  fasts  during  another  three  days,  that
is  called  the  Taptak^Mra.

11.  (If  one  lives  during  one  day)  on  cow's  urine,
(during  one  day)  on  cowdung,  (during  one  day)  on
milk,  (during  one  day)  on  sour  milk,  (during  one  day)
on  clarified  butter,  (during  one  day)  on  a  decoction
of  Kusa  grass,  and  during  one  (day  and)  night  on
air,  that  is  called  the  Sawtapana  'Krikkkvz.

12.  Let  him  take  the  cow's  urine,  reciting  the
Gayatri;  the  cowdung,  (reciting  the  text), '  Gandha-

7.  VasishMa  XXIII,  43 ;  see  above,  II,  1,  2,  39.

8.  VasisMa  XXIV,  2-3 ;  see  above,  II,  1,  2,  40.

9.  See  above,  II,  1,  2,  41.  10.  See  above,  II,  1,  2,  37.

11.  Vasish/^a  XXVII,  13;  Vishmi  XLVI,  19.

12.  The  texts  quoted  are  found,  Taitt.  Arawyaka  X,  1,  10;  III,
17;  Taitt.  Sawhita  I,  5,  n?  4,  7 ;  1, 1,  10,  3 ;  VII,  1, 11, 1.


IV,  5.  RITES   SECURING   SUCCESS.  325


dvaram;'  the  milk,  (reciting  the  verse),  'Apyayasva;'
the  sour  milk,  reciting  (the  verse),  '  Dadhikrav/za;'
the  clarified  butter,  (saying), '  6ukram  asi ;.'  the  decoc-
tion of  Kusa  grass  (with  the  text),  'Devasya  tva;'

13.  (And  mix  together)  one  part  of  cow's  urine,
half  as  much  cowdung,  three  parts  of  milk,  two  of
sour  milk,  one  part  of  clarified  butter,  and  one  part
of  water  boiled  with  Kusa  grass ;  a  Sawtapana
"Krikkkva.  (performed)  in  this  manner  will  purify
even  a  6vapaka.

14.  He  who  subsists  during  five  (days  and)  nights
on  cow's  urine,  cowdung,  milk,  sour  milk,  and  clari-
fied butter  will  be  purified  by  (that)  Pa££agavya
(the  five  products  of  the  cow).

15.  If,  self- restrained  and  attentive,  he  fasts  during
twelve  days,  that  is  called  a  Paraka  Krikkhra,  which
destroys  all  sin.

16.  If  he  subsists  on  cow's  urine  and  the  other
(substances  named  above),  one  day  on  each,  and  con-
tinues (this  mode  of  life)  during  thrice  seven  days,  the
theologians  call  that  a  Mahasawtapana  Krz&Mra.

17.  If  he  daily  adds  to  his  food  one  mouthful
during  the  bright  (half  of  the  month)  and  diminishes
it  daily  by  one  mouthful  during  the  dark  (half  of  the
month),  and  keeps  two  fasts  in  the  two  halves  of  the
month,  that  is  called  a  Aandraya?za.

18.  If,  with  concentrated  mind,  a  Brihma^a  eats
four  mouthfuls  in  the  morning  and  four  mouthfuls
when  the  sun  has  set,  he  will  perform  the  Aandra-
ya^a  of  children.

13.  Vasish^a  XXVII,  13.  14.  Vasish/fta  XXVII,  14.

15.  Vishmi  XLVI,  18.  16.  Vishmi  XL VI,  20.

17.  Vasish//$a  XXVII,  21 ;  see  above,  III,  8.

18.  Vishmi  XLVII,  8.


2,26  BAUDHAYANA.  TV,  5.

19.  If,  self-restrained,  he  daily  eats,  during  a
month,  at  midday  eight  mouthfuls  of  food,  fit  for
a  sacrifice,  he  will  perform  the  Alindraya/za  of
ascetics.

20.  But  a  Brahma/za  who  eats  anyhow,  during  a
month,  thrice  eighty  mouthfuls  of  food,  fit  for  a  sacri-
fice, goes  to  the  world  of  the  moon.

21.  As  the  rising  moon  frees  the  world  from  the
fear  of  darkness,  even  so  a  Brahma/za  who  performs
a  Aandraya^a  removes  the  fear  of  sin.

22.  He  who  lives  one  day  on  (rice)-grains,  three
days  on  oil-cakes,  Hvg  days  on  buttermilk  mixed
with  water,  seven  days  on  water,  and  (one  day)  on
air,  (performs)  the  guilt-destroying  Tulapurusha.

23.  Living  on  barley-gruel  (yavaka)  removes  the
guilt  of  corporeal  beings  after  seven  days,  and  so
does  a  fast  of  seven  days ;  that  has  been  recognised
by  wise  men.

24.  By  dressing  in  wet  clothes,  by  living  in  the
open  air,  and  by  exposing  himself  to  the  sun  during
the  light  halves  of  the  months  Pausha  (December-
January),  Bhadrapada  (August-September),  and
GyeshtAs.  (May-June),  a  Brahma/za  is  freed  from
(all)  sin  excepting  crimes  causing  loss  of  caste
(pataniya).

25.  (If  one  swallows)  cows'  urine,  cowdung,  milk,

19.  Vishmi  XLVII,  7.

20.  Vishmi  XLVII,  9.   Govinda  places  this  verse  before  Sutra  19.
22.  Vishmi  XLVII,  22.

24.  The  meaning  is  that  the  performer  is  to  stand  in  wet  clothes
during  the  first  half  of  the  month  Pausha,  in  the  cold  season ;  to
live  in  the  open  air  during  the  first  half  of  Bhadrapada,  in  the  rainy
season ;  and  to  allow  himself  to  be  broiled  by  the  sun  in  (ryesh/Zza,
the  hottest  time  of  the  hot  season.

25.  I  doubt  if  the  reading  of  Govinda,  yavaMmena  (explained


327


IV,  5-  RITES   SECURING   SUCCESS.

sour  milk,  clarified  butter,  and  a  decoction  of  Kura
grass,  mixed  with  barley  gruel,  that  is  the  most
sanctifying  Brahmakur^a.

26.  He  who  fasts  on  the  new  moon  day  and  eats
sesamum  grains  on  the  full  moon  day,  will  be  freed
in  the  course  of  a  year  from  the  sins  which  he  com-
mitted in  the  bright  and  the  dark  halves  of  the
month.

27.  He  who  lives  on  alms  obtained  from  Agni-
hotrins  is  purified  in  one  month  ;  (he  who  obtains
his  food)  from  a  Yayavara,  in  ten  days;  he  who  re-
ceives it  from  a  hermit  in  the  forest,  in  five  days;

28.  (He  who  lives)  on  food  given  by  a  person
who  has  a  store  sufficient  for  one  day  only,  will  be
purified  in  one  day ;  he  who  drinks  water  given  by
a  person  subsisting  by  the  Kapota-vmti  (pigeon-
life),  is  purified  in  three  (days).

29.  If  one  recites  the  whole  i?/g-veda,  Ya^*ur-
veda,  and  Sama-veda,  or  thrice  reads  one  of  these
Vedas  and  fasts,  (that  is)  a  most  efficient  means  of
purification.

30.  Now  if  one  is  in  haste  to  finish,  one  may  live
on  air  during  a  day,  and  pass  the  night  standing
in  water,  that  is  equal  (in  efficacy)  to  a  Pra^apatya
(¥Lrtkkkr&).

31.  He  who  at  sunrise  mutters  the  Gayatrt  one
thousand  and  eight  times,  is  free  from  all  sin,  pro-
vided he  has  not  slain  a  learned  Brahma^a.

by  yavagM)  sawyuktam,  ■  mixed  with  barley-gruel/  is  correct.  All
the  MSS.  of  the  text  have  yavan&m  ekasawyukto,  which  I  do  not
understand.  Govinda  has  Brahmakrikkhrak  instead  of  Brahma-
kur£a&     But  "see  the  Petersb.  Diet.  s.  v.  brahmakur^a.

28.  Regarding  the  Kapota-v/Ytti,  see  above,  III,  2,  15.

30.  Vasish//6a  XXVII,  17.  Govinda  adds  after  kartum,  '  to
finish,'  '  the  rites  connected  with  the  Vedas '  (Sutra  1).


328  baudhAyana.  iv,  5.

32.  He  who  distributes  food,  speaks  the  truth,  and
has  compassion  on  all  living  beings,  is  more  (holy)
than  all  those  who  have  been  purified  by  the
restraints  mentioned  above.


Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  6.

1.  The  (eleven  Anuvakas  called)  Rudras  together
with  (the  ten  hymns)  seen  by  Madhu/£/Mandas,  the
Gayatrl  with  the  syllable  Om,  and  likewise  the
seven  Vyahmis  (are  the  texts)  which  should  be
muttered  (and)  which  remove  guilt.

2.  The  Mrzgaresh/i,  the  Pavitresh/i,  the  Trihavis,
the  Pavamanl  are  the  Ish/is  which  efface  sin,  if  they
are  (each)  combined  with  the  Vaisvanara  (Dvada^a-
kapala).

3-4.  Learn,  also,  the  following  most  excellent
secret ;  he  will  be  freed  from  all  sins  of  all  kinds
who  sprinkles  himself  with  water,  reciting  the
Pavitras,  who  mutters  the  eleven  (Anuvakas  called)
Rudras,  who  offers  burnt  oblations  of  butter,  reciting
the  Pavitras,  and  gives  gold,  a  cow,  and  sesamum  (to
Brahma^as).

5.  He  who  partakes  of  boiled  barley-gruel,  mixed
with  cow's  urine,  liquid  cowdung,  sour  milk,  milk,
and  butter,  is  quickly  freed  from  sin.

6.  Both  he  who  has  begotten  a  child  on  a  .Sttdra
woman  and  he  who  has  had  connexion  with  a  female,

6.  1.  The  hymns  are  Rig-veda  I,  1-10.

2.  Regarding  the  Mngaresh/i,  see  Taitt.  Sazrchita  IV,  7, 15.  In
explanation  of  the  term  Trihavis,  Govinda  adds  the  word  Savanesh/i.

5.  Yavaka,  translated,  as  usually,  by  barley-gruel,  can  also
denote,  as  Govinda  points  out,  other  dishes  made  of  barley.

6.  See  above,  II,  1,  2,  7, 10,  13-14.


IV,  7*  RITES   SECURING   SUCCESS.  329

intercourse  with  whom  is  forbidden  (agamya),  are
purified  (if  they  live)  according  to  this  rule  during
seven  days.

7.  (That  is  likewise)  the  remedy  when  one  has
swallowed  semen,  ordure,  and  urine,  or  eaten  the
food  of  persons  whose  food  must  not  be  eaten,  (and
also)  when  a  younger  brother  has  kindled  the  sacred
fire,  has  offered  a  .Srauta  sacrifice,  or  taken  a  wife
before  the  elder.

8.  He  who  has  committed  even  a  great  number
of  (wicked)  actions,  excepting  mortal  sins,  will  be
freed  (by  that  rule)  from  all  guilt.  That  is  the
statement  of  the  virtuous.

9.  But  (this)  ordinance,  which  is  based  on  the
authority  of  the  sacred  texts,  is  stated  (to  be  that)
through  which  Bharadva^a  and  others  became  equal
to  Brahman.

10.  Through  the  performance  of  these  rites  a
Brahma^a,  whose  heart  is  full  of  peace,  obtains  what-
ever desires  he  may  have  in  his  heart.


Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  7.

t.  The  wishes  of  a  Brahma^a  who  has  left  off  evil
deeds  and  is  (ever)  engaged  in  holy  works  are  ful-
filled even  without  (the  practice  of)  restraints.

2.  Upright  Brahma^as  quickly  accomplish  what-

'  7.  See  above,  II,  1,  1,  21,  39-40.  I  follow  the  reading  of  M.
and  of  the  commentary,  paryadhane^yayor  etat  parivitte  £a  bhe-
sha^am.  The  reading  of  the  Dekhan  MSS.  is  etat  patite  /Saiva
bho^anam,  ■  that  food  must  be  eaten  .  .  .  .  ,  and  when  one  has
become  an  outcast.'

7.  1.  Yantram,  'restraints,'  i.e.  YLrikkhxzs,  the  fasts,  and  other
practices  described  in  the  preceding  chapters.


33°  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  7.

ever  they  wish  in  their  hearts,  if  they  are  purified
by  honest  actions.

3.  Thus  a  wise  man  should  practise  those  re-
straints until  he  has  purified  his  bodily  frame.

4.  He  who  has  been  purified  by  those  restraints
should,  after  fasting  three  (days  and)  nights,  begin
the  performance  of  that  sacred  rite  through  which
he  wishes  to  gain  the  fulfilment  of  his  desires, —

5.  (Reciting)  the  Kshapavitra,  the  Sahasraksha,
the  Mrzgara,  the  two  Ga^as  (called)  Amhomu^,  the
Pavamanis,  the  Kushma^ls,  and  the  Rik&s,  ad-
dressed to  Vaisvanara,

6.  (And)  offering  with  (each  of)  these  (Mantras)
boiled  rice  and  clarified  butter  during  seven  days,  in
the  morning,  at  midday,  and  in  the  evening,  keeping
a  rigid  silence,  living  on  food  fit  for  a  sacrifice,
restraining  his  senses  and  his  actions,

7.  He  is  freed  from  all  crimes,  even  mortal  sins,
after  looking  on  a  cross-road  at  a  pot  filled  with
water,  (and  reciting  the  text),  'Si^he  me  manyu^/

8.  He  is  freed  from  the  multitude  of  sins,  com-
mitted unintentionally  in  old  age,  in  youth,  and  in
infancy,  and  even  from  those  belonging  to  former
births;

9.  After  feeding  at  the  end  (of  the  seven  days)
Brahma^as   with    milk   and   rice,  well   mixed   with

5.  According  to  Govinda  the  Kshapavitra,  or  as  the  Dekhan
MSS.  read,  Kshmapavitra,  occurs  in  the  Sutrapa/^a  of  the  Taitti-
riyas,  consists  of  six  verses,  and  begins  '  Agne  naya.'  The  text
meant  must  be  similar  to  Taitt.  Sa/rchita  I,  1,  14,  3.  The  Saha-
sraksha is  the  Purushasukta.  The  Mrzgara  consists  of  the  Ya^ya-
nuvakyas  of  the  Mrzgaresh/i,  Taitt.  Sawhitd  IV,  7,  15.  The  two
Gawas  called  Awhomu^  are  found  Taitt.  Sawhita  II,  3,  13,  1,  'ya*
vam  indravaru/zau'  and  'yo  vam  indravaruwau.'  The  verses  addressed
to  Agni  VaLrvanara  are  the  first  eight  of  Taitt.  Sawhitd  I,  5,  11.


IV,  8.  RITES   SECURING   SUCCESS.  33 1

butter,  and  distributing  to  them  after  their  dinner
cows,  land,  sesamum,  and  gold,

10.  A  Brahma^a  becomes  internally  pure,  his
guilt  being  consumed  like  fuel,  and  fit  for  the  per-
formance of  rites  which  secure  the  fulfilment  of
wishes  and  of  rites  like  the  kindling  of  the  sacred
fire.

Prasna  IV,  Adhyaya  8.

1.  He  who,  through  excessive  greed  or  careless-
ness, performs  this  rite  for  others,  is  tainted  by  sin,
and  perishes  like  one  who  has  swallowed  poison.

2.  A  Brahma#a  who  performs  this  rite  for  his
teacher,  his  father,  his  mother,  or  for  himself  is
resplendent  like  the  sun.  Therefore  this  rite  may
be  performed  for  those  (persons).

3.  Ka  (Pra^apati)  purified  by  means  of  this  rite
the  god  with  a  thousand  eyes  (Sahasraksha),  Fire,
Wind,  the  Sun,  Soma,  Yama,  and  other  lords  of  the
gods.

4.  Whatever  there  is  in  these  three  worlds,  famed
as  possessing  a  holy  name,  Brahma^as  and  the  rest,
(all)  that  was  produced  by  Ka  through  this  rite  of
sanctification.

5.  This  sin-destroying  secret  of  Pra^apati  was
first  produced;  thereafter  thousands  of  purificatory
rites  came  into  existence.

.6.  He  who  performs  those  eight  Ga/zahomas  on
the  (first)  day  of  the  year,  of  a  half-year,  of  a  season,
or  of  a  fortnight,  sanctifies  ten  ancestors  and  ten
descendants  of  his  line  ;

7.  And,  while  still  on  earth,  he  is  known  to  the

8.  5.  I.  e.  those  mentioned  V,  7,  5.


332  BAUDHAYANA.  IV,  8.

gods  in  heaven  as  a  holy  man,  and  (after  death)
that  virtuous  man  rejoices  for  a  very  long  time  in
heaven  like  a  god.

8.  If  a  Brahma^a  is  unable  to  offer  those  eight
Ga^ahomaSj  let  him  offer  one ;  thereby  his  guilt  is
effaced.

9.  He,  also,  whose  sons  or  pupils  offer  those  eight
Ga/zahomas,  is  freed  from  his  sin  which  is  bought
off  by  his  having  instructed  (them).

10.  Through  a  desire  of  removing  one's  guilt  one
even  may  cause  (these  oblations)  to  be  offered  by
men  who  have  been  engaged  for  money,  in  case
oneself  is  unable  (to  do  it) ;  a  man  need  not  torment
himself.

11.  Even  among  the  virtuous  a  distribution  of
wealth  is  made  (for  the  success)  of  holy  rites ;  some-
times a  man  who  is  free  from  debt  is  (thereby)  freed
from  guilt.

12.  Liberated  according  to  this  rule  from  the
ocean  of  guilt  and  debt,  he  considers  himself  pure
and  able  to  successfully  perform  the  sacred  rites.

1 3.  But  in  the  case  of  that  pure  mortal  who,  freed
from  all  sin  and  debts,  begins  the  sacred  rites,  they
will  succeed  without  any  effort.

14.  Let  him  daily  (study  and)  teach  this  holy
(rule)  of  Pra^apati,  which  the  sage  has  proclaimed,
let  him  remember  it  or  hear  it.  (By  doing  that)  he
is  freed  from  all  guilt  and  will  be  exalted  in  Brah-
man's world.

10.  The  meaning  is  that  in  case  a  wealthy  man  is  unable  to  bear
'  the  restraints/  he  may  hire  others  to  perform  the  Homas.  Though
the  hired  performer  will  be  guilty  of  a  serious  offence  (Sutra  1),
the  person  who  causes  them  to  be  performed  will  derive  benefit
from  them.


IV,  8.  RITES   SECURING   SUCCESS.  333

15.  Let  him  mutter  during  twelve  days  those
sacred  texts  through  which  he  wishes  to  accomplish
(his  desires),  eating  once  (a  day)  at  night  boiled
rice  with  clarified  butter,  with  milk,  or  with  sour
milk.

16.  (Let  him  offer)  ten  times  a  burnt  oblation  and
sprinkle  clarified  butter.  (That  is)  the  preliminary
worship  (which  must  be  performed)  when  one  desires
to  accomplish  one's  objects  through  those  sacred
texts.


PARISISH^A.


Prasna  VII,  Adhyaya  5.

1 .  We  will  explain  the  rule  for  the  adoption  of  a
son.

2.  Man,  formed  of  virile  seed  and  uterine  blood,
proceeds  from  his  mother  and  father  (as  an  effect)
from  its  cause.

3.  (Therefore)  the  father  and  the  mother  have
power  to  give,  to  abandon,  or  to  sell  their  (son).

4.  But  let  him  not  give  nor  receive  (in  adoption)
an  only  son  ;

5.  For  he  (must  remain)  to  continue  the  line  of
the  ancestors.

6.  Let  a  woman  neither  give  nor  receive  a  son
except  with  the  permission  of  her  husband.

7.  He  who  is  desirous  of  adopting  (a  son)  pro-
cures two  garments,  two  earrings,  and  a  finger-ring ;
a  spiritual  guide  who  has  studied  the  whole  Veda ;  a
layer  of  Kusa.  grass  and  fuel  of  Pala\?a  wood  and  so
forth.

5.  1.  This  chapter  has  been  translated  by  Mr.  Sutherland,  Dattaka
Mima/tfsa  V,  42,  and  Dattaka  ^Tandrika  II,  16,  and  by  myself,
Journal  Bengal  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc.,  vol.  XXXV,  p.  162.

2-6.  Identical  with  VasishMa  XV,  1-5.  The  best  MS.  omits
the  particle  tu, '  but,'  in  Sutra  6,  while  others  have  it.

7-8.  Vasish/$a  XV,  7.  The  translation  of  madhye  by  '  in  their
presence '  rests  on  the  authority  of  the  Sa^zskarakaustubha  47  b,  it,
where  it  is  explained  madhye  [a]  iti  bandhusamaksham.  The  other
explanation  '  in  the  middle  (of  his  dwelling),'  to  which  the  interpo-
lated text  of  the  Dattaka  Mimawsa  and  Dattaka  .Afandrika  refers,
is,  however,  also  possible.


VII,  5-  ADOPTION.  335

8.  Then  he  convenes  his  relations,  informs  the
king  (of  his  intention  to  adopt)  in  (their)  presence,
feeds  the  (invited)  Brahma/zas  in  the  assembly  or
in  (his)  dwelling,  and  makes  them  wish  him  'an
auspicious  day,'  '  hail,'  (and)  '  prosperity.'

9.  Then  he  performs  the  ceremonies  which  begin
with  the  drawing  of  the  lines  on  the  altar  and  end
with  the  placing  of  the  water-vessels,  goes  to  the
giver  (of  the  child)  and  should  address  (this)  request
(to  him), '  Give  me  (thy)  son/

10.  The  other  answers,  '  I  give  (him).'

11.  He  receives  (the  child  with  these  words),  T
take  thee  for  the  fulfilment  of  (my)  religious  duties  ;
I  take  thee  to  continue  the  line  (of  my  ancestors)/

12.  Then  he  adorns  him  with  the  (above-men-
tioned) two  garments,  the  two  earrings,  and  the
finger-ring,  performs  the  rites  which  begin  with  the
placing  of  the  (pieces  of  wood  called)  paridhis
(fences  round  the  altar)  and  end  with  the  Agni-
mukha,  and  offers  (a  portion)  of  the  cooked  (food)
in  the  fire.

13.  Having  recited  the  Puronuvakya  (verse),  'He
who  thinking  of  thee  with  a  discerning  mind,'  &c.,
he  offers  an  oblation,  reciting  the  Ya^ya  (verse), '  To
which  performer  of  good  deeds,  thou,  O  (^ata-
vedas,'  &c.

14.  Then  he  offers  (oblations,  reciting)  the  Vya-
hrztls ; — (the  ceremonies)  which  begin  the  oblation
to  Agni  Svishfekrzt  and  end  with  the  presentation

8.  The  ceremony  alluded  to  is  the  so-called  puwyahava^anam.

12.  The  correct  reading  is  pakva^  ^uhoti.

13.  The  two  texts  are  found  Taittiriya  Sawhita  I,  4,  46, 1.

14.  Vasish/^a  XV,  7.  The  parenthetical  phrase  occurs  fre-
quently in  the  Dharma-sutra ;  see  e.  g.  Ill,  4,  3.


336  BAUDHAYANA.  VII,  5.

of  a  cow  as   a   fee  (to  the  officiating  priest   are)
known ; —

15.  And  presents  (to  the  spiritual  guide)  as  a
sacrificial  fee  those  two  dresses,  those  two  earrings,
and  that  finger-ring  (with  which  he  had  adorned  the
child).

16.  If  after  the  performance  of  these  (rites)  a  legi-
timate son  of  his  own  body  is  born  (to  the  adopter,
then  the  adopted  son)  receives  a  fourth  (of  the  legi-
timate son's)  share.     Thus  says  Baudhayana.

16.  VasishMa  XV,  9.


INDEX


TO


VOLS.    II   AND    XIV.


[14]


INDEX  TO  VOLS.  II  AND  XIV.


Ap.  -  Apastamba  ;  Ga.  =  Gautama ;  Va.  =  Vasish/^a ;  Ba.  =?  Baudhayana.


Abhijasta,  Ap.  i,  3,  25;  21,  8;  24,
6-25;  26,6;  29,8-14,17,  Ga.
11,  35;  xvii,  17;  xix,  10.  Va.
xiv,  2  ;  xxii,  7  ;  xxm,  14.    Ba.

1,  ii,35.

Abortion,  Ap.  1,  21,  8;  24,  8.     Ga.

xxi,  9;  xxii,  13.  Va.  xxviii,  7.

Adoption,  Va.  xv,  1-10.     Ba.  Par.

VII,  4.

—  forbidden,   Ap.   11,  13,  11.     See

Son  adopted.
Adultery,  Ap.  1,  21,  9-10.

—  penances  for,  Ap.  1,  25,  1-2,  10;

28,  15,  18,  20;  II,  26,  24-27,  1.
Ga.  1,  xxii,  1-17,  23,  26-27,  35.
Va.  V,  3  ;  xx,  13-16  ;  xxi,  1-10,
12,13,16-17.    Ba.  11,  i,  13-15;

2,  n-14;  3,  48-51 ;  4,  15-

—  punishments  for,  Ap.  11,  26,  18-

27;    27,   8-13.     Ga.   XII,    2-3.

Ba.  1, 18, 18;  11,  3,  52-4,  3    See

Guru,  Wife,  repudiation  of.
Agamya    (females   not    to   be    ap-
proached),   enumeration,    Ba.

11,  4,  11.
Aghamarshawa  penance,  Ba.  Ill,  5.
Agnidhra  priest,  seat  of,  Ba,  1,  15,  25.
Agnihotra    sacrifice,   Ap.    1,   14,  1.

Va.  ix,  10.     Ba.  11,  4,  23.
Agnihotrin,   Ap.    11,    7,   13;    9,  *3.

Va.  vi,  21 ;   viii,  9;    xxv,   2.

Ba.  11,  13,  8;   iv,  5,  27.
Agnishtoma  sacrifice,  Ap.  II,  7,  4.

Ga.  viii,  20.     Ba.  11,  4,  23.
Agnish/ut    sacrifice,    Ga.    xix,    10;

xxii,  10.     Va.  xxii,  7.     Ba.  11,

1,  4;  in,  10,  8.
Agnyadheya  sacrifice,  Ga.  viii,  19.

Va.  viii,  20.     Ba.  1,  13,  10;  11,

4,  22-23.
Agrahayawi,  Ga.  viii,  18.   Va.  xi,  43.


Agraya«a  sacrifice,  Ga.  viii,  19.   Va.

xi,  46.     Ba.  11,  4,  23.
Agriculture,  Ap.  11,  10,  7.     Ga.  x,

5,  49.     Va.  11,  19,  31-36.     Ba.

1,  10,  28-30;  11,  4,  20-21.
Ahiwsaka  mode  of  life,  Ba.  ill,  2,

A/£arya,  etymology  of,  Ap.  1,  1,  13.

See     Teacher    and    Spiritual

Guide.
Ambash/£a  caste,  Ga.  iv,  1 6.  Va.  x  viii,

18.   Ba.  1, 16,7,9;  17,  3,9,  12.
Anamatparayawa  penance,  Ap.  1,  27,

9.     Va.  iv,  32;  xx,  46.

—  description  of,  Ba.  in,  9.
Andhra  (Andhra),  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxv,

xxx-xxxvii.

Anga,  country,  Ba.  I,  2,  13.

Angas,  of  Veda,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi,  Ga.
viii,  5;  xi,  19;  xv,  28.  Va.
in,  19-20,  23;  xiii,  7-  Ba-
il, 14,  2,  6.

—  enumeration  of,  Ap.  11,  8,  10-11.
Animals,  eatable  and  forbidden,  Ap.

I,  17,  29-39.  Ga.  xvii,  27-38.
Va.  Xiv,  39-48.   Ba.  1,  12,  1-8.

—  slaying  of,  Va.  iv,  5-8.

—  penance  for  slaying,  Ap.  I,   25,

13-26,  2.  Ga.  xxii,  18-22,  24-
25.  Va.  xxi,  18,  23-27.  Ba.
1,  19,  6.

—  penance  for  bite  of,  Ga.  xxm,  7.

Va.  xxm,  31.   Ba.  1,  11,  38-41.
Animal  sacrifices,  Va.  xi,  46.      Ba.

1,  9;  11,  4,  23.     See  NiruV^a-

pajubandha.
Anvash/aki,  Va.  xi,  43.
Apapatra  (low-caste),  vol.  ii,  p.  n;

Ap.  I,  15,  29;  21,  6;  11,  17,  20.

Va.  xx,  16.     Ba.  1,  21,  15;  2,

13;  11,  2,13.
Z    2


34Q


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


Apastamba,  vol.  ii,  pp.  ix-xliv,     Ba.

n,  i°,  H-

—  age  of,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxvii-xliii.

—  home  of,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxii-xliv.
•^-  works  of,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xi-xiv.
Apastambha,  vol,  ii,  p.  xxxiii ;  vol.

xiv,  p.  xlii.

Apastambins  (-biya),  vol.  ii,  p.  xv.

Aptoryama  sacrifice,  Ga.  vm,  20.

Arattas,  Ba.  1,  2,  14.

Arghya,  Ga.  v,  32.  See  Honey-
mixture.

Arms,  trade  of,  Ap.  1,  18,  19;  11,  10,
6;  17,  21.  Ga.  xiii,  13-23.  Va.
in,  25;   xiv,  5.    Ba.  1,  2,  3;

Arsha  marriage,  Ap.  II,  n,  18.    Ga.

iv,  8,  30.    Va.  I,  32.     Ba.  I,

20,  4,
Arthajastra,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxix.
Artisan,  Ga.  x,  3 1 ;  xi,  2 1 ;    Va.  xix,

Arya  (Aryan),  Ap.  1,  3,  40;  12,  6,
8-10;  21,  13,  17;  28,  11;  29,
9;  11,10,11.  Ga.  vi,  11;  ix,
65,69;  x,  61,  67;  xii,  2  ;  xxii,
5.  Ba.  1,  10,  20;  11,2,18.  See
Caste, three  first  or  twice-born.

Aryavarta,  boundaries  of,  Va.  1,  8-15.
Ba.  1,  2,  9-12.

Ascetic,  Ap.  11,  9,  13  ;  21,  1  ;  26, 14.
Ga.  in,  2;  xii,  38.  Va.  xi,  17,
34;  xix,  37;  xxi,  33.    Ba.i,  19,

13;  ii,  i3,  7.

—  duties  of,  Ap.  11,  21,  9-17.     Ga.

in,  11-25.     Va-  vi,  19-20;   x.
Ba.  11,  11,  16-26, 18.

—  rites  on  entering  order  of,  Ba.

11,  17.
Ashtaka,  Ap.  1,  10,  2.      Ga.  vin,  18;
xvi,  38-39.    Va.  xiii,  22.     Ba.

11,15,9-
Assassin.    See  Self-defence.
Assault,  Ap.  1,  26,  6.     Ga.  xxi,  20-

22.     Va.  xjx,  9.     Ba.  11,  1,  7.
Assault-of-arms,  Ap.  11,  25,  14.
Assembly  legal.     See  Parishad.
Assessors,  Ga.  xiii,  11.
Astrologer,  Ga,  xiii,  1.     Brahma^a

not  to  be  an,  Va,  x,  21.     Ba.

11,  2,  16.
Astronomy,  a  Vedanga,  Ap.  11,  8, 11.
Asura  marriage,  Ap.  11,  12,  1.     Ga.

iv,  11.   Ba.  1,  20,  7, 13;  21,  2-3.

See  Manusha  marriage.
Ajoka,  king,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiv.


Aju£ikara  crimes,  Ap.  1,  21,  12-19.
Ba.  11,  2,  15-16.

—  penances  for,  Ap.  1,  29, 17-18  ;  11,

12,  22-23.     Ba.  11,  2,  17.
A.rvalayana,  Ba.  11, 10,  14.
A^vins,  Ba.  11, 16,  2.
Atharvajiras  Upanishad,  vol.  ii,  p.  Ivi.

Ga.  xix,  1 2.  Va.  xxii,  9;  xxviii,

14.
Atharva-veda,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxiv-xxv,

xxix,    Ap.  11,  29,  12.     Ba.  iv,

3,  45  5,1-
Atheist,  Ap.  1,  20,  5.     Ga.  xv,  16 ;
xxi,  1.    Va.  1,  23;  xii,  41.    Ba.

I,  10,  25.

—  penance  for,  Va.  xxi,  29-30.
Atikr/^^ra  penance,  Ga.  xix,  20;

xxv,  18-19.  Va.  xiv,  33;  xx,
8,  10,  19;  xxi,  16,  30;  xxii,  16.
Ba.  11,  1,  7;  4,  12  ;  in,  10,  18.

—  description  of,Va.  xxiv,  1-2.    Ba.

II,  2,40;  iv,  5,  8.

Atiratra  sacrifice,  Ap.  ji,  7,  4.     Ga.

vm,  20.
Atithi,    etymology    of,  Va.  vm,  7.

See  Guest.
Atman.     See  Soul.
Atreya,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xl.
Atreyi,  etymology  of,  Va.  xx,  35-36.

See  Murder,  penance  for,
Aukheyas,  vol.  ii,  p.  xv.
Aukhya,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxxvi.
Aupa^andhani,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xl.     Ba.

11,  3,  33.
Austerity,  Ga.  xix,  11,  15.     Va.  xx,

47;   xxii,  8.     Ba.  111,9,  9,i3-
Avakirwin.     See  Student,  penances

for.
Avanti,  country,  Ba.  1,  2,  13.
Avaras,  men  of  later  times,  vol.  ii,

pp,  xvii,  xxxvii.     Ap.  p.  1 9 ;  II,

x      J3,  IO,

Ayogava  caste,  Ga.  iv,  17.     Ba.  1,
16,8;  17,1,8.

Bali   offering,  Ap.  1,  12,  16;   11,  3,

12-15,  18-4,  9.     Ga.  11,  4;   v,

9-17.     Va.  xi,  4.     Ba.  11,  5, 1 1 ;

vol.  xiv,  p.  257.
Barbarians,  Ap.  1,  32,  18.     Ga.  ix,

16.  Va.  vi,  41.
Bathing,  rule  of,  Ap.  1,  2,  30 ;  11,  22,

14.     Ga.  ix,  2,  61.    Va.  vi,  15.

Ba.  1,  3,  39;   11,  5,  1-7;   6,  3,

24-25;  7,  3,  8.

—  a  penance,  Ap.  1, 25, 10,  &c.    Ga.


INDEX   TO   VOLS.  II   AND   XIV.


34*


xix,  15,  &c.    Va.  Xxiii,  33,  &c.
Ba.  in,  10,  13,  &c.
Baudhayana,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xv-xvi,  xviii-
xxiii ;  vol.  xiv,  pp.  xxix-xlv.

—  age  of,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xlix,  li ;   vol.

xiv,  p.  xliii.

—  home  of,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xii,

—  works  of,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxx.

—  quoted,  Ba.  1,  5,  13  ;  6,  15  ;  7,  8  ;

11,  jo,  14;  111,5,  7;  6,13.  Ba.
Par.  vii,  4,  16.

Baudhayanins  (-iyas),  vol.  ii,  p.  xv ;

vol.  xiv,  pp.  xli-xlii.
Begging,  Ap.  1,  3,  25-4,  4;  11,  10, 1-3.

Ga.  11,  35^41  ;  in,  14-15.     Va.

Vii,  9 ;  xi,  68-70 ;  xii,  2-3.    Ba.

1,  3,  16-18;  5>8-n;  11,  11,  22;
18,  4-6,  14.

Bestial  crime,  Ga.  xxii,  36;    xxiii,

12.  Va.  xxiii,  5-6.
Bhallavins,  Va.  1,  14-15.      Ba.  1,  2,

11-12.

Bharadvag-a,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xvi,  xxiii.

Bharadva^-ins,  vol.  ii,  p.  xv.

Bhavishyat-pura«a,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxviii.
Ap.  11,  24,  6.

Bhikshu,  vol.  ii,  p.  lv.  Ga.  ill,  2.
Ba.  11,  11,  12.

Bhrigya.ka.ntba,  caste,  Ga.  iv,  20.

Blind  man,  excluded  from  inherit-
ance, Ba.  11,  3,  38.

Bodhayana,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xliii.

Boundary,  Va.  xv,  18.     See  Land.

Brahmakunfca  penance,  Ba.  iv,  5,  25.

Brahma/£arin.     See  Student.

Brahma  marriage,  Ap.  11,11,17.  Ga.
IV,  6>33-   Va.  1,  30.   Ba.  1,  20,  2.

—  offspring  of,  Va.  Ill,  19.
Brahman,  offering  to.     See  Veda-
study.

—  priest,  Ba.  1,  15,  21,  23.

—  slayers  of,  Ap.  1,  1,  27.
Brahma/za,  quoted,  Ap.  1,  9-10;    3,

9,  26;  7,  7,  11,  10,  8;   12,  1-2,

10,  14;  17,  28;  11,  7,  15;  13,6.
Ba.  11,  11,  7.

Brahmawa  caste,  duties,  livelihood,
and  occupations,  Ap.  1,  1 8,  3-8,
13-15;  20,19-21,4;  29,4.    Ga.

11,  20;  vn,  4-23;  viii,  1-11;
ix,  1-6,  40.  Va.  11,  13-14,  22-
47;  in,  i-ii,  24;  vi,  23,  25,
33-44;  Vlll,  17;  x,  31;  xi,  45-
48.     Ba.  1,  10,  24-30;  18,  2;  11,

2,  13,16,26-29;  3,  1;  4,16-21.

—  special  rules  for  initiation,  stu-


dentship, impurity,  &c,  Ap.  1,
18,21;  2,33,38,40-41;  3,28;
5,  16;  14,  23,  26.  Ga.  1,  5-6,
15-20,  22,  24,  26.  Va.  in,  26,
31;  xi,  49,  52,  55,  58,  64,  67-
^  68,  71.  Ba.  1,  3,  1-15,  17.
Brahmawa  caste,  rank  and  preroga-
tives, Ap.  1,  1,  3-4;  14,25;  30,
20,22;  31,6;  11,4,16;  11,5-6;
12,5-8526,10.  Ga.  v,  43-44;
viii,  12-13;  ix,  12;  x,  44;  XI,
1,7,12-14;  xiii,  26;  xiv,  46  ;
xviii,  24-29.  Va.  1,  39-40,  43-
46;  111,14;  vi,  11;  xi,  13;  XII,
28-30.  Ba.  1,  18,  1-11 ;  11,  6,
30;  7,  38.

—  feeding  of  and  gifts  to,  Ap.  11, 15,

12-13;  I7)4-22;  18,10;  20,
2-4,  6  ;  25,  11  ;  26,  1-2.  Ga.  V,
20-21;  x,  9;  xv,  5,  7-14;  XVIII,
3 1.  Va.  VI,  25,  30  ;  VIII,  6  ;  xi,
17-20,27,29.  Ba.  11,  5, 19;  11,
5  5  14,2-5.

—  property  inherited  by  Brahmawas

only,     Ga.    xxviii,    41.      Va.
xvii,  84-86.     Ba.  1,  13,  14.
• —  punishments  of,  Ap.  11,  26,  11-13,
17-19.     Ga.  xii,  11,  16,  46-47.
Ba.  1,  18,  17-18;  11,  4,  1.

—  wives  of,  Va.  1,  24-26.  Ba.i,  16,  2.

—  marriages  lawful  for,  Ba.  1,  20,  10.

—  murder  of,  Ap.  1,  24,  7-25  ;    25,

11-12;  28,21-29,1.  Ga.  xxi,
1 ;  xxii,  1-13;  xxiv,  6-12.  Va.
xx,  23-28,  34,  37;  xxv,  4.  Ba.
1,  18,  18-19;  i9,  5  5  ii,  1,  2-6;
iv,  1,  29  ;  2,  6-8.

—  other  offences  against,  Ga.  xxi,

17,  20-22;  xxii,  28.     Ba.  11,  1,

7.     See  Srotriya.
Brahmanvadhana  rite,  Ba.  11,  17, 18-

19.
Bride,  Va.  XIII,  60.
Bridegroom,  Va.  xi,  2.     Ba.  11,  6,  30.
Brother,  Ap.  1,  14,  9.     Ga.  VI,  3,  8.

Ba.  1,  3,  33.

—  inherits  sister's  fee,  Ga.  xxviii,

25.

—  eldest   inherits  brother's  estate,

Ga.  xxviii,  27.

—  younger  brother  sacrificing,  mar-

rying, &c.  before  elder,  Ap.  11,
12,  22.  Ga.  xv,  18  ;  xviii,  20.
Va.  1,  18;  xx,  7-8.  Ba.  11,  1,
39-40;  iv,  6,  7.  See  Sons,
eldest,  &c.


342


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


Buddhists,  vol.  ii,  p.  lv.
Bukkaraya,  king,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xlii.

Caste,  four  original,  Ap.  1, 1,3-7.  Va.
II,  1.     Ba.  1,  16,  1.

—  three  first  or  twice-born,  Ap.  11,

25,  13;    26,  4  5A   27,  8-15.     Va.
11,  2-3.     See  Arya.

—  mixed,  Ga.  iv,  16-28.    Va.  XVIII.

Ba.  1,  16,  6-17,  15.

—  change  of,  Ga.  iv,  22-24.

—  duties  of  all,  Va.  iv,  5.

—  exclusion  from,  Ga.  xx,  1-9.    Va.

xv,  11-16.     Ba.  11,  1,  36.

—  origin  of,  Ga.  iv,  24.     Va.  iv,  1-3.

Ba.  1,18,  1-6.

—  re-admission  into,  Ga.  xx,  10-16.

Va.  xv,  17-21.
Central  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxii.
Conduct,  rule  of,  Va.  vi,  1-9.

—  how  settled,  Ap.  1,  20,  1-9 ;   11,

29,  14.

—  penance  for  violation  of,Ga.  xxv,

7-
Connubial  intercourse,  duty  of,  Ap.

1,  32, 1-2;  11, 1,  9, 16-2,  1.    Ga.

v,  1-2  ;  ix,  28-29.  Va.  xii,  6-7,

21.     Ba.  1,  2i,  18;  iv,  1, 16-21.
Coparcener,    acquisition     by,    Ga.

xxvin,  30-31.
Countries,  law  of,  Ap.  11, 15,  1.     Ga.

xi,  20.   Va.  1, 17.    Ba.  1, 2, 1-8.
Cows,  Ap.  1,  17,  30-31 ;   26,  1 ;    30,

20  ;   31,  8-12  ;  II,  8,  5-7.     Ga.

vii,  8;    ix,  12,  19,   23;    x,  18;

xvii,  30;    xxii,  18;    XXIII,  12.

Va.  iv,  8  ;  vi,  1 1 ;  xii,  9  ;  xiv,

30,  45-46;   xxi,  18;   xxiii,  6.
Ba.  11,  4,  18  ;  6,  17,  18,  30.

Crimes,  classification   of,  Ap.  1,  21,

7-19.     Ga.  xxi.     Va.  1,  19-23.

Ba.  11,  2, 1,  12,  15.
Cultivator,  law  affecting,  Ap.  11,  28,

1-2.     Ga.  x,  24-25;  xi,  21.
Custom,  law  of,  Ap.  11,  t  5,  1.  Ga.  xi,

20.     Va.  1,  17.     Ba.  1,  2,1-12.

Daiva  marriage, Ap.  11, 1 1, 19.  Ga.iv,
9,  31.    Va.  1,  31.    Ba.  1,  20,  5.

Dakshi/za.     See  Sacrificial  fee.

Damage,  done  by  cattle,  Ap.  11,  28,
5.     Ga.  xii,  19-26.

Dancing,  where  to  take  place,  Ap.  11,

25,^4.
Danrapurwamasa  sacrifices,  Ga.  viii,
19.     Ba.  11,  4,  23.


Dattaka.     See  Son  adopted.
Daughter,    duty   of    marrying,  Ga.

xviii,  20-23.     Va.  xvii,  67-70.

Ba.  iv,  1,  1 1-6.

—  crime   of   selling,  Ap.  11,  13,  11.

Va.i,  36-38. a  Ba.  1,  21,  2-3  ;  11,
2,  27.     See  Asura  marriage.

—  inherits  from  father,  Ap.  11,  14,  4.
from  mother,  Ga.  xxvm,  24.

Va.  xvii,  46.     Ba.  11,  3,  43.

—  mother  inherits  from,  Ga.  xxviii,

25.

—  appointed, Ga.  xxviii,  18-19.  Va.

xvii,  45-46.     Ba.  11,  3, 16.
Daushyanta  caste,  Ga.  iv,  16.
Deaf  man,  free  from  taxes,  Ap.  11,

26,  16.

Debts,  Ga.  XII,  40-41.    Va.  xvi,  31.

—  Brahmawa's  three,  Va.  xi,  47-48.

Ba.  11,  16,  4-8.
Defamation,  Ap.  1,  26,  3-4,  7  ;   11,

27,  14.  Ga.  xii,  1,  8-14;  xxi,
10,17-18;  xxiii,  27-28;  xxv,
7.  Va.  xix,  9;  xxm,  38-40.
Ba.  11,  2,  33-34.

Dekhan,  Ba.  1,  2,  13.

Deposits,  Ga.  xii,  42.     Va.  xvi,  18.

Ba.  11,  2,  3.
Dejastha  Brahman?,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxi.
Devapala,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiii.
Dharmajastra,  Ga.  xi,  19.

—  reading,  a  penance,  Va.  xxvn,  19.

—  rule  for  teaching,  Va.  xxiv,  6-7.

Ba.  iv,  2,  9-10.
Dhivara  caste,  Ga.  iv,  19.
Dhruva  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,  1,  16;

2,  7-10.
Documents,  Va.  xv,  10,  14-15.
Domestic  priest,  Ap.  11,  10,  14-16.

Ga.  xi,  12-17.     Va.  xix,  3-6,

41-42.     Ba.  1,  18,  7-8.
Dowry,  Va.  xiii,  53.
Dravi^a,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxv,  xxxiv-xxxv.
Dress,  Ap.  1,  2,  39-3,  9;  15, 1 ;  30,

10-14;  11,  4,  21.     Ga.  1,  16-21;

in,  18-19;  Ix>  3_6«    Va.  ix,  1 ;

x,   9-10;    xi,   61-67;   xii,  14,

38-39.     Ba.  1,  3,  14;  5,  6;  13,

4-10;  II,  6,  39-40;  6,  39;  11,

15;  18,  44;  19,  21.
Drinking   spirituous   liquor,  Ap.  1,

21,8.    Ga.  11,  20;  xxi,  1.    Ba.

1,  2,  4;  18,18.

—  penance  for,  Ap.  1,  25,  3,  10;  27,

10.  Ga.  xxiii,  10-12.  Va.  xx,
19,22;  xxvi,  5.   Ba.  11, 1,18-22.


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


343


Dumb  man,  free  from  taxes,  Ap.  n,

26,  16.
Duty.     See  Taxes.
Dvada^aha  sacrifice,  Ap.  11,  7,  4.

Eating,  rules  of,  Ap.  1,  15,  16-20,
16;  3i,i;n,  1,  2-7.  Ga.  IX,  32,
56-59.  Va.  in,  69-70 ;  vi,  20-
22  ;  xii,  18-20,  31,  35.  Ba.  1,  2,
2 ;  11,  5, 2 1-6, 2 ;  1 2-1 3 ;  6, 39-40.

Eka,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.     Ap.  1,  19,  7.

Emigrant,  property  of,  Ga.  xiv,  44.
Va.  xiv,  19-20.

—  wife  of,  Ga.  xvm,  15-17.  Va.
xvii,  75-80.

Enasvin.     See  Sinful  men.

Etymology,  a  Vedanga,  Ap.  11,  8,  n.

Eunuch,  excluded  from  inheritance,
Ap.  11,  14,  1.  Ga.  xxviii,  43.
Va.  xvii,  52-53;  xix,  35-36.

Evidence,  threefold,  Va.  xvi,  10.
See  Documents,  Ordeals,  Pos-
session, Witness.

—  venial  false,  Ga.  xxiii,  29 ;  Va.

xvi,  33.
Exclusion  from  inheritance,  Ap.  xiv,

I,  15.  Ga.  xxviii,  23,  40,  43.
Va.  xvii,  52-53.  Ba.11,  3,  37-
40.

Excommunication.     See  Caste.

Excrements,  voiding  of,  Ap.  I,  30,
15-31,  3-  Ga.  ix,  12,  14,  37-
43.  Va.  vi,  10-13;  xii,  11,
13-17.     Ba.  1,  10,  10-14.

Families,  law  of,  Ap.  11,  15, 1.     Ga.

ix,  20.     Va.  1,  17.
Fasting,   a  penance,    Ga.   xix,  11.

Va.  xxii,  8.     Ba.  in,  10,  9,  &c.

—  a  punishment,  Ap.  1,  8,  30,  &c.

—  forbidden,  Ba.  n,  13,  8-9.
Father,  Ap.  1,  1,  17;  10,  4;  14,  6;

II,  10,  1.  Va.  iv,  21 ;  xni,  48.
Ba.  1,  11,  20;  11,  3,  45.

—  partition  by,  Ap.   11,  13,  13-14,

I,  6-9.     Ga.  xxviii,  2.     Ba.  1,
-  21,  12  ;  n,  1,  25 ;  3,  2-8.

—  partition  against  will  of,  Ga.  xv.

—  power  over  children,  Ap.  II,  13,

II.  Va.  xv,  2.   Ba.  Par.  vii,  4,  3.
over    marriageable    daughter

lost,  Ga.  xvin,  20.     Va.  xvn,

67-68.     Ba.  iv,  1,  14.
to  be  cast  off,  Ga.  xx,  1.    Va.

xni,  47.
to  be  maintained  though  out-


cast, Ga.  xxi,  15-16.     See  Pa-
rents, Son.
Father-in-law,  Ap.  n,  8,  7.     Ga.  v,

27;  vi,  9.    Va.  xni,  41.    Ba.  1,

3,  45  5  n,  6,  30.
Fellow-student,  Ap.  1,  7,  29  ;  10, 12  ;

11, 11.     Ga.  11,  40 ;  m,  8  ;  xiv,

20.     Ba.  1,  11,  30.
Food,  lawful  and  forbidden,  Ap.  1,

16,  21-31;    17,  5,   14-18,    16;

n,  15,  14.     Ga.   ix,  38;   xvii.

Va.  iv,  30;  vi,  27-29;  xni,  1-

11,  14-48.     Ba.  1,  9,  1-8;  10,

2-9;  12, 1-15.

—  penance  for  eating  forbidden,  Ap.

I,  26,  7  ;  27,  3-6.  Ga.  xxiii,
45,  23-26;  xxiv,  3;  xxv,  7.
Va.  iv,  31;  xx,  17,  21;  xxiii,
30;  xxvii,  10-17.  Ba.  1,  12,
12-13;  n,  5,  8;  iv,  1,  5-6;  2,

5,  13-14;  6,  7.

—  purifying,  Ga.  xix,  13.   Va./Xxn,

II.  Ba.  in,  10,  11,  &c.     k^
Fornication,  Ap.  n,  26, 18,  21.     Ba.

11,  2,  13.

Funeral  ceremonies,  Ap.  n,  15,  9-
11.  Ga.  xiv,  37-42.  Va.  iv,
9-15,  36.     Ba.  1,  11,  24-26.

Funeral  sacrifices.     See  Sraddhas.

Gambling,  Ap.  11,  25,  12-13.     Ga.

xxv,  18.     Ba.  n,  2,  16.
Gawahomas,  Ba.  iv,  7,  5-7;  8, 1-11.
Gandharva,  Ap.  1,  20,  6.   Va.  xxviii,

6.  Ba.  11,  4,  5.
Gandharva  marriage,  Ap.  n,  11-20.

Ga.  iv,  10.     Va.  1,  33.     Ba.  1,

20,  6,  12,  16.
Ganges,  Va.  1,  12.     Ba.  1,  2,  10.
Garbhadhana,  Ga.  vni,  4.
Gautama,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xlvi-lvi;   vol.

xiv,  pp.  xxi,  xl.

—  quoted,  Va.  iv,  34,  36.     Ba.  I,  2,

7  5  11,4,17.
Gaya,  Va.  xi,  43.
Gayatri.     See  Savitri.
Gifts,  Ap.  1,  12,  16;  18,  1-19,  16;

11,  10,  4;  15,13.   Ga.  v,  21-23;

x,  1;  xix,   11,  16.     Va.  11,  14,

15  ;    vi,  26,    30-32;    vni,   13;

XIV,  12-13;   XX,  47;  xxii,   8;

xxviii,  16-22;    xxix.     Ba.   1,

18,   2-4;  11,  5,  19-20;  6,  41-

42  ;  in,  10,  9,  14.

—  manner  of  making,  Ap.  n,  9,  8-9.

Ga.  v,  18-23.     Ba.  11,  7,  39-40.


344


INDEX   TO   VOLS.  II   AND   XIV.


Gifts,  penance  for  accepting,  Ap.  I,

28, 1 1.  Ga.  xxiv,  2.  Ba.  11, 5,  8 ;

iv,  2,  4.
Girdle,  sacred,  Ap.i,  2>  33-37.   Ga.  1,

15.  Va.  xi,  58-60.  Ba.  ij  3,  13.
Godana  rite,  Ga.  11,  9.
Godavan  river,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxi.
Gods,  images  of,  Ap.  1,  30,  20,  22.

Ga.  ix,  12.
Gosava  sacrifice,  Va.  xxn,  7.     Ba.

11, 1,  4.
Govindasvamin,  vol  ii,  p.  xlix ;  vol.

xiv,  p.  xlv.
Grammar,  a  Vedanga,  Ap.  11,  8,  11.

—  study  of,  Va.  x,  20.

Guests,  Ap.  1,  15,  1 ;  11,  4,  1,  11 5  n,
4,  11,  13-20;  6,  5-9,  4.  Ga.
v,  25-45.  Va.  viii,  4-5,  11-15.
Ba.  11,  5,  11-18;  6,  36-37.

Gujarat,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxii.

Guru  (venerable  person),  Ap.  I,  2,
29;  6,  29,31,33;  8,14-15;  10,
2;  14,  6,  15-17;  15,  1;  21,  9;
11,15,8.    Ga.  11,  14,  37;  v,  21;

VI,   3;    IX,   64;    XVII,   4;    XX,    2,

6.  Va.  xiii,  24 ;  xiv,  "13  ;  xvn,
56;  xx,  1,  9-10.     Ba.  11,  2,  13;

4,  9  5  5,  19.

—  slaying  a,  Ap.  1,  24,  24-25.

—  adultery  with  wife  of,  Ap.  1,  25,

1-2,  10;    28,  15-18.     Ga.  xxi,

I,  8  ;  xxiii,  8-12  ;  xxiv,  10-12.
Va.  1,  20;  xx,  13-14;  xxvi,  7-8.
Ba.  1, 18,18;  11,  1,  13-15;  4,15.

• —  other  offences  against,  Ga.  xxi,
10;  xxiii, 30-31.  Va.i,  23;  xxi,
28.     See  Teacher,  Parents.

Gaiminiya  school,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlix.
Ganaka,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxviii;  p.  131.

Ba.  11,  3,  34.
Gatakarman,  Ga.  viii,  14.
Gyesh^asaman,  he  who  knows,  Ap.

II,  17,  22.  Ga.  xv,  28.  Va.  111,
19.     Ba.  11,  14,  2.

Hair,  arrangement  of,  Ap.  I,  2,  31-
32.  Ga.  1,  27;  in,  11-12,  24.
Va.  11,  21;  vii,  11;  ix,  1 ;  x,  6.
Ba.  11, 11,  15,  18.

Haradatta,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xliii-xliv,  lvii.

Harihara  king,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiii.

Harita,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi ;  vol.  xiv,  p.  xx.

—  quoted,  Ap.  1,  13,  10;  18,  2;  19,

12;  28,  1,  6;  29,  12,  16.  Va.
II,  6.     Ba.  II,  2,  21,


Herdsman,  law  affecting,  Ap.  11,  28,

3-9.    Ga.  xi,  21 ;  xii,  20.
Hermit,  Ap.  1,  18,  31 ;  11,  9, 13  ;  21,

1.  Ga.  in,  2.  Ba.  11,  11,  12;
13,7  5  17,6;  111,1,8;  iv,  5,  27.

—  classes  of,  Ba.  in,  3,  9-15.

—  duties  of,  Ap.  11,  21,  18;  23,  2.

Ga.  in,  26-35.  Va.  vi,  19-20;
ix.  Ba.  11,  11,  14-15;  in,  3,
18-4,  22.

—  penance  for,  Va.  xxi,  32.
Himalaya,  Va.  1,  8-9.     Ba.  1,  2,  9.
Hira«yakejin,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xiii,  xvi,

xxiii-xxiv;  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxxvi.  Ba.

11,  10, 14.
Homicide,  Ap.  1,  21,  8  ;  29,  2-3  ;  11,

27,  16-17.     See  Murder.
Honey-mixture,  Ap.  11,  8,  5-9.    Ga.

v,  27-30.    Va.  xi,  1-2.    Ba.  11,

6,  36-37.
Horse-sacrifice,  Ap.  1,  24,  22.     Ga.

xix,  9  ;  xxiii,  9.     Va.  xi,  78 ;

xxii,   6.     Ba.  11,  1,   4-5  ;    m,

10,  7.

Hotri  priest,  seat  of,  Ba.  1,  15,  24.
House,  dispute  about,  Va.  xvi,  12-

13.
Householder,  duties  of,  Ap.  11,  1,  1-
13,23;   20,10-20.     Ga.  iv-v.
Va.  vi,  19-20;  viii;   xi.     Ba.

11,  4,  22-5,  9;  13,  7-9-
Husband  and  wife,  rights  of,  Ap.  11,

14,  16-18;  27,  1-7;  29,  3-4.
Ga.  vi,  6;  xvm,  1-3.  Va.  v,
1-2  ;  xxi,  9-10 ;  xxviii,  7.  Ba.
H|  3,  44-47  ;  4,  6-     See  Wife.

Idiot,   excluded    from    inheritance,
Ga.  xxviii,  43.    Ba.  11,  3,  38.

—  son  of,  inherits,  Ga.  xxviii,  44.
Impure    substances,    penances    for

swallowing,  Ga.  xxiii,  3.     Va.

xx,  20.     Ba.  11,  2,  36  ;  iv,  6,  7.

for  touching,  Va.  xxiii,  24-

25.
Impurity  through  births  and  deaths,

Ap.  1,  15,  18;  11,  15,  2-8,  20-

26.    Ga.  xiv.     Va.  iv,  16-37.

Ba.    1,  11,  1-8,  17-23,   27-32.

See  Purification.
Incest,  Ap.  1,  21,  8.    Ga.  xxi,  1-8  ;

xxiii,  12.     Va.  xx,  15.    Ba.  11,

2,  13;  4,  11-12.

Indivisible    property,    Ga.    xxviii,

46-48.
Infants,  Ap.  11,  15,  20-26.    Ga.  11,


INDEX   TO   VOLS.  II   AND   XIV.


:45


1-5  ;  xiv,  44.  Va.  II,  6-7  ;  xix,
37.     Ba.  1,  3,  6;  n,  3-4.

Inheritance,  Ap.  11,  13,  2,  13-14, 14.
Ga.  xxviii,  1-47.  Va,  xv,  9 ;
xvii,  1-54,  81-87.  Ba.  1, 11,11,
16;  11,  32-43.  See  Brother,
Daughter,  Mother,  Sakulya,
SapWa,  Son,  Wife,  Pupil,
Teacher,  Officiating  priest,
King,  Exclusion  from  inherit-
ance, Coparcener,  Indivisible
property,  Partition,  Re-united
coparcener.

Initiation,  Ap.  1,  1,  5,  8-21.  Ga.  1,  5-
14.  Va.  11,  3;  xi,  49-73'  Ba.
I,  3,  7-12.

—  neglect    of,  Ap.  1,  1,   22-2,  10.

Ga.  xxi,  11.  Va.  xi,  74-79.
Ba.  1,  16,  16.

—  second,  Ga.  xxn,  2.    Va.  xx,  17-

20;  xxiii,  30.    Ba.n,  1,  19-21.
Interest,   Ga.   xn,  29-36.     Va.  11,
43-51.     Ba.  1,  10,  22-25.

Judge,  Ap.  11,  29,  5-6.  Ga.  xm,
26-31.     Ba.  1,  19,  8-9.

Judicial  procedure,  Ap.  11,  1 1,  1-3  ;
29,  6-9.  Ga.  xi,  19-25  ;  xm.
Va.  xvi.     Ba.  1,  18,  7-16.

Kalakavana,  Va.  1,  8.     Ba.  1,  2,  9.
Kaleyas  (Kaletas),  vol.  ii,  p.  xv.
Kalinga,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxiv-xxxvi.  Ba.

1,  2,14-15.

Kalpa,  a  Vedanga,  Ap.  II,  8,  11.
Kalpa-sutras,  vol.  ii,  p.  xi.    Ap.  II,  8,

12-13.
Kawara  country,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxi.
Ka«va,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.     Ap.  1,  19,  3;

28,1.
Kawva,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi ;   vol.  xiv,  p.

xxxvi.  Ap.i,  19,  7.  Ba.  11, 10, 14.
Ka/zvayana,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxxvi.
Kapila,son  of  Prahlada,  Ba.  11,11,28.
Kapota  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,  1,  16;

2,  15;  iv,  5,  28.
Kara«a  caste,  Ga.  iv,  21.
Karaskara  country,  Ba.  1,  2,  14.
Kamateka  Brahmans,  vol.  ii,  p>  xxxi.
Karshapawa,  Va.  xix,  37,
Kajakritsna,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xl.
Kajyapa,  Ba.  1,  21,  2.

Kanaka,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiii ;  vol.  xiv,
p.  xvi.

—  quoted,  Va.  xn,  24;  xxx,  5.
Katya,  Ba.  1,  3,  46.


Katyayana,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxv.
Kauddali  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,  1,  16;

2,  5-6.

Kautsa,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.  Ap.  1, 19,  4  ;
28,  1.

Ketalaputra,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxv.

KhiWikiya  school,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xv-xvii.

King,  Ap.  1,  31,5;  8,23;  11,8,6-7;
11,  5.  Ga.  v,  30-31;  VI,  13,
24-25  ;  viii,  1-3  ;  ix,  63  ;  xn,
2;  xm,  11,  13;  xiv,  10,  45;
xxi.  Va.  11,  49-50 ;  in,  4,  13  ;
xm,  59;  xvi,  17.    Ba.  11,  4,15;

6,  3°;  7,  15.

—  duties  of,  Ap.  11,  7,  12  ;   10,  14 ;

11,  1-4;  25,  1-29,  10.  Ga.  x,
7-48;  xi ;  xm,  26;  xviii,  30-
32.  Va.  1,41-43;  xvi,  2-9,  21-
26;  xix.    Ba.  1,  18-19.

—  takes   heirless  property,  Ap.  II,

14,5.  Ga.  xxviii,  42.  Va.  xvii,
83-86.     Ba.  1,  13,  15-16.

property  without  owner,  Va.

xix,  1 9-20.  See  Domestic  priest,
Minister,  Officials,  Pardon,  Pu-
nishment.

Kri&fihra.  penance,  Ap.  1,  25,  8  ;  27,
6,  8;  28,  20.  Ga.  xix,  20;
xxiii,  32 ;  xxvii,  2.  Va.  xx,
6-10, 12, 16, 19;  xxi,  13,  16, 18,
24-27,29,32;  xii,  16;  XXIII,
19  ;  xxvii,  20.  Ba.  1,  12,  12 ;
II,  1,7,  19,23,38-40;  2,  33-34J

3,  48,  50;  4,  12;  in,  10,  8.

—  description  of,  Ap.  1,  27,  7  ;  Ga.

xxvi,  1-17.  Va.  xxi,  20;  xxiii,

42-43;   xxiv,  4-5.     Ba.  1,  12,

12;  11,2,38,42-45;  iv,  5,6-7.
K/v^ratikri^ra      penance,    Ga.

xxvi,  20.    Va.  xxiv,  3.     Ba.  11,

2,  41;  iv,  5,  9.
Kr/'shwala,  Ga.  x,  18.
K  WshwapaWita  Dharmadhikarin,  vol.

xiv,  pp.  xxvii-xxviii.
Kshatra  marriage,  Va-  1,  34.      See

Rakshasa  marriage.
Kshatriya  caste,  Ap.  1,  1,  3-4;    14,

25,  18,  9;  11,4,  18,25-27.     Ga.

v,  44;    vi,  18;  vii,  6.     Va.  11,

1-2.     Ba.  1,  5,  9;  6,9;  11,  1,21;

4,  16-17.

—  duties    and  occupations,  Ap.  11,

10,6,10-11.  Ga.  vii,  26;  x,  19,
41.  Va.  1,  24;  11,  15-17,  24-
40;  in,  25.  Ba.i,  16,  3;  18,  3;
20, 12.


346


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


Kshatriya  caste,  special  rules  for  ini-
tiation, studentship,  saluting,
&c,  Ap.  I,  1,5,  18,  21  ;  2,  34,
38,  40;  3,  1,  5,  9,  29;  5,  16;
14,23,27.  Ga.  1,  11,  13,  15-17,
23,  26 ;  v,  41 ;  xiv,  2.  Va.  in,
27,  32;  XI,  53,  56,  59,  62,  65,
67,  69.  Ba.  I,  3,  8,  10,  15,  17;
8,  23.

—  murder  of,  Ap.  1,  24,  1-9.     Ga.

xxii,  14.     Va.  xx,  31,  34,  38.
Ba.  1,  18,  20-19,  1 ;  11,  1,  8.

—  punishments  of,  Ga.  xn,  8-9,  14,

16.  Va.  xxi,  3.     Ba.  1,  18,  19.
Kshattri  caste,  Ga.  1  v,  1 8.    Ba.  1, 1 6,

8;  17,  1,7,  io-ii.
Kukku/aka  caste,   Ba.  1,  16,  8,  12;

17,  i,  H-

Kuwika,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.     Ap.  1,  19,  7.
KushmaWa    penance,   rule  of,  Ba.

in,  6.
Kutsa,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.     Ap.  1,  19,  7.

A"aitri  rite,  Ga.  in,  18.
Aakra^ara  beggars,  Ba.  in,  1,  1,5.
Kandala.  (ATaWala)  caste,  Ap.  1,  9, 15,

17;  11,6,8-9;  9,5-6.     Ga.iv,

17-18,  28;    xiv,  30;    xv,  24;

xvi,  19.    Va.  xi,  9;    xiii,  11;

xviii,  1;  xxiv,  33-34,  4.     Ba.

1,  9,  5,  7;  16,8,  17,  1,  7;  11,  4,

13-14.
/Tandrayawa  penance,  Ga.  xix,  20.

Va.  xxi,  13  ;  xxn,  16;  xxm,  16  ;

xxvii,  20.     Ba.  11,  3,  49  ;  4,  12  ;

in,  10,  18.

—  description   of,  Ga.  xxvii  ;    Va.

xxiv,  45-47;    xxvii,  21.     Ba.

in,  8;  iv,  5,17-21.
A'arawavyuha,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xv,    xxx-

xxxi,  xlvii.
A!aturmasya-kaWa  quoted,  Va.  1,  37.

—  sacrifice,  Ap.  1,  10,  1.     Ga.  vin,

19.     Va.  xi,  46.     Ba.  11,  4,  23.
A^aula  rite,  Ga.  vin,  14.
A^olas,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxv-xxxvi.

Land,  dispute  about,  Va.  xvi,  13.

Law,  sources  of  the,  Ap.  1,  1,  1-2  ;
20,7-8 ;  11, 15, 1 ;  29, 13-15.  Ga.
1,  1-4  ;  vi,  22  ;  xi,  20  ;  xxviii,
48-52.    Va.  1,1-18.    Ba.  1,  1-2.

—  institutes  of.    See  Dharmajastra.
Lending  money.     See  Usury.
Limitation,  law  of,  Ga.  xxi,  37-39.

Va.  xvi,  16--18.


Livelihood,  various  means  of,  Ba.  in,
1-3.     See  Occupations.

Madhava-Saya«a,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xlii.
Madhuparka.     See  Honey-mixture.
Madhyandina-jakha,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxv,

xxxix.
Madman,  excluded    from    inherit-
ance, Ap.  ii,  14,  1.     Va.  xvn,

54;  xix,  35-36.
Magadha  country,  Ba.  I,  2,  13.
Magadha  caste,  Ga.  iv,  17-18.     Ba.

16,  8  ;  17,  1,  7.
Magic  rites  and  incantations,  Ap.  I,

26,  7529,15.    Ga.  xi,  17;  xxv,

7.     Ba.  11,  2,  16.
Mahabharata,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xli.
Mahadeva,  commentator,  vol.ii,p.xvi.
Mahagagnu,  Ba.  in,  9,  21.
Mahapataka  crimes,  Ga.  xxi,  1-10;

xxvi,   22.     Va.  1,  19-22  ;    xx,

13-47.
Maharwava,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxi-xxxii.
Mahasawtapana  penance,  Ba.  iv,  5,

16.
Mahaya^a.     See  Sacrifices  great.
Mahishya  caste,  Ga.  iv,  20.
Maintenance,  Ap.  1,  28,  9  ;  n,  26,  22.

Ga.  xxi,  15;   xxviii,  43.     Va.

xvn,  54;  xix,  30-36.     Ba.  11, 1,

37  5   3,  37,  42.
Maitrayawiya  school,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxii ;

vol.  xiv,  pp.  xvi,  xxi.
Manava    school,  vol.  ii,   pp.  ix-xi,

xxxii ;  vol.  xiv,  p.  xviii.

—  sutra,  vol.  ii,  pp.  ix,  lvii  ;  vol.  xiv,

p.  xviii.     Va.  iv,  5-8.
Manes,  libations  to.    See  Tarpawa.

—  oblations  to.     See  Sraddha.
Manu,  vol.  ii,  p.  lvii;  vol.  xiv,  pp.

xvii-xx.

—  quoted,  Ga.  xxi,  7.   Va.  1, 1 7  ;  ni,

2  ;  xi,  23  ;  xiii,  16  ;  xix,  .37.

—  referred  to,  Ap.  n,  14,  11 ;   16,  1.

Ga.  xxm,  28.  Va.  xn,  16  ;
xxm,  43.  Ba.  11,  3,  2;  iv,  1,
13  ;  2,  15.

Manusha  marriage,  Va.  1,  35.  See
Asura  marriage.

Mara^a  Brahmans,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxi-
xxxii.

Marriage,  expenses  of,  Ap.  n,  10,  1.
Ga.  v,  21 ;  xviii,  24-28.     Ba.

n,  5,  19.

—  forbidden   degrees  and  impedi-

ments, Ap.  11,  11,  15-16.      Ga.


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


347


iv,  2.     Va.  viii,  1-2.     Ba.  I,  2,
2;  11, 1,  37-38.
Marriage,    intermarriage    between
different  castes  forbidden,  Ap.

11,13,4-5-

permitted,  Ga.  iv,  16.     Va.  1,

24-25.     Ba.  1,  16,  2-5.

—  rites,  Ap.  11,  11,  17-12,  4.     Ga.

iv,  6-15.  Va.  1,  27-35.  Ba'  h
20,  1-21,  23.

—  second    of    infant    widows,  Va.

xvii,  72-74.  Ba.  iv,  1,16.  See
Woman  remarried.

—  time  of,  for   females,  Ga.  xviii,

20-23.  Va.  xvii,  69-71.  Ba.
iv,  1,11-14.

Masha,  Ga.  xn,  29.     Va.  II,  51.

Maternal  uncle,  Ap.  1,  14,  11.  Ga.
v,  27  ;  vi,  7,  9.  Va.  xi,  2  ;  xm,
41.     Ba.  1,  3,  45;  11,  6,  30.

Matr/'datta,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxiii.

Maudgalya,  Ba.  11,  4,  8.

Measures  and  weights,  Va.  xix,  13.

Merchants,  to  decide  their  own  dis-
putes, Ga.  x,  35.

Metrics,  a  Vedanga,  Ap.  11,  8,  11.

Mimawsa,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxi,  xxvii,  pp.

15,  134;  vol.  xiv,  p.  1.     Ap.  11,

8,  13.     Va.  in,  20.     Ba.  1, 1,  8.
Ministers,  royal,  Va.  xvi,  2.
Minors,  Ga.  x,  48.     Va.  xvi,  7-9,

16.  Ba.  11,  3,  36.
Mitramijra,  date  of,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xliii-

xliv.
Mother,  Ap.  1,  1,  17;  2,  5,  15-16;
10,  14;  14,  6  ;  11,  10,  1.  Ga.  II,
51  ;  vi,  7  ;  xiv,  16  ;  xxvm,  24.
Va.  iv,  21 ;  xm,  48.  Ba.  1,  n,
20,  22  ;  11,  1,  25.

—  inherits     from     daughter,     Ga.

xxvm,    25-26.

—  outcast,  Ap.  1,  28,  9.     Ga.  xxi,

15.  Va.  xm,  47.    Ba.  11,  3,  42.

—  power  over  children,  Va.  xv,  2,  5.

Ba.  Par.  VII,  4,  2,  5.

—  succession    to,    Ga.    xxvm,    24.

Va.  xvii,  46.     Ba.  11,  3,  43.
Mukhenadayin  hermits,  Ba.  in,   3,

9,  12.

Murder,  penances  and  punishments
for,  Ap.  1,  24,  1-25;  25,11-12;
28,  21-29,  *•  Ga.  xxn,  1-17,
23,  26-27;  xxiv,  6-10.  Va.
xx,  23-40;  xxv,  4.  Ba.  1,  18,
18-19,  5;  11, 1,  2-12;  iv,  1,  29;
2,  6-8.     See  Homicide.


Murdhavasikta  caste,  Ga.  iv,  19.
Music,  Ap.  n,  25, 13.

Nandivarman,  Pallava-malla,  vol.  xiv,

p.  xlii.
Narmada  river,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxi.
NiruV/6apajubandha     sacrifice,     Ga.

viii,  19.
Nishada  caste,  Ga.  iv,  16.   Va.  xvm,

8.     Ba.  1,  16,  7,  11;   17,  3,  13-

14;  11,  3,  30,  32.
Niyoga  (appointment  of  widows),  Ga.
xviii,  4,  14;  xx vni,   22.     Va.
xvn,  58-66.     Ba.  11,  4,  9-10.

—  forbidden,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxiv-xxv.

Ap.  11,  27,  2-7.
Northern  Brahmans,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiii;

vol.  xiv,  p.  xli.    Ap.  n,  17,  7.

Ba.  1,  2.
Nyaya.     See  Mimawzsa.

Oath  of  witnesses,  Ga.  xin,  12-13.

Occupations  of  castes,  Ap.  1,  1,  6;
20,  10-20;  n,  10,  4-9.  Ga.  vn,
4-26;  ix,  1,  7-30;  x.  Va.  11,
13-51.  Ba.  1,  10,  21-30;  18,
1-6;  11,  4,  16-21.  See  Liveli-
hood.

Officials,  royal,  Ap.  11,  26,  4-8.  Ga.
vi,  13;  xn,  38.   Va.  xv,  21-26.

Officiating  priests,  Ap.  n,  8,  6-7  ;
10,  8-9;  11,  19;  27,  18.  Ga.
v,  27-29;  vi,  9;  xi,  18;  xiv,
1 ;  xv,  14  ;  xxi,  1 2.  Va.  xi,  2  ;
xm,  50.   Ba.  1,  3,  45;  11,  2, 13,

29;  i3,5-io;  i5,9,i7;  11,6,30.
Om,  syllable,  Ap.  I,  13,  6-8.     Ga.  1,

57.    Va.  xxv,  9— r3.    Ba.  11, 11,

6;   18,  25-26;  iv,  1,  27-28.
Ordeals,  Ap.  n,  11,  3  ;  29,  6.
Orders,  four,  Ap.  II,  21,  1-5.     Ga.

in,  2.  Va.  vn,  1-2.     Ba.  11,  11,

12.

—  comparison  of  four,  Ap.  n,  23-24.

Ga.  in,  36.     Ba.  n,  11,  9-34.
Outcasts,  Ap.  1,  9,  9  ;  n,  2,  7.     Ga.
n,  35  ;  iv,  27 ;  xv,  24.     Va.  xi,
9;   xm,  51-52;   xiv,  2;   XVII,
20.     Ba.  n,  1,  20;  6,  22.

—  definition   of  term,  Ga.  xxi,  6,

8-10,  13-14.

—  excluded  from  inheritance,  Ap.  n,

141.    Va.  xvii,  53.    Ba.  n,  3,
40.

—  intercourse  with  forbidden,  Ap.

1,  21,  5;  28,  6-10.   Ga.  xxi,  3  ;


348


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II   AND    XIV.


xxn,  33.  Va.  1,  20-22  ;  xx,  45-
46  ;  xxiii,  36.    Ba.  II,  2,  18-25,

35  5  3,  41;  5,  8-9.
Outcasts,  marriage  with  daughter  of,
permitted,   Va.  xiii,   53.     See
Abhuasta  caste,  exclusion  from,
readmission  into.

Paija^a  marriage,   vol.   ii,  p.  xxiv.

Ga.  iv,  13  ;  Ba.  1,  20,  9, 13.
Pakaya^was,  Ap.  1,  26,  8.     Ga.  viii,

18;  x,  65.    Va.  xxvi,  10.     Ba.

1,  5,  12.

Palani  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,  1,  16 ;

2,  13.

Pallavas,  vol.  ii,  p»  xxxiii;  vol.  xiv,

p.  xlii.
PsWya,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxiv-xxxv.
Pacini,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxv,  xxxix-xlii.
Pa^g-ab,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiii.
Pa;z>£agavya  (the  five  products  of  the

cow),  Va.  xxvn,  14.     Ba.  iv,

1,  14.
Panktidusha«a  (defilers  of  the  com-
pany), Ap.  11,  17,  21.     Ga.  xv,

16-19,  30-31.
Panktipavana  (sanctifiers  of  the  com-
*    pany),  Ap.  n,  17,  22.     Ga.  xv,

28,    31.     Va.   in,  19.     Ba.   11,
^14,  2.
Paraka  penance,  Ba.  iv,  5,  15.
Parajava  caste,  Ga.  iv,  16-21.     Va.

xvin,  9-10.     Ba.  1,  17,  4;  11,

3,  30.

Pardon,   right   of,   Ap.   n,   27,    20.

Ga.  xii,  52;  xiv,  43.     Va.  xv,

19;  xix,  40.
Parents,  Ap.  n,  15,  6.     Ga.  vi,  3 ;

xiv,  15.    Va.  iv,  20-21.    Ba.  1,

11, 19-23.  See  Father,  Mother.
Paripatra  mountains,  Va.  1,  18.    Ba.

1,  2,  9.
Parishad  (legal  assembly), Ga.xxvni,

48-49.     Va.  in,  5-7,  20.     Ba.

1,  1,  7-16.
Partition,  Ap.  n,  13,  13-14,  1,  6-9.

Ga.  xv,  19;  xxvin,  1-17.    Va.

xvn,  40-51.     Ba.  II,  3,  2-13.

See     Coparcener,     Indivisible

property,    Sons.
Parva  days,  Ap.  1,  26,  14;  11,  1,  4;

3,8.     Va.  xn,  21.     Ba.  1,  5,  7;

21,  17,  19-22.
Parva«a-sthalipaka,  Ga.  viii,  18.
Pataka  crimes,  Ba.  iv,  1,  10;  2,  14;

3,  2.


Pata^-ali,  voU  ii,  p.  xxxix.

Pataniya  crimes,  Ap.  1,  2 1,  7-1 1 ;  28,
14.     Ba»  n,  2,  i-ii  ;  iv,  1,  10.

Paulkasa  caste,  Ap.  n,  2,  6.

Pavitresh/i,  Va.  xxn,  10.  Ba.  1,  2,
16-17.

Penances,  Ap.  1,  18,  11-12;  25-29;
n,  2,  9;  12,  15-18.  Ga.  xix;
Xxii-xxiii.  Va.  iv,  32;  xiv,
33;  xvin,  16;  xix,  40-42;
xx-xxiv.  Ba.  1,  2, 14-17  ;  11,
37-41;  12,  12;  19,  16;  11,  1,
1-2,  45;  3,  48-4, 15;  in,  4-
iv,  2.

—  for  secret  crimes,  Ga.  xxiv-xxv.

Va.  xxv-xxvin.    Ba.  iv,  3-4.

—  how  imposed,  Ap.  n,  10,  12-16.

Va.  1,  16.     Ba.  1,  1,  14-15.
Phonetics,  a  Vedanga,  Ap.  n,  8,  11.
Physician,   Ap.   1,  18,    21;    19,  15.

Ga.  xvn,  17.     Va.  in,  3;   xiv,

2.
Pledge,  Ga.  xn,  32,  35,   42.    Va.

xvi,  16-18.
Possession,  evidence  by,  Va.  xvi,  ro.
Pra^apati,  the  Lord   of  creatures,

Ap.  1, 19,14;  11,4,4  5  7,i;  24,

7,  13.     Ga.  v,  10.    Va.  xiv,  16,

24,  30.     Ba.  11,  7,  15;  12,  13;

18,  26;  111,9,  20;  iv,  8,  3-5.
Pra^-apatya  marriage,  Ga.  iv,  7.   Ba.

1,  20,  3.

—  penance.     See  YLrikkhra..
Pra«agnihotra,  description  of,  Ba.  II,

12-13.
Prawayama  (suppressing  the  breath),

a  penance,   Ap.   n,  12,  15-18.

Va.  xxv,  3-5,  13,  &c.    Ba.  iv,

1,  4-10,  20-29.
Pranuna  country,  Ba.  I,  2,  14.
Prasr/'tiyavaka  penance,  Ba.  Ill,  6.
PravrittaVin  hermits,  Ba.  in,  3,  9, 1 1.
Property,  acquisition  of,  Ga.  x,  39-

42.

—  given  up,  Va.  xvi,  19-20.

—  lost,  Ga.  x,  36-48.

—  of  persons  unfit  for  legal  business,

Va.  xv,  8.

—  stolen,  Ap.  n,  26,  8.     Ga.  x,  46-

47.
Pulkasa  caste,  Ga.  iv,  19.   Va.  xvin,

5.     Ba.  1,  16,  8,  11;  17,  1,  13.
Puwsavana  rite,  Ga.  xvin,  14.
Punarbhu.    See  Woman  remarried.
Punastoma   sacrifice,   Ga.    xix,    7.

Ba.  1,  2,  14;  in,  10,  6,


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


349


Punishment,  king's  duty  of,  Ga.  xn,
45-52.  Va.  xix,  40-48.  Ba.
11,  1,  17.     See  Pardon.

—  of  sin  after  death,  Ap.  11,  2,  5-7  ;

11,  11.     Ga.  xi,   30.    Va.  xx,

43-44;  xxi,  11.
Pupil,  inherits,  Ap.  11,  14,   3.     Va.

xvii,  82.     Ba.  1,  11,  13.     See

Student,  Teacher.
Purawa,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxviii.     Ap.  1,  19,

13;  28,7;  11,22,  24;  23,  3.    Ga.

viii,  6;   X,  19.     Va.  xxvii,   6.

Ba.  II,  10,  14;  iv,  3,  4.
Purification  of  persons,  Ap.  1,  15,  1-

16,  15.    Ga.  1,  28,  35-44 ;  11,  2  ;

xiv,  30.   Va.  in,  26-43,  58-60;

IV,  37;  VI,  14-19.     Ba.  1,  8,  1-

31  ;  9j  5  ;  10,11-20,  34;  11,36;

15,  4,  6.

—  of  things,  Ap.  1,  17,  8-13  ;   11,  3,

9,  Ga.  1,  29-34.  Va.  in,  44-
57,  59,  61-63;  xiv,  23-24,  26.
Ba.  I,  8,  32-53;   9,  i-4,  7-12;

10,  1-9;  13,  n-14,  19-
Purificatory  texts,  Ap.  1,  2,  2,  &c.  Ga.

xix,  12;  Va.  xxii,  9;  xxviii,
10-15.     Ba.  in,  10,  10;  iv,  4,  8.

Purohita.     See  Domestic  priest.

Pushkarasadi,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.  Ap.  1,
19,7;  28,1.

Ra^putana,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxii.
Rakshasa    marriage,   Ap.  II,  12,    2.

Ga.  iv,  12.     Ba,   1,   20,    8,  12.

See  Kshatra  marriage.
Ramaka  caste,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxv.    Va.

XVIII,  4.
Rawayaniya  school,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xlvi,

xlviii.
Rathakara    (carpenter)    caste,   vol.

xiv,  p.  xxxviii.     Ba.  1,  3,  9  ;  17,

1,6.
Re-united  coparcener,  Ga.  xxviii,

28.   Va.  xvi,  16.
Rewards  after  death,  Ap.  11,  2,  2-4  ;

11,  10.     Ga.  xi,  29.
Rig-veda,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxiv  ;  vol.  xiv,  pp.

xi-xii,  xiv,  xl.  Ga.  xvi,  21.  Va.
xiii,  30.     Ba.  11,  10,  14  ;  iv,  3,

3;  5,  29.
.R/gvedins,  vol.  xiv,  pp.  xiii-xv.
Rishi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xvii,  xxxvii.     Ap.  1,

5,  4-5;  13,  1  5  11,  23,  4-5  5  24,
13-14.  Ga.  in,  29;  iv,  3;
xviii,  6;  ix,  14.  Va.  iv,  655x1,
48;   xn,  51;    xxii,  12;    XXIII,


47.     Ba.  11,  5,  4;  6,  36;   10,  14;

11-15;  in,  9,  19,  21  ;  10,  12.
Rishi,  persons   descended  from   the

same  Rishi  inherit,Ga.  xxviii, 2 1 .
Rites  procuring  success,  Ba.  iv,  5-8.
Roads  near  fields  and  houses,  Va.  x  v,

11-12.
Romaka,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxv,  p.  94.

Sacraments,    enumeration    of,    Ga.

viii,  14-21.
Sacred  fire,  duty  of  kindling,  Ga.  v,

7-9.     Va.  viii,  3  ;  xi,  45.     Ba.

1,  5,  6;  11,  4,  22.

—  rule  for  kindling,  Ap.  11,  1,  13.

—  extinguishing  or  neglecting,  Ap.

1,18,32.     Ga.  xxii,  34.     Va.  1,

18;  xxi,  27.
Sacred  learning,  goddess  of,  Va.  11,

8-12.
Sacrificer  and  his  wife,  Ba.  1,  13,  5  ;

15,  10,  17,  21,  26.
Sacrifices,  great  daily,  Ap.  1,  12,  15.

Ga-  v,  3-5-     Ba.  11,  11, 1-8.

—  jrauta,  Ap.  11,  10,  1 ;    Ga.  v,  21 ;

viii,  19-20;  ix,  54;  xviii,  24-

27.     Va.  xi,  45-48.     Ba.  1,  13-

15  ;  11,  4,  23.
Sacrificial  fee  (present),  Ap.  11,  9,  9.

Ga.  xxv,  6.    Va.  xv,  16.    Ba.  1,

20,  4;  in,  4,  3;  7,  14;  8,  13.
Sacrificial  thread  (string),  Ap.  1,  31,

8  ;    11,  4,  22.     Ga.  1,  36.     Va.

xn,  14.     Ba.  1,  5,  5  5  8,  5-10.
Sages.     See  Rishis.
Sagotra  relation,  Ap.  11,  11,  15;  27,

2.  Ga.  xviii,  6.     Va.  VIII,  1.

—  inherits,  Ga.  xxviii,  21.

—  penance  for  marrying,  Ba.  11,  1,

37-38.
Sakulya  relation,  Ba.  1,  11,  10,  12.
Sale  of  children,  forbidden,  Ap.  11,

13,  11-12.

—  permitted,  Va.  xv,  2.     Ba.  Par.

vii,  4,  2.     See  Daughter,  Son

bought.
Saluting,  Ap.  1,  5,  12-23  ;    14,  7-30.

Ga.  11,  30-34;    v,  41-42;   vi.

Va.  xiii,  41-46.  Ba.  1,  3,  25-33,

44-45  ;  11,  6,  38.
Samanapravara   relation,  Ga.  iv,  2  ;

xviii,  1.   Va.  viii,  1.
Samans,  vol.  ii,   p.  xlvii ;    vol.  xiv,

pp.  xvii,  xxxix.   Ap.  1, 10, 17-18.

Ga.  xvi,  21.    Va.  xiii,  30.    Ba.

1,  21,  5.


35o


INDEX    TO    VOLS.   II    AND    XIV.


Sama-veda,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xlvi-xlix ;  vol.

xiv,  pp.  xvii,  xxxix.     Va.  in,  19.

Ba.  11,  10,14;  iv,  3,  3;  5,  r.
Samavidhana,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlvii.
Samprakshalani  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,

1,  7;  2,  11.
Sawskaras.     See  Sacraments.
Sawtapana  penance,  Ba.  iv,  5,  13.
Samuha  mode  of  life,  Ba.  ill,  1,7;

2,  12.

Sandhya  worship,  Ap.  1,  30,  8.     Ga.

11,  10-11.     Ba.  11,  7.
SapWa  relation,  Ap.  11,  n,  16;   15,

2,  11.     Ga.  xiv,  1,  20,  34,  44;

xv,  13;  xviii,  6.   Va.iv,  16,  33;

viii,  2.     Ba.  1,  11, 1.

—  definition  of,  Ga.  xiv,  13.  Va.  iv,

17-19.     Ba.  1,  11,  2,  9.

—  inherits,  Ap.  11, 14,  2.  Ga.  xxvm,

21.  Va.  xvii,  81.    Ba.  1,  11,  11.
Sarasvati  river,  Va.  1,  8,  15.     Ba.  1,

2,  9,  13.
Sarvaprish/M  sacrifice,  Ba.  I,  2,  14.
SatyashaV^a.     See  Hira«yake.rin.
SatyashaV/Mns,  vol.  ii,  p.  xvi.
Sautramam  sacrifice,  Ga.  viii,  20.
Sauvira  country,  Ba.  1,  2,  13-14.
Savar«a  caste,  Ga.  iv,   16.     Ba.  1,

16,  6.
Savitri  verse,  Ap.  1, 1,  9,  23  ;  26,  14  ;

27,  1.  Ga.  1,  12,  55;  xix,  12;
xx,  8;  21,  11;  23,  21;  24,  11.
Va.  II,  3  ;  XI,  74,  76  ;  xxi,  6-8  ;
xxn,  9  ;  xxiii,  20,  35  ;  xxv,  9,
12-13;  xxvii,  18.  Ba.  1,16,16;
n,7,5-7;  i7,M,4i;  iv,  1,27-

28,  &c.

Saya»a.     See  Madhava.

Sea,  going  to,  Ba.  1,  2,  4;  11,  2,  2.

Self-defence,  Ga.  vn,  25.     Va.  in,

15-18,  24.     Ba.  1,  18,  12-13.
Sha/z/zivartani  mode  of  life,  Ba.  ill,  1,

7  5  2,1-4.
Sho^a/in  sacrifice,  Ga.  viii,  19.
Siddhow^a  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,  1,7;

2,  16-17.
Simantonnayana  rite,  Ga.  viii,  14.
Siwhavarman  1 1 ,  king,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxiii.
Sindh  country,  Ba.  1,  2,  13.
Sinful   men  (enasvina£),  Ap.  11,  12,

22.  Ga.  1,  18.
Singing,  Ap.  11,  25,  13.

Sipping  water,  Ap.  1,  4,  20-21 ;  15,
1-16,14.  Ga.  1,  28,  36;  ix,  10-
11.  Va.  in,  26-40,  42.  Ba.  1,
7,  3;  8,12-23,26,  29.


Sleeping,  rules  regarding,  Ap.  1,  4,
22,28;  32,11,15-16.  Ga.  ix,
60.

—  at  sunrise  or   sunset,  Ap.  II,  12,

13-14.     Ga.  xxiii,  21.     Va.  1,

18;  xx,  4-5.
Smr/ti  (tradition),  Ap.  n,  4,24;  15,

26.  Ga.  1,  2.  Va.  1, 4.  Ba.  1,1,3.
Snataka  (he  who  has  completed  his

studentship),  Ap.  n,  8,  6  ;  27,20.

Ga.  vi,  24;  xv,  28.     Va.  xi,  2.

Ba.  11, 14,  2.

—  definition  of  term,  Ap.  I,  30,  1-5.

—  duties,  Ap.  1,  30,  6-32,  29.     Ga.

ix.     Va.  xii.     Ba.  1,  5 ;   11,  5,
10-6,  42.
Soma-sacritice,  Ap.  1,  24,6,  24;  27,

2.  Ga.  viii,  20.  Va.  viii,  10;
xi,  46.     Ba.  1,  13,  7,  9,  3i.

Son,  adopted,  Ga.  xxvm,  32.  Va.
xv,  6-10  ;  xvn,  28-29.     Ba.  n,

3,  20,  31.     Ba.  Par.  vn,  4,  16.

—  begot  on  widow  or  wife,  Ap.  n,

13,  6-7.  Ga.  xviii,  8-14;
xxviii,  23,  32.  Va.  xvii,  6-10,
14,63-64.     Ba.  11,  3, 18-19,  31,

34-35-

—  born  after  partition,  Ga.  xxviii,

29.

—  born    secretly,   Ga.   xxviii,  32.

Va.  xvii,  24.     Ba.  n,  3,  22,  31.

—  bought,  Ga.  xxviii,  33.   Va.xvn,

31-32.     Ba.  11,  3,  28,  32.

—  cast    off,   Ga.    xxvm,    32.     Va.

xvn,  36-37.     Ba.  11,  3,23,  31.

—  effecting  partition  against  father's

will,  Ga.  xv,  19.

—  eldest  (share),  Ap.  13, 13  ;  14,  5-6,,

10,  12-13.  Ga.  xxvm,  3,  5-9.
Va.  xvn,  42-43.  Ba.  11,  3,  4,  6,
9,  12.

—  legitimate,  Ap.  n,  13,  1-12.     Ga.

xxviii,  32,  34.  Va.  xvn,  13.
Ba.  ir,  3,  11,  14-15,  31,  33.

—  made,  Ga.  xxviii,  32.     Ba.  n,  3,

21,  31.

—  middlemost  (share),  Ga.  xxviii,

6.     Va.  xvii,  44.

—  not  liable  for  father's  debt,  Va.

xvi,  31.

—  of  appointed  daughter,  Ga.  xxviii,

33.  Va.  xvii,  17.  Ba.  n,  3,
15-16,  31.

—  of  pregnant  bride, Ga.  xxviii,  33.

Va.  xvii,  27.     Ba.  n,  3,  25,  32.

—  of  remarried  woman,  Ga.  xxv,  18;


INDEX    TO   VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


351


xxviii,  33.     Va.  xvii,  18-20.
Ba.  11,  3,  27,  32.
Son  of  Sudra  wife,  Ga.  xxviii,  39, 45.
Va.  xvii,  38.     Ba.  11,  3,  28,  32.

—  of     unmarried     daughter,     Ga.

xxviii,  33.  Va.  xvii,  22-23.
Ba.  11,  3,  24,  32.

—  only  son  not  to  be  adopted,  Va.

xv,  3-4.     Ba.  Par.  vii,  4, 4-5.

—  self-given,  Ga.  xxviii,  33.     Va.

xvii,  33-35.     Ba.  11,  3,  28,  32.

—  youngest  (share),  Ga.  xxviii,  7.

Va.  xvii,  44.
Sons  by  several  wives  of  equal  caste
(shares),  Ga.  xxviii,  14-17.

—  by    wives    of    different     castes

(shares),  Ga.  xxviii,  35-38.
Va.  xvii,  47-50.  Ba.  11,  3,  10,
12.

—  by  wives    of  higher    caste,  Ga.

xxviii,  45.

—  inherit  equally,  Ap.  11,  13,  2  ;  14,

1;  11,  14.     Ba.  11,  3,  3.

—  merit  and  duty  of  begetting,  Ap.

11,  24, 1-4.  Va.  xvii,  1-5.  Ba.
n,  11,  33-34;  16,  2-14.

—  not  to  take  property  of  outcast

parents,  Ga.  xxi,  16.
Soul,   knowledge  of,  Ap.  1,  22-23.

Va.  x,  13;  xxx.
Spiritual  guide  (teacher),  Ap.  11,  18,

12-13.     Va.  xx,  3.
Spring-festival,  Ap.  1,  1 1,  20.
Staff  of  student,  Ap.  1,  2,  38.     Ga.  1,
^22;   Va.  xi, 52-57.    Ba.i,  3,  15.
Sthalipaka,  Ap.  11, 1, 10 ;  29, 17.    Ba.

1,  5,  6.
Student,  Ap.  11,  6,  1-2,  12-13;    21,

1,  5  ;  26,  13.    Ga.  in,  1 ;  x,  12  ;

xiv,  1.     Va.  vii,  2  ;  xi,  5.     Ba.

11,17,  2.

—  duties  of,  Ap.  1,  2,  11-7,  19;  13,

9-20;  14,  3-5;  11,  9,  13.  Ga.
1,  46-54;  11,7-51-  Va.vi,  19-
21;  vii,  7-17.  Ba.  1,  2-4;  11,
13,  7-9.

—  penances  for,  Ap.  1,  26,  8-27,  2.

Ga.  1,  58-61;  xxiii,  16-20;
xxv,  1-6.  Va.  xxiii,  1-4,  7-9;
11-13.    Ba.  11, 1,  25-35;  111,4;

IV,  2,  IO-II.

—  professed,  Ap.  11,  21,  6-7.  Ga.  in,

4-9.  Va.  vii,  4-6.  Ba.  11,  11, 13.

—  returned  home,  Ap.  1,  7,  20-8,  3 1 ;

13,5;  14,7-30;  18,9-12.  Ba.
1,5-


Suicide,  Ap.  1,  28,  17.     Ga.  xiv,  12.

Va.  xxiii,  14-21.
Surash/ra  country,  Ba.  1,  2,  13.
Surety,  Ga.  xn,  41.     Va.  xv,  31.
Suta    caste,   Ga.  iv,  17,  18.      Va.

xvni,  6.     Ba.  1,  17,  1,  8.

Saliki,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xl.

•Salina  (householder),  Ba.  11,  12,  1;

17,  3;  "I,  1,  1-3-
■Sankhayana,  vol.  ii,  p.  xiii.
5atapatha-brahma«a,  vol.  ii,  p.xxxix ;

vol.  xiv,  pp.  xvii,  xxxix.
Sa/yayanins,  vol.  ii,  p.  xv.
Saunaka,  Ba.  11,  10,  14.
SWonk/A  mode  of  life,  Ba.  in,  1,  16  ;

2,  14.
.Siras,  text,  Va.  xxi,  6-8;   xxv,  13.

Ba.  iv,  1,  28.

—  vows,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xvii.     Va.  xxvi,

12.     Ba.  11, 14,  2.
5ish/as,  Va.  1,  5-6;  vi,  42-43.   Ba.  1,

x,  4-6  ;  2,  8;  11,  2,  22  ;  III,  2,  26.
Sim  Angirasa,  Ba.  1,  3,  47.
SijukW^ra  penance,  Va.  xxiii,  42-

43.     Ba.  iv,  5,  7.
Sraddha  (sacrifice  to   the  Manes),

Ap.  1,  10,  26,  28;    11,  16,  1-2.

Ga.  viii,  18;  xv ;  xvi,  34.   Va.

xiii,  15-16.     Ba.  11,  14-15.

—  daily,  Ap.  1,  1 3, 1 ;  11,  4,  5-6" ;   18,

4-16.    Va.  xi,  5.     Ba.  11,  11,

1,  3.

—  materials  for,  Ap.  11, 16,  23-17,  3 ;

18,  1-3.     Ga.  xv,  6,  15.

—  monthly,  Ap.  11,  18,  17;   19,  19-

21 ;  20, 1-2.

—  persons  to  be  fed,  Ap.  11, 17,4-23.

Ga.  xv,  5,  7-1 1, 16-30.  Va.  xi,
17-20,  27-29.  Ba.  11,  14,  2-6,
15,10-11.

—  special  rites,  Ap.  11, 18, 19-19,  17,

22  ;  20,  3-20.

—  time  for,  Ap.  11, 16, 4-22  ;  17,  23-

25.     Ga.  xv,  2-5.     Va.  xi,  16,

36,  43-44-
«Srama«aka,  rule  or  sutra,Ga.  in,  27.

Va.  xi,  10.     Ba.  11,  11, 15.
Sravawi  rite,  Ga.  VIII,  18.
Srotriya  (a  learned  Brahmawa),  Ap.

1,  3,345  i°,  n-13;  14,  13,30;

19, 33 ;  24,24;  11, 7,17;  14,13;

17,  22  ;  26,  10.  Ga.  v,  20,  30-
32;  vi,  17,  25;  x,  9;  xii,  38;
xiv,28;  xv,9;  xxn,3o;  xxviii,
50-52.     Va.m,8,  19  ;v,  9;  xi,


352


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


5,  17;  xvi,  18,  30;  xix,  23,
37.  Ba.  1,  19,  13;  21,4;  11,5,
i5,i9-

Srotriya,  definition  of,  Ap.  11,  6,  4.

—  inherits  Brahman  property,  Ga.

xxviii,  41.
■Sudra  caste : —

—  duties  and  position,  Ap.  1,1,  3-

7  5  3,  4i;  5,  i6;  9,  9-n;  14,
29;  17,  1;  26,  9;  11,  3,  4-9;
4,  19-20;  6,  9-10;  II,  26,  15.
Ga.  v,  42;  vi,  10-11;  x,  42,
50-65;  xii,  13;  xiii,  13;  XIV,
5;  xvi,  19;  xviii,  24.    Va.  11,

I,  20;  in,  34  ;  iv,  24;  xi,  10;
xvi,  30;  xviii,  12-14;  XXVII,
16.  Ba.  1,  8,  22-23;  10,  20;
16,  1,  5;  18,  5-6;  20,  13-15;
21,  15;  11,  5,  14;  ni,  8,  18.

—  knowledge  of,  Ap.  11,  29,  11.

—  murder   of,   Ap.  1,    24,    3.     Ga.

xxii,  16.  Va.  x,  33,  40.  Ba.
1,18,5;  11,1,10.

—  penances  and  punishments  for,

Ap.  1,  26,  4 ;  11,  27,  9-16.  Ga.
xii,  1-7,  12, 15.  Va.  xxi,  1,  5.
Ba.  1, 19,  3;  11,  3,  52.

—  food  and  gilts  of,  Ap.  1,  7,  20-21 ;

16,  22;  18,  13-15;  21,  17;  n,
18,  2.  Ga.  ix,  11 ;  xvii,  5;
xx,  1.  Va.  iv,  26-29  ;  xiv,  4.
Ba.  11,  3,1;  111,6,  5;  iv,  1,  5.

—  connexion  or  marriage  of  Aryans

with,  females,  Ap.  1,  19,  33  ;  11,

17,  21 ;  27,  8.  Ga.  xv,  18,  22  ;
xxv,  7.  Va.  1,  25;  xiv,  11;
xviii,  17-18.  Ba.  11, 1,7-8,  n;

6,  32;  IV,  1,  5;  2,  13;  6,  6.

—  connexion  or  marriage  of  Aryan

women  with,  Ap.  1,  21, 13  ;  26,

7,  Va.  xxi,  12.

—  sacrificing  for,  teaching  and  serv-

ing, Ga.  xx,  1.    Va.  111,  3  ;  xv,

II.  Ba.  11,  1,  6.  See  Son  of
Sudra  wife.

Suna&repa,  Va.  xvii,  31,  34-35.
Svapaka  caste,  Va.  xxvn,  13.     Ba.  1,

16,9;  17,  11;  iv,  5,13-
Svetaketu,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxvi,  xxxvii-

xxxix.     Ap.  1,  5,  6  ;  13,  18.

Taittiriya-arawyaka,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxv,
xlviii,  lvi ;  vol.  xiv, pp.  xvii,  xxxix.

—  brahmawa,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxv.

—  sawhita,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxxix.

—  veda,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxii.


Taptakr/^^ra  penance,  Va.  xxi,  18;
xxiii,  16.

—  description  of,  Va.  xxi,  20.     Ba.

11,  2,  37  5  iv,  5,  io-
Tarpawa,  Ga.  iv,  5.     Ba.  11,  9-10.
Taxes,    Ap.  11,    26,   9-17.     Ga.  x,

24-35.    Va.  1,  42-44;  xix,  15,

23-24,  26-28,  37.     Ba.  1,  18,  1,

M-i5-
Teacher,  Ap.  1, 1, 14-17;  2, 1 1-7,  31 ;

10,  4  5  13,  9-20;  14,  6;  11,  5,
2-1 1 ;  8,6;  27,20.  Ga.  1,  45-
61;  11,  18,  21-29,  37-4o,  50;
111,5-6;  v,  27;  vi,  3;  xi,  31-
32  ;  xiv,  28.  Va.  vii,  4-6,  10,
12-14;  xiii,  39,  48,  50.  Ba.  1,
3,  21-22,  25-32,  35-38;  4,  1-2;

11,  28.

—  definition  of  term,  Ap.  1, 1, 10-13.

Ga.  I,  9-10.  Va.  11,  3-5  ;  ill,  21.

—  duties  of,  Ap.  1,  8,  24-31;    32,

1-15;  11,  5,  16-6,  2.  Ga.  11,
42-44;  xv,  14;  xvi,  3-4.

—  inherits,  Ap.  11,  14,  3.     Va.  xvii,

82.     Ba.  1,  11, 13.

—  non-Brahmanical,  Ap.  11,  4,  25-

27.     Ga.  vii,  1-3.     Ba.  1,  3,

41-43.

—  penance  for,  Va.  xxiii,  10.     Ba.

11,  1,  23-24.
Teacher's  fee,  Ap.  1,  7,  19-22;  11,
10,  1.     Ga.  11,  48.

—  son,  Ap.  1,  7,  30,  9 ;  11, 18,  31-32  ;

in,  7;  xiv,  28.    Va.  xiii,  40.
,     Ba.  1,  3,  36,  44;  11,  28.

—  teacher,   Ap.   1,   8,  19-21.    Va.

xiii,  54.

—  wives,  Ap.  1,  7,  27.     Ga.  11,  18,

31-34;  xiv,  28.     Va.  xiii,  40,
42.     Ba.  1,  3,  33-34.
Theft,  definition  of,  Ap.  1,  28,  1-5.
Ga.  xii,  49-50.

—  penances  for,  Ap.  1,  25,  4-8,  10.

Ga.  xxiv,  10-12.  Va.  xx,  41-
42;  xxvi,  6.  Ba.  11,  1,  16-17;
2,  3,  10.

—  punishments  for,  Ap.  11,  27,  16-

17528, 10-12.  Ga.  xii,  15-18,
43-45.  Va.xix,38.  Ba.  1, 18,18.

Times  of  distress,  Ap.  1,  20, 10-21,
4;  11,  4,  25-27.  Ga.  vii;  ix,
37.  Va.  11,  22-39.  Ba.  1,  3,
41-44;  4,16-21.

Tirthas,  Va.  ill,  26,  64-68.  Ba.  1,
8,  14-16.

Tolls,  Va.  xix,  25.


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


353


Toyahara    hermits,    Ba.   in,   3,   9,

13-
Trade,  Ap.  1,  20,  10-21,  4.   Ga.  vn,

8-21;  x,  5,  4,  49.    Va.  11,19,

24-39.     Ba.  1,  2,  4;  18,  14-15;

11,  2,  4,  26-29.
Treasure-trove,  Ga.  x,  43-45.    Va.

in,  13-14.
Trimadhu,     J  Ap.   11,  17,    22.     Ga.
TrircaAiketa,  [  xv,  28.     Va.   in,  19.
Trisuparwa,   )  Ba.  n,  14,  2.
Tulapurusha  penance,  Ba.  iv,  5,  22.
Twilight  devotions.     See   Sandhya

worship.

Uddalaka  penance,  Va.  xi,  76-77.
Ugra  caste,  Ap.  1,  7,  20-21 ;  18,  1.
Ga.  iv,  16.    Va.  xvm,  8.     Ba.

I,  16,  7, 10;  17,1,  5,  9, 11.
Ukthya  sacrifice,  Ap.  n,  7,  4.     Ga.

vin,  20.
Unma^aka  hermits,  Ba.  in,  3, 9-10.
Unnatural  crime,  Ap.  1,  26,  7.     Ga.

xxv,  7.    Va.  xii,  22.    Ba.  iv,  1,
Ar9;  2,13.
Upadhyaya  (sub-teacher),  Ap.  1,  9,

1-2  ;  10,  2.    Ga.  xvi,  1,  40,  44.

Va.   xiii,  1-4.     Ba.  1,  12,  16;

21,  12  (note).
Upanishad,  Ap.  11,  5,  1.     Ga.  xix,

12.     Va.   xxii,  9.     Ba.  11,  18,

15  ;  in,  10, 10.
Upapataka  crimes,  Ga.  xx,  17  ;  xxi,

11;  xxii,  34.     Va.  1,  23.     Ba.

II,  2,12-14;  iv,  1,7-8.
Upavrit  country,  Ba.  I,  2,  13.
Ujanas,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlvi ;  vol.  xiv,  p.  xli.

Ba.  11,  4,  26.
Usurer,  usury,  Ap.  1, 18,  22  ;  27,  10 ;

11,  10,  7.     Ga.  x,  6,  49  ;  xv,  18.

Va.  11,  40-43 ;   xiv,  3.    Ba.  1,

10,  21-25.
Utathya,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlvii.

Va^asaneyaka,  vol.  ii,"  p.  xxv.  Ap.  1,
17,  31.    Va.  xii,  31;  xiv,  46.

Va#asaneyi-brahma«a,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxv;
vol.  xiv,  p.  xxxix.     Ap.  1,  12,  3.

—  jakha,  Va.  VIII,  19 ;  xxin,  13.

Vaidehaka  caste,  Ga.  iv,  17,  20.  Ba.
1, 16,  8;  17,  1,  10, 12.

Vaikhanasa.     See  Hermit.

Vai«a  caste,  Ap.  11,  2,  6.    Va.  xvin,

2.  Ba.  1,  16,  8, 10;  17,  1, 12.
Vakvadeva  sacrifice,  Ap.  1, 13,  1 ;  11,

3,  1-16;  4,  13;  9,5.     Ga.  v,  3,

[14]


9-10.  Va.xi,3.  Ba.  11,  3,5,11;
6,  11,  1-2.

Vauvanara  offering,  Va.  xxii,  10.
Ba.  1,  2,15,17.

Vaijya  caste,  duties,  occupations,
and  position,  Ap.  1,  1,  3-5,
18,  21;  2,  36-38,  40;  3,  2,  6,
29;    5,  16;    14,  23,  28;    11,  4,

18,  25-27;  10,  7.  Ga.  1,  11,
14-17,  21,  23-24,  26  ;  x,  1,  42,
49  5  xiv,  3,  24.  Va.  1,  24;  II,
18-19,  22;  in,  24,  28;  xi,  51,
54,  57,  60,  63,  66-67,  70,  73.
Ba.  1,  3,  9,  11,  15,  17;  10,  21;
16,  4;  18,  4;  20,  13-14;  n,  4,
18.

—  murder  of,  Ap.  1,  24,  2.  Ga.  xxii,

15.  Va.  xx,  32,  34,  39.    Ba.  1,

19,  2  ;  11, 1,  9.

—  punishments  for,  Ga.  xn,  10,  14,

16.  Va.  xxi,  2,  4.
Vawja-brahmawa,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlvi.
Vanga  country,  Ba.  1,  2,  14.
Varshyaya«i,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvi.    Ap.  I,

19,  5,  8;  28,  1.
Vasish*/6a,  Va.  11,  51 ;  xxiv,  5 ;  xxx,

11.
Vasish/£a    Dharmajastra,  vol.  xiv,

pp.  xi-xxviii.
Vasso  of  Buddhists,   vol.  ii,  p.  Iv,

p.  191.
Vayubhaksha  hermits,  Ba.  in,  1,  9,

i4-
Vayu-pura«a,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxix.
Veda,  authority  of,  Ap.  1,  1,  2,  13,

21;  11,  23,9.     Ga.i,  1;  VI,  23.

Va.  1,  4.     Ba.  1, 1, 1.

—  definition  of,  Ap.  n,  8,  13.

—  divulging  or  selling,  Ga.  XX,  1.

Ba.  1,  11,  36.

—  neglect  of,  Ap.  I,  2 1,  8.    Ga.  xxi,

11;  xxii,  34.  Va.  1,  18;  xx,
12.     Ba.  1,  10,  26.

—  purifying  power  of,  Ga.  xix,  1 1-

12.  Va.  xxii,  8-9  ;  xxvii,  1-9.
Ba.  in,  10,  9-10.

—  recitation  of.     See  Veda-study.
Vedanta,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvii.     Ga.  xix,

1 2  ;  Va.  xxii,  9.  Ba.  in,  10, 10.
Veda-study,  duty  of,  Ap.  n,  10,  4;
21,4.  Ga.  x,  1.  Va.  11, 14, 16,
18  ;  in,  1-12  ;  Xi,  48.  Ba.  1, 1,
10-14;  10,26-30;  11,18,24-25.

—  duration  of  annual  term,  Ap.  1,  9,

1-3.  Ga.  xvi,  1-2.  Va.  xiii,
1,  5-7.     Ba.  1,  12, 16.

A  a


354


INDEX    TO    VOLS.  II    AND    XIV.


Veda-study,  interruptions  of,  Ap.  i,
9,11,11-38.  Ga.i,  58-61;  xvi,
5-49.  Va. xiii,  8-40 ;  xviii,  1 2-
13;  xxiii,  36.    Ba.  1,  21,  4-22.

—  private  daily,  Ap.  1, 11,  22-12,  16;

13,  1;   15,  1 ;   18,  33;  n,  5,  3;
21, 10522, 19.    Ga.  v,  4,  9 ;  ix,
26.     Ba.  11,  11,  1,  6-8.
Vedotsarga,  Ap.  1,  10,  2.     Ga.  xvi,

40.
VigTzancrvara,  vol.  ii,  p.  xliii ;  vol.xiv,

p.  xxv.
Vindhya  mountains,  Va.  1,  9.
Vijva^it  sacrifice,  Ga.  v,  20.    Ba.  11,

5,i9-
Vows  for  the  Veda,  Ap.  1, 1 3,  9.    Ga.

vm,  15.
Vratapati-ishri,  Va.  xxn,  10.     Ba.  1,

2,  17.

Vratya,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxv.   Ba.  1, 16, 16  ;

a  17,15.
Vratyastoma,  Ga.  xix,  8.     Va.  xi,

79-
Vr/shaparvan,  Ba.  11,  4,  26.
Vyahr/tis,  vol.  ii,  p.  xlviii.     Ap.  1,  2,

3,  Ga.  1,  51 ;  xxv,  8.  Va.  xv,
6;  xxiii,  23,  46,  &c.  Ba.  I,  6,
6;  II,  7,  2;  11,  6,&c.

Wages,  lost,  Va.  xvi,  16.
Waterpot,  duty  of  carrying,  Ba.  1,
w    5,45  6;  7.
Way,  right  of,  Ap.  11,  11,  5-9.     Ga.

vi,   23-25.      Va.    xiii,    58-60.

Ba.  11,  6,  30.
Weights.     See  Measures.
Widow,  Ga.  xviii,  4-14;   xxxviii,

22.    Va.  xvii,  55-56.     Ba.  11,

4,  7-10.  See  Niyoga,  Son
begotten  on.

Wife,  duties  and  position  of,  Ap.  11,
1,  1;  14,  16-18;  27,  2-7;  29,
3-4.    Ga.  xviii,  1-3.

—  duty  of  guarding,  Ap.  11,  13,  7.

Ba.  11,  3,  34-35 ;  4,  2.

—  of  emigrant,  Ga.   xviii,  15-17.

Va.  xvii,  75-80.

—  inherits,  Ap.  11, 14, 9.  Ga.  xxvin,

21.


Wife,  qualifications  required,  Ap.  11,

1 3,  1-9 ;  iv,  1-5.    Va.  vm,  1-2.

—  repudiation  and  supersession,  Ap.

1,  28,  19;   11,  11,  12-14.     Va.
xiii,  49  ;  xxi,  9-10.    Ba.  11,  4,
6 ;  iv,  1,  20.
Wives,  all  mothers  through  one  son,
Va.  xvii,  11.

—  of  several  castes,  Ga.  iv,  16.     Va.

I,  24-25.  Ba.  1, 16,  2-5.  See
Adultery,Connubial  intercourse,
Husband,  Marriage,  Sudra  caste.

Witnesses,  Ap.  11,  11,  3  ;    29,  7-10.
Ga.  xiii,  1-25.   Va.  xvi,  10, 13-

14,  27-36.     Ba.  1, 19,  7-16.
Woman,  duties  and  position,  Ap.  1,

14,21,23,  30;  11,  11,7;  15,  10,
18;  26,  11 ;  29,  11,  15.  Ga.
xviii,  1-3.  Va.  in,  34;  v,  1-2;
xxvin,  1-9.     Ba.  1,  8,  22-23;

n,  3,  44-47  ;  4,  4-5-

—  menstruating,  Ap.  1,  9,  13.     Ga.

xiv,  30;  xxiii,  34;  xxiv,  4-5.
Va.  iv,  37  ;  v,  5-9 ;  xxvin,  1-6.

Ba.  1,11,34-35;  19,5;  11,  1,  12.

—  murder  of,  Ap.  1,  25,  5,  9.     Ga.

xxii,  12,  17,  26-27.     Ba.  1,  11,

34-35  5  19,  3,  5  5  11,  1,  11.

—  property  of,  Va.  xvi,  16.     Ga.

xxvin,  24.

—  remarried,  Va.  xvii,  19-20.     See

Son  of  remarried  woman.

Yajvzavalkya,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxviii.     Ba.

II,  9,  14.

Ya^ur-veda,  Ga.  xvi,  21.    Va.  xiii,
30.   Ba.  11, 10, 14;  iv,  3,  3;  5, 1.

—  Black,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xi,  xvi,  xxxi.
"< —  White,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxii.

Yama,  Va.  xi,  20 ;  xiv,  30 ;  xix,  48 ;

xx,  2.
Yamuna  river,  Va.  1,  12.      Ba.  1,  2,

10.
Yavana  caste,  vol.  ii,  p.  lvi.    Ga.  iv,

21.
Yayavaras,  Ba.  11,  12,  1 ;  17,  3 ;  in,  1,

1,  4,  16;  iv,  5,  27.
Yoga,  Ap.  1,  23,  6.     Va.  xxv,  5-8.

Ba.  iv,  1,  23-25.


ADDITIONS   AND   CORRECTIONS
TO   VOLS.   II   AND    XIV.

Vol.  II.

Page  xxxii,  note  i.  Maitraya«iyas  still  exist  in  Gujarat,  see  Report
on  Sanskrit  MSS.  for  1879-80;  Schroder,  Maitrayawi  Sawhita,
pp.  xxii-xxiii.

P.  xxxii,  1.  1.  Rao  Saheb  V.  N.  MaWlik,  Vyavahara  Mayukha  and
Yag-wavalkya,  p.  300,  has  challenged  the  accuracy  of  my  statement
regarding  the  prevalence  of  the  Apastamba  Sakha  in  Bombay.  He,
however,  admits  that  some  Dejasthas  and  DravWas  actually  follow
the  Sakha.  His  dissent  really  refers  to  the  Konkawasthas,  the  division
to  which  he  himself  belongs.  Among  the  latter  those  who  originally
were  Apastambiyas  have  partly  gone  over  to  the  Hairawyakejas.  But
in  the  old  list  of  the  Konkanastha  families  (see  Elph.  Coll.  collection
of  1867-68,  Gl.  xii,  no.  5)  which  I  procured  from  Mr.  Limaye  of
Ash^e,  the  families  which  really  are  Apastambiyas  are  carefully  enu-
merated. Both  in  Pu«a  and  Bombay  I  have  met  with  a  number  of
Brahmans,  who  called  themselves  sometimes  Dejasthas  and  some-
times Konkawasthas,  and  were  able  and  willing  to  recite  portions  of
the  Apastamba  Sutras  for  a  small  consideration.

P.  xxxvii,  note  1.  The  date  of  the  Kajika  vritti  has  been  shown  by  Pro-
fessor Max  M  tiller  to  be  about  650  a.  d.

P.  xlix,  1.  10,  for  Baudhayana  1, 1,  21,  read  Baudhayana  I,  1,  2-6.

P.  xlix,  1.  28,  for  Baudhayana  I,  1,  17-24,  read  Baudhayana  I,  1,  2,  1-8.

P.  li,  note  1,  1.  5  seqq.,  for  Baudhayana  in,  5,  read  Baudhayana  III,  10.

P.  78, 1.  32  (Ap.  1,  9,  23,  28,  note),  for  Baudhayana,  Pr.  1,  Adhy.  10,  read
Baudhayana  I,  10,  19,  1.

P.  90, 1.  33  (Ap.  1,  10,  29,  9,  note),  for  Baudhayana  Pr.  I,  Adhy.  12,  read
Baudhayana  11,  1,  2,  18.

P.  176, 1.  20  (Ga.  1,  28,  note),  raz^Vasish^&aiii,  43.

P.  206,  1.  33  (Ga.  vi,  5,  note),  for  Manu  III,  123,  read  Manu  II,  123.

P.  210, 1.  18  (Ga.  vii,  17),  for  others  read  for  another.

P.  222, 1.  13  (Ga.  IX,  61),  read^ox  shall  he  bathe,  &c.

P.  254, 1.  9  (Ga.  xv,  17),  read  Whosoever  lives,  &c.

P.  291,  1.  2-3,  for  Defiled  by,  &c,  read  Oh  lust,  I  have  been  incontinent,
incontinent,  &c. ;  oh  lust,  I  have  committed  evil,  I  have  committed
evil,  oh  lust,  &c.

Vol.  XIV.
P.  24, 1.  25  (Va.  in,  56,  note),/or  Baudhayana  1,  5,  52,  read  Baudhayana

h  5,  9>"-

P.  50,  1.  9  (Va.  xi,  7).   Govindasvamin  on  Baudhayana  II,  7,  13,  3  gives

A  a  2


356    ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS  TO  VOLS.  II  AND  XIV.

for  pradataA  the  reading  pra^ata^,  '(newly) -confined  women,' which
seems  to  be  the  correct  one.  Owing  to  the  peculiar  Indian  pro-
nunciation of  ga  as  a  d  mouille,  da  sometimes  occurs  by  mistake
for  ga  in  Sanskrit  MSS.  In  Prakrit  words  da  is  also  sometimes  the
representative  of  ga.

P.  99, 1.  3  (Va.  xix,  2  3),  for  pradata£  read  pra#ata£,  '(newly)-confined
women.'

P.  102,  1.  12  (Va.  xix,  48),  read  for  a  sacrificial  session.

P.  in,  1.  27  (Va.  xxi,  6,  note).    The  Siras  text  occurs  Taitt.  Ar.  x,  35.

P.  122, 1.  19  (Va.  xxiii,  39),  dele  which  does  not  cause  loss  of  caste.

P.  127,  1.  31  (Va.  XXVI,  S),for  Manu  LI,  251,  read  Manu  XI,  251.

P.  206,  1.  19  (Ba.  I,  11,  20,  12),  for  the  sixth  read  the  fifth.

P.  207,  1. 1  (Ba.  I,  11,  20,  1 3),  for  the  fifth  read  the  sixth.

P.  223, 1.  33  (Ba.  11, 1,  2,  41,  note),  add  at  end:  But  the  word  refers  to
the  numeration  of  the  Krikkbra.  penances,  given  Gautama  xxvi,  20,
and  its  occurrence  shows  that  Baudhayana  simply  copied  Gautama.

P.  267-268  (Ba.  II,  8,  14,  7,  note),  dele  note  and  substitute:  'The  Agni-
mukha  is  a  term  denoting  the  last  of  the  offerings  which  precede  the
Pradhanahoma.     See  Baudhayana  Gr/'hya-sutra  I,  4,  end,  and  5.'


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS.


357


Chinese.

k
kh

.-...        •            *  -    .    .    .

,G ...

X

r\  n  «*  «n  n~

n  %  t:  £\  c    •                  •    •    •    •

1

D      •     *      •  '0

~  —    UoJ*J  •               •    "    k)-<^>  •

|
1

D      !\)     "  »0

!       ~    __     L)oJ-L)    •                  li)    "    k)  *J   •

1

^\  3    ^OnJ    -

=?

;;     ^;;

■

N

•      #-N     '"*    ***"

•  c^2  s>

;    ;    ;          &  ;  af  ;   ;

a

■

£  £  P  pr     .      K>      iu/

IP-  fcr  P5-  M^  tr

ID

pa

•<
ffi

s

•<
1

1

s

r  *

u

i

:«  j*              *  ^    *»  %  '«

1

U

H

O
co

O

u

CQ

©        .         .

1        '       -
g        '     1

-P    .  .a

t    ■   &
*  -  -

.2                     B

H        5

CO

-     a,  ,j5

CO           1

!     1    i

c3      a

Oh    *  =

S      J

!  1

:::::§

ts

13*1    1   -

i  §.-a  s.-3  §3

r.   .-.'.    1*1

)     05     O     h    N                       CO

I— 1     rH      1-H                              •—

i

"5.

en

c

i

:  1  i

CO       ►x'

1

i  *  »

i

>     CO    K-

<      rH      i-»

358


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS


inese.

>%

•       H

-  •  4 '  '. ; .  1  ■. , '.

fl       -H

^3

«3          .        N       "°         •

U

*

.

•

.                  «*=>        .

£

.        .

,

.

J3

**                               •

•         •

£  q    .  r  r

•

I"!  J^

.D  o  —  m    •

X

•

•

•

1

$.

4h        [

d  :-o  ->  '

n

3-1

b      '•    ~»  "b      •'

<

•

/^-V

i

1

^).

'V^

o  .  <-)  o   : .

o

3-D

^            ^        ^

Ph

•

b    '    ->

5>
3

*\

^    <^

^  :  :  *>  :

~«4

*  :v>

£

.

r^s

init.

:  ?*

z> \>   ;  <t\<^

•

d

B
N

**3

"^  •

:  3  :  ^o  :  :

1
1

FT

*  ;

|c   P"     •    hr  jy

iriefg

.  ip  i

n

<

n

•  |

0

.   .   .

0

:  *  :S

'  n  m

3

4

8

g

->  «^      «0       *»

r>»

<

2

S

i

5

1
0

>»

«•  £  •  t»  sg

C    p-

•       CO         •       N         •         •

..!.!.

'     2     |

•      r-l      CM

•   Ua   ^

r-i      C

J          '          *          '        01        B

H    .

M

•
2                «

3  .!

5-   j

3    -

*  £2    *w

*  °3      83

9     S     2
3    &  c

-1        03      i— 1

1  ill

©   •  -ali

H     •    §    §

•  03

•1

*    a

•  CO
03

03

.2

.     'ol
o

.2    .J

o   "
S    i

a       .       .       .     B     1

3     _     N        •    J    J

3     g     g    .2     «     §
»     2     «     2     2

03       03      i-H       03       03

o

§        a

3
•

3       5      5      8

1     •'    •€     M

2

3  1

Sz;  a2

•>

C       •>      5      •»      *

s

H              S

Oh

CO                  c

ri   ©   «-•   cm

M     TH     «5     tO     S

00

OS    O

r-H      C

<I     CO     •*     »«     CD     b-

!

i—i                         r

H     <M     <M     <M

<M    CM    <M     <M    <M

CM

<M     CO

CO      C

0     CO     CO     CO     CO     CO

FOR    THE    SACRED    BOOKS   OF    THE    EAST.


359


*    'a

'    S    *

<M

a  .'  :  :  :  r  :

mcipin

"  n    !

.         .     r—

-*  •*  :  ^  :  ^  :

:  :  y  :

«_  .

']    -

-a  ^a     •     .     •    ->    •

:      y  :  D*  :

<_  .

:•]  ^

.  .     .  .  ^  .

19

•  ;?;

.  ^i>    .

5)  <^

•           •                       •                                  a

:a-

:     •  h  :

:».&

h9   to    fl>    \V    &   w     .

•     ST

ty  t*  ftr  jr

1    ST       '.

•    .  &■  *p  g

*    *    "     *   *

•

....

*•  ^  "w  *§   8    .   *»

•     •     •     •    s

S'  •  .  '•     •

•    •  s

<s

at     ta


ft-g.-°    5


s    &    *


O     a?

6,2

CO    0

31

s
ft


«8     .t3


.2       £

s     «


OO    Ol    o
M     CO     ^


o

*     3

n

B

<o

Ch

Ctt

w

0,     c3

CO       c


1  s

£    CO


CL,

CO


C     .2


r- 1    <M     CO     rt<     i-O    CO     h»


3<5o


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS.


6

8
.5

u

)«j

.         03       <cS       -r-       <p*            .            .            .

.     3    <2     <u    <*»    <cS     j,      •     O       •    <£       •

.  •#     •

i
£

a

1-  :

:  |,  |»  |.,|-  :  :

:  i^ih=  •  .•  •  I-*-  •■■•

•

13              ,
<        1      •

:  .|  ii  j,  ij, . :  :  .:

:-l-A  :  :5l3  :  :  :  :;i>  :

.    .    .

1

:  >i  ^j  |v  tj, :  :

;«i-i>  j  ;  =  b  :'  •;  1  -;l>  •

.        .        •

u

i

si

•    ;    ;  —    •  o    *    •    •    •  *"■

.

i

N

•  :  *  3  -i  n-  ;  ;

.    .    .

5

ca
to

•     '  BP   g  if**-  P  1^  IS5*  &F*  *>  V>     -  *<*     •     '•     •  %  %

•        •        •

H
M

pa
<!
X
ft.

<
><

<
Z

o

IT.

3

r  !2
3

•     •

.    .    .

u

•    •    •  3  *  S 2*2^*    •    •  2  J,

.       .       ,

U

O     *u     >0      c9    <tf    >~    ~     J3    %     'g     'g      S     <3      ©w^wWo^,^    ^S    :S     :h    :[J    :0

*3  -s         <o         g   g

J

o

>

2                                a

»>       •>

'     "     '   "3                      '    8

!  .  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  *  *  -l        :  :  -g

.                                                   .2   d   ft           ^    •  ^

•     4

s  i°  o  *  ft  •>  &  o

.::...:

\

.      c

;

1 :

i-i    c

\     2    -2     a      •      *      '      '

3  -s  M  JS   g   i   |   ?

:>          r3          .2           2

3              S3             ^              <|

1        S        3        ®        .

3         O         P-.         Q         h

1  §  6  1 1      |         1      3         JS  1  1  1
ff     •§     1     ^        1     .&        -s  -3  -s  -s

__

October,  1882.

(Elatentron  $tes8,   ©xfot)J.

A  SELECTION  OF

BOOKS

PUBLISHED   FOR  THE  UNIVERSITY  BY

HENRY    FROWDE,

AT    THE    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE,
7    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON.

ALSO  TO  BE  HAD   AT  THE

CLARENDON    PRESS    DEPOSITORY,    OXFORD.


LEXICONS,  GRAMMARS,  &c.

(See  also  Clarendon  Press  Series,  pp.  21,  24.)

A    Greek-English  Lexicon,  by  Henry  George

Liddell,  D.D.,  and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.    Sixth  Edition,  Revised  and
Augmented.     1870.  4to.  cloth,  iV.  16s.

A  copious  Greek-English   Vocabulary,  compiled

from  the  best  authorities.     1850.  24mo.  bound,  3s.

A  Practical  Introduction  to  Greek  Accentuation,

by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1881.    8vo.  cloth,
1  os.  6d.

A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edi-
tion of  Freund's  Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great
part  rewritten  by  Charlton   T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,
.  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Latin  in  Columbia  College,  New  York.     1879.
4to.  cloth,  1 1.  5s.

The  Book  of  Hebrew  Roots,  by  Abu  51-Walld

Marwan  ibn  Janah,  otherwise  called  Rabbi  Yonah.   Now  first  edited,
with  an  Appendix,  by  Ad.  Neubauer.     1875.  4to.  cloth,  2/.  7s.  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


A  Treatise  on  the  use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebrew.

By  S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.  Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.
1 88 1.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6 d.

Hebrew  Accentitation  of  Psalms,  Proverbs,  ana

fob.     By  William  Wickes,  D.D.     1881.  Demy  8vo.  stiff  cover,  5s.

Thesatcrzcs  Syriacus :    collegerunt   Quatremere,

Bernstein,  Lorsbach,  Arnoldi,  Field :  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,
S.T.P.R.

Fasc.  I-V.  1868-79.  sm.  fol.  each,  1/.  is.

Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V.  sm.  fol.  cloth,  5/.  5s.

A  Practical  Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language,

arranged  with  reference  to  the  Classical  Languages  of  Europe,  for
the  use  of  English  Students,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.,  Boden
Professor  of  Sanskrit.     Fourth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.  cloth,  15s.

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary,  Etymologically

and  Philologically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,
German,  Anglo-Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  In  do  European
Languages.  By  Monier  Williams,  M.A.,  Boden  Professor  of  San-
skrit.    1872.  4to.  cloth,  4/.  14s.  6 d.

Nalopdkhydnam.     Story  of   Nala,  an  Episode

of  the  Maha-Bharata :  the  Sanskrit  text,  with  a  copious  Vocabulary,
and  an  improved  version  of  Dean  Milman's  Translation,  by  Monier
Williams,  M.A.  Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Improved.  1879.
8vo.  cloth,  15s.

Sakuntala.     A  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  seven  Acts.

Edited  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.  Second  Edition,  1876.  8vo.
cloth,  2 is.

An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.

Collections  of  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Anglo-
Saxon,  Oxford.  Edited  and  enlarged  by  Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,  M.A.,
Owens  College,  Manchester.  (To  be  completed  in  four  parts).
Parts  I  and  II.  4to.  15s.  each.    Just  Published.

An  Icelandic- English  Dictionary,  based  on  the

MS.  collections  of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  com-
pleted by  G.  Vigfusson.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of
Richard  Cleasby,  by  G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.     1874.  4to.  cloth,


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


A   List  of  English    Words  the  Etymology   of

whick  is  illustrated  by  comparison  with  Icelandic.  Prepared  in  the
form  of  an  Appendix  to  the  above.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,
stitched,  2  s.

A  Handbook  of  the  Chinese  Language.     Parts

I  and  II,  Grammar  and  Chrestomathy.  By  James  Summers.
1863.  8vo.  half  bound,  \l.  8s.

An   Etymological  Dictionary    of  the   English

Language,  arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,
Ellington  and  Bosworth  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University
of  Cambridge.     1882.  4to.  cloth,  2I.  4s.

Part  IV.,  completing  the  Work,  10s.  6d.

A     Concise    Etymological    Dictionary    of    the

English  Language.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  1882.  Crown  8vo.
cloth,  5s.  6d.


GREEK  CLASSICS,  &c.

Heracliti  Ephesii  Reliquiae.  Recensuit  I.  By-
water,  M.A.  Appendicis  loco  additae  sunt  Diogenis  Laertii  Vita
Heracliti,  Particulae  Hippocratei  De  Diaeta  Libri  Primi,  Epistolae
Heracliteae.     1877.  8vo.  cloth,  price  6s.

Homer:  A  Complete  Concordance  to  the  Odys-
sey and  Hymns  of  Homer ;  to  which  is  added  a  Concordance  to
the  Parallel  Passages  in  the  Iliad,  Odyssey,  and  Hymns.  By
Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.,  Member  of  the  General  Council,  University
of  Edinburgh.     1880.  4to.  cloth,  1/.  is.

Plato :    The  Apology,  with  a  revised  Text  and

English  Notes,  and  a  Digest  of  Platonic  Idioms,  by  James  Riddell,
M.A.     1878.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6 d.

Plato:  Philebus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English

Notes,  by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.     i860.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6c?.

Plato :  Sophistes  and  Politims,  with  a  revised

'  Text   and   English   Notes,    by   L.   Campbell,  M.A.     1866.     8vo.
cloth,  1 8s.

Plato:    Theaetetus,  with    a   revised    Text   and

English  Notes,  by,L.  Campbell,  M.A.  New  Edition  in  the  Press.
B  2


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Plato :    The  Dialogues,  translated  into  English,

with  Analyses  and  Introductions,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius
Professor  of  Greek.  A  new  Edition  in  5  volumes,  medium  8vo.
1875.  cloth,  3/.  10s.

Plato:    The  Republic,  translated  into  English,

with  an  Analysis  and  Introduction,  "by  B.  Jowett,  MA.  Medium
8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d.

Plato:   Index  to.     Compiled   for   the    Second

Edition  of  Professor  Jowett's  Translation  of  the  Dialogues.  By
Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.     1875.  8vo.  paper  covers,  25.  6d.

Thucydides :  Translated  into  English,  with  In-
troduction, Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices.  By  B.  Jowett,
M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek.  2  vols.  1881.  Medium  8vo.
cloth,  1/.  12s.


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c.

The  Holy  Bible  in  the  earliest  English  Versions,

made  from  the  Latin  Vulgate  by  John  Wycliffe  and  his  followers :
edited  by  the  Rev.  J.  Forshall  and  Sir  F.  Madden.  4  vols.  1850.
Royal  4to.  cloth,  3/.  3s.

Also  reprinted  from  the  above,  with.  Introduction  and
Glossary  by  *W.  W.   Skeat,  M.A.

The  New  Testament  in  English,  according  to

the  Version  by  John  Wycliffe,  about  A.r>.  1380,  and  Revised  by
John  Purvey,  about  a.d.  i  388.    Extra  fcap.     8vo.  cloth,  6s.

The  Books  of  Job,  Psalms,   Proverbs,   Eccle-

siastes,  and  the  Song  of  Solomon:  according  to  the  Wyclifnte  Version
made  by  Nicholas  de  Hereford,  about  a.d.  1381,  and  Revised  by
John  Purvey,  about  a.d.  1388.     Extra  fcap.     8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6 d.


The  Holy  Bible:   an  exact  reprint,    page   for

page,  of  the  Authorized  Version  published  in  the  year  161 1.
Demy  4to.  half  bound,  il.  is.

Vetus    Testamentum  ex   Versione  Septuaginta

Interpretum  secundum  exemplar  Vaticanum  Romae  editum.  Accedit
potior  varietas  Codicis  Alexandrini.  Tomi  III.  Editio  Altera.
i8mo.  cloth,  1 8s.  ,


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Origenis    Hexaplorum    quae    supersunt ;    sive,

Veterum  Interpretum  Graecorum  in  totum  Vetus  Testamentum
Fragmenta.  Edidit  Fridericus  Field,  A.M.  2  vols.  1867-18 74.
4to.  cloth,  5Z.  5s.

Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Latina,  cum

Paraphrasi  Anglo-Saxonica.  Edidit  B.  Thorpe,  F.A.S.  1835.
8vo.  cloth,  1  os.  6d.

Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Gallica  e  Cod.

MS.  in  Bibl.  Bodleiana  adservato,  una  cum  Versione  Metrica
aiiisque  Monumentis  pervetustis.  Nunc  primum  descripsit  et  edidit
Franciscus  Michel,  Phil.  Doct.    i860.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

The  Psalms  in  Hebrew  without  points.      1879.

Crown  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6c?.

The  Book  of  Wisdom :  the   Greek   Text,  the

Latin  Vulgate,  and  the  Authorised  English  Version ;  with  an  In-
troduction, Critical  Apparatus,  and  a  Commentary.  By  William
J.  Deane,  M.A.,  Oriel  College,  Oxford ;  Rector  of"  Ashen,  Essex.
Small  4to.  cloth,  12s.  6d.

The  Book  of  Tobit.     A  Chaldee  Text,  from  a

unique  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library ;  with  other  Rabbinical  Texts,
English  Translations,  and  the  Itala.  Edited  by  Ad.  Neubauer,  M. A.
1878.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s.

A  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  Attri-
buted to  Abraham  Ibn  Ezra.  Edited  from  a  Manuscript  in  the
Bodleian  Library  by  S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  paper  cover,
3s.  6d.

Horae  Hebraicae  et  Talmudicae,  a  J.  Lightfoot.

A  new  Edition,  by  R.  Gandell,  M.A.  4  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth,
1/.  is.

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Antiquissimorum

Codicum  Textus  in  ordine  parallelo  dispositi.  Accedit  collatio
Codicis  Sinaitici.  Edidit  E.  H.  Hansell,  S.T.B.  Tomi  III.  1864.
8vo.  half  morocco,  2/.  1 2s.  6d.

Novum  Testamenhcm  Graece.     Accedunt  paral-

lela  S.  Scripturae  loca,  necnon  vetus  capitulorum  notatio  et  canones
Eusebii.  Edidit  Carolus  Lloyd,  S.  T.  P.  R.,  necnon  Episcopus
Oxoniensis.     i8mo.  cloth,  3s.

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  cloth,  10s.


6  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.

Novtim    Testamentum   Graece  juxta   Exemplar

Milliamim.     i8mo.  cloth,  is.  6d.
The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  cloth,  9s,

Evangelia  Sacra  Graece.  fcap,  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d.
The    Greek     Testament,    with    the     Readings

adopted  by  the  Revisers  of  the  Authorised  Version  : —

(1)  Pica  type.      Second  Edition,  with  Marginal  References,

Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

(2)  Long  Primer  type.     Fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

(3)  The  same,  on  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  cloth,  15s.

Canon  Muratorianus :   the  earliest  Catalogue

of  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament.  Edited  with  Notes  and  a
Facsimile  of  the  MS.  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  by  S.  P.
Tregelles,  LL.D.     1868.  4to.  cloth,  10s.  6d.


FATHERS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  &c.

St.  Athanasius:    Orations  against  the  Arians.

With  an  Account   of  his  Life  by  William  Bright,  D.D.     1873.
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  9s.

St.  Athanasius:  Historical  Writings,  according

to  the  Benedictine  Text.   With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,
D.D.     1881.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

St.  Augustine:   Select  Anti-Pelagian  Treatises ,

and  the  Acts  of  the  Second  Council  of  Orange.     With  an  Intro-
duction by  William  Bright,  D.D.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  9s.

The  Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils

of  Nicaea,  Constantinople,  Ephesus,  and  Chalcedon.    1877.  Crown
8vo.  cloth,  2  s.  6d.

Notes  on  the' Canons  of  the  First  Four  General

Councils.     By   William    Bright,  D.D.     1882.    Crown  8vo.  cloth,
5s.  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  XII  Pro-

phetas.     Edidit  P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.     Tomi  II.     1868.  8vo.  cloth,

2/.   2S.

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  D.  yoannis

Evangelium.  Accednnt  Fragmenta  Varia  necnon  Tractatus  ad
Tiberium  Diaconum  Duo.  Edidit  post  Aubertum  P.  E.  Pusey,
A.M.     Tomi  III.     1872.  8vo.  2/.  5s.

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  Commentarii

in  Lucae  Evangelium  quae  supersunt  Syriace.  E  MSS.  apud  Mus.
Britan.  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,  A.M.     1858.   4to.  cloth,  xl.  2s.

The  same,  translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.

2  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth,  14s.

Ephraemi  Syri,    Rabulae    Episcopi    Edesseni,

Balaei,  aliorumque  Opera  Selecta.  E  Codd.  Syriacis  MSS.  in
Museo  Britannico  et  Bibliotheca  Bodleiana  asservatis  primus  edidit
J.  J.  Overbeck.     1865.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  is.

Eusebius    Ecclesiastical  History,   according   to

the  text  of  Burton,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.
1881.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d.

Irenaeus:     The    Third  Book   of  St.   Irenaeus,

Bishop  of  Lyons,  against  Heresies.  With  short  Notes  and  a
Glossary  by  H.  Deane,  B.D.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.
1874.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d.

Patrum  Apostolicorum,  S.  Clementis  Romani,

S.  Ignatii,  S.  Polycarpi,  quae  supersunt.  Edidit  Guil.  Jacobson,
S.T.P.R.     Tomi  II.     Fourth  Edition,  1863.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  is.

Socrates    Ecclesiastical   History,    according   to

the  Text  of  Hussey,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.
1878.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.


ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  &c.

Baedae    Historia    Ecclesiastica.      Edited,    with

English  Notes,  by  G.  H.  Moberly,  M.A.     1881.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,
1  os.  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Bright  (W.,  D.D.).    Chapters  of  Early  English

Church  History.     1878.  8vo.  cloth,  12s.

Burnet's   History   of  the   Reformation    of  the

Church  of  England.  A  new  Edition.  Carefully  revised,  and  the
Records  collated  with  the  originals,  by  N.  Pocock,  M.A.  7  vols.
1865.    8vo.  Price  reduced  to  il.  10s.

Councils  and  Ecclesiastical  Documents  relating

to  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  Edited,  after  Spelman  and  Wilkins,
by  A.  W.  Haddan,  B.D.,  and  W.  Stubbs,  MA.,  Regius  Professor
of  Modern  History,  Oxford.  Vols.  I.  and  III.  1869-71.  Medium
8vo.  cloth,  each  ii.  is.

Vol.  II.  Part  I.  1873.  Medium  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.
Vol.  II.  Part  II.    1878.   Church  of  Ireland;   Memorials   of  St.
Patrick.     Stiff  covers,  3s.  6d.

Hammond   (C.  E).      Liturgies,   Eastern    and

Western.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a  Liturgical
Glossary.     1878.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

An  Appendix  to  the  above.     1879.  Crown  8vo.  paper  covers,  is.  6d.

John,  Bishop  of  Ephesus.     The  Third  Part  of

his  Ecclesiastical  History.  [In  Syriac]  Now  first  edited  by
"William  Cureton,  MA.     1853.  4to-  cloth,  \l.  12s.

The  same,  translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.

i860.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.

Monumenta  Ritualia  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.  The

occasional  Offices  of  the  Church  of  England  according  to  the  old
use  of  Salisbury  the  Prymer  in  English,  and  other  prayers  and
forms,  with  dissertations  and  notes.  By  William  Maskell,  M.A.
Second  Edition.     1882.  3  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  2I.  10s.

The  Ancient  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,

according  to  the  uses  of  Sarum,  York,  Hereford,  and  Bangor,  and
the  Roman  Liturgy  arranged  in  parallel  columns,  with  preface  and
notes.  By  William  Maskell,  M.A.  Third  Edition.  1882.  8vo.
cloth,  15s.

The  Liturgy  and  Ritiial  of  the  Celtic  Church.

By  F.  E.  Warren,  B.D.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.
1 88 1.  8vo.  cloth,  14s.

The  Leofric  Missal.     By  the  same  Editor.     In

the  Press.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Records    of   the    Reformation.     The    Divorce,

J52 7-1533-  Mostly  now  for  the  first  time  printed  from  MSS.  in
the  British  Museum  and  other  libraries.  Collected  and  arranged
by  N.  Pocock,  M.A.     1870.   2  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  16s.

Shirley  (W.  W.).     Some  Account  of  the  Church

in  the  Apostolic  Age.  Second  Edition,  1874.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
3s.  6d.

Stubbs  (W.).     Regis  trtcm  Sacrum  Anglicamim.

An  attempt  to  exhibit  the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession  in  Eng-
land.    1858.  small  4to.  cloth,  8s.  6d.


ENGLISH    THEOLOGY.

Butler  s  Works,  with  an  Index  to  the  Analogy.

2  vols.     1874.  8vo.  cloth,  us.

Butler  s  Sermons.     8vo.  cloth,  $s.  6d.
Btttlers  Analogy  of  Religion.  8vo.  cloth,  55-.  6d.
Heurt ley's    Collection   of  Creeds.       1858.    8vo.

cloth,  6s.  6d.

Homilies    appointed    to    be   read  in    Chtirches.

Edited  by  J.  Griffiths,  M.A.     1859.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.


Hooker  s   Works,  with  his  Life  by  Walton,  ar

ranged  by  John
cloth,  1 1.  us.  6d


ranged  by  John  Keble,  M.A.      Sixth  Edition,   1874.   3  vols.  8vo.
th,  1 1.  us.


Hookers  Works ;  the  text  as  arranged  by  John

Keble,  M.A.     2  vols.     1875.  8vo.  cloth,  us.

Pearsons  Exposition   of  the    Creed.      Revised

and  corrected  by  E.  Burton,  D.D.   Sixth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.  cloth,
1  os.  6d.

Waterland's   Review    of    the    Doctrine   of  the

Eucharist,  with  a  Preface  by  the  present  Bishop  of  London.    1880.
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d.


io  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD,


Wheat  lys  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common

Prayer.     A  new  Edition,  1846.  8vo.  cloth,  5  s.

Wyclif.     A   Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works

of/ohn  Wyclif,  by  W.  W.  Shirley,  D.D.     1865.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Wyclif.    Select  English  Works.    By  T.  Arnold,

M.A.     3  vols.     1871.  8vo.  cloth.     Price  reduced  to  \l.  is.

Wyclif.    Trialogus.    With  the  Supplement  now

first  edited.    By  Gotthard  Lechler.    1869.  8vo.  cloth.   Price  reduced
to  p.


HISTORICAL    AND    DOCUMENTARY   WORKS.

British  Barrows,  a  Record  of  the  Examination

of  Sepulchral  Mounds  in  various  parts  of  England.  By  William
Green  well,  M.A.,  F.S.  A.  Together  with  Description  of  Figures  of
Skulls,  General  Remarks  on  Prehistoric  Crania,  and  an  Appendix
by  George  Rolleston,  M.D.,  F.R.S.    1877.  Medium  8vo.  cloth,  25s.

Britton.     A  Treatise  upon  the  Common  Law  of

England,  composed  by  order  of  King  Edward  I.  The  French  Text
carefully  revised,  with  an  English  Translation,  Introduction,  and
Notes,  by  F.  M.  Nichols,  M.A.  2  vols.  1865.  Royal  8vo.  cloth,
\l.  1 6s.

Clarendon  s    (Edw.  Earl  of)   History    of  the

Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars  in  England.  7  vols.  1839.  i8mo.  cloth,
1/.  is.

Clarendons    (Edw.    Earl  of)   History   of    the

Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars  in  England.  Also  his  Life,  written  by
himself,  in  which  is  included  a  Continuation  of  his  History  of  the
Grand  Rebellion.  With  copious  Indexes.  In  one  volume,  royal
8vo.  1842.  cloth.  i7.  2s.

Clintons  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Hellenici.     1 85 1 .

8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d.

Clintons  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Romani.     1854.

8vo.  cloth,  7s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  n


Freeman  s    (E.   A.)    History   of  the    Norman

Conquest  of  England ;  its  Causes  and  Results.  In  Six  Volumes.
8vo.  cloth,  5/.  9s.  6d.

Vols.  I-II  together,  3rd  edition,  1877.  il.  16s.

Vol.  Ill,  2nd  edition,  1874.  il.  is.

Vol.  IV,  2nd  edition,  1875.  il.  is.

Vol.  V,  1876.  1/.  is.

Vol.  VI.     Index.     1879.  $vo-  cloth,  10s.  6d.

Freeman  {E.  A).     The  Reign  of  William  Rufns

and  the  Accession  of  Henry  the  First.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  16s.

Gascoigne  s     Theological    Dictionary    ("  Liber

Veritatum ") :  Selected  Passages,  illustrating  the  condition  of
Church  and  State,  1403-1458.  With  an  Introduction  by  James
E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.P.     Small  4to.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

Magna  Carta,  a  careful   Reprint.     Edited  by

W.  Stubbs,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History.  1879.
4to.  stitched,  is.

Ola/.    Passio  et  Mir  acuta  Beati  Olavi.     Edited

from  a  Twelfth-Century  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi
College,  Oxford,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Frederick
Metcalfe,  M.A.     Small  4to.  stiff  cover,  6s.

Protests  of  the  Lords,    including   those  which

have  been  expunged,  from  1624  to  1874;  with  Historical  Intro-
ductions. Edited  by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.  1875.  3  vols.
8vo.  cloth,  il.  2s.

Rogers  s  History  of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in

England,  a.d.  1 259-1 793.

Vols.  I  and  II  (1259-1400).  1866.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  2s.
Vols.  Ill  and  IV  (1401-1582).  1882.  8vo.  cloth,  2I.  10s.

Sturlunga  Saga,  including  the  Islendinga  Saga

of  Lawman  Sturla  Thordsson  and  other  works.  Edited  by  Dr.
Gudbrand  Vigfusson.     In  2  vols.     1878.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  2s.

Two   of  the   Saxon    Chronicles  parallel,    with

Supplementary  Extracts  from  the  Others.  Edited,  with  ^Intro-
duction,  Notes,  and  a  Glossarial  Index,  by  J.  Earle,  M.A.  1865.
8vo.  cloth,  16s.


12  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.

Statu  ta  Universitatis  Oxoniensis.      1882.     8vo.

cloth,  5s.

The  Student" s  Handbook  to  the  University  and

Colleges  of  Oxford.  Sixth  Edition.  1881.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  2s.  6d.

MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL   SCIENCE,  &c.

Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  Uni-
versity Observatory,  Oxford,  under  the  direction  of  C.  Pritchard,
M.A.,  Savilian  Professor  of  Astronomy.  No.  I.  1878.  Royal  8vo.
paper  covers,  3s.  6d.

Treatise  on  Infinitesimal  Calculus.    By  Bartho-
lomew Price,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy,  Oxford.
Vol.  I.  Differential  Calculus.   Second  Edition,  8vo.  cloth,  14s.  6d.
Vol.  II.    Integral  Calculus,  Calculus  of  Variations,  and  Differential

Equations.     Second  Edition,  1865.  8vo.  cloth,  18s.
Vol.  III.    Statics,  including  Attractions ;  Dynamics  of  a  Material

Particle.     Second  Edition,  1868.  8vo.  cloth,  16s.
Vol.  IV.  Dynamics  of  Material  Systems ;  together  with  a  chapter

on  Theoretical  Dynamics,  by  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  1862.

8vo.  cloth,  1 6s.

Rigaud 's    Correspondence  of  Scientific  Men  of

the  17th  Century,  with  Table  of  Contents  by  A.  de  Morgan,  and
Index  by  the  Rev.  J.  Rigaud,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,
Oxford.     2  vols.  1841-1862.  8vo.  cloth,  18s.  6d.

Vesuvius.       By   John    Phillips,    M.A.,    F.R.S.,

Professor  of  Geology,  Oxford.     1869.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

Geology    of   Oxford    and    the    Valley    of   the

Thames.     By  the  same  Author.     1871.  8vo.  cloth,  21s.

Synopsis    of   the    Pathological    Series    in    the

Oxford  Museum.  By  H.  W.  Acland,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  1867.  8vo.
cloth,  2s.  6d.

Thesaurus  Entomologicus  Hopeianus,  or  a  De-
scription of  the  rarest  Insects  in  the  Collection  given  to  the
University  by  the  Rev.  William  Hope.  By  J.  O.  Westwood,  M.A.,
F.L.S.     With  40  Plates.     1874.   Small  folio,  half  morocco,  7/.  10s.

Text-Book  of  Botany,  Morphological  and  Phy-
siological. By  Dr.  Julius  Sachs,  Professor  of  Botany  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Wiirzburg.  A  New  Edition.  Translated  by  S.  H.  Vines,
M.A.    Royal  8vo.  1/.  us.  6d.    Just  Published.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  13


yohannes  Milller  on  Certain  Variations  in  the

Vocal  Organs  of  the  Passeres  that  have  hitherto  escaped  notice.
Translated  by  F.  J.  Bell.  B.A.,  and  edited  with  an  Appendix,  by
A.  H.  Garrod,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  With  Plates.  1878.  4to.  paper
covers,  7s.  6d.


MISCELLANEOUS.

Bacoris  Novum  Orgamtm.  Edited,  with  Eng-
lish notes,  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  9s.  6d.

Bacon  s  Novum  Organum.     Translated  by  G.

W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  9s.  6d.     (See  also  p.  37.)

The  Works  of  George  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly

Bishop  of  Cloyne ;  including  many  of  his  writings  hitherto  un-
published. With  Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his
Life  and  Philosophy,  by  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  M.A.  4  vols.
1 8  71.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  18s.

The  Life,  Letters,  &c.     1  vol.  cloth,  165.     See  also  p.  37.

The  Logic  of  Hegel ;  translated  from  the  En-
cyclopaedia of  the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With  Prolegomena  by
William  Wallace,  M.A.     1874.  8vo.  cloth,  14s.

Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,     A  new  Edition,

with  Notes,  by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.    2  vols.  1880.  cloth,  21s.

A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Art,  delivered  before

the  University  of  Oxford  in  Hilary  Term,  1870,  by  John  Ruskin,
M.A.,  Slade  Professor  of  Fine  Art.     8vo.  cloth,  6s.

Aspects  of  Poetry ;    being   Lectures   delivered

at  Oxford  by  John  Campbell  Shairp,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Poetry,
Oxford.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

A  Critical  Account  of  the  Drawings  by  Michel

Angelo  and  Raffaello  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.  By  J.
C.  Robinson,  F.S.A.     1870.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s.

Catalogue  of  the  Castellani  Collection  of  Anti-

quities  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.  By  W.  S.  W.  Vaux,  M.A.,
F.R.S.     Crown  8vo.  stiff  cover,  is.


i4  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Wit  Sacrrtr  23oofcs  of  tit  lEast.

Translated  by  various  Oriental  Scholars,  and  edited  by

F.  Max  Muller.

Vol.    I.    The    Upanishads.     [Translated  by  F.  Max

Muller.]  Part  I.  The  A^andogya-upanishad,  The  Talavakara-
upanishad,  The  Aitareya-arawyaka,  The  Kaushitaki-brahmawa-
upanishad,  and  The  Va^asaneyi-sawhita-upanishad.  8vo.  cloth,
i os.  6d.

Vol.  II.   The  Sacred  Laws   of  the  Aryas,  as  taught

in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  VasishMa,  and  Baudhayana.
[Translated  by  Prof.  Georg  Biihler.]  Part  I,  Apastamba  and
Gautama.     8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d.

Vol.  III.    The  Sacred  Books  of  China.     The  Texts

of  Confucianism.  [Translated  by  James  Legge.]  Part  I.  The  Shu
King,  The  Religious  portions  of  the  Shih  King,  and  The  Hsiao
King.     8vo.  cloth,  1 2s.  6d.

Vol.    IV.     The     Vendidad.      Translated     by    James

Darmesteter.     8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d.

Vol.  V.  The  Bundahis,  Bahman   Yas/,  and  Shdyast-

l&Sh&yast.  Pahlavi  Texts,  Part  I.  Translated  by  E.  W.  West.
8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d.

Vols.  VI    and    IX.     The   QuSdn.      Parts    I  and  II.

Translated  by  Professor  E.  H.  Palmer.     8vo.  cloth,  21s.

Vol.  VII.    The    Lnstittites    of    Vishnu.      Translated

by  Professor  Julius  Jolly.     8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d.

Vol.  VIII.    The    Bhagavadgita,    Sanatsngdtiya,    and

Aniigita.  Translated  by  Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang.  8vo.  cloth,
ios.  6d.

Vol.  X.   The  Dhammaflada,   translated    by  Professor

F.  Max  Muller ;  and  The  Sutta  Nifidta,  translated  by  Professor
Fausboll ;  being  Canonical  Books  of  the  Buddhists.  8vo.  cloth,
ios.  6d.

Vol.  XI.  The  Mahdparinibbdna  Sntta,   The  Tevigga

Sutta,  The  Mah&sudassana  Sutta,  The  Dhamma-Kakkapfiavattana
Sutta.     Translated  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids.     8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6 d.

Vol.    XII.    The     Satapatha-Brdhmana.      Translated

by  Professor  Eggeling.     Vol.  I.     8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d.

Vol.  XIII.   The  Pdtimokkha.     Translated  by  T.  W.

Rhys  Davids.  The  Mahavagga,  Part  I.  Translated  by  Dr.  H.
Oldenberg.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  15


Vol.  XVI.   The  Yi  King,  with  an  Appendix  on  the

Philosophy  of  the  Scholars  of  the  Sung  dynasty,  professedly  derived
from  the  Yi.     Translated  by  James  Legge.

The  following  Volumes  are  in  the  Press : —

Vol.  XIV.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught

in  the  Schools  of  VasishMa  and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Pro-
fessor Georg  Biihler.

Vol.   XV.    The    Upanishads.      Part    II.      Translated

by  F.  Max  Miiller.

Vol.  XVII.    The  Mahdvagga,  and  YLullavagga.     Part

II.     Translated  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Dr.  H.  Oldenberg.

Vol.  XVIII.    The  Dddistdn-i  Dinik,  and  Epistles  of

Mdmtskihar.   Pahlavi     exts,  Part  II.    Translated  by  E.  W.  West.

Vol.  XIX.   The  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.   Translated  by

Samuel  Beal.

Vol.  XX.   The  Vdyu-Purdna.  Translated  by  Professor

Bhandarkar,  of  Elphinstone  College,  Bombay.

Vol.  XXI.  The  Saddharma-pimdarzka.  Translated  by

Professor  Kern.

Vol.  XXII.     The    Akdrdnga-SiUra.     Translated   by

Professor  Jacobi.

gSntrtrota  ©xonfensia:

Classical    Series.      Vol.    I.      Part    I.      The   English

Manuscripts  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics,  described  in  relation  to
Bekker's  Manuscripts  and  other  Sources.  By  J.  A.  Stewart,  M.A.,
Classical  Lecturer,  Christ  Church.     Small  4to.  3s.  6d.

Classical    Series.     Vol.  I.      Part   II.     Nonius   Mar-

cellus,  de  Compendiosa  Doctrina,  Harleian  MS.  2719.  Collated
by  J.  H.  Onions,  M.A.,  Senior  Student  of  Christ  Church.  Small
4to.  3s.  6d.

Semitic    Series.     Vol.    I.     Part    I.     Commentary    on

Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  By  Rabbi  Saadiah.  Edited  by  H.J.  Matthews,
M.A.,  Exeter  College,  Oxford.     Small  4to.  3s.  6d.

Aryan     Series.     Vol.    I.      Part    I.     Buddhist    Texts

from  Japan.     Edited  by  F.  Max  Midler.     Small  4to.  3s.  6d.

Mediaeval  and  Modern  Series.  Vol.  I.  Part  I.
Sinonoma  Bartholomei ;  A  Glossary  from  a  Fourteenth-Century
MS.  in  the  Library  of  Pembroke  College,  Oxford.  Edited  by  J.
L.  G.  Mowat,  MA.,  Fellow  of  Pembroke  College.  Small  410.
3s.  6c?.


16  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


€faxtvfoaxt  ^xtBB  %mt$


The  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press  having  undertaken
the  publication  of  a  series  of  works,  chiefly  educational,  and
entitled  the  Ctanfom  Ijnag  %zm$,  have  published,  or  have
in  preparation,  the  following.

Those  to  which  prices  are  attached  are  already  published  ;  the
others  are  in  preparation.

I.    ENGLISH.

A  First  Reading  Book.     By  Marie  Eichens  of

Berlin  ;  and  edited  by  Anne  J.  Clough.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff
covers,  4c?.

Oxford  Reading  Book,    Part    I.       For    Little

Children.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  6d.

Oxford  Reading  Book,   Part  II.      For  Junior

Classes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  6d.

An  Elementary  English  Grammar  and  Exercise

Book.  By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Norwich  School.
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.

An  English  Grammar  and  Reading  Bobk,  for

Lower  Forms  in  Classical  Schools.  By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,
Head  Master  of  Norwich  School.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.
8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Typical  Selections  from  the  best  English  Writers,

with  Introductory  Notices.  Second  Edition.  In  Two  Volumes.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.  each.

Vol.  J.  Latimer  to  Berkeley.  Vol.  II.  Pope  to  Macaulay.

The  Philology  of  the  English   Tongue.     By  J.

Earle,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  and  Professor  of
Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
7s.  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  17


A  Book  for  the  Beginner  in  Anglo-Saxon.     By

John  Earle,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford.  Second
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

An  Anglo-Saxon  Reader.     In  Prose  and  Verse.

With  Grammatical  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.  By  Henry
Sweet,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d.

An  Anglo-Saxon  Primer,  with  Grammar,  Notes,

and  Glossary.    By  the  same  Author.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

The  Ormulum ;  with  the  Notes  and  Glossary

of  Dr.  R.  M.  White.  Edited  by  Rev.  R.  Holt,  M.A.  1878.  2  vols.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  21s.

Specimens  of  Early  English.  A  New  and  Re-
vised Edition.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.
By  R.  Morris,  LL.D.,  and  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.

Part  I.     From  Old  English  Homilies  to  King  Horn  (a.d.  1150
to  a.d.  1300).     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  9s.

Part  II.     From  Robert  of  Gloucester  to  Gower  (a.d.  1298  to
a.d.  1393).     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.

Specimens    of   English    Literature,    from    the

'Ploughmans  Crede'  to  the  'Shepheardes  Calender'  (a.d.  1394  to
a.d.  1579).  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By
W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  7s.  6d.

The    Vision   of  William  concerning  Piers   the

Plowman,  by  William  Langland.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  W.
Skeat,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Chaucer.     The  Prioresses   Tale ;    Sir   Thopas  ;

The  Monkes  Tale ;  The  Clerkes  Tale  ;  The  Squieres  Tale,  &c.
Edited  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.
8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Chaucer.      The    Tale  of  the  Man   of  Lawe ;

The  Pardoneres  Tale ;  The  Second  Nonnes  Tale ;  The  Chanouns
Yemannes  Tale.  By  the  same  Editor.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
4s.  6 d.     (See  also  p.  19.)

C


1 8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Old  English  Drama.  Marlowe  s  Tragical  His-
tory of  Dr.  Faustus,  and  Greene's  Honourable  History  of  Friar
Bacon  and  Friar  Bungay.  Edited  by  A.  W.  Ward,  MA.,  Professor
of  History  and  English  Literature  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.
1878.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d.

Marlowe.      Edward  II.      With    Introduction,

Notes,  &c.  By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Norwich
School.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.

Shakespeare.     Hamlet.     Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,

MA.,  and  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  2s.

Shakespeare.      Select    Plays.       Edited    by    W.

Aldis  Wright,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers.

The  Tempest;  is.  6d.  King  Lear,  is.  6d.

As  You  Like  It,  is.  6d.  A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  is.  6d.

Julius  Csesar,  2s.  Coriolanus,  2s.  6d.

Richard  the  Third,  2s.  6d.  Henry  the  Fifth,  2s.

Twelfth  Night.     In  the  Press.     (For  other  Plays,  see  p.  19.)

Milton.     Areopagitica.    With  Introduction  and

Notes.  By  J.  W.  Hales,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,
Cambridge.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.     -

Bunyan.     Holy  War.     Edited  by  E.  Venables,

M.A.     In  the  Press.     (See  also  p.  20.)

Locke  s  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.     Edited,

with  Introduction,  Notes,  &c,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  as.

Addison.  Selections  from  Papers  in  the  Spec-
tator. With  Notes.  By  T.  Arnold,  MA.,  University  College.
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Burke.      Four    Letters    on    the    Proposals    for

Peace  with  the  Regicide  Directory  of  France.  Edited,  with  In-
troduction and  Notes,  by  E.  J.  Payne,  MA.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  5s.     (See  also  p.  20.)


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  19

Also  the  following  in  paper  covers  :  —

Goldsmith.      The  Deserted  Village,     id.
Gray.     Elegy  and  Ode  on  Eton  College.     2d.
Johnson.      Vanity  of  Human    Wishes.      With

Notes  by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.     40?.

Keats.      Hyperion,   Book   I.     With    Notes    by

W.  T.  Arnold,  B.A,     4<*.

Milton.     With  Notes  by  R.  C.  Browne,  M.A.

Lycidas,  $d.       L' Allegro,  3d.        II  Penseroso,  40?.       Comus,  6d.
Samson  Agonistes,  6d.

Pamell.      The  Hermit.     2d.

Scott.     Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.     Introduction

and  Canto  I,  with  Preface  and  Notes  by  W.  Minto,  M.A.     6c?.

A  SERIES  OF  ENGLISH  CLASSICS,

Designed  to  meet  the  wants  of  Students  in  English  Litera-
ture, by  the  late  Rev.  J.  S.  BREWER,  M.A.,  of  Queen's  College,
Oxford,  and  Professor  of  English  Literature  at  King's  College,
London.

i.   Chaucer.      The  Prologtie  to  the   Canterbury

Tales  ;  The  Knightes  Tale  ;  The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale.  Edited  by
R.  Morris,  Editor  of  Specimens  of  Early  English,  &c,  &c.  Sixth
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.     (See  also  p.  17.)

2.  Spenser 's  Faery   Queene.     Books   I    and    II.

Designed  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introduction,  Notes,
and  Glossary.     By  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.

Book  I.     Eighth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Book  II.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

3.  Hooker.   Ecclesiastical  Polity ,  Book  L .    Edited

by  R.  W.  Church,  M.A.,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's  ;  formerly  Fellow  of
Oriel  College,  Oxford.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.

4.  Shakespeare.     Select  Plays.     Edited  by  W.

G.  Clark,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge ;  and  W.
Aldis  Wright,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Extra  fcap.
8vo.  stiff  covers.

I.  The  Merchant  of  Venice,     is.
II.  Richard  the  Second,     is.  6d.
III.  Macbeth,     is.  6d.     (For  other  Plays,  see  p.  18.)
C  2


2o  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


5.  Bacon.

I.  Advancement  of  Learning.     Edited   by  W.  Aldis  Wright,
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.
II.  The   Essays.       With   Introduction   and   Notes.      By  J.  R.
Thursfield,   MA.,   Fellow   and  formerly   Tutor   of  Jesus
College,  Oxford.

6.  Milton.     Poems.     Edited  by  R.  C.  Browne,

M.A.     2  vols.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d.
Sold  separately,  Vol.  I.  4s. ;  Vol.  II.  3s.     (See  also  p.  19.)

7.  Dryden.      Select   Poems.      Stanzas    on    the

Death  of  Oliver  Cromwell ;  Astrgea  Redux  ;  Annus  Mirabilis ;
Absalom  and  Achitophel ;  Religio  Laici;  The  Hind  and  the
Panther.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Christie,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Extra
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

8.  Bunyan.       The  Pilgrims   Progress,    Grace

Abounding,  Relation  of  the  Imprisonment  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan.
Edited,  with  Biographical  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.  Venables,
M.A.      1879.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.

9.  Pope.     With  Introduction    and   Notes.     By

Mark  Pattison,  B.D.,  Rector  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford.

I.  Essay  on  Man.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     is.  6d.
II.  Satires  and  Epistles.    Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.

10.  ^0  Anson.      Passe  las ;    Lives   of  Pope   and

Dryden.  Edited  by  Alfred  Milnes,  B.A.  (London),  late  Scholar  of
Lincoln  College,  Oxford.     Extra  fcap.   8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

11.  Burke.  Select  Works.  Edited,  with  In-
troduction and  Notes,  by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,
Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.

I.   Thoughts  on  the  Present  Discontents ;  the  two  Speeches  on
America.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.   8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.
II.  Reflections    on    the    French   Revolution.     Second   Edition.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.     (See  also  p.  18.)

12.  Cowper.     Edited,  with  Life,   Introductions,

and  Notes,  by  H.  T.  Griffith,  B.A.,  formerly  Scholar  of  Pembroke
College,  Oxford.

I.  The  Didactic  Poems  of  178?,  with  Selections  from  the  Minor
Pieces,  a.d.  i  779-1 783.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.
II.  The  Task,  with  Tirocinium,  and  Selections  from  the  Minor
Poems,  a.d.  1 784-1 799.     Extra  fcap.   8vo.  cloth,  3s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  21


II.    LATIN.

An  Elementary  Latin  Grammar.     By  John  B.

Allen,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Perse  Grammar  School,  Cambridge.
Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

A  First  Latin  Exercise  Book.     By  the    same

Author.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

A  Second  Latin  Exercise  Book.     By  the  same

Author.     Preparing.

Anglice  Reddenda,  or  Easy  Extracts,  Latin  and

Greek,  for  Unseen  Translation.  By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.  Second
Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin.     For  the

use  of  Passmen  and  others.  Selected  by  J.  Y.  Sargent,  M.A.,
Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Fifth  Edition.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

First  Latin  Reader.      By  T.  J.   Nunns,  M.A.

Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.

Second  L atin  Reader.     I  n  Preparation.
Caesar.    The  Commentaries  (for  Schools).    With

Notes  and  Maps.     By  Charles  E.  Moberly,  M.A.

Part  I.    The    Gallic    War.      Third   Edition.      Extra   fcap.  8vo.

cloth,  4s.  6d.
Part  II.   The  Civil  War.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6 d.
The  Civil  War.     Book  I.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.

Cicero.  Selection  of  interesting  and  descrip-
tive passages.  With  Notes.  By  Henry  Walford,  M.A.  In  three
Parts.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.  Each
Part  separately,  limp,  is.  6c?.

Part  I.       Anecdotes  from  Grecian  and  Roman  History.

Part  II.     Omens  and  Dreams :  Beauties  of  Nature.

Part  III.  Rome's  Rule  of  her  Provinces.

Cicero.     Selected  Letters   (for    Schools).     With

Notes.  .By  the  late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth.  3s.


22  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Cicero.     Select    Orations  (for  Schools).      With

Notes.     By  J.  R.  King,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Cornelius   Nepos.      With    Notes.       By    Oscar

Browning,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Livy.     Selections   (for  Schools).      With   Notes

and  Maps.  By  H.  Lee-Warner,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  In  Parts,
limp,  each  is.  6d.

Part  I.      The  Caudine  Disaster.

Part  II.    Hannibal's  Campaign  in  Italy.

Part  III.  The  Macedonian  War.

Livy.     Books  V-VII.     With  Introduction  and

Notes.     By  A.  R.  Cluer,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Ovid.     Selections  for  the  use  of  Schools.   With

Introductions  and  Notes,  and  an  Appendix  on  the  Roman  Calendar.
By  W.  Ramsay,  M.A.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A,,  Professor
of  Humanity,  Glasgow.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
5s.  6d.

Pliny.     Selected  Letters   (for    Schools).     With

Notes.  By  the  late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.


Catulli  Veronensis  Liber.     Iterum  recognovit,

apparatum  criticum   prolegomena   appendices   addidit,   Robinson
Ellis,  A.M.     1878.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s.

A    Commentary   on    Catulhts.       By    Robinson

Ellis,  M.A.     1876.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s.

Catulli  Veronensis  Carmina  Selecta,  secundum

recognitionem  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Cicero    de    Oratore.     With     Introduction    and

Notes,  by  A.  S.  Wilkins,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin,  Owens  College,
Manchester.

Book  I.  1879.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.         Book  II.  1881.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  23

Cicero  s  Philippic  Orations.     With  Notes.     By

J.  R.  King,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1879.     8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

Cicero.  Select  Letters.  With  English  Intro-
ductions, Notes,  and  Appendices.  By  Albert  Watson,  M.A.  Third
Edition.     1881.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  18s.

Cicero.     Select  Letters.     Text.     By   the    same

Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.

Cicero  pro   Cluentio.     With    Introduction    and

Notes.  By  W.  Ramsay,  MA.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Horace.      With    a    Commentary.      Volume    I.

The  Odes,  Carmen  Seculare,  and  Epodes.  By  Edward  C.  Wick-
ham,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Wellington  College.  Second  Edition.
1877.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  12s.

Horace.     A   reprint    of  the    above,   in    a    size

suitable  for  the  use  of  Schools.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d.


Livy,   Book   I.     With  Introduction,   Historical

Examination,  and  Notes.  By  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor
of  Modern  History,  Cambridge.  Third  Edition.  1881.  8vo.
cloth,  6s.

Ovid,      P.    Ovidii   Nasonis   Lbis.      Ex    No  vis

Codicibus  Edidit.  Scholia  Vetera  Commentarium  cum  Prolego-
menis  Appendice  Indice  addidit,  R.  Ellis,  A.M.  Demy  8vo.
cloth,  10s.  6c?.


Pershts.       The   Satires.      With    a    Translation

and  Commentary.      By  John  Conington,  M.A.      Edited  by  Henry
Nettleship,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1874.     8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.

Virgil.    With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  T.  L.

Papillon,    M  A.,   Fellow   of  New    College,    Oxford.      Two    vols,
crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.


24  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Selections  from  the  less  known  Latin  Poets.     By

North  Pinder,  M.A.     1869.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  15s.

Fragments    and    Specimens    of   Early    Latin.

With  Introductions  and  Notes.  1874.  By  John  Wordsworth,  M.A.
8vo.  cloth,  1 8s.

Tacitus.       The   Annals.      With     Essays    and

Notes.     Preparing.

Vergil:    Suggestions   Introductory  to   a  Study

of  the  Aeneid.     By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.     8vo.  sewed,  is.  6d.

Ancient  Lives  of  Vergil ;  with  an  Essay  on  the

Poems  of  Vergil,  in  connection  with  his  Life  and  Times.  By
H.  Nettleship,  M.A.     8vo.  sewed,  2s.

The  Roman  Satura :  its  original  form  in  con-
nection with  its  literary  development.  By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.
8vo.  sewed,  is.

A    Manual    of    Comparative    Philology.      By

T.  L.  Papillon,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  New  College.
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s.

The  Roman  Poets  of  the  Augtistan  Age.     By

William  Young  Sellar,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Humanity  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Edinburgh.     Virgil.     1877.     8 vo.  cloth,  14s.

The  Roman  Poets  of  the  Republic.    By  the  same

Author.  New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  1881.  8vo.  cloth,
14s.

III.    GREEK.

A   Greek  Primer,  for  the  use  of  beginners  in

that  Language.  By  the  Right  Rev.  Charles  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.
Bishop  of  St.  Andrews.  Sixth  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.

Graecae     Grammaticae    Rudimenta     in    usum

Scholarum.  Auctore  Carolo  Wordsworth,  D  C.L.  Twentieth
Edition   1882.     1 2mo.  cloth,  4s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  25


A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell

and  Scott's  4V0.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.  Nineteenth
Edition.  Carefully  Revised  throughout.  1880.  Square  i2mo.
cloth,  7s.  6d.

Greek    Verbs,   Irregular   and  Defective;   their

forms,  meaning,  and  quantity ;  embracing  all  the  Tenses  used  by
Greek  writers,  with  references  to  the  passages  in  which  they  are
found.  By  W.  Veitch.  Fourth  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.

The  Elements  of  Greek  A  ccentuation  (for  Schools) :

abridged  from  his  larger  work  by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.,  Waynflete
Professor  of  Moral  and  Metaphysical  Philosophy,  Oxford.  Extra
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.

A  Series  of  Graduated  Greek  Readers : —

First  Greek  Reader.    By  W.  G.  Rushbrooke,

M.L .,  formerly  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Second
Classical  Master  at  the  City  of  London  School.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  2s.  6d.

Second  Greek  Reader.      By  A.  M.  Bell,  M.A.

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s,  6d.

Third  Greek  Reader.     In  Preparation.
Fourth    Greek   Reader;    being   Specimens   of

Greek  Dialects.  With  Introductions  and  Notes.  By  W.  W.
Merry,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Lincoln  College.  Extra
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Fifth    Greek   Reader.      Part    I.      Selections

from  Greek  Epic  and  Dramatic  Poetry,  with  Introductions  and
Notes.     By  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.,   Fellow  of  Balliol  College.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.
Part  II.     By  the  same  Editor.     In  Preparation.

The  Golden  Treasury  of  Ancient  Greek  Poetry  ;

being  a  Collection  of  the  finest  passages  in  the  Greek  Classic  Poets,
with  Introductory  Notices  and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,
Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d.

A   Golden   Treasury  of  Greek  Prose,  being   a

collection  of  the  finest  passages  in  the  principal  Greek  Prose
Writers,  with  Introductory  Notices  and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,
M.A.,  and  J.  E.  L.  Shadwell,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.


26  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Aeschylus.      Prometheus   Bound  (for   Schools).

With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  A.  0.  Prickard,  M.A.,  Fellow  of
New  College.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  26,

Aeschylus.      Agamemnon.     With    Introduction

and  Notes  by  Arthur  Sidgwick,  M.A.,  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi
College,  Oxford;  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and
Assistant  Master  of  Rugby  School.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.

Aeschylus.    The  Choephoroe.    With  Introduction

and  Notes  by  the  same  Editor.     Preparing.

Aristophanes.     In    Single    Plays,    edited,   with

English  Notes,  Introductions,  &c,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.  Extra
fcap.  8vo.

The  Clouds,  2s.  The  Acharnians,  2s.

Other  Plays  will  follow.

Ai'rian.   Selections  (for  Schools).    With  Notes.

By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  Head  Master  of  Bedford  School.

Cedes.      Tabula.     With  Introduction  and  Notes

by  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Euripides.     Alcestis  (for   Schools).     By   C.  S.

Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.

Eitripides.     Helena.     Edited  with  Introduction,

Notes,  and  Critical  Appendix,  for  Upper  and  Middle  Forms.  By
C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.

Herodotus.  Selections  from.  Edited,  with  In-
troduction, Notes,  and  a  Map,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  Fellow  and
Lecturer  of  Lincoln  College.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Homer.     Odyssey,  Books  I-XII  (for  Schools).

By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.  Twenty-fourth  Thousand.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  4s.  6d.

Book  II,  separately,  is.  6d.

Homer.      Odyssey,    Books    XIII-XXIV    (for

Schools).     By  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  27


Homer.      Iliad,    Book    I    (for    Schools).       By

D.  B.  Monro,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.

Homer.     Iliad,    Books   VI   and   XXI.     With

Introduction  and  Notes.  By  Herbert  Hailstone,  M.A.,  late  Scholar
of  St.  Peter's  College,  Cambridge.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.
each.

Lucian.       Vera   Hisloria    (for    Schools).       By

C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d.

Plato.     Selections  (for  Schools).     With   Notes.

By  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek;  and  J.  Purves,
M.A.,  Fellow  and  late  Lecturer  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.  In
the  Press.

1  Sophocles.  In  Single  Plays,  with  English  Notes,

&c.  By  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  Univer-
sity of  St.  Andrew's,  and  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.,  Balliol  College,
Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp.

Oedipus  Tyrannus.     New  and  Revised  Edition.     2s.

Oedipus  Coloneus,         Antigone,  is.  gd.  each.

Ajax,         Electra,         Trachiniae,         Philoctetes,  2s.  each.

Sophocles.     Oedipus  Rex:  Dindorf's  Text,  with

Notes  by  the  present  Bishop  of  St.  David's.  Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  limp,
is.  6d.

Theocritus   (for    Schools).      With    Notes.      By

H.  Kynaston,  M.A.  (late  Snow),  Head  Master  of  Cheltenham
College.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Xenophon.    Easy  Selections  (for  Junior  Classes).

With  a  Vocabulary,  Notes,  and  Map.  By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,
and  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
3s.  6d.

Xenophon.    Selections  (for  Schools).   With  Notes

and  Maps.  By  J.  S.  Phillpotts.  B  C.L.,  Head  Master  of  Bedford
School.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Xenophon.     Anabasis,  Book   II.     With    Notes

and  Map.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  MA.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.


28  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Aristotles  Politics.     By  W.  L.  Newman,  M.A.,

Fellow  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Aristotelian  Studies.     I.   On  the  Structure  of

the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.  By.  J.  C.  Wilson,
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.  1879.  Medium  8vo.
stiff,  5s.

Demosthenes  and  Aeschines.     The  Orations  of

Demosthenes  and  iEschines  on  the  Crown.  With  Introductory
Essays  and  Notes.  By  G.  A.  Simcox,  M.A.,  and  W.  H.  Simcox,
M.A.     1872.  8vo.  cloth,  12s.

Homer.     Odyssey,  Books  I-XII.     Edited  with

English  Notes,  Appendices,  etc.  By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  and  the
late  James  Riddell,  M.A.     1876.  Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s.

Homer.     Iliad.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.

By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A.,  Vice-Provost  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.
Preparing.

A  Grammar  of  the  Homeric  Dialect.     By  D.  B.

Monro,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College.  Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.
Just  Published.

Sophocles.     The  Plays  and  Fragments.     With

English  Notes  and  Introductions,  by  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  Pro-
fessor of  Greek,  St.  Andrews,  formerly  Fellow  of  Queen's  College,
Oxford.     2  vols.

Vol.  I.      Oedipus   Tyrannus.      Oedipus   Coloneus.      Antigone.
Second  Edition.     1879.  Svo.  cloth,  16s.

Vol.  II.  Ajax.    Electra.    Trachiniae.     Philoctetes.     Fragments
188 1.  Svo.  cloth,  1 6s.


Sophocles.     The  Text  of  the  Seven  Plays.     By

the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

A   Manual  of  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions.

By   E.  L.  Hicks,  M.A.,    formerly   Fellow   and   Tutor   of  Corpus
Christi  College,  Oxford.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s,  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  29


IV.    FRENCH.

An    Etymological    Dictionary   of   the    French

Language,  with  a  Preface  on  the  Principles  of  French  Etymology.
By  A.  Brachet.  Translated  into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.

Bracket's  Historical  Grammar  of  the  French

Language.  Translated  into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.
Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

A    Short  History  of  French  Literature.      By

George  Saintsbury,  M.A.    Crown  Svo.  cloth,  105.  6d.

Specimens  of  French  Liter  atiire,  from  Villon  to

Hugo.     Selected  and  arranged  by  the  same  Editor.     Preparing.

*A  Primer  of  French  Liter  attire.     By  the  same

Author.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.
French  Classics,  Edited  by  GTJSTAVE  MAS  SON,  B.A.

Cor nei lies   Cinna,  and  Molieres   Les   Femmes

Savantes.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
2  s.  6 d.

Racine s  Andromaque,  and  Corneilles  Le  Men-

teur.  With  Louis  Racine's  Life  of  his  Father.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.
cloth,  2s.  6d.

Molieres  Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin,  and  Ra-
cine's Athalie.  With  Voltaire's  Life  of  Moliere.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.
cloth,  2s.  6d.

Selections  from  the  Correspondence  of  Madame

de  Sevigne  and  her  chief  Contemporaries.  Intended  more  especially
for  Girls'  Schools.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.

Voyage  autour  de  ma  Chambre,  by  Xavier  de

Maistre;  Ourika,  by  Madame  de  Duras ;  La  Dot  de  Suzette,  by
.     Fievee;    Les  Jumeaux  de  l'Hotel  Corneille.  by  Edmond  About;
Mesaventures  d'un  Ecolier,  by  Rodolphe  Topffer.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.
cloth,  2s.  6d.

Regnard's  Le  Joueur  and  Brueys  and  Pala-

prat's  Le  Grondeur.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.


3o  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Louis  XIV  and  his  Contemporaries ;  as  de-
scribed in  Extracts  from  the  best  Memoirs  of  the  Seventeenth
Century.  With  English  Notes,  Genealogical  Tables,  &c.  Extra
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.


V.    GERMAN.

IiANGE'S  German  Course.     By  HERMAN N  LANGE,
Teacher  of  Modern  Languages,  Manchester :

The  Germans  at  Home  ;  a  Practical  Introduc-
tion to  German  Conversation,  with  an  Appendix  containing  the
Essentials  of  German  Grammar,  Second  Edition.  8vo.  cloth,
2  s.  6d.

The   German  Manual ;    a  German    Grammar,

a  Reading  Book,  and  a  Handbook  of  German  Conversation.     8vo.
cloth,  7s.  6d.

A   Grammar  of  the  German  Language.     8vo.

cloth,  3s.  6d.

This  •  Grammar »  is  a  reprint  of  the  Grammar  contained  in
«  The  German  Manual,'  and,  in  this  separate  form,  is  in-
tended for  the  use  of  Students  who  wish  to  make  them-
selves acquainted  with  German  Grammar  chiefly  for  the
purpose  of  being  able  to  read  German  books.

German   Composition;    Extracts   from   English

and   American  writers  for  Translation  into   German,  with  Hints
for  Translation  in  footnotes.     In  the  Press.


Lessings  Laokoon.  With  Introduction,  Eng-
lish Notes,  etc.  By  A.  Hamann,  Phil.  Doc  ,  MA.  Extra  fcap.
8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Wilhelm  Tell.  A  Drama.  By  Schiller.  Trans-
lated into  English  Verse  by  E.  Massie,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  5s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  31


Also,  Edited  by  C.  A.  BTJCHHEIM,  .Phil.  Doc,  Professor
in  King's  College,  London :

Goethe  s  Egmont.     With  a  Life  of  Goethe,  &c.

Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.

Schiller  s  Wilhelm  Tell.  With  a  Life  of  Schiller;

an  historical  and  critical  Introduction,  Arguments,  and  a  complete
Commentary.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Lessing  s  Minna  von  Barnhelm.     A  Comedy.

With  a  Life  of  Lessing,  Critical  Analysis,  Complete  Commentary,
&c.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

Schiller  s  Historische  Skizzen  ;    Egmonts  Leben

*    und  Tod,  and  Belagerung  von  Antwerpen.    Second  Edition.    Extra
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Goethe  s  Iphigenie  attf  Tauris.    A  Drama.  With

a  Critical  Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.

Modern  German  Reader.    A  Graduated  Collec-
tion of  Prose  Extracts  from  Modern  German  writers  : —
Part  I.     With  English  Notes,  a  Grammatical  Appendix,  and  a  com-
plete Vocabulary.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.
Parts  II  and  III  in  Preparation.

Lessing  s  JVathan  der   Weise.     With  Introduc-
tion, Notes,  etc.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.    Just  Published.

In  Preparation.

Becker  s  (K.  F.)  Friedrich  der  Grosse.

Schiller  s  Maria  Shear t.     With   Notes,   Intro-
duction, &c.

Schiller  s  Jungfran  von  Orleans.     With  Notes,

Introduction,  &c.

Selections    from    the    Poems    of    Schiller   and

Goethe.


32  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


VI.    MATHEMATICS,  &c.

Figures  Made  Easy:   a  first  Arithmetic  Book.

(Introductory  to  '  The  Scholar's  Arithmetic.')  By  Lewis  Hensley,
M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6d.

Answers  to  the  Examples  in  Figures  made  Easy,

together  with  two  thousand  additional  Examples  formed-  from  the
Tables  in  the  same,  with  Answers.  By  the  same  Author.  Crown
8vo.  cloth,  is.

The   Scholars   Arithmetic;   with    Answers   to

the  Examples.     By  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

The  Scholar  s  Algebra.     An  Introductory  work

on  Algebra.     By  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Book-keeping.    By  R.  G.  C.  Hamilton,  Financial

Assistant  Secretary  to  the  Board  of  Trade,  and  John  Ball  (of  the
Firm  of  Quilter,  Ball,  and  Co.),  Co-Examiners  in  Book-keeping
for  the  Society  of  Arts.  New  and  enlarged  Edition.  Extra  fcap.
8vo.  limp  cloth,  2s.

A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Pure  Geometry.     By

Henry  J.  Stephen  Smith,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi
College,  and  Savilian  Professor  of  Geometry  in  the  University  of
Oxford.

Acoustics.     By  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,   F.R.S.,

Savilian  Professor  of  Astronomy,  Oxford.  1870.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,
7s.  6d.

A  Treatise  on  Electricity  and  Magnetism.     By

J.  Clerk  Maxwell,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Experimental  Physics
in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Demy
8vo.  cloth,  1 1.  11s.  6d.

An   Elementary    Treatise   on  Electricity.      By

the  same  Author.  Edited  by  William  Garnett,  M.A.  Demy  8vo.
cloth,  7s.  6d.

A  Treatise  on  Statics.    By  G.  M.  Minchin,  M.  A.,

Professor  of  Applied  Mathematics  in  the  Indian  Engineering  College,
Cooper's  Hill.  Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  1879.
8vo.  cloth,  14s.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  33


A    Treatise  on    the  Kinetic    Theory  of    Gases.

By  Henry  William  Watson,   M.A.,   formerly  Fellow   of  Trinity
College,  Cambridge.     1876.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d.

A    Treatise  on  the  Application  of  Generalised

Coordinates  to  the  Kinetics  of  a  Material  System.     By   H.  W.
Watson,  M.A.,  and  S.  H.  Burbury,  M.A.     1879.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.

Geodesy.     By  Colonel  Alexander  Ross  Clarke,

C.B.,  R.E.     1880.  8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d.


VII.  PHYSICAL    SCIENCE.

A   Handbook   of  Descriptive  Astronomy,     By

G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.  Third  Edition.  1877.  Demy  8vo.
cloth,  28s.

A  Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects.  Observed,  Re-
duced, and  Discussed  by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth,  R.N.  Revised,
condensed,  and  greatly  enlarged  by  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.
1881.  8vo.  cloth,  21s.

Chemistry  for  Students,     By  A.  W.  Williamson,

Phil.  Doc,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistry,  University  College,
London.  A  new  Edition,  with  Solutions.  1873.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  8s.  6d.

A  Treatise  on  Heat,  with  numerous  Woodcuts

and  Diagrams.  By  Balfour  Stewart,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of
Natural  Philosophy  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  Fourth
Edition.  1881.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.

Lessons  on  Thermodynamics.     By  R.  E.  Baynes,

M.A.,  Senior  Student  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and  Lee's  Reader
in  Physics.     1878.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.

Forms   of  Animal  Life.      By   G.    Rolleston,

M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Linacre  Professor  of  Physiology,  Oxford.  Illustrated
by  Descriptions  and  Drawings  of  Dissections.  A  New  Edition  in
the  Press.

u


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


Exercises    in    Practical    Chemistry.      Vol.   I.

Elementary  Exercises.  By  A.  G.  Vernon  Harcourt,  M.A. ;  and
H.  G.  Madan,  M.A.  Third  Edition.  Revised  by  H.  G.  Madan,
M.A.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  9s.

Tables  of  Qualitative  Analysis.     Arranged  by

H.  G.  Madan,  M.A.     Large  4to.  paper  covers,  4s.  6d.

Crystallography .      By  M.   H.  N.  Story-Maske-

lyne,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Mineralogy,  Oxford ;  and  Deputy  Keeper
in  the  Department  of  Minerals,  British  Museum.     In  the  Press.


VIII.  HISTORY.

The  Constitictional  History  of  England,  in  its

Origin  and  Development.     By  William  Stubbs,  D.D.,  Regius  Pro-
fessor of  Modern  History.   Library  Edition.   Three  vols,  demy  8vo.
cloth,  2I.  8s.
Also  in  3  vols,  crown  8vo.  price  12s.  each.

Select  Charters  and  other  Illustrations  of  Eng-

lish  Constitutional  History,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Reign
of  Edward  I.  Arranged  and  Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.  Fourth
Edition.     1881.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d.

A  History  of  England,  principally  in  the  Seven-
teenth Century.  By  Leopold  Von  Ranke.  Translated  by  Resident
Members  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  under  the  superintendence
of  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.,  and  C.  W.  Boase,  M.A.  1875.  6  vols.
8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s.

A  Short  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of

England.    By  E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Genealogical  Tables  illustrative  of  Modern  His-
tory. By  H.  B.  George,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Small  4to.
cloth,  12s.

A  History  of  France.     With  numerous  Maps,

Plans,  and  Tables.  By  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.  In  Three  Volumes.
1 8 73-77.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  each  10s.  6d.

Vol.  1.  Second  Edition.     Down  to  the  Year  1453.
Vol.  2.  From  1453-1624.
Vol.  3.  From  1624-1793.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


35


A   History  of  Germany  and  of  the   Empire^

down  to  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages.  By  J.  Bryce,  D.C.L.,
Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Law  in  the  University  of  Oxford.

A  History  of  British  India.     By  S.  J.  Owen,

M.A.,  Reader  in  Indian  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford.

A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and

other  Papers  of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G.,  during  his
Government  of  India.  Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.,  formerly
Professor  of  History  in  the  Elphinstone  College,  Bombay.  1877.
8vo.  cloth,  1/.  4s.

A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and

other  Papers  relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal  the  Duke  of
Wellington,  K.G.     By  the  same  Editor.     1880.  8vo.  cloth,  24s.

A  History  of  the   United  States  of  America.

By  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of  University
College,  Oxford.     In  the  Press.

A  History  of  Greece  from  its  Conquest  by  the

Romans  to  the  present  time,  b.c.  146  to  a.d.  1864.  By  George
Finlay,  LL.D.  A  new  Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in  part
re-written,  with  considerable  additions,  by  the  Author,  and  Edited
by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.,  Tutor  and  late  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,
Oxford.     1877.     7  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  3Z.  10s.

A   Manual  of  Ancient  History.     By  George

Rawlinson,  M.A.,  Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  formerly
Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  Demy  8vo.
cloth,  14s.

A  History  of  Greece.    By  E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A.,

formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Italy  and  her  Invaders,  a.d.  376-476.     By  T.

Hodgkin,  Fellow  of  University  College,  London.  Illustrated  with
Plates  and  Maps.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  12s.


IX.  LAW.

The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence.     By  Thomas

Erskine  Holland,  D.C.L.,  Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law
and  Diplomacy,  and  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford.  Second
Edition.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d.


36  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  edited  as  a  recen-
sion of  the  Institutes  of  Gaius.  By  the  same  Editor.  Second
Edition,  1881.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.

Gaii  Institutionum  Juris  Civilis  Commentarii

Quatuor ;  or,  Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius.  With  a  Trans-
lation and  Commentary  by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,
and  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  1875.  8vo.
cloth,  1 8s.

Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Jtistinian.     By

T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.,  Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law
and  Diplomacy,  and  Fellow  of  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford,  and
C.  L.  Shadwell,  B.C.L.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.  8vo.
cloth,  14s.

Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers,  as  follows  : —
Part  I.      Introductory  Titles.     2s.  6d.
Part  II.    Family  Law.     is.
Part  III.  Property  Law.     2s.  6c?.
Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  1).     3s.  6d.
Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  2).     4s.  6d.

An  Introduction   to   the  Principles  of  Morals

and  Legislation.     By  Jeremy  Bentham.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d.

Elements  of  Law  considered  with  reference  to

Principles  of  General  Jurisprudence.  By  William  Markby,  M.A.,
Judge  of  the  High  Court  of  Judicature,  Calcutta.  Second  Edition,
with  Supplement.  1874.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.  Supplement
separately,  2  s.

Alberici  Gentilis,  LCD.,  I.C.   Professoris    Re-

gii,  De  lure  Belli  Libri  Tres.  Edidit  Thomas  Erskine  Holland
I.C.D.,  Iuris  Gentium  Professor  Chicheleianus,  Coll.  Omn.  Anim.
Socius.  necnon  in  Univ.  Perusin.  Iuris  Professor  Honorarius.  1877.
Small  4to.  half  morocco,  21s.

International  Law.     By  William  Edward  Hall,

M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  21s.

An  Introduction  to  the  History  of  the  Law  of

Real  Property,  with  original  Authorities.  By  Kenelm  E.  Digby,
M.A.,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law.  Second  Edition.  1876.
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  37


Principles   of  the   English   Law   of  Contract,

and  of  Agency  in  its  Relation  to  Contract.  By  Sir  William  R.
Anson,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  Warden  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford
Second  Edition.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d.    Just  Published.


X.     MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY.

Bacon.  Novum  Organum.  Edited,  with  In-
troduction, Notes,  &c,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in
the  University  of  Oxford.     1878.     8vo.  cloth,  14s.

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.     Edited,

with  Introduction,  Notes,  &c,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  as.

Selections  from  Berkeley,  with  an  Introduction

and  Notes.  For  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By
Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.
cloth,  7s.  6 d.     (See  also  p.  13.)

The   Elements   of  Deductive    Logic,    designed

mainly  for  the  use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  T.
Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.
Seventh  Edition,  with  a  Collection  of  Examples.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  3s.  6d.

The    Elements    of   Lnductive   Logic,    designed

mainly  for  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  the  same
Author.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.

A  Manual  of  Political  Economy,  for  the  use

of  Schools.  By  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogersf  M.A.,  formerly  Professor
of  Political  Economy,  Oxford.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  4s.  6d.

XI.     ART,  &e.
A  Handbook  of  Pictorial  Art.     By  R.  St.  J.

Tyrwhitt,  M.A.,  formerly  Student  and  Tutor  of  Christ  Church,
Oxford.     With  coloured  Illustrations,  Photographs,  and  a  chapter
on  Perspective  by  A.  Macdonald.     Second  Edition.     1875.     8vo.
-     half  morocco,  18s.

A  Music  Primer  for  Schools.    By  J.  Troutbeck,

M.A.,  Music  Master  in  Westminster  School,  and  R.  F.  Dale,  M.A.,
B.  Mus.,  Assistant  Master  in  Westminster  School.  Crown  8vo.
cloth,  is.  6d.


38  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.


A    Treatise  on  Harmony.     By  Sir  F.  A.  Gore

Ouseley,  Bart.,  Professor  of  Music  in  the  University  of  Oxford.
Second  Edition.     4to.  cloth,  ios.

A  Treatise  on  Counterpoint,  Canon,  and  Fugue,

based  upon   that   of  Cherubim.     By  the   same  Author.     Second
Edition.    4*0.  cloth,  16s.

A    Treatise  on   Musical  Form    and   General

Composition.     By  the  same  Author.     4to.  cloth,  ios.

The   Cultivation   of  the   Speaking    Voice.     By

John  Hullah.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.


XII.     MISCELLANEOUS.

The     Construction     of     Healthy     Dwellings;

namely  Houses,  Hospitals,  Barracks,  Asylums,  &c.  By  Douglas
Galton,  late  Royal  Engineers,  C.B.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  Demy  8vo.
cloth,  ios.  6d.

A   Treatise  on  Rivers  and  Canals,  relating  to

the  Control  and  Improvement  of  Rivers,  and  the  Design,  Construc-
tion, and  Development  of  Canals.  By  Leveson  Francis  Vernon-
Harcourt,  M.A.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford,  Member  of  the  Institution
of  Civil  Engineers.  2  vols.  (Vol.  I,  Text.  Vol.  II,  Plates.)  8vo.
cloth,  2  is.

A  System  of  Physical  Education :  Theoretical

and  Practical.  By  Archibald  Maclaren.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,
7s.  6d.

Specimens  of  Lowland  Scotch    and  Northern

English.     By  Dr.  J.  A.  H.  Murray.     Preparing.

English  Plant  Names  from  the  Tenth  to  the

Fifteenth  Century.     By  J.  Earle,  M.A.     Small  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.

An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with  Notes,  Gram-
mar, and  Glossary  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson  and  F.  York
Powell,  M.A.     1879.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d.


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  39


Dante.      Selections   from    the    Inferno.      With

Introduction  and  Notes.  By  H.  B.  Cotterill,  B.A.  Extra  fcap.
8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.

Tasso.      La    Gerusalemme    Liber  at  a.      Cantos

i,  ii.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor.  Extra
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6a?.

The   Modem    Greek  Langtiage  in   its    relation

to  Ancient  Greek.  By  E.  M.  Geldart,  B.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  4s.  6c?.

Outlines  of  Textual  Criticis7n  applied  to   the

New  Testament.  By  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor
of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.
cloth,  3s.  6d.

A  Handbook  of  Phonetics,  including  a  Popular

Exposition  of  the  Principles  of  Spelling  Reform.  By  Henry  Sweet,
M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.


LONDON:   HENRY  FROWDE,

Oxford    University    Press  Warehouse,    7  Paternoster    Row,

OXFORD:   CLARENDON  PRESS  DEPOSITORY,

116  High  Street.

-  The  Delegates  of  the  Press  invite  suggestions  and  advice  from
all  persons  interested  in  education;  and  will  be  thankful  for  hints,  &c.
addressed  to  the  Secretary  to  the  Delegates,  Clarendon  Press,
Oxford.


B9315
S23
1879
pt.2


Buhler,   Oeorg
A     The  sacred  laws  of  the
Aryas  as  taipht  in  the
schools  of  Apastamba


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
