Buddhist Suttas: Mahaparinibbana, Dhamma-Kakka, etc.
T. W. Rhys Davids, trans. (1881)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/sacredbooksoftheeastvol11_202002
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

By VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY

F- MAX MULLER


L-i


VOL. U


I Itiimi itM.,


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

editor: F. Max Muller

These volumes of the Sacred Books of the East Series
include translations of all the most important works of the
seven non-Christian religions. These have exercised a pro¬
found influence on the civilizations of the continent of
Asia. The Vedic Brahmanic System claims 21 volumes.
Buddhism 10, and Jainism 2; 8 volumes comprise Sacred
Books of the Parsees; 2 volumes represent Islam; and 6 the
two main indigenous systems of China, thus placing the
historical and comparative study of religions on a solid
foundation.

[ISBN: 81-208-0101-6] 50 Vols. Rs. 80 (per volume) Rs. 4000 (for set)

VOLUMES

1, 15. THETJPANISAI>S:in2Vols.i^. iwfajc

2, 14. THE SACRED LAWS OF THE ARY AS:

in 2 Vols. Georg Buhler

3, 16, 27, 28, 39. 40. THE SACRED BOOKS OF CHINA:

in 6 Vols. James Legge

4, 23, 31. THE ZEND-AVESTA: in 3 Vols. James Darmesteter

& Z.. U. AJills

5, 18, 24, 37, 47. PAHALVI TEXTS: in 5 Vols. E. TV. JVest

6, 9. THE QUR’AN: in 2 Vols. E. H. Palmer

7, THE INSTITUTES OF VISNU: J. Jolly

8, THE BHAGAVADGItA with the f anatsujatiya and the

Anugita: K.. T. Telang

10. THE DHAMMAPADA: F. Max Muller
SUTTA-NIPATA: V. Fausholl

11. BUDDHIST SUTTAS: T. TV. Bhys Davids

12, 26, 41, 43, 44. THE SATAPATHA-BRAHMAN A : in 5 Vols.

J. Eggeling

13, 17, 20. VINAYA TEXTS: in 3 Vols. T. TV. Rhys Davids

m

19.

21.

22, 45.

25.

29, 30.

32, 46.

33,

34, 38.

35, 36.

42.

48.

49.

50.


& H. Oldenberg

THE FO-SHO-HING-TSAN-KING: Samuel Beal

THE SADDHARMA-PUNDARIKA or THE LOTUS
OF THE TRUE LAWS: H. Kern
JAINA SUTRAS: in 2 Vols. Hermann Jacobi
MANU : Georg Buhler
THE GRIHYA-SUTRAS: in 2 Vols.

H. Oldenberg &. F. Max Muller

VEDIC HYMNS: in 2 Vols. F. Max Muller

<& H. Oldenberg

THE MINOR LAW-BOOKS: J. Jolly

THE VEDANTA SUTRAS: in 2 Vols. with ^ankara-

carya’s Comm.: G. Thibaut

THE QUESTIONS OF KING MILINDA: in 2 Vols.:
T. TV. Rhys Davids

HYM^NS of the ATHARVA-VEDA: AT. Bloomfield

THE VEDANTA-SCfTRAS with Ramanuja’s Sribhasya:
G. Thibaut

BUDDHIST MAHAyANA TEXTS:

E. B. Cowell, F. Max Muller J, Takakusu
INDEX : M. TVinternitz


BUDDHIST-SUTTAS


TRANSLATED FROM PALI
BY

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS


1% THE MAHA-PARINIBBANA SUTTANfTA

2. THE DHAMMA-jSTAKKA-PPAVATTANA SUTTA

3. THE TEVIOGA SUTTANTA

4. THE AKAI^KHEYYA SUTTA
5- THE i^TETOKHILA §UTTA

6. THE MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTANTA

7. THE SABBASAVA SUTTA


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Delhi Varanasi Patna
Bangalore Afadras


First Published by the Oxford University Press, 1881
Reprinted by Motilal Banarsidass, 1965, 1968, 1973, 1980, 1989

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007

Branches

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
24 Race Course Road, Bangalore 560 001
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004

O 1989 by Motilal Banarsidass. All Rights Reserved.
ISBN : 81-208-0112-1


- UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS — Indian Series.
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series
of the Unesco Collection of Representative Works
jointly sponsored by the United Nations Educa¬
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization
{UNESCO'l and the Government of India.


Printed in India

BV JAINBNDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 ANP PUBLISHED BY
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI 110 007.


Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New Delhi-4
June 10, 1962


I am very glad to know that the Sacred Books
of the East published years ago by the Clarendon
Press, Oxford, which have been out-of-print for a
number of years, will now be available to all
students of religion and philosophy. The enterprise
of the publishers is commendable and I hope the
books will be widely read.


S. Radhakrishnan


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE NEW EDITION


Since 1948 the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), upon the recom¬
mendation of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
has been concerned with facilitating, the translation of the works
most representative of the culture of certain of its Member
States, and, in particular, those of Asia.

One of the major difficulties confronting this programme
is the lack of translators having both the qualifications and
the time to undertake translations of the many outstanding
books meriting publication. To help overcome this difficulty in
part, UNESCO’s advisers in this field ( a panel of experts conve¬
ned every other year by the International Council for Philo¬
sophy and Humanisitic Studies), have recommended that many
worthwhile translations published during the 1 9th century, and
now impossible to find except in a limited number of libraries,
should be brought back into print in low-priced editions, for
the use of students and of the general public. The experts also
pointed out that in certain cases, even though there might be
in existence more recent and more accurate translations endo¬
wed with a more modern apparatus of scholarship, a number
of pioneer works of the greatest value and interest to students of
Eastern religions also merited republication.

This point of view was warmly endorsed by the Indian
National Academy of Letters (Sahitya Akademi) , and the
Indian National Commission for UNESCO.

It is in the spirit of these recommendations that this
woi'k from the famous series ‘‘Sacred Books of the East” is
now once again being made available to the general public
as part of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works.


PUBLISHER’S NOTE

First, the man distinguished between eternal and perish¬
able. Later he discovered within himself the germ of the
Eternal. This discovery was an epoch in the history of the
human mind and the East was the first to discover it.

To watch in the Sacred Books of the East the dawn of
this religious consciousness of man, must always remain one
of the most inspiring and hallowing sights in the whole history
of the world. In order to have a solid foundation for a com¬
parative study of the Religions of the East, we must have before
all things, complete and thoroughly faithful translation of their
Sacred Books in which some of the ancient sayings were pre¬
served because they were so true and so striking that they
could not be forgotten. They contained eternal truths, ex¬
pressed for the first time in human language.

With profoundest reverence for Dr. S. Radhakrishnan,
President of India, who inspired us for the task; our deep
sense of gratitude for Dr. G. D. Deshmukh & Dr. D. S.
Kothari, for encouraging assistance; esteemed appreciation of
UNESCO for the warm endorsement of the cause; and finally
with indebtedness to Dr. H. Rau, Director, Max Muller
Bhawan, New Delhi, in procuring us the texts of the Series
for reprint, we humbly conclude.


CONTENTS.

PA.GE

General Introduction to the Buddhist Suttas . ix

1 . The Book of the Great Decease (Maha-parinibbana

SuTTANTa) ....... . XXIX

Introduction . . . . . . . . xxxi

Translation ........ i

2. The Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness


(DHAMMA-iTAKKA-PPAVATTANA SuTTa) . . 137

Introduction . . . • . • . • 139

Translation . . . • . • • .146

3. On Knowledge of the Vedas (Tevigga Suttanta) 157

Introduction . . . . . • • . 159

Translation . . . 167

(The Silas pp. 189-200)

4. If HE should desire (Akankheyya Sutta) . . 205

Introduction . . ' . . . • • • 207

Translation . . . . - - • • 210

5. Barrenness AND Bondage (Aetokhila Sutta) . 219

Introduction. - . - ... . 221

Iranslation ........ 223

6. Legend of the Great King of Glory (Maha-Sudas-

SANA Suttanta) . • ..... 235

Introduction . . .... . . 237

( Maha-Sudassana Gataka, pp. 238-241.)

Translation ........ 247

7. AlltheAsavas (Sabbasava Sutta) . . . 291

Introduction . . . . . • . . 293

Translation ........ 296

Index ......... 309


Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the
Translations of the Sacred Books of the East


317


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


TO THE

BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


On bein^ asked to contribute a volume of translations
from the ' P^li Suttas to the important series of which this
work forms a part, the contributor has to face the difficulty
of choosing from the stores of a nearly unknown literature—
a difficulty arising from the embarrassment, not of poverty,
but of wealth. I have endeavoured to make such a choice
as would enable me to bring together into one volume a
collection of texts which should be as complete a sample as
one volume could afford of what the Buddhist scriptures,
on the whole, contain. With this object in view I have re¬
frained frbm confining myself to the most interesting books
— those, namely, which deal with the Noble Eightfold Path,
the most essential, the most original, and the most attractive
part of Gotama’s teaching ; and I have chosen accordingly,
besides the Sutta of the Foundation of the Kingdom of
Righteousness (the Dh amma - ^akka - ppavattana-.
Sutta), which treats of the Noble Path, six others which
treat of other sides of the Budahist system ; less interesting
perhaps ir? their subject matter, but of no less historical
value.

These are —

I. The Book of the Great Decease (the Mahlt-
parinibbina - Suttanta), which is the Buddhist repre¬
sentative of what, among the Christians, is called a Gospel.

a. The Foundation of the Kingdom of Righte¬
ousness (the Dhamma - ^akka - ppavattana- Sutta),
containing the Four Noble Truths, and the Noble Eight¬
fold Path which ends in Arahatship.


X


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


3. The Discussion on Knowledge of the Three
Vodas (the Tevi^^a- Suttanta), which is a controversial
dialogue on. the right method of attaming to a state of
union with Brahm4.

4. The Sutta entitled ‘If he should desire — ^^’(Akah-
kheyya-Sutta), which shows in the course of a very
beautiful argument some curious sides of early Buddhist
mysticism and of curiously unjustified belief.

5. The Treatise on Barrenness and Bondage
(the iTetoknila-SuttaV which treats ot the Buddhist
Order of Mendicants, from the moral, as distinguished from
the disciplinary, point of view-

6. The Legend of the Great King of Glory (the
Mahd-sudassana-Suttanta), which is an example of
tne way in which previously existing legends were dealt
with by the early Buddhists.

7. The Sutta entitled ‘ All the Asavas’ (the Sabbd-
sava -Sutta), which explains the signification of a con¬
stantly recurring technical term, and lays down the essen¬
tial principles of Buddhist Agnosticism.

The Discipline of the B”-ddhist Mendicants, the Rules
of their Order — probably the most influential, as it is the
oldest, in the world — -wilt be fully described, down to its
minutest details, in the translation of the Vinaya Pi /aka,
which will appropriately form a subsequent part of this
Series of Translations 01 the Sacred Books of the East.
There was therefore no need to include any Sutta on this
subject in the present volume : but of the rest of the matters
discussed in the Buddhist Sacred Books — of Buddhist le¬
gend, gospel, controversial theology, and ethics — the works
selected will I trust give a correct and adequate, if necessa¬
rily a somewhat fragmentary, idea.

The age of these writings can be fixed, without much
uncertainty, at about the latter end of the fourth or the
beginning of the third century before the commencement
of the Christian era. This is the only hypothesis which
seems, at present, to account for the facts known about
them. It should not however be looked upon as anything


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XI


more than a good working hypothesis to be accepted until
all the texts of the Buddhist Plli Suttas shall have been
properly edited. For it depends only on the fact that one
of the texts now translated contains several statements,
and one very significant silence, which afford ground for
ch ronological argument. That argument amounts only to
probability, not to certainty ; and it might scarcely be worth
while to put it forward were it not that the course of the
enquiry will be found to raise several questions of very
considerable interest.

The significant silence to which I refer occurs in the
account of the death of Gotama at the end of the Mah^-
parinibbdna-Sutta and I cannot do better than quote
Dr. Oldenberg’s remarks upon it at p. xxvi of the able
Introduction to his edition of the text of the Mah^-vagga.

* The Tradition regarding the Councils takes up the
thread of the story where the accounts of the life and work
of Buddha, given in the Sutta Pi/aka, end. Alter the death
of the Master — so it is related in the u^ulla-vagga — Su-
bhadda, the last disciple converted by Buddha shortly
before his death proclaimed views which threatened the
dissolution of the communitv-

‘ “ Do not grieve, do not lament,'' he is said to have said
to the believers. “ It is well that we have been relieved of
the Great Master’s presence. We were oppressed by him
when he said, ‘ This is permittee to you, this is not per¬
mitted.’ In future we can do as we like, and not do as we
do not like.”

* In opposition to Subhadda, — the tradition goes on to
relate, — there came forward one of the most distinguished
and oldest of Buddha's disciples, the great Kassapa, who
proposed that five hundred of the most eminent members
of the community should assemble at RiS^agaha, the royal
residence of the ruler of Magadha, in order to collect the
Master’s precepts in an authentic form, Jt has already
been said above, how, during the seven months' sitting of

^ Translated below, pp. 112— x 35.

“ This is a mistake. The Subhadda referred to is quite a different person
from the last convert. See my note below, p. J 2 7.


Xll


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


the assembly, Kassapa as president fixed the Vinaya with
the assistance of Up41i, and the Dhamma with the assist¬
ance of Ananda.

‘ This is the story as it has come down to us. What we
have here before us is not history, but pure invention ; and,
moreover, an invention of no very recent date. Apart from
internal reasons that might be adduced to support this, we
are able to prove it by comparing another text which
is older than this story, and the author of which
cannot yet have known it. I allude to the highly
important Sutta, which gives an account of the death of
Buddha, and the Pdli text of which has recently been
printed by Professor Childers. This Sutta gives ^ the
story — in long passages word for word the same as in
the- ^ulla-vagga — of the irreverent conduct of Subhadda,
which Kassapa opposes by briefly pointing to the true con¬
solation that should support the disciples in their separation
from the Master. Theu follows the account of the burning
of Buddha’s corpse, of the distribution of his relics among
the various princes and cities, and of the festivals which
were instituted in honour of these relics. Kverything that
the legend of the First Council alleges as a motive for, and
as the background to, the story about Kassapa’s proposal
for holding the Council, is found here altogether, except
that there is no allusion to the proposal itself, or
to the Council. We hear of those speeches of Subhadda,
which, according to the later tradition, led Kassapa to make
his proposal, but we do not hear anything of the proposal
itself. We hear of the great assembly that meets for the
distribution of Buddha’s relics, in which — according to the
later tradition — Kassapa’s proposal was agreed to, but we
do not hear anything of these transactions. It may be
added that we hear in this same Sutta ^ of the precepts
which Buddha delivered to his followers shortly before his
death, concerning doubts and differences of opinion that
might arise, among the members of the community, with
regard to the Dhamma and the Vinaya, and with regard to


^ Pages 67, 68 in the edition of Childers.
^ Pages 39, 60, 61, ibid.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


xm


the treatment of such cases when he should no longer be
with them. If anywhere, we should certainly have ex¬
pected to find here some allusion to the great authentic
depositions of Dhamma and Vinaya after Buddha's death,
which, according to the general belief of Buddhists, esta¬
blished a firm standard according to which differences could
be judged and have been judged through many centuries.
There is not the slightest trace of any such allusion to the
Council. This silence is as valuable as the most direct
testimony. It shows that the author of the Mahd-
parinibb^lna-S utta did not know anything of the
First Council.’

The only objection which it seems to me possible to
raise against this argument is that the conclusion is worded
somewhat too absolutely ; and that it is rather a begging of
the question to state, in the very first words referring to the
Mahd-parinibbdna-Sutta, that it is older than the story in
the f’Tulla-vagga, and that its authoi could nor have known
that work. But no one will venture to dispute the accuracy
of Dr. Oldenberg's representation of the facts on which he
bases his conclusion ; and the conclusion that he draws is,
at least, the easiest and readiest way of explaining the very
real discrepancy that he has pointed out. We shall be
quite safe if we only say that we have certain facts which
lend strong probability to the hypothesis that the author
of the Mahd-parinibbdna-Sutta did not know that account
of the First Council which we find in the isTulla-vagga,

We do not know for certain the time at which that part
of the jSTuI 1 a- vagga, in which that account occurs, was com¬
posed. I think it quite possible that it was as late as the
Council of Patna (b. c. 250), though Dr. Oldenberg places
it somewhat earlier ^ But even if we put the conclusion of
the .^ulla-vagga as late as the year I have mentioned, it
is still in the highest degree improbable that the Mah4-
parinibb^na-Sutta, supposing it to be an older work, can
have been composed very much later than -^he fourth century
B. C. — a provisional date sufficient at present for practical
purposes.


XIV


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS-


This conclusion, however, is only almost, and not quite
certain- It is just possible that the author of the Book of
the Great Decease omitted all mention of the First Council
at Ra^agaha, not because he did not know of it, but because
he considered it unnecessary to mention an event which
nad no bearing on the subject of his work. He was de¬
scribing the death of the Buddha, and no^ the history of
the Canon or of the Order.

I must confess however that I only mention this as a
possibility from a desire rather to understate than to over¬
state my case. For, hrstly, it should be remembered that
the writer does not merely omit to mention an occurrence
subsequent to and unconnected with the Great Decease.
He does more: he gives an account of the Subhadda in¬
cident which is inconsistent and irreconcilable with the
legend or narrative of the R^^agaha Council as related in
the J'Tulla-vagga. Had that narrative, as we now have it,
been received in his time among the Brethren, he would
scarcely have done this.

And, secondly, he does not, after all, close his book, as he
might well have done, with the Great Decease itself. It
will be seen from the translation below ^ that there was a
point in his narrative, the exclamations of sorrow at the
death , of the Buddha, which would have formed, had he
desired to omit all unnecessary details, a very fitting con¬
clusion to his narrative. The Book of the Great King of
Glory, the Mah^-sudassana-Sutta, closes with the very ex¬
clamation our author puts, at this point, into the mouth of
Sakka. The Mahd-parinibbana was then over, and the
IVfaha-parinibbdna-Sutta might have then been closed.
But he goes on and describes in detail the cremation, the
distribution of the relics, and the feasts celebrated in their
honour. It is not necessary for my point to show that it
was in the least degree unnatural to do so. It is sufficient
to be able to point out that the author having done so, —
having gone on to the arrival of Kassapa, who . was after¬
wards (in the -ftTulla vagga) said to have held the Council ;
having mentioned the very incident which, according to the


‘ See below, Chap. VI, § 21.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XV


Other narrative, gave rise to the holding of the Council ;
and having referred to events which took place after the
Council, — it is scarcely a tenable argument to say that he,
knowing of it, did not refer, even incidentally and in half a
sentence, to so important an event, simply because it did not
come, necessarily, within the subject of his work. And when
we find that in other works on the death of the Buddha,
referred to below^, the account of the Council of Ra^agaha
has, in fact, been included in the story, it is difficult to
withhold our assent to the very great probability of the
hypothesis, that it would have been included also in the
Pdli Book of the Great Decease had the belief in the tradi¬
tion of the Council been commonly held at the time when
that book was put into its present shape. At tne same
time we must hold ourselves quite prepared to learn that
some other explanation may turn out to be possible. The
argument, if it applied to writers of the nineteenth centui-y,
would be conclusive. But we know too little about the
mode in which the P^li Pi^akas were composed to presume
at present to be quite certain.

The Mah^-parinibblna-Sutta was then probably com¬
posed before the account of the First Council of
gaha in the concluding part of the JSTulla-vagga. It was
also almost certainly composed after Pdj^aliputta, the
modern Patna, had become the capital city of the king¬
dom of Magadha ; after the worship of relics had become
common in the Buddhist church ; and after the rise of a
general belief in the TTakkavatti theory, in the ideal of a
sacred king, a supreme overlord in India.

The first of these last three arguments depends on the
prophecy placed in Gotama’s mouth as to the future great¬
ness of Pd/aliputta — a prophecy found in the Mahd-vagga
as well as in the Mahd-parinibbdna-Sutta. It is true that
the guess may actually have been made, and that it re¬
quired no great boldness to hazard a conjecture so vaguely
expressed. The words simply are —

‘And among famous places of residence and haunts of


^ See p. xxxviii.


XVI


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS*


busy men, this will become the chief, the city of Pd^aliputta,
a centre for interchange of all kinds of wares. But there
will happen three disasters to P4/aliputta, one of fire, and
one of water, and one of dissension

But it is, to say the least, improbable that the conjecture
would have been recorded Until after the event had proved
it to be accurate : and it would scarcely be too hazardous
to maintain that th4 tradition of the guess having been
made would not have arisen at all until after the event had.
occurred.

What was the event referred to may also be questioned,
as the words quoted do not, in terms, declare that the city
would become the actual capital. But we know, not only
from Buddhist, but from Greek historians, that it did, and
this is most probably the origin of the prophecy.

Now the M^lcLlahkdravatthu, a Pdli work of modern
date, but following very closely the more ancient books,
has been translated, through the Burmese, by Bishop
Bigandet ; and it says,

‘That monarch [Susundga], not unmindful of his motbePs
origin, re-established the city of Vesdli, and fixed in it the
royal residence. From that time R^^gaha lost her rank of
royal city, which she never afterwards recovered. He died
in 8 1* [that is, of the Buddhist era reckoned from the Great
Decease] .

Relying on similar authority Bishop Bigandet afterwards
himself says ;

King Kd/dsoka left Ra^agaha, and removed the seat of
his empire to Palibothra [the Greek name for Pd/aliputta],
near the place where the modern city of Patna stands

* See below. Chap. I, § 28. I have translated Pu/abhedanaw, *a centre
for the interchange of all kinds of wares,’ in accordance with the commentary,
which is clearly based on a derivation from pu^a, * a bag or bundle.’ But I see
that Trenckner in his PHli Miscellany renders nan^pu/ahhedanaz/s by * sur¬
rounded by a number of dependent towns.’

At the end the text has ‘ from fire or from water or from dissension on which
Buddhaghosa says that or stands here for and; and the comment is correct
enough, not of course philo''ogically, but exegetically. But in either case the
last clause is of very little imuortance for the present argument.

^ Bigandet’s * Legend of the Burmese Budha,’ third edition, vol. ii. pp. 115,
183. I have altered the spelling only of the proper names. *


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XVll


It would seem therefore that, according’ to the tradition
followed by this writer, Susunaga first removed the capital
to Vesdli, and his successor K^/dsoka who died, in the
opinion of the writer in question, in ii8 after the Great
Decease, finally fixed it at P4/alipatta.

If we therefore apply this date to the prophecy we must
come to the conclusion that the Book of the Great Decease
was put into its present form at least loo years after the
Buddha’s death, and probably a little more. But tlie
authority followed by Bishop Bigandet .is very late; and
no mention of these occurrences is found either in the
Dipava^sa or in the Mah4va7;>2sa. I think indeed that the
whole account of these two kings, as at present accepted
in Ceylon and Birma, is open to grave doubt ^ (in which
connection it should be noticed that the oldest account
of the Council of Ves41i, in the isTulla-vagga, Book XII,
makes no mention of K.^/4soka).

We have next to consider the reference to the relics in
the concluding sections of Chapter VI as a possible basis for
chronological argument. These sections are almost certainly
older than the time when especial sanctity w^as claimed for
Buddhist d:&gabas on the ground that they contained par¬
ticular relics of the Blessed One (such as a tooth, or the
bowl, or the neck bone) ; for if such special relics were
accepted as objects of worship when the Book of the Great
Decease was put together, they would naturally have been
mentioned in the course of Chapter VI.

It is even almost certain that when the sections were put
into their present form no Buddhist d4gaba was in exist¬
ence except at the eight places mentioned in them ; and
the words are quite consistent with the belief that those
eight had themselves then ceased to have any very wide¬
spread and acknowledged sanctity. So in Chapter V, § 13,
where four places are spoken of ‘ which the believing man
should visit with feelings of reverence and of awe,’ there is
no mention of d^gabas at all ; and in Chapter V, § 16, it is

^ See xny ‘ Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon,* p. 50.

[II] b


XVlll


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


clearly implied that only one d^gaba, or memorial burial
mound, should be erected in honotii* of a Tathdgata, just as
one memorial mound should be erected in honour of a king
of kings.

When we recollect that in the first and second, and
perhaps in the third century before Christ, ddgabas had
already been erected in honour of the Buddha in distant
parts of the continent of India, and had rapidly become
famous as places of pilgrimage, the reasonable conclusion
to be drawn from these passages is that the Book of the
Great Decease is older than them all; or, at the least, that
it was written before any of them had become famous.

On the other hand, there is evidently an exaggerated
belief as to the respect in which the Buddha was held by
his contemporaries underlying the concluding and other
sections of the hook. It is probable enough that Gotama
was held in deep respect by the simple people among
whom he lived and moved about as a religious teacher and
reformer. It may well be that the inhabitants of the village
where he died gave him a sort of public funerai. But that
the neighbouring clans should have vied one with the other
for the possession of his remains is quite inconsistent with
the position that he can reasonably be supposed to have
held among them. It must have taken some time for this
belief to spring up, and be received without question.

In a similar way a considerable interval must have elapsed
before the beautiful parable in the last section of Chapter I
could have given 4*186 to ‘the belief in the miracle (the soli¬
tary miracle ascribed to the Buddha, so far as I know, in
the Sutta Pi /aka) recorded in the previous section.

So also the comparison drawn between the Buddha and
a ^akkavatti or King of Kings in Chapter V, § 37,

and Chapter VI, § 33, can scarcely have arisen till the rise
of a lord paramount in the valley of the Ganges had fami¬
liarised the people with the idea of a Universal Monarch,
Now it was either ’ ust before or just after the well-known
Councils at Ves41i, of which mention has been made above,
that that important revolution took place which raised a


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XIX


low-caste adventurer to be the first -^akkavatti To

the people of that time JsTandragupta seemed to be lord,
of the world, for to them India was the world — just as
European writers even now talk complacently of * the world ’
while ignoring" three-fourths of the human race.

‘ Is it surprising,’ as I have asked elsewhere, ‘ that this
unity of power in one man made a deep impression upon
them ? Is it surprising that, like Romans worshipping
Augustus, or like Greeks adding the glow of the sun-myth
to the glory of Alexander, the Indians should have formed
an ideal of their .isTakkavatti, and have transferred to this
new ideal many of the dimly sacred and half-understood
traits of the Vedic heroes ? Is it surprising that the Bud¬
dhists should have found it edifying to recognise in their
hero “ the A'akkavatti of Righteousness ; ” and that the
story of the Buddha should have become tinged with the
colouring of these A^akkavatti myths ? ’

In point of fact we know that in later works the attraction
of this poetic ideal led to the almost complete disregard of
the simpler narrative which seemed so poor and meagre in
comparison ; and M. Senart has shown how large a pro¬
portion of the later poem called the Lalita V'istara is inspired
by it. When, in isolated passages of the Book of the Great
Decease, we find the earliest germs of this fruitful train of
thought, we are I think safe in concluding that it assumed
its present form after the notorious career of ATandragupta
had made him supreme in the valley of the Ganges.

All the above arguments tend in one direction ; namely,
that the final redaction of the Book of the Great Decease
must be as.signed to the latter part of the fourth century
before Christ, or to the earlier part of the following century.
And so much alike are it and all the other Suttas translated
in this volume in their form, in their views of life, and in

^ I have ventured in my * Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon,’ p. 51, to
point out that the Councils of Vesali were very X'«ssibly held just at the time
when Nanda was defeated by .Almdragupta. Taranatha, the Tibetan histo¬
rian, while i-dacing the Councils, like all the later autho ities, under an As ok a
(probably ATandragupta), says (p. 41 of Wassiliers German translation) that the
assembled brethren were fed by Nanda.

b 2


XX


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


the religious doctrines they lay down, that, though it may
be possible hereafter to show thai, some are a little older
or a little younger than the others, every one will I think
admit that they must all be assigned to about the same
period of time. There is not the least reason to believe
that either of them is older than the Book of the Great
Decease ; and the argument has only been confined to it
because it alone deals with the kind of subject which can
give foundation to chronological conclusions. When the
whole of the literature of the P^li Piifakas has been fully
explored, we may perhaps be able to reach a more definite
conclusion.

W'e are in absolute ignorance as to the actual author
of any of the texts I have translated. It is quite evident
that they are not the work of Gotama himself ; and it is
difficult to believe that even his immediate disciples could
have spoken of him in the exaggerated terms in which
occasionally he is here described. On the other hand, the
history of similar religious movements teaohes us how
quickly such notions spring up concerning the omniscience
and sinlessness of the founder of the movement ; and it
would be better to reserve our judgment as to the impos¬
sibility, on this account alone, of Ihose Suttas having been
composed even by the very earliest disciples.

It would be of less importance who composed the Suttas
if we could be sure that they gave an accurate account of
the teachings of the great thinker and reformer whose words
they purport to preserve. But though, like ill other writings
of a similar character, they are doubtless based upon tradi¬
tions older than the time of their authors or final redactors,
they cannot unfortunately be depended upon as entirely
authentic. And it will be always difficult, even when the
whole of the Suttas have been published, to attempjt to
discriminate between the original doctrine of Gotama, and
the later accretion"^* to, or modifications of it.

But we can already make some steps towards such a
discrimination, without much fear of being contradicted.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION. xxi


There can be little doubt but that the doctrines of the
Four Noble Truths and of the Noble Eightfold Path, the
‘ Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness/ were not
only the teaching of Gotama himself but were the central
and most essential part of it. I am aware that no method
can be more misleading, or more uncritical, than first to
form a theory regarding the personal character of the author
of a new religious movement — as some later critics of the
Gospel History have done — and then to adopt those pas¬
sages in the sacred books which fit in with that character,
and to reject those which oppose it. We cannot begin by
postulating that Gotama was a man of high moral earnest¬
ness, and of great intellectual acuteness ; and then disregard
all the passages in which erroneous, and even puerile, opinions
or sayings are placed in his mouth. But it does not follow
that we are obliged either altogether to reject the evidence
of the Buddhist Scriptures as to what Gotama did actually
teach, or altogether to accept it.

It will be acknowledged that the Suttas have preserved
for ns at least the belief of the earliest Buddhists — the
Buddhists in India — as to what the original doctrines,
taught by the Buddha himself, had been. We have in the
Vinaya Pi/aka an invaluable and indisputable record of
the mental characteristics and capabilities of these earliest
followers of the Buddhist faith. Sanskrit scholars are
engaged in elucidating the history of the beliefs in which
Gotama was brought up, and which though often modified
and frequently denied, still underlie, throughout, all that he
is represented to have taught. We have therefore reliable
evidence of the system out of which, and we know the
system into which, Gotama s teaching was developed. This
being so, it will be impossible to refrain, in despair, from the
attempt to solve one of the most interesting problems which
the history of the Aryan race presents to us. Scholars
will never be unanimously agreed on all points ; but they
will agree in ascribing some parts of the early Buddhist
Hharma or doctrine only to ‘the early disciples ; and after
allowing for all reasonable doubts, they will agree in ascribing
other parts to the great Teacher himself, t venture to think


XXll


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


that not only the Four Noble Truths, but the whole of the
Seven Jewels of the Law, may already be placed, with
certainty, in the latter category^.


The form, in which these Suttas have been preserved,
deserves careful attention. Every reader will be struck at
once with the constant repetitions. These repetitions are
not essential, and are merely designed to facilitate the
learning of the Suttas by heart. Writing was unknown in
the age of the Buddha, and probably for long after his
time. In all probability indeed, just as the Indians
learnt from the Greeks, not the art of coinage, but the
custom of issuing a legally authorised coinage ^ ; so it was
from tne Greeks that they acquired, if not their earliest
alphabet, at least the knowledge of the utility of writing.
But even for some time after writing was generally known,
it was considered a desecration to make use of it for the
preservation of the srcred books. This feeling naturally
passed away much sooner among the adherents of the
popular religious faith of Buddhism, than it did among their
conservative opponents. With the latter it is by no means ex¬
tinct even now, and the first record we have of the Buddhist
Scriptures being reduced into writing is the well-known
passage in the IDlpava^?i;sa, which speaks of their being
recorded in books in Ceylon towards the beginning of the
first century before the commencement of our era. And
as all our copies of the Buddhist Pi/akas are, at present,
derived from those then in use in Ceylon, we are practically
concerned only with those thus referred to in the Dipa-
vamsB.

The date of the Lipava^^sa may be placed approxi¬
mately in the fourth century of our era ; but its author
reproduces the continued tradition of the monasteries in

^ They will be found enumerated, and shortly described, in a note below
Cpp. 62, 63'). I am glad to learn that my friend Dr. Morris is preparing a full
account of them, drawn from various parts of the Sutta Piifaka, for his forth¬
coming work to be accordingly entitled ‘ The Seven Jewels of the Law.’

2 See my ‘ Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon’ (Part VI of ISTumismata
Orientalia), p. 13.

® Dtpava?«sa XX, vv. 20, 21. quoted in the MahS.va»isa, p. 207.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XXlll


which he dwelt, and he is more probably correct, than
notj in the assertion I have quoted. It would follow that
the Buddhist Scrij>tures were, till then, handed down by
word of mouth only ; and no one who is acquainted with
the wonderful powers of memorv possessed by Indian
priests, who can devote their whole lives to the task of
acquiring and “epeating their sacred books by heart, will
doubt for a moment the possibility of this having been
the case.

Xwo methods were adopted in India to aid this power
of memory. One, adopted chiefly by the grammarians,
was to clothe the rules to be remembered in very short
enigmatical phrases (called shtras or threads), which taxed
the memory but little, while they required elaborate com¬
mentaries to render them intelligible. Xhe other, the
methoa adopted in the Buddhist writings (both Sutta arid
"V in ay a), was, firstly, the use of stock phrases, of which
the commencement once given, the remainder followed as
a matter of course ; and secondly, the habit of repeating
whole sentences, or even paragraphs, which in our modern
books would be understood or inferred, instead of being
expressed.

Xhe stock ohrases, which must be distinguished from
the repetitions, belong certairily to a very early period of
Buddhism, and many of them recur in Sanskrit as well as in
Pdli texts One result of these numei'ous repetitions of
phrases and paragraphs is that the preservation of the text,
when once established, was rendered very easy ; and that
mistakes in the MSS. can now be easily rectified when they
occur ill such repeated jiassages. Xo edit the text of such
portions of a Pali Sutta is therefore a comparatively easy
task ; and it may be said of all the Suttas here translated,
that they have thus acquired a valuable protection against
that danger of corruption from various readings which
often renders uncertain the text of important passages of
works written on the very different and simpler system

^ Several examples of such passages occur in Uie present volume in the
Akafikheyya- and Maha-sudassana-Suttas, where they are pointed out in the
notes.


xxiv


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


to which we are accustomed. On the other hand, however,
the catchwords niay sometimes have given rise to serious
interpolations.

It is open to much doubt whether, in the numerous
passages where such stock phrases and repetitions occur,
the best mode of translation is to follow word for word
the expressions found in the original (but only inserted
there to perform a service no longer necessary), or to
make use of contractions, the fact of their being so being
duly pointed out, either in notes, or by some typographical
expedient. Where, for instance, a long paragraph is devoted
to what an elder of the Buddhist Order of Mendicants should
do, or be, under certain given circumstances, and the whole
paragraph is then repeated word for word, of an ordinary
member, and of a nun, and of a lay-disciple (updsaka),
or of a religious woman (upasikd)^, it would be possible
to convey the whole sense intended, by translating that
an elder of the Order and an ordinary member, and a
nun, and a lay- disciple of either sex, should do, or be, such
and such things.

But every case of repetition is not so simple as this ;
such curtailing destroys at least the form and the em¬
phasis of the originals ; and it seemed more in accordance
with the rules laid down in the prospectus to the Series
of Translations from the Sacred Books of tne East, of
which this volume forms a part, to adhere in all cases
strictly to the text. W’ith the exception of the earlier
chitpters in the Book of the Great Decease, in which a
few such contractions will he found mentioned in the
notes, I have therefore reproduced almost all the repeti¬
tions. The result will not, I trust, be embarrassing to the
reader who keeps constantly in mind the aim and origin of
these stock phrases and repetitions, and does not allow
the wearisome form in which they are presented to shut
out from his view the logical sequence of the sometimes
very striking Ideas which these Suttas contain. I venture
to go further and to maintain that it is not necessary or


^ See below. Book of the Great Decease, Chap. Ill, §§ 7, 8.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XXV


i^ven correct to read tliirough the whole of passages which
were never intended td be read. We shall do wisely whon
coming to a phrase which we already know, to make use
of a little judicious skipping, and, noting the course of
the argument, to pass on, with even mind, to the next
paragraph.


I send forth the following translations with very great
diffidence. It is not too much to say that the discovery
of early Buddhism has placed all previous knowledge of
the subject in an entirely new light; and has turned the
flank, so to speak, of most of the existing literature on
Buddhism. I use the term ‘ discovery * advisedly, for
though the PAli texts have existed for many years in our
public libraries, they are only now beginning to be under¬
stood ; and the Buddhism of the P41i Pi/akas is not only
a quite different thing from Buddhism as hitherto com¬
monly received, but is antagonistic to it. I cannot hope
that the renderings of the many technical terms, now for
the flrst time submitted to the judgment of students of
early Buddhism, will all stand the test of time. So per¬
fectly dovetailed is the old Buddhist system, so utterly
different from Furopean Ghristianiry are the ideas involved,
so pregnant are the expressions used with deep and earnest
religious feelings resting on a foundation completely apart
from our own, that the translation of each term becomes
a problem of great difficulty and delicacy. Where Gogerly
or Burnouf has dealt with any word, the process has been
easier: but there are many words they have not toucned,
and while Gogerly had no sympathy with these ancient
beliefs, Burnouf has confined himself chiefly to later
phases of Buddhism. There are several paragraphs —
such as the one at Chapter I, § la of the Book of the
Great Decease — which have cost me more time and
trouble than the reader of the few words they contain
will easily believe ; and it would be impossible to add
a note to every word justifying the rendering which was
finally adopted to convey the Buddhist idea, without in¬
volving at the same time some misleading implication.


xi^vi


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


In order to call attention to the fact, when a word in
the original P41i is one of these technical terms of the
Buddhist system of self-training, and when therefore the
English expression must be taken in that technical sense,

I have throughout written the technical terms with capital
letters ; and I would invite the special notice of the reader
to the words thus distinguished

Apart, too, from the necessity of great care in the
rendering of single words, I have felt bound to make
some attempt, however inadequate, to reproduce the style
and tone of the Buddhist author, or authors. A mere
word-for-word translation, though much easier to make,
and perhaps more useful to those engaged in the study
of the language would not only fail to do justice to the
original, but would even convey a wrong impression to
those who are interested in these works from the point
of view of the comparative history of religious belief.
There is a very real, though peculiar, eloquence in* a
considerable number of the prose passages, and more
especially in the closing sections of each chapter ; not
the mere rhetorical eloquence of a clever word-painter,
but -the unconscious eloquence which springs from deep
religious emotion. So also in the verses scattered through
the Book of the Great Decease, while there is occasional
there are also One oir two passages (such as I, 34 ;

; VI, 15—18, and 63) where the rhythm of the Pdli
erses is exceedingly beautiful, and the thoughts expressed
not devoid of fancy. The translation of such passages
has been beset with difficulty; and I am only too con¬
scious how small has been the success attained. But I
must ask the reader constantly to bear in mind that words,
dull and bare to us, are full of meaning to the Buddhist.
‘The Blessed Master came to the Mango-grove ’ is a very
plain statement of Supposed fact ; but to the earnest
Buddhist the mention of ‘ the Master ’ calls up to his mind

^ I regret to say that th.2 printer has Very .frequently omitted to reproduce
these capitals ; but they still remain ih some places, >^and the paragraph which
explains them is therefor* retained.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


XXVll


his highest ideal of what is wise and great and khid;
and the Mango-grove is surrounded to him with all the
poetry, and is associated with all the tender memories
which to the devout and earnest Christian are wrapped
up in such names as Bethany the Mount of Olives.
While impressed therefore with the knowledge of having
come far sho.t of my ideal, I feel there is for these
reasons some justification in asking a kindly consideration
for this first volume of English transitions from the prose
portions of the Belli Pi/akas.

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS.


Brick Court, Temple,
August, 1880.


4


4


%


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


In translating this Sutta I have followed the text pub¬
lished by my friend the late Mr Childers, first in the
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, and afterwards sepa¬
rately. In the former the text appeared in two instalments,
the first two sheets, with many various readings in the foot¬
notes, in the volume for 1874; and the remainder, with
much fewer various readings, ih the volume for 1876. The
reprinted text omits most of the various readings in the
first two sheets, and differs therefore slightly in the paging.
The letters D, S, Y, and Z, mentioned in the notes, refer to
MSS. sent to Mr. Childers from Ceylon by myself, Subhilti
Uniidnse, Y^tramulle Llnn^nse, and Mudliar de Zoysa re¬
spectively. The MS. mentioned as P (in the first two sheets
quoted only in the separate edition) is, no doubt, the Digha
Nik^ya MS. of the Phayre collection in the India Office
Library. The other four are now I believe in the British
Museum.

The Hon. George Tumour of the Ceylon Civil Service
published an analysis of this work in the Journal of the
Bengal Asiatic Society for 1839; but as he unfortunately
skips, or only summarises, most of the difficult passages, his
work, though a. most valuable contribution for the time,
now more than half a century ago, has not been of much
service for the present purpose. Of much greater value
was B Liddhaghosa’ s commentary contained in the Su-
mahgala VilHsini ^ ; but the great fifth-century commen-

^ I have used the copy made for Tumour, and now in. the India Office
Collection.


XXXll


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


tator wrote of course for Buddhists, and not for foreign
scholax's ; and his edifying notes and long exegetical ex¬
pansions of the text (quite in the style of Matthew Henry)
often fail to throw light on the very points which are most
interesting, and most doubtful, to European readers.

The M^ldlankdra-vatthu, a late Pdli work by a Bur¬
mese author of the eighteenth century is based, in that
part of it relating to the last days of the Buddha, almost
exclusively on the Book of the Great Decease, and on
Buddhaghosa’s commentary upon it. Bishop BigandePs
translation into English of a Burmese translation of this
work, well known under the title of ‘ The Life or Legend
of Gaudama the Budha of the Burmese,’ affords evidence
therefore of the traditional explanations of the text. In
the course either of the original author’s recasting, or
of the double translation, so many changes have taken
place, that its evidence is frequently ambiguous and not
always quite trustworthy ; but with due caution, it may be
used as a second commentary.

The exact meaning which was originally intended by the
title of the book is open to doubt. Great-Decease-Book ’
may as well mean ‘ the Great Book of the Decease,’ as ' the
Book of the Great Decease.’ This book is in fact longer
than, any other in the collection, and the ep’thet ‘ Great ’
is often opposed in titles to a ‘ Short ’ Sutta of (otherwise)
the same name But the epithet is also frequently intended,
w’thout doubt, to qualify the immediately succeeding word
in the title* ; and, though the phrase ‘ Great Decease,’ as
applied to the death of the Buddha, has not been found
elsewhere, it is, I think, meant to do so here


^ See ‘ The Life or Legend,’ &c., third edition, vol. ii. p. 149. The date
there given (1134 of the Burmese era = 1773 a.d.) is evidently the date of the
original work, and not of the translation. Nothing is said in the book itself
or in Bishop Eigandet’s notes of the name of the author, or of the name or
date of the Burmese translator.

^ There are several such pairs in the Ma^AimS. NikS,ya ; and the MahS.-

in the Digha is the same as the SatipaZ/y^ana-
Sutta in the Ma^^/4ima.

® E. g. in the Maha-padhEna-Sutta and Mah^-sudassana-Sutta.

* Childers seems to have been of the same opinion, vide Diet. I, 368.


INTRODUCTION-


XXXlll


The division of the Book into chapters, or rather Portions
for Recitation, is found in the MSS. ; the division of these
chapters into sections has been made by myself. It will
be noticed that a very large number of the sections have
already been traced, chiefly by Dr. Morris and myself, in
various other parts of the P41i Pirakas : whole paragraphs
or episodes, quite independent of the repetitions and stock
phrases above referred to, recurring in two or more places.
The question then arises whether (i) the Book of the Great
Decease is the borrower, whether (a) it is the original source,
or whether (3) these passages were taken over, both into it,
and into the other places where they recur, from earlier
sources. It will readily be understood that, in the present
state of our knowledge, or rather ignorance of the P41i
Pi/akas, this question cannot as yet be answered with any
certainty. But a few observations may even now be made.

Generally speaking the third of the above possible ex¬
planations is not only more probable in itself, but is confirmed
by parallel instances in literatures developed under similar
conditions, both in the valley of the Ganges and in the basin
of the Mediterranean.

It is quite possible that while some books — such as
the Mah^-vagga, the iTulla-vagga, and the Dlgha
Nikdya — usually owe their resemblances to older sources
now lost or absorbed ; others — such as the Sa7/i:yutta and
the Ahguttara — are always in such cases simply borrowers
from sources still existing.

At the time when our Book of the Great Decease was
put into its present shape, and still more so when a Book
of the Great Decease was first drawn up, there may well
have been some reliable tradition as to the events that
took place, and as to the subjects of his various discourses,
on the Buddha’s last journey. He had then been a public
Teacher for forty-five years ; and his system of doctrine,
which is really, on the whole, a very simple one, had already
been long ago elaborated, and applied in numerous dis¬
courses to almost every conceivable variety of circumstances.
What he then said would most naturally be, as it js repre¬
sented to have been, a final recapitulation of tine most
[iij c


xxxiv


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE-


irpportant and characteristic tenets of his religion. But
these are, of course, precisely those subjects which are most
fully and most frequently dealt with in other parts of the
P41i Pi/akas. No record of his actual words could have
been preserved. It is quite evident that the speeches placed
in the Teacher’s mouth, though formulated in the first
person, in direct narrative, are only intended to be sum¬
maries, and very short summaries, of what was said on
these occasions. Now if corresponding summaries of his
previous teaching had been handed down in the Order, and
w'ere in constant use among them, at the time when the
Book of the Gre?t Decease was put together, it would be
a safe and easy method to insert such previously existing
summaries in the historical account as having been spoken
at the places where the Teacher was traditionally believed
to have spoken on the corresponding doctrines. In the
historical book the simple summaries would sufficiently
answer every purpose ; but when each particular matter
became the subject of a separate book or division of a
book, the same summaries would be included, but would
be amplified and elucidated. And this is in fact the relation
in which several of the recurring passages, as found in the
Book of the Great Decease, stand to the same passages
when found elsewhere.

On the other hand, some of the recurring passages do not
consist of such summaries, but are actual episodes in the
history. As an instance of these we may take the long
extract at the end of the first, and the beginning of the
second chapter (I, 30—11, 3, and again II, 16— II, 34), which
is found also in the Maha-vagga. The words are
(nearly^) identical in both places, but in the Book of the
Great Decease the account occurs in its proper place in
the middle of a connected narrative, whereas in the MahA-
vagga, a treatise on the Rules and Regulations of the
Order, it seems strangely oat of place- So the passage,
also a long one, with which the Book of the Great


^ On the difference see the note at II, i6- It affects only a few localising
phrases in „ narrative occupying (in the translation) thirteen pages.


INTRODUCTION.


XXXV


Decease commences (on. the Seven Conditions of Welfare),
seems to have been actually borrowed by the Aiiguttara
Nik4ya from our work.

The question of these summaries and parallel passages
cannot be adequately treated by a discussion of the in¬
stances found in any one particular book. It must be
considered as a whole, and quite apart from the allied
question of the ' stock phrases ’ above alluded to, in a
discussion of all the instances that can be found in the
Pali Pi/akas. Por this purpose tabulated statements are
essential, and as a mere beginning such a statement is here
annexed (including the passages, marRed with an asterisk,
which have every appearance of belonging to the same


category) .

BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.

Chap. I (34 sections) §§ i— 10

,, § 1 1

§§16,17^


„ M §§ 20-34

§§1,2,3

Chap. II (35 sections) §§ 13, 14,

„ „ §§ 16-24

„ ,, §§ 27-35

Chap. Ill (66 sections) §§ i — 10

„ „ §§11-20

,, „ §§21-23*"

,, » §§ 24-32

„ „ §§ 33-42 .

Chap. IV (58 sections) §§2,3
,, ,, §§7-ii*

^ Omitted in Po-fa-tsii.

C


OTHER BOOKS.

Ahguttara (Sutta-nipata).

„ (iOa-nipata).
Digha (Sampas^daniya) and
Sawjutta (Satippa^'/y^itna-
vagga).

.. Mah^-vagga VI, 28.
Maha-vagga VI, 29.

, Digha (Satippa////jina).

) M ,,

J Sawj’^utta ,,

' Vibhahga ,,

MahcL-vagga VI, 30.
Sa/wyutta (SatippaZ/y^ana-
vagga).

j Sawyutta(Iddhip£ida-vagga).
1 Ahguttara (A////a-nipata).

.. Ahguttara (AZ/Z/a-nipata).

.. ? Eight Assemblies.

Ahguttara (A//Z/a-nipdta).

.. Ahguttara (A/Z/ia-nipdta).
Ahguttara (jSTatuka-nipdta).

See below, p. xxxviii.


XXXVl


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.

Chap. V (69 sections) §10


3?


33


§§ 16 — 2

§§ 27-3

§36


33


33


41-44


§60

§ 63
§68

Chap. VI (6 2 sections) $16


33

33


33


33


33


33


§§36-41


OTHER BOOKS.

Ahguttara (Duka-nipdta).

,, (jSratuka-nipS.ta).

33 33

Sa?3^yutta (Satippa/Z^^na-
vagga).

IDigha (Mah^-sudassana-
Sutta).

jSTulla-vagga V, 8, i.
Mah^-va^^ga I, 38, i.
ATulla-vagga XI, i, 15.
Dtgha (Mahd-sudassana-
Sutta).

JVulla-vagga XI, i, i.


No Sanskrit work has yet been discovered giving an
account of the last days of Gotama ; but there are several
Chinese works which seem to be related to ours. Of one
especially, named the Fo Fan-ni-pan King (apparently
Buddha-Parinibbd-na-Sutta, but such an expression is un¬
known in PMi), Mr. Beal says ^ :

' This appears to be the same as the SCttra known in
the South. ... It was translated into Chinese by a Shaman
called Fa-tsu, of the Western Xsin dynasty, circa 200 A.D.’

I do not understand this date. The Western Tsin
dynasty is placed by Mr. Beal himself on the fly-leaf of
the Catalogue at 265-313 a.D. And whether the book
referred to is really the same work as the Book of the
Great Decease seems to me to be very doubtful. At
p. 160 of his 'Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the
Chinese * Mr. Beal says, that another Chinese work ‘ known
as the Mah4 Parinirvd.?^a Sfltra ' ' is evidently the same
as the Mah4 Parinibbdna Sutta of Ceylon/ but it is quite
evident from the extracts which he gives that it is an
entirely diflerent and much later work.

On this book there would seem further to be a trans¬
lated commentary, Ta Pan-ni-pan King Lo, mentioned


^ Omitted by Po-fa-tsii. See balow, p. xxxviii.

* Catalogvie of Buddhist Chinese Books in the India Office Library, p. 95.


INTRODUCTION.


XXX VI 1


at p. loo of the same Catalogue, and there assigned to
Chang-an of the Tsin dynasty (5S9— 619 A. D.),

At pp. I a— 13 of the same Catalogue we find no less than
seven other works, and an eighth on p. 77, not indeed
identified with the Book of the Great Decease, but bearing
titles which Mr. Beal represents in Sanskrit as Mah^pari-
nirv^^za Sutra. They purport to be translated respectively —

A. D.

X. By Dharmaraksha of the Northern Liai.g dynasty . 502-555

2. By DharmaraKsha „ ,,

3. By Fa Hian and Buddhabhadra of the Eastern Tsin

dynasty . . . . . . .31 7—4 1 9

4. By Crwanabhadra and others of the Eastern Tang-

dynasty . 620-904

5. By Dharmagupta and others of the Western 1 sin

dynasty . 265-313

6. By Fa Hian of the Eastern Tsin dynasty . . 317— 419

7. Unknown.

8. By Dharmabodhi of the Former Wei dynasty . . circa 200

Indian author, Vasubandhu.

Whether Nos. i and z, and again 3 and 6 are the same
is not stated; and in the Indian A.ntiq[uary for 1875
Mr. Beal gives an account 01 another undated work, as
existing in the India Office Collection, bearing a different
title from any of the above, but which he also translates as
Mahaparinibbdna Sutta. It purports to be the very oldest of
the Vaipulya Sutras, whereas the book quoted in the Catena
is there said to begone of the latest of the expanded Sfltras.’

‘ The general outline," says Mi. Beal ^ ‘ is this. Buddha,
on a certain occasion, proceeded to Kinsinagara (sic), and
entering a grove of Sdla trees, there reposed. He received
a gift of food from Chanda, an artisan of the neighbouring
town. After partaking of the food he was seized with
illness. He discoursed through the. night with his disciples,
and disputed with certain heretical teachers. At earl}"
dawn he turned on his right side with his head to the
north, and died. The S41a trees bent down to form a
canopy over his head. The account then proceeds to relate


^ Indian Antiquary, vol. iv. !>. 90.


xxxviii THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


tb^ circumstances of his cremation, and the subsequent
disputes, between the MalTas and others, for his ashes.’

There is a curious echo here of some of the sections
translated below ; though each particular item of the
summary is really in contradiction with the corresponding
part of the Pali book. There is perhaps another Chinese
work on the death of Buddha, of the existence of which
I have been informed, through the kind intervention of Pro¬
fessor Max Muller, by Mr. Kasawara. It was translated by
Po-fa-tsu between 390 and 306 A.D. It Seems to be the
same as the first mentioned above, but it contains a good
deal of matter not found in the Maha-parinibb4na-Sutta
(notably an account of the Rd^agaha Council, the mention
of which is so conspicuously absent from the Pdli work) ;
and it omits many of the sections found in the Pdli. Mr.
Kasawara has been kind enough to send me the following
details regarding those omissions, and they are of peculiar
interest as compared \/ith the table given above ^ ;


Chapters in the PS.li.
I St Chapter
3rd Chapter
4th Chapter
5th Chapter
6th Chapter


Sections wanting
21—42.

53-56.

4-6 ; 16-23 ;
27; 48-50.


Chinese*


27-31; 48-51-


There is no evidence to show that any of the above
works are translations of our Sutta, or in any sense the
same work. No reliance, in fact, can be placed upon the
mere similarity of title in order to show that a Chinese
work and an Indian one are really the same : and I regret
that attempts should have been made to fix the date of
Indian works by the fact that Chinese translations bearing
titles are said to have been made in a certain
period. But the above-mentioned works on the Great
Dece^e will, when published* throw valuable light on the
traditions of different, though no doubt later, schools of
Buddhist thought ; and a detailed comparison would pro¬
bably throw a very interesting light on the way in which


^ On p. xxxvi.


INTRODUCTION.


XXXIX


religious legends of this kind vary and grow ; and the
existence of these Chiixese translations affords ground fo-
the hope that we may some day discover an earlier
Sanskrit work on the same subject

The cremation ceremonies described in the sixth chapter
are not without interest. It would be natural enough that
Gotama should have been buried without any of those ritual¬
istic forms the usefulness of which he denied, and without
any appeal to gods whose power over men he ignored.
But the tone of the narrative makes it at least possible
that there was not really anything ur^usual in the method
of his cremation ; and tJtiat the elaborate rites prescribed in
the Br^hmanical books for use at a funeral ^ were not, in
practice, obseived in the case of the death of any person
other than a wealthy Brahman, or some layman of rank
who was a devoted adherent of the Br§.hmans.

In the same way we find that in those countries where
the more ancient form of Buddhism still prevails, there are
a few simple forms to be used in the case of the cremation
of a distinguished Bhikkhu or Up4saka; but in ordinary
cases bodies are buried without any ceremony.

So in Ceylon, Robert K.nox — whose rare and curious
work, one of the most ti astworthy books of travels extant,
deserves more notice than it has received, and who was a
captive there for many years before the natives were influ¬
enced by any contact with Europeans — says

‘ It may not be unacceptable to relate how they burn
their dead. As for persons of inferior quality, they are
interred in some convenient places in the woods (there
being no set places for burial), carried thither by two or
three of their friends, and buried without any more ado.
They lay them on their backs, with their heads to the West,
and their feet to the East, as we do. Then these people go
and wash : for they are unclean by handling the dead.


^ I have not been able to trace any reference to either of -these Chinese works
in Mr. Edkins*s * Chinese Buddhism.’

“ See Max MUller in Z. D. M. G., vol. ix.

® Knox’s * Historical Relation of Ceyloii,’ Part III, Chap. xi.


xl


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


‘ But persons of greater quality are burned, and that with
ceremony. When they are dead they lay them out, and
put a cloth over their privy parts ; and then wash the body,
by taking half a dozen pitchers of water and pouring upon
it. Then they cover him with a linen cloth, and so carry
him forth to burning. This is when they burn the body
speedily. But otherwise they cul down a i.ree that may be
proper for their purpose, and hollow it like a hog-trough,
and put the body, being disembowelled and embalmed, into
it, filling up all about with pepper, and so let it lie in the
house until it be the king’s command to carry it out to the
burning. For that they dare not do without the king’s
order if the person deceased be a courtier. Sometimes
the king gives no order in a great while ; it may be not at
all : therefore, in such cases, that the body may not take
up house-room or annoy them, they dig a hole in the floor
of their house, and put hollowed tree and all in, and cover
it. If afterwards the king commands to burn the body,
they take it up again, in obedience to the king — otherwise
there it lies.

* Their order for burning is this : if the body be not thus
put into a trough or hollow tree, it is laid upon one of his
bedsteads, which is a great honour among them. This
bedstead with the body on it, or hollowed tree with the
body in it, is fastened with poles, and carried upon men’s
shoulders unto the place of burning, which is some eminent
place in the fields, or highways, or where else they please.
There they lay it upon a pile of wood some two or three
fecu high ; — then they pile up more wood upon the corpse,
lying thus on the bedstead or in the trough. Over all they
have a kind of canopy built (if he be a person of very high
quality), covered at top, hung about with painted cloth,
and bunches of cocoa-nuts, and green boughs ; and so fire
is put to it. A-fter all is burnt to ashes, they sweep to¬
gether the ashes into the manner of a sugar-loaf, and hedge
the place round from wild beasts breaking in, and they will
sow herbs there. Thus I saw the king’s uncle, the chief
tirinanx * (v/ho was, as it were, the chief primate of all the

Knox 3 way ot apeliiug T er unnaiise, that is, Thera.


INTRODUCTION. xli


nation), burned upon a high place, that the blaze might be
seen a great way

I myself saw an Unndns^ burned very much in this
way near the Weyangoda Court-house ; and there is a long
account in the native newspaper, the Lak-riwi-kirana
(Ceylon Sunbeam), of the 12th March, 1870, of the crema¬
tion of a Weda-rala, or native doctor. Bishop Bigcindet
relates in a note in his ‘ Life or Legend of Gautama ’ the
corresponding ceremonies still in use in Burma, of which he
has been a witness ^ ; but cremation is apparently as seldom
resorted to in Burma as it is in Ceylon.

The unceremonious mode of burying the dead referred to
by Knox is not adopted in the more settled districts on
the sea coast. When at Galle I enquired into the funeral
customs there prevalent, with the following result ^ :

A few houi'S after a man has died, the relations wash the
corpse, shave it ; and, having clothed it with a strip of clean
white cloth, place it on a bedstead covered with white cloth,
and under a canopy (wiyana) also of white cloth. They
then place two lamps, one to burn at the head, and the other
at the foot of the corpse, and use perfumes.

A coffin is then prepared, covered with black cloth ; and
the body is placed on the coffin, and is then sprinkled over
with lavender or rose-water. The women meanwhile bow
backwards and forwards with their hands behind their
heads, uttering loud wailings over the deceased.

Then the male relatives carry the coffin to the grave,
which is dug in one of their own cocoa-nut topes near by,
and over which is raised a more or less elaborate canopy or
arch of cloths and evergreens (ge^:/i-ge), adorned with the
tender leaves and flowers of the cocoa-nut. Along the path
also from the house to the grave young cocoa-nut leaves
and flowers are sometimes hung, and the pathway itself is
often spread with clean white cloths.

The tom-tom beaters go first ; and the dull monotonous


^ In the older editions of Knox there is a onrioiis engraving of a body being
thus burnt.

“ Third edition, vol. ii. pp. 7S, 79.

^ See the Ceylon h’ricnd for 1S70, pp, too and following.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


xlii


sound of their instruments of music is appropriate enough.
Then follow some Buddhist mendicants, in number accord¬
ing to the wealth or influence of the deceased, and walking
under a portable canopy of white cloth. Then the coffin is
carried by the nearest male relatives, and followed by other
male relatives and relations — no females, even the widowed
mother of an only son, taking part in this last sad pro¬
cession.

Three times the coffin is carried round the grave : then
it is placed on two sticks placed across the mouth of the
pit ; and one end of a roll of white cloth is placed on the
coffin, the other end being held by all the XJnn^nsds
(Bhikkhus) whilst the people repeat three times in Pcili
the well-known formula of the Refuges (the simple Nicene
Creed of the Buddhists) :

‘ I take my refuge in the Buddha,

I take my refuge in the Dhamma,

I take my refuge in the Order’.*

Then the priests respond, thrice repeating in Pali the
well-known verse discussed below :

‘ How transient are all component things I
Their nature*s tc be born and die ;

Coming, they g*o ; and then is best,

When each has ceased, and all is resc ! *

Then the Unn^ns^s^ let go the roll of white cloth, and
whilst water is poured from a goblet into a cup placed
on a plate until the cup is full to the brim they again
chaunt three times in Pali the following verses : —

‘ As rivers, when they fill, must flow.

And reach, and fill the distant main ;


^ Buddha//^ sara72a//2 ga^^iSami

Dhammazw sara^aw
Sa/«gIxa/?2 sara^^a^ra ga^j^/5ia.mi.

® Anij&JkS. vata sawkhara uppadavaya-dhammino

niru,gg-^anti tesawz vupasamo sukho.

See * Book of the Great Decease,’ VI, i6, and the ‘ Legend of the Great King
of Glory,’ 31, 42,

This ceremony is called Fae/u wadanawi..


INTRODUCTION.


xliii


So surely what is given here

"Will reach and bless the spirits there I

If you on earth will gladly give
Departed ghosts will gladly live !

As water poured on mountain tops
Must soon descend, and reach the plain ;

So surely what is given here

Will reach and bless the spirits there ^ '

The relatidris then place the coffin in the giave, and

each throws in a handful of earth. The Unndnses then

go away, taking the roll or rolls of cloth, one end of which

was placed upon the coffin. The grave is filled in. Two

lights, one at the head of it, and one at the foot, are left

*

burning. And ther^ the friends and relations return to
the house.

The funeral now being over, is followed by a feast ;
for though nothing may be cooked in a house or hut in
which there is a corpse, yet plenty of food has been brought
in from neighbouring tenements by the relations of the
deceased.

There is, however, yet another very curious ceremony
to be gone through. Three or seven days — whichever,
according to the rules of astrology, is a lucky day — after
the deceased person died, an Unndnse is duly invited to
the house in which the deceased died. He arrives in the
evening ; reads ban a (that is, the Word, passages from the
sacred books) throughout the night ; and in the morning
is pre.sented with a roll of white cloth, and is asked to
partake of food, chiefly of course curries, of those different
kinds of which the deceased had been most particularly
fond.


* Yatha varivahd pCirS. paripurenti sS.gai'aw

Evam eva ito dinna;;/ petdaam upakappati.

Ito dinnena yapenti x^eta kalakata tahi/w.

Unname tidakaw yaUaw yatha ninnaw pavattati
Kvam eva ito dinna;-.' petana^/; npakapiDati.

These verses occur in the Tirokuc/i/a-Sutta of the K.hnddaka-Pa/^a, but in
a different order.


xliv


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


This ceremony is called Mat aka DUnaya (Gift for
the Dead), and the previous feast is called Mataka
Bhatta (Feast in honour of the Dead) : the two combined
taking the place of an ancient rite observed in pagan,
pre-Buddhistic, times, and then also called Mataka Bhatta,
in which offerings were made to the Betas ; that is, to
the manes, or departed ghosts, of ancestors and near
relations. Such offerings are of course forbidden to Bud¬
dhists^, and it is a very instructive instance of a survival in
belief, of the effect of the natural reluctance to make much
change in the mode of paying the customar57- funeral respect
to deceased friends, that the kind of food supposed to be
most appreciated by the dead should still be used in the
Buddhist funeral rites.

Another part of the ceremony, that part where one end
of a roll of cloth is placed on the coffin while the other end
is held by all the assembled XJnn^nsds is a fragment of
ritualistic syinbolism which deserves attention. The mem¬
bers of the Buddhist Order of Mendicants were enjoined to
avoid all personal decoration of any kind ; and to attire
themselves in cloths of no value, such as might be gathered
from a dust heap (Pa/^^isu-kfila), or even from a cemetery.
This was a principle to be followed, not a literal rule to be
observed ; and therefore from the first presents of strips of
plain white cotton cloth, first torn in pieces to deprive
them of any commercial value, then pieced together again
and dyed a dull orange colour to call to mind the colour of
old worn out linen, were the material from which the
mendicants’ clothing was actually made. But the duty of
contempt for dress (called Pawsu-kfilikanga, from the
dust heap) was never lost sight of, and advantage was taken
of the gifts given by the faithful at funerals to impress this
duty upon the minds of the assembled Bhikkhus.

Nothing is known of any religious ceremony having been
performed by the early Buddhists in India, whether the
person deceased was a layman, or even a member of the

^ Compare the Mataka- Bhatta- 6^4taka (ISTo. l8), translated in ‘Buddhist
Birth Stories,’ vol. i. pp. 236 and following.

2 See p. xlii.


INTRODUCTION.


xlv


Order. The Vinaya Pi/aka, which enters at so great length
into all the details ot the daily life of the recluses, hrs
no rules regarding the mode of treating the body of a
deceased Bhikkhu. It was probably burnt, and very much
in the manner described in the last chapter of our Sutta
— that is to say, it was reverently carried out to some
convenient spot, and there simply cremated on a funeral
pyre without any religious ritual, a small tope being more
often than not erected over the ashes. Though funerals
are, naturally, not unfrequently mentioned in the historical
books, and in the Birth Stories, there is nowhere any
reference to a recognised mode of performing any religious
ceremony


The date of the Great Decease is not quite certain.
The dwellers in the valley of the Ganges, for many genera¬
tions after Gotama’s death, were a happy people, who had
no need of dates ; and it was only xong afterwards, and in
Ceylon, that the great event became used as the starting-
puij.it for chronological calculations, as the Buddhist era.

The earliest use of the Buddha^s Parinibb^na as such
an era is in an Inscription of King Nissanka Malians, of the
twelfth century A. D., published by me in the Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society for 1875. Both in the historical
records of Ceylon, and in those passages of the Purd^^as
which are the nearest approach to historical records in
India, the chronology is usually based on the lists of kings,
just as it is in the Old Testament. Only by adding to¬
gether the lengths of the reigns of the intermediate kings
is it possible to calculate the length of the time that is said
to have elapsed between any two given events.

If these lists of kings had been accurately kept from

^ Compare Mah§.vawsa, pp. 4, 135, 129, 199, 323-225, and Chap. 39, verse 28;
G^dtaka I, 166, 181, 402; II, 6; Dasaratha tPdtaka, pp. l, 2i, 22, 26, &c. ;
Dhamraapada Commentary, pp. 94, 205, 206, 322, 359; Hatthavana-galla-
vihara-va/wsa, Chap. IX; Hardy, ‘ Eastern Monachism,’ pp. 322-324.

The words Saddha?;/, Udd h ad eh i kaw, and Nivdpo, given in Childers,
refer to pagan rites.

On funerals among Buddhists in Japan, see Miss Bird’s * Unbeaten Tracks,’
vol. i.


xlvi


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


Gotama’s time to the time when the existing chronicles
were compiled, we should be able, if we could fix the date
of any one of the kings, to calculate the date of the
Buddha’s death. This last we can do ; for the date of
^andragupta, and the date of his grandson Asoka, can be
independently fixed within a few years by the aid of the
Greek historians. But unfortunately the earlier parts of
the otherwise reliable Ceylon chronicles are, like the earlier
parts of Livy’s otherwise reliable history of R-ome, full of
inconsistencies and impossibilities.

According to the Rd^a-parampara, or line of kings,
in the Ceylon chronicles, the date of the Great Decease
would be 543 B.C., which is arrived at by adding to the
date i6i B. C. (from which the reliable portion of the
history begins) two periods of 146 and 2,^6 years. The
first purports to give the time which elapsed between 16 i
B.C. and the great Buddhist church Council held under
Asoka, and in the eighteenth year of his reign, at Patna ;
and the second to give the interval between that Council
and the Buddha’s death.

It would result from the first calculation that the date
of Asoka*s coronation would be 325 B.C. (1464-1614- 18).
But we know that this must contain a blunder or blunders,
as the date of Asoka’s coronation can be fixed, as above
stated, with absolute certainty within a year or two either
way of 267 B.C.

Would it then be sound criticism to accept the other,
earlier, period of 2r^6 years found in those chronicles — -a
period which we cannot test by Greek chronology — and
by simply adding the Ceylon calculation of 336 years to
the European date for the eighteenth year of Asoka (that
in circa 249 B.C.) to conclude that the Buddha dried in or
about 485 B. C. ?

I cannot think so. The further we go back the greater
does the probability of error become, not less. The most
superficial examination of the details of this earlier period
shows too, that they are unreliable ; and what reliance
would it be wise to place upon the total, apart from the
details, when we find it mentioned for the first time in


INTRODUCTION.


xlvii


a work, the Dipa va^/iJS a, written eight centuries after the
date it is proposed to fix ?

If further proof were needed, we have it in the fact that
the Dipavawsa actually contains the details of another
calculation — based not on the lists of kings (RcL^a-param-
par^), but on a list of Theras (Th era-param par4)
stretching back from Asoka’s time to the time of the
great Teacher — which contradicts this calculation of
236 5/ears.

The Thera-parampard gives the name of the member
of the Buddhist Order of Mendicants, that is, the Thera,
who ordained Mahinda (the son of Asoka), then the name
of the Thera who ordained that Thera, and so on. There
are only five of them from Updli, who was ordained six¬
teen years after Buddha’s death, down to Mahinda in¬
clusive. This would account not for ^236, but only for
about 150 years.

For let the reader take the case of any clergyman in
the present day. The Bishop v*ho ordains him would have
been ordained thirty or forty years before ; and four such
intervals would fill out, not 236 years, but about a century
and a half ; and a similar argument applies with reasonable
certainty to the case in point.

An examination of the details of the List of Theras
confirms this conclusion strongly on every essential point.
An examination also of the List of Kings shows that
the period of 236 years is wrong by being too long.
The shorter period of j 50 years between Asoka and the
Great Decease agrees much, better with what we know
of the literary history of Buddhism during that interval.
And it also agrees with the tradition of the northern Bud¬
dhists as preserved by Hiouen Thsang, and in Ka.shmir
and Tibet In the ‘Questions of Milinda ’ also — a work
of unknown date, preserved only in its form, but


* Jnlien’s translation of Hiouen Thsang, * M^inoires sur les contrees occi¬
dental es,’ vol. i. p. 172 ; Kahlawa’s Ra^a-tarangini, Book I ; and Csoma Korosi
in ‘Asiatic Researches,’ vol. xx. pp. 92, 297. They place the Great Decease
400 years before Kanishka, whose Council was held shortly after the commence¬
ment of our era.


• * *

xlvill


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


possibly derived from a northern Buddhist Sanskrit work
— the date of the Buddha’s death is fixed at five hundred
years before the time of Milinda who certainly reigned
about a century aiter Christ. I am, therefore, of opinion
that the hitherto accepted date of the Buddha’s death
should be modified accordingly.

This would make the date of the Great Decease about
420—400 B.C. (very possibly a year or two later), and the
date of Gotama’s birth therefore eighty years earlier, or in
round mimbers about 500 B. C.

I have discussed the whole question at full length in my
‘Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon,’ written in ampli¬
fication of a paper read in 1874 before the Royal Asiatic
Society ; and to that work I must refer any reader, who
may take interest in these chronological discussions, for
ampler details. I have been able here to present only a
summary of an argument which is in so far of little im¬
portance, inasmuch the rectification which I have ven¬
tured to propose only differs by a little more than half a
century from the earliest date which can in any case be
suggested as approximately correct (that is about 485 B.C.).
The date 543 B.C.. still unfortunately accepted outside the
circle of students of Buddhism is now acknowledged to
be too early by all scholars who have seriously considered
the subject.


^ Trenckner, p. 3. Mr. Trenckner says in his preface that Buddhaghosa
quotes this work, but unfortunately he does not give any reference. See the
note below on our Sutta, Chap. VI, § 3.

^ See, for instance. Max Dunckcr, * History of Antiquity,’ vol. iv. p. 364.
On the dated Edict, ascribed by some to Asoka, see my note loc. cit., and
Oldenberg, * Introd. to the Mahi-vagga,’ p. xxxviii.


THE BOOK


OF THE

GREAT DECEASE.


MAH:iL-FAB,IlTIBBl.lSrA-STJTTA.


Chapter I.

I \ Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once dwelling in R^^agaha, on the hill called the
Vulture’s Peak. Now at that time A^^dtasattu, the
son of the queen-consort of Videha origin the king
of Magadha, was desirous of attacking the Va^.fians ;
and he said to himself, ‘ I will root out these Va^-

^ Sections i— 10, inclusive, recur in the Va^^i Vagga of the
Sutta Nipdta in the Afiguttara Nikaya , and there is a curiously
incorrect version of § 3 in the Fa Kheu Pi Hu, translated from
the Chinese by Mr. Beal, under the title of ‘ The Dhammapada
from the Buddhist Canon,’ pp. 165, 166.

^ A^^tasattu Vedehiputto. The first word is not a per¬
sonal name, but an official epithet, ‘ he against whom there has
arisen no (worthy or equal) foe ; ’ the second gives us the maiden
family, or tribal (not personal) name of his mother. Persons of
distinction are scarcely ever mentioned by name in Indian Buddhist
books, a rule applying more especially to kings, but extended
not unfrequently to private persons. Thus Upatissa, the earnest
and thoughtful disciple whom the Buddha himself declared to be
‘ the second founder of the kingdom of righteousness,’ is referred
to either as Dhamma-senapati or as Sdriputta ; epithets of cor¬
responding origin to those in the text. By the (9ains A^^tasattu
is called Kh;^ika or ICowika, which again is probably not the name
given to him at the rice-eating (the ceremony corresponding to
infant baptism), but a nickname acquired in after life.

[II] B


2


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


^ans, mighty and powerful though they be, I will
destroy these Va^^ians, I will bring these Vaj^ians
to utter ruin ! ’

2. So he spake to the Brdhman Vassakdra, the
prime-minister of Magadha, and said :

‘ Come now, O Brdhman, do you gc to the Blessed
One, and bow down in adoration at his feet on my
behalf, and enquire iti my name whether he is free
from illness and suffering, and in the enjoyment of
ease and comfort, and vigorous health. Then tell
him that A^atasattu, son of the Vedehi, the king of
Magadha, in his eagerness to attack the Va^^ians,
has resolved, I will root out these Va^^ians, mighty
and powerful though they be, I will destroy these
Va^^ians, I will bring these Va^ians to utter ruin !”
And bear carefully in mind whatever the Blessed
One may predict, and repeat it to me. For the
Buddhas speak nothing untrue ! ’

3. Then the Brahman Vassakara hearkened to the
words of the king, saying, ‘ Be it as you say.’ And
ordering a number of magnificent carriages to be
made ready, he mounted one of them, left Rd^agaha
with his train, and went to the Vulture’s Peak,
riding as far as the ground was passable for car-


^ Evatn mahiddhike evammahSnubhS.ve. There is nothing
supernatural about the iddhi here referred to. Etena tesah
samagga-bh^van kathesi says the commentator simply; thus
referring the former adjective to the power of union, as he does
the second to the power derived from practice in military tactics
(hatthisipp^dihi). The epithets are, indeed, most commonly
applied to the supernatural powers of Devatas, Ndgas, and other
fairy-like beings ; but they are also used, sometimes in the simple
sense of this passage, and sometimes in the other sense, of Buddhas
and of oth^r Arahats. See M. P. S. 12, 43 ; M. Sud. S. 49—53 ;
Gkt. I, 34, 35, 39, 41.


I.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


•n

o


riages, and then alighting and proceeding on foot
to the place where the Blessed One was. On
arriving there he exchanged with the Blessed One
the greetings and compliments of friendship and
civility, sat down respectfully by his side fand then
delivered to h*m the message even as the king had
commanded ^ J

4. Now at that time the venerable Ananda was
standing behind the Blessed One, and fanning him.
And the Blessed One said - to him : ‘ Have you

heard, Ananda, that the Va^^ians hold full and
frequent public assemblies?*

‘ Lord, so I have heard,* replied he.

‘ So long, Ananda,* rejoined the Blessed One, " as
the Vaj^ians hold these full and frequent public
assemblies ; so long may they ae expected not to
decline, but to prosper.*

[And in like manner questioning Ananda, and
receiving a similar reply, the Blessed One declared
as follows the other conditions which would ensure
the welfare of the Va.^^ian confederacy^.]

‘ So long, Ananda, as the Va,^§^ians meet together
in concord, and rise in concord, and carry out
their undertakings in concord — so long as they
enact nothing not already established, abrogate
nothing that has been already enacted, and act in
accordance with the ancient institutions of the
Va^^^ians as established in former days — so long
as they honour and esteem and revere and support
the Va^'ian elders, and hold it a point of duty to
hearken to their words — so long as no women or girls

^ § 2 repeated.

® In the text there is a question, answer, and reply with each
clause.


B 2


4


CH


THE BOOK OF TJIE GREAT DECEASE.


belonging to their clans are detained among them
by force or abduction — so long as they honour anc
esteem and revere and support the Va^^ian shrines ‘
in town or country, and allow not the propel offerings
and rites, as formerly given and performed, to fall into
desuetude— so long as the rightful protection, defence,
and support shall be fully provided for the Arahats
among them, so that Arahats from a distance may
enter the realm, and the Arahats therein may live at
ease — so long may the V a^j^^ans be expected not

to decline, but to prosper/

5. Then the Blessed One addressed Vassak^ra

the Brahman, and said :

‘When I was once staying, O BrMiman, at Vesali
at the Sarandada Temple ^ I taught the Va^,;^ians
these conditions 01 welfare ; and so long as those
conditions shall continue to exist among the Va^'-
^ians, so long as the Va^'^ans shall be well instructed
in those conditions, so long inay we expect them
not to decline, but to prosper/

‘We may expect then,’ answered the Brahman, ‘the
welfare and not the decline of the Va^^^ians when
they are possessed of any one of these conditions of
welfare, how much more so when they are possessed
of all the seven. So, Gotama, the Va,^^ians cannot
be overcome by the king of Magadha ; that is, not
in battle, without diplomacy or breaking up their
alliance And now, Gotama, we must go ; we are
busy, and have much to do.’

^ J^T’etiyani, which Sum. Vil. explains as Yakkha-^etiydpi-
® The .commentator adds that this was a vihdra erected on the
site of a former temple of the Yakkha Sarandada.

® ‘Overcome’ is literally ‘done* (akarawt yd), but the word
evidently has a similar sense to that wbich ‘ done * occasionally has


5


1.


maha-parinibbAna sutta-


‘ Whatever you think most fitting’, O BrAhman,*
was the reply. And the Brahman Vassakdra, de¬
lighted and pleased with the wordo of the . Blessed
One, rose from his seat, and went his way.


6. Now soon after he had gone the Blessed One
addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : ^ Oo now,
Ananda, and assemble in the Service Hall such of
the Brethren! as live in the neighbourhood of
Ra^agaha.*


in colloquial English. The Sum. Vil. (fol. /i) says akara/ziya,
akatabba agahetabbi^ : yadi daii, nip^ta-mattah : yuddhas-
sati, karawatthe sami-vaA'anah, abhimukhena yuddhena
gahetuh na sakka ti attho. Upalfipan^, which I have only
met with here, must mean ‘ humbug, cajoHry, diplomacy ; ' see the
use of the verb upa- lapeti, at Mahd Vagga V, 2,21; 6^at. II, 266.
267 ; Pat. in the 70th Pa^’. Sum. Vil. explains it, at some length,
as making an alliance, by gifts, with hostile intent, which comes
to much the same thing. The root I think is It.

' The word translated * brethren ’ throughout is in the original
bhikkhfi, a word most difficult to render adequately by any word
which would not, to Christians and in Europe, connote something
different from the Buddhist idea, A bhikkhu, literally ‘ beggar,’
was a disciple who had joined Gotama’s order ; but the word refers
to their renunciation of worldly things, rather than to their conse¬
quent mendicancy ; and they did not really beg in our modern
sense of the word. Hardy has ‘ priests ; ’ I have elsewhere u.sed
‘ monks ’ and sometimes ‘ beggars ' and ‘ members of the order.’
This last is, I think, .the best rendering ; but it is too long for con¬
stant repetition, as in this passage, and too complex to be a really
good version of bhikkhu. The members of the order were not
priests, for they had no priestly powers. They were not monks, for
they took no vow of obedience, and could leave the order (and
constantly did so and do so still) whenever they chose. They
were not beggars, for they had none of the mental and moral
equalities associated with that word. ‘ Brethren’ connotes very much
the position in which they stood to one another; but I wish there
were a better word to use in rendering bhikkhu.


6


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


(SH.


And he did so ; and returned to the Blessed One^,
and informed him, saying :

' The company of the Brethren, Lord, is assem¬
bled, let the Blessed One do as seemeth to him fit.’

And the Blessed One arose, and went to the
Service Hall ; and when he was seated, he addressed
the Brethren, and said :

‘ I will teach you, O mendicants, seven conditions
of the welfare of a community. Listen well and
attend, and I will speak.’

‘ Even so, Lord,’ said the Brethren, in assent, to
the Blessed One ; and he spake as follows :

‘ So long-, O mendicants, as the brethren meet
together in full and frequent assemblies — so long
as they meet together in concord, and rise in con¬
cord, and carry out in concord the duties of the
order — so long as the brethren shall establish
nothing that has not been already prescribed, and
abrogate nothing that has been already established,
and act in accordance with the rules of the order as
now laid down- — so long as the brethren honour and
esteem and revere and support the elders of expe¬
rience and long standing, the fathers and leaders
of the order, and hold it a point of duty to hearken
to their words — so long as the brethren fall not
under the influence of that craving which, springing
up within them, would give rise to renewed exist¬
ence — so long as the brethren delight in a life
of solitude — so long as the brethren so train their
minds ^ that good and holy men shall come to
them, and those who have come shall dwell at ease

^ ‘PonobhavikS.^ punabbhava- d^yikd. (S. V. fol. /ft.)

^ * Pa /^-^atta/;^ yeva satim upa//j^dpessantt ’ ti attano ab-
bhantare sati»2 upa/Mdpessanti. (S. V. fol. /u.)


T. MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


— SO long may the brethren be expected, not to
decline, but to prosper. So long- as these seven con
ditions shall continue to exist among the brethren, so
long as they are well-instructed in these conditions,
so long may the brethren be expected not to decline,
but to prosper ’

7. ‘ Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I
will speak-’

And on their expressing their assent, he spake
as follows :

‘ So long as the brethren shqll not engage in,
or be fond of, or be connected with business — so
long as the brethren shall not be in the habit
of, or be fond of, or be partakers in idle talk — so
long as the brethren shrdl not be addicted to, or
be fond of, or indulge in slothfulness — so long
as the brethren shall not frequent or be fond of,
or indulge in society — so long as the brethren
shall neither have, nor fa^l under the influence of,
sinful desires — so long as the brethren shall not
become the friends, companions, or intimates of
sinners — so long as the brethren shall not come
to a stop on their way [to Nirva/2a’] because they


^ ‘Oramattaken^’ ti avaramattakena appamattakena. ‘An-
tara' ti arahattaw appatv^ Va etth’ antare. ‘ Vosan an' ti . . - .
osakkanam idaw vuttaz?^ hoti. Ydva sila-pdrisuddhi-mat-
t en a vit vipas sanil-matten a v Ci sotapann a-bh d va-m at ten a va
sakad d gami-bh dva-mattena vd anagami-bhdva-mattena vd
*vosanar^2’ na ‘ apa^^gissanti ’ nama ‘ vuddhi yeva bhikkhCi-
naw pa/ika7«kha no parihdni.' S. V. (fol. tri). This is an inter¬
esting analogue to Philippians iii. X3 : ‘I count not myself to have
apprehended : but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
1 press toward the mark,’ &c. See also below, Chap. V, § 68.


8 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH,

nave attained to any lesser thing — so long may the
brethren be expected not to decline, but to prosper.

‘ So long as these conditions shall continue to
exist among the brethren, so long as they are in¬
structed in these conditions, so long may the brethren
be expected not to decline, but to prosper."

8. ‘ Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I
will speak."

And on their expressing their assent, he spake
as follows :

‘So long as the brethren shall be full of faith,
modest in heart, afraid of sin full of learning, strong
in energy, active in mind, and full of wisdom, so
long may the brethren be expected not to decline,
but to prosper.

‘ So long as these conditions shall continue to
exist among the brethren, so long as they are in¬
structed in these conditions, so long may the brethren
be expected not to decline, but to prosper."

9. ‘ Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I
will speak."

And on their expressing their assent, he spake
as follows :


^ The exact distinction between hiri and ottappa is here ex¬
plained by Buddhaghosa as follows :

‘Hiriman^’ ti pdpa-^igu>l’>^>^ana-lakkha7zaya hiriyd yut-
ta-^itta. ^Ott^pi’ti ptpato bhaya-lakkha?zeiia ottappena sa-
mannagat^: that is, loathing sin as contrasted with fear of sin.
But this is rather a gloss than an exact and exclusive definition.
Ahirikd is shamelessness, anotappaz?z frowardness. At <?dt. I,
207 we find hiri described as subjective, and ottappa as objec¬
tive, modesty of heart as contrasted with decency in outward
behaviour.


MAHA-PAR3NIBBANA-SUTTA.


9


I.


* So long- as the brethren shall exercise themselves
in the sevenfold higher wisdom, that is to say, in
mental activity, search after truth, energy, joy, peace,
earnest contemplation, and equanimity of mind, so
long may the brethren be expected not to decline,
but to prosper.

‘ So long as these conditions shall continue to
exist among the brethren, so long as they are in¬
structed in these conditions, so long may the brethren
be expected not to decline, but to prosper.’

10. ‘ Other seven conditions of welfare will I teach
you, O brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I
will speak,’

And on their expressing their assent, he spake
as follows :

‘ So long as the brethren shall exercise themselves
in the sevenfold perception due to earnest thought,
that is to say, the perception of impermanency, of
non-individualityh of corruption, of the danger of sin,
of sanctification, of purity of heart, of Nirv^/za, so
long may the brethren be expected not to decline,
but to prosper.

‘ So long as these conditions shall continue to exist
among the brethren, so long as they are instructed
in these conditions, so long may the brethren be
expected not to decline, but to prosper.’

11. ‘Six conditions of welfare will I teach you, O
brethren. Listen well, and attend, and I will speak.’

And on their expressing their assent, he spake
as follows :

^ For a further explanation of the meaning of anattaw see
Gotama’s second discourse in the Mahd Vagga I, 6 z 38—47.
IBuddhaghosa makes no special comment here on either of the
seven perceptions.


TO


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


‘ So long as the brethren shall persevere in kind¬
ness of action, speech, and tnought amongst the.
saints, both in public and in private — so long as
they shall divide without partiality, and share in
common with the upright and the holy, all such
things as they receive in accordance with the
just provisions of the order, down even to the mere
contents of a begging bowl — so long as the brethren
shall live among the saints in the practice, both
in public and in private, of those virtues which (un¬
broken, intact, unspotted, unblemished) are produc¬
tive of freedom and praised by the wise ; which are
untarnished by the desire of future life, or by the
belief in the efficacy of outward acts ^ ; and which
are conducive to high and holy thoughts — so long as
the brethren shall live among the saints, cherishing,
both in public and in private, that noble and saving-
faith which leads to the complete destruction of the
sorrow of him who acts according to it — so Ipng
may the brethren be enpected not to decline, but
to prosper.

‘ So long as these six conditions shall continue to

Buddhaghosa takes this in a spiritual sense, ‘tdni pan' etani
(sil^ni) ta/zha-dasavyato mo^l'etv^ bhu^issa-bhdva- kara-
:^ato bhu^iss^ni:' that is, ‘These virtues are bhu^issani be¬
cause they bring one to the state of a free man by delivering him
from the slavery of craving/

^ Ta«hd-di/Mihi apardma/Z-^atti, idam nama tva;;^
napubbo ti kena/^i parama///^u??x asakkuweyyattd. ^a, ‘apa-
rama//>^ani' (S. V. fol. Z/u), that is, ‘These virtues ai*e called
apardmaZZy^^ni ' because they are untarnished by craving or de¬
lusion, and because no one can say of him who practises them,
“ you have been already guilty of such and such a sin." ’ Craving
is here the hope of a future life in heaven, and delusion the
belief in the efficacy of rites and ceremonies (the two nissayas)
which are condemned as unworthy inducements to virtue.


I.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTAo


1 1


exist among; the brethren, so long as they are in¬
structed in these six conditions, so long may the
brethren be expected not to decline, but to prosper/

12. And whilst the Blessed One stayed there at
Rd^agaha on the Vult are’s Peak he held that com¬
prehensive religious talk with the b**ethren on the
nature of upright conduct, and of earnest contem¬
plation, and of intelligence. ‘ Great is the fruit,
great the advantage of earnest contemplation when
set round with upright conduct. Great is the fruit,
great the advantage of intellect when set round with
earnest contemplation. The mind set round with
intelligence is freed from the great evils, that is
to say, from sensuality, from indiv'iduality, . from
delusion, and from ignorance

^ This parpgraph is spoken of as if it were a well-known sum¬
mary, and it is constantly repeated below. The word I have
rendered ‘earnest contemplation' is sam^dhi, which occupies in
the Pali Pi/akas very much the same position as faith does in the
New Testament ; and this section shows that the relative import¬
ance of samddhi, and sila played a part in early Bud¬

dhism just as the distinction between faith, reason, and works
did afterwards in Western theology. It would be diflicult to find
a passage in which the Buddhist view of the relation of these
conflicting ideas is stated with greater beauty of thought, or equal
succinctness of form.

The expression 'set round with' is in Pdli paribhdvita, which
Dr. Morris holds to be -etymologically exactly parallel to our
phrase 'perfected by,' on the ground that facio is a causal of the
Latin representative of the Sanskrit root bhfl. In the ATetokhila
Sutta of the Ma^^y^ima NikS.ya eggs are said to be paribhd vitdni
by a brooding hen. Buddhaghosa says simply stla-paribhavito
ti ^desu yamhi stle Z/^atvS, magga-sam^dhi?ra nibbattenti
so tena stlena paribh^vito. 'The samddhi belonging to
the (Noble Eightfold) Path is said to be paribhdvito by that
virtue, in which they (that is, the convened) are steadfast whilst
they practise the samddhi.'


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH-


I 2


13. Now when the Blessed One had sojourned
at JCa^agaha as long" as he pleased, he addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : ‘ Come, Ananda,
let us go to Ambala///^ik4.'

‘ So be it, Lord ! ' said Ananda in assent, and the
Blessed One, with a large company of the brethren,
proceeded to Ambala/Z/^ika.

14. There the Blessed One stayed in the king’s
house and held that comprehensive religious talk
with the brethren on the nature of upright conduct,
and of earnest contemplation, and of intelligence.

‘ Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest
contemplation when set round with ux^right conduct.
Great is the fruit, great the advantage of intellect
when set round with earnest contemplation. The
mind set round witn intelligence is freed from the
great evils, that is to say, from sensuality, from
individuality, from delusion, and from ignorance.'

15. Now when, the Blessed One* had stayed as
long as was convenient at Ambala///^ik^, he ad¬
dressed the venerable Ananda, and said : " Come,
Ananda, let us go on to Nalandd.'

‘So be it. Lord!’ said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed O lie proceeded, with a great
company of the brethren, to Nalanda ; and there, at
NMandd, the Blessed One stayed in the P4v4rika
mango grove.

t6. ’ Now the venerable Sariputta came to the

^ This conversation is given at length in the Sampasadaniya
Sutta of the Digha Nikaya, and also in the Satipa/ZZ'ana Vagga
of the Sa/^/j'Utta Nik^i_va. I have compressed mere repetitions at
the places marked with [[ j where the preceding clauses are, in the
text, repeated in full.


I.


M A T I A -P AR I N I B B AN A-S U TT A .


13


place where the Blessed One was, and havirg
saluted him, took his seat respectfully at his side
and said : ^ Lord ! such faith have I in the Blessed
One, that methinks there never has been, nor will
there be, nor is there now any other, whether
Saina?2a or Brahman, A^dio is greater and wiser than
the Blessed One, that is to say, as regards the
higher wisdom.’

‘ Grand and bold are the words of thy mouth,
Sdriputta : verily, thou hast burst forth into a song
of ecstasy ! of course then thou hast known all the
Blessed Ones who in the long ages of the pas^ have
been Arahat Buddhas, comprehending their minds
with yours, and aware what their conduct was, what
their doctrine, what their wisdom, what their mode
of life, and what salvation the}^ attained to ?’

‘ N ot so, O Lord ! ’

‘ Of cQitrse then thou hast perceived all the
Blessed Ones who in the long ages of the future
shall be Arahat Buddhas comprehending [in the
same manner their whole minds with yours] ?’

‘ Not so, O Lord!’

‘ But at least then, O S^riputta, thou knowest me
as the Arahat Buddha now alive, and hast pene¬
trated my mind [in the manner I have mentioned] ! ’

‘Not even that, O Lord!’

‘You see then, S^riputta, that you know not the
hearts of the Arahat Buddhas of the past and of the
future. Why therefore are your words so grand
and bold ? Why do you burst forth into such a
song of ecstasy ? ’

17. ‘ O Lord I I have not the knowledge of the
hearts of the Arahat Buddhas that have been, and
are to come, and now are. I only know the lineage


14


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


of the faith. Just, Lord, as a king might have a
boroer city, strong in its foundations, strong in its
ramparts and tora^^as, and with one gate alone ; and
the king might have a watchman there, clever, ex¬
pert, and wise, to stop all strangers and admit only
friends. And he, on going over the approaches all
round the city, might not so observe all the joints
and crevices in the ramparts of that city as to know
where even a cat could get out. That might well
be. Yet all living things of larger size that entered
or left the city, would have to do so by that gate.
Thus only is it. Lord, that I know the lineage of
the faith. I know that the Arahat Buddhas of the
past, putting away all lust, ill-will, sloth, pride, and
doubt ; knowing all those mental faults which make
men weak ; training their minds in the four kinds of
mental activity ; thoroughly exercising themselves
in the sevenfold higher wisdom, received the full
fruition of Enlightenment. And I know that the
Arahat Buddhas of the times to come will [do the
same]. And I know that the Blessed One, the
Arahat Buddha of to-day, has [done so] now

1 8. There in the Pavarika mango grove the
Blessed One held that comprehensive religious talk

^ The tertium quid of the comparison is the completeness of
the knowledge. S§,riputta acknowledges that he was wrong in
jumping to the wide conclusion that his own lord and master was
the wisest of all the teachers of the different religious systems that
■were known to him. So far — after the cross-examination by the
Buddha — he admits that his knowledge does not reach. But he
maintains that he does know that which is, to him, after all the
main thing, namely, that all the Buddhas must have passed through
the process here laid down as leading up to Buddhahood. The
Pdli of The full fruition of Enlightenment ’ is anuttara/w samma-
sambodhizw, which might be rendered ‘Supreme Buddhahood.'


M ahA-parinibbAna-sutta .


15


I.


with the brethren on the nature of uprig-ht conduct,
and of earnest contemplation, and of intelligence
‘ Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest
contemplation when set round with upright conduct.
Great is the fruit, great the advantage of intellect
when set round with earnest contemplation. The
mind set round with intelligence is freed from the
great evils, that is to say, from sensuality, from
individuality, from delusion, and from ignorance.’


19. Now when the Blessed One had stayed as
long as was convenient at NAlard^, he addressed

A A

the venerable Ananda, and said : Conie, Ananda,
let us go on to P^/aligAma.’

‘So be it, Lord!’ said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One proceeded, with a great
company of the brethren, to P4^falig^ma.

20. ^ Now the disciples at PA^faligdma heard of his
arrival there, and they went to the place where he
was, took their seats respectfully beside him, and
invited him to their village rest house. And the
Blessed One signified, by silence, his consent.

21. Then the PA/aligAma disciples seeing that he
had accepted the invitation, rose from their seats,
and went away to the rest house, bowing to the
Blessed One and keeping him on their right as they
past him On arriving there they made the rest

’ From this sentence down to the end of the verses at Chap. II,
§ 3, is, with a few unimportant variations, word for word the same
as Maha Vagga VI, 28, i, to VI, 29, 2.

® It would be very rude to have left him otherwise. So in
Europe a similar custom is carried still further, persons leaving the
royal presence being expected to go out backwards.


THE BOOK OF TFIE GREAT DECEASE.


CH,


I 6


house fit in everyway for occupation^, placed seats
in it, set up a water-pot, and fixed an oil lamp.
Then they returned to the Blessed One, and bowing-,
stood beside him, and said ; * All thing^s are ready,
Lord I It is time for you to do what you deem
most fit.’

2 2. And the Blessed One robed himself, took his
bowl and other things, went with the brethren to
the rest house, washed his feet, entered the hall',
and took his seat against the centre pillar, with his
face towards the east. And the brethren also, after
washing their feet, entered the hall, and took their
seats round the Blessed One, aorainst the western
wall, and facing the east. And the Pa/alig4ma disci¬
ples too, after washing their feet, entered the hall,
and took their seats opposite the Blessed One, against
tiie eastern wall, and facing towards the west.

23* ^ Then the Blessed One addressed the P^/ali-
gdma disciples, and said: ‘Fivefold, O householders,
is the loss of tJie wrong-doer through his want of
rectitude. In the first place the wrong-doer, devoid
of rectitude, falls into great poverty through sloth ;
in the next place his evil repute gets noised abroad;
thirdly, whatever society he enters — whether of
Brahmans, nobles, heads of houses, or Samai^as —


With reference to Oldenberg-’s note at Mahd Vagg’a, p. 3845 it
may be mentioned that Buddhaghosa says here, ‘ sabba-s ant ha¬
rin’ ti yatha sa.hhzm santhataz7z yeva. (S. V. fol. /e.)

following sentences contain a synopsis of what was merely
the elementary righteousness, the Adi-brahm a-iSariy aw, quite
distinct from, and not for a moment to be compared in glory with
the Magga-brahma->^ariya?w, the system developed in the ISfoble
Eightfold Path. It will have been seen above, § ii, that the latter,
to be perfect, must be untarnished by the attraction of the hope of
heaven or the fear of hell.


I.


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


17


he enters shyly and confused ; fourthly, he is full
of anxiety when he dies ; and lastly, on the dis¬
solution of the body, after death, he is reborn into
some unhappy state of suffering or woe This, O
householders, is the fivefold loss of the evil-doer ! ’

24. ‘ Fivefold, O householders, is the gain of the
well-doer through his practice of rectitude. In the
first place the well-doer, strong in lectitucle, acquires
great wealth through his industry ,* in the next place,
good reports of him are spread abroad ; thirdly,
whatever society he enters — whether of nobles, BrAh-
mans, heads of houses, or members of the order —
he enters confident and self-possessed ; fourthly, he
dies without anxiety; and lastly, on the dissolution
of the body, after death, he is reborn into some
happy state in heaven. This, O householders, is
the fivefold gain of the well-doer.'

25. When the Blessed One had thus taught the
disciples, and incited them, and roused them, and
gladdened them, far into the night with religious
discourse, he dismissed them, saying, ‘ The night is
far spent, O householders. It is time for you to do
what you deem most fit.' ‘ Even so. Lord ! ' answered
the disciples of Pdz^aligdma, and they rose from their
seats, and bowing to the Blessed One, and keeping
him on their right hand as they jD^ssed him, they
departed thence.

And' the Blessed One, not long after the disciples


^ Four such states are mentioned, apdya, dugg^aii, vinipiito,
and nirayo, all of Avhich are tempoi-ary states- The first three
seem to be synonyms. The last is one of the four divisions into
which the first is usually divided, and is often translated hell - but
not being an eternal state, and not being dependent or consequent
upon any judgment, it caniipt accurately be so rendered.

[n] C


1 8 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH.

of Pa/aligama had departed thence, entered into his
private chamber.


26. At that time Sunidha and Vassakara, the
chief ministers of Magadha, were building a fortress
at P^/alig^ma to repel the Va^^ians, and there
were a number of fairies who haunted in thousands
the plots of ground there. Now, wherever ground
is so occupied by powerful fairies, they bend the
hearts of the most powerful kings and ministers to
build dwelling-places there, and fairies of middling-
and inferior power bend in a similar way the hearts
of middling or inferior kings and ministers.

27. And the Blessed One, with his great and
clear vision, surpassing that of ordinary men, saw
thousands of those fairies haunting P4/alig4ma.
And he rose up very early in the morning, and said
to Ananda : ‘ Who is it then, Ananda, who is build¬
ing a fortress at P^/aligllnia ?

* Sunidha and Vassakara, Lord, the chief minis¬
ters of Magadha, are building a fortress there to keep
back the Va;^dans.’

28. They act, Ananda, as if they had consulted

with the T4vati?;^sa angels. |]And telling him of
what he had seen, and of the influence such fairies
had, he added] : * And among famous places of

residence and haunts of busy men, this will become
the chief, the city of P^/ali-putta, a centre for the
interchange of all kinds of wares- But three dangers
will hang over P4/ali-putta, that of fire, that of water,
and that of dissension h"


^ This paragraph is of importance to the orthodox Buddhist as
proving the Buddha's power of prophecy and the authority of the


X. mahA-parinibbana-sutta. 19

29. Now Sunidha and Vassakara, the chief
ministers of Magadha, proceeaed to the place where
the Blessed One was. And when they had come
there they exchanged with the Blessed One the
greetings and compliments of friendship and civility,
and stood there respectfully on one side. And, so
standing, Sunidha and VassakAra, the chief ministers
of Magadha, spake thus to the Bleosed One :

^ May the venerable Gotama do us the honour
of taking his meal, together with the company of
the brethren, at our house to-day.' And the Blessed
One signified, by silence, his consent.

Then when Sunidha and VassakAra, the chief
ministers of Magadha, perceived that he had given
his consent, they returned to the place where they
dwelt. And on arriving there, they prepared sweet
dishes of boiled rice, and cakes ; and informed the
Blessed One, saying :

. ' ' " ■■ ■■ ■ ■ ■■ . “"•- '• ^ ni.r,,-- ' . - , .1. --tr ' ' ' ' . - ir ' — - - T -

Buddhist scriptures. To those who conclude that such a passage
must have been written after the event that is prophesied, it is
valuable evidence of the age both of the Mahd Vagga and of the
Mahdparinibbdna Sutta ; — evidence, however, that cannot as yet
be applied to its full extent, as the lime at w'hich Pa/ali-gdma
had grown into the great and important city of PS/ali-putta is not
as yet known with sufficient certainty. The late Burmese tradition
on this point given in Bigandefs Legend of the Burmese Buddha,
vol. ii, p. 183, can scarcely be depended upon, though it doubt¬
less rests on older documents, and. is mentioned also by tiiouen
Thsang.

The curious popular belief as to good and bad fairies haunting
the sites of houses gave rise to a quack science, akin to astrology,
called vatthu-vi^^^^ji, which Buddhaghosa explains here at some
length, and which is frequently condemned elsewhere in the Pali
Pi/akas. See, for instance, § x of the Mahti-silaw, translated
below in the Tevi^^a Sutta. The belief is turned to ridicule
in the edifying legend. No. 40, in my ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories,'
pp. 326-334.


C 2


20


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


‘ The hour of food has come, O Gotama, and
all is ready/

And the Blessed One robed himself early, took
his bowl with him and repaired with the brethren
to the dwelling-place of Sunidha and Vassakhra,
and sat down on the seat prepared for him.
And with their own hands they set the sweet rice
and the cakes before the brethren with the Buddha
at their head, and waited on them till they had had
enough. And when the Blessed One had finished
eating his meal, the ministers brought a low seat,
and sat down respectfully at his side.

31. And when they were thus seated the Blessed
One gave thanks in these verses : —

‘ Wheresoe’er the prudent man shall take up his
abode

Let him support there good and upright men of
self-control.

Let him give gifts to all such deities as may
be there.

Revered, they will revere him : honoured, they
honour him again ;

Are gracious to him as a mother to her own, her
only son.

And the man who has the grace of the godsj good
fortune he beholds


^ This passage gives Buddhaghosa a good deal of difiSculty, as it
apparently inculcates offerings to the gods, which is contrary not
only to both the letter and spirit of Buddhism, but also to the
practice of Buddhists. He explains away the gifts to the deities
by saying they are gifts ot merit only (patti) — the giver giving the
four necessaries to Bhikkhus, and then expressing a wish that
the Hevatas should share in his punna.. I am inclined 10 think,
on the authority of the Deva-dhamma Gataka (No. 9 in ‘ Buddhist


I. MAHA-PARINIBBAnA-SUTTA. 2 1


32. And when he had thanked the ministers in
these verses he rose from his seat and departed
thence. And they followed him as he went, saying,
‘ The g-ate the Sama^^^a Gotama p-oes out by to-day
shall be called Gotama's gate, and the ferry at
which he crossvjs the river shall be called Gotama’s
ferry.’ And the gate he went out at was called
Gotama’s gate.


33. But the Blessed One went on to • the river.
And at that time the river Ganges was brimful and
overflowing ^ ; and wishing to cross to the opposite
bank, some began to seek for boats, some for rafts of
wood, while some made rafts of basket-work Then
the Blessed One as instantaneously as a strong man
would stretch forth his arm. or draw it back again
when he had stretched it forth, vanished from this
side of the river, and stood on the further bank with
the company of the Drethren.

34. And the Blessed One beheld the people
looking for boats and rafts, and as he beheld them
he brake forth at that time into this song : —

‘ They who cross the ocean drear
Making a solid path across the pools —

Birth Stories'), that by the deities are here meant the ‘good and
upright men of self-control,' mentioned in the previous clause.
The verses were perhaps originally non-Buddhistic.

^ Samatittik^ k^kapeyy^. See the note on Tevi^^a Sutta
I, 19, translated below, where the same expression occurs.

® Ulumpan ti pdrazw gamanatth^ya &niyo ko//etv^ ka-
tzm; kullan ti valli-^dthi bandhitv^ katabbazw, says
Buddhaghosa. The spelling u/umpaw would correspond better
to the Sanskrit form u<:/upa, and has been chosen by Childers in
his dictionary, and by Oldenberg in his transliteration of this
passage (MaM Vagga VI, 28: ii, 12).


22


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


Whilst the vain world ties its basket rafts —
These are the wise, these are the saved indeed M'


End of the First Portion for Recitation.


^ That is, those who cross the ‘ocean drear ^ of ta«ha, or
craving ; avoiding, by means of the ‘ dyke ’ or causeway of the
Noble Path/ the ‘ pools ^ or shallows O'f lust, and ignorance, and
delusion (comp. Dhp. v. 91), whilst the vain world looks for sal¬
vation from rites, and ceremonies, and gods, — ‘ these are the wise,
these are the saved indeed I ’

How the metre of the verses in the text fell into the confusion
in which it at present stands is not easy to ,see. One would
expect —

Ye visa^^a pallalani taranti anna.v2.7n sara;/^

Kulla??i hi ^ano bandhati medhavino ^and,.

That a gloss can creep into the text, even in verses, is clear from
the indisputable instance at Gataka II, 35; and the words setuw
katvina would have been a very natural gloss had the passage
once stood as above. Then supposing that a copyist or reciter
had found the words ye visa^^a pallaldni setu;;/ katv^na
taranti anfiavam saraw., he might have corrected, as he thought,
the order of the words so as to avoid any possibility of the words
being taken to mean that the setu, the solid causeway, was made
over the a«!?zava3';r sara?;;, the vastly deep, which would be pal¬
pably absurd. Buddhagnosa found setu?;2 katvdna in the text,
but it is not possible to tell in what order he found the words. The
Tumour MS. of the Suniangala Vilasini has pabandhati, but a
Ceylon copy of the Sanianta P^sadika confirms the Burmese read¬
ing bandhati at Mah^ Yagga VI, 28, 13. I* need scarcely say
that the translation follows the printed text. We know too little
about the history of the P^li Suttas to be able to do more than
make a passing note of such curiosities.

On vanishing away from a place, comp, below, III, 22.


ir.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


23


Chapter II.

1. Now the Blessed One addressed the venera¬
ble Ananda, and said : ‘ Come, Ananda, let us go
on to Ko/igama.’

‘ So be it, Lord ! ’ said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

The Blessed One proceeded with a great company
of the brethren to Ko/ig^ma ; and there he stayed
in the village itself^.

2. And a.t that place the Blessed One addressed
the brethren, and said : " It is through not under¬
standing and grasping four Noble Truths, O brethren,
that we have had to run so long, to Avander so
long in this weary path of transmigration, both you
and I ! '

‘ And what are these four ? '

‘ The noble truth about sorrow ; the noble truth
about the cause of sorrow ; +^he noble truth about
the cessation of sorrow ; and the noble truth about
the path that leads to that cessation. But when
these noble truths are grasped and known the
craving for existence is rooted out, that which
leads to renewed existence is destro^T'ed,- and then
there is no more birth ! ’

3. Thus spake the Blessed One ; and when the
Happy One had thus spoken, then again the
Teacher said:

^ As will be observed from the similar passages that follow,
there is a regular sequence of clauses in the set descriptions of the
Buddha's movements. The last clause should specify the particular
grove or house where the Blessed One staj-^ed ; but it is also (in
this and one or two other cases) inserted with due regularity even
when it adds nothing positive to the sense.


24


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


‘By not seeing the four Noble Truths as they
really are,

Long is the path that is traversed through many
a birth ;

When these are grasped, the cause of birth is
then removed.

The root of sorrow rooted out, and there is no
more birth/

4. There too, while staying at Ko^figdma, the
Blessed One held that comprehensive religious dis¬
course with the brethren on the nature of upright
conduct, and of earnest contemplation, and of in¬
telligence. ‘ Great is the fruit, great the advan¬
tage of earnest contemplation when set round with
upright conduct. Great is the fruit, great the
advantage of intellect when set round with earnest
contemplation. The mind set round with intelligence
is freed from the great evils, — that is to say, from
sensuality, from individuality, from delusion, and
from ignorance.’ _

5. Now when the Blessed One had remained as
long as was convenient at Kozfig^ma, he addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : ‘ Come, Ananda,
let us go on to the villages of Nddika/

VSo be it, Lord!' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

And the Blessed proceeded to the villages of
N^dikti with a great company of the brethren; and
there, at Nddika, the Blessed One stayed at the
Brick HalP.


^ At first N^dika is (twice) spoken of in the plural number ; but
then, thirdly, in the last clause, in the singular. Buddhaghosa


II.


M AHA-PARINIBB An A-SU TT A.


25


6. And the venerable Ananda went to the
Blessed One and paid him reverence and took
his seat beside him. And when he was seated, he
addressed the Blessed One, and said : " The brother
named Sd/>^a has died at Nddika, Lord. Where has
he been reborn, and what is his destiny ? The
sister named Nandd has died, Lord, at N^dika.
Where is she reborn, and what is her destiny
And in the same terms he enquired concerning-
the devout Sudatta, and the devout lady Su^AtA,
the devout Kakudha, and K4linga, and Nikaz^a,
and Ka/issabha, and Tu/i:^>^a, and Santu^V/^a, and
Bhadda, and Subhadda.

7. * The brother named Sa//^a, Ananda, by the
destruction of the great evils has by himself, and ‘in
this world,* known and realised and attained to Ara-
hatship, and to emancipation of heart and to emanci¬
pation of mind. The sister named Nandd, Ananda,
has, by the complete destruction of the five bonds
that bind people to this world, become an inheritor
of the highest heavens, there to pass entirely away,
thence never to return. The devout Sudatta,
Ananda, by the complete desti action of the three
bonds, and by the reduction to a minimum of lust,
hatred, and delusion has become a Sakadag4min,
who on his first return to this world will make an
end of sorrow. The devout woman Su^dtd, Ananda,
by the complete destruction of the three bonds, has
become converted, is no longer liable to be reborn
in a state of suffering, and is assured of final salva-

explains this by saying- that there were two villages of the same
name on the shore of the same piece of water. On the public
resting-place for travellers, which in this instance bore the proud
title of Brick Hall, see ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,' pp. .280—285.


26


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


lion \ The devout Kakudha, Ananda, by the com¬
plete destruction of the five bonds that bind people
to these lower worlds of lust, has become an inheritor
of the highest heavens, there to pass entirely away,
thence never to return. So also is the case with
K.41inga, Nika^fa, Ka/issabha, Tu///^a, Santu^'M-a,
Bhadda, and Subhadda, and with more than fift}’
devout men of Nadika. More than ninety devout
men of Nadika, who have died, Ananda, have by
the complete destruction of the three bonds, and
by the reduction of lust, hatred, and delusion, be¬
come Sakadagamins, who on their first return to
this Avorld will make an end of sorrow. More than
five hundred devout men of Nadika who have died.

A,

Ananda, have by the complete destruction of the
three bonds become converted, are no longer liable
to be reborn in a state of suffering, and are assured
of final salvation.

8. ‘ Now there is nothing strange in this, Ananda,
that a human being should die, but that as each one
does so you should come to the Buddha, and en¬
quire about them in this manner, that is wearisome
to the Buddha. I will, therefore, teach you a way
of truth; called the Mirror of Truth, which if an
elect' disciple possess he ixiay himself predict of him¬
self, Hell is destroyed for me, and rebirth as an
ammal, or a ghost, or in any place of woe. I am
converted, I am no longer liable to be reborn in a
state of suffering, and am assured of final salvation."’

9. ‘ What then, Ananda, is this mirror of truth ?
It is the consciousness that the elect disciple is
in this world possessed of faith in the Buddha —


^ See ‘Buddhism,’ pp. 108- no, and below, VI, 9.


II. maha-parinibbAna-sutta. 27

believing- the Blessed One to be the Holy One,
the Fully-enlightened One, Wise, Upright, Happy,
W^orld-kn owing, Supreme, the Bridler of men’s way¬
ward hearts, the Teacher of gods and men, the
Blessed Buddha. And that he (the disciple) is
possessed of faith in the Truth — believing the truth
to have been proclaimed by the Blessed One, of
advantage in this world, passing not awa}'-, wel¬
coming all, leading to salvation, and to be attained
to by the wise, each one for himself. And that he
(the disciple) is pos^'essed of faith in the Order —
l^elieving the multitude of the disciples of the Blessed
One who are walking in the four stages of the noble
eightfold path, the righteous, the upright, the just,
the law-abiding — believing this church of the
Buddha to be worthy of honour, of hospitality, of
gifts, and of reverence ; *to be the supreme sowing
ground of merit for the world ; to be possessed of
the virtues beloved by the good, virtues unbroken,
intact, unspotted, unblemished, virtues which make
men truly free, virtues which are praised by the
wise, are untarnished by the desire of future life
or by the belief in the efficacy of outward acts, and
are conducive to high and holy thought

10. ‘ This, Ananda, is the way, the mirror of truth,

which if an elect disciple possess he may himself
predict of himself: Hell is destroyed for me ; and

rebirth as an animal, or a ghost, or in any place of
woe. I am converted ; I am no longer liable to be
reborn in a state of suffering, and am assured of final
salvation.”’ _

11. There, too, at the Brick Hall-at Nadika the


^ See above, § I, ii.


28


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH-


Blessed One addressed to the brethren that com¬
prehensive religious discourse on the nature of up¬
right conduct, and of earnest contemplation, and of
intelligence.

‘Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest
contemplation when set round with upright conduct.
Great is the fruit, great the advantage of intellect
when set round with earnest contemplation. The
mind set round with intelligence is freed from the
great evils, that is to say, from sensuality, from
individuality, from delusion, and from ignorance.’

12. Now when the Blessed One had remained as
long as he wished at N4dika, he addressed Ananda,
and said : ‘ Come, Ananda, let us go on to Vesdli.’

‘ So be it, Lord 1’ said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One proceeded, with a great
company of the bretnren, to Ves^li ; and there at
Ves^li the Blessed One stayed at AmbapMi’s grove-

13. Now there the Blessed One addressed the
brethren, and said : * Let a brother, O mendicants,
be mindful and thoughtful; this is our instruction
to you.’

14. ‘And how does a brother become mindful ?’

‘Herein, O mendicants, let a brother, as he dwells

in . the body, so regard the body that he, being
strenuous, thoughtful, and mindful, may, whilst in
the world, overcome the grief which arises from
bodily craving — while subject to sensations, let
him continue so to regard the sensations that
he, being strenuous, thoughtful, and mindful, may,
whilst in the world, overcome the grief arising from
the craving which follows our sensation — and so also


ir. mahA-parinibbana-sutta. 29

as he thinks or reasons or feels let him overcome
the grief which arises from tho craving due to iaeao,
or reasoning, or feeling/

15. ‘And how does a brother become thoughtful ?’

‘ He acts, O mendicants, in full presence of mind
whatever he may do, in going out and coming in,
in looking and watching, in bending in his arm or
stretching it forth, in wearing his robes or carrying
his bowl, in eating and drinking, in consuming or
tasting, in walking or standing or sitting, in sleeping
or waking, in talking and in being silent.

‘ Thus let a brother, O mendicants, be mindful
and thoughtful ; this is our instruction to you


^ This doctrine of being ‘mindful and thoughtful’ — sato sampa-
^dno — is one of the lessons most frequently inculcated in the
Pdli Pi/akas, and is one of the ‘ Seven Jewels of the Law.’ It is
fully treated of in each of the Nik^yas, forming the subject of the
Mahd Satippa/MS.na Sutta in the Digha NikSya, and the Satipa//>^^na
Sutta of the Ma^^-^ima Nikaya, and the Satippa//Mna Vaggo of
the Sa^Tzyutta Nikaya, as well as of various passages in the
Ahguttara NikUya and of the work called Vibhahga in the Abhi-
dhamma Pi/aka. I am glad to learn that Dr. Morris intends to
collect and compare all these passages in his forthcoming work
on the ‘ Seven Jewels of the Law.’ These sections of the Mahd-
parinibbdna Sutta and the treatment in the 'Vibhahga have pre¬
served, in Dr. Morris’s opinion, the oldest form of the doctrme.
Compare Chap. II, § 34.

Buddhaghosa has no comment here on the subject itself, re¬
serving what he has to say for the comment on the Suttas devoted
entirely to it ; but he observes in passing that the reason why the
Blessed One laid stress, at this particular time and place, on the
necessity of being ‘mindful and thoughtful,’ was because of the
imminent approach of the beautiful courtezan in. whose grove they
were staying. The use of the phrase sati upa//-^dpetabbd
below, Chap. V, § 13 (text, p. 51), in reference to the way in
which women should be treated, is quite iii accordance with this
explanation. But see the next note.


30 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE- CH.

1 6. ^ Now the courtezan Ambapdli heard that the
Blessed One had arriv ed at Vesdli, and was staying"
at her mango grove. And ordering a number of
magnificent vehicles to be made ready, she mounted
one of them, and. proceeded with her train towards
her garden. She went in the carriage as far as
the ground was passable for carriages ; there she
alighted ; and she proceeded on foot to the place
where the Blessed One was, and took her seat
respectfully on one side. And when she was thus
seated the Blessed One instructed, aroused, incited,
and gladdened her with religious discourse.

1 7. Then she — instructed, aroused, incited, and
gladdened with his words — addressed the Blessed
One, and said :

‘ May the Blessed One do me the honour or
taking his meal, together with the brethren, at my
house to-morrow.'

And the Blessed One gave, by silence, his
consent. Then when AmbapMi the courtezan saw
that the Blessed One had consented, she rose from
her seat and bowed down before him, and keeping
him on her right hand as she past him, she departed
thence.


^ From this point down to the words ‘ he rose from his seat,' in
§ II5 24, is, with a few unimportant variations, word for word the
same as Mah^ Vagga VI, 30, i, to VI, 30, 6. But the passage
there follows immediately after the verses translated above, § I, 34,
so that the events here (in §§ 16—22) localised at Vesdli, are there
localised at Ko/igdma. Our section II, 5 is then inserted between
our sections II, 32 and II, 23; and our section 11, 12 does not
occur at all, the Blessed One only reaching Amhap^li’s grove
when he goes there (as in our section II, 23) to partake of the
meal to which he had been invited. Buddhaghdsa passes over this
discrepancy in silence.


n.


MAHA-PARINIBbAnA-SU TTA.


31


1 8. Now the Li/^y^/^avis of Ves^Ii heard that the
Blessed One had arrived at VesAli, and was staying^
at AmbapAlfs grove. And ordering a number of
magnificent carriages to be made ready, they
mounted one of them and proceeded with their
tram to Vesili. Some of them were dark, dark in
colour, and wearing dark clothes and ornaments :
some of them were fair, fair in colour, and wearing
light clothes and ornaments: some of them were
red, ruddy in colour, and wearing red clothes and
ornaments: some of them were white, pale in colour,
and wearing white clothes and ornaments.

19. And Ambapiii drove up against the young
'ILiM^/za.viSy axle to axle, wheel to wheel, and yoke
to yoke, and the Li/^’/&/^avis said to Ambap^li the
courtezan, ‘ How is it, Ambapall, that thou drivest
up against us thus ?

My Lords, I have just invited the Blessed One
and his brethren for their moi row’s meal,’ said she.

‘ Ambapdli I give up this meal to us for a hundred
thousand,’ said they.

‘My Lords, were you to offer all VesAli with its
subject territory b I would not give up so honourable
a feast !’

Then the Liy^'y^>^avis cast up their hands exclaim¬
ing, ‘We are outdone by this mango girl ! we are
out-reached by this mango girl ^ ’ and they went on
to AmbapMi’s grove.

20. When the Blessed One saw the Li/f'y^/iavis


^ S^h^ran ti sa-^g^anapadan. (S. V. /au.)

® Anguli po//2esuz7/. Childers translates this phrase *to snap
the fingers as a token of pleasure ; ’ but Buddhaghosa says,
ahguU po/y^esun ti afigult /^alesuw. (S. V. /au.)

® Ambapdli means mango grower, one who looks after mangoes.


32


CH.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


approaching in the distance, he addressed the
hreinren, and said :

‘ O brethren, let those of the brethren who have
never seen the Tdvati?/^sa gods, gaze upon this
company of the Li/^/^^avis, behold this company of
the Li/^y^/^avis, compare this company of the Li/^/i'/^a-
vis — even as a company of Tavatis^^sa gods’/

2 1. And when they had ridden as far as the
ground was passable for carriages, the Li/rz&^avis
alighted there, and then went on on foot to the
place where the Blessed One was, and took their
seats respectfully by his side. And when they
were thus seated the Blessed One instructed and
roused and incited and gladdened them with reli¬
gious discourse^.

2 2. Then they instructed and roused and incited,
and gladdened with his words, addressed the Blessed
One, and said, ^ May the Blessed One do us the
honour of taking his meal, together with the brethren,
at our house to-morrow ? ’

* O Li/§Z?/2avis, I have promised to dine to-morrow
with Ambapili the courtezan,’ was the reply.


^ The Tavatizwsa-dev^ are the gods in the heaven of the
Great Thirty-Three, the principal deities of the Vedic Pantheon.
Buddhaghosa says, ‘ Ima/;z U/^/^^avi-parisa/?z tumhaka;^/ ^I’ittena
Tavatiwsa-parisa/?z upasa?72haratha upanetha alliydp'etha : Yath’ eva
hi TavatiwsS, abhirupa pasidika nil^di-nina-vaTi?/^ eva;^ inie

plti. T^vatiz/zsehi samake katv^ passathd. ti attho.’

® The Malilahkara-vatthu gives the substance of the discourse
on this occasion. ‘The princes had come in their finest and richest
dress ; in their appearance they vied in beauty with the nats (or
angels). But foreseeing the ruin and misery that was soon to come
upon them all, the Buddha exhorted his disciples to entertain a
thorough contempt for things that are dazzling to the eyes, but
essentially perishable and unreal in their nature.’ — Bigandet, znd
ed. p. 260.


mahA-parinibbIna-sutta.


33


rr.


Then the Li/§-^>^avis cast up their hands, exclaiming,

‘ We are outdone by this maiig^o girl 1 we are out-
reached by this mango girl ! ^ And expressing their
thanks and approval of the words of the Blessed
One, they rose from their seats and bowed down
before the Blessed One, and keeping him on their
right hand as they past him, they departed thence.

23. And at the end of the night AmbapAli th^;
courtezan made ready in her mansion sweet rice
and cakes, and announced the time to the Blessed
One, saying, ‘The hour. Lord, has come, and the
meal is ready ! *

And the Blessed One robed himself early in the
morning, and took his bowl, and went with the
brethren to the place where Ambapllli’s dwelling-
house was : and when he had come there he seated
himself on the seat prepared for him. And AmbapAli
the courtezan set the sweet rice and cakes before the
order, with the Buddha at their head, and waited
upon them till they refused any more.

24. And when the Blessed One had quite finished
his meal, the courtezan had a low stool brought, and
sat down at his side, and addressed the Blessed One,
and said : ‘ Lord, I present this mansion to the order
of mendicants, of which the Buddha is the chief.’
And the Blessed One accepted the gift; and after
instructing, and rousing, and inciting, and gladden¬
ing her with religious discourse, he rose from his
seat and departed thence*.

' Bishop Bigandet says : ‘ In recording the conversion of a

courtezan named Apapalika, her liberality and gifts to Budha and
his disciples, and the preference designedly given to her over
princes and nobles, who, humanely speaking, seemed in every
respect better entitled to attentions — one is almost reminded of

[iij D


34


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


25. While at Ambapdli's mango grove the Blessed
One held that comprehensive religious discourse
with the disciples on the nature of upright conduct,
and of earnest contemplation, and of intelligence.

* Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest
contemplation when set round with upright eonduct.
Great is the fruit, great the advantage of intellect
when set round with earnest contemplation. The
mind set round with intelligence is freed from the
great evils, that is to say, from sensuality, from
individuality, from delusion, and from ignorance.’


26. Now when the Blessed One had remained
as long as he wished at Ambap^li’s grove, he
addressed Ananda, and said : ‘ Come, Ananda, let
us go on to Beluva

* So be it. Lord,’ said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One proceeded, with a great
company of the brethren, to Beluva, and thefe the
Blessed One stayed in the village itself.


27. Now the Blessed One there addressed the
brethren, and said ; ‘ O mendicants, do you take up
your abode round about Vesali, each according to
the place where his friends, intimates, and close
companions may live, for the rainy season of vassa.
I shall enter upon the rainy season here at Beluva.’


the conversion of ** a woman that was a sinner,*' mentioned in the
Gospels' (Legend of the Burmese Budha, 2nd ed. p. 258).

^ Beluva-glmako ti Ves^li-samtpe pS.da-g4mako, ' a vil-
lage on a slope at the foot of a hill near Vesali,' says Buddhag’hosa.
(S. V. /an.)


It. mahA-parinibbAna-sutta. 35

* So be it, Lord ! ’ said those brethren, in assent,
to the Blessed One. And tney entered upon the
rainy season round about Vesdli,. each according
to the place where his friends or intimates or close
companions lived : whilst the Blessed One stayed
even there at Beluva.

28. Now when the Blessed One had thus entered
upon the rainy season, there fell upon him a dire
sickness, and sharp pains came upon him, even unto
death. But the Blessed One, mindful and self-
possessed, bore them without complaint.

29. ‘Then this thought occurred to the Blessed
One, ‘ It would not be right for me to pass away
from existence without addressing the disciples,
without taking leave of the oraer. Let me now,
by a strong effort of the will, bend this sickness
down again, and keep my hold on life till the
allotted time be come

30. And the Blessed One, by a strong effort of
the will, bent that sickness down again, and kept
his hold on life till the time he fixed upon should
come. And the sickness abated upon him.

31. Now very soon after the Blessed One began
to recover ; when he had quite got rid of the sick¬
ness, he wrent out from the monastery, and sat down
behind the monastery on a seat spread out there.
And the venerable Ananda went to the place where
the Blessed One was, and saluted him, and took
a seat respectfully on one side, and addressed the


^ The commentary on ^tvita-sankhdra/« adhitthdya viha-
reyyan is not quite clear, but the g-eneral meaning of the words
cannot be very different from the version given in the text.

T) 2


36


CH.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT BECEASE.


Blessed One, and said : ‘ I have beheld, Lord, how
the Blessed One was m health, and I have beheld
how the Blessed One had to suffer. And thoug^h
at the sight of the sickness of the Blessed One my
body became weak as a creeper, and the horizon
became dim to me, and my faculties were no longer
clear yet notwithstanding I took some little comfort
from the thought that the Blessed One would not
pass away from existence until at least he had left
instructions as touching the order.’

32. ‘ What, then, Ananda ? Does the order ex¬
pect that of me ? I have preached the truth "without
making any distinction between exoteric and esote¬
ric doctrine : for in respect of the truths, Ananda, the
Xath^gata has no such thing as the closed fist of
a teacher, who keeps some things back Surely,
Ananda, should there be any one who harbours the
thought, “ It is I who will lead the brotherhood,”
or, “ The order is dependent upon me,” it is he w’ho


^ Madhuraka-^^to viyS, ti saw^dta-garubh^vo
ta/Z^abhr^vo (sic) siile uttdsita-sadiso: na pakkh^yantt
ti na pak^senti nlLndkara^za na upaZ/^^ahanti : Dhamm^
pi maOT na ppaZibhanti ti sati-ppa/Z//^nS, dhammd may-
ham p^kaZd na honti. (S^ V. fol. Zim.) As the first clause is
corrupt, I have translated madkuraka -^^to independently of it-
Childers's reading n a na ppaZibhanti is clearly incorrect. My
own MS. of the JDfgha Nikaya and the Tumour MS. of the Sam-
3'utta Nikdya agree with Buddhaghosa.

^ Na tatth’ Ananda TathS-gatassa dhammesu d/^ariya-
muZZ/^i ;*^on whichBuddhaghosa says, A/^ariya-muZZ/^i i (MS. vu//Ai)
ti yathU bt.h.irakdnawz a/^ariya-muZZAi n^ma hoti: dahara-
k^le kassa^i akathetva pay^,^i^imai-kdle maraj^a-ma»^e
nipannli piya-manUpassa antevdsikkssa kathenti: evam Ta-
thagatassa idaw mahallaka-k^le pa^^v^ima-ZZi^dne kathes-
sam$ ti mnZZAiz» (MS. vuZMi/») katvd. pariharitvd Z;^apitaz/i
kiwy&i n’atthi ti. (S. V. Z§,m.) Comp. Gataka II, 221, 250.


II.


37


MAHA-PARINIBB ANA-S U TTA.


should lay down instructions in any matter concern-
ing the order. Now the Tathdgata, Ananda, thinks
not that it is he who should lead the brotherhood, or
that the order is dependent upon him. W'^hy then
should he leave instructions in any matter concern¬
ing’ the order ? I too, O Ananda, am now grown
did, and full of years, my journey is drawing to
its close, I have reached my sum of days, I am
turning eighty years of age ; and just as a worn-out
cart, Ananda, can only with much additional care
be made to move along, so, niethinks, the body
of the Tathdgata can only be kept going with
much additional care^. It is only, Ananda, when


^ Vegha-mis sakena, the meaning of .vhich is not clear. The
MdldIahkS,ra-vatthu, as rendered by Bigandet, has ‘ repairs.' The
SumangalaVilasini says, Vegha miss aken4 ti bdha-bandhana-
X’akka-bandhan^dind pa/isahkhara/zena veghamissakena ;
thus giving the same meaning, but in sucli a way as to throw no light
on the derivation of the word. The whole episode from § II, 27 to the
end of the chapter occurs also word for word in the Satipa//Mna
Vagga of the Sazzzyutta Nikd3"a, and the Burmese Phayre MS-
there reads vekh amis sakena, as the Burmese MS. does here.
My Digha Nikdya confirms Childers's reading, which no doubt
correctly represents the uniform tradition of the Ceylon MSS.
The Sumangala Vildsini goes on, ma?7we ti ^g^ara-saka/a/w
viya megbamissakena mazzwe ydpeti arahatta-phala-
veghanena X’atu-iriy i patha-kappana^w Tathdgatassa
hoti nidasseti. Here the reading megha of the Tumour MS*
must be a copyist’s slip of the pen for vegha, and veghanena
is no clearer than veghamissakena. On the use of the
word missaka at the end of a compound see (S'dtaka II, 8,
420, 433. I have translated on what seems to me the only solu¬
tion at present possible, namely, that an initial a has been dropt,
and that veghd or vekhd=avekshd, 'attention, foresight, care.'
Ill the same way though avalaw^eti does occur (6rStaka I, 111),
the more usual form in Pali, and the only one given by Childers,
is valazz^eti.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH-


;8


the Tath^gata, ceasing to attend to any outward
thing, or to experience any sensation, becomes
plunged in that devout meditation of heart which is
concerned with no material object — it is only then
that the body of the Tathagata is at ease.

33. ‘ Therefore, O Ananda, be ye lamps unto your¬
selves. Be ye a refuge to yourselves. Betake
yourselves to norexternal refuge. Hold fast to the
truth as a lamp. Hold fast as a refuge to the truth.
Look not for refuge to any one besides ^^ourselves.
And how, Ananda, is a brother to be a lamp unto
himself, a refuge to himself, betaking himself to no
external refuge, holding fast to the truth as a lamp,
holding last as a refuge to the truth, looking not
for refuge to any one besides himself ?

34. ‘ Herein, O Ananda, let a brother, as he dwells
in the body, so regard the body that he, being
strenuous, thoughtful, and mindful, may, whilst in
the world, overcome the grief which arises from
bodily craving — while subject to sensations let him
continue so to regard the sensations that he, being
strenuous, thoughtfxil, and mindful, may, whilst in
the world, overcome the grief which arises from the
sensations — and so, also, as he thinks, or reasons,
or feels, let him overcome the grief which arises
from the craving due to ideas, or to reasoning, or
to feeling.

35. * And whosoever, Ananda, either now or after
I am dead, shall be a lamp unto themselves, and a
refuge unto themselves, shall betake themselves to
no external refuge, but holding fast to the truth
as their lamp, and holding fast as their refuge to
the truth, shall look not for refuge to any one
besides themselves- — it is they, Ananda, among my


II.


39


MAHA-PARINIBBANA“SUTTA.


bhikkhus, who shall reach the very topmost
Height ! — but they must be anxious to learn

End of the Second Portion for Recitation.


^ T amatagg-e me te A nan da bhikkhO. bhavissanti ye ke/^i
sikkhaki,m^. The Burmese MSS. for me te read p'ete, which
is a little easier. Buddhaghosa says, Taniatagge ti tamagge.
Ma^^/^e takdro padasandhivasepa vutto. Idam vutta?^
hoti ime aggatama ime aggam^ ti : eva77^ sabbaw- tama-
yog^rn Z’Ainditva ativiya agge uttama-bhave te Ananda
mama/w bhikkhh bhavissanti. Kesa?7^ ati-agge bhavis¬
santi? Ye ke/?’i sikkhakdmd sabbesaw te /’atu-sati-ppa/-
//iana-go^’ard ko, bhikkhh agge bhavissanti ti. Arahatta-
likii/ena desawam gawhati, ‘Tamatagge is^ for tamagge.
The t in the middle is used for euphony. This word means,
these are the most pre-eminent, the very chief.'^ Having, as
above stated, broken every bond of darkness (tama) those bhikkhus
of mine, Ananda, will be at the very top, in the highest condition.
They will be at the very top of whom ? Those bhikkhus who are
willing to learn, and those who exercise themselves in the four
ways of being mindful and thoughtful^ they sliall be at the top of
all (the rest). Thus does he maSce Arahatship the three-peaked
height of his discourse’ (compare on this last phrase Nibbdnena
desanakii/a/.z ga?zhati, <9dtaka I, 275, 393, 401 ; and see also
I, 1 1 4). Uttama, the highest (scil. bha^^a, condition), is used abso¬
lutely of Arahatship or Nirvliwa at G^^taka I, 96; Aggaphala
occurs in the same sense at (9dtaka I, 114; and even Phalagga
at Mah. 102. The last words, ‘out they must be anxious to learn,’
seem to me to be an after thought. It is only those who are
thoroughly determined to work out their own salvation, without
looking for safety to any one else, even to the Buddha himself, who
will, whilst in the world, enter into and experience Nirvd^a. But,
of course, let there be no mistake, merely to reject the vain baubles
of the current superstitious beliefs is not enough. There is plenty
to learn and to acquire, of which enough discourse is elsewhere.
For aggama in the comment we must read aggatami.. If one
could read ainatagge in the text, all difficulty would vanish; but
this would be too bold, and neither do I see how the use of
anamatagge can help us.


40


CH,


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


Chapter III.

I Now the Blessed One robed himself early in
the morning, and taking his bcwl in the robe,
went into Vesdli for alms, and when he returned he
sat down on che seat prepared for him, and after
he had finished eating the rice he addressed the
venerable Ananda, and said : ‘ Take up the mat,
Ananda ; I will go to spend the day at the

‘So be it, Lord!' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One. And taking up the mat
he followed step for step behind the Blessed One.

2. So the Blessed One proceeded to the Afdpdla
.^etiya, and when he had come there he sat down
on the mat spread out for him, and the venerable
Ananda took his seat respectfully beside him. Then
the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ananda,
and said: ‘ How delightful a spot, Ananda, is Ves§.li,
and the U dena ATetiya, and the Gotamaka ATetiya,
and the Sattambaka ^etiya, and the Bahuputta
ATetiya, and the S^randada A^etiya, and the ATdp^la
A^etiya.

3. Ananda I whosoever has thought out, deve¬
loped, practised, accumulated, and ascended to the
very heights of the four paths to Tddhi 2, and so


The whoie of this passage down to the end of § 10 recurs in
the Iddhipdda Vagga of the Sa/z^yutta Nikaya.

Idfdhi. The four paths are, i. will, 2. effort, 3. thought,
and 4. investigation, each united to earnest thought and the
struggle against sin. The Iddhi reached by them, is^ supposed in
works on Buddhism to be a bodily condition (power of flying, &c.),
by which the body rose superior to all the ordinary limitations of


III.


41


mahA-parinibb^Ka-sutta.


mastered them as to be able to use them as a
means of (mental) advancement, and as a basis for
edification, he, should he desire it, could remain in
the same birth for a kalpa, or for that portion of the
kalpa which had yet to run. Now the Xathagata
has thought them out, and thoroughly practised and
developed them [in all respects as just more fully
described], and he could, therefore, should he desire
it, live on yet for a kalpa, or for that portion of the
kalpa which has yet to run/

4. But even though a suggestion so evident and
a hint so clear were thus given by the Blessed One,
the venerable Ananda was incapable of comprehend¬
ing them ; and he besought not the Blessed One.
saying, ‘ Vouchsafe, Lord, to remain during the
kctlpa ! Live on through the kalpa, O Blessed One !
for the good and the happiness of the great multi¬
tudes, out of pity for the world, for the good and
the gain and the w'eal of gods and men ! ’ So far
was his heart possessed by the Evil One


matter — a bodil> condition corresponding' to the mental condition
of exaltation and power by which it was reached. On this curiously
perverted exaggeration of the real influence of the mind over the
body see, further, the translator’s ‘Buddhism,’ pp. 174—177.. T'wo
of the string of participles — ydniicata, which may possibly mean
‘made use of as a vehicle,’ and susamtiraddha, ‘most thoroughly
ascended up to — might seem to allude to Iddhi as a power of
flying bodily through the air. But the whole set of participles
is used else'where of conditions of mind highly esteemed among
the Buddhists, and incapable of giving support to any such
allu.sion. So, for instance, of universal love (mettd) at (jataka
II, 6i.

Yathd ta^/^ IVIarena pariy u/Mita>l’itto. Here t aw? is the
indeclinable particle, yath^ tawz introducing an explanation. My
IMS. of the Dtgha Nikaya and the Tumour MS. of the Sumangala
Vilasini read pariz’u/Z/Siita, and either spelling is correct. The


42


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


5. A second and a third time did the Blessed One
[say the same thing-, and a second and a third time
was Ananda's heart thus hardened].

6. Now the Blessed One addressed the venera-

A A

ble Ananda, and said ; ‘ You may leave me, Ananda,
awhile, and do whatever seemetli tc thee ht.’

‘So be it, Lord!* said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed, and rising from his seat he
saluted the Blessed One, and passing him on the
right, sat down at the foot of a certain tree not
far off thence.

A

7. Now not long after the venerable Ananda
had been gone, Mdra, the Evil One, approached the
Blessed One, and stood beside him. And so stand¬
ing there, he addressed the Blessed One in these
words :

‘ Pass away now. Lord, from existence ; let the
Blessed One now die. Now is the time for the
Blessed One to pass away — even according to the

fact is that the or & in such cases is even less than euphonic ; it
is an assistance not to the speaker, but merely to the writer. Thus
in the Sinhalese duwanaw^., ‘to run,’ the spoken word is dii-
anaw^, and the zv is written only to avoid the awkward use in
the middle of a word of the initial sign for the sound a. That the
speakers of Pili found no difficulty in pronouncing two vowels
together is abundantly proved by numerous instances. The
writers of Pali, in those cases in which the second vowel begins a
word, use without hesitation the ' initial sign ; but in the middle of
the word this would be so ungainly that they naturally prefer to
insert a consonantal sign to carry the vowel sign. The varying
readings I have pointed out are a strong confirmation of the cor¬
rectness of the pronunciation of modern native scholars ; and we
may the more readily adopt it as the question is not really one
concerning the pronunciation of P^li, but concerning the use which
modern native copyists make of their own alphabet. I would pro-r
nounce therefore pari-u/Z^^ita-’i^itto.


Ill-


mahA-parinibbAna~sutta.


43


word which the Blessed One spoke when he said ^ :

I shall not die, O Bvil One I until the brethren
and sisters of the order, and until the lay-disciples
of either sex ^ shall have become true hearers, wise
and well-trained, ready and learned, versed in the
Scriptures, fulfilling- all the greater and the lesser
duties, correct in life, walking according to the pre¬
cepts — until they, having thus themselves learned
the doctrine, shall be able to tell others of it, preach
it, make it known, establish it, open it, minutely ex¬
plain it and make it clear— until they, when others
start vain doctrine, shall be a.ble by the truth to
vanquish and refute it, and so to spread the wonder¬
working truth abroad ! '

8. * And now, Lord, the brethren and sisters of the
order and the lay-disciples of either sex have be¬
come [all this], are able to do [all this]. Pass away
now therefore, Lord, from existence ; let the Blessed
One now die ! The time has come for the' Blessed
One to pass away — even according to the word
which he, spake when he said, “I shall not die, O
Evil One ! until this pure religion of mine shall
have become successful, prosperous, widespread, and
popular in all its full extent — until, in a word,
it shall have been well proclaimed to men.’' And
now, Lord, this pure religion of thine has become
[all this]. Pass away now therefore, Lord, from


^ The words here quoted were spoken by the Buddha, after he
had been enjoying the first bliss of NirvS,na, under the shepherd's
Nigrodha tree (see my ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories,’ pp. 109-111). The
Evil One then also tempted him to die (see below, paragraph III,
43), and this was his reply.

^ The whole paragraph is repeated, here and below, for each of
these classes of persons.


44


CH.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.

existence; let the Blessed One now die! The time
Jtias come for the Blessed One to pass away 1 ’

9. And when he had thus spoken, the Blessed
One addressed Mara, the Evil One, and said: ‘O
Evil One ! make thyself happy, the final extinction
of the Tathagata shall take place before long. At
the end of three months from this time the Tathd-
gata will die I ’

10. Thus the Blessed One while at the J^apdla
./ifetiya deliberately and consciously rejected the rest
of his allotted sum of life. And on his so rejecting it
there arose a mighty earthquake, awful and terrible,
and. the chunders of heaven burst forth. And when
the Blessed One beheld this, he broke out at that
time into this hymn of exultation :

* His sum of life the sage renounced,

The cause of life immeasurable or small ;

With inward joy and calm, he broke.

Like coat of mail, his life’s own cause ! ’


11. Now the following thought occurred to the

venerable Ananda : ‘ AVonderful indeed and marvel¬
lous is it that this mighty earthquake should arise,
awful and terrible, and that the thunders of heaven
should burst forth 1 What may be the proximate,
what the remote cause of the appearance of this
earthquake ? ’ ^

12. Then the venerable Ananda went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and did obeisance
to the Blessed One, and seated himself respectfully
at one side, and said : * Wonderful indeed and mar¬
vellous is it that this mighty earthquake should
arise, awful and terrible, and that the thunders of


III.


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta.


45


heaven should burst forth 1 What may be the
proximate, what the remote cause of the appearancfe
of this earthquake ? ’

13. ' Kight are the proximate, eight the remote
causes, Ananda, for the appearance of a mighty
eartnquake. ^A^hat are the eight ? This great
earth, Ananda, is established on water, the water on
wind, and the wind rests upon space. And at such
a time, Ananda, as the mighty winds blow, the
waters are shaken by the mighty winds as they
blow, and by the moving water the earth is shaken.
These are the first causes, proximate and remote,
of the appearance of a mighty earthquake.

14. * Again, Ananda, a Sama^^a or a BrAhman of
great (intellectual) power, and who has the feelings
of his heart well under his control ; or a gad or fairy
(devatA of great might and power, — when such a

Devatd is a fairy, god, genius, or angel. I am at a loss how
to render this word without conveying an erroneous impression
to those not familiar with ancient ideas, and specially with ancient
Buddhist ideas, of the spirit world. It includes gods of all sorts ;
tree and river nymphs ; the kindly fairies or ghosts who haunt
houses (see my * Buddhist Birth Stories,' Tale No. 40); spirits in
the ground (see above, § I, 26); the angels who minister at the great
renunciation, the temptation, and the death of the Buddha ; the
guardian angels who watch over men, and towns, and countries ;
and many other similar beings. * Celestial being ' would be wholly
inapplicable, for instance, to the creatures referred to in the curious
passage above (§ I, 26). " Superhuman being ' would be an inaccu¬

rate rendering ; for all these light and airy shapes come below, and
after, man in the Buddhist order of precedence. ‘ Spirit ' being
used of the soul inside the human body, and of the humah soul
after it has left the body, and figuratively of mental faculties — none
of which are included under devatd — would suggest ideas incon¬
sistent with that of the Pali word. As there is therefore no appro¬
priate general word I have chosen, for each passage where the
expression occurs, the word used in English of the special class


46


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


one by intense meditation of the finite idea of earth
or the infinite idea of water (has succeeded in
realising the comparative value of things he can
make this earth move and tremble and be shaken
violently. These are the second causes, proximate
or remote, of the appearance of a mighty earth¬
quake,

15. ‘Again, Ananda, when a Bodhisatta consciously
and deliberately leaves his temporary form in the
heaven of delight and descends into his mother’s
womb, then is this earth made to quake and tremble
and is shaken violently. These are the third causes,
proximate or remote,, of the appearance of a mighty
earthquake


more particul arly referred to in the passage of the text. Here all
kinds of devatSs being referred to, and there being no word in
English for them all, I have ventured to put the word devat^ into
my version, and to trouble the reader with this note.

^ Yassa paritti pa/^^ia vi- sazzw^ bhavit^ hoti appam^«^
dposaww^, on which Buddhaghosa says simply, Parittd ti dub-
bald : appania?zd ti balava, and then goes on, as a note to
kampeti, to tell a long story how Sangharakkhita Sdmawera, the
nephew of Naga Thera, attained Arahatsbip on the day of his
admission to the order; and at once proceeded to heaven, and
standing on the pinnacle of the palace of' the king of the gods,
shook the whole place with his big toe; to the great consternation
and annoyance of the exalted dwellers therein ! There is no
doubt a real truth in the idea that deep thought can shake the
universe, and make the palaces of the gods to tremble, just as faith
is said in Matthew xxi. 21 to be able to remove mountains, and
cause them to be cast into the sea. But these figurative expressions
have, in Buddhism, become a fruitful soil for the outgrowth of
superstitions and misunderstandings; and the train of early Bud¬
dhist speculation in this field has yet to be elucida,ted There is
much about it in the MahS. Padhana Sutta of the Digha Nikaya,
where Ghap. Ill, §§11—20 recur.

® The Bodhisatta’s voluntary incarnation is looked upon by the
Buddliists as a great act of renunciation, and curious legends have


III.


47


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


1 6. 'Again, Ananda, when a Bodhisatta deliberately
and consciously quits his mother’s womb, then the
earth quakes and trembles and is shaken violently.
This is the fourth cause, proximate and remote, of
the appearance of a mighty earthquake.

17. ‘Again, Ananda, when a Tathdgata arrives
at the supreme and perfect enlightenment, then this
earth quakes and trembles and is siiaken violently.

gathered about it. One is that on the night when she conceived
his mother dreamt that a white elephant entered her side- The
account will be found at length in my ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories’ (pp-
62—64), and the earthquake is there mentioned in terms identical
with those in the text. The sacred event is also one of those
represented on the ancient bas-reliefs round the Bharhut ThCipa, a
full description of which will be found in General Cunningham’s
most interesting work, ‘ The Stupa of Bharhut/ General Cunning¬
ham says of the description placed above this sculpture : ‘ Above it
in large characters is inscribed Bhagavato rfikdanta, which may
perhaps be translated, ‘^Buddha as the sounding elephant,” from ru,
to .sound, to make a particular sort of sound.’ N ow the first w'ord
of the inscription is in the genitive case so tha*' if the second word
could mean an elephant, the whole would signify, ‘ The Buddha’s
elephant.’ But the characters which General Cunningham reads
rukdanta are, T venture to suggest, okkanti {? ftkkanti) ; and the
inscription simply says, ‘The descent of the blessed One/ As
I have pointed out in ‘Buddhism’ (p. 184), the white elephant
legend is one of those hallowed sun stories by which half-con¬
verted Hindus have striven to embellish the life story of the
Teacher whose followers they had become. In the Lalita Vistara
(Calc. ed. p. 63) the entrance of the elephant into Mdyd precedes
the dream ; but though the ignorant may have therefore accepted
it as a fact, it is of course only a figure of speech — and I venture
to think from the Hindu standpoint, a beautiful figure of speech —
to express the incarnation of divine mildness and majesty in a
human form. The use of such a figure is not confined to India.
In the earliest of the Apocryphal Gospels, the Gospel according to
the Hebrews, the incarnation of the divine gentleness and love is
expressed by saying that a dove from heaven ‘ entered into ’ the
human form.


48


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


This is the fifth cause, proximate and remote, of the
appearance of a mighty earthquake.

18. ‘Again, Ananda, when a Tathdgata founds the
sublime kingdom of righteousness, then this earth
quakes and trembles and is shaken violently. This
is the sixth cause, proximate and remote, of the
appearance of a mighty earthquake.

19. ‘ Again, Ananda, when a Tath%*ata consciously
and deliberately rejects the remainder of his life,
then this earth quakes and trembles and . is shaken
violently. This is the seventh cause, proximate and
remote, of the appearance of a mighty earthquake.

20. ‘ Again, Ananda, when a T athagata passes
entirely away with that utter passing away in
which nothing whatever is left behind, then this
earth quakes and crembles and is shaken violently.
This is the eighth cause, proximate and remote, ot
the appearance of a mighty earthquake.

21. 'Now of eight kinds, Ananda, are these as¬
semblies. Which are the eight ^ ? Assemblies of
nobles, Brclhma^^as, householders, and Sama/^as, and
the angel hosts of the Guardian Angels, the Great
"l"hirty-Three, Mara, and Brahma.

22. ‘ Now I call to mind, Ananda, how when I
used to enter into an assembly of many hundred
nobles, before I had seated myself there or talked to
them or started a conversation with them, I used to
become in colour like unto tl^eir colour, and in voice
like unto their voice. Then with religious discourse

* The connection, or rather want of connection, between this
and the last paragraph seems to me to be very sug'gestive as to the
way in which the Sutta was composed. The narrative is resumed
at paragraph 111, 43. On vanishing away, comp. I, 33.


ni.


49


M A H A-P A R IN I B B AN A-SU TT A.


I used to instruct, incite, and quicken them, and fill
them with gladness. But they knew me not when
I spoke, and would say, “ Who may this be who thus
speaks ? a man or a god ? Then having instructed,
incited, quickened, and gladdened them with reli¬
gious discourse I would vanish away. But they
knew me not even when I vanished away ; and
would say, *‘Who may this be who has thus vanished
away ? a man or a god ? ” ’

23. [And in the same words the Blessed One
spake of how he had been used to enter into assem¬
blies of each of the other of the eight kinds, and of
how he had not been made known to them either in
speaking or in vanishing away.] * Now these, Ananda,
are the eight assemblies.’

24. ‘ Now these, Ananda, are the eight positions
of mastery [over the delusion arising from the
apparent permanence of external things d. What
are the eight?


^ AbhibhS,yata nt ti abhibhavanakaraw^ ni. abhi-

bhavanti? nika-dh am me pi drammawdni pi: tani

hi pa/ipakkha-bhdv ena pa/(’^antka-dham me abhibhavanti
pug-galassa wdnuttaritdya drammawdni, sa^^s Buddhai^hosa.
(Sum. Vil. m.)

This and the next paragraph are based ^upon the Buddhist
belief as to the long-vexed question between the Indian schools who
represented more or less closely the Kuropean Idealists and Realists.
When cleared of the many repetitions inserted for the benefit of
the repeaters or reciters, the fundamental idea seems to be that the
great necessity is to get rid of the delusion that what one sees
and feels is real and permanent. Nothing is real and i^ermanent
but character.

The so-called eight Positions of Mastery are merely an expan¬
sion of the first two of the following eight Stages of IDelive ranee,
and the whole argument is also expressed in another form in the

[II] E


50 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH.

25. ‘When a man having- subjectively the idea of
form sees externally forms -which are finite, and
pleasant or unpleasant to the sight, and having mas¬
tered them, is conscious that he knows and sees —
this is the first position of mastery.

26. ‘When a man having subjectively the idea of
form sees externally forms which are boundless, and
pleasant or unpleasant to the sight, and having mas¬
tered them, is conscious that he knows and sees —
this is the second position of mastery.

27. ‘When a man without the subjective idea of
form sees externally forms which are finite, and plea¬
sant or unpleasant to the sight, and having mastered
them, is conscious that he knows and sees — this is
the third position of mastery.

28. ‘ When a man without the subjective idea of
form sees externally forms which are boundless,
and pleasant or unpleasant to the sight, and having
mastered them, is conscious that he knows and sees
— this is the fourth position of mastery.

29. ‘ When a man without the subjective idea of
form sees externally forms that are blue in colour,
blue in appearance, and reflecting blue, — just, for


passage on the nine successive " Cessations,' of which an abstract
Will be found in Childers, sub voce nircdha.

The two lists have been translated and comnaented upon by
Burnouf (Lotus de la Bonne Loi, pp. 543> ^ 2 4—83 2), who took
the texts from the IVEahS-niddna Sutta and the Sangtti Sutta
respectively. The former has been reprinted in Grimblot’s Sept
Suttas Palis, where the passage will be found at pp. 261, 262. I
regret that in my interpretation I have been compelled to differ
so greatly from Burnouf. Though I have devoted much care and
time to the subject, I do not suppose that I have understood it
better than he did. We cannot hope to get to the bottom of
w'hat these old Buddhists thought about matter and mind from
such curt lists as these.


III.


MAHA-PARINTBBANA-SUTTA.


5 j


instance, as the Ummll flower is blue in colour, blue
in appearance, and reflecting^ blue ; or, again, as that
fine muslin of Benares which, on whichever side yon
look at it, is blue in colour, blue in appearance, and
reflecting blue, — v/hen a man without the subjective
idea of form sees externally forms which, just in
that way, are blue, blue in colour, blue in appearance,
and reflecting blue, and having mastered them, is
conscious that he knows and sees — that is the fifth
position of mastery.’

30—32. [The sixth, seventh, and eighth positions
of mastery are explained in words identical with
those used to explain the fifth ; save that yellow, red,
and white are respectively substituted throughout for
bluej^and the ICa^^^ik^ra flower, the Bandhu-^^vaka
flower, and the morning star are respectively substi¬
tuted for the Umm^ flower, as the first of the two
objects given as examples.]

33. ‘ Now these stages of deliverance, Ananda
[from the hindrance to thought arising from the
sensations and ideas due to external forms ^], are^
eight in number. Which are the eight ?

34. * A man possessed with the idea of form sees
forms — this is the first stage of deliverance.

35. ‘Without the subjective idea of form, he sees
forms externally — this is the second stage of deli¬
verance.

^ These are the Ktihiai Vimokkh^. Buddhaghosa has no com¬
ment upon them; merely saying, ‘The passage on the Vimokkhas
is easy to understand ’ — which is tantalizing. The last five Vi¬
mokkhas occur again below, in Chap. VI, §§ 1 1— 13, where it is clear
that they are used to express the progress through deep meditation,
into absent-mindedness, abstraction, and being sunk in thought,
until finally the thinker falls into actual trance.

£ 2


52


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


36. ‘ With the thought it is well/’ he becomes
intent (upon what he sees) — this is the third stage
of deliverance,

37. ‘ By passing quite beyond all idea of form, by
putting an end to all idea of resistance, by paying
no attention to the idea of distinction, he, thinking
“it is all infinite space/’ reaches (mentally) and re¬
mains in the state of mind in which the idea of the
infinity of space is the only idea that is present —
this is the fourth stage of deliverance,

38. ‘ By passing quite beyond all idea of space
being the infinite basis, he, thinking “ it is all infinite
reason,” reaches (mentally) and remains in the state
of mind to which the infinity of reason is alone
present — this is the fifth stage of deliverance.

39. ‘ By passing quite beyond the mere conscious¬
ness of the infinity of reason, he, thinking ‘‘nothing
at all exists,” reaches (mentally) and remains in the
state of mind to which nothing at all is specially
present — this is the sixiih stage of deliverajice.

40. ‘ By passing quite beyond all idea of nothing¬
ness he reaches (mentally) and remains in the state
of mind to which neither ideas nor the absence of
ideas are specially present— this is the seventh stage
of deliverance.

41. ‘ By passing quite beyond the state of “ neither
ideas nor the absence of ideas ” he reaches (men¬
tally) and remains in the state of mind in which
both sensations and ideas have ceased to be — this
is the eighth stage of deliverance.

42. ‘ Now these, Ananda, are the eight stages of

deliverance. _ _

43. ‘ On one occasion, Ananda, I was resting under
the shepherd’s Nigrodha" tree on the bank of the


III.


MAHA-PARINIBbAn A-r UTTA.


river Nera?^^ar^ immediately after having- reached
the great enlightenment. Then Mara, the Hvil
One, came, Ananda, to the place where I was,
and standing beside me he addressed me in the
words : ‘‘ Pass away now, Lord, from existence ! Let
the Blessed One now die! Now is the time for
the Blessed One to pass away V*

A

44. ‘ And when he had thus spoken, Ananda, I
addressed Mdra, the Kvil One and said ; I shall
not die, O Kvil One ! until not only the brethren
and sisters of the order, but also the lay-discix:>les
of either sex shall have become ti iie hearers, wise
and well-trained, n^ady and learned, versed in the
Scriptures, fulfilling all the greater and the lesser
duties, correct in life, walking according to the pre¬
cepts — until they, having thus rhemselves learned
the doctrine, shall be able to tell others of it, preach
it, make it known, establish it, open it, minutely ex¬
plain it and make it clear — until they, when others
start vain doctrine, shall be able by the truth to
vanquish and refute it, and so to spread the wonder¬
working truth abroad !

45. ‘ “ I shall not die until this pure religion of
mine shall have become successful, prosperous,
wide-spread, and popular in all its full extent —
until, ill a word, it shall have been well proclaimed
among men 1

46. ‘ And now again to-day, Ananda, at the .ATdp^la
ATetiya, M^ra, the Kvil One, came to the f>lace where
I was, and standing beside me addressed me [in the
same words].

47. ‘ And when he had thus spoken, Ananda,
I answered him and said ; Make thyself happy, the
final extinction of the Tath^gata shall take place


54


THK BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


before long. At the end of three months from this
time the Tath^gata will die ! ’’

48. ‘ Thus, Ananda, the Tath^gata has now

to-day at the ATetiya consciously and deli¬

berately rejected the rest of his allotted term of
life.’

49. And when he had thus spoken the venera¬
ble Ananda addiessed the Blessed One, and said :
'Vouchsafe, Lord, to remain during the kalpa !
live on through the kalpa, O Blessed One ! for the
good and the happiness of the great multitudes, out
of pity for the world, for the good and the gain and
the weal of gods and men ! ’

50. ‘Enough now, Ananda, beseech not the Xa-
th^gata ! ’ was the reply. ‘ The time for making
such request is pasc.’

51. And again, the second time, the venerable
Ananda besought the Blessed One [in the same
words. And he received from the Blessed One the
same reply].

52. And again, the third time, the venerable
Ananda besought the Blessed One [in the same
words].

53. ‘ Hast thou faith, Ananda, in the wisdom of
the Tathagata ? ’

‘ Even so, Lord ! ’

' Now why, then, Ananda, dost thou trouble the
Tathagata even until the third time?’

54. ‘ From his own mouth have I heard from the
Blessed One, from his own mouth have I received
this saying, “Whosoever has thought out, Ananda,
and developed, practised, accumulated, and ascended
to the very heights of the four paths to saintship,
and so mastered them as to be able to use them as


III.


mahA-parinibkAna-sutta.


55


a means of (mental) advancement, and as a basis for
edification — he, should he desire it, could remain in
the same birth for a kalpa, or for that portion of a
kalpa which has yet to run.” Now the XathAgata
has thought out an*d thoroughly practised them [in
all respects as just now fully described], and might,
should he desire it, remain alive for a kali^a, or for
that portion of a kalpa which has yet to run.’

A

55. ‘ Hast thou faith, Ananda ? ’

' Even so, Lord ! ’

A

' Then, O Ananda, thine is the fault, thine is the
offence — in that when a suggestion so evident and a
hint so clear were thus given thee by the T athAgata,
thou wast yet incapable of comprehending them, and
thou besoughtest not the TathAgata, saying, “ Vouch-
safe> Lord, to remain during the kalpa. Live on, O
Blessed One ! through the kalpa for the good and
the happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity
for the world, for the good and the gain and the
weal of g'ods and men.” If thou shouldst then have so
besought the XathAgaxa, the TathAgata might have
rejected the appeal even to the second time, but the
third time he would have granted it. Thine, there¬
fore, O Ananda, is the fault, thine is the offence 1 ’

A

56. ‘ On one occasion, Ananda, I was dwelling at
RA^agaha, on the hill called the Vulture’s Peak.
Now there, Ananda, I spoke to thee, and said:

A

“ How pleasant a spot, Ananda, is RA^agaha ; how
pleasant is this Vulture’s Peak. Whosoever has

A

thought out, Ananda, and developed, practised, accu¬
mulated, and ascended to the very heights of the
four paths to saintship, and so mastered them as to
be able to use them as a means of (mental) advance¬
ment, and as a basis for edification — he, should he


56 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH.

desire it, could remain in the same birth for a
kalpa, or for that portion of a kalpa which has yet
to run. But even when a suggestion so evident and
a hint so clear v/ere thus given thee by the Xath^-
gata, thou wast yet incapable of comprehending
them, and thou besoughtest not the Xath^gata,
saying, ' V ouchsafe, Lord, to remain during the
kalpa. Live on, O Blessed One ! through the
kalpa for the good and the happiness of the great
multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the good
and the gain and the weal of gods and men.’ 11
thou shouldst then have so besought the Tathdgata,
the Tathagata might have rejected the appeal even
to the second time, but the third time he would
have granted it. Thine, therefore, O Ananda, is
the fault, thine is the offence!”

57. ‘ On one occasion, Ananda, I was dwelling at
that same Rd^agaha in the Banyan Grove — on one
occasion at that same Ra^agaha at the Robbers’ Cliff
— on one occasion at that same R^^^agaha in the Satta-
p^nm cave on the slope of Mount Vebhara — on one
occasion at that same R^^^agaha at the Black Rock
on the slope of Mount Isigili — on one occasion at
that same Rd^agaha in the Sltavana Grove in the
mountain cave Sappaso^^^fika — on one occasion at
that same R^agaha in the Tapoda Grove — on one
occasion at that same Ra^agaha in the Bambu Grove
in the Squirrels’ Feeding Ground — on one occasion
at that same Rd^gaha in L^lvaka’s Mango Grove
— on one occasion at that same Rd^ag-aha in the
Oeer Forest at Maddakuy^/^/^i.’

58. ‘ Now there too, Ananda, I spoke to thee,
and said: ‘‘How pleasant, Ananda, is Rd^agaha ;
how pleasant the V ulture’s Peak ; how pleasant the


III.


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


57


Banyan tree of Gotama ; how pleasant the Robloers'
Cliff ; how pleasant tne Sa.tta.ps.7im cave on tne
slope of Mount Vebhara ; how pleasant the Black
Rock on the slope of Mount Isigili ; how pleasant
the mountain cave Sappaso72^ika in the Sita^ana
Grove ; how pleasant the T apoda Grove ; how plea¬
sant the Squirrels’ Feeding Ground in the Bambu
Grove ; how pleasant drivaka’s Mango Grove j how
pleasant the Deer Forest at lVIaddaku/^>^>^i !

59. ‘ Whosoever, Ananda, has thought out and
developed, practised, accumulated, and ascended
to the very heights of the four paths to saintship,
and so mastered them as to be able to use them as
a means of (mental) advancement and as a basis for
edification — he, should he desire it, could reina.in in
the same birth for a kalpa, or for that portion of a
kalpa which has yet to run/' Now the Xqthagata
has thought out and thoroughly practised them j^in
all resjDects as just now fully described], and might,
should he desire it, remain alive for a kalpa, or for
that portion of a kalpa which has yet to run.’

60, ‘ On one occasion, Ananda, I was residing

here at Ves^li at the Udena TsTetiya. And there
too, Ananda, I spoke to thee, and said : Mow

pleasant, Ananda, is Vesali ; how pleasant the
Udena ATetiya. Whosoever, Ananda, has thought
out and developed, practised, accumulated, and
ascended to the very heights of the four paths to
saintship, and so mastered them as to be able to use
them as a means of (mental) advancement and. as a
basis for edification — he, should he desire it, could
remain in the same birth for a kalpa, or for that
portion of a kalpa which has yet to run.” Novr the
Xath^gatahas thought out and thoroughly pra.ctised


5^


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


them [in all respects as just now fully described.],
and might, should he desire it, remain alive for a
kalpa, or for that portion of a kalpa which has yet
to run.

61. ‘ On one occasion, Ananda, I was dwelling
here at VesMi at the Gotam^ka Afetiya — on one occa¬
sion here at V es41i at the Sattamba j^etiya — on one

occasion here at Vesdli at the Bahuputta ATetiya -

on one occasion here at Ves^li at the Sdrandada
^etiya [and on each occasion I spoke to thee,
Ananda, in the same words].

62. ‘ And now to-day, Ananda, at the ATdp^la
^etiya, I spoke to thee, and said: “ How pleasant,
Ananda, is Ves4li ; how pleasant the Udena Afetiya ;
how pleasant the Gotamaka Afetiya ; how pleasant
the Sattamba ATetiya ; how pleasant the Bahuputta
ATetiya ; how pleasant the S^randada ATetiya. Who¬
soever, Ananda, has thought out and developed,
practised, accumulated, and ascended to the very
heights of the four paths to saintship, and so mas¬
tered them as to be able to use them as a means of

(mental) advancement, and as a basis for edification -

he, should he desire it, could remain in the same
birth for a kalpa, or for that portion of a kalpa
which has yet to rur. Now the Xathagata has
thought and thoroughly practised them [in all
respects as just now fully described], and might,
should he desire it, remain alive for a kalpa, or for
that portion of a kalpa which has yet to run.*’

63. * But now, Ananda, have I not formerly^ de-

^ That pa/ig-az&i^' eva means ‘formerly, already ’ is clear from.
Maha Vagga I, 7, i ; X, 2, 3, though its derivation would seem to
render the meaning ‘ frequently, recurringly ’ more natural. The


III.


M aha-parinibbAna-sutta .


59


dared to you that it is in the very nature of all
things, near and dear unto us, that we must diviae
ourselves from them, leave them, sever ourselves
from them ? How then, Ananda, can this be pos¬
sible — whereas anything whatever born, brought
into being, and organised, contains within itself the
inherent necessity of dissolution — how then can this
be possible that such a being should not be dis¬
solved ? No such condition can exist ! And this
mortal being, Ananda, has been relinquished, cast
away, renounced, rejected, and abandoned by the
Tathdgata. The remaining sum oi' life has been
surrendered by hinn- Verily, the word has gone
forth from the Tath^gata, saying, “ The final extinc¬
tion of the Tath^gata shall take place before long.
At the end of three months from this time the
Tath^gata will die!’' That the Tath^gata for the
sake of living should repent him again of that
saying — this can no wise be ^ ! ’

64. ‘ Come, Ananda, let us go to the KCi/4gara
Hall, to the Mahavana.’

At

Kven so, Lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One proceeded, with Ananda


phrase occurs pretty often. Trenckner (miUnda-paz/haw/, p- 422)
proposes a correction into pa/ika/tZ’’ eva. Palu^>',^>'iLi just below
is noteworthy as an unusual contraction of palu^>-^»-e iti.

^ I do not understand the connection of ideas between this
paragraph and the idea repeated with such tedious iteration in the
preceding paragraphs. The two seem to be in marked contrast,
if not in absolute contradiction. Perhaps we have here the older
tradition ; and certainly the latter utterance of the two is more in
accordance with the general impression of the character, and witli
the other sayings, of Gotama as handed down in the Pali Pi/akas.


6o


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


with him, to the Mahavana to the Hall :

and when he had arrived there he addressed the

A ,

venerable Ananda, and said :

* Go now, Ananda, and assemble in the Service
Hall such of the brethren as reside in the neig'h-
bourhood of V esMi/

‘ Even so, Lord," said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One. And when he had as¬
sembled in the Service Hall such of the brethren as
resided in the neighbourhood of Ves^li, he went to
the Blessed One and saluted him and stood beside
him. And standing beside him, he addressed the
Blessed One, and said :

* Lord ! the assembly of the brethren has met
together. Let the Blessed One do even as seemeth
to him fit."

65. Then the Blessed One proceeded to the
Service Hall, and sat down there on the mat spread
out for him. And when he was seated the Blessed
One addressed the brethren, and said :

‘ Therefore, O brethren — ye to whom the truths
I have perceived have been made kndwn by me —
having thoroughly made yourselves masters of
them, practise them, meditate upon them, and spread
them abroad ; in order that pure religion may last
long and be perpetuated, in order that it may con¬
tinue to be for the good and happiness of the great
multitudes, out of pity for the world, to the good
and the gain and the weal of gods and men !

‘ W^hich then, O brethren, are the truths which,
when I had perceived, I made known to you, which,
when you have mastered it behoves you to practise,
meditate upon, and spread abroad, in order that pure
religion may last long and be perpetuated, in order


ITI.


MAhA-PARINIBB ANA-S U TTA.


6r


that it may continue to be for the good and the
happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity for
the world, to the good and the gain and the weal of
gods and men ? "

They are these :

The four earnest meditations.

The fourfold great struggle against sin.

The four loads to saintship.

The five moral powers.

The five organs of spiritual sense.

The seven kinds of wisdom, and
The noble eightfold path.

These, O brethren, are the truths which, when
I had perceived, I made known to you, which, when
you have mastered it behoves you to practise,
meditate upon, and spread abroad, in order that
pure religion may last long and be perpetuated, in
order that it may continue to be for the good and
the happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity
for the world, to the good and the gain and the
weal of gods and men f

66. And the Blessed One exhorted the brethren,
and said :

‘ Behold now, O brethren, I exhort you, saying,
“ All component things must grow old. Work out
your salvation with diligence. The final extinction
of the Tath^gata will take place before long. At
the end of three months from this time the Tatha-
gata will die !

" My age is now full ripe, my life draws to its close ;

I leave you, I depart, relying on myself alone !

Be earnest then, O brethren ! holy, full of
thought !


62


CH.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


Be steadfast in resolve ! Keep watch o’er your
own hearts !

Who wearies not, but holds fast to this truth
and law \

Shall cross this sea of life, shall make an end of
grief.’

End of the Third Portion for Recitation


^ Dhamma and vinaya. The Buddhist religion, as just
summarised, and the regulations of the order.

® It is of great interest to notice what are the points upon which
Gotama, in this last address to his disciples, and at the solemn
tirne when death was so near at hand, is ^teported to have lain such
emphatic stress. Unfortunately we have only a fragment of the
address, and, as it would seem from its commencement, only the
closing fragment. This, however, is in the form of a summary,
consisting of an enumeration of certain aggregates, the details
of which must have been as familiar to the early Buddhists as the
details of similar numerical terms — such as the ten command¬
ments, the twelve tribes, the seven deadly sins, the four gospels,
and so on — afterwards were to the Christians. This summary of
the Buddha’s last address may fairly be taken as a summary of
Buddhism, w'hich thus appears to be simply a system of earnest
self-culture and self-control.

The following are the details of the aggregate technical terms
used in the above summarj^ but it will be understood that the
English equivalents used give rather a general than an exact
representation of the ideas expressed by the Pali ones. To
attempt more would demand a treatise rather than a note, and
it has given me peculiar pleasure to learn, as these sheets are
passing through the press, that my friend Dr. Morris intends to
devote a book to the treatment of these seven ‘ Jewels of the Law,’
as the jSjulla Vagga calls them (IX, i, 4), which form, when united,
the bright diadem of Nirvdwa.

The four Earnest Meditations (>^attdro Satipa//>^dn^) are —

1. Meditation on the body.

2. Meditation on the sensations.

3. Meditation cn the ideas.

4. Meditation on reason and character.


III.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


6


o


The fourfold Great Struggle against sin is divided into -^att^ro
Samappadh^nd, which are —

1. The struggle to prevent sinfulness arising.

2. The struggle to put away sinful states which have arisen,

3. The struggle to produce goodness not previously existing.

4. The struggle to increase goodness w’hen it does exist.

The four Roads to Saintship are four means by which Iddht (see

above, § 3, note) is to be acquired. They are the ^att^ro
Iddhipddd:

1. Ihe will to acquire it united to earnest meditation and the
struggle against sin.

2. The necessary exertion united to earnest meditation and the
struggle against sin.

3. The necessary preparation of the heart united to earnest
meditation and the struggle against sin.

4. Investigation united to earnest meditation and the struggle
against sin.

The five moral powers (pa^Z’a Balfini) are said to be the
same as the next class, called organs (Indriydni). It is no doubt
mc.it remarkable that, in a summary like chis, tw'-o classes out of
seven should be absolutely identical except in name. The differ¬
ence of name is altogether too unimportant to account, by itself, for
the distinction made. Either the currently accepted explanation of
one of the two aggregate terms must be incorrect, or we must look
for some explanation of the repetition other than the mere desire
to record the double title. Is it impossible that the one class
was split into two to bring the number of the classes up to the
sacred number seven, corresponding to the seven Ratanas of a
.fiTakkavatti ?

The details of both classes are —

r. Faith. 2. Energy. 3. Thought- 4. Contemplation.

5. Wisdom.

The seven kinds of Wisdom (satta B o^^j^Zrangd) are —

I. Energy. 2. Thought. 3. Contemplation. 4. Investiga¬
tion (of scripture). 5. Joy. 6. Repose. 7. Serenity.

The Noble Eightfold Path (ariyo a//>^angiko Maggo) forms
the subject of the Dhamma-X’akka-ppavattana-sutta, translated in this
volume, and consists of —

I. Right views. 2. High aims- 3. Right speech, 4, Upright
conduct. 5. A harmless livelihood. 6. Perseverance in well-doing.
7. Intellectual activity. 8. Earnest thought.


64


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH-


Ch AFTER IV.

1. Now the Blessed One early in the morning-
robed nimself, and taking his bowl, entered Ves4li
for alms : and when he had passed through Vesdli,
and had eaten his meal and was retarning from his
alrns-seeking he gazed at Vesali with an elephant
look ^ and addressed the venerable Ananda, and said ;

' This will be the last time, Ananda, that the
Tathigata will behold Vesali. Come, Ananda, let
ns go on to Bha?/^a-gdma.’

‘ Even so, Lord!’ said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One.

And the Blessed One proceeded with a great
company of the brethren to Bha?2</a"gdma ; and
there the Blessed One stayed in the village itself.

2. There the Blessed One addressed the bre¬
thren, and said : ‘It is through not understanding
and grasping four truths -, O brethren, that we have
had to run so long, to wander so long in this weary
path of transmigration — both you and I.’

‘ And what are these four ? The noble conduct of
life, the noble earnestness in meditation, the noble
kind of wisdom, and the noble salvation of freedom.
But when noble conduct is realised and known,
when noble meditation is realised and known, when
noble wisdom is realised and known, when noble


^ Ndgapalokita/?* V’es^liya7;^ apaloketvd. The Buddhas
were accustomed, sa;j's Buddhaghosa, on looking backwards to turn '
the whole body round as an elephant does ; because the bones in
their neck were firmly fixed, more so than those of ordinary men 1
“ Or Conditions (Dhamma). They must, of course, be care¬
fully distinguished from the better known Four Noble Truths
(Sa/{’X’ani) above. Chap. II, § z.


IV.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta-


65


freedom is realised and known — then is the era vine
for existence rooted out, that which leads to re¬
newed existence is destroyed, and there is no more
birth.'

3. Thus spake the Blessed One ; and when the
Happy One had thus spoken, then again the
teacher said ^ ;

‘ Righteousness, earnest thought, wisdom, and
freedom sublime —

These are the truths realised by Gotama, far-
renowned.

Knowing them, he, the knower, proclaimed the
truth to the brethren.

The master with eye divine, the quencher of
griefs, must die ! '

4. There too, while staying at Bha/z^a-g^ma, the
Blessed One held that comprehensive religious dis¬
course with the brethren on the nature of upright
conduct, and of earnest contc^mplation, and of intel¬
ligence. ‘ Great is the fruit, great the advantage of
earnest contemplation when set round with upright
conduct. Great is the fruit, great the advantage of
intellect when set round with earnest contemi)lation ,

^ This is merely a stock phrase Tor introducing v^erses which
repeat the idea of the preceding iihrase (see above, paragraph 32).
It is an instructive sign of the state of mind in which such records
are put together, that these verses could be ascribed to (lolama
himself without any feeling of the incongruity involved. 'I'lic last
word means, completely gone out; and here refers to the ex¬
tinction of kilesa and ta^zhd, which will bring about, inevitably,
the extinction of being. Compare the passage quoted by
Burnouf in Lotus de la Bonne Loi, p. Probably tl^-^ whole

stanza formerly stood in some other connection, where the word
parinibbuto had its more usual sense. See Buddhaghosa’s
note on IV, 23.

["]


F


66


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


The mind set round with intelligence is freed from
the great e^ils — that is to say, from sensuality, from
individuality, from delusion, and from ignorance.'


5. Now when the Blessed One had remained at
Bha^2<r/a-g4ma as long as he desired, he addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : ‘ Come, Ananda,
let us go on to Hatthi-gdma.’

' Kven so. Lord ! ' said Ananda, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One proceeded with a great
company of the brethren to Hatthi-gdma.

6. [And in similar words it is then related how
the Blessed One went on to Amba-gdma, to <9ambu-
gama, and to Bhoga-nagara.]


7. Now there at Bhoga-nagara the Blessed One
stayed at the Ananda ATetiya.

There the Blessed One addressed the brethren,
and said: ‘ I will teacn you, O brethren, these four
Great References Listen thereto, and give good
heed, and I will speak.’

‘ Even so. Lord ! ’ said the brethren, in assent to


^ The meaning of mahfpadesa is not quite clear. Perhaps
it should be rendered true authorities. I have followed Buddha-
ghosa in taking apadesa as the last part of the compound. He
says, mahdpadesd ti maha-ok^se mahi-apadese va. Bud-
dhadayo mahante raahante apadisitvd vuttani maha-
k^ra«^nt ti attho, ‘the causes (authorities) alleged 'when
referring to Buddha and other great men.*

^ I ought perhaps to have explained why I have ventured to
differ from Childers in the rendering of the common word pa/i-
suw^ti. The root j-ru seems to have meant ‘to sound' before it
meant ‘ to hear;’ and, whether this be so or not, pa/i-su7z^ti
means not simply ‘ to consent/ but ‘ to answer (assentingly).’ It


IV.


M AH A-PARTN-IBBAN A-S UTT A.


67


the Blessed One, and the Blessed One spoke as
follows :

8. ‘In the first place, brethren, a brother may
say thus: “From the mouth of the Blessed One
himself have I heard, from his own mouth have I
received it. This is the truth, this the law, this the
teaching’ of the Master.^' The word spoken, bre¬
thren, by that brother should neither be received
with praise nor treated with scorn. Without praise
and without scorn every word and syllable should
be carefully understood, and then put beside the
scripture and compared with the rules of the
order If when so compared they do not har¬
monise with the scripture, and do not fit in with the
rules of the order, then you may come to the con¬
clusion, “ Verily, this is not the word of the Blessed
One, and has been wrongly grasped by that
brother?’’ Therefore, brethren, you should reject
it. But if they harmonise with the scripture and
fit in with the rules of the order, then you may
come to the conclusion, “Verily, this is the word of
the Blessed One, and has been well grasped by
that brother."’ This, brethren, you should receive
as the first Great Reference.

9. ‘ Again, brethren, a brother may say thus :
“In such and such a dwelling-place there is a com¬
pany of the brethren with their elders and leaders.
From the mouth of that company have I heard,

has been pointed out to me that answer was formerly * and-
swerian,^ where swerian is probably not unrelated to the root
svar, ‘to sound/

^ Sutte ot^retabb^ni vinaye sandassetabbS.ni, where one
would expect to find the word Pi/aka if it had been in use when
this passage was first written or composed.

F 2


68 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH.


face to face have I received it. This is the truth,
this the law, this the teaching of the Master."' The
word spoken, brethren, by that brother should
neithei be received with praise nor treated with
scorn. Without praise and without scorn every
word and syllable should be carefully understood,
and then put beside the scripture and compared
with the rules of the order. If when so compared
they do not harmonise with the scripture, and do
not fit in with the rules of the order, then you may
come to the conclusion, “Verily, this is not the
word of the blessed One, and has been wi'ongly
grasped by that company of the brethren.’" There¬
fore, brethren, you should reject it. But if they
harmonise with the scripture and fit in with the
rules of the order, then you may come to the con¬
clusion, “Verily, this is the Avord of the Blessed One,
and has been well grasped by that company ot the
brethren.” This, brethren, you should receive as
the second Great Reference.

JO. 'Again, brethren, a orother may say thus:
“In such and such a dwelling-place there are
dwelling- many elders of the order, deeply read,
holding the faith as handed down by tradition,
^^ersed in the truths, versed in the regulations of
the order, versed in the summaries of the doctrines
and the law. From the mouth of those elders have
I heard, from their mouth have I received it.
This is the truth, this the law, this the teaching of
the Master.” The word spoken, brethren, by that
brother should neither be received with praise nor
treated with scorn. W^ithout praise and without
scorn every word and syllable should be carefully
understood, and then put beside the scripture and


IV.


MAHA~PARINIBBANA'-SUTTA„


69


compared with the rules of the order. If when so
compared they do not harmonise with the scripture,
and do not fit in with the rules of the order, then
you ma}?- come to the conclusion, “ Veril3r, this is
not the word of the Blessed One, and has been
wrongly grasped by those elders Therefore, bre¬
thren, you should reject it. But if the^^ harmonise
with the scripture and fit in with tlie rules of the
order, then you may come to the conclusion,
“Verily, this is the word of the Blessed One, and
has been well grasped by those elders.” This,
brethren, you should receive as the third Great
Reference.

II. ‘Again, brethren, a brother may say, “In
such and such a dwelling-place there is there living
a brother, deeply read, holding the faith as handed
down by tradition, versed in the truths, versed in
the resxnlations of the order,- versed in the sum-
maries of the doctrines and the law. From the
mouth of that elder have I heard, from his mouth
have I received it. This is the truth, this the law,
this the teaching of the Master.” 'Fhe word spoken,
brethren, by that brother should neither be received
with praise nor treated with scorn. Without praise
and without scorn every woixl and syllable should
be carefully understood, and then put beside the
scripture and compared with the rules of the
order. If when so compared the^y do not har¬
monise with the scripture, and do not fit in with the
rules of the order, then you may come to the
conclusion, “ Verily, this is not the word of the
Blessed One, and has been Avrongly grasped
by that brother.” Therefore, brethren, you should
reject it. But if they harmonise with tlie scripture


70


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


and fit in with the rules of the order, then you
may come to the conclusion, “Verily, this is the word
of the Blessed One, and has been w^ell grasped by
that brother.” Xhis, brethren, you should receive
as the fourth Oreat Reference.’

‘ These, brethren, are the Four Great References.’


12. There, too, the Blessed One held that com¬
prehensive religious talk with the brethren on the
nature of upright conduct, and of earnest contem¬
plation, and of intelligence. ‘ Great is the fruit,
great the advantage of earnest contemplation when
set round with upright conduct. Great is the fruit,
great the advantage of intellect when set round with
earnest contemplation. The mind set round with
intelligence is freed from the great evils — that is
to say, from sensuality, from individuality, frona
delusion, and from ignorance.’


13. Now w'hen the Blessed One had remained
as long as he desired at Bhoga-gama, he addressed
the venerable Ananda, and said : ' Come, Ananda,
let us go on to Pav4.’

‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One. And the Blessed One
proceeded with a great company of the brethren to
Pava.

And there at Pava the Blessed One stayed at
the Mango Grove of ATunda, who was by family a
smith.

14. Now i^unda, the worker in metals, heard
that the Blessed One had come to Pava, and was
staying there in his Mango Grove.


IV.


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


71


And A^iinda, the worker in metals, went to the
place where the Blessed One was, and saluting him,
took his seat respectfully on one side. And when
he was thus seated, the Blessed One instructed,
aroused, incited, and gladdened him with religious
discourse.

15. Then he, instructed, aroused, incited, and
gladdened by the religious discourse, addressed the
Blessed One, and said : ‘ May the Blessed One do
me the honour of taking his meal, together with the
brethren, at my house to-morrow.’

And the Blessed One signified, by silence, his
consent.

16. Then seeing that the Blessed One had con¬
sented, ATunda, the worker in metals, rose from his
seat and bowed down before the Blessed One, and
keeping him on his right hand as he past him,
departed thence.

17. Now at the end of the night, Afunda, the
worker in metals, made ready in his dwelling-place
sweet rice and cakes, and a quantity of dried boar’s
flesh. And he announced the hour to the Blessed
One, saying, ‘ The hour. Lord, has come, and the
meal is ready.’

18. And the Blessed One robed himself early in
the morning, and taking his bowl, went with the bre¬
thren to the dwelling-place of ATunda, the worker in
metals. When he had come thither he seated him¬
self on the seat prepared for him. And when he
was seated he addressed ATunda, the worker in
metals, and said : * As to the dried boar’s flesh you
have made ready, serve me with it, ATunda ; and as
to the other food, the sweet rice and cakes, serve
the brethren with it.’


72


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CM.


‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said .ATunda, the worker in
metals, in assent, to the Blessed One. And the
dried boar’s flesh he had made ready he served to
the Blessed One ; whilst the other food, the sweet
rice and cakes, he served to the members of the
order.

19. Now the Blessed One addressed Ahinda, the
worker in metals, and said : ‘ Whatever dried boar’s
flesh, ATunda, is left over to thee, that bury in a hole.

I see no one, ATunda, on earth nor in Mara’s heaven,
nor in Brahma’s heaven, no one among’ Sama//as
and Brahma^/as, among gods and men, by whom,
when he has eaten it, that food can be assimilated,
save by the Tathdgata.’

* ‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said A'unda, the worker in
metals, in assent, to the Blessed One. And what¬
ever dried boar’s flesh remained over, that he buried
in a hole.

20. And he. went to the place where the Blessed
One was ; and when he had come there, took his
seat respectfully^ on one side. And when he was
seated, the Blessed One instructed and aroused
and incited and gladdened Ahinda, the worker in
metals, with I'eligious discourse. And the Blessed
One then rose from his seat and departed thence.

21. Now when the Blessed One had eaten the
food prepared by A^uiida, the worker in metal, there
fell upon him a dire sickness, the disease of dy^’sen-
tery, and sharp pain came upon him, even unto
death. But the Blessed One, mindful and self-
possessed, bore it without compkiint.

22. And the Blessed One addressed the venerable
Ananda, and said : ‘ Come, Ananda, let us go on to

■f jr- . /«. A >

Ivusmara.


IV.


M AH A-P ARINIBB AN A-S U TT A .


73


‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One.


23. When he had eaten Ahinda’s food,

The copper-smith’s — thus have I heard —

He bore with fortitude the pain.

The sharp pain even unto death !

And from the dried flesh of the boar, as soon as
he had eaten it.

There fell upon the teacher sickness dire.

Then after nature was relieved the Blessed One
announced and said :

‘ I now am going- on to Kusinara

24. Now the Blessed One went aside from the
path to the foot of a certain tree ; and when he
had come there he addressed the venerable Ananda,
and said : ‘ Fold, 1 pray you, Ananda, the robe ; and
spread it out for me. I am wear}', Ananda, and
must rest awhile ! ’

‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One, and si^read out the robe*
folded fourfold.

25. And the Blessed One seated himself on the
seat prepared for him ; and when he was seated, he
addi'essed the venerable Ananda, and said : ' Fetch
me, I pray you, Ananda, some water. I am thirsty,
Ananda, and would drink.’

26. When he had thus spoken, the venerable

Ananda said to the Blesied One : ‘ But just now,


^ ‘ It should be understood,’ saj’-s Buddhaghosa, * that these are
verses by the Theras who held the council.’ And he repeats this
at §§ 52, 5^-


74


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


Lord, about five hundred carts have gone over. TThat
water stirred up by the wheels has become shallow
and flows fouled and turbid. This river Kakutthd,
Lord, not far off, is clear and pleasant, cool and
transparent, easy to get down into, and delightful.
There the Blessed One may both drink the water,
and cool his limbs K"

27. Again the second time the Blessed One

addressed the venerable Ananda, and said : ‘ Fetch

me, I pray you, Ananda, some water. I am thirsty,
Ananda, and would drink.’

28. And again the second time the venerable
Ananda said to the Blessed One : ‘But just now,
Lord, about five hundred carts have gone over. That
water stirred up by the wheels has become shallow
and flows fouled and turbid. This river Kakuttha,
Lord, not far off, is clear and pleasant, cool and
transparent, easy to get down into, and delightful.
There the Blessed One may both drink the water,
and cool his limbs.’

29. Again the third time the Blessed One ad¬
dressed the venerable Ananda, and said: ‘ Fetch me,*

A

I pray you, Ananda, some water. I am thirsty,
Ananda, and would drink.’

30. ‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said the venerable Ananda,
in assent, to the Blessed One ; and taking a bowl he
went down to the streamlet. And lo ! the streamlet
which, stirred up by the wheels, Avas but just now
become shallow, and was floAving fouled and turbid,
had begun, Avhen the A*enerable Ananda came up to it,
to flow clear and bright and free from all turbidity.


^ A h o d i k a ti p a s a n n o d ik a :
iUodika Li tanu-siLala-salila
supatittha ti sundara-titthaA


satodika ti madhurodhika
; setaka ti nikkaddama
(S. V. Comp. IV, 56,


IV.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


75


31. Then Ananda thought: ‘How wonderful,
how marvellous is the great might and power of
the Tath^gata ! For this streamlet which, stirred up
by the wheels, was but just now become shallow and
flowing foul and ^iirbid, now, as I come up to it, is
flowing clear and bright and free from all turbidity.'

32. And taking water in the bowl he returned
towards the Blessed One ; and when he had come
where the Blessed One was he said to him : ‘ How
wonderful, how marvellous is the great might and
power of the Xathdgata ! For this streamlet which,
stirred up by the wheels, was but just now become
shallow and flowing foul and turbid, now, as I come
up to it, is flowing clear and bright and free from
all turbidity. Let the Blessed One drink the water!
Let the Happy One drink the water 1 ’

Then the Blessed One drank of the water-


33. Now at that time a man named Pukkusa

a young Mallian, a disciple of A/dra Kaldma’s, was
passing along the high road frona Kusinard to Pdvd.

34. And Pukkusa, the young Mallian, saw the
Blessed One seated at the foot of a tree. On
seeing him, he went up to the place where the
Blessed One was, and when he had come there he
saluted the Blessed One, and took his rest respect¬
fully on one side. And when he was seated


‘ The Pukkusa caste was one of the lower castes of -STulras.
Compare AssiUayana Sutta (Pischel), pp. 13, 33; Burnours ‘In¬
troduction,’ &c., pp. 1:44, 208 ; Lalita Vislara XXI, 17, But Bud-
dhaghosa says Pukkusa must here be simply a name, as the INlallas
were of the Khattiya caste. He adds that this Pukkusa was the
owner of the five hundred carts that had just passed by; and that
A/ara Kalama was called A/ara because he was Digha-pihgalo,
Kalama being his family name.


76


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


Pukkusa, the young; Mallian, said to the Blessed
One: ‘How wonderful a thing is it. Lord! and
how marvellous, that those who have gone forth out
of the world should pass their time in a state of
mind so calm ! '

35. ‘ Fprmerly, Lord, A/ara K^lama was once
walking along the high road ; and leaving the road
he sat himself down under a certain tree to rest
during the heat of the day. Now, Lord, five hun¬
dred carts passed by one after the other, each close
to A/ara K^lama. And a certain man, avIio was fol¬
lowing close beuind that caravan of carts, went up to
the place where A/ara ICalUma was, and when he was
come there he spake as follows to A/ara K^lama :

But, Lord, did you see those five hundred carts
go by ? ”

‘ “ No, indeed, sir, I saw them not.”

‘ “ But, Lord, did you hear the sound of them ?

‘ “ No, indeed, sir, 1 heard not their sound.”

But, Lord, were you then asleep ? ”

No, sir, I was not asleep.”

But, Lord, were you then conscious ? ”

‘ “ Yes, I was conscious, sir.”

So that you, Lord, though you were both con¬
scious and awake, neither saw, nor heard the sound
of five hundred carts passing by, one after the other,
and each close to you. Why, Lord, even your robe
was sprinkled over with the dust of them ! ”

‘ “ It is even so, sir.”

3d. ‘ Then thought that man: “ Plow wonderful a
thing is it, and how marvellous, that those who have
gone forth out of the world should pass their time
in a state of mind so calm ! So much so that a
man though being both conscious and awake,


IV.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


77


neither sees, nor hears the sound of five hundred
carts passing' by, one after the other, and each close
to him.”

‘And after giving' utterance to his deep faith in
A/ara Kdlarna, he departed thence.*

37. ‘ Now what think you, Pukkusa, which is the
more difficult thing either to do or to meet with —
that a man being conscious and awake should
neither see, nor hear the sound of five hundred
carts passing by, one after the other, close to him,
— or that a man, being conscious and awake, should
neither see, nor hear the sound thereof when the
falling rain goes on beating and splashing, and the
lightnings are flashing forth, and the thunderbolts
are crashing ? ’

38. ‘ What in comparison, I^ord, can these five
hundred carts do, or six c;r seven or eight or nine
or ten hundred, yea, even hundreds and thousands
of carts. That certainly is more difficult, both to
do and to meet with, that a man being conscious
and awake should neither see, nor hear the sound
thereof when the falling rain goes on beating and
splashing, and the lightnings are flashing forth, and
the thunderbolts are crashing.’

39. ‘Now on one occasion, Pukkusa, I was dwelling
at Atumd, and was at the Threshing-floor^. And at
that time the falling rain begun to beat and to
splash, and the lightnings to flash forth, and the
thunderbolts to crash ; and two peasants, brothers,
and four oxen were killed. Then, Pukkusa, a great
multitude of people went forth from A turn d, and
went up to the place where the two peasants,
brothers, and the four oxen, lay killed.

Bhusagdfe ti kha/u-sildy azw.


X


78


THE BOOIC OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


40. ‘ Now at that time, Pukkusa, I had g-one forth
from the Threshing-floor, ard was walking up and
down thinking at the entrance to the Threshing-
floor. And a certain man came, Pukkusa, out of
that great multitude of people, up to the place
where I was ; and when he came up he saluted me,
and took his place respectfully on one side.

41. ‘And as he stood there, Pukkusa, I said to
the man :

‘ “ Why then, sir, is this great multitude of people
assembled together ? ”

‘ “ But just uow, the falling rain began to beat
and to splash, and the lightnings to flash forth, and
the thunderbolts to crash ; and two peasants, bro¬
thers, were killed, and four oxen. Therefore is this
great multitude of people gathered together. But
where, Lord, were you ?

‘ “ I, sir, have been here all the while.”

‘ “ But, Lord, did you see it ? ”

I, sir, saw nothing.”

‘ “ But, Lord, did you hear it ? ”

I, sir, heard nothing.”

‘“Were you then. Lord, asleep ?”

‘ “ I, sir, was not asleep.”

‘“AVere you then conscious. Lord ?”

‘ “ Even so, sir.”

‘ “ So that you, Lord, being conscious and awake,

neither saw, nor heard the sound thereof when the

%

falling rain went on beating and splashing, and the
liofhtnings were flashing forth, and the thunderbolts
were crashing.”

That is so, sir.”

42. ‘ Then, Pukkusa, the thought occurred to that
mail :


IV.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


79


‘ How wonderful a thing is it, and marvellous
that those who have gone forth out of the world
should pass their time in a state of mind so calm ! —
so that a man being conscious and awake neither
sees nor hears the sound thereof when the falling
rain is beating and splashing, and the lightnings are
flashing forth, and the thunderbolts are crashing.”
And after giving utterance to his deep faith in me,
he departed from me with the customary demonstra¬
tions of respect.*

43. And when he had thus spoken Pukkusa,
the young Mallian, addressed the Blessed One in
these words : ' Now I, Lord, as to the faith that

I had in A/:§.ra KAlAma, that I winnow away as in
a mighty wind, and wash it away as in a swiftly
running stream. Most excellent, Lord, are the words
of thy mouth, most excel? ent! Just as if a man
were to set up that which is thrown down, or were
to reveal that which is hidden away, or were to
point out the right road to him who has gone astray,
or were to bring a lamp into the darkness, so that
those who have eyes can see external forms — just
even so. Lord, has the truth been made known to
me, in many a figure, by the Blessed One. And I,
even I, betake myself. Lord, to the Blessed One as
my refuge, to the d ruth, and to the Brotherhood.
May the Blessed One accept me as a disciple, as a
true believer, from this day forth, as long as life

s

endures ^ I*

^ This, is, a stock phrase constituting the final answer of a
hitherto unconverted man at the end of one of those argumentative
dialogues by which Gotama overcame opposition or expounded
the truth. After a discussion of exalted themes it fits in very
appropriately ; here and elsewhere it is incongruous and strained.
See below, V, 50.


8o


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


44. Now Fukkusa, the young Mallian, addressed
a certain man, and said; ‘ Fetch me, I pray you, my
good man, a pair of robes of cloth of gold, burnished
and ready for wear.’

* So be it, sir I ’ said that man, in assent, to
Fukkusa, the young Mallian ; and he brought a
pair of robes of cloth of gold, burnished and ready
for wear.

45. And the Mallian Fukkusa presented the pair of
robes of cloth of gold, burnished and ready for wear,
to the Blessed One, saying, ‘ Lord, this pair of
robes of burnished cloth of gold is ready for wear.
May the Blessed One show me favour and accept it
at my hands I ’

‘In that case, Fukkusa, robe me in one, and
Ananda In one.’

‘ Kven so, Lord ! ’ said Fukkusa, in assent, to the
Blessed One ; and in one he robed the Blessed One,
and in one, Ananda.

46. Then the Blessed One instructed and aroused
and incited and gladdened Fukkusa, the young Mal¬
lian, with religious discourse. And Fukkusa, the
young Mallian, when he had been instructed and
aroused and incited and gladdened by the Blessed
One with religious discourse, arose from his seat,
and bowed down before the Blessed One ; and keep¬
ing him on his right hand as he past him, departed
thence.


47, Now not long after the Mallian Fukkusa had
gone, the venerable Ananda placed that pair of
robes of cloth of gold, burnished and ready for wear,
on the body of the Blessed One, and when it was so


IV.


MAHA-PARINIBbAnA“SUTTA.


8 1


placed on the body of the Blessed One it appeared
to have lost its splendour ' !

48. And the venerable Ananda said to the Blessed
One : ‘ How wonderful a thing is it, Lord, and how
marvellous, that the colour of the .skin of the Blessed
One should be so clear, so exceeding bright I For
when I placed even this pair of robes of burnished
cloth of gold and ready for wear on the body of the
Blessed One, lo ! it seemed as if it had lost its
splendour ! ^

A. A

49. ‘ It is even so, Ananda Ananda, there are two
occasions on which the colour of the skin of a Tatha-
gata becomes clear and exceeding bright. What
are the two ? ’

50. ‘On the night, Ananda, on which a Tatha-
gata attains to the supreme and perfect insight, and
on the night in which he passes finally away in that
utter passing away which leaves nothing whatever
to remain- — on these two occasions the colour of the
skin of the Tath^gata becomes clear and exceeding
bright.

51. ‘ And now this day, Ananda, at the third, watch
of the night, in the Upavattana of ICusin4r^, in the
S^la Grove of the Mallians, between the twin S4la


^ The commentator says, Bhagavato kSyam upandmitan ti
nivdsana-p drhpana-vasena alliydpitaw: Bhagavd pi

tato ek&m nivdsesi ekaw pdrfipi- Vita/’/tMka??^ (MS. A’A'/i)
viyd ti yathd (MS. tathd) vita/’^iko ahgdiro antanteh ev?i
^otiti bahi pan’ assa pabhd n’ atthi,. ev^iii bahi pa^-/&Aiiina-
(MS. pai&^Aiwwa-) pabhd hutvd kbSyatl: ti. My MS. of the
text reads vitdsikaw (as did Ydtrdmulle’s MS. here, and cine MS.
of FausbdU's at 6^dtaka I, 153, 164). There the word is used of
embers in which food is cooked, * without flame,’ = * glowing,
smoldering.’ Vita.^i^Aikd, ‘an eruption on the skin,’ belongs
to the root k&t/f:,

[113


G


82


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


trees, the utter passing away of the Xath^gata will
take place. Come, Ananda! let us go on to the
river KakutthH.*

‘ Even so, Lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One.

52. The pair of robes of cloth of gold,

All burnished, Pukkusa had brought.

Clad on with them the Master then
Shone forth in colour like to gold ^ 1


53. Now the Blessed One with a great company
of the brethren went on to the river Kakutth^ ; and
when he had come there, he went down into the water,
and bathed, and drank. And coming up out again
on the other side he went on to the Mango Grove.

54. And when he was come there he addressed
the venerable iiTundaka, and said : ‘ Fold, I pray you,
ATundaka, a robe in four and spread it out. I am
weary, A’undaka, and would lie down."

' Even so. Lord ! ’ said the venerable ATiindaka, in
assent, to the Blessed One. And he folded a robe
in four, and spread it out.


^ We have here the commencement of the legend which after¬
wards grew into an account of an actual ‘ transfiguration ' of the
Buddha. It is very curious that it should have taken place soon
after the Buddha had announced to Ananda his approaching death,
and that in 'the Buddhist Sutta it should be connected so closely
with that event; for a similar remark applies also to the Trans¬
figuration mentioned in the Gospels. The M ^laiahk^ra-vatthu,
for instance, says, * His body appeared shining like a flame. Ananda
was exceedingly surprised. Nothing of this kind had, as yet,
happened. “ Your exterior appearance,'' said he to Budha, “ is all
at once white, shining, and beautiful above all expression." What
you say, O Ananda, is perfectly true. There are two occasions [&c,,
much as above]. The shining light emanating from my body is a
certain forerunner of this great event [his Parinibb^na]." '


IV.


MAHA“PARINIBBAnA-SUTTA.


83

55. And the Blessed One laid himself down on
his right side, with -one fo'bt resting on the other ;
and calm and self-possessed, he meditated on the
idea of rising up again in due time. And the
venerable ATiindaka seated himself there in front of
the Blessed One:

56. The Buddha to Kakutthd^’s river came,

Whose clear and pleasant waters limpid flow.

He plunged beneath the stream wearied and

-worn,

The Buddha without equal in the world !

When he had bathed and drunk, the teacher
then

Crossed o’er, the brethren thronging round
his steps ;

The Blessed Master, preaching the while the
truth.

The Mighty Sage came to the Mango Orove.

There spake he to the brother j^undaka :

‘ Spread me the fourfold robe out as a couch.’

Cheered by the Holy One, he quickly spread

The fourfold robe in order on the ground.

The Master laid him down, wearied and worn;

And there, before him, ATunda took his seat.

57. And the Blessed One addressed the vener¬
able Ananda, and said : ‘ Now it may happen,

Ananda, that some one should stir up remorse in
Aunda the smith, by saying, “ This is evil to thee,
Amnda, and loss to thee in that when the Tath^gata
had eaten his last meal from thy provision, then he
died.” Any such remorse, Ananda, in ATunda
the smith should be checked by Baying, “ This is
good to thee, Afunda, and g;ain to thee, in that when

G 2


84


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


the Tathagata had eaten his last meal from thy
provision, then he died. From the very mouth of
the Blessed One, ^unda, have I heard, from his
own mouth have I received this saying, ‘ "I hese two
offerings of food are of equal ft uit, and of equal
profit, and of much greater fruit and much greater
profit than any other — and which are the two ?
The offering of food which, when a Tathagata has
eaten, he attains to supreme and perfect insight ;
and the offering of food which, when a Tathagata
has eaten, he passes away by that utter passing
away in which nothing whatever remains behind —
these two offerings of food are of equal fruit and of
equal profit, and of much greater fruit and much
greater profit than any others. There has been laid
up by ^unda the smith a karma redounding to
length of life, redounding to good birth, redounding
to good fortune, redounding to good fame, redound¬
ing to the inheritance of heaven, and of sovereign
power.’” In this way, Ananda, should be checked
any remorse in ATunda the smith.’

58. Then the Blessed One perceiving how the
matter stood, uttered, even at that time, this hymn
of exultation :

To him who gives shall virtue be increased ;

In him who curbs himself, no anger can arise ;

The righteous man casts off all sinfulness,

And by the rooting out of lust, and bitterness.

And all delusion, doth to Nirv4?za reach! ’

End of the Fourth Portion for Recitation, containing

the Episode of A/dra.


V.


85


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


Chapter V.

1. Now the Blessed One addressed the vener-

A

able Ananda, and said : ^ Come, Ananda, let us go
on to the SAla Grove of the Mallas, the Upavattana
of KusinAr^, on the further side of the river Hira-
nyavati.’

‘ Even so, Lord ! ' said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One.

2. And the Blessed One proceed*=^d with a great
company of the brethren to the SMa Grove of the
Mallas, the U pavattana of KusinArd, on the further
side of the river Miranyavati : and when he had

A

come there he addressed the venerable Ananda, and
said :

A

3. ' Spread over for me, I pray you, Ananda, the
couch with its head to the north, between the twin
Sdla trees I am weary, Ananda, and would lie
down.*

‘ Even so. Lord ! * said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One. And he spread a


’ According to the commentator ‘ tradition saj’s that there was
a row of S^la trees at the head (stse) of that couch (ma«>?!a), aijid
another at its foot, one young S§.la tree being close to its head,
and another close to its foot. The twin Sala trees were so called
because the two trees were equally grown in respect of the roots,
trunks, branches, and leaves. There was a couch there in the
park for the special use of the (periodically elected) r%-a of the
Mallas, and it was this couch wtiich the Blessed One asked Ananda
10 make ready.’ There is no further explanation of the term
uttara-slsaka/«, which may have been the name for a slab of
wood or stone reserved on great occasions for the use of the
leaders of the neighbouring republic, but available at other times
for passers by.


86


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE-


CH.


covering over the couch with its head to the north,
between the twin Sala trees. And the Blessed One
laid himself down on his right side, with one leg*
resting on the other ; and he was mindful and self-
possessed.

4. Now at that time the twin. S41a trees w^ere
all one mass of bloom w^ith flowers out of season ^ ;
and all over the body of the Tathagata these dropped
and sprinkled and scattered themselves, out of
reverence for the successor of the Buddhas of old.
And heavenl^^ Mandarava flowers, too, and hea¬
venly sandal -wood powder came falling from
the sky, and all over the body of the Xathdgata
they descended and sprinkled and scattered them¬
selves, out of reverence for the successor of the
Buddhas of old. And heavenly music was sounded
in the sky, out of reverence for the successor of the
Buddhas of old. Ard heavenly songs came wafted
from the skies, out of reverence for the successor of
the Buddhas of old !

5. Then the Blessed One addressed the vener-
able Ananda, and said : ‘ The twin S^la trees are
all one mass of bloom with flowers out of season ;
all over the body of the Tathdgata these drop
and sprinkle and scatter themselves, out of rever¬
ence for the successor of the Buddhas of old. And
heavenly Mandarava flowers, too, and heavenly
sandal-wood powder come falling from the sky,
and all over the body of the Tath^gata they descend
and sprinkle and scatter themselves, out of rever-

^ Sabbaphiliphull^ ti sabbe samantato pupphita mftlato
pa//^aya ydva aggd eka/&i>^annd ahesu»2. (S. V. Z/z/u.) Com¬
pare ekaphaliphu Haw vanaw at C?dtaka I, 52.


V.


MAHA“PARINIBBAnA“SUTTA.


87


ence for the successor of the Buddhas of old. And
heavenly music sounds in the sky, out of reverence
for the successor of the Buddhas of old. And hea¬
venly songs come wafted from the skies, out of rever¬
ence for the successor *of the Buddhas of old 1 ’

6. ‘ Now it is not thus, Ananda, that the TathA-
gata is rightly honoured, reverenced, venerated, held
sacred or revered. But the brother or the sister, the
devout man or the devout woman, who continually
fulfils all the greater and the lesser duties, who is
correct in life, walking according to the precepts — it
is he who rightly honours, reverences, venerates, holds
sacred, and reveres the Tathdgata with the worthiest
homage. Therefore, O Ananda, be ye constant in
the fulfilment of the greater and of the lesser duties,
and be ye correct in life, walking according to the
precepts ; and thus, Ananda, should it be taught.'

7. Now at that time the venerable UpAvawa

was standing in front of the Blessed One, fanning
him.. And the Blessed One was not pleased with
UpAva/^a, and he said to him : ‘ Stand aside, O

brother, stand not in front of me ! '

8. Then this thought sprung up in the mind of
the venerable Ananda : * The venerable UpAva? a
has long been in close personal attendance and ser¬
vice on the Blessed One. And now, at the last
moment, the Blessed One is not pleased with UpA-
va?2a, and has said to him, Stand aside, O brother,
stand not in front of me ! ” What may be the cause
and what the reason that the Blessed One is not
pleased with UpAva/^a, and speaks thus with him ?'

9. And the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One : ^ The venerable U pAva:^a has long


88


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


been in close personal attendance and service on the
Blessed One, And now, at the last moment, the
Blessed One is not pleased with Upava^a, and has
said to him, Stand aside, O brother, stand not in
front of me ! ” What may be the cause and what
the reason that the Blessed One is not pleased with
Up^va?«a, and speaks thus with him

A

lo. ' In great numbers, Ananda, are the gods of
the ten world-systems assembled together to be¬
hold the Tath^gata. For twelve leagues, Ananda,
around the Sala Grove of the Mallas, the XJpavattana
of Kusinari, uhere is no spot in size even as the
pricking of the point of the tip of a hair which is
not pervaded by powerful spirits And the spirits,
Ananda, are murmuring, and say, “ From afar have
we come to behold the Tath§.gata. Few and far
between are the Tath^gatas, the Arahat Buddhas
who appear in the world : and now to-day, in the
last watch of the night, the death of a Tathagata
will take place ; and this eminent brother stands in


^ Buddhaghosa explains that even twenty to sixty angels or gods
(devat^yo) could stand ^ragga-ko/i-nittildana- (MS. nittad-
dana-) matte pi, ‘on a point pricked by the extreme point of
a gimlet,’ without inconveniencing one another (aw;^am a«wa?7z
a y^badhenti). It is most cunous to find this exact analogy to the
notorious discussion as to how many angels could stand on the
point of a needle in a commentary written at just that period of
Buddhist history which corresponds to the Middle Ages of Christen¬
dom. The passage in the text does not really imply or suggest
any such doctrine, though the whole episode is so absurd that the
author of the text could not have hesitated to say so, had such
an idea been the common belief of the early Buddhists. With
these sections should be compared the similar sections in Chapter
VI, of which these are perhaps merely an echo.

There is no comment on nittfidana, but there can be little
doubt that Childers’s conjectural reading is correct.


V.


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta.


89


front of the TathAgata, concealing" him, and in his
last hour we are prevented from beholding the
Xath^gata ; thus, Ananda, do the spirits murmur/

11. ‘ But of what kind of spirits is the Blessed
One thinking ? ’

12. ‘There are. spirits, Ananda, in the sky, but of

worldly mind, who dishevel their hair and weep, who
stretch forth their arms and weep, who fall prostrate
on the ground, and roll to and fro in anguish at the
thought: “ Too soon will the Blessed One die ! Too
soon will the Happy One pass away 1 ‘Full soon
will the Light of the world vanish away ^ '

13. ‘There are spirits, too, Ananda, on the earth,
and of worldly mind, who tear their hair and weep,
who stretch forth their arms and weep, who fall pros¬
trate on the ground, and roll to and fro in anguish
at the thought : Too soon will the Blessed One die !
Too soon will the Happy One pass away! Full soon
will the Eye of the world disappear from sight ! ”

14. ‘But the spirits who are free from passion bear
it, calm and self-possessed, mindful of the saying
which begins, “ Impermanent indeed are all compo¬
nent things. How then is it possible [^whereas any¬
thing whatever, when born, brought into being, and

^ .fiTakkuzwi loke antaradh^yiss? ti, on which there is no coiTx-
ment. It is literally, * the Eye in the world will vanish away/ where
Eye is of course used figuratively of that by the aid of which
spiritual truths can be perceived, corresponding exactly to the
similar use in Europe of the word Light. The Master is often
called ^akkhumS., ‘He with the Eye/ ‘He of the spiritual Eye'
(see, for instance, the last verses in this Sutta), and here by a bold
figure of speech he is called the Eye itself, which was shortly about
to Vanish away from the world, the means of spiritual insight which
was no lopger to be available for the common use of all men. But
this is, it will be noticed, only the lament of the foolish and
ignorant.


90


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH,


organised, contains within, itself the inherent neces¬
sity of dissolution — how then is it possible that such
a being should not be dissolved ? No such condition
can exist ! ”] ^

15. ‘ In times past, Lord, the brethren, when they
had spent the rainy season in different districts, used
to come to see the Tathigata, and we used to receive
those very reverend brethren to audience, and to
wait upon the Blessed One. But, Lord, after the
end of the Blessed One, we shall not be able to
receive those very reverend brethren to audience,
and to wait upon the Blessed One.'

16. ‘There are these four places, Ananda, which
the believing man should visit with feelings of rever¬
ence and awe. ^Vhich are the four ?

' ^

1 7. ‘ The place, Ananda, at which the believing
man can say, ‘‘ Here the Tathdgata was born ! " is a
spot to be visited with feelings of reverence and awe.

18. ‘The place, Ananda, at which the believing
man can say, “ Here the Tath^gata attained to the
supreme and perfect insight ! " is a spot to be visited
wdth feelings of reverence and awe-

19. ‘The place, Ananda, at which the believing
man can say, “ Here was the kingdom of righteous¬
ness set on foot by the Tathdgata ! " is a spot to be
visited with feelings of reverence and awe.

20. ‘ The place, Ananda, at which the believing
man can say, “ Here the Tath^gata passed finally
away in that utter passing away which leaves nothing
whatever to remain behind ! " is a spot to be visited
with feelings of reverence and awe.

^ The words in brackets have been, inserted from par. Ill, 63
above. See par. VI, 39 below.


V.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


91


2 1. * And there will come, Ananda, to such spots,
believers, brethren and sisters of the order, or devout
men and devout women, and will say, “ Here was
the TathAgata born ! or, “ Here did the Tatli^gata
attain to the supreme and perfect insight ! ” or, Here
was the kingdom of righteousness set on foot by the
Tathdgata! ’’ or, Here the Tath^gata passed away
in that utter passing away which leaves nothing
whatever to remain behind !

22. ‘And they, Ananda, who shall die while they,
with believing heart, are journeying on suH* pilgrim¬
age, shall be reborn after death, when the body shall
dissolve, in the happy realms of heaven.’

23. ‘ How are we to conduct ourselves, Lord,
with regard to womankind ? ’

‘ Don’t see them, Ananda.’

‘ But if we should see them, what are we to do ? ’

‘ Abstain from speech, Ananda.’

‘ But if they should speak to us, Lord, what are
we to do ? ’

‘ Keep wide awake. Ananda.’

24. ‘What are we to do. Lord, with the remains
of the Tathagata ? ’

‘ Hinder not yourselves, Ananda, by honouring
the remains of the Xath^gata. Be zealous, I beseech
you, Ananda, in your own behalf! Devote your¬
selves to your own good ! Be earnest, be zealous,
be intent on your own good ! There are wise men,
Ananda, among the nobles, among the Brahmans,
among the heads of houses, who are firm believers
in the Tath§.gata ; and they will do due honour to
the remains of the Tathagata.


92


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


25. ^‘"What should be done, Lord, with the
remains of the Tath^gata ? ’

^ As men treat the remains of a king- of kings,
so, Ananda, should they treat the remains of a
Xath^gata.*

^ And how, Lord, do they treat the remains of a
king of kings ^ *

26. ‘ They wrap the body of a king of kings,
Ananda, in a new cloth. When that is done they
wrap it in carded cotton wool When that is done
they wrtfcp it m a new cloth, — and so on till they have
wrapped the body in five hundred successive layers
of both kinds- Then they place the body in an oil
vessel of iron and cover that close up with another

Ml

^ This conversation occurs also below (VI, 33), and the older
tradition probably had it only in that connection.

® ICing of kings is an inadequate rendering of iSTakkavatti
It is a king whose power no other king can dispute, who is the
acknowledged overlord in India. The idea can scarcely have
existed before .^andragupta, the first JSTakravarti, had raised himself
to power. This passage, therefore, is a guide to the date at which
the Mah^-pa'rinibb^na Sutta assumed its present form,

^Vihatenakapp^sen^tisupho/itenakapp^senarK^sika-
'va.ttha.m hi sukhumatta telam na ga/zhati, tasmS, vihatena
kappasen^ ti aha. * As Benares cloth, by reason of its fineness
of texture, does not take the oil, he therefore says, “ with vihata
cotton wool,” that is, with cotton wool that has been well forced
asunder.' That pho/ita is here the participle of the causal verb,
and not of the simple verb, follows of necessity from its being
used as an explanation of vihata, ‘torn to pieces.' The technical
use of the word, as applied to cotton wool, has only been found in
this passage. It usually means ‘ torn with grief.'

■* Ayasaya tela-do«iyd, where one would expect iyas^ya, but
my MS. of the Digha Nikaya confirms twice over here, and twice
again below, VI, 33, 35, the reading given by Childers. Buddha-
ghosa says, Ayasan ti su vaTzzza;^?/, suvazzzzamhi idha dyasah
ti adhippeto, but here again we should expect the second time
to find ayo or ayasazzz. The meaning of the word is also not


V.


93


MAH A-PARINIBbAn A-S U TTA*


oil vessel of iron \ They then build a funeral pile
of all kinds of perfumes, and burn the body of the
king of kings. And then at the four cross roads
they erect a dAgaba “ to the king of kings. This,
Ananda, is the way in which they treat the remains
of a king of kings.

' And as they treat the remains of a king of kings,
so, Ananda, should they treat the remains of the
Tathdgata. At the four cross rop.ds a d^gaba should
be erected to the Tath^gata. And whosoever shall
there place garlands or perfumes or paint, or make
salutation there, or become in its presence calm in
heart — that shall long be to them for a profit and
a joy’ -

27. ‘These men, Ananda, worthy of a .ddgaba -,
are four in number. Which are the four ?

‘ A Tath^gata, or A rahat- Buddha, is worthy of a
dlLgaba. A Pa>^/^eka-Buddha is worthy of a d^gaba

quite clear. It no doubt was originally used for bronze, and only later
for iron also, and at .last exclusively of iron. As kawsa is already a
common word for bronze in very e^rly Buddhist Pllli texts, I think
^yasa or ayasa must here mean ‘ of iron.' When Buddhaghosa
says it is here a name for gold, we can only conclude that iron
had become, in his time, a metal which he might fairly consider
too base for the purpose proposed.

^ Buddhaghosa has no note on pa/iku^^etvS. ; but from its use
at GS^taka I, 50, 29 : 69, 23, it must, I think, have this meaning.
I am not certain to what root it ought to be referred. I should
mention that pakkhipatl seems to me never to mean in Pali, ‘ to
hurl forth into, to throw forth,' but always ‘ to place (slowly and
carefully) into.'

* A solid mound or tumulus, in the midst of which the bones and
ashes are to be placed. The dome of St. Paul's as seen from the
Thatnes Embankment gives a very good idea of one of the later
Buddhist dagabas. The P'^U word here and below is Thfipa.

® A Pa/C’-^eka-Buddha, who has attained to the supreme and per¬
fect insig'ht; but dies without proclaiming the truth to the world.


94


CH.


THE TBOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


A true hearer of the Tath^gata is worthy of a d^-
gaba. A king of kipgs is worthy of a ddgaba,

28. ‘ And on account of what circumstance,

Ananda, is a Tathdgata, an Arahat-Buddha, worthy
ofadigaba? ^

‘ At the thought, Ananda, “This is the d^gaba
of that Blessed One, of that Arahat-Buddha,'^ the
hearts of many shall be made calm and happy ;
and since they there had calmed and satisfied their
hearts they will be reborn after death, when the
body has dissolved, in the happy realms of heaven.
It is on account of this circumstance, Ananda, that
a Tathagata, an Arahat-Buddha, is worthy of a
digaba.

29. ‘ And on account of what circumstance,
Ananda, is a Pa/^/^eka-Buddha worthy of a ddgaba ?

“At the thought, Ananda, “This is the d^gaba of
that Blessed One, of that Pa/^^^eka- Buddha," the
hearts of many shall be made calm and happy ; and
since they there had calmed and satisfied their
hearts they will be reborn after death, when the
body has dissolved, in the happy realms of heaven.
It is on account of this circumstance, Ananda, that
a Pa/^-^eka-Buddha is worthy of a ddgaba.

30. ‘ And on account of what circumstance,

A

Ananda, is a true hearer of the Blessed One, the
Arahat-Buddha, worthy of a ddgaba ?

‘ At the thought, Ananda, “ This is the d^gaba of
that true hearer of the Blessed Arahat-Buddha," the
hearts of many shall be made calm and happy ; and
since they there had calmed and satisfied their hearts
they will be reborn after death, when the body has
dissolved, in the happy realms of heaven. It is on
account of this circumstance, Ananda, that a true


V.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


95


hearer of’ the Blessed One, the Arahat-Buddha, is
worthy of a dagaba.

31. ‘And on account of what circumstance,

A

Ananda, is a king of kings worthy of a d^gaba ?

‘ At the thought, Ananda, “ This is the ddgaba of
that righteous king who ruled in righteousness,’" the
hearts of many shall be made calm and happy ; and
since they there had calmed and satisfied their
hearts they will be reborn after death, when the
body has dissolved, in the happy realms of heaven.
It is on account of this circumstance, Ananda, that
a king of kings is worthy of a ddgaba.

‘ These four, Anaxida, are the persons worthy of
a ddgaba."

32. ‘bJow the venerable Ananda went into the
Vilidra, and stood leaning against the lintel of the
door b and w’eeping at the thought : “ Alas ! I remain
still but a learner, one who has yet to work out his
own perfection And the Master is about to pass
away from me — he who is so kind ! ” "

33. Now the Blessed One called the brethren,
and said : ‘ Where, then, brethren, is Ananda ?

The venerable Ananda, Lord, has gone into the

^ Kapisisaz^a. Buddhaghosa says, KapisJsakan ti -dv^tra-
baha-ko/iyaz?/ aggala-rulckha^w, ‘ a piece of wood fixed

as a bolt at the top of the door posts." The Sanskrit lexicographers
give kapi-jirsha in the sense of ‘ coping of a wall." Compare
Pdtimokkha, Pa-^dttiya, No. 19.

The expression that Ananda went ' into the Vihara " at the end of
a conversation represented as having taken place in the SSla Grove,
would seem to point to the fact that this episode originally stood
in some other connection. Buddhaghosa attempts to explain away
the discrepancy by saying that Vihara here means Ma/«<a?ala.

® Ananda had entered the Noble Path, but had not j'^et reached
the end of it. He had not attained to NirvSwa.


96


CH.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE-


V'ih^ra, and stands leaning' against the lintel of the
door, and weeping at the thought : " Alas ! I remain
still but a learner, one who has yet to work out his
own perfection. And the Master is about to pass
away from me— he who is so kind ! '

34. And the Blessed One called a certain brother,
and said : ‘ Go now, brother, and call Ananda in my
name, and say, “ Brother Ananda, the Master calls
for thee.’' ’

‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said that brother, in assent, to
the Blessed One. And he went up to the place
where the Blessed One was ; and when he had come
there, he said to the venerable Ananda : Brother

A

Ananda, the Master calls for thee.^

‘Very well, brother,' said the venerable Ananda,
in assent, to that brother. And he went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and when he had
come there, he bowed down before the Blessed One,
and took his seat respectfully on one side.

35- Then the Blessed One said to the venerable
Ananda, as he sat there by his side : ‘ Enough,

Ananda ! Oo not let yourself be troubled ; do not
weep! Have I not already, on former occasions, told
you that it is in the very nature of all things most
near and dear unto us that we must divide ourselves
from them, leave them, sever ourselves from them ?
How, then, Ananda, can this be possible — whereas
anything whatever born, brought into being, and
organised, contains within itself the inherent neces¬
sity of dissolution — how, then, can this be possible,
that such a being should not be dissolved ? ISfo
such condition can exist ! For a long time, Ananda,
have you been very near to me by acts of love,
kind and good, that never varies, and is beyond all


V.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


97


measure. Por a long- time, Ananda, have you been
very near to me by words of love, kind and good,
that never varies, and is beyond all measure. Por
a long time, Ananda, have you been very near
to me by thoughts of love, kind and good, that
never varies ^ and is beyond all measure. You
have done well, Ananda I Be earnest in effort, and
you too shall soon be free from the great evils — from
sensuality, from individuality, from delusion, and
from ignorance ^ 1 ’

36. ^ Then the Blessed One addressed the bre¬
thren, and said : ‘ Whosoever, brethren, have been
Arahat-Buddhas through the long ages of the past,
there were servitors just as devoted to those Blessed
Ones as Ananda has been to me. And wnosoever,
brethren, shall be Arahat-Buddhas in the long ages
of the future, there shall be servitors just as devoted
to those Blessed Ones as Ananaa has been to me.

37. ‘ He is a wise man, brethren, — is Ananda.


Advayena. which Buddhaghosa explains as not being- that
kind of love which is now one thing and now another, or which
varies in the presence or the absence of the object loved. When
the Buddha is called in the Axnara Kosha I, i, i, 9, advaya-
v^din, that must mean in a similar way, ‘ One whose teaching does
not vary.'

® Literally, thou shalt become an Andsava, that is, one who is
free from the four Asavas, all which are explained above in § I, 12,
from which I have taken the details suggested to a Buddhist by
the word used. The state of mind to which an Anasava has
reached is precisely the same, though looked at from a different
point of view, as the state of mind expressed by the better known
word Nirvawa.

® What follows is repeated in the Satipattha^za Vagga of the
Sawyutta Nikdya ; but in regard to Sariputta (Upatissa) and
Moggalldna, and reading sdvaka-yugaw for upa/Mako.

[II] H


98 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH.

He knows when it is the right time for him to come
and visit the Tath^gata, and when it is the right
time for the brethren and sisters of the order, for
devout men and devout women, for a king, or for a
king’s ministers, for other teachers or their disciples,
to come and visit the Xathdgata.

38. ‘ Brethren, there are these four wonderful and
marvellous qualities in Ananda. Which are the four?

‘If, brethren, a number of the brethren of the
order should come to visit Ananda, they are filled
with joy on beholding him ; and if Ananda should
then preach the truth to them, they are filled with
joy at tJtie discourse ; while the company of brethren
is ill at ease, brethren, when Ananda is silent.

‘ If, brethren, a number of the sisters of the
order, or of devout men, or of devout women,
should come to visit Ananda, they are filled with
joy on beholding him ; and if Ananda should then
preach the truth to them, they are filled with joy at
the discourse; while the company of sisters is ill at
ease, brethren, when Ananda is silent.

39. ‘ Brethren, there are these four wonderful
and marvellous qualities in a king of kings. "What
are the four ?

‘ If, brethren, a number of nobles, or Brahrpan, or
heads of houses, or Sama?2as should come to visit
a king of kings, they are filled with joy on behold¬
ing him ; and if the king of kings should then speak,
they are filled with joy at what is said ; while they
are ill at ease, brethren, when the king of kings is
silent.

40. ‘Just so, brethren, are the four wonderful and
marvellous qualities in Ananda.

‘If, brethren, a number of the brethren of the


V-


99


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


order, or of the sisters of the order, or of devout
men, or of devout women, should come to visit
Ananda, they are filled with joy on beholding- him ;
and if Ananda should then preach the truth to them,
they are filled with joy at the discourse ; while the
company of brethren is ill at ease, brethren, when
Ananda is silent.

‘ Now these, brethren, are the four wonderful and
marvellous qualities that are in Ananda.

41. When he had thus spoken h the venerable

A

Ananda said to the Blessed One ;

‘ Bet not the Blessed One die in this little wattel
and daub town, in this town in the midst of the
jungle, in this branch township '^. For, Lord, there
are other great cities, such as ATampA, R^-^agaha,
S^vatthi, Saketa, Kosambi, and Benares. Let the
Blessed One die in one of them. There there are
many wealthy nobles and Brilhnians and heads of
houses, believers in the Tath^gata, who will pay due
honour to the remains of the Xath§.gata


^ From here down to the end of section 44 is found also, nearly
word for word, in the beg-inning: of the MahS.-Sudassana Sutta,
translated below; compare also Mahd-Sudassana (jrataka, No. 95.

® Ku^fi/a-nagarake ti pa/irupake sambitdhe khuddaka-
nagare: U^^ahgala-nagarake ti visa m a-nagarake. (S.V. foL
//zau.) K.uddsi, if this explanation be right, seems to be mereb’^ an
old and unusual form for kshudra, and the Burmese correction
into khudda to be unnecessary ; but I venture to thiiik it is more
likely to be=kucfya, and to mean a wall built of mud and sticks, or
what is called in India, of -wattel and daub. When Buddhaghosa
explains u^^ahgala as Mawless/ he is expressing his view that
a town in the jungle is likely to be a heathen, pagan sort of
place.

® With reference to Childerses note in his Dictionary on mah^-
saia, with which every one must entirely agree, Buddhaghosa’s

H 2


lOO


THE BOOK OF THE GREA.T DECEASE.


CH.


A A

42. * Say not so, Aiianda ! Say not so, Ananda, that
this is but a small wattel and daub town, a town in
the midst of the jungle, a branch township. Long
ago, Ananda, there was a king, by name Maha-Sudas-
sana, a king of kings, a righteous man who ruled in
righteousness, Lord of the four quarters of the earth,
conqueror, the protector of his people, possessor of
the seven royal treasures. This Kusinar^, Ananda,
was the royal city of king Maha-Sudassana, under the
name of Kusavatl, and on the east and on t\ie west it
was twelve longues in length, and on the north and on
the south it was seven leagues in breadth.

43. ‘ That royal city Kus^vati, Ananda, was mighty,
and prosperous, and full of people, crowded with
men, and provided with all things for food J ust,
Ananda, as the royal city of the gods, A/akamanda
by name, is mighty, prosperous, and full of people,
crowded with the gods, and provided with all kinds
of food, so, Ananda, was the royal city Kusavati
mighty and prosperous, full of people, crowded
with men, and provided with all kinds of food.

44. ‘ Both by day and by night, Ananda, the royal
city Kusivatl resounded with the ten cries ; that is
to say, the noise of elephants, and the noise of
horses, and the noise of chariots ; the sounds of the '


explanation of the word will be interesting as a proof (if proof
be needed) that the Ceylon scholars are not always trustworthy.
He says, Khattiy a-mahdsala ti khattiya-mahasarS. sara-
patta maha-khattiya. Eso nayo sabbattha.

^ The first three of these adjectives are applied at 6^dtaka I, 29
(v. 212) to the relig'ion of the Buddhas; and I think the right
reading there must be phitam, in accordance with the corrections
in two MSS. as noted by Mr. Fausboll, and not pttayw as he
has preferred to read. The whole set of epithets is often used
of cities.


V.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


TOI


drum, of the tabor, and of the lute ; the sound of
singing, and the sounds* of the cymbal and of the
gong ; and lastly, with the cry, “ Eat, drink, and be
merry’!”

A

45. ‘ Go now, Ananda, and enter into Kusinara,
and inform the Mallas of Kusin^ra, saying, “ This
day, O Vclse//y4as, in the last watch of the night, the
final passing away of the Tathigata will take place.
Be favourable herein, O Vdse/z/^as, be favourable. .
Give no occasion to reproach yourselves hereafter,
saying, ‘In our own village did the death of our
Tath^gata take place, and we took not the opportu¬
nity of visiting the Tathdgata in his last hours.’

‘ Even so, Lord,’ said the venei'able Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One ; and he robed himself,
and taking his bowL^, entered into Kusinar^ attended
by another member of the order.


^ This enumeration is found also at Crataka, p. 3, only that the
conch shell is added there — wrongly, for that makes the number of
cries eleven. The Maha-Sudassana Sutta has in the corresponding
passage, like the Burmese MS. noted here by Childers, conch
instead of cymbal. My MS. reads cymbal here.

® Niv^setvd i>atta-/’tvara772 addya atta-dutiyo. Buddha-
ghosa has, naturall}^ enough, no comment on this oft-recurring
phrdse. It cannot be meant that he put on only his under-gar¬
ments, and carried his upper robe with him ; for then his shoulders
would have been bare ; and it is quite against the rules to go into
a village without all the robes having been put carefully on (Pdti-
mokkha, Sekhiya 1-3). I do not even understand how Ananda,
with due regard to the rules of the brotherhood (see Pdtimokkha,
Nisaggiya 21-29), could have had a spare robe then with him.
And patta-X’ivara/?? can scarcely mean simply ‘bowl-robe,’ refer¬
ring to the length of cotton cloth in which the bowl was carried
over the shoulder (‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’ p. 71). ‘With both
his under-garments on, he entered Kusindrd duly bowled and robed ’
may be impossible English, but it probably correctly catches the


102


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


46. Now at that time the Mallas of Kusinara
were assembled in the council hall on some public
affair

And the venerable Ananda went to the council
hall of the Mallas of Kusinard ; and when he had
arrived there, he informed them, saying, ' This
day, O Vase///^as, in the last watch of the night,
the final passing away of the Tathdgata will take
place. Be favourable herein, O Vase///^as, be
favourable. Give no occasion to reproach your¬
selves hereafber, saying, ‘‘In our own village did
the death of our Tathagata take place, and we took
not the opportunity of visiting the Tathagata in his
last hours.’" ’

47. And when they had heard this saying of the
venerable Anancla, the Mallas with their young men
and maidens and their vdves were grieved, and sad,
and afifiicted at heart. And some of them wept, dis¬
hevelling their hair, and stretched forth their arms
and wept, fell prostrate on the ground, and rolled
to and fro in anguish at the thought: ‘Too soon
will the Blessed One die! Too soon will the Happy
One pass away! Full soon will the Light of the
world vanish away ! ’


48. Then the Mallas, with their young men and

idea involved, though of course one (at least) of the under-cloths
had been put on long before. See p. 122. A Thera never goes
about in public alone, he is always accompanied by a Sa maw era.

^ Kena/C'id eva karawiyena. Professor Pischel, in his edition
of the Assalayana Sutta (p. i), prints this expression ken'aX’i deva-
karawiyena, and translates it (p. 28), ‘for some religious pur¬
poses.' It seems to me that he has been misled by the commentary,
which really presupposes the more correct division adopted by
Childers.


V,


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA,


103


maidens and their wives, being- grieved and sad
and afflicted at heart, went to the S^la Grove of the
Mallas, to the Upavattana, and to the place where

A

the venerable Ananda was.

49. Then the venerable Ananda thought : ‘If
I allow the Mallas of Kusinard, one by one, to pay
their respects to the Blessed One, the whole of the
Mallas of Kusin^rd will not have been presented to
the Blessed One until this night brightens up into the
dawn. Let me, now, cause the Mallas of Kusinara
to stand in groups, each family in a group, and so
present them to the Blessed One, saying, “ Lord I a
Malla of such and such a name, with his ''hildren,
his wives, his retinue, and his friends, humbly bcws
down at the feet of the Blessed One.’' '

50. And the venerable Ananda caused the Mallas
of Kusin^r4 to stand in groups, each family in a
group, and so presented them to the Blessed One, and
said : ‘ Lord ! a Malla of such and such a name, with
his children, his wives, his retinue, and his friends,
humbly bows down at the feet of the Blessed^ One.*

51. And after this manner the venerable Ananda
presented all the Mallas of Kusinard to the Blessed
One in the first watch of the night.

52. Now at that time a mendicant named Su-
bhadda, who was not a believer, was dwelling at
Kusinar^. And the mendicant Subhadda heard
the news : ‘ This very day, they say, in the third
watch of the night, will take place the final passing
away of the Sama/2^a Gotania.*

53. Then thought the mendicant Subhadda :
‘This have I heard from fellow mendicants of
mine, old and well stricken in years, teachers and


104


THE BOOK OF THE CHEAT DECEASE.


CH.


disciples, when they said : “ Sometimes and full

seldom do Tathhgatas appear in the world, the
Arahat Buddhas.’' Yet this day, in the last watch
of the night, the final passing away of the Sama^-^a
Gotama will take place. Now a certain feeling of
uncertainty has sprung up in my mind ; and this
faith have I in the Sama;za Gotama, that he, me-
thinks, is able so to present the truth that I may
get rid of this feeling of uncertainty.’

54. Then the mendicant Subhadda went to the
Shla Grove of the Mallas, to the Upavattana of Kusi-
nara, to the place where the venerable Ananda was.

55. And when he had come there he said to the
venerable Ananda : ‘ Thus have I heard from fellow
mendicants of mine, old and well stricken in years,
teachers and disciples, when they said : “ Sometimes
and full seldom do Tathdgatas appear in the world,
the Arahat Buddhas.” Yet this day, in the last watch
of the night, the final passing away of the Samaz/a
Gotama will take place. Now a certain feeling of
uncertainty has sprung up in my mind ; and this faith
have I in the Sama/^a Gotama, that he, methinks, is
able so to present the truth that I may get rid of this
feeling of uncertainty. O that I, even I, Ananda,
might be allowed to see die Sama/^a Gotama ! ’

56. And when he had thus spoken the vener¬
able Ananda said to the mendicant Subhadda :
' Enough ! friend Subhadda. Trouble not the Tath^-
gata. The Blessed One is weary.’

57. And again the mendicant Subhadda [made the
same request in the same words, and received the
same reply] ; and the third time the mendicant
Subhadda [made the same request in the same
words, and received the same reply].


V.


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta. 105


58. Now the Blessed One overheard this con¬

versation of the venerable Ananda with the men¬
dicant Subhadda. And the Blessed One called
the venerable Ananda, and said : ‘ It is eixoiig-h,

Ananda ! Do not keep out Subhadda. Subhadda,
Ananda, may be allowed to see the TathAgata.
Whatever Subhadda may ask of me, he will ask
from a desire for knowledge, and not to annoy me.
And whatever I may say in answer to his questions,
that he will quickly understand.'

59. Then the venerable Ananda said to Subhadda,

the mendicant : ‘ Enter in, friend Subhadda ; for

the Blessed One gives you leave.’

60. Then Subhadda, the mendicant, went in to
the place where the Blessed One was, and saluted
him courteously, and after exchanging with him the
compliments of esteem and of civility, he took his
seat on one side. And when he was thus seated,
Subhadda, the mendicant, said to the Blessed One ;
* The BrAhmans by saintliness of life Gotama, who


-Samawa-br^hmawS., which compound may possibly mean
Samaj^as and Brdhmans as it has usually been rendered, but I think
not necessarily. Not one of those here specified were Brdhmans
by caste, as is apparent from the Sumangala VMsint on the Sd-
ma?2wa Phala Sutta, p. 114. Compare the use of Kshatriya-
brS.hmawo, ‘a soldier priest,' a Kshatriya who offered sacrifice;
and of Brdhmawo, absolutely, as an epithet of an Arahat. In
the use of the word samara there seems to me to be a hopeless
confusion between, a complete mingling of the meanings of, the
two roots jrram and jam (which, in Pali, would both become sam).
It connotes both asceticism and inward peace, and might best be
rendered ‘ devotee,’ were it not for the intellectual inferiority im¬
plied by that word in our language. A Sama^fza Brdhman should
therefore mean a man of any caste, who by his saintliness of life,
by his renunciation of the world, and by his reputation as a reli¬
gious thinker, had acquired the position of a quasi BrAhman, and


io6


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


are heads of companies of disciples and students,
teachers of students, well known, renowned, founders
of schools of doctrine, esteemed as g-ood men by the
multitude — to wit, Pura^za Kassapa, Makkhali of the
cattle-pen, A^ita of the garment of hair, Ka/^/C’ayana
of the Pakudha tree, Sa^^^aya the son of the Be-
slave-girl, and Niga?^//^a of the Natha clan
- — -have they all, according to their own assertion,
thoroughly understood things ? or have they not ?
or are there some of them who have understood,
and some who have not ’ ? ’

61. ‘ Enough, Subhadda ! Let this matter rest
whether they, according to their own assertion,
have thoroughly understood things, or whether
they have not, or whether some of them have
understood and some have not ! The truth, Anar.da,
will I teach you. Listen well to that, and give
ear attentively, and I will speak.’

‘ Even so. Lord ! said the mendicant Subhadda,
in assent, to the Blessed One.

62. And the Blessed One spake : ‘ In whatso¬

ever doctrine and discipline, Subhadd?, the noble
eightfold path is not found, neither in it is there
found a man of true sa-inthness of the first or of
the second or of the third or of the fourth degree


■was looked up to by the people in the same way as that in which
they looked up to a Bnthman by caste. Compare further mjy'
‘ Buddhist Birth Stories,' vol. i. p, 260 ; and also Mr. Beal's remarks
in the Indian Antiquary for IMaj", 1880; and Professor IMax
Miiller’s note on Dhammapada, verse 265.

^ Buddhaghosa has an exegetical note on abbha/Iwanisu, but
passes over those celebrated Six Xeachcrs in silence. The little
that is thus far known of them will be discussed in another place.

® This refers to the four divisions of the Noble Eightfold Path-
See above, chap. II, § 8, where their characters are described. The


V.


107


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


And in whatsoever doctrine and discipline, Sii-
bhadda, the noble eightfold path is found, is found
the man of true saintliness of the first and the
second and the third and the fourth degree. Now
in this doctrine and discipline, Subhadda, is found
the noble eightfold path, and in it alone, Subhadda,
is the man of true saintliness. Void are the sys¬
tems of other teachers — void of true saints. And
in this one, Subhadda, may the brethren live the
Life that’s Right, so that the world be not bereft of
Arahats


word translated * man of true saintliness, ' or * true saint, is in the
text Samawo, on which see the note on page 105. I am at a aOSS
how to render the word adequately here.

Arahats are those who have reached Wirvawa, the ‘supreme
goal,' the ‘highest fruit’ of the Noble Eightfold Path. To live
‘the Life that’s Right’ (samma) is to live in the Noble Path, each
of the eight divisions of which is to be sammtl, round, right and
perfect, normal and complete. To live right (samma) is therefore
to have — i. Right views, fi*ee from superstiiion. 2. Right aims,
high and worthy of the intelligent aiid earnest man. 3. Right
speech, kindly, open, truthful. 4. Right conduct, in all concerns
of life. 5. Right livelihood, bringing hurt or danger to no living
thing. 6. Right perseverance, in all the other seven. 7. Right
mindfulness, the watchful, active mind. 8. Right contemplation,
earnest thought on the deep mysteries of life. In each of these
the word right is samma, and the whole paragraph being on the
Noble Path, the allusion is certainly to this central doctrine of the
Buddhist Dhamma.

Buddhaghosa says that that bhikkhu samma viharati, who,
having himself entered the Noble Path, leads his brother into it,
and this is, no doubt, good Buddhism. But it is a practical appli¬
cation of the text, a theological exegesis, and not a philological
explanation. p],ven so it seems to lay the stress too much on
‘ bereft,’ and too little on ‘ Arahats.’

In the last words of the prose wc seem to have a reminiscence
of what were once verses, which may have run —

Su77/7a pavada samawehi ay7/}e;


I08 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT E^ECEASE. CH.


' But twenty-nine was I when I renounced
The world, Subhadda, seeking; after good.

For fifty years and one year more, Subhadda,
Since I went out, a pilgrim have I been
Through the wide realms of virtue and of truth.
And outside these no really “ saint ” can be ’ !

‘ Yea, not of the first, nor of the second, nor of the
third, nor of the fourth degree. Void are the systems
of other teachers — void of true saints. But in this
one, Subhadda, may the brethren live the perfect
life, that the world be not bereft of those who have
reached the highest fruit.*

63. And when he had thus spoken, Subhadda,
the mendicant, said to the Blessed One : ‘ Most

excellent, Lord, are the words of thy mouth, most
excellent I J ust as if a man were to set up that
which is thrown down, or were to reveal that which
is hidden away, or were to point out the right road
to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a
lamp into the darkness, so that those who have eyes
can see external forms; — just even so. Lord, has
the truth been made known to me, in many a figure,
by the Blessed One. And I, even I, betake myself,
Lord, to the Blessed One as my refuge, to the
truth, and to the order. May the Blessed One
accept me as a disciple, as a true believer, from this
day forth, as long as life endures V


Ime ^’a samma vihareyyu bhikkhfi,

Asu««o loko 'rahatehi assa.

^ I have followed, though with some doubt, Childers's punctua¬
tion. Buddhaghosa refers padesa-vattl to sama/^o; and ito,
not to padesa, but to magga, understood; and it is quite pos¬
sible that this is the correct explanation- On samddhikani see
the comment at Gdtaka II, 383.-


V.


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta.


109


64. " Whosoever, Subhadda, that has formerly been
a follower of another doctrine and then desires to be
received into the higher or the lower grade in this
doctrine and discipline, he remains on probation
for the space of four months ; and at the end of the
four months, the brethren, exalted in spirit, receive
him into the lower or into the higher grade of the
order. Nevertheless in this case I acknowledge the
difference in persons.*

65. ‘If, Lord, whosoever that has formerly been
a follower of another doctrine and then desires
to be received into the higher or the lower grade
in this doctrine and discipline, — if, in that, case,
such a person remains on probation for the space
of four months ; and at the end of the four
months, the brethren, exalted in sjDirit, receive
him into the lower or into the higher grade of the
order — I too, then, will remain on probation for the
space of four months ; and at the end of the four
months let the brethren, exalted in spirit, receive
me into the lower or into the higher grade of the
order ! ’

66. But the Blessed One called the venerable
Ananda, and said : ‘ As it is, Ananda, receive Su¬
bhadda into the order!’

‘Even so. Lord 1* said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the Blessed One.

67. And Subhadda, the mendicant, said to the vene¬
rable Ananda : ‘ Great is your gain, friend Ananda,
great is your good fortune, friend Ananda, that you
all have been sprinkled with the sprinkling of dis-
cipleship in this brotherhood at the hands of the
Master himself!’

68. So Subhadda, the mendicant, was received


I lO


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


into the hig^her grade of the order under the Blessed
One ; and from immediately after his ordination the
venerable Subhadda remained alone and separate,
earnest, zealous, and resolved. And e’er longr he
attained to that supreme goal of the higher life ^ for
the sake of which men go out from all and every
household gain and comfort to become houseless
wanderers — -yea, that supreme goal did he, by him-
self, and while yet in this visible world, bring him-
self to the knowledge of, and continue to realise, and
to see face to face 1 And he became conscious that
birth was at an end, that the higher life had been
fulfilled, that all that should be done had been
accomplished, and that after this present life there
would be no beyond !

69. So the venerable Subhadda became yet another
among the Arahats ; and. he was the last disciple
whom the Blessed One himself converted


End of the Hira^l/'javatiya portion, being the
Fifth Portion for Recitation.


^ That is, Nirvtlwa. Compare Mahgala Sutta V, 1 1, and the
Dhammapada, verses 180, 354, and above Chap. I, § 7.

^ Buddhaghosa says that die last five words in the text (the last
twelve words in my translation) were added by the Theras who
held the Council. On Subhadda’s ordination he has the following
interesting note: ‘The There (that is, Ananda), they say, took
him on one side, pioured Avater over his head from a water vessel,
made him repeat the formula of meditation on tlie irnpermanency
of the body(T ayC’a-pa/7/('aka-kamma///^itna w ; see my “ Buddhist
Birth Stories,” p. 161), shaved off his hair and beard, clad him in
the yellow robes, made him repeat the “ T'liree Refuges,” and led
him back to the Blessed One. The Blessed One himself admitted
him then into tlie higher rank of the brotherhood, and pointed out
to him a subject for meditation (karama////ana;7z ; see “Buddhist


V.


MAHA“PARIN1BBANA*SUTTA.


Ill


I T2


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


Chapter VI.

1. Now the Blessed One addressed the venerable

A A

Ananda, and said : ‘ It maybe, Ananda, that in some
of you the thought may arise, “The word of the
Master is ended, we have no teacher more But
it is not thus, Ananda, that you should regard it.
The truths and the rules of the order which I
have set forth and laid down for you all, let them,
after 1 am g^one, be the Teacher to you.’

A

2. ‘ Ananda ! when I am gone address not one
another in the way in which the brethren have
heretofore addressed each other — with the epithet,
that is, of “Avuso” (Friend). A younger brother
may be addressed by an elder with his name, or his
family name, or the title “ Friend.” But an elder
should be addressed by a younger brother as “Lord ”
or as “Venerable Sir.”’

3. AVhen I am gone, Ananda, let the order, if
it should so wish, abolish all the lesser and minor
precepts

4. ‘ When I am gone, Ananda, let the higher
penalty be imposed on brother W/^anna.’

‘ But what, Lord, is the higher penalty ?’


’ In ^ulla Vagga XI, i, 9, 10, is related how the brotherhood
formally considered the permission thus accorded to them, and
resolved to adhere to all the precepts as laid down in the Buddha’s
lifetime. In his comment on this passage Buddhaghosa incident¬
ally refers to a conversation on the subject between Nagasena and
Milinda Ra^a, but makes no mention of the work known as Milinda
Pa/7ha. Compare Trenckner's edition of that work, p. 142,


VI.


maha-parikij3bAna-sutta.


I 13


‘ Let JiTAa-nna, say whatever he may like, Ananda
the brethren should neither speak to him, nor exhort
him, nor admonish him k'

5. Then the Blessed One addressed the brethren,
and said : ‘It may be, brethren, that there may be
doubt or missfivin^ in the mind of some brother as
to the Buddha, or the truth, or the path, or the
way. Knquire, brethren, freely. Do not have to
reproach yourselves afterwards with the thoug^ht
“ Our teacher was face to face with us, and we
could not bring ourselves to enquire of the Blessed
One when we were face to face with him.”

And when he had thus spoken the brethren were
silent.

6, And again the second and the third time the
Blessed One addressed the brethren, and said : ‘It
may be, brethren, that there may be doubt or mis¬
giving' in the mind of some brother as to the Buddha,
or the truth, or the path, or the way. Enquire,
brethren, freely. Do not have to reproach your¬
selves afterwards with the thought, “ Our teacher
was face to face with us, and we could not bring
ourselves to enquire of the Blessed One when we
were face to face with him.”

And even the third time the brethren were silent.

* Compare AfulUi Vagina I, 25—31: IV, 14, i : XI, i, 12—14.
AViianna is represented as an obstinate, perverse man ; so destitute
of the proper ‘ esprit de corps ' tliat he dared to take part with
the sisterhood, and against the brotherhood, in a tlispute which
had arisen between them. But after the social penalty here re¬
ferred to had been dnl}' imposed upon him, even Ins proud and
independent spirit was tamed ; he became humble ; his eyes were
opened ; and he, also, attained to the ‘ supreme goal ’ of the
Buddhist faith.


I


1 14


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH-


7. Then the Blessed One addressed the brethren,
and said: ‘ It may be, brethren, that you put no
questions out of reverence for the teacher. Let
one friend communicate to another.'

And when he had thus spoken the brethren were
silent.

8. And the venerable Ananda said to the Blessed
One : ‘ How wonderful a thing is it. Lord, and how
marvellous! Verily, I believe that in i this whole
assembly of the brethren there is not one brother
who has any doubt or misgiving as to the Buddha,
or the truth, or the path, or the way I '

9 ‘ It is out of the fulness of faith that thou hast

A yv

Spoken, Ananda? But, Ananda, the Tathagata
knows for certain that in this whole assembly of the
brethren there is not one brother who has any
doubt or misgiving as to the Buddha, or the truth,
or the path, or the way! For even the most back-
ward, Ananda, of all these five hundred brethren
has become converted, and is no longfer liable to be
born in a state of suffering, and is assured of final
salvation k'

10. Then the Blessed One addressed the brethren,
and said, ‘ Behold now, brethren, I exhort you,
saying, “ Decay is inherent in all component things !
Work out your salvation with diligence ! " ’

This was the last word of the Tathagata !


II. Then the Blessed One entered into the first


^ Compare above, Chap. II, § 7. By ‘ the most backward,’
according- to Buddhaghosa, the Blessed One referred to Ananda,
and he said this to encourage him.


VI.


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


1 15


stage of deep meditation And rising out of the
first stage he passed inco the second. And rising
out of the second he passed into the third. And
rising out of the third stage he passed into the
fourth. And rising out of the fourth stage of
deep meditation he entered into the state of mind
to which the infinity of space is alone present And
passing out of the mere consciousness of the in¬
finity of space he entered into the state of mind to
which the infinity of thought is alone present. And
passing out of the mere consciousness of the infi¬
nity of thought he entered into a state of mind to
which nothing at all was specially present. And
passing out of the consciousness of no special object
he fell into a state between consciousness and
unconsciousness. And passing out of the state
between consciousness and unconsciousness he fell
into a state in which the consciousness both of
sensations and of ideas had wholly passed away.

12. Then the venerable Ananda said to the
venerable Anuruddha : * O my Lord, O Anuruddha,
the Blessed One is dead ! ’

‘ Nay! brother Ananda, the Blessed One is not
dead. He has entered into that state in which both
sensations and ideas have ceased to be ! *

13. Then the Blessed One passing out of the
state in which both sensations and ideas have
ceased to be, entered into the state between con¬
sciousness and unconsciousness. And passing out
of the state between consciousness and uncon¬
sciousness he entered into the state of mind to

^ G/zana, the full text and an explanation of which will be found
in the translator’s ‘ Buddhism,' pp. 174—176.

^ Compare above, Chap. Ill, §§ 37—42.

I 2


I i6


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE^


CH.


which nothing at all is specially present. And
passing out of the consciousness of no special
object he entered into the state of mind to which
the infinity of thought is alone present. And
passing out of the mere consciousness of the infi¬
nity of thought he entered into the state of mind
to which the infinity of space is alone present.
And passing out of the mere consciousness of the
infinity of space he entered into the fourth stage of
deep meditation. And passing out of the fourth stage
he entered into the third. And passing out of the
third stage he entered into the second. And passing
out oi the second he entered into the first. And
passing out of the first stage of deep meditation he
entered into the second. And passing out of the
second stage he entered into the third. And passing
out of the third stage he entered into the fourth
stage of deep meditation. And passing out of the
last stage of deep meditation he immediately ex¬
pired.

14. When the Blessed One died there, arose, at the
moment of his passing out of existence, a mighty
earthquake, terrible and awe-inspiring : and the
thunders of heaven burst forth.

15. When the Blessed One died, Brahmd Saham-
pati, at the moment of his passing away from exist¬
ence, uttered this stanza :

‘ They all, all beings that have life, shall lay
Aside their complex form — that aggregation
Of mental and material qualities.

That gives them, or in heaven or on earth.

Their fleeting individuality 1

E’en as the teacher — being such a one.


VI.


117


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta.


Unequalled amorig* all the men that are.
Successor of the prophets of old time.

Mighty by wisdom, and in insight clear —

Hath died ^ ’

1 6- When the Blessed One died, Sakka, the king
of the gods, at the moment of his passing away
from existence, uttered this stanza :

‘ TheyVe transient all, each being^s parts and
powers,

Growth is their nature, and decay.

They are produced, they are dissolved again :

And then is best, when they have sunk to rest ^ ! ’


^ Brahm^, the first cause, the highest result of Indian theo¬
logical speculation, the one God of the Indian Pantheists, is repre¬
sented as using expressions full of deep allusions to the most
characteristic Buddhist doctrines. The Samussaya is the result
of the temporary collocation of the ‘ aggregations ' (khandha) of
mental and material qualities which give to each being (bhuto,
that is, man, animal, god, ghost, fairy, or what net) its outward and
visible shape, its individuality. Loka is here not the world in our
sense, but the ‘ locality ’ in the Buddhist universe which such an
individual occupies until it is dissolved. (Comp. Chap. II, §§ 14, 34.)
Brahmd appears therefore as a veritable Vibha^^avadi.

On this celebrated verse see below the Introduction to Maha-
Sudassana Sutta. It must be the original of the first verse in the
Chinese work. Fa Kheu Pi Hu (Beal, Dhammapada, p. 32), though
it is there so changed that every clause has lost its point.

‘ Whatever exists is without endurance.

And hence the terms “flourishing" and “decaying,"

A man is born, and then he dies.

Oh, the happiness of escaping from this condition !’

The very meaning which is here the most essential connotation of
sahkhdrd is lost in the phrase ‘whatever exists.' By a misap¬
prehension of the, no doubt, difficult word Hhamma, which,
however, never means ‘ term,’ the second clause has lost its point.
And by a grammatical blunder the third clause in the Chinese con¬
fines the doctrine, erroneously, to man. In a Chinese tale, called


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


1 1 8


17. When the Blessed One died, the venerable
Anuruddha, at the moment of his passing’ away from
existence, uttered these stanzas ;

‘ When he who from all craving want was free,

Who to Nirv4/^a*s tranquil state had reached,
When the great sage finished his span of life,

No gasping struggle vexed that steadfast heart I

All resolute, and with unshaken mind.

He calmly triumphed o’er the pain of death.

E’en as a bright flame dies away, so was
His last deliverance from the bonds of life ^ '

18. When the Blessed One died, the venerable
Ananda, at the moment of his passing away from
existence, uttered this stanza :

‘ Then was there terror !

Then stood the hair on end !

When he endowed with every grace —

The supreme Buddha — died ^ ! ’


Ngan shih niu, translated by Mr. Beal, in the Indian Antiquary
for May, 1880, the following verses occur; and they are possibly
another reflection of this stanza :

* All things that exist are transitory.

They must of necessity perish and disappear ;

Though joined together, there must be separation ;

Where there is life there must be death.^

^ iTetaso Vimokho. Kena^i dhammena andvarawa-vimo-
kho sabbaso apaw?zatti-bhSviipagamo, says Buddhaghosa ;
that is, ‘ the deliverance which is free from the restraint of each
and every mental quality completely vanishing away^ (dhammS.
being here = sanuk and vedan4 and sahkhdrd; see ‘ Bud¬
dhism,' pp. 91, 92). See also below, p. 153.

® In these four stanzas we seem to have the way in which the
death of the Buddha would be regtLrded, as the early Buddhist
thought, by four representative persons — the exalted God of the
theologians ; the Jupiter of the multitude (allowing in the case of


VI.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


I 19


19^, When the Blessed One died, of those of the
brethren who were not yet free from the passions,
some stretched out their arms and wept, and
some fell headlong on the ground, rolling to and
fro in anguish at the thought : ‘ Too soon has the
Blessed One died ! Too soon has the Happy One
passed away from existence! Too soon has the
Light gone out in the world 1 ’

But those of the brethren who were free from
the passions (the Arahats) bore their grief collected
and composed at the thought ; ‘ Impeiinanent are all
component things ! H ow is it possible that [they
should not be dissolved]?'

20. Then the venerable Anuruddha exhorted the
brethren, and said ; ‘ Enough, my brethren! Weep

not, neither lament! Has not tne Blessed One
formerly declared this to us, that it is in the very
nature of all things near and dear unto us, that we
must divide ourselves from them, leave them, sever
ourselves from them ? How then, brethren, can this
be possible — that whereas anything whatever born,
brought in^-o being, and organised, contains within,
itself the inherent necessity of dissolution — how
then can this be possible that such a being should
not be dissolved ? No such condition can exist !
Even the spirits, brethren, will reproach us


each of these for the change in character resulting from their con¬
version to Buddhism) ; the holy, thoughtful Arahat ; and the loving,
childlike disciple.

^ Nearly = V, 11—14 ; below, VI, 39.

^ U^^y^dyanti. I have followed the reading of my own MS.,
which is confirmed by the Sumangala Vildsini and the Mdld-
lafikdra-vatthu. Vi^^>5tdy anti, which Childers reads, would be
questionable Buddhism. The spirits do not become extinct ; that
is, not as a general rule, as would be implied by the absolute state-


I 20


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


* But of what kind of spirits is the Lord, the
venerable Anuruddha, thinking'?’

21. ‘ There are spirits, brother Ananda, in the
sky, but of worldly mind, who dishevel their hair
and weep, and stretch forth their arms and weep,
fall prostrate on the ground, and roll to and fro
in anguish at the thought: ‘‘Too soon has the


ment, ‘ Even the spirits, brethren, become extinct/ It is no doubt
true that all spirits, from the lowest to the highest, from the most
in significant fairy to the God of theological speculation, are re¬
garded as temporary. But when they cease to exist as gods or
spkits (devat^), they do not go out, they are not extinguished
(vi^^/^'^.yanti) ; they continue to exist , in some other form. And
though that other form would, from the European point of view,
be a different being, as there would be no continuity of conscious¬
ness, no passage of a ‘ soul ’ from the one to the other ; it would,
from the Buddhist point of view, be the same being, as it would be
the resultant effect of the same Karma. There would follow on
the death of a dev at a, -not extinction, but a transmutation of force,
a transmigration of character, a passing on, an inheritance of
Karma. Only in the exceedingly fare case of an an a gd min, of
which an instance will be found above. Chap. II, § 7, could it be
said that a spirit becomes extinct.

The expression ‘of worldly mind,’ here and above in V, ii, is
in Pdli pa/j^avi-sawwiniy o, an ambiguous phrase which has only
been found in this connection. Buddhaghosa sa^^s merely, ‘because
they made (mapetv^) an earth in heaven/ This gloss again may
be taken either in a figurative or in a literal sense ; but, if not
impossible, it is at least unlikely that the good commentator means
calmly to state that the angels created a floor in the skies — for the
greater convenience of tumbling ! The word seems to me also to
be opposed to vitaraga, ‘free from passion,’ and I have therefore
taken it in a spiritual sense. There is a third possibility, viz. that
it is used in an intellectual sense, ‘ having the idea of the world
present to their mind;’ and this would be in accordance with the
more usual use of sa.nni. But how easily, especially in Buddhism,
the intellectual merges into ihe religious may be seen from such
a phrase as mara72a-sa//;^ino, used at Mahavaz/zsa 33 of the
bhikkhus. Compare also above. III, 14.


VI.


MAHA-PARINIBBANA-SUTTA.


I 2 I


Blessed One died ! Too soon has the Happy One
passed away! Too soon has the Light gone out in
the world 1 ’’ '

' There are spirits, too, Ananda, on the earth, and
of worldly mind, who tear their hair and weep, and
stretch forth their arms and weep, fall prostrate on
the ground, and roll to and fro in anguish at the
thought : '‘Too soon has the Blessed one died I Too
soon has the Happy One passed away I Too soon
has the Light gone out in the world 1 ”

‘ But the spirits who are free from passion bear it,
calm and self-possessed, mindful of the saying which
begins, “ Impermanent indeed are all component
things. How then is it possible [that such a being
should not be dissolved] ? ” '

2 2. Now the venerable Anuruddha and the vener-
able Ananda spent the rest of that night in religious
discourse. Then the venerable Anuruddha said to

A A

the venerable Ananda : ‘ Oo now, brother Ananda,
into Kusin^rd and inform the Mallas of Ivusinard,
saying, ‘ The Blessed One, O is dead : do,

then, whatever seemeth to you fit ! ^

‘ Even so. Lord ! ’ said the venerable Ananda, in
assent, to the venerable Anuruddha. And having
robed himself early in the morning, he took his
bowl, and went into Kusin^rd with one of the brethren
as an attendant.

23. Now at that time the Mallas of Kusin^r4
were assembled in the council hall concerning that
very matter.

And the venerable Ananda went to the council
hall of the Mallas of Kusindr4 ; and when he had
arrived there, he informed them, saying, ‘ The


122


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


Blessed One, O Vase/^^/^as, is dead ; do, then, what¬
ever seemeth to you fit ! "

24. And when they had heard this saying’ of the

A

venerable Ananda, the Mallas, with their young men
and their maidens and their wives, were grieved,
and sad, and afflicted at heart. And some of them
wept, dishevelling their hair, and some stretched
forth their arms and wept, and some fell prostrate
on the ground, and some reeled to and fro in anguish
at the thought : ' Too soon has the Blessed One
died ! Too soon has the Happy One passed away !
Too soon has the Light gone out in the world ! ’


25. Then the Mallas of Kiisin§.rd gave orders to
their attendants, saying, ‘ Gather together perfumes
and garlands, and all the music in Kusin^r^ ! ’ ,

26. And the Mallas of Kusindr^ took the per¬
fumes and garlands, and all the musical instruments,
and five hundred suits of apparel, and went to the
Upavattana, to the S^la Grove of the Mallas, where
the body of the Blessed One lay. There they past
the day in paying honour, reverence, respect, and
homage to the remains of the Blessed One with
dancing, and hymns, and music, and with garlands
and perfumes ; and in making canopies of their gar¬
ments, and preparing decoration wreaths to hang
thereon


^ The dress of the Mallas consisted probably of mere lengths of
muslin or cotton cloth ; and a suit of apparel consisted of two or,
at the outside, of three of these — one to wrap round the loins, one
to throw over the shoulders, and one to use as a turban. To make
a canopy on occasions of state they -would join such pieces to¬
gether; to make the canopy into a tent they would simply add
walls of the same material ; and the only decoration, as simple as it


vr.


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


123


27. Then the Mallas of KusinArA thoug^ht :

‘It is much too late to burn the body of the
Blessed One to-day. Let us now perform the
cremation to-morrow.^ And in paying honour, re¬
verence, respect, and homage to the remains of the
Blessed One with dancing, and hymns, and music,
and with garlands and perfumes ; and in making
canopies of their garments, and preparing decoration
wreaths to hang thereon, they past the second
day too, and then the third day, and the fourth, and
the fifth, and the sixth day also.


28. Then on the seventh day the Mallas of
KusinArA thought :

‘ Let us carry the body of the Blessed One, by
the south and outside, to a spot on the south, and
outside of the city, — paying it honour, and reverence,
and respect, and homage, with dance and song and
music, with garlands and perfumes, — and there, to
the south of the city, let us perform the cremation
ceremony ! ’

29. And thereupon eight chieftains among the
Mallas bathed their heads, and clad themselves in
new garments with the intention of bearing the
body of the Blessed One. But, behold, they could
not lift it up !

30. Then the Mallas of KusinAr^ said to the

venerable Anuruddha : ‘ What, Lord, can be the

reason, what can be the cause that eight chieftains
of the Mallas who have bathed their heads, and
clad themselves in new garments with the intention


is beautiful, would be wreaths of flowers, or single lotuses, hanging
from the roof, or stretched along the sides.


1 24.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH,


of bearing^ the body of the Blessed One, are unable
to lift it up ? *

‘ It is because you, O Vase2f//^as, have one pur¬
pose, and the spirits have another purpose.’

31. ‘ But what. Lord, is the purpose of the spirits?’

* Your purpose, O V^se//>^as, is this, Let us carr^^

the body of the Blessed One, by the south and out¬
side, to a spot on the south, and outside of the city, —
paying it honour, and reverence, and respect, and
homage, with dance and song and music, with gar¬
lands and periumes, — and there, to the south of the
city, let us perform the cremation ceremony. But
the purpose of the spirits, Vdse///^as, is this. Let us
carry the body of the Blessed One by the north to the
north of the city, and entering the city by the north
gate, let us bring it through the midst of the city
into the midst thereof. And going out again by the
eastern gate, — paying honour, and reverence, and
respect, and homage to the body of the Blessed
One, with heavenly dance, and song, and music,
and garlands, and perfumes, — let us carry it to the
shrine of the Mallas called Maku/a-bandhana, to the
east of the city, and there let us perform the crema¬
tion ceremony.’

Even according to the purpose of the spirits, so.
Lord, let it be ! ’

32. Then immediately all Kusindra down even to
the dust bins and rubbish heaps became strewn
knee-deep with Mandarava flowers from heaven 1
and while both the spirits from the skies, and the
Mallas of KusinarH upon earth, paid honour, and
reverence, and respect, and homage to the body
of the Blessed One, with dance and song and music,
with garlands and with perfumes, they carried the


VI.


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta.


125


body by the north to the north of the city; and
entering the city by the north gate they carried
it through the midst of the city into the midst
thereof; and going out again by the eastern gate
they carried it to the shrine of the Mallas, called
Maku/^a-bandhana ; and there, to the east of the
city, they laid down the body of the Blessed One


33, ^ Then the Mallas of Kusinard said to the
venerable Ananda : ‘ What should be done, Lord,
with the remains of the Xath^gata ?

‘ As men treat the remains of a king of kings,
so, Vdse/Z/^as, should they treat the remains of a
Tathdgata.’

‘ And how, Lord, do they treat the remains of a
king of kings ? *

‘ They wrap the body of a king of kings, V^se//>^as,
in a new cloth. When that is done they wrap it in
cotton wool. When that is done they wrap it in a
new cloth, — and so on till they have wrapped the
body in five hundred successive layers of both kinds.
Then they place the body in an oil vessel of iron,
and cover that close up with another oil vessel of
iron. They then build a funeral pile of all kinds
of perfumes, and burn the body of the king of kings.
And then at the four cross roads they erect a dAgaba
to the king of kings. This, VAse/^f^as, is the way in
which they treat the remains of a king of kings.

‘ And as they treat the remains of a king of kings,
so, V^se///^as, should they treat the remains of the

^ The point of this interesting- legend is that the inhabitants of
an Indian village of that time would have considered it a desecra¬
tion or pollution to bring a dead body into or through their village.

® Compare Chap. V, §§ 25—30.


126


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


Tath^g-ata. At the four cross roads a dUgaba should
be erected to the Tath^gata. And whosoever shall
there place garlands or perfumes or paint, or make
salutation there, or become in its presence calm in
heart — that shall long be to them for a profit and
a joy/

34, Therefore the Mallas gave orders to their
attendants, saying, ‘ Gather together all the carded
cotton wool of the Mallas ! ’

35. Then the Mallas of Kusindr^ wrapped the
body of the Blessed One in a new cloth. And when
that was done, they wrapped it in cotton wool. And
when ^hat was done, they wrapped it in a new cloth,
— and so on till they had wrapped the body of the
Blessed One in five hundred layers of both kinds.
And then they placed the body in an oil vessel of
iron, and covered that close up with another oil
vessel of iron. And then they built a funeral pile
of all kinds of perfumes, and upon it they placed
the body of the Blessed One.


36. Now at that time the venerable lyCahd Kas-
sapa was journeying along the high road from P4v4
to Kusin4r4 with a great company of the brethren,
with about five hundred of the brethren. And the
venerable Mah4 Kassapa left the high road, and sat
himself down at the foot of a certain tree.

37. Just at that time a certain naked ascetic who
had picked up a Manddrava flower in ICusinltr4 was
coming along the high road to P4v4.

38. And the venerable Mah4 Kassapa saw the
naked ascetic coming in the distance ; and when he
had seen him he said to the naked ascetic :

‘ O friend ! surely thou knowest our Master ? "


VI.


mahA-parinibbana-sutta.


127


* Yea, friend! I know him. This day the Sama^^a
Gotama has been dead a week ! That is how I
obtained this Mandarava flower.’

39. And immediately of those of the brethren
who were not yet free from the passions, some
stretched out their arms and wept, and some fell
headlong* on the ground, and some reeled to and
fro in anguish at the thought : ‘ Too soon has the
Blessed One died ! Too soon has the Happy One
passed away from existence ! Too soon has the
Light gone out in the world!’

But those of the brethren who were free from
the passions (the Arahats) bore their grief coUected
and composed at the thought : ' Impermanent are
all component things ! How is it possible that they
should not be dissolved ? ’

40. Now at that time a brother named Subhadda,
who had been received into the order in his old
age, was seated there in their company

And Subhadda the old addressed the brethren, and
said : * Enough, brethren ! Weep not, neither lament I
We are well rid of the great Samara. We used to
be annoyed by being told, ** This beseems you, this
beseems you not.” But now we shall be able to do
whatever we like ; and what we do not like, that we
shall not have to do I ’

' At p. xxvi of the Introduction to his edition of the Mah^
Vagga, Dr. Oldenberg identifies this Subhadda with Subhadda the
last convert, mentipned above in Chap. V, §§ 52—68. They are
different persons ; the last convert being represented as .1. young
man of high character, incapable of the conduct here ascribed
to this Subhadda. The last convert was a Brahman, traditionally
supposed to be younger brother to Aw/Ja Kondaw;^a,^the first
convert ; this Subhadda had been a barber in the village Atum^.


128


CH.


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


41. But the venerable Mah^ Kassapa addressed
the brethren, and said : ‘ Enough, my brethren !

Weep not, neither lament ! Has not the Blessed
One formerly declared this to us, that it is in
the very nature of all things, near and dear unto
us, that we must divide ourselves from them,
leave them sever ourselves from them ? How then,
brethren, can this be possible — that whereas any¬
thing whatever born, brought into being, and or¬
ganised contains within itself the inherent necessity
of dissolution — how then can this be possible that
such a being should not be dissolved ? No such
condition can exist ! ’


42. Now just at that time four chieftains of the
M alias had bathed their heads and clad therriselves
in new garments with the intention of setting on fire
the funeral pile of the Blessed One. But, behold,
they were unable to set it alight !

43. Then- the Mallas of Kusin^rd said to the
venerable Anuruddha-: ‘What, Lord, can be the
reason, and what the cause, that four chieftains of
the Mallas who have bathed their heads, and clad
themselves in new garments, with the intention of
setting on fire the fureral pile of the Blessed One,
are unable to set it on fire ? ’

‘ It is because you, O V^se/if/^as, have one purpose,
and the spirits have another purpose.*

44. ‘ But what, Lord, is the purpose of the spirits ? *

‘ The purpose of the spirits, O V4se//>^as, is this :

That venerable brother Mah^ Kassapa is now
journeying along the high road from Pdvd to Kusi-
nar4 with a great company of the brethren, with
five hundred of the brethren. The funeral pile of


vr.


129


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta.


the Blessed One shall not catch fire, until the venera¬
ble MahA Kassapa shall have been able reverently
to salute the sacred feet of the Blessed One.*

* Even according- to the purpose of the spirits, so,
Lord, let it be ! *

45. Then the venerable Maha Kassapa went on
to Maku/a-bandhana of KusinAra, to the shrine of
the Mallas, to the place where the funeral pile of
the Blessed One was. And when he had come up
to it, he arranged his robe on one shoulder ; and
bowing down with clasped hands he thrice walked
reverently round the pile ; and then, uncovering the
feet, he bowed down in reverence at the feet of
the Blessed One.

46. ‘And those five hundred brethren arranged
their robes on one shoulder ; and bowing down
with clasped hands, they thrice walked reverently
round the pile, and then bowed down in reverence
at the feet of the Blessed One.

47. And when the homage of the venerable MahA
Kassapa and of those five hundred brethren was
ended, the funeral pile of the Blessed One caught
fire of itself^.


^ It is possi'ble that we have here the survival of some ancient
custom. Spence Hardy appropriately refers to a ceremony among
Jews (of what place or time is not mentioned) in the following
terms : ‘ Just before a Jew is taken out of the house to be buried,
the relatives and acquaintances of the departed stand round the
coffin ; when the feet are uncovered ; and each in rotation lays hold
of the great toes, and begs pardon for any offence given to the
deceased, and requests a favourable mention of them in the next
world.* (Manual of Buddhism, p. 348).

The Buddhist bhikkhus in Siam and the great majority of
those in Ceylon (the adherents of the Siyam-samAgama) always
keep one shoulder uncovered. It is evident that the bhikkhus

[ii] K


130


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH-


48. Now as the body of the Blessed One burned
itself away, from the skin and the integument, and
the flesh, and the nerves, and the fluid of the joints,
neither soot nor ash was seen : and only the bones
remained behind.

J list as one sees no soot or ash when glue or
oil is burned ; so, as the body of the Blessed One
burned itself away, from the skin and the integu¬
ment, and the flesh, and the nerves, and the fluid
of the joints, neither soot nor ash was seen : and
only the bones remained behind. And of those five
hundred pieces of raiment the very innermost and
outermost were both consumed.

49. And when the body of the Blessed One had
been burnt up, there came down streams of .water
from the sky and extinguished the funeral pile of
the Blessed One ; and there burst forth streams of
water from the storehouse of the waters (beneath
the earth), ard extinguished the funeral pile of the
Blessed One. The Mallas of Kusin^ra also brought
water scented with all kinds of perfumes, and ex¬
tinguished the funeral pile of the Blessed One k

in Burma, and those in Ceylon who belong to the Amara-pura-
samdgama, are more in accordance with ancient custom in
wearing the robe ordinarily over both shoulders-

^ There is something very quaint in the way in which the
faithful Mallas are here represented as bringing coals to Newcastle.
The ‘ storehouse of the waters^ is in Pali udaka-sdla, on which
Buddhaghosa has two theories : first, that the Sala trees around
shed down a miraculous rain from their trunks and branches and
leaves; and next, that the w’-aters burst up from the earth and
became as it were a diadem of crystal round the pyre. On the
belief that water thus burst up miraculously through the earth, see
* Buddhist Birth Stories,’ pp. 64, 6*j. If the reading be correct it
is scarcely possible that sala can here have anything to do with
SS.la trees; but the other interpretation is open to the objections


VT.


mahA-parinibbAna-sutta. 13 j

50- Then the Mallas of Kusin^ra surrounded the
bones of the Blessed Onfe in their council hall with
a lattice work of spears, and with a rampart of bows ;
and there for seven days they paid honour and
reverence and respect and homag^e to them with
dance and song- and music, and with garlands and
perfumes.

51. Now the king of Magadha, A^atasattu, the
son of the queen of the Videha clan, heard the
news that the Blessed One had died at fCusin§.r^.

Then the king of Magadha, A^^^atasattu, the
son of the queen of the Videha clan, sent a mes¬
senger to the Mallas, saying, ‘The Blessed One
belonged to the soldier caste, and I too am of the
soldier caste. I am worthy to receive a portion
of the reilics of the Blessed One. Over the remains
of the Blessed One will I put up a sacred cairn,
and in their honour will I celebrate a feast ^ "

52. And the Ti/{?/’>^avis of Vcsali heard the news
that the Blessed One had died at KusindrA. And
the Lii’A'^avis of Vesali sent a messenger to the
Mallas, saying, ‘ The Blessed One belonged to the
soldier caste, and we too are of the soldier caste.
We are worthy to receive a portion of the relics of
the Blessed One. Over the remains of the Blessed
One will we put up a sacred cairn, and in their
honour will we celebrate a feast ! ’

53. And the S^kiyas of Kapila-vatthu heard the


that sala means an open hall rather than a storehouse, and that
the belief in a ‘ storehouse of water ’ has not, as yet, been found
elsewhere.

* The commentator gives a long account of A^dtasattu's pro¬
ceedings on this occasion.


K 2


132 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE. CH.

news that the Blessed One had died at Klusindr^.
And the S^kiyas of Kapila-vatthu sent a messenger
to the Mallas, saying, ‘ The Blessed One was the
pride of our race. We are worthy to receive a
portion of the relics of the Blessed One. Over the
remains of the Blessed One will we put up a sacred
cairn, and in their honour will we celebrate a feast ! *

54. And the Bulis of Allakappa heard the news
that the Blessed One had died at ICusin4rd. And
the Bulis of Allakappa sent a messenger to the
Mallas, saying, ^ The Blessed One belonged to the
soldier caste, and we too are of the soldier caste.
We are worthy to receive a portion of the relics
of the Blessed One. Over the remains of the
Blessed One ^vill we put up a sacred cairn, and in
their honour will we celebrate a feast ! ’

55. And the Koliyas of R^mag^ma heard the
news that the Blessed One had died at Kusindrd.
And the Kcliyas of R4mag4ma sent a messenger
to the Mallas, saying, ' The Blessed One belonged
to the soldier caste, and we too are of the soldier
caste. TVe are worthy to receive a portion of the
relics of the Blessed One. Over the remains of the
Blessed One will we put up a sacred cairn, and in
their honour will we celebrate a feast ! ’

56. And the Brahman of Ve/z^adtpa heard the
news that the Blessed One had died at Kusinard.
And the Brahman of Ve/z^adipa sent a messenger
to the Mallas, saying, ‘ The Blessed One belonged
to the soldier caste, and I am a Brdhman. . I am
worthy to receive a portion of the relics of the
Blessed One. Over the remains of the Blessed
One will I put up a sacred cairn, and in their
honour will I celebrate a feast I ’


VI.


maha-farinibbAna-sutta.


133


57* And the Mallas of PavA heard the news that'
the Blessed One had died at KusinAr^.

Then the Mallas of P4v4 sent a messenger to the
Mallas, saying, ‘ The Blessed One belonged to the
soldier caste, and we too are of the soldier caste. We
are worthy to receive a portion of the relics of the
Blessed One. Over the remains of the Blessed One
will we put up a sacred cairn, and in their honour
will we celebrate a feast ! ’


58. When they heard these things the Mallas of
KusindrA spoke to the assembled brethren, saying,

* The Blessed One died in our village domain.
We will not give any part of the remains of

the Blessed One ! '

59. When they had thus spoken, Do^a the Brah¬
man addressed the assembled brethren, and said :

‘ Hear, reverend sirs, one single word from me.

Forbearance was our Buddha wont to teach.

Unseemly is it that over the division

Of the remains of him who was the best of
beings

Strife should arise, and wounds, and war 1

Let us all, sirs, with one accord unite

In friendly harmony to make eight portions.

Wide spread let ThClpas rise in every land

That in the Enlightened One mankind may trust ! ’

60. ‘ Do thou then, O Brdhman, thyself divide
the remains of the Blessed One equally into eight
parts, with fair division

' Be it so, sir ! ' said Do^a, in assent, to the assem-

* Here again the commentator expands and adds to the com¬
paratively simple version of the text.


^34


THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.


CH.


bled brethren. And he divided the remains of the
Blessed One equally into eight parts, with fair
division. And he said to them : ‘ Give me, sirs,

this vessel, and I will set up over it a sacred cairn,
and in its honour will I establish a feast.’

And they gave the vessel to Do^^a the Brahman.


6i. And the Moriyas of Pippbalivana heard the
news that the Blessed One had died at Kusin§.rd.

Then the Moriyas of Pipphalivana sent a mes¬
senger to the Mallas, saying, ‘ The Blessed One
belonged to the soldier caste, and we too are of the
soldier caste. We are worthy to receive a portion of
the reiics of the Blessed One, Over the remains of
the Blessed One will we put up a sacred cairn, and
in their honour will we celebrate a feast 1 ’

And when they heard the answer, saying, ' There
is no portion of the remains of the Blessed One left
over. The remains of the Blessed One are all dis¬
tributed,’ then they took away the embers.


62. Then the king of Magadha, A^atasattu, the
son of the queen of the Videha clan, made a mound
in Rd^agaha over the remains of the Blessed One,
and held a feast.

And the L.i/^’^/^.avis of Vesali made a mound in
Ves^li over the remains of the Blessed One, and
held a feast.

And the Bulis of Allakappa made a mound in
Allakappa over the remains of the Blessed One, and
held a feast.

And the Koliyas of Ramagama made a mound in
Ramagama over the remains ot the Blessed One,
and held a feast.


VI.


^35


maha-parinibbAna-sutta.


And Ve/>^adipaka the BrAhman made a mound in
VeMadipa over the remains of the Blessed One, and
held a feast.

And the Mallas of P4v4 made a mound in Pava
over the remains of the Blessed One, and held a
feast.

And the Mallas of Kusindrd made a mound in
KusindrA over the remains of the Blessed One, and
held a feast.

And Do?2a the Brdhman made a mound over the
vessel in which the body had been burnt, and held a
feast-

And the Moriyas of Pipphalivana made a mound
over the embers, and held a feast.

Thus were there eight mounds [Thupas] for the
remains, and one for the vessel, and one for the
embers. This was how it used to be \


[63. Eight measures of rehcs there were of him
of the far-seeing- eye,

Of the best of the best of men. In India seven
are worshipped.

And one measure in Rdmagdma, by the kings of
the serpent race.

One tooth, too, is honoured in heaven, and one in
Gandhdra’s city.

One in the ICAlinga realm, and one more by the
N^ga race.


’ Here closes Buddhaghosa’s long and edifying commentary.
He has no note on the following verses, which he says were added
by Theras in Ceylon. The additional verse found in the Phayre
MS. was in the same way probably added in Burma.


CH. VI.


136 THE BOOK OF THE GREAT DECEASE.

Through their glory the bountiful earth is made
bright with offerings painless— ^

For with such are the Great Teacher’s relics best
honoured by those who are honoured,

By gods and by N^gas and kings, yea, thus by
the noblest of monarchs —

Bow down with clasped hands !

Hard, hard is a Buddha to meet with through
hundreds of ages !]


End of the Book of the Great Decease.


INTRODUCTION


' TO THE

FOUNDATION OF THE KINGDOM
OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


This translation is made from a transcript of the text
as found in the very beautiful Ceylon MS. on silver
plates, now in the British Museum The letters, which
are perfectly formed, are cut into the silver ; and the
MS. has this peculiarity, that every sentence is repeated
with a slight change in the collocation of the words-
Thus the first sentence is given as follows : —

Evaw me suta^2. JEkam samaya/^ Bhagavd
B4rd«asiyaiW viharati Isipatane Migad4ye. Me
suta^2. Ekaf;»z samayazzz Bhagavd BcLrdwasi-
ysiin Isipatane Migaddye viharati.

As this repetition is merely carried out for the further se¬
curity of the text it has not been followed in the translation.

This text belongs to the Ahguttara Nik^ya. M. L6on
Feer has lithographed the Sa/wyutta treatment in his
‘ Textes tires du Kandjour together with the text
of the corresponding passage in the Lalita Vistara, and
the Tibetan translation from that poem. The Sanskrit
text, so far as it runs parallel with our Sutta, will also
be found in Rajendra Lai Mitra’s edition of the Lalita
Vistara (p. 540 and foil.) and the Tibetan text, with a
French translation, in M. Foucaux’s rGya Cher Rol Pa.’
Dr. Oldenberg has just published the Vinaya treatment
contained in the Mahd Vagga I, 6. It is the same word
for woicd as our Sutta (except § i, which is of course not
found there). The Sa/zzyutta expands the idea of the
portion numbered below §§ 9-20, having also similar
paragraphs in reference to the bhikkhus themselves. The


^ MS. Egerton, 794; bought from a bookseller named Rodel in 1839.
“ Livraison, No. X.


140 FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


Lalita Vistara differs a good deal in minor details, but
is substantially the same as regards the Noble Truths,
and the eight divisions of the Noble Path.

A translation of this Sutta, found among Mr. Gogerly’s
papers after his death, was published in the Journal of
the Ceylon Asiatic Society for 1865: and the Journal
Asiatiqne for 1870 contained a translation and full analysis
by M. L^on Peer.

It would be difficult to estimate too highly the historical
value of this Sutta. There can be no reasonable doubt that
the very ancient tradition accepted by all Buddhists as
to the substance of the discourse is correct, and that we
really have in it a summary of the words in which the
great Indian thinker and reformer for the first time suc¬
cessfully promulgated his new ideas. And it presents
to us in a few short and pithy sentences the very essence
of that remarkable system which has had so profound
' an influence on the religious history of so large a portion
of the human race.

The name given to it by the early Buddhists — the
setting in motion onwards of the royal chariot- wheel of
the supreme dominion of the Dhamma — means, as I have
shown elsewhere not ‘ the turning of the wheel of the
law,’ as it has been usually rendered ; but ‘ the inaugura¬
tion, or foundation, of the Kingdom of Righteousness.’

Is it possible that the praying wheels of Thibet have led
to the misapprehension and mistranslation now so common ?
But who would explain a passage in the New Testament by
a superstition current, say, in Spain in the twelfth century ?
And so when Mr. Da Cunha thinks that the Dhamma is
symbolised by the wheel, because ‘ Gotama ignored the
beginning, and was uncertain as to the end he seems to me
to be following a vicious method of interpreting such figures
of speech. It cannot be disputed that the term wheel ’
might have implied such an idea as he puts into it.
But if we want to know what it ^id imply, we must be
guided wholly by the previous use of the word at the


^ * Buddhism/ p. 45.


* ‘Memoir on the Tooth Relic,' (See., p. 15.


INTRODUCTION.


14 I


time when it was first used in a figurative sense : and
that previous use allows only of the interpretation given
above. Perhaps, however, Mr. Da Cunha is only copying
(not very exactly) Mr. Alabaster, who has said, ‘Buddha,
as I have tried to show in other parts of this book, did
not attempt to teach the beginning of existence, but as¬
sumed it as a rolling circle of causes or effects. This was
his circle or wheel of the law

Mr. Alabaster therefore calls his very useful book on
Siamese Buddhism, ® The Wheel of the Law ; ’ — an ex¬
pression which he on the first page of his preface takes to
be about equivalent to Buddhism. But his theory of the
meaning of the term seems to be based upon a misunder¬
standing of a passage in the Siamese ‘Life of Buddha,’ which
he there translates. At page 78 he renders his text, ‘The
Holy Wheel which the Law taught is plenteous in twelv e
ways,’ and he explains this on p. 169 as referring to the
twelve Nid^nas, the chain of causes and effects. But the
passage in the Siamese text is evidently a reminiscence of
fhe ‘ twelvefold manner ’ spoken of in the same connection
in our Siitta (§ ai), and does not refer to the Niddnas at all.

A better comment on the word is the legend of the
Treasure of the Wheel, which will be found below in the
‘ Book of the Great King of Glory 2/ a passage which
shows that this figure belonged to that circle of poetical
imagery which the early Buddhists so often, borrowed
from the previous poets of Vedic literature to aid them
in their attempts to describe the most important events
in the life of their revered Teacher. And, like the day
of Pentecost by the early Christians, this Inauguration
of the Kingdom of Righteousness was rightly regarded
by them as a turning-point in the history of their faith.
We find this even in the closing sections of our Sutta ;
and in later times the poets of every Buddhist clime
have vied one with another in endeavouring to express
their sense of the importance of the occasion.

‘The evening was like a lovely maiden ; the stars


1 ‘ Wheel of the Law,’ p. 288.


* Chap. I, §§ 10-20.


142 FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


were the pearls upon her neck ; the dark clouds her
braided hair; the deepening space her flowing robe. As
a crown she had the heavens where the angels dwell ;
these three worlds were as her body;« her eyes were the
white lotus flowers which open to the rising moon ; and
her voice was as it were the humming of the bees. To do
homage to the Buddha, and to hear the first preaching
of his word, this lovely maiden came.* The angels (de^/as)
throng to hear the discourse until the heavens are empty ;
and the sound of their approach is like the rain of a
storm ; all the worlds in which there are sentient beings
are made void of life, so that the congregation assembled
was in number infinite, but at the sound of the blast of
the glorious trumpet of Sakka, the king of the gods, they
became still as a waveless sea. And then each of the
countless listeners thought that the sage was looking
towards himself, and was speaking to him in his own
tongue, though the language used was M^gadhi i

It is most curious that this la.st figure should be so
closely analogous to the language used with respect to
the corresponding evexit in the history of the Christian
church : and I do not know the exact source from which
Hardy (Manual of Buddhism, p. 186) derives it. But I think
it is highly improbable that there is any borrowing on the
one side or on the other.

It cannot be denied that there is a real beauty of an
Oriental kind in the various expressions which the Bud¬
dhists u.se and that there was real ground for the
enthusiasm which gave them birth. Never in the history
of the world had a scheme of salvation been put forth
so simple in its nature, so free from any superhuman
agency, so independent of, so even antagonistic to the
belief in a soul, the belief in God, and tlxe hope for
a future life. And we must not allow our estimate of
the importance of the event to be influenced by our dis¬
agreement from the opinions put forth. Whether these
be right or wrong, it was a turning-point in the religious
history of man when a reformer, full of the most earnest
moral purpose, and trained in all the intellectual culture


INTRODUCTION.


243


of his timej put forth deliberately, and with a knowledge
of the opposing views, the doctrine of a salvation to be
found here, in this life, in an inward change of heart, to
be brought about by perseverance in a mere system of
self-culture and of self-control.


That system, it will be seen, is called the Noble Path,
and is divided into eight sections or divisions, each of
which commences with the word samma — a word for
which we have no real equivalent in English, though
it has been rendei-ed by such terms as ‘ right," perfect,"
and ^ correct." Our word ‘ right," in some of its uses, would
be a sufficiently adequate translation, but it is based on
a different derivation, and connotes a set of ideas not
alluded to by samm^. If used as an adjective this
word — signifying literally ‘ going with" — means either
‘ general, common," or ‘ corresponding, mutual,’ and as an
adverb, * commonly, usually, normally, or fittingly, pro¬
perly, correctly ; " and hence, in a secondary sense, and
with allusion to both these ideas, ‘ round, fit, and perfect,
normal and complete.’ When used to characterise such
widely different things as language, livelihood, and belief,
the meaning of the term is by no means difficult to grasp ;
but it is difficult, if not impossible, to find any single
English word which in each case would convey its full
force without importing also some extraneous idea. P'rom
a desire to follow closely the P41i form of expression I
had first in my manual of ‘ Buddhism ’ adopted the one
word * right * throughout the translation of the text ; and
I have kept to this below, though I feel that that word
quite fails to give the force of the preposition sam (o-vv-,
con-), which is the essential part of the P41i sammd.
But I think the meaning of the Buddhist ideal, of the
summary which is the most essential doctrine, the very
pith of Buddhism, would be better brought out by a
diversified rendering in the way I afterwards attempted
in an article in the Fortnightly Review (No- CLVI) ; or, as
above (p. 107), with the authorised interpretation appended.
It would then run —


144


FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


I. Right Views ; free fi'om superstition or delusion.

а. Right Aims; high and worthy of the intelligent,

earnest man.

3. Right Speech; kindly, open, truthful.

4. Right Conduct; peaceful, honest, pure.

5. Right Livelihood ; bringing hurt or danger to no

living thing-

б. Right Effort; in self- training, and in self-controL

7. Right Mindfulness; the active, watchful mind.

8. Right Contemplation; earnest thought on the

deep mysteries of life.

It is interesting to notice that Gogerly, who first rendered
sammd throughout by correct \ afterwards adopted the
other method ^ ; and as these eight divisions of the perfect
life are of such vital importance for a correct understanding
of what Buddhism really was, I here add in j>arallel columns
his two versions of the terms used : —

1. Correct views (of truth). Correct doctrines.

2. Correct thoughts. A clear perception (of their

nature).

3. Correct words. Inflexible veracity.

4. Correct conduct. Purity of conduct.

5- Correct (mode of obtain- A sinless occupation,
ing a) livelihood.

6. Correct efforts. Perseverance in duty.

7. Correct meditation. Holy meditation.

8. Correct tranquillity. Mental tranquillity.

The varying expressions in these two lists are intended in all
cases, (except perhaps the second,} to convey the same idea.
The second division (samm4-sankappo) is not really
open to any doubt. Sankappois will, volition, determina¬
tion, desire; that exertion of the will in the various affairs
of life which results from the feeling that a certain result
will be desirable. The only variation in the meaning ’is
that sometimes more stress is laid upon the implied exertion
of the will, sometimes more stress upon the implied desire


^ Journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society, 1845.


Ibid. 1865.


INTRODUCTION.


145


which calls it into action. ‘ Motive ’ would be somewhat
too impersonal, ‘ volition ” too metaphysical a rendering ;
‘ aims ’ or aspirations ' seems to me to best express
the sense intended in this passage.

In No. 7 (sammd-sati) sati is literally ‘memory/ but
is used with reference to the constantly repeated phrase
‘ mindful and thoughtful’ (sato sampa^^no) ; and means
that activity of mind and constant presence of mind
which is one of the duties most frequently inculcated on
the good Buddhist. Gogerly’s rendering of the term should
have been reserved for the last division (sammd-samadhi),
that prolonged meditation on the deep mysteries of life,
which is stated in the Great Decease ^ to be the necessary
complement and accessory to intelligence and goodness.
Reason and works are good in themselves, but they reauire
to be made perfect by that sam^dhi which in Buddhism
corresponds to faith in Christianity.


This Buddhist ideal of the perfect life has an analogy
most instructive from a historical point of view’ with the
ideals of the last pagan thinkers in Europe before the
rise of Christianity, and of the modern exponents of what
has been called fervent atheism. When after many cen¬
turies of thought a pantheistic or monotheistic unity has
been evolved out of the chaos of polytheism, — which is
itself a modified animism or animistic polyda^monism, —
there has always arisen at last a school to whom theo¬
logical discussions have lost their interest, and who have
sought for a new solution of the questions to which the
theologies have given inconsistent answers, in a new system
in which man was to work out here, on earth, his own
salvation. It is their place in the progress of thought that
helps us to understand how it is that there is so much
in common between the Agnostic philosopher of India,
the Stoics of Greece and Rome, and some of the newest
schools in France, in Germany, and among ourselves.


1


Chap. I, § 12, and often afterwards.


THE FOUNDATION

OF THE

KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


I)HAM:MA-A’'AK:KA-PPA'VATTA’JSrA-SirTTA.


Reverence to the Blessed One, the Holy One,
the Fully-Enlightened One.

1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once staying at Benares, at the hermitage called
Migaddya, And there the Blessed One addressed
the company of the five Bhikkhus h and said :

2. ‘ There are two extremes, O Bhikkhus, which
the man who has given up the world ^ ought not
to follow— the habituah practice, on the one hand,
of those things whose attraction depends upon the
passions, and especially of sensuality — a low and
pagan ^ way (of seeking satisfaction) unworthy, un¬
profitable, and fit only for the worldly-minded —


These are the five mendicants who had waited on the Bodisat
during his austerities, as described in ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’
pp. 88, 89. Their names are given on p. 113 of that book ; see
below, the note on § 32.

^ Pabba^ito, one who has gone forth, who has renounced
worldly things, a ‘ religious.’

® Gamma, a word of the same derivation as, and corresponding
meaning to, our word ‘ pagan.’


DHAMMA-JSTAKKA-PPAVATTANA-SUTTA.


147


and the habitual practice, on the other hand, of
asceticism (or self-mortification), which is painful,
unworthy, and unprofitable.

3. ‘ There is a middle path, O Bhikkhus, avoiding’
these two extremes, discovered by the Tathllgata "
— a path which opens the eyes, and bestows under¬
standing, which leads to peace of mind, to the
higher wisdom, to full enlightenment, to Nirv4/za !

4. ‘'What is that middle path, O Bhikkhus,
avoiding these two extremes, discovered by the
Tath^gata — that path which opens the eyes, and
bestows understanding, which leads to peace of
mind, to the higher wisdom, to full enlightenment,
to Nirv^^^a ? Verily ! it is this noble eightfold
path ; that is to say :

‘ Right views ;

Right aspirations ;

Right speech ;

Right conduct ;

Right livelihood ;

Right effort ;

Right mindfulness ; and

Right contemplation.

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is that middle path, avoiding
these two extremes, discovered by the Tath^gata —
that path which opens the eyes, and bestows under-


* The Tathdgata is an epithet of a Buddha. It is interpreted
by Buddhaghosa, in the Samangala Vildsint, to mean that he came
to earth ‘or the same purposes, after having passed through the
same training in former births, as all the supposed former Buddhas;
and that, when he had so come, all his actions corresponded with
theirs.

Avoiding these two extremes^ should perhaps be referred to the
Tath^gata, but I prefer the above rendering.

L 2


148 FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Standing, which leads to peace of mind, to the
higher wisdom, to full enligntenment, to Nirv4^^a I

5. Now^ this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth
concerning suffering.

' Birth is attended with pain decay is painful,
disease is painful, death is painful. Union with the
unpleasant is painful, painful is separation from
the pleasant ; and any craving that is unsatisfied,
that too is painful. In brief, the five aggregates
which spring from attachment (the conditions of
individuality and their cause) ^ are painful.

‘ This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth con-
cerning suffering.

6. VNow this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth
concerning the origin of suffering.

*. Verily, it is that thirst (or craving), causing the
renewal of existence, accompanied by sensual de¬
light, seeking satisfaction now here, now there-—
that is to say, the craving for the gratification of the
passions, or the craving lor (a future) life, or the
craving for success (in this present life)

^ On. the following ‘ four truths * compare Dhammapada, verse
19 1, and Mah^-parinibblina Sutta II, a, 3, and IV, 7, 8.

® Or ‘ is painful.*

» Pa^vl’ upddanakkhandha. On the Khandh^, or the mate¬
rial and mental aggregates whiGb go to make up an individual, see
my ‘Buddhism,* Chap. III. XJndd^na, or ‘grasping* is their
source, and the uprooting of this updd^na from the mind is
Arahatship.

One might express the central thought of this First JSr6ble
Truth in the language of the nineteenth century by s''ying that
pain results from existence as an individual. It is the struggle to
maintain one*s individuality which produces pain — a most preg¬
nant and far-reaching suggestion. See for a fuller exposition the
Fortnight!}'' Review for December, 1879.

* ‘ The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life '


DHAMMA-JTAKKA-PPAVATTAlSrA-SUTTA.


14.9


' This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth con¬
cerning the origin of suffering.

7. ^ Now this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth
concerning the destruction of suffering.

'Verily, it is the destruction, in which no passion
remains, of this very thirst ; the laying aside of, the
getting rid of, the being free from, the harbouring
no longer of this thirst.

‘ This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth con¬
cerning the destruction of suffering.

8, ' Now this, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth
concerning the way ^ which leads to the destruction
of sorrow. Verily! it is this noble eightfold path®;
that is to say :

correspond very exactly to the first and third of these three ta?2hd.s.

‘ The lust of the flesh, the lust of life, and the pride of life,' or ‘ the
lust of the flesh, the lust of life, and the love of this present world/
would be not inadequate renderings of all three.

The last two are in Pfili bhava- tawhfi and vibhava-ta^zhfi,
on which Childers, on the authority of Vi^esi^iha, says : ^ The
former applies to the sassata- di/Mi, and means a desire for an
eternity of existence ; the latter applies to the

and means a desire for annihilation in the very first (the present)
form of existence.' Sassata-di//-^i may be called the ' everlasting
life heresy/ and Ui^i^^^eda-di/Z^i the ‘^let-us-eat-and-drink-for-
to-morrow-we-die heresy.” These two heresies, thus implicitly
condemned, have very close analogies to theism and materialism.

Spence Hardy says (‘ Manual of Buddhism,' p. 496): ‘Bhawa-
tawhfi signifies the pertinacious love of existence induced by the
supposition that transmigratoiy existence is not only eternal, but
felicitous and desirable. Wibha wa-tawhS, is the love of the
present life, under the notion that existence will cease therewith,
and that there is to be no future state.”

Vibhava in Sanskrit means, i. development; 2. might, majesty,
prosperity ; and 3. property : but the technical Buddhist sense, as
will be seen from the above, is something more than this.

^ PaZipadfi.

2 Ariyo atangiko Maggo.


150 FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


‘ Right views;

Right aspirations ;

Right speech ;

Right conduct ;

Right livelihood ;

Right effort;

Right mindfulness ; and
Right contemplation.

' This then, O Bhikkhus, is the noble truth con¬
cerning the destruction of sorrow.


9. ‘ That this was the noble truth concerning
sorrow, was not, O Bhikkhus, among the doctrines
handed down, but there arose widiin me the eye
(to perceive it), there arose the knowledge (of its
nature), there arose the understanding (of its cainse),
there arose the wisdom (to guide in the path of
tranquillity), there arose the light (to dispel darkness
from it)

10. ‘And again, O Bhikkhus, that I should, com¬
prehend that this was the noble truth concerning
sorrow, though it was not among the doctrines
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there
arose the knowledge, there arose the understanding,
there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

11. ‘And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had compre¬
hended that this was the noble truth concerning
sorrow, though it was not among the doctidnes
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there


^ The words in parentheses have been added by Gogerly, doubt¬
less from some comment not accessible to me ; and I have included
them also, but in parentheses, as they seem to complete the ideas
actually involved in the text.


DHAMMA-JRTAKKA-PPAVATTANA-SUTTA. I 5 I


arose the knowledg-e, there arose the understanding-,
there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

12. ‘That this was the noble truth concerning
the origin of sorrow, though it was not among the
doctrines handed down, there arose within me the
eye ; but there arose within me the knowledge, there
arose the understanding, there arose the wisdom,
there arose the light.

X 3. ‘ And again, O Bhikkhus that I should put
away the origin of sorrow, though the noble truth
concerning it was not among the doctrines handed
down, there arose within me the eye, there arose
the knowledge, there arose the understanding, there
arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

14. 'And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had fully put
awe^r the origin of sorrow, tnough the noble truth
concerning it was not among the doctrines handed
down, there arose within me the eye, there arose
the knowledge, there arose the understanding, there
arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

15. ‘That this, O Bhikkhus, was the noble truth
concerning the destruction of sorrow, though it was
not among the doctrines handed down ; but there
arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the wis¬
dom, there arose the light.

16. ‘And again, O Bhikkhus, that I should fully
realise the destruction of sorrow, though the noble
truth concerning it was not among the doctrines
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there
arose the knowledge, there ax'ose the understanding,
there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

1 7. ‘ And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had fully
realised the destruction of sorrow, though the noble


152 FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


truth concerning it was not among the doctrines
handed down, there arose within me the eye, there
arose the knowledge, there arose the understanding,
there arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

18. ‘ That this was the noble truth concerning the
way which leads to the destruction of sorrow, was
not, O Bhikkhus, among the doctrines handed down ;
but there arose within me the eye, there arose the
knowledge, there arose the understanding, there
arose the wisdom, there arose the light.

19. ^ And again, O Bhikkhus, that 1 should be¬
come versed in the way which leads to the destruc¬
tion of sorrow, though the noble truth concerning it
was not among the doctrines handed down, there
arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the
wisdom, there arose the light.

20. ' And again, O Bhikkhus, that I had be¬
come versed in the way which leads to the destruc¬
tion of sorrow, though the noble truth concerning it
was not among the doctrines handed down, there
arose within me the eye, there arose the knowledge,
there arose the understanding, there arose the
wisdom, there arose the light.

21. ‘ So long, O Bhikkhus, as my knowledge and
insight were not quite clear, regarding each of these
four noble truths in this triple order, in this twelve¬
fold manner — so long was I uncertain whether I
had attained to the full insight of that vdsdom
which is unsurpassed in the heavens or on earth,
among the whole race of Sama^^as and Brahmans,
or of gods or men.

22. ‘But as soon, O Bhikkhus, as my knowledge


DHAMMA-^TAKKA-PPAVATTANA-SUTTA.


153


and insight were quite clear regarding each of
these four noble truths, in this triple order, in this
twelvefold manner — then did I become certain that
I had attained to the full insight of that wisdom
which is unsurpassed in the heavens or on earth,
among the whole race of Sama:?ms and Brahmans,
or of gods or men.

23. ' And now this knowledge and this insight has
arisen within me. Immovable is the emancipation
of my heart. This is my last existence. There
will now be no rebirth for me ! '

2.4. Thus spake the Blessed One. The company
of the five Bhikkhus, glad at heart, exalted the
words of the Blessed One. And when the discourse
had been uttered, there arose within the venerable
Konda^^^a the eye of truth, spotless, and without
a stain, (and he saw that) whatsoever has an origin,
in that is also inherent the necessity of coming to
an end _

25. And when the royal chariot wheel of the
truth had thus been set rolling onwards by the
Blessed One, the gods of the earth gave forth a
shout, saying :

‘ In Benares, at the hermitage of the Migad^ya,
the supreme wheel of the empire of Truth has been
set rolling by the Blessed One — that wheel which
not by any Sama^^a or Brahman, not by any god,

^ It is the perception of this fact which is the ID h a m m a a kkhu,
the Eye of Truth, or the Eye for Qualities as it might be rendered
with reference to the meaning of Dhainma in the words that
follow.

They are in Pali yaw2 samudaya-dhammazw, sabbasw

ta.m nirodha-dhamma/72, literally, ‘whatever has the quality of
beginning, that has the quality of ceasing,"


154 FOUNDATION OF KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


not by any Brahma or Mara, not by any one in the
universe, can ever be turned back ! ’

26. And when they heard the shout of the g’ods
of the earth, the attendant gods of the four great
kings ^ (the guardian angels of the four quarters of
the globe) gave forth a shout, saying :

‘ In Bendres, at the hermitage of the Migad^ya,
the supreme wheel of the empire of Truth has been
set rolling by the Blessed One- — that wheel which
not by any Sama^^a or Brdhman, not by any god,
not by any Brahma or M^ra, not by any one in the
universe, can ever be turned back ! '

27, [And thus as the gods in each of the heavens
heard the shout of the inhabitants of the heaven
beneath,. they took up the cry until the gods in the
highest heaven of heavens] gave forth the shout,
saying :

' In Bendres, at the hermitage of the Migaddya,
the supreme wheel of the empire of Truth has been
set rolling by the Blessed One — that wheel which
not by any Sama?/a or Brahman, not by any god,
not by any Brahma or M4ra, not by any one in the
universe, can ever be turned back ^ 1 ’

^ Their names are given in the Mah^ Samaya Sutta in Grim-
blot's * Sept Suttas Palis/

^ The text repeats § 26 for each of the heavens; and the gods
thus enumerated are as follows, beginning with JBhummd Deva
in § 25 :

1. Bhumm^ Dev^.

2. yiTatumahard^ika Dev^.

3. Ydmd Deva.

4. TusitS. Teva.

5. Nfmmanaratf Deva.

6. ParanimmitavasavattJ Dev^.

7. Brahmakayika Deva.

See the Mahi Samaya Sutta in Grimblot’s ‘ Sept Suttas Palis,^ and


DHAMMA-RTAKKA-PPAVATTANA-SUTTA.


^55


28. And thus, in an instant, a second, a moment,
the sound went up even to the world of Brahma :
and this great ten-thousand-world-system quaked
and trembled and was shaken violently, and an
immeasurable bright light appeared in the universe,
beyond even the power of the gods !


29. Then did the Blessed One give utterance to
this exclamation of joy : ‘ Konda^^T^a hath realised
it. Konda^ma hath realised it I’ And so the vener¬
able Konda^^/ia acquired the name of Af^;^4ta-
Konda;'2;'2a (‘ the Konda/^^^a who realised ’)


End of the Dhamma-^f^akka-ppavattana-sutta.


compare Professor Max Miiller’s note in ^ Buddhaghosha's Parables/
p. xxxiii, and Plardy in the ‘ Manual of Buddhism/ p. 25.

^ The Maha Vagga , completes the narrative as follows: ‘And
then the venerable A?7/7ata-Kondoiyi/a having seen the truth, .having
arrived at the truth, having known the truth, having penetrated the
truth, having past beyond doubt, iiaving laid aside uncertainty,
having attained to confidence, and being dependent on no one
beside himself for knowledge of the religion of the teacher, snake
thus to the Blessed One :

‘ “ May I become, O my Lord, a novice under the Blessed
One, may I receive full ordination!'^

‘“Welcome, O brother!'* said the Blessed One, “the truth has
been well laid clown. Practice holiness to the complete suppression
of sorrow !”

‘ And that was the ordination of the Venerable One.’

The other four, Vappa, Bhaddiya, Mahan^ma, and Assa^gi, were
converted on the following days, according to the ‘ Buddhist Birth
Stories/ p. 113.

It is there also said that ‘ myriads of the angels (devas) had been
converted simultaneously with Kondanya/


TEVIGCA-SUTTANTA.


INTRODUCTION

TO

THE TEVIGGA SUTTA.


This is the twelfth and last Sutta in the first division
of the Digha Nikiya, which is called the Silakkhandha
Vaggo, because the whole of its twelve Dialogues deal,
from one point of view or another, with Sila, or Right
Conduct.

There is another Sutta sometimes caUed by the same
name, No. 21 in the Middle Fifty of the Ma^.^ima Nik^ya :
but it has nothing, except the nante, in common with the
present. It is called Tevi^^a Sutta merely because
Gotama is there described by the complimentary title
of Tevi^^a, ‘Wise in the Vedas;' and its full name is
the Tevi^^;^-va>^^^agotta-sutta

I have made the present translation from a text con¬
stituted from three MSS., — -my own MS. of the Digha
Nik^ya, referred to as D ; the Tumour MS. of the same
in the Indian Office, referred to as T ; both in Sinhalese
characters: and the Phayre MS- in the same place, in
Burmese characters, referred to as P.


In this book we have Right Conduct used as a sort
of argumentum ad hominem for the conversion of
two earnest young Brahmans.

Thev ask which is the true path to a state of uni<itv
(in the next birth) with God. After arguing, in a kind
of Socratic dialogue, that on their own showing, on the


^ It may be noted, in passing, tliat the substance of it recurs as the Vai&^Aa-
gotta Sawyutta in the Sazwyutta Nikdya.


i6o


TEVIGGfA SUTTA.


basis of facts they themselves admitted, the Brdhmans
could have no real knowledge of their God, Gotama
maintains that union with a God whom they admitted
to be pure and holy must be unattainable by men impure
and sinful and self-righteous, however great their know¬
ledge of the Vedas. And he then lays down, not without
occasional beauty of language, that system of Right
Conduct, which must be the only direct way to a real
union with God.

One would think perhaps that such a Sutta might be
adapted, without very great difficulty, for use as a mis¬
sionary tract, so closely does it remind us of the argument
of many a sermon on the text, ‘ Except your righteoiisness
shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall in no wise enter the kingdom of heaven 1 ’ And
it is true tl^at the Tevi^g^S — -the men of special knowledge
in the three Vedas— correspond exactly in most essential
particulars with the Scribes and Pharisees of the NTew
Testament. They were the official preservers by repeating,
as the Scribes were by copying, the sacred books ; and
they were the recogi^iised interpreters, and the sole cus¬
todians of the traditional interpretation — which too often
explained away the real meaning — of those books. It
follows that as the law in both cases was included in the
sacred books, it was they who, in both cases, were the
real lawgivers, and practically the only lawyers. And
as almost all learning was confined to, or in close con¬
nection with the sacred books, the Tevi^^d were the chief
Pa?z«a?its, as the Scribes were the ‘ Doctors of the Law.*
Like the Pharisees, too, the Brlthmans laid claim to
peculiar sanctity ; and many of them in the pride of their
education, their birth, and their wealth, looked down with
self-righteous scorn on the masses of the people. And
while, on the other hand, the Brdhmans further resem¬
bled the' Scribes and Pharisees in that many of them
were justly deserving of the respect in which they were
held ; it is only the undeserving who, in both cases, are
intended to be condemned.

But whatever interpretation of the ‘ kingdom of heaven *


INTRODUCTION.


i6i


the reader may adopts it must be very different from any¬
thing the Sutta can mean by ‘ a state of union with
Brahm^.’ It is not easy to say what opinion is really
imputed to the young Brahmans before their conversion.
It is probably meant that they were seeking a way by
which their Self should become identified, after death,
with Brahman ; a vvay by which they could escape from
the immortality of transmigration, from existence alto¬
gether as separate individuals And in holding out a
hope of union with Brahm^ as a result of the practice
of universal love the Buddha is most probably intended
to mean ‘ a union with Brahrad ’ in the Buddhist sense —
that is to say, a temporary companionship as a separate
being with the Buddhist BrahmS., to be enjoyed by a
new individual not consciously identical with its pre¬
decessor. It is just possible that the argumentum ad
hominem should be extended to this part of the Sutta;
and that the statement in III, i should be taken to mean,

‘ This (universal love) is the only way to that kind of
union with your own Brahm4 which you desire.’ But
such a yielding to heretical opinion at the close of his
own exposition of the truth would scarcely be imputed
to a Buddha.

Just as during the time of the early Christians, in the
way which Archbishop Trench has so instructively pointed
out, it was not men only who received a new birth and
a new baptism, but old words and terms of common use
were also infused with a new spirit; so the Indian reformer,
while clothing his new system in the current phraseology,
infused a different and in many cases a higher meaning
into the old expressions.

Thus, for instance, Tevi^^a (Sanskrit Traividya) meant
either knowledge of the Three Vedas, or as an adjective,
a Brdhman possessed of that knowledge ; and then, as a
noun of multitude, such an assembly of those Brahmans


Compare Professor Max Muller’s Preface to the Sacred Books of tlie East,
A'ol. i. p. XXX.

® See Chapter III, §§ i, a.


M


i62


TEVIffG^A SUTTA.


is described in the first sections of our Sutta. As there
were many Brahmans who had not that knowledge, the
word naturally came to imply a person worthy of the
respect due to special learning, and was used as a compli¬
mentary title, not very different from our Doctor. It is
preserved as an epithet of Arahats in the Buddhist writings,
but as meaning one possessed of the knowledge of a funda¬
mental threefold doctrine of Buddhism, the doctrine of the
im permanency, the inherent pain, and the absence of any
abiding principle (any Self) in the confections or compo¬
nent things That is to say, the knowledge of the Vedas
was replaced by a knowledge of the real character of the
deceptive and evanescent phenomena by which we are
encircled, and of which we form a part.

So also with regard to Brahmcl. The name was retained,
but the idea was entirely changed. The course of religious
belief had passea among the Indian section of the Aryan
tribes through the usual stages of animism and polytheism
to a kind of pantheism peculiar to India, in which Brahman
was held to be a first cause, the highest self, emotion¬
less, infinite, absolute. As the Buddhist system was
constructed without any use of the previous idea of a
separate soul, or self, or ghost, or spirit, supposed to exist
inside the human body, this woven chain of previous
speculation had as little importance for it as theological
discussions have for positivism. But Buddhism fell into
what to the positivist would be the unpardonable sin-—
perhaps inevitable at the time and place of its youth — of
continuing to express a belief in the external spirits, big
and little, of the then Hindu pantheon.

They were preserved very much in the previous order
of precedence, and were all — except Mara, the Kvil One,
and his personal following, and a few others — supposed to be
passably good Buddhists. They were not feared any more ;
they were patronized as a kind of fairies, usually beneficent.


See ATulla Vagga VI, 6, 2,=/?iitaka, vol. i- p. 217; MahUva^wsa, p. 79;
Dlpavazwsa XV, 80 (where the Arahats are women) ; and on ‘confections' below,
in the Introduction to the Book of the Great King of Glory.'


INTRODUCTION.


t63


though always more or less foolish and ignorant. They
were of course not worshipped anj*' more, for they were
much less worthy of reverence than afty wise and good
man. And they were not eternal, — all of them, even the
very best or highest being liable, like all things and all
other creatures, to dissolution. If they had behaved well
they were then reborn under happy outward conditionsi
and might even look forward to being some day born as
men, so that they could attain to the supreme goal of
the Buddhist faith, to that bliss which passeth not away,— -
the Nirv4«a of a perfect life in Arahatship.

The duty of a Buddhist who had entered the Noble Path
towards these light and airy shapes— for to such vain things
had the great gods fallen — was the same as his duty towards
every fellow creature ; pity for his ignorance, sympathy with
his weakness, equanimity (the absence of fear or malice, or
the sense of any differing or opposing interest^, and the
constant feeling of a deep and lasting love, all pervading,
grown great, and beyond measure.

No exception was made in the case of Brahmcl. He,
like every other creature that had life, was evanescent,
was bound by the chain of existence, the result of ignor¬
ance, ahd could only find salvation by walking along the
Noble Eightfold Path. It must be remembered that the
Brahm^ of modern times, the God of the ardent theism
of some of the best of the later Hindus, had not then come
into existence : that conception was one effect of the in¬
fluence of Mohammadan and Christian thought upon
Hindu minds. And it would be useless to conjecture
how the Buddhist theory might have been modified by
contact with that ideal.

While regarded however as essentially of the same class
as all other external spirits, Brahmfi was still regarded
as a superior spirit, as a very devout Buddhist, and as
a kind of king among the angels. The Brahmd of this
world system, who was living in Gotama’s time, and who
is living now, acquired his present exalted position from
his virtue in a previous birth as a Bhikkhu named Sahaka

M 2


I 64 TEVIGGA SUTTA.


in the time when Kassapa Buddha’s religion flourished
upon earth According ro the author of the <94taka com¬
mentary, he assisted at the future Buddha’s birth ^ ; and
twice afterwards he rendered service to the Bodisat just
before the great conflict with M4ra And when after the
victory the Blessed One hesitated whether it world be
of any use to tell to others the truth he had found, it
was Brahm4 who appeared and besought him to proclaim
the truth Brahmd Sahampati was the first to give
utterance to the universal sorrow which followed on the
death of the Buddha ® ; and at a critical period in the
later history of the Buddhist church he is represented to
have descended from heaven, and to have appeared to the
Thera S4//^a, to confirm his wavering faith

Tnese instances will show the high character ascribed
to the Brahmd of the world system in which we live ;
and in each of the infinite world systems which are scat¬
tered through space there is supposed to be a like finite,
temporary, virtuous Brahm4 sitting as king over the most
exalted of the angel hosts.

It must be evident that it follows, without the possi¬
bility of question, that the early Buddhists cannot with
any accuracy be described as monotheists,’ and it is much
to be regretted that even cultured and scholarly writers
still speak of them as such, and can suggest that the in¬
dependent monotheism of the later Jews can be paralleled
by a supposed monotheism among the Buddhists

And even if the idea of Brahm^ were at all the same
as the idea of God, a union with this Brahm^ would mean
a merely temporary life as an angel in the BrahmS, heaven
— such a life as is represented below to have been the result


* Teste a comment quoted by Childers, Diet. p. 227.

* ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories,* p. 66. ® Ibid. pp. 92, 97

* Ibid. p. III. Related already in the MahS. Vag-ga I, 2 ; 6, 7.

® Book of the Great Decease, Chapter VI, § 14.

® MahSvawsa, p, 17..

‘ Their (the Jews’) monotheism was perhaps independently evolved ; but the
Buddhists at least showed a contemporary monotheism.* Mr. Huth, in ‘ Life
&c- of Buckle,* p. 238.


INTRODUCTION.


165


of the noble life and noble thoughts of the Great King
of Glory. But this was not the supreme goal of the
Buddhist faith ; and the angel, though the same person
as the king, from the Buddhist point of view (as resulting
from, and carrying on, the same Karma), would be a dif¬
ferent person from the king, according to the Christian
point of view ; for there is no mention of the passage of
a soul from the earth to heaven, no conscious identity, no
continuing memory.

We may draw, from the above, two conclusions. Firstly,
that the use of a word in Sanskrit authors is but very
little guide to the meaning of the corresponding word in
the P41i Buddhist scriptures whenever the word has
reference to an idea of a religious character.

And, secondly, that very little reliance can be placed,
without careful investigation, on a resemblance — however
close at first sight- — between a passage in the Pd.li Piifakas
and a passage in the New Testament.

It is true that many passages in these two litera¬
tures can be easily shown to have a similar tendency.
But when some writers on the basis of such similarities
proceed to argue that there must have been some historical
connection between the two, and that the New Testament,
as the later, must be the borrower, I venture to think
that they are wrong. There does not seem to me to be
the slightest evidence of any historical connection between
them ; and whenever the resemblance is a real one — and
it often turns out to be really least when it first seems
to be greatest, and really greatest when it first seems
least — it is due, not to any borrowing on the one side or
on the other, but solely to the similarity of the conditions
under which the two movements grew.

This does not of course apply to the later literature
of the two religions ; and it ought not to detract from
the very great value and interest of the parallels which
may be adduced from the earlier books. If we wish to
understand what it was that gave such life and force to
the stupendous movement which is called Buddhism, we


i66


TEVIGGA SUTTA.


canaot refrain from comparing it~not only in the points
in which it agrees with it, but also in the points in which
it differs from it — with our own faith. I trust I have not
been wrong in making use occasionally of this method,
though the absence of any historical connection between
the New Testament and the PMi Pi/akas has always
seemed to me so clear,, that it would be unnecessary to
mention it. But when a reviewer who has been kind
enough to appreciate, I am afraid too highly, what he
calls my * service in giving, for the first time, a thoroughly
human, acceptable, and coherent* account of the ‘life of
Buddha/ and of the ‘simple groundwork of his religion’
has gone on to conclude that the parallels I had thus
adduced are ‘ an unanswerable indication of the obligations
of the New Testament to Buddhism,* I must ask to be
allowed to enter a protest against an inference which seems
to me to be against the rules of sound historical criticism.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE

VEDAS.


TEVlC?d7A-SUTTA-


Ch AFTER I.

1. This have I heard. At one time when the
Blessed One was journeying through Kosala with
a;, great company of the brethren, with about five
hundred brethren, he came to the Br4hman vil¬
lage in Kosala which is called Manas4ka/a. And
there at Manasaka/a the Blessed One stayed in the
mango grove, on the bank of the river A/§iravati, to
the south of Manas^kaz^a

2. Now at that time many very distinguished and
wealthy Brahmans were staying at Manas4ka/a—
to wit, isfankt the Brdhman, Tirukkha the Br4hman,
Pokkharas^ti che Brahman, G^nussoni the Brah¬
man, Todeyya the Brahman, and other very distin¬
guished and wealthy Brahmans


^ Buriiouf, in a long note at ‘Lotus/ See., p. 491, already
attempted to show that the river A/^iravati is the same as the-
modern l^apti, which he supposed to be a corruption of the latter
part of the longer name. Hiouen Thsang mentions a river A-clii-
lo-fa-tij which is doubtless the same. It is evidently the river on
which stood the town of S^vatthi, and near to which lay the 6reta-
vana monastery (see ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories/ p. 331) ; and it must
therefore, in accordance with Burnouf’s conjecture, be the Rap*:,
which is the Sanskrit Irdvati. The Phayre Burmese MS. has
almost always Ai^travath
® Buddhaghosa says that

ATafiki lived at Opasdda,

Tarukkha lived at IX’Magala,


i68


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


3. Now a conversation sprung- up between Vd-

and Bhdradvdj^a, when they were taking
exercise (after their bath) and walking up and down
in thoughtful mood, as to which was the true path,
and which the false

4. The young Brdhman Vase//^a spake thus :

‘ This is the straight path, this the direct way
which leads him, who acts according to it, into a
state of union with Brahmd^ — I mean that which
has been announced by the Brdhman Pokkarasdti.'

5. The young Brdhman Bhdradvd^ spake thus :


Pokkharasddi (sic MS.) lived at Ukka///&a,

<94/zussom lived at S^vatthi, and
Todeyya lived at Tudig^ma.

There is some difference in the MSS. as to the spelling of these
names : T. reads .STahkt ; P. T. and D. Pokkharas^ti (Sanskrit
Paushkaras^di) ; P. (jdnuyoni, T. T>. (9dnnsoni ; P. To-

reyya, and Bu»-nouf Nodevya (which is possibly merely a misread¬
ing). G^usoni was converted by the Bhaya-bherava Sutta ; and
I think it very probable that the other names are also those of
subsequent converts,

Buddhaghosa adds that because Manas^ka/a was a pleasant
place the Brahmans had built huts there on the bank of the river
and fenced them in, and used to go and stay there from time to
time to repeat their mantras.

^ GsLhgh^vih^iram anu/6ahkamantS.nawz anuvi^ar ant^na/;/.
On the first word see 6^dtaka II, 272 (and comp. II, 240). ^STan-
kamati is to walk up and down thinking. I have added ‘ after their
bath ^ from Buddhaghosa, who says that this must be understood
to have taken place when, after learning by heart and repeating all
day, they went down in the evening to the river-side to bathe, and
then walked up and down on the sand.

Brahma-sahavyat^y a. The first part of the compound is
masculine (see below, § 12), but the Buddhists probably included
under the name, when put into the mouth of Brahmans, all that
the Brihmans included under both Brahmd and Brahman. The
Buddhist archangel or god Brahmd is different from both, being
part of an entirely different system of thought.


r.


TEVIG'G'A SUTTA.


169


‘ This is the straight path, this the direct way
which leads him who acts according* to it, into a
state of union with Brahm4 — I mean that which has
been announced by the Brahman Tdrukkha/

6. But neither was the young Brahman

able to convince the young Brahman BhJ.radv^^a,
nor was the young Brahman Bh^radvaj*a able to
convince the young BrMiman Viise^Ma.

7. Then the young Brahman Vdse^/z^a said to the
young Brahman Bharadvd^a :

‘ That Samara Gotama, Bhdradvd^a, ol the Sakya
clajni, who left the Sakya tribe to adopt the religious
life, is now staying at Manasdka/a, in the rrango
grove, on the bank of the river A-^iravati, to the
south of Manas^kazfa. Now regarding that vener¬
able Gotama, such is the high reputation that has
been noised abroad, that he is said to be “ a fully
enlightened one, blessed and worthy, abounding in
wisdom and goodness, happy, with knowledge of
the world, unsurpassed as a guide to erring mortals,
a teacher of gods and men, a blessed Buddha^.
Come^ then, Bh^radv^^a, let us go to the place
where the Samara Gotama is ; and when we have
come there, let us ask the Sama^^^a Gotama touch¬
ing this matter. AAThat the Samara Gotama shall
declare unto us, that let us bear in mind.’

‘ Very well, my friend ! ’ said the young Brahman
Bh^radv^a, in assent, to the young Brahman
V _ _ _

B. Then the young Brahman Vdse//^a and the
young Brahman Bhllradv^^a went on to the place
where the Blessed One was.


^ ^ee below, § 46.


I 70 OK KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS- CK.

And when they had come there, they exchang^ed
with the Blessed One the greetings and compli¬
ments of friendship and civility, and sat down
beside him.

And while they were thus seated the young
Brdhman V4se/Ma said to the Blessed One :

* As we, Gotama, were taking exercise and
walking up and down, there sprung up a con¬
versation between us on which w^as the true path
and which the false. I said thus :

* This is the straight path, this the direct way
which leads him, who acts according to it, into a
state of union with Brahm^ — I mean that which has
been announced by the Brahman Pokkaras^ti.”

‘ Bh^radva^a said thus :

* “ This is the straight path, this the direct way
which leads him, who acts according to it, into a
state of union with Brahmal — I mean that which has
been announced by the Brahman Tdrukkha.”

‘ Regarding this matter, Gotama, there is a strife,
a dispute, a difference of opinion between us.'


9. ‘ So you say, V4se///^a, that you said thus :

‘ This is the straight path, this the direct way
which leads him, who acts according to it, into a
state of union vrith Brahm4 — I mean that which has
been announced by the Brahman Pokkaras4ti.'*

‘ While Bhdradv^^^a said thus :

‘ “ This is the straight path, this the direct way
which leads him, who acts according to it, into a
state of union with Brahmd — I mean that which has
been announced by the Br4hman T^rukkha.”


I. TEVIGGA SUTTA. I7I

‘Wherein, then, O V^se/Ma, is there a strife, a
dispute, a difference of opinion between you ^ ?’

10. * Concerning^ the true path and the false. Go-
tama. Various Brahmans, Gotama, teach various
paths — the Addhariya Brahmans, the Tittiriya
Brahmans, the ^/^andoka Brdhmans, the i^-^andava
Brahmans, the Brahma^ariya Brdhmans Are all
those saving paths ? Are they all paths which will
lead him, who acts according to them, into a state
of union with Brahmd ?

‘ J ust, Gotama, as near a village or a town there
are many and various paths yet they all meet
together in the village — just in that way are all
the various paths taught by various Brahmans — the
Addhariya Brahmans, the Tittiriya Brdhmans, the
^i^andoka ^i^^hmans, the ufilT^andava Brahmans, the
Brahma^ariya Brahmans. Are all these saving
paths ? Are they all paths which will lead him,
who acts according to them, into a state of union
with Brahmil ?*

1 1. ‘ Do you say that they all lead aright, V4se//Aa ?'

‘ I say so, Gotama.*

‘ Do you really say that they all lead aright,
V4se//>^a ? *

‘ So I say, Gotama.'


^ This is either mildly sarcastic — as much as to say, ' that is six
to one, and half a dozen to the other ' — or is intended to lead on
VS.se/Ma to confess still more directly the fact that the different
theologians held inconsistent opinions.

® P. here Atthariy^, but below Addhariyd (Sans. Adhvar>a) ;
D. Titittiriyi, T. Tattiriyd, P. apparently TitthiriyS. (Sans. Taitti-
riya) ; D. jOand^va, T. P. omit (? Sans. ATv^dndasa) ; all three MSS.
Af^^ndota (Sans. .^Aandoga) ; P. Bavhadi^£ here and below ATav-
hadi^^ for BrahmaiftariyS, (? Sans. Brahma^^ri). See ‘ Lotus,* p. 493*
* Maggdni, which is noteworthy as a curious change of gender.


172 ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. CH.

12. ‘But then, Vdse//>^a, is there a single one of
the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas who has
ever seen Brahmd face to face ? ’

‘ No, indeed, Gotama 1 '

‘ But is there then, Vise//>^a, a single one of the
teachers of the Brdhmans versed in the Three Vedas
who has seen Brahmd face to face ? ’

‘ No, indeed, Gotama ! '

‘But is there then, Vdse/^/^a, a single one of the
pupils of the teachers of the Brihnians versed in the
Three Vedas who has seen Brahmi face to face ?’

‘ No, indeed, Gotama ! ’

‘But is there then, Vdse^/-^a, a single one of the
Brdhmans up to the seventh generation who has
seen Brahmi face to face ?’

‘No, indeed, Gotama T

13. ‘Well then, Vdse/^/^a, those ancient i?fshis
of the Brdhmans versed in the Three Vedas, the
authors of the verses, the utterers of the verses,
whose ancient form of words so chaunted, uttered,
or composed, the Brahmans of to-day chaunt over
again or repeat; intoning or reciting exactly as has
been intoned or recited — to wit, A//^aka, Vdmaka,
V^madeva, Vessdmitta, Yamataggi, Ahgirasa, Bhd-
radvi^a, Vdse/^^/^a, Kassapa, and Bhagu ^ — did even
they speak thus, saying: “We know it, we have
seen it, where Brahmd is, whence Brahma is, whither
Brahma is?”'

‘ Not so, Gotama !’

14. ‘ Then you say, Vdse/^/^a [that not one of the
Brahmans, or of their teachers, or of their pupils,
even up to the seventh generation, has ever seen
Brahmd face to face. And that even the AVshis of


' See Maha Vagga VI, 35, 2.


TEVIGOA SUTTA. 1 73

old, the authors and utterers of the verses, of the
ancient form of words which the Brdhmans of
to-day so carefully intone and recite precisely as
they have been handed down — even they did not
pretend to know or to have seen where or whence
or whither Brahm^ is] So that the Brdhmans
versed in the Three Vedas have forsooth said thus :
“What we know not, what we have not seen, to a
state of union with that we can show the way,
and can say: /This is the straight path, this is the
direct way which leads him, who acts according to
it, into a state of union with Brahmst I

‘Now what think you, V^se////a? Does it not follow,
this being so, that the talk of the Brahmans, versed
though they be in the Three Vedas, is foolish talk ? '

‘In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that
the talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
is. foolish talk r

15. ‘ Verily, Vdse///^a, that Brahmans versed in
the Three Vedas should be able to show the way
to a state of union with that which they dp not
know, neither have seen — such a condition of things
has no existence !

‘ Just, V^se///^a, as when a string of blind- men are
clinging one to the other/, neither can the foremost

* In the text §§ 12, 13 are repeated word for word.

® Andhavewi parampara?;»x s^msa.tta,. The Phayre MS. has
replaced vent by pavewt, after the constant custom of the Bur¬
mese MSS. to improve away unusual or difficult expressions.
Buddhaghosa explains andhave/zi by andhapavewi, and tells
a tale of a wicked wight, who meeting a company of blind men,
told them of a certain village wherein plenty of good food was to
be had. When they besought him for hire to lead them there, he
took the money, made one blind man catch hold of his stick, the
next of that one, and so on, and then led them on till they came
to a wilderness. There he deserted them, and they all — still


^74


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


see, nor can the middle one see, nor can the hindmost
see— just even so, methinks, V^se^^Ma, is the talk of
the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas but blind
talk : the first sees not, the middle one sees not,
nor can the latest see. The talk then of these
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas turns out to
be ridiculous, mere words, a vain and empty thing ! ’

1 6. ‘ N ow what think you, V4se//y^a ? Can the Brdh-
mans versed in the T hree Vedas — -like other, ordinary,
folk' — see the sun and the moon as they pray to,
and praise, and worship them, turning round with
clasped hands towards the place whence they rise
and where they set ? ’

‘ Certainly, Gotama, they [can]

17. ‘ Now what think you, Vdse///^a ? The Brdh-

mans versed in the Three Vedas, who can very
well — ^like other, ordinary, folk — see the sun and
the moon as they pray to, and praise, and worship
them, turning round with clasped hands to the place
whence they rise and where they set — are those
Brahmans, versed in the Three Vedas, able to point
out the way to a state of union with the sun or the
moon, saying : “This is the straight path, this the
direct way which leads him, who acts according to it,
to a state of union with the sun or the tnoon ? *

‘ Certainly not, Gotama I ’

18. ‘So you say, Vdse^Ma, that the Brahmans
[are not able to point out the way to union with that


holding each the other, and vainly, and with tears, seeking both
their guide and the path — came to a miserable end !

^ The words of the question are repeated in the text in this and
the following answers. It must be remembered, for these sections,
that the sun and moon were Gods just as much as Brahma.


I. TEVIGG^A SUTTA. I 75

which they have seen], and you further say that
[neither any one of them, nor of their pupils, nor
of their predecessors even to the seventh generation
has ever seen Brahma]. And you further say that
even the J^zshis of old, [whose words they hold in
such deep respect, did not pretend to know, or to
have seen where, or whence, or whither Brahmd is.
Yet these Brdhmans versed in the Three Vedas say,
forsooth, that they can point out the way to union
with that which they know not, neither have seen !]^
Now what think you, Vdse^/>^a ? Does it not follow
that, this being so, the talk of the Brdhmans, versed
though they be in the. Three Vedas, is foolish talk ? ’

‘ In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that
the talk of the Brdhmans versed in the Three Vedas
is foolish talk ! '

19. ‘ Very good, Vdse^?Ma. Verily then, Vdse^Y>4a,
that Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas should
be able to show the way to a state of union with
that which they do not know neither have seen —
such a condition of things has no existence.


‘Just, Vdse///^a, as if a man should say, “How
I long for, how I love the most beautiful woman
in this land !

‘ And people should ask him, “Well ! good friend !
this most beautiful woman in the land whom you
thus love and long for, do you know whether that
beautiful woman is a noble lady or a Brihman
woman, or of the trader class, or a »5"udra ? ”

‘ But when so asked he should answer “ No.’’

‘And when peoxde should ask him, “Well ! good

^ The text repeats at length the words of §§ 12, 13, 14.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


I 76


friend I this most beautiful woman in all the land,
whom you so love and long for, do you know what
the name of that most beautiful woman is, or what
is her family name, whether she be tall or short,
dark or of medium complexion, black or fair, or
in what village or town or city she dwells ? ""

‘ But when so asked he should answer “ No.”

* And then people should say to him, “ So then,
good friend, whom you know not, neither have seen,
her do you love and long for ? ”

^ And then when so asked he should answer
Yes.” ’

' Now what think you, V4se^'//^a ? Would it not
turn out, that being so, that the talk of that man
was foolish talk ? '

‘ In sooth, Gotama, It would turn out, that being
so, that the talk of that man was foolish talk 1 '

20. 'And just even so, V^se/ify^^a, though you say
that the Brahmans [are not able to point out the
way to union with that which they have seen], and, you
further say that [neither any one of them, nor of their
pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the seventh
generation has ever seen Brahm^]. And you further
say that even the ^fshis of old, [whose words they
hold in such deep respect, did not pretend to know,
or to have seen where, or whence, or whither Brah¬
ma is. Yet these Brahmans versed in the Three
Vedas say, forsooth, that they can point out the
way to union with that which they know not,
neither have seen I] Now what think you, Vase//^a ?
Does it not follow that, this being so, the talk of
the Brahmans, versed though they be in the Three
Vedas, is foolish talk ? ’

' In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that


I.


TEVIGGA SUTTA.


177


the talk of the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas
is foolish talk ! ’

^Very good, Vdse^?//^a. Verily then, V^se^fz^/^a,
that Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas should
be able to show the way to a state of union with
that which they do not know, neither have seen —
such a condition of things has no existence.'


21. ‘Just, Vdse/Z^a, as if a man should make a stair¬
case in the place where four roads cross, to mount
up into a mansion. And people should say to him,
“Well, good friend, this mansion, to mount up into
which you are making this staircase, do you know
whether it is in the east, or in the south, or in the
west, or in the north ? whether it is high or low or
of medium size ? '

‘ And when so asked he should answer “ No." '

‘ And people should say to him, “But then, good
friend, you are making a staircase to mount up into
something — taking it for a mansion — which, all the
while, you know not, neither have seen ! "

‘And when so asked he should answer “ V^es."'

‘ Now what think you, V^se//>^a ? Would it not
turn out, that being so, that the talk of that man
was foolish talk ? ’

‘ In sooth, Gotama, it would turn out, that being
so, that the talk of that man was foolish talk ! '

22.. ‘And just even so, V4se///la, though you say
that the Brahmans [are not able to point out the
way to union with that which they have seen], and
you further say that [neither any one of them, nor
of their pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the
seventh generation has ever seen Brahmd]. And
you further say that even the j??fshis of old, [whose

Cll] N


178


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


words they hold in such deep respect, did not
pretend to know, or to have seen where, or whence,
or whither Brahmd is. Yet these Brahmans
versed in the Three Vedas say, forsooth, that they
can point out the way to union with that which
they know not, neither have seen!] Now what
think you, Vdse/ii^^a ? Does it not follow that, this
being so, the talk of the Brahmans versed in the
Three Vedas is foolish talk ? "

‘In sooth, Gotama, that being so, it follows that
the talk of the Brdhmans versed in the Three
V edas is foolish talk 1 *

23. ‘ Very good, Vdse2f/>^a. Verily then, Vdse/Ma,
that Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas should
be able t:o show the way to a state of union with
that which they do not know, neither have seen —
such condition of things has no existence.’

24. ‘ Again, V4se^//^a, if this river A/^iravatl
were full of water even to the brim, and over¬
flowing And a man with business on the other


^ SamatittikS, k^kapeyyS, a stock phrase used of a river in
flood time. Buddhaghosa says, Samatittiki. ti samaharitd
(sic ? sam^haritd) : k^kapeyya ti yatthakattha^i tire Mitena
kdkena sakkd plitnn ti kdkapeyyd, which does not seem to me
to solve the question as to the origin and history of these difficult
terms. With respect to the right form of samatittik^ it should
be noticed that the northern Buddhist spelling is samatirthakd
(Sukhavatlvyflha, ed. Max Mailer in J. R. A. S. for 1880, p. 182),
and that both Childers and Oldenberg have read samatitthikS. in
the Burmese MSS. of Mah^parinibbllna Sutta I, 33 = Mah4 Vagga
VI, 28, Now the difference in Burmese letters between tt and tth
(08 so very small that the copyists frequently write

one for the other; and even in good MSS. where the two are not
confounded, it is sometimes difficult to tell which is really meant.
When talking of rivers the mention of t it t has seems so appro-


1.


TEVIGJGA SUTTA.


179


side, bound for the other side, should come up, and
want to cross over. And he, standing on this bank,
should invoke the further bank, and say, “ Come
hither, O further bank ! come over to this side !

priate that a copyist, and especially a Burmese copyist, would
naturally read a doubtful combination as tth ; so that even if all
Burmese MSS. spell this word with tth (which is by no means
certain), very little reliance should be placed upon the fact. On
the other hand, the distinction in Sinhalese between tt and tth is
very marked and <I>c5), and the Sinhalese MSS. all read tt.

I think therefore that Childers was rig-ht in finally adopting sama-
tittik^ as the correct PS.li form. In the numerous words in
which Buddhist Sanskrit has a form differing in a way which sets
philological rules at defiance from the corresponding Pali form,
Childers thought (see Diet. p. xi, where the list of words might be
greatly extended) that the Sanskrit was always derived from the
Pali, and the Sanskrit writers had merely blundered. I venture,
with great diffidence, to doubt this. It seems more likely that, at
least in many instances, both P^li and Sanskrit were alike derived
from a previous Prdkrit form, and that in differently interpreting
a difficult word, both Sanskrit and Pali authors made mistakes.
That may be the case here ; and it is almost certain that the
original word had nothing to do with tirtha. How easily this
idea could be adopted we see from the fact that Childers when
first editing the MSS. (in the J. R, A. S. for 1874), and when he
had only Sinhalese MSS. then before him, altered their reading
into samatitthikd, and put this form into his Dictionary; though
he afterwards (in the separate edition), and after noting that
reading in the Phayre MS., chose the other. But what, after all,
does ‘ having equal or level tirthas or landing-places ' mean, when
spoken of a river? Comp. Samatittikaw bhuw^dmi (Mil- 213,
214); Sabbato pokkharayziw (<!!!xat. I, 339, text titthaz/z) ;

and Samatittiko telapatto (ibid. 393, text ®iyo, but see p. 400).
The root perhaps is tmit?.

Kdkapeyya, according to Buddhaghosa, would mean ‘crov.-
drinkablfc.' Crows do not drink on the wing ; and they could stand
to drink either when a river actually overflowed its banks and
formed shallows on the adjoining land ; or when in the hot season
it had formed shallow’s in its own bed. * Crow'-drinkable ^ might
mean therefore just as w'ell ‘ shallow ’ as ‘ overflowing.' Had the
word originally anything to do with k^ka after afl ?

N 2


ON KNOWLEDOE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


i8o


‘Now what think you, Vase//>^a ? Would the
further bank of the river A/§iravati, by reason of
that man’s invoking^ and praying and hoping and
praising, come over to this side ? '

‘ Certainly not, Gotama 1 ’

25. ‘In just the same way, V4se//-^a, do the
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas — omitting
the practice of those qualities which really make a
man a Brahman, and adopting the practice of those
qualities which really make men not Brahmans — say
thus: “Indra we call upon. Soma we call upon,
Varu^a we call upon, tsdna we call upon, Pa^4pati
we call upon, Brahm^ we call upon, Mahiddhi we
call upon, Yama we call upon^l” Verily, V4sei!f/>^a,
that those Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas,
but omitting the practice of those qualities which
really make a man a Brdhman, and adopting the
practice of those qualities which really make men
not Brahmans — that they, by reason of their in¬
voking and praying and hoping and praising, should,
after death and when the body is dissolved, become
united with Brahm^ — verily such a condition of
things has no existence ! ’

26. ‘Just, V4se//f/^a, as if this river A^^iravatt
were full, even to the- brim, and overflowing. And
a man with business on the other side, bound for
the other side, should come up, and wa,nt to cross
over. And he, on this bank, were to be bound
tightly, with his arms behind his back, by a strong

^ The Sinhalese MSS. omit Mahiddhi and Yama, but repeat the
verb ' we call upon * three times after Brahmd. It is possible that
the Burmese copyist has wrongly insertea them to remove the
strangeness of this repetition. The comment is silent.


I.


TEYIGGA SUTTA.


l8l


chain. Now what think you, V4se#Aa, would that
man be able to get ovei from this bank of the river
AZdravati to the further bank ? ’

' Certainly not, Gotama 1 ’

27. 'In the same way, V^se^f/v^^a, there are five
things leading to lust, which are called in the
Discipline of the Noble One a “chain’' and a
“bond.”’

‘ What are the five ? ’

‘ Forms perceptible to the eye ; desirable, agree¬
able, pleasant, attractive forms, that are accom¬
panied by lust and cause delight. Sounds of the
same kind perceptible to the ear. Odours of the
same kind perceptible to the nose. Tastes of the
same kind perceptible to the tongue. Substances
of the same kind, perceptible to the body by touch.
These five things predisposing to passion are called
in the Discipline of the Noble One a “ chain and
3^ bond.” A.nd these five things p'^edisposing to
lust, V^se//^a, do the Brahmans versed in the
Three Vedas cling to, they are infatuated by them,
guilty of them, see not the danger of them, ls.no\v
not how unreliable they are, and so enjoy them.

28. ‘ And verily, V^se/Ma, that BrMimans versed
in the Three Vedas, but omitting the practice of
those qualities which really make a man a Brah¬
man, and adopting the practice of those qualities
which really make men non-Brahmans clinging to
these five things predisposing to passion, infatuated
by them, guilty of them, seeing not their danger,
knowing not their unreliability, and so enjoying
them — that these Brahmans should after death, on
the dissolution of the body, become united to Brahm^
— such a condition of things has no existence.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


182


29. ‘Again, if this river A^Travati were

full of water even to the brim, and overflowing.
And a man with business on the other side, bound
for the other side, should come up, and want to
cross over. And if he covering himself up, even to
his head, were to lie down, on this bank, to sleep.

‘ Now what think you, Vdse///^a ? Would that
man be able to get over from this bank of the river
A/dravati to the further bank ? ’

‘ Certainly not, Gotama ! ’

30. ‘And in the same way, Vase//y^a, there are
these five hindrances, in the Discipline of the Noble
One, which are called “ veils and are called “ hin¬
drances and are called “ obstacles^,” and are called
“ entanglements

‘ Which are the five ? '

‘ The hindrance of lustful desire,

The hindrance of malice,

The hindrance of sloth and idleness.

The hindrance o:^ pride and self-righteousness,
The hindrance of doubt.

‘ These are the five hindrances, V4se/?//^a, which,
in the Discipline of the Noble One, are called veils,
and are called hindrances, and are called obstacles,
and are called entanglements.

31. ‘Now with these five hindrances, V^se^^//^a,
the Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas are veiled,
hindered, obstructed, and entangled.

32. ‘And verily, that BrMimans versed


^ Avaraj^^i. ^ Nivara7?a.

* All three MSS. onaha. S. V. reads onaddha7;z in the text,
and explains it by on ah si.

All three I\ISS. pariyanaha. S. V. reads pariyoddha?^ in
the text, and explains it by par iy onaha.


TKVIGGA. SUTTA.


I.


183


in the Three Vedas, but omitting^ the practice ot
those qualities which really make a man a Brahman,
and adopting the practice of those qualities which
really make men non-Br^hmans — veiled, hindered,
obstructed, and eiitangled by these Five Hindrances
— that these Brdhmans should after death, on the
dissolution of the body, become united to Brahma —
such a condition of things has no existence/

33. ‘ Now what think you, V^se/if/^a, and what

have you heard from the BrMimans aged and well-
stricken in years, when the learners and teachers
are talking together ? Is Brahm^ in possession of
wives and wealth, or is he not ^ ’

‘ He is not, Ootama.’

‘ Is his mind full of anger, or free from anger ? '

* Free from anger, Gotama/

‘ Is his mind full of malice, or free from malice ? ’

" Free from malice, Gotama.’

^ Is his mind depraved, or pure - ? '

‘ It is pure, Gotama/

' Has he self-mastery, or has he not ® ? ’

* He has, Gotama.’

34. ' Now what think you, Vdse///^a, are the

^ Saparig-gaho vrl Br-ahm^ apariggaho ti. Buddhaghosa
says on V^se/Ma^s reply, * I^Sma/'^^andassa abhdvato itthi-
pariggaheno apariggaho,' thus restricting the ‘possession' to
women, with especial reference to the first ‘ hindrance ; ' but the
word in the text, though doubtless alluding to possession of women
in particular, includes more. Compare, on the general idea ot the
passage, the English expression * no encumbrances/

2 AsankiH//'//a-^’itto. That is, says Buddhaghosa, ‘free from
mental sloth and idleness, self-righteousness, and pride/

''' Vasavattl vd avasavattf vd. Buddhaghosa says, in expla¬
nation of the answer : * By the absence of doubt he has his mind
under control' (vase vatteti).


184


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


Brahmans versed in the Vedas in the possession of
wives and wealth, or are they not ? '

‘ They are, Gotama/

‘ Have they anger in their hearts, or have they not ? ’

^ They have, Gotama/

‘ Ho they bear malice, or do they not ? ’

‘ They do, Gotama.""

‘ Are they pure in heart, or are they not ? '

‘ They are not, Gotama/

‘ Have they self-mastery, or have they not ? '

‘ They have not, Gotama/

35. ‘Then you say, Vdse//^a, that the Brahmans are
in possession of wives and wealth, and that Brahm4
is not. Can there, then, be agreement and likeness
between the Brahmans with their wives and pro¬
perty, and Brahm4, who has none of these things ? ’

‘ Certainly not, Gotama ! '

36. ‘Very good, V4se2f//5a. But, verily, that these
Brahmans versed in the Vedas, who live married
and wealthy should after death, when the body is dis¬
solved, become united with Brahmd, who has none
of these things — such a condition of things has no
existence.’


37. ‘Then you say, too, Vdse//^a, that the Brah¬
mans bear anger and malice in their hearts, and are
sinful and uncontrolled, whilst Brahrnd is free from
anger and malice, and sinless, and has self-mastery.
Now can there, then, be concord and likeness be¬
tween the Brahmans and Brahmd ? ’

, ‘ Certainly not, Gotama ! ^

38. ‘Very good, Vdse^f//^a. That these Brdhmans
versed in the Vedas and yet bearing anger and
malice in their hearts, sinful, and uncontrolled,


I.


TEVICG^A SUTTA.


185


should after death, when the body is dissolved,
become united to Brahin^, who is free from anger
and malice, sinless, and has self-mastery — such a
condition of things has no existence/


39. ‘ So that thus then, V aseZ/y^a, the Brahmans,
versed though they be in the Three Vedas, while
they sit down (in confidence), are sinking down (in
the mire)^; and so sinking they are arriving only at
despair, thinking the while that they are crossing
over into some happier land.

‘ Therefore is it that the threefold wisdom of
the Brdhmans, wise in their Three Vedas, is called
a waterless desert, their threefold wisdom is called a
pathless jungle, their threefold v>^isdom is called
destruction ! ’


40. When he had thus spoken, the young Brah¬
man Vdse^Z/^a said to the Blessed One :

‘ It has been told me, Gotama, that the Sama^^a
Gotama knows the way to the state of union with
Brahma.

41. ‘What do you think, V^se/z^/^a, is not Manas4-
ka/a near to this spot, not distant from this spot ? '

‘ J ust so, Gotama. Manas^ka/a is near to, is not
far from here/

42. ‘ Now what think you, V4se//y^a, suppose there
were a man born in Manasdka^fa, and people should

^ Astditva sa?7zst<ianti. I have no doubt the commentator
3S right in his explanation of these figurative expressions. Confi¬
dent in their knowledge of the Vedas, and in their practice of Vedic
ceremonies, they neglect higher things ; and so, sinking into sin and
superstition, ‘ they are arriving only at despair, thinking the while
that they are crossing over into some happier land.’


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


1 86


aski him, who never till that time had left IVIanas^-
ka^fa, which was the way to Manas^ka^fa. W^ould
that man, born and brought up in Manas4ka/a, be
in any doubt or difficulty ? "

‘ Certainly not, Gotama ! And why ? If the man
had been born and brought up in Manas^ka/a, every
road that leads to Manas4ka/a would be perfectly
familiar to him.’

43. * That man, V^se///^a, born, and brought up
at Manas4ka/a might, if he were asked the way
to Manasaka^'a, fall into doubt and difficulty, but
to the Tathdgata, when asked touching the path
which leads to the world of Brahma, there can be
neither doubt nor difficulty. For Brahm^, I know,
Vase/fif/^a, and the world of Brahm^, and the path
which leadeth unto it. Y* ea, I know it even as
one who has entered the Brahmd world, and has
been born within it 1 '

44. When he had thus spoken, V4se//y^a the young
Brdhman said to the Blessed One :

' So has it been told me, Gotama, even that the
Samara Gotama knows the way to a state of union
with Brahma. It is well ! Let the venerable Gotama
be pleased to show us the way to a state of union
with Brahm4, let the venerable Gotama save the
Brahman race ! ’

45. ‘ Listen then, VaseZ/^^a, and give ear atten¬
tively, and I will speak ! ’

‘ So t>e it. Lord ! ' said the young Brahman
V^se/^'/^.a, in assent, to the Blessed One.

46. Then the Blessed One spake, and said :

' ^ Know, Vase///^a, that’ (from time to time) a


^ From here down to the end of p. 200 is a repetition word for


TEVIGGA SUTTA.


187


I*


Tathag-ata is born into the world, a fully Enlight¬
ened One, blessed and worthy, abounding in wisdom
and goodness, happy, with knowledge of the world,
unsurpassed as a guide to erring mortals, a teacher
of gods and men, a Blessed Buddha He, by him¬
self, thoroughly understands, and sees, as it were,
face to face this universe — the world below with all
its spirits, and the worlds above, of Mara and of
Brahm^ — and all creatures, Sama?2as and Br^i-
mans, gods and men, and he then makes his
knowledge known to others. The truth cloth he
proclaim both in its letter and in its spirit, lovely
in its origin, lovely in its progress, lovely in its
consummation : the higher life doth he make

known, in all its purity and in all its perfectness.

A7. * A ’ householder (gahapati), or one of his
children, or a man of inferior birth in any class,
listens to that truth On hearing the truth he has
faith in the Tath^gata, and when he has acquired
that faith he thus considers w’th himself:

' “ Full of hindrances is household life, a path
defiled by passion : free as the air is the life of
him who has renounced all worldly things. How
difficult is it for the man who dwells at home to live
the higher life in all its fulness, in all its purity,
in all its bright perfection ! Let me then cut oft
my hair and beard, let me clothe myself in the


word of Samaw/2a Phala Sutta, pp. 133 following; including

the passages there parallel to those in Subha Sutta, p. i57’
l>rahma-^ala Sutta, pp. 5—16.

See above, § 7.

The point is, that the acceptance of this ‘ Doctrine and
Discipline ^ is open, to all, not of course that Brahmans nevei
accept it.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


1 88


orange-coloured robes, and let me go forth from
a household life into the homeless state ! ”

48. ‘ Then before long, forsaking his portion of
Avealth, be it great or be it small ; forsaking his
circle of relatives, be they many or be they fe^v, he
cuts off his hair and beard, he clothes himself in the
orange-coloured robes, and he goes forth from the
household life into the homeless state.

49. ‘ When he has thus become a recluse he passes
a life self-restrained according to the rules of the
Pdtimokkha ; uprightness is his delight, and he sees
danger in the least of those things he should avoid ;
he adopts and trains himself in the precepts ; he
encompasses himself with holiness in word and deed ;
he sustains his life by means that are quite pure ;
good is his conduct, guarded the door of his senses ;
mindful and self-possessed, he is altogether happy ‘‘T


* The argument is resumed after the Three Silas, or Descrip¬
tions of Conduct — a text, doubtless older than the Suttas in which
it occurs, setting forth the distinguishing moral characteristics of
a member of the Order.

The First Sila is an expansion of the Ten Precepts (^Buddhism, ^
p. 160), but omitting the fifth, against the use of intoxicating drinks.
The Second Sila is a further expansion of the first and then of
the last four, and finally of the fourth Precept. The Third Sila
is directed against auguries, divinations, prophecies, astrology,
quackerj”, ritualism, and the worship of Gods (including Brahm^).

These Three Silas may perhaps have been inserted in the Sutta
as a kind of counterpoise to the Three Vedas. Our Sutta really
reads better without them ; but they are interesting in themselves,
and the third is especially valuable as evidence of ancient customs
and beliefs.


II.


TEVIG'G'A SUTTA.


I 89


Chapter II.

The Short Paragraphs on Conduct.
THE siLAiliT’.


1. ‘ Now wherein, Vdse/Z/^a, is his conduct g^ood ?'

‘ Herein, O Vise^fZ/za, that putting away the mur¬
der of that which lives, he abstains from destroying
life. The cudgel and the sword he lays aside ; and,
full of modesty and pity, he is compassionate and
kind to all creatures that have life !

‘ This is the kind of goodness that he has.

2. * Putting away the theft of that which is not
his, he abstains from taking anything not given.
He takes only what is given, therewith is he con¬
tent, and he passes his life in honesty and in purity
of heart !

‘This, too, is the kind of goodness that he has.

3. ‘ Putting away inchastity, he lives a life of
chastity and purity, averse to the low habit of
sexual intercourse.

‘This, too, (&:c., see f II, 2.)^

^ There is no division into acLnal chapters in the original, but it
is convenient to arrange the following enumeration of moral pre¬
cepts separately, as they occur in various suttas in the same order j;
and are always divided into the three divisions of Lower, Medium,
and Higher Morality.

* The clause ‘ this, too, is the kind of goodness that he has ’ is
repeated in the text after each section. The clause, which differs


1 90


CH.


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.

4. ‘ Putting away lying, he abstains from speaking
falsehood. He speaks truth, from the truth he
never swerves ; faithful and trustworthy, he injures
not his fellow man by deceit.

‘ This, too, (&c., see ^ It, 2.)

5- ‘ Putting away slander, he abstains from ca¬
lumny. What he hears here he repeats not else¬
where to raise a quarrel against the people here :
what he hears elsew^here he repeats not here to
raise a quarrel against the people there. Thus he
lives as a binder together of those who are divided,
an encourager of those who are friends, a peace¬
maker, a lover of peace, impassioned for peace, a
speaker of words that make for peace.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

6. ‘ Putting away bitterness of speech, he abstains
from harsh language. Whatever word is humane,
pleasant to the ear, lovely, reaching to the heart,
urbane, pleasing to the people, beloved of the
people — such are the words he speaks.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

7. ‘ Putting away foolish talk, he abstains from
vain conversation. In season he speaks ; he speaks
that which is ; he speaks fact ; he utters good doc¬
trine ; he utters good aiscipline ; he speaks, and at the
right time, that which redounds to profit, is well-
grounded, is well-defined, and is full of wisdom.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

8. ‘ He refrains from injuring any herb or any
creature. He takes but one meal a day ; abstaining

in the different suttas in which this enumeration of Buddhist
morality is found, is distinct from the enumeration itself, and, like
the opening- reference to Vdse///^a, characteristic only of the par¬
ticular Sutta.


n.


TEVIGGA SUTTA.


I91


from food at night time, or at the wrong time. He
abstains from dancing, singing, music, and theatrical
shows. He abstains from wearing, using, or adorning
himself with garlands, and scents, and unguents, and
he abstains from lofty couches and large beds.

‘This, too, (&c., see f II, 2.)

9. ‘He abstains from the getting of silver or

gold. He abstains from the getting of grain un¬
cooked. He abstains from the getting of flesh that
is raw. He abstains from the getting of any woman
or girl. He abstains from the getting of bondmen

or bondwomen. He abstains from the getting of

sheep or goats. He abstains from the getting of

fowls or swine. He abstains from the getting of

elephants, cattle, horses, and mares. He abstains
from the getting of fields or lands.

‘This, too, (&c., see f II, 2.)

10. ‘He refrains from carrying out those com¬
missions on which messengers can be sent. He
refrains from buying and selling. He abstains from
tricks with false weights, alloyed metals, or false
measures. He abstains from bribery, cheating,
fraud, and crooked ways.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2,)

11. ‘He refrains from maiming, killing, im¬
prisoning, highway robbery, plundering villages, or
obtaining money by threats of violence.

‘This, too, (&c., see II, 2.)'


End of the Short Paragraphs on Conduct.


192


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


The Middle Paragraphs on Conduct.


THE StLAifef:


1. ‘ Or whereas some Sama/^a-Br4hmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to injuring- plants or vegetables : that is to
say, the germs arising from roots, the germs arising
from trunks of trees, the germs arising from joints,
the germs arising from buds, or the germs arising
from seeds. He, on the other hand, refrains from
injuring such plants or animals.

‘This, too, (&c., see f II, 2.)

2. ‘ Or whereas some Sama/^a-Brdhmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to storing up property : that is to say, meat,
drink, clothes, equipages, beds, perfumes, and grain.
He, on the other hand, refrains from storing up
such property.

‘ This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

3. ‘ Or whereas some Samara- Brdhmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to witnessing public spectacles ; that is to
say, dancing, singing, concerts, theatrical representa¬
tions, recitations, instrumental music, funeral cere¬
monies, drummings, balls, gymnastics, tumblings,
feasts in honour of the dead, combats between
elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks,
and quails, cudgel playing, boxing, wrestling, fencing,
musters, marching, and reviews of troops. He, on
the other hand, refrains from such public spectacles.


II.


TEVIGG^A SUTTA.


193


‘ This, too, (&c., see ^ II, 2.)

4. ‘ Or whereas son.e Samara- Brahmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to occupying their time with games detri¬
mental to their pi ogress in virtue : that is to say,
with a board of sixty-four squares, or of one hun¬
dred squares ; tossing up ; hopping over diagrams
formed on the ground ; removing substances from a
heap without shaking the remainder ; dicing ; trap-
ball ; sketching rude figures ; tossing balls ; blowing
trumpets ; ploughing matches ; tumbling ; forming
mimic windmills ; guessing at measures ; chariot
races ; archery ; shooting marbles from the fingers ;
guessing other people’s thoughts ; and mimicking
other people’s acts. He, on the other hand, refrains
from such games detrimental to virtue.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

5. ‘ Or whereas some Samara- Brdhmans, who
live on the food provided by the fajthful, continue
addicted to the use of elevated and ornamented
couches or things to recline upon : that is to say,
of large couches ; ornamented beds ; coverlets with
long fleece ; embroidered counterpanes ; woollen
coverlets, plain or worked with thick flowers ; cotton
coverlets, worked with knots, or dyed with figures
of animals ; fleecy carpets ; carpets inwrought with
gold or with silk ; far-spreading carpets ; rich ele¬
phant housings, trappings, or harness ; rugs for
chariots ; skins of the tiger or antelope ; and pillows
or cushions ornamented with gold lace or embroi¬
dery. He, on the other hand, refrains from the use
of such elevated or ornamented couches or things
to recline upon.

‘ This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

Cl I] o


194 KlSrOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. CH.

6. ' Or whereas some Sama/^a-Brdhmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to the use of articles for the adornment
of their persons : that is to say, unguents ; fragrant
oils ; perfumed baths ; shampooings ; mirrors ; anti¬
mony for the eyebrows and eyelashes ; flowers ;
cosmetics ; dentifrices ; bracelets ; diadems ; hand¬
some walking-sticks ; tiaras ; swords ; umbrellas ;
embroidered slippers; fillets; jewelry; fans of the
buffalo tail ; and long v^rhite garments. He, on the
other hand, refrains from the use of such articles for
the adornment of the person.

‘This, too, (&c., s^e J II, 2.)

7. ‘ Or whereas some Samara-Brahmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to mean talk ; that is to say, tales of kings,
of robbers, or of ministers of state; tales of arms,
of war, of terror ; conversation respecting meats,
drinks, clothes, couches, garlands, perfumes, relation¬
ships, equipages, streets, villages, towns, cities, pro¬
vinces, women, warriors, demigods ; fortune-telling ;
hidden treasures in jars ; ghost stories ; empty tales ;
disasters by sea; accidents on shore; things which
are, and things which are not. He, on the other
hand, refrains from such mean conversation.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

8. * Or whereas some Sama«a-Br4hmans, who

live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to wrangling ; that is to say, to saying,
“ V ou are ignorant of this doctrine and discipline,
but I understand them ! ” “ What do you know of

doctrine or discipline “ Y ou are heterodox, but

I am orthodox ! “ My discourse is profitable, but

yours is worthless ! ” “ That which you should speak


ir.


TEVIOGA SUTTA.


^95


first you speak last, and that which you should speak
last you speak first 1 What you have long- studied
I have completely overturned!"’ “Your errors are
made quite plain I “ You are disgraced I ” “ Go

away and escape from this disputation ; or if not,
extricate yourself from your difficulties!” He, on
the other hand, refrains from such wrangling.

‘ This, too, (&c., see ^ H, 2.)

9. ‘ Or whereas some Sama^^a-Br^hmans, who

live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to performing the servile duties of a go-
between : that is to say, between kings, ministers of
state, soldiers. Brahmans, people of property, or
young men, w^ho say, “ Come here ! ” Go there! ”
“ Take this to such a place ! ” “ Bring that here ! ”

But he refrains from such servile duties of a
messenger.

‘ This, too, (&c., see J II, 2.)

10. ' Or whereas some Sama?«a-Br4hmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
addicted to hypocrisy ; that is to say, they speak
much ; they make high professions ; they disparage
others ; and they are continually thirsting after
gain. But he refrains from such hypocritical craft.

* This, too, (&c., see f II, 2-)’


End of the Middle Paragraphs on Conduct.


o 2


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


196


The Long Paragraphs on Conduct.


THE MAHA SlliAi?/:


I. 'Or whereas some Sama^a-Brdhmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts, by such lying
practices as these : that is to say, by divination from
marks on the body ; by auguries ; by the interpreta-
tion of prognostics, of dreams, and of omens, good or
bad * by divinations from the manner in which cloth
and other such things have been bitten by rats ; by
sacrifices to the god of fire, offerings of Dabba
grass, offerings with a ladle, offerings of husks,
of bran, of rice, of clarified butter, of oil, and of
liquids ejected from the mouth ; and by bloody
sacrifices ; by teaching spells for preserving the
body, for determining lucky sites, for protex:ting
fields, for luck in war, against ghosts and goblins,
to secure good harvests, to cure snake bites, to
serve as antidotes for poison, and to cure bites of
scorpions or rats ; by divination, by the flight of
hawks, or by the croaking of ravens ; by guessing
at length of life ; by teaching spells to ward off
wounds ; and by pretended knowledge of the lan¬
guage of beasts. —

‘ He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by such low arts, by such lying practices.

'This, too, (&c., see f II, 2.)

2. ' Or whereas some Sama/za-Br4hmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts, by such lying


II.


TIEVIGGA SUTTA.


197


practices as these : that is to say, by explaining the
good and bad points in jewels, sticks, garments,
swords, arrows, bows, weapons of war, women, men,
youths, maidens, male and female slaves, elephants,
horses, bulls, oxen, goats, sheep, fowl, snipe, iguanas,
long-eared creatures, turtle, and deer. —

‘ He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by such low arts, by such lying practices.

* This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

3. ‘ Or whereas some Samara-Brahmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such lying
practices as these ; that is to say. bv foretelling future
events, as these :

‘ “ There will be a sortie by the king.*' “ There
will not be a sortie by the king.” “ The king within
the city will attack.” The king outside the city
will retreat.” “ The king within the city will gain
the victory.” The king outside the city will be
defeated,” “ The king outside the city will be the
conqueror.” “ The king inside the city will be van¬
quished.” Thus prophesying to this one victory and
to that one defeat. —

‘ He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by such low arts, by such lying practices.

^ This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

4. * Or whereas some Samara- Brahmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such lying
practices as these : that is to say, by predicting —

‘ “ There will be an eclipse of the moon.” There
will be an eclipse of the sun.” There will be an
eclipse of a planet.” “ The sun and the moon will be
in conjunction.” “ The sun and the moon will be in


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


198


opposition.” “The planets will be in conjunction,

“ The planets will be in opposition.” ‘‘ There will be
falling meteors, and fiery coruscations in the atmo¬
sphere.” There will be earthquakes, thunderbolts,
and forked lightniiigs.” The rising and setting of
the sun, moon, or planets will be cloudy or clear.”
And then : “ The eclipse of the moon will have such
and such a result.” “ The eclipse of the sun will
ha /e such and such a result.” “ The eclipse of the
moon will have such and such a result.” “ The sun
and the moon being in conjunction will have such
and such a resuit.” The sun and the moon being
in opposition will have such and such a result.”
“ The planets being in conjunction will have such and
such a result.” “ The planets being in opposition
will have such and such a result.” “ The falling
meteors and fiery coruscations in the atmosphere
will have such and such a result.” “ The earth¬
quakes, thunderbolts, and forked lightnings will
have such and such a result.” “ The rising and
setting of the sun, moon, or planets, cloudy or clear,
will have such and such a result.”

‘ He. on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by such low arts, by such lying practices.

‘ This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

5. ‘ Or whereas some Sama^a-Brdhmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such lying
practices as these ; that is to say, by predicting —

‘ “ There will be an abundant rainfall.” “ There will
be a deficient rainfall.” “ There will be an abundant
harvest.” “ There will be famine.” “ There will be
tranquillity.” ‘‘ There will be disturbances.” “ The
season will be sickly.” “ The season will be healthy.”


II.


TEVIGGA SUTTA.


199


Or by drawing deeds, making up accounts,
giving pills, makitig verses, or arguing points of
casuistry. —

‘ He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by such low arts, by such lying practices.

‘ This, too, (&e., see § II, 2.)

6. ' Or whereas some Samara-Brahmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such lying
practices as these : that is to say, by giving advice
touching the taking in marriage, or the giving in
marriage ; the forming of alliances, or the dissolution
of cortnections ; the calling in property, or the laying
of it out. By teaching spells to procure prosperity,
or to cause adversity to others ; to remove sterility ;
to produce dumbness, locked-jaw, deformity, or
deafness. By obtaining oracular responses by the
aid of a mirror, or from a young girl, or from a god.
By worshipping the sun, or by worshipping Brahm^;
by spitting fire out of their mouths, or by laying
hands on people’s heads. —

‘He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by suchdow arts, by such lying practices.

‘This, too, (&c., see § II, 2.)

7. ‘ Or whereas some Sama?2a-Br4hmans, who
live on the food provided by the faithful, continue
to gain a livelihood by such low arts and such lying
practices as these ; that is to say, by teaching the
ritual for making vows and performing them ; for
blessing fields; for imparting virility and rendering
impotent ; for choosing the site of a house ; for
performing a house-warming. By teaching forms of
words to be used when cleansing the mouth, "when
bathing, and when making offerings to the god of


200


ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS.


CH.


fire. By prescribing medicines to produce vomiting
or purging, or to remove obstructions in the higher
or lower intestines, or to relieve head-ache. By
preparing oils for the ear, collyriums, catholicons,
antimony, and cooling drinks. By practising cau¬
tery, midwifery, or the use of root decoctions or
salves. —

‘He, on the other hand, refrains from seeking a
livelihood by such low arts, by such lying practices.

‘This, too, (&c., see f II, s.V


End of the Long Paragraphs on Conduct.


II r.


TEVIGOA sutta.


201


Chapter III.

1. ^ ‘ And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of
the world with thoughts of Love, and so the second,
and so the third, and so the fourth. And thus the
whole wide world, above, below, around, and every¬
where, does he continue to pervade with heart of
LrOve, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond measure.

2. * Just, Vdse//>^a, as a mighty trumpeter makes
himself heard- — and that without difticulty — in all
the four directions ; even so of all things that have
shape or life, there is not one that he passes by or
leaves aside, but regards them all with mind set
free, and deep-felt love.

‘ V erily this, V Use/fMa, is the way to a state of
union with Brahmli.

3. ‘ And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of
the world with thoughts of pity, sympathy, and equa¬
nimity, and SO the second, and so the third, and so
the fourth. And thus the whole wide world,
above, below, around, and everywhere, does he
continue to pervade with heart of pity, sympathy,
and equanimity, far-reaching, grown great, and be¬
yond measure.

4. ‘ Just, V^se/Ma, as a mighty trumpeter makes
himself heard — and that without difficulty — in all
the four directions ; even so of all things that have

^ This paragraph occurs frequently ; see, inter alia, below,
MahS.-^^udassana Sutta II, 8. It will be seen from ‘Buddhism,^
pp. 170, 1 7 1, that these meditations play a great part in later
Buddhism, and occupy very much the place that prayer takes in
Christianity. A fifth, the meditation on Imparity, has been added,
at what time I do not know, before the last. All five are prac¬
tised in Siam (Alabaster, ‘ Wheel of the L.aw/ p. 168).


202 ON. KNOWLEDGE OF THE VEDAS. CH.


shape or life, there is not one that he passes by or
leaves aside, but regards tnem all with mind set
free, and deep-felt pity, sympathy, and equanimity.

* Verily this, Vdse///^a, is the way to a state of
union with Brahm^.’


5. ‘ Now what think you, V^se/^f^a, will the
Bhikkhu^ who lives thus be in possession of
women and of wealth, or will he not?'

* He will not, Gotama ! '

' Will he be full of anger, or free from anger ? '

' He will be free from anger, Gotama T

'Will his mind be full of malice, or free from
malice ? '

‘ F ree from malice, Gotama ! ’

‘ Will his mind be sinful, or pure ? '

‘ It will be pure, Gotama ! '

' Will he have self-mastery, or will he not ? ’

' Surely he will, Gotama 1 ’

6. ‘ Then you say, Vdse^/z^a, that the Bhikkhu is
free from- household cares, and that Brahm^ is free
from household cares. Is there then agreement and
likeness between the Bhikkhu and Brahm^ ? *

' There is, Gotama ! '

7. ‘Very good, Vdse^f/Aa. Then in sooth, V4seif-
thoi^ that the Bhikkhu who is free frona household
cares should after death, when the body is dissolved,
become united with Brahm4, who is the same — such
a condition of things is every way possible !

8. ‘ And so you say, V dse/^>^a, that the Bhikkhu
is free from anger, and free from malice, pure in
mind, and master of himself ; and that BrahmH is

^ Or ‘ Member of our Order/ See the note on Mah^parinib-
T^4na Sutta I, 6.


III.


TEVIGGA SUTTA.


203


free from, anger, and. free from malice, pure in mind,
and master of himself. Then in sooth, V4se//.^a,
that the Bhikkhu who is free from anger, free from
malice, pure in mind, and master of himself should
after death, when the body is dissolved, become
united with Brahm^, who is the same — such a
condition of things is every way possible ! ’

9. When he had thus spoken, the young Br4hmans
Vdse//f^a and Bhdradvd^a addressed the Blessed One,
and said :

‘ Most excellent. Lord, are the words of thy
mouth, most excellent! Just as if a man were to
set up that which is thrown down, or' were to reveal
that which is hidden away, or were to point out the
right road to him who has gone astray, or were to
bring a lamp into the darkness, so that those who
have eyes can see external forms ; — just even so.
Lord, has the truth been made known to us, in
many a figure, by the Blessed One. And we, even
we, betake ourselves, Lord, to the Blessed One as
our refuge, to the Truth, and to the Brotherhood.
May the Blessed One accept us as disciples, as
true believers, from this day forth, as long as life
endures I '


End of the Tevi^^ Suttanta.


INTRODUCTION


TO THE


Akai^kheyya sutta.


Just as tne Tevi,^^ Sutta is an argu men turn ad
homineni to the man wise in the Vedas, and seeking
through that knowledge Cor union with the Deity, urging
him to adopt rather the Buddhist method of a life of right¬
eousness here on earth ; so the present Sutta is a similar
argument addressed to the seeker after the various things
specified in its different sections. If he should desire any
of these things then let him live the life of uprightness
as set out in the opening section, and cultivate the intel¬
ligent earnestness and spiritual insight described in the
refrain.

The two combined amount, as would naturally be ex¬
pected, to the Nirv4«a of a perfect life in Arahatship —
the supreme goal not only of every good Buddhist, but
of every good Buddhist argument. As applied in the
earlier sections it is only a re-statement of a familiar doc¬
trine ; as applied in the later sections it has the additional
interest of showing us the answer of early Buddhism to
the mystics, as the Tevi^a shows us its answer to
the theologians. And in the answer we find the details
of some curious beliefs which existed in India when Bud¬
dhism arose, and which in after times, and especially in
the northern church, had so disastrous an effect upon it.

With regard to the reality of these mystical powers
our Sutta gives an uncertain sound ; leaving, however, an
impression rather in its favour. The argument is equally
good either way, but the author of the Sutta is so en¬
grossed with Arahatship that he does not stay to say


208


IF HE SHOULD DESIRE


whether he regards the belief in the powers referred to
as a delusion or not. I have no doubt that he really
believed in their theoretical possibility, which is elsewhere
also in the Pdli Pi/akas accepted or implied ; though the
practical effect of ;the belief has greatly varied amoiig
Puddhists in different times and countries. In the southern
church, which adhered more closely to the simple doctrines
of early Buddhism, these beliefs have been relegated to
the region of legend and fairy tale ; in the northern church
there have been found, from time to time, believers who
attached to them a practical importance. There is a useful
analogy between the expressions used in i Samuel xxviii,
and those in the latter part of our Suttas ; and between
the general position of witchcraft in the history of
Christianity, and of these beliefs in the history of Bud¬
dhism ; but it would take too long to carry out the com¬
parison and contrast in detail here, and with due regard
to the necessary lirnitations under which the comparison
should be made. Th^e analogy only reaches to their '
history, and to their relative- importance in the religious
systems with which they were connected j the two sets
of belief themselves are fundamentally different, the Indian
beliefs being much more nearly allied to modern spiritual¬
ism and mesmerism.

Vv^e have a curious instance of the way in which such
legends grow in a parallel passage of the earlier and
later lives of Gotama as accepted by orthodox Buddhists.
In the Mahd Vagga^ ic is said that during the first watch
of the night following on Gotama’s victory over the Evil
One, he fixed his mind upon the Chain of Causation,
during the second watch he did the same, and during the
third watch he did the same — the only difference in the
narrative being the verses with which in each of the three
watches the meditation closed.

In the life of Gotama prefixed to the dr^takas the
simplicity of this account is improved away by saying that

^ I, I, 2-6.

* 6’§.taka I, 75, translated in ‘ BnddHst Birth Stories,’ p. 102.


INTRODUCTION.


209


i.i the first watch he acquired the knowledge of Past Births
(Pubbe-nivdsa-ndna, described in our § 17), in the
second the knowledge of Present Births (D ibba-/^akkhu,
described in our § 1 9), and only in the third the kno ^rledge
of the Chain of Causation (Pati^^y^a-samuppUda). It is
curious that in the corresponding passage of the northern
Buddhist Sanskrit poem, the Lalita Vistara we find
precisely the same tradition, which must therefore have
been current in both northern and southern churches before
the fifth century of our era.

I think it is quite possible that at that time it had
become part of the Buddhist theory that every Arahat
possessed this supernatural insight ; and as Gotama was
supposed by the authors of these two later works to have
acquired Arahatship by his victory over the Evil One, it
naturally seemed to them proper to say that he then also
acquired these particular powers. It is clear that even in
the time when the Pi/fakas were put into their present form
it was considered that the Buddha had acquired them
and that they could be acquired by less exalted persons
In the later literature several instances are given of par¬
ticular persons who possessed one or other of them in a
greater or less degree ; but it is instructive to notice that
these are always persons who lived long before the time
of the writer who records the instances.

The early Buddhist doctrine as to witchcraft, astrology,
omens, auguries, sacrifices, prophecies, and the like, will be
found in the Mahd Sila (above, pp. i96--'20o), and in the
Third Fetter (below, p. %%%),


^ Calcutta edition, pp. 440-448.

“ See, for instance, the Tevj,g;^-va>5Z’i4agotta Sutta.
® SSma^;^a Phala Sutta, pp. 144-154.


IF HE SHOULD DESIRE


AKAISTKHE YYA-SUT T A.

4


1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once staying' at Si-vatthi in. Andtha ‘Bindik.SLS park.

There the Blessed Gne addressed the Brethren,
and said, ' Bhikkhiis/ ‘Yea, Lord!’ said the
Brethren, in assent, to the Blessed One.

Then spake the Blessed One :

2. * Continue, Brethren, in the practice of Right
Conduct adhering to the Rules of the Order ^ ;
continue enclosed by thae restraint of the Rules of
the Order, devoted to uprightness in life ® ; train
yourselves according to the Precepts taking them
upon you in the sense of the danger in the least
offence.

3. ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to be¬
come beloved, popular, respected among his fellow-
disciples, let him tlien fulfil all righteousness, let
him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within let him not drive back the
ecstasy of contemplation ®, let him look through
things let him be much alone ! *

" S!la. 2 Pdtimokkh^

* A.^4rag04^ar^. Comp. Tevi^^a Sutta I, 49.

* Sikkh^pa^desu. The Buddhist Decalogue (given in *’Bud-
dhism/ p. 160).

’ Ag^hB.tt&Tn. yfeeto samatha/«. e Ghtxi3„

’’’ VipassanS. : it is always used, in contrast to s a mat ha


Akankheyya sutta.


211


4. * If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to receive
the requisites — clothing, food, lodging, and medicine,
and other necessaries for the sick — let him then fulfil
all righteousness, let him be devoted to that quietude
of heart which springs from within, let him not
drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look
through things, let him be much alone ! '

5. ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, that to
those people among whoi# he receives the requisites
- — clothing, food, lodging, and medicine, and other
necessaries for the sick — that charity of theirs should
redound to great fruit and great advantage, let him
then fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted to
that quietude of heart which springs from within, let
him not drive back the ecstasy of contemplation,
let him look through things, let him be much
alone I *

6. ‘If a Bhikkhu should desire. Brethren, that
those relatives of his, of one blood with him, dead
and gone, who think of him with believing heart
should find therein great fruit and great advantage’,
let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be de¬
voted to that quietude of heart which springs from
within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of con¬
templation, let him look through things, let him be
much alone 1 '

7. ‘If a Bhikkhu should desire. Brethren, that he

(note 5), of insight into objective phenomena. These three quali¬
ties are constantly referred to as parts of Arahatship. The Rev.
David da Silva makes vipassana identical with the sevenfold
perception (sa^;^d, mentioned as conditions of the welfare of a
community in the Book of the Great Decease, Chap. I, § 10).

^ Even after death those who remember the Buddha, the Truth,
or the Order with believing heart can reap spiritual advantage.
Compare the Dhammapada commentary, p. 97.

P 2


I


IF HE SHOUEE DESIRE - .


y^er discontent and lust that
overpowerhim, that he should
Y discontent that had sprung
then fulfil all righteousness,
that quietude of heart which
let him not drive back the
n, let him look through things,

I »

«

>ul^ desire, Brethren, that he
over (spiritual) cianger and
Lnger nor dismay should ever
e should master and subdue
may, let him then fulfil all
be devoted to that Quietude


^ Aratiratisaho. Arati is the disinclination to fulfil the
duties of a Sama»a, discontent with the restrictions of the Order.

® The bliss here referred to, and described in detail below,
Mab4>Sudassana Sutta, Chap. Ill, is the ' ecstasy of contem¬
plation ' referred to in the refrain.


AKANKHEYYA SUTTA.


2 1 3


phenomena let him then fulfil all righteousness^ let:
him be devoted to that quietude of heart wtiicbi
springs from within, let him not drive back ttie
ecstasy of contemplation, let him look throu^la
things, let him be much alone 1 "

11. ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire. Brethren, by trie
complete destruction of the three Bonds to become
converted, to be no longer liable to be reborn in
a state of suffering, and to be assured of final sa.lv'st-
tion let him then fulfil all righteousness, let bim
be devoted to that quietude of heart which springs
from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him.
be much alone 1 *

12. ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire. Brethren, by tine
complete destruction of the three Bonds, and by tlae
reduction to a minimum of lust, hatred, and delnsiori,
to become a Sakad^g^min, and (thus) on his fiarst
return to this world to make an end of sorrow, let
him then fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted
to that quietude of heart which springs from with-in,
let him not drive back the ecstasy of contempls-tion,
let him look through things, let him be much alone T

13. ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, by tbe
complete destruction of the five Bonds which bind
people to this earth, to become an inheritor of” tlie
highest heavens there to pass entirely away, tHence

^ These are the eight Vimokkha, a list of which occurs iii

the Great Decease, Chap, III, §§ 33--42-

® O3 this and the two following sections compare Mala^pari-
nibMna Sutta II, 7, and on the Bonds or Fetters below, p. 25 22-

» Opapdtika. This is another of those words whiclx, from
their connoting Buddhist ideas unknown in Europe, are really
untranslatable. It means a being who springs into existence
without the intervention of parents, and therefore, as it were.


214


IF HE SHOULD DESIRE - -


never to return, let him then fulfil all righteousness,
let him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the
ecstasy of Contemplation; let him look through
things, let him be much alone ! ’

14.^ ‘If a Bhikkhu should desire. Brethren, to
exercise one by one each of the different Iddhis,
being one to become multiform, being multiform to
become one ; to beoome visible, or to become in¬
visible ; to go without being stopped to the further
side of a wall, or a fence, or a mountain, as if
through air ; to penetrate up and down through
solid ground, as if through water; to walk on the
water without dividing it, as if on solid ground ; to
travel cross-legged through the sky, like the birds on
wing ; to touch and feel with the hand even the
sun and the moon, mighty and powerful though
they be ; and to reach in the body even up to the
heaven of Brahm^ ; let him then fulfil all righteous-


uncaused, and seeming to appear by chance. All the higher
devas (angels or gods) are opap'Stika, there being no sex or
birth in the highest heavens ; and it is with especial allusion to
this that the word is here used. There is of course from the
Suddhist point of view (which admits of nothing without a cause)
a very sufficient* cause for the sudden appearance of an opapd-
tika in heaven, viz. the karma of a being who has past away
somewhere else ; but the Buddhist theory necessitated the choice
of an expression which would give no countenance to the (here¬
tical) idea of a soul flying away after the death of its body from
one world to another.

In the expression ‘which bind people to this world,^ by« world
is meant the B-hpa-loka, or world of form, which include all
those parts of the universe whose inhabitants have an outward
form and are subject to lusts.

^ With this paragraph compare Mah^parinibb^na Sutta III, 14,
and S^maw;?a Phala Sutta, p. 145.


Akankheyya sutta.


215


tiess, let him be devoted to that quietude of heart
which springs from within, let him not drive back
the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through
things, let him be much alone ! '

1 5. ^ ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire. Brethren, to
hear with clear and heavenly ear, surpassing that
of men, sounds both human and celestial, whether
far or near, let him then fulfil all righteousness, let
him be devoted to that quietude of heart which
springs from within, let him not drive back the
ecstasy of contemplation, let him look through
things, let him be much alone ! ’

16. ^ ‘ If a Bhikkhu '■should desire, Brethren, to com¬
prehend by his own heart the hearts of other beings
and of other men ; to discern the passionate mind to
be passionate, and the calm mind calm ; the angry
mind to be angry, and the peaceable peaceable ;
the deluded mind to be deluded, and the wise mind
wise ; the concentrated thoughts to be concentrated,
and the scattered to be scattered ; the lofty mind
to be lofty, and the narrow mind narrow ; the sub¬
lime thoughts to be sublime, and the mean to be
mean ; the steadfast mind to be steadfast, and the
wavering to be wavering ; the free mind to be free,
and the enslaved mind to be enslaved ; let him then
fulfil all righteousness, let him be devoted to that
quietude of heart which springs from within, let
him not drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let
him look through things, let him be much alone ! ’

17. ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to be
able to call to mind his various temporary states
in days gone by ; such as one birth, two births,

With this paragraph compare Sdmas^^a Phala Sutta, p. 146.

® Compare M. P. S. I, 16, and S^maw/^a Phala Sutta, p. 147-


2I6


IF HE SHOULJD HESIRE


three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred or a thousand, or a hundred thousand
births ^ ; his births in many an seon of destruction,
in many an seon of renovation, in many an seon of
both destruction and renovation ^ ; (so as to be able
to say), "‘In that place such was my name, such my
family, such my caste such my subsistence, such
my experience of comfort or of pain, and such the
limit of my life ; and when I passed from thence,

I took fotm again in that other place where my
name was so and so, such my family, such my
caste, such my subsistence, such my experience of
comfort pr of joy, and such my term of life ; and
when I fell from thence, I took form in such and
such a place ; ’’—should he desire thus to call to
mind his temporary states in days gone by in all
their modes and all their details let him then fulfil
all righteousness, let him be devoted to that quie¬
tude of heart which springs from within, let him
not drive back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him
look through things, let him be much alone I ’

1 8.® ‘ If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, to see
with pure and heavenly vision, surpassing that of


^ The Lalita Vistara (p. 442) characteristically carries this enu¬
meration further up into innumerable ko/is and niyutas of
births.

^ This is based on the Buddhist theory of the periodical destruc¬
tion and renovation of the universe, each of which takes countless
years to be accomplished.

® V a/zTxa, colour.

■* The text of this clause recurs nearly word for word in the
Brahma-^^la Sutta, pp. 17—21 : and in the Lalita Vistara, Chap-
XXII, p. 442 ; and exactly in the Sama««a Phala Sutta, p. 148.

® This paragraph recurs in the S^ma^iza Phala Sutta, p. 150
and in nearly the same words in the Lalita Vistara, Chap. XXII.


Akankhevya sutta.


217


men, beings as they pass from one stiate of existence
and take form in others ; beiftgs base or noble,
good-looking or ill-favoured, happy or miserable,
according to the karma they inherit — (if he should
desire to be able to say), “ Xhese beings, reverend
sirs, by their bad conduct in action, by their bad
conduct in word, by their bad conduct in thought, by
their speaking evil of the Noble Ones by their
adhesion to false doctrine, or by their acquiring
the karma «jf false doctrine have been reborn, on
the dissolution of the body after death, in some
unhappy state of suffering or woe V’ These beings,
reverend sirs, by their good conduct in action, by
their good conduct in word, by their good conduct
in thought, by their not speaking evil of the Noble
Onfis, by their adhesion to right doctrine, by their
acquiring the karma of right doctrine, have been
reborn, on the dissolution of the body after death,
into some happy state in heaven ; — should he desire
thus to see with pure and heavenly vision, sur¬
passing that of men, beings as they thus pass from
one State of existence and take form in others ;
beings base or noble, good-looking or ill-favoured,
happy or miserable, according to the karma they
inherit ; let him then fulfil all righteousness, let him
be devoted to that quietude of heart which springs


' This is a collective term, meaning^ Buddhas, Pa^it’eka Buddhas,
Arahats, An^g^mins, SakadlLgamins, and Sot^pannas ; that is, those
who are walking in the Noble Eightfold Path-
’ ® The Pdli is xsxikk h^~ (and below sammd-) di//i^i-kamma-
sam^ddha; the Lalita Vistara, whose other expressions are
identical with the Pdli, has, very strangely, 'mithyd- (and below
samy ag-) di//>5i-karma-dharma-samS.d4na.

® See note on M- P. S-, Chap. I, § 23.


2i8


IF HE SHOULD DESIRE -


from within, let him not drive back the ecstasy of
contemplation, let him look through things, let him
be much alone ! ^

19J ‘If a Bhikkhu should desire, Brethren, by
the destruction of the great evils (Asavas ®), by him¬
self, and even in this very world, to know and realise
and attain to Arahatship, to emancipation of heart,
and emancipation of mind, let him then fulfil all right¬
eousness, let him bo devoted to that quietude of
heart which springs from within, let him not drive
back the ecstasy of contemplation, let him look
through things, let him be much alone 1 '

20„ ‘ Continue therefore, Brethren, in the practice
of Right Conduct, adhering to the Rules of the
Order ; continue enclosed by the restraint of the
Rules of the Order, devoted to uprightness in life ;
train yourselves according to the Precepts, taking
them upon you in the sense of the danger in the
least offence. For to this end alone has all, that
has been said, been said ! ’

21. Thus spake the Blessed One. And those
Brethren, delighted in heart, exalted the word of
the Blessed One.


End of the Akahkheyya Sutta.


^ Compare Sama/i^a Phala Sutta, p. 15 1 ; Mahaparinibb^na
Sutta II, 7 ; and Lalita Vistara, Chap. XXII, p. 442
^ Sensuality, individuality, delusion, and ignorance.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

^ETOKHILA SUTTA.


The following translation has been made from a text,
based on the Tumour and Phayre MSS. in the India Office,
of which Dr. Morris was kind enough to allow me the use.
The Suttas in the Ma^^^ima Nikdya are usually distin¬
guished by the way in which a single thought or one or
two allied thoughts are stated shortly at the commence¬
ment, and are then elaborated and repeated through a
number of consecutive and carefully-balanced paragraphs
arranged in a literary form that would now be considered
monotonous and tiresome in the extreme. The repetitions
in tne Suttas of the Dtgha Nikdya are no doubt equally
artificial, but the train of reasoning being longer and more
varied, there is always the hope of a change in the form, or
of a new departure in the thought, to sustain the reader’s
flagging interest.

The argument of this Sutta may be shortly stated thus.
The means by which freedom from barrenness and bondage
of heart can be reached are zeal and determined effort.
But that zeal will be crippled in its struggle against barren¬
ness by want of confidence in the teacher, his doctrine, his
order, or his system of self-culture, and by want of concord
with the brethren. And that zeal will be crippled in its
struggle against bondage by sensuality, by sloth, or by
a craving after a future life in any of its various forms. If
the disciple be strenuously diligent in the struggle against
these things he need not fear or doubt, he will never fail,
but Will assuredly reach even to the supreme security of
Arahatship.

When I first read this Sutta I was irresistibly reminded
of that passage in the New Testament where the exhorta¬
tion to the disciple, ‘ giving all diligence ’ to add to his faith


222


BARRENNESS AND BONDAGE.


virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, and
brotherly kindness, is followed by the figure that these
things will make him to be ‘ neither barren nor unfruitful ; *
and closes with the promise that if he do these things,
giving diligence to make his calling and election sure, he
shall never fall, but shall enter into that everlasting kingdom
which is the supreme goal of the Christian life.

The analogy is sufficiently close to throw considerable
light upon our Sutta, but it touches only the barrenness.
The bondage is specially Buddhistic, and is allied with the
doctrine of the Sanyo^anas, or fetters, v/hich the pilgrim
along the ISToble Path has to break before he can reach the
full fruit of Arahatship. It should be compared also with
the fivefold bond mentioned in the Tevi,^a Sutta, Chap. I,
§§ 26—28, the word there used being bandhana?//, as
against vinibandhana//^ here, and the fivefold bond
being a fivefold division of our first bondage.

The ton fetters are —

1. The delusion of self (sakk^ya-d i/Mi).

2. Doubt (vi^ikiy&;&^4).

3. Reliance on the efficacy of rites and ceremonies

(stlabbata-pardmdsa).

4. The bodily lusts or passions (kdma).

5. Hatred, ill-feeling (patigha).

6. Desire for a future life in the worlds of fprm

(rfiparfi.ga).

7. Desire for a future life in the formless worlds

(arfipar^ga).

8. Pride (m^no).

9- Self-righteousness (ud d ha

10. Ignorance (avi^^^).

Here the 4th fetter is correlative to our first bondage ; the
6th fetter to our 2nd and 3rd bondage ; and part of the
3ra fetter to our 5th bondage.

The 2nd, 3rd, and 5th bondage are in fact but a new way
of stating the fundamental Buddhist doctrine that good
must be pursued without any ulterior motive ; and that
that man is not spiritually free iri whom there is still the
least hankering after any future life beyond the grave.


BARRENNESS AND BONDAGE.


.^TETOKHILA-SUTTA.


1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once dwelling at Sivatthi, in the park of Andtha
Vind\k.2i,

There the Blessed One addressed the brethren,
saying, ‘ Brethren ! '

* Yea, Lord 1 ' said those brethren, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One spake :

2. * Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has not
quite become free from the five kinds of spiritual
barrenness^, has not altogether broken through the
five kinds of mental bondage ^ — that such* a one
should reach up to the full advantage of, should
attain to the full growth in, to full breadth in, this
doctrine and discipline ® — that can In no wise be ! *

3. * And who has not become free from the five
kinds of spiritual barrenness ? '

' In the first place, O Bhikkhus, when a brother


^ Pa^ka X’etokhil^.

® P^Wi^a >5etaso vinibandh^.

® 'Dhamma-vinaye. On the disputed question as to whether
this compound is a D van da or not, see Dr. Oldenberg, Mah^
Vagga, p. X. M. L^on Peer (‘Etudes Bouddhiques,’ p. 203) has
taken it as Tatpurusha; and it would be hazardous to say that
it is never used as such. Here I think it is a Dvandva.


224


BARRENNESS AND BONDAGE.


doubts in the Teacher (Satth^), is uncertain re¬
garding him, has not confidence in him, and has not
faith in him ; then is his mind not inclined towards
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not towards
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has
not become free from this first spiritual barrenness.

4. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
doubts in the System of Belief (Dhamma), is
uncertain regarding it, has not confidence in it, has
not faith in it ; then is his mind not inclined towards
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not towards
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has
not become free from this second spiritual barren¬
ness.

5. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has doubt in the Brotherhood (Sahgha), is un¬
certain about it, has no confidence in it, has no faith
in it ; then is his mind not inclined towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not towards
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
become free from this third spiritual barrenness.

6. ‘ And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has doubt in the System of Self-culture (Sik-
kh^), is uncertain about it, has no confidence in it,
has no faith in it; then is his mind not inclined
towards zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
become free from this fourth spiritual barrenness.

7. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
is angry with his fellow-disciples, discontented with


^ETOKHlt-A SUTTA.


225


them, excited against them, barren towards them,
the mind of the brother, O Bhikkhiis, thus angry
with his fellow-disciples, discontented with them,
excited against them, barren towards them does
not incline towards zeal, exertion, perseverance,
and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not towards
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has
not become free from this fifth spiritual barrenness.

‘ It is such a one, O Bhikkhus, who is not free
from the five kinds of spiritual barrenness.’

8. ‘ And who has not broken through the five
kinds of spiritual bondage ? ’

'In the first place, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has not got rid of the passion for lusts (k^me), has
not got rid of the desire after lusts, has not got rid
of the attraction to lusts, has not got rid of the
thirst for lusts, has not got rid of the fever of lust,
has not got rid of the craving after lusts. —

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has not got
rid of the passion for lusts, has not got rid of the
desire after lusts, has not got rid of the attraction to
lusts, has not got rid of the thirst for lusts, has not
got rid of the fever of lust, has not got rid of the
craving after lusts, his mind does not incline to zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not toward zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
broken through this first spiritual bondage.

9. And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has not got rid of the passion for a body (kdy e),

^ It is possible that kdya may be used here in a technical sense,
as the group or aggregate of qualities, apart from form, which go

[ii] Q


2 26


BARRENNESS ^ND BONDAGE.


has not got rid of the desire after a body, has not
got rid of the attraction to a body, has not got
rid of the thirst for a body, has not got rid of the
fever of a body, has not got rid of the craving
after a body. —

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has not got
rid of the passion for a body, has not got rid of the
desire after a body, has not got rid of the attraction
to a body, has not got rid of the thirst for a body,
has not got rid of the fever of a body, has not got
rid of the craving after a body, his mind does not
incline to zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not toward zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
broken through this second spiritual bondage.

lo. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has not got rid of the passion for a form (rfipe),
has not got rid of the desire after a form, has not
got rid of the attraction to a form, has not got
rid of the thirst for a form, has not got rid of the
fever of a form, has not got rid of the craving
after a form.^ —

‘ W^hatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has not got
rid of the passion for a form, has not got rid of the
desire after a form, has not got rid of the attraction
to a form, has not got rid of the thirst for a form, .
has not got rid of the fever of a form, has not got
rid of the craving after a form, his mind does not
incline to zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not toward zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
broken through this third spiritual bondage.

to make up an individual. This paragraph would then correspond
to the 7th Saz-^iryo^ana.


JTETOKHILA SUTTA.


227


11. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, a brother may
have eaten enough ana to satiety, and begins to
follow after the ease of sleep, the ease of softness,
the ease of sloth.

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, when he has
eaten enough and to satiety, begins to follow after
the ease of sleep, the ease of softness, the ease
of sloth, his mind does not incline to zeal, exertion,
perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whos*esoever mind inclineth not toward zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
broken through this fourth spiritual bondage.

12. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, a brother may
have adopted the religious life in the aspiration of
belonging to some one or other of the angel
hosts and thinking to himself : “ By this morality,
or by this observance, or by this austerity, or by
this religious life, I shall become an angel, or one
of the angels !'’ —

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bliikkhus, may have
adopted the religious life in the aspiration of be¬
longing to some one or other of the angel hosts,
and thinking to himself : “ By this morality, or by
this observance, or by this austerity, or by this reli¬
gious life, I shall become an angel, or one of the
angels !” his mind does not incline to zeal, exertion,
perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth not toward zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has not
broken through this fifth spiritual bondage.

‘It is such a one, O Bhikkhus, who has not
broken through the five kinds of mental bondage.

’ A?/watara7/^ deva-nikdya7«. Compare Mahaparinibbana
Sutta, Chap. I, § ii. Chap. II, § 9.

Q 2


228


BARRENNESS AND BONDAGE.


13. "And whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has
not quite become free from the five kinds of spiritual
barrenness, has not altogether broken through the
five kinds of mental bondage — that such a one
should reach up to the full advantage of, should
attain to the full growth in, to full breadth in, this
doctrine and discipline — that can in no wise be !

14. "But whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has
become quite free from the five kinds of mental
barrenness, has altogether broken through the five
kinds of spiritual bondage — that such a one should
reach up to the full advantage of, should attain to
full growth in, to full breadth in, this doctrine and
discipline — that can well be I *

15. ‘ And who has become free from the five
kinds of spiritual barrenness ?’

* In the first place, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
does not doubt in the Teacher (Satthd), is .not
uncertain regarding him, has confidence in him, and
has faith in him ; then his mind does incline to zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this first spiritual barrenness.

16. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
does not doubt in the System of Belief (Dhamma),
is not uncertain regarding it, has confidence in it,
and has faith in it; then his mind does incline to
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this second spiritual barrenness.

17. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother


ATETOKHILA SUTTA.


229


does not doubt in the Brotherhood (Sahgha), is not
vincertain about it, has confidence in it, and has faith
in it ; then his mind does incline to zeal, exertion,
perseverance, and struggle.

But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this third spiritual barrenness.

18. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
does not doubt in the System of Self-culture. (Sik-
kha), is not uncertain about it, has confidence in it,
and has faith in it ; then his mind does incline to
zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this fourth spiritual barrenness.

19. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
is not angry with his fellow-disciples, is not discon¬
tented with them, is not excited against them, is not
barren towards them, the mind of the brother, O
Bhikkhus, who is thus not angry with his fellow-
disciples, not discontented with them, not excited
against them, not barren towards them, does incline
toward zeal, exertion, perseverance, and struggle.

' But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this fifth spiritual barrenness.'


20. “ And who has broken through the five kinds
of spiritual bondage?’

In the first place, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has got rid of the passion after lusts (kdme), has
got rid of the desire after lusts, has got rid of
the attraction to lusts, has got rid of the thirst for


230


BARRENNESS AND BONDAGE.


lusts, has got rid of the fever of lust, has got rid of
the craving after lusts. —

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has got rid
of the passion after lusts, has got rid of the desire
after lusts, has got rid of the attraction to lusts, has
got rid of the thirst for lusts, has got rid of the
fever of lust, has got rid of the craving after lusts,
his mind does incline to zeal, exertion, perseverance,
and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this first spiritual bondage.

2 1. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has got rid of the passion after a body (kdye), has
got rid of the desire after a body, has got rid of the
attraction to a body, has got rid of the thirst for a
body, has got rid of the fever of a body, has got rid
of the craving after a body. —

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has got rid'
of the passion after a body, has got rid of the desire
after a body, has got rid of the attraction to a body,
has got rid of the thirst for a body, has got rid of
the fever of a body, has got rid of the craving after
a body, his mind does incline to zeal, exertion, per¬
severance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal?
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this second spiritual bondage-

22. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
has got rid of the passion for a form (rdpe), has
got rid of the desire after a form, has got rid of the
attraction to a form, has got rid of the thirst for a
form, has got rid of the fever of a form, has got
rid of the craving after a form. —


A-ETOKHII.A SUTTA.


231


‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has got rid
of the passion for a foim, has got rid of the desire
after a form, has got rid of the attraction to a form,
has got rid of the thirst for a form, has got rid
of the fever of a form, has got rid of the craving
after a form, his mind does incline to zeal, exertion,
perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this third spiritual bondage.

23. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother
does not, having eaten enough and to satiety, begin
to follow after the ease of sleep, the ease of softness,
the ease of sloth.

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, does not,
ha'dng eaten enough and to satiety, begin to follow
after the ease of sleep, the ease of softness, the ease
of sloth, his mind does incline to zeal, exertion,
perseverance, and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this fourth spiritual bondage k

24. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, when a brother

has not adopted the religious life in the aspiration
of belonging to some one or other of the angel
hosts, thinking to himself : “ By this morality, or

by this observance, or by this austerity, or by this
religious life, I shall become an angel, or one of the
angels ! ” —

‘Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has not


^ In this section, and in section ii, I havs rendered sukha by
ease, and not by happiness, as I think the former is always its
more exact meaning in such passages.


232 BARRENi^ESS AND BONDAGE.

adopted the religious life in the aspiration, of be¬
longing to some one or other of the angel hosts,
thinking to himself : “By this morality, or by this
observance, or by this austerity, or by this religious
life, 1 shall become an angel, or one of the angels
his mind does incline to zeal, exertion, perseverance,
and struggle.

‘ But whosesoever mind inclineth towards zeal,
exertion, perseverance, and struggle, he has become
free from this fifth spiritual bondage.

‘It is such a one, O Bhikkhus, who has broken
through the five kinds of spiritual bondage.

25. ‘ Whatsoever brother, O Bhikkhus, has be¬
come quite free from the five kinds of mental
barrenness, has altogether broken through the five
kinds of spiritual bondage — that such a one should
reach up to the full advantage of, should attain to
full growth in, to full breadth in, this doctrine and
discipline — -that can well be !


26. ‘ H e practises the (first) road to saintship^,
which is accompanied by the union of the will to
acquire it with earnest contemplation, and with tji^
struggle against sin. He practises the (second) road
to saint ship, which is accompanied by the union
of exertion with earnest contemplation, and with
the struggle against sin. He practises the (third)
road to saintship, which is accompanied by the
union of thought with earnest contemplation, and
with the struggle against sin. He practises the
(fourth) road to saintship, which is accompanied
by the union of investigation with earnest con-

^ Iddhipada/w. Here Iddhi must be (spiritual) welfare.


JKTETOKHILA SUTTA.


233


templation and the strug-gle ag-ainst sin\ — and strong
determination too as a iifth.

27. ‘The brother, O Bhikkhus, thus endowed
with fifteenfold determination ^ becomes destined
to come forth into the light, capable of the higher
wisdom, sure of attaining to the supreme security

28. ‘Just, O Bhikkhus, as when a hen has
eight or ten or twelve eggs, and the hen has pro¬
perly brooded over them, properly sat upon them,
properly sat herself round them, however much such
a wish may arise on her heart as this, “ O would
that my little chickens should break open the egg¬
shell with the points of their claws, or with their
beaks, and come forth into the light in safety 1 ” yet
all the while those little chickens are. sure to break the
egg-shell with the points of their claws, or with their
beaks, and to come forth into the light in safety.

29. ‘Just even so, a brother thus endowed with
fifteenfold determination is sure to come forth into
the light, sure to reach up to the higher wisdom,
surfe to attain to the supreme security ^ ! ’

The text of this section, so far, will be found in Childerses
dictionary, sub voce Iddhip^do.

® That is, the four Iddhip^das, and Usso/^i, each multiplied
by three.

® Anuttarassa Y ogakkhemassa ; that is, Nirva/za. Com¬
pare Dhammapada, ver. 23 and p. 180.

* The tertium quid of the parable is the absolute certainty of
the event which will follow on the hen having duly and diligently
followed the law of her instinct, even though she, meanwhile, in
her ignorance, be full of doubt and desire. The certainty of the
delivery of a woman with child is not unfrequently used as a
symbol of what can be absolutely depended upon. So of ' the
word of the glorious Buddhas,' which endureth for ever, in ‘ Bud¬
dhist Birth Stories,' p. 18. I have attempted to imitate the play in
the text upon the two words for the ‘ coming forth into the light,


234


BARRENNESS AND BONDAGE.


30, Thus spake the Blessed One. And those
Brethren, delighted in heart, exalted the word of
the Blessed One.


End. of the Sutta, the sixth, on barrenness and

bondage.


figuratively and literally, of the disciple and of the little chicken.
The first is in Pfili hhabbo abhinibbidiya (from vid), the latter
is aho vata . . . sotthin^ abhinibbhi^^eyyan (from bhid).
On sammfi'paribhavitini, here applied to the a«^ftni, see
above, MahiparinibMna Sutta, Chap. I, f 12, note.


INTRODUCTION


TO THK

M ahA-sudassana sutta.


The following translation is made from a text based on
three MSS. from the same sources as those referred to at
the commencement of the Tevy^^ Sutta, and referred to in
my notes by the same letters.

This Sutta follows in the Digha Nik^ya immediately
after the Book of the Great Decease, and is based on the
same legend as the Mah4-Sudassana dr^taka, No. 95 in
Mr. Fausbbirs edition. As the latter dift'ers in several
important particulars from our Sutta, it is probably not
taken directly from it, but is merely derived from the
same source. To facilitate comparison between the two
I add here a translation of the Gdtaka, which has not been
reached as yet in my ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories/ and which
is very short.

The part enclosed in brackets [ ] is the comment, which
was probably written in Ceylon in the fifth century of our
era, and I have included that part of the comment which
is explanatory of the words in the verse, as it is of more
than usual interest. There is every reason to believe, for
the reasons given in the Introduction to the ‘ Buddhist Birth
Stories,* that the stories themselves belong to a very early
period in the history of Buddhism; and we may be sure
that if this particular story had been abstracted by the
author of the commentary from our Sutta, he would not
have ventured to introduce such serious changes into what
he regarded as sacred writ.


238


MAHA~SUDASSANA SUTTA.


MAHA-SXJ3DASSA1TA G^ATAKA.


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.

[‘How transient are all component things/
This the Master told when lying on his death-couch, con¬
cerning that word of Ananda the Thera, when he said, ‘ Do
not, O Blessed One, die in this little town,’ and so on.

When the Tathdgata was at the G^etavana ^ he thought
‘ the Thera Sdriputta, who was born at Nalagarna, has died,
on the day of the full moon in the month of Kattika, in
that very village ^ ; and Mah4 Moggalldna in the latter, the
dark half of that same month. As my two chief disciples
are thus dead, I too will pass away at Kusindrd.’ There¬
upon he proceeded straight on to that place, and lay down
on the Uttara-sisaka couch, between the twin Sala trees,
never to rise again.

Then the venerable Ananda besought him, saying, ‘ Let


^ It is not easy with, our present materials to reconcile the apparently con¬
flicting statements with regard to the Buddha’s last journey. According to
the M S.lalankara-vatthu this refers here to a residence at the Cetavana, which
took place between the end of § 30 in Chap. II, in the Book of the Great
Decease, and the beginning of § 31. It will be noticed that § 31 speaks ol
* the monastery,’ which is apparently an undesigned confirmation of this ti'a-
dition. (Such undesigned circumstances, however really undesigned, are very
far, of course, from proving the actual truth of the tradition. They would only
show that it was older than the time when the works in which they occur were
put into their present shape.)

Mr. I^ausboll, by his punctuation, includes these words in the following
thought ascribed to the Blessed One, but I think they onH' describe the time
at which the thought is supposed to have arisen.

^ Or perhaps * at Varaka.’ I do not understand the w'ord varaka, which
has puzzled Mr. Fausbcill. The modern name of the village, afterwards the
site of the famous Buddhist university of Nalanda, is Baraga on. The full-
moon day in Kattika is the ist of December. An account of the death ol
.Sariputta will be found in the Malalaiikara-vatthu (Bigandet, * Degend,’ 8cc.,
3rd ed., II, 1—25), and of the murder of Moggallana by the Nigaw/z^as in the
Dhiimma|jada commentary (Fausbdll, p. 29S seq.), of which Spence Hardy’s
account (‘ Manual of Buddhism,’ p. 338) is nearly a translation ; and Bigandet’s
account (loc. cit. pp. 25-2';') is an abridgment.


INTRODUCTION.


239


not the Blessed One die in this little townships, in this
little town in the jungle, in this branch township. Let the
Blessed One die in one of the other great cities, such as
Ra^^agaha, and the rest I ’

But the Master answered, ‘ Say not, Ananda, that this is
a little township, a little town in the jungle, a branch town¬
ship. I was dwelling formerly in this town at the time
when I was Sudassana, the king of kings ; and then it was
a great city, surrounded by a jewelled rampart, twelve
leagues in length ! ’

And at the request of the Thera, he, telling the tale,
uttered the Mahd-Sudassana Sutta.J

Now on that occasion when Queen Subhaddd saw Maha
Sudassana, when he had come down out of the Palace of
Righteousness, and was lying down, not far off, on the
appropriate couch, spread out in the grove of the seven
kinds of gems, and when she said : ‘ Thine, O king, are
th^se four and eighty thousand cities, of which the chief is
the royal city of Kusavati. Quicken thy desire after these ! ’

Then replied Mah^ Sudassana, ' Speak not thus, O queen 1
but exhort me rather, saying, “ Cast away desire for these,
long not after them ^ ’

And when she asked, ‘ Why so, O king?’ ‘ To-day my
time is come, and I shall die I ’ was his reply

Then the weeping queen, wiping her eyes, brought her¬
self with difficulty and distress to address him accordingly.
And having spoken, she wept, and lamented ; and the
other four and eighty thousand women wept too, and
lamented ; and of the attendant courtiers not one could
restrain himself, but all also wept.

But the Bodisat stopped them all, saying, ‘ Enough my
friends! Be still!’ And he exhorted the queen, saying,
‘ Neither do thou, O queen, weep: neither do thou lament.
For even unto a grain of sesamum fruit there is no such


‘ Ivh u d d a k a-M a ar ak c. See tlie iiotti on Mahapai'initjbana SnUa, ver, 6o.
" lioth these speeches are diflerent troni those on the same occasion

in the Sutta below.

® This question and answer are not in the Sutta.


240


MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA.


thing as a compound which is permanent! All are tran¬
sient, all have the inherent quality of dissolution !/

And when he had so said, he further uttered this stanza :

* How transient are all component things !

Growth is their nature and decay :

They are produced, they are dissolved again :

And then is best, — when they have sunk to rest ^ I ’
[In these verses the words * Ho w transient are all
c o mponent t hi ngs ! ’ mean ‘ Dear lady, Subhadda, where¬
soever and by whatsoever causes made or come together,
compounds — that is, all those things which possess the
essential constituents (whether material or mental) of exist¬
ing things — all these compounds are impermanence itself.
For of these form^ is impermanent, reason^ is imperma¬
nent, the (mental) eye® is impermanent, and qualities"
are impermanent. And whatever treasure there be, whether
conscious or unconscious, that is transitory. Understand
therefore How transient are all component things ! ’’

‘And why? “Growth is their nature and decay.”
These, all, have the inherent quality of coming into (indi¬
vidual) existence, and have also the inherent quality of
growing old ; or (in other words) their very nature is to
come into existence and to be broken up. Therefore should
it be understood that they are impermanent.

‘ And since they are impermanent, when “they are
produced, they are dissolved again,” Having come
into existence, having reached a state they are surely
dissolved. For all these things come into existence, taking
an individual form ; and are dissolved, being broken up*
To them as soon as there is birth, there is what is called a
state; as soon as there is a state, there is what is called


^ All this is- omitted in the Sutta. It is true the verse occurs there, but it
is placed in the Sutta in the mouth of the Teacher, after the account of Mahft
Sudassana’s death.

The last clause is literally, ‘ Blessed is their cessation,' where the word for
cessation, upasamo, is derived from the word sam, ‘to be calm, to be quiet,’
and means cessation by sinking into rest. Compare below.

* Sahkhara. * Khandayatanadayo. ‘

Vin^lknum. « ATakkhu^^. ’ Dhamma. « xhiti.


INTRODUCTION.


241


disinteg;ration \ For to the unborn there is no such
thing as state, and there is no such thing as a state which
is without disintegratian. Thus are all compounds, having
attained to the three characteristic marks (of imperma-
nency, pain, and want of any abiding principle subject,
in this way and in that way, to dissolution. All these
component things therefore, without exception, are imper¬
manent, momentary despicable, unstable, disintegrating,
trembling, quaking, unlasting, sure to depart only for a
time and without substance ; — as temporary as a phan¬
tom, as the mirage, or as foam !

‘ How then in these, dear lady Subhadd4j is there any
sign of ease? Understand rather that ‘*^then is best,
when they have sunk to rest;” but their sinking to
rest, their cessation, comes from the cessation of, the whole
round (of life), and is the same as Hirv^^za. That and
this are one And hence there is no such thing as ease.’]


And when Mah^ Sudassana had thus brought his dis¬
course to a point with the ambrosial great Nirv^zza, he
made exhortation also to the rest of the great multitude,
saying, * Give gifts ! Observe the precepts 1 Keep the
sacred days ’ and became an inheritor of the world of
the gods.

[When the Master had concluded this lesson in the
truth, he summed up the (Sdtaka, saying, ‘ She who was
then Subhadd4 the queen was the mother of Rdhula, the
great adviser was R4hula, the rest of the retinue the Bud¬
dha’s retinue, and Mahd Sudassana I myself.’]


* Bhango.

® KxiGikk&tnf dukkha»^, anatta/»e. See C?S.taka I, 375; and, on the last,
IMahEparinibbdna Sntta I, lo, and MabS, Vagga I, vi, 38—47.

* Khr-^ikd. See Oldenberg’s note on Dlpavawsa I, 53.

* Bay&tS., literally ‘departed.^ The forms paydti and pay^to, g’iven by
Cbilders, should be corrected into pS.yS.ti and pSySto. See cjStaka I, 146.

® TSvakSlikS. See C^Staka I, 121, where the word is used of a cart let
out on hire for a time only.

* Tad ev eka^» eka»v, which is not altogether without ambiguity.

■* This paragraph, too, is omitted in the Sutta.

fit] K


mahA-sudars^/^na sutta.


242


The word translated ‘ component things * or ‘compounds*
in this (S'Maka is sankhara, literally confections, from
kar, ‘ to do/ and sam, ‘together.’ It is a word very fre¬
quently used in Buddhist writings, and a word consequently
of many different connotations : and there is, of course, no
exactly corresponding word in English. ‘Production’ would
often be very nearly correct, although it fails entirely to
give the force of the preposition sam ; but a greater objec¬
tion to that word is the fact that it is generally used, not
of things that have come into being of themselves, but of
things that have been produced by some one else- It
suggests, if it does not imply, a producer ; which is con¬
trary to the whole spirit of the Buddhist passages in which
the word sahkhdr4 occurs. In this important respect the
word ‘ compound ’ is a much more accurate translation,
though it lays somewhat too much stress on the sam.

The term Confections (to coin a rendering) is sometimes
used, as in the first line of these verses (as used in this con¬
nection), to denote all things which have been brought
together, made up, by pre-existing causes ; and in this
sense it includes, as the commentator here points out, all
those material or mental qualities which unite to form
an individual, a separate thing or being, whether conscious
or unconscious.

It is more usually used, with special reference to their
origin from pre-existing causes, and with allusion to the
wider class denoted by the same word, of the mental con¬
fections only, of all sentient beings generally, or of man
alone. In this sense it forms by itself one of the five
classes or aggregates (khandhd) into which the material
and mental qualities of each separate individual are divided
in Buddhist writings — the class of disposi^tions, capabilities,
and all that goes together to make what we call character.
This class has naturally enough been again divided and
subdivided ; and a full list of the Confections in this sense,
as now acknowledged by orthodox Buddhists, will be found
in my manual ‘ Buddhism.* At the time when the Pali
Pi/akas reached their present form, no such elaborate list
of Confections in detail seems to have been made ; but the


INTRODUCTION. 243


general sense of the word was, as is quite clear from the
passages in which it occurs, the idea which these details
together convey. It is this second and more usual meaning
of the term which is more especially emphasised in the
concluding verse of the above stanza.

I have ventured to dw^ell so far on the word Confections,
because the commentator here says that the cessation of
these Confections is the same thing as Nirvdwa ; and the
question of Nirv^/^a engrosses so large a share of the
attention of those who are interested in Buddhism.

Whether it is entitled to do so is open to serious question.
The Buddhist salvation was held to consist in a change of
heart, a modification of personal character, to be attained '
to in this world, and forming the subject of Gotama’s first
discourse, * The Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteous¬
ness When looked at from different points of view this
state of mind was denoted, in the very numerous passages
in which it is mentioned or referred to, under a great variety
of different names or epithets, suggestive of the different
points of view from which it could be regarded. The term
Nibb^na, or Nirva?/a, is only one of those epithets ; and it
is a most significant fact, to which I would invite especial
attention, that it is an epithet comparatively very seldom
employed in the Pali Pi/akas themselves.. It is to the state
of mind itself, the salvation which every Arahat has reached
while yet alive, in a word, to Arahatship, that importance
ought to be attached, rather than to that particular conno¬
tation. of it suggested by the word NirvU/za.

One of the many ideas involved in Arahatship was the
absolute dissolution of individuality. Gotama, whether
rightly or wrongly is here of no importance, held that
freedom from pain, absolute ease, happiness, was incom¬
patible with existence as a distinct individual (whether
animal, god, or man). The cessation of the Confections,
so far from being a thing to be dreaded, was the inevitable
result of the emancipation of heart and mind in Arahatship.


^ The Dhamina,-^akka-pxiavattn.na Suttn., tratislated. below.

R 2


^44


MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA.


But it was not a thing to be desired, and could not, in fact,
be brought about apart from all the other things involved
in Arahatship. The formation of these Confections ceases
in Nirvd^^a, and in Nirv^^a alone ; and when the poet
declares that their cessation is blessed, he is saying the
same thing as if he had said ‘Nirv4«a is blessed

Turning now to the Sutta itself, we find that the portion
of the legend omitted in the <x4taka throws an unexpected
light upon the tale ; for it commences with a long descrip¬
tion of the riches and glory of Mah^ Sudassa*^a, and reveals
in its details the instructive fact that the legend is nothing
more nor less than a spiritualist’s sun-myth.

It cannot be disputed that the sun-myt:h theory has
become greatly discredited, and with reason, by having
been used too carelessly and freely as an explanation of
religious legends of different times and countries which
have really no historical connection with the earlier awe and
reverence inspired by the sun. The very mention of the
word sun-myth is apt to call forth a smile of incredulity,
and tne indubitable truth which is the basis of the theory
has not sufficed to protect it from the shafts of ridicule.
The Book of the Great King of Glory ’ seems to afford
a useful example both of the extent to which the theory
mav be accepted, and of the limitations under which it
should always be applied.

It must at once be admitted that whether the whole
story is based on a sun-story, or whether certain parts or
details of it are derived from things first spoken about the
sun, or not, it is still essentially Buddhistic. A large pro¬
portion of its contents has nothing at all to do with the
worship of the sun ; and even that which has, had not, in


^ In this respect it should be noticed that the very word here used '"or cessa¬
tion, upasamo, is nsed as one among’ a string of epithets of Arahatship at
II)hamma->6akka-ppavattana Sutta, % 3, = (7S.taka I, 97, and again in Dhamma’
pada. verses 36S, 381. In this last passage the -whole of the phrase in the last
verse in our stanza recurs in the accusative case as an equivalent to Arahatship,
and the comma inserted by Mr. Fausboll between sahkhArfipasamaiM and
sukhaxn is, in both verses, unnecessary.


INTRODUCTION.


245


the mind of the author,, when the book was put together.
Whether indebted to a sun-myth or not, it is therefore
perfectly true and valid evidence of the religious belief of
the people among whom it was current ; and no more
shows that the Buddhists were unconscious sun worship¬
pers than the story of Samson, under any theory of its
possible origin, would prove the same of the Jews.

What we really have is a kind of wonderful fairy tale, a
gorgeous poem, in which an attempt is made to describe
in set terms the greatest possible glory and majesty of the
greatest possible king, in order to show that all is vanity,
save only righteousness — -just such a poem as a Jewish
prophet might have written of Solomon in all his gloi'y. It
would have been most strange, perhaps impossible, for the
author to refrain from using the language of the only poets
he knew, who had used their boldly figurative language in
an attempt to describe the appearance of the sun.

To trace back all the rhetorical phrases of our Sutta to
their earliest appearance in the Vedic hymns would be an
interesting task of historical philology, though it would
throw more light upon Buddhist forms of speech than upon
Buddhist, forms of belief. In M. Senart’s valuable work, ‘La
Legende du Boi^iddha,’ he has already done this with regard
to the'* seven treasures (mentioned in the early part of the
Sutta) on the basis of the corresponding passage in the later
Buddhist Sanskrit poem called the Lalita Vistara. The
descriptions of the royal city and of its wondrous Palace of
Righteousness have been probably originated by the author,
though on the same lines ; and it reminds one irresistibly,
in many of its expressions, of the similar, but simpler and
more beautiful poem in which a Jewish author, some three
centuries afterwards, described the heavenly Jerusalem.

When the Northern Buddhists, long afterwards, had
smothered the simple teaching of the founder of their
religion under the subtleties of theological and metaphy¬
sical speculation, and had forgotten all about the Noble
Path, their goal was no longer a change of heart in the
Arahatship to be reached on earth, but a life of happiness,
under a change of outward condition, in a heaven of bliss


246


MAHA-SUDASSAKA SUTTA.


beyond the skies. One of the most popular books among
the Buddhists of China and Japan is a description of this
heavenly paradise of theirs, called the Sukh^vatf-vyiiha,
the ‘ Book of the Happy Country,’ the Sanskrit text of
which has been just published by Professor Max Muller in
the volume of the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
for the present year. It is instructive to find that several
of the expressions used are word for word the same as the
corresponding phrases in the ‘ Book of the Great King of
Glory.’


THE GREAT KING OF GLORV^


MAHI-SITBASSAI^ A - SUTTA.


Chapter i.

1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
C3nce staying* at Kusindri in the Upavattana, the
Sala grove of the Mallas, between the twin Sala
trees, at the time of his death.

2. Now the venerable Ananda went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and bowed down
before him, and took his seat respectfully on one
side. And when he was so seated, the venerable

A

Ananda said to the Blessed One :

^ ‘ Let not the Blessed One die in this little wattel
and daub town, in this town in the midst of the
jungle, in this branch township. For, Lord, there
are other great cities, such as A'ampa, Ra^gaha,
Sivatthi, S4keta, Kosambi, and Benares. Let the
Blessed One die in one of them. There there are
many wealthy nobles and Brahmans and heads of
houses, believers in the Tath^gata, who will pay
due honour to the remains of the Tathdgata.'

3. ‘ Say not so, Ananda I Say not so, Ananda,

' Svidassana means ‘beautiful to see, having a glorious appear¬
ance,' and is the name of many kings and heroes in Indian
legend.

“ From here down to the end of the next section is found also,
nearly word for word, in the hlahaparinibbana Sutta, above, pp. 99,
100. Compare also Mah^-Sudassana Gataka, No. 95.


248


THE GREAT KING OF GEORV.


CH.


that this is but a small wattel and daub town, a
town in the midst of the jungle, a branch township.
Long ago, Ananda, there was a king, by name
Mah^-Sudassana, a king of kings, a righteous man
who ruled in righteousness, an anointed Kshatriya
Lord of the four quarters of the earth, conqueror,
the protector of his people, possessor of the seven
royal treasures. This Kusin^r^, Ananda, was the
royal city of king Maha-Sudassana, under the name
of ICus^vati and on the east and on the west it w^as
twelve leagues in length, and on the north and on
the south it was seven leagues in breadth. That
royal city Kus^vati, Ananda, was mighty, and pros¬
perous, and full of people, crowded with men, and
provided with all things for food. Just, Ananda,
as the royal city of the gods, A/akamandd by name,
is mighty, prosperous, and full of people, crowded
with the gods, and provided with all kinds of food,
so, Ananda, was the royal city Kusavati mighty and
prosperous, full of people, crowded with men, and
provided with all kinds of food. Both by day and
by night, Ananda, the royal city Kusavatt resounded

^ Khattiyo muddhavasitto, which does not occur in the
Mahaparinibbana Sutta, the Mah^padhdna Sutta, the Lakkhawa
Sutta, and other places where this stock description of a X'akka-
vatti is found. It is omitted also in the Lalita Vistara. The
Burmese Phayre MS. of the India. Office reads here mudddbhi-
sitto, but this is an unnecessary correction. So the name of the
Hindu caste mentioned in the Sahyadri K.han</a. of the Skanda
Pura?/a is spelt both ways. The epithet is probably inserted here
froux § 12 below.

® Kuj^vati was the name of a famous city mentioned as the
capital of Southern Kusala in post-Buddhistic Sanskrit plays and
epic poems. In the Mahdbharata it is called Ku.ravatt It is
said to have been so named after Ivuj'a, son of Rama, by whom it
was built; and it is also called Ku.rasthalt


I.


249


mahA-sudassana sutta.


with the ten cries ; that is to say, the noise of ele-
phants, and the noise of horses,- and the noise of
chariots ; the sounds of the drum, of the tabor, and
of the lute ; the sound of singing, and the sounds of
the cymbal and of the gong ; and lastly, with the
cry, Eat, drink, and be merry ^ I

4. ‘ The royal city ICusdvati, Ananda, was sur¬
rounded by Seven R.amparts. Of these, one
rampart was of gold, and one of silver, and one of
beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate, and one
of coral, and one of all kinds of gems ^ '


^ This enumeration is lound also at 6^S.taka, p. 3, only that the
chank is added there — wrongly, for that makes the number of
cries eleven.

^ Beryl, agate, and coral are doubtful renderings of Pali names
of precious substances, the exact meaning of which has been dis¬
cussed on the very slender evidence available (and hence, it seems
to me, with very little certain result) by Burnouf in the * Lotus de
la Bonne Loi,' pp. 3 1 9—321 ; and Professor Max Muller has a further
note in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1880, p. 178.
The Pali words here are in the first column :

1. Sova/2«amayo, Suvarwasya ;

2. RfipimayO; Rtipasya;

3. Ve/uriyamayo, Vai^ffiryasya ;

4. Phalikamayo, Spha/ikasya ;

5. Lohitahkamayo, Lohitarauktasy^a ;

6. Masaragallamayo, Asmagarbhasya ;

7. Sabbaratanamayo, Mus^ragalvasya :

those in the second being taken from the Sukhavativyuha in the
passage corresponding to § 6 below. It is quite possible that
the writers of these passages used the rarer words only as names
of precious substances, without attaching any clearly distinct
meaning to each (compare Rev. xxi. 19—21). The Pdli author
seems to have been hard put to it to find enough names to fill up
the sacred number seven ; just as in the ‘ Seven Jewels * of the
Bhamma, the sacred number seven is reached by giving to one
jewel two distinct names indriy fini = p balfini).

At ATiulla Vagga IX, i, 4 we find the following enumeration of


250


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


5. ‘To the royal city Kus^vati, Ananda, there
were Four Gates, One g^ate was of gold, and one
of silver, and one of jade, and one of crystal. At
each gate seven pillars w^ere fixed ; in height as
three times or as four times the heisfht of a man.
And one pillar was of gold, and one of silver, and
one of beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate,
and one of coral, and one of all kinds of gems.

6. ‘ The royal city Kusdvati, Ananda, was sur¬
rounded by Seven Rows of Palm Trees. One
row was of palms of gold, and one of silver, and one
of beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate, and
one of coral, and one of all kinds of gems.

7. ‘ And the Golden Palms had trunks of gold,
and leaves and fruits of silver. i\.nd the Silver


Palms had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of
gold. And the Palms of Beryl had trunks of beryl,
and leaves and fruits of crystal. And the Crystal
Palms had trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of
beryl. And the Agate Pajms had trunks of agate,
and leaves and fruits of coral. And the Coral Palms


had trunks of coral, and leaves and fruits of agate.
i\nd the Palms of every kind of Gem had trunks
and leaves and fruits of every kind of gem.

8. ^ ‘ And when those rows of palm trees, Ananda,


rata«as as found in the ocean, though only Nos. i, 4, 5, 6 are
really produced there :

1. Mutta. 6. Pavfi/awz.

2. Ma?2i. <2

Ve/uriyo.

Sahkho.

Sil^.


3-

4-
5*


Ra^ata?/^.

8. Gatarupa??z.

9. Lohitahko.

10. Masaragailaw.

^ This section and § 9 should be compared with one in the
Sukhavatlvyuha, tranblated by Professor Max Muller as follows
(Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1880, p. 170):

‘ And again, O *Sariputra, when those rows of palm trees and


I.


MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA.


251


were shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet,
and pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

‘ J ust, Ananda, as the seven kind of instruments
yield, when well played upon, to the skilful man, a
sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and in¬
toxicating — ^just even so, Ananda, when those rows
of palm trees were shaken by the wind, there arose
a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and
intoxicating.

^ A

9. ‘ And whoever, Ananda, in the royal city
Kusavati w^ere at that time gamblers, drunkards,
and given to drink, they used to dance round to¬
gether to the sound of those palms when shaken
by the wind,

10. ‘ The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was the
possessor of Seven Precious Things, and was
gifted with Four Marvellous Powers.*

* What are those seven ? *

11. ^ ‘ In the first place, Ananda, when the Great
King of Glory, on the Sabbath day on the day of

strings of bells in that Buddha country are moved by the wind,
a sweet and enrapturing sound proceeds from them. Yes, O 6'^ri-
putra, as from a heavenly musical instrument consisting of a hun¬
dred thousand ko/is of soilnds, when played by Aryas, a sweet
vtnd enrapturing sound proceeds ; a sweet and enrapturing sound
proceeds from those rows of palm trees and strings of bells moved
by the wind.

' And when the men there hear that souiid, reflection on Buddha
arises in their body, reflection on the Law, reflection on the
Assembly.'

Compare also below, § 81, and (rataka I, 32.

‘The following enumeration is found word for word in several
other P4U Suttas, and occurs also, in almost identical terms, in the
Lalita Vistara (Calcutta edition, pp. 14—19).

* Uposatha, a weekly sacred day; being full-moon day, new-
nioon da}', and the two equidistant intermediate days. Comp. §21*


252


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


the full moon, had purified himself, and had gone
up into the upper story of his palace to keep the
sacred day, there then appeared to him the heavenly
Treasure of the Wheel with its nave, its tire,
and all its thousand spokes complete.

12. ‘W^hen he beheld it the Great King of
Gloiy^ thought :

'“This saying have I heard, 'When a king of
the warrior race, an anointed king, has purified
himself on the Sabbath day, on the day of the
full moon, and has gone up into the upper story
of his palace to keep the sacred day ; if there
appear to him the heavenly Treasure of the
Wheel, with its nave, its tire, and all its thousand
spokes complete — that king becomes a king of
kings invincible.’ May I, then, become a king of
kings invincible

13. 'Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
rose from his seat, and reverently uncovering from
one shoulder his robe, he held in his left hand a
pitcher, and with his right hand he sprinkled water
up over the Wheel, as he said :

' “ Roll onward, O my Lord, the Wheel ! O my
Lord, go forth and overcome ! ”

14. 'Then the wondrous Wheel, Ananda, rolled
onwards towards the region of the East, and after it
went the Great King of Glory ®, and with him his


^ .STakka-ratanaOT, where the ^akka is the disk of the sun.

® .S'akkavattir^^d.

■ ® Atha kho ^akka-ratana/» puratthima/w dis3.m pavatti
anvad eva Mah^sudassano, &c. Here anvad must be

the Sanskrit anvawye. The Lalita Vistara has anveti in the
corresponding passage, and the (Phayre Burmese) MS- here reads
anud eva. The verb in the second clause must be supplied, as


s.


MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA.


253


army, horses, and chariots, and elephants, and men,

A

And in whatever place, Ananda, the Wheel stopped,
there the Great King of Glory took up his abode,
and with him his army, horses, and chariots, and
elephants, and men.

15. * Then, Ananda, all the rival kings in the
region of the East came to the Great King of
Glory and said :

‘ “ Come, O mighty king ! Welcome, O mighty
king ! All is thine, O mighty king ! Do thou, O
mighty king, be a Teacher to us !

16. * Thus spake the Great King of Glory :

‘“Ye shall slay no living thing.

‘ “ Ye shall not take that which has not been
g^ven.

‘“Ye shall not act wrongly touching the bodily
desires.

‘ “ Ye shall speak no lie.

‘ “ Ye shall drink no maddening drink,

‘ “ Ye shall eat as ye have eaten

1 7. ‘ Then, Ananda, all the rival kings in the
region of the East became subject unto the Great
King of Glory.

1 8. ‘ But the wondrous Wh^sel, Ananda, having
plunged down into the great waters in the East,
rose up out again, and rolled onward to the region
of the South [and there all happened as had hap-


is the case in the one or two other passages where I have met
with this phrase. ,

^ YathibhuttaOT bhu/2^atha. Buddhaghosa has no comment
on this. I suppose it means, * Observe the irules current among
you regarding clean and unclean meats.^ If so, the Great King
of Glory disregards the teaching of the Amagandha Sutta, quoted
in ‘Buddhism,’ p. 13 1.


THE GREAT KING OF GEORY.


CH.


254


pened in the region of the East. And in like-
manner the wondrous Wheel rolled on\vard to the
extremest boundar}?" of the West and of the North ;
and there, too, all happened as had happened in the
region of the East].

19. " Now when the wondrous Wheel, Ananda,
had gone forth conquering and to conquer o’er the
whole earth to its very ocean boundary, it returned
back again to the ro3rai city of Kusavati and re¬
mained fixed on the open terrace in hont of the
entrance to the inner apartments of the Great King
of Glory, as a glorious adornment to the inner
apartments of the Great King of Glor^E

20. ' Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Wheel which
appeared to the Great King of Glory.

A

2 1. " Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Elephant Treasure^,
all white, sevenfold firm wonderful in power, flying
through the — the Elephant-King, whose name

was The Changes of the INI con •t”

22. ‘When he beheld it tlie Great King of Glory
was pleased at heart at the thought :


' Hatthi-ratana.

- Satta-ppatittho, that is, perhaps, in reg-ard to its four, legs,
two tusks, and trunk. The expression is curious, -and Buddba-
i»hosa has no noie upon it. Il is quite possible that it merely sig¬
nifies 'exceeding firm,' the number seven being used without any
hard and fast interpretation.

* Up o sat ho. In the l.alita Vistara its name is 'Wisdom'
(Bodhi). Upiosatha is the name for the sacred day of the moon's
changes — first, and more especially tlie full-moon day; next, the
new-moon day ; and lastly, the days ec}uidistant between these
two. It was therefore a weekly sacred day, and, as Childers says,
may often be well rendered ‘ Sabbath.'


I.


MAhA-SUDuASSAKA sutta.


255


‘“Auspicious were it to ride upon that Klephant,
if only it would submit 1.0 be controlled ! ”

23. ‘Then, Ananda, the wondrous Elephant — like
a fine elephant of noble blood long since well
trained — submitted to control.

A

24. ‘ When as before, Ananda, the Great King of
Glory, to test that wondrous Elephant, mounted on
to it early in the morning, it passed over along the
broad earth to its very ocean boundary, and then
returned again, in time for the morning meal, to the
royal city of Kus^vatl h

25. ‘Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Elephant
that appeared to the Great King of Glory.

26. ‘ Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Horse Treasure^, all
yvhite with a black head, and a dark mane, wonderful
in power, flying through the sky — the Charger-King,
whose name was “ Thunder-cloud

27. ‘When he beheld it, the Great King of Glory
was pleased at heart at the thought :

‘ “ Auspicious were it to ride upon that Horse if
only it would submit to be controlled !

28. ‘Then, Ananda. the wondrous Horse — like

^ Compare on this and § 29 my ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 85,
where a similar phrase is used of EZanthaka.

® Assa-ratana^,

* Valdhako. Compare the Valdhassa <ydtaka (Fausbdll, No.
196, called in the Burmese MS. Val^hakassa (S^dtaka), of which
the Chinese story translated by Mr. Beal at prp. 332—340 of his
* Romantic History,' &c., is an expanded and altered version. In
the VaMhaka Sazwyutta of the Sawyutta NikSya the spirits of the
skies are divided into TJw.ha-valdhakd HevS., Sita-valdhakS,
Hevd, Abbha-valdhakd HevS., Vdta- val;S.hakd Dev^, and
Vassa-valahakH Hevd, that is, the cloud-spirits of cold, heat,
air, wind, and rain respectively.


256


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


a fine horse of the best blood longf since well
trained — submitted to control.

29. ‘When as before, Ananda, the Great King’ of
Glory, to test that wondrous Horse, mounted on to
it early in the morning, it passed over along the
broad earth to its very ocean boundary, and then
returned again, in time for the morning meal, to the
royal city of Kus&vatt.

30. ‘ Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Horse that
appeared to the Great King of Glory.

31. ‘How further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Gem-Treasure That
Gem was the Ve/uriya, bright, of the finest species,
with eight facets, excellently wrought, clear, trans¬
parent, perfect in every way.

A

32. ‘ The splendour, Ananda, of that wondrous
Gem spread round about a league on every side.

33. ‘When as before, Ananda, the Great King
of Glory, to test that wondrous Gem, set all his
fourfold army in array and raised aloft the Gem
upon his standard top, he was able to march out in
the gloom and darkness of the night.

34. ‘ And then too, Ananda, all the dwellers in
the villages, round about, set about their daily work,
thinking, “ The daylight hath appeared.”

35. ‘ Such, Ananda, was the wondrous Gem that
appeared to the Great King of Glory.

36. ‘ Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory the Woman-Treasure^,
graceful in figure, beautiful in appearance, charming
in manner, and of the most fine complexion ; neither


^ Ma/zi-ratanazw.


“ Itthi-ratanaw.


I.


257


MAHA-SUDi^SSANA SUTTA-


very tall, nor very short ; neither very stout, nor
very slim ; neither veiy dark, nor very fair ; sur¬
passing human beauty, she had attained unto the
beauty of the gods

37- ‘ The touch too, Ananda, of the skin of that
wondrous Woman was as the touch of cotton or of
cotton wool : in the cold her limbs were warm, in
the heat her limbs were cool ; while from her body
was wafted the perfume of sandal wood and from
her mouth the perfume of the lotus.

38. ‘ That Pearl among Women too, Ananda, used
to rise up before the Great King of Glory, and after
him retire to rest ; pleasant was she in speech, and
ever on the watch to hear what she might do in
order so to act as to give him pleasure.

39. * That Pearl among W'omen too, Ananda, was
never, even in thought, unfaithful to the Great King
of Glory — how much less then could she be so with
the body !

40. ‘ Such, Ananda, was the Pearl among \A7omen
who appeared to the Great King of Glory.

41. ‘ Now further, Ananda, there appeared unto
the Great King of Glory a Wonderful Trea¬
surer 2, possessed, through good deeds done in a

^ The above description of an ideally beautiful woman is of
frequent occurrence.

® Gahapati-ratana»2. The word gahapati has been hitherto
usually rendered ‘householder,* but this may often, and would
certainly here, convey a wrong impression. There is no single
word in English which is an adequate rendering of the term, for
it connotes a social condition now no longer known among us.
The gahapati was the head of a family, the representative in a
village community of a family, the pater familias. So the god
of fire, with allusion to the sacred fire maintained in each house¬
hold, is called in the Rig-veda the grz*hapati, the pater familias,
[n] S


258


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


former birth, of a marvellous power of vision by
which he could discover treasure, whether it had an
owner or whether it had not.

42. ‘ He went up to the Great Kingf of Glory,
and said :

^ Do thou, O king-, take thine ease ! I will deal
with thy wealth even as wealth should be dealt with/'

43. * Then, as before, Ananda, the Great King of
Glory, to test that wonderful Treasurer, went on
board a boat, and had it pushed out into the current
in the midst of the river Ganges. Then he said to
the w’^onderful steward ;

‘ “ I have need, O Treasurei, of yellow gold ! "

‘ “ Let the ship then, O Great King, go alongside
either of the barks/'

It is here, O Treasurer, that I have need . of
yellow gold/’

44. ‘ Then the wonderful Treasurer reached down
to the water with both his hands, and drew up a jar


of the human race. Thence it is often used in opposition to brdh^
ma«a very much as we might use ‘yeoman’ in opposition to 'clerk’
(frdtaka I, 83, and below, § 53); and the two combined are used
in opposition to people of other ranks and callings held to be
less honourable than that of clerk or yeoman (6rdtaka I, 318). In
this respect the term gahapati is nearly equivalent, though from
a different point of view, to the Kshatriyas and Vai^-yas of the
Hindu caste division; but the compound brS-hmawa-gahapatikd
as a collective term comes to be about equivalent to ‘ priests and
laymen’ (see, for instance, below, § 53, and Mah^ Vagga I, 23 ;
3, 4, &c.). Then again the gahapati is distinct from the subor¬
dinate members of the family, who had not the control and
management of the common property (Sama/z«a Phala Sutta,
t33»==Tevi^^a Sutta I, 47) ; and it is this implication of the term
that is emphasised in the text. Buddhaghosa uses, as an expla*-
natory phrase, the words se/Mi -gahapati. See further the
passages quoted in the index to the iSTulla Vagga, (p. 354)-


I. MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA. 259

full of yellow gold, and said to the Great Kingf of
Glory ;

‘ “ Is that enough, O Great King ? Have I done
enough, O Great King ? ”

‘ And the Great King of Glory replied :

‘ ‘‘ It is enough, O Treasurer. You have done
enough, O Treasurer. You have offered me enough,
O Treasurer! ”

A

45. ‘Such was the wonderful Treasurer, Ananda,
who appeared to the Great King of Glory,

46. ‘Now further, Ananda, there appeared to the
Great King of Glory a W onderful Adviser^,
learned, clever, and wise ; and qualified to lead the
Great King of Glory to undertake what he ought to
undertake, and to leave undone what he ought to
leave undone.

47. ‘ He went up to the Great King of Glory,
and said :

‘ “ Do thou, O King, take thine ease ! I will be
thy guide.”

48. ‘Such, Ananda, was the wonderful Adviser
who appeared to the Great King of Glory.

‘ The Great King of Glory w^as possessed of these
Seven Precious Things.

49. ‘ Now further, Ananda, the Great King of
Glory was gifted with Four Marvellous Gifts

‘ What are the Four Marvellous Gifts ? '

^ Pari3>2i^yaka-ratana»z. Buddhaghosa says that he was the
eldest son of the king; but this ts probably a mere putting back
into the Sutta of a later idea derived from the summary in the
<9ataka. The Lalita Vistara makes him a general.

® jSTathhi iddhthi. Here again, as elsewhere, it will be noticed
that there is nothing supernatural about these four Iddhis. See

S 2


26o


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


50. * In the first place, Ananda, the Great King
of Glory was graceful in figure, handsome in ap¬
pearance, pleasing in manner, and of most beautiful
complexion, beyond what other men are.

‘ The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was endowed
with this First Marvellous Gift.

51. ‘ And besides that, Ananda, the Great King
of Glory was of long life, and of many years, beyond
those of other men.

‘ The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was endowed
with this Second Marvellous Gift.

52. 'And besides that, Ananda, the Great King
of Glory was free from disease, and free from bodily
suffering ; and his internal fire was neither too hot
nor too cold, but such as to promote good digestion,
beyond that of other men


the notes above on the 'Book of the Great Decease,' I, r ; III, 2.
They are merely attributes accompanying or forming part of the
majesty (iddhi) of the J5!akkavatti.

^ Samavep^kiniy ^ gahawiy^ samannagato ndtisitdya
ti§Lk^unh§.ya. The same thing is said of Ra///^apala in the
Ra//>%ap^la Sutta, where Gogerly renders the whole passage,
' Ra//i5apS,la is healthy, free from pain, having a good digestion
and appetite, being troubled v.dth no excess of either heat or cold'
(Journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society, 1847— 1848, p. 98). The
gaha«i is a supposed particular organ or function situate at the
junction of the stomach and intestines. Moggall^na explains it,
udare tu tathS, pSi^analasmi?zz gahawi (Abhidh^na-ppadtpik^,
972), where Subhiiti’s Sinhalese version is ‘kukshi, p^k^gni,'
and his English version, ‘ the belly, the internal fire which pro¬
motes. digestion.' Buddhaghosa explains samavip^kiyd kam-
ma^S.-te^o-dhfituyfi, and adds, ‘If a man's food is dissolved
the moment he has eaten it, or if it remains like a lump, he has not
the samavepfikini gaha«i, but he who has appetite (bhatta/l’-
^7/ an do) when the time for food comes round again, he has the
samavepakini gaha^i,'— -which is delightfully naive.


I.


MAHA“SUD.xSSANA SUTTA.


261


‘ The Great King of Glory, Ananda, was endowed
with this Third Marvellous Gift.

A

53. ‘ And besides that, Ananda, the Great King
of Glory was beloved and popular with Brahmans
and with laymen alike Just, Ananda, as a father

A

is near and dear to his own sons, just so, Ananda,
was the Great King of Glory beloved and popular
with Brahmans and with laymen alike. And just,
Ananda, as his sons are near and dear to a father,

A

just so, Ananda, were Brahmans and laymen alike
near and dear to the Great King of Glory.

54. ‘ Once, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
marched out with all his fourfold army to the
pleasure ground. There, Ananda, the Br4hmans
and laymen went up to the Great King of Glory,
and said :

‘ ‘‘ O King, pass slowly by, that we may look
upon thee for a longer time !

^ But the Great King of Glory, Ananda, addressed
his charioteer, and said :

‘ Drive on the chariot slowly, charioteer, that I
may look upon my people (Brahmans and laymen)
for a longer time ! ’’

55. *This was the Fourth Marvellous Gift, Ananda,
with which the Great King of Glory was endowed.

56. ' These are the Four Marvellous Gifts,

Ananda, with which the Great King of Glory was
endowed. _____

A

57. ‘ Now to the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
there occurred the thought :

‘“Suppose, now, I were to make Lotus-ponds


Brdhma«a-gahapatikdnaw‘i!. See the note on § 41,


1


262


CH.


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


in the spaces between these palms, at every hun¬
dred bow lengths/*

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great ICing of Glory, in the
spaces between those palms, at distances of a hun¬
dred bow lengths, made Lotus-ponds.

58. * And those Lotus- ponds, Ananda, were faced
with tiles of four kinds. One kind of tile was of
gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of
crystal.

59. ‘And to ^ach of those Lotus-ponds, Ananda,
there were four flights of steps, of four different
kinds. One flight of steps was of gold, and one of
silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal. The
flight of golden steps had balustrades of gold,
with the cross bars and the figure head of silver.
The flight of silver steps had balustrades of silver,
with the cross bars and the figure head of gold.
The flight of beryl steps had balustrades of beryl*
with the cross bars and the figure head of crystal.
The flight of crystal steps had balustrades of crystal,
with cross bars and figure head of beryl.

60. ‘ And round those Lotus-ponds there ran,
Ananda, a double railing. One railing was of gold,
and one was of silver. The golden railing had its
posts of gold, and its cross bars and its capitals of
silver. The silver railing had its posts of silver,
and its cross bars and its capitals of gold

' Pokkhara^i, the word translated Lotus-pond, is an artificial
pool or small lake for water plants. There are some which are
prooably nearly as old as this passage still in good preservation in
AnurS:dhapuru in Ceylon. Each is oblong, and has its tiles and its
four flights of steps, and some had railings. The balustrades,
cross bars, figure head, and railing are in Pali thambhd,
sflv^iyo, unhisa^z, and vedika, of the exact meaning of which
I am not quite confident. They do not occur in the description


I.


mahA-suda-ssana sutta.


263


61. ‘Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
there occurred the thought :

“ Suppose, now, I were to have flowers of every
season planted in those Lotus-ponds for the use of
all the people — to wit, blue water lilies and blue
lotuses, white lotuses and white water lilies/^

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory had
flowers of every season planted in those Lotus-
ponds for the use of all the people — to wit, blue
water lilieo and blue lotuses, white lotuses and
white water lilies.

_ , A

62. ‘ Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
occurred the thought ;

‘ “ Suppose, now, I were to place bathing-men on
the banks of those Lotus-ponds, to bathe such of
the people as come there from time to time.'’

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory placed
bathing-men on the banks of those Lotus-ponds, to
bathe such of the people as come there from time
to time,

63. ‘ Now, to the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
occurred the thought :

‘ “ Suppose, now, I were to establish a perpetual
grant by the banks of those Lotus-ponds — to wit,
food for the hungry, drink for the thirsty, raiment
for the naked, means of conveyance for those who
have need of it, couches for the tired, wives for

of the Lotus-lakes in Sukhavalt. General Cunningham says that
the cross bars of the Buddhist railings are called shv^iiyo in the
inscr’ptions at Bharhut (The Stupa of Bharhut, p. 127), Buddha-
ghosa, who is good enough to tell us the exact number of the
ponds — to wit, 84,000, has no explanation of these words, merely
saying that of the two vedikas one was ac the limit of the tiles
and one at the limit of the parivewa. The phrases in the text
are repeated below, §§ 73—87, of the Palace of Righteousness.


264


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


those who want wives, gold for the poor, and money
for those who are in want/'

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory esta¬
blished a perpetual grant by the banks of those
Lotus-ponds- — to wit, food for the hungry, drink for
the thirst3^, raiment for the naked, means of con¬
veyance* for those who needed it, couches for the
tired, wives for those who wanted wives, gold for the
poor, and money for those who were in want.

64. ‘ Nov/, Ananda, the people (Brdhmans and
laymen) went to the Great King of Glory, taking
with them much wealth. And they said :

‘“This abundant wealth, O King, have we
brought here for the use of the King of Kings.
Let the King accept it of us ! ”

‘ “ I have enough wealth, my friends, laid up for
myself, the produce of righteous taxation. Do you
keep this, and take away more with you ! "

65. ‘When those men were thus refused by the
King they went aside and considered together,
saying :

‘ “ It would not beseem us now, were we to take
back this wealth to our own houses. Suppose, now,
we were to build a mansion for the Great King of
Glory.”

66. ‘ Then they went to the Great King of Glory,
and said :

‘“A mansion would we build for thee, O King!” ’

‘ “ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory signi¬
fied, by silence, his consent.

67. ‘ NoWj Ananda, when Sakka, the king, of the
gods, became aware in his mind of the thoughts that


I.


mahA-sudassana sutta.


265


were in the heart of the Oreat Kling of Glory, he
addressed Vissakamma the god and said ;

^ “ Come now, Vissakamma, create me a mansion
for the Great King of Glory — a palace which shall
be called ‘ Righteousness

68. ' “ Kven so, Lord 1 said Vissakamma, in

A

assent, Ananda, to Sakka, the king of the gods.
And as- instantaneously as a strong man might
stretch forth his folded arm, or draw in his arm
again when it was stretched forth, so quickly did he
vanish from the heaven of the Great Xhirty-Xhree,
and appeared before the Great King of Glory.

69. ^ Then, Ananaa, Vissakamma the god said to
the Great King of Glory :

‘ “ I would create for thee, O King, a mansion —
a palace wdiicli shall be called ‘ Righteousness 1 '

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory signi¬
fied, by silence, his consent.

70. ‘ So Vissakamma the god, Ananda, created
for the Great King of Glory a mansion — a palace to
be called “ Righteousness.’^

71. ‘ The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was on
the east and on the west a league in length, and on
the north and on the south half a league in breadth.

.72. ‘The ground-floor, Ananda, of the Palace of
Righteousness in height as three times the height
to which a man can reach, was built of bricks, of
four kinds. One kind of brick was of gold, and
one of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal.


^ Vissakammaw dev aputta7;2, where devaputtasTz means not
* son of a god,' but * belonging to, born into the class of, the gods.’
® Dhammazw nSrna Pdsdda^?^.

^ Dhammassa pds^dassa vatthuw.


266


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


73. * To the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda,
there were eighty-four thousand pillars of four kinds.
One kind of pillar was of goldj and one of silver,
and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

74- * The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was
fitted up with seats of four kinds. One kind of seat
was of gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl, and
one of crystal.

75. ‘ In the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda,
there were tvrenty-four staircases of four kinds.
One staircase was of gold, and one of silver, and
one of beryl, and one of crystal. The staircase of
gold had balustrades of gold, with the cross bars
and the figure head of silver. The staircase of silver
had balustrades of silver, with the cross bars and the
figure head of gold. The staircase of beryl had
balustrades of beryl, with the cross bars and the
figure head of crystal. The staircase of crystal had
balustrades of crystal, with cross bars and figure
head of beryl.

76. ‘In the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda,
there were eighty-four thousand chambers of four
kinds. One kind of chamber was of gold, and one
of silver, and one of beryl, and one of crystal.

In the golden chamber a silver couch was spread ;
in the silver chamber a golden couch ; in the beryl
chamber a couch of ivory ; and in the crystal cham¬
ber a couch of coral.

‘ At the door of the golden chamber there stood
a palm tree of silver ; and its trunk was of silver and
its leaves and fruits of gold.

‘ At the door of the silver chamber there stood
a palm tree of gold ; and its trunk was of gold, and
its leaves and fruits of silver.


I.


marA-sudassana sutta.


267


‘At the door of the beryl chamber there stood a
palm tree of crystal; and its trunk was of crystal,
and its leaves and fruits of beryl.

‘ At the door of the crystal chamber there stood
a palm tree of beryl ; and its trunk was of beryl, and
its leaves and fruits of crystal.


77. ‘ Now there occurred, Ananda, to the Great
King^ of Glory this thought :

‘ “ Suppose, now, I were to make a grove of palm
trees, all of gold, at the entrance to the chamber of
the Great Complex’, under the shade of which
I may pass the heat of the day.”

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory made
a grove of palm trees, all of gold, at the entrance
to the chamber of the Great Complex, under the
shade of which he might pass the heat of the day.

78. ‘ The Palace of Righteousness, Ananda, was
surrounded by a double railing. One railing was of
gold, and one was of silver. The golden railing had
its posts of gold, and its cross bars and its figure head
of silver. The silver railing had its posts of silver,
and its cross bars and its figure head of gold

79. ‘The Palace of Righteousness; Ananda, was
hung round with two networks of bells. One net¬
work of bells was of gold, and one was of silver.


‘ Mahavy iihassa ku/agdrassa dvdre. The ‘Great Com¬
plex contains a double allusion, in the same spirit in which the
whole- legend has been worked out: i. To the Great Complex as
a name of the Sun-God regarded as a unity of i-he four mytho¬
logical deities, Vasudeva, Sahkarshawa, Pra^umna, and Aniruddha;
and 2. To the Great Complex as a name of a particular kind of
deep religious meditation or speculation.

See above, § 60, and the note on § 54.


268 THE GREAT KING OF GEORY. CH,

Xhe g-olden network had bells of silver, and the
silver network had bells of gold.

So. ' And when those networks of bells, Ananda,
were shaken by the wind there arose a sound sweet,
and pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

^ J ust, Ananda, as the seven kind of instruments
yield, when well played upon, to the skilful man,
a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and
intoxicating — ^just even so, Ananda, when those
networks of bells were shaken by the wind, there
arose a sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming,
and intoxicating.

8 1. ‘And whoever, Ananda, in the royal city
Kus^vatt were at that time gamblers, drunkards,
and givem to drink, they used to dance round toge¬
ther to the sound of those networks of bells when
shaken by the wind.

82. ‘When the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda,
was finished it was hard to look at, destructive to
the eyes. Just, Ananda, as in the last month of the
rains in the autumn time, when the sky has become
clear and the clouds have vanished away, the sun,
springing up along the heavens, is hard to look at,
and destructive to the eyes,- — just so, Ananda, when
the Palace of Righteousness was finished was it hard
to look at, and destructive to the eyes.

83. ‘Now there occurred, Ananda, to the Oreat
Ring of Glory this thought :

‘ “Suppose, now, in front of the Palace of Right¬
eousness, I were to make a Lotus-lake to bear the
name of ‘ Righteousness.’ ”

‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory made a
Lotus-lake to bear the name of “ Righteousness.”


I.


MAHA-SUDi.\SSANA SUTTA.


269


S4. ‘ The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, was on
the east and on the west a league in length, and on
the north and on the south half a league in breadth.

85. * The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, was
faced with tiles of four kinds. One kind of tile was
of gold, and one of silver, and one of beryl, and one
of crystal.

86. * The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, had four
and twenty' flights of steps, of four different kinds.
One flight of steps was of gold, and one of silver,
and one of beryl, and one of crystal. The flight of
golden steps had balustrades of gold, with the cross
bars and the figure head of silver. The flight of
silver steps had balustrades of silver, wdth the cross
bars and the figure head of gold. The flight of beryl
steps had balustrades of beryl, with the cross bars
and the figure head of crystal. The flight of crystal
steps had balustrades of crystal, with cross bars and
figure head of beryl.

87. ‘ Round the Lake of Righteousness, Ananda,
there ran a double railing. One railing was of gold,
and one was of silver. The golden railing had
its posts of gold, and its cross bars and its capitals
of silver. The silver railing had its posts of silver,
and its cross bars and its capitals of gold.

88. ^ The Lake of Righteousness, Ananda, was
surrounded by seven rows of palm trees. One row
was of palms of gold, and one of silver, and one
of beryl, and one of crystal, and one of agate, and
one of coral, and one of all kinds of gems.

89. ‘ And the golden palms had trunks of gold,
and leaves and fruits of silver. And the silver
palms had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of
gold. And the palms of beryl had trunks of beryl,


2 70


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


and leaves and fruits of crystal. And the crystal
palms had trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits
of beryl. And the agate palms had trunks of agate,
and leaves and fruits of coral. And the coral palms
had trunks of coral, and leaves and fruits of agate.
And the palms of every kind of gem had trunks
and leaves and fruits of every kind of gem.

90. ‘ And when those rows of palm trees, Ananda,
were shaken by the wind, there arose a sound sweet,
and pleasant, and charming, and intoxica’^ing.

‘ Just, Ananda, as the seven kind of instruments
yield, when well played upon, to the skilful man, a
sound sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxicat¬
ing, — just even so, Ananda, when those rows of palm
trees were shaken by the wind, there arose a sound
sweet, and pleasant, and charming, and intoxicating.

91. ‘And whoever, Ananda h in the royal city
Kusdvati were at that time gamblers, drunkards,
and given to drink, they used to dance round to¬
gether to the sound of those palms when shaken
by the wind.

92. 'When the Palace of Righteousness, Ananda,
was finished, and the Lotus-lake of Righteousness was
finished, the Great King of Glory entertained with all
good things those of the Sama/^as who, at that time,
were held in high esteem, and those of the Brahmans
who, at that time, were held in high esteem. Then
he ascended up into the Palace of Righteousness/

End of the First Portion for Recitation.

^ This paragraph is perhaps repeated by mistake; but it is scarcely
less in harmony with its context at § 8 than it is here. It is more
probable that § 92 followed, originally, immediately after § 82, with
the Lotus-lake clause omitted.


II.


MAHA-SUD^.SSANA SUTTA.


271


Chapter II.

1. ‘ Now there occurred, Ananda, this thought to
the Great King of Glory :

‘ “ Of what previous character, now, may this be
the fruit, of what previous character the result, that
I am now so mighty and so great ?

2. * And then occurred, Ananda, to the Great King
of Glory this thought :

‘ “ Of three qualities is this the fruit, of three
qualities the result, that I am now so mighty and
so great, — that is to say, of giving, of self-conquest,
and of self-control


Ai

3. ' Now the Great King of Glory, Ananda, as¬
cended up into the chamber of the Great Complex ;
and when he had come there he stood at the door,
and there he broke out iixto a cry of intense
emotion :

^ “ Stay here, O thoughts of lust 1

‘ “ Stay here, O thoughts of ill-will !

‘ “ Stay here, O thoughts of hatred !

‘ “ Thus far only, O thoughts of lust !

* Thus far only, O thoughts of ill-will !

" “ Thus far only, O thoughts of hatred !

4. ‘ And when, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
had entered the chamber of the Great Complex,


^ I have here translated kamma by ‘ p-evious character’ and
by ‘ quality.’ The easiest plan would, no doubt, have been, to pre¬
serve in the translation the technical term karma, which is explained
at some length in ‘ Buddhism,’ pp. 99—106.


272


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


and had seated himself upon the couch of gold,
having put away all passion and all unrighteousness,
he entered into, and remained in, the First
— a state of joy and ease, born of seclusion, full of
reflection, full of investigation.

5. ‘ By suppressing reflection and investigation,
he entered into, and remained in, the Second <S^>^ana,
— a state of joy and ease, born of serenity, without
reflection, without investigation, a state of elevation
of mind, of internal calm.

6. ‘ By absence of the longing after joy, he re¬
mained indifferent, conscious, self-possessed, experi¬
encing in his body that ease which the noble ones
announce, saying, “ The man indifferent and self-
possessed is well at ease,"' and thus he entered into,
and remained in, the Third G/zAna,

7. ‘ By putting away ease, by putting away pain,
by the previous dying away both of gladness and of
sorrow, he entered into, and remained in, the Fourth
G/iAna., — a state of purified self-possession and equa¬
nimity, without ease, and without pain


8. ‘ Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory went
out from the chamber of the Great Complex, and
entered the golden chamber and sat himself down
on the silver couch. And he let his mind pervade


^ The above parag^raphs are an endeavour to express the inmost
eelings when they are first strung to the uttermost by the intense
jffeets of deep religious emotion, and then feel the effects of what
nay be called, for want of a better word, the reaction. Most
leeply religious natures have passed through such a crisis ; and
hough the feelings are perhaps really indescribable, this passage
s dealing, not with a vain mockery, but with a very real event in
ipiritual experience-


IT.


MAhA-SULtASSANA sutta.


273


one quarter of the world with thoughts of Love ; and
so the second quarter, and so the third, and so the
fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above,
below, around, and everywhere, did he continue to
pervade with heart of Love, far-reaching, grown great,
and beyond measure, free from the least trace of
anger or ill-will.

9. ‘ And he let his mind pervade one quarter of
the world with thoughts of Pity ; and so the second
quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth. And
thus the whole wide world, above, below, aroiind,
and everywhere, did he continue to pervade with
heart of Pity, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond
measure, free from the least trace of anger or
ill-will.

10. ‘ And he let his mina pervade one quarter of
the world with thoughts of Sympathy ; and so the
second quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth.
And thus the whole wide world, above, below,
around, and everywhere, did he continue to pervade
with heart of Sympathy, far-reaching, grown 'great,
and beyond measxire, free from the least trace of
anger or illrwill.

11. ‘And he let his mind pervade one quarter of
the world with thoughts of Equanimity ^ ; and so the
second quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth.
And thus the whole wide world, abpve, below,
around, and everywhere, did he continue to pervade
with heart of Ec^uanimity, far-reaching, grown great,
and beyond measure, free from the least trace; of
anger or ill-will.

^ These are the four Appamawwas or infinite feelings, also
called (e. g. below, § II, 36) the four Brahma- vi hfiras. They
are here very appropriately represented to follow immediately after
[/I] T


2 74


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


1 2. " The Great King* of Glory, Ananda, had
four and eighty thousand cities, the chief of which
was the royal city of Kusavati :

‘ Four and eighty thousand palaces, the chief of
which was the Palace of Righteousness :

‘ Four and eighty thousand chambers, the chief
of which was the chamber of the Great Complex :

‘ Four and eighty thousand divans, of gold, and
silver, and ivory, and sandal wood, spread with
long-haired rugs, and cloths embroidered with
flowers, and magnificent antelope skins ; covered
with lofty canopies ; and provided at both ends with
purple cushions :

"Four and eighty thousand state elephants, with
trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden
coverings of network, — of which the king of ele¬
phants, called “ the Changes of the Moon,” was
chief :

‘Four and eighty thousand state horses, with
trappings of gold, and gilded flags, and golden
coverings of network, — of which Thunder-cloud,”
the king of horses, was the chief :

‘ Four and eighty thousand chariots, with cover¬
ings of the skins of lions, and of tigers, and of pan¬
thers, — of which the chariot called “ the Flag of
Victory” was the chief :

‘Four and eighty thousand gems, of which the
Wondrous Gem was the chief:

‘ Four and eighty thousand wives, of whom the
Queen of Glory was the chief :

the state of feeling- described in the <x/^anas ; but they ought to be
the constant companions of a good Buddhist (see KhaggavisSna
Sutta 8 ; and compare also Tevi^^a Sutta III, 7 ; Cataka, vol. i.
p. 246; and the Araka 6rataka, No. 169).


rr. MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA. 2/5

' Four and eighty thousand yeomen, of whom the
Wonderful Steward was the chief:

‘Four and eighty thousand nobles, of whom the
Wonderful Adviser was the chief :

‘ Four and eighty thousand cows, with jute trap¬
pings, and horns tipped with bronze :

‘ Four and eighty thousand myriads of garments,
of delicate textures, of flax, and cotton, and silk, and
wool :

‘Four and eighty thousand dishes, in which, in
the evening and in the morning, rice was served


I 3. ‘ Now at that time, Ananda, th€i four and eighty
thousand state elephants used to come every evening
and every morning to be of service to die Great
K.ing of Glory.

14. ‘And this thought occurred to the Great
King of Glory :

‘ “ These eighty thousaxtd elephants come every
evening and every morning to be of service to me.
Suppose, now, I were to let the elephants come in
alternate forty thousands, once each, every alternate
hundred years i ”

15. ‘Then, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
said to the Great Adviser :

‘ “ O, my friend, the Great Adviser! these eighty
thousand elephants come every evening and every
morning to be of service to me. Now, let the
elephants come, O my friend, the Great Adviser, in


^ Most of the trapping's and cloths here nxentioned are the same
as those referred to in the Sila, §§ 5, 6, 7 recurring in

the Tevi^^a Sutta, and in the Brahma^^ala Sutta. The whole
paragraph is four times repeated below, §§ 29, 31, 33, 37.

T 2


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


2 76

alternate forty thousands, once each, every alternate
hundred years ! ”

‘“Even so. Lord!’' said the W^onderfiil Adviser,
in assent, to the Great King- of Glory.

16. ‘ From that time forth, Ananda, the elephants
came in alternate forty thousands, once each, every
alternate hundred years.

A,

17. ‘ Now, Ananda, after the lapse of many years,
of many hundred years, of many thousand years,
there occurred to the Queen of Glory ^ 'this thought :

‘“'Tis long since I have beheld the Great King
of Glory. Suppose, now, I wei-c to go and visit the
Great King of Glory.”

18. ‘ Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory said to
the women of the harem :

‘ “Arise now, dress your hair, and clad yourselves
in fresh raiment. 'Tis long since we have beheld
the Great King of Glory. Let us go and visit the
Great King of Glory!”

19. ‘“Even so. Lady!” said the women of the
harem, Ananda, in assent, to the Queen of Glory.
And they dressed their hair, and clad themselves
in fi'esh raiment, and came near to the Queen
of Glory.

20. ‘ Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory said to
the Great Adviser :

‘“Arrange, O Great Adviser, the fourfold army
in array. ’Tis long since I have beheld the Great
King of Glory. I am about to go to visit the Great
King of Glory.”

^ Subhaddd Devt. Subhadda, ‘glorious, magnificent,' is a
not uncommon name both for men and women in Buddhist and
post-Buddhistic Hindu literature.


II.


MAH A -SUD ASS ANA SUTTA.


277


2 1. ‘‘‘Even SO3 O Queen ! ’’ said the Great Ad-
viser, Ananda, in assent, to the Queen of Glory.
And he set the fourfold army in array, and had the
fact announced to the Queen of Glory in the words :

‘ “ The fourfold army, O Queen, is set for thee in
array. Do now whatever seemeth to thee fit."’

A

2 2. ‘ Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory, with the
fourfold army, repaired, with the women of the
harem, to the Palace of Righteousness. And when
she had arrived there she mounted up into the
Palace of Righteousness, and went on to the chamber
of the Great Complex. And when she had reached it,
she stopped and leant against the side of the door.

23. ‘ When, Ananda, the Great King of Glory
heard the noise he thought :

‘ “ What, now, may this noise, as of a great multi¬
tude of people, mean ? ""

24. ‘ And going out from the chamber of the
Great Complex, he beheld the Queen of Glory stand¬
ing leaning up against the side of the door. And
when he beheld her, he said to the Queen of Glory :

‘ “ Stop there, O Queen ! Enter not ! ”

25. ‘ Then the Great King of Glory, Ananda, said
to one of his attendants :

‘ “ Arise, good man 1 take the golden couch out of
the chamber of the Great Complex, and make it
ready under that grove of palm trees which is all
of gold.’*

26. ‘ “ Even so. Lord !” said the man, in assent, to
the Great King of Gl^ry. And he took the golden
couch out of the chamber of the Great Complex,
and made it ready under that grove of palm trees
which was all of gold.


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH,


278


27. ‘Then, Anancla, the Great King of Glory laid
himself down in the dignified way a lion does ; and
lay with one leg resting on the other, calm and self-
possessed.

28. ‘ Then, Ananda, there occurred to the Queen
of Glory this thought :

‘ “ How calm are all the limbs of the Great King
of Glory! How clear and bright is his appear¬
ance I O may it not be that the Grea^ King of
Glory is dead ^ I ”

29. ‘ And she said to the Great King of Glory :

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand cities, the chief of which is the royal city of
Kusavatt. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these ! quicken thy longing after life I

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand palaces, the chief of which is the Palace of
Righteousness. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire
for these 1 quicken thy longing after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand chambers, the chief of which is the chamber
of the Great Complex. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy
desire for these ! quicken thy longing after life !

Thine, O King, are those fcur and eighty thou¬
sand divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and
sandal wood, spread with long-haired rugs, and
cloths embroidered with flowers, and 'magnificent
antelope skins ; covered with lofty canopies ; and
provided at both ends with purple cushions. Arise,


^ The rather curious connexion between these clauses is woi*thy
of notice in comparison with the legend of the Transfiguration '
just before the Buddha's death (above, pp. 80—82).


II.


mahA-sudassana sutta.


279


O King;, re-a waken thy desire for these I quicken
thy long-ing- after life i

‘ Thine, O King’, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand state elephants, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network, — of
which the king of elephants, called " the Changes
of the Moon,’ is chief. Arise, O King, re-a waken
thy desire for these ! quicken thy longing after life I

‘ ‘‘Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand state horses, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network, —
of which ‘ Thunder-cloud,’ the king of horses, is the
chief. Arise, O King, re-a waken thy desire for these !
quicken thy longing after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions,
and of tigers, and of panthers,— of which the chariot
called ‘ the Flag of Victory ’ is the chief. Arise,
O King, re-awaken thy desire for these ! quicken
thy longing after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand gems, of which the Wondrous Gem is the
chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these !
quicken thy longing after life !

‘ “Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand wives, of whom the Queen of Glory is the
chief. Arise, O King, re-aweiken thy desire for these!
quicken thy longing after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand yeomen, of whom the V'onderful Steward is
the chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for
these ! quicken thy longing after life !

‘“Thine, O King, ai-e those four and eighty thou¬
sand nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser is the


28o


CH.


THE GREAT KING OF GEORY.


chief. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire for these
quicken thy longing after life 1

Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped
with bronze. Arise, O King, re-awaken thy desire
for these ! quicken thy longing after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of
ffax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Arise, O King,
re-awaken thy desire for these ! quicken thy long-
ing after life !

‘ “Thine, O King, are those four and eighty thou¬
sand dishes, in which, in the evening and in the
morning, rice is served. Arise, O King, re-awaken
thy desire for these ! quicken thy longing after life !”

30. ‘ When she had thus spoken, Ananda, the
Great King of Glory said to the Queen of Glory :

‘“Long hast thou addressed me, O Queen, in
pleasant words, much to be desired, and sweet. Y et
now in this last time you speak in words unpleasant,
disagreeable, not to be desired.”

31. ‘ “ How then, O King, shall I address thee ?”

‘ “ Thus, O Queen, shouldst thou address me :• —
The nature of all things neai and dear to us,
O King, is such that we must leave them, divide
ourselves from them, separate ourselves from them^.
Pass not away, G King, with longing in thy heart.
Sad is the death of him who longs, unworthy is the
deatrt of him who longs 2. Thine, O King, are these

^ The Pdli words are the same as those at the beginning of the
constantly repeated longer phrase to the same effect in the Book
of the Great Decease.

- Compare (9ataka, No. 34.


ir. maha-sudassana sutta. 281


four and eig’hty thousand cities, the chief of which
is the royal city of Kusdvati. Cast away desire for
these ! long not after life I

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand palaces, the chief of whiph is the Palace of
Righteousness. Cast away desire for these! long
not after life 1

' ‘‘ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand chanibers, the chief of which is the chamber
of the Great Complex. Cast away desire for these !
long not after life !

* “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and
sandal wood, spread with loaig-haired rugs, and
cloths embroidered with flowers, and magnificent
antelope skins ; covered with lofty canopies ; and
provided at both ends with purple cushions. Cast
away desire for these ! long not after life 1

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand state elephants, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network, — of
which the king of elephants, called ‘ the Changes
of the Moon," is chief. Cast away desire for these !
long not after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand state horses, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network,—^
of which ‘ Thunder-cloud," the king of horses, is the
chief. Cast away desire for these ! long not after life !

* “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions,
and of tigers, and of panthers, — of which the chariot
called "the Flag of Victory" is the chief. Cast away
desire for these ! long not after life !


282


THE GREAT KING OF GLORF-


CH.


‘ “ Thine, O Kiiig^, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand gems, of which the Wondrous Gem is the chief.
Cast away desire for these ! long not after life f

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand wives, of whom the Queen of Glory is the chief.
Cast away desire for these ! long not after life !

‘ ‘‘ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand yeomen, of whom the Wonderful Steward is
the chief. Cast away desire for these ! long not
after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou-
sand nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser is
the chief. Cast away desire for these ! long not
after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped
with bronze. Cast away desire for these I long not
after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of
flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Cast away
desire for these 1 long not after life I

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand dishes, in which, in the evening and in the
morning, rice is served. Cast away desire for these!
long not after life !


32. ‘ When he thus spake, Ananda, the Queen
of Glory wept and poured forth tears.

o3. ‘ Then, Ananda, the Queen of Glory wiped
away her tears, and addressed the Great* King of
Glory, and said ;

‘ The nature of all things near and dear to us,
O King, is such that we must leave them, divide


i:.


mAha-*sudassana sutta.


ourselves from them, separate ourselves from them.
Pass not away, O King', with longing in thy heart.
Sad is the death of him who longs, unworthy is the
death of him who longs. Thine, O King, are these
four and eighty thousand cities, the chief of which
is the royal city of Kus§,vati. Cast away desire for
these ! long not after life !

Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand palaces, the chief of which is the Palace of
Righteousness. Cast away desire for these ! long
not after life !

^ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand chambers, the chief of which is the chamber
of the Great Complex. Cast away desire for these !
long not after life !

‘ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand divans, of gold, and silver, and ivory, and
sandal wood, spread with long-haired rugs, and
cloths embroidered with flowers, and magnificent
antelope sikins ; covered with lofty canopies ,* and
provided at both ends with purple cushions. Cast
away desire for these ! long not after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou-
sand state elephants, with trappings of gold, and
gilded flags, and golden coverings of network, — of
which the king of elephants, called ' the Changes
of the Moon," is chief. Cast away desire for these !
long not after life !

* “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand state horses, with trappings of gold, and gilded
flags, and golden coverings of network, — of which
‘Thunder-cloud," the king of horses, is the chief
Cast away’’ desire for these ! long not after life !

‘“Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou-


284


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


c«.


sand chariots, with coverings of the skins of lions,
and of tigers, and of panthers, — of which the chariot
called ‘the Flag of Victory* is the chief. Cast away
desire tor these ! long not after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand gems, of which the Wondrous Gem is the chief.
Cast away desire for these ! long not after life !

* “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand wives, of whom the Queen of Glory is the chief.
Cast away desire for these ! long not after life !

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand yeomen, of whom the Wonderful Steward is
the chief. Cast away desire for these ! long not
after life 1

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand nobles, of whom the Wonderful Adviser is
the chief. Cast away desire for these ! long not
after life 1

‘“Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand cows, with jute trappings, and horns tipped
with bronze. Cast away desire for these ! long not
after life !

♦

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand myriads of garments, of delicate textures, of
flax, and cotton, and silk, and wool. Cast away
desire for these! long not after life I

‘ “ Thine, O King, are these four and eighty thou¬
sand dishes, in which, in the evening and in the
morning, rice is served. Cast away desire for these!
long not after life ! ”

34. ‘ Then immediately, Ananda, the Great King

A

of Glory died. Just, Ananda, as when a yeoman
has eaten a hearty meal he becomes all drowsy.


If.


mahA-sudassana sutta.


285


just so were the feeling's he experienced, Anaiida,
as death came upon the Great King of Glory.

35. ‘When the Great King of Glory, Ananda,
had died, he came to life again in the happy world
of BrahmU.

36. ‘ For eight and forty thousand years, Ananda,
the Great . King of Glory lived the happy life of a
prince; for eight and forty thousand years he was vice¬
roy and heir-apparent ; for eight and forty thousand
years he ruled the kingdom ; and for eight and forty
thousand years he lived, as a layman, the noble life
in the Palace of Righteousness. And then, when full
of noble thoughts, he died ; he entered, after the dis¬
solution of the body, the noble world of Brahma^.

37. ‘ Now it may be, Ananda, that you may think
“ The Great King of Glory of that time was another
person.” But, Ananda, you should not view the
matter thus. I at that time was the Great King
of Glory.

‘ Mine at that time were the four and eighty
thousand cities, of which the chief was the royal city
of Kus^vati,

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand palaces,
of which the chief was the Palace of Righteousness.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand cham¬
bers, of which the chief was the chamber of the
Great Complex.

^ Mine were the four and eighty thousand divans.


The ‘noble thoughts’ are the Brahm a-viharas, described
above, Chap. II, §§ 8~ii. The ‘noble life 'is che BrahmaA-ariy
which does not mean the same as it does in Sanskrit. The adjec¬
tive Brahma may have reference here also to the subsequent (and
consequent?) rebirth in the Brahma-loka.


2 86


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.


CH.


of g’old, and silver, and ivory, and sandal wood,
spread with long’-haired rug’s, and cloths embroidered
with flowers, and magnificent antelope skins ; covered
with lofty canopies ; and provided at both ends with
purple cushions.

‘ Mine vrere the four and eighty thousand state
elephants, with trappings of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — of which the
king of elephants, called ‘‘the Changes of the Moon,'’
was chief.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand state
horses, with trappings, of gold, and gilded flags,
and golden coverings of network, — of which “ Thun¬
der-cloud,” the king of horses, was the chief.

Mine were the four and eighty thousand chariots,
with coverings of the skins of lions, and of tigers,
and of panthers, — of which the chariot called the
Flag of Victory ” was the chief.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand gems,
of which the Wondrous Gem was the chief.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand wives,
of whom the Queen of Glory was the chief.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand yeomen,
of whom the Wonderful Steward was the chief.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand nobles,
of whom the Wonderful Adviser was the chief.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand cows,
with jute trappings, and horns tipped with bronze.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand myriads
of garments, of delicate textures, of flax, and cotton,
and silk, and wool.

‘ Mine were the four and eighty thousand dishes,
in which, in the evening and in the morning, rice
was served.


ir. MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA. 287

38. “ Of those four and eighty thousand cities,
Ananda, one was that city in which, at that time, I
used to dwell — to wit, the royal city of Kusdvati.

‘ Of those four and eighty thousand palaces too,
Ananda, one was that palace in which, at that time. I
used to dwell — to wit, the Palace of Righteousness.

' Of those four and eighty thousand chambers too,
Ananda, one was that chamber in which, at that
time, I used to dwell — to wit, the chamber of the
Great Complex.

‘ Of those four and eighty thousand divans too,
Ananda, one was that divan which, at that time,
I used to occupy — to wit, one of gold, or One of
silver, or one of ivory, or one of sandal wood.

‘ Of those four and eighty thousand state ele¬
phants too, Ananda, one was that elephant which,
at that time, .1 used to ride — to wit, the king of
elephants, “ the Changes of the Moon."'

' Of those four and eighty thousand horses too,
Ananda, one was that horse which, at that time,
I used to ride — to wit, the king of horses, “the
Thunder-cloud.'’

‘ Of those four and eighty thousand chariots too,
Ananda, one was that chariot in which, at that time,
I used to ride — to w’it, the chariot called “ the Flag
of Victory.”

‘ Of those four and eighty thousand wives too,
Ananda, one was that wife who, at that time, used
to wait upon me- — to wit, either a lady of noble
birth, or a Veldmikdni.

‘ Of those four and eighty thousand myriads of
suits of apparel too, Ananda, one was the suit of
apparel which, at that time, I wore — to wit, one of
delicate texture, of linen, or cotton, or silk, or wool.


288


CH.


THE GREAT KING OF GLORY.

* Of those four and eighty thousand dishes too,
Ananda, one was that dish from which, at that time,
I ate a measure of rice and the curry suitable thereto.


39. ‘ See, Ananda, how all these things are now
past, are ended, have vanished away. Thus im¬
permanent, Ananda, are component things ; thus
transitory, Ananda, are component things ; thus
untrustworthy, Ananda, are component things. In¬
somuch, Ananda, is it meet to be weary of, is it meet
to be estranged from, is it meet to be set quite free
from the bondage of all component things !

40. ‘ Now I call to mind, Ananda, how in this
spot my body had been six times buried. And
when I was dwelling here as the righteous king
who ruled in righteousness, the lord of the four
regions of the earth, the conqueror, the protector
of his people, the possessor of the seven royal trea¬
sures — that was the seventh time.

41. ‘But I behold not any spot, Ananda, in the
world of men and gods, nor in the world of M4ra,
nor in the world of Brahma, — no, not among the
race of Sama?zas or Brahmans, of gods or men, —
where the Tathdgata for the eighth time will lay
aside his bodyk^


* The whole of this conversation between the Great King- of
Glory and the Queen is very much shorter in the Gdtaka, the
enumeration of the possessions of the Great King being omitted
(except the first clause referring to the four and eighty thousand
cities), and clauses 34-38, 40, and 41 being also left out, § 39 and
the concluding being placed in the mouth of the King immediately
after § 33. This may be perhaps partly explained by the narrative
style in which the Gatakas are composed — a style incompatible


II.


MAHA-SUDASSANA SUTTA.


289


42. Thus spake the Blessed One ; and when
the Happy One had thus spoken, once again the
Teacher said :

‘How transient are all component things!
Growth is their nature and decay ;

They are produced, they are dissolved again :
And then is best, when they have sunk to rest ^ ’


End of the Mahi-Sudassana Sutta.


with the repetitions of the Suttas, and confined to the facts of the
story.

But I think that no one can read this Sutta in comparison with
the short passage found in the Book of the Great Decease (above,
pp. 99—101) without feeling that the latter is the more original of
the two, and that the legend had not, when the Book of the Great
Decease was composed, attained to its present extended form.

We seem therefore really to have three stages of the legend
before us, and though the (rdtaka story was actually put into its
present shape at a known date (the fifth century of our era) long
after the latest possible date for the Book of the Great King of
Glory, it has probably preserved foi' us a reminiscence of what the
legend was at the time when the Book of the Great Decease w'as
composed.

^ On this celebrated verse, see the note at Mahiiparimbbana
Sutta VI, 16, where it is put into the mouth of Sakka, the king
of the gods, and the discussion in the Introductioia to this Sutta.


in Buddhism to the mental habit we should now call
agnosticism, I have adhered to the intention of including
it in this volume.

The word Asava seems in this Sutta to be used in a
general sense, — not confined only to the Asavas of sen¬
suality, individuality, delusion, and ignorance, but including
the moie various defilements or imperfections of mind, out
of which those especial defilements will proceed.

Incidentally reference is made to the well-known Bud¬
dhist doctrine, that the right thing is to seek afte. the
Nirvd/za of a perfect life in Arahatship, and not to trouble
and confuse oneself by the discussion of speculative ques¬
tions as to past or future existence, or even as to the


^ §§ 9, lo.


2 94


SABBASAVA iSUTTA.


presence within the body of a soul. Buddhism Is not only
independent of the theory of scul, but regards the con¬
sideration of that theory as worse than profitless, as the
source of manifold delusions and superstitions- Practically
this comes, however, to much the same thing as the denial
of the existence of the soul ; just as agnosticism is, at
best, but an earnest and modest sort of atheism. And
we have seen above that anattaw, the absence of a soul
or self as abiding principle, is one of the three parts of
Buddhist wisdom (vi^gg^^) ^ and of Buddhist perception
(sa7??2a) The reconciliation of these two doctnnes, of the
agnosticism and of the denial, is, I think, that the absence
of soul is only predicated of those five Aggregates of parts
and powers to which a good Buddhist should confine his
attention. These alone he should consider ; and he does
wrong to care whether beyond and beside them a soul has^
or has not, any real existence.

A.

I may add that the importance of the Asavas appeals
from the fact that elsewhere the knowledge of them, of their
origin, of their cessation, and of the way that leads to their
cessation is placed on the road to Arahatship immediately
after, and parallel to, the knowledge of Suffering, of its
origin, of its cessation, and of the way that leads to its ces¬
sation — the knowledge, that is, of the four Noble Truths®.

The Asavas there meant are sensuality, individuality
(or life), and ignorance ; and the expressions ‘ to him who
knows, to him who sees’ (^anato passato) are used
there much in the same way as they are in our § 3. Per¬
haps this was the passage which Burnouf had in his mind
when he wrongly said that he had found in the Mah^-
parinibb^na Sutta an enumeration of three classes of
Asavas, whereas that Sutta always divides them into four
classes.

I am unable to suggest any good translation of the term
itself — simple though it is. It means literally ‘ a running
or flowing,* or (thence) ‘ a leak ; ’ but as that figure is not


^ See above, p. 162.

^ Sama/?;?a Phala Sutta, p. 152,


“ See above, p. 9.

* Lotus de la Bonne Loi, p. 823,


used in English in a spiritual sense, it is necessary to
choose some other figure; and it is not easy to find one
that is appropriate. ‘ Sin ' would be very misleading, the
Christian idea of sin being inconsistent with. Buddhist
ethics. A ‘ fault ’ in the geological use of the word comes
somewhat nearer. ‘Imperfection’ is too long, and for
‘stain’ the Pili has a different word I In the Book of
the Great Decease I have chosen ‘ evil ; ’ here I leave the
word untranslated.


* Ka^o. $56 the verses translated in ‘ Buddhist Birth Stories,’ p. 164.


ALL THE ASAVAS.


SABBASAVA-SUTTA.


1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was
once staying at Si.vatthi, at the (Jetavana, in Anatha
Pi^^^fika’s park.

There the Blessed One addressed the brethren,
and said, ‘ Bhikkhus.'

‘ Yea, Lord !’ said those brethren, in assent, to the
Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One spake :

2. ‘I will teach you, O brethren, the lesson of the
subjugation of all the Asavas. Listen well, and
attend, and I will speak T

‘ Even so, Lord ! ’ said the brethren, in assent, to
the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One spake :

‘ I say that there is destruction of the Asavas,
brethren, to him who knows, to him who sees ; not
to him who knows not, to him who sees not. And
what do I say, brethren, is the destruction of the
Asavas to him who knows, to him who sees ? It
is (a matter of) wise consideration, and of foolish
consideration.

3. ‘In him, brethren, who considers unwisely,
Asavas which have not arisen spring up, and Asavas
which have arisen are increased. In him, brethren,
who considers wisely, Asavas which have not arisen


sabbAsava sutta.


297


spring not up, and Asavas which have arisen do
not increase. _ _ _

4. ‘ There are Asavas which should be abandoned,
brethren, by insight, there are Asavas which should
be abandoned by subjugation, there are Asavas
which should be abandoned by right use, there are
Asavas which should be abandoned by endurance,
there are Asavas which should be abandoned by
avoidance, there are Asavas wnich should be aban¬
doned by removal, there are Asavas which should
be abandoned by cultivation.

5. ‘ And which, brethren, are the Asavas which
should be abandoned by insight ^ ?

‘ In the first place, brethren, the ignorant uncon¬
verted man, who perceives not the Noble Ones, who
comprehends not, nor is trained according to the
doctrine of the noble ones ; who perceives not good
men, who comprehends not, nor is trained according*
to the doctrine of good men ; he neither understands
what things ought to be considered, nor what things
ought not to be considered ; the things that ought
not to be considered, those he considers ; and the
things that ought to be considered, those he does
not consider.

6. ‘ And which, brethren, are those things which
he should not consider, which he nevertheless con¬
siders ?

‘ There are things which, when a man considers
them, the Asava of Lust springs up within him, which
had not sprung up before ; and the Asava of Lust,
which had sprung up, grows great ; the Asava of


^ Dassan^.


298


ALL THE AsAVAS.


Life spring^s up within him, which had not sprung
up before ; and the Asava of Life, which had
sprung up, grows great ; the Asava of Ignorance
springs up within him, which had not sprung up
before; and the Asava of Ignorance, which had
sprung up, grows great.

* These are the things which ought not to be
considered, things which he considers.

7. ‘ And which, brethren, are those things which
should be considered, which he nevertheless does
not consider ?.

‘ There are things, brethren, which, when a man
considers them, the Asava of Lust, if it had not
sprung up before, springs not up within him ; and
the Asava of Lust which had sprung up, is put away ;
the Asava of Life, if ir had not sprung up before,
springs not up within him ; and the Asava of Life,
which had sprung up, is put away ; the Asava of
Ignorance, if it had not sprung up before, springs

/V

not up within him ; and the Asava of Ignorance,
which had sprung up, is put away.

‘ These are the things which ought to be con¬
sidered, things which he does not consider.

8. ‘It is by his consideration of those things,
which ought not to be considered ; and by his non¬
consideration of those things, w’hich ought to be
considered, that Asavas arise within him w-hich had
not sprung up ; and Asavas which had sprung up,
grow great.’

9. ‘ Unwisely doth he consider thus :

‘“Have I existed during the ages that are past,
or have I not ? What was I during the ages that
are past ? How' was I during the ages that are


SABBAoAVA sutta.


299


past ? Having” been what, what did I become in the
ages that are past ? Shall I exist during the ages of
the future, or shall I not ? What shall I be during
the ages of the future ? How shall I be during the
ages of the future ? Having been what, what shall
I become during the ages of the future ? ’’

‘ Or he debates within himself as to the present :
“Do I after all exist, or am I not? How am I ?
This is a being; whence now did it come, and
whither w*il it go ?

10. ‘In him, thus unwisely considering, there
springs up one or other of the six (absurd) notions

‘ As something true and real he gets the notion,
“ I have a self ! ”

‘ As something true and real he gets the notion,

‘ ‘ I have not a self !

‘ As something true and real he gets the notion,
“By my self, I am conscious of my self! ”

‘ As something true and real he gets the notion,
“ By myself I am conscious of my non-self! ”

‘ Or, again, he gets the notion, “ This soul of mine
can be perceived, it has experienced the result of
good and evil actions committed here and there :
now this soul of mine is permanent, lasting, eternal,
has the inherent quality of never changing, and
will continue for ever and ever 1

11. ‘This, brethren, is called the walking in delu¬
sion, the jungle of delusion -, the wilderness of de¬
lusion, the puppet show of delusion, the writhing of
delusion, the fetter of delusion.

12. ‘ Bound, brethren, with this fetter of delusion,

“ Di/Z/zi-g-ahanaz/i, with allusion, doubtless, if the reading is
correct, to gahawaw.


300


ALL THE AsAVAS.


the ignorant unconverted man becomes not freed
from birth, decay, and death, from sorrows, lamenta¬
tions, pains, and griefs, and from expedients ^ — he
does not become free, I say, from pain.


1 3. ‘ But the wise man, brethren, the disciple
walking in the Noble Path, who perceives the noble
ones; who comprehends, and is trained according to,
the doctrine of the Noble Ones ; who perceives good
men, who comprehends, and is trained according to,
the doctrine of good men ; he understands both
what things ought to be considered, and what things
ought not to be considered — and thus understand¬
ing, the things that ought to be considered those he
considers : and the things that ought not to be
considered, those he does not consider,

14. ‘And which, brethren, are those things which
ought not to be considered, and which he does not
consider ?

‘ There are things which, when a man considers
them, the Asava of Lust springs up within him, which
had not sprung up before ; and the Asava of Lust,
which had sprung up, grows great ; the Asava of
Life springs up within him, which had not sprung
up before ; and the Asava of Life, which had
sprung up, grows great ; the Asava of Ignorance
springs up within him, which had not sprung up
before ; and the Asava of Ignorance, which had
sprung up, grows great.

‘ These are the things which ought not to be con¬
sidered, things which he considers.


That is, the practice of rites and ceremonies and the worship
of Gods.


SABteASAVA SUTTA.


301


15. ‘ And which, brethren, are those things which
should be considered, and which he does consider ?

* There arp things, brethren, which, when a man
considers them, the Asava of Lust, if it had not
sprung up before, springs not up within him ; and
the Asava of Lust, which had sprung up, is put away;
the Asava of Life, if it had not sprung up before,
springs not up within him ; and the Asava of Life,
which had sprung up, is put away ; the Asava of
Ignorance, if it had not sprung up before, springs not
up within him ; and the Asava of Ignorance, which
had sprung up, is put away.

* These are the things which ought to be con¬
sidered, things which he does not consider.

16. ‘It is by his not considering those things

which ought to be considered, and by his con¬

sidering those things which ought not to be con¬
sidered, that Asavas which had not sprung up within
him spring not up, and Asavas which had sprung up
are put away.

17. ‘ He considers, “ This is suffering.'' He con¬
siders, “ This is the origin of suffering." He con-

siders, "This is the cessation of suffering.” He
considers, “ This is the way which leads to the cessa¬
tion of suffering." And from him, thus considering,
the three fetters fall away— the delusion of self,
hesitation, and the dependence on rites and cere¬
monies.

‘ These are the Asavas, brethren, which are to be
abandoned by insight.

1 8. ‘ And which are the Asavas to be abandoned
by subjugation (samvarA) ?

‘ Herein, brethfen, a Bhikkhu, wisely reflecting,


302 ALL THE AsAVAS.

remains shut in by the subjug'ation of the organ of
Sight. For whereas to the man not shut in by the
subjugation of the organ of sight Asavas may arise,
full of vexation and distress, to the man shut in by

in,

the subjugation of the organ of sight the Asavas,
full of vexation and distress, are not.

19. ‘"Wisely reflecting, he remains shut in by the
subjugation of the organ of Hearing. For whereas
to the man not shut in by the subjugation of the
organ of hearing Asavas may arise, full of vexation
and distress, to the man shut in by the subjugation
of the organ of hearing the Asavas, full of vexation
and distress, are not.

20. ‘ Wisely reflecting, he remains shut in by the
subjugation of the organ of Smell. For whereas to
the man not shut in by the subjugation of the organ
of smell Asavas may arise, full of vexation and dis¬
tress, to the man shut in by the subjugation of the
organ of smell the Asavas, full of vexation and
distress, are not.

21. ‘ Wisely reflecting, he remains shut in by the
subjugation of the organ of Taste. For whereas to
the man not shut in by the subjugation of the organ
of taste Asavas may arise, full of vexation and
distress, to the man shut in by the subjugation of
the organ of taste the Asavas, full of vexation and
distress, are not.

22. ‘Wisely reflecting, he remains shut in by the
subjugation of the organ of Touch. For whereas to
the man not shut in by the subjugation of the organ
of touch Asavas may arise, full of vexation and
distress, to the man shut in by the subjugation of
the organ of touch the Asavas, full of vexation and
distress, are not.


SABBAiaAVA SUTTA.


23. Wisely reflecting-, he remains shut in by the
subjugation of the organ of Mind. For whereas to
the man not shut in by the subjugation of the organ
of mind Asavas may arise, full of vexation and dis¬
tress, to the man shut in by the subjugation of

the organ of mind the Asavas, full of vexation and
distress, are not.

These, brethren, are called the Asavas to be
abandoned by subjugation.


24 ‘And which are the Asavas to be abandoned
by right use * ?

Herein, brethren, a Bhikkhu, wisely reflecting

makes use of his robes for the purpose only of

warding off the cold, of warding off the heat, of

warding off the contact of gad-flies and mosquitoes,

of wind and sun, and snakes; and of covering his
nakedness ^


25. ‘ Wisely reflecting, he makes use of alms, not
for sport or sensual enjoyment, not for adorning
or beautifying himself, but solely to sustain the
body m life, to prevent its being injured to aid
himself Jn the practice of a holy life— thinking the
while, Thus shall I overcome the old pain, and
Shall incur no new; and everywhere shall I be at
ease, and free from blame. ’’


2 . Wisely reflecting^, he makes use of an abode ;
<^ly to ward off cold, to ward off heat, to ward off
t e contact of g-ad-flies and mosquitoes, of wind and
sun, and snakes ; only to avoid the dangers of the
climate, and to secure the delight of privacy.


^ Pa/isevant.

however^HroS!’''””’' P' where .he reading.


304


ALL THE AsAVAS.


27. ‘ Wisely reflecting’, he makes use of medicine
and other necessaries for the sick; only to ward off the
pain that causes injury, and to preserve his health.

28. ‘For whereas, brethren, to the man not making
such right use, Asavas may arise, full of vexation
and distress ; to the man making such right use,
the Asavas, full of vexation and distress, are not.

‘ These, brethren, are called the Asavas to be
abandoned by right use.


29. ‘ And which, brethren, are the Asavas to be
abandoned by endurance ^ ?

‘ Flerein, brethren, a Bhikkhu, wisely reflecting, is
patient under cold and heat, under hunger and
thirst, under the contact of gad-flies and mosqui¬
toes, of wind and sun, and snakes ; he is enduring
under abusive words, under bodily suffering, under
pains however sharp, rough, severe, unpleasant, dis¬
agreeable, and destructive even to life.

30. ‘ For whereas, brethren, to the man who en-
dureth not, Asavas may arise, full of vexation and
distress ; to him who endures, the Asavas, full of
vexation and distress, are ’not.

These, brethren, are called the Asavas to be
abandoned by endurance.


And which, brethren, are the A.savas to be
abandoned by avoidance ^ ?


Herein, brethren, a Bhikkhu wisely ireiflectinor^
avoids a rogue elephant, he avoids a furious horse
he avoids a wild bull, he avoids a mad dog, a snak^
a stump in the path, a thorny bramble, a pit a
precipice, a dirty tank or pool. When tempted \o


^ AdhivasanS.


^ Pariva^^anS,.


sabbasava sutta.


305


sit in a place where one should not sit, or to walk
where one should not walk, or to culti\'-ate tlie ac¬
quaintance of bad companions, he is skilled to slum
the evil : and wisel\’ reflecting; he avoids that, as
a place whereon one should not sit, that, as a place
wherein one should not walk, those men, as com¬
panions that are bad.

32. ‘ For whereas, brethren, to the man w’ho
avoideth not, Asavas may arise, full of vexation
and distress ; to him who avoids, the Asavas, full of
vexation and distress, are not.

‘ These, brethren, are called the Asavas to be
abandoned by avoidance.

33. ‘ And which, brethren, are the Asavas to be
abandoned by removal^?

‘ Herein, brethren, a Bhikkhu, wisely reflecting',
when there has sprung* up tvitliin him a lustful
thought, that he endureth not, lie puts it away, he
removes it, he destroys it, he makes it not to be :
when there has sprung up within him an angry
thought, a malicious thought, some sinful, wrong dis¬
position, that he endureth not, he p\its it away, he
removes it, he destroys it, he makes it not to be.

34. ‘For whereas, brethren, to the man who re-
moveth not, Asavas may arise, full of vexation and

A

distress ; to him who removes, the Asavas, full of
vcixation and distress, are not.

A

‘ These, brethren, are called the Asavas to be
abandoned by removal.

A

35. ‘ And which, brethren, are the Asavas to be
abandoned by cuTtivation ^ ?


^ i n o < 1 a n a .

[ri]


X


13 1 1 a V a n a .


ALL THE ASAVAS.


306


* Herein, brethren, a Bhikkhu, wisely reflecting,
cultivates that part of the higher wisdom called
Mindfulness, dependent on seclusion, dependent
on passionlessness, dependent on the utter ecstasy
of contemplation, resulting in the passing off of
thoughtlessness.

36. ‘ He cultivates that part of the higher wisdom
called Search after Truth, he cultivates that part of
the higher wisdom called Energy, lie cultivates that
part of the higher wisdom called Joy, he cultivates
that part of the higher wisdom called Peace, he
cultivates that part of the higher wisdom called
Earnest Contemplation, he cultivates that part of the
higher wisdom called Equanimity — each dependent
on seclusion, dependent on passionlessness, dependent
on the utter ecstasy of contemplation, resulting in
the passing off of thoughtlessness.

37. ‘ For whereas, brethren, to the man who cul-
tivateth not, Asavas may arise, full of vexation and
distress ; to him who cultivates, the Asavas, full of
vexation and distress, are not.

‘ These, brethren, are called the Asavas to be
abandoned by cultivation.

38. 'And then when a Bhikkhu has by insight
put away the Asavas to be abandonee^ by insight,
and by subjugation has put away the Asavas to be
abandoned by^ subjugation, and by right use has
put away the Asavas to be abandoned by right use,
and- by endurance has put away the Asavas to be
abandoned by endurance, and by avoidance has put
away the Asavas to be abandoned by avoidance.


Compare MaMparinibbdna Sutta I, 9.


1


SABBASAVA SUTTA.


307


and by removal has put away the Asavas to be
abandoned by removal, and by cultivation has put

A

away the Asavas to be abandoned by cultivation —
that Bhikkhu, brethren, remains shut in by the sub-

A

jugation of the Asavas, he has destroyed that
Craving Thirst, by thorough penetration of mind he
has rolled away every Fetter, and he has made an
end of Pain/


39. Thus spake the Blessed One : and those
Bhikkhus, glad at heart, exalted the word of tiie
Blessed One.


End of the Sabbasava Sutta.


INDEX.


Abhibhayatananij the eight, pages 49,
50-

Addhariya Brahmans, 17 1.

Age of the Suttas, x.

A^g^tasattu, king of Magadha, r,
131.

Agita,one of the Six Teachers, 106-
A/(nravati river, 167, 178.

Alabaster, IMr,, 141.

Allakappa, name of a place, 132.
Aiara Kalama, teacher, 75-77*
Ambagama, near Vesili, 66.
Ambala/^^ik^, near Ragagaha, 12.
Anibap^li, the courtezan, 28.

-™ CMitertains the Buddha, 30--32.
Ananda’s soitom' and imperfection,
95, 96.

— his character, 97, 98, 118, 1x9.
Ananda Aetiya, 66.

Angels. See Tavatiwsa.

— called devata^ 45.

— on the point of a needle, 88.^

— desire to become an, is spiritual.

bondage, 227.

Ahgirasa, a Vedic poet, 173.

Apadesa, 66.

Appama77«as, the four, 201, 273.
Arahat Buddhas, 15, 104.

Arahats, who are, &.C., 107, X19.
Arahatship and the Ten Fetters,
222.

Arahatship and Nirva/^a, 243.

Asavas, 293-307.

— translation of, 295.

Assemblies, the eight, 48, 49.
Astrology, 197, 198.

Atumi, name of a village, 77.
Att/j'aaiij Vedic poet, 172.

Bahuputta iTetiya, 40.

Baptism, 1.

Beal, the Rev. Samuel, 118, 255.
Beluva, near Vesali, 34.


Benares, 99.

Benares muslin, 54, 92.

Bhadda, convert at Nadika, 25, 26.
Bhagu, a Vedic poet, 172.
Bha«^a-gama, near VesSli, 64, 66.
Bh^radvlga, a young Brahman, 168-
170.

— a Vedic poet, 172.

Bhikkhu, meaning of, 5.
Bhoga-nagara., near Vesali, 66.

Bible, texts in, referred to —

1 Samuel xxviii, 208.

2 Kings vi, 17, 19.

Matthew v. 20, 160,

Matthew xi. 31, 46.

Matthew xv. 14, xxii. 26, 173,
JMatthew x\ii. 31, 207.

Mark ix. 39, 207.

Luke vii. 37-39, 34.

Acts ii. 6, 142.

Philippians ii. 12, 1x4.
Philippians iii, 15, 7.

2 Peter i, ro, 114.

Revelation xxi. 19-21, 245, 249.
Bigandet’s Legend ofGaudama, xxxii .

— quoted, xvi, 32, 33, 34, 82.
Bodisat, the, 239.

Bc)g'g'/>ahgS, 9, 14*

14onds, the five, 18 1.

— the ten, 222.

Brahma, the supreme deity, ri6.
162 -r 65,

Brahma/'ariya Brahmans, 171,
Brahmans, 160, 180-185.

— dilFerent schools of, 171.
Brahma-viharas, the four, 201, 273.
Brick Hall, the, at NIdika, 24.
Buddha, the, description oi character

of, 27, 169.

— his relation to the Order, 37*

— his last illness, 3 5.

— date of death of the, xlviii.
Buddhahood, how reached, 14.


310


THE BUDDHIST SUTTAS.


BuddhaSj past and future, 13, 97,
X04.

— description of character o^, 186.
Buddhism, ancient summary of, 62,

63.

— another, 65.

— central doctrine of, 143, 144.
Buddhist era, date of, xlv-xlviii.
Buddhists, modern sects of, T29.
Bulls of Allakappa, a clan, 132,

Burial rites, xl-xlv, 92.

Bumouf, Eugene, 50, 65, 75, 167.

Cats, 1 4.

Causation, chain of, 208.

Cave dwellings, 56.

Chetiyas, 4, 66. See isTetiya.

— the seven at Ves^li, 40, 58.
Chinese works on the Great De¬
cease, xxxvi-xxxix.

Christianity, is it indebted to Bud¬
dhism? 165, 166.

Clans, customs of, 3, 4.

Cloth of gold, 80—82.

— of BenSres, 92.

Conditions of the welfare of a com¬
munity, 6—1 1.

— the Four Noble, 64, 65.
Confections (Sawkhar^), 242, 243.
Council of R^agalia, xii, xiii, xv.

— of Patna, xiii.

— of Vesali, xvii, xix.

Cremation ceremonies, xl.
Cunningham, General, 47, 263,

Da Cuhha, Mr., 140.

Da Silva, the Rev. David, 211, 293.
Dagaba, or tope, 93, x 31— 135.
D§,gabas, date of earliest, xvii.
Dawn, as the 'VV'oman- Treasure of
the King of Glory, 257.
Deliverance, eight stages of, 51, 52.
Delusion. See T>\ith\.

Destiny, result of actions, 25, 26.
DevatS, note on meaning of, 45.
Dhamma, 62, 64, 117, n8.
Dhamma-jJakkhu, 82, 96, 119, 127,
153-

Dibba-j^akkhu, 209, 218.

Dipavay«sa, xxii.

Dh/M. See Asava.

— six kinds of, in detail, 297.
Divinations condemned, 196.

Do«a, a Brahman, 133, 134.

Earth rests on water, 45.


Earthquake, occurrence of, 44.

— eight causes of, 45—48.

El'^phant look, curious belief as to,

64.

Era, date of the Buddhist, xlv-xlviii.
Esoteric doctrine, none in Bud¬
dhism, 36.

Existence, cause of renewed, 6.

Eye, epithet of the Buddha, 84.

Eye of Truth. SeeDhamma-i^akkhu.

Fairies of the earth, 18, 19, 45.

Faith, reason, and works, ir.

Fa Kheu Pi Hu, a Chinese work,

1 17.

Fausbdil, Professoi'. 100.

Feer, M. T€on, 139, 140.

Fetters, the ten, 222, 307.

— the first three, 299.

Final perseverance of the saints, 26,
27, 1x4.

Fortune-telling, 197, 199-
Foucanx, M., 139.

Funeral ceremonies, xl-xlv.

Gaha«i, curious belief as to, 260.
Gahapati, pater familias, 257, 258.
Games of chance and skill, 193.
GandhSra, a city, 135.

Gods, good men so called, 20, 21.
Gogerly, the Rev. Samuel, 139, 144,
150, 260.

Gotama, name of the Buddha, 103,
104, 169.

Gotama’s gate, 21.

— own teaching, xx— xxii.

Gotamaka JTetiya, 40.

Great Decease, meaning of, xxxii.
Grimblot’s ‘ Sept Suttas PS.lis,* 50.

Gains (and see Niga«?i>a), i.
Gambug§.ma, near Vesali, 66.
Gawussowi, a Brahman, 1 67.

Gv6ana, 115, 210, 212.

— the four, in detail, 3 7'».

Hardy, the Rev. Spence, 129, 142,
149.

Hatthi-gS.ma, near Vesali, 66.

Hell, corresponding belief to, among
the Buddhists, 17.

Hindrances, the five, 182.

Huth’s * Life of Buckle,’ quoted,
164.

Iddhi, 2, 40, 259.


INDEX.


Idealists, European and Buddhist,
49.

l^;^i>agala, in Kosala, 167.

Incarnation of the Buddha, 46, 47.
Infinite feelings, Ihe four, incumbent
on the Buddhist, 20 r, 273.
Isigili, Mount at Ra^agaha, 56.

Kakudha, convert at N3.dika, 16, 25.
Kakuttha river, 74.

Ka^iSyana, one of the Six Teachers,
106.

Kalandaka-nivapa, 56.

Kalihga, convert at N§.dika, 25,

26.

Kalpa, an aeon. 41.

K^/Ssoka, xvi.

Karma, 84, 165, 214, 217, 271-
Kassapa. See PQra«a-Kassapa and
Maha-Kassapa.

— a Vedic poet, 172.

Kajfissabha, convei't at Nadika, 25,

26.

Koliyas of Ramag^ina, a clan, 132.
Ko«ika= A^^tasattu, i.

T.osambi, a great city, 99.

Kojfigama, near Patna, 23.
Ku«!ika=A^&tasattu, i.

KusSvatt, former name of Kusinara,
too, 248.

Kusinara, where the Buddha died,
73, 100, 248.

KQ/cigara Hall at Ves^li, 59.

iSTakkavatti, ideal of, xviii-xx.
jRTamp^, a city, 99.
jRTandragupta, xix.
jSTahki, a BrS.hman of Kosala, 167.
iifjipala iSTetiya, 40, 58.

Xy&andava Brahmans, 17 1.

JO>andoka BrS,hmans, 171.
jR3anna, the penalty imposed upon,
112.

— attains NirvRwa, 113.

ifunda, the smith, of P§.va, 70—73,
83, 84.

JSTundaka, a mendicant, 82, 83.

Lalita Vistara, quoted, 47, 75, X39,
209, 216, 218, 251.

Life, future, virtue inspired by hope
of is impure, 10, 222.

Light of the world, 89.

LU-i-S-avis, of Vesali, 31, X31.

Lineage of the Buddhist faith, 14.
Love, duty of universal, 163.


3II


Love, the true path to union with
God, i6r.

— how a Buddhist should love the

world, 201, 273.

MaddakuM’Ai at Rt^agaha, 56.
Mahi-Kassapa, the great disciple,
126—129.

MahS.padesa, the four, 66-6g.
Mahhvana, at Vesali, 59, 60-
Makkhali, one of the Six Teachers,
io6.

Makiua-bandhana, shrine of the Mal-
las, 124.

Mfil^Iahkara-vatthu, the, xvi, xxxii.
Mallas of Kusinara, 12 1— 135.

— of PavS., 133, 135.

Manas^kajfa, in Kosala, X67, x68.
Mandarava flowers from heaven, 124.
Mara, 41, 53.

Max Miiller, Pi’ofessor, 105, x8o,
246.

Milinda, king, xlviii.

Mindful and thoughtful, doctrine
of, X9, 38.

Mirror of Truth, the so-called, 27.
Monotheism, 164.

Moriyas of Pipphalavana, a clan, 134,

135.

Morris, Dr. Riv.hard, 29, 221, 293.
Muhammadanism, 163.

Nadika, near Patna, 24.

NSga Thera, 46.

NSgas, the race of, 135, x 3 6.
Nalanda, near Rtgagaha, 12,

Names (family, tribal, &c.), i.
Nanda, king of Magadha, xix.
Nature of things, doctrine of, 59.
Nera%-ara, river, 53.

Nigaw/Aa, founder of the Gains, 106.
Nika^a, convert at Nadika, 25, 26.
Nirvawa, the Brethren not to be
satisfied till they have attained,
7-

— perception of, due to earnest

thought, 9.

— attainment of, dependent on one¬

self, 3 8.

— consists of the seven jewels of

the Law, 62.

— is the rooting out of lust, bitter¬

ness, and delusion, 84.

— the Supreme Goal of the higher

life, xio.

— how the gods can attain to it, 163-


312


THE Bt'DDHIST SUTTAS,


Nirvana, emancipation of heart and
mind, 218.

— is the cessation of the Sawkharas,
241.

— is one side of Arahatship, 243.
Nissahka INIa’.la, xlv.

Nivaranfi, liindranceSj 182.

Noble Ones, the, 182, 272, 295, 298.
Nymphs included under devatS, 45.

Oldenberg, Dr., xi, 139.

Opasada in Kosala, 167.

Order, the Buddhist, description of,
27.

Paral)lcs : —

The city guard and the cat, 14.
Blind leading the blind, 173.
The man in love, 175.

'I'he staircase up to nothing, 177,
Praying to the further bank, 179.
Themanboundon the bank, r So.
The man veiled on the bank, 182.
7’he skillul musician, 201, 270.
The hen and her chick ';ns, 233.
P itiMa-samuppatlu, 209.

Patimokkha, quoted, 10 1.

refcrrcxl to, 18S, 210.

Patna, Sec Pa/aliputta.

PiValigtiina, on the Canges, 15-22.
Paa'aliputta, prophecy cvoncerning,

XV, 18.

Pava, last journey of the Buddha v.o,
70*

Pavarika, grove at Nalanda, 12.
Penetrability of matter, 214.
Pentecost, day of, T41.

Pilgrimage, the lour places of, 90.
Pipphalavana, name of a place, 134.
Pischel, Professor, 75, 102.

Pi/aka, lateness of the word, 67,
Pi/akas and the New Testament,
165, 166.

Pokkharasati, a Brahman, 167.
Position.sol'mastcrVjthe eight, 49,50.
IVobation before entering the Order,
109,

Pubbe-uivasa-wana, 209, 215.

Public assemblies of a clan, 3.
Pukkusa, the young Mallian, 75-82.
— name of a caste, 75.

Puray/a- Kassapa, one of the Six
Teachers, 106.

RHc-agaha, r-12, 56, 99,

Rarnsg.ama, 132, 135.


Rapti river, 167.

Realists, European and Buddhist, 49
Rel.'rth, Ibia* kinds of, 25, 26.

Rest house, public, in a village, 15,25.
Ritualisnt contlemv.cd, to.

— various kinds of, 199.

Robbers’ Cliff, 56.

Sabbath day, the Buddliist, 251. '
Sahaka, a Bhikkhu. 163.
Sakadagamin, 25, 26.

SAketa, a town, 99.

Sakka, king of the gods, 113. 142,264.
Sakyas, the clan, 131.

Sala trees, tlie twin, 85.

Sa//>a, native ofNildika, 25,

— the Thera, 1 64.

Sam'adhi, 11, 145.

Sanuwa-brahmans, 105,

Sanrson and sun-niytli.^, 245.
Sawgharukkhita 'Tlicra, story of, 46,
Sawkhflras, tlic Confections, 242.
Sawya^»-anas, the ten, -222.

Santuttha, convert at Nildika, 25.
Sa/7jfaya, one of the Six Teachers,

106.

SawT/a., sevenfold, 9.

Sappaso«^-/ika Cave at Rfi^gagaha, 56.
Sarandada, name of a shrine, 4, 40.
Sariputta, i, 12-14.

Satippa/Z/^ilnii, 14, 29, 38.
Sattambaka A'etiya, 40.

Sattapa/;«i Cave at Rajj-agaba, 56.
Savatthi, on the Rapti, 99, 167, r68.
Senart’s ‘ L6gende du Bouddha,’ xix,
2 42 ••

Service Hall, 5, 60.

Service, religious, how conducted
among Buddhists, i6~i8.

Seven classes of gods, 154-
Seven conditions of welfare, 2-7.
Seven jewels of tlic Law, 29, 61—63.
Seven sacred places at Rii^agaha,
56, 57*

Seven sacred places at Vcsrli, 40, 58,
Seven Treasures of a king of kings,
63, 251.

Seven wondrous gems, 249.
Sevenfold higher wisdom, 9, 14, 21 1.
Shows of various kinds, 192.

Silas, the three, 188-200.

Sitavana, grove, 56.

Sorrow, cause of, Szc., 23, 24.

Soul, early Buddhist doctrine as to,
162, 165, 299.

Spells, 196, 199,


INDEX,


Spirits. See Devata.

Spiritualism, 208.

Storehouse of waters beneath the
earth, 130.

Subhaclda, the barber, xi, 127.

— the last convert, 103-111.

— - convert at Nadika, 25, 26,
Subhaclda, the Queen of Glory, 240,,
241, 276.

Siibhuti Unnfinse, xxxi.

Sudatta, convert at Nadika, 25.
Su^^ata, convert at Nficlika, 25.
Sukhavativyuha, quoted, 246, 249.
Sunidha, minister, iS, 19, 21.
Sun-myths, 244, 245.

Susunaga, xvi.

Tapoda, grove at Rf^^^agaha, 56.
TaranSthu, quoted, xix.

Tarukkha, a Brahman, 167.
Tavatiwsa angels, 18, 32.
Teviji;^a-vjiX-;^/jagotta Sutta, 1 59,209.
Textile fabrics of various kinds, 195.
Theism, 163.

Thirst, or craving. See the Noble
Truths.

Thirty-Three, the Great. See Ta-
vatiwsa.

Thunder-cloud, name of the sun-
horse, 255, 274.

Thupa. See Dagaba.

7’ittiriya Brahmins, 171.

Todeyya, a Brahman, 167.

1*01)0. See DIgabet.

Transfiguration of the Buddha, 82,
Truth, nature of the Buddhist, 27.
Truths, the Four Noble, 23, 24,
148-150.

Tndigama, in Kosala^ r68.

Tuttha, convert at Nadika. 25, 26.

Udena A'etiya, 40,

'L'kkai‘//2a, in Kosala, 16S-
C patissa — Sariputta, 1.
l'i)ava/^a, mendicant, 87.
Tpavattana, at Kiisinara, 85.


Uposatha, the Sabbath day, 251.

name of the solar elephant, 254.
Uttara-sisakaw, 85.

Mi?,£fians, 1-4.

Yallhaka, name of the sun-horse,
235, 274^.

Vfimadeva, Vcdic poet, 172.

Vamaka, Vedic poet, 172.

Vimishing away, 21, 22, rrS.

a young Bnlhman, 168-

203.

— a \'cdic poet, 172.

Vasc///)as, epithet of the Mallas, 121.
Vassa, season ot^ 34.

Vassakara, Brahman, 2-4, 18, 19, 21.
Vebhara i\ fount, at RIgagaha, 56.
Vedehi-putto, r.

Vedic images adopted by the Bud¬
dhists, 141, 245.

Vedic poets, 172.

Ve/uriya, a kind of gem, 256.

Vesali, xvi, 28, 40, 58, 64.
Vc^ssamitta, a Vedic poet, 172.
Vcr/6adipa, a Brahmrn village, 1C32,
'vldeha, i.

Viinokkha, the eight, 51, 52, 213.
Virtue, description of Bucldhist, 10.
Vissakuniina. the god (Vulcan), 265.
Vulture’s Peak, 1,55-

AVhecl oftb.eLaw, 140. 141, 153.
'Wisdom, the sevenfold higher, 9.

— its details, 306.

— possessed by the Buddhas, 14.
Vditcheraid, 20S.

Women, 43, 53, 91, 98, 103, 257.
Word of the Buddhas enduring for
ever, 233.

Writing, introduction of into India,
xxii.

Yamataggi, a Vedic poet, 172.
Yatramulle Unnanse, xxxi,

Zoysa, INTudaliyai <ie, xxxi.


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA.


MahS-parinibbana Sutta I, 23, 24. The ‘nobles’ (khattiyas)
should come before the ‘Brihmans,’ as in III, 21, and in the
Tevi^^a Sutta 1, 19. The sentiment of 1, 24 recurs in a passage
given by Mr. Beal from the Chinese in the ‘Indian Antiquary,’
IV, 96.

— II, 31. ‘Went out from the monastery’ (vihara), There is no

mention of a vihara in the previous sections. The following con¬
versation seems therefore to have been originaJy recorded in
some other connection.

— HI, 20. Add at the end, ‘These, Ananda, are the eight causes,

proximate and remote, of the appearance of a mighty earth¬
quake.’

— V, 10 (note p. 88). The passage here quoted from Buddhaghosa,

about angels on the point of a gimlet, recurs in the Ahguttara
Nikaya, Duka Nipita.

— V, 52. The words ‘ who was not a believer ’ should be in brackets.

They are inserted to give the full force of the word paribba^ako,
as the translation ‘ mendicant ’ might convey the impression that
Subhadda was a Buddhist mendicant,

— VI, 26. Compare GStaka 1, 60, line 17.


Trainsli teration of Oriental Alphabets adoptee for the Translations

OF the Sacred Books of the East.


transliteration of oriental alphabets.


D

fi


fi

U"'


<


<

0


2

0


G


u


cc


/n o ^ <~i n.


n 22 t: ti


9 »


D


• •!>


” — U tO u


D . ! 1-1


^ SI c, Ov/


L) oJ'iJ


•0^^ S.^ oj


ja? PT pr


s. ^

be 2 "5

irv% ^


He/


3 ^ 'S


tij

C;


to

>:

<

y:

o

to

y:

o

o


CO

O

c3

§

4^

.4^

0


ctJ


c3


d

.4-2»


cr^


IS) - u -tO


IF l£3 JR IT


* «


*4^


C>,


2 ±


CJ W


00

d


w

3


d

4i

nd


TT

o

D


d

O


tn ^

» •«-< BQ

ir«-H t

C3 r*^

o CO

S y

^ cf2

CJ op


orj

3

O

pa


00

d

d

o


r-, CSI C'O t;i iXi


tn

^2;

CO


W

d

07

d


q


cn

d


C


GJ 07

S S


00 05 O CM


cd

0


O

a

CO

o

|HM«|

c8


4:^

"S

pi

o


«

* •

lit

• »

“

B

m *

«

«

«

m m

•

d

,

m •

<R

•\ m

0}

Q

4 •

•W

*0^ •

2 •

4^

* ll«^

£5_J *

, ^

Oj

r-H •

Oj

t«

d

Oi

.ss

2

a

c->

:: 3

»*

cr:

0

Cl***,

■w*

r— 1

fwH p-«<^

3 ! 8 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS


9 (> <»

o o •


rn ri n • O


rv


to h> M h3 ^


n :


p- tP lo- Jr


p* 'B? p


J=i JC

CO (<|


oS o

•Si .s2


^ 2

3 =


6 e J


ca

w

o

>

m

m,

OH

OQ

!3

•4J»

CO

.2

CO

CO

00
« <M<

w

O

>

'JO

p

•4fn>

<«J

>*

ce

**«

ss

6

0)

• HHt

#k

m

13

C

-

OZJ

CU

«H

*5

03

to

c^

'P

CJ

•H

CO

p

p

,2

CO

to

to

<

>

vmm4

<M

CO

Tfi

*o

CD

oo

o

O

r^

<M

oo

'Tt

CO

oo

oo

rtf

*o

WO

»o

wo

wo

wo

wo

wo

Si 1 j: ’ A J : V AT r i j AUitT.


320 2 KAiS’SLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS,


)C^


cs

h«

<


I


t?

a

NJ


'u
M
V)

r, i

^ I


rt i

P I


^ <3S


1 ►


i 'J 1' b'.


>1-^1- b.


*

« S|


2? ^ -1


P <P (D «0 ^ • O

"S •


S3

<CL


1-- ^ |^ 1


• •


• -ilo


1*'^ ‘ ‘»b


• «<,■> •


.-N n

o


to


2. :


S' p nrii*r )c'’ jr ‘i?' Iw |5 1 jv /Jv


• -.V


\l

o


.'i.


p


g.


tr v>


«3


- )

«


ID


33 <C5 • 4jm


• (S4

k


d

Vw^

<a>


w

'4

>


>*1;


<L>


30


Ck

33 I

15

r*

4^ r ^

C* *

^ 04 CO


35

^£»

C3

•

k

•

r—'

rf

IE

P

.S

be

c

0

cn

>■■

p

bD

m

'>

a

4;

ti<3

43

0

»--4

k

43

3 ,2

■»*

<#* '•^
„ .j J3

c £,

^ O CP


33

:3

rn

3

Q


03

Cl '>

fcJD g
o ^

»— < OT

"i

:: So
c


CO

43

»

119

*

«

•

cd

>4-*

c3

*

«

'rt

cej

CO

•

P

tp*

»

k

<a

tmmi

c;

be

C

*

0

00

- Ci '>

(3

bo

•

0

0

I— H

D

4.:»

4.^

.0

k

43

G

0

»kii4l

■4-»

^ ^ p p

<cd ^ ^

<0 ^ 2

^ O) o


;o


40

G

O


o

05

1

3

rt

J


^ c3
tt «3

s ^

O

1

p

k

G

J 40

4O


!:C

VJ


G

O

p#-*H

4r

Ck


U


r'«*QO{J50rHCS|co*^iOCON.


w

"s

rS

<3

$

o

- u

»o

^40

-*o

3

o

CO 05


O

CN5


3

4D

00

P

bD

G

O

fXIi ^l>^ #•

4-J
fl

C4

tMMf

rH (M CO
CM coi cq


2i Giitturalis fmcta . . , ,

25 Paliitalis fracta . . . . .

26 Laliialis fmcta . , . . .

27,Gutluro-]abialis fracta .
