The Dhammapada and Sutta-Nipata
F. Max Muller, trans. (1881)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/1922707.0010.001.umich.edu
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

jk g PROPERTY Or

Unwmitytf


ARTES SCIENTIA VERITAS


<5,l SJZUl*


\o\o

V.jfo


THE


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


VOLUME X

Part I. The Dhammapada
Part II. The Sutta-Nipata


[io]


ILontron

HENEY FROWDE


OXFOBD UNIVEBSITY PBESS WABEHOUSE
7 PATERNOSTER ROW


n?9 ^.


THE


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


TRANSLATED


BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY


F. MAX MULLER


VOLUME X
PART I


(Bitot*

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1881

[All rights reserved"]


16 ID


AM4&


THE DHAMMAPADA

A COLLECTION OF VERSES

BEING ONE OF THE CANONICAL BOOKS OF THE
BUDDHISTS


TRANSLATED FROM PALI


B¥


F. MAX MULLER


%JAN


Worfc


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1881

[All rights reserved]


(^


CONTENTS.


Introduction to the Dhammapada


ix-lv


DHAMMAPADA.

Chapter 1.

The Twin-verses ...... 3

2.

On Earnestness .

9

* '

3.

Thought

12

V '

4.
5.

Flowers . .
The Fool .

16
20

1

6.

The Wise Man (Pa/^ita)

23

<

7.

The Venerable (Arhat)

27

T

8.

9.

10.

The Thousands .
Evil ....
Punishment .

3i

• 34

36

\ ,

11.

Old Age

41

N

12.

Self ....

. 45

>
>

, 13.

14.

, 15.

The World .

The Buddha (the Awakened)

Happiness .

47
49
53

\

, 16.
17.

Pleasure ....
Anger

56
58

r '

18.

Impurity

60

I

, 19.

The Just .

64

{

, 20.
, 21.
, 22.
, 23.
, 24.
, 25.
, 26.

The Way .

Miscellaneous

The Downward Course

The Elephant

Thirst

The Bhikshu (Mendicant) .

The Brdhmawa (Arhat) .

67

70
74

77
80

85
89

Inde

X


97

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the
Translations of the Sacred Books of the East (see the
end of this volume) .221


n


f <\ '/


INTRODUCTION

TO

THE DHAMMAPADA.


The Dhammapada, a Canonical Book.

The Dhammapada forms part of the Pali Buddhist canon,
though its exact place varies according to different authori-
ties, and we have not as yet a sufficient number of complete
MSS. of the Tipi/aka to help us to decide the question1.

Those who divide that canon into three Pi/akas or
baskets, the Vinaya-pi/aka, Sutta-pi/aka, and Abhidham-
ma-pi&tka, assign the Dhammapada to the Sutta-pi/aka.
That Pi/aka consists of five Nikayas : the Digha-nik&ya,
the Ma^^ima-nik&ya, the Sa/^yutta-nik&ya, the Anguttara-
nik&ya, and the Khuddaka-nik&ya. The fifth, or Khuddaka-
nik&ya, comprehends the following works : i. Khuddaka-
pi/^a; 2. Dhammapada; 3. Udina ; 4. Itivuttaka; 5. Sutta-
nipata ; 6. Vimanavatthu ; 7. Petavatthu ; 8. TheragatM ;
9.Therigith^; 10. Gataka ; n.Niddesa; 12. Pa/isambhida ;
13. Apadana; 14; Buddhava^sa ; 15. iTariya-pi^aka.

According to another division 2, however, the whole Bud-
dhist canon consists of five Nikiyas : the Digha-nikaya, the
Ma^^ima-nik&ya, the Sawyutta-nik&ya, the Anguttara-
niMya, and the fifth, the Khuddaka-nik&ya, which Khud-
daka-nikiya is then made to comprehend the whole of
the Vinaya (discipline) and Abhidhamma (metaphysics),
together with the fifteen books beginning with the Khud-
daka-pd/^a.

The order of these fifteen books varies, and even, as
it would seem, their number. The Dighabha/zaka school

1 See Feer, Journal Asiatique, 1871, p. 263. There is now at least one com-
plete MS. of the Tipitaka, the Phayre MS., at the India Office, and Professor
Forchhammer has just published a most useful List of Pali MSS., collected in
Burma, the largest collection hitherto known.

2 See Childers, s. v. Nikaya, and extracts from Buddhaghosa's commentary
on the Brahmag-ala-sutta.


DHAMMAPADA.


admits twelve books only, and assigns them all to the Abhi-
dhamma, while the Ma^^imabM/zakas admit fifteen books,
and assign them to the Sutta-pi/aka. The order of the
fifteen books is: i. Cataka [10] ; %. Mahaniddesa [n];
3. iTullaniddesa [1 1] ; 4. Pa/isambhidamagga [13] ; 5. Sutta-
nipata [5] ; 6. DHAMMAPADA [%] ; 7. Udana [3] ; 8. Iti-
vuttaka [4] ; 9. VirMnavatthu [6] ; 10. Petavatthu [7] ;
11. Theragatha [8]; 12. Therigatha [9]; 13. iTariya-
pi&ika [15] ; 14. Apad&na [13] ; 15. Buddhava^sa [14] \

The Khuddaka-pci^a is left out in the second list, and
the number is brought to fifteen by dividing Niddesa into
MaM-niddesa and iTulla-niddesa.

There is a commentary on the Dhammapada in Pali,
and supposed to be written by Buddhaghosa ?, in the first
half of the fifth century A.D. In explaining the verses of the
Dhammapada, the commentator gives for every or nearly
every verse a parable to illustrate its meaning, which is
likewise believed to have been uttered by Buddha in his
intercourse with his disciples, or in preaching to the multi-
tudes that came to hear him.

Date of the Dhammapada.
The only means of fixing the date of the Dhammapada
is trying to ascertain the date of the Buddhist canon
of which it forms a part, or the date of Buddhaghosa,
who wrote a commentary on it. This, however, is by no
means easy, and the evidence on which we have to rely is
such that we must not be surprised if those who are
accustomed to test historical and chronological evidence

1 The figures within brackets refer to the other list of books in the Khud-
daka-nikaya. See also p. xxviii.

2 M. LeonFeer in the Journal Asiatique, 1871, p. 266, mentions another com-
mentary of a more philosophical character, equally ascribed to Buddhaghosa,
and having the title Vivara Bra Dhammapada, i. e. L'auguste Dhammapada
devoile. Professor Forchhammer in his ' List of Manuscripts,' 1879-80, men-
tions the following works in connection with the Dhammapada : Dhammapada-
Nissayo ; Dh. P. A^Aakatha by Buddhaghosa ; Dh. P. A^Aakatha Nissayo,
3 vols., containing a complete translation of the commentary ; Dh. P. Vattku.
Of printed books he quotes: Kayanupassanakyam, a work based on the
Garavaggo, Mandalay, 1876 (390 pages), and Dhammapada-desanakyam,
printed in * British Burma News.'


INTRODUCTION. XI


in Greece and Rome, decline to be convinced by it. As
a general rule, I quite agree that we cannot be too sceptical
in assigning a date to ancient books, particularly if we
intend to use them as documents for tracing the history
of human thought. To the initiated, I mean to those who
have themselves worked in the mines of ancient Oriental
literature, such extreme scepticism may often seem un-
scientific and uncalled for. They are more or less aware
of hundreds of arguments, each by itself, it may be, of
small weight, but all combined proving irresistible. They
are conscious, too, of having been constantly on the look
out for danger, and, as all has gone on smoothly, they feel
sure that, in the main, they are on the right road. Still it is
always useful to be as incredulous as possible, particularly
against oneself, and to have before our eyes critics who will
not yield one inch beyond what they are forced to yield by
the strongest pressure of facts.

The age of our MSS. of the canonical books, either in
P&li or Sanskrit, is of no help to us. All Indian MSS. are
comparatively modern, and one who has probably handled
more Indian MSS. than anybody else, Mr. A. Burnell,
has lately expressed his conviction that 'no MS. written
one thousand years ago is now existent in India, and that
it is almost impossible to find one written five hundred
years ago, for most MSS. which claim to be of that date
are merely copies of old MSS. the dates of which are
repeated by the copyists V

Nor is the language, whether Sanskrit or P&li, a safe
guide for fixing dates. Both languages continue to be
written to our own time, and though there are some
characteristic marks to distinguish more modern from more
ancient Buddhist Sanskrit and Pali, this branch of critical
scholarship requires to be cultivated far more extensively
and accurately before true scholars would venture to fix the
date of a Sanskrit or P&li text on the strength of linguistic
evidence alone2.

1 Indian Antiquary, 1880, p. 233.

2 See some important remarks on this subject in FausbolPs Introduction to
Sutta-nipata, p. xi.


Xll DHAMMAPADA.


The Buddhists themselves have no difficulty in assigning
a date to their sacred canon. They are told in that canon
itself that it was settled at the First Council, or immediately
after the death of Buddha, and they believe that it was
afterwards handed down by means of oral tradition, or
actually written down in books by order of Klsyapa, the
president of the First Council \ Buddhaghosa, a learned
and in some respects a critical scholar, living in the be-
ginning of the fifth century A.D., asserts that the canon
which he had before him, was the same as that fixed by
the First Council 2.

Several European students have adopted the same
opinion, and, so far as I know, no argument has yet been
advanced showing the impossibility of the native view,
that some collection of Buddha's doctrines was made im-
mediately after his death at R^agaha, and that it was
finally settled at what is called the Second Council, or the
Council of Ves&li. But what is not impossible is not there-
fore true, nor can anything be gained by appealing to later
witnesses, such as, for instance, Hiouen Thsang, who tra-
velled through India in the seventh century, and wrote
down anything that he could learn, little concerned whether
one statement tallied with the other or not 3. He says that
the Tipi/aka was written down on palm leaves by Klsyapa
at the end of the First Council. But what can be the weight
of such a witness, living more than a thousand years after
the event, compared with that, for instance, of the Mahd-
va^sa, which dates from the fifth century of our era, and


1 Bigandet, Life of Gaudama (Rangoon, 1866), p. 350 ; but also p. 120 note.

2 See Childers, s. v. Tipi^aka. There is a curious passage in Buddhaghosa's
account of the First Council. * Now one may ask,' he says, ' Is there or is there
not in this first Paragika anything to be taken away or added? ' I reply, There
is nothing in the words of the Blessed Buddha that can be taken away, for the
Buddhas speak not even a single syllable in vain, yet in the words of disciples
and devatas there are things which may be omitted, and these the elders who
made the recension, did omit. On the other hand, additions are everywhere
necessary, and accordingly, whenever it was necessary to add anything, they
added it. If it be asked, What are the additions referred to? I reply, Only
sentences necessary to connect the text, as 'at that time,' * again at that time,'
'and so forth.'

3 Pelerins Bouddhistes, vol. i. p. 158.


INTRODUCTION. Xlll


tells us in the account of Mahinda's missionary journey-
to Ceylon (341/318), that the son of Asoka had to spend
three years in learning the Tipi/aka by heart from the
mouth of a teacher1? No mention is then made of any
books or MSS., when it would have been most natural to
do so 2. At a later time, during the reign of King Va#aga-
mani3 (88-76 B.C.), the same chronicle, the Mahava^sa, tells
us that * the profoundly wise priests had theretofore orally
(mukhapa/fena) perpetuated the Pali of the Pi/akattaya
and its A^akatha (commentary), but that at this period the
priests, foreseeing the perdition of the people assembled,
and in order that the religion might endure for ages, re-
corded the same in books (potthakesu likhapayuM)4.'

No one has yet questioned the dates of the Dtpava^sa,
about 400 A.D., or of the first part of the Mahava^sa,
between 459-477 A. D., and though no doubt there is an
interval of nearly 600 years between the composition of
the Mahava/^sa and the recorded writing down of the
Buddhist canon under Va#agamani, yet we must remember
that the Ceylonese chronicles were confessedly founded on
an older A^akatha preserved in the monasteries of the
island, and representing an unbroken line of local tradition.

My own argument therefore, so long as the question was
only whether we could assign a pre-Christian date to the
Pali Buddhist canon, has always been this. We have
the commentaries on the Pali canon translated from Sin-
halese into Pali, or actually composed, it may be, by
Buddhaghosa. Buddhaghosa confessedly consulted various

1 Mahavarasa, p. 37 ; DrpavawsaVII, 28-31 ; Buddhaghosha's Parables, p.xviii.

2 Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, p. 351.

8 Dr. E. Miiller (Indian Antiquary, Nov. 1880, p. 270) has discovered inscrip-
tions in Ceylon, belonging to Devanapiya Maharaja Gamirai Tissa, whom he
identifies with Va^agamani.

* The same account is given in the Dipavamsa XX, 20, and in the S&ra-
sangraha, as quoted by Spence Hardy, Legends, p. 192. As throwing light
on the completeness of the Buddhist canon at the time of King Vaftag&mani,
it should be mentioned that, according to the commentary on the Mahavamsa
(Tumour, p. liii), the sect of the Dhammaru£ikas established itself at the
Abhayavihara, which had been constructed by Va#agamani, and that one of
the grounds of their secession was their refusing to acknowledge the Parivara
(thus I read instead of Pariwana) as part of the Vinaya-pi/aka. According to
the Dipavamsa (VII, 42) Mahinda knew the Parivara.


XIV DHAMMAPADA.


MSS., and gives various readings, just as any modern
scholar might do. This was in the beginning of the fifth
century A.D., and there is nothing improbable, though I
would say no more, in supposing that some of the MSS.,
consulted by Buddhaghosa, dated from the first century
B.C., when Va#agamani ordered the sacred canon to be
reduced to writing.

There is one other event with reference to the existence
of the sacred canon in Ceylon, recorded in the Mahava^sa,
between the time of Buddhaghosa and Va#agamani, viz.
the translation of the Suttas from P&li into the language of
Ceylon, during the reign of Buddhadasa, 339-368 A. D.
If MSS. of that ancient translation still existed, they would,
no doubt, be very useful for determining the exact state
of the Pcili originals at that time \ But even without them
there seems no reason to doubt that Buddhaghosa had
before him old MSS. of the Pctli canon, and that these
were in the main the same as those written down at the
time of Va^/agamani.

Buddhaghosa's Age.
The whole of this argument, however, rested on the
supposition that Buddhaghosa's date in the beginning of
the fifth century A. D. was beyond the reach of reasonable
doubt. ' His age,5 I had ventured to say in the Preface
to Buddhaghosha's Parables (1870), 'can be fixed with
greater accuracy than most dates in the literary history
of India.5 But soon after, one of our most celebrated Pali
scholars, the great Russian traveller, Professor Joh. Minayeff,
expressed in the Melanges Asiatiques (13/25 April, 187 1)
the gravest doubts as to Buddhaghosa's age, and thus
threw the whole Buddhist chronology, so far as it had
then been accepted by all, or nearly all scholars, back into
chaos. He gave as his chief reason that Buddhaghosa was
not, as I supposed, the contemporary of Mahanama, the

1 A note is added, stating that several portions of the other two divi-
sions also of the Pi/akattaya were translated into the Sinhalese language, and
that these alone are consulted by the priests, who are unacquainted with Pali.
On the other hand, it is stated that the Sinhalese text of the A#AakatM exists
no longer. See Spence Hardy, Legends, p. xxv, and p. 69.


INTRODUCTION. XV


author of the Mahava/^sa, but of another Mahanama, the
king of Ceylon.

Professor Minayeff is undoubtedly right in this; but I am
not aware that I, or anybody else, had ever questioned so
palpable a fact. There are two Mahanamas ; one, the king
who reigned from 410-433 A. D. ; the other, the supposed
author of the Mahava^sa, the uncle and protector of King
Dhatusena, 459-477. c Dhatusena,' I had written, ' was the
nephew of the historian Mahanama, and owed the throne
to the protection of his uncle. Dhatusena was in fact the
restorer of a national dynasty, and after having defeated
the foreign usurpers (the Damilo dynasty) " he restored the
religion which had been set aside by the foreigners "' (Mahav.
p. 2^6). Among his many pious acts it is particularly
mentioned that he gave a thousand, and ordered the Dipa-
va^sa to be promulgated. As Mahanama was the uncle
of Dhatusena, who reigned from 459-477, he may be con-
sidered as a trustworthy witness with regard to events that
occurred between 410 and 433. Now the literary activity of
Buddhaghosa in Ceylon falls in that period V

These facts being admitted, it is surely not too great
a stretch of probability to suppose, as I did, that a man
whose nephew was king in 459-477, might have been
alive in 410-433, that is to say, might have been a con-
temporary of Buddhaghosa. I did not commit myself to
any further theories. The question whether Mahanama,
the uncle of Dhatusena, was really the author of the Maha-
vawsa, the question whether he wrote the second half of
the 37th chapter of that work, or broke off his chronicle in
the middle of that chapter, I did not discuss, having no
new materials to bring forward beyond those on which
Tumour and those who followed him had founded their
conclusions, and which I had discussed in my History of
Sanskrit Literature (1859), p. 367. All I said was, 'It is
difficult to determine whether the 38th as well as the (whole
of the) 37th chapter came from the pen of Mahanama, for

1 ' Ungefahr 50 Jahre alter als MaMnama ist Buddhaghosha/ see Wester-
gaard, Uber Buddha's Todesjahr, p. 99.


XVI DHAMMAPADA.


the Mahava/^sa was afterwards continued by different
writers, even to the middle of the last century. But,
taking into account all the circumstances of the case, it is
most probable that Mahanclma carried on the history to
his own time, to the death of Dhatusena, 477 A.D.'

What I meant by c all the circumstances of the case'
might easily be understood by any one who had read Tur-
nouts Preface to the Mah&va/^sa. Tumour himself thought
at first that Mahanima's share in the MaMva^sa ended
with the year 301 A.D., and that the rest of the work, called
the Sulu Wans6, was composed by subsequent writers1.
Dharmakirti is mentioned by name as having continued
the work to the reign of Prikrama B&hu (a.D. 1266). But
Tumour afterwards changed his mind 2. Considering that
the account of MaMsena's reign, the first of the Seven
Kings, terminates in the middle of a chapter, at verse 48,
while the whole chapter is called the Sattara^iko, 'the
chapter of the Seven Kings,' he naturally supposed that
the whole of that chapter, extending to the end of the reign
of his nephew Dhatusena, might be the work of Mahinama,
unless there were any strong proofs to the contrary. Such
proofs, beyond the tradition of writers of the MSS., have
not, as yet, been adduced 3.

But even if it could be proved that Mah&n&ma's own pen
did not go beyond the 48th verse of the 37th chapter, the
historical trustworthiness of the concluding portion of that
chapter, containing the account of Buddhaghosa's literary
activity, nay, even of the 38th chapter, would be little
affected thereby. We know that both the Mahava^sa
and the somewhat earlier Dipava^sa were founded on the
Sinhalese A^akathas, the commentaries and chronicles
preserved in the Mah&viMra at Anur&dhapura. We also
know that that ViMra was demolished by Mahasena, and
deserted by nearly all its inmates for the space of nine
years (p. 335), and again for the space of nine months

1 Introduction, p. ii. The iTulavawsa is mentioned with the Mahavamsa, both
as the works of Mahanama, by Professor Forchhammer in his List of Pali MSS.

2 Introduction, p. xci.

3 See Rhys Davids, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1875, p. 196.


INTRODUCTION. XV11


(p. 237). We can well understand therefore why the older
history, the Dipava^sa, should end with the death of MaM-
sena (died 302 A.D.), and why in the Mah&varasa too there
should have been a break at that date. But we must not
forget that, during Mahan&ma's life, the MaMvihara at
Anuradhapura was restored, that some kind of chronicle,
called the Dtpava^sa, whether it be a general name of any
' chronicle of the island,' or of our Dipava^sa, or, it may be,
even of our Mah&va#zsa, was ordered to be published or pro-
mulgated (dipetum) under Dh&tusena, the nephew and protege
of Mahan&ma. Therefore, even if we do not insist on the
personal authorship of Mahanama, we may certainly main-
tain that historical entries had been made in the chronicles
of Anuradhapura during Dhatusena's reign, and probably
under the personal auspices of Mahanama, so that if we
find afterwards, in the second half of the 37th chapter of
his Mahava^sa, an account of events which had happened
between the destruction of the Mahavihara and the reign
of Dh&tusena, and among them an account of so important
an event as the arrival of Buddhaghosa from Magadha and
his translation of the Sinhalese A///£akathcL into the lan-
guage of Magadha, we may well suppose that they rest
on the authority of native chronicles, written not long after
the events, and that therefore, £ under all the circumstances
of the case/ the age of Buddhaghosa can be fixed with
greater accuracy than most dates in the literary history
of India.

There is one difficulty still remaining with regard to the
date of the historian Mahanama which might have per-
plexed Tumour's mind, and has certainly proved a stumbling-
block to myself. Tumour thought that the author of the
commentary on the Mahava/^sa, the Va/^satthappakctsini,
was the same as the author of the Mahava^sa, viz. Maha-
nama. The date of that commentary, however, as we know
now, must be fixed much later, for it speaks of a schism
which took place in the year 601 A. D., during the reign
of Agrabddhi (also called Dhatapatisso). Tumour1 looked


1 Introduction, p. liii.

£10] b


XV111 DHAMMAPADA.


upon that passage as a later interpolation, because he
thought the evidence for the identity of the author and
the commentator of the Mahavawsa too strong to be set
aside. He trusted chiefly to a passage in the commentary,
and if that passage had been correctly rendered, the con-
clusion which he drew from it could hardly be resisted.
We read in the Mahava/^sa (p. 254) :

' Certain members of the Moriyan dynasty, dreading the
power of the (usurper) Subho, the balattho, had settled in
various parts of the country, concealing themselves. Among
them there was a certain landed proprietor Dhatusena, who
had established himself at Nandivapi. His son named
Dhata, who lived at the village Ambiliyago, had two sons,
Dhatusena and Silatissabodhi, of unexceptional descent.
Their mother's brother(Mahanama), devoted to the
cause of religion, continued to reside (at Anura-
dhapura) in his sacerdotal character, at the edifice
built by the minister Dighasandana. The youth
Dhatusena became a priest in his fraternity, and on a certain
day, while he was chaunting at the foot of a tree, a shower
of rain fell, and a Naga, seeing him there, encircled him in
his folds, and covered him and his book with his hood. . . .
Causing an image of Maha Mahinda to be made, and con-
veying it to the edifice (Ambamalaka) in which the thera's
body had been burnt, in order that he might celebrate
a great festival there, and that he might also promul-
gate the contents of the Dipava^sa, distributing
a thousand pieces, he caused it to be read aloud V

If we compare with this extract from the Mahava^sa
a passage from the commentary as translated by Tumour,
we can well understand how he arrived at the conclusion
that it was written by the same person who wrote the
Mahavamsa.

Tumour translates (p. liv) :

' Upon these data by me, the thera, who had, with due

1 Mr. Turnour added a note in which he states that Dipavarasa is here meant
for Mahavamsa, but whether brought down to this period, or only to the end of
the reign of Mahasena, to which alone the Tika extends, there is no means of
ascertaining (p. 257).


INTRODUCTION. XIX


solemnity, been invested with the dignified title of Maha-
nama, resident at the parive^a founded by the
minister Dighasandana, endowed with the capacity
requisite to record the narrative comprised in the Maha-
va^sa, in due order, rejecting only the dialect in which
the Singhalese A////akatha are written, but retaining their
import and following their arrangement, the history, entitled
the Palapaddruva^sa (Padyapadanuva/^sa), is compiled.
As even in times when the despotism of the ruler of the
land, and the horrors arising from the inclemencies of the
seasons, and when panics of epidemics and other visitations
prevailed, this work escaped all injury; and moreover, as
it serves to perpetuate the fame of the Buddhas, their
disciples, and the Pach6 Buddhas of old, it is also worthy
of bearing the title of Va/^satthappakasini.'

As the evidence of these two passages in support of the
identity of the author and the commentator of the Maha-
va/^sa seemed to me very startling, I requested Mr. Rhys
Davids to copy for me the passage of the commentary.

The passage runs as follows :

Ya ettavata mahava/^satthanusarakusalena Dighasanda-
senapatina karapita-mahaparive^avasina Mahanamo ti ga-
ruhi gahitanamadheyyena there/za pubba-Sihala-bhasitaya
Sthala/Z^akathaya bhasantara/^ eva va.gg\ya, atthasaram
eva gahetva tantinayanurupena katassa imassa Padyapada-
nuva^zsassa atthava/mana maya tarn eva sannissitena
araddha, padesissariya- dubbu///£ibhaya - rogabhayadi - vivi-
dha-antaraya-yuttakale pi anantarayena ni^Mnam upagata,
sa buddha-buddhasavaka-pa^ekabuddhadina^ poran&nant
kikkam pubbava^satthappakasanato ayam Vawsatthappa-
kasini nama ti dharetabba. . . . Padyapadanuvawsa-
va.nna.nsi Va^satthappakasini mtthitt.

Mr. Rhys Davids translates this :

' The commentary on this Padyapada.nuvaw.ra, which (latter
work) was made (in the same order and arrangement, and re-
taining the sense, but rejecting the dialect, of the Sinhalese
commentary formerly expressed in the Sinhalese tongue)
by the elder who bore the name of Mahanama, which he had

b 2


XX DHAMMAPADA.


received from the venerable, who resided at the Mahapari-
ve/za built by the minister Dighasanda, and who was well
able to conform to the sense of the Mahava/^sa — (this com-
mentary) which was undertaken by me out of devotion to
that (history), and which (though thus undertaken) at a time
full of danger of various kinds — such as the danger from
disease, and the danger from drought, and the danger
from the government of the province — has been safely
brought to a conclusion — this (commentary), since it makes
known the meaning of the history of old, the mission of
the ancients, of the Buddhas, of their disciples, and of the
Pa^eka Buddhas, should bear the name Va^satthappa-
kasini. . . .
'End of the Va^satthappakasint, the commentary on
the Padyapadanuva^sa.'

This shows clearly that Tumour made a mistake in trans-
lating this exceedingly involved, yet perfectly intelligible,
passage, and that so far from proving that the author of
the commentary was the same person as the author of the
text1, it proves the very contrary. Nay, I feel bound to
add, that we might now argue that as the commentator
must have lived later than 60 1 A. D., the fact that he too
breaks off at verse 48 of chapter 37, seems to show that at
Tiis time also the Mahava^sa did not extend as yet beyond
that verse. But even then, the fact that with the restoration
of the Mahavihara of Anuradhapura an interest in historical
studies revived in Ceylon, would clearly show that we may
trust the date of Buddhaghosa, as fixed by the second part
of the 37th chapter of the Mahava^sa, at all events till
stronger evidence is brought forward against such a date.

Now I am not aware of any such evidence2. On the
contrary, making allowance for a difference of some ten or
twenty years, all the evidence which we can gain from
other quarters tends to confirm the date of Buddha-

1 Dr. Oldenberg informs me that the commentator quotes various readings
in the text of the Mahavarasa.

8 The passage, quoted by Professor Minayeff from the Sasanavamsa, would
assign to Buddhaghosa the date of 930 — 543 = 387 a.d., which can easily be
reconciled with his accepted date. If he is called the contemporary of Siripala,
we ought to know who that Siripala is.


INTRODUCTION. XXI


ghosa1. I therefore feel no hesitation in here reprinting
that story, as we find it in the Mahava^sa, not free from
legendary ingredients, it is true, yet resting, I believe, on
a sound foundation of historical fact.

' A Brahman youth, born in the neighbourhood of the
terrace of the great Bo-tree (in Magadha), accomplished in
the "vig*ra" (knowledge) and "sippa" (art), who had achieved
the knowledge of the three Vedas, and possessed great
aptitude in attaining acquirements ; indefatigable as a
schismatic disputant, and himself a schismatic wanderer
over Gambudtpa, established himself, in the character of
a disputant, in a certain vihara 2, and was in the habit of
rehearsing, by night and by day with clasped hands, a
discourse which he had learned, perfect in all its com-
ponent parts, and sustained throughout in the same lofty
strain. A certain Mahathera, Revata, becoming acquainted
with him there,vand (saying to himself), " This individual is
a person of profound knowledge, it will be worthy (of me)
to convert him ; " enquired, " Who is this who is braying
like an ass ? " The Brahman replied to him, " Thou canst
define, then, the meaning conveyed in the bray of asses."
On the Thera rejoining, " I can define it ; " he (the Brah-
man) exhibited the extent of the knowledge he possessed.
The Thera criticised each of his propositions, and pointed
out in what respect they were fallacious. He who had
been thus refuted, said, " Well, then, descend to thy own
creed ; " and he propounded to him a passage from the
Abhidhamma (of the Pi/akattaya). He (the Brahman)
could not divine the signification of that passage, and
enquired, "Whose manta is this?" — "It is Buddha's manta."
On his exclaiming, " Impart it to me ; " the Thera replied,
"Enter the sacerdotal order." He who was desirous of
acquiring the knowledge of the Pi/akattaya, subsequently
coming to this conviction, " This is the sole road " (to sal-
vation), became a convert to that faith. As he was as
profound in his eloquence (ghosa) as Buddha himself, they
conferred on him the appellation of Buddhaghosa (the

1 See Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, pp. 351, 381.

2 On this vihara, its foundation and character, see Oldenberg, Viaaya, vol. i.
p. liii ; Hiouen-thsang, III, p. 487 seq.


XX11 DHAMMAPADA.


voice of Buddha) ; and throughout the world he became as
renowned as Buddha. Having there (in Gambudipa) com-
posed an original work called iVanodaya (Rise of Know-
ledge), he, at the same time, wrote the chapter called
A/^asalint, on the Dhammasangani (one of the commen-
taries on the Abhidhamma).

' Revata Thera then observing that he was desirous of
undertaking the compilation of a general commentary
on the Pifekattaya, thus addressed him : " The text
alone of the Pi/akattaya has been preserved in this land,
the Att/iaka.th& are not extant here, nor is there any
version to be found of the schisms (vada) complete. The
Sinhalese A^akatha are genuine. They were com-
posed in the Sinhalese language by the inspired and pro-
foundly wise Mahinda, who had previously consulted the
discourses (katMmagga) of Buddha, authenticated at the
three convocations, and the dissertations and arguments of
S&riputta and others, and they are extant among the Sin-
halese. Preparing for this, and studying the same, translate
them according to the rules of the grammar of the Maga-
dhas. It will be an act conducive to the welfare of the
whole world."

'Having been thus advised, this eminently wise personage
rejoicing therein, departed from thence, and visited this
island in the reign of this monarch (i. e. Mahanama, 410-
432). On reaching the Mahavihara (at Anuradhapura), he
entered the Mahapadhana hall, the most splendid of the
apartments in the vihara, and listened to the Sinhalese
A//^akath&, and the Theravada, from the beginning to the
end, propounded by the Thera Sanghapala ; and became
thoroughly convinced that they conveyed the true meaning
of the doctrines of the Lord of Dhamma. Thereupon
paying reverential respect to the priesthood, he thus peti-
tioned : " I am desirous of translating the A/^akatha ;
give me access to all your books." The priesthood, for the
purpose of testing his qualifications, gave only two gathas,
saying, " Hence prove thy qualification ; having satisfied
ourselves on this point, we will then let thee have all our
books/' From these (taking these gatha for his text), and


INTRODUCTION. XX111


consulting the Pi/akattaya, together with the A^akathd,
and condensing them into an abridged form, he composed
the work called the Visuddhimagga. Thereupon, having
assembled the priesthood, who had acquired a thorough
knowledge of the doctrines of Buddha, at the Bo-tree, he
commenced to read out the work he had composed. The
devatas, in order that they might make his (Buddhaghosa's)
gifts of wisdom celebrated among men, rendered that book
invisible. He, however, for a second and third time re-
composed it. When he was in the act of producing his
book for the third time, for the purpose of propounding it,
the devatas restored the other two copies also. The assem-
bled priests then read out the three books simultaneously.
In those three versions there was no variation whatever
from the orthodox Theravadas in passages, in words, or in
syllables. Thereupon, the priesthood rejoicing, again and
again fervently shouted forth, saying, "Most assuredly
this is Metteya (Buddha) himself," and made over to him
the books in which the Pi^akattaya were recorded, together
with the A/^akatha. Taking up his residence in the
secluded Ganth&kara-vihara (at Anuradhapura), he trans-
lated, according to the grammatical rules of the Maga-
dhas, which is the root of all languages, the whole of the
Sinhalese Az^akatha (into Pali). This proved an achieve-
ment of the utmost consequence to all beings, whatever
their language.

'All the Theras and A/£ariyas held this compilation in
the same estimation as the text (of the Pi/akattaya). There-
after, the objects of his mission having been fulfilled, he
returned to Gambudipa, to worship at the Bo-tree (at Uru-
velaya, or Uruvilva, in Magadha).5

Here x we have a simple account of Buddhaghosa 2 and

1 Mahavarasa, p. 250, translated by Tumour.

2 The Burmese entertain the highest respect for Buddhaghosa. Bishop
Bigandet, in his Life or Legend of Gaudama (Rangoon, 1866), writes: ' It is
perhaps as well to mention here an epoch which has been, at all times, famous
in the history of Budhism in Burma. I allude to the voyage which a Religious
of Thaton, named Budhagosa, made to Ceylon, in the year of religion 943 = 400
a.d. The object of this voyage was to procure a copy of the scriptures. He
succeeded in his undertaking. He made use of the Burmese, or rather Taking


XXIV DHAMMAPADA.


his literary labours written by a man, himself a priest,
and who may well have known Buddhaghosa during his
stay in Ceylon. It is true that the statement of his writing
the same book three times over without a single various
reading, partakes a little of the miraculous ; but we find
similar legends mixed up with accounts of translations
of other sacred books, and we cannot contend that writers
who believed in such legends are therefore altogether
unworthy to be believed as historical witnesses.

But although the date which we can assign to Buddha-
ghosa's translation of the commentaries on the Pali Tipi-
/aka proves the existence of that canon, not only for the
beginning of the fifth century of our era, but likewise, though
it may be, with less stringency, for the first century before
our era, the time of Va//agamani, the question whether Bud-
dhaghosa was merely a compiler and translator of old com-
mentaries, and more particularly of the commentaries brought
to Ceylon by Mahinda (241 B.C.), or whether he added any-
thing of his own1, requires to be more carefully examined.
The Buddhists themselves have no difficulty on that point.
They consider the A/^akathas or commentaries as old as
the canon itself. To us, such a supposition seems impro-
bable, yet it has never been proved to be impossible. The
Mahava^sa tells us that Mahinda, the son of Asoka, who
had become a priest, learnt the whole of the Buddhist
canon, as it then was, in three years (p. 37) 2; and that
at the end of the Third Council he was despatched to
Ceylon, in order to establish there the religion of Buddha
(p. 71). The king of Ceylon, Devanampiya Tissa, was
converted, and Buddhism soon became the dominant

characters, in transcribing the manuscripts, which were written with the cha-
racters of Magatha. The Burmans lay much stress upon that voyage, and
always carefully note down the year it took place. In fact, it is to Budhagosa
that the people living on the shores of the Gulf of Martaban owe the pos-
session of the Budhist scriptures. From Thaton, the collection made by Budha-
gosa was transferred to Pagan, six hundred and fifty years after it had been
imported from Ceylon.' See ibid. p. 392.

1 He had written the iVanodaya, and the Aw^asalini, a commentary on the
Dhamma-sangawi, before he went to Ceylon. Cf. Mahavamsa, p. 251.

2 He learnt the five Nikayas, and the seven sections (of the Abhidhamma) ;
the two Vibhangas of the Vinaya, the Parivara and the Khandhaka. See
Dipavamsa VII, 42.


INTRODUCTION. XXV


religion of the island. The Tipi/aka and the A#$akatha,
such as they had been collected or settled at the Third
Council in 242 B.C., were brought to Ceylon by Mahinda,
who promulgated them orally, the Tipi/aka in Pali, the
A#/£akatha in Sinhalese, together with an additional
A#$akatha of his own. It does not follow that Mahinda
knew the whole of that enormous literature by heart, for, as
he was supported by a number of priests, they may well
have divided the different sections among them, following
the example of Ananda and Upali at the First Council.
The same applies to their disciples also. But the fact of
their transmitting the sacred literature by oral tradition1 was
evidently quite familiar to the author of the Mah&va^sa.
For when he comes to describe the reign of Va^agamani
(88-76 B.C.) he simply says : 'The profoundly wise priests
had heretofore orally perpetuated the Pali Pi/akattaya and
its A////akatha (commentaries). At this period these priests,
foreseeing the perdition of the people (from the perversions
of the true doctrines), assembled ; and in order that the reli-
gion might endure for ages, wrote the same in books/ No
valid objection has yet been advanced to our accepting
Buddhaghosa's A///zakathas as a translation and new re-
daction of the A#/zakathas which were reduced to writing
under Va//agamani 2, and these again as a translation of the
old A^akathas brought to Ceylon by Mahinda 3. There
is prima facie evidence in favour of the truth of historical
events vouched for by such works as the Dipava/^sa and
the Mahava^sa so far back at least as Mahinda, because
we know that historical events were recorded in the
monasteries of Ceylon long before Mahanama's time.
Beyond Mahinda we move in legendary history, and must
be ready to surrender every name and every date as soon
as rebutting evidence has been produced, but not till then.
I cannot, therefore, see any reason why we should not
treat the verses of the Dhammapada, if not as the utter-
ances of Buddha, at least as what were believed by the


1 On the importance of oral tradition in the history of Sanskrit literature see
the writer's Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 1859, PP- 497~524-

2 Mahavarasa, p. 207; Dipavawasa XX, 20. 3 Mahavamsa, p. 251.


XXVI DHAMMAPADA.


members of the Council under A^oka, in 242 B.C., to have
been the utterances of the founder of their religion ; nor can
I see that Professor Minayeff has shaken the date of Bud-
dhaghosa and the general credibility of the Ceylonese tradi-
tion, that he was the translator and editor of commentaries
which had existed in the island for many centuries,
whether from the time of Va#agamani or from the time
of Mahinda.

Date of the Buddhist Canon.

We now return to the question of the date of the Bud-
dhist canon, which, as yet, we have only traced back to the
first century before Christ, when it was reduced to writing in
Ceylon under King Va//agamani. The question is, how far
beyond that date we may trace its existence in a collected
form, or in the form of the three Pi/akas or baskets. There
may be, and we shall see that there is, some doubt as to the
age of certain works, now incorporated in the Tipi&ika. We
are told, for instance, that some doubt attached to the canon-
icity of the iTariya-pi/aka, the Apadana, and the Buddha-
va/^sa1, and there is another book of the Abhidhamma-
pi/aka, the Kathavatthu, which was reported to be the work
of Tissa Moggaliputta, the president of the Third Council.
Childers, s. v., stated that it was composed by the apostle
Moggaliputtatissa, and delivered by him at the Third
Mahasarigiti. The same scholar, however, withdrew this
opinion on p. 507 of his valuable Dictionary, where he says :
'It is a source of great regret to me that in my article
on Kathavatthuppakara^aw I inadvertently followed James
D'Alwis in the stupendous blunder of his assertion that the
Kathavatthu was added by Moggaliputtatissa' at the Third
Convocation. The Kathavatthu is one of the Abhidhamma
books, mentioned by Buddhaghosa as having been rehearsed
at the First Convocation, immediately after Gotama's death ;
and the passage in Mahava^sa upon which D'Alwis rests
his assertion is as follows, Kathavatthuppakarara;za?// para-
vadappamaddana^ abhasi Tissatthero ka. tasmi^ sangiti-
ma^ale, which simply means ' in that Convocation-assem-

1 See Childers, s. v. Nikaya.


INTRODUCTION. XXV11


bly the Thera Tissa also recited (Buddha's) heresy-crushing
Kathavatthuppakara/za.5

This mistake, for I quite agree with Childers that it was
a mistake, becomes however less stupendous than at first
sight it would appear, when we read the account given in
the Dipava^sa. Here the impression is easily conveyed
that Moggaliputta was the author of the Kathavatthu, and
that he recited it for the first time at the Third Council.
'Wise Moggaliputta/ we read1, 'the destroyer of the
schismatic doctrines, firmly established the Theravada, and
held the Third Council. Having destroyed the different
(heretical) doctrines, and subdued many shameless people,
and restored splendour to the (true) faith, he proclaimed
(pakasayi) (the treatise called) Kathavatthu.' And again :
' They all were sectarians2, opposed to the Theravada ; and
in order to annihilate them and to make his own doctrine
resplendent, the Thera set forth (desesi) the treatise belong-
ing to the Abhidhamma, which is called Kathavatthu3.'

At present, however, we are not concerned with these
smaller questions. We treat the canon as a whole, divided
into three parts, and containing the books which still exist
in MSS., and we want to find out at what time such a
collection was made. The following is a short abstract of
the Tipi/aka, chiefly taken from Childers' Pali Dictionary :

I. Vinaya-pi/aka.
i. Vibhanga4.

Vol. I, beginning with Para£*ika, or sins involving

expulsion.
Vol. II, beginning with Pa^ittiya, or sins involving
penance.

2. Khandhaka.

Vol. I, Mahavagga, the large section.
Vol. II, iTullavagga, the small section.

3. Parivarapa/^a, an appendix and later resume (25 chap-

ters). See p. xiii, n. 4 ; p. xxiv, n. 2.

1 Dipavamsa VII, 40. 2 Dipavarasa VII, 55.

3 Dr. Oldenberg, in his Introduction to the Vinaya-pi/aka, p. xxxii.

4 Oldenberg, Vinaya-piteka I, p. xvi, treats it as an extended reading of the
Patimokkha.


XXV111 DHAMMAPADA.


II. Sutta-pi/aka.

i. Digha-nikaya, collection of long suttas (34 suttas)1.

2. Ma^^ima-nikaya, collection of middle suttas (152

suttas).

3. Sa^yutta-nikdya, collection of joined suttas.

4. Anguttara-nikaya 2, miscellaneous suttas, in divisions

the length of which increases by one.

5. Khuddaka-nikaya3, the collection of short suttas, con-

sisting of —

1. Khuddakapa^a, the small texts4.

2. Dhammapada, law verses (423) 5.

3. Udana, praise (82 suttas).

4. Itivuttaka, stories referring to sayings of Buddha.

5. Suttanipita, 70 suttas 6.

6. Viminavatthu, stories of Vimanas, celestial palaces.

7. Petavatthu, stories of Pretas, departed spirits.

8. Theragathi, stanzas of monks.

9. Therigatha, stanzas of nuns.

10. Cataka, former births (550 tales)7.

11. Niddesa, explanations of certain suttas by Sariputta.

1 The Mahaparinibbana-sutta, ed. by Childers, Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, translated with other Suttas by Rhys Davids (S. B. E. vol. xi). Sept
Suttas Palis, par Grimblot, Paris, 1876.

2 The first four are sometimes called the Four Nikayas, the five together the
Five Nikayas. They represent the Dharma, as settled at the First and Second
Councils, described in the JSTullavagga (Oldenberg, I, p. xi).

s Sometimes Khuddaka-nikaya stands for the whole Vinaya and Abhidhamma-
piteka, with the fifteen divisions here given of Khuddaka-nikaya. In the com-
mentary on the Brahmag-ala-sutta it is said that the Dighanikaya professors
rehearsed the text of the Gataka, Maha and isTulla Niddesa, Padsambhidamagga,
Suttanipata, Dhammapada, Udana, Itivuttaka, Vimana, and Petavatthu, Thera
and Theri Gatha, and called it Khuddakagantha, and made it a canonical text,
forming part of the Abhidhamma ; while the Mag-g-Aimanikaya professors assert
that, with the addition of the -Kariyapi/aka, Apadana, and Buddhavamsa, the
whole of this Khuddakagantha was included in the Suttapi/aka. See Childers,
s. v. Nikaya. See also p. x.

4 Published by Childers, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1869.

5 Published by Fausboll, 1855.

6 Thirty translated by Sir Coomara Swamy ; the whole by Fausboll, in Sacred
Books of the East, vol. x.

7 Published by Fausboll, translated by Rhys Davids.


INTRODUCTION. XXIX


12. Parisambhidamagga, the road of discrimination, and

intuitive insight.

13. Apadana1, legends.

14. Buddhava^sa 1) story of twenty-four preceding Bud-

dhas and of Gotama.

15. iTariyapi/aka1, basket of conduct, Buddha's meri-

torious actions 2.

III. Abhidhamma-pi/aka.

1. Dhammasahga/zi, numeration of conditions of life3.

2. Vibhanga, disquisitions (18).

3. Kathavatthupakara/za, book of subjects for discussion

(1000 suttas).

4. Puggalapa^atti or pa^^atti, declaration on puggala,

or personality.

5. Dhatukatha, account of dhatus or elements.

6. Yamaka, pairs (ten divisions).

7. Pa#Mnapakara?za, book of causes.

Taking this collection as a whole we may lay it down as
self-evident that the canon, in its collected form, cannot be
older than any of the events related therein.

There are two important facts for determining the age of
the Pali canon, which, as Dr. Oldenberg4 has been the first to
show, should take precedence of all other arguments, viz.

1. That in the Tipi/aka, as we now have it, no mention
is made of the so-called Third Council, which took place
at Pa/aliputta, under King Asoka, about 242 B. C.

%. That in the Tipi&tka, as we now have it, the First
Council of Ra^agaha (477 B.C.) and the Second Council
of Vesali (377 B.C.) are both mentioned.

From these two facts it may safely be concluded that the
Buddhist canon, as handed down to us, was finally closed

1 Buddhaghosa does not say whether these were recited at the First Council.

2 Partly translated by Gogerly, Journal of the Asiatic Society of Ceylon, 1852.
8 Cf. Gogerly, Journal of the Asiatic Society of Ceylon, 1848, p. 7.

4 See Oldenberg's Vinaya-pitaka, Introduction, p. xxv. The kings Ag-atasatru
(485-453 b.c), Udayin (453-437 B.C.), and Mu«rfa (437"429 B-c0 are al1
mentioned in the Tipitfaka. See Oldenberg, Zeitschrift der D. M. G., XXXIV,
PP. 752, 753-


XXX DHAMMAPADA.


after the Second and before, or possibly at, the Third
Council. Nay, the fact that the description of the two
Councils stands at the very end of the iTullavagga may be
taken, as Dr. Oldenberg remarks, as an indication that it
was one of the latest literary contributions which obtained
canonical authority, while the great bulk of the canon may
probably claim a date anterior to the Second Council.

This fact, namely, that the collection of the canon, as
a whole, must have preceded the Second Council rests on
an argument which does great credit to the ingenuity of
Dr. Oldenberg. The Second Council was convoked to
consider the ten deviations1 from the strict discipline of the
earliest times. That discipline had been laid down first in
the Patimokkha rules, then in the commentary now included
in the Vibhanga, lastly in the Mahavagga and isfullavagga.
The rules as to what was allowed or forbidden to a Bhikkhu
were most minute2, and they were so firmly established
that no one could have ventured either to take away or
to add anything to them as they stood in the sacred
code. In that code itself a distinction is made between
the offences which were from the first visited with punish-
ment (para^ika and pa^ittiya) and those misdemeanours
and crimes which were put down as punishable at a later
time (dukka/a and thulla^aya). With these classes the
code was considered as closed, and if any doubt arose as to
the criminality of certain acts, it could be settled at once
by an appeal to the Vinaya-pi/aka. Now it so happens
that, with one exception, the ten deviations that had to be
considered at the Second Council, are not provided for in
the Vinaya-pifeka ; and I quite agree with Dr. Oldenberg's
argument that, if they had been mentioned in the Vinaya-
pifeka, the Second Council would have been objectless.
A mere appeal to chapter and verse in the existing Pi/aka
would then have silenced all dissent. On the other side, if it
had been possible to add anything to the canon, as it then
existed, the ten, or nine, deviations might have been con-

1 Oldenberg, Introduction, p. xxix. 2 Oldenberg, loc. cit. p. xx.


INTRODUCTION. XXXI


demned by a few additional paragraphs of the canon,
without convoking a new Council.

I think we may be nearly certain, therefore, that we
possess the principal portion of the Vinaya-pi/aka as it
existed before the Council of Vesalf.

So far I quite agree with Dr. Oldenberg. But if he
proceeds to argue1 that certain portions of the canon must
have been finally settled before even the First Council took
place, or was believed to have taken place, I do not think
his arguments conclusive. He contends that in the Parinib-
bana-sutta, which tells of the last days of Buddha's life,
of his death, the cremation of his body, and the distribution
of his relics, and of Subhadda's revolt, it would have
been impossible to leave out all mention of the First
Council, if that Council had then been known. It is true,
no doubt, that Subhadda's disloyalty was the chief cause
of the First Council, but there was no necessity to mention
that Council. On the contrary, it seems to me that the
unity of the Parinibbana-sutta would have been broken if,
besides telling of the last days of Buddha, it had also given
a full description of the Council. The very title, the Sutta
of the Great Decease, would have become inappropriate, if
so important a subject as the first Sahgiti had been mixed
up with it. However, how little we may trust to such
general arguments, is best shown by the fact that in some
very early Chinese renderings of the Htnayana text of the
Mahaparinibbana-sutta the story is actually carried on to
the First Council, two (Nos. 552 and 119) mentioning the
rehearsal under Ka^yapa, while the third (No. 118) simply
states that the Tipi/aka was then collected 2.

1 Loc. cit. pp. xxvi-xxviii.

2 There are several Chinese translations of Sutras on the subject of the Maha-
parinirvawa. Three belong to theMahayana school: i. Mahaparinirvawa-sutra,
translated by Dharmaraksha, about 414-423 a. d.; afterwards revised, 424-453
(Nos. 113, 114). 2. Translation by Fa-hian and Buddhabhadra, about 415 a.d.;
less complete (No. 120). 3. Translation (vaipulya) by Dharmaraksha I, i.e. Ku
Fa-hu, about 261-308 a.d. (No. 116). Three belong to the Hinayana school :

1. Mahaparinirvawa-sutra, translated by Po-fa-tsu, about 290-306 a.d. (No. 552).

2. Translation under the Eastern Tsin dynasty, 31 7-420 a.d. (No. 119). 3. Trans-
lation by Fa-hian, about 415 a.d. (No. 118).


XXX11 DHAMMAPADA.


We must be satisfied therefore, so far as I can see
at present, with fixing the date, and the latest date, of
a Buddhist canon at the time of the Second Council,
377 B.C. That some works were added later, we know;
that many of the treatises included in the canon existed
before that Council, can hardly be doubted. The second
chapter of the Dhammapada, for instance, is called the
Appam&da-vagga, and if the Mahava^sa (p. 25) tells us
that at the time when Asoka was converted by Nigrodha,
that Buddhist priest explained to him the Appamada-
vagga, we can hardly doubt that there existed then a
collection (vagga) of verses on Appam&da, such as we
now possess in the Dhammapada and in the Sa/^yutta-
nikaya 1.

With regard to the Vinaya, I should even feel inclined to
admit, with Dr. Oldenberg, that it must have existed in
a more or less settled form before that time. What I doubt
is whether such terms as Pi/aka, basket, or Tipi/aka, the
three baskets, i.e. the canon, existed at that early time.
They have not been met with, as yet, in any of the canon-
ical books ; and if the Dipavaz/zsa (IV, 32) uses the word
' Tipi/aka,' when describing the First Council, this is due to
its transferring new terms to older times. If Dr. Olden-
berg speaks of a Dvi-pi/aka2 as the name of the canon
before the third basket, that of the Abhidhamma, was
admitted, this seems to me an impossible name, because at
the time when the Abhidhamma was not yet recognised as
a third part of the canon, the word pi/aka had probably
no existence as a technical term 3.

We must always, I think, distinguish between the three
portions of the canon, called the basket of the Suttas, the

1 Feer, Revue Critique, 1870, No. 24, p. 377. 2 Introduction, pp. x, xii.

3 Dr. Oldenberg informs me that pi/aka occurs in the .Kankisuttanta in the
Maggvfcima Nikaya (Tumour's MS., fol. the), but applied to the Veda. He
also refers to the tipi^akaHryas mentioned in the Western Cave inscriptions as
compared with the Pa#£anekayaka in the square Asoka character inscriptions
(Cunningham, Bharhut, pi. lvi, No. 52). In the Sutrakr/d-anga of the Gainas,
too, the term picfagam occurs (MS. Berol. fol. 77 a). He admits, however, that
pi/aka or tipitaka, as the technical name of the Buddhist canon, has not yet been
met with in that canon itself, and defends Dvipi/aka only as a convenient term.


INTRODUCTION. XXX1U


basket of Vinaya, and the basket of Abhidhamma, and
the three subjects of Dhamma (sutta), Vinaya, and Abhi-
dhamma, treated in these baskets. The subjects existed
and were taught long before the three baskets were de-
finitely arranged. Dhamma had originally a much wider
meaning than Sutta-pi^aka. It often means the whole
teaching of Buddha ; and even when it refers more par-
ticularly to the Sutta-pifeka, we know that the Dhamma
there taught deals largely with Vinaya and Abhidhamma
doctrines. Even the fact that at the First Council, accord-
ing to the description given in the iTullavagga, the Vinaya
and Dhamma only were rehearsed, though proving the
absence at that time of the Abhidhamma, as a separate
Pi/aka, by no means excludes the subject of the Abhi-
dhamma having been taught under the head of Dhamma.
In the Mahakaru/zapu/z<^arika-sutra the doctrine of Buddha
is divided into Dharma and Vinaya ; the Abhidharma is
not mentioned. But the same text knows of all the twelve
Dharmaprava/fcanani \ the I. Sutra; %. Geya ; 3. Vyaka-
ra/za; 4. GatM ; 5. Udana ; 6. Nidana ; 7. Avadana ; 8.
Itivrzttaka ; 9. £ataka ; 10. Vaipulya ; 11. Adbhutadharma ;
12. Upade^a ; some of these being decidedly metaphysical.
To my mind nothing shows so well the historical character
both of the iTullavagga and of By ddhaghosa in the Introduc-
tion to his commentary on the Digha-nikaya, as that the
former, in its account of the First Council, should know
only of the Vinaya, as rehearsed by Upali, and the Dhamma,
as rehearsed by Ananda, while the much later Buddhaghosa,
in his account of the First Council 2, divides the Dhamma
into two parts, and states that the second part, the Abhi-
dhamma, was rehearsed after the first part, the Dhamma.
Between the time of the iTullavagga and the time of
Buddhaghosa the Abhidhamma must have assumed its
recognised position by the side of Vinaya and Sutta. It
must be left to further researches to determine, if possible,

1 See Academy, August 28, 1880, Division of Buddhist Scriptures.

2 Oldenberg, Introduction, p. xii ; Tumour, Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal, vi, p. 510 seq.

[10] c


XXXIV DHAMMAPADA.


the time when the name of pi/aka was first used, and when
Tipi/aka was accepted as the title of the whole canon.

Whenever we see such traces of growth, we feel that we
are on historical ground, and in that sense Dr. Olden-
berg's researches into the growth of the Vinaya, previous
to the Second Council, deserve the highest credit. He
shows, in opposition to other scholars, that the earliest
elements of Vinaya must be looked for in the short Pati-
mokkha rules, which were afterwards supplemented by
explanations, by glosses and commentaries, and in that
form answered for some time every practical purpose.
Then followed a new generation who, not being satisfied,
as it would seem, with these brief rules and comments,
wished to know the occasion on which these rules had been
originally promulgated. What we now call the Vibhanga,
i. e. the first and second divisions of the Vinaya-pi/aka, is
a collection of the stories, illustrating the origin of each
rule, of the rules themselves (the Patimokkha), and of the
glosses and comments on these rules.

The third and fourth books, the Mahavagga and iTulla-
vagga, are looked upon as possibly of a slightly later date.
They treat, in a similar manner as the Vibhanga, on the rules
not included in that collection, and give a general picture
of the outward life of the monks. While the Vibhanga deals
chiefly with the original so-called para^ika, sahghadisesa, and
pa&ttiya offences, the Khandhaka, i. e. the Mahavagga
and j&Tullavagga, treats of the so-called dukka/a and thul-
la^aya crimes. The arrangement is the same, story, rule,
and comment succeeding each other in regular sequence.

If we follow the guidance of the Vinaya-pi/aka, we should
be able to distinguish the following steps in the growth of
Buddhism before the Second Council of Vesili :

i. Teaching of Buddha and his disciples (543/477 A.D.

Buddha's death).
%. Collection of P&timokkha rules (first code).

3. Comment and glosses on these rules.

4. Stories in illustration of these rules (vibhanga).

5. Mahavagga and iTullavagga (Khandhaka).


INTRODUCTION. XXXV


6. Council of Vesali for the repression of ten abuses

(443/377 A. D.)

7. Description of First and Second Councils in ATullavagga.
The iTullavagga ascribes the settlement of the canon to
the First Council, and does not even claim a revision of
that canon for the Second Council. The Dipava^sa claims
a revision of the canon by the 700 Arhats for the Second
Council.

Chronology.

In order to bring the Council of Vesali in connection
with the chronology of the world, we must follow the
Buddhist historians for another century. One hundred and
eighteen years after the Council of Vesali they place the
anointment of King Asoka, during whose reign a Third
Council, under the presidency of Tissa Moggaliputta, took
place at Pa/aliputta, the new capital adopted by that king,
instead of Ra^agaha and Vesali. This Council is chiefly
known to us through the writings of the southern Buddhists
(Dipava/^sa, Mahava/^sa, and Buddhaghosa), who belong
to the school of Moggaliputta (Theravada or Vibha^avada),
which ruled supreme at Pa&iliputta, while Upagupta, the
chief authority of the northern Buddhists, is altogether
ignored in the Pali chronicles.

Now it is well known that Asoka was the grandson
of isfandagutta, and iTandagutta the contemporary of
Alexander the Great. Here we see land, and I may
refer to my History of Sanskrit Literature, published in
1859, for the process by which the storm-tossed ship of
Indian chronology has been landed in the harbour of real
historical chronology. We are told by the monks of the
Mahavihara in Ceylon that Asoka was crowned, according
to their computation, 146 + 18 years before the accession
of Du/Afcigamani, 161 B.C., i.e. 325 B.C. ; that between his
coronation and his father's death four years had elapsed
(329 B. C.) ; that his father Bindusara had reigned twenty-
eight years1 (357-329 B.C.), and Bindusara's father, Aan-

1 MaMvamsa, p. 21.
C 2


XXXVI DHAMMAPADA.


dagutta, twenty-four years (381-357). As we know that
iTandagutta, whom the Ceylonese place 381-357 B.C., was
king of India after Alexander's conquest, it follows that
Ceylonese chronology is wrong by more than half a
century. For reasons stated in my History of Sanskrit
Literature, I fix the exact fault in Ceylonese chronology
as sixty-six years, assigning to iTandagutta the dates
315-391, instead of 381-357. This gives us 291-263 for
Bindusara, 259 for Asoka's abhisheka ; 259+118 = 377
for the Council of Vesali, and 377 + 100=477 for Buddha's
death, instead of 543 B.C.1

These dates are, of course, approximate only, and they
depend on one or two points on which people may differ.
But, with that reservation, I see no ground whatever for
modifying the chronological system which I put forward
more than twenty years ago. Professor Westergaard and
Professor Kern, who have since suggested different dates
for the death of Buddha, do not really differ from me in
principle, but only in their choice of one or the other alter-
native, which I readily admit as possible, but not as more
certain than my own. Professor Westergaard2, for instance,
fixes Buddha's death at 368 (370), instead of 477. This
seems a wide difference, but it is so in appearance only.

Following Justinus, who says that Sandrokyptos 3 had
conquered the empire of India at the time when Seleucus
laid the foundations of his own greatness, I had accepted
315 4, half-way between the murder of Porus and the
taking of Babylon by Seleucus, as the probable beginning

1 According to Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, p. 361, the era of Buddha's death
was introduced by Agutasatru, at the conclusion of the First Council, and
began in the year 146 of the older Eetzana era (p. 12). See, however, Rhys
Davids, Num. Orient, vi, p. 38. In the Kararctfa-vyuha, p. 96, a date is given
as 300 after the Nirvaraa, « tntiye varshasate gate mama parinirvr/tasya.' In the
Asoka-avadana we read, mama nirvntim arabhya satavarshagata Upagupto
nama bhikshur utpatsyati.

2 Uber Buddha's Todesjahr (i860), 1862.

3 The Greek name Sandrokyptus shows that the Pali corruption isTandagutta
was not yet the recognised name of the king.

* Mr. Rhys Davids accepts 315 b. c. as the date when, after the murder of
king Nanda, -STandragupta stept into the vacant throne, though he had begun
to count his reign seven or eight years before. Buddhism, p. 220.


INTRODUCTION. XXXVU


of isfandragupta's reign. Westergaard prefers 320 as a
more likely date for i^fandragupta, and therefore places the
death of the last Nanda and the beginning of Anoka's
royal pretensions 268. Here there is a difference between
him and me of five years, which depends chiefly on the
view we take as to the time when Seleucus really laid what
Justinus calls the foundation of his future greatness.
Secondly, Westergaard actually adopts the idea, at which I
only hinted as possible, that the southern Buddhists made
two A^okas out of one, and two Councils out of one.
Trusting in the tradition that 118 years elapsed between
Buddha's death and the Council under A^oka(at Pafeliputra),
and that the Council took place in the king's tenth year
(as was the case with the imaginary Kala^oka's Council),
he gets 268 — 10 = 258 as the date of the Council, and 368
or 370 as the date of Buddha's death \

The two points on which Westergaard differs from me,
seem to me questions which should be kept before our
mind in dealing with early Buddhist history, but which,
for the present at least, admit of no definite solution.

The same remark seems to me to apply to the calcula-
tions of another eminent Sanskrit scholar, Professor Kern 2.
He lays great stress on the general untrustworthiness of
Indian chronology, and I am the last to differ from him
on that point. He then places the beginning of iTandra-
gupta's reign in 322 B.C. Allowing twenty-four years to him
and twenty-eight to his son Bindusara, he places the begin-
ning of Anoka's reign in 270. Anoka's inscriptions would
fall about 258. As A^oka reigned thirty-six or thirty-seven
years, his death would fall in 234 or 233 B.C. Like Wester-
gaard, Professor Kern too eliminates Kala^oka, as a kind of
chronological A^oka, and the Council of Vafcali, and there-
fore places Buddha's death, according to the northern tradi-
tion, 100 or no years before Dharma^oka, i.e. 270+100
or + 110 = 370 or 380 3; while, according to the southern

1 Westergaard, loc. cit. p. 128.

2 Jaartelling der Zuidelijke Buddhisten, 1873.

3 See Professor Kern's remark in Indian Antiquary, 1874, p. 79.


XXXV111 DHAMMAPADA.


tradition, that 118 years elapsed between Anoka's acces-
sion and Buddha's death, the Ceylonese monks would seem
originally to have retained 270+ n81 = 388 B.C. as Buddha's
Nirvana, a date which, as Professor Kern holds, happens
to coincide with the date assigned to the death of Maha-
vira, the founder of the Gaina religion.

Here we see again that the moot point is the beginning
of iTandragupta's reign in accordance with the information
supplied by Greek historians. Professor Kern places it in
322, Westergaard in 320, I myself in 315. That difference
once granted, Dr. Kern's reasoning is the same as my own.
According to the traditions which we follow, Buddha's
death took place 100, no, 118, or 228 years before A^oka.
Hence Professor Westergaard arrives at 368 or 370 B.C.
Professor Kern at 370 (380) or 388 B. c, I myself at 477 B.C.
Every one of these dates is liable to certain objections, and
if I prefer my own date, 477 B.C., it is simply because it
seems to me liable to neither more nor less reservations
than those of Professor Westergaard and Professor Kern,
and because, so long as we always remember the grounds
of our differences, namely, the beginning of iTandragupta's
reign, and the additional century, every one of these dates
furnishes a good hypothesis to work on, until we can arrive
at greater certainty in the ancient chronology of India.

To my mind all dates beyond ^Tandragupta are as yet
purely tentative, resting far more on a chronological theory
than on actual tradition ; and though I do not doubt the
historical character of the Council of VaLrali, I look upon
the date assigned to it, on the authority of the Dipava/^sa
and Mahava^sa, as, for the present, hypothetical only.

1 When Professor Kern states that the Mahavarasa (p. 22) places the Third
Council 218 years after Buddha's death, this is not so. Asoka's abhisheka takes
place in that year. The prophecy that a calamity would befall their religion, 118
years after the Second Council (Mahavamsa, p. 28), does not refer to the Council,
but to -Kandasoka's accession, 477 — 218 = 259 b. c.


INTRODUCTION. XXXIX


B.C.

557. Buddha born.

552. Bimbis&ra born.

537-485. Bimbiscira, 5 years younger than Buddha, was
15 when crowned, 30 or 31 when he met Buddha in 522.

485-453. A^ata^atru (4x8 years).

477. Buddha's death (485—8=477).

477. Council at RAgagriha under Klsyapa, Ananda,
and Up&li.

453-437. Udayibhadra (2x8 years).
( Anuruddhaka (8 years).

437 439- J Mu^a (at Pd/aliputra).

429-405. N&gadasaka (3x8 years).

405-3 87. vSi^unaga (at Vai^dli).

387-359. Kala^oka.

377. Council at Valsali, under Ya^as and Revata,
a disciple of Ananda (259 + 118 = 377).

359-337. Ten sons of Kala^oka (22 years).

337-315. Nine Nandas (22 years); the last, Dhana-
nanda, killed by iTa/zakya.

315-291. iTandragupta (477 — 162 = 315; 3x8 years)1.

291-263. Bindusara.

263-259. A.roka, sub-king at IJ^ayinf, as pretender —
his brothers killed.

259. Ai"oka anointed at Pd/aliputra (477 — 218 = 259).

256. A^oka converted by Nigrodha (D.V. VI, 18).

256-253. Building of Viharas, Sthupas, &c.

255. Conversion of Tishya (M. V. p. 34).

253. Ordination of Mahendra (born 477 — 204=273).

251. Tishya and Sumitra die (D.V. VII, 32).

242. Council at Pafaliputra (259—17 = 242 ; 477—
236=241), under Tishya Maudgaltputra (477 — 236=241;
D.V. VII, 37).

241. Mahendra to Ceylon.

222. Ai^oka died (259— 37 = 222).

193. Mahendra died (D.V. XVII, 93).

161. Du//^agclmani.

88-76. Vattag&mani, canon reduced to writing.


400. Dipava/^sa.

420. Buddhaghosha, Pali commentaries.

459-477. Mahava^sa.

1 Westergaard, 320 — 296; Kern, 322 — 29


xl DHAMMAPADA.


Though the preceding table, embodying in the main the
results at which I arrived in my History of Ancient San-
skrit Literature, still represents what I hold to be true or
most probable with respect to Indian chronology, previous
to the beginning of our era, yet I suppose I may be expected
to say here a few words on the two latest attempts to fix
the date of Buddha's death ; the one by Mr. Rhys Davids
in the Numismata Orientalia, Part VI, 1877, the other by
Dr. Blihler in the Indian Antiquary, 1877 and 1878 1. Mr.
Rhys Davids, to whom we owe so much for the elucidation
of the history of Buddha's religion, accepts Westergaard's
date for the beginning of iTandragupta's reign, 320 B.C.,
instead of 322 (Kern), 315 (myself); and as he assigns
(p. 41) to Bindusara 25 years instead of 28 (Mahava/^sa,
p. 21), he arrives at 268 as the year of Anoka's coronation2.
He admits that the argument derived from the mention of
the five foreign kings in one of Anoka's inscriptions, dated
the twelfth year of his reign, is too precarious to enable us
to fix the date of Anoka's reign more definitely, and though,
in a general way, that inscription confirms the date assigned
by nearly all scholars to A^oka in the middle of the third
century B.C., yet there is nothing in it that A^oka might
not have written in 247 quite as well as in 258-261. What
chiefly distinguishes Mr. Rhys Davids' chronology from that
of his predecessors is the shortness of the period between
Anoka's coronation and Buddha's death. On the strength
of an examination of the list of kings and the list of the
so-called patriarchs, he reduces the traditional 218 years
to 140 or 150, and thus arrives at 412 B.C. as the probable
beginning of the Buddhist era.

In this, however, I cannot follow him, but have to
follow Dr. Biihler. As soon as I saw Dr. Blihler's first
essay on the Three New Edicts of Ajoka, I naturally felt
delighted at the unexpected confirmation which he fur-
nished of the date which I had assigned to Buddha's
death, 477 B.C. And though I am quite aware of the

1 Three New Edicts of Asoka, Bombay, 1877 J Second Notice, Bombay, 1878.

2 Mr. Rhys Davids on p. 50 assigns the 25 years of Bindusara rightly to the
Purawas, the 28 years to the Ceylon Chronicles.


INTRODUCTION. xli


danger of unexpected confirmations of one's own views,
yet, after carefully weighing the objections raised by Mr.
Rhys Davids and Professor Pischel against Dr. Buhler's
arguments, I cannot think that they have shaken Dr.
Buhler's position. I fully admit the difficulties in the
phraseology of these inscriptions : but I ask, Who could
have written these inscriptions, if not A^oka ? And how,
if written by A^oka, can the date which they contain mean
anything but 256 years after Buddha's Nirvana? These
points, however, have been argued in so masterly a manner
by Dr. Biihler in his ' Second Notice,' that I should be
afraid of weakening his case by adding anything of my
own, and must refer my readers to his i Second Notice.'
Allowing that latitude which, owing to the doubtful read-
ings of MSS., and the constant neglect of odd months, we
must allow in the interpretation of Buddhist chronology,
A^oka is the only king we know of who could have
spoken of a thirty-fourth year since the beginning of his
reign and since his conversion to Buddhism. And if he
calls that year, say the very last of his reign {%%% B.C.), 256
after the departure of the Master, we have a right to say
that as early as Anoka's time, Buddha was believed to have
died about 477 B.C. Whether the inscriptions have been
accurately copied and rightly read is, however, a more
serious question, and the doubts raised by Dr. Oldenberg
(Mahavagga, p. xxxviii) make a new collation of the
originals absolutely indispensable, before we can definitely
accept Dr. Buhler's interpretation.

I cannot share Dr. Buhler's opinion1 as to the entire
worthlessness of the Gaina chronology in confirming the
date of Buddha's death. If the .SVetambara Gainas place
the death of Mahavira 470 before Vikramaditya, i. e. $6 B.C.
-f 470 = 526B.C., and the Digambaras 605, i.e. 7 8 a.d. deducted
from 605 = 527 B.C., this so far confirms Dr. Buhler's and
Dr. Jacobi's brilliant discovery that Mahavira was the same
as Niga/^/^a Nataputta, who died at Pava during Buddha's
lifetime2. Most likely 527 is too early a date, while another

1 Three Edicts, p. 21; Second Notice, pp. 9, 10.

2 See Jacobi, Kalpa-sfitra of Bhadrabahu, and Oldenberg, Zeitschrift der
D.M.G., XXXIV, p.749.


xlii DHAMMAPADA.


tradition fixing Mahavira's death 155 years before iTandra-
gupta1, 470 B.C., is too late. Yet they both show that
the distance between A^oka (259-222 B.C.), the grandson
of ATandragupta (315-291 B.C.), and the contemporaries of
Buddha was by the Camas also believed to be one of two
rather than one century.

When I saw that the date of Buddha's death, 477 B.C.,
which in my History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature (1859)
I had myself tried to support by such arguments as were
then accessible, had received so powerful a support by the
discovery of the inscriptions of Sahasram, Rupnath, and
Bairdt, due to General Cunningham, who had himself
always been an advocate of the date 477 B.C., and through
their careful decipherment by Dr. Buhler, I lost no time
in testing that date once more by the Dipava/^sa, that
Ceylonese chronicle having lately become accessible through
Dr. Oldenberg's edition and translation 2. And here I am
able to say that, before having read Dr. Buhler's Second
Notice, I arrived, though by a somewhat different way, at
nearly the same conclusions as those so well worked out by
Dr. Buhler in his restoration of the Episcopal Succession
(theravali) of the Buddhists, and therefore feel convinced
that, making all such allowances as the case requires, we
know now as much of early Buddhist chronology as could
be known at the time of Anoka's Council, 242 B. C.

Taking the date of Buddha's death 477 B.C. for granted,
I found that Upali, who rehearsed the Vinaya at the First
Council, 477 B.C., had been in orders sixty years in the
twenty-fourth year of A^ata^atru, i. e. 461 B.C., which was
the sixteenth year A.B. He must therefore 3 have been born
in 541 B.C., and he died 447 B.C., i. e. thirty years A.B., at
the age of 94. This is said to have been the sixth year of
Udayi, and so it is, 453 — 6 = 447 B.C.

In the year 461 B.C. Da^aka received orders from Upali,
who was then 80 years of age ; and when Dlraka had been


1 Oldenberg, loc. cit. p. 750.

2 The Dipavarasa, an ancient Buddhist historical record. London, 1879.

3 Assuming twenty to be the minimum age at which a man could be ordained.


INTRODUCTION. xllii


in orders forty-five years (Dipava;/zsa IV, 41), he ordained
6aunaka. This would give us 461 —45=416 B.C., while the
tenth year of Nagadasa, 439 — 10, would give us 419 A.D.
Later on the Dipava^sa (V, 78) allows an interval of forty
years between the ordinations of D£L?aka and 5aunaka,
which would bring the date of 5aunaka's ordination to 421
B.C., instead of 419 or 416 B.C. Here there is a fault which
must be noted. Dai-aka died 461—64=397 A.D., which is
called the eighth year of SLmnaga, and so it is, 405 — 8 =
397 A.D.

When 6aunaka had been in orders forty years, i. e.
416—40=376, Kdllroka is said to have reigned a little
over ten years, i. e. 387 — 11 = 376 A.D., and in that year
^Saunaka ordained Siggava. He died 416—66=350 A.D.,
which is called the sixth year of the Ten, while in reality
it is the ninth, 359 --6 = 353 A.D. If, however, we take 419
as the year of vSaunaka's ordination, his death would fall
419-66=353 B.C.

Siggava, when he had been in orders sixty-four years,
ordained Tishya Maudgaliputra. This date 376—64=313
B.C. is called more than two years after iTandragupta's
accession, and so it very nearly is, 315 — 2 = 313.

Siggava died when he had been in orders seventy-six
years, i. e. 376 — 76 = 300 A.D. This year is called the
fourteenth year of iTandragupta, which it very nearly is,
315-14=301.

When Tishya had been in orders sixty1 years, he or-
dained Mahendra, 312—60 = 253 B.C. This is called six
years after Anoka's coronation, 259 — 6 = 253, and so it very
nearly is. He died 312 — 80 = 232 B.C., which is called the
twenty-sixth year of Aroka, and so it very nearly is.


1 I take 60 (80), as given in Dipavamsa V, 95, 107, instead of 66 (86), as
given in Dipavarasa V, 94.


xhv

DHAMMAPADA.

Buddhist Patriarchs.

Ordination of

Patri-

Birth. (

Drdination.

successor. Death.

Age.

archate.

Upali

(Generally

20 years

before

527
(60)

461 447

94

30

Da\raka

ordination.)

461

45)
42 V

40 J

416) 397

4i9 f
421 J

84

50

*Saunaka

»

416)

419 f
421 J

(40)

376) 350
379 } 353
381 J

86

44 (47)

Siggava

»

37H
(64)

3124 300J

96

50 (52)

Tishya

»

3i2§

253 233

100

68

(60)


Mahendra 273


253


J93


80


40


282(284)


If we test the dates of this table by the length of time
assigned to each patriarchate, we find that Upali ruled
thirty years, from Buddha's death, 477 to 447 ; Dijaka
fifty years. To 6aunaka forty-four years are assigned,
instead of forty-seven, owing to a fault pointed out before ;
and to Siggava fifty-two years, or fifty-five * instead of fifty.
Tishya 's patriarchate is said to have lasted sixty-eight
years, which agrees with previous statements.

Lastly, the years of the death of the six patriarchs, as
fixed according to the reigns of the kings of Magadha,
agree extremely well.

Upclli died in the sixth year of Udayi,i. 6.453 — 6=447 B.C.

Da^aka died in the eighth year of Sisunaga,, i.e. 405—8 =
397 B.C.

*Saunaka died in the sixth year of the Ten, i. e. 359—6 =
353 B.C., showing again the difference of three years.


1 The combined patriarchates of Saunaka and Siggava are given as 99 by the
Dlpavamsa.


INTRODUCTION. xlv


Siggava died in the fourteenth year of isfandragupta, i. e.
315-14=301 B.C.

Tishya died in the twenty-sixth or twenty-seventh year
of Ai-oka, i.e. 259 — 37 = 333 B.C.

This general and more than general agreement between
dates taken from the history of the kings and the history
of the patriarchs leaves on my mind a decided impression
of a tradition which, though not strictly historical, in our
sense of the word, represents at all events the result of such
enquiries as could be made into the past ages of Buddhism
at the time of A^oka. There are difficulties in that tradition
which would certainly have been avoided, if the whole
chronology had been simply made up : but there is no
doubt a certain method too perceptible throughout, which
warns us that we must not mistake a smooth chronology
for solid history.

The Title of Dhammapada.

The title of Dhammapada has been interpreted in various
ways. It is an ambiguous word, and has been accepted as
such by the Buddhists themselves. Dhamma has many
meanings. Under one aspect it means religion, particu-
larly the religion taught by Buddha, the law which every
Buddhist should accept and observe. Under another aspect
dhamma is virtue, or the realisation of the law.

Pada also has many meanings. In the Abhidhana-
padtpika it is explained by place, protection, Nirvana, cause,
word, thing, portion, foot, footstep.

Hence dhammapada may mean ' footstep of religion/
and thus the title was first rendered by Gogerly, only that
he used the plural instead of the singular, and called it ' The
Footsteps of Religion,5 while Spence Hardy still more freely
called it ' The Paths of Religion.' It may be quite true, as
pointed out by Childers, that pada by itself never means
path. But it means footstep, and the footstep towards
a thing is much the same as what we call the path to a
thing. Thus we read, verse 31, 'appamado amatapadam,'
earnestness is the step, i. e. the path that leads to immor-


xlvi DHAMMAPADA.


tality. Again, ' pamado ma^uno padam ' can hardly mean
anything but that thoughtlessness is the path of death, is
the path that leads to death. The commentator, too,
rightly explains it here by amatasya adhigamupaya, the
means of obtaining immortality, i. e. Nirvana, or simply by
upclyo, and even by maggo, the way. If we compare verses
92 and 93 of our text, and verses 254 and 255, we see that
pad a is used synonymously with gati, going. In the
same manner dhammapada would mean the footstep or
the footpath of virtue, i. e. the path that leads to virtue, and
supply a very appropriate title for a collection of moral
precepts. In verses 44 and 45 * path of virtue ' seems to be
the most appropriate meaning for dhammapada 1, and it is
hardly possible to assign any other meaning to it in the
following verse (iTundasutta, v. 6) :

Yo dhammapade sudesite

Magge ^*ivati sa/z/zato satima,

Anava^a-pad&ni sevam&no

Tattyam bhikkhum ahu magga^ivim,
' He who lives restrained and attentive in the way that has
been well pointed out, in the path of the law, cultivating
blameless words, such a Bhikkhu they call a Magga^ivi
(living in the way).'

I therefore think that ' Path of Virtue/ or ' Footstep of
the Law,5 was the idea most prominent in the mind of those
who originally framed the title of this collection of verses.
It seems to me that Buddhaghosa also took the same view,
for the verse which D'Alwis 2 quotes from the introduction
of Buddhaghosa's commentary, —
Sampatta-saddhammapado sattM dhammapada^ subha^
Desesi,
and which he translates, ' The Teacher who had reached
the very depths (lit. bottom) of Saddhamma, preached this
holy Dhammapada,' — lends itself far better to another
translation, viz. 'The Teacher who had gained a firm


Cf. Dhammapada, v. 285, nibb&nam sugatena desitaw*.
Buddhist Nirvana, p. 62.


INTRODUCTION. xlvii


footing in the Good Law, showed (preached) the holy Path
of the Law.'

Gogerly, again, who may generally be taken as a faithful
representative of the tradition of the Buddhists still pre-
served in Ceylon, translates the title by the ' Footsteps of
Religion,' so that there can be little doubt that the priests
of that island accept Dhammapada in the sense of ' Vestiges
of Religion,' or, from a different point of view, ' The Path
of Virtue.'

M. L. Feer1 takes a slightly different view, and assigning
to pada the meaning of foot or base, he translates Dhamma-
pada by Loi fondamentale, or Base de la Religion.

But it cannot be denied that the title of Dhammapada
was very soon understood in a different sense also, namely,
as ' Sentences of Religion.' Pada means certainly a foot of
averse, a verse, or a line, and dhammapadam actually
occurs in the sense of a * religious sentence.' Thus we read
in verse 102, 'Though a man recite a hundred Gathas made
up of senseless words, one dhammapadam, i. e. one single
word or line of the law, is better, which if a man hears, he
becomes quiet/ But here we see at once the difficulty of
translating the title of ' dhammapadam ' by ' religious sen-
tences.' Dhammapadam means one law verse, or wise
saw, not many. Professor Fausboll, who in his excellent
edition of the Dhammapada translated that title by ' a col-
lection of verses on religion,' appeals to such passages as
verses 44 and 102 in support of his interpretation. But in
verse 42 dhammapadam sudesitam, even if it does not
mean the path of the law, could never mean 'versus legis
bene enarratos,' but only versum legis bene enarra-
tum, as Dr. Fausboll himself renders eka/^ dhammapadam,
in verse 102, by unus legis versus. Buddhaghosa, too,
when he speaks of many law verses uses the plural, for
instance 2, ' Be it known that the Gatha consists of the
Dhammapadani, Theragatha, Therigatha, and those un-
mixed (detached) Gatha not comprehended in any of the
above-named Suttanta.'

1 Revue Critique, 1870, p. 378. 2 D'Alwis, Pali Grammar, p. 61.


xl viii DH AMM AP ADA .


The only way in which Dhammapada could be defended
in the sense of ' Collection of Verses of the Law,' would be
if we took it for an aggregate compound. But such aggre-
gate compounds, in Sanskrit at least, are possible with
numerals only; for instance, tribhuvanam, the three
worlds ; ^aturyugam, the four ages1. It might therefore
be possible in Pali, too, to form such compounds as da^a-
padam, a collection of ten padas, a work consisting often
padas, a decamerone, but it would in no wise follow that
we could in that language attempt such a compound as
Dhammapadam, in order to express a collection of law
verses2. Mr. Beal3 informs us that the Chinese seem to
have taken Dhammapada in the sense of ' stanzas of law,'
1 law texts,' or ' scripture texts.'

It should be remembered, also, that the idea of repre-
senting life, and particularly the life of the faithful, as a
path of duty or virtue leading to deliverance, (in Sanskrit
dharmapatha,) is very familiar to Buddhists. The four
great truths of their religion 4 consist in the recognition of
the following principles : i. that there is suffering ; 2. that
there is a cause of that suffering ; 3. that such cause can be
removed ; 4. that there is a way of deliverance, viz. the
doctrine of Buddha. This way is the ash/anga-marga,
the eightfold way 5, taught by Buddha, and leading to Nir-
vana6. The faithful advances on that road, padatpadam,


1 See M. M.'s Sanskrit Grammar, § 519.

2 Mr. D'Alwis' arguments (Buddhist Nirvaraa, pp. 63-67) in support of this
view, viz. the dhammapada may be a collective term, do not seem to me to
strengthen my own conjecture.

3 Dhammapada from Chinese, p. 4.
* Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 496.

5 Burnouf, Lotus, p. 520, 'Ajoutons, pour terminer ce que nous trouvons a dire
sur le mot magga, quelque commentaire qu'on en donne d'ailleurs, que suivant
une definition rapportee par Tumour, le magga renfermeune sous-division que
Ton nomme paHpadsi, en Sanscrit p rati pad. Le magga, dit Tumour, est la
voie qui conduit auNibbana, la pa/ipad&, litteralement "la marche pas a pas,
ou le degre," est la vie de rectitude qu'on doit suivre, quand on marche dans la
voie du magga.'

6 See Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 496. Should not £aturvidha-dharmapada,
mentioned on p. 497, be translated by ' the fourfold path of the Law?' It can
hardly be the fourfold word of the Law.


INTRODUCTION. xllX


step by step, and it is therefore called paripadol, lit. the step
by step.

If we make allowance for these ambiguities, inherent in
the name of Dhammapada, we may well understand how
the Buddhists themselves play with the word pada (see
v. 45). Thus we read in Mr. Beal's translation of a Chinese
version of the Pr&timoksha x :

' Let all those who desire such birth,
Who now are living in the world,
Guard and preserve these Precepts, as feet.5

Translation.

In translating the verses of the Dhammapada, I have
followed the edition of the Pali text, published in 1855 by
Dr. Fausboll, and I have derived great advantage from his
Latin translation, his notes, and his copious extracts from
Buddhaghosa's commentary. I have also consulted trans-
lations, either of the whole of the Dhammapada, or of
portions of it, by Burnouf, Gogerly2, Upham, Weber,
and others. Though it will be seen that in many places
my translation differs from those of my predecessors,
I can only claim for myself the name of a very humble
gleaner in this field of Pali literature. The greatest
credit is due to Dr. Fausboll, whose editio princeps of
the Dhammapada will mark for ever an important epoch
in the history of Pili scholarship ; and though later critics
have been able to point out some mistakes, both in his
text and in his translation, the value of their labours is not
to be compared with that of the work accomplished single-
handed by that eminent Danish scholar.

In revising my translation, first published in 1870 3, for

1 Catena, p. 207.

2 • Several of the chapters have been translated by Mr. Gogerly, and have
appeared in The Friend, vol. iv, 1840/ (Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism,
p. 169.)

3 Buddhaghosha's Parables, translated from Burmese by Captain T. Rogers,
R. E. With an Introduction, containing Buddha's Dhammapada, translated
from Pali by F. Max Miiller. London, 1870.

[to] d


1 DHAMMAPADA.


the Sacred Books of the East, I have been able to avail
myself of ' Notes on Dhammapada,' published by Childers
in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (May, 1871),
and of valuable hints as to the meaning of certain words
and verses scattered about in the Pali Dictionary of that
much regretted scholar, 1875. I have carefully weighed the
remarks of Mr. James D'Alwis in his * Buddhist Nirvi^a,
a review of Max Miiller's Dhammapada' (Colombo, 1871),
and accepted some of his suggestions. Some very suc-
cessful renderings of a number of verses by Mr. Rhys
Davids in his c Buddhism/ and a French translation, too, of
the Dhammapada, published by Fernand Hu1, have been
consulted with advantage.

It was hoped for a time that much assistance for a more
accurate understanding of this work might be derived from
a Chinese translation of the Dhammapada2, of which
Mr. S. Beal published an English translation in 1878.
But this hope has not been entirely fulfilled. It was,
no doubt, a discovery of great interest, when Mr. Beal
announced that the text of the Dhammapada was not
restricted to the southern Buddhists only, but that similar
collections existed in the north, and had been translated
into Chinese. It was equally important when Schiefner
proved the existence of the same work in the sacred canon
of the Tibetans. But as yet neither a Chinese nor a Tibetan
translation of the Pali Dhammapada has been rendered
accessible to us by translations of these translations into
English or German, and what we have received instead,
cannot make up for what we had hoped for.

The state of the case is this. There are, as Mr. Beal
informs us, four principal copies of what may be called
Dhammapada in Chinese, the first dating from the Wu
dynasty, about the beginning of the third century A.D.
This translation, called Fa-kheu-king, is the work of a


1 Le Dhammapada avec introduction et notes par Fernand Hu, suivi du
Sutra en 42 articles, traduit du Tibetain, par Leon Feer. Paris, 1878.

2 Texts from the Buddhist Canon, commonly known as Dhammapada, trans-
lated from the Chinese by Samuel Beal. London, 1878.


INTRODUCTION. li


Shaman Wei-^i-lan and others. Its title means ' the Sutra
of Law verses,5 kheu being explained by gatha, a verse,
a word which we shall meet with again in the Tibetan
title, Gathasangraha. In the preface the Chinese translator
states that the Shamans in after ages copied from the
canonical scriptures various gathas, some of four lines and
some of six, and attached to each set of verses a title,
according to the subject therein explained. This work of
extracting and collecting is ascribed to Tsun-£e-Fa-kieou,
i. e. Arya-Dharmatrata, the author of the Sa^yuktabhi-
dharma-^astra and other works, and the uncle of Vasumitra.
If this Vasumitra was the patriarch who took a prominent
part in the Council under Kanishka, Dharmatrata's col-
lection would belong to the first century B.C. ; but this is, as
yet, very doubtful.

In the preface to the Fa-kheu-king we are told that the
original, which consisted of 500 verses, was brought from
India by Wai-^i-lan in 223 A.D., and that it was translated
into Chinese with the help of another Indian called Tsiang-
sin. After the translation was finished, thirteen sections
were added, making up the whole to 752 verses, 14,580
words, and 39 chapters 1.

If the Chinese translation is compared with the Pali
text, it appears that the two agree from the 9th to the
35th chapter (with the exception of the 33rd), so far as
their subjects are concerned, though the Chinese has in
these chapters 79 verses more than the Pali. But
the Chinese translation has eight additional chapters in
the beginning (viz. On Intemperance, Inciting to Wisdom,
The Sravaka, Simple Faith, Observance of Duty, Re-
flection, Loving-kindness, Conversation), and four at the
end (viz. Nirvana, Birth and Death, Profit of Religion,
and Good Fortune), and one between the 24th and 25th
chapter of the Pali text (viz. Advantageous Service), all of
which are absent in our Pali texts. This, the most ancient

1 Beal, Dhammapada, p. 30. The real number of verses, however, is 760. In
the Pali text, too, there are five verses more than stated in the Index ; see
M. M., Buddhaghosha's Parables, p. ix, note ; Beal, loc. cit. p. 11, note.

d 2


lli DHAMMAPADA.


Chinese translation of Dharmatrata's work, has not been
rendered into English by Mr. Beal, but he assures us that
it is a faithful reproduction of the original. The book which
he has chosen for translation is the Fa-kheu-pi-ii, i. e.
parables connected with the Dhammapada, and translated
into Chinese by two Shamans of the western Tsin dynasty
(A.D. 365-313). These parables are meant to illustrate the
teaching of the verses, like the parables of Buddhaghosa,
but they are not the same parables, nor do they illustrate
all the verses.

A third Chinese version is called -ffuh-yan-king, i. e. the
Sutra of the Dawn (avadana?), consisting of seven volumes.
Its author was Dharmatrata, its translator iTu-fo-nien (Bud-
dhasmrzti), about 410 A.D. The MS. of the work is said
to have been brought from India by a Shaman Sangha-
bhadanga of Kipin (Cabul), about 345 A. D. It is a much
more extensive work in 33 chapters, the last being, as in
the Pali text, on the Brahma/za.

A fourth translation dates from the Sung dynasty (800
or 900 A. D.), and in it, too, the authorship of the text is
ascribed to Arya- Dharmatrata.

A Tibetan translation of a Dhammapada was dis-
covered by Schiefner in the 28th volume of the Sutras,
in the collection called Udanavarga. It contains ^
chapters, and more than 1000 verses, of which about one-
fourth only can be traced in the Pali text. The same
collection is found also in the Tan^ur, vol. 71 of the Sutras,
foil. 1-53, followed by a commentary, the Udanavarga-
vivara^a by the A^arya Pra^avarman. Unfortunately
Schiefner's intention of publishing a translation of it (Me-
langes Asiatiques, torn. viii. p. 560) has been frustrated by
his death. All that he gives us in his last paper is the
Tibetan text with translation of another shorter collection,
the Gathasangraha by Vasubandhu, equally published in
the 72nd volume of the Sutras in the Tan^ur, and accom-
panied by a commentary.


INTRODUCTION. liil


Spelling of Buddhist Terms.

I had on a former occasion1 pleaded so strongly in
favour of retaining, as much as possible, the original San-
skrit forms of Pali Buddhist terms, that I feel bound to
confess openly that I hold this opinion no longer, or, at all
events, that I see it is hopeless to expect that Pali scholars
will accept my proposal. My arguments were these : ' Most
of the technical terms employed by Buddhist writers come
from Sanskrit ; and in the eyes of the philologist the various
forms which they have assumed in Pali, in Burmese, in
Tibetan, in Chinese, in Mongolian, are only so many corrup-
tions of the same original form. Everything, therefore,
would seem to be in favour of retaining the Sanskrit forms
throughout, and of writing, for instance, Nirvana instead of
the Pali Nibbana, the Burmese Niban or Nepbhan, the
Siamese Niruphan, the Chinese Nipan. The only hope, in
fact, that writers on Buddhism will ever arrive at a uniform
and generally intelligible phraseology seems to lie in their
agreeing to use throughout the Sanskrit terms in their
original form, instead of the various local disguises and
disfigurements which they present in Ceylon, Burmah, Siam,
Tibet, China, and Mongolia.'

I fully admitted that many Buddhist words have assumed
such a strongly marked local or national character in the
different countries and in the different languages in which
the religion of Buddha has found a new home, that to trans-
late them back into Sanskrit might seem as affected, nay,
prove in certain cases as misleading, as if, in speaking of
priests and kings, we were to speak of presbyters and
cynings. The rule by which I meant mainly to be guided
was to use the Sanskrit forms as much as possible ; in fact,
everywhere except where it seemed affected to do so.
I therefore wrote Buddhaghosha instead of the Pali Bud-
dhaghosa, because the name of that famous theologian, 'the
Voice of Buddha,' seemed to lose its significance if turned

1 Introduction to Buddhaghosha's Parables, 1870, p. 1.


llV DHAMMAPADA.


into Buddhaghosa. But I was well aware what may be
said on the other side. The name of Buddhaghosa, ' Voice
of Buddha,' was given him after he had been converted
from Brahmanism to Buddhism, and it was given to him
by people to whom the Pali word ghosa conveyed the
same meaning as ghosha does to us. On the other hand,
I retained the Pali Dhammapada instead of Dharmapada,
simply because, as the title of a Pcili book, it has become so
familiar that to speak of it as Dharmapada seemed like
speaking of another work. We are accustomed to speak
of Samanas instead of 5rama^as, for even in the days of
Alexander's conquest, the Sanskrit word vSrama^a had
assumed the prakritized or vulgar form which we find in
P&li, and which alone could have been rendered by the
later Greek writers (first by Alexander Polyhistor, 80-60
B.C.) by aafiavaLoi1. As a Buddhist term, the Pali form
Samana has so entirely supplanted that of 5rama;za that,
even in the Dhammapada (v. 388), we find an etymology
of Samana as derived from sam, 'to be quiet,' and not from
j-ram, ' to toil.' But if we speak of Samanas, we ought also
to speak of Bahma^as instead of Brahma^as, for this word
had been replaced by bahma/za at so early a time, that in
the Dhammapada it is derived from a root vah, ' to remove,
to separate, to cleanse V

I still believe that it would be best if writers on Buddhist
literature and religion were to adopt Sanskrit throughout
as the lingua franca. For an accurate understanding of
the original meaning of most of the technical terms of
Buddhism a knowledge of their Sanskrit form is indispen-
sable ; and nothing is lost, while much would be gained, if,
even in the treating of southern Buddhism, we were to


1 See Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde, vol. ii. p. 700, note. That Lassen
is right in taking the 'Xap/xavai, mentioned by Megasthenes, for Brahmanic, not
for Buddhist ascetics, might be proved also by their dress. Dresses made of
the bark of trees are not strictly Buddhistic.

2 See Dhammapada, v. 388; Bastian, Volker des ostlichen Asien, voL iii.
p. 412: *Ein buddhistischer Monch erklarte mir, dass die Brahmanen ihren
Namen fiihrten, als Leute, die ihre Siinden abgespiilt hatten.' See also Lalita-
vistara, p. 551, line 1 ; p. 553, line 7,


INTRODUCTION. Iv


speak of the town of 5ravasti instead of Savatthi in P&li,
Sevet in Sinhalese ; of Tripi/aka, 'the three baskets,5 instead
of Tipi/aka in P&li, Tunpitaka in Sinhalese; of ArthakatM,
' commentary,5 instead of A//^akath& in Pali, Atuwava in
Sinhalese ; and therefore also of Dharmapada, ' the path of
virtue/ instead of Dhammapada.

But inclinations are stronger than arguments. Pali
scholars prefer their Pali terms, and I cannot blame them
for it. Mr. D'Alwis (Buddhist Nirvana, p. 68) says : ' It
will be seen how very difficult it is to follow the rule rigidly.
We are, therefore, inclined to believe that in translating Pali
works, at least, much inconvenience may not be felt by the
retention of the forms of the language in which the Buddhist
doctrines were originally delivered/ For the sake of uni-
formity, therefore, I have given up my former plan. I use
the Pili forms when I quote from Pali, but I still prefer the
Sanskrit forms, not only when I quote from Sanskrit Bud-
dhist books, but also when I have to speak of Buddhism in
general. I speak of Nirvana, dharma, and bhikshu, rather
than of Nibb&na, dhamma, and bhikkhu, when discussing the
meaning of these words without special reference to southern
Buddhism ; but when treating of the literature and religion
of the Theravada school I must so far yield to the argu-
ments of Pali scholars as to admit that it is but fair to
use their language when speaking of their opinions.


DHAMMAPADA.


DHAMMAPADA.


CHAPTER I.

THE TWIN-VERSES.

i. All that we are is the result of what we have
thought : it is founded on our thoughts, it is made
up of our thoughts. If a man speaks or acts with
an evil thought, pain follows him, as the wheel fol-
lows the foot of the ox that draws the carriage.

i. Dharma, though clear in its meaning, is difficult to translate.
It has different meanings in different systems of philosophy, and its
peculiar application in the phraseology of Buddhism has been fully
elucidated by Burnouf, Introduction a l'Histoire du Buddhisme,
p. 4 1 seq. He writes : ' Je traduis ordinairement ce terme par
condition, d'autres fois par lois, mais aucune de ces traductions
n'est parfaitement complete; il faut entendre par dharma ce qui
fait qu'une chose est ce qu'elle est, ce qui constitue sa nature
propre, comme l'a bien montre* Lassen, a Toccasion de la celebre
formule, " Ye dharma hetuprabhavaV' ' Etymological ly the Latin
for- ma expresses the same general idea which was expressed by
dhar-ma. See also Burnouf, Lotus de la bonne Loi, p. 524. Faus-
boll translates : ' Naturae a mente principium ducunt/ which
shows that he rightly understood dharma in the Buddhist sense.
Gogerly (see Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 28) translates :
* Mind precedes action/ which, if not wrong, is at all events wrongly
expressed ; while Professor Weber's rendering, ' Die Pflichten aus
dem Herz folgern,' is quite inadmissible. D'Alwis (Buddhist Nir-
wana, p. 70 seq.), following the commentary, proposes to give a
more technical interpretation of this verse, viz. ' Mind is the leader
of all its faculties. Mind is the chief (of all its faculties). The very
mind is made up of those (faculties). If one speaks or acts with a
polluted mind, then affliction follows him as the wheel follows the
feet of the bearer (the bullock)/ To me this technical acceptation


DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. I.


2. All that we are is the result of what we have
thought : it is founded on our thoughts, it is made
up of our thoughts. If a man speaks or acts with a
pure thought, happiness follows him, like a shadow
that never leaves him.

3. * He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me,
he robbed me/ — in those who harbour such thoughts
hatred will never cease.

4. ' He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me,
he robbed me/ — in those who do not harbour such
thoughts hatred will cease.

seems not applicable here, where we have to deal with the simplest
moral precepts, and not with psychological niceties of Buddhist
philosophy. It should be stated, however, that Childers, who first
(s. v. dhamma) approved of my translation, seems afterwards to have
changed his opinion. On p. 120 of his excellent Pali Dictionary
he said : ' Three of the five khandhas, viz. vedana, samia, and sah-
khara, are collectively termed dhamma (plur.), " mental faculties/'
and in the first verse of Dhammapada the commentator takes the
word dhamma to mean those three faculties. But this interpretation
appears forced and unnatural, and 1 look upon Dr. Max Muller's
translation, "All that we are is the result of what we have thought/'
as the best possible rendering of the spirit of the phrase mano pub-
bahgamd dhamma/ But on p. 577 the same scholar writes: 'Of
the four mental khandhas the superiority of vmwaraa is strongly
asserted in the first verse of Dhammapada, " The mental faculties
(vedana, samla, and sarikhara) are dominated by Mind, they are
governed by Mind, they are made up of Mind." That this is the
true meaning of the passage I am now convinced ; see D' Alwis, Nir-
wana, pp. 70-75/ I do not deny that this may have been the tra-
ditional interpretation, at all events since the days of Buddhaghosa,
but the very legend quoted by Buddhaghosa in illustration of this
verse shows that its simpler and purely moral interpretation was
likewise supported by tradition, and I therefore adhere to my
original translation.

2. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 169.

3. On akko^i, see Ka^ayana VI, 4, 1 7. D' Alwis, Pali Grammar,
p. 38 note. ' When akkokkki means " he abused," it is derived
from kruj, not from krudh/ See Senart, Ka^ayana, 1. c.


TWIN-VERSES.


5. For hatred does not cease by hatred at any
time : hatred ceases by love, this is an old rule.

6. The world does not know that we must all
come to an end here ; — but those who know it, their
quarrels cease at once.

7. He who lives looking for pleasures only, his
senses uncontrolled, immoderate in his food, idle,
and weak, Mara (the tempter) will certainly over-
throw him, as the wind throws down a weak tree.

8. He who lives without looking for pleasures,
his senses well controlled, moderate in his food,
faithful and strong, him M&ra will certainly not
overthrow, any more than the wind throws down
a rocky mountain.

9. He who wishes to put on the yellow dress
without having cleansed himself from sin, who dis-
regards also temperance and truth, is unworthy of
the yellow dress.

6. Pare is -explained by ' fools/ but it has that meaning by
implication only. It is ol 7roXAot, cf. Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg, vol. i.
p. 5, 1. 4. Yamamase, a 1 pers. plur. imp. Atm., but really a Le/
in Pali. See Fausboll, Five (jratakas, p. 38.

7. Mara must be taken in the Buddhist sense of ' tempter/ or
'evil spirit/ See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 76 : ' Mara est le ddmon
de 1' amour, du pe'che' et de la mort ; c'est le tentateur et Tennemi
de Buddha/ As to the definite meaning of virya, see Burnouf,
Lotus, p. 548.

In the Buddhistical Sanskrit, kustda, ' idle/ is the exact counter-
part of the Pali kusfta ; see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 548. On the change
of Sanskrit d into Pali t, see Kuhn, Beitrage zur Pali Grammatik,
p. 40; Weber, Ind. Studien, XIII, p. 135.

9. The dark yellow dress, the Kasava or Kashaya, is the dis-
tinctive garment of the Buddhist priests. See Vishwu-sutra LXIII,
36. The play on the words anikkasavo kasavam, or in Sanskrit
anishkashaya^ kashayam, cannot be rendered in English. Kashaya
means ' impurity/ nish -kashaya, ' free from impurity/ anish-kashaya,
' not free from impurity/ while k&shaya is the name of the yellowish


DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. I.


i o. But he who has cleansed himself from sin, is
well grounded in all virtues, and regards also tem-
perance and truth, he is indeed worthy of the yellow
dress.

ii. They who imagine truth in untruth, and see
untruth in truth, never arrive at truth, but follow
vain desires,

12. They who know truth in truth, and untruth
in untruth, arrive at truth, and follow true desires.

1 3. As rain breaks through an ill-thatched house,
passion will break through an unreflecting mind.

1 4. As rain does not break through a well- thatched
house, passion will not break through a well-reflecting
mind.

15. The evil-doer mourns in this world, and he

Buddhist garment. The pun is evidently a favourite one, for, as
Fausboll shows, it occurs also in the Mahabharata, XII, 568 :
Anishkashaye kashayam iMrtham iti viddhi tarn,
Dharmadhva^anaw mund&n&m vr/ttyartham iti me mati^.
' Know that this yellow-coloured garment on a man who is not free
from impurity, serves only for the purpose of cupidity ; my opinion
is, that it is meant to supply the means of living to those shavelings,
who carry their virtue or the dharma like a flag/

(I read vnttyartham, according to the Bombay edition, instead of
kntartham, the reading of the Calcutta edition.)

On the exact colour of the dress, see Bishop Bigandet, The Life
or Legend of Gaudama, the Budha of the Burmese, Rangoon, 1866,
p. 504. Cf. (rataka, vol. ii. p. 198.

10. With regard to sila, 'virtue/ see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 547.

11, 12. S&ra, which I have translated by ' truth/ has many mean-
ings in Sanskrit. It means the sap of a thing, then essence or
reality ; in a metaphysical sense, the highest reality ; in a moral
sense, truth. It is impossible in a translation to do more than indi-
cate the meaning of such words, and in order to understand them
fully, we must know not only their definition, but their history. See
Beal, Dhammapada, p. 64.

13. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 65.

15. Kili//^a is klish/a, a participle of kh\r. It means literally,


TWIN-VERSES.


mourns in the next ; he mourns in both. He mourns
and suffers when he sees the evil of his own work.

1 6. The virtuous man delights in this world, and
he delights in the next ; he delights in both. He
delights and rejoices, when he sees the purity of his
own work.

17. The evil-doer suffers in this world, and he
suffers in the next; he suffers in both. He suffers
when he thinks of the evil he has done ; he suffers
more when going on the evil path.

18. The virtuous man is happy in this world,
and he is happy in the next ; he is happy in both.
He is happy when he thinks of the good he has
done; he is still more happy when going on the
good path.

19. The thoughtless man, even if he can recite
a large portion (of the law), but is not a doer of
it, has no share in the priesthood, but is like a
cowherd counting the cows of others.

what is spoilt. The abstract noun kleja, ' evil or sin/ is constantly
employed in Buddhist works; see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 443.

16. Like klish/a in the preceding verse, visuddhi in the present
has a technical meaning. One of Buddhaghosa's most famous
works is called Visuddhi-magga. See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 844;
Beal, Dhammapada, p. 67.

17, 18. 'The evil path and the good path' are technical expres-
sions for the descending and ascending scale of worlds through
which all beings have to travel upward or downward, according to
their deeds ; see Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, p. 5, note 4, and
p. 449; Burnouf, Introduction, p. 599 ; Lotus, p. 865, 1. 7 ; 1. 11.
Fausboll translates ' heaven and hell/ which comes to the same ;
cf. vv. 126, 306.

19. In taking sahitam in the sense of sa^hitam or sazrchM, I fol-
low the commentator who says, Tepi/akassa Buddhava^anass' eta/rc
n&maztf, but I cannot find another passage where the Tipi/aka, or
any portion of it, is called Sahita. Sawhita in vv. 100-102 has
a different meaning. The fact that some followers of Buddha were


8 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. I.

20. The follower of the law, even if he can recite
only a small portion (of the law), but, having for-
saken passion and hatred and foolishness, possesses
true knowledge and serenity of mind, he, caring
for nothing in this world or that to come, has in-
deed a share in the priesthood.

allowed to learn short portions only of the sacred writings by heart,
and to repeat them, while others had to learn a larger collection, is
shown by the story of ^akkhupala, p. 3, of Mahakala, p. 26, &c.
See Childers, s. v. sahita.

20. Samara, which I have rendered by ' priesthood/ expresses
all that belongs to, or constitutes a real Samara or *Srama#a, this being
the Buddhist name corresponding to the Brdhma^a, or priest, of
the orthodox Hindus. Buddha himself is frequently called the
Good Samara. Fausboll takes the abstract word sdman^a as
corresponding to the Sanskrit samanya, ' community/ but Weber
has well shown that it ought to be taken as representing jr&ma^ya.
He might have quoted the Samafma-phala-sutta, of which Burnouf
has given such interesting details in his Lotus, p. 449 seq. Faus-
boll also, in his notes on v. 332, rightly explains samaw^atd by
,rrama#yata\ See Childers, s. v. samara.

Anup&diyano, which I have translated by l caring for nothing/
has a technical meaning. It is the negative of the fourth Niddna,
the so-called Up&d&na, which Koppen has well explained by
Anhanglichkeit, ' taking to the world, loving the world/ Koppen,
Die Religion des Buddha, p. 610. Cf. Suttanip&ta, v. 470.


EARNESTNESS.


CHAPTER II.

ON EARNESTNESS1.

21. Earnestness is the path of immortality (Nir-
Vcl/za), thoughtlessness the path of death. Those
who are in earnest do not die, those who are
thoughtless are as if dead already.

22. Those who are advanced in earnestness,
having understood this clearly, delight in earnest-
ness, and rejoice in the knowledge of the Ariyas
(the elect).

23. These wise people, meditative, steady, always
possessed of strong powers, attain to Nirvana, the
highest happiness.

1 There is nothing in the tenth section of the Dhammapada, as
translated by Beal, corresponding to the verses of this chapter.

21. Apram&da, which Fausboll translates by 'vigilantia/ Gogerly
by ' religion/ Childers by ' diligence/ expresses literally the absence
of that giddiness or thoughtlessness which characterizes the state of
mind of worldly people. It is the first entering into oneself, and
hence all virtues are said to have their root in apramada. (Ye ke&
kusald dhamma sabbe te appamadamulakd.) I have translated it
by ' earnestness/ sometimes by ' reflection.' ' Immortality/ amrz'ta,
is explained by Buddhaghosa as Nirvana. Amn'ta is used, no
doubt, as a synonym of Nirvana, but this very fact shows how many
different conceptions entered from the very first into the Nirvana
of the Buddhists. See Childers, s. v. nibb&na, p. 269.

This verse, as recited to A^oka, occurs in the Dipavawsa VI,
53, and in the Mahavazrcsa, p. 25. See also Sanatsu^atiya, translated
by Telang, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii. p. 138.

22. The Ariyas, the noble or elect, are those who have entered
on the path that leads to Nirvana ; see Eoppen, p. 396. Their
knowledge and general status is minutely described ; see Koppen,

P. 436.

23. Childers, s.v. nibbana, thinks that nibbana here and in
many other places means Arhatship.

[io] e


IO DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. II.

24. If an earnest person has roused himself, if
he is not forgetful, if his deeds are pure, if he
acts with consideration, if he restrains himself, and
lives according to law, — then his glory will increase.

25. By rousing himself, by earnestness, by restraint
and control, the wise man may make for himself
an island which no flood can overwhelm.

26. Fools follow after vanity, men of evil wis-
dom. The wise man keeps earnestness as his best
jewel.

27. Follow not after vanity, nor after the enjoy-
ment of love and lust ! He who is earnest and
meditative, obtains ample joy.

28. When the learned man drives away vanity
by earnestness, he, the wise, climbing the terraced
heights of wisdom, looks down upon the fools,
serene he looks upon the toiling crowd, as one
that stands on a mountain looks down upon them
that stand upon the plain.

29. Earnest among the thoughtless, awake among
the sleepers, the wise man advances like a racer,
leaving behind the hack.

30. By earnestness did Maghavan (Indra) rise
to the lordship of the gods. People praise earnest-
ness ; thoughtlessness is always blamed.

31. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in
earnestness, who looks with fear on thoughtless-


25. Childers explains this island again as the state of an Arhat
(arahatta-phalam).

28. Cf. Childers, Dictionary, Preface, p. xiv. See Vinaya, ed.
Oldenberg, vol. i. p. 5, s. f.

31. Instead of sahazrc, which Dr. Fausboll translates by ' vin-
cens/ Dr. Weber by ' conquering/ I think we ought to read dahan,
'burning/ which was evidently the reading adopted by Buddha-


EARNESTNESS. 1 1


ness, moves about like fire, burning all his fetters,
small or large.

32. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in
reflection, who looks with fear on thoughtlessness,
cannot fall away (from his perfect state) — he is close
upon NirvcUa.

ghosa. Mr. R. C. Childers, whom I requested to see whether the
MS. at the India Office gives sahazrc or ddh&tn, writes that the
reading </aha*# is as clear as possible in that MS. The fetters are
meant for the senses. See verse 370.
32. See Childers, Notes, p. 5.


e 2


1 2 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. III.


CHAPTER III.

THOUGHT.

33. As a fletcher makes straight his arrow, a
wise man makes straight his trembling and un-
steady thought, which is difficult to guard, difficult
to hold back,

34. As a fish taken from his watery home and
thrown on the dry ground, our thought trembles
all over in order to escape the dominion of Mara
(the tempter).

35. It is good to tame the mind, which is difficult
to hold in and flighty, rushing wherever it listeth ;
a tamed mind brings happiness.

36. Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for
they are difficult to perceive, very artful, and they
rush wherever they list: thoughts well guarded
bring happiness.

37. Those who bridle their mind which travels
far, moves about alone, is without a body, and hides
in the chamber (of the heart), will be free from
the bonds of Mara (the tempter).

38. If a mans thoughts are unsteady, if he does
not know the true law, if his peace of mind is
troubled, his knowledge will never be perfect.

39. If a mans thoughts are not dissipated, if


33. Cf. Crataka, vol. i. p. 400.

34. On Mara, see verses 7 and 8.
35-39. Cf. (rataka, vol. i. pp. 312, 400.

39. Fausboll traces anavassuta, 'dissipated/ back to the Sanskrit


THOUGHT. 1 3


his mind is not perplexed, if he has ceased to think
of good or evil, then there is no fear for him while
he is watchful.


root jyai, 'to become rigid;' but the participle of that root would
be rfta, not jyuta. Professor Weber suggests that anavassuta stands
for the Sanskrit anavasruta, which he translates unbefleckt, ' un-
spotted/ If avasruta were the right word, it might be taken in the
sense of ' not fallen off, not fallen away/ but it could not mean
'unspotted;' cf. dhairyaw no 'susruvat, 'our firmness ran away/
I have little doubt, however, that avassuta represents the Sanskrit
avasruta, and is derived from the root jru, here used in its tech-
nical sense, peculiar to the Buddhist literature, and so well explained
by Burnouf in his Appendix XIV (Lotus, p. 820). He shows that,
according to Hema^andra and the 6rina-alanMra, a\?ravakshaya,
P&li a^savasa/rckhaya is counted as the sixth abhignsi, wherever six
of these intellectual powers are mentioned, instead of five. The
Chinese translate the term in their own Chinese fashion by ' stilla-
tionis finis/ but Burnouf claims for it the definite sense of destruc-
tion of faults or vices. He quotes from the Lalita-vistara (Adhy&ya
XXII, ed. Rajendra Lai Mittra, p. 448) the words uttered by
Buddha when he arrived at his complete Buddhahood : —
*Sushkd a\yrav& na puna^ jravanti,
'The vices are dried up, they will not flow again;'
and he shows that the Pali Dictionary, the Abhidhanappadipika,
explains asava simply by kama, ' love, pleasure of the senses.' In
the Mahaparinibbana-sutta, three classes of asava are distinguished,
the kamasava, the bhavasav^, and the avigg-asava\ See also Bur-
nouf, Lotus, p. 665 ; Childers, s. v. dsavo.

That sru means ' to run/ and is in fact a merely dialectic variety
of sru, has been proved by Burnouf, while Boehtlingk thinks the
substitution of s for s is a mistake. Ayrava therefore, or Asrava,
meant originally ' the running out towards objects of the senses '
(cf. sahga, alaya, &c), and had nothing to do with asrava, ' a run-
ning, a sore/ Atharva-veda I, 2, 4. This conception of the ori-
ginal purport of & + sru or ava-jru is confirmed by a statement of
Colebrooke's, who, when treating of the (zainas, writes (Miscella-
neous Essays, I, 382): ' Asrava is that which directs the embodied
spirit (asravayati purusham) towards external objects. It is the
occupation and employment (vr/tti or pravrz'tti) of the senses or
organs on sensible objects. Through the means of the senses it


14 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. III.

40. Knowing that this body is (fragile) like a
jar, and making this thought firm like a fortress,
one should attack Mara (the tempter) with the
weapon of knowledge, one should watch him when
conquered, and should never rest.

41. Before long, alas! this body will lie on the
earth, despised, without understanding, like a use-
less log.

42. Whatever a hater may do to a hater, or


affects the embodied spirit with the sentiment of taction, colour,
smell, and taste. Or it is the association or connection of body
with right and wrong deeds. It comprises all the karmas, for they
(asravayanti) pervade, influence, and attend the doer, following him
or attaching to him. It is a misdirection (mithy^-pravn'tti) of the
organs, for it is vain, a cause of disappointment, rendering the
organs of sense and sensible objects subservient to fruition. Sa#z-
vara is that which stops (sa#zvrz>zoti) the course of the foregoing,
or closes up the door or passage to it, and consists in self-com-
mand or restraint of organs internal and external, embracing all
means of self-control and subjection of the senses, calming and
subduing them.'

For a full account of the a\rravas, see Lalita-vistara, ed. Calc.
pp. 445 and 552, where Kshfosirrava is given as a name of Buddha.
Axrava occurs in Apastamba's Dharma-sutras II, 5, 9, where the
commentator explains it by objects of the senses, by which the
soul is made to run out. It is better, however, to take a\yrava
here, too, as the act of running out, the affections, appetites,
passions.

40. Anivesana has no doubt a technical meaning, and may
signify, one who has left his house, his family and friends, to
become a monk. A monk shall not return to his home, but travel
about; he shall be anivesana, 'homeless/ anagara, 'houseless/
But I doubt whether this can be the meaning of anivesana here,
as the sentence, let him be an anchorite, would come in too
abruptly. I translate it therefore in a more general sense, let him
not return or turn away from the battle, let him watch Mara, even
after he is vanquished, let him keep up a constant fight against the
adversary, without being attached to anything or anybody.


THOUGHT. 15


an enemy to an enemy, a wrongly-directed mind
will do us greater mischief.

43. Not a mother, not a father will do so much,
nor any other relative ; a well-directed mind will
do us greater service.

43. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 73.


1 6 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. IV.


CHAPTER IV.

FLOWERS1.

44. Who shall overcome this earth, and the
world of Yama (the lord of the departed), and
the world of the gods ? Who shall find out the
plainly shown path of virtue, as a clever man
finds out the (right) flower ?

45. The disciple will overcome the earth, and
the world of Yama, and the world of the gods.
The disciple will find out the plainly shown path
of virtue, as a clever man finds out the (right)
flower.

1 See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 75.

44, 45. If I differ from the translation of Fausboll and Weber,
it is because the commentary takes the two verbs, vig-essati and
pa^essati, to mean in the end the same thing, i. e. sai^i-karissati,
' he will perceive/ I have not ventured to take vig-essate for viga-
nissati, though it should be remembered that the overcoming of the
earth and of the worlds below and above, as here alluded to, is
meant to be achieved by means of knowledge. Pa^essati, ( he
will gather ' (cf. vi-£i, Indische Spriiche, 4560), means also, like ' to
gather' in English, 'he will perceive or understand/ and the dham-
mapada, or 'path of virtue/ is distinctly explained by Buddha-
ghosa as consisting of the thirty-seven states or stations which lead
to Bodhi. (See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 430 ; Hardy, Manual, p. 497.)
Dhammapada might, no doubt, mean also 'a law-verse/ and
sudesita, ' well taught/ and this double meaning may be intentional
here as elsewhere. Buddha himself is called Marga-darcaka and
Marga-dejika (cf. Lai. Vist. p. 551). There is a curious similarity
between these verses and verses 6540-41, and 9939 of the *Santi-
parva :

Pushpa^iva vi&nvantam anyatragatamanasam,
Anavapteshu kameshu mr/tyur abhyeti manavam.
'Death approaches man like one who is gathering flowers, and


FLOWERS. 1 7


46. He who knows that this body is like froth,
and has learnt that it is as unsubstantial as a mirage,
will break the flower-pointed arrow of Mara, and
never see the king of death.

47. Death carries off a man who is gathering
flowers and whose mind is distracted, as a flood
carries off a sleeping village.

48. Death subdues a man who is gathering flowers,
and whose mind is distracted, before he is satiated
in his pleasures.

49. As the bee collects nectar and departs without
injuring the flower, or its colour or scent, so let a
sage dwell in his village.

50. Not the perversities of others, not their sins


whose mind is turned elsewhere, before his desires have been

fulfilled/

Suptaztt vyaghrazra mahaugho v& mr/tyur adaya ga^ati,
Sa^invanakam evainazrc kamanam avitnptikam.

' As a stream (carries off) a sleeping tiger, death carries off this

man who is gathering flowers, and who is not satiated in his

pleasures/

This last verse, particularly, seems to me clearly a translation

from Pali, and the kam of saiUinvanakam looks as if put in metri

causa\

46. The flower-arrows of M&ra, the tempter, are borrowed from
Kama, the Hindu god of love. For a similar expression see
Lalita-vistara, ed. Calc. p. 40, 1. 20, mayamari&sadrzsa vidyutphe-
nopama\r £apalM. It is on account of this parallel passage that
I prefer to translate marivfci by ' mirage/ and not by ' sunbeam/ as
Fausboll, or by ' solar atom/ as Weber proposes. The expression,
1 he will never see the king of death/ is supposed to mean Arhatship
by Childers, s.v. nibbana, p. 270.

47. See Thiessen, Die Legende von Kisagotamt, p. 9.

48. Antaka, ' death/ is given as an explanation of Mara in the
Amarakosha and Abhidhanappadfpika (cf. Fausboll, p. 210).

49. See Beal, Catena, p. 159, where vv. 49 and 50 are ascribed to
Wessabhu, i. e. Viyvabhu. See also Der Weise und der Thor, p. 1 34.


1 8 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. IV.

of commission or omission, but his own misdeeds
and negligences should a sage take notice of.

51. Like a beautiful flower, full of colour, but
without scent, are the fine but fruitless words of him
who does not act accordingly.

52. But, like a beautiful flower, full of colour and
full of scent, are the fine and fruitful words of him
who acts accordingly.

53. As many kinds of wreaths can be made from
a heap of flowers, so many good things may be
achieved by a mortal when once he is born.

54. The scent of flowers does not travel against
the wind, nor (that of) sandal-wood, or of Tagara
and Mallika flowers ; but the odour of good people
travels even against the wind ; a good man per-
vades every place.

55. Sandal- wood or Tagara, a lotus-flower, or a
Vassikl, among these sorts of perfumes, the perfume
of virtue is unsurpassed.

56. Mean is the scent that comes from Tagara
and sandal-wood ; — the perfume of those who pos-
sess virtue rises up to the gods as the highest.

57. Of the people who possess these virtues, who
live without thoughtlessness, and who are emanci-


51. St. Matthew xxiii. 3, 'For they say, and do not/
54, Tagara, a plant from which a scented powder is made.
Mallaka or mallikd, according to Benfey, is an oil vessel. Hence
tagaramallika was supposed to mean a bottle holding aromatic
powder, or oil made of the Tagara. Mallika, however, is given by
Dr. Eitel (Handbook of Chinese Buddhism) as the name of a
flower now called Casturi (musk) on account of its rich odour, and
Dr. Morris informs me that he has found mallika in Pali as a name
of jasmine. See also Childers, s. v.; Notes, p. 6 ; and Beal, Dhamma-
pada, p. 76.


FLOWERS. 19


pated through true knowledge, M&ra, the tempter,
never finds the way.

58, 59. As on a heap of rubbish cist upon the
highway the lily will grow full of sweet perfume and
delight, thus the disciple of the truly enlightened
Buddha shines forth by his knowledge among those
who are like rubbish, among the people that walk
in darkness.

58, 59. Cf. Beal, Dhammapada, p. 76.


20 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. V.


CHAPTER V.

THE FOOL.

60. Long is the night to him who is awake ; long
is a mile to him who is tired ; long is life to the
foolish who do not know the true law.

61. If a traveller does not meet with one who is
his better, or his equal, let him firmly keep to his
solitary journey ; there is no companionship with
a fool.

62. ' These sons belong to me, and this wealth
belongs to me/ with such thoughts a fool is tor-
mented. He himself does not belong to himself;
how much less sons and wealth ?

63. The fool who knows his foolishness, is wise at
least so far. But a fool who thinks himself wise, he
is called a fool indeed.

64. If a fool be associated with a wise man even
all his life, he will perceive the truth as little as a
spoon perceives the taste of soup.

65. If an intelligent man be associated for one
minute only with a wise man, he will soon perceive
the truth, as the tongue perceives the taste of soup.

66. Fools of little understanding have themselves


60. ' Life,' sazrcs&ra, is the constant revolution of birth and death
which goes on for ever until the knowledge of the true law or the
true doctrine of Buddha enables a man to free himself from sa/rcsara,
and to enter into Nirvana. See Buddhaghosha's Parables, Parable
XIX, p. 134.

61. Cf. Suttanipata, v. 46.

63. Cf. Beal, Dhammapada, p. 77.
65. Cf. Beal, Dhammapada, p. 78.


THE FOOL. 21


for their greatest enemies, for they do evil deeds
which must bear bitter fruits.

67. That deed is not well done of which a man
must repent, and the reward of which he receives
crying and with a tearful face.

68. No, that deed is well done of which a man
does not repent, and the reward of which he receives
gladly and cheerfully.

69. As long as the evil deed done does not bear
fruit, the fool thinks it is like honey ; but when it
ripens, then the fool suffers grief.

70. Let a fool month after month eat his food
(like an ascetic) with the tip of a blade of Kun
grass, yet is he not worth the sixteenth particle of
those who have well weighed the law.

71. An evil deed, like newly-drawn milk, does not
turn (suddenly) ; smouldering, like fire covered by
ashes, it follows the fool.

67. See Beal, I.e. p. 78.

69. Taken from the Sa^yutta-nikdya, where, however, we read
thananhi instead of madhuva; see Feer, Comptes Rendus, 187 1,
p. 64.

70. The commentator clearly takes sarikhata in the sense of
sankhyata, ' reckoned,' for he explains it by Mtadhamma, tulita-
dhamma\ The eating with the tip of Kara grass has reference
to the fastings performed by the Brahmans, but disapproved of,
except as a moderate discipline, by the followers of Buddha. This
verse seems to interrupt the continuity of the other verses which
treat of the reward of evil deeds, or of the slow but sure ripening
of every sinful act. See Childers, s. v. sankMto.

71. I am not at all certain of the simile, unless mu^ati, as applied
to milk, can be used in the sense of changing or turning sour. In
Manu IV, 172, where a similar sentence occurs, the commentators
are equally doubtful : Nadharmaj £arito loke sadya^ phalati gaur
iva, ' for an evil act committed in the world does not bear fruit at
once, like a cow;' or Mike the earth (in due season);' or 'like
milk/ See Childers, Notes, p. 6.


2 2 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. V.

72. And when the evil deed, after it has become
known, brings sorrow to the fool, then it destroys
his bright lot, nay, it cleaves his head.

73. Let the fool wish for a false reputation, for
precedence among the Bhikshus, for lordship in the
convents, for worship among other people !

74. ' May both the layman and he who has left the
world think that this is done by me ; may they be
subject to me in everything which is to be done or
is not to be done/ thus is the mind of the fool, and
his desire and pride increase.

75. ' One is the road that leads to wealth, another
the road that leads to Nirvana;' if the Bhikshu,
the disciple of Buddha, has learnt this, he will not
yearn for honour, he will strive after separation
from the world.


72. I take wattam for g-^apitam, the causative of gwatam, for
which in Sanskrit, too, we have the form without i, ^aptam. This
^waptam, 'made known, revealed,' stands in opposition to the
^anna, ' covered, hid/ of the preceding verse. Sukkawsa, which
Fausboll explains by juklawsa, has probably a more technical and
special meaning. Childers traces ^attain to the Vedic ^atram,
' knowledge/ Fausboll refers to Gataka, vol. i. p. 445, v. 118.

75. Viveka, which in Sanskrit means chiefly understanding, has
with the Buddhists the more technical meaning of separation,
whether separation from the world and retirement to the solitude
of the forest (Mya-viveka), or separation from idle thoughts (&tta-
viveka), or the highest separation and freedom (Nirvana).


THE WISE MAN. 23


CHAPTER VI.

THE WISE MAN (PAiVDiTA).

76. If you see an intelligent man who tells you
where true treasures are to be found, who shows
what is to be avoided, and administers reproofs,
follow that wise man ; it will be better, not worse,
for those who follow him.

77. Let him admonish, let him teach, let him
forbid what is improper ! — he will be beloved of the
good, by the bad he will be hated.

78. Do not have evil-doers for friends, do not
have low people for friends : have virtuous people
for friends, have for friends the best of men.

79. He who drinks in the law lives happily with
a serene mind : the sage rejoices always in the law,
as preached by the elect (Ariyas).

80. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they
like) ; fletchers bend the arrow ; carpenters bend
a log of wood ; wise people fashion themselves.

78. It is hardly possible to take mitte kalya/ze in the technical
sense of kalya^a-mitra, 'ein geistlicher Rath/ a spiritual guide.
Burnouf (Introd. p. 284) shows that in the technical sense kalyawa-
mitra was widely spread in the Buddhist world.

79. Ariya, ' elect, venerable/ is explained by the commentator
as referring to Buddha and other teachers.

80. See verses 33 and 145, the latter being a mere repetition of
our verse. The nettikas, to judge from the commentary and from
the general purport of the verse, are not simply water-carriers, but
builders of canals and aqueducts, who force the water to go where
it would not go by itself. The Chinese translator says, ' the pilot
manages his ship/ See Beal, 1. c. p. 79.


24 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VI.

8 1. As a solid rock is not shaken by the wind,
wise people falter not amidst blame and praise.

82. Wise people, after they have listened to the
laws, become serene, like a deep, smooth, and still
lake.

83. Good people walk on whatever befall, the
good do not prattle, longing for pleasure ; whether
touched by happiness or sorrow wise people never
appear elated or depressed.

84. If, whether for his own sake, or for the sake
of others, a man wishes neither for a son, nor for
wealth, nor for lordship, and if he does not wish for
his own success by unfair means, then he is good,
wise, and virtuous.

85. Few are there among men who arrive at the
other shore (become Arhats); the other people here
run up and down the shore.

83. The first line is very doubtful. I have adopted, in my trans-
lation, a suggestion of Mr. Childers, who writes, ' I think it will be
necessary to take sabbattha in the sense of" everywhere/' or " under
every condition ;" pan^akhandadibhedesu, sabbadhammesu, says
Buddhaghosha. I do not think we need assume that B. means
the word vi^ahanti to be a synonym of va^anti. I would rather
take the whole sentence together as a gloss upon the word va^anti :
— va^antiti arahattawanena apakaafo^anta ^andarag-aw vi^ahanti;
va^-anti means that, ridding themselves of lust by the wisdom which
Arhatship confers, they cast it away.' I am inclined to think the
line means ' the righteous walk on (unmoved) in all the conditions
of life/ Nindd, pasawsd, sukha, dukkha are four of the eight
lokadhammas, or earthly conditions ; the remaining lokadhammas
are l&bha, aldbha, yasa, ayasa.

In v. 245, passatd, ' by a man who sees/ means ' by a man who
sees clearly or truly/ In the same manner vra^- may mean, not
simply ' to walk/ but ' to walk properly/ or may be used synony-
mously with pravrag-.

85. ' The other shore ' is meant for Nirvana, ' this shore ' for
common life. On reaching Nirvana, the dominion of death is


THE WISE MAN. 25


86. But those who, when the law has been well
preached to them, follow the law, will pass across
the dominion of death, however difficult to over-
come.

87, 88. A wise man should leave the dark state
(of ordinary life), and follow the bright state (of the
Bhikshu). After going from his home to a home-
less state, he should in his retirement look for
enjoyment where there seemed to be no enjoy-
ment. Leaving all pleasures behind, and calling
nothing his own, the wise man should purge himself
from all the troubles of the mind.

89. Those whose mind is well grounded in the
(seven) elements of knowledge, who without cling-


overcome. The commentator supplies taritvd, ' having crossed/ in
order to explain the accusative ma^iudheyyam. Possibly param
essanti should here be taken as one word, in the sense of over-
coming.

87, 88. Dark and bright are meant for bad and good ; cf. Sutta-
nipata, v. 526, and Dhp. v. 167. Leaving one's home is the same
as becoming a mendicant, without a home or family, an anagara,
or anchorite. A man in that state of viveka, or retirement (see
v. 75, note), sees, that where before there seemed to be no pleasure
there real pleasure is to be found, or vice versa. A similar idea is
expressed in verse 99. See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 4 7 4, where he speaks
of ' Le plaisir de la satisfaction, ne* de la distinction/

The five troubles or evils of the mind are passion, anger, igno-
rance, arrogance, pride ; see Burnouf, Lotus, pp. 360, 443. As to
pariyodapeyya, see verse 183, and Lotus, pp. 523, 528; as to
akm^ano, see Mahabh. XII, 6568, 1240.

89. The elements of knowledge are the seven Sambodhyangas,
on which see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 796. D'Alwis explains them as
the thirty-seven Bodhipakkhiya-dhammd. Khi/z&savd, which I have
translated by ' they whose frailties have been conquered/ may also
be taken in a more metaphysical sense, as explained in the note to
v. 39. The same applies to the other terms occurring in this verse,
such as &dana, anupad&ya, &c. Dr. Fausboll seems inclined to
[10] f


26 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VI.

ing to anything, rejoice in freedom from attachment,
whose appetites have been conquered, and who are
full of light, are free (even) in this world.


take asava in this passage, and in the other passages where it
occurs, as the Pali representative of a\sraya. But a\yraya, in Buddhist
phraseology, means rather the five organs of sense with manas,
' the soul/ and these are kept distinct from the asavas, ' the inclina-
tions, the appetites, passions, or vices/ The commentary on the
Abhidharma, when speaking of the Yoga^lras, says, ' En r^unissant
ensemble les receptacles (a\sraya), les choses recues (amta) et les
supports (alambana), qui sont chacun composes de six termes, on a
dix-huit termes qu'on appelle " Dhatus " ou contenants. La col-
lection des six receptacles, ce sont les organes de la vue, de l'oui'e,
de Todorat, du gout, du toucher, et le " manas " (ou Torgane du
cceur), qui est le dernier. La collection des six choses recues, c'est
la connaissance produite par la vue et par les autres sens jusqu'au
"manas" inclusivement. La collection des six supports, ce sont la
forme et les autres attributs sensibles jusqu'au " Dharma" (la loi ou
T&re) inclusivement.' See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 449.

Parinibbuta is again a technical term, the Sanskrit parinivr/ta
meaning * freed from all worldly fetters/ like vimukta. See Bur-
nouf, Introduction, p. 590. See Childers, s. v. nibMna, p. 270,
and Notes on Dhammapada, p. 3 ; and D'Alwis, Buddhist Nirvana,
P- 75.


THE VENERABLE. 2J


CHAPTER VII.

THE VENERABLE (ARHAT).

90. There is no suffering for him who has finished
his journey, and abandoned grief, who has freed him-
self on all sides, and thrown off all fetters.

91. They depart with their thoughts well-collected,
they are not happy in their abode ; like swans who
have left their lake, they leave their house and
home.

92. Men who have no riches, who live on recog-
nised food, who have perceived void and uncon-
ditioned freedom (Nirvana), their path is difficult to
understand, like that of birds in the air.


91. Satimanto, Sanskrit smr/timanta^, l possessed of memory/
but here used in the technical sense of sati, the first of the Bodhyan-
gas. See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 797. Clough translates it by
1 intense thought,' and this is the original meaning of smar, even
in Sanskrit. See Lectures on the Science of Language, vol. ii.
P- 332.

UyyuTi^anti, which Buddhaghosa explains by ' they exert them-
selves/ seems to me to signify in this place 'they depart/ i.e.
they leave their family, and embrace an ascetic life. See note to
verse 235. See also Rhys Davids, Mahdparinibbana-sutta, Sacred
Books of the East, vol. xi. p. 22.

92. Su^ato and animitto are adjectives belonging to vimokho,
one of the many names of Nirvana, or, according to Childers, s. v.
nibbana, p. 270, Arhatship; see Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 442,
462, on junya. The Sanskrit expression junyatanimittaprawihitam
occurs in L'enfant egar6, 5 a, 1. 4. Nimitta is cause in the most
general sense, i. e. what causes existence. The commentator ex-
plains it chiefly in a moral sense : Rdgadinimittdbhavena animittaw,
tehi £a vimuttan ti animitto vimokho, i. e. owing to the absence of
passion and other causes, without causation ; because freed from

f 2


28 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VII.

93. He whose appetites are stilled, who is not
absorbed in enjoyment, who has perceived void and
unconditioned freedom (Nirvana), his path is diffi-
cult to understand, like that of birds in the air.

94. The gods even envy him whose senses, like
horses well broken in by the driver, have been
subdued, who is free from pride, and free from
appetites.

95. Such a one who does his duty is tolerant like
the earth, like Indra's bolt ; he is like a lake without
mud ; no new births are in store for him.

96. His thought is quiet, quiet are his word and
deed, when he has obtained freedom by true know-
ledge, when he has thus become a quiet man.


these causes, therefore it is called freedom without causation. See
Childers, Pali Dictionary, p. 270, col. 2, line 1.

The simile is intended to compare the ways of those who have
obtained spiritual freedom to the flight of birds, it being difficult
to understand how the birds move on without putting their feet on
anything. This, at least, is the explanation of the commentator.
The same metaphor occurs Mahabh. XII, 6763. Childers translates,
* leaving no more trace of existence than a bird in the air/

95. Without the hints given by the commentator, we should
probably take the three similes of this verse in their natural sense,
as illustrating the imperturbable state of an Arahanta,, or venerable
person. The earth is always represented as an emblem of patience;
the bolt of Indra, if taken in its technical sense, as the bolt of a
gate, might likewise suggest the idea of firmness ; while the lake is
a constant representative of serenity and purity. The commentator,
however, suggests that what is meant is, that the earth, though
flowers are cast on it, does not feel pleasure, nor the bolt of Indra
displeasure, although less savoury things are thrown upon it ; and
that in like manner a wise person is indifferent to honour and dis-
honour.

96. That this very natural threefold division, thought, word, and
deed, the trividha-dv&ra or the three doors of the Buddhists (Hardy,
Manual, p. 494), was not peculiar to the Buddhists or unknown to


THE VENERABLE. 29


97. The man who is free from credulity, but knows
the uncreated, who has cut all ties, removed all
temptations, renounced all desires, he is the greatest
of men.


the Brahmans, has been proved against Dr. Weber by Professor
Koppen in his* Religion des Buddha,' I, p. 445. He particularly called
attention to Manu XII, 4-8 ; and he might have added Mahabh.
XII, 4059, 6512, 6549, 6554; XIII, 5677, &c. Dr. Weber has
himself afterwards brought forward a passage from the Atharva-
veda, VI, 96, 3 (ya£ ^akshush^ manasa ya£ ^a va&i uparima),
which, however, has a different meaning. A better one was quoted
by him from the Taitt. Ar. X, 1, 12 (yan me manasa, v&M, karmawd
va dushkrztaw kn'tam). Similar expressions have been shown to
exist in the Zend-avesta, and among the Manichseans (Lassen,
Indische Alterthumskunde, III, p. 414 ; see also Boehtlingk's Dic-
tionary, s. v. Mya, and Childers, s. v. kayo). There was no ground,
therefore, for supposing that this formula had found its way into
the Christian liturgy from Persia, for, as Professor Cowell remarks
(Journal of Philology, vol. vii. p. 215), Greek writers, such as Plato,
employ very similar expressions, e.g. Protag. p. 348, 30, npos cinau
epyov Koi \6yov Kal biav6r)fxa. In fact, the opposition between words
and deeds occurs in almost every writer, from Homer downwards ;
and the further distinction between thoughts and words is clearly
implied even in such expressions as, 'they say in their heart.' That
the idea of sin committed by thought was not a new idea, even to the
Jews, may be seen from Prov. xxiv. 9, ' the thought of foolishness
is sin.' In the Apastamba-sutras, lately edited by Professor Buhler,
we find the expression, atho yatkm^a manasa vaia ^akshusha va
sankalpayan dhyayaty ah^bhivipa^yati va tathaiva tad bhavatityu-
padlranti, 'they say that whatever a Brahman intending with his
mind, voice, or eye, thinks, says, or looks, that will be.' This is
clearly a very different division, and it is the same which is intended
in the passage from the Atharva-veda, quoted above. In the mis-
chief done by the eye, we have, perhaps, the first indication of the
evil eye. (Mahabh. XII, 3417. See Dhammapada, vv. 231-234.)
On the technical meaning of tadi, see Childers, s. v. D'Alwis
(p. 78) has evidently received the right interpretation, but has not
understood it. Madma also is used very much like tadma, and
from it mariso, a venerable person, in Sanskrit marsha.


30 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VII.

98. In a hamlet or in a forest, in the deep water
or on the dry land, wherever venerable persons
(Arahanta) dwell, that place is delightful.

99. Forests are delightful ; where the world finds
no delight, there the passionless will find delight,
for they look not for pleasures.


THE THOUSANDS. 3 I


CHAPTER VIII.

THE THOUSANDS.

ioo. Even though a speech be a thousand (of
words), but made up of senseless words, one word
of sense is better, which if a man hears, he becomes
quiet.

101. Even though a Gathd (poem) be a thousand
(of words), but made up of senseless words, one
word of a Gathcl is better, which if a man hears, he
becomes quiet.

102. Though a man recite a hundred Gathis made
up of senseless words, one word of the law is better,
which if a man hears, he becomes quiet.

103. If one man conquer in battle a thousand
times thousand men, and if another conquer himself,
he is the greatest of conquerors.

104. 105. One's own self conquered is better than
all other people ; not even a god, a Gandharva, not
Mara with Brahman could change into defeat the

100. This Sahasravarga, or Chapter of the Thousands, is quoted
by that name in the Mahavastu (Minayeff, Melanges Asiatiques, VI,
p. 583): Tesham Bhagavaw gzf\\&n&m Dharmapadeshu sahasra-
vargam bhashati : ' Sahasram api va^anam anarthapadasa/rchitanam,
ekarthavati jreya y&m jrutva, upa^amyati. Sahasram api gatMnam
anarthapadasawhitanam, ekarthavati jreya yaw jrutva upa^amyati'
(MS. R. A. S. Lond.) Here the Pali text seems decidedly more
original and perfect.

104. Gitaw, according to the commentator, stands for^ito (lih-
gavipaMso, i. e. viparyasa) ; see also Senart in Journal Asiatique,
1880, p. 500.

The Devas (gods), Gandharvas (fairies), and other fanciful beings
of the Brahmanic religion, such as the Nagas, Sarpas, Gammas, &c,


32 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VIII.

victory of a man who has vanquished himself, and
always lives under restraint.

106. If a man for a hundred years sacrifice month
after month with a thousand, and if he but for one
moment pay homage to a man whose soul is grounded
(in true knowledge), better is that homage than a
sacrifice for a hundred years.

107. If a man for a hundred years worship Agni
(fire) in the forest, and if he but for one moment pay
homage to a man whose soul is grounded (in true
knowledge), better is that homage than sacrifice for
a hundred years.

108. Whatever a man sacrifice in this world as an
offering or as an oblation for a whole year in order to
gain merit, the whole of it is not worth a quarter (a
farthing) ; reverence shown to the righteous is better.

were allowed to continue in the traditional language of the people
who had embraced Buddhism. See the pertinent remarks of Burnouf,
Introduction, pp. 134 seq., 184. On Mara, the tempter, see v. 7.
Sastram Aiyar, On the (raina Religion, p. xx, says : ( Moreover as
it is declared in the (-raina Vedas that all the gods worshipped by
the various Hindu sects, viz. *Siva, Brahma, Vishnu, Ga«apati,
Subramaniyan, and others, were devoted adherents of the above-
mentioned Tirthahkaras, the Gainas therefore do not consider
them as unworthy of their worship ; but as they are servants of
Arugan, they consider them to be deities of their system, and
accordingly perform certain pfi^as in honour of them, and worship
them also/ The case is more doubtful with orthodox Buddhists.
'Orthodox Buddhists/ as Mr. D'Alwis writes (Attanagalu-vansa,
p. 55), 'do not consider the worship of the Devas as being sanc-
tioned by him who disclaimed for himself and all the Devas any
power over man's soul. Yet the Buddhists are everywhere idol-
worshippers. Buddhism, however, acknowledges the existence of
some of the Hindu deities, and from the various friendly offices
which those Devas are said to have rendered to Gotama, Buddhists
evince a respect for their idols/ See also Buddhaghosha's Parables,
p. 162.


THE THOUSANDS. 33


109. He who always greets and constantly reveres
the aged, four things will increase to him, viz. life,
beauty, happiness, power.

no. But he who lives a hundred years, vicious
and unrestrained, a life of one day is better if a man
is virtuous and reflecting.

in. And he who lives a hundred years, ignorant
and unrestrained, a life of one day is better if a man
is wise and reflecting.

1 1 2. And he who lives a hundred years, idle and
weak, a life of one day is better if a man has attained
firm strength.

113. And he who lives a hundred years, not seeing
beginning and end, a life of one day is better if a
man sees beginning and end.

114. And he who lives a hundred years, not
seeing the immortal place, a life of one day is better
if a man sees the immortal place.

115. And he who lives a hundred years, not
seeing the highest law, a life of one day is better
if a man sees the highest law.

109. Dr. Fausboll, in a most important note, called attention to
the fact that the same verse, with slight variations, occurs in Manu.
We there read, II, 1 2 1 :

Abhivadanarflasya nityaw vr/ddhopasevina^,
Aatvari sampravardhante dyur vidy& yajo balam.
Here the four things are, life, knowledge, glory, power.

In the Apastamba-sutras, I, 2, 5, 15, the reward promised for
the same virtue is svargam ayus £a, ' heaven and long life/ It
seems, therefore, as if the original idea of this verse came from the
Brahmans, and was afterwards adopted by the Buddhists. How
largely it spread is shown by Dr. Fausboll from the Asiatic Re-
searches, XX, p. 259, where the same verse of the Dhammapada
is mentioned as being in use among the Buddhists of Siam.

112. On kusito, see note to verse 7.


34 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. IX.


CHAPTER IX.

EVIL.

116. If a man would hasten towards the good,
he should keep his thought away from evil ; if a
man does what is good slothfully, his mind delights
in evil.

117. If a man commits a sin, let him not do it
again ; let him not delight in sin : pain is the out-
come of evil.

118. If a man does what is good, let him do it
again ; let him delight in it : happiness is the out-
come of good.

119. Even an evil-doer sees happiness as long as
his evil deed has not ripened; but when his evil
deed has ripened, then does the evil-doer see evil.

120. Even a good man sees evil days, as long as
his good deed has not ripened ; but when his good
deed has ripened, then does the good man see happy
days.

121. Let no man think lightly of evil, saying in
his heart, It will not come nigh unto me. Even by
the falling of water-drops a water-pot is filled ; the
fool becomes full of evil, even if he gather it little
by little.

122. Let no man think lightly of good, saying in
his heart, It will not come nigh unto me. Even by
the falling of water-drops a water-pot is filled ; the
wise man becomes full of good, even if he gather it
little by little.

123. Let a man avoid evil deeds, as a merchant,
if he has few companions and carries much wealth,


evil. 35

avoids a dangerous road ; as a man who loves life
avoids poison.

124. He who has no wound on his hand, may
touch poison with his hand ; poison does not affect
one who has no wound ; nor is there evil for one
who does not commit evil.

125. If a man offend a harmless, pure, and inno-
cent person, the evil falls back upon that fool, like
light dust thrown up against the wind.

126. Some people are born again; evil-doers go
to hell ; righteous people go to heaven ; those who
are free from all worldly desires attain Nirvi/za.

127. Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea,
not if we enter into the clefts of the mountains, is
there known a spot in the whole world where a
man might be freed from an evil deed.

128. Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea,
not if we enter into the clefts of the mountains, is
there known a spot in the whole world where death
could not overcome (the mortal).

125. Cf. Suttanipata, v. 661; Indische Spriiche, 1582; Katha-
saritsagara, 49, 222,

126. For a description of hell and its long, yet not endless
sufferings, see Buddhaghosha's Parables, p. 132. The pleasures of
heaven, too, are frequently described in these Parables and else-
where. Buddha himself enjoyed these pleasures of heaven, before he
was born for the last time. It is probably when good and evil deeds
are equally balanced, that men are born again as human beings ;
this, at least, is the opinion of the (rainas. Cf. Chintamam, ed.
H. Bower, Introd. p. xv.

127. Cf. St. Luke xii. 2, ' For there is nothing covered that shall
not be revealed;' and Psalm cxxxix. 8-12.


36 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. X.


CHAPTER X.

PUNISHMENT.

129. All men tremble at punishment, all men fear
death ; remember that you are like unto them, and
do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

1 30. All men tremble at punishment, all men love
life ; remember that thou art like unto them, and do
not kill, nor cause slaughter.

131. He who seeking his own happiness punishes
or kills beings who also long for happiness, will not
find happiness after death.


129. One feels tempted, no doubt, to take upama in the sense
of 'the nearest (der Nachste), the neighbour/ and to translate,
1 having made oneself one's neighbour/ i. e. loving one's neighbour
as oneself. But as upamam, with a short a, is the correct accusative
of upamd, we must translate, ' having made oneself the likeness,
the image of others, having placed oneself in the place of others/
This is an expression which occurs frequently in Sanskrit; cf.
Hitopadcra 1, 1 1 :

Pra/za yathatmano 'bhish/d bhutanam api te tatha,
Atmaupamyena bhuteshu d&y&m kurvanti sadhava^.
e As life is dear to oneself, it is dear also to other living beings :
by comparing oneself with others, good people bestow pity on all
beings/

See also Hit. I, 12; Ram. V, 23, 5, atmanam upama/tf kr/tva
sveshu dareshu ramyatsim, ' making oneself a likeness, i. e. putting
oneself in the position of other people, it is right to love none but
one's own wife/ Dr. Fausboll has called attention to similar pas-
sages in the Mahabharata, XIII, 5569 seq.

130. Cf. St. Luke vi. 31.

131. Dr. Fausboll points out the striking similarity between this
verse and two verses occurring in Manu and the Mahabharata : —


PUNISHMENT. 37


132. He who seeking his own happiness does not
punish or kill beings who also long for happiness,
will find happiness after death.

133. Do not speak harshly to anybody; those
who are spoken to will answer thee in the same
way. Angry speech is painful, blows for blows will
touch thee.

134. If, like a shattered metal plate (gong), thou
utter not, then thou hast reached Nirvana ; conten-
tion is not known to thee.

135. As a cowherd with his staff drives his cows
into the stable, so do Age and Death drive the life
of men.

136. A fool does not know when he commits his
evil deeds : but the wicked man burns by his own
deeds, as if burnt by fire.

137. He who inflicts pain on innocent and harm-
less persons, will soon come to one of these ten
states :


Manu V, 45 :

Yo 'hitfzsaMni bhutani hinasty atmasukhe^Maya,
Sa giv&ms ka, mn'ta^ >£aiva na kva&t sukham edhate.
Mahabharata XIII, 5568 :

Ahizrcsakani bhut&ni da^dena vinihanti yak,
Atmana^ sukham i^an sa pretya naiva sukhi bhavet.
If it were not for ahiwsakani, in which Manu and the MahabMrata
agree, I should say that the verses in both were Sanskrit modifica-
tions of the Pali original. The verse in the Mahabharata presup-
poses the verse of the Dhammapada.

133. See Mahabharata XII, 4056.

134. See Childers, s.v. nibbana, p. 270, and s. v. Mmso ; D'Alwis,
Buddhist Nirvana, p. 35.

136. The metaphor of 'burning' for ' suffering ' is very
common in Buddhist literature. Everything burns, i.e. every-
thing suffers, was one of the first experiences of Buddha himself.
See v. 146.


38 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. X.

138. He will have cruel suffering, loss, injury of
the body, heavy affliction, or loss of mind,

139. Or a misfortune coming from the king, or
a fearful accusation, or loss of relations, or destruc-
tion of treasures,

140. Or lightning-fire will burn his houses; and
when his body is destroyed, the fool will go to hell.

141. Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not
fasting, or lying on the earth, not rubbing with dust,

138. ' Cruel suffering ' is explained by sisaroga, ' headache/ &c.
' Loss' is taken for loss of money. ' Injury of the body ' is held to
be the cutting off of the arm, and other limbs. ' Heavy afflictions '
are, again, various kinds of diseases.

139. Upasarga means ' accident, misfortune/ Dr. Fausboll
translates rag-ato va upassaggam by * fulgentis (lunae) defectionem ;'
Dr. Weber by 'Bestrafung vom Konig;' Beal by ' some govern-
mental difficulty.' Abbhakkhanam, Sanskrit abhyakhyanam, is a
heavy accusation for high treason, or similar offences. Beal trans-
lates, ' some false accusation.' The i destruction of pleasures or
treasures' is explained by gold being changed to coals (see Buddha-
ghosha's Parables, p. 98 ; Thiessen, Kis&gotami, p. 6), pearls to
cotton seed, corn to potsherds, and by men and cattle becoming
blind, lame, &c.

141. Cf. Hibbert Lectures, p. 355. Dr. Fausboll has pointed out
that the same or a very similar verse occurs in a legend taken from
the Divyavad&na, and translated by Burnouf (Introduction, p. 3 1 3
seq.) Burnouf translates the verse : l Ce n'est ni la coutume de
marcher nu, ni les cheveux natt^s, ni Tusage d'argile, ni le choix
des diverses especes d' aliments, ni Thabitude de coucher sur la
terre nue, ni la poussiere, ni la malproprete^ ni l'attention a fuir
l'abri d'un toit, qui sont capables de dissiper le trouble dans lequel
nous jettent les d^sirs non-satisfaits ; mais qu'un homme, maitre
de ses sens, calme, recueilli, chaste, eVitant de faire du mal a aucune
creature, accomplisse la Loi, et il sera, quoique pare d'ornements,
un Brahmane, un Qramana, un Religieux.' See also Suttanipata,
v. 248.

Walking naked and the other things mentioned in our verse
are outward signs of a saintly life, and these Buddha rejects because
they do not calm the passions. Nakedness he seems to have


PUNISHMENT. 39


not sitting motionless, can purify a mortal who has
not overcome desires.

142. He who, though dressed in fine apparel,
exercises tranquillity, is quiet, subdued, restrained,
chaste, and has ceased to find fault with all other
beings, he indeed is a Brahma/za, an ascetic (ira-
ma/za), a friar (bhikshu),

143. Is there in this world any man so restrained
by humility that he does not mind reproof, as a
well-trained horse the whip ?

144. Like a well-trained horse when touched by

rejected on other grounds too, if we may judge from the Suma-
gadha-avadana : ' A number of naked friars were assembled in the
house of the daughter of Anatha-pi^ika. She called her daughter-
in-law, Sumagadhd, and said, " Go and see those highly respectable
persons." Sum&gadh&, expecting to see some of the saints, like
»Sariputra, Maudgalyayana, and others, ran out full of joy. But
when she saw these friars with their hair like pigeon wings, covered
by nothing but dirt, offensive, and looking like demons, she became
sad. "Why are you sad?" said her mother-in-law. Sumagadha
replied, "O mother, if these are saints, what must sinners be like ?"'

Burnouf (Introduction, p. 312) supposed that the (jrainas only,
and not the Buddhists, allowed nakedness. But the (jrainas, too,
do not allow it universally. They are divided into two parties, the
.Svetambaras and Digambaras. The *Svetambaras, clad in white,
are the followers of Parcvanatha, and wear clothes. The Digam-
baras, i. e. sky-clad, disrobed, are followers of Mahavira, resident
chiefly in Southern India. At present they, too, wear clothing,
but not when eating. See Sastram Aiyar, p. xxi.

The £-a/a, or the hair platted and gathered up in a knot, was a
sign of a *Saiva ascetic. The sitting motionless is one of the pos-
tures assumed by ascetics. Clough explains ukku/ika as ' the act
of sitting on the heels ;' Wilson gives for utka/uMsana, ' sitting on
the hams/ See Fausboll, note on verse 1 40.

142. As to da/zdanidMna, see Mahabh. XII, 6559, and Sutta-
nipata, v. 34.

143, 144. I am very doubtful as to the real meaning of these
verses. If their object is to show how reproof or punishment


4-0 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. X.

the whip, be ye active and lively, and by faith, by
virtue, by energy, by meditation, by discernment of
the law you will overcome this great pain (of reproof),
perfect in knowledge and in behaviour, and never
forgetful.

145. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they
like) ; fletchers bend the arrow ; carpenters bend
a log of wood ; good people fashion themselves.

should be borne, my translation would be right, though alpabodhati
in the sense of parvi facere is strange.

145. The same as verse 80. According to Fausboll and Subhuti
we ought to render the verses by, * What man is there found on
earth so restrained by shame that he never provokes reproof, as a
good horse the whip ? ' See Childers, s. v. appabodhati.


OLD AGE. 41


CHAPTER XL

OLD AGE.

146. How is there laughter, how is there joy, as
this world is always burning ? Why do you not
seek a light, ye who are surrounded by darkness ?

147. Look at this dressed-up lump, covered with
wounds, joined together, sickly, full of many thoughts,
which has no strength, no hold !

148. This body is wasted, full of sickness, and
frail ; this heap of corruption breaks to pieces, life
indeed ends in death.

1 48. Dr. Fausboll informs me that Childers proposed the emen-
dation mara^antazrc hi £-rvita#z. The following extract from a letter,
addressed by Childers to Dr. Fausboll, will be read with interest : —
'As regards Dhp. v. 148, I have no doubt whatever. I quite agree
with you that the idea (mors est vita ejus) is a profound and noble
one, but the question is, Is the idea there ? I think not. Mararcaw
tamhi givit&m is not Pali, I mean not a Pali construction, and
years ago even it grated on my ear as a harsh phrase. The reading
of your MSS. of the texts is nothing; your MSS. of Dhammapada
are very bad ones, and it is merely the vicious Sinhalese spelling of
bad MSS., like kammawtaw for kammantaw. But the comment sets
the question at rest at once, for it explains mara«antaz# by mara«a-
pariyosana#z, which is exactly the same. I see there is one serious
difficulty left, that all your MSS. seem to have tamhi, and not
taw hi ; but are you sure it is so ? There was a Dhammapada in
the India Office Library, and I had a great hunt for it a few days
ago, but to my deep disappointment it is missing. I do not agree
with you that the sentence " All Life is bounded by Death," is
trivial : it is a truism, but half the noblest passages in poetry are
truisms, and unless I greatly mistake, this very passage will be found
in many other literatures/

Dr. Fausboll adds : —

'I have still the same doubt as before, because of all my

[10] g


42 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XI.

149. Those white bones, like gourds thrown away
in the autumn, what pleasure is there in looking at
them ?

150. After a stronghold has been made of the
bones, it is covered with flesh and blood, and there
dwell in it old age and death, pride and deceit.

151. The brilliant chariots of kings are destroyed,
the body also approaches destruction, but the virtue
of good people never approaches destruction, — thus
do the good say to the good.

152. A man who has learnt little, grows old like
an ox ; his flesh grows, but his knowledge does not
grow.

153. 154. Looking for the maker of this taber-
nacle, I shall have to run through a course of many
births, so long as I do not find (him) ; and painful is
birth again and again. But now, maker of the taber-
nacle, thou hast been seen ; thou shalt not make up

MSS. reading mara^aw tamhi. I do not know the readings
of the London MSS. The explanation of the commentary does
not settle the question, as it may as well be considered an
explanation of my reading as of the reading which Childers
proposed. — V. Fausboll/

149. In the Rudrayaraavad&na of the Divyavadana this verse
appears as,

Yanimany apariddhani vikshiptani di.ro dua^,
Kapctavar/zany asthini tani drzsh/vaiha ka rati^.
See Schiefner, Mel. Asiat. VIII, p. 589 ; <2ataka, vol. i. p. 322.

150. The expression ma^salohitalepanam is curiously like the
expression used in Manu VI, 76, msiztfsa.romtalepanam, and in
several passages of the Mahabharata, XII, 12462, 12053, as pointed
out by Dr. Fausboll.

x53> *54- These two verses are famous among Buddhists, for
they are the words which the founder of Buddhism is supposed
to have uttered at the moment he attained to Buddhahood. (See
Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 180.) According to the Lalita-vistara,
however, the words uttered on that solemn occasion were those


OLD AGE. 43


this tabernacle again. All thy rafters are broken,
thy ridge-pole is sundered ; the mind, approaching
the Eternal (visankh&ra, nirvana), has attained to
the extinction of all desires.

quoted in the note to verse 39. In the commentary on the
Brahmag-ala this verse is called the first speech of Buddha, his last
speech being the words in the Mahaparinibbana-sutta, 'Life is
subject to age ; strive in earnest/ The words used in the Maha-
parinibb&na-sutta, Chap. IV, 2, iTatunna/rc dhammanam ananubodM
appa/ivedha evam idazra digham addhdna^ sandhdvita^ saz#saritaz#
raamaw k9 eva tumMkaft £a, answer to the anticipation expressed
in our verse.

The exact rendering of this verse has been much discussed, chiefly
by Mr. D'Alwis in the Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxviii, and again in his
Buddhist Nirvana, p. 78 ; also by Childers, Notes on Dhammapada,
p. 4, and in his Dictionary. Gogerly translated : * Through various
transmigrations I must travel, if I do not discover the builder whom
I seek/ Spence Hardy : ' Through many different births I have run
(to me not having found), seeking the architect of the desire-re-
sembling house/ Fausboll : ' Multiplices generationis revolutiones
percurreram,non inveniens,domus (corporis) fabricatorem quaerens/
And again (p. 322): 'Multarum generationum revolutio mihi sub-
eunda esset, nisi invenissem domus fabricatorem/ Childers: ' I have
run through the revolution of countless births, seeking the architect
of this dwelling and finding him not/ D'Alwis : * Through transmi-
grations of numerous births have I run, not discovering, (though)
seeking the house-builder/ All depends on how we take sandha-
vissam, which Fausboll takes as a conditional, Childers, following
Trenckner, as an aorist, because the sense imperatively requires
an aorist. In either case, the dropping of the augment and the
doubling of the s are, however, irregular. Sandhavissam is the
regular form of the future, and as such I translate it, qualifying,
however, the future, by the participle present anibbisan, i.e. not
finding, and taking it in the sense of, if or so long as I do not find
the true cause of existence. I had formerly translated anibbisan,
as not resting (anirvisan), but the commentator seems to authorise
the meaning of not finding (avindanto, alabhanto), and in that case
all the material difficulties of the verse seem to me to disappear.

' The maker of the tabernacle ' is explained as a poetical expres-
sion for the cause of new births, at least according to the views of

s2


44 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XI.

155. Men who have not observed proper disci-
pline, and have not gained treasure in their youth,
perish like old herons in a lake without fish.

156. Men who have not observed proper disci-
pline, and have not gained treasure in their youth,
lie, like broken bows, sighing after the past.

Buddha's followers, whatever his own views may have been. Bud-
dha had conquered M&ra, the representative of worldly temptations,
the father of worldly desires, and as desires (tawha) are, by means
of upadana and bhava, the cause of g&ti, or 'birth/ the destruction of
desires and the conquest of Mara are nearly the same thing, though
expressed differently in the philosophical and legendary language
of the Buddhists. Ta^zha, 'thirst* or 'desire/ is mentioned as
serving in the army of Mara. (Lotus, p. 443.)

155. On ^Myanti, i.e. kshayanti, see Dr. Bollensen's learned
remarks, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft, XVIII,
834, and Boehtlingk-Roth, s.v. ksha.


SELF. 45


CHAPTER XII.

SELF.

157. If a man hold himself dear, let him watch
himself carefully; during one at least out of the
three watches a wise man should be watchful.

158. Let each man direct himself first to what is
proper, then let him teach others ; thus a wise man
will not suffer.

159. If a man make himself as he teaches others
to be, then, being himself well subdued, he may sub-
due (others) ; one's own self is indeed difficult to
subdue.

160. Self is the lord of self, who else could be
the lord ? With self well subdued, a man finds a
lord such as few can find.

161. The evil done by oneself, self-begotten, self-
bred, crushes the foolish, as a diamond breaks a
precious stone.

162. He whose wickedness is very great brings
himself down to that state where his enemy wishes
him to be, as a creeper does with the tree which it
surrounds.

163. Bad deeds, and deeds hurtful to ourselves,
are easy to do ; what is beneficial and good, that is
very difficult to do.

157. The three watches of the night are meant for the three
stages of life. Cf. St. Mark xiii. 37, 'And what I say unto you,
I say unto all, Watch/

158. Cf. Crataka, vol. ii. p. 441.

161. The Chinese translation renders va^iram by 'steel drill/


46 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XII.

164. The foolish man who scorns the rule of the
venerable (Arahat), of the elect (Ariya), of the vir-
tuous, and follows false doctrine, he bears fruit to
his own destruction, like the fruits of the Kanaka
reed.

165. By oneself the evil is done, by oneself one
suffers; by oneself evil is left undone, by oneself
one is purified. Purity and impurity belong to one-
self, no one can purify another.

166. Let no one forget his own duty for the sake
of another's, however great ; let a man, after he has
discerned his own duty, be always attentive to his
duty.

164. The reed either dies after it has borne fruit, or is cut down
for the sake of its fruit.

Di//$i, literally 'view/ is used even by itself, like the Greek
' hairesis,' in the sense of heresy (see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 444). In
other places a distinction is made between mikkh&diftki (vv. 167,
316) and sammadi//#i (v. 319). If arahataw ariyana/ra are used in
their technical sense, we should translate ' the reverend Arhats/ —
Arhat being the highest degree of the four orders of Ariyas, viz.
SrotaHpanna, Sakad&g&min, An&g&min, and Arhat. See note to
verse 178.

166. Attha, lit. 'object,' must here be taken in a moral sense,
as ' duty ' rather than as ' advantage/ Childers rendered it by
' spiritual good/ The story which Buddhaghosa tells of the Thera
Attadattha gives a clue to the origin of some of his parables, which
seem to have been invented to suit the text of the Dhammapada
rather than vice versa\ A similar case occurs in the commentary
to verse 227.


THE WORLD. 47


CHAPTER XIII.

THE WORLD.

167. Do not follow the evil law ! Do not live on
in thoughtlessness ! Do not follow false doctrine !
Be not a friend of the world.

168. Rouse thyself! do not be idle ! Follow the
law of virtue! The virtuous rests in bliss in this
world and in the next.

169. Follow the law of virtue ; do not follow that
of sin. The virtuous rests in bliss in this world and
in the next.

1 70. Look upon the world as a bubble, look upon
it as a mirage : the king of death does not see him
who thus looks down upon the world.

171. Come, look at this glittering world, like unto
a royal chariot ; the foolish are immersed in it, but
the wise do not touch it.

172. He who formerly was reckless and after-
wards became sober, brightens up this world, like
the moon when freed from clouds.

173. He whose evil deeds are covered by good
deeds, brightens up this world, like the moon when
freed from clouds.

1 74. This world is dark, few only can see here; a few
only go to heaven, like birds escaped from the net.

175. The swans go on the path of the sun, they
go through the ether by means of their miraculous

168, 169. See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 65.
170. See Suttanipata, v. 11 18.

175. Ha/rasa may be meant for the bird, whether flamingo, or
swan, or ibis (see Hardy, Manual, p. 17), but it may also, I believe,


48 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIII.

power ; the wise are led out of this world, when
they have conquered Mira and his train.

176. If a man has transgressed one law, and
speaks lies, and scoffs at another world, there is no
evil he will not do.

177. The uncharitable do not go to the world of
the gods ; fools only do not praise liberality ; a wise
man rejoices in liberality, and through it becomes
blessed in the other world.

1 78. Better than sovereignty over the earth, better
than going to heaven, better than lordship over all
worlds, is the reward of the first step in holiness.


be taken in the sense of saint. As to iddhi, 'magical power/
i.e. rz'ddhi, see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 310; Spence Hardy, Manual,
pp. 498, 504 ; Legends, pp. 55, 177 ; and note to verse 254.

178. Sotapatti, the technical term for the first step in the path
that leads to Nirvana. There are four such steps, or stages, and on
entering each, a man receives a new title : —

(1) The *Srotaapanna, lit. he who has got into the stream.
A man may have seven more births before he reaches the other
shore, i. e. Nirvana.

(2) Sakralag&min, lit. he who comes back once, so called be-
cause, after having entered this stage, a man is born only once
more among men or gods. Childers shows that this involves really
two more births, one in the deva world, the other in the world of
men. Burnouf says the same, Introduction, p. 293.

(3) Anagamin, lit. he who does not come back, so called be-
cause, after this stage, a man cannot be born again in a lower
world, but can only be born into a Brahman world, before he
reaches Nirvana.

(4) Arhat, the venerable, the perfect, who has reached the highest
stage that can be reached, and from which Nirvana is perceived
(sukkhavipassana, Lotus, p. 849). See Hardy, Eastern Monachism,
p. 280; Burnouf, Introduction, p. 209; Koppen, p. 398; D'Alwis,
Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxiv; Feer, Sutra en 42 articles, p. 6.


THE BUDDHA. 49


CHAPTER XIV.

THE BUDDHA (THE AWAKENED).

179. He whose conquest is not conquered again,
into whose conquest no one in this world enters, by
what track can you lead him, the Awakened, the
Omniscient, the trackless ?

180. He whom no desire with its snares and
poisons can lead astray, by what track can you
lead him, the Awakened, the Omniscient, the
trackless ?

181. Even the gods envy those who are awakened
and not forgetful, who are given to meditation, who
are wise, and who delight in the repose of retire-
ment (from the world).

182. Difficult (to obtain) is the conception of men,
difficult is the life of mortals, difficult is the hearing
of the True Law, difficult is the birth of the Awak-
ened (the attainment of Buddhahood).

179, 180. Buddha, the Awakened, is to be taken as an appella-
tive rather than as the proper name of the Buddha (see v. 183).
It means, anybody who has arrived at complete knowledge. Anan-
tago^aram I take in the sense of, possessed of unlimited knowledge.
Apadam, which Dr. Fausboll takes as an epithet of Buddha and
translates by ' non investigabilis/ is translated ' trackless/ in order
to show the play on the word pada ; see Childers, s. v. The com-
mentator says : l The man who is possessed of even a single one of
such conditions as r&ga, &c, him ye may lead forward ; but the
Buddha has not even one condition or basis of renewed existence,
and therefore by what track will you lead this unconditioned
Buddha ?' Cf. Dhp. vv. 92, 420; and G&taka, vol. i. pp. 79, 313.

182. Mr. Beal (Dhammapada, p. 1 10) states that this verse occurs
in the Sutra of the Forty-two Sections.


50 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIV.

183. Not to commit any sin, to do good, and to
purify one's mind, that is the teaching of (all) the
Awakened.

184. The Awakened call patience the highest
penance, long-suffering the highest Nirvana ; for he
is not an anchorite (pravra^ita) who strikes others,
he is not an ascetic (irama/za) who insults others.

185. Not to blame, not to strike, to live restrained
under the law, to be moderate in eating, to sleep and
sit alone, and to dwell on the highest thoughts, —
this is the teaching of the Awakened.

183. This verse is again one of the most solemn verses among
the Buddhists. According to Csoma Korosi, it ought to follow
the famous Ary& stanza, ' Ye dhamma4' (Lotus, p. 522), and serve
as its complement. But though this may be the case in Tibet, it
was not so originally. The same verse (ascribed to Kanakamuni)
occurs at the end of the Chinese translation of the Pratimoksha
(Beal, J. R. A. S. XIX, p. 473; Catena, p. 159); in the Tibetan
translation of the Gathasangraha, v. 14 (Schiefner, Mel. Asiat.
VIII, pp. 568, 586 ; and Csoma Korosi, As. Res. XX, p. 79).
Burnouf has fully discussed the metre and meaning of our verse on
pp. 527, 528 of his * Lotus/ He prefers sa&ttaparidamanam, which
Csoma translated by ' the mind must be brought under entire sub-
jection' (sva&ttaparidamanam), and the late Dr. Mill by 'proprii
intellectus subjugatio/ But his own MS. of the Mahapadh&na-sutta
gave likewise sa&ttapariyodapanam, and this is no doubt the cor-
rect reading. (See D'Alwis, Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxix.) We
found pariyodappeya in verse 88, in the sense of purging oneself
from the troubles of thought. From the same verb, (pari) ava + dai,
we may derive the name Avadana, a legend, originally a pure and
virtuous act, an dplcrreia, afterwards a sacred story, and possibly a
story the hearing of which purifies the mind. See Boehtlingk-
Roth, s. v. avad&na.

184. Childers, following the commentator, translates, 'Patience,
which is long-suffering, is the best devotion, the Buddhas declare
that Nirvana is the best (of things).'

185. Cf. Suttanipata, v. 337. Patimokkhe, 'under the law/ i.e.
according to the law, the law which leads to Moksha, or ' freedom/
Pratimoksha is the title of the oldest collection of the moral laws


THE BUDDHA. 51


186. There is no satisfying lusts, even by a shower
of gold pieces ; he who knows that lusts have a short
taste and cause pain, he is wise ;

187. Even in heavenly pleasures he finds no satis-
faction, the disciple who is fully awakened delights
only in the destruction of all desires.

188. Men, driven by fear, go to many a refuge, to
mountains and forests, to groves and sacred trees.

189. But that is not a safe refuge, that is not the
best refuge ; a man is not delivered from all pains
after having gone to that refuge.

190. He who takes refuge with Buddha, the Law,

of the Buddhists (Burnouf, Introduction, p. 300 ; Bigandet, The
Life of Gaudama, p. 439; Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 162), and as
it was common both to the Southern and the Northern Buddhists,
patimokkhe in our passage may possibly be meant, as Professor
Weber suggests, as the title of that very collection. The commen-
tator explains it by ^e/Z^akasfla and p&timokkhasfla. Sayanstsam
might stand for jayana^anam, see Mahabh. XII, 6684 ; but in Bud-
dhist literature it is intended for jayanasanam; see also Mahabh. XII,
9978, ,rayyasane. Fausboll now reads p&nta instead of patthaw.

187. There is a curious similarity between this verse and verse
6503 (9919) of the 3antiparva :

Ya£ ka. kamasukhaw loke, ya£ ka. divyam mahat sukham,
Tr/shtf&kshayasukhasyaite narhata^ shodaslm kalam.
' And whatever delight of love there is on earth, and whatever is
the great delight in heaven, they are not worth the sixteenth part
of the pleasure which springs from the destruction of all desires/
The two verses 186, 187 are ascribed to king Mandh&tr/, shortly
before his death (M.61. Asiat.VIII, p. 471; see also (rataka, vol. ii.

P."3)-

188-192. These verses occur in Sanskrit in the Pratiharyasutra,

translated by Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 162-189; see p. 186.
Burnouf translates rukkha^etyani by ' arbres consacre's ; ' properly,
sacred shrines under or near a tree. See also (rataka, vol. i. p. 97.
190. Buddha, Dharma, and Sahgha are called the Tri^arawa
(cf. Burnouf, Introd. p. 630). The four holy truths are the four
statements that there is pain in this world, that the source of


52 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIV.

and the Church ; he who, with clear understanding,
sees the four holy truths : —

191. Viz. pain, the origin of pain, the destruction
of pain, and the eightfold holy way that leads to the
quieting of pain ; —

192. That is the safe refuge, that is the best
refuge ; having gone to that refuge, a man is deli-
vered from all pain.

193. A supernatural person (a Buddha) is not
easily found, he is not born everywhere. Wherever
such a sage is born, that race prospers.

194. Happy is the arising of the awakened,
happy is the teaching of the True Law, happy is
peace in the church, happy is the devotion of those
who are at peace.

x95> x96. He who pays homage to those who
deserve homage, whether the awakened (Buddha)
or their disciples, those who have overcome the
host (of evils), and crossed the flood of sorrow, he
who pays homage to such as have found deliverance
and know no fear, his merit can never be measured
by anybody.

pain is desire, that desire can be annihilated, that there is a way
(shown by Buddha) by which the annihilation of all desires can be
achieved, and freedom be obtained. That way consists of eight
parts. (See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 630.) The eightfold way
forms the subject of Chapter XVIII. (See also Feer, Journal
As. 1870, p. 418, and Chips from a German Workshop, 2nd ed.
vol. i. p. 251 seq.)


HAPPINESS. 53


CHAPTER XV.

HAPPINESS.

197. Let us live happily then, not hating those
who hate us ! among men who hate us let us dwell
free from hatred !

198. Let us live happily then, free from ailments
among the ailing ! among men who are ailing let us
dwell free from ailments !

199. Let us live happily then, free from greed
among the greedy ! among men who are greedy let
us dwell free from greed !

200. Let us live happily then, though we call
nothing our own ! We shall be like the bright gods,
feeding on happiness !

201. Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is
unhappy. He who has given up both victory and
defeat, he, the contented, is happy.

198. The ailment here meant is moral rather than physical
Cf. Mahabh. XII, 9924, sa^pra^anto niramaya^; 9925, yo 'sau
prawantiko rogas taw trzshnam tyagata^ sukham.

200. The words placed in the mouth of the king of Videha,
while his residence Mithila" was in flames, are curiously like our
verse; cf. MaMbh. XII, 9917,

Susukhaw vata ^ivami yasya me nasti km^ana,
Mithilayam pradiptayaw na me dahyati km^ana.
*I live happily, indeed, for I have nothing; while Mithila is in
flames, nothing of mine is burning.' Cf. Muir, Religious Senti-
ments, p. 106.

The abhassara, i. e. abhasvara, ' the bright gods/ are frequently
mentioned. Cf. Burnouf, Introd. p. 611.

201. This verse is ascribed to Buddha, when he heard of the
defeat of Ag&tasztm by Prasenagit. It exists in the Northern or


54 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XV.

202. There is no fire like passion ; there is no
losing throw like hatred ; there is no pain like this
body ; there is no happiness higher than rest.

203. Hunger is the worst of diseases, the body
the greatest of pains ; if one knows this truly, that
is Nirv&^a, the highest happiness.

Sanskrit and in the Southern or Pali texts, i. e. in the Avadana-
jataka, in the Sa#zyutta-nikaya. See Feer, Comptes Rendus, 187 1,
p. 44, and Journal As. 1880, p. 509. In the Avadana-^ataka, the
Sanskrit version is —

(jrayo vairam prasavati, du^khaw sete paragita^
Upa^anta^ sukhaw sete hitva ^ayapara^ayam.

202. I take kali in the sense of an unlucky die which makes a
player lose his game. A real simile seems wanted here, as in
verse 251, where, for the same reason, I translate graha by 'shark/
not by ' captivitas/ as Dr. Fausboll proposes. The same scholar
translates kali in our verse by ' peccatum/ If there is any ob-
jection to translating kali in Pali by * unlucky die,' I should still
prefer to take it in the sense of the age of depravity, or the demon
of depravity. To judge from Abhidhanappadipika, 1106, kali was
used for para^aya, i. e. loss at game, a losing throw, and occurs in
that sense again in verse 252. The Chinese translation has, 'there
is no distress (poison) worse than hate/ A similar verse occurs
Mahabh. Santip. 175, v. 35.

' Body ' for khandha is a free translation, but it is difficult to find
any other rendering. The Chinese translation also has 'body/
According to the Buddhists each sentient being consists of five
khandhas (skandha), or aggregates, the organized body (rupa-
khandha) with its four internal capacities of sensation (vedana),
perception (sa^g-M), conception (sawskara), knowledge (vi^mna).
See Burnouf, Introd. pp. 589, 634; Lotus, p. 335.

203. Sawskara is the fourth of the five khandhas, but the com-
mentator takes it here, as well as in verse 255, for the five khandhas
together, in which case we can only translate it by ' body/ See
also verse 278. Childers proposes 'organic life' (Notes on Dham-
mapada, p. 1). There is, however, another sazrcsMra, that which
follows immediately upon avidyd, ' ignorance/ as the second of the
nid&nas, or ' causes of existence/ and this too might be called the
greatest pain, considering that it is the cause of birth, which is the
cause of all pain. Saz/zskara seems sometimes to have a different


HAPPINESS. 55


204. Health is the greatest of gifts, contented-
ness the best riches ; trust is the best of relation-
ships, Nirvana the highest happiness.

205. He who has tasted the sweetness of solitude
and tranquillity, is free from fear and free from sin,
while he tastes the sweetness of drinking in the
law.

206. The sight of the elect (Arya) is good, to live
with them is always happiness ; if a man does not
see fools, he will be truly happy.

207. He who walks in the company of fools suf-
fers a long way; company with fools, as with an
enemy, is always painful ; company with the wise is
pleasure, like meeting with kinsfolk.

208. Therefore, one ought to follow the wise, the
intelligent, the learned, the much enduring, the du-
tiful, the elect ; one ought to follow a good and wise
man, as the moon follows the path of the stars.

and less technical meaning, being used in the sense of conceptions,
plans, desires, as, for instance, in verse 368, where sankharana/rc
khayam is used much like ta^hakhaya. Again, in his comment on
verse 75, Buddhaghosa says, upadhiviveko sankharasangamkazrc
vinodeti; and again, upadhiviveko fa nirupadhinaw puggalana^
visankMragat&nam.

For a similar sentiment, see Stanislas Julien, Les Avad&nas, vol. i.
p. 40, 'Le corps est la plus grande source de souffrance/ &c.
I should say that the khandhas in verse 202 and the sankharas in
verse 203 are nearly, if not quite, synonymous. I should prefer to
read £-iga/££M-param& as a compound. G\g%kkh&, or as it is written
in one MS., diga&6M (Sk. £ighats&), means not only < hunger/ but
' appetite, desire/

204. Childers translates, ' the best kinsman is a man you can trust/

205. Cf. Suttanipata, v. 256.

208. I should like to read sukho fa dhirasawv&so.


56 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVI.


CHAPTER XVI.

PLEASURE.

209. He who gives himself to vanity, and does
not give himself to meditation, forgetting the real
aim (of life) and grasping at pleasure, will in time
envy him who has exerted himself in meditation.

210. Let no man ever look for what is pleasant,
or what is unpleasant. Not to see what is pleasant
is pain, and it is pain to see what is unpleasant.

2 1 1 . Let, therefore, no man love anything ; loss
of the beloved is evil. Those who love nothing,
and hate nothing, have no fetters.

212. From pleasure comes grief, from pleasure
comes fear ; he who is free from pleasure knows
neither grief nor fear.

213. From affection comes grief, from affection
comes fear; he who is free from affection knows
neither grief nor fear.

214. From lust comes grief, from lust comes
fear ; he who is free from lust knows neither grief
nor fear.

215. From love comes grief, from love comes
fear ; he who is free from love knows neither grief
nor fear.

216. From greed comes grief, from greed comes
fear ; he who is free from greed knows neither grief
nor fear.

217. He who possesses virtue and intelligence,

214. See Beal, Catena, p. 200.


PLEASURE. 57


who is just, speaks the truth, and does what is his
own business, him the world will hold dear.

218. He in whom a desire for the Ineffable (Nir-
vana) has sprung up, who is satisfied in his mind,
and whose thoughts are not bewildered by love, he
is called tirdhva^srotas (carried upwards by the
stream).

219. Kinsmen, friends, and lovers salute a man
who has been long away, and returns safe from
afar.

220. In like manner his good works receive him
who has done good, and has gone from this world
to the other ; — as kinsmen receive a friend on his
return.

218. Urdhva^srotas or uddha#zsoto is the technical name for
one who has reached the world of the Av/7'has (Aviha), and is pro-
ceeding to that of the Akanish//5as (Akani//$a). This is the last
stage before he reaches the formless world, the Arupadhatu. (See
Buddhaghosha's Parables, p. 123; Burnouf, Introduction, p. 599.)
Originally urdhva^srotas may have been used in a less technical
sense, meaning one who swims against the stream, and is not
carried away by the vulgar passions of the world.


[10]


58 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVII.

CHAPTER XVII.

ANGER.

221. Let a man leave anger, let him forsake pride,
let him overcome all bondage ! No sufferings befall
the man who is not attached to name and form, and
who calls nothing his own.

222. He who holds back rising anger like a rolling
chariot, him I call a real driver ; other people are
but holding the reins.

223. Let a man overcome anger by love, let him
overcome evil by good ; let him overcome the greedy
by liberality, the liar by truth !

224. Speak the truth, do not yield to anger ; give,
if thou art asked for little ; by these three steps
thou wilt go near the gods.

225. The sages who injure nobody, and who
always control their body, they will go to the un-
changeable place (Nirvana), where, if they have
gone, they will suffer no more.

226. Those who are ever watchful, who study day
and night, and who strive after Nirvana, their pas-
sions will come to an end.

227. This is an old saying, O A tula, this is not
only of to-day : ' They blame him who sits silent,

221. 'Name and form' or 'mind and body' is the translation
of nama-rupa, the ninth of the Buddhist Nidanas. Cf. Burnouf,
Introduction, p. 501; see also Gogerly, Lecture on Buddhism, and
Bigandet, The Life of Gaudama, p. 454.

223. Mahabh. XII, 3550, asadhuzrc sadhund #ayet. Cf. Ten
Gatakas, ed. Fausboll, p. 5.

227. It appears from the commentary that porarcam and agg-ata-
nam are neuters, referring to what happened formerly and what


ANGER. 59


they blame him who speaks much, they also blame
him who says little ; there is no one on earth who
is not blamed.

228. There never was, there never will be, nor is
there now, a man who is always blamed, or a man
who is always praised.

229. 230. But he whom those who discriminate
praise continually day after day, as without blemish,
wise, rich in knowledge and virtue, who would dare
to blame him, like a coin made of gold from the
Gambti. river? Even the gods praise him, he is
praised even by Brahman.

231. Beware of bodily anger, and control thy
body ! Leave the sins of the body, and with thy
body practise virtue !

232. Beware of the anger of the tongue, and con-
trol thy tongue ! Leave the sins of the tongue, and
practise virtue with thy tongue !

233. Beware of the anger of the mind, and con-
trol thy mind ! Leave the sins of the mind, and
practise virtue with thy mind !

234. The wise who control their body, who con-
trol their tongue, the wise who control their mind,
are indeed well controlled.

happens to-day. and that they are not to be taken as adjectives
referring to asinam, &c. The commentator must have read atula
instead of atulam, and he explains it as the name of a pupil whom
Gautama addressed by that name. This may be so (see note to
verse 166); but atula may also be taken in the sense of incom-
parable (Mahabh. XIII, 1937), and in that case we ought to supply,
with Professor Weber, some such word as ' saw ' or ' saying.'

230. The Brahman worlds are higher that the Deva worlds as
the Brahman is higher than a Deva; see Hardy, Manual, p. 25;
Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 134, 184.


h 2


60 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVIII.


CHAPTER XVIII.

IMPURITY.

235. Thou art now like a sear leaf, the messen-
gers of death (Yama) have come near to thee ; thou
standest at the door of thy departure, and thou hast
no provision for thy journey.

236. Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise!
When thy impurities are blown away, and thou art
free from guilt, thou wilt enter into the heavenly
world of the elect (Ariya).

237. Thy life has come to an end, thou art come
near to death (Yama), there is no resting-place for
thee on the road, and thou hast no provision for
thy journey.

238. Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise !
When thy impurities are blown away, and thou art
free from guilt, thou wilt not enter again into birth
and decay.

239. Let a wise man blow off the impurities of
his self, as a smith blows off the impurities of silver,
one by one, little by little, and from time to time.

240. As the impurity which springs from the iron,

235. Uyyoga seems to mean departure. See Buddhaghosa's
commentary on verse 152, p. 319, 1. 1; Fausboll, Five Gatakas,

p. 35-

236. ' An island/ for a drowning man to save himself; (see verse
25.) Dipankara is the name of one of the former Buddhas, and it
is also used as an appellative of the Buddha, but is always derived
from dipo, ' a lamp/

239. This verse is the foundation of the thirty-fourth section of
the Sutra of the forty-two sections; see Beal, Catena, p. 201; Sutta-
nip&ta, v. 962.


IMPURITY. 6 1


when it springs from it, destroys it ; thus do a trans-
gressor's own works lead him to the evil path.

241. The taint of prayers is non-repetition; the
taint of houses, non-repair ; the taint of the body is
sloth ; the taint of a watchman, thoughtlessness.

242. Bad conduct is the taint of woman, greedi-
ness the taint of a benefactor ; tainted are all evil
ways, in this world and in the next.

243. But there is a taint worse than all taints, —
ignorance is the greatest taint. O mendicants !
throw off that taint, and become taintless !

244. Life is easy to live for a man who is without
shame, a crow hero, a mischief-maker, an insulting,
bold, and wretched fellow.

245. But life is hard to live for a modest man,
who always looks for what is pure, who is disinter-
ested, quiet, spotless, and intelligent.

246. He who destroys life, who speaks untruth,
who in this world takes what is not given him, who
goes to another man's wife ;

247. And the man who gives himself to drinking
intoxicating liquors, he, even in this world, digs up
his own root.

248. O man, know this, that the unrestrained are
in a bad state ; take care that greediness and vice
do not bring thee to grief for a long time !

244. Pakkhandin is identified by Dr. Fausboll with praskandin,
one who jumps forward, insults, or, as Buddhaghosa explains it,
one who meddles with other people's business, an interloper. At
all events, it is a term of reproach, and, as it would seem, of theo-
logical reproach.

246. On the five principal commandments which are recapitu-
lated in verses 246 and 247, see Buddhaghosha's Parables, p. 153.

248. Cf. Mahabharata XII, 4055, yesha^z vrzttis ka. sa^yata.
See also verse 307.


62 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVIII.

249. The world gives according to their faith or
according to their pleasure : if a man frets about
the food and the drink given to others, he will find
no rest either by day or by night.

250. He in whom that feeling is destroyed, and
taken out with the very root, finds rest by day and
by night.

251. There is no fire like passion, there is no
shark like hatred, there is no snare like folly, there
is no torrent like greed.

252. The fault of others is easily perceived, but
that of oneself is difficult to perceive ; a man win-
nows his neighbours faults like chaff, but his own
fault he hides, as a cheat hides the bad die from the
gambler.

253. If a man looks after the faults of others, and
is always inclined to be offended, his own passions
will grow, and he is far from the destruction of
passions.

254. There is no path through the air, a man
is not a Sama/za by outward acts. The world

249. This verse has evidently regard to the feelings of the Bhik-
shus or mendicants who receive either much or little, and who are
exhorted not to be envious if others receive more than they them-
selves. Several of the Parables illustrate this feeling.

251. Dr. Fausboll translates gaho by ( captivitas/ Dr. Weber by
' fetter.' I take it in the same sense as graha in Manu VI, 78 ; and
Buddhaghosa does the same, though he assigns to graha a more
general meaning, viz. anything that seizes, whether an evil spirit
(yakkha), a serpent (agugara), or a crocodile (kumbhila).

Greed or thirst is represented as a river in Lalita-vistara, ed.
Calc. p. 482, trish/za-nadi tivega pra^oshita me ^anasuryewa, ' the
wild river of thirst is dried up by the sun of my knowledge.'

252. See Childers, Notes, p. 7; St. Matthew vii. 3.

253. As to asava, 'appetite, passion/ see note to verse 39.

254. I have translated this verse very freely, and not in accord-


IMPURITY. 63


delights in vanity, the TatMgatas (the Buddhas)
are free from vanity.

255. There is no path through the air, a man
is not a Samara by outward acts. No creatures
are eternal ; but the awakened (Buddha) are never
shaken.

ance with Buddhaghosa's commentary. Dr. Fausboll proposed to
translate, 'No one who is outside the Buddhist community can
walk through the air, but only a Samara;' and the same view is
taken by Professor Weber, though he arrives at it by a different
construction. Now it is perfectly true that the idea of magical powers
(r/ddhi) which enable saints to walk through the air, &c., occurs in
the Dhammapada, see v. 175, note. But the Dhammapada may
contain earlier and later verses, and in that case our verse might be
an early protest on the part of Buddha against the belief in such
miraculous powers. We know how Buddha himself protested
against his disciples being called upon to perform vulgar miracles.
* I command my disciples not to work miracles/ he said, ' but to
hide their good deeds, and to show their sins' (Burnouf, Introd.
p. 170). It would be in harmony with this sentiment if we trans-
lated our verse as I have done. As to bahira, I should take it in
the sense of ' external,' as opposed to adhyatmika, or ' internal ; '
and the meaning would be, ' a Samara is not a Samara by out-
ward acts, but by his heart.' D'Alwis translates (p. 85) : < There is
no footprint in the air ; there is not a Samara out of the pale of
the Buddhist community/

Prapaw£a, which I have here translated by ' vanity/ seems to
include the whole host of human weaknesses ; cf. v. 196, where it is
explained by tawhadi/Mimanapapa^a ; in our verse by ta/rcMdisu
papa^esu: cf. Lalita-vistara, p. 564, analayaw nishprapaw&im
anutp&dam asambhavam (dharma^akram). As to Tathagata, a
name of Buddha, cf. Burnouf, Introd. p. 75.

255. Sahkhara for sa^skara; cf. note to verse 203. Creature
does not, as Mr. D'Alwis (p. 69) supposes, involve the Christian
conception of creation.


64 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIX.


CHAPTER XIX.

THE JUST.

256, 257. A man is not just if he carries a matter
by violence ; no, he who distinguishes both right
and wrong, who is learned and leads others, not by
violence, but by law and equity, and who is guarded
by the law and intelligent, he is called just.

258. A man is not learned because he talks much ;
he who is patient, free from hatred and fear, he is
called learned.

259. A man is not a supporter of the law because
he talks much ; even if a man has learnt little, but
sees the law bodily, he is a supporter of the law,
a man who never neglects the law.

260. A man is not an elder because his head is
grey ; his age may be ripe, but he is called ' Old-
in-vain/

261. He in whom there is truth, virtue, love,
restraint, moderation, he who is free from impurity
and is wise, he is called an elder.

262. An envious, greedy, dishonest man does not
become respectable by means of much talking only,
or by the beauty of his complexion.

263. He in whom all this is destroyed, and taken
out with the very root, he, when freed from hatred
and wise, is called respectable.

259. Buddhaghosa here takes law (dhamma) in the sense of
the four great truths, see note to verse 190. Could dhammaw
kayena passati mean, 'he observes the law in his acts?7 Hardly,
if we compare expressions like dhammaw vipassato, v. 373.


THE JUST. 65


264. Not by tonsure does an undisciplined man
who speaks falsehood become a Samara ; can a
man be a Samara who is still held captive by desire
and greediness ?

265. He who always quiets the evil, whether
small or large, he is called a Samara (a quiet man),
because he has quieted all evil.

266. A man is not a mendicant (Bhikshu) simply
because he asks others for alms ; he who adopts
the whole law is a Bhikshu, not he who only begs.

267. He who is above good and evil, who is
chaste, who with knowledge passes through the
world, he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

268. 269. A man is not a Muni because he ob-
serves silence (mona, i. e. mauna), if he is foolish


265. This is a curious etymology, because it shows that at the
time when this verse was written, the original meaning of ^rama«a
had been forgotten. *Srama?za meant originally, in the language
of the Brahmans, a man who performed hard penances, from jram,
' to work hard/ &c. When it became the name of the Buddhist
ascetics, the language had changed, and ^rama/za was pronounced
samara. Now there is another Sanskrit root, jam, ' to quiet/ which
in Pali becomes likewise sam, and from this root sam, ' to quiet/
and not from jram, * to tire/ did the popular etymology of the day
and the writer of our verse derive the title of the Buddhist priests.
The original form jrama^a became known to the Greeks as 2ap-
fiavai, that of samara as Sa/mraloi ; the former through Megasthenes,
the latter through Bardesanes, 80-60 b.c. (See Lassen, Indische
Alterthumskunde, II, 700.) The Chinese Shamen and the Tun-
gusian Shamen come from the same source, though the latter has
sometimes been doubted. See Schott, Uber die doppelte Bedeutung
des Wortes Schamane, in the Philosophical Transactions of the
Berlin Academy, 1842, p. 463 seq.

266-270. The etymologies here given of the ordinary titles of
the followers of Buddha are entirely fanciful, and are curious only
as showing how the people who spoke Pali had lost the etymo-
logical consciousness of their language. A Bhikshu is a beggar,


66 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIX.

and ignorant ; but the wise who, taking the balance,
chooses the good and avoids evil, he is a Muni,
and is a Muni thereby; he who in this world
weighs both sides is called a Muni.

270. A man is not an elect (Ariya) because he
injures living creatures ; because he has pity on all
living creatures, therefore is a man called Ariya.

271. 272. Not only by discipline and vows, not
only by much learning, not by entering into a trance,
not by sleeping alone, do I earn the happiness of
release which no worldling can know. Bhikshu, be
not confident as long as thou hast not attained the
extinction of desires.

i. e. a Buddhist friar who has left his family and lives entirely on
alms. Muni is a sage, hence -Sakya-muni, a name of Gautama.
Muni comes from man, ' to think/ and from muni comes mauna,
' silence/ Ariya, again, is the general name of those who embrace
a religious life. It meant originally ' respectable, noble.' In verse
270 it seems as if the writer wished to guard against deriving ariya
from ari, * enemy/ See note to verse 22.

272. See Childers, Notes, p, 7.


THE WAY. 67


CHAPTER XX.

THE WAY.

273. The best of ways is the eightfold ; the best
of truths the four words ; the best of virtues
passionlessness ; the best of men he who has eyes
to see.

274. This is the way, there is no other that leads
to the purifying of intelligence. Go on this way !
Everything else is the deceit of Mara (the tempter).

275. If you go on this way, you will make an end
of pain ! The way was preached by me, when I had
understood the removal of the thorns (in the flesh).

276. You yourself must make an effort. The
Tathagatas (Buddhas) are only preachers. The
thoughtful who enter the way are freed from the
bondage of Mara.

277. 'All created things perish/ he who knows
and sees this becomes passive in pain ; this is the
way to purity.

273. The eightfold or eight-mem bered way is the technical term
for the way by which Nirvana is attained. (See Burnouf, Lotus,
p. 519) This very way constitutes the fourth of the Four Truths,
or the four words of truth, viz. Du^kha, ' pain ;' Samudaya, ' origin ;'
Nirodha, ' destruction ;' M&rga, ' road/ (Lotus, p. 517.) See note
to verse 178. For another explanation of the Marga, or ' way,' see
Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 280.

274. The last line may mean/ this way is the confusion of Mara,'
i. e. the discomfiture of Mara.

275. The ralyas, i arrows or thorns/ are the ^oka^alya, ' the arrows
of grief/ Buddha himself is called maha^alya-hartd, 'the great
remover of thorns/ (Lalita-vistara, p. 550 ; MaMbh. XII, 5616.)

277. See v. 255.


68 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XX.

278. 'All created things are grief and pain/ he
who knows and sees this becomes passive in pain ;
this is the way that leads to purity.

279. 'All forms are unreal/ he who knows and
sees this becomes passive in pain ; this is the way
that leads to purity.

280. He who does not rouse himself when it is
time to rise, who, though young and strong, is full
of sloth, whose will and thought are weak, that lazy
and idle man will never find the way to knowledge.

281. Watching his speech, well restrained in mind,
let a man never commit any wrong with his body!
Let a man but keep these three roads of action clear,
and he will achieve the way which is taught by the
wise.

282. Through zeal knowledge is gotten, through
lack of zeal knowledge is lost ; let a man who knows
this double path of gain and loss thus place himself
that knowledge may grow.

283. Cut down the whole forest (of lust), not a
tree only ! Danger comes out of the forest (of lust).
When you have cut down both the forest (of lust)
and its undergrowth, then, Bhikshus, you will be
rid of the forest and free !

278. See v. 203.

279. Dhamma is here explained, like sankhara, as the five
khandha, i. e. as what constitutes a living body.

281. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 159.

282. Bhuri was rightly translated ' intelligentia ' by Dr. Fausboll.
Dr. Weber renders it by ' Gedeihen,' but the commentator distinctly
explains it as 'vast knowledge,' and in the technical sense the
word occurs after vidya and before medha, in the Lalita-vistara,
p. 541.

283. A pun, vana meaning both 'lust' and 'forest.' See some
mistaken remarks on this verse in D'Alwis, Nirvana, p. 86, and
some good remarks in Childers, Notes, p. 7.


THE WAY. 69


284. So long as the love of man towards women,
even the smallest, is not destroyed, so long is his
mind in bondage, as the calf that drinks milk is to
its mother.

285. Cut out the love of self, like an autumn lotus,
with thy hand! Cherish the road of peace. Nir-
vana has been shown by Sugata (Buddha).

286. ' Here I shall dwell in the rain, here in winter
and summer/ thus the fool meditates, and does not
think of his death.

287. Death comes and carries off that man, praised
for his children and flocks, his mind distracted, as a
flood carries off* a sleeping village.

288. Sons are no help, nor a father, nor relations ;
there is no help from kinsfolk for one whom death
has seized.

289. A wise and good man who knows the mean-
ing of this, should quickly clear the way that leads
to Nirvana.

285. Cf. £ataka, vol. i. p. 183.

286. Antaraya, according to the commentator, ^ivitantaraya,
i. e. interitus, death. In Sanskrit, antarita is used in the sense of
' vanished' or ' perished.'

287. See notes to verse 47, Thiessen, Kisagotami, p. n, and
Mahabh. XII, 9944, 6540.


70 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXI.


CHAPTER XXI.

MISCELLANEOUS.

290. If by leaving a small pleasure one sees a
great pleasure, let a wise man leave the small plea-
sure, and look to the great.

291. He who, by causing pain to others, wishes
to obtain pleasure for himself, he, entangled in the
bonds of hatred, will never be free from hatred.

292. What ought to be done is neglected, what
ought not to be done is done ; the desires of unruly,
thoughtless people are always increasing.

293. But they whose whole watchfulness is always
directed to their body, who do not follow what ought
not to be done, and who steadfastly do what ought
to be done, the desires of such watchful and wise
people will come to an end.

294. A true Brahma^a goes scatheless, though he
have killed father and mother, and two valiant kings,
though he has destroyed a kingdom with all its
subjects.

295. A true Brahma^a goes scatheless, though he
have killed father and mother, and two holy kings,
and an eminent man besides.

292. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 264.

294> 295- These two verses are either meant to show that a
truly holy man who, by accident, commits all these crimes is guilt-
less, or they refer to some particular event in Buddha's history.
The commentator is so startled that he explains them allegorically.
Mr. D'Alwis is very indignant that I should have supposed Buddha
capable of pardoning patricide. ' Can it be believed/ he writes,
* that a Teacher, who held life, even the life of the minutest insect,


MISCELLANEOUS. 7 1


296. The disciples of Gotama (Buddha) are always
well awake, and their thoughts day and night are
always set on Buddha.

297. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their thoughts day and night are always
set on the law.

298. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their thoughts day and night are always
set on the church.

299. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their thoughts day and night are always
set on their body.

nay, even a living tree, in such high estimation as to prevent its
wanton destruction, has declared that the murder of a Brahmaraa, to
whom be accorded reverence, along with his own Sangha, was blame-
less?7 D'Alwis, Nirvana, p. 88. Though something might be said in
reply, considering the antecedents of king A^ata^atru, the patron of
Buddha, and stories such as that quoted by the commentator on the
Dhammapada (Beal, I.e. p. 150), or inDerWeise und der Thor, p. 306,
still these two verses are startling, and I am not aware that Buddha
has himself drawn the conclusion, which has been drawn by others,
viz. that those who have reached the highest Sambodhi, and are in
fact no longer themselves, are outside the domain of good and bad,
and beyond the reach of guilt. Verses like 39 and 412 admit of a
different explanation. Still our verses being miscellaneous extracts,
might possibly have been taken from a work in which such an
opinion was advanced, and I find that Mr. Childers, no mean
admirer of Buddha, was not shocked by my explanation. ' In my
judgment/ he says, ' this verse is intended to express in a forcible
manner the Buddhist doctrine that the Arhat cannot commit a
serious sin/ However, we have met before with far-fetched puns
in these verses, and it is not impossible that the native commen-
tators were right after all in seeing some puns or riddles in this
verse. D'Alwis, following the commentary, explains mother as
lust, father as pride, the two valiant kings as heretical systems,
and the realm as sensual pleasure, while veyyaggha is taken by
him for a place infested with the tigers of obstruction against
final beatitude. Some confirmation of this interpretation is sup-


72 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXI.

300. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their mind day and night always de-
lights in compassion.

301. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their mind day and night always de-
lights in meditation.

302. It is hard to leave the world (to become
a friar), it is hard to enjoy the world; hard is the
monastery, painful are the houses ; painful it is to
dwell with equals (to share everything in common),
and the itinerant mendicant is beset with pain.
Therefore let no man be an itinerant mendicant,
and he will not be beset with pain.

303. Whatever place a faithful, virtuous, cele-
brated, and wealthy man chooses, there he is re-
spected.

304. Good people shine from afar, like the snowy

plied by a passage in the third book of the Lankavatara-sutra, as
quoted by Mr. Beal in his translation of the Dhammapada, Intro-
duction, p. 5. Here a stanza is quoted as having been recited by
Buddha, in explanation of a similar startling utterance which he
had made to Mahamati :

'Lust, or carnal desire, this is the Mother,

Ignorance, this is the Father,

The highest point of knowledge, this is Buddha,

All the kle^as, these are the Rahats,

The five skandhas, these are the Priests;

To commit the five unpardonable sins

Is to destroy these five

And yet not suffer the pains of hell.'
The Lankavatara-sutra was translated into Chinese by Bodhiru^i
(508-511); when it was written is doubtful. See also Gataka,
vol. ii. p. 263.

302. This verse is difficult, and I give my translation as tentative
only. Childers (Notes, p. n) does not remove the difficulties, and
I have been chiefly guided by the interpretation put on the verse
by the Chinese translator; Beal, Dhammapada, p. 137.


MISCELLANEOUS. 73


mountains ; bad people are not seen, like arrows
shot by night.

305. He alone who, without ceasing, practises the
duty of sitting alone and sleeping alone, he, sub-
duing himself, will rejoice in the destruction of all
desires alone, as if living in a forest.

305. I have translated this verse so as to bring it into something
like harmony with the preceding verses. Vanante, according to
a pun pointed out before (v. 283), means both 'in the end of a
forest/ and i in the end of desires.'


[10]


74 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXII.


CHAPTER XXII.

THE DOWNWARD COURSE.

306. He who says what is not, goes to hell ; he
also who, having done a thing, says I have not done
it. After death both are equal, they are men with
evil deeds in the next world.

307. Many men whose shoulders are covered with
the yellow gown are ill-conditioned and unrestrained ;
such evil-doers by their evil deeds go to hell.

308. Better it would be to swallow a heated iron
ball, like flaring fire, than that a bad unrestrained
fellow should live on the charity of the land.

309. Four things does a wreckless man gain who
covets his neighbours wife, — a bad reputation, an
uncomfortable bed, thirdly, punishment, and lastly,
hell.


306. I translate niraya, ' the exit, the downward course, the evil
path,' by 'hell/ because the meaning assigned to that ancient
mythological name by Christian writers comes so near to the
Buddhist idea of niraya, that it is difficult not to believe in some
actual contact between these two streams of thought. See also
MaMbh. XII, 7176. Cf. Gataka, vol. ii. p. 416; Suttanip&ta,
v. 660.

307, 308. These two verses are said to be taken from the Vinaya-
pi/aka I, 4, 1; D'Alwis, Nirvana, p. 29.

308. The charity of the land, i. e. the alms given, from a sense
of religious duty, to every mendicant that asks for it.

309, 310. The four things mentioned in verse 309 seem to be
repeated in verse 310. Therefore, apuwwal&bha, 'bad fame/ is the
same in both : gati p&pika" must be niraya ; d&nda, must be ninda\
and rati thokik& explains the anikamaseyya/ra. Buddhaghosa


THE DOWNWARD COURSE. 75

310. There is bad reputation, and the evil way
(to hell), there is the short pleasure of the frightened
in the arms of the frightened, and the king imposes
heavy punishment ; therefore let no man think of
his neighbour's wife.

311. As a grass-blade, if badly grasped, cuts the
arm, badly-practised asceticism leads to hell.

312. An act carelessly performed, a broken vow,
and hesitating obedience to discipline, all this brings
no great reward.

313. If anything is to be done, let a man do it,
let him attack it vigorously ! A careless pilgrim
only scatters the dust of his passions more widely.

314. An evil deed is better left undone, for a
man repents of it afterwards ; a good deed is better
done, for having done it, one does not repent.

315. Like a well-guarded frontier fort, with de-
fences within and without, so let a man guard him-
self. Not a moment should escape, for they who
allow the right moment to pass, suffer pain when
they are in hell.

3 1 6. They who are ashamed of what they ought
not to be ashamed of, and are not ashamed of what
they ought to be ashamed of, such men, embracing
false doctrines, enter the evil path.

317. They who fear when they ought not to fear,
and fear not when they ought to fear, such men,
embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

takes the same view of the meaning of anikamaseyya, i. e. yatha
i/^^ati evazrc seyyam alabhitv&, ani^itaw parittakam eva kalaw
seyyaw labhati, ' not obtaining the rest as he wishes it, he obtains
it, as he does not wish it, for a short time only/

313. As to rag-a meaning 'dust' and 'passion/ see Buddha-
ghosha's Parables, pp. 65, 66.

i 2


76 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXII.

318. They who forbid when there is nothing to
be forbidden, and forbid not when there is some-
thing to be forbidden, such men, embracing false
doctrines, enter the evil path.

319. They who know what is forbidden as for-
bidden, and what is not forbidden as not forbidden,
such men, embracing the true doctrine, enter the
good path.


THE ELEPHANT. 77


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE ELEPHANT.

320. Silently shall I endure abuse as the elephant
in battle endures the arrow sent from the bow : for
the world is ill-natured.

321. They lead a tamed elephant to battle, the
king mounts a tamed elephant ; the tamed is the
best among men, he who silently endures abuse.

322. Mules are good, if tamed, and noble Sindhu
horses, and elephants with large tusks ; but he who
tames himself is better still.

323. For with these animals does no man reach
the untrodden country (Nirvi^a), where a tamed
man goes on a tamed animal, viz. on his own well-
tamed self.

324. The elephant called Dhanapalaka, his tem-
ples running with sap, and difficult to hold, does not
eat a morsel when bound ; the elephant longs for
the elephant grove.

320. The elephant is with the Buddhists the emblem of endurance
and self-restraint. Thus Buddha himself is called N&ga, ' the Ele-
phant ' (Lai. Vist. p. 553), or Mahanaga, * the great Elephant' (Lai.
Vist. p. 553), and in one passage (Lai. Vist. p. 554) the reason of
this name is given, by stating that Buddha was sudanta, < well-
tamed/ like an elephant. He descended from heaven in the form
of an elephant to be born on earth.

Cf. Manu VI, 47, ativadaff/s titiksheta.

323. I read, as suggested by Dr. Fausboll, yath* attana sudan-
tena danto dantena g&kkhdtix (cf. verse 160). The India Office MS.
reads na hi etehi /Mnehi ga^^eya agatazrc disam, yath' attana^
sudantena danto dantena ga^^ati. As to Manehi instead of yanehi,
see verse 224.


78 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIII.

325. If a man becomes fat and a great eater, if
he is sleepy and rolls himself about, that fool, like
a hog fed on wash, is born again and again.

326. This mind of mine went formerly wandering
about as it liked, as it listed, as it pleased ; but
I shall now hold it in thoroughly, as the rider who
holds the hook holds in the furious elephant.

327. Be not thoughtless, watch your thoughts!
Draw yourself out of the evil way, like an elephant
sunk in mud.

328. If a man find a prudent companion who walks
with him, is wise, and lives soberly, he may walk with
him, overcoming all dangers, happy, but considerate.

329. If a man find no prudent companion who
walks with him, is wise, and lives soberly, let him
walk alone, like a king who has left his conquered
country behind, — like an elephant in the forest.

330. It is better to live alone, there is no com-
panionship with a fool ; let a man walk alone, let
him commit no sin, with few wishes, like an ele-
phant in the forest.

326. Yoniso, i.e. yorma^, is rendered by Dr. Fausboll ' sapientiaV
and this is the meaning ascribed to yoni by many Buddhist authori-
ties. But the reference to Hema^andra (ed. Boehtlingk and Rieu,
p. 281) shows clearly that it meant ' origin/ or 'cause/ Yoniso occurs
frequently as a mere adverb, meaning ' thoroughly, radically' (Dham-
mapada, p. 359), and yoniso manasikara (Dhammapada, p. no)
means ' taking to heart' or ' minding thoroughly/ or, what is nearly
the same, 'wisely/ In the Lalita-vistara, p. 41, the commentator has
clearly mistaken yoni^a^, changing it to ye *nijo, and explaining it
by yamaniram, whereas M. Foucaux has rightly translated it by
'depuis rorigine/ Professor Weber suspected in yomra^ a double
entendre, but even grammar would show that our author is
innocent of it. In Lalita-vistara, p. 544, 1. 4, ayonua occurs in
the sense of error.

328, 329. Cf. Suttanipata, vv. 44, 45.


THE ELEPHANT. 79


331. If an occasion arises, friends are pleasant;
enjoyment is pleasant, whatever be the cause ; a
good work is pleasant in the hour of death ; the
giving up of all grief is pleasant.

332. Pleasant in the world is the state of a mother,
pleasant the state of a father, pleasant the state of
a Samara, pleasant the state of a Br&hma^a.

333. Pleasant is virtue lasting to old age, pleasant
is a faith firmly rooted ; pleasant is attainment of
intelligence, pleasant is avoiding of sins.

332. The commentator throughout takes these words, like mat-
teyyatd, &c, to signify, not the status of a mother, or maternity,
but reverence shown to a mother.


8o DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIV.


CHAPTER XXIV.

THIRST.

334. The thirst of a thoughtless man grows like
a creeper ; he runs from life to life, like a monkey
seeking fruit in the forest.

335. Whomsoever this fierce thirst overcomes,
full of poison, in this world, his sufferings increase
like the abounding Bira^a grass.

336. He who overcomes this fierce thirst, difficult
to be conquered in this world, sufferings fall off from
him, like water-drops from a lotus leaf.

337. This salutary word I tell you, ' Do ye, as many
as are here assembled, dig up the root of thirst, as
he who wants the sweet-scented U^ira root must
dig up the Bira^a grass, that M&ra (the tempter)
may not crush you again and again, as the stream
crushes the reeds/

338. As a tree, even though it has been cut down,
is firm so long as its root is safe, and grows again,
thus, unless the feeders of thirst are destroyed, this
pain (of life) will return again and again.

339. He whose thirst running towards pleasure
is exceeding strong in the thirty-six channels, the

334. This is explained by a story in the Chinese translation.
Beal, Dhammapada, p. 148.

335. Birawa grass is the Andropogon muricatum, and the
scented root of it is called IMra (cf. verse 337).

338. On Anusaya, i. e. Anmaya (Anlage), see Wassiljew, Der
Buddhismus, p. 240 seq.

339. The thirty-six channels, or passions, which are divided by
the commentator into eighteen external and eighteen internal, are


THIRST. 8 1


waves will carry away that misguided man, viz. his
desires which are set on passion.

340. The channels run everywhere, the creeper
(of passion) stands sprouting ; if you see the creeper
springing up, cut its root by means of knowledge.

341. A creature's pleasures are extravagant and
luxurious ; sunk in lust and looking for pleasure, men
undergo (again and again) birth and decay.

342. Men, driven on by thirst, run about like
a snared hare ; held in fetters and bonds, they
undergo pain for a long time, again and again.

343. Men, driven on by thirst, run about like a
snared hare ; let therefore the mendicant drive out
thirst, by striving after passionlessness for himself.

344. He who having got rid of the forest (of
lust) (i.e. after having reached Nirvana) gives him-
self over to forest-life (i.e. to lust), and who, when
removed from the forest (i. e. from lust), runs to the
forest (i. e. to lust), look at that man ! though free,
he runs into bondage.


explained by Burnouf (Lotus, p. 649), from a gloss of the 6rina-
alanMra : ' Vindication precise des affections dont un Buddha
acte ind^pendant, affections qui sont au nombre de dix-huit, nous
est fburni par la glose d'un livre appartenant aux Buddhistes de
Ceylan,' &c. Subhuti gives the right reading as manapassavana" ;
cf. Childers, Notes, p. 12.

Vah&, which Dr. Fausboll translates by ' equi,' may be vahd,
'undae/ Cf. Suttanipata, v. 1034.

344. This verse seems again full of puns, all connected with the
twofold meaning of vana, ' forest and lust/ By replacing ' forest '
by 'lust/ we may translate: 'He who, when free from lust, gives
himself up to lust, who, when removed from lust runs into lust,
look at that man,' &c. Nibbana, though with a short a, may be
intended to remind the hearer of NibMna. The right reading is
nibbanatho ; see Childers, Notes, p. 8.


82 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIV.

345. Wise people do not call that a strong fetter
which is made of iron, wood, or hemp ; far stronger
is the care for precious stones and rings, for sons
and a wife.

346. That fetter wise people call strong which
drags down, yields, but is difficult to undo ; after
having cut this at last, people leave the world, free
from cares, and leaving desires and pleasures behind.

347. Those who are slaves to passions, run down
with the stream (of desires), as a spider runs down
the web which he has made himself; when they
have cut this, at last, wise people leave the world,
free from cares, leaving all affection behind.

348. Give up what is before, give up what is
behind, give up what is in the middle, when thou
goest to the other shore of existence ; if thy mind
is altogether free, thou wilt not again enter into
birth and decay.

349. If a man is tossed about by doubts, full of
strong passions, and yearning only for what is de-
lightful, his thirst will grow more and more, and he
will indeed make his fetters strong.

350. If a man delights in quieting doubts, and,
always reflecting, dwells on what is not delightful

345. Apekha, apeksha, 'care;' see ManuVI, 41, 49; Suttani-
pata, v. 37; and Gataka, vol. ii. p. 140.

346. Paribba^, i.e. parivra^-; see ManuVI, 41.

347. The commentator explains the simile of the spider as
follows: 'As a spider, after having made its thread- web, sits in
the middle, and after killing with a violent rush a butterfly or a fly
which has fallen in its circle, drinks its juice, returns, and sits
again in the same place, in the same manner creatures who are
given to passions, depraved by hatred, and maddened by wrath,
run along the stream of thirst which they have made themselves,
and cannot cross it,' &c.


THIRST. 83


(the impurity of the body, &c), he certainly will
remove, nay, he will cut the fetter of Mara.

351. He who has reached the consummation, who
does not tremble, who is without thirst and without
sin, he has broken all the thorns of life : this will be
his last body.

352. He who is without thirst and without affec-
tion, who understands the words and their interpre-
tation, who knows the order of letters (those which
are before and which are after), he has received his
last body, he is called the great sage, the great
man.

353. ' I have conquered all, I know all, in all con-
ditions of life I am free from taint ; I have left all,
and through the destruction of thirst I am free ;
having learnt myself, whom shall I teach ?'

354. The gift of the law exceeds all gifts; the
sweetness of the law exceeds all sweetness ; the
delight in the law exceeds all delights ; the extinc-
tion of thirst overcomes all pain.

355. Pleasures destroy the foolish, if they look
not for the other shore ; the foolish by his thirst for
pleasures destroys himself, as if he were his own
enemy.

352. As to nirutti, and its technical meaning among the Bud-
dhists, see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 841. Fausboll translates 'niruttis
vocabulorum peritus/ which may be right, if we take nirutti in the
sense of the language of the Scriptures. See note to verse 363.
Could not sannipata mean sa^hita or sannikarsha ? Sannipata
occurs in the ASakala-pratwakhya, but with a different meaning.

353. Cf. Suttanip&ta, v. 210.

354. The dhammadana, or 'gift of the law/ is the technical
term for instruction in the Buddhist religion. See Buddhaghosha's
Parables, p. 160, where the story of the Sakkadevara^a is told,
and where a free rendering of our verse is given.


84 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIV.

356. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by passion : therefore a gift bestowed
on the passionless brings great reward.

357. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by hatred : therefore a gift bestowed on
those who do not hate brings great reward.

358. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by vanity : therefore a gift bestowed on
those who are free from vanity brings great reward.

359. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by lust : therefore a gift bestowed on
those who are free from lust brings great reward.


THE BHIKSHU. 85


CHAPTER XXV.

THE BHIKSHU (MENDICANT).

360. Restraint in the eye is good, good is restraint
in the ear, in the nose restraint is good, good is re-
straint in the tongue.

361. In the body restraint is good, good is re-
straint in speech, in thought restraint is good, good
is restraint in all things. A Bhikshu, restrained in
all things, is freed from all pain.

362. He who controls his hand, he who controls
his feet, he who controls his speech, he who is well
controlled, he who delights inwardly, who is collected,
who is solitary and content, him they call Bhikshu.

363. The Bhikshu who controls his mouth, who
speaks wisely and calmly, who teaches the meaning
and the law, his word is sweet.

364. He who dwells in the law, delights in the
law, meditates on the law, follows the law, that
Bhikshu will never fall away from the true law.

365. Let him not despise what he has received,


363. On artha and dharma, see Stanislas Julien, Les Avadanas,
I, 217, note; 'Les quatre connaissances sont; i° la connaissance
du sens (artha) ; 20 la connaissance de la Loi (dharma) ; 30 la con-
naissance des explications (niroukti) ; 40 la connaissance de l'intel-
ligence (pratibhana).'

364. The expression dhammaramo, 'having his garden or de-
light (Lustgarten) in the law,' is well matched by the Brahmanic
expression ekarama, i.e. nirdvandva (Mahabh. XIII, 1930). Cf.
Suttanipata, v. 326 ; Dhammapada, v. 32.


86 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXV.

nor ever envy others : a mendicant who envies
others does not obtain peace of mind.

366. A Bhikshu who, though he receives little,
does not despise what he has received, even the
gods will praise him, if his life is pure, and if he is
not slothful.

367. He who never identifies himself with name
and form, and does not grieve over what is no more,
he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

368. The Bhikshu who acts with kindness, who is
calm in the doctrine of Buddha, will reach the quiet
place (Nirvi/za), cessation of natural desires, and
happiness.

369. O Bhikshu, empty this boat ! if emptied, it
will go quickly ; having cut off passion and hatred,
thou wilt go to Nirvana.

370. Cut off the five (senses), leave the five, rise
above the five. A Bhikshu, who has escaped from
the five fetters, he is called Oghati^/za, ' saved from
the flood/

371. Meditate, O Bhikshu, and be not heedless !
Do not direct thy thought to what gives pleasure,
that thou mayest not for thy heedlessness have to
swallow the iron ball (in hell), and that thou mayest
not cry out when burning, ' This is pain/


367. N&marupa is here used again in its technical sense of
mind and body, neither of which, however, is with the Buddhists
dtman, or ' self.' Asat, ' what is not,' may therefore mean the same
as namarupa, or we may take it in the sense of what is no more,
as, for instance, the beauty or youth of the body, the vigour of the
mind, &c.

368. See Childers, Notes, p. 11.

371. The swallowing of hot iron balls is considered as a punish-
ment in hell ; see verse 308. Professor Weber has perceived the


THE BHIKSHU. 87


372. Without knowledge there is no meditation,
without meditation there is no knowledge : he who
has knowledge and meditation is near unto Nirvi^a.

373. A Bhikshu who has entered his empty house,
and whose mind is tranquil, feels a more than human
delight when he sees the law clearly.

374. As soon as he has considered the origin and
destruction of the elements (khandha) of the body,
he finds happiness and joy which belong to those
who know the immortal (Nirvi^a).

375. And this is the beginning here for a wise
Bhikshu : watchfulness over the senses, contented-
ness, restraint under the law ; keep noble friends
whose life is pure, and who are not slothful.

376. Let him live in charity, let him be perfect
in his duties ; then in the fulness of delight he will
make an end of suffering.

377. As the Vassiki plant sheds its withered
flowers, men should shed passion and hatred, O ye
Bhikshus !

378. The Bhikshu whose body and tongue and
mind are quieted, who is collected, and has rejected
the baits of the world, he is called quiet.

379. Rouse thyself by thyself, examine thyself by
thyself, thus self-protected and attentive wilt thou
live happily, O Bhikshu !

380. For self is the lord of self, self is the refuge
of self ; therefore curb thyself as the merchant curbs
a good horse.

right meaning of bhavassu, which can only be bhavayasva, but
I doubt whether the rest of his rendering is right, for who would
swallow an iron ball by accident ?

372. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 247.

375. Cf. Suttanipata, v. 337.


88 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXV.

381. The Bhikshu, full of delight, who is calm in
the doctrine of Buddha will reach the quiet place (Nir-
vi^a), cessation of natural desires, and happiness.

382. He who, even as a young Bhikshu, applies
himself to the doctrine of Buddha, brightens up this
world, like the moon when free from clouds.


381. See verse 368. D'Alwis translates, * dissolution of the
sankh&ras (elements of existence)/


THE BRlHMAiVA. 89


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE BRAHMA2VA (ARHAT).

383. Stop the stream valiantly, drive away the
desires, O Br&hma/za ! When you have understood
the destruction of all that was made, you will under-
stand that which was not made.

384. If the Brdhma^a has reached the other shore
in both laws (in restraint and contemplation), all
bonds vanish from him who has obtained knowledge.

385. He for whom there is neither this nor that
shore, nor both, him, the fearless and unshackled,
I call indeed a Brdhma^a.

386. He who is thoughtful, blameless, settled,
dutiful, without passions, and who has attained the
highest end, him I call indeed a Brdhma^a.

387. The sun is bright by day, the moon shines
by night, the warrior is bright in his armour, the
Brihma^a is bright in his meditation ; but Buddha,
the Awakened, is bright with splendour day and
night.

388. Because a man is rid of evil, therefore he is
called Br&hma/za ; because he walks quietly, there-
fore he is called Samara ; because he has sent away
his own impurities, therefore he is called Pravra^ita
(Pabba^ita, a pilgrim).

385. The exact meaning of the two shores is not quite clear,
and the commentator who takes them in the sense of internal and
external organs of sense, can hardly be right. See verse 86.

388. These would-be etymologies are again interesting as show-
ing the decline of the etymological life of the spoken language of
[10] k


90 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVI.

389. No one should attack a Br&hma^a, but no
Br&hma^a (if attacked) should let himself fly at his
aggressor! Woe to him who strikes a Brahma/za,
more woe to him who flies at his aggressor !

390. It advantages a Br&hma/za not a little if he
holds his mind back from the pleasures of life ; when
all wish to injure has vanished, pain will cease.

391. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who does
not offend by body, word, or thought, and is con-
trolled on these three points.

392. After a man has once understood the law
as taught by the Well-awakened (Buddha), let him
worship it carefully, as the Brdhma^a worships the
sacrificial fire.

393. A man does not become a Brahma^a by his
platted hair, by his family, or by birth ; in whom
there is truth and righteousness, he is blessed, he is
a Brahma/za.

394. What is the use of platted hair, O fool ! what
of the raiment of goat-skins ? Within thee there is
ravening, but the outside thou makest clean.

395. The man who wears dirty raiments, who is

India at the time when such etymologies became possible. In
order to derive Bralimawa from vsih, it must have been pronounced
bahma#o ; v&h, ' to remove/ occurs frequently in the Buddhistical
Sanskrit. Cf. Lal.Vist. p. 551, 1. 1; 553, 1. 7. See note to verse 265.
390. I am afraid I have taken too much liberty with this verse.
Dr. Fausboll translates, ' Non Brcthma#ae hoc paulo melius, quando
retentio fit mentis a jucundis.'

393. Fausboll proposes to read g&kki (g&tyi). 'Both' in the first
edition of my translation was a misprint for ' birth/

394. I have not copied the language of the Bible more than
I was justified in. The words are abbhantaran te gahanaw, Mhiraw
parimagg-asi, ' interna est abyssus, externum mundas.' Cf. Gdtaka,
vol. i. p. 481.

395. The expression Kisan dhamanisanthatam is the Sanskrit


THE BRAHMAiVA. 9 1


emaciated and covered with veins, who lives alone
in the forest, and meditates, him I call indeed a
Br&hma^a.

396. I do not call a man a Brihma^a because of
his origin or of his mother. He is indeed arrogant,
and he is wealthy : but the poor, who is free from
all attachments, him I call indeed a Br£hma/za.

397. Him I call indeed a Brahma^a who has cut
all fetters, who never trembles, is independent and
unshackled.

398. Him I call indeed a Brdhma^a who has cut
the strap and the thong, the chain with all that per-
tains to it, who has burst the bar, and is awakened.

399. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za who, though
he has committed no offence, endures reproach, bonds,
and stripes, who has endurance for his force, and
strength for his army.

400. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who is free
from anger, dutiful, virtuous, without appetite, who
is subdued, and has received his last body.

krw dhamanisantatam, the frequent occurrence of which in the
Mahabharata has been pointed out by Boehtlingk, s. v. dhamani.
It looks more like a Br&hmanic than like a Buddhist phrase.

396. From verse 396 to the first half of verse 423, the text of
the Dhammapada agrees with the text of the Vasish/^a-Bharadvag-a-
sutra. These verses are translated by D'Alwis in his Nirvana,
pp. 1 1 3-1 18, and again by Fausboll, Suttanip&ta, v. 620 seq.

The text contains puns on km^ana, which means ' wealth/ but
also ' attachment;' cf. Childers, s.v.

398. D'Alwis points out a double entendre in these words.
Nandhi may be either the strap that goes round a drum, or en-
mity; varatta may be either a thong or attachment; sand&na
either chain or scepticism; sahanakkamam either due order or
all its concomitants; paligha either bar or ignorance.

399. The exact meaning of balanika is difficult to find. Does
it mean, possessed of a strong army, or facing a force, or leading
a force ?

k2


92 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVI.

401. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za who does
not cling to pleasures, like water on a lotus leaf, like
a mustard seed on the point of a needle.

402. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who, even
here, knows the end of his suffering, has put down
his burden, and is unshackled.

403. Him I call indeed a Brdhma^a whose know-
ledge is deep, who possesses wisdom, who knows
the right way and the wrong, and has attained the
highest end.

404. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who keeps
aloof both from laymen and from mendicants, who
frequents no houses, and has but few desires.

405. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za who finds no
fault with other beings, whether feeble or strong,
and does not kill nor cause slaughter.

406. Him I call indeed a Brahma/za who is tole-
rant with the intolerant, mild with fault-finders, and
free from passion among the passionate.

407. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a from whom
anger and hatred, pride and envy have dropt like
a mustard seed from the point of a needle.

408. Him I call indeed a Brdhma^a who utters
true speech, instructive and free from harshness, so
that he offend no one.

409. Him I call indeed a Brahma^a who takes
nothing in the world that is not given him, be it
long or short, small or large, good or bad.

410. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za who fosters
no desires for this world or for the next, has no incli-
nations, and is unshackled.

405. On tasa and thavara, see Childers, s. v., and D'Alwis, Nir-
vana, p. 115. On da/zda, 'the rod/ see Hibbert Lectures, p. 355,
note.


THE BRAHMAtfA. 93


411. Him I call indeed a Brahma^a who has no
interests, and when he has understood (the truth),
does not say How, how ? and who has reached the
depth of the Immortal.

412. Him I call indeed a Brahma/za who in this
world is above good and evil, above the bondage of
both, free from grief, from sin, and from impurity.

413. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who is bright
like the moon, pure, serene, undisturbed, and in
whom all gaiety is extinct.

414. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who has tra-
versed this miry road, the impassable world and its
vanity, who has gone through, and reached the other
shore, is thoughtful, guileless, free from doubts, free
from attachment, and content.

415. Him I call indeed a Br^hma^a who in this
world, leaving all desires, travels about without a
home, and in whom all concupiscence is extinct.

416. Him I call indeed a Brdhma^a who, leaving
all longings, travels about without a home, and in
whom all covetousness is extinct.

417. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za who, after
leaving all bondage to men, has risen above all

411. Akathahkathi is explained by Buddhaghosa as meaning,
* free from doubt or hesitation/ He also uses kathankatM in the
sense of ' doubt' (verse 414). In the Kavy&darca, III, 17, the com-
mentator explains akatham by katharahitam, nirvivadam, which
would mean, ' without a kathd, a speech, a story without contra-
diction, unconditionally/ From our passage, however, it seems as
if kathahkathd was a noun derived from kathankathayati, ' to say
How, how?' so that neither the first nor the second element had
anything to do with kath, 'to relate;' and in that case akatham,
too, ought to be taken in the sense of ' without a Why/

412. See verse 39. The distinction between good and evil
vanishes when a man has retired from the world, and has ceased
to act, longing only for deliverance.


94 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVI.

bondage to the gods, and is free from all and every
bondage.

418. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who has left
what gives pleasure and what gives pain, who is
cold, and free from all germs (of renewed life), the
hero who has conquered all the worlds.

419. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za who knows
the destruction and the return of beings everywhere,
who is free from bondage, welfaring (Sugata), and
awakened (Buddha).

418. Upadhi, if not used in a technical sense, is best trans-
lated by ' passions or affections.' Technically there are four upadhis
or substrata, viz. the kandhas, Mma, ' desire,' kilesa, 'sin/ and
kamma, ' work/ The Braiima«a may be called nirupadhi, as being
free from desire, misery, and work and its consequences, but not
yet of the kandhas, which end through death only. The com-
mentator explains nirupadhi by nirupakkilesa, * free from sin/ See
Childers, s. v. nibbana, p. 268 a.

419. Sugata is one of those many words in Buddhist literature
which it is almost impossible to translate, because they have been
taken in so many acceptations by the Buddhists themselves.
Sugata etymologically means 'one who has fared well/ sugati
means 'happiness and blessedness/ It is wrong to translate it
literally by ' welcome/ for that in Sanskrit is sv&gata; and we
cannot accept Dr. Eitel's statement (Handbook, p. 138) that
sugata stands incorrectly for sv&gata. Sugata is one oif the
not very numerous technical terms in Buddhism for which hitherto
we know of no antecedents in earlier Brahmanism. It may have
been used in the sense of ' happy and blessed/ but it never became
a title, while in Buddhism it has become, not only a title, but
almost a proper name of Buddha. The same applies to tatha-
gata, lit. 'thus come/ but used in Sanskrit very much like
tathavidha, in the sense of talis, while in Buddhism it means
a Buddha. There are of course many interpretations of the word,
and many reasons are given why Buddhas should be called
Tath&gata (Burnouf, Introduction, p. 75, &c.) Boehtlingk s. v.
supposed that, because Buddha had so many predicates, he was,
for the sake of brevity, called ' such a one as he really is/ I think
we may go a step further. Another word, t&dr/$a, meaning


THE BRAHMAiVA. 95


420. Him I call indeed a Br&hma/za whose path
the gods do not know, nor spirits (Gandharvas),
nor men, whose passions are extinct, and who is
an Arhat (venerable).

421. Him I call indeed a Br&hma^a who calls
nothing his own, whether it be before, behind, or
between, who is poor, and free from the love of the
world.

422. Him I call indeed a BrAhma^a, the manly,
the noble, the hero, the great sage, the conqueror,
the impassible, the accomplished, the awakened.

423. Him I call indeed a Brihma^a who knows
his former abodes, who sees heaven and hell, has
reached the end of births, is perfect in knowledge,
a sage, and whose perfections are all perfect.

talis, becomes in Pali, under the form of t&di, a name of
Buddha's disciples, and afterwards of Buddha himself. If applied
to Buddha's disciples, it may have meant originally ' such as he/ i. e.
his fellows ; but when applied to Buddha himself, it can only mean
'such a one/ i.e. 'so great a man/ The Sanskrit marsh a is
probably the Pali mariso, which stands for ma di so, Sk. madr^a,
'like me/ used in Pali when a superior addresses others as his
equals, and afterwards changed into a mere title of respect.


INDEX.


The figures of this Index refer to the numbers of the verses.


Abhasvara, gods, 200.

Agni, worshipped, 107, 392.

A^atajatru, defeated by Prasena^it,
201.

Akanish/^as, 218.

Akm£ana, 87.

Akkokk/A, 1.

Amata (amrita), the immortal (Nir-
vana), 21.

Animitta, 92, 93.

Anivejana, 40.

Anujaya, foundation, root, 338.

Apastamba, Dharma-sutra, 39, 96,
109.

Appamadavagga, 21.

Arahantavagga, 90.

Arahat, and Ariya, 164.

Ariya, the elect, 22, 79.

— etymology of, 270.

Artha and dharma, 363.

Arupadhatu, 218.

Asava, asrava, 253.

Asava, khi«asava, 89.

Asrava, 39. See Asava.

Ajoka, 21.

Ajraya, 89.

Atharva-veda, 96.

Attavagga, 157.

Atula, 227.

Avadaha, legend, etymology of, 183.

Avasa, monastery, 72, 302.

Avassuta, 39.

Avr/ha, 218.

Balavagga, 60.

Bee, emblem of a sage, 49.

Bhikkhuvagga, 360.

Bhikshu, a mendicant, 31,32,72,75,
266, 267.

Bhikshu, different from 5rama«a and
Brahma«a, 142.

Bhovadi, arrogant, addressing vener-
able people by bho ! 396.

[10]


Bhuri, knowledge, 282.
Bodhiru^i (508-511 a.d.), 294.
Bodhyanga. See Sambodhyanga, 89.
Brahma^alasutta, 153.
Brahman, above the gods, 230.
Brahman, with Mara, 105.
Brahma/za, with Sramarca and Bhik-
shu, 142.
Brahmawa, etymology of, 388.
Brahmawavagga, 383.
Buddha's last words, 153, 154.

— commandments, 183, 185.
Buddhavagga, 179.

Convent (avasa), 73, 302.

Dah, to burn, not sah, 31,
Daw^anidhana, 142, 405.
Daw^avagga, 129.
Death, its dominion, 86.

— king of, 170.

Dhamma, plur., forms, things, 279.
Dhamma, plur., three of the five khan-

dhas, vedana, sa##a, and saii-

khara, 1.
Dhammadana, 354.
Dhammatthavagga, 256.
Dhanapalaka, 324.
Dharma, explained, 1.
Dhatu, eighteen, 89.
Digambaras (Gainas, followers of

Mahavira), 141.
Dipa, island (arhatship), 25, 26.
Dipa, dvipa, island, 236, 238.
Dipankara, 236, 238.
Dipavawsa, 21.
Disciple (sekha), 45.
Dirt£i, dr/sh/i, heresy, 164.
Divyavadana, 141, 149.
Drinking, 247.

Eightfold, the way, 191, 273.
Elephant, Buddha, 320.

1


98


DHAMMAPADA.


Fetters of life, 345, 346, 350.

Fire, worshipped by Brahmans, 107,

392.
Flowers, with and without scent, 51,

52.
Four truths, 190, 273.

Gandharva, 104.

Gatha, 10 1.

Gathasangraha, 183.

Gods, 94, 200.

Gold pieces, 186, 230 (nekkha).

Good and evil bear fruit, 1 19-122.

Gotama, 296.

Graha, gaha, 251.

Camas, 104, 141.

Gambu river, gold of it, 230.

Garavagga, 146.

Gataka, 9, 33, 35"39, 72, 149, 158,

179, 187, 285, 294, 306, 345.
Ga*a, sign of Saiva ascetic, 141.

Hair, platted, of Brahmans, 393, 394.
Hatred, how it ceases, 3, 4.
— ceases by love, 5.
Hitopadeja, 129.

Immortal place, 114.
Immortality and death, 21.
Indra's bolt, 95.
Island (dipa), 25, 26.

Kakajura, 244.

Kali, unlucky die, 202.

Kalya«amitra, 78.

Kanakamuni, 183.

Kasava, kashaya, yellow dress, 9.

Kathasaritsagara, 125.

Kavyadarja, 411.

Kilittba, klishta, 15.

Kisagotami, 45.

Kodhavagga, 221.

Kuja, grass, 311.

Kuja grass, for eating with, 70.

Alttavagga, 33.

Lalita-vistara, 39, 44, 46, 153, 251,

2^54? 275, 282, 320, 326, 388.
Lankavat&ra-sutra, 294.
Lily (lotus), its purity, 58, 59.
Lokavagga, 167.
Lotus leaf, water on it, 401.

Made and not made, 383.


Maggavagga, 273.
Maghavan, Indra, 30.
Mahabharata, 9, 44, 87, 92, 96, 129,

131,133,142,150,185,187,198,

200,202, 223, 227, 248, 275, 287,

306,364,395.
Mahaparinibbana-sutta, 39, 153.
Mahavawsa, 21.
Mahavastu, quotes Dharmapada, and

Sahasravarga, 100.
Mahavira, 141.
Malavagga, 235.
Mallika, 54.
Mandhatr/, 185.
Manu, laws, 71, 96, 109, 131, 150,

251, 320, 345, 346.
Mara, the tempter, 7, 8, 34, 37, 40,

46, 57, io5? 175, 274, 276, 337,

35o.
Milk, turning suddenly, 71.
Miracles, Buddha's view of, 254.
Mithila, 200.

Muni, etymology of, 268, 269.
Mustard seed, on a needle, 401, 407.

Nagavagga, 320.

Nakedness, 141.

Namarupa, mind and body, 221, 367.

Nibbuta, nirvrita, freed, 89.

Niraya, hell, 306.

Nirayavagga, 306.

Nirukti, 363.

Nirvawa, 23, 32, 75, 126, 134, 184,
203, 204, 218, 225, 226, 285,
289,^323, 368, 372, 374.

Nishkashaya, free from impurity,
play on word, 9.

Old-in-vain, 260.
Overcome evil by good, 223.

Paki««akavagga, 290.

Pakkhandin, praskandin, 244.

Pa«^itavagga, 76.

Papavagga, 116.

Paragamin, 85.

Pare, ol 7roX\ot, 6.

Parjvanatha, 141.

Path, the evil and the good, 17, 18,

316-319.
Patricide, 294.
Piyavagga, 209.
Platted hair, 141.
Prapa^a, 254.
Prasena^it, defeated by A^atajatru,


INDEX.


PritibMna, 363.

Pratimoksha, 183, 185.

Pravra^, 83.

Pravra^ita, etymology of, 388.

Proverbs, 96.

Puns, 283, 294, 295, 305.

Pupphavagga, 44.

Ra^a, dust, passion, 313.
Ramayawa, 129.

Sacrifice, worthless, 106.
Sahassavagga, quoted in Mahavastu,

100.
Sahita— Tipiteka, 19.
St. Luke, 130.
St. Matthew, 252.
St. Mark, 157.
Sama«a, etymology of, 265.
Sama/ma, priesthood, 20.
Sambodhyanga, 89.
Sawsara, 60.
Sawskara, conception, 202.

— the five skandhas, 202.
Sawyutta-nikaya, 69.
Sanatsu^atiya, 21.
Saiikhara, creature, 255.
Sankhata, 70.

Sa%#a, perception, 202.
Sara, truth, reality, 11.
Sati, smriti, intense thought, 91.
Sayanasanam, jayanasanam, 185.
Self, lord of self, 160, 165.
Seven elements of knowledge, 89.
Shore, the other, 85, 384.

— the two shores, 385.
Sindhu horses, 322.
Skandha, body, 202.
Snowy mountains, 304.
Spider, 347.

Spoon, perceives no taste, 64.
Sugata, Buddha, 285,419 (welfaring).
Sukhavagga, 197.

Suttanipata, 20, 61, 87, 125, 141, 142,
170, 185, 205, 239, 306, 328,

339, 345, 353, 3^4, 375, 39*-
423.

Sakala-prati jakhya, 352.
•Sunya, 92.

•Svetambaras (Camas, followers of
Parjvanatha), 141.


Tabernacle, maker of, 153.

Tagara, plant, 54.

Taittiriya-ara«yaka, 96.

Tawhavagga, 334.

Tathagata, 254.

Tathagatas, are preachers, 276.

Ten evil states, 137.

Thirty-six passions, 339.

Thought, word, and deed, 96.

Thoughts, their influence, 1.

Tirthankara, 104.

Tonsure, 264.

Trijarawa, 190.

Trividhadvara, thought, word, and

deed, 96.
Twin-verses, 1.

Ukkurika, see Utkamkasana, 141.
Uncreated (akata), 97.
Upadana, 20.
Upadhi, 418.
Upadhiviveka, 203.
Upama, aupamya, 129.
Upasarga, misfortune, 139.
tJrdhvawsrotas, 218.
Utkamkasana, sitting on the hams,
141.

Vaha, horse, or vaha, wave, 339.
Vana, forest and lust, 283.
Vasish^a-Bharadva^a-sutra, 396.
Vassika flower, 377.
Vassiki, flower, 55.
Vedana, sensation, 202.
Videha, king of, 200.
Vi^ana, knowledge, 202.
Vimoksha, freedom, 92, 93.
Vinaya-pi/aka, 28, 307.
Vishwu-sutra, 9.
Vijvabhu Tathagata, 49.
Viveka, separation, retirement^ 5,8 7 .

Works, good, 220.
World, the next, 176.
— of the gods, 177.

Yama, 44, 45, 235.

Yama's messengers, 235.

Yamakavagga, 1.

Ye dhamma, &c, 183.

Yellow dress, 9, 10, 307.

Yonija£, truly, thoroughly, 326.


THE


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


SUTTA-NIPATA


[10]


Uoniron

HENRY FROWDE


OXFOED UNIVEBSITY PBESS WABBHOUSE
7 PATERNOSTER ROW


THE


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


TRANSLATED


BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY


F. MAX MULLER


VOLUME X
PART II


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1881

[All rights reserved]


THE SUTTA-NIPATA

A COLLECTION OF DISCOURSES

BEING ONE OF THE CANONICAL BOOKS OF THE
BUDDHISTS


TRANSLATED FROM PALI


V. FAUSBOLL


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1881

[ All rights reserved]


CONTENTS.


Introduction to Sutta-Nipata

I. URAGAVAGGA .

i. Uragasutta

2. Dhaniyasutta .

3. Khaggavisa^asutta

4. KasibMradva^asutta

5. JTundasutta

6. Parabhavasutta

7. Vasalasutta

8. Mettasutta

9. Hemavatasutta

10. A/avakasutta .

11. Vi^-ayasutta

12. Munisutta

II. VTULAVAGGA .

1. Ratanasutta .

2. Amagandhasutta

3. Hirisutta

4. MaMmahgalasutta

5. SiUilomasutta

6. Dhamma^ariyasutta or Kapilasutta

7. Brahmawadhammikasutta

8. Navasutta

9. Kizflsilasutta .

10. U/Manasutta .

11. Rahulasutta

12. Vangtsasutta .

13. Sammaparibba^aniyasutta

14. Dhammikasutta


FACE

xi

1
1

3
6
11
15
17
20
24

25
29

32

33

37
37
40
42
43
45
46

47
52
54
55
55
57
60
62


Vlll CONTENTS.

PAGE

III. MAHAVAGGA . 67

x. Pabbag^asutta

67

2. PadMnasutta

69

3. Subhasitasutta

72

4. SundarikabMradvag-asutt

a

74

5. M&ghasutta .

80

6. Sabhiyasutta

85

7. Selasutta

96

8. Sallasutta

106

9. Vase//#asutta

108

10. Kokaliyasutta

118

n. Nalakasutta .

124

12. Dvayat&nupassanasutta

131

IV. A7TZTAKAVAGGA

146

1. K&masutta

146

2. Guha//£akasutta

147

3. Du///$a///£akasutta .

148

4. Suddha/Z^akasutta .

. 150

5. Parama/Z^akasutta .

. 152

6. (?arasutta

• 154

7. Tissametteyyasutta

156

8. Pasfirasutta .

157

9. Magandiyasutta

159

10. Pur&bhedasutta

162

11. Kalahaviv&dasutta .

164

12. ^Tulaviyuhasutta

167

13. Mahaviyfihasutta .

• 171

14. Tuva/akasutta

. 174

15. Attadaflfc/asutta

• 177

16. S&riputtasutta

. 180

V. PARiYANAVAGGA

. 184

1. Vatthugatha .

. 184

2. A£itama^avapu&£M

. 190

CONTENT

S.

IX

PAGE

3. Tissametteyyama^avapu/£/£M 191

4. Pufl/zakama^avapu^M .

. 192

5. Mettaguma^avapu^M .

• *93

6. Dhotakama^avapu^M .

. 196

7. Upasivama/zavapu^M .

• x97

8. Nandama?zavapu^M

. 199

9. Hemakama;zavapu&£M .

. 201

10. Todeyyama«avapu£/£M .

. 202

11. Kappama#avapu££M

. 203

12. Gatuka«mma/zavapu£/£M

204

13. Bhadravudhama>zavapu&£M

205

14. Udayama>zavapu£y£M

206

15. Posalama^zavapu^M

207

16. Moghara^ama/zavapu^a

208

17. Pihgiyamawavapu^Ma .
Index

209
215

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the

Translations of the Sacred Books of the East . .221


EXPLANATION OF WORDS
the meaning of which is not always given in the translation.


A^ivika, one belonging to a sect
of naked ascetics.

Arahat, a holy man, a saint.

Ariya, noble.

Bhagavat, worshipful, blessed, a
name of a Buddha.

Bhikkhu, a mendicant.

Brahman, the supreme god of the
Hindus.

Brahma/za, a sage.

Buddha, enlightened, a name of
certain holy men who have freed
themselves from existence, parti-
cularly of Samara Gotama.

D ham ma, tenet, doctrine, custom,
law, religion, virtue, thing.

Gaha/Ma, Gihin, a householder.

Gotama, a name of the last Bud-
dha.

G a t i la, an ascetic wearing clotted
hair.

£ina, a conqueror, a name of a
Buddha.

I s i, a sage.

Khattiya, a warrior, a prince.

K and rila, an outcast.

M ara, a name of the king of death,
the devil.

Muni, a thinker, a sage.

Niga, an eminent man ; sinless ?

Namu£i = Mira.

Nibbina, extinction, the state of
bliss of the Buddhist.

Niga/zMa, a naked ascetic.


Pabba^^a, leaving the world, em-
bracing ascetic life, taking the
robe.

Pabba^ita, an ascetic, having
taken the robe.

Paribb&^a, Paribb&^aka, a
wandering mendicant.

Sakka = Sakya, belonging to the
Sakya tribe.

Sakyamuni, the Sakya sage, a
name of Buddha.

Samara, an ascetic.

Sa^khar^, all compound things,
the material world.

Sa^s&ra, revolution, transmigra-
tion.

Savaka, a hearer, a follower, a
disciple of Buddha, including
both laity and clergy.

Sekha, a novice, student.

Sudda, a man of the servile caste.

Sugata, happy, a name of a Bud-
dha.

Thera, an elder, a senior priest.

Titthiya, an ascetic adhering to
a certain system of philosophy.

U pad hi, the elements of the world.

Upasaka, a follower, a lay de-
votee.

Upasampadi, priest's orders.

Vessa, Vessika, a man of the
third caste.

Yakkha, a giant, a malignant
spirit.


INTRODUCTION


TO


THE SUTTA-NIPATA.


The Collection of Discourses, Sutta-Nipata, which I have
here translated1, is very remarkable, as there can be no
doubt that it contains some remnants of Primitive Bud-
dhism. I consider the greater part of the MaMvagga, and
nearly the whole of the A#$akavagga as very old. I have
arrived at this conclusion from two reasons, first from the
language, and secondly from the contents.

i . We not only find here what we meet with in other
Pali poetry, the fuller Vedic forms of nouns and verbs in
the plural, as avltata/^Mse, pa^itdse, dhammdse, sitise,
upa^itase, pavidiyise, &c., and ^arimase, asmase, sik-
khisscimase ; the shorter Vedic plurals and the instrumental
singular of nouns, as vini£Mayci, lakkha^ci for vmikMs-yknl,
lakkha^ani, mantel, pari^a, vinaycl, labhakamyci for man-
taya, &c. ; Vedic infinitives, as vippahatave, sampayatave,
u^^ametave ; contracted (or sometimes old) forms, as santyci,
gakk&y duggakkk, sammu^a, titthya, thiyo, parihtrati for san-
tiyd, ^atiya, sammutiyi, titthiycl, itthiyo, parihariyati, by the
side of protracted forms, such as dtumdna^ ; but also some
unusual (sometimes old) forms and words, as apu^^asi,
sagghasi2=sakkhissasi, sussa^ = sumssimi (Sansk. .srosh-
ycimi), pdva and p&Vci = vadati, pave^Me = paveseyya,
parikissati = parikilissati, vineyya, vi^eyya, nikkkeyya., pap-
puyya,= vinayitva, &c, da^u = disva (S. drzsh/va), atisi-
tva = atikkamitva, anuvi^a = anuviditva, paribbasana =
vasamana, amhana (S. a^mand) = pasa/zena, v&kibhi, ^atubbhi,
rattamaMbhi, ise (vocative), suvcimi = sami, maga = miga,

1 Sir M. Coom&ra Swamy's translation of part of the book has been a great
help to me. I hope shortly to publish the Pali text.
8 C reads pagghasi.


XII SUTTA-NIPATA,


tumo = so, parovara = par&vara, bhunahu = bhutihanaka,
upaya, imagandha, dhona, vyappatha, vyappathi, vevikkkk,
visenibhuta, visenikatva, pariseniyanti. Sometimes we meet
also with difficult and irregular constructions, and very con-
densed expressions. All this proves, I think, that these
parts of the book are much older than the Suttas in which
the language is not only fluent, but of which some verses
are even singularly melodious.

2. In the contents of the Suttanipata we have, I think,
an important contribution to the right understanding of
Primitive Buddhism, for we see here a picture not of
life in monasteries, but of the life of hermits in its first
stage. We have before us not the systematizing of the
later Buddhist church, but the first germs of a system, the
fundamental ideas of which come out with sufficient clear-
ness. From the A^akavagga especially it is evident
where Buddha takes his stand in opposition to Philo-
sophy (Ait tin = darcana). * -

Indian society at the time of Buddha had two large andf***^*^
distinguished religious sects, Samaras and Brahma;^as. ,^£
This is apparent from several passages where they are
mentioned together ; for instance, Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg, II,
P- 295 5 Grimblot, Sept Suttas Palis, p. ix, 8 &c, 118 &c,
158 &c, 306 &c, 309 ; Dhammapada, p. 393 ; Suttanipdta,
vv. 99, 129, 189, 440, 529, 859, 1078 ; Sabhiyasutta, at the
beginning; the Inscriptions of Asoka; Mahabhashya, 11,4,
9 (fol. 398 a); Lalita Vistara, pp. 309, 1. 10, 318, 1. 18, 320,
1. 20 ; and lastly, Megasthenes (Schwanbeck, p. 45), bvo yivrj
(j)Lkocr6(l)(i)V, &v tovs [x\v Bpa)(joiaz;as KaXet, tqvs he *2apfxava$.

Famous teachers arose and gathered around them flocks
of disciples. As such are mentioned Pura^a-Kassapa,
Makkhali-Gosala, A^ita- Kesakambali, Pakudha-Ka^a-
yana, Sa^"aya-Bela/^iputta, and Niga^a-Nataputta *■ ;
see Suttanipata, p. 86 ; MaMparinibbanasutta, ed. Childers,
p. 58 ; Vinaya II, p. rn ; Grimblot, Sept Suttas Palis, p. 114,
&c; Milindapa^ha, ed.Trenckner, p. 4. Besides these there
is Bavari (Suttanipata, p. 184), and his disciples A^ita, Tissa-
metteyya, Pu^^aka, Mettagu, Dhotaka, Upastva, Nanda,


1 Cf. Indian Antiquary, 1880, p. 158.


INTRODUCTION. Xlll


Hemaka, Todeyya, Kappa, Gatuka/z/zin, Bhadravudha,
Udaya, Posala, Moghara^an (Pifigiya, vv. i 006-1008 ; Sela,
p. 98), and A'ankin, Tarukkha, Pokkharasati, Gknussonl,
Vase/^a, and Bharadva^a, p. 109.

We learn that there were four kinds of Samaras, viz.
Magga^inas, Maggadesakas (or Maggadesins, Maggagg-M-
yins), Magga^ivins, and Maggadusins, vv. 83-88. Among
these Samaras disputes arose, vv. 838, 883-884 ; a number
of philosophical systems were formed, and at the time of
Buddha there were as many as sixty-three of them, v. 538.
These systems are generally designated by dittM, vv. 54,
151, 786, 837, 851, &c. ; or by di/^igata, vv. 834, 836, 913 ;
or by di/^asuta, v. 778 ; or by di#$a, suta, and muta,
vv. 793, 813, 914; or by ditt/ia, suta, silavata1, and muta,
vv. 790, 797—798, 836, 887, 1080. The doctrines themselves
are called diMinivesa, v. 785 ; or nivesana, vv. 209, 470,
801, 846 ; or vini£/^aya, vv. 838, 866, 887, 894 ; and he who
entertains any of them, is called nivissavadin, vv. 910, 913.

What is said of the Samaras seems mostly to hold good
about the Brahma^as also. They too are called dispu-
tatious, vadasila, v. 381, &c, p. 109 ; and three kinds of
them are mentioned, viz. Titthiyas, A^ivikas, and Ni-
ga/z^as, w. 380, 89 1- 893. In contradistinction to the
Samaras the Brahma^as are designated as Tevi^as, vv.
594, 1019; they are Padakas, Veyyakara/zas, and perfect
in £appa, Nigha^u, Ketubha, Itihasa, &c, v. 595, p. 98.
They are called friends of the hymns, v. 139 ; well versed
in the hymns, v. 976; and their principal hymn is Savitti2,
w. 568, 456. They worship and make offerings to the fire,
pp. 74, 20. In Brahma/zadhammikasutta the ancient and
just Brahma^as are described in opposition to the later

1 I am not sure whether silavata is to be understood as one notion or two.
It is generally written in one word, but at p. 109 Vase//#a says, when one is
virtuous and endowed with works, he is a Brahmarca, yato kho bho silav& fa
hoti vatasampanno fa ettavat& kho brahmawo hoti. Silavata, I presume, refers
chiefly to the Brahmawas.

2 From v. 456 we see that Buddha has rightly read varemyam as the metre
requires, but I must not omit to mention that the Commentator understands
by Savitti the Buddhistic formula: Buddhara sarawam g&kkh&mi, Dhammam
sarawara ga£Mami, Samgham sarawam ga££Aami, which, like Savitti, contains
twenty-four syllables.


XIV SUTTA-NIPATA.


Brahma^as, who slay innocent cows and have acquired wealth
through the favour of the kings, vv. 307, 308, 311, 30a1.

All these disputants hold fast to their own prejudiced
views, v. 910. They say that purity comes from philo-
sophical views, from tradition, and from virtuous works,
and in many other ways, v. 1078, and that there is no bliss
excepting by following their opinions, vv. 889, 891, 893.

Buddha himself has, it is true, sprung from the Samaras :
he is called Sama/za Gotama, p. 96 ; he shines like a sun
in the midst of the Samaras, v. 550 ; and intercourse with
Samaras is said to be the highest blessing, v. 265. But
Buddha has overcome all their systems, v. 538 ; there is
nothing which has not been seen, heard, or thought by him,
and nothing which has not been understood by him, v. 1121.
All the disputatious Brahma^as do not overcome him in
understanding, v. 380 ; and he asserts that no one is puri-
fied and saved by philosophy or by virtuous works, vv. 1079,
839. Sanctification, in fact, does not come from another,
vv. 773, 790, 813; it can be attained only by going into
the yoke with Buddha, v. 834 ; byjbdieying in him and in
the Dhamma of the Saints, vv. 183, 185, 370, 1142 ; _onJ;he
whole, by being what Buddha is.
"What tESnirB^HEaT^*™"^

First he is a Visionary, in the good sense of the word ;
his knowledge is intuitive, ' Seeing misery/ he says, ' in the
philosophical views, without adopting any of them, searching
for truth, I saw inward peace,' vv. 837, 207. And again, ' He,
a conqueror unconquered, saw the Dhamma visibly, with-
out any traditional instruction,' vv. 934, 1052, 1065. He
teaches an instantaneous, an immediate religious life, vv.
567, 1136. He is called ^akkhumat, endowed with an eye,
clearly-seeing, w. 160, 405, 540, 562, 596, 956, 992, 1028,
1 1 15, 11 27 ; samanta^akkhu, the all-seeing, vv. 1062, 1068 ;
and as such he has become an eye to the world, v. 599.
He sees the subtle meaning of things, vv. 376, 175 ; he is,
in one word, Sambuddha, the perfectly-enlightened, vv. 177,
555, 596, 992 ; and by knowledge he is delivered, w. 1106,

1 Besides the religious Brahmarcas some secular Brahmarcas are mentioned,
p. 11.


INTRODUCTION. XV


737, 733> Existence is avigfi, ignorance, v. 729 ; v\gg&>
knowledge, is the extinction of the world, v. 730.

Secondly, he is an Ascetic, a Muni1, one that forsakes
the world and wanders from the house to the houseless
state, vv. 273, 375, 1003 ; because from house-life arises
defilement, v. 206. An ascetic has no prejudiced ideas,
v. 802 ; he has shaken off every philosophical view, v. 787;
he does not enter into disputes, v. 887 ; he is not pleased
nor displeased with anything, v. 813 ; he is indifferent to
learning, v. 911; he does not cling to good and evil,
vv. 520, 547, 790 ; he has cut off all passion and all desire,
vv. 2, 795, 1130, 916; he is free from marks, v. 847; and
possessionless, aki^ana, vv. 175, 454, 490, 62,0, 1058, 1062,
976, 1069, 1 1 14. He is equable, v. 855 ; under all circum-
stances the same, v. 952 ; still as the deep water, v. 920 ;
calm, vv. 459, 861. He has reached peace, vv. 837, 845,
919 ; he knows that bliss consists in peace, v. 933 ; he has
gone to immortal peace, the unchangeable state of Nib-
Mna, v. 203. And how is this state brought about ? By
the destruction of consciousness, vv. 734-735. And how
does consciousness cease? By the cessation of sensa-
tion, vv. 1109-1110; by being without breathing, vv.
1089-10902.

1. What then is sin according to Buddha?

Subjectively sin is desire, in all its various forms,
vv. 923, 1 103 ; viz. desire for existence generally, vv. 776,
1059, 1067, and especially for name and form, i. e. indi-
vidual existence, vv. 354, 1099. As long as man is led by
desire he will be whirled about in existence, v. 740 ; for as
long as there is birth, there will be death, v. 742. Exist-
ence is called the stream of death, v. 354 ; the realm of
Mara, vv. 164, 1145. Those who continually go to sa/^-
s&ra with birth and death, are the ignorant, v. 729.

1 Buddha is sometimes styled the great Isi, vv. 1060, 1082 ; sometimes a Muni,
vv. 164, 700 ; sometimes a Brahmawa, v. 1064 ; sometimes a Bhikkhu, w. 411,
415 ; and all these appellations are used synonymously, w. 283, 284, 1064, 1066,
843, 844, 911, 912, 946, 220. Ascetic life is praised throughout the book,
especially in the Uraga-, Muni-, Rahula-, Sammaparibbag-aniya-, Dhammika-,
Nalaka-, Purabheda-, Tuvataka-, Attadam/a-, and Sariputta-suttas.

2 This system ends, it will be seen from this, like other ascetic systems, in
mysticism.


XVI SUTTA-NIPATA.


But desire originates in the body, vv. 370, 1099 ; sin lies
objectively in embodiment or matter, and conse-
quently the human body is looked upon as a contemptible
thing. See Vi^ayasutta, p. 33.

2. And what is bliss?

Subjectively, it is emancipation from desire by
means of the peace that Buddha preaches, vv. 1065-1066,
1069, 1084, 1 108, 838-839.

Objectively, it is emancipation from body and
matter. One must destroy the elements of existence/upa-
dhi/vv. 373, 54^> 1050, 1056; and leave the body behind,
that one may not come to exist again, w. 1130, 1133, 761.
, . ,The ignorant only create upadhi, v. 1050, and go again
^^^^^^^^•^nd again to sa^sara, v. 729. The wise do not enter time,
kappa, w. 521, 535> 860 ; they look upon the world as
voic|, v. 1 1 18; hold that there is nothing really existing,
v. 1069 ; and those whose minds are disgusted with a fu-
ture existence, the wise who have destroyed their seeds (of
existence), go out like a lamp, vv. 334, 353-354. As a flame,
blown about by the violence of the wind, goes out, and
cannot be reckoned (as existing), even so a Muni, delivefed
from name and body, disappears, and cannot be reckoned
(as existing), v. 1073. For him who has disappeared, there
is no form ; that by which they say he is, exists for him no
longer, v. 1075.

' Exert thyself, then, — O Dhotaka,' so said Bhagavat, —
* being wise and thoughtful in this world, let one, having
listened to my utterance, learn his own extinction,5 v. 1061.
Tena h' atappaw karohi, — Dhotaka 'ti Bhagava, —
idh1 eva nipako sato
ito sutvana nigghosa/^
sikkhe nib ban am attano.

With this short sketch of the contents of the Suttani-
pata for a guide, I trust it will be easy to understand even
the more obscure parts of the book.

V. FAUSBOLL.

Copenhagen,
Sept. 13, 1880.


I. URAGAVAGGA.


*0


1. URAGASUTTA.

The Bhikkhu who discards all human passions is compared to a
snake that casts his skin. — Text and translation in Fr. Spiegel's
Anecdota P&lica.

i. He who restrains his anger when it has
arisen, as (they) by medicines (restrain) the poison
of the snake spreading (in the body), that Bhikkhu
leaves this and the further shore, as a snake (quits
its) old worn out skin. (i)

2. He who has cut off passion entirely, as (they cut
off) the lotus-flower growing in a lake, after diving
(into the water), that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (2)

3. He who has cut off desire entirely, the flowing,
the quickly running, after drying it up, that Bhik-
khu leaves this and the further shore, as a snake
(quits its) old worn out skin. (3)

4. He who has destroyed arrogance entirely, as the
flood (destroys) a very frail bridge of reeds, that
Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as a
snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (4)

5. He who has not found any essence in the exist-
ences, like one that looks for flowers on fig-trees,
that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as
a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (5)

[10] B


URAGAVAGGA.


6. He in whose breast there are no feelings of
anger, who has thus overcome reiterated existence,
that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as
a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (6)

7. He whose doubts are scattered, cut off en-
tirely inwardly, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (7)

8. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, who overcame all this (world of) de-
lusion, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (8)

9. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, having seen that all this in the world
is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (9)

10. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, being free from covetousness, (seeing)
that all this is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and
the further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn
out skin. (10)

11. He who did not go too fast forward, nor
was left behind, being free from passion, (seeing)
that all this is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and
the further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn
out skin. (11)

12. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, being free from hatred, (seeing) that all
this is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (12)

13. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, being free from folly, (seeing) that all this
is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (13)


DHANIYASUTTA.


14. He to whom there are no affections whatso-
ever, whose sins are extirpated from the root, that
Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as a snake
(quits its) old worn out skin. (14)

15. He to whom there are no (sins) whatsoever
originating in fear, which are the causes of coming
back to this shore, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (15)

16. He to whom there are no (sins) whatsoever
originating in desire, which are the causes of binding
(men) to existence, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (16)

17. He who, having left the five obstacles, is free
from suffering, has overcome doubt, and is without
pain, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore,
as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (17)

Uragasutta is ended.


2. DHANIYASUTTA.

A dialogue between the rich herdsman Dhaniya and Buddha, the
one rejoicing in his worldly security and the other in his religious
belief.— This beautiful dialogue calls to mind the parable in the
Gospel of S. Luke xii. 16.

i. * I have boiled (my) rice, I have milked (my
cows)/ — so said the herdsman Dhaniya, — 'I am
living together with my fellows near the banks of
the Mahi (river), (my) house is covered, the fire is
kindled: therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky!' (18)

2. ' I am free from anger, free from stubborn-
ness/— so said Bhagavat, — ' I am abiding for one
night near the banks of the Mahl (river), my house

b 2


URAGAVAGGA.


is uncovered, the fire (of passions) is extinguished :
therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky!' (19)

3. ' Gad-flies are not to be found (with me)/ — so
said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ' in meadows abound-
ing with grass the cows are roaming, and they can
endure rain when it comes : therefore, if thou like,
rain, O sky!' (20)

4. ' (By me) is made a well-constructed raft/ — so
said Bhagavat, — * I have passed over (to Nibbana),
I have reached the further bank, having overcome
the torrent (of passions); there is no (further) use
for a raft : therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky!' (21)

5. ' My wife is obedient, not wanton/ — so said the
herdsman Dhaniya, — * for a long time she has been
living together (with me), she is winning, and I hear
nothing wicked of her : therefore, if thou like, rain,
OskyT (22)

6. ' My mind is obedient, delivered (from all world-
liness)/ — so said Bhagavat, — * it has for a long time
been highly cultivated and well-subdued, there is no
longer anything wicked in me : therefore, if thou
like, rain, O sky!' (23)

7. c I support myself by my own earnings/ — so
said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ' and my children are
(all) about me, healthy ; I hear nothing wicked of
them : therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky!1 (24)

8. ' I am no one's servant/ — so said Bhagavat, —
' with what I have gained I wander about in all the
world, there is no need (for me) to serve : therefore,
if thou like, rain, O sky ! ' (25)

9. ' I have cows, I have calves/ — so said the
herdsman Dhaniya, — ' I have cows in calf and heifers,
and I have also a bull as lord over the cows : there-
fore, if thou like, rain, O sky !' (26)


DHANIYASUTTA.


10. * I have no cows, I have no calves/ — so said
Bhagavat, — ' I have no cows in calf and no heifers,
and I have no bull as a lord over the cows : there-
fore, if thou like, rain, O sky!' (27)

11. 'The stakes are driven in, and cannot be
shaken/ — so said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ' the
ropes are made of mu^a grass, new and well-made,
the cows will not be able to break them : therefore,
if thou like, rain, O sky!' (28)

12. ' Having, like a bull, rent the bonds; having,
like an elephant, broken through the galu&Mi
creeper, I shall not again enter into a womb : there-
fore, if thou like, rain, O sky!' (29)

Then at once a shower poured down, filling both
sea and land. Hearing the sky raining, Dhaniya
spoke thus :

13. 'No small gain indeed (has accrued) to us
since we have seen Bhagavat ; we take refuge in
thee, O (thou who art) endowed with the eye (of
wisdom); be thou our master, O great Muni!' (30)

14. 'Both my wife and myself are obedient; (if)
we lead a holy life before Sugata, we shall conquer
birth and death, and put an end to pain/ (31)

15. 'He who has sons has delight in sons/ — so
said the wicked Mctra, — ' he who has cows has de-
light likewise in cows ; for upadhi (substance) is the
delight of man, but he who has no upadhi has no
delight/ (32)

16. 'He who has sons has care with (his) sons/ —

so said Bhagavat, — f he who has cows has likewise

care with (his) cows ; for upadhi (is the cause of)

people's cares, but he who has no upadhi has no

care/ ^ (33)

Dhaniyasutta is ended.


URAGAVAGGA.


3. KHAGGAVISAiWVSUTTA.

Family life and intercourse with others should be avoided, for
society has all vices in its train; therefore one should leave
the corrupted state of society and lead a solitary life.

1. Having laid aside the rod against all beings,
and not hurting any of them, let no one wish for a
son, much less for a companion, let him wander
alone like a rhinoceros \ (34)

2. In him who has intercourse (with others) af-
fections arise, (and then) the pain which follows
affection ; considering the misery that originates in
affection let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (35)

3. He who has compassion on his friends and
confidential (companions) loses (his own) advan-
tage, having a fettered mind ; seeing this danger
in friendship let one wander alone like a rhino-
ceros. (36)

4. Just as a large bamboo tree (with its branches)
entangled (in each other, such is) the care one has
with children and wife ; (but) like the shoot of a
bamboo not clinging (to anything) let one wander
alone like a rhinoceros2. (37)

5. As a beast unbound in the forest goes feeding
at pleasure, so let the wise man, considering (only
his) own will, wander alone like a rhinoceros. (38)

6. There is (a constant) calling in the midst of
company, both when sitting, standing, walking, and
going away; (but) let one, looking (only) for free-
dom from desire and for following his own will,
wander alone like a rhinoceros. (39)

7. There is sport and amusement in the midst of

1 Comp. Dhp. v. 142. 2 Comp. Dhp. v. 345.


KHAGGAVISAJVASUTTA.


company, and for children there is great affection ;
(although) disliking separation from his dear friends,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (40)

8. He who is at home in (all) the four regions
and is not hostile (to any one), being content with
this or that, overcoming (all) dangers fearlessly, let
him wander alone like a rhinoceros. (41)

9. Discontented are some pabba^itas (ascetics),
also some gaha^as (householders) dwelling in
houses ; let one, caring little about other people's
children, wander alone like a rhinoceros. ^ (42)

10. Removing the marks of a gihin (a house-
holder) like a Kovildra tree whose leaves are fallen,
let one, after cutting off heroically the ties of a
gihin, wander alone like a rhinoceros. (43)

11. If one acquires a clever companion, an asso-
ciate righteous and wise, let him, overcoming all
dangers, wander about with him glad and thought-
ful1. ^ (44)

12. If one does not acquire a clever companion,
an associate righteous and wise, then as a king
abandoning (his) conquered kingdom, let him wan-
der alone like a rhinoceros 2. (45)

13. Surely we ought to praise the good luck of
having companions, the best (and such as are our)
equals ought to be sought for; not having ac-
quired such friends let one, enjoying (only) allowable
things, wander alone like a rhinoceros 3. (46)

14. Seeing bright golden (bracelets), well-wrought
by the goldsmith, striking (against each other when
there are) two on one arm, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (47)

1 Comp. Dhp. v. 328. 2 Comp. Dhp. v. 329.

3 Comp. Dhp. v. 61.


8 URAGAVAGGA.


15. Thus (if I join myself) with another I shall
swear or scold ; considering this danger in future,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (48)

16. The sensual pleasures indeed, which are
various, sweet, and charming, under their different
shapes agitate the mind; seeing the misery (ori-
ginating) in sensual pleasures, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (49)

1 7. These (pleasures are) to me calamities, boils,
misfortunes, diseases, sharp pains, and dangers;
seeing this danger (originating) in sensual pleasures,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (50)

1 8. Both cold and heat, hunger and thirst, wind
and a burning sun, and gad-flies and snakes — having
overcome all these things, let one wander alone like
a rhinoceros1. (51)

19. As the elephant, the strong, the spotted, the
large, after leaving the herd walks at pleasure in
the forest, even so let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (52)

20. For him who delights in intercourse (with
others, even) that is inconvenient which tends to
temporary deliverance ; reflecting on the words of
(Buddha) the kinsman of the AdL£/£a family, let one
wander alone like a rhinoceros. (53)

21. The harshness of the (philosophical) views
I have overcome, I have acquired self-command, I
have attained to the way (leading to perfection),
I am in possession of knowledge, and not to be
led by others; so speaking, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (54)

22. Without covetousness, without deceit, without


1 Comp. Gataka I, p. 93.


KHAGGAVISA2VASUTTA. 9

craving, without detraction, having got rid of pas-
sions and folly, being free from desire in all the
world, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (55)

23. Let one avoid a wicked companion who
teaches what is useless and has gone into what is
wrong, let him not cultivate (the society of) one
who is devoted (to and) lost in sensual pleasures,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (56)

24. Let one cultivate (the society of) a friend
who is learned and keeps the Dhamma, who is
magnanimous and wise; knowing the meaning (of
things and) subduing his doubts, let one wander
alone like a rhinoceros. (57)

25. Not adorning himself, not looking out for
sport, amusement, and the delight of pleasure in the
world, (on the contrary) being loath of a life of
dressing, speaking the truth, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (58)

26. Having left son and wife, father and mother,
wealth, and corn, and relatives, the different objects of
desire, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (59)

2 7. ' This is a tie, in this there is little happi-
ness, little enjoyment, but more of pain, this is a
fish-hook/ so having understood, let a thoughtful
man wander alone like a rhinoceros. (60)

28. Having torn the ties, having broken the net
as a fish in the water, being like a fire not returning
to the burnt place, let one wander alone like a rhi-
noceros. (61)

29. With downcast eyes, and not prying1, with his
senses guarded, with his mind protected free from

1 Na h padalolo ti ekassa dutiyo dvinnazfl tatiyo ti evazra
ga#ama£g7taw pavisituk&mataya kaw^uyamanapsido viya abhavanto
digha£arika-anavattha£ankavirato va\ Commentator.


IO URAGAVAGGA.


passion, not burning (with lust), let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (62)

30. Removing the characteristics of a gihin
(householder), like a Piri^atta tree whose leaves
are cut off, clothed in a yellow robe after wandering
away (from his house), let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (63)

31. Not being greedy of sweet things, not being
unsteady, not supporting others, going begging from
house to house, having a mind which is not fettered
to any household, let one wander alone like a rhi-
noceros. (64)

32. Having left the five obstacles of the mind,
having dispelled all sin, being independent, having
cut off the sin of desire, let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (65)

33. Having thrown behind (himself bodily) plea-
sure and pain, and previously (mental) joy and
distress, having acquired equanimity, tranquillity,
purity, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (66)

34. Strenuous for obtaining the supreme good
(i.e. Nibbana), with a mind free from attachment, not
living in idleness, being firm, endowed with bodily
and mental strength, let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (67)

35. Not abandoning seclusion and meditation,
always wandering in (accordance with) the Dhammas1,
seeing misery in the existences, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros 2. (68)

36. Wishing for the destruction of desire (i.e. Nib-
Mna), being careful, no fool, learned, strenuous, con-
siderate, restrained, energetic, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (69)

1 Dhammesu Vixkk&m anudhamma^ari. 2Comp. Dhp. v. 20.


KASIBHARADVAGASUTTA. 1 1

37. Like a lion not trembling at noises, like the
wind not caught in a net, like a lotus not stained by
water, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (70)

38. As a lion strong by his teeth, after overcom-
ing (all animals), wanders victorious as the king of the
animals, and haunts distant dwelling-places1, (even
so) let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (71)

39. Cultivating in (due) time kindness, equanimity,
compassion, deliverance, and rejoicing (with others),
unobstructed by the whole world, let one wander
alone like a rhinoceros. (72)

40. Having abandoned both passion and hatred and
folly, having rent the ties, not trembling in the loss
of life, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros2. (73)

41. They cultivate (the society of others) and
serve them for the sake of advantage ; friends with-
out a motive are now difficult to get, men know
their own profit and are impure ; (therefore) let one
wander alone like a rhinoceros. (74)

Khaggavisa/zasutta is ended.


4. KASIBHARADVAGASUTTA.

The Brahmarca Kasibh&radva^u reproaches Gotama with idleness,
but the latter convinces him that he (Buddha) also works, and
so the Brahma^a is converted, and finally becomes a saint.
Compare Sp. Hardy, A Manual of Buddhism, p. 214; Gospel
of S. John v. 17.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt in Magadha at Dak-
khm&giri in the Br&hma^a village Ekana/a. And at
that time the Br&hma^a KasibhcLradvi^as five hun-

1 Pantdniti durani senasan&niti vasati//Mnani. Commentator.

2 Comp. Dhp. v. 20.


1 2 URAGAVAGGA.


dred ploughs were tied (to the yokes) in the sowing
season. Then Bhagavat, in the morning, having put
on his raiment and taken his bowl and robes, went
to the place where the Br&hma/za Kasibh&radvafas
work (was going on). At that time the Brahma^a
Kasibhdradvd^a's distribution of food took place.
Then Bhagavat went to the place where the distri-
bution of food took place, and having gone there, he
stood apart. The Br&hma^a Kasibharadva^a saw
Bhagavat standing there to get alms, and having
seen him, he said this to Bhagavat :

' I, O Sama/za, both plough and sow, and having
ploughed and sown, I eat; thou also, O Samara,
shouldst plough and sow, and having ploughed and
sown, thou shouldst eat/

' I also, O Brclhma^a, both plough and sow, and
having ploughed and sown, I eat/ so said Bhagavat.

' Yet we do not see the yoke, or the plough, or
the ploughshare, or the goad, or the oxen of the
venerable Gotama/

And then the venerable Gotama spoke in this way :

' I also, O Brahma/za, both plough and sow, and
having ploughed and sown, I eat,' so said Bhagavat.

Then the Brahma^a Kasibh&radv^a addressed
Bhagavat in a stanza :

i. 'Thou professest to be a ploughman, and yet
we do not see thy ploughing ; asked about (thy)
ploughing, tell us (of it), that we may know thy
ploughing/ (75)

2. Bhagavat answered : ' Faith is the seed, penance
the rain, understanding my yoke and plough, mo-
desty the pole of the plough, mind the tie, thought-
fulness my ploughshare and goad. (76)

3. ' I am guarded in respect of the body, I am


KASIBHARADVAGASUTTA. 1 3

guarded in respect of speech, temperate in food ;
I make truth to cut away (weeds), tenderness is my
deliverance. (77)

4. ' Exertion is my beast of burden ; carrying (me)
to NibMna he goes without turning back to the
place where having gone one does not grieve. (78)

5. 'So this ploughing is ploughed, it bears the
fruit of immortality ; having ploughed this ploughing
one is freed from all pain/ (79)

Then the BrAhma^a Kasibharadva^a, having
poured rice-milk into a golden bowl, offered it to
Bhagavat, saying, * Let the venerable Bhagavat eat
of the rice-milk ; the venerable is a ploughman, for
the venerable Gotama ploughs a ploughing that
bears the fruit of immortality/

6. Bhagavat said : ' What is acquired by reciting
stanzas is not to be eaten by me ; this is, O Br&h-
ma/za, not the Dhamma of those that see rightly ;
Buddha rejects what is acquired by reciting stanzas,
this is the conduct (of Buddhas) as long as the
Dhamma exists. (80)

7. ' One who is an accomplished great I si, whose
passions are destroyed and whose misbehaviour has
ceased, thou shouldst serve with other food and
drink, for this is the field for one who looks for
good works1/ (81)

* To whom then, O Gotama, shall I give this rice-
milk ?' so said Kasibharadva^a.

* I do not see, O Brahma^a, in the world (of men)

1 Annena, k& kevalinaw mahesiw
Khira&savaw kukku££avtipasantaw
Annena pdnena upa//$ahassu,
Khettaw hi taw puimapekhassa hoti.
Cf. Sundarikabharadvagu v. 28.


14 URAGAVAGGA.


and gods and M&ras and Brahmans, amongst beings
comprising gods and men, and Samaras and Br&h-
ma^as, any by whom this rice-milk when eaten can
be properly digested with the exception of Tath&gata,
or a disciple of Tathigata. Therefore, O Br&hma^a,
thou shalt throw this rice-milk in (a place where
there is) little grass, or cast it into water with no
worms/ so said Bhagavat.

Then the Brihma^a Kasibh&radvagu threw the
rice-milk into some water with no worms. Then
the rice-milk thrown into the water splashed, hissed,
smoked in volumes ; for as a ploughshare that has
got hot during the day when thrown into the water
splashes, hisses, and smokes in volumes, even so the
rice-milk (when) thrown into the water splashed,
hissed, and smoked in volumes.

Then the Brahma^a Kasibh&radva£*a alarmed and
terrified went up to Bhagavat, and after having
approached and fallen with his head at Bhagavat's
feet, he said this to Bhagavat:

6 It is excellent, O venerable Gotama ! It is ex-
cellent, O venerable Gotama ! As one raises what
has been overthrown, or reveals what has been
hidden, or tells the way to him who has gone
astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark that
those who have eyes may see the objects, even so
by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the
Dhamma (has been) illustrated. I take refuge in
the venerable Gotama and in the Dhamma and in
the Assembly of Bhikkhus; I wish to receive the
pabba^d, I wish to receive the upasampadS, (the
robe and the orders) from the venerable Gotama,'
so said Kasibhiradv&^a.

Then the Brdhma^a Kasibharadva^a received the


JTUNDASUTTA. 1 5


pabbagg^, from Bhagavat, and he received also the
upasampada; and the venerable Bh&radva^a having
lately received the upasampadi, leading a solitary,
retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived after
having in a short time in this existence by his own
understanding ascertained and possessed himself of
that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander
away from their houses to a houseless state. ' Birth
had been destroyed, a religious life had been led,
what was to be done had been done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence/ so he
perceived, and the venerable Bharadva^a became
one of the arahats (saints).

Kasibharadvi^asutta is ended.


5. ^UNDASUTTA.

Buddha describes the foun different kinds of Samaras to ^"unda,
the smith.

i. 4 1 ask the Muni of great understanding/ — so
said Aunda, the smith, — ' Buddha, the lord of the
Dhamma, who is free from desire, the best of bipeds,
the most excellent of charioteers, how many (kinds
of) Samaras are there in the world; pray tell me
that?' (82)

2. ' There are four (kinds of) Samaras, (there is)
not a fifth/ O isfunda, — so said Bhagavat, — ' these I
will reveal to thee, being asked in person ; (they are)
Magga^inas and Maggadesakas, Magga^ivins and
Maggadfisins/ (83)

3. ' Whom do the Buddhas call a Magga^na?' — so
said .ffunda, the smith, — * How is a Magga^gv^ayin


1 6 URAGAVAGGA.


unequalled ? Being asked, describe to me a Mag-
ga^lvin, and reveal to me a Maggadusin/ (84)

4. Bhagavat said : ' He who has overcome doubt,
is without pain, delights in Nibbana, is free from
greed, a leader of the world of men and gods, such
a one the Buddhas call a magga^ina (that is, vic-
torious by the way). (85)

5. ' He who in this world having known the best
(i.e. NibMna) as the best, expounds and explains here
the Dhamma, him, the doubt-cutting Muni, without
desire, the second of the Bhikkhus they call a mag-
gadesin (that is, teaching the way). (86)

6. ' He who lives in the way that has so well been
taught in the Dhammapada, and is restrained, atten-
tive, cultivating blameless words, him the third of
the Bhikkhus they call a magga^ivin (that is,
living in the way1). (87)

7. ' He who although counterfeiting the virtuous is
forward, disgraces families, is impudent, deceitful, un-
restrained, a babbler, walking in disguise, such a one
is a maggadusin (that is, defiling the way) 2. (88)

8. ' He who has penetrated these (four Samaras),
who is a householder, possessed of knowledge, a pupil
of the venerable ones, wise, having known that they
all are such, — having seen so, his faith is not lost ;
for how could he make the undepraved equal to the
depraved and the pure equal to the impure ? ' (89)

Aundasutta is ended.


1 Yo Dhammapade sudesite
Magge £ivati sa?mato satfmd
Anavagg-apadani sevamano

Tatiyazra bhikkhunam dhu maggag-ivi#z.

2 Comp. Gataka II, p. 281.


PARABHAVASUTTA. 1 7


6. PARABHAVASUTTA.

A dialogue between a deity and Buddha on the things by which
a man loses and those by which he gains in this world. — Text
by Grimblot, in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (187 1), p. 237 ; transla-
tion by L. Feer, in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (187 1), p. 309, and
by Gogerly, reprinted in Journal Asiatique, t. xx (1872), p. 226.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Savatthi, in £eta-
vana, in the park of Anathapim/ika. Then when
the night had gone, a certain deity of a beautiful
appearance, having illuminated the whole £etavana,
went up to Bhagavat, and having approached and
saluted him, he stood apart, and standing apart that
deity addressed Bhagavat in stanzas :

1. 'We ask (thee), Gotama, about a man that
suffers loss ; having come to ask, Bhagavat, (tell us)
what is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (90)

2. Bhagavat : * The winner is easily known, easily
known (is also) the loser : he who loves Dhamma is
the winner, he who hates Dhamma is the loser/ (91)

3. Deity : ' We know this to be so, this is the
first loser ; tell (us) the second, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (92)

4. Bhagavat : ' Wicked men are dear to him, he
does not do anything that is dear to the good, he
approves of the Dhamma of the wicked,— that is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (93)

5. Deity: 'We know this to be so, this is the
second loser ; tell us the third, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (94)

6. Bhagavat : ' The man who is drowsy, fond of
society and without energy, lazy, given to anger, —
that is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (95)

[10] c


1 8 URAGAVAGGA.


7. Deity : ' We know this to be so, this is the
third loser ; tell us the fourth, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (96)

8. Bhagavat : ' He who being rich does not support
mother or father who are old or past their youth, —
that is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (97)

9. Deity : * We know this to be so, this is the
fourth loser ; tell us the fifth, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (98)

10. Bhagavat: 'He who by falsehood deceives
either a Brahma^a or a Samara or any other men-
dicant,— that is the cause (of loss) to the losing
(man)/ (99)

11. Deity: 'We know this to be so, this is the
fifth loser ; tell us the sixth, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (IO°)

12. Bhagavat: 'The man who is possessed of
much property, who has gold and food, (and still)
enjoys alone his sweet things, — that is the cause
(of loss) to the losing (man)/ (IQI)

1 3. Deity : ' We know this to be so, this is the
sixth loser ; tell us the seventh, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (102)

14. Bhagavat : ' The man who proud of his birth,
of his wealth, and of his family, despises his rela-
tives,— that is the cause (of loss) to the losing
(man)/ (103)

15. Deity: 'We know this to be so, this is the
seventh loser ; tell us the eighth, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (104)

16. Bhagavat: 'The man who given to women,
to strong drink, and to dice, wastes whatever he has
gained, — that is the cause (of loss) to the losing
(man)/ (105)


PARABHAVASUTTA. 1 9


1 7. Deity : ' We know this to be so, this is the
eighth loser ; tell us the ninth, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (IQ6)

18. Bhagavat: 'He who, not satisfied with his
own wife, is seen with harlots and the wives of
others, — that is the cause (of loss) to the losing
(man).' (io7)

1 9. Deity : ' We know this to be so, this is the
ninth loser ; tell us the tenth, O Bhagavat, what
(is) the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).' (108)

20. Bhagavat : ' The man who, past his youth,
brings home a woman with breasts like the timbaru
fruit, and for jealousy of her cannot sleep, — that is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).' (io9)

21. Deity: 'We know this to be so, this is the
tenth loser ; tell us the eleventh, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man)/ (i id)

22. Bhagavat: 'He who places in supremacy a
woman given to drink and squandering, or a man of
the same kind, — that is the cause (of loss) to the
losing (man)/ (II1)

23. Deity: 'We know this to be so, this is the
eleventh loser; tell us the twelfth, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).' (112)

24. Bhagavat : ' He who has little property, (but)
great desire, is born in a Khattiya family and wishes
for the kingdom in this world, — that is the cause (of
loss) to the losing (man)/ (IX3)

25. Having taken into consideration these losses
in the world, the wise, venerable man, who is en-
dowed with insight, cultivates the happy world (of
the gods)/ (114)

Parabhavasutta is ended.


c 2


20 URAGAVAGGA.


7. VASALASUTTA.

The Brahma^a Aggikabharadva^a is converted by Buddha, after
hearing his definition of an outcast, illustrated by the story of
Matanga, told in the M&tangag-ataka. Comp. Sp. Hardy, The
Legends and Theories of the Buddhists, p. 49. — Text and trans-
lation in Alwis's Buddhist Nirvana, p. 119.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Savatthl, in Gets.-
vana, in the park of Anathapi/^ika. Then Bhagavat
having put on his raiment in the morning, and having
taken his bowl and his robes, entered Savatthl for alms.

Now at that time in the house of the Brahma^a
Aggikabharadvafa the fire was blazing, the offering
brought forth. Then Bhagavat going for alms from
house to house in Savattht went to the house of the
Brahma^a Aggikabharadva^a. The Brahma/za Ag-
gikabharadva^a saw Bhagavat coming at a distance,
and seeing him he said this : * Stay there, O Shave-
ling; (stay) there, OSama^aka (i.e. wretched Samara);
(stay) there, O Vasalaka (i.e. outcast)!'

This having been said, Bhagavat replied to the
Brdhma^a Aggikabharadv&^a : ' Dost thou know,
O Brdhma^a, an outcast, or the things that make
an outcast V

* No, O venerable Gotama, I do not know an
outcast, or the things that make an outcast; let
the venerable Gotama teach me this so well that I
may know an outcast, or the things that make
an outcast/

1 Listen then, O Br&hma/za, attend carefully, I will
tell (thee)/

* Even so, O venerable one/ so the Brahma^a
Aggikabh&radva^a replied to Bhagavat.


VASALASUTTA. 2 1


Then Bhagavat said this :

i. 'The man who is angry and bears hatred, who
is wicked and hypocritical, who has embraced wrong
views, who is deceitful, let one know him as an
outcast. (I][5)

2. 'Whosoever in this world harms living beings,
whether once or twice born, and in whom there is
no compassion for living beings, let one know him
as an outcast. (IJ6)

3. ' Whosoever destroys or lays siege to villages
and towns, and is known as an enemy, let one know
him as an outcast. (i 1 7)

4. ' Be it in the village or in the wood, whosoever
appropriates by theft what is the property of others
and what has not been given, let one know him as
an outcast. (I][8)

5. 'Whosoever, having really contracted a debt,
runs away when called upon (to pay), saying, " There
is no debt (that I owe) thee," let one know him as
an outcast. ( 1 1 9)

6. * Whosoever for love of a trifle having killed a
man going along the road, takes the trifle, let one
know him as an outcast. (I2°)

7. ' The man who for his own sake or for that
of others or for the sake of wealth speaks falsely
when asked as a witness, let one know him as an
outcast. (I21)

8. ' Whosoever is seen with the wives of relatives
or of friends either by force or with their consent, let
one know him as an outcast. (I22)

9. ' Whosoever being rich does not support mother
or father when old and past their youth, let one know
him as an outcast. (T23)

10. 'Whosoever strikes or by words annoys mother


2 2 URAGAVAGGA.


or father, brother, sister, or mother-in-law, let one
know him as an outcast. (I24)

ii.c Whosoever, being asked about what is good,
teaches what is bad and advises (another, while) con-
cealing (something from him), let one know him as
an outcast. (I25)

12. ' Whosoever, having committed a bad deed,
hopes (saying), " Let no one know me " (as having
done it, who is) a dissembler, let one know him as
an outcast. (I26)

13. 'Whosoever, having gone to another's house
and partaken of his good food, does not in return
honour him when he comes, let one know him as an
outcast. (I27)

14. * Whosoever by falsehood deceives either a
Brahma/za or a Samara or any other mendicant, let
one know him as an outcast. (I28)

15. ' Whosoever by words annoys either a Brah-
ma^a or a Samara when meal-time has come and
does not give (him anything), let one know him as
an outcast. (I29)

16* 'Whosoever enveloped in ignorance in this
world predicts what is not (to take place), coveting
a trifle, let one know him as an outcast. (I3°)

17. 'Whosoever exalts himself and despises others,
being mean by his pride, let one know him as an
outcast. (I3I)

1 8. 'Whosoever is a provoker and is avaricious, has
sinful desires, is envious, wicked, shameless, and fear-
less of sinning, let one know him as an outcast. (132)

19. 'Whosoever reviles Buddha or his disciple,
be he a wandering mendicant (paribba^a) or a
householder (gaha^a), let one know him as an
outcast. (iSS)


VASALASUTTA. 23


20. ' Whosoever without being a saint (arahat)
pretends to be a saint, (and is) a thief in all the
worlds including that of Brahman, he is indeed the
lowest outcast ; (all) these who have been described
by me to you are indeed called outcasts. (I34)

21. 'Not by birth does one become an outcast,
not by birth does one become a Brahma^a; by
deeds one becomes an outcast, by deeds one be-
comes a Br&hma/za. (135)

22. * Know ye this in the way that this example
of mine (shows) : There was a Aa&a&la of the
Sop&ka caste, well known as M&tariga. (I36)

23. 'This Matanga reached the highest fame, such
as was very difficult to obtain, and many Khattiyas
and Br&hma^as went to serve him. (x37)

24. 'He having mounted the vehicle of the gods,
(and entered) the high road (that is) free from
dust, having abandoned sensual desires, went to
the Brahma world. (l3%)

25. 'His birth did not prevent him from being
re-born in the Brahma world ; (on the other hand)
there are Brahma/zas, born in the family of pre-
ceptors, friends of the hymns (of the Vedas), (139)

26. ' But they are continually caught in sinful deeds,
and are to be blamed in this world, while in the
coming (world) hell (awaits them); birth does not
save them from hell nor from blame. (140)

27. '(Therefore) not by birth does one become an
outcast, not by birth does one become a Brahma;za,
by deeds one becomes an outcast, by deeds one
becomes a Brahma/ea.' (I4I)

This having been said, the Brahma^a Aggikabha-
radvag*a answered Bhagavat as follows :

' Excellent, O venerable Gotama ! Excellent, O


24 URAGAVAGGA.


venerable Gotama ! As one, O venerable Gotama,
raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what
has been hidden, or tells the way to him who has
gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark
that those who have eyes may see the objects, even
so by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the
Dhamma has been illustrated ; I take refuge in the
venerable Gotama and in the Dhamma and in the
Assembly of Bhikkhus. Let the venerable Gotama
accept me as an upasaka (a follower, me) who
henceforth for all my life have taken refuge (in
him)/

Vasalasutta is ended.


8. METTASUTTA.

A peaceful mind and goodwill towards all beings are praised. — Text
by Grimblot in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (187 1), p. 250, and by
Childers in Khuddaka PaY/fca, p. 15; translation (?) by Gogerly
in the Ceylon Friend, 1839, p< 211, by Childers in Kh. Pa/^a
and by L. Feer in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (187 1), p. 328.

i. Whatever is to be done by one who is skilful
in seeking (what is) good, having attained that tran-
quil state (of NibMna): — Let him be able and upright
and conscientious and of soft speech, gentle, not
proud, (H2)

2. And contented and easily supported and having
few cares, unburdened and with his senses calmed
and wise, not arrogant, without (showing) greediness
(when going his round) in families. (x43)

3. And let him not do anything mean for which
others who are wise might reprove (him) ; may all
beings be happy and secure, may they be happy-
minded, (H4)


HEMAVATASUTTA. 25


4. Whatever living beings there are, either feeble
or strong, all either long or great, middle-sized,
short, small or large, (I45)

5. Either seen or which are not seen, and which
live far (or) near, either born or seeking birth, may
all creatures be happy-minded. (I46)

6. Let no one deceive another, let him not despise
(another) in any place, let him not out of anger or
resentment wish harm to another. (I47)

7. As a mother at the risk of her life watches
over her own child, her only child, so also let every
one cultivate a boundless (friendly) mind towards all
beings. (I48)

8. And let him cultivate goodwill towards all the
world, a boundless (friendly) mind, above and below
•and across, unobstructed, without hatred, without
enmity; (J49)

9. Standing, walking or sitting or lying, as long
as he be awake, let him devote himself to this
mind ; this (way of) living they say is the best in
this world. (^o)

10. He who, not having embraced (philosophical)
views, is virtuous, endowed with (perfect) vision,
after subduing greediness for sensual pleasures, will
never again go to a mothers womb. (I5I)

Mettasutta is ended.


9. HEMAVATASUTTA.

A dialogue between two Yakkhas on the qualities of Buddha.
They go to Buddha, and after having their questions answered
they, together with ten hundred Yakkhas, become the followers
of Buddha,

i. 'To-day is the fifteenth, a fast day; a lovely


26 URAGAVAGGA.


night has come/ — so said the Yakkha Satagira, — 'let
us (go and) see the renowned Master Gotama/ (152)

2. ' Is the mind of such a one well disposed towards
all beings?' — so said the Yakkha Hemavata, — *are
his thoughts restrained as to things wished for or
not wished for ? ' (T53)

3. 'His mind is well disposed towards all beings,
(the mind) of such a one/ — so said the Yakkha
Scitagira, — 'and his thoughts are restrained as to
things wished for or not wished for/ (r54)

4. * Does he not take what has not been given (to
him) ?' — so said the Yakkha Hemavata, — ' is he self-
controlled (in his behaviour) to living beings ? is
he far from (a state of) carelessness ? does he not
abandon meditation ? ' ( 1 5 5 )

5. 'He does not take what has not been given
(to him)/ — so said the Yakkha Satagira, — ' and he is
self-controlled (in his behaviour) to living beings,
and he is far from (a state of) carelessness ; Buddha
does not abandon meditation/ (J56)

6. 'Does he not speak falsely?' — so said the
Yakkha Hemavata, — ' is he not harsh - spoken ?
does he not utter slander ? does he not talk non-
sense?' (I57)

7. ' He does not speak falsely/ — so said the Yak-
kha Satagira, — ' he is not harsh-spoken, he does
not utter slander, with judgment he utters what
is good sense/ (l5%)

8. 'Is he not given to sensual pleasures?' — so
said the Yakkha Hemavata, — 'is his mind undis-
turbed ? has he overcome folly ? does he see
clearly in (all) things (dhammas)?' (I59)

9. 'He is not given to sensual pleasures,' — so
said the Yakkha Sat&gira, — * and his mind is undis-


HEMAVATASUTTA. 2 J


turbed ; he has overcome all folly ; Buddha sees
clearly in (all) things/ (i 60)

10. * Is he endowed with knowledge ?' — so said
the Yakkha Hemavata, — 'is his conduct pure?
have his passions been destroyed ? is there no
new birth (for him) ?' i1^1)

11. 'He is endowed with knowledge/ — so said
the Yakkha S&tagira, — ' and his conduct is pure ; all
his passions have been destroyed ; there is no new
birth for him. i1^2)

12. 'The mind of the Muni is accomplished in
deed and word; Gotama, who is accomplished
by his knowledge and conduct, let us (go and)
see. (T63)

1 3. ' Come, let us (go and) see Gotama, who has
legs like an antelope, who is thin,, who is wise, living
on little food, not covetous, the Muni who is medi-
tating in the forest {^A)

14. ' Having gone to him who is a lion amongst
those that wander alone and does not look for sen-
sual pleasures, let us ask about the (means of) deli-
verance from the snares of death. (l^5)

15. ' Let us ask Gotama, the preacher, the ex-
pounder, who has penetrated all things, Buddha
who has overcome hatred and fear/ (I66)

16. ' In what has the world originated?' — so said
the Yakkha Hemavata, — 'with what is the world
intimate ? by what is the world afflicted, after
having grasped at what?' {^l)

17. 'In six the world has originated, O Hema-
vata/— so said Bhagavat, — 'with six it is intimate,
by six the world is afflicted, after having grasped
at six/ (168)

18. Hemavata said: 'What is the grasping by


28 URAGAVAGGA.


which the world is afflicted ? Asked about salva-
tion, tell (me) how one is released from pain ?' (169)

19. Bhagavat said: ' Five pleasures of sense are
said to be in the world, with (the pleasure of) the
mind as the sixth ; having divested oneself of desire
for these, one is thus released from pain. (17°)

20. ' This salvation of the world has been told to
you truly, this I tell you : thus one is released from
pain/ (171)

21. Hemavata said: 'Who in this world crosses
the stream (of existence) ? who in this world crosses
the sea ? who does not sink into the deep, where
there is no footing and no support ? ' i1?2)

22. Bhagavat said : 'He who is always endowed
with virtue, possessed of understanding, well com-
posed, reflecting within himself, and thoughtful,
crosses the stream that is difficult to cross. (173)

23. 'He who is disgusted with sensual pleasures,
who has overcome all bonds and destroyed joy, such
a one does not sink into the deep/ (I74)

24. Hemavata said : ' He who is endowed with a
profound understanding, seeing what is subtile, pos-
sessing nothing, not clinging to sensual pleasures,
behold him who is in every respect liberated, the
great Isi, walking in the divine path* (I75)

25. 'He who has got a great name, sees what is
subtile, imparts understanding, and does not cling to
the abode of sensual pleasures, behold him, the all-
knowing, the wise, the great Isi, walking in the noble
path. (1 76)

26. 'A good sight indeed (has met) us to-day, a
good daybreak, a beautiful rising, (for) we have seen
the perfectly enlightened (sambuddham), who has
crossed the stream, and is free from passion. (177)


AZAVAKASUTTA. 29


2 7. i These ten hundred Yakkhas, possessed of
supernatural power and of fame, they all take refuge
in thee, thou art our incomparable Master. (178)

28. i We will wander about from village to vil-
lage, from mountain to mountain, worshipping the
perfectly enlightened and the perfection of the

DhammaV (J79)

Hemavatasutta is ended.


10. AZAVAKASUTTA.

The Yakkha A/avaka first threatens Buddha, then puts some
questions to him which Buddha answers, whereupon A/avaka
is converted.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at A/avf, in the
realm of the Yakkha A/avaka. Then the Yakkha
A/avaka went to the place where Bhagavat dwelt,
and having gone there he said this to Bhagavat :

' Come out, O Samara ! '

' Yes, O friend ! ' so saying Bhagavat came out.

' Enter, O Samara ! '

* Yes, O friend ! ' so saying Bhagavat entered.

A second time the Yakkha A/avaka said this to
Bhagavat : ' Come out, O Samara ! '

1 Yes, O friend ! ' so saying Bhagavat came out.
' Enter, O Samara ! '

* Yes, O friend ! J so saying Bhagavat entered.

A third time the Yakkha A/avaka said this to
Bhagavat : ' Come out, O Sama/za ! '

* Yes, O friend ! ' so saying Bhagavat came out.
1 Enter, O Samara ! '

1 Dhammassa £a sudhammatam.


30 URAGAVAGGA.


' Yes, O friend ! ' so saying Bhagavat entered.

A fourth time the Yakkha A/avaka said this to
Bhagavat : ' Come out, O Samara ! '

' I shall not come out to thee, O friend, do what
thou pleasest/

' I shall ask thee a question, O Samara, if thou
canst not answer it, I will either scatter thy thoughts
or cleave thy heart, or take thee by thy feet and
throw thee over to the other shore of the Ganga/

' I do not see, O friend, any one in this world nor
in the world of gods, Maras, Brahmans, amongst the
beings comprising gods, men, Samaras, and Brah-
ma^as, who can either scatter my thoughts or
cleave my heart, or take me by the feet and throw
me over to the other shore of the Ganga ; however,
O friend, ask what thou pleasest/

Then the Yakkha A/avaka addressed Bhagavat
in stanzas :

i. * What in this world is the best property for a
man ? what, being well done, conveys happiness ?
what is indeed the sweetest of sweet things ? how
lived do they call life the best ?' (^o)

2. Bhagavat said : ' Faith is in this world the
best property for a man ; Dhamma, well observed,
conveys happiness ; truth indeed is the sweetest of
things ; and that life they call the best which is lived
with understanding/ i1^1)

3. A/avaka said : * How does one cross the
stream (of existence) ? how does one cross the
sea ? how does one conquer pain ? how is one
purified?' (182)

4. Bhagavat said : * By faith one crosses the
stream, by zeal the sea, by exertion one conquers
pain, by understanding one is purified.' (1^3)


ALAVAKASUTTA. 3 1


5. A/avaka said : * How does one obtain under-
standing ? how does one acquire wealth ? how does
one obtain fame ? how does one bind friends (to
himself) ? how does one not grieve passing away
from this world to the other?' (184)

6. Bhagavat said : 'He who believes in the
Dhamma of the venerable ones as to the acquisi-
tion of Nibbana, will obtain understanding from his
desire to hear, being zealous and discerning. (185)

7. ' He who does what is proper, who takes the
yoke (upon him and) exerts himself, will acquire
wealth, by truth he will obtain fame, and being
charitable he will bind friends (to himself). (186)

8. ' He who is faithful and leads the life of a
householder, and possesses the following four
Dhammas (virtues), truth, justice (dhamma), firm-
ness, and liberality, — such a one indeed does not
grieve when passing away. (I87)

9. * Pray, ask also other Samaras and Brahma/zas
far and wide, whether there is found in this world
anything greater than truth, self-restraint, liberality,
and forbearance/ (x88)

10. A/avaka said : ' Why should I now ask
Samaras and Brahma/zas far and wide ? I now
know what is my future good. (!89)

11. ' For my good Buddha came to live at A/avi ;
now I know where (i. e. on whom bestowed) a gift
will bear great fruit. (J9o)

12. ' I will wander about from village to village,
from town to town, worshipping the perfectly en-
lightened (sambuddha) and the perfection of the
Dhamma/ (T9I)

A/avakasutta is ended.


32 URAGAVAGGA.


11. VI£AYASUTTA.

A reflection on the worthlessness of the human body ; a fol-
lower of Buddha only sees the body as it really is, and conse-
quently goes to NibMna. — -Comp. <2&taka I, p. 146.

i. If either walking or standing, sitting or lying,
any one contracts (or) stretches (his body, then) this
is the motion of the body. (I92)

2. The body which is put together with bones
and sinews, plastered with membrane and flesh, and
covered with skin, is not seen as it really is. (193)

3. It is filled with the intestines, the stomach, the
lump of the liver, the abdomen, the heart, the lungs,
the kidneys, the spleen. (I94)

4. With mucus, saliva, perspiration, lymph, blood,
the fluid that lubricates the joints, bile, and fat. (195)

5. Then in nine streams impurity flows always
from it ; from the eye the eye-excrement, from the
ear the ear-excrement, (T96)

6. Mucus from the nose, through the mouth it
ejects at one time bile and (at other times) it ejects
phlegm, and from (all) the body come sweat and
dirt. (197)

7. Then its hollow head is filled with the
brain. A fool led by ignorance thinks it a fine
thing. (198)

8. And when it lies dead, swollen and livid,
discarded in the cemetery, relatives do not care
(for it). (199)

9. Dogs eat it and jackals, wolves and worms;
crows and vultures eat it, and what other living
creatures there are. (200)

10. The Bhikkhu possessed of understanding in
this world, having listened to Buddha's words, he


MUNISUTTA. 33


certainly knows it (i. e. the body) thoroughly, for he
sees it as it really is. (2QI)

ii. As this (living body is) so is that (dead one),
as this is so that (will be1) ; let one put away desire
for the body, both as to its interior and as to its
exterior. (202)

1 2. Such a Bhikkhu who has turned away from de-
sire and attachment, and is possessed of understand-
ing in this world, has (already) gone to the immortal
peace, the unchangeable state of Nibbana. (203)

13. This (body) with two feet is cherished (al-
though) impure, ill-smelling, filled with various kinds
of stench, and trickling here and there. (204)

14. He who with such a body thinks to exalt
himself or despises others — what else (is this) but
blindness ? (2°5)

Vi^ayasutta is ended.


12. MUNISUTTA.

Definition of a Muni.

i, From acquaintanceship arises fear, from house-
life arises defilement; the houseless state, freedom
from acquaintanceship — this is indeed the view of
a Muni. (206)

2. Whosoever, after cutting down the (sin that has)
arisen, does not let (it again) take root and does not
give way to it while springing up towards him, him

1 YalM idaw tatha etam
Yatha etaw tatha idam.

[10] D


34 URAGAVAGGA.


the solitarily wandering they call a Muni; such a
great Isi has seen the state of peace1. (207)

3. Having considered the causes (of sin, and)
killed the seed, let him not give way to desire for
it; such a Muni who sees the end of birth and
destruction (i. e. Nibbana), after leaving reasoning
behind, does not enter the number (of living
beings) 2. (208)

4. He who has penetrated all the resting-places3
(of the mind, and) does not wish for any of them, —
such a Muni indeed, free from covetousness and free
from greediness, does not gather up (resting-places),
for he has reached the other shore. (209)

5. The man who has overcome everything, who
knows everything, who is possessed of a good
understanding, undefiled in all things (dhamma),
abandoning everything, liberated in the destruc-
tion of desire (i. e. Nibbana), him the wise style a
Muni4. (210)

6. The man who has the strength of understand-
ing, is endowed with virtue and (holy) works, is
composed, delights in meditation, is thoughtful, free
from ties, free from harshness (akhila), and free from
passion, him the wise style a Muni. (21 1)

7. The Muni that wanders solitarily, the zealous,

1 Yo g-atam ukkhigga. na ropayeyya
(■rayantaztt assa nanuppave^Ae
Tarn aim ekaw muninaw iarantaw,
Addakkhi so santipada#z mahesi.

2 SaztfkMya vatthuni pamaya big&m
Sineham assa nanuppave^^e,

3a ve muni ^atikhayantadassi
Takkaw pahaya na upeti sawkhaw.

3 Nivesanani. Comp, Du//#aka, v. 6.

4 Comp. Dhp. v. 353.


MUNISUTTA. 35


that is not shaken by blame and praise, like a lion
not trembling at noises, like the wind not caught in a
net, like a lotus not soiled by water, leading others,
not led by others, him the wise style a Muni. (212)

8. Whosoever becomes firm as the post in a
bathing-place, in whom others acknowledge pro-
priety of speech, who is free from passion, and
(endowed) with well-composed senses, such a one
the wise style a Muni. (2I3)

9. Whosoever is firm, like a straight shuttle, and
is disgusted with evil actions, reflecting on what is
just and unjust, him the wise style a Muni. (2I4)

10. Whosoever is self-restrained and does not do
evil, is a young or middle-aged Muni, self-subdued,
one that should not be provoked (as) he does not
provoke any, him the wise style a Muni. (2 1 5)

11. Whosoever, living upon what is given by
others, receives a lump of rice from the top, from
the middle or from the rest (of the vessel, and) does
not praise (the giver) nor speak harsh words, him
the wise style a Muni. (2I6)

12. The Muni that wanders about abstaining from
sexual intercourse, who in his youth is not fettered
in any case, is abstaining from the insanity of pride,
liberated, him the wise style a Muni. (2I7)

13. The man who, having penetrated the world,
sees the highest truth, such a one, after crossing the
stream and sea (of existence), who has cut off all
ties, is independent, free from passion, him indeed
the wise style a Muni. (2J[8)

14. Two whose mode of life and occupation are
quite different, are not equal : a householder main-
taining a wife, and an unselfish virtuous man. A
householder (is intent) upon the destruction of

d 2


36 URAGAVAGGA.


other living creatures, being unrestrained ; but a
Muni always protects living creatures, being re-
strained. (2I9)
15. As the crested bird with the blue neck (the
peacock) never attains the swiftness of the swan,
even so a householder does not equal a Bhikkhu,
a secluded Muni meditating in the wood, (220)


Munisutta is ended.
Uragavagga is ended.


II. ^ULAVAGGA.


1. RATANASUTTA.

For all beings salvation is only to be found in Buddha, Dhamma,
and Sangha. — Text and translation in Childers' Khuddaka
Pd/^a, p. 6.

i. Whatever spirits have come together here, either
belonging to the earth or living in the air, let all
spirits be happy, and then listen attentively to what
is said. (22T)

2. Therefore, O spirits, do ye all pay attention,
show kindness to the human race who both day and
night bring their offerings; therefore protect them
strenuously. (222)

3. Whatever wealth there be here or in the other
world, or whatever excellent jewel in the heavens, it
is certainly not equal to Tathagata. This excellent
jewel (is found) in Buddha, by this truth may there
be salvation. (223)

4. The destruction (of passion), the freedom from
passion, the excellent immortality which Sakyamuni
attained (being) composed, — there is nothing equal
to that Dhamma. This excellent jewel (is found) in
the Dhamma, by this truth may there be salva-
tion. (224)

5. The purity which the best of Buddhas praised,
the meditation which they call uninterrupted, there
is no meditation like this. This excellent jewel (is


38 ^{JLAVAGGA.


found) in the Dhamma, by this truth may there be
salvation. (225)

6. The eight persons that are praised by the
righteous1, and make these four pairs, they are
worthy of offerings, (being) Sugata's disciples ; what
is given to these will bear great fruit This ex-
cellent jewel (is found) in the Assembly (sangha),
by this truth may there be salvation. (226)

7. Those who have applied themselves studiously
with a firm mind and free from desire to the com-
mandments of Gotama, have obtained the highest
gain, having merged into immortality, and enjoying
happiness after getting it for nothing. This excel-
lent jewel (is found) in the Assembly, by this truth
may there be salvation. (227)

8. As a post in the front of a city gate is firm in
the earth and cannot be shaken by the four winds, like
that I declare the righteous man to be who, having
penetrated the noble truths, sees (them clearly).
This excellent jewel (is found) in the Assembly, by
this truth may there be salvation. (228)

9. Those who understand the noble truths well
taught by the profoundly wise (i.e. Buddha), though
they be greatly distracted, will not (have to) take the
eighth birth. This excellent jewel (is found) in the
Assembly, by this truth may there be salvation. (229)

10. On his (attaining the) bliss of (the right) view
three things (dhammas) are left behind (by him) :
conceit and doubt and whatever he has got of virtue
and (holy) works. He is released also from the four
hells, and he is incapable of committing the six

1 The Commentator: satam pasattha ti sappurisehi buddha-
pa^ekabuddhasavakehi aiwiehi ka. devamanussehi pasattM.


RATANASUTTA. 39


deadly sins. This excellent jewel (is found) in the
Assembly, by this truth may there be salvation. (230)

1 1. Even if he commit a sinful deed by his body,
or in word or in thought, he is incapable of conceal-
ing it, (for) to conceal is said to be impossible for
one that has seen the state (of Nibbana). This
excellent jewel (is found) in the Assembly, by this
truth may there be salvation. (23I)

12. As in a clump of trees with their tops in
bloom in the first heat of the hot month, so (Buddha)
taught the excellent Dhamma leading to NibMna to
the greatest benefit (for all). This excellent jewel (is
found) in Buddha, by this truth may there be salva-
tion. (232)

13. The excellent one who knows what is excel-
lent, who gives what is excellent, and who brings
what is excellent, the incomparable one taught the
excellent Dhamma. This excellent jewel (is found) in
Buddha, by this truth may there be salvation. (233)

14. The old is destroyed, the new has not arisen,
those whose minds are disgusted with a future exist-
ence, the wise who have destroyed their seeds (of
existence, and) whose desires do not increase, go out
like this lamp. This excellent jewel (is found) in the
Assembly, by this truth may there be salvation. (234)

15. Whatever spirits have come together here,
either belonging to the earth or living in the air, let
us worship the perfect (tathagata) Buddha, revered by
gods and men ; may there be salvation. (235)

16. Whatever spirits have come together here,
either belonging to the earth or living in the air, let
us worship the perfect (tathagata) Dhamma, revered
by gods and men ; may there be salvation. (236)

17. Whatever spirits have come together here,


40 tfdLAVAGGA.


either belonging to the earth or living in the air, let
us worship the perfect (tathagata) Sangria, revered
by gods and men ; may there be salvation. (237)

Ratanasutta is ended.


2. AMAGANDHASUTTA.

A bad mind and wicked deeds are what defiles a man ; no outward
observances can purify him. Comp. Gospel of S. Matthew
xv. 10.

i. Amagandhabrahma/za : 'Those who eat Sci-
maka, /£ing&laka, and >£inaka, pattaphala, miilaphala,
and gaviphala (different sorts of grass, leaves, roots,
&c), justly obtained of the just, do not speak false-
hood,(nor are they) desirous of sensual pleasures. (238)

2. 'He who eats what has been well prepared, well
dressed, what is pure and excellent, given by others,
he who enjoys food made of rice, eats, O Kassapa,
Amagandha (what defiles one). (239)

3. ' (The charge of) Amagandha does not apply to
me,' so thou sayest, ' O Brahman (brahmabandhu,
although) enjoying food (made) of rice together
with the well-prepared flesh of birds. I ask thee,
O Kassapa, the meaning of this, of what description
(is then) thy Amagandha ?' (240)

4. Kassapabuddha : ' Destroying living beings,
killing, cutting, binding, stealing, speaking falsehood,
fraud and deception, worthless reading x, intercourse
with another's wife ; — this is Amagandha, but not
the eating of flesh. (24x)

1 AggAQn&kuggan ti niratthakanattha^anakaganthapariyapu-
«anaw. Commentator.


AMAGANDHASUTTA. 4 1

5. * Those persons who in this world are unre-
strained in (enjoying) sensual pleasures, greedy of
sweet things, associated with what is impure, sceptics
(natthikadi//^i), unjust, difficult to follow; — this is
Amagandha, but not the eating of flesh. (242)

6. * Those who are rough, harsh, backbiting, trea-
cherous, merciless, arrogant, and (who being) illiberal
do not give anything to any one; — this is Ama-
gandha, but not the eating of flesh. (243)

7. ' Anger, intoxication, obstinacy, bigotry, deceit,
envy, grandiloquence, pride and conceit, intimacy
with the unjust; — this is Amagandha, but not the
eating of flesh. (244)

8. 'Those who in this world are wicked, and such as
do not pay their debts, are slanderers, false in their
dealings, counterfeiters, those who in this world
being the lowest of men commit sin ; — this is Ama-
gandha, but not the eating of flesh. (245)

9. ' Those persons who in this world are unre-
strained (in their behaviour) towards living creatures,
who are bent upon injuring after taking others'
(goods), wicked, cruel, harsh, disrespectful ; — this is
Amagandha, but not the eating of flesh. (246)

10. ' Those creatures who are greedy of these
(living beings, who are) hostile, offending ; always
bent upon (evil) and therefore, when dead, go to
darkness and fall with their heads downwards into
hell ; — this is Amagandha, but not the eating of
flesh. (247)

11. 'Neither the flesh of fish, nor fasting, nor
nakedness, nor tonsure, nor matted hair, nor dirt,
nor rough skins, nor the worshipping of the fire, nor
the many immortal penances in the world, nor hymns,
nor oblations, nor sacrifice, nor observance of the


42 idjLAVAGGA.


seasons, purify a mortal who has not conquered his
doubt1. (248)

1 2. * The wise man wanders about with his organs
of sense guarded, and his senses conquered, standing
firm in the Dhamma, delighting in what is right and
mild; having overcome all ties and left behind all pain,
he does not cling to what is seen and heard/ (249)

13. Thus Bhagavat preached this subject again
and again, (and the Brihma^a) who was accomplished
in the hymns (of the Vedas) understood it ; the Muni
who is free from defilement, independent, and difficult
to follow, made it clear in various stanzas. (25o)

14. Having heard Buddha's well-spoken words,
which are free from defilement and send away all
pain, he worshipped Tathdgata's (feet) in humility,
and took orders at once. (25x)

Amagandhasutta is ended.


3. HIRISUTTA.

On true friendship.

i. He who transgresses and despises modesty,

who says, ' I am a friend/ but does not undertake

any work that can be done, know (about) him : ' he

is not my (friend)/ (252)

2. Whosoever uses pleasing words to friends with-
out effect2, him the wise know as one that (only) talks,
but does not do anything. (253)

3. He is not a friend who always eagerly suspects
a breach and looks out for faults ; but he with whom
he dwells as a son at the breast (of his mother),

1 Comp. Dhp. v. 141.

2 Ananvayan ti yaw atthaw dassami karissamiti bMsati tena
ananugataw. Commentator.


MAHAMANGALASUTTA.


he is indeed a friend that cannot be severed (from
him) by others. (254)

4. He who hopes for fruit, cultivates the energy
that produces joy and the pleasure that brings praise,
(while) carrying the human yoke1. (255)

5. Having tasted the sweetness of seclusion and
tranquillity one becomes free from fear and free from
sin, drinking in the sweetness of the Dhamma2. (256)

Hirisutta is ended.


4. MAHAMANGALASUTTA.

Buddha defines the highest blessing to a deity. — Text by Grimblot
in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (1871), p. 229, and by Childers in
Kh. PaVyfca, p. 4 ; translation by Gogerly in the Ceylon Friend,
1839, P- 2°8; by Childers in Kh. PaV^a, p. 4; and by L. Feer
in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (187 1), p. 296.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sdvatthl, in Geta-
vana, in the park of Anithapi^ika. Then, when
the night had gone, a deity of beautiful appearance,
having illuminated the whole £etavana, approached
Bhagavat, and having approached and saluted him,
he stood apart, and standing apart that deity ad-
dressed Bhagavat in a stanza :

1 . * Many gods and men have devised blessings,
longing for happiness, tell thou (me) the highest
blessing/ (257)

2. Buddha said : ' Not cultivating (the society of)

1 Pamugg-akara^aw thaxi&m
Pasa/flsavahana#z sukhaztf
Phalanisazraso* bhaveti
Vahanto porisazrc dhurazrc.

2 Comp. Dhp. v. 205.

* Phalam pa/ikankham&no phal&nisamso. Commentator.


44 iOJLAVAGGA.


fools, but cultivating (the society of) wise men, wor-
shipping those that are to be worshipped, this is the
highest blessing. (258)

3. * To live in a suitable country, to have done
good deeds in a former (existence), and a thorough
study of one's self, this is the highest blessing. (259)

4/ Great learning and skill, well-learnt discipline, and
well-spoken words, this is the highest blessing. (260)

5. ' Waiting on mother and father, protecting child
and wife, and a quiet calling, this is the highest
blessing. (26i)

6. ' Giving alms, living religiously, protecting
relatives, blameless deeds, this is the highest bless-
ing. (262)

7. ' Ceasing and abstaining from sin, refraining
from intoxicating drink, perseverance in the Dham-
mas, this is the highest blessing. (263)

8. ' Reverence and humility, contentment and gra-
titude, the hearing of the Dhamma at due seasons,
this is the highest blessing. (264)

9. ' Patience and pleasant speech, intercourse with
Samaras, religious conversation at due seasons, this
is the highest blessing. (265)

10. * Penance and chastity, discernment of the
noble truths, and the realisation of Nibbana, this is
the highest blessing. (266)

11. ' He whose mind is not shaken (when he is)
touched by the things of the world (lokadhamma),
(but remains) free from sorrow, free from defilement,
and secure, this is the highest blessing. (267)

12. 'Those who, having done such (things), are
undefeated in every respect, walk in safety every-
where, theirs is the highest blessing/ (268)

MaMmangala is ended.


SU31L0MASUTTA. 45


5. sCatilomasutta.

The Yakkha Su&loma threatens to harm Buddha, if he cannot
answer his questions. Buddha answers that all passions pro-
ceed from the body.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Gaya (seated) on
a stone seat in the realm of the Yakkha Su^iloma.
And at that time the Yakkha Khara and the Yakkha
Sti/£iloma passed by, not far from Bhagavat. And
then the Yakkha Khara said this to the Yakkha
Stl/£iloma : ' Is this man a Samara ?'

SMiloma answered : ( He is no Samara, he is a
Sama^aka (a wretched Samara) ; however I will
ascertain whether he is a Samara or a Sama/eaka/

Then the Yakkha S&£iloma went up to Bhagavat,
and having gone up to him, he brushed against
Bhagavat's body. Then Bhagavat took away his
body. Then the Yakkha S&£iloma said this to
Bhagavat : ' O Samara, art thou afraid of me ?'

Bhagavat answered : 'No, friend, I am not afraid
of thee, but thy touching me is sinful/

S&£iloma said : 1 1 will ask thee a question, O
Samara ; if thou canst not answer it I will either
scatter thy thoughts or cleave thy heart, or take thee
by the feet and throw thee over to the other shore
of the GangS,.'

Bhagavat answered : ' I do not see, O friend,
neither in this world together with the world of the
Devas, Maras, Brahmans, nor amongst the genera-
tion of Samara and Brdhma^as, gods and men, the
one who can either scatter my thoughts or cleave
my heart, or take me by the feet and throw me over


46 tfULAVAGGA.


to the other shore of the Ganga. However ask, O
friend, what thou pleasest.' Then the Yakkha
Sti/£iloma addressed Bhagavat in a stanza :

i. ' What origin have passion and hatred, dis-
gust, delight, and horror ? wherefrom do they arise ?
whence arising do doubts vex the mind, as boys vex
a crow ?' (269)

2. Buddha said : * Passion and hatred have their
origin from this (body), disgust, delight, and horror
arise from this body ; arising from this (body) doubts
vex the mind, as boys vex a crow. (27°)

3. ' They originate in desire, they arise in self,
like the shoots of the banyan tree; far and wide
they are connected with sensual pleasures, like the
maluva creeper spread in the wood. (27l)

4. ' Those who know whence it (sin) arises, drive
it away. Listen, O Yakkha ! They cross over
this stream that is difficult to cross, and has not
been crossed before, with a view to not being born
again/ (272)


Sftiilomasutta is ended.


6. DHAMMA^ARIYASUTTA or KAPILA-
SUTTA.

The Bhikkhus are admonished to rid themselves of sinful persons,
and advised to lead a pure life.

i. A just life, a religious life, this they call the
best gem, if any one has gone forth from house-life
to a houseless life. (273)

2. But if he be harsh-spoken, and like a beast
delighting in injuring (others), then the life of such
a one is very wicked, and he increases his own
pollution. (274)


BRAHMAiVADHAMMIKASUTTA. 47

3. A Bhikkhu who delights in quarrelling and is
shrouded in folly, does not understand the Dhamma
that is preached and taught by Buddha. (275)

4. Injuring his own cultivated mind, and led by
ignorance, he does not understand that sin is the
way leading to hell. (276)

5. Having gone to calamity, from womb to womb,
from darkness to darkness, such a Bhikkhu verily,
after passing away, goes to pain. (277)

6. As when there is a pit of excrement (that has be-
come) full during a number of years, — he who should
be such a one full of sin is difficult to purify. (278)

7. Whom you know to be such a one, O Bhikkhus,
(a man) dependent on a house, having sinful desires,
sinful thoughts, and being with sinful deeds and
objects, (279)

8. Him do avoid, being all in concord ; blow him
away as sweepings, put him away as rubbish. (280)

9. Then remove as chaff those that are no Sama-
ras, (but only) think themselves, blowing away those
that have sinful desires and those with sinful deeds
and objects. (28i)

10. Be pure and live together with the pure,
being thoughtful ; then agreeing (and) wise you will
put an end to pain. (282)

Dhamma^ariyasutta is ended.


7. BRAHMAiVADHAMMIKASUTTA.

Wealthy Br&hma^as come to Buddha, asking about the customs of
the ancient Brahma«as. Buddha describes their mode of life
and the change wrought in them by seeing the king's riches, and
furthermore, how they induced the king to commit the sin of


48 ^Olavagga.


having living creatures slain at sacrifices. On hearing Buddha's
enlightened discourse the wealthy Brdhma^as are converted.
Compare Sp. Hardy's Legends, p. 46,

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Savatthl, in Creta-
vana, in the park of Anathapi/zafika. Then many
wealthy Br&hma/zas of Kosala, decrepit, elderly, old,
advanced in age, or arrived at extreme old age, went
to Bhagavat, and having gone to him they talked
pleasantly with him, and after having had some
pleasant and remarkable talk with him, they sat
down apart. Sitting down apart thes.e wealthy
Brahma^as said this to Bhagavat : ' O venerable
Gotama, are the Brahma/zas now-a-days seen (en-
gaged) in the Brahmanical customs (dhamma) of
the ancient Brahma^as ?'

Bhagavat answered : ' The Brahma/zas now-a-days,
O Br&hma/zas, are not seen (engaged) in the Brah-
manical customs of the ancient Br&hma/zas/

The Br^hma^as said : * Let the venerable Gotama
tell us the Brahmanical customs of the ancient Br&h-
ma^as, if it is not inconvenient to the venerable
Gotama/

Bhagavat answered : ' Then listen, O Brdhma^as,
pay great attention, I will speak/

' Yes/ so saying the wealthy Brahma^as listened
to Bhagavat. Bhagavat said this :

1. The old sages (isayo) were self-restrained, peni-
tent; having abandoned the objects of the five
senses, they studied their own welfare. (283)

2. There were no cattle for the Brahma/zas, nor
gold, nor corn, (but) the riches and corn of medita-
tion were for them, and they kept watch over the
best treasure. (284)


BRAHMAiVADHAMMIKASUTTA. 49

3. What was prepared for them and placed as food
at the door, they thought was to be given to those that
seek for what has been prepared by faith. (285)

4. With garments variously coloured, with beds
and abodes, prosperous people from the provinces
and the whole country worshipped those Brah-
ma^as. (286)

5. Inviolable were the Brahma/zas, invincible, pro-
tected by the Dhamma, no one opposed them (while
standing) at the doors of the houses anywhere. (287)

6. For forty-eight years they practised juvenile
chastity, the Brahma^as formerly went in search of
science and exemplary conduct. (288)

7. The Brahma^as did not marry (a woman be-
longing to) another (caste), nor did they buy a wife ;
they chose living together in mutual love after
having come together. (289)

8. Excepting from the time about the cessation of
the menstruation else the Br&hma/zas did not indulge
in sexual intercourse1. (29°)

9. They praised chastity and virtue, rectitude,
mildness, penance, tenderness, compassion, and pa-
tience. (29l)

10. He who was the best of them, a strong Br&h-
ma?za, did not (even) in sleep indulge in sexual
intercourse. (292)

11. Imitating his practices some wise men in this
world praised chastity and patience. (293)

1 2. Having asked for rice, beds, garments, butter,
and oil, and gathered them justly, they made sacri-

1 Aimatra tamhd samaysi
Utuveramawim pati
Antari methunaz# dhammam
N&su ga^Manti brahma«a\
[10] E


50 .r&LAVAGGA.


fices out of them, and when the sacrifice came on,
they did not kill cows. (294)

13. Like unto a mother, a father, a brother, and
other relatives the cows are our best friends, in
which medicines are produced. (295)

14. They give food, and they give strength, they
likewise give (a good) complexion and happiness ;
knowing the real state of this, they did not kill
cows. (296)

15. They were graceful, large, handsome, re-
nowned, Brahma/zas by nature, zealous for their
several works ; as long as they lived in the world,
this race prospered. (297)

16. But there was a change in them: after gra-
dually seeing the king's prosperity and adorned
women, (298)

17. Well-made chariots drawn by noble horses,
carpets in variegated colours, palaces and houses,
divided into compartments and measured out, (299)

18. The great human wealth, attended with a
number of cows, and combined with a flock of beau-
tiful women, the BrAhma^as became covetous. (300)

19. They then, in this matter, having composed
hymns, went to Okk&ka, and said : ' Thou hast much
wealth and corn, sacrifice thy great property, sacrifice
thy great wealth/ (3QI)

20. And then the king, the lord of chariots, in-
structed by the Br&hma^as, brought about assa-
medha, purisamedha, sammapisa, and va^apeyya
without any hinderance, and having offered these
sacrifices he gave the Brihma^as wealth : (302)

21. Cows, beds, garments, and adorned women,
and well-made chariots, drawn by noble horses,
carpets in variegated colours, (303)


BRAHMA2VADHAMMIKASUTTA. 5 l

22. Beautiful palaces, well divided into compart-
ments ; and having filled these with different (sorts of)
corn, he gave this wealth to the Brahma^as. (304)

23. And they having thus received wealth wished
for a store, and the desire of those who had given
way to (their) wishes increased still more ; they then,
in this matter, having composed hymns, went again
to Okk&ka, and said : (3°5)

24. * As water, earth, gold, wealth, and corn, even
so are there cows for men, for this is a requisite for
living beings ; sacrifice thy great property, sacrifice
thy wealth/ (306)

25. And then the king, the lord of chariots, in-
structed by the Brihma^as, caused many hundred
thousand cows to be slain in offerings. (30 7)

26. The cows, that are like goats, do not hurt
any one with their feet or with either of their horns,
they are tender, and yield vessels (of milk),— seizing
them by the horns the king caused them to be slain
with a weapon. (3°8)

27. Then the gods, the forefathers, Inda, the
Asuras, and the Rakkhasas cried out : ' This is
injustice/ because of the weapon falling on the
cows. (309)

28. There were formerly three diseases: desire,
hunger, and _decayr J)ut from the slaying of cattle
there came ninety-eight (3IQ)

29. This injustice of (using) violence that has
come down (to us), was old ; innocent (cows) are
slain, the sacrificing (priests) have fallen off from
the Dhamma. (311)

30. So this old and mean Dhamma is blamed by
the wise ; where people see such a one, they blame
the sacrificing priest. (312)

e 2


52 idjLAVAGGA.


31. So Dhamma being lost, the Suddas and the
Vessikas disagreed, the Khattiyas disagreed in mani-
fold ways, the wife despised her husband. (3 1 3)

32. The Khattiyas and the Brahma^as and those
others who had been protected by their castes, after
doing away with their disputes on descent, fell into
the power of sensual pleasures. (3I4)

This having been said, those wealthy Brahma^as
said to Bhagavat as follows :

* It is excellent, O venerable Gotama! It is excel-
lent, O venerable Gotama ! As one raises what has
been overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden,
or tells the way to him who has gone astray, or
holds out an oil lamp in the dark that those who
have eyes may see the objects, even so by the
venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma
has been illustrated ; we take refuge in the vener-
able Gotama, in the Dhamma, and in the Assembly
of Bhikkhus ; may the venerable Gotama receive us
as followers (up&saka), who from this day for life
have taken refuge (in him)/

Br&hma/zadhammikasutta is ended.


8. nAvAsutta.

On choosing a good and learned teacher.

1. A man should worship him from whom he
learns the Dhamma, as the gods (worship) Inda;
the learned man being worshipped and pleased with
him, makes the (highest) Dhamma manifest. (315)

2. Having heard and considered that (Dhamma),
the wise man practising the Dhamma that is in


NAVASUTTA. 53


accordance with the (highest) Dhamma, becomes
learned, expert, and skilful, strenuously associating
with such a (learned teacher). (3X6)

3. He who serves a low (teacher), a fool who has
not understood the meaning, and who is envious,
goes to death, not having overcome doubt, and not
having understood the Dhamma. (31?)

4. As a man, after descending into a river, a
turgid water with a rapid current, is borne along
following the current, — how will he be able to put
others across? (3*8)

5. Even so how will a man, not having under-
stood the Dhamma, and not attending to the ex-
planation of the learned and not knowing it himself,
not having overcome doubt, be able to make others
understands? (3*9)

6. As one, having gone on board a strong ship,
provided with oars and rudder, carries across in it
many others, knowing the way to do it, and being
expert and thoughtful, (32°)

7. So also he who is accomplished, of a cultivated
mind, learned, intrepid, makes others endowed with
attention and assiduity understand it, knowing (it
himself), (321)

8. Therefore indeed one should cultivate (the
society of) a good man, who is intelligent and
learned ; he who leads a regular life, having under-
stood what is good and penetrated the Dhamma,
will obtain happiness. (322)


Nivasutta is ended.


54 jrfjLAVAGGA.


9. KU/StLASUTTA.

How to obtain the highest good.

i. By what virtue, by what conduct, and perform-
ing what works, will a man be perfectly established
(in the commandments) and obtain the highest
good? (323)

2. Let him honour old people, not be envious,
let him know the (right) time for seeing his teachers,
let him know the (right) moment for listening to their
religious discourses, let him assiduously hearken to
their well-spoken (words). (324)

3. Let him in due time go to the presence of his
teachers, let him be humble after casting away ob-
stinacy, let him remember and practise what is good,
the Dhamma, self-restraint, and chastity. (325)

4. Let his pleasure be the Dhamma, let him de-
light in the Dhamma, let him stand fast in the
Dhamma, let him know how to enquire into the
Dhamma, let him not raise any dispute that pol-
lutes the Dhamma, and let him spend his time
in (speaking) well-spoken truths \ (326)

5* Having abandoned ridiculous talk, lamentation,
corruption, deceit, hypocrisy, greediness and haughti-
ness, clamour and harshness, depravity and foolish-
ness, let him live free from infatuation, with a steady
mind. (327)

6. The words, the essence of which is under-
stood, are well spoken, and what is heard, if under-
stood, contains the essence of meditation ; but the
understanding and learning of the man who is hasty
and careless, does not increase. (32^)


1 Comp. Dhp. v. 364.


RAHULASUTTA. 55


7. Those who delight in the Dhamma, proclaimed
by the venerable ones, are unsurpassed in speech,
mind and work, they are established in peace, ten-
derness and meditation, and have gone to the essence
of learning and understanding. (329)

Ki^silasutta is ended.


10. UZ7^ANASUTTA.

Advice not to be lukewarm and slothful.

1. Rise, sit up, what is the use of your sleeping ; to
those who are sick, pierced by the arrow (of pain),
and suffering, what sleep is there ? (330)

2. Rise, sit up, learn steadfastly for the sake of
peace, let not the king of death, knowing you to
be indolent (pamatta), befool you and lead you into
his power. (33 1)

3. Conquer this desire which gods and men stand
wishing for and are dependent upon, let not the
(right) moment pass by you ; for those who have
let the (right) moment pass, will grieve when they
have been consigned to hell. (332)

4. Indolence (pamada) is defilement, continued
indolence is defilement ; by earnestness (appam&da)
and knowledge let one pull out his arrow. (333)

TJV/Mnasutta is ended.


11. RAHULASUTTA.

Buddha recommends the life of a recluse to R&hula, and admonishes
him to turn his mind away from the world and to be moderate.

1. Bhagavat said: * Dost thou not despise the
wise man, from living with him constantly ? Is he


56 JrtiLAVAGGA.


who holds up a torch to mankind honoured by
thee?' (334)

2. Ri,hula : ' I do not despise the wise man, from
living with him constantly ; he who holds up a torch
to mankind is always honoured by me/ (335)

Vatthug&thl

3. Bhagavat : * Having abandoned the objects of
the five senses, the beautiful, the charming, and
gone out from thy house with faith, do thou put
an end to pain. (336)

4. ' Cultivate (the society of) virtuous friends and
a distant dwelling-place, secluded and quiet; be
moderate in food1. (337)

5. ' Robes, alms (in bowl), requisites (for the
sick), a dwelling-place, — do not thirst after these
(things), that thou may est not go back to the world
again. ^ (338)

6. ' Be subdued according to the precepts, and as
to the five senses, be attentive as regards thy body,
and be full of disgust (with the world). (339)

7. ' Avoid signs, what is pleasant and is accom-
panied with passion, turn thy mind undisturbed and
well composed to what is not pleasant. (340)

8. ' Cherish what is signless, leave the inclina-
tions for pride ; then by destroying pride thou
shalt wander calm/ (34 1)

So Bhagavat repeatedly admonished the venera-
ble R&hula with these stanzas.

Rahulasutta is ended.

1 Mitte bhagussu kalyawe
Pantail £a sayan&sanazrc
Vivittaoz appanigghosaztf,
Mattawnu hohi bhq^ane.
Comp. Dhp. v. 185 and v. 375.


VANGfSASUTTA. 57


12. VANGfSASUTTA.

Vangfsa desires to know the fate of Nigrodhakappa, whether he
has been completely extinguished, or whether he is still with
some elements of existence left behind. He is answered by
Buddha.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at A/avt, in the
temple of Aggd/ava. At that time the teacher of
the venerable Vanglsa, the Thera, by name Nigro-
dhakappa, had attained bliss not long before (a^ira-
parinibbuta). Then this reflection occurred to the
venerable Vangfsa, while retired and meditating :

Whether my teacher be blessed (parinibbuta) or
whether he be not blessed. Then the venerable
Vanglsa, at the evening time, coming forth from his
retirement went to Bhagavat, and having gone to
him he sat down apart after saluting him, and sit-
ting down apart the venerable Vahgtsa said this
to Bhagavat :

' Lord, while retired and meditating, this reflec-
tion occurred to me here : Whether my teacher be
blessed or whether he be not blessed/

Then the venerable Vanglsa, rising from his seat,
throwing his robe over one shoulder and bending
his joined hands towards Bhagavat, addressed him
in stanzas :

i. 'We ask the Master of excellent understand-
ing : he who in this world had cut off doubt, died
at Aggci/ava, a Bhikkhu, well known, famous, and
of a calm mind. (342)

2. 'The name " Nigrodhakappa" was given to
that Br&hma^a by thee, O Bhagavat ; he wandered


58 jrflLAVAGGA.


about worshipping thee, having liberation in view,
strong, and seeing Nibbana. (343)

3. ' O Sakka, thou all-seeing, we all wish to learn
(something about) this disciple ; our ears are ready
to hear, thou art our Master, thou art incom-
parable. (344)

4. ' Cut off our doubt, tell me of him, inform us
of the blessed, O thou of great understanding ; speak
in the midst of us, O thou all-seeing, as the thousand-
eyed Sakka (speaks in the midst) of the gods. (345)

5. 'Whatever ties there are in this world (con-
stituting) the way to folly, combined with ignorance,
forming the seat of doubt, they do not exist before
Tath&gata, for he is the best eye of men. (346)

6. ' If a man does not for ever dispel the sin as
the wind (dispels) a mass of clouds, all the world
will be enveloped in darkness, not even illustrious
men will shine. (347)

7. * Wise men are light-bringers, therefore, O wise
man, I consider thee as such a one ; we have come
to him who beholds meditation, reveal Kappa to us
in the assembly. (348)

8. ' Uplift quickly, O thou beautiful one, thy
beautiful voice, like the swans drawing up (their
necks), sing softly with a rich and well-modulated
voice; we will all listen to thee attentively. (349)

9. ' Having earnestly called upon him who has
completely left birth and death behind and shaken
off (sin), I will make him proclaim the Dhamma, for
ordinary people cannot do what they want, but the
Tathagatas act with a purpose1. (35°)

1 Pahinagatimaratfaztf asesaw
Niggayha dhonaw vadessami dhammaw,
Na Mmakaro hi puthu^ananaw
Sawkheyyak&ro £a tathagat&naw.


VANGISASUTTA. 59


10. ' This full explanation by thee, the perfectly
wise, is accepted, this last clasping of the hands is
well bent, O thou of high wisdom, knowing (Kappa's
transmigration), do not delude us1. (35 1)

11. 'Having perfectly2 comprehended the Dham-
ma of the venerable ones, do not delude (us), O thou
of unsurpassed strength, knowing (everything) ; as
one in the hot season pained by the heat (longs for)
water, so I long for thy words ; send a shower of
learning. (352)

12. ' The rich religious life which Kappiyana led,
has not that been in vain (to him), has he been
(completely) extinguished, or is he still with some
elements of existence (left behind) ? How he was
liberated, that we want to hear/ (353)

1 3. Bhagavat : ' He cut off the desire for name and
form in this world/ — so said Bhagavat, — ' Kaphas
(i. e. M&ra's) stream, adhered to for a long time,
he crossed completely birth and death/ so said
Bhagavat, the best of the five (Brahma/zas, pa££a-
vaggiyd). (354)

14. Vangisa : ' Having heard thy word, O thou
the best of the I sis, I am pleased ; not in vain have
I asked, the Brahma^a did not deceive me. (355)

15. 'As he talked so he acted, he was a (true)
disciple of Buddha, he cut asunder the outspread
strong net of deceitful death. (356)

1 6. ' Kappiya (Kapp&yana) saw, O Bhagavat, the be-

1 Sampannaveyyakaranaw tava-y-idaw
Samu^g-upamkssa samuggahitaw,
Ayam awg-ali pa^imo suppanamito,
M& mohayi ^dnam anomapa^a.
2 Parovaran ti lokuttaralokiyavasena sundar&sundaraw dure
santikaw va. Commentator.


60 ittjLAVAGGA.


ginning of attachment, Kapp&yana verily crossed the
realm of death, which is very difficult to cross/ (357)

Vangisasutta is ended.


13. sammAparibbAsaniyasutta.

The right path for a Bhikkhu.

i. ' We will ask the Muni of great understanding,
who has crossed, gone to the other shore, is blessed
(parinibbuta), and of a firm mind : How does a
Bhikkhu wander rightly in the world, after having
gone out from his house and driven away de-
sire ?' (358)

2. ' He whose (ideas of) omens, meteors, dreams
and signs are destroyed/ — so said Bhagavat, — ' such
a Bhikkhu who has abandoned the sinful omens,
wanders rightly in the world. (359)

3. ' Let the Bhikkhu subdue his passion for human
and divine pleasures, then after conquering exist-
ence and understanding the Dhamma, such a one
will wander rightly in the world. (360)

4. ' Let the Bhikkhu, after casting behind him
slander and anger, abandon avarice and be free
from compliance and opposition, then such a one
will wander rightly in the world. (361)

5. * He who having left behind both what is
agreeable and what is disagreeable, not seizing
upon anything, is independent in every respect and
liberated from bonds, such a one will wander rightly
in the world. (362)

6. ' He does not see any essence in the Upadhis,
having subdued his wish and passion for attachments,


SAMMAPARIBBAGANIYASUTTA. 6 1

he is independent and not to be led by others, such
a one will wander rightly in the world1. (363)

7. ' He who is not opposed (to any one) in word,
thought or deed, who, after having understood the
Dhamma perfectly, longs for the state of Nibbana,
such a one will wander rightly in the world. (364)

8. * He who thinking "he salutes me" is not
elated, the Bhikkhu who, although abused, does not
reflect (upon it, and) having received food from
others does not get intoxicated (with pride), such
a one will wander rightly in the world. (365)

9. ' The Bhikkhu who, after leaving behind covet-
ousness and existence, is disgusted with cutting and
binding (others), he who has overcome doubt, and
is without pain, such a one will wander rightly in
the world. (366)

10. 'And knowing what becomes him, the Bhik-
khu will not harm any one in the world, under-
standing the Dhamma thoroughly, such a one will
wander rightly in the world. (367)

11. 'He to whom there are no affections what-
soever, whose sins are extirpated from the root, he
free from desire and not longing (for anything), such
a one will wander rightly in the world. (368)

12. 'He whose passions have been destroyed, who
is free from pride, who has overcome all the path of
passion, is subdued, perfectly happy (parinibbuta),
and of a firm mind, such a one will wander rightly
in the world. (369)

13. 'The believer, possessed of knowledge, see-

1 Na so upadhisu saram eti
Adanesu vineyya ^andaragaw
So anissito anamaneyyo
Samm& so.


62 ^Olavagga.


ing the way (leading to NibMna), who is no partisan
amongst the partisans (of the sixty-two philosophical
views), wise after subduing covetousness, anger, such
a one will wander rightly in the world. (37°)

14. ' He who is pure and victorious, who has re-
moved the veil (of the world), who is subdued in the
Dhammas, has gone to the other shore, is without
desire, and skilled in the knowledge of the cessation
of the Sawkh&ras, such a one will wander rightly in
the world. (37 1)

15. ' He who has overcome time (kapp&ttta) in
the past and in the future, is of an exceedingly pure
understanding, liberated from all the dwelling-places
(of the mind), such a one will wander rightly in the
world. (372)

16. * Knowing the step (of the four truths), under-
standing the Dhamma, seeing clearly the abandon-
ment of the passions, destroying all the elements of
existence (upadhl), such a one will wander rightly in
the world/ (373)

1 7. ' Certainly, O Bhagavat, it is so : whichever
Bhikkhu lives in this way, subdued and having
overcome all bonds, such a one will wander rightly
in the world/ (374)

Samm&paribb&g'aniyasutta is ended.


14. DHAMMIKASUTTA.

Buddha shows Dhammika what the life of a Bhikkhu and what
the life of a householder ought to be.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sivatthl, in £eta-
vana, in the park of An&thapi/z^ika. Then the
follower (upasaka) Dhammika, together with five


DHAMMIKASUTTA. 63


hundred followers, went to Bhagavat, and having
gone to Bhagavat and saluted him, he sat down
apart; sitting down apart the follower Dhammika
addressed Bhagavat in stanzas :

1. * I ask thee, O Gotama of great understanding,
How is a Sclvaka (disciple) to act to be a good one ?
is it the one who goes from his house to the wilder-
ness, or the followers with a house ? (375)

2. * For thou knowest the doings of this world
and that of the gods, and the final end; there is
nobody like thee seeing the subtle meaning (of
things) ; they call thee the excellent Buddha, (376)

3. ' Knowing all knowledge thou hast revealed
the Dhamma, having compassion on creatures; thou
hast removed the veil (of the world), thou art all-
seeing, thou shinest spotless in all the world. (377)

4. 'The king of elephants, Erdva/za by name,
hearing that thou wert Gma. (the Conqueror), came
to thy presence, and having conversed with thee
he went away delighted, after listening (to thee,
and saying), "Very good!" (378)

5. * Also king Vessava/za Kuvera came to ask
thee about the Dhamma; him, too, thou, O wise
man, answeredst when asked, and he also after
listening was delighted, (379)

6. 'All these disputatious Titthiyas and Agt-
vikas and Niga/^as do not any of them overcome
thee in understanding, as a man standing (does not
overcome) the one that is walking quickly, (380)

7. ' All these disputatious Br&hma/zas, and there
are even some old Br&hma^as, all are bound by thy
opinion, and others also that are considered dis-
putants. (381)

8. ' This subtle and pleasant Dhamma that has


64 idjLAVAGGA.


been well proclaimed by thee, O Bhagavat, and
which we all long to hear, do thou, O thou best
of Buddhas, speak to us when asked. (3%2)

9. ' Let all these Bhikkhus and also Upasakas
that have sat down to listen, hear the Dhamma
learnt (anubuddha) by the stainless (Buddha), as the
gods (hear) the well-spoken (words) of V&sava/ (383)

10. Bhagavat : ' Listen to me, O Bhikkhus, I
will teach you the Dhamma that destroys sin, do
ye keep it, all of you ; let him who looks for what
is salutary, the thoughtful, cultivate the mode of
life suitable for Pabba^itas. (3^4)

11. 'Let not the Bhikkhu walk about at a
wrong time, let him go to the village for alms at
the right time ; for ties ensnare the one that goes
at a wrong time, therefore Buddhas do not go at
a wrong time. (385)

12. ' Form, sound, taste, smell, and touch which
intoxicate creatures, having subdued the desire for
(all) these things (dhammas), let him in due time go
in for his breakfast. (386)

1 3. * And let the Bhikkhu, after having obtained
his food at the right time and returned, sit down
alone and privately; reflecting within himself let
him not turn his mind to outward things, (but be)
self-collected. (387)

14. 'If he speak with a S&vaka or with anybody
else, or with a Bhikkhu, let him talk about the ex-
cellent Dhamma, (but let him) not (utter) slander,
nor blaming words against others. (388)

15. 'For some utter language contradicting others1;
those narrow-minded ones we do not praise. Ties

1 Vddaw hi eke pa/iseniyanti==viru£g^anti yuggAitukimsi hutvd
sen&ya pa/imukhaw ga^antS. viya honti. Commentator,


DHAMMIKASUTTA. 65


from here and there ensnare them, and they send
their mind far away in that (dispute). (389)

1 6. ' Let a S&vaka of him with the excellent under-
standing (Buddha), after hearing the Dhamma taught
by Sugata, discriminate^ seek for food, a monastery,
a bed and a chair, and water for taking away the
dirt of his clothes. (39°)

1 7. ' But without clinging to these things, to food,
to bed and chair, to water for taking away the dirt
of his clothes, let a Bhikkhu be like a waterdrop on
a lotus. (391)

18. ' A householders work I will also tell you, how
a S&vaka is to act to be a good one ; for that com-
plete Bhikkhu-dhamma cannot be carried out by one
who is taken up by (worldly) occupations. (392)

19. * Let him not kill, nor cause to be killed any
living being, nor let him approve of others killing,
after having refrained from hurting all creatures,
both those that are strong and those that tremble
in the world. (393)

20. ' Then let the Savaka abstain from (taking)
anything in any place that has not been given (to
him), knowing (it to belong to another), let him not
cause any one to take, nor approve of those that
take, let him avoid all (sort of) theft. (394)

21. * Let the wise man avoid an unchaste life as a
burning heap of coals ; not being able to live a life
of chastity, let him not transgress with another
mans wife. (395)

22. * Let no one speak falsely to another in the
hall of justice or in the hall of the assembly, let him
not cause (any one) to speak (falsely), nor approve
of those that speak (falsely), let him avoid all (sort
of) untruth. (396)

[10] F


66 KtLAVAGGA.


23. 'Let the householder who approves of this
Dhamma, not give himself to intoxicating drinks; let
him not cause others to drink, nor approve of those
that drink, knowing it to end in madness. (397)

24. ' For through intoxication the stupid commit
sins and make other people intoxicated; let him
avoid this seat of sin, this madness, this folly, de-
lightful to the stupid. (39^)

25. ' Let him not kill any living being, let him not
take what has not been given (to him), let him not
speak falsely, and let him not drink intoxicating drinks,
let him refrain from unchaste sexual intercourse, and
let him not at night eat untimely food. (399)

26. ' Let him not wear wreaths nor use perfumes,
let him lie on a couch spread on the earth : — this they
call the eightfold abstinence (uposatha), proclaimed
by Buddha, who has overcome pain. (400)

27. 'Then having with a believing mind kept
abstinence (uposatha) on the fourteenth, fifteenth,
and the eighth days of the half-month, and (having
kept) the complete Pa/ihirakapakkha 1 consisting of
eight parts, (401)

28. ' And then in the morning, after having kept
abstinence, let a wise man with a believing mind, glad-
dening the assembly of Bhikkhus with food and drink,
make distributions according to his ability. (402)

29. ' Let him dutifully maintain his parents, and
practise an honourable trade ; the householder who
observes this strenuously goes to the gods by name
Sayampabhas/ (403)

Dhammikasutta is ended.
.Afti/avagga is ended.

1 Compare T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 141.


III. MAHAVAGGA.


1. PABBAGGASUTTA.

King Bimbisara feeling interested in Buddha tries to tempt him
with wealth, but is mildly rebuked by Buddha.

i . I will praise an ascetic life such as the clearly-
seeing (Buddha) led, such as he thinking (over it)
approved of as an ascetic life. (404)

2. i This house-life is pain, the seat of impurity/
and l an ascetic life is an open-air life/ so considering
he embraced an ascetic life. (4°5)

3. Leading an ascetic life, he avoided with his
body sinful deeds, and having (also) abandoned sin
in words, he cleansed his life. (406)

4. Buddha went to Ra^*agaha, he entered the
Giribbafa in Magadha for alms with a profusion
of excellent signs. (407)

5. Bimbisara standing in his palace saw him, and
seeing him endowed with these signs, he spoke these
words : (408)

6. ' Attend ye to this man, he is handsome, great,
clean, he is both endowed with good conduct, and he
does not look before him further than a yuga (the
distance of a plough). (409)

7. ' With downcast eyes, thoughtful, this one is not
like those of low caste; let the kings messengers run
off, (and ask) : " Where is the Bhikkhu going?"' (410)

8. The kings messengers followed after (him, and

F 2


68 mahAvagga.


said) : ' Where is the Bhikkhu going, where will he
reside? (411)

9. ' Going begging from house to house, watching
the door (of the senses), well restrained, he quickly
filled his bowl, conscious, thoughtful. (412)

10. 'Wandering about in search of alms, having
gone out of town, the Muni repaired to (the moun-
tain) Pa/zafava; it must be there he lives/ (4X3)

n. Seeing that he had entered his dwelling, the
messengers then sat down, and one messenger having
returned announced it to the king. (4*4)

1 2. ' This Bhikkhu, O great king, is sitting on the
east side of Pa^ava, like a tiger, like a bull, like a
lion in a mountain cave.' (4X5)

13. Having heard the messenger's words, the
Khattiya in a fine chariot hastening went out to the
Pa^ava mountain. (416)

14. Having gone as far as the ground was prac-
ticable for a chariot, the Khattiya, after alighting
from the chariot, and approaching on foot, having
come up (to him), seated himself. (4J7)

1 5. Having sat down the king then exchanged the
usual ceremonious greetings with him, and after the
complimentary talk he spoke these words : (418)

1 6. ' Thou art both young and delicate, a lad in
his first youth, possessed of a fine complexion, like a
high-born Khattiya. (4X9)

1 7. ' I will ornament the army-house, and at the
head of the assembly of chiefs (n&ga) give (thee)
wealth; enjoy it and tell me thy birth, when
asked/ (420)

18. Buddha: 'Just beside Himavanta, O king,
there lives a people endowed with the power of
wealth, the inhabitants of Kosala. (421)


PADHANASUTTA. 69


19. 'They are Adidas by family, Sikiyas by birth ;
from that family I have wandered out, not longing
for sensual pleasures. (A22)

20. ' Seeing misery in sensual pleasures, and con-
sidering the forsaking of the world as happiness,
I will go and exert myself; in this my mind de-
lights/ (423)

Pabbagfasutta is ended.


2. PADHANASUTTA.

M&ra tries to tempt Buddha, but disappointed is obliged to withdraw.
Comp. Gospel of S. Matthew iv.

i. To me, whose mind was intent upon exertion
near the river Nera^ard, having exerted myself, and
given myself to meditation for the sake of acquiring
Nibb&na (yogakkhema), (424)

2. Came Namuii speaking words full of compas-
sion : ' Thou art lean, ill-favoured, death is in thy
neighbourhood. (425)

3. 'A thousandth part of thee (is the property) of
death, (only) one part (belongs to) life ; living life, O
thou venerable one, is better ; living thou wilt be
able to do good works *. (426)

4. ' When thou livest a religious life, and feedest
the sacrificial fire, manifold good works are woven to
thee ; what dost thou want with exertion ? (427)

5. ' Difficult is the way of exertion, difficult to
pass, difficult to enter upon;' saying these verses
Mara stood near Buddha. (428)

1 Sahassabh&go mara^assa,
Ekaztfso tava ^ivitaztf,
G\v&m bho givitam seyyo,
Giv2itn puml&ni kahasi.


70 MAHAVAGGA.


6. To M&ra thus speaking Bhagavat said this :
* O thou friend of the indolent, thou wicked one, for
what purpose hast thou come here ? (429)

7. ' Even the least good work is of no use to me ;
and what good works are required, Mara ought to
tell. (430)

8. ' I have faith and power, and understanding is
found in me ; while thus exerting myself, why do you
ask me to live1? (43 1)

9. ' This (burning) wind will dry up even the cur-
rents of the rivers ; should it not by degrees dry up
my blood, while I am exerting myself? (432)

10. 'While the blood is drying up, the bile and
the phleigm are dried up ; while the flesh is wasting
away, the mind gets more tranquil, and my atten-
tion, understanding, and meditation get more stead-
fast2. (433)

11. 'While I am living thus, after having felt the
extreme sensations, my mind does not look for
sensual pleasures; behold a beings purity. (434)

12. 'Lust thy first army is called, discontent thy
second, thy third is called hunger and thirst, thy
fourth desire. (435)

13. 'Thy fifth is called sloth and drowsiness, thy
sixth cowardice, thy seventh doubt, thy eighth
hypocrisy and stupor, (436)

14. ' Gain, fame, honour, and what celebrity has

1 Evaw maw pahitattam pi
Kim ^ivam anupu^Masi.

2 Lohite sussam&namhi
Pittaw semhaw £a sussati,
Mawsesu khiyamilnesu
Bhiyyo &ttaw pasidati
Bhiyyo sati ka, pawM £a
Sam&dhi mama ti//^ati.


PADHANASUTTA. 7 1


been falsely obtained; and he who exalts himself and
despises others l. (437)

15. 'This, O Namu/£i, is thine, the black one's,
fighting army; none but a hero conquers it, and after
conquering it obtains joy. (43$)

16. * Woe upon life in this world! death in battle is
better for me than that I should live defeated. (439)

1 7. ' Plunged into this world some Samaras and
Br&hma/zas are not seem, and they do not know the
way in which the virtuous walk. (440)

1 8. ' Seeing on all sides an army arrayed, and
Mara on his elephant, I am going out to do battle,
that he may not drive me away from my place. (441)

19. ' This army of thine, which the world of men
and gods cannot conquer, I will crush with under-
standing as (one crushes) an unbaked earthen pot
with a stone2. (442)

20. * Having made my thought subject to me and
my attention firm, I shall wander about from kingdom
to kingdom, training disciples extensively. (443)

21. ' They (will be) zealous and energetic, execut-
ing my orders, (the orders) of one free from lust, and
they will go (to the place) where, having gone, they
will not mourn/ (444)

22. Mclra : ' For seven years I followed Bhagavat
step by step ; I found no fault in the perfectly en-
lightened, thoughtful (Buddha). (445)

1 Yo #attana/# samukkamse
Pare #a ava^anati.

2 Yam te tarn na-ppasahati
Senaw loko sadevako

Taw te papaya ga££Mmi*
Amaw pattaw va amhanst.

* Instead of ga£Mami I read bha»#ami. Ba has ve^Mapi, B1 ve#gMmi.


72 MAHAVAGGA.


23. * The crow hovered round the rock that looked
like (a lump of) fat : " Do we here find something
soft, is it something sweet ?" (446)

24. ' Having obtained nothing sweet there, the
crow went away from that spot Thus like the crow
approaching the rock, being disgusted, we shall go
away from Gotama1.' (447)

25. While overcome with sorrow the string of his
lute slipped down ; then that evil-minded Yakkha
disappeared there. (448)

Padhanasutta is ended.


3. SUBHASITASUTTA.

On well-spoken language.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sdvatthi in £eta-
vana. Bhagavat said this : ' O Bhikkhus, the speech
that is provided with four requisites is well-spoken,
not ill-spoken, both faultless and blameless to the
wise/

' Which four ?'

'O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu speaks well-spoken
(language), not ill-spoken ; he speaks what is right
(dhamma), not what is unrighteous (adhamma) ; he
speaks what is pleasing, not what is unpleasing ; he
speaks what is true, not what is false. O Bhikkhus,
the speech that is provided with these four requi-
sites, is well-spoken, not ill-spoken, both faultless

1 K&ko va sekm dsa^g-a*
Nibbi^g-tpema Gotamawf.

* Cb Ck avag#a, Ba assag^a, B1 ^ssagg-a. + Instead of G otamam I read Gotama.


SUBHASITASUTTA. *]$


and blameless to the wise/ This said Bhagavat.
When Sugata had said this, then the Master spoke
the following :

t. 'Well-spoken language the just call the prin-
cipal (thing) ; let one speak what is right (dhamma),
not what is unrighteous (adhamma), that is the
second ; let one speak what is pleasing, not what is
unpleasing, that is the third ; let one speak what is
true, not what is false, that is the fourth/ (449)

Then the venerable Vangisa, rising from his seat,
throwing his robe over one shoulder and bending
his joined hands towards Bhagavat, said this : ' It
occurs to me, O Sugata!'

' Let it occur to thee, O Vangisa ! ' said Bhagavat.

Then the venerable Vangisa, standing before Bha-
gavat, praised him with appropriate stanzas :

2. ' Let one say such words by which he does not
pain himself, nor hurt others ; such words are truly
well-spoken. (45°)

3. 'Let one speak pleasing words which are re-
ceived joyfully (by all), and which (saying) he, with-
out committing sins, speaks what is pleasing to
others. (45 1)

4. ' Truth verily is immortal speech, this is a true
saying ; in what is true, in what is good, and in what
is right, the just stand firm, so they say. (45 2)

5. ' The words which Buddha speaks, which are
sure to bring about extinction and put an end to
pain, such (words) are truly the best/ (453)

Subhasitasutta is ended.


74 MAHAVAGGA.


4. SUNDARIKABHARADVA£ASUTTA.

Buddha shows to Sundarikabharadvag-a on whom to bestow obla-
tions, and the Brahmawa is finally converted.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt in Kosala on the bank
of the river Sundarika. And during that time the
Brahma/za Sundarikabh&radv&^a made offerings to
the fire and worshipped the fire. Then the Brahma^a
Sundarikabharadva/a, having made offerings to the
fire and worshipped the fire, and having risen from
his seat, looked about him on all sides towards the
four quarters of the globe, saying : ' Who is to enjoy
the rest of this oblation ?' The Brahma/za Sunda-
rikabharadvagu saw Bhagavat sitting not far off at
the root of a tree, wrapped up head and body ; and
seeing him he, after taking the rest of the oblation
with his left hand and the waterpot with his right
hand, went up to Bhagavat. Then Bhagavat, on
hearing the footsteps of Sundarikabhclradv&^a, the
Brahma^a, uncovered his head. Then the Brah-
ma/za Sundarikabh&radv&^a thought : ' This man is
shaved, this man is a shaveling/ and he wished to
return again from there. Then this came to the
mind of Sundarikabhctradv^a, the Brahma^a: 'Some
Brahma^as also here are shaved, I think I shall go
up and ask him about his descent/ Then the Brah-
ma/za Sundarikabhctradva^a went up to Bhagavat,
and having gone tip he said this : ' Of what family
art thou ?'

Then Bhagavat answered Sundarikabh&radva^a,
the Brahma^a, in stanzas :

i. ' No Brahma^a am I, nor a king's son, nor any


SUNDARIKABHARADVAGASUTTA. 75

Vessa; having thoroughly observed the class of
common people, I wander about the world re-
flectingly, possessing nothing. (454)

2. * Dressed in a sangh&^i1 and houseless I wander
about, with my hair cut off, calm, not intermixing
with people in this world. Thou askest me an
unseasonable question about (my) family, O Brah-
ma*a!' (455)

3. Sundarikabharadv&^a : ' Sir, Brahma^as toge-
ther with Br&hma/zas ask truly, Art thou a Brah-
ma/za?'

Bhagavat: 'If thou sayest, I am a Br&hma/za,
and callest me no Brihma^a, then I ask thee about
the Sivitti that consists of three padas and twenty-
four syllables V (456)

4. Sundarikabharadva^a : * For what (reason) did
the I sis, men, Khattiyas, Br&hma/sas make offerings
to the gods abundantly in this world ?'

Bhagavat: ' He who, perfect and accomplished at
the time of offering, obtains the ear of one or the
other (god), he will succeed, so I say/ (457)

5. 'Surely his offering will bear fruit/ — so said
the Brahma^a, — 'because we saw such an accom-
plished man ; for by not seeing such as you, some-
body else will enjoy the oblation/ (45 8)

6. Bhagavat : ' Therefore, O Brahma^a, as you
have come here to ask for something, ask; perhaps
thou mightest here find one that is calm, without
anger, free from pain, free from desire, one with
a good understanding/ (459)

1 See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 166.
2 Taw Savittiw pu^^ami
Tipadaw ^atuvtsatakkharaw.

(Rig-veda III, 62, 10.)


j6 mahAvagga.


7. Sundarikabharadva^a : ' I delight in offering,
O Gotama, I desire to make an offering, but I do
not understand it ; do thou instruct me, tell me in
what case the offering succeeds/ (460)

8. Bhagavat : ' Therefore, O Br&hma^a, lend me
thy ear, I will teach thee the Dhamma. (461)

9. ' Do not ask about descent, but ask about con-
duct ; from wood, it is true, fire is born ; (likewise) a
firm Muni, although belonging to a low family, may
become noble, when restrained (from sinning) by
humility. (462)

10. 'He who is subdued by truth, endowed with
temperance, accomplished, leading a religious life,
on such a one in due time people should bestow
oblations ; let the Br&hma^a who has good works
in view, offer. (463)

ii.' Those who, after leaving sensual pleasures,
wander about houseless, well restrained, being like
a straight shuttle, on such in due time people should
bestow oblations ; let the Brihma^a who has good
works in view, offer. (464)

12. 'Those whose passions are gone, whose senses
are well composed, who are liberated like the moon
out of the grasp of Rihu, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the Br&hma/za
who has good works in view, offer. (465)

1 3. ' Those who wander about in the world without
clinging (to anything), always thoughtful, having left
selfishness, on such in due time people should be-
stow oblations; let the Brihma/za who has good
works in view, offer. (466)

14. 'He who, after leaving sensual pleasures, wan-
ders about victorious, he who knows the end of
birth and death, who is perfectly happy (parinib-


sundarikabhAradvagasutta. 7 7

buta), calm like a deep water, Tathagata deserves
the oblation. (467)

15. 'Just with the just and far from the unjust1,
Tath&gata is possessed of infinite understanding ;
undefiled both in this world and in the other, Tatha-
gata deserves the oblation. (468)

16. 'He in whom there lives no deceit, no arro-
gance, he who is free from cupidity, free from selfish-
ness, free from desire, who has banished anger, who
is calm, the Brahma^a who has removed the taint
of grief, Tathagata deserves the oblation. (469)

17. ' He who has banished (every) resting-place
of the mind, he for whom there is no grasping, he
who covets nothing either in this world or in the
other, Tath&gata deserves the oblation2. (470)

18. 'He who is composed, who has crossed over
the stream (of existence) and knows the Dhamma
by (taking) the highest view (of it), he whose pas-
sions are destroyed, who is wearing the last body,
Tathigata deserves the oblation. (47 1)

19. 'He whose passion for existence and whose
harsh talk are destroyed, are perished, (and therefore)
exist not, he the accomplished and in every respect
liberated Tath&gata deserves the oblation. (472)

20. 'He who has shaken off all ties, for whom
there are no ties, who amongst arrogant beings is
free from arrogance, having penetrated pain to-
gether with its domain and subject, Tathagata
deserves the oblation. (473)

21. 'He who, without giving himself up to desire,
sees seclusion (i.e. NibMna), who has overcome the
view that is to be taught by others, to whom there

1 Samo samehi visamehi dfire. 2 Comp. Dhp. v. 20.


78 MAHAVAGGA.


are no objects of sense whatever, Tathagata de-
serves the oblation1. (474)

22. 'He to whom all Dhammas of every descrip-
tion, after he has penetrated them, are destroyed,
are perished, (and therefore) exist not, he who is
calm, liberated in the destruction of attachment (i. e.
Nibbana), Tath&gata deserves the oblation. (475)

23. 'He who sees the destruction of bond and
birth, who has totally evaded the path of passion,
(who is) pure, faultless, spotless, undepraved, Tatha-
gata deserves the oblation. (476)

24. ' He who does not measure himself by him-
self, who is composed, upright, firm, without desire,
free from harshness (akhila), free from doubt, Tathd-
gata deserves the oblation. (477)

25. 'He to whom there is no cause of folly, who
has a supernatural insight in all Dhammas, who
wears the last body, and who has acquired perfect
enlightenment, the highest, the blessed, (for him)
thus a Yakkhas purification (takes place)2/ (478)

26. Sundarikabharadvci£"a : ' May my offering be
a true offering, because I met with such a one out
of the accomplished ; Brahman is my witness, may
Bhagavat accept me, may Bhagavat enjoy my obla-
tion/ ^ (479)

2 7. Bhagavat : ' What is obtained by stanzas is
not to be enjoyed by me, this is not the custom of
the clearly-seeing, O Br&hma/za ; Buddhas reject
what is obtained by stanzas. While the Dhamma

1 Asaw anissaya vivekadasst
Paravediya/rc * di//^im up&tivatto
Arammawd yassa na santi ke&, &c.

2 Comp. Kalahavivadasutta, v. 14.

* Paravediyan ti parehi ^apetabba/w. Commentator.


SUNDARIKABHARADVAGASUTTA. 79

exists, O Br&hma^a, this is the practice (of the
Buddhas). (480)

28. ' With other food and drink must thou serve
one that is perfect, a great I si, whose passions are de-
stroyed, and whose misbehaviour has ceased, for this
is a field for one who looks for good works V (481)

29. SundarikabhUradv&^a : ' Good, O Bhagavat,
then I should like to know, who will enjoy a gift
from one like me, and whom I shall seek at the time
of sacrifice (as one worthy of offerings) after having
accepted thy doctrine/ (482)

30. Bhagavat : ' Whosoever has no quarrels, whose
mind is untroubled, and who has freed himself from
lusts, whose sloth is driven away, (483)

31. ' Whosoever conquers his sins, knows birth
and death, the Muni who is endowed with wisdom 2,
such a one who has resorted to offering, (484)

32. * Him you should worship and honour with
food and drink; so the gifts will prosper/ (485)

33. Sundarikabh!lradv&£*a : * Thou Buddha de-
servest the oblation, (thou art) the best field for
good works, the object of offering to all the world ;
what is given to thee will bear great fruit/ (486)

Then the Brahma^a Sundarikabharadva^a said
this to Bhagavat : 'It is excellent, O venerable
Gotama ! It is excellent, O venerable Gotama !
As one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals
what has been hidden, or tells the way to him who
has gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark
that those who have eyes may see the objects, even
so by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the
Dhamma has been illustrated; I take refuge in

1 Comp. KasibMradva^asutta, v. 7.

2 Moneyyasampannaw=pawMsampanna^. Commentator.


80 MAHAVAGGA.


the venerable Gotama, in the Dhamma, and in the
Assembly of Bhikkhus ; I wish to receive the robe
and the orders from the venerable Gotama/

The Brahma^a Sundarikabhiradva^*a received the
pabba^-^ from Bhagavat, and he received also the
upasampad^ ; and the venerable Bharadva^a, having
lately received the upasampadd, leading a solitary,
retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived after
having in a short time in this existence by his own
understanding ascertained and possessed himself of
that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander
away from their houses to a houseless state. * Birth
had been destroyed, a religious life had been led,
what was to be done had been done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence/ so he
perceived, and the venerable Bharadva^a became
one of the arahats.

Sundarikabharadv&^asutta is ended.


5. MAGHASUTTA.

Buddha on being asked tells M&gha of those worthy of offerings
and the blessing of offering.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Ra^agaha, in the
mountain (called) the Vulture s Peak (Gigg^akft/a).

Then the young man M&gha went to Bhagavat,
and having gone to him he talked pleasantly with
him, and after having had some pleasant, remarkable
conversation writh him he sat down apart; sitting
down apart the young man M&gha spoke this to
Bhagavat :


MAGHASUTTA. 8 1


' O venerable Gotama, I am a liberal giver, boun-
tiful, suitable to beg of; justly I seek for riches, and
having sought for riches justly, I give out of the
justly obtained and justly acquired riches to one, to
two, to three, to four, to five, to six, to seven, to
eight, to nine, to ten, to twenty, to thirty, to forty,
to fifty, to a hundred, I give still more. (I should
like to know), O venerable Gotama, whether I, while
so giving, so offering, produce much good/

' Certainly, O young man, dost thou in so offering
produce much good; he, O young man, who is a
liberal giver, bountiful, suitable to beg of, and who
justly seeks for riches, and having sought for riches
justly, gives out of his justly obtained and justly
acquired riches to one, to two, to three, to four, to
five, to six, to seven, to eight, to nine, to ten, to
twenty, to thirty, to forty, to fifty, to a hundred, and
gives still more, produces much good/

Then the young man Migha addressed Bhagavat
in stanzas :

i. * I ask the venerable Gotama, the bountiful/ —
so said the young man Migha, — ' wearing the yel-
low robe, wandering about houseless : ' ' He who is
a householder, suitable to beg of, a donor, who, de-
sirous of good, offers having what is good in view,
and giving to others in this world food and drink, —
where (i. e. on whom bestowed) will the oblation of
such an offerer prosper?' (487)

2. 'He who is a householder, suitable to beg of,
a donor/ O Migha, — so said Bhagavat, — 'who, de-
sirous of good, offers having what is good in view,
and giving to others in this world food and drink,
such a one will prosper with those worthy of
offerings/ (488)

[10] G


82 mahAvagga.


3. 'He who is a householder, suitable to beg of,
a donor/— s© said the young man, — 'who, desirous
of good, offers having what is good in view, and
giving to others in this world food and drink, — tell
me (I being such a one), O Bhagavat, of those worthy
of offerings/ (489)

4. Bhagavat : * Those indeed who wander about in
the world without clinging to anything and without
possessing anything, perfect, self-restrained, on such
in due time people should bestow oblations ; let the
Brdhma/ea who has good (works) in view, offer. {490)

5. ' Those who have cut through all bonds and
letters, who are subdued, liberated, feee from pain,
and free from desire, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Br&hma/za who has
good (works) in view, offer. (491)

6. ' Those who are released from all bonds, who
are subdued, liberated, free from pain, and free
from desire, on such in due time people should
bestow oblations ; let the Brdhma^a who has good
{works) in view, offer, (492)

7. * Those who, having forsaken both passion and
hatred and folly, have destroyed their desires and
lead a religious life, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Br&hma^a who has
good (works) in view, offer1. (493)

8. ' Those in whom there lives no deceit, no arro-
gance, who are free from cupidity, free from selfish-
mess, free from desire, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Brlthma^a who has
good (works) in view, offer. (494)

9. ' Those indeed who without being lost in desire,


1 Comp. Dhp. v. 20.


MAGHASUTTA. 83


after crossing the stream (of existence), wander
about free from selfishness, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the Brahma^a
who has good (works) in view, offer. (495)

10. ' Those in whom there is no desire for any-
thing in the world, nor for existence after existence
here or in the other world, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the Br&hma^a
who has good (works) in view, offer. (496)

ii.( Those who, after leaving sensual pleasures,
wander about houseless, well restrained, being like
a straight shuttle, on such in due time people should
bestow oblations; let the Brahma/za who has good
(works) in view, offer. (497)

12. ' Those whose passions are gone, whose senses
are well composed, who are liberated like the moon
out of the grasp of R&hu, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Brihma^a who has
good (works) in view, offer. (498)

13. ' Those who are calm, whose passions are gone,
who are without anger, and for whom there is no
transmigration after having left here, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations ; let the Brih-
ma/za who has good (works) in view, offer. (499)

14. ' Those who, after leaving birth and death alto-
gether, have conquered all doubt, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the Brihma^a
who has good (works) in view, offer. (5°°)

15. ' Those who wander about in the world with
themselves for a light, not possessed of anything, in
every respect liberated, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Brdhma^a who has
good (works) in view, offer. (501)

16. 'Those who in this world rightly understand

g 2


84 MAHAVAGGA.


this: " This is the last (birth), there is no re-birth/' on
such in due time people should bestow oblations;
let the Brahma^a who has good (works) in view,
offer. (502)

17. 'He who is accomplished, and delights in me-
ditation, thoughtful, possessed of thorough enlight-
enment, a refuge for many, on such a one in due
time people should bestow oblations ; let the Brah-
ma^a who has good (works) in view, offer/ (503)

18. ' Certainly my question was not in vain, Bha-
gavat has told me of those worthy of offerings ; for
thou truly knowest this in this world, as surely to
thee this Dhamma is known. (5°4)

19. 'He who is a householder, suitable to beg of,
a donor/ — so said the young man M&gha, — 'who,
desirous of good, offers having what is good in
view, and giving to others in this world food and
drink, — tell me (I being such a one), O Bhagavat,
of the blessing of offering/ (505)

20. ' Offer, O M&gha/ — so said Bhagavat, — ' and
while offering make calm thy mind in all things ;
the object of the one that offers is the oblation,
standing fast in this he leaves hatred behind. (506)

21. 'Such a one whose passion is gone will re-
press hatred, cultivating an unbounded friendly
mind ; continually strenuous night and day he will
spread infinite goodness through all regions/ (507)

22. M&gha : ' Who prospers ? who is liberated and
who is bound ? In which way can one by himself go
to Brahmaloka ? Tell this to me who does not know,
O Muni, when asked. Bhagavat is indeed my wit-
ness that Brahman is seen by me to-day, for thou art
to us equal to Brahman, this is the truth ; how can one
attain Brahmaloka, O thou glorious one?' (508)


SABHIYASUTTA. 85


23. 'He who offers the threefold blessing of obla-
tion/ O M&gha, — so said Bhagavat, — 'such a one
will prosper with those worthy of offerings ; so,
having offered properly, he who is suitable to beg
of attains Brahmaloka, so I say/ (509)

This having been said, M&gha the young man
spoke as follows to Bhagavat : ' Excellent, O vener-
able Gotama ! Excellent, O venerable Gotama ! As
one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what
has been hidden, or tells the way to him who has
gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark that
those who have eyes may see the objects, even so by
the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma
has been illustrated ; I take refuge in the venerable
Gotama and in the Dhamma and in the Assembly of
Bhikkhus. Let the venerable Gotama accept me as
an upisaka (a follower, me), who henceforth for all
my life have taken refuge (in him)/

Maghasutta is ended.


6. SABHIYASUTTA.

Sabhiya, the Paribba^aka, goes to the six famous teachers of his
time to have his questions answered, but not having his doubts
solved, he repairs to Gotama and asks him how one is to behave
to become a Br&hmawa, a Samara, a NaMtaka, a Khettagina, a
Kusala, a Pa«dita, a Muni, a Vedagu, an Anuvidita, a Dhira, an
A^-aniya, a Sottiya, an Ariya, a jffarawavat, a Paribbagaka.
Bhagavat answers his questions, and Sabhiya finally receives the
robe and the orders from Buddha.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Rd/agaha, in
Ve/uvana, in Kalandakanivdpa. And at that time
questions were recited to Sabhiya, the ParibM/aka


86 MAHAVAGGA.


(wandering mendicant), by an old benevolent deity:
* He who, O Sabhiya, be it a Samara or a Br&h-
ma/za, explains these questions to thee when asked,
near him thou shouldst live a religious life/

Then Sabhiya, the ParibM^aka, having learnt the
questions from that deity, went to whatever Samaras
and Br&hma^as there were that had an assembly (of
Bhikkhus), a crowd (of followers), and were well-
known teachers, famous leaders, considered excel-
lent by the multitude, as P&ra/za-Kassapa, Makkhali-
Gosala, A^ita-Kesakambali, Pakudha-Ka££&yana,
Sa%aya - Bela/Miputta, and N igzntka. - Ndtaputta.
Those he went to, and after going to them, he
asked the questions. They, being asked the ques-
tions by Sabhiya, the Paribb^aka, did not succeed
(in answering them), and not succeeding they showed
wrath and hatred and discontent, and they also in
return put questions to Sabhiya, the Paribba^aka.

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Parib-
bcl^aka: * Whatever Samaras and Brahma/zas there
are that have an assembly (of Bhikkhus), a crowd
(of followers), and are well-known teachers, famous
leaders, considered excellent by the multitude, as
Ptira/za-Kassapa, Malckhali-Gos&la, A^ita-Kesakam-
bali, Pakudha-Ka^dyana, Sa%iaya- Bela^iputta,
and Niga^^a-Nataputta, they, being asked ques-
tions by me, did not succeed (in answering them),
and not succeeding they showed wrath and hatred
and discontent, and they also in return put ques-
tions to me in this matter ; surely I think I shall go
back to what I have left, and enjoy sensual plea-
sures/

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the
Paribbd^aka : ' This Sama/za Gotama has both an


SABHIYASUTTA. 87


assembly (of Bhikkhus) and a crowd (of followers),
and is a well-known teacher, a famous leader, con-
sidered excellent by the multitude, surely I think I
shall go to Samara Gotama and ask these ques-
tions/ Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya,
the Paribb&£*aka : ' Whatever Samaras and Br&h-
ma^as there are that are decayed, old, aged, ad-
vanced in years, having reached old age, expe-
rienced elders, long ordained, having assemblies (of
Bhikkhus), crowds (of followers), being teachers wel
known, famous leaders, considered excellent by the
multitude, as Ptira/za - Kassapa, Makkhali - Gos&la,
A^ita-Kesakambali, Pakudha-Ka^ayana, Sa/^aya-
Bela^iputta, and Niga^^a-NAtaputta, they, being
asked questions by me, did not succeed (in answering
them), and not succeeding they showed wrath and
hatred and discontent, and they also in return put
questions to me in this matter; (I should like to
know) whether Samara Gotama being asked these
questions will be able to explain them to me, for
Samara Gotama is both young by birth and new in
ascetic life.'

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the
ParibM^aka : ' Samara Gotama is not to be slighted
because he is young ; even if the Samara is young,
yet he is mighty and powerful ; surely I think I
shall go to Samara Gotama and ask t?hese ques-
tions/ Then Sabhiya, the Paribba^-aka, went on a
journey to Ra^agaha, and wandering on his journey
in regular order he came to Rd^agaha, Ve/uvana,
Kalandakaniv&pa, to Bhagavat, and having come to
Bhagavat he talked pleasantly with him, and after
having had some pleasant and remarkable conversa-
tion with him he sat down apart ; sitting down apart


88 MAHAVAGGA.


Sabhiya, the Paribb&^aka, spoke to Bhagavat in
stanzas :

i. 'Anxious and doubtful I have come/ — so said
Sabhiya, — ' longing to ask questions. Do thou put
an end to these (doubts when) asked these questions
by me, in regular order, and rightly explain them
to me/ (5xo)

2. ' Thou hast come from afar, O Sabhiya/ — so
said Bhagavat, — ' longing to ask questions ; I shall
put an end to those (doubts when) asked those
questions by thee, in regular order, and rightly I
shall explain them to thee. (511)

3. 'Ask me, O Sabhiya, a question; whatsoever
thou wishest in thy mind that question I (will
explain, and) put an end to (thy doubt)/ (512)

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Parib-
b&£*aka : * It is marvellous, it is wonderful indeed, the
reception which I did not get from other Samaras
and Brihma^as has been given me by Gotama/
so saying he glad, rejoicing, delighted, and highly
elated asked Bhagavat a question :

4. ' What should a man (necessarily) have obtained
that people may call him a Bhikkhu?' — so said
Sabhiya, — 'how may they call him compassionate,
and how subdued? how can he be called enlightened
(buddha) ? Asked (about this) do thou, Bhagavat,
explain it to me/ (5I3)

5. ' He who by the path he has himself made,
O Sabhiya/ — so said Bhagavat, — 'has attained to
perfect happiness, who has conquered doubt, who
lives after having left behind both gain and goods,
who has destroyed re-birth, he is a Bhikkhu. (514)

6. 'Always resigned and attentive, he will not
hurt any one in all the world, the Samara who has


SABHIYASUTTA. 89


crossed the stream (of existence, and is) untroubled ;
for whom there are no desires (ussada), he is com-
passionate. (5I5)

7. ' He whose senses are trained internally and
externally in all the world, he who after penetrating
this and the other world longs for death, being
trained, he is subdued. (S1^)

8. * Whosoever, after having considered all times
(kappa), the revolution (sawscira), both the vanishing
and re-appearance (of beings), is free from defilement,
free from sin, is pure, and has obtained destruction of
birth, him they call enlightened (buddha)/ (517)

Then Sabhiya, the ParibM^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad, re-
joicing, delighted, highly elated, asked Bhagavat
another question :

9. ' What should a man (necessarily) have obtained
that people may call him a Br&hma^a?' — so said
Sabhiya, — 'and how (may they call him) a Samara?
and how a Nahdtaka ? how can he be called a
N&ga? Asked (about this) do thou Bhagavat explain
it to me/ (518)

10. 'He who, after removing all sins, O Sabhiya/
— so said Bhagavat, — ' is immaculate, well composed,
firm-minded, perfect after crossing the Sa^sara, such
an independent one is called a Brdhma^a. (519)

11. 'He who is calm, having left behind good and
evil, free from defilement, having understood this
and the other world, and conquered birth and death,
such a one is called a Samara by being so1/ (520)

12. 'Whosoever, after having washed away all
sins internally and externally in all the world, does


Sama/zo t&di pavu^ate tathattS.


90 MAHAVAGGA.


not enter time (kappa) amongst gods and men who
are subject to time, him they call a Nah&taka
(cleansed)1. (521)

13. * He who does not commit any crime in the
world, who, after abandoning all bonds and fetters,
clings to nothing, being liberated, such a one is called
a N&ga (sinless) by being so V (522)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribb&^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad,
rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, further asked
Bhagavat a question :

14. 'Whom do the Buddhas call a Khetta^ma?' —
so said Sabhiya, — 'how (can they call any one) a
Kusala? and how a Pa^ta ? how can he be called
a Muni ? Asked (about this) do thou Bhagavat ex-
plain it to me/ (523)

15. 'He who, after examining all regions, O Sa-
bhiya/— so said Bhagavat, — 'the divine and the
human, and Brahman's region, is delivered from the
radical bond of all regions, such a one is called a
Khetta^ina (he who has conquered the regions) by
being so. (524)

16. 'He who, after examining all treasures, the
divine and the human, and Brahman's treasure, is
delivered from the radical bond of all treasures, such
a one is called a Kusala (happy) by being so. (525)

17. 'He who, after examining both kinds of
senses, internally and externally, is endowed with a

1 Devamanussesu kappiyesu
Kappan n' eti tarn ahu nahdtako.

2 Agum na karoti km& loke
Sabbasa;#yoge visagga bandhan&ni
Sabbattha na sa^ati vimutto
N&go tadi pavu^ate tathattl

But compare Pabbag^asutta 17, Magandiyasutta 11, &c.


SABHIYASUTTA. 91


clear understanding and has conquered evil and good
(ka/zhasukka), such a one is called a Pa/z^ita (wise)
by being so. (526)

18. 'He who, having understood the Dhamma of
the just and the unjust, internally and externally, in
all the world, is to be worshipped by gods and men,
he, after breaking through the net of ties, is called
a Muni (sage)/ (527)

Then Sabhiya, the ParibM^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad,
rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, further asked
Bhagavat a question :

1 9. ' What should one (necessarily) have obtained
that people may call him Vedagti ?' — so said Sabhiya,
— ' and how (may they call him) Anuvidita ? and
how Viriyavat ? How does one become A^aniya ?
Asked (about this) do thou, O Bhagavat, explain it
to me/ (528)

20. 'He who, having conquered all sensations, O
Sabhiya/ — so said Bhagavat, — 'which are (known) to
Samaras and to Brihma^as, is free from passion for
all sensations, he is Vedagft (having passed sensa-
tion) after conquering all sensation. (529)

21. ' He who, having seen the delusion of name
and form1, internally and externally, the root of
sickness, and is delivered from the radical bond of
all sickness, such a one is called Anuvidita (well-
informed) by being so. (53°)

22. ' He who is disgusted in this world with all
sins, is strong after conquering the pain of hell, is
strong and powerful, such a one is called Dhfra ( =
viriyavat, firm) by being so. (53 1)


1 Anuvi^a papa^anamarupaw.


92 MAHAVAGGA.


23. 'He whose bonds are cut off internally and
externally, the root of ties1, who is delivered from
the radical bond of all ties, such a one is called
A^*dniya (high-bred) by being so/ (532)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribbi^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad,
rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, further asked
Bhagavat a question :

24. 'What should a man (necessarily) have ob-
tained that people may call him a Sottiya ? ' — so
said Sabhiya, — 'how (may they call him) an Ariya ?
and how a jfifara^avat ? how may he become a
Paribba^aka ? Asked (about this) do thou, O Bha-
gavat, explain it to me/ (533)

25. 'Whosoever, after having heard and under-
stood every Dhamma in the world, O Sabhiya/ — so
said Bhagavat, — 'whatsoever is wrong and what-
soever is blameless, is victorious, free from doubt,
liberated, free from pain in every respect, him they
call a Sottiya (learned in the revelation). (534)

26. ' Whosoever, after having cut off passions and
desires, is wise and does not (again) enter the womb,
having driven away the threefold sign, the mud (of
lust), and who does not (again) enter time (kappa),
him they call an Ariya (noble). (535)

27. 'He who in this world, after having at-
tained the (highest) gain in the A^ara^as, is skilful,
has always understood the Dhamma, clings to nothing,
is liberated, and for whom there are no passions, he is
a isfara/zavat (endowed with the observances). (536)

28. ' Whosoever abstains from the action that has
a painful result, above and below and across and in

1 Yass' assu lut&ni bandhanani
KgghvXtvm- bahiddha £a sangamula/rc.


SABHIYASUTTA. 93


the middle, who wanders with understanding, who
has put an end to deceit, arrogance, cupidity and
anger, name and form, him they call a Paribba-
^aka (a wandering mendicant) who has attained the
(highest) gain/ ^ ^ (537)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribba^*aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad, re-
joicing, delighted, highly elated, having risen from
his seat, and having put his upper robe upon one
shoulder, bending his joined hands towards Bha-
gavat, praised Bhagavat face to face in appropriate
stanzas :

29. ' Having conquered the three and sixty (philo-
sophical) views referring to the disputations of the
Samaras, thou hast crossed over the darkness of
the stream1. (?) (538)

30. * Thou hast passed to the end of and beyond
pain, thou art a saint, perfectly enlightened, I consider
thee one that has destroyed his passions, thou art glo-
rious, thoughtful, of great understanding, O thou who
puts an end to pain, thou hast carried me across. (539)

31. * Because thou sawest my longing, and car-
riedst me across my doubt, adoration be to thee, O
Muni, who hast attained the (highest) gain in the
ways of wisdom ; O thou who art a true kinsman of
the Adidas, thou art compassionate. (54°)

32. 'The doubt I had before thou hast cleared
away for me, O thou clearly-seeing ; surely thou art
a Muni, perfectly enlightened, there is no obstacle
for thee. (541)


1 Y&ni £a tfm y&ni ka, sa//#i
Sama/zappav&dasit&ni bhfiripaTma
Sawwakkhara saimanissMni (?)
Osaratf&ni vineyya oghatam' aga\


94 MAHAVAGGA.


33. ' And all thy troubles are scattered and cut
off, thou art calm, subdued, firm, truthful. (542)

34. ' All gods and both Nirada and Pabbata re-
joice at thee, the chief of the sinless (naganaga), the
great hero, when thou art speaking. (543)

35. ' Adoration be to thee, O noble man, adora-
tion be to thee, O thou best of men ; in the world of
men and gods there is no man equal to thee. (544)

36. ' Thou art Buddha, thou art the Master, thou
art the Muni that conquers M&ra ; after having cut
off desire thou hast crossed over and hast carried
across this generation. (545)

37. ' The elements of existence (upadhi) are over-
come by thee, the passions are destroyed by thee,
thou art a lion, free from desire, thou hast left behind
fear and terror. {5 46)

38. 'As a beautiful lotus does not adhere to the
water, so thou dost not cling to good and evil, to
either ; stretch forth thy feet, O hero, Sabhiya wor-
ships the Masters (feet)/ (547)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribb&^aka, stooping with his
head to Bhagavat's feet, said this to Bhagavat :

' It is excellent, O venerable ! It is excellent,
O venerable ! As one raises what has been over-
thrown, or reveals what has been hidden, or tells the
way to him who has gone astray, or holds out an
oil lamp in the dark that those who have eyes may
see the objects, even so by the venerable Gotama
in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illus-
trated ; I take refuge in the venerable Gotama, in
the Dhamma, and in the Assembly of Bhikkhus; I
wish to receive the robe and the orders from the
venerable Bhagavat.

' He who, Q Sabhiya, formerly belonging to


SABHIYASUTTA. 95


another creed (a$/zatitthiyapubba), wishes to be
adopted into this religion (dhammavinaya), and
wishes to receive the robe and the orders, he serves
for four months; after the lapse of four months
Bhikkhus who have appeased their thoughts will
give him the robe and the orders to become a
Bhikkhu, (for) I also in this matter acknowledge a
difference of persons/

'If, O venerable, those that formerly belonged
to another creed and wish to be adopted into this
religion and to receive the robe and the orders,
serve for four months, and after the lapse of
four months Bhikkhus who have appeased their
thoughts give them the robe and the orders that
they may become Bhikkhus, I will (also) serve for
four months, and after the lapse of four months
Bhikkhus who have appeased their thoughts shall
give (me) the robe and the orders that I may
become a Bhikkhu/

Sabhiya,the Paribb&^aka, received the robe and the
orders from Bhagavat, and the venerable Sabhiya,
having lately received the upasampadi, leading a
solitary, retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived
after having in a short time in this existence by his
own understanding ascertained and possessed himself
of that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander
away from their houses to a houseless state. * Birth
had been destroyed, a religious life had been led,
what was to be done had been done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence/ so he
perceived, and the venerable Sabhiya became one
of the saints.

Sabhiyasutta is ended.


96 MAHAVAGGA.


7. SELASUTTA.

Kemya, the £a/ila, invites Buddha with his assembly to take his
meals with him on the morrow. Sela, the Brdhmawa, arrived at
that place with his three hundred young men ; seeing the pre-
parations he asks what is going on, and is answered that Buddha
is expected the next day. On hearing the word ' Buddha/ Sela
asks where Buddha lives, goes to him, converses with him, and
is converted ; so are his followers.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhaga vat wandering about in Afigut-
tar&pa, with a large assembly of Bhikkhus, with 1250
Bhikkhus, went to Apa/za, a town in Anguttarapa.

And Ke/ziya, the ascetic, with matted hair (^*a/ila)
heard the following : ' The Samara, the venerable
Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out from the family of
the Sakyas, wandering about in Anguttar&pa with a
large assembly of Bhikkhus, with 1250 Bhikkhus,
has reached Apa^a, and the following good praising
words met the venerable Gotama : " And so he is
Bhagavat, the venerable, the perfectly enlightened,
endowed with science and works (vi^*aiara^a), the
happy, knowing the world, the incomparable, the
charioteer of men that are to be subdued, the
master, the enlightened of gods and men, the glo-
rious ; he teaches this world and the world of gods,
of M&ras, of Brahmans, and beings comprising Sa-
maras and Br&hma/zas, gods and men, having him-
self known and seen them face to face ; he teaches
the Dhamma (which is) good in the beginning, in
the middle, and in the end, is full of meaning and
rich in words, quite complete ; he teaches a religious
life, and good is the sight of such saints." '

Then Ke/ziya, the 6a/ila, went (to the place) where


SELASUTTA. 97


Bhagavat was, and having gone there he talked
pleasantly with him, and after having had some
pleasant and remarkable conversation (with him) he
sat down apart ; and while Ke/ziya, the 6Wila, was
sitting down apart, Bhagavat, by religious talk,
taught, advised, roused, and delighted him. Then
Kemya, the GWila, having been taught, advised,
roused, and delighted by Bhagavat through religious
talk, said this to Bhagavat :

( Let the venerable Gotama accept my food to-
morrow, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus/

This having been said, Bhagavat answered
Kemya, the GWila : ' Large, O Kemya, is the
assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two hundred
and fifty Bhikkhus, and thou art intimate with the
Brahma^as/

A second time Kemya, the 6a/ila, said this to
Bhagavat : ' Although, O venerable Gotama, the
assembly of Bhikkhus is large, one thousand two
hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, and I am intimate with
the Brdhma^as, let the venerable Gotama accept
my food to-morrow, together with the assembly of
Bhikkhus/

A second time Bhagavat said this to Ke/ziya, the
6a^ila : ' Large, O Ke/ziya, is the assembly of Bhik-
khus, one thousand two hundred and fifty Bhikkhus,
and thou art intimate with the Br&hma^as/

A third time Ke^iya, the GWila, said this to Bha-
gavat: 'Although, O venerable Gotama, the assembly
of Bhikkhus is large, one thousand two hundred and
fifty Bhikkhus, and I am intimate with the Brdh-
ma^as, yet let the venerable Gotama accept my food
to-morrow, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus/
Bhagavat assented by being silent.

[10] H


98 MAHAVAGGA.


Then Ke/ziya, the GWila, having learnt the assent
of Bhagavat, after rising from his seat went to his
hermitage, and having gone there he addressed his
friends and servants, his relatives and kinsmen (as
follows) : ' Let my venerable friends and servants,
relatives and kinsmen hear me ; — the Sama/za Go-
tama has been invited by me to (take his) food (with
me) to-morrow, together with the assembly of Bhik-
khus; wherefore you must render me bodily service/

' Surely, O venerable one/ so saying the friends
and servants, relatives and kinsmen of Kemya, the
GWila, complying with his request, some of them dug
fireplaces, some chopped firewood, some washed the
vessels, some placed waterpots, some prepared seats.
Kemya, the GWila, on the other hand, himself pro-
vided a circular pavilion.

At that time the Br&hma/za Sela lived at Apa/za,
perfect in the three Vedas, vocabulary, Ke^ubha,
etymology, Itihasa as the fifth (Veda), versed in
metre, a grammarian, one not deficient in popular
controversy and the signs of a great man, he taught
three hundred young men the hymns1. At that
time Ke/ziya, the GWila, was intimate with the
Br&hma/za Sela. Then the Brahma^a Sela sur-
rounded by three hundred young men, walking on
foot, arrived at the place where the hermitage of
Ke/ziya, the GWila, was. And the Brahma/za Sela
saw the GWilas in Ke/ziyas hermitage, some of them
diggIng fireplaces, some chopping firewood, some
washing the vessels, some placing waterpots, some


1 Tena kho pana samayena Selo brahma/zo Apa«e pa/ivasati
tinmm vedanaffz paragfi sanigha«</uke/ubhana#* s&kkharappabhe-
d&naztf itihasapa^amana^ padako veyyakara/zo lokayatamahapuri-
salakkhawesu anavayo tim mawavakasatdni mante va^eti.


SELASUTTA.


preparing seats, and Ke^iya, the GWila, on the other
hand, himself providing a circular pavilion ; seeing
Ke^iya, the 6Wila, he said this : ' Is the venerable
Ke/ziya to celebrate the marriage of a son or the
marriage of a daughter, or is there a great sacrifice
at hand, or has Bimbisira, the king of Magadha,
who has a large body of troops, been invited for
to-morrow, together with his army?'

' I am not to celebrate the marriage of a son or
the marriage of a daughter, nor has Bimbisara, the
king of Magadha, who has a large body of troops,
been invited for to-morrow, together with his army,
yet a great sacrifice of mine is at hand. The Sa-
mara Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out from the
Sakya family, wandering about in Anguttarapa with
a large assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two
hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, has reached Apa^a, and
the following good praising words met the venerable
Gotama: "And so he is Bhagavat, the venerable,
the perfectly enlightened, endowed with science and
works (vigfaiara/za), the happy, knowing the world,
the incomparable, the charioteer of men that are to
be subdued, the master, the enlightened of gods
and men, the glorious, he has been invited by
me for to-morrow, together with the assembly of
Bhikkhus.,, '

* Didst thou say that he is a Buddha, O venerable
Ke/ziya ? '

' Yes, I say, O venerable Sela, that he is a Buddha/
' Didst thou say that he is a Buddha, O venerable
Ke/ziya ? '

' Yes, I say, O venerable Sela, that he is a Buddha/

Then this occurred to the Brahma^a Sela : ' This

sound " Buddha" is (indeed) rare, but in our hymns

H 2


IOO MAHAVAGGA.


are to be found the thirty-two signs of a great man,
and for a great man endowed with these there are
two conditions and no more : if he lives in a house
he is a king, a universal (king), a just religious king,
a lord of the four-cornered (earth), a conqueror, one
who has obtained the security of his people (and) is
possessed of the seven gems. These are his seven
gems, namely, the wheel gem, the elephant gem,
the horse gem, the pearl gem, the woman gem, the
householder gem, and the chief gem as the seventh.
He has more than a thousand sons, heroes, possessing
great bodily strength and crushing foreign armies ;
he having conquered this ocean-girt earth without a
rod and without a weapon, but by justice, lives (in a
house). But if, on the other hand, he goes out from
(his) house to the houseless state, he becomes a
saint, a perfectly enlightened, one who has removed
the veil in the world. And where, O venerable
Kemya, dwells now that venerable Gotama, the
saint and the perfectly enlightened ? '

This having been said, Kemya, the GWila,
stretching out his right arm, spoke as follows to the
Brdhma^a Sela : ' There, where yon blue forest line
is, O venerable Sela/

Then the Brahma^a Sela together with (his) three
hundred young men went to the place where Bhaga-
vat was. Then the Brahma^a Sela addressed those
young men : ' Come ye, venerable ones, with but
little noise, walking step by step, for Bhagavats are
difficult of access, walking alone like lions, and when
I speak to the venerable Samara Gotama, do ye not
utter interrupting words, but wait ye venerable ones,
for the end of my speech/

Then the Brahma^a Sela went to the place where


SELASUTTA. IOI


Bhagavat was, and having gone there he talked
pleasantly with Bhagavat, and after having had some
pleasant and remarkable conversation with him he
sat down apart, and while sitting down apart Sela,
the Brihma^a, looked for the thirty-two signs of
a great man on the body of Bhagavat. And the
Br&hma^a Sela saw the thirty-two signs of a great
man on the body of Bhagavat with the exception of
two ; in respect to two of the signs of a great man
he had doubts, he hesitated, he was not satisfied, he
was not assured as to the member being enclosed in
a membrane and as to his having a large tongue.

Then this occurred to Bhagavat: 'This Brahma^a
Sela sees in me the thirty- two signs of a great man
with the exception of two, in respect to two of the
signs of a great man he has doubts, he hesitates, he
is not satisfied, he is not assured as to the member
being enclosed in a membrane, and as to my having
a large tongue/ Then Bhagavat created such a
miraculous creature that the Brahma/za Sela might
see Bhagavat's member enclosed in a membrane.
Then Bhagavat having put out his tongue touched
and stroked both his ears, touched and stroked both
nostrils, and the whole circumference of his forehead
he covered with his tongue.

Then this occurred to the Brihma^a Sela : ' The
Samara Gotama is endowed with the thirty-two signs
of a great man, with them all, not with (only) some
of them, and yet I do not know whether he is a
Buddha or not ; I have heard old and aged Br&h-
ma;zas, teachers and their previous teachers, say
that those who are saints and perfectly enlightened
manifest themselves when their praise is uttered.
I think I shall praise the Samara Gotama face to


102 MAHAVAGGA.


face in suitable stanzas/ Then the Brahma/za Sela
praised Bhagavat face to face in suitable stanzas :

i . * Thou hast a perfect body, thou art resplen-
dent, well-born, of beautiful aspect, thou hast a golden
colour, O Bhagavat, thou hast very white teeth,
thou art strong. (54-8)

2. * All the signs that are for a well-born man, they
are on thy body, the signs of a great man. (549)

3. fThou hast a bright eye, a handsome coun-
tenance, thou art great, straight, majestic, thou
shinest like a sun in the midst of the assembly of
the Samaras. (55°)

4. * Thou art a Bhikkhu of a lovely appearance,
thou hast a skin like gold ; what is the use of being
a Samara to thee who art possessed of the highest
beauty? (551)

5. ' Thou deservest to be a king, a king of uni-
versal kings, a ruler of the four-cornered (earth),
a conqueror, a lord of the jambu grove (i. e.
India). (552)

6. ' Khattiyas and wealthy kings are devoted to
thee ; rule, O Gotama, as a king of kings, a leader
of men.' (553)

7. ' I am a king, O Sela/ — so said Bhagavat, —
' an incomparable, religious king (dhammar^an), with
justice (dhammena) I turn the wheel, a wheel that is
irresistible1/ (554)

8. ' Thou acknowledgest thyself (to be) perfectly
enlightened (sambuddha)/ — so said Sela, the Brah-
ma^a, — ' an incomparable, religious king ; " with
justice I turn the wheel," so thou sayest, O
Gotama. (555)


Compare Gospel of S.John xviii. 37.


SELASUTTA. 103


9. 'Who is thy general, (who is thy) disciple,
(who is) the successor of the master, who is to
turn after thee the wheel of religion turned (by
thee)?' (556)

10. 'The wheel turned by me, O Sela/ — so said
Bhagavat, — 'the incomparable wheel of religion,
Sariputta is to turn after (me), he taking after
Tathagata. (557)

11. 'What is to be known is known (by me),
what is to be cultivated is cultivated (by me), what
is to be left is left by me, therefore I am a Buddha,
O Brahma^a. (558)

12. 'Subdue thy doubt about me, have faith (in
me), O Br&hma/za, difficult (to obtain) is the sight of
Buddhas repeatedly. (559)

1 3. ' Of those whose manifestation is difficult for
you (to obtain) in the world repeatedly, I am, O
Brdhma^a, a perfectly enlightened, an incomparable
physician, (560)

14. 'Most eminent, matchless, a crusher of Maras
army ; having subjected all enemies I rejoice secure
on every side/ (561)

15. Sela: 'O venerable ones, pay attention to
this : as the clearly-seeing (Buddha) says, (so it is) :
he is a physician, a great hero, and roars like a
lion in the forest. (5^2)

16. 'Who, having seen him, the most eminent,
the matchless, the crusher of Mira's army, is not
appeased, even if he be of black origin (ka^hdbhi-
^itika). (563)

17. 'He who likes me, let him follow after (me),
he who does not like me, let him go away ; I shall
at once take the orders in the presence of him of
excellent understanding (i. e. Buddha).' (564)


104 MAHAVAGGA.


1 8. The followers of Sela : ' If this doctrine of the
perfectly enlightened pleases thee, we also shall take
the orders in the presence of him of excellent under-
standing/ (565)

19. These three hundred Brahma^as asked with
clasped hands (to be admitted into the order) : ' We
want to cultivate a religious life, O Bhagavat, in thy
presence/ (566)

20. 'A religious life is well taught (by me), — O
Sela/ so said Bhagavat, — ' an instantaneous, an im-
mediate (life), in which it is not in vain to become
an ascetic to one who learns in earnest1/ (567)

Then the Brahma^a Sela together with his as-
sembly took the robe and the orders in the presence
of Bhagavat.

Then Ke/ziya, the GWila, by the expiration of that
night, having provided in his hermitage nice hard
food and soft food, let Bhagavat know the time (of
the meal): * It is time, O venerable Gotama, the
meal is prepared/ Then Bhagavat in the morning,
having put on his raiment and taken his bowl and
robes, went to the GWila Kenya's hermitage, and
having gone there he sat down on the prepared
seat, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus. Then
Ke^iya, the Garila, satisfied and served with his own
hands the assembly of Bhikkhus, with Buddha at
their head, with nice hard food and soft food. Then
Ke/nya, the 6Wila, having gone up to Bhagavat who
had finished eating and had taken his hand out of
the bowl, took a low seat and sat down apart, and


Svakkhataw brahma^ariyaw
Sandi///^ika^ akalikaw
Yattha amoghd pabba^d
Appamattassa sikkhato.


SELASUTTA. 105


while Ke/ziya, the GWila, was sitting down apart,
Bhagavat delighted him with these stanzas :

21. ( The principal thing in sacrifice is the sacred
fire, the principal thing amongst the hymns is the Sa-
vitti1, the king is the principal amongst men, and the
sea the principal amongst waters (nadtna^2). (568)

22. 'Amongst the stars the moon is the prin-
cipal thing, the sun is the principal thing amongst
the burning 3 (objects), amongst those that wish for
good works and make offerings the assembly (sa^-
gha) indeed is the principal/ (569)

Then Bhagavat, having delighted Ke^iya, the
GWila, with these stanzas, rose from (his) seat and
went away.

Then the venerable Sela together with his as-
sembly leading a solitary, retired, strenuous, ardent,
energetic life, lived after having in a short time in
this existence by his own understanding ascertained
and possessed himself of that highest perfection of a
religious life for the sake of which men of good
family rightly wander away from their houses to a
houseless state ; ' birth (had been) destroyed, a reli-
gious life (had been) led, what was to be done (had
been) done, there was nothing else (to be done) for
this existence/ so he perceived, and the venerable
Sela together with his assembly became one of the
saints.

Then the venerable Sela together with his as-
sembly went to Bhagavat, and having gone (to him)
he put his upper robe on one shoulder, and bending
his joined hands towards Bhagavat he addressed
him in stanzas:

1 Savitti ^andaso mukhaw. 2 Comp. Nalakasutta v. 42.

3 Adi^o tapataw mukha^.


106 MAHAVAGGA.


23. because we took refuge in thee on the eighth
day previous to this, O thou clearly-seeing, in seven
nights, O Bhagavat, we have been trained in thy
doctrine. (57°)

24. ' Thou art Buddha, thou art the Master, thou
art the Muni that conquered M£ra, thou hast, after
cutting off the affections, crossed over (the stream
of existence) and taken over these beings. (571)

25. ' The elements of existence (upadhi) have been
overcome by thee, the passions have been destroyed
by thee, thou art a lion not seizing on anything, thou
hast left behind fear and danger. (572)

26. * These three hundred Bhikkhus stand here
with clasped hands ; stretch out thy feet, O hero, let
the N&gas worship the Masters feet/ (573)

Selasutta is ended.


8. SALLASUTTA.

Life is short, all mortals are subject to death, but knowing the
terms of the world the wise do not grieve, and those who have
left sorrow will be blessed. — Text in the Dasaratha-G&taka,
P- 34.

i. Without a cause and unknown is the life of
mortals in this world, troubled and brief, and com-
bined with pain. (574)

2. For there is not any means by which those
that have been born can avoid dying ; after reaching
old age there is death, of such a nature are living
beings. (575)

3. As ripe fruits are early in danger of falling,
so mortals when born are always in danger of
death. (576)

4. As all earthen vessels made by the potter end
in being broken, so is the life of mortals. (577)


SALLASUTTA. IO7


5. Both young and grown-up men, both those who
are fools and those who are wise men, all fall into
the power of death, all are subject to death. (578)

6. Of those who, overcome by death, go to the
other world, a father does not save his son, nor rela-
tives their relations. (579)

7. Mark! while relatives are looking on and lament-
ing greatly, one by one of the mortals is carried off,
like an ox that is going to be killed. (5 80)

8. So the world is afflicted with death and decay,
therefore the wise do not grieve, knowing the terms
of the world. (581)

9. For him, whose way thou dost not know, either
when he is coming or when he is going, not seeing
both ends, thou grievest in vain. (582)

10. If he who grieves gains anything, (although
he is only) a fool hurting himself, let the wise man
do the same. (583)

11. Not from weeping nor from grieving will
any one obtain peace of mind; (on the contrary),
the greater his pain will be, and his body will
suffer. (584)

12. He will be lean and pale, hurting himself by
himself, (and yet) the dead are not saved, lamenta-
tion (therefore) is of no avail. (585)

13. He who does not leave grief behind, goes
(only) deeper into pain; bewailing the dead he
falls into the power of grief. (586)

14. Look at others passing away, men that go (to
what they deserve) according to their deeds, beings
trembling already here, after falling into the power
of death. (587)

15. In whatever manner people think (it will come
to pass), different from that it becomes, so great is


I08 MAHAVAGGA.


the disappointment1 (in this world) ; see, (such are)
the terms of the world. (588)

16. Even if a man lives a hundred years or even
more, he is at last separated from the company of
his relatives, and leaves life in this world. (5 89)

1 7. Therefore let one, hearing (the words of) the
saint, subdue his lamentation ; seeing the one that
has passed away and is dead, (let him say) : ' He will
not be found by me (any more)/ (59°)

18. As a house on fire is extinguished by water,
so also the wise, sensible, learned, clever man rapidly
drives away sorrow that has arisen, as the wind a
tuft of cotton. (59 1)

19. He who seeks his own happiness should draw
out his arrow (which is) his lamentation, and com-
plaint, and grief. (592)

20. He who has drawn out the arrow and is not
dependent (on anything) will obtain peace of mind ;
he who has overcome all sorrow will become free
from sorrow, and blessed (nibbuta). (593)

Sallasutta is ended.


9. VASEZrZfASUTTA.

A dispute arose between two young men, Bharadva^a and Vase//^a,
the former contending man to be a Brahma^a by birth, the latter
by deeds. They agreed to go and ask Samara Gotama, and he
answered that man is a Brahmaraa by his work only. The two
young men are converted. — Text (from Mag^imanik&ya) and
translation in Alwis's Buddhist Nirvana, p. 103.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at I/£/§Mna^kala, in
the I/£/£Mna^kala forest. At that time many dis-

1 Etadiso vinabhavo.


VASETTffASUTTA. 109


tinguished, wealthy BrcLhrna^as lived at l&M&nam-
kala, as the Brahma^a Kamkin, the Brahma/za
Tarukkha, the Brahma/za Pokkharasati, the Brah-
ma^a ^anusso/zi, the Brahma^a Todeyya, and other
distinguished, wealthy Brdhma^as.

Then this dialogue arose between the young men
Vdse//^a and Bharadva^a while walking about :

' How does one become a Brahma^a ?'

The young man Bharadva^a said : ' When one
is noble by birth on both sides, on the mothers and
on the fathers side, of pure conception up to the
seventh generation of ancestors, not discarded and
not reproached in point of birth, in this way one is
a Brahma;za/

The young man Vase^a said : * When one is
virtuous and endowed with (holy) works, in this way
he is a Brahma^a/

Neither could the young man Bh&radva^a con-
vince the young man V&se^a, nor could the young
man Vase///£a convince the young man Bharadv&^a.
Then the young man Vdse/^a addressed the young
man Bharadvaf a : ' O Bharadva^a, this Samara
Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out from the Sakya
family, dwells at I/£Mana^kala, in the forest of
I/§/£Mna;/zkala, and the following good praising words
met the venerable Gotama : " And so he is Bha-
gavat, the venerable, the enlightened, the glorious,
let us go, O venerable Bhdradvd^a, let us go (to
the place) where the Samara Gotama is, and having
gone there let us ask the Samara Gotama about
this matter, and as the Samara Gotama replies so
will we understand it." '

' Very well, O venerable one ;' so the young man
Bharadva^a answered the young man Vase#/£a.


IIO MAHAVAGGA.


Then the young men Vdse//^a and Bharadv^a
went (to the place) where Bhagavat was, and having
gone, they talked pleasantly with Bhagavat, and
after having had some pleasant and remarkable con-
versation (with him) they sat down apart. Sitting
down apart the young man Vise/^a addressed Bha-
gavat in stanzas :

i. ' We are accepted and acknowledged masters
of the three Vedas 1, I am (a pupil) of Pokkharas&ti,
and this young man is (the pupil) of Tarukkha. (594)

2. * We are accomplished in all the knowledge
propounded by those who are acquainted with the
three Vedas, we are padakas (versed in the metre),
veyy&kara/zas (grammarians ?), and equal to our
teachers in recitation (^*appa)2. (595)

3. ' We have a controversy regarding (the distinc-
tions of) birth, O Gotama! Bharadva£*a says, one
is a Brahma/za by birth, and I say, by deeds ; know
this, O thou clearly-seeing ! (596)

4. * We are both unable to convince each other,
(therefore) we have come to ask thee (who art) cele-
brated as perfectly enlightened. (597)

5. ' As people adoring the full moon worship (her)
with uplifted clasped hands, so (they worship) Gotama
in the world. (59§)

6. ' We ask Gotama who has come as an eye to
the world : Is a man a Brahma/za by birth, or is he so

1 Anmmatapatm^atd
Tevi^a mayam asm' ubho.

2 Tevigg-ana/tf * yad akkMtaw
Tatra kevalino 'smase,
Padak' asm& veyyakara#&
Gappet d^ariyasadisa.

* Tevig#anam==tivedanam. Commentator; but compare v. 63.
f Gappe = vede. Commentator.


VASE7THASUTTA. I 1 1


by deeds ? Tell us who do not know, that we may
know a Br&hma^a/ (599)

7. ' I will explain to you,— O Vase#/£a,' so said
Bhagavat, — ' in due order the exact distinction of
living beings according to species, for their species
are manifold. (600)

8. ' Know ye the grass and the trees, although they
do not exhibit (it), the marks that constitute species
are for them, and (their) species are manifold. (601)

9. ' Then (know ye) the worms, and the moths,
and the different sorts of ants, the marks that con-
stitute species are for them, and (their) species are
manifold. (602)

10. ' Know ye also the four-footed (animals), small
and great, the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold. (603)

11. * Know ye also the serpents, the long-backed
snakes, the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold. (604)

1 2. ' Then know ye also the fish which range in
the water, the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold. (605)

13. ' Then know ye also the birds that are borne
along on wings and move through the air, the marks
that constitute species are for them, and (their) spe-
cies are manifold. (606)

14. ' As in these species the marks that constitute
species are abundant, so in men the marks that con-
stitute species are not abundant. (607)

15. ' Not as regards their hair, head, ears, eyes,
mouth, nose, lips, or brows, (608)

16. * Nor as regards their neck, shoulders,
belly, back, hip, breast, female organ, sexual inter-
course, (609)


1 1 2 MAHAVAGGA.


1.7. 'Nor as regards their hands, feet, palms,
nails, calves, thighs, colour, or voice are there marks
that constitute species as in other species. (610)

18. ' Difference there is in beings endowed with
bodies, but amongst men this is not the case, the
difference amongst men is nominal (only)1. (61 1)

19. 'For whoever amongst men lives by cow-
keeping, — know this, O Vase^a, — he is a husband-
man, not a Brahma^a. (6.12)

20. ' And whoever amongst men lives by dif-
ferent mechanical arts, — know this, O V&se///£a, —
he is an artisan, not a Brahma/za. (613)

2i.' And whoever amongst men lives by trade, —
know this, O Vdse^a, — he is a merchant, not a
Brahma/za. (614)

22. And whoever amongst men lives by serving
others, — know this, O Vase/^a, — he is a servant,
not a Brahma^a. (615)

23. ' And whoever amongst men lives by theft, —
know this, O V&se^a,— he is a thief, not a Brah-
ma/za. (616)

24. 'And whoever amongst men lives by archery,
— know this, O Vdse/Z^a, — he is a soldier, not a
Brahma/za. (617)

25. 'And whoever amongst men lives by per-
forming household ceremonials, — know this, O Vci-
se#/£a, — -he is a sacrificer, not a Brahma;za. (618)

26. 'And whoever amongst men possesses villages
and countries, — know this, O Vase///4a, — he is a king,
not a Brahma^a, (619)

1 Pa^attaw sasariresu,
Manussesv-eta#z na vig^ati,
Vokaraw ka, manussesu
Samamlaya pavu^iati.


VASEfTtf ASUTTA. 1 1 3


27. 'And I do not call one a Brihma^a on account
of his birth or of his origin from (a particular)
mother ; he may be called bhovadi, and he may be
wealthy, (but) the one who is possessed of nothing
and seizes upon nothing, him I call a Br&h-
ma^a1. (620)

28. 'Whosoever, after cutting all bonds, does not
tremble, has shaken off (all) ties and is liberated, him
I call a Brihma/za. (621)

29. ' The man who, after cutting the strap (i. e.
enmity), the thong (i. e. attachment), and the rope
(i.e. scepticism) with all that pertains to it, has
destroyed (all) obstacles (i. e. ignorance), the enlight-
ened (buddha), him I call a Brahma^a. (622)

30. 'Whosoever, being innocent, endures reproach,
blows, and bonds, the man who is strong in (his)
endurance and has for his army this strength, him
I call a Brahma^a. (623)

31. 'The man who is free from anger, endowed
with (holy) works, virtuous, without desire, sub-
dued, and wearing the last body, him I call a Brah-
ma#a. (624)

32. 'The man who, like water on a lotus leaf, or a
mustard seed on the point of a needle, does not cling
to sensual pleasures, him I call a Brdhma^a. (625)

33. 'The man who knows in this world the de-
struction of his pain, who has laid aside (his) burden,
and is liberated, him I call a Brahma^a. (626)

34. ' The man who has a profound understanding,
who is wise, who knows the true way and the wrong
way, who has attained the highest good, him I call
a Brihma^a. {&2l)


1 Comp. Dhp. v. 396, &c.

[10] I


114 MAHAVAGGA.


35. ' The man who does not mix with householders
nor with the houseless, who wanders about without
a house, and who has few wants, him I call a Br&h-
ma/za. (628)

36. 'Whosoever, after refraining from hurting
(living) creatures, (both) those that tremble and
those that are strong, does not kill or cause to be
killed, him I call a Brahma^a. (629)

3 7. ' The man who is not hostile amongst the
hostile, who is peaceful amongst the violent, not
seizing (upon anything) amongst those that seize
(upon everything), him I call a Brclhma^a. (630)

38. 'The man whose passion and hatred, arrogance
and hypocrisy have dropt like a mustard seed from
the point of a needle, him I call a Brahma/za. (631)

39. ' The man that utters true speech, instructive
and free from harshness, by which he does not
offend any one, him I call a Br&hma^a. (632)

40. ' Whosoever in the world does not take what
has not been given (to him), be it long or short,
small or large, good or bad, him I call a Brih-
ma^a. (633)

41. 'The man who has no desire for this world
or the next, who is desireless and liberated, him
I call a Brahma/za. (634)

42. 'The man who has no desire, who know-
ingly is free from doubt, and has attained the depth
of immortality, him I call a BrS.hma^a. (635)

43. ' Whosoever in this world has overcome good
and evil, both ties, who is free from grief and defile-
ment, and is pure, him I call a Brdhma^a. (636)

44. 'The man that is stainless like the moon,
pure, serene, and undisturbed, who has destroyed
joy, him I call a Brahma/za. (637)


VASETTH ASU TTA. 1 1 5


45. * Whosoever has passed over this quagmire
difficult to pass, (who has passed over) revolution
(sawsara) and folly, who has crossed over, who has
reached the other shore, who is meditative, free
from desire and doubt, calm without seizing (upon
anything), him I call a Brahma^a. (638)

46. ' Whosoever in this world, after abandoning
sensual pleasures, wanders about houseless, and
has destroyed the existence of sensual pleasures
(kamabhava), him I call a Brahma^a. (639)

47. * Whosoever in this world, after abandoning
desire, wanders about houseless, and has destroyed
the existence of desire (ta^habhava), him I call a
Br&hma/za. (640)

48. ' Whosoever, after leaving human attachment
(yoga), has overcome divine attachment, and is
liberated from all attachment, him I call a Br&h-
ma^a. (641)

49. * The man that, after leaving pleasure and
disgust, is calm and free from the elements of exist-
ence (nirupadhi), who is a hero, and has conquered
all the world, him I call a Brahma/za. (642)

50. ' Whosoever knows wholly the vanishing and
reappearance of beings, does not cling to (anything),
is happy (sugata), and enlightened, him I call a
Brihma^a. (643)

51. ' The man whose way neither gods nor Gan-
dhabbas nor men know, and whose passions are de-
stroyed, who is a saint, him I call a Br&hma^a. (644)

52. * The man for whom there is nothing, neither
before nor after nor in the middle, who possesses
nothing, and does not seize (upon anything), him
I call a Brahma/za. (645)

53. ' The (man that is undaunted like a) bull, who

1 2


Il6 MAHAVAGGA.


is eminent, a hero, a great sage (mahesi), victorious,
free from desire, purified, enlightened, him I call a
Brahma^a. (646)

54. ' The man who knows his former dwellings,
who sees both heaven and hell, and has reached the
destruction of births, him I call a Br&hma/za. (647)

55. ' For what has been designated as "name"
and " family " in the world is only a term, what has
been designated here and there is understood by
common consent *. (648)

56. ' Adhered to for a long time are the views of
the ignorant, the ignorant tell us, one is a BrAhma^a
by birth. (649)

57. * Not by birth is one a Br&hma^a, nor is one
by birth no Brahma^a ; by work (kammana) one is
a Brahma^a, by work one is no Br&hma/za. (650)

58. i By work one is a husbandman, by work one
is an artisan, by work one is a merchant, by work
one is a servant. (651)

59. ' By work one is a thief, by work one is a
soldier, by work one is a sacrificer, by work one is
a king. (652)

60. i So the wise, who see the cause of things and
understand the result of work, know this work as
it really is2. (653)

61. 'By work the world exists, by work mankind


Samaimd h' es& lokasmiw
Namagottaw pakappitaw
Sammu^M samud%ata^
Tattha tattha pakappita^.
Evam eta*rc yathabhutaw
Kammaw passanti pa#</ita
Pa/i^asamuppddadasd
Kammavipakakovida.


VASErr#ASUTTA. 117


exists, beings are bound by work as the linch-pin
of the rolling cart (keeps the wheel on) \ (654)

62. * By penance, by a religious life, by self-restraint,
and by temperance, by this one is a Brahma^a, such
a one (they call) the best Br&hma/za. (655)

63. ' He who is endowed with the threefold
knowledge 2, is calm, and has destroyed regenera-
tion,— know this, O Vase^a, — he is to the wise
Brahman and Sakka/ (656)

This having been said, the young men Vase//^a
and Bharadv&^a spoke to Bhagavat as follows :

* It is excellent,© venerable Gotama! It is excellent,
O venerable Gotama ! As one raises what has been
overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden, or
tells the way to him who has gone astray, or holds
out an oil lamp in the dark that those who have eyes
may see the objects, even so by the venerable Go-
tama in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illus-
trated ; we take refuge in the venerable Gotama, in
the Dhamma, and in the Assembly of Bhikkhus;
may the venerable Gotama receive us as followers
(upisaka), who from this day for life have taken
refuge (in him)/

Vase^asutta is ended.


1 Kammana vattati loko,
Kammana vattati pa^,
KammanibandhanS, satta,
Rathassamva yayato.

2 Tihi vi^g-ahi sampanno.


I I 8 MAHAVAGGA.


10. KOKALIYASUTTA.

Kokaliya abuses Sariputta and Moggallana to Buddha ; therefore
as soon as he has left Buddha, he is struck with boils, dies and
goes to the Paduma hell, whereupon Buddha describes to the
Bhikkhus the punishment of backbiters in hell.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Savatthi, in
Getavana, in the park of Andthapi^ika. Then
the Bhikkhu Kok&liya approached Bhagavat, and
after having approached and saluted Bhagavat he
sat down apart; sitting down apart the Bhikkhu
Kok&liya said this to Bhagavat : 'O thou venerable
one, S&riputta and Moggallana have evil desires,
they have fallen into the power of evil desires/

When this had been said, Bhagavat spoke to the
Bhikkhu Kokaliya as follows : ' (Do) not (say) so,
Kokaliya ; (do) not (say) so, Kokaliya ; appease, O
Kok&liya, (thy) mind in regard to Sariputta and
Moggallana: Siriputta and Moggallana are amiable1/

A second time the Bhikkhu Kokaliya said this to
Bhagavat : ' Although thou, O venerable Bhagavat,
(appearest) to me (to be) faithful and trustworthy,
yet S&riputta and MoggaMna have evil desires, they
have fallen into the power of evil desires/

A second time Bhagavat said this to the Bhikkhu
Kokaliya : * (Do) not (say) so, Kok&liya ; (do) not
(say) so, Kok&liya; appease, O Kokaliya, (thy) mind
in regard to Sariputta and Moggallana : Sariputta and
Moggallana are amiable/

A third time the Bhikkhu Kokiliya said this to
Bhagavat : ' Although thou, O venerable Bhagavat,
(appearest) to me (to be) faithful and trustworthy,

1 Pes a la ti piyasila. Commentator.


KOKALIYASUTTA. 1 19


yet Sdriputta and MoggaMna have evil desires,
Sdriputta and MoggaMna have fallen into the power
of evil desires/

A third time Bhagavat said this to the Bhikkhu
Kokaliya: '(Do) not (say) so, Kokaliya; (do) not
(say) so, Kokdliya; appease, O Kokdliya, (thy) mind
in regard to Sdriputta and MoggaMna : Sariputta
and Moggallana are amiable/

Then the Bhikkhu Kokaliya, after having risen
from his seat and saluted Bhagavat and walked
round him towards the right, went away ; and when
he had been gone a short time, all his body was
struck with boils as large as mustard seeds; after
being only as large as mustard seeds, they became
as large as kidney beans ; after being only as large
as kidney beans, they became as large as chick peas;
after being only as large as chick peas, they became
as large as a Kola//>&i egg (?) ; after being only as
large as a Kola#/£i eggy they became as large as the
jujube fruit ; after being only as large as the jujube
fruit, they became as large as the fruit of the emblic
myrobalan ; after being only as large as the fruit of
the emblic myrobalan, they became as large as the
unripe beluva fruit ; after being only as large as the
unripe beluva fruit, they became as large as a billi
fruit (?); after being as large as a billi fruit, they
broke, and matter and blood flowed out. Then
the Bhikkhu Kokdliya died of that disease, and when
he had died the Bhikkhu Kokaliya went to the
Paduma hell, having shown a hostile mind against
Sariputta and MoggaMna. Then when the night
had passed Brahman Sahampati of a beautiful ap-
pearance, having lit up all £etavana, approached
Bhagavat, and having approached and saluted Bha-


1 20 MAHAVAGGA.


gavat, he stood apart, and standing apart Brahman
Sahampati said this to Bhagavat : ' O thou venera-
ble one, Kokiliya, the Bhikkhu, is dead; and after
death, O thou venerable one, the Bhikkhu Kok&liya
is gone to the Paduma hell, having shown a hostile
mind against Sariputta and Moggallana/

This said Brahman Sahampati, and after saying
this and saluting Bhagavat, and walking round him
towards the right, he disappeared there.

Then Bhagavat, after the expiration of that
night, addressed the Bhikkhus thus : ' Last night,
O Bhikkhus, when the night had (nearly) passed,
Brahman Sahampati of a beautiful appearance, having
lit up all Cetavana, approached Bhagavat, and having
approached and saluted Bhagavat, he stood apart,
and standing apart Brahman Sahampati said this to
Bhagavat : " O thou venerable one, Kokaliya, the
Bhikkhu, is dead ; and after death, O thou venerable
one, the Bhikkhu Kokiliya is gone to the Paduma
hell, having shown a hostile mind against Sariputta
and MoggaMna." This said Brahman Sahampati, O
Bhikkhus, and having said this and saluted me, and
walked round me towards the right, he disappeared
there/

When this had been said, a Bhikkhu asked Bha-
gavat : ' How long is the rate of life, O venerable
one, in the Paduma hell ?'

' Long, O Bhikkhu, is the rate of life in the Pa-
duma hell, it is not easy to calculate either (by
saying) so many years or so many hundreds of years
or so many thousands of years or so many hundred
thousands of years.'

* But it is possible, I suppose, to make a com-
parison, O thou venerable one ?'


KOKALIYASUTTA. 121


' It is possible, O Bhikkhu;' so saying, Bhagavat
spoke (as follows) : ' Even as, O Bhikkhu, (if there
were) a Kosala load of sesamum seed containing
twenty kharis, and a man after the lapse of every hun-
dred years were to take from it one sesamum seed at
a time, then that Kosala load of sesamum seed, con-
taining twenty kMris, would, O Bhikkhu, sooner by
this means dwindle away and be used up than one
Abbuda hell ; and even as are twenty Abbuda hells,
O Bhikkhu, so is one Nirabbuda hell ; and even as
are twenty Nirabbuda hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one
Ababa hell ; and even as are twenty Ababa hells,
O Bhikkhu, so is one Ahaha hell ; and even as are
twenty Ahaha hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one A/a/a
hell ; and even as are twenty A/a/a hells, O
Bhikkhu, so is one Kumuda hell; and even as
are twenty Kumuda hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one
Sogandhika hell ; and even as are twenty Sogan-
dhika hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Uppalaka hell;
and even as are twenty Uppalaka hells, O Bhikkhu,
so is one Pu/zdarika hell ; and even as are twenty
Pu^arika hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Paduma hell ;
and to the Paduma hell, O Bhikkhu, the Bhikkhu
Kokaliya is gone, having shown a hostile mind
against Sariputta and Moggallana/ This said Bha-
gavat, and having said this Sugata, the Master,
furthermore spoke as follows :

i. 'To (every) man that is born, an axe is born in
his mouth, by which the fool cuts himself, when
speaking bad language. (657)

2, (He who praises him who is to be blamed, or
blames him who is to be praised, gathers up sin
in his mouth, and through that (sin) he will not find
any joy. (658)


122 MAHAVAGGA.


3. ' Trifling is the sin that (consists in) losing
riches by dice ; this is a greater sin that corrupts
the mind against Sugatas. (659)

4. ' Out of the one hundred thousand Nirabbudas
(he goes) to thirty-six, and to five Abbudas ; because
he blames an Ariya he goes to hell, having employed
his speech and mind badly. (660)

5. ' He who speaks falsely goes to hell, or he
who having done something says, " I have not
done it;" both these after death become equal, in
another world (they are both) men guilty of a
mean deed1. (661)

6. ' He who offends an offenceless man, a pure
man, free from sin, such a fool the evil (deed)
reverts against, like fine dust thrown against the
wind2. (662)

7. ' He who is given to the quality of covetous-
ness, such a one censures others in his speech,
(being himself) unbelieving, stingy, wanting in affa-
bility, niggardly, given to backbiting. (663)

8. ' O thou foul-mouthed, false, ignoble, blasting,
wicked, evil-doing, low, sinful, base-born man, do
not be garrulous in this world, (else) thou wilt be
an inhabitant of hell 3. (664)

9. * Thou spreadest pollution to the misfortune
(of others), thou revilest the just, committing sin
(yourself), and having done many evil deeds thou
wilt go to the pool (of hell) for a long time. (665)

1 Comp. Dhp. v. 306. 2 Comp. Dhp. v. 125.

3 Mukhadugga vibhftta-m-anariya
Bhftnahu* papaka dukkatakari
Purisanta kali ava^ata
Ma bahubMm dha nerayiko si.

* Bhunahu bhutihanaka vuddhinasaka. Commentator.


KOKALIYASUTTA. 1 23


10. * For one's deeds are not lost, they will
surely come (back to you), (their) master will meet
with them, the fool who commits sin will feel the
pain in himself in the other world1. (666)

ii. ' To the place where one is struck with iron
rods, to the iron stake with sharp edges he goes ;
then there is (for him) food as appropriate, resem-
bling a red-hot ball of iron. (667)

12. * For those who have anything to say (there)
do not say fine things, they do not approach (with
pleasing faces); they do not find refuge (from their
sufferings), they lie on spread embers, they enter
a blazing pyre. (668)

13. * Covering (them) with a net they kill (them)
there with iron hammers; they go to dense dark-
ness 2, for that is spread out like the body of the
earth. (669)

14. 'Then (they enter) an iron pot, they enter
a blazing pyre, for they are boiled in those (iron
pots) for a long time, jumping up and down in
the pyre. (670)

15. 'Then he who commits sin is surely boiled
in a mixture of matter and blood ; whatever quarter
he inhabits, he becomes rotten there from coming
in contact (with matter and blood). (671)

16. 'He who commits sin will surely be boiled
in the water, the dwelling-place of worms; there
it is not (possible) to get to the shore, for the jars
(are) exactly alike3. (?) (672)

1 Comp. Revelation xiv. 13.

2 Andha#2 va Timisa^ £tyanti.
8 Pu/avavasathe salilasmi^

Tattha k\m pa^ati kibbisakari,
Gantuztf na hi tiram p' atthi
Sabbasama hi samantakapalla\


124 MAHAVAGGA.


17. 'Again they enter the sharp Asipattavana
with mangled limbs; having seized the tongue
with a hook, the different watchmen (of hell) kill
(them). (673)

18. 'Then they enter Vetara^i, that is difficult
to cross and has got streams of razors with sharp
edges; there the fools fall in, the evil-doers after
having done evil. (674)

19. 'There black, mottled flocks of ravens eat
them who are weeping, and dogs, jackals, great
vultures, falcons, crows tear (them). (675)

20. ' Miserable indeed is the life here (in hell)
which the man sees that commits sin. Therefore
should a man in this world for the rest of his life
be strenuous, and not indolent. (676)

21. 'Those loads of sesamum seed which are
carried in Paduma hell have been counted by the
wise, they are (several) nahutas and five koris,
and twelve hundred ko/is besides1. (677)

22. 'As long as hells are called painful in this
world, so long people will have to live there for
a long time ; therefore amongst those who have
pure, amiable, and good qualities one should always
guard speech and mind/ (678)

Kokaliyasutta is ended.


11. NALAKASUTTA.

The Isi Asita, also called Kawhasiri, on seeing the gods rejoicing,
asks the cause of it, and having heard that Buddha has been
born, he descends from Tusita heaven. When the Sakyas
showed the child to him, he received it joyfully and prophesied

1 Nahutani hi ko/iyo paw^a bhavanti
Dvadasa ko/isatani pun ama,


NALAKASUTTA. 1 25


about it. Buddha explains to Nalaka, the sister's son of Asita,
the highest state of wisdom. — Compare Lalita-vistara, Adhyaya
VII ; Asita and Buddha, or the Indian Simeon, by J. Muir, in
the Indian Antiquary, Sept. 1878.

VatthugatM.

1. The Isi Asita saw in (their) resting-places
during the day the joyful, delighted flocks of the
Tidasa gods, and the gods in bright clothes, always
highly praising Inda, after taking their clothes and
waving them. (679)

2. Seeing the gods with pleased minds, delighted,
and showing his respect, he said this on that occa-
sion : ' Why is the assembly of the gods so exceed-
ingly pleased, why do they take their clothes and
wave them? (680)

3. 'When there was an encounter with the Asuras,
a victory for the gods, and the Asuras were defeated,
then there was not such a rejoicing. What wonder-
ful (thing) have the gods seen that they are so de-
lighted ? (681)

4. 'They shout and sing and make music, they
throw (about their) arms and dance ; I ask you, the
inhabitants of the tops of (mount) Meru, remove
my doubt quickly, O venerable ones!' (682)

5. ' The Bodhisatta, the excellent pearl, the incom-
parable, is born for the good and for a blessing in
the world of men, in the town of the Sakyas, in
the country of Lumbini Therefore we are glad
and exceedingly pleased. (683)

6. 'He, the most excellent of all beings, the pre-
eminent man, the bull of men, the most excellent of
all creatures will turn the wheel (of the Dhamma) in
the forest called after the I sis, (he who is) like the
roaring lion, the strong lord of beasts/ (684)


126 MAHAVAGGA.


7. Having heard that noise he descended from
(the heaven of) Tusita. Then he went to Suddho-
danas palace, and having sat down there he said
this to the Sakyas: * Where is the prince? I wish to
see (him)/ (685)

8. Then the Sakyas showed to (the I si), called
Asita, the child, the prince who was like shining
gold, manufactured by a very skilful (smith) in the
mouth of a forge, and beaming in glory and having
a beautiful appearance. (686)

9. Seeing the prince shining like fire, bright like
the bull of stars wandering in the sky, like the
burning sun in autumn, free from clouds, he joyfully
obtained great delight. (687)

10. The gods held in the sky a parasol with a
thousand circles and numerous branches, yaks tails
with golden sticks were fanned, but those who held
the yaks tails and the parasol were not seen. (688)

1 1. The I si with the matted hair, by name Ka^ha-
siri, on seeing the yellow blankets (shining) like
a golden coin, and the white parasol held over his
head, received him delighted and happy. (689)

12. And having received the bull of the Sakyas,
he who was wishing to receive him and knew the
signs and the hymns, with pleased thoughts raised
his voice, saying : ' Without superior is this, the
most excellent of men/ (690)

13. Then remembering his own migration he was
displeased and shed tears ; seeing this the Sakyas
asked the weeping I si, whether there would be any
obstacle in the prince's path. (691)

14. Seeing the Sakyas displeased the I si said :
' I do not remember anything (that will be) un-
lucky for the prince, there will be no obstacles at


NALAKASUTTA. 12 7


all for him, for this is no inferior (person). Be
without anxiety. (692)

15. 'This prince will reach the summit of per-
fect enlightenment, he will turn the wheel of the
Dhamma, he who sees what is exceedingly pure
(i. e. Nibb&na), this (prince) feels for the welfare
of the multitude, and his religion1 will be widely
spread. (693)

16. ' My life here will shortly be at an end, in
the middle (of his life) there will be death for me ;
I shall not hear the Dhamma of the incomparable
one ; therefore I am afflicted, unfortunate, and suf-
fering/ (694)

17. Having afforded the Sakyas great joy he
went out from the interior of the town to lead a
religious life; but taking pity on his sister's son,
he induced him to embrace the Dhamma of the
incomparable one. (695)

18. 'When thou hearest from others the sound
" Buddha," (or) "he who has acquired perfect en-
lightenment walks the way of the Dhamma,,, then
going there and enquiring about the particulars,
lead a religious life with that Bhagavat/ (696)

19. Instructed by him, the friendly-minded, by
one who saw in the future what is exceedingly
pure (i. e. NibMna), he, Nalaka, with a heap of
gathered-up good works, and with guarded senses
dwelt (with him), looking forward to £ina (i.e.
Buddha). (697)

20. Hearing the noise, while the excellent Cina
turned the wheel (of the Dhamma), and going and
seeing the bull of the I sis, he, after being converted,

1 Brahma^ariyaw=sasanaw. Commentator.


128 MAHaVAGGA.


asked the eminent Muni about the best wisdom,
when the time of Asita's order had come. (698)

The Vatthug&th&s are ended.

21. 'These words of Asita are acknowledged
true (by me), therefore we ask thee, O Gotama,
who art perfect in all things (dhamma). (699)

22. 'O Muni, to me who am houseless, and
who wish to embrace a Bhikkhu's life, explain
when asked the highest state, the state of wisdom
(moneyya).' (700)

23. i I will declare to thee the state of wisdom/
— so said Bhagavat, — 'difficult to carry out, and
difficult to obtain ; come, I will explain it to thee,
stand fast, be firm. (7QI)

24. ' Let a man cultivate equanimity : which is
(both) reviled and praised in the village, let him take
care not to corrupt his mind, let him live calm,
and without pride. (7°2)

25. 'Various (objects) disappear, like a flame
of fire in the wood l ; women tempt the Muni, let
them not tempt him. (703)

26. 'Let him be disgusted with sexual inter-
course, having left behind sensual pleasures of all
kinds, being inoffensive and dispassionate towards
living creatures, towards anything that is feeble
or strong. (7°4-)

27. 'As I am so are these, as these are so am
I, identifying himself with others, let him not kill
nor cause (any one) to kill2. (7°5)

1 XJkk3.wd.k3. ni^^aranti
Daye aggisikhfipamd.

2 YatM ahaw tathd ete
Yatha ete tatha ahaw


NALAKASUTTA. 1 29


28. * Having abandoned desire and covetousness
let him act as one that sees clearly where a common
man sticks, let him cross over this hell. (7°6)

29. * Let him be with an empty stomach, taking
little food, let him have few wants and not be
covetous; not being consumed by desire he will
without desire be happy. (7°7)

30. ' Let the Muni, after going about for alms,
repair to the outskirts of the wood, let him go
and sit down near the root of a tree. (7°8)

31. ' Applying himself to meditation, and being
wise, let him find his pleasure in the outskirts of
the wood, let him meditate at the root of a tree
enjoying himself. (7°9)

32. * Then when night is passing away let him
repair to the outskirts of the village, let him not
delight in being invited nor in what is brought
away from the village. (7ro)

33. ' Let not the Muni, after going to the village,
walk about to the houses in haste ; cutting off (all)
talk while seeking food, let him not utter any
coherent speech \ ( 7 1 1 )

34. ' " What I have obtained that is good," " I did
not get (anything that is) good," so thinking in both
cases he returns to the tree unchanged2. (712)

35. ' Wandering about with his alms-bowl in his

Attdnaw upamazrc katva*
Na haneyya na ghataye.

Comp. Dhp, v. 129.

1 Na va^am payutam bhawe.

2 Alattha/rc yad idam s&dhu
Nalatthazrc kusalam iti,
Ubhayen' eva so tadi *
Rukkhaw va upanivattati,

* TMi~nibbika.ro. Commentator.

[10] K


I30 MAHAVAGGA.


hand, considered dumb without being dumb, let
him not blush at a little gift, let him not despise
the giver. (713)

36. * Various are the practices illustrated by the
Samara, they do not go twice to the other shore,
this (is) not once thought1. (?) (7*4)

3 7. ' For whom there is no desire, for the Bhikkhu
who has cut off the stream (of existence) and aban-
doned all kinds of work, there is no pain. (715)

38. * I will declare to thee the state of wisdonV-r-
so said Bhagavat, — ' let one be like the edge of a
razor, having struck his palate with his tongue, let
him be restrained in (regard to his) stomach. (716)

39. ' Let his mind be free from attachment, let
him not think much 2 (about worldly affairs), let him
be without defilement, independent, and devoted
to a religious life. (7X7)

40. ' For the sake of a solitary life and for the
sake of the service that is to be carried out by
Samaras, let him learn, solitariness is called wis-
dom3; alone indeed he will find pleasure. (718)

41. 'Then he will shine through the ten regions,
having heard the voice of the wise, of the medi-
tating, of those that have abandoned sensual plea-
sures, let my adherent then still more devote himself
to modesty and belief. (7J9)

42. * Understand this from the waters in chasms


1 \Jkk&v2&$L- hi pa/ipad£
Sama/zena, pak$3it&,

Na para/tf digun&m yanti,
Na idaw ekagu«aw; mutaw.

2 Na £&pi bahu iintaye.

3 Ekattaw monam akkhataaz.


DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 1 3 I

and cracks : noisy go the small waters, silent goes
the vast ocean \ (72o)

43. 'What is deficient that makes a noise, what is
full that is calm; the fool is like a half-(filled) water-
pot, the wise is like a full pool. (721)

44. i When the Samara speaks much that is pos-
sessed of good sense, he teaches the Dhamma while
knowing it, while knowing it he speaks much2. (722)

45. ' But he who while knowing it is self-restrained,
and while knowing it does not speak much, such a
Muni deserves wisdom (rnona), such a Muni has
attained to wisdom (mona) V (722>)

Nalakasutta is ended


12. dvayatAnupassanAsutta.

All pain in the world arises from upadhi, aviggi, saafckhM, vm&a,
phassa, vedand, taaM, upadina, &rambha, aMra, i%ita, nissaya,
rupa, mosadhamma, sukha,

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sivatthi in Pub-
Mrdma, Mig&ramatar's mansion. At that time
Bhagavat on the Uposatha day4, on the fifteenth,

1 Tan nadihi viginatha

Sobbhesu padaresu k%.\

Sananta yanti kussobbhl

Tudii yati mahodadhi.
8 Ya*# samaszo bahu bh&sati

Upeta«* atthasa^hita^

G&xmn so dhamma^ deseti

G&nam so bahu bhasati.

3 Yo ia gzx&m sawyatatio
G&n&m na bahu bh&sati
Sa muni monam arahati
Sa muni monam agg^agl

4 See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 140.

K 2


132 MAHAVAGGA.


it being full moon, in the evening was sitting in the
open air, surrounded by the assembly of Bhikkhus.
Then Bhagavat surveying the silent assembly of
Bhikkhus addressed them (as follows) :

'Whichever Dhammas there are, O Bhikkhus,
good, noble, liberating, leading to perfect enlighten-
ment,— what is the use to you of listening to these
good, noble, liberating Dhammas, leading to perfect
enlightenment ? If, O Bhikkhus, there should be
people that ask so, they shall be answered thus :
Yes, for the right understanding of the two Dham-
mas/ 'Which two do you mean?' '(I mean), "this
is pain, this is the origin of pain," this is one con-
sideration, " this is the destruction of pain, this is
the way leading to the destruction of pain," this is
the second consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the
Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly1, is stre-
nuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to
be expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or,
if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the state
of an Anagamin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

i. 'Those who do not understand pain and the
origin of pain, and where pain wholly and totally is
stopped, and do not know the way that leads to the
cessation of pain, (724-)

2. 'They, deprived of the emancipation of thought

1 . . . ka upanisa savan&yd 'ti iti kz bhikkhave pu£££it£ro assu te
evam assu va^aniya : y&vad eva dvayat&nazra dhammanazra yatM-
bhutazrc M/zaya 'ti, km^a dvayataw vadetha ? * idazra dukkha/w, aya#z
dukkhasamudayo ' ti ayam ekanupassana, 'ayaw dukkhanirodho,
aya/rc dukkhanirodhagamint pa/ipada ' ti aya/rc dutiyanupassana ;
evaw sammadvayatanupassino ...


DVAY ATANUP ASSANASUTTA. I 3 3

and the emancipation of knowledge, are unable to
put an end (to sawsara), they will verily continue to
undergo birth and decay. (725)

3. ' And those who understand pain and the
origin of pain, and where pain wholly and totally is
stopped, and who know the way that leads to the
cessation of pain, (726)

4. ' They, endowed with the emancipation of
thought and the emancipation of knowledge, are
able to put an end (to sa/^sara), they will not
undergo birth and decay. (727)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the upadhis (elements of existence),"
this is one consideration, "but from the complete
destruction of the upadhis, through absence of pas-
sion, there is no origin of pain," this is the second
consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu
that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous,
ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be
expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any
of the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an
Anagamin (one that does not return)/ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

5. * Whatever pains there are in the world, of
many kinds, they arise having their cause in the
upadhis ; he who being ignorant creates upadhi, that
fool again undergoes pain ; therefore being wise do
not create upadhi, considering what is the birth and
origin of pain. (72^)

i " Should there be a perfect consideration of the


1 34 MAHAVAGGA.


Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in conse-
quence of avi^a (ignorance)," this is one consider-
ation, " but from the complete destruction of avi^a,
through absence of passion, there is no origin of pain,"
this is the second consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus,
by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is
to be expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or,
if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the state
of an Anagamin (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

6. * Those who again and again go to sa^sara
with birth and death, to existence in this way or
in that way, — that is the state of avigfa. (729)

7. * For this avig^a is the great folly by which
this (existence) has been traversed long, but those
beings who resort to knowledge do not go to re-
birth. (730)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of the sawkh&ras (matter)" this is
one consideration, " but from the complete destruc-
tion of the sa^kharas, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second
consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu
that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous,
ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be
expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or, if
any of the (five) attributes still remain, the state


DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 1 35

of an An&g&min (one that does not return).' This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

8. * Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the sa^kh&ras, by the destruction of the saw-
kharas there will be no origin of pain. {73 1)

9. ' Looking upon this pain that springs from the
sa^kMras as misery, from the cessation of all the
sa^kh&ras, and from the destruction of conscious-
ness will arise the destruction of pain, having
understood this exactly, (732)

10. 'The wise who have true views and are
accomplished, having understood (all things) com-
pletely, and having conquered all association with
Mara, do not go to re-birth, (733)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of vinn&na (consciousness)," this is
one consideration, " but from the complete destruc-
tion of 'vinn&KB.y through absence of passion, there
is no origin of pain," this is the second consider-
ation ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that
considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an And-
g&min (one that does not return).' This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

11. 'Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of vmn&na, by the destruction of vi^^a^a there is
no origin of pain. (734)


I36 MAHAVAGGA.


12. 'Looking upon this pain that springs from
vm^a/za as misery, from the cessation of vmn&na.
a Bhikkhu free from desire (will be) perfectly happy
(parinibbuta). (735)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of phassa (touch)," this is one con-
sideration, "but from the complete destruction of
phassa, through absence of passion, there is no
origin of pain," this is the second consideration;
thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute,
of two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five)
attributes still remain, the state of an An&g&min
(one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke :

13. 'For those who are ruined by phassa, who
follow the stream of existence, who have entered
a bad way, the destruction of bonds is far off. (736)

14. 'But those who, having fully understood
phassa, knowingly have taken delight in cessation,
they verily from the comprehension of phassa, and
being free from desire, are perfectly happy. (737)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the vedanas (sensations)/' this is one
consideration, "but from the complete destruction
of the vedanas, through absence of passion, there is


DVA YATAN UPASSAN ASUTTA. 1 3 7

no origin of pain," this is the second consideration;
thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute,
of two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five)
attributes still remain, the state of an An&gamin
(one that does not return)/ This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke :

15. 'Pleasure or pain, together with want of
pleasure and want of pain, whatever is perceived
internally and externally, (73%)

1 6. 'Looking upon this as pain, having touched
what is perishable and fragile, seeing the decay
(of everything), the Bhikkhu is disgusted, having
from the perishing of the vedanas become free from
desire, and perfectly happy. (739)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of ta#h& (desire)/' this is one con-
sideration, "but from the complete destruction of
ta^ha, through absence of passion, there is no origin
of pain," this is the second consideration ; thus,
O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the
Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of
two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anagamin (one that
does not return).' This said Bhagavat, (and) when
Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke :

17. 'A man accompanied by ta^hcl, for a long
time transmigrating into existence in this way or


1 38 MAHAVAGGA.


that way, does not overcome transmigration (sa^-
sara). (74°)

18. ' Looking upon this as misery, this origin of
the pain of ta^ha, let the Bhikkhu free from ta/zha,
not seizing (upon anything), thoughtful, wander
about. (741)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of the upadanas (the seizures)," this
is one consideration, " but from the complete destruc-
tion of the up&danas, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second con-
sideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that
considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an Ana-
gamin (one that does not return)/ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

19. i The existence is in consequence of the
up&d&nas ; he who has coftie into existence goes to
pain, he who has been born is to die, this is the
origin of pain. (742)

20. ' Therefore from the destruction of the
upadanas the wise with perfect knowledge, having
seen (what causes) the destruction of birth, do not
go to re-birth. (743)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in


DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 1 39

consequence of the arambhas (exertions)," this is
one consideration, "but from the complete destruc-
tion of the arambhas, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain," this is the second con-
sideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that
considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an And-
gamin (one that does not return)/ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

21. ' Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the irambhas, by the destruction of the Arambhas
there is no origin of pain. (744)

22,23. 'Looking upon this pain that springs
from the arambhas as misery, having abandoned
all the Arambhas, birth and transmigration have
been crossed over by the Bhikkhu who is liberated
in non-exertion, who has cut off the desire for
existence, and whose mind is calm ; there is for
him no re-birth. (745, 746)

* " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the Ah&ras (food?)," this is one consi-
deration, " but from the complete destruction of the
Aharas, through absence of passion, there is no origin
of pain," this is the second consideration ; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad
duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits
one fruit is to be expected : in this world perfect
knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still


140 MAHAVAGGA.


remain, the state of an Anag&min (one that does
not return)/ This said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata
had said this, the Master further spoke:

24. ' Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the aharas, by the destruction of the aharas there
is no origin of pain. (747)

25. * Looking upon this pain that springs from the
aharas as misery, having seen the result of all aharas,
not resorting to all &h&ras, (74-8)

26. ' Having seen that health is from the destruc-
tion of desire, he that serves discriminatingly and
stands fast in the Dhamma cannot be reckoned as
existing, being accomplished1. (749)

* " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the i/z^itas (commotions)," this is one
consideration, " but from the complete destruction of
the i%itas, through absence of passion, there is no
origin of pain," this is the second consideration ; thus,
O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad
duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits
one fruit is to be expected : in this world perfect
knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still
remain, the state of an Anag&min (one that does
not return).' This said Bhagavat, (and) when Su-
gata had said this, the Master further spoke :

27. ' Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of
the i/z^itas, by the destruction of the i/^itas there is
no origin of pain. (75°)

28. ' Looking upon this pain that springs from


1 Sawkhaw n6peti vedagu.


DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 141

the i^itas as misery, and therefore having aban-
doned the i/^itas and having stopped the sa^kharas,
let the Bhikkhu free from desire and not seizing
(upon anything), thoughtful, wander about. (75 1)
* " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is: " For the nissita (dependent) there
is vacillation," this is one consideration, " the inde-
pendent (man) does not vacillate," this is the second
consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu
that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous,
ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be
expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any
of the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an
Anagamin (one that does not return)/ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

29. i The independent (man) does not vacillate,
and the dependent (man) seizing upon existence
in one way or in another, does not overcome sa/»-
sara. (752)

30. * Looking upon this as misery (and seeing)
great danger in things you depend upon, let a
Bhikkhu wander about independent, not seizing
(upon anything), thoughtful. (753)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " The formless (beings), O Bhikkhus,
are calmer than the r ft pas (for ruppa, i.e. form-pos-
sessing)," this is one consideration, " cessation is
calmer than the formless," this is another considera-
tion ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that con-


1-42 MAHAVAGGA.


siders the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an Ana-
gamin (one that does not return).' This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

31. * Those beings who are possessed of form,
and those who dwell in the formless (world), not
knowing cessation, have to go to re-birth. (754)

32. i But those who, having fully comprehended
the forms, stand fast in the formless (worlds), those
who are liberated in the cessation, such beings leave
death behind. (755)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : " What has been considered true
by the world of men, together with the gods, Mara,
Brahman, and amongst the Samaras, Brihma^as,
gods, and men, that has by the noble through their
perfect knowledge been well seen to be really false"
this is one consideration ; " what, O Bhikkhus, has
been considered false by the world of men, together
with the gods, Mira, Brahman, and amongst the
Samaras, Brahma^as, gods, and men, that has by
the noble through their perfect knowledge been well
seen to be really true," this is another consideration.
Thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute,
of two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five)
attributes still remain, the state of an Anagamin
(one that does not return).' This said Bhagavat,


DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 1 43

(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke :

33. ' Seeing the real in the unreal, the world of
men and gods dwelling in name and form1, he
thinks : " This is true." (756)

34. 'Whichever way they think (it), it becomes
otherwise, for it is false to him, and what is false is
perishable2. (?) (757)

35. 'What is not false, the Nibbana, that the noble
conceive as true, they verily from the comprehen-
sion of truth are free from desire (and) perfectly
happy3. ^ ^ (758)

' " Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way," if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : " What, O Bhikkhus, has been con-
sidered pleasure by the world of men, gods, Mara,
Brahman, and amongst the Samaras, Brahma^as,
gods, and men, that has by the noble by (their)
perfect knowledge been well seen to be really pain,"
this is one consideration ; " what, O Bhikkhus, has
been considered pain by the world of men, gods,
Mara, Brahman, and amongst the Samaras, Brah-
ma^as, gods, and men, that has by the noble by
their perfect knowledge been well seen to be really
pleasure," this is the second consideration. Thus, O

1 N&marupasmiw, ' individuality/

2 Yena yena hi manwanti
Tato taw hoti aimatM,
Taw hi tassa musd hoti,
Mosadhammaw hi ittaraw.

3 Amosadhammaw nibbanaw
Tad ariyd sa^ato vidu,
Te ve sa/&Mbhisamay&
Ni/fc&fcata parinibbutd.


144 MAHAVAGGA.


Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu who considers the Dyad
duly, who is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two
fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anagamin (one who
does not return)/ This said Bhagavat, (and) when
Sugata had said so, the Master further spoke :

36. l Form, sound, taste, smell, and touch are all
wished for, pleasing and charming (things) as long
as they last, so it is said. (759)

37. ' By you, by the world of men and gods these
(things) are deemed a pleasure, but when they cease
it is deemed pain by them. (760)

38. ' By the noble the cessation of the existing
body is regarded as pleasure ; this is the opposite
of (what) the wise in all the world (hold)1. (761)

39. * What fools say is pleasure that the noble
say is pain, what fools say is pain that the noble
know as pleasure : — see here is a thing difficult to
understand, here the ignorant are confounded. (762)

40. ' For those that are enveloped there is gloom,
for those that do not see there is darkness, and for
the good it is manifest, for those that see there
is light ; (even being) near, those that are ignorant
of the way and the Dhamma, do not discern (any-
thing)2. (763)

1 Sukhan ti di///&am ariyehi

SakMyass' uparodhanaw,

Pa^anikam idazrc hoti

Sabbalokena passataw.
3 Nivutanaw tamo hoti

Andhakaro apassata^,

Sataw ka. viva/aw hoti

Aloko passat&m iva,

Santike na vig-ananti

Maggadhammass* akovida.


DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 1 45

41. 'By those that are overcome by the passions
of existence, by those that follow the stream of
existence, by those that have entered the realm of
Mara, this Dhamma is not perfectly understood. (764)

42. ' Who except the noble deserve the well
understood state (of NibMna) ? Having perfectly
conceived this state, those free from passion are
completely extinguished1/ (765)

This spoke Bhagavat. Glad those Bhikkhus
rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat. While this
explanation was being given, the minds of sixty
Bhikkhus, not seizing (upon anything), were libe-
rated.

Dvayatanupassanasutta is ended.

Mahavagga, the third.


1 Ko nu amiatra-m-ariyehi
Padaw sambuddham arahati
Yaw padaw samma-d-armaya
Parinibbanti anasavd.


[10]


IV. A7V77AKAVAGGA.


1. KAMASUTTA.

Sensual pleasures are to be avoided.

i. If he who desires sensual pleasures is success-
ful, he certainly becomes glad-minded, having ob-
tained what a mortal wishes for. (7^6)

2. But if those sensual pleasures fail the person
who desires and wishes (for them), he will suffer,
pierced by the arrow (of pain). (767)

3. He who avoids sensual pleasures as (he would
avoid treading upon) the head of a snake with his
foot, such a one, being thoughtful (sato), will conquer
this desire. (768)

4. He who covets extensively (such) pleasures (as
these), fields, goods, or gold, cows and horses, ser-
vants, women, relations, (769)

5. Sins will overpower him, dangers will crush
him, and pain will follow him as water (pours into)
a broken ship. {770)

6. Therefore let one always be thoughtful, and
avoid pleasures ; having abandoned them, let him
cross the stream, after baling out the ship, and go to
the other shore. (77l)

K&masutta is ended.


GUHAmTAK ASUTTA. 1 4 7

2. GU HA TTHAK ASUTTA.

Let no one cling to existence and sensual pleasures.

i. A man that lives adhering to the cave (i.e. the
body), who is covered with much (sin), and sunk
into delusion, such a one is far from seclusion, for
the sensual pleasures in the world are not easy to
abandon. (772)

2. Those whose wishes are their motives, those
who are linked to the pleasures of the world, they
are difficult to liberate, for they cannot be liberated
by others, looking for what is after or what is
before, coveting these and former sensual plea-
sures. (773)

3. Those who are greedy of, given to, and infa-
tuated by sensual pleasures, those who are niggardly,
they, having entered upon what is wicked, wail when
they are subjected to pain, saying: ' What will become
of us, when we die away from here ?' (774)

4. Therefore let a man here x learn, whatever he
knows as wicked in the world, let him not for the
sake of that (?) practise (what is) wicked2; for short
is this life, say the wise. (775)

5. I see in the world this trembling race given
to desire for existences; they are wretched men who
lament in the mouth of death, not being free from
the desire for reiterated existences. (776)

6. Look upon those men trembling in selfishness,
like fish in a stream nearly dried up, with little
water; seeing this, let one wander about unselfish,
without forming any attachment to existences. (777)

1 Idheva=imasmiz# yeva sasane. Commentator.

2 Na tassa hetu visama*# /fcareyya.

L 2


I48 AFrtfAKAVAGGA.


7. Having subdued his wish for both ends1, having
fully understood touch without being greedy, not
doing what he has himself blamed, the wise (man)
does not cling to what is seen and heard 2. (778)

8. Having understood name3, let the Muni cross
over the stream, not defiled by any grasping; having
pulled out the arrow (of passion), wandering about
strenuous, he does not wish for this world or the
other. (779)

Guha//^akasutta is ended.


3. DUTTJ7ATTJIAKASUTTA.

The Muni undergoes no censure, for he has shaken off all systems
of philosophy, and is therefore independent.

i. Verily, some wicked-minded people censure,
and also just-minded people censure, but the Muni
does not undergo the censure that has arisen ; there-
fore there is not a discontented (khila) Muni any-
where. (780)

2. How can he who is led by his wishes and
possessed by his inclinations overcome his own
(false) view? Doing his own doings let him talk
according to his understanding4. (781)

3. The person who, without being asked, praises

1 Comp. Sallasutta, v. 9.

2 Ubhosu antesu vineyya ^andazra
Phassaw parwmaya ananugiddho
Yad atta garahi tad akubbam&no
Na lippati di//#asutesu dhiro.

3 Sarc#aw==namarupaw. Commentator.

4 Sakazra hi dif/Mm kathaw a^ayeyya
.Oandanunito rukiy& nivi//#o,
Sayaw samattani pakubbam&no
YathS hi ^aneyya tath& vadeyya.


DVTTH ATrtf AKASUTTA. 1 49

his own virtue and (holy) works to others, him the
good call ignoble, one who praises himself1. (782)

4. But the Bhikkhu who is calm and of a happy
mind, thus not praising himself for his virtues, him
the good call noble, one for whom there are no
desires anywhere in the world2. (783)

5. He whose Dhammas are (arbitrarily) formed
and fabricated, placed in front, and confused, be-
cause he sees in himself a good result, is therefore
given to (the view which is called) kuppa-pa/iiia-
santi 3. (?) (784)

6. For the dogmas of philosophy are not easy
to overcome, amongst the Dhammas (now this and
now that) is adopted after consideration ; there-
fore a man rejects and adopts (now this and now
that) Dhamma amongst the dogmas4. (785)

7. For him who has shaken off (sin) there is
nowhere in the world any prejudiced view of the
different existences ; he who has shaken off (sin),
after leaving deceit and arrogance behind, which
(way) should he go, he (is) independent5. (786)

1 Yo atum&naw say am eva pav&=yo evaw attanaw say am eva
vadati. Commentator.

2 Yass' ussada" n' atthi kuhm& loke.

3 Pakappita" sawkhatd yassa dhamma"
Purakkhata santi avivadatd

Yad attani passati dnisatfzsaw
Tzm nissito kuppapa/i^asanti^.

4 DiffMmves& na hi sv&tivatt&,
Dhammesu ni^eyya samuggahitaw,
Tasm& naro tesu nivesanesu
Nirassatt adiyati-^a dhammas.

Comp. Parama/Z^akasutta, v. 6.

5 Dhonassa hi n' atthi kuhwUi loke
Pakappitd di//#i bhav&bhavesu,
Mayaw £a manaw ka, pahdya dhono
Sa kena ga^Meyya, anfipayo so.


1 50 A7T#AKAVAGGA.


8. But he who is dependent undergoes censure

amongst the Dhammas ; with what (name) and how

should one name him who is independent ? For by

him there is nothing grasped or rejected, he has

in this world shaken off every (philosophical)

view1. (7%7)

Du/^a^akasutta is ended.


4. SUDDHAr777AKASUTTA.

No one is purified by philosophy, those devoted to philosophy run
from one teacher to another, but the wise are not led by passion,
and do not embrace anything in the world as the highest.

i. I see a pure, most excellent, sound man, by
his views a man's purification takes place, holding
this opinion, and having seen this view to be the
highest, he goes back to knowledge, thinking to
see what is pure2. (788)

2. If a mans purification takes place by (his
philosophical) views, or he by knowledge leaves
pain behind, then he is purified by another (way
than the ariyamagga, i. e. the noble way), together
with his upadhis, on account of his views he tells
him to say so3. (789)

1 Upayo* hi dhammesu upeti vadaw
Anupaya#2 kena katha^ vadeyya
Attaztf nirattaw na hi tassa atthi
Adhosi so di//^im idh' eva Sabbat.

2 Passami suddhaw parama/tf arogaw,
Di//#ena sazrasuddhi narassa hoti,
~Et' abhi^anaw paraman ti watvd
SuddMnupassiti pa££eti n&n&m.

3 Di/Mihi na^ p^va tatM vad&naw.
Comp. Gar&sutta, v. 10; Pasurasutta, v. 7.

* Upayo ti tawhadiftMnissito. Commentator.


SUDDHATTtfAKASUTTA. 1 5 I

3. But the Br&hma/za who does not cling to
what has been seen, or heard, to virtue and (holy)
works, or to what has been thought, to what is
good and to what is evil, and who leaves behind
what has been grasped, without doing anything in
this world, he does not acknowledge that purifica-
tion comes from another1. (79°)

4. Having left (their) former (teacher) they go
to another, following their desires they do not
break asunder their ties; they grasp, they let go
like a monkey letting go the branch (just) after
having caught (hold of it). (791)

5. Having himself undertaken some (holy) works
he goes to various (things) led by his senses, but
a man of great understanding, a wise man who by
his wisdom has understood the Dhamma, does not
go to various (occupations). (792)

6. He being secluded amongst all the Dhammas,
whatever has been seen, heard, or thought — how
should any one in this world be able to alter him,
the seeing one, who wanders openly2? (793)

7. They do not form (any view), they do not
prefer (anything), they do not say, ' I am infinitely
pure;' having cut the tied knot of attachment,
they do not long for (anything) anywhere in the
world. (794)

1 Na brihmawo awwato suddhim aha
Di/Me sute silavate mute vS
Funne ka. pape ka. anupalitto
Attarcg-aho na idha pakubbamano.

2 Sa sabbadhammesu visenibhuto *
Yam kinki diftkam va sutaw mutaw v&
Tarn eva dassi/w viva/aw ^arantaw
Ken' idha lokasmiw vikappayeyya ?

* Marasenam vmasetva /Aitabhavena visenibhfito. Commentator.


15^ A7THAKAVAGGA.


8. He is a Brahma^a that has conquered (sin)1;
by him there is nothing embraced after knowing
and seeing it; he is not affected by any kind of
passion ; there is nothing grasped by him as the
highest in this world. (795)

Suddha^akasutta is ended.


5. PARAMA7VWAKASUTTA.

One should not give oneself to philosophical disputations ; a Brdh-
ma»a who does not adopt any system of philosophy, is unchange-
able, has reached Nibbana.

1. What one person, abiding by the (philoso-
phical) views, saying, ' This is the most excellent,'
considers the highest in the world, everything
different from that he says is wretched, therefore
he has not overcome dispute2. (796)

2. Because he sees in himself a good result, with
regard to what has been seen (or) heard, virtue
and (holy) works, or what has been thought, there-
fore, having embraced that, he looks upon every-
thing else as bad3. (797)

3. The expert call just that a tie dependent

1 ifatunna#z kilesasimanazra atitatta
Simatigo bahitapapatta ka, brahmawo.

2 Paraman ti di//^isu paribbasano
Yad uttariw kurute ^antu loke
Hind ti a»me tato sabbam aha,
Tasm& viv&d&ni avitivatto.

Properly, ' others (are) wretched.'

3 Yad attani passati anisawsaw
Di//Ae sute silavate mute va
Tad eva so tattha samuggaMya
Nihtnato passati sabbam anmm.


PARAMATTtfAKASUTTA. I 5 3

upon which one looks upon anything else as bad.
Therefore let a Bhikkhu not depend upon what is
seen, heard, or thought, or upon virtue and (holy)
works *. (798)

4. Let him not form any (philosophical) view in
this world, either by knowledge or by virtue and
(holy) works, let him not represent himself equal
(to others), nor think himself either low or dis-
tinguished. (799)

5. Having left what has been grasped, not seizing
upon anything he does not depend even on know-
ledge. He does not associate with those that are
taken up by different things, he does not return to
any (philosophical) view 2. (800)

6. For whom there is here no desire for both
ends, for reiterated existence either here or in an-
other world, for him there are no resting-places (of
the mind) embraced after investigation amongst the
doctrines (dhammesu)3. (801)

7. In him there is not the least prejudiced idea
with regard to what has been seen, heard, or thought;
how could any one in this world alter such a Brah-
ma^a who does not adopt any view ? (802)


1 T&m v&pi ganthaw kusald vadanti
Yaw nissito passati hinam a?ma/rc,
Tasmd hi dittMm va sutaw muta/# vd
Silabbatazrc bhikkhu na nissayeyya.

2 Attaw pahdya anupadiy&no
N&ne pi so nissayaw no karoti,
Sa ve viyattesu na vaggasari,
Di///Hm pi so na pa^eti kinki.

8 Yass' ubhayante pamdhidha n' atthi
Bhavstbhavaya idha va huraw v&
Nivesana, tassa na santi ke&
Dhammesu ni^Meyya samuggahM.


T 5 4 ATTHAK AVAGGA.


8. They do not form (any view), they do not
prefer (anything), the Dhammas are not chosen by
them, a Brdhma^a is not dependent upon virtue
and (holy) works ; having gone to the other shore,
such a one does not return. (803)

Parama^akasutta is ended.


6. £ARASUTTA.

From selfishness come grief and avarice. The Bhikkhu who has
turned away from the world and wanders about houseless, is inde-
pendent, and does not wish for purification through another.

i. Short indeed is this life, within a hundred
years one dies, and if any one lives longer, then he
dies of old age. (804)

2. People grieve from selfishness, perpetual cares
kill them, this (world) is full of disappointment ;
seeing this, let one not live in a house. (805)

3. That even of which a man thinks 'this is mine'
is left behind by death : knowing this, let not the
wise (man) turn himself to worldliness (while being
my) follower K (806)

4. As a man awakened does not see what he
has met with in his sleep, so also he does not see
the beloved person that has passed away and is
dead. (807)

5. Both seen and heard are the persons whose
particular name is mentioned, but only the name

1 Mara«ena pi taw pahiyati
Yaw puriso mama-y-idan ti maimati,
Evam pi viditvd pa^dito
Na pamattSya nametha m&mako.


GARASUTTA. 1 55


remains undecayed of the person that has passed
away \ (808)

6. The greedy in their selfishness do not leave
sorrow, lamentation, and avarice ; therefore the
Munis leaving greediness wandered about seeing
security (i. e. Nibbana). (809)

7. For a Bhikkhu, who wanders about unattached
and cultivates the mind of a recluse, they say it
is proper that he does not show himself (again) in
existence2. (810)

8. Under all circumstances the independent Muni
does not please nor displease (any one); sorrow and
avarice do not stick to him (as little) as water to
a leaf. (811)

9. As a drop of water does not stick to a lotus,
as water does not stick to a lotus, so a Muni does
not cling to anything, namely, to what is seen or
heard or thought 3. (8 1 2)

10. He who has shaken off (sin) does not there-
fore think (much of anything) because it has been
seen or heard or thought; he does not wish for


1 Di///#api sutapi te ^ana
Yesaw nama^ idaw pavu^ati
N&mam evavasissati
Akkheyyazrc petassa ^antuno.

2 Patilina^arassa bhikkhuno
Bhag'amanassa vittam&nasaw *
S&maggiyam ahu tassa taw

Yo attana/tf bhavane na dassaye.
9 Udabindu yathapi pokkhare
Padume v&ri yatM na lippati
Evaw muni nopalippati
Yad idaw di/Masutaw mutesu va\

* B* has vivitta-.


I 5 6 ATTHAK AVAGGA.


purification through another, for he is not pleased
nor displeased (with anything) \ (8 1 3)

^ardsutta is ended.


7. TISSAMETTEYYASUTTA.

Sexual intercourse should be avoided.

1. 'Tell me, O venerable one/ — so said the
venerable Tissa Metteyya, — ' the defeat of him who
is given to sexual intercourse ; hearing thy precepts
we will learn in seclusion/ (814)

2. ' The precepts of him who is given to sexual
intercourse, O Metteyya/ — so said Bhagavat,— ' are
lost, and he employs himself wrongly, this is what is
ignoble in him. (815)

3. ' He who, having formerly wandered alone,
gives himself up to sexual intercourse, him they
call in the world a low, common fellow, like a roll-
ing chariot. (816)

4. ' What honour and renown he had before, that
is lost for him; having seen this let him learn to
give up sexual intercourse. (8 1 7)

5. 'He who overcome by his thoughts meditates
like a miser, such a one, having heard the (blaming)
voice of others, becomes discontented. (818)

6. 'Then he makes weapons (i.e. commits evil

1 Dhono na hi tena mamiati
Yad idaztf di//y&asutaw mutesu va4,
Na?mena visuddhim i^Mati,
Na hi so ragg-ati no vira^ati.
Comp. Suddha/Z^akasutta, v. 2.


PASdRASUTTA. I57


deeds) urged by the doctrines of others, he is very-
greedy, and sinks into falsehood \ (8 1 9)

7. ' Designated "wise " he has entered upon a soli-
tary life, then having given himself up to sexual
intercourse, he (being) a fool suffers pain. (820)

8. ' Looking upon this as misery let the Muni from
first to last in the world firmly keep to his solitary
life, let him not give himself up to sexual inter-
course. (821)

9. ' Let him learn seclusion, this is the highest for
noble men, but let him not therefore think himself
the best, although he is verily near Nibbana. (822)

10. ' The Muni who wanders void (of desire), not
coveting sensual pleasures, and who has crossed the
stream, him the creatures that are tied in sensual
pleasures envy/ (823)

Tissametteyyasutta is ended.


8. pasOrasutta.

Disputants brand each other as fools, they wish for praise, but
being repulsed they become discontented ; one is not purified by
dispute, but by keeping to Buddha, who has shaken off all sin.

i. Here they maintain ' purity/ in other doctrines
(dhamma) they do not allow purity; what they have
devoted themselves to, that they call good, and they
enter extensively upon the single truths 2. (824)

1 Atha satthani kurute

Paravadehi /fcodito,

Esa khv-assa mahagedho,

Mosavaggaw pagahati.
8 Idh' eva suddhi;# iti v&diyanti

Namtesu dhammesu visuddhim dhu

Yaw nissita' tattha subhaw vaddnst

Pa^ekasa^esu puthu nivi//M.


1 5 8 AmrAKAVAGGA.


2. Those wishing for dispute, having plunged into
the assembly, brand each other as fools mutually,
they go to others and pick a quarrel, wishing for
praise and calling themselves (the only) expert. (825)

3. Engaged in dispute in the middle of the
assembly, wishing for praise he lays about on all
sides; but when his dispute has been repulsed he
becomes discontented, at the blame he gets angry
he who sought for the faults (of others). (826)

4. Because those who have tested his questions
say that his dispute is lost and repulsed, he laments
and grieves having lost his disputes ; * he has con-
quered me/ so saying he wails. (827)

5. These disputes have arisen amongst the Sa-
maras, in these (disputes) there is (dealt) blow (and)
stroke ; having seen this, let him leave off disput-
ing, for there is no other advantage in trying to get
praise. (828)

6. Or he is praised there, having cleared up the
dispute in the middle of the assembly ; therefore he
will laugh and be elated, having won that case as
he had a mind to. (829)

7. That which is his exaltation will also be the
field of his defeat, still he talks proudly and arro-
gantly ; seeing this, let no one dispute, for the ex-
pert do not say that purification (takes place) by
that1. (830)

8. As a hero nourished by kingly food goes about
roaring, wishing for an adversary — where he (i.e.
the philosopher, Di^igatika) is, go thou there, O

1 Y& u/z/zati sassa vigh&tabhumi,
M&natim&naflz vadate pan' eso,
Etam pi disv& na viv&dayetha
Na hi tena suddhiw kusalsi vadanti.
Comp. Suddha/Z^akasutta, v. 2.


MAGANDIYASUTTA. 1 5 9


hero ; formerly there was nothing like this to fight
against1. (831)

9. Those who, having embraced a (certain philo-
sophical) view, dispute and maintain * this only (is)
true/ to them say thou when a dispute has arisen,
' Here is no opponent2 for thee/ (832)

10. Those who wander about after having secluded
themselves, without opposing view to view — what
(opposition) wilt thou meet with amongst those, O
Pastira, by whom nothing in this world is grasped
as the best ? (833)

11. Then thou wentest to reflection thinking in
thy mind over the (different philosophical) views ;
thou hast gone into the yoke with him who has
shaken off (all sin), but thou wilt not be able to
proceed together (with him)3. (8 34)

Pasftrasutta is ended.


9. MAGANDIYASUTTA.

A dialogue between M&gandiya and Buddha. The former offers
Buddha his daughter for a wife, but Buddha refuses her. Magan-
diya says that purity comes from philosophy, Buddha from ' in-
ward peace/ The Muni is a confessor of peace, he does not
dispute, he is free from marks.

i. Buddha : * Even seeing Ta/zha, Arati, and Raga
(the daughters of Mira), there was not the least wish

1 Suro yath& ra^akh&daya pu///5o
Abhiga^am eti pa/isuram ikkkatn —
Yen* eva so tena palehi sura,
Pubbe va n' atthi yad idaw yudMya.

2 Pa/isenikattl ti pa/ilomakarako. Commentator.

3 Atha tvaw pavitakkam &gam&
Manas& di//#igatani ^intayanto,
Dhonena yugaw samdgam^,

Na hi tvaztf pagghasi sampayalave.


1 60 ATTHAK AVAGG A .


(in me) for sexual intercourse. What is this (thy
daughters body but a thing) full of water and
excrement? I do not even want to touch it with
my foot/ (835)

2. Mdgandiya : * If thou dost not want such a
pearl, a woman desired by many kings, what view,
virtue, and (holy) works, (mode of) life, re-birth dost
thou profess ?' (836)

3. '"This I say," so (I do now declare), after in-
vestigation there is nothing amongst the doctrines
which such a one (as I would) embrace/ — O Mdgan-
diya, so said Bhagavat, — ' and seeing (misery) in the
(philosophical) views, without adopting (any of them),
searching (for truth) I saw " inward peace1." ' (837)

4. 'All the (philosophical) resolutions2 that have
been formed/ — so said Magandiya, — 'those indeed
thou explainest without adopting (any of them) ; the
notion "inward peace" which (thou mentionest), how
is this explained by the wise?' (838)

5. ' Not by (any philosophical) opinion, not by
tradition, not by knowledge/ — O Magandiya, so said
Bhagavat, — ' not by virtue and (holy) works can any
one say that purity exists ; nor by absence of (philo-
sophical) opinion, by absence of tradition, by absence
of knowledge, by absence of virtue and (holy) works
either; having abandoned these without adopting
(anything else), let him, calm and independent, not
desire existence 3. (839)

1 Ida/** vad&miti na tassa hoti — Mdgandiysl ti Bhagava —
Dhammesu ni^eyya samuggahitazrc

Passat k& di//Aisu anuggaMya
A^g^attasantizra pa£inaz# adassaw.

2 Vini^^aya, placita?

8 Na di/Miya na sutiya na wa«ena — M&gandiyd ti Bhagava —
Silabbatendpi na suddhim aha


mAgandiyasutta. i 6 i

6. < If one cannot say by (any philosophical) opinion,
or by tradition, or by knowledge/ — so said Magan-
diya, — 'or by virtue and (holy) works that purity
exists, nor by absence of (philosophical) opinion, by
absence of tradition, by absence of knowledge, by
absence of virtue and (holy) works, then I consider
the doctrine foolish, for by (philosophical) opinions
some return to purity/ (840)

7. ' And asking on account of (thy philosophical)
opinion/ O Magandiya, — so said Bhagavat, — 'thou
hast gone to infatuation in what thou hast embraced,
and of this (inward peace) thou hast not the least
idea, therefore thou holdest it foolish \ (841)

8. ' He who thinks himself equal (to others),
or distinguished, or low, he for that very reason
disputes ; but he who is unmoved under those three
conditions, for him (the notions) " equal" and "dis-
tinguished" do not exist. (842)

9. * The Br&hma/za for whom (the notions)
" equal " and " unequal " do not exist, would he
say, "This is true?" Or with whom should he dis-
pute, saying, " This is false ?" With whom should
he enter into dispute 2 ? (843)

10. 'Having left his house, wandering about

Adi//^iyd assutiyd wifafa
Asilatd abbatd no pi tena,
Ete k& nissa^ga anuggahaya
Santo anissiya bhava/zz na guppe.

1 Ditthm ka, nissaya anupu^^amano
Samuggahitesu pamoham aga"

Ito fa naddakkhi amim pi saMaw
Tasma* tuv&m momuhato dah&si.

2 Sa^an ti so brahma/zo kizrc vadeyya
Musd ti v& so vivadetha kena
Yasmiff* samazrc visamaw Mpi n' atthi
Sa kena vadaw pa/isawyug-eyya.

[10] M


1 62 AZTtfAKAVAGGA.


houseless, not making acquaintances in the village,
free from lust, not desiring (any future existence),
let the Muni not get into quarrelsome talk with
people. (844)

11. * Let not an eminent man (n&ga) dispute
after having embraced those (views) separated from
which he (formerly) wandered in the world ; as
the thorny lotus elambu^a is undefiled by water
and mud, so the Muni, the confessor of peace, free
from greed, does not cling to sensual pleasures and
the world. (845)

12. 'An accomplished man does not by (a phi-
losophical) view, or by thinking become arrogant,
for he is not of that sort ; not by (holy) works, nor
by tradition is he to be led, he is not led into
any of the resting-places (of the mind). (846)

13. i For him who is free from marks there are
no ties, to him who is delivered by understanding
there are no follies ; (but those) who grasped after
marks and (philosophical) views, they wander about
in the world annoying (people)1/ ($47)

Magandiyasutta is ended.


10. purAbhedasutta.

Definition of a calm Muni.

1. 'With what view and with what virtue is
one called calm, tell me that, O Gotama, (when)
asked about the best man?' (848)

2. 'He whose desire is departed before the
dissolution (of his body)/ — so said Bhagavat, — * who

1 Sa?mavirattassa na santi gantM,
PaMavimuttassa na santi moha,
Sannan kz. diithin ka. ye aggahesu^
Te gha//ayantS vi^aranti loke.


PURABHEDASUTTA. 1 63

does not depend upon beginning and end, nor
reckons upon the middle, by him there is nothing
preferred 1. (849)

3. ' He who is free from anger, free from trem-
bling, free from boasting, free from misbehaviour,
he who speaks wisely, he who is not elated, he is
indeed a Muni who has restrained his speech. (850)

4. 'Without desire for the future he does not
grieve for the past, he sees seclusion in the phas-
sas (touch), and he is not led by (any philosophical)
views, (851)

5. ' He is unattached, not deceitful, not covetous,
not envious, not impudent, not contemptuous, and
not given to slander. (852)

6. 'Without desire for pleasant things and not
given to conceit, and being gentle, intelligent,
not credulous, he is not displeased (with any-
thing). ^ (853)

7. * Not from love of gain does he learn, and
he does not get angry on account of loss, and
untroubled by desire he has no greed for sweet
things2. (854)

8. ' Equable (upekhaka), always thoughtful, he
does not think himself equal (to others)3 in the
world, nor distinguished, nor low : for him there
are no desires (ussada). (855)


1 Vftata»ho pura bhedd
Pubbam antam anissito
Vemagg^e n' upasa^kheyyo
Tassa n' atthi purekkhata/ra.

2 Rasesu nanugiggv&ati

8 Na loke mandate sama/#
Na visesi na rnkeyyo.
Compare Tuva/akasutta, v. 4 ; Attada«dasutta, v. 20.

M 2


164


ATTHAKAVAGGA.


9. ' The man for whom there is nothing upon which
he depends, who is independent, having understood
the Dhamma, for whom there is no desire for coming
into existence or leaving existence, (856)

10. ' Him I call calm, not looking for sensual
pleasures ; for him there are no ties, he has over-
come desire. (857)

11. i For him there are no sons, cattle, fields,
wealth, nothing grasped or rejected is to be found
in him. (858)

1 2. ' That fault of which common people and
Samaras and Brahma^as say that he is possessed,
i3 not possessed by him, therefore he is not moved
by their talk. (859)

13. 'Free from covetousness, without avarice, the
Muni does not reckon himself amongst the distin-
guished, nor amongst the plain, nor amongst the
low, he does not enter time, being delivered from
time \ (860)

14. ' He for whom there is nothing in the world
(which he may call) his own, who does not grieve over
what is no more, and does not walk amongst the
Dhammas (after his wish), he is called calm V (861)

Purabhedasutta is ended.


11. KALAHAVIVADASUTTA.

The origin of contentions, disputes, &c. &c.
i. 'Whence (do spring up) contentions and dis-
<3^4> putes, lamentation and sorrow together with envy ;

1 Vftagedho ama^ari
Na ussesu vadate muni
Na samesu na omesu,
Kappa/ra n' eti akappiyo.
2 Comp. infra, AtCada?fc/asutta, v. 16, and Dhp. v. 367.


KALAHAVIVADASUTTA. 165

and arrogance and conceit together with slander,
whence do these spring up ? pray, tell me this/ (862)

2. i From dear (objects) spring up contentions
and disputes, lamentation and sorrow together with
envy ; arrogance and conceit together with slander ;
contentions and disputes are joined with envy, and
there is slander in the disputes arisen/ (863)

3. ' The dear (objects) in the world whence do
they originate, and (whence) the covetousness that
prevails in the world, and desire and fulfilment
whence do they originate, which are (of consequence)
for the future state of a man x ?' (864)

4. ' From wish 2 originate the dear (objects) in the
world, and the covetousness that prevails in the
world, and desire and fulfilment originate from it,
which are (of consequence) for the future state of
a man/ (865)

5. ' From what has wish in the world its origin,
and resolutions 3 whence do they spring, anger and
falsehood and doubt, and the Dhammas which are
made known by the Samara (Gotama) ?' (866)

6. 'What they call pleasure and displeasure in
the world, by that wish springs up ; having seen
decay and origin in (all) bodies4, a person forms
(his) resolutions in the world. (867)

7. * Anger and falsehood and doubt, these Dham-
mas are a couple 5 ; let the doubtful learn in the way
of knowledge, knowingly the Dhammas have been
proclaimed by the Samara/ (868)

8. ' Pleasure and displeasure, whence have they

1 Ye samparayaya narassa honti. 2 JST^anda.

3 Vinii^aya. 4 Rftpesu disvi vibhava/» bhavaw ka..

5 Te pi kodMdayo dhammd s&lasStadvaye sante eva pahonti
uppa^g-antL Commentator.


1 66 ATTHAKAVAGGA.


their origin, for want of what do these not arise ?
This notion which (thou mentionest), viz. "decay and
origin/' tell me from what does this arise/ (869)

9. ' Pleasure and displeasure have their origin
from phassa (touch), when there is no touch they do
not arise. This notion which (thou mentionest), viz.
"decay and origin," this I tell thee has its origin
from this/ (870)

10. ' From what has phassa its origin in the world,
and from what does grasping spring up ? For want
of what is there no egotism, by the cessation of what
do the touches not touch ?' (871)

11. 'On account of name and form the touches
(exist), grasping has its origin in wish ; by the cessa-
tion of wishes there is no egotism, by the cessation
of form the touches do not touch/ (872)

12. ' How is one to be constituted that (his) form
may cease to exist, and how do joy and pain cease
to exist? Tell me this, how it ceases, that we should
like to know, such was my mind1 ?' (873)

13. i Let one not be with a natural consciousness,
nor with a mad consciousness, nor without con-
sciousness, nor with (his) consciousness gone; for
him who is thus constituted form ceases to exist, for
what is called delusion has its origin in conscious-
ness V (?) (874)

14. 'What we have asked thee thou hast explained

1 Kathafli sametassa vibhoti mp&m,
Sukha/tf dukhaw v&pi kathazra vibhoti,
Etaw me pabr&hi, yathd vibhoti
Taw £-£tniyama, iti me mano ahft.

2 Na sannasaimi na visannasafmi
No pi asaiwi na vibhutasalwi
Evaw sametassa vibhoti r&paw
Samianidana; hi papa#$asa#*kha.


KVL AVIYUHASUTTA. 1 6 7

unto us ; we will ask thee another question, answer
us that : Do not some (who are considered) wise in
this world tell us that the principal (thing) is the
purification of the yakkha, or do they say something
different from this * ? ' (875)

15. * Thus some (who are considered) wise in this
world say that the principal (thing) is the purification
of the yakkha ; but some of them say samaya (anni-
hilation), the expert say (that the highest purity
lies) in anupadisesa (none of the five attributes
remaining) 2. (876)

16. 'And having known these to be dependent,
the investigating Muni, having known the things we
depend upon, and after knowing them being libe-
rated, does not enter into dispute, the wise (man)
does not go to reiterated existence3/ (%77)

Kalahavivadasutta is ended.


12. atOlaviyOhasutta.

A description of disputing philosophers. The different schools of
philosophy contradict each other, they proclaim different truths,
but the truth is only one. As long as the disputations are going
on, so long will there be strife in the world.

i. Abiding by their own views, some (people),

having got into contest, assert themselves to be

1 Comp. SundarikabMradva^asutta, v. 25.

2 Ettavat' aggam pi vadanti h' eke
Yakkhassa suddhizrc idha paraditase,
Tesa#z pun' eke samayaw * vadanti
Anup&disese kusala vadana.

8 Ete k& watva upanissita ti
iVatva muni nissaye so vima#zsi
i\/atva vimutto na vivadam eti
Bhavabhavaya na sameti dhiro.

* UMedam. Commentator.


1 68 ArrtfAKAVAGGA.


the (only) expert (saying), '(He) who understands
this, he knows the Dhamma ; he who reviles this, he
is not perfect1/ (878)

2. So having got into contest they dispute : * The
opponent (is) a fool, an ignorant (person)/ so they
say. Which one of these, pray, is the true doctrine
(vada)? for all these assert themselves (to be the
only) expert. (879)

3. He who does not acknowledge an opponent's
doctrine (dhamma), he is a fool, a beast, one of poor
understanding, all are fools with a very poor under-
standing ; all these abide by their (own) views. (880)

4. They are surely purified by their own view,
they are of a pure understanding, expert, thoughtful,
amongst them there is no one of poor understanding,
their view is quite perfect! (881)

5. I do not say, ' This is the reality/ which fools
say mutually to each other ; they made their own
views the truth, therefore they hold others to be
fools. (882)

6. What some say is the truth, the reality, that
others say is void, false, so having disagreed they
dispute. Why do not the Samaras say one (and
the same thing) ? (883)

7. For the truth is one, there is not a second,
about which one intelligent man might dispute with
another intelligent man ; (but) they themselves praise
different truths, therefore the Samaras do not say
one (and the same thing)2. (884)

1 Sakaw saka/0 di//6i paribbas&nS
Viggayha nan& kusald vadanti

Yo evam g&n&ti sa vedi dhammazrc
Idaw pa/ikkosaw akevali so.

2 Ekazra hi s&kfam na dutfyam atthi
Yasmi#& pag^no vivade pag-ana/0,


idjLAVIYftHASUTTA. 1 69

8. Why do the disputants that assert themselves
(to be the only) expert, proclaim different truths ?
Have many different truths been heard of, or do they
(only) follow (their own) reasoning? (885)

9. There are not many different truths in the world,
no eternal ones except consciousness ; but having
reasoned on the (philosophical) views they proclaim
a double Dhamma, truth and falsehood1. (886)

10. In regard to what has been seen, or heard,
virtue and (holy) works, or what has been thought,
and on account of these (views) looking (upon
others) with contempt, standing in (their) resolutions
joyful, they say that the opponent is a fool and an
ignorant person2. (?) (887)

1 1. Because he holds another (to be) a fool, there-
fore he calls himself expert, in his own opinion he is
one that tells what is propitious, others he blames,
so he said3. (?) (888)

12. He is full of his overbearing (philosophical)
view, mad with pride, thinking himself perfect, he is
in his own opinion anointed with the spirit (of genius),
for his (philosophical) view is quite complete. (889)

Nana* te sa^ani sayaw thunanti,

Tasma na ekaw samara vadanti.
1 Na h' eva sa^ani bahuni n&n&

Awwatra saMaya ni^dni loke,

Takkaft fa di//£isu pakappayitvS

Sa.kka.rn musS ti dvayadhammam Shu.
* Di///$e sute silavate mute v&

Ete ka, nissaya vim&nadass?

Vini/fc^aye thatv& pahassaman^

B&lo paro akusalo ti kahu.
3 Yen' eva bdlo ti paraw dah&ti

Ten&tum&nazrc kusalo ti kaha.,

Sayam attand so kusald vadano

hnnam vimSneti, tath' eva pav&.


I 70 ATTHAK AVAGGA .


1 3. If he according to another's report is low, then
(he says) the other is also of a low understanding,
and if he himself is accomplished and wise, there
is not any fool amongst the Samaras1. (890)

14. 'Those who preach a doctrine (dhamma)
different from this, fall short of purity and are
imperfect/ so the Titthiyas say repeatedly, for they
are inflamed by passion for their own (philosophical)
views. (891)

15. Here they maintain purity, in other doctrines
(dhamma) they do not allow purity ; so the Titthi-
yas, entering extensively (upon details), say that in
their own way there is something firm. (892)

16. And saying that there is something firm in his
own way he holds his opponent to be a fool ; thus
he himself brings on strife, calling his opponent a
fool and impure (asuddhadhamma). (893)

17. Standing in (his) resolution, having himself
measured (teachers, &c), he still more enters into
dispute in the world ; but having left all resolutions
nobody will excite strife in the world 2. (894)

A^laviyfihasutta is ended.


1 Parassa ke hi va^asa nihino
Tumo * saha hoti nihinapa?mo,
Atha ke sayaw vedagu hoti dhiro
Na ko& balo sama^esft atthi.

2 Vini>l^aye //fotva say aw pamaya
Uddhaw so lokasmiw vivadam eti,
Hitvana sabbani vini^Mayani

Na medhaka#z kunite ^antu loke.

* So pi ten' eva. Commentator. Ved. tva (?).


MAHAVIY^HASUTTA. I 7 1


13. mahAviyOhasutta.

Philosophers cannot lead to purity, they only praise themselves and
stigmatise others. But a Brahma^a has overcome all dispute,
he is indifferent to learning, he is appeased.

i. Those who abiding in the (philosophical) views
dispute, saying/ This is the truth/ they all incur blame,
and they also obtain praise in this matter. (895)

2. This is little, not enough to (bring about)
tranquillity, I say there are two fruits of dispute ;
having seen this let no one dispute, understanding
Khema (i. e. NibMna) to be the place where there
is no dispute. (896)

3. The opinions that have arisen amongst
people, all these the wise man does not embrace ;
he is independent. Should he who is not pleased
with what has been seen and heard resort to
dependency1? (?) (897)

4. Those who consider virtue the highest of all,
say that purity is associated with restraint ; having
taken upon themselves a (holy) work they serve.
Let us learn in this (view), then, his (the Master s)
purity ; wishing for existence they assert themselves
to be the only expert2. (898)

5. If he falls off from virtue and (holy) works, he
trembles, having missed (his) work ; he laments, he

1 Yd ka£' imd sammutiyo puthuggi
Sabbd va et& na upeti vidvd,
Anupayo so, upaya#z kim eyya
"Dittke sute khantizra* akubbamano?

2 Siluttama saymamenaliu suddhizra,
Vatazra samadaya upa//#it&se,

Idh' eva sikkhema ath' assa suddhiffi,
BhavupanM kusald vadana\
* So all the MS&


172 ATTHAK A VAGGA.


prays for purity in this world, as one who has lost
his caravan or wandered away from his house. (899)

6. Having left virtue and (holy) works altogether,
and both wrong and blameless work, not praying
for purity or impurity, he wanders abstaining (from
both purity and impurity), without having embraced
peace. (900)

7. By means of penance, or anything disliked, or
what has been seen, or heard, or thought, going
upwards they wail for what is pure, without being
free from desire for reiterated existence. (9QI)

8. For him who wishes (for something there
always are) desires1, and trembling in (the midst
of his) plans ; he for whom there is no death and
no re-birth, how can he tremble or desire any-
thing ? (902)

9. What some call the highest Dhamma, that
others again call wretched; which one of these,
pray, is the true doctrine (vada)? for all these
assert themselves (to be the only) expert. (903)

10. Their own Dhamma they say is perfect,
another's Dhamma again they say is wretched ;
so having disagreed they dispute, they each say
their own opinions (are) the truth. (904)

11. If one (becomes) low by another's censure,
then there will be no one distinguished amongst
the Dhammas ; for they all say another's Dhamma
(is) low, in their own they say there is something
firm 2. (905)

1 Gappitani.

2 Parassa ke vamhayitena hfno
Na ko& dhammesu visesi assa,
PutM hi amiassa vadanti dhammaw
Nihinato samhi da/haw vadana.


mahAviy6hasutta. i 73

12. The worshipping of their own Dhamma is
as great as their praise of their own ways ; all
schools would be in the same case, for their purity
is individual1. (906)

13. There is nothing about a Brihma^a de-
pendent upon others, nothing amongst the Dhammas
which he would embrace after investigation ; there-
fore he has overcome the disputes, for he does not
regard any other Dhamma as the best. (907)

14. * I understand, I see likewise this/ so saying,
some by (their philosophical) views return to purity.
If he saw purity, what then (has been effected) by
another's view ? Having conquered they say that
purity exists by another2. (?) (908)

15. A seeing man will see name and form, and
having seen he will understand those (things) ; let
him at pleasure see much or little, for the expert
do not say that purity exists by that. (909)

16. A dogmatist is no leader to purity, being
guided by prejudiced views, saying that good con-
sists in what he is given to, and saying that purity
is there, he saw the thing so 3. (910)

17. A Brahma/za does not enter time, (or) the


1 Sadhammap%-a kz, pana tath' eva
YatM pasawsanti sakayan&ni,
Sabbe pav&dd tath' iv& bhaveyyuw
Suddhi hi nesaw pa^attam eva.

2 Gan&mi pass&mi tath' eva etaw
di/Z^iyst eke pa^enti suddhi^
Addakkhi ko kiw hi tumassa tena
Atisitva arafena vadanti suddhiw.

8 Nivissav&di na hi suddhin&yo
PakappM dxtthi purekkhar&no
Yaw nissito tattha subhaw vad&no
Suddhiw vado tattha, tath' addasd so.


1 74 ATTtfAKAVAGGA.


number (of living beings), (he is) no follower of
(philosophical) views, nor a friend of knowledge ;
and having penetrated the opinions that have arisen
amongst people, he is indifferent to learning, while
others acquire it (911)

1 8. The Muni, having done away with ties here
in the world, is no partisan in the disputes that
have arisen; appeased amongst the unappeased
he is indifferent, not embracing learning, while
others acquire it. (912)

19. Having abandoned his former passions, not
contracting new ones, not wandering according to
his wishes, being no dogmatist, he is delivered
from the (philosophical) views, being wise, and he
does not cling to the world, neither does he blame
himself. (913)

20. Being secluded amongst all the doctrines
(dhamma), whatever has been seen, heard, or
thought, he is a Muni who has laid down his
burden and is liberated, not belonging to time (na
kappiyo), not dead, not wishing for anything. So
said Bhagavat. (9H)

Mah&viyfihasutta is ended.


14. TUVA7AKASUTTA.

How a Bhikkhu attains bliss, what his duties are, and what he is

to avoid.

i. ' I ask thee, who art a kinsman of the Adidas
and a great I si, about seclusion (viveka) and the
state of peace. How is a Bhikkhu, after having
seen it, extinguished, not grasping at anything in
the world ?' (915)


TUVATAKASUTTA. 1 75


2. ' Let him completely cut off the root of what is
called papaya1 (delusion), thinking "I am wisdom;" '
— so said Bhagavat, — 'all the desires that arise in-
wardly, let him learn to subdue them, always being
thoughtful. 916)

3. ' Let him learn every Dhamma inwardly or out-
wardly ; let him not therefore be proud, for that is
not called bliss by the good. (9*7)

4. i Let him not therefore think himself better
(than others or) low or equal (to others) ; questioned
by different people, let him not adorn himself2. (918)

5. * Let the Bhikkhu be appeased inwardly, let
him not seek peace from any other (quarter) ; for
him who is inwardly appeased there is nothing
grasped or rejected. (9*9)

6. ' As in the middle (i. e. depth) of the sea no
wave is born, (but as it) remains still3, so let the
Bhikkhu be still 3, without desire, let him not desire
anything whatever/ (920)

7. He with open eyes expounded clearly the
Dhamma that removes (all) dangers ; tell (now)
the religious practices; the precepts or contem-
plation4. (921)

8. Bhagavat : ' Let him not be greedy with his
eyes, let him keep his ears from the talk of the town,
let him not be greedy after sweet things, and let
him not desire anything in the world. (922)

9. ' When he is touched by the touch (of illness),

1 Avi^adayo kilesa\ Commentator.

2 Natumana#z vikappayan ti/Me. 8 7%ito.

4 Akittayi viva/a^akkhu sakkhi
Dhammaztf parissayavinaya^,
Pa/ipada/tf vadehi, bhaddan te,
Patimokkha^ athavapi sam&dhiw.


1 76 A7TITAKAVAGGA,


let the Bhikkhu not lament, and let him not wish
for existence anywhere, and let him not tremble at
dangers. (923)

10. ' Having obtained boiled rice and drink, solid
food and clothes, let him not store up (these things),
and let him not be anxious, if he does not get
them. (924)

11. ' Let him be meditative, not prying, let him
abstain from misbehaviour 1, let him not be indolent,
let the Bhikkhu live in his quiet dwelling. (925)

12. 'Let him not sleep too much, let him apply
himself ardently to watching, let him abandon sloth,
deceit, laughter, sport, sexual intercourse, and adorn-
ment. (926)

13. ' Let him not apply himself to practising (the
hymns of) the Athabba/za(-veda), to (the interpreta-
tion of) sleep and signs, nor to astrology ; let not
(my) follower (mamaka) devote himself to (inter-
preting) the cry of birds, to causing impregnation,
nor to (the art of) medicine. (927)

14. * Let the Bhikkhu not tremble at blame, nor
puff himself up when praised; let him drive off
covetousness together with avarice, anger, and
slander. (928)

15. 'Let the Bhikkhu not be engaged in purchase
and sale, let him not blame others in anything, let
him not scold in the village, let him not from love of
gain speak to people. (929)

16. ' Let not the Bhikkhu be a boaster, and let
him not speak coherent 2 language ; let him not learn
pride, let him not speak quarrelsome language. (930)

1 Virame kukkukfam.

3 Payuta; comp. Nalakasutta, v. 33.


ATTADAiVDASUTTA. 177

1 7. * Let him not be led into falsehood, let him
not consciously do wicked things ; and with respect
to livelihood, understanding, virtue, and (holy) works
let him not despise others. (93 1)

18. 'Having heard much talk from much-talking
Samaras let him not irritated answer them with harsh
language; for the good do not thwart1 others. (932)

19. ' Having understood this Dhamma, let the
investigating and always thoughtful Bhikkhu learn ;
having conceived bliss to consist in peace, let him
not be indolent in Gotamas commandments. (933)

20. * For he a conqueror unconquered saw the
Dhamma visibly, without any traditional instruction2;
therefore let him learn, heedful in his, Bhagavat's,
commandments, and always worshipping/ (934)

Tuva/akasutta is ended.


15. ATTADAiV77ASUTTA.

Description of an accomplished Muni.

i. From him who has seized a stick fear arises.
Look at people killing (each other); I will tell of
grief as it is known to me. (935)

2. Seeing people struggling like fish in (a pond
with) little water, seeing them obstructed by each
other, a fear came over me. (9 3 6)

3. The world is completely unsubstantial, all
quarters are shaken ; wishing for a house for myself
I did not see (one) uninhabited. (937)

4. But having seen (all beings) in the end ob-
structed, discontent arose in me ; then I saw in

1 Pa/isenikaronti.

2 Sakkhi dhammaw anftiham adassi.

[10] N


178 ATTHAKAVAGGA.


this world an arrow, difficult to see, stuck in the
heart. (938)

5. He who has been pierced by this arrow runs
through all quarters ; but having drawn out that ar-
row, he will not run, he will sit down (quietly). (939)

6. There (many) studies are gone through ; what
is tied in the world let him not apply himself to
(untie) it ; having wholly transfixed desire, let him
learn his own extinction (nibMna). (940)

7. Let the Muni be truthful, without arrogance,
undeceitful, free from slander, not angry, let him
overcome avarice. (94 1)

8. Let the man who has turned his mind to Nib-
Mna conquer sleepiness, drowsiness, and sloth ; let
him not live together with indolence, let him not in-
dulge in conceit. (942)

9. Let him not be led into falsehood, let him
not turn his affection to form ; let him penetrate
arrogance, let him wander abstaining from vio-
lence. (943)

10. Let him not delight in what is old, let him
not bear with what is new, let him not grieve for
what is lost, let him not give himself up to
desire \ (944)

11. (This desire) I call greed, the great stream,
I call (it) precipitation, craving, a trouble, a bog of
lust difficult to cross 2. (945)

12. The Muni who without deviating from truth

1 Akasaw na si to siya ti tawhaw nissito na bhaveyya.
Commentator.

2 Gedhaw brmni mahogho ti
A^avazrc brtimi ^appanaw
Aramma#azrc pakappanaw
Kamapawko dura^ayo.


ATTADA7VZ)ASUTTA. 1 79


stands fast on the firm ground (of NibMna, being) a
Brahma/ea, he, having forsaken everything, is indeed
called calm. (946)

13. He indeed is wise, he is accomplished, having
understood the Dhamma independent (of every-
thing); wandering rightly in the world he does not
envy any one here. (947)

14. Whosoever has here overcome lust, a tie
difficult to do away with in the world, he does not
grieve, he does not covet1, having cut off the
stream, and being without bonds. (948)

15. What is before (thee), lay that aside; let there
be nothing behind thee ; if thou wilt not grasp after
what is in the middle, thou wilt wander calm2. (949)

16. The man who has no desire at all for name
and form (individuality) and who does not grieve
over what is no more, he indeed does not decay in
the world3. (95°)

17. He who does not think, * this is mine ' and ' for
others there is also something/ he, not having ego-
tism, does not grieve at having nothing4. (95 1)

18. Not being harsh, not greedy, being without
desire, and being the same under all circumstances
(samo5), — that I call a good result, when asked about
an undaunted man. (95 2)

1 9. For him who is free from desire, for the

1 NSggfeti^n&bhiggftati (read nabhig^ayati). Commentator.

2 Comp. infra, Gatuka^win's question, v. 4, and Dhammapada,
p. 308.

3 Comp. infra, 6ratuka«#in's question, v. 5.

4 Yassa n' atthi 'idam me' ti

'Paresazrc vapi kmk^m.m1

Mamattaw so asawvindaw

' N' atthi me' ti na so^ati.
6 =upekhako. Commentator.
N 2


l8o A7THAKAVAGGA.


discerning (man) there is no Sa^khara ; abstaining
from every sort of effort he sees happiness every-
where1. (953)
20. The Muni does not reckon himself amongst
the plain, nor amongst the low, nor amongst the
distinguished ; being calm and free from avarice, he
does not grasp after nor reject anything2. (954)
Attada^asutta is ended.


16. SARIPUTTASUTTA.

On Sariputta asking what a Bhikkhu is to devote himself to,
Buddha shows what life he is to lead.

i. ' Neither has before been seen by me/ — so said
the venerable Sariputta, — ' nor has any one heard of
such a beautifully-speaking master, a teacher arrived
from the Tusita heaven. (955)

2. 'As he, the clearly-seeing, appears to the world
of men and gods, after having dispelled all darkness,
so he wanders alone in the midst (of people). (956)

3. ' To this Buddha, who is independent, un-
changed, a guileless teacher, who has arrived (in
the world), I have come supplicatingly with a ques-
tion3 from many who are bound in this world. (957)

4. * To a Bhikkhu who is loath (of the world)
and affects an isolated seat, the root of a tree or
a cemetery, or (who lives) in the caves of the
mountains, (958)

1 Ane^assa vi^anato
N' atthi ka£i nisa^khiti,
Virato so viy&rambh&
Khemazrc passati sabbadhi.

2 Comp. supra, Purabhedasutta, vv. 15, 20.

3 Atthi pawhena agamic =atthiko pawhena agato 'mhiti atthi-
k&naw v& pawhena atthi agamanaw ka. ti. Commentator.


S ARIPU TTAS U TT A. 151

5. * How many dangers (are there not) in these
various dwelling-places at which the Bhikkhu does
not tremble in his quiet dwelling ! (959)

6. ' How many dangers (are there not) in the
world for him who goes to the immortal region1,
(dangers) which the Bhikkhu overcomes in his
distant dwelling! (960)

7. * Which are his words, which are his objects
in this world, which are the virtue and (holy) works
of the energetic Bhikkhu? (961)

8. 'What study having devoted himself to, in-
tent on one object2, wise and thoughtful, can he
blow off his own filth as the smith (blows off) that
of the silver 3 ?' (962)

9. 'What is pleasant for him who is disgusted
(with birth, &c), — O Sariputta/ so said Bhagavat,
— ' if he cultivates a lonely dwelling-place, and
loves perfect enlightenment in accordance with
the Dhamma, that I will tell thee as I under-
stand it. (963)

10. ' Let not the wise and thoughtful Bhikkhu
wandering on the borders 4 be afraid of the five
dangers : gad-flies and (all other) flies 5, snakes,
contact with (evil) men 6, and quadrupeds. (964)

11. ' Let him not be afraid of adversaries7, even
having seen many dangers from them; further he


1 Ga^^ato amatazra disaw.

2 Ekodi=ekagga&tto. Commentator.

3 Comp. Dhp. v. 239. 4 PariyantaMrf.

5 Z>a#zsadhipatanan ti pihgalamakkhikanaw k& sesamakkhi-
kanaft £a, sesamakkhikd hi tato adhipatitvd kMdanti, tasmst adhi-
pata ti vu^anti. Commentator.

6 Manussaphassanan ti £oradiphassana/rc. Commentator.

7 Paradhammikanaw.


1 8 2 ATTHAK AVAGG A.


will overcome other dangers while seeking what is
good. ^ (965)

12. ' Touched by sickness and hunger let him
endure cold and excessive heat, let him, touched
by them in many ways, and being houseless, make
strong exertions. (966)

1 3. ' Let him not commit theft, let him not speak
falsely, let him touch friendly what is feeble or
strong, what he acknowledges to be the agitation
of the mind, let him drive that off as a partisan
of Ka/zha (i. e. Mara). (967)

14. ' Let him not fall into the power of anger
and arrogance ; having dug up the root of these,
let him live, and let him overcome both what is
pleasant and what is unpleasant. (968)

15. ' Guided by wisdom, taking delight in what
is good, let him scatter those dangers, let him
overcome discontent in his distant dwelling, let him
overcome the four causes of lamentation. (969)

16. 'What shall I eat, or where shall I eat? — he
lay indeed uncomfortably (last night) — where shall
I lie this night ? let the Sekha who wanders about
houseless subdue these lamentable doubts. (970)

17. 'Having had in (due) time both food and
clothes, let him know moderation in this world for
the sake of happiness; guarded in these (things)
and wandering restrained in the village let him, even
(if he be) irritated, not speak harsh words. (971)

18. 'Let him be with down-cast eyes, and not
prying, devoted to meditation, very watchful ; having
acquired equanimity let him with a composed mind
cut off the seat of doubt, and misbehaviour. (972)

19. 'Urged on by words (of his teachers) let
him be thoughtful and rejoice (at this urging), let


SARIPUTTASUTTA. 1 8 3


him break stubbornness in his fellow-students, let
him utter propitious words and not unseasonable,
let him not think detractingly of others. (973)

20. 'And then the five impurities in the world,
the subjection of which he must learn thoughtfully,
— let him overcome passion for form, sound and
taste, smell and touch. (974)

21. 'Let the Bhikkhu subdue his wish for these
Dhammas and be thoughtful, and with his mind
well liberated, then in time he will, reflecting upon
Dhamma, and having become intent upon one object,
destroy darkness/ So said Bhagavat. (975)

SHriputtasutta is ended.
A#/£akavagga, the fourth.


V. PARAYANAVAGGA.


To the Brahmawa Bavari, living on the banks of the Godh&vari, in
Assaka's territory, comes another Brahma/za and asks for five
hundred pieces of money, but not getting them he curses Bavari ,
saying, 'May thy head on the seventh day hence cleave into
seven/ A deity comforts Bavari by referring him to Buddha.
Then B&vari sends his sixteen disciples to Buddha, and each of
them asks Buddha a question.

i. vatthugAthA.

i. From the beautiful city of the Kosalas (S&-
vatthl) a Brahma/za, well versed in the hymns, went
to the South (Dakkhi/z&patha) wishing for nothing-
ness1. (976)

2. In Assakas territory, in the neighbourhood
of A/aka, he dwelt on the banks of the Godhavari,
(living) on gleanings and fruit. (977)

3. And close by the bank there was a large
village, with the income of which he prepared a
great sacrifice. (978)

4. Having offered the great sacrifice, he again
entered the hermitage. Upon his re-entering,
another Brahma/za arrived, (979)

5. With swollen feet2, trembling, covered with
mud, with dust on his head. And he going up

1 Akinkanna.

2 Uggha/Zapado ti maggakkamanena gha//apadatalo pawhi-
kaya vi pa^hikaw gopphakena va" gopphakaw ^a^/mkena g&nnu-
\&m &gantvapi gha/Zapado. Commentator.


VATTHUGATHA. 1 8 5


to him (i. e. the first Brdhma/za) demanded five
hundred (pieces of money). (980)

6. Bcivarl, seeing him, bade him be seated, asked
him whether he was happy and well, and spoke as
follows: (981)

7. ' What gifts I had are all given away by
me ; pardon me, O Brdhma^a, I have no five
hundred/ (982)

8. * If thou wilt not give to me who asks, may thy
head on the seventh day cleave into seven/ (983)

9. So after the usual ceremonies this impostor
made known his fearful (curse). On hearing these
his words B&varl became sorrowful. (984)

10. He wasted away taking no food, transfixed
by the arrow of grief, but yet his mind delighted in
meditation. (985)

11. Seeing Bavari struck with horror and sorrow-
ful, the benevolent deity (of that place) approached
him and said as follows : (986)

12. 'He does not know (anything about) the head;
he is a hypocrite coveting riches; knowledge of the
head and head-splitting is not found in him1/ (987)

13. 'If the venerable (deity) knows it, then tell
me, when asked, all about the head and head-
splitting ; let us hear thy words/ (988)

14. 'I do not know this; knowledge of it is not
found in me ; as to the head and head-splitting, this
is to be seen by Buddhas (only)/ (989)

15. 'Who then, say, in the circumference of the


1 Na so muddhaw pagun&ti,
Kuhako so dhanatthiko,
Muddhani muddhap&te k&
Namm tassa na vig-gati.


1 86 PARAYANAVAGGA.


earth knows die head and head-splitting, tell me
that, O deity?' (990)

16. ' Formerly went out from Kapilavatthu a ruler
of the world, an offspring of the OkMka king, the
Sakya son, the light-giving; (99 1)

17. ' He is, O Brahma/za, the perfectly Enlightened
(Sambuddha) ; perfect in all things, he has attained
the power of all knowledge, sees clearly in everything;
he has arrived at the destruction of all things, and is
liberated in the destruction of the upadhis1. (992)

18. * He is Buddha, he is Bhagavat in the world,
he, the clearly-seeing, teaches the Dhamma ; go thou
to him and ask, he will explain it to thee/ (993)

19. Having heard the word ' Sambuddha/ Bavari
rejoiced, his grief became little, and he was filled
with great delight. (994)

20. Bavari glad, rejoicing, and eager asked the
deity : ' In what village or in what town or in what
province dwells the chief of the world, that going
there we may adore the perfectly Enlightened, the
first of men ?' (995)

21. 'In Savatthi, the town of the Kosalas, dwells
6rina (the Victorious), of great understanding and
excellent wide knowledge, he the Sakya son, un-
yoked, free from passion, skilled in head-splitting,
the bull of men/ (996)

22. Then (Bavari) addressed his disciples, Brah-
ma^as, perfect in the hymns : ' Come, youths, I will
tell (you something), listen to my words : (997)

23. ' He whose appearance in the world is diffi-
cult to be met with often, he is at the present time 2

1 Sabbadhammakkhayaw patto (i. e. nibMna)
Vimutto upadhisawzkhaye.

2 Sv-a^a.


VATTHUGATHA. 187


born in the world and widely renowned as Sam-
buddha (the perfectly Enlightened) ; go quickly to
Savatthl and behold the best of men/ (998)

24. ' How then can we know, on seeing him, that
he is Buddha, O Br&hma/za ? Tell us who do not
know him, by what may we recognise him ? (999)

25. ' For in the hymns are to be found the marks
of a great man, and thirty-two are disclosed alto-
gether, one by one/ (1000)

26. ' For him on whose limbs these marks of
a great man are to be found, there are two ways
left, a third does not exist. (1001)

27. ' If he abides in a dwelling, he will subdue
this earth without rod (or) sword, he will rule with
justice. (1002)

28. ' And if he departs from his dwelling for the
wilderness, he becomes the saint, incomparable
Sambuddha, who has removed the veil (from the
world)1. (xoo3)

29. ' Ask in your mind about my birth and family,
my marks, hymns, and my other disciples, the head
and head-splitting. (1004)

30. 'If he is Buddha, the clear-sighted, then he
will answer by word of mouth the questions you
have asked in your mind/ (IO°5)

31. 32, 33. Having heard B&vari's words his dis-
ciples, sixteen Br&hma/zas, A^ita, Tissametteyya,
Pu/maka, further Mettagfi, Dhotaka and Upaslva,
and Nanda, further Hemaka, the two Todeyya and
Kappa, and the wise Catuka/ml, Bhadravudha and
Udaya, and also the Brahma/za Posila, and the wise
Moghari^an, and the great Isi Piiigiya, (1006-1008)

34. All of them, having each their host (of pupils),

1 Comp. Lalita-vistara (ed. Calc), pp. 116, 118.


1 88 PARAYANAVAGGA.

and being themselves widely renowned throughout the
world, thinkers delighting in meditation, wise, scented
with the perfume of former (good deeds) \ (1009)

35. Having saluted Bavari and gone round him
towards the right, all with matted hair and bear-
ing hides, departed with their faces turned to the
north. (10 10)

36. To Pati/^ana of A/aka first, then to Mahis-
satl, and also to Ugg*enl, Gonaddha, Vedisa, Vana-
savhaya, (IQI1)

37. And also to Kosambf, Sdketa, and Savatthi,
the most excellent of cities, to Setavya, Kapila-
vatthu, and the city of Kusindra, (10 12)

38. And to Piva, the city of wealth, to Vesalt, the
city of Magadha, to Pas&^aka .ATetiya (the Rock
Temple), the lovely, the charming. (1013)

39. As he who is athirst (longs for) the cold water,
as the merchant (longs for) gain, as he who is plagued
by heat (longs for) shade, so in haste they ascended
the mountain. (^H)

40. And Bhagavat at that time attended by the
assembly of the Bhikkhus taught the Dhamma to the
Bhikkhus, and roared like a lion in the forest. (10 15)

41. A^ita beheld Sambuddha as the shining (sun)
without (burning) rays, as the moon on the fifteenth,
having reached her plenitude. (1016)

42. Then observing his limbs and all the marks
in their fulness, standing apart, rejoiced, he asked the
questions of his mind : — (101 7)

43. /Tell me about (my masters) birth, tell me
about his family together with the marks, tell me
about his perfection in the hymns, how many (hymns)
does the Brahma/za recite ?' (1018)

1 Pubbavasanav&sita\


VATTHUGATHA. I 89


44. Bhagavat said : * One hundred and twenty-
years (is his) age, and by family he is a B&varl ;
three are his marks on the limbs, and in the three
Vedas he is perfect. (xoi9)

45. 'In the marks and in the Itihasa together with
Nigha^u and KeAibha — he recites five hundred —
and in his own Dhamma he has reached perfec-
tion/ (1020)

46. A^ita thought : * Explain fully the marks of
Bavarl, O thou best of men, who cuts off desire ;
let there be no doubt left for us/ (102 1)

47. Bhagavat said : 'He covers his face with his
tongue, he has a circle of hair between the eye-
brows, (his) privy member (is) hidden in a sheath,
know this, O young man1/ (1022)

48. Not hearing him ask anything, but hearing
the questions answered, the multitude reflected over-
joyed and with joined hands: — (xo23)

49. * Who, be he a god, or Brahman, or Inda, the
husband of Su^l, asked in his mind those questions,
and to whom did that (speech) reply ?' (J024)

50. A^ita said : ' The head and head-splitting
Bavarl asked about; explain that, O Bhagavat,
remove our doubt, O I si/ (I025)

51. Bhagavat said : 'Ignorance is the head, know
this; knowledge cleaves the head, together with
belief, thoughtfulness, meditation, determination, and
strength/ (1026)

52. Then with great joy having composed him-
self the young man put his hide on one shoulder,


1 Mukha#z ^ivhaya ^adeti,
XJnn' assa bhamukantare,'
Kosohita/ra vatthaguyhaw,
Evaw ^anahi md^ava.


I90 PARAYANAVAGGA.


fell at (Bhagavat's) feet (and saluted him) with his
head, (saying) : (J027)

53. * Bcivari, the Brahma^a, together with his
disciples, O thou venerable man, delighted and
glad, does homage to thy feet, O thou clearly-
seeing/ (1028)

54. Bhagavat said : ' Let Bavari, the Brihma^a,
be glad together with his disciples ! Be thou also
glad, live long> O young man! (!029)

55. * For Bcivari and for thee, for all there are all
(kinds of) doubt ; having got an opportunity, ask ye
whatever you wish/ (!03o)

56. After getting permission from Sambuddha,
A^ita sitting there with folded hands asked Tatha-
gata the first question. (103 1)

The Vatthugclthcis are ended.


2. AGlTAMAA^AVAPUA^/fA.

1. ' By what is the world shrouded/ — so said
the venerable A^ita, — ' by what does it not shine ?
What callest thou its pollution, what is its great
danger?' (1032)

2. * With ignorance is the world shrouded, O
A^ita/ — so said Bhagavat, — ' by reason of avarice
it does not shine ; desire I call its pollution, pain is
its great danger/ (J033)

3. ' The streams of desire flow in every direction/
— so said the venerable A^ita ; — ' what dams the
streams, say what restrains the streams, by what
may the streams be shut off * ?' (1034)

1 Comp. Dhp. v. 340.


TISSAMETTEYYAMAiVAVAPUtfisrtf A. 1 9 1

4. * Whatever streams there are in the world, — O
A^ita/ so said Bhagavat, — ' though tfulness is their
dam, though tfulness I call the restraint of the streams,
by understanding they are shut off/ (io35)

5. * Both understanding and though tfulness/ — so
said the venerable A^ita, — 'and name and shape1,
O venerable man, — asked about this by me, declare
by what is this stopped?' O036)

6. Buddha: 'This question which thou hast asked,
O A^ita, that I will explain to thee ; (I will explain
to thee) by what name and shape2 are totally
stopped ; by the cessation of consciousness this is
stopped here/ (io37)

7. A^ita : ' Those who have examined (all)
Dhammas (i. e. the saints), and those who are
disciples, (and those who are) common men here,
— when thou art asked about their mode of life,
declare it unto me, thou who art wise, O venerable
man/ (1038)

8. Buddha : ' Let the Bhikkhu not crave for sensual
pleasures, let him be calm in mind, let him wander
about skilful in all Dhammas, and thoughtful/ (1039)

A^itama/zavapu/^M is ended.


3. tissametteyyamAatavapua^t/a.

1. 'Who is contented in the world/ — so said the
venerable Tissametteyya, — 'who is without com-
motions ? Who after knowing both ends does not
stick in the middle, as far as his understanding is

1 Namarfipaw £a. 2 N&maw kz. rfipaw £a.


192 PAR A YAN AVAGG A.

concerned ? Whom dost thou call a great man ?
Who has overcome desire in this world ? ' (1040)
2. ' The Bhikkhu who abstains from sensual
pleasures, — O Metteyya/ so said Bhagavat, — 'who
is free from desire, always thoughtful, happy by
reflection, he is without commotions, he after know-
ing both ends does not stick in the middle, as far
as his understanding is concerned ; him I call a great
man; he has overcame desire in this world/ (1041)

Tissametteyyami^avapu^^ct is ended.


4. VXJNNAKAMANKVAVMKKHA.

1. * To him who is without desire, who has seen
the root (of sin)/ — so said the venerable Punnaka,,
— ' I have come supplicatingly with a question : on
account of what did the I sis and men, Khattiyas
and Brahma/zas, offer sacrifices to the gods abun-
dantly in this world? (about this) I ask thee, O
Bhagavat, tell me this.' (J042)

2. * All these I sis and men, Khattiyas and Brah-
ma^as, — O Punnaka.,' so said Bhagavat, — 'who
offered sacrifices to the gods abundantly in this
world, offered sacrifices, O Punnaka, after reaching
old age, wishing for their present condition/ (1043)

3. ■ All these I sis and men, Khattiyas and Brah-
ma#as,' — so said the venerable Pu^aka,— ' who
offered sacrifices to the gods abundantly in this
world, did they, O Bhagavat, indefatigable in the
way of offering, cross over both birth and old age,
O venerable man ? I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell
me this/ (1044)


METTAG1JM ANAVAFVKKHA. 1 9 3

4. ' They wished for, praised, desired, abandoned
(sensual pleasures), — O Pu##aka/ so said Bhagavat,
— * they desired sensual pleasures on account of what
they reached by them ; they, devoted to offering, dyed
with the passions of existence, did not cross over
birth and old age, so I say/ (io45)

5. ' If they, devoted to offering/ — so said the
venerable Pu/maka, — 'did not by offering cross
over birth and old age, O venerable man, who
then in the world of gods and men crossed over
birth and old age, O venerable man, I ask thee,
O Bhagavat, tell me this ?' (1046)

6. ' Having considered everything1 in the world, —
O Pu##aka/ so said Bhagavat, — 'he who is not
defeated anywhere in the world, who is calm with-
out the smoke of passions, free from woe, free
from desire, he crossed over birth and old age,
so I say/ (io47)

Pu^^akami^avapu^M is ended.


5. mettagCmA^avapu^at/A.

1. 'I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this/ — so
said the venerable Mettagu, — ' I consider thee
accomplished and of a cultivated mind, why are
these (creatures), whatsoever they are of many kinds
in the world, always subject to pain ? ' (1048)

2. ' Thou may est well ask me concerning the
origin of pain, — O Mettagti/ so said Bhagavat, —

1 Parovar&niti parctai ka. ordni ka, parattabhavasakattabhavS,-
dini parani ka. orani ki ti vuttaw hoti. Commentator,
[10] O


194 PARAYANAVAGGA.


1 1 will explain that to thee in the way I myself
know it: originating in the upadhis pains arise,
whatsoever they are, of many kinds in the
world. (I049)

3. 'He who being ignorant creates upadhi, that
fool again undergoes pain ; therefore let not the
wise man create upadhi, considering (that this is)
the birth and origin of pain/ (I05°)

4. Mettagft: 'What we have asked thee thou
hast explained to us ; another (question) I ask thee,
answer that, pray : How do the wise cross the
stream, birth and old age, and sorrow and lamenta-
tion ? Explain that thoroughly to me, O Muni, for
this thing (dhamma) is well known to thee/ (105 1)

5. * I will explain the Dhamma to thee, — O Met-
tagii,' so said Bhagavat ; — ' if a man in the visible
world, without any traditional instruction, has under-
stood it, and wanders about thoughtful, he may over-
come desire in the world1/ (io52)

6. Mettagfi : 'And I take a delight in that, in the
most excellent Dhamma, O great I si, which if a
man has understood, and he wanders about thought-
ful, he may overcome desire in the world/ (!053)

7. 'Whatsoever thou knowest, — O Mettagti/ so
said Bhagavat, — ' (of what is) above, below, across,
and in the middle, taking no delight and no rest
in these things, let thy mind not dwell on
existence. (x054)

8. ' Living so, thoughtful, strenuous, let the Bhikkhu
wandering about, after abandoning selfishness, birth,

1 Kittayiss&mi te dhammaw — Mettagft ti Bhagavd— -
Di//^e dhamme anitihaw
Yaw viditva sato £araz#
Tare loke visattikaw.


METTAG^JMAiVAVAPU^^HA. 1 9 5

and old age, and sorrow, and lamentation, being a
wise man, leave pain in this world/ (io55)

9. Mettagti : ' I delight in these words of the
great I si ; well expounded, O Gotama, is (by thee)
freedom from upadhi (i. e. Nibbana). Bhagavat
in truth has left pain, for this Dhamma is well
known to thee1. (J056)

10. 'And those also will certainly leave pain
whom thou, O Muni, constantly mayest admonish ;
therefore I bow down to thee, having come hither,
O chief (naga), may Bhagavat also admonish me
constantly/ (x057)

11. Buddha: 'The Brihma^a whom I may ac-
knowledge as accomplished, possessing nothing,
not cleaving to the world of lust, he surely has
crossed this stream, and he has crossed over to
the other shore, free from harshness (akhila), (and)
free from doubt. (io58)

12. 'And he is a wise and accomplished man
in this world; having abandoned this cleaving to
reiterated existence he is without desire, free from
woe, free from longing, he has crossed over birth
and old age, so I say/ (io59)

Mettagfima/2avapu/£/£M is ended.


1 Et' dbhinanddmi va£o mahesino
Sukittitaw Gotama nfipadhikazrc,
Addhd hi Bhagavsi paMsi dukkhaw,
TatM hi te vidito esa dhammo.
Sukittita/ft Gotama nupadhtkan ti ettha anupadhikan ti
nibbana;#, tazra sandhaya va Bhagavantaw alapanto Sha sukitti-
taw, &c. Commentator.


O 2


I96 PARAYANAVAGGA.


6. DHOTAKAMAilfAVAPUi^i/A.

1. 'I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this/ — so
said the venerable Dhotaka, — ' I long for thy word,
O great I si ; let one, having listened to thy utter-
ance, learn his own extinction/ (1060)

2. ' Exert thyself then, — O Dhotaka/ so said
Bhagavat, — 'being wise and thoughtful in this world,
let one, having listened to my utterance, learn his
own extinction/ (1061)

3. Dhotaka : ' I see in the world of gods and
men a Brahma^a wandering about, possessing no-
thing; therefore I bow down to thee, O thou all-
seeing one, free me, O Sakka, from doubts/ (1062)

4. Buddha : ' I shall not go to free any one in
the world who is doubtful, O Dhotaka ; when thou
hast learned the best Dhamma, then thou shalt cross
this stream1/ (1063)

5. Dhotaka : ' Teach (me), O Brahma^a, having
compassion (on me), the Dhamma of seclusion (i.e.
Nibbana), that I may understand (it and) that I,
without falling into many shapes like the air,
may wander calm and independent in this
world2/ (?) (1064)

1 Nahaw gamissami pamo^anaya
Kathawkathiw Dhotaka kaw& loke,
Dhammaw £a setf/iam. a^anamano
Evazrc tuvazrc ogham im&m taresi.

2 Anusasa brahme karuwayamano
Vivekadhammaw yam aha#* vig&nn&m
Yathaha/tf akaso va avyapagg-am&no *
Idh' eva santo asito ksLveyy&m.

* Nanappakarataw anapa^amano. Commentator.


UPASivAM ANAVAVVKKHA. 1 9 7

6. ' I will explain to thee peace x, — O Dhotaka/
so said Bhagavat ; — ' if a man in the visible world,
without any traditional instruction, has understood
it, and wanders about thoughtful, he may overcome
desire in the world/ (1o6^)

7. Dhotaka : ' And I take delight in that, the
highest peace2, O great Isi, which if a man has
understood, and he wanders about thoughtful, he
may overcome desire in the world/ (1066)

8. ' Whatsoever thou knowest, — O Dhotaka/ so
said Bhagavat, — ' (of what is) above, below, across,
and in the middle, knowing this to be a tie in the
world, thou must not thirst for reiterated ex-
istence/ (IQ67)

Dhotakama^avapu^/^a is ended.


7. UPASlVAMAiVAVAPUA^A^A.

1. * Alone, O Sakka, and without assistance I
shall not be able to cross the great stream/ — so
said the venerable Upaslva; — 'tell me an object,
O thou all-seeing one, by means of which one may
cross this stream/ (1068)

2. ' Having in view nothingness, being thought-
ful, — O Upaslva/ so said Bhagavat, — ' by the
reflection of nothing existing shalt thou cross the
stream ; having abandoned sensual pleasures, being
loath of doubts, thou shalt regard the extinction of
desire (i. e. Nibbana), both day and night3/ (1069)

1 Santiw. 2 Santim uttamaw.

8 kkinkawnzm pekkhamano satima — UpasM ti Bhagava —

N' atthiti nissaya tarassu oghaw,

Kame pahaya virato kathahi

Ta#hakkhaya»z rattamaMbhi passa.


I98 PARAYANAVAGGA.


3. Upasiva : ' He whose passion for all sensual
pleasures has departed, having resorted to nothing-
ness, after leaving everything else, and being deli-
vered in the highest deliverance by knowledge, will he
remain there without proceeding further1?' (1070)

4. ' He whose passion for all sensual pleasures
has departed, — O Upasiva/ so said Bhagavat, —
* having resorted to nothingness after leaving every-
thing else, and being delivered in the highest
deliverance by knowledge, he will remain there
without proceeding further.' C1^1)

5. Upasiva : ' If he remains there without pro-
ceeding further for a multitude of years, O thou
all-seeing one, (and if) he becomes there tranquil
and delivered, will there be consciousness for such
a one2 ?' (io72)

6. * As a flame blown about by the violence of
the wind, — O Upasiva/ so said Bhagavat, — ' goes
out, cannot be reckoned (as existing), even so a
Muni, delivered from name and body, disappears,
and cannot be reckoned (as existing) V (Jo73)

7. Upasiva : ' Has he (only) disappeared, or does
he not exist (any longer), or is he for ever free


1 Sabbesu kamesu yo vitar&go
Akinkannam nissito hitva-m-a?ma/ra
Saimavimokhe parame vimutto
Ti/Me nu so tattha ananuyayi.

2 Titthe £e so tattha ananuyayf
Pugam pi vassdna^ samanta^akkhu
Tatth' eva so siti siy& vimutto
Bhavetha vmn&n&m tathavidhassa ?

3 AM yatM vatavegena khitto
Atthazra paleti na upeti szmkhzm
Evaztf muni nSmakayd vimutto
Atthaw paleti na upeti sazrakhafli.


NANDAMANAVAVVKKHA. 1 99

from sickness ? Explain that thoroughly to me,
O Muni, for this Dhamma is well known to
thee1/ (!074)

8. 'For him who has disappeared there is no
form, O Upasiva/ — so said Bhagavat, — 'that by
which they say he is, exists for him no longer, when
all things (dhamma) have been cut off, all (kinds
of) dispute are also cut off2/ (io75)

Upastvamd^avapu^Mi is ended.


8. NANDAMAi^AVAPtLOT^A.

1. 'There are Munis in the world/ — so said the
venerable Nanda, — 'so people say. How is this
(understood) by thee ? Do they call him a Muni
who is possessed of knowledge or him who is pos-
sessed of life3?' (io76)

2. Buddha : ' Not because of (any philosophical)
view, nor of tradition, nor of knowledge, O Nanda,
do the expert call (any one) a Muni ; (but) such as
wander free from woe, free from desire, after having
secluded themselves, those I call Munis4/ (loyj)

1 Atthahgato so uda va so n' atthi
Udahu ve sassatiy& arogo,

Tarn me munf s&dhu viy&karohi,
TatM hi te vidito esa dhammo.

2 Atthahgatassa na pama^am atthi,
Yena nam vagg-u taw tassa n' atthi,
Sabbesu dhammesu samuhatesu
Samuhatd v&dapatMpi sabbe.

3 iVamipapannaw no munim vadanti
Udahu ve ^-iviten' upapannaw ?

4 Na ditthiy& na sutiya" na wa^ena
Munm £a Nanda kusald vadanti,


2 OO PARAYANAVAGGA.


3. 'All these Samaras and Brahma^as/ — so said
the venerable Nanda, — ' say that purity comes from
(philosophical) views, and from tradition, and from
virtue and (holy) works, and in many (other) ways.
Did they, in the way in which they lived in the
world, cross over birth and old age, O venerable
man ? I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this/ (1078)

4. ' All these Samaras and Brahma/zas, O Nanda/
— so said Bhagavat, — ' say that purity comes from
(philosophical) views, and from tradition, and from
virtue and (holy) works, and in many (other) ways ;
still they did not, in the way in which they lived
in the world, cross over birth and old age, so
I say/ (Io79)

5. ' All these Samaras and Br&hma/zas/ — so said
the venerable Nanda, — ' say that purity comes from
(philosophical) views, and from tradition, and from
virtue and (holy) works, and in many (other) ways ;
if thou, O Muni, sayest that such have not crossed
the stream, who then in the world of gods and men
crossed over birth and old age, O venerable man ?
I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this/ (1080)

6. ' I do not say that all Samaras and Brahma-
/zas, — O Nanda/ so said Bhagavat, — 'are shrouded
by birth and old age ; those who, after leaving in
this world what has been seen or heard or thought,
and all virtue and (holy) works, after leaving every-
thing of various kinds, after penetrating desire, are
free from passion, such indeed I call men that have
crossed the stream1/ (1081)


Visenikatva anigM nirSsa
iTaranti ye te munayo ti brfimi.
1 Nahaw 'sabbe sama^abrahma^ase
Ga%araya nivutd ' ti brumi,


HEM AK AM ANAVAVUKKH A. 2 O I

7. Nanda : ' I delight in these words of the great
I si ; well expounded (by thee), O Gotama, is freedom
from upadhi (i. e. Nibbana) ; those who, after leaving
in this world what has been seen or heard or thought,
and all virtue and (holy) works, after leaving every-
thing of various kinds, after penetrating desire, are
free from passion, such I call men that have crossed
the stream/ (1082)

Nandama/zavapu/£/£M is ended.


9. HEMAKAMA^AVAPUiTA^A.

1. ' Those who before in another world/ — so said
the venerable Hemaka, — ' explained to me the doc-
trine of Gotama, saying, " So it was, so it will be,"
all that (was only) oral tradition, all that (was only)
something that increased (my) doubts1. (xo83)

2. 'I took no pleasure in that, but tell thou me the
Dhamma that destroys desire, O Muni, which if a
man has understood, and he wanders about thought-
ful, he may cross desire in the world/ (joS^-)

3. Buddha : ' In this world (much) has been seen,


Ye s' idha ditt/iam va suta*# muta#z v&

Silabbataztf v&pi pah ay a sabbazrc

Anekarupam pi paMya sabban

Ta?/ha#z parm^aya anasavase

Te ve nara; oghatinnzi ti brumi.

Ye me pubbe viyakawsu

Hura;# Gotamasasanazra

I^-asi iti bhavissati

Sabban tarn itihitihaw

Sabban tam takkava^/^anaw.


202 PARAYANAVAGGA.


heard, and thought ; the destruction of passion and
of wish for the dear objects that have been per-
ceived, O Hemaka, is the imperishable state of
NibMna. (1085)

4. ' Those who, having understood this, are
thoughtful, calm, because they have seen the
Dhamma, tranquil and divine, such have crossed
desire in this world1/ (1086)

Hemakama;zavapu/£/£M is ended.


10. TODEYYAMAATAVAPUATA^A.

1. ' He in whom there live no lusts/ — so said the
venerable Todeyya, — i to whom there is no desire,
and who has overcome doubt, what sort of deliver-
ance is there for him ?' ^oSy)

2. * He in whom there live no lusts, — O Todeyya/
so said Bhagavat, — ' to whom there is no desire, and
who has overcome doubt, for him there is no other
deliverance/ (1088)

3. Todeyya : * Is he without breathing or is he
breathing, is he possessed of understanding or is he
forming himself an understanding2? Explain this to
me, O thou all-seeing one, that I may know a Muni,
O Sakka/ (1089)

1 Etad awwaya ye sat&
Di//Aadhamma^hinibbuta'
Upasantd kz. tedas&(?)*
Ti//?za loke visattikaw.

2 Nir&saso so uda dsasano
Paima#av& so uda patfmakappi.

* B reads ye sat& instead of tedasa\


KAPPAMAiVAVAPU.KXtfA. 203

4. Buddha : * He is without breathing, he is not
breathing, he is possessed of understanding, and he
is not forming himself an understanding ; know, O
Todeyya, that such is the Muni, not possessing any-
thing, not cleaving to lust and existence/ (1090)

Todeyyama;zavapu/§/£M is ended.


11. KAPPAMAi^AVAPUA^^A.

1. ' For those who stand in the middle of the
water/ — so said the venerable Kappa, — * in the for-
midable stream that has set in, for those who are
overcome by decay and death, tell me of an island,
O venerable man, and tell thou me of an island that
this (pain) may not again come on1/ (!09i)

2. * For those who stand in the middle of the
water, — O Kappa/ so said Bhagavat, — ' in the for-
midable stream that has set in, for those overcome
by decay and death, I will tell thee of an island,
O Kappa. (1092)

3. 'This matchless island, possessing nothing (and)
grasping after nothing, I call Nibbana, the destruc-
tion of decay and death2. (I093)

1 Tvaw ka. me dipam* akkhahi
YatM yid&m naparafl* siyL

2 Akm^anaw anadana/#
Etazra dfpazra anapara^
Nibbanaw iti nam brumi
Garama^uparikkhayaw.

Akm^anan ti km^anapa/ipakkha^, anad&nan ti ad&napa/i-
pakkhaztf, km/£an&d&navfipasaman ti vuttaw hoti. Commentator.
* B reads disam.


204 PARAYANAVAGGA.


4. ' Those who, having understood this, are

thoughtful (and) calm, because they have seen the

Dhamma, do not fall into the power of Mara, and

are not the companions of Mara/ (1094)

Kappam&/zavapu/&£M is ended.


12. GAT\JKANNIMANAWAV\JKKHA.

1. ' Having heard of a hero free from lust/ — so
said the venerable Gatukannm, — ' who has crossed
the stream, I have come to ask him who is free
from lust ; tell me the seat of peace, O thou with
the born eye (of wisdom), tell me this truly, O
Bhagavat. (J095)

2. * For Bhagavat wanders about after having
conquered lust as the hot sun (conquers) the earth
by its heat ; tell the Dhamma to me who has (only)
little understanding, O thou of great understanding,
that I may ascertain how to leave in this world
birth and decay/ (!096)

3. ' Subdue thy greediness for sensual pleasures, —
O £ratuka/min/ so said Bhagavat, — ' having consi-
dered the forsaking of the world as happiness, let
there not be anything either grasped after or re-
jected by thee1. (io97)

4. 'What is before thee, lay that aside ; let there be
nothing behind thee; if thou wilt not grasp after what
is in the middle, thou wilt wander calm2. (1098)

1 Kamesu vinaya gedhazrc,
Nekkhamma/ra da//^u khemato
Uggahitazra niratta?;? v&

M.2L te viggittha, kwUana#z.

2 Comp. supra, Attada^asutta, v. 15.


BHADRAVUDHAMAiNTAVAPUJT^JIA. 205

5. * For him whose greediness for name and form

is wholly gone, O Brahma^a, for him there are no

passions by which he might fall into the power of

death/ (1099)

£atuka;mimi72avapu/£/£M is ended.


13. BHADRAVUDHAMAiVAVAPUA^i/A.

1. 'I entreat the wise (Buddha), the houseless, who
cuts off desire/ — so (said) the venerable Bhadr&vu-
dha, — 'who is free from commotion, forsakes joy, has
crossed the stream, is liberated, and who leaves time
behind ; having heard the chiefs (word), they will
go away from here \ (1 100)

2. ' Different people have come together from
the provinces, longing (to hear) thy speech, O hero ;
do thou expound it thoroughly to them, for this
Dhamma is well known to thee/ (II01)

3. * Let one wholly subdue the desire of grasping
(after everything), — O Bhadravudha/ so said Bha-
gavat, — ( above, below, across, and in the middle ;
for whatever they grasp after in the world, just by
that M&ra follows the man. (1102)

4. 'Therefore, knowing this, let not the thoughtful
Bhikkhu grasp after anything in all the world, con-
sidering as creatures of desire this generation, stick-
ing fast in the realm of death/ (1 103)

Bhadravudhama;zavapu/£/£M is ended.

1 Oka^ahaw tanhakkhidam aneg-azra
Nandi/tfg-ahazrc oghatw#aw vimuttaw
Kappaffzgahaw abhiya^e sumedham,
Sutv&na n&gassa apanamissanti ito.


206 PARAYANAVAGGA.


14. UDAYAMAJVAVAPUArAT#A.

i. 'To Buddha who is sitting meditating, free
from pollution/ — so said the venerable Udaya, —
' having performed his duty, who is without passion,
accomplished in all things (dhamma), I have come
with a question ; tell me the deliverance by know-
ledge, the splitting up of ignorance/ (i 104)

2. ' (It consists in) leaving lust and desire, — O
Udaya/ so said Bhagavat, — 'and both (kinds of)
grief, and driving away sloth, and warding off mis-
behaviour. (iio5)

3. ' The deliverance by knowledge which is puri-
fied by equanimity and thoughtfulness and preceded
by reasoning on Dhamma I will tell thee, the splitting
up of ignorance V (1 106)

4. Udaya : ' What is the bond of the world, what
is its practice ? By the leaving of what is Nibbana
said to be2 ?' (iio7)

5. Buddha : ' The world is bound by pleasure,
reasoning is its practice; by the leaving of desire
NibMna is said to be/ (1108)

6. Udaya : ' How does consciousness cease in
him that wanders thoughtful ? Having come to ask
thee, let us hear thy words/ (1 109)

1 Upekhasatisazrcsuddha^
Dhammatakkapure^-avaw
Awwdvimokhaztf pabrumi
Avi^guya pabhedanaarc.

2 ~K\m su saztfyqg-ano loko,
YAm su tassa vi^ara^
Kiss* assa vippahanena
Nibbanaw iti vu^ati?


POSALAMAiVAVAPU^^HA. 207

7. Buddha : ' For him who both inwardly and out-
wardly does not delight in sensation, for him who thus
wanders thoughtful, consciousness ceases/ (i 1 10)

Udayam&/2avapu/§/£M is ended.


15. POSALAMAiWYVAPU^Of^A.

1. 'He who shows the past (births, &c.),' — so said
the venerable Posala, — 'who is without desire and
has cut off doubt, to him who is accomplished in
all things (dhamma), I have come supplicatingly
with a question. (i 1 1 1)

2. ' O Sakka, I ask about his knowledge who is
aware of past shapes, who casts off every corporeal
form, and who sees that there exists nothing either
internally or externally ; how can such a one be led
(by anybody) 1?y (1I12)

3. ' Tathagata, knowing all the faces of con-
sciousness,— O Pos&la,' so said Bhagavat, — ' knows
(also) him who stands delivered, devoted to that
(object)2. (I][I3)

4. 'Having understood that the bonds of pleasure
do not originate in nothingness (?), he sees clearly in

1 Vibhfttarfipasa?missa
SabbakayapaMyino
AgghaXtiaM, £a bahiddM kz.
Natthi kmiiti passato
N&n&m Sakkanupu&£Mmi,
Katha^z neyyo tathavidho.

2 Vmwa^atthitiyo sabba" — Posala ti Bhagavd —
Abhig£na*# Tathagato

Ti//$antam enaw ^andti
Vimuttazra tappar&yana/w.


2 o8 PAR AYANAVAGGA


this (matter), this (is) the knowledge of a perfect,
accomplished Brahma^a V ( 1 1 1 4)

Posalami^avapu^^a is ended.


16. MOGHARAGAMA^AVAPUATAT.tfA.

1. ' Twice have I asked Sakka,' — so said the
venerable Moghar&£*an, — ' but the clearly-seeing has
not explained it to me ; if the divine Isi is asked
for the third time, he will explain it, so I have
heard. (II][5)

2. * There is this world, the other world, Brah-
man's world together with the world of the gods ;
I do not know thy view, the famous Gotamas
(view). (II16)

3. ' To this man who sees what is good I have
come supplicatingly with a question : How is any
one to look upon the world that the king of death
may not see him ? ' (II][7)

4. ' Look upon the world as void, O Moghard^an,
being always thoughtful ; having destroyed the view
of oneself (as really existing), so one may overcome
death ; the king of death will not see him who thus
regards the world V ( 1 1 1 8)

Moghara^ami^avapu^^a is ended.


1 Aki?Ua?masambhava/#
Nandisawyqgunaztf iti
Evam evaw abhmr&ya
Tato tattha vipassati,
Eta#* n&n&m tathawtassa
Brahmawassa vusimato,

2 Comp. Dhp. v. 170.


PINGIYAMAiVrAVAPU*:2sr#A. 20g

17. PINGIYAMA^AVAPUi^ZfA.

i. ' I am old, feeble, colourless/ — so said the vene-
rable Pingiya, — ' my eyes are not clear, my hearing
is not good ; lest I should perish a fool on the way,
tell me the Dhamma, that I may know how to leave
birth and decay in this world/ v„. (i 119)

2. * Seeing others afflicted by the body, — O Pin-
giya/ so said Bhagavat, — ' (seeing) heedless people
suffer in their bodies; — therefore, O Pingiya, shalt
thou be heedful, and leave the body behind, that thou
mayest never come to exist again/ (11 20)

^ 3. Pingiya : ' Four regions, four intermediate re-
gions, above and below, these are the ten regions ;
there is nothing which has not been seen, heard, or
thought by thee, and (is there) anything in the world
not understood (by thee) ? Tell (me) the Dhamma,
that I may know how to leave birth and decay in
this world/ (II21)

4. ' Seeing men seized with desire, — O Pingiya/ so
said Bhagavat, — ' tormented and overcome by decay,
— therefore thou, O Pingiya, shalt be heedful, and
leave desire behind, that thou mayest never come
to exist again/ (1122)

Pingiyamci/zavapu^/£M is ended.


This said Bhagavat, living in Magadha at Pas&-
?zaka ./sTetiya (the Rock Temple). Sought by sixteen
Br&hma/zas, the followers (of B&vart, and) questioned
by each of them in turn, he responded to the ques-
tions. If a man, having understood the meaning
and tenor of each question, lives according to the
Dhamma, then he will go to the further shore of
decay and death, for these Dhammas lead to the
[10] p


2 1 0 PARAYANAVAGGA.


further shore, and therefore this order of Dhamma
was called * the way to the other shore/

i, 2. A^ita, Tissametteyya, Pu^^aka and Met-
tagft, Dhotaka and Upasiva, Nanda and Hemaka,
the two Todeyya and Kappa, and the wise Gatu-
ka/zmn, Bhadr&vudha and Udaya, and also the Brah-
ma^a Posala, and the wise Moghar^an, and Pingiya
the great Isi, (1123, n 24)

3. These went up to Buddha, the Isi of exemplary
conduct; asking subtle questions they went up to
the supreme Buddha. (II25)

4. Buddha, being asked, responded to their ques-
tions truly, and in responding to the questions the
Muni delighted the Br&hma^as. (11 26)

5. They, having been delighted by the clearly-
seeing Buddha, the kinsman of the Adidas, devoted
themselves to a religious life near the man of excel-
lent understanding. ( 1 1 2 7)

6. He who, lived according to what had been
taught by Buddha (in answer) to each single ques-
tion, went from this shore to the other shore. (1 1 28)

7. From this shore he went to the other shore
entering upon the most excellent way; this way
is to lead to the other shore, therefore it is called
'the way to the other shore/ (n29)


8. ' I will proclaim accordingly the way to the
further shore/ — so said the venerable Pingiya ; — * as
he saw it, so he told it ; the spotless, the very wise,
the passionless, the desireless lord, for what reason
should he speak falsely ? (i:L3o)

9. 'Well! I will praise the beautiful voice of
(Buddha), who is without stain and folly, and who
has left behind arrogance and hypocrisy. (II3I)

10. ' The darkness-dispelling Buddha, the all-


PARAYANASUTTA. 211


seeing, who thoroughly understands the world1,
has overcome all existences, is free from passion,
has left behind all pain, is rightly called (Buddha),
he, O Brdhma/za, has come to me. (II32)

ii. 'As the bird, having left the bush, takes
up his abode in the fruitful forest, even so I, having
left men of narrow views, have reached the great
sea, like the ha^sa2. (uSS)

12. 'Those who before in another world explained
the doctrine of Gotama, saying, " So it was, so it
will be," all that was only oral tradition, all that was
only something that increased my doubts 3. (i 134)

1 3. ' There is only one abiding dispelling darkness,
that is the high-born, the luminous, Gotama of great
understanding, Gotama of great wisdom, (1 1 35)

14. 'Who taught me the Dhamma, the instanta-
neous, the immediate, the destruction of desire, free-
dom from distress, whose likeness is nowhere4/ (1 136)

15. Bcivarl : ' Canst thou stay away from him even
for a moment, O Pingiya, from Gotama of great under-
standing, from Gotama of great wisdom, (1 1 37)


1 Lokantagfi.

2 Digo yatM kubbanakaw paMya
Bahupphalaw k&nanaw dvaseyya
Evam p' ahaw appadasse pahaya
Mahodadhiw hawso-r-iv' a^g-^apatto.

8 Ye 'me pubbe viy&kawsu

huraw Gotamas&sanaw

i^-dsi iti bhavissati

sabban taw itihitihaw

sabban taw takkavadtf^anaw.
4 Yo me dhammam adesesi

Sandi/Z^ikam akalikaw

Tawhakkhayam anitikaw

Yassa n' atthi upam& kva&.
P 2


212 PARAYANAVAGGA.


1 6. 'Who taught thee the Dhamma, the instan-
taneous, the immediate, the destruction of desire,
freedom from distress, whose likeness is no-
where ?' (lI3%)

1 7. Pingiya : ' I do not stay away from him even
for a moment, O Br&hma^a, from Gotama of great
understanding, from Gotama of great wisdom, (11 39)

18. 'Who taught me the Dhamma, the instan-
taneous, the immediate, the destruction of desire,
freedom from distress, whose likeness is no-
where. (1140)

19. 'I see him in my mind and with my eye,
vigilant, O Brdhma^a, night and day; worshipping
I spend the night, therefore I think I do not stay
away from him. (II4I)

20. ' Belief and joy, mind and thought incline
me towards the doctrine of Gotama; whichever
way the very wise man goes, the very same I am
inclined to1. (?) (1142)

21. 'Therefore, as I am worn out and feeble,
my body does not go there, but in my thoughts
I always go there, for my mind, O Brahma/za, is
joined to him. (XI43)

22. ' Lying in the mud (of lusts) wriggling, I
jumped from island to island ; then I saw the per-
fectly Enlightened, who has crossed the stream, and
is free from passion/ (IX44)

23. Bhagavat2: 'As Vakkali was delivered by

1 SaddM fa piti k& mano sati ka.
N&menti me Gotamas&sanamha" (?),
Yaw yam disaw va^-ati bhuripaTwk)
Sa tena ten' eva nato 'ham asmi.
2 At the conclusion of this (i. e. the preceding) g&M, Bhagavat,
who stayed at Savatthi, when seeing the maturity of the minds of


PARAYANASUTTA. 2 1 3


faith, (as well as) Bhadrdvudha and A/avi-Gotama,
so thou shalt let faith deliver thee, and thou shalt
go, O Pingiya, to the further shore of the realm
of death1/ (iH5)

24. Pingiya : ' I am highly pleased at hearing
the Muni's words ; Sambuddha has removed the
veil, he is free from harshness, and wise. (1146)

25. ' Having penetrated (all things) concerning
the gods, he knows everything of every descrip-
tion ; the Master will put an end to all questions
of the doubtful that (will) admit (him). (II47)

26. ' To the insuperable, the unchangeable (Nib-
Mna), whose likeness is nowhere, I shall certainly
go ; in this (NibMna) there will be no doubt (left)
for me, so know (me to be) of a dispossessed
mindV (1148)

Parayanavagga is ended.

Suttanipita is ended.


Pingiya and Bavari, shed a golden light. Pingiya, who sat pic-
turing Buddha's virtues to B&vari, having seen the light, looked
round, saying, ' What is this ? ' And when he saw Bhagavat
standing, as it were, before him, he said to the Brahmawa Bavari :
'Buddha has come/ The Brahma^a rose from his seat and stood
with folded hands. Bhagavat, shedding a light, showed himself to
the Brahmawa, and knowing what was beneficial for both, he said
this stanza while addressing Pingiya. Commentator.

1 Yathd ahu Vakkali muttasaddho
Bhadr&vudho A/avi-Gotamo ka.

Evam eva tvam pi pamu^ayassu saddhaw,
Gamissasi tvaw Pingiya maMudheyyapara/ra.

2 Asawhiraw asa^kuppa^
Yassa n' atthi upama kva£i

Addh& gamissami, na me 'ttha kazrckha,
Evaztf padMrehi avitta#ittaw.


INDEX.


The figures of this Index refer to the pages of the Translation, and
the numerals to the Introduction.


Ababu hell, 121.

Abbuda hell, 121, 122.

Adi^a family, 8, 69, 93, 174, 210.

Agga/ava temple, 57.

Aggika-Bharadvag-a brahma/za, 20.

A^aniya, high-bred, 92.

A^ita-Kesakambali titthakara, xii,

86.
A^ita mawava, xii, 188, 190.
A^ivika brahma^a, xiii, 63.
Ahaha hell, 121.
Ahara, food? 139.
Akhila, free from harshness, 78.
Aki^ana, possessionless, xii.
Alwis, 20, 108.
A/aka city, 184, 188.
A/avaka yakkha, 29.
A/avi city, 29, 31, 57.
A/avi-Gotama, 213.
Amagandha brahmawa, 40.
Anagamin,who does not return, 132,

A 133.
AnathapiWika, 17, 20, 43, 48, 62,

118.
Anguttarapa country, 96, 99.
Anupadisesa, not having the upadis

remaining, 167.
Anuvidita, well-informed, 91.
A«#atitthiyapubba, 95.
Apa«a city, 96, 99.
Appamada, 55.
Arahat, saint, 15, 80.
Arambha, exertion, 139.
Arati, daughter of Mara, 159.
Ariya, noble, 92, 122.
Ariyamagga, the noble way, 150.
Ascetic, xv.
Ascetic life, xv, 67.
Asipattavana hell, 124.
Asita isi, 125.
Asoka, inscriptions of, xii.
Assaka kingdom, 184.


Assamedha, horse-sacrifice, 50.
Assembly of Bhikkhus, 52, 66, 80,

85, 94, 117,132.
Asuddhadhamma, impure, 170.
Asura demon, 51, 125.
Athabba»a-veda, 176.
Attada«*/asutta, 177.
A/afa hell, 121.
Avigg-a, ignorance, xv, 134.

Bamboo tree, 6.

Bavari brahma«a, xii, 184*-

Belief, religious, 3.

Bhadravudha mawava, xiii, 205, 213.

Bharadvag-a mawava, xiii, 108.

Bhovadi, 113.

Bimbisara, king, 67, 99.

Bodhisatta, 125.

Body, xvi.

Bracelets, 7.

Brahmabandhu, 40.

Brahman, 14, 23, 30, 45, 78, 117^

142, 189.
Brahmawadhammikasutta, 47.
Brahman Sahampati, 119.
Brahma world, 23, 84, 90, 96, 208.
Buddha, his relation to philosophy,

xii ; sprung from the Sama»as,

xiv ; his titles, xv.
Buddhistic formula, xiii.

Cows are slain, xiii.

Dakkhi«agiri, 11.

Dakkhiwapatha, 184.

Dasaratha-Gataka, 106.

Davids, T.W. Rhys, 66, 75, 131.

Deity, 17, 43, 86, 186.

Desire, xv.

Deva, god, 45, 51, 52, 75, 94, 125,

126, 142, 189.
Dhamma^ariyasutta, 46.


2l6


SUTTA-NIPATA.


Dhammapada, xii, 6, 7, 10, 11, 16,
34,42, 54, 56, 77, 82, 113, 122,
129, 164, 179, 181, 190, 208.

Dhammarag-an, a religious king, 102.

Dhammika upasaka, 62.

Dhammavinaya, 95.

Dhaniya herdsman, 3.

Dhira, firm, 91.

Dhotaka ma»ava, xii, 196.

Disputants, xiii, 157, 167, 169.

Di#£asutamuta, xiii.

Dittbi, philosophy, xii, xiii.

Ditf&gata, philosopher, xiii.

Ditf/Mgatika, philosopher, 158.

Ditt^inivesa, xiii.

Duta&ata&akasutta, 148.

Dvayatanupassanasutta, 131.

Ekana/a, a brahmawa village, 11.
Ekodi, intent on one object, 181.
Elambu^a lotus, 162.
Eravawa, king of elephants, 63.
Etymology, 98.
Extinction, xvi.

Feer, Leon, 17, 24, 43.
Fire, offerings to, xiii, 74.
Forefathers, 51.

Gahatf^a, householder, 7, 22.

Galu££iM creeper, 5.

Gafiga, 30, 45.

Gaviphala, 40.

Gaya, 45^.

Giggbak&fa mountain, 80.

Gihin, householder, 7, 10.

Giribba^a city, 67.

Godhavari river, 184.

Gogerly, 17, 24, 43.

Gonaddha city, 188.

Gospel of S. John, 1 1, 102 ; S. Luke,
3 ; S. Matthew, 40, 69.

Gotama, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20, 23, 24,
26,27,38, 48,52, 63,72, 76,79,
80, 81, 85, 88, 94, 97, 100, 102,
109, no, 117,128, 162, 177, 201,
208, 211 ; cf. Samawa Gotama.

Grammarian, 98.

Grimblot, xii, 17, 24, 43.

Guhata&akasutta, 147.

Ganusso/zi brahmawa, xiii, 109.
Gappa, recitation, xiii, no.
Garasutta, 154.
Gataka, 8, 16, 32.
Gatukatf/zin mawava, xiii, 204.


Getavana, 17, 20, 43, 48, 62, 72, 118.
Gina, conqueror, 63, 127, 186.

Hawsa, 2ii.

Hardy, Spence, 11, 20, 48.
Hell, 23, 41, 55, 121, 122, 123, 124.
Hemaka mawava, xiii, 201.
Hemavata yakkha, 26.
Himavanta mountain, 68.
Hirisutta, 42.
Householder, 62, 8i.
Hymns, xiii, 23, 42, 50, 98, 126, 176,
184, 186, 188.

IkAhanambala, 108.
Inda god, 51, 52, 125, 189.
I%ita, commotion, 140.
Isi, sage, 28, 34, 48, 59, 75, 116, 125,
174, 192, 196, 197, 201, 208, 210.
Itihasa, xiii, 98, 189.

Kalahavivadasutta, 164.
Kalandakanivapa, 85, 87.
Kamabhava, 116.
Kamasutta, 146.
Ka»ha = Mara, 59, 71, 182.
Kawhabhig-atika, of black origin, 103.
Kawhasiri isi, 124, 126.
Kapilasutta, 46.
Kapilavatthu city, 186, 188.
Kappa, time, xvi, 89, 90, 92.
Kappa mawava, xiii, 203.
Kappa = N igrodhak appa, 5 8 .
Kappatita, who has overcome time,

62.
Kappayana or Kappiya brahma»a=

Nigrodhakappa, 59.
Kasibharadva^a brahmawa, n.
Kassapa buddha, 40.
Ke/ziya ^a/ila, 96.
Ke/ubha, xiii, 98, 189.
Khaggavisawa, rhinoceros, 6.
Khara yakkha, 45.
Khari measure, 121.
Khattiya, 19, 23, 52, 68, 75, 102, 192.
Khema = Nibbana, 171.
Khetta^-ina, who has conquered the

regions, 90.
Kiwsilasutta, 54.
Kokaliya bhikkhu, 118.
KolattM, 119.
Kosala country, 48, 68, 74, 121, 184,

186.
Kosambi city, 188.
Kori number, 124.
Kovilara tree, 7.


INDEX.


217


Kumuda hell, 121.
Kuppapafi^asanti, 149.
Kusala, happy, 90.
Kusinara city, 188.
Kuvera king, 63.

Kaiikin brahmawa, xiii, 109.
KandaXZy 23.

ifara«avat, endowed with the observ-
ances, 92.
ifinaka, 40.
£mgfilaka, 40.
ifulaviyuliasutta, 167.
jRTunda smith, 15.

Lalita Vistara, xii.
Lamp, go out like a, xvi.
Lokadhamma, the things of the

world, 44.
Lumbini country, 125.

Magadha country, 11, 67, 209.

Magandiyasutta, 159.

Maggadesaka or Maggadesin, teach-
ing the way, xiii, 15, 16.

Maggadusin, defiling the way, xiii,
15, 16.

Maggag^ayin = Maggadesaka, xiii,

15.

Magga^ina, victorious by the way,
xiii, 15, 16.

Magga^ivin, living in the way, xiii,
15, 16.

Magna mawava, 80.

Ma^/Mmanikaya, 108.

Mahamangalasutta, 43.

Mahaparinibbanasutta, xii.

Mahaviyuhasutta, 171.

Mahi river, 3.

Mahissati city, 188.

Makkhali-Gosala titthakara, xii, 86.

Mamaka, follower, 176.

Mara yakkha, the king of death, the
evil spirit, xv, 5, 14, 30, 45, 69,
7o, 71, 94, 96, 103, 106, 135, 142,
143, 145,^59, 182, 204, 205.

Matanga £a»dala, 20, 23.

Matter, xvi.

Megasthenes, xii.

Meru mountain, 125.

Metre, versed in, xiii, 98, no.

Mett&, friendliness, 24.

Mettagu mawava, xii, 193.

Migaramatar, 131.

Milindapa/zha, xii.

Moggallana thera, 118.


Moghara^-an ma«ava, xiii, 208.

Mona, wisdom, 131.

Moneyya, state of wisdom, 128.

Muir, 125.

Miilaphala, 40.

Muni, ascetic, xv, xvi, 5, 15, 16, 27,
33, 42, 60, 68, 76, 79, 84, 90,
93, 94, 106, 128, 129, 131, 148,
155, 157, 162, 163, 164, 167,
174, 177, 178, 180, 194, 198,
199, 200, 201, 203, 210, 213.

Mu%a grass, 5.

Muta, xiii.

Naga, chief; sinless (na + agas?), 68,
90, 94, 106, 162, 195.

Nahataka, cleansed, 90.

Nahuta number, 124.

Nalaka, sister's son of Asita, 125,127.

Namu£i = Mara, 69, 71.

Nanda mawava, xii, 199.

Narada isi, 94.

NatthikaditaM, sceptic, 41.

Navasutta, 52.

Nera^g-ara river, 69.

Nibbana, xv, xvi, 4, 10, 13, 16, 24,
3i, 32, 33, 34, 39, 44, 5®, 61,
62, 69, 77, 78, 127, 143, 145,

155, 157, 171, 178, 179, 195,

196, 197, 202, 203, 206, 213.
Nibbuta, happy, 108.
Nigaw/£a brahma«a, xiii, 63.
Nigaw^a-Nataputta titthakara, xii,

86.
NighaWu, vocabulary, xiii, 189.
Nigrodhakappa brahma«a, 57, 58.
Nirabbuda hell, 121, 122.
Nirupadhi, free from the elements of

existence, 115.
Nissita, dependent, 141.
Nivesana, resting-place, dogma, xiii.
Nivissavadin, dogmatist, xiii, 173, 174.

Obstacles, five, 3.
Okkaka king, 50, 51, 186.
Oldenberg, xii.

Pabbagg-a, leaving the world, 14, 67,

80.
Pabba^ita, ascetic, 64.
Pabbata isi, 94.

Padaka, versed in metre, xiii, 98, no.
Padhanasutta, 69.
Paduma hell, 120, 121, 124.
Pakudha-Ka^ayana titthakara, xii,

86.


2l8


SUTTA-NIPATA.


PamSda, indolence, 55.

Pamatta, indolent, 55.

Paw^ava mountain, 68.

PaWita, wise, 91.

Pa^avaggiya, 59.

Papaya, delusion, 175.

Parabhavasutta, 17.

Paramatf^akasutta, 152.

P&rayana, the way to the further

shore, 184.
Paribba^-a, Paribba^aka, wandering

mendicant, 22, 92.
Pari^atta tree, 10.
Parinibbuta, happy, blessed, 60, 61,

76, 136.
PariyantaHrin, wandering on the

borders, 181.
Pasa«aka £etiya, rock temple, 188,

209.
Pasurasutta, 157.
Patitf^ana city, 188.
Pattaphala, 40.
Pa/iharakapakkha, 66.
Pava city, 188.
Phassa, touch, 136.
Philosophers, two sorts of, xii, 159.
Philosophy, no one saved by, xiv.
Pingiya ma#ava, xiii, 209.
Pleasures of sense, 28.
Pokkharasati brahma^a, xiii, 109.
Posala mawava, xiii, 207.
Pubbarama, 131.
PuWarika hell, 121.
Pu««aka ma/zava, xii, 192.
Purabhedasutta, 162.
Purawa-Kassapa titthakara, xii, 86.
Purisamedha, sacrifice of a man, 50.

Raga*, daughter of Mara, 159..

Ra^agaha city, 67, 80, 85, 87.

Rahu, demon, 76, 83.

Rahula, Buddha's son, 55.

Rakkhasa, demon, 51.

Ratanasutta, 37.

Revelation, 123.

Rhinoceros, 6.

Rupa, Ruppa, form-possessing, 141.

Sabhiya paribba^aka, 85.

Saketa city, 188.

Sakiya = Sakya, Sakka, tribe, 69.

Sakka=Inda, 58, 117.

Sakka = Buddha, 58, 196, 197, 202,

207, 208.
Sakya muni = Buddha, 37.
Sakya son = Buddha, 96, 109.


Sakya tribe, 96, 109, 125, 126, 186.

Sallasutta, 106.

Sama, equable, same, 179.

Samaka grass, 40.

Sama«a, ascetic, xii, xiii, xiv, 12, 14,

15,16,18, 22, 29, 30,31,44,45,

47, 71, 88, 89, 93, 96, 102, 130,

131,142,164, 168, 170, 177, 200.
Samara Gotama, xiv, 86, 98, 100,

101, 109, 165.
Samawaka, wretched Samawa, 20, 45.
Sambuddha, perfectly enlightened,

28, 31, 102, 186, 187, 188, 190,

213.
Sammaparibba^aniyasutta, 60.
Sammapasa sacrifice, 50.
Sawkhara, matter, 62, 134, 180.
Sawsara, revolution, transmigration,

existence, xv, xvi, 89, 115, 133,

141.
Sanctification, xiv.
Sangha, assembly, 37, 38, 105.
Sangha/i, under-garment, 75.
Sa«#aya-Bela#£iputta titthakara, xii,

86.
Sariputta thera, 103, 118, 180.
Satagira yakkha, 26.
Savaka, disciple, 63, 65.
Savatthi city, 17, 20, 43, 48, 62, 72,

118, 131, 184, 186,188.
Savitti hymn, xiii, 75.
Sayampabha gods, 66.
Schwanbeck, xii.
Security, worldly, 3.
Seeds of existence, xvi.
Sekha, pupil, 182.
Sela brahmawa, xiii, 96.
Setavya city, 188.
Shaveling, 20, 74.

Signs of a great man,98, 101, 102, 126.
Silavata, xiii.

Sin according to Buddha, xv.
Snake, 1.

Sogandhika hell, 121.
Sopaka caste, 23.

Sottiya, learned in the revelation, 92.
Spiegel, 1.
Subhasitasutta, 72.
Sudda, man of the servile caste, 52.
Suddhaf/y&akasutta, 150.
Suddhodana king, 126.
Sugata — Buddha, 5, 38, 65, 73, 115,

121, 122, 132.
Su&loma yakkha, 45.
Sundarika river, 74.
Sundarikabharadva^a brahmawa, 74.


INDEX.


219


Suta, xiii.

Systems, philosophical, sixty-three,


Ta«ha, desire, 137, 159.
Ta#habhava, 116.
TaYukkha brahmawa, xiii, 109.
Tathagata, perfect, Buddha, 14, 37,

39, 42, 58, 77, 78, 103, 190,

207.
Teachers, famous, xii, 86.
Tevigg-a, perfect in the three Vedas,

xiii, 98, no, 189.
Tidasa gods, 125.
Timbaru fruit, 19.
Tissametteyya mawava, xii, 156, 191.
Titthiya brahmawa, xiii, 63, 170.
Todeyya brahmaraa, xiii, 109, 202.
Trenckner, xii.
Tusita heaven, 126, 180.
Tuvafakasutta, 174.

Udaya mawava, xiii, 206.

U^eni city, 188.

Upadana, seizure, 138.

Upadhi, substance, elements of exist-
ence, xvi, 5, 60, 62, 106, 133,
150, 186, 194, 195, 201.

Upasaka, follower, adherent, 24, 52,
62, 64, 85.

Upasampada, priest's orders, 14, 80,

95.
Upasiva ma«ava, xii, 197.
Upekhaka, equable, 163.
Uposatha, fasting, abstinence, 66,

131.
Uppalaka hell, 121.
Uraga, snake, 1.
Ussada, desire, 89, 163.
U//£ana, exertion, 55.

Vada, doctrine, 168, 172.


Vadasila, disputatious, xiii, 63, 109.

Vakkali, 212.

VaHpeyya sacrifice, 50.

Vanasavhaya city, 188.

Vangtea thera, 57, 73.

Vasala, Vasalaka, outcast, 20.

Vasava = Inda, 64.

Vase#£a mawava, xiii, 108.

Vatthugatha, 56,128.

Veda, 23, 98, no, 189.

Vedagfi, having passed sensation, 91.

Vedana, sensation, 136.

Vedisa city, 188.

Ve/uvana, 85, 87.

Vesali city, 188.

Vessavawa Kuvera king, 63.

Vessika, man of the third caste, 52.

Vetarawf river in hell, 124.

Veyyakarawa, grammarian, xiii, no.

Views, philosophical, 8, 25, 150, 152,
153, i59» 160, 162, 163,169, 170,
171, 173,174,199,200.

Vi^ayasutta, 32.

Vi^g-a, knowledge, xv.

Vigg-a/terawa, science and works, 96,
99.

Vini&6£aya, resolutions, placita, xiii.

ViMana, consciousness, 135.

Viriyavat, firm, 91.

Visionary, xiv.

Viveka, seclusion, 174.

Vocabulary, 98.

Wheel of the Dhamma, 127.
Work, 116.
Works, virtuous, xiv.
World is void,, xvi.

Yakkha, 25, 29, 45, 72, 78, 167.
Yoga, attachment, 115.
Yogakkhema = Nibbana, 69.
Yuga, distance of a plough, 67.


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


221


- S


r\ n ^ ^ n.


H % jz Pv C


*U


*» - UoJU


k)^


D . ^ . .«>


*» — UoJ-U


It)


u ^


*\ 3 «>sj


s;


<^^3 g^Ov/


Qy


Kr » * F


Ift iw


IF |cr IT |* &r


r *

0


*>-§>


^3


3 *>1» *


'bo

a


s


e3


1 3

OQ I


« .2 tf

O w 63

S o o

lis


£


OQ H
03 ^


8 §


-4-3 .2

•p, J
8 fc


H N CO ^ JO


a.

N 00 O) O h N


e3
H3


CO tH >0 O N


222


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS


£ q . r? r . ^^


.D d — M


*b • ^


♦0 o . .o D— 5


->b


'a.


*b


♦Q o • .o D— d


Vi


? <J fc-


init.


*W


?-3 8-M>


»


IB IT


•)


<v


ter f


* « IS


"^"S* «* «*


s


* £


to

If


I |


IB


•-a


& % £


©
P


Ph *s5


.§ 2

Oh '53

03 c3


i-i <M

^ 3 »H N

s s


a.
Oi O


T-H N


CO


a,


E 1


^«55CS00O5OHNC0rJ<«550N


FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.


223


s *


a


m cin n


n


-a ^a


]


«a .a


]


^

o*


1


<J


: :^


sr


■*


^


* *> |W fc> ^ ^


F I* fcr *


.a
p*


03

^3


00 o o

CO CO ^


o3

•s OS

** es3


fe-T p


s •«


c3 .13


* T3 g


an

65

s

&

1 ^

>

08

c3

• JM

^

1— 1

J ' «

J •

' 'a.

fri

: .9

» ■+-

5 ?

i *

03 g

J "

a

V

. "c

• 01

i i
1 .§

! °

$ «

> * a

C8


.2 -a >

3 o3 -g

e jg S

<u w <t>

H fc CQ


P*

02


<y

03

t>

bf)

•s 09

*h

" 2

d

P

<n

t>

CO T*


00 o*


t-<<MCOTH»OCOIvaOO


224


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


8

a
2
u

>e3

• • • • ._, <<3 " *-.*

• o8 <eS ••- «-« • • • • 0 <pj oj <© <cj • o • <§ •

• .... '53...

:2 •

i

l„ :

: |, |k|..|- : : : : |.„ \»\.. : : : \>*. : :

J

: 'I ^ l% !* : : : :"I*j> • :&b : : : :A :

1

: (| ^ I1 & : : : H*^ : :^ : : : :A :

1

Or

c- a

<a .3 3 • <> — • r, • • • • -- •

— q

•a

g

N

.... S?/ . . . -?

: : * ? -•*»• : : : : - ^ - : : :**>^~ :

• • • • . . io ** * * ' ^L> '

9

i i p % *r<»r |g u* $> d? 07 |6 ! */* ! : I^-?g

S3

PQ

<
>••

Oil
<!
Z

o

s

§

• ••••••••••••••••••a

1

• • • 3 • S 2 • 2 ^ • * • S §

i

O w >0 c8 <c« — «* ^ 33 •£ ^ 53 <3 © v!l ^ ^S JO, O ,*, <g ^S >S :«S :-« :S :0

^ -S -s <o g §

GO

S3 • • .a

O 0

£ 1

S c
O P-

M CO t^ «

jj

3 o
CI o

• ; -§ • • 3

! . ! !!!.!..!! ! - " ra ! ! -s

•....•CS>i GO ,* ^

• ea

© c 2 5 s > be P

.

rQ ^5 ^ £ © M

• V3 « .2 c8 * ' * * a - ' * 3 1* a 3

i-Ml*iiii^]!i.l i.i

'•3 & ^ -J§ * '-3 » o * _g o * o

K:B sl «? •& r3 ^ S M 2

i-4WCOThlO^ON.00050rH<MCOTH»OCOr>-.OOOiOrHC

1—4 t— 1 i-H i— 4 r-H i— Ii— « t- « t— 1 »— ■ IWCQC

e3

CO

I '-5

o O

II

3 S3

3 O

3 CM

January, 1881.

BOOKS

PUBLISHED FOR THE UNIVERSITY BY

HENBY PEOWDE,

AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

7 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

ALSO TO BE HAD AT THE

CLARENDON PRESS DEPOSITORY, OXFORD.


LEXICONS, GBAMMARS, &c.

(See also Clarendon Press Series pp. 24, 26.)

A Greek-English Lexicon, by Henry George Liddell, D.D.,
and Robert Scott, D.D. Sixth Edition, Revised and Augmented,
1870. 4*0. cloth, 1/. 1 6s.

A copious Greek-English, Vocabulary, compiled from the
best authorities. 1850. 241110. bound, 3s.

A Practical Introduction to Greek Accentuation, by H. W.

Chandler, M.A. 1862. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Etymologicon Magnum. Ad Godd. MSS. recensuit et not is
variorum instruxit Thomas Gaisford, S.T.P. 1848. fol. cloth, 1/. 12s.

Suidae Lexicon. Ad Codd. MSS. recensuit Thomas Gaisford,
S.T.P. Tomi III. 1834. fol. cloth, 2/. 2s.

Scheller's Lexicon of the Latin Tongue, with the German ex-
planations translated into English by J. E. Riddle, M.A. 1835. fol.
cloth, 1/. is.

A Latin Dictionary, founded on Andrews' edition of Freund's
Latin Dictionary, revised, enlarged, and in great part rewritten by
Charlton T. Lewis, Ph.D., and Charles Short, LL.D., Professor of
Latin in Columbia College, New York. 1879. 4to* cloth, 1/. lis. 6d.

Scriptores Rei Metricae. Edidit Thomas Gaisford, S.T.P.
Tomi III. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Sold separately:
Hephaestion, Terentianus Maurus, Proclus, cum annotationibus, etc.
Tomi II. ios. Scriptores Latini. 5s.

[2]


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


The Book of Hebrew Boots, by Abu 'L-Walid Marwan ibn
Janah, otherwise called Rabbi Y6nah. Now first edited, with an
Appendix, by Ad. Neubauer. 1875. 4to. cloth, il. p. 6d.

A Treatise on the use of the Tenses in Hebrew. By S. R.
Driver, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

Thesaurus Syriacus : collegerunt Quatremere, Bernstein, Lors-
bach, Arnoldi, Field : edidit R. Payne Smith, S.T.P.R.

Fasc. I-V. 1868-79. sm« fo1* eacn> Jl- ls'

Vol. I, containing Fasc. I-V. sm. fol. cloth, 5/. 5s.

A Practical Grammar of the Sanskrit Language, arranged
with reference to the Classical Languages of Europe, for the use of
English Students, by Monier Williams, M.A., Boden Professor of San-
skrit. Fourth Edition, 1877. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

A Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Etymologically and Philo-
logically arranged, with special reference to Greek, Latin, German,
Anglo-Saxon, English, and other cognate Indo-European Languages.
By Monier Williams, M.A., Boden Professor of Sanskrit. 1872. 4to.
cloth, 4/. 14s. 6d.

Nalopakhyanam. Story of Nala, an Episode of the Maha-
Bharata : the Sanskrit text, with a copious Vocabulary, and an im-
proved version of Dean Milman's Translation, by Monier Williams, M.A.
Second Edition, Revised and Improved. 1879. ^vo. c^otnt 15s'

Sakuntala. A Sanskrit Drama, in seven Acts. Edited by

Monier Williams, M.A. Second Edition, 1876. 8vo. cloth, 21s.

An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by the late Joseph Bosworth,
D.D., Professor of Anglo-Saxon, Oxford. New edition. In the Press.

An Icelandic-English Dictionary, based on the MS. col-
lections of the late Richard Cleasby. Enlarged and completed by
G. Vigfiisson. With an Introduction, and Life of Richard Cleasby,
by G. Webbe Dasent, D.C.L. 1874. 410. cloth, 3/. 7s.

A List of English Words the Etymology of which is
illustrated by comparison with Icelandic. Prepared in the form
of an Appendix to the above. By W. W. Skeat, M.A., stitched, 2s.

A Handbook of the Chinese Language. Parts I and II,

Grammar and Chrestomathy. By James Summers. 1863. 8vo. half
bound, il. 8s.

Cornish Drama (The Ancient). Edited and translated by E.
Norris, Esq., with a Sketch of Cornish Grammar, an Ancient Cornish
Vocabulary, etc. 2 vols. 1859. 8vo. cloth, il. is.

The Sketch of Cornish Grammar separately, stitched, 2s. 6d.

An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language,
arranged on an Historical Basis. By W. W. Skeat, M.A., Elrington
and Bosworth Professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University of Cambridge.
To be completed in Four Parts. Parts I— III, 4to. 10s. 6d. each.
Part IV. In the Press.


Clarendon Press > Oxford.


GEEEK CLASSICS, &e.

Aeschyli quae supersunt in Codice Laurentiano quoad effici
potuit et ad cognitionem necesse est visum typis descripta edidit
R. Merkel. 1861. Small folio, cloth, 1/. is.

Aeschylus: Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione Guil.
Dindorfii. Second Edition, 185 1. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.

Aeschylus: Annotationes Guil. Dindorfii. Partes II. 1841.
8vo. cloth, 10s.

Aeschylus : Scholia Graeca, ex Godicibus aucta et emendata a
Guil. Dindorfio. 1 851. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

Sophocles: Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione et cum
commentariis Guil. Dindorfii. Third Edition, 2 vols. i860, fcap. 8vo.
cloth, 1/. is.

Each Play separately, limp, 2s. 6d.

The Text alone, printed on writing paper, with large
margin, royal i6mo. cloth, 8s.

The Text alone, square i6mo. cloth, $s.6d.

Each Play separately, limp, 6d. (See also p. 26.)

Sophocles : Tragoediae et Fragmenta cum Annotatt. Guil.
Dindorfii. Tomi II. 1849. 8vo. cloth, 10s.

The Text, Vol. I. 5s. 6d. The Notes, Vol.11. 4s. 6d.

Sophocles : Scholia Graeca :

Vol. I. ed. P. Elmsley, A.M. 18 25. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.
Vol. II. ed. Guil. Dindorfius. 1 85 2. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Euripides : Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione Guil. Din-
dorfii. Tomi II. 1834. 8 vo. cloth, I os.

Euripides : Annotationes Guil. Dindorfii. Partes II. 1840.
8vo. cloth, 1 os.

Euripides : Scholia Graeca, ex Codicibus aucta et emendata a
Guil. Dindorfio. Tomi IV. 1863. 8vo. cloth, ll. 16s.

Euripides : Alcestis, ex recensione Guil. Dindorfii. 1834. 8vo.
sewed, 2s. 6d.

Aristophanes : Comoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione Guil.
Dindorfii. Tomi II. 1835. 8vo. cloth, lis. (Seepage 27.)

Aristophanes: Annotationes Guil. Dindorfii. Partes II. 1837.
8vo. cloth, us.

Aristophanes : Scholia Graeca, ex Codicibus aucta et emendata
a Guil. Dindorfio. Partes III. 1839. ^vo* c*°^> **•
B 2


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Aristophanem, Index in: J.Caravellae. 1822. 8vo. cloth, 3/,

Metra Aeschyli Sophoclis Euripidis et Aristophanis. De-

scripta a Guil. Dindorfio. Accedit Chronologia Scenica. 1842. 8vo.
cloth, %&.

Anecdota Graeca Oxoniensia. Edidit J. A. Cramer, S.T.P.
Tomi IV. 1835. 8vo. cloth, il. 2s.

Anecdota Graeca e Codd. MSS. Bibliothecae Regiae Parisien-
sis. Edidit J. A. Cramer, S.T.P. Tomi IV. 1839. 8vo. cloth, 1/. 2s.

Apsinis et Longini Rhetorica. E Codicibus MSS. recensuit
Joh. Bakius. 1849. 8vo. cloth, 3s.

Aristoteles ; ex recensione Immanuelis Bekkeri. Accedunt In-
dices Sylburgiani. Tomi XI. 1837. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 10s.
The volumes (except vol. IX.) may be had separately, price 5s. 6d. each.

Aristotelis Ethica Nicomachea, ex recensione Immanuelis
Bekkeri. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s.

Choerobosci Dictata in Theodosii Canones, necnon Epimerismi
in Psalmos. E Codicibus MSS. edidit Thomas Gaisford, S.T.P. Tomi

III. 1842. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Demosthenes : ex recensione Guil. Dindorfii. Tomi I. II. III.

IV. 1846. 8vo. cloth, 1/. is.

Demosthenes: Tomi V. VI. VII. Annotationes Interpretum.
1849. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Demosthenes: Tomi VIII. IX. Scholia. 1851. 8vo. cloth, ioj.

Harpocrationis Lexicon, ex recensione G. Dindorfii. Tomi
II. 1854. 8vo. cloth, ios.6d.

Heracliti Ephesii Reliquiae. Recensuit I. By water, M.A.

Appendicis loco additae sunt Diogenis Laertii Vita Heracliti, Particulae
Hippocratei De Diaeta Libri Primi, Epistolae Heracliteae. 1877. 8vo.
cloth, price 6s.

Herculanensinm Voluminum Partes II. 1824. 8vo. clotJb, ioj.

Homerus : Ilias, cum brevi Annotatione C. G. Heynii. Acce-
dunt Scholia minora. Tomi II. 1834. 8vo. cloth, 15*.

Homerus: Ilias, ex rec. Guil. Dindorfii. 1856. 8vo. cloth, 5J. 6d.

Homerus : Scholia Graeca in Iliadem. Edited by Prof. W. Din-
dorf, after a new collation of the Venetian MSS. by D. B. Monro,
M.A., Fellow of Oriel College.

Vols. I. II. 1875. 8vo. cloth, 24s. Vols. III. IV. 1877. 8vo. cloth, 26s.

Homerus : Odyssea, ex rec. Guil. Dindorfii. 1855. 8vo. cloth,
5s. 6d.

Homerus : Scholia Graeca in Odysseam. Edidit Guil. Dindorfius,
Tomi II. 1855. 8vo. cloth, 15s. 6d.


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Homerum, Index in : Seberi. 1780. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

Homer: A Complete Concordance to the Odyssey and Hymns
of Homer; to which is added a Concordance to the Parallel Passages
in the Iliad, Odyssey, and Hymns. By Henry Dunbar, M.D., Member of
the General Council, University of Edinburgh. 1880. 4to. cloth, 1/. is.

Oratores Attici ex recensione Bekkeri :

I. Antiphon, Andocides, et Lysias. 1822. 8vo. cloth, fs.

II. Isocrates. 1822. 8vo. cloth, 7s.

III. Isaeus, Aeschines, Lycurgus,Dinarchus,etc. 1823. 8vo. cloth, 7s.

Scholia Graeca in Aeschinem et Isocratem. Edidit G. Dindor-

fius. 1852. 8vo. cloth, 4s.

Paroemiographi Graeci, quorum pars nunc primum ex Codd.
MSS. vulgatur. Edidit T.Gaisford, S.T.P. 1836. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.

Plato : The Apology, with a revised Text and English Notes,
and a Digest of Platonic Idioms, by James Riddell, M.A. 1878, 8vo.
cloth, 8s. 6d.

Plato : Philebus, with a revised Text and English Notes, by
Edward Poste, M.A. i860. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

Plato : Sophistes and Politicals, with a revised Text and Eng-
lish Notes, by L. Campbell, M.A. 1866. 8vo. cloth, 18s.

Plato : Theaetetus, with a revised Text and English Notes, by
L. Campbell, M.A. 1861. 8vo. cloth, gs.

Plato : The Dialogues, translated into English, with Analyses
and Introductions, by B. Jowett, M.A., Regius Professor of Greek.
A new Edition in 5 volumes, medium 8vo. 1875. cloth, 3/. 10s.

Plato : Index to. Compiled for the Second Edition of Professor

Jowett's Translation of the Dialogues. By Evelyn Abbott, M.A. 1875.
8vo. paper covers, 2s. 6d.

Plato : The Bepublie, with a revised Text and English Notes,
by B. Jowett, M.A., Regius Professor of Greek. Demy 8vo. Preparing,

Plotinus. Edidit F. Creuzer. Tomi III. 1835. 4to. 1/. 8s.

Stobaei Plorilegium. Ad MSS.fidem emendavit et supplevit
T. Gaisford, S.T.P. Tomi IV. 1822. 8vo. cloth, iL

Stobaei Ecloganim Physicarum et Ethicarum libri duo. Ac-
cedit Hieroclis Commentarius in aurea carmina Pythagoreorum. Ad
MSS. Codd. recensuit T.Gaisford, S.T.P. Tomi II. 1850. 8vo.cloth,ns.

Thucydides : History of the Peloponnesian War, translated
into English by B. Jowett, M.A., Regius Professor of Greek.
In the Press,

Xenophon : Historia Graeca, ex recensione et cum annotatio-
nibus L. Dindorfii. Second Edition, 1 85 2. 8vo. cloth, lOs.Qd,


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Xenophon : Expeditio Cyri, ex rec. et cum annotatt. L. Din-

dorfii. Second Edition, 1855. 8vo. cloth, los.6d.
Xenophon : Institutio Cyri, ex rec. et cum annotatt. L. Din-

dorfii. 1857. 8vo. cloth, ios.6d.

Xenophon : Memorabilia Socratis, ex rec. et cum annotatt. L.
Dindorfii. 1862. 8vo. cloth, *js.6d.

Xenophon : Opuscula Politica Equestria et Venatica cum Arri-
ani Libello de Venatione, ex rec. et cum annotatt. L. Dindorfii. 1866.
8vo. cloth, 1 os. 6d.

THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, &c.

The Holy Bible in the earliest English Versions, made from the

Latin Vulgate by John Wycliffe and his followers : edited by the Rev.
J. Forshall and Sir F. Madden. 4 vols. 1850. royal 410. cloth, 3/. 3s.
Also reprinted from the above:

The New Testament in English, according to the Version
by John Wycliffe, about a.d. 1380, and Revised by John Purvey,
about a.d. 1388. With Introduction and Glossary by W. W.
Skeat, M.A. 1879. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

The Book of Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Solomon's Song : according to the Version by John Wycliffe,
Revised by John Purvey. Nearly ready.

The Holy Bible: an exact reprint, page for page, of the Author-
ized Version published in the year 161 1. Demy ^to. half bound, ll. is,

Vetus Testamentum Graece cum Variis Lectionibus. Edi-
tionem a R. Holmes, S.T.P. inchoatam continuavit J. Parsons, S.T.B.
Tomi V. 1 798-1827. folio, 7/.

Vetus Testamentum ex Versione Septuaginta Interpretum
secundum exemplar Vaticanum Romae editum. Accedit potior varietas
Codicis Alexandrini. Tomi III. Editio Altera. i8mo. cloth, 18s.

Origenis Hexaplorum quae supersunt; sive, Veterum Inter-
pretum Graecorum in Jotum Vetus Testamentum Fragmenta. Edidit
Fridericus Field, A.M. 2 vols. 1 867-1 874. 410. cloth, 5/. 5s.

Libri Psalmorum Versio antiqua Latina, cum Paraphrasi

Anglo-Saxonica. Edidit B. Thorpe, F.A.S. 1835. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Libri Fsalmorum Versio antiqua Gallica e Cod. MS. in Bibl.

Bodleiana adservato, una cum Versione Metrica aliisque Monumentis
pervetustis. Nunc primum descripsit et edidit Franciscus Michel, Phil.
Doct. i860. 8vo. cloth, 1 os. 6d.

The Psalms in Hebrew without points. 1879. Crown 8vo.
cloth, 3s. 6d.

Iiibri Prophetarum Majorum, cum Lamentationibus Jere-
miae, in Dialecto Linguae Aegyptiacae Memphitica seu Coptica. Edidit
cum Versione Latina H. Tattam, S.T.P. Tomi II. 1 85 2. 8vo. cloth, 1 7s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Libri duodecim Prophetarum Minorum in Ling. Aegypt.
vulgo Coptica. Edidit H. Tattam, A.M. 1836. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d.

Novum Testamentum Graece. Antiquissimorum Codicum
Textus in ordine parallelo dispositi. Accedit collatio Codicis Sinaitici.
Edidit E. H. Hansell, S.T.B. Tomi III. 1864. 8vo. half morocco,
il. 12s. 6d.

Novum Testamentum Graece. Accedunt parallela S. Scrip-
turae loca, necnon vetus capitulorum notatio et canones Eusebii. Edidit
Carolus Lloyd, S.T.P.R., necnon Episcopus Oxoniensis. i8mo. cloth, 3s.

The same on writing paper, with large margin, cloth, ioj. 6d»

Novum Testamentum Graece juxta Exemplar Millianum.

i8mo. cloth, 2s. 6d.
The same on writing paper, with large margin, cloth, gs.
Evangelia Sacra Graece. fcap. 8vo. limp, is. 6d.

The New Testament in Greek and English. Edited by
E. Cardwell, D.D. 2 vols. 1837. crown 8vo. cloth, 6s.

Novum Testamentum Coptice, cura D. Wilkins. 1716. 4to.

cloth, 12 s. 6d.
Evangeliorum Versio Gothica, cum Interpr. et Annott. E,

Benzelii. Edidit, et Gram. Goth, praemisit, E. Lye, A.M. 1759. 4to.

cloth, 1 2s. 6d.
Diatessaron; sive Historia Jesu Christi ex ipsis Evangelistarum

verbis apte dispositis confecta. Ed. J.White. 1856. i2mo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Canon Muratorianus : the earliest Catalogue of the Books of

the New Testament. Edited with Notes and a Facsimile of the MS. in
the Ambrosian Library at Milan, by S.P. Tregelles, LL.D. 1868. 4to.
cloth, 1 os. 6d.

The Five Books of Maccabees, in English, with Notes and
Illustrations by Henry Cotton, D.C.L. 1 833. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Horae Hebraicae et Talmudicae, a J. Lightfoot. A new
Edition, by R. Gandell, M.A. 4 vols. 1859. 8vo. cloth, il. is.


FATHERS OF THE CHURCH, &c.

Liturgies, Eastern and Western. Edited, with Introduction,
Notes, and a Liturgical Glossary, by C. E. Hammond, M.A. 1878.
Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

An Appendix to the above. 1879. Crown 8vo. paper covers, is. 6d.

St. Athanasius : Orations against the Arians. With an Account
of his Life by William Bright, D.D., Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical
History, Oxford. 1873. Crown 8vo. cloth, 9s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


St. Athanasius : Historical Tracts. With an Introduction by

William Bright, D.D., Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History, Oxford.
In the Press.

St. Augustine: Select Anti-Pelagian Treatises, and the Acts
of the Second Council of Orange. With an Introduction by William
Bright, D.D. Crown 8vo. cloth, 9s.

The Canons of the First Four General Councils of Nicaea,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon. 1877. Crown 8vo. cloth, 2s.6d.

Catenae Graecorum Patrum in Novum Testamentum. Edidit
J. A. Cramer, S.T.P. Tomi VIII. 1838-1844. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 4s.

dementis Alexandrini Opera, ex recensione Guil. Dindorfii.

Tomi IV. 1869. 8vo. cloth, 3/.

Cyrilli Archiepiscopi Alexandrini in XII Prophetas. Edidit
P. E. Pusey, A.M. Tomi II. 1868. 8vo. cloth, 2L 2s.

Cyrilli Archiepiscopi Alexandrini in D. Joannis Evangelium.
Accedunt Fragmenta Varia necnon Tractatus ad Tiberium Diaconum Duo.
Edidit post Aubertum P. E. Pusey, A.M. Tomi III. 1872. 8vo. 2/. 5s.

Cyrilli Archiepiscopi Alexandrini Gommentarii in Lucae Evan-
gelium quae supersunt Syriace. E MSS. apud Mus. Britan. edidit R.
Payne Smith, A.M. 1858. 4to. cloth, ll. 2s.

The same, translated by R. Payne Smith, M.A. 2 vols. 1859.
8vo. cloth, 14s.

Ephraemi Syri, Rabulae Episcopi Edesseni, Balaei, aliorumque
Opera Selecta. E Codd. Syriacis MSS. in Museo Britannico et Biblio-
theca Bodleiana asservatis primus edidit J. J. Overbeck. 1 865. 8vo.
cloth, ll. is.

Eusebii Pamphili Evangelicae Praeparationis Libri XV. Ad
Codd. MSS. recensuit T. Gaisford, S.T.P. Tomi IV. 1843. 8vo.
cloth, ll. 10s.

Eusebii Pamphili Evangelicae Demonstrationis Libri X. Re-
censuit T. Gaisford, S.T.P. Tomi II. 1852. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Eusebii Pamphili contra Hieroclem et Marcellum Libri. Re-
censuit T. Gaisford, S.T.P. 1852. 8vo. cloth, Js.

Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History, according to the text of

Burton, with an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. 1872. Crown
8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d.

Eusebii Pamphili Hist. Eccl. : Annotationes Variorum.

Tomi II. 1842. 8vo. cloth, 17s.

Evagrii Historia Ecclesiastica, ex recensione H.Valesii. 1844.
8vo. cloth, 4s.

Irenaeus : The Third Book of St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons,
against Heresies. With short Notes and a Glossary by H. Deane, B.D.,
Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford. 1874. Crown 8vo. cloth, $s. 6d.


Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Origenis Pliilosophumena ; sive omnium Haeresium Refutatio.

E Codice Parisino nunc primum edidit Emmanuel Miller. 185 1. 8vo.

cloth, I os.
Patrum Apostolicorum, S. Clementis Romani, S. Ignatii, S.

Polycarpi, quae supersunt. Edidit Guil. Jacobson, S.T.P.R. Tomi II.

Fourth Edition, 1863. 8vo. cloth, ll. is.
Reliquiae Saerae secundi tertiique saeculi. Recensuit M.J.

Routh, S.T.P. Tomi V. Second Edition, 1846-1848. 8vo. cloth, il. 5s.

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Opuscula. Recensuit M. J.
Routh, S.T.P. Tomi II. Third Edition, 1858. 8vo. cloth, ios.

Socratis Scholastici Historia Ecclesiastica. Gr. et Lat. Edidit
R. Hussey, S.T.B. Tomi III. 1853. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Socrates' Ecclesiastical History, according to the Text of

Hussey, with an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. 1878. Crown
8vo. cloth, 75. 6d.

Sozomeni Historia Ecclesiastica. Edidit R. Hussey, S.T.B.
Tomi III. 1859. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Theodoreti Ecclesiasticae Historiae Libri V. Recensuit T.
Gaisford, S.T.P. 1854. 8vo. cloth, p. 6d.

Theodoreti Graecarum Affectionum Guratio. Ad Codices MSS.
recensuit T. Gaisford, S.T.P. 1839. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

Dowling (J. G.) Notitia Scriptorum SS. Patrum aliorumque vet.
Eccles. Mon. quae in Collectionibus Anecdotorum post annum Christi
mdcc. in lucem editis continentur. 1839. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, &c.

Baedae Historia Ecclesiastica. Edited, with English Notes
by G. H. Moberly, M.A. 1869. crown 8vo. cloth, ios. 6d.

Bingham's Antiquities of the Christian Church, and other
Works. 10 vols. 1855. 8vo. cloth, 3/. 3s.

Bright (W., D.D.). Chapters of Early English Church History.
1878. 8vo. cloth, 12s.

Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of Eng-
land. A new Edition. Carefully revised, and the Records collated
with the originals, by N.Pocock, M.A. 7 vols. 1865. 8vo. 4/. 4s.

Burnet's Life of Sir M. Hale, and Fell's Life of Dr. Hammond.
1856. small 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Cardwell's Two Books of Common Prayer, set forth by
authority in the Reign of King Edward VI, compared with each other.
Third Edition, 1852. 8vo. cloth, Js.

Cardwell's Documentary Annals of the Reformed Church of
England; being a Collection of Injunctions, Declarations, Orders, Arti-
cles of Inquiry, &c. from 1546 to 1 716. 2 vols. 1 843. 8vo. cloth, 18s.


io Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Cardwell's History of Conferences on the Book of Common
Prayer from 1551 to 1690. Third Edition , 1849. 8vo. cloth, p.6d.

Councils and Ecclesiastical Documents relating to Great
Britain and Ireland. Edited, after Spelman and Wilkins, by A. W.
Haddan, B.D., and W. Stubbs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern
History, Oxford. Vols. I. and III. 1869-71. Medium 8vo. cloth,
each 1/. is.
Vol. II. Part I. 1873. Medium 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.
Vol. II. Part II. 1878. Church of Ireland ; Memorials of St. Patrick.
stiff covers, 3s. 6d,

Formularies of Faith set forth by the King's Authority during
the Reign of Henry VIII. 1856. 8vo. cloth, 7s.

Fuller's Church History of Britain. Edited by J. S. Brewer,
M.A. 6 vols. 1845. 8vo. cloth, il. 19s.

Gibson's Synodus Anglicana. Edited by E. Cardwell, D.D.
1854. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

Hussey's Rise of the Papal Power traced in three Lectures.
Second Edition, 1863. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Inett's Origines Anglicanae (in continuation of Stillingfleet).
Edited by J. Griffiths, M.A. 3 vols. 1855. 8vo. cloth, 15s.

John, Bishop of Ephesus. The Third Part of his Ecclesias-
tical History. [In Syriac] Now first edited by William Cureton,
M.A. 1853. 4to. cloth, il. 12s.

The same, translated by R. Payne Smith, M.A. i860. 8vo.
cloth, 1 os.

Knight's Life of Dean Golet. 1823. 8vo. cloth, ys. 6d.

lie Neve's Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae. Corrected and continued
from 1715 to 1853 by T.Duffus Hardy. 3 vols. 1854. 8vo. cloth, il. is.
The Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church. By F. E.
Warren, B.D., Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford. In the Press.

Missale Vetus Anglo-Saxonieum : the Liturgy of the Anglo-
Saxon Church. By the same Editor. In Preparation.

EToelli (A.) Catechismus sive prima institutio disciplinaque
Pietatis Christianae Latine explicata. Editio nova cura Guil. Jacobson,
A.M. 1844. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.

Prideaux's Connection of Sacred and Profane History. 2 vols.
1851. 8vo. cloth, 10s.

Primers put forth in the Reign of Henry VIII. 1848. 8vo.

cloth, 5s.

Becords of the Reformation. The Divorce, 15 27—1533.
Mostly now for the first time printed from MSS. in the British Museum
and other Libraries. Collected and arranged by N. Pocock, M.A.
1870. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, 1/. 1 6s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. n


Reformatio Legum Ecelesiasticarum. The Reformation of
Ecclesiastical Laws, as attempted in the reigns of Henry VIII, Edward
VI, and Elizabeth. Edited by E. Cardwell, D.D. 1850. 8vo. cloth,
6s. 6d.

Shirley's (W. W.) Some Account of the Church in the Apostolic
Age. Second Edition, 1874. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Shuckford's Sacred and Profane History connected (in con-
tinuation of Prideaux). 2 vols. 1848. 8vo. cloth, 10s.

Stillingfieet's Origines Britannicae, with Lloyd's Historical
Account of Church Government. Edited by T. P. Pantin, M.A. 2 vols.
1842. 8vo. cloth, 10s.

Stubbs (W.). Registrum Sacrum Anglicanum. An attempt
to exhibit the course of Episcopal Succession in England. 1858. small
4to. cloth, 8s. 6d.

Strype's Works Complete, with a General Index. 27 vols.
18 2 1-1843. 8vo. cloth, 7/. 13s. 6d. Sold separately as follows: —
Memorials of Cranmer. 2 vols. 1840. 8vo. cloth, iu.
Life of Parker. 3 vols. 1828. 8vo. cloth, 16s, 6d.
Life of Grindal. 182 1. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.
Life of Whitgift. 3 vols. 1822. 8vo. cloth, 16 s. 6d.
Life of Aylmer. 1820. 8vo. cloth, $s. 6d.
Life of Gheke. 1821. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.
Life of Smith. 1820. 8vo. cloth, $s. 6d.
Ecclesiastical Memorials. 6 vols. 1822. 8vo. cloth, 1/. 13J.
Annals of the Reformation. 7 vols. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 3/. 6d.
General Index. 2 vols. 1828. 8vo. cloth, iu.

Sylloge Confessionum sub tempus Reformandae Ecclesiae edi-
tarum. Subjiciuntur Catechismus Heidelbergensis et Canones Synodi
Dordrechtanae. 1 82 7. 8vo. cloth, 8s.

ENGLISH THEOLOGY.

Beveridge's Discourse upon the XXXIX Articles. The third
complete Edition, 1847. 8vo. cloth, 8s.

Bilson on the Perpetual Government of Christ's Church, with a
Biographical Notice by R.Eden, M.A. 1842. 8vo. cloth, 4s.

Biscoe's Boyle Lectures on the Acts of the Apostles. 1840. 8vo.
cloth, 9s. 6d,

Bull's Works, with Nelson's Life. Edited by E. Burton, D.D.
A new Edition, 1846. 8 vols. 8vo. cloth, 2I. 9s.

Burnet's Exposition of the XXX IX Articles. 1845. 8vo. cloth, 7s.

Burton's (Edward) Testimonies of the Ante-Nicene Fathers to
the Divinity of Christ. Second Edition, 1829. 8vo. doth, p.
B3


12 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Burton's (Edward) Testimonies of the Ante-Nicene Fathers to
the Doctrine of the Trinity and of the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.
1831. 8vo. cloth, $s.6d.

Butler's Works, with an Index to the Analogy. 2 vols. 1874.
8vo. cloth, 11s.

Butler's Sermons. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.

Butler's Analogy of Religion. 8vo. cloth, 5J. 6d.

Chandler's Critical History of the Life of David. 1853. 8vo.
cloth, 8s. 6d.

Chillingworth's Works. 3 vols. 1838. 8vo. cloth, 1/. is. 6d.

Clergyman's Instructor. Sixth Edition, 1855. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

Comber's Companion to the Temple ; or a Help to Devotion in
the use of the Common Prayer. 7 vols. 1841. 8vo. cloth, il. us. 6d.

Cranmer's Works. Collected and arranged by H. Jenkyns,
M.A., Fellow of Oriel College. 4 vols. 1834. 8vo. cloth, il. 10s.

Enchiridion Theologicum Anti-Romanum.

Vol. I. Jeremy Taylor's Dissuasive from Popery, and Treatise on

the Real Presence. 1852. 8vo. cloth, 8s.
Vol. II. Barrow on the Supremacy of the Pope, with his Discourse

on the Unity of the Church. 1852. 8vo. cloth, *]s.6d.
Vol. III. Tracts selected from Wake, Patrick, Stillingfleet, Clagett,

and others. 1837. 8vo. cloth, us.

[FelPs] Paraphrase and Annotations on the Epistles of St. Paul.
1852. 8vo. cloth, 7s.

Greswell's Harmonia Evangelica. Fifth Edition, 1856. 8vo.
cloth, gs. 6d.

Greswell's Prolegomena ad Harmoniam Evangelicam. 1840.
8vo. cloth, 9s. 6d.

Greswell's Dissertations on the Principles and Arrangement
of a Harmony of the Gospels. 5 vols. 1837. 8vo. cloth, 3/. 3s.

Hall's (Bp.) Works. A new Edition, by Philip Wynter, D.D.
10 vols. 1863. 8vo. cloth, 3/. 3s.

Hammond's Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testa-
ment. 4 vols. 1845. 8vo. cloth, il.

Hammond's Paraphrase on the Book of Psalms. 2 vols. 1850.
8vo. cloth, ios.

Heurtley's Collection of Creeds. 1858. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

Homilies appointed to be read in Churches. Edited by J.
Griffiths, M.A. 1859. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 13


Hooker's "Works, with his Life by Walton, arranged by John
Keble, M.A. Sixth Edition, 1874. 3 vols. 8vo. cloth, 1l.1is.6d.

Hooker's Works; the text as arranged by John Keble, M.A.
2 vols. 1875. 8vo. cloth, lis.

Hooper's (Bp. George) Works. 2 vols. 1855. 8vo. cloth, 8j.

Jackson's (Dr. Thomas) Works. 12 vols. 1844. 8vo. cloth,
3I. 6s.

Jewel's Works. Edited by R. W. Jelf, D.D. 8 vols. 1847.
8vo. cloth, il. ios.

Patrick's Theological Works. 9 vols. 1859. 8vo. cloth, 1/. is,

Pearson's Exposition of the Greed. Revised and corrected by
E. Burton, D.D. Sixth Edition, 1877. 8vo. cloth, ios. 6d.

Pearson's Minor Theological Works. Now first collected, with
a Memoir of the Author, Notes, and Index, by Edward Churton, M.A.
2 vols. 1844. 8vo. cloth, ios.

Sanderson's Works. Edited by W. Jacobson, D.D. 6 vols.

1854. 8vo. cloth, 1/. ios.

Stanhope's Paraphrase and Comment upon the Epistles and
Gospels. A new Edition. 2 vols. 1851. 8vo. cloth, ios.

Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae. 2 vols. 1837. 8vo. cloth, 9/.

Stillingfleet's Rational Account of the Grounds of Protestant
Religion; being a vindication of Abp. Laud's Relation of a Conference,
&c. 2 vols. 1844. 8vo. cloth, ios.

Wall's History of Infant Baptism, with Gale's Reflections, and
Wall's Defence. A new Edition, by Henry Cotton, D.C.L. 2 vols.
1862. 8vo. cloth, il. is.

Waterland's Works, with Life, by Bp. Van Mildert. A new
Edition, with copious Indexes. 6 vols. 1857. 8vo. cloth, 2l. lis.

Waterland's Review of the Doctrine of the Eucharist, with a
Preface by the present Bishop of London. 1868. crown 8vo. cloth,
6s. 6d.

Wheatly's Illustration of the Book of Common Prayer. A
new Edition, 1S46. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

Wyclif. A Catalogue of the Original Works of John Wyclif, by
W. W. Shirley, D.D. 1865. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Wyclif. Select English Works. By T Arnold, M.A 3 vols.
1871. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 2s.

Wyclif. Trialogus. With the Supplement now first edited. By
Gotthard Lechler. 1869. 8vo. cloth, 14s.


14 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


ENGLISH HISTORICAL AND DOCUMENTARY
WORKS.

British Barrows, a Record of the Examination of Sepulchral
Mounds in various parts of England. By William Greenwell, M.A.,
F.S.A. Together with Description of Figures of Skulls, General
Remarks on Prehistoric Crania, and an Appendix by George Rolleston,
M.D., F.R.S. 1877. Medium 8vo. cloth, 25s.

Two of the Saxon Chronicles parallel, with Supplementary
Extracts from the Others. Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and a
Glossarial Index, by J. Earle, M.A. 1865. 8vo. cloth, 16s.

Magna Carta, a careful Reprint. Edited by W.Stubbs, M.A.,
Regius Professor of Modern History. 1879. 4to* stitched, is.

Britton, a Treatise upon the Common Law of England, com-
posed by order of King Edward I. The French Text carefully revised,
with an English Translation, Introduction, and Notes, by F. M. Nichols,
M.A. 2 vols. 1865. royal 8vo. cloth, ll. 16s.

Burnet's History of His Own Time, with the suppressed Pas-
sages and Notes. 6 vols. 1833. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 10s.

Burnet's History of James II, with additional Notes. 1852,
8vo. cloth, gs. 6d.

Carte's Life of James Duke of Ormond. A new Edition, care-
fully compared with the original MSS. 6 vols. 1851. 8vo. cloth, ll. 5s.

Clarendon's (Edw. Earl of) History of the Rebellion and Civil
Wars in England. To which are subjoined the Notes of Bishop War-
burton. 7 vols. 1849. medium 8vo. cloth, 2/. 10s.

Clarendon's (Edw. Earl of) History of the Rebellion and Civil
Wars in England. 7 vols. 1839. i8mo. cloth, ll. is.

Clarendon's (Edw. Earl of) History of the Rebellion and Civil
Wars in England. Also His Life, written by Himself, in which is in-
cluded a Continuation of his History of the Grand Rebellion. With
copious Indexes. In one volume, royal 8vo. 1842. cloth, 1/. 2s.

Clarendon's (Edw. Earl of) Life, including a Continuation of
his History. 2 vols. 1857. medium 8vo. cloth, ll. 2s.

Clarendon's (Edw. Earl of) Life, and Continuation of his His-
tory. 3 vols. 1827. 8vo. cloth, 16s. 6d.

Calendar of the Clarendon State Papers, preserved in the
Bodleian Library. In three volumes. 1869-76.

Vol. I. From 1523 to January 1649. 8vo. cloth, I 8s.
Vol. II. From 1649 to 1654. 8vo. cloth, 16s.
Vol. III. From 1655 to 1657. 8vo« cloth, 14s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 15


Calendar of Charters and Rolls preserved in the Bodleian
Library. 1878. 8vo. cloth, il. us. 6d.

Freeman's (E. A.) History of the Norman Conquest of England;
its Causes and Results. In Six Volumes. 8vo. cloth, 5/. 9s. 6d.

Vols. I— II together, 3rd edition, 1877. i/. 1 6s.

Vol. Ill, 2nd edition, 1874. 1/. is.

Vol. IV, 2nd edition, 1875. il. is.

Vol. V, 1876. il. is.

Vol. VI. Index. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Lloyd's Prices of Corn in Oxford, 1583-1830. 8vo. sewed, is.

Luttrell's (Narcissus) Diary. A Brief Historical Relation of
State Affairs, 1678-1714. 6 vols. 1857. 8vo. cloth, il. 4s.

May's History of the Long Parliament. 1854. 8vo. clothes. 6d.

Rogers's History of Agriculture and Prices in England, a.d.
1 259-1 793. Vols. I and II (1 259-1400). 8vo. cloth, 2I. 2s.
Vols. Ill and IV in the Press.

Sprigg's England's Recovery ; being the History of the Army
under Sir Thomas Fairfax. 1854. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

Whitelock's Memorials of English Affairs from 1625 to 1660.
4 vols. 1853. 8vo. cloth, il. ios.

Protests of the Lords, including those which have been
expunged, from 1624 to 1874; with Historical Introductions. Edited
by James E. Thorold Rogers, M.A. 1875. 3 vols. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 2*.

Enactments in Parliament, specially concerning the Universi-
ties of Oxford and Cambridge. Collected and arranged by J. Griffiths,
M.A. 1869. 8vo. cloth, 12s.

Ordinances and Statutes [for Colleges and Halls] framed or
approved by the Oxford University Commissioners. 1863. 8vo. cloth,
12s. — Sold separately (except for Exeter, All Souls, Brasenose, and
Corpus), at is. each.

Statuta Universitatis Oxoniensis. 1880. 8vo. cloth, 5/.

The Student's Handbook to the University and Colleges

of Oxford. Fifth Edition. 1879. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.6d.

Index to Wills proved in the Court of the Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, &c. Compiled by J. Griffiths, M.A. 1862.
royal 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Catalogue of Oxford Graduates from 1659 to 1850. 1851.
8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.


1 6 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


CHRONOLOGY, GEOGRAPHY, &c.

Clinton's Fasti Hellenici. The Civil and Literary Chronology
of Greece, from the LVIth to the CXXIIIrd Olympiad. Third edition,
1841. 4to. cloth, ll. 14s. 6d.

Clinton's Fasti Hellenici. The Civil and Literary Chronology
of Greece, from the CXXIVth Olympiad to the Death of Augustus.
Second edition, 1851. 4to. cloth, ll. 12s.

Clinton's Epitome of the Fasti Hellenici. 1851. 8vo. cloth,
6s. 6d.

Clinton's Fasti Romani. The Civil and Literary Chronology
of Rome and Constantinople, from the Death of Augustus to the Death
of Heraclius. 2 vols. 1845, 1850. 4to. cloth, 3/. 9s.

Clinton's Epitome of the Fasti Romani. 1854. 8vo. cloth, 7s.

Cramer's Geographical and Historical Description of Asia
Minor. 2 vols. 1832. 8vo. cloth, lis.

Cramer's Map of Asia Minor, 15J.

Cramer's Map of Ancient and Modern Italy, on two sheets, 15J.

Cramer's Description of Ancient Greece. 3 vols. 1828. 8vo.
cloth, 16s. 6d.

Cramer's Map of Ancient and Modern Greece, on two sheets, 1 5^.

Greswell's Fasti Temporis Catholici. 1852. 4 vols. 8vo. cloth,
2/. 1 OS.

Greswell's Tables to Fasti, 4to., and Introduction to Tables,
8vo. 1852. cloth, 15s.

Greswell's Origines Kalendariae Italicae. 1854. 4 vols. Svo. cloth

2l. 2S.

Greswell's Origines Kalendariae Hellenicae. 6 vols. 1862.
8vo. cloth, 4/. 4s.


MATHEMATICS, PHYSICAL SCIENCE, &c.

Arehimedis quae supersunt omnia cum Eutocii commentariis
ex recensione Josephi Torelli, cum nova versione Latina. 1792. fol.
cloth, ll. 5s.

Bradley's Miscellaneous Works and Correspondence. With an
Account of Harriot's Astronomical Papers. 1832. 4to. cloth, 17s.
Reduction of Bradley's Observations by Dr. Busch. 1838. 4to. cloth, 3s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 17


Astronomical Observations made at the University Obser-
vatory, Oxford, under the direction of C. Pritchard, M A., Savilian Pro-
fessor of Astronomy. No. I. 1878. Royal 8vo. paper covers, 3s. 6d.

Treatise on Infinitesimal Calculus. By Bartholomew Price,
M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Natural Philosophy, Oxford.

Vol.1. Differential Calculus. Second Edition, 8vo. cloth, 14s. 6d.

Vol. II. Integral Calculus, Calculus of Variations, and Differential
Equations. Second Edition, 1865. 8vo. cloth, 185.

Vol. III. Statics, including Attractions; Dynamics of a Material
Particle. Second Edition, 1868. 8vo. cloth, 16s.

Vol. IV. Dynamics of Material Systems; together with a Chapter on
Theoretical Dynamics, by W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S. 1862.
8vo. cloth, 16s.

Bigaud's Correspondence of Scientific Men of the 17th Century,
with Table of Contents by A. de Morgan, and Index by the Rev. J.
Rigaud, M.A., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. 2 vols. 1841-1862.
8vo. cloth, 1 8s. 6d.

Daubeny's Introduction to the Atomic Theory. 1850. i6mo.
cloth, 6s.

Vesuvius. By John Phillips, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of
Geology, Oxford. 1869. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Geology of Oxford and the Valley of the Thames. By the same
Author. 1 87 1. 8vo. cloth, 21s.

Synopsis of the Pathological Series in the Oxford Museum.
By H. W. Acland, M.D., F.R.S., 1867. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Thesaurus Entomologicus Hopeianus, or a Description of

the rarest Insects in the Collection given to the University by the
Rev. William Hope. By J. O. Westwood, M.A., F.L.S. With 40
Plates. 1874. Small folio, half morocco, 7/. 1 os.

Text-Book of Botany, Morphological and Physiological. By
Dr. Julius Sachs, Professor of Botany in the University of Wiirzburg.
Translated by S. H. Vines, M.A., and edited by W. T. Thiselton Dyer,
M.A. Royal 8vo. Second Edition, in the Press.

Johannes Muller on Certain Variations in the Vocal Organs

of the Passeres that have hitherto escaped notice. Translated by
F. J. Bell, B.A., and edited with an Appendix, by A. H. Garrod, M.A.,
F.R.S. With Plates. 1878. 410. paper covers, p. 6d.


1 8 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


BIBLIOGBAPHY.

Ebert's Bibliographical Dictionary, translated from the German.
4 vols. 1837. 8vo. cloth, il. 10s.

Cotton's List of Editions of the Bible in English. Second Edition,
corrected and enlarged. 1852. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d.

Cotton's Typographical Gazetteer. 1831. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

Cotton's Typographical Gazetteer, Second Series. 1866. 8vo.

cloth, 1 2s. 6d.

Cotton's Rhemes and Doway. An attempt to shew what has
been done by Roman Catholics for the diffusion of the Holy Scriptures
in English. 1 85 5. 8vo. cloth, 9s.


MISCELLANEOUS.

Bacon's Novum Orgamim. Edited, with English notes, by
G. W. Kitchin, M.A. 1855. 8vo. cloth, gs. 6d.

Bacon's Novum Organum. Translated by G. W. Kitchin,
M.A. 1855. 8vo. cloth, gs. 6d. (See also p. 35.)

The Works of George Berkeley, DJX, formerly Bishop of

Cloyne ; including many of his writings hitherto unpublished. With

Prefaces, Annotations, and an Account of his Life and Philosophy, by

Alexander Campbell Fraser, M.A. 4 vols. 1871. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 18s.

The Life, Letters, &c. 1 vol. cloth, 16s. See also p. 35.

The Logic of Hegel; translated from the Encyclopaedia of
the Philosophical Sciences. With Prolegomena by William Wallace,
M.A. 1874. 8vo. cloth, 14s.

Smith's Wealth of Nations. A new Edition, with Notes,
by J. E. Thorold Rogers, M.A. 2 vols. 1870. cloth, 21s.

A Course of Lectures on Art, delivered before the University
of Oxford in Hilary Term, 1870, by John Ruskin, M.A., Slade
Professor of Fine Art. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

A Critical Account of the Drawings by Michel Angelo

and RarTaello in the University Galleries, Oxford. By J. C. Robinson,
F.S.A. 1870. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s.

Sturlunga Saga, including the Islendinga Saga of Lawman
Sturla Thordsson and other works. Edited with Prolegomena, Ap-
pendices, Tables, Indices, and Maps, by Dr. Gudbrand Vigfusson. In
2 vols. 1878. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 2s.


Clarendon Press } Oxford. 19


Casauboni Ephemerides, cum praefatione et notis J. Russell,
S.T.P. Tomi II. 1850. 8vo. cloth, 15*.

The Ormulum; with the Notes and Glossary of Dr. R. M.
White. Edited by Rev. R. Holt, M.A. 1 8 78. 2 vols. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, 2 is.

The Sacred Books of the East. Translated by various,
Oriental Scholars, and edited by F. Max Mtiller.

Vol. I. The Upanishads. Part I. The £#andogya-upanishad,
The Talavakara-upanishad, The Aitareya-arawyaka, The Kaushitaki-
brahmawa-upanishad, and The Vag-asaneyi-samhita-upanishad. Trans-
lated by F. Max Miiller. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Vol. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught in the
Schools of Apastamba and Gautama. Translated by Georg Biihler.
8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Vol. III. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Con-
fucianism. Part I. The Shu King, The Shih King, and The Hsiao
King. Translated by James Legge. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

Vol. IV. The Zend-Avesta. Part I. The Vendidad. Trans-
lated by James Darmesteter. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Vol. V. Pahlavi Texts. Part I. The Bundahis, Bahman
Yast, and Shayast-la-Shayast. Translated by E. W. West. 8vo. cloth,
12s. 6c?.

Vols. VI and IX. The Qur'an. Translated by Professor
E. H. Palmer. 8vo. cloth, 21s.

Vol. VII. The Institutes of Vishwu. Translated by Julius
Jolly. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.


The following Volumes are also in the Press : —

Vol. VIII. The Bhagavadgita with other extracts from the
Mahabharata. Translated by Kashinath Trimbak Telang.

Vol. X. The Suttanipata, etc* Translated by Professor

Fausboll.

Vol. XI. The Mahaparinibbana Sutta, The Tevigga

Sutta, The Mahasudassana Sutta, The Dhamma-isTakkappavattana
Sutta. Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids.


20 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


dHrattom llmss Sitxm*


The Delegates of the Clarendon Press having undertaken
the publication of a series of works, chiefly educational, and
entitled the (Klamtbmt |teg Series, have published, or have
in preparation, the following.

Those to which prices are attached are already published; the others are in
preparation.

I. ENGLISH.

A First Reading Book. By Marie Eichens of Berlin; and
edited by Anne J. Clough. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 4*/.

Oxford Reading Book, Part I. For Little Children. Extra

fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 6d.

Oxford Reading Book, Part II. For Junior Classes. Extra
fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 6d,

An Elementary English Grammar and Exercise Book.

By O. W. Tancock, M.A., Head Master of Norwich School. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

An English Grammar and Reading Book, for Lower Forms
in Classical Schools. By O. W. Tancock, M.A., Head Master of
Norwich School. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Typical Selections from the best English Writers, with Intro-
ductory Notices. Second Edition. In Two Volumes. Extra fcap. 8vo.
cloth, 3s. 6d. each.

Vol. I. Latimer to Berkeley. Vol. II. Pope to Macaulay.

The Philology of the English Tongue. By J. Earle, M.A.,
formerly Fellow of Oriel College, and Professor of Anglo-Saxon, Oxford.
Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

A Book for the Beginner in Anglo-Saxon. By John Earle,
M.A., Professor of Anglo-Saxon, Oxford. Second Edition. Extra fcap.
Svo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

An Anglo-Saxon Reader. In Prose and Verse. With
Grammatical Introduction, Notes, and Glossary. By Henry Sweet,
M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 21


Specimens of Early English. A New and Revised Edition.
With Introduction, Notes, and Glossarial Index. By R. Morris, LL.D.,
and W. W. Skeat, M.A.
Part I. In the Press.

Part II. From Robert of Gloucester to Gower (a.d. 1298 to a.d. 1393).
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

Specimens of English Literature, from the 'Ploughmans
Crede' to the 'Shepheardes Calender' (a.d. 1394 to a.d. 1579). With
Introduction, Notes, and Glossarial Index. By W. W. Skeat, M.A.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

The Vision of William concerning Piers the Plowman,

by William Langland. Edited, with Notes, by W. W. Skeat, M.A.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Chaucer. The Prioresses Tale; Sir Thopas; The Monkes
Tale; The Clerkes Tale; The Squieres Tale, &c. Edited by
W. W. Skeat, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Chaucer. The Tale of the Man of Lawe; The Pardoneres
Tale ; The Second Nonnes Tale ; The Chanouns Yemannes Tale.
By the same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. (See also p. 22.)

Old English Drama. Marlowe's Tragical History of Dr.
Faustus, and Greene's Honourable History of Friar Bacon and Friar
Bungay. Edited by A. W. Ward, M.A., Professor of History and
English Literature in Owens College, Manchester. 1878. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, £s. 6d.

Marlowe. Edward II. With Introduction, Notes, &c. By
O. W. Tancock, M.A., Head Master of Norwich School. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, 3s.

Shakespeare. Hamlet. Edited by W. G. Clark, M.A., and
W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Extra fcap. bvo. slipcovers, 2$.

Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. Aldis Wright, M.A.
Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers.

The Tempest, is. 6d. King Lear, is. 6d.

As You Like It, is. 6d. A Midsummer Night's Dream, is. 6d.

Julius Caesar, as. Coriolanus, 2s. 6d.

Richard the Third, 2s. 6d. Henry the Fifth. In the Press.

(For other Plays, see p. 23.)

Milton. Areopagitica. With Introduction and Notes. By

J. W. Hales, M.A., late Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge. Second
Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.


22 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Bunyan. Holy War, Life and Death of Mr. Badman, &c.
Edited by E. Venables, M.A. In Preparation. (See also p. 23.)

Locke's Conduct of the Understanding. Edited, with Intro-
duction, Notes, etc., by T. Fowler, M.A., Professor of Logic in the
University of Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. Just Published,

Addison. Selections from Papers in the Spectator. With
Notes. By T. Arnold, M.A., University College. Second Edition,
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Burke. Four Letters on the Proposals for Peace with the Regi-
cide Directory of France. Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by
E. J. Payne, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5s. (See also p. 23.)

Also the following in paper covers : —

Goldsmith. The Deserted Village. 2d.

Gray. Elegy, and Ode on Eton College. 2d.

Johnson. Vanity of Human Wishes. With Notes by E. J.
Payne, M.A. ^d.

Keats. Hyperion, Book I. With Notes byW.T. Arnold, B. A. \d.

Milton. With Notes by R. G. Browne, M.A.

Lycidas, 3d. L'Allegro, 3J. II Penseroso, ^d. Comus, 6d.
Samson Agonistes, 6d.
Parnell. The Hermit. 2d.

A SERIES OF ENGLISH CLASSICS,

Designed to meet the wants of Students in English Literature,
by the late Rev. J. S. Brewer, M.A., of Queen's College, Oxford,
and Professor of English Literature at King's College, London.

1 . Chaucer. The Prologue to the Canterbury Tales ; The

Knightes Tale; The Nonne Prestes Tale. Edited by R. Morris,
Editor of Specimens of Early English, &c, &c. Sixth Edition. Extra
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. (See also p. 21.)

2 . Spenser's Faery Queene. Books I and 1 1. Designed chiefly

for the use of Schools. With Introduction, Notes, and Glossary. By
G. W. Kitchin, M.A.

Book I. Eighth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

Book II. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

3. Hooker. Ecclesiastical Polity, Book I. Edited by R. W.

Church, M.A., Dean of St. Paul's ; formerly Fellow of Oriel College,
Oxford. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. a$


4. Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. G. Clark, M.A.,

Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge j and W. Aldis Wright, M.A.,
Trinity College, Cambridge. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers.
I. The Merchant of Venice, is.
II. Richard the Second, is. 6d.
III. Macbeth. Is. 6d. (For other Plays, see p. 21.)

5. Bacon.

I. Advancement of Learning. Edited by W. Aldis Wright, M.A.

Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, 4s. 6d.
II. The Essays. With Introduction and Notes. By J. R. Thursfield,
M.A., Fellow and formerly Tutor of Jesus College, Oxford,

6. Milton. Poems. Edited by R. C. Browne, M.A. 2 vols.

Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

Sold separately, Vol. I. 4s.; Vol. II. 3s. (See also p. 22.)

7. Dryden. Select Poems. Stanzas on the Death of Oliver

Cromwell ; Astraea Redux ; Annus Mirabilis ; Absalom and Achitophel ;
Religio Laici; The Hind and the Panther. Edited by W. D. Christie,
M.A. Second Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

8. Bunyan. The Pilgrim's Progress, Grace Abounding, Relation

of the Imprisonment of Mr. John Bunyan. Edited, with Biographical
Introduction and Notes, by E. Venables, M.A. 1879. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, 5s.

9. Pope. With Introduction and Notes. By Mark Pattison,

B.D., Rector of Lincoln College, Oxford.

I. Essay on Man. Sixth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. is. 6d.

II. Satires and Epistles. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2s.

10. Johnson. Rasselas ; Lives of Pope and Dryden. Edited
by Alfred Milnes, B.A. (London), late Scholar of Lincoln College,
Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

11. Burke. Select Works. Edited, with Introduction and Notes,
by E. J. Payne, M.A., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-Law, and Fellow of
University College, Oxford.

I. Thoughts on the Present Discontents; the two Speeches on
America. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

II. Reflections on the French Revolution. Second Edition. Extra
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5s. (See also p. 22.)

12. Cowper. Edited, with Life, Introductions, and Notes, by
H. T. Griffith, B.A., formerly Scholar of Pembroke College, Oxford.

I. The Didactic Poems of 1782, with Selections from the Minor

Pieces, a.d. i 779—1 783. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.
II. The Task, with Tirocinium, and Selections from the Minor Poems,
a.d. 1 784-1 799. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.


24 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


II. LATIH.

An Elementary Latin Grammar. By John B. Allen, M.A.,
Head Master of Perse Grammar School, Cambridge. Third Edition,
Revised and Corrected. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

A First Latin Exercise Book. By the same Author.
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2S. 6d.

Angliee Reddenda, or Easy Extracts, Latin and Greek, for

Unseen Translation. By C. S. Jerram, M.A. Second Edition, Revised
and Enlarged. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Passages for Translation into Latin. For the use of Pass-
men and others. Selected by J. Y. Sargent, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of
Magdalen College, Oxford. Fifth Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

First Latin Reader. By T. J. Nunns, M.A. Third Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.

Second Latin Reader. In Preparation.

Caesar. The Commentaries (for Schools). With Notes and
Maps. By Charles E. Moberly, M.A.

Part I. The Gallic War. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4«.6tf.
Part II. The Civil War. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.
The Civil War. Book I. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.

Cicero, Selection of interesting and descriptive passages. With
Notes. By Henry Walford, M.A. In three Parts. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6c?. Each Part separately, limp, is.6d.
Part I. Anecdotes from Grecian and Roman History.
Part II. Omens and Dreams: Beauties of Nature.
Part III, Rome's Rule of her Provinces.

Cicero. Selected Letters (for Schools). With Notes. By the
late C. E. Prichard, M.A., and E. R. Bernard, M.A. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.

Cicero. Select Orations (for Schools). With Notes. By J. R.
King, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Cornelius ITepos. With Notes. By Oscar Browning, M.A.
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Livy. Selections (for Schools). With Notes and Maps. By
H. Lee-Warner, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. In Parts, limp, each is. 6d.

Part I. The Caudine Disaster.

Part II. Hannibal's Campaign in Italy,

Part III. The Macedonian War.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 25


Ovid. Selections for the use of Schools. With Introductions
•and Notes, and an Appendix on the Roman Calendar. By "W. Ramsay,
M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A., Professor of Humanity, Glas-
gow. Second Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.

Pliny. Selected Letters (for Schools). With Notes. By
the late C. E. Prichard, M.A., and E. R. Bernard, M.A. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.

Virgil. Edited with Notes, etc., by T. L. Papillon, M.A., Fellow

of New College, Oxford. In Preparation.


Catulli Veronensis Liber. Iterum recognovit, apparatum
criticum prolegomena appendices addidit, Robinson Ellis, A.M. 1878.
Demy 8vo. cloth, l6s.

A Commentary on Catullus. By Robinson Ellis, M.A. 1876.
Demy 8vo. cloth, 16s.

Catulli Veronensis Carmina Seleeta, secundum recogni-
tionem Robinson Ellis, A.M. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Cicero de Oratore. With Introduction and Notes, by A. S.
Wilkins, M.A., Professor of Latin, Owens College, Manchester. Book I.
1879. 8vo. cloth, 6s. Book II. In the Press.

Cicero's Philippic Orations. With Notes. By J. R. King, M.A.
Second Edition. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Cicero. Select Letters. With English Introductions, Notes,
and Appendices. By Albert Watson, M.A. Second Edition. 1 8 74.
Demy 8vo. cloth, 1 8s.

Cicero. Select Letters. Text. By the same Editor. Extra
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4$.

Cicero pro Cluentio. With Introduction and Notes. By W.
Ramsay, M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth,
3s. 6d.

Horace. With a Commentary. Volume I. The Odes, Carmen
Seculare, and Epodes. By Edward C. Wickham, M.A., Head Master
of Wellington College. Second Edition. 1877. 8vo. cloth, 1 2s,
Also a small edition for Schools.

Livy, Books I-X. By J. R. Seeley, M.A., Regius Professor of
Modern History, Cambridge. Book I. Second Edition. 1874. 8vo.
cloth, 6s.

Also a small edition for Schools.

Persius. The Satires. With a Translation and Commentary.
By John Conington, M.A. Edited by Henry Nettleship, M.A. Second
Edition. 1874. Svo. cloth, p. 6d.


26 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Selections from the less known Latin Poets. By North
Pinder, M.A. 1869. Demy 8vo. cloth, 15s.

Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin. With Introduc-
tions and Notes. 1874. By John Wordsworth, M.A. Svo. cloth, 18s,

Tacitus. The Annals. Books I-VI. With Essays and Notes.
Preparing.

Vergil : Suggestions Introductory to a Study of the Aeneid.
By H. Nettleship, M.A. 8vo. sewed, is. 6d.

Ancient Lives of Vergil ; with an Essay on the Poems of Vergil,
in connection with his Life and Times. By H. Nettleship, M.A. 8vo.
sewed, 2s.

The Roman Satura : its original form in connection with its
literary development. By H. Nettleship, M.A. 8vo. sewed, is.

A Manual of Comparative Philology. By T. L. Papillon,
M.A., Fellow and Lecturer of New College. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. cloth, 6s.

The Roman Poets of the Augustan Age. By William
Young Sellar, M.A., Professor of Humanity in the University of
Edinburgh. Virgil. 1877. 8vo. cloth, 14s.

The Roman Poets of the Republic. By the same Author.

Nearly ready.


III. GREEK.

A Greek Primer, for the use of beginners in that Language.
By the Right Rev. Charles Wordsworth, D.C.L., Bishop of St. Andrews.
Sixth Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, Is. 6d.

Graecae Grammaticae Rudimenta in usum Scholarum. Auctore
Carolo Wordsworth, D.C.L. Nineteenth Edition, 187 7. i2mo. bound, 4s.

A Greek-English Lexicon, abridged from Liddell and Scott's

4to. edition, chiefly for the use of Schools. Eighteenth Edition. Care-
fully Revised throughout. 1879. Square 12 mo. cloth, Js. 6d.

Greek Verbs, Irregular and Defective; their forms, mean-
ing, and quantity; embracing all the Tenses used by Greek writers,
with references to the passages in which they are found. By W. Veitch.
Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

The Elements of Greek Accentuation (for Schools): abridged
from his larger work by H. W. Chandler, M.A., Waynflete Professor of
Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy, Oxford. Ext. fcap. Svo. cloth, as. 6d.


Clarendon Press \ Oxford. 27


A Series of Graduated Greek Readers; —

First Greek Reader. ByW. G. Rushbrooke, M.L., for-
merly Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, Second Classical
Master at the City of London School. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Second Greek Reader. By A. M. Bell, M.A. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Third Greek Reader. In Preparation.

Fourth Greek Reader ; being Specimens of Greek.

Dialects. With Introductions and Notes. By W, W. Merry, M. A.,
Fellow and Lecturer of Lincoln College. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Fifth Greek Reader. Part I. Selections from Greek Epic

and Dramatic Poetry, with Introductions and Notes. By Evelyn
Abbott, M.A., Fellow of Balliol College. Ext.fcap. 8vo. cloth, ^s.6d.

Part II. By the same Editor. In Preparation.

The Golden Treasury of Ancient Greek Poetry ; being a Col-
lection of the finest passages in the Greek Classic Poets, with Introduc-
tory Notices and Notes. By R. S. Wright, M.A., Fellow of Oriel
College, Oxford. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d,

A Golden Treasury of Greek Prose, being a collection of the

finest passages in the principal Greek Prose Writers, with Introductory
Notices and Notes. By R. S. Wright, M.A., and J. E. L. Shadwell, M.A.
Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Aeschylus. Prometheus Bound (for Schools). With Intro-
duction and Notes, by A. O. Prickard, M.A., Fellow of New College.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2$.

Aeschylus. Agamemnon (for Schools), with Introduction and
Notes by Arthur Sidgwick, M.A., Lecturer at Corpus Christi College,
Oxford ; late Assistant Master at Rugby School, and Fellow of Trinity
College, Cambridge.

Aristophanes. In Single Plays, edited, with English Notes,
Introductions, etc., by W. W. Merry, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo.
The Clouds, 2s. The Acharnians, 2s. Just Published.

Other Plays will follow.

Arrian. Selections (for Schools). With Notes. By J. S. Phill-
potts, B.C.L., Head Master of Bedford School.

Cebes. Tabula. With Introduction and Notes by G. S.
Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Euripides. Alcestis (for Schools). By C. S. Jerram, M.A.

Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Euripides. Helena (for Schools). By the same Editor. In

the Press,


28 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Herodotus. Selections from. Edited, with Introduction, Notes,
and a Map, by W. W. Merry, M. A., Fellow and Lecturer of Lincoln
College. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Homer. Odyssey, Books I— XII (for Schools). By W. W.
Merry, M.A. Nineteenth Thousand. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.
Book II, separately, is. 6d.

Homer. Odyssey, Books XIII-XXIV (for Schools). By the
same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

Homer. Iliad, Book I (for Schools). By D. B. Monro, M.A.

Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.

Homer. Iliad, Book XXI. Edited with Notes, etc., for the

use of Schools, by Herbert Hailstone, M.A., late Scholar of St, Peter's
College, Cambridge. Extr. fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

Iiucian. Vera Historia (for Schools). By G. S. Jerram, M.A.
Extra fcap. 8vo. clotht is. 6d.

Plato. Selections (for Schools). With Notes. By B. Jowett,
M.A., Regius Professor of Greek ; and J. Purves, M.A., Fellow and
late Lecturer of Balliol College, Oxford. In the Press,

Sophocles. In Single Plays, with English Notes, &c. By Lewis
Campbell, M.A., and Evelyn Abbott, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. limp.
Oedipus Rex, Oedipus Coloneus, Antigone, is. gd. each.
Ajax, Electra, Trachiniae, Philoctetes, 2s. each.

Sophocles. Oedipus Rex : Dindorfs Text, with Notes by the
present Bishop of St. David's. Ext. fcap. 8vo. limp, is. 6d.

Theocritus (for Schools). With Notes. By H. Kynaston, M.A.
(late Snow), Head Master of Cheltenham College. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Xenophon. Easy Selections (for Junior Classes). With a
Vocabulary, Notes, and Map. By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., and C. S.
Jerram, M.A. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Xenophon. Selections (for Schools). With Notes and Maps.
By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., Head Master of Bedford School. Fourth
Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Xenophon. Anabasis, Book II. With Notes and Map. By C. S.
Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.


Aristotle's Politics. By W. L. Newman, M.A., Fellow of
Balliol College, Oxford.

Aristotelian Studies. I. On the Structure of the Seventh
Book of the Nicomachean Ethics. By J. C. Wilson, M.A., Fellow of
Oriel College, Oxford. 1879. Medium 8vo. stiff, 5s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 29


Demosthenes and Aesehines. The Orations of Demosthenes

and iEschines on the Crown. With Introductory Essays and Notes.
ByG. A. Simcox, M.A.,and W.H.Simcox.M.A. 1872. Svo. cloth, 12s.
Homer. Odyssey, Books I-XII. Edited with English Notes,
Appendices, etc. By W. W. Merry, M.A., and the late James Riddelf,
M.A. 1876. Demy 8vo. cloth, 1 6s.

Homer. Odyssey, Books XIII-XXIV. With Introduction
and Notes. By S. H. Butcher, M.A., Fellow of University College.

Homer. Iliad. With Introduction and Notes. By D. B.
Monro, M.A., Vice-Provost of Oriel College, Oxford. Preparing.

A Homeric Grammar. By D. B. Monro, M.A. In the Press.
Sophocles. The Plays and Fragments. With English Notes
and Introductions, by Lewis Campbell, M.A., Professor of Greek, St.
Andrews, formerly Fellow of Queen's College, Oxford. 2 vols.

Vol. I. Oedipus Tyrannus. Oedipus Coloneus. Antigone. Second
Edition. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 1 6s. Vol.11. In the Press.

Sophocles. The Text of the Seven Plays. By the same Editor.
Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

A Handbook of Greek Inscriptions, illustrative of Greek
History. By E. L. Hicks, M.A., formerly Fellow of Corpus Christi
College, Oxford. In the Press.

IV. FREHCH.

An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, with
a Preface on the Principles of French Etymology. By A. Brachet.
Translated into English by G. W. Kitchin, M.A. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. cloth, *js. 6d.

Brachet's Historical Grammar of the French Language.
Translated into English by G. W. Kitchin, M.A. Fourth Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 6d.

Historical Outlines of French Literature. By George
Saintsbury, M.A. In Preparation.

A Primer of French Literature. By the same Author. Extra
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.

French Classics, Edited by GUSTAVE MASSON, B.A.

Corneille's Cinna, and Moliere's Les Femmes Savantes. With
Introduction and Notes. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Racine's Andromaque, and Corneille's Le Menteur. With
Louis Racine's Life of his Father. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Moliere's Les Fourberies de Scapin, and Racine's Athalie.

"With Voltaire's Life of Moliere. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.
Selections from the Correspondence of Madame de Sevign6

and her chief Contemporaries. Intended more especially for Girls'

Schools. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, $s.


30 Clarendon Press, Oxford*


Voyage autour de ma Ghambre, by Xavier de Maistre ; Ourika,
by Madame de Duras ; La Dot de Suzette, by Fievee ; Les Jumeaux
de THotel Corneille, by Edmond About ; M&aventures d'un Ecolier,
by Hodolphe T6pffer. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Regnard's Le Joueur, and Brueys and Faiaprat's Le

Grondeur. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Iiouis XIV and his Contemporaries ; as described in Extracts

from the best Memoirs of the Seventeenth Century. With English
Notes, Genealogical Tables, &c. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.


V. GEEMAN.

LANGE'S German Course. By HERMANN LANGE, Teacher of
Modern Languages, Manchester;

The Germans at Home ; a Practical Introduction to German
Conversation, with an Appendix containing the Essentials of German
Grammar. Second Edition, 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

The German Manual ; a German Grammar, a Reading Book,

and a Handbook of German Conversation. 8vo. cloth, p. 6d.

A Grammar of the German Language. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

This 'Grammar' is a reprint of the Grammar contained in1 The German
Manual' and, in this separate form, is intended for the use of students
who wish to make themselves acquainted with German Grammar
chiefly for the purpose of being able to read German books.

German Composition; Extracts from English and American
writers for Translation into German, with Hints for Translation in foot-
notes. In the Press.


Lessing's Laokoon. With Introduction, English Notes, etc.
By A. Hamann, Phil. Doc., M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4$. 6d.

Wilhelm Tell. A Drama. By Schiller. Translated into
English Verse by E. Massie, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

Also, Edited by C. A. BuCHHElM, Phil. Doc., Professor in
King's College, London :

Goethe's Egmont. With a Life of Goethe, &c. Second Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.

Schiller's Wilhelm Tell. With a Life of Schiller ; an historical
and critical Introduction, Arguments, and a complete Commentary.
Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

Lessing's Minna von Barnhelm. A Comedy. With a Life of
Lessing, Critical Analysis, Complete Commentary, &c. Fourth Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 6d.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 31


Schiller's Historische Skizzen ; Egmonts Leben und Tod, and

Belagerung von Antwerpen. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth,
2s. 6d.

Goethe's Iphigenie auf Tauris. A Drama. With a Critical
Introduction and Notes. Extra fcap. Svo. cloth, $s.

In Preparation,
Schiller's Maria Stuart. With Notes, Introduction, &c.
Schiller's Jungfrau von Orleans. With Notes, Introduction, Sec,
Selections from the Poems of Schiller and Goethe.
Becker's (K. F.) Friedrich der Grosse.
A German Reader, in Three Parts. Part I. In the Press.
VI. MATHEMATICS, &c.

Figures Made Easy: a first Arithmetic Book. (Introductory
to 'The Scholar's Arithmetic.') By Lewis Hensley, M.A., formerly
Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. Crown 8vo.
cloth, 6d.

Answers to the Examples in Figures made Easy, together

with two thousand additional Examples formed from the Tables in the
same, with Answers. By the same Author. Crown Svo, cloth, is.
The Scholar's Arithmetic; with Answers to the Examples.
By the same Author. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

The Scholar's Algebra. An Introductory work on Algebra.
By the same Author. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d,

Book-keeping. By R. G. C. Hamilton, Financial Assistant
Secretary to the Board of Trade, and John Ball (of the Firm of
Quilter, Ball, & Co.), Co-Examiners in Book-keeping for the Society
of Arts. New and enlarged Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. limp cloth, 2s,

A Course of Lectures on Pure Geometry. By Henry J.
Stephen Smith, M.A., F.R.S., Fellow of Corpus Christi College, and
Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University of Oxford.

Acoustics. By W, F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S., Savilian Professor
of Astronomy, Oxford. 1870. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. By J. Clerk
Maxwell, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Experimental Physics in the Uni-
versity of Cambridge. A New Edition in the Press, edited by W. D.
Niven, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.

An Elementary Treatise on the same subject. Edited, from
the materials left by Professor Clerk Maxwell, by W. Garnett, M.A.,
Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. Preparing.

A Treatise on Statics. By G. M. Minchin, M.A., Professor of

Applied Mathematics in the Indian Engineering College, Cooper's Hill.
Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 14s,


32 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


A Treatise on the Kinetic Theory of Gases. By Henry

William Watson, M.A., formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
1876. 8vo. cloth, $s.6d.

A Treatise on the Application of Generalised Coordinates

to the Kinetics of a Material System* By H. W. Watson, M.A., and
S. H. Burbury, M. A., formerly Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge.
1879. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

Geodesy. By Colonel Alexander Ross Clarke, C.B., R.E. 1880,
8vo. cloth, I2s,6d.

VII. PHYSICAL SCIENCE.

A Handbook of Descriptive Astronomy. By G. F,

Chambers, F.R.A.S. Third Edition. 1877. Demy 8vo. cloth, 28s.

A Cycle of Celestial Objects. An enlarged and revised edition
of vol. II. of Admiral Smyth's work. By G. F. Chambers, F.R.A.S.
In the Press.

Chemistry for Students. By A. W. Williamson, Phil. Doc,
F.R.S., Professor of Chemistry, University College, London. A new
Edition, with Solutions, 1873. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d.

A Treatise on Heat, with numerous Woodcuts and Diagrams.
By Balfour Stewart, LL.D., F.R.S., Professor of Natural Philosophy in
Owens College, Manchester. Third Edition. 1876. Extra fcap. 8 vo.
cloth, 7s. 6d.

Lessons on Thermodynamics. By R. E. Baynes, M.A., Senior
Student of Christ Church, Oxford, and Lee's Reader in Physics. 1878,
Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

Forms of Animal Life. By G. Rolleston, M.D., F.R.S.,

Linacre Professor of Physiology, Oxford. Illustrated by Descriptions
and Drawings of Dissections. Demy 8vo. cloth, 1 6s.

Exercises in Practical Chemistry. Vol. I. Elementary Exer-
cises. By A. G. Vernon Harcourt, M.A., F.R.S., Senior Student of
Christ Church, and Lee's Reader in Chemistry; and H. G. Madan,
M.A., Fellow.of Queen's College, Oxford. Third Edition. Revised by
H. G. Madan, M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth, gs.

Crystallography. By M. H. N. Story-Maskelyne, M.A., Pro-
fessor of Mineralogy, Oxford ; and Deputy Keeper in the Department of
Minerals, British Museum. In the Press,

VIII. HISTORY,

The Constitutional History of England, in its Origin and
Development. By William Stubbs, D.D., Regius Professor of Modern
History. Library Edition. Three vols, demy 8vo. cloth, 2/. 85.
Also in 3 vols, crown 8vo. price 125. each.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 33


Select Charters and other Illustrations of English Con-
stitutional History, from the Earliest Times to the Reign of Edward I.
Arranged and Edited by W. Stubbs, M.A. Third Edition, 1876.
Crown 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6 d.

A History of England, principally in the Seventeenth Century.
By Leopold Von Ranke. Translated by Resident Members of the
University of Oxford, under the superintendence of G. W. Kitchin,
M.A., and C. W. Boase, M.A. 1875. 6 vols. 8vo. cloth, 3/. 3s.

A Short History of the Norman Conquest of England. By

E. A. Freeman, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2$. 6d.

Genealogical Tables illustrative of Modern History. By

H. B. George, M.A. Second Edition. Small 4to. cloth, 12s.

A History of France. With numerous Maps, Plans, and
Tables. By G. W. Kitchin, M.A. In Three Volumes. 1873-77.
Crown 8vo. cloth, each 10s. 6d.

Vol. I. Down to the Year 1453. Vol. 2. From 1453-1624.
Vol. 3. From 1624-1793.

A History of Germany and of the Empire, down to the close
of the Middle Ages. By J. Bryce, D.C.L., Regius Professor of Civil
Law in the University of Oxford.

A History of British India. By S. J. Owen, M.A., Reader in

Indian History in the University of Oxford.

A Selection from the Despatches, Treaties, and other Papers

of the Marquess Wellesley, K.G., during his Government of India.
Edited by S. J. Owen, M.A., formerly Professor of History in the Elphin-
stone College, Bombay. 1877. 8vo. clothf il. 4s.

A Selection from the Despatches, Treaties, and other Papers
relating to India of Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington, K.G. By
the same Editor. 8vo. cloth, 24s.

A History of the United States of America. By E. J. Payne,

M.A., Barrister-at-Law, and Fellow of University College, Oxford. In
the Press.

A History of Greece from its Conquest by the Romans to
the present time, b.c. 146 to a.d. 1864. By George Finlay, LL.D.
A new Edition, revised throughout, and in part re-written, with con-
siderable additions, by the Author, and Edited by H. F. Tozer, M.A.,
Tutor and late Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. 1877. 7 vols.
8vo. cloth, 3/. 1 os.

A Manual of Ancient History. By George Rawlinson, M.A.,
Camden Professor of Ancient History, formerly Fellow of Exeter
College, Oxford. Second Edition. Demy 8vo. cloth, 14s.

A History of Greece. By E. A. Freeman, M.A., formerly
Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford.


34 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


Italy and her Invaders, a.d. 376-476. By T. Hodgkin,

Fellow of University College, London. Illustrated with Plates and
Maps. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, il. 12s.

IX. LAW.

The Elements of Jurisprudence. By Thomas Erskine
Holland, D.C.L., Chichele Professor of International Law and Diplo-
macy, and Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. 1880. Demy 8vo.
cloth, 1 os. 6d.

The Institutes of Justinian, edited as a recension of the Insti-
tutes of Gaius. By the same Editor. 1873. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 55.

Q-aii Institutionum Juris Civilis Commentarii Quatuor;

or, Elements of Roman Law by Gaius. With a Translation and Com-
mentary by Edward Poste, M.A., Barrister-at-Law, and Fellow of Oriel
College, Oxford. Second Edition. 1875. 8vo. cloth, iSs.

Select Titles from the Digest of Justinian. By T. E.

Holland, D.C.L., Chichele Professor of International Law and Diplo-
macy, and Fellow of All Souls' College, Oxford, and C. L. Shadwell,
B.C.L., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. In four Parts.

Part I. Introductory Titles. 8vo. sewed, 2s. 6d.

Part II. Family Law. 8vo. sewed, is.

Part III. Property Law. 8*vo. sewed, 2s. 6d.

Part IV. Law of Obligations (No. 1). 8vo. sewed, is. 6d.

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legisla-
tion. By Jeremy Bentham. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

Elements of Law considered with reference to Principles of
General Jurisprudence. By William Markby, M.A., Judge of the High
Court of Judicature, Calcutta. Second Edition, with Supplement.
1874. Crown Svo. cloth, "js. 6d. Supplement separately, 2s*

Alberiei Gentilis, I. G. D., I. C. Professoris Regii, De lure Belli
Libri Tres. Edidit Thomas Erskine Holland LCD., Iuris Gentium
Professor Chicheleianus, Coll. Omn. Anim. Socius, necnon in Univ.
Perusin. Iuris Professor Honorarius. 1877. Small 4to. half morocco, 21s.

International Law. By William Edward Hall, M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law. Demy 8vo. cloth, 21s.

An Introduction to the History of the Law of Heal

Property, with original Authorities. By Kenelm E. Digby, M.A., of
Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-Law. Second Edition. 1876. Crown 8 vo.
cloth, Js. 6d.

Principles of the English Law of Contract. By Sir William
R. Anson, Bart., B.C.L., Vinerian Reader of English Law, and Fellow
of All Souls College, Oxford. 1879. Crown 8vo. cloth, 9s.


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 35


X. MENTAL AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

Bacon. Novum Organum. Edited, with Introduction, Notes,
&c, by T. Fowler, M.A., Professor of Logic in the University of
Oxford. 1878. 8vo. cloth, 14s.

Locke's Conduct of the Understanding. Edited, with In-
troduction, Notes, etc., by T. Fowler, M.A., Professor of Logic in the
University of Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. Just Published.

Selections from Berkeley, with an Introduction and Notes.
For the use of Students in the Universities. By Alexander Campbell
Fraser, LL.D. Second Edition, Crown 8vo. cloth, p. 6d. (See also
p. 18.)

The Elements of Deductive Logic, designed mainly for the
use of Junior Students in the Universities. By T. Fowler, M.A.,
Professor of Logic in the University of Oxford. Seventh Edition, with
a Collection of Examples. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.

The Elements of Inductive Logic, designed mainly for the
use of Students in the Universities. By the same Author. Third
Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

A Manual of Political Economy, for the use of Schools. By
j. E. Thorold Rogers, M.A., formerly Professor of Political Economy,
Oxford. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.


XI. ART, &c.

A Handbook of Pictorial Art. By R. St. J. Tyrwhitt, M. A.,
formerly Student and Tutor of Christ Church, Oxford. With coloured
Illustrations, Photographs, and a chapter on Perspective by A. Mac-
donald. Second Edition. 1875. 8vo. half morocco, iSs.

A Music Primer for Schools. By J. Troutbeck, M.A., Music

Master in Westminster School, and R. F. Dale, M.A., B. Mus., Assistant
Master in Westminster School. Crown 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

A Treatise on Harmony. By Sir F. A. Gore Ouseley, Bart.,
Professor of Music in the University of Oxford. Second Edition. 4to.
cloth, 1 os.

A Treatise on Counterpoint, Canon, and Fugue, based upon
that of Cherubini. By the same Author. Second Edition. 4to. cloth, 16$.

A Treatise on Musical Form and General Composition.

By the same Author. 4to. cloth, 10s.

The Cultivation of the Speaking Voice. By John Hullah.
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.


36 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


XII. MISCELLANEOUS.

The Construction of Healthy Dwellings ; namely Houses,
Hospitals, Barracks, Asylums, etc. By Douglas Galton, late Royal
Engineers, C.B., F.R.S., etc. Demy 8vo. cloth, ios. 6d.

River and Canal Engineering. By Leveson Francis Vernon
Harcourt, M.A., C.E. Preparing.

A System of Physical Education : Theoretical and Practical.

By Archibald Maclaren. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, *js. 6d.

Specimens of Lowland Scotch and Northern English. By

Dr. J. A. H. Murray. Preparing.

English Plant Names from the Tenth to the Fifteenth Century.
By J. Earle, M.A. Small fcap. 8vo. cloth, $s.

An Icelandic Prose Reader, with Notes, Grammar, and Glos-
sary by Dr. Gudbrand Vigfusson and F. York Powell, M.A. 1879.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, ios. 6d.

Dante. Selections from the Inferno. With Introduction and
Notes. By H. B. Cotterill, B. A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Tasso. La Gerusalemme Liberata. Cantos i, ii. With Intro-
duction and Notes. By the same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d.

The Modern Greek Language in its relation to Ancient Greek.
By E. M. Geldart, B.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

The Book of Tobit. A Chaldee Text, from a unique MS. in
the Bodleian Library; with other Rabbinical Texts, English Trans-
lations, and the Itala. Edited by Ad. Neubauer, M.A. 1878. Crown
8vo. cloth, 6s.

A Commentary on the Book of Proverbs. Attributed to
Abraham Ibn Ezra. Edited from a Manuscript in the Bodleian Library
by S. R. Driver, M.A. Crown 8vo. paper cover, 3s. 6d.

Outlines of Textual Criticism applied to the New Testament.
By C. E. Hammond, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Exeter College, Oxford.
Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3$. 6d.

A Handbook of Phonetics, including a Popular Exposition of
the Principles of Spelling Reform. By Henry Sweet, M.A. Extra fcap.
8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

LONDON: HENRY FROWDE,
Oxford University Press Warehouse, 7 Paternoster Row,
OXFORD: CLARENDON PRESS DEPOSITORY,
116 High Street.

The Delegates of the Press invite suggestions and advice from
all persons interested in education; and will be thankful for hints, &c.
addressed to the Secretary to the Delegates, Clarendon Press,
Oxford.


Bibles 3lttntefc at tije ©latenton $tcm


THE

OXFORD BIBLE FOR TEACHERS.

THREE NEW EDITIONS, ON INDIA PAPER,
EXTREMELY THIN AND LIGHT.


IS.


and professions of obedience.


piicken thou me according to thy
)rd.

6 I have declared my ways, and thou
ardest me : » teach me thy statutes.

7 Make me to understand the way
thy precepts: so V shall I talk of

y wondrous works.

8 * My soul 2 melteth for heaviness :
rengthen thou me according unto thy
>rd.

9 Remove from me the way of lying :
d grant me thy law graciously.

0 I have chosen the way of truth:


« ver. 40.
Ps.143.11.


* ver. 12.
Ps. 25. 4.

* 27. 11.

* 86. 11.
y Ps. 145.

6,6.

• Ps.107.
26.

2Heh.
droppelh.


PSALMS.


and professions of obedience.


i Loed ;
endur-


filed in
the law


eep his
mwith


r: they


"quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me: x teach me thy
statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts: so v shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

28 zMy soul 2 melteth for heavi-
ness: strengthen thou me according
unto thy word.

29 Remove from me the way of
lying: and grant me thy law gra-
ciously.

30 I have chosen the way of


• ver. 12.

Ps. 25. 4.

k 27. 11.

A 86. 11.
fPs.145.5,6.

•Ps.107.26.
2Heb.
droppeth.


No. 2A. Minion 8vo. thin.

(STJPEKINTENDENT'S EDITION.)

Size, 7| inches long, B\ inches broad, and 1 inch
thick. Weight 22 ounces.

Paste grain morocco, limp .

Persian morocco, limp .

Turkey morocco, limp . ,

Turkey morocco, flap edges .

Levant morocco, lined calf, flap edges

Ditto, very flexible, silk sewed, red)
under gold in the round— the most >
durable binding extant j

With Apocrypha, extra ....

With Prayer-Book, extra


PSALMS.


and professions of obedience.


to the Lord ;
lercy endureth

9.

mdru prayen,

qf wedienee.

lundefiled in
Ik in the law

hat keep his
eek him with


"quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me: * teach me thy
statutes. , ,

27 Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts: so V shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

28 *My soul 2 melteth for heavi-
ness : strengthen thou me according
unto thy word.

29 Remove from me the way of
lying: and grant me thy law gra-

Diquity : they | 30 i have chosen the way of truth :


« TOT. 12.
Ps. 25. 4.

& 27. 11.

& 86. 11.
It VS. 145. 5,8.
• Ps. 107. 26.
2Heb.

drepptth.


No. 5A. Ruby 16mo. THIN.

(POCKET EDITION.)

Size, 6£ inches long, 4i inches broad, and 1 inch thick.
Weight 15 ounces including binditig. 1456 pp.


Paste grain morocco, limp .

Persian morocco, limp ....

Turkey morocco, limp ....

Turkey morocco, flap edges .

Levant morocco, lined calf, flap edges .

Ditto, very flexible, silk sewed, red)
under gold in the round— the most V
durable binding extant j

With Apocrypha, extra ....

With Prayer-Book, extra


No. 6A. Pearl 16mo. thin.

(SMALLEST EDITION.)

Size, 5J inches long, Z'i inches broad, and 1 inch
thick. Weight 12i ounces.

Paste grain morocco, limp . . . 0 7 0

Persian morocco, limp .... 0 8 0

Turkey morocco, limp . . . . 0 10 0

Turkey morocco, flap edges . . . 0 12 0

Levant morocco, lined calf, flap edges . 0 14 6
Ditto, very flexible, silk sewed, red)

under gold in the round— the most \ 0 18 0
durable binding extant )

With Apocrypha, extra , . . , 0 2 3

With Prayer-Book, extra ... 0 2 3


Specimen leaves tvill be sent on application.


THE OXFORD BIBLE FOR TEACHERS.

Six Editions printed on lest Bag-made printing paper.


of obedience.


3 thy

thou
ttes.
way
Ik of


x ver. 12.

Ps. 25. 4.

A 27. 11.

* 86. 11.
y Ps. 145.

5,6.
« Ps. 107.


- Width of Margin. —


No. 1. Minion Small 4to.

(9| X 7 x If inches.)

A Superb Edition, with Wide Margins for Manu-
script Notes.

Cloth boards, red edges . . . . 0 12 0

Persian morocco, liinp, red under gold edges 0 18 0

Best Turkey morocco, limp . . . 14 0

Best Turkey morocco, circuit edges . 1 10 0

Levant Morocco, lined calf, with flap edges 1 16 0


IS.


and professions of obedience.


luicken thou me according to thy
>rd.

6 I have declared my ways, and thou
ardest me : * teach me thy statutes.

7 Make me to understand the way
thy precepts: so V shall I talk of

y wondrous works.


« ver. 12.

Ps. 25. 4.

A 27. 11.

A 86. 11.
y Ps. 145.

5,6.


No. 2. Minion Crown 8vo.

(7 J X 5J X If inches.)

Cloth boards, red edges .

French morocco, gilt edges

Paste Grain morocco, limp

French morocco, circuit edges

Best Turkey morocco, limp

Best Turkey morocco, circuit edges

Levant morocco, calf lined, with flap edges


0

8

0

0

10

0

0

10

6

0

]2

0

0

15

0

0

19

6

3edg

es 1

1

0

{ALMS.


and professions of obedience.


d;


DALETH.

25 « My soul cleaveth unto the dust :
"quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me: * teach me thy
statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts: so * shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.


* ver. 12.
Ps. 25. 4.
&2'i. H.
A 86. 11.

* Pi. 145.5,6.


No. 3: Nonpareil 8vo.

(7x4$Xl£ inches.)

Cloth boards, red edges .... 0

French morocco, gilt edges ... 0

Paste Grain morocco, limp ... 0

French morocco, circuit edges . . 0

Best Turkey morocco, limp ... 0

Best Turkey morocco, circuit edges . 0

Levant morocco, calf lined, with flap edges 0


ALMS.


"*


and professions of obedience.


"quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me: * teach me thy
statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts: so J' shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.


' ver. 12.

Ps. 25. 4.

A 27. 11.

& 86. 11.
»P».145.5.€


PSALMS.


and professions of obedience.


Loed;
€7idur-


"quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me: x teach me thy
statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts: so v shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.


* ver. 12.

Ps. 25. 4.

A27.ll.

A 80. 11.
^Ps.145.5,6.


and professions of obedience.


to the Lord ;
lercy endureth


M quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me: * teach me thy
statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts : so V shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.


Ps. 25. 4.

& 27. 11.
& 86. 11.
tYs. 145.5,6.


No. 4. Rsd Line Edition.
Nonpareil 8vo. (7 x 4f x 1| inches.)

Persian morocco, red under gold edges 0 12 0

Best Turkey morocco . . . . 0 15 0

Best Turkey morocco, circuit edges . 0 19 0

Levant morocco, calf lined, with flap edges 110


No. 5. Buby 16mo,

(6 \ X 4£ x If inches.)

Cloth boards, red edges .

French morocco, gilt edges .

Paste Grain morocco, limp .

French morocco, circuit edges

Best Turkey morocco, limp .

Best Turkey morocco, circuit edges

Levant morocco, lined calf, with flap edges

No. 6. Pearl 16mo.
(5| X 3f X 1| incites.)
Cloth boards, red edges .
French morocco, gilt edges .
Paste Grain morocco, limp
French morocco, circuit edges
Best Turkey morocco, limp .
Best Turkey morocco, circuit edges
Levant morocco, lined calf, with flap edges


9 0
12 0
16 0


THE

OXFORD BIBLE FOE TEACHERS

COKTAINS THE FOLLOWING

HELPS TO THE STUDY OF THE BIBLE.


I. NOTES ANALYTICAL, CHRONOLOGICAL, HISTORICAL, GEOGRAPHICAL,
ZOOLOGICAL, BOTANICAL, AND GEOLOGICAL.


1. Notes on the Old Testament:—
i. Title of the Bible.

ii. Hebrew Divisions of the Bible :—

(a) The Law.

(&) The Prophets.

(c) The Scriptures.
iii. Divisions of the English Bible:—

(a) The Pentateuch.

(b) The Historical Books.

(c) The Poetical Books.

{d) The Prophetical Books.
Analysis and Summary of each.

2. Summary of the Interval between the

Old and New Testaments.
S. Family of the Herods.

4. Jewish Sects, Parties, &o.

5. Chronology of the Old Testament.

6. Chronology of the Acts and Epistles.

7. Historical Summary.

8. Miracles and Parables of the Old Tes-

tament.

9. Miracles and Parables of Our Lord.

10. Names, Titles, and Offices of Christ.

11. Prophecies relating to Christ.

12. Special Prayers found in Scripture.

13. Notes on the New Testament :—
i. Early Copies.

ii. Divisions of the New Testament :—

(a) Constitutional and Historical.

(b) Didactic.

(c) Prophetic.

Analysis and Summary of each.

14. Harmony of the Gospels.


15. Paul's Missionary Journeys.
1(3. „ Voyage to Rome.

17. Geography and Topography of Pales-

tine.

18. Mountains of Scripture, with their As-

sociations.

19. Rivers and Lakes of Scripture, and

Events connected with each.

20. Ethnology of Bible Lands.

21. Quadrupeds named in the Bible, with

Description of each.

22. Summary of Mammalia of the Bible.

23. Fisheries of Palestine, with their Pro-

ducts.

24. Aquatic Animals mentioned in the Bible.

25. Birds found in Palestine.

26. Reptiles of Scripture.

27. Insects of Palestine.

28. Trees, Plants, Flowers, &c, of Palestine.

29. Geology of Bible Lands :—

i. Mineral Substances, &c.
ii. Metals,
iii. Precious Stones.

30. Music and Musical Instruments :—

i. Stringed Instruments.
ii. Wind Instruments,
iii. Instruments of Percussion.

31. Tables of Weights, Measures, Time, and

Money.

32. The Jewish Year.

33. Words Obsolete or Ambiguous.

34. Words used Symbolically.

35. Blank Leaves for MS. Notes.


II. AN INDEX TO THE HOLY BIBLE.

III. THE NEW OXFORD CONCORDANCE.

IV. DICTIONARY OF SCRIPTURE PROPER NAMES, WITH THEIR
PRONUNCIATION, MEANINGS, AND REFERENCES.

V. SCRIPTURE ATLAS (INDEXED).


1.— The Nations of the Ancient World.

2.— Armenia, Assyria, Babylonia, Syria, &c,
in the Patriarchal Ages.

3.— Canaan in the Patriarchal Ages.

4.— Egypt and the Sinai Peninsula, illus-
trating the Journeys of the Israelites to the
Promised Land.

5.— Canaan as divided among the Tribes.

6.— Dominions of David and Solomon.


7.— The Kingdoms of Judah and Israel.
8.— Assyria and the Adjacent Lands, illus-
trating the Captivities.
9.— Jerusalem and its Environs.
10.— Palestine in the Time of Our Saviour.
11.— The Roman Empire in the Apostolic

Age.
12.— Map illustrating the Travels of St.
Paul,


THE OXFORD BIBLE FOR TEACHERS.


dfytvsLct* from ©pinion*.

"The large collection of varied information which you have appended to the Oxford
Bible fob Teachers, in a form so readily available for reference, has evidently been com-
piled with the greatest care; and the testimony which you have received to its accuracy
is a guarantee of its high value. I cannot doubt that the volume, in its various forms, will
be of great service." — The Archbishop of Canterbury.

" The notion of including in one volume all the helps that a clergyman or teacher would
be likely to want for the study of the Bible has never been realised before with the same
success that you have attained in the Oxford Bible for Teachers. In the small
edition (Ruby 16mo. thin), by the use of paper very skilfully adapted to the purpose, there
is a Bible with an Atlas, a Concordance, an Index, and several Tractates on various points
of Biblical antiquity, the whole, in a very solid binding, weighing a pound and an ounce : no
great weight for what is really a miniature library. The clergy will probably give the
preference to the larger book, marked No. 4. This includes the Apocrypha, with all the
helps to the use of the Bible that distinguish the series. Its type is excellent. Many
clergymen are obliged to write sermons when travelling from place to place. This volume
would serve as a small library for that purpose, and not too large for the most moderate
portmanteau. I think that this work in some of its forms should be in the hands of
every teacher. The atlas is very clear and well printed. The explanatory work and the
indices, so far as I have been able to examine them, are very carefully done. I am glad
that my own University has, by the preparation of this series of books, taken a new step
for the promotion of the careful study of the Word of God. That such will be the effect
of the publication I cannot doubt." — The Archbishop of York.

"It would be difficult, I think, to provide for Sunday-School Teachers, or indeed for other
students of the Bible, so much valuable information in so convenient a form as is now
comprised in the Oxford Bible for Teachers." — The Bishop of London.

" The idea of a series of Bibles in different types, corresponding page for page with one
another, is one which the Dean has long wished to see realised for the sake of those who find
the type of their familiar copies no longer available .... The amount of information com-
pressed into the comparatively few pages of the Appendix is wonderful. And the Dean is
glad to hear that the help of such eminent contributors has been available for its com-
pilation. The Concordance seems to be sufficiently full for reference to any text that may
be required." — The Dean of Rochester,

"Having by frequent use made myself acquainted with this edition of the Holy Scrip-
tures, I have no hesitation in saying that it is a most valuable book, and that the ex-
planatory matter collected in the various appendices cannot but prove most helpful, both
to teachers and learners, in acquiring a more accurate and extensive knowledge of the Word
of God." — The Bishop of Lichfield.

"I have examined the Oxford Bible for Teachers with very great care, and con-
gratulate you upon the publication of so valuable a work. It contains within a reason-
able compass a large mass of most useful information, arranged so conveniently as to be
easily accessible, and its effect will be not merely to aid, but also, I think, to stimulate
the studies of the reader. The book is also printed so beautifully, and is so handsome
in every way, that I expect it will be greatly sought after, as a most acceptable present
to any who are engaged in teaching in our Sunday Schools and elsewhere."— The Dean of
Canterbttry.


THE OXFORD BIBLE FOR TEACHERS.


(Eftvact* from ©pmfotrf (continued).

"I have examined with some care a considerable portion of the 'Helps to the Study
of the Bible,' which are placed at the end of the Oxford Bible fob Teachers, and have
been much struck with the vast amount of really useful information which has there been
brought together in a small compass, as well as the accuracy with which it has been com-
piled. The botanical and geological notices, the account of the animals of Scripture, &c.,
seem to be excellent, and the maps are admirable. Altogether, the book cannot fail to be
of service, not only to teachers, but to all who cannot afford a large library, or who have
not time for much independent study."— The Dean of Peterborough.

" I have been for some time well aware of the value of the Oxford Bible for Teach-
ers, and have been in the habit of recommending it, not only to Sunday-School Teachers,
but to more advanced students, on the ground of its containing a large mass of accurate
and well- digested information, useful and in many cases indispensable to the thoughtful
reader of Holy Scripture ; in fact, along with the Bible, a copious Index, and a Concor-
dance complete enough for all ordinary purposes, this one volume includes a series of short
but comprehensive chapters equivalent to a small library of Biblical works." — The Bishop
of Limerick.

"Having examined the Oxford Bible for Teachers carefully, I am greatly pleased
with it. The 'Helps to the Study of the Bible' at the end contain a great amount of
most valuable information, well calculated not only to lead to a good understanding of the
text, but to stimulate the student to further efforts. It differs from many publications in
this, that the information is so admirably arranged, that it is well suited for reference,
and is easily available for the student. The edition would be most useful to Sunday-School
Teachers, a great help to those who desire that the young shall have a real knowledge of the
Word of God." — The Bishop of Cork.

"The Oxford Bible for Teachers may, I think, without exaggeration, be described
as a wonderful edition of the Holy Scriptures. The clearness and beauty of the type, and
the convenient shape of the volume, leave nothing to be desired. I know nothing of the
same compass which can be compared to the 'Helps to the Study of the Bible' for fulness
of information and general accuracy of treatment. It is only real learning which can ac-
complish such a feat of compression." — The Bishop of Derry and Raphoe.

"I consider the Oxford Bible for Teachers to be simply the most valuable edition
of the English Bible ever presented to the public."— The Ven. Archdeacon Reichel.

"The Oxford Bible for Teachers is in every respect, as regards type, paper, binding,
and general information, the most perfect volume I have ever examined."— The Rev. Pre-
bendary WelsoN, of the National Society's Depository,

" The essence of fifty expensive volumes, by men of sacred learning, is condensed into the
pages of the Oxford Bible for Teachers." — The Rev. Andrew Thomson, D.D., Edinburgh-

"The latest researches are laid under contribution, and the Bible Student is furnished
with the pith of them all."— Dr. Stoughton.

"The whole combine to form a Help of the greatest value."— Dr. Angus.

" I cannot imagine anything more complete or more helpful."— Dr. W. Morley Punshon.

" I congratulate the teacher who possesses it, and knows how to turn its ' Helps ' to good
account." — Dr. Kennedy.


THE OXFORD BIBLE FOR TEACHERS.


(^tracts from ©pinion* (continued).


" The Oxford Bible for Teachers is the most valuable help to the study of the Holy-
Scriptures, within a moderate compass, which I have ever met with. I shall make constant
use of it ; and imagine that few who are occupied with, or interested in the close study
of the Scriptures, will allow such a companion to be far from their side." — The Rev. Baldwin
Brown.

"I do not think I shall ever leave home without the Oxford Bible for Teachers,
for one can scarcely miss his ordinary books of reference when this Bible is at hand. I
know no other edition which contains so much valuable help to the reader."— The Rev. A. H.
Charteris, D.D., Dean of the Chapel Royal.

"The Oxford Bibles for Teachers are as good as ever we can expect to see." —
The Rev. C. H. Spurgeon.

" The modest title of the work scarcely does justice to the range of subjects which it
comprehends, and the quality of their treatment. As a manual of Biblical information and
an auxiliary of Biblical study, it is unrivalled. It is as exhaustive as it is concise, — no
irrelevant matter has been introduced, and nothing essential to Biblical study seems to have
been omitted,— and in no instance, so far as I can judge, has thoroughness or accuracy been
sacrificed to the necessities of condensation." — The Rev. Robert N. Young, of HeadingUy
College, Leeds.

" The Oxford Bible for Teachers is really one of the greatest boons which in our day
has been offered to the reading public. The information given is so various, and so com-
plete, as scarcely to leave a single desideratum. To Christians, in their quiet researches at
home, or in the course of extensive journeys, or in preparation for the duties of tuition, it is
simply invaluable, and constitutes in itself a Biblical Library. The range of topics which it
seeks to illustrate is very great, while the care and accuracy manifest in the articles deserves
the highest praise. It is no exaggeration to say, that to the mass of Christian people it
saves the expense of purchasing and the toil of consulting a library of volumes. At the same
time, I know no book more likely to stimulate enquiry, and to give the power of appreciat-
ing further research into the history, structures, and meaning of the Sacred Oracles." —
Dr. Goold, of Edinburgh.

" I have only recently possessed one of the Oxford Bibles for Teachers ; and after
a most patient examination of it, am astonished at the immense amount of accurate and
carefully digested matter it contains: and that, too, of a kind precisely adapted to the
Teacher's needs. Would that such a Bible had been within my reach when I first began
my teaching life ; and would that I had possessed one earlier, since I began to write for
Teachers. As I look at its upwards of 300 pages of 'Helps to the Study of the Bible/
I recall my toilsome pilgrimage through many volumes, at much expenditure of time,
for what is here so distinctly stated and tabulated. With such a desk companion I
might have done so much more, and done it so much better. All I can do now is to
entreat all Teachers -who need a perfectly reliable Bible for study or class purposes, to
procure one of the Oxford Bibles for Teachers. This I do most earnestly. And I
would add that as a presentation volume by a class to its Teacher, or by a School to
its Superintendent, no gift would be better appreciated or more appropriate than the

small quarto size with its wide margin, and magnificent type, and superb flexible binding."

The Rev. James Comper Gray, Author of " Class and Desk" " Topics for Teachers"
" Biblical Museum" Sfc , fyc.

"These admirable Bibles must tend to extend the fame even of the Oxford Press."

The Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P.


THE OXFORD BIBLE FOR TEACHERS


IS RECOMMENDED BY


The AECHBISHOP of CANTERBURY.

The ARCHBISHOP of YORK.

The BISHOP of LONDON.

The BISHOP of WINCHESTER.

The BISHOP of BANGOR.

The BISHOP of CARLISLE.

The BISHOP of CHICHESTER.

The BISHOP of ELY.

The BISHOP of GLOUCESTER and BRISTOL.

The BISHOP of LICHFIELD.

The BISHOP of LLANDAFF.

The BISHOP of MANCHESTER.

The BISHOP of OXFORD.

The BISHOP of PETERBOROUGH.

The BISHOP of RIPON.

The BISHOP of ROCHESTER.

The BISHOP of SALISBURY.

The BISHOP of St. ALBANS.

The BISHOP of St. ASAPH.

The BISHOP of St. DAVID'S.

The BISHOP of WORCESTER.

The BISHOP of SODOR and MAN,

The BISHOP of BEDFORD.

The DEAN of CANTERBURY.

The DEAN of DURHAM.

The DEAN of BANGOR.

The DEAN of WELLS.

The DEAN of ELY.

The DEAN of EXETER.

The DEAN of HEREFORD.

The DEAN of LICHFIELD.

The DEAN of LLANDAFF.

The DEAN of MANCHESTER.

The DEAN of NORWICH.

The DEAN of PETERBOROUGH.

The DEAN of RIPON.

The DEAN of ROCHESTER.

The Late DEAN of WORCESTER.

CANON LIDDON.

CANON GREGORY.

The ARCHBISHOP of ARMAGH.

The ARCHBISHOP of DUBLIN.

The BISHOP of MEATH.

The BISHOP of DOWN and CONNOR.

The BISHOP of KILLALOE.

The BISHOP of LIMERICK.

The BISHOP of TUAM.

The BISHOP of DERRY and RAPHOE.

The BISHOP of CASHEL.

The BISHOP of KILMORE.

The BISHOP of CORK.

The BISHOP of OSSORY.

The Ven. ARCHDEACON REICHEL.

The PRINCIPAL of the THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE,

GLOUCESTER.
The PRINCIPAL of the NATIONAL SOCIETY'S

TRAINING COLLEGE, BATTERSEA.
The CANON IN CHARGE of the DIVINITY SCHOOL,

TRURO.
The PRINCIPAL of St. BEES COLLEGE.
The PRINCIPAL of the THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE,

WELLS.
The PRINCIPAL of LICHFIELD THEOLOGICAL

COLLEGE.
The PRINCIPAL, St. DAVID'S COLLEGE.
The RIGHT HON. WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE,

M.P., LL.D.
The Rev. A. H. CHARTERIS, D.D., Professor of Bibli-
cal Criticism in the University of Edinburgh.
Db. LEE, Professor of Ecclesiastical History in the

University of Glasgow.
The RIGHT HON. JOHN INGLIS, D.C.L., LL.D.,

Chancellor of the University of Edinburgh.


The EARL of SHAFTESBURY.

Db. ANGUS.

Db. STOUGHTON.

The Rev. C. H. SPURGEON.

Db. RIGG, of (he Westminster Normal Institution.

Db. KENNEDY.

The Rev. EDWIN PAXTON HOOD.

The Rev. W. MORLEY PUNSHON, LL.D.

The Rev. H0RAT1US BONAR, D.D.

Db. GOOLD, of Edinburgh.

PROFESSOR BINNIE, D.D.

PROFESSOR BLAIKIE, D.D.

Db. ANDREW THOMSON, of Edinburgh.

Db. DAVID BROWN, Principal of Free Church Col-

PROFESSOR SALMOND, of Free Church College,
Aberdeen.

Db. W. LINDSAY ALEXANDER,

DB. ALEXANDER MACLAREN.

The Rev. PRINCIPAL RAINY, D.D., of New Col-
lege, Edinburgh.

Db. JAMES MACGREGOR, of Edinburgh.

Db. ANTLIFF, Principal of the Theological Insti-
tute, Sunderland.

Db. NEWTH, of New College.

The Rev. E. E. JENKINS, M.A., President of the
Wesleyan Conference.

The Rev. M. C. OSBORN, Secretary of the Wesleyan
Conference.

Db. GEORGE OSBORN, of the Theological Institu-
tion, Bichmond.

The Rev. R. GREEN.

The Rev. W. HUDSON.

The Rev. F. GREEVES.

Db. W. P. POPE, Professor of Theology, Didsbury.

Db. GERVASE SMITH.

The Rev. GEORGE MARTIN.

Db. FALDING.

Db. CHARLES STANFORD.

Db. LANDELS.

The Rev. JOHN H. GODWIN.

The Rev. J. C. HARRISON.

The Rev. JOSEPH WOOD, M.A.

Db. CUMMING.

The Rev. COLIN CAMPBELL McKECHNIE.

The Rev. R. TUCK, B.A.

The Rev. PRINCIPAL McALL, of Hackney College.

The Rev. ROBERT N. YOUNG, of Head ingley College,
Leeds.

The Rev. R. VAUGHAN PRYCE, M.A., LL.D., of
Cheshunt College.

The Rev. PROFESSOR REYNOLDS, B.A., D.D., of
Cheshunt College.

The Late Db. JOSEPH MULLENS, Foreign Secretary
of the London Missionary Society.

The Rev. T. G. ROOKE, B.A., President of the Bap-
tist College, Bawdon, Leeds.

The Rev. CHARLES CHAPMAN, M.A., of Western
College, Plymouth.

The Rev. ALEXANDER HANNAY, Secretary of the
Congregational Union of England and Wales.

The Rev. W. H. GRIFFITH, M.A., Principal of In-
dependent College, Taunton.

Db. ALEXANDER THOMSON, Professor of Hebrew
in the Lancashire Independent College.

The Rev. JAMES COMPER GRAY, Author of "Class
and Desk" " Topics for Teachers" "Biblical Mu-
seum," &c, dec.

The Rev. J. BALDWIN BROWN, B.A.

Sib CHARLES REED, Chairman of the London School
Board.

W. H. GROSER, Chairman of the Publication Com-
mittee of the Sunday School Union.


Just Ready, Pica IQmo.

Four Light Volumes, in Finger Case, from £l 3 o.

THE HOLY BIBLE,

FOR THE USE OF INVALIDS.

(7i x 5f x 4 inches.)


THE Lord is my shepherd ;
I shall not want.
2 He maketh me to lie down
in green pastures : he leadeth
me beside the still waters.


4 He that hath clean
and a pure heart ; wh<
not lifted up his soul i
vanity, nor sworn dec*

5 He shall receive the


In Various Bindings, from 3s. 6d.

THE SMALLEST BIBLE IN THE WORLD.

(41 x 21 x I inches.)

Distinction of meats LEVITICUS, XI. clean and unclean.


for a wave offering before the Lord ;
and it shall be thine, and thy sons'
with thee, by a statute for ever; as
thp Lord hath commanded.

16 U And Moses diligently sought
the goat of the sin offering, and, be-
hold, it wa» burnt: and he was angry
with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of
Aaron which were left alive, saying,


CHAPTER XI.

1 What least* may, 4 and what map

nut be eaten. 9 Whatfishet. 13

What fowl*. 29 The creeping thitup

which are unclean.

AND the Lord spake unto Moses

jTX and to Aaron, saying unto them,

2 Speak unto the children of Israel,

saying, These are the beasts which ye


"The type of this dainty little volume, though necessarily very
minutt,, is clear and legible." — The Times.

" Jt is printed on tough India paper of extreme thinness, and is
wonderfully clear." — The Guardian.

" When bound in limp morocco leather it weighs less than 3| oz." —
The Athenceum.

" It will pass through the post for a penny, and yet contains the whole
of the Authorised Version from Genesis to Revelation." — The Graphic.

" It is not only a curiosity, but so convenient as not to encumber an
ordinary waistcoat pocket." — The Globe.

"It is smaller than an ordinary Prayer-Book, and can be read
easily enough. * * * * It is a curiosity of the Binder's as well as
of the Printers art." — The Spectator.

"Besides being a marvel as regards size, the little volume is a
model of printing, highly creditable to the Oxford University Press." —
The Standard.

LONDON: HENRY FROWDE,

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

7, PATERNOSTEE ROW,


THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
GRADUATE LIBRARY


DATE DUE


Form 9584


BOUND


UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
