The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, Vol. 1 (SBE 2)
============================================
The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, Vol. 1 (Sacred Books of the East 2), translated by Georg Buhler (Oxford, 1879), public domain. Buhler's rendering of the Apastamba and Gautama Dharma Sutras. Scan via Internet Archive.

y^'Tte/i/^  c/zu^^AJ/^^^Zc/ha 


^Ae^e^n/e/^  .-/y. 


T 

t/Uvia.  C^ui,i/Cdl a^..... L--^^ 


THE 


SACRED   BOOKS   OF   THE   EAST 


Hontrott 
HENRY     FROWDE 


OXFORD     UNIVERSITY     PRESS     WAREHOUSE 
7    PATERNOSTER   ROW 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL   SCHOLARS 


AND    EDITED    BY 


F.   MAX    MULLER 


VOL.    II 


AT      THE      CLARENDON      PRESS 
1879 

[All  rights  res€rved'\ 


THE 

SACRED  LAWS  OF  THE  ARYAS 

AS    TAUGHT    IN    THE    SCHOOLS    OF 

APASTAMBA,    GAUTAMA,    VASISHri^A, 
AND    BAUDHAYANA 


TRAXSLATED    BY 


GEORG     BUHLER 


PART     I 
ApASTAMBA     and     GAUTAMA 


AT      THE      CLARENDON      PRESS 
1879 

\^AU  rights  reserved '\ 


ot-  I 


^ 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction  to  Apastamba 
Introduction  to  Gautama 


PAGE 

ix 

xlv 


APASTAMBA'S  Aphorisms  on  the  Sacred  Law. 

General  Rules  .... 

Initiation  .... 

Studentship        .... 

A  Student  who  has  returned  Home 

The  Study  of  the  Veda     . 

A  Student  who  has  returned  Home 

Saluting    ..... 

Purification        .... 

Eating,  and  Forbidden  Food    . 

Lawful  Livelihood     . 

Penance    ..... 

Rules  for  a  Snataka 

The  Duties  of  a  Householder  . 

Inheritance        .... 

Funeral  Oblations 

The  Four  Orders 

The  King         .... 

GAUTAiNIA'S  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  L 

Initiation  ..... 
Purification  .... 
Studentship  .... 
The  Ascetic  .... 
The  Hermit  .... 
The  Householder 


I 

2 

7 
29 

53 
48 
51 
54 
57 
71 
75 
92 

99 
129 
136 
151 
159 


173 
177 
180 
190 
192 
191 


VIU                                              CONTENTS. 

Saluting 

Times  of  Distress 

PAGE 
.         205 

209 

A  King  and  J3rahma«a  versed  in  the  Vedas 

211 

The  Duties  of  a  Snataka 

216 

Lawful  Occupations  and  Livelihood  . 

224 

The  Duties  of  a  King      .... 

231 

Civil  and  Criminal  Law    .... 

236 

Witnesses          ...... 

243 

Impurity 

Funeral  Oblations 

246 
252 

The  Study  of  the  Veda     .... 

256 

Eating,  and  Forbidden  Food     . 

262 

Women     ....... 

267 

Penances  

271 

Inheritance 

299 

Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Trans- 
lations of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East 


309 


INTRODUCTION 

TO 

APASTAMBA. 

For  all  students  of  Sanskrit  philology  and  Indian  history 
Apastamba's  aphorisms  on  the  sacred  law  of  the  Arj-an 
Hindus  possess  a  special  interest  beyond  that  attaching  to 
other  works  of  the  same  class.  Their  discovery  enabled 
Professor  Max  Muller,  nearly  thirty  years  ago,  to  dispose 
finally  of  the  Brahmanical  legend  according  to  which 
Hindu  society  was  supposed  to  be  governed  by  the  codes 
of  ancient  sages,  compiled  for  the  express  purpose  of  tying 
down  each  individual  to  his  station,  and  of  strictly  regu- 
lating even  the  smallest  acts  of  his  daily  life  ^     It  enabled 

'  Max  Muller,  Historj'  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  133  seq. 

The  following  letter,  addressed  to  the  late  W.  H.  Morley,  and  published 
by  hina  in  his  Digest  of  Indian  Cases,  1850,  may  be  of  interest  as  connected 
with  the  first  discovery  of  the  Apastamba-sutras  : — 

9,  Park  Place,  Oxford,  July  29,  1849. 
My  dear  Morley, — I  have  been  looking  again  at  the  law  literature,  in 
order  to  write  you  a  note  on  the  sources  of  Manu.  I  have  treated  the  subject 
fully  in  my  introduction  to  the  Veda,  where  I  have  given  an  outline  of  the  dif- 
ferent periods  of  Vaidik  literature,  and  analyzed  the  peculiarities  in  the  style 
and  language  of  each  class  of  Vaidik  works.  What  I  consider  to  be  the  sources 
of  the  Manava-dharma-sastra,  the  so-called  Laws  of  Manu,  are  the  Sutras.  These 
are  works  which  presuppose  the  development  of  the  prose  literature  of  the 
Brahma/zas  (like  the  Aitareya-brahma/ja,  Taittiriya-brahmana,  &c.)  These 
Brahma/jas,  again,  presuppose,  not  only  the  existence,  but  the  collection  and 
arrangement  of  the  old  hymns  of  the  four  Samhitas.  The  Sutras  are  therefore 
later  than  both  these  classes  of  Vaidik  works,  but  they  must  be  considered  as 
belonging  to  the  Vaidik  period  of  literature,  not  only  on  account  of  their  inti- 
mate connexion  with  Vaidik  subjects,  but  also  because  they  still  exhibit  the  irre- 
gularities of  the  old  Vaidik  language.  They  form  indeed  the  last  branch  of  Vaidik 
literature ;  and  it  will  perhaps  be  possible  to  fix  some  of  these  works  chronologi- 
cally, as  they  are  contemporar\-  with  the  first  spreading  of  Buddhism  in  India. 

Again,  in  the  whole  of  Vaidik  literature  there  is  no  work  written  (like  the 
Manava-dharma-sastra)  in  the  regular  epic  51oka,  and  the  continuous  employ- 
ment of  this  metre  is  a  characteristic  mark  of  post -Vaidik  writings. 

One  of  the  principal  classes  of  Sutras  is  known  by  the  name  of  Kalpa- 


X  APASTAMBA. 


him  not  only  to  arrive  at  this  negative  result,  but  also 
to  substitute  a  sounder  theory  the  truth  of  which  sub- 
sequent investigations  have  further  confirmed,  and  to  show 
that  the  sacred  law  of  the  Hindus  has  its  source  in  the 
teaching  of  the  Vedic  schools,  and  that  the  so-called  re- 
vealed law  codes  are^  in  most  cases,  but  improved  metrical 


Sutras,  or  rules  of  ceremonies.  These  are  avowedly  composed  by  human 
authors,  while,  according  to  Indian  orthodox  theology,  both  the  hymns  and  Brah- 
manas  are  to  be  considered  as  revelation.  The  Siltras  generally  bear  the  name  of 
their  authors,  like  the  Sdtras  of  Asvalayana,  Katyayana,  &c.,  or  the  name  of  the 
family  to  which  the  Siltras  belonged.  The  great  number  of  these  writings  is  to 
be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  there  was  not  one  body  of  Kalpa-sutras  bind- 
ing on  all  Brahmanic  families,  but  that  different  old  families  had  each  their  own 
Kalpa-sutras.  These  works  are  still  very  frequent  in  our  libraries,  yet  there  is 
no  doubt  that  many  of  them  have  been  lost.  Siitras  are  quoted  which  do  not 
exist  in  Europe,  and  the  loss  of  some  is  acknowledged  by  the  Brahmans  them- 
selves. There  are,  however,  lists  of  the  old  Brahmanic  families  which  were  in 
possession  of  their  own  redaction  of  Vaidik  hymns  (_Samhitas),  of  Brahmawas,  and 
of  Sutras.  Some  of  these  families  followed  the  Rig-veda,  some  the  Yag'ur-veda,  the 
Sama-veda,  and  Atharva-veda ;  and  thus  the  whole  Vaidik  literature  becomes 
divided  into  four  great  classes  of  Brahma«as  and  Sutras,  belonging  to  one  or 
the  other  of  the  four  principal  Vedas. 

Now  one  of  the  families  following  the  Ya^ur-veda  was  that  of  the  Manavas(cf. 
^ara^avyiiha).  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  that  family,  too,  had  its  own  Sutras. 
Quotations  from  Manava-siitras  are  to  be  met  with  in  commentaries  on  other 
Sutras  ;  and  I  have  found,  not  long  ago,  a  MS.  which  contains  the  text  of  the 
Manava-srauta-sutras,  though  in  a  very  fragmentary  state.  But  these  Sutras, 
the  5rauta-s{itras,  treat  only  of  a  certain  branch  of  ceremonies  connected  with  the 
great  sacrifices.  Complete  Siitra  works  are  divided  into  three  parts:  i.  the 
first  (5'rauta),  treating  on  the  great  sacrifices;  2.  the  second  (Gn'hya),  treating 
on  the  Sawskaras,  or  the  purificatory  sacraments;  3.  the  third  (SamayaMrika" 
or  Dharma-sutras),  treating  on  temporal  duties,  customs,  and  punishments. 
The  last  two  classes  of  Sutras  seem  to  be  lost  in  the  Manava-sutra.  This  loss  is, 
however,  not  so  great  with  regard  to  tracing  the  sources  of  the  Manava-dharma- 
sastra,  because  whenever  we  have  an  opportunity  of  comparing  Siitras  belonging 
to  different  families,  but  following  the  same  Veda,  and  treating  on  the  same 
subjects,  the  differences  appear  to  be  very  slight,  and  only  refer  to  less  important 
niceties  of  the  ceremonial.  In  the  absence,  therefore,  of  the  Manava-samayaA'arika- 
sutras,  I  have  taken  another  collection  of  Sutras,  equally  belonging  to  the  Ya^r- 
veda,  the  Sutras  of  Apastamba.  In  his  family  we  have  not  only  a  Brahma«a, 
but  also  Apastamba  6'rauta,  Gn'hya,  and  SamayaHrika-sutras.  Now  it  is,  of 
course,  the  third  class  of  Sutras,  on  temporal  duties,  which  are  most  likely  to 
contain  the  sources  of  the  later  metrical  Codes  of  Law,  written  in  the  classical 
51oka.  On  a  comparison  of  different  subjects,  such  as  the  duties  of  a  Brahma- 
Aarin,  a  Gr/hastha,  laws  of  inheritance,  duties  of  a  king,  forbidden  fruit,  &c., 
I  find  that  the  Sutras  contain  generally  almost  the  same  words  which  have  been 
brought  into  verse  by  the  compiler  of  the  Manava-dharma-.sastra.  I  consider, 
therefore,  the  Siitras  as  the  principal  source  of  the  metrical  Smn'tis,  such  as  the 


INTRODUCTION.  Xt 


editions  of  older  prose  works  which,  in  the  first  instance, 
were  destined  to  be  committed  to  memory  by  the  young 
Aryan  students,  and  to  teach  them  their  duties.  This 
circumstance,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  Apastamba's  work 
is  free  from  any  suspicion  of  having  been  tampered  with 
by  sectarians  or  modern  editors,  and  that  its  intimate  con- 
nexion with  the  manuals  teaching  the  performance  of  the 
great  and  small  sacrifices,  the  5rauta  and  Gr/hya-sutras, 
which  are  attributed  to  the  same  author,  is  perfectly  clear 
and  indisputable,  entitle  it,  in  spite  of  its  comparatively 
late  origin,  to  the  first  place  in  a  collection  of  Dharma- 
sOtras. 

The  Apastambiya  Dharma-sutra  forms  part  of  an  enor- 
mous Kalpa-sutra  or  body  of  aphorisms,  which  digests  the 
teaching  of  the  Veda  and  of  the  ancient  T^zshis  regarding 
the  performance  of  sacrifices  and  the  duties  of  twice-born 
men,  Brahma;/as,  Kshatriyas,  and  VaijA^as,  and  which,  being 
chiefly  based  on  the  second  of  the  four  Vedas,  the  Ya^ur- 
veda  in  the  Taittiriya  recension,  is  primarily  intended 
for  the  benefit  of  the  Adhvaryu  priests  in  whose  families 
the  study  of  the  Ya^ur-veda  is  hereditary. 

The  entire  Kalpa-sutra  of  Apastamba  is  divided  into 
thirty  sections,  called   Prajnas,  literally  questions  ^.     The 

Manava-dharma-.  astra,  YaoTiavalkya-dharma-sastra,  &c.,  though  there  are  also 
many  other  verses  in  these  works  which  may  be  traced  to  different  sources. 
They  are  paraphrases  of  verses  of  the  Sa?«hitas,  or  of  passages  of  the  Brahma.'zas, 
often  retaining  the  same  old  words  and  archaic  constructions  which  were  in  the 
original.  This  is  indeed  acknowledged  by  the  author  of  the  Manava-dharma- 
sastra,  when  he  says  (B.  II,  v.  6),  '  The  roots  of  the  Law  are  the  whole  Veda 
(Sawhitas  and  Brahmawas),  the  customs  and  traditions  of  those  who  knew  the 
Veda  (as  laid  down  in  the  Sutras),  the  conduct  of  good  men,  and  one's  own 
satisfaction.'  The  Manava-dharma-sastra  may  thus  be  considered  as  the  last 
redaction  of  the  laws  of  the  Manavas.  Quite  different  is  the  question  as  to  the 
old  Manu  from  whom  the  family  probably  derived  its  origin,  and  who  is  said 
to  have  been  the  author  of  some  very  characteristic  hymns  in  the  Rig-veda- 
samhita.  He  certainly  cannot  be  considered  as  the  author  of  a  Manava-dharma- 
jastra,  nor  is  there  even  any  reason  to  suppose  the  author  of  this  work  to  have 
had  the  same  name.  It  is  evident  that  the  author  of  the  metrical  Code  of  Laws 
speaks  of  the  old  Manu  as  of  a  person  different  from  himself,  when  he  says 
(B.  X,  V.  63%  '  Not  to  kill,  not  to  lie,  not  to  steal,  to  keep  the  body  clean,  and 
to  restrain  the  senses,  this  was  the  short  law  which  Manu  proclaimed  amongst 
the  four  castes.'— Yours  truly,  M.  M. 
*  Burnell,  Indian  Antiquar)-,  I,  5  seq. 


XU  APASTAMBA. 


first  twenty-four  of  these  teach  the  performance  of  the 
so-called  wSrauta  or  Vaitanika  sacrifices,  for  which  several 
sacred  fires  are  required,  beginning  with  the  simplest 
rites,  the  new  and  full  moon  offerings,  and  ending  with 
the  complicated  Sattras  or  sacrificial  sessions,  which  last  a 
whole  year  or  even  longer.  The  twenty-fifth  Praxna  con- 
tains the  Paribhashas  or  general  rules  of  interpretation, 
which  are  valid  for  the  whole  Kalpa-sutra,  the  Pravara- 
khanda,  the  chapter  enumerating  the  patriarchs  of  the 
various  Brahmanical  tribes,  and  finally  the  Hautraka, 
prayers  to  be  recited  by  the  Hotraka  priests.  The 
twenty-sixth  section  gives  the  Mantras  or  Vedic  prayers 
and  formulas  for  the  Grthya  rites,  the  ceremonies  for  which 
the  sacred  domestic  or  Grihya  fire  is  required,  and  the 
twenty-seventh  the  rules  for  the  performance  of  the  latter. 
The  aphorisms  on  the  sacred  law  fill  the  next  two  Pra^nas ; 
and  the  vSulva-sutra  ^,  teaching  the  geometrical  principles, 
according  to  which  the  altars  necessary  for  the  vSrauta 
sacrifices  must  be  constructed,  concludes  the  work  with 
the  thirtieth  Praj-na. 

The  position  of  the  Dharma-sutra  in  the  middle  of  the 
collection  at  once  raises  the  presumption  that  it  originally 
formed  an  integral  portion  of  the  body  of  Sutras  and  that 
it  is  not  a  later  addition.  Had  it  been  added  later,  it  would 
either  stand  at  the  end  of  the  thirty  Praj-nas  or  altogether 
outside  the  collection,  as  is  the  case  with  some  other 
treatises  attributed  to  Apastamba  ^.  The  Hindus  are,  no 
doubt,  unscrupulous  in  adding  to  the  works  of  famous 
teachers.  But  such  additions,  if  of  considerable  extent, 
are  usually  not  embodied  in  the  works  themselves  which 
they  are  intended  to  supplement.  They  are  mostly  given 
as  .yeshas  or  parii'ish/as,  tacked  on  at  the  end,  and  generally 
marked  as  such  in  the  MSS. 

In  the  case  of  the  Apastamba  Dharma-sutra  it  is, 
however,  not  necessary  to  rely  on  its  position  alone,  in 
order  to  ascertain  its  genuineness.  There  are  unmistakable 
indications  that  it  is  the  work  of  the  same  author  who 


1  On  the  5'ulva-sutras  see  G.  Thibaut  in  '  the  Pandit,'  1875,  p.  292. 
"  Burnell  loc.  cit. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIU 


wrote  the  remainder  of  the  Kalpa-stJtra.  One  important 
argument  in  favour  of  this  view  is  furnished  by  the  fact 
that  Pra^na  XXVII,  the  section  on  the  Grz'hya  cere- 
monies, has  evidently  been  made  very  short  and  concise 
with  the  intention  of  saving  matter  for  the  subsequent 
sections  on  the  sacred  law.  The  Apastambiya  Gr/hya-sutra 
contains  nothing  beyond  a  bare  outline  of  the  domestic 
ceremonies,  while  most  of  the  other  Gr/'hya-sutras, 
e.g.  those  of  Ajvalayana,  ^ankhayana,  Gobhila,  and  Para- 
skara,  include  a  great  many  rules  which  bear  indirectly 
only  on  the  performance  of  the  offerings  in  the  sacred 
domestic  fire.  Thus  on  the  occasion  of  the  description 
of  the  initiation  of  Aryan  students,  Aj-valayana  inserts 
directions  regarding  the  dress  and  girdle  to  be  worn,  the 
length  of  the  studentship,  the  manner  of  begging,  the 
disposal  of  the  alms  collected,  and  other  similar  questions^. 
The  exclusion  of  such  incidental  remarks  on  subjects  that 
are  not  immediately  connected  with  the  chief  aim  of  the 
work,  is  almost  complete  in  Apastamba's  Gr/hya-sutra, 
and  reduces  its  size  to  less  than  one  half  of  the  extent  of 
the  shorter  ones  among  the  works  enumerated  above.  It 
seems  impossible  to  explain  this  restriction  of  the  scope 
of  Pra^na  XXVII  otherwise  than  by  assuming  that  Apa- 
stamba  wished  to  reserve  all  rules  bearing  rather  on  the 
duties  of  men  than  on  the  performance  of  the  domestic 
offerings,  for  his  sections  on  the  sacred  law. 

A  second  and  no  less  important  argument  for  the  unity 
of  the  whole  Kalpa-sutra  may  be  drawn  from  the  cross- 
references  which  occur  in  several  Praj'nas.  In  the  Dharma- 
s<itra  we  find  on  various  occasions^  where  the  performance 
of  a  ceremony  is  prescribed,  the  expression  yathopade^-am, 
according  to  the  injunction,  added.  In  two  of  these 
passages,  Dh.  I,  i,  4,  16,  and  II,  7,  17,  16,  the  Gr/hya- 
sutra  is  doubtlessly  referred  to,  and  the  commentator 
Haradatta  has  pointed  out  this  fact.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  Grzhya-sutra  refers  to  the  Dharma-sutra,  employ- 
ing the    same    expression    which    has   been    quoted    from 

'  Asvalayana  Gr.hya-sutra  I,  19,  ed.  Stenzkr. 


XIV  APASTAMBA. 


the  latter.  Thus  we  read  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter 
on  funeral  oblations,  Grzhya-sutra,  Pa/ala  4,  Kha;/<^a  3i,  ma- 
sij-raddhasyaparapakshe  yathopadej-a;;^  kala//,  '  the  times  for 
the  monthly  funeral  sacrifice  (fall)  in  the  latter  (dark)  half 
of  the  month  according  to  the  injunction.'  Now 
as  neither  the  Gnhya-sutra  itself  nor  any  preceding 
portion  of  the  Kalpa-sutra  contains  any  injunction  on  this 
point,  it  follows  that  the  long  passage  on  this  subject 
which  occurs  in  the  Dharma-sutra  II,  7,  16,  4-22  is  referred 
to.  The  expression  yathopad&yam  is  also  found  in  other 
passages  of  the  Grzhya-sutra,  e.  g.  towards  the  end  of 
Khauda.  7  and  in  the  beginning  of  Kha;/<g^a  8,  and  must 
be  explained  there  in  a  like  manner.  There  are  further 
a  certain  number  of  Sutras  which  occur  in  the  same  words 
both  in  the  Frasna.  on  domestic  rites,  and  in  that  on  the 
sacred  law,  e.g.  Dh.  I,  i,  i,  18;  I,  i,  2,  38;  I,  i,  4,  14.  It 
seems  that  the  author  wished  to  call  special  attention  to 
these  rules  by  repeating  them.  Their  recurrence  and 
literal  agreement  may  be  considered  an  additional  proof 
of  the  intimate  connexion  of  the  two  sections. 

Through  a  similar  repetition  of,  at  least,  one  Sutra  it 
is  possible  to  trace  the  connexion  of  the  Dharma-sutra 
with  the  vSrauta-sutra.  The  rule  r/tve  va  ^ayam  upeyat, 
'or  he  may  have  conjugal  intercourse  with  his  wife  in  the 
proper  season,'  is  given,  Dh.  II,  2,  5,  17,  with  reference  to 
a  householder  who  teaches  the  Veda.  In  the  chapter  on 
the  A'aturmasya  sacrifices  it  occurs  also,  as  Haradatta  has 
stated,  and  applies  there  to  the  sacrificer.  In  this  case 
the  repetition  of  the  same  words  cannot  be  accidental, 
for  the  Sutra  contains  an  irregular  grammatical  form,  ritve 
for  ^z'tvye.  If  the  Dharma-sutra  were  the  production  of 
a  different  author  and  a  later  addition,  the  Pseudo-Apa- 
stamba  would  most  probably  not  have  hit  on  this  peculiar 
irregular  form.  The  repetition  of  the  Sutra,  under  these 
circumstances,  may  be  taken  to  show  that  the  5rauta-sutra 
and  the  Dharma-sutra  belong  to  the  same  author. 

Who  this  author  really  was,  is  a  problem  which  cannot 
be  solved  for  the  present,  and  which  probably  will  always 
remain  unsolved,  because  we  know  his  family  name  only. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 


For  the  form  of  the  word  itself  shows  that  the  name 
Apastamba,  just  Hke  those  of  most  founders  of  Vedic 
schools,  e.  g.  Baudhayana,  Bharadva^,  Aj\'alayana,  Gau- 
tama, is  a  patronymic.  This  circumstance  is,  of  course, 
fatal  to  all  attempts  at  an  identification  of  the  individual 
who  holds  so  prominent  a  place  among  the  teachers  of  the 
Black  Ya^r-veda. 

But  we  are  placed  in  a  somewhat  better  position  with 
respect  to  the  histor>-  of  the  school  which  has  been  named 
after  Apastamba  and  of  the  works  ascribed  to  him.  Re- 
garding both,  some  information  has  been  preser\'ed  by 
tradition,  and  a  little  more  can  be  obtained  from  inscrip- 
tions and  later  works,  while  some  interesting  details  regard- 
ing the  time  when,  and  the  place  where  the  Sutras  were 
composed,  may  be  elicited  from  the  latter  themselves. 
The  data,  obtainable  from  these  sources,  it  is  true,  do  not 
enable  us  to  determine  with  certainty  the  year  when  the 
Apastambiya  school  was  founded,  and  when  its  Sutras 
were  composed.  But  they  make  it  possible  to  ascertain 
the  position  of  the  school  and  of  its  Sutras  in  Vedic  lite- 
rature, their  relative  priority  or  posteriority  as  compared 
with  other  Vedic  schools  and  works,  to  show  with  some 
amount  of  probability  in  what  part  of  India  they  had 
their  origin,  and  to  venture,  at  least,  a  not  altogether 
unsupported  conjecture  as  to  their  probable  antiquity. 

As  regards  the  first  point,  the  -^ara/zavyuha,  a  supple- 
ment of  the  White  Ya^r-veda  which  gives  the  lists  of  the 
Vedic  schools,  informs  us  that  the  Apastambiya  school 
formed  one  of  the  five  branches  of  the  Khaw^ikiya  school, 
which  in  its  turn  was  a  subdivision  of  the  Taittiriyas.  one 
of  the  ancient  sections  of  Brahma;/as  who  study  the  Black 
Ya^r-veda.  Owing  to  the  very  unsatisfactory'  condition 
of  the  text  of  the  /sTara^/avyuha  it  is  unfortunately  not 
possible  to  ascertain  what  place  that  work  really  assigns 
to  the  Apastambiyas  among  the  five  branches  of  the 
Khaw^ikiyas.  Some  MSS.  name  them  first,  and  others 
last.  They  give  either  the  following  list,  i.  Kaleyas 
(Kaletas),  2.  Sa/yayanins,  3.  Hiraz/yakejins,  4.  Bharadva^ins. 
and  5.  Apastambins,  or,  i.  Apastambins,  2.  Baudhayanins, 


XVI  APASTAMBA. 


3.  Satyasharf7/ins,  4.  Hira«yakej-ins,  5.  Aukheyas^.  But 
this  defect  is  remedied  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  now 
generally  current  tradition  that  the  Apastambiyas  are 
younger  than  the  school  of  Baudhayana,  and  older  than 
that  of  Satyasha<a%a  Hira«yakej-in.  Baudhayana,  it  is 
alleged,  composed  the  first  set  of  Siitras  connected  with  the 
Black  Ya^ur-veda,  and  was  succeeded  by  Bharadva^a, 
Apastamba,  and  Satyashad/ia  Hira«yakei-in,  who  all  founded 
schools  which  bear  their  names  ^. 

This  tradition  has  preserved  two  important  pieces  of 
information.  Firstly,  the  Apastamba  school  is  what  Pro- 
fessor Max  Miiller  appropriately  calls  a  Sutra/^arawa,  i.  e.  a 
school  whose  founder  did  not  pretend  to  have  received 
a  revelation  of  Vedic  Mantras  or  of  a  Brahma«a  text,  but 
merely  gave  a  new  systematic  arrangement  of  the  precepts 
regarding  sacrifices  and  the  sacred  law.  Secondly,  the 
Sutras  of  Apastamba  occupy  an  intermediate  position  be- 
tween the  works  of  Baudhayana  and  Hirawyakej-in.  Both 
these  statements  are  perfectly  true,  and  capable  of  being 
supported  by  proofs,  drawn  from  Apastamba's  own  and 
from  other  works. 

As  regards  the  first  point,  Professor  Max  Miiller  has 
already  pointed^  out  that,  though  we  sometimes  find  a 
Brahmawa  of  the  Apastambiyas  mentioned,  the  title  Apa- 
stamba-brahma;/a  is  nothing  but  another  name  of  the 
Taittiriya-brahmawa,  and  that  this  Brahmawa^  in  reality; 
is  always  attributed  to  Tittiri  or  to  the  pupils  of  Vaij-am- 
payana,  who  picked  up  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda  in  the  shape 
of  partridges  (tittiri).  The  same  remark  applies  to  the 
collection  of  the  Mantras  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda,  which, 
likewise,  is  sometimes  named  Apastamba-sawhit^.  The 
irara;?avyuha  states  explicitly  that  the  five   branches  of 

^  Max  Miiller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  371.     A  MS.  of  the  ^aranavyfiha 
with  an  anonymous  commentary,  in  my  possession,  has  the  following  passage  : 

^rAmnl  TJ'q  >|^T  H^flT  I  ^^#TI  ^VT^^'t  ^T^T^R'^  ffl^ni^^ 

^  Max  Miiller  loc.  cit.,p.  194.  These  statements  occur  in  Mahadeva's  commen- 
tary on  the  Hiranyakesi-sfitras ;  see  Weber,  Hist.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  1 10,  2nd  ed. 
*  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  195. 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 


k 


the  Kha«^/ikiya  school,  to  which  the  Apastambiyas  be- 
long, possess  one  and  the  same  recension  of  the  revealed 
texts,  consisting  of  7  Ka;;^as,  44  Praxnas.  651  Anuvakas, 
2198  Pannasis,  19290  Padas\  and  253.868  syllables,  and 
indicates  thereby  that  all  these  five  schools  were  Sutra- 
>tara«as. 

If  we  now  turn  to  Apastamba's  own  works,  we  find  still 
clearer  proof  that  he  laid  no  claim  to  the  title  7?/shi,  or 
inspired  seer  of  Vedic  texts.  For  (Dharma-sutra  T,  2,5,  4-5) 
he  says  distinctly  that  on  account  of  the  prevalent  trans- 
gression of  the  rules  of  studentship  no  T^/shis  are  born 
among  the  Avaras,  the  men  of  later  ages  or  of  modern 
times,  but  that  some,  by  virtue  of  a  residue  of  the  merit 
which  they  acquired  in  former  lives,  become  similar  to 
Rtshis  by  their  knowledge  of  the  \^eda.  A  man  who 
speaks  in  this  manner,  shows  that  he  considers  the  holy 
ages  during  which  the  great  saints  saw  with  their  mind's 
eye  the  uncreated  and  eternal  texts  of  the  Veda  to  be  past, 
and  that  all  he  claims  is  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the 
scriptures  which  had  been  handed  down  to  him.  The  same 
spirit  which  dictated  this  passage  is  also  obsen-able  in  other 
portions  of  the  Dharma-sutra.  For  Apastamba  repeatedly 
contrasts  the  weakness  and  sinfulness  of  the  Avaras.  the 
men  of  his  own  times^  with  the  holiness  of  the  ancient 
sages,  who,  owing  to  the  greatness  of  their  '  lustre,'  were 
able  to  commit  various  forbidden  acts  without  diminishing 
their  spiritual  merit  ■^.  These  utterances  prove  that  Apa- 
stamba considered  himself  a  child  of  the  Kali  Yuga,  the 
age  of  sin,  during  which,  according  to  Hindu  notions,  no 
i?/shis  can  be  born.  If,  therefore,  in  spite  of  this  explicit 
disclaimer,  the  Sawhita  and  the  Brahma;/a  of  the  Black 
Ya^r-veda  are  sometimes  called  Apastamba  or  Apastam- 
biya,  i.e.  belonging  to  Apastamba,  the  meaning  of  this 
expression  can  only  be,  that  they  were  and  are  studied 
and  handed  down  by  the  school,  not  that  its  founder  was 
their  author,  or,  as  the  Hindus  would  say,  saw  them. 

'  See  also  Weber,  Ind.  Lit.,  p.  98,  2nd  ed. 
^  Dharma-sutra  II,  6,  13,  8-10;  II,  10,  27,  4. 

[2]  b 


XVlll  APASTAMBA. 


The  fact  that  Apastamba  confined  his  activity  to  the 
composition  of  SCitras  is  highly  important  for  the  deter- 
mination of  the  period  to  which  he  belonged.  It  clearly 
shows  that  in  his  time  the  tertiary  or  Siitra  period  of  the 
Ya^ur-veda  had  begun.  Whether  we  assume,  with  Professor 
Max  M tiller,  that  the  Sutra  period  was  one  and  the  same 
for  all  the  four  Vedas,  and  fix  its  limits  with  him  between 
600-200  B.C.,  or  whether  we  believe,  as  I  am  inclined  to 
do,  that  the  date  of  the  Slatra  period  differed  for  each 
Veda,  still  the  incontestable  conclusion  is  that  the  origin 
of  the  Apastambiya  school  cannot  be  placed  in  the  early 
t'nres  of  the  Vedic  period,  and  probably  falls  in  the  last 
five  centuries  before  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era. 

The  correctness  of  tie  traditional  statement  that  Apa- 
stamba is  younger  than  Baudhayana  may  be  made  very 
probable  by  the  following  considerations.  Firstly,  Bau- 
dh?yana^s  and  Apastamba's  works  on  Dharma  have  a 
considerable  number  of  Sutras  in  common.  Thus  at  the 
end  of  the  chapter  on  Penances  no  less  than  seven  con- 
secutive Sutras  (Ap.  Dh.  I,  10,  29,  8-14),  prescribing  the 
manner  in  which  outcasts  are  to  live  and  to  obtain  read- 
mission  into  the  Brahmawical  community  for  their  children, 
occur  in  both  treatises.  Besides  this  passage,  there  are 
a  number  of  single  Sutras  ^  which  agree  literally.  Taken 
by  itself  this  agreement  does  not  prove  much,  as  it  may 
be  explained  in  various  ways.  It  may  show  either  that 
Baudhayana  is  older  than  Apastamba,  and  that  the  latter 
borrowed  from  the  former,  or  that  the  reverse  was  the  case. 
It  may  also  indicate  that  both  authors  drew  from  one 
common  source.  But  if  it  is  taken  together  with  two  other 
facts,  it  gains  a  considerable  importance.  Firstly,  Apa- 
stamba holds  in  several  cases  doctrines  which  are  of  a  later 
origin  than  those  held  by  Baudhayana.  With  respect  to 
this  point  the  puritan  opinions  which  Apastamba  puts 
forward  regarding  the  substitutes  for  legitimate  sons  and 


'  E.g.  Ap.  Dh.  I,  I,  2,  30;  I,  I,  3,  6  ;  I,  2,  6,  8-9;  I,  5,  15,  8  are  found  in 
the  Baudh.  Dh.,  Piasna  I,  Adhy&ya  2. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 


regarding  the  appointment  of  widows  (niyoga),  and  his 
restriction  of  the  number  of  marriage-rites,  may  be  adduced 
as  examples.  Like  many  other  ancient  teachers,  Baudha- 
yana  permits  childless  Aryans  to  satisfy  their  craving  for 
representatives  bearing  their  name,  and  to  allay  their  fears 
of  falling  after  death  into  the  regions  of  torment  through 
a  failure  of  the  funeral  oblations,  by  the  affiliation  of 
eleven  kinds  of  substitutes  for  a  legitimate  son.  Illegiti- 
mate sons,  the  illegitimate  sons  of  wives,  the  legitimate  and 
illegitimate  offspring  of  daughters,  and  the  children  of  rela- 
tives, or  even  of  strangers  who  may  be  solemnly  adopted, 
or  received  as  members  of  the  family  without  any  ceremony, 
or  be  acquired  by  purchase,  are  all  allowed  to  take  the 
place  and  the  rights  of  legitimate  sons^.  Apastamba 
declares  his  dissent  from  this  doctrine.  He  allows  legiti- 
mate sons  alone  to  inherit  their  father's  estate  and  to  follow 
the  occupations  of  his  caste,  and  he  explicitly  forbids  the 
sale  and  gift  of  children  2. 

In  like  manner  he  protests  against  the  custom  of  making 
over  childless  widows  to  brothers-in-law  or  other  near  rela- 
tives in  order  to  obtain  sons  who  are  to  offer  the  funeral  obla- 
tions to  the  deceased  husband's  manes,  while  Baudhayana 
has  as  yet  no  scruple  on  the  subject^  Finally,  he  omits 
from  his  list  of  the  marriage-rites  the  Pai^a-^a  vivaha,  where 
the  bride  is  obtained  by  fraud  ■*,  though  it  is  reluctantly 
admitted  by  Baudhayana  and  other  ancient  teachers.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  law  which  placed  the  regular 
continuance  of  the  funeral  oblations  above  all  other  con- 
siderations, and  which  allowed,  in  order  to  secure  this 
object,  even  a  violation  of  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage-tie 
and  other  breaches  of  the  principles  of  morality,  belongs 
to  an  older  order  of  ideas  than  the  stricter  views  of  Apa- 
stamba. It  is  true  that,  according  to  Baudhayana's  own 
statement  ^,  before  his  time  an  ancient  sage  named  Aupa- 

'  West  and  Biihler,  Digest  of  Hindu  Law  Cases,  p.  310,  ist  ed. 
"^  Ap.  Dh.  II,  5, 13, 1-2,  II. 

*  Ap.  Dh.  II,  10,  27,  2-7. 

*  Ap.  Dh.  II,  5,  II  and  12. 

*  West  and  Biihler,  loc.  cit.,  p.  311,  Sutra  24. 

b2 


XX  APASTAMBA. 


^andhani,  who  is  also  mentioned  in  the  vSatapatha-brahmawa, 
had  opposed  the  old  practice  of  taking  substitutes  for  a 
legitimate  son.  It  is  also  very  probable  that  for  a  long 
time  the  opinions  of  the  Brahma;^a  teachers,  who  lived  in 
different  parts  of  India  and  belonged  to  different  schools, 
may  have  been  divided  on  this  subject.  Still  it  seems  very 
improbable  that  of  two  authors  who  both  belong  to  the 
same  Veda  and  to  the  same  school,  the  earlier  one  should 
hold  the  later  doctrine,  and  the  later  one  the  earlier  opinion. 
The  contrary  appears  the  more  probable  assumption.  The 
same  remarks  apply  to  the  cases  of  the  Niyoga  and  of  the 
Talsaka.  marriage. 

The  second  fact,  which  bears  on  the  question  how  the 
identity  of  so  many  Siitras  in  the  two  Dharma-sutras  is  to 
be  explained,  affords  a  still  stronger  proof  of  Apastamba's 
posteriority  to  Baudhayana.  For  on  several  occasions,  it 
appears,  Apastamba  controverts  opinions  which  Baudha- 
yana holds,  or  which  may  be  defended  with  the  help  of 
the  latter's  Sutras.  The  clearest  case  of  this  kind  occurs 
in  the  chapter  on  Inheritance,  where  the  treatment  of  the 
eldest  son  on  the  division  of  the  estate  by  the  father  is 
discussed.  There  Apastamba  gives  it  as  his  own  opinion 
that  the  father  should  make  an  equal  division  of  his  pro- 
perty '  after  having  gladdened  the  eldest  son  by  some 
(choice  portion  of  his)  wealth,'  i.  e.  after  making  him  a 
present  which  should  have  some  value,  but  should  not  be 
so  valuable  as  to  materially  affect  the  equality  of  the 
shares^.  Further  on  he  notices  the  opinions  of  other 
teachers  on  this  subject,  and  states  that  the  practice  advo- 
cated by  some,  of  allowing  the  eldest  alone  to  inherit,  as 
well  as  the  custom  prevailing  in  some  countries,  of  allotting 
to  the  eldest  all  the  father's  gold,  or  the  black  cows,  or  the 
black  iron  and  grain,  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  Vedas.  In  order  to  prove  the  latter  assertion 
he  quotes  a  passage  of  the  Taittiriya  Saw^hiti,  in  which  it 
is  declared  that  '  Manu  divided  his  wealth  among  his  sons,' 
and  no  difference  in  the  treatment  of  the  eldest  son  is  pre- 

*  Ap.  Dh.  II,  6,  13,  13,  and  II,  6, 14,  i. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 


scribed.  He  adds  that  a  second  passage  occurs  in  the 
same  Veda,  which  declares  that  '  they  distinguish  the  eldest 
son  by  (a  larger  portion  of)  the  heritage,'  and  which  thus 
apparently  countenances  the  partiality  for  the  first-born. 
But  this  second  passage,  he  contends,  appealing  to  the 
opinion  of  the  Mimawsists,  is,  like  many  similar  ones, 
merely  a  statement  of  a  fact  which  has  not  the  autho- 
rity of  an  injunction  ^.  If  we  now  turn  to  Baudhayana, 
we  find  that  he  allows  of  three  different  methods  for  the 
distribution  of  the  paternal  estate.  According  to  him, 
either  an  equal  share  may  be  given  to  each  son,  or  the 
eldest  may  receive  the  best  part  of  the  wealth,  or,  also, 
a  preferential  share  of  one  tenth  of  the  whole  property. 
He  further  alleges  that  the  cows,  horses,  goats,  and  sheep 
also  go  to  the  eldest  son.  As  authority  for  the  equal 
division  he  gives  the  first  of  the  two  Vedic  passages  quoted 
above ;  and  for  the  doctrine  that  the  eldest  is  to  receive  the 
best  part  of  the  estate,  he  quotes  the  second  passage  which 
Apastamba  considers  to  be  without  the  force  of  an  injunc- 
tion^. The  fact  that  the  two  authors'  opinions  clash  is 
manifest,  and  the  manner  in  which  Apastamba  tries  to 
show  that  the  second  Vedic  passage  possesses  no  authority, 
clearly  indicates  that  before  his  time  it  had  been  held  to  con- 
tain an  injunction.  As  no  other  author  of  a  Dharma-sfitra 
but  Baudhayana  is  known  to  have  quoted  it,  the  conclusion 
is  that  Apastamba's  remarks  are  directed  against  him.  If 
Apastamba  does  not  mention  Baudhayana  by  name,  the 
reason  probably  is  that  in  olden  times,  just  as  in  the  present 
day,  the  Brahmanical  etiquette  forbad  a  direct  opposition 
against  doctrines  propounded  by  an  older  teacher  who  be- 
longs to  the  same  spiritual  family  (vidyavawj"a)  as  oneself. 
A  similar  case  occurs  in  the  chapter  on  Studentship  ^, 
where  Apastamba,  again  appealing  to  the  Mimawsists, 
combats  the  doctrine  that  pupils  may  eat  forbidden  food, 
such  as  honey,  meat,  and  pungent  condiments,  if  it  is  given 
to  them  as  leavings  by  their  teacher.     Baudhayana  gives 


'  Ap.  Dh.  II,  6,  14,  6-13.  ^  West  acd  Biihler,  loc.  cit.,  p.  309. 

'  Ap.  Dh.  I,  I,  4,  5-7. 


XXll  APASTAMBA. 


no  explicit  rule  on  this  point,  but  the  wording  of  his 
Sutras  is  not  opposed  to  the  doctrine  and  practice,  to 
which  Apastamba  objects.  Baudhayana  says  that  students 
shall  avoid  honey,  meat,  pungent  condiments,  &c. ;  he  fur- 
ther enjoins  that  pupils  are  to  obey  their  teachers  except 
when  ordered  to  commit  crimes  which  cause  loss  of  caste 
(pataniya);  and  he  finally  directs  them  to  eat  the  fragments 
of  food  given  to  them  by  their  teachers.  As  the  eating  of 
honey  and  other  forbidden  substances  is  not  a  crime 
causing  loss  of  caste,  it  is  possible  that  Baudhayana  himself 
may  have  considered  it  the  duty  of  a  pupil  to  eat  any  kind 
of  food  given  by  the  teacher,  even  honey  and  meat.  At  all 
events  the  practice  and  doctrine  which  Apastamba  blames, 
may  have  been  defended  by  the  wording  of  Baudhayana's 
rules. 

The  three  points  which  have  been  just  discussed,  viz.  the 
identity  of  a  number  of  Sutras  in  the  works  of  the  two 
authors,  the  fact  that  Apastamba  advocates  on  some  points 
more  refined  or  puritan  opinions,  and  that  he  labours  to  con- 
trovert doctrines  contained  in  Baudhayana's  Sutras,  give  a 
powerful  support  to  the  traditional  statement  that  he  is 
younger  than  that  teacher.  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  say 
how  great  the  distance  between  the  two  really  is,  Maha- 
deva,  as  stated  above,  places  between  them  only  Bhara- 
dva^a,  the  author  of  a  set  of  Sutras,  which  as  yet  have  not 
been  completely  recovered.  But  it  seems  to  me  not  likely 
that  the  latter  was  his  immediate  predecessor  in  the  vidya- 
\3imsdi  or  spiritual  family  to  which  both  belonged.  For  it 
cannot  be  expected  that  two  successive  heads  of  the  school 
should  each  have  composed  a  Sutra  and  thus  founded  a 
new  branch-school.  It  is  more  probable  that  Baudhayana 
and  Bharadva^a,  as  well  as  the  latter  and  Apastamba,  were 
separated  by  several  intervening  generations  of  teachers, 
who  contented  themselves  with  explaining  the  works  of 
their  predecessors.  The  distance  in  years  between  the  first 
and  the  last  of  the  three  Sutrakaras  must,  therefore,  I 
think,  be  measured  rather  by  centuries  than  by  decades  ^. 

*  The  subjoined  pedigree  of  the  Sutrakaras  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda  will 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIU 


As  regards  the  priority  of  Apastamba  to  the  school  of 
Satyashaa7/a  Hira«yakejin,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about 
the  correctness  of  this  statement.  For  either  Hirawyakei-in 
himself,  or,  at  least,  his  immediate  successors  have  appro- 
priated Apastamba's  Dharma-stitra  and  have  inserted  it 
with  slight  modifications  in  their  own  collection.  The 
alterations  consist  chiefly  in  some  not  verj^  important  addi- 
tionSj  and  in  the  substitution  of  more  intelligible  and 
more  modern  expressions  for  difficult  and  antiquated 
words  ^.  But  they  do  not  extend  so  far  as  to  make  the 
language  of  the  Dharma-sutra  fully  agree  with  that  of  the 
other  sections  of  the  collection,  especially  with  the  Grzhya- 
sutra.  Numerous  discrepancies  between  these  two  parts 
are  observable.  Thus  we  read  in  the  Hira«yakei-i  Gr/hya- 
sutra  that  a  Brahmawa  must,  ordinarily,  be  initiated  in  his 
seventh  year,  while  the  rule  of  the  Dharma-sutra.  which 
is  identical  with  Ap.  Dh.  I,  i,  i,  i8,  prescribes  that  the 
ceremony  shall  take  place  in  the  eighth  year  after  con- 
ception. The  commentators,  Matr/datta  on  the  Grihya.- 
sutra  and  Mahadeva  on  the  Dharma-sutra,  both  state  that 
the  rule  of  the  Gn'hya-sutra  refers  to  the  seventh  year 
after  birth,  and,  therefore,  in  substance  agrees  with  the 
Dharma-sutra.     They  are    no  doubt   right.     But  the  dif- 

perhaps  make  the  above  remarks  and  my  interpretation  of  the  statements  of  the 
iTarawa-vyllha  and  of  Mahadeva  more  intelligible : — 

KhanJika,  taught  the  Taittirlya  recension  of  the  Black  YaoTir-veda. 

(Successors  of  Kh&ruiiks.,  number  unknown,  down  to) 
Baudliayana,  ist  Sutrakara,  and  foimder  of  Baudhayana-^arawa. 

(Successors  of  Baudhayana  down  to  fellow-pupil  of  Bharadva^^  number  unknown.) 
(Successors  of  Baudhayana  after  the  schism  down  to  the  present  day.) 
Bharadvao-a,  2nd  Sutrakara,  and  founder  of  Bharadvao-a-iarawa. 

(Successors  of  Bharadva^  down  to  fellow-pupil  of  Apastamba,  number  unknown.) 
(Successors  after  the  schism  down  to  the  present  day.) 
Apastamba,  3rd  Sutrakara,  and  founder  of  Apastamba-*ara«a. 

(Successors  of  Apastamba  down  to  fellow-pupil  of  Satyasha^/ia  Hira«yakerin,  number 
unknown. ) 
(Successors  of  Apastamba  down  to  the  present  day.) 
SatyashaJAa   Hira/zyakesin,  4th  Sutrakara,  and  founder  of  Hira«yakesi- 
karana.. 
(Successors  of  Satyasha/tta  Hiranyakerin  down  to  the  present  day.) 

After  the  schism  of  SatyashaifAa  Hira'iyakesin  the  pedigree  has  not  been  con- 
tinued, though  Mahadeva  asserts  that  several  other  Siitrakaras  arose.  But  to 
work  it  out  further  would  be  useless. 

'  See  the  notes  to  my  edition  of  the  text  of  the  Ap.  Dh.  passim. 


XXIV  APASTAMBA. 


ference  in  the  wording  shows  that  the  two  sections  do  not 
belong  to  the  same  author.  The  same  inference  may  be 
drawn  from  the  fact  that  the  Hira;zyakei-i  Grzhya-sutra, 
which  is  much  longer  than  Apastamba's,  includes  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  matter  which  refers  to  the  sacred  law, 
and  which  is  repeated  in  the  Dharma-siltra,  According  to 
a  statement  which  I  have  heard  from  several  learned  Brah- 
mawas,  the  followers  of  Hira^zyakei-in,  when  pronouncing 
the  sawkalpa  or  solemn  pledge  to  perform  a  ceremony, 
declare  themselves  to  be  members  of  the  Hirawyake^yi 
school  that  forms  a  subdivision  of  Apastamba's  (apastam- 
bantargatahirawyake.yij'akhadhyayi  .  .  .  aham).  But  I  have 
not  been  able  to  find  these  words  in  the  books  treating  of 
the  ritual  of  the  Hirawyakej-ins,  such  as  the  Mahej'abha/'/i. 
If  this  assertion  could  be  further  corroborated,  it  would  be 
an  additional  strong  proof  of  the  priority  of  Apastamba, 
which,  however,  even  without  it  may  be  accepted  as  a  fact. 
The  distance  in  time  between  the  two  teachers  is  probably 
not  as  great  as  that  between  Apastamba  and  Baudhayana, 
as  Mahadeva  mentions  no  intermediate  Stitrakara  between 
them.     Still  it  is  probably  not  less  than  lOO  or  150  years. 

The  results  of  the  above  investigation  which  show  that  the 
origin  of  the  Apastamba  school  falls  in  the  middle  of  the  Siitra 
period  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda,  and  that  its  Sfttras  belong 
to  the  later,  though  not  to  the  latest  products  of  Vedic  litera- 
ture, are  fully  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  quotations 
from  and  references  to  Vedic  and  other  books  contained  in 
Apastamba's  Sdtras,  and  especially  in  the  Dharma-sutra.  We 
find  that  all  the  four  Vedas  are  quoted  or  referred  to.  The 
three  old  ones,  the  Rtk,  Ya^us,  and  Saman,  are  mentioned 
both  separately  and  collectively  by  the  name  trayi  vidya, 
i.  e.  threefold  sacred  science,  and  the  fourth  is  called  not 
Atharvangirasa//,  as  is  done  in  most  ancient  Sutras,  but 
Atharva-veda  ^.  The  quotations  from  the  Rik  and  Saman 
are  not  very  numerous.  But  a  passage  from  the  ninth 
Ma«(^ala  of  the  former,  which  is  referred  to  Dh.  I,  i,  3,  2,  is 
of  some  extent,  and  shows  that  the  recension  which  Apa- 


*  Ap.  Dh.  II,  II,  29, 1  2. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 


stamba  knew,  did  not  differ  from  that  which  still  exists. 
As  Apastamba  was  an  adherent  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda, 
he  quotes  it,  especially  in  the  6"rauta-sutra,  very  frequently, 
and  he  adduces  not  only  texts  from  the  Mantra-sawhita, 
but  also  from  the  Taittiriya-brahmawa  and  Arawyaka.  The 
most  important  quotations  from  the  latter  work  occur  Dh. 
II,  2,  3,  16-II,  2,  4,  9,  w^here  all  the  Mantras  to  be  recited 
during  the  performance  of  the  Bali-offerings  are  enumerated. 
Their  order  agrees  exactly  with  that  in  which  they  stand 
in  the  sixty-seventh  Anuvaka  of  the  tenth  Prapa///aka  of 
the  recension  of  the  Ara;/yaka  which  is  current  among  the 
Andhra-brahma;/as  ^.  This  last  point  is  of  considerable 
importance,  both  for  the  history  of  the  text  of  that  book 
and,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  for  the  history  of  the  Apa- 
stambiya  school. 

The  White  Ya^r-veda,  too,  is  quoted  frequently  in  the 
>S"rauta-s<jtra  and  once  in  the  section  on  Dharma  by  the 
title  Va^asaneyaka,  while  twice  its  Brahmawa,  the  Va^- 
saneyi-brahma;/a,  is  cited.  The  longer  of  the  two  passages, 
taken  from  the  latter  work,  Dh.  I,  4,  12,  3,  does,  however, 
not  fully  agree  with  the  published  text  of  the  Madhyandina 
recension.  Its  wording  possesses  just  sufficient  resemblance 
to  allow  us  to  identify  the  passage  which  Apastamba 
meant,  but  differs  from  the  5atapatha-brahma«a  in  many 
details.  As  it  is  known  that  the  Brahma/za  of  the  Va^a- 
saneyins  existed  in  several  recensions,  among  which  the 
Ka«va  jakha  was  the  oldest^,  and  as  a  teacher  of  that 
name  is  quoted  by  Apastamba  as  an  authority  on  the 
sacred  law,  it  is  not  iqjprobable  that  Apastamba's  quota- 
tion is  taken  from  the  Ka«va  recension,  and  that  the  now 
more  common  Madhyandina  sakha.  was  unknown  to  him. 
As  regards  the  Atharva-veda,  Apastamba  giveS;,  besides  the 
reference  mentioned  above  and  a  second  to  the  Angirasa- 
pavitra^,  an  abstract  of  a  long  passage  from  Atharva-veda 
XV,io-i3,  regarding  the  treatment  of  aVratya,  i.e.  a  learned 

^  The  Taittiriya  Aranyaka  exists  in  three  recensions,  the  Drzyida.,  Kar«a/a, 
and  the  Andhra,  the  first  of  which  has  been  commented  on  by  Sayana. 
'  See  the  passage  from  the  JS^ara«a^•)'uhabhashya  given  below,  ver.  lo. 
»  Ap.  Dh.  I,  2,  2,  2. 


XXVI  APASTAMBA. 


mendicant  Brahma«a,  who  really  deserves  the  title  of  atithi, 
or  guest  ^  It  is  true  that  Apastamba,  in  the  passage  re- 
ferred to,  does  not  say  that  his  rule  is  based  on  the  Atharva- 
veda.  He  merely  says  that  a  Brahma;/a  is  his  authority. 
But  it  seems,  nevertheless,  certain  that  by  the  expression 
a  Brahma^^a,  the  Brahma;/a-like  fifteenth  book  of  the 
Atharva-veda  is  meant>  as  the  sentences  to  be  addressed  by 
the  host  to  his  guest  agree  literally  with  those  which  the 
Atharva-veda  prescribes  for  the  reception  of  a  Vratya. 
Haradatta  too,  in  his  commentary,  expresses  the  same 
opinion.  Actual  quotations  from  the  Atharva-veda  are  not 
frequent  in  Vedic  literature,  and  the  fact  that  Apastamba's 
Dharma-sutra  contains  one,  is,  therefore,  of  some  interest. 

Besides  these  Vedic  texts,  Apastamba  mentions,  also, 
the  Angas  or  auxiliary  works,  and  enumerates  six  classes, 
viz.  treatises  on  the  ritual  of  the  sacrifices,  on  grammar, 
astronomy,  etymology,  recitation  of  the  Veda,  and  metrics  ^. 
The  number  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  considered  the 
correct  one  in  our  days  ^. 

As  the  Dharma-sutra  names  no  less  than  nine  teachers  in 
connexion  with  various  topics  of  the  sacred  law,  and  fre- 
quently appeals  to  the  opinion  of  some  (eke),  it  follows 
that  a  great  many  such  auxiliary  treatises  must  have 
existed  in  Apastamba's  time.  The  A/^aryas  mentioned 
are  Eka,  Ka^^va,  Kawva,  Ku«ika,  Kutsa,  Kautsa,  Push- 
karasadi,  Varshyayawi,  vSvetaketu,  and  Harita^.  Some  of 
these  persons,  like  Harita  and  Ka«va,  are  known  to  have 
composed  Siitras  on  the  sacred  law,  and  fragments  or 
modified  versions  of  their  works  are  still  in  existence, 
while  Ka;/va,  Kautsa,  Pushkarasadi  or  Paushkarasadi,  as 
the  correct  form  of  the  name  is,  and  Varshyayawi  are 
quoted  in  the  Nirukta,  the  Pratij-akhyas,  and  the  Varttikas 
on  Pacini  as  authorities  on  phonetics,  etymology,  and 
grammar  ^.  Ka«va,  finally,  is  considered  the  author  of  the 
still  existing  Kalpa-sutras  of  the  Kanva.  school,  which  has 

»  Ap.  Dh.  II,  3,  7,  12-17.  2  ^p  j3j^  jj^  ^^  g^  jQ 

^  See  also  Max  Miiller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  iii. 

*  Ap.  Dh.  I,  6, 19,  3-8  ;  I,  10,  28,  1-2  ;  I.  4,  13, 10  ;  I,  6,  iS,  2  ;  I,  6,  19,  1 2  ; 
I,  10,  28,  5,  16;  I,  10,  29,12-16. 

*  Max  Miiller,  loc.  cit.,  p.  142. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll 


been  mentioned  above.  It  seems  not  improbable  that  most 
of  these  teachers  were  authors  of  complete  sets  of  Angas. 
Their  position  in  Vedic  literature,  however,  except  as  far 
as  Kawva,  Harita,  and  6"vetaketu  are  concerned,  is  diffi- 
cult to  define,  and  the  occurrence  of  their  names  throws 
less  light  on  the  antiquity  of  the  Apastambiya  school  than 
might  be  expected.  Regarding  Harita  it  must,  however,  be 
noticed  that  he  is  one  of  the  oldest  authors  of  Sutras,  and 
that  he  is  quoted  by  Baudhayana,  Apastamba's  predecessor. 
The  bearing  of  the  occurrence  of  5vetaketu's  name  will  be 
discussed  below. 

Of  even  greater  interest  than  the  names  of  the  teachers 
are  the  indications  which  Apastamba  gives,  that  he  knew 
two  of  the  philosophical  schools  which  still  exist  in  India, 
viz.  the  Pilr\'a  or  Karma  Mima7//sa  and  the  Vedanta.  As 
regards  the  former,  he  mentions  it  by  its  ancient  name, 
Nyaya,  which  in  later  times  and  at  present  is  usually 
applied  to  the  doctrine  of  Gautama  Akshapada.  In  two 
passages  ^  he  settles  contested  points  on  the  authority  of 
those  who  know  the  Nyaya,  i.  e.  the  Purva  ^^limawsa,  and 
in  several  other  cases  he  adopts  a  line  of  reasoning  which 
fully  agrees  with  that  followed  in  G^aimini's  Mimaw/sa-sutras. 
Thus  the  arguments-,  that  'a  revealed  text  has  greater 
weight  than  a  custom  from  which  a  revealed  text  may  be 
inferred,'  and  that '  no  text  can  be  inferred  from  a  custom 
for  which  a  worldly  motive  is  apparent,'  exactly  correspond 
with  the  teaching  of  (S^aimini's  Mimawsa-sutras  I,  3,  3-4. 
The  wording  of  the  passages  in  the  two  works  does  not 
agree  so  closely  that  the  one  could  be  called  a  quotation 
of  the  other.  But  it  is  evident,  that  if  Apastamba  did  not 
know  the  Mimawsa-siitras  of  C^aimini,  he  must  have  pos- 
sessed some  other  very  similar  work.  As  to  the  Vedanta, 
Apastamba  does  not  mention  the  name  of  the  school. 
But  Kha.fid3.s  22,  23  of  the  fir^tj'a/ala  of  the  Dharma-sutra  X  ^  A 
unmistakably  contain  the  chief  tenets  of  the  Vedantists,  and  ' 

recommend  the  acquisition  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Atman 
as   the   best    means   for    purifying    the   souls    of   sinners. 


1  Ap.  Dh.  II,  4,  8,  13  ;  II,  6,  14,  I; 
*  Ap.  Dh.  I,  I,  14,  S,  9-10. 


XXVlll  APASTAMBA. 


Though  these  two  Kha«(fas  are  chiefly  filled  with  quota- 
tions, which,  as  the  commentator  states,  are  taken  from  an 
Upanishad,  still  the  manner  of  their  selection,  as  well  as 
Apastamba's  own  words  in  the  introductory  and  concluding 
StJtras,  indicates  that  he  knew  not  merely  the  unsystematic 
speculations  contained  in  the  Upanishads  and  Ara^yakas, 
but  a  well-defined  system  of  Vedantic  philosophy  identical 
with  that  of  Badaraya«a's  Brahma-sutras.  The  fact  that 
Apastamba's  Dharma-sutra  contains  indications  of  the  ex- 
istence of  these  two  schools  of  philosophy,  is  significant 
as  the  Purva  Mima7«sa  occurs  in  one  other  Dharma-sCitra 
only,  that  attributed  to  V^sishf/ia,  and  as  the  name  of  the 
Vedanta  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  prose  treatises  on  the 
sacred  law. 

Of  non-Vedic  works  Apastamba  mentions  the  Furana.. 
The  Dharma-stJitra  not  only  several  times  quotes  passages 
from  '  a  Pura«a '  as  authorities  for  its  rules  ^,  but  names  in 
one  case  the  Bhavishyat-purawa  as  the  particular  Pura«a 
from  which  the  quotation  is  taken '^.  References  to  the 
Purawa  in  general  are  not  unfrequent  in  other  Sutras  on 
the  sacred  law,  and  even  in  older  Vedic  works.  But 
Apastamba,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  the  only  Sutrakara  who 
specifies  the  title  of  a  particular  Purawa,  and  names  one 
which  is  nearly  identical  with  that  of  a  work  existing  in 
the  present  day.  For  among  the  so-called  Upa-pura;?as 
we  find  one  of  considerable  extent  which  bears  the  title 
Bhavishya-purawa^  It  is  true  that  the  passage  quoted  in 
the  Dharma-sutra  from  the  Bhavishyat-pura^^a  is  not  to  be 
found  in  the  copy  of  the  Bhavishya-pura«a  which  I  have 
seen,  and  that  the  two  titles  differ  by  one  letter.  It  is, 
therefore,  not  possible  to  assert  positively  that  Apastamba 
knew  the  present  Bhavishya-pura;za.  Still  considering  the 
close  resemblance  of  the  two  titles,  and  taking  into  account 
the  generally  admitted  fact  that  most  if  not  all  Purawas 
have  been    remodelled  and   recast*,  it  seems   to    me  not 

^  Ap.  Dh.  I,  6,  |9^  t3  ;  I,;jo,  29,  7.  ^  Ap.  Dh.  II,  9,  24,  6. 

'  Aufrecht,  Oxford  Catalogue,.p.  30. 

*  Max  Miiller,  Hist.  7Vpc.,Sansl^..-Lit.,  pp.  40-42.     W-'eber,  Literaturgeschichte, 
pp.  206-208.     Though  I  fully  subscribe  to  the  opinion,  held  by  the  most  illus- 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 


unlikely  that  Apastamba's  authority  was  the  original  on 
which  the  existing  Upa-purd//a  is  based.  It  is.  of  course, 
not  admissible,  at  present,  to  found  far-going  speculations 
on  this  hypothesis.  But  whether  that  hypothesis  may 
prove  tenable  or  not,  the  occurrence  of  a  special  Pura-'/a 
title  in  our  Dharma-sQtra  will  remain  of  great  interest  both 
for  the  history  of  the  Pura;/as  and  of  the  Apastambiya- 
sutras. 

There  is  yet  another  point  on  which  Apastaraba  shows 
a  remarkable  agreement  with  a  theory  which  is  prevalent 
in  later  Sanskrit  literature.  He  says  (Dh.  II,  ii,  29, 
11-12),  'The  knowledge  which  ^udras  and  women  possess, 
is  the  completion  of  all  study,'  and  *  they  declare  that  this 
knowledge  is  a  supplement  of  the  Atharva-veda.'  The 
commentator  remarks  with  reference  to  these  two  Sutras, 
that  '  the  knowledge  which  5udras  and  women  possess,"  is 
the  knowledge  of  dancing,  acting,  music,  and  other  branches 
of  the  so-called  Arthaj^astra,  the  science  of  useful  arts  and 
of  trades,  and  that  the  object  of  the  Siltras  is  to  forbid 
the  study  of  such  subjects  before  the  acquisition  of  sacred 
learning.  His  interpretation  is,  without  doubt,  correct,  as 
similar  sentiments  are  expressed  byother  teachers  in  parallel 
passages.    But.  if  it  is  accepted,  Apastamba's  remark  that 

trious  Sanskritists,  that,  in  general,  the  existing  Pura-'ias  are  not  identical  \vith 
the  works  designafed  by  that  title  in  Vedic  works,  still  I  cannot  believe  that 
they  are  altogether  independent  of  the  latter.  Xor  can  I  agree  to  the  assertion 
that  the  Puranas  known  to  us,  one  and  all,  are  not  older  than  the  tenth  or 
eleventh  century  a.  d.  One  important  fact  bearing  on  the  latter  point  may  be 
mentioned  here,  viz.  that  the  poet  Ba^a,  who  wrote  shortly  after  600  a.  d.,  in 
the  S'riharshajtarita,  orders  hisPaura«ika  to  recite  the Pavanaprokta-purawa,  i.e. 
the  Vayu-pura«a  (.S'riharshaiarita,  p.  6f,  Calcutta  ed.)  Dr.  Hall,  the  discoverer 
of  the  life  of  5raharsha,  read  in  his  copy  Yavanaprokta-pura/ia,  a  title  which, 
as  he  remarks,  might  suggest  the  idea  that  Bajta.  knew  the  Greek  epic  poetrj-. 
But  a  comparison  of  the  excellent  Ahmadabad  and  Benares  Devanagari  MSS. 
and  of  the  Ka^mir  5arada  copies  shows  that  the  correct  reading  is  the  one 
given  above.  The  earlier  history  of  the  Pura/tas,  which  as  yet  is  a  myster}-, 
will  only  be  cleared  up  when  a  real  history  of  the  orthodox  Hindu  sects, 
especially  of  the  -Sivites  and  Vishnuites,  has  been  written.  It  will,  then,  pro- 
bably become  apparent  that  the  origin  of  these  sects  reaches  back  far  beyor^d 
the  rise  of  Buddhism  and  Jainism.  It  will  also  be  proved  that  the  orthodox 
sects  used  Pura^as  as  text  books  for  popular  readings,  the  Pura/iapaiAana  of 
our  days,  and  that  some,  at  least,  of  the  now  existing  Pura/ias  are  the  latest 
recensions  of  those  mentioned  in  Vedic  books. 


XXX  APASTAMBA. 


'  the  knowledge  of  5iidras  and  women  is  a  supplement 
of  the  Atharva-veda,'  proves  that  he  knew  the  division  of 
Hindu  learning  which  is  taught  in  Madhustidana  Sarasvati's 
Prasthanabheda  \  For  Madhusudana  allots  to  each  Veda 
an  Upa-veda  or  supplementary  Veda,  and  asserts  that  the 
Upa-veda  of  the  Atharva-veda  is  the  Arthaxastra.  The 
agreement  of  Apastamba  with  the  modern  writers  on  this 
point,  furnishes,  I  think,  an  additional  argument  that  he 
belongs  to  the  later  Vedic  schoolmen. 

In  addition  to  this  information  regarding  the  relative 
position  of  the  Apastambiya  school  in  ancient  Sanskrit 
literature,  we  possess  some  further  statements  as  to  the 
part  of  India  to  which  it  belongs,  and  these,  as  it  happens, 
are  of  great  importance  for  fixing  approximately  the  period 
in  which  the  school  arose.  According  to  the  Brahmanical 
tradition,  which  is  supported  by  a  hint  contained  in  the 
Dharma-sutra  and  by  information  derivable  from  inscrip- 
tions and  the  actual  state  of  things  in  modern  India,  the 
Apastambtyas  belong  to  Southern  India,  and  their  founder 
probably  was  a  native  of  or  resided  in  the  Andhra  country. 
The  existence  of  this  tradition,  which  to  the  present  day 
prevails  among  the  learned  Brahmans  of  Western  India 
and  Benares,  may  be  substantiated  by  a  passage  from  the 
above-mentioned  commentary  of  the  T^arawavyuha^,  which, 

'  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  I,  1-24. 

2  iTarawavyuhabhashya,  fol.  1 5%  1.  4  seqq. : — 

^cfT  ^f^d  Hin  (sic)  ^Tq'5T*^l^c5T^T"  I 

^T^>^j>Tm  ^  ii5«^.*iifwTf7R:  II  ^u 

^FJI^Tj^^  ^^W3c5T^^'i  lis II 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 


though  written  in  barbarous  Sanskrit,  and  of  quite  modern 
origin,  possesses  great  interest,  because  its  description  of 
the  geographical  distribution  of  the  Vedas  and  Vedic 
schools  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.  The  verses  from 
a  work  entitled  Mahar;/ava,  which  are  quoted  there, 
state  that  the  earth,  i.  e.  India,  is  divided  into  two  equal 
halves  by  the  river  Narmada  (Nerbudda),  and  that  the 
school  of  Apastamba  prevails  in  the  southern  half  (ver.  2). 
It  is  further  alleged  (ver.  6)  that  the  Ya^r-veda  of  Tittiri 
and  the  Apastambiya  school  are  established  in  the  Andhra 
country  and  other  parts  of  the  south  and  south-east  up  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Godavari  (godasagara-avadhi).  According 
to  the  Mahar«ava  the  latter  river  marks,  therefore,  the 
northern  frontier  of  the  territory  occupied  by  the  Apa- 
stambiyas,  which  comprises  the  Mard///a  and  Kawara  dis- 
tricts of  the  Bombay  Presidency,  the  greater  part  of  the 
Nizam's  dominions,  and  the  Madras  Presidency,  with  the 
exception  of  the  northern  Sirkars  and  the  western  coast. 
This  allegation  agrees,  on  the  whole,  with  the  actual  facts 
which  have  fallen  under  my  observation.  A  great  number 
of  the  De^astha-brahmawas  in  the  Nasik,  Pu;/a,  Ahmad- 
nagar,  Satara,  Sholapur,  and  Kolhapur  districts,  and  of  the 
Ka;/ara  or  Kar;/a/aka-brahma;/as  in  the  Belgam,  Dh^rva^, 
Kaladghi,  and  Karva^  collectorates,  as  well  as  a  smaller 

Twt  ^^  ^  «f6^-M*lftiT:  [^:  Mf<<*lf#rn:]  1 
^iHiin^^rv{jiiiiM4ljn<^i^iJK  ^^^f^  (sic)  I 

W^ir^MldK^HlPji^li  ^^TrarnTi^^  (sic)  I 
f^Tinn^[f^]^Tren  M5J<-I*<W  (sic)  ^ftf^  U«9  II 

»nTrq%iTT#^  TR^i;^w:  1 

smn  ^n[^]y=M^5ir^  Wnrot  nfTTf^rn  iitii 

iH^-^^-cfcfc^^-i'a  eh  Mint  (1)  ntrrenn  (sic)  1 

^Tsra^ffhr  [^]  ^jrmr  ^  *mqf^  Tirrifatu  iiqii 

^jfwr  ^isi^'^H  ^^^  r^wrii  I 

^n«h1*i  [^]  ^^  TT^Ri  ^^[^rnFj^^fii  u<joii 


XXXU  APASTAMBA. 


number  among  the  i^Tittapavanas  of  the  Konka«a  are  Apa- 
stambiyas.  Of  the  Nizam's  dominions  and  the  Madras 
Presidency  I  possess  no  local  knowledge.  But  I  can  say 
that  I  have  met  many  followers  of  Apastamba  among  the 
Telingana-brahmawas  settled  in  Bombay,  and  that  the  fre- 
quent occurrence  of  MSS.  containing  the  Sutras  of  the 
Apastambiya  school  in  the  Madras  Presidency  proves  that 
the  /Tarawa  there  must  count  many  adherents.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  have  never  met  with  any  Apastambiyas  among  the 
ancient  indigenous  subdivisions  of  the  Brahmanical  com- 
munity dwelling  north  of  the  Mara//^a  country  and  north 
of  the  Narmada.  A  few  Brahma;zas  of  this  school,  no 
doubt,  are  scattered  over  Gujarat  and  Central  India,  and 
others  are  found  in  the  great  places  of  pilgrimage  in  Hin- 
dustan proper.  The  former  mostly  have  immigrated  during 
the  last  century,  following  the  Mara^'//a  chieftains  who  con- 
quered large  portions  of  those  countries,  or  have  been 
imported  in  the  present  century  by  the  Mara//^a  rulers 
of  Gwalior,  Indor,  and  Baroda.  The  settlers  in  Benares, 
Mathura,  and  other  sacred  cities  also,  have  chiefly  come  in 
modern  times,  and  not  unfrequcntly  live  on  the  bounty  of 
the  Mara/^a  princes.  But  all  of  them  consider  themselves 
and  are  considered  by  the  Brahmawas,  who  are  indigenous 
in  those  districts  and  towns,  as  aliens,  with  whom  inter- 
marriage and  commensality  are  not  permitted.  The  indi- 
genous sections  of  the  Brahmaz/as  of  Gujarat,  such  as  the 
Nagaras,  Khe</avals,  Bhargavas,  Kapilas,  and  Motalas, 
belong,  if  they  are  adherents  of  the  Ya^ur-veda,  to  the 
Madhyandina  or  KAnva.  schools  of  the  White  Ya^ur-veda. 
The  same  is  the  case  with  the  Brahma/^as  of  Ra^putana, 
Hindustan,  and  the  Pari^ab.  In  Central  India,  too,  the 
White  Ya^r-veda  prevails ;  but,  besides  the  two  schools 
mentioned  above,  there  are  still  some  colonies  of  Maitraya- 
mya.s  or  M^navas^.  It  seems,  also,  that  the  restriction  of 
the  Apastambiya  school  to  the  south  of  India,  or  rather  to 
those  subdivisions  of  the    Brahmanical  community  which 

^  See  Bhau  Da^i,  Joum.  Bombay  Br.  Roy.  As.  See.  X,  40.    The  Maitraya/iiyas 
in  G  u^arat,  of  whom  the  i^arawavyuha  speaks,  have  died  out. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXlll 


for  a  long  time  have  been  settled  in  the  south  and  are 
generally  considered  as  natives  of  the  south,  is  not  of 
recent  date.  For  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  the  numerous 
ancient  landgrants  which  have  been  found  all  over  India 
indicate  exactly  the  same  state  of  things.  I  am  not  aware 
that  on  any  grant  issued  by  a  king  of  a  northern  dynasty 
to  Brahma;/as  who  are  natives  of  the  northern  half  of 
India,  an  Apastambiya  is  mentioned  as  donee.  But  among 
the  southern  landgrants  there  are  several  on  which  the 
name  of  the  school  appears.  Thus  in  a  jasana  of  king 
Harihara  of  Vidyanagara,  dated  5aka  sawvat  131 7  or 
1395-96  A,  D.,  one  of  the  recipients  of  the  royal  bounty 
is  'the  learned  Ananta  Dikshita,  son  of  Ramabha//a,  chief 
of  the  Apastambya  (read  Apastambiya)  i-akha,  a  scion  of 
the  Vasish/Z^a  gotra  \'  Again,  on  an  ancient  set  of  plates 
written  in  the  characters  which  usually  are  called  cave- 
characters,  and  issued  by  the  Pallava  king  Siwhavarman  11, 
we  find  among  the  donees  five  Apastambhiya  -  Brahma;/as, 
who,  together  with  a  Hairawyakesa.  a  Va^asaneya,  and 
a  Sama-vedi,  received  the  village  of  Mangadur,  in  Vengo- 
r4sh/ra".  This  inscription  is,  to  judge  from  the  characters, 
thirteen  to  fourteen  hundred  years  old,  and  on  this  account 
a  very  important  witness  for  the  early  existence  of  the 
Apastambiyas  in  Southern  India. 

Under  the  circumstances  just  mentioned,  a  casual  remark- 
made  by  Apastamba,  in  describing  the  5raddhas  or  funeral 
oblations,  acquires  considerable  importance.  He  says  (Dh. 
II,  7,  17, 17)  that  the  custom  of  pouring  water  in  the  hands 
of  Brahma;/as  invited  to  a  5raddha  prevails  among  the 
northerners,  and  he  indicates  thereby  that  he  himself 
does  not  belong  to  the  north  of  India.  If  this  staterr.ent 
is  taken  together  with  the  above-stated  facts,  which  tend 


*  Colebrooke,  Essays,  II,  p.  264,  ver.  24  (Madras  ed.) 

*  Apastambhiya  for  Apastambiya  may  be  a  mistake.  But  it  ought  to  be 
noted  that  Devapala's  commentary  on  the  Ka/'aka  Gn'hyasutra  has  Apa.- 
stambha  for  Apastamba. 

'  Ind.  Ant.  V,  135.  Mr.  Fleet  informs  me  that  an  unpublished  grant  o.  the 
Eastern  Chalukya  king  Vinayaditya  II  'ninth  century  a.  d,)  mentions  a  number 
of  Apastambiyas  as  t'.onets. 

[2]  C 


XXXIV  APASTAMBA. 


to  show  that  the  Apastambiyas  were  and  are  restricted  to 
the  south  of  India,  the  most  probable  construction  which 
can  be  put  on  it  is  that  Apastamba  declares  himself  to  be 
a  southerner.  There  is  yet  another  indication  to  the  same 
effect  contained  in  the  Dharma-sutra.  It  has  been  pointed 
out  above  that  the  recension  of  the  Taittiriya  Arawyaka 
which  Apastamba  recognises  is  that  called  the  Andhra 
text  or  the  version  current  in  the  Andhra  country,  by 
which  term  the  districts  in  the  south-east  of  India  between 
the  Godavari  and  the  Krzshwa  have  to  be  understood  ^. 
Now  it  seems  exceedingly  improbable  that  aVedic  teacher 
would  accept  as  authoritative  any  other  version  of  a  sacred 
work  except  that  which  was  current  in  his  native  country. 
It  would  therefore  follow,  from  the  adoption  of  an  Andhra 
text  by  Apastamba,  that  he  was  born  in  that  country,  or, 
at  least,  had  resided  there  so  long  as  to  have  become  natu- 
ralised in  it.  With  respect  to  this  conclusion  it  must  also 
be  kept  in  mind  that  the  above-quoted  passage  from  the 
Maharwava  particularly  specifies  the  Andhra  country 
(andhradi)  as  the  seat  of  the  Apastambiyas.  It  may  be 
that  this  is  due  to  an  accident.  But  it  seems  to  me  more 
probable  that  the  author  of  the  Maharwava  wished  to  mark 
the  Andhra  territory  as  the  chief  and  perhaps  as  the  ori- 
ginal residence  of  the  Apastambiyas. 

This  discovery  has,  also,  a  most  important  bearing  on  the 
question  of  the  antiquity  of  the  school  of  Apastamba.  It 
fully  confirms  the  result  of  the  preceding  enquiry,  viz.  that 
the  Apastambiyas  are  one  of  the  later  i^arawas.  For  the 
south  of  India  and  the  nations  inhabiting  it,  such  as 
Kalingas,  Dravi^^as,  Andhras,  A'olas,  and  Tandyas, 
do  not  play  any  important  part  in  the  ancient  Brahmanical 
traditions  and  in  the  ancient  history  of  India,  the  centre  of 
both  of  which  lies  in  the  north-west  or  at  least  north  of  the 
Vindhya  range.  Hitherto  it  has  not  been  shown  that  the 
south  and  the  southern  nations  are  mentioned  in  any  of  the 
Vedic  Sa;;^hitas.  In  the  Brahmawas  and  in  the  Sfitras 
they  do  occur,  though  they  are  named  rarely  and  in  a  not 

*  See  Cunningham,  Geography,  p.  527  seqq. ;  Burnell,  South  Ind.  Pal.,  p.  14, 
note  2. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 


compHmentar}'^  manner.  Thus  the  Aitareya-brahmawa 
gives  the  names  of  certain  degraded,  barbarous  tribes,  and 
among  them  that  of  the  Andhras^  in  whose  country,  as 
has  been  shown,  the  Apastambiyas  probably  originated. 
Again,  Baudhayana,  in  his  Dharma-sutra  I,  i,  quotes  some 
verses  in  which  it  is  said  that  he  who  visits  the  Kalingas 
must  purify  himself  by  the  performance  of  certain  sacrifices 
in  order  to  become  fit  for  again  associating  with  Arj'ans, 
The  same  author,  also,  mentions  distinctive  forbidden 
practices  (a^ara)  prevailing  in  the  south  (loc.  cit.)  Further, 
Pacini's  grammatical  Sutras  and  Katyayana's  Varttikas 
thereon  contain  rules  regarding  several  words  which  pre- 
suppose an  acquaintance  with  the  south  and  the  kingdoms 
which  flourished  there.  Thus  Pa;nni,  IV,  2,  98,  teaches  the 
formation  of  dakshiwatya  in  the  sense  of  '  belonging  to  or 
living  in  the  south  or  the  Dekhan,'  and  a  Varttika  of 
Katyayana  on  Pawini.  IV,  1,  175,  states  the  words  A'ola 
and  Vandya.  are  used  as  names  of  the  princes  ruling  over 
the  Kola,  and  Fandya  countries,  which,  as  is  known  from 
history,  were  situated  in  the  extreme  south  of  India.  The 
other  southern  nations  and  a  fuller  description  of  the  south 
occur  first  in  the  oMahabharata  ^.  While  an  acquaintance 
with  the  south  can  thus  be  proved  only  by  a  few  books 
belonging  to  the  later  stages  of  Vedic  literature,  several  of 
the  southern  kingdoms  are  named  already  in  the  oldest 
historical  documents.  Aj'oka  in  his  edicts^,  which  date 
from  the  second  half  of  the  third  century  B.  C,  calls  the 
TiTolas,  Tandyas,  and  the  Ketalaputra  his  pratyantas 
(pa>^anta)  or  neighbours.  The  same  monarch  informs  us 
also  that  he  conquered  the  province  of  Kalinga  and  an- 
nexed it  to  his  kingdom  *.  The  early  civilisation  of  the 
same  province  is  also  attested  by  the  Khandgiri  inscrip- 
tion of  Maharaja  Aira  or  Khara^,  which,  if  it  is  not 


'  Aitareya-brahmawa  VII,  18. 

*  Lassen,  Ind.  Alterthumskunde,  I,  6''4,  2nd  ed. 

'  Edict  III,  Cunningham,  Corp.  Inscr.  Ind.,  vol.  i,  plate  V;    Lassen,  Ind. 
Alterthumskunde,  II,  252,  2nd  ed. 

*  Edict  XIII;  Lassen,  loc.  cit.,  II,  256. 

'  Cunningham,  Corp.  Inscr.  Ind.,  vol.  i,  plate  XVII. 

C    2 


XXXVl  APASTAMBA. 


considerably  older  than  Ai-oka's  edicts,  is  certainly  not 
younger.  Numerous  inscriptions  in  the  Buddhistic  caves 
of  Western  India,  as  well  as  coins,  prove  the  existence 
during  the  last  century  before  and  the  first  centuries  after 
the  beginning  of  our  era  of  a  powerful  empire  of  the 
Andhras,  the  capital  of  which  was  probably  situated  near 
the  modern  Amaravatt  on  the  lower  Kr/sh;^a  ^  The 
princes  of  the  latter  kingdom,  though  great  patrons  of  the 
Buddhist  monks,  appear  to  have  been  Brahmanists  or 
adherents  of  the  ancient  orthodox  faith  which  is  founded 
on  the  Vedas.  For  one  of  them  is  called  Vedisiri  (vedij-ri), 
'  he  whose  glory  is  the  Vedi,'  and  another  Yanasiri  (ya^na- 
svi),  'he  whose  glory  is  the  sacrifice,'  and  a  very  remark- 
able inscription  on  the  Nanaghat^  contains  a  curious 
catalogue  of  sacrificial  fees  paid  to  priests  (dakshiwa)  for 
the  performance  of  .Srauta  sacrifices.  For  the  third  and 
the  later  centuries  of  our  era  the  information  regarding 
Southern  India  becomes  fuller  and  fuller.  Very  numerous 
inscriptions,  the  accounts  of  the  Buddhist  chroniclers  of 
Ceylon,  of  the  Greek  geographers,  and  of  the  Chinese 
pilgrims,  reveal  the  existence  and  give  fragments,  at  least, 
of  the  history  of  many  kingdoms  in  the  south,  and  show 
that  their  civilisation  was  an  advanced  one,  and  did  not 
differ  materially  from  that  of  Northern  India. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  south  of  India  has  been 
conquered  by  the  Aryans,  and  has  been  brought  within  the 
pale  of  Brahmanical  civilisation  much  later  than  India 
north  of  the  Vindhya  range.  During  which  century  pre- 
cisely that  conquest  took  place,  cannot  be  determined  for 
the  present.  But  it  would  seem  that  it  happened  a  con- 
siderable time  before  the  Vedic  period  came  to  an  end,  and 
it  certainly  was  an  accomplished  fact,  long  before  the 
authentic  history  of  India  begins  at  the  end  of  the  fourth 

*  See  Bha'irfarkar,  Report  of  Or.  Cong.,  pp.  306-354,  and  especially  p.  34S 
seqq.  The  existence  of  the  Andhra  kingdom  is  also  attested  by  Pliny,  Hist. 
Nat.  VI,  22. 

■^  The  Nanaghat  is  the  pass  leading  from  the  Konka«a  through  the  Sahyadri 
range  to  the  town  of  Gunir.  The  inscription  in  question  has  as  }  et  been  neither 
published  nor  deciphered  completely. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXX  VI 1 


century  B.C.  It  may  be  added  that  a  not  inconsiderable 
period  must  have  elapsed  after  the  conquest  of  the  south, 
before  the  Aryan  civilisation  had  so  far  taken  root  in  the 
conquered  territory,  that,  in  its  turn,  it  could  become  a 
centre  of  Brahmanical  activity,  and  that  it  could  produce 
new  Vedic  schools. 

These  remarks  will  suffice  to  show  that  a  Vedic  A'arawa 
which  had  its  origin  in  the  south,  cannot  rival  in  antiquity 
those  whose  seat  is  in  the  north,  and  that  all  southern  schools 
must  belong  to  a  comparatively  recent  period  of  Vedic  his- 
tor>'.  For  this  reason,  and  because  the  name  of  Apastamba 
and  of  the  Apastambiyas  is  not  mentioned  in  any  Vedic 
work,  not  even  in  a  Kalpa-sutra,  and  its  occurrence  in  the 
older  grammatical  books,  v/ritten  before  the  beginning  of 
our  era,  is  doubtful  \  it  might  be  thought  advisable  to  fix 
the  terminus  a  quo  for  the  composition  of  the  Apastam- 
biya-sutras  about  or  shortly  before  the  beginning  of  the  era, 
when  the  Brahmanist  Andhra  kings  held  the  greater  part 
of  the  south  under  their  sway.  It  seems  to  me,  however, 
that  such  a  hypothesis  is  not  tenable,  as  there  are  several 
points  which  indicate  that  the  school  and  its  writings 
possess  a  much  higher  antiquity.  For.  firstly,  the  Dharma- 
sfitra  contains  a  remarkable  passage  in  which  its  author 
states  that  5vetaketu,  one  of  the  Vedic  teachers  who  is 
mentioned  in  the  5atapatha-brahma;/a  and  in  the  AV/an- 
dogya  Upanishad,  belongs  to  the  Avaras,  to  the  men  of 
later,  i.e.  of  his  own  times.  The  passage  referred  to,  Dh. 
I,  2,  5,  4-6,  has  been  partly  quoted  above  in  order  to  show 
that  Apastamba  laid  no  claim  to  the  title  Rish'x,  or  seer  of 
revealed  texts.  It  has  been  stated  that  according  to  Sutra 
4,  'No  Azshis  are  born  among  the  Avaras,  the  men  of  later 
ages,  on  account  of  the  prevailing  transgression  of  the  rules 
of  studentship;'  and  that  according  to  Sutra  5,  '  Some  in 
their  new  birth  become  similar  to  A/shis  by  their  know- 
ledge of  the  Veda  (j-rutarshi)  through  a  residue  of  merit 


'  The  name  Apastamba  occurs  only  in  the  gana  \-idadi,  which  belongs  to 
Pavini  IV,  i,  104,  and  the  text  of  this  gar/a  is  certain  only  for  the  times  of 
the  Kauka,  about  800  a.  d. 


XXXVIU  APASTAMBA. 


acquired  in  former  existences/  In  order  to  give  an  illus- 
tration of  the  latter  case,  the  author  adds  in  Sutra  6,  '  Like 
^■vetaketu.'  The  natural  and,  in  my  opinion,  the  only- 
admissible  interpretation  of  these  words  is,  that  Apastamba 
considers  .Svetaketu  to  be  one  of  the  Avaras,  who  by 
virtue  of  a  residue  of  merit  became  a  5rutarshi.  This  is 
also  the  view  of  the  commentator  Haradatta,  who,  in  eluci- 
dation of  Sutra  6,  quotes  the  following  passage  from  the 
K/iandogya.  Upanishad  (VI,  i,  1-2): 

'  I.  Forsooth  there  lived  5vetaketu,  a  descendant  of 
Aruna.  His  father  spake  unto  him,  "  O  5vetaketu,  dwell 
as  a  student  (with  a  teacher) ;  for,  verily,  dear  child,  no  one 
in  our  family  must  neglect  the  study  of  the  Veda  and 
become,  as  it  were,  a  Brahma«a  in  name  only." 

'  3.  Forsooth  he  (5vetaketu)  was  initiated  at  the  age  of 
twelve  years,  and  when  twenty-four  years  old  he  had 
learned  all  the  Vedas  ;  he  thought  highly  of  himself  and 
was  vain  of  his  learning  and  arrogant.' 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  person  and  the 
story  referred  to  in  the  Dharma-sutra.  For  the  fact  which 
the  Upanishad  mentions,  that  vSvetaketu  learned  all  the 
Vedas  in  twelve  years,  while  the  Smrz'tis  declare  forty- 
eight  years  to  be  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of 
that  task,  makes  Apastamba's  illustration  intelligible  and 
appropriate.  A  good  deal  more  is  told  in  the  K/ikn- 
dogya  Upanishad  about  this  5vetaketu,  who  is  said  to 
have  been  the  son  of  Uddalaka  and  the  grandson  of  Aru«a 
(aru;?eya).  The  same  person  is  also  frequently  mentioned 
in  the  6"atapatha-brahma«a.  In  one  passage  of  the  latter 
work,  which  has  been  translated  by  Professor  Max  Muller\ 
it  is  alleged  that  he  was  a  contemporary  of  Ya^navalkya, 
the  promulgator  of  the  White  Ya^ur-veda,  and  of  the  learned 
king  6"anaka  of  Videha,  who  asked  him  about  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice.  Now,  as  has  been  shown 
above,  Apastamba  knew  and  quotes  the  White  Ya^ur-veda 
and  the  5atapatha-brahma«a.  The  passage  of  the  latter 
work,  which  he  quotes,  is  even  taken  from  the  same  book 


'  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  421  seq. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 


in  which  the  story  about  5vetaketu  and  Canaka  occurs. 
The  fact,  therefore,  that  Apastamba  places  a  teacher  whom 
he  must  have  considered  as  a  contemporar}'-  of  the  pro- 
mulgator of  the  White  Ya^ur-veda  among  the  Avaras, 
is  highly  interesting  and  of  some  importance  for  the  history 
of  Vedic  literature.  On  the  one  hand  it  indicates  that 
Apastamba  cannot  have  considered  the  White  Ya^ur-veda, 
such  as  it  has  been  handed  down  in  the  schools  of  the 
Kawvas  and  Madhyandinas.  to  belong  to  a  remote 
antiquity.  On  the  other  hand  it  makes  the  inference  which 
otherwise  might  be  drawn  from  the  southern  origin  of 
the  Apastambiya  school  and  from  the  non-occurrence  of 
its  name  in  the  early  grammatical  writings,  viz.  that  its 
founder  lived  at  the  beginning  of,  or  in  the  first  century  B.C., 
extremely  improbable.  For  even  if  the  term  A  vara  is 
not  interpreted  very  strictly  and  allowed  to  mean  not 
exactly  a  contemporary,  but  a  person  of  comparatively 
recent  times,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  place  between 
5vetaketu  and  Apastamba  a  longer  inter\'al  than,  at  the 
utmost,  two  or  three  hundred  years.  5vetaketu  and 
Ya^Savalkya  would  accordingly  find  their  places  in  the 
third  or  fourth  century  B.C.,  and  the  6"atapatha-brahma;/a 
as  well  as  all  other  Vedic  works,  which  narrate  incidents 
from  their  lives,  must  have  been  composed  or  at  least 
edited  still  later.  Though  little  is  known  regarding  the 
history  of  the  Vedic  texts,  still  it  happens  that  we  possess 
some  information  regarding  the  texts  in  question.  For  we 
know  from  a  statement  made  by  Katyayana  in  a  Varttika 
on  Pacini  IV,  3,  105,  and  from  Patan^ali's  commentary  on 
his  words  that  the  Brahmawa  proclaimed  by  Ya^navalkya, 
i.e.  the  .Satapatha-brahma;/a  of  the  White  Ya^r-veda,  was 
considered  to  have  been  promulgated  by  one  of  the 
Ancients,  in  the  times  of  these  tsvo  writers,  i.e.  in  the 
fourth  and  second  centuries  B.C.^ 

'  This  famous  Varttika  has  been  interpreted  in  various  ways  ;  see  Max  Miiller, 
Hist.  Anc.Sansk.  Lit.,  pp.  360-364  ;  Goldstiicker,  la/uni,  pp.  132-140;  Weber, 
Ind.  Stud  V,  65-74;  XIII,  443,  444.  As  regards  the  explanation  of  Katya- 
yana's  and  Patans-ali's  words,  I  side  with  Kaiya'a  and  Professor  Goldstiicker, 
But  I  am  unable  to  follow  the  latter  in  the  inferences  which  he  draws  from  the 


xl  Apastamba. 

These  considerations  will  show  that  it  is  necessary  to 
allow  for  Apastamba  a  much  higher  antiquity  than  the 
first  century  B.C. 

The  same  inference  may  also  be  drawn  from  another 
series  of  facts,  viz,  the  peculiarities  of  the  language  of  his 
Sutras.  The  latter  are  very  considerable  and  very  remark- 
able. They  may  be  classed  under  four  heads.  In  the 
Apastambiya  Dharma-sfitra  we  have,  firstly,  archaic  words 
and  forms  either  occurring  in  other  Vedic  writings  or 
formed  according  to  the  analogy  of  Vedic  usage  ;  secondly, 
ancient  forms  and  words  specially  prescribed  by  Pa/nni, 
which  have  not  been  traced  except  in  Apastamba's  Sutras ; 
thirdly,  words  and  forms  which  are  both  against  Vedic 
usage  and  against  Pa?/ini's  rules,  and  which  sometimes 
find  their  analogies  in  the  ancient  Prakrits ;  and  fourthly, 
anomalies  in  the  construction  of  sentences.  To  the  first 
class  belong,  kravyadas,  I,  7,  21,  15,  carnivorous,  formed 
according  to  the  analogy  of  risadas;  the  frequent  use 
of  the  singular  dara,  e.g.  II,  i,  i,  17-18,  a  wife,  instead  of 
the  plural  dara//;  salavrzki,  I,  3,  10,  17,  for  salavr/ki  ; 
the  substitution  of  /  for  r  in  plehkha,  I,  11,  31,  16  ;  occa- 
sional offences  against  the  rules  of  internal  and  external 
Sandhi,  e.g.   in  agrzhyamanakarawa//,  I,  4,  12,  8;    in 


fact,  that  Katyayana  and  Patau,§-ali  declare  Yag-fiavalkya  and  other  sages  to  be 
as  ancient  as  those  whose  Brahma'^as  and  Kalpas  are  designated  by  the  plural 
of  adjectives  formed  by  the  addition  of  the  affix  in  to  the  names  of  the  promul- 
gators. Though  Pa?zini  asserts,  IV,  7,,  105,  that  only  those  Biahma?ias  which 
are  known  under  appellations  like  Bhallavina/?,  KaushitakinaA,  &c.,  have  been 
proclaimed  by  ancient  sages,  and  though  Katyayana  and  the  author  of  the 
Cheat  Commentary  add  that  this  rule  does  not  hold  good  in  the  case  of 
tlie  work  called  Yaj^uavalkani  Brahma^^ani,  it  does  not  necessarily  follow,  as 
Professor  Goldstiicker  thinks,  that  an  extraordinarily  long  interval  lies  between 
Pa'/ini  and  Katyayana^so  long  a  period  that  what  Pacini  considered  to  be 
rccerit  had  become  ancient  in  Katyayana's  time.  Professor  Weber  has  rightly 
fibjected  to  this  reasoning.  The  difference  between  the  statements  of  the  two 
grammarians  may  have  been  caused  by  different  traditions  prevailing  in  different 
schools,  or  by  an  oversight  on  the  part  of  Pacini,  which,  as  the  scene  of 
Ya;f~iavalkya's  activity  seems  to  have  been  Videha  in  eastern  India,  while  Pacini 
belonged  to  the  extreme  north-west,  is  not  at  all  improbable.  As  regards  the 
two  dates,  I  place,  following,  with  Professor  Max  MUller,  the  native  tradition, 
Katyayana  in  the  fourth  century  b.c,  and  Patau  o-ali,  with  Professors  Goldstiicker, 
Kern,  and  Bha«(/arkar,  between  17S-140  b.c. 


INTRODUCTION.  xll 


skuptva,  I,  II,  31,  24,  absolutive  of  skubh  ;   in  paduna, 

I,  I,  2,  13;  in  adhajanaj-ayin,  I,  i,  2,  21 ;  and  in  sarvato- 
peta,  I,  6,  19,  6  ;  the  neglect  of  the  rule  requiring  vz-^'ddhi 
in  the  first  S}'llable  of  the  name  Pushkarasadi,  1, 10,  28,  1; 
the  irregular  instrumentals  vidya.  1, 11,  30,  3,  for  vidyaya, 
and  m/isreyasa.,  II,  7,  16,  2,  for  ni/zi-reyasena ;  the 
nominative  dual  avam,  I,  7,  20,  6,  for  avam  ;  and  the 
potentials  in  it  a,  such  as  prakshalayita,  I,  1,  2,  28  ;  abhi- 
prasarayita,  I,  i,  2,  28,  &c. 

Among  the  words  mentioned  by  Pacini,  but  not  traced 
except  in  the  Dharma-sutra,  may  be  enumerated  the  verb 
str/h,  to  do  damage,  I,  11,  31,  9;  the  verb  srmkh,  to 
sneeze,  from  which  jr/rikhanika,  I,  5,  16,  4,  and  ni^- 
jr/nkhana.  I,  2,  5,  9,  are  derived  ;  and  the  noun  veda- 
dhyaya,  I,  9,  24,  6;  II,  4,  8,  5,  in  the  sense  of  a  student 
of  the  Veda.  Words  offending  against  rules  given  by  Pacini, 
without  being  either  archaic  or  Prakritic,  are  e.g.  sar- 
vannin,  I,  6,  18,  39.  one  who  eats  anybody's  food,  which, 
according  to  Pa«ini  V,  2,  9.  should  be  sarvannina; 
sarpaj-irshin,  I,  5,  17,  39;  annasawskartr/,  a  cook,  II, 
3,  6,  16;  dharmya,  righteous,  for  dharmya  I,  2,  7,  21, 
and  elsewhere;  divitrz,  a  gambler,  II,  10,  25,  13,  for 
devitrz,  the  very  remarkable  form  prai-fiati,  I,  i,  4,  i,  for 
pra^nati,  which  finds  an  analogy  in  yakha.:  and  the 
curious  compounds  avangagra,  I,  i,  2,  38,  parahga- 
vr/tta  II,  3,  10,  II,  where  the  first  parts  show  the  forms 
of  the  nominative  instead  of  the  base,  and  pratisurya- 
matsya//,  which  as  a  copulative  compound  is  without 
analogy.  The  irregular  forms  caused  by  the  same  ten- 
dencies as  those  which  effected  the  formation  of  the 
Prakrit  languages,  are,  aviprakramiwa,  II,  2,  5.  2.  for 
aviprakramawa,  where  an  a  standing  in  thesi  has  been 
changed    to    z;    sa.mvrttti/i,    II,  3,   6,   14,    sawvartete, 

II.  5,  II.  20,  and  paryanta,  I,  3,  9,  21  (compare  Mara/Z/i 
a;«t  for  anta//).  in  each  of  which  a  standing  before  a 
nasal  has  been  lengthened  ;  a;/ika,  I.  6,  19,  i,  the  initial 
a  of  which  stands  for  ri,  if  it  really  has  the  meaning  of 
r/wika,  as  some  commentators  asserted;  anulepawa,  I,  3, 
II,  13;   I,  II,  32.  5,  with  the  Prakritic  change  of  na  to 


xlii 


APASTAMBA, 


na;  vyupa^ava,  I,  2,  8,  j^,  with  va  for  pa;  ritve  for 
r/tvye,  where  j/  seems  to  have  been  absorbed  by  the 
following  e;  apaj-jayita,  I,  ii,  ^2,  i6,  for  apaj-rayita, 
and  bhatr/vyatikrama,  I,  lo,  28,  20,  where  r  has  been 
assimilated  to  the  preceding,  or  has  been  lost  before  the 
following  consonant.  The  irregularities  in  the  construction 
are  less  frequent.  But  in  two  Sutras,  I,  3, 10,  2,  and  I,  3, 1 1, 
21,  some  words  which  ought  to  stand  in  the  locative  case 
have  the  terminations  of  the  nominative,  and  it  looks  as 
if  the  author  had  changed  his  mind  about  the  construction 
which  he  meant  to  use.  In  a  third  passage,  II,  10,  26,  20, 
sisna.kk/ieda.na.m  savr/sha;/asya,  the  adjective  which 
is  intended  to  qualify  the  noun  i"i.yna  has  been  placed  in 
the  genitive  case,  though  the  noun  has  been  made  the 
first  part  of  a  compound. 

The  occurrence  of  so  many  irregularities^  in  so  small 
a  treatise  as  the  Dharma-sutra  is,  proves  clearly  that  the 
author  did  not  follow  Pawini^s  grammar,  and  makes  it  very 
unlikely  that  he  knew  it  at  all.  If  the  anomalous  forms 
used  by  Apastamba  all  agreed  with  the  usage  of  the 
other  Sfjtrakaras,  known  to  us,  it  might  be  contended  that, 
though  acquainted  with  the  rules  of  the  great  grammarian, 
he  had  elected  to  adopt  by  preference  the  language  of  the 
Vedic  schools.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  The 
majority  of  the  irregular  forms  are  peculiar  to  Apastamba. 
As  it  is  thus  not  probable  that  Apastamba  employed  his 
peculiar  expressions  in  obedience  to  the  tradition  of  the 
Vedic  schools  or  of  his  particular  school,  he  must  have 
either  been  unacquainted  with  Famni  or  have  considered 
his  teachings  of  no  great  importance.  In  other  words,  he 
must  either  have  lived  earlier  than  Pacini  or  before  Pacini's 
grammar  had  acquired  general  fame  throughout  India,  and 
become  the  standard  authority  for  Sanskrit  authors.  In 
either  case  so  late  a  date  as  100  B.C.  or  the  first  century 
B,  C.  would  not  fit.    For  Patan^ali's  Mahabhashya  furnishes 


'  Many  more  miL;ht  be  collected  from  the  otlier  divisions  of  the  bod)-  of 
Sutras.  1  have  noticed  them  especially  in  the  Grihya-sutra,  the  onl)  part, 
besides  the  Dharma-sutra,  which  I  have  read  carefully. 


INTRODL'CTION.  xHil 


abundant  proof  that  at  the  time  of  its  composition,  in  the 
second  century  B.C.,  Pacini's  grammar  occupied  a  position 
similar  to  that  which  it  holds  now,  and  has  held  since  the 
beginning  of  our  era  in  the  estimation  of  the  learned  of 
India.  On  linguistic  grounds  it  seems  to  me  Apastamba 
cannot  be  placed  later  than  the  third  century  B.  C,  and 
if  his  statement  regarding  5vetaketu  is  taken  into  account, 
the  lower  limit  for  the  composition  of  his  SCltras  must  be 
put  further  back  by  150-200  years. 

But  sufficient  space  has  already  been  allotted  to  these 
attempts  to  assign  a  date  to  the  founder  of  the  Apastambiya 
school,  the  results  of  which,  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  ancient  history  of  India,  must  remain, 
I  fear,  less  certain  and  less  precise  than  is  desirable.  It 
now  is  necessary  to  say,  in  conclusion,  a  few  words  about 
the  history  of  the  text  of  the  Dharma-sutra,  and  about  its 
commentary,  the  U^^vala  Vritti  of  Haradatta.  The 
oldest  writer  with  a  known  date  who  quotes  the  Apastam- 
biya Dharma-sutra  is  Vi^uanexvara,  who  composed  the 
Mitakshara,  the  well-known  commentary  on  Ya^navalk\a"s 
Dharma-j-astra  during  the  reign  of  the  A^alukya  king  Vikra- 
maditya  VI,  of  Kalya//a  towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh 
century.  From  that  time  downwards  Apastamba  is  quoted 
by  almost  ev^ery  writer  on  law.  But  the  whole  text,  such 
as  it  is  given  in  my  edition  \  is  vouched  for  only  by  the 
commentator  Haradatta,  who  probably  wrote  his  LJ^v'a'a 
Vr/tti  in  the  sixteenth  century  A.  D.  Haradatta  is  very 
reticent  about  himself  and  about  his  circumstances "'.  But 
his  date  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  oldest 
writer  on  law  quoting  his  opinions  is  Mitramiira,  the  author 
of  the  Viramitrodaya,  who  dedicated  his  learned  treatise 

'  ApaitambiyaDharma-sutram,  Part  I,  Bombay,  1868;  Part  II,  BomI:ay,  iSji. 

*  It  seems,  however,  not  doubtful  that  Haradatta,  the  author  of  the  U ^'"'•■aia, 
is  the  same  person  who  wrote  the  A  u  a  k  u  1  a  V  r  / 1 1  i  on  the  A  pastambi}  a  Gr;hy a- 
sutra,  an  explanation  of  the  Apastambiya  Gr/hya-mantras  (see  Buniell,  Ind. 
Ant.  1, 6\  which  I  have  not  seen,  and  the  Mitakshara  Vr/tti  on  the  Dharma- 
sutra  of  Gautama.  From  the  occurrence  in  the  latter  work  of  Tamil  words, 
added  in  explanation  of  Sanskrit  expressions,  it  follows  that  Haradatta  was  a 
native  of  the  south  of  India  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  decide  if  our  author  also 
wrote  the  Padaman^ari  Vr/tti  on  the  Kasika  of  Vamana  and  Gayaditya. 


xllv  APASTAMIJA. 


on  law  to  the  Bundela  chief  Virasi;;zha  of  Or^/za,  the 
murderer  of  Akbar's  friend  Abul  Fazl,  and  who  wrote, 
therefore,  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  A.  D. 
Haradatta  was,  however,  not  the  first  commentator  of  the 
Dharma-siitra.  He  frequently  quotes  the  opinions  of  several 
predecessors  whom  he  designates  by  the  general  expressions 
anya/i  or  apara/z,  i.  e,  another  (writer).  The  fact  that  the 
LJ^vala  was  preceded  by  earlier  commentaries  which  pro- 
tected the  text  from  corruption,  also  speaks  in  favour  of 
the  authenticity  of  the  latter,  which  is  further  attested  by 
the  close  agreement  of  the  Hkanyakesi  Dharma-sutra, 
mentioned  above. 

As  regards  the  value  of  the  LJ^^vala  for  the  explanation 
of  Apastamba's  text,  it  certainly  belongs  to  the  best  com- 
mentaries existing.  Haradatta  possessed  in  the  older 
Vr/ttis  abundant  and  good  materials  on  which  he  could 
draw  ;  he  himself  apparently  was  well  versed  in  Hindu  law 
and  in  Sanskrit  grammar,  and  distinguished  by  sobriety 
and  freedom  from  that  vanity  which  induces  many  Indian 
commentators  to  load  their  works  with  endless  and  useless 
quotations.  His  explanations,  therefore,  can  mostly  be 
followed  without  hesitation,  and,  even  when  they  appear 
unacceptable,  they  deserve  careful  consideration. 


INTRODU  CTION 

TO 

GAUTAMA. 

Compared  with  the  information  collected  above  regard- 
ing the  origin  and  the  history  of  Apastamba's  Dharma- 
sutra,  the  facts  which  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  Gautama's 
Institutes  are  scanty  and  the  conclusions  deducible  from 
them  somewhat  vague.  There  are  only  two  points,  which, 
it  seems  to  me,  can  be  proved  satisfactorily,  viz.  the  con- 
nexion of  the  work  with  the  Sama-veda  and  a  Gautama 
A'arawa,  and  its  priority  to  the  other  four  Dharma-siitras 
which  we  still  possess.  To  go  further  appears  for  the 
present  impossible,  because  very  little  is  known  regard- 
ing the  history  of  the  schools  studying  the  Sama-veda, 
and  because  the  Dharmaj-astra  not  only  furnishes  very  few 
data  regarding  the  works  on  which  it  is  based,  but  seems 
also,  though  not  to  any  great  extent,  to  have  been  tampered 
with  by  interpolators. 

As  regards  its  origin,  it  was  again  Professor  Max  Miiller, 
who,  in  the  place  of  the  fantastic  statements  of  a  fabri- 
cated tradition,  according  to  which  the  author  of  the 
Dharmai^astra  is  the  son  or  grandson  of  the  sage  Utathya, 
and  the  grandson  or  great-grandson  of  Ui'anas  or  5ukra,  the 
regent  of  the  planet  Venus,  and  the  book  possessed  generally 
binding  force  in  the  second  or  Treta  Yuga  \  first  put  forward 
a  rational  explanation  which,  since,  has  been  adopted  by 
all  other  writers  on  Sanskrit  literature.  He  says,  Hist. 
Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  134,  'Another  collection  of  Dharma- 
sutras,  which,  however,  is  liable  to  critical  doubts,  belongs 

*  Manu  III,  16;  Colebrooke,  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  Preface,  p.  xvii 
I, Madras  ed.) ;  Anantayao^'an  in  Dr.  Bumell's  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  MSS., 
p.  57;  Para^ara,  Dharma^aatra  I,  22  ^^Calcutta  ed.) 


xlvi 


GAUTAMA. 


to  the  Gautamas,  a  A'arawa  of  the  Sama-veda.'     The  cor- 
rectness of  this  assertion  may  be  proved  by  the  following 
arguments.     Gautama's  work,  though  called  Dharma^astra 
or  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law,  closely  resembles,  both  in 
form  and  contents,  the  Dharma-sutras  or  Aphorisms  on  the 
Sacred  Law,  which  form  part  of  the  Kalpa-sutras  of  the 
Vedic  schools  of  Baudhayana.  Apastamba,and  Hirawyakei-in. 
As  we  know  from  the  i^ara/^avyuha,  from  the  writings  of 
the  ancient  grammarians,  and  from  the  numerous  quotations 
in  the  Kalpa-sutras  and  other  works  on  the  Vedic  ritual, 
that  in  ancient  times  the  number  of  Vedic  schools,  most  of 
which  possessed  .S"rauta,  Grz'hya,  and  Dharma-sutras,  was 
exceedingly  great,  and  that  the  books  of  many  of  them 
have  either  been  lost  or  been   disintegrated,  the  several 
parts  being  torn  out  of  their  original  connexion,  it  is  not 
unreasonable   to    assume   that    the    aphoristic    law-book, 
usually  attributed  to    the  Rtshi  Gautama,  is  in  reality  a 
manual  belonging  to  a  Gautama  Ka.ra.na..     This  conjecture 
gains  considerably  in  probability,  if  the  fact  is  taken  into 
account  that  formerly  a  school  of  Sama-vedis,  which  bore 
the  name  of  Gautama,  actually  existed.     It  is  mentioned 
in  one  of  the  redactions  of  the  iTarawavyuha  ^  as  a  sub- 
division of  the  Rawayaniya  school.     The  Vawwa-brahmawa 
of  the  Sama-veda^  also,  enumerates  four  members  of  the 
Gautama  family  among  the    teachers  who  handed  down 
the  third  Veda,  viz.  Gatrz   Gautama,  Sumantra  Babhrava 
Gautama,  Sawkara  Gautama,  and  Radha  Gautama  ^,  and 
the  existing  6'rauta  and  Grz'hya-sutras  frequently  appeal  to 
the  opinions  of  a  Gautama  and  of  a  Sthavira  Gautama". 
It  follows,  therefore,  that  at  least  one,  if  not  several  Gau- 
tama A'arawas,  studied  the  Sama-veda,  and  that,  at  the 
time  when  the  existing  Sutras  of  La/yayana  and  Gobhila 
were  composed,  Gautama  5rauta  and  GrzTiya-sutras  formed 
part  of  the  literature  of  the  Sama-veda.     The  correctness 
of  the  latter  inference  is  further  proved  by  Dr.  Burnell's 

'  Max  Mliller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  374. 
*  See  Biirnell,  Vam,sa-brahma«a,  pp.  7,  9,  li,  and  12. 

^  See  the  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s. v.  Gautama;    Weber,  Hibt.  Ind.  Lit., 
p.  77  (English  ea.);  Gobhila  Gr/hya-sfitra  III,  10,  6. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlvil 


discovery  of  a  Pitnmedha-sutra,  which  is  ascribed  to  a 
teacher  of  the  Sama-veda,  called  Gautama  ^. 

The  only  link,  therefore,  which  is  wanting  in  order  to 
complete  the  chain  of  evidence  regarding  Gautama's  Apho- 
risms on  the  sacred  law,  and  to  make  their  connexion  with 
the  Sama-veda  perfectly  clear,  is  the  proof  that  they  contain 
special  references  to  the  latter.  As  long  as  evidence  on 
that  point  has  not  been  furnished,  it  is  always  possible  to 
object,  that,  though  the  Gautama  Dharma^astra  may  have 
been  the  manual  of  a  Vedic  A'ara/za,  and  though  one  or 
more  Gautamas  may  have  taught  the  ritual  of  the  Sama- 
veda  and  have  founded  schools  of  Sama-vedis,  still  the 
Dharmai-astra  may  have  belonged  to  some  other  Veda, 
because  members  of  the  Gautama  family  are  also  named  as 
teachers  in  works  belonging  to  other  Vedas.  It  is,  however, 
not  very  difficult  to  show  that  the  Gautama  who  composed 
our  Dharmaj-astra  was  a  Sama-vedi.  For,  firstly,  he  has 
borrowed  one  entire  chapter,  the  twenty-sixth,  which  con- 
tains the  description  of  the  ¥^rikkhra.s  or  difficult  penances 
from  the  Samavidhana,  one  of  the  eight  Brahma;/as  of  the 
Sama-veda  ^.  The  agreement  of  the  two  texts  is  complete 
except  in  the  Mantras  (Sutra  12)  where  invocations  of 
several  deities,  which  are  not  usually  found  in  Vedic 
writings,  have  been  introduced.  Secondly,  in  the  enumera- 
tion of  the  purificatory  texts,  XIX,  12,  Gautama  shows  a 
marked  partiality  for  the  Sama-veda.  Among  the  eighteen 
special  texts  mentioned,  we  find  no  less  than  nine  Samans. 
Some  of  the  latter,  like  the  BnTiat,  Rathantara,  G^yesh/Z/a, 
and  Mahadivakirtya  chants,  occur  also  in  works  belonging 
to  the  i?/g-veda  and  the  Ya^r-veda,  and  are  considered  by 
Brahma«as  of  all  schools  to  possess  great  efficacy.  But 
others,  such  as  the  Purushagati,  Rauhi;/a,  and  Mahavaira^a 
Samans,  have  hitherto  not  been  met  with  anywhere  but 
in  books  belonging  to  the  Sama-veda,  and  do  not  seem 
to  have  stood  in  general  repute.  Thirdly,  in  two  pas- 
sages, I,  50  and  XXV,  8,  the  Dharma^astra  prescribes  the 


'  Weber,  Hist.  Ind.  Lit.,  p.  84,  note  89  (English  ed.) 
*  See  below,  pp.  292-296. 


xlviii  GAUTAMA. 


employment  of  five  Vyahr/tis,  and  mentions  in  the  former 
Sutra,  that  the  last  Vyahrz'ti  is  satyam,  truth.  Now  in  most 
Vedic  works,  three  Vyahrztis  only,  hhu/i,  bhuva//,  sva/i,  are 
mentioned  ;  sometimes,  but  rarely,  four  or  seven  occur. 
But  in  the  Vyahn'ti  Saman,  as  Haradatta  points  out  ^,  five 
such  interjections  are  used,  and  satyam  is  found  among 
them.  It  is,  therefore,  not  doubtful,  that  Gautama  in  the 
above-mentioned  passages  directly  borrows  from  the  Sama- 
veda.  These  three  facts,  taken  together,  furnish,  it  seems 
to  me,  convincing  proof  that  the  author  of  our  Dharma^-astra 
was  a  Sama-vedi.  If  the  only  argument  in  favour  of  this 
conclusion  were,  that  Gautama  appropriated  a  portion  of 
the  Samavidhana,  it  might  be  met  by  the  fact  that  he  has 
also  taken  some  Sutras  (XXV,  1-6)  from  the  Taittiriya 
Ara;^yaka.  But  his  partiality  for  Samans  as  purificatory 
texts  and  the  selection  of  the  Vyahr/tis  from  the  Vyahrz'ti 
Saman  as  part  of  the  Mantras  for  the  initiation  (I,  50),  one 
of  the  holiest  and  most  important  of  the  Brahmanical 
sacraments,  cannot  be  explained  on  any  other  supposition 
than  the  one  adopted  above. 

Though  it  thus  appears  that  Professor  Max  M tiller  is 
right  in  declaring  the  Gautama  Dharma^astra  to  belong  to 
the  Sama-veda,  it  is,  for  the  present,  not  possible  to  posi- 
tively assert,  that  it  is  the  Dharma-sutra  of  that  Gautama 
Karana.,  which  according  to  the  A'ara/zavyuha,  quoted  in 
the  ^abdakalpadruma  of  Radhakanta,  formed  a  sub- 
division of  the  Ra/zayawiyas.  The  enumeration  of  four 
AMryas,  bearing  the  family-name  Gautama,  in  the  Vamsa- 
brahma//a,  and  La/yayana's  quotations  from  two  Gautamas^ 
make  it  not  unlikely,  that  several  Gautama  Kavauas  once 
existed  among  the  Sama-vedi  Brahma//as,  and  we  possess 
no  means  for  ascertaining  to  which  our  Dharmaj-astra  must 
be  attributed.  Further  researches  into  the  history  of  the 
schools  of  the  Sama-veda  must  be  awaited  until  we  can  do 
more.  Probably  the  living  tradition  of  the  Seima-vedis  of 
Southern  India  and  new  books  from  the  South  will  clear  up 
what  at  present  remains  uncertain. 


See  Gautama  I,  50,  note. 


INTRODUCTION.  xHx 


In  concluding  this  subject  I  may  state  that  Haradatta 
seems  to  have  been  aware  of  the  connexion  of  Gautama's 
law-book  with  the  Sama-veda,  though  he  does  not  say  it 
expressly.  But  he  repeatedly  and  pointedly  refers  in  his  com- 
mentary to  the  practices  of  the  AT/zandogas,  and  quotes  the 
Grzhya-sutra  of  the  6^aiminiyas^,  who  are  a  school  of  Sama- 
vedis,  in  explanation  of  several  passages.  Another  southern 
author,  Govindasvamin  (if  I  understand  the  somewhat  cor- 
rupt passage  correctly),  states  directly  in  his  commentary 
on  Baudhayana  I,  i,  2i,  that  the  Gautamiya  Dharma- 
jistra  was  originally  studied  by  the  isT/zandogas  alone  ^. 

In  turning  now  to  the  second  point,  the  priority  of  Gau- 
tama to  the  other  existing  Dharma-sutras,  I  must  premise 
that  it  is  only  necessarj'  to  take  into  account  two  of  the 
latter,  those  of  Baudhayana  and  Vasish///a.  For,  as  has  been 
shown  above  in  the  Introduction  to  Apastamba,  the  Sutras 
of  the  latter  and  those  of  Hira;/yakej'in  Satyasha^//a  are 
younger  than  Baudhayana's.  The  arguments  which  allow 
us  to  place  Gautama  before  both  Baudhayana  and  Vasish///a 
are,  that  both  those  authors  quote  Gautama  as  an  authority 
on  law,  and  that  Baudhayana  has  transferred  a  whole 
chapter  of  the  Dharmai-astra  to  his  work,  which  Vasish//^a 
again  has  borrowed  from  him. 

As  regards  the  case  of  Baudhayana,  his  references  to 
Gautama  are  two,  one  of  which  can  be  traced  in  our 
Dharmaj^astra.  In  the  discussion  on  the  peculiar  customs 
prevailing  in  the  South  and  in  the  North  of  India  (Baudh. 
Dh.  I,  I,  17-24)  Baudhayana  expresses  himself  as  follows  : 

*  17.  There  is  a  dispute  regarding  five  (practices)  both  in 
the  South  and  in  the  North. 

'  18.  We  shall  explain  those  (peculiar)  to  the  South. 

'  19.  They  are,  to  eat  in  the  company  of  an  uninitiated 

*  A  Gnliya-sutra  of  the  Gaiminiyas  has  been  discovered  by  Dr.  Bumell  with 
a  commentary  by  S'rtnivasa.  He  thinks  that  the  Gaiminiyas  are  a  Sutra-sakha 
of  the  Sa/yayana-Talavakaras. 

*  My  transcript  has  been  made  from  the  MS.  presented  by  Dr.  Bumell,  the 
discoverer  of  the  work,  to  the  India  Office  Library.  The  passage  runs  as  fol- 
lows :  Yatha  va  bodhayaniyaw  dharmasastraw  kai^^tid  eva  pa/Ayamanawi  sar- 
vadhikaram  bhavati  tatha  gautamiye  gobhiliye  {?)  iAandogair  eva  pa/Ayate  || 
vasish/Aawi  tu  bahvn'/tair  eva  || 

[2]  d 


1  GAUTAMA. 


person,  to  eat  in  the  company  of  one's  wife,  to  eat  stale 
food,  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a  maternal  uncle  or  of  a 
paternal  aunt. 

'  20.  Now  (the  customs  peculiar)  to  the  North  are,  to 
deal  in  wool,  to  drink  rum,  to  sell  animals  that  have  teeth 
in  the  upper  and  in  the  lower  jaws,  to  follow  the  trade  of 
arms,  and  to  go  to  sea. 

'21.  He  who  follows  (these  practices)  in  (any)  other 
country  than  the  one  where  they  prevail  commits  sin. 

'  32.  For  each  of  these  practices  (the  rule  of)  the  country 
should  be  (considered)  the  authority. 

'23.    Gautama  declares  that  that  is  false. 

'  24.  And  one  should  not  take  heed  of  either  (set  of 
practices),  because  they  are  opposed  to  the  tradition  of 
those  learned  (in  the  sacred  law  ^).' 

From  this  passage  it  appears  that  the  Gautama  Dharma- 
sutra,  known  to  Baudhayana,  expressed  an  opinion  adverse 
to  the  authoritativeness  of  local  customs  which  might  be 
opposed  to  the  tradition  of  the  vSish/as,  i.  e.  of  those  who 
really  deserve  to  be  called  learned  in  the  law.  Our  Gau- 
tama teaches  the  same  doctrine,  as  he  says,  XI,  20,  'The 
laws  of  countries,  castes,  and  families,  which  are  not 
opposed  to  the  (sacred)  records,  have  also  authority.' 

As  clear  as  this  reference,  is  the  case  in  which  Baudha- 
yana has  borrowed  a  whole  chapter  of  our  Dharma^astra. 
The  chapter  in  question  is  the  nineteenth,  which  in  Gau- 
tama's  work    forms    the   introduction    to    the    section   on 

^f^7TT:fw^%^fiT  n:^«^ii 

^h4  ^^  ^f^^  f^^firf^dv^^^ii^dii 


INTRODUCTION.  li 


penances  and  expiation.  It  is  reproduced  with  a  number 
of  various  readings  ^  in  the  third  Frasna.  of  Baudhayana's 
Dharma-sutra,  where  it  forms  the  tenth  and  last  Adhyaya. 
Its  contents,  and  especially  its  first  Sutra,  which  connects 
the  section  on  penances  with  the  preceding  ones  on  the  law 
of  castes  and  orders,  make  it  perfectly  clear  that  its  proper 
position  can  only  be  at  the  beginning  of  the  rules  on  ex- 
piation, not  in  the  middle  of  the  discussion,  as  Baudhayana 
places  it  ^.  This  circumstance  alone  would  be  sufficient  to 
prove  that  Baudhayana  is  the  borrower,  not  Gautama,  even 
if -the  name  of  the  latter  did  not  occur  in  Baudhayana's 
Dharma-sutra.  But  the  character  of  many  of  Baudhayana's 
readings,  especially  of  those  in  Sutras  2,  10,  11,  13,  and  15, 
which,  though  supported  by  all  the  MSS.  and  Govindasva- 
min's  commentary',  appear  to  have  arisen  chiefly  through 
clerical  mistakes  or  carelessness,  furnishes  even  an  additional 
argument  in  favour  of  the  priority  of  Gautama's  text. 

As  regards  Baudhayana's  second  reference  to  Gautama, 
the  opinion  which  it  attributes  to  the  latter  is  directly 
opposed  to  the  teaching  of  our  Dharmai'astra.     Baudha- 

Baudhayana's  various  readings  are  the  following  ;    Gaut.  XIX,  i  = 
Baudh.  Ill,  10, 1,  '^#«f  ^T°.      Gaut.  XIX,  2  =  Baudh.  Ill,  10,  2,  'SlfWr 

^T^TST?r^Wl^  ^  '^frT.  Gaut.  XIX,  4  left  out.  Gaut.  XIX, 
6  =  Baudh.  Ill,  10,  5,  ftrf^W^.  Gaut.  XIX,  7  =  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  6, 
g^^^  imiT;  f^^^^  left  out.  Gaut.  XIX,  8  left  out.  Gaut. 
XIX.  9  =  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  7,  ^rsn"«3^"5Tf%  ITrfff.  Gaut.  XIX,  10  = 
Baudh.  Ill,  5,  8,  °^J  ^^W.  Gaut.  XIX,  12  =  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  10, 
i^T^"\  %^T^:;  ^■^^:.  Gaut.  XIX,  13=  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  11, 
■^xr^^m^  W^Tnn.  Gaut.  XIX,  14  =  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  12,  ^f^ftl- 
4riHlf^;   Tn?^dMr<°.      Gaut.  XIX,  15  =  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  13,  wff^ 

Gaut.  XIX,  17=  Baudh.  Ill,  5,  15,  ^^Vmh*!^  ^  SfTFSi:.  Gaut. 
XIX,  i8=Baudh.  Ill,  5, 16,  f^oR^VT  left  out.     Gaut.  XIX,  2o=Baudh. 

Ill,  5, 18,  ^nrqf^f^:. 

2  Baudhayana's  treatment  of  the  subject  of  penances  is  very  un- 
methodical. He  devotes  to  them  the  following  chapters,  I,  11  and  II,  i; 
III,  5-10 ;  and  the  greater  part  of  Prasna  IV. 

d  2 


Hi  GAUTAMA. 


yana  gives  II,  2,  7°  the  rule  that  a  Brahma?^a  who  is 
unable  to  maintain  himself  by  teaching,  sacrificing,  and 
receiving  gifts,  may  follow  the  profession  of  a  Kshatriya, 
and  then  goes  as  follows  ^  : 

'  71.  Gautama  declares  that  he  shall  not  do  it.  For  the 
duties  of  a  Kshatriya  are  too  cruel  for  a  Brahma«a.' 

As  the  commentator  Govindasvamin  also  points  out, 
exactly  the  opposite  doctrine  is  taught  in  our  Dharma- 
^astra,  which  (VII,  6)  explicitly  allows  a  Brahmawa  to 
follow,  in  times  of  distress,  the  occupations  of  a  Kshatriya. 
Govindasvamin  explains  this  contradiction  by  assuming 
that  in  this  case  Baudhayana  cites  the  opinion,  not  of  the 
author  of  our  Dharma^-astra,  but  of  some  other  Gautama. 
According  to  what  has  been  said  above  ^  the  existence  of 
two  or  even  more  ancient  Gautama  Dharma-s(itras  is  not 
very  improbable,  and  the  commentator  may  possibly  be 
right.  But  it  seems  to  me  more  likely  that  the  Sutra  of 
Gautama  (VII,  6)  which  causes  the  difficulty  is  an  inter- 
polation, though  Haradatta  takes  it  to  be  genuine.  My 
reason  for  considering  it  to  be  spurious  is  that  the  permis- 
sion to  follow  the  trade  of  arms  is  opposed  to  the  sense  of 
two  other  rules  of  Gautama.  For  the  author  states  at  the 
end  of  the  same  chapter  on  times  of  distress,  VII,  25,  that 
'  even  a  Brahmawa  may  take  up  arms  when  his  life  is  in 
danger.'  The  meaning  of  these  words  can  only  be,  that  a 
Brahmawa  must  not  fight  under  any  other  circumstances. 
But  according  to  Sutra  6  he  is  allowed  to  follow  the  occu- 
pations of  a  Kshatriya,  who  lives  by  fighting.  Again,  in 
the  chapter  on  funeral  oblations,  XV,  18,  those  Brahmawas 
'  who  live  by  the  use  of  the  bow '  are  declared  to  defile 
the  company  at  a  funeral  dinner.  It  seems  to  me  that 
these  two  Siitras,  taken  together  with  Baudhayana's  asser- 
tion that  Gautama  does  not  allow  Brahmawas  to  become 
warriors,  raise  a  strong  suspicion  against  the  genuineness 
of  VII,  6,  and  I  have  the  less  hesitation  in  rejecting  the 


>  Baudh.  Dh.  II,  2,  71  :— 
^  See  p.  xlviii. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 


111 


latter  Sutra,  as  there  is  at  least  one  other  interpolated 
passage  in  the  text  received  by  Haradatta  \  I  mean  the 
Mantras  in  the  chapter  taken  from  the  Samavidhana, 
XXVI,  12,  where  the  three  invocations  addressed  to  5iva 
are  certainly  modern  additions,  as  the  old  Sutrakaras  do 
not  allow  a  place  to  that  or  any  other  Paura;/ic  deity  in 
their  works. 

The  Vasish/Z/a  Dharma-sutra  shows  also  two  quotations 
from  Gautama ;  and  it  is  a  curious  coincidence  that,  just 
as  in  the  case  of  Baudhayana's  references,  one  of  them  only 
can  be  traced  in  our  Dharmaj-astra.  Both  the  quotations 
occur  in  the  section  on  impurity,  Vas.  IV,  where  we  read 
as  follows  - : 

'  ^^.  If  an  infant  aged  less  than  two  years,  dies,  or  in 
the  case  of  a  miscarriage,  the  impurity  of  the  Sapiw^as 
(lasts)  for  three  (days  and)  nights. 

'34.  Gautama  declares  that  (they  become)  pure 
at  once  (after  bathing). 

'  ;^j.  If  (a  relative)  dies  in  a  foreign  countr)'  and  (his 
Sapbidsis)  hear  (of  his  death)  after  the  lapse  of  ten  days, 
the  impurity  lasts  for  one  (day  and)  night. 

'36.  Gautama  declares  that  if  a  person  who  has 
kindled  the  sacred  fire  dies  on  a  journey,  (his 
Sapiw^as)  shall  again  celebrate  his  obsequies, 
(burning  a  dummy  made  of  leaves  or  straw,)  and 
remain  impure  (during  ten  days)  as  (if  they  had 
actually  buried)  the  corpse.' 

The  first  of  these  two  quotations  or  references  apparently 
points  to  Gautama  Dh.  XIV,  44,  where  it  is  said,  that 
'if  an  infant  dies,  the  relatives  shall  be  pure  at  once.' 
For,  though  Vasish///a's  Sutra  34,  strictly  interpreted, 
would  mean,  that  Gautama  declares  the  relatives  to  be 
purified  instantaneously,  both  if  an  infant  dies  and  if  a 
miscarriage  happens,  it  is  also  possible  to  refer  the  excep- 

'  In  some  MSS.  a  whole  chapter  on  the  results  of  various  sins  in  a  second 
birth,  is  inserted  after  Adhyaya  XIX.  But  Haradatta  does  not  notice  it ;  see 
Stenzler,  Gautama,  Preface,  p.  iii. 

*  In  quoting  the  Vasish//%a  Dh.  I  always  refer  to  the  Benares  edition,  which  is 
accompanied  by  the  commentary  of  Kriihnapa.ndita  Dharmadhikarin,  called 
Vidvanmodini, 


Hv 


GAUTAMA. 


tion  to  one  of  the  two  cases  only,  which  are  mentioned  in 
Sutra  ^^.  Similar  instances  do  occur  in  the  Sutra  style, 
where  brevity  is  estimated  higher  than  perspicuity,  and 
the  learned  commentator  of  Vasish/^//a  does  not  hesitate 
to  adopt  the  same  view.  But,  as  regards  the  second 
quotation  in  Sutra  ^6,  our  Gautama  contains  no  passage 
to  which  it  could  possibly  refer.  Govindasvamin,  in  his 
commentary  on  the  second  reference  to  Gautama  in  Bau- 
dhayana's  Dharma^-astra  II,  2,  71,  expresses  the  opinion 
that  this  Sutra,  too,  is  taken  from  the  '  other '  Gautama 
Dharma-sutra,  the  former  existence  of  which  he  infers 
from  Baudhayana's  passage.  To  me  it  seems  more  pro- 
bable that  the  quotation  in  Vas.  Dh.  IV,  36  is  taken  from 
the  Gr/hya-sutra  which  belonged  to  the  Gautama  Karsina.. 
For  the  rule  refers  quite  as  much  to  the  chapter  "on  burial, 
which  properly  belongs  to  and  frequently  is  treated  in  the 
Gr/hya-sutras  ^  as  to  impurity. 

Regarding  Gautama's  nineteenth  chapter,  which  appears 
in  the  Vasish/'/^a  Dharmai^astra  as  the  twenty-second,  I  have 
already  stated  above  that  it  is  not  taken  directly  from 
Gautama's  work,  but  from  Baudhayana's.  For  it  shows 
most  of  the  characteristic  readings  of  the  latter.  But  a  few 
new  ones  also  occur,  and  some  Sutras  have  been  left  out, 
while  one  new  one,  a  well  known  verse  regarding  the  efficacy 
of  the  Vaii'vanara  vratapati  and  of  the  Pavitresh/i,  has  been 
added.  Among  the  omissions  peculiar  to  Vasish/'/^a,  that 
of  the  first  Sutra  is  the  most  important,  as  it  alters  the 
whole  character  of  the  chapter,  and  removes  one  of  the 
most  convincing  arguments  as  to  its  original  position  at 
the  head  of  the  section  on  penances.  Vasish^'//a  places  it 
in  the  beginning  of  the  discussion  on  penances  which  are 
generally  efficacious  in  removing  guilt,  and  after  the  rules 
on  the  special  penances  for  the  classified  offences. 

These  facts  will,  I  think,  suffice  to  show  that  the 
Gautama  Dharmaj-astra  may  be  safely  declared  to  be  the 
oldest  of  the  existing  works  on  the  sacred  law.  This 
assertion  must,  however,  not  be  taken  to  mean,  that  every 


'  See  e.g.  Asvalayana  Gnhya-sutra  IV,  i. 


INTRODUCTION.  Iv 


single  one  of  its  SOtras  is  older  than  the  other  four  Dharma- 
sutras.  Two  interpolations  have  already  been  pointed  out 
above  \  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  there  may  be  more, 
especially  such  as  refer  to  the  wording  of  the  Sutras.  For 
it  is  a  suspicious  fact  that  Gautama's  language  agrees  closer 
with  Pacini's  rules  than  that  of  Apastamba  and  Baudha- 
yana.  If  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  Gautama's  work  has 
been  torn  out  of  its  original  connexion,  and  from  a  school- 
book  has  become  a  work  of  general  authority,  and  for 
a  long  time  has  been  studied  by  Pandits  who  were 
brought  up  in  the  traditions  of  classical  grammar,  it 
seems  hardly  likely  that  it  could  retain  much  of  its  ancient 
peculiarities  of  language.  But  I  do  not  think  that  the 
interpolations  and  alterations  can  have  affected  the  general 
character  of  the  book  very  much.  It  is  too  methodically 
planned  and  too  carefully  arranged  to  admit  of  any  very 
great  changes.  The  fact,  too,  that  in  the  chapter  borrowed 
by  Baudhayana  the  majority  of  the  variae  lectiones  are 
corruptions,  not  better  readings,  favours  this  view.  Regard- 
ing the  distance  in  time  between  Gautama  on  the  one 
hand,  and  Baudhayana  and  Vasish///a  on  the  other,  I 
prefer  not  to  hazard  any  conjecture,  as  long  as  the  position 
of  the  Gautamas  among  the  schools  of  the  Sama-veda  has 
not  been  cleared  up.  So  much  only  can  be  said  that 
Gautama  probably  was  less  remote  from  Baudhayana  than 
from  V'asish/Z/a.  There  are  a  few  curious  terms  and  rules 
in  which  the  former  two  agree,  while  they,  at  the  same  time, 
differ  from  all  other  known  writers  on  Dharma.  Thus  the 
term  bhikshu,  literally  a  beggar,  which  Gautama-  uses  to 
denote  an  ascetic,  instead  of  the  more  common  yati  or 
sannyasin,  occurs  once  also  in  Baudhayana's  Sutra.  The 
same  is  the  case  with  the  rule.  III,  13,  which  orders  the 
ascetic  not  to  change  his  residence  during  the  rains.  Both 
the  name  bhikshu  and  the  rule  must  be  very  ancient,  as  the 
Buddhists  have  appropriated  them^  and  have  founded  on 
the  latter  their  practice  of  keeping  the  Vasso,  or  residence 
in  monasteries  during  the  rainy  season. 

*  See  p.  liii. 

*  Gaut.  Dh.  Ill,  2,  II  ;  see  also  Weber,  Hist.  Ind.  Lit.,  p.  327  (English  ed.) 


Ivi 


GAUTAMA. 


As  the  position  of  the  Gautamas  among  the  Saman 
schools  is  uncertain,  it  will,  of  course,  be  likewise  inad- 
visable to  make  any  attempt  at  connecting  them  with  the 
historical  period  of  India.  The  necessity  of  caution  in 
this  respect  is  so  obvious  that  I  should  not  point  it  out, 
were  it  not  that  the  Dharma^astra  contains  one  word,  the 
occurrence  of  which  is  sometimes  considered  to  indicate  the 
terminus  a  quo  for  the  dates  of  Indian  works.  The  word 
to  which  I  refer  is  Yavana.  Gautama  quotes,  IV,  3i,  an 
opinion  of  '  some,'  according  to  which  a  Yavana  is  the  off- 
spring of  a  5udra  male  and  a  Kshatriya  female.  Now  it  is 
well  known  that  this  name  is  a  corruption  of  the  Greek 
'laFav,  an  Ionian,  and  that  in  India  it  was  applied,  in  ancient 
times,  to  the  Greeks,  and  especially  to  Bactrian  and  Indo- 
Bactrian  Greeks,  who  ruled  in  the  second  century  B,  C.  over 
a  portion  of  Northern  India.  As  there  is  no  historical 
evidence  to  show  that  the  Indians  became  acquainted  with 
the  Greeks  before  the  invasion  of  Alexander  in  the  fourth 
century  B.  c,  it  has  been  held  that  works  containing  the 
word  Yavana  cannot  have  been  composed  before  300  B.  C. 
But  irrespective  of  the  consideration  that  the  text  of  our 
Dharmaj-astra  is  not  trustworthy  enough  to  allow  its  date  to 
be  ascertained  by  a  single  word,  the  reasoning  itself  on 
which  the  determinative  power  of  the  word  Yavana  is 
based,  is  not  beyond  doubt,  as  it  is  applied  to  a  person  who, 
to  judge  from  his  name,  was  not  a  Greek,  in  the  ancient 
inscription  of  Rudradaman  at  Gxina.ga.d/i'^. 

The  information  regarding  the  state  of  the  Vedic  litera- 
ture, which  the  Dharma^astra  furnishes,  is  not  very  ex- 
tensive. But  some  of  the  items  are  interesting,  especially 
the  proof  that  Gautama  knew  the  Taittiriya  Arawyaka, 
from  which  he  took  the  first  six  Sutras  of  the  twenty-fifth 
Adhyaya  ;  the  Samavidhana  Brahma;/a,  from  which  the 
twenty-sixth  Adhyaya  has  been  borrowed  ;  and  the  Athar- 
va^iras,  which  is  mentioned  XIX,  12.  The  latter  word 
denotes,  according  to  Haradatta,  one  of  the  Upanishads  of 

1  The  person  alluded  to  is  Asoka's  lieutenant,  the  Yavanara^a  Tushaspa, 
who  appears  to  have  been  a  Persian ;  for  the  inscription,  see  Ind.  Ant.  VII, 
P-  257. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ivil 


the  Atharva-veda,  which  usually  are  not  considered  to 
belong  to  a  high  antiquity.  The  fact  that  Gautama  and 
Baudhayana  knew  it,  will  probably  modify  this  opinion. 
Another  important  fact  is  that  Gautama,  XXI,  7,  quotes 
Manu,  and  asserts  that  the  latter  declared  it  to  be  impos- 
sible to  expiate  the  guilt  incurred  by  killing  a  Brah- 
ma«a,  drinking  spirituous  liquor,  or  violating  a  Guru's  bed. 
From  this  statement  it  appears  that  Gautama  knew  an 
ancient  work  on  law  which  was  attributed  to  Manu.  It 
probably  was  the  foundation  of  the  existing  Manava  Dhar- 
majastra.  No  other  teacher  on  law,  besides  Manu,  is  men- 
tioned by  name.  But  the  numerous  references  to  the 
opinions  of  '  some '  show  that  Gautama's  work  was  not  the 
first  Dharma-sutra. 

In  conclusion,  I  have  to  add  a  few  words  regarding  the 
materials  on  which  the  subjoined  translation  is  based. 
The  text  published  by  Professor  Stenzler  for  the  Sanskrit 
Text  Society  has  been  used  as  the  basis  \  It  has  been 
collated  with  a  rough  edition,  prepared  from  my  own 
MSS.  P  and  C,  a  MS.  belonging  to  the  Collection  of  the 
Government  of  Bombay,  bought  at  Belgam,  and  a  MS. 
borrowed  from  a  Tuna.  5astri.  But  the  readings  given  by 
Professor  Stenzler  and  his  division  of  the  Sutras  have 
always  been  followed  in  the  body  of  the  translation.  In 
those  cases,  where  the  variae  lectiones  of  my  MSS.  seemed 
preferable,  they  have  been  given  and  translated  in  the 
notes.  The  reason  which  induced  me  to  adopt  this 
course  was  that  I  thought  it  more  advisable  to  facilitate 
references  to  the  printed  Sanskrit  text  than  to  insist  on  the 
insertion  of  a  few  alterations  in  the  translation,  which  would 
have  disturbed  the  order  of  the  Sutras.  The  notes  have 
been  taken  from  the  above-mentioned  rough  edition  and 
from  my  MSS.  of  Haradatta's  commentary,  called  Gau- 
tamiya  Mitakshari. 

^  The  Institutes  of  Gautama,  edited  with  an  index  of  words  by  A.  F.  Stenzler, 
London,  1876. 


APASTAMBA, 

APHORISMS   ON   THE    SAC^fb   LAW 
OF  THE    HINDUS. 


AP  A  STAxMB  A, 

APHORISMS  ON  THE  SACRED  LAW 
OF  THE  HINDUS. 


PrASNA    I,    PaTALA    1,    KHAA-iJA    1. 

1.  Now,  therefore,  we  will  declare  the  acts  pro- 
ductive of  merit  which  form  part  of  the  customs  of 
daily  life,  as  they  have  been  settled  by  the  agree- 
ment (of  those  who  know  the  law). 

2.  The  authority  (for  these  duties)  is  the  agree- 
ment of  those  who  know  the  law,  (and  the  authorities 
for  the  latter  are)  the  Vedas  alone. 

3.  (There  are)  four  castes — Brahma^as,  Kshatri- 
yas,  Vaii'yas,  and  6'udras. 

4.  Amongst  these,  each  preceding  (caste)  is  supe- 
rior by  birth  to  the  one  following. 

5.  (For  all  these),  excepting  6'udras  and  those 
who  have  committed  bad  actions,  (are  ordained)  the 
initiation,  the  study  of  the  Veda,  and  the  kindling  of 

1.  I.  Samaya,  '  agreement,  decision,'  is  threefold.  It  includes 
injunction,  restriction,  and  prohibition. 

Dharma,  '  acts  productive  of  merit,'  usually  translated  by  '  duty 
or  law,'  is  more  accurately  explained  as  an  act  which  produces 
the  quality  of  the  soul  called  apurva,  the  cause  of  heavenly  bliss 
and  of  final  liberation. 

2.  Manu  II,  6,  12;  Ya§^.  I,  -;  Gautama  I,  i. 
5.   Manu  II,  35. 

[2]      .  B 


APASTAMBA.  I,  i, 


the  sacred  fire ;  and  (their)  works  are  productive  of 
rewards  (in  this  world  and  the  next). 

6.  To  serve  the  other  (three)  castes  (is  ordained) 
for  the  ^'udra. 

7.  The  higher  the  caste  (which  he  serves)  the 
greater  is  the  merit. 

8.  The  initiation  is  the  consecration  in  accordance 
with  the  texts  of  the  Veda,  of  a  male  who  is  desirous 
of  (and  can  make  use  of)  sacred  knowledge. 

9.  A  Brahma;/a  declares  that  the  Gayatrt  is  learnt 
for  the  sake  of  all  the  (three)  Vedas. 

10.  (Coming)  out  of  darkness,  forsooth,  he  enters 
darkness,  whom  a  man  unlearned  in  the  Vedas, 
initiates,  and  (so  does  he)  who,  without  being  learned 
in  the  Vedas,  (performs  the  rite  of  initiation.)  That 
has  been  declared  in  a  Brahma;^a. 

11.  As  performer  of  this  rite  of  initiation  he  shall 
seek  to  obtain  a  man  in  whose  family  sacred  learning 
is  hereditary,  who  himself  possesses  it,  and  who  is 
devout  (in  following  the  law). 

12.  And  under  him  the  sacred  science  must  be 


6,    Manu  I,  91,  VIII,  410,  and  IX,  334  ;  Ya^n.  I,  120. 

8.  The  use  of  the  masculine  in  the  text  excludes  women.  For 
though  women  may  have  occasion  to  use  such  texts  as  '  O  fire, 
lord  of  the  dwelling,'  &c.  at  the  Agnihotra,  still  it  is  specially 
ordained  that  they  shall  be  taught  this  and  similar  verses  only  just 
before  the  rite  is  to  be  performed. 

9.  The  object  of  the  Sutra  is  to  remove  a  doubt  whether  the 
ceremony  of  initiation  ought  to  be  repeated  for  each  Veda,  in  case 
a  man  desires  to  study  more  than  one  Veda.  This  repetition  is 
declared  to  be  unnecessary,  except,  as  the  commentator  adds,  in 
the  case  of  the  Atharva-veda,  for  which,  according  to  a  passage  of 
a  Brahma«a,  a  fresh  initiation  is  necessary.  The  latter  rule  is  given 
in  the  Vaitana-sutra  I,  i,  5. 

12.    Haradatta:    'But  this  (latter  rule  regarding  the  taking  of 


I,  r,  r.  INITIATION. 


Studied  until  the  end,  provided  (the  teacher)  does  not 
fall  off  from  the  ordinances  of  the  law. 

13.  He  from  whom  (the  pupil)  gathers  (a/'inoti) 
(the  knowledge  of)  his  religious  duties  (dharman)  (is 
called)  the  A/'arya  (teacher). 

14.  Him  he  should  never  offend. 

15.  For  he  causes  him  (the  pupil)  to  be  born  (a 
second  time)  by  (imparting  to  him)  sacred  learning. 

16.  This  (second)  birth  is  the  best. 

1 7.  The  father  and  the  mother  produce  the  body 
only. 

1 8.  Let  him  initiate  a  Brahma/^a  in  spring,  a 
Kshatriya  in  summer,  a  Vaiiya  in  autumn,  a  Brah- 
ma;^a  in  the  eighth  year  after  his  conception,  a 
Kshatriya  in  the  eleventh  year  after  his  conception, 
(and)  a  Vaii^^a  in  the  twelfth  after  his  conception. 

19.  Now  (follows  the  enumeration  of  the  years 

another  teacher)  does  not  hold  good  for  those  who  have  begun 
to  study,  solemnly  binding  themselves  to  their  teacher.  How  so  ? 
As  he  (the  pupil)  shall  consider  a  person  who  initiates  and 
instructs  him  his  A/farya,  and  a  pupil  who  has  been  once  initiated 
cannot  be  initiated  again,  how  can  another  man  instruct  him  ?  For 
this  reason  it  must  be  understood  that  the  study  begun  with  one 
teacher  may  not  be  completed  with  another,  if  the  first  die.'  Com- 
pare also  Haradatta  on  I,  2,  7,  26,  and  the  rule  given  I,  i,  4,  26. 
In  our  times  also  pupils,  who  have  bound  themselves  to  a  teacher 
by  paying  their  respects  to  him  and  presenting  a  cocoa-nut,  in 
order  to  learn  from  him  a  particular  branch  of  science,  must  not 
study  the  same  branch  of  science  under  any  other  teacher. 

13.  ^Nlanu  II,  69;  Ya§^.  I,  15. 

14.  jNIanu  II,  144. 

15.  INIanu  II,  146-148. 

16.  '  Because  it  procures  heavenly  bliss  and  final  liberation.' — 
Haradatta. 

17.  Manu  II,  147. 

18.  Ya^n.  I,  14  ;  Manu  II,  36;  Ajvalayana  Gri.  Su.  I,  19,  i,  4; 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  20  seq. 

B  2 


APASTAMBA.  I,  i,  i. 


to  be  chosen)  for  the  fulfilment  of  some  (particular) 
wish. 

20.  (Let  him  initiate)  a  person  desirous  of  excel- 
lence in  sacred  learning  in  his  seventh  year,  a  person 
desirous  of  long  life  in  his  eighth  year,  a  person 
desirous  of  manly  vigour  in  his  ninth  year,  a  person 
desirous  of  food  in  his  tenth  year,  a  person  desirous 
of  strength  in  his  eleventh  year,  a  person  desirous  of 
cattle  in  his  twelfth  year. 

21.  There  is  no  dereliction  (of  duty,  if  the  initia- 
tion takes  place),  in  the  case  of  a  Brahma;ea  before 
the  completion  of  the  sixteenth  year,  in  the  case  of  a 
Kshatriya  before  the  completion  of  the  twenty-second 
year,  in  the  case  of  a  Vai^ya  before  the  completion 
of  the  twenty-fourth  year. 

22.  (Let  him  be  initiated  at  such  an  age)  that  he 
may  be  able  to  perform  the  duties,  which  we  shall 
declare  below. 

23.  If  the  proper  time  for  the  initiation  has 
passed,  he  shall  observe  for  the  space  of  two  months 

20.  Manu  II,  37. 

21.  Asv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  19,  5,  7;   Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  21. 

22.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is,  that  the  initiation  shall  be 
performed  as  soon  as  the  child  is  able  to  begin  the  study  of  the 
Veda.  If  it  is  so  far  developed  at  eight  years,  the  ceremony  must 
then  be  performed;  and  if  it  be  then  neglected,  or,  if  it  be 
neglected  at  any  time  when  the  capacity  for  learning  exists,  the 
expiation  prescribed  in  the  following  Sutras  must  be  performed. 
The  age  of  sixteen  in  the  case  of  Brahma?zas  is  the  latest  term 
up  to  which  the  ceremony  may  be  deferred,  in  case  of  incapacity 
for  study  only.  After  the  lapse  of  the  sixteenth  year,  the  expiation 
becomes  also  necessary.    Manu  II,  38;  Ysigu.  1,  si- 

23.  The  meaning  is,  he  shall  keep  all  the  restrictions  imposed 
upon  a  student,  as  chastity,  &c.,  but  that  he  shall  not  perform 
fire-worship  or  service  to  a  teacher,  nor  study.  Manu  II,  39;  XI,  192; 
Y%u.  I,  38;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  10 1. 


I,  I,  2.  INITIATION. 


the  duties  of  a  student,  as   observed  by  those  who 
are  studying  the  three  Vedas. 

24.  After  that  he  may  be  initiated. 

25.  After  that  he  shall  bathe  (daily)  for  one  year. 

26.  After  that  he  may  be  instructed, 

27.  He,  whose  father  and  grandfather  have  not 
been  Initiated,  (and  his  two  ancestors)  are  called 
'  slayers  of  the  Brahman.' 

28.  Intercourse,  eating,  and  intermarriage  with 
them  should  be  avoided. 

29.  If  they  wish  it  (they  may  perform  the  follow- 
ing) expiation ; 

30.  In  the  same  manner  as  for  the  first  neglect 
(of  the  initiation),  (a  penance  of)  two  months  (was) 
prescribed,  so  (they  shall  do  penance  for)  one  year. 

31.  Afterwards  they  may  be  initiated,  and  then 
they  must  bathe  (daily), 

Pra^na  I,  Pa^ala  1,  Khaa'da  2. 

1.  For  as  many  years  as  there  are  uninitiated 
persons,  reckoning  (one  year)  for  each  ancestor  (and 
the  person  to  be  initiated  himself), 

2.  (They  should  bathe  daily  under  the  recitation) 
of  the  seven  Pavamanis,  beginning  with  '  If  near  or 
far '  of  the  Ya^shpavitra,  (*  May  the  waters,  the 
mothers  purify  us,'  &c.)  of  the  Samapavitra,  (*  With 

25.  *If  he  is  strong,  he  shall  bathe  three  times  a  day — morning, 
midday,  and  evening/ — Haradatta. 

27.  Brahman,  apparently, here  means  'Veda,'  and  those  who  neg- 
lect its  study  may  metaphorically  be  called  '  slayers  of  the  Veda.' 

28.  Manu  II,  40;  Ajv.Grz'.Su.  1,19, 8,9;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,2i. 
30.    Compare  above,  I,  i,  i,  23. 

2.  2.  The  seven  Pavamanis  are  seven  verses  \vhich  occur  i?/g-veda 
IX,67, 21-27.  Ya^shpavitra=Taitt.  Sa//ih.  1, 2,  i,  i.  Samapavitra  is 
found  Sama-veda  I,  2,  2,  3,  5.  Angirasapavitra=i?/g-veda  IV,  40,  5. 


APASTAMBA. 


what  help  assists,'  &c.),  and  of  the  Angirasapavitra 
('  A  swan,  dwelhng  in  purity '), 

3.  Or  also  under  the  recitation  of  the  Vyahrztis 
(om,  bhM,  bhuva/^,  suva/^). 

4.  After  that  (such  a  person)  may  be  taught  (the 
Veda). 

5.  But  those  whose  great-grandfather's  (grand- 
father's and  father's)  initiation  is  not  remembered, 
are  called  '  burial-grounds.' 

6.  Intercourse,  dining,  and  intermarriage  with 
them  should  be  avoided.  For  them,  if  they  like,  the 
(following)  penance  (is  prescribed).  (Such  a  man) 
shall  keep  for  twelve  years  the  rules  prescribed  for 
a  student  who  is  studying  the  three  Vedas.  After- 
wards he  may  be  initiated.  Then  he  shall  bathe 
under  the  recitation  of  the  Pavamanis  and  of  the 
other  (texts  mentioned  above,  I,  i,  2,  2). 

7.  Then  he  may  be  instructed  in  the  duties  of  a 
householder. 

8.  He  shall  not  be  taught  (the  whole  Veda),  but 
only  the  sacred  formulas  required  for  the  domestic 
ceremonies. 

9.  When  he  has  finished  this  (study  of  the  Grzhya- 
mantras),  he  may  be  initiated  (after  having  per- 
formed the  penance  prescribed)  for  the  first  neglect 
(I,  I,  I,  23). 

10.  Afterwards  (everything  is  performed)  as  In 
the  case  of  a  regular  initiation. 

11.  He  who  has  been  initiated  shall  dwell  as  a 
religious  student  in  the  house  of  his  teacher, 

10.  The  commentator  observes  that  for  those  whose  great-great- 
grandfather or  remoter  ancestors  were  not  initiated,  no  penance  is 
prescribed,  and  that  it  must  be  fixed  by  those  who  know  the  law. 

11.  Manu  II,  164. 


I,  I,  2.  STUDENTSHIP. 


1 2.  For  forty-eight  years  (if  he  learns  all  the  four 
Vedas), 

13.  (Or)  a  quarter  less  (i.  e.  for  thirty-six  years), 

14.  (Or)  less  by  half  (i.  e.  for  twenty-four  years), 

15.  (Or)  three  quarters  less  (i.e.  for  eighteen 
years), 

16.  Twelve  years  (should  be)  the  shortest  time 
(for  his  residence  with  his  teacher). 

17.  A  student  who  studies  the  sacred  science  shall 
not  dwell  with  anybody  else  (than  his  teacher). 

18.  Now  (follow)  the  rules  for  the  studentship. 

19.  He  shall  obey  his  teacher,  except  (when 
ordered  to  commit)  crimes  which  cause  loss  of 
caste. 

20.  He  shall  do  what  is  serviceable  to  his  teacher, 
he  shall  not  contradict  him. 

21.  He  shall  always  occupy  a  couch  or  seat  lower 
(than  that  of  his  teacher). 

22.  He  shall  not  eat  food  offered  (at  a  funeral 
oblation  or  at  a  sacrifice), 

12.    Manu  III,  I,  and  Ya^.  I,  ^6  ;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  125. 

16.  The  commentator  declares  that  Manu  III,  i,  the  expression 
*  until  he  has  learnt  it,'  must  be  understood  in  this  sense,  that  the 
pupil  may  leave  his  teacher,  if  he  has  learnt  the  Veda,  after  twelve 
years'  study,  never  before.    But  compare  also  Xsv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  22, 3. 

17.  The  commentator  states  that  this  rule  refers  only  to  a 
temporary,  not  to  a  professed  student  (naish/^ika).  He  also  gives 
an  entirely  different  explanation  to  the  Sutra,  which,  according  to 
some,  means,  '  A  student  who  learns  the  sacred  science  shall 
not  fast  in  order  to  obtain  heaven.'  This  rendering  also  is  ad- 
missible, as  the  word  para  may  mean  either  a  '  stranger '  or 
'  heaven,'  and  upavasa,  '  dwelling '  or  '  fasting.' 

19.  Regarding  the  crimes  which  cause  loss  of  caste  (pataniya), 
see  below,  I,  7,  21,  7. 

20.  Manu  II,  108,  and  Ya^il.  I,  27. 

21.  Manu  II,  108,  198;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  123  and  124. 


8  Apastamba.  I,  I,  ^. 

23.  Nor  pungent  condiments,  salt,  honey,  or  meat. 

24.  He  shall  not  sleep  in  the  day-time. 

25.  He  shall  not  use  perfumes. 

26.  He  shall  preserve  chastity. 

27.  He  shall  not  embellish  himself  (by  using  oint- 
ments and  the  like). 

28.  He  shall  not  wash  his  body  (with  hot  water 
for  pleasure). 

29.  But,  if  it  is  soiled  by  unclean  things,  he  shall 
clean  it  (with  earth  or  water),  in  a  place  where  he  is 
not  seen  by  a  Guru. 

30.  Let  him  not  sport  in  the  water  whilst  bathing  ; 
let  him  swim  (motionless)  like  a  stick. 

31.  He  shall  wear  all  his  hair  tied  in  one  knot. 

32.  Or  let  him  tie  the  lock  on  the  crown  of  the 
head  in  a  knot,  and  shave  the  rest  of  the  hair. 

33.  The  girdle  of  a  Brahma^^a  shall  be  made  of 


23.  Regarding  the  meaning  of  kshara, '  pungent  condiments,'  see 
Haradatta  on  II,  6,  15,  15.  Other  commentators  explain  the  term 
differently. — Manu  II,  177;  Yagn.  1,  33;  and  Weber,  Ind.  Stud. 
X,  123.     A.5-V.  Gri.  Su.  I,  22,  2. 

25.  Manu  II,  177;  Y%n.  I,  33. 

26.  Manu  II,  180. 

27.  Manu  II,  178  ;  Ya^ii.  I,  33. 

29.  'Here,  in  the  section  on  the  teacher,  the  word  guru  desig- 
nates the  father  and  the  rest  also.' — Haradatta. 

30.  Another  version  of  the  first  portion  of  this  Sutra,  proposed 
by  Haradatta,  is,  '  Let  him  not,  whilst  bathing,  clean  himself  (with 
bathing  powder  or  the  like).'  Another  commentator  takes  Siitra  28 
as  a  prohibition  of  the  daily  bath  or  washing  generally  ordained 
for  Brahma«as,  and  refers  Sutra  29  to  the  naimittika  snana  or 
'  bathing  on  certain  occasions,'  and  takes  Siatra  30  as  a  restriction 
of  the  latter. 

31.  Manu  II,  219. 

33.  Manu  II,  42-44;  Ya^n,  I,  29;  Asv.  Gn.  Sft.  I,  19,  12; 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  23. 


I,  I,  2.  STUDENTSHIP. 


Mufi^  grass,  and  consist  of  three  strings  ;  if  possible, 
(the  strings)  should  be  twisted  to  the  right. 

34.  A  bowstring  (should  be  the  girdle)  of  a 
Kshatriya, 

35.  Or  a  string  of  INIun^  grass  in  which  pieces 
of  iron  have  been  tied. 

36.  A  wool  thread  (shall  be  the  girdle)  of  a 
Vaii^^a, 

37.  Or  a  rope  used  for  yoking  the  oxen  to  the 
plough,  or  a  string  made  of  Tamala-bark. 

38.  The  staff  worn  by  a  Brahmawa  should  be 
made  of  Pala^a  wood,  that  of  a  Kshatriya  of  a 
branch  of  the  Banian  tree,  which  grows  downwards, 
that  of  a  Vaijya  of  Badara  or  Udumbara  wood. 
Some  declare,  without  any  reference  to  caste,  that 
the  staff  of  a  student  should  be  made  of  the  wood  of 
a  tree  (that  is  fit  to  be  used  at  the  sacrifice). 

39.  (He  shall  wear)  a  cloth  (to  cover  his  naked- 
ness). 

40.  (It  shall  be  made)  of  hemp  for  a  Brahma;/a, 
of  flax  (for  a  Kshatriya),  of  the  skin  of  a  (clean) 
animal  (for  a  Vaii'ya). 

41.  Some  declare  that  the  (upper)  garment  (of  a 
Brahma;/a)  should  be  dyed  with  red  Lodh, 

38.  Manu  II,  45;  Ya^.  I,  29;  As\.  Gri.  Su.  I,  19,  13;  20,  i; 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  23. 

Haradatta  gives  no  commentary  on  this  Sutra,  but  refers  back 
to  the  Grzliya-sutra,  where  the  same  words  occur. 

39.  The  word  forms  a  Sutra  by  itself,  in  order  to  show  that 
every  one  must  wear  this  cloth. 

40.  Manu  II,  41.  '  Clean  '  means  here  and  ever)-where  else,  if 
appUed  to  animals  or  things,  '  fit  to  be  used  at  the  sacrifice.' 

41.  ks\.  Gri.  Su.  I,  19,  ii;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  22. 


lO  APASTAMBA.  I,  i,  3. 

Pra-s-na  I,   Pat-ala  1,  Khatvda  3. 

1.  And  that  of  a  Kshatriya  dyed  with  madder, 

2.  And  that  of  a  Vaii^ya  dyed  with  turmeric. 

3.  (The  skin)  worn  by  a  Brahma;^a  shall  be  that 
of  a  common  deer  or  of  a  black  doe. 

4.  If  he  wears  a  black  skin,  let  him  not  spread  it 
(on  the  ground)  to  sit  or  lie  upon  it 

5.  (The  skin  worn)  by  a  Kshatriya  shall  be  that 
of  a  spotted  deer. 

6.  (The  skin  worn)  by  a  Vai^ya  shall  be  that  of  a 
he-goat. 

7.  The  skin  of  a  sheep  is  fit  to  be  worn  by  all 
castes, 

8.  And  a  plaid  made  of  wool. 

9.  He  who  wishes  the  increase  of  Brahma/^a 
power  shall  wear  skins  only ;  he  who  wishes  the  in- 
crease of  Kshatriya  power  shall  wear  cloth  only ;  he 
who  wishes  the  increase  of  both  shall  wear  both 
(skin  and  cloth).     Thus  says  a  Brahma;2a. 

10.  But  (I,  Apastamba,  say),  let  him  wear  a  skin 
only  as  his  upper  garment. 

11.  Let  him  not  look  at  dancing. 

12.  Let  him  not  go  to  assembHes  (for  gambling, 
&c,),  nor  to  crowds  (assembled  at  festivals). 

3.  3.    Manu  II,  41;  Yaga.  I,  29;  Asv.  Grt.  Su.  I,  19,  10. 

9.  See  also  Gopatha-brahmaz/a  I,  2,  4. 

10.  According  to  I,  i,  2,  39,  I,  i,  3,  10,  the  rule  of  dress  for 
students  is  the  following : — According  to  Apastamba,  a  student 
shall  wear  a  piece  of  cloth  to  cover  his  nakedness  (lango/t),  and 
a  skin  as  upper  garment.  Other  teachers  allow,  besides,  an  upper 
dress  of  cloth,  coloured  differently  for  the  different  castes,  with  or 
without  the  addition  of  a  deer-skin. 

11.  Manu  II,  178. 

12-13.   Manu  II,  179;  Y%ri.  I,  33. 


I,  I,  3.  STUDENTSHIP.  I  I 

13.  Let  him  not  be  addicted  to  gossiping. 

14.  Let  him  be  discreet. 

15.  Let  him  not  do  anything  for  his  own  pleasure 
in  places  which  his  teacher  frequents. 

16.  Let  him  talk  with  women  so  much  (only)  as 
his  purpose  requires. 

1 7.  (Let  him  be)  forgiving. 

18.  Let  him  restrain  his  organs  from  seeking 
illicit  objects. 

19.  Let  him  be  untiring  in  fulfilling  his  duties  ; 

20.  Modest ; 

2 1 .  Possessed  of  self-command  ; 

22.  Energetic  ; 

23.  Free  from  anger  ; 

24.  (And)  free  from  envy. 

25.  Bringing  all  he  obtains  to  his  teacher,  he  shall 
go  begging  with  a  vessel  in  the  morning  and  in  the 
evening,  (and  he  may)  beg  (from  everybody)  except 
low-caste  people  unfit  for  association  (with  Aryas) 
and  Abhijrastas. 

15.  'Anything  for  his  own  pleasure,'  i.e.  keeping  conversations 
with  friends,  making  his  toilet,  &c. 

19.  The  explanations  of  the  last"  two  terms,  janta  and  danta, 
are  different  from  those  given  usually,  ^'ama  is  usually  explained 
as  'the  exclusive  direction  of  the  mind  towards  God,'  and  dama 
as  '  the  restraining  of  the  senses.' 

23.    i\Ianu  II,  178. 

25.    Regarding  the  explanation  of  the  term  Abhlrasta  see  below, 

I,  7,  21,  7.  Haradatta:  'Apapatras  are  called  those  born  from  a 
high-caste  mother  and  a  low-caste  father,  such  as  washermen.  For 
their  cooking  vessels  &c.  are  unfit  for  the  use  of  the  four  castes.  .  .  . 
Since  Apastamba  says,  "  In  the  evening  and  in  the  morning,  food 
obtained  in  the  evening  must  not  be  used  for  the  morning  meal, 
nor  food  obtained  in  the  morning  for  the  evening  meal." '    JNIanu 

II,  182,  183,  185;  Asv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  22,  4.  See  also  Gopatha- 
brahmawa  I,  2,  6. 


1 2  APASTAMBA.  I,  i,  3. 

26.  A  Brahma;za  declares  :  Since  a  devout  stu- 
dent takes  away  from  women,  who  refuse  (to  give 
him  alms,  the  merit  gained)  by  (^rauta)- sacrifices, 
by  gifts,  (and)  by  burnt-offerings  (offered  in  the 
domestic  fire),  as  well  as  their  offspring,  their  cattle, 
the  sacred  learning  (of  their  families),  therefore,  for- 
sooth, (a  woman)  should  not  refuse  (alms)  to  the 
crowd  of  students  ;  for  amongst  those  (who  come  to 
beg),  there  might  be  one  of  that  (devout)  kind,  one 
who  thus  (conscientiously)  keeps  his  vow. 

2  7.  Alms  (shall)  not  (be  considered)  leavings  (and 
be  rejected)  by  inference  (from  their  appearance),  but 
on  the  strength  of  ocular  or  oral  testimony  (only). 

28.  A  Brahma;2a  shall  beg,  prefacing  (his  request) 
by  the  word  '  Lady ;' 

29.  A  Kshatriya  (inserting  the  word)  'Lady'  in 
the  middle  (between  the  words  'give  alms'); 

30.  A  Vaij-ya,  adding  the  word  '  Lady'  (at  the  end 
of  the  formula). 

31.  (The  pupil)  having  taken  those  (alms)  shall 
place  them  before  his  teacher  and  offer  them  to  him. 

32.  He  may  eat  (the  food)  after  having  been 
ordered  to  do  so  by  his  teacher. 


27.  To  eat  the  residue  of  the  meal  of  any  person  except  that 
left  by  the  teacher  and  other  Gurus,  is  not  permitted  to  a  student ; 
see  also  below,  I,  i,  4,  i  seq.;  Manu  II,  56;  Yagn.  1,  33. 

28.  The  formula  to  be  used  by  a  Brahmawa  is,  'Lady,  give  alms ;' 
that  to  be  used  by  a  Kshatriya,  'Give,  lady,  alms  ;'  and  that  used 
by  a  Vaij-ya,  '  Give  alms,  lady.'  Manu  II,  49 ;  Ya^u,  I,  30  ;  Ajv. 
Gri.  Su.  I,  22,  8. 

31.  The  words  with  which  he  announces  the  alms  are,  Idam 
ittham  ahr/tam,  'this  much  have  I  received.'  Manu  II,  51;  Ya^n. 
I,  27;  Asv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  22,  10. 

32.  The  answer  of  the  teacher  is,  Saumya  tvameva  bhufikshva, 
'  friend,  eat  thou.' 


I,  I,  3.  STUDENTSHIP. 


2,^.  If  the  teacher  is  absent,  the  pupil  (shall  offer 
the  food)  to  (a  member  of)  the  teacher's  family. 

34.  If  the  (family  of  the  teacher)  is  (also)  absent, 
the  pupil  (may  offer  the  food)  to  other  learned 
Brahma;2as  (^'rotriyas)  also  (and  receive  from  them 
the  permission  to  eat). 

35.  He  shall  not  beg  for  his  own  sake  (alone). 

36.  After  he  has  eaten,  he  himself  shall  clean  his 
dish. 

2,y.    And  he  shall  leave  no  residue  (in  his  dish). 

38.  If  he  cannot  (eat  all  that  he  has  taken  in 
his  dish),  he  shall  bury  (the  remainder)  in  the 
ground ; 

39.  Or  he  may  throw  it  into  the  water ; 

40.  Or  he  may  place  (all  that  remains  in  a  pot), 
and  put  it  down  near  an  (uninitiated)  Arya ; 

41.  Or  (he  may  put  it  down)  near  a  ^'udra  slave 
(belonging  to  his  teacher). 

42.  If  (the  pupil)  is  on  a  journey,  he  shall  throw 


34.  Regarding  the  term  5rotriya,  see  below,  II,  3,  6,  4. 

35.  '  The  meaning  of  this  Sutra  is,  that  the  rule  given,  Sutra  42 
(below),  for  a  pupil  who  is  on  a  journey,  shall  hold  good  also  for 
a  pupil  who  is  at  home,  if  (in  the  absence  of  his  teacher)  no 
xSrotriyas  are  to  be  found  (from  whom  he  can  receive  the  per- 
mission to  eat).' — Haradatta. 

36.  '  He  commits  no  sin,  if  he  has  the  alms-pot  cleaned  by 
somebody  else.  Some  say  that  the  Sutra  refers  to  both  vessels 
(the  alms-pot  and  his  own  dish).' 

40.  An  Arya  is  a  person  belonging  to  one  of  the  first  three 
castes  (see  below).  The  Ar}'a  must  be  a  boy  who  is  not  initiated, 
because  children  are  kamabhaksha/^,  i.e.  allowed  to  eat  what  they 
like,  even  leavings. 

42.  This  rule  holds  good  if  no  6'rotriyas  are  near.  If  ^rotriyas 
are  to  be  found,  Sutra  38  applies.  Agni,  the  god  of  fire,  is  con- 
sidered to  be  of  the  Brahminical  caste,  and  hence  he  takes  the 


14  APASTAMBA.  I,  r,  4- 

a  part  of  the  alms  into  the  fire  and  eat  (the  re- 
mainder). 

43.  Alms  are  declared  to  be  sacrificial  food.  In 
regard  to  them  the  teacher  (holds  the  position 
which)  a  deity  (holds  in  regard  to  food  offered  at  a 
sacrifice). 

44.  And  (the  teacher  holds  also  the  place  which) 
the  Ahavantya  fire  occupies  (at  a  sacrifice,  because 
a  portion  of  the  alms  is  offered  in  the  fire  of  his 
stomach). 

45.  To  him  (the  teacher)  the  (student)  shall  offer 
(a  portion  of  the  alms), 

PrA,SNA    I,    PaT^ALA    1,    KHAiVDA    4. 

1.  And  (having  done  so)  eat  what  is  left. 

2.  For  this  (remnant  of  food)  is  certainly  a  rem- 
nant of  sacrificial  food. 

3.  If  he  obtains  other  things  (besides  food,  such 
as  cattle  or  fuel,  and  gives  them  to  his  teacher)  as 
he  obtains  them,  then  those  (things  hold  the  place 
of)  rewards  (given  to  priests  for  the  performance  of 
a  sacrifice). 

4.  This  Is  the  sacrifice  to  be  performed  daily  by 
a  religious  student. 

5.  And  (the  teacher)  shall  not  give  him  anything 
that  is  forbidden  by  the  revealed  texts,  (not  even  as) 
leavings, 

6.  Such  as  pungent  condiments,  salt,  honey,  or 
meat  (and  the  like). 

place  of  the  teacher  or  of  the  ^rotriyas.  See  also  Manu  II,  247, 
248,  and  the  passages  collected  from  the  Brahmawas,  by  Prof. 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  IX,  39. 

44.   Manu  II,  231. 

4.  6.    See  above,  I,  i,  2,  23. 


I,  T,  4.  STUDENTSHIP.  1 5 

7.  By  this  (last  Sutra)  (it  is)  explained  (that)  the 
other  restrictions  (imposed  upon  a  student,  such  as 
abstinence  from  perfumes,  ointments,  &c.,  are  like- 
wise not  to  be  broken). 

8.  For  (explicit)  revealed  texts  have  greater  force 
than  custom  from  which  (the  existence  of  a  permis- 
sive passage  of  the  revelation)  may  be  inferred. 

9.  Besides  (in  this  particular  case)  a  (worldly) 
motive  for  the  practice  is  apparent. 

7.  See  above,  I,  1,2,  24  seq. : — According  to  Haradatta,  teachers 
were  in  the  habit  of  gi\'ing  ointments  and  the  Uke  forbidden  sub- 
stances to  their  pupils,  and  Apastamba  gives  this  rule  in  order 
to  show  his  dissent  from  the  practice. 

8.  '  Anumanika  means  •'  proper  to  be  inferred  from."  For  the 
existence  of  a  test  of  the  revelation  or  tradition  (Smmi)  is 
inferred  from  custom.  A  visible  text  of  the  revelation  is  (how- 
ever) of  greater  weight  than  a  custom  from  which  the  existence 
of  a  text  may  be  inferred.  It  is  impossible  to  infer  (the  existence 
of  a  text)  which  is  opposed  to  such  (a  \'isible  text),  on  account  of 
the  maxim  "  an  inference  (can  be  made  only,  if  it  is)  not  opposed 
(by  ocular  proof)."  (Apastamba),  by  speaking  thus,  ("  For  revealed 
texts,"  &c.,)  shows  that  the  rule  forbidding  a  student  to  eat  pun- 
gent condiments,  salt,  &c.  is  based  on  the  existing  text  of  a 
Brahmana.' — Haradatta. 

9.  '  Though  the  text  forbidding  the  use  of  pungent  condiments, 
salt,  and  the  like  refers  to  such  substances  if  they  are  not  leaWngs, 
still  it  is  improper  to  assert,  on  the  ground  of  the  custom  from 
which  a  permissive  text  may  be  inferred,  that  it  (the  existing  text), 
which  is  general,  must  be  restricted  (to  those  cases  only)  where  the 
forbidden  substances  are  not  leavings  given  by  the  teacher.  (If 
an  opponent  should  answer  that)  certainly  there  are  also  texts 
which  contradict  each  other,  such  as  "he  takes"  and  "he  does 
not  take,"  and  that  therefore  there  is  no  reason  why  a  text  restricted 
(to  the  case  in  which  forbidden  substances  are  lea\ings  of  the 
teacher)  should  not  be  inferred.  In  order  to  answer  (that  plea), 
he  (Apastamba)  says  (Sutra  9),  "  True,  that  would  be  right  if  no 
motive  whatever  could  be  discovered  for  that  custom  (to  eat  for- 
bidden food  which  is  given  by  the  teacher).  But  a  reason  for  this 
coiu-se  of  action  exists." ' — Haradatta. 


1 6  APASTAMBA.  I,  i,  4- 

10.  For  pleasure  is  obtained  (by  eating  or  using 
the  forbidden  substances). 

11.  A  residue  of  food  left  by  a  father  and  an  elder 
brother,  may  be  eaten. 

12.  If  they  act  contrary  to  the  law,  he  must  not 
eat  (their  leavings). 

13.  In  the  evening  and  in  the  morning  he  shall 
fetch  water  in  a  vessel  (for  the  use  of  his  teacher). 

14.  Daily  he  shall  fetch  fuel  from  the  forest,  and 
place  it  on  the  floor  (in  his  teacher's  house). 

15.  He   shall   not   go    to    fetch    firewood    after 
sunset. 

16.  After    having  kindled  the   fire,   and   having 
swept  the  ground  around  (the  altar),  he  shall  place 

10.  'What  is  that  (reason)?  [Sutra  10]  For  to  eat  pungent 
condiments,  salt,  &c.  gives  pleasure  to  the  eater,  and  therefore 
according  to  the  maxim,  I,  4,  12,  12,  "  That  in  case  a  custom  has 
pleasure  for  its  motive,  there  is  no  text  of  the  holy  law  to  authorise 
it,"  no  text  restricting  (the  prohibition  of  forbidden  substances  to 
the  case  in  which  a  Brahma/^arin  does  not  receive  them  as  leavings 
from  his  teacher)  can  be  inferred  (from  the  practice  of  eating  such 
leavings) .' — Haradatta. 

12.  Another  explanation  of  this  Sutra  is  given  by  Haradatta  : 
'  If  by  eating  their  leavings  he  should  commit  a  sin  (because  the 
food  contains  salt  &c.),  he  shall  not  do  it.' 

13.  Manu  II,  182. 

1 4.  The  reason  for  placing  the  fuel  on  the  ground  is,  according 
to  Haradatta,  the  fear  lest,  if  placed  on  some  shelf  or  the  like,  it 
should  tumble  down  and  injure  the  teacher's  children.  Others, 
however,  are  of  opinion  that  the  wood  which  the  pupil  fetches 
daily,  is  not  to  be  used  by  the  teacher  for  cooking,  but  for  the 
performance  of  the  pupil's  daily  fire-offering.  The  reason  for  this 
interpretation  is,  that  in  the  GnTiya-sutra  (Pa/ala  4)  the  daily 
offering  of  fuel  is  enjoined  with  the  same  words.  See  Weber, 
Ind.  Stud.  X,  123;  Manu  II,  186. 

16.  Some  explain,  instead  of '  after  having  swept  the  ground 
around  the  altar,'  &c.,  '  after  having  raked  the  scattered  brands 
into  a  heap.' — Haradatta. 


1,1,4.  STUDENTSHIP.  1 7 

the  sacred  fuel  on  the  fire  every  morning  and 
evening,  according  to  the  prescription  (of  the 
GWhya-sutra). 

17.  Some  say  that  the  fire  is  only  to  be  wor- 
shipped in  the  evening. 

18.  He  shall  sweep  the  place  around  the  fire  after 
it  has  been  made  to  burn  (by  the  addition  of  fuel), 
with  his  hand,  and  not  (with  the  bundle  of  Kusa. 
grass  called)  Samuhani. 

19.  But,  before  (adding  the  fuel,  he  is  free  to  use 
the  Samuhani)  at  his  pleasure. 

20.  He  shall  not  perform  non- religious  acts 
with  the  residue  of  the  water  employed  for  the 
fire-worship,  nor  sip  it. 

21.  He  shall  not  sip  water  which  has  been  stirred 
with  the  hand,  nor  such  as  has  been  received  into 
one  hand  only. 

22.  And  he  shall  avoid  sleep  (whilst  his  teacher 
is  awake). 

23.  Then  (after  having  risen)  he  shall  assist  his 
teacher  daily  by  acts  tending  to  the  acquisition  of 
spiritual  merit  and  of  wealth. 

24.  He  having  served  (his  teacher  during  the  day 
in  this  manner  he  shall  say  when  going  to  bed) :  I 
have  protected  the  protector  of  the  law  (my  teacher). 

18.   Asv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  22,  5. 

20.  During  the  fire-worship  water  is  wanted  for  sprinkling  the 
altar  in  various  ways. 

23.  Acts  tending  to  the  acquisition  of  merit  are  here — collecting 
sacred  fuel,  Kuxa  grass,  and  flowers  for  sacrifices.  Acts  tending 
to  the  acquisition  of  wealth  are— gathering  fuel  for  cooking,  &c. 
Manu  II,  182  ;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  123  and  124. 

24.  Another  explanation  of  the  words  spoken  by  the  student  is, 
*  O  law,  I  have  protected  him ;  protect  thou  me.'  See  also  Gopatha- 
brahmawa  I,  2,  4. 

[2]  C 


1 8  APASTAMBA.  1,2,5. 

25.  If  the  teacher  transgresses  the  law  through 
carelessness  or  knowingly,  he  shall  point  it  out  to 
him  privately. 

26.  If  (the  teacher)  does  not  cease  (to  transgress), 
he  himself  shall  perform  the  religious  acts  (which 
ought  to  be  performed  by  the  former)  ; 

2"].    Or  he  may  return  home. 

28.  Now  of  him  who  rises  before  (his  teacher) 
and  goes  to  rest  after  (him),  they  say  that  he  does 
not  sleep. 

29.  The  student  who  thus  entirely  fixes  his  mind 
there  (in  the  teacher's  family),  has  thereby  performed 
all  acts  which  yield  rewards  (such  as  the  6^yotish- 
/oma),  and  also  those  which  must  be  performed  by 
a  householder. 

Pra^na  I,   Patala  2,   Khajvda  5. 

1.  The  word  'devotion'  (must  be  understood  to 
apply)  to  (the  observance  of)  the  rules  (of  student- 
ship). 

2.  If  they  are  transgressed,  study  drives  out  the 
knowledge  of  the  Veda  acquired  already,  from  the 
(offender)  and  from  his  children. 

26.    Compare  above,  I,  i,  i,  12. 

29.  The  Sutra  refers  to  a  naish//nka  brahma^arin  or  professed 
student,  who  never  leaves  his  teacher's  family,  and  never  enters 
any  other  order ;  and  it  declares  his  merit  to  be  equal  to  that  of 
one  who  becomes  a  householder.     Manu  II,  243,  244;  Ya^ii. 

I,  49>  50- 

5.  I.    Manu  II,  164. 

2.  The  meaning  of  the  phrase,  '  Study  drives  out  the  Veda, 
which  has  already  been  learnt  from  him  who  studies  transgressing 
the  rules  prescribed  for  the  student,'  is,  '  The  Veda  recited  at  the 
Brahmayaj^ila  (daily  study),  and  other  religious  rites,  produces  no 
effect,  i.e.  gains  no  merit  for  the  reciter.'     Manu  II,  97.     Hara- 


1,2,5-  STUDENTSHIP.  1 9 

3.  Besides  he  will  go  to  hell,  and  his  life  will  be 
shortened. 

4.  On  account  of  that  (transgression  of  the  rules 
"of  studentship)  no  7?z'shis  are  born  amongst  the  men 
of  later  ages. 

5.  But  some  in  their  new  birth,  on  account  of  a 
residue  of  the  merit  acquired  by  their  actions  (in 
former  lives),  become  (similar  to)  7?2shis  by  their 
knowledge  (of  the  Veda), 

6.  Like  6'vetaketu. 

7.  And  whatever  else,  besides  the  Veda,  (a  stu- 
dent) who  obeys  the  rules  learns  from  his  teacher, 
that  brings  the  same  reward  as  the  Veda. 

8.  Also,  if  desirous  to  accomplish  something  (be 

datta  gives  also  the  following  three  explanations  of  this  Sutra, 
adopted  by  other  commentators  : — 

a.  If  these  (rules)  are  transgressed,  he  loses  his  capacity  for 
learning,  because  the  Brahman  forsakes  him,  &c. 

b.  If  these  rules  are  transgressed,  the  capacity  for  learning  and 
the  Brahman  leave  him,  &c. 

c.  From  him  who  studies  whilst  transgressing  these  rules,  the 
Brahman  goes  out,  &c. 

4.  '  Amongst  the  avaras  means  "  amongst  the  men  of  modern 
times,  those  who  live  in  the  Kaliyuga."  No  i?i'shis  are  bom 
means  "  there  are  none  who  see  (receive  the  revelation  of)  Man- 
tras, Vedic  texts." ' — Haradatta. 

5.  '  How  is  it  then  that  men  in  our  days,  though  they  trans- 
gress the  rules  prescribed  for  students,  learn  the  four  Vedas  with 
little  trouble  ?  (The  answer  is),  By  virtue  of  a  residue  of  the 
reward  (due)  for  the  proper  observance  of  those  rules  (of  student- 
ship) in  a  former  Yuga.  Therefore  Apastamba  says,  Sutra  6, 
"  But  some,"  &c.  New  existence  means  "  new  birth  (life)." ' — 
Haradatta. 

6.  An  example  of  this  (follows,  Sutra  6) :  '  Like  -Svetaketu. 
For  5vetaketu  learned  the  four  Vedas  in  a  short  time  ;  as  we  read 
in  the  ^>^andogya  Upanishad  (Prapa//^aka  VI,  i).' — Haradatta. 

7.  '  Whatever  else  besides  the  Veda,  such  as  poison-charms 
and  the  like.' — Haradatta. 

C  2 


20  APASTAMBA.  1,2,5- 

it  good  or  evil),  he  thinks  it  in  his  mind,  or  pro- 
nounces it  in  words,  or  looks  upon  it  with  his 
eye,  even  so  it  will  be ;  thus  teach  (those  who 
know  the  law). 

9.  (The  duties  of  a  student  consist  in)  acts  to 
please  the  spiritual  teacher,  the  observance  (of 
rules)  conducive  to  his  own  welfare,  and  industry 
in  studying. 

10.  Acts  other  than  these  need  not  be  performed 
by  a  student. 

11.  A  religious  student  who  retains  what  he  has 
learned,  who  finds  pleasure  in  the  fulfilment  of  the 
law,  who  keeps  the  rules  of  studentship,  who  is 
upright  and  forgiving,  attains  perfection. 

12.  Every  day  he  shall  rise  in  the  last  watch  of 
the  night,  and  standing  near  his  teacher,  salute  him 
with  (this)  salutation  :  I,  N.  N.,  ho!  (salute  thee.) 

13.  And  (he  shall  salute)  also  other  very  aged 
(learned  Brahma/eas)  who  may  live  in  the  same 
village,  before  the  morning  meal. 

14.  If  he  has  been  on  a  journey,  (he  shall  salute 


9.  'Acts  to  please  the  teacher  are — washing  his  feet  and  the 
like  ;  observance  (of  rules)  conducive  to  welfare  are — obedience 
to  the  prohibition  to  cross  a  river  swimming,  to  eat  pungent  con- 
diments, and  obedience  to  the  injunction  to  beg.' — Haradatta. 

10.  '  Acts  other  than  these,  such  as  pilgrimages  and  the  like.' — 
Haradatta. 

1 1.  'What  this  "perfection"  is  has  been  declared,  Sutras  7, 8.' — 

Haradatta. 

12.  Manu  II,  122  and  124. 

14.  This  salutation  is  to  be  performed  only  when  the  occasion 
requires  it.  The  formerly-mentioned  salutation  (Sutras  12,  13)  is 
to  be  performed  daily.  In  the  next  Sutra  follows  that  by  which 
the  fulfilment  of  a  wish  may  be  obtained. — Haradatta.  Manu  II, 
121;  Y%-n.  I,  26. 


1, 2, 5.  STUDENTSHIP.  2 1 


the  persons  mentioned)  when  he  meets  them  on  his 
return. 

15.  (He  may  also  salute  the  persons  mentioned 
at  other  times),  if  he  is  desirous  of  heaven  and  long 
life. 

16.  A  Brahmawa  shall  salute  stretching  forward 
his  right  arm  on  a  level  with  his  ear,  a  Kshatriya 
holdinof  it  on  a  level  with  the  breast,  a  Vaina 
holding  it  on  a  level  with  the  waist,  a  ^'udra  hold- 
ing it  low. 

17.  (He  shall  salute)  stretching  forsvard  his  joined 
hands. 

1 8.  And  when  returning  the  salute  of  (a  man  be- 
longing) to  the  first  (three)  castes,  the  (last  syllable 
of  the)  name  (of  the  person  addressed)  is  produced 
to  the  length  of  three  moras. 

19.  But  when  he  meets  his  teacher  after  sunrise 
(coming  for  his  lesson),  he  shall  embrace  (his  feet). 

20.  On  all  other  occasions  he  shall  salute  (him  in 
the  manner  described  above). 

21.  But  some  declare  that  he  ought  to  embrace 
the  (feet  of  his)  teacher  (at  every  occasion  instead  of 
saluting  him). 

22.  Having  stroked  the  teacher's  right  foot  with 
his  right  hand  below  and  above,  he  takes  hold  of  it 
and  of  the  ankle. 

23.  Some  say,  that  he  must  press  both  feet,  each 
with  both  hands,  and  embrace  them. 

16.  'A  Vauya  shall  salute  stretching  forth  his  arm  on  a  level 
with  his  middle,  i.e.  the  stomach;  others  say,  on  a  level  with  his 
thigh ;  the  5udra  stretching  it  forth  low,  i.  e.  on  a  level  with  his 
feet.' — tl  aradatta. 

18.  See  also  Manu  II,  125. 

19.  Manu  II,  71. 
23.   Manu  II,  72. 


22  ApASTAMBA.  1,2,6. 

24.  He  shall  be  very  attentive  the  whole  day 
long,  never  allowing  his  mind  to  wander  from  the 
lesson  during  the  (time  devoted  to)  studying. 

25.  And  (at  other  times  he  shall  be  attentive)  to 
the  business  of  his  teacher. 

26.  And  during  the  time  for  rest  (he  shall  give) 
his  mind  (to  doubtful  passages  of  the  lesson  learnt). 

2"].  And  he  shall  study  after  having  been  called 
by  the  teacher  (and  not  request  the  teacher  to  begin 
the  lesson). 

PrA^-NA    I,    PArALA    2,    KHAiVDA    6. 

1.  Every  day  he  shall  put  his  teacher  to  bed 
after  having  washed  his  (teacher's)  feet  and  after 
having  rubbed  him. 

2.  He  shall  retire  to  rest  after  having  received 
(the  teacher's  permission). 

3.  And  he  shall  not  stretch  out  his  feet  towards 
him. 

4.  Some  say,  that  it  is  not  (sinful)  to  stretch  out 
the  feet  (towards  the  teacher),  if  he  be  lying  on  a 
bed. 

5.  And  he  shall  not  address  (the  teacher),  whilst 
he  himself  is  in  a  reclining  position. 

6.  But  he  may  answer  (the  teacher)  sitting  (if  the 
teacher  himself  is  sitting  or  lying). 


24.    Manu  II,  191. 

27.   Ya^n.  I,  27  ;  Manu  II,  191. 

6.  I.   Manu  II,  209. 

2.    Manu  II,  194. 

4.  'But,  in  Apastamba's  opinion,  it  is  sinful  even  in  this  case.'- 
Haradatta. 

5.  Manu  II,  195. 

6.  Manu  II,  196. 


1,2,6.  STUDENTSHIP.  23 

7.  And  if  (the  teacher)  stands,  (he  shall  answer 
him,)  after  having  risen  also. 

8.  He  shall  walk  after  him,  if  he  walks. 

9.  He  shall  run  after  him,  if  he  runs. 

10.  He  shall  not  approach  (his  teacher)  with  shoes 
on  his  feet,  or  his  head  covered,  or  holding  (imple- 
ments) in  his  hand. 

11.  But  on  a  journey  or  occupied  in  work,  he  may 
approach  him  (with  shoes  on,  with  his  head  covered, 
or  W'ith  implements  in  his  hand), 

12.  Provided  he  does  not  sit  down  quite  near  (to 
his  teacher). 

13.  He  shall  approach  his  teacher  with  the  same 
reverence  as  a  deity,  without  telling  idle  stories, 
attentive  and  listening  eagerly  to  his  words. 

14.  (He  shall  not  sit  near  him)  with  his  legs 
crossed. 

15.  If  (on  sitting  down)  the  wind  blows  from  the 
pupil  towards  the  master,  he  shall  change  his  place. 

16.  (He  shall  sit)  without  supporting  himself  with 
his  hands  (on  the  ground), 

17.  Without  leaning  against  something  (as  a  wall 
or  the  like). 

18.  If  the  pupil  wears  two  garments,  he  shall 
wear  the  upper  one  after  the  fashion  of  the  sacred 
thread  at  the  sacrifices. 

19.  But,  if  he  wears  a  (lower)  garment  only,  he 
shall  wrap  it  around  the  lower  part  of  his  body. 

20.  He  shall  turn  his  face  towards  his  teacher 
though  the  latter  does  not  turn  his  towards  him. 

15.    Manu  II,  203. 

18.    At  sacrifices  the  sacred  thread  passes  over  the  left  shoulder 
and  under  the  right  arm.    Manu  II,  63,  and  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  i,  3. 
20.   Manu  II,  197. 


24  APASTAMBA.  I,  2,  6. 

21.  He  shall  sit  neither  too  near  to,  nor  too  far 
(from  the  teacher), 

22.  (But)  at  such  a  distance,  that  (the  teacher) 
may  be  able  to  reach  him  with  his  arms  (without 
rising). 

23.  (He  shall  not  sit  in  such  a  position)  that  the 
wdnd  blows  from  the  teacher,  towards  himself. 

24.  (If  there  is)  only  one  pupil,  he  shall  sit  at  the 
right  hand  (of  the  teacher). 

25.  (If  there  are)  many,  (they  may  sit)  as  it  may 
be  convenient. 

26.  If  the  master  (is  not  honoured  with  a  seat 
and)  stands,  the  (pupil)  shall  not  sit  down. 

27.  (If  the  master  is  not  honoured  with  a 
couch)  and  sits,  the  (pupil)  shall  not  lie  down  on 
a  couch. 

28.  And  if  the  teacher  tries  (to  do  something), 
then  (the  pupil)  shall  offer  to  do  it  for  him,  if  it  is  in 
his  power. 

29.  And,  if  his  teacher  is  near,  he  shall  not 
embrace  (the  feet  of)  another  Guru  who  is  inferior 
(in  dignity) ; 

30.  Nor  shall  he  praise  (such  a  person  in  the 
teacher's  presence)  by  (pronouncing  the  name  of) 
his  family. 

31.  Nor  shall  he  rise  to  meet  such  an  (inferior 
Guru)  or  rise  after  him,  even  if  he  be  a  Guru  of  his 
teacher. 

23.    See  Sutra  15  and  Manu  quoted  there. 

29.  The  term  Guru  includes  a  father,  maternal  uncle,  &c.  (see 
above),  and  these  are  inferior  to  the  teacher.    Manu  II,  205. 

31.  'The  pupil  is  not  to  show  the  mentioned  marks  of  respect 
to  any  of  his  own  inferior  Gurus,  even  if  the  person  is  the  Guru, 
e.  g.  the  maternal  uncle,  of  his  teacher.' — Haradatta. 


1,2,7-  STUDENTSHIP.  25 

32.  But  he  shall  leave  his  place  and  his  seat,  (in 
order  to  show  him  honour.) 

33.  Some  say,  that  (he  may  address)  a  pupil  of 
his  teacher  by  (pronouncing)  his  name,  if  he  is  also 
one  of  his  (the  pupil's)  own  Gurus. 

34.  But  towards  such  a  person  who  is  generally 
revered  for  some  other  reason  than  being  the  teacher 
(e.  g.  for  his  learning),  the  (student)  should  behave  as 
towards  his  teacher,  though  he  be  inferior  in  dignity 
to  the  latter. 

35.  After  having  eaten  in  his  (teacher's)  presence,, 
he  shall  not  give  away  the  remainder  of  the  food 
wdthout  #6ing. 

36.  Nor  shall  he  sip  water  (after  having  eaten  in 
the  presence  of  his  teacher  without  rising). 

2,'].  (He  shall  rise)  addressing  him  (with  these 
words),  '  What  shall  I  do  ? ' 

Pra^na  I,  Patala  2,  Khajvda  7. 

1.  Or  he  may  rise  silently. 

2.  Nor  shall  he  (in  going  away)  move  around  his 
teacher  with  his  left  hand  turned  towards  him  ;  he 
shall  go  away  after  having  walked  around  him  with 
his  right  side  turned  towards  him. 

3.  He  shall  not  look  at  a  naked  woman. 


33.  '  But  Apastamba's  own  opinion  is  that  he  ought  not  to 
address  by  name  a  (maternal  uncle  or  other)  Guru  (who  visits  his 
teacher).' — Haradatta. 

35.  According  to  I,  i,  3,  40  seq.,  a  student  shall  give  what  he 
is  unable  to  eat  to  a  child,  or  to  a  slave.  If  he  has  eaten  in 
the  presence  of  his  teacher,  he  shall  not  give  the  food  away 
without  rising  for  the  purpose. 

7.  3.   Manu  IV,  53;  Ya^.  I,  135. 


26  APASTAMBA.  1,2,7- 

4.  He  shall  not  cut  the  (leaves  or  flowers)  of 
herbs  or  trees,  in  order  to  smell  at  them. 

5.  He  shall  avoid  (the  use  of)  shoes,  of  an 
umbrella,  a  chariot,  and  the  like  (luxuries). 

6.  He  shall  not  smile. 

7.  If  he  smiles,  he  shall  smile  covering  (the 
mouth  with  his  hand) ;  thus  says  a  Brahma;^a. 

8.  He  shall  not  touch  a  woman  with  his  face,  in 
order  to  inhale  the  fragrance  of  her  body. 

9.  Nor  shall  he  desire  her  in  his  heart. 

10.  Nor  shall  he  touch  (a  woman  at  all)  without 
a  particular  reason. 

ri.  A  Brahma;^a  declares,  '  He  shall  be  dusty,  he 
shall  have  dirty  teeth,  and  speak  the  truth.' 

12.  Those  teachers,  who  instructed  his  teacher  in 
that  science  which  he  (the  pupil)  studies  with  him, 
(are  to  be  considered  as)  spiritual  teachers  (by  the 
pupil). 

13.  If  (a  teacher),  before  the  eyes  of  his  (pupil), 
embraces   the    feet  of  any  other  persons,   he   (the 

4.  Gopatha-brahma«a  I,  2,  2. 

5.  Manu  II,  178. 

10.  Manu  II,  179. 

11.  'Though  both  (these  first  two  precepts)  have  been  given 
Sutra  I,  I,  2,  27,  still  they  are  repeated,  in  order  to  show  that  a 
A-auta  penance  for  the  breach  of  them,  is  enjoined  by  a  revealed 
text.' — Haradatta. 

12.  The  term  vzmsy^i,  'ancestor,'  for  the  teacher's  teacher  is 
explained  by  the  circumstance,  that  Hindus  consider  a  '  school,' 
consisting  of  a  succession  of  teachers  and  pupils,  as  a  spiritual 
family,  and  call  it  a  vidyavawja,  vidyaparampara.    Manu  II,  205. 

13.  'Another  (commentator)  says,  "  He,  the  pupil,  must  embrace 
their  feet  (at  every  meeting)  from  that  time  (when  he  first  saw 
his  teacher  do  it)."  Because  the  word  "  but "  is  used  in  the  S6tra, 
he  must  do  so  even  after  he  has  returned  home  (on  completion  of 
his  studies).' — Haradatta. 


1,2,7.  STUDENTSHIP.  1*J 

pupil)  also  must  embrace  their  feet,  (as  long  as  he 
remains)  in  that  (state  of  studentship). 

14.  If  (a  pupil)  has  more  than  one  teacher,  the 
alms  (collected  by  him)  are  at  the  disposal  of  him  to 
whom  he  is  (just  then)  bound. 

15.  When  (a  student)  has  returned  home  (from 
his  teacher),  he  shall  give  (whatever  he  may  obtain 
by  begging  or  otherwise)  to  his  mother. 

16.  The  mother  shall  give  it  to  her  husband; 

1 7.  (And)  the  husband  to  the  (student's)  teacher. 

18.  Or  he  may  use  it  for  religious  ceremonies. 

19.  After  having  studied  as  many  (branches  of) 
sacred  learning  as  he  can,  he  shall  procure  in  a 
righteous  manner  the  fee  for  (the  teaching  of)  the 
Veda  (to  be  given  to  his  teacher),  according  to  his 
power. 

20.  But,  if  the  teacher  has  fallen  into  distress,  he 
may  take  (the  fee)  from  an  Ugra  or  from  a  ^'udra. 


1 4.  '  ]More  than  one  teacher,'  L  e.  several,  who  have  taught  him 
the  several  \'edas.  Each  Brahman  generally  knowing  one  Veda 
only. 

This  passage  shows,  that  the  young  Brahraans  in  olden  time, 
just  as  now,  went  from  one  teacher  to  the  other,  learning  from 
each  what  he  knew.  The  rules,  which  seemingly  enjoin  a  pupil 
to  stay  with  one  and  the  same  teacher,  refer  only  to  the  principle, 
that  the  pupil  must  stay  with  his  teacher,  until  he  has  learnt  the 
subject  which  he  began  with  him. 

18.  'Religious  ceremonies,  i.e.  the  wedding  and  the  like.  For 
them  he  may  use  it  optionally.  He,  i.  e.  on  failure  of  the  teacher ; 
the  father,  on  failure  of  the  father ;  the  mother,  on  failure  of  all 
(the  pupil)  himself.' — Haradatta. 

19.  Manu  II,  245  and  246;  Ya^^n.  I,  51;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud. 
X,  125. 

20.  '  The  word  Ugra  denotes  either  the  offspring  of  a  Vaij-ya 
and  of  a  ^udra  woman,  or  a  twice-born  man,  who  perpetrates 
dreadful  deeds.' — Haradatta. 


28  APASTAMBA.  I,  2,  7. 

2  1.  But  some  declare,  that  it  is  lawful  at  any 
time  to  take  the  money  for  the  teacher  from  an 
Ugra  or  from  a  ^'udra. 

22.  And  having  paid  (the  fee),  he  shall  not  boast 
of  having  done  so. 

23.  And  he  shall  not  remember  what  he  may 
have  done  (for  his  teacher). 

24.  He  shall  avoid  self-praise,  blaming  others, 
and  the  like. 

25.  If  he  is  ordered  (by  his  teacher  to  do  some- 
thing), he  shall  do  it  at  once. 

26.  On  account  of  the  incompetence  of  his 
teacher,  (he  may  go)  to  another  (and)  study  (there). 

27.  He  shall  behave  towards  his  teacher's  wife 
as  towards  the  teacher  himself,  but  he  shall  not 
embrace  her  feet,  nor  eat  the  residue  of  her  food. 

28.  So  also  (shall  he  behave)  towards  him  who 
teaches  him  at  (the  teacher's)  command, 

29.  And  also  to  a  fellow-student  who  is  superior 
(in  learning  and  years). 

30.  He  shall  behave  to  his  teacher's  son  (who  is 

24.    Manu  II,  179. 

26.  See  above,  I,  i,  i,  12,  and  note.  Here  also  Haradatta 
states  that  the  permission  to  leave  the  teacher  is  to  be  restricted  to 
those  who  have  not  solemnly  bound  themselves  to  their  teacher  by 
allowing  him  to  perform  the  ceremony  of  initiation. 

27.  Manu  II,  208-212. 

28.  '  The  use  of  the  present  "  adhyapayati,"  shows  that  this  rule 
holds  good  only  for  the  time  during  which  he  is  taught  by  such 
a  man.' — Haradatta. 

29.  '  Because  (an  older  fellow-student)  is  of  use  to  him,  accord- 
ing to  the  verse  :  One-fourth  (of  his  learning)  a  pupil  receives 
from  his  teacher,  one-fourth  he  acquires  by  his  own  intelligence, 
one-fourth  from  his  fellow-students,  one-fourth  he  is  taught  by 
time.' — Haradatta. 

30.  Manu  II,  207-209. 


I,  2, 8.      A    STUDENT   WHO    HAS    RETURNED    HOME.  29 

superior  to  himself  in  learning  or  years)  as  to  his 
teacher,  but  not  eat  the  residue  of  his  food. 

31.  Though  he  may  have  returned  home,  the 
behaviour  towards  his  (teacher  and  the  rest)  w^hich 
is  prescribed  by  the  rule  of  conduct  settled  by  the 
agreement  (of  those  who  know  the  law),  (must  be 
observed  by  him  to  the  end), 

Pra^na  I,  Fatal  A  2,  Kha^vda  8. 

1.  Just  as  by  a  student  (actually  living  with  his 
teacher). 

2.  He  may  wear  garlands,-  anoint  his  face  (with 
sandal),  oil  his  hair  and  moustaches,  smear  his  eye- 
lids (with  collyrium),  and  (his  body)  with  oil,  wear  a 
turban,  a  cloth  round  his  loins,  a  coat,  sandals,  and 
wooden  shoes. 

3.  Within  the  sight  of  his  (teacher  or  teacher's 
relations)  he  shall  do  none  of  those  (actions,  as 
putting  on  a  garland),  nor  cause  them  to  be  done. 

4.  Nor  (shall  he  wear  garlands  &c.  whilst  per- 
forming) acts  for  his  pleasure, 

5.  As,  for  instance,  cleaning  his  teeth,  shampoo- 
ing, combing  the  hair,  and  the  like. 

6.  And  the  teacher  shall  not  speak  of  the  goods 
of  the  (pupil)  with  the  intention  to  obtain  them. 


8.  I.  Haradatta  does  not  connect  this  Sutra  with  the  preced- 
ing one.  He  explains  it  by  itself :  *  (We  will  now  declare)  how  a 
student  (who  has  left  his  teacher,  but  is  not  married)  ought  to 
behave.' 

6.  '  If  the  teacher  comes  to  the  house  of  his  (former)  pupil  (who 
has  become  a  householder),  he  shall,  for  instance,  not  say,  "  Oh, 
what  a  beautiful  dish !"  in  such  a  manner,  that  his  desire  to  obtain 
it  becomes  apparent.' — Haradatta. 


30  •      APASTAMBA.  I,  2, 8. 


7.  But  some  declare,  that,  if  a  pupil  who  has 
bathed  (after  completing  his  studies)  is  called  by  his 
teacher  or  has  gone  to  see  him,  he  shall  not  take  off 
that  (garland  or  other  ornaments)  which  he  wears 
according  to  the  law  at  the  time  (of  that  ceremony). 

8.  He  shall  not  sit  on  a  seat  higher  (than  that  of 
his  teacher), 

9.  Nor  on  a  seat  that  has  more  legs  (than  that 
of  his  teacher), 

10.  Nor  on  a  seat  that  stands  more  firmly  fixed 
(on  the  ground  than  that  of  his  teacher), 

11.  Nor  shall  he  sit  or  lie  on  a  couch  or  seat 
which  is  used  (by  his  teacher). 

12.  If  he  is  ordered  (by  his  teacher),  he  shall  on 
a  journey  ascend  a  carriage  after  him. 

1 3.  (At  his  teacher's  command)  he  shall  also  enter 
an  assembly,  ascend  a  roller  (which  his  teacher  drags 
along),  sit  on  a  mat  of  fragrant  grass  or  a  couch  of 
straw  (together  with  his  teacher). 

14.  If  not  addressed  by  a  Guru,  he  shall  not 
speak  to  him,  except  (in  order  to  announce)  good 
news. 


7.  This  opinion  is  contrary  to  Apastamba's  view  given  in 
Sutras  2  and  3  above. 

10.  *  When  he  gives  to  his  teacher  a  wooden  seat  (with  legs), 
he  shall  not  sit  on  a  cane-seat  (without  legs),  for  the  latter  touches 
the  ground  on  all  sides.' — Haradatta. 

11.  Manu  II,  119. 

12.  This  rule  is  an  exception  to  I,  2,  7,  5.     Manu  II,  204. 

13.  'The  roller  is  an  implement  used  by  husbandmen,  with 
which  the  ploughed  land  is  made  even.  If  one  person  ascends  it 
and  another  drags  it  along,  the  ground  becomes  even.  If  that  is 
dragged  by  the  teacher,  the  pupil  shall  ascend  it  at  his  command. 
He  shall  not  disobey  from  fear  of  the  unseemliness  of  the  action.' — 
Haradatta. 


1,2,8.   A  STUDENT  WHO  HAS  RETURNED  HOME.    3I 

15.  He  shall  avoid  to  touch  a  Guru  (with  his 
finger),  to  whisper  (into  his  ear),  to  laugh  (into  his 
face),  to  call  out  to  him,  to  pronounce  his  name  or  to 
give  him  orders  and  the  like  (acts). 

16.  In  time  of  need  he  may  attract  attention  (by 
any  of  these  acts). 

17.  If  (a  pupil)  resides  (in  the  same  village)  with 
(his  teacher  after  the  completion  of  his  studies),  he 
shall  go  to  see  him  every  morning  and  evening, 
without  beino^  called. 

18.  And  if  he  returns  from  a  journey,  he  shall 
(go  to)  see  him  on  the  same  day. 

19.  If  his  teacher  and  his  teacher's  teacher  meet, 
he  shall  embrace  the  feet  of  his  teacher's  teacher, 
and  then  show  his  desire  to  do  the  same  to  his 
teacher. 

20.  The  other  (the  teacher)  shall  (then)  forbid  it. 

21.  And  (other  marks  of)  respect  (due  to  the 
teacher)  are  omitted  in  the  presence  of  the  (teacher's 
teacher). 

22.  And  (if  he  does  not  live  in  the  same  village), 
he  shall  go  frequently  to  his  teacher's  residence,  in 
order  to  see  him,  and  bring  him  some  (present),  with 
his  own  hand,  be  it  even  only  a  stick  for  cleaning 
the  teeth.  Thus  (the  duties  of  a  student  have  been 
explained). 

23.  He  shall  not  approach  empty-handed  his 
mother,  father,  his  teacher,  the  (sacred)  fires,  his 
house,  or  a  king,  if  he  has  not  known  him  (before). 


15.    ManuII,  199;  regarding  the  term  Guru,  see  above,  1,2,6,  29. 

17.  This  and  the  following  Sutras  refer  to  a  person  who  has 
finished  his  studentship,  while  the  preceding  ones,  from  Siitra  8, 
apply  to  the  time  of  studentship  also. 


32  APASTAMBA.  1,2,8. 

24.  (Now)  the  conduct  of  a  teacher  towards  his 
pupil  (will  be  explained). 

25.  Loving  him  like  his  own  son,  and  full  of 
attention,  he  shall  teach  him  the  sacred  science, 
without  hiding  anything  in  the  whole  law. 

26.  And  he  shall  not  use  him  for  his  own  pur- 
poses to  the  detriment  of  his  studies,  except  in  times 
of  distress. 

27.  That  pupil  who,  attending  to  two  (teachers), 
accuses  his  (principal  and  first)  teacher  of  ignorance, 
remains  no  (longer)  a  pupil. 

28.  A  teacher  also,  who  neglects  the  instruction 
(of  his  pupil),  does  no  (longer)  remain  a  teacher. 

29.  If  the  (pupil)  commits  faults,  (the  teacher) 
shall  always  reprove  him. 

30.  Frightening,  fasting,  bathing  in  (cold)  water, 
and  banishment  from  the  teacher's  presence  are  the 
punishments  (which  are  to  be  employed),  according 
to  the  greatness  (of  the  fault),  until  (the  pupil)  leaves 
off  (sinning). 

31.  He  shall  dismiss  (the  pupil),  after  he  has 
performed  the  ceremony  of  the  Samavartana  and 
has  finished  his  studentship,  with  these  words, 
'  Apply  thyself  henceforth  to  other  duties.' 

25.   Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  126. 

27.  'Another  commentator  says,  "That  pupil  who  offends  his 
teacher  in  word,  thought,  or  deed,  and  directs  his  mind  impro- 
perly, i.e.  does  not  properly  obey,  does  not  (any  longer)  remain  a 
pupil." ' — Haradatta. 

30.  But  see  also  Manu  VIII,  299,  where  corporal  punishment 
is  permitted. 


1,3,9-  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  33 

Pr/5XA  I,   Patala  3,   Kha.vda  9. 

1.  After  having  performed  the  Upakarma  for 
studying  the  Veda  on  the  full  moon  of  the  month 
.S'rava;/a  (July-August),  he  shall  for  one  month  not 
study  in  the  evening. 

2.  On  the  full  moon  of  the  month  Pausha 
(December-January),  or  under  the  constellation 
Rohi;/t,  he  shall  leave  off  reading  the  Veda. 

3.  Some  declare,  (that  he  shall  study)  for  four 
months  and  a  half. 

4.  He  shall  avoid  to  study  the  Veda  on  a  market- 
road. 

5.  Or  he  may  study  it  (on  a  high-road),  after 
having  smeared  (a  space)  with  cowdung. 


9. 1.  The  Upakarma  is  the  ceremony  which  is  performed  every 
year  at  the  beginning  of  the  course  of  study.  It  is.  in  fact  the 
solemn  opening  of  the  Brahmanic  term.  '  Because  Apastamba 
uses  the  word  evening  (i.  e.  first  part  of  the  night)  it  is  not  sinful  to 
study  later  in  the  night.' — Haradatta.  Manu  IV,  95  ;  Ya^fi.I,  142, 
143;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  130  and  134. 

2.  The  term  lasts  therefore  for  five  months;  (i.  e.  latter  half  of 
6'ravawa,  Bhadrapada,  Aj-vina,  Kartika,  Marga^irsha,  and  the  first 
half  of  Pausha.)     The  constellation  Rohi«i  comes  in  Pausha. 

3.  '  According  to  this  latter  opinion  the  Upakarma  should  be 
performed  on  the  full  moon  of  Bhadrapada,  as  has  been  taught  in 
another  work  (Manu  IV,  95);  the  (time  of  the)  Utsar_§-ana,  (the 
solemn  closing  of  the  term)  should  be  advanced  ;  and  after  the 
Utsar^na  has  been  performed,  one  may  study  the  Veda  during 
the  light  nights  of  each  month  until  the  full  moon  of  ^ravawa, 
in  order  to  fix  in  one's  mind  the  part  learned  already  ;  and  in  the 
dark  fortnight  of  each  month  one  may  study  the  Vedangas,  i.  e. 
grammar  and  the  rest  (Manu  IV,  98).  On  the  full  moon  of  5ra\-a«a 
the  Upakarma  should  be  performed  once  more,  and  that  part  of 
the  Veda  should  be  studied  which  has  not  yet  been  learned' — 
Haradatta. 

[2]  D 


34  APASTAMBA.  I,  3,  9. 

6.  He  shall  never  study  in  a  burial-ground  nor 
anywhere  near  it  within  the  throw  of  a  ^'amya. 

7.  If  a  village  has  been  built  over  (a  burial- 
ground)  or  its  surface  has  been  cultivated  as  a  field, 
the  recitation  of  the  Veda  (in  such  a  place)  is  not 
prohibited. 

8.  But  if  that  place  is  known  to  have  been  (a 
burial-ground),  he  shall  not  study  (there). 

9.  A  ^'udra  and  an  outcast  are  (included  by  the 
term)  burial-ground,  (and  the  rule  given,  Sutra  6, 
applies  to  them.) 

10.  Some  declare,  that  (one  ought  to  avoid  only, 
to  study)  in  the  same  house  (where  they  dwell). 

11.  'But  if  (a  student  and)  a  ^S"udra  woman  merely 
look  at  each  other,  the  recitation  of  the  Veda  must 
be  interrupted, 

12.  Likewise,  if  j(a  student  and)  a  woman,  who 
has  had  connexion  with  a  man  of  a  lower  caste,  (look 
at  each  other.) 

13.  If  he,  who  is  about  to  study  the  Veda,  wishes 
to  talk  to  a  woman  during  her  courses,  he  shall  first 
speak  to  a  Brahma^za  and  then  to  her,  then  again 
speak  to  a  Brahma72a,  and  afterwards  study.  Thereby 
the  children  (of  that  woman)  will  be  blessed. 

14.  (He  shall  not  study  in  a  village)  in  which  a 
corpse  lies ; 

6.  The  -Samya  is  a  round  stick,  about  a  foot  and  a  half  in 
length,  which  is  used  for  the  preparation  of  the  Vedi.  Manu  IV, 
116;  Ya^ii.  I,  148. 

8.  '  Nor  anywhere  near  it  within  the  throw  of  a  -5'amya.'  This 
must  be  understood  from  Sutra  6. 

9.  Ya^n.  I,  148. 

13.  The  last  part  of  the  Sutra  may  also  be  interpreted  :  'Thus 
she  will  be  blessed  with  children.' — Haradatta. 

14.  Manu  IV,  108;  Ya^ii.  I,  148, 


1,3,9-  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  35 

15.  Nor  in  such  a  one  where  A'az/^alas  Hve. 

16.  He  shall  not  study  whilst  corpses  are  being 
carried  to  the  boundary  of  the  village, 

1 7.  Nor  in  a  forest,  if  (a  corpse  or  J^andala.)  is 
within  sight. 

18.  And  if  outcasts  have  entered  the  villagfe,  he 
shall  not  study  on  that  day, 

19.  Nor  if  good  men  (have  come). 

20.  If  it  thunders  in  the  evening,  (he  shall  not 
study)  during  the  night. 

21.  If  lightning  is  seen  (in  the  evening,  he  shall 
not  study  during  that  night),  until  he  has  slept. 

22.  If  lightning  is  seen  about  the  break  of  dawn, 
or  at  the  time  when  he  may  distinguish  at  the  dis- 
tance of  a  vSamya-throw,  whether  (a  cow)  is  black  or 
red,  he  shall  not  study  during  that  day,  nor  in  the 
following  evening. 

23.  If  it  thunders  in  the  second  part  of  the  third 
watch  of  the  night,  (he  shall  not  study  during  the 
following  day  or  evening.) 

24.  Some  (declare,  that  this  rule  holds  good,  if  it 
thunders),  after  the  first  half  of  the  night  has  passed. 

25.  (Nor  shall  he  study)  whilst  the  cows  are  pre- 
vented from  leaving  (the  village  on  account  of  thieves 
and  the  like), 

18.  Haradatta  explains  Bahya,  'outcasts,'  by  '  robbers,  such  as 
Ugras  and  Nishadas.'  But,  I  think,  it  means  simply  such  outcasts 
who  live  in  the  forest  or  outside  the  village  in  the  Yzcfi,  as  the 
Bkeis,  Mahars,  Mangs  of  the  present  day.  INIost  of  these  tribes, 
however,  are  or  were  given  to  thieving.  See  Kulliika  on  Manu  X, 
28,  and  the  Petersburg  Diet.  s.  v. 

19.  \%n.  I,  150. 

20.  Manu  IV,  106;  Ya^Q.  I,  145.  'This  rule  refers  to  the 
rainy  season.  (For  thunder)  at  other  (seasons)  he  orders  below 
a  longer  (cessation).' — Haradatta. 

D  2 


2^6  APASTAMBA.  I,  3,  10. 

26.  Nor  whilst  criminals  are  being  executed. 

27.  He  shall  not  study  whilst  he  rides  on  beasts 
(of  burden). 

28.  At  the  new  moon,  (he  shall  not  study)  for 
two  days  and  two  nights. 

Pra^na  I,  PArALA  3,   Kuan  DA  10. 

1.  (Nor  shall  he  study)  on  the  days  of  the  full 
moons  of  those  months  in  which  the  A'aturmasya- 
sacrifice  may  be  performed  (nor  on  the  days  pre- 
ceding them). 

2.  At  the  time  of  the  Vedotsarga,  on  the  death  of 
Gurus,  at  the  Ash/aka-6raddha,  and  at  the  time  of 
the  Upakarma,  (he  shall  not  study)  for  three  days ; 

3.  Likewise  if  near  relations  have  died. 

4.  (He  shall  not  study)  for  twelve  days,  if  his 
mother,  father,  or  teacher  have  died. 

27.  Manu  IV,  120;  Ya^il.  I,  151. 

28.  '  "  For  two  days,"  i.  e.  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon  and  the 
preceding  one,  the  fourteenth  of  the  half  month.' — Haradatta. 
Manu  IV,  113;  Ya^fi.  I,  146. 

10.  I.  The  three  full-moon  days  are  Phalguni  (February-March), 
Ashaa%i  (June-July),  Kartiki  (October-November). 

2.  The  construction  is  very  irregular,  the  first  noun  standing 
in  the  nominative  and  the  rest  in  the  locative.  A  similar  irre- 
gularity occurs  below,  I,  3,  11,  31.  The  Vedotsarga  is  the  ceremony 
which  is  performed  at  the  end  of  the  Brahmanic  term,  in  January. 
'  In  the  case  of  the  death  of  a  Guru,  the  vacation  begins  with  the 
day  on  w'hich  the  death  occurs.  On  the  other  occasions  men- 
tioned he  shall  not  study  on  the  day  preceding  (the  ceremony),  on 
the  day  (of  the  ceremony),  nor  on  the  day  following  it.' — Haradatta. 
I\Ianu  IV,  119;  Y%n.  I,  144.  'The  Gurus'  intended  here,  are 
fathers-in-law,  uncles,  &c. 

3.  '  This  rule  applies  to  a  student  only.  It  is  known  from 
another  work  that  those  who  have  been  infected  by  impurity  (on 
the  death  of  a  relation),  must  not  study  whilst  the  impurity  lasts.' — 
Haradatta.    Ya^n.  I,  144. 


1,3,10.  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  37 

5.  If  these  (have  died),  he  must  (also)  bathe  for 
the  same  number  of  days. 

6.  Persons  who  are  }ounger  (than  the  relation 
deceased),  must  shave  (their  hair  and  beard). 

7.  Some  declare,  that  students  who  have  returned 
home  on  completion  of  their  studentship,  shall  never 
shave,  except  if  engaged  in  the  initiation  to  a  ^'rauta- 
sacrifice. 

8.  Now  a  Brahma;/a  also  declares,  '  Forsooth  an 
empty,  uncovered  (pot)  is  he,  whose  hair  is  shaved 
off  entirely ;  the  top-lock  is  his  covering.* 

9.  But  at  sacrificial  sessions  the  top-lock  must  be 
shaved  off,  because  it  is  so  enjoined  in  the  Veda. 

10.  Some  declare,  that,  upon  the  death  of  the 
teacher,  (the  reading  should  be  interrupted)  for  three 
days  and  three  nights. 

11.  If  (he  hears  of)  the  death  of  a  learned  Brah- 
ma«a  (.5'rotriya)  before  a  full  year  (since  the  death) 

6.  The  NYord  anubhavinaji,  interpreted  by  Haradatta  as  '  persons 
who  are  younger  than  the  deceased,'  is  explained  in  different  ways 
by  others  ;  firstly,  as  '  the  mourners,'  and  secondly,  as  '  Samano- 
dakas  or  gentiles  beyond  the  sixth  degree.'  In  the  latter  case  the 
Sutra  ought  to  be  translated  thus:  'On  the  death  of  gentiles  beyond 
the  sixth  degree,  (the  head)  ought  to  be  shaved.' 

7.  Regarding  the  Diksha  '  initiation,'  see  Aitareya-brahma^/a  I,  i, 
and  ]M tiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  309  seq. 

8.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  top-lock  should  not  be  shaved  off, 
except  in  the  case  mentioned  in  the  following  Sutra. 

9.  Sattras,  '  sacrificial  sessions,'  are  sacrifices  which  last  longer 
than  twelve  days. 

10.  'But  in  his  opinion  it  should  be  twelve  days,  as  declared 
above,  Sutra  4.' — Haradatta.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  this  Sutra 
is  to  be  connected  with  Sutra  4. 

11.  '  Because  the  word  "  death  "  is  used  here,  death  only  is  the 
reason  (for  stopping  the  reading),  in  the  case  of  Gurus  and  the 
rest  (i.e.  the  word  "died"  must  be  understood  in  Sutra  2  and 
the  following  ones).' — Haradatta, 


38  APASTAMBA.  I,  3,  10. 

has  elapsed,  (he  shall  interrupt  his  reading)  for  one 
night  (and  day). 

12.  Some  declare,  (that  the  deceased  vSrotriya 
must  have  been)  a  fellow-student, 

13.  If  a  learned  Brahma;/a  (^'rotriya)  has  arrived 
and  he  is  desirous  of  studying  or  is  actually  study- 
ing, (or  if  he  is  desirous  of  teaching  or  is  teaching,) 
he  may  study  or  teach  after  having  received  per- 
mission (to  do  so  from  the  KSrotriya). 

14.  He  may  likewise  study  or  teach  in  the  pre- 
sence of  his  teacher,  if  (the  latter)  has  addressed  him 
(saying),  '  Ho,  study!  (or.  Ho,  teach!)' 

15.  When  a  student  desires  to  study  or  has 
finished  his  lesson,  he  shall  at  both  occasions  em- 
brace the  feet  of  his  teacher. 

16.  Or  if,  whilst  they  study,  another  person  comes 
in,  he  shall  continue  his  recitation,  after  those  words 
('  Ho,  study!')  have  been  pronounced  (by  the  new- 
comer). 

1 7.  The  barking  of  (many)  dogs,  the  braying  of 
(many)  asses,  the  cry  of  a  wolf  or  of  a  solitary  jackal 
or  of  an  owl,  all  sounds  of  musical  instruments,  of 
weeping,  and  of  the  Saman  melodies  (are  reasons 
for  discontinuing  the  study  of  the  Veda). 

14.  Manu  II,  73. 

15.  Manu  II,  73. 

16.  Haradatta  states  rightly,  that  the  plural  ('they  study')  is 
useless.  According  to  him,  the  use  of  the  verb  in  the  singular 
may  be  excused  thereby,  that  the  advice  is  addressed  to  each  of 
the  persons  engaged  in  study.    Manu  IV,  122. 

17.  The  ekasn'ka,  'solitary  jackal,'  is  now  called  Balu  or 
Pheough,  and  is  considered  to  be  the  constant  companion  of  a 
tiger  or  panther.  Its  unharmonious  cry  is,  in  the  present  day  also, 
considered  to  be  an  evil  omen.  Y%ti.  I,  148;  Manu  IV,  108, 
115  and  123. 


I,  3,  10.  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  39 

18.  If  another  branch  of  the  V^eda  (is  being  recited 
in  the  neighbourhood),  the  Saman  melodies  shall  not 
be  studied. 

19.  And  whilst  other  noises  (are  being  heard), 
(the  recitation  of  the  Veda  shall  be  discontinued),  if 
they  mix  (with  the  voice  of  the  person  studying). 

20.  After  having  vomited  (he  shall  not  study) 
until  he  has  slept. 

21.  Or  (he  may  study)  having  eaten  clarified 
butter  (after  the  attack  of  vomiting). 

22.  A  foul  smell  (is  a  reason  for  the  discon- 
tinuance of  study). 

23.  Food  turned  sour  (by  fermentation),  which 
he  has  in  his  stomach,  (is  a  reason  for  the  dis- 
continuance of  the  recitation,  until  the  sour  risino- 
ceases.) 

24.  (Nor  shall  he  study)  after  having  eaten  in  the 
evening, 

25.  Nor  as  long  as  his  hands  are  wet. 

26.  (And  he  shall  discontinue  studying)  for  a  day 
and  an  evening,  after  having  eaten  food  prepared  in 
honour  of  a  dead  person  (for  whom  the  Sapiw^i- 
kara;/a  has  not  yet  been  performed), 

27.  Or  until  the  food  (eaten  on  that  occasion)  is 
digested. 

19.  !Manu  IV,  121. 

20.  ■Nlanu  IV,  121. 

22.  Manu  IV,  107  ;  Ya^fl.  I,  150. 

23.  Manu  IV,  121. 

24.  '  Therefore  he  shall  sup,  after  having  finished  his  study.' — 
Haradatta. 

25.  Manu  IV,  121 ;  Ya^.  I,  149. 

26.  Manu  IV,  112  ;  Ya^S.  I,  146. 

27.  'If  that  food  has  not  been  digested  by  the  end  of  that 
time  (i.  e.  in  the  evening),  he  shall  not  study  until  it  has  been 
digested.' —  Haradatta. 


40  APASTAMBA.  I^  3,  ii- 

28.  But  he  shall  (always)  eat  in  addition  (to  the 
meal  given  in  honour  of  a  dead  person),  food  which 
has  not  been  given  at  a  sacrifice  to  the  Manes. 

PrA-SNA    I,    PArALA    3,    KlIAA^DA    11. 

1.  (The  recitation  of  the  Veda  shall  be  interrupted 
for  a  day  and  evening  if  he  has  eaten),  on  beginning 
a  fresh  Ka.7ida.  (of  his  Veda),  food  given  by  a  mother- 
less person, 

2.  And  also  if  he  has  eaten,  on  the  day  of  the  com- 
pletion of  a  Kanda.,  food  given  by  a  fatherless  person. 

3.  Some  declare,  that  (the  recitation  shall  be  inter- 
rupted for  the  same  space  of  time),  if  he  has  eaten 
at  a  sacrifice  offered  in  honour  of  gods  who  were 
formerly  men. 

4.  Nor  is  the  recitation  interrupted,  if  he  has 
eaten  rice  received  the  day  before,  or  raw  meat 
(though  these  things  may  have  been  offered  in 
honour  of  the  dead), 

28.  'Because  in  this  Sutra  the  expression  "food  not  given  at 
a  6'raddha"  occurs,  some  think  that  the  preceding  Sutra  refers 
to  "  food  eaten  at  a  -Sraddha." ' — Haradatta.  This  explanation 
is  not  at  all  improbable.  At  least  I  think  that  both  the  Suta- 
kanna  and  the  Aaddhanna  (Manu  IV,  112)  are  intended  by  the 
term  pretasawk/Zpta. 

11.  I.  The  Black  Ya^ur-veda,  to  which  Apastamba  belongs,  is 
divided  throughout  into  books  called  Kawa'as. 

3.  Haradatta  names  as  such  gods,  on  the  authority  of  the 
Brahma-purawa,  Kuvera,  Nandi^vara,  and  Kumara.  Other  com- 
mentators, however,  explain  IManushyaprakr/'ti  by  Manushyamukha, 
'possessing  human  faces.'  A  similar  rule  occurs  Gautama  XVI,  34, 
where  a  Manushyaya_o-ua  is  mentioned  as  a  cause  for  discontinu- 
ing the  recitation  of  the  Veda.  In  his  commentary  on  Gautama, 
also,  Haradatta  is  in  doubt.  He  first  refers  the  term  to  the  sacra- 
ments like  the  Simantonnayana,  and  then  adds,  that  some  explain 
it  to  mean  '  a  sacrifice  to  gods  who  formerly  were  men.' 

4.  This  Sutra  is  an  exception  to  I,  3,  10,  26. 


1,3,11.  THE    STUDY    OF   THE    VEDA.  4I 

5.  Nor  (if  he  has  eaten  at  a  funeral  dinner)  roots 
or  fruits  of  herbs  and  trees. 

6.  When  he  performs  the  ceremony  for  beginning 
a  Kkudsi,  or  when  he  studies  the  index  of  the  Anu- 
vakas  of  a  {Ka.nda),  he  shall  not  study  that  (Kaz/rt'a) 
on  that  day  (nor  in  that  night). 

7.  And  if  he  performs  the  ceremonies  prescribed 
on  beginning  or  ending  the  recitation  of  one  entire 
Veda,  he  shall  not  study  that\^eda  (during  that  day). 

8.  If  the  wind  roars,  or  if  it  whirls  up  the  grass 
on  the  ground,  or  if  it  drives  the  rain-drops  forward 
during  a  rain-shower,  (then  the  recitation  shall  be 
interrupted  for  so  long  a  time  as  the  storm  lasts.) 

9.  (Nor  shall  he  study)  on  the  boundary  betAveen 
a  villagre  and  forest, 

10.  Nor  on  a  hig^hwav. 

11.  If  (some    of  his)    fellow-students   are    on    a 


6.  Haradatta's  commentan-  on  this  Sutra  is  very  meagre,  and 
he  leaves  the  words  '  yasya  >fanuvakya;«  kun  ita  '  unexplained.  I 
am  not  certain  that  my  explanation  is  correct.  But  it  is  coun- 
tenanced by  the  statements  of  the  Gr/hya-sutras  regarding  the 
order  of  studpng.    Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  132. 

7.  V%n.  I,  145.  This  Sutra  is  a  Gfiapaka  or  'such  a  one 
which  indicates  the  existence  of  a  rule  not  expressly  mentioned.' 
Above  (I,  3,  9,  i)  the  yearly  performance  of  the  Upakarma  and 
Utsarga  ceremonies  for  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  Brahmanic 
term  has  been  prescribed.  In  this  Sutra  the  performance  of  the 
Upakarma  and  Utsarga  at  the  beginning  and  completion  of  the 
Parayana  or  the  vow  to  go  through  a  whole  Veda  is  incidentally 
mentioned.  Thence  it  may  be  inferred  that  these  ceremonies  must 
be  likewise  performed  on  the  latter  occasions,  though  no  absolute 
rule  to  this  effect  has  been  given.  Such  Guapakas  are  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  all  Sutras,  and  constitute  one  of  the  chief  difficulties 
of  their  interpretation. 

8.  Y%^.  I,  149;  Manu  IV,  102.  122. 

II.   Others   explain   the    Sutra   thus:    'If  he   meets    fellow- 


42  APASTAMBA.  I,  3,  n. 

journey,   he   shall   not  study,  during   that  day,  (the 
passage)  which  they  learn  together. 

12.  And  whilst  performing  acts  for  his  pleasure, 

13.  Such  as  washing  his  feet,  shampooing  or 
anointing  himself, 

14.  He  shall  neither  study  nor  teach,  as  long  as 
he  is  thus  occupied. 

15.  (He  shall  not  study  or  teach)  in  the  twilight, 

16.  Nor  whilst  sitting  on  a  tree, 

17.  Nor  whilst  immersed  in  water, 

18.  Nor  at  night  with  open  doors, 

19.  Nor  in  the  day-time  with  shut  doors. 

20.  During  the  spring  festival  and  the  festival  (of 
Indra),  in  the  month  of  Asha<7%a  (June-July),  the 
study  of  an  Anuvaka  is  forbidden. 

21.  (The  recitation)  of  the  daily  portion  of  the 
Veda  (at  the  Brahmaya^^na  is  likewise  forbidden  if 
done)  in  a  manner  differing  from  the  rule  (of  the 
Veda). 

22.  (Now  follows)  the  rule  (for  the  daily  recita- 
tion) of  that  (Brahmaya^fia). 


students,  after  they  have  come  home  from  a  journey,  he  shall  not 
study  with  them  on  that  day.' 

15.  Ya^ii.  I,  145;  Manu  IV,  113. 

16.  Ya^il.  I,  151  ;  Manu  IV,  120. 

20.  According  to  Haradatta,  Apastamba  uses  the  word  Anuvaka 
in  order  to  indicate  that  smaller  portions  of  the  Veda  may  be 
studied.  Others  think,  that  by  Anuvaka,  the  Sa/«hita  and  the 
Brahmawa  are  meant,  and  that  the  study  of  the  Angas  is  per- 
mitted. The  Vasantotsava,  or  spring-festival,  which,  according  to 
the  Dramas,  was,  in  olden  times,  kept  all  over  India,  falls,  according 
to  Haradatta,  on  the  thirteenth  of  the  first  half  of  ^aitra,  about 
the  beginning  of  April. 

21.  'Hence,  if  one  has  forgotten  it  and  eaten  one's  breakfast,  a 
penance,  not  the  Brahmaya_§'na,  must  be  performed.' — Haradatta. 


1,  3,  ir.        THE  STUDY  OF  THE  VEDA.  43 

23.  Before  taking  his  morning-meal,  he  shall  go 
to  the  water-side,  and  having  purified  himself,  he 
shall  recite  aloud  (a  portion  of  the  \^eda)  in  a  pure 
place,  leaving  out  according  to  (the  order  of  the) 
texts  (what  he  has  read  the  day  before). 

24.  If  a  stoppage  of  study  is  enjoined  (for  the 
day,  he  shall  recite  the  daily  portion)  mentally. 

25.  If  lightning  flashes  without  interruption,  or. 
thunder  rolls  continuallv,  if  a  man  has  neglected  to 
purify  himself,  if  he  has  partaken  of  a  meal  in  honour 
of  a  dead  person,  or  if  hoarfrost  lies  on  the  ground, 
(in  these  cases)  they  forbid  the  mental  recitation  (of 
the  daily  portion  of  the  X'^eda). 

26.  Some  forbid  it  only  in  case  one  has  eaten  a 
funeral  dinner. 

27.  Where  lightning,  thunder,  and  rain  happen 
together  out  of  season,  the  recitation  shall  be  inter- 
rupted for  three  da}s. 

28.  Some  (declare,  that  the  recitation  shall  stop) 
until  the  ground  is  dry. 

29.  If  one  or  two  (of  the  phenomena  mentioned 
in  Sutra  27  appear,  the  recitation  shall  be  interrupted) 
from  that  hour  until  the  same  hour  next  day. 

30.  In  the  case  of  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  of  the 

23.    See  Taittiriya  Ara//yaka  II.  11,  i  and  11  ;  Ai-v.  Gri.  Su.  III. 

2,  1-2.  In  our  days  this  rule  is  usually  not  observed.  Brahnia/;as 
mostly  recite  at  the  daily  Brahmaya^fia,  '  Veda-offering,'  one  par- 
ticular formula,  which  s\Tnbolically  comprises  the  whole  Veda. 
A  few  learned  Brahma«a  friends,  however,  have  assured  me,  that 
they  stiU  recite  the  whole  of  their  6'akha  every  year  according  to 
this  rule  of  Apastamba. 

25.  Ya^ii.  I,  149  ;  Manu  IV,  106, 120,  127;  Taict.  Ar.  II,  15,  i. 

26.  Manu  IV,  109,  116. 

27.  I^Ianu  IV,  103  and  104. 

30.    Ya^u.  I,  145;  Manu  IV,  1C5,  118. 


44  APASTAMBA.  I,  3,  H- 

moon,  of  an  earthquake,  of  a  whirlwind,  of  the  fall  of  a 
meteor,  or  of  a  fire  (in  the  village),  at  whatever  time 
these  events  happen,  the  recitation  of  all  the  sacred 
sciences  (Vedas  and  Angas)  must  be  interrupted 
from  that  hour  until  the  same  hour  next  day. 

31.  If  a  cloud  appears  out  of  season,  if  the  sun  or 
the  moon  is  surrounded  by  a  halo,  if  a  rainbow,  a 

'  parhelion  or  a  comet  appears,  if  a  (high)  wind  (blows), 
a  foul  smell  (is  observed),  or  hoarfrost  (lies  on  the 
ground),  at  all  these  occasions  (the  recitation  of  all 
the  sacred  sciences  must  be  interrupted)  during  the 
duration  (of  these  phenomena). 

32.  After  the  wind  has  ceased,  (the  interruption 
of  the  recitation  continues)  for  one  muhurta. 

33.  If  (the  howl  of)  a  wolf  or  of  a  solitary  jackal 
(has  been  heard,  he  shall  stop  the  reading)  until  he 
has  slept. 

34.  At  night  (he  shall  not  study)  in  a  wood,  where 
there  is  no  fire  nor  gold. 

35.  Out  of  term  he  shall  not  study  any  part  of 
the  Veda  which  he  has  not  learnt  before. 

36.  Nor  (shall  he  study  during  term  some  new 
part  of  the  Veda)  in  the  evening. 

37.  That  which  has  been  studied  before,  must 
never  be  studied  (during  the  vacation  or  in  the 
evening). 


31.  Manu  IV,  104,  and  see  above. 

32.  One  muhurta  =  48  minutes. 

36.  Other  commentators  interpret  the  Sutra  in  a  different  sense. 
They  take  it  to  mean  :  '  And  during  the  night  (from  the  twelfth 
to  the  thirteenth  of  each  half  of  the  month,  he  shall  not  study  at 
all,  be  it  in  or  out  of  term).' 

37.  'What  has  been  studied  before,  must  not  be  studied  (again) 
at  any  time  in  the  vacation  nor  in  the  evening.' — Haradatta. 


I,  4,  12.  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  45 

38.  Further  particulars  (regarding  the  interruption 
of  the  Veda-study  may  be  learnt)  from  the  (teaching 
and  works  of  other)  Vedic  schools. 

Pra^na  I,  Patala  4,   Khaada  12. 

1.  A  Brahma^^a  declares,  'The  daily  recitation  (of 
the  Veda)  is  austerity.' 

2.  In  the  same  (sacred  text)  it  is  also  declared, 
'  Whether  he  recites  the  daily  portion  of  the  Veda 
standing,  or  sitting,  or  lying  down,  he  performs  aus- 
terity thereby;  for  the  daily  recitation  is  austerity. 

3.  Now  the  Va^asaneyi-brahmawa  declares  also, 

38.  Haradatta  thinks  that  by  '  Parishad,'  ^Nlanu's  and  other  Dhar- 
ma-^astras  are  meant.  This  explanation  is,  however,  not  exact. 
Parishad,  '  assemblage,'  means,  in  the  language  of  the  6'astras, 
either  a  PaB-^,  an  assemblage  of  learned  Brahmans  called  together 
to  decide  some  knotty  point  of  law,  or  a  Brahminical  school,  which 
studies  a  particular  redaction  of  the  Veda  (see  the  Petersburg 
Diet.  s.  V.)  The  latter  meaning  is  that  applicable  to  this  Sutra. 
By  '  Parishada/^ '  are  here  intended  the  Vedic  schools,  and  their 
writings  and  teaching.  Gautama  also  says,  XVI,  49,  Pratividyaw 
yan  smaranti  smaranti,  '  (he  shall  observe  the  stoppages  of  the 
Veda- study)  which  they  teach  in  (the  writings  belonging  to)  each 
of  the  Vedas.' 

12.1.  'It  procures  as  much  reward  as  penance.' — Haradatla. 
Manu  II,  166;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  113.  The  phrase  occurs 
frequently  in  the  Brahma7/as,  e.g.  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  14,  3. 

2.  Regarding  the  proper  position  at  the  '  Veda-offering,'  or 
daily  recitation,  see  above,  I,  3,  i,  23,  and  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  ir,  3. 
Passages  similar  to  the  first  part  of  the  sentence  quoted  in  this 
Sutra  occur  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  12,  3,  and  15,  3.  It  ought  to  be  observed, 
that  the  Taitt.  Ar.  in  both  places  has  the  word  '  vra^an,'  which  is 
also  read  in  the  P.  and  P.  U.  MSS.  The  second  part  is  taken 
apparently  from  the  same  work,  II,  14,  2. 

3.  See  .S'atapatha-brahmawa  XI,  5,  6,  8,  where  a  passage  very 
similar  to  that  quoted  by  Apastamba  occurs.  Vasha/  and  the  other 
exclamations,  which  are  pronounced  by  the  HotrZ-priest,  serve  as 
signals  for  the  x\dhvaryu  to  throw  th§  oblations  into  the  fire. 


4^  APASTAMBA.  I,  4,  12. 

'  The  daily  recitation  is  a  sacrifice  at  which  the  Veda 
is  offered.  When  it  thunders,  when  Hghtning  flashes 
or  thunderbolts  fall,  and  when  the  wind  blows  vio- 
lently, these  sounds  take  the  place  of  the  exclama- 
tions Vasha^'  (Vausha^  and  Svaha).  Therefore  he 
shall  recite  the  Veda  whilst  it  thunders,  whilst  light- 
ning flashes  and  thunderbolts  fall,  and  whilst  the 
wind  blows  violently,  lest  the  Vasha/  (should  be 
heard)  in  vain.' 

4.  The  conclusion  of  the  passage  from  that(Va^a- 
saneyi-brahma;2a  is  found)  in  another  ^'akha  (of  the 
Veda). 

5.  '  Now,  if  the  wind  blows,  or  if  it  thunders,  or 
if  lightning  flashes,  or  thunderbolts  fall,  then  he 
shall  recite  one  i?zk-verse  (in  case  he  studies  the 
7?/g-veda),  or  one  Ya^s  (in  case  he  studies  the 
Ya^ur-veda),  or  one  Saman  (in  case  he  studies  the 
Sama-veda),  or  (without  having  regard  to  his  par- 
ticular Veda,  the  following  Ya^us),  "  BhM  Bhuva/^, 
Suva/4,  in  faith  I  offer  true  devotion."  Then,  for- 
sooth, his  daily  recitation  is  accomplished  thereby 
for  that  day.' 

6.  If  that  is  done,  (if  the  passage  of  the  Va^a- 
saneyi-brahma7^a  is  combined  with  that  quoted  in 
Sutra  5,  the  former  stands)  not  in  contradiction  with 
the  decision  of  the  Aryas. 

7.  For  they  (who  know  the  law)  teach  both  the 
continuance  and  the  interruption  (of  the  daily  re- 
citation of  the  Veda).     That  would  be  meaningless, 

5,  '  Some  suppose  that  the  words  Bhuh  Bhuva/^  and  Suva/^  &c. 
(are  to  be  used  only)  if  one  studies  the  Brahmawa  portion  of  the 
Veda,  not  everywhere.' — Haradatta. 

6.  Haradatta  explains  Aryas  by  vi^-ish/a/^,  '  excellent  ones,'  i.  e. 
persons  who  know  the  law,  and  he  gives  INIanu  as  an  instance. 


I,  4,  12.  THE    STUDY    OF    THE   VEDA.  47 

if  one  paid  attention  to  the  (passage  of  the)  Va^a- 
saneyi-brahma«a  (alone). 

8.  For  no  (worldly)  motive  for  the  decision  of 
those  Aryas  is  perceptible;  (and  hence  it  must  have 
a  religious  motive  and  be  founded  on  a  passage  of 
the  Veda.) 

9.  (The  proper  interpretation  therefore  is,  that) 
the  prohibition  to  study  (given  above  and  by  the 
Aryas  generally)  refers  only  to  the  repetition  of  the 
sacred  texts  in  order  to  learn  them,  not  to  their 
application  at  sacrifices. 

10.  (But  if  you  ask,  why  the  decision  of  the  Aryas 
presupposes  the  existence  of  a  Vedic  passage,  then  I 
answer) :  All  precepts  were  (originally)  taught  in  the 
Brahmawas,  (but)  these  texts  have  been  lost. 

11.  Their  (former  existence)  may,  however,  be 
inferred  from  usage. 

12.  But  it  is  not  (permissible  to  infer  the  former 
existence  of)  a  (Vedic)  passage  in  cases  where  plea- 
sure is  obtained  (by  following  a  rule  of  the  Smrz'ti 
or  a  custom). 

13.  He  who  follows  such  (usages)  becomes  fit 
for  hell. 

14.  Now  follow  (some  rites  and)  rules  that  have 
been  declared  in  the  Brahma;^as. 

8.    See  above,  I,  i,  4,  9  and  10,  and  notes. 

11.  How  then  is  their  existence  known.?  'They  are  inferred 
from  usage.'  '  "  Usage  "  means  the  teaching  of  the  law-books 
and  the  pracdce.  From  that  it  is  inferred  that  Manu  and  other 
(authors  of  law-books)  knew  such  texts  of  the  Brahmawas.  For 
how  could  othenvise  (i?/shis  like  Manu)  teach  in  their  works  or 
practise  (such  customs)  for  which  no  authority  is  now  found? 
And  certainly  they  were  intimately  connected  with  the  revealed 
texts  (i.  e.  saw  them).' — Haradatta. 

12.  Compare  above,  I,  i,  4,  8-10. 

14.  The  consequence  of  the  introduction  of  these  rules  into  a 


48  APASTAMBA.  1, 4,  13. 


15.  By  way  of  laudation  they  are  called  'great 
sacrifices  '  or  '  great  sacrificial  sessions,' 

16.  (These  rites  include):  The  daily  Bali-offering 
to  the  (seven  classes  of)  beings ;  the  (daily)  gift  of 
(food)  to  men  according  to  one's  power  ; 

PrA^'NA    I,    PArALA    4,    KUANDA    13. 

T.  The  oblation  to  the  gods  accompanied  by  the 
exclamation  Svaha,  which  may  consist  even  of  a  piece 
of  wood  only;  the  offering  to  the  Manes  accompanied 
by  the  exclamation  Svadha,  which  may  consist  even 
of  a  vessel  with  water  only ;  the  daily  recitation  for 
the  i'^/shis. 

2.  Respect  must  be  shown  to  those  who  are 
superior  by  caste, 

3.  And  also  to  (persons  of  the  same  caste  who  are) 
venerable  (on  account  of  learning,  virtue,  and  the  like). 

4.  A  man  elated  (with  success)  becomes  proud,  a 
proud  man  transgresses  the  law,  but  through  the 
transgression  of  the  law,  forsooth,  hell  (becomes  his 
portion). 

Smr/ti  work  is,  that  their  omission  must  be  expiated  by  a  Smarta 
penance  and  not  by  a  .5'rauta  one. 

15.  The  commentator  observes,  that,  as  these  rites  are  called 
'  great  sacrifices,'  by  way  of  laudation  only,  the  particular  laws 
binding  on  performers  of  real  Soma-sacrifices  cannot  be  transferred 
to  the  performers  of  these  ceremonies.  Regarding  the  term 
'great  sacrifices,'  see  also  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  11,  10,  i  seq.,  and  Sata.- 
paiha-brahmawa  XI,  5,  6,  i. 

13.  I.  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  10,  2  and  3,  and  .S'atapatha-br.  loc.  cit.  2. 
Haradatta  observes,  ihat  some  consider  the  Devaya^iia,  mentioned 
in  the  Sutra,  to  be  different  from  the  Vaijvadeva,  but  that  he  holds 
it  to  be  the  same.  Further  he  mentions,  that  some  prescribe  this 
Vaijvadeva  to  be  performed  even  if  one  has  nothing  to  eat. 

2.  '  Namely,  by  allowing  them  to  walk  in  front  on  the  road  and 
by  giving  them  perfumed  garlands  and  the  like  at  festive  occasions.' 
— Haradatta. 


1,4,  13-        A  STUDENT  WHO  HAS  RETURNED  HOME.  49 


5.  It  has  not  been  declared,  that  orders  (may 
be  addressed  by  the  teacher)  to  a  pupil  who  has 
returned  home. 

6.  The  syllable  '  Om '  is  the  door  of  heaven. 
Therefore  he  who  is  about  to  study  the  \'eda,  shall 
begin  (his  lesson)  by  (pronouncing)  it. 

7.  If  he  has  spoken  anything  else  (than  what 
refers  to  the  lesson,  he  shall  resume  his  reading  by 
repeating  the  word  '  Om  ').  Thus  the  \'eda  is  sepa- 
rated from  profane  speech.  And  at  sacrifices  the 
orders  (given  to  the  priests)  are  headed  by  this  word. 

8.  And  in  common  life,  at  the  occasion  of  cere- 
monies performed  for  the  sake  of  welfare,  the  sen- 
tences shall  be  headed  by  this  word,  as.  for  instance, 
'  (Om)  an  auspicious  day,'  '  (Om)  welfare,'  '  (Om) 
prosperity.' 

9.  Without  a  vow  of  obedience  (a  pupil)  shall  not 
study  (nor  a  teacher  teach)  a  difficult  (new  book) 
with  the  exception  of  (the  texts  called)  Tri/^jrava;/a 
and  Tri/^sahava^na. 

10.  Harita  declares,  that  the  (whole)  \'eda  must 

5.  Haradatta  gives  as  an  example  the  order  to  fetch  water,  and 
adds  that  a  voluntary  act  on  a  former  pupil's  part  ought  not  to  be 
forbidden. 

6.  Compare  also  Taitt.  Ar.  I,  2,  4,  and  ^Nlanu  II,  74. 

8.  The  example  given  in  the  Sutra  is  that  of  the  Pu//yahava>Jana, 
which  precedes  every  G/zhya  ceremony,  and  at  which  the  sacrificer 
requests  a  number  of  invited  Brahmawas  to  wish  him  success.  The 
complete  sentences  are,  The  sacrificer:  0-7/  karmawa/i  pu//yaham 
bhavanto  bruvantviti,  '  Om,  wish  that  the  day  may  be  auspicious 
for  the  performance  of  the  ceremony.'  The  Brahma/zas :  Om 
puwyahaw  karma«a  iti,  '  Om,  may  the  day  be  auspicious  for  the 
ceremony.'  In  the  same  manner  the  Brahma//as  after^vards  wish 
'  welfare/  svasti,  '  prosperity,'  vriddhi,  to  the  sacrificer. 

9.  Manu  II,  112. 

10.  The  meaning  of  Harita  is,  that  the  vow  of  obedience  is 
[2]  E 


50  APASTAMBA.  I,  4,  13. 

be  studied  under  a  vow  of  obedience  until  there  is 
no  doubt  (regarding  it  in  the  mind  of  the  pupil). 

1 1.  No  obedience  is  due  (to  the  teacher  for  teach- 
ing) works  which  do  not  belong  to  the  Veda. 

12.  (A  student)  shall  embrace  the  feet  of  a  person, 
w^ho  teaches  him  at  the  request  of  his  (regular 
teacher),  as  long  as  the  instruction  lasts. 

13.  Some  (declare,  that  he  shall  do  so)  always,  (if 
the  substitute  is)  a  worthy  person. 

14.  But  obedience  (as  towards  the  teacher)  is  not 
required  (to  be  shown  towards  such  a  person). 

15.  And  (pupils)  older  (than  their  teacher  need 
not  show  him  obedience). 

16.  If  (two  persons)  teach  each  other  mutually 
(different  redactions  of)  the  Veda,  obedience  (towards 
each  other)  is  not  ordained  for  them. 

17.  (For)  the  (wise)  say,  'The  Veda-knowledge 
(of  either  of  them)  grows.' 

18.  ^'vetaketu  declares,  'He  who  desires  to  study 
more,  after  having  settled  (as  a  householder),  shall 
dwell  two  months  every  year,  with  collected  mind, 
in  the  house  of  his  teacher,' 

19.  (And  he  adds),  '  For  by  this  means  I  studied 
a  larger  part  of  the  Veda  than  before,  (during  my 
studentship.)' 

required  for  the  Tri/wrava«a  and  Tri//sahava/C'ana,  which  Apastamba 
exempted  in  the  preceding  Sutra.  It  follows  from  this  rule  that 
the  Angas  or  works  explanatory  of  the  Veda  need  not  be  studied 
under  a  vow  of  obedience. 

12.  This  rule  is  a  supplement  to  I,  2,  7,  28. 

13.  '"A  worthy  person,"  i.e.  on  account  of  his  learning  or 
character.' — Haradatta. 

15.  'According  to  some,  this  rule  refers  only  to  the  time  after 
the  instruction  has  been  completed  ;  according  to  others,  to  the 
time  of  studentship.' — Haradatta.    But  see  Manu  II,  151  seq. 


I,  4,  14.       A  STUDENT  WHO  HAS  RETURNED  HOME.  5  I 

20.  That  is  forbidden  by  the  6astras. 

21.  For  after  the  student  has  settled  as  a  house- 
holder, he  is  ordered  by  the  \'eda,  to  perform  the 
daily  rites, 

Pra^-xa   I,    PArALA  4,   Khaa'da   14. 

1.  (That  is  to  say)  the  Agnihotra,  hospitality, 

2.  And  what  else  of  this  kind  (is  ordained). 

3.  He  whom  (a  student)  asks  for  instruction,  shall 
certainly  not  refuse  it ; 

4.  Provided  he  does  not  see  in  him  a  fault,  (which 
disqualifies  him  from  being  taught.) 

5.  If  by  chance  (through  the  pupil's  stupidity  the 
teaching)  is  not  completed,  obedience  towards  the 
(teacher  is  the  pupil's  only  refuge). 

6.  Towards  a  mother  (grandmother  and  great- 
grandmother)  and  a  father  (grandfather  and  great- 
grandfather) the  same  obedience  must  be  shown  as 
towards  a  teacher. 

7.  The  feet  of  all  Gurus  must  be  embraced  (every 
day)  by  a  student  who  has  returned  home ; 

8.  And  also  on  meetino-  them,  after  returning 
from  a  journey. 

9.  The  feet  of  (elder)  brothers  and  sisters  must  be 
embraced,  according  to  the  order  of  their  seniority. 

14.  I.  TheAgnihotra,  i.e.  certain  daily  oblations  of  clarified  butter. 
3.    Manu  II,  109-115. 

5.  Manu  11,  218. 

6.  IManu  II,  228,  235. 

7.  The  word  Gurus,  '  venerable  persons,'  includes  besides  the 
teacher  and  persons  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Sutra,  an  elder 
brother,  a  maternal  uncle,  and  all  others  who  are  one's  betters 
or  elders.     See  above,  I,  2,  6,  29-34. 

8.  'That  is  to  say,  whether  he  himself  or  "the  venerable  persons" 
undertook  the  journey.' — Haradatta. 

9.  Manu  II,  133. 

E  2 


52  APASTAMBA.  I,  4,  I4- 


10.  And  respect  (must)  always  (be  shown  to  one's 
elders  and  betters),  according  to  the  injunction  (given 
above  and  according  to  the  order  of  their  seniority). 

11.  He  shall  salute  an  officiating  priest,  a  father- 
in-law,  a  father's  brother,  and  a  mother's  brother, 
(though  they  may  be)  younger  than  he  himself,  and 
(when  saluting)  rise  to  meet  them. 

12.  Or  he  may  silently  embrace  their  feet. 

13.  A  friendship  kept  for  ten  years  with  fellow- 
citizens  (is  a  reason  for  giving  a  salutation,  and  so 
is)  a  friendship,  contracted  at  school,  which  lasted 
for  five  years.  But  a  learned  Brahmaz/a  (known)  for 
less  than  three  years,  must  be  saluted. 

14.  If  the  age  (of  several  persons  whom  one 
meets)  is  exactly  known,  one  must  salute  the  eldest 
(first). 

15.  He  need  not  salute  a  person,  who  is  not  a 
Guru,  and  who  stands  in  a  lower  or  higher  place 
than  he  himself. 

16.  Or  he  may  descend  or  ascend  (to  the  place 
where  such  a  person  stands)  and  salute  him. 

17.  But  every  one  (Gurus  and  others)  he  shall 
salute,  after  having  risen  (from  his  seat). 

18.  If  he  is  impure,  he  shall  not  salute  (anybody); 

10.  See  above,  I,  4,  13,  2. 

11.  INIanu  II,  130. 

12.  The  commentator  adds  that  the  mode  of  salutation  must 
depend  on  their  learning  and  virtue. 

13.  Manu  II,  134. 

16.  This  Sutra,  like  the  preceding,  refers  to  those  who  are 
not  '  Gurus.' 

17.  Manu  II,  120. 

18.  '  Impure,' i.e.  unfit  for  associating  with  others  on  account 
of  the  death  of  relations  or  through  other  causes,  see  below,  I,  5, 
15,7  seq. 


1,4,14-  SALUTING.  53 

19.  (Xor  shall  he  salute)  a  person  who  is  impure. 

20.  Nor  shall  he,  being  impure,  return  a  saluta- 
tion. 

21.  iNIarried  women  {must  be  saluted)  accorJinL,^ 
to  the  (respective)  ages  of  their  husbands. 

22.  He  shall  not  salute  with  his  shoes  on,  or  his 
head  wrapped  up,  or  his  hands  full. 

23.  In  saluting  women,  a  Kshatriya  or  a  \'^ai5")a 
he  shall  use  a  pronoun,  not  his  name. 

24.  Some  (declare,  that  he  shall  salute  in  this 
manner  even)  his  mother  and  the  wife  of  his 
teacher. 

25.  Know  that  a  Brahma;^a  of  ten  years  and  a 
Kshatriya  of  a  hundred  years  stand  to  each  other  in 
the  relation  of  father  and  son.  But  between  those 
tw^o  the  Brahma;/a  is  the  father. 

26.  A  younger  person  or  one  of  equal  age  he 
shall  ask,  about  his  well-being  (employing  the  word 
ku^ala). 

27.  (He  shall  ask  under  the  same  conditions) 
a  Kshatriya,  about  his  health  (employing  the  word 
anamaya) ; 

28.  A  Vai^ya  if  he  has  lost  anything  (employing 
the  word  anash/a). 

23.  He  shall  say, 'I  salute,' not 'I,  N.  N.,  salute.'    ]\Ianu  II,  123. 

24.  Apastamba,  of  course,  holds  the  contrary  opinion.  Manu 
II,  216. 

25.  This  verse,  which  is  found  with  slight  variations  in  most 
Smr/tis,  contains,  according  to  Haradatta,  an  instruction  given  by 
a  teacher  to  his  pupil.    ^lanu  II,  135. 

26.  Of  course,  in  case  the  person  addressed  is  a  Brahman. 
]\Ianu  II,  127.  Kulluka  quotes  under  this  verse  the  above  and 
the  following  Siitras.  But  his  quotation  has  only  a  faint  resem- 
blance to  our  text. 

28.  That  is  to  say  in  these  terms:  'I  hope  you  have  not  lost 
any  cattle  or  other  property!' — Haradatta. 


54  APASTAMIIA.  I,  5,  lo- 

29.  A  6'udra,  about  his  health  (employing  the 
word  arogya), 

30.  He  shall  not  pass  a  learned  Brahma;za  with- 
out addressing"  him  ;  nor  an  (unprotected)  woman  in 
a  forest  (or  any  other  lonely  place). 

Pra^s-na   I,   Patala  5,   Kiiaa'^zia  15. 

1.  When  he  shows  his  respect  to  Gurus  or  aged 
persons  or  guests,  when  he  offers  a  burnt-oblation 
(or  other  sacrifice),  when  he  murmurs  prayers  at 
dinner,  when  sipping  water  and  during  the  (daily) 
recitation  of  the  Veda,  his  garment  (or  his  sacrificial 
thread)  shall  pass  over  his  left  shoulder  and  under 
his  right  arm. 

2.  By  sipping  (pure)  water,  that  has  been  col- 
lected on  the  ground,  he  becomes  pure. 

3.  Or  he,  whom  a  pure  person  causes  to  sip  water, 
(becomes  also  pure.) 

4.  He  shall  not  sip  rain-drops. 

3c.  He  shall  address  a  woman  in  order  to  re-assure  her,  and 
do  it  in  these  terms :  '  Mother,  or  sister,  what  can  I  do  for  you  ? 
Don't  be  afraid  ! '  &c. — Haradatta. 

15.  I.    Taitt.  Ar.  II,  i,  2  seq. ;  jNIanu  IV,  58. 

2.  Pure  water  is  that  which  a  cow  v.ill  drink.  Ya^^^^il.  I,  192; 
^lanu  V,  128. 

3.  The  ceremony  of  '  sipping  water'  may  be  performed  in  two 
ways  ;  either  the  '  person  sipping '  may  take  the  water  out  of  a 
river,  pond,  &c.,  or  he  may  get  the  water  poured  into  his  hand  by 
another  person.  But,  according  to  Apastamba,  he  must  not  take 
a  pot  or  gourd  in  his  left  hand  and  pour  the  water  into  his  right, 
as  some  Smr/tis  allow.  The  reason  for  this  rule  is,  that  Apa- 
stamba considers  it  essential  that  both  hands  should  be  used  in 
conveying  the  water  to  the  mouth;  see  also  above,  I,  i,  4,  21. 
This  agrees  with  the  custom  now  followed,  which  is  to  bend  the 
right  hand  into  the  form  of  a  cow's  ear,  and  to  touch  the  right 
wrist  with  the  left  hand  while  drinking. 

4.  '  Some  think,  that  this  Sutra  is  intended  to  forbid  also 
the    drinking  of  rain-water.     Other  commentators    declare    that, 


1,5,15-  PURIFICATION.  55 

5.  (He  shall  not  sip  water)  from  a  (natural)  cleft 
in  the  ground. 

6.  He  shall  not  sip  water  heated  (at  the  fire) 
except  for  a  particular  reason  (as  sickness). 

7.  He  who  raises  his  empty  hands  (in  order  to 
scare)  birds,  (becomes  impure  and)  shall  wash  (his 
hands). 

8.  If  he  can  (find  water  to  sip)  he  shall  not  remain 
impure  (even)  for  a  muhurta. 

9.  Nor  (shall  he  remain)  naked  (for  a  muhurta  if 
he  can  help  it). 

10.  Purification  (by  sipping  water)  shall  not  take 
place  whilst  he  is  (standing)  in  the  water, 

1 1 .  Also,  when  he  has  crossed  a  river,  he  shall 
purify  himself  by  sipping  water. 

12.  He  shall  not  place  fuel  on  the  fire,  without 
having  sprinkled  it  (with  water). 

13.  (If  he  is  seated  in  company  with)  other  unclean 

according  to  this  Sutra,  it  is  allowed  to  use  for  "  sipping  "  drops 
of  water  which  fall  from  a  vessel  suspended  by  ropes  [because  the 
Sutra  emphatically  excludes  "  rain-drops  "  only].' — Haradatta. 

6.  Manu  II,  61.  'Because  the  term  "heated  by  fire"  is  used, 
there  is  no  objection  to  water  heated  by  the  rays  of  the  sun.  In 
the  same  manner  the  use  of  '"  hot "  water  only  is  usually  forbidden 
in  the  Smmis.' — Haradatta. 

7.  'Because  the  phrase  '"'with  empty  hands"  is  used, he  commits 
no  fault  if  he  raises  his  hand,  holding  a  stick  or  a  clod.  Some 
declare,  that  the  term  "  touching  water  "  (rendered  by  "  washing  '") 
means  "  sipping  water."' — Haradatta. 

11.  The  translation  given  above  is  based  on  the  interpretation 
of  Haradatta,  who  considers  that  Apastamba  holds  '  crossing  a 
river '  to  cause  impurity.  The  natural  and  probably  the  right  inter- 
pretation, however,  is  that  rejected  by  Haradatta,  '  But  he  shall  sip 
water  after  having  come  out  (of  the  river  or  tank).' 

12.  '"On  the  fire  used  for  Vedic  or  Smarta  sacrifices  or  for 
household  purposes."  .  .  .  Some  declare,  that  (the  fuel  need  not  be 
sprinkled  with  water)  if  used  for  the  kitchen  fire.' — Haradatta. 


56  APASTAMBA.  I,  5,  15. 

persons  on  a  seat  consisting  of  a  confused  heap 
of  straw,  and  does  not  touch  them,  he  may  consider 
himself  pure. 

14.  (The  same  rule  applies,  if  he  is  seated)  on 
grass  or  wood  fixed  in  the  ground. 

15.  He  shall  put  on  a  dress,  (even  if  it  is  clean,) 
only  after  having  sprinkled  it  with  water. 

16.  If  he  has  been  touched  by  a  dog,  he  shall 
bathe,  with  his  clothes  on  ; 

1 7.  Or  he  becomes  pure,  after  having  washed 
that  part  (of  his  body)  and  having  touched  it  with 
fire  and  again  washed  it,  as  well  as  his  feet,  and 
having  sipped  water. 

18.  Unpurified,  he  shall  not  approach  fire,  (so 
near  that  he  can  feel  the  heat.) 

19.  Some  declare,  that  (he  shall  not  approach 
nearer)  than  the  length  of  an  arrow. 

20.  Nor  shall  he  blow  on  fire  with  his  breath. 

21.  Nor  shall  he  place  fire  under  his  bedstead. 

22.  It   is  lawful   for  a   Brahma;^a  to  dwell  in  a 

14.  Haradatta's  commentary  is  of  little  use,  and  I  am  not  quite 
certain  that  my  translation  is  correct. 

15.  Manu  V,  118. 

17.  This  second  proceeding  is  adopted  in  case  the  dog  has 
touched  the  hands  or  the  lower  parts  of  the  body,  as  may  be  learnt 
by  the  comparison  of  a  verse  of  Manu. 

18.  Manu  IV,  142;  Ya^n.  I,  155. 

20.  INIanu  IV,  53.  Haradatta  mentions  other  explanations  of 
this  Sutra.  Some  say  that  the  -5'rauta  fire  may  be  kindled  by 
blowing,  because  that  is  ordained  particularly  in  the  Vag^asaneyaka, 
but  that  the  domestic  fire  is  not  to  be  treated  so.  Others  again 
consider  the  rule  absolute,  and  say,  that  a  hollow  reed  or  bellows 
must  be  used  for  kindling  the  fire,  lest  drops  of  saliva  should  fall 
upon  it. 

21.  Manu  IV,  54. 

22.  The  last  condition  mentioned  in  the  Sutra  indicates,  that 


I,  5,  i6.  PURIFICATION.  57 

village,  where  there  is  plenty  of  fuel  and  water, 
(and)  where  he  may  perform  the  rites  of  purification 
by  himself. 

23.  When  he  has  washed  away  the  stains  of  urine 
and  faeces  after  voiding  urine  or  faeces,  the  stains  of 
food  (after  dinner),  the  stains  of  the  food  eaten  the 
day  before  (from  his  vessels),  and  the  stains  of 
semen,  and  has  also  washed  his  feet  and  afterwards 
has  sipped  water,  he  becomes  pure. 

Pra^xa   I,   PArALA  5,   Kha.vda  16. 

1.  He  shall  not  drink  water  standing  or  bent 
forwards. 

2.  Sitting  he  shall  sip  water  (for  purification) 
thrice,  the  water  penetrating  to  his  heart. 

3.  He  shall  wipe  his  lips  three  times. 

the  place  must  have  a  river  or  tank,  not  wells  only,  as  the  purifi- 
cation by  sipping  water  cannot  be  performed  without  help,  with 
water  from  wells. 

23.    Manu  V,  138. 

16.  I.  Haradatta  takes  aizm  here  to  mean  '  to  drink  water,'  and 
thinks  that  it  is  forbidden  to  do  this  standing  or  in  a  bent  position. 
Others  refer  the  prohibition  to  '  sipping  water  for  the  sake  of 
purification,'  and  translate,  '  He  shall  not  sip  water  standing  or  in 
a  bent  position  (except  in  case  of  necessity),'  i.  e.  if  the  bank  of  the 
river  is  so  high  that  he  cannot  reach  the  water  sitting  down,  and 
in  this  case  he  shall  enter  it  up  to  his  thighs  or  up  to  his  navel. 

2.  Manu  II,  60  and  62;  V.  139:  and  Va^.  I,  20  and  27; 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  165.  Haradatta  observes,  that  the  further 
particulars  regarding  purification  by  sipping  water  must  be  supplied 
from  other  Srarnis.  The  rule  quoted  by  him  is  as  follows :  '  The 
performer  should  be  sitting  in  a  pure  place,  not  on  a  seat,  except 
when  sipping  water  after  dinner,  and  should  sip  thrice  from  his 
hand  water  which  is  free  from  bubbles  and  foam,  and  which  he 
has  attentively  regarded,  in  such  a  quantity  as  would  cover  a  Masha- 
grain.  The  water  sipped  by  a  Brahman  should  reach  his  heart, 
that  sipped  by  a  Kshatriya  the  throat,  and  that  sipped  by  a  Vai.rya 
the  palate.     A  ^udra  sips  once  as  much  as  to  wet  his  tongue.' 


58  APASTAMBA.  I,  5,  16. 

4.  Some  (declare,  that  he  shall  do  so)  twice. 

5.  He  shall  then  touch  (his  lips)  once  (with  the 
three  middle  fingers). 

6.  Some  (declare,  that  he  shall  do  so)  twice. 

7.  Having  sprinkled  water  on  his  left  hand  with 
his  right,  he  shall  touch  both  his  feet,  and  his  head 
and  (the  following  three)  organs,  the  eyes,  the  nose, 
and  the  ears. 

8.  Then  he  shall  wash  (his  hands). 

9.  But  if  he  is  going  to  eat  he  shall,  though  pure, 
twice  sip  water,  twice  wipe  (his  mouth),  and  once 
touch  (his  lips). 

10.  He  shall  rub  the  gums  and  the  inner  part  of 
his  lips  (w^ith  his  finger  or  with  a  piece  of  wood)  and 
then  sip  water. 

11.  He  does  not  become  impure  by  the  hair  (of 
his  moustaches)  getting  into  his  mouth,  as  long  as 
he  does  not  touch  them  with  his  hand. 

12.  If  (in  talking),  drops  (of  saliva)  are  perceived 
to  fall  from  his  mouth,  then  he  shall  sip  water. 

1 3.  Some  declare,  that  if  (the  saliva  falls)  on  the 
ground,  he  need  not  sip  water. 

14.  On  touching  during  sleep  or  in  sternutation 
the  effluvia  of  the  nose  or  of  the  eyes,  on  touching 
blood,  hair,  fire,  kine,  a  Brahma;za,  or  a  woman,  and 

7.  The  eyes  are  to  be  touched  with  the  thumb  and  the  fourth 
finger,  either  at  once,  or  one  after  the  other,  the  nostrils  with  the 
thumb  and  the  second  finger,  the  ears  with  the  thumb  and  the 
small  finger. 

9.    Manu  V,  138. 

11.  Haradatta  observes  that  this  Sutra  shows,  that  every  other 
foreign  substance  brought  with  the  food  into  the  mouth,  makes  the 
food  '  leavings  '  and  the  eater  impure.     IManu  V,  14 1. 

12.  INIanuV,  141  declares  sipping  to  be  unnecessary  in  this  case. 
14.    Manu  V,  145. 


I,  5,  r6.  PURIFICATION  ;    EATING.  59 

after  having  walked  on  the  high  road,  and  after 
having  touched  an  unclean  {thing  or  an  impure  man), 
and  after  having  put  on  his  lower  garment,  he  shall 
either  bathe  or  sip  or  merely  touch  water  (until  he 
considers  himself  clean). 

15.  (Or  he  may  touch)  moist  cowdung,  wet  herbs, 
or  moist  earth. 

16.  He  shall  not  eat  meat  which  has  been  cut 
with  a  sword  (or  knife)  used  for  killing. 

17.  He  shall  not  bite  off  with  his  teeth  (pieces 
from)  cakes  (roots  or  fruits). 

iS.  He  shall  not  eat  in  the  house  of  a  (relation 
within  six  degrees)  where  a  person  has  died,  before 
the  ten  days  (of  impurity)  have  elapsed. 

19.  (Nor  shall  he  eat  in  a  house)  where  a  lying-in 
woman  has  not  (\et)  come  out  (of  the  lying-in 
chamber), 

20.  (Xor  in  a  house)  where  a  corpse  lies. 

21.  Food  touched  by  a  (Brahma;/a  or  other  high- 
caste  person)  who  is  impure,  becomes  Impure,  but 
not  unfit  for  eating. 

18.  '  The  term  "  ten  days''  is  used  in  order  to  indicate  the  time 
of  impurity  generally.  In  some  cases,  as  that  of  a  Kshatriya,  this 
lasts  longer.  In  other  cases,  where  the  impurity  las's  thirty-six 
hours  only,  (the  abstention  from  dining  in  such  houses  is 
shorter.)" — Haradatta.     Manu  IV,  217. 

19.  A  lying-in  woman  is  impure,  and  must  not  be  touched 
during  the  first  ten  days  after  her  confinement.  During  this  tim.e, 
she  exclusively  occupies  the  Sutikagr^lia  or  lying-in  chamber. 
Manu  IV,  217. 

20.  Haradatta  remarks  that  in  the  case  of  the  death  of  a  person 
who  is  not  a  relation,  it  is  customary  to  place  at  the  distance  of 
'  one  hundred  bows  '  a  lamp  and  water-vessel,  and  to  eat  (beyond 
that  distance). 

21.  '  Food  which  is  simply  impure,  may  be  purified  by  putting 
it  on  the  fire,  sprinkling  it  with  water,  touching  it  with  ashes  or 
earth,  and  praising  it.' — Haradatta. 


6o  APASTAMBA.  I,  5,  16. 

2  2.  But  what  has  been  brought  (be  it  touched  or 
not)  by  an  impure  .Sudra,  must  not  be  eaten, 

23.  Nor  that  food  in  which  there  is  a  hair, 

24.  Or  any  other  unclean  substance. 

25.  (Nor  must  that  food  be  eaten)  which  has 
been  touched  with  an  unclean  substance  (such  as 
garlic), 

26.  Nor  that  in  which  an  insect  living  on  impure 
substances  is  found, 

27.  Nor  that  in  which  excrements  or  limbs  of  a 
mouse  are  found,  nor  that  which  has  been  touched 
by  the  foot  (even  of  a  pure  person), 

28.  Nor  what  has  been  (touched)  with  the  hem 
of  a  garment, 

29.  Nor  that  which  has  been  touched  by  a  dog 
or  an  Apapatra, 

30.  Nor  what  has  been  brought  in  the  hem 
of  a  garment,  (even  though  the  garment  may  be) 
clean, 


22.  Others  say,  that  the  food  becomes  unfit  for  eating,  only,  if 
in  bringing  it,  the  .Sudra  has  touched  it. — Haradatta. 

23.  Manu  IV,  207;  Ya^-fi.  I,  167.  'But  this  rule  holds  good 
only  if  the  hair  had  been  cooked  with  the  food.  If  a  hair  falls  into 
it  at  dinner,  then  it  is  to  be  purified  by  an  addition  of  clarified 
butter,  and  may  be  eaten.' — Haradatta. 

24.  Haradatta  quotes  a  passage  from  Baudhayana,  which  enu- 
merates as  '  unclean  things '  here  intended, '  hair,  worms  or  beedes, 
nail-parings,  excrements  of  rats.'  The  rule  must  be  understood 
as  the  preceding,  i.  e.  in  case  these  things  have  been  cooked  with 
the  food. 

26.  Manu  IV,  207;  Y%ii.  I,  167,  168.  This  Sutra  must  be 
read  with  Sutra  23  above. 

29.  ]\Ianu  IV,  208  ;  Ya_o-n.  I,  167.  Apapatras  are  persons  whom 
one  must  not  allow  to  eat  from  one's  dishes,  e.  g.  KandiV^s,  Patitas, 
a  woman  in  her  courses  or  during  the  ten  days  of  impurity  after 
confinement.     See  also  above,  I,  i,  3,  25. 


1,5,17-  EATING    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  6 1 

31.  Nor  what  has  been  brought  at  night  by  a 
female  slave. 

32.  If  during  his  meal, 

Pra^na  I,  PArALA  5,   KhaiVda  17. 

1.  A  6'udra  touches  him,  (then  he  shall  leave  off 
eating.) 

2.  Nor  shall  he  eat  sitting  in  the  same  row  with 
unworthy  people. 

3.  Nor  shall  he  eat  (sitting  in  the  same  row  with 
persons)  amongst  whom  one,  whilst  they  eat,  (leav^es 
off)  and  without  rising,  gives  his  leavings  to  his 
pupils  or  sips  water ; 

4.  Nor  (shall  he  eat)  where  they  give  him  food, 
revilinof  him, 

5.  Nor  (shall  he  eat)  what  has  been  smelt  at  by 
men  or  other  impure  (beings,  as  cats). 

6.  He  shall  not  eat  in  a  ship, 

7.  Nor  on  a  wooden  platform. 

8.  He  may  eat  sitting  on  ground  which  has  been 

31.  Haradatta  thinks,  that  as  the  Sutra  has  the  feminine  gender, 
dasi,  it  does  not  matter  if  a  male  slave  brings  the  food.  But 
others  forbid  also  this. 

17.  I.  'Some  say,  that  this  Sutra  indicates  that  the  touch  of  a 
A^udra  does  not  defile  at  any  other  time  but  at  dinner,  whilst  others 
hold  that  a  ^Sudra's  touch  defiles  always,  and  that  the  Sutra  is 
intended  to  indicate  an  excess  of  impurity,  if  it  happens  at  dinner- 
time.'— Haradatta. 

2.  '  Unworthy  people  are  those  who  are  neither  of  good  family, 
nor  possess  learning  and  virtue.' — Haradatta. 

3.  According  to  Haradatta  a  person  who  misbehaves  thus,  is 
called  '  a  dinner-thorn.'  This  point  of  etiquette  is  strictly  observed 
in  our  days  also.     Manu  IV,  212. 

4.  ]\Ianu  IV,  212  ;  Ya^n.  I,  167. 

5.  '  As  the  text  has  avaghrata,  "  smelt  at,"  it  does  not  matter  if 
they  smell  the  food  from  a  distance.' — Haradatta. 


62  APASTAMBA.  I,  5,  17. 

purified    (by    the    application    of  cowdung  and   the 
hke). 

9.  (If  he  eats)  out  of  an  earthen  vessel,  he  shall 
eat  out  of  one  that  has  not  been  used  (for  cooking). 

10.  (If  he  can  get)  a  used  vessel  (only,  he  shall 
eat  from  it),  after  having  heated  it  thoroughly. 

11.  A  vessel  made  of  metal  becomes  pure  by 
being  scoured  with  ashes  and  the  like. 

12.  A  wooden  vessel  becomes  pure  by  being 
scraped. 

13.  At  a  sacrifice  (the  vessels  must  be  cleaned) 
according  to  the  precepts  of  the  Veda. 

14.  He  shall  not  eat  food  which  has  been  bought 
or  obtained  ready-prepared  in  the  market. 

15.  Nor  (shall  he  eat)  flavoured  food  (bought  in 
the  market)  excepting  raw  meat,  honey,  and  salt. 

16.  Oil  and  clarified  butter  (bought  in  the  market) 
he  may  use,  after  having  sprinkled  them  with  w^ater. 

1 7.  Prepared  food  which  has  stood  for  a  night, 
must  neither  be  eaten  nor  drunk. 

18.  Nor  (should  prepared  food)  that  has  turned 
sour  (be  used  in  any  way). 

19.  (The  preceding  two  rules  do)  not  (hold  good 

11.  'It  must  be  understood  from  other  Smrz'tis,  that  brass  is  to 
be  cleaned  with  ashes,  copper  with  acids,  silver  with  cowdung,  and 
gold  with  water.' — Haradatta.     Manu  V,  114. 

12.  IManu  V,  115. 

16.  'Having  sprinkled  them  with  water  and  purified  them  by 
boiling ;  or,  according  to  others,  mixing  them  with  so  much  water 
as  will  not  spoil  them.' — Haradatta. 

17.  The  Sanskrit  has  two  terms  for  'eating;'  the  first  'khad' 
applies  to  hard  substances,  the  second  '  ad '  to  soft  substances. 
Manu  IV,  211  ;  Ya^n.  I,  167. 

18.  INIanu  IV,  211  ;  V,  9  ;  Y%n.  I,  167. 

19.  ?danu  V,  10,  24  and  25. 


1,5,17-  KATING    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  6 


J 


in  regard  to)  the  juice  of  sugar-cane,  roasted  rice- 
grains,  porridge  prepared  with  whey,  roasted  yava, 
gruel,  vegetables,  meat,  flour,  milk  and  preparations 
from  it,  roots  and  fruits  of  herbs  and  trees. 

20.  (Substances  which  have  turned)  sour  with- 
out  beinor   mixed    with    anvthino^   else    (are    to    be 

'  avoided). 

21.  All  intoxicating  drinks  are  forbidden, 

22.  Likewise  sheep's  milk, 

23.  Likewise  the  milk  of  camels,  of  does,  of 
animals  that  give  milk  while  big  with  young,  of  those 
that  bear  twins,  and  of  (one-hoofed  animals), 

24.  Likewise  the  milk  of  a  cow  (buffalo-cow  or 
she-goat)  during  the  (first)  ten  days  (after  their 
giving  birth  to  young  ones), 

25.  Likewise  (food  mixed)  with  herbs  which  serve 
for  preparing  intoxicating  liquors, 

26.  (Likewise)  red  garlic,  onions,  and  leeks, 

27.  Likewise  anything  else  which  (those  who  are 
learned  in  the  law)  forbid, 

28.  r^Iushrooms  ought  not  to  be  eaten  ;  that  has 
been  declared  in  a  Brahma7/a ; 

20.  According  to  Haradatta,  Apastamba  returns  once  more  to 
the  question  about  sour  food,  in  order  to  teach  that  dishes  pre- 
pared with  curds  and  other  sour  substances  may  be  eaten. 

22.  Manu  V,  8;  Ya^.  I,  170. 

23.  Manu  V,  8,  9;  Ya^ii.  I,  170.  '  Sandhini,  translated  by 
"  females  that  give  milk  while  big  with  young,"  means,  according 
to  others,  "  female  animals  that  give  milk  once  a  day."  ' — Haradatta. 

24.  ]Manu  V,  8. 

26.  ^Nlanu  V,  5;  Y%u.  I,  176. 

27.  Haradatta  observes  that  Apastamba,  finding  the  list  of  for- 
bidden vegetables  too  long,  refers  his  pupils  to  the  advice  of  the 
6ish/as.     The  force  of  this  Sutra  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of 

I,  3,  II,  38. 

28.  Ya^n.  I,  171. 


64  APASTAMBA.  I,  5,  17. 

29.  (Nor  the  meat)  of  one-hoofed  animals,  of 
camels,  of  the  Gayal,  of  village  pigs,  of  ^Sarabhas, 
and  of  cattle. 

30.  (But  the  meat)  of  milch-cows  and  oxen  may 
be  eaten. 

31.  The  Va^asaneyaka  declares  '  bull's  flesh  is  fit 
for  oflerings.' 

32.  Amongst  birds  that  scratch  with  their  feet  for 
food,  the  (tame)  cock  (must  not  be  eaten). 

33.  Amongst  birds  that  feed  thrusting  forward 
their  beak,  the  (heron,  called)  Plava  (or  KSaka-^abila, 
must  not  be  eaten). 

34.  Carnivorous  (birds  are  forbidden), 

35.  Likewise  the  Ha;;^sa,  the  Bhasa,  the  Brah- 
ma;/! duck,  and  the  falcon. 

36.  Common  cranes  and  Saras-cranes  (are  not  to 
be  eaten)  with  the  exception  of  the  leather-nosed 
Lakshma;/a. 

2)1.  Five-toed  animals  (ought  not  to  be  eaten) 
with  the  exception  of  the  Iguana,  the  tortoise,  the 

29.  The  camel,  Gayal,  and  ^arabha  are  mentioned  as  '  forbidden 
animals/  -Satapaiha-br.  I,  2,  i,  8;  Aitareya-br.  II,  i,  8;  see  also 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  62  ;  Manu  V,  11,  18  ;  Yign.  I,  172,  176. 

32.  Y%n.  I,  176. 

33.  Manu  V,  12  ;  Ya^'n.  I,  172. 

34.  Manu  V,  II  ;   Y^n.  I,  172. 

35.  Y%ri.  I,  172. 

36.  Other  commentators  take  the  whole  Sutra  as  on?  compound, 
and  explain  it  as  an  exception  to  Siitra  34.  In  that  case  the 
translation  runs  thus  :  ('  Carnivorous  birds  are  forbidden)  except 
the  Kruu/ta,  KrauilX-a,  Vardhrawasa,  and  Lakshmawa.' — Haradatta. 
This  translation  is  objectionable,  because  both  the  Kruil^-as,  now 
called  Kulam  or  Kufi/^,  and  the  Krauii/^a,  the  red-crested  crane,  now 
called  Saras  (Cyrus),  feed  on  grain.     Manu  V,  la;  Ya^il.  I,  172. 

37.  Manu  V,  18  ;  Yao-fi.  I,  177.  Putikhasha  is,  according  to  Hara- 
datta, an  animal  resembling  a  hare,  and  found  in  the  Himalayas. 


I,  6,  1 8.  EATING   AND   FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  65 

boar  called  SviivU,  the  porcupine,  the  rhinoceros, 
the  hare,  and  the  Putikhasha. 

^8.  Amongst  fishes,  the  A'e/a  ought  not  to  be 
eaten, 

39.  Nor  the  snake-headed  fish,  nor  the  alligator, 
nor  those  which  live  on  flesh  only,  nor  those  which 
are  misshaped  (like)  mermen. 

Pra^na  I,   PArALA  6,  Kha.vda  18. 

1.  Honey,  uncooked  (grain),  venison,  land,  roots, 
fruits,  (a  promise  of)  safety,  a  pasture  for  cattle,  a 
house,  and  fodder  for  a  draught-ox  may  be  accepted 
(even)  from  an  Ugra. 

2.  Harita  declares,  that  even  these  (presents)  are 
to  be  accepted  only  if  they  have  been  obtained  by 
a  pupil. 

3.  Or  they  (Brahma;za  householders)  may  accept 
(from  an  Ugra)  uncooked  or  (a  little)  unflavoured 
boiled  food. 

4.  (Of  such  food)  they  shall  not  take  a  great 
quantity  (but  only  so  much  as  suffices  to  support 
life). 

5.  If  (in  times  of  distress)  he  is  unable  to  keep 
himself,  he  may  eat  (food  obtained  from  anybody), 

39.  Haradatta  closes  this  chapter  on  flesh-eating  by  quoting 
Manu  V,  56,  which  declares  flesh-eating,  drinking  spirituous  liquor, 
and  promiscuous  intercourse  to  be  allowable,  but  the  abstinence 
therefrom  of  greater  merit.  He  states  that  the  whole  chapter  must 
be  understood  in  this  sense. 

18.  I.  Manu  IV,  247.  'Ugra  denotes  either  a  bad  twice-born 
man  or  the  offspring  of  a  Vaijya  and  of  a  .Sudra-woman.  Other 
persons  of  a  similar  character  must  be  understood  to  be  included 
by  the  term.' — Haradatta. 

4.   Also  this  rule  seems  to  belong  to  Harita,  on  account  of  its 
close  connexion  with  the  preceding  two. 
[2]  F 


66  APASTAMBA.  1,6,  i8. 


6.  After  having  touched  it  (once)  with  gold, 

7.  Or  (having  touched  it  with)  fire. 

8.  He  shall  not  be  too  eager  after  (such  a  way  of 
living).  He  shall  leave  It  when  he  has  obtained  a 
(lawful)  livelihood. 

9.  (A  student  of  the  Brahmanic  caste)  who  has 
returned  home  shall  not  eat  (In  the  house)  of  people 
belonging  to  the  three  tribes,  beginning  with  the 
Kshatriya  (I.  e.  of  Kshatrlyas,  Vali'yas,  and  KS'udras). 

10.  He  may  (usually)  eat  (the  food)  of  a  Brah- 
ma;^a  on  account  of  (the  giver's)  character  (as  a 
Brahma;^a).  It  must  be  avoided  for  particular 
reasons  only. 

11.  He  shall  not  eat  In  a  house  where  (the  host) 
performs  a  rite  which  Is  not  a  rite  of  penance,  whilst 
he  ought  to  perform  a  penance. 

12.  But  when  the  penance  has  been  performed, 
he  may  eat  (in  that  house). 

8.  Haradatta  quotes,  in  support  of  the  last  Sutras,  a  passage  of 
the  iOandogya  Upanishad,  I,  10,  i,  and  one  from  the  7?eg-veda, 
IV,  18,  13,  according  to  which  it  would  be  lawful  to  eat  even 
impure  food,  as  a  dog's  entrails,  under  such  circumstances.  Other 
commentators  explain  this  and  the  preceding  three  Sutras  differently. 
According  to  them  the  translation  would  run  thus  :  '  If  he  himself 
does  not  find  any  livelihood  (in  times  of  distress,  he  may  dwell  even 
with  low-caste  people  who  give  him  something  to  eat,  and)  he  may 
eat  (food  given  by  them)  paying  for  it  with  (some  small  gift  in)  gold 
or  with  animals.'     This  second  explanation  is  perhaps  preferable. 

9.  Manu  IV,  218,  219,  and  223. 

I  r.  '  If  a  Brahmawa  who  has  been  ordered  to  perform  a  penance, 
performs  a  Vai^vadeva  or  other  rite  without  heeding  the  order  of 
his  spiritual  teacher,  then  a  student  who  has  returned  home  ought 
not  to  eat  in  his  house,  until  the  enjoined  penance  has  been  per- 
formed.'— Haradatta. 

12.  '  The  use  of  the  part.  perf.  pass,  "performed"  indicates  that 
he  must  not  eat  there,  whilst  the  penance  is  being  performed.'  — 
Haradatta. 


I,  6,  i8.  EATING    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  67 

13.  According  to  some  (food  offered  by  people) 
of  any  caste,  who  follow  the  laws  prescribed  for 
them,  except  that  of  ^S'udras,  may  be  eaten. 

14.  (In  times  of  distress)  even  the  food  of  a 
vSudra,  who  lives  under  one's  protection  for  the  sake 
of  spiritual  merit,  (may  be  eaten.) 

15.  He  may  eat  it,  after  having  touched  it  (once) 
with  gold  or  with  fire.  He  shall  not  be  too  eager 
after  (such  a  way  of  living).  He  shall  leave  it  when 
he  obtains  a  (lawful)  livelihood. 

16.  Food  received  from  a  multitude  of  givers 
must  not  be  eaten, 

1 7.  Nor  food  offered  by  a  general  invitation  (to 
all  comers). 

18.  Food  offered  by  an  artisan  must  not  be 
eaten, 

19.  Nor  (that  of  men)  who  live  by  the  use  of 
arms  (with  the  exception  of  Kshatriyas), 

20.  Nor  (that  of  men)  who  live  by  letting  lodgings 
or  land. 

21.  A  (professional)  physician  is  a  person  whose 
food  must  not  be  eaten, 

22.  (Also)  a  usurer, 

23.  (Also)  a  Brahma;/a  who  has  performed  the 

14.  Ya^ii.  I,  166. 

15.  Manu  IV,  223. 

16.  Manu  IV,  209. 

17.  Manu  IV,  209  ;  Y%n.  T,  168. 

18.  Manu  IV,  210,  215;  Ya^fi.  I,  162-164. 

19.  Ya^u.  I,  164. 

21.  Manu  IV,  212  ;  Ya^.  I,  162. 

22.  Manu  IV,  210;  Ya^n.  I,  161. 

23.  '  That  is  to  say,  one  who  has  begun,  but  not  finished  a 
Soma-sacrifice.' — Haradatta.  Manu  IV,  210,  and  Gopatha-brah- 
m&na,  III,  19. 

F  2 


68  APASTAMBA.  I,  6,  i8. 

Diksha;ziyesh/i  (or  initiatory  ceremony  of  the  Soma- 
sacrifice)  before  he  has  bought  the  king  (Soma). 

24.  (The  food  given  by  a  person  who  has  per- 
formed the  Diksha;dyesh/i  may  be  eaten),  when  the 
victim  sacred  to  Agni  and  Soma  has  been  slain, 

25.  Or  after  that  the  omentum  of  the  victim 
(sacred  to  Agni  and  Soma)  has  been  offered. 

26.  For  a  Brahma;^a  declares,  '  Or  they  may  eat 
from  the  remainder  of  the  animal,  after  having  set 
apart  a  portion  for  the  offering.' 

2^.  A  eunuch  (is  a  person  whose  food  must  not 
be  eaten), 

28.  (Likewise)  the  (professional)  messenger  em- 
ployed by  a  king  (or  others), 

29.  (Likewise  a  Brahma;^a)  who  offers  substances 
that  are  not  fit  for  a  sacrifice, 

2)0.    (Likewise)  a  spy, 

31.  (Also)  a  person  who  has  become  a  hermit 
without  (being  authorized  thereto  by)  the  rules  (of 
the  law), 

32.  (Also)  he  who  forsakes  the  sacred  fires 
(without  performing  the  sacrifice  necessary  on  that 
occasion), 

25.    Aitareya-brahmawa  II,  i,  9. 

27.  Manu  IV,  211  ;  Ya^il.  I,  161. 

28.  The  village  or  town  messengers  are  always  men  of  the 
lowest  castes,  such  as  the  INIahars  of  Maharashtra. 

29.  'For  example,  he  who  offers  human  blood  in  a  magic 
rite.' — Haradatta. 

30.  Haradatta  explains  JAx\,  translated  by  '  spy,'  to  mean  '  a 
secret  adherent  of  the  6akta  sect'  (gu^/^aMri,  jakta/^).  The  exist- 
ence of  this  sect  in  early  times  has  not  hitherto  been  proved. 

31.  Haradatta  gives  the  -Sakyas  or  Bauddhas  as  an  instance. 
But  it  is  doubtful,  whether  Apastamba  meant  to  refer  to  them, 
though  it  seems  probable  that  heretics  are  intended. 

32.  Ya^n.  I,  160. 


I,  6,  19.  EATING    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  69 

^2,.  Likewise  a  learned  Brahmawa  who  avoids 
everybody,  or  eats  the  food  of  anybody,  or  neglects 
the  (daily)  recitation  of  the  Veda,  (and)  he  whose 
(only  living)  wife  is  of  the  ^'udra  caste. 

PrA^NA    I,    PaT^ALA    6,    KHAiVDA    19. 

1.  A  drunken  man,  a  madman,  a  prisoner,  he  who 
learns  the  Veda  from  his  son,  a  creditor  who  sits 
with  his  debtor  (hindering  the  fulfilment  of  his 
duties),  a  debtor  who  thus  sits  (with  his  creditor 
are  persons  whose  food  must  not  be  eaten)  as  long 
as  they  are  thus  engaged  or  in  that  state. 

2.  Who  (then)  are  those  whose  food  may  be 
eaten  ? 

3.  Ka;/va  declares,  that  it  is  he  who  wishes  to 
give. 

4.  Kautsa  declares,  that  it  is  he  who  is  holy. 

5.  Varshyaya;/i  declares,  that  it  is  every  giver  (of 
food). 

6.  For  if  guilt  remains  fixed  on  the  man  (who 
committed  a  crime,  then  food  given  by  a  sinner)  may 
be  eaten  (because  the  guilt  cannot  leave  the  sinner). 

33.  'Who  avoids  everybody,  i.e.  who  neither  invites  nor  dines 
with  anybody.' — Haradatta. 

19.  I.  ManuIV,  207  ;  Ya^.  I,  161,  162.  Another  commentator 
explains  awika,  translated  above  -'  he  who  learns  the  Veda  from  his 
son,'  by  '  a  money-lender,'  and  combines  praty-upavish/a^  with 
this  word,  i.  e. '  a  money-lender  who  sits  with  his  debtor  hindering 
him  from  fulfilling  his  duties.'  This  manner  of  forcing  a  debtor 
to  pay,  which  is  also  called  Aiarita  (see  -Nlanu  VIII,  49),  is,  though 
illegal,  resorted  to  sometimes  even  now. 

2.  '  The  object  of  this  Sutra  is  to  introduce  the  great  variety  of 
opinions  quoted  below.' — Haradatta. 

4.  'Holy'  means  not  only  'following  his  lawful  occupations,' 
but  particularly  '  practising  austerities,  reciting  prayers,  and  offering 
burnt- oblations.' — Haradatta. 


70  APASTAMBA.  I,  6,  19. 

But  if  guilt  can  leave  (the  sinner  at  any  time,  then 
food  given  by  the  sinner  may  be  eaten  because)  he 
becomes  pure  by  the  gift  (which  he  makes), 

7.  Offered  food,  which  is  pure,  may  be  eaten, 
according  to  Eka,  Ku;^ika,  Ka/^va,  Kutsa,  and 
Pushkarasadi, 

8.  Varshyaya;a's  opinion  is,  that  (food)  given 
unasked  (may  be  accepted)  from  anybody. 

9.  (Food  offered)  willingly  by  a  holy  man  may  be 
eaten. 

10.  Food  given  unwillingly  by  a  holy  man  ought 
not  to  be  eaten. 

11.  Food  offered  unasked  by  any  person  what- 
soever may  be  eaten, 

12.  '  But  not  if  it  be  given  after  an  express  pre- 
vious announcement;'  thus  says  Harita. 

13.  Now  they  quote  also  in  a  Pura;^a  the  follow- 
in  [>■  two  verses  : 

14.  'The  Lord  of  creatures  has  declared,  that 
food  offered  unasked  and  brought  by  the  giver  him- 
self, may  be  eaten,  though  (the  giver  be)  a  sinner, 
provided  the  gift  has  not  been  announced  before- 
hand. The  Manes  of  the  ancestors  of  that  man  who 
spurns  such  food,  do  not  eat  (his  oblations)  for  fifteen 
years,  nor  does  the  fire  carry  his  offerings  (to  the 
gods).' 

15.  (Another  verse  from  a  Pura?/a  declares)  :  'The 
food  given   by  a  physician,  a  hunter,  a  surgeon,  a 

10,  Another  commentator  explains  this  Sutra  thus:  'He  need 
not  eat  the  food  offered  by  a  righteous  man,  if  he  himself  does  not 
wish  to  do  so.' — Haradatta. 

14.  See  Manu  IV,  248  and  249,  where  these  identical  verses 
occur. 

15.  Manu  IV,  211,  212. 


I,  7,  20.       FORBIDDEN  food;    LAWFUL  LIVELIHOOD.  7 1 

fowler,  an  unfaithful  wife,  or  a  eunuch  must  not  be 
eaten.' 

16.  Now  (in  confirmation  of  this)  they  quote  (the 
following  verse) :  '  The  murderer  of  a  Brahma^a 
learned  in  the  Veda  heaps  his  guilt  on  his  gi-iest,  an 
innocent  man  on  his  calumniator,  a  thief  set  at  liberty 
on  the  king,  and  the  petitioner  on  him  who  makes 
false  promises.' 

Pra5Xa  I,  Patala  7,  Khaa'zja  20. 

1.  He  shall  not  fulfil  his  sacred  duties  merely  in 
order  to  acquire  these  worldly  objects  (as  fame,  gain, 
and  honour). 

2.  For  when  they  ought  to  bring  rewards,  (duties 
thus  fulfilled)  become  fruitless. 

3.  (Worldly  benefits)  are  produced  as  accessories 
(to  the  fulfilment  of  the  law),  just  as  in  the  case  of  a 
mango  tree,  which  is  planted  in  order  to  obtain  fruit, 
shade  and  fragrance  (are  accessory  advantages). 

4.  But  if  (worldly  advantages)  are  not  produced, 
(then  at  least)  the  sacred  duties  have  been  fulfilled. 

5.  Let  him  not  become  irritated  at,  nor  be  de- 
ceived by  the  speeches  of  hypocrites,  of  rogues,  of 
infidels,  and  of  fools. 

6.  For  Virtue  and  Sin  do  not  go  about  and  say, 
'  Here  we  are  ;'  nor  do  Gods,  Gandharvas,  or  Manes 
say  (to  men),  '  This  is  virtue,  that  is  sin.' 

7.  But  that  is  virtue,  the  practice  of  which  wise 

16.  Regarding  the  liberation  of  the  thief,  see  Apastamba  I.  9. 
25,  4.  A  similar  verse  occurs  Manu  VIII,  317,  which  has  caused 
the  confusion  observable  in  many  MSS.,  as  has  been  stated  in  the 
critical  notes  to  the  text. 

20.  7.  The  Siitra  is  intended  to  show  how  the  law  should  be 
ascertained  in  diflficult  cases.     Haradatta  quotes  here  the  passage  of 


72  APASTAMBA.  I,  7,  20. 

men  of  the  three  twice-born  castes  praise;  what  they 
blame,  is  sin. 

8.  He  shall  regulate  his  course  of  action  according 
to  the  conduct  which  in  all  countries  is  unanimously 
approved  of  by  men  of  the  three  twice-born  castes, 
who  have  been  properly  obedient  (to  their  teachers), 
who  are  aged,  of  subdued  senses,  neither  given  to 
avarice,  nor  hypocrites. 

9.  Acting  thus  he  will  gain  both  worlds. 

10.  Trade  is  not  lawful  for  a  Brahma72a. 

11.  In  times  of  distress  he  may  trade  in  marketable 
goods,  avoiding  the  following,  that  are  forbidden  : 

12.  (Particularly)  men,  condiments  and  liquids, 
colours,  perfumes,  food,  skins,  heifers,  substances 
used  for  glueing  (such  as  lac),  water,  young  corn- 
stalks, substances  from  which  spirituous  liquor  may 
be  extracted,  red  and  black  pepper,  corn,  flesh,  arms, 
and  the  hope  of  rewards  for  meritorious  deeds. 

13.  Among  (the  various  kinds  of)  grain  he  shall 
especially  not  sell  sesamum  or  rice  (except  he  have 
grown  them  himself), 

14.  The  exchange  of  the  one  of  these  (above- 
mentioned  goods)  for  the  other  is  likewise  unlawful. 

15.  But  food  (may  be  exchanged)  for  food,  and 

Ya^ii.  I,  9,  on  Parishads,  and  states  that  the  plural  arya>^  shows 
that  three  or  four  must  be  employed  to  arrive  at  a  decision.     See 
also  Manu  XII.  108  seq. 
8.    JEffi  I,  6. 

11.  This  Sutra,  which  specifies  only  one  part  of  a  Vai^ya's  occu- 
pations as  permissible  for  Brahmawas  in  distress,  implies,  according 
to  Haradatta,  that  his  other  occupations  also,  as  well  as  those  of  a 
Kshatriya,  are  permissible.     IVIanu  IV,  6;  X,  82  ;  Ya§-ii.  Ill,  35. 

12.  Manu  X,  86-89  ;  Ya^fi.  Ill,  36-39. 

13.  The  exception  stated  above,  is  given  by  Haradatta  on  the 
authority  of  Manu  X,  90 ;  Y%ri.  Ill,  39. 

15.    '  From  the  permission  to  exchange  learning  for  learning,  it 


1,7,21.  LAWFUL    LIVELIHOOD.  73 

slaves  for  slaves,  and  condiments  for  condiments,  and 
perfumes  for  perfumes,  and  learning  for  learning. 

t6.  Let  him  traffic  with  lawful  merchandise  which 
he  has  not  bought, 

Pra^na  I,  Pat-ala  7,   Kha.vda  21. 

1.  With  ^luii^a-grass,  Balba^a-grass  (and  articles 
made  of  them),  roots,  and  fruits, 

2.  And  with  (other  kinds  of)  grass  and  wood  which 
have  not  been  worked  up  (into  objects  of  use). 

3.  He  shall  not  be  too  eager  (after  such  a  live- 
lihood), 

4.  If  he  obtains  (another  lawful)  livelihood,  he 
shall  leave  off  (trading). 

5.  Intercourse  with  fallen  men  is  not  ordained, 

6.  Nor  with  Apapatras. 

7.  Now  (follows  the  enumeration  of)  the  actions 
which  cause  loss  of  caste  (Pataniya). 

8.  (These  are)  stealing  (gold),  crimes  whereby  one 
becomes  an  Abhii-asta,  homicide,  neglect  of  the 
Vedas,  causing  abortion,  incestuous  connexion  with 
relations  born  from  the  same  womb  as  one's  mother 


may  be  known  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  sell  it.' — Haradatta.     Manu 
X,  94. 

2L  2.  'Since  it  is  known  that  MuS^a  and  Balba^  are  kinds 
of  grass,  it  may  be  inferred  from  their  being  especially  mentioned 
(in  Sutra  i)  that  objects  made  of  them  (may  be  also  sold).' — 
Haradatta. 

4.  Yagn.  Ill,  35. 

5.  Manu  XI,  180. 

6.  Regarding  the  definition  of  the  word  Apapatra,  see  above,  I, 
5,  16,  29. 

8.  The  crimes  by  which  a  person  becomes  Abhi^asta  are  enu- 
merated below,  I,  9,  24,  6  seq.,  where  an  explanation  of  the  term 
will  be  given. 


74  APASTAMBA.  I,  7,  21, 

or  father,  and  with  the  offspring  of  such  persons, 
drinking  spirituous  Hquor,  and  intercourse  with  per- 
sons the  intercourse  with  whom  is  forbidden. 

9.  That  man  falls  who  has  connexion  with  a  female 
friend  of  a  female  Guru,  or  with  a  female  friend  of  a 
male  Guru,  or  with  any  married  woman, 

10.  Some  (teachers  declare),  that  he  does  not  fall 
by  having  connexion  with  any  other  married  female 
except  his  teacher's  wife. 

11.  Constant  commission  of  (other)  sins  (besides 
those  enumerated  above)  also  causes  a  man  to  lose 
his  caste. 

12.  Now  follows  (the  enumeration  of)  the  acts 
which  make  men  impure  (A^u/i'ikara). 

13.  (These  are)  the  cohabitation  of  Aryan  women 
with  ^'lidras, 

14.  Eating  the  flesh  of  forbidden  (creatures), 

15.  As  of  a  dog,  a  man,  village  cocks  or  pigs,  car- 
nivorous animals, 

16.  Eating  the  excrements  of  men, 

17.  Eating  what  is  left  by  a  ^S^udra,  the  cohabita- 
tion of  Aryans  with  Apapatra  women. 

18.  Some  declare,  that  these  acts  also  cause  a  man 
to  lose  his  caste. 

19.  Other  acts  besides  those  (enumerated)  are 
causes  of  impurity.  He  who  learns  (that  a  man  has) 
committed  a  sin,  shall  not  be  the  first  to  make  it 
known  to  others  ;  but  he  shall  avoid  the  (sinner), 
when  performing  religious  ceremonies. 

9.  Regarding  the  'male  Gurus'  see  above.     By  'female  Gurus' 
their  wives  are  meant. 

10.  I.e.  he  need  not  perform  so  heavy  a  penance. 

19.  'That  is  to  say,  he  is  not  to  invite  the  sinner  to  dinners, 
given  at  the  occasion  of  religious  ceremonies.' — Haradatta. 


1,8,22.     penance;  knowledge  of  the  atmax.         75 


Prasna  I,  PArALA  8,   Khandx  22. 

1.  He  shall  employ  the  means  which  tend  to  the 
acquisition  of  (the  knowledge  of)  the  Atman.  which 
are  attended  by  the  consequent  (destruction  of  the 
passions,  and)  which  prevent  the  wandering  (of  the 
mind  from  its  object,  and  fix  it  on  the  contemplation 
of  the  Atman). 

2.  There  is  no  higher  (object)  than  the  attain- 
ment of  (the  knowledge  of  the)  Atman. 

3.  We  shall  quote  the  verses  (from  the  \^eda) 
which  refer  to  the  attainment  of  (the  knowledge 
of)  the  Atman. 

4.  All  living  creatures  are  the  dwelling  of  him 
who  lies  enveloped  in  matter,  who  is  immortal  and 
who  is  spotless.  Those  become  immortal  who  wor- 
ship him  who  is  immovable  and  lives  in  a  movable 
dwellino-. 

5.  Despising  all  that  which  in  this  world  is  called 
an  object  (of  the  senses)  a  wise  man  shall  strive  after 
the  (knowledge  of  the)  Atman. 

22.  I.  The  knowledge  of  the  Vedanta  and  the  means  which  pre- 
pare men  for  the  knowledge  of  the  Atman,  the '  absolute,  the  universal 
soul,'  are  placed  in  this  Pa/ala  at  the  head  of  the  penances,  because 
they  are  most  efficacious  for  the  removal  of  all  sin.  The  means 
are  absence  of  anger  &c.,  which  are  enumerated  I,  8,  23,  6. 

2.  Haradatta  gives  in  his  commentary  a  lengthy  discussion  on 
the  Atman,  which  corresponds  nearly  to  5ankara's  Introduction  to 
and  Commentary  on  the  first  Siitra  of  Badarayana. 

3.  The  following  verses,  according  to  Haradatta,  are  taken 
from  an  Upanishad. 

4.  The  spotless  one  &c.  is  the  Paramatman.  The  spots  are 
merit  and  demerit  which,  residing  in  the  Manas,  the  internal  organ 
of  perception,  are  only  falsely  attributed  to  the  Atman,  '  the  soul.' 
To  become  immortal  means  '  to  obtain  final  liberation.' 

5.  It  seems  to  me  that  Haradatta's  explanation  of  the  words 


76  APASTAMBA.  I,  8,  22. 

6.  O  pupil,  I,  who  had  not  recognised  in  my  own 
self  the  great  self-luminous,  universal,  (absolutely) 
free  Atman,  which  must  be  obtained  without  the 
mediation  of  anything  else,  desired  (to  find)  it  in 
others  (the  senses).  (But  now  as  I  have  obtained 
the  pure  knowledge,  I  do  so  no  more.)  Therefore 
follow  thou  also  this  good  road  that  leads  to  welfare 
(salvation),  and  not  the  one  that  leads  into  misfor- 
tune (new  births). 

7.  It  is  he  who  is  the  eternal  part  in  all  creatures, 
whose  essence  is  wisdom,  who  is  immortal,  unchange- 
able, destitute  of  limbs,  of  voice,  of  the  (subtle)  body, 
(even)  of  touch,  exceedingly  pure;  he  is  the  uni- 
verse, he  is  the  highest  goal ;  (he  dwells  in  the 
middle  of  the  body  as)  the  Vishuvat  day  is  (the 
middle  of  a  Sattra-sacrifice) ;  he,  forsooth,  is  (accessi- 
ble to  all)  like  a  town  intersected  by  many  streets. 

8.  He  who  meditates  on  him,  and  everywhere 
and  always  lives  according  to  his  (commandments), 
and  who,  full  of  devotion,  sees  him  who  is  difficult 
to  be  seen  and  subtle,  will  rejoice  in  (his)  heaven. 

'  idam  idi  ha  idi  ha'  is  wrong.  They  ought  to  be  divided  thus, 
'idamid,  iha  id,  iha  loke.'  The  general  sense  remains  the  same, 
and  there  is  no  necessity  to  assume  very  curious  and  otherwise 
unknown  Vedic  forms. 

6.  The  verse  is  addressed  by  a  teacher  to  his  pupil.  My  trans- 
lation strictly  follows  Haradatta's  gloss.  But  his  interpretation  is 
open  to  many  doubts.  However,  I  am  unable  to  suggest  anything 
better. 

7.  The  Sutra  contains  a  further  description  of  the  Paramatman. 

8.  Haradatta  explains  the  word  vish/ap,  '  heaven,'  by  '  pain- 
freed  greatness,'  apparently  misled  by  a  bad  etymology.  The 
heaven  of  the  Atman  is,  of  course,  liberation,  that  state  where  the 
individual  soul  becomes  merged  in  the  Brahman  or  Paramatman, 
which  is  pure  essence,  intelligence  and  joy. 


1,8,23-        PENA>XE  ;    KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  ATMAX.  77 

Pra,sna  I,   Patala  8,  Kiia.vz)A  23. 

1.  That  Brahma;/a,  who  is  wise  and  recognises 
all  creatures  to  be  in  the  Atman,  who  pondering 
(thereon)  does  not  become  bewildered,  and  who  re- 
cognises the  Atman  in  every  (created)  thing,  shines, 
forsooth,  in  heaven. 

2.  He,  who  is  intelligence  itself  and  subtler  than 
the  thread  of  the  lotus-fibre,  pervades  the  universe, 
and  who,  unchangeable  and  larger  than  the  earth, 
contains  the  universe  ;  he,  who  is  different  from  the 
know'ledge  of  this  world,  which  is  obtained  by  the 
senses  and  which  is  identical  with  its  objects,  pos- 
sesses the  highest  (form  consisting  of  absolute  know- 
ledge). From  him,  who  divides  himself,  spring  all 
(created)  bodies.  He  is  the  primary  cause,  he  is 
eternal,  he  is  unchangeable. 

3.  But  the  eradication  of  the  faults  is  brought 
about  in  this  life  by  the  means  (called  Yoga).  A  wise 
man  who  has  eradicated  the  (faults)  which  destroy 
the  creatures,  obtains  salvation. 

4.  Now  we  will  enumerate  the  faults  which  tend 
to  destroy  the  creatures. 

5.  (These  are)  anger,  exultation,  grumbling,  cove- 
tousness,  perplexity,  doing  injury  (to  anybody),  hypo- 
crisy, lying,  gluttony,  calumny,  envy,  lust,  secret 
hatred,  neglect  to  keep  the  senses  in  subjection, 
neglect  to  concentrate  the  mind.  The  eradication 
of  these  (faults)  takes  place  through  the  means  of 
(salvation  called)  Yoga. 

6.  Freedom   from    anger,   from   exultation,   from 

23.  2.  This  Sutra  again  contains  a  description  of  the  Para- 
matman.  The  translation  strictly  follows  the  commentary,  though 
the  explanation,  given  in  the  latter,  is  open  to  objections. 


78  APASTAMBA.  I,  9,  24. 


grumbling,  from  covetousness,  from  perplexity,  from 
hypocrisy  (and)  hurtfulness  ;  truthfulness,  moderation 
in  eating,  silencing  slander,  freedom  from  envy,  self- 
denying  liberality,  avoiding  to  accept  gifts,  upright- 
ness, affability,  extinction  of  the  passions,  subjection 
of  the  senses,  peace  with  all  created  beings,  con- 
centration (of  the  mind  on  the  contemplation  of  the 
Atman),  regulation  of  one's  conduct  according  to 
that  of  the  Aryas,  peacefulness  and  contentedness ; 
— these  (good  qualities)  have  been  settled  by  the 
agreement  (of  the  wise)  for  all  (the  four)  orders ;  he 
who,  according  to  the  precepts  of  the  sacred  law, 
practises  these,  enters  the  universal  soul. 

Pra^-na  I,   Pat^ala  9,  Kha^vda  24. 

I.  He  who  has  killed  a  Kshatriya  shall  give  a 
thousand  cows  (to  Brahma^^as)  for  the  expiation  of 
his  sin. 


24.  I.  INIanu  XI,  128  ;  Ya^n.  Ill,  266.  Others  explain  the  phrase 
vairayatanartham,  '  for  the  expiation  of  his  sin,'  thus  :  '  He,  who  is 
slain  by  anybody,  becomes,  in  dying,  an  enemy  of  his  slayer  (and 
thinks),  "  O  that  I  might  slay  him  in  another  life,"  for  the  removal 
of  this  enmity! ' — Haradatta.  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  agree  with 
the  other  commentator,  and  to  translate  vairayatanartham,  '  in  order 
to  remove  the  enmity.'  I  recognise  in  this  fine  a  remnant  of  the 
law  permitting  compositions  for  murder  which  was  in  force  in 
ancient  Greece  and  among  the  Teutonic  nations.  Under  the  expla- 
nation adopted  by  Haradatta,  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  reasonable 
interpretation  for  praya^/C'ittartha//,  Sutra  4.  Haradatta,  seduced 
by  the  parallel  passage  of  Manu,  takes  it  to  be  identical  with  vai- 
rayatanartham. I  propose  to  translate  our  SCura  thus :  *  He  who 
has  killed  a  Kshatriya  shall  give  a  thousand  cows  (to  the  relations 
of  the  murdered  man)  in  order  to  remove  the  enmity.'  According 
to  Baudhayana,  Pr.  I,  Adhy.  10,  the  cows  are  to  be  given  to  the 
king :  Kshatriyavadhe  gosahasraw  vrzshabhadhikaw  ragna.  uts;7^ed 
vairayatanartham. 


1,9,24.  PENANXE.  /9 

2.  (He  shall  give)  a  hundred  cows  for  a  \^aLfya, 

3.  Ten  for  a  6'udra, 

4.  And  in  every  one  (of  these  cases)  one  bull 
(must  be  given)  in  excess  (of  the  number  of  cows) 
for  the  sake  of  expiation. 

5.  And  if  women  of  the  (three  castes  mentioned 
have  been  slain)  the  same  (composition  must  be 
paid). 

6.  He  who  has  slain  a  man  belonging  to  the  two 
(first-mentioned  castes)  who  had  studied  the  \'eda, 
or  had  been  initiated  for  the  performance  of  a  Soma- 
sacrifice,  becomes  an  Abhi^asta. 

7.  And  (he  is  called  an  Abhii^asta)  who  has  slain 
a  man  belonging  merely  to  the  Brahma;/a  caste 
(though  he  has  not  studied  the  \'^eda  or  been  initi- 
ated for  a  Soma-sacrifice), 

8.  Likewise  he  who  has  destroyed  an  embryo 
of  a  (Brahma;m,  even  though  its  sex  be)  undistin- 
guishable, 

9.  Or  a  woman  (of  the  Brahma;/a  caste)  during 
her  courses. 

10.  (Xow  follows)  the  penance  for  him  (who  is  an 
Abhi^asta). 

11.  He  (himself)  shall  erect  a  hut  in  the  forest. 

2.  iManu  XI,  130;  Ya^u.  Ill,  267. 

3.  Manu  XI,  131 ;  Ya^ii.  Ill,  267. 

6.  Manu  XI,  87.  Abhij-asta  means  literally  'accused,  accursed,' 
and  corresponds  in  Apastamba's  terminology  to  the  mahapatakin  of 
^lanu  and  Y^iiavalkya,  instead  of  which  latter  word  Manu  uses  it 
occasionally,  e.g.  II,  185. 

9.  '  Others  interpret  atreyi,  "  during  her  courses,"  by  '•  belonging 
to  the  race  of  Atri."  ' — Haradatta. 

II.  Others  say  that  he  may  carry  the  skull  of  any  corpse. 
This  Siitra  is  to  be  construed  with  Sutra  14,  Sutras  12  and  13 
being  inserted  parenthetically. — Haradatta.  Manu  XI,  72-78; 
Ya^.  Ill,  243. 


8o  APASTAMBA.  I,  9,  24. 

restrain  his  speech,  carry  (on  his  stick)  the  skull  (of 
the  person  slain)  like  a  flag,  and  cover  the  space 
from  his  navel  to  his  knees  with  a  quarter  of  a  piece 
of  hempen  cloth. 

12.  The  path  for  him  when  he  goes  to  a  village, 
is  the  space  between  the  tracks  (of  the  wheels), 

1 3.  And  if  he  sees  another  (Arya),  he  shall  step 
out  of  the  road  (to  the  distance  of  two  yards). 

14.  He  shall  go  to  the  village,  carrying  a  broken 
tray  of  metal  of  an  inferior  quality. 

15.  He  may  go  to  seven  houses  only,  (crying,) 
'  Who  wdll  give  alms  to  an  Abhii-asta  ?' 

16.  That  is  (the  way  in  which  he  must  gain)  his 
livelihood. 

17.  If  he  does  not  obtain  anything  (at  the  seven 
houses),  he  must  fast. 

18.  And  (whilst  performing  this  penance)  he  must 
tend  cows. 

19.  When  they  leave  and  enter  the  village,  that  is 
the  second  occasion  (on  which  he  may  enter)  the 
village. 

20.  After  having  performed  (this  penance)  for 
twelve  years,  (he  must  perform)  the  ceremony  known 
(by  custom),  through  which  he  is  re-admitted  into 
the  society  of  the  good. 

2 1 .  Or  (after  having  performed  the  twelve  years' 
penance),  he  may  build  a  hut  on  the  path  of  robbers, 
and  live  there,  trying  to  take  from  them  the  cows  of 
Brahma;2as.     He  is  free  (from  his  sin),  when  thrice 

20.  '  I.  e.  after  having  performed  the  penance,  he  shall  take 
grass  and  offer  it  to  a  cow.  If  the  cow  approaches  and  confidingly 
eats,  then  one  should  know  that  he  has  performed  the  penance 
properly,  not  otherwise.' — Haradatta.     Manu  XI,  195  and  196. 

21.  Manu  XI,  8r. 


I,  9,  25.  PENANCE. 


he  has  been  defeated  by  them,  or  thrice  he  has  van- 
quished them. 

22.  Or  he  is  freed  (from  his  sin),  if  (after  the 
twelve  years'  penance)  he  bathes  (with  the  priests) 
at  the  end  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 

23.  This  very  same  (penance  is  ordained)  for  him 
who,  when  his  duty  and  love  of  gain  come  into  con- 
flict, chooses  the  gain. 

24.  If  he  has  slain  a  Guru  or  a  Brahmawa,  who 
has  studied  the  Veda  and  finished  the  ceremonies  of 
a  Soma-sacrifice,  he  shall  live  according  to  this  very 
same  rule  until  his  last  breath. 

25.  He  cannot  be  purified  in  this  life.  But  his 
sin  is  removed  (after  death). 

Pra5Xa  I,  Patala  9,  Khanda  25. 

1.  He  who  has  had  connexion  with  a  Guru's  wife 
shall  cut  off  his  organ  together  with  the  testicles, 
take  them  into  his  joined  hands  and  walk  towards 
the  south  without  stopping,  until  he  falls  down  dead. 

2.  Or  he  may  die  embracing  a  heated  metal 
image  of  a  woman. 

22.  jNIanu  XI,  83  ;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  67. 

23.  'Or  the  Sutra  may  have  reference  to  unrighteous  gain 
acquired  by  false  testimony  and  the  like.' — Haradatta. 

24.  *  Guru  means  "  the  father  and  the  rest."  ' — Haradatta. 

25.  'His  sin  is  removed  after  death.  Hence  the  meaning  is 
that  his  sons  or  other  (relations)  may  perform  the  funeral  cere- 
monies and  the  Uke.  But  others  think  that  the  first  part  of  the 
Sutra  forbids  this,  and  that  the  meaning  of  pratyapattiA  (can  be 
purified)  is  "  connexion  by  being  received  as  a  son  or  other  rela- 
tion." '—Haradatta. 

25.  I.  Haradatta's  explanation  of  a  '  Guru's  wife'  by  'mother' 
rests  on  a  comparison  of  similar  passages  from  other  Smmis,  where 
a  different  '  penance '  is  prescribed  for  incestuous  intercourse  with 
other  near  relations.     Manu  XI,  105  ;  Ya^n.  Ill,  259. 

2.   Manu  XI,  104  ;  Yagu.  Ill,  259. 
[2]  G 


82  APASTAMBA.  1,9,25. 


3.  A  drinker  of  spirituous  liquor  shall  drink  ex- 
ceedingly hot  liquor  so  that  he  dies. 

4.  A  thief  shall  go  to  the  king  with  flying  hair, 
carrying  a  club  on  his  shoulder,  and  tell  him  his 
deed.  He  (the  king)  shall  give  him  a  blow  with 
that  (club).     If  the  thief  dies,  his  sin  is  expiated. 

5.  If  he  is  forgiven  (by  the  king),  the  guilt  falls 
upon  him  who  forgives  him, 

6.  Or  he  may  throw  himself  into  the  fire,  or 
perform  repeatedly  severe  austerities, 

7.  Or  he  may  kill  himself  by  diminishing  daily 
his  portion  of  food, 

8.  Or  he  may  perform  a  Kn'/^/^/^ra  penance  (un- 
interruptedly) for  one  year. 

9.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse): 

10.  Those  who  have  committed  a  theft  (of  gold), 
drunk  spirituous  liquor,  or  had  connexion  with  a 
Guru's  wife,  but  not  those  who  have  slain  a  Brah- 
ma;/a,  shall  eat  every  fourth  meal-time  a  little  food, 
bathe  at  the  times  of  the  three  libations  (morning, 
noon,  and  evening),  passing  the  day  standing  and 
the  night  sitting.  After  the  lapse  of  three  years 
they  throw  off  their  guilt. 

11.  (A  man  of  any  caste)  excepting  the  first,  who 

3.  Manu  XI,  91,  92;  Ya^il.  Ill,  253. 

4.  I.  e.  who  has  stolen  the  gold  of  a  Brahmawa.  Manu  VIII, 
314,  316;  XI,  99-101;  Ya^fi.  Ill,  257. 

5.  Manu  VIII,  317. 

6.  Manu  XI,  102. 

8.  According  to  Haradatta  this  Sutra  refers  to  all  kinds  of  sins, 
and  it  must  be  understood  that  the  Kn'/^-('/^ra  penances  must  be 
heavy  for  great  crimes,  and  lighter  for  smaller  faults ;  see  also 
below,  I,  9,  27,  7  and  8. 

9.  Haradatta  states  that  the  verse  is  taken  from  a  Pura/za. 
II.   Manu  XI,  74;  Y%-ii.  Ill,  248. 


1,9,26.  PENANCE.  8^ 

has  slain  a  man  of  the  first  caste,  shall  go  on  a 
battle-field  and  place  himself  (between  the  two 
hostile  armies).  There  they  shall  kill  him  (and 
thereby  he  becomes  pure). 

12.  Or  such  a  sinner  may  tear  from  his  body  and 
make  the  priest  offer  as  a  burnt-offering  his  hair, 
skin,  flesh,  and  the  rest,  and  then  throw  himself  into 
the  fire. 

13.  If  a  crow,  a  chameleon,  a  peacock,  a  Brahma/a 
duck,  a  Ha;;/sa,  the  vulture  called  Bhasa.  a  frog,  an 
ichneumon,  a  musk-rat,  or  a  dog  has  been  killed, 
then  the  same  penance  as  for  a  ^'udra  must  be  per- 
formed. 

PR-JlSNA    I,    PArALA    9,    KH-JuVDA    26. 

1.  (The  same  penance  must  be  performed),  if  a 
milch-cow  or  a  full-grown  ox  (has  been  slain),  without 
a  reason. 

2.  And  for  other  animals  (which  have  no  bones), 
if  an  ox-load  of  them  has  been  killed. 

3.  He  who  abuses  a  person  who  (on  account  of 

12.  The  Mantras  given  in  the  commentan',  and  a  parallel 
passage  of  Vasish/y^a  XX,  show  that  this  terrible  penance  is  not 
altogether  a  mere  theorj"  of  Apastamba.     Yag'fi.  Ill,  247. 

13.  'According  to  some,  the  penance  must  be  performed  if  all 
these  animals  together  have  been  slain ;  according  to  others,  if  only 
one  of  them  has  been  killed.' — Haradatta.  Manu  XI,  132,  136; 
Ya§^.  Ill,  270-272. 

26.  I.  'A  reason'  for  hurting  a  cow  is,  according  to  Haradatta, 
anger,  or  the  desire  to  obtain  meat. 

2.  Manu  XI,  141;  Ya^.  Ill,  269.  That  'animals  without 
bones,'  i.  e.  insects  or  moUusks,  are  intended  in  the  Suira  is  an 
inference,  drawn  by  Haradatta  from  the  parallel  passages  of  Gau- 
tama, Manu,  and  YagTiavalkya. 

3.  '  A  person  who  ought  not  to  be  abused,  i.  e.  a  father,  a  teacher, 
and  the  like.' — Haradatta. 

G  2 


§4  APASTAMBA.  I,  9,  26. 


his  venerability)  ought  not  to  be  abused,  or  speaks 
an  untruth  (regarding  any  small  matter)  must  ab- 
stain for  three  days  from  milk,  pungent  condiments, 
and  salt. 

4.  (If  the  same  sins  have  been  committed)  by  a 
^S^udra,  he  must  fast  for  seven  days. 

5.  And  the  same  (penances  must  also  be  per- 
formed) by  women,  (but  not  those  which  follow.) 

6.  He  who  cuts  off  a  limb  of  a  person  for  whose 
murder  he  would  become  an  Abhii'asta  (must  per- 
form the  penance  prescribed  for  killing  a  K^iidra), 
if  the  life  (of  the  person  injured)  has  not  been 
endangered. 

7.  He  who  has  been  guilty  of  conduct  unworthy 
of  an  Aryan,  of  calumniating  others,  of  actions  con- 
trary to  the  rule  of  conduct,  of  eating  or  drinking 
things  forbidden,  of  connexion  with  a  woman  of  the 
vSudra  caste,  of  an  unnatural  crime,  of  performing 
magic  rites  with  intent  (to  harm  his  enemies)  or 
(of  hurting  others)  unintentionally,  shall  bathe  and 
sprinkle  himself  with  water,  reciting  the  (seven) 
verses  addressed  to  the  Waters,  or  the  verses 
addressed  to  Varu;ea,  or  (other  verses  chosen  from 
the  Anuvaka,  called)  Pavitra,  in  proportion  to  the 
frequency  with  which  the  crime  has  been  committed. 


5.  The  same  penances,  i.  e.  those  prescribed  I,  9,  24-I,  9,  26,  4, 
According  to  Haradatta  this  Sutra  is  intended  to  teach  that  women 
shall  not  perform  the  penances  which  follow.  Others,  however, 
are  of  opinion  that  it  is  given  in  order  to  indicate  that  the  pre- 
ceding Sutras  apply  to  women  by  an  atideja,  and  that,  according 
to  a  Smarta  principle,  applicable  to  such  cases,  it  may  be  inferred, 
that  women  are  to  perform  one-half  only  of  the  penances  pre- 
scribed for  men. 

7.    The  Anuvaka  intended  is  Taitt.  Sawh.  II,  5,  12. 


I,  9,  26.  PENANXE.  85 

8.  A  (student)  who  has  broken  the  vow  of  chas- 
tity, shall  offer  to  Nirmi  an  ass,  according  to  the 
manner  of  the  Pakaya^na-rites. 

9.  A  6'udra  shall  eat  (the  remainder)  of  that 
(offering). 

10.  (Now  follows)  the  penance  for  him  who  trans- 
gresses the  rules  of  studentship. 

11.  He  shall  for  a  year  serve  his  teacher  silently, 
emitting  speech  only  during  the  daily  study  (of  the 
Veda,  in  announcing  necessary'  business  to)  his 
teacher  or  his  teacher's  wife,  and  whilst  collectino- 
alms. 

12.  The  following  (penances)  which  we  are  going 
to  proclaim,  may  be  performed  for  the  same  sin,  and 
also  for  other  sinful  acts,  which  do  not  cause  loss  of 
caste. 

13.  He  may  either  offer  oblations  to  Kama  and 
Manyu  (with  the  following  two  Mantras),  '  Kama 
(passion)  has  done  it ;  Manyu  (anger)  has  done  it.' 
Or  he  may  mutter  (these  Mantras). 

14.  Or,  after  having  eaten  sesamum  or  fasted  on 
the  days  of  the  full  and  new  moon  he  may,  on  the 
following  day  bathe,  and  stopping  his  breath,  repeat 
the  Gavatri  one  thousand  times,  or  he  mav  do  so 
without  stopping  his  breath. 

8.  Taitt.  Ar.  II,  18,  and  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  102:  Manu  XI, 
119  seq. ;  and  Y%ii.  Ill,  280.  Regarding  the  Pakaya^iia-rites, 
see  Ajv.  Gri'.  Su.  I,  i,  2,  and  Miiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  p.  203. 

12.  Regarding  the  Pataniya-crimes  which  cause  loss  of  caste, 
see  above,  I,  7,  21,  7  seq. 

13.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  102.  According  to  the  greatness  of 
the  crime  the  number  of  the  burnt-oblations  must  be  increased  and 
the  prayers  be  repeated. 


86  APASTAMBA.  I,.9,  27. 

Pra^-na  I,   PajTALa  9,  Kuan  DA  27. 

1.  After  having  eaten  sesamum  or  having  fasted 
on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  month  .5'rava;2a  (July- 
August),  he  may  on  the  following  day  bathe  in  the 
water  of  a  great  river  and  offer  (a  burnt-oblation  of) 
one  thousand  pieces  of  sacred  fuel,  whilst  reciting 
the  Gayatri,  or  he  may  mutter  (the  Gayatri)  as  many 
times. 

2.  Or  he  may  perform  Ish/is  and  Soma-sacrifices 
for  the  sake  of  purifying  himself  (from  his  sins). 

3.  After  having  eaten  forbidden  food,  he  must 
fast,  until  his  entrails  are  empty. 

4.  That  is  (generally)  attained  after  seven  days. 

5.  Or  he  may  during  winter  and  during  the  dewy 
season  (November-March)  bathe  in  cold  water  both 
morning  and  evening, 

6.  Or  he  may  perform  a  Krz/c/c/ira,  penance,  which 
lasts  twelve  days. 

7.  The  rule  for  the  KriMArs.  penance  of  twelve 
days  (is  the  following)  :  For  three  days  he  must  not 
eat  in  the  evening,  and  then  for  three  days  not  in  the 
morning;  for  three  days  he  must  live  on  food  which 
has  been  given  unasked,  and  three  days  he  must  not 
eat  anything. 

8.  If  he  repeats  this  for  a  year,  that  is  called  a 
KriM/ir£L  penance,  which  lasts  for  a  year, 

27.  I.  'The  oblations  of  sacred  fuel  (samidh)  are  not  to  be 
accompanied  by  the  exclamation  Svaha.' — Haradatta. 

2.  Ish/is  are  the  simplest  forms  of  the  Aauta-sacrifices,  i.e.  of 
those  for  which  three  fires  are  necessary. 

3.  For  some  particular  kinds  of  forbidden  food  the  same  penance 
is  prescribed,  Manu  XI,  153-154. 

7.  The  same  penance  is  described,  under  the  name  Pra^apatya 
'kr/M/iT^.,  the  KriVcMvB.  invented  by  Pra^apati,  Manu  XI,  212,  and 
Ya^fi.  Ill,  320. 


I,  10,  28.  PENANCE.  87 

9.  Now  follows  another  penance.  He  who  has 
committed  ev^en  a  great  many  sins  which  do  not 
cause  him  to  fall,  becomes  free  from  guilt,  if,  fasting, 
he  recites  the  entire  6akha  of  his  Veda  three  times 
consecutively. 

10.  He  who  cohabits  with  a  non-Aryan  woman, 
he  who  lends  money  at  interest,  he  who  drinks 
(other)  spirituous  liquors  (than  Sura),  he  who  praises 
everybody  in  a  manner  unworthy  of  a  Brahma;/a, 
shall  sit  on  grass,  allowing  his  back  to  be  scorched 
(by  the  sun). 

11.  A  Brahmawa  removes  the  sin  which  he  com- 
mitted by  serving  one  day  and  night  (a  man  of)  the 
black  race,  if  he  bathes  for  three  years  at  every 
fourth  meal-time. 

Prasna  I,  Papal  A  10,  Kh.\.vz)a  28. 

1.  He  who,  under  any  conditions  whatsoever, 
covets  (and  takes)  another  man's  possessions  is  a 
thief;  thus  (teach)  Kautsa  and  Harita  as  well  as 
Kawva  and  Pushkarasadi. 

2.  \''arshyaya;^i  declares,  that  there  are  exceptions 
to  this  law,  in  regard  to  some  possessions. 

3.  If  seeds  ripening  in  the  pod,  food  for  a 
draught-ox  (are  taken),  the  owners  ought  not  to 
forbid  it. 

9.   Manu  XT,  259. 

II.  The  expression  kmh«a  varwa,  'the  black  race,'  is  truly 
Vedic.  In  the  Ji/g-veda  it  usually  denotes  the  aboriginal  races, 
and  sometimes  the  demons.  Others  explain  the  Sutra  thus : 
A  Brahmawa  removes  the  sin,  which  he  committed  by  cohabiting 
for  one  night  with  a  female  of  the  5'udra  caste,  &c. — Haradatta. 
The  latter  explanation  has  been  adopted  by  Kulluka  on  IManu 
XI,  179. 

28.  3.  The  same  rule  Manu  emphatically  ascribes  to  himself. 
Manu  YIII,  339.     But  see  also  VIII,  331. 


8  8  APASTAMBA.  I,  lo,  2i 


4.  To  take  even  these  things  in  too  great  a  quan- 
tity is  sinful. 

5.  Harita  declares,  that  in  every  case  the  per- 
mission (of  the  owner  must  be  obtained)  first. 

6.  He  shall  not  go  to  visit  a  fallen  teacher  or 
blood  relation. 

7.  Nor  shall  he  accept  the  (means  for  procuring) 
enjoyments  from  such  a  person. 

8.  If  he  meets  them  accidentally  he  shall  silently 
embrace  (their  feet)  and  pass  on. 

9.  A  mother  does  very  many  acts  for  her  son, 
therefore  he  must  constantly  serve  her,  though  she 
be  fallen. 

10.  But  (there  shall  be)  no  communion  (with  a 
fallen  mother)  in  acts  performed  for  the  acquisition 
of  spiritual  merit. 

1 1.  Enjoyments  taken  unrighteously  he  shall  give 
up  ;  he  shall  say,  '  I  and  sin  (do  not  dwell  together).' 
Clothing  himself  with  a  garment  reaching  from  the 
navel  down  to  the  knee,  bathing  daily,  morn,  noon, 
and  evening,  eating  food  which  contains  neither  milk 
nor  pungent  condiments,  nor  salt,  he  shall  not  enter  a 
house  for  twelve  years. 

12.  After  that  he  (may  be)  purified. 

13.  Then  he  may  have  intercourse  with  Aryans. 

14.  This  penance  may  also  be  employed  in  the 
case  of  the  other  crimes  which  cause  loss  of  caste 
(for  which  no  penance  has  been  ordained  above). 

15.  But  the  violator  of  a  Guru's  bed  shall  enter  a 

7.  Haradatta  remarks,  that  this  Sutra  implicitly  forbids  to  accept 
the  heritage  of  an  outcast. 

II,    A  similar  but  easier  penance  is  prescribed,  INIanu  XI,  194. 

15.  '  (This  penance,  which  had  been  prescribed  above,  I,  9,  25,  i), 
is  enjoined  (once  more),  in  order  to  show  that  it  is  not  optional 
(as  might  be  expected  according  to  Sutra  14).' — Haradatta. 


I,  10,  29.  PENANXE.  89 

hollow  iron  image  and,  having  caused  a  fire  to  be  lit. 
on  both  sides,  he  shall  burn  himself. 

16.  According  to  Harita,  this  (last-mentioned 
penance  must)  not  (be  performed). 

I  7.  For  he  who  takes  his  own  or  another's  life 
becomes  an  Abhii"asta. 

18.  He  (the  violator  of  a  Guru's  bed)  shall  per- 
form to  his  last  breath  (the  penance)  prescribed  by 
that  rule  (Sutra  11).  He  cannot  be  purified  in  this 
world.     But  (after  death)  his  sin  is  taken  away. 

19.  He  who  has  unjustly  forsaken  his  wife  shall 
put  on  an  ass's  skin,  with  the  hair  turned  outside, 
and  beg  in  seven  houses,  saying,  '  Give  alms  to  him 
who  forsook  his  wife.'  That  shall  be  his  livelihood 
for  six  months. 

20.  But  if  a  wife  forsakes  her  husband,  she  shall 
perform  the  twelve-night  Y^rikkhx-^L.  penance  for  as 
long  a  time. 

21.  He  who  has  killed  a  man  learned  in  the  Vedas 
and  Vedangas  shall  put  on  the  skin  of  a  dog  or  of  an 
ass,  with  the  hair  turned  outside,  and  take  a  human 
skull  for  his  drinking-vessel, 

PrA^XA    I,    PArALA    10,    KHAA-i)A    29. 

I.  And  he  shall  take  the  foot  of  a  bed  instead  of 
a  staff  and,  proclaiming  the  name  of  his  deed,  he 
shall  go  about  (saying),  '  Who  (gives)  alms  to  the 
murderer  of  a  Brahma;za,  learned  in  the  Vedas  and 
the  Angas?'  Obtaining  thus  his  livelihood  in  the 
village,  he  shall  dwell  in  an  empty  house  or  under  a 
tree,  [knowing  that)  he  is  not  allowed  to  have  inter- 
course with  Ar}'ans.  According  to  this  rule  he  shall 
act  until  his  last  breath.  He  cannot  be  purified  in 
this  world.      But  (after  death)  his  sin  is  taken  away. 


90  APASTAMBA.  I,  lo,  29. 

2.  He  even  who  slays  unintentionally,  reaps  never- 
theless the  result  of  his  sin. 

3.  (His  guilt  is)  greater,  (if  he  slays)  intentionally. 

4.  The  same  (principle  applies)  also  to  other  sin- 
ful actions, 

5.  And  also  to  good  works. 

6.  A  Brahma7^a  shall  not  take  a  weapon  into  his 
hand,  though  he  be  only  desirous  of  examining  it. 

7.  In  a  Pura;2a  (it  has  been  declared),  that  he  who 
slays  an  assailant  does  not  sin,  for  (in  that  case) 
wrath  meets  wrath. 

8.  But  Abhij-astas  shall  live  together  in  dwellings 
(outside  the  village) ;  considering  this  their  lawful 
(mode  of  life),  they  shall  sacrifice  for  each  other, 
teach  each  other,  and  marry  amongst  each  other. 

9.  If  they  have  begot  sons,  let  them  say  to  them : 
'  Go  out  from  amongst  us,  for  thus  the  Aryas,  (throw- 
ing •  the  guilt)  upon  us,  will  receive  you  (amongst 
their  number). 

10.  For  the  organs  do  not  become  impure  together 
with  the  man. 


29.  5.  Haradatta  gives,  as  an  example,  the  case  where  a  war- 
rior saves  the  property  of  a  traveller  from  thieves.  If  the  traveller 
turns  out  to  be  a  Brahmawa,  and  the  warrior  did  not  know  his 
caste  before  rescuing  his  property,  his  merit  will  be  less  than  if  he 
had  rescued  knowingly  the  property  of  a  Brahmawa. 

9.  It  is  impossible  to  agree  with  Haradatta's  explanation  of  the 
words  to  be  addressed  by  Abhijastas  to  their  children.  No  Vedic 
license  can  excuse  the  use  of  the  second  person  plural  instead  of 
the  third.  I  propose  the  following  :  '  Go  out  from  among  us  ;  for 
thus  (leaving  the  guilt)  to  us,  you  will  be  received  (as)  Aryas.'  It 
is,  however,  not  improbable  that  our  text  is  disfigured  by  several 
very  old  corruptions.  Baudhayana,  who  (Prai'na  I,  Adhy.  12)  also 
gives  the  whole  passage  from  Sutra  8  to  Siitra  14,  reads:  pravra- 
^atasmatta  evam  aryan  sampratipatsyatha. 


1, 10. 29.  PE^-A^•CE.  91 

1 1.  (The  truth  of)  that  may  be  learned  from  this 
(parallel  case) ;  a  man  deficient  in  limbs  begets  a  son 
who  possesses  the  full  number  of  limbs. 

12.  Harita  declares  that  this  is  wrong. 

13.  A  wife  is  similar  to  the  vessel  which  contains 
the  curds  (for  the  sacrifice). 

14.  For  if  one  makes  impure  milk  curdle  (by 
mixing  it  with  whey  and  water)  in  a  milk- vessel  and 
stirs  it,  no  sacrificial  rite  can  be  performed  with  (the 
curds  produced  from)  that.  Just  so  no  intercourse 
can  be  allowed  with  the  impure  seed  which  comes 
(from  an  Abhi^asta). 

15.  Sorcery  and  curses  (employed  against  a  Brah- 
ma;/a)  cause  a  man  to  become  impure,  but  not  loss 
of  caste. 

16.  Harita  declares  that  they  cause  loss  of  caste. 

1 7.  But  crimes  causing  impurity  must  be  ex- 
piated, (when  no  particular  penance  is  prescribed.) 
by  performing  the  penance  enjoined  for  crimes  caus- 
inor  loss  of  caste  durinof  twelve  months,  or  twelve 
half  months,  or  t^velve  twelve-nights,  or  twelve 
se'nnights,  or  twelve  times  three  days,  or  twelve 
days,  or  seven  days,  or  three  days,  or  two  days,  or 
one  day. 

18.  Thus  acts  causing  impurity  must  be  expiated 
according  to  the  manner  in  which  the  (sinful)  act 
has  been  committed  (whether  intentionally  or  un- 
intentionally). 

II.  'In  like  manner  a  man  who  has  lost  his  rights,  (can)  beget 
a  son,  who  possesses  the  rights  (of  his  caste).  For  the  wife  is  also 
a  cause  (of  the  birth  of  the  son),  and  she  is  guiltless." — Haradatta. 

13.  The  statements  now  following  are  those  with  which  Apa- 
stamba  agrees.  Those  contained  in  Sutras  8-1 1  are  merely  the 
purvapaksha. 


92  APASTAMBA.  I,  ll,  30. 

PrA^-xNA    I,    PArALA    11,    KlIAiVDA    30, 

1.  Some  declare,  that  a  student  shall  bathe  after 
(having  acquired)  the  knowledge  of  the  Veda,  (how- 
ever long  or  short  the  time  of  his  studentship  may 
have  been.) 

2.  (He  may)  also  (bathe)  after  having  kept  the 
student's  vow  for  forty-eight,  (thirty-six  or  twenty- 
four)  years,  (though  he  may  not  have  mastered  the 
Veda.) 

3.  Some  declare,  that  the  student  (shall  bathe) 
after  (having  acquired)  the  knowledge  of  the  Veda 
and  after  (the  expiration  of)  his  vow. 

4.  To  all  those  persons  who  have  bathed  (in 
accordance  with  any  of  the  above  rules  must  be 
shown)  the  honour  due  to  a  Snataka. 

5.  The  reverence  (shown  to  a  Snataka)  brings, 
however,  different  rewards  according  to  the  degree 
of  devotion  or  of  learning  (possessed  by  the  person 
honoured). 

6.  Now  follow  the  observances  (chiefly  to  be  kept) 
by  a  Snataka. 

7.  He  shall  usually  enter  the  village  and  leave  it 
by  the  eastern  or  the  northern  gate. 

8.  During  the  morning  and  evening  twilights,  he 
shall  sit  outside  the  village,  and  not  speak  anything 
(referring  to  worldly  matters). 

9.  (But  an  Agnihotri,  who  is  occupied  at  home  by 
oblations  in  the  morning  and  evening,  must  not  go 


30.  I.  The  bath  is  taken  at  the  end  of  the  studentship,  and  forms 
part  of  the  Samavartana-ceremony.  From  this  rite  a  student  who 
has  completed  his  course  of  study  derives  the  name  Snataka,  '  one 
who  has  bathed.'     See  also  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  125. 


I,  ll,30.  RULES    FOR    A    SNATAKA.  93 

out ;  for)  in  the  case  of  a  conflict  (of  duties),  that 
enjoined  by  the  \^eda  is  the  more  important. 

10.  He  shall  avoid  all  dyed  dresses, 

11.  And  all  naturally  black  cloth. 

12.  He  shall  wear  a  dress  that  is  neither  shining. 

13.  Nor  despicable,  if  he  is  able  (to  afford  it). 

14.  And  in  the  day-time  he  shall  avoid  to  wrap 
up  his  head,  except  when  voiding  excrements. 

15.  But  when  voiding  excrements,  he  shall  en- 
velop his  head  and  place  some  (grass  or  the  like) 
on  the  crround. 

16.  He  shall  not  void  excrements  in  the  shade  (of 
a  tree,  where  travellers  rest). 

17.  But  he  may  discharge  urine  on  his  own 
shadow. 

18.  He  shall  not  void  excrements  with  his  shoes 
on,  nor  on  a  ploughed  field,  nor  on  a  path,  nor  in 
water. 

19.  He  shall  also  avoid  to  spit  into,  or  to  have 
connexion  with  a  woman  in  the  water, 

20.  He  shall  not  void  excrements  facingr  the  fire. 
the  sun,  water,  a  Brahma;^a,  a  cow,  or  (images  of) 
the  gods. 

21.  He  shall  avoid  to  clean  his  body  from  ex- 
crements with  a  stone,  a  clod  of  earth,  or  with 
(boughs  of)  herbs  or  trees  which  he  has  broken 
off,  whilst  they  were  on  the  tree  and  full  of  sap. 

10.  The  rule  to  wear  white  garments  is  given  Y^gn.  I,  131  ; 
Manu  IV,  35. 

13.    Manu  IV,  34. 
15.    Manu  IV,  49. 

18.  Manu  IV,  45,  46  ;  Ya^.  I,  137. 

19.  ^lanu  IV,  56. 

20.  Manu  IV,  48,  52;  Y%-5.  I,  134. 


94  APASTAMBA.  I,  II,  31. 

2  2.  If  possible,  he  shall  not  stretch  out  his  feet 
towards  a  fire,  water,  a  Brahma;^a,  a  cow,  (images 
of)  the  gods,  or  a  door. 

23.    Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) : 

Pra^'XA  I,  Fatal  A  11,  KnAiVDA  31. 

1.  He  shall  eat  facing  the  east,  void  faeces  facing 
the  south,  discharge  urine  facing  the  north,  and 
wash  his  feet  turned  towards  the  west. 

2.  He  shall  void  excrements  far  from  his  house, 
havinof  o-one  towards  the  south  or  south-west. 

3.  But  after  sunset  he  must  not  void  excrements 
outside  the  village  or  far  from  his  house. 

4.  And  as  long  as  he  is  impure  he  (shall  avoid) 
to  pronounce  the  names  of  the  gods. 

5.  And  he  shall  not  speak  evil  of  the  gods  or  of 
the  king. 

6.  He  shall  not  touch  with  his  foot  a  Brahma;^a, 
a  cow,  nor  any  other  (venerable  beings). 

7.  (Nor  shall  he  touch  them)  with  his  hand,  except 
for  particular  reasons. 

8.  He  shall  not  mention  the  blemishes  of  a  cow, 
of  sacrificial  presents,  or  of  a  girl. 

9.  And  he  shall  not  announce  it  (to  the  owner) 
if  a  cow  does  damage  (by  eating  corn  or  grass  in 
a  field). 

22.  The  prohibition  to  stretch  the  feet  towards  a  fire  occurs  also 
ManuIV,  53;  Ya^o^il.  I,  137. 

31.  2.    IManu  IV,  151  ;  Ya^il.  I,  i6. 

5.    Manu  IV,  163. 

8.  '  In  the  section  on  transcendental  knowledge  (I,  8,  23,  5), 
"  speaking  evil  "  has  been  forbidden,  in  connexion  with  the  means 
of  salvation.  And  below  (Sutra  25)  the  (author)  will  declare  that 
the  sins  which  destroy  the  creatures  are  to  be  avoided.  But  this 
precept  (is  given  in  order  to  indicate  that)  in  the  case  of  cows  and 
the  rest  an  extra  penance  must  be  performed.' — Haradatta. 


1,11,31.  RULES    FOR    A    SNATAKA.  95 

10.  (Nor  shall  he  call  attention  to  it)  if  a  cow  is 
together  with  her  calf,  except  for  a  particular  reason. 

1 1.  And  of  a  cow  which  is  not  a  milch-cow  he  shall 
not  say,  '  She  is  not  a  milch-cow.' 

12.  He  must  say,  'This  is  a  cow  which  will  become 
a  milch-cow.' 

13.  He  shall  not  call  'lucky'  that  which  is  lucky. 

14.  He  shall  call  it  '  a  mercy,  a  blessing.' 

15.  He  shall  not  step  over  a  rope  to  which  a  calf 
(or  cow)  is  tied. 

16.  He  shall  not  pass  between  the  posts  from 
which  a  swing  is  suspended. 

17.  (In  company)  he  shall  not  say,  'This  person 
is  my  enemy.'  If  he  says,  '  This  person  is  my 
enemy,'  he  will  raise  for  himself  an  enemy,  who 
will  show  his  hatred. 

18.  If  he  sees  a  rainbow,  he  must  not  say  to 
others,  '  Here  is  Indra's  bow.' 

19.  He  shall  not  count  (a  flock  of)  birds. 

20.  He  shall  avoid  to  look  at  the  sun  when  he 
rises  or  sets. 

21.  During  the  day  the  sun  protects  the  crea- 
tures, during  the  night  the  moon.  Therefore  let 
him  eagerly  strive  to  protect  himself  on  the  night 

13.    Manu  IV,  139. 

15.  Manu  IV,  38. 

16.  *  Or  according  to  others,  "  He  shall  not  pass  between  pillars 
supporting  an  arch."  '— Haradatta. 

18.  Manu  IV,  59. 

19.  '  Others  explain  (the  Sutra  thus)  :  He  shall  not  announce  it 
to  others,  if  he  sees  (the  souls  of)  good  men  falling  from  heaven  on 
account  of  the  expenditure  of  their  merit,  (i.  e.)  he  shall  not  call 
attention  to  shooting-stars.' — Haradatta. 

20.  Manu  IV,  37. 

21.  Manu  IV,  153. 


96  APASTAMBA.  I,  11,32. 

of  the  new  moon  by  purity,   continence,   and  rites 
adapted  for  the  season. 

22.  For  during  that  night  the  sun  and  the  moon 
dwell  together. 

23.  He  shall  not  enter  the  village  by  a  by-path. 
If  he  enters  it  thus,  he  shall  mutter  this  i?/k-verse, 
'  Praise  be  to  Rudra,  the  lord  of  the  dwelling,'  or 
some  other  (verse)  addressed  to  Rudra. 

24.  He  shall  not  (ordinarily)  give  the  residue  of 
his  food  to  a  person  who  is  not  a  Brahma;ea.  When 
he  gives  it  (to  such  a  one),  he  shall  clean  his  teeth 
and  give  (the  food)  after  having  placed  in  it  (the 
dirt  from  his  teeth). 

25.  And  let  him  avoid  the  faults  that  destroy  the 
creatures,  such  as  anger  and  the  like. 

PrA^NA    I,    PaTALA    11,    KHAiVDA    32. 

1.  Let  him  who  teaches,  avoid  connubial  inter- 
course during  the  rainy  season  and  in  autumn. 

2.  And  if  he  has  had  connexion  (with  his  wife), 
he  shall  not  lie  with  her  during  the  whole  night. 

3.  He  shall  not  teach  whilst  he  is  lying  on  a  bed, 

4.  Nor  shall  he  teach  (sitting)  on  that  couch  on 
which  he  lies  (at  night  with  his  wife). 

5.  He  shall  not  show  himself  adorned  with  a 
garland,  or  anointed  with  ointments. 


23.  Manu  IV,  73;  Ya^n.  I,  140. 

24.  Manu  IV,  80.  'This  prohibition  (given  in  the  first  part  of 
the  Sutra)  refers  to  -Sudras  who  are  not  dependents;  to  dependents 
the  following  (exception  applies).' — Haradatta. 

25.  See  above,  I,  8,  23,  4  and  5,  and  Manu  IV,  163. 
32.  I.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  42. 

2.   Manu  IV,  40. 
5.   Manu  IV,  72. 


I,  II,  32.  RULES    FOR    A    SNATAKA.  97 


6.  At  night  he  shall  always  adorn  himself  for  his 
wife. 

7.  Let  him  not  submerge  his  head  together  with 
his  body  (in  bathing), 

8.  And  (let  him  avoid)  to  bathe  after  sunset. 

9.  Let  him  avoid  to  use  a  seat,  clogs,  sticks  for 
cleaning  the  teeth,  (and  other  utensils)  made  of 
Pallra-wood. 

10.  Let  him  avoid  to  praise  (himself)  before  his 
teacher,  saying, '  I  have  properly  bathed  or  the  like.' 

11.  Let  him  be  awake  from  midnight. 

12.  Let  him  not  study  (or  teach)  in  the  middle  of 
the  night ;  but  (he  may  point  out)  their  duties  to  his 
pupils. 

13.  Or  (he  may)  by  himself  mentally  (repeat  the 
sacred  texts). 

14.  After  midnight  he  may  study  (and  teach). 

15.  When  he  has  risen  (at  midnight,  and  taught) 
during  the  third  watch  of  the  night,  let  him  not  lie 
down  again  (saying),  '  Studying  is  forbidden.' 

1 6.  At  his  pleasure  he  may  (sleep)  leaning  (against 
a  post  or  the  like). 

1 7.  Or  he  may  mentally  repeat  (the  sacred  texts). 

18.  Let  him  not  visit  inferior  men  (such  as  Nisha- 
das),  nor  countries  which  are  inhabited  by  them, 

19.  Nor  assemblies  and  crowds. 

20.  If  he  has  entered  a  crowd,  he  shall  leave  it, 
turnine  his  rigfht  hand  towards  the  crowd. 

21.  Nor  shall  he  enter  towns  frequently. 

22.  Let  him  not  answer  directly  a  question  (that 
is  difficult  to  decide). 

15.   I.e.  if  the  following  day  is  a  forbidden  day,  e.g.  an  Ash/ami. 
See  also  Manu  IV,  99. 
18.    Manu  IV,  60  and  61. 

[2]  H 


98  APASTAMBA.  I,  1 1,  32. 

23.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  verse) : 

24.  (The  foolish  decision)  of  a  person  who  decides 
wrongly  destroys  his  ancestors  and  his  future  hap- 
piness, it  harms  his  children,  cattle,  and  house,  '  Oh 
Dharmaprahradana,  (this  deed  belongs  not)  to  Ku- 
malana  !'  thus  decided  Death,  weeping,  the  question 
(addressed  to  him  by  the  J^ish'i). 

25.  Let  him  not  ascend  a  carriage  yoked  with 
asses ;  and  let  him  avoid  to  ascend  or  to  descend 
from  vehicles  in  difficult  places. 

26.  And  (let  him  avoid)  to  cross  a  river  swimming. 

27.  And  (let  him  avoid)  ships  of  doubtful  (solidity). 

28.  He  shall  avoid  cutting  grass,  crushing  clods 
of  earth,  and  spitting,  without  a  particular  reason, 

29.  And  whatever  else  they  forbid. 

24.  Haradatta  tells  the  story  to  which  the  second  half  of  the 
verse  alludes,  in  the  following  manner :  '  A  certain  Rt'shi  had  two 
pupils,  called  Dharmaprahradana  and  Kumalana.  Once  they 
brought  from  the  forest  two  great  bundles  of  firewood  and  threw 
them  negligently  into  their  teacher's  house,  without  looking.  One 
of  the  bundles  struck  the  teacher's  little  son  so  that  he  died.  Then 
the  teacher  asked  his  two  pupils,  "  Which  of  you  two  has  killed 
him  ? "  Both  answered,  "  Not  I,  not  I."  Hereupon  the  teacher, 
being  unable  to  (come  to  a  decision  in  order  to)  send  away  the 
sinner  and  to  keep  the  innocent  one,  called  Death,  and  asked  him, 
"  Which  of  the  two  has  killed  the  boy  ? "  Then  Death,  finding 
himself  involved  in  a  difficult  law-question,  began  to  weep,  and 
giving  his  decision,  said,  "  Oh  Dharmaprahradana  to  Kumalana 
(the  dative  has  the  sense  of  the  genitive),  this  sin  is  none  of 
Kumalana's  !  "  Instead  of  declaring,  "  Dharmaprahradana,  thou 
hast  done  this,"  he  said,  "  The  other  did  not  do  it."  Still  from 
the  circumstances  of  the  case  it  appeared  that  the  meaning  of  the 
answer  was,  "  The  other  has  done  it."  "  This  was  the  decision 
which  he  gave  crying." ' 

26.    Manu  IV,  77. 

28.    Manu  IV,  70  and  71. 


II,  I,  I.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  99 

PRAiSXA    II,    PaT^ALA    1,    KhAA^DA    1. 

1.  After  marriage  the  rites  prescribed  for  a  house- 
holder and  his  wife  (must  be  performed). 

2.  He  shall  eat  at  the  two  (appointed)  times, 
(morning  and  evening.) 

3.  And  he  shall  not  eat  to  repletion. 

4.  And  both  (the  householder  and  his  wife)  shall 
fast  on  (the  days  of)  the  new  and  full  moon. 

5.  To  eat  once  (on  those  days  in  the  morning), 
that  also  is  called  fasting. 

6.  And  they  may  eat  (at  that  meal)  until  they 
are  quite  satisfied. 

7.  And  on  (the  anniversary  of )  that  (wedding)-day 
they  may  eat  that  food  of  which  they  are  fond. 

1.  I.  According  to  Haradatta,  this  rule  is  intended  to  refute  the 
opinion  of  those  who  hold  that  the  sacred  household-fire  may  be 
kept,  and  the  prescribed  offerings  therein  may  be  performed, 
either  from  the  time  of  the  marriage,  or  after  the  division  of  the 
family  estate.  He  also  states  that  the  use  of  the  dual  gr/hame- 
dhino/^  indicates  that  husband  and  wife  must  perform  the  rites 
conjointly.    Manu  III,  67. 

2.  Haradatta  thinks  that  this  Sutra  is  intended  to  prevent 
householders  from  having  more  than  two  meals  a  day,  and  to  keep 
them  from  gluttony.  Others  are  of  opinion  that  its  object  is  to 
keep  householders  from  excessive  fasting,  and  to  make  them 
perform  the  Prawagnihotra  at  either  meal.  At  the  Prawagnihotra 
the  sacrificer  eats  five  mouthfuls  invoking  successively,  whilst  he 
eats,  the  five  vital  airs.  At  the  first  mouthful  he  says,  '  To  Pra«a 
svaha;'  at  the  second,  'To  Apana  svaha,'  &c. 

5.   Asv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  10,  2. 

7.  Haradatta  holds  that  the  words  *  on  that  day'  do  not  refer  to 
the  days  of  the  new  and  full  moon,  the  Parva-days,  mentioned  in 
Sutra  4.  His  reasons  are,  firstly,  that  the  permission  to  eat  food, 
of  which  the  householder  may  be  particularly  fond,  has  already 
been  given  in  Sutra  6,  by  the  term  tr/ptiy^,  'satisfaction;'  and, 
secondly,  that  the  singular  '  on  this  day '  does  not  agree  with  the 
plural '  on  the  Parva-days.'     Hence  he  comes  to  the  conclusion 

H  2 


lOO  APASTAMBA.  IT,  i,  r. 

8.  And  (on  the  night  of  that  day)  they  shall  sleep 
on  the  ground  (on  a  raised  heap  of  earth). 

•9.    And  they  shall  avoid  connubial  intercourse. 

10.  And  on  the  day  after  (that  day)  a  Sthalipaka 
must  be  offered. 

11.  The  manner  in  which  that  offering  must  be 
performed  has  been  declared  by  (the  description  of 
the  Sthalipaka)  to  be  performed  on  the  days  of  the 
new  and  full  moon  (the  Parva;^a). 

12.  And  they  declare  (that  this  rite  which  is 
known)  amongst  the  people  (must  be  performed) 
every  (year). 

that  the  words  '  on  that  day '  must  refer  to  the  wedding-day, 
mentioned  in  Sutra  i,  as  well  as  to  its  anniversary.  Haradatta  is, 
probably,  right  in  his  explanation,  though  the  reasons  adduced 
here  are  very  weak.  A  stronger  reason  for  detaching  this  Siltra 
from  Sutra  4  will  be  brought  forward  below,  under  Sutra  11.  MahS- 
deva,  the  commentator  of  the  Hira/zyake^idharma,  adopts  the  view 
rejected  by  Haradatta. 
8.   Asv.  Gri.  Su.  I,  3,  10. 

10.  A  Sthalipaka  is  an  offering  at  which  rice  cooked  in  a  pot, 
sthali,  is  offered  in  the  fire.  A  full  description  of  this  kind  of 
sacrifice  occurs,  Ksv.  Gri.  Sii.  I,  10,  i  seq. 

11.  The  Parva«a  Sthalipaka  has  been  described  by  Apastamba 
in  the  Gr?'hya-sutra,  Pa/ala  3.  Again,  Haradatta  returns  to  the 
question  whether  the  words  on  that  day  (Sutra  7)  refer  to  the 
Parva-days,  or  the  marriage-day  and  its  anniversaries.  He  now 
adds,  in  favour  of  the  latter  view,  that  the  word  Parvawena,  '  by 
the  rite  to  be  performed  on  Parva-days,'  by  which  the  Sthalipaka 
on  Parva-days  is  intended,  clearly  proves  the  impossibility  to  refer 
the  preceding  rules  to  the  Parva-days.  He  adds  that  some, 
nevertheless,  adopt  the  explanation  rejected  by  himself. 

12.  They,  i.e.  the  6'ish/as,  those  learned  in  the  law.  'Another 
commentator  says,  the  rite  which  will  be  taught  (in  the  following 
Siitra),  and  which  is  known  from  the  usage  of  the  learned,  is 
constant,  i.  e.  must  be  performed  in  every  case.  That  it  is  what 
the  "learned"  declare.' — Haradatta.  The  latter  explanation  of 
the  Sutra  is  adopted  by  Mahadeva. 


II,  I,  I.     THE  DUTIES  OF  A  HOUSEHOLDER.       lOI 

13.  At  every  (burnt-offering),  when  he  wishes  to 
place  the  fire  on  the  ahar  (called  Stha;^rt^ila),  let  him 
draw  on  that  (altar)  three  lines  from  west  to  east 
and  three  Hnes  from  south  to  north,  and  sprinkle 
(the  altar)  with  water,  turning  the  palm  of  the  hand 
downwards,  and  let  him  then  make  the  fire  burn 
brightly  by  adding  (fuel). 

14.  He  shall  pour  out  (the  remainder  of)  this  water 
used  for  sprinkling,  to  the  north  or  to  the  east  (of 
the  altar),  and  take  other  (water  into  the  vessel). 

15.  The  water- vessels  in  the  house  shall  never 
be  empty;  that  is  the  duty  to  be  observed  by  the 
householder  and  his  wife. 

16.  Let  him  not  have  connubial  intercourse  (with 
his  wife)  in  the  day-time. 

1 7.  But  let  him  have  connexion  with  his  wife  at 
the  proper  time,  according  to  the  rules  (of  the  law). 

18.  Let  him  have  connubial  intercourse  in  the 
interv'al  also,  if  his  wife  (desires  it,  observing  the 
restrictions  imposed  by  the  law). 

19.  (The  duty  of)  connubial  intercourse  (follows 
from)  the  passage  of  a  Brahma;/a,  ('  Let  us  dwell 
together  until  a  son  be  born.') 

13.   Asv.  Gn.  Su.  I,  3,  1-3. 

15.  Haradatta  states  that  the  object  of  the  repetition  of  the 
words  '  the  householder  and  his  wife '  is  to  show  that  they 
themselves  must  fill  the  water-vessels,  and  not  employ  others  for 
this  purpose.  He  adds  that,  according  to  another  commentator, 
the  object  of  the  repetition  is  to  show  that  Sutras  13  and  14  apply 
not  only  to  householders,  but  also  to  students,  and  that  hence 
students,  when  they  offer  the  daily  oblations  of  sacred  fuel  (above, 
I,  I,  4,  14  seq.),  should  also  perform  the  rites  taught  in  the  pre- 
ceding Sutras. 

17.  See  Manu  III,  46-48;  Y%n.  I,  79,  80. 

18.  ManuIII,  45;    Y%n.  I,  81. 

19.  See  Taittiriya  Sa/?ihita  II,  5,  i,  5. 


I02  APASTAMBA.  II,  i,  2. 

20.  But  during  intercourse  he  shall  be  dressed  in 
a  particular  dress  kept  for  this  purpose. 

21.  And  during  intercourse  only  they  shall  lie 
together, 

22.  Afterwards  separate. 

23.  Then  they  both  shall  bathe  ; 

Pras-na  II,  Patala  1,  Khanda  2. 

1.  Or  they  shall  remove  the  stains  with  earth  or 
water,  sip  water,  and  sprinkle  the  body  with  water. 

2.  Men  of  all  castes,  if  they  fulfil  their  (assigned) 
duties,  enjoy  (in  heaven)  the  highest,  imperishable 
bliss. 

3.  Afterwards  when  (a  man  who  has  fulfilled  his 
duties)  returns  to  this  world,  he  obtains,  by  virtue  of 
a  remainder  of  merit,  birth  in  a  distinguished  family, 
beauty  of  form,  beauty  of  complexion,  strength,  apti- 
tude for  learning,  wisdom,  wealth,  and  the  gift  of 
fulfilling  the  laws  of  his  (caste  and  order).  There- 
fore in  both  worlds  he  dwells  in  happiness,  (rolling) 
like  a  wheel  (from  the  one  to  the  other). 

4.  As  the  seed  of  herbs  (and)  trees,  (sown)  in 
good  and  well-cultivated  soil,  gives  manifold  returns 
of  fruit  (even  so  it  is  with  men  who  have  received 
the  various  sacraments). 

5.  The  increase  of  the  results  of  sins  has  been 
explained  hereby. 

6.  Thus  after  having  undergone  a  long  punish- 
ment in  the  next  world,  a  person  who  has  stolen 
(the  gold  of  a  Brahma^za)  or  killed  a  (Brahma;^a)  is 
born  again,  in  case  he  was  a  Brahma^^a  as  a  K2M- 

2.  6.  Manu  XII,  55 ;  Ya^ii.  Ill,  206,  207.  A  Paulkasa  is  said 
to  be  the  offspring  of  a  Nishada  and  a  Kshatriya  woman.  See  the 
Pet.  Diet.  s.  V.    A  Vaiwa  is  a  rope-dancer,  or  equilibrist. 


II,  2,  3-  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  IO3 

^ala,  in  case  he  was  a  Kshatriya  as  a  Paulkasa,  in 
case  he  was  a  Vaii"ya  as  a  Vai;/a. 

7.  In  the  same  manner  other  (sinners)  who  have 
become  outcasts  in  consequence  of  their  sinful  actions 
are  born  again,  on  account  of  (these)  sins,  losing  their 
caste,  in  the  wombs  (of  various  animals). 

8.  As  it  is  sinful  to  touch  a  A'aw^ala,  (so  it  is  also 
sinful)  to  speak  to  him  or  to  look  at  him.  The 
penance  for  these  (offences  will  be  declared). 

9.  (The  penance)  for  touching  him  is  to  bathe, 
submerging  the  whole  body ;  for  speaking  to  him  to 
speak  to  a  Brahma;^a ;  for  looking  at  him  to  look  at 
the  lights  (of  heaven). 

PrA^-XA    II,    PArALA    2,    Kh.JuVDA    3. 

1 .  Pure  men  of  the  first  three  castes  shall  prepare 
the  food  (of  a  householder  which  is  used)  at  the 
Vai^'adeva  ceremony. 

2.  The  (cook)  shall  not  speak,  nor  cough,  nor  spit, 
while  his  face  is  turned  towards  the  food. 

3.  He  shall  purify  himself  by  touching  water  if  he 
has  touched  his  hair,  his  limbs,  or  his  garment. 

4.  Or  6"udras  may  prepare  the  food,  under  the 
superintendence  of  men  of  the  first  three  castes. 

5.  For  them  is  prescribed  the  same  rule  of  sip- 
ping water  (as  for  their  masters). 

6.  Besides,  the  (6"udra  cooks)  daily  shall  cause  to 

7.  Manu  XII,  52. 

3.  I.  '  The  food  which  is  used  at  the  Vaii-vadeva.  i.  e.  the  food 
prepared  for  the  meals  of  the  householder  and  of  his  wife.' — 
Haradatta. 

5.  This  Sutra  is  a  Giiapaka,  as  it  indicates  that  Apastamba  also 
recognises  the  different  rules  which  are  usually  prescribed  in  the 
Smr/tis  for  Brahma»as,  Kshatriyas,  Vai^-yas,  and  ^Siidras.  See  above, 
I,  5,  16,  2. 


I04  APASTAMBA.  II,  2,  3. 

be  cut  the  hair  of  their  heads,  their  beards,  the  hair 
on  their  bodies,  and  their  nails. 

7.  And  they  shall  bathe,  keeping  their  clothes  on. 

8.  Or  they  may  trim  (their  hair  and  nails)  on  the 
eighth  day  (of  each  half-month),  or  on  the  days  of 
the  full  and  new  moon. 

9.  He  (the  householder  himself)  shall  place  on  the 
fire  that  food  which  has  been  prepared  (by  ^S'udras) 
without  supervision,  and  shall  sprinkle  it  with  water. 
Such  food  also  they  state  to  be  fit  for  the  gods. 

10.  When  the  food  is  ready,  (the  cook)  shall  place 
himself  before  his  master  and  announce  it  to  him 
(saying),  '  It  is  ready.' 

11.  The  answer  (of  the  master)  shall  be,  'That 
well-prepared  food  is  the  means  to  obtain  splendour ; 
may  it  never  fail !' 

12.  The  burnt-oblations  and  Bali-offerings  made 
with  the  food  which  the  husband  and  his  wife  are  to 
eat,  bring  (as  their  reward)  prosperity,  (and  the  enjoy- 
ment of)  heaven. 

13.  Whilst  learning  the  sacred  formulas  (to  be 
recited  during  the  performance)  of  those  (burnt- 
oblations  and  Bali -offerings,  a  householder)  shall 
sleep  on  the  ground,  abstain  from  connubial  inter- 
course and  from  eating  pungent  condiments  and 
salt,  during  twelve  days. 

7.  Usually  in  bathing  both  Aryas  and  6'udras  wear  no  dress 
except  the  lango/i. 

11.  Manu  11,  54. 

12.  Balis  are  portions  of  food  which  are  thrown  before  the  door, 
or  on  the  floor  of  the  house.     See  below,  Sutra  16  seq. 

13.  Others  explain  this  Sutra  thus  :  'After  having  used  for  the 
first  time  these  sacred  formulas  (which  are  to  be  recited  in  offering 
the  burnt-oblation  and  the  Balis,  the  householder  and  his  wife) 
shall  sleep,'  &c. 


II,  2,  3-  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  IO5 

14.  (When  he  studies  the  Mantras)  for  the  last 
(BaH  offered  to  the  gobhns),  he  shall  fast  for  one 
(day  and)  night. 

15.  For  each  Bali-offering  the  ground  must  be 
prepared  separately.  (The  performer)  sweeps  (the 
ground)  with  his  (right)  hand,  sprinkles  it  with  water, 
turning  the  palm  downwards,  throws  down  (the  offer- 
ing), and  afterwards  sprinkles  water  around  it. 

16.  (At  the  VaiiA'adeva  sacrifice)  he  shall  offer 
the  oblations  with  his  hand,  (throwing  them)  into 
the  kitchen-fire  or  into  the  sacred  (Gr/hya)-fire,  and 
reciting  (each  time  one  of)  the  first  six  ]\Iantras 
(prescribed  in  the  Naraya;^i  Upanishad). 

17.  He  shall  sprinkle  water  all  around  both  times 
(before  and  after  the  oblations),  as  (has  been  de- 
clared) above. 

14.  Regarding  the  use  of  ekaratra  in  the  sense  of  '  a  (day  and  a) 
night,'  see  above.  The  '  last '  Bali-oflFering  is  that  described  below, 
11,  2,  4,  5. 

15.  'They  say  that  the  word  "afterwards"  is  used  in  order  to 
indicate  that  perfumes,  garlands,  and  other  (Upa^^aras)  must  be 
oflfered  between  (the  last  two  acts).' — Haradatta. 

16.  It  is  a  disputed  point  with  the  commentators  whether  every 
Brahma«a  may  offer  the  Vai^rvadeva  in  the  common  kitchen-fire,  or 
those  persons  only  who  do  not  keep  a  sacred  domestic  fire.  The 
six  Mantras,  which  are  given  Taitt.  Ar.  X,  67,  i,  are:  i.  Agnaye 
svaha,  'to  Agni  svaha;'  2.  Somaya  svaha,  'to  Soma  svaha;' 
3.  Vij-vebhyo  devebhya^  svaha, '  to  all  the  gods  svaha  ;'  4.  Dhruvaya 
bhumaya  svaha,  'to  Dhruva  Bhiama  svaha;'  5.  Dhruvakshitaye  svaha, 
'  to  Dhruvakshiti  svaha  ; '  6.  Ay^yutakshitaye  svaha, '  to  A-^yutakshiti 
svaha.'  Haradatta  adds  that  some  add  a  seventh  formula,  addressed 
to  Agni  svish/akr/t,  '  to  the  fire  which  causes  the  proper  perform- 
ance of  the  sacrifice,'  while  others  leave  out  the  second  Mantra  and 
give  that  addressed  to  Agni  s\ish/akr/t  the  sixth  place.  This 
latter  is  the  order  given  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  Taittiriya 
Ara«yaka. 

17.  '  Above,  i.  e.  Gr/liya-siitra,  Pa/ala  2.' — Haradatta.  The  Man- 
tras recited  are :  i .  at  the  first  sprinkling,  Adiie  'numanyasva,  ' Aditi 


106  APASTAMBA.  11,2,3. 

1 8.  In  like  manner  water  is  sprinkled  around  once 
only  after  the  performance  of  those  Bali-offerings 
that  are  performed  in  one  place. 

19.  (If  a  seasoning)  has  been  prepared,  (the 
Bali-offering  should  consist  of  rice)  mixed  with  that 
seasoning. 

20.  With  the  seventh  and  eighth  Mantras  (Balis 
must  be  offered  to  Dharma  and  Adharma)  behind 
the  fire,  and  must  be  placed  the  one  to  the  north  of 
the  other. 

21.  With  the  ninth  (Mantra  a  Bali  offered  to  the 
waters  must  be  placed)  near  the  water-vessel  (in 
which  the  water  for  domestic  purposes  is  kept). 

22.  With  the  tenth  and  eleventh  (Mantras,  Balis, 
offered  to  the  herbs  and  trees  and  to  Rakshodeva- 
^ana,  must  be  placed)  in  the  centre  of  the  house, 
and  the  one  to  the  east  of  the  other. 

23.  With  the  following  four  (Mantras,  Balis  must 
be  placed)  in  the  north-eastern  part  of  the  house 
(and  the  one  to  the  east  of  the  other). 

permit;'  Anumate 'numanyasva, '  Anumati  permit;'  Sarasvaty  anu- 
manyasva,  'Sarasvati  permit;'  Deva  Savita-^  prasuva, '  Divine  Savitr?" 
permit;'  2.  at  the  second  sprinkling-,  the  same  as  above,  anva- 
msLmsihak  and  prasaviy^,  '  thou  hast  permitted,'  being  substituted 
for  anumanyasva  and  prasuva. 

18.    This  Sutra  is  a  restriction  of  Sutra  15. 

20.  The  first  six  offerings  constitute  the  Devaya^ila  or  Vaijva- 
deva,  which  is  offered  in  the  fire.  Now  follow  the  Bali-offerings, 
which  are  merely  placed  on  the  ground.  '  Behind  the  fire '  means 
*  to  the  east  of  the  fire  ;'  for  the  sacrificer  must  face  the  east. 

21.  The  Mantra  is,  Adbhya^  svaha,  '  to  the  Waters  svaha.' 

22.  The  Mantras  are,  Oshadhivanaspatibhya//  svaha,  'to  the 
herbs  and  trees  svaha;'  Rakshodeva^anebhya^  svaha,  'to  the 
Rakshasas  and  the  servants  of  the  gods  svaha.' 

23.  These  four  Balis  are  sacred  to  the  Gn'has,  to  the  Avasanas, 
to  the  Avasanapatis,  and  to  all  creatures. 


II,  2,  4'  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  IO7 

PrA5NA    II,    PArALA    2,    KHAiVZ>A    4. 

1.  Near  the  bed  (a  Bali  must  be  offered)  with 
(a  Mantra)  addressed  to  Kama  (Cupid). 

2.  On  the  door-sill  (a  Bali  must  be  placed)  with 
(a  Mantra)  addressed  to  Antariksha  (the  air). 

3.  With  (the  Mantra)  that  follows  (in  the  Upani- 
shad,  he  offers  a  Bali)  near  the  door. 

4.  With  the  following  (ten  INIantras,  addressed  to 
Earth,  Air,  Heaven,  Sun,  Moon,  the  Constellations, 
Indra,  BrzTiaspati,  Pra^apati,  and  Brahman,  he  offers 
ten  Balis,  each  following  one  to  the  east  of  the  pre- 
ceding one),  in  (the  part  of  the  house  called)  the 
seat  of  Brahman. 

5.  He  shall  offer  to  the  south  (of  the  Balis  offered 
before,  a  Bali)  with  a  Mantra  addressed  to  the  iNIanes; 
his  sacrificial  cord  shall  be  suspended  over  the  right 
shoulder,  and  the  (palm  of  his  right  hand  shall  be 
turned  upwards  and)  inclined  to  the  right. 

6.  To  the  north  (of  the  Bali  given  to  the  Manes, 

4.  2.  '  Others  explain  dehali,  "  the  door-sill,"  to  mean  "  the 
door-case. ' ' — Haradatta. 

3.  '  Others  explain  apidhana,  "  the  panels  of  the  door,"  to  mean 
"  the  bolt  of  the  door." ' — Haradatta.  The  offering  is  made  to 
Nama,  '  the  name,  or  essence  of  things.' 

4.  Haradatta  gives  two  explanations  of  the  word  Brahmasadana, 
'  the  seat  of  Brahman.'  According  to  some,  it  is  an  architectural 
term,  designating  the  centre  of  the  house  ;  according  to  others,  it 
denotes  the  place  where,  at  the  time  of  the  burnt-oblations,  the 
Brahman  or  superintending  priest  is  seated,  i.  e.  a  spot  to  the  south 
of  the  sacred  fire. 

5.  Balis  and  water  for  the  Manes  are  placed  or  poured  into  the 
palm  of  the  hand  and  thrown  out  between  the  thumb  and  fore- 
finger. That  part  of  the  palm  is,  therefore,  sometimes  called  '  the 
tirtha  sacred  to  the  Manes.'     See  IManu  II,  39. 

6.  '  That  is  to  say,  the  sacrificial  cord  shall  not  be  suspended 
over  the  right  shoulder,  nor  shall  the  Bali  be  thrown  out  between 
the  thumb  and  forefinger.' — Haradatta. 


I08  APASTAMBA.  II,  2,  4. 

a  Bali  shall  be  offered)  to  Rudra,  in  the  same  manner 
as  to  the  (other)  gods. 

7.  The  sprinkling  with  water  (which  precedes  and 
follows  the  oblation)  of  these  two  (Balis,  takes  place) 
separately,  on  account  of  the  difference  of  the  rule 
(for  each  case). 

8.  At  night  only  he  shall  offer  (the  Bali  to  the 
goblins),  throwing  it  into  the  air  and  reciting  the  last 
(Mantra). 

9.  He  who  devoutly  offers  those  (above-described 
Balis  and  Homas),  according  to  the  rules,  (obtains) 
eternal  bliss  in  heaven  and  prosperity. 

10.  And  (after  the  Balis  have  been  performed,  a 
portion  of  the  food)  must  first  be  given  as  alms. 

IT.    He  shall  give  food  to  his  guests  first, 

12.  And  to  infants,  old  or  sick  people,  female 
(relations,  and)  pregnant  women. 

13.  The  master  (of  the  house)  and  his  wife  shall 
not  refuse  a  man  w^ho  asks  for  food  at  the  time  (when 
the  Vaii-vadeva  offering  has  been  performed). 

7.  In  sprinkling  around  an  offering  to  tlie  gods,  the  sacrificer 
turns  his  right  hand  towards  the  oblation  and  pours  out  the  water, 
beginning  in  the  south  and  ending  in  the  east.  In  sprinkling  around 
an  offering  to  the  Manes,  exactly  the  opposite  order  is  to  be  followed. 

8.  At  night,  i.e.  before  the  evening  meal.  The  Mantra  is,  '  To 
those  beings  which,  being  servants  of  Vituda,  roam  about  day  and 
night,  desiring  a  Bali-offering,  I  offer  this  Bali,  desirous  of  pros- 
perity. May  the  Lord  of  prosperity  grant  me  prosperity,  svaha.' 
Haradatta  adds,  that  according  to  another  commentator,  no  other 
Bali  but  this  is  to  be  offered  in  the  evening,  and  that  some  modify 
the  Mantra  for  each  occasion,  offering  the  Bali  in  the  morning  to 
'  the  Bhutas  that  roam  about  during  the  day,'  and  in  the  evening 
'  to  the  night-walkers.'  Compare  for  the  whole  section  Manu  III, 
90-92  ;  Yag'n.  I,  102-104. 

10.  Manu  III,  94  seq. 

11.  Manu  III,  115;  Ya^n.  I,  105. 

12.  Manu  III,  1 143  Y%n.  I,  105. 


11,  2,  4-     THE  DUTIES  OF  A  HOUSEHOLDER.       IO9 

14.  If  there  is  no  food,  earth,  water,  grass,  and 
a  kind  word,  forsooth,  never  fail  in  the  house  of  a 
good  man.     Thus  (say  those  who  know  the  law). 

15.  Endless  worlds  are  the  portion  (of  those 
householders  and  wives)  who  act  thus. 

16.  To  a  Brahma;^a  who  has  not  studied  the 
Veda,  a  seat,  water,  and  food  must  be  given.  But 
(the  giver)  shall  not  rise  (to  do  him  honour). 

1 7.  But  if  (such  a  man)  is  worthy  of  a  salutation 
(for  other  reasons),  he  shall  rise  to  salute  him. 

18.  Nor  (shall  a  Brahma?/a  rise  to  receive)  a 
Kshatriya  or  Vai-s-ya  (though  they  may  be  learned). 

19.  If  a  vSudra  comes  as  a  guest  (to  a  Brahma/^a), 
he  shall  give  him  some  work  to  do.  He  may  feed 
him,  after  (that  has  been  performed). 

20.  Or  the  slaves  (of  the  Brahma;/a  householder) 
shall  fetch  (rice)  from  the  royal  stores,  and  honour 
the  6'udra  as  a  Qoiest. 

21.  (A  householder)  must  always  wear  his  garment 
over  (his  left  shoulder  and  under  his  right  arm). 

22.  Or  he  may  use  a  cord  only,  slung  over  his 
left  shoulder  and  passed  under  his  right  arm,  instead 
of  the  garment. 

14.  Manu  III,  loi;  Ya^.  I,  107.  As  read  in  the  text,  the 
first  line  of  the  verse  has  one  syllable  in  excess.  This  irregularity 
would  disappear  if  trz>/a,  the  Vedic  form  of  the  nom.  ace.  plural, 
were  read  for  trma.ni,  and  it  seems  to  me  not  improbable  that 
tr?«ani  is  a  correction  made  by  a  Pandit  who  valued  grammatical 
correctness  higher  than  correctness  of  metre. 

16.    Manu  III,  99. 

18.  jManu  III,  110-112;  Y^^.  I,  107. 

19.  Manu  loc.  cit. 

20.  *  Hence  it  is  known  that  the  king  ought  to  keep  stores  of 
rice  and  the  like  in  every  village,  in  order  to  show  hospitality  to 
6'udra  guests.' — Haradatta. 


no  APASTAMBA.  11,2,5. 

23.  He  shall  sweep  together  (the  crumbs)  on  the 
place  where  he  has  eaten,  and  take  them  away. 
He  shall  sprinkle  water  on  that  place,  turning  the 
palm  downwards,  and  remove  the  stains  (of  food 
from  the  cooking-vessels  with  a  stick),  wash  them 
with  water,  and  take  their  contents  to  a  clean  place 
to  the  north  (of  the  house,  offering  them)  to  Rudra. 
In  this  manner  his  house  will  become  prosperous. 

24.  It  is  declared  in  the  Smmis  that  a  Brah- 
ma;za  alone  should  be  chosen  as  teacher  (or  spiritual 
guide). 

25.  In  times  of  distress  a  Brahma^^a  may  study 
under  a  Kshatriya  or  Vai^ya. 

26.  And  (during  his  pupilship)  he  must  walk 
behind  (such  a  teacher). 

27.  Afterwards  the  Brahma;^a  shall  take  prece- 
dence before  (his  Kshatriya  or  Vaii"ya  teacher). 

PrA5'NA    II,    PaTALA    2,    KliAiVDA   5. 

I.  On  the  day  on  which,  beginning  the  study  of 
the  whole  sacred  science,  the  Upanishads  (and  the 
rest,  he  performs  the  Upakarma  in  the  morning), 
he  shall  not  study  (at  night). 

24.  Manu  11,  241,  242.  From  here  down  to  II,  3,6,2,  Apa- 
stamba  again  treats  of  the  duties  of  students  and  teachers,  a  subject 
which  appears  to  have  in  his  eyes  a  greater  importance  than  any 
other.  The  rules  given  now  apply  chiefly  to  householders.  It 
would  seem  that  they  have  been  inserted  in  this  particular  place, 
because  the  reception  of  a  former  teacher  is  to  be  described  from 
II)  3)  3)  4~ii)  3-i^d  that  of  a '  learned  guest'  from  II,  3,  6,  3. 

5.  I.  This  rule  refers  to  the  Upakarma,  to  be  performed  yearly 
by  householders.  In  our  days,  too,  the  custom  is  observed,  and  the 
whole  Brahminical  community  change  on  this  occasion  their  (renvis 
or  sacrificial  cords  in  the  month  of  5'rava«a.  The  adherents  of 
the  various  ^S'akhas  of  the  Vedas,  however,  perform  the  ceremony 


II,  2,  5-  THE    DUTIES    OF   A    HOUSEHOLDER.  Ill 

2.  And  he  shall  not  leave  his  teacher  at  once  after 
having  studied  (the  Veda  and  having  returned  home). 

3.  If  he  is  in  a  hurry  to  go,  he  shall  perform  the 
daily  recitation  of  the  Veda  in  the  presence  of  his 
teacher,  and  then  go  at  his  pleasure.  In  this  manner 
good  fortune  will  attend  both  of  them. 

4.  If  the  (former)  teacher  visits  him  after  he  has 
returned  home,  he  shall  go  out  to  meet  him,  embrace 
his  (feet),  and  he  shall  not  wash  himself  (after  that 
act),  showing  disgust.  He  then  shall  let  him  pass 
first  into  the  house,  fetch  (the  materials  necessary  for 
a  hospitable  reception),  and  honour  him  according  to 
the  rule. 

5.  If  (his  former  teacher  is)  present,  he  himself 
shall  use  a  seat,  a  bed,  food,  and  garments  inferior 
to,  and  lower  (than  those  offered  to  the  teacher). 

6.  Standing  (with  his  body  bent),  he  shall  place 
his  left  hand  (under  the  water-vessel,  and  bending 
with  his  other  hand  its  mouth  downwards),  he  shall 
offer  to  his  teacher  water  for  sipping. 

on  different  days.  According  to  Haradatta,  the  Upanishads  are 
named,  in  order  to  show  that  they  are  of  the  highest  importance. 
See  also  ^Satapatha-brahmawa  X,  3,  5,  12. 

2.  Others  consider  that  this  Sutra  refers  to  the  annual  Upakarma 
of  the  householder.  In  that  case  the  translation  would  be,  '  And 
after  having  performed  the  Upakarma,'  &c.  Probably  Apastamba 
means  to  give  a  general  rule,  applicable  both  to  householders  and 
to  students  who  have  returned  home. 

4.  '  Though  he  may  suspect  that  the  teacher  had  been  defiled  by 
the  touch  of  a  A'a«</ala  or  the  like,  still  he  shall  not  show  disgust 
nor  wash  himself.' — Haradatta.  Regarding  the  rule  of  receiving 
guests,  see  below,  II,  4,  8,  6  seq. 

6.  According  to  Haradatta,  the  repetition  of  the  word  aiar}am, 
'  the  teacher,'  in  this  Sutra,  indicates  that  the  rule  holds  good  not 
only  when  the  teacher  comes  as  a  guest  to  his  former  pupil,  but  on 
every  occasion  when  he  receives  water  for  sipping. 


112  APASTx\MBA.  II,  2,  5. 

7.  And  (he  shall  offer  water  for  sipping  in  this 
manner)  to  other  guests  also  who  possess  all  (good 
qualities)  together. 

8.  He  shall  imitate  (his  teacher)  in  rising,  sitting, 
walking  about,  and  smiling, 

9.  In  the  presence  (of  his  teacher)  he  shall  not 
void  excrements,  discharge  wind,  speak  aloud,  laugh, 
spit,  clean  his  teeth,  blow  his  nose,  frown,  clap  his 
hands,  nor  snap  his  fingers. 

10.  Nor  shall  he  tenderly  embrace  or  address 
caressing  words  to  his  wife  or  children. 

11.  He  shall  not  contradict  his  teacher, 

12.  Nor  any  of  his  betters. 

13.  (He  shall  not)  blame  or  revile  any  creature. 

14.  (He  shall  not  revile  one  branch  of)  sacred 
learning  by  (invidiously  comparing  it  with)  another. 

15.  If  he  is  not  well  versed  in  a  (branch  of)  sacred 
learning  (which  he  studied  formerly),  he  shall  again 
go  to  the  (same)  teacher  and  master  it,  observing 
the  (same)  rules  as  (during  his  first  studentship). 

16.  The  restrictions  (to  be  kept)  by  the  teacher 

7.  '  He  is  called  samudeta,  "  possessed  of  all  (good  qualities) 
together,"  who  is  endowed  with  (good)  birth,  disposition,  behaviour, 
(great)  learning,  and  a  (venerable)  age.' — Haradatta. 

8.  The  word  syat  is  to  be  understood  from  Sutra  5. 

13.  Haradatta  states  that  '  speaking  evil'  is  forbidden  here  once 
more  in  order  that  it  should  be  particularly  avoided. 

14.  'For  example,  he  shall  not  say,  "The  i?2g-veda  is  sweet  to 
the  ear,  the  other  Vedas  grate  on  the  ear,"  or  "  the  Taittiriya-veda 
is  a  »S"akha  consisting  of  leavings,"  or  "  the  Brahmawa  proclaimed 
by  Y%ilavalkya  is  of  modern  origin."' — Haradatta.  The  second 
sentence  refers  to  the  story  that  Ya^ilavalkya  vomited  the  Black 
Ya^ur-veda,  and  his  fellow-students,  becoming  partridges,  picked  it 
up.  Regarding  the  third  sentence,  see  Varttika  on  Pamni  IV,  3, 
105,  and  Miiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  363. 

16.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  42. 


11,3,6.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  II3 

from  the  beginning  of  the  course  of  teaching  to  its 
end  are,  to  avoid  cutting  the  hair  on  the  body,  par- 
takinof  of  meat  or  of  oblations  to  the  Manes,  and 
connexion  (with  a  woman), 

1 7.  Or  (he  may  have  conjugal  intercourse)  with 
his  wife  at  the  proper  season. 

18.  He  shall  be  attentive  in  instructing  his  pupils 
in  the  sacred  learning,  in  such  a  manner  that  they 
master  it,  in  observing  the  restrictions  (imposed 
upon  householders  during  their  teaching).  He  who 
acts  thus,  gains  heavenly  bliss  for  himself,  his 
descendants  and  ancestors. 

19.  He  who  entirely  avoids  with  mind,  word, 
nose,  eye,  and  ear  the  sensual  objects  (such  as  are) 
enjoyed  by  the  touch,  the  organ,  or  the  stomach, 
gains  immortality. 

Pr.a^-xa  H,   Fatal  a  3,   Kha.vda  6. 

1.  If  he  has  anv  doubts  reofardinsf  the  caste  and 
conduct  of  a  person  who  has  come  to  him  in  order 
to  fulfil  his  duty  (of  learning  the  \'eda),  he  shall 
kindle  a  fire  (with  the  ceremonies  prescribed  for 
kindling  the  sacrificial  fire)  and  ask  him  about  his 
caste  and  conduct. 

2.  If  he  declares  himself  to  be  (of)  good  (family 
and  conduct,  the  teacher  elect)  shall  sav,  'Asfni  who 
sees,  Vayu  who  hears,  Aditya  who  brings  to  light, 

6.  I .  The  person  desirous  to  study  addresses  his  teacher  elect  with 
the  following  ^lantra :  Bhagavan  maitrewa  >^akshusha  pajya  jivena 
manasanugr/ha/za  prasida  mam  adhyapaya,  '  venerable  Sir,  look  on 
me  with  a  friendly  eye,  receive  with  a  favourable  mind,  be  kind  and 
teach  me.'  The  teacher  elect  then  asks:  Kiwgotrossi  saumya, 
kima^ara>^,  '  friend,  of  what  family  art  thou }  what  is  thy  rule  of 
conduct  ?' 

[2]  I 


114  APASTAMBA.  11,3,6. 

vouch  for  his  goodness  ;  may  it  be  well  with  this 
person !  He  is  free  from  sin.'  Then  he  shall 
begin  to  teach  him. 

3.  A  guest  comes  to  the  house  resembling  a 
burning  lire. 

4.  He  is  called  a  ^'rotriya  who,  observing  the  law 
(of  studentship),  has  learned  one  recension  of  the 
Veda  (which  may  be  current  in  his  family). 

5.  He  is  called  a  guest  (who,  being  a  K^rotriya), 
approaches  solely  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  religious 
duties,  and  with  no  other  object,  a  householder  who 
lives  intent  on  the  fulfilment  of  his  duties. 

6.  The  rew^ard  for  honouring  (such  a  guest)  is 
immunity  from  misfortunes,  and  heavenly  bliss. 

7.  He  shall  go  to  meet  such  (a  guest),  honour  him 
according  to  his  age  (by  the  formulas  of  salutation 
prescribed),  and  cause  a  seat  to  be  given  to  him. 

8.  Some  declare  that,  if  possible,  the  seat  should 
have  many  feet. 

9.  The  (householder  himself)  shall  wash  the  feet 
of  that  (guest) ;  according  to  some,  two  vS'udras  shall 
do  it. 

3.  The  object  of  this  Siitra  is  to  show  the  absolute  necessity  of 
feeding  a  guest.  For,  if  offended,  he  might  burn  the  house  with 
the  flames  of  his  anger. 

4.  The  object  of  this  Sutra  is  to  complete  the  definition  of  the 
term  '  guest '  to  be  given  in  the  following  Sutra.  In  my  translation 
I  have  followed  Haradatta's  gloss.  The  literal  sense  of  Apa- 
stamba's  words  is,  '  He  who,  observing  the  law,  has  studied  one 
recension  of  each  (of  the  four)  Vedas,  becomes  a  ^rotriya.'  Hara- 
datta  says  this  definition  would  be  contrary  to  the  current  accepta- 
tion of  the  term.  That  argument  proves,  however,  nothing  for 
Apastamba's  times. 

5.  Manu  III,  102,  103;  Ya^n.  I,  iii. 

6.  Ya^m.  I,  109;  Manu  III,  loi. 

8.   Haradatta  states  that  this  is  also  Apastamba's  opinion. 


11,3,6.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  II5 

10.  One  of  them  shall  be  employed  in  pouring 
water  (over  the  guest,  the  other  in  washing  his  feet). 

1 1 .  Some  declare  that  the  water  for  the  (guest) 
shall  be  brought  in  an  earthen  vessel. 

12.  But  (a  guest)  who  has  not  yet  returned  home 
from  his  teacher  shall  not  be  a  cause  for  fetching 
w^ater. 

13.  In  case  a  (student  comes,  the  host)  shall 
repeat  the  Veda  (together  with  him)  for  a  longer 
time  (than  with  other  guests). 

14.  He  shall  converse  kindly  (with  his  guest), 
and  gladden  him  with  milk  or  other  (drinks),  with 
eatables,  or  at  least  with  water. 

15.  He  shall  offer  to  his  guest  a  room,  a  bed,  a 
mattress,  a  pillow  with  a  cover,  and  ointment,  and 
what  else  (may  be  necessary). 

16.  (If  the  dinner  has  been  finished  before  the 
arrival  of  the  guest),  he  shall  call  his  cook  and  give 
him  rice  or  yava  for  (preparing  a  fresh  meal  for)  the 
guest. 

17.  (If  dinner  is  ready  at  the  arrival  of  the  guest), 
he  himself  shall  portion  out  the  food  and  look  at  it, 
saying  (to  himself),  '  Is  this  (portion)  greater,  or 
this  ? ' 

18.  He  shall  say,  '  Take  out  a  larger  (portion  for 
the  guest).' 


11.  According  to  Haradatta,  Apastamba  is  of  opinion  that  it 
should  be  brought  in  a  pot  made  of  metal. 

12.  I.e.  it  is  unnecessary  to  offer  water  for  washing  the  feet  to 
a  student.  This  translation  follows  the  corrected  reading  given  in 
the  additions  to  Critical  Notes. 

15.  '  Ointment,  (i.  e.)  oil  or  clarified  butter  for  anointing  the 
feet.' — Haradatta.     Manu  III,  107. 

16.  Manu  III,  108. 

I  2 


Il6  APASTAMBA.  11,3,7. 

19.  A  guest  who  is  at  enmity  (with  his  host)  shall 
not  eat  his  food,  nor  (shall  he  eat  the  food  of  a  host) 
who  hates  him  or  accuses  him  of  a  crime,  or  of  one 
who  is  suspected  of  a  crime. 

20.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  he  (who 
eats  the  food  of  such  a  person)  eats  his  guilt. 

PkASNA    II,    PaTALA    3,    KlIAiVDA    7. 

1.  This  reception  of  guests  is  an  everlasting 
(^'rauta)- sacrifice  offered  by  the  householder  to 
Pra^apati. 

2.  The  fire  in  the  stomach  of  the  guest  (repre- 
sents) the  Ahavaniya,  (the  sacred  fire)  in  the  house 
of  the  host  represents  the  Garhapatya,  the  fire  at 
which  the  food  for  the  guest  is  cooked  (represents) 
the  fire  used  for  cooking  the  sacrificial  viands  (the 
Dakshi;^agni). 

3.  He  who  eats  before  his  guest  consumes  the 
food,  the  prosperity,  the  issue,  the  cattle,  the  merit 
which  his  family  acquired  by  sacrifices  and  charitable 
works. 

4.  Food  (offered  to  guests)  which  is  mixed  with 
milk  procures  the  reward  of  an  Agnish/omia-sacrifice, 
food  mixed  with  clarified  butter  procures  the  reward 

19.    ]Manu  IV,  213  ;  Ya^il.  I,  162. 

7.  I.  'Pra^apatya  may  mean  either  "created  by  Pra^apati  "  or 
"  sacred  to  Pra^apati."  ' — Haradatta. 

2.  In  the  first  Sutra  the  reception  of  guests  had  been  compared 
to  an  everlasting  Vedic  sacrifice.  This  analogy  is  traced  further 
in  ('etail  in  this  Sutra.  One  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  a  Vedic 
sacrifice  is  the  vitana,  or  the  use  of  three  sacred  fires.  Hence 
Apastamba  shows  that  three  fires  also  are  used  in  offering  hospi- 
tality to  guests. 

4.  Regarding  the  Agnish/oma  and  the  other  sacrifices  men- 
tioned, see  Aitareya-brahma??a  III,  8  ;  IV,  i;  IV,  4. 


II,  3,  7-  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  I  I  J 

of  an  Ukthya,  food  mixed  with  honey  the  reward  of 
an  Atiratra,  food  accompanied  by  meat  the  reward 
of  a  Dvadai^aha,  (food  and)  water  numerous  offspring 
and  long  Hfe.. 

5.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda, '  Both  welcome  and 
indifferent  guests  procure  heaven  (for  their  host).' 

6.  When  he  gives  food  in  the  morning,  at  noon, 
and  in  the  evening,  (these  gifts)  are  the  Savanas  (of 
that  sacrifice  offered  to  Pra^^apati). 

7.  When  he  rises  after  his  guest  has  risen  (to 
depart),  that  act  represents  the  Udavasaniya  ish/i 
(of  a  Vedic  sacrifice), 

8.  When  he  addresses  (the  guest)  kindly,  that 
kind  address  (represents)  the  Dakshi;/a. 

9.  When  he  follows  (his  departing  guest,  his  steps 
represent)  the  steps  of  \lsh;^u. 

10.  When  he  returns  (after  having  accompanied 
his  guest),  that  (act  represents)  the  Avabhr/tha, 
(the  final  bath  performed  after  the  completion  of  a 
sacrifice.) 

11.  Thus  (a  Brahmawa  shall  treat)  a  Brahma;^a, 
(and  a  Kshatriya  and  a  Vai^ya  their  caste-fellows.) 


6.  The  morning,  midday,  and  evening  offerings  offered  at  the 
great  Vedic  sacrifices  are  called  Savanas.  The  object  of  this 
Sutra  is  to  prescribe  the  hospitable  reception  of  guests  at  all  times 
of  the  day,  and  to  further  describe  the  similarity  of  a  guest-offering 
to  a  Vedic  sacrifice. 

7.  Regarding  the  Udavasaniya  ishrt,  see  Aitareya-brahmawa 
VIII,  5.    It  is  the  '  concluding  ish/i.' 

8.  Dakshiwa  is  the  reward  given  to  priests  who  officiate  at  a 
sacrifice. 

9.  '  The  steps  of  Vishwu '  are  three  steps  which  the  sacrificer 
has  to  make  between  the  Vedi  and  the  Ahavaniya-fire.  See  Pet. 
Diet.  s.  V. 


Il8  ...  APASTAMBA.  11,3,7. 

12.  If  a  guest  comes  to  a  king,  he  shall  make  (his 
Purohita)  honour  him  more  than  himself. 

13.  If  a  guest  comes  to  an  Agnihotrin,  he  himself 
shall  go  to  meet  him  and  say  to  him  :  '  O  faithful 
fulfiller  of  thy  vows,  where  didst  thou  stay  (last 
night)  ?  '  (Then  he  offers  water,  saying) :  '  O  faithful 
fulfiller  of  thy  vows,  here  is  water.'  (Next  he  offers 
milk  or  the  like,  saying) :  '  O  faithful  fulfiller  of  thy 
vows,  refresh  thyself.' 

14.  (If  the  guest 'Stays  at  the  time  of  the  Agni- 
hotra,  he  shall  make  him  sit  down  to  the  north  of 
the  fire  and)  murmur  in  a  low  voice,  before  offering 
the  oblations  :  '  O  faithful  fulfiller  of  thy  vows,  may 
it  be  as  thy  heart  desires;'  'O  faithful  fulfiller  of 
thy  vows,  may  it  be  as  thy  will  is;'  'O  faithful 
fulfiller  of  thy  vows,  may  it  be  as  thy  wish  is;' 
'  O  faithful  fulfiller  of  thy  vows,  may  it  be  as  thy 
desire  is.' 

15.  If  a  guest  comes,  after  the  fires  have  been 
placed  (on  the  altar),  but  before  the  oblations  have 
been  offered,  (the  host)  himself  shall  approach  him 
and  say  to  him  :  '  O  faithful  fulfiller  of  thy  vows, 
give  me  permission ;  I  wish  to  sacrifice.'  Then  he 
shall  sacrifice,  after  having  received  permission.  A 
Brahma;/a  declares  that  he  commits  a  sin  if  he  sacri- 
fices without  permission. 


12.  'A  gviest/  i.e.  such  a  one  as  described  above,  II,  3,  6,  4 
and  5. 

13.  An  Agnihotrin  is  a  Brahma«a  who  offers  certain  daily  burnt- 
offerings  called  Agnihotra. 

14.  According  to  some,  all  these  sentences  must  be  pronounced; 
according  to  Haradatta,  one  only,  which  may  be  selected  optionally. 

15.  Haradatta  states  that  the  Brahmawa  mentioned  in  the  text 
is  the  Atharva«a-brahma«a.     See  Atharva-veda  XV,  11-12. 


11,4,8.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  II9 

16.  He  who  entertains  giiests  for  one  night 
obtains  earthly  happiness,  a  second  night  gains  the 
middle  air,  a  third  heavenly  bliss,  a  fourth  the  world 
of  unsurpassable  bliss  ;  many  nights  procure  endless 
worlds.     That  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda. 

17.  If  an  unlearned  person  who  pretends  to  be 
(worthy  of  the  appellation)  '  guest '  comes  to  him,  he 
shall  give  him  a  seat,  water,  and  food,  (thinking)  '  I 
give  it  to  a  learned  Brahmawa.'  Thus  (the  merit)  of 
his  (gift)  becomes  (as)  great  (as  if  a  learned  Brah- 
ma;^a  had  received  it). 

Pras-xa  II,  PArALA  4,   Khanda  8. 

1.  On  the  second  and  following  days  of  the 
guest's  stay,  the  host  shall  not  rise  or  descend 
(from  his  couch)  in  order  to  salute  his  (guest),  if 
he  has  been  saluted  before  (on  the  first  day). 

2.  He  shall  eat  after  his  guests. 

3.  He  shall  not  consume  all  the  flavoured  liquids 
in  the  house,  so  as  to  leave  nothing  for  guests, 

4.  He  shall  not  cause  sweetmeats  to  be  prepared 
for  his  own  sake. 

5.  (A  guest)  who  can  repeat  the  (whole)  Veda 
(together  with  the  supplementary  books)  is  worthy 
to  receive  a  cow  and  the  Madhuparka, 

6.  (And  also)  the  teacher,  an  officiating  priest,  a 
Snataka,  and  a  just  king  (though  not  learned  in  the 
Veda). 

8.  2.   Manu  III,  117;  Ya^ii.  I,  105. 

3.  Flavoured  liquids,  i.  e.  milk,  whev,  &c. 

4.  Manu  III,  106. 

5.  Manu  III,  119  and  120;  Ya^ii.  I,  no;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X, 
125.  A  guest  is  also  called  goghna,  'cow-killer,'  because  formerly 
a  cow  used  to  be  killed  on  the  arrival  of  a  distinguished  guest. 
The  rite  is  described  by  A.cvalayana  Gr/liya-sutra  I,  24,  31-33. 


I20  APASTAMBA.  11,4,8. 

7.  A  COW  and  the  Madhuparka  (shall  be  offered) 
to  the  teacher,  to  an  officiating  priest,  to  a  father- 
in-law,  and  to  a  king,  if  they  come  after  a  year  has 
elapsed  (since  their  former  visit). 

8.  The  Madhuparka  shall  consist  of  curds  mixed 
with  honey,  or  of  milk  mixed  with  honey. 

9.  On  failure  (of  these  substances)  water  (mixed 
with  honey  may  be  used). 

10.  The  Veda  has  six  Angas  (auxiliary  works). 

11.  (The  six  auxiliary  works  are)  the  Kalpa 
(teaching  the  ritual)  of  the  Veda,  the  treatises  on 
grammar,  astronomy,  etymology,  phonetics,  and 
metrics. 

12.  (If  any  one  should  contend  that)  the  term 
Veda  (on  account  of  its  etymology,  implying  that 
which  teaches  duty  or  whereby  one  obtains  spiritual 
merit)  applies  to  the  complete  collection  of  (works 
which  contain)  rules  for  rites  which  are  to  be  per- 
formed on  the  authority  of  precepts,  (that,  conse- 
quently, the  Kalpa-sutras  form  part  of  the  Veda,  and 
that  thereby)  the  number  (fixed  above)  for  those 
(Angas)  is  proved  to  be  wrong, 

13.  (Then  we  answer).  All  those  who  are  learned 
in  Mima;;^sa  are  agreed  that  (the  terms  Veda,  Brah- 
ma.na,  and  the  like,  which  are  applied  to)  the  principal 
(works),  do  not  include  the  Angas  (the  Kalpa-sutras 
and  the  rest). 

8.   Ajvalayana  Gnhya-sutra  I,  24,  5  and  6. 

10.  This  Sutra  explains  the  term  vedadhyaya,  '(a  guest)  who 
can  repeat  the  (whole)  Veda,'  which  occurs  above,  Sutra  5. — 
Haradatta.    Miiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  iii. 

12.  This  Sutra  and  the  following  one  are  directed  against  those 
w^ho  consider  the  Kalpa-sutras  to  be  a  part  of  the  Veda,  the  re- 
vealed texts.  See  also  Miiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  p.  95  seq. 


11,4,9-  THE    DUTIES   OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  121 

14.  If  he  remembers  at  any  time  during  dinner, 
that  he  has  refused  a  guest,  he  shall  at  once  leave 
off  eatino^  and  fast  on  that  day, 

PrA5NA    II,    FaTALA    4,    KH^\iS-DA    9. 

1.  And  on  the  following  day  (he  shall  search  for 
him),  feast  him  to  his  heart's  content,  and  accompany 
him  (on  his  departure). 

2.  (If  the  guest)  possesses  a  carriage,  (he  shall 
accompany  him)  as  far  as  that. 

3.  Any  other  (guest  he  must  accompany),  until 
permission  to  return  is  given. 

4.  If  (the  guest)  forgets  (to  give  leave  to  depart), 
the  (host)  may  return  on  reaching  the  boundar}-  of 
his  village. 

5.  To  all  (those  who  come  for  food)  at  (the  end 
of)  the  Vaiivadeva  he  shall  give  a  portion,  even  to 
dogs  and  A'aw^'alas. 

6.  Some  declare  that  he  shall  not  give  an)thing 
to  unworthy  people  (such  as  A'a;/^alas). 

7.  A  person  who  has  been  initiated  shall  not  eat 
the  leavings  of  women  or  of  an  uninitiated  person. 

8.  All  gifts  are  to  be  preceded  by  (pouring  out) 
water. 

9.  (But  gifts  offered  to  priests)  at  sacrifices  (are  to 
be  given)  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  \  eda. 

10.  The  division  of  the  food  must  be  made   in 

9.  I.   Y^gh.  I,  113. 

7.  After  a  long  discussion  on  the  object  of  this  Sutra,  Haradatta 
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  given  '  against  the  improper 
custom  to  dine  out  of  the  same  vessel  with  one's  wife  and  uninitiated 
children,  which  prevails  in  some  countries.' 

8.  '  Consequently  a  gift  of  food  also.'  The  custom  is  to  pour 
water,  usually  with  the  spoon  called  Dan  i  (Palli),  into  the  extended 
palm  of  the  recipient's  right  hand. 


122  APASTAMBA.  II,  5,  lO. 

such  a  manner  that  those  who  receive  daily  portions 
(slaves)  do  not  suffer  by  it. 

11.  At  his  pleasure,  he  may  stint  himself,  his  wife, 
or  his  children,  but  by  no  means  a  slave  who  does 
his  work, 

12.  And  he  must  not  stint  himself  so  much  that 
he  becomes  unable  to  perform  his  duties. 

13.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  two 
verses) : 

*  An  ascetic  may  eat  eight  mouthfuls,  a  hermit 
living  in  the  woods  sixteen,  a  householder  thirty-two, 
and  a  student  as  much  as  he  likes.  An  Agnihotrin, 
a  draught-ox,  and  a  student,  those  three  can  do  their 
work  only  if  they  eat ;  without  eating  (much),  they 
cannot  do  it.' 

Pra^-na  II,   Pa^ala  5,  Khanda  10. 

1.  The  reasons  for  (which)  begging  (is  permissible 
are),  (the  desire  to  collect  the  fee  for)  the  teacher, 
(the  celebration  of)  a  wedding,  (or  of)  a  ^'rauta-sacri- 
fice,  the  desire  to  keep  one's  father  and  mother,  and 
the  (impending)  interruption  of  ceremonies  performed 
by  a  worthy  man. 

2.  (The  person  asked  for  alms)  must  examine  the 
qualities  (of  the  petitioner)  and  give  according  to  his 
power. 

3.  But  if  persons  ask  for  alms  for  the  sake  of 
sensual  gratification,  that  is  improper ;  he  shall  not 
take  heed  of  that. 

4.  The    lawful    occupations   of  a   Brahma;/a  are, 

13.    Manu  VI,  28;  Ya^n.  Ill,  55. 

10.  I.  Manu  IV,  251;  XI,  i  seq.;  Ya^n.  I,  216.  By  the  term 
arhat,  '  a  worthy  person,'  a  Brahmawa  is  here  designated  who  has 
studied  the  Veda  and  performs  an  Agnihotra. 

4.    Manu  I,  88;   X,  75  ;   Ya^fi.  I,  118. 


IF,  5,  10.  THE    DUTIES   OF    A   HOUSEHOLDER.  1 25 

Studying,  teaching,  sacrificing  for  himself,  officiating 
as  priest  for  others,  giving  alms,  receiving  alms,  inhe- 
riting, and  gleaning  corn  in  the  fields  ; 

5.  And  (he  may  live  by  taking)  other  things  which 
belong  to  nobody, 

6.  (The  lawful  occupations)  of  a  Kshatriya  are 
the  same,  with  the  exception  of  teaching,  officiating 
as  priest,  and  receiving  alms.  (But)  governing  and 
fighting  must  be  added. 

7.  (The  lawful  occupations)  of  a  Vaii'ya  are  the 
same  as  those  of  a  Kshatriya,  with  the  exception  of 
governing  and  fighting.  (But  in  his  case)  agriculture, 
the  tendinor  of  cattle,  and  trade  must  be  added. 

8.  He  (shall)  not  choose  (for  the  performance  of 
a  vSrauta-sacrifice)  a  priest  who  is  unlearned  in  the 
Veda,  nor  one  who  haggles  (about  his  fee). 

9.  (A  priest)  shall  not  officiate  for  a  person 
unlearned  in  the  Veda. 

10.  In  war  (Kshatriyas)  shall  act  in  such  a 
manner  as  those  order,  who  are  learned  in  that 
(art   of  war). 

1 1.  The  Aryas  forbid  the  slaughter  of  those  who 
have  laid  down  their  arms,  of  those  who  (beg  for 
mercy)  with  flying  hair  or  joined  hands,  and  of 
fugitives. 

12.  The  spiritual  guide  shall   order  those  who, 


5.  I.  e.  wild  roots  and  fruits. 

6.  Manu  I,  89;  X,  77,  79;  \%n.  I,  118,  119. 

7.  INIanu  I,  90 ;  X,  78,  79  ;  Ya^fi.  loc.  cit. 

11.  Manu  VII,  91  scq. ;  Ya^n.  I,  325. 

12.  Haradatta  explains  the  word  ^astrairadhigatanam,  'who 
whilst  participating,  according  to  the  sacred  law,  (in  the  rights  of 
their  caste,) '  by  '  who  have  been  sanctified  according  to  the  law 
by  the  sacraments,  such  as  the  Garbhadhana,  and  are  entitled  (to 
the  rights  and  occupations  of  their  caste).' 


124  APASTAMBA.  II,  5,  ll. 

(whilst)  participating  according  to  sacred  law  (in  the 
rights  of  their  caste),  have  gone  astray  through  the 
weakness  of  their  senses,  to  perform  penances  pro- 
portionate to  (the  greatness  of)  their  sins,  according 
to  the  precepts  (of  the  SmritV). 

13.  If  (such  persons)  transgress  their  (A/'arya's) 
order,  he  shall  take  them  before  the  king. 

14.  The  king  shall  (send  them)  to  his  domestic 
priest,  who  should  be  learned  in  the  law  and  the 
science  of  governing. 

15.  He  shall  order  (them  to  perform  the  proper 
penances  if  they  are)  Brahma?2as. 

16.  He  shall  reduce  them  (to  reason)  by  forcible 
means,  excepting  corporal  punishment  and  servitude. 

Pra^-na  H,  Patala  5,  Khanda  11. 

1.  In  the  cases  of  (men  of)  other  castes,  the  king, 
after  having  examined  their  actions,  may  punish 
them  even  by  death. 

2.  And  the  king  shall  not  punish  on  suspicion. 

3.  But  having  carefully  investigated  (the  case)  by 
the  help  of  ordeals  and  of  questions  (addressed  to 
witnesses),  the  king  may  proceed  to  punish. 

4.  A  king  who  acts  thus,  gains  both  (this  and  the 
next)  world. 

5.  The  road  belongs  to  the  king  except  if  he 
meets  a   Brahma;/a. 

16.  Probably  this  Sutra  is  meant  to  give  a  general  rule,  and  to 
exempt  Brahmawas  in  every  case  from  corporal  punishment  and 
servitude.    Manu  VIII,  379-380. 

11.  3.    See  also  below,  II,  11,  29,  6. 

5.  Manu  II,  139;  Ya^il.  I,  117.  According  to  Haradatta  this 
Sutra  is  given,  though  the  precedence  among  the  various  castes 
has  been  already  setded,  in  order  to  show  that  common  Kshatriyas 
must  make  way  for  an  anointed  king. 


11,5,  n.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER,  I25 

6.  But  if  he  meets  a  Brahma;za,  the  road  belongs 
to  the  latter. 

7.  All  must  make  way  for  a  (laden)  vehicle,  for  a 
person  who  carries  a  burden,  for  a  sick  man,  for  a 
woman  and  others  (such  as  old  men  and  infants). 

8.  And  (way  must  be  made),  by  the  other  castes, 
for  those  men  who  are  superior  by  caste. 

9.  For  their  own  welfare  all  men  must  make  way 
for  fools,  outcasts,  drunkards,  and  madmen. 

10.  In  successive  births  men  of  the  lower  castes 
are  born  in  the  next  higher  one,  if  they  have  fulfilled 
their  duties. 

11.  In  successive  births  men  of  the  higher  castes 
are  born  in  the  next  lower  one,  if  they  neglect  their 
duties. 

12.  If  he  has  a  wife  who  (is  willing  and  able)  to 
perform  (her  share  of)  the  religious  duties  and  who 
bears  sons,  he  shall  not  take  a  second. 

13.  If  a  wife  is  deficient  in  one  of  these  two 
(qualities),  he  shall  take  another,  (but)  before  he 
kindles  the  fires  (of  the  Agnihotra). 

14.  For  a  wife  who  assists  at  the  kindling  of  the 
fires,  becomes  connected  with  those  religious  rites  of 
which  that  (fire-kindling)  forms  a  part. 

6.    Manu  II,  138  ;  Ya^ii.  I,  117. 
10.    !Manu  X,  64,  65  ;  Ya^n.  I,  96. 

12.  jManu  IX,  95;  Ya^n.  I,  76. 

13.  Manu  IX,  80,  81  ;  Ya^a.  I,  73. 

14.  A  wife  who  assists  at  the  kindling  of  the  fires  for  any 
sacrificial  rite,  becomes  connected  with  that  rite  like  any  priest, 
and  in  that  rite  no  other  woman  can  take  her  place.  Hence  in 
the  case  of  an  Agnihotra,  which  lasts  during  the  performer's 
lifetime,  or  at  least  as  long  as  he  is  a  householder,  the  performer 
cannot  take  another  principal  wife  after  he  once  has  begun  his 
sacrifice.  If  the  wife  of  an  Agnihotrin  dies,  he  must  marry  again, 
and  also  kindle  his  fires  afresh.    INIanu  Y,  167,  168;  Yao'ii.  T,  89. 


126  APASTAMBA.  11,5,11. 

15.  He  shall  not  give  his  daughter  to  a  man 
belonging  to  the  same  family  (Gotra), 

16.  Nor  to  one  related  (within  six  degrees)  on 
the  mother's  or  (the  father's)  side. 

1 7.  At  the  wedding  called  Brahma,  he  shall  give 
away  his  daughter  for  performing  (with  her  husband) 
the  rites  that  must  be  performed  together  (by  a  hus- 
band and  his  wife),  after  having  enquired  regarding 
the  bridegroom's  family,  character,  learning,  and 
health,  and  after  having  given  (to  the  bride)  orna- 
ments according  to  his  power. 

18.  At  the  wedding  called  Arsha,  the  bridegroom 
shall  present  to  the  father  of  the  bride  a  bull  and  a  cow. 

19.  At  the  wedding  called  Daiva,  (the  father) 
shall  give  her  to  an  officiating  priest,  who  is  per- 
forming a  KS'rauta-sacrifice. 

15.  The  term  Gotra  corresponds  to  the  Latin  Gens.  It  may 
be  of  two  kinds,  Vaidika  for  Brahma/zas  and  Laukika,  '  worldly/ 
for  men  of  other  castes.  In  the  first  case  it  denotes  '  persons 
descended  from  the  same  Jii'shi ; '  in  the  second,  '  persons  dis- 
tinguished by  the  same  family  name,  or  known  to  be  descended 
from  the  same  ancestor.'  In  our  days  Brahmawas  also  have  Lau- 
kika Gotras,  which  form  subdivisions  of  the  very  large  Vedic 
Gotras.  Regarding  the  Vaidika  Gotras,  see  Miiller's  History  of 
Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  pp.  379-390,  and  particularly  p.  387. 
Manu  III,  5;  Y%n.  I,  53  ;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  75  seq. 

16.  The  term,  yonisambandha,  'related  (within  six  degrees),' 
corresponds  to  the  more  common  Sapiwa^a  of  Manu,  Ya^navalkya, 
and  others;  see  the  definitions  given  below,  II,  7,  15,  2.  In 
Apastamba's  terminology  Sapi«^a  has  probably  a  more  restricted 
sense.  It  seems  very  doubtful  whether  Haradatta's  explanation  of 
k^.,  translated  by  *  or,'  is  correct,  and  whether  his  interpolation  of 
'  the  fathers'  ought  to  be  admitted.  Probably  Sutra  15  refers  to 
the  father's  side,  and  Sutra  16  to  the  mother's  side. 

17.  Manu  III,  27;  Ya^il.  I,  58. 

18.  Manu  III,  29;  Ya^il.  I,  59. 

19.  Manu  III,  28;  Ya^n.  I,  59. 


11,5,12.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  1 27 

20.  If  a  maiden  and  a  lover  unite  themselves 
through  love,  that  is  called  the  Gandharva-rite. 

Prasna  II,   Fatal  A  5,   Khaa^zja  12. 

1.  If  the  suitor  pays  money  (for  his  bride)  accord- 
ing to  his  ability,  and  marries  her  (afterwards),  that 
(marriage  is  called)  the  Asura-rite. 

2.  If  the  (bridegroom  and  his  friends)  take  away 
(the  bride),  after  having  overcome  (by  force)  her  father 
(or  relations),  that  is  called  the  Rakshasa-rite. 

3.  The  first  three  amongst  these  (marriage-rites 
are  considered)  praiseworthy;  each  preceding  one 
better  than  the  one  followinof. 

4.  The  quality  of  the  offspring  is  according  to  the 
quality  of  the  marriage-rite. 

5.  He  shall  not  step  on  a  spot  which  has  been 
touched  by  the  hand  of  a  Brahma;/a,  without  havino- 
sprinkled  it  with  water. 

6.  He  shall  not  pass  between  a  fire  and  a 
Brahma;^a, 

7.  Nor  between  Brahma;/as. 

8.  Or  he  may  pass  between  them  after  having 
received  permission  to  do  so. 

9.  He  shall  not  carry  fire  and  water  at  the  same 
time. 


20.   Manu  III,  32;  Ya^.  I,  61. 

12.  I.  Manu  III,  31;  Ya^.  I,  61.  It  must  be  understood  that, 
at  this  rite,  a  regular  sale  of  the  bride  must  take  place.  If  a  suitor 
merely  gives  presents  to  the  bride,  that  is  not  an  Asura-marriage. 

2.  Manu  III,  33;  Ya^ii.  I,  61.  Haradatta  points  out  that  the 
other  law-books  enumerate  two  additional  marriage-rites,  the  Pr%a- 
patya  or  Kaya  and  the  Paijaia.  But  Vasish/z^a,  like  Apastamba, 
gives  six  rites  only. 

3.  Manu  III,  24,  25;  Ya^.  I,  58-60. 

4.  I.  e.  from  praiseworthy  marriages  virtuous  children  are  born, 
and  from  blamable  marriages  bad  ones.    Manu  III,  42. 


128  APASTAMBA.  H,  5.  12. 

10.  He  shall  not  carry  fires  (burning  in)  separate 
(places)  to  one  (spot). 

11.  If,  whilst  he  walks,  fire  is  being  carried 
towards  him,  he  shall  not  walk  around  it  with  his 
right  hand  turned  towards  it,  except  after  it  has 
been  placed  on  the  ground. 

12.  He  shall  not  join  his  hands  on  his  back. 

13.  If  the  sun  sets  whilst  he  sleeps,  he  shall  sit 
up,  fasting  and  silent,  for  that  night.  On  the  follow- 
ing morning  he  shall  bathe  and  then  raise  his  voice 
(in  prayer). 

14.  If  the  sun  rises  whilst  he  is  asleep,  he  shall 
stand  during  that  day  fasting  and  silent. 

15.  Some  declare  that  he  shall  restrain  his  breath 
until  he  is  tired. 

16.  And  (he  shall  restrain  his  breath  until  he  is 
tired)  if  he  has  had  a  bad  dream, 

1 7.  Or  if  he  desires  to  accomplish  some  object, 

18.  Or  if  he  has  transgressed  some  other  rule. 

19.  (If  he  is)  doubtful  (whether)  the  result  (of  an 
action  will  be  good  or  evil),  he  shall  not  do  it. 

20.  (He  shall  follow)  the  same  principle  (if  he  is 
in  doubt  whether  he  ought)  to  study  or  not. 

21.  He  shall  not  talk  of  a  doubtful  matter  as  if  it 
were  clear. 

22.  In  the  case  of  a  person  who  slept  at  sunset,  of 


10.  Another  commentator  says, 'He  shall  not  throw  (brands 
taken  from)  one  fire  into  another  fire.' — Haradatta. 

11.  The  Sutra  implies  that  under  other  circumstances  he  must 
show  this  respect  to  a  fire. 

13.    Manu  II,  220. 

18.    Manu  XI,  200.  .  . 

21.  See  above,  I,  11,  32,  22. 

22.  These  sinners  are  enumerated  in  nearly  the  same  order, 


11,6,13.         THE    DUTIES    OF    A    HOUSEHOLDER.  1 29 

one  who  slept  at  sunrise,  of  one  who  has  black  nails, 
or  black  teeth,  of  one  who  married  a  younger  sister 
before  the  elder  one  was  married,  of  one  who  mar- 
ried an  elder  sister  whose  younger  sister  had  been 
married  already,  (of  a  younger  brother  who  has 
kindled  the  sacred  Gr/hya-fire  before  his  elder  bro- 
ther,) of  one  whose  younger  brother  has  kindled  the 
sacred  fire  first,  (of  a  younger  brother  who  offers  a 
Soma-sacrifice  before  his  elder  brother,)  of  an  elder 
brother  whose  younger  brother  offered  a  Soma- 
sacrifice  first,  of  an  elder  brother  who  marries  or 
receives  his  portion  of  the  inheritance  after  his 
younger  brother,  and  of  a  younger  brother  who 
takes  a  wife  or  receives  his  portion  of  the  inherit- 
ance before  his  elder  brother, — penances  ordained 
for  crimes  causing  impurity,  a  heavier  one  for  each 
succeeding  case,  must  be  performed. 

23.  Some  declare,  that  after  having  performed 
that  penance,  he  shall  remove  its  cause. 

Pra^na  II,  Patala  6,  Kkanda  13. 

I.  Sons  begotten  by  a  man  who  approaches  in 
the  proper  season  a  woman  of  equal  caste,  who  has 
not  belonged  to  another  man,  and  who  has   been 

Taittirtya-brahmawa  III,  2, 8,  ii  and  12.  See  also  Manu  XI,  44-49. 
Regarding  the  crimes  causing  impurity,  see  above,  I,  7,  21, 12-19. 

23.  'Its  cause,  L  e.  the  black  nails,  &c.  According  to  another 
Smr/ti,  one  shall  not  put  away  a  wife  or  extinguish  a  fire,  for  the 
taking  or  kindling  of  which  the  penance  had  to  be  performed.' — 
Haradatta. 

13.  I.  * ^Sastravihita  (translated  by  "  who  has  been  married  to  him 
legally  ")  means  either  "  married  according  to  the  rites  prescribed 
in  the  5astras,"  or  "  possessed  of  the  qualities  (which  have  been 
described)  by  (the  rule  of)  the  -Sastras,  He  shall  not  give  his 
daughter  to  a  man  of  the  same  Gotra,"  and  in  similar  (passages).' — ■ 
Haradatta.  See  also  Colebrooke,  Digest,  Book  V,  Text  cxcix. 
[2]  K 


130  APASTAMBA.  11,6,13. 

married     legally,    have    a    right    to    (follow)    the 
occupations  (of  their  castes), 
■    2.    And  to  (inherit  the)  estate, 

3.  If  they  do  not  sin  against  either  (of  their 
parents), 

4.  If  a  man  approaches  a  woman  who  had  been 
married  before,  or  was  not  legally  married  to  him,  or 
belongs  to  a  different  caste,  they  both  commit  a  sin. 

5.  Through  their  (sin)  their  son  also  becomes 
sinful. 

6.  A  Brahma;^a  (says),  '  The  son  belongs  to  the 
begetter.' 

7.  Now  they  quote  also  (the  following  Gatha  from 
the  Veda) :  '  (Having  considered  myself)  formerly  a 
father,  I  shall  not  now  allow  (any  longer)  my  wives 
(to  be  approached  by  other  men),  since  they  have 
declared  that  a  son  belongs  to  the  begetter  in  the 
world  of  Yama.  The  giver  of  the  seed  carries  off  the 
son  after  death  inYama's  world;  therefore  they  guard 
their  wives,  fearing  the  seed  of  strangers.    Carefully 

3.  Another  (commentator)  says,  'Neither  of  the  parents  shall 
pass  them  over  at  (the  distribution  of)  the  heritage.  Both  (parents) 
must  leave  their  property  to  them.' — Haradatta.  The  text  of  the 
Sutra  admits  of  either  explanation. 

6.  See  also  Manu  IX,  48  seq.,  where  the  opposite  doctrine  is 
taught. 

7.  According  to  Haradatta  this  Gatha  gives  the  sentiments  of  a 
husband  who  neglected  to  watch  his  wives,  and  who  had  heard 
from  those  learned  in  the  law  that  the  sons  of  his  unfaithful  wives 
would  in  the  next  world  belong  to  their  natural  fathers,  and  that 
he  would  not  derive  any  spiritual  benefit  from  their  oblations.  He 
adds  that  this  verse  does  not  refer  to  or  prevent  the  appointment 
of  a  eunuch's  wife  or  of  a  childless  widow  to  a  relation.  He  also 
quotes  a  passage  from  the  6'rauta-sutra  I,  9,  in  which  the  dvipita, 
'  the  son  of  two  fathers,'  is  mentioned.  But  Haradatta's  view 
cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  statements  made  below,  II,  10,  27, 


11,6,13.  HOUSEHOLX>ER  ;    INHERITANCE.  I3I 

watch  over  (the  procreation  of)  your  children,  lest 
stranger  seed  be  sown  on  your  soil.  In  the  next 
world  the  son  belongs  to  the  begetter,  an  (impru- 
dent) husband  makes  the  (begetting  of)  children 
vain  (for  himself).' 

8.  Transgression  of  the  law  and  violence  are 
found  amongst  the  ancient  (sages). 

9.  They  committed  no  sin  on  account  of  the 
greatness  of  their  lustre. 

10.  A  man  of  later  times  who  seeing  their  (deeds) 
follows  them,  falls. 

11.  The  gift  (or  acceptance  of  a  child)  and  the 
right  to  sell  (or  buy)  a  child  are  not  recognised. 

12.  It  is  declared  in  the  Veda  that  at  the  time  of 
marriage  a  gift,  for  (the  fulfilment  of)  his  wishes, 
should  be  made  (by  the  bridegroom)  to  the  father 
of  the  bride,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  law.  '  Therefore 
he  should  give  a  hundred  (cows)  besides  a  chariot ; 

2-7,  where  the  Niyoga  is  plainly  forbidden.  Baudhayana,  who 
(II,  2,  34)  quotes  the  same  Gatha,  reads  in  the  first  line  the 
vocative  '^naka'  instead  of  the  nominative  '^naka^^,'  and  in 
the  fifth  line  'pare  bi^ni'  instead  of  'parabi^nL'  The  com- 
mentator Govindasvamin  adds  that  the  verses  are  addressed  by 
the  i?2shi  Aupa^ndhani  to  king  (kanaka  of  Videha.  The  trans- 
lation of  the  first  Une  must  therefore  run  thus :  '  O  G^anaka,  now 
I  am  jealous  of  my  wives,  (though  I  was)  not  so  formerly,'  &c. 
Baudhayana's  readings  are  probably  the  older  ones,  and  Govin- 
dasvamin's  explanation  the  right  one.  See  also  Colebrooke,  Digest, 
Book  V,  Text  ccli. 

II.  Haradatta  thinks  that,  as  most  other  Smr/tis  enumerate  the 
adopted  son,  and  '  the  son  bought '  in  their  lists  of  substitutes  for 
lawful  sons  of  the  body,  Apastamba's  rule  can  refer  only  to  the 
gift  or  sale  of  an  eldest  son,  or  to  the  gift  or  sale  of  a  child 
effected  by  a  woman.  Though  it  is  possible  that  he  may  be  right 
in  his  interpretation,  it  remains  a  remarkable  fact  that  Apastamba 
does  not  mention  the  *  twelve  kinds  of  sons,'  which  are  known  to 
other  Smr/tis. 

K  2 


132  APASTAMBA.  11,6,14. 

that  (gift)  he  should  make  bootless  (by  returning  it 
to  the  giver).'  In  reference  to  those  (marriage-rites), 
the  word  '  sale '  (which  occurs  in  some  Smr/tis  is 
only  used  as)  a  metaphorical  expression ;  for  the 
union  (of  the  husband  and  wife)  is  effected  through 
the  law. 

13.  After  having  gladdened  the  eldest  son  by 
some  (choice  portion  of  his)  wealth, 

PrA^^NA    II,    PaTALA    6,    KHAiVDA    14. 

1.  He  should,  during  his  lifetime,  divide  his 
wealth  equally  amongst  his  sons,  excepting  the 
eunuch,  the  mad  man,  and  the  outcast. 

2.  On  failure  of  sons  the  nearest  Sapi;^2^a  (takes 
the  inheritance). 

14.  I.  The  last  Sutra  of  Kha«</a  13  and  the  first  of  Khaw^fa  14  are 
quoted  by  Colebrooke,  Digest,  Book  V,  Text  xlii,  and  Colebrooke, 
Mitakshara,  Chap.  I,  Sect,  iii,  Par.  6.  Colebrooke  translates  ^ivan, 
'  during  his  lifetime,' by  'who  makes  a  partition  during  his  lifetime.' 
I  think  that  this  is  not  quite  correct,  and  that  Apastamba  intends 
to  exhort  householders  to  make  a  division  during  their  lifetime,  as 
later  they  ought  to  become  ascetics  or  hermits.  Haradatta  intro- 
duces into  his  commentary  on  this  Sutra  the  whole  chapter  on  the 
division  of  a  father's  estate  amongst  his  sons,  supplementing 
Apastamba's  short  rule  by  the  texts  of  other  lawyers.  No  doubt, 
Apastamba  means  to  lay  down,  in  these  and  the  following  Sutras, 
only  the  leading  principles  of  the  law  of  inheritance,  and  he  intends 
that  the  remaining  particulars  should  be  supplied  from  the  law  of 
custom  or  other  Smrrtis. 

2.  Haradatta  gives  in  his  commentary  a  full  summary  of  the 
rules  on  the  succession  of  remoter  relations.  One  point  only 
deserves  special  mention.  He  declares  that  it  is  the  opinion  of 
Apastamba,  that  widows  cannot  inherit.  In  this  he  is  probably 
right,  as  Apastamba  does  not  mention  them,  and  the  use  of  the 
masculine  singular  '  sapi«</a-^  '  in  the  text  precludes  the  possibility 
of  including  them  under  that  collective  term.  It  seems  to  me 
certain,  that  Apastamba,  like  Baudhayana,  considered  women, 
especially  widows,  unfit  to  inherit. 


II, 6, T4.  householder;  inheritance.  133 

3.  On  failure  of  them  the  spiritual  teacher  (in- 
herits) ;  on  failure  of  the  spiritual  teacher  a  pupil 
shall  take  (the  deceased's  wealth),  and  use  it  for 
religious  works  for  the  (deceased's)  benefit,  or  (he 
himself  may  enjoy  it) ; 

4.  Or  the  daughter  (may  take  the  inheritance). 

5.  On  failure  of  all  (relations)  let  the  king  take 
the  inheritance. 

6.  Some  declare,  that  the  eldest  son  alone  inherits. 

7.  In  some  countries  gold,  (or)  black  cattle,  (or) 
black  produce  of  the  earth  is  the  share  of  the  eldest. 

8.  The  chariot  and  the  furniture  in  the  house  are 
the  father's  (share). 

4.  '  Some  say  "  on  failure  of  sons,"  others  that  the  rule  refers 
to  the  preceding  Sutra  (i.  e.  that  the  daughter  inherits  on  failure 
of  pupils  only).' — Haradatta.  The  latter  seems  to  be  the  correct 
interpretation. 

5.  *  Because  the  word  "  all "  is  used,  (the  king  shall  take  the 
estate)  only  on  failure  of  Bandhus  and  Sagotras,  i.  e.  gentiles 
within  twelve  degrees.' — Haradatta. 

6.  '  The  other  sons  shall  live  under  his  protection.' — Haradatta. 
Colebrooke,  ^Mitakshara,  Chap.  I,  Sect  iii,  Par.  6. 

7.  '  "Black  produce  of  the  earth,"  i.  e.  black  grain,  or  according 
to  others  black  iron.' — Haradatta.  Compare  for  this  and  the 
following  Sutras  Colebrooke,  iNIitakshara,  Chap.  I,  Sect,  iii.  Par.  6, 
and  Digest,  Book  V,  Text  xlviii. 

8.  The  translation  given  above  agrees  with  what  I  now  recognise 
to  be  Haradatta's  explanation,  and  with  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara, 
Chap.  I,  Sect,  iii,  Par.  6.  Both  the  P.  U.  and  :Mr.  U.  :\ISS.  of  the 
U^^'ala  read  ratha^  pitura///Jo  grihe  yatparibha«</am  upakarawam 
piMadi  tadapi,  '  the  chariot  (is)  the  father's  share ;  the  furniture 
which  (is)  in  the  house,  that  also.'  To  this  reading  Mahadeva's 
U^^vala  on  the  Hirawyakeji  Sutra  points  likewise,  which  gives 
pitur  anta^.  The  N.  U.  IMS.  of  the  U^^'ala,  according  to  which 
I  made  the  translation  given  in  the  Appendix  to  West  and  Biihler's 
Digest,  leaves  out  the  word  Zfns2./i,  and  therefore  makes  it  necessary 
to  combine  this  Sutra  with  the  preceding  one,  and  to  translate, 
•  The  father's  chariot  and  the  furniture  in  the  house  (are)  also  (the 


134  APASTAMBA.  11,6,14. 

9.  According  to  some,  the  share  of  the  wife  con- 
sists of  her  ornaments,  and  the  wealth  (which  she 
may  have  received)  from  her  relations. 

10.  That  (preference  of  the  eldest  son)  is  for- 
bidden by  the  vS'astras. 

11.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  without 
(marking)  a  difference  (in  the  treatment  of  the 
sons) :    Manu  divided  his  wealth  amongst  his  sons. 

12.  Now  the  Veda  declares  also  in  conformity 
with  (the  rule  in  favour  of  the  eldest  son)  alone  : 
They  distinguish  the  eldest  by  (a  larger  share  of) 
the  heritage. 

13.  (But  to  this  plea  in  favour  of  the  eldest  I 

share  of  the  eldest).'  This  latter  translation  agrees  nearly  with 
that  given  by  Colebrooke,  Digest,  Book  V,  Text  xlviii,  where  this 
and  the  preceding  Sutra  have  been  joined ;  but  the  chariot  is  not 
mentioned.  A  further  variation  in  the  interpretation  of  this  Sutra 
occurs  in  Colebrooke's  Digest,  Book  V,  Text  Ixxxix,  and  Mit^- 
kshara,  loc.  cit.,  where  the  words  '  the  furniture  in  the  house  '  are 
joined  with  Sutra  9,  and  the  furniture  is  declared  to  be  the  wife's 
share.  Considering  that  Sfitra  9  is  again  quoted  in  Colebrooke's 
Digest,  Book  V,  Text  cccclxxii,  and  is  not  joined  with  the  latter 
part  of  Sutra  8,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  Gagannatha  has  not 
shown  any  greater  accuracy  than  his  brethren  usually  do. 

9.  The  Mitakshara,  loc.  cit,,  apparently  takes  the  words  '  ac- 
cording to  some '  as  referring  only  to  property  received  from 
relations.  I  follow  Haradatta.  The  former  interpretation  is,  how- 
ever, admissible,  if  the  Sutra  is  split  into  two. 

10.  The  xS'astras  are,  according  to  Haradatta,  the  Vedas. 

11.  Taittiriya  Sa;«hita  III,  i,  9,  4. 

12.  '  Athapi  (now  also)  means  "and  certainly."  They  dis- 
tinguish, they  set  apart  the  eldest  son  by  wealth  :  this  has  been 
declared  in  the  Veda  in  conformity  with  (the  rule  regarding)  one 
(heir,  Sutra  6).  He  denies  (Sutra  13)  that  a  passage  also,  which 
agrees  with  the  statement  that  the  eldest  son  alone  inherits,  is 
found  in  the  Veda.' — Haradatta.    See  Taittiriya  Sawzhita  II,  5,  2,  7. 

13.  Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  interpretation  of  the 
law  are  the  Mima/z^sakas.     The  translation  of  the  second  Vedic 


11,6,14.  householder;  inheritance.  135 

answer) :  Now  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
interpretation  of  the  law  declare  a  statement  of  facts 
not  to  be  a  rule,  as  for  instance  (the  following) : 
*  Therefore  amongst  cattle,  goats  and  sheep  walk 
together ; '  (or  the  following),  '  Therefore  the  face 
of  a  learned  Brahma?^a  (a  Snataka)  is,  as  it  were, 
resplendent ;'  (or),  '  A  Brahma//a  who  has  studied 
the  Vedas  (a  .Srotriya)  and  a  he-goat  evince  the 
stronp'est  sexual  desires.' 

14.  Therefore  all  (sons)  who  are  virtuous  inherit. 

15.  But  him  who  expends  money  unrighteously, 
he  shall  disinherit,  though  he  be  the  eldest  son. 

16.  No  division  takes  place  bet^veen  husband  and 
wife  ;  for,  from  the  time  of  marriage,  they  are  united 
in  religious  ceremonies, 

17.  Likewise  also  as  regards  the  rewards  for 
works  by  which  spiritual  merit  is  acquired,  and  the 
acquisition  of  property'. 

18.  For  they  declare  that  it  is  not  a  theft  if  a 

passage  is  by  no  means  certain,  as  the  roof  ribh,  translated  by  '  to 
be  resplendent,'  usually  means  'to  give  a  sound.'  Haradatta 
thinks  that  Apastamba  means  to  show  that  the  passage  '  Manu 
divided  his  wealth  among  his  sons '  is  likewise  merely  a  statement 
of  facts,  and  cannot  be  considered  a  rule.  This  is  probably 
erroneous,  as  Sutras  10  and  11  distinctly  state,  that  the  practice 
to  allow  the  eldest  alone  to  inherit,  is  forbidden  by  the  above- 
mentioned  passage  of  the  Veda. 

15.  Compare  for  this  Sutra  and  the  following  one  Colebrooke's 
Digest,  Book  V,  Text  cccxv.  The  translation  of  pratipadayati, 
'  expends,'  by  *  gains,'  which  is  also  proposed  by  G^agannatha,  is 
against  Apastamba's  usage,  see  II,  5,  11,  17,  and  below,  II,  8, 
20,  16. 

16.  According  to  Haradatta,  this  Sutra  gives  the  reason  why, 
in  Sutra  i,  no  share  has  been  set  apart  for  the  wife.  Compare 
Colebrooke's  Digest,  Book  V,  Text  Ixxxix,  for  this  Sutra  and  the 
following  two. 

18.   See  below,  II,  11,  29,  3. 


136  Apastamba.  11,6,15. 

wife   expends    money   on    occasions    (of  necessity) 
during  her  husband's  absence. 

PrA5'NA    II,    PaTALA    6,    KHAiVDA    15. 

1.  By  this  (discussion)  the  law  of  custom,  which 
is  observed  in  (particular)  countries  or  families,  has 
been  disposed  of. 

2.  On  account  of  the  blood  relations  of  his 
mother  and  (on  account  of  those)  of  his  father 
within  six  degrees, 

3.  Or,  as  far  as  the  relationship  is  traceable, 

4.  He  shall  bathe  if  they  die, 

5.  Excepting  children  that  have  not  completed 
their  first  year. 

6.  On  account  of  the  death  of  the  latter  the 
parents  alone  bathe, 

7.  And  those  who  bury  them. 

8.  If  a  wife  or  one  of  the  chief  Gurus  (a  father  or 
A/^arya)  die,  besides,  fasting  (is  ordained  from  the 
time  at  which  they  die)  up  to  the  same  time  (on  the 
following  day). 

9.  (In  that  case)  they  shall  also  show  the  (follow- 
ing) signs  of  mourning : 

10.  Dishevelling  their  hair  and  covering  them- 
selves with  dust  (they  go  outside  the  village),  and, 
clothed  with  one  garment,  their  faces  turned  to  the 

15.  I.  Customs  are  to  be  followed  only  if  they  are  not  opposed 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Vedas  and  Smri'tis. 

2.  Manu  V,  60  ;  Ya^fi.  I,  53. 

3.  Manu  V,  60. 

4.  Manu  V,  58  ;  Ya^il.  Ill,  3. 

7.  Manu  V,  69  and  70. 

8.  Manu  V,  80. 

10.  Ya^ii,  III,  5,  7  seq.  The  Mantra  to  be  spoken  in  throwing 
the  water  is, '  I  give  this  water  to  you  N.  N.  of  the  family  of  N.  N.' 


11,6,15.  householder;   inheritance.  137 

south,  stepping  into  the  river  they  throw  up  water 
for  the  dead  once,  and  then,  ascending  (the  bank), 
they  sit  down.  This  (they  repeat)  thrice.  They 
pour  out  water  consecrated  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  dead  will  know  it  (to  be  given  to  them).  Then 
they  return  to  the  village  without  looking  back,  and 
perform  those  rites  for  the  dead  which  (pious)  women 
declare  to  be  necessary. 

11.  Some  declare,  that  these  same  (observances) 
shall  also  be  kept  in  the  case  (of  the  death)  of  other 
(Sapi;^^as). 

12.  At  all  religious  ceremonies,  he  shall  feed 
Brahma/^as  who  are  pure  and  who  have  (studied 
and  remember)  the  Veda. 

13.  He  shall  distribute  his  gifts  at  the  proper 
places,  at  the  proper  times,  at  the  occasion  of  purifi- 
catory rites,  and  to  proper  recipients. 

14.  That  food  must  not  be  eaten  of  which  (no 
portion)  is  offered  in  the  fire,  and  of  which  no  por- 
tion is  first  given  (to  guests). 

15.  No  food  mixed  with  pungent  condiments  or 
salt  can  be  offered  as  a  burnt-offering. 

16.  Nor  (can  food)  mixed  with  bad  food  (be  used 
for  a  burnt-oblation). 

The  water  ought  to  be  mixed  with  sesamum.  According  to  Hara- 
datta  those  who  know  the  correct  interpretation,  declare  that  the 
word  'women'  denotes  in  this  Sutra  'the  Srar/tis.'  But  I  fear  these 
learned  interpreters  wi]l  find  few  adherents  among  those  who  pay 
attention  to  the  last  Sutra  of  this  work. 

12.  Manu  III,  128. 

13.  Manu  III,  98. 

15.  '  That  (substance)  is  called  kshara,  "  of  pungent  or  alkaline 
taste,"  the  eating  of  which  makes  the  saliva  flow.' — Haradatta. 

16.  Avaranna,  'bad  food,'  is  explained  by  'kulittha  and  the 
Hke.'  Kulittha,  a  kind  of  vetch,  is  considered  low  food,  and  eaten 
by  the  lower  castes  only.   The  meaning  of  the  Siitra,  therefore,  is, 


APASTAMBA.  II,  7,  16. 


17.  If  (he  is  obliged  to  offer)  a  burnt-offering  of 
food  unfit  for  that  purpose,  he  shall  take  hot  ashes 
from  the  northern  part  of  his  fire  and  offer  the  food 
in  that.     That  oblation  is  no  oblation  in  the  fire. 

18.  A  female  shall  not  offer  any  burnt-oblation, 

19.  Nor  a  child,  that  has  not  been  initiated. 

20.  Infants  do  not  become  impure  before  they 
receive  the  sacrament  called  Annapraj-ana  (the  first 
feeding). 

21.  Some  (declare,  that  they  cannot  become  im- 
pure) until  they  have  completed  their  first  year, 

22.  Or,  as  long  as  they  cannot  distinguish  the 
points  of  the  horizon. 

23.  Another  (opinion  is,  that  they  cannot  be 
defiled)  until  the  initiation  has  been  performed. 

24.  For  at  that  (time  a  child)  according  to  the 
rules  of  the  Veda  obtains  the  right  (to  perform  the 
various  religious  ceremonies). 

25.  That  ceremony  is  the  limit  (from  which  the 
capacity  to  fulfil  the  law  begins). 

26.  And  the  Smriti  (agrees  with  this  opinion). 

PrA^NA    II,    PArALA    7,    KnAiVDA    16. 

I.  Formerly  men  and  gods  lived  together  in  this 
world.     Then  the  gods  in  reward  of  their  sacrifices 

'  If  anybody  has  been  forced  by  poverty  to  mix  his  rice  or  Dal 
with  kulittha  or  similar  bad  food,  he  cannot  offer  a  burnt- oblation 
at  the  Vaii-vadeva  ceremony  with  that.  He  must  observe  the  rule, 
given  in  the  following  Sutra. 

18.  Manu  V,  155;  XI,  36. 

1 9.  Manu  II,  171. 

26.  Haradatta  quotes  Gautama  II,  1-3,  on  this  point,  and  is 
apparently  of  opinion  that  Apastamba  alludes  to  the  same  passage. 
But  he  is  probably  wrong,  as  all  Smrz'tis  are  agreed  on  the  point 
mentioned  by  Apastamba. 

16. 1.  '  Intending  to  give  the  rules  regarding  the  monthly ^Sraddha, 


II,  7,  i6.  HOUSEHOLDER  ;    INHERITANCE.  1 39 

went  to  heaven,  but  men  were  left  behind.  Those 
men  who  perform  sacrifices  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  gods  did,  dwell  (after  death)  with  the  gods  and 
Brahma  in  heaven.  Now  (seeing  men  left  behind), 
Manu  revealed  this  ceremony,  which  is  designated 
by  the  word  6'raddha  (a  funeral-oblation). 

2.  And  (thus  this  rite  has  been  revealed)  for  the 
salvation  of  mankind. 

3.  At  that  (rite)  the  Manes  (of  one's  father,  grand- 
father, and  great-grandfather)  are  the  deities  (to 
whom  the  sacrifice  is  offered).  But  the  Brahma/^as, 
(who  are  fed,)  represent  the  Ahavaniya-fire. 

4.  That  rite  must  be  performed  in  the  latter  half 
of  every  month. 

5.  The  afternoon  is  preferable  (for  it). 

6.  The  last  days  of  the  latter  half  (of  the  month) 
likewise  are  (preferable  to  the  first  days). 

7.  (A  funeral-oblation)  offered  on  any  day  of  the 
latter  half  of  the  month  gladdens  the  Manes.  But  it 
procures  different  rewards  for  the  sacrificer  according 
to  the  time  observed. 

8.  If  it  be  performed  on  the  first  day  of  the  half- 
month,  the  issue  (of.  the  sacrificer)  will  chiefly  consist 
of  females. 

he  premises  this  explanatory  statement  in  oi'der  to  praise  that 
sacrifice.' — Haradatta. 

2.  The  reading '  niy^jreyasa  ^a'  apparently  has  given  great  trouble 
to  the  commentators.  Their  explanations  are,  however,  gram- 
matically impossible.  The  right  one  is  to  take  ni>^jreyasa  as  a 
Vedic  instrumental,  for  nl^jreyasena,  which  may  designate  the 
'  reason.'    If  the  dative  is  read,  the  sense  remains  the  same. 

3.  'The  comparison  of  theBrahma«as  withtheAhavaniya  indicates 
that  to  feed  Brahma«as  is  the  chief  act  at  a  6'raddha.' —  Haradatta. 

4.  Manu  III,  122,  123  ;  Ya^.  I,  217. 

5.  Manu  III,  255,  278. 

7.   Manu  III,  2773  Ya^.  I,  264,  265. 


140  APASTAMBA.  II,  7,  16. 

9.  (Performed  on  the  second  day  It  procures) 
children  who  are  free  from  thievish  propensities. 

10.  (If  it  be  performed)  on  the  third  day  children 
will  be  born  to  him  who  will  fulfil  the  various  vows 
for  studying  (portions  of  the  Veda). 

11.  (The  sacrificer  who  performs  it)  on  the  fourth 
day  becomes  rich  in  small  domestic  animals. 

12.  (If  he  performs  it)  on  the  fifth  day,  sons  (will 
be  born  to  him).  He  will  have  numerous  and  dis- 
tinguished offspring,  and  he  will  not  die  childless. 

13.  (If  he  performs  it)  on  the  sixth  day,  he  will 
become  a  great  traveller  and  gambler. 

14.  (The  reward  of  a  funeral-oblation  performed) 
on  the  seventh  day  is  success  in  agriculture. 

15.  (Its  reward  when  performed)  on  the  eighth 
day  is  prosperity. 

16.  (Its  reward  when  performed)  on  the  ninth 
day  is  one-hoofed  animals. 

17.  (Its  reward  when  offered)  on  the  tenth  day 
is  success  in  trade. 

18.  (Its  reward  when  offered)  on  the  eleventh  day 
is  black  iron,  tin,  and  lead. 

19.  (If  he  performs  a  funeral-oblation)  on  the 
twelfth  day,  he  will  become  rich  in  cattle. 

20.  (If  he  performs  a  funeral-oblation)  on  the 
thirteenth  day,  he  will  have  many  sons  (and)  many 
friends,  (and)  his  offspring  will  be  beautiful.  But  his 
(sons)  will  die  young. 


12.  The  translation  follows  the  corrected  reading  given  in  the 
Addenda  to  the  Critical  Notes. 

20.  Others  read  the  last  part  of  the  Sutra,  ayuvamarinas-tu 
bhavanti,  'they  will  not  die  young.' — Haradatta.  If  the  two 
halves  of  the  Sutra  are  joined  and  Darjaniyapatyoyuvamari«a>^  is 
read,  the  Sandhi  may  be  dissolved  in  either  manner. 


11,7,17-  householder;  inheritanxe.  141 

2T.  (Its  reward  when  performed)  on  the  four- 
teenth day  is  success  in  battle. 

22.  (Its  reward  when  performed)  on  the  fifteenth 
day  is  prosperity. 

23.  The  substances  (to  be  offered)  at  these  (sacri- 
fices) are  sesamum,  masha,  rice,  yava,  water,  roots, 
and  fruits. 

24.  But  the  satisfaction  of  the  Manes,  if  food 
mixed  with  fat  (is  offered),  is  greater,  and  (lasts)  a 
longer  time, 

25.  Likewise,  if  money,  lawfully  acquired,  is  given 
to  worthy  (persons). 

26.  Beef  satisfies  (the  Manes)  for  a  year, 

27.  Buffalo's  (meat)  for  a  longer  (time)  than  that. 

28.  By  this  (permission  of  the  use  of  buffalo's 
meat)  it  has  been  declared  that  the  meat  of  (other) 
tame  and  wild  animals  is  fit  to  be  offered. 

Pra^na  II,  Patala  7,  Khaa'da  17. 

1.  (If)  rhinoceros'  meat  (is  given  to  Brahma^ms 
seated)  on  (seats  covered  with)  the  skin  of  a  rhino- 
ceros, (the  Manes  are  satisfied)  for  a  very  long  time. 

2.  (The  same  effect  is  obtained)  by  (offering  the) 
flesh  (of  the  fish  called)  vS'atabali, 

3.  And  by  (offering  the)  meat  of  the  (crane  called) 
Vardhrawasa. 

21.  Manu  III,  276,  and  Ya^fi.  I,  263,  declare  the  fourteenth 
day  to  be  unfit  for  a  ^Sraddha,  and  the  latter  ^dds  that  ^raddhas 
for  men  killed  in  battle  may  be  offered  on  that  day.  This  latter 
statement  explains  why  Apastamba  declares  its  reward  to  be  '  success 
in  battle.'  The  nature  of  the  reward  shows  that  on  that  day  Ksha- 
triyas,  not  Brahma«as,  should  offer  their  6'raddhas. 

23.    jNIanu  III,  267;  Ya^.  I,  257. 

26.   Manu  III,  271. 

17.  I.    Manu  III,  272;  Ya^ii.  I,  259. 

2.   ^lanu  V,  16,  where  Rohita  is  explained  by  6'atabali. 


142  APASTAMBA.  11,7,17. 

4.  Pure,  with  composed  mind  and  full  of  ardour, 
he  shall  feed  Brahma/^as  who  know  the  Vedas,  and 
who  are  not  connected  wdth  him  by  marriage,  blood 
relationship,  by  the  relationship  of  sacrificial  priest 
and  sacrificer,  or  by  the  relationship  of  (teacher  and) 
pupil. 

5.  If  strangers  are  deficient  in  the  (requisite) 
good  qualities,  even  a  full  brother  who  possesses 
them,  may  be  fed  (at  a  6'raddha). 

6.  (The  admissibility  of)  pupils  (and  the  rest)  has 
been  declared  hereby. 

7.  Now  they  quote  also  (in  regard  to  this  matter 
the  following  verse) : 

8.  The  food  eaten  (at  a  sacrifice)  by  persons 
related  to  the  giver  is,  indeed,  a  gift  offered  to  the 
goblins.  It  reaches  neither  the  Manes  nor  the 
gods.  Losing  its  power  (to  procure  heaven),  it  errs 
about  in  this  world  as  a  cow  that  has  lost  its  calf 
runs  into  a  strange  stable. 

9.  The  meaning  (of  the  verse)  is,  that  gifts  which 
are  eaten  (and  offered)  mutually  by  relations,  (and 
thus  go)  from  one  house  to  the  other,  perish  in  this 
world. 

10.  If  the  good  qualities  (of  several  persons  who 
might  be  invited)  are  equal,  old  men  and  (amongst 
these)  poor  ones,  who  wish  to  come,  have  the 
preference. 

11.  On  the  day  before  (the  ceremony)  the  (first) 
invitation  (must  be  Issued). 

4.   Manu  III,  128-138,  and  149,  188;  Ya^fi,  I,  225. 

8.  See  Manu  III,  141,  where  this  Trish/ubh  has  been  turned 
into  an  Anush/ubh. 

II.  Manu  III,  187;  Ya^.  I,  225.  According  to  Haradatta 
the  formula  of  invitation  is,  ^va^  jraddham  bhavita,  tatrahavant- 
ySrthe  bhavadbhi/^  prasada^  kartavya  iti,  'to-morrow  a  5raddha 


11,7,17.     householder;  funeral-oblations.         143 

12.  On  the  following  day  the  second  invitation 
takes  place. 

13.  (On  the  same  day  also  takes  place)  the  third 
invitation  (which  consists  in  the  call  to  dinner). 

14.  Some  declare,  that  every  act  at  a  funeral- 
sacrifice  must  be  repeated  three  times. 

15.  As  (the  acts  are  performed)  the  first  time, 
(so  they  must  be  repeated)  the  second  and  the  third 
times. 

16.  WTien  all  (the  three  oblations)  have  been 
offered,  he  shall  take  a  portion  of  the  food  of 
all  (three),  and  shall  eat  a  small  mouthful  of  the 
remainder  in  the  manner  described  (in  the  Grihyai- 
sutra). 

1 7.  But  the  custom  of  the  Northerners  is  to  pour 
into  the  hands  of  the  Brahmawas,  when  they  are 
seated  on  their  seats,  (water  which  has  been  taken 
from  the  water-vessel.) 

18.  (At  the  time  of  the  burnt-offering  which  is 
offered  at  the  beginning  of  the  dinner)  he  addresses 
the  Brahmawas  with  this  Mantra :  '  Let  it  be  taken 
out,  and  let  it  be  offered  in  the  fire.' 

19.  (They  shall  give  their  permission  with  this 
Mantra) :  '  Let  it  be  taken  out  at  thy  pleasure,  let 

will  take  place.     Do  me  the  favour  to  take  at  that  the  place  of 
the  Ahavaniya-fire.' 

12.  The  fonnula  is,  Adya  jraddham,  *  to-day  the  ^raddha  takes 
place/ 

13.  The  call  to  dinner  is,  Siddham  agamyatam,  'the  food  is 
ready;  come.' 

16.  Apastamba  Gr/Tiya-stitra  IV,  21.  'He  shall  eat  it  pro- 
nouncing the  Mantra,  "  Pra«e  nirish/osmr;ta/7z  ^oihomi."  '  Taitt. 
At.  X,  33- 

17.  The  North  of  India  begins  to  the  north  of  the  river  5aravatt. 
The  rule  alluded  to  is  given  by  Ya^.  I,  226,  229 ;  Manu  III,  210. 

18.  Y%n.  I,  235. 


144  APASTAMBA.  11,7,17. 

it  be  offered  in  the  fire  at  thy  pleasure.'  Having 
received  this  permission,  he  shall  take  out  (some  of 
the  prepared  food)  and  offer  it. 

20.  They  blame  it,  if  dogs  and  Apapatras  are 
allowed  to  see  the  performance  of  a  funeral-sacrifice. 

2 1 .  The  following  persons  defile  the  company  if 
they  are  invited  to  a  funeral-sacrifice,  viz.  a  leper, 
a  bald  man,  the  violator  of  another  man's  bed,  the 
son  of  a  Brahma;2a  who  follows  the  profession  of 
a  Kshatriya,  and  the  son  of  (a  Brahma/za  who  by 
marrying  first  a  ^Sudra  wife  had  himself  become)  a 
K^udra,  born  from  a  Brahmana.  woman. 

22.  The  following  persons  sanctify  the  company 
if  they  eat  at  a  funeral-sacrifice,  viz.  one  who  has 
studied  the  three  verses  of  the  Veda  containing  the 
word  '  Madhu,'  each  three  times  ;  one  who  has  studied 

20.  Manu  III,  239. 

21.  Manu  III,  152-166,  and  particularly  153  and  154;  Ya^n. 
I,  222-224.  Haradatta's  explanation  of  the  word  '-Sudra'  by  'a 
Brahmawa  who  has  become  a  jS'udra '  is  probably  right,  because 
the  son  of  a  real  -Sudra  and  of  a  Brahmawa  female  is  a  J^a.nda.\a, 
and  has  been  disposed  of  by  the  preceding  Sutra. 

22.  Compare  Manu  III,  185,  186;  Ya^n.  I,  219-221.  The  three 
verses  to  be  known  by  a  Trimadhu  are,  Madhu  vata  rz'tayate,  &c., 
which  occur  both  in  theTaitt.Sawh,  and  in  the  Taitt.  Ar.  The  expla- 
nation of  Trisuparwa  is  not  certain.  Haradatta  thinks  that  it  may 
mean  either  a  person  who  knows  the  three  verses  iTatushkaparda 
yuvati-^  supcfa,  &c.,  Taittiriya-brahmawa  I,  2,  i,  27,  &c.,  or  one  who 
knows  the  three  Anuvakas  from  the  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  48-50, 
beginning,  Brahma  me  tu  mam,  &c.  The  word  '  Triwd/^iketa '  has 
three  explanations  : — a.  A  person  who  knows  the  NaX'iketa-fire 
according  to  the  Taittirtyaka,  Ka//^avalli,  and  the  ^Satapatha,  i.  e.  has 
studied  the  portions  on  the  Na/^iketa-fire  in  these  three  books. 
d.  A  person  who  has  thrice  kindled  the  Na-^iketa-fire.  c.  A  person 
who  has  studied  the  Anuvaka,  called  Vira^as.  ^aturmedha  may 
also  mean  '  one  who  has  performed  the  four  sacrifices '  enumerated 
above. 


11,8,  i8.       HOUSEHOLDER ;    FUNERAL-OBLATIONS.  1 45 

the  part  of  the  Veda  containing  the  word  '  Suparwa ' 
three  times ;  a  Triwa/'iketa ;  one  who  has  studied 
the  Mantras  required  for  the  four  sacrifices  {called 
A^vamedha,  Purushamedha,  Sarvamedha,  and  Vitri- 
medha) ;  one  who  keeps  five  fires ;  one  who  knows 
the  Saman  called  6^yesh//^a ;  one  who  fulfils  the 
duty  of  daily  study ;  the  son  of  one  who  has  studied 
and  is  able  to  teach  the  whole  Veda  with  its  Anofas, 
and  a  ^Srotriya. 

23.  He  shall  not  perform  (any  part  of)  a  funeral- 
sacrifice  at  night. 

24.  After  having  begun  (a  funeral-sacrifice),  he 
shall  not  eat  until  he  has  finished  it. 

25.  (He  shall  not  perform  a  funeral-sacrifice  at 
night),  except  if  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  takes  place. 

Pra5na  H,  Pat^ala  8,  KnAiVDA  18. 

1.  He  shall  avoid  butter,  butter-milk,  oil-cake, 
honey,  meat, 

2.  And  black  grain  (such  as  kulittha),  food  given 
by  K^udras,  or  by  other  persons,  whose  food  is  not 
considered  fit  to  be  eaten, 

3.  And  food  unfit  for  oblations,  speaking  an  un- 
truth, anger,  and  (acts  or  words)  by  which  he  might 

23.  Manu  III,  280, 

24.  '  The  6'raddha  is  stated  to  begin  with  the  first  invitation  to 
the  Brahmans.' — Haradatta. 

25.  '  The  Northerners  do  not  generally  receive  this  Sutra,  and 
therefore  former  commentators  have  not  explained  it.' — Haradatta. 

1 8.  I.  Sutras  1-4  contain  rules  for  a  vow  to  be  kept  for  the  special 
objects  mentioned  in  Sutras  3  and  4  for  one  year  only.  Haradatta 
(on  Sutras)  says  that  another  commentator  thinks  that  Sutras  1-3 
prescribe  one  vow,  and  Sutra  4  another,  and  that  the  latter  applies 
both  to  householders  and  students.  A  passage  from  Baudhayana 
is  quoted  in  support  of  this  latter  \aew. 

[2]  L 


14^  Apastamba,  II,  8,  i8. 


excite  anger.  He  who  desires  a  (good)  memory, 
fame,  wisdom,  heavenly  bHss,  and  prosperity,  shall 
avoid  these  twelve  (things  and  acts) ; 

4.  Wearing  a  dress  that  reaches  from  the  navel 
to  the  knees,  bathing  morning,  noon,  and  evening, 
living  on  food  that  has  not  been  cooked  at  a  fire, 
never  seeking  the  shade,  standing  (during  the  day), 
and  sitting  (during  the  night),  he  shall  keep  this  vow 
for  one  year.  They  declare,  that  (its  merit)  is  equal  to 
that  of  a  studentship  continued  for  forty-eight  years. 

5.  (Now  follows)  the  daily  funeral-oblation. 

6.  Outside  the  village  pure  (men  shall)  prepare 
(the  food  for  that  rite)  in  a  pure  place. 

7.  Nine  vessels  are  used  for  that, 

8.  In  which  the  food  is  prepared,  and  out  of 
which  it  is  eaten. 

9.  And  those  (vessels)  he  shall  present  to  the 
(Brahma;/as)  who  have  been  fed. 

10.  And  he  shall  feed  (Brahma;«as)  possessed  of 
all  (good  qualities). 

11.  And  he  shall  not  give  the  residue  (of  that 
funeral-dinner)  to  one  who  is  inferior  to  them  in 
good  qualities. 

12.  Thus  (he  shall  act  every  day)  during  a  year. 

13.  The  last  of  these  (funeral-oblations)  he  shall 
perform,  offering  a  red  goat. 

c.    Manu  III,  82  seq. 

6.  The  term  '  pure  (men)'  is  used  in  order  to  indicate  that  they 
must  be  so  particularly,  because,  by  II,  2,  3,  i,  purity  has  already 
been  prescribed  for  cooks. 

7.  For  the  unusual  meaning  of  dravya,  'vessel,'  compare  the 
term  sitadravya«i,  '  implements  of  husbandry,'  Manu  IX,  293,  and 
the  Petersburg  Diet.  s.  v. 

13.  The  red  goat  is  mentioned  as  particularly  fit  for  a  6'raddha, 
Ya^n.  I,  259,  and  Manu  III^  272. 


11,8,19.     householder;  funeral-oblations.         147 

14.  And  let  him  cause  an  altar  to  be  built,  con- 
cealed (by  a  covering  and  outside  the  village). 

15.  Let  him  feed  the  Brahma/^as  on  the  northern 
half  of  that. 

16.  They  declare,  that  (then)  he  sees  both  the 
Brahma?^as  who  eat  and  the  Manes  sitting  on  the 
altar. 

17.  After  that  he  may  offer  (a  funeral-sacrifice 
once  a  month)  or  stop  altogether. 

18.  For  (by  appearing  on  the  last  day  on  the 
altar)  the  Manes  signify  that  they  are  satisfied  by 
the  funeral-offering-. 

19.  Under  the  constellation  Tishya  he  who  de- 
sires prosperity, 

PrA5NA    II,    PaT-ALA    8,    KH.\A'IiA    19. 

1.  Shall  cause  to  be  prepared  powder  of  white 
mustard-seeds,  cause  his  hands,  feet,  ears,  and  mouth 
to  be  rubbed  over  with  that,  and  shall  eat  (the 
remainder).  If  the  wind  does  not  blow  too  violently, 
he  shall  eat  sitting,  silent  and  his  face  turned  towards 
the  south,  on  a  seat  (facing  the)  same  (direction) — 
the  first  alternative  is  the  skin  of  a  he-goat. 

2.  But  they  declare,  that  the  life  of  the  mother 
of  that  person  who  eats  at  this  ceremony,  his  face 
turned  in  that  direction,  will  be  shortened. 

3.  The  vessel  used  at  this  occasion  shall  be  made 
of  brass, 

19.  I.  The  ceremony  which  is  here  described,  may  also  be  per- 
formed daily.  If  the  reading  prasya  is  adopted,  the  translation 
must  run  thus:  'and  he  shall  scatter  (the  remainder  of  the  powder). 
If  the  wind,'  &c. 

2.  '  Therefore  those  whose  mothers  are  alive  should  not  per- 
form this  ceremony.' — Haradatta. 

L  2 


148  APASTAMBA.  11,8,19. 

4.  And  its  centre  shall  be  adorned  with  gold. 

5.  (Such  a  one)  is  the  best. 

6.  And  nobody  else  shall  eat  out  of  that  vessel. 

7.  He  shall  make  a  lump  of  as  much  (food)  as  he 
can  swallow  (at  once). 

8.  (And  he  shall)  not  scatter  anything  (on  the 
ground). 

9.  He  shall  not  let  go  the  vessel  (with  his  left 
hand) ; 

10.  Or  he  may  let  it  go. 

11.  He  shall  swallow  the  whole  mouthful  at  once, 
introducing  it,  together  with  the  thumb,  (into  the 
mouth.) 

1 2.  He  shall  make  no  noise  with  his  mouth  (whilst 
eating). 

13.  And  he  shall  not  shake  his  right  hand  (whilst 
eating). 

14.  After  he  (has  eaten  and)  sipped  water,  he 
shall  raise  his  hands,  until  the  water  has  run  off  (and 
they  have  become  dry). 

4.  If,  as  I  have  done,  the  words  suvar??anabha/^  and  pra^asta^ 
are  taken  as  separate  Sutras,  the  meaning  is,  '  The  vessel  used 
should  be  of  brass;  if  not  of  brass,  it  should  at  least  have  a  golden 
ornament  in  the  centre ;  and  a  vessel  possessing  both  qualities  is 
the  best.'  If  3,  4,  5  are  taken  as  one  Sutra,  as  is  done  in  P.  U. 
and  Mr.  U.,  the  sense  is,  '  It  is  best  to  use  a  brass  vessel,  &c.,  but 
another  may  be  used  in  its  stead.' 

6.  If  the  masculine  bhoktavya-^  is  used  instead  of  bhoktavyam, 
the  participle  must  be  construed  with  /('amasa/^. 

7.  The  verbum  finitum,  which  according  to  the  Sanskrit  text 
ought  to  be  taken  with  the  participle  saranayan,  is  grasita,  Sutra  1 1. 

10.  'Why  is  this  second  alternative  mentioned,  as  {the  first 
Sutra)  suffices?  True.  But  according  to  the  maxim  that  "re- 
strictions are  made  on  account  of  the  continuance  of  an  action 
once  begun,"  the  meaning  of  this  second  Sutra  is  that  he  shall 
continue  to  the  end  to  handle  the  vessel  (in  that  manner  in  which) 
he  has  handled  it  when  eating  for  the  first  time.' — Haradatta. 


II, 8, 20.     householder;  funeral-oblations.         149 

15.  After  that  he  shall  touch  fire. 

16.  And  (during  this  ceremony)  he  shall  not  eat 
in  the  day-time  anything  but  roots  and  fruits. 

17.  And  let  him  avoid  Sthalipaka-offerings,  and 
food  offered  to  the  Manes  or  to  the  Gods. 

18.  He  shall  eat  wearing  his  upper  garment  over 
his  left  shoulder  and  under  his  right  arm. 

19.  At  the  (monthly)  ^'raddha  which  must  neces- 
sarily be  performed,  he  must  use  (food)  mixed  with 
fat. 

20.  The  first  (and  preferable)  alternative  (is  to 
employ)  clarified  butter  and  meat. 

21.  On  failure  (of  these),  oil  of  sesamum,  vegeta- 
bles, and  (similar  materials  may  be  used). 

22.  And  under  the  asterism  Magha  he  shall  feed 
the  Brahma;/as  more  (than  at  other  times)  with  (food 
mixed  with)  clarified  butter,  according  to  the  rule  of 
the  ^'raddha. 

Pra5Xa  II,   Patau  A  8,  Khaa'da  20. 

1.  At  every  monthly  ^'raddha  he  shall  use,  in 
whatever  manner  he  may  be  able,  one  dro;/a  of 
sesamum. 

2.  And  he  shall  feed  Brahma;/as  endowed  with  all 
(good  qualities),  and  they  shall  not  give  the  fragments 
(of  the  food)  to  a  person  who  does  not  possess  the 
same  good  qualities  (as  the  Brahma;^as). 

3.  He  who  desires  prosperity  shall   fast   in   the 

18.  Haradatta  remarks  that  some  allow,  according  to  II,  2,  4, 
22,  the  sacred  thread  to  be  substituted,  and  others  think  that  both 
the  thread  and  the  garment  should  be  worn  over  the  left  shoulder 
and  under  the  right  arm. 

20.  I.  A  drowa  equals  128  seers  or  jeras.  The  latter  is  variously 
reckoned  at  1-3  lbs. 

3.   The  reason  why  the  constellation  Tishya  has  been  chosen 


1 50  APASTAMBA.  II,  8,  20. 

half  of  the  year  when  the  sun  goes  to  the  north, 
under  the  constellation  Tishya,  in  the  first  half  of 
the  month,  for  (a  day  and)  a  night  at  least,  prepare  a 
Sthalipaka-offering,  offer  burnt-oblations  to  Kuvera 
(the  god  of  riches),  feed  a  Brahma^^a  with  that  (food 
prepared  for  the  Sthalipaka)  mixed  with  clarified 
butter,  and  make  him  wish  prosperity  with  (a 
Mantra)  implying  prosperity. 

4.  This  (rite  he  shall  repeat)  daily  until  the  next 
Taisha-month. 

5.  On  the  second  (Tishya-day  and  during  the 
second  month  he  shall  feed)  two  (Brahma/zas). 

6.  On  the  third  (Tishya-day  and  during  the  third 
month  he  shall  feed)  three  (Brahma^^^as). 

7.  In  this  manner  (the  Tishya-rite  is  to  be  per- 
formed) for  a  year,  with  a  (monthly)  increase  (of  the 
number  of  Brahma;/as  fed). 

8.  (Thus)  he  obtains  great  prosperity. 

9.  But  the  fasting  takes  place  on  the  first 
(Tishya-day)   only. 

10.  He  shall  ayoid  to  eat  those  things  which 
have  acquired  strength  (as  butter-milk,  curds,  and 
whey). 

11.  He  shall  avoid  to  tread  on  ashes  or  husks  of 
grain,  to  w^ash  one  foot  with  the  other,  or  to  place 
one  foot  on  the  other, 

12.  And  to  swing  his  feet,  and  to  place  one  leg 
crosswise  over  the  knee  (of  the  other), 

for  this  rite  seems  to  be  that  Tishya  has  another  name,  Pushya, 
i.  e.  '  prosperous.'  This  sacrifice  is  to  begin  on  the  Tishya-day  of 
the  month  called  Taisha  or  Pausha  (December-January),  and  to 
continue  for  one  year.  The  Tishya  or  Pushya-day  is  the  ninth 
day  of  each  solar  month. 
II.    Manu  IV,  78. 


11,9,21.  THE  FOUR  ORDERS.  I51 

13.  And  to  make  his  nails  or  (his  finger-joints) 
crack  without  a  (good)  reason, 

14.  And  all  other  acts  which  they  blame. 

15.  And  let  him  acquire  money  in  all  ways  that 
are  lawful. 

16.  And  let  him  spend  money  on  worthy  (persons 
or  objects). 

1 7.  And  let  him  not  give  anything  to  an  unworthy 
(person),  of  whom  he  does  not  stand  in  fear. 

18.  And  let  him  conciliate  men  (by  gifts  or 
kindness). 

19.  And  he  may  enjoy  the  pleasures  which  are 
not  forbidden  by  the  holy  law. 

20.  (Acting)  thus  he  conquers  both  worlds. 

Prasna  II,  Fatal  A  9,  Kha.vz)a  21. 

1.  There  are  four  orders,  viz.  the  householder- 
ship,  the  studentship,  the  order  of  ascetics,  and  the 
order  of  hermits  in  the  woods. 

2.  If  he  lives  in  all  these  four  according  to  the 
rules  (of  the  law),  without  allowing  himself  to  be 
disturbed  (by  anything),  he  will  obtain  salvation. 

3.  The  duty  to  live  in  the  teacher's  house  after 
the  initiation  is  common  to  all  of  them. 

4.  Not  to  abandon  sacred  learning  (is  a  duty 
common)  to  all. 

13.  'Good  reasons  for  cracking  the  joints  are  fatigue  or  rheu- 
matism.'— Haradatta. 

16.    Manu  XI,  6,  and  passim. 

21.  I.  'Though  four  (orders)  are  enumerated,  he  uses  the  word 
"  four,"  lest,  in  the  absence  of  a  distinct  rule  of  the  venerable 
teacher,  one  order  only,  that  of  the  householder,  should  be  allowed, 
as  has  been  taught  in  other  Smr/tis.' — Haradatta.   !Manu  VI,  87. 

2.  Manu  VI,  88. 

3.  INIanu  II,  247-249,  and  above. 


152  APASTAMBA.  II,  9,  21. 

5.  Having  learnt  the  rites  (that  are  to  be  per- 
formed in  each  order),  he  may  perform  what  he 
wishes. 

6.  Worshipping  until  death  (and  living)  according 
to  the  rule  of  a  (temporary)  student,  a  (professed) 
student  may  leave  his  body  in  the  house  of  his 
teacher. 

7.  Now  (follow  the  rules)  regarding  the  ascetic 
(Sa#/nyasin). 

8.  Only  after  (having  fulfilled)  the  duties  of  that 
(order  of  students)  he  shall  go  forth  (as  an  ascetic), 
remaining  chaste. 

9.  For  him  (the  Sa;;2nyasin)  they  prescribe  (the 
following  rules) : 

TO.  He  shall  live  without  a  fire,  without  a  house, 
without  pleasures,  without  protection.  Remaining 
silent  and  uttering  speech  only  on  the  occasion  of 
the  daily  recitation  of  the  Veda,  begging  so  much 
food  only  in  the  village  as  will  sustain  his  life,  he 
shall  wander  about  neither  caring  for  this  world  nor 
for  heaven. 

11,  It  is  ordained  that  he  shall  wear  clothes 
thrown  away  (by  others  as  useless). 

12,  Some  declare  that  he  shall  go  naked, 

8.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is,  that  the  studentship  is  a 
necessary  preliminary  for  the  Sawmyasin.  If  a  man  considers 
himself  sufficiently  purified  by  his  life  in  that  order,  he  may  be- 
come a  Sawmyasin  immediately  after  its  completion.  Otherwise  he 
may  first  become  a  householder,  or  a  hermit,  and  enter  the  last 
order,  when  his  passions  are  entirely  extinct.  See  also  Manu  VI, 
36;  Y%n,  III,  56-57- 

10.  Manu  VI,  33,  42-45 ;  Ya^fi.  Ill,  58  seq, 

12.  'Another  (commentator)  says,  "  Some  declare  that  he  is 
frt  e  from  all  injunctions  and  prohibitions,  i.  e.  he  need  neither 
perform  nor  avoid  any  (particular  actions)." ' — Haradatta. 


11,9,21.  THE    HERMIT.  •  153 

13.  Abandoning  truth  and  falsehood,  pleasure 
and  pain,  the  Vedas,  this  world  and  the  next,  he 
shall  seek  the  universal  soul. 

14.  (Some  say  that)  he  obtains  salvation  if  he 
knows  (the  universal  soul). 

15.  (But)  that  (opinion)  is  opposed  to  the  ^'astras. 

16.  (For)  if  salvation  were  obtained  by  the  know- 
ledge of  the  universal  soul  alone,  then  he  ought 
not  to  feel  any  pain  even  in  this  (world). 

1 7.  Thereby  that  which  follows  has  been  declared. 

18.  Now  (follow  the  rules  regarding)  the  hermit 
living  in  the  woods. 

19.  Only  after  (completing)  that  (studentship)  he 
shall  go  forth,  remaining  chaste. 

20.  For  him  they  give  (the  following  rules) : 

21.  He  shall  keep  one  fire  only,  have  no  house, 
enjoy  no  pleasures,  have  no  protector,  observe 
silence,  uttering  speech  on  the  occasion  of  the  daily 
recitation  of  the  Veda  only. 

13.  'He  shall  seek,  i.e.  worship,  the  soul,  which  has  been 
described  in  the  section  on  transcendental  knowledge  (I,  8).' — 
Haradatta. 

15.  Haradatta  apparently  takes  the  word  iS'astras  to  mean  'Dhar- 
majastras.' 

17.  ' That  which  follows '  are  the  Yogas,  which  must  be  employed 
in  order  to  cause  the  annihilation  of  pain,  after  the  knowledge  of 
the  universal  soul  has  been  obtained. 

21.  •  But  which  is  that  one  fire  ?  Certainly  not  the  Gr/liya-fire, 
because  he  must  remain  chaste.  Therefore  the  meaning  intended 
is,  "  He  shall  offer  a  Saraidh  mom  and  evening  in  the  common 
fire,  just  as  formerly,  (during  his  studentship.)"  Another  com- 
mentator says,  "  Gautama  declares  that  he  shall  kindle  a  fire 
according  to  the  rule  of  the  5'rama«aka  Sutra.  The  ^ramawaka 
Sutra  is  the  Vaikhanasa  Sutra.  Having  kindled  a  fire  in  the 
manner  prescribed  there,  he  shall  sacrifice  in  it  ever}'  morning 
and  ever}-  evening."  ' — Haradatta.     See  also  Manu  VI,  4 ;   Y%Ti, 


154  •  APASTAMBA.  11,9,22. 

PrA^NA    II,    PArALA    9,    KHAiV5A    22. 

1.  A  dress  of  materials  procured  in  the  woods 
(skins  or  bark)  is  ordained  for  him. 

2.  Then  he  shall  wander  about,  sustaining  his 
life  by  roots,  fruits,  leaves,  and  grass. 

3.  In  the  end  (he  shall  live  on)  what  he  may 
obtain  by  chance. 

4.  Next  he  shall  live  on  water,  (then)  on  air,  then 
on  ether. 

5.  Each  following  one  of  these  modes  of  subsist- 
ence is  distinguished  by  a  (greater)  reward. 

6.  Now  some  (teachers)  enjoin  for  the  hermit  the 
successive  performance  (of  the  acts  prescribed  for 
the  four  orders). 

7.  After  having  finished  the  study  of  the  Veda, 
having  taken  a  wife  and  kindled  the  sacred  fires, 
he  shall  begin  the  rites,  which  end  with  the  Soma- 
sacrifices,  (performing)  as  many  as  are  prescribed  in 
the  revealed  texts. 

8.  (Afterwards)  he  shall  build  a  dwelling,  and 
dwell  outside  the  village  with  his  wife,  his  children, 
and  his  fires, 

9.  Or  (he  may  live)  alone. 

Ill,  45.  The  Vaikhanasa  Sutra  is  in  existence,  and  procurable  in 
Gujarat. 

22.  I.    Manu  VI,  6. 

2.    ]Manu  VI,  5,  21;  Ya^fi.  Ill,  46. 

4.  '  Then  he  shall  live  on  ether,  i.  e.  eat  nothing  at  all.' — 
Haradatta.    Manu  VI,  31;  Ya^il.  Ill,  55. 

6.  '  The  word  atha,  "  now,"  introduces  a  different  opinion. 
Above,  it  had  been  declared  that  the  life  in  the  woods  (may  be 
begun)  after  the  studentship  only.  But  some  teachers  enjoin  just 
for  that  hermit  a  successive  performance  of  the  acts  (prescribed 
for  all  four  orders).' 

8.    Manu  VI,  3  seq. ;  Ya^n.  Ill,  45. 


11,9,22.  THE    HERMIT.  1 55 

10.  He  shall  support  himself  by  gleaning  corn, 

11.  And  after  that  he  shall  not  any  longer  take 
presents. 

12.  And  he  shall  sacrifice  (only)  after  having 
bathed  (in  the  following  manner) : 

13.  He  shall  enter  the  water  slowly,  and  bathe 
without  beating  it  (with  his  hand),  his  face  turned 
towards  the  sun. 

14.  This  rule  of  bathing  is  valid  for  all  (castes 
and  orders). 

15.  Some  enjoin  (that  he  shall  prepare)  two  sets 
of  utensils  for  cooking  and  eating,  (and)  of  choppers, 
hatchets,  sickles,  and  mallets. 

16.  He  shall  take  one  of  each  pair  (of  instru- 
ments), give  the  others  (to  his  wife),  and  (then)  go 
into  the  forest. 

1 7.  After  that  time  (he  shall  perform)  the  burnt- 
oblations,  (sustain)  his  life,  (feed)  his  guests,  and 
(prepare)  his  clothes  with  materials  produced  in  the 
forest. 

18.  Rice  must  be  used  for  those  sacrifices  for 
which  cakes  mixed  with  meat  (are  employed  by  the 
householder). 

19.  And  all  (the  Mantras),  as  well  as  the  daily 
portion  of  the  \^eda,  (must  be  recited)  inaudibly. 

20.  He  shall  not  make  the  inhabitants  of  the 
forest  hear  (his  recitation). 

lo.  Haradatta  thinks  that  this  rule  refers  both  to  the  hermit 
who  lives  with  his  family  and  to  him  who  lives  alone.  Others 
refer  it  to  the  latter  only. 

15.  According  to  Haradatta,  the  word  ka^  appears  to  designate 
'a  mallet;'  in  the  passage  from  the  Ramayawa  quoted  in  the  Peters- 
burg Diet,  the  commentator  explains  it  by  pe/aka,  '  basket.' 

17.   Y%n.  Ill,  46. 

20.   This  Siatra  explains  the  word  upa^isu,  '  inaudibly.' 


156  APASTAMBA.  11,9,23. 

21.  (He  shall  have)  a  house  for  his  fire  (only). 

22.  He  himself  (shall  live)  in  the  open  air. 

23.  His  court  and  seat  must  not  be  covered  (with 
mats). 

24.  If  he  obtains  fresh  grain,  he  shall  throw  away 
the  old  (store). 

PrA^NA    H,    PArALA    9,    KllANDA    23. 

1.  If  he  desires  (to  perform)  very  great  austerities, 
he  (shall  not  make  a  hoard  of  grain,  but)  collect  food 
every  day  only,  morning  and  evening,  in  his  vessel. 

2.  Afterwards  he  shall  wander  about,  sustaining 
his  life  with  roots,  fruits,  leaves,  and  grass  (which  he 
collects).  Finally  (he  shall  content  himself  with) 
what  comes  into  his  hand  accidentally.  Then  he 
shall  live  on  water,  then  on  air,  (and  finally)  upon 
ether.  Each  succeeding  mode  of  subsistence  pro- 
cures greater  rewards. 

3.  Now  they  quote  (the  following)  two  verses 
from  a   Pura;2a  : 

4.  Those  eighty  thousand  sages  who  desired 
offspring  passed  to  the  south  by  Aryaman's  road 
and  obtained  burial-grounds. 

5.  Those  eighty  thousand  sages  who  desired  no 

24.    Manu  VI,  15;  Ya^u.  Ill,  47. 

23.  I.    The  following  rules  apply  to  a  solitary  hermit. 

2.  These  Sutras  are  repeated  in  order  to  show  that,  according 
to  the  opinion  of  those  who  allow  hermits  to  live  with  their  families, 
the  end  should  be  the  same. 

3.  '  The  "  orders  "  have  been  described.  Now,  giving  conflict- 
ing opinions,  he  discusses  which  of  them  is  the  most  important.' — 
Haradatta. 

4.  This  verse  and  the  next  are  intended  to  disparage  the  order 
of  householders.  Haradatta  explains  '  burial-grounds  '  by  '  fresh 
births;'  but  see  below,  Sutra  10.    See  also  Ya^fi.  Ill,  186-187. 


II,  g,  23.    COMPARISON  OF  THE  FOUR  ORDERS.      I  5  7 

offspring  passed   by  Aryaman's  road  to  the  north 
and  obtained  immortality. 

6.  Thus  are  praised  those  who  keep  the  vow  of 
chastity.  Now  they  accomplish  also  their  wishes 
merely  by  conceiving  them, 

7.  For  Instance,  (the  desire  to  procure)  rain,  to 
bestow  children,  second-sight,  to  move  quick  as 
thought,  and  other  (desires)  of  this  description. 

8.  Therefore  on  account  of  (passages)  of  the  re- 
vealed texts,  and  on  account  of  the  visible  results, 
some  declare  these  orders  (of  men  keeping  the  vow 
of  chastity  to  be)  the  most  excellent. 

9.  But  (to  this  we  answer) :  It  is  the  firm  opinion 
of  those  who  are  well  versed  in  the  threefold  sacred 
learning,  that  the  Vedas  are  the  highest  authority. 
They  consider  that  the  (rites)  which  are  ordered 
there  to  be  performed  with  rice,  yava,  animals,  clari- 
fied butter,  milk,  potsherds,  (in  conjunction)  with  a 
wife,  (and  accompanied)  by  loud  or  muttered  (Man- 
tras), must  be  performed,  and  that  (hence)  a  rule  of 
conduct  which  is  opposed  to  these  (rites)  is  of  no 
authority. 

10.  But  by  the  term  burial-ground  (in  the  text 
above  given)  it  is  intended  to  ordain  the  last  rites 
for  those  who  have  performed  many  sacrifices,  (and 
not  to  mean  that  dead  householders  become  demons 
and  haunt  burial-grounds.) 

11.  The  revealed  texts  declare  that  after  (the 
burial  follows)  a  reward  without  end,  which  is  desig- 
nated by  the  term  '  heavenly  bliss.' 

10.  The  Sutra  is  intended  to  remove  the  blame  thrown  •n  the 
order  of  householders  by  the  verse  quoted.  Haradatta  seems  f 
have  forgotten  his  former  explanation  of  3'majanani. 


158  Apastamba.  11,9,24. 

Pra5NA  II,  PArALA  9,  Khanda  24. 

1.  Now  the  Veda  declares  also  one's  offspring  to 
be  immortality  (in  this  verse) :  *  In  thy  offspring  thou 
art  born  again,  that,  mortal,  is  thy  immortality.' 

2.  Now  it  can  also  be  perceived  by  the  senses 
that  the  (father)  has  been  reproduced  separately  (in 
the  son) ;  for  the  likeness  (of  a  father  and  of  a  son) 
is  even  visible,  only  (their)  bodies  are  different. 

3.  '  These  (sons)  who  live,  fulfilling  the  rites 
taught  (in  the  Veda),  increase  the  fame  and  heavenly 
bliss  of  their  departed  ancestors.' 

4.  'In  this  manner  each  succeeding  (generation 
increases  the  fame  and  heavenly  bliss)  of  the  pre- 
ceding ones.' 

5.  *  They  (the  ancestors)  live  in  heaven  until  the 
(next)  general  destruction  of  created  things.' 

6.  '  (After  the  destruction  of  the  world,  they  stay) 
again  in  heaven,  being  the  seed  (of  the  new  creation).' 
That  has  been  declared  in  the  Bhavishyatpura;^a. 

7.  Now  Pra^apati  also  says, 

8.  '  Those  dwell  with  us  who  fulfil  the  following 
(duties) :  the  study  of  the  three  Vedas,  the  student- 
ship, the  procreation  of  children,  faith,  religious  aus- 
terities, sacrifices,  and  the  giving  of  gifts.  He  who 
praises  other  (duties),  becomes  dust  and  perishes.' 

9.  Those  among  these  (sons)  who  commit  sin, 
perish  alone,  (but  not  their  ancestors,) 

10.  Just  as  the  leaf  of  a  tree  (which   has  been 

24.  3.  According  to  the  reading  of  P.  U.  and  Mr.  U.  the  four 
Sutras,  3-6,  must  be  joined  into  one,  and  the  whole  is  a  quotation 
from  the  Pura«a.  The  reading  of  P.  U.  seems  now  to  me  preferable. 

8.  'Other  (duties),  i.e.  the  order  of  ascetics  and  the  like.' — 
Haradatta. 


11,10,25.  THE    KING.  159 

attacked  by  worms  falls  without  injuring  its  branch 
or  tree). 

11.  (For)  the  (ancestor)  has  no  connexion  with 
the  acts  committed  (by  his  descendant)  in  this  world, 
nor  with  their  results  in  the  next. 

12.  (The  truth  of)  that  may  be  known  by  the 
following  (reason) ; 

13.  This  creation  (is  the  work)  of  Pra^apati  and 
of  the  sages. 

14.  The  bodies  of  those  (sages)  who  stay  there 
(in  heaven)  on  account  of  their  merits  appear  visibly 
most  excellent  and  brilliant  (as,  for  instance,  the 
constellation  of  the  seven  7?/shis). 

15.  But  even  though  some  (ascetic)  may  gain 
heaven  through  a  portion  of  (the  merit  acquired  by 
his  former)  works  or  through  austerities,  whilst  he 
is  still  in  the  body,  and  though  he  may  accomplish 
(his  objects)  by  his  mere  wish,  still  this  is  no  reason 
to  place  one  order  before  the  other. 

PRAiSNA  II,  Patala  10,  Khajvda  25. 

1.  The  general  and  special  duties  of  all  castes 
have  been  explained.  But  we  will  now  declare  those 
of  a  king  in  particular. 

2.  He  shall  cause  to  be  built  a  town  and  a  palace, 
the  gates  of  both  of  which  (must  look)  towards  the 
south. 

3.  The  palace  (shall  stand)  in  the  heart  of  the  town. 

14.  As  the  i?/shis  have  not  lost  heaven  through  the  sins  of  their 
sons,  the  dogma  according  to  which  ancestors  lose  heaven  through 
the  sins  of  their  sons,  must  be  false. 

15.  Apastamba's  own  opinion  is  apparently  against  pure  as- 
ceticism. 

25.3.  *  In  the  heart  of  the  town,  i.  e.  in  that  town  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  all  the  walls.' — Haradatta.    Compare  Manu  VII,  76. 


l6o  APASTAMBA.  11,10,25. 

4.  In  front  of  that  (there  shall  be)  a  hall.  That 
is  called  the  hall  of  invitation. 

5.  (At  a  little  distance)  from  the  town  to  the 
south,  (he  shall  cause  to  be  built)  an  assembly-house 
with  'doors  on  the  south  and  on  the  north  sides,  so 
that  one  can  see  what  passes  inside  and  outside. 

6.  In  all  (these  three  places)  fires  shall  burn 
constantly. 

7.  And  oblations  must  be  offered  in  these  fires 
daily,  just  as  at  the  daily  sacrifice  of  a  householder. 

8.  In  the  hall  he  shall  put  up  his  guests,  at  least 
those  who  are  learned  in  the  Vedas. 

9.  Rooms,  a  couch,  meat  and  drink  should  be 
given  to  them  according  to  their  good  qualities. 

10.  Let  him  not  live  better  than  his  Gurus  or 
ministers. 

11.  And  in  his  realm  no  (Brahma^^a)  should  suffer 
hunger,  sickness,  cold,  or  heat,  be  it  through  want, 
or  intentionally. 

12.  In  the  midst  of  the  assembly-house,  (the 
superintendent  of  the  house)  shall  raise  a  play-table 
and  sprinkle  it  with  water,  turning  his  hand  down- 
wards, and  place  on  it  dice  in  even  numbers,  made 
of  Vibhitaka  (wood),  as  many  as  are  wanted. 

6.  According  to  Haradatta,  the  fires  are  to  be  common,  not 
consecrated  ones. 

7.  Manu  VII,  78;  Y%ii.  I,  313. 

8.  Manu  VII,  82  seq. 

10.  'The  Gurus  are  the  father  and  other  (venerable  rela- 
tions).'— Haradatta. 

11.  Manu  VII,  134.  'Or  intentionally;  with  reference  to 
that  the  following  example  may  be  given.  If  anybody  is  to  be 
made  to  pay  his  debts  or  taxes,  then  he  is  to  be  exposed  to  cold 
or  heat,  or  to  be  made  to  fast  (until  he  pays).  The  king  shall 
punish  (every  one)  who  acts  thus.' — Haradatta. 


II,  10,  26.  THE    KING.  l6l 

13.  Men  of  the  first  three  castes,  who  are  pure 
and  truthful,  may  be  allowed  to  play  there. 

14.  Assaults  of  arms,  dancing,  singing,  music,  and 
the  like  (performances)  shall  be  held  only  (in  the 
houses)  of  the  king's  servants. 

15.  That  king  only  takes  care  of  the  welfare  of 
his  subjects  in  whose  dominions,  be  it  in  villages 
or  forests,  there  is  no  danger  from  thieves. 

PRA5NA    II,    PArALA    10,    KHAiVDA    26. 

1.  A  (king)  who,  without  detriment  to  his  servants, 
gives  land  and  money  to  Brahma;/as  according  to 
their  deserts  gains  endless  worlds. 

2.  They  say  (that)  a  king,  who  is  slain  in  at- 
tempting to  recover  the  property  of  Brahma;^as, 
(performs)  a  sacrifice  where  his  body  takes  the  place 
of  the  sacrificial  post,  and  at  which  an  unlimited  fee 
is  given. 

3.  Hereby  have  been  declared  (the  rewards  of) 
other  heroes,  who  fall  fighting  for  a  (worthy)  cause. 

4.  He  shall  appoint  men  of  the  first  three  castes. 


13.  'Having  played  there,  they  shall  give  a  fixed  sum  to  the 
gambling-house  keeper  and  go  away.  The  latter  shall,  every  day 
or  every  month  or  everj'  year,  give  that  gain  to  the  king.  And 
the  king  shall  punish  those  who  play  elsewhere  or  quarrel  in  the 
assembly-house.' — Haradatta. 

14.  'At  festivals  and  the  like  occasions  (these  performances) 
take  place  also  elsewhere,  that  is  the  custom.' — Haradatta. 

15.  Manu  VII,  143,  and  passim;  Ya^ii.  I,  335. 
26.  I.    Manu  VII,  83,  84,  88;  Yagn.  I,  314. 

2.  According  to  Haradatta  the  king's  body  represents  the  post 
(yiipa),  his  soul  the  sacrificial  animal,  the  recovered  property  the 
reward  for  the  priests  or  fee. 

3.  Manu  VII,  89;  Ya^u.  I,  323,  324. 

4.  INIanu  VII,  115-124  ;  Ya^m.  I,  321. 
[2]  M 


1 62  APASTAMBA.  II,  lO,  26. 

who  are  pure  and  truthful,  over  villages  and  towns 
for  the  protection  of  the  people. 

5.  Their  servants  shall  possess  the  same  qualities. 

6.  They   must  protect  a  town   from   thieves   in 
every  direction  to  the  distance  of  one  yo^ana. 

7.  (They  must  protect  the  country  to  the  distance 
of)  one  kroi'a  from  each  village. 

8.  They  must  be  made  to  repay  what  is  stolen 
within  these  (boundaries). 

9.  The  (king)  shall  make  them  collect  the  lawful 
taxes  (5ulka). 

10.  A  learned  Brdhma;^a  is  free  from  taxes, 

11.  And  the  women  of  all  castes, 

12.  And    male    children    before    the    marks    (of 
puberty  appear), 

13.  And  those  who  live  (with  a  teacher)  in  order 
to  study, 

14.  And  ascetics,  who  are  intent  on  fulfilling  the 
sacred  law, 


6.  Ya^n.  II,  271-272.    A  yo^ana  is  a  distance  of  4  kro^a,  kos. 

7.  A  kroja,  kos,  or  gau,  literally  'the  lowing  of  a  cow,'  is 
variously  reckoned  at  i|-4  miles. 

8.  Ya^il.  I,  272.  This  law  is,  with  certain  modifications,  still  in 
force.     See  Bombay  Regulations,  XII,  27  par. 

9.  According  to  Haradatta's  commentary  as  given  in  P.  U,  and 
]\Ir.  U.  and  printed  in  the  Sanskrit  notes,  the  julka  is  the  217*^^ 
part  of  a  merchant's  gains.  On  account  of  the  Sutras  immediately 
following,  it  is,  however,  more  probable  that  the  term  is  here  used 
as  a  synonym  of  '  kara,'  and  includes  all  taxes.  '  Lawful '  taxes 
are,  of  course,  those  sanctioned  by  custom  and  approved  of  by 
the  Smr/tis. 

10.  Manu  VII,  133. 

11.  Haradatta  thinks  that  the  rule  applies  to  women  of  the 
Anuloma,  the  pure  castes,  only. 

14.  'Why  does  he  say  "intent  on  fulfilling  the  holy  law?" 
Those  shall  not  be  free  from  taxes  who  perform  austerities  in  order 


II,  lO,  26.  CIVIL    AND    CRIMINAL    LAW,  163 

15.  And  a  6'udra  who  lives  by  washing  the  feet, 

16.  Also  blind,  dumb,  deaf,  and  diseased  persons 
(as  long  as  their  infirmities  last), 

1 7.  And  those  to  whom  the  acquisition  of  property- 
is  forbidden  (as  Sannydsins). 

18.  A  young  man  who,  decked  with  ornaments, 
enters  unintentionally  (a  place  where)  a  married 
woman  or  a  (marriageable)  damsel  (sits),  must  be 
reprimanded. 

19.  But  if  he  does  it  intentionally  with  a  bad 
purpose,  he  must  be  fined. 

20.  If  he  has  actually  committed  adultery,  the 
organ  shall  be  cut  off  together  with  the  testicles. 

21.  But  (if  he  has  had  intercourse)  with  a  (mar- 
riageable) girl,  his  property  shall  be  confiscated  and 
he  shall  be  banished. 

22.  Afterwards  the  king  must  support  (such 
women  and  damsels), 

2T,.    And  protect  them  from  defilement. 

24.  If  they  agree  to  undergo  the  (prescribed) 
penance,  he  shall  make  them  over  to  their  (lawful) 
guardians. 

to  make  their  magic  charms  efficacious.' — Haradatta.  Probably, 
however,  Apastamba  means  to  exclude  all  heretical  hermits,  of 
whom  India  has  had  plenty  at  all  times. 

18.  The  ornaments  would  indicate  that  he  was  bent  on  mis- 
chief.    Compare  above,  I,  11,  32,  6. 

19.  '  The  punishment  must  be  proportionate  to  his  property  and 
the  greatness  of  his  oflfence.  The  term  "  with  a  bad  purpose  "  is 
added,  because  he  who  has  been  sent  by  his  teacher  (to  such  a 
place)  should  not  be  punished.' — Haradatta.  Manu  VIII,  354; 
Ya^.  II,  284. 

24.  '  I.  e.  a  married  woman  to  her  husband  or  father-in-law,  an 
unmarried  damsel  to  her  father  or  to  her  brother.' — Haradatta. 


M  2 


164  APASTAMBA.  11,10,27. 

PRAi-NA    II,    Pa^ALA    10,    KUANDA    27. 

1.  If  (adulteresses)  have  performed  (the  pre- 
scribed penance),  they  are  to  be  treated  as  before 
(their  fault).  For  the  connexion  (of  husband  and 
wife)  takes  place  through  the  law. 

2.  (A  husband)  shall  not  make  over  his  (wife), 
who  occupies  the  position  of  a  '  gentilis,'  to  others 
(than  to  his  'gentiles'),  in  order  to  cause  children  to 
be  begot  for  himself. 

3.  For  they  declare,  that  a  bride  is  given  to  the 
family  (of  her  husband,  and  not  to  the  husband 
alone). 

4.  That  is  (at  present)  forbidden  on  account  of 
the  weakness  of  (men's)  senses. 

5.  The  hand  (of  a  gentilis  is  considered  in  law  to 
be)  that  of  a  stranger,  as  well  as  (that  of  any  other 
person  except  the  husband). 

6.  If  the  (marriage  vow)  is  transgressed,  both 
(husband  and  wife)  certainly  go  to  hell. 

7.  The  reward  (in  the  next  world)  resulting  from 
observing  the  restrictions  of  the  law  is  preferable 
to  offspring  obtained  in  this  manner  (by  means  of 
Niyoga). 

8.  A  man  of  one  of  the  first  three  castes  (who 
commits  adultery)  with  a  woman  of  the  ^'udra  caste 
shall  be  banished. 

27.  2.  This  Sutra  refers  to  the  begetting  of  a  Kshetra_§-a  son, 
and  gives  the  usual  rule,  that  only  the  Sagotras  in  the  order  of  the 
grade  of  relationship,  a  brother-in-law,  a  Sa,p\nda.,  &c.,  shall  be 
employed  for  this  purpose. 

4.  '  For  now-a-days  the  senses  of  men  are  weak,  and  therefore 
the  peculiar  (law  formerly)  in  force  regarding  gentiles  is  so  no 
longer,  lest  husbands  should  be  set  aside  under  the  pretended 
sanction  of  the  ^astras.' — Haradatta. 


11,10.27.  CIVIL    AND    CRIiUNAL    LAW.  1 65 

9.  A  6'udra  (who  commits  adultery)  with  a 
woman  of  one  of  the  first  three  castes  shall  suffer 
capital  punishment. 

10.  And  he  shall  emaciate  a  woman  who  has 
committed  adultery  with  a  (6'udra,  by  making  her 
undergo  penances  and  fasts,  in  case  she  had  no 
child). 

11.  They  declare,  that  (a  Brahma;/a)  who  has 
once  committed  adultery  with  a  married  woman  of 
equal  class,  shall  perform  one-fourth  of  the  penance 
prescribed  for  an  outcast. 

12.  In  like  manner  for  every  repetition  (of  the 
crime),  one-fourth  of  the  penance  (must  be  added). 

13.  (If  the  offence  be  committed)  for  the  fourth 
time,  the  whole  (penance  of  twelve  years  must  be 
performed). 

14.  The  tongue  of  a  6'udra  who  speaks  evil  of 
a  virtuous  person,  belonging  to  one  of  the  first  three 
castes,  shall  be  cut  out» 

15.  A  vSudra  who  assumes  a  position  equal  (to 
that  of  a  member  of  one  of  the  first  three  castes), 
in  conversation,  on  the  road,  on  a  couch,  in  sitting 
(and  on  similar  occasions),  shall  be  flogged. 

16.  In  case  (a  ^^udra)  commits  homicide  or  theft, 
appropriates  land  (or  commits  similar  heinous  crimes), 
his  property  shall  be  confiscated  and  he  himself 
shall  suffer  capital  punishment. 

9.  Manu  VIII,  374;  Ya^.  II,  286.  According  to  Haradatta, 
this  refers  to  a  Sudia.  servant  who  seduces  a  woman  committed  to 
his  charge.  In  other  cases  the  punishment  prescribed,  II,  10,^26, 
10,  is  to  take  effect.     The  same  opinion  is  expressed  by  Gautama. 

II.  This  refers  to  the  wife  of  a  .Srotriya,  as  Haradatta  states 
according  to  Gautama.     The  penance  is  three  years'  chastity. 

1 5.  In.  conversation,  i.  e.  addressing  Ar)'as  familiarly,  with  tvam, 
'  thou,'  &c. 


l66  APASTAMBA.  II,  ii,  28. 

1 7.  But  if  these  (offences  be  committed)  by  a 
Brahma;za,  he  shall  be  made  blind  (by  tying  a  cloth 
over  his  eyes). 

18.  He  shall  keep  in  secret  confinement  him  who 
violates  the  rules  (of  his  caste  or  order),  or  any 
other  sinner,  until  (he  promises)  amendment. 

19.  If  he  does  not  amend,  he  shall  be  banished. 

20.  A  spiritual  teacher,  an  officiating  priest,  a 
Snataka,  and  a  prince  shall  be  able  to  protect  (a 
criminal  from  punishment  by  their  intercession), 
except  in  case  of  a  capital  offence. 

Pra^na  II,   Patala  11,  Khanda  28. 

1.  If  a  person  who  has  taken  (a  lease  of)  land 
(for  cultivation)  does  not  exert  himself,  and  hence 
(the  land)  bears  no  crop,  he  shall,  if  he  is  rich,  be 
made  to  pay  (to  the  owner  of  the  land  the  value  of 
the  crop)  that  ought  to  have  grown. 

2.  A  servant  in  tillage  who  abandons  his  work 
shall  be  flogged. 

17.  Haradatta  states  expressly  that  the  eyes  of  a  Brahmawa 
must  not  be  put  out  by  any  sharp  instrument.  He  should  be  kept 
blindfold  all  his  life. 

20.  '  The  intercession  is  to  take  effect  in  this  manner :  that 
mutilation  is  commuted  to  a  fine,  a  fine  to  a  flogging,  a  flogging 
to  a  reprimand.' — Haradatta. 

28.  I.  This  Sfttra  shows  that  the  system  of  leasing  land  against 
a  certain  share  of  the  crops,  which  now  prevails  generally  in  Native 
States,  and  is  not  uncommon  in  private  contracts  on  British  terri- 
tory, was  in  force  in  Apastamba's  times. 

2.  See  Colebrooke,  Digest,  Book  III,  Text  Ixviii,  for  this  Siatra 
and  the  following  two.  Another  commentator,  quoted  by  Hara- 
datta, connects  this  Sutra  with  the  preceding,  and  refers  it  to  a 
poor  lessee  of  land,  who  cannot  pay  the  value  of  the  crop  which 
was  lost  through  his  negligence.     A  third  explanation  refers  the 


11.11,2'=?.  CIVIL    A^"D    CRIMINAL    LAW.  1 67 

3.  The  same  (punishment  shall  be  awarded)  to  a 
herdsman  (who  leaves  his  work) ; 

4.  And  the  flock  (entrusted)  to  him  shall  be  taken 
away  (and  be  given  to  some  other  herdsman). 

5.  If  cattle,  leaving  their  stable,  eat  (the  crops  of 
other  persons,  then  the  owner  of  the  crops,  or  the 
king's  servants),  may  make  them  lean  (by  impound- 
ing them) ;  (but)  he  shall  not  exceed  (in  such 
punishment). 

6.  If  (a  herdsman)  who  has  taken  cattle  under 
his  care,  allows  them  to  perish,  or  loses  (them  by 
theft,  through  his  negligence),  he  shall  replace  them 
(or  pay  their  value)  to  the  owners. 

7.  If  (the  king's  forester)  sees  cattle  that  have 
been  sent  .into  the  forest  through  negligence  (with- 
out a  herdsman),  he  shall  lead  them  back  to  the 
village  and  make  them  over  to  the  owners. 

8.  If  the  same  negligence  (occur)  again,  he  shall 
once  impound  them  (and  afterwards  give  them 
back). 

9.  (If  the  same  fault  be  committed  again)  after 
that  (second  time),  he  shall  not  take  care  (of  them). 

10.  He  who  has  taken  unintentionally  the  pro- 
perty of  another  shall  be  reprimanded,  in  case  (the 
property  be)  fuel,  water,  roots,  flowers,  fruits,  per- 
fumes, fodder,  or  vegetables. 

11.  (If  he  takes  the  above-mentioned  kinds  of 
property)  intentionally,  his  garment  shall  be  taken 
away. 

Sutra  to  a  cultivator  who  neglects  to  till  his  land.  Gagannatha's 
authorities,  the  ^mtamam  and  Ratnakara,  agree  with  Haradatta's 
first  explanation. 

5.  Manu  VIII,  240;  Ya^.  II,  159-161. 

6.  Manu  VIII,  232;  Ya^^n.  II,  164. 


t68  apastamba.  11,11,29. 

12.  He  who  takes  intentionally  food  when  he  is 
in  danger  of  his  life  shall  not  be  punished. 

13.  If  the  king  does  not  punish  a  punishable 
offence,  the  guilt  falls  upon  him. 

PrA^NA    II,    PaTALA    11,    KHAiVDA    29. 

1.  He  who  instigates  to,  he  who  assists  in,  and 
he  who  commits  (an  act,  these  three)  share  its 
rewards  in  heaven  and  its  punishments  in  hell. 

2.  He  amongst  these  who  contributes  most  to 
the  accomplishment  (of  the  act  obtains)  a  greater 
share  of  the  result. 

3.  Both  the  wife  and  the  husband  have  power 
over  (their)  common  property. 

4.  By  their  permission,  others  also  may  act  for 
their  good  (in  this  and  the  next  world,  even  by 
spending  money). 

5.  Men  of  learning  and  pure  descent,  who  are 
aged,  clever  in  reasoning,  and  careful  in  fulfilling 
the  duties  (of  their  caste  and  order,  "shall  be  the 
judges)  in  lawsuits. 

6.  In  doubtful  cases  (they  shall  give  their  deci- 
sion) after  having  ascertained  (the  truth)  by  infer- 
ence, ordeals,  and  the  like  (means). 

13.    Manu  VIII,  18,  308  ;  Ya^n.  I,  336. 

29.  3.  '  Though  this  is  so,  still  the  wife  cannot  spend  (money) 
without  the  permission  of  her  husband,  but  the.  husband  can  do 
(so  without  the  consent  of  his  wife).  That  may  be  known  by 
Sutra  11,  6,  14,  11,  "They  do  not  declare  it  to  be  a  theft  if  the 
wife  spends  money  for  a  good  reason  during  the  absence  of  her 
husband."  ' — Haradatta. 

4.  '  Others,  i.  e.  the  sons  and  the  rest.' — Haradatta. 

5.  Yagu.  II,  2. 

6.  'And  the  like,  i.e.  by  cross-examination,  &c.' — Haradatta. 


Tl,  ir,  ?9-  CIVIL   AND    CRIMINAL    LAW.  169 

7.  A  person  who  is  possessed  of  good  qualities 
(may  be  called  as  a  witness,  and)  shall  answer  the 
questions  put  to  him  according  to  the  truth  on  an 
auspicious  day,  in  the  morning,  before  a  kindled  fire, 
standing  near  (a  jar  full  of)  water,  in  the  presence  of 
the  king,  and  with  the  consent  of  all  (of  both  parties 
and  of  the  assessors),  after  having  been  exhorted  (by 
the  judge)  to  be  fair  to  both  sides. 

8.  If  (he  is  found  out  speaking)  an  untruth,  the 
king  shall  punish  him. 

9.  Besides,  in  that  case,  after  death,  hell  (will  be 
his  punishment). 

10.  If  he  speaks  the  truth,  (his  reward  will  be) 
heaven  and  the  approbation  of  all  created  beings, 

11.  The  knowledge  which  ^'udras  and  women 
"possess  is  the  completion  (of  all  study). 

12.  They    declare,    that    (this    knowledge)    is    a 
"  supplement  of  the  Atharva-veda. 

13.  It  is  difficult  to  learn  the  sacred  law  from 
(the  letter  of)  the  Vedas  (only);  but  by  following 
the  indications  it  is  easily  accomplished. 

14.  The  indications  for  these  (doubtful  cases  are), 
'  He  shall  regulate  his  course  of  action  according  to 
the  conduct  which  is  unanimously  recognised  in  all 
countries  by  men  of  the  three  twice-born  castes,  who 

7.  Manu  VIII,  87  seq. ;  Y%n.  II,  68-75. 

8.  Manu  VIII,  119  seq. 

9.  Manu  VIII,  89  seq. 

10.  Manu  VIII,  8i  seq. 

11.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is,  that  men  ought  not  to  study 
solely  or  at  first  such  ^astras  as  women  or  6'udras  also  learn,  but 
that  at  first  they  must  study  the  Veda.  See  JNIanu  II,  168.  The 
knowledge  which  women  and  ^Sudras  possess,  is  dancing,  music, 
and  other  branches  of  the  Artha^astra. 

14.    See  above,  I,  7,  20,  8  and  9. 


170  APASTAMBA.  11,11,29. 

have  been  properly  obedient  (to  their  teachers), 
who  are  aged,  of  subdued  senses,  neither  given  to 
avarice,  nor  hypocrites.  Acting  thus  he  will  gain 
both  worlds.' 

15.  Some  declare,  that  the  remaining  duties 
(which  have  not  been  taught  here)  must  be  learnt 
from  women  and  men  of  all  castes. 


GAUTAMA, 

INSTITUTES    OF   THE   SACRED    LAW, 


GAUTAMA, 

INSTITUTES    OF   THE    SACRED   LAW 


Chapter  I. 

1.  The  Veda  is  the  source  of  the  sacred  law, 

2.  And  the  tradition  and  practice  of  those  who 
know  the  (Veda). 

3.  Transgression  of  the  law  and  violence  are  ob- 
served (in  the  case)  of  (those)  great  (men) ;  but  both 
are  without  force  (as  precedents)  on  account  of  the 
weakness  of  the  men  of  later  ages. 

4.  If  (authorities)  of  equal  force  are  conflicting, 
(either  may  be  followed  at)  pleasure. 

5.  The  initiation  of  a  Brahma;^a  (shall  ordinarily 
take  place)  in  his  eighth  year ; 

6.  (It  may  also  be   performed)  in   the   ninth   or 

I.   1-2.   Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  1-2. 

3.  Apastamba  II,  6,  13,  8-10.  Instances  of  transgressions  of 
the  law  are  the  adultery  of  Kataka  and  Bharadva^a,  Vasish/^a"s 
marriage  with  the  KznddXi  Akshamala,  Rama  Gamadagnya's  murder 
of  his  mother.  Haradatta  explains  the  term  '  a\'ara,'  translated  by 
'  men  of  later  ages/  to  mean  'men  like  ourselves'  (asmadadi).  In 
his  comment  on  the  parallel  passage  of  Apastamba  he  renders 
it  by  idanintana,  '  belonging  to  our  times ; '  and  in  his  notes 
on  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  4,  he  substitutes  arva^ina  kali}'ugavartin, 
'  men  of  modern  times  living  in  the  Kaliyuga.'  The  last  explana- 
tion seems  to  me  the  most  accurate,  if  it  is  distinctly  kept  in  mind 
that  in  the  times  of  Gautama  the  Kaliyuga  was  not  a  definite  period 
of  calculated  duration,  but  the  Iron  Age  of  sin  as  opposed  to  the 
happier  times  when  justice  still  dwelt  on  earth. 

6.   Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  19-20. 


1 74  GAUTAMA.  I,  7. 

fifth  (years)  for  the  fulfilment  of  (some  particular) 
wish. 

7.  The  number  of  years  (is  to  be  calculated)  from 
conception. 

8.  That  (initiation)  is  the  second  birth. 

9.  The  (person)  from  whom  he  receives  that 
(sacrament  is  called)  the  AMrya  (teacher). 

ro.  And  (the  same  title  is  also  bestowed)  in  con- 
sequence of  the  teaching  of  the  Veda. 

11.  (The  initiation)  of  a  Kshatriya  (shall  ordi- 
narily take  place)  in  the  eleventh  (year  after  con- 
ception), and  that  of  a  Vaii"ya  in  the  twelfth. 

12.  Up  to  the  sixteenth  year  the  time  for  the 
Savitri  of  a  Brahma;^a  has  not  passed, 

13.  Nor  (for  the  initiation)  of  a  Kshatriya  up  to 
the  twentieth  (year), 

14.  (And  the  limit  for  that)  of  aVaii'ya  (extends) 
two  years  beyond  (the  latter  term). 

15.  The  girdles  (worn  by  students)  shall  be  strings 
of  Mun^a  grass,  a  bow-string,  or  a  (wool)  thread, 
according  to  the  order  (of  the  castes). 

16.  (Their  upper  garments  shall  be)  the  skins  of 
black-bucks,  spotted  deer,  (or)  he-goats. 

17.  Hempen  or  linen  cloth,  the  (inner)  bark  (of 

7.    Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  18.         8.    Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  16-17. 

9.    Apastamba  1, 1,1, 13.       10.  ManuII,  140;  Ya§'fiavalkya  1,34. 

11.  Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  18. 

12.  Apastamba  I,  I,  I,  21.  Savitri,  literally  the  Rik  sacred  to 
Savitr?',  is  here  used  as  an  equivalent  for  upanayana,  initiation, 
because  one  of  the  chief  objects  of  the  ceremony  is  to  impart  to 
the  neophyte  the  Mantra  sacred  to  Savitr/,  Rig-veda  III,  62,  10. 

13-14.   Apastamba  I,  I,  I,  21. 

15.   Apastamba  I,  I,  2,  33-36.  16.   Apastamba  I,  i,  3,  3-6. 

17.    Haradatta  explains  .^ira,  the  inner  bark  of  a  tree,  by  'made 

of  Kiua  Q;rass  and  the  like.'     Reorardino;  dresses  made  of  Kuj-a 


1,2-j.  INITIATION.  175 

trees),  and  woollen  plaids  (may  be  worn  as  lower 
garments  by  students)  of  all  (castes), 

18.  And  undyed  cotton  cloth. 

19.  Some  (declare  that  it)  even  (may  be  dyed)  red. 

20.  (In  that  case  the  garment)  of  a  Brahma;^a 
(shall  be  dyed  with  a  red  dye)  produced  from  a  tree, 

21.  (And  those  of  students)  of  the  other  two 
(castes  shall  be)  dyed  with  madder  or  turmeric. 

22.  The  staff  (carried  by  a  student)  of  the  Brah- 
ma;^a  (caste  shall  be)  made  of  Bilva  or  Palai-a  wood. 

2T,.  Staves  made  of  A^vattha  or  Pilu  wood  (are 
fit)  for  (students  of)  the  remaining  (two  castes). 

24.  Or  (a  staff  cut  from  a  tree)  that  is  fit  to  be 
used  at  a  sacrifice  (may  be  carried  by  students)  of  all 
(castes). 

25.  (The  staves  must  be)  unblemished,  bent  (at  the 
top)  like  a  sacrificial  post,  and  covered  by  their  bark, 

26.  They  shall  reach  the  crown  of  the  head,  the 
forehead,  (or)  the  tip  of  the  nose  (according  to  the 
caste  of  the  wearer). 

27.  (It  is)  optional  (for  students)  to  shave  (their 
heads),  to  wear  the  hair  tied  in  a  knot,  (or)  to  keep 

grass,  see  the  Petersburg  Diet.  s.v.  Kuraiira.  .A'ira  may  also  mean 
' rags,'  such  as  were  worn  by  Sannyasins  (see  below,  III,  1 9)  and 
Bauddha  ascetics. 

19-21.   Apastamba  I,  i,  2,  41-I,  i,  3,  2. 

22.   Apastamba  I,  i,  2,  38. 

24.  'Because  the  term  "fit  to  be  used  at  a  sacrifice"  is  em- 
ployed, the  Vibhitaka  and  the  like  (unclean  trees)  are  excluded.' — 
Haradatta.  Regarding  the  Vibhitaka,  see  Report  of  Tour  in 
Kajmir,  Journal  Bombay  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc.  XXXIV  A,  p.  8. 

25.  Manu  II,  47.  'Unblemished  means  uninjured  by  worms 
and  the  like.' — Haradatta. 

26.  !Manu  II,  46. 

27.  Apastamba  I,  i,  2,  31-32.  The  above  translation  follows 
the  reading  of  my  MSS.  mundsLgaJilasikhi^/a  va,  which  seems  more 


I  76  GAUTAMA.  I,  28. 

(merely)  a  lock  on  the  crown  of  the  head  tied  in  a 
knot  (shaving  the  other  portions  of  the  head), 

28.  If  he  becomes  impure  while  holding  things 
in  his  hands,  he  shall  (purify  himself)  by  sipping 
water  without  laying  (them  on  the  ground). 

in  accordance  with  the  Sutra  style.  It  must,  however,  be  under- 
stood that  the  arrangement  of  the  hair  is  not  regulated  by  the 
individual  choice  of  the  student,  but  by  the  custom  of  his  family, 
school,  or  country.  In  the  commentary,  as  given  by  one  of  my 
MSS.,  it  is  stated  the  custom  of  shaving  the  whole  head  prevailed 
among  the  -Oandogas.  Max  IMiiller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  p.  53  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  X,  95. 

28.  The  above  translation  agrees  with  Professor  Stenzler's  text 
and  ManuV,  143.  But  according  to  Haradatta  the  meaning  of 
the  Sutra  is  not  so  simple.  His  explanation  is  as  follows  :  '  If 
while  holding  things  in  his  hands  he  becomes  impure,  i.  e.  he  is 
defiled  by  urine,  feces,  leavings  of  food,  and  the  hke  (impurities) 
which  are  causes  for  sipping  water,  then  he  shall  sip  water  after 
placing  those  things  on  the  ground.  This  refers  to  uncooked 
food,  intended  to  be  eaten.  And  thus  Vasish//^a  (III,  4,  3,  Benares 
edition)  declares  :  "  If  he  who  is  occupied  with  eatables  touches 
any  impure  substance,  then  he  shall  place  that  thing  on  the  ground, 
sip  water,  and  afterwards  again  use  it."  But  the  following  text  of 
another  Smr/ti,  "A  substance  becomes  pure  by  being  sprinkled 
with  water  after  having  been  placed  on  the  ground,"  refers  to  cooked 
food,  such  as  boiled  rice  and  the  like  Or  (the  above  Sutra  may 
mean),  "  If  he  becomes  impure  while  holding  things  in  his  hands, 
then  he  shall  sip  water  without  laying  them  on  the  ground."  And 
thus  Manu  (V,  143)  says:  "He  who  carries  in  any  manner  any- 
thing in  his  hands  and  is  touched  by  an  impure  substance  shall 
cleanse  himself  by  sipping  water  without  laying  his  burden  down." 
This  rule  refers  to  things  not  destined  to  be  eaten,  such  as  gar- 
ments. And  in  the  (above)  Sutra  the  words,  "  He  who  becomes 
impure  shall  sip  water,"  must  be  taken  as  one  sentence,  and  (the 
whole),  "  If  while  holding  things  in  his  hands  he  becomes  impure, 
he  shall  sip  water  without  laying"  (them)  down,"  must  be  taken  as 
a  second.' 

Though  it  may  be  doubted  if  the  yogavibhaga,  or  '  division  of  the 
construction,'  proposed  by  Haradatta,  is  admissible,  still  it  seems 
to  me  not   improbable   that  Gautama    intended   his  Sutra  to  be 


1,32.  PURIFICATION'.  1 77 

29.  (As  regards)  the  purification  of  things,  (objects) 
made  of  metal  must  be  scoured,  those  made  of  clay 
should  be  thoroughly  heated  by  fire,  those  made  of 
wood  must  be  planed,  and  (cloth)  made  of  thread 
should  be  washed. 

30.  (Objects  made  of)  stone,  jewels,  shells,  (or) 
mother-of-pearl  (must  be  treated)  like  those  made  of 
metal. 

31.  (Objects  made  of)  bone  and  mud  (must  be 
treated)  like  wood. 

32.  And  scattering  (earth  taken  from  a  pure  spot 
is  another  method  of  purifying  defiled)  earth. 

taken  in  two  different  ways.  For,  if  according  <o  the  ancient 
custom  it  is  written  without  an  Avagraha  and  without  separating 
the  words  joined  by  Sandhi,  dravyahasta  u^/^/zish/onidhaya- 
/^amet,  the  latter  group  may  either  stand  for  xiAkAishfo  nidhaya 
a^amet  or  for  u^/^Aish/o  anidhaya  d-^amet.  As  the  Sutra- 
karas  aim  before  all  things  at  brevity,  the  Sutra  may  have  to  be 
read  both  ways.  If  that  had  to  be  done,  the  correct  translation 
would  be :  'If  while  holding  things  in  his  hands,  he  becomes 
impure,  he  shall  (purify  himself  by)  sipping  water,  either  laying 
(his  burden)  down  (or)  not  laying  it  down,  (as  the  case  may 
require.)' 

29.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  10-12;  ^lanu  V,  115,  122. 

30.  Manu  V,  111-112. 

31.  'Bone,  i.e.  ivory  and  the  Uke.  Mud,  i.e.  (the  mud  foor 
of)  a  house  and  the  like.  The  purification  of  these  two  is  the 
same  as  that  of  wood,  i.  e.  by  scraping  (or  planing).  How  is 
it  proper  that,  since  the  author  has  declared  (Statra  29)  that 
objects  made  of  wood  shall  be  purified  by  planing,  the  ex- 
pression "like  wood"  should  be  substituted  (in  this  Sutra)?  (The 
answer  is  that),  as  the  author  uses  the  expression  "like  wood," 
when  he  ought  to  have  said  "like  objects  made  of  wood," 
he  indicates  thereby  that  the  manner  of  purification  is  the  same 
for  the  material  as  for  the  object  made  thereof — Haradatta.  The 
SUtra  is,  therefore,  a  so-called  G^iiapaka,  intended  to  reveal  the 
existence  of  a  general  rule  or  paribhasha  which  has  not  been 
explicitly  given. 

32.  'Scattering  over,  i.e.  heaping  on  (earth)  after  bringing  it 
[2]  N 


1 78  GAUTAMA.  I,  33. 

33.  Ropes,  chips  (of  bamboo),  and  leather  (must 
be  treated)  like  garments. 

34.  Or  (objects)  that  have  been  defiled  very 
much  may  be  thrown  away, 

35.  Turning  his  face  to  the  east  or  to  the  north, 
he  shall  purify  himself  from  personal  defilement, 

36.  Seated  in  a  pure  place,  placing  his  right  arm 
between  his  knees,  arranging  his  dress  (or  his  sacri- 
ficial cord)  in  the  manner  required  for  a  sacrifice  to 
the  gods,  he  shall,  after  washing  his  hands  up  to 
the  wrist,  three  or  four  times,  silently,  sip  water  that 
reaches  his  heart;  twice  wipe  (his  lips);  sprinkle  his 

from  another  spot  is  an  additional  method  of  purifying  earth. 
With  regard  to  this  matter  VasishMa  (III,  57)  says  :  "  Earth 
is  purified  by  these  four  (methods,  viz.)  by  digging,  burning, 
rain,  being  trodden  on  by  cows,  and,  fifthly,  by  being  smeared 
with  cowdung."  ' — Haradatta. 

What  Haradatta  and  probably  Gautama  mean,  is  that  the  mud 
floors  of  houses,  verandahs,  and  spots  of  ground  selected  for 
sitting  on,  if  defiled,  should  be  scraped,  and  that  afterwards  fresh 
earth  should  be  scattered  over  the  spot  thus  cleansed.  See, 
however,  Manu  V,  125,  who  recommends  earth  for  the  purification 
of  other  things  also.  The  Sutra  may  also  be  interpreted  so  as 
to  agree  with  his  rule. 

33.  '  Chips  (vidala),  i.  e.  something  made  of  chips  of  ratan-cane 
or  bamboo,  or,  according  to  others,  something  made  of  feathers.' — 
Haradatta. 

34,  '  The  word  "or"  is  used  in  order  to  exclude  the  alternative 
(i.  e.  the  methods  of  purification  described  above).' — Haradatta. 
For  the  explanation  of  the  expression  'very  much'  Haradatta  refers 
to  Vasish//^a  IH,  58,  with  which  Manu  V,  123  may  be  compared. 

35.  '  The  alternative  (position)  depends  on  the  pleasure  of  the 
performer.' — Haradatta. 

36,  My  MSS.  more  conveniently  make  five  Sutras  of  Professor 
Stenzler's  one  Sutra.  The  divisions  have  been  marked  in  the 
translation  by  semicolons, 

a.  '  How  many  times  ?  Three  times  or  four  times ;  the  alter- 
native depends  upon  the  pleasure  of  the  performer.  Another 
(commentator  says):    When,  according  to  a  special  rule  of  the 


I,  41.  PURIFICATION.  I  79 

feet  and  (his  head) ;  touch  the  cavities  in  the  head 
(severally)  with  (certain  fingers  of  his)  right  hand ; 
(and  finally)  place  (all  the  fingers)  on  the  crown  of 
his  head  and  (on  the  navel). 

2,y.  After  sleeping,  dining,  and  sneezing  (he  shall) 
again  (sip  water  though  he  may  have  done  so  before). 

38.  (Remnants  of  food)  adhering  to  the  teeth  (do 
not  make  the  eater  impure  as  little)  as  his  teeth, 
except  if  he  touches  them  with  his  tongue. 

39.  Some  (declare,  that  such  remnants  do  not 
defile)  before  they  fall  (from  their  place). 

40.  If  they  do  become  detached,  he  should  know 
that  he  is  purified  by  merely  swallowing  them,  as 
(in  the  case  of)  saliva. 

41.  Drops  (of  saliva)  falling  from  the  mouth  do 

Vedas  the  sipping  must  be  accompanied  by  the  recitation  of 
sacred  texts,  then  the  act  shall  be  repeated  four  times,  else  three 
limes.' — Haradatta. 

b.  The  custom  of  touching  the  lips  twice  is  noted  as  the 
opinion  of  some,  by  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  4. 

c.  ' "  Sprinkle  his  feet  and."  On  account  of  the  word  "  and  " 
he  shall  sprinkle  his  head  also.' — Haradatta. 

d.  ' "  Touch  the  cavities,"  &c.  Here  the  word  "  and  "  indicates 
that  each  organ  is  to  be  touched  separately.' — Haradatta.  Regard- 
ing the  manner  of  touching,  see  Apastamba  I,  5,  6,  5  and  7  note. 

e.  '  "(And  finally)  place,"  &c.  Because  the  word  "  and "  is  used, 
he  shall  touch  the  navel  and  the  head  with  all  the  fingers.' — 
Haradatta.  Regarding  the  whole  Aiamanakalpa,  see  Apastamba 
I,  5,  16,  I  seq. 

37.    ManuV,  145.  38.    ManuV,  141. 

39.  Vasish/>5a  IH,  41. 

40.  '  As  the  author  ought  to  have  said,  "  If  they  become  de- 
tached, he  is  purified  by  merely  swallowing  them,"  the  addition  of 
the  words  "  he  should  know "  and  "  as  in  the  case  of  saliva  "  is 
intended  to  indicate  that  in  the  case  of  saliva,  too,  he  becomes 
pure  by  swallowing  it,  and  that  purification  by  sipping  need  not  be 
considered  necessar}'." — Haradatta. 

41.  Apastamba  I,  5,  16, 12. 

N  2 


l8o  GAUTAMA.  1,42. 

not  cause  impurity,  except  if  they  fall  on  a  limb  of 
the  body. 

42.  Purification  (from  defilement)  by  unclean  sub- 
stances (has  been  effected)  when  the  stains  and  the 
(bad)  smell  have  been  removed. 

43.  That  (should  be  done)  by  first  (using)  water 
and  (afterwards)  earth, 

44.  When  urine,  faeces,  or  semen  fall  on  a  (limb) 
and  when  (a  limb)  is  stained  (by  food)  during  meals 
(water  should  be  sipped). 

45.  And  in  case  the  Veda  ordains  (a  particular 
manner  of  purification,  it  must  be  performed  accord- 
ing to  the  precept). 

46.  Taking  hold  with  (his  right)  hand  of  the  left 
hand  (of  his  teacher),  but  leaving  the  thumb  free, 
(the  pupil)  shall  address  his  teacher,  (saying): 
'Venerable  Sir,  recite!' 

47.  He  shall  fix  his  eyes  and  his  mind  on  the 
(teacher). 

48.  He  shall  touch  with  Ku-s^a  grass  the  (seat  of 
the)  vital  airs. 

42.  In  explanation  of  the  term  amedhya,  'unclean  substances,' 
Haradatta  quotes  INIanu  V,  135. 

43.  Manu  V,  134  ;  see  also  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  15. 

44.  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  14. 

45.  '  If  the  Veda  ordains  any  particular  manner  of  purification 
for  any  particular  purpose,  that  alone  must  be  adopted.  Thus  the 
sacrificial  vessels  called  /^amasa,  which  have  been  stained  by  rem- 
nants of  offerings,  must  be  washed  with  water  on  the  heap  of  earth 
called  mar^aliya.' — Haradatta. 

46.  This  and  the  following  rules  refer  chiefly  to  the  teaching 
of  the  Savitri,  which  forms  part  of  the  initiation.  According  to 
Gobhila  Gn'hya-sutra  II,  10,  38,  the  complete  sentence  addressed 
to  the  teacher  is,  '  Venerable  Sir,  recite  !  May  the  worshipful  one 
leach  me  the  Savitri.' 

47.  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  24  ;  I,  2,  6,  20;  Manu  II,  192. 

48.  '  The  (seat  of  the)  vital  airs  are  the  organs  of  sense  located 


1,56.  STUDENTSHIP.  l8l 

49.  He  shall  thrice  restrain  his  breath  for  (the 
space  of)  fifteen  moments; 

50.  And  he  shall  seat  himself  on  (blades  of  Kui'a 
grass)  the  tops  of  which  are  turned  toward  the  east. 

51.  The  five  Vyahrz'tis  must  (each)  be  preceded 
by  (the  syllable)  Om  and  end  with  Satya. 

52.  (Every)  morning  the  feet  of  the  teacher  must 
be  embraced  (by  the  pupil), 

53.  And  both  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of 
a  lesson  in  the  Veda. 

54.  After  having  received  permission,  the  pupil 
shall  sit  down  to  the  right  (of  his  teacher),  turning 
his  face  towards  the  east  or  towards  the  north, 

55.  And  the  Savitri  m^ust  be  recited; 

56.  (All  these  acts  must  be  performed)  at  the 
beginning  of  the  instruction  in  the  Veda. 

in  the  head.  The  pupil  shall  touch  these,  his  own  (organs  of  sense) 
located  in  the  head,  in  the  order  prescribed  for  the  A>^amana  (see 
Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  7  note).' — Haradatta.     See  also  Manu  II,  75. 

49.  '  Passing  one's  hand  along  the  side  of  the  knee,  one  will  fill 
the  space  of  one  Tru/ika.  That  is  one  moment  (matra).' — Hara- 
datta.    Manu  II,  75. 

50.  Manu  II,  75. 

51.  'In  the  Vyahri'ti-samans  (see  Burnell,  Arsheya-br.,  Index 
s.  V.)  five  Vyahr/tis  are  mentioned,  viz.  Bhu>^,  Bhuva^,  Sva^,  Satyam, 
Purusha^.  Each  of  these  is  to  be  preceded  by  the  syllable  Om.  But 
they  are  to  end  with  Purusha/^,  which  (in  the  above  enumeration) 
occupies  the  fourth  place.' — Haradatta.    See  also  Manu  II,  75  seq. 

52-53.   Apastamba  I,  2,  5, 19-21. 

54.  Apastamba  I,  2,  6,  24  ;  Manu  II,  193.  *"  Turning  his  face 
towards  the  east  or  towards  the  north."  This  alternative  depends 
upon  (the  nature  of)  the  business.' — Haradatta. 

55.  Manu  II,  77. 

56.  '  All  those  acts  beginning  with  the  touching  of  the  organs 
of  sense  with  Kara  grass  and  ending  with  the  recitation  of  the 
Savitri,  which  have  been  prescribed  (Sutras  48-57),  must  be  per- 
formed before  the  pupil  begins  to  study  the  Veda  with  his  teacher,  but 
should  not  be  repeated  daily.  After  the  initiation  follows  the  study  of 


t82  GAUTAMA.  1,57- 

5  7.  The  syllable  Om  (must  precede  the  recitation 
of)  other  (parts  of  the  Veda)  also. 

58.  If  (any  one)  passes  between  (the  teacher  and 
the  pupil)  the  worship  (of  the  teacher  must  be 
performed)  once  more, 

59.  If  a  dog,  an  ichneumon,  a  snake,  a  frog,  (or) 
a  cat  (pass  between  the  teacher  and  the  pupil)  a 
three  days'  fast  and  a  journey  (are  necessary). 

60.  (In  case  the  same  event  happens)  with  other 
(animals,  the  pupil)  must  thrice  restrain  his  breath 
and  eat  clarified  butter, 

61.  And  (the  same  expiation  must  be  performed), 
if  (unwittingly)  a  lesson  in  the  Veda  has  been  given 
on  the  site  of  a  burial-ground. 

the  Savitri.  The  touching  of  the  organs  of  sense  and  the  other 
(acts  mentioned)  form  part  of  this  (study).  But  the  rules  prescribed 
in  the  three  Sutras,  the  first  of  which  is  Sutra  52,  and  the  rule  to 
direct  the  eye  and  mind  towards  the  teacher  (Sutra  47),  must  be 
constantly  kept  in  mind.  This  decision  is  confirmed  by  the  rules 
of  other  Smri'tis  and  of  the  GnTiya-sutras.' — Haradatta. 

57.  Apastamba  I,  4,  13,  6-7. 

58.  '  The  worship  of  the  teacher  {upasadana)  consists  in  the  per- 
formance of  the  acts  prescribed  in  Siitras  46-57,  with  the  exception 
of  the  study  of  the  Savitri  and  the  acts  belonging  to  that.  The 
meaning  of  the  Siitra  is  that,  though  the  worship  of  the  teacher  may 
have  already  been  performed  in  the  morning  of  that  day,  it  must, 
nevertheless,  be  repeated  for  the  reason  stated.' — Haradatta. 

59.  *  A  journey  (vipravasa)  means  residence  in  some  other  place 
than  the  teacher's  house.' — Haradatta.  The  commentator  adds 
that  the  somewhat  different  rule,  given  by  Manu  IV,  126,  may  be 
reconciled  with  the  above,  by  referring  the  former  to  the  study  for 
the  sake  of  remembering  texts  recited  by  the  teacher  (dharawadhya- 
yana),  and  the  latter  to  the  first  instruction  in  the  sacred  texts. 

60.  '  This  penance  must  be  performed  by  the  pupil,  not  by  the 
teacher.     Others  declare  that  both  shall  perform  it.' — Haradatta. 

6r.  See  also  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  6-8.  The  last  clauses  of  this 
and  all  succeeding  chapters  are  repeated  in  order  to  indicate  that 
the  chapter  is  finished. 


11,2.  UNINITIATED    PERSONS.  1 83 

Chapter  II. 

1.  Before  initiation  (a  child)  may  follow  its 
inclinations  in  behaviour,  speech,  and  eating.  (It 
shall)  not  partake  of  offerings.  (It  shall  remain) 
chaste.  It  may  void  urine  and  faeces  according  to 
its  convenience. 

2.  No  rule  of  (purification  by)  sipping  water  is 
prescribed  for  it.      But  (the  stains   of  impure  sub- 

II.  r.  In  concluding  the  explanation  of  this  Sutra,  Haradatta 
states  that  its  last  clause  is  intended  to  give  an  instance  of  the 
freedom  of  behaviour  permitted  to  a  child.  In  his  opinion  Gautama 
indicates  thereby  that  a  person  who,  before  initiation,  drinks 
spirituous  liquor,  commits  murder  or  other  mortal  sins,  becomes 
an  outcast,  and  is  liable  to  perform  the  penances  prescribed  for 
initiated  sinners.  In  support  of  this  view  he  quotes  a  passage, 
taken  from  an  unnamed  Smr/'ti,  according  to  which  the  parenrs 
or  other  relatives  of  children  between  five  and  eleven  years  are 
to  perform  penances  vicariously  for  the  latter,  while  children 
between  eleven  and  fifteen  years  are  declared  to  be  liable  to  half 
the  penances  prescribed  for  initiated  adults.  Hence  he  infers  that 
though  the  above  text  of  Gautama  speaks  of  uninitiated  persons 
in  general,  its  provisions  really  apply  to  children  under  five  years 
of  age  only.  Though  it  would  seem  that  some  of  Gautama's  rules 
refer  to  half-grown  persons  rather  than  to  infants  or  very  young 
boys,  it  is  impossible  to  assume  that  Gautama  meant  to  give  full 
license  of  behaviour,  speech,  and  eating  to  Brahma«as  who  were  not 
initiated  before  their  sixteenth  year,  or  to  Kshatriyas  and  Vaijyas 
up  to  the  age  of  twenty  and  twenty-two.  It  seems  more  likely 
that,  as  Haradatta  thinks,  his  rules  are  meant  in  the  first  instance 
for  infants  and  very  young  children  only,  and  that  he  intended 
the  special  cases  of  half-grown  or  nearly  grown  up  boys  to  be 
dealt  with  according  to  the  custom  of  the  family  or  of  the 
country. 

2.  Haradatta  points  out  that  the  Siitra  does  not  forbid  unini- 
tiated persons  to  sip  water,  but  that  it  merely  denies  the  appli- 
cability of  the  rules  (kalpa)  given  above,  I,  36.  Uninitiated  persons 
may,  therefore,  sip  water  in  the  manner  practised  by  women  and 
»Siidras. 


184  GAUTAMA.  11,3. 

Stances)  shall  be  removed  by  wiping,  by  washing, 
or  by  sprinkling  water. 

3.  (Other  persons)  cannot  be  defiled  by  the  touch 
of  such  (a  child). 

4.  But  one  must  not  employ  a  (child)  to  perform 
oblations  in  the  fire  or  Bali-offerings ; 

5.  Nor  must  one  make  it  recite  Vedic  texts, 
except  in  pronouncing  Svadha. 

6.  The  restrictive  rules,  (which  will  be  enumerated 
hereafter,  must  be  obeyed)  after  initiation, 

7.  And  (for  a  student  the  duty  of)  chastity,  which 
has  been  prescribed  (above  for  a  child  is  likewise 
obligatory), 

8.  (Also)  to  offer  (daily)  sacred  fuel  in  the  fire, 
and  to  beg,  to  speak  the  truth,  (and)  to  bathe 
(daily). 

9.  Some  (declare,  that  the  duty)  to  bathe  (exists) 
after  (the  performance  of)  the  Godana  (only). 

10.  And  the  morninsf  and  eveningf  devotions 
(Sandhya  must  be  performed)  outside  (the  village). 

11.  Silent  he  shall  stand  during  the  former,  and 

4.  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  19;  Manu  XI,  36. 

5.  'The  expression  "pronouncing  Svadha"  includes  by  impli- 
cation the  performance  of  all  funeral  rites.' — Haradatta. 

7.  Apastamba  I,  i,  2,  26. 

8.  Apastamba  I,  i,  4,  14-17;  I,  i,  3,  25;  I,  r,  2,  28-30; 
Manu  II,  176. 

9.  Regarding  the  sacrament  called  Godana,  see  Gobhila  Gn'hya- 
sutra  I,  9,  26. 

10.  Apastamba  I,  11,  30,  8. 

11.  '  From  (the  time  when  one)  light  (is  still  visible,'  &c.),  i.  e.  in 
the  morning  from  the  time  when  the  stars  are  still  visible  until 
the  sun  rises,  and  in  the  evening  from  the  time  when  the  sun 
still  stands  above  the  horizon  until  the  stars  appear.  Haradatta 
observes  that,  as  Manu  II,  102  prescribes  the  recitation  of  the 
Gayatri  during  the  morning  and  evening  devotions,  either  his  or 


II,  ly.  STUDENTSHIP.  185 

sit  during  the  latter,  from  (the  time  when  one)  light 
(is  still  visible)  until  (the  other)  light  (appears). 

12.  He  shall  not  look  at  the  sun. 

13.  He  shall  avoid  honey,  meat,  perfumes,  gar- 
lands, sleep  in  the  day-time,  ointments,  collyrium,  a 
carriage,  shoes,  a  parasol,  love,  anger,  covetousness, 
perplexity,  garrulity,  playing  musical  instruments, 
bathing  (for  pleasure),  cleaning  the  teeth,  elation, 
dancing,  singing,  calumny,  (and)  terror, 

14.  (And)  in  the  presence  of  his  Gurus,  covering 
his  throat,  crossing  his  legs,  leaning  (against  a  wall 
or  the  like,  and)  stretching  out  his  feet, 

15.  (As  well  as)  spitting,  laughing,  yawning, 
cracking  the  joints  of  the  fingers, 

16.  To  gaze  at  and  to  touch  women,  if  there  is 
danger  of  a  breach  of  chastity, 

17.  Gambling,  low  service,  to  take  things  not 
offered,  to  injure  animate  beings, 


Gautama's  rule  may  be  followed.  He  adds  that  another  com- 
mentator refers  the  injunction  to  keep  silence  to  conversations 
on  worldly  matters  only.  He  himself  has  adopted  this  view  in 
his  commentary  on  Apastamba  I,  11,  30,  8. 

12.  Apastamba  I,  11,  31,  20. 

13.  Apastamba  I,  i,  2,  23-28;    I,  i,  3,  11-14,  20-24;  I>  2, 

14.  Apastamba  I,  2,6,  3,  14,  17-18.  The  term  Guru  includes, 
besides  the  teacher,  the  parents  and  other  venerable  persons. 

15.  Apastamba  I,  2,  7,  6-7  ;  II,  2,  5,  9.  Haradatta  observes 
that  this  Sutra  again  contains  a  general  rule,  and  does  not  merely 
refer  to  the  presence  of  Gurus. 

16.  Apastamba  I,  2,  7,  3,  8-10. 

17.  Apastamba  II,  I,  3, 12.  '"Low  service,"  i.e.  service  by  wiping 
off  urine,  faeces,  and  the  like.  .  .  .  That  is  not  even  to  be  performed 
for  the  teacher.  Or  the  expression  may  mean  that  he  shall  not 
serve  a  teacher  deficient  in  learning  and  virtue.  The  same 
opinion  is  expressed  by  Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  11.' — Haradatta. 


1 86  GAUTAMA.  II,  i8. 

1 8.  To  pronounce  the  names  of  the  teacher,  of 
the  (teacher's)  sons  and  wives,  and  of  a  person 
who  has  performed  the  Diksha;nyesh/i  of  a  Soma- 
sacrifice, 

19.  To  make  bitter  speeches. 

20.  A  Brahmawa  (shall)  always  (abstain  from) 
spirituous  liquor. 

21.  (A  student)  shall  occupy  a  seat  and  a  couch 
lower  (than  those  of  his  teacher),  shall  rise  before 
(him)  and  retire  to  rest  after  (him). 

22.  He  shall  keep  his  tongue,  his  arms,  and  his 
stomach  In  subjection. 

23.  (If  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  pronounce) 
his  teacher's  name  and  family-name,  he  ought  to 
indicate  It  by  (using)  a  synonymous  term. 

24.  (He  must  speak)  in  the  same  (respectful) 
manner  of  a  man  who  Is  (generally)  revered  and 
of  his  betters. 

25.  (If  the  teacher  speaks  to  him),  he  shall  answer 
after  having  risen  from  his  couch  or  seat  (in  case 
he  was  lying  down  or  sitting). 

18.    Manu  II,  199.  19.    Apastamba  I,  2,  7,  24. 

20.  'A  Brahmawa  shall  avoid  it  always,  i.e.  even  as  a  house- 
holder ;  Kshatriyas  and  Vaij'yas  need  do  it  only  as  long  as  they 
are  students.  But  in  their  case,  too,  they  forbid  the  use  of 
liquor  distilled  from  bruised  rice,  under  all  circumstances.' — 
Haradatta. 

21.  Apastamba  I,  r,  2,  21  ;  I,  i,  4,  23,  28. 

22.  Apastamba  I,  i,  3,  13.  'Keeping  his  arms  in  subjection 
means  that  he  shall  not  (without  a  cause)  break  clods  of  earth 
and  the  like.  Keeping  his  stomach  in  subjection,  i.  e.  eating  with 
moderation.' — Haradatta. 

23.  'He  shall  indicate  it  by  another  synonymous  word, 
e.  g.  instead  of  saying,  "  Haradatta  (given  by  Hara),"  he  shall  say, 
"  the  venerable  Bhavarata  (given  by  Bhava)."  ' — Haradatta. 

25.    Apastamba  I,  2,  6,  5-7. 


11.33-  STUDENTSHIP.  1 8/ 

26.  At  the  command  (of  his  teacher)  he  shall 
approach,  though  he  may  not  be  visible. 

27.  And  if  he  sees  his  teacher  standing  in  a 
lower  place  or  to  the  leeward  or  to  the  windward, 
he  shall  rise  (and  change  his  position). 

28.  If  (his  teacher)  is  walking,  he  shall  walk 
after  him,  informing  him  of  the  work  (which  he 
is  going  to  do  and)  telling  (him  what  he  has  done). 

29.  He  shall  study  after  having  been  called  (by 
the  teacher,  and  not  request  the  latter  to  begin 
the  lesson). 

30.  He  shall  be  intent  on  (doing)  what  is  pleasing 
and  serviceable  (to  the  teacher) ; 

31.  And  (he  shall  behave)  towards  (the  teacher's) 
wives  and  sons  just  as  (towards  the  teacher), 

32.  But  not  eat  their  leavings,  attend  them  while 
bathing,  assist  them  at  their  toilet,  wash  their  feet, 
shampoo  them  nor  embrace  their  feet. 

33.  On  returning  from  a  journey  he  shall  embrace 
the  feet  of  the  wives  of  his  teacher. 


26.  He  must  not  think  that,  as  the  teacher  cannot  see  him, 
he  need  not  obey  the  summons. 

27.  Apastamba  I,  2,  6,  15,  23. 

28.  '  Work  (karma)  means  performance.  The  meaning  is  that 
the  pupil  shall  announce  to  his  teacher  the  performance  of  all 
he  is  going  to  do.  But  what  is  useful  for  the  teacher,  as  fetching 
water  and  the  like,  he  shall  inform  him  of  the  performance  of 
that,  i.  e.  knowing  himself  (without  being  told)  that  such  work  is 
necessary  at  a  particular  time  (and  acting  on  this  knowledge). 
Any  other  explanation  of  this  Siatra  does  not  please  me.' — Hara- 
datta.  See  also  Apastamba  I,  2,  6,  8.  ^ly  MSS.  divide  this  Sutra 
into  two,  beginning  the  second  with  '  Informing '  &c.  Haradatta's 
final  remark,  quoted  above,  seems  to  indicate  that  the  division 
was  intended  by  him. 

29.  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  27.  30.    Apastamba  I,  i,  4,  23. 
31.    Apastamba  I,  2,  7,  30;  Manu  II,  207-212. 


GAUTAMA.  II,  34. 


34.  Some  declare,  that  (a  pupil)  who  has  attained 
his  majority  is  not  (to  act  thus)  towards  young 
(wives  of  his  teacher). 

35.  Alms  may  be  accepted  from  men  of  all  castes, 
excepting  Abhi^astas  and  outcasts. 

36.  (In  begging)  the  word  Bhavat  must  be  pro- 
nounced in  the  beginning,  in  the  middle,  or  at  the 
end  (of  the  request),  according  to  the  order  of  the 
castes. 

2,^.  (He  may  beg  in  the  houses)  of  the  teacher, 
of  blood  relations,  (or)  of  Gurus,  and  in  his  own,  if 
he  obtains  no  (alms)  elsewhere. 

38.  Among  these  he  shall  avoid  each  preceding 
one  (more  carefully  than  those  named  later). 

39.  After  having  announced  to  the  teacher  (what 


34.  '  One  who  has  attained  his  majority,  i.  e.  one  who  has  com- 
pleted his  sixteenth  year  and  is  (already)  a  youth.' — Haradatta. 

35.  Haradatta  explains  abhi^asta  by  upapatakin,  'one  who  has 
committed  a  minor  offence,'  apparently  forgetting  Apastamba  I,  7, 
21,  7.     See  also  Apastamba  I,  i,  3,  25. 

36.  Apastamba  I,  i,  3,  28-30,  where  the  formulas  have  been 
given  in  the  notes.  Haradatta  remarks  that  the  G^aimini  Gr/hya- 
sutra  forbids  the  lengthening  or  drawling  pronunciation  of  the 
syllables  ksha;«  and  hi  in  begging.  Baudhayana,  on  the  other 
hand,  expressly  prescribes  this.  In  the  text  read  varwanupur- 
vye«a. 

37.  Manu  IT,  184.  It  is  just  possible  that  the  translation 
ought  to  be  'in  the  houses  of  his  teacher's  blood  relations,' 
instead  of  '  in  the  houses  of  his  teacher  (and)  of  blood  relations.' 

38.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is,  that  if  a  student  does  not 
obtain  anything  from  strangers,  he  shall  first  go  to  his  own 
family,  next  to  the  houses  of  Gurus,  i.  e.  paternal  and  maternal 
uncles  and  other  venerable  relatives,  then  to  his  other  blood 
relations,  i.  e.  Sapi^a'as,  and  in  case  of  extreme  necessity  only 
apply  to  the  teacher's  wife. 

39.  Apastamba  I,  i,  3,  31-32. 


II,  51.  STUDENTSHIP.  189 

he  has  received)  and  having  received  his  permission, 
the  (student)  may  eat  (the  collected  food). 

40.  If  (the  teacher)  is  not  present,  (he  shall  seek 
the  permission  to  eat)  from  his  (teacher's)  wives  or 
sons,  from  fellow-students  or  virtuous  (strangers). 

41.  Having  placed  water  by  his  side,  (he  shall 
eat)  in  silence,  contented,  (and)  without  greed. 

42.  (As  a  rule)  a  pupil  shall  not  be  punished 
corporally. 

43.  If  no  (other  course)  is  possible,  (he  may  be 
corrected)  with  a  thin  rope  or  a  thin  cane. 

44.  If  (the  teacher)  strikes  him  with  any  other 
(instrument),  he  shall  be  punished  by  the  king. 

45.  He  shall  remain  a  student  for  twelve  years 
in  order  (to  study)  one  (recension  of  the  Veda), 

46.  Or,  if  (he  studies)  all  (the  Vedas)  twelve 
years  for  each, 

47.  Or  during  (as  long  a  period  as  he  requires 
for)  learning  (them). 

48.  On  completion  of  the  instruction  the  teacher 
must  be  offered  a  fee. 

49.  After  (the  pupil)  has  paid  (that)  and  has 
been  dismissed,  he  may,  at  his  pleasure,  bathe  (as 
is  customary  on  completion  of  the  studentship). 

50.  The  teacher  is  chief  among  all  Gurus. 

51.  Some  (say)  that  the  mother  (holds  that 
place). 

40,  Apastamba  I,  i,  3,  33-34.  4i-    Manu  II,  53-54- 

42.  Apastamba  I,  2,  8,  30;  Macnaghten,  Miiakshara  IV,  i,  9. 

43.  Manu  VIII,  299.  45-47.  Apastamba  I,  i,  2,  12-16. 
48.  Apastamba  I,  2,  7,  19.  49.  Apastamba  I,  2,  8,  31. 
50.  INIanu  II,  225-237. 


190  GAUTAMA.  Ill, 


Chapter  III. 

1.  Some  {declare,  that)  he  (who  has  studied  the 
Veda)  may  make  his  choice  (which)  among  the 
orders  (he  is  going  to  enter). 

2.  (The  four  orders  are,  that  of)  the  student, 
(that  of)  the  householder,  (that  of)  the  ascetic 
(bhikshu),  (and  that  of)  the  hermit  in  the  woods 
(vaikhdnasa). 

3.  The  householder  is  the  source  of  these,  because 
the  others  do  not  produce  offspring. 

4.  Among  them  a  (professed)  student  (must  follow 
the  rules)  given  (in  the  preceding  chapters). 


III.  I.  Other  Smmikaras  maintain  that  a  Brahmawa  must  pass 
through  all  the  four  orders.  Compare  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  5; 
Manu  VI,  34-38  ;  and  the  long  discussion  on  the  comparative 
excellence  of  the  orders  of  householders  and  of  ascetics.  Apa- 
stamba II,  9,  23,  3;  II,  9,  24,  15. 

2.  '  Though  the  order  of  studentship  has  already  been  described 
above,  still  in  the  following  chapter  the  rules  for  a  professed 
(naishMika)  student  will  be  given  (and  it  had  therefore  again  to 
be  mentioned).  Bhikshu  has  generally  been  translated  by  ascetic 
(sannyasin).  Vaikhanasa,  hterally,  he  who  lives  according  to  the 
rule  promulgated  by  Vikhanas,  means  hermit.  For  that  (sage)  has 
chiefly  taught  that  order.  In  all  other  .Sastras  (the  order  of)  hermits 
is  the  third,  and  (the  order  of)  ascetics  the  fourth.  Here  a  different 
arrangement  is  adopted.  The  reason  of  the  displacement  of  the 
hermit  is  that  the  author  considers  the  first-named  three  orders 
preferable.  Hence  if  a  man  chooses  to  pass  through  all  four, 
the  sequence  is  that  prescribed  in  other  ^Sastras.' — Haradatta. 
In  making  these  statements  the  commentator  has  apparently 
forgotten  that  Apastamba  (II,  9,  21,  i)  agrees  exactly  with  Gau- 
tama. It  is,  however,  very  probable  that  Haradatta  has  given 
correctly  the  reason  why  the  hermit  is  placed  last  by  our  author 
and  by  Apastamba. 

3.  Manu  VI,  87,  4,   Apastamba  I,  i,  4,  29. 


Ill,  17.  ASCETIC.  191 

5.  He  shall  remain  obedient  to  his  teacher  until 
(his)  end. 

6.  In  (the  time)  remaining  after  (he  has  attended 
to)  the  business  of  his  Guru,  he  shall  recite  (the 
Veda). 

7.  If  the  Guru  dies,  he  shall  serve  his  son, 

8.  (Or)  if  there  is  no  (son  of  the  teacher),  an 
older  fellow-student,  or  the  fire. 

9.  He  who  lives  thus,  gains  the  heaven  of  Brah- 
man, and  (of  him  it  is  said  that)  he  has  subdued 
his  organs  (of  sense  and  action). 

10.  And  these  (restrictions  imposed  on  students 
must  also  be  observed  by  men)  of  other  (orders, 
provided  they  are)  not  opposed  (to  their  particular 
duties). 

11.  An  ascetic  shall  not  possess  (any)  store. 

12.  (He  must  be)  chaste, 

13.  He  must  not  change  his  residence  during  the 
rainy  season. 

14.  He  shall  enter  a  village  (only)  in  order  to  beg. 

15.  He  shall  beg  late  (after  people  have  finished 
their  meals),  without  returning  (twice), 

16.  Abandoning  (all)  desire  (for  sweet  food). 

17.  He  shall  restrain  his  speech,  his  eyes,  (and) 
his  actions. 

5.  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  6. 

6.  According  to  Haradatta  the  term  Guru  here  includes  the  father. 
But  see  the  next  Sutra,  where  Guru  can  only  mean  the  teacher. 

10.  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  3-4.  ]My  MSS.  have  uttaresham,  'of 
the  later  named,'  instead  of  itaresham,  '  of  the  other'  (orders),  both 
in  the  Sutra  and  in  subsequent  quotations  of  the  same. 

1 1.  Apastamba  II,  9,  2 1,  8-10  ;  Manu  VI,  41-43  ;  Colebrooke, 
Mitakshara  II,  8,  7. 

1 3.   This  rule  shows  that  the  Vasso  of  the  Bauddhas  and  Gainas 
is  also  derived  from  a  Brahmanical  source. 
15.    Manu  VI,  55-56. 


192  GAUTAMA.  Ill,  18. 

18.  He  shall  wear  a  cloth  to  cover  his  naked- 
ness. 

19.  Some  (declare,  that  he  shall  wear)  an  old  rag, 
after  having  washed  it. 

20.  He  shall  not  take  parts  of  plants  and  trees, 
except  such  as  have  become  detached  (spontane- 
ously). 

21.  Out  of  season  he  shall  not  dwell  a  second 
night  in  (the  same)  village. 

22.  He  may  either  shave  or  wear  a  lock  on  the 
crown  of  the  head. 

23.  He  shall  avoid  the  destruction  of  seeds. 

24.  (He  shall  be)  indifferent  towards  (all)  crea- 
tures, (whether  they  do  him)  an  injury  or  a  kindness. 

25.  He  shall  not  undertake  (anything  for  his 
temporal  or  spiritual  welfare). 

26.  A  hermit  (shall  live)  in  the  forest  subsisting 
on  roots  and  fruits,  practising  austerities. 

2"].  Kindling  the  fire  according  to  the  (rule  of 
the)  Srama;^aka  (Sutra,  he  shall  offer  oblations  in 
the  morning  and  evening). 

19.  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  11. 

20.  '  He  shall  not  appropriate,  i.e.  take  parts  of  these,  i.e.  fruits, 
leaves,  and  the  like,  which  have  not  been  detached,  i.e.  have  not 
fallen  oflf.  But  he  may  take  what  has  become  detached  spon- 
taneously.'— Haradatta. 

21.  Out  of  season,  i.e.  except  in  the  rainy  season,  during  which, 
according  to  Sutra  13,  an  ascetic  must  not  wander  about. 

23.  'He  shall  avoid,  i.e.  neither  himself  nor  by  the  agency  of 
others  cause  the  destruction,  i.e.  the  pounding  by  means  of  a  pestle 
or  the  like,  of  seeds,  i.e.  rice  and  the  Hke.  Hence  he  shall  accept 
as  alms  cooked  food  only,  not  rice  and  the  like.' — Haradatta. 

26.  Apastamba  II,  9,  21,  18-II,  9,  23,  2.  *  Austerities  (tapas) 
means  emaciating  his  body.' — Haradatta. 

27.  'He  shall  offer  oblations  in  the  morning  and  evening,' 
(these  words),  though  not  expressed,  are  understood. 


111,36.  HERMIT.  193 

28.  He  shall  eat  wild-growing  (vegetables  only). 

29.  He  shall  worship  gods,  manes,  men,  goblins, 
and  /?/shis. 

30.  He  shall  receive  hospitably  (men  of)  all 
(castes)  except  those  (with  whom  intercourse  is) 
forbidden. 

31.  He  may  even  use  the  flesh  of  animals  killed 
by  carnivorous  beasts. 

32.  He  shall  not  step  on  ploughed  (land), 

33.  And  he  shall  not  enter  a  village. 

34.  He  shall  wear  (his  hair  in)  braids,  and  dress 
in  (garments  made  of)  bark  and  skins. 

35.  He  shall  not  eat  anything  that  has  been 
hoarded  for  more  than  a  year. 

36.  But  the  venerable  teacher  (prescribes)  one 
order  only,  because  the  order  of  householders  is 
explicitly  prescribed  (in  the  Vedas). 

29.  I.e.  he  shall  perform  the  five  Mahaya^as,  just  like  a  house- 
holder, only  using  wild-growing  fruits,  roots,  &c.  for  the  oblations. 

31.  'They  declare,  that  baishka  means  the  flesh  of  an  animal, 
slain  by  a  tiger  or  the  like.  He  may  use  even  that.  The  word 
"  even"  implies  blame.  Hence  this  is  a  rule  for  times  of  distress, 
and  it  must  be  understood  that  such  food  is  to  be  eaten  only 
on  failure  of  roots  and  fruits  and  the  like.' — Haradatta.  The 
commentator  adds  that  the  flesh  of  forbidden  animals  must  be 
avoided. 

34.  According  to  Haradatta  the  lower  garment  shall  be  made 
of  ^ira,  which  he  again  explains  as  cloth  made  of  Ku^ra  grass  and 
the  like,  and  the  upper  of  a  skin. 

35.  Haradatta  reads  atisawvatsaram,  not  atisawvatsaram,  as  in 
Professor  Stenzler's  edition,  though  he  notices  the  latter  reading. 
ManuVI,  15. 

36.  '  The  duties  of  a  householder,  the  Agnihotra,  and  the  like, 
are  frequently  prescribed  and  praised  in  all  Vedas,  Dharmajastras, 
and  Itihasas.  As,  therefore,  the  order  of  householders  is  explicitly 
prescribed,  this  alone  is  the  order  (obligatory  on  all  men).  But  the 
Other  orders  are  prescribed  only  for  those  unfit  for  the  (duties  of 

[2]  O 


194  GAUTAMA.  IV,  i. 

Chapter  IV, 

1.  A  householder  shall  take  a  wife  (of)  equal 
(caste),  who  has  not  belonged  to  another  man  and 
is  younger  (than  himself). 

2.  A  marriage  (may  be  contracted)  between  per- 
sons who  have  not  the  same   Pravaras, 

3.  (And)  who  are  not  related  within  six  degrees 
on  the  father's  side, 

4.  Or  on  the  side  of  the  begetter, 

5.  (Nor)  within  four  degrees  on  the  mother's 
side. 

6.  (If  the  father)  gives  (his  daughter)  dressed 
(in  two  garments)  and  decked  with  ornaments  to 
a  person   possessing  (sacred)  learning,   of  virtuous 

a  householder).  That  is  the  opinion  of  many  teachers.' — Haradatta. 
Haradatta's  explanation  of  aX-arya/^,  which  he  takes  to  mean  '  many 
teachers,'  seems  to  me  inadmissible.  Eke,  '  some  (teachers),'  is 
used  in  that  sense,  and  a/^arya/^  cannot  possibly  be  a  synonymous 
term.  Further  on  (IV,  23)  Haradatta  himself  admits  that  by 
aMrya/^  one  teacher  is  meant.  It  must  be  translated  '  the  venerable 
teacher,'  because  the  Hindus  are  very  fond  of  the  use  of  the  plu- 
ralis  majestatis.  I  have  no  doubt  that  Gautama  means  his  own 
teacher,  whom,  of  course,  etiquette  forbids  him  to  name.  See  also 
R.  Garbe,  Uebersetzung  des  Vaitana-sutra,  I,  3. 

IV.  I.  Apastamba  II,  6,  13,  i;  Manu  III,  4,  12  ;  Ya^n.  I,  52. 

2.  Regarding  the  Pravaras,  see  Miiller's  History  of  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  386.     Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  15. 

3.  Apastamba  II,  5,  1 1, 16  ;  Manu  III,  5 ;  Ya^fi.  I,  52. 

4.  This  rule  refers  to  the  case  where  a  husband  has  made  over 
his  wife  to  another  man  and  the  bridegroom  stands  in  the  relation 
of  a  son  to  the  husband  of  his  mother  and  to  his  natural  father 
(dvipita).     See  Ya^n.  I,  68. 

5.  Ya§-n.  I,  53. 

6.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  17.  'Virtuous  conduct  (/^aritra),  i.e. 
the  performance  of  the  acts  prescribed  (in  the  Vedas  and  Smmis), 
....  good  disposition  (jila),  i.  e.  faith  in  the  ordinances  of  the 
law.' — Haradatta. 


IV,  17.  HOUSEHOLDER.  1 95 

conduct,  who  has  relatives  and  a  (good)  disposition, 
(that  is  a)  Brahma  (wedding). 

7.  At  the  Pra^patya  (wedding)  the  marriage- 
formula  is,  '  Fulfil  ye  the  law  conjointly.' 

8.  At  the  Arsha  (wedding  the  bridegroom)  shall 
present  a  cow  and  a  bull  to  him  who  has  (authority 
over)  the  maiden. 

9.  (If  the  bride)  is  given,  decked  with  ornaments, 
to  a  priest  at  the  altar,  that  is  a  Daiva  wedding. 

10.  The  spontaneous  union  with  a  willing  (maiden 
is  called)  a  Gandharva  wedding. 

11.  If  those  who  have  (authority  over)  a  female 
are  propitiated  by  money,  (that  is)  an  Asura  wedding. 

12.  (If  the  bride)  is  taken  by  force,  (that  is)  a 
Rakshasa  weddino-. 

13.  If  (a  man)  embraces  a  female  deprived  of 
consciousness,  (that  is)  a  Paii'aia  wedding. 

14.  The  first  four  (rites)  are  lawful ; 

15.  Some  say,  (the  first)  six. 

16.  (Children)  born  in  the  regular  order  of 
wives  of  the  next,  second  or  third  lower  castes 
(become)  Savar;/as,  AmbashMas,  Ugras,  Nishadas. 
Daushyantas  or  Para^avas. 

17.  (Children   born)   in    the    inverted   order    (of 

7.  Manu  III,  30 ;  Y%n.  I,  60. 

8.  Apastamba  II,  5,  II,  18.  9.  Apastamba  II,  5, 11, 19. 
10.   Apastamba  II,  5, 11,  20.  11.    Apastamba  II,  5, 12,  i. 
12.   Apastamba  II,  5,  12,  2.  13.    Manu  III.  34;  Ya^.I,  61. 
14.    Manu  III,  24,  39.  15.   Manu  III,  23. 

16.  I.e.  from  a  Brahma«a  and  a  Kshatriya  springs  a  Savarwa, 
from  a  Brahmawa  and  aVaijyS  a  Nishada,  from  a  Brahraawa  and 
a  .Sudra  a  Para.fava,  from  a  Kshatriya  and  a  Vai^ya  an  Ambash/Aa, 
and  from  a  Kshatriya  and  a  ^udra  a  Daushyanta,  from  a  Vairya 
and  a  Sudri  an  Ugra.  Compare  for  this  and  the  following  five 
Siitras  Manu  X,  6-18  ;  Ya^Q.  I,  91-95. 

1 7.  I.  e.  from  a  Kshatriya  and  a  BxahmaKi  springs  a  Suta,  from 

O  2 


196  GAUTAMA.  IV,  18. 

wives  of  higher  castes  become)  Sutas,  Magadhas, 
Ayogavas,  Kshattrz's,  Vaidehakas  or  Kandalas. 

18.  Some  declare,  that  a  woman  of  the  Brahma;2a 
caste  has  born  successively  to  (husbands  of)  the  (four) 
castes,  sons  (who  are)  Brahma/^as,  Sutas,  Magadhas 
or  IC3.7id3.\a.s  ; 

19.  (And  that)  a  woman  of  the  Kshatrlya  caste 
(has  born)  to  the  same,  Murdhavasiktas,  Kshatriyas, 
Dhivaras,  Pulkasas ; 

20.  Further,  a  woman  of  the  Vaii'ya  caste  to 
the  same,  'Bhrz^yaks.n^/ia.s,  Mahishyas,  Vaii-yas,  and 
Vaidehas ; 

21.  (And)  a  woman  of  the  6'udra  caste  to  the 
same,  Parai^avas,  Yavanas,  Kara;^as,  and  .Sudras. 

22.  In  the  seventh  (generation  men  obtain)  a 
change  of  caste,  either  being  raised  to  a  higher 
one  or  being  degraded  to  a  lower  one. 

a  Vaijya  and  a  Kshatriya  a  Magadha,  from  a  ^udra  and  a  Vai^yS 
an  Ayogava,  from  a  Vaii'ya  and  a  Brahma;?i  a  Kshattrz',  from  a 
^'udra  and  a  Kshatriya  a  Vaidehaka,  from  a  ^'udra  and  a  Brahmawl 
a  A'aw^ala. 

18.  The  words  '  Some  declare'  stand  only  at  the  end  of  Sutra 
21.  But  Haradatta  rightly  declares  that  they  refer  to  all  the  four 
Sutras.  The  proof  for  the  correctness  of  his  interpretation  lies  in 
the  use  of  the  form  a^i^anat,  which  refers  to  each  of  the  Sutras. 

22.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  lo-ii.  'That  is  as  follows:  If  a 
Savarwa  female,  born  of  the  Kshatriya  wife  of  a  Brahmawa,  is 
married  to  a  Brahma«a,  and  her  female  descendants  down  to  the 
seventh  likewise,  then  the  offspring  which  that  seventh  female 
descendant  bears  to  her  Brahmawa  husband  is  equal  in  caste  to 
a  Brahmawa.  In  like  manner,  if  a  Savar«a  male,  the  son  of  a 
Brahmana  and  of  his  Kshatriya  wife,  again  marries  a  Kshatriya 
wife  and  his  male  descendants  down  to  the  seventh  likewise,  then 
the  offspring  of  that  seventh  male  descendant  is  equal  in  caste  to 
a  Kshatriya.  The  same  principle  must  be  applied  to  the  offspring 
of  Kshatriyas  and  wives  of  the  Vaijya  caste  as  well  as  to  Vaijyas 
and  wives  of  the  -Siidra  caste.' — Haradatta. 


IV,  30.  HOUSEHOLDER.  197 

23.  The  venerable  teacher  declares  (that  this 
happens)  in  the  fifth  (generation). 

24.  And  (the  same  rule  applies)  to  those  born 
(from  parents  of  different  classes  that  are)  inter- 
mediate between  (two  of  the  castes  originally) 
created  (by  Brahman). 

25.  Those  born  in  the  inverse  order  (from 
fathers  of  a  lower  and  mothers  of  a  higher  caste 
stand)  outside  (the  pale  of)  the  sacred  law, 

26.  As  well  as  (those  born  in  the  regular  order) 
from  a  female  of  the  ^Sudra  caste. 

27.  But  he  whom  a  ^udra  (begets)  on  a  female 
of  unequal  caste  shall  be  treated  like  an  outcast. 

28.  The  last  (named,  the  A'a/^-^ala),  is  the  foulest. 

29.  \"irtuous  sons  (born  of  wives  of  equal  caste) 
and  wedded  according  to  approved  rites  sanctify 
(their  father's  family). 

30.  (A  son    born    of  a  wife    married)    according 

23.  '  (The  venerable)  teacher  opines  that  the  change  of  caste 
takes  place  in  the  fifth  generation.  They  declare  that  the  plural 
may  be  used  to  denote  one  teacher.  This  Sutra  refers  to  (cases 
of  extraordinar}-  merit  acquired  through)  virtuous  conduct  and  study 
of  the  Veda.' — Haradatta.  It  is  clear  that  in  this  case  Haradatta, 
too,  has  seen  that  the  word  a-^arya-^  has  another  force  than  the 
more  common  eke ;  see  above,  note  to  III,  36. 

24.  'That  is  as  follows:  If  the  daughter  of  a  Savarwa,  born 
of  a  wife  of  the  AmbashZ/u  caste,  is  married  again  to  a  Savar;?a, 
and  her  female  descendants  down  to  the  seventh  likewise,  then  the 
offspring  of  that  seventh  female  descendant,  begotten  by  a  Savar«a 
husband,  is  equal  in  caste  to  a  Savarwa.' — Haradatta.  Regarding 
the  birth  of  the  four  castes  from.  Brahman,  see  Rig-veda  X,  90,  12. 

25.  Manu  X,  41,  67-68. 

26.  Manu  X,  68. 

27.  '"Shall  be  treated  like  an  outcast,"  i.  e.  one  must  avoid  to 
look  at  him,  &c.,  just  as  in  the  case  of  an  outcast.' — Haradatta. 

28.  ISIanu  X,  51-56. 

30.   Manu  III,  38;  Ya^n.  I,  59. 


198  GAUTAMA.  IV,  31. 

to    the    Arsha   rite    (saves)    three    ancestors   (from 
hell), 

31.  (A  son  born  of  a  wife  married)  according  to 
the  Daiva  rite  ten, 

32.  (A  son  born  of  a  wife  married)  according  to 
the  Pra^dpat^^a  rite,  also  ten. 

33.  (But)  the  son  of  a  wife  married  according  to 
the  Brdhma  rite  (saves)  ten  ancestors,  ten  descend- 
ants, and  himself. 

Chapter  V. 

1.  (A  householder)  shall  approach  (his  wife)  in 
the  proper  season, 

2.  Or  (he  may  do  so)  at  any  time  except  on 
the  forbidden  (days). 

3.  He  shall  worship  gods,  manes,  men,  goblins, 
(and)  i?/shis. 

4.  Every  day  he  shall  recite  privately  (a  portion 
of  the  Veda), 

5.  And  the  (daily)  libation  of  water  to  the  manes 
(is  obligatory  on  him). 

6.  Other  (rites  than  these  he  may  perform)  ac- 
cording to  his  ability. 

31.  Manu  III,  38;  Y^-fi.  I,  59. 

32.  Manu  III,  38  ;  Ya^fl.  I,  60. 

33.  Manu  III,  37  ;  Y%a.  I,  58. 
V.   I.   Apastamba  II,  i,  i,  17, 

2.  Apastamba  II,  i,  i,  18. 

3.  Apastamba  I,  4,  12,  16;  I,  4,  13,  i  ;  Manu  III,  69-72;  IV, 
29,  21  ;  Y%n.  I,  99,  102-104. 

4.  Manu  III,  8 1 ;  Y%il.  I,  104. 

5.  Manu  III,  82;  Ya^n.  I,  104.  'The  word  "and"  indicates 
that  water  must  be  offered  to  the  gods  and  i?2shis  also.' — Hara- 
datta. 

6.  '(Rites)  other  than  those  prescribed  in  Siitras  3-5  he  may 
perform  according  to  his  energy,  i.  e.  according  to  his  ability.    But 


V,  n.  HOUSEHOLDER.  1 99 

7.  The  (sacred)  fire  (must  be  kindled)  on  his 
marriage  or  on  the  division  of  the  family  estate. 

8.  The  domestic  (ceremonies  must  be  performed) 
with  (the  aid  of)  that  (fire). 

9.  (Also)  the  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  manes,  (and) 
men,  and  the  private  recitation  (and)  the  Bali- 
offerings. 

10.  The  oblations  (which  are  thrown)  Into  the 
(sacred)  fire  (at  the  Vai^vadeva-sacrifice  are  offered) 
to  Agni,  to  Dhanvantari,  to  all  the  gods,  to  Pra^a- 
pati,  (and  to  Agni)  Svish/akm ; 

11.  And  (Bali-offerings   must  be   given)   to   the 

those  he  should  zealously  perform.  As  the  oblations  to  the  gods 
and  the  other  (Mahaya^uas)  are  mentioned  before  the  kindling  of 
the  domestic  fire,  they  must  be  performed  by  a  person  who  has  not 
yet  kindled  the  domestic  fire  with  the  aid  of  the  common  (kitchen)- 
fire.' — Haradatta. 

7.  As  long  as  the  family  remains  united,  its  head  offers  the 
oblations  for  all  its  members. 

8.  '  The  domestic  rites,  i.  e.  the  Puwzsavana  and  the  rest.  .  .  . 
Now  with  the  aid  of  which  fire  must  a  man,  who  has  not  yet  kindled 
the  domestic  fire,  perform  the  Puwsavana,  &c.  ?  Some  answer  that 
he  shall  use  a  common  fire.  But  the  opinion  of  the  teacher  (Gau- 
tama) is  that  he  shall  use  the  sacred  fire  which  has  been  kindled  on 
that  occasion.' — Haradatta. 

9.  Haradatta  states  that  the  iSIahaya^as  are  again  enumerated 
in  order  to  show  that  a  person  who  has  kindled  the  sacred  fire 
shall  use  this  for  them,  not  a  common  fire.  He  also  states  that 
a  passage  of  Ujanas,  according  to  which  some  teachers  prescribe 
the  performance  of  the  daily  recitation  near  the  sacred  fire,  shows 
that  this  rite  too  has  a  connexion  with  the  sacred  fire. 

10.  Apastamba  II,  2,  3,  16,  where,  however,  as  in  all  other 
works,  the  order  of  the  off"erings  differs.  Haradatta  adds  that  the 
word  '  oblations '  is  used  in  the  Sutra  in  order  to  indicate  that 
the  word  svaha  must  be  pronounced  at  the  end  of  each  Mantra, 
and  that  the  expression  '  in  the  fire'  indicates  that  the  Bali-oiferings 
described  in  the  following  Sutra  must  be  thrown  on  the  ground. 

11.  Compare  Apastamba  II,  2,  3,  20;  II,  2,  4,  8  ;  Manu  III, 
87-90,  where,  as  elsewhere,  the   order  of  the   offerings  differs. 


200  GAUTAMA.  V,  I2. 

deities  presiding  over  the  (eight)  points  of  the 
horizon,  in  their  respective  places, 

12.  At  the  doors  (of  the  house)  to  the  Maruts, 

13.  To  the  deities  of  the  dwelHng  inside  (the 
house), 

14.  To  Brahman  in  the  centre  (of  the  house), 

15.  To  the  Waters  near  the  water-pot, 

16.  To  the  Ether  in  the  air, 

17.  And  to  the  Beings  walking  about  at  night 
in  the  evening. 

According  to  Haradatta  the  deities  intended  are,  Indra,  Agni,  Yama, 
Nirr/ti,  Varii;/a,  Vayu,  Soma,  and  I^-ana.  The  first  offering  must  be 
placed  to  the  east,  the  next  to  the  south-east,  south,  &c. 

12.  At  all  the  doors,  as  many  as  there  are,  a  Bali  must  be 
offered  with  the  INIantra,  '  To  the  Maruts,  svaha.' — Haradatta. 

13.  'As  he  says  "inside"  (pravi^ya,  literally  entering)  he  must 
stand  outside  while  offering  the  Balis  at  the  doors.  ...  At  this 
occasion  some  require  the  following  Mantra,  "  To  the  deities  of 
the  dwelling,  svaha,"  because  that  is  found  in  the  Ajvalayana 
(Gr/Tiya-sutra  I,  2,  4).  Others  consider  it  necessary  to  mention 
the  deities  by  name,  and  to  present  as  many  offerings  as  there  are 
deities,  while  pronouncing  the  required  words.'— Haradatta.  The 
commentator  then  goes  on  to  quote  a  passage  from  U^anas,  which 
he  considers  applicable,  because  it  contains  the  names  of  the 
Grzliadevatas.  I  doubt,  however,  if  the  '  others '  are  right,  and 
still  more  if,  in  case  they  should  be  right,  it  would  be  advisable 
to  supply  the  names  of  the  Gr/hadevatas  from  U^anas. 

14.  '  Because  the  word  "  and  "  occurs  in  Sutra  1 1  after  the  word 
"  to  the  deities  presiding  over  the  points  of  the  horizon  "  a  Bali- 
offering  must  be  presented  to  the  deities  mentioned  by  the  author 
in  Sutra  10,  viz.  to  the  earth,  wind,  Pra^apati,  and  to  all  the  gods, 
after  a  Bali  has  been  offered  to  Brahman.' — Haradatta. 

16.  '  The  Bali  presented  to  Akaja,  "  the  ether,"  must  be  thrown 
up  into  the  air,  as  Manu  says,  III,  90.' — Haradatta. 

17.  '  Because  of  the  word  "and,"  he  must,  also,  present  Balis  to 
the  deities  mentioned  above.' — Haradatta.  The  commentator  means 
to  say  that  in  the  evening  not  only  the  '  Beings  walking  about 
at  night'  (naktaw/'ara)  are  to  receive  a  pordon,  but  all  the  other 
deities  too,  and  that  the  Balikarma  must  be  offered  twice  a  day. 


V,23.  HOUSEHOLDER.  201 

1 8.  A  gift  of  food  shall  be  preceded  by  a  libation 
of  water  and  (it  shall  be  presented)  after  (the  re- 
cipient) has  been  made  to  say,  *  May  welfare  attend 
thee/ 

19.  And  the  same  (rule  applies)  to  all  gifts  pre- 
sented for  the  sake  of  spiritual  merit. 

20.  The  reward  of  a  gift  (offered)  to  a  person 
who  is  not  a  Brahma;/a  is  equal  (to  the  value  of 
the  gift),  those  (of  presents  given)  to  a  Brahma;^a 
twofold,  to  a  vSrotriya  thousandfold,  to  one  who 
knows  the  whole  \  eda  (vedaparaga)  endless. 

21.  Presents  of  money  (must  be  given)  outside 
the  Vedi  to  persons  begging  for  their  Gurus,  (or)  in 
order  to  defray  the  expenses  of  their  wedding,  (or 
to  procure)  medicine  for  the  sick,  to  those  who 
are  without  means  of  subsistence,  to  those  who  are 
going  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  to  those  engaged  in  study, 
to  travellers,  (and)  to  those  who  have  performed 
the  Vi^va^it-sacrifice. 

22.  Prepared  food  (must  be  given)  to  other 
beggars. 

23.  For  an  unlawful  purpose  he  shall  not  give 
(anything),  though  he  may  have  promised  it. 


18-19.   Apastamba  II,  4,  9,  8. 

20.  According  to  Haradatta  the  term  5'rotriya  here  denotes  one 
who  has  studied  one  Veda,  (but  see  also  Apastamba  II,  3,  6,  4  ; 
II,  4,  8,  5.)  Vedaparaga  is  a  man  who  has  studied  one  Veda, 
together  with  the  Angas,  Kalpa-sutras,  and  Upanishads. 

21.  Apastamba  II,  5,  10,  1-2.  'Now  he  promulgates  a  Siitra 
which  refers  to  those  cases  where  one  must  necessarily  make  gifts, 
and  where  one  incurs  guilt  by  a  refusal.  ...  As  the  expression 
"  outside  the  Vedi  "  is  used,  presents  must  be  given  to  others  also 
"  inside  the  Vedi  "  (i.  e.  fees  to  priests,  &c.) ' — Haradatta. 

22.  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  14. 

23.  Apastamba  II,  5, 10,  3 ;  Colebrooke  II,  Digest  IV,  47 ;  Mayu- 


202  GAUTAMA.  V,  24. 

24.  An  untruth  spoken  by  people  under  the  influ- 
ence of  anger,  excessive  joy,  fear,  pain  (or)  greed, 
by  infants,  very  old  men,  persons  labouring  under 
a  delusion,  those  being  under  the  influence  of  drink 
(or)  by  mad  men  does  not  cause  (the  speaker)  to 
fall. 

25.  Before  (a  householder  eats)  he  shall  feed  his 
guests,  the  infants,  the  sick  people,  the  pregnant 
women,  the  females  under  his  protection,  the  very 
aged  men,  and  those  of  low  condition  (who  may 
be  in  his  house). 

26.  But  (when)  his  teacher,  parents  (or  intimate) 
friends  (visit  his  house),  he  shall  proceed  to  the 
preparation  of  the  dinner  after  asking  them  (for 
orders). 

27.  When  an  officiating  priest,  his  teacher,  his 
father-in-law,  paternal  or  maternal  uncles  visit  (him), 
a  Madhuparka  (or  honey-mixture  must  be  offered 
to  them). 

28.  (If  they  have  been  once  honoured  in  this 
manner  the  ceremony  need  be)  repeated  (only)  after 
a  year. 

29.  (But)   on  (the    occasion    of)   a  sacrifice   and 

kha  IX,  5.     'As  he  says  "for  an  unlawful  purpose,"  what  has  been 
promised  must  in  other  cases  necessarily  be  given.' — Haradatta. 

24.  Colebrooke  II,  Digest  IV,  56.  '"Does  not  cause  (the 
speaker)  to  fall,"  i.  e.  produces  no  guilt.  Hence  such  persons 
need  not  even  give  a  promised  present.' — Haradatta. 

25.  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  11-13;  II,  4,  9,  10;  Manu  III,  116. 
'  Females  under  his  protection  (suvasinya/?),  i.  e.  daughters  and 
sisters  .  .  .  ,  those  of  low  condition  (^aghanya/i),  i.  e.  servants, 
slaves,  and  the  like.  .  .  .  The  term  "men  of  low  condition"  is 
made  a  separate  word  in  the  text  in  order  to  show  that  they 
come  after  the  others.' — Haradatta. 

26.  INIanu  III,  113. 

27.  Apastamba  II,  4,  8,  5-9. 


V,  36.  HOUSEHOLDER.  203 

of  the  wedding  (a  Madhuparka  must  be  offered, 
though)  less  than  a  year  (has  passed  since  the  last 
visit  of  the  persons  thus  honoured). 

30.  And  to  a  king  who  is  a  6'rotriya  (a  Madhu- 
parka must  be  offered  as  often  as  he  comes), 

31.  (But  to  a  king)  who  is  not  a  ^Srotriya  a  seat 
and  water. 

32.  But  for  a  5'rotriya  he  shall  cause  to  be  pre- 
pared a  foot-bath,  an  Arghya,  and  food  of  a  superior 
quality, 

33.  Or  his  usual  food  distinguished  by  a  (par- 
ticularly careful)  preparation. 

34.  To  a  (Brahmawa)  who  is  not  learned  in  the 
V^edas,  (but)  of  good  conduct,  food  of  a  middling 
(quality)  shall  be  given, 

35.  To  one  who  is  the  reverse  (of  virtuous)  grass 
and  water, 

36.  (Or)  at  least  a  welcome. 

30.  '  And  to  a  king  a  Madhuparka  must  be  offered  on  his 
arrival.  If  he  is  a  ^rotriya  (this  must  be  done)  on  each  visit.' — 
Haradatta. 

31.  'A  king  who  is  not  a  ^rotriya  shall  be  honoured  with  a 
seat  and  water,  not  with  a  ^ladhuparka.' — Haradatta. 

32.  Apastamba  II,  3,  6,  7-10,  14-15.  'This  Siitra  may  be 
optionally  taken  as  referring  to  a  Brahma//a,  because  the  word 
^Srotriya  is  repeated.  For  a  6'rotriya  who  has  come  as  a  guest, 
a  foot-bath,  i.  e.  water  for  washing  the  feet,  an  Arghya,  i.  e.  water 
mixed  with  Diirva  grass,  flowers,  &c.,  and  food  of  a  superior 
quaUty,  i.  e.  milk  and  rice ;  cakes  and  the  like  shall  be  particularly 
prepared,  if  the  host  is  able  to  afford  it.' — Haradatta. 

33.  '  But  if  (the  host  is)  not  able  (to  afford  dainties),  he  shall 
prepare  that  same  food  which  is  daily  used  in  his  house,  dis- 
tinguished in  the  preparation,  i.  e.  by  adding  pepper  and  the  like 
condiments,  by  frying  it,  and  so  forth.' — Haradatta. 

34.  Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  16 ;  II,  3,  6,  12.  Haradatta  points  out 
that  in  this  case  nothing  but  a  simple  dinner  shall  be  given. 

36.   Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  14.    '  On  failure  of  grass  and  the  rest. 


204  GAUTAMA,  V,  37. 

37.  Honour  (must  be  shown  to  a  guest,  and  the 
host  must)  not  dine  better  (than  his  guest). 

2)8.  A  couch,  a  seat,  (and)  a  lodging  (of  the) 
same  (quahty  as  the  host  uses  must  be  given)  to 
(a  guest)  of  equal  condition  and  to  one's  betters ; 
they  must  be  accompanied  (on  departure)  and  re- 
spectfully attended  to  (during  their  stay). 

39.  (The  host  shall  show  similar)  though  less 
(attention)  to  (a  guest)  who  is  inferior  (to  himself). 

40.  He  is  called  a  guest  who,  belonging  to  a 
different  village  (and)  intending  to  stay  for  one 
night  only,  arrives  when  the  sun's  beams  pass  over 
the  trees. 

41.  According  (to  his  caste  a  guest)  must  be  asked 
about  his  well-being  (kui'ala),  about  his  being  free 
from  hurt  (anamaya),  or  about  his  health  (arogya). 

42.  The  last  (formula  must  also  be  used  in  ad- 
dressing) a  ^'udra. 

43.  A  man  of  a  lower  caste  (is)  not  (to  be  con- 

a  welcome,  i.  e.  (the  host  shall  say),  "  Thou  art  tired,  sit  down 
here."  ' — Haradatta. 

37.  Manu  III,  106-107.  'This  Sutra  refers  solely  to  such  a 
guest,  as  is  described  below,  Sutra  40/ — Haradatta. 

38.  'Accompanying,  i.  e.  walking  after  him;  respectfully  attend- 
ing to,  i.  e.  sitting  with  him  and  so  forth.  As  it  is  not  possible 
that  these  two  acts  can  be  performed  by  the  host  in  the  same 
manner  as  for  himself,  the  meaning  of  the  Sutra  must  be  taken  to 
be  merely  that  they  are  to  be  performed.' — Haradatta. 

39.  Haradatta  says  that  some  explain  this  Sutra  to  mean, 
'(The  host  shall  show  the  same  attention)  even  to  a  man  who  is  a 
little  inferior  (to  himself  in  learning,  &c.),'  but  that  he  disapproves 
of  their  opinion. 

40.  Apastamba  II,  3,  6,  5.  Haradatta  states,  that  by  '  the  time 
when  the  sun's  rays  pass  over  the  trees,'  either  the  middle  of  the 
day  or  the  late  afternoon  may  be  meant. 

41.  Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  26-29. 
43.    Apastamba  11,  2,  4,  18-19. 


VI,  5.  SALUTING.  205 

sidered)  a  guest  by  a  Brahmawa,  except  if  he  has 
approached  on  (the  occasion  of)  a  sacrifice. 

44.  But  a  Kshatriya  must  be  fed  after  the  Brah- 
ma;/a  (guests). 

45.  (Men  of)  other  (castes  he  shall  feed)  with  his 
servants  for  mercy's  sake. 

Chapter  VI. 

1.  (To  salute)  ever}-  day  on  meeting  (by)  an 
embrace  of  the  feet, 

2.  And  (particularly)  on  return  from  a  journey, 

3.  (Is  prescribed  in  the  case)  of  parents,  of  their 
blood  relations,  of  elder  (brothers),  of  persons  venera- 
ble on  account  of  their  learning,  and  of  the  Gurus  of 
the  latter. 

4.  On  meeting  (several  persons,  to  whom  such 
a  salutation  is  due),  together,  the  most  venerable 
(must  be  saluted  first). 

5.  On  meeting  persons  who  understand  (the  rule 
of  returning  salutes)  one  shall  salute  (them)  pro- 
nouncing one's  name,  and  (saying),  'I  N.  X.  (ho ! 
salute  thee).' 


VI.  I.   Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  7-9;  I,  2,  5,  19;  I,  2,  8,  17-18. 

3.  '  Their  blood  relations,  i.  e.  paternal  and  maternal  uncles  and 
the  rest ;  elders,  i.e.  elder  brothers  ;  persons  venerable  on  account 
of  their  learning,  i.  e.  the  teacher  who  has  initiated  him  (aiarya), 
the  teacher  who  has  instructed  him  (upadhyaya),  and  the  rest.' — 
Haradatta. 

4.  Apastamba  I,  2,  6,  29;  I,  2,  8,  19.  '  On  meeting  his  mother 
and  other  persons  whose  feet  must  be  embraced,  he  shall  first 
embrace  the  highest,  i.  e.  the  most  excellent,  afterwards  the  others. 
\Mio  the  most  excellent  is  has  been  declared  above,  II,  50-51. 

5.  Apastamba  I,  2,  5,  12-15.  Professor  Stenzler  reads  agna.- 
samavaye,  while  my  copies  and  their  commentar)-  show  that 
^fiasamavaye  has  to  be   read.     Besides,  it  seems  impossible  to 


206  GAUTAMA.  VI,  6. 


6.  Some  (declare  that)  there  is  no  restrictive  rule 
for  salutations  between  man  and  wife. 

7.  (The  feet  of)  other  female  (relations)  than  the 
mother,  a  paternal  uncle's  wife  and  (elder)  sisters 
(need)  not  (be  embraced,  nor  need  they  be  salif^d) 
except  on  return  from  a  journey. 

8.  The  feet  of  wives  of  brothers  and  the  mother- 
in-law  (need)  not  be  embraced  (on  any  occasion). 

9.  But  (on  the  arrival  of  an)  officiating  priest, 
a  father-in-law,  paternal  and  maternal  uncles  who 
are  younger  (than  oneself),  one  must  rise ;  they 
need  not  be  saluted  (as  prescribed  above,  Sutra  5). 

10.  In  like  manner  (any)  other  aged  fellow-citizen, 
even  a  .S'udra  of  eighty  years  and  more,  (must  be 
honoured)  by  one  young  enough  to  be  his  son, 

make  any  sense  out  of  the  former  reading  without  assuming 
that  the  construction  is  strongly  elliptical.  '  On  meeting,  i.  e.  on 
coming  together  with  him  who  knows  the  rule  of  returning  a 
salute,  he  shall  utter,  i.  e.  loudly  pronounce  his  name,  i.  e.  the 
name  which  he  has  received  on  the  tenth  day  (after  his  birth),  and 
which  is  to  be  employed  in  saluting,  and  speak  the  word  "  I "  as 
well  as  the  word  "  this."  They  declare  that  instead  of  the  word 
"  this,"  which  here  is  explicitly  prescribed,  the  word  "  I  am  "  must 
be  used.  Some  salute  thus,  "I  Haradatta  byname;'  others,  "I 
Haradattajarman;"  and  the  common  usage  is  to  say,  "I  Haradatta- 
jarman  by  name."  Thus  the  salutation  must  be  made.  Salutation 
means  saluting.  The  affix  a/^  is  added  to  causatives  and  the  rest. 
With  reference  to  this  matter  the  rule  for  returning  salutes  has 
been  described  by  Manu  II,  126.  ...  As  (in  the  above  Sutra) 
the  expression  "  on  meeting  persons  knowing "  is  used,  those 
who  are  unacquainted  with  the  manner  of  returning  a  salute  must 
not  be  saluted  in  this  manner.  How  is  it  then  to  be  done  ?  It  is 
described  by  Manu  III,  123.' — Haradatta. 

6.  *  As  Gautama  says,  "  Some  declare,"  the  restrictive  rule  must, 
in  his  opinion,  be  followed.' — Haradatta. 

7.  Manu  IT,  132  ;  Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  6,  9. 

9.  Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  ir. 

10.  'Old  (purva),  i.e.  of  greater  age.  ...  A  ^lidra  even,  who 


VI,  i6.  SALUTING.  207 

11.  (And)  an  Arja,  though  (he  be)  younger,  by 
a  6udra ; 

12.  And  he  shall  avoid  (to  pronounce)  the  name 
of  that  (person  who  is  worthy  of  a  salutation). 

13.  And  an  official  who  (is)  not  (able  to)  recite 
(the  Veda  shall  avoid  to  pronounce  the  name)  of 
the  king. 

14.  A  contemporar}'  who  is  born  on  the  same  day 
(shall  be  addressed  with  the  terms)  hho/i  or  bhavan 
(your  honour), 

15.  (Likewise)  a  fellow-citizen  who  is  ten  years 
older  (than  oneself), 

16.  (Also)  an  artist  who  is  five  years  (older). 


answers  this  description,  must  be  honoured  by  rising,  not,  however, 
be  saluted  by  one  young  enough  to  be  his  son,  i.  e.  by  a  Brah- 
ma«a  who  is  very  much  younger.  The  .Sudra  is  mentioned  as 
an  instance  of  a  man  of  inferior  caste.  Hence  a  6'iidra  must 
(under  these  circumstances)  be  honoured  by  rising,  not  be  saluted 
by  men  of  the  three  higher  castes,  a  Vaijya  by  those  of  the  two 
higher  castes,  and  a  Kshatriya  by  a  Brahma«a.' — Haradatta. 

11.  '  An  Arya,  i.  e.  a  man  of  the  three  twice-born  castes,  though 
he  be  inferior,  i.  e.  younger,  must  be  honoured  by  rising,  not  be 
saluted  by  a  6'iidra.  The  ^Vudra  is  mentioned  in  order  to  give  an 
instance  of  (a  man  of)  inferior  caste.' — Haradatta. 

12.  'An  inferior  shall  avoid  to  take  his  name,  i.e.  that  of  a 
superior.' — Haradatta. 

14.  Haradatta  says  that  samanehani,  'on  the  same  day,'  means 
'in  the  same  year.'  He  is  probably  right  in  thinking  that  the 
expression  must  not  be  interpreted  too  strictly.  But  his  assertion 
that  ahaA  means  also  '  year '  cannot  be  proved  by  his  quotation 
from  the  Nighaw/uka,  abde  sa/wvatsaram  ahar^ram. 

15.  'A  person  aged  by  ten  years,  i.e.  at  least  ten  years  older, 
who  lives  in  the  same  town  as  oneself,  is  to  be  addressed  as 
bho>4,  bhavan,  though  he  may  be  deficient  in  good  qualities.' — 
Haradatta. 

16.  'The  words  "years  older"  must  be  understood.  He  who 
lives  by  the  fine  arts  (kala),  i.  e.  the  knowledge  of  music,  painting, 


208  GAUTAMA.  VI,  17. 

I  7.  And  a  KS'rotriya  belonging  to  one's  own  Vedic 
school  who  is  three  years  older, 

18.  (Further),  Brahma;^as  destitute  of  learning 
and  those  who  follow  the  occupations  of  Kshatriyas 
or  Vaii-yas, 

19.  And  (a  contemporary)  who  has  performed  the 
Dlksha;^tyesh/i  of  a  Soma-sacrifice  before  he  buys 
the  Soma. 

20.  Wealth,  relations,  occupation,  birth,  learning, 
and  age  must  be  honoured ;  (but)  each  later  named 
(quality)  is  more  important  (than  the  preceding 
ones). 

21.  But  sacred  learning  is  more  important  than 
all  (other  good  qualities), 

22.  Because  that  is  the  root  of  the  sacred  law, 

23.  And  because  the  Veda  (expressly  declares  it). 

24.  Way  must  be  made  for  a  man  seated  in  a 
carriage,  for  one  who  is  in  his  tenth  (decade),  for 

leaf-cutting,  and  the  like,   and  is  at  least  five  years  older  than 
oneself,  must  be  addressed  as  bho/^  or  bhavan.' — Haradatta. 

17.  Haradatta  notes  that  Apastamba  II,  4,  14,  13  gives  a  some- 
what different  rule. 

18.  Haradatta  adds  that  a  person  destitute  of  learning,  be  he 
ever  so  old,  may  still  be  treated  as  an  equal,  and  addressed  as 
hho/i,  bhavan,  by  a  more  learned  man. 

20.  INIanu  II,  136.  'As  wealth  and  the  rest  cannot  be  directly 
honoured,  the  persons  possessing  them  are  to  be  honoured.  .  .  . 
Respect  (mana)  means  honour  shown  by  saluting  and  the  like.' — 
Haradatta. 

21.  Manu  II,  154. 

23.  Haradatta  says  that  a  passage  to  this  effect  occurs  in  the 
^/^andogya-brahma«a.    He  also  refers  to  Manu  II,  151. 

24.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  5,  7-9.  'A  person  requiring  con- 
sideration, i.  e.  one  afflicted  by  disease.  A  woman,  i.  e.  a  bride 
or  a  pregnant  woman.  A  Snataka,  i.  e.  a  person  who  has  bathed 
after  completing  his  studies  and  after  having  kept  the  vow  of 
studentship.' — Haradatta. 


VII,  7-  TIMES    OF    DISTRESS.  209 

one    requiring   consideration,   for   a    woman,    for   a 
Snataka,  and  for  a  king. 

25.    But  a  king  (must  make  way)  for  a  ^^rotriya. 

Chapter  VII. 

1.  The  rule  for  (times  of)  distress  (is)  that  a 
Brahma;^a  may  study  under  a  teacher  who  is  not 
a  Brahma;/a. 

2.  (A  student  is  bound)  to  walk  behind  and  to 
obey  (his  non-Brahmanical  teacher). 

3.  (But)  when  (the  course  of  study)  has  been 
finished,  the  Brahma;^a  (pupil  is  more)  venerable 
(than  his  teacher). 

4.  (In  times  of  distress  it  is  permissible)  to  offer 
sacrifices  for  (men  of)  all  (castes),  to  teach  (them), 
and  to  accept  (presents  from  them). 

5.  Each  preceding  (mode  of  living  is)  preferable 
(to  those  named  later). 

6.  On  failure  of  the  (occupations  lawful  for  a 
Brahma;m)  he  may  live  by  the  occupations  of  a 
Kshatriya. 

7.  On  failure  of  those,  he  may  live  by  the 
occupations  of  a  Vai^^-a. 

25.    Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  6. 

VII.  I.   Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  25, 

2.   Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  26.  3.   Apastamba  II,  2,  4,  27. 

4.  Haradatta  quotes  ^lanu  X,  103  in  support  of  the  above 
explanation,  and  adds  that  another  commentator  interprets  the 
Sutra  to  mean,  that  in  times  of  distress  men  of  all  castes  may 
support  themselves  by  sacrificing  for  others,  teaching,  and  the 
acceptance  of  gifts,  though  in  ordinary  times  these  modes  of 
living  are  reserved  for  Brahmawas. 

5.  The  use  of  the  masculine  in  the  text,  '  purva^^  purvo  guru;^,' 
may,  I  think,  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  compound  in  the 
preceding  Sutra  ends  with  a  noun  of  the  masculine  gender. 

6.  Manu  X,  81 ;  Ya^a.  Ill,  35.         7.   Apastamba  I,  7,  20,  11. 
[2]  p 


2IO  GAUTAMA.  VII,  8. 

8.  (Goods)  that  may  not  be  sold  by  a  (Brahma?^a 
are), 

9.  Perfumes,  substances  (used  for)  flavouring 
(food),  prepared  food,  sesamum,  hempen  and  hnen 
cloth,  skins, 

10.  Garments  dyed  red  or  washed, 

1 1 .  Milk  and  preparations  from  it, 

12.  Roots,  fruits,  flowers,  medicines,  honey,  flesh, 
grass,  water,  poison, 

13.  Nor  animals  for  slaughter, 

14.  Nor,  under  any  circumstances,  human  beings, 
heifers,  female  calves,  cows  big  with  young. 

15.  Some  (declare,  that  the  traffic  in)  land,  rice, 
barley,  goats,  sheep,  horses,  bulls,  milch-cows,  and 
draught-oxen  (is)  likewise  (forbidden). 

16.  But  (it  is  permissible)  to  barter, 

1 7.  One  kind  of  substances  used  for  flavouring 
others, 

9.  Apastamba  I,  7,  20,  12-13.  'Substances  used  for  flavouring 
(rasa),  i.  e.  oil,  sugar,  clarified  butter,  salt,  and  the  like.' — Hara- 
datta.  From  Sutra  19  it  is  clear  that  'rasa'  does  not  simply  mean 
'  liquids.' 

10.  My  MSB.  read  nir«ikte  for  nikte,  and  nirmktam  is  explained 
by  '  washed  by  a  washerman  or  the  like  person.'  It  is  possible  to 
translate  Professor  Stenzler's  reading  in  accordance  with  Manu  X, 
87,  '  pairs  of  (i.  e.  upper  and  lower)  garments  dyed  red.' 

11.  'Preparations  from  it,  i.e.  sour  milk  and  the  like.' — 
Haradatta. 

12.  This  rule  contradicts  Apastamba  I,  7,  21,  12,  but  agrees 
with  Manu  X,  87.  'Under  any  circumstances  (nityam,  literally 
"  always ")  means  even  when  they  are  not  sold  for  slaughter. 
Another  (commentator)  says,  that,  as  the  expression  "under  any 
circumstances  "  is  used  here,  the  prohibition  regarding  the  above- 
mentioned  things,  i.  e.  sesamum  and  the  like,  does  not  hold  good 
under  all  circumstances,  and  that  hence  self-grown  sesamum  and 
other  grain  may  be  sold,  see  Manu  X,  90.' — Haradatta. 

15.   Manu  X,  88.     Haradatta  explains  'land'  by  'houses.' 


VIII,  I.      KING  AND  BRAHMAiVA  VERSED  IN  VEDAS.        211 

1 8.  And  animals  (for  animals). 

19.  Salt  and  prepared  food  (must)  not  (be 
bartered), 

20.  Nor  sesamiim. 

21.  But  for  present  use  an  equal  (quantity  of)  un- 
cooked (food  may  be  exchanged)  for  cooked  (food). 

22.  But  if  no  (other  course  is)  possible  (a  Brah- 
ma«a)  may  support  himself  in  any  way  except  by 
(following  the  occupations)  of  a  ^Sudra. 

23.  Some  (permit)  even  this  in  case  his  life  is 
in  danger. 

24.  But  to  mix  with  that  (caste)  and  forbidden 
food  must  be  avoided  (even  in  times  of  distress). 

25.  If  his  life  is  threatened,  even  a  Brahma?^a 
may  use  arms. 

26.  (In  times  of  distress)  a  Kshatriya  (may  follow) 
the  occupations  of  a  Vaii^ya. 

Chapter  VIII. 

I.  A  king  and  a  Brahma;/a,  deeply  versed  in 
the  Vedas,  these  two,  uphold  the  moral  order  in 
the  world. 

19.  '  The  sale  of  salt  and  prepared  food  has  been  forbidden  by 
Sutra  9,  but  their  barter  has  been  permitted  (by  Sutra  17).' — Hara- 
datta. 

22.    Regarding  the  ^Sudra's  occupations,  see  below,  X,  57-60. 

24.  'Restriction  (niyama),  i.e.  avoiding.  That  Brahma«a 
even  who  lives  the  life  of  a  6'udra  must  not  mix  with  that 
.Sudra  caste,  i.  e.  he  must  not  sit  among  .Sadras  and  so  forth.' — 
Haradatta. 

25.  Apastamba  I,  10,  29,  7;  ManuVIII,  348. 

26.  Haradatta  adds,  that  in  accordance  with  the  principle 
exemplified  by  the  rule  of  this  Sutra  in  times  of  distress  a 
Vaijya  may  follow  the  occupations  of  a  ^Sudra. 

VIIL  I.  6'atapatha-brahma«a  V,  4,  4,  5 ;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X, 
29.     Haradatta  explains  vrata,   'moral  order,'  by  karmawi,  'the 

P  2 


2 1 2  GAUTAMA.  VIII,  2. 

2.  On  them  depends  the  existence  of  the  fourfold 
human  race,  of  internally  conscious  beings,  of  those 
which  move  on  feet  and  on  wings,  and  of  those 
wdiich  creep,    . 

3.  (As  well  as)  the  protection  of  offspring,  the 
prevention  of  the  confusion  (of  the  castes  and)  the 
sacred  law. 

4.  He  is  (called)  deeply  versed  in  the  Vedas, 

5.  Who  is  acquainted  with  the  (ways  of  the) 
world,  the  Vedas  (and  their)  Angas  (auxiliary 
sciences), 

6.  Who  Is  skilled  in  disputations  (and),  in  (recit- 
ing) legends  and  the  Pura;^a, 

rites  and  occupations,'  and  loka,  '  world,'  by  rash/ra,  '  kingdom.' 
Ultimately  my  translation  and  his  explanation  come  to  the  same 
thing.  He  adds  that  the  king  upholds  order  by  punishing,  and 
a  learned  Brahma«a  by  teaching.  Regarding  the  excellence  of 
these  two,  see  also  Manu  IV,  135. 

2.  '  Internally  conscious  beings,  i.  e.  trees  and  the  like,  which 
are  immovable,  but  grow  and  decay.  For  such  possess  internal 
consciousness  only,  no  corresponding  external  faculty  of  acting.  .  .  . 
The  existence  of  these,  i.  e.  of  men  and  the  rest,  depends  upon, 
i.  e.  is  subordinate  to  the  king  and  to  a  Brahmawa  deeply  versed 
in  the  Vedas.  How  is  that  ?  As  regards  the  Brahmawa,  an 
offering  which  has  been  properly  thrown  into  the  fire  reaches  the 
sun;  from  the  sun  comes  rain;  from  rain  food  is  produced  and 
thereon  live  the  creatures.  By  this  reasoning  he  is  shown  to 
be  the  cause  of  their  existence.  But  the  king  is  (also)  the  cause 
of  their  existence ;  for  he  punishes  robbers  and  the  like.' — 
Haradatta. 

3.  Haradatta  takes  prasutirakshawam,  '  the  protection  of  their 
offspring,'  as  a  copulative  compound,  and  explains  it  by  '  their 
prosperity  (abhivr/ddhi)  and  their  protection.'  But  a  samahara- 
dvandva  is  here  out  of  place. 

4.  INIacnaghten,  IMitakshara  I,  2,  27.  'By  the  word  loka,  "the 
world,"  are  intended  the  laws  of  countries  and  the  like,  which  may 
be  learnt  from  the  practice  of  the  world.' — Haradatta.  Regarding 
the  Angasj  see  Apastamba  II,  4,  8,  10. 


VIII,  14.       KING  AND  BRAHMAYA  VERSED  IN  VEDAS.      2  I  3 

7.  Who  looks  to  these  (alone),  and  lives  according 
to  these, 

8.  Who  has  been  sanctified  by  the  forty  sacra- 
ments (sawskara), 

9.  Who  is  constantly  engaged  in  the  three  occu- 
pations (prescribed  for  all  twice-born  men), 

10.  Or  in  the  six  (occupations  prescribed  specially 
for  a  Brahma;/a), 

11.  (And)  who  is  well  versed  in  the  duties  of 
daily  life  settled  by  the  agreement  (of  those  who 
know  the  law). 

12.  (Such  a  Brahma/^a)  must  be  allowed  by  the 
king  immunity  from  (the  following)  six  (kinds  of 
opprobrious  treatment) : 

13.  (I.e.)  he  must  not  be  subjected  to  corporal 
punishment,  he  must  not  be  imprisoned,  he  must 
not  be  fined,  he  must  not  be  exiled,  he  must  not  be 
reviled,  nor  be  excluded. 

14.  The  Garbhadhana  (or  ceremony  to  cause 
conception),  the  Pu?;^savana  (or  ceremony  to  cause 
the  birth  of  a  male  child),  the  Simantonnayana  (or 
arranging  the  parting  of  the  pregnant  wife's  hair), 
the  6^atakarman  (or  ceremony  on  the  birth  of  the 


8.  Regarding  the  forty  sacraments,  see  below,  Sutras  14-20. 

9.  Regarding  the  three  occupations,  common  to  all  twice-bom 
men,  see  below,  X,  I. 

10.  See  below,  X,  2. 

11.  The  Samayaiarika  or  Smarta  duties  are  those  taught  in 
the  Dharma-sutras  and  Smr/tis,  see  Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  i,  and 
INIiiller's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  10 1. 

12.  See  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  41,  60,  66;  Macnaghten,  Mita- 
kshara  I,  2,  27. 

14.  Regarding  the  Sawzskaras  mentioned  in  this  Sutra,  see 
Ajvalayana  Grzliya-sutra  I,  13-23;  .S'ahkhayana  Gnliya-sutra  I, 
19-II,  5;  Paraskara  Gr/"hya-siatra  I,  13-II,  2. 


214  GAUTAMA.  VIII,  15. 

child),  the  ceremony  of  naming  the  child,  the  first 
feeding,  the  A"aula  (or  tonsure  of  the  head  of  the 
child),  the  initiation, 

15.  The  four  vows  (undertaken)  for  the  study 
of  the  Veda, 

16.  The  bath  (on  completion  of  the  studentship), 
the  taking  of  a  help-mate  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
religious  duties,  the  performance  of  the  five  sacrifices 
to  gods,  manes,  men,  goblins,  and  Brahman, 

17.  And  (the  performance)  of  the  following 
(sacrifices) : 

18.  The  seven  kinds  of  Pakaya^nas  (or  small 
sacrifices),  viz.  the  Ash/aka,  the  Parva72a  (Sthali- 
paka,  offered  on  the  new  and  full  moon  days),  the 
funeral  oblations,  the  Sravajti,  the  Agrahaya^^i,  the 
A'aitri,  and  the  Asvayu^i ; 

15.  The  four  vows,  as  Haradatta  states,  are,  according  to 
Ajvalayana,  the  Mahanamnivrata,  the  Mahavrata,  the  Upanishad- 
vrata,  and  the  Godana;  see  A^valayana  -S'rauta-sutra  VIII,  14, 
where  the  first  three  are  described  ii\  detail,  and  Gnliya-sutra 
I,  22,  3,  with  the  commentary  thereon.  Other  Grzliya-sutras  give 
more  and  different  names,  see  H.  Oldenberg,  ^Safikhayana  Gr/hya- 
sutra  II,  11-12  (in  Weber's  Ind.  Stud.  vol.  XV),  and  Gobhila 
Gr/'hya-sutra  III,  i,  28-III,  2,  62. 

16.  Haradatta  explains  snana,  'the  bath,'  by  samavartana,  'the 
ceremony  on  completion  of  the  studentship.'  Regarding  the  five 
sacrifices,  usually  called  the  great  sacrifices,  see  a,hove,WlSt,  9  seq. 

18.  The  various  Pakaya^Sas,  named  here,  are  fully  oescribed  by 
Ajvalayana  Gr/hya-sutra  II,  i,  i-II,  10,  8;  Gobhila  III,  10  seq.; 
Paraskara  III,  3  seq.  See  also  INIax  JMiiller,  History  of  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  203.  The  Ash/akas  are  sacrifices  offered  on 
the  eighth  day  of  the  dark  halves  of  the  winter  months,  and  of  those 
of  the  dewy  season,  i.  e.  Kartika,  Marga.yiras,  Pausha,  and  Magha. 
The  6'ravam  is  offered  on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  month  of 
i5'rava«a,  the  Agrahayawt  on  the  fourteenth,  or  on  the  full  moon  day 
of  Marga>riras,  the  ^aitri  on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  Aaitra,  and 
the  Aj-vayu^i  on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  month  Ajvayu^a  or 
Ajvina. 


VIII,  25-       KING  AND  BRAHMAiS^\  VERSED  IN  VEDAS.      2  I  5 

19.  The  seven  kinds  of  Havirya^fias,  viz.  the 
Agnyadheya,  the  Agnihotra,  the  Darjapaun^amasas, 
the  Agraya;^a,  the  A'^turmasyas,  the  Niru^/^apaju- 
bandha,  and  the  Sautrama?^! ; 

20.  The  seven  kinds  of  Soma-sacrifices,  viz.  the 
Agnish/oma,  the  Atyagnish^oma,  the  Ukthya,  the 
Sho^ajin,  the  Atiratra,  and  the  Aptoryama ; 

21.  These  are  the  forty  sacraments. 

22.  Now  (follow)  the  eight  good  qualities  of  the 
soul, 

23.  (Viz.)  compassion  on  all  creatures,  forbear- 
ance, freedom  from  anger,  purity,  quietism,  aus- 
piciousness,  freedom  from  avarice,  and  freedom  from 
covetousness. 

24.  He  who  is  sanctified  by  these  forty  sacra- 
ments, but  whose  soul  is  destitute  of  the  eight  good 
qualities,  will  not  be  united  with  Brahman,  nor  does 
he  reach  his  heaven. 

25.  But  he,  forsooth,  who  Is  sanctified  by  a  few 
only  of  these  forty  sacraments,  and  whose  soul  is 
endowed  with  the  eight  excellent  qualities,  will  be 
united  with  Brahman,  and  will  dwell  in  his  heaven. 


19-20.  The  Havirya^as  and  Soma-sacrifices  are  described  in 
the  Brahma«as  and  ^rauta-sutras.  Havis  denotes  any  kind  of  food 
used  for  oblations,  such  as  clarified  butter,  milk,  rice,  meat,  &c. 

22.  Apastamba  I,  8,  23,  6, 

23,  Haradatta  explains  mangalya,  '  auspiciousness,'  to  mean 
*  always  doing  what  is  praised  (by  good  men)  and  avoiding  what 
is  blamed  by  them.'  Anayasa,  'quietism,'  means,  according  to  him, 
'avoiding  to  undertake  that  which  causes  pain  to  oneself,  even 
though  it  be  a  duty.' 


2l6  GAUTAMA.  IX,  i. 

Chapter  IX. 

1.  Such  (a  man)  shall  bathe,  after  (having  ful- 
filled) the  law  (regarding  studentship),  take  unto 
him  a  wife,  and,  fulfilling  the  duties  of  a  householder 
which  have  been  declared  above,  in  addition  obey 
the  following  ordinances  : 

2.  (He  shall  be)  always  pure  (and)  sweet-smelling 
(and)  bathe  frequently. 

IX.  I.  Apastamba  I,  ii,  30,  1-4.  Haradatta  says  that  the  ex- 
pression sa, '  such  (a  man),'  refers  to  the  king  and  to  the  Brahma«a 
deeply  versed  in  the  Vedas,  who  have  been  described  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter.  My  MSS.  insert  between  this  and  the  following 
one  another  Sutra,  which  has  been  left  out  in  Professor  Stenzler's 
edition.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  absolutely  required,  and  I  there- 
fore insert  it  here,  together  with  Haradatta's  comment,  according 
to  my  best  copy,  P. 

Gautama :  '  (And)  a  Snataka  (i.  e.  a  person  who  has  completed 
his  studentship,  but  has  not  yet  taken  a  wife,  shall  act  thus).'  Hara- 
datta :  '  It  must  be  understood  that  the  word  "  and  "  has  been  left 
out.  (The  meaning  is)  :  "  And  a  Snataka  shall  obey  the  following 
ordinances."  If  this  Sutra  were  not  given,  those  ordinances  would 
have  to  be  obeyed  after  marriage  only ;  and  if  the  preceding  Sutra 
(i)  had  not  been  given,  before  marriage  only,  because  the  term 
Snataka  is  usually  employed  in  that  (sense)  only.  For  this  reason 
both  (Sutras)  have  been  given.  Hence,  though  a  man  may  not  enter 
another  order,  he  shall,  after  taking  the  bath  (on  completion  of  his 
studentship),  obey  these  ordinances  during  his  whole  life.  As  here 
(SUtra  i)  the  word  sa,  "  such  a  man,"  is  used,  a  Kshatriya  and 
a  Brahmawa  only  must  necessarily  obey  the  rules  prescribed  for 
a  Snataka  and  perform  a  penance  for  breaking  them ;  and  the 
penance  for  breaking  the  rules  prescribed  for  a  Snataka  is  fasting. 
This  is  (the  object  of  the  insertion  of  the  word  sa,  "such  (a  man)." 
But,  if  a  Vaijya  follows  them,  (his  reward  will  be)  prosperity ;  if 
he  breaks  them,  he  need  not  perform  a  penance.  With  respect  to 
this  matter  another  Smn'ti  says ;  "  The  penance  which  is  prescribed 
for  a  breach  of  the  Snataka  laws,  must  be  performed  by  a  Kshatriya 
and  a  Brahmawa  alone,  never  by  (men  of)  the  other  (caste)." ' 

2.    Manu  IV,  35. 


IX,  12.  THE    DUTIES    OF   A    SNATAKA.  2  I  7 

3.  If  he  possesses  wealth,  he  shall  not  be  dressed 
in  old  or  dirty  clothes ; 

4.  Nor  shall  he  wear  dyed  or  sumptuous  gar- 
ments, nor  such  as  have  been  worn  (before)  by 
others, 

5.  Nor  a  garland  and  shoes  (that  have  been  worn 
by  others). 

6.  (He  may  wear  a  cast-off  garment)  which  has 
been  washed,  if  he  is  unable  (to  afford  a  new  one). 

7.  He  shall  not  allow  his  beard  to  grow  without 
a  (sufficient)  reason. 

8.  He  shall  not  carry  water  and  fire  at  the  same 
time. 

9.  He  shall  not  drink  out  of  his  joined  hands. 

10.  He  shall  not  sip  water  standing,  nor  (shall  he 
sip)  water  drawn  up  (from  a  well), 

11.  Nor  (water)  that  is  offered  by  a  ^'udra  or 
an  impure  man,  or  that  has  been  taken  up  with 
one  hand. 

12.  Facing  or  within  sight  of  wind,  fire,  Brah- 
ma;;as,  the  sun,  water,   (images  of  the)  gods,  and 

3-4.  Apastamba  1, 11,30,  10-13.  5-  jManu  IV^,  66. 

6.  According  to  Haradatta  the  same  rule  applies  to  garlands 
and  shoes. 

7.  Manu  IV,  35.  'The  expression  "his  beard"  includes  by 
implication  the  nails  and  the  rest As  he  says  "  without  a  suf- 
ficient reason,"  he  shall  allow  his  beard  to  grow  during  the  preg- 
nancy of  his  wife  and  on  other  occasions.  With  respect  to  this 
matter  they  quote  the  following  verse  :  "  In  the  sixth  year  and  in 
the  sixteenth  year,  likewise  in  the  year  of  his  marriage  and  during 
the  pregnancy  of  his  wife,  he  shall  avoid  the  use  of  a  razor." ' — 
Haradatta. 

8.  Apastamba  11^5,  12,  9.  9.   Manu  IV,  63. 
10.   Apastamba  I,  5, 16,  i. 

IT.    Apastamba  I,  i,  4,  21 ;  I,  5,  16,  3. 
12.   Apastamba  I,  II,  30, 18-20. 


2  1 8  GAUTAMA.  IX,  13. 

COWS  he  shall   not  eject    urine    or  faeces   or  other 
impurities. 

13.  He  shall  not  stretch  out  his  feet  towards 
those  divine  beings. 

14.  He  shall  not  remove  urine  or  fceces  with 
leaves,  clods  of  earth,  or  stones. 

15.  He  shall  not  stand  upon  ashes,  hair,  nail 
(parings),  husks  (of  grain),  pot-sherds,  or  impure 
substances. 

16.  He  shall  not  converse  with  barbarians,  im- 
pure or  wicked  men. 

17.  If  he  has  conversed  (with  such  persons),  he 
shall  meditate  on  virtuous  (men) ; 

18.  Or  he  may  speak  with  a  Brahma;^a. 

19.  He  shall  call  (a  cow  that  is)  not  a  milch-cow, 
a  cow  that  will  become  a  milch-cow. 

20.  (An  event)  that  is  not  lucky  (he  shall  call) 
lucky. 

21.  (In  speaking  of)  a  skull  (he  shall  use  the 
word)  bhagala  instead  of  kapala, 

22.  (And  in  speaking  of)  a  rainbow,  ma;2idhanus 
(the  jewelled  bow)  instead  of  indradhanus  (Indra's 
bow). 


13.  Apastamba  I,  11,  30,  22. 

14.  Apastamba  I,  11,  30,  21.  Haradatta  remarks  that  some 
explain  losh/,^a,  '  a  clod  of  earth,'  by  kapala,  '  a  pot-sherd.' 

15.  Apastamba  II,  8,  20,  11.  Kapala,  'pot-sherds,'  may  also 
mean  'skull-bones.' 

16.  Manu  IV,  57.  Haradatta  says  that  only  a  conversation, 
properly  so  called,  is  forbidden,  not  to  ask  barbarians  &c.  about 
the  road  and  similar  matters. 

18.  Compare  the  analogous  case,  mentioned  Apastamba  I,  3, 

9>i3- 

19.  Apastamba  I,  II,  31,  I  i-i 2. 
22.    Apastamba  I,  11,  31,  18. 


IX,  32-  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    SNATAKA.  2  1 9 

23.  Let  him  not  announce  it  to  others,  if  a  cow 
suckles  (her  calf), 

24.  Nor  let  him  prevent  her  (from  doing  it). 

25.  After  conjugal  intercourse  he  shall  at  once 
clean  himself. 

26.  Let  him  not  recite  the  daily  portion  of  the 
Veda  (lying)  on  that  couch  (on  which  he  lies  with 
his  wife). 

27.  And  when  he  has  studied  during  the  third 
watch  of  the  night,  he  shall  not  again  retire  to  rest. 

28.  Let  him  not  have  intercourse  with  his  wife 
when  she  is  ill, 

29.  Nor  during  her  courses  ; 

30.  Nor  let  him  embrace  her  (during  that  period), 

31.  Nor  an  unmarried  female. 

32.  He  shall  avoid  to  blow  the  fire  with  his 
mouth,  to  contend  with  words,  to  show  himself 
covered  with  perfumed  ointments  or  wearing  gar- 
lands, to  scratch  himself  with  any  impure  (imple- 
ment), to  take  his  meals  with  his  wife,  to  look  at 
(a  woman)  who  is  anointing  herself,  to  enter  (his 
village)  by  a  back-gate,  to  wash  one  foot  with  the 

23.  Apastamba  1, 11,  30,  10.  Haradatta  remarks  that  the  pro- 
hibition does  not  extend  to  those  cases  where  the  Vedic  ritual 
requires  the  fact  to  be  pointed  out.  He  is,  of  course,  right  in 
making  this  statement,  as  an  express  injunction  of  the  Smti  always 
overrides  the  rules  of  the  Smr/ti. 

24.  Haradatta  adds  that  this  and  the  preceding  Sutras  include 
by  implication  the  cases  where  a  cow  does  damage  in  a  field ;  see 
Apastamba  1, 11,  31,  9. 

25.  Apastamba  II,  I,  I,  2 i-H,  I,  2, 1. 

26.  Apastamba  I,  11,  32,  3.  27.    Apastamba  I,  ii,  32, 15. 
29-30.    Manu  IV,  40. 

32.  Apastamba  I,  5,  15,  20;  I,  11,  32,  5;  INIanu  IV,  43;  Apa- 
stamba I,  II,  31,  23;  Manu  IV,  74;  Apastamba  I,  11,  32,  26; 
I,  II,  32,  25. 


220  GAUTAMA.  IX,  33. 

Other,  to  eat  food  deposited  on  a  chair,  to  cross 
a  river  swimming,  to  ascend  trees  and  dangerous 
(places),  or  to  descend  therefrom,  and  to  imperil 
his  life  (in  any  other  manner). 

33.  Let  him  not  ascend  a  ship  (of)  doubtful 
(solidity). 

34.  He  shall  protect  himself  by  all  (possible) 
means. 

35.  In  the  day-time  he  shall  not  wrap  up  his 
head  while  walking  about ; 

36.  But  at  night  he  shall  cover  it, 

^'j.    And  while  voiding  urine  and  fseces. 

38.  (Let  him)  not  (ease  nature)  without  (first) 
covering  the  ground  (with  grass  or  the  like), 

39.  Nor  close  to  his  dwelling, 

40.  Nor  on  ashes,  on  cow-dung,  in  a  ploughed 
field,  in  the  shade  (of  a  tree),  on  a  road,  in  beautiful 
(spots). 

41.  Let  him  eject  both  urine  and  fseces,  facing 
the  north  in  the  day-time, 

42.  And  in  the  twilight, 

43.  But  at  night,  facing  the  south. 

44.  Let  him  avoid  to  use  a  seat,  clogs,  a  stick 
for  cleaning  the  teeth  (and  other  implements)  made 
of  Palai'a-wood. 

45.  With  shoes  on  (his  feet),  he  shall  not  eat, 
sit  down,  salute,  or  worship  (the  gods). 

33.   Apastamba  1, 11,  31,  27. 

35.  Apastamba  I,  11,  30,  14.  Haradatta  adds  that  he  may  wrap 
up  his  head  while  sitting  down  and  in  walking  when  the  sun  or 
rain  annoys  him. 

38.    Apastamba  I,  II,  30, 15.  39.    Apastamba  I,  11,  31,  2. 

40.   Apastamba  I,  II,  30,  16-18.        41.   Apastamba  1, 11,  31,  i, 

43.   Apastamba  I,  II,  31,  3.  44.   Apastamba  1, 11,  32,  9. 

45.   Apastamba  I,  4,  14,  22. 


IX,  55-  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    SNATAKA.  221 

46.  Let  him  not  pass  idly  (any  part  of  the  day, 
be  it)  morning,  midday,  or  evening ;  but  according 
to  his  ability  (he  shall  make  each  useful)  by  the 
acquisition  of  spiritual  merit  or  of  wealth,  and  by 
taking  his  pleasure. 

47.  But  among  those  (three  aims  of  human  life) 
he  shall  chiefly  attend  to'  the  acquisition  of  spiritual 
merit.. 

48.  Let  him  not  look  at  a  naked  woman  wedded 
to  another  man. 

49.  Let  him  not  draw  a  seat  towards  himself  with 
his  foot. 

50.  He  shall  keep  his  organ,  his  stomach,  his 
hands,  his  feet,  his  tongue,  and  his  eyes  under  due 
restraint. 

51.  Let  him  avoid  to  cut,  to  break,  to  scratch, 
and  to  crush  (anything),  or  to  make  (his  joints) 
crack,  without  a  (sufficient)  reason. 

52.  Let  him  not  step  over  a  rope  (to  which)  a 
calf  (is  tied). 

53.  Let  him  not  be  a  stay-at-home. 

54.  Let  him  not  go  to  (perform)  a  sacrifice  with- 
out being  chosen  (to  officiate  as  priest). 

55.  But  at  his  pleasure  (he  may  go)  to  see  it. 

46.  Colebrooke,  ]Mitakshara  II,  i,  22.  'He  shall  use  the 
morning,  according  to  his  ability,  for  acts  tending  to  the  acquisi- 
tion of  spiritual  merit,  such  as  reciting  the  Vedas ;  the  middle  part 
of  the  day  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth;  and  the  evening  for 
scenting  himself,  adorning  himself  with  garlands  and  the  like  acts 
giving  pleasure.' — Haradatta. 

47.  Apastamba  I,  7,  20,  1-4. 

48.  Manu  IV,  53. 

50.  Apastamba  II,  2,  5,  19  ;  Manu  IV,  175,  177. 

51.  Apastamba  I,  11,  32,  28;  II,  8,  20,  13. 

52.  Apastamba  I,  11,  31,  15.  Haradatta  remarks  that  the  word 
'  calf  is  used  to  designate  any  animal  of  the  bovine  species. 


2  22  GAUTAMA.  IX,  56. 

56.  Let  him  not  eat  food  (that  he  has  placed)  in 
his  lap, 

57.  Nor  what  has  been  brought  at  night  by  a 
servant. 

58.  He  shall  not  eat  (substances)  that  have  ac- 
quired strength  (by  standing),  such  as  milk  from 
which  the  cream  has  separated,  butter,  oil-cake, 
buttermilk,  and  the  like. 

59.  But  he  shall  take  his  meals  in  the  morning 
and  in  the  evening,  blessing  his  food,  not  grumbling 
at  it. 

60.  He  shall  never  sleep  naked  at  night ; 

61.  Nor  shall  bathe  (naked); 

62.  And  he  shall  perform  whatever  (else)  aged 
(Brahma72as),  of  subdued  senses,  who  have  been  pro- 
perly obedient  (to  their  teachers),  who  are  free  from 
deceit,  covetousness,  and  error,  and  who  know  the 
Vedas,  declare  (to  be  right). 

63.  In  order  to  acquire  wealth  and  for  the  sake 
of  security  he  may  go  to  a  ruling  (king), 

56.    Manu  IV,  63.  57.   Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  31. 

58.  Apastamba  II,  8,  18,  i;  II,  8,  20,  10.  Haradatta  adds  that 
this  rule  has  been  inserted  here  instead  of  in  the  chapter  on  for- 
bidden food  in  order  to  indicate  that  its  breach  must  be  expiated 
by  the  penance  prescribed  for  a  breach  of  the  Snataka's  vow, 
not  by  that  prescribed  for  eating  forbidden  food. 

59.  Apastamba  II,  i,  i,  2;  II,  2,  3,  11. 

60.  Manu  IV,  75.  61.   Manu  IV,  61. 

62.  Apastamba  I,  11,  32,  29;  I,  7,  20,  8.  Haradatta  adds  that 
the  plural  is  used  in  the  above  Sutra  in  order  to  indicate  that  many 
Brahmawas  must  be  unanimous  regarding  the  practices  to  be 
followed. 

63,  Manu  IV,  33;  X,  113.  'For  the  sake  of  these  objects 
he  may  go  to  a  ruler,  i.  e.  a  king,  without  cringing,  because  the 
preposition  adhi  is  used  (in  the  text,  and)  adhi  denotes  mastership 
(Pacini  I,  4,  97),  The  meaning  that  he  shall  go  (as  becomes) 
an  independent  man.' — Haradatta. 


IX,  73-  THE    DUTIES    OF   A    SNATAKA.  223 

64.  (But)  to  no  Other  (being)  except  the  gods,  his 
Gurus,  and  righteous  (Brahmawas). 

65.  He  shall  seek  to  dwell  in  a  place  where  fire- 
wood, water,  fodder,  Ku^a  grass,  (materials  for 
makine)  earlands  and  roads  exist  in  abundance, 
which  is  chiefly  inhabited  by  Aryans,  which  is  rich 
in  industrious  (men),  and  which  is  governed  by  a 
righteous  (ruler). 

66.  He  shall  pass  excellent  (beings  and  things), 
auspicious  (objects),  temples  of  the  gods,  cross-roads, 
and  the  like  with  his  right  turned  towards  them. 

67.  The  rule  for  times  of  distress  (is,  that)  he 
shall  mentally  perform  all  (that  is  required  by  the 
rule  of)  conduct. 

68.  He  shall  always  speak  the  truth. 

69.  He  shall  conduct  himself  (as  becomes)  an 
Aryan. 

70.  He  shall  instruct  virtuous  (men  only). 

71.  He  shall  follow  the  rules  of  purification 
taught  (in  the  6astras). 

72.  He  shall  take  pleasure  in  the  (study  of  the) 
Veda. 

j^,-    He  shall  never  hurt  (any  being),  he  shall  be 

65.  Apastamba  I,  5,  15,  22;  I,  11,  32,  18.  Aryans,  i.e.  Brah- 
manas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaixyas. 

66.  Manu  IV,  39.  '  A  cow,  a  Brahmawa,  a  well-known  tree, 
and  the  like  are  called  excellent  (beings  or  things).  An  auspicious 
(object),  i.  e.  a  filled  jar  and  the  like.' — Haradatta. 

67.  Haradatta  observes  that  this  rule  refers  to  cases  where, 
being  in  a  hurn,-,  one  cannot  show  one's  reverence  in  the  manner 
described  in  the  preceding  Sutra. 

68.  Manu  IV,  138,  175,  236. 

70.  ISIanu  IV,  80-81. 

71.  Purification  is  here  again  mentioned  in  order  (to  indicate 
that  Snataka  must  pay)  particular  attention  to  it 

72.  Manu  IV,  147-149.  73.   Manu  IV,  2,  238,  246. 


224  GAUTAMA.  IX,  74. 

gentle,  (yet)  firm,  ever  restrain  his   senses,  and  be 
liberal. 

74.  A  Snataka  who  conducts  himself ,  in  this 
manner  will  liberate  his  parents,  his  ancestors,  and 
descendants  from  evil,  and  never  fall  from  Brah- 
man's heaven. 

Chapter  X. 

1.  (The  lawful  occupations  common)  to  (all) 
twice-born  men  are  studying  the  (Veda),  offering 
sacrifices  (for  their  own  sake),  and  giving  (alms). 

2.  Teaching,  performing  sacrifices  for  others,  and 
receiving  alms  (are)  the  additional  (occupations)  of  a 
Brahma;2a. 

3.  But  the  former  (three)  are  obligatory  (on  him). 

4.  Instruction  in  the  Veda  (may  be  given)  with- 
out the  above-mentioned  (vows  and  ceremonies)  in 
case  a  teacher,  blood  relations,  friends  or  Gurus 
(receive  it),  and  in  case  (the  Veda)  is  exchanged  for 
money  or  learning. 

74.    ]\Ianu  II,  260. 

X.  I.  Twice-born  men,  i.e.  Brahma/zas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaijyas. 
Haradatta  says  that  some  believe  the  term  '  twice-born '  to  have 
been  used  in  order  to  indicate  that  the  three  occupations  may  be 
lawfully  followed  after  the  second  birth,  i.e.  the  initiation  only. 
But  he  declares  that  alms  may  be  given  even  by  an  uninitiated 
Aryan,  while  studying  the  Veda  and  sacrificing  are  specially  for- 
bidden to  him. 

2.  Apastamba  II,  5,  10,  4. 

3.  Manu  X,  76.  'The  former,  i.e.  the  three  beginning  with 
studying  (Sutra  i),  must  necessarily  be  followed.  If  he  neglects 
them,  he  commits  sin ;  if  he  follows  them,  he  will  be  exalted. 
But  the  other  occupations,  teaching,  &c.,  shall  be  followed  if 
there  is  occasion  for  them.  No  sin  is  committed  by  neglecting 
them,  nor  any  greatness  gained  by  following  them.  They  are 
merely  means  of  livelihood.' — Haradatta. 

4.  Apastamba  I,  4,  13,  14-17.     The  expression  'above-men- 


X,  12.        LAWFUL  OCCUPATIONS  AND  LIVELIHOOD.  225 

5.  Agriculture  and  trade  (are)  also  {lawful  for 
a  Brahma/^a)  provided  he  does  not  do  the  work 
himself, 

6.  Likew^ise  lending  money  at  interest. 

7.  To  protect  all  created  beings  is  the  additional 
(occupation)  of  a  king, 

8.  And  to  inflict  lawful  punishments. 

9.  He  shall  support  (those)  vS'rotriyas,  (who  are) 
Brahma;/as, 

10.  And  people  unable  to  work,  (even  if  they  are) 
not  Brahma;/as, 

11.  And  those  who  are  free  from  taxes, 

12.  And  (needy)  temporary  students. 

tioned '  refers  to  the  whole  of  the  rules  regarding  a  pupil's  conduct 
given  above,  I,  52-II,  51.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  is 
intended  by  '  the  exchange  of  the  Veda  for  wealth  or  money,'  if 
it  is  not  the  bhr/takadhyapana  or  teaching  for  money  which  Manu 
III,  156  blames  so  severely.  It  seems  to  me  unlikely  that  Gau- 
tama means  simply  to  sanction  this  practice.  It  is  more  probable 
that  his  rule  refers  to  the  case  of  Brahma«as  in  distress,  who 
avail  themselves  of  the  permission  given  above,  VII,  4. 

5-6.  These  rules  which  allow  Brahma«as  to  be  gentlemen 
farmers  and  sleeping  partners  in  mercantile  or  banking  firms, 
managed  by  Vaijyas,  do  not  occur  in  other  Sm/'/tis.  But  they 
agree  with  the  practice  followed  at  present  in  many  parts  of  India, 
and  the  praise  bestowed  in  Vedic  works  on  those  who  present  land 
to  Brahmawas  as  well  as  the  numerous  ancient  land  grants  show 
that  from  early  times  many  Brahma//as  were  holders  of  land,  which, 
as  a  rule,  was  cultivated  by  .Siidras. 

7-8.   Apastamba  II,  5,  10,  6  ;  Manu  VII,  27. 

9.   Apastamba  II,  10,  25,  11  ;  Manu  VII,  135. 

11.  Haradatta  takes  this  Sutra  differently.  He  says:  'The 
immunity  from  taxes  which  has  been  granted  to  Brahmawas  and 
others  by  former  kings  he  shall  maintain  in  the  same  manner 
as  formerly.'  But  I  think  that  *  akara '  must  be  taken  as  a  Bahu- 
vrihi  compound,  and  is  used  to  designate  widows,  orphans, 
ascetics,  &c. ;  see  Apastamba  II,  10,  26,  10-17. 

12.  Haradatta  observes  that  others  explain  upakurva//a,  '  tem- 

[2]  Q 


2  26  GAUTAMA.  X,  13. 

1 3.  And  (to  take)  measures  for  ensuring  victory 
(is  another  duty  of  a  king), 

14.  Especially  when  danger  (from  foes  threatens 
the  kingdom) ; 

1 5.  And  (to  learn)  the  management  of  chariots  and 
the  use  of  the  bow  (is  a  further  duty  of  the  king), 

16.  As  well  as  to  stand  firm  in  battle  and  not  to 
turn  back. 

17.  No  sin  (is  committed)  by  injuring  or  slaying 
(foes)  In  battle, 

18.  Excepting  those  who  have  lost  their  horses, 
charioteers,  or  arms,  those  who  join  their  hands  (In 
supplication),  those  who  flee  with  flying  hair,  those 
who  sit  down  with  averted  faces,  those  who  have 
climbed  (in  flight)  on  eminences  or  trees,  messen- 
gers, and  those  who  declare  themselves  to  be  cows 
or  Brahma/^as. 

19.  If  another  Kshatriya  is  supported  by  (the 
king),  he  shall  follow  the  same  occupations  as  his 
(master). 

20.  The  victor  shall  receive  the  booty  gained  In 
battle. 

21.  But  chariots  and  animals  used  for  riding  (be- 
long) to  the  king, 

porary  students,'  opposed  to  naish//nka,  '  permanent  students/  to 
mean  'men  who  benefit  the  people,'  i.e.  physicians  and  the  Hke. 

13.    Manu  VII,  103— no,  160-200;  X,  119. 

16.    Manu  VII,  87-89  ;  X,  119;  Ya^navalkya  I,  233. 

17-18.  Apaslamba  II,  5,  10,  11.  Persons  who  declare  them- 
selves to  be  cows  or  Brahmawas  become  inviolable  on  account 
of  the  sacred  character  of  the  beings  they  personate.  Historical 
instances  are  narrated  where  conquered  kings  were  forced  to 
appear  before  their  victors,  holding  grass  in  their  mouths  or 
dancing  like  peacocks  in  order  to  save  their  lives. 

20.    Manu  VII,  96. 


X,  30.       LAWFUL  OCCUPATIONS  AND  LIVELIHOOD.  Il"] 


22.  And  a  preferential  share,  except  when  the 
booty  has  been  gained  in  single  combat. 

23.  But  the  king  shall  equitably  divide  (all)  other 
(spoils). 

24.  Cultivators  (must)  pay  to  the  king  a  tax 
(amounting  to)  one  tenth,  one  eighth,  or  one  sixth 
(of  the  produce). 

25.  Some  declare,  that  (the  tax)  on  cattle  and 
gold  (amounts  to)  one  fiftieth  (of  the  stock). 

26.  In  the  case  of  merchandise  one  twentieth 
(must  be  paid  by  the  seller)  as  duty, 

27.  (And)  of  roots,  fruits,  flowers,  medicinal  herbs, 
honey,  meat,  grass,  and  firew^ood  one  sixtieth. 

28.  For  it  is  the  duty  (of  the  king)  to  protect  the 
(tax-payers). 

29.  But  to  (the  collection  of)  these  (taxes)  he 
shall  always  pay  particular  attention. 

30.  He  shall  live  on  the  surplus. 


22-23.    Manu  VII,  97. 

24.  Manu  VII,  130.  The  amount  depends  on  the  nature  of 
the  soil  and  the  manner  of  cultivation. 

25.  ]Manu  VII,  130.  The  above  translation  follows  Haradatta's 
explanation,  while  Sir  W.  Jones'  rendering  of  Manu  gives  a  dif- 
ferent meaning  to  the  identical  words. 

26.  Manu  VII,  127.  27.   Manu  X,  120. 

28.   Manu  VII,  128.  29.    Manu  VII,  128,  139. 

30.  Haradatta  takes  this  Sutra  differently.  He  says,  'Adhika, 
"  additional,"  means  the  money  which  is  paid  on  account  of  (the 
additional  occupations)  which  have  been  explained  above  (Sutra 
7  seq.)  "  To  protect  all  created  beings,"  &c.  Thereon  shall  he 
live,  he  himself,  his  servants,  his  elephants,  horses,  and  his  other 
(animals).'  If  this  explanation  is  adopted,  the  Sutra  ought  to  be 
translated  thus,  '  He  shall  live  on  (the  taxes  paid  for  his)  additional 
(occupations).'  It  seems,  however,  more  probable  that  Gautama 
means  to  say  that  the  king  shall  live  on  the  surplus  which  remains 
after  providing  for  the  external  and  internal  security  of  the  kingdom, 

Q  2 


2  28  GAUTAMA-  X,  31. 

31.  Each  artizan  shall  monthly  do  one  (day's) 
work  (for  the  king). 

32.  Hereby  (the  taxes  payable  by)  those  who 
support  themselves  by  personal  labour  have  been 
explained, 

T)^.  And  (those  payable  by)  owners  of  ships  and 
carts. 

34.  He  must  feed  these  (persons  while  they  work 
for  him). 

35.  The  merchants  shall  (each)  give  (every  month 
one)  article  of  merchandise  for  less  than  the  market 
value. 

36.  Those  who  find  lost  (property)  the  owner  of 
which  is  not  (known),  shall  announce  it  to  the  king. 

37.  The  king  shall  cause  it  to  be  proclaimed  (by 
the  public  crier),  and  (if  the  owner  does  not  appear) 
hold  it  in  his  custody  for  a  year. 

38.  Afterwards  one  fourth  (of  the  value  goes)  to 
the  finder  (and)  the  remainder  to  the  king. 

39.  A  (man  becomes)  owner  by  inheritance,  pur- 
chase, partition,  seizure,  or  finding. 


and  that  his  object  is  to  forbid  the  application  of  the  whole  revenue 
to  the  personal  expenses  of  the  ruler. 

31.  IManu  VII,  131. 

32.  Haradatta  says  that  wood-carriers,  dancers,  and  the  like  are 
intended. 

36-38.  Manu  VIII,  30-36;  Ya^ilavalkya  II,  33,  173;  Mac- 
naghten,  Mitakshara  V,  i,  6. 

39.  Manu  X,  115;  INIayukha  IV,  i,  2  ;  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara 
I,  I,  8;  III,  Digest  IV,  22.  'Partition,  i.e.  the  division  (of 
the  estate)  between  brothers  and  other  (coparceners) ;  seizure, 
i.  e.  the  appropriation  before  (others)  of  forest  trees  and  other 
things  which  have  no  owner ;  finding,  i.  e.  the  appropriation  of 
lost  property  the  owner  of  which  is  unknown,  such  as  treasure- 
trove.' — Haradatta. 


X,  50.       LAWFUL  OCCUPATIONS  AND  LIVELIHOOD.  2  29 

40.  Acceptance  is  for  a  Brahma;/a  an  additional 
(mode  of  acquisition) ; 

41.  Conquest  for  a  Kshatriya  ; 

42.  Gain  (by  labour)  for  a  Vai^ya  or  6udra. 

43.  Treasure-trove  is  the  property  of  the  king. 

44.  Excepting  (such  as  is  found)  by  a  Brahma;^a 
who  hves  according  to  (the  law). 

45.  Some  declare,  that  a  finder  of  a  non-Brah- 
manical  caste  even,  who  announces  (his  find  to  the 
king),  shall  obtain  one  sixth  (of  the  value). 

46.  Having  recovered  property  stolen  by  thieves, 
he  shall  return  it  to  the  owner ; 

47.  Or  (if  the  stolen  property  is  not  recovered) 
he  shall  pay  (its  value)  out  of  his  treasury. 

48.  The  property  of  infants  must  be  protected 
until  they  attain  their  majority  or  complete  their 
studentship. 

49.  The  additional  (occupations)  of  a  Vaii-ya  are. 
agriculture,  trade,  tending  cattle,  and  lending  money 
at  interest. 

50.  The  ^'udra  (belongs  to)  the  fourth  caste, 
which  has  one  birth  (only). 

43.  ISIanu  VIII,  38;  Y%Tiavalkya  II,  34;  Macnaghten,  Mita- 
kshara  V,  i,  10. 

44.  Manu  VIII,  37  ;  Ya^navalkya  II,. 34  ;  ^Macnaghien  loc.  cit, 

46.  INIanu  VIII,  40  ;  Y%navalkya  II,  36 ;  Macnaghten,  Mita- 
kshara  V,  i,  14. 

47.  Apastamba  II,  10,  26,  8;  Macnaghten  loc.  cit. 

48.  Manu  VIII,  27. 

49.  Apastamba  II,  5,  10,  7. 

50.  Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  5;  Manu  X,  4.  Between  this  SiJira  and 
the  next,  my  MSS.  insert  an  additional  one,  not  found  in  Professor 
Stenzler's  edition,  ^udrasyapi  nishekapuwsavanasimantonnayanag^a- 
takarmanamakara  «  opanishkrama/rannaprlfana -^  aulany  amantrakaw  i 
yathakalam  upadish/ani/l,  '  for  the  6'udra  also  the  Nisheka  (or 
impregnation),  the  Puwsavana  (or  rite  for  securing  male  offspring). 


230  GAUTAMA.  X,  51. 

51.  For  him  also  (are  prescribed)  truthfulness, 
meekness,  and  purity. 

52.  Some  (declare),  that  instead  of  sipping  water, 
he  shall  wash  his  hands  and  feet. 

53.  (He  shall  also  offer)  the  funeral  oblations, 

54.  Maintain  those  depending  upon  him, 

55.  Live  with  his  wife  (only), 

56.  And  serve  the  higher  (castes). 

57.  From  them  he  shall  seek  to  obtain  his  liveli- 
hood. 

58.  (He  shall  use  their)  cast-off  shoes,  umbrellas, 
garments,  and  mats  (for  sitting  on), 

59.  (And)  eat  the  remnants  of  their  food  ; 

60.  And  (he  may)  live  by  (practising)  mechanical 
arts; 

61.  And  the  Arya  under  whose  protection  he 
places  himself,  must  support  him  even  if  he  (be- 
comes) unable  to  work. 

the  Simantonnayana  (or  arranging  the  parting  of  a  pregnant 
wife),  the  Gatakarman  (or  ceremony  on  the  birth  of  the  child), 
the  name-giving,  the  first  walk  in  the  open  air,  the  first  feeding, 
and  the  Aaula  (or  tonsure  of  the  child's  head)  are  prescribed 
to  be  performed  at  the  proper  periods,  but  without  the  recita- 
tion of  sacred  texts.'  But  I  am  inclined  to  consider  it  spurious  : 
firstly,  because  there  is  no  proper  commentary ;  secondly,  because 
the  enumeration  of  the  Saraskaras  given  here  does  not  agree  with 
that  given  above,  VIII,  14;  and  thirdly,  because,  according  to  the 
practice  of  Gautama,  this  Sutra  should  begin  with  'tasyapi'  instead 
of  with  '^udrasyapi,'  and  the  '  tasyapi'  in  the  next  would  become 
superfluous.  The  rule  agrees  however  with  Manu  X,  63,  127. 
51.    ]\Ianu  IX,  335.  53.    Manu  X,  127-128. 

55.  '  Another  commentator  explains  the  Sutra  to  mean  that 
he  shall  live  with  his  wife  only,  and  never  enter  another  order 
(i.e.  never  become  a  student,  hermit,  or  ascetic).' — Haradatta. 

56.  Apastamba  I,  i,  i,  6-7;  Manu  X,  121-123. 

57.  Manu  X,  124.  58-59.    Manu  X,  125. 
60.    Manu  X,  99. 


XI,  3-  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  23 1 

62.  And  a  man  of  higher  caste  (who  is  his  master 
and  has  fallen  into  distress  must  be  maintained)  b}' 
him. 

63.  His  hoard  shall  serve  this  purpose. 

64.  If  permission  has  been  given  to  him,  he 
may  use  the  exclamation  nama//  (adoration)  as  his 
Mantra. 

65.  Some  (declare),  that  he  himself  may  offer  the 
Pakaya^fias. 

66.  And  all  men  must  serve  those  who  belong  to 
higher  castes. 

67.  If  Aryans  and  non- Aryans  interchange  their 
occupations  and  conduct  (the  one  taking  that  of  the 
other,  there  is)  equality  (between  them). 

Chapter  XL 

1.  The  king  is  master  of  all,  with  the  exception 
of  Brahma?zas. 

2.  (He  shall  be)  holy  in  acts  and  speech, 

3.  Fully  instructed  in  the  threefold  (sacred  science) 
and  in  logic, 

65.  Manu  X,  127.  Regarding  the  Pakaya^-uas,  see  above, 
VIII,  18. 

67.  '  There  is  equality  between  them,  i.  e.  the  one  need  not 
serve  the  other.  A  ^udra  need  not  serve  even  a  Brahmawa,  (much 
less)  any  other  (twice-born  man)  who  lives  the  life  of  a  non-Aryan 
(6'udra).  A  5udra,  even,  who  conducts  himself  like  an  Ar)'an 
must  not  be  despised  by  men  of  other  castes,  who  follow  the 
occupations  of  non-Aryans,  on  account  of  his  inferior  birth.' — 
Haradatta. 

XI.  I.  Macnaghten,  Mitakshara  I,  i,  27;  Manu  IX,  S^S'B-^'} 
Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  29.  60. 

2.  Manu  VII,  26.  '  Holy  in  acts,'  i.  e.  constantly  acting  in  con- 
formity with  the  6'astras ;  '  holy  in  speech,'  i.  e.  when  administering 
justice  he  shall  not  speak  partially. 

3.  ]Manu  VII,  43;  Yagiiavalkya  I,  310.     Haradatta  thinks  ihat 


232  GAUTAMA.  XI,  4. 

4.  Pure,  of  subdued  senses,  surrounded  by  com- 
panions possessing  excellent  qualities  and  by  the 
means  (for  upholding  his  rule). 

5.  He  shall  be  impartial  towards  his  subjects; 

6.  And  he  shall  do  (what  is)  good  for  them. 

7.  All,  excepting  Brahma^zas,  shall  worship  him 
who  is  seated  on  a  higher  seat,  (while  they  them- 
selves sit  on  a)  lower  (one). 

8.  The  (Brahma;ms),  also,  shall  honour  him. 

9.  He  shall  protect  the  castes  and  orders  in  ac- 
cordance w^ith  justice  ; 

10.  And  those  who  leave  (the  path  of)  duty,  he 
shall  lead  back  (to  it). 

11.  For  it  is  declared  (in  the  Veda)  that  he  ob- 
tains a  share  of  the  spiritual  merit  (gained  by  his 
subjects). 

12.  And  he  shall  select  as  his  domestic  priest 
(purohita)  a  Brahma;^a  who  is  learned  (in  the  Vedas), 

the  term  '  the  threefold  sacred  science  includes  the   fourth  Veda 
also,  because  it  consists  chiefly  of  Rikzi  and  Ya^us  formulas.' 

4.  Manu  VII,  30-31  ;  Ya^nlavalkya  I,  354  ;  Apastamba  II,  11, 
27,  18.  'Of  subdued  senses,  i.e.  free  from  the  (seven)  vices 
(common  among  kings),  i.  e.  sensuality,  gambling,  hunting,  drink- 
ing, &c.' — Haradatta.  The  means  (upaya)  are  those  mentioned 
by  Ya^navalkya  I,  345-346. 

5.  Manu  VII,  80  ;  Yao-navalkya  I,  333. 

6.  '  And  he  shall  do  what  is  good,  i.e.  dig  tanks,  build  embank- 
ments and  bridges  &c.  for  them,  i.  e.  his  subjects.'— Haradatta. 

7.  '(On  a)  lower  (one),  i.e.  on  the  ground  only.' — Haradatta. 
This  is  still  the  custom  in  native  courts,  where,  however,  Brah- 
mawas,  as  a  rule,  must  also  sit  on  the  floor. 

8.  '  Honour  him,'  i.  e.  worship  him  by  invoking  blessings  on 
him  and  the  like. 

9.  Manu  VII,  35.  10.    Ya^navalkya  I,  360. 

11.  Manu  VIII,  304;  Ya^ilavalkya  I,  334. 

12.  Manu  VII,  78;  Ya^fiavalkya  1,312.  Haradatta  explains 
vaksampanna,  'eloquent,'  by  'one  who  knows  Sanskrit.'    According 


XI,  i8.  THE    DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  233 

of  noble  family,  eloquent,  handsome,  of  (a  suitable) 
age,  and  of  a  virtuous  disposition,  who  lives  right- 
eously and  who  is  austere. 

13.  With  his  assistance  he  shall  fulfil  his  religious 
duties. 

14.  For  it  is  declared  (in  the  Veda) :  '  Kshatriyas, 
who  are  assisted  by  Brahma;/as,  prosper  and  do  not 
fall  into  distress.' 

15.  He  shall,  also,  take  heed  of  that  which  astro- 
logers and  interpreters  of  omens  tell  (him). 

16.  For  some  (declare),  that  the  acquisition  of 
wealth  and  security  depend  upon  that. 

17.  He  shall  perform  in  the  fire  of  the  hall  the 
rites  ensuring  prosperity  which  are  connected  with 
expiations  (i^anti),  festivals,  a  prosperous  march,  long 
life,  and  auspiciousness ;  as  well  as  those  that  are 
intended  to  cause  enmity,  to  subdue  (enemies),  to 
destroy  (them)  by  incantations,  and  to  cause  their 
misfortune. 

18.  Officiating  priests  (shall  perform)  the  other 
(sacrifices)  according  to  the  precepts  (of  the  X'^eda). 

to  the  same,  'the  (suitable)  age'  is  the  prime  of  life,  when  men 
are  neither  too  young  nor  too  old.  '  Austere  '  is  interpreted  to 
mean  *  not  given  to  sensual  enjoyments.' 

13.    Manu  VII,  78.  14.    .Satapatha-brahmawa  IV,  i,  4,  4-6. 

17.  Apastamba  II,  10,  25,  4,  7.  6'antis,  'expiations,'  are  rites 
intended  to  avert  an  impending  misfortune  which  is  announced  by  an 
evil  omen.  '  Festivals '  are,  according  to  Haradatta,  wedding-days 
and  the  like  ;  '  rites  connected  with  auspiciousness '  are,  according 
to  the  same,  rites  on  entering  a  new  dwelling  and  the  like.  Hara- 
datta further  remarks  that,  though,  according  to  the  text,  the  king 
must  perform  these  rites,  he  is,  in  reality,  only  to  give  the  neces- 
sary orders,  and  to  furnish  the  means  for  their  performance,  while 
the  Purohita  is  to  officiate  as  priest.  He  adds,  that  another  com- 
mentator asserts  that  '  the  Purohita,'  not  '  the  king,'  must  be  taken 
as  the  subject  of  the  sentence. 

18.  Manu  VII,  78-79;   Yajnavalkya  I,  313.     Haradatta  says 


2  34  GAUTAMA.  XI,  19, 

19.  His  administration  of  justice  (shall  be  regu- 
lated by)  the  Veda,  the  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law, 
the  Arigas,  and  the  Pura;2a. 

20.  The  laws  of  countries,  castes,  and  families, 
which  are  not  opposed  to  the  (sacred)  records,  (have) 
also  authority. 

21.  Cultivators,  traders,  herdsmen,  money-lenders, 
and  artizans  (have  authority  to  lay  down  rules)  for 
their  respective  classes. 

22.  Having  learned  the  (state  of)  affairs  from 
those  who  (in  each  class)  have  authority  (to  speak 
he  shall  give)  the  legal  decision. 

23.  Reasoning  is  a  means  for  arriving  at  the 
truth. 

24.  Coming  to  a  conclusion  through  that,  he  shall 
decide  properly. 


that  by  the  '  other '  sacrifices,  both  Gr/hya  and  6'rauta  rites 
are  meant.  I  think  that  the  latter  are  chiefly  intended,  as  the 
Sawzskaras  are  included  under  the  rites  of  festive  days,  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  Sutra. 

19.  The  Ahgas,  i.  e.  the  six  auxiliary  branches  of  learning 
mentioned  above,  VIII,  5.  My  best  copy  inserts  'the  Upavedas ' 
after  the  Afigas.  But  the  words  upaveda/z  and  dharmajastrawi,  '  the 
institutes  of  law,'  are  probably  interpolations.  For  the  latter  are 
already  included  by  the  term  Ahga,  as  part  of  the  Kalpa. 

20.  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  i;  INIanu  VII,  203;  VIII,  41,  46; 
Ya^iiavalkya  I,  342.  '  The  (sacred)  records,  i.  e.  the  Vedas  and  the 
rest.' — Haradatta. 

22.  'Having  learned,  i.e.  having  heard  and  considered,  from 
them,  i.  e.  from  men  of  those  classes,  according  to  their  authority, 
i.  e.  from  those  who  in  each  class  are  authorised  to  give  decisions, 
the  (state  of)  affairs,  i.  e.  the  peculiar  customs,  the  legal  decision 
must  be  given  in  accordance  with  that  which  they  declare  to  be 
the  rule  in  their  community.' — Haradatta. 

23.  Manu  VIII,  44;  XII,  105-106;  Macnaghten,  Mitakshara 
II,  8,  8.  Haradatta  remarks,  that  this  Siitra  refers  to  the  case 
where  the  spokesmen  of  a  guild  may  be  suspected  of  partiality. 


XI,  32.  THE    DUTIES    OF   A    KING.  2^5 


25.  If  (the  evidence)  is  conflicting,  he  shall  learn 
(the  truth)  from  (Brahma;/as)  who  are  well  versed  in 
the  threefold  sacred  lore,  and  give  his  decision 
(accordingly). 

26.  For,  (if  he  acts)  thus,  blessings  will  attend 
him  (in  this  world  and  the  next). 

27.  It  has  been  declared  in  the  Veda :  '  Brahma;/as. 
united  with  Kshatriyas,  uphold  gods,  manes,  and 
men.' 

28.  They  declare,  that  (the  word)  daWa  (rule  or 
punishment)  is  derived  from  (the  verb)  damayati  (he 
restrains) ;  therefore  he  shall  restrain  those  who  do 
not  restrain  themselves, 

29.  (Men  of)  the  (several)  castes  and  orders  who 
always  live  according  to  their  duty  enjoy  after 
death  the  rewards  of  their  works,  and  by  virtue  of  a 
remnant  of  their  (merit)  they  are  born  again  in  ex- 
cellent countries,  castes,  and  families,  (endowed)  with 
beauty,  long  life,  learning  in  the  \"edas,  (virtuous) 
conduct,  wealth,  happiness,  and  wisdom. 

30.  Those  who  act  in  a  contrary  manner  perish, 
being  born  again  in  various  (evil  conditions). 

31.  The  advice  of  the  spiritual  teacher  and  the 
punishment  (inflicted  by  the  king)  guard  them. 

32.  Therefore  a  king  and  a  spiritual  teacher  must 
not  be  reviled. 


25.  Manu  XII,  108-113.     According  to  Haradatta  this  Sutra 
refers  to  particularly  difficult  cases. 

26.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  4. 

29.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  10. 

30.  Apastamba  II,  5,  11,  11.    'Perish,  i.e.  fall  from  one  mis- 
fortune into  the  other.' — Haradatta. 

31.  Apastamba  II,  5,  10,  12-16. 

32.  Manu  VII,  8. 


236  GAUTAMA.  XII,   T. 

Chapter  XII. 

1.  A  ^'udra  who  intentionally  reviles  twice-born 
men  by  criminal  abuse,  or  criminally  assaults  them 
with  blows,  shall  be  deprived  of  the  limb  with  which 
he  offends. 

2.  If  he  has  criminal  intercourse  with  an  Aryan 
woman,  his  organ  shall  be  cut  off,  and  all  his  property 
be  confiscated. 

3.  If  (the  woman  had)  a  protector,  he  shall  be 
executed  after  (having  undergone  the  punishments 
prescribed  above). 

4.  Now  if  he  listens  intentionally  to  (a  recitation 
of)  the  Veda,  his  ears  shall  be  filled  with  (molten) 
tin  or  lac. 

5.  If  he  recites  (Vedic  texts),  his  tongue  shall  be 
cut  out. 

6.  If  he  remembers  them,  his  body  shall  be  split 
in  twain. 

7.  If  he  assumes  a  position  equal  (to  that  of 
twice-born  men)  in  sitting,  in  lying  down,  in  conver- 
sation or  on  the  road,  he  shall  undergo  (corporal) 
punishment. 


XII.  I.  Apastamba  II,  10,  27,  14;  Manu  VIII,  270,  279-283; 
Ya^ilavalkya  II,  215.  Haradatta  adds  that  an  abusive  word  or  a 
blow  given  in  jest  must  not  be  punished  in  the  manner  prescribed 
above,  as  the  word  '  parushya '  presupposes  criminal  intent. 

2.  Apastamba  II,  10,  26,  20;  Mayukha  XIX,  7,  where,  however, 
arya  has  been  altered  to  a/'arya.  Haradatta  adds  that  the  two 
punishments  are  cumulative  in  the  case  of  a  Brahmam  only.  If 
the  offence  is  committed  with  a  Kshatriya,  the  offender  is  liable  to 
the  first  only ;  if  he  sins  with  a  Vaijya,  to  the  second. 

3.  Apastamba  II,  10,  27,  9;  Manu  VIII,  359;  Yag'iiavalkya 
II,  286. 

7.    Apastamba  II,  10,  27,  15;  Manu  VIII,  281. 


Xri,  17.  CRIMINAL    AND    CIVIL    LAW.  237 


8.  A  Kshatriya  (shall  be  fined)  one  hundred 
(Karshapawas)  if  he  abuses  a  Brahma;/a, 

9.  In  case  of  an  assault,  twice  as  much, 

10.  A  Vaii-ya  (who  abuses  a  Brahma;^a,  shall  pa\) 
one  and  a  half  (times  as  much  as  a  Kshatriya). 

11.  But  a  Brahma;^a  (who  abuses)  a  Kshatriya 
(shall  pay)  fifty  (Karshapa;^as), 

12.  One  half  of  that  (amount  if  he  abuses)  a 
Vaii-ya, 

1 3.  (And  if  he  abuses)  a  ^'udra,  nothing. 

14.  A  Kshatriya  and  a  Vaii-ya  (who  abuse  one 
another  shall  pay  the  same  fines)  as  a  Brahma;/a 
and  a  Kshatriya. 

15.  (The  value  of)  property  which  a  ^'udra  un- 
righteously acquires  by  theft,  must  be  repaid  eight- 
fold. 

16.  For  each  of  the  other  castes  (the  fines  must 
be)  doubled. 

17.  If  a  learned  man  offends,  the  punishment 
shall  be  very  much  increased.  / 

8.  Manu  VIII,  267;  Y%Tiavalkya  III,  204-207.  Manu VIII,  136 
states  one  Karshapawa  or  copper  Pa/za  contains  80  Raktikas,  which 
would  correspond  to  97.60  grammes  of  the  metrical  system. 

10.    Manu  VIII,  267.  11.    Manu  VIII,  268. 

12.  Manu  VIII,  268. 

13.  Manu  VIII,  268.  Haradatta  adds  that,  as  a  Brahma«a  is 
declared  to  pay  nothing  for  abusing  a  6"udra,  a  Kshatriya  and  a 
Vaij-ya  are  liable  to  be  fined  for  that  offence,  and  that  according 
to  Ujanas  a  Kshatriya  shall  pay  twenty-four  Pa«as,  and  a  Vaijya 
thirty-six. 

14.  I.e.  a  Vaijya  shall  pay  one  hundred  Pa«as  for  abusing 
a  Kshatriya,  and  a  Kshatriya  fifty  for  abusing  a  Vai^ya. 

15.  Manu  VIII,  337. 

16.  Manu  VIII,  337-338.  I.e.  a  Vaijya  is  to  pay  sixteen 
times  the  value  of  the  stolen  property,  a  Kshatriya  thirty- two 
times,  and  a  Brahma^a  sixty-four  times. 

17.  Manu  VIII,  338. 


238  GAUTAMA.  XII,  18. 

18.  If  fruits,  green  corn,  and  vegetables  are  ap- 
propriated in  small  amounts,  (the  fme  is)  five  Krish- 
nalas  (of  copper). 

19.  If  damage  is  done  by  cattle,  the  responsibility 
falls  on  the  owner. 

20.  But  if  (the  cattle)  were  attended  by  a  herds- 
man, (it  falls)  on  the  latter. 

21.  (If  the  damage  was  done)  in  an  unenclosed 
field  near  the  road,  (the  responsibility  falls)  on  the 
herdsman  and  on  the  owner  of  the  field. 

22.  Five  Mashas  (are  the  fine  to  be  paid)  for 
(damage  done  by)  a  cow, 

2T,.    Six  for  a  camel  or  a  donkey, 

24.  Ten  for  a  horse  or  a  buffalo, 

25.  Two  for  each  goat  or  sheep. 

26.  If  all  is  destroyed,  (the  value  of)  the  whole 
crop  (must  be  paid  and  a  fine  in  addition). 

27.  If  (a  man)  always  neglects  the  prescribed 
(duties)  and  does  that  which  is  forbidden,  his  pro- 
perty beyond  (the  amount  required  for)  raiment  and 
food  shall  be  taken  from  him  (until  he  amends). 

28.  He  may  take,  as  his  own,  grass  for  a  cow, 
and  fuel  for  his  fire,  as  well  as  the  flowers  of 
creepers  and  trees  and  their  fruit,  if  they  be  un- 
enclosed. 

29.  The  legal  interest  for  money  lent  (is  at  the 

18.  Manu  VIII,  330.  Knshwala  is  another  name  for  Raktika, 
used  also  by  Ya^ilavalkya  I,  362.  It  equals  0.122  grammes  of 
the  metrical  system,  Prinsep,  Useful  Tables,  p.  97. 

20-21.    Manu  VIII,  240;  Ya^navalkya  II,  162. 

22-26.  Manu  VIII,  241;  Y%navalkya  II,  159-161;  Colebrooke 
III,  Digest  IV,  40.  Haradatta,  relying  on  U^anas  everywhere, 
reckons  twenty  Mashas  to  the  Karshapawa. 

27.  Apastamba  II,  11,  27,  18. 

28.  Apastamba  I,  10,  28,  3  ;  Colebrooke  III,  Digest  IV,  22. 

29.  Manu  VIII,   140;    Ya^o-fiavalkya    II,    37  j     Colebrooke   I, 


XII,  35-  CRIMINAL    AND    CIVIL    LAW.  239 

rate  of)  five  Mashas  a  month  for  twenty  (Karsha- 
pa;/as). 

30.  Some  (declare,  that  this  rate  should  not  be 
paid)  longer  than  a  year. 

31.  If  (the  loan)  remains  outstanding  for  a  long 
time,  the  principal  may  be  doubled  (after  which 
interest  ceases). 

32.  A  loan  secured  by  a  pledge  that  is  used  (by 
the  creditor)  bears  no  interest; 

2,0.  Nor  money  tendered,  nor  (a  debt  due  by  a 
debtor)  who  is  forcibly  prevented  (from  paying). 

34,  (Special  forms  of  interest  are)  compound  in- 
terest, periodical  interest, 

35.  Stipulated  interest,  corporal  interest,  daily 
interest,  and  the  use  of  a  pledge. 

Digest  25.  Haradatta  states  that  a  Karshapa^a  contains  twenty 
Mashas.  Thus  the  monthly  interest  for  400  INIashas  being  five 
Mashas,  the  rate  is  I5  per  cent  for  the  month,  or  15  per  cent 
per  annum.  / 

30.  Colebrooke  I,  Digest  40  ;   Manu  VIII,  153. 

31.  Manu  VIII,  151  ;  Colebrooke  I,  Digest  59. 

32.  Manu  VIII,  143;  Colebrooke  I,  Digest  79. 

33.  Colebrooke  I,  Digest  79.  *  Likewise  the  debt  of  a  debtor 
who,  being  desirous  to  pay,  is  imprisoned  by  the  king  or  others 
in  a  prison  or  the  like,  and  who  is  thus  unable  to  pay,  does  not 
increase  from  that  day.' — Haradatta. 

34.  For  this  and  the  next  Sucra,  see  also  Colebrooke  I,  Digest 
35-45,  in  the  notes  on  which  latter  text  the  various  explana- 
tions of  these  terms,  found  here,  have  been  fully  discussed.  '  If 
a  large  or  a  small  mterest  is  taken  on  condition  that  the  loan 
is  to  be  repaid  on  a  certain  date,  and  that,  in  case  of  non-payment, 
it  is  to  be  trebled  or  quadrupled,  that  is  called  periodical  interest.' — 
Haradatta. 

35.  '  Where  the  lender  and  the  borrower,  having  regard  to 
the  country,  the  time,  the  object,  and  the  condition  (of  the  bor- 
rower), agree  between  themselves  (on  a  certain  rate),  e.  g.  of  ten 
per  cent  per  mensem,  that  is  called  stipulated  interest.  Corporal 
interest  is  that  which  is  payable  by  bodily  labour.     Thus  B/zlia- 


240  GAUTAMA.  XII,  36. 

36.  The  interest  on  products  of  animals,  on  wool, 
on  the  produce  of  a  field,  and  on  beasts  of  burden 
(shall)  not  (increase)  more  than  the  fivefold  (value 
of  the  object  lent). 

^'j.  The  property  of  (a  person  who  is)  neither  an 
idiot  nor  a  minor,  having  been  used  by  strangers 
before  his  eyes  for  ten  years,  (belongs)  to  him  who 
uses  it, 

38.  (But)  not  (if  it  is  used)  by  ^'rotriyas,  ascetics, 
or  royal  officials. 

39.  Animals,  land,  and  females  are  not  lost  (to 
the  owner)  by  (another's)  possession. 

spati  says,  "  Corporal  interest  is  that  connected  with  work."  But 
Vyasa  explains  it  thus,  "  Corporal  interest  is  that  which  arises 
from  the  work  (or  use)  of  a  (pledged  female  quadruped)  to  be 
milked,  or  of  (a  male)  to  carry  burdens."  Katyayana  explains 
the  daily  interest  (lit.  the  interest  resembling  the  growth  of  the 
lock  on  the  head),  "  That  which  is  taken  daily  is  called  daily 
interest."  .  .  .  E.  g.  for  a  Prastha  of  grain  lent  a  handful  of  grain 
is  taken  daily.' — Haradatta. 

36.  Colebrooke  I,  Digest  62.  Haradatta  mentions  also  another 
explanation  of  the  Sutra  :  '  Another  (commentator)  says,  "  If  pro- 
ducts of  animals  and  the  rest  have  been  bought,  and  the  price 
is  not  paid  at  once,  that  may  increase  fivefold  by  the  addition 
of  interest,  but  not  to  a  greater  sum."  ' 

37.  jNIanu  VIII,  147-148;  Ya^fiavalkya  II,  24. 

38.  Haradatta  adds  that  in  the  case  of  a  6'rotriya  and  of  an 
ascetic,  the  owner  may  allow  the  use  of  his  property  for  a  long 
time,  desiring  to  acquire  m.erit  by  doing  so,  and  that  fear  may 
prevent  him  from  opposing  the  king's  servants.  Hence  pro- 
longed possession  by  such  persons  does  not  necessitate  the  con- 
clusion that  the  owner  had  given  up  his  rights.  As  ascetics  cannot 
possess  any  property,  the  Sutra  must  refer  to  their  occupying  an 
empty  house  which  has  an  owner. 

39.  Manu  VIII,  149;  Ya_^fiavalkya  II,  25.  The  translation 
given  above  agrees  with  an  explanation  of  the  Sutra  which  Hara- 
datta mentions,  but  rejects.  He  himself  prefers  the  following : 
'  Animals,  i.  e.  quadrupeds ;  land,  i.  e.  a  field,  a  garden,  and  the 
like;  females,  i.  e.  female  slaves  and  the  like.     No  long  possession 


XII,  43-  CRIMINAL    AND    CIVIL    LAW.  241 

40.  The  heirs  shall  pay  the  debts  (of  a  deceased 
person). 

41.  Money  due  by  a  surety,  a  commercial  debt,  a 
fee  (due  to  the  parents  of  the  bride),  debts  con- 
tracted for  spirituous  liquor  or  in  gambling,  and  a 
fine  shall  not  involve  the  sons  (of  the  debtor). 

42.  An  (open)  deposit,  a  sealed  deposit,  an  object 
lent  for  use,  an  object  bought  (but  not  paid),  and  a 
pledge,  being  lost  without  the  fault  of  the  holder, 
(shall  not  involve)  any  blameless  person. 

43.  A  man  who  has  stolen  (gold)  shall  approach 

of  animals  and  the  rest  is  necessarj-  in  order  to  acquire  the  rights  of 
ownership  over  them.  Even  after  a  short  period  they  become  the 
property  of  the  possessor.  For  how  (would  it  be  possible  that)  a 
person,  who  himself  wants  buttermilk  and  the  like,  should  allow  a 
cow  which  he  himself  has  bought,  and  which  gives  daily  a  Drowa 
of  milk,  to  be  milked  in  the  house  of  another  person  ? '  &c.  &c. 

40.  Manu  VIII,  162;  Ya^avalkya  II;  51. 

41.  Manu  VIII,  159-160;  Y%SavaIkya  II,  47,  54;  Cole- 
brooke  I,  Digest  202.  Taking  into  account  the  parallel  passages 
of  Manu  and  Ya^avalkya,  Haradatta  verj'  properly  restricts  this 
rule  to  a  bail  for  the  personal  appearance  of  an  offender.  In 
explanation  of  the  expression  *  a  commercial  debt '  he  gives  the 
following  instance  :  '  If  a  person  has  borrowed  money  from  some- 
body on  the  condition  that  he  is  to  repay  the  principal  together 
with  the  gain  thereon,  and  if  he  dies  in  a  foreign  countr}',  while 
travelling  in  order  to  trade,  then  that  money  shall  not  be  repaid 
by  the  son.'  The  instance  explaining  the  term  '  fee '  (julka)  is 
as  follows  :  '  If  a  person  has  promised  a  fee  (to  the  parents  of 
a  woman)  and  dies  after  the  wedding,  then  that  fee  does  not 
involve  his  son,  i.  e.  need  not  be  paid  by  him.'  The  word  julka 
is,  however,  ambiguous,  and  may  also  mean  '  a  tax  or  toll.' 

42.  :Manu  VIII,  189  ;  Ya^avalkya  II,  59,  66  ;  Colebrooke  II, 
Digest  I,  29.  Haradatta  declares  the  meaning  to  be,  that  in  case 
the  bailee  was  guilty  of  no  negligence  and  took  the  same  care 
of  the  deposits  &c.  as  of  his  own  property,  neither  he  nor  his 
heirs  need  make  good  the  value  of  those  which  were  lost  or 
destroyed. 

43.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  4. 

[2]  R 


242  GAUTAMA,  XII,  44. 

the  king,  with  flying  hair,  holding  a  club  in  his  hand, 
and  proclaim  his  deed. 

44.  Whether  he  be  slain  or  be  pardoned,  he  is 
purified  (of  his  guilt). 

45.  If  the  king  does  not  strike,  the  guilt  falls  on 
him. 

46.  Corporal  punishment  (must)  not  (be  resorted 
to  in  the  case)  of  a  Brahma^za. 

47.  Preventing  (a  repetition  of)  the  deed,  pub- 
licly proclaiming  his  crime,  banishment,  and  branding 
(are  the  punishments  to  which  a  Brahma;^a  may  be 
subjected). 

48.  That  (king)  who  does  not  do  his  duty  (by 
inflicting  punishment)  becomes  liable  to  perform  a 
penance. 

49.  (A  man  who)  knowingly  (becomes)  the  servant 
(of  a  thief  shall  be  treated)  like  a  thief, 

50.  Likewise  he  who  (knowingly)  receives  (goods) 
from  (a  thief  or)  an  unrighteous  man. 

51.  The  award  of  the  punishment  (must  be  regu- 
lated) by  a  consideration  (of  the  status)  of  the  criminal, 
of  his  (bodily)  strength,  of  (the  nature  of)  the  crime, 
and  whether  the  offence  has  been  repeated. 

52.  Or  a  pardon  (may  be  given)  in  accordance 
with  the  opinion  of  an  assemblage  of  persons  learned 
in  the  Vedas. 


45.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  5. 

46.  Manu  VIII,  124  ;  Macnaghten,  Mitakshara  III,  4,  9. 

47.  Manu  IX,  239,  241;  Apastamba  II,  10,  27,  8,  17-19; 
INIacnaghten  loc.  cit.  Karmaviyoga,  'preventing  (a  repetition  of)  the 
deed,'  may  also  mean  'suspension  from  (his  priestly)  functions.' 

48.  Apastamba  II,  11,  28,  13. 

49-50.    Manu  IX,  278;  Ya^niavalkya  II,  276. 

51.   Manu  VII,  16;  VIII,  126  ;  Ya^fiavalkya  I,  367. 


XIII,  7-  WITNESSES.  243 

Chapter  XIII. 

1.  In  disputed  cases  the  truth  shall  be  established 
by  means  of  witnesses. 

2.  The  (latter)  shall  be  many,  faultless  as  regards 
the  performance  of  their  duties,  worthy  to  be  trusted 
by  the  king,  and  free  from  affection  for,  or  hatred 
against  either  (party). 

3.  (They  may  be)  -Sudras  even. 

4.  But  a  Brahma/za  must  not  be  forced  (to  give 
evidence)  at  the  word  of  a  non-Brahma«a,  except  if 
he  is  mentioned  (in  the  plaint). 

5.  (Witnesses)  shall  not  speak  singly  or  without 
being  asked, 

6.  And  if,  (being  asked,)  they  do  not  answer,  they 
are  guilty  of  a  crime. 

7.  Heaven  is  their  reward,  if  they  speak  the 
truth ;  in  the  contrary  case  hell  (will  be  their 
portion). 

XIII.   I.    Manu  VIII,  45;  Ya^avalkya  II,  2^ 

2.  Apastamba  II,  11,  29,  7.  'Many  means  at  least  three.' — 
Haradatta, 

3.  Manu  VIII,  63.  I.  e.  -S'udras  endowed  with  the  qualities 
mentioned  above. 

4.  Manu  VIII,  65.  'A  Brahmawa  means  here  a  iS'rotriya.  If  a 
man  other  than  a  Brahmawa  says :  "This  Brahma«a  is  a  witness  of 
this  fact,"  then  the  (^rotriya)  shall  not  be  forced  to  become,  i.  e.  not 
be  taken  as  a  witness,  provided  he  has  not  been  mentioned,  i,  e.  he 
has  not  been  entered  in  the  written  plaint  (as  one  of  the  witnesses). 
But  if  he  has  been  entered  in  the  plaint,  he  certainly  becomes 
a  witness.' — Haradatta. 

5.  Manu  VIII,  79;  IMacnaghten,  Mitakshara  VI,  i,  21.  In  the 
INIitakshara  the  Sutra  is  read  nasamaveta;^  przsh/a^  prabrfiyu^, 
*  witnesses  need  not  answer  if  they  are  examined  singly.'  Mitra- 
mijra  in  the  Viramitrodaya  says  that  Haradatta's  reading  of  the 
text  is  the  same,  and  that  his  explanation  does  not  agree  with  it. 

6.  Manu  VIII,  107;  Ya^avalkya  II,  76-77. 

7.  Apastamba  II,  11,  29,  9-10. 

R  2 


244  GAUTAMA.  XIII,  8. 

8.  (Persons)  not  mentioned  (in  the  plaint),  must 
also  give  evidence. 

9.  No  objection  (can  be  raised  against  witnesses) 
in  a  case  of  (criminal)  hurt, 

10.  Nor  if  they  have  spoken  inadvertently. 

11.  If  the  sacred  law  or  the  rules  (referring  to 
worldly  matters)  are  violated,  the  guilt  (falls)  on  the 
witnesses,  the  assessors,  the  king,  and  on  the 
offender. 

12.  Some  (declare,  that  the  witnesses)  shall  be 
charged  on  oath  to  speak  the  truth. 

13.  In  the  case  of  others  than  Brahmaf^as  that 
(oath  shall  be  sworn)  in  the  presence  of  the  gods,  of 
the  king,  and  of  Brahma;^as. 

14.  By  false  evidence  concerning  small  cattle  a 
witness  kills  ten, 

15.  (By  false  evidence)  regarding  cows,  horses, 
men,  or  land,  in  each  succeeding  case  ten  times  as 
many  (as  in  the  one  mentioned  before), 

16.  Or  (by  false  evidence)  regarding  land  the 
whole  (human  race). 

17.  Hell  (is  the  punishment)  for  a  theft  of  land. 

9.  Manu  VIII,  72;  Ya^navalkya  II,  72. 

10.  '  Negligence,  i.  e.  inadvertence.  If  anything  has  been  spoken 
at  random  by  a  witness  in  a  conversation  referring  to  something  else 
(than  the  case),  no  blame  must  be  thrown  on  him  for  that  reason.' — 
Haradatta. 

11.  Manu  VIII,  18.  The  translation  follows  Haradatta,  Perhaps 
it  would,  however,  be  as  well  to  take  dharmatantra,  '  the  sacred  law 
and  the  rules  referring  to  worldly  matters,'  as  a  Tatpurusha,  and  to 
translate, '  If  there  is  a  miscarriage  of  justice,  the  guilt,'  &c. 

12-13.   Apastamba  II,  11-29,  7. 

14-22.  Manu  VIII,  98-100.  'By  speaking  an  untruth  regarding 
them,  the  witness  kills  ten.  Ten  what  ?  Even  ten  (of  that  kind) 
regarding  which  he  has  lied.  His  guilt  is  as  great  as  if  he  actually 
killed  ten  of  them,  and  the  punishment  (is  the  same).  Equal 
penances  must  also  be  prescribed  for  both  cases.' — Haradatta. 


XIII,  27-  WITNESSES.  245 


18.  (By  false  evidence)  concerning  water  (he 
incurs)  the    same  (guilt)  as  (for  an  untruth)  about 

land, 

1 9.  Likewise  (by  false  evidence)  regarding  (crimi- 
nal) intercourse. 

20.  (By  false  evidence)  regarding  honey  or  clari- 
fied butter  (he  incurs)  the  same  (guilt)  as  (by  an 
untruth)  about  small  cattle, 

21.  (By  false  evidence)  about  clothes,  gold,  grain, 
and  the  Veda,  the  same  as  (by  an  untruth)  about 
kine, 

22.  (And  by  false  evidence)  regarding  a  carriage 
(or  a  beast  of  burden)  the  same  as  (by  an  untruth) 
about  horses. 

23.  A  witness  must  be  reprimanded  and  punished 
for  speaking  an  untruth. 

24.  No  guilt  is  incurred  by  giving  false  evidence, 
in  case  the  life  (of  a  man)  depends  thereon. 

25.  But  (this  rule  does)  not  (hold  good)  if  the 
life  of  a  very  wicked  (man  depends  on  the  evidence 
of  a  witness). 

26.  The  king,  or  the  judge,  or  a  Brahma?/a  learned 
in  the  6astras  (shall  examine  the  witnesses). 

27.  (The  litigant)  shall  humbly  go  to  seek  the 
judge. 

23.  Manu  VIII,  1 19-123;  Ya^fiavalkya  II,  81.  'YapyaA 
(literally  "  must  be  turned  out ")  means  "  must  be  reprimanded  " 
in  the  presence  of  the  whole  audience,  lest  anybody  have  inter- 
course with  him.' — Haradatta. 

24-25.   Manu  VIII,  104-105  ;  Ya^avalkya  II,  83. 

26.  Manu  VIII,  8-9,  79;  Ya^iiavalkya  II,  i,  3,  73. 

27.  Manu  VIII,  43.  The  meaning  of  the  Sutra  is  that  the 
judge  shall  not  promote  litigation,  and  incite  people  to  institute 
suits.  If  litigants  do  not  humbly  appear  before  him,  he  is  not 
to  send  for  them. 


246  GAUTAMA.  XIII,  28. 

28.  If  (the  defendant)  is  unable  to  answer  (the 
plaint)  at  once,  (the  judge)  may  wait  for  a  year. 

29,  But  (in  an  action)  concerning  kine,  draught- 
oxen,  women,  or  the  procreation  (of  offspring),  the 
defendant  (shall  answer)  immediately, 

30.  Likewise  in  a  case  that  will  suffer  by  delay. 

31,  To  speak  the  truth  before  the  judge  is  more 
important  than  all  (other)  duties. 

Chapter  XIV. 

1 .  The  Sapi?2^as  become  impure  by  the  death  (of 
a  relative)  during  ten  (days  and)  nights,  except  those 
who  officiate  as  priests,  who  have  performed  the 
Diksha/^iyesh^i  (or  initiatory  ceremony  of  a  ^'rauta 
sacrifice),  and  those  who  are  students, 

2.  (The  impurity)  of  a  Kshatriya  lasts  for  eleven 
(days  and)  nights, 

3.  (That)  of  a  Vai^ya  tw^elve  (days  and)  nights, 

4.  (Or),  according  to  some,  half  a  month, 

5.  (And  that)  of  a  .Sudra  a  whole  month. 

6.  If  during  (a  period  of  impurity)  another  (death) 
happens,  the  (relatives)  shall  be  pure  after  (the 
lapse  of)  the  remainder  of  that  (first  period). 

7.  (But)  if  one  night  (only  of  the  period  of  impu- 
rity) remains  (and  another  death  happens,  they  shall 

28.  See  also  Narada  I,  38,  41. 

29.  Yag'navalkya  II,  12.  Haradatta  explains  pra^anana,  'the 
procreation  (of  offspring),'  to  mean  '  marriage.' 

XIV.  I.  Manu  V,  59,  83,  93;  Ya^fiavalkya  III,  18,  28;  see 
also  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  18.  Regarding  the  meaning  of  the  term 
Sapi«(/a,  see  below,  Sutra  13.  This  Sutra  refers,  of  course,  to 
Brahmawas  only. 

2-3.    ManuV,  83;  Ya^iTavalkya  III,  22. 

5.  Manu  and  Y^iiavalkya  1. 1.  cit. 

6.  Manu  V,  79. 


XIV,  14.  IMPURITY.  247 

become   pure)   after  (the  lapse  of)  two  (days   and 
nights). 

8.  (If  the  second  death  happens)  on  the  morning 
(after  the  completion  of  the  period  of  impurity,  they 
shall  be  purified)  after  three  (days  and  nights). 

9.  (The  relatives)  of  those  who  are  slain  for  the 
sake  of  cows  and  Brahma;/as  (become  pure)  imme- 
diately after  the  burial, 

10.  And  (those  of  men  destro}'ed)  by  the  anger 
of  the  king, 

11.  (Further,  those  of  men  killed)  in  battle, 

12.  Likewise  (those)  of  men  who  voluntarily  seek 
death  by  abstaining  from  food,  by  weapons,  fire, 
poison,  or  water,  by  hanging  themselves,  or  by 
jumping  (from  a  precipice). 

13.  Sapi/Zi'/^  relationship  ceases  with  the  fifth  or 
the  seventh  (ancestor). 

14.  (The  rules  regarding  impurity  caused  by  the 
death  of  a  relative  apply)  to  the  birth  (of  a  child) 
also.  J 

9.  Ya§-navalkya  III,  27.  The  Sutra  may,  however,  also  be 
translated  '  the  relatives  of  those  who  have  been  killed  by  a  cow, 
or  by  a  Brahmawa,  &c.,  as  the  latter  case,  too,  is  mentioned  by 
Yag-iiavalkya  III,  21,  The  word  anvaksham,  translated  by 
'  immediately  after  burial,'  is  explained  by  Haradatta  as  follows : 
'  The  corpse  is  seen,  i.  e.  is  visible,  so  long ;  the  meaning  is  that 
they  will  be  pure  after  having  bathed  at  the  end  of  the  burial.' 

10.  Y%navalkya  III,  21. 

12.  Manu  V,  89  ;  Ya^fiavalkya  III,  21. 

13.  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  2.  Haradatta  states  that  the  Sapim/a- 
relationship  extends  to  four  degrees  in  the  case  of  the  son  of  an 
appointed  daughter  (see  below,  XXVIII,  18),  while  it  includes  the 
relatives  within  six  degrees  in  the  case  of  a  legitimate  son  of  the 
body.  In  either  case  the  term  refers  to  Sagotra-sapiwis'as,  or 
Sapiwfl'as  who  bear  the  same  family  name  only.  The  case  of  the 
Bhinnagotra-sapi?/a'as  will  be  discussed  below,  Sutra  20. 

14-16.    Manu  V,  62;  Ya^navalkya  III,  18-19. 


248  GAUTAMA.  XIV,  15. 

15.  (In)  that  (case  the  impurity  falls)  on  the 
parents, 

16.  Or  on  the  mother  (alone). 

17.  (The  impurity)  for  a  miscarriage  (lasts  for  a 
number  of  days  and)  nights  equal  to  (the  number  of) 
months  from  conception, 

18.  Or  three  days. 

19.  And  if  he  hears  (of  the  death  of  a  Sapinda.) 
after  (the  lapse  of)  ten  (days  and  nights,  the  impu- 
rity lasts  for)  one  night  together  with  the  preceding 
and  following  days, 

20.  Likewise  when  a  relative  who  is  not  a  Sapi?/^a, 
a  relative  by  marriage,  or  a  fellow-student  (has 
died). 

21.  For  a  man  who  studies  the  same  recension 
of  the  Veda  (the  impurity  lasts)  one  day, 

17.    Manu  V,  66;  Ya§^navalkya  III,  20. 

19.  IManu  V,  75-77. 

20.  Manu  V,  81.  Haradatta  explains  asapiw^a,  'a  kinsman  who 
is  not  a  Sapiw^^a,'  by  Samanodaka,  i.e.  'a  kinsman  bearing  the  same 
family  name,  but  more  than  six  degrees  removed,'  and  yonisam- 
bandha,  '  a  relative  by  marriage,'  by  '  the  maternal  grandfather,  a 
maternal  aunt's  sons,  and  their  sons,  &c.,  the  fathers  of  wives  and 
the  rest.'  The  latter  term,  for  which  '  a  person  related  through  a 
female'  would  be  a  more  exact  rendering  than  the  one  given 
above,  includes,  therefore,  those  persons  who,  according  to  the 
terminology  of  Manu  and  Ya^navalkya,  are  called  Bhinnagotra- 
sapiw^as,  Bandhavas,  or  Bandhus  (see  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  II, 
53  ;  II,  6).  Gautama's  terminology  agrees  in  this  respect  with 
that  of  Apastamba,  see  note  on  II,  5,  11,  6. 

2 1 .  Haradatta  explains  sabrahmaMrin  by  suhr/t,  '  a  friend.' 
But  the  term  which  elsewhere  means  '  a  fellow-student '  cannot 
have  that  sense  in  our  Sutra,  as  the  fellow-student  (sahadhyayin) 
has  been  mentioned  already.  The  translation  given  above  is 
supported  by  the  manner  in  which  it  is  used  in  the  ancient  land- 
grants,  where  expressions  like  bahvrz'/^asabrahmaX'arin  are  of 
common  occurrence. 


XIV,  28.  IMPURITV^  249 

2  2.  Likewise  for  a  6'rotriya  who  dwells  in  the 
same  house, 

27,.  On  touching  (i.e.  on  carr^^ng  out)  a  corpse 
from  an  interested  motive,  the  impurity  lasts  for  ten 
days. 

24.  (The  duration  of  the  impurity)  of  aVaii'ya  and 
of  a  6'udra  (in  the  same  case)  has  been  declared  (by 
Sutras  3-5). 

25.  Or  (it  shall  last  for  these  two)  as  many  nights 
as  there  are  seasons  (in  the  year); 

26.  And  (the  same  rule  may  be  made  applicable) 
to  the  two  higher  (castes). 

27.  Or  (the  impurity  lasts)  three  days. 

28.  And  if  the  teacher,  his  son  or  wife,  a  person 
for  whom  (a  Brahma;/a)  sacrifices  or  a  pupil  (has 
been  carried  out,  the  dur9,tion  of  the  impurity  is)  the 
same. 

22.  Manu  V,  8.1. 

23.  '  The  word  upaspar^ana  (literally  touching)  does  not  denote 
here  simple  touching.  For  below,  Sutra  30,  bathing  with  the 
clothes  on,  will  be  prescribed  for  that.  What  does  upasparjana 
then  mean?  It  means  carr}ing  out  a  corpse.  For  that  an 
impurit)'  lasting  ten  days  falls  on  the  performer,  pro\-ided  that 
carr}-ing  out  be  done  for  an  object,  i.e.  with  the  intention  of 
gaining  a  fee  or  the  like,  not  for  the  sake  of  doing  one's  duty. 
The  word  impurity  is  here  repeated  in  order  to  indicate  that  the 
impiuity,  here  intended,  differs  from  that  described  above.  Hence 
the  rules  given  below,  Sutra  37.  which  prescribe  sleeping  and 
sitting  on  the  ground  and  so  forth,  do  not  apply.  (The  word 
impurity)  indicates  (here)  merely  that  (the  performer  of  the  act) 
must  not  be  touched,  and  has  no  right  (to  perform  sacred 
ceremonies).' — Haradatta. 

25.  Haradatta  states  that  Gautama  does  not  simply  say  'six 
days,*  because  five  seasons  only  are  to  be  reckoned  in  the  case 
of  a  Vaijya,  and  six  in  the  case  of  a  ^Sudra. 

28.  Haradatta  asserts  that  mr/teshu, '  have  died,'  must  be  under- 
stood.   But  as  both  the  preceding  and  the  following  Sutras  refer  to 


250  GAUTAMA.  XIV,  29. 

29.  And  if  a  man  of  lower  caste  carries  out  (the 
corpse  of)  one  of  higher  caste,  or  a  man  of  higher 
caste  (carries  out  the  body  of)  one  of  lower  caste, 
(the  duration  of)  the  impurity  in  these  (cases)  is 
determined  by  (the  caste  of)  the  dead  man. 

30.  On  touching  an  outcast,  a  A'a;2^ala,  a  woman 
impure  on  account  of  her  confinement,  a  woman  in 
her  courses,  or  a  corpse,  and  on  touching  persons 
who  have  touched  them,  he  shall  purify  himself  by 
bathing  dressed  in  his  clothes, 

31.  Likewise  if  he  has  followed  a  corpse  (that 
was  being  carried  out), 

32.  And  (if  he  has  come  into  contact)  with  a  dog. 

33.  Some  (declare),  that  (the  limb)  which  (a  dog) 
may  touch  (must  be  washed). 

34.  The  S:ip'mdas  shall  offer  (libations  of)  water 
for  (a  deceased  relative)  whose  A'aula-karman  (or 
tonsure)  has  been  performed, 

35.  As  well  as  for  the  wives  and  daughters  of 
such  (a  person). 

36.  Some  (declare,  that  it  must  be  done  in  the 
case)  of  married  female  relatives  (also). 

^y.    (During    the    period    of    impurity)    all    (the 

the  carrying  out  of  corpses,  it  is  impossible  to  agree  with  him. 
It  seems  to  me  that  Gautama's  rule  means,  that,  if  a  man  has 
carried  out  the  corpse  of  a  teacher,  &c.,  he  becomes  impure  for  ten, 
eleven,  or  twelve  days,  or  for  three  days  only.  See  also  Manu  V, 
91,  103;  Ya^navalkya  III,  15. 

30.  Apastamba  II,  2,  2,  8-9;  Manu  V,  85;  Ya^navalkya III,  30. 

31.  ManuV,  103;  Ya^ilavalkya  III,  26. 
32-33.   Apastamba  I,  5,  15,  16-17. 

34.  Apastamba  II,  6,  15,  10;  ManuV,  70.  Haradatta  observes 
that  most  Gnliya-sutras  prescribe  the  performance  of  the  ^aula- 
karman  in  the  third  year. 

36.  Ya^fiavalkya  III,  4. 

37.  Manu  V,  73  ;  Yag-fiavalkya  III,  16. 


XIV,  46-  IMPURITY.  25 1 

mourners)  shall  sleep  and  sit  on  the  ground   and 
remain  chaste. 

T,S.    They  shall  not  clean  (themselves) ; 

39.  Nor  shall  they  eat  meat  until  (the  funeral 
oblation)  has  been  offered. 

40.  On  the  first,  third,  fifth,  seventh,  and  ninth 
(days  after  the  death)  water  (mixed  with  sesamum) 
must  be  offered  ; 

41.  And  the  garments  (worn  during  that  cere- 
mony) must  be  changed, 

42.  But  on  the  last  (day  they  must  be  given)  to 
men  of  the  lowest  castes. 

43.  The  parents  (shall  offer  water  for  a  son  who 
dies)  after  he  has  teethed. 

44.  If  infants,  (relatives)  who  live  in  a  distant 
country-,  those  who  have  renounced  domestic  life. 
and  those  who  are  not  Sapiw^as,  (die),  the  purifica- 
tion is  instantaneous. 

45.  Kings  (remain  always  pure),  lest  their  busi- 
ness be  impeded, 

46.  And  a  Brahma;za,  lest  his  daily  study  of  the 
Veda  be  interrupted. 


39.   ManuV,  73.  43-    ManuV,  70. 

44.  Ya^avalkya  III,  23.  Haradatta  remarks  that  the  rule 
refers  to  those  Sapiwa'as  residing  in  foreign  countries  only,  of 
whose  death  one  may  hear  a  year  after  their  decease,  and  to 
remoter  relations  of  whose  death  one  hears  after  the  lapse  of 
ten  days;  see  IManuV,  75-76. 

45.  ManuV,  93-94;  Y^fiavalkya  III,  27.  Haradatta  adds 
that  the  plural  '  kings '  is  used  in  order  to  include  all  rulers  and 
governors,  and  such  persons  as  the  king  wishes  to  be  pure. 

46.  Ya^avalkya  III,  28. 


252  GAUTAMA.  XV,  i. 

Chapter  XV. 

1.  Now  (follow  the  rules  regarding)  funeral  obla- 
tions (^'raddha). 

2.  He  shall  offer  (them)  to  the  Manes  on  the  day 
of  the  new  moon, 

3.  Or  in  the  dark  half  (of  the  month)  after  the 
fourth  (lunar  day), 

4.  Or  on  any  day  (of  the  dark  half)  according  to 
(the  results  he  may)  desire ; 

5.  Or  if  (particularly  appropriate)  materials  or 
(particularly  holy)  Brahma;^as  are  at  hand,  or  (the 
sacrificer  is)  near  a  (particularly  sacred)  place,  no 
restriction  as  to  time  (need  be  observed)  : 

6.  Let  him  select  as  good  food  as  he  can  afford, 
and  have  it  prepared  as  well  as  possible. 

7.  He  shall  feed  an  uneven  number  (of  Brah- 
ma/^as),  at  least  nine, 

8.  Or  as  many  as  he  is  able  (to  entertain). 

9.  (Let    him    feed    such    as    are)  KSrotriyas  and 

XV.  I,  '  The  word  "  now  "  indicates  that  a  new  topic  begins.' — 
Haradatta.  The  rules  now  following  refer  in  the  first  instance  to 
the  Parva;/a  or  monthly  6'r^ddha,  but  most  of  them  serve  also  as 
general  rules  for  all  the  numerous  varieties  of  funeral  sacrifices. 

2.  Manu  III,  122;  Ya^uavalkya  I,  217. 

3.  Apastamba  II,  7,  i6,  6. 

4.  Apastamba  II,  7,  16,  6-22. 

5.  Some  of  the  most  famous  among  the  places  where  the  per- 
formance of  a  ^'raddha  is  particularly  efficacious  and  meritorious 
are  Gaya  in  Bihar,  Pushkara  or  Pokhar  near  A^mir,  the  Kuru- 
kshetra  near  Dehli,  Nasika  on  the  Godavari.  Pilgrims  or  persons 
passing  through  such  places  may  and  must  perform  a  -Sraddha 
on  any  day  of  the  month. 

7.    Ya^navalkya  I,  227.  8.    See  also  below,  Siatra  21. 

9.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  4.  Haradatta  explains  vak,  'eloquence,' 
by  'ability  to  speak  Sanskrit,'  rupa,  'beauty,'  by  'the  proper  number 
of  limbs,' and  vaya^sampanna, 'of  (suitable)  age,'  by  'not  too  young.' 


XV,  i6.  FUNERAL   OBLATIONS.  253 

endowed  with  eloquence  and  beauty,  of  a  (suitable) 
age,  and  of  a  virtuous  disposition. 

ID.  It  is  preferable  to  give  (food  at  a  6'raddha)  to 
young  (men  in  the  prime  of  life). 

1 1 .  Some  (declare,  that  the  age  of  the  guests 
shall  be)  proportionate  to  (that  of)  the  Manes. 

12.  And  he  shall  not  try  to  contract  a  friendship 
by  an  (invitation  to  a  K^raddha). 

13.  On  failure  of  sons  (the  deceased  person's) 
Sapiw^as,  the  Sapi;^^/as  of  his  mother,  or  a  pupil 
shall  offer  (the  funeral  oblations), 

14.  On  failure  of  these  an  officiating  priest  or  the 
teacher. 

15.  The  ISIanes  are  satisfied  for  a  month  by 
gifts  of  sesamum,  Masha-beans,  rice,  barley,  and 
water. 

For  (three)  years  by  fish  and  the  flesh  of  common 
deer,  spotted  deer,  hares,  turtles,  boars,  and  sheep. 

For  twelve  years  by  cow's  milk  and  messes  made 
of  milk. 

For  a  very  long  time  by  the  flesh  of  (the  crane 
called)  Vardhri/^asa,  by  Ocymum  sanctum  (sacred 
Basil),  and  by  the  flesh  of  goats,  (especially)  of  a  red 
(he-goat),  and  of  a  rhinoceros,  (if  these  dishes  are) 
mixed  with  honey. 

16.  Let  him  not  feed  a  thief,  a  eunuch,  an  out- 
cast, an  atheist,  a  person  who  lives  like  an  atheist, 
the  destroyer  of  the  sacred  fire,  (the  husband  of)  a 

11.  I.  e.  in  honour  of  the  father  a  young  man  is  to  be  invited, 
in  honour  of  the  grandfather  an  old  man,  and  in  honour  of  the 
great-grandfather  a  ver}'  old  man. 

12.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  4,  8;  Manu  III,  140. 

15.  Apastamba  II,  7,  16,  23-II,  7,  17,  3  ;  H,  8,  18,  13. 

16.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  21.  'A  destroyer  of  the  sacred  fire 
(\  irahan),  i.  e.  one  who  extinguishes  intentionally  the  (domestic)  fire 


2  54  GAUTAMA.  XV,  1 7. 


younger  sister  married  before  the  elder,  the  hus- 
band of  an  elder  sister  whose  youngest  sister  was 
married  first,  a  person  who  sacrifices  for  women  or 
for  a  multitude  of  men,  a  man  who  tends  goats, 
who  has  given  up  the  fire-worship,  who  drinks 
spirituous  liquor,  whose  conduct  is  blamable,  who  is 
a  false  witness,  who  lives  as  a  door-keeper ; 

17.  Whoso  lives  with  another  man's  wife,  and 
the  (husband)  who  allows  that  (must  not  be  in- 
vited) ; 

t8.  (Nor  shall  he  feed)  a  man  who  eats  the  food 
of  a  person  born  from  adulterous  intercourse,  a 
seller  of  Soma,  an  incendiary,  a  poisoner,  a  man  who 
during  studentship  has  broken  the  vow  of  chastity, 
who  is  the  servant  of  a  guild,  who  has  intercourse 
with  females  who  must  not  be  touched,  who  de- 
lights in  doing  hurt,  a  younger  brother  married 
before  the  elder  brother,  an  elder  brother  married 
after  his  younger  brother,  an  elder  brother  whose 


out  of  hatred  against  his  wife,  and  for  the  like  reasons.' — Haradatta. 
He  also  remarks  that  some  read  agredidhishu  instead  of  agredi- 
dhishu,  and  he  proposes  to  explain  the  former,  on  the  authority  of 
Vyaghra  and  of  the  Naighaw/ukas,  as  '  a  Brahmawa  whose  wife  has 
been  wedded  before  to  another  man.' 

17.  My  MSS.  make  two  Sutras  out  of  Professor  Stenzler's  one, 
and  read  upapati/^  I  yasya  ^a  sa^.  The  sense  remains  the  same, 
but  the  latter  version  of  the  text  is,  I  think,  the  correct  one. 

18.  Haradatta  says  that  kunda.sm  may  also  mean  '  he  who  eats 
out  of  a  vessel  called  kunda.,'  as  the  people  have  in  some  countries 
the  habit  of  preparing  their  food  and  afterwards  eating  out  of  the 
kunda..  Haradatta  explains  tyaktatman,  '  one  who  despairs  of 
himself,'  by  '  one  who  has  made  an  attempt  on  his  own  life,  and 
has  tried  to  hang  himself,  and  the  like.'  He  remarks  that  some 
explain  dur-v^la,  'a  bald  man,'  by  nirvesh/ita^epha.  He  who 
neglects  the  recitation  of  the  sacred  texts,  i.  e.  of  those  texts  which, 
like  the  Gayatri,  ought  to  be  recited. 


XV,  23-  FUNERAL    OBLATIONS.  255 

junior  has  kindled  the  sacred  fire  first,  a  younger 
brother  who  has  done  that,  a  person  who  despairs 
of  himself,  a  bald  man,  a  man  who  has  deformed 
nails,  or  black  teeth,  who  suffers  from  white  leprosy, 
the  son  of  a  twice-married  woman,  a  gambler,  a 
man  who  neglects  the  recitation  (of  the  sacred 
texts),  a  servant  of  the  king,  any  one  who  uses 
false  weights  and  measures,  whose  only  wife  is  a 
^Sudra  female,  who  neglects  the  daily  study,  who 
suffers  from  spotted  leprosy,  a  usurer,  a  person  who 
lives  by  trade  or  handicrafts,  by  the  use  of  the  bow, 
by  playing  musical  instruments,  or,  by  beating  time, 
by  dancing,  and  by  singing  ; 

19.  Nor,  (sons)  who  have  enforced  a  division  of 
the  family  estate  against  the  wish  of  their  father. 

20.  Some  (allow)  pupils  and  kinsmen  (to  be  in- 
vited). 

21.  Let  him  feed  upwards  of  three  (or)  one 
(guest)  endowed  with  (particularly)  excellent  qua- 
lities. -^ 

22.  If  he  enters  the  bed  of  a  ^'udra  female  im- 
mediately after  partaking  of  a  funeral  repast,  his 
ancestors  will  lie  for  a  month  in  her  ordure. 

23.  Therefore  he  shall  remain  chaste  on  that  day. 

19.  Below,  XXVIII,  2,  it  will  be  prescribed  that  the  division  of 
the  family  estate  may  take  place  during  the  lifetime  of  the  father 
with  his  consent.  From  this  Sutra  it  would  appear  that  sons 
could  enforce  a  division  of  the  ancestral  estate  against  his  will, 
as  Ya^avalkya  also  allows  (see  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  I,  6, 
5-1 1),  and  that  this  practice,  though  legal,  was  held  to  be  contra 
bonos  mores. 

20.  Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  5-6. 

21.  This  Sutra,  according  to  Haradatta,  is  intended  as  a  modi- 
fication of  Sutra  8. 

22.  Manu  III,  250.  23.   Manu  III,  188. 


256  GAUTAMA.  XV,  24. 

24.  If  (a  funeral  offering)  is  looked  at  by  dogs, 
A!'a;2rt'alas,  or  outcasts,  it  is  blemished. 

25.  Therefore  he  shall  offer  it  in  an  enclosed 
(place),  ' 

26.  Or  he  shall  scatter  grains  of  sesamum  over  it, 

27.  Or  a  man  who  sanctifies  the  company  shall 
remove  the  blemish. 

28.  Persons  who  sanctify  the  company  are,  any 
one  who  knows  the  six  Aiigas,  who  sings  the  6^ye- 
sh///a-samans,  who  knows  the  three  texts  regarding 
the  Na/^iketa-fire,  who  knows  the  text  which  con- 
tains thrice  the  word  Madhu,  who  knows  the  text 
which  thrice  contains  the  word  Supar/^a,  who  keeps 
five  fires,  a  Snataka,  any  one  who  knows  the  Man- 
tras and  Brahma/^as,  who  knows  the  sacred  law, 
and  in  whose  family  the  study  and  teaching  of  the 
Veda  are  hereditary. 

29.  (The  same  rule  applies)  to  sacrifices  offered 
to  gods  and  men. 

30.  Some  (forbid  the  invitation  of)  bald  men  and 
the  rest  to  a  funeral  repast  only. 

Chapter  XVI. 
I.    The  annual  (term  for  studying  the  Veda)  be- 
gins on  the  full  moon  of  the  month  Sra.va.U3.  (July- 
August)  ;    or   let  him  perform   the   Upakarman   on 


24.   Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  20. 

28.   Apastamba  II,  7,  17,  22. 

29-30.    Manu  III,  132-137,  148-149. 

XVI.  I.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  i.  The  Upakarman  is  the  ceremony 
which  is  annually  performed  at  the  beginning  of  the  course  of 
study,  and  it  is  obligatory  on  householders  also;  see  Apastamba 
II,  2,  5,  I.  ^^andawsi,  'the  Vedic  texts,'  i.e.  the  Mantras  and 
Brahmawas.  The  Aiigas  may  be  studied  out  of  term;  see  Apa- 
stamba I,  3,  9,  3  note. 


XVI,  13-       THE  STUDY  OF  THE  VEDA.  257 

(the  full  moon  of)  Bhadrapada  (August-September) 
and  study  the  Vedic  texts, 

2.  During  four  months  and  a  half,  or  during  five 
months,  or  as  long  as  the  sun  moves  towards  the 
south. 

3.  Let  him  remain  chaste,  let  him  not  shave,  nor 
eat  flesh  (during  that  period) ; 

4.  Or  (this)  restrictive  rule  may  (be  observed) 
during  two  months. 

5.  He  shall  not  recite  the  Veda,  if  the  wind 
whirls  up  the  dust  in  the  day-time, 

6.  Nor  if  it  is  audible  at  night, 

7.  Nor  if  the  sound  of  a  \'a;/a,  of  a  large  or  a 
small  drum,  the  noise  of  a  chariot,  and  the  wail  of 
a  person  in  pain  (are  heard), 

8.  Nor  if  the  barking  of  many  dogs  and  jackals, 
or  the  braying  of  many  donkeys  (is  heard), 

9.  Nor  if  (the  sky  appears  flaming)  red,  a  rainbow 
(is  seen),  or  hoar-frost  (lies  on  the  ground), 

10.  Nor  if  clouds  rise  out  of  season. 

11.  (Let  him  not  study)  when  he  feels  the  neces- 
sity to  void  urine  or  excrements, 

12.  Nor  at  midnight,  in  the  twilight,  and  (while 
standing)  in  the  water, 

13.  Nor  while  rain  falls. 

2.  Apastamba  I,  3.  9,  2-3. 

3.  This  Sutra  and  the  following  one  reftr  to  a  teacher  or  to  a 
householder  who  again  goes  through  the  Veda  ;  see  Apastamba  II, 
2,  5,  15,^16. 

5-6.   Apastamba  I,  3,  ii,  8. 

7-8.  Apastamba  I,  3,  10, 17.  A  Va«a  is  a  kind  of  lute,  or  harp, 
with  a  hundred  strings. 

9.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  25,  31. 

10.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  31.  11.    Manu  IV,  109. 

12.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  15,  17;  INIanu  IV,.  109. 

13.  Manu  IV,  103. 

[2]  S 


258  GAUTAMA.  XVI,  14. 

14.  Some  (declare,  that  the  recitation  of  the  Veda 
must  be  interrupted  only)  when  (the  rain)  is  dripping 
from  the  edge  of  the  roof. 

15.  (Nor  shall  he  study)  when  the  teachers  (of 
the  gods  and  Asuras,  i.e.  the  planets  Jupiter  and 
Venus)  are  surrounded  by  a  halo, 

16.  Nor  (when  this  happens)  to  the  two  (great) 
lights  (the  sun  and  the  moon), 

17.  (Nor)  while  he  is  in  fear,  riding  In  a  carriage 
or  on  beasts  of  burden,  or  lying  down,  nor  while  his 
feet  are  raised, 

18.  (Nor)  in  a  burial-ground,  at  the  extremity  of 
a  village,  on  a  high-road,  nor  during  Impurity, 

19.  Nor  while  a  foul  smell  (is  perceptible),  while 
a  corpse  or  a  Aa^^fl'ala  (is)  in  (the  village),  nor  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  -Sudra, 

20.  Nor  while  (he  suffers  from)  sour  eructations. 

21.  The  i?2"g-veda  and  the  Ya^ur-veda  (shall  not  be 
studied)  while  the  sound  of  the  Samans  (Is  heard). 

22.  The  fall  of  a  thunderbolt,  an  earthquake,  an 
eclipse,  and  (the  fall  of)  meteors  (are  reasons  for 
discontinuing  the  reading  of  the  Veda)  until  the 
same  time  (next  day), 

22.    Likewise   when    it    thunders   and    rains   and 


15.  'Another  (commentator  says):  "  Pariveshawa,  being  sur- 
rounded by  a  halo,  means  bringing  food."  .  .  .  (The  Sutra  means, 
therefore),  He  shall  not  study  while  his  teacher  eats.' — Haradatta. 

16.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  31. 

17.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  27;  I,  3,  11,  12;  Manu  IV,  112; 
Ya^fiavalkya  I,  150. 

18.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  4,  6;  I,  3,  10,  2,  4;  I,  3,  11,  9. 

19.  Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  22;  I,  3,  9,  6,  14-15. 

20.  Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  23.  21.    Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  17. 

22.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  30. 

23.  Apastamba  I   3^  11.  29;  Manu  IV,  29. 


XVI,  29-  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  259 

when  lightning  (flashes  out  of  season)  after  the  fires 
have  become  visible  (in  the  twilight). 

24.  (If  these  phenomena  appear)  during  the 
(rainy)  season,  (the  reading  must  be  interrupted) 
for  a  day  (or  a  night), 

25.  And  if  lightning  (is  observed)  during  the 
night,  (the  recitation  of  the  Veda  shall  be  inter- 
rupted) until  the  third  watch. 

26.  If  (lightning)  flashes  during  the  third  part 
of  the  day  or  later,  (the  Veda  must  not  be  read) 
during  the  entire  (following  night). 

27.  (According  to  the  opinion)  of  some,  a  fiery 
meteor  (has  the  same  effect)  as  lightning, 

28.  Likewise  thunder  (which  is  heard)  during  the 
last  part  of  the  day, 

29.  (Or)  also  in  the  twilight. 

24.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  22.  The  above  translation  follows  the 
reading  of  my  ]MSS.,  which  diflfer  very  much  from  Professor 
Stenzler's  edition.  According  to  them  the  commentary  on  the 
latter  part  of  Statra  23  and  on  Sutra  24  nms  as  follows:  .  .  .  pra- 
tyekam  akalika  anadhyayahetava^  I  apartav  idam  I  n'tAv  aha  II 

Aha  e/t.\v  11  24  u 

Varshartav  ete  yadi  bhave^-u-^  sandhyayawz  tadaharmatram  ana- 
dhyaya^  i  prataj>^et  I  saya/;/  tu  ratrav  anadhyaya  ityarthasiddhatvad 
anuktam  11  •  •  •  'are  each  reasons  for  discontinuing  the  recita- 
tion until  the  same  time  next  day.  This  (rule)  refers  to  other 
times  than  the  rainy  season.  He  now  declares  (the  rule)  for  the 
rainy  season  : 

24.  "During  the  (rainy)  season  for  a  day." 

'  If  these  (phenomena)  happen  in  the  twilight  during  the  rainy 
season,  the  interruption  of  the  study  lasts  for  that  day  only,  pro- 
vided (they  happen)  in  the  morning.  But  if  they  happen  in  the 
evening,  study  is  forbidden  during  the  night.  As  this  is  clear 
from  the  context,  it  has  not  been  declared  specially.' — Haradatta. 
I  suspect  that  Professor  Stenzler's  reading  apartau  is  a  correction, 
made  by  an  ingenious  Pandit,  of  an  old  varia  lectio  '  ahartau '  for 
aha  r/tau,  which  is  found  in  one  of  my  ]\ISS.  (C)  also. 

25.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  21. 

S    2 


26o  GAUTAMA.  XVI,  30. 

30.  (If  thunder  is  heard  before  midnight,  the 
study  of  the  Veda  must  be  interrupted)  during  the 
whole  night, 

31.  (If  it  is  heard)  during  the  (early  part  of  the) 
day,  (the  interruption  must  continue)  as  long  as  the 
sun  shines, 

32.  Likewise  if  the  king  of  the  country  has  died. 

33.  If  one  (pupil)  has  gone  on  a  journey  (and) 
another  (stays)  with  (the  teacher,  the  study  of  the 
Veda  shall  be  interrupted  until  the  absentee  re- 
turns). 

34.  When  an  attack  (is  made  on  the  village), 
or  a  fire  (breaks  out),  when  one  Veda  has  been 
completed,  after  (an  attack  of)  vomiting,  when  he 
has  partaken  of  a  funeral  repast  or  of  a  dinner  on 
the  occasion  of  a  sacrifice  offered  to  men,  (the  study 
of  the  Veda  shall  be  interrupted)  for  a  day  and  a 
night, 

35.  Likewise  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon. 

36.  (On  the  latter  occasion  it  may  also  be  inter- 
rupted) for  two  days. 

37.  (The  Veda  shall  not  be  studied  for  a  day 
and  a  night)  on  the  full  moon  days  of  the  months 
Kartika,  Phalgu/^a,  and  Asha(#2a. 

30.    Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  23. 

33.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  11.  Haradatta  adds  that  others 
enjoin  a  stoppage  of  the  Veda-study  from  the  hour  of  the  de- 
parture until  the  same  hour  on  the  following  day,  while  another 
commentator  gives  the  following  explanation  :  '  All,  indeed,  the 
teacher  and  the  rest,  shall,  on  that  day,  not  even  recite  the  Veda 
in  order  to  remember  it.' 

34.  Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  25;  I,  3,  10,  20,  26-28;  I,  3,  11,  6,  30; 
Manu  IV,  118.  Haradatta  is  in  doubt  whether  'a  sacrifice  offered 
in  honour  of  men '  means  a  Sawskara,  or  a  sacrifice  to  gods,  like 
Kumara,  who  formerly  were  men;  see  Apastamba  I,  3,  n,  3. 

36.    Apastamba  I,  3,  9,  28.  37.    Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  i. 


XVI,  46.  THE    STUDY    OF    THE    VEDA.  26 1 

38.  On  the  three  Ash/akas  (the  Veda  shall  not 
be  studied)  for  three  (days  and)  nights. 

39.  Some  (declare,  that  the  rule  applies)  to  the 
last  Ash/aka  (only). 

40.  (On  the  occasion  of)  the  annual  (Upakarman 
and  Utsarga  the  reading  shall  be  interrupted)  on 
the  day  (of  the  ceremony)  and  those  preceding  and 
following  it. 

41.  All  (teachers  declare,  that  the  reading  shall 
be  interrupted  for  three  days)  when  rain,  thunder, 
and  lightning  (are  observed)  simultaneously, 

42.  When  the  rain  is  ver}-  heavy,  (the  reading 
shall  be  interrupted  as  long  as  it  lasts.) 

43.  On  a  festive  day  (the  reading  shall  be 
stopped)  after  the  (morning)  meal, 

44.  And  he  who  has  begim  to  study  (after  the 
Upakarman  shall  not  read)  at  night  for  four 
Muhijrtas. 

45.  Some  (declare,  that  the  recitation  of  the  Veda 
is)  always  (forbidden)  in  a  town. 

46.  While  he  is  impure  (he  shall)  not  even  (recite 
the  Veda)  mentally. 

38.  Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  2.  Regarding  the  meaning  of  the  word 
Ash/aka,  see  above,  VIII,  18  note. 

40.    Apastamba  I,  3,  10,  3.  41.    Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  27. 

42.  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  28. 

43.  Haradatta  explains  '  a  festive  day '  to  mean  the  day  of  the 
initiation  and  the  like,  but  see  Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  20. 

44.  Haradatta  explains  this  Sutra  as  equivalent  to  Apastamba  1, 
3,  9,  I.  He  adds  that  another  commentator  reads  pradhitasya 
^  as  a  separate  Siitra,  interpreting  it  to  mean,  '  And  a  person 
who  has  performed  the  Upakarman  (shall  not  study  after  dinner)," 
and  refers  the  words  '  at  night  for  four  Muhurtas '  to  the  pro- 
hibition to  read  on  the  evening  of  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  dark 
half  of  the  month. 

45.  Manu  IV,  116.  46.   Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  25. 


262  GAUTAMA.  XVI,  47. 

47.  (The  study)  of  those  who  offer  a  funeral 
sacrifice  (must  be  interrupted)  until  the  same  time 
next  day, 

48.  Even  if  uncooked  grain  is  offered  at  the 
funeral  sacrifice. 

49.  And  (those  rules  regarding  the  stoppage  of 
the  reading  must  be  observed),  which  they  teach  in 
the  several  schools. 

Chapter  XVII. 

1.  A  Brahma/m  may  eat  the  food  given  by  twice- 
born  men,  who  are  praised  for  (the  faithful  perform- 
ance of  their)  duties, 

2.  And  he  may  accept  (other  gifts  from  them). 

3.  Fire-wood,  water,  grass,  roots,  fruits,  honey, 
(a  promise  of)  safety,  food  brought  unsolicited,  a 
couch,  a  seat,  shelter,  a  carriage,  milk,  sour  milk, 
(roasted)  grain,  small  fish,  millet,  a  garland,  venison, 
and  vegetables,  (spontaneously  offered  by  a  man)  of 
any  (caste)  must  not  be  refused, 

4.  Nor  anything  else  (that  may  be  required  for 
providing  for  (the  worship  of  the)  Manes  and  gods, 
for  Gurus  and  dependents. 

5.  If  the  means  for  sustaining  life  cannot  (be 
procured)  otherwise,  (they  may  be  accepted)  from  a 
^'udra. 

6.  A  herdsman,  a  husbandman,  an  acquaintance 

47.    Apastamba  ibidem. 
49.    Apastamba  I,  3,  11,  38. 
XVII.  I.    Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  13. 

3.  Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  i;  I,  6,  19,  14;  Manu  IV,  247-250. 

4.  Manu  IV,  251.  Gurus,  i.e.  parents  and  other  venerable 
persons. 

5.  Apastamba  I,  6,  18,  14. 

6.  Manu  IV,  253;  Ya^iiavalkya  I,  166. 


XVII,  i6.  EATING    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  263 

of  the  family,  a  barber,  and  a  servant  are  persons 
whose  food  may  be  eaten, 

7.  And  a  trader,  who  is  not  (at  the  same  time) 
an  artisan. 

8.  (A  householder)  shall  not  eat  every  day  (the 
food  of  strangers). 

9.  Food  into  which  a  hair  or  an  insect  has  fallen 
(must  not  be  eaten), 

10.  (Nor)  what  has  been  touched  by  a  woman 
during  her  courses,  by  a  black  bird,  or  with  the 
foot, 

11.  (Nor)  what  has  been  looked  at  by  the  mur- 
derer of  a  learned  Brahmawa, 

12.  (Nor)  what  has  been  smelt  at  by  a  cow, 

13.  (Nor)  what  is  naturally  bad, 

14.  Nor  (food)  that  (has  turned)  sour  by  itself. 
excepting  sour  milk, 

15.  (Nor)  what  has  been  cooked  twice, 

16.  (Nor)    what   (has    become)   stale    (by    being 

7.  E.  g.  a  man  who  sells  pots,  but  does  not  make  them. 

8.  Manu  III,  104;  Ya§-navalkya  I,  112. 

9.  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  23,  26. 

10.  Apastamba  I,  5,  16,  27,  29.  Haradatta  explains  'a  black 
bird  '  by  '  a  crow,'  and  no  doubt  the  crow,  as  the  ^a«</ala  among 
birds,  is  intended  in  the  first  instance. 

11.  Manu  IV,  208  ;  Ya^fiavalkya  I,  167. 

12.  Manu  IV,  209  ;  Yag'navalkya  I,  168. 

13.  'What  has  been  given  in  a  contemptuous  manner  by  the 
host,  or  what  is  not  pleasing  to  the  eater,  that  is  called  bhava- 
dush/a,  "  naturally  bad." ' — Haradatta.  The  second  seems  to  be 
the  right  explanation,  as  food  falling  under  the  first  is  mentioned 
below,  Sutra  21. 

14.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  28,  20. 

15.  Haradatta  states  that  this  rule  does  not  re'"er  to  dishes 
the  preparation  of  which  requires  a  double  cooking,  but  to  those 
which  ordinarily  are  cooked  once  only. 

16.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  17.    Haradatta  says  that  food  prepared 


264  GAUTAMA.  XVII,  17. 

kept),  except  vegetables,  food  that  requires   masti- 
cation, fatty  and  oily  substances,  meat  and  honey. 

17.  (Food  given)  by  a  person  who  has  been  cast 
off  (by  his  parents),  by  a  woman  of  bad  character, 
an  Abhii^asta,  a  hermaphrodite,  a  police-officer,  a 
carpenter,  a  miser,  a  jailer,  a  surgeon,  one  who 
hunts  without  using  the  bow,  a  man  who  eats  the 
leavings  (of  others),  by  a  multitude  (of  men),  and  by 
an  enemy  (must  not  be  eaten), 

18.  Nor  what  is  given  by  such  men  who  defile 
the  company  at  a  funeral  dinner,  as  have  been 
enumerated  before  bald  men ; 

19.  (A  dinner)  which  is  prepared  for  no  (holy) 
purpose  or  where  (the  guests)  sip  water  or  rise 
against  the  rule, 

20.  Or  where  (one's)  equals  are  honoured  in  a 
different  manner,  and  persons  who  are  not  (one's) 


for  the  morning  meal  and  kept  until  supper  is  also  called  parjushite, 
'  stale.' 

17.  For  this  and  the  following  Sutras,  see  Apastamba  I,  6,  18, 
16-I,  6,  19,  i-I,  7,  20,  16;  Manu  IV,  205-217;  Ya^navalkya  I, 
1 61-165.  An  Abhi^asta  is  a  person  who  is  wrongly  or  falsely 
accused  of  a  heinous  crime,  see  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  6-9.  Hara- 
datta  adduces  the  explanation  '  hermaphrodite '  for  anapadej-ya  as 
the  opinion  of  others.  He  himself  thinks  that  it  means  '  a  person 
not  worthy  to  be  described  or  named."  '  One  w'ho  hunts  without 
using  the  bow '  is  a  poacher  who  snares  animals.  Snaring  animals 
is  a  favourite  occupation  of  the  non-Aryan  tribes,  such  as  Vaghris, 
Bhils,  and  Kolis. 

18.  See  above,  XV,  15-18,  where  'bald  men  '  occupy  the  four- 
teenth place  in  Sutra  18. 

19.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  3;  Manu  IV,  212.  That  is  called  'food 
(prepared)  for  no  (sacred)  purpose '  which  a  man  cooks  only  for 
himself,  not  for  guests  and  the  rest,  see  Apastamba  II,  4,  8,  4; 
Manu  V,  7. 

20.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  2. 


XVII,  28.  EATING   AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  265 

equals  are  honoured  in  the  same  manner  (as  oneself, 
must  not  be  eaten), 

21.  Nor  (food  that  is  given)  in  a  disrespectful 
manner. 

22.  And  the  milk  •which  a  cow  gives  during  the 
first  ten  days  after  calving  (must  not  be  drunk), 

23.  Nor  (that)  of  goats  and  buffalo-cows  (under 
the  same  conditions). 

24.  (The  milk)  of  sheep,  camels,  and  of  one- 
hoofed  animals  must  not  be  drunk  under  any  cir- 
cumstances, 

25.  Nor  (that)  of  animals  from  whose  udders  the 
milk  flows  spontaneously,  of  those  that  bring  forth 
twins,  and  of  those  ^vingr  milk  while  bigr  with 
young, 

26.  Nor  the  milk  of  a  cow  whose  calf  is  dead 
or  separated  from  her. 

27.  And  five-toed  animals  (must)  not  (be  eaten) 
excepting  the  porcupine,  the  hare,  the  (boar  called) 
6'vavidh,  the  iguana,  the  rhinoceros,  and  the  tor- 
toise, 

28.  Nor  animals  which  have  a  double  row  of 
teeth,  those  which  are  covered  with  an  excessive 
quantity  of  hair,  those  which  have  no  hair,  one- 
hoofed  animals,  sparrows,  the  (heron  called)  Plava, 
Brahmawi  ducks,  and  Hawsas, 

21.    Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  4. 

22-23.    Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  24. 

24.   Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  23.  25.    Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  23. 

26.  ManuV,  8;  Ya^avalkya  I,  170. 

27.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  37. 

28.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  29,  33,  35.  Haradatta  gives  as  an 
example  of  *  animals  covered  with  an  excessive  quantit)'  of  hair ' 
the  Yak  or  Bos  gnmniens,  and  of  '  those  that  have  no  hair '  snakes 
and  the  like. 


266  GAUTAMA.  XVII,  29. 

29.  (Nor)  crows,  herons,  vultures,  and  falcons, 
(birds)  born  in  the  water,  (birds)  with  red  feet  and 
beaks,  tame  pigs  and  cocks, 

30.  (Nor)  milch-cows  and  draught-oxen, 

31.  Nor  the  flesh  of  animals  whose  milk-teeth 
have  not  fallen  out,  which  are  diseased,  nor  the 
meat  of  those  (which  have  been  killed)  for  no 
(sacred)  purpose, 

32.  Nor  young  sprouts,  mushrooms,  garlic,  and 
substances  exuding  (from  trees), 

33.  Nor  red  (juices)  which  issue  from  incisions. 

34.  Woodpeckers,  egrets,  cranes,  parrots,  cor- 
morants, peewits,  and  Mandhalas,  (as  well  as  birds) 
flying  at  night,  (ought  not  to  be  eaten.) 

35.  Birds  that  feed  striking  with  their  beaks, 
or  scratching  with  their  feet,  and  are  not  web- 
footed  may  be  eaten, 

36.  And  fishes  that  are  not  misshapen, 


29.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  29,  32,  34,  35;  Y^navalkya  I,  173. 

30.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  29-30, 

31.  Aitareya-brahmawa  VII,  14.  For  the  explanation  of  vrz'tha- 
mawsa,  '  the  flesh  (of  animals  killed)  for  no  (sacred)  purpose,' 
Haradatta  refers  back  to  Sutra  19,  but  see  also  the  Petersburg 
Diet.  s.  V.  vntha. 

32.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  28;  Manu  V,  5,  6,  19. 

34.  Manu  V,  12  ;  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  36  ;  Ya^Savalkya  I,  173. 
Haradatta  explains  mandhala  by  vagvada,  which  seems  to  be  the 
same  as  the  bird  vagguda  (Manu  XII,  64).  Mandhala  is  not 
found  in  our  dictionaries,  but  it  apparently  is  a  vicarious  form  for 
manthala,  which  occurs  in  the  Va^asaneyi-sa?«hita,  and  is  said  to 
be  the  name  of  a  kind  of  mouse  or  rat.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  large  herbivorous  bat,  usually  called  the  flying  fox  (in  Gu^a- 
rati  vagud  or  vagul)  is  really  meant,  which,  by  an  inaccurate 
observer,  might  be  described  both  as  a  bird  and  as  a  kind  of  rat. 

35.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  32-33. 

36.  Apastamba  I,  5,  17,  38-39. 


XVIII,  5-  WOMEN.  267 

2,^.  And  (animals)  that  must  be  slain  for  (the 
fulfilment  of)  the  sacred  law. 

38.  Let  him  eat  (the  flesh  of  animals)  killed  by 
beasts  of  prey,  after  having  washed  it,  if  no  blemish 
is  visible,  and  if  it  is  declared  to  be  fit  for  use  by 
the  word  (of  a  Brahma;^a). 

Chapter  XVIII. 

1.  A  wife  is  not  independent  with  respect  to  (the 
fulfilment  of)  the  sacred  law. 

2.  Let  her  not  violate  her  duty  towards  her 
husband. 

3.  Let  her  restrain  her  tongue,  eyes,  and  (organs 
of)  action. 

4.  A  woman  whose  husband  is  dead  and  who  de- 
sires offspring  (may  bear  a  son)  to  her  brother-in-law. 

5.  Let  her  obtain  the  permission  of  her  Gurus, 

37.  I.e.  animals  offered  at  6'raddhas  and  6'rauta- sacrifices, 
though  under  other  circumstances  forbidden,  may  be  eaten  both 
by  the  priests  and  other  Brahma//as. 

38.  Haradatta  takes  vyala,  'beasts  of  prey,'  to  mean  sporting 
dogs,  which  no  doubt  are  also  intended. 

XVIII.  I.  ]\Ianu  V,  155.  This  Sutra  refers  in  the  first  instance 
to  the  inability  of  wives  to  offer  on  their  own  account  -Srauta  or 
GrAya-sacrifices,  or  to  perform  vows  and  religious  ceremonies 
prescribed  in  the  Purawas,  without  the  permission  of  their  husbands. 
As  the  word  stri  means  both  wife  and  woman,  its  ulterior  mea!ning 
is,  that  women  in  general  are  never  independent;  see  Manu  V,  148; 
IX,  3 ;  Ya^avalkya  I,  85. 

2.  Apastamba  II,  10,  27,  6;  Manu  IX,  102. 

3.  Manu  V,  166;  Ya^avalkya  I,  87. 

4.  Apastamba  II,  20,  27,  2-3;  Manu  IX.  59-60;  Ya^avalkya 
I,  68.  Apati,  '  she  whose  husband  is  dead,'  means  literally,  '  she 
who  has  no  husband.'  But  as  the  case  of  a  woman  whose  husband 
has  gone  abroad,  is  discussed  below,  it  follows  that  the  former 
translation  alone  is  admissible.  It  must,  of  course,  be  understood 
that  the  widow  has  no  children. 

5.  The  Gurus  are  here  the  husband's  relatives,  under  whose 
protection  the  widow  lives. 


268  GAUTAMA.  XVIII,  6. 

and    let    her   have    intercourse    during   the    proper 
season  only. 

6.  (On  failure  of  a  brother-in-law  she  may  obtain 
offspring)  by  (cohabiting  with)  a  Sapi;/^a,  a  Sagotra, 
a  Samanapravara,  or  one  who  belongs  to  the  same 
caste. 

7.  Some  (declare,  that  she  shall  cohabit)  with 
nobody  but  a  brother-in-law. 

8.  (She  shall)  not  (bear)  more  than  two  (sons). 

9.  The  child  belongs  to  him  who  begat  it, 

10.  Except  if  an  agreement  (to  the  contrary  has 
been  made). 

11.  (And  the  child  begotten  at)  a  living  husband's 
(request)  on  his  wife  (belongs  to  the  husband). 

12.  (But  if  it  was  begotten)  by  a  stranger  (it 
belongs)  to  the  latter, 

13.  Or  to  both  (the  natural  father  and  the 
husband  of  the  mother). 

14.  But  being  reared  by  the  husband,  (it  belongs 
to  him.) 

15.  (A    wife    must)    wait   for   six   years,    if    her 

6.  Regarding  the  term  Sapiw^a,  see  above,  XIV,  13  ;  a  Sagotra 
is  a  relative  bearing  the  same  family  name  (laukika  gotra)  removed 
seven  to  thirteen  degrees,  or  still  further.  A  Samanapravara  is 
one  who  is  descended  from  the  same  i?zshi  (vaidika  gotra). 

8.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  265.  Haradatta  explains  atidvitiya,  'not 
more  than  two  (sons),'  to  mean  'not  more  than  one  son'  (prathamam 
apatyam  atitya  dvitiyam  na^anayed  iti).    But  see  Manu  IX,  61. 

9.  Apastamba  II,  6,  13,  6-7.  10.   Manu  IX,  52. 

11.  Manu  IX,  145.  Such  a  son  is  called  Kshetra^a,  see  below, 
XXVIII,  32. 

12.  Manu  IX,  144. 

13.  Ya^Bavalkya  II,  127.  Such  a  son  is  called  dvipitr/  or 
dvyamushyayawa. 

15.  Manu  IX,  76.  'When  the  husband  has  disappeared,  i.  e.  has 
gone  to  a  foreign  country,  his  wife,  though  childless,  shall  wait 


XVIII,  23-  WOMEN.  269 

husband  has  disappeared.     If  he   is   heard   of,  she 
shall  go  to  him. 

16.  But  if  (the  husband)  has  renounced  domestic 
life,  (his  wife  must  refrain)  from  intercourse  (with 
other  men). 

1 7.  (The  wife)  of  a  Brahma;/a  (who  has  gone  to 
a  foreign  country)  for  the  purpose  of  studying  (must 
wait)  twelve  years. 

18.  And  in  like  manner  if  an  elder  brother  (has 
gone  to  a  foreign  country)  his  younger  brother  (must 
wait  twelve  years)  before  he  takes  a  wife  or  kindles 
the  domestic  fire. 

19.  Some  (declare,  that  he  shall  wait)  six  years. 

20.  A  (marriageable)  maiden  (who  is  not  given 
in  marriage)  shall  allow  three  monthly  periods  to 
pass,  and  afterwards  unite  herself,  of  her  own  will, 
to  a  blameless  man,  giving  up  the  ornaments  received 
from  her  father  (or  her  family). 

21.  A  girl  should  be  given  in  marriage  before 
(she  attains  the  age  of)  puberty. 

22.  He  who  neglects  it,  commits  sin. 

23.  Some  (declare,  that  a  girl  shall  be  given  in 
marriaore)  before  she  wears  clothes. 


for  six  years.  After  (the  lapse  of)  that  (period)  she  may,  if  she 
desires  it,  produce  a  child  (by  cohabiting  M\-ith  a  Sapiwa'a),  after 
having  been  authorised  thereto  by  her  Gurus.  If  the  husband 
is  heard  of,  i.  e.  that  he  dwells  in  such  and  such  a  country,  she 
shall  go  to  him.'— Haradatta.  Kshapawa,  'waiting,'  is  ambiguous, 
and  may  also  mean  being  continent  or  emaciating  herself 

17.    I.e.  before  she  goes  to   live  with  a  Sapi«</a,  or  tries  to 
follow  her  husband,  in  case  his  residence  is  known. 

20.  ;Manu  IX,  90-92;  Ya^uavalkya  I,  64. 

21.  r^Ianu  IX,  88. 

22.  Manu  IX,  4  ;  Y^ilavalkya  T,  64.    '  He  who,'  i.  e.  the  father 
or  eruardian. 


270  GAUTAMA.  XVIII,  24. 

24.  In  order  to  defray  the  expenses  of  a  wedding, 
and  when  engaged  In  a  rite  (enjoined  by)  the  sacred 
law,  he  may  take  money  (by  fraud  or  force)  from 
a  ^'udra, 

25.  Or  from  a  man  rich  in  small  cattle,  who 
neglects  his  religious  duties,  though  he  does  not 
belong  to  the  ^'udra  caste, 

26.  Or  from  the  possessor  of  a  hundred  cows, 
who  does  not  kindle  the  sacred  fire, 

27.  Or  from  the  possessor  of  a  thousand  cows, 
who  does  not  drink  Soma. 

28.  And  when  he  has  not  eaten  (at  the  time  of 
six  meals  he  may  take)  at  the  time  of  the  seventh 
meal  (as  much  as  will  sustain  life),  not  (such  a 
quantity  as  will  serve)  to  make  a  hoard, 

29.  Even  from  men  who  do  not  neglect  their 
duties. 

30.  If  he  is  examined  by  the  king  (regarding 
his  deed),  he  shall  confess  (it  and  his  condition). 

3 1 .  For  if  he  possesses  sacred  learning  and  a  good 
character,  he  must  be  maintained  by  the  (king). 

32.  If  the  sacred  law  is  violated  and  the  (king) 
does  not  do  (his  duty),  he  commits  sin. 

24.  Manu  XI,  II,  13.  Haradatta  explains  dharmatantra, '  a  rite 
prescribed  by  the  sacred  law,'  here,  as  well  as  Sutra  32,  by  'the 
means/  i.  e.  a  sacrificial  animal  and  the  like  required  by  one  who 
is  engaged  in  performing  a  sacred  duty,  i.e.  a  Paj-ubandha-sacrifice 
and  the  like. 

25.  Manu  XI,  12.  26-27.    ]\Ianu  XI,  14. 
28.    Manu  XI,  16  ;  Yao-fiavalkya  III,  43. 

30.  Manu  XI,  17;  Y%navalkya  III,  43-44. 

31.  Manu  XI,  21-22.  Haradatta  adds  that  a  Brahma^za  who 
acts  thus,  must,  of  course,  not  be  punished. 

32.  Haradatta  refers  this  Sutra  to  the  case  where  a  sacrificial 
animal  or  other  requisites  for  a  sacrifice  are  stolen  from  a  Brah- 
ma//a.    It  seems,  however,  more  probable  that  it  refers  to  the  duty 


XIX,  6,  PENANCES.  27I 

Chapter  XIX. 

1.  The  law  of  castes  and  of  orders  has  been 
declared. 

2.  Now,  indeed,  man  (in)  this  (world)  is  polluted 
by  a  vile  action,  such  as  sacrificing  for  men  unworthy 
to  offer  a  sacrifice,  eating  forbidden  food,  speaking 
what  ought  not  to  be  spoken,  neglecting  what  is 
prescribed,  practising  what  is  forbidden, 

3.  They  are  in  doubt  if  he  shall  perform  a 
penance  for  such  (a  deed)  or  if  he  shall  not  do  it. 

4.  (Some)  declare,  that  he  shall  not  do  it, 

5.  Because  the  deed  does  not  perish. 

6.  The  most  excellent  (opinion  is),  that  he  shall 
perform  (a  penance). 

of  the  king  to  prevent,  by  all  means  in  his  power,  a  violation  of 
the  sacred  duty  to  perform  6'rauta-sacrifices,  and  that  it  is  intended 
to  prescribe  that  he  is  to  assist  a  man  who  is  engaged  in  them 
and  too  poor  to  finish  them. 

XIX.  I.  Haradatta  thinks  that  the  object  of  this  Sutra  is  to 
assert  that  in  the  following  chapter  the  laws  given  above  for  castes 
and  orders  must  be  kept  in  mind.  Thus  penances  like  offering 
a  Punastoma  are  not  intended  for  .Sudras,  who  have  no  business 
with  Vedic  rites,  but  other  penances  are.  He  also  states  that  another 
commentator  believes  that  the  Sutra  is  meant  to  indicate  that  the 
following  rules  refer  not  merely  to  those  men  who  belong  to  castes 
and  orders,  but  to  the  Pratilomas  also,  who  have  been  declared 
to  stand  outside  the  pale  of  the  sacred  law.  Haradatta's  opinion 
appears  to  be  preferable. 

2.  '  Ayam  purusha^,  "  man  (in)  this  (world),"  indicates  the 
universal  soul  which  is  dwelling  in  the  body.  Yapya,  "  vile," 
i.  e.  despicable  (kutsita).' — Haradatta. 

3.  'They,  i.e.  the  theologians  (brahmavadina^).' — Haradatta. 

5.  I.e.  the  guilt  (adharma)  contracted  by  the  deed  is  not  effaced 
before  it  has  produced  its  result  in  the  shape  of  punishment  in 
hell  and  in  other  births,  see  also  Manu  XI,  45. 

6,  'Apara,  "most  excellent,"  means  that  which  nothing  sur- 
passes, i.  e.  the  settled  doctrine.' — Haradatta. 


272  GAUTAMA.  XIX,  7. 

7.  For  it  is  declared  in  the  Veda,  that  he  who 
has  offered  a  Punastoma  (may)  again  come  to  (par- 
take of)  the  Hbations  of  Soma, 

8.  Likewise  he  who  has  offered  a  Vratyastoma. 

9.  (The  Veda  says)  further:  'He  who  offers  a 
horse-sacrifice,  conquers  all  sin,  he  destroys  the 
guilt  of  the  murder  of  a  Brahma;2a ; 

10.  Moreover:  'He  shall  make  an  Abhi^asta 
perform  an  Agnish^'ut  sacrifice.' 

11.  Reciting  the  Veda,  austerity,  a  sacrifice, 
fasting,  giving  gifts  are  the  means  for  expiating 
such  a  (blamable  act). 

12.  The  purificatory  (texts  are),  the  Upanishads, 
the  Vedantas,  the  Sa^/^hita-text  of  all  the  Vedas, 
the  (Anuvakas  called)  Madhu,  the  (hymn  of) 
Aghamarsha/za,  the  Atharvai'iras,  the  (Anuvakas 
called  the)  Rudras,  the  Purusha-hymn,  the  two 
Samans  (called)  Ra^ana  and  Rauhi;2eya,  the  Brihat 
(Saman)  and  the  Rathantara,  the  Purushagati  (Sa- 
man),  the  Mahanamnis,  the  Mahavaira^a  (Saman), 
the  Mahadivakirtya  (Saman),  any  of  the  Gyesh^Aa. 
Samans,  the  Bahishpavamana  (Saman),  the  Kush- 
Yna.nda.s,  the  Pavamanis,  and  the  Savitri. 

7.  The  Punastoma  is  one  of  the  -S'rauta-sacrifices  belonging 
to  the  class  called  Ekaha.  Regarding  its  efficacy,  see  also  La/ya- 
yana  »S'rauta-sutra  IX,  4,  5. 

8.  The  Vratyastoma  is  another  Ekaha-sacrifice.  Regarding  its 
efficacy, see  Ya^fiavalkya  I,  38;  La/yayana  Aautra-sutra  VIII,  6,  29. 

9.  6'atapatha-brahmawa  XIII,  3,  i,  i. 

10.  The  Agnish/ut  is  an  Ekaha-sacrifice.  Regarding  its  efficacy, 
see  Manu  XI,  75. 

11.  Manu  XI,  46,  228;  Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  12-I,  9,  27,  11. 

12.  '  Those  parts  of  the  Arawyakas  which  are  not  (Upanishads) 
are  called  Vedantas.  In  all  the  Vedas  [Mz.ndas),  i.  e.  in  all  xSakhas 
(prava/('ana),  the  Saz'zhita-text,  not  the  Pada-text,  nor  the  Krama- 
text.     Another  commentator  says,  "  One  Sawhita  is  to  be  made 


XIX,  15-  PENANCES.  273 

13.  To  live  on  milk  alone,  to  eat  vegetables  only, 
to  eat  fruits  only,  (to  live  on)  barley-gruel  prepared 
of  a  handful  of  grain,  to  eat  gold,  to  eat  clarified 
butter,  and  to  drink  Soma  (are  modes  of  living 
which)  purify. 

14.  All  mountains,  all  rivers,  holy  lakes,  places 
of  pilgrimage,  the  dwellings  of  i?/shis,  cow-pens,  and 
temples  of  the  gods  (are)  places  (which  destroy 
sin). 

15.  Continence,  speaking  the  truth,  bathing  morn- 
ing, noon,  and  evening,  standing  in  wet  clothes, 
sleeping  on  the  ground,  and  abstaining  from  food 
(are  the  various  kinds  of)  austerity. 

with  all  the  metres,  i.e.  the  Gayatri  and  the  rest,  and  to  be  recited  ac- 
cording to  the  manner  of  the  Prataranuvaka." ' — Haradatta.  Accord- 
ing to  the  same,  the  Madhus  are  found  Taittiriya  Ara^yaka  X,  38, 
the  hymn  of  Aghamarsha«a  Rig-veda  X,  190,  the  Rudras  Taittiriya- 
sa/whita  IV,  5,  i-ii,  and  in  the  corresponding  eleven  chapters  of 
all  other  Ya^s-J'akhas,  the  Purushasukta  Rig-veda  X,  90,  the  Kush- 
mandsis  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  X,  3-5,  the  Pavamanis  Rig-veda  IX, 
while  by  Atharva^iras  the  Upanishad,  known  by  that  name,  is  meant. 
As  regards  the  Samans  mentioned  in  the  Siitra  it  suffices  to  refer 
to  Professor  Benfey's  Index,  Ind.  Stud.  Ill,  199,  and  to  Dr.  Bur- 
nell's  Index  of  the  Arsheya-brahmawa. 

13.  According  to  Haradatta  the  word  iti,  which  appears  in 
the  text  at  the  end  of  the  enumeration,  is  intended  to  include 
other  similar  kinds  of  food,  as  'the  five  products  of  the  cow.' 
Eating  gold  means  eating  small  particles  of  gold  which  have  been 
thrown  into  clarified  butter  and  the  like. 

14.  The  word  iti  used  in  the  text  is,  according  to  Haradatta, 
again  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  '  and  so  forth.'  The  translation 
of  parishkanda,  'a  temple,'  not  parishkandha,  as  Professor  Stenzler 
reads,  is  based  on  Haradatta's  explanation.  Etymologic  ally  it 
seems  to  mean  '  a  place  for  circumambulation,'  and  to  denote 
the  platform  on  which  the  temples  usually  stand,  and  which  is 
used  for  the  Pradakshi«a  ceremony. 

15.  The  word  iti  in  the  text  is  explained  as  in  the  preceding 
Sutras. 

[2]  T 


2  74  GAUTAMA.  XIX,i6. 

1 6.  Gold,  a  cow,  a  dress,  a  horse,  land,  sesamum, 
clarified  butter,  and  food  are  the  gifts  (which  destroy 
sin). 

17.  A  year,  six  months,  four  (months),  three 
(months),  two  (months),  one  (month),  twenty-four 
days,  twelve  days,  six  days,  three  days,  a  day  and 
a  night  are  the  periods  (for  penances). 

18.  These  (acts)  may  be  optionally  performed 
when  no  (particular  penance)  has  been  prescribed, 

19.  (Viz.)  for  great  sins  difficult  (penances),  and 
for  trivial  faults  easy  ones. 

20.  The  Y^rikkhxd.  and  the  Atikr/z^/^/^ra,  (as 
well  as)  the  i^andraya;za,  are  penances  for  all 
(ofi"ences). 

Chapter   XX. 

1.  Let  him  cast  off  a  father  who  assassinates  a 
king,  who  sacrifices  for  ^'udras,  who  sacrifices  for 
his  own  sake  (accepting)  money  from  vSiidras,  who 
divulges  the  Veda  (to  persons  not  authorised  to 
study  it),  who  kills  a  learned  Brdhma/za,  who  dwells 
with  men  of  the  lowest  castes,  or  (cohabits)  with  a 
female  of  one  of  the  lowest  castes. 

2.  Having  assembled  the  (sinner's)  spiritual  Gurus 


18.  These  (acts),  i.  e.  the  recitation  of  the  Veda  and  so  forth, 
which  have  been  enumerated  above,  Sutras  11-16. 

20.  Regarding  these  penances,  see  chapters  XXVI  and  XXVII. 
Haradatta  again  takes  the  word  iti,  which  occurs  in  the  text,  to 
include  other  difficult  penances. 

XX.  I.  Haradatta  remarks  that  the  father  is  mentioned  here, 
in  order  to  indicate  that  other  less  venerable  relatives  must  certainly 
also  be  abandoned.  He  also  states  that  bhruwahan, '  he  who  slays 
a  learned  Brahmawa,'  includes  sinners  who  have  committed  other 
mortal  sins  (mahapatakas),  see  XXI,  i. 

2.    jNIanu  XI,  183-185;  Ya^iiavalkya  III,  295.     The  spiritual 


XX,  ID.  PENANCES.  275 

and  the  relatives  by  marriage,  (the  sons  and  other 
kinsmen)  shall  perform  (for  him)  all  the  funeral 
rites,  the  first  of  which  is  the  libation  of  water, 

3.  And  (afterwards)  they  shall  overturn  his  water- 
vessel  (in  the  following  manner)  : 

4.  A  slave  or  a  hired  servant  shall  fetch  an 
impure  vessel  from  a  dust-heap,  fill  it  (with  water 
taken)  from  the  pot  of  a,  female  slave  and,  his  face 
turned  towards  the  south,  upset  it  with  his  foot, 
pronouncing  (the  sinner's)  name  (and  saying) :  '  I 
deprive  N.  N.  of  water.' 

5.  All  (the  kinsmen)  shall  touch  him  (the  slave) 
passing  their  sacrificial  cords  over  the  right  shoulder 
and  under  the  left  arm,  and  untying  the  locks  on 
their  heads. 

6.  The  spiritual  Gurus  and  the  relatives  by 
marriaofe  shall  look  on. 

7.  Having  bathed,  they  (all  shall)  enter  the 
villasfe. 

8.  He  who  afterwards  unintentionally  speaks  to 
the-  (outcast  sinner)  shall  stand,  during  one  night, 
recitinor  the  Savitri. 

9.  If  he  intentionally  (converses  with  the  out- 
cast, he  must  perform  the  same  penance)  for  three 
nights. 

10.  But  if  an  (outcast  sinner)  is  purified  by 
(performing)  a  penance,  (his  kinsmen)  shall,  after 
he  has  become  pure,  fill  a  golden  vessel  (with  water) 
from  a  very  holy  lake  or  a  river,  and  make  him 
bathe  in  water  (taken)  from  that  (vessel). 

Gurus,  i.  e.  the  teacher  who  initiated  him  (aHrya)  and  those  who 
instructed  him  in  the  Veda  (upadhyaya). 

8.    ManuXI,  185. 

10.    jNIanu  XI,  187-188;  Ya^avalkya  III,  296. 

T    2 


276  GAUTAMA.  XX,  11. 

11.  Then  they  shall  give  him  that  vessel  and  he, 
after  taking  it,  shall  mutter  (the  following  Mantras) : 
'  Cleansed  is  the  sky,  cleansed  is  the  earth,  cleansed 
and  auspicious  is  the  middle  sphere ;  I  here  take 
that  which  is  brilliant.' 

12.  Let  him  offer  clarified  butter,  (reciting)  these 
Ya^us  formulas,  the  Pavamanis,  the  Taratsamandis, 
and  the  ¥iush.ma.?ida.s. 

13.  Let  him  present  gold  or  a  cow  to  a  Brah- 
ma;/a, 

14.  And  to  his  teacher. 

15.  But  he,  whose  penance  lasts  for  his  (whole) 
lifetime,  is  purified  after  death. 

16.  Let  (his  kinsmen)  perform  for  him  all  the 
funeral  rites,  the  first  of  which  is  the  libation  of 
water. 

17.  This  same  (ceremony  of  bathing  in)  water 
consecrated  for  the  sake  of  purification  (must  be 
performed)  in  the  case  of  all  minor  offences  (upapa- 
takas). 

Chapter    XXL 

I.  The  murderer  of  a  Brahma?/a,  he  who  drinks 
spirituous  liquor,  the  violator  of  a  Guru's  bed,  he 


11.  As  appears  from  Gobhila  GnTiya-sutra  III,  4,  16,  the  noun 
to  be  understood  is  apam  an^ali/z, '  a  handful  of  water/ 

12.  Haradatta  refers  the  term  Pavamanis  here  to  Taittiriya- 
brahma«a  I,  4,  8.  The  Taratsamandis  are  found  Rig-veda  IX,  58. 

17.  '  "Water  (consecrated)  for  the  sake  of  purification"  means 
water  consecrated  by  the  formulas,  "  Cleansed  is  the  earth,"  &c.' — 
Haradatta. 

XXI.  I.  Apastamba  I,  7,  21,  7-9,  11;  I,  9,  24,  6-9 ;  IManu  XI, 
35  ;  Ya^navalkya  III,  227.  Guru,  i.  e.  a  father  or  spiritual  teacher. 
The  term  yonisambandha,  'sisters  and  their  female  offspring,'  seems 
to  be  used  here  in  a  sense  different  from  that  which  it  has  III,  3  ; 


XXI,  9-  PENANXES.  277 

who  has  connexion  with  the  female  relatives  of  his 
mother  and  of  his  father  (within  six  degrees)  or  with 
sisters  and  their  female  offspring,  he  who  steals  (the 
gold  of  a  Brahma;/a),  an  atheist,  he  who  constantly 
repeats  blamable  acts,  he  who  does  not  cast  off 
persons  guilty  of  a  crime  causing  loss  of  caste,  and 
he  who  forsakes  blameless  (relatives),  become  out- 
casts, 

2.  Likewise  those  who  instigate  others  to  acts 
causing  loss  of  caste, 

3.  And  he  who  for  a  (whole)  year  associates 
with  outcasts, 

4.  To  be  an  outcast  means  to  be  deprived  of 
the  right  to  follow  the  lawful  occupations  of  twice- 
born  men, 

5.  And  to  be  deprived  after  death  of  the  rewards 
of  meritorious  deeds. 

6.  Some  call  (this  condition)  hell. 

7.  iNIanu  (declares,  that)  the  first  three  (crimes, 
named  above)  cannot  be  expiated. 

8.  Some  (declare,  that  a  man)  does  not  become 
an  outcast  (by  having  connexion^  with  female  (rela- 
tives), except  (when  he  violates)  a  Guru's  bed. 

9.  A  woman  becomes  an    outcast  by  procuring 

XIV,  20;  and  XIX,  20.    It  may  possibly  include  also  daughters- 
in-law. 

2.  Apastamba  II,  11,  29,  i. 

3.  Manu  IX.  181  ;  Ya^avalkya  III,  261. 

7.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  24-25;  I,  9,  25,  1-3:  Manu  XL  90-92, 
104-105.  The  'penances'  prescribed  are  equal  to  a  sentence  of 
death. 

8.  Apastamba  I.  7,  21,  10. 

9.  Yacmavalkya  III,  298.  'On  account  of  the  word  "and," 
by  slaying  a  Brahmawa  and  similar  crimes  also.  Another  (com- 
mentator) says,  "  A  woman  who  serves  the  slayer  of  a   learned 


GAUTAMA.  XXI,  lO. 


abortion,  by  connexion  with  a  (man  of)  lower  (caste) 
and  (the  hke  heinous  crimes). 

10.  Giving  false  evidence,  calumnies  which  will 
reach  (the  ears  of)  the  king,  an  untrue  accusation 
brought  against  a  Guru  (are  acts)  equal  to  mortal 
sins  (mahapataka). 

11.  (The  guilt  of  a)  minor  offence  (upapataka) 
rests  on  those  who  (have  been  declared  to)  defile 
the  company  (at  a  funeral  dinner  and  have  been 
named  above)  before  the  bald  man,  killers  of  kine, 
those  who  forget  the  Veda,  those  who  pronounce 
Vedic  texts  for  the  (last-mentioned  sinners),  students 
w^ho  break  the  vow  of  chastity,  and  those  who  allow 
the  time  for  the  initiation  to  pass. 

12.  An  officiating  priest  must  be  forsaken,  if  he 
is  ignorant  (of  the  rules  of  the  sacrifice),  a  teacher, 
if  he  does  not  impart  instruction,  and  (both)  if  they 
commit  crimes  causing  loss  of  caste. 

13.  He  who  forsakes  (them)  under  any  other 
circumstances,  becomes  an  outcast. 

14.  Some  declare,  that  he,  also,  who  receives  (a 

Brahma«a  or  a  man  of  lower  caste,  i.  e.  becomes  his  wife,  loses 
her  caste.  On  account  of  the  word  '  and '  the  same  happens 
in  case  she  kills  a  Brahmawa  or  commits  a  similarly  heinous  crime. 
The  slayer  of  a  Brahma^a  is  mentioned  in  order  to  include  (all) 
outcasts." ' — Haradatta. 

10.  Manu  XI,  56-57;  Ya^navalkya  III,  228-229. 

11.  Manu  XI,  60-67  !  Ya^navalkya  III,  234-242;  Apastamba 
I,  7,  21,  12-17,  19.  The  persons  who  defile  the  company  are 
enumerated  above,  XV,  i6-i8. 

12.  Apastamba  I,  2,  4,  26;  I,  2,  7,  26;  I,  2,  8,  28.  Haradatta 
asserts  that,  as  the  desertion  of  sinners  has  been  prescribed  above, 
XX,  I,  the  expression  pataniyasevayam  must  here  mean  '  if  they 
associate  with  outcasts.'  The  former  rule  refers,  however,  to  blood 
relations  only,  and  our  Sutra  may  be  intended  to  extend  it  to 
spiritual  relations. 


XXI,  22.  PE^'A^XES.  279 

person   who    has    unjustly   forsaken    his    priest   or 
teacher,  becomes  an  outcast). 

15.  The  mother  and  the  father  must  not  be 
treated  improperly  under  any  circumstances. 

16.  But  (the  sons)  shall  not  take  their  property. 

17.  By  accusing  a  Brahma;/a  of  a  crime  (the  ac- 
cuser commits)  a  sin  equal  (to  that  of  the  accused). 

18.  If  (the  accused  is)  innocent,  (the  accuser's 
guilt  is)  twice  (as  great  as  that  of  the  crime  which 
he  imputed  to  the  other). 

19.  And  he  who,  though  able  to  rescue  a  weak 
man  from  injury,  (does)  not  (do  it,  incurs  as  much 
guilt  as  he  who  injures  the  other). 

20.  He  who  in  anger  raises  (his  hand  or  a  weapon) 
against  a  Brahma;za,  will  be  banished  from  heaven 
for  a  hundred  years. 

21.  If  he  strikes,  (he  will  lose  heaven)  for  a 
thousand  (years). 

22.  If  blood  flows,  (he  will  lose  heaven)  for  a 
number  of  years  equal  to  (that  of  the  particles  of) 
dust  which  the  spilt  (blood)  binds  together. 

15.  Apastamba  I,  lo,  28,  9-10.  The  meaning  is  that  parents, 
though  they  have  become  outcasts,  must  be  pro\ided  with  the 
necessaries  of  life. 

16.  Haradatta  adds  that  their  property  goes  to  the  king. 

17.  Apastamba  I,  7,  21,  19. 

18.  YagTiavalkya  III,  285. 

20-21.  ^Nlanu  XI,  207;  Ya^avalkya  III,  293.  According  to 
Haradatta  the  word  asvargyam,  '  will  be  banished  from  or  lose 
heaven,'  may  either  mean  that  a  hundred  years'  residence  in  heaven 
will  be  deducted  from  the  rewards  for  his  meritorious  deeds,  or 
that  he  will  reside  in  hell  for  the  period  specified. 

22.    Manu  XI,  20^;  Ya^avalkya  III,  293. 


28o  GAUTAMA.  XXII,  i. 

Chapter  XXII. 

1.  (Now  follows  the  description  of  the)  penances. 

2.  He  who  has  (intentionally)  slain  a  Brahma?^a 
shall  emaciate  himself,  and  thrice  throw  himself  into 
a  fire, 

3.  Or  he  may  become  in  battle  a  target  for 
armed  men, 

4.  Or,  remaining  chaste,  he  may,  during  twelve 
years,  enter  the  village  (only)  for  the  purpose  of 
begging,  carrying  the  foot  of  a  bedstead  and  a 
skull  in  his  hand  and  proclaiming  his  deed. 

5.  If  he  meets  an  Arya,  he  shall  step  out  of  the 
road. 

6.  Standing  by  day,  sitting  at  night,  and  bathing 
in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening,  he  may 
be  purified  (after  twelve  years), 

7.  Or  by  saving  the  life  of  a  Brahma;2a, 

8.  Or  if  he  is,  at  least,  thrice  vanquished  in 
(trying  to  recover)  the  property  (of  a  Brahma/za) 
stolen  (by  robbers), 

9.  Or  by  bathing  (with  the  priests)  at  (the  end 
of)  a  horse-sacrifice, 

XXIL  I.  The  text  of  the  Siitra  consists  of  the  single  word 
'  penance'  in  the  singular,  which,  being  the  adhikara  or  heading, 
must  be  taken  with  each  of  the  following  Sutras  down  to  the  end 
of  chapter  XXIII. 

2.  Manu  XI,  74. 

3.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  II. 

4.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  11-20.  Haradatta  says,  'the  foot  of  a 
bedstead '  (kha/vanga)  is  known  in  the  case  of  the  Pajupatas,  and 
indicates  thereby  that  he  interprets  the  term  to  mean  '  a  club 
shaped  like  the  foot  of  a  bedstead,'  which  the  Pajupatas  wear. 

5.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  13.  6.    Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  10. 

7.  Manu  XI,  80;  Ya«-uavalkya  III,  244-245. 

8.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  21.  9.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  22. 


XXII,  17-  PENANCES.  281 

10.  Or  at  (the  end  of)  any  other  (Vedic)  sacrifice, 
provided  that  an  Agnish/ut  (sacrifice)  forms  part 
of  it. 

11.  (The  same  penances  must  be  performed) 
even  if  he  has  attempted  the  Hfe  of  a  Brahma/za, 
but  failed  to  kill  him, 

12.  Likewise  if  he  has  killed  a  female  (of  the 
Brahma;/a  caste)  who  had  bathed  after  temporary 
uncleanness, 

13.  Also  for  (destroying)  the  embryo  of  a  Brah- 
ma;/a,  though  (its  sex)  may  be  not  distinguishable. 

14.  For  (intentionally)  killing  a  Kshatriya  the 
normal  vow  of  continence  (must  be  kept)  for  six 
years ;  and  he  shall  give  one  thousand  cows  and 
one  bull. 

15.  For  (killing)  a  Vaiiya  (the  same  penance 
must  be  performed)  during  three  years ;  and  he 
shall  give  one  hundred  cows  and  one  bull. 

1 6.  For  (killing)  a  6'Lidra  (the  same  penance  must 
be  performed)  during  one  year;  and  he  shall  give 
ten  cows  and  one  bull. 

1 7.  And  the  same  (rule  applies)  if  a  female  (has 

10.  Haradatta  names  the  Pau-^aratra  sacrifice  as  an  instance  of 
a  iSrauta  ya^iia,  of  which  an  AgnishAit  forms  part.  He  adds  that 
another  commentator  explains  the  Sutra  to  mean,  '  or  at  any  other 
sacrifice,  provided  that  an  Agnish/ut  sacrifice  be  its  final  ceremony.' 
Regarding  the  Agnish/ut  sacrifice  see  also  above,  XIX,  10. 

11.  Y%navalkya  III,  252. 

12.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  g;  INIanu  XI,  88;  Y%uavalkya  III, 
251. 

13.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  8;  Manu,  Ya^fiavalkya,  loc.  cit. 

14.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  i.  'Prakrna  (normal)  means  natural 
(svabhavika),  i.  e.  not  accompanied  by  the  carrying  of  the  foot  of 
a  bedstead  and  the  rest.' — Haradatta. 

15.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  2,  4. 

16.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  3,  4. 

17.  Apastamba  I,  9,  24,  5;  Ya^avalkya  III,  269.     Haradatta 


282  GAUTAMA.  XXII,  i8. 

been  killed)  who  was  not  in  the  condition  (described 
in  Sutra  12). 

18.  (The  penance  for  killing)  a  cow  is  the  same 
as  for   (the  murder  of)  a  Vaii'ya, 

19.  And  for  injuring  a  frog,  an  ichneumon,  a 
crow,  a  chameleon,  a  musk-rat,  a  mouse,  and  a  dog, 

20.  And  for  killing  one  thousand  (small  animals) 
that  have  bones, 

21.  Also  for  (killing)  an  ox-load  of  (animals)  that 
have  no  bones; 

22.  Or  he  may  also  give  something  for  (the  de- 
struction of)  each  animal  that  has  bones. 

23.  For  (killing)  a  eunuch  (he  shall  give)  a  load 
of  straw  and  a  masha  of  lead  ; 

24.  For  (killing)  a  boar,  a  pot  of  clarified  butter; 

25.  For  (killing)  a  snake,  a  bar  of  iron  ; 

26.  For  (killing)  an  unchaste  woman,  who  is 
merely  in  name  a  Brahma/^i,  a  leather  bag; 

says  that  this  rule  refers  to  the  expiation  of  the  murder  of  a  virtuous 
Brahma/n. 

18.  Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  i;  Manu  XI,  109-116;  Ya^navalkya  III, 
263.  Haradatta  thinks  that  the  Sutra  refers  to  the  cow  of  a  vir- 
tuous -S'rotriya  or  of  a  poor  Brahma;;a  who  has  many  children. 

19.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  13.  Haradatta  explains  dahara  to  mean 
a  small  mouse,  but  gives  the  meaning  assigned  to  it  in  the  transla- 
tion as  the  opinion  of  others.  He  states  that  all  the  animals  named 
must  have  been  intentionally  injured  and  together. 

20.  INIanuXI,  142;  Ya^navalkya  III,  275. 

21.  Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  2. 

22.  Haradatta  quotes  averse  showing  that  'something'  means 
eight  handfuls  (mush/i)  of  grain. 

23.  Manu  XI,  134  ;  Ya^navalkya  III,  273. 

24.  Manu  XI,  135. 

25.  Manu  XI,  34  ;  Ya^uavalkya  III,  273.  Possibly  da.nda.,  a  bar, 
denotes  here  a  particular  measure,  as  a  dafida.  is  said  to  be  equal 
to  four  hastas  or  ninety-six  angulis. 

26.  Manu  XI,  139. 


XXII,  36.  PENANCES.  28 


J 


27.  (For  killing  a  woman  who  subsists)  by  har- 
lotry, nothing  at  all. 

28.  For  preventing  that  (a  Brahma;za)  obtains  a 
wife,  food,  or  money,  (he  must)  in  each  case  (remain 
chaste)  during  a  year, 

29.  For  adultery  two  years, 

30.  (For  adultery  with  the  wife)  of  a  ^'rotriya 
three  years. 

31.  And  if  he  has  received  a  present  (from  the 
woman),  he  shall  throw  it  away, 

32.  Or  restore  it  to  the  giver. 

33.  If  he  has  employed  Vedic  texts  for  people 
(with  whom  such  intercourse  is)  forbidden,  (he  shall 
remain  chaste  for  a  year),  provided  (the  portion  of 
the  Veda  thus  employed)  contained  one  thousand 
words. 

34.  And  the  same  (penance  must  be  performed) 
by  him  who  extinguishes  the  (sacred)  fires,  who 
neglects  the  daily  recitation  of  the  Veda,  or  (who  is 
guilty)  of  a  minor  offence  (upapataka), 

35.  Also  by  a  wife  who  violates  her  duty  (to 
her  husband);  but,  being  guarded,  she  shall  receive 
food. 

36.  For  committing  a  bestial  crime,  excepting 
(the  case  of )  a  cow,  (he  shall  offer)  an  oblation  of 
clarified  butter,  (reciting)  the  Kushma/z^/a  texts. 


29-30.   Apastamba  II,  10,  27,  11. 

33.  Haradatta  says  that  by  the  employment  of  Vedic  texts, 
teaching  or  sacrificing  is  meant,  but  that  others  refer  the  Siitra 
to  the  performance  of  these  acts  in  the  company  of,  not  for 
unworthy  people. 

35.  ^lanu  XI,  189;  Y%navalkya  III,  297. 

36.  Manu  XI,  174.    Regarding  the  Kushma«i/as,  see  XIX,  12. 


284  GAUTAMA.  XXIII,  i. 

Chapter  XXIII. 

1.  They  shall  pour  hot  spirituous  liquor  into  the 
mouth  of  a  Brahma/^a  who  has  drunk  such  liquor ; 
he  will  be  purified  after  death. 

2.  If  he  has  drunk  it  unintentionally,  (he  shall 
drink)  for  three  days  hot  milk,  clarified  butter,  and 
Avater,  and  (inhale  hot)  air.  That  (penance  is  called 
the  Tapta-)kr//('Mra.  Afterwards  he  shall  be  again 
initiated. 

3.  And  (the  same  penance  must  be  performed) 
for  swallowing  urine,  excrements,  or  semen, 

4.  And  (for  eating)  any  part  of  a  carnivorous 
beast,  of  a  camel  or  of  an  ass, 

5.  And  of  tame  cocks  or  tame  pigs. 

6.  If  he  smells  the  fume  (exhaled)  by  a  man  who 
has  drunk  spirituous  liquor,  (he  shall)  thrice  restrain 
his  breath  and  eat  clarified  butter, 

7.  Also,  if  he  has  been  bitten  by  (one  of  the 
animals  mentioned)  above   (Sutras  4-5). 

8.  He  who  has  defiled  the  bed  of  his  Guru  shall 
extend  himself  on  a  heated  iron  bed, 

9.  Or  he  shall  embrace  the  red-hot  iron  image  of 
a  woman. 

XXIII.  I.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  3.  Haradatta  remarks  that  other 
twice-born  men  also  must  perform  the  same  penance  in  case  they 
drink  liquor  forbidden  to  them,  see  above,  II,  20  note.  He  also 
states  that  the  offence  must  have  been  committed  intentionally  and 
repeatedly  in  order  to  justify  so  severe  an  expiation.  Regarding 
the  effect  of  the  purification  after  death,  see  above,  XX,  16. 

2-3.  Manu  XI,  151 ;  Ya^ilavalkya  III,  255  ;  see  also  Apastamba 
I,  9,  25,  10. 

4-5.    Manu  XI,  157.  6.   Manu  XI,  150. 

7.    Manu  XI,  200;  Ya§-navalkya  III,  277. 

8-10.  Apastamba  I,  9,  25,  1-2.  Haradatta  asserts  that  Guru 
denotes  here  the  father  alone. 


XXIII,  15.  PENANCES.  285 

10.  Or  he  shall  tear  out  his  organ  and  testi- 
cles and,  holding  them  in  his  hands,  walk  straight 
towards  the  south-west,  until  he  falls  down  dead. 

11.  He  will  be  purified  after  death. 

12.  (The  guilt  of  him  who  has  intercourse)  with 
the  wife  of  a  friend,  a  sister,  a  female  belonging  to 
the  same  family,  the  wife  of  a  pupil,  a  daughter- 
in-law,  or  with  a  cow,  is  as  great  as  that  of  (him 
who  violates  his  Guru's)  bed. 

1 3.  Some  (declare,  that  the  guilt  of  such  a  sinner 
is  equal  to)  that  of  a  student  who  breaks  the  vow  of 
chastity. 

14.  A  woman  who  commits  adultery  with  a  man 
of  lower  caste  the  king  shall  cause  to  be  devoured 
by  dogs  in  a  public  place. 

15.  He  shall  cause  the  adulterer  to  be  killed 
(also). 


12.  Manu  XI,  1 71-172;  Ya^avalkya  III,  232-233. 

13.  'The  penance  also  consists  in  the  performance  of  the  rites 
obligator}-  on  an  unchaste  student  (see  Sutras  17-19),  and  that  for 
the  violation  of  a  Guru's  bed  need  not  be  performed.' — Haradatta. 

14.  Manu  VIII,  371. 

15.  INIanuVIII,  372;  Ya^avalkya  II,  286;  Apastamba  II,  10, 
27,  9.  jNIy  best  MSS.  read  ghatayet,  'shall  cause  to  be  killed,' 
instead  of  Professor  Stenzler's  khadayet,  '  shall  cause  to  be  de- 
voured.' C.  has  khadayet,  but  its  commentar}-,  as  well  as  that 
given  in  the  other  ]MSS.,  shows  that  ghatayet  is  the  correct  read- 
ing. The  text  of  the  commentar}'  runs  as  follows :  Anantarokta- 
vishaye  gata^  puman  ra^a  ghatayit\TO  [khadayitavyo  C]  vadha- 
prakaraj^anantaram  eva  vasish/^ava-^ane  darj-ita^.  The 
passages  of  VasishMa,  which  Haradatta  has  quoted  in  explana- 
tion of  Sutra  14,  prescribe  that  the  adulterer  is  to  be  burnt. 
Another  objection  to  the  reading  khadayet  is  that  the  word  would 
be  superfluous.  If  Gautama  had  intended  to  prescribe  the  same 
punishment  for  the  adulterer  as  for  the  woman,  he  would  simply 
have  said  puma/// s am. 


286  GAUTAMA. 


XXIII,  i6. 


1 6.  (Or  he  shall  punish  him  in  the  manner)  which 
has  been  declared  (above). 

1 7.  A  student  who  has  broken  the  vow  of  chastity 
shall  offer  an  ass  to  Nirr/ti  on  a  cross-road. 

18.  Putting  on  the  skin  of  that  (ass),  with  the 
hair  turned  outside,  and  holding  a  red  (earthen) 
vessel  in  his  hands,  he  shall  beg  in  seven  houses, 
proclaiming  his  deed. 

19.  He  will  be  purified  after  a  year. 

20.  For  an  involuntary  discharge  caused  by  fear 
or  sickness,  or  happening  during  sleep,  and  if  for 
seven  days  the  fire-oblations  and  begging  have  been 
neglected,  (a  student)  shall  make  an  offering  of  clari- 
fied butter  or  (place)  two  pieces  of  fuel  (in  the  fire) 
reciting  the  two  (verses  called)  Retasya. 

21.  Let  him  who  was  asleep  when  the  sun  rose 
remain  standing  during  the  day,  continent  and  fast- 
ing, and  him  who  was  asleep  when  the  sun  set 
(remain  in  the  same  position)  during  the  night, 
reciting  the  Gayatri. 

22.  He  who  has  looked  at  an  impure  (person), 
shall  look  at  the  sun  and  restrain  his  breath  (once). 

23.  Let  him  who  has  eaten  forbidden  food  [or 
swallowed  impure  substances],  (fast  until)  his  entrails 
are  empty. 

16.    Above,  i.  e.  XII,  2,  where  the  mutilation  of  the  offender  has 
been  prescribed.     See  also  Apastamba  11,  10,  26,  20. 
17-19.   Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  8-9. 

20.  Manu  II,  181,  187;  Ya«-riavalkya  III,  278,  281.  The 
Retasyas  are  found  Taittiriya  Ara;?yaka  I,  30. 

21.  Apastamba  II,  5,  12,  22  ;  Manu  II,  220. 

22.  Manu  V,  86.  'An  impure  person,  i.  e.  a  jK'a.ndala.  and  the 
like.  This  rule  refers  to  a  student  (who  sees  such  a  person)  while 
he  recites  the  Veda.' — Haradatta. 

23-24.   Apastamba  I,  9,  27,  3-4.     My  copies  omit  amedhya- 


XXIII,  31.  PENANCES.  287 

24.  (In  order  to  attain  that),  he  must  entirely  ab- 
stain from  food  at  least  for  three  (days  and)  nights. 

25.  Or  (he  becomes  pure)  after  eating  during 
seven  (days  and)  nights  fruits  that  have  become 
detached  spontaneously,  avoiding  (all  other  food). 

26.  (If  he  has  eaten  forbidden  food  mentioned 
above)  before  five-toed  animals,  he  must  throw  it 
up  and  eat  clarified  butter. 

27.  For  abuse,  speaking  an  untruth,  and  doing 
injury,  (he  shall  practise)  austerities  for  no  longer 
period  than  three  (days  and)  nights. 

28.  If  (the  abuse)  was  merited,  (he  shall  offer) 
burnt-oblations,  reciting  (the  Mantras)  addressed  to 
Varu;za  and  (the  hymns)  revealed  by  Manu. 

29.  Some  (declare,  that)  an  untruth  (spoken)  at 
the  time  of  marriage,  during  dalliance,  in  jest  or 
while  (one  suffers  severe)  pain  is  venial. 

30.  But  (that  is)  certainly  not  (the  case)  when 
(the  untruth)  concerns  a  Guru. 

31.  For  if  he  lies  in  his  heart  only  to  a  Guru  re- 
garding small  matters  even,  he  destroys  (himself), 
seven  descendants,  and  seven  ancestors. 


prajane  va,  or  has  swallowed  impure  substances,  and  the  words  are 
not  required,  as  another  penance  has  been  prescribed  for  the  case 
above,  Siitra  3.     But  see  also  Samavidhana  I,  5,  13. 

26.  Manu  XI,  161.     The  Sutras  referred  to  are  XVII,  9-26. 

27.  Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  3.  My  copies  read  triratraparamam 
instead  of  triratram  paramam.  This  reading,  which  seems  pre- 
ferable, is  also  confirmed  by  the  commentary,  where  the  words  are 
explained,  triratraparataya  pare«a  triratram. 

28.  According  to  Haradatta  the  texts  addressed  to  Varu«a  are 
yatki///  ^edam,  Taitt.  Sawh.  Ill,  4,  11,6  ;  imam  me  varu«a,  tattva 
yami,  Taitt.  Sawh.  II,  i,  n,  6;  and  ava  te  he/o,  Taitt.  Samh.  I, 
5,  II,  3.     The  hymns  seen  by  Manu  are  Rig-veda  VIII,  27-31. 

29.  Manu  VII,  112. 


GAUTAMA.  XXIII,  32. 


32.  For  intercourse  with  a  female  (of  one)  of  the 
lowest  castes,  he  shall  perform  a  Kr^'/^Z'/^ra  penance 
during  one  year. 

33.  (For  committing  the  same  sin)  undesignedly, 
(he  shall  perform  the  same  penance)  during  twelve 
(days  and)  nights, 

34.  For  connexion  with  a  woman  during  her 
courses,  (he  shall  perform  the  same  penance)  for 
three  (days  and)  nights. 

Chapter  XXIV. 

1.  A  secret  penance  (must  be  performed)  by  him 
whose  sin  is  not  publicly  known, 

2.  He  who  desires  to  accept  or  has  accepted  (a 
gift)  which  ought  not  to  be  accepted,  shall  recite 
the  four  J^tk-verses  (IX,  58,  1-4),  (beginning)  Tarat 
sa  mandi,  (standing)  in  water, 

3.  He  who  desires  to  eat  forbidden  food,  shall 
scatter  earth  (on  it), 

4.  Some    (declare,  that)   he  who  has    connexion 

32.  Apastamba  I,  10,  28,  lo-ii.  Regarding  the  Kn'kMra. 
penance,  see  below,  chapter  XXVI. 

34.   Manu  XI,  174  ;  Ya^ilavalkya  III,  288. 
XXIV.  I.    Manu  XI,  248;  Ya^ilavalkya  III,  301, 

2.  Manu  XI,  254.  '  He  who  has  accepted  or  desires  to  accept, 
i.  e.  because  no  other  course  is  possible,  (a  present)  offered  by  a 
man  that  is  blamable  on  account  of  the  caste  of  the  giver  or 
on  account  of  his  deeds,  or  (a  present)  that  in  itself  is  blamable, 
e.  g.  the  skin  of  a  black-buck  and  the  like  ,  ,  .  in  water,  i.  e, 
according  to  some,  standing  in  water  that  reaches  to  his  navel; 
according  to  others,  entirely  immersed  in  water,' — Haradatta, 

3.  Manu  loc,  cit.  '  Forbidden  food  has  been  described  above, 
XVII,  8,  9.  If,  being  unable  to  act  otherwise,  he  desires  to  eat 
that,  he  shall  throw  earth,  i.  e.  a  piece  of  earth,  (into  it)  and  then 
eat  it.' — Haradatta. 

4.  Haradatta  adds  that  he  shall  bathe,  dressed  in  his  garments. 


XXIV,  9.  PENANCES.  289 

with  a  woman  during  her  courses  becomes  pure  by 
bathing. 

5.  Some  (declare,  that  this  rule  holds  good)  in  the 
case  of  (one's  own)  wives  (only). 

6.  The  (secret)  penance  for  killing  a  learned 
Br4hma;/a  (is  as  follows):  Living  during  ten  days 
on  milk  (alone)  or  (on  food  fit  for  offerings),  during 
a  second  (period  of  ten  days)  on  clarified  butter,  and 
during  a  third  (period  of  ten  days)  on  water,  par- 
taking of  (such  food)  once  only  each  day,  in  the 
morning,  and  keeping  his  garments  constantly  wet, 
he  shall  (daily)  offer  (eight)  oblations,  (representing) 
the  hair,  the  nails,  the  skin,  the  flesh,  the  blood,  the 
sinews,  the  bones,  (and)  the  marrow.  The  end  of 
each  (Mantra)  shall  be,  '  I  offer  in  the  mouth  of  the 
Atman  (the  soul),  in  the  jaws  of  Death.' 

7.  Now  another  (penance  for  the  murder  of  a 
Brahmawa  will  be  described): 

8.  The  rule  (as  to  eating  and  so  forth),  which  has 
been  declared  (above,  Sutra  6,  must  be  observed), 

9.  (And)  he  shall  offer  clarified  butter,  reciting 
(the  sacred  text  Rig-veda  I,  189,  2),  *0  fire,  do 
thou  ferry  over,'  the  Mahavyahmis,  and  the  Kush- 
maz/rt'as  ; 


5.  Haradatta  adds  that  another  commentator  reads  ekestrishu, 
i.  e.  eke  astrishu,  and  explains  the  Sutra  to  mean, '  Some  (declare 
the  above  rule  to  refer  also)  to  a  bestial  crime.' 

6.  Ya^navalkya  III,  303.  According  to  Haradatta  the  complete 
Mantras  are  as  follows:  Lomanyatmano  mukhe  mrz'tyorasye^uhomi 
svaha,  nakhanya.  m.  m.  a.  ^homi  svaha,  &c.  This  secret  penance 
is  apparently  a  milder  form  of  that  prescribed  Apastamba  I,  9, 
25,  12. 

9.  The  Maha\Tahr/tis  are,  bhu^,  bhuva^,  sva//.  Regarding  the 
Kushmawdfas,  see  above,  XIX,  12. 

[2]  U 


290  GAUTAMA.  XXIV,  10. 

10.  Or,  for  the  murder  of  a  Brahma/^a,  for  drinking 
spirituous  liquor,  for  stealing  (gold),  and  for  the  vio- 
lation of  a  Guru's  bed,  he  may  perform  that  (same 
vow),  tire  himself  by  repeatedly  stopping  his  breath, 
and  recite  (the  hymn  seen  by)  Aghamarsha;2a.  That 
is  equal  (in  efficacy)  to  the  final  bath  at  a  horse- 
sacrifice  ; 

11.  Or,  repeating  the  Gayatri  a  thousand  times, 
he,  forsooth,  purifies  himself; 

12.  Or,  thrice  repeating  (the  hymn  of)  Agha- 
marsha;2a  while  immersed  in  water,  he  is  freed  from 
all  sins. 

Chapter  XXV. 

1.  Now  they  say:  'How  many  (gods)  does  a 
student  enter  who  violates  the  vow  of  chastity  ? ' 

2.  (And  they  answer):  '  His  vital  spirits  (go  to) 
the  Maruts  (winds),  his  strength  to  Indra,  his  emi- 
nence in  sacred  learning  to  Brz'haspati,  all  the  re- 
maining parts  to  Agni. 

3.  He  kindles  the  fire  in  the  night  of  the  new 
moon,  and  offers,  by  way  of  penance,  two  oblations 
of  clarified  butter, 

10.  Manu  XI,  260-261 ;  Ya^navalkya  III,  302.  The  vow 
intended  is  that  prescribed  above,  Siitras  6,  8. 

11.  Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  14-!,  9,  27,  i.  Haradatta  remarks 
that  the  performer  of  the  penance  shall  live  on  milk  and  stop  his 
breath,  repeatedly  stopping  his  breath. 

XXV.  I.  For  this  and  the  following  five  Siltras,  see  Taittiriya 
Ara«yaka  II,  18,  i  seq. 

2.  '  All  the  remaining  parts,  i.  e.  his  sight  and  the  other  organs 
of  sense,  go  to  Agni.  Thus  a  student  who  has  broken  the  vow  of 
chastity  becomes  short-lived,  weak,  destitute  of  eminence  in  sacred 
learning,  and  destitute  of  sight,  and  so  forth.  Therefore  a  penance 
must  be  performed.' — Haradatta.  It  must,  of  course,  be  under- 
stood that  the  penance  prescribed  here,  is  a  '  secret  penance.' 

3.  '  He,  i.  e.  the  unchaste  student,  shall  kindle  the  fire  in  the 


XXV,  7-  PENA^XES.  291 

4-  (Reciting  these  two  sacred  texts),  '  Defiled  by 
lust  am  I,  defiled  am  I,  oh  Lust;  to  Lust  svaha;' 
'Injured  by  lust  am  I,  injured  am  I,  oh  Lust;  to 
Lust  svaha.'  (Next)  he  (silently)  places  one  piece  of 
sacred  fuel  (on  the  fire),  sprinkles  water  round  the 
fire,  offers  the  Ya^navastu  (oblation),  and  approaching 
(the  fire)  worships  it,  thrice  (reciting  the  text),  '  May 
the  waters  sprinkle  me.' 

5.  These  worlds  are  three ;  in  order  to  conquer 
these  worlds,  in  order  to  gain  mastership  over  these 
worlds,  (this  rite  must  be  performed.) 

6.  According  to  some,  the  above  (described)  rite 
is  a  penance  (for  all  hidden  offences)  in  general,  (and 
they  say)  regarding  it,  'He  who  maybe  impure,  as  it 
were,  shall  offer  burnt-oblations  in  this  manner,  and 
shall  recite  sacred  texts  in  this  manner;  the  fee  (of 
the  officiating  priest  shall  be)  whatever  he  may 
choose.' 

7.  He  who  has  been  guilty  of  cheating,  of  calum- 
niating, of  acting  contrary  to  the  rule  of  conduct, 
of  eating  or  drinking  things  forbidden,  of  con- 
nexion with  a  woman  of  the  ^udra  caste,  of  an  un- 
natural crime,  and  even  of  performing  magic  rites 
with  intent  (to  harm  his  enemies),  shall  bathe  and 

night  of  the  new  moon,  i.  e.  at  midnight,  in  the  manner  declared  in 
the  Grihya-sutra.' — Haradatta. 

4.  Haradatta  says  that  while  sprinkling  water  the  performer 
shall  recite  the  texts  'Aditi,  thou  hast  permitted,'  see  Apastamba  II, 
2,  3,  17  note.  The  Ya^avastu  oblation,  which  follows  after  the 
Svish/akr/t  offering,  is  described  Gobhila  Gnhya-sutra  I,  8,  26-29, 

7.  Apastamba  I,  9,  26,  7.  The  verses  addressed  to  the  Waters 
are,  Rv.  X,  9,  i-3  =  Taitt.  Sawh.  IV,  i,  5,  i,  and  Taitt.  Sawh.  V, 
6,  I.  Regarding  those  addressed  to  Vanma, see  above,  XXIII,  28. 
As  an  instance  of  '  other  purificatory  texts '  Haradatta  quotes 
Taittiriya-brahma;;a  I,  4,  8,  i. 

U    2 


292  GAUTAMA.  XXV,  8. 

sprinkle  himself  with  water,  reciting  the  texts  ad- 
dressed to  the  Waters,  or  those  addressed  to 
Vavuna.,  or  other  purificatory  texts. 

8.  For  offences  committed  by  speaking  or  think- 
ing of  forbidden  things,  the  five  Vyahr/tis  (must  be 
recited). 

9.  Or  for  all  (offences)  he  may  sip  water,  (reciting) 
in  the  morning  (the  text),  '  May  the  day  and  the  sun 
purify  me;'  and  in  the  evening,  'The  night  and 
Varu;^a.' 

10.  Or  he  may  offer  eight  pieces  of  sacred  fuel, 
(reciting  the  texts  beginning)  '  Devakmasya.'  By 
merely  offering  them  he  becomes  free  from  all  sin. 

Chapter  XXVI. 

1.  Now,  therefore,  we  will  describe  three  Krz^- 
k/irsis  (or  difficult  penances). 

2.  (During  three  days)  he  shall  eat  at  the  morning- 
meal  food  fit  for  offerings,  and  fast  in  the  evening. 

8.    Regarding  the  five  Vyahr2tis,  see  above,  I,  51. 

10.  Haradatta  gives  the  following  four  Mantras :  Devakr/ta- 
syainasovaya^anam  asi  svaha,  '  thou  art  the  expiation  for  sin  com- 
mitted by  the  gods,'  svaha  pitr^'kritasyainaso  .  .  .  svaha,  manushya- 
kn'tasyainaso  .  .  .  svaha,  asmatkr/tasyainaso  .  .  .  svaha.  But  see 
Va^asaneyi-sawhita  VIII,  13,  where  eight  Mantras  are  given,  and 
below,  XXVII,  7. 

XXVI.  I.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  i;  Apastamba  I,  9,  27,  7.  Haradatta 
states  that  ata/^,  'therefore,'  means  'because  the  Kn'^'^kvas  cannot  be 
performed  if  they  have  not  been  described,'  while  Saya«a,  on  the 
Samavidhana,  asserts  that  it  means  '  because  unpurified  persons 
who  are  unable  to  offer  sacrifices  cannot  gain  heavenly  bliss 
without  performing  austerities  such  as  KriM/iTa.s.'  It  is  a  remark- 
able fact  that  Haradatta  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  that 
the  twenty-sixth  chapter  of  Gautama  is  taken  bodily  from  the 
Samavidhana. 

2.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  2.  'Food  fit  for  offerings,  i.e.  such  as 
is  not  mixed  with  salt  or  pungent  condiments.' 


XXVI,  12.  PENANCES.  293 

3.  Next,  he  shall  eat  (food  fit  for  offerings), 
during  another  period  of  three  days,  in  the  even- 
ing (only). 

4.  Next,  during  another  period  of  three  days,  he 
shall  not  ask  anybody  (for  food). 

5.  Next,  he  shall  fast  during  another  period  of 
three  days. 

6.  He  who  desires  (to  be  purified)  quickly,  shall 
stand  during  the  day,  and  sit  during  the  night. 

7.  He  shall  speak  the  truth. 

8.  He  shall  not  converse  with  anybody  but 
Aryans. 

9.  He  shall  daily  sing  the  tw^o  (Samans  called) 
Raurava  and  Yaudha^aya. 

10.  He  shall  bathe  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and 
in  the  evening,  reciting  the  three  (verses  which 
begin)  '  For  ye  waters  are,'  and  he  shall  dry  himself 
reciting  the  eight  purificatory  (verses  which  begin) 
'  The  golden-coloured.' 

11.  Next  (he  shall  offer)  libations  of  water. 

12.  Adoration  to  him  who  creates  self-conscious- 
ness, who  creates  matter,  who  gives  gifts,  who  de- 
stroys (sin),  who  performs  penance,  to  Punarvasu, 
adoration. 

3-5.    Samavidhana  I,  2,  3. 

6.    Samavidhana  I,  2,  4. 

7-1 1.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  5.  Aryans,  i.e.  Brahma«as,  Ksha- 
triyas,  and  Vai^yas.  Regarding  the  Samans  and  Mantras,  see  notes 
to  Burnell's  edition  of  the  Samavidhana,  and  above,  XXV,  7. 
Haradatta  remarks  that  in  the  Taitt.  Sawh.  (V,  6,  i)  the  Mantras 
beginning  'The  golden-coloured'  are  ten  in  number,  and  adds  that 
'  if  in  some  other  -Sakha  eight  are  found,  those  must  be  taken.' 

12.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  5,  vihere,  however,  only  four  Mantras  are 
given  instead  of  our  thirteen.  The  epithets  given  to  the  deity  in 
the  Samavidhana  can  all  be  referred  to  the  Sun,  provided  he  is 


294  GAUTAMA.  XXVI,  r2. 

Adoration  to  him  who  is  worthy,  of  (offerings) 
consisting  of  Mun^a  grass,  who  is. worthy  of  (offer- 
ings of)  water,  who  conquers  wealth,  to  him  who 
conquers  the  universe,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  him  who  gives  success,  who  gives 
full  success,  who  gives  great  success,  to  him  who  car- 
ries (all  undertakings)  to  a  successful  issue,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  Rudra,  the  lord  of  cattle,  the  great 
god,  the  triocular,  solitary,  supreme  lord  Hari,  to 
dread  ^Sarva,  to  li'ana  who  carries  the  thunderbolt, 
to  the  fierce  wearer  of  matted  locks,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  the  Sun,  to  Aditi's  offspring,  adora- 
tion. 

Adoration  to  him  whose  neck  Is  blue,  to  him 
whose  throat  Is  dark-blue,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  the  black  one,  to  the  brown  one, 
adoration. 

Adoration  to  Indra,  the  first-born,  the  best,  the 
ancient,  to  chaste  Harlke^^a,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  the  truthful  purifier,  to  fire-coloured 
Kama,  who  changes  his  form  at  pleasure,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  the  brilliant  one,  to  him  whose 
form  is  brilliant,  adoration. 


identified  with  the  universal  soul,  while  in  the  above  Stitra,  Rudra 
and  Indra  have  been  introduced.  It  cannot  be  doubtful  that  the 
Samavidhana  gives  an  older  and  more  authentic  form  of  the  prayer. 
My  translation  of  the  epithets,  which  are  found  in  the  Samavidhana 
also,  follows  Saya^a's  gloss.  Haradatta  does  not  explain  them. 
About  Sobhya  in  the  twelfth  Mantra,  which  possibly  might  mean, 
*  he  who  dwells  in  a  mirage,  i.  e.  the  Sarasara,'  I  feel  doubtful. 
My  MSS.  read  somya,  and  the  Samavidhana  has  saumya  in  the 
second  Mantra.  But  I  am  unwilling  to  alter  the  word,  as  Professor 
Stenzler's  reading  may  have  been  derived  from  a  South-Indian 
MS.,  where  bhya  and  mya  do  not  resemble  each  other  so  much  as 
in  the  Devanagari  characters. 


XXVI,  21.  PENANCES.  295 

Adoration  to  the  fierce  one,  to  him  whose  form 
is  fierce,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  Sobhya,  the  beautiful,  the  great 
male,  the  middle  male,  the  highest  male,  to  the 
student  of  the  Veda,  adoration. 

Adoration  to  him  who  wears  the  moon  on  his 
forehead,  to  him  whose  garment  is  a  skin,  adoration. 

13.  The  worship  of  Aditya  (the  sun)  must  be 
performed  with  the  same  (texts). 

14.  Offerings  of  clarified  butter  (must  be  made 
with  the  help  of)  the  same  (texts). 

15.  At  the  end  of  the  period  of  twelve  days  he 
shall  boil  rice  and  make  offerings  to  the  following 
deities, 

16.  (Viz.)  to  Agni  svah^,  to  Soma  svaha,  to  Agni 
and  Soma  (conjointly),  to  Indra  and  Agni  (con- 
jointly), to  Indra,  to  all  the  gods,  to  Brahman,  to 
Pra^pati,  (and)  to  Agni  Svish/akm. 

1 7.  Afterwards  (he  must  feed)  Brahma;/as. 

18.  By  the  above  (rules)  the  Atikr/X^/^//ra  (or 
exceedingly  difficult)  penance  has  been  explained. 

19.  (But  when  he  performs  that),  he  shall  eat 
(only)  as  much  as  he  can  take  at  one  (mouthful). 

20.  The  third  {KrzM/ira)  is  that  where  water 
is  the  (only)  food,  and  it  is  called  KrzM/irditi- 
krz/kMra.  (or  the  most  difficult  penance). 

21.  He  who  has  performed  the  first  of  these 
(three)  becomes  pure,  sanctified,  and  worthy  (to 
follow)  the  occupations  (of  his  caste). 

13-17.    Samavidhana  I,  2,  5. 

18.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  6. 

19.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  7;  Manu  XI,  214;  Ya^iiavalkya  III,  320. 

20.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  8  ;  Y%uavalkya  III,  321. 
21-23.    Samavidhana  I,  2,  9. 


296  GAUTAMA.  XXVI,  22. 

2  2.  He  who  has  performed  the  second  is  freed 
from  all  sins  which  he  commits,  excepting  mortal 
sins  (mahapataka). 

23.  He  who  has  performed  the  third,  removes  all 
guilt. 

24.  Now  he  who  performs  these  three  Y^rikkhx2js, 
becomes  perfect  in  all  the  Vedas,  and  known  to  all 
the  gods ; 

25.  Likewise  he  who  knows  this. 

Chapter  XXVH. 

1.  Now,  therefore,  the  A'andraya^^a  (or  lunar 
penance  will  be  described). 

2.  The  (general)  rules  prescribed  for  a  Y^rikkhxdi 
(are  applicable)  to  that. 

3.  (The  hair  must  be)  shaved,  in  case  it  (is  per- 
formed as)  a  penance. 

4.  He  shall  fast  on  the  day  preceding  the  full 
moon. 

5.  And  (he  shall  offer)  libations  (of  water),  obla- 
tions of  clarified  butter,  consecrate  the  sacrificial 
viands,  and  worship  the  moon,  reciting  these  (n'/^as), 
'  Increase'  (Rig-veda  I,  91,  17),  'May  milk  be  joined 
with  thee'  (Rig-veda  I,  91,  18,  and)  'Ever  new' 
(Rig-veda  X,  85,  19). 

24-25.  Samavidhana  I,  2,  10.  Sarveshu  vedeshu  snata/^, 'perfect 
in  all  the  Vedas,'  means,  literally,  equal  to  a  student  who  has  bathed 
after  completing  the  study  of  all  the  four  Vedas. 

XXVII.  2.  The  rules  meant  particularly  are  those  given 
XXVI,  6-1 1. 

3.    '  He  calls  penance  vrata.' — Haradatta. 

5.  '  The  four  religious  acts,  the  first  of  which  is  the  offering  of 
libations,  are  to  be  performed  with  the  help  of  the  three  sacred 
texts,  the  first  of  which  begins  "  Increase."  As  the  number  (of  the 
acts  and  of  the  verses)  does  not  agree,  the  fire-oblations  and  the 


XXVII,  9-  PENANCES.  297 

6.  He  shall  offer  (clarified  butter),  reciting  the 
four  [rik'ds  beginning)  '  Yad  devi  devaheflfanam,' 

7.  And  at  the  end  (of  the  offering  of  clarified 
butter  he  shall  offer)  pieces  of  sacred  fuel,  reciting 
(the  texts  beginning)  '  Devakr/tasya.' 

8.  Each  mouthful  of  food  must  be  consecrated 
by  the  mental  recitations  (of  one)  of  the  following 
(words) :  Om,  bhu//,  bhuva//,  sva/z,  truth,  fame, 
prosperity,  vigour,  refreshment,  strength,  lustre, 
soul,  law,  6'iva. 

9.  Or  (he  may  consecrate)  all  (of  them  at  once, 
saying),  Adoration  svaha. 

libations  of  water  must  be  performed  severally,  each  with  one  text, 
and  the  consecration  (of  the  oflferings)  and  the  worship  (of  the 
moon  must  be  performed  ^\•ith  all  of  them)  together/ — Haradatta. 

6.  '  He  shall  oifer — as  nothing  is  specified — clarified  butter, 
with  the  first  four  r/ias  of  the  Anuvaka  'Yad  deva  devahe</anam.' 
Counting  the  three  mentioned  above  (Sutra  5),  altogether  seven 
oblations  of  clarified  butter  must  be  made.' — Haradatta. 

7.  '  On  completion  of  the  oblations  of  clarified  butter,  he 
shall  offer  pieces  of  sacred  fuel,  reciting  the  eight  sacred  texts, 
which  begin  "  Devakr/tasya,"  and  have  been  mentioned  above 
(XXV,  10).  The  word  "completion"  (anta)  is  merely  a  con- 
firmation of  something  established,  because  (the  place  of  the 
offering)  is  already  fixed  by  the  place  of  the  rule.  But  others 
explain  the  word  "  ante "  to  mean  "  at  the  end  of  the  ^andra- 
ya«a."  The  word  "and"  does  not  agree  with  their  (opinion).' — 
Haradatta. 

8.  Haradatta  observes  that  on  the  days  when  the  performer  eats 
less  than  fifteen  mouthfuls,  the  later  mentioned  texts  must  be  left 
out,  and  that,  while  eating,  the  performer  must  employ  the  Prawahuti 
INIantras  (Apastamba  II,  i,  i,  2  note).  He  concludes  by  giving  the 
following  prayoga  for  the  performance  of  the  ceremony :  '  He 
places  all  the  food  in  his  dish,  and  consecrates  it  by  the  texts 
"  Increase,"  &c.  Next  he  divides  it  into  mouthfuls,  and  consecrates 
each  successively  with  the  word  Om  and  the  rest,  and  eats  them, 
reciting  the  texts  for  the  Pra«ahutis.' 

9.  Haradatta  states  that  either  of  the  two  words  may  be  used 


298  GAUTAMA.  XXVII,  10. 

10.  The  size  of  a  mouthful  (shall  be  such)  as  not 
to  cause  a  distortion  of  the  mouth  (in  swallowing  it). 

1 1 .  The  sacrificial  viands  are,  boiled  rice,  food 
obtained  by  begging,  ground  barley,  grain  separated 
from  the  husk,  barley-gruel,  vegetables,  milk,  sour 
milk,  clarified  butter,  roots,  fruits,  and  water;  (among 
these)  each  succeeding  one  is  preferable  (to  those 
enumerated  earlier). 

12.  He  shall  eat  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon 
fifteen  mouthfuls,  and  during  the  dark  half  (of  the 
month)  daily  diminish  his  portion  by  one  (mouthful). 

13.  He  shall  fast  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon, 
and  during  the  bright  half  (of  the  month)  daily  in- 
crease (his  portion)  by  one  (mouthful). 

14.  According  to  some  (the  order  shall  be)  in- 
verted. 

15.  That  (is  called)  a  month,  occupied  by  the 
Ka.ndr3.ya.jta.  penance. 

16.  He  who  has  completed  that,  becomes  free 
from  sin  and  free  from  crime,  and  destroys  all  guilt. 

17.  He  who  has  completed  a  second  (month, 
living  according  to  that  rule),  sanctifies  himself,  ten 


in  consecrating  all  the  mouthfuls,  but  that  others  think,  both  should 
be  used. 

10.  Ya^fiavalkya  III,  324. 

11.  The  term  'sacrificial  viands'  denotes  here,  according  to 
Haradatta,  the  food  eaten  by  the  performer,  which,  like  that  eaten 
by  the  performer  of  a  Kn'^Mva.,  must  be  havishya,  'fit  for  an  offering,' 
see  above,  XXVI,  2.  Haradatta  adds  that,  as  a  Gr/hastha  must  not 
beg,  the  food  obtained  by  begging  must  have  been  collected  by  his 
pupils,  and  that  liquid  food  must  be  used  for  the  expiation  of  the 
more  serious  offences. 

12.  Manu  XI,  217-218;  Ya^fiavalkya  III,  324-325. 

14.  I.  e.  the  performer  may  begin  with  the  fast  on  the  day  of 
the  new  moon. 


XXVIII,  5-  INHERITANCE.  299 

ancestors,  and   ten   descendants,   as   well    as    (any) 
company  (to  which  he  may  be  invited)  ; 

18.  And  he  who  has  lived  for  a  year  (according 
to  that  rule),  dwells  (after  death)  in  the  world  of  the 
moon. 

Chapter  XXVIII. 

1.  After  the  father's  death  let  the  sons  divide 
his  estate, 

2.  Or,  during  his  lifetime,  when  the  mother  is 
past  child-bearing,  if  he  desires  it, 

3.  Or  the  whole  (estate  may  go)  to  the  first-born; 
(and)  he  shall  support  (the  rest)  as  a  father. 

4.  But  in  partition  there  is  an  increase  of  spiritual 
merit. 

5.  (The  additional  share)  of  the  eldest  (son  con- 
sists of )  a  twentieth  part  (of  the  estate),  a  male  and 

18.    Manu  XI,  221 ;  Ya^navalkya  III,  327. 

XXVIII.  I.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  II,  4;  Mitakshara  I,  2,  7  ; 
V,  Digest  20;  Mayukha  IV,  4,  3.  Haradatta  remarks  that,  accord- 
ing to  Gautama,  the  sons  alone  shall  divide  the  estate,  and  that  the 
mother  is  not  to  receive  a  share,  as  other  teachers,  e.  g.  Y%fiavalkya 
II,  123,  prescribe.  Apastamba  II,  6, 13,  2;  Manu  IX,  104;  Ya^na- 
valkya  II,  117. 

2.  Colebrooke  and  Ma}'ukha  loc.  cit.  '  Or  the  sons  may  divide 
the  estate  even  during  the  lifetime  of  the  father ;  when  he  desires 
it,  i.  e.  by  his  permission.  The  time  for  such  a  (division  is)  when 
the  mother  is  past  child-bearing.' — Haradatta.  The  correctness  of 
this  interpretation  of  our  Sutra  is  corroborated  by  the  exclusion  of 
sons  who  have  divided  the  family  estate  against  the  father's  will 
(XV,  19)  from  the  ^Sraddha  dinner.     Apastamba  II,  6,  14,  i. 

3.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  III,  i,  15;  Manu  IX,  105. 

4.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  III,  i,  14;  V,  Digest  47.  After 
dinsion  each  brother  has  to  perform  the  Vaijvadeva  and  the  other 
domestic  ceremonies  separately,  while  in  a  united  family  they  are 
performed  by  the  eldest  brother.  Thus  a  diWsion  of  the  family 
estate  causes  an  increase  of  spiritual  merit;  see  also  Manu  IX,  in. 

5.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  11,37;  ^^j  Digest  4  7 ;  Manu  IX,  1 1 2 . 


300  GAUTAMA.  XXVIII,  6. 

a  female  (of  animals  with  one  row  of  front  teeth, 
such  as  cows),  a  carriage  yoked  with  animals  that 
have  two  rows  of  front  teeth,  (and)  a  bull. 

6.  (The  additional  share)  of  the  middlemost  (con- 
sists of)  the  one-eyed,  old,  hornless,  and  tailless 
animals,  if  there  are  several, 

7.  (The  additional  share)  of  the  youngest  (con- 
sists of)  the  sheep,  grain,  the  iron  (utensils),  a  house, 
a  cart  yoked  (with  oxen),  and  one  of  each  kind  of 
(other)  animals. 

8.  All  the  remaining  (property  shall  be  divided) 
equally. 

9.  Or  let  the  eldest  have  two  shares, 

10.  And  the  rest  one  each. 

11.  Or  let  them  each  take  one  kind  of  property, 
(selecting),  according  to  seniority,  what  they  desire, 

6.  Colebiooke  11.  cit.  '  And  that  (additional  share  is  given),  if 
of  the  one-eyed  and  the  rest  there  are  several,  i.  e.  if  the  others  also 
get  (some).' 

7.  Colebrooke  11.  cit.  '  K.\\h  (a  sheep),  i.  e.  an  animal  having 
a  fleece.  The  singular  number  (is  used  to  denote)  the  species, 
(and  the  explanation  is),  "As  many  sheep  as  there  are."  For  (the 
possession  of)  one  would  follow  already  from  the  phrase,  "  And 
one  of  each  kind  of  animals."  Another  (commentator  says), 
"  Though  the  father  may  possess  one  sheep  only,  still  it  belongs  to 
the  youngest,  and  the  phrase  '  one  of  each  kind  of  animals'  refers 
to  the  case  when  there  are  many."  .  .  .  This  (additional  share  is 
that)  belonging  to  the  youngest.  (If  there  are  more  than  three 
sons)  the  others  obtain  the  share  of  the  middlemost.' — Haradalta. 

8.  Colebrooke  11.  cit. 

9.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  II,  37;  V,  Digest  51.  INIy  best  copy 
P.  leaves  out  this  Sutra  and  the  next.  The  others  read  dvyawm  va 
pilrva^a,^  (not  purva^asya,  as  Professor  Stenzler  reads),  and  explain 
the  former  word  as  follows,  '  dvava;;zjau  dvyawzjaw  tadasyastiti 
dvya;7m.'     Manu  IX,  117. 

10.  Colebrooke  11.  cit. 

11.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  68. 


XXVIII,  19-  INHERITANCE.  3OI 


1 2.  Ten  head  of  cattle. 

13.  (But)  no  (one  brother  shall)  take  (ten)  one- 
hoofed  beasts  or  (ten)  slaves. 

14.  (If  a  man  has  several  wives)  the  additional 
share  of  the  eldest  son  is  one  bull  (in  case  he  be 
born  of  a  later-married  wife)  ; 

15.  (But  the  eldest  son)  being  born  of  the 
first-married  wife  (shall  have)  fifteen  cows  and  one 
bull; 

16.  Or  (let  the  eldest  son)  who  is  born  of  a  later- 
married  wife  (share  the  estate)  equally  with  his 
younger  (brethren  born  of  the  first-married  wife). 

17.  Or  let  the  special  shares  (be  adjusted)  in 
each  class  (of  sons)  according  to  their  mothers. 

18.  A  father  who  has  no  (male)  issue  may  appoint 
his  daughter  (to  raise  up  a  son  for  him),  presenting 
burnt  offerings  to  Agni  (fire)  and  to  Pra^apati  (the 
lord  of  creatures),  and  addressing  (the  bridegroom 
with  these  words), '  For  me  be  (thy  male)  offspring.' 

19.  Some  declare,  that  (a  daughter  becomes)  an 


12.  Colebrooke  loc.  cit.  The  meaning  appears  to  be  that  no 
brother  is  to  select  more  than  ten  head  of  cattle. 

13.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  69.  'But,  as  has  been  declared  above 
(Sfitra  11),  one  of  each  kind  only.  In  the  case  of  the  v.  1.  dvipa- 
danam,  the  word  pada  (step)  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  word  pada 
(foot).' — Haradatta. 

14.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  58;  ^lanu  IX,  123. 

15.  Colebrooke  loc.  cit. ;  INIanu  IX,  124. 

16.  Colebrooke  loc.  cit. 

17.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  59.  'After  having  divided  the  estate 
into  as  many  portions  as  there  are  wives  who  possess  sons,  and 
having  united  as  many  shares  as  there  are  sons  (of  each  mother), 
let  the  eldest  in  each  class  (of  uterine  brothers)  receive  the  special 
share  of  one-twentieth  and  so  forth.' — Haradatta. 

18-19.    Colebrooke  V,  Digest  225  ;  Manu  IX,  130-140. 


302  GAUTAMA.  XXVIII,  20. 

appointed  daughter  solely  by  the  intention  (of  the 
father). 

20.  Through  fear  of  that  (a  man)  should  not 
marry  a  girl  who  has  no  brothers. 

21.  Sap'mdas  (blood  relations  within  six  degrees), 
Sagotras  (relations  bearing  a  common  family  name), 
(or)  those  connected  by  descent  from  the  same  jRzshi 
(vaidika  gotra),  and  the  wife  shall  share  (the  estate) 
of  a  person  deceased  without  (male)  issue  (or  an 
appointed  daughter). 

22.  Or  (the  widow)  may  seek  to  raise  up  offspring 
(to  her  deceased  husband). 

23.  (A  son)  begotten  on  a  (widow)  whose  hus- 
band's brother  lives,  by  another  (relative),  is  ex- 
cluded from  inheritance. 

24.  A  woman's  separate  property  (goes)  to  her 
unmarried  daughters,  and  (on  failure  of  such)  to  poor 
(married  daughters). 


20.  Manu  III,  1 1 ;  Y%navalkya  I,  53. 

21.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  XI,  6,  25;  Mitakshara  II,  i,  18; 
V,  Digest  440.  My  copies  as  well  as  Gimutavahana  and  Vi^fia- 
nejvara  read  in  the  text  stri  va,  'or  the  wife/  instead  of  stri  /^a, 
'and  the  wife.'  Still  the  latter  seems  to  be  the  reading  recog- 
nised by  Haradatta,  as  he  says,  '  But  the  wife  is  joined  together 
(samu/^/tiyate)  with  all  the  Sagotras  and  the  rest.  When  the  Sago- 
tras and  the  rest  inherit,  then  the  wife  shall  inherit  one  share  with 
them,'  &c.     Apastamba  II,  6,  14,  2;  Manu  IX,  187;  Ya^iiavalkya 

II,  135-136. 

22.  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  II,  i,  8,  where  this  Siitra  has,  how- 
ever, been  combined  with  the  preceding.  See  also  above,  XVIII, 
4-8  ;  Manu  IX,  145-146,  190. 

23.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  341 ;  Manu  IX,  144. 

24.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  IV,  2,  13;  Mitakshara  I,  3,  u; 
II,  2,  4 ;  V,  Digest  490;  Mayiikha  IV,  8,  12.  See  also  Manu  IX, 
192;  Ya^navalkya  II,  145. 


XXVIII,  32.  INHERITANXE.  303 

25.  The  sister's  fee  belongs  to  her  uterine  bro- 
thers, if  her  mother  be  dead. 

26.  Some  (declare,  that  it  belongs  to  them)  even 
while  the  mother  lives. 

27.  The  heritage  of  not  reunited  (brothers)  de- 
ceased (without  male  issue  goes)  to  the  eldest 
(brother). 

28.  If  a  reunited  coparcener  dies  (without  male 
issue)  his  reunited  coparcener  takes  the  heritage. 

29.  A  son  born  after  partition  takes  exclusively 
(the  wealth)  of  his  father. 

30.  What  a  learned  (coparcener)  has  acquired  by 
his  own  efforts,  he  may  (at  his  pleasure)  withhold 
from  his  unlearned  (coparceners). 

31.  Unlearned  (coparceners)  shall  divide  (their 
acquisitions)  equally. 

32.  A  legitimate  son,  a  son  begotten  on  the  wife 


25.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  IV,  3,  27;  Y,  Digest  511;  Mayukha 
IV,  10,  32.  'The  fee,  i.e.  the  money  which  at  an  Asura,  or  an 
Arsha  wedding,  the  father  has  taken  for  giving  the  sister  away. 
That  goes  after  his  (the  father's)  death  to  the  uterine  brothers  of 
that  sister  ;  and  that  (happens)  after  the  mother's  death.  But 
if  the  mother  is  alive  (it  goes)  to  her.' — Haradatta. 

26.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  511. 

27.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  424.  'The  word  "eldest"  is  used 
to  give  an  example.  (The  property)  goes  to  the  brothers,  not 
to  the  widow,  nor  to  the  parents.  That  is  the  opinion  of  the 
venerable  teacher.' — Haradatta.     Ya^avalkya  II,  134. 

28.  Mayukha  IV,  9,  15;  Manu  IX,  212;  Ya^avalkya 
II,  138. 

29.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  VII,  3  ;  Manu  IX,  216. 

30.  Colebrooke,  Dayabhaga  VI,  i,  17;  V,  Digest  355  ;  Mayu- 
kha IV,  7,  10  ;  ]Manu  IX,  206;  Ya^avalkya  II,  119. 

31.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  137;  Manu  IX,  205. 

32-33-  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  184;  Manu  IX,  166-178;  Ya^a- 
valkya  II,  128-132.   My  best  copy  P.  inserts  another  Sutra  between 


304  GAUTAMA.  XXVIII,  33. 

(by  a  kinsman),  an  adopted  son,  a  son  made,  a  son 
born  secretly,  and  a  son  abandoned  (by  his  natural 
parents)  inherit  the  estate  (of  their  fathers). 

T)T).  The  son  of  an  unmarried  damsel,  the  son  of 
a  pregnant  bride,  the  son  of  a  twice-married  woman, 
the  son  of  an  appointed  daughter,  a  son  self-given, 
and  a  son  bought  belong  to  the  family  (of  their 
fathers). 

34.  On  failure  of  a  legitimate  son  or  (of  the) 
other  (five  heirs)  they  receive  a  fourth  (of  the 
estate). 

35.  The  son  of  a  Brahma/za  by  a  Kshatriya  wife, 
being  the  eldest  and  endowed  with  good  qualities, 
shares  equally  (with  a  younger  brother,  born  of  a 
Brahma;^!) ; 

36.  (But  he  shall)  not  (obtain)  the  additional 
share  of  an  eldest  son. 


this  and  the  following  one,  ete  tu  gotrabhagz/i,  '  but  these  (latter 
six)  belong  to  the  family  (only,  and  do  not  inherit).' 

34.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  184.  '  The  residue  of  the  estate 
goes  to  the  Sapiw^as.  If  it  is  here  stated  that  the  son  of  an 
appointed  daughter  receives,  even  on  failure  of  a  legitimate  son, 
a  fourth  part  of  the  estate  only,  that  refers  to  the  son  of  an  ap- 
pointed daughter  of  lower  caste,  i.  e.  to  a  son  who  is  born,  when 
somebody  makes  the  daughter  of  a  wife  of  lower  caste  his  ap- 
pointed daughter,  and  does  that  by  intent  only.' — Haradatta. 

35.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  158;  Manu  IX,  149-153;  Ya^na- 
valkya  II,  125.  'If  the  son  of  a  Brahma«a  by  a  Kshatriya  wife 
is  endowed  with  good  qualities  and  the  eldest,  then  he  shares 
equally  with  a  younger  son  by  a  Brahmam.  For  the  one  possesses 
seniority  by  age  and  the  other  by  caste.' — Haradatta. 

36.  Colebrooke  loc.  cit.  '  What  is  exclusive  of  the  additional 
share  of  the  eldest,  which  has  been  declared  above,  Sutra  5,  (that) 
other  (part)  he  shall  obtain.  The  verb  must  be  understood 
from  the  context.  Regarding  a  son  by  a  Kshatriya  wife  who  is 
the  eldest,  but  destitute  of  good  qualities,  the  Manava  Dharma- 


XXVIII,  41.  INHERITANCE.  305 

^'J.  If  there  are  sons  begotten  (by  a  Brahma;-?a) 
on  wives  of  the  Kshatriya  and  Vaijya  castes  (the 
division  of  the  estate  between  them  takes  place 
according  to  the  same  rules)  as  (between)  the  (son 
by  a  Kshatriya  wife)  and  the  son  by  a  Brahma/zi. 

2i^.  And  (the  sons  by  a  Kshatriya  wife  and  by 
a  Vaii-ya  wife  share  in  the  same  manner)  if  (they 
have  been  begotten)  by  a  Kshatriya  (father). 

39.  The  son  by  a  .Sudra  wife  even,  if  he  be  obe- 
dient like  a  pupil,  receives  a  provision  for  main- 
tenance (out  of  the  estate)  of  a  (Brahma;^a)  deceased 
without  (other)  male  issue. 

40.  According  to  some,  the  son  of  a  woman  of 
equal  caste  even  does  not  inherit,  if  he  be  living 
unrighteously. 

41.  ^'rotriyas  shall  divide  the  estate  of  a  childless 
Brahma;/a. 


jastra  declares  (IX,  152-153),  "Or  (if  no  deduction  be  made)," 
&c.' — Haradatta.  The  sense  in  which  the  Sutra  has  been  taken 
above,  agrees  with  the  explanation  of  the  Ratnakara  adduced  in 
the  Digest  loc.  cit.,  though  the  reading  of  the  text  followed  there 
seems  to  be  different. 

37-38.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  159.  In  the  Digest  V,  160,  an 
additional  Sutra  regarding  the  partition  between  the  sons  of  a 
Vaijya  by  Vaijya  and  5udra  wives  is  quoted,  which,  however,  is 
not  recognised  by  Haradatta. 

39.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  169;  Mayukha  IV,  4,  30.  '(The 
word)  of  a  Brahma«a  must  be  understood  (from  Sutra  35).' — 
Haradatta. 

40.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  316;  Apastamba  11,  6,  14,  15. 

41.  Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  II,  7,  3;  Mayukha  IV,  8,  25.  'The 
expression  "of  a  childless  (Brahma«a)"  includes  by  implication 
(the  absence)  of  Sapiwo'as  and  other  (heirs).' — Haradatta.  .S'ro- 
triyas,  i.  e.  Brahmawas  learned  in  the  Vedas.  See  also  INIanu 
IX,  188. 

[2]  X 


306  GAUTAMA.  XXVIII,  42. 

42.  The  king  (shall  take  the  property  of  men)  of 
other  (castes). 

43.  An  idiot  and  a  eunuch  must  be  supported. 

44.  The  (male)  offspring  of  an  idiot  receives  (his 
father's)  share. 

45.  (Sons  begotten)  on  women  of  higher  castes 
(by  men  of  lower  castes  shall  be  treated)  like  sons 
(begotten  by  a  Brahma;^a)  on  a  ^'udra  wife. 

46.  Water,  (property  destined  for)  pious  uses  or 
sacrifices,  and  prepared  food  shall  not  be  divided ; 

47.  Nor  (shall  a  partition  be  made)  of  women 
connected  (with  members  of  the  family). 

48.  In  cases  for  which  no  rule  has  been  given, 
(that  course)  must  be  followed  of  which  at  least  ten 
(Brahma;/as),  who  are  well  instructed,  skilled  in 
reasoning,  and  free  from  covetousness,  approve. 

49.  They  declare,  that  an  assembly  (parishad, 
shall  consist)  at  least  (of)  the  ten  following  (mem- 
bers, viz.)  four  men  who  have  completely  studied 
the  four  Vedas,  three  men  belonging  to  the  (three) 
orders  enumerated  first,  (and)  three  men  who  know 
(three)  different  (institutes  of)  law. 

42.  Apastamba  II,  6,  14,  5. 

43.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  335;  Manu  IX,  201-202;  Y^Sa- 
valkya  11,  140. 

44.  Colebrooke  loc.  cit. ;  Manu  IX,  203;  Ya^ilavalkya  II,  141. 

45.  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  171,  335. 

46.  Manu  IX,  219.  For  a  fuller  explanation  of  the  terms  yoga 
and  kshema,  (property  destined  for)  pious  uses  and  sacrifices,  see 
Colebrooke,  Mitakshara  I,  4,  23. 

47.  Colebrooke,  INIitakshara  I,  4,  22;  V,  Digest  367;  Mayfikha 

IV,  7,  19-   ^ 

49-51.    Apastamba  II,  11,  29,  13-14;    Manu  XII,  108-113. 

Three  men  belonging  to  the  (three)  orders  enumerated  first,  i.  e.  a 

student,  a  householder,  and  an  ascetic,  see  above,  III,  2. 


XXVIII,  53-  INHERITANCE.  307 


50.  But  on  failure  of  them  the  decision  of  one 
6'rotriya,  who  knows  the  Veda  and  is  properly  in- 
structed (in  the  duties,  shall  be  followed)  in  doubtful 
cases. 

51.  For  such  a  man  is  incapable  of  (unjustly) 
injuring  or  (unjustly)  favouring  created  beings. 

52.  He  who  knows  the  sacred  law  obtains  hea- 
venly bliss,  more  than  (other)  righteous  men,  on 
account  of  his  knowledge  of,  and  his  adherence 
to  it. 

53.  Thus  the  sacred  law  (has  been  explained). 


TRANSLITERATION    OF   ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS. 


309 


s 

c 

2 
u 

-^    !    !    ! 

.           «:..•• 

n  n  '^  '^  n. 

•    n  %  c  Pv  c 

• 

•      • 

< 

D      •     ^     •  =0 

!     -   -    UoJu 

• 

•     L)<^ 

c 

D      i  ^^     i  =0 

i     »   —    UoJkJ 

•                           ^ 

.    W-O^ 

s 

11! 

^  q    *10j 

■     ^ 

ei 

^; 

{/ 

^ 

si  : 

•a 
N 

<^^^  a^aj 

c 
m 

If  fir  tr  P^ 

.     K'     rw 

r  IP  i^  t*"  tr 

i 

< 

< 
> 

a. 

< 

z 

7: 
7: 

i 

(9 
0 

**:.*! 

G 

■  --  3    ^-  t    ; 

L    |J 

^  ^    ^  "^    3^     •" 

c                    ^     _      * 

k; 

oi 
Z 

<; 
0 

0 

u 

C 

cr 

IS 

0 

C 

.2 

CO 

(- 
c 
c 

<r 
a 

.2 
00 

111 

0        30        i, 

ST    5t     S 

C5     0     -;J 

93 

1— ( 

0 

0    .. 

s  § 

gn    e3 

in 

'  t 

s 

u'^ 

- 

>— 1 

[^] 


3IO 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS 


V 

,       , 

. 

. 

rSi             • 

c 

>» 

•     • 

M 

+3 

-a     .     .     .     . 

C 

— ' 

CO 

• 

N      "^        • 

U 

" 

.... 

• 

«=        . 

i 

,         , 

, 

. 

i 

*- 

•     • 

• 

e 

q    .  r  r    . 

»n  J^ 

•  . 

9 

Q 

►-      M         . 

X 

• 

• 

• 

< 

^. 

•/b 

• 

D 

.    Q     o       .  .1 

3-0 

!) 

->^  : 

? 

•5 

^: 

•^b- 

■^ 

D 

•    Q    1       •  .1 

T3-D 

V  'S's 

&. 

b 

"> 

^~ 

«> 

•9 

CJ 

%r 

.      .     ^    .      .  . 

.^ 

^ 

^ 

.v^    .    . 

Ot 

.      .            .      . 

rN 

• 

init. 

• 

• 

•  • 

N 

gv^ 

.  ?  -^ 

2^    \J      \    'r\<ir 

■^ 

• 

''i 

^  .  . 

FT 

'  ^ 

• 

ic 

^      •    Hr  ff      • 

IT 

te  f§ 

tv 

*  *.  '. 

e 

< 

u 

.         .         .         .                    .         .       H         • 

.    a     . 

• 

J 

s 

CD 

J 

<; 

, ^ 

^^^ 

• 

'             •             " 

'     ' 

d 

u 

"ft^ ' 

=v        CO 

^1 

• 

•             •             ■ 

'     ' 

^ 

z 

o 

^ 

^ 

i 

.  2. 

!>. 

-*^ 

5      .    -^    ^      • 

- 

OS 

tSJ 

•      ai 

.       3 

s 

•     ,^ 

1s 

•     .-1     (M 

t/i 

'    :S 

r2 

CO 

•        CO        CD 

.      S      3 

H 

to 

m^ 

"~; 

s  s 

7 

i 

c 

u 
7 

C 

•v. 

03 

»4 

en 

•      03 

1         ^ 

e3 

CO 

'S 

c3      . 

cS     r^ 

£:   -= 

Oh     "S 
05         CO 

•     ^     -§ 

'        Oh    ■« 

.2 

O 

s 

O 

s 

t-i 

CO 

CS 

1 

'E  'S 

CO    S    3 

'S    ai   a. 

(. 

O 

tn 

C3      SS               83      e3 

O 

s 

m 

.^ 

^ 

3 

's 

-t= 

•\          •» 

5 

3 

c 

3   'S 

;c 

" 

•>       s      s 

CO^ 

C-i 

S 

^ 

;    1/2 

02 

CO 

C5 

O     1-1 

(M 

CO 

Tti     LO     to     N.     00 

O 

■5    O 

^^ 

(M 

CO 

'^l 

lo   o   ^• 

I— 1 

(M     C^ 

(M 

IM 

(M     (M     C 

Q     (M     DJ 

c 

q    CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

00 

CO     CO     CO 

FOR  THE  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST. 


311 


•        •....      K. 

'         OB 

0-  "S    ^    .' 

s  & 

%i,     •     .     . 

fi    ''.'.'.  r    '' 

ja  m  /n  n 

0    ! 

: "  :  : 

"*  "^     •!);->•* 

;    ;  >    ; 

<_  . 

1  •.  :  : 

"*  "^     ;;•->;. 

]>  :  y  : 

t_  . 

•3  .  :  : 

:? 

-;i; 

>>    • 

5)  ^    ;     J 

:  :  5^  :  ^  '^  ; 

:8- 

'      ^  :^  : 

-^ 

hJ   to    |»    h?   P    >^      • 

tr 

p-  If  r  » 

tr     ! 

.     i    Pr-p    1? 

!!!!!!.'-.' 

*..*!! 

■**    5   "s    ^     s      •     ^ 

• 

!    .'    !    .*   5 

-    •     • 

•      •     S    -s 

c-  -r   ^   -=: 


::     :s     i    <« 


so   ^ 

n 


«s    .- 


■TS      "^ 


o 

•iH 
Hi 


12         -3  •-> 


00    C5    o 
CO     CO     ^ 


"S    s  c  i  s 

S         H  ^  cc 


.-I     IM 


3ia 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS. 


s 

2 
u 

)d       •       .     c8    <aJ    •-    <-<       .       •       .       .      s    <3     a>    <«    <cS       ^      •     O       •    ^^ 

.                               •      .      .      .                                   "5      •            •     "       • 

••S      ' 

1 

i.. : :  |.  iH-i- ; : : ;  I-- 1=-  h ; ; ;  k-  ; ; 

s 

< 

:  :  >l  ^  1.  ij, :  :  :  i^l^j^  :  i^i^  :  :  :  :;!^  ; 

i 
1 

:  :  .1  ^  1.  ij. :  :  :  :.|^i^  :  i^L)  :  :  :  :;!^ 

0^ 

..tj     ,     ,     ....      , 

•«;sq    -n ^       o-    •    •    ■  ^    • 

•  —    :?          

•6 

N 

....           S^/  .    .    .           ^ 

:  :  ^  ?  -^  ^  :  :  :  :  -  ^n^  •-  :  :  :^^- 

•    •                     •    •    •    •           to  ^    '    '    '           5L» 

c 

U5 

'•     '•  \F'   ^  tvfiW  \S  W\^^  \^  V>     ^tv^lv     '.     '.     ^^'^ 

h 

w 

(S 

a 

■< 
>■ 

b! 

«: 

2 

0 

-  S 

'     • 

•   3     ■   S    '     ■     ■•     '      •   '^    •   2  'S     '     ■     •   v£-   « 

O     xu     )0      CS     <C3     —     <«     ;S     las     'i:     ^S      S     <;3      «     v5    ^^     ^   3,     O     ^    ,g    ^S-    :c3     -.-h     :3     :o 

^0             *^             z)     0 

o 
> 

'0 

1 
12 

•    ^    "-^     >     b 

Mh     1— 1          CO 

■^   Q^   cf^   ri*    ir 

C  .2      ec 
>      b 

-S  J 
:;  "el 

>    CO     I> 

*            *         05         jj           " 

„  .2     03    ■>     tie  .2     0: 

•  2             ■'3              <n 

OS              3            'S 

S       .S       -g 

Q         J         J 

CO     05     0     "-H     CM     C^ 

.        .     j^                         •        •      05 

in           !    .  •- 

III  .  A'il 

t^l     III 

03            bD                 -^            bc 

Ttll-OCOI^OOOiO'-iC 

e3 
0      e 

^    .2 

-S    1; 

3      c 
0    p. 

M    CO    ■*    ir 
\j     C^j     CM     ?> 

\     c 

1    ^ 
S      a 

H      1— 

5   cr 

•  «* 

•  0 

c3 
m 

§3 
^  1 

J     C^ 

December  1885. 

(Elarentron  ipress,   ©xfortJ 

A  SELECTION  OF 

BOOKS 

PUBLISHED   FOR  THE  UNIVERSITY   BY 

HENRY    PROWDE, 

AT    THE    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE, 

AMEN    CORNER,    LONDON. 

ALSO  TO  BE  HAD   AT  THE 

CLARENDON    PRESS    DEPOSITORY,    OXFORD. 

\Every  book  is  bound  in   doth,   unless  othenvise  described. ^ 


LEXICONS,  GRAMMARS,  &c. 

Anglo-Saxon. — An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the 

MS.  Collections  of  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon, 
Oxford.  Edited  and  enlarged  bv  Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,  M.A.  (To  be  completed 
in  four  parts.)  Parts  I  and  II.  'A— HWISTLL\N  (pp.  vi,  576).  1882.  4to. 
1 5 J.  each. 

Chinese. — A  Handbook  of  the  Chinese  Language.    By  James 

Summers.     1863.    8vo.  half  bound,  \l.  %s. 

English. — A  Neiv  English  Dictionary,  on  Historical  Prin- 
ciples: founded  maiiily  on  the  materials  collected  by  the  Philological  Societj'. 
Edited  by  James  A.  H.  Murray,  LL.D.,  President  of  the  Philological  Society ; 
with  the  assistance  of  many  Scholars  and  men  of  Science.  Part  I.  A — ANT 
(pp.  x^-i,  352).  Part  II.  ANT — BATTEN  (pp.  ^•iii,  353-704).  Imperial 
4to.  1 2 J.  hd.  each. 

An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  La?iguage. 

By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1SS4.   4to.  2I.  \s. 

Supplement  to  the  First  Edition  of  the  above.     1884. 

4to.  2s.  6d. 

A  Cojicise  Etytnological  Dictionary  of  tJie  English  Lan- 


guage.   By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    1885.    Crown  Svo.  jj.  6rf. 
Greek. — A     Greek-English     Lexicon,    by     Heniy     George 

Liddell,  D.D.,  and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.     Seventh  Edition,  Revised  and  Aug- 
mented throughout.     18S3.    410.  \l.  i6j. 

A    Greek-EnglisJi  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and 

Scott's  4to.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.      Twenty-first  Edition. 
1884.     Square  I  amo.  "js.^d. 

A    copious   Greek-English    Vocabulary,   compiled   from 

the  best  authorities.     1850.    24mo.  3^. 

A  Practical  Lntroductio7i  to  Greek  Accentuation,  by  H. 

W.  Chandler,  M.A.    Second  Edition.     1881.    Svo.  io.f.  6a'. 

[9] 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Hebrew. — The  Book   of  Hebrew   Roots,   by  Abu   '1-WaIid 

Marwan  ibn  Janah,  otherwise  called  Rabbi  Yonah.   Now  first  edited,  with  an 
Appendix,  by  Ad.  Neubauer.     1875.    4to.  il.'js.^d. 

A   Treatise  on  the  use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebrew.     By 

S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.     Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     1881.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  7^.  (id. 

Hebrew  Accentuation   of  Psalms,   Proverbs,   and  Job. 


By  William  Wickes,  D,D.     1881.    Demy  8vo.  stiff  covers,  5J. 

Icelandic. — An  Icelandic- English  Dictionary,  based  on  the 

MS.  collections  of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  completed  by 
G.  Vigfusson,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of  Richard  Cleasby,  by 
G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.     1874.  4to.  3/.  "js. 

A  List  of  English  Words  the  Etymology  of  which  is 

illustrated  by  comparison  with  Icelattdic.  Prepared  in  the  form  of  an 
Appendix  to  the  above.    By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     1876.  stitched,  2J. 

An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with  Notes,  Grammar  and 

Glossary,  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfiisson  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.  1879. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  los.  6c?, 

Latin, — A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edition 

of  Freund's  Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten 
by  Charlton  T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D.    1879.  4to.  1/.  5.f. 

Melanesian. — The    Melanesian    Languages.       By    R.    H. 

Codrington,  D.D.,  of  the  Melanesian  Mission,  Fellow  of  Wadham  College, 
Oxford.     8vc^_  iS.s'.    Just  Published. 

Sanskrit.-4-^  Practical  Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language, 

arranged  wrTfTreference  to  the  Classical  Languages  of  Europe,  for  the  use  of 
English  Students,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.   Fourth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.  15^-. 

A    Sanskrit-English  Dictionary,    Etymologically    and 

Philologically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German,  Anglo- 
Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  Indo-European  Languages.  ByMonier 
Williams,  M.A.     1872.  4to.  4/.  145-.  6a'. 

■ Nalopdkhydnam.     Story   of   Nala,  an   Episode   of  the 

Maha-Bharata:  the  Sanskrit  text,  with  a  copious  Vocabulary,  and  an  improved 
version  of  Dean  Milman's  Translation,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.  Second 
Edition,  Revised  and  Improved.     1879.  8vo.  15J. 

*^—\Sakuntald.    A  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  Seven  Acts.    Edited 

byT?fonier  Williams,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  1876.   8vo.  2ij. 

Syriac. — Thesaurus  Syriacus :  collegerunt  Quatremere,  Bern- 
stein, Lorsbach,  Arnoldi.  Agrell,  Field,  Roediger:  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith, 
S.T.P.  Fasc.  I-VI.  1868-83.  sm.  fol.  each,  i/.  is.  Vol.  I,  containing 
Fasc.  I-V,  sm.  fol.  5/.  5J. 

■         The  Book  of  Kalllah  and  Dimnah.  Translated  from  Arabic 

into  Syriac.      Edited  by  W.  Wright,  LL.D.     18S4.  8vo.  21J. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


GREEK  CLASSICS,  &c. 

Aristopharies :    A   Complete   Concordance   to   the  Comedies 

and  Fragments.     By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.     4to.  \l.  \s. 

Aristotle :    The  Politics^  translated  into  English,  with  Intro- 

dnction,  Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.  Medium 
8vo.     2  vols.  2 1  J.    Jtist  Published. 

Heracliti  Ephesii   Reliquiae.     Recensuit    I.    By  water,   M.A. 

Appendicis  loco  additae  sunt  Diogenis  Laertii  Vita  Heracliti,  Particulae  Hip- 
pocratei  De  Diaeta  Libri  Primi,  Episiolae  Heracliteae.   1877.  Svo.  6j. 

Herculanensiuin   Vohiminum.     Partes  II.  1824.  Svo.   icy. 
Fragmenta  Heradanensia.     A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the 

Oxford  copies  of  the  Herculanean  Rolls,  together  with  the  texts  of  several 
pap)Ti,  accompanied  by  facsimiles.  Edited  by  Walter  Scott,  M..\.,  Fellow 
of  Merton  College,  Oxford.     Royal  Svo.  doth,  21s.    Jtist  Published. 

Homer:    A    Complete    Concordance    to    the    Odyssey    and 

Hymns  of  Homer  ;  to  which  is  added  a  Concordance  to  the  Parallel  Passages 
in  the  Iliad,  Odyssey,  and  Hymns.  By  Henrj' Dunbar,  M.D.    1880.   4to.  \l.\s. 

Scholia  Graeca   in  Iliadem.      Edited  by  Professor  W. 

Dindorf,  after  a  new  collation  of  the  Venetian  MSS.  by  D.  B.  Monro  M.A., 
Provost  of  Oriel  College.    4  vols.  8vo.  2/.  lof.    Vols.  V  and  VI.    /;;  the  Press. 

Scholia  Graeca  in  Odysseam.     Edidit  Guil.  Dindorfius. 

Tomill.     1855.  Svo.    l5-f-6i/. 


Plato :  Apology,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  and 

a  Digest  of  Platonic  Idioms,  by  James  Riddell,  M.A.     1878.  Svo.  8j.  6d. 

Philebus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 

Edward  Poste,  M.A.     i860.    8vo.  -,s.  6d. 

Sophistes  and  Politicus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English 

Notes,  by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.     1S67.    Svo.  iSj. 

Thedefetus,  with  a  revised  Text  and    English    Notes, 

by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.    Second  Edition.   Svo.  los.  6d. 

The  Dialogues,  translated  into  English,  with  Analyses 

and  Introductions,  by  B.  Joweit,  M.A.    A  new  Edition  in  5  volumes,  medium 
Svo.    1875.   3/.  lOf. 

The  Republic,  translated  into  English,  with  an  Analysis 


and  Introduction,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.     Medium  Svo.    1 2s.  6d. 

Thucydides :    Translated    into    English,   with    Introduction, 

Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices.    By  B.  Jowett,  M.A.    2  vols.    iSSi. 


Medium  Svo.    i/.  12s. 

B  2 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


THE    HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

Studia  Biblica. — Essays  in  Biblical  Archaeology  and  Criti- 
cism, and  kindred  subjects.  By  Members  of  the  University  of  Oxford.  8vt>. 
\os.  6(/,    Jtist  Published. 


English, —  The  Holy  Bible  hi  the  earliest  English  Versions, 

made  from  the  Latin  Vulgate  by  John  Wycliffe  and  his  followers :  edited  by 
the  Rev.  J.  Forshall  and  Sir  F.  Madden.  4  vols.   1850.   Royal  4to.  3/.  3.?. 

[Also  reprinted  from  the  above,  with  Introduction  and  Glossary 
by  AV.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 

TJie  Books  of  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and  the 

Song  of  Solomon :  according  to  the  Wycliffite  Version  made  by  Nicholas 
de  Hereford,  about  A.D.  1381,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about  A.D.  1388. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.     3^.  6ci. 

The  New  Testament  in  English,  according  to  the  Version 

by  John  Wycliffe,  about  A.D.  1380,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about  A.D. 
1388.     Extra  fcap.    8vo.    Cj.] 


—  The  Holy  Bible :  an  exact  reprint,  page  for  page,  of  the 

Authorised  Version  published  in  the  year  161 1.   Demy  4to.  halfbound,  \l.  \s. 

—  TJie  Psalter,  or  Psalms  of  David,  and  certain  Catiticles, 

with  a  Translation  and  Exposition  in  English,  by  Richard  RoUe  of  Hampole. 
Edited  by  H.  R.  Bramley,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  S.  M.  Magdalen  College,  Oxford. 
With  an  Introduction  and  Glossary.     Demy  8vo.    i/.  \s. 

—  Lectures    on    Ecclesiastes.     Delivered    in   Westminster 


Abbey  by  the  Very  Rev.  George  Granville  Bradley,  D.D.,  Dean  of  West- 
minster,    down  8vo.  4j.  dd.     fust  Fnblished. 

Gothic. —  The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark  in   Gothic^  according  to 

the  translation  made  by  Wulfila  in  the  Fourth  Century.  Edited  with  a 
Grammatical  Introduction  and  Glossarial  Index  by  W,  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  \s. 

Greek. —  Vetns  Testameiitum  ex  Versione  Septuaginta  Inter- 

pretum  secundum  exemplar  Vaticanum  Romae  editum.  Accedit  potior  varietas 
Codicis  Alexandrini.   Tomi  III.   Editio  Altera.    i8mo.  i8.r. 

Origenis  Hexaplorum  quae   supersunt ;    sive,  Veterum 

Interpretum  Graecorum  in  totum  Vetus  Testamentum  Fragmenta.  Edidit 
Fridericus  Field,  A.M.     2  vols.     1875.    4^0-   il-i^- 

The   Book  of  Wisdom :    the   Greek  Text,   the   Latin 

Vulgate,  and  the  Authorised  English  Version ;  with  an  Introduction,  Critical 
Apparatus,  and  a  Commentary.  By  William  J.  Deane,  M.A.  Small4to.  12s.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Antiquissimorum  Codicum 

Textus  in  ordine  parallelo  dispositi.  Accedit  collatio  Codicis  Sinaitici.  Edidit 
E.  H.  Hansen,  S.T.B.  TomillL   1864.    8vo.   half  morocco,  il.xzs.dd. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Greek. — Novum  Testaincntum  Graece.     Accedunt  parallela 

S.  Scripturae  loca,  necnon  vetuscapitulorumnotarioetcanones  Eusebii.  tdidit 
Carolus  Lloyd,  S.T.  P.R.    iSmo.  y. 

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  laige  margin,  ioj. 

Novum  Tcstamentum  Graece  juxta  Exemplar  Millianum. 

iSmo.   IS.  6d. 

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  ^s. 

Evangelia  Sacra  Graece.     Fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

The  Greek   Testament,  with  the  Readings  adopted  by 


the  Re\-isers  of  the  Authorised  Version : — 

(i)  Pica  type,  with  Marginal  References.     Demy  8vo.  loj.  6</. 

(2)  Long  Primer  type.     Fcap.  8vo.   45.  6rf. 

(3)  The  same,  on  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  15s. 

The  Parallel  New  Testament,  Greek  and  English  ;  being 

the  Authorised  Version,  161 1  ;  the  Revised  Version,  iSSi ;  and  the  Greek 
Text  followed  in  the  Revised  Version.     8vo.    1 2s.  6d. 

The  Revised  Version  is  the  joint  property  of  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge . 

Canon   Aluratoriamis :    the   earliest   Catalogue   of  the 

Books  of  the  New  Testament.  Edited  with  Notes  and  a  Facsimile  of  the 
MS.  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  by  S.  P.  Tregelles,  LL.D.  1S67. 
4to.   loj.  dd. 

Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism  applied  to  the  Xczv  Testa- 
ment.    By  C.  E.  Hammond,  ^LA.  Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  ^s.  6c/. 

Hebrew,  etc. — The  Psalms  in  Hebrew  ivithout points.     1879, 

Crown  Svo.   3J.  6d. 

A   Commentary  on   the  Book  of  Proverbs.     Attributed 

to  Abraham  Ibn  Ezra.  Edited  from  a  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library  by 
S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.     Crown  Svo.  paper  covers,  3J.  6d. 

The  Book  of  Tobit.     A  Chaldee  Text,  from  a  unique 

MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library;  with  other  Rabbinical  Texts,  English  Transla- 
tions, and  the  Itala.    Edited  by  Ad.  Neubauer,  M.A.    187S.    Crown  Svo.  6j-. 

Horae  Hcbraicae  ct  Talmudicae,  a  J.  Lightfoot.     A  new 

Edition,  bV  R.  Gandell,  M.A.     4  vols.    1S59.  Svo.  i/.  \s. 

Latin. — Libri  P salmortim  Versio  antiqua  Latina,  cum  Para- 

phrasi  Anglo-Saxonica.     Edidit  B.  Thorpe,  F.A.S.     1S35.    Svo.  loj.  Qd. 

Old-Latin  Biblical  Texts :  No.  I.  The  Gospel  according 

to  St.  Matthew  from  the  St.  Germain  MS.  (g:).  Edited  ^vith  Introduction 
and  Appendices  by  John  \Vord_- worth,  ^LA.     Small  4to.,  stiff  covers,  6j. 

Old-French. — Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Gallica  e 

Cod-  MS.  in  Bibl.  Bodleiana  adservato,  una  cum  Versione  Metrica  aiiisque 
Monumentis  pen-etustis.  Nunc  primum  descripsitet  edidit  Franciscns  Michel, 
Phil.  Doc.     i860.  Svo.   \os.(id. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


FATHERS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  &c. 

St.  Athanasms:  Historical  Writings,  according  to  the  Bene- 
dictine Text.  \Vith  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1881.  Crown 
8vo.   loj.  dd. 

Orations  against  the  Arians,     With  an  Account  of  his 


Life  by 'William  Bright,  D.D.     1873.    Crown  8vo.  9J. 

St.  Augustine :  Select  Anti-Pelagian  Treatises,  and  the  Acts 

of  the  Second  Council  of  Orange.     With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright, 
D.D.     Crown  Svo.  9J. 

Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils  of  Nicaea,  Con- 
stantinople, Ephesus,  and  Chalcedon.   1877.  Crown  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Notes  on  the  Canons  of  the  First  Fonr  General  Councils. 

By  William  Bright,  D.D.     1882.    Crown  Svo.  5^.  f>d. 

Cyrilli  Archicpiscopi  Alexandrini  in  XII  Prophetas.     Edidit 

P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.     Tomi  II.     1868.  Svo.  cloth.  2/.  2s. 

in  D.  Joamiis  Evangelinni.     Accedunt  Fragmenta  varia 

necnon    Tractatus   ad   Tiberium    Diaconum   duo.      Edidit  post  Aubertum 
P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.     Tomi  III.     1S72.  Svo.  2/.  5J. 

'  Commentarii    in    Lucae   Evangelitim    quae    supersunt 

Syriace.     E  MSS.  apud  Mus.  Britan.  edidit  R.   Payne  Smith,  A.M.     1858. 
4to.    l/.  7S, 

Translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.     1  vols.     1859. 


8vo.   14J. 

Ephraenii  Syri,  Rabulae  Episcopi  Edesseni,  Balaei,  aliorum- 

que  Opera  Selecta.   E  Codd.  Syriacis  MSS.  in  Museo  Britannico  et  Bibliotheca 
Bodleiana  asservatis  primus  edidit  J.  J.  Overbeck.     1865.  Svo.   il.  is. 

Eusebius'    Ecclesiastical  History,   according   to    the   text   of 

Burton,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D,     18S1.    Crown  Svo. 
Sj.  6d. 

Irenaens :  The  Third  Book  of  St.  Irenaeus,  Bishop  of  Lyons, 

against  Heresies.     With  short  Notes  and  a  Glossary  by  H.  Deane,  B.D, 
1S74.  Crown  Svo.   5^.  dd. 

Patruni    Apostolicornm,    S.   Clementis    Romani,    S.   Ignatii, 

S.  Polycarpi,  quae  supersunt.      Edidit  Guil.  Jacobson,  S.T.P.R.      Tomi  II. 
Fourth  Edition,  1863.  Svo.   i/.  is. 

Socrates''  Ecclesiastical  History,  according  to  the  Text  of 
Hussey,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  187S.  Crowa  Svo. 
7^.  M. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTOEY,  BIOGRAPHY,  &c. 

Ancient  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  according  to  the 

OSes  of  Saram,  York,  Hereford,  and  Bangor,  and  the  Roman  Liturgj'  arranged 
in  parallel  columns,  with  preface  and  notes.  By  William  Maskell,  M.A. 
Third  Edition.     1SS2.   8vo.  15J. 

Baedae  Historia  Ecclesiastica.     Edited,  with  English  Notes, 

by  G.  H.  Moberly,  M.A.  18S1.    Crown  8ko.   ioj.  dd. 

Bright  (  W}j.     Chapters  of  Early  English    Church  History. 

1878.  8vo.   \2s. 

Burnet  s  History  of  the  Reformation  of  the  CJiurch  of  England. 

A  new  Edition.  Carefully  reused,  and  the  Records  collated  with  the  originals, 
by  X.  Pocock,  M.A.     7  vols.  1S65.   8vo.  Price  reduced  to  \l.  \cys. 

Councils  and  Ecclesiastical  Docuvietits  relatifig  to  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland.  Edited,  after  Spelman  and  Wilkins,  by  A.  W.  Haddan,  B.D., 
and  \V.  Stubbs,  M.A.  Vols.  I.  and  III.    1869-71.  Medium  8vo.  each  i/.  u. 

Vol.  II.  Part  I.  1873.  Medium  Svo.    loj.  f)d. 

Vol.11.  Part  II.    1878.   Church  of  Ireland;   Memorials  of  St.  Patrick. 
Stiff  covers,  3J.  (id. 

Hamilton  [jfohn,  ArchbisJwp  of  St.  Andreu's).   The  Catechism 

of.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Glossary,  by  Thomas  Graves  Law.  With 
a  Preface  by  the  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone.     Svo.  1 2j-.  6d. 

Hamrnond  {C_E.).    Liturgies,  Eastern  and  Western.    Edited, 

with  Introduction,  Xotes,  and  Liturgical  Glossar)',  1878.  Crown  Svo.  10s.  6d. 
An  Appendix  to  th.e  above.     1S79.  Crown  Svo.  paper  covers,  is.  6d. 

John,  Bishop  of  Ephcsus.  The  Third  Part  of  his  Eccle- 
siastical History.  [In  Smac]  Xow  first  edited  by  William  Cureton,  M.A. 
1853.  4^0.   i/.  I2J. 

Translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith.  M.A.     i860.  Svo.  icj-. 

Leofric  Missal,   The,  as  used    in   the   Cathedral  of  Exeter 

during  the  Episcopate  of  its  first  Bishop.  .\.D.  1050-1072  ;  together  with  some 
Account  of  the  Red  Book  of  Derby,  the  Missal  of  Robert  of  Jumieges,  and  a 
few  other  early  MS.  Sers-ice  Books  of  the  English  Church.  Edited,  with  In- 
troduction and  Notes,  by  F.  E.  Warren,  B.D.    4to.  half  morocco,  35J. 

Monumenta  Ritualia  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.     The   occasional 

Offices  of  the  Church  of  England  according  to  the  old  use  of  Salisburj-,  the 
Prymer  in  English,  and  other  prayers  and  forms,  with  dissertations  and  notes. 
By  William  Maskell,  M.A.    Second  Edition.     1882.  3  vols.  Svo.  2/.  los. 

Records  of  the  Reformation.   The  Divorce,  1527-1533.  Mostly 

now  for  the  first  time  printed  from  MSS.  in  the  British  Sluseum  and  other  libra- 
ries. Collected  and  arranged  by  X.  Pocock,  M.A.   1S70.    3  vols.  Svo.  i/.  i6x. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Shirley  (  W.  W.).  Some  Account  of  the  Church  in  the  Apostolic 
Age,     Second  Edition,  1874.   Fcap.  8vo.  3s.  60?. 

Stubbs  (  W.).  Rcgistriim  Sacrtmi  Anglicanum.  An  attempt 
to  exhibit  the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession  in  England.  1858.  Small  ^to. 
8j.  6(/. 

Warren  {F.  E.).     Liturgy  and  Ritual  of  the  Celtic  Church. 

1881.  8vo.  14J. 

ENGLISH    THEOLOGY. 

Butler'' s  Works,  with  an  Index  to  the  Analogy.    2  vols.  1874. 
^^'  ^^^'  Also  separately, 

Sermons,  ^s.  6d.  Analogy  of  Religio7i,  ^s.  6d. 

GresweUs  Harmonia  Evangelica.  Fifth  Edition.  8vo.  1855. 
95.  (3d. 

Heurtlefs   Harmonia   Symbolica:    Creeds    of    the   Western 

Church.     1858.    8vo.  6s.  6d. 

Homilies    appointed    to    be    read    in    Churches.     Edited    by 

J.  Griffiths,  M.A.     1859.  8vo.   7j.  6d. 

Hooker  s  Works,  with  his  life  by  Walton,  arranged  by  John 

Keble,  M.A.     Sixth  Edition,  1874.   3  vols.  8vo.  1/,  i\s.  6d. 

the  text   as  arranged  by  John   Keble,   M.A.     2  vols. 

1875.  8vo.   ii.f. 

Jetvers  Works.     Edited  by  R.  W.  Jelf,  D.D.     8  vols.    1848. 

Svo.  i/.  \os. 
Pearson^ s  Expositioft  of  the  Creed.     Revised  and  corrected  by 

E.  Burton,  D.D.   Sixth  Edition,  1877.  Svo.   los.  6d. 

Waterland's  Review  of  the  Docti'ijie  of  the  Eticharist,  with 

a  Preface  by  the  late  Bishop  of  London.    Crov^fn  Svo.  ()s.  6d. 

Works,  with  Life,  by  Bp.  Van  Mildert.    A  new  Edition, 

with  copious  Indexes.    6  vols.     1S56.    Svo.    2/.  iij. 

Wheatly's  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Commoti  Prayer.    A  new 

Edition,  1S46.  Svo.  jj. 

Wyclif.     A  Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif, 

by  W.  W.  Shirley,  D.D.     1865.  Svo.  3^.  6^. 

Select  English    Works.     By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.   3  vols. 

1869-1S71.  8vo.      Price  reduced  to  \l.  IS. 

Trialogus.    With    the   Supplement    now   first   edited. 


By  Gotthard  Lechler.   1869.  Svo.    Price  reduced  to  p. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD 


HISTORICAL   AND    DOCUMENTARY   WORKS. 
British  Barrozus,  a  Record  of  the  Examination  of  Sepulchral 

Mounds  in  various  parts  of  England.  By  William  Greenwell,  M.A.,  F.S.A. 
Together  with  Description  of  Figures  of  Skulls,  General  Remarks  on  Pre- 
historic Crania,  and  an  Appendix  by  George  Rolleston,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  1877. 
Medium  8vo.  25^. 

Brittoii.    A    Treatise  upon   the   Common   Law   of  England^ 

composed  by  order  of  King  Edward  I.  The  French  Text  carefully  revised, 
with  an  English  Translation,  Introduction,  and  Notes,  by  F.  M.  Nichols,  M.A. 
2  vols.     1S65.  Royal  8vo.  \l.  i6j. 

Clare7idon  s   History  of   the    Rebellion    and    Civil   Wars    in 

England.    7  vols.    1839.  iSmo.  1/.  \s. 

Clarendon  s   History   of   the   Rebellion    and    Civil    Wars    in 

England.  Also  his  Life,  written  by  himself,  in  which  is  included  a  Con- 
tinuation of  his  History  of  the  Grand  Rebellion.  With  copious  Indexes. 
In  one  volume,  royal  8vo.  1S42.  il.is. 

Clinton  s  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Helleniei.     1 85 1 .     8vo.    6s.  6d. 

Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Romani.     1854.     8vo.    "/S. 

Corpvs  Poeticvm  Boreale.     The  Poetry  of  the  Old  Northern 

Tongue,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Thirteenth  Century.  Edited,  clas- 
sified, and  translated,  with  Introduction.  Excursus,  and  Notes,  by  Gudbrand 
Vigfusson,  M.A.,  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.     2  vols.     1883.  8vo.  42 j.' 

Freeman  [E.  A.).  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  Eng- 
land; its  Causes  and  Results.    In  Six  Volumes.   8vo.  5/.  9J.  dd. 

Freeman  {E.  A.).      The   Reign  of  William  Rnfus  and  the 

Accession  of  Henrj- the  First.     2  vols.  8vo.  i/.  16s. 

Gaseoigne's     Theologieal    Dictionary    ("Liber    Veritatum") : 

Selected  Passages,  illustrating  the  condition  of  Church  and  State,  1403-1458. 
With  an  Introduction  by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.P.  Small  4to.  ioj.  6d. 

Magna  Carta,  a  careful  Reprint.    Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A. 

1879.  4^0-  Stitched,  is. 

Passio  et  Miracula  Beati  Olani.  Edited  from  a  Twelfth- 
Century  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  with  an  In- 
troduction and  Notes,  by  Frederick  Metcalfe,  M.A.  SmaU  4to.  stiff  covers,  6j. 

Protests  of  the  Lords,  including  those  which  have  been  ex- 
punged, from  1624  to  1874;  with  Historical  Introductions.  Edited  by  James 
E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.    1875.    3vols,  8vo.  2/.  2J. 

Rogers  (y.  E.  T.).     History  of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in 

England,  a.d.  i  259-1 793. 

Vols.  I  and  II  (1259-14C0).  1866.  8vo.  2I.2S. 
Vols.  Ill  aodlV  (1401-1582).  1882.  8vo.  2/  ioj. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Saxon  Chronicles  [Two  of  the)  pai'allel,  with  Supplementary- 
Extracts  from  the  Others.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a  Glos- 
sarial  Index,  by  J.  Earle,  M.A.     1865.    8vo.  i6j. 

Sttirlunga  Saga,  including  the  Islendinga  Saga  of  Lawman 

Sturla  Thordsson  and  other  works.  Edited  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson. 
In  2  vols.     1878.  8vo.  2/.  2s. 

York  Plays.     The  Plays  performed  by  the  Crafts  or  Mysteries 

of  York  on  the  day  of  Corpus  Christi  in  the  14th,  15th,  and  i6th  centuries. 
Now  first  printed  from  the  unique  manuscript  in  the  Library  of  Lord  Ashburn- 
ham.  Edited  with  Introduction  and  Glossary  by  LucyToulmin  Smith.  Svo. 
2\s.    Just  Published. 


Statutes  made  for  the  University  of  Oxford^  and  for  the  Colleges 

and  Halls  therein,  by  the  University  of  Oxford  Commissioners.     1882.     Svo. 
\2s.  6d. 

Statu ta  Universitatis  Oxonicnsis.     1885.     Svo.  ^s. 

The  Examination  Statutes  for  the  Degrees  of  B.A.,  B.  Mus., 

B.C.L.,  and B.M.     Revised  to  Trinity  Term,  1885.     Svo.  sewed,  is. 

The  Student's  Handbook   to   the   U?iiversity  and  Colleges   of 

Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

The  Oxford  University  Calendar  for  the  year  1885.     Crown 

8vo.  4s.  6d. 
The  present  Edition  includes  all  Class  Lists  and  other  University  distinctions  for 
the  five  years  ending  with  1884. 

Also,  supplementary  to  the  above,  price  5s.  (pp.  606), 

The  Honours  Register  of  the  University  of  Oxford.   A  complete 

Record  of  University  Honours,  Officers,  Distinctions,  and  Class  Lists  ;  of  the 
Heads  of  Colleges,  &c.,  &c.,  from  the  Thirteenth  Century  to  1883. 


MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL   SCIENCE,  &c. 

Aeland  (H  W.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).     Synopsis  of  the  Pathological 

Series  in  the  Oxford  Alusetim.     1867.    Svo.   2s.6d. 

Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  University  Observ- 
atory, Oxford,  under  the  direction  of  C.  Pritchard,  M.A.  No.  i.  1878. 
Royal  Svo.  paper  covers,  3^.  Gd. 

De  Bary  [Dr.  A.)     Comparative  Anatomy  of  the   Vegetative 

Organs  of  the  Phanerogams  and  Ferns.  Translated  and  Annotated  by  F.  O. 
Bower,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  and  D.  H.  Scott,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  F.L.S.  With  two 
hundred  and  forty-one  woodcuts  and  an  Index.  Royal  8vo.,  half  morocco, 
\l.  2s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  ii 

Mailer  (y.).     On  ccrtam  Variations  in  the  Vocal  Organs  of 

the  Passeres  that  have  hitherto  escaped  notice.  Translated  by  F.  J-  Bell,  B.A., 
and  edited,  with  an  Appendix,  by  A.  H.  Garrod.  M.A.,  F.R.S.  With  Plates. 
1878.    4to.  paper  covers,  7^.  f>d. 

Phillips  {John,  JILA.,  F.RS.}.     Geology  of  Oxford  and  the 

Valley  of  the  Thames.     1S71.    Svo.  2\s. 

Vesuvius.    1869.    Crown  Svo.    10^.  6d. 

Price  {Bartholomew',  M.A.,  F  R.S.).     Treatise  on  Infinitesimal 

Calculus. 

Vol.  I.  Differential  Calculus.     Second  Edition.     Svo.  14-r.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  Intej^nil  Calculus,  Calculus  of  Variations,  and  Differential  Equations. 
Second  Edition,  1S65.     Svo.  iSj. 

Vol.  III.  Statics,  including  Attractions;  Dynamics  of  a  Material  Particle. 
Second  Edition.  1S6S.     Svo.  i6j. 

Vol.  IV.  DjTiamics  of  Material  Systems;  together  with  a  chapter  on  Theo- 
retical Dynamics,  by  W.  F.  Donkin.  M.  A.,  F.R.S.     1S62.     Svo.  i6s. 

Rigaud's  Correspondence  of  Scientific  Mc7i  of  the  I'jth  Century, 
with  Table  of  Contents  by  A.  de  Morgan,  and  Index  by  the  Rev.  J.  Rigaud, 
M.A.     2  vols.     1841-1S62.    Svo.  iSs.6d. 

Rolleston  {George,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).  Scientific  Papers  and  Ad- 
dresses. Arranged  and  Edited  by  William  Turner,  M.B.,  F.R.S.  With  a 
Biographical  Sketch  by  Edward  Tylor,  F.R.S.  With  Portrait.  Plates,  and 
Woodcuts.     2  vols.  Svo.    1/.  4J. 

Sachs'  Text-Book  of  Botany,  Morphological  and  Physiological. 

A  Ncd}  Edition.  Translated  by  S.  H.  Vines,  M.A.  1S82.  Royal  Svo.,  half 
morocco,  1/.  iij.  ftd. 

Westu'ood  (y.  O.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).      Thesaurus  Entomologicus 

Hofeianus.  or  a  Description  of  the  rarest  Insects  in  the  Collection  given  to 
the  University  by  the  Rev.  William  Hope.  With  40  Plates.  1S74.  Small 
folio,  half  morocco,  'l.ios. 

C&c  ^acrttr  23ool:s  of  tfic  15ast. 

Tr.anslated  bv  v.\rious  Orient.\l  Schol.\rs,  .\nd  edited  by 
f.  m.\x  muller. 
[Demy  8%-o.  cloth.] 

V  Vol.    I.    The   Upanishacls.     Translated  by  F.  Max    Miiller. 

-L  Part  I.  The  A^andogya-npanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya- 
arawyaka.  The  Kaushitaki-brahma^^a-upanishad,  and  The  Va^^usaneyi-sawhita- 
upanishad.     ics.  6d. 

\Vol.  II.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aiyas,  as  taught  in    the 

Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish/Z/a,  and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by 
Prof.  Georg  Biihler.    Part  I.  Apastamba  and  Gautama.     loj.  6d. 


12  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Vol.  III.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China.  The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism. Translated  by  James  Legge.  Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The  Reli- 
gious portions  of  the  Shih  King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.     1 2s.  dd. 

Vol.  IV.  The  Zend-Avesta.     Translated  by  James  Darme- 

steter.     Parti.    The  Vendidad.     loj.  6^. 

Vol.  V.  The   Pahlavi   Texts.     Translated   by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  I.  The  Bundahij,  Bahman  Yajt,  and  Shayast  la-shayast.     1 2s.  6d. 

Vols.  VI  and  IX.  The  Qur'an.     Parts  I  and  II.     Translated 

by  E.  H.  Palmer.     21s, 

Vol.  VII.    The  Institutes  of  Vish;m.     Translated   by  Julius 

""        Jolly,     los.  Gd. 

Vol.  VIII.  The  Bhagavadgita,  with  The  Sanatsu^atiya,  and 

The  Anugita.     Translated  by  Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang.     loj-.  6d. 

Vol.  X.  The  Dhammapada,  translated  from  Pali  by  F.  Max 

Miiller;  and  The  Sutta-Nipata,  translated  from  Pali  by  V.  Fausboll;  being 
Canonical  Books  of  the  Buddhists,     ioj.  dd. 

Vol.  XI.  Buddhist  Suttas.     Translated  from  Pali  by  T.  W. 

Rhys  Davids,  i.  The  Mahaparinibbana  Suttanta  ;  2.  The  Dhamma-^akka- 
ppavattana  Sutta  ;  3.  The  Tevi^^a  Suttanta;  4.  The  Akankheyya  Sutta ; 
5.  The  Aetokhila  Sutta;  6.  The  Maha-sudassana  Suttanta ;  7.  TheSabbasava 
Sutta.     los.Gd. 

tVol.  XII.  The  .S"atapatha-Brahma;/a,  according  to  the  Text 

of  the  Madhyandina  School.  Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  I. 
Books  I  and  II.     12s.  6d. 

Vol.  XIII.  Vinaya   Texts.      Translated    from    the   Pali   by 

L T.  \V.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg,     Part  I.     The  Patimokkha. 

The  Mahavagga,  I-IV.     los.  6d. 

Vol.  XIV.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in  the 

' —  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish/Z^a  and  Baudhayana.  Translated 
by  Georg  Biihler.     Part  II.     Vasish//ia  and  Baudhayana.     10s.  6d. 

^  Vol.  XV.     The  Upanishads.     Translated  by  F.  Max  Mullcr. 

^  Part  II.  The  KaMa-upanishad,  The  Muwr/aka-uiJanishad,  The  Taittiriyaka- 
upanishad,  The  Br/hadarawyaka-upanishad,  The  .S'vetajvatara-upanishad,  The 
Pra.f;/a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitraya;^a-Brahma«a-upanishad.     loj.  6d. 

Vol.  XVI.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China.  The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism.   Translated  by  James  Legge.     Part  II.  The  Yi  King.     tos.  6d. 

Vol.  XVII.   Vinaya   Texts.     Translated   from   the   Pali   by 

'--"  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  II.  The  Mahavagga, 
V-X.     The  Aullavagga,  I  JII.     io.f.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  13 

Vol.  XVIII.  .Pahlavi    Texts.      Translated   by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  II.     The  Da^stan-i  Dinik  and  The  Epistles  of  Manuj->feihar.     1 2s.  (yd. 

Vol.  XIX.  The  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.     A  Life  of  Buddha 

by  Ajvaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from  Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by  Dhar- 
maraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from  Chinese  into  English  by  Samuel  Beal.     lof.  dd. 

Vol.  XX.  Vinaya  Texts.  Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W. 
Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  III.  The  Aullavagga,  IV-XII. 
loj.  (id. 

nVoI.  XXI.  The  Saddharma-pu;/^arika ;  or,  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law.    Translated  by  H.  Kern.     \2s.  6d. 

{JVol.  XXII.  G^aina-Sutras.  Translated  from  Prakrit  by  Her- 
mann Jacobi.     Part  I.     The  A>^ranga-Sutra.     The  Kalpa-Sutra.     loj.  6d. 

Vol.  XXIII.     The  Zend-Avesta.    Translated  by  James  Dar- 

mesteter.    Part  II.     The  Sirozahs,  Yajts,  and  Nyayij.     los.  6d. 

Vol.  XXIV.   Pahlavi   Texts.      Translated   by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  III.     Dina-i  Mainog-i  Khirad,  .Slkand-gumanik,  and  Sad-Dar.     105. 6d. 


Second  Series. 

The  following  Volumes  are  in  the  Press:— 

Vol.  XXV.     Manu.     Translated  by  Georg  Buhler. 

Vol.  XXVI.      The   5atapatha-Brahma«a.      Translated    by 

^'      Julius  Eggeling.     Part  II. 

Vols.  XXVII  and  XXVIII.     The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  Parts  III  and  IV. 
The  Li  Ki,  or  Collection  of  Treatises  on  the  Rules  of  Propriety,  or  Ceremonial 
Usages. 

JVols.  XXIX  and  XXX.     The  Grzliya-sutras,  Rules  of  Vedic 

Domestic  Ceremonies.     Translated  by  Hermann  Oldenberg.     Parts  I  and  II. 

Vol.   XXXI.     The   Zend-Avesta.     Part   III.     The   Yazna, 

Visparad,  Afrigan,  and  Gahs.     Translated  by  the  Rev.  L.  H.  Mills. 


u 


Vol.  XXXII.    Vedic  Hymns.    Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller. 


PartL 

\*  The  Second  Series  will  consist  of  Twenty-Four  Volumes 


14  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


€hxtxi^m  Uri^ss  Btxm 


I.    ENGLISH. 


A  First  Reading  Book.     By  Marie  Eichens  of  Berlin  ;    and 

edited  by  Anne  J.  Clough.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    stiff  covers,  4^. 

Oxford  Reading  Book,  Part  I.     For  Little  Children.     Extra 

fcap.  8vo.   stiff  covers,  6d. 

Oxford  Reading  Book,  Part  II.     For  Junior  Classes.     Extra 

fcap.  8vo.    stiff  covers,  6c?. 

An  Elementary  English  Grammar  and  Exercise  Book>     By 

O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.    \s.  6d. 

All  English  Grammar  and  Reading  Book,  for  Lower  Forms 

in  Classical  Schools.     By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra 
fcap.  Svo.    3J.  6d. 

Typical  Selections  from  the  best  English  Writers,  with  Intro- 
ductory Notices.  Second  Edition.  In  Two  Volumes.  Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
3J.  6(/.  each. 

Vol.  I.  Latimer  to  Berkeley.  Vol.  II.  Pope  to  Macaulay. 

Shairp  {J.  €.,  LL.D.).     Aspects  of  Poetry ;    being  Lectures 

delivered  at  Oxford.     Crown  Svo.  loj.  6d. 


A  Book  for  the  Beginner  in  Anglo-Saxon.     By  John  Earle, 

M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Reader.  In  Prose  and  Verse.  With  Gram- 
matical Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.  By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.  Fourth 
Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  8j.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Primer,  with  Grammar,  Notes,  and  Glossary.. 

By  the  same  Author,    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d, 

Old  English  Reading  Primers  ;  edited  by  Henry  Sweet,  M.A. 

I.  Selected  Homilies  of  yElfric.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.,  stiff  covers,  is.  6d. 

II.  Extracts  from  Alfred's  Orosius.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.,  stiff  covers,  is.  6d. 

First  Middle  English  Primer,  with  Grammar  and  Glossary. 

By  the  same  Author.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 

The   Philology  of  the  English  Tongue.     By  J.  Earle,  M.A. 

Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  "js.  6d. 

A  Handbook  of  Phonetics,  including  a  Popular  Exposition  of 

the  Principles  of  Spelling  Reform.   By  H.  Sweet,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  (>d. 

Elementarbnch  des  Gesprocheneii  Englisch.  Grammatik, 
Texte  und  Glossar.     Von  Henry  Sweet.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.,  stiff  covers,  2s.  dd. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  15 

The  Ormiihim;    with  the  Notes  and  Glossary  of  Dr.  R.  M. 

White.     Edited  by  R.  Holt,  M.A.    1878.    2  vols.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  21  j. 

English   Plant  Names    from    the   Tenth   to    the   Fifteenth 

Century.     By  J.  Earle,  M.A.    Small  fcap.  Svo.  5s. 

Specimens  of  Early  English.     A  New  and  Revised  Edition. 

With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  R.  Morris,  LL.D.,  and 
W.  W.  Skeat.  M.A. 

Part  I.  From  Old  English  Homilies  to  King  Horn  (A.D.  1 150  to  A.D.  1300). 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  9J. 
Part  II.    From  Robert  of  Gloucester  to  Gower  (.4.D.  1298  to  A.D.  1393). 
Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  7J.  6t/. 

Specimens   of  English   Literature,   from    the    '  Ploughmans 

Crede'  to  the  *  Shepheardes  Calender'  (a.d.  T394  to  A.D.  1579).  With  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  W'.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  Extra  fcap. 
Svo.     7J.  dd. 


T/ie  Vision  of  IVilliam   concerning  Piers   the   Plowman,   by 

William   Langland.      Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     Third 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  dd. 

Chaucer.     I.   The  Prologue    to    the   Canterbury    Tales;    the 

Knightes  Tale ;    The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale.     Edited  by  R.  Morris,  Editor  of 
Specimens  of  Early  English,  ifec,  &c.    Fifty-first  Thousand.    Extra  fcap.  Svo. 

II.  The   Prioresses    Tale;    Sir   Thopas ;    The   Monkes 


Tale  ;  The  Clerkes  Tale  ;  The  Squieres  Tale,  &c.     Edited  by  W.  W.  Skeat, 
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  \s.  6d. 

III.  The  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Lawe ;    The  Pardoneres 

Tale;  The  Second  Nonnes  Tale;  The  Chanouns  Yemannes  Tale.     By  the 
same  Editor.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4s.  6d. 

Gamclyn,  The  Tale  of.     Edited  with  Notes,  Glossary,  &c..  by 

W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.    Stiff  covers,  \s.  6d. 

Spenser  s  Faery  Queene.     Books  I  and  II.     Designed  chiefly 

for  the  use  of  Schools.     With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.     By  G.  W. 
Kitchin,  D.D. 

Book  I.     Tenth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Book  II.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  td. 

Hooker.     Ecclesiastical  Polity,   Book   I.     Edited   by    R.  W. 

Church,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 

Marlo^ve  and  Greene.     Marlowe's   Tragical  History  of  Dr. 

Fatistus,  and  Greene^ s  Honourable  History  of  Friar  Bacon  and  Friar  Bungay. 
Edited  by  A.  W.  Ward,  M.A.     1S7S.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5J.  6^/. 

Marloive.     Edward  II.     With  Introduction,  Notes,  &c.     By 
O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  jj. 


1 6  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Shakespeare.     Select  Plays.     Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A., 

and  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers. 

The  Merchant  of  Venice,     u.  Macbeth,     xs.dd. 

Richard  the  Second,     u.  dd.  Hamlet.     2j. 

Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A. 

The  Tempest,     u.  6i.  A     Midsummer     Night's     Dream. 
As  You  Like  It.     i.f.  (>d.  is.  6d. 

Julius  Caesar.     2s.  Coriolanus.     2s.  6d. 

Richard  the  Third.     2s.  6d.  Henry  the  Fifth.     2s. 

King  Lear.     is.  6d.  Twelfth  Night,     is.  6d. 

King  John,  yust  Ready. 

SJiakespeare  as  a  Dramatic  Artist ;    a  popular  Illustration  of 

the  Principles  of  Scientific  Criticism.     By  Richard  G.  Moulton,  M.A.     Crown 
Svo.  jj. 

Bacojt.     I.  Advancement  of  Learning.     Edited  by  W.  Aldis 

Wright,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4?.  6d. 

II.  The  Essays.     With   Introduction   and  Notes.     By 


S.  H.  Reynolds,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Brasenose  College.     In  Preparation. 

Milton.     I.  Areopagitica.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By 

John  W.  Hales,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  is. 

' II.  Poems.     Edited  by  R.  C.  Browne,   M.A.     2  vols. 

Fifth  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  ()s.  6d.  Sold  separately.  Vol.  1. 4J.;  Vol.  IL  y. 

In  paper  covers  : — 

Lycldas,  id.        L'Allegro,  id.        II  Penseroso,  4^.        Comus,  6d. 

Samson  Agonistes,  6d. 

III.  Samson  Agonistes.     Edited  with  Introduction  and 


Notes  by  John  Churton  Collins.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  stiff  covers,  is. 

Bunyan.  I.  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Grace  Abotmding,  Rela- 
tion of  the  Imprisonment  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan.  Edited,  with  Biographical 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.     1S79.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5^. 

II.   Holy  War,  &-c.     Edited    by    E.   Venables,    M.A. 


In  the  Press. 

Dryden.     Select  Poems.     Stanzas   on   the   Death   of  Oliver 

Cromwell;  Astraea  Redux;  Annus  Mirabilis ;  Absalom  and  Achitophel; 
Religio  Laici ;  The  Hind  and  the  Panther,  Edited  by  W.  D.  Christie,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  ^s.  6d. 

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.     Edited,  with  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  &c.,  by  T.  Fowler^  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  17 

Addison.     Selections  from   Papers    in   the   Spectator.     With 

Notes.     By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  ^r.  dd. 

Steele.     Selections  froin  the  Tatler,  Spectator,  and  Guardian. 

Edited  by  Austin  Dobson.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  a^.  6</.    In  white  Parchment,  -s.  6d. 

Pope.   With  Introduction  and  Notes.   By  Mark  Pattison,  B.D. 

I.    Essay  on  Man.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

II.  Satires  and  Epistles.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Parnell.     The  Hermit.     Paper  covers,  id. 

Johnson.     I.  Rasselas ;  Lives  of  Dryden  and  Pope.     Edited 

by  Alfred  Milnes,  M.A.  (London).     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  dd. 

Lives  of  Pope  and  Dryden-     Stiflf  covers,    2^-.  6d. 

II.    Vanity  of  Human  Wishes.     With  Notes,  by  E.  J. 

Payne,  M.A.     Paper  covers,  4^. 

Gray.     Selected  Poems.     Edited   by  Edmund   Gosse,    Clark 

Lecturer  in  English  Literature  at  the  University  of  Cambridge.     Extra  fcap. 
Svo.     Stiflf  covers,  \s.  6d.     In  white  Parchment,  3^. 

Elegy  and  Ode  on  Eton  College.     Paper  covers,  2d. 

Goldsmith.     The  Deserted  Village.     Paper  covers,  2d. 

Cowpcr.     Edited,  with    Life,    Introductions,   and   Notes,   by 

H.  T.  Griffith,  B.A. 

I.   The  Didactic  Poems  of  \']^2,  with  Selections  from  the 

Minor  Pieces,  A.D.  1779-1783.     Extra  fcap    Svo.  3^^. 

II.   The  Task,  with  Tirocinium,  and  Selections  from  the 

Minor  Poems.  A.D.  1 784-1 799.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3J, 

Burke.     Select  Works.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A. 

I.   Thoughts  071  the  Present  Discontents  ;  the  two  Speeches 

on  America.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4.f.  6d. 

II.  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.   Second  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5J. 

III.  Four  Letters  on  the  Proposals  for  Peace  with  the 

Regicide  Directory  of  France.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5^. 

Keats.   Hyperion,  Book  I.   With  Notes  by  W.  T.Arnold,  B.A. 

Paper  covers,  ^d. 

Byron.     Childe  Harold.    Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.    Cloth,  3^.  dd.     In  white  Parchment, 
IS.    Just  Publhhed. 

Scott.     Lay  of  the  Last  Mitistrel.     Introduction  and  Canto  I, 
with  Preface  and  Notes  by  W.  Minto,  M.A.     Paper  covers,  td. 

[9] 


1 8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


II.    LATIN. 

Rtidimenta  Latina.     Comprising  Accidence,  and  Exercises  of 

a  very  Elementaiy  Character,  for  the  use  of  Beginners.     By  John  Barrow 
Allen,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

An  Elementary  Latin    Grammar.      By   the    same   Author. 

Forty-second  Thousand.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.6d. 

A  First  Latin  Exercise  Book.     By  the  same  Author.     Fourth 

Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

A  Second  Latin  Exercise  Book.    By  the  same  Author.     Extra 

fcap.  8vo.   3^.  dd. 

Reddenda  Minora,  or  Easy  Passages,  Latin  and  Greek,  for 

Unseen  Translation.     For  the  use  of  Lower  Forms.     Composed  and  selected 
by  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.   is.  6d. 

Anglice  Reddenda,  or  Easy  Extracts,  Latin  and   Greek,  for 

Unseen  Translation.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Third  Edition,  Revised  and 
Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Passages  for  Trafislation  into  Latin.     For  the  use  of  Passmen 

and   others.     Selected  by  J.  Y.  Sargent,  M.A.     Fifth  Edition,     Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  2s.  dd. 

Exercises  hi   Latin  Prose   Composition ;    with   Introduction, 

Notes,  and  Passages  of  Graduated  Difficulty  for  Translation  into  Latin.     By 
G.  G.  Ramsay,   M.A.,  LL. D.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  ()d. 

Hints  and  Helps  for  Latin  Elegiacs.   By  H.  Lee-Warner,  M.A., 

late  Pillow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby 
School.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3.?.  (>d.     Just  Published. 

First  Latin  Reader.     By  T.  J.  Nunns,  M.A.     Third  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Caesar.     The  Commentaries  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and 

Maps.     By  Charles  E.  Moberly,  M.A. 

Part  I.   The  Gallic  War.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  dd. 

Part  11.   The  Civil  War.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s,  6(f. 

The  Civil  War.    Book  I.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Cicero.   Selection  of  interesting  and  descriptive  passages.   With 

Notes.     By  Henry  Walford,  M.A.     In  three  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8V0.4J.  6(/.^ 

Each  Part  separately,  limp,  \s.  6d. 
Part  I.      Anecdotes  from  Grecian  and  Roman  History.     Third  Edition. 
Part  II.    Omens  and  Dreams:  Beauties  of  Nature.     Third  Edition. 
Part  III.  Rome's  Rule  of  her  Provinces.     Third  Edition. 

Cicero.  Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  the 
late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  19 

Cicero.     Select   Orations   (for   Schools).     In  Verrem   I.     De 

Imperio  Gn.  Pompeii.    Pro  Archia.    Philippica  IX.    With  Introduction  and 
Notes  by  J.  R.  King,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8yo.  2j.  dd. 

Cornelius  Nepos.    With  Notes.     By  Oscar  Browning,  M.A, 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Livy.     Selections  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and  Maps.     By 

H.  Lee-Wamer,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.    In  Parts, limp,  each  \s.  6d. 
Part  I.     The  Caudine  Disaster. 
Part  II.    Hannibal's  Campaign  in  Italy. 
Part  III.  The  Macedonian  War. 

Livy.     Books  V— VII.     With    Introduction   and    Notes.     By 

A.  R.  Cluer,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3^^.  6d. 

Ovid.     Selections  for  the  use  of  Schools.    With  Introductions 

and  Notes,  and  an  Appendix  on  the  Roman  Calendar.     By  W.  Ramsay,  M.A. 
Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap,  Svo.  5J.  6d. 

Ovid.  Tristia.  Book  I.  The  Text  revised,  with  an  Intro- 
duction and  Notes.     By  S.  G.  Owen,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  y.  6d. 

Pliny.     Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).     With  Notes.     B}'  the 

late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    E.\tra 
fcap.  Svo.  IS. 

Tacitus.  The  Annals.  Books  I-IV.  Edited,  with  Introduc- 
tion and  Notes  for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Junior  Students,  by  H.  Furneaux, 
M.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.    sx. 

Terence.     Andria.     With  Notes  and  Introductions.      By  C. 

E.  Freeman,  M.A.,  and  A.  Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3J. 


Catidli  Veronensis  Liber.     Iterum  recognovit,  apparatum  cri- 

ticum  prolegomena  appendices  addidit,  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     1S7S.    Demy 
Svo.  16s. 

A  Commentary  on  Catidlus.     By  Robinson  Ellis,  M.A. 


1876.    Demy  Svo.  i6j. 
Veronensis  Carmina  Selecta,  secundum   recognitionem 

Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3^.  6d. 

Cicero  de  Oratore.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  A.  S. 

WUkins,  M.A. 

Book  I.   1S79.  Svo.  6j.         Book  II.  1881.  Svo.  jj, 

Philippic  Orations.     With  Notes.     By  J.  R.  King,  M.A. 

Second  Edition,     1S79.    Svo.  ioj.  dd. 

C  Z 


ao  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Cicero.    Select  Letters.  With  English  Introductions,  Notes,  and 

Appendices.   By  Albert  Watson,  M.A.    Third  Edition.  1881.    Demy8vo.  i8s. 

Select  Letters.     Text.     By  the  same  Editor.     Second 

Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J. 

pro  Chtentio.     With  Introduction   and   Notes.     By  W. 


Ramsay,  M.A.    Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.   Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  35.  6d. 

Horace.  With  a  Commentary.  Volume  I.   The  Odes,  Carmen 

Seculare,  and  Epodes.      By  Edward  C.  Wickham,  M.A.      Second  Edition. 
1877.     Demy  8vo.   12J. 

■ A  reprint  of  the  above,  in  a  size  suitable  for  the  use 

of  Schools.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5.?.  ^d. 

Livy,  Book  I.     With   Introduction,  Historical  Examination, 

and  Notes.     By  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1881.     8vo.  6j. 

Ovid.     P.  Ovidii  Nasonis  Ibis.     Ex  Novis  Codicibus  edidit, 

Scholia  Vetera  Commentarium  cum  Prolegomenis  Appendice  Indice  addidit, 
R.  Ellis,  A.M.     8vo.  loj.  td. 

Persius.  The  Satires.  With  a  Translation  and  Commentary. 
By  John  Conington,  M.A.  Edited  by  Henry  Nettleship,  M.A.  Second 
Edition.     1874.     8vo.  ^s.  6d. 

Plauttis.     The  Trinummus.     With  Notes  and  Introductions. 

Intended  for  the  Higher  Forms  of  Public  Schools.     By  C.  E.  Freeman,  M.A., 
and  A.  Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3^. 

Sallust.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  W.  W.  Capes, 

M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     4J,  (>d. 

Tacittis.  The  Annals.  Books  I- VI.  Edited,  with  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  H.  Furneaux,  M.A.    8vo.  i8j. 

Virgil.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  T.  L.  Papillon, 

M.A.     Two  vols.   Crown  8vo.  lOJ.  f^d. 


Nettleship  {H.,  M.A.).     Lectures  and  Essays  on  Subjects  con- 
nected with  Latin  Scholarship  and  Literature.     Crown  8vo.  ']s.  6d. 

The  Roman  Satura :  its  original  form  in  connection  with 

its  literary  development.     8vo.  sewed,  \s. 

Ancient  Lives  of  Vergil.     With  an  Essay  on  the  Poems 


of  Vergil,  in  connection  with  his  Life  and  Times.     8vo.  sewed,  2J. 

Papillon  [T.  L.,  M.A.).     A  Manual  of  Comparative  Philology. 

Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     1882.  Crown  8vo.  6j. 

Pinder  [North,  M.A.).     Selections  from  the  less  known  Latin 

Poets.     1869.    8vo.  15J. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD,  t\ 

Sellar  ( W.  F.,  M.A).     Roman  Poets  of  the  Augustan  Age. 

ViRGlu     New  Edition.    1883.    Crown  8vo.  9J. 

Roman  Poets  of  tJte  Republic.     New  Edition,  Revised 

and  Enlarged.     18S1.     8vo.  14J. 

Wordsworth  {J.,  M.A.).    Fragments  and  Specimens  of  Early 

Latin.     With  Introductions  and  Notes.    1874.    8vo.  i8j. 

III.    GREEK. 

A  Greek  Primer,  for  the  use  of  beginners  in  that  Language, 

By  the  Right  Rev.  Charles  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.  Seventh  Edition.  Extra  f cap. 
8vo.  xs.  6d. 

Graecae  Grammaticae  Rudimenta  in  usum  Scholarum.     Auc- 

tore  Carolo  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.     Nbeleenth  Edition,  1SS2.     i2mo.  4^. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and  Scott's 

4to.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.  Twenty-first  Edition.  18S4. 
Square  i2mo.  7^.  6d. 

Greek  Verbs,  Irregular  and  Defective;  their  forms,  meaning, 

and  quantit)-;  embracing  all  the  Tenses  used  by  Greek  writers,  with  references 
to  the  passages  in  which  they  are  found.  By  W.  Veitch.  Fourth  Edition., 
Crown  8vo.  loj.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Greek  Accentuation  (for  Schools)  :    abridged 

from  his  larger  work  by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

A  Series  of  Graduated  Greek  Readers: — 

First  Greek  Reader.    By  W,  G.  Rushbrooke,  IM.L,     Second 

Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8to.  2j.  dd. 

Second  Greek  Reader.     By  A.  M,  Bell,  M.A.     Extra  fcap. 

8vo.  jj.  dd. 

Faurth  Greek  Reader ;  being  Specimens  of  Greek  Dialects. 

With  Introductions  and  Notes.     By  W.  W.  Merrj-,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
4^.  dd. 

Fifth   Greek  Reader.      Selections   from    Greek    Epic    and 

Dramatic  Poetr)',  with  Introductions  and  Notes,     By  Evel}-n  Abbott,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^.  dd. 

Tlie  Golden  Treasury  of  Ancient  Greek  Poetry:  being  a  Col- 
lection of  the  finest  passages  in  the  Greek  Classic  Puets  with  Introductory- 
Notices  and  Notes.    13y  R.  S.  Wright.  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  Sj.  (>d. 

A  Golden  Treastiry  of  Greek  Prose,  being  a  Collection  of  the 

■  finest  passages  in  the  principal  Greek  Prose  Writers,  with  Introductory  Notices 
and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  and  J.  E.  L.  Shadwell,  M.A.  Extra  fcap, 
Svo,  4f.  dd. 


22  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Aeschylus.     Prometheus  Bound  (for  Schools).     With  Introduc- 
tion and  Notes,  by  A.  O.Prickard,M. a.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2J. 

Agamemnon.     With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Arthur 

Sidgwick,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  35. 

Choephoroi.     With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  the  same 


Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.   },s. 

Aristophanes.     In  Single  Plays.     Edited,  with  English  Notes, 

Introductions,  &c.,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
I.  The  Clouds,  Second  Edition,  2s. 
II.  The  Acharnians,  2s.  III.  The  Frogs,  2s. 

Cebes.     Tabula.     With    Introduction   and   Notes.     By  C.   S. 

Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  zs.  6d. 

Euripides.    Alcestis  (for  Schools).     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s,  6d. 

Heletta.     Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Critical 

Appendix,  for  Upper  and  Middle  Forms.      By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra 
fcap.  Svo.  3.?. 

Iphigenia  in  Tauris.     Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 

and  Critical  Appendix,  for  Upper  and  Middle  Forms.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  y. 

Herodotus,  Selections  from.    Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 

and  a  Map,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6ci. 

Homer.     Odyssey,   Books   I-XII    (for   Schools).     By  W.  W. 

Merry,  M.A.    Twenty-seventh  Thousand.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  ^s.  6d. 
Book  II,  separately,  is.  6d. 

Odyssey,   Books   XIII-XXIV    (for    Schools).     By   the 

same  Editor.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5^'. 

Iliad,   Book  I  (for  Schools).     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 

Iliad,  Books  I-XII  (for  Schools).  With  an  Introduction, 

a  brief  Homeric  Grammar,  and  Notes.     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A.     Extra  fcap. 
Svo.  6s. 

— —  Iliad,  Books  VI  and  XXI.      With    Introduction    and 

Notes.  By  Herbert  Hailstone,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  is.  dd.  each. 

Lucian.      Vera   Historia   (for   Schools).     By    C.   S,   Jerram, 

M.A.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  \s.  6d. 

Plato.     Selections  from  the  Dialogues  [including  the  whole  of 

the  Apology  and  Crito\   With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  John  Purves,  M.A., 
and  a  Preface  by  the  Rev.  B.  Jowett,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  6j.  6^. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  23 

Sophocles.     In    Single  Plays,  with  English   Notes,  &c.     By 

Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  and  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp. 
Oedipus  TjTannus,  Philoctetes.  New  and  Revised  Edition,  is.  each. 
Oedipus  Coloneus,  Antigone,   \s.  ^d.  each. 

Ajax,         Electra,        Trachiniae,  2s.  each. 

Oedipus   Rex:    Dindorfs    Text,    with    Notes    by    the 

present  Bishop  of  St.  David's.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

Theocritus   (for   Schools).     With    Notes.     By   H.  Kynaston, 

D.D.  (late  Snow).     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  6</. 

Xenopho7i.    Easy  Selections,     (for  Junior  Classes).     With  a 

Vocabulary.  Notes,  and  Map.  By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  and  C.  S.  Jenam, 
M.A.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  y.  6d. 

SelectioJts  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and   Maps.     By 

J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.     Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J.  6^/. 

Anabasis,  Book  t.     Edited  for  the  use  of  Junior  Classes 

and  Private  Students.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Index.  By  J.  Mar- 
shall, M.A.,  Rector  of  the  Royal  High  School,  Edinburgh.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
2  J.  6</.    Just  Published. 

Anabasis,  Book  II.     With  Notes  and  Map.     By  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.   2s. 

Cyropaedia,  Books  IV  and  V.     With  Introduction  and 

Notes  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 


A  ristotle's  Politics.  By  W.  L.  Newman,  M.A.  [In  preparation. 1 

Aristoteliari  Studies.  I.  On  the  Structure  of  the  Seventh 
Book  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.  By  J.  C.  Wilson,  M.A.  1879.  Medium  8vo. 
stiff,  5J. 

Demosthenes  and  Aeschines.     The  Orations  of  Demosthenes 

and  .^schines  on  the  Crown.     With   Introductory  Essays  and  Notes.     By 
G.  A.  Simcox,  M.A.,  and  W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.     1872.  8vo.  I2J. 

Geldart  [E.  M.,  B.A.).     The  Modern  Greek  Language  in  its 

relation  to  Ancient  Greek,     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  \s.  6d. 

Hicks  (E.  L.,  M.A.).  A  Manual  of  Greek  Historical  Inscrip- 
tions.   Demy  8vo.  10^.  dd. 

Homer.     Odyssey,  Books  I-XII.     Edited  with  English  Notes, 

Appendices,  etc.     By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  and  the  late  James  Riddell,  M.A. 
1876.  Demy  8vo.  i6j. 

A  Grammar  of  the  Homeric  Diakct.     By  D.  B.  Monro, 

M.A.    Demy  Svo.  loj.  dd. 


24  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Sophocles.     The  Plays  and  Fragments.     With  English  Notes 

and  Introductions,  by  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.    2  vols. 

Vol.  I.     Oedipus  Tyrannus.      Oedipus  Coloneus.      Antigone.       Second 

Edition.     1879.  8vo.  i6s. 
Vol.  11.   Ajax.     Electra.    Trachiniae.    Philoctetes.     Fragments.       1881. 
8vo.  16s. 

Sophocles.     The   Text    of  the   Seven  PJays.     By  the   same 

Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  Cyd. 

IV.    FRENCH  AND   ITALIAN. 

Br  ache  fs  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French  Language^ 

with  a  Preface  on  the  Principles  of  French  Etymology.     Translated  into 
English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.    Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  7j.  (>d. 

Historical  Grammar  of  the  French  Language.  Trans- 
lated into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.  P'ourth  Edition.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  3J.  6(/. 

V^orks  by  GEOBGE  SAINTSBUET,  M.A. 

Primer  of  French  Literature.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is. 

Short  History  of  French  Literature.     Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Specimens  of  French  Literature,  from  Villon  to  Hugo.  Crown 
Svo.  9J. 

Corneille's  Horace.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

George  Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  (>d, 

Molihe's  Les  Pr^cieuses  Ridicules.     Edited,  with  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  \s.  6d. 

Beaumarchais'  Le  Bar  bier  de  Seville.   Edited,  with  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Austin  Dobson.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  dd. 

Voltaire's  Merope.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

George  Saintsbury.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  is.    Just  Published. 

Mussefs  On  ne  badine pas  avec  V Amour,  and  Fantasio.  Edited, 

with   Prolegomena,  Notes,  etc.,   by  Walter   Herries   Pollock.     Extra  fcap. 
Svo.  2S. 


Sainte-Beuve.    Selections  from  the  Causeries  du  Lu7idi.   Edited 

by  George  Saintsbury.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 

Quinet's  Lettres  a  sa  Mh'C.     Selected  and  edited  by  George 

Saintsbury.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  cloth,  2s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  *5 

L' Eloquence  de  la  Chaire  et  de  la  Tribune  Frangaises.     Edited 

by  Paul  Bloiiet,  B.A.  (Univ.  Gallic).  Vol.  I.  French  Sacred  Oratory 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Edited  by  GUSTAVE  MASSON,  B.A. 

Corneille's  Cinna,  and  Molieres  Les  Feinmes  Savantes.     With 

Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  dd. 

Louis  XIV  and  his  Contemporaries  ;  as  described  in  Extracts 

from  the  best  Memoirs  of  the  Seventeenth  Centur)-.  With  English  Notes, 
Genealogical  Tables,  &c.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2J.  dd. 

Maistre,  Xavier  de.     Voyage  autour  de  ma  Chambre.     Ourika, 

by  Madame  de  Duras;  La  Dot  de  Suzette,  by  Fieveej  Les  Jumeaux  de 
I'Hotel  ComeWle.hy  £dmond  A  dott/ ;  Mesa  ventures  d'un  Ecolier,  by  Rodolphe 
Topffer.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2j.  dd. 

Molih-e's  Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin.    With  Voltaire's  Life  of 

Moliere.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  stiff  covers,  u.  dd. 

Moli^re's  Les  Fourberies  de   Scapin,   and   Racine  s  Athalie. 

With  Voltaire's  Life  of  Moliere.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Racine's  Andromaque,   and    Corneille's  Le  Menteur.      With 

Louis  Racine's  Life  of  his  Father.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2j.  6d, 

Regnard's  Le  Jouejcr,  and  Briieys  and  Palaprafs  Le  Grondeur. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Sevigni,  Madame  de,  and  her  chief  Contemporaries,  Selections 

from  the  Correspondetue  of.  Intended  more  especially  for  Girls'  Schools. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  y. 

Dante.     Selections  from  the  Inferno.     With  Introduction  and 

Notes.     By  H.  B.  Cotterill,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4?.  (>d. 

Tasso.     La  Gcrtcsalemme  Liberata.     Cantos  i,  ii.     With  In- 
troduction and  Notes.     By  the  same  Editor.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

V.    GERMAN. 

Scherer  (  W.).     A  History  of  Germafi  Literature.    Translated 

from  the  Third  German  Edition  by  Mrs.  F.  Conybeare.  Edited  by  F.  Max 
Miiller.     2  vols.  Svo.  21  j.    Just  Published. 

GERMAN  COURSE.     By  HERMANN  LANGE. 

The  Germans  at  Home ;  a  Practical  Introduction  to  German 

Conversation,  with  an  Appendix  containing  the  Essentials  of  German  Grammar. 
Second  Edition.     Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Tlie  German  Manual ;  a  German  Grammar,  Reading  Book, 
and  a  Handbook  of  German  Conversation.    Svo.  is.  dd. 


2  6  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Grammar  of  the  German  Language.     8vo.  3^.  6d. 

This  '  Grammar '  is  a  reprint  of  the  Grammar  contained  in  '  The  German  Manual," 
and,  in  this  separate  form,  is  intended  for  the  use  of  Students  who  wish  to  make 
themselves  acquainted  with  German  Grammar  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  being 
able  to  read  German  books. 

German  Composition ;  A  Theoretical  and  Practical  Guide  to 

the  Art  of  Translating  English  Prose  into  German.     8vo.  4J.  dd. 


Lessing's  Laokoon.     With  Introduction,  English  Notes,  etc. 

By  A.  Hamann,  Phil.  Doc,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  6d. 

Schiller  s  Wilhelm  Tell.  Translated  into  English  Verse  by 
E.  Massie,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5^. 

Also,  Edited  by  C.  A.  BUCHHEIM,  Phil.  Doc. 

Goethe's  Egmont.  With  a  Life  of  Goethe,  &c.    Third  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3J. 

Iphigenie  auf  Tauris.  A  Drama.  With  a  Critical  In- 
troduction and  Notes.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3J. 

Heine'' s  Prosa,  being  Selections  from  his  Prose  Works.     With 

English  Notes,  etc.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  6d. 

Lessing's  Minna  von  BarnJictm.     A  Comedy.     With  a  Life 

of  Lessing,  Critical  Analysis,  Complete  Commentary,  &c.     Fourth  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3J.  dd. 

Nathan    der    Weise.     With    Introduction,   Notes,   etc. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  dd. 

Schiller'' s  Historische  Skissen ;  Egmont" s  Leben  tmd  Tod,  and 

Belagerung  von  Antwerpen.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Wilhelm  Tell.  With  a  Life  of  Schiller ;  an  his- 
torical and  critical  Introduction,  Arguments,  and  a  complete  Commentary, 
and  Map.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  y.  6d. 

— —    Wilhelm  Tell.    School  Edition.  With  Map.    Extra  fcap. 

Svo.    2S. 

Halm's  Griseldis.     In  Preparation. 


Modern  German  Reader.     A  Graduated   Collection  of  Ex- 
tracts in  Prose  and  Poetry  from  Modern  Gennan  writers  : — 

Part  I.     With   English   Notes,   a   Grammatical   Appendix,   and   a   complete 

Vocabulary.   Fourth  Edition.   Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2$.  bd. 
Part  II.    With  English  Notes  and  an  Index.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d.    Just 

Published. 
Part  III  in  Preparation. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  a; 

VI.    MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL    SCIENCE,  &c. 
By  IiE"WIS  HENSLET,  M.A. 

Figures  made  Easy :  a  first  Arithmetic  Book.     (Introductory 

to  '  The  Scholar's  Arithmetic.')     Crown  8vo.  6d. 

Answers   to  the  Exaviples  in  Figures  made  Easy,  together 

with  two  thousand  additional  Examples  formed  from  the  Tables  in  the  same, 
with  Answers.     Crown  8vo.  is. 

The  Scholar's  Arithmetic:   with  Answers  to  the  Examples. 

Crown  8vo.  4J.  dd. 

The  Scholar's  Algebra.    An  Introductory  work  on  Algebra. 

Crown  Svo.  \s.  6d. 


Baynes  {R.  E.,  M.A.).    Lessons  on  Thermodynamics.     1878, 

Crown  Svo.  7j.  6d. 

Chambers   [G.   F.,  F.R.A.S.).     A    Handbook    of  Descriptive 

Astronomy.    Third  Edition.     1877.    Demy  8vo.  28^. 

Clarke  {Col.  A.  R.,C.B.,R.E.).    Geodesy.    1880.    8vo.   i2.r.  6rt'. 

Cremona  {Luigi).     Elements  of  Projective  Geometry.     Trans- 
lated by  C.  Lendesdorf,  M.A..     Svo.     12s.  6d. 

Donkin  {  W.  F.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).    Acoustics.     Second  Edition. 

Crown  Svo.  "js.  6d. 

Gallon  {Douglas,  C.B.,  F.R.S.).     The  Construction  of  Healthy 

Dwellings ;  namely  Houses,  Hospitals,  Barracks,  Asylums,  &c.     Demy  Svo. 
loj.  td. 

Hamilton  {Sir  R.  G.  C),  and  J.  Ball.     Book-keeping.     New 

and  enlarged  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  limp  cloth,  2s. 

Har court  {A.  G.    Vernon,  M.A.),  and  H.  G,  Madan,  M.A. 

Exercises   in   Practical  Chemistry.     Vol.  I.  Elementary  Exercises.     Third 
Edition.    Crown  Svo.  9J. 

Maclaren   {Archibald).     A    Systetn   of  Physical  Education  : 

Theoretical  and  Practical.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  1$.  6d. 

Madan   {H.   G.,   M.A.).       Tables    of   Qualitative    Analysis. 

Large  4to.  paper,  4J.  6d. 

Maxivell{J.  Clerk,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).    A  Treatise  on  Electricity 

and  Magnetism.     Second  Edition.     2  vols.  Demy  Svo.  i/.  lis.  (>d. 

An   Elementary    Treatise    on    Electricity.     Edited    by 

William  Gamett,  M.A.    Demy  Svo.  is.  6d. 


2  8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Minchin   {G.   M.,   M.A.).      A    Treatise  on   Statics.     Third 

Edition,  Corrected  and  Enlarged.  Vol.  I.  Equilibrium  of  Coplaimr  Forces. 
8vo.    ()s.   Just  Published.     Vol.  II.     In  the  Press. 

Uniplanar  Kinematics  of  Solids  and  Fluids.   Crown  8vo. 

7j.  dd. 

Rolleston  [G.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).  Forms  of  Animal  Life.  Illus- 
trated by  Descriptions  and  Drawings  of  Dissections.  A  New  Edition  in  the 
Press. 

Smyth.     A   Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects.      Observed,  Reduced, 

and  Discussed  by  Admiral  W.H.Smyth,  R.N.  Revised,  condensed,  and  greatly 
enlarged  by  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.     1881.  Svo.   Price  reduced  to  12s. 

Stezvart  [Balfour,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.).     A  Ti-eatise  on  Heat,  with 

numerous  Woodcuts  and  Diagrams.  Fourth  Edition.  1881.  Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
7.f.  dd. 

Story-Maskelyne  {M.  H.  N.,M.A.).    Crystallography.-    In  the 

Press. 

Vernon- Harconrt  [L.  F.,  M.A.).     A   Treatise  on  Rivers  and 

Canals,  relating  to  the  Control  and  Improvement  of  Rivers,  and  the  Design, 
Construction,  and  Development  of  Canals.  2  vols.  (Vol.  I,  Text.  Vol.  II, 
Plates.)     Svo.  2\s. 

Harbours  and  Docks;  their  Physical  Features,  History, 

Construction,  Equipment,  and  Maintenance;  with  Statistics  as  to  their  Com- 
mercial Development.     2  vols.   Svo.  25^. 

Watson  [H.  W.,  M.A.).     A   Treatise  on  the  L^inetic  Theory 

of  Gases.     1S76.  Svo.  ^s.  6d. 

Watson  (H.  W.,  D.  Sc,  F.R.S.),  and  S.  H.  Burbury,  M.A. 

I.  A  Treatise  on  the  Application  of  Generalised  Coordinates  to  the  Kinetics  of 

a  Material  System.     1879.  Svo.  6s. 

II.  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Electricity  and  Magnetism.     Vol.  I.  Electro- 
statics.    8vo.   los.  ()d.    Just  Published. 

Williamson   [A.    W.,   Phil.   Doc,   F.R.S.).      Chemistry  for 

Students.    A  new  Edition,  with  Solutions.     1873.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  Ss.  dd. 

VII.  HISTORY. 

Bluntschli  {J.  K.).     The   Theory  of  the   State.       By   J.   K, 

Bluntschli,  late  Professor  of  Political  Sciences  in  the  University  of  Heidel- 
berg. Authorised  English  Translation  from  the  Sixth  German  Edition. 
Demy  Svo.  half-bound,  \2s.  6d.    Just  Published. 

Finlay  [George,  LL.D.).  A  History  of  Greece  from  its  Con- 
quest by  the  Romans  to  the  present  time,  B.C.  146  to  a.d.  1864.  A  new 
Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in  part  re-written,  with  considerable  ad- 
ditions, by  the  Author,  and  edited  by  II.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.  1877.  7  vols.  Svo. 
3/.  lOJ. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  29 

Fortescue   (Sir  John,  Kt.).      The   Governance  of  England: 

otherwise  called  The  Difference  between  an  Absolute  and  a  Limited  Mon- 
archy. A  Revised  Text.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Appendices, 
by  Charles  Plummer,  M.A.     8vo.  half-bound,  12s.  dd.    Just  Published. 

Freeman  {E.A.,  D.C.L.).     A   Short  History  of  the  Norman 

Conquest  of  England.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  (>d. 

A  History  of  Greece.     In  preparation. 

George  {H.  B.,  M.A .).  Genealogical  Tables  illustrative  of  Modern 

History.     Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Small  4to.   1 2s. 

Hodgkin  ( 7".).      Italy   and  her   Invaders.      Illustrated    with 

Plates  and  Maps.     Vols.  I  and  II.,  A.D.  376-476.  8vo.  il.  12s 
Vols.  III.  and  IV.    The  Ostrogothic  Invasion,  and  The  Imperial  Restoration. 
8vo.   \l.  ids.    Jzist  Published. 

Kitchin  {G.  W.,D.D.).   A  History  of  France.  With  numerous 

Maps,  Plans,  and  Tables.  In  Three  Volumes.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Svo. 
each  loj.  6d. 

Vol.  I.  Down  to  the  Year  1453. 

Vol.  2.  From  1453-1624.  Vol.  3.  From  1624-1793. 

Payne  {E.  J.,  M.A.).     A    History  of  the    United  States   of 

America.     In  the  Press. 

\Ranke  [L.  vo7i).     A  History  of  England,  principally  in  the 

Se%-enteenth  Century.  Translated  by  Resident  Members  of  the  University  of 
Oxford,  under  the  snperintendence  of  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.,  and  C.  W.  Boase, 
M.A.     1875.   6  vols.  Svo.  3/.  3 J. 

Rawlinsoji  {George,  M.A.).     A  Manual  of  Ancient  History. 

<~        Second  Edition.   Demy  Svo.  I4r. 

Select  Charters  and  other  Illustrations  of  English  Constitutional 

History,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I.  Arranged  and 
edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.     Fifth  Edition.     1883.     Crown  Svo.  8j.  6d. 

Stiibbs  (  W.,  D.D.).     The  Constitutional  History  of  England, 

in  its  Origin  and  Development.     Library  Edition.    3  vols,  demy  Svo.  2/.  8j. 
Also  in  3  vols,  crown  Svo.  price  12s.  each. 

Wellesley.     A  Selection  from    the  Despatches,    Treaties,   and 

other  Papers  of  the  Marquess  Welleslev.  K.G.,  during  his  Government 
of  India.    Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.     1S77.     Svo.  i/.  45. 

Wellington.     A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and 

other  Papers  relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  K.G. 
Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.     18S0.  Svo.  24J. 

A   History  of  British  India.     By  S.J.Owen,  M.A.,  Reader 
—     in  Indian  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     In  preparation. 


30  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


VIII.  LAW. 

Alberici  Gentilis,  I.C.D.,  I.C.  Professoris  Regii,  De  lure  Belli 

Libri   Tres.     Edidit  Thomas  Erskine  Holland,   LCD.     1877.     Small  4to. 
half  morocco,  21s. 

Anson  {Sir  William  R.,  Bart.,  D.C.L.).     Principles   of  the 

English  Law  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency  in  its  Relation  to  Contract.     Second 
Edition.     Demy  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Benthain   {Jeremy).      An   Introdnctioft   to   the   Principles  of 

Morals  and  Legislation.     Crown  Svo.  (>s.  6d. 

Digby  {Kenelm  E.,  M.A.).     An  Introduction  to  the  History  of 

the  Laiv  of  Real  Property.    Third  Edition.     Demy  Svo.    Jos.  6d. 

Gaii  Institntiomini  Juris  Civilis  Commentarii  Qnattuor ;  or, 

Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius.     With  a  Translation  and  Commentary 
by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1875.     Svo.  i8j. 

Hall  (  W.  E.,  M.A.).     International  Law.     Second  Edition. 

Demy  Svo.  2\s. 

Holland  {T.  E.,  D.C.L.).     The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence. 

Second  Edition.     Demy  Svo.  io.f.  (id. 

The  European  Concert  in  the  Eastern  Question,  a  Col- 
lection of  Treaties  and  other  Public  Acts.  Edited,  with  Introductions  and 
Notes,  by  Thomas  Erskine  Holland,  D.C.L.     Svo.  \2s.  6d. 

Imperatoris  lustiniani  Institutionuni  Libri  Quattuor ;    with 

Introductions,  Commentary,  Excursus  and  Translation.   By  J,  E.  Moyle,  B.C.L., 
M.A.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo.  21s. 

Justinian,   The  Institutes   of,  edited   as   a  recension  of  the 

Institutes  of  Gaius,  by  Thomas  Erskine  Holland,  D.C.L.    Second  Edition, 
1 88 1.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5J. 

Justinian,  Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of.   By  T.  E.  Holland^ 

D.C.L.,  and  C.  L.  Shadwell,  B.CL.     Svo.  14J. 

Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers,  as  follows  : — 

Part  I.  Introductory  Titles.     2s.  (yd.  Part  II.  Family  Law.     is. 

Part  III.  Property  Law.     2s.  6i.       Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  i).    3s.  dd. 

Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  2).     4s.  (>d. 

Markby  (  VV.,  D.C.L.).  Elements  of  Law  considered  with  refer- 
ence to  Principles  of  General  Jurisprudence.  Third  Edition.  Demy  Svo.  12^.6^. 

Twiss  {Sir  Travers,  D.C.L.).    The  Law  of  Nations  considered 

as  Independent  Political  Communities. 
Part  I.  On  the  Rights  and  Duties  of  Nations  in  time  of  Peace.    A  new  Edition, 

Revised  and  Enlarged.  1884.  Demy  Svo.   15^. 
Part  II.  On  the  Rights  and  Duties  of  Nations  in  Time  of  War.     Second  Edition 

Revised.    1875.  Demy  Svo.  2\s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  31 


IX.     MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  &c. 

Bacon^s  Novum  Orgamim.     Edited,  with  English  Notes,  by 

G.  \V.  Kitchin,  D.D.     1855.    8vo.  9J.  f)d. 

Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.     1855.  8vo.  9^.  6d. 

Berkeley.     The    Works  of  George   Berkeley,   D.D.,   formerly 

Bishop  of  ClojTie;    including   many  of  his  writings  hitherto   unpublished. 
With  Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his  Life  and  Philosophy, 
by  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  M. A.   4  vols.     1871.    8vo.  2/.  18^-. 
The  Life,  Letters,  &c.     i  vol.    i6j. 

Selections  from.      With    an    Introduction    and    Notes. 

For  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.     By  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser, 
LL.D.    Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  7j.  6d. 

Fowler  ( T.,  M.A.).    The  Elements  of  Deductive  Logic,  designed 

mainly  for  the  use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.     Eighth  Edition, 
with  a  Collection  of  Examples.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Inductive  Logic,  designed  mainly  for 

the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.   Fourth  Edition.   Extra  fcap.  8 vo.  6s. 
Edited  by  T.  FO'WLER,  M.A. 

Bacon.    Novum  Orgamim.     With   Introduction,   Notes,   &c. 

1878.    8vo.  14J. 
Locke's    Condtict    of  the    Understanding.      Second    Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 


Green  {T.  LI.,  M.A.).     Prolegomena   to   Ethics.      Edited   by 

A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.  \2s.  6d. 

Hegel.  The  Logic  of  Hegel ;  translated  from  the  Encyclo- 
paedia of  the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With  Prolegomena  by  William 
Wallace,  M.A.     1874.    ^vo.  ii,s. 

Lotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books ;   of  Thought,  of  Investigation, 

and  of  Knowledge.     English  Translation;   Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.  8vo.  doth,  1 2s.  6d. 

Metaphysic,   in   Three   Books;    Ontology,    Cosmology, 

and    Psychology.     English   Translation ;    Edited   by   B.   Bosanquet,    M.A. 
8vo.  cloth,  1 2s.  6d. 

Martineau  [James,  D.D.).     Types  of  Ethical  TJicory.     2  vols. 

8vo.  24^. 

Rogers  {J.  E.  Thorold,M.A.).  A  Manual  of  Political  Economy, 

for  the  use  of  Schools.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4?.  6r/. 

Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations.  A  new  Edition,  with  Notes,  by 
J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.     2  vols.  8vo.     1880.  21J. 


32  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

X.    ART,  &c. 

Hullah  [John).      The   Cultivation    of   the    Speaking    Voice. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Ouseley  {Sir  F.  A.  Gore,  Bart.).      A    Treatise  on  Harmony. 

Third  Edition.    4to.  ioj. 

A   Treatise  on  Counterpoint,  Canon,  and  Fngue,  based 

upon  that  of  Cherubini.     Second  Edition.     4to.  i6.f. 

A   Treatise  on  Musical  Form  and  General  Composition. 

4to.   lOJ. 

Robinson  {J .  C,  F.S.A.).   A  Critical  Account  of  the  Drawings 

by  Michel  Angela  and  Raffaello  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     1870. 
Crown  Svo.  4J. 

Ruskin  {John,  M.A.).    A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Art,  delivered 

before  the  University  of  Oxford  in  Hilary  Term,  1870.     Svo.  6s. 

Troutbeck  {J.,  M.A.)  and R.  F.  Dale,  M.A.     A  Music  Primer 

(for  Schools).     Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  u.  6^. 

Tyrwhitt{R.  St.  jf.,  M.A.).     A   Handbook  of  Pictorial  Art. 

With  coloured  Illustrations,  Photographs,  and  a  chapter  on  Perspective  by 
A.  Macdonald.    Second  Edition.     1875.     Svo,  half  morocco,  i8j. 

Vattx  (  IV.  S.  W.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).     Catalogue  of  the  Castellani 

Collection  of  Antiquities  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     Crown  Svo. 
stiff  cover,  \s. 

The  Oxford  Bible  for  Teachers,  containing  supplemen- 
tary Helps  to  the  Study  of  the  Bible,  including  Summaries 
of  the  several  Books,  with  copious  Explanatory  Notes  and  Tables 
illustrative  of  Scripture  History  and  the  characteristics  of  Bible 
Lands;  with  a  complete  Index  of  Subjects,  a  Concordance,  a  Diction- 
ary of  Proper  Names,  and  a  series  of  Maps.  Prices  in  various  sizes 
and  bindings  from  3.y.  to  2/.  5^. 


Helps   lo   the   Shidy   of   the  Bible,    taken    from    the 

Oxford  Bible  for  Teachers,  comprising  Summaries  of  the 
several  Books,  with  copious  Explanatory  Notes  and  Tables  illus- 
trative of  Scripture  History  and  the  Characteristics  of  Bible  Lands  ; 
with  a  complete  Index  of  Subjects,  a  Concordance,  a  Dictionary 
of  Proper  Names,  and  a  series  of  Maps.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  3J.  dd. ; 
l6mo.  cloth,  IS. 

LONDON:   HENRY  FROWDE, 
Oxford    University   Press  Warehouse,    Amen    Corner, 

OXFORD:  CLARENDON  PRESS  DEPOSITORY, 
ii6  High  Street. 

The  Delegates  of  the  Press  invite  suggestions  and  advice  from  all  persons 
interested  in  education;  and  will  be  thankful  for  hints,  ^c.  addressed  to  the 
Secretary  to  the  Delegates,  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


LS' 


K 

B9315 
S23 
1879 
pt.l 


Biihler,   Georg 

The  sacred  laws  of  the 
Aryas  as  taught  in  the 
schools  of  Apastamba 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


i''   i.   -'V.'
