Memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon, Vol. 4 (Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon (Katharine Prescott Wormeley, trans.), 1829)
==========================================================
Saint-Simon's Mémoires (written 1691-1723, first published 1829) - the court of Louis XIV from the inside; the greatest memoirist of the age. Wormeley's English translation (1899-1901; 1909 printing), 4 vols. Vol. 4 of 4.

THE  DUC  de  SAINT-SIMON

Volume  Four

MARIE  ANTOINETTE  EDITION

Limited  to  Six  Hundred  Numbered
and  Registered  Copies ,  of  which  this  is

Number.

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2019  with  funding  from
Kahle/Austin  Foundation

https://archive.org/details/memoirsofducdesa0004sain

ROMANCES  OF  ROYALTY

MEMOIRS

OF  THE

DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON

ON  THE  TIMES  OF

LOUIS  XIV  AND  THE  REGENCY

TRANSLATED  AND  ABRIDGED
BY

KATHARINE  PRESCOTT  WORMELEY

FROM  THE  EDITION  COLLATED  WITH  THE  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT
BY  M.  CHÉRUEL

Editor-in-chief

G.  K.  FORTESCUE,  LL.D.

Keefer  of  Printed  Books  at  the  British  Museum

IN  FOUR  VOLUMES

VOL.  IV.

BOSTON

J.  B.  MILLET  COMPANY

1909

2X2  130  ,  S;?  n  H-  *|  v;.H-

Copyright,  1899,

By  Hardy,  Pratt  &  Company.
All  rights  reserved.

«

©nibttsitg  -jpress  :

John  Wilson  and  Son,  Cambridge,  U.  S.  A.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  I.

Page

The  Duc  d’Orléans  unprepared  for  the  king’s  death.  —  Session  of
Parliament  for  the  regency.  —  The  Duc  du  Maine  arrives.  —  Read¬
ing  of  the  king’s  will  and  codicil.  —  Speech  of  the  regent. — The
will  abrogated  as  to  the  administration  of  the  State.  —  Dispute,  first
public,  then  private,  between  the  regent  and  the  Duc  du  Maine.  —

The  regent  declares  M.  le  Duc  chief  of  the  Council  of  Regency. —

The  session  closes  with  great  applause.  —  Brief  joy  of  the  Maréchal
de  Villeroy.  — The  afternoon  session  ;  speech  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans.

—  The  codicil  abrogated  wholly. — The  regent  invested  with  all
power.  —  Speech  of  the  regent,  indicating  his  course.  —  Madame
asks  one  sole  favour  of  the  regent.  —  The  king’s  heart  taken  to  the
Grands-Jésuites  ;  marvellous  ingratitude.  —  Visit  of  the  regent  to
Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —  Removal  of  Louis  XV.  from  Versailles  to
Vincennes.  —  Obsequies  of  the  late  king.  —  The  prisons  opened  ;
horrors.  —  Cardinal  de  Noailles  made  chief  of  the  council  on  eccle¬
siastical  affairs  — Reception  and  result  of  this  news  in  Paris. —
Reflections.  —  Formation  of  the  Council  of  Regency.  —  Outbreak  of
the  princes  of  the  blood  against  the  claims  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.

—  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  lodged  at  the  Luxembourg.  —  First
Council  of  Regency.  —  Novelties  at  Court .  1

CHAPTER  II.

The  Scotch  project.  —  The  Earl  of  Stair.  —  Stair  urges  the  regent  to
arrest  the  Pretender.  —  The  Pretender  escapes  the  assassins  of
Stair.  —  Balls  at  the  Opera.  —  Reasons  for  keeping  the  Court  at
Versailles;  it  is  kept  in  Paris.  —  I  wish  to  retire  from  Court  after
the  death  of  the  king.  —  The  regent  deceived  about  the  Parliament.

146267

VI

CONTENTS.

Page

—  M.  du  Maine  makes  me  a  visit  without  a  cause.  —  I  return  it,  and
hear  very  singular,  but  very  polite,  remarks. — The  Abbé  Dubois,
Counsellor  of  State  for  the  Church.  —  The  Duchesse  de  Berry
usurps  honours  that  she  does  not  keep.  —  Abandons  herself  to
Rion  ;  who  and  what  he  was.  —  Daily  life  and  personal  conduct  of
the  regent.  —  Religious  enormities.  —  Cabal  which  commits  the
regent  to  England.  —  The  Duc  d’Orléans  never  desired  the  crown.

—  I  urge  upon  the  regent  a  union  with  Spain.  —  Rascality  of  Stair

and  Bentivoglio.  —  The  party  of  the  Unigenitus  make  me  an  odious
proposition.  —  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  walls  up  the  garden  of  the
Luxembourg . 34

CHAPTER  III.

Parliament  opposes  the  edicts  of  the  regent.  —  Law,  called  Lass  ;  his
bank.  —  The  regent  puts  me  in  communication  with  Law  against
my  will.  —  Arouet,  poet  under  the  name  of  Voltaire,  exiled. —
Death  of  Mme.  Guyon.  —  The  king  taken  to  visit  the  Chancellor
Pontchartrain.  —  Assemblies  of  Huguenots;  the  regent  inclined  to
recall  them.  —  I  persuade  him  not  to  do  so.  —  Louville  sent  on  a
confidential  mission  to  the  King  of  Spain. — The  result  of  it. —
Gibraltar  lost  to  Spain.  —  Death  of  Montrevel  from  fear  of  spilt
salt.  —  Marriage  of  the  Duchesse  d’Alba.  —  Bitterness  between
the  princes  of  the  blood  and  the  bastards.  —  Paris  the  sink  of
all  Europe.  —  D’Aguesseau,  procureur-général,  made  chancellor.  —
Career  and  character  of  Chancellor  d’Aguesseau.  —  I  prevent  the
destruction  of  Marly.  —  Illness  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon . 65

CHAPTER  IV.

My  prediction  at  the  Council  of  Regency.  — D’Aguesseau  sends  Cardinal
de  Noailles  and  me  a  memorial  against  the  bull.  —  The  regent
delivered  over  to  the  bull  Unigenitus.  —  Cardinal  de  Noailles  misses
another  grand  stroke.  —  Tête-à-tête  between  the  regent  and  me  in
his  opera-box. — The  regent  puts  me,  against  my  will,  on  a  com¬
mittee  of  finance.  —  I  cause  the  purchase  of  the  diamond  after¬
wards  called  “the  Regent.”  —  The  czar,  Peter  I.,  comes  to  France.
—  Motives  of  the  czar  for  wishing  to  be  a  Catholic.  —  His  arrival
in  Paris.  —  Great  qualities  of  the  czar.  —  His  face,  clothes,  and  food.
— Journal  of  the  czar’s  visit.  —  Goes  to  Versailles,  and  sees  Trianon
and  Marly.  —  Makes  an  insulting  visit  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —  I

CONTENTS.

Vil

Page

go  to  see  the  czar  at  d’Antin’s  house.  —  His  departure;  his  pain  at
the  luxury  of  France;  his  prediction.  —  His  passionate  desire  to
unite  himself  to  France.  —  Why  he  did  not  become  a  Catholic. —
Choice  lesson  of  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  to  the  king.  —  Quarrel  about
the  medals.  —  Hatred  of  the  King  of  England  to  the  Prince  of
Wales . 97

CHAPTER  V.

The  committee  on  finance;  my  proposal  of  reform.  —  Resolutions  of
the  committee  made  an  edict. — Manœuvres  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles
in  regard  to  Law.  —  Intimacy  between  Dubois  and  Law  ;  its  cause.

—  Edict  in  favour  of  the  “Company  of  the  West.”  —  Defeat  of
Noailles  and  the  chancellor.  —  Project  about  the  taille  tax. —

All  good  impossible  in  France.  —  Manœuvres  against  Law  by
Noailles  and  the  chancellor.  —  Law’s  faith  in  his  system.  —  My
conduct  in  this  matter.  —  D’Argenson  chosen  for  the  finance  and
Seals. — I  prepare  d’Argeuson;  why. — The  chancellor  loses  the
Seals  and  is  exiled. — Trifles  between  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  me. —
Death  of  Fagon,  the  late  king’s  physician.  —  The  Abbé  de  Saint-
Pierre  publishes  a  book.  —  Burning  of  a  bridge  in  Paris. — Death
of  the  Queen  of  England.  —  Audacious  action  of  Parliament.  —
Extraordinary  commission  given  to  the  king’s  law-officers. — The
regent  is  drawn  from  his  lethargy.  —  He  forces  me  to  speak  to  him
about  the  Parliament.  —  Measures  of  Parliament  to  capture  and
hang  Law.  —  I  propose  a  lit  de  justice  at  the  Tuileries.  —  The
regent  sends  for  me.  —  He  proposes  to  attack  Parliament  and  the
Duc  du  Maine. — I  oppose  his  attacking  the  Duc  du  Maine;  why.

—  Plans  laid  at  a  conference . 127

CHAPTER  VI.

I  settle  with  Fontanieu  the  secret  arrangements  of  the  lit  de  justice. —

M.  le  Duc  writes  to  me  and  asks  an  interview.  —  Long  conversa¬
tion  between  M.  le  Duc  and  me.  —  I  oppose  the  deposition  of  the
Duc  du  Maine.  —  M.  le  Duc  declares  that  his  attachment  to  the
regent  depends  upon  it.  —  I  render  an  account  to  the  regent  of  my
conversation  with  M.  le  Duc.  —  The  regent  promises  to  hold  firm
against  removing  the  Duc  du  Maine.  —  He  tells  me  that  M.  le  Duc
insists  on  having  the  king’s  education.  —  Conversation  between  the
Comte  de  Toulouse  and  the  regent. — Fontanieu  remedies  the

vin

CONTENTS.

Page

raised  seats.  —  Meeting  between  M.  le  Duc  and  me  in  the  garden
of  the  Tuileries.  —  I  make  a  last  effort  to  prevent  the  attack  on  the
Duc  du  Maine.  —  M.  le  Due’s  reply.  —  M.  le  Due  gives  me  his  word
that  the  bastards  shall  be  reduced  to  their  rank  in  the  peerage.  —

I  propose  to  keep  the  rank  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  unchanged.  —

All  things  foreseen  and  provided  for  the  lit  de  justice.  —  I  confide
the  coming  event  to  the  Duc  de  Chaulnes.  —  Notice  given  of  the
lit  de  justice  at  six  in  the  morning  of  August  26.  —  I  notify  the
Comte  de  Toulouse  of  his  safety.  —  I  arrive  at  the  Tuileries.  —  The
lit  de  justice  promptly  and  secretly  arranged. — Tranquillity  of
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals.  —  The  regent  arrives  at  the  Tuileries.  —
Appearance  of  the  Council.  —  Entrance  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.  —
Entrance  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  —  Colloquies  of  the  Duc  du
Maine  with  others.  —  Colloquy  of  the  regent  with  the  Comte  de
Toulouse.  —  The  bastards  retire  from  the  Council  chamber.  —  The
Council  take  their  seats . 160

CHAPTER  VII.

Speech  of  the  regent.  —  Tableau  of  the  Council.  —  Speech  of  the  regent
and  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals.  —  Opinions  given.  —  Speech  of  the
regent  on  the  reduction  of  the  bastards.  —  Effect  of  the  regent’s
speech.  —  Reading  of  the  declaration;  effect  upon  the  council. —
Votes  taken;  I  abstain  from  voting.  —  Speech  of  the  regent  on  the
reinstatement  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  —  Effect;  the  vote  taken.
—  M.  le  Duc  demands  the  education  of  the  king.  —  Agitation  of
the  council.  —  The  regent  takes  the  votes. —  Maréchal  de  Villeroy
complains  ;  the  regent  launches  a  thunderbolt.  —  Parliament  at¬
tempts  to  refuse  to  obey  the  summons.  —  The  regent  undisturbed;
vote  and  steps  taken.  —  Parliament  arrives  at  the  Tuileries  on  foot.
—  We  go  to  fetch  the  king.  —  The  march  to  the  lit  de  justice. —
I  enter,  and  confide  the  reduction  of  the  bastards  to  certain  peers.
—  The  spectacle  of  the  lit  de  justice.  —  Entrance  of  the  king  ;
calm  and  majestic  bearing  of  the  regent.  —  The  bearing  of  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals.  —  He  opens  this  great  scene  with  a  speech  to
parliament  on  its  duties. —  Consternation  of  the  parliament;  en¬
venomed  speech  of  the  president.  —  Reduction  of  the  bastards  to
their  rank  in  the  peerage.  —  I  decline  in  a  marked  manner  to  vote.
—  Speech  of  M.  le  Duc  demanding  the  education  of  the  king. —
He  obtains  his  demand.  —  Registration  of  all  the  decrees  by  the
lit  de  justice — The  king’s  behaviour;  his  indifference  about  M.  du
Maine.  —  The  lit  de  justice  ends .

193

CONTENTS.

IX

CHAPTER  VIII.

Page

The  regent  forces  me  to  tell  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  of  the  fall  of  her
brothers.  —  I  break  the  news  to  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans.  —  She  dic¬
tates  to  me  a  singularly  noble  letter. —  Conduct  of  the  Comte  de
Toulouse.  —  Clandestine  use  of  secret  registers  by  parliament.  —

M.  le  Duc  takes  charge  of  the  education  of  the  king. — My  rela¬
tions  with  Fleury,  Bishop  of  Fréjus.  —  I  propose  to  Fréjus  an
easy,  novel,  agreeable,  and  useful  way  of  instructing  the  king.  —
Cellamare’s  plot  against  the  regent.  —  His  despatches  captured  at
Poitiers.  —  Cellamare  arrested;  his  conduct.  —  The  other  foreign
ministers  make  no  remonstrance.  —  The  regent  confides  to  me  and
others  that  M.  and  Mme.  du  Maine  are  in  the  conspiracy.  —  We  all
advise  their  arrest. — The  Duc  du  Maine  arrested  at  Sceaux.—

The  Duchesse  du  Maine  arrested  in  Paris.  —  Excellent,  straight¬
forward  conduct  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  —  Forged  papers  pur¬
porting  to  issue  from  the  King  of  Spain. — Distress  of  the  regent
at  the  “Philippiques.” —  Père  Tellier;  I  try  to  help  him;  is  con¬
fined  at  La  Flèche.  —  Ingratitude  of  the  Jesuits.  —  Strange  conduct
of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry.  —  The  sacraments  refused  to  her  by  the
rector  and  Cardinal  de  Noailles. — Death  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;
her  life  at  Saint-Cyr.  —  Curious  but  unintelligible  statement  of
Fleury’s  power  over  the  king . 226

CHAPTER  IX.

The  wonders  of  “  The  Mississippi.”  —  Law  and  the  regent  urge  me  in
vain  to  accept  some.  —  I  refuse,  but  accept  payment  of  an  old  debt.

—  Absurd  but  persistent  theories  of  parliament  as  to  its  power. —

Law  proposes  a  scheme  to  hold  parliament  in  check.  —  I  prevent
the  regent  from  adopting  it.  —  The  Mississippi  madness  ;  all  heads
turned.  —  Diminution  of  specie,  and  recoinage.  — Law  desires  to  be¬
come  a  Catholic  ;  his  converters.  —  Determination  of  the  Duchesse
de  Berry  to  declare  her  marriage  to  Rion.  —  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
goes  to  her  in  her  last  illness.  —  Brief  sketch  of  the  Duchesse  de
Berry;  grief  of  the  regent.  —  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  sends  for
me  to  be  with  him.  — Death  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  ;  illness  of
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon. — La  Muette  given  to  the  king  for  his
amusements.  —  The  regent  wishes  to  make  me  governor  of  the
king. — I  dissuade  him.  —  Confusion  in  the  finances;  Law  made
controller-general.  —  Insecurity  of  Law’s  system  and  bank  isbecom-

X

CONTENTS.

Page

ing  apparent.  —  Inconceivable  prodigality  of  the  regent.  —  Grievous
and  infinite  results.  —  Forced  levies  to  people  the  Mississippi  ;  disas¬
trous  results.  —  Marriage  contract  produced  by  Law’s  system.  —

How  the  Abbé  Dubois  made  himself  Archbishop  of  Cambrai. —

The  Prince  de  Conti  attacks  Dubois  ;  his  consecration.  —  Edict  of
the  Council  of  State,  which  reveals  the  condition  of  the  finances.

—  Is  revoked,  and  leads  to  the  ruin  of  Law.  —  The  “  Company  of
the  Indies  ”  made  a  commercial  company. — Fatal  results  of  that
expedient.  —  Law  leaves  the  kingdom  ;  his  end  ;  his  family  .  .  .  259

CHAPTER  X.

Declaration  for  receiving  the  bull  Unigenitus  read  at  the  Council.  —  Par¬
liament  refuses  to  enregister  it.  —  The  regent  carries  the  matter  to
the  Grand  Council.  —  Nullity  of  that  registration.  —  Death,  fortune,
character,  family,  and  memoirs  of  Dangeau.  —  The  regent  confides
to  me  the  marriage  of  the  king  to  the  infanta.  —  I  obtain  the  em¬
bassy  to  Spain.  —  Dubois  made  cardinal  at  last;  his  conduct  on  the
occasion.  —  His  pectoral  cross;  embarrassment  of  M.  de  Fréjus. —
Conduct  of  Fréjus  toward  the  king,  the  regent,  Yilleroy,  and  the
world. — My  embassy  announced  ;  the  Duc  de  Lauzun’s  advice. —

My  suite  ;  I  leave  Paris  for  Madrid.  —  Passage  of  the  Pyrenees  ;  I
go  to  see  Loyola.  —  Arrived  in  Madrid,  I  make  my  first  bow  to
their  Catholic  Majesties. — Sketch  of  the  King  of  Spain.  —  Sketch
of  the  Queen  of  Spain.  —  Hunting  the  daily  pleasure  of  the  king.

—  Illumination  of  the  Place  Major  wonderful  and  surprising. —
Departure  of  their  Catholic  Majesties  for  Lerma.  —  I  am  lodged
in  the  village  of  Villahalmanza,  near  Lerma.  —  On  my  arrival  I
fall  ill  with  the  small-pox . 292

CHAPTER  XI.

Exchange  of  the  princesses,  January  9,  1722.  —  The  king,  queen,  and
Prince  of  the  Asturias  go  to  meet  the  princess.  — I  go  to  make  my
bow  to  the  princess.  —  Amusing  ignorance  of  Cardinal  Borgia,  who
celebrates  the  marriage  — I  am  made  grandee  of  Spain  of  the  first
class.  —  My  eldest  son  is  made  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece. —

The  Princess  of  the  Asturias  becomes  unwell.  —  Extraordinary
conduct  of  the  princess  to  the  king  and  queen.  —  The  “Peregrine,”
an  incomparable  pearl.  —  Lent  very  grievous  in  the  Castiles. —

I  take  my  audience  of  leave  of  the  king  and  queen,  March  22. —

CONTENTS.

XL

Page

Extraordinary  leave-taking  of  the  Princess  of  the  Asturias.  —  I
leave  Madrid,  and  meet  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon.  —  Long  interview
between  me,  the  regent,  and  Cardinal  Dubois.  —  Marriage  of  my
daughter  to  the  Prince  de  Chimay. — The  Court  returns  perma¬
nently  to  Versailles. — Death  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough. —
Maréchal  de  Villeroy  refuses  to  obey  the  regent.  —  He  is  arrested,
and  taken  to  Villeroy. — The  king  much  distressed. — Extraor¬
dinary  disappearance  of  Fréjus.  —  The  king  consoled  by  the  return
of  Fréjus.  —  Singular  conversation  between  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and
me.  —  Dubois  well  known  to  his  master  ;  incredible  weakness  of
the  regent.  —  Another  strange  conversation  between  the  regent  and
me.  —  Death  of  the  Princesse  des  Ursins.  —  Death  of  Dacier;  his
wife.  —  Death  of  Madame;  her  character . 323

CHAPTER  XII.

1723  ;  sterility  of  the  records  of  this  year  ;  its  cause.  —  The  king  attains
his  majority.  —  The  Council  of  Regency  ends  ;  the  Council  of  State
takes  its  place.  —  Marriage  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  —  The  king
goes  to  Meudon  —  for  the  convenience  of  Cardinal  Dubois.  —  Illness
and  death  of  Dubois;  his  wealth;  his  obsequies. —  Sketch  of
Cardinal  Dubois. — His  crazy  capers;  his  marriage. — The  Due
d’Orléans  greatly  relieved  by  his  death.  —  The  king  appoints  the
Duc  d’Orléans  prime  minister. — Death  of  Mesmes,  president  of
parliament.  —  I  find  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  go  back  to  him,  the
same  as  ever. — Sad  condition  of  his  health.  —  I  warn  Fréjus  of
the  state  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  health.  —  I  exhort  him  to  take  meas¬
ures  in  consequence.  —  Falseness  and  policy  of  that  prelate.  —
Death  of  the  Duc  de  Lauzun.  —  Sudden  death  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans.

—  M.  le  Due  made  prime  minister.  —  Gross  blunder  of  the  Due
de  Chartres. — I  go  to  see  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans.  —  Conversa¬
tion  between  me  and  M.  le  Duc.  —  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  goes  to
Versailles  to  pay  her  court  to  the  king.  —  Intimations  given  to  her.

—  I  am  confirmed  in  the  resolution,  long  taken,  to  retire  to  Paris.

—  Effect  of  the  death  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  on  foreign  countries. —

On  the  king,  the  Court,  the  Church,  Paris,  the  provinces,  and  the
people.  —  Conclusion  :  truth,  self-restraint,  impartiality  ....  354

INDEX  .

391

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page

Philippe,  Due  d’Orleans,  Regent  op  Prance . Frontispiece

By  Monet  (Carl)  ;  from  an  old  engraving  by  T.  Yoyer.

Chapteb

IL  Marie-Louise-Elisabeth  d’Orleans,  Duchesse  de  Berry  48

By  Largillière  (Nicolas  de)  ;  owned  by  Duchesse  de  Bajano,

Paris.

IV.  Peter  the  Great,  Czar  op  Russia . 120

By  Casanova  (Francesco)  ;  in  the  gallery  of  Prince  Lichtenstein,
Vienna.

VI.  Toulouse,  Louis-Alexandre  de  Bourbon,  Comte  de  .  .  168
By  Trinquesse  ;  formerly'  owned  by  the  late  Duc  d’Aumale;
original  now  at  Chantilly.

XII.  Louis  XV.,  in  his  Robes  op  State .

By  Rigaud;  painted  in  1723;  original  at  Versailles.

360

MEMOIRS

OF

THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

i.

The  king’s  death  overtook  the  indolence  of  the  Due
d’Orléans  as  if  it  were  unexpected;  he  was  still  precisely

The  Due  where,  as  we  have  seen,  I  left  him.  He  had

pared  for  the  made  no  progress  m  any  of  the  resolutions

king’s  death.  he  ought  to  have  taken,  either  on  matters  of

business  or  in  the  choice  of  persons.  He  was  now  over¬
whelmed  with  orders  to  give  and  matters  to  regulate  ;  each
more  petty  or  more  commonplace  than  the  others,  hut  all  so
immediately  necessary  that  the  very  case  I  had  predicted
to  him  happened,  —  he  had  no  time  to  think  of  anything
important.

I  heard  of  the  king’s  death  on  waking,  and  went  at  once
to  make  my  bow  to  the  new  monarch.  The  first  wave  had
passed  ;  I  found  myself  almost  alone.  From  there  I  went  to
the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  was  surrounded  in  his  apartments,
where  there  was  not  room  for  a  pin  to  drop  to  the  ground.  I
took  him  aside  into  his  cabinet  to  make  a  last  effort,  which
proved  absolutely  useless,  for  the  convocation  of  the  States-
general.  I  saw  him  again  later  during  the  dinner-hour,  when
he  was  less  overwhelmed  with  people,  and  he  then  acknowl¬
edged  to  me  that  he  had  made  no  lists,  nor  any  choice  except

VOL.  IV.  —  1

2

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

those  of  which  I  have  spoken,  nor  had  he  decided  upon  his
course  about  anything.  It  was  no  time  then  to  blame  or
scold  him.  I  merely  shrugged  my  shoulders  and  exhorted
him  to,  at  least,  be  on  his  guard  against  solicitations  and
the  ministers.  Then  I  put  him  on  the  will  and  the  codicil,
and  asked  how  he  meant  to  conduct  himself  about  them
before  parliament,  where  we  were  to  go  the  next  day  for
the  reading  of  the  two  documents.  He  was  the  firmest
man  in  the  world  in  his  cabinet,  and  the  least  so  elsewhere.
He  promised  marvels  ;  I  again  pointed  out  to  him  the  im¬
portance  of  the  occasion  and  all  that  would  result  for  him.
I  was  with  him  almost  two  hours.

The  next  day,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  we,  the  peers,
went  together  to  the  parliament  with  all  our  carriages  and

The  session  of  cortège  and  suites.  Less  than  half  a  quarter
Parliament  for  0f  an  hour  after  we  were  in  our  seats  the

the  regency.

The  Duc  du  bastards  arrived.  M.  du  Maine  was  bursting
Maine  arrives.  with  joy.  That  expression  seems  strange,  but
his  bearing  cannot  otherwise  be  rendered.  A  smiling,  satis¬
fied  air  covered  an  air  of  confidence  and  audacity,  which  was
visible  nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the  politeness  that  seemed
endeavouring  to  repress  it.  He  bowed  to  right  and  left  and
darted  his  glance  at  every  one.  After  advancing  a  few  steps
he  bowed  to  the  presidents  with  a  jubilant  manner,  which
the  bow  of  the  chief-president,  Mesmes,  reflected  openly.  To
the  peers,  the  gravity,  not  to  say  the  respect,  slowness,  and
depth  of  his  bow  on  all  three  sides,  was  indeed  speaking.  His
head  remained  bent  even  after  he  had  raised  himself  up  —
so  heavy  is  the  weight  of  crimes,  even  at  a  moment  when
triumph  is  no  longer  doubtful.  My  eyes  followed  him
closely,  and  I  remarked  that  on  all  three  sides  the  bows
that  were  returned  to  him  were  stiff  and  short.  As  for  his
brother,  nothing  appeared  in  him  but  his  usual  coldness.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

3

They  were  scarcely  seated  before  M.  le  Duc  arrived,  and,
an  instant  after,  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  After  a  short  silence
I  saw  the  chief-president  say  a  few  words  in  a  low  voice  to
the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  then,  in  a  loud  tone,  send  the  deputa¬
tion  of  parliament  to  fetch  the  king’s  will  and  its  codicil,
which  had  both  been  deposited  in  the  same  place.  Silence
continued  during  this  great  but  short  expectation  ;  each  man
looked  at  the  rest,  but  without  stirring.  We,  the  peers,  were
on  the  lower  seats  ;  the  doors  were  supposed  to  be  shut,  but
the  audience  chamber  was  crowded  with  inquisitive  persons
of  all  qualities  and  stations,  and  the  numerous  suites  of  those
who  took  part  in  the  session.

The  deputation  was  not  long  in  returning.  The  will  and
the  codicil  were  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  chief-president,
who  presented  them,  without  yielding  his  hold

Reading  of  the

king’s  will  and  upon  them,  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  after  which
he  passed  them  from  hand  to  hand  along
the  judges  to  Dreux,  counsellor  of  parliament,  saying  that
Dreux  read  well  and  in  a  loud  voice  which  would  be  heard
by  all  from  his  seat,  which  was  above  that  of  the  presi¬
dents  and  near  the  window  of  the  robing-room.  It  can
be  imagined  in  what  silence  we  listened,  and  how  all  eyes
and  ears  were  fastened  on  the  reader.  Amid  his  joy  the  Due
du  Maine  betrayed  a  troubled  soul;  he  felt  himself  at  the
moment  of  a  great  operation  which  he  had  to  undergo.
The  Duc  d’Orléans  showed  nothing  but  tranquil  attention.

I  shall  not  pause  upon  the  two  documents,  which  related
exclusively  to  the  grandeur  and  power  of  the  bastards,
to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  Saint-Cyr,  to  the  choice  of
education  for  the  king,  and  to  that  of  the  Council  of  Be-
gency,  which  delivered  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  robbed  of  all  au¬
thority,  to  the  unlimited  power  bestowed  upon  the  Duc  du
Maine.  I  observed  a  gloom  and  a  sort  of  indignation  over-

4

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap,  l

spread  all  faces  as  the  reading  went  on,  which  turned  to  a
species  of  voiceless  ferment  when  the  codicil  was  read.
The  Duc  du  Maine  felt  it,  and  turned  pale;  for  his  whole
attention  was  given  to  the  faces  of  those  present;  and  my
eyes  followed  his  while  I  listened,  turning  them  now  and
then  to  the  countenance  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans.

The  reading  over,  the  prince  prepared  to  speak.  Pass¬
ing  his  eyes  around  the  whole  assembly,  he  took  off  Iris
speech  of  the  hat,  replaced  it,  and  said  a  few  words  of  eulogy
Due  d’Orieans.  and  grief  about  the  late  king.  Then,  raising  In¬
voice,  he  declared  that  he  had  nothing  but  approval  for  all
that  related  to  the  education  of  the  young  king,  and  to  an
establishment  so  fine  and  so  useful  as  that  of  Saint-Cyr,  the
arrangements  for  which  had  just  been  listened  to.  But  with
regard  to  the  dispositions  that  concerned  the  government  of
the  State,  he  must  speak  differently  of  those  contained  in
the  will  and  the  codicil.  He  found  it  difficult,  he  said,  to
reconcile  them  with  what  the  king  had  said  to  him  during
the  last  days  of  his  life,  and  with  the  assurances  he  had
publicly  given  him  that  nothing  would  he  found  in  those
arrangements  with  which  he  would  not  he  content  ;  in  con¬
sequence  of  which  the  king  had  subsequently  referred  all
orders  and  the  ministers  themselves  to  him.  The  king  could
therefore  not  have  fully  understood  the  force  of  what  he  had
been  made  to  do  (here  the  Duc  d’Orléans  looked  in  the
direction  of  the  Duc  du  Maine),  inasmuch  as  the  Council  of
Regency  was  chosen,  and  his,  the  regent’s,  authority  so  fixed
by  the  terms  of  the  will  that  no  real  authority  was  left  to
him.  Such  derogation,  he  went  on  to  say,  offered  to  his  right
of  birth,  to  his  attachment  to  the  person  of  the  king,  to  his
love  and  his  fidelity  to  the  State,  was  of  a  nature  not  to  he
endured  with  preservation  of  his  honour;  and  he  trusted
sufficiently  in  the  esteem  of  those  there  present  to  feel  con-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

5

fident  that  his  regency  would  be  declared  by  them  such  as
it  ought  to  be,  namely:  complete,  independent,  with  the
right  to  choose  its  own  Council  (to  which  he  should  not  deny
the  deliberative  voice)  ;  because  he  could  only  discuss  public
business  with  those  persons  who,  being  approved  by  the
public,  possessed  also  his  own  confidence.  This  short  ad¬
dress  seemed  to  make  a  great  impression.

The  Duc  du  Maine  apparently  wished  to  speak.  As  he
took  off  his  hat,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  advanced  his  head  beyond
The  will  abro-  M.  le  Duc  and  said  to  him  in  a  curt  tone  :

gated  as  to  the
administration
of  the  State.

“  Monsieur,  you  will  speak  in  your  turn.”  In
a  moment  the  affair  turned  in  accordance  with

the  wishes  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  The  composition  of  the
Council  of  Eegency  and  its  power  were  overthrown.  The
choice  of  the  Council  was  given  to  the  regent  of  the  king¬
dom,  with  the  full  authority  of  regency,  and  the  decision  on
matters  of  business  only  to  a  plurality  of  the  votes  of  the
Council,  the  vote  of  the  regent  counting  as  two  in  case  of  an
equal  division.  In  this  way  all  favours  and  penalties  were
put  into  the  sole  hands  of  the  regent.  The  acclamations
were  such  that  the  Duc  du  Maine  dared  not  say  a  word.
He  reserved  himself  to  maintain  the  codicil,  which  would
neutralize  all  that  the  regent  had  now  obtained.

After  a  few  moments’  silence  the  Duc  d’Orléans  spoke
again.  He  expressed  surprise  that  the  dispositions  of  the
will  had  not  sufficed  the  persons  who  had  suggested  them  ;
and  he  pointed  out  that,  not  content  with  being  there  made
masters  of  the  State,  they  had  themselves  discovered  certain
clauses  so  peculiar  that,  in  order  to  secure  themselves,  they
needed  something  more  to  make  them  masters  of  the  king’s
person,  of  his  own  person,  of  the  Court  and  of  Paris.  He
added  that  if  his  honour  was  wounded  by  the  will  to  an
extent  which,  it  seemed  to  him,  the  assembly  felt  as  he  did

6

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap,  l

himself,  it  was  still  more  violated  by  the  dispositions  of  the
codicil,  which  left  him  neither  liberty  nor  life  in  safety,  and
placed  the  person  of  the  king  under  the  absolute  control  of
those  who  had  dared  to  profit  by  the  weakness  of  a  dying
monarch  to  wring  from  him  that  which  he  could  never  have
intended.  He  concluded  by  declaring  that  it  was  impossible
to  exercise  the  regency  under  such  conditions,  and  he  doubted
not  that  the  wisdom  of  the  assembly  would  annul  a  codicil
which  could  not  be  maintained,  because  its  dispositions  would
fling  all  France  into  the  greatest  and  most  inevitable  misfor¬
tunes.  While  the  prince  was  speaking  a  grave  and  deep
silence  applauded  him  without  other  expression.

The  Duc  du  Maine,  who  had  turned  all  colours,  began  to
speak,  and  this  time  he  was  allowed  to  do  so.  He  said  that
Dispute,  first  the  education  of  the  king,  and  consequently

public  then  pri¬
vate,  between
the  regent  and
the  Duc  du

his  person,  being  confided  to  him,  it  was  quite
natural  that  he  should  have,  to  the  exclusion
of  all  others,  complete  authority  over  the

Maine.

king’s  household,  civil  and  military,  without  which  he  could
not  undertake  to  serve  him  or  make  himself  responsible  for
his  person.  After  which  he  vaunted  his  attachment,  so  well-
known  to  the  late  king,  who  had  placed  his  sole  confidence
in  it.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  interrupted  him  at  these  words,  to
which  he  demurred.  M.  du  Maine  tried  to  temper  them  by
praises  of  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  who  was  associated  with
him,  but  always  under  him,  in  the  same  duties  and  the  same
confidence.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  replied  that  it  would  be  a
strange  state  of  things  if  the  first  and  most  entire  confidence
were  not  placed  in  him  ;  and  further  that  he  could  not  live
near  the  young  king  under  the  authority  and  protection  of
those  who  had  made  themselves  absolute  masters  both
within  and  without  the  household,  and  of  Paris  itself,  by
the  command  of  the  regiments  of  the  guards.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

7

The  dispute  grew  hot,  and  was  carried  on  in  short  phrases
each  interrupting  the  other,  until,  fearing  the  end  of  an
altercation  that  was  growing  indecent,  I  yielded  to  the
persuasion  of  the  Duc  de  La  Force  (who  leaned  over  to  me
across  the  Duc  de  La  Rochefoucauld,  who  was  seated  be¬
tween  us),  and  made  a  sign  with  my  hand  to  the  Due
d’Orléans  to  go  out  and  finish  the  discussion  in  the  chamber
of  inquests,  which  has  a  door  of  communication  into  the
audience  chamber.  I  was  led  to  do  this  because  I  saw  that
M.  du  Maine  was  getting  stronger  and  muttering  something
about  division  of  authority,  while  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was
not  maintaining  his  rightful  position,  inasmuch  as  he  was
condescending  to  plead  his  cause  against  the  Duc  du  Maine.
He  was  short-sighted,  and  his  mind  was  so  wholly  bent  on
attacking  and  answering  that  he  did  not  see  my  sign.  A
few  moments  later  I  made  it  again,  equally  without  success  ;
then  I  rose,  advanced  a  few  steps,  and  said,  though  still  at
quite  a  distance  :  “  Monsieur,  if  you  were  to  go  with  M.  du
Maine  into  the  chamber  of  inquests  you  could  talk  more
comfortably  there.”  As  I  spoke  I  went  nearer  and  made
him  a  sign  with  my  hand  and  eyes  which  he  was  able  to
distinguish.  He  returned  it  with  a  nod,  and  I  was  hardly
reseated  before  I  saw  him  pass  in  front  of  M.  le  Duc  and
the  Duc  du  Maine,  who  both  rose  and  followed  him  into  the
chamber  of  inquests.  I  could  not  see  who  else  followed
them,  for  the  whole  assembly  rose  as  they  passed  out,  and
then  reseated  itself  in  the  deepest  silence  and  did  not  stir
again.  Some  time  later  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  rose  and
went  into  the  inquest-chamber;  and  shortly  after  the  Due
de  La  Force  did  the  same.

The  latter  was  gone  but  a  short  time.  Returning  to  the
assembly  he  passed  the  Duc  de  La  Rochefoucauld  and  me
and  put  his  head  between  that  of  the  Duc  de  Sully  and

8

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

mine  (because  he  did  not  want  to  be  overheard  by  La
Rochefoucauld),  and  said  to  me:  “In  God’s  name  go  in
there  ;  things  are  going  very  badly.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  is
weakening;  stop  the  dispute,  bring  him  back,  and  make
him  say,  as  soon  as  he  is  seated,  that  it  is  too  late  to  end
the  session  before  dinner,  but  it  will  be  renewed  in  the  after¬
noon.  Then,  in  the  interval,”  added  La  Force,  “  summon  all
the  king’s  lawyers  to  the  Palais-Royal,  talk  with  the  doubt¬
ful  peers  and  with  the  leaders  of  the  pack  among  the
magistrates.”

The  advice  seemed  to  me  good  and  important.  I  left  the
hall  and  went  to  the  chamber  of  inquests.  I  found  a  large
circle,  well  supplied  with  spectators.  The  Comte  de  Tou¬
louse  was  near  the  entrance,  a  little  in  advance,  but  still  in
the  circle.  M.  le  Duc  was  about  the  middle  of  it,  also  in
advance,  and  both  were  at  some  distance  from  the  fireplace,
before  which  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  the  Duc  du  Maine  were
standing  alone,  disputing  with  gestures  but  in  low  tones,
each  of  them  with  an  inflamed  air.  I  considered  the  scene
for  a  few  moments  ;  then  I  walked  towards  the  fireplace
with  the  air  of  a  man  who  has  something  to  say.  “  What
is  it,  monsieur?”  said  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  with  sharp  im¬
patience.  “  A  hurried  word,  monsieur,”  I  replied,  “  that  I
want  to  say  to  you.”  He  continued  to  talk  to  the  Duc  du
Maine,  I  making  almost  a  third  in  their  conversation.  I
renewed  my  appeal.  He  turned  his  ear  to  me.  “Not  here,”
I  said,  taking  his  hand,  “  come  over  there  ;  ”  and  with  that  I
drew  him  to  a  corner.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse,  wTio  was
near  by,  drew  back,  and  so  did  the  whole  circle  on  that  side,
and  the  Duc  du  Maine  behind  them.

I  whispered  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  that  there  was  no  hope
of  gaining  anything  from  M.  du  Maine,  who  would  never
sacrifice  the  codicil  to  any  reasons  ;  that  the  length  of  the

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

9

conference  was  becoming  indecent,  as  well  as  useless  and
dangerous  ;  that  he  was  being  made  a  spectacle  to  all  who  en¬
tered,  and  who  were  looking  at  him  and  watching  ;  and  that
the  only  thing  to  do  was  to  return  to  the  audience-chamber
and  adjourn  the  session  instantly.  “You  are  right,”  he  said,
“  and  I  will  do  it.”  “  But,”  I  said,  “  do  it  at  once  ;  don’t  let
them  entice  you  out  of  it.  It  is  M.  de  La  Force  who  sends
you  this  advice  by  me.”  He  left  me  without  another  word
and  went  to  M.  du  Maine,  to  whom  he  merely  said  that  it
was  late,  and  the  matter  would  be  concluded  after  dinner.

I  still  stood  where  he  had  left  me.  I  saw  the  Duc  du
Maine  make  him  a  bow  and  retire  ;  at  the  same  time  M.  le
Duc  advanced  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  they  talked  together.
The  colloquy  lasted  but  a  short  time  and  was  very  amicable,
though  M.  le  Duc  had  an  eager  air.  As  it  was  necessary
to  pass  close  by  me  to  re-enter  the  audience-chamber,  they
both  came  up  to  me.  At  that  moment  I  became  aware  that
M.  le  Duc  had  asked  the  Duc  d’Orléans  to  appoint  him  to
the  Council  as  its  chief,  inasmuch  as  the  will  was  now
abrogated.  I  think,  though  he  had  not  dared  to  tell  me  of
it,  that  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  already  bound  himself  to  give
the  place,  for  M.  le  Duc  seemed  to  summon  him  to  do  so,
rather  than  ask  it  of  him.  At  any  rate,  the  Duc  d’Orléans
now  told  me  that  he  should  speak  of  the  matter  to  parlia¬
ment  before  adjourning  the  session.  I  bowed  with  an  air
of  congratulation  and  approval  to  M.  le  Duc,  and  we  re¬
entered  the  audience-chamber.1

The  noise  accompanying  such  entrance  having  quieted
down,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  said  it  was  too  late  to  impose  longer

1  Louis-Henri,  son  of  Louis  III.,  Duc  de  Bourbon  (Condé),  and  Louise,
daughter  of  Louis  XIV.  and  Mme.  de  Montespan  ;  born  in  1692  ;  prime
minister  of  Louis  XV.  after  the  death  of  the  regent,  from  1723  to  1726.
He  was  the  last  to  bear  the  distinctive  title  of  “  M.  le  Duc.”  —  Ta

10

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

on  the  assembly;  that  we  must  now  go  to  dinner,  and
return  afterwards  to  finish  the  session;  adding  immedi-
The  regent  de-  ately  that  he  thought  it  proper  M.  le  Due
chiefofuhe'coun-  should  enter  the  Council  of  Eegency  and  take
eu  of  Regency.  hk  position  as  chief  of  it  ;  and  as  the  assembly
had  now  done  him  the  justice  due  to  his  birth  and  his
office  of  regent,  he  should  explain  to  it  what  he  thought
as  to  the  form  that  should  be  given  to  the  government,
expecting  to  profit  by  the  lights  and  the  wisdom  of  the
assembly,  to  which  he  should  henceforth  grant  its  former
right  of  remonstrance.  These  words  were  followed  by  loud
and  general  applause,  and  the  session  adjourned  immediately.

I  approached  the  Duc  d’Orléans  as  he  left  the  hall  and
whispered  in  his  ear  :  “  The  moments  are  precious  ;  I  follow
you  to  the  Palais-Royal.”  When  I  reached  there  I  found
that  curiosity  had  gathered  a  great  crowd,  to  which  were
added  some  who  had  been  spectators  at  the  parliament.
All  those  with  whom  I  was  acquainted  asked  me  eagerly
for  news.'  I  contented  myself  with  replying  that  everything
was  going  well  and  in  due  form,  hut  was  not  yet  finished.
The  Duc  d’Orléans  had  passed  into  his  cabinet,  where  I  found
him  alone  with  Canillac,  who  had  waited  for  him.  We  took
our  measures  at  once.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  sent  for  d’Agues-
seau ,  procureur-général  (afterwards  chancellor),  and  Joly  de
Fleury,  first  avocat-général.  It  was  then  two  o’clock.
Dinner  was  served  on  a  small  table  with  four  covers,  where
Canillac,  Conflans,  first  gentleman  of  the  bedchamber  to  the
Duc  d  Orléans,  and  I  sat  down  with  the  prince.  I  may  men¬
tion  in  passing  that  this  was  the  last  meal  I  ever  took
with  him,  except  one  at  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans’  house  at
Bagnolet.

lhe  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  had  stayed  behind  at  Ver¬
sailles.  He  had  charged  Groesbriant  to  go  to  the  parlia-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

11

Brief  joy  of  the
Maréchal  de
Villeroy.

ment-chamber  and  send  the  news  to  him  frequently.  He  re¬
ceived  three  couriers  following  closely  upon  one  another,  all
bearing  news  that  filled  him  with  such  joy  and
hope  —  him  and  his  former  love,  the  Duchesse
de  Yentadour  —  that  they  felt  no  doubt  of
the  codicil  being  maintained  and  of  the  will  being  vir¬
tually  re-established.  Unable  to  contain  themselves,  they
spread  the  news  of  a  complete  victory  of  M.  du  Maine
over  the  Duc  d’Orléans  all  about  Versailles.  Paris  was
also  misled  in  the  same  way  by  emissaries  of  the  Duc  du
Maine,  who  were  despatched  on  all  sides.  But  their
triumph  was  not  of  long  duration.

We  returned  to  parliament  soon  after  four  o’clock.  I  went
alone  in  my  coach  before  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  found  every
The  afternoon  one  already  in  his  seat.  I  was  looked  at,  so  it
of theDuc PeeCh  seemed  t°  me.  with  great  curiosity  ;  I  don’t
d’Orléans.  know  whether  they  had  learned  where  I  came
from.  I  was  careful  that  my  behaviour  should  show  noth¬
ing.  In  passing  the  Duc  de  La  Force  I  merely  said  that  his
advice  was  salutary,  that  there  was  reason  to  hope  for  all
success,  and  that  I  had  told  the  Duc  d’Orléans  the  thought
was  his  and  he  had  sent  me.  After  the  arrival  of  the  regent,
and  the  tumult  inseparable  from  a  numerous  suite  had
quieted  down,  the  prince  said  that  matters  must  be  taken
up  where  they  were  left  in  the  morning  ;  that  he  must  in¬
form  the  assembly  he  had  come  to  no  agreement  with  M.
du  Maine,  and  he  must  therefore  bring  before  it  once  more
the  monstrous  clauses  of  a  codicil  wrung  from  the  dying
king,  —  clauses  more  strange  than  those  of  the  will  itself,
which  the  court  of  parliament  had  already  adjudged  should
not  be  executed  ;  and  if  so,  neither  should  the  person  of  the
king,  the  Court,  Paris,  consequently  the  State,  be  handed  over
to  the  Duc  du  Maine  ;  nor  yet  the  person,  liberty,  and  life

12

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

of  the  regent,  which  the  Duc  du  Maine  would  be  in  a  posi¬
tion  to  rule  the  moment  he  was  absolute  master  of  the  king’s
household,  civil  and  military.  The  court  of  parliament  must
surely  see  all  that  would  necessarily  result  from  such  an
unheard-of  innovation,  and  he  therefore  relied  upon  its  in¬
telligence,  its  prudence,  wisdom,  equity,  and  love  for  the
State  to  declare  what  it  thought.

M.  du  Maine  now  seemed  as  contemptible  on  the  field  of
battle  as  he  had  been  formidable  in  the  obscurity  of  cahi-
The  codicil  wholly  nets.  He  had  the  air  of  a  condemned  con-

abrogated.  vict  ;  and  his  usually  ruddy  face  was  as  pale

*

as  death.  He  replied  in  a  low  voice  that  was  scarcely
intelligible,  and  with  an  air  as  humble  and  respectful  as  it
was  audacious  earlier  in  the  day.  The  vote  was  taken  with¬
out  listening  to  him,  and  the  complete  abrogation  of  the
codicil  was  passed  as  it  were  with  one  voice.  This  was  done
as  hastily  as  the  abrogation  of  the  will  in  the  morning  ;  both
acts  being  the  result  of  sudden  indignation.  The  king’s
lawyers  ought  to  have  spoken  before  the  vote  was  taken,
and  they  were  there  before  any  one  voted.  Moreover,  the
president  did  not  call  for  the  votes  ;  they  anticipated  the
order  of  proceedings.  D’Aguesseau,  though  procureur-gén¬
éral,  and  Fleury,  avocat-général,  then  spoke,  —  the  first  in
few  words  ;  the  latter  more  at  length  and  making  a  fine
speech.  As  it  exists  in  the  libraries  I  shall  only  say  that
it  was  in  all  ways  and  throughout  favourable  to  the  Due
d’Orléans.

After  they  had  spoken,  the  Duc  du  Maine,  seeing  himself
shorn  of  everything,  tried  a  last  resource.  He  represented,

The  regent  in-  more  vigour  than  might  have  been  ex-

vestedwithau  pected  from  the  appearance  he  presented  at

power.

the  second  session,  but  still  cautiously,  that  if
he  were  robbed  of  the  authority  given  him  by  the  codicil  he

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

13

should  ask  to  be  discharged  from  the  guardianship  of  the
king  and  from  all  responsibility  for  his  person,  retaining  only
the  superintendence  of  his  education.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  at
once  replied,  “  Very  willingly,  monsieur  ;  that  is  all-suffi¬
cient.”  Whereupon  Mesmes,  the  president,  as  completely
crushed  as  the  Duc  du  Maine,  called  for  the  votes.  Each
person  answered  by  agreeing  to  that  conclusion,  and  the
decree  was  made  in  such  shape  that  no  sort  of  power  re¬
mained  to  the  Duc  du  Maine,  who  was  placed  entirely  in
the  hands  of  the  regent,  with  the  right  of  the  latter  to  put
into  the  Council  of  Regency  whom  he  pleased,  and  to  re¬
move  any  as  he  thought  best  ;  also  of  doing  whatever  he
judged  proper  as  to  the  form  to  be  given  to  the  govern¬
ment  ;  authority  in  matters  of  business  only  being  vested  in
the  Council  of  Regency  by  plurality  of  votes,  that  of  the
regent  counting  as  two  in  case  of  an  equal  division.  M.  le
Duc  was  declared  chief  of  the  Council  of  Regency  under
the  regent.

While  the  votes  were  being  taken  and  judgment  delivered
the  Duc  du  Maine  sat  with  his  eyes  lowered,  seemingly  more
dead  than  alive,  and  quite  motionless.  His  son  and  his
brother  gave  no  sign  of  taking  part  in  anything.  The  judg¬
ment  was  received  with  loud  acclamations  from  the  crowd
around  the  audience-chamber,  which  soon  filled  the  rest  of
the  building,  as  the  news  spread  of  what  had  been  decided.

As  soon  as  this  noise,  which  was  rather  prolonged,  had
quieted,  the  regent  made  a  short,  courteous,  and  dignified
speech  of  thanks  to  the  assembly  ;  protesting
regent]  indicating  the  care  with  which  he  should  employ  the  au-
his  course.  thority  thus  given  to  him  for  the  good  of  the

State.  After  which  he  said  it  was  now  time  to  inform  the
assembly  of  the  forms  that  he  thought  necessary  to  establish
to  aid  him  in  the  administration  of  the  State.  He  added

14

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

that  he  did  this  with  all  the  more  confidence  because  what
he  proposed  to  do  was  only  the  execution  of  plans  which
M.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  (it  was  so  he  called  him)  had  re¬
solved  upon,  and  which  were  found  among  his  papers.  He
made  a  short  and  beautiful  eulogy  of  the  ideas  and  intentions
of  that  prince  ;  and  then  announced  that,  besides  the  Council
of  Begency,  which  would  be  supreme,  and  from  which  all  the
decisions  of  the  government  would  emanate,  he  proposed  to
establish  other  councils  :  one  for  foreign  affairs,  one  for  war,
one  for  the  navy,  one  for  financial  matters,  one  for  ecclesias¬
tical  affairs,  and  one  for  the  internal  affairs  of  the  kingdom.
He  proposed  to  select  certain  magistrates  from  the  assembly
before  him  to  enter  the  two  latter  councils  and  assist  them
with  their  ideas  on  the  police  of  the  kingdom,  on  questions
of  jurisprudence,  and  on  all  that  related  to  the  liberties  of  the
Gallican  Church.  The  applause  of  the  magistrates  hereupon
hurst  forth,  and  the  crowd  responded.  The  president  closed
the  session  with  a  very  brief  compliment  to  the  regent,  who
rose,  as  did  the  rest  of  the  assembly,  and  all  departed.

We  must  remember  here  the  very  singular  coincidence  in
the  same  thought  about  these  councils  between  the  Duc  de

Chevreuse  and  me,  which  I  have  related  elsewhere  ;  councils
adopted  and  determined  upon  by  M.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,
and  found,  as  the  regent  had  stated,  among  his  papers.  It
is  difficult  to  render  the  impression  made  by  the  mention  of
that  august  name,  or  to  what  point  the  memory  of  that
prince  seemed  precious,  and  his  person  regretted  and  re¬
spected  with  sincere  veneration.

The  regent  went  straight  from  the  parliament  to  Versailles,
for  it  was  very  late  ;  and  he  wanted  to  see  the  king  before  he

Madame  asks  one  went  to  1)ed’  as  if  to  render  him  an  account  of
what  had  taken  place.  From  there  he  went  to
see  Madame.  She  ran  to  meet  him,  and  em-

sole  favour  of
the  regent.

Ï715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

15

braced  him  in  a  transport  of  joy.  After  the  first  questions
and  congratulations  were  over  she  told  him  she  desired  noth¬
ing  but  the  happiness  of  the  State  through  a  good  and  wise
government,  and  his  own  good  fame  ;  that  she  should  never  ask
him  for  any  favour  save  one,  and  that  one  was  solely  for  his
own  good  and  his  honour  ;  but  she  wanted  his  pledged  word
upon  it,  —  namely,  never  to  employ  in  anything,  however
trifling,  the  Abbé  Dubois,  who  was  the  greatest  knave  and
the  most  utter  scoundrel  that  there  was  in  the  world,  of
which  she  had  ten  thousand  proofs  ;  a  scoundrel  who,  by  dint
of  creeping,  meant  to  thrust  himself  everywhere,  and  would
sell  him,  and  the  State,  too,  for  his  own  interests.  She  said
various  other  things  about  him,  and  pressed  her  son  so  much
that  she  finally  drew  a  positive  promise  from  him  never  to
employ  the  Abbé  Dubois  in  any  way.

I  reached  Versailles  an  hour  later,  and  went  to  see  Mme.
la  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  who  appeared  to  me  to  be  trying  to
seem  glad.  I  avoided  giving  her  details,  on  the  ground  that
I  must  go  and  rest  ;  in  fact,  it  was  really  necessary.  I
learned  the  next  day  of  the  promise  exacted  and  given,  of
the  total  exclusion  of  the  Abbé  Dubois.  We  shall  see  but
too  soon  that  the  promises  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  were  only
words,  or  rather  sounds  that  beat  the  air.

Friday,  Sept.  6,  Cardinal  de  Rohan  carried  the  late  king’s
heart  to  the  Grands- Jésuites  with  very  little  pomp  or  cortège.

Except  such  as  were  actually  on  duty,  not  six

The  king’s  heart

taken  to  the  persons  belonging  to  the  Court  went  to  the
MarvdenousUIteS  Grands- Jésuites  for  the  ceremony.  It  is  not  for
ingratitude.  me,  who,  following  the  example  of  my  father,

never  in  my  life  missed  attending  the  anniversary  of  the
death  of  Louis  XIII.  at  Saint-Denis  (where  I  have  now  gone
for  fifty-two  years,  without  ever  seeing  another  person  pres¬
ent)  to  call  attention  to  this  quick  ingratitude.

16

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

On  the  same  day  the  regent  did  an  action  of  the  rarest
merit  if  the  thought  of  God  had  led  him  to  do  it,  hut  really
visit  of  the  °f  great  unworthiness,  because  religion  had  no
regent  to  Mme.  r)art  in  it,  and  he  ought  to  have  had  too  much

de  Maintenon.  1  ,

respect  for  himself  to  have  shown  to  the  world
so  hastily  what  safety  there  was  in  persecuting  and  reviling
him  in  the  most  persistent  and  cruel  way.  He  went  at  eight
o’clock  in  the  morning  to  see  Mme.  de  Maintenon  at  Saint-
Cyr.  He  was  nearly  an  hour  with  that  enemy  who  had
wanted  to  make  him  lose  his  head  and  had  so  recently
delivered  him  over,  bound  hand  and  foot,  to  the  Duc  du
Maine  by  the  monstrous  terms  of  the  king’s  will  and  codicil.
The  regent  promised  her  during  this  visit  that  the  four  thou¬
sand  francs  which  the  late  king  had  given  her  every  month
should  he  continued.  He  also  told  her  that  if  she  wanted
more  she  had  only  to  ask  for  it  ;  and  he  assured  her  of  his
protection  for  Saint-Cyr,  —  where  all  the  classes  of  young
ladies  were  assembled  for  his  inspection  as  he  left.

It  is  well  to  know  that  besides  the  estate  of  Maintenon
and  other  property  belonging  to  this  famous  and  fatal  witch,
the  establishment  of  Saint-Cyr,  which  had  an  income  of  more
than  four  hundred  thousand  francs  and  much  money  laid  by,
was  hound  by  the  terms  of  its  foundation  to  receive  Mme.  de
Maintenon  if  she  wished  to  retire  there  ;  to  obey  her  in  all
things  as  the  sole  and  absolute  superior  ;  to  maintain  her
and  all  whom  she  brought  with  her  —  servants,  carriages,  and
equipments  —  in  the  manner  she  desired  ;  her  own  table  and
other  food  to  be  supplied  in  the  same  way  ;  and  all  this  at  the
cost  of  the  establishment,  which  engagement  was  punctually
fulfilled  until  her  death.  Thus  she  had  no  need  of  the  liber¬
ality  of  forty-eight  thousand  francs  a  year.  It  would  have
been  enough  if  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  simply  forgotten  her
existence  and  left  her  in  peace  at  Saint-Cyr.

1715]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

17

The  regent  was  careful  not  to  tell  me  of  this  visit,  either
before  or  after  ;  neither  did  I  take  the  trouble  to  reproach
him  and  make  him  feel  ashamed  of  it.  It  made  a  great  talk
in  the  world  and  was  not  approved.  The  Spanish  affair  was
not  forgotten,  and  the  story  of  the  will  and  the  codicil  was
the  topic  of  all  conversations.

Saturday,  September  7,  was  the  day  fixed  for  the  first  lit
de  justice  of  the  young  king  ;  but  as  he  had  taken  cold  dur-
Removai  of  the  ing  the  night  it  was  postponed,  and  parliament,
slnfes  VCr  which  was  about  to  rise  for  its  holiday,  was
vmcennes.  continued  a  week  longer.  The  next  day  the

regent,  who  was  hampered  by  the  life  at  Versailles  because
he  liked  to  live  in  Paris  and  have  his  pleasures  close  beside
him,  proposed  to  remove  the  king  to  Vincennes  ;  but  finding
great  opposition  in  the  Court  physicians  (all  of  them  conven¬
iently  lodged  at  Versailles)  to  the  removal  of  the  king’s  per¬
son,  making  his  little  cold  their  pretext,  he  sent  for  the  Paris
physicians  who  had  been  summoned  to  attend  the  late  king.
They,  having  nothing  to  gain  by  the  Court’s  residence  at
Versailles,  laughed  at  the  other  doctors,  and  on  their  advice
the  king  was  taken,  Monday,  19th,  to  Vincennes,  where  all
was  ready  to  receive  him.

On  the  same  day  the  body  of  the  late  king  was  taken  to
Saint-Denis.  I  have  already  said  that  nothing  was  either
obsequies  of  the  ordered  or  forbidden  about  his  obsequies;  it
late  king.  wag  arranged  to  follow  the  last  example,  in

order  to  avoid  expense,  embarrassment,  and  tedious  ceremo¬
nies.  Louis  XIII.,  in  his  modesty  and  humility,  had  himself
ordered  his  own  funeral  to  be  as  plain  as  possible.  Those
virtues,  together  with  many  others  that  were  Christian  and
heroic,  he  had  not  transmitted  to  his  son.  But  the  prece¬
dent  of  his  example  as  to  the  funeral  was  used,  and  no  one
criticised  the  action  or  thought  it  wrong  ;  so  true  is  it  that

VOL.  IV.  —  2

18

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

personal  attachment  and  gratitude  are  virtues  that  have
flown  to  heaven  with  Astræa  ;  as  had  been  amply  showm  at
the  Grands-Jésuites  a  few  days  earlier  when  the  king’s  heart
was  taken  there,  —  that  heart  that  had  never  loved  any  one,
and  had  been  so  little  loved  itself.  M.  le  Duc,  instead  of  the
Duc  d’Orléans,  who  did  not  feel  himself  obliged  to  go,  headed
the  procession.

The  day  after  the  arrival  of  the  king  at  Vincennes,  the
regent  worked  in  the  morning  with  the  different  secretaries
The  prisons  °f  State,  whom  he  had  ordered  to  bring  him
opened.  Horrors.  pst,s  0f  ap  £}ie  litres  de  cachet  in  their  offices,
with  the  reasons  for  each,  many  of  which  proved  to  be  very
short.  Most  of  the  lettres  de  cachet  for  exile  or  imprison¬
ment  had  been  issued  for  Jansenism  and  in  consequence  of
the  bull  Unigenitus  ;  many  of  them  for  reasons  known  to  the
king  alone  and  those  who  had  caused  them  to  be  issued  ;
others  came  down  from  the  time  of  preceding  ministries,
among  them  many  now  wholly  unknown  and  long  forgotten.
The  regent  set  all  these  persons  at  liberty,  both  exiles  and
prisoners,  except  such  as  were  condemned  for  actual  crimes,
bringing  endless  benedictions  on  his  head  for  an  act  of  jus¬
tice  and  humanity.  Very  singular  tales  were  told  in  con¬
sequence  ;  some  of  them  very  strange,  making  the  public
deplore  the  misery  of  the  victims  and  the  tyranny  of  the  last
reign  and  its  ministers.  Among  those  who  were  found  in
the  Bastille  was  a  man  arrested  thirty-five  years  earlier  on
the  day  he  arrived  in  Paris  from  Italy,  where  he  belonged
and  whence  he  came  to  travel.  It  was  not  known  why  he
was  arrested  or  whether  he  had  ever  been  interrogated  ;  as,
in  fact,  was  the  case  with  many  others.  He  was  thought  to
have  been  imprisoned  by  mistake.  When  told  that  he  had
his  liberty,  he  asked  sadly  what  he  should  do  with  it.  He
said  he  had  not  a  sou,  that  he  knew  no  one  in  Paris,  not

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

19

even  a  single  street,  nor  a  soul  in  France  ;  that  his  relations
in  Italy  were  apparently  dead  since  he  left  them,  and  his
property  had  probably  been  divided  up  during  the  many
years  when  they  had  heard  nothing  of  him  ;  in  short,  he
knew  not  what  to  do  with  himself.  He  asked  to  be  allowed
to  remain  in  the  Bastille  for  the  rest  of  his  days  with  food
and  lodging.  This  was  granted  him,  with  all  the  liberty  he
chose  to  take.  As  for  those  who  were  taken  from  dungeons
where  the  hatred  of  the  ministers,  the  Jesuits,  and  the  pro¬
moters  of  the  hull  had  consigned  them,  the  horror  of  the
state  in  which  they  were  found  dismayed  every  one  and  made
credible  all  the  cruelties  which  they  related  as  soon  as  they
were  fully  at  liberty.

During  the  first  days  after  we  took  up  our  residence  in
Paris,  that  is  to  say,  as  soon  as  the  king  was  at  Vincennes,
the  councils  were  discussed  between  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and
me.  It  was  not  without  some  reproach  on  my  part  that
these  selections  had  still  to  be  made.  He  began  to  talk
doubtfully  about  the  place  of  president  of  the  finances,  though
he  had  promised  it  to  the  Duc  de  Nouilles,  as  I  have  already
said,  before  the  death  of  the  king.  Although  by  this  time  I
had  reason  to  know  what  to  expect  personally  from  that
gallant  man,  I  felt  I  owed  more  to  the  State  and  to  our  origi¬
nal  plan  than  to  myself.  I  still  thought  him  capable  of  good
work,  trained  as  he  was  for  two  years  by  Desmarets.  His
wealth  and  his  great  resources  assured  me  of  his  having
clean  hands;  also  his  ambition  and  his  great  efforts  to  do
well  made  him,  as  I  thought,  fit  for  so  important  a  place,
where  I  wanted  a  seigneur,  and  for  which  I  saw  none  to
equal  him.  I  therefore  confirmed  the  Duc  d’Orléans  in  his
intention  to  give  it  to  him.

At  the  same  time  I  managed  to  fortify  the  regent  against
the  efforts  that  were  being  made  to  destroy  Cardinal  de

20

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

Noailles.  Cardinals  de  Rolian  and  de  Bissy,  the  Nuncio
Bentivoglio,  and  the  other  promoters  of  the  hull,  were  in  the
deepest  anxiety  as  to  the  treatment  Cardinal
Noaiiies  made  (Je  Noailles  might  receive  after  the  death  of
cil  on  ecciesiasti-  the  king.  They  were  dying  of  fear  lest  he
cai  affairs.  should  be  placed  at  the  head  of  ecclesiastical

affairs  ;  they  moved  heaven  and  earth  to  prevent  it  ;  they
called  for  help  from  every  one  ;  they  asked  of  the  principal
personages  protection  for  religion  and  “  the  good  cause.”
Bissy  came  to  me,  quite  distracted,  before  we  left  Ver¬
sailles,  and  I  answered  him  with  frigid  modesty.  One
evening,  when  there  was  a  large  but  select  company  at  the
Duc  d’Orléans’  soon  after  our  settlement  in  Paris,  I  saw  the
Duc  de  Noailles  talking  to  Canillac,  and  both  of  them
glancing  at  me.  Immediately  after,  Canillac  came  to  me
and  took  me  aside  to  represent  the  danger  of  delay  in  de¬
claring  Cardinal  de  Noailles  head  of  the  council  of  con¬

science,  or  ecclesiastical  affairs  (the  council  bore  both  names),
the  movements  and  intrigues  of  the  opposing  party,  and  the
embarrassing  position  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  if  he  gave  time
for  the  pope  to  write  him  a  friendly  brief,  asking  as  a  favour
that  Cardinal  de  Noailles  should  not  be  placed  at  the  head
of  that  council.  This  argument  struck  me  forcibly  ;  I  agreed
with  Canillac  that  there  was  no  time  to  lose.  He  proposed
to  me  to  speak  on  the  instant  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  I
did  so  a  moment  later.  I  made  him  afraid  of  the  predica¬
ment  of  either  disobliging  the  pope  or  of  giving  him  a  footing
on  which  to  meddle  in  the  internal  affairs  of  the  govern-
ment,  —  a  precedent  which  would  certainly  result  in  danger¬
ous  consequences.  He  felt  this,  but  seemed  reluctant  to  end
the  matter.  I  then  proposed  to  him  (to  avoid  all  other  in¬
fluence)  to  declare  at  once  the  offices  of  the  Due  and  Car¬
dinal  de  Noailles  ;  to  call  the  duke  up  then  and  there,

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

21

announce  the  appointments  aloud  before  the  assembled
company,  and  tell  the  duke  to  go  and  tell  his  uncle.  The
regent  still  hesitated;  I  urged  him,  and  carried  the  point.
He  called  to  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  and,  going  nearer  to  the
company,  he  made  the  announcement.

The  news  resounded  immediately  in  the  Palais-Royal,  and
by  evening  throughout  all  Paris.  The  next  day  every  one
Reception  and  knew  it,  and  the  joy  and  plaudits  seemed  to
7Z:l?Pl™r  be  universal  ;  but  the  grief  and  wrath  of  the
ment-  opposite  party,  once  so  large  and  so  trium¬

phant,  now  reduced  in  numbers  and  credit,  were  extreme.
The  thanks  of  the  cardinal,  which  he  offered  to  the  regent  on
the  following  day,  concluded  the  matter.  It  was  high  time.
The  request  of  the  pope  was  already  determined  upon.  He
changed  his  letter  to  complaints,  but  they  were  mild.  The
regent  replied  more  mildly  still,  but  with  firmness  as  to  the
matter  itself,  mingled  with  many  compliments  and  much
respect.  The  power  of  temporal  interests  over  matters
ecclesiastical  was  then  seen  plainly  ;  and  very  transparent
was  the  thin  gauze  of  that  mantle  of  religion  which  covers
so  much  ambition,  so  many  cabals,  intrigues,  and  infamies.
The  “  good  cause  ”  on  which  under  the  late  king  faith  and
religion  itself  seemed  to  depend,  —  that  of  the  bull  which  had
obscured  the  gospel  and  made  it  of  little  account  in  com¬
parison  with  itself  (and  what  I  say  is  not  exaggerated),  —  that
“  cause  ”  changed  all  of  a  sudden  in  its  relation  to  the  party
of  unbelievers,  rebels,  schismatics,  proscribed  and  exiled
heretics,  whose  noblest  heads  were  dispersed  and  banished
or  cast  into  prisons  and  dungeons  without  any  tribunal
taking  cognizance  of  their  cases,  or  any  relief  such  as  justice
and  humanity  vainly  demanded  for  them.  This  one  great
stroke  of  the  return  of  Cardinal  de  Noailles  and  his  friends
to  power  on  the  death  of  the  king  cast  down  their  enemies,

22  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  l

sufficed  to  write  upon  their  foreheads  the  ignominy  of  their
ambition,  their  plots,  their  violence  ;  it  revealed  their  hull  as
the  opprobrium  of  religion,  the  enemy  of  true  doctrine,  of
Holy  Writ,  of  the  Fathers,  and  their  “  cause”  as  odious  and
dangerous  to  religion  and  the  State.

Twenty-four  hours  sufficed  for  this  great  change  ;  fifteen
days  completed  it.  Grass  had  grown  in  the  archbishop’s
courtyard  ;  no  one  ventured  there,  save  a  few  trembling
Nicodemuses  in  terror  of  the  synagogue.  In  a  moment,
men  turned  that  way  ;  in  the  next  they  rushed  there.  All
the  bishops  who  had  prostituted  themselves  to  the  king,  all
the  priests  of  the  second  class,  who  had  thrust  themselves
forward  to  make  their  way,  all  the  people  of  the  world  who
had  been  most  eager  to  ingratiate  themselves  by  supporting
the  ecclesiastical  dictators,  were  not  ashamed  to  swell  the
court  of  Cardinal  de  Noailles;  and  there  were  even  some
who  were  impudent  enough  to  endeavour  to  make  him
believe  they  had  always  loved  and  respected  him,  and  that
their  conduct  was  innocent.  He  himself  was  ashamed  for
them.  He  received  them  all  like  a  true  father  ;  showed  no
coldness  to  any  but  those  whose  duplicity  was  manifest;
and  even  to  them  no  bitterness  or  complaint.  He  was  little
moved,  in  fact,  by  the  sudden  change,  which  he  regarded
as  the  pledge  of  another  should  the  favour  now  shown  to
him  cease.

The  complete  prostration  of  his  enemies  was  incredible.
It  showed  that  they  had  nothing  to  rely  on  but  an  arm  of

flesh;  of  which  they  were  so  well  convinced

Reflections.  J

that  after  their  first  bewilderment  the  most
rabid  of  them  gathered  together  once  more,  trying  to  con¬
jure  the  storm  and  to  return  in  time  to  the  place  whence
they  had  fallen,  by  the  same  intrigues  which  had  put  them
there  in  the  first  instance.  God,  who  tests  his  people,  whose

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

23

reign  is  not  of  this  world,  for  which  our  Lord  declared  he
did  not  pray,  was  pleased  to  bring  the  plots  of  that  same
world  to  an  end,  although  the  smiling  prospect  had  but  short
duration.

All  the  other  councils  being  chosen,  it  was  necessary  to  come
to  that  of  the  Eegency,  the  formation  of  which  was  far  more

difficult.  It  ought  to  have  been  composed  of
few  members,  to  make  it  the  more  august,  but
there  were  several  personages  openly  inimical

Formation  of  the
Council  of
Regency.

to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  or  suspected  of  being  so,  whose  station
did  not  allow  of  their  being  excluded.  These  were  the  Due
du  Maine,  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  Maréchal  Villeroy,  Maré¬
chal  d’Harcourt  (who  had  refused  the  place  offered  to  him  as
head  of  the  council  of  the  interior),  and  Chancellor  Yoysin,
to  whom  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  made  the  enormous  mistake
of  promising  that  he  should  keep  the  Seals.  Toulouse  and
Harcourt  were  only  suspected,  but  very  much  so,  —  the
former  from  his  position  and  through  his  brother,  different
as  he  was  from  him  ;  the  latter  because  of  his  former  inti¬
macy  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  Princesse  des
Ursins.  The  others  were  open  enemies.  It  was  therefore
necessary  to  counterbalance  them  by  persons  who  were  sure
for  the  regent  and  also  of  a  character  and  station  to  make
them  listened  to  in  the  Council,  to  which  all  matters  within
and  without  the  kingdom  were  reported  by  the  other  councils
and  decided,  in  the  last  resort,  by  plurality  of  votes.  It  was
necessary  also  to  take  into  consideration  that  the  opinion  of
M.  le  Duc,  though  at  present  it  had  little  weight,  would
grow  weightier  with  age,  and  might,  through  self-interest
and  cabals,  be  readily  turned  against  the  regent.

The  fatal  pliancy  of  the  Duc  d’Orleans  was  such  in  this
matter  of  great  importance  that  he  yielded  to  the  persuasions
of  Maréchal  de  Besons  to  change  him  from  the  council  of

24

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap,  l

war,  where  the  good-nature  of  the  regent  had  placed  him,  to
the  Council  of  Regency.  Besons  was  a  rough  boor,  who  had
run  away  from  his  father  when  he  wanted  to  put  him  in
the  Church,  to  enlist  among  the  troops  sent  clandestinely  to
Portugal,  where  he  carried  a  musket.  Being  recognized  by
emissaries  from  his  father,  he  was  soon  made  an  officer  and
served  with  diligence.  This,  with  the  Latin  he  knew  before
he  enlisted,  was  all  the  education  he  ever  had.  He  was  a
good  general  officer  ;  knew  very  well  how  to  lead  a  cavalry
wing,  and  understood  certain  details  ;  though  his  boorishness
and  high  temper  hindered  him  quite  often  from  seeing  and
comprehending  as  he  should  have  done.  Anything  more
than  this  was  beyond  his  capacity,  as  was  proved  more  than
once  when,  by  chance,  he  had  an  army  to  command.  With
a  temper  that  was  intolerable  and  very  little  intelligence,  he
was  personally  brave  and  knew  what  honour  was;  but  he
was  also  awkward  in  every  way,  extremely  cautious  towards
every  one,  with  a  great  passion  for  being  and  having  ;  very
coarse  and  very  dull,  though  not  lacking  in  a  certain  petty
spirit  of  short  intrigue,  in  which  he  showed  judgment.  He
had  the  head  of  a  lion,  very  large  with  flopping  lips,  in¬
cased  in  a  huge  wig  that  would  have  made  a  good  study  for
Rembrandt  ;  and  this  head,  seeming  to  be  of  one  piece  with
his  body,  was  thought  by  fools  to  be  a  sound  one.  He  was
not  a  personage  to  pit  against  any  one  in  a  Council  of  Re¬
gency.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  let  me  see  he  was  ashamed  of  the
promise  he  had  given  ;  as  for  me,  I  was  much  annoyed  to
find  myself  harnessed  with  such  a  man.

Another  man  whom  the  regent  put  into  the  Council  of
Regency,  about  whom  he  was  much  embarrassed  to  inform  me
and  only  let  me  know  it  by  degrees,  was  Torcy,  to  the  amaze¬
ment  of  all  France.  He  had  always  been  allied  with  those
who  were  most  opposed  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  if  we  except

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

25

the  latter’s  two  worst  enemies,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the
Duc  du  Maine.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  had  had  many  reasons
to  complain  of  him,  and  until  after  the  death  of  the  king
neither  he  nor  his  wife  had  held  any  intercourse  with  him.
I  myself  was  strongly  persuaded  of  Torcy’s  opposition  to  the
Duc  d’Orléans.  I  was  prejudiced  against  him,  I  admit  it
frankly,  by  the  sentiments  the  Ducs  de  Chevreuse  and  de
Beauvilliers  cherished  against  him,  although  their  reasons  for
this  aversion  related  only  to  the  affairs  of  Rome.  I  had  never
had  with  Torcy  and  his  wife  anything  more  than  a  slight
acquaintance,  far  less  any  intimacy  ;  and  (if  truth  requires
that  nothing  should  be  hidden),  as  they  had  only  the  best
and  most  select  company  at  their  house,  my  vanity  was  not
pleased  at  never  receiving  the  slightest  advance  on  their  part.
Torcy  was,  moreover,  a  man  of  the  old  ministry,  and,  in  my
desire  to  do  away  with  the  secretaries  of  State  and  their  power,
he  was  not,  of  course,  to  my  mind.  I  had  often  urged  the  Due
d’Orléans  to  exclude  him,  and  though  he  would  never  answer
me  on  that  point  as  clearly  as  I  wished,  I  still  hoped  for  his
exclusion,  and  was  working  for  it  when  the  regent  let  me
see  I  need  not  count  upon  him.  I  redoubled  my  efforts,
until  at  last  he  owned  to  me,  with  great  embarrassment,  that
he  thought  him  necessary,  in  order  to  obtain  the  secrets  of
foreign  affairs  during  the  many  years  Torcy  had  been  the
minister  of  them,  and  also  the  secrets  of  the  post-office,  which
he  could  not  do  without.  This  was  really  what  led  him  to
retaining  Torcy.  It  will  be  seen  in  the  end  how  fully  I
recognized  my  error,  and  the  close  intimacy  which  esteem,
that  I  shall  venture  to  call  mutual,  produced  between  Torcy
and  myself,  which  has  lasted  until  this  present  time,  namely,
March,  1746.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  had  always  intended  to  put  a  bishop
into  the  Council  of  Regency.  I  thought  myself  that  he

26

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  l

could  do  without  one.  My  opinion  was  that  of  the  late  king,
and,  I  believe,  that  of  every  sensible  man,  especially  during
the  fire  of  the  Unigenitus.  The  interests  of  the  late  Arch¬
bishop  of  Cambrai,  urged  upon  me  by  the  immense  influence
of  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers,  had  kept  me  from  opposing  that
desire,  so  that  after  the  death  of  those  two  personages  I  had
no  time  to  do  so  successfully.  I  sought  therefore  for  the
least  bad  and  most  hopeful  choice  that  could  be  made  ;  and
I  proposed  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  the  former  Bishop  of  Troyes.

We  have  seen  who  and  what  he  was  at  the  beginning  of
these  Memoirs,  where  I  enlarged  upon  him  on  the  occasion
of  his  retirement  from  the  world.  At  the  age  I  then  was,  I
had  scarcely  more  than  seen  his  face  and  had  never  known
him  personally  ;  but  from  what  I  heard  then  he  now  seemed
to  me  expressly  made  for  the  Council  of  Regency  ;  I  felt  that
here  was  a  prelate  profoundly  wise  as  to  the  temporal  affairs
of  the  clergy,  versed  in  those  of  Rome,  withal  a  [Frenchman,
and  possessing  enough  ecclesiastical  learning.  This  was  his
reputation.  He  had  moreover  spent  Ms  life  until  his  retire¬
ment  in  the  great  world  of  the  Court  and  city;  welcomed
in  the  best  and  most  important  circles  ;  a  friend  of  most  of
the  great  personages  and  of  the  principal  women  of  his  time,
with  whom  he  had  mingled  in  many  matters.  This  great
knowledge  of  the  world  was  a  great  point.  He  was  a  bishop
without  a  diocese,  who  thought  of  nothing  so  little  as  of
coming  back  to  the  surface.  At  Troyes  he  saw  no  one  and
lived  with  his  nephew  ;  when  the  nephew  visited  Paris
he  moved  to  a  room  in  the  monastery  of  Troyes,  where  he
also  saw  no  one  but  the  monks  and  was  assiduous  at  their
services.  He  also  passed  all  Lents  and  Advents  with  them.

Such  a  life,  grafted  on  one  of  the  great  world  solely  by
choice,  and  so  well  sustained,  seemed  to  me  calculated  to
have  much  weight  in  restraining  the  license  of  the  life

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

27

of  the  regent.  He  had,  moreover,  no  connection  whatever
with  any  cabal.  All  these  things  led  me  to  believe  he
was  expressly  fitted  for  the  place,  inasmuch  as  a  bishop  was
thought  to  be  needful.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  approved  the
choice  and  made  it.  Nothing  was  ever  more  applauded.
The  bishop  was  sent  for  ;  he  arrived,  and  he  accepted,  with¬
out  affectation.  The  world,  which  nearly  always  expects
more  of  good  people  than  is  fair,  would  have  liked  him  to
hold  back,  or  even  to  refuse  altogether.  The  beginnings
were  admirable.  He  attended  only  to  his  necessary  duties.
I  congratulated  myself  on  having  thought  of  him.  But  all
these  marvels  were  of  short  duration  ;  I  was  as  much  mis¬
taken  about  him  as  I  was  about  Torcy,  but  in  the  opposite
direction.  It  is  not  yet  time,  however,  to  talk  of  that.

The  Council  of  Regency  was,  when  completed,  composed
of  the  following  members,  in  their  order  of  precedence  :  M.
le  Duc  d’Orléans,  M.  le  Duc,  the  Duc  du  Maine,  the  Comte
de  Toulouse,  Voysin,  chancellor,  myself,  since  I  must  name
myself,  the  Maréchals  de  Villeroy,  d’Harcourt,  and  de  Besons,
the  former  Bishop  of  Troyes,  and  Torcy  ;  with  La  Yrillière
to  keep  the  records,  and  Pontchartrain,  —  the  two  latter
without  votes.  Those  who  came  to  report  from  the  other
councils  were  :  the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux  from  the  council
of  conscience,  a  man  who  had  never  been  subjected  by  the
promoters  of  the  bull;  the  Maréchals  de  Yillars,  d’Estrées,
and  d’Huxelles,  from  the  councils  of  war,  navy,  and  foreign
affairs  ;  the  Ducs  de  Noailles  and  d’Antin  from  those  of  the
finances  and  the  interior.  We  can  now  see  on  whom  and  on
how  much  the  regent  could  count  as  friends,  enemies,  and
neutrals.  It  resulted,  however,  in  the  Council  being  almost
always  tranquil,  and  the  regent  left  master  of  everything.

Yillars,  second  maréchal  of  France,  the  most  completely
lucky  of  all  the  millions  of  men  born  under  the  long  reign

28

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

of  Louis  XIV.,  was  made  chief  of  the  council  of  war,  because
in  his  brilliant  position  it  could  not  be  otherwise  as  soon  as
Villeroy,  the  senior  maréchal,  left  the  way  open  to  him  by
his  own  selection  as  head  of  the  council  of  finance,  besides
his  other  employments  named  in  the  king’s  will.  We  have
seen  his  character  already,  and  the  reasons  why  Mme.  Scarron,
on  becoming  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  never  failed  to  protect  him.
His  mother,  a  tiny,  shrivelled  old  woman,  all  mind  and  no
body,  who  had  lately  died  at  eighty-six  years  of  age,  was  the
most  surprised  person  of  all  at  the  amazing  good  fortune  of
her  son.  She  was  spicy,  amusing,  and  malicious,  with  a  fund
of  incomparably  pithy  sayings,  lightly  as  they  seemed  to
touch.  Although  she  tried  to  conceal  it,  the  little  that  she
thought  of  her  son  was  quite  apparent  ;  she  always  advised
him  to  talk  much  of  himself  to  the  king  only,  never  to
others.  But  none  of  the  heads  of  the  councils  who  reported
to  the  Council  of  Regency  (except  d’Antin,  who  excelled  in
doing  so),  were  more  fit  for  the  work  than  Villars.  I  will
give  an  instance  concerning  the  maréchal  himself,  which
will  show  how  much  the  public  business  suffered  in  con¬
sequence.

Villars,  who  wrote  such  a  villanous  hand  that  no  one
could  read  it,  came  to  the  Council  of  Regency  with  a  ruling
of  the  council  of  war  in  forty  or  fifty  articles,  relating  to
rations,  forage,  magazines,  the  marching  of  troops  about  the
kingdom,  with  other  details.  He  read  the  document  article
by  article,  on  which  each  member  of  the  Council  gave  his
opinion,  making  changes  in  several,  which  Villars  wrote
down  on  the  margin.  When  the  reading  was  finished,  the
regent  told  the  maréchal  to  read  over  each  article  with  the
notes  he  had  just  appended,  to  see  if  all  was  clear,  and
whether  it  was  necessary  to  add  or  to  change.  Villars,  who
was  next  to  me,  read  out  the  first  article,  but  when  it  came

1715]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

29

to  his  notes  he  looked  at  them  this  way  and  that,  turning  in
vain  to  the  light,  and  finally  asked  me  to  look  and  see  if  I
could  make  out  what  they  meant.  I  laughed,  and  asked
him  if  he  thought  I  could  do  better  than  himself  at  his  own
writing,  which  he  had  just  that  moment  written.  Everybody
laughed  ;  at  which  he  was  not  in  the  least  embarrassed.  He
proposed  to  send  for  his  secretary,  who  was,  he  said,  in  the
antechamber,  and  knew  how  to  read  his  writing,  because  he
was  accustomed  to  it.  The  regent  said  that  that  could  not
be  allowed  ;  and  we  all  looked  at  each  other,  laughing,  and
not  knowing  how  to  get  out  of  the  difficulty.  Finally,  the
regent  said  there  was  nothing  to  do  but  begin  all  over  again  ;
and  he  ordered  me  to  take  a  pen  and  write  the  notes  and
opinions  as  each  one  gave  them  ;  which  doubled,  of  course,
the  length  of  the  affair.  It  is  true  it  was  only  time  ridicu¬
lously  lost  ;  but  the  evil  was  much  greater  when  the  reports
themselves  came  in,  so  long  and  so  badly  prepared  that  none
of  us  could  fully  understand  them,  and,  consequently,  we
could  not  wisely  decide  the  matters  they  concerned.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  scarcely  through  the  first  em¬
barrassments  in  which  he  had  allowed  himself  to  be  placed
„  ,  ,  when  another,  of  importance,  arose.  I  shall

Outbreak  of  the  ’  r

princes  of  the  merely  note  here  the  epoch  of  its  beginning,
claims  of  the  Due  because  its  consequences  are  not  of  the  present
du  Maine.  moment.  The  suit  as  to  the  inheritance  of

M.  le  Prince  was  still  going  on.  In  an  affidavit  which  the
Duc  du  Maine  was  called  upon  to  make  he  assumed  the
quality  of  prince  of  the  blood,  as  he  was  authorized  to  do  by
the  declaration  of  the  late  king,  registered  by  parliament,
which  gave  it  to  him,  and  permitted  him  to  use  it  in  all
deeds  and  otherwise,  both  him  and  his  children,  and  also  the
Comte  de  Toulouse.  Mme.  la  Duchesse  and  M.  le  Duc,
who  had  never  dared  breathe  a  word  while  the  late  king

30  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

lived,  made  a  great  disturbance  and  declared  that,  whatever
protection  the  Duc  du  Maine  assumed  to  draw  from  that
declaration,  it  gave  him  no  right  to  qualify  as  prince  of  the
blood  with  the  true  princes  of  the  blood,  or  to  take  any
judicial  or  legal  action  as  such  in  a  suit  with  them.  They
drew  in  the  Princesse  de  Conti  and  her  son  to  make  common
cause  with  them  in  this  question,  although  the  latter  were
united  with  M.  and  Mme.  du  Maine  by  community  of  interest
in  the  suit  against  M.  le  Duc  for  the  inheritance  of  M.  le
Prince.  The  uproar  was  great  ;  the  regent  tried  to  pacify  it  ;
we  shall  see  the  results  hereafter.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry  now  established  herself  in  the
Luxembourg  with  her  little  Court.  An  effort  was  made  to

The  Duchesse  de  l°dge  us  there  conveniently,  Mme.  de  Saint-
Berry  lodged  at  Simon,  and  myself  ;  but  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,

the  Luxembourg.  tit  tt

who  had  never  been  able  honourably  to  quit
the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  seized  this  occasion  to  live  as  much
apart  from  her  as  was  possible,  bio  place  was  found  in  the
Luxembourg  where  we  could  be  comfortably  lodged  to¬
gether  and  we  therefore  continued  to  live  in  our  own  house
in  Paris.  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  insisted,  however,  that
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  should  have  a  lodging  at  the  Luxem¬
bourg  ;  but  she  did  not  furnish  it  or  even  set  foot  in  it.  She
never  went  to  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  in  the  mornings,  unless
there  were  audiences  or  some  ceremony,  but  usually  in  the
evenmgs,  at  the  hour  for  cards,  when  ladies  were  not  re¬
quired  to  present  themselves  in  full  dress,  and  were  often
retained  to  sup  with  the  Duchesse  de  Berry.  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon  almost  never  supped  there.  We  had  company  every
day  to  dinner  and  supper,  as  for  years  we  had  usually  had.
Very  rarely  she  attended  the  duchess  on  her  drives  and  visits,
unless  when  she  went  to  the  king  or  to  the  theatre.  Mme.  de
Saint-Simon  was  firm  in  maintaining  this  freedom,  and  with

1715]  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

31

great  and  just  reason,  but  she  was  treated  invariably  with  the
utmost  consideration.  When  the  duchess  was  at  Saint-Cloud
she  always  stayed  with  her,  because  she  could  not  do  other¬
wise.  As  for  me,  I  behaved  as  usual.  I  never  went  more
than  twice  a  year  to  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  for  a  moment
each  time,  being  always  extremely  well  received.  The  mo¬
tives  for  this  conduct  have  been  seen  elsewhere.

On  Monday,  September  28,  the  first  Council  of  Regency
was  held  after  dinner  at  Vincennes  in  the  grand  cabinet  of
First  Council  of  the  king  ;  and  on  this  occasion  the  heads
Regency.  and  presidents  of  all  the  other  councils  were

allowed  to  be  present.  It  was  ruled  that  the  Council
should  have  four  sittings  a  week,  namely:  Saturday,  after
dinner  ;  Sunday  morning  ;  Tuesday,  after  dinner  ;  and
Wednesday  morning;  that  the  members  should  consider
themselves  notified  once  for  all  of  those  four  meetings  ;  but
notice  should  be  given  of  all  extra  meetings  if  the  regent
called  them.  It  was  also  ruled  on  what  days  the  head  or
president  of  each  of  the  other  councils  should  report  its
affairs  ;  that  he  should  leave  as  soon  as  he  had  finished,
whether  the  Council  rose  or  not;  and  that  all  heads  and
presidents  of  councils  should  be  summoned  for  extraordinary
business  whenever  the  regent  thought  proper.  This  first
Council  was  chiefly  passed  in  balloting  ;  it  was  not  until  the
next  meeting  that  it  took  up  serious  work,  which  then  related
to  affairs  of  State.

The  council  of  finances  had  found  its  matters  in  a  strange
state.  For  one  thing,  there  were  due  over  sixteen  hundred
thousand  francs  to  our  ambassadors  and  those  whom  the  late
king  had  kept  at  foreign  Courts  ;  most  of  whom  had  literally
not  enough  money  to  pay  the  postage  on  their  letters,  having
spent  all  they  had  ;  this  was  a  cruel  discredit  to  us  through¬
out  all  Europe.  The  financiers,  however,  had  made  their

32

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

profit  out  of  them  to  get  all  they  wanted.  Noailles  and
Rouillé  of  the  council  of  finances  proposed  to  scrutinize  their
proceedings,  which  so  terrified  them  that  Plénoeuf,  for  one,
disappeared  and  escaped  into  Italy.  It  would  require  a  great
knowledge  of  finances,  a  vast  and  correct  memory,  and  whole
volumes  devoted  solely  to  this  matter  to  explain  what  was
tried,  abandoned,  and  accomplished  in  relation  to  it.  This  is
a  work  beyond  my  powers  and  my  tastes.  I  shall  content
myself  with  noting  down  the  principal  events  in  this  line,
leaving  others  more  capable  than  myself  to  treat  them
fundamentally.

Singular  novelties  were  now  seen  at  Court,  which  soon
produced  others  that  were  still  more  strange.  Nothing  could
Novelties  at  equal  the  pride  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  as
Court'  I  have  said  and  shown  elsewhere,  and  her

empire  over  the  mind  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  continued  the
same,  however  undeserved.  She  took  it  into  her  head  to
want  a  captain  of  the  guards.  No  daughter  of  France  had
ever  had  one.  It  was  an  honour  unknown  even  to  queen-
mothers  and  queen-regents,  until  the  last,  the  mother  of
Louis  XIV.,  who  had  one.  Madame  had  never  dreamed  of
one.  At  first  the  Duc  d’Orléans  resisted  this  fancy,  but  he
soon  yielded,  though  he  ruled  that  Madame  should  have  one
too,  as  her  rank  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Duchesse  de
Berry.  He  engaged  to  pay  the  cost  of  the  latter  because
Madame,  whose  household  was  large  and  her  revenues  not  at
all  so,  did  not  wish  for  such  expense  ;  in  fact  she  would  not
have  a  company  of  guards,  but  continued  to  use  those  of  the
Duc  d’Orléans.  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  had  very  few  guards,
but  she  now  set  up  a  company,  the  lieutenancy  of  which  she
gave  to  Rion.  I  mention  this  trifling  detail,  because  there
will  be  some  mention  of  Rion  later  on,  and  this  was  the  first
time  anybody  ever  heard  of  him.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  33

The  perpetual  jaunts  and  parties  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,
either  alone  or  with  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  at  the  be¬
ginning  of  her  marriage,  had  obliged  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
to  ask  for  some  relief  in  attending  her,  and  the  king  had
allowed  her  to  propose  to  the  duchess  four  ladies-in-waiting.
In  France  vanity  is  contagious  and  spreads  rapidly.  The
Duchesse  d’Orléans,  now  wife  of  the  regent,  profited  by  that
position  to  amalgamate  herself  (at  least  in  this  respect)  with
the  daughters  of  France,  and  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was  not  a
man  to  refuse  her,  though  he  cared  nothing  himself  for  the
distinction.  So  she,  too,  obtained  four  ladies.

Mme.  la  Duchesse,  who  had  never  been  reconciled  to
seeing  her  younger  sister  raised  so  much  above  herself,
could  not  long  endure  that  the  Duchesse  d’Orleans  should
have  ladies-in-waiting  without  having  them  herself.  She
found  her  commodities  of  this  kind  rather  mixed,  hut
among  them  were  women  who  for  their  bread  and  their
amusement  desired  nothing  better.  The  pliancy  of  the  Due
d’Orléans  made  him  permit  it,  as  he  did  other  things  ;  after
which,  the  remaining  princesses  of  the  blood  had  what  they
pleased.

VOL.  IV.  —  3

IL

The  late  king  had  returned  to  his  natural  inclinations
and  his  former  principles  about  England  after  the  death  of
The  scotch  Queen  Anne  and  the  overthrow  of  all  the
project.  persons  who  had  her  confidence  and  formed

her  council.  The  king,  her  successor,  had  replaced  those  in
office  whom  she  had  displaced;  the  Whigs  were  in  power
and  the  Tories  dismissed.  Such  changes  cannot  be  exe¬
cuted,  either  in  a  government  or  in  a  nation  naturally  in¬
clined  to  factions,  without  producing  a  great  number  of
malcontents  of  all  kinds  ;  and  all  the  more  in  this  case
because  the  new  ministers  and  favourites  breathed  vengeance
against  those  who  had  driven  them  out  and  taken  their
places  during  the  last  reign,  and  were  determined  to  pursue
and  bring  to  trial  those  who  had  been  most  instrumental  in
making  the  peace,  —  to  whom,  therefore,  France  was  under
much  obligation.  Scotland  could  not  console  itself  for  be¬
coming  a  mere  province  of  England.  The  Duke  of  Ormond
was  hiding  in  Paris,  while  awaiting  what  the  Earl  of  Mar
could  do  in  Scotland,  where  the  party  were  stirring  ;  and
the  Pretender  (to  use  the  received  term)  was  at  Bar,  waiting
for  some,  not  apparent,  conjunction  to  cross  the  channel,
certain  of  the  protection  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  probably  of  that
of  the  King  of  Spain.

The  death  of  the  king,  who  entered  secretly  but  with  all
his  heart  into  this  project,  which  might  soon  have  been
favoured  by  Sweden  and  Russia,  who  were  both  anxious  to
end  their  war  by  a  treaty  of  peace  in  this  direction,  discon-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

35

certed  the  Pretender’s  plan.  The  minority  of  the  yonng
king,  with  the  interior  of  France  left  in  the  condition  it
was  on  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  was  not  the  time  for
France  to  risk  a  rupture  with  England  without  being  well
assured  of  that  which  it  was  difficult  to  make  sure  of  ;  I
mean  a  sudden  and  complete  revolution,  such  as  that  which
placed  King  William  on  the  throne  of  his  uncle  and  father-
in-law.  The  late  king  had,  as  we  have  seen,  left  the  throne
of  Philippe  V.  firmly  secured,  the  union  of  the  two  crowns
perfect,  and  both  countries  enjoying  a  peace  with  all  Europe
by  the  treaties  of  Utrecht  and  Baden.  The  regent  was  abso¬
lutely  determined  to  preserve  so  necessary  a  blessing.

Other  circumstances  kept  him  from  lending  himself  to
the  project  of  the  late  king  in  favour  of  the  Pretender.  The
The  Eari  of  Earl  of  Stair  had  been  sent  to  France  by  King
George  about  a  year  before  the  death  of  the
king,  but  without  using  his  commission  as  ambassador,  which
he  kept  in  his  pocket.  He  was  a  very  simple  Scottish  gentle¬
man,  tall,  well-made,  slender,  still  quite  young,  holding  his
head  high  with  a  proud  air.  He  had  intellect,  cleverness
and  craft  ;  active  withal,  well-informed,  secretive,  master  of
himself  and  his  face,  speaking  readily  in  all  characters  as
he  judged  them  suitable.  Under  pretext  of  loving  society,
good  living,  and  debauchery  (which  he  never  pushed  far),
he  made  acquaintances  and  procured  intimacies  which  he
put  to  use  in  serving  his  master  and  his  own  party  also.
His  party  was  that  of  the  Whigs  and  of  all  those  whom
King  George  had  restored  to  power,  and  also  of  the  family
and  friends  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  whose  creature  he
was,  under  whom  he  had  served  and  who  had  procured  him
a  regiment  and  the  Scottish  Order.

Stair  had  seen  from  afar  the  threatening  failure  of  the
king’s  health.  He  perceived  plainly  that  he  had  nothing  to

36

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

hope  from  the  authority  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  which,  if  it
prevailed,  would  follow  the  maxims  and  intentions  of  the
king.  He  therefore  felt  very  early  that  the  only  part  to
take  was  that  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  who  had  the  right  on
his  side,  to  flatter  him  with  assurances  of  his  master’s
support  if  there  were  need  to  recognize  his  regency  and  the
authority  it  conveyed,  to  enroll  him,  so  to  speak,  early  with
King  George  by  offers  made  in  a  period  of  doubt,  by  persuad¬
ing  him  that  their  interests  were  the  same,  and  (to  tell  it
frankly,  for  Stair  was  not  afraid  to  let  the  actual  phrase
escape  him)  by  suggesting  the  thought  that  two  usurpers,
such  close  neighbours,  were  bound  to  support  each  other
mutually,  through  and  against  all  ;  for  both  were  in  the  same
case,  King  George  with  regard  to  the  Pretender,  the  Due
d’Orléans  under  the  renunciations  of  the  King  of  Spain,  if
so  weak  and  young  a  child  as  the  successor  of  Louis  XIV.,
should  fail.

The  troubles  of  England  were  increasing,  and  the  Earl  of
Mar  had  successes  in  Scotland.  Stair  was  wholly  occupied
in  preventing  France  from  giving  any  help  to
the  Pretender  and  in  stopping  his  passage
across  the  kingdom  if  he  tried  to  gain  the
shores  of  the  channel.  He  had  good  spies  ;  and  before  long
he  heard  that  the  prince  was  preparing  to  leave  Bar,  on
which  he  rushed  to  the  regent,  demanding  to  have  him
arrested.  Having  reason  to  think  that  the  regent  was  try¬
ing  to  gain  time  to  see  what  would  happen  in  England,  he
let  his  Boyal  Highness  know  that  if  he  looked  at  these
troubles  with  indifference  England  would  do  the  same  for
whatever  might  come  in  France.  These  were  the  terms
on  which  they  were  when,  suddenly,  the  Pretender  disap¬
peared  from  Bar,  and  Stair  again  came  crying  to  the  Due
d’Orléans  to  stop  his  way  through  France  and  arrest  him.

Stair  urges  the
regent  to  arrest
the  Pretender.

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

37

The  regent,  who  was  cleverly  swimming  between  two  cur¬
rents,  had  promised  the  Pretender  to  shut  his  eyes,  and  so
far  favour  the  project,  provided  the  move  was  made  in  the
utmost  secrecy.  At  the  same  time,  he  granted  Stair’s  re¬
quest,  and  immediately  despatched  Contade,  who  was  devoted
to  him  and  very  intelligent,  the  major  of  a  regiment  of
guards,  with  orders  to  take  his  brother,  a  lieutenant  in  the
same  regiment  and  two  sergeants  of  his  own  choice,  and  go
to  Château-Thierry,  where  Stair  had  positive  knowledge  the
Pretender  was  to  pass.  Contade  started  on  the  night  of  the
9th  of  November,  fully  determined,  and  instructed,  to  miss
finding  his  man.  Stair,  who  was  only  outwardly  trustful,
took  other  measures,  which  came  very  near  succeeding  ;  and
this  is  what  happened.

The  Pretender  started  disguised  from  Bar,  accompanied  by
three  or  four  persons  only,  and  came  to  Chaillot,  where  the
Duc  de  Lauzun  had  a  little  old  house  that  he
did  not  occupy.  It  was  there  the  Pretender
slept  and  saw  his  mother,  the  queen,  who  was
staying  as  she  often  did  with  the  Pilles  de  Sainte-Marie  at
Chaillot.  From  there  he  started,  in  Torcy’s  post-chaise,
along  the  road  to  Alençon  to  embark  from  Bretagne.

Stair  discovered  this  proceeding,  and  resolved  to  neglect
nothing  to  deliver  his  party  once  for  all  from  this  last  rem¬
nant  of  the  Stuarts.  He  despatched  men  silently  along  the
different  routes,  giving  that  from  Paris  to  Alençon  to  Colonel
Douglas,  a  half-pay  officer  in  an  Irish  regiment  in  the  French
service,  who,  by  reason  of  his  name,  his  intelligence,  his
energy,  and  his  intrigue,  had  insinuated  himself  in  Paris.
He  was  on  a  footing  of  consideration  and  familiarity  with
the  regent  and  often  came  to  my  house  ;  he  lived  in  the  best
company,  had  married  on  the  frontier  of  Metz,  was  very  poor,
with  much  politeness,  knowledge  of  the  world,  a  reputation  of

The  Pretender
escapes  the  as¬
sassins  of  Stair.

38

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

great  valour,  and  nothing  about  him  to  make  any  one  sus¬
pect  that  he  was  capable  of  crime.

Douglas  put  himself  into  a  post-chaise  with  two  valets
and  another  man  on  horseback,  all  four  armed  to  the  teeth,
and  started  slowly  along  the  route  to  Alençon.  Nonancourt
is  a  little  town  about  nineteen  leagues  from  Paris  on  that
road.  Here  he  stopped,  asked  for  something  to  eat  at  the
post-inn,  and  inquired  with  great  care  about  a  post-chaise,
which  he  described,  together  with  those  who  escorted  it,
expressing  fears  lest  it  had  passed  and  that  the  people  of  the
inn  were  deceiving  him.  The  master  of  the  post-inn  was
named  Lospital.  Pie  was  absent  ;  but  his  wife  was  there,  who
was,  luckily,  a  very  worthy  woman,  of  intelligence,  good  sense,
brains,  and  courage.  Nonancourt  is  only  five  leagues  from
La  Perte  ;  I  therefore  knew  this  post-mistress  very  well,  and
she  has  herself  told  me  this  whole  adventure  more  than
once.  She  tried  in  vain  to  get  some  light  on  the  matter,
which  made  her  uneasy.  All  she  could  discover  was  that
they  were  English  and  concerned  in  some  violent  action  ;
that  their  object,  whatever  it  was,  was  important,  and  that
they  were  planning  some  evil  deed.  She  imagined  that  it
related  to  the  Pretender,  and  she  resolved  to  save  him  ;
arranging  a  plan  in  her  head,  which  she  was  happily  able
to  execute.

In  order  to  succeed  she  did  all  the  two  gentlemen  wanted,
and  made  them  feel  so  secure  of  being  duly  warned  that
Douglas  went  off  somewhere  along  the  road,  taking  one  valet
with  him.  The  other  remained  with  the  second  gentleman
on  watch  at  the  inn.  She  then  made  her  plan.  She  asked
the  gentleman  to  drink,  and  gave  him  her  best  wine  and
kept  him  at  table  as  long  as  she  could,  sending  meantime
a  faithful  servant  to  watch  for  the  post-chaise  ;  her  intention
being  to  keep  the  man  and  the  valet  shut  in,  and  to  relay

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

39

the  chaise  at  the  back  of  the  house,  where  she  kept  her
horses  ready.  But  the  chaise  did  not  come,  aud  the  man
got  tired  of  sitting  at  table.  She  then  persuaded  him  to  lie
down  in  one  of  the  chambers  and  rely  upon  her  and  his
valet  to  call  him  as  soon  as  the  chaise  appeared.  After
which  she  slipped  off  to  a  friend  in  a  side  street,  told  her
her  adventure  and  suspicions,  and  made  her  promise  to  re¬
ceive  the  person  she  wanted  to  hide.  She  then  sent  for  a
priest,  her  relation,  told  him  the  story,  and  borrowed  an
abbé’s  suit  and  a  priest’s  wig.  That  done,  she  went  home,
found  the  English  valet  watching  on  the  steps,  pitied  his
ennui,  told  him  how  good  he  was  to  be  so  faithful,  gave  him
something  to  drink,  and  then  by  the  help  of  a  trusty  hostler
made  him  so  drunk  that  he  went  to  sleep  under  the  table.
Meantime  she  had  turned  the  key  gently  on  the  English
gentleman  who  was  sleeping  upstairs.

Half  an  hour  later  the  faithful  man  she  had  on  the  watch
announced  that  the  chaise  was  coming.  Mme.  Lospital
went  to  meet  it;  in  it  was  King  James;  she  told  him  he
was  expected  and  would  be  lost  if  he  did  not  take  care  ;  but
he  must  trust  to  her  and  follow  her  ;  and  in  a  minute  she
had  him  at  her  friend’s  house.  There  he  heard  what  had
happened,  and  they  hid  him  as  best  they  could  with  his
three  companions.  After  which  Mme.  Lospital  returned
home  and  sent  for  the  officers  of  the  law,  to  whom  she  told
her  suspicions  of  evil-dealing,  and  made  them  arrest  the
drunken  valet  and  the  gentleman  who  was  asleep  in  the
chamber.  Then  she  despatched  one  of  the  postilions  back
to  Torcy.  Meantime  the  law  proceeded,  and  a  copy  of  the
procès-verbal  was  sent  to  Court.  Nothing  can  describe  the
rage  of  the  English  gentleman  and  his  fury  against  the  valet
for  getting  drunk.  As  for  Mme.  Lospital,  he  would  have
strangled  her  if  he  could,  and  she  was  long  in  terror  of  some

40

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  it

ill- turn.  King  James  remained  three  days  at  Nonancourt
to  let  the  noise  die  out,  and  then,  dressed  as  an  abbé,  he
continued  his  journey  in  another  post-chaise  and  embarked
in  Bretagne  for  Scotland.

Douglas  returned  to  Paris,  where  the  Earl  of  Stair  made  a
great  to-do  about  the  Nonancourt  adventure,  which  he  treated
with  extreme  audacity  and  impudence,  as  an  attack  against
the  rights  of  individuals.  Douglas,  who  could  not  be  igno¬
rant  of  what  was  said  of  him,  had  the  equal  audacity  to  go
wherever  he  was  accustomed,  to  the  theatres,  and  even  to
present  himself  before  the  regent.  Many  persons  closed
their  doors  to  him.  He  tried  in  vain  to  force  mine,  and  even
dared  to  complain  to  me  about  it.  Soon  after  he  disappeared
from  Paris,  and  I  never  knew  what  became  of  him.

The  Queen  of  England  sent  for  Mme.  Lospital  to  come  to
Saint-Germain,  where  she  thanked  her,  caressed  her  as  she
deserved,  gave  her  her  portrait,  and  that  was  all.  The  regent
did  nothing  for  her.  Long  afterwards  King  James  wrote  to
her,  and  sent  her  his  portrait.  Such  is  the  indigence  of  de¬
throned  kings,  and  their  perfect  forgetfulness  of  great  perils
and  signal  services.

The  Chevalier  de  Bouillon,  who,  since  the  death  of  the  son
of  the  Comte  d’Auvergne,  had  taken  the  title  of  Prince
Bails  at  the  d’ Auvergne,  proposed  to  the  regent  to  establish

°pera'  public  balls  at  the  Opera,  masked  or  not

masked,  where  the  boxes  would  give  every  convenience  to
see  the  ball  to  those  who  did  not  wish  to  go  upon  the  floor.
It  was  thought  that  a  public  ball,  guarded  as  the  Opera  is
whenever  open,  would  be  safe  from  adventures,  and  would
put  a  stop  to  the  discreditable  little  balls  all  over  Paris,
where  so  many  scandals  happened.  Those  at  the  Opera
were  therefore  established,  with  a  grand  concourse  of  people,
and  all  the  effect  that  had  been  proposed.  The  master  of

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

41

ceremonies  had  a  salary  of  over  six  thousand  francs,  and  a
mechanism  was  admirably  invented  and  very  easily  and
rapidly  worked  to  cover  the  orchestra,  and  floor  the  stage
and  the  parterre  at  the  same  level.  Unfortunately,  the
Opera  was  at  the  Palais-Koyal,  and  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had
only  a  step  to  go  on  leaving  his  suppers,  so  that  he  often
showed  himself  at  these  balls  in  a  very  unsuitable  condition.
The  Duc  de  Koailles,  who  was  forever  trying  to  pay  court
to  him,  was  among  the  first  to  go  so  drunk  that  there  was
no  indecency  he  did  not  commit  there.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  very  much  bored  at  Vincennes  ;  he
wanted  to  have  the  king  in  Paris.  I  had  done  what  I  could
„  to  induce  a  return  to  Versailles.  We  were

keeping  the  court  there,  alone  with  the  Court,  away  from  the

at  Versailles.

sort  of  world  that  never  sleeps  out  of  Paris,
unless  it  goes  to  the  country.  Those  who  had  business  to
attend  to  could  find  in  an  hour  the  persons  they  had  to  see  ;
whereas  in  Paris  one  had  to  go  ten  times  and  into  all  quar¬
ters  of  the  city.  Moreover,  no  one  could  have  at  Versailles
the  dissipation  and  loss  of  time  to  be  found  in  Paris.  But
what  I  considered  as  more  important  still  was  the  distance
from  the  tumult  of  parliament,  the  markets,  the  vulgar  life,
and  the  adventures  of  a  minority,  such  as  Louis  XIV.  had
met  with,  and  which  drove  him  furtively  out  of  Paris  on  that
eve  of  the  Epiphany.  I  was  spurred  also  to  get  the  Due
d’Orléans  away  from  the  pernicious  company  with  whom  he
supped  every  evening,  and  from  the  state  in  which  he  showed
himself  at  the  Opera-balls,  and  his  fatal  loss  of  time  at  the
theatres.  But  all  this  was  precisely  what  attached  him  to  a
residence  in  Paris,  from  which  I  soon  saw  there  was  no  way
to  drag  him.  He  even  made  the  doctors  have  a  grand  con¬
sultation  about  bringing  the  king  to  Paris  from  Vincennes  ;
but  the  Court  doctors  and  those  of  Paris  were  agreed  in  this

42

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

case,  and  declared  that  he  ought  not  to  be  brought  there  till
the  first  frosts  had  purified  the  air  and  extinguished  a  great
deal  of  small-pox  of  very  dangerous  type,  which  then  pre¬
vailed  in  the  city.

It  was,  therefore,  not  until  Monday,  December  30,  that
the  king  left  Vincennes,  after  his  dinner,  to  come  to  Paris.
The  men  charged  with  his  education  had  already  begun  at
Vincennes,  where  they  had  lodgings,  to  take  care  of  them¬
selves.  At  the  Tuileries  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  had  a
fine  apartment,  and  presently  took  that  of  the  queen  ad¬
joining  those  of  the  king,  and  the  Duc  du  Maine  had
the  beautiful  rooms  of  the  dauphins  on  the  lower  floor.
M.  de  Fréjus  had  one  above  ;  the  sub-governors  also.  The
city  harangued  the  king  on  his  arrival,  and  he  found  a
great  crowd  in  his  apartment.  Thus  ended  the  year
1715.

I  had  felt  the  supineness  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  at  the  death
of  the  king,  not  only  in  what  concerned  himself  personally,
I7l6_  but  in  many  other  matters,  and  I  wanted  to

i  wish  to  retire  retire  once  for  all.  I  had  therefore  withdrawn

from  Court  after

the  death  of  the  to  my  own  house  and  did  not  leave  it.  The

k,ng'  Duc  d’Orléans  was  troubled  by  this  ;  he  wanted

me  not  to  be  vexed,  hut  without  intending  himself  to  do
better.  He  sent  the  Abbé  Dubois  to  me  again  and  again,  to
conjure  me  to  return  to  him,  and  not  abandon  him  in  this
first  crisis,  to  trust  entirely  to  his  friendship,  his  confidence,
his  gratitude,  —  in  short,  the  finest  messages  in  the  world.  I
had  great  difficulty  in  letting  myself  —  not  be  persuaded,  but
simply  —  yield  to  what  was  proper.  He  himself  said  stronger
things  to  me  personally,  so  that,  in  spite  of  myself,  I  was
pledged  again.  This  was  before  the  formation  of  the  coun¬
cils.  I  was  not  long  in  perceiving  something  worse  than
supineness.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

43

Parliament,  led  by  d’Effiat  and  Canillac,  prompted  by  the
Duc  de  Noailles  and  supported  by  the  Duc  du  Maine  and

the  numerous  group  he  had  united  with  him

The  regent  °  1

deceived  about  under  the  respectable  name  of  “noblesse,”

the  parliament.  .

began  now  to  show  its  teeth  to  the  regent,  to
fail  to  answer  him,  or  even  to  obey  him.  It  was  not  afraid
to  show  scorn  of  a  prince  who  treated  it  with  timid  caution
produced  by  fears  which  it  readily  perceived.  These  magis¬
trates,  guided  by  such  hands,  soon  understood  that  they
could  do  all  they  wished  and  risk  nothing  ;  that  the
regent,  who  coaxed  them  '  cautiously  to  get  them  to  pass  the
edicts  and  declarations  he  wanted  to  make  on  matters  of
finance  and  government,  would  never  compromise  himself
with  them  on  any  matter  which  did  not  bear  upon  his  per¬
sonal  wishes.  It  was  in  vain  that  I  represented  to  his  Eoyal
Highness  the  public  derision  which  the  parliament  made  of
his  authority,  and  the  danger  of  its  resisting  him  hereafter
about  matters  that  would  greatly  embarrass  him  in  carrying
on  the  government,  —  and  resisting  him,  too,  whenever  it
pleased  them  so  to  do.  What  I  told  him  was  evident,  and
he  was  not  long  in  meeting  with  a  shameful  experience  of
it  ;  but  now  I  talked  in  vain  ;  I  only  made  him  despair  at
the  excellence  of  my  reasons,  to  which  he  could  make  no
reply.  His  distrust  persuaded  him  that  I  argued  as  a  duke
and  peer,  with  that  interest  alone  in  view  ;  his  love  for
division,  which  he  thought  it  well  to  keep  up  between  the
dukes  and  parliament  and  among  the  dukes  themselves,  and
his  weakness,  increased  by  the  pernicious  counsels  of  Noailles,
Besons,  d’Effiat,  Canillac,  and  others,  all  induced  him  to  think
he  must  manoeuvre  cautiously  if  he  wanted  parliament  to  be
favourable  to  his  measures.  People  were  not  long  in  per¬
ceiving  that  he  made  it  his  policy,  as  much  in  general
things  as  in  special  things,  to  excite  disputes  ;  and  soon  a

44

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  n.

favourite  saying  frequently  escaped  him  as  an  admirable
maxim  of  practice  :  Divide  et  régna.

I  was  much  surprised  soon  after  the  return  from  Vincennes
to  see  the  Duc  du  Maine  enter  my  room.  He  covered  his
m.  du  Maine  embarrassment  by  an  easy  air,  and,  with  great
withouTInyVIS,t  politeness,  talked  to  me  as  if  we  had  never  had
cause  for  it.  anything  between  us,  but  without  saying  a

word  about  the  past.  No  man  knew  better  than  he  how  to
lead  a  conversation  and  all  sorts  of  talk.  He  used  that
talent  now  with  all  his  graces,  and  neglected  nothing  that
could  please  me,  but  without  touching  for  a  moment  on
anything  that  interested  either  of  us.  I  was  forced,  on  my
part,  to  try  to  pay  him  in  the  same  coin.  Though  the  game
was  not  equal,  I  got  myself  fairly  well  out  of  it,  with  enough
fine  language  and  politeness  to  score  nothing  against  me.
This  lasted  more  than  half  an  hour  tête-à-tète.  It  was  the
morning  for  the  Council  of  Regency,  and  not  at  all  an  hour  for
visits.  This  in  itself  seemed  to  me  suspicious  ;  and  after  he
had  gone  I  felt  myself  doubly  relieved  in  being  delivered,
and  in  finding  his  action  was  simply  a  visit.  I  told  the
regent  of  it  a  moment  before  the  council  began,  and  we
laughed  together  over  the  fears  of  a  man  who  had  counted
him  for  so  little  but  a  short  time  ago,  and  me,  as  was  natural,
for  infinitely  less.  The  regent,  however,  exhorted  me  to
return  the  visit,  as  M.  du  Maine  had  made  the  first  advance,
and  to  show  less  stiffness  and  avoidance  in  my  manner  in
those  places  where  it  was  necessary  we  should  meet.  How¬
ever  reasonable  that  counsel  was,  it  cost  me  dear  to  follow  it
after  all  that  had  happened.  I  have  never  been  false  ;  and
it  seemed  to  me  falseness  to  live  with  the  Duc  du  Maine  as  I
would  with  a  man  to  whom  I  was  indifferent.  Nevertheless
I  yielded  as  much  as  I  could  to  the  demands  of  propriety
with  rather  bad  grace,  I  believe,  always  avoiding  as

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

45

much  as  I  could  getting  within  reach  of  his  conversation,
and  greatly  annoyed  by  the  prostitution  of  his  bows  and
allurements,  by  which  he  constantly  tried  to  please  and
win  me.

I  chose  the  end  of  a  morning  to  return  his  visit,  in  order
to  have  a  safe  pretext  not  to  see  Mme.  du  Maine.  I  gained
i  return  it  and  nothing  by  that.  I  was  received  with  eager-
LTbuTvery11211'  ness  an<l  even  with  thanks.  As  I  prepared  to
polite  remarks.  take  leave  after  making  a  very  short  visit,  he
said  that  Mme.  la  Duchesse  du  Maine  would  never  forgive

him  if  he  let  me  go  without  seeing  her.  No  matter  what  I
said  and  did,  he  took  me  to  her  in  spite  of  myself,  and  put
me  in  a  chair  by  her  bedside.  Her  greeting  was  the  same
as  his  ;  for  the  wife  could  do  with  herself  and  her  tongue
exactly  what  she  pleased,  and  with  no  less  grace  and  polite¬
ness,  when  she  chose,  than  her  husband.  I  rose  to  take
leave;  they  both  cried  out  that  it  was  such  a  pleasure  to
them  to  see  me  that  I  must  stay  longer.  And  then,  im¬
mediately,  as  if  they  feared  to  miss  their  chance,  she  began
to  speak  of  the  quarrel  between  M.  le  Duc  and  themselves.
I  tried  to  avoid  entering  on  the  matter,  but  she  forced  me
to  do  so  by  questions,  gently  pushed  on  by  the  Duc  du
Maine,  so  that  I  presently  found  myself  on  the  witness
stand,  attentively  looked  at  and  listened  to  by  a  little  group
of  men  who  were  present.  I  finally  got  out  of  it  by  saying
that  M.  du  Maine  (and  consequently  she  herself)  was  well
aware  of  what  I  thought  on  the  subject,  for  I  had  more  than
once  told  him  of  it.

I  hoped  to  cut  her  short  with  this  answer,  which  told  all
and  explained  nothing.  But  Mme.  du  Maine  was  not  satis¬
fied.  After  joking  M.  du  Maine  for  not  telling  her  every¬
thing,  she  asked  me  to  speak  more  plainly.  This  made  me
inwardly  angry.  I  then  said  that  if  she  absolutely  insisted

46

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  n.

on  again  hearing  what  I  thought,  I  would  obey  her,  pro¬
vided  she  would  be  good  enough  to  remember  that  she  com¬
manded  me  to  do  so.  And  thereupon  I  told  her  that  I  was
quite  content  they  should  he  princes  of  the  blood  with  suc¬
cession  to  the  throne,  because  with  that  the  peers  had  no
dispute;  that  as  long  as  they  held  that  position  we  had
nothing  to  say  against  it  ;  but  they  must  be  careful  to  main¬
tain  it  ;  because  if  they  lost  it  we,  the  peers,  would  never
permit  an  intermediary  rank  ;  we  should  then  do  all  that  was
possible  to  prevent  them  from  standing  between  the  princes
of  the  blood  and  ourselves.  They  both,  not  seeing  farther
than  their  own  thoughts,  said  I  was  right,  and  they  had  no
reason  to  complain  if  we  were  satisfied  with  their  present
position.  “  But,”  added  Mme.  du  Maine,  “  will  you  not
excite  the  princes  of  the  blood  against*  us?”  “Madame,”
I  replied,  “  it  is  not  our  affair  ;  it  is  that  of  the  princes  of
the  blood,  who  do  not  want  our  advice,  and  have  never  asked
for  it.”  I  rung  the  changes  thus  on  this  delicate  question.
They  were  satisfied  with  what  I  said,  because  they  wanted
to  be,  and  I  was  still  more  satisfied  at  having  got  out  of  the
matter  without  being  tripped  up  either  way.

After  that  wherever  I  met  him  the  Duc  du  Maine  was  sur¬
passingly  polite,  and  I  put  the  best  face  forward  that  I  could,
which,  to  tell  the  truth,  was  not  too  good  a  one,  and  always
with  great  reserve,  —  never  addressing,  almost  never  ap¬
proaching  him,  and  avoiding,  as  much  as  I  decently  could,
allowing  him  to  join  me.

I  was  not  upon  this  tone  with  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  He,
as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  was  a  very  true  and  very  worthy
man.  He  had  taken  no  part  in  the  grandeurs  which  his
brother  had  piled  one  upon  another,  like  a  Titan,  to  scale
the  skies.  His  manner  of  giving  his  opinion  in  Council,  of
seeking  the  good  for  good’s  sake,  and  right  for  the  right’s  sake,

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

47

had  won  me.  I  often  saw  him  at  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans’,
and  I  lived  with  him  in  perfect  openness,  and  he  with  me  ;
which  had  come  about  reciprocally  on  both  sides,  without,
however,  leading  to  the  confidences  of  intimate  friendship,
and  without  meeting  at  each  other’s  houses  ;  but  elsewhere
every  day,  and  always  speaking  very  freely.  My  seat  was
next  to  his  at  the  Council,  where  we  talked  freely,  and  some¬
times  tête-à-tête  before  and  after  the  session.

The  Abbé  Dubois  was  very  anxious  to  be  counsellor  of
State  for  the  Church,  and  he  came  to  ask  me  to  break  the
The  Abbé  Dubois  ice  for  him  with  the  regent.  My  frankness
stat^forthe  could  not  be  silent.  I  replied  that  I  wished
church.  him  an  sorts  of  good,  but  as  for  that  place  I

begged  him  to  look  behind  him  and  see  if  it  suited  him  ;  also
to  remember  the  vexation  the  other  counsellors  of  State
would  feel  ;  and  to  see  whether  his  attachment  to  the  Due
d’Orléans  would  allow  him  to  bring  down  upon  the  regent
the  hatred  of  the  whole  Council  and  all  the  aspirants,  and
the  spiteful  offices  which  would  certainly  grow  out  of  such  a
choice.  He  was  rather  surprised,  but  he  had  no  real  reply  ;
and  we  did  not  fail  to  separate  on  very  good  terms.  Four
days  later  he  returned.  “I  have  come,”  he  said,  trans¬
ported  with  joy,  “to  tell  you  I  am  counsellor  of  State.”
“My  dear  abbé,”  I  replied,  “I  am  delighted,  and  all  the
more  that  I  have  had  no  part  in  it  ;  you  are  content  and
so  am  I.  But  take  care  of  the  consequences  ;  since  the  thing
is  done,  hold  yourself  steady,  and  watch,  but  without  being
afraid.”  I  embraced  him  and  he  went  off  quite  satisfied
with  me.  I  did  not  say  a  word  to  the  regent,  nor  he  to
me.  My  custom  was  never  to  speak  to  him  of  things  done
that  I  disapproved;  his  never  to  tell  me  of  those  he  had
done  when  he  knew  they  were  done  unwisely.  The  conse¬
quences  were  such  as  I  foresaw.  There  was  no  one,  from

48

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ir.

the  chancellor  to  the  lowest  master  of  petitions,  who  did  not
feel  himself  personally  affronted,  and  who  did  not  show  it.
Neither  they  nor  the  other  aspirants  restrained  their  com¬
plaints  or  their  remarks.  The  Abbé  Dubois,  who  thought
only  of  himself,  had  what  he  wanted,  and  cared  nothing  for
the  uproar,  nor  for  his  master.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry  profited  by  her  position  to  usurp
all  the  honours  of  a  queen,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of
The  Duchesse  de  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  who  assured  her  of  the
Berry  usurps  dislike  that  would  follow  such  a  course.  She

honours  that  she

does  not  keep.  drove  about  Paris  with  drums  beating,  and
along  the  whole  length  of  the  quay  of  the  Tuileries  where
the  king  was  living.  The  next  day  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy
carried  his  complaints  to  the  regent,  who  promised  him  that
so  long  as  the  king  was  in  Paris  no  other  drums  should  be
heard  but  his,  and  ever  after  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  had
none.  After  that  she  went  to  the  theatre  with  a  dais  over
her  box,  four  of  her  guards  on  the  stage,  others  in  the  pit,
the  hall  more  lighted  than  usual,  and  received  an  harangue
before  the  play  from  the  comedians.  This  made  a  great  up¬
roar  in  Paris  ;  so  much  so  that  she  dared  not  go  to  the  the¬
atre  again  in  the  same  way  ;  but  in  order  not  to  back  down,
she  renounced  going  to  the  play  at  all,  and  took  a  little  box
at  the  Opera,  where  she  was  scarcely  seen  and  as  if  incognito.

After  many  passing  love-affairs,  she  became  infatuated  for
good  and  all  with  Rion,  a  cadet  of  the  house  of  Aydie,  son
of  a  sister  of  Mme.  de  Biron,  who  had  neither

Abandons  herself

to  Rion  ;  who  and  figure  nor  mind.  He  was  a  short,  stout,  pale,
and  puffy  lad,  with  many  pimples  on  his  face,
which  made  it  look  like  an  abscess.  He  had  fine  teeth,  but
never  imagined  he  could  cause  a  passion  which,  in  very  little
time,  became  frantic  and  lasted  ever  after,  —  without,  how¬
ever,  hindering  a  few  passing  distractions  and  contrary  loves.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

49

He  had  not  a  sou,  hut  a  great  many  brothers  and  sisters,  who
had  none  either.  M.  and  Mme.  de  Pons  (lady-in-waiting  to
the  Duchesse  de  Berry)  were  related  to  him  ;  they  brought
him  from  the  provinces,  he  being  a  lieutenant  of  dragoons,
to  try  to  make  something  of  him.  He  had  hardly  arrived
before  the  passion  declared  itself  and  he  became  the  master
of  the  Luxembourg.  M.  de  Lauzun,  whose  great-nephew  he
was,  laughed  in  his  sleeve  ;  he  was  enchanted,  and  fancied
himself  hack  in  the  Luxembourg  in  the  days  of  Mademoiselle  ;
and  he  gave  his  successor  instructions.

Pion  was  gentle  and  naturally  polite  and  respectful,  a  good
and  honest  lad.  He  felt  that  the  power  of  his  charms  could
only  captivate  the  incomprehensible,  depraved  fancy  of  a
princess.  He  did  not  abuse  his  position  with  any  one,  and
made  everybody  like  him,  but  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Berry
he  treated  as  Lauzun  had  treated  Mademoiselle.  He  was
soon  adorned  with  the  finest  laces  and  the  richest  clothes,
and  heaped  with  money,  boxes,  jewels,  and  precious  stones.
He  made  himself  desired;  he  amused  himself  by  exciting
the  jealousy  of  his  princess,  and  seeming  himself  still  more
jealous,  so  that  he  often  made  her  weep.  Little  by  little  he
put  her  on  the  footing  of  never  daring  to  do  anything  with¬
out  his  permission,  not  even  the  most  indifferent  things.
Sometimes,  when  she  was  ready  to  go  to  the  Opera,  he
made  her  stay  at  home  ;  at  other  times  he  forced  her  to  go
where  she  did  not  wish,  and  to  do  kindnesses  to  ladies
whom  she  hated  and  was  jealous  of,  and  incivilities  to
those  she  liked  and  of  whom  he  pretended  '  jealousy.
Even  in  her  dress  she  had  no  liberty.  He  diverted  him¬
self  by  making  her  pull  down  her  hair  or  change  her
gown  when  she  was  all  ready  ;  and  this  so  often,  and
sometimes  so  publicly,  that  he  brought  her  at  last  to  take
his  orders  over  night  for  her  dress  and  her  occupations  the

VOL.  IV.  —  4

50

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

next  day  ;  but  the  next  day  he  often  changed  everything,
and  the  princess  wept  more  than  ever.  Finally,  she  had
come  to  sending  him  messages  by  trusty  valets  (for  he  lodged
at  the  gate  of  the  Luxembourg),  and  her  messengers  went
several  times  during  her  toilet  to  ask  what  ribbon,  or  gown,  or
ornaments  he  wished  her  to  wear,  and  he  usually  made  her
take  those  that  she  did  not  wish  herself.  If  sometimes  she
dared  to  assert  her  freedom  in  a  trifling  way,  he  treated  her
like  a  servant,  and  the  tears  lasted  several  days.  This  haughty
princess,  who  took  such  pleasure  in  showing  and  exercising
her  excessive  pride,  degraded  herself  by  taking  her  meals  with
him  and  with  other  obscure  men  like  himself  ;  she,  with  whom
no  man  but  a  prince  of  the  blood  had  a  right  to  eat  !

A  Jesuit,  named  Père  Piglet,  whom  she  had  known  as  a
child,  and  who  ever  since  had  cultivated  her,  was  admitted
to  these  private  meals  without  being  ashamed  of  it.  Mme.
de  Mouchy  was  the  confidant  of  these  strange  proceedings  ;
she  and  Pion  invited  the  guests  and  chose  the  days.  La
Mouchy  frequently  patched  up  the  quarrels  of  the  princess
and  her  lover,  who  was  also  hers,  though  the  princess  did
not  dare  to  take  notice  of  it  for  fear  of  losing  a  man  so  dear
and  a  confidant  so  useful.  The  singular  thing  is  that  in  the
midst  of  this  life  she  took  an  apartment  at  the  Carmelite
convent  in  the  faubourg  Saint-Germain,  where  she  went
sometimes  in  the  afternoons,  and  always  to  sleep  on  festivals,
sometimes  remaining  there  several  days.  She  took  with
her  only  two  ladies  ;  never  any  servants  ;  she  ate  with  her
ladies  what  the  convent  served  to  her,  attended  all  the  daily
services  in  the  choir,  and  often  those  at  night  ;  and  besides
these  services  she  continued  long  in  prayer  and  fasted
rigidly  on  the  days  of  obligation.

Two  Carmelite  nuns,  women  of  much  intelligence  who
knew  the  world,  were  appointed  to  receive  her  and  be  con-

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

51

stantly  near  her.  One  was  very  beautiful,  the  other  had
been.  They  were  both  quite  young,  especially  the  handsome
one,  but  excellent  nuns  and  saintly  women,  who  performed
this  duty  very  reluctantly.  When  they  became  more  familiar,
they  spoke  frankly  to  the  princess,  telling  her  that  if  they
knew  nothing  but  what  they  saw  they  should  admire  her  as
a  saint  ;  hut  they  knew  in  other  ways  that  she  led  a  strange
life,  and  so  publicly  that  they  could  not  understand  why  she
wanted  to  come  and  stay  in  their  convent.  The  Duchesse
de  Berry  laughed  and  was  not  displeased.  Sometimes  they
lectured  her,  talked  to  her  of  people  and  things  by  their
names,  and  exhorted  her  to  change  so  scandalous  a  life  ;  all
of  which  she  repeated  afterwards  among  her  ladies.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry  paid  over  to  her  father  with  usury
the  rough  treatment  and  tyranny  she  bore  from  Bion,  with¬
out  his  weakness  allowing  him  to  have  less  devotion,  less
compliance,  or,  it  must  he  said,  less  submission  and  fear  of
her.  He  was  miserable  at  the  public  reign  of  Bion  and  the
scandal  of  his  daughter’s  life,  hut  he  dared  not  say  a  word,
and  when  at  times  some  scene,  both  ridiculous  and  violent,
between  the  princess  and  her  lover  came  to  the  ears  of  the
public,  if  the  regent  ventured  to  make  some  remonstrance
he  was  treated  like  a  negro,  sulked  at  for  several  days,  and
not  allowed  to  make  his  peace.  There  was  never  a  day,
however,  that  father  and  daughter  did  not  see  each  other,
and  chiefly  at  the  Luxembourg.  It  is  time  now  to  speak  of
the  public  and  private  occupations  of  the  regent,  of  his
conduct,  his  parties,  and  his  daily  life.

All  his  mornings  were  given  up  to  public  business,  and
each  division  of  it  had  its  regular  days  and  hours.  He
began  work  alone,  before  dressing;  received

Daily  life  and  °  °  ’

personal  conduct  people  at  his  lever,  which  was  short,  and  was
followed  by  audiences  on  which  he  wasted

52  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

time.  After  that  he  received  successively  until  two  o’clock
those  who  were  more  directly  charged  with  the  various
matters  of  business,  such  as  the  heads  of  councils  ;  Le
Blanc  (whom  he  used  frequently  for  espionage);  those
with  whom  he  worked  on  the  Unigenitus  affairs;  those  of
the  parliament  ;  often  Torcy  about  the  post  ;  sometimes
Villeroy  to  paw  the  ground  and  make  a  show  ;  once  a  week
the  foreign  ministers  ;  besides  all  this,  he  attended  the
councils,  and  mass  in  his  chapel  privately  on  feast-days  and
Sundays.  At  first  he  rose  early,  a  habit  which  slackened,
little  by  little,  and  grew  tardy  and  uncertain,  according  to
the  hour  when  he  went  to  bed.  At  half-past  two  he  took
his  chocolate  in  public  and  talked  with  the  company.  He
then  returned  to  his  cabinet  and  gave  audiences  to  men  and
women  ;  after  which  he  went  to  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  or
the  Council  of  Regency,  and  always  to  the  king,  whom  he
approached  and  addressed  and  quitted  with  hows  and  an  air
of  respect,  which  pleased  the  little  king  and  taught  manners
to  those  about  him.  After  the  Council,  that  is,  about  five
o’clock,  there  was  no  further  question  of  business.  He  went
either  to  the  Opera  or  the  Luxembourg,  or  to  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans,  or  out  by  the  back  way  ;  or  else  he  received  his
company  by  the  same  way.  In  summer  he  drove  to  Saint-
Cloud  and  other  country-places  ;  if  Madame  was  in  Paris  he
saw  her  a  moment  before  his  mass,  and  when  she  was  at
Saint-Cloud  he  went  to  see  her  and  always  paid  her  great
attention  and  respect.

His  suppers  were  in  very  strange  company,  —  that  of  his
mistresses,  sometimes  an  opera-girl,  often  the  Duchesse  de
Berry  and  a  dozen  men,  first  one  set,  then  others,  whom  he
never  called  otherwise  than  his  roués,  together  with  certain
ladies  of  medium  virtue  but  belonging  to  the  great  world,
and  a  few  obscure  persons,  obscure  as  to  name,  hut  brilliant

17 1G]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

53

for  their  mind  or  their  debauchery.  The  exquisite  food
served  was  cooked  in  places  arranged  for  the  purpose  ex¬
pressly  on  the  same  floor,  and  always  with  silver  utensils  ;
the  company  lending  a  hand  quite  often  to  the  cooks.  At
these  suppers  everything  and  everybody  was  reviewed  —  min¬
isters  and  favourites  as  much  as  the  rest  —  with  a  freedom
which  was  really  unbridled  license.  Gallantries  past  and
present  of  the  Court,  old  gossip,  disputes,  jokes,  sarcasms  —
no  person  and  no  thing  was  spared.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  held
up  his  corner  with  the  rest  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  it  was
very  seldom  indeed  that  any  of  these  tales  made  the  slightest
impression  upon  him.  The  company  drank,  grew  heated,  and
said  vile  things  at  the  tops  of  their  voices,  rivalling  one
another  in  impious  remarks,  and  when  they  had  made  a  vast
deal  of  noise  and  were  dead  drunk  they  went  to  bed  and
began  it  all  over  again  the  next  day.  The  moment  the  hour
came  for  these  suppers  to  begin,  all  was  so  barricaded  against
the  outside  world  that  no  affair  could  enter,  and  it  was  use¬
less  to  try  to  reach  the  regent.  I  am  not  speaking  only  of
private  matters,  but  of  those  most  vitally  important  to  the
State  and  his  own  person  ;  and  this  embargo  lasted  till  the
next  morning.

One  thing  was  very  extraordinary  about  the  regent:
neither  his  mistresses,  nor  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  nor  his
roues,  even  in  his  drunken  moments,  ever  learned  anything
from  him,  whether  of  much  or  of  little  importance,  about
the  government  and  public  matters.  He  lived  openly  with
Mme.  de  Parabère,  and  was  living  at  the  same  time  with
others  ;  he  amused  himself  with  the  jealousy  and  spite  of
these  women  ;  but  he  was  none  the  less  on  good  terms  with
all  of  them,  and  the  scandal  of  this  public  harem,  and  that
of  the  filth  and  impiety  of  his  nightly  suppers  was  extreme,
and  spread  everywhere.

54

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  il

Religious  enor¬
mities.

Lent  had  begun,  and  I  foresaw  a  dreadful  stigma  or  else  a  hor¬
rible  sacrilege  at  Easter  which  would  only  increase  the  already
terrible  scandal.  It  was  this  that  made  me
resolve  to  speak  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  though
I  had  long  kept  silence  as  to  his  debaucheries,  having  lost  all
hope  about  them.  I  told  him,  therefore,  that  the  straits
where  Easter  would  place  him  seemed  to  me  so  terrible  as
regarded  God,  so  grievous  in  regard  to  the  world,  which  likes
to  do  evil  itself  but  thinks  it  bad  in  others,  especially  in  its
masters,  that,  against  my  resolutions,  I  could  not  abstain
from  representing  to  him  the  consequences.  He  listened
patiently,  and  asked  what  I  wished  to  propose  to  him.  I
told  him  it  was  only  an  expedient,  which  would  not  remove
the  scandal,  but  lessen  it  and  prevent  an  excess  of  indigna¬
tion  which  he  must  otherwise  expect.  It  was  simply  to  go
and  pass  at  his  country-house  at  Yillers-Cotterets  the  five
last  days  of  Holy  Week,  and  Easter  Sunday  and  Monday  ;
to  take  with  him  no  ladies  or  roués,  but  half  a  dozen  persons
whom  he  liked,  of  good  reputation,  with  whom  to  talk  and
amuse  himself  ;  to  eat  maigre,  in  which  he  could  have  just
as  good  eating  as  in  gras  ;  not  to  talk  loosely  at  table,  or
sit  there  too  long  ;  to  go  to  service  on  Good  Friday  and  to
high-mass  on  Easter-Sunday  ;  and  that  was  all  I  asked  of
him.  He  took  the  advice  in  good  part  ;  in  fact,  it  comforted
him,  for  he  did  not  know  what  I  might  propose  ;  he  thanked
me  for  having  thought  of  the  expedient,  and  was  really  per¬
suaded  that  the  trip  was  wise  and  that  he  ought  to  make  it.
The  misery  was  that  the  good  he  resolved  upon  was  so
seldom  executed,  because  of  the  scoundrels  with  whom  he
surrounded  himself.  This  was  just  what  happened  now.
At  the  first  word  he  uttered  about  it  his  mistresses  and
roués  took  alarm,  and  the  worthy  group  so  worked  on  his
facile  nature  that  the  trip  was  abandoned.  When  I  took

1716]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

55

leave  of  him  to  go  to  my  own  estate  I  conjured  him  to
restrain  himself  on  the  four  holy  days,  namely,  Thursday,
Friday,  Saturday,  and  Sunday  ;  and  above  all  things,  not  to
commit  the  gratuitous  sacrilege  of  taking  the  sacrament,
which  would  injure  him  more  with  the  world  which  he  ex¬
pected  to  conciliate  than  his  abstention,  because  his  life  would
soon  and  very  publicly  give  the  lie  to  it.

Thereupon  I  went  off  to  La  Ferté,  hoping  to  have,  at  least,
warded  off  the  worst.  I  had  the  grief  to  learn  that  after
passing  the  last  days  of  Holy  Week  worse  than  equivocally,
though  with  more  concealment  than  usual,  he  had  been  to
nearly  all  the  functions  of  those  days,  and  on  Easter-Sunday
had  heard  high  mass  at  Sainte-Eustache,  his  parish  church
where  with  great  pomp  and  ceremony  he  had  taken  the
sacrament.  Alas  !  it  was  the  last  communion  of  this  un-
happy  prince  ;  and  it  resulted,  as  regards  the  world,  precisely
as  I  had  warned  him.  Let  us  leave  so  sad  a  matter  and
turn  to  those  that  were  happening  elsewhere.

We  have  seen  the  beginning  of  the  Scotch  project,  the
secret  journey  of  the  Pretender  to  embark  in  Bretagne  and,
cabal  which  his  escape  from  the  assassins  of  Stair.  This
committed  the  project  had  been  resolved  upon  with  the  late

regent  to  Eng-  r  J

land.  king  and  with  the  King  of  Spain,  who  agreed

between  them  to  pay  the  costs.  The  death  of  Louis  XIY.
was  therefore,  from  this  point  of  view,  one  of  the  greatest
misfortunes  of  James  III.  The  memory  of  the  king  was
still  too  recent  at  the  time  of  this  secret  journey  for  France
to  seem  to  have  changed  in  sentiment.  He  was  therefore
allowed  to  go  on,  but  without  the  intention  of  giving  him
any  help,  unless  encouraged  to  do  so  by  a  sudden  revolution
in  Great  Britain.  I,  myself,  was  thoroughly  Jacobite,  and
fully  persuaded  that  the  interest  of  France  was  to  give
England  a  long-protracted  domestic  occupation,  which  should

56

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

put  her  out  of  condition  to  think  of  foreign  affairs  and  of
encroaching  upon  the  commerce  of  Spain  and  our  own.
iSTor  had  we  a  less  interest  in  keeping  out  of  relations  with
the  King  of  England,  who  by  his  States  and  his  interests  in
Germany  was  more  German  than  English,  and  always  in
fear  and  in  leading  strings  and,  as  much  as  he  could  be,  in
union  with  the  emperor.

Thinking  as  I  did  about  England,  I  could  not  like  an
alliance  with  his  ambassador,  which  a  triumvirate  formed  of
Noailles,  Canillac,  and  the  Abbé  Dubois,  seeking  to  turn  the
regent  toward  King  George,  pressed  upon  the  former  by  an
arugment  that  was  purely  selfish,  consequently  detestable,
namely  :  that  King  George  was  a  usurper  of  the  crown  of
Great  Britain,  and,  if  any  misfortune  happened  to  the  young
king,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  would  be  the  usurper  of  the  crown
of  France  ;  consequently,  the  same  interest  was  in  both,  and
this  was  a  reason  to  cultivate  each  other,  and  so  guarantee
their  mutual  crowns  and  avoid  any  step  which  should  part
them  from  this  one  grand  object  ;  whereby,  they  added,  the
French  prince  gained  all  that  could  insure  his  hopes,  while
the  English  king,  being  in  possession,  gained  almost  nothing.
Moreover,  they  added,  the  latter  had  to  do  with  a  Pretender
without  friends  or  help,  while  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  should  the
case  occur,  would  have  as  competitor  the  powerful  King  of
Spain,  a  country  conjoined  to  the  coasts  of  France  by  sea
and  land.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  swallowed  this  poison,  offered  with
great  adroitness  by  persons  on  whose  intelligence,  capacity,
The  Due  and  personal  attachment  he  believed  he  ought

desh'ed  the'CVer  to  count,  but  who  proved  to  him  in  the  end
crown-  that  their  intelligence  was  unsound,  their  capa¬

city  nought,  their  attachment  worthless  and  solely  concerned
with  themselves.  The  prince  had  too  much  penetration  not

1710]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

57

to  perceive  the  trap;  but  the  wonder  is  the  thing  that
seduced  him,  namely  :  the  tortuous  course  of  such  policy,
and  not  in  the  least  the  desire  to  reign.  I  fully  expect  that
if  these  Memoirs  ever  see  the  light,  this  statement  will
create  a  laugh  and  discredit  my  other  statements,  and  make
me  pass  for  a  great  fool,  if  I  expect  my  readers  to  believe
it  ;  or  for  an  imbecile  if  I  believe  it  myself.  Yet  such  is  the
simple  truth;  to  which  I  sacrifice  what  may  be  thought  of
me.  However  incredible  it  may  appear,  it  is  true.  I  dare  to
advance  the  opinion  that  there  are  many  such  truths  ignored
in  histories,  which  would  amaze  the  world  could  they  only
be  known,  and  which  are  unknown  solely  because  so  few
histories  are  written  at  first  hand.

I  repeat  it,  and  I  owe  it  to  the  truth  which  reigns  in  these
Memoirs,  that  never  did  the  Duc  d’Orléans  desire  the  crown  ;
he  desired  most  sincerely  the  king’s  life  ;  he  did  more,  he
desired  that  he  should  reign  for  himself,  as  we  shall  see  in
the  sequel.  Never  of  himself  did  he  think  of  the  king’s  life
failing,  nor  of  the  things  that  might  follow  that  misfortune,
which  he  regarded  most  honestly  as  such,  and  as  a  misfor¬
tune  for  himself  should  it  ever  occur.  The  most  that  he
did  was  to  lend  an  ear  to  reflections  about  it  which  others
presented  ;  he  was  utterly  incapable  of  thinking  of  it  him¬
self  or  of  the  measures  to  be  taken  should  that  contingency
arrive.  I  do  not  say  that  if  it  arrived  he  would  have
abandoned  the  right  given  to  him  by  the  mutual  renun¬
ciations  and  guaranteed  by  all  Europe  ;  but  I  do  say
that  possession  of  the  crown  was  to  him  the  smallest  con¬
sideration  in  that  phase  of  the  matter;  and  that  honour,
courage,  and  his  own  safety  would  have  had  by  far  the
largest  share.  I  say  again  :  these  are  truths  which  my
perfect  knowledge,  my  conscience,  and  my  honour  oblige
me  to  report.

58

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

The  regent  could  not  long  hide  from  me  the  strong  in¬
clination  he  had  taken  towards  England.  I  approved  of  it
up  to  a  certain  point,  to  preserve  the  peace

I  urge  upon  the  x

regent  a  union  which  the  exhaustion  of  France  and  a  long
with  spam.  minority  needed  so  sorely,  and  also  to  restrain
the  too  dangerous  leaning  of  King  George  to  the  emperor.
But  I  could  not  approve  of  any  dispositions  going  farther
than  that.  I  repeated  to  the  regent  what  I  had  often  said
to  him,  and  had  also  stated  more  than  once  before  the  Coun¬
cil  of  Regency,  namely,  that  the  essential  interest  of  the
State  was  in  a  solid  and  unalterable  union  with  Spain.  I
also  urged,  when  the  regent  and  I  were  tête-à-tête  (as  we
usually  were),  that  after  the  attack  upon  him  in  Spainj  and
his  reconciliation  with  the  king,  together  with  his  personal
position  in  relation  to  the  renunciations,  nothing  could
turn  personally  more  to  his  good  or  more  to  his  harm
in  France  and  throughout  all  Europe  than  to  treat  Spain  in
the  manner  I  proposed  or  the  reverse.  I  dwelt  on  the  fact
that  to  Rome  (which  in  those  days  was  still  the  centre
of  affairs)  and  to  all  the  other  Courts  as  well,  the  inter¬
ests  of  the  two  branches  of  the  house  of  Austria  had  never
ceased  to  he  equally  strong,  even  to  the  domestic  and  inter¬
nal  affairs  of  the  empire  ;  that  nothing  could  touch  the
one  that  the  other  did  not  incontinently  intervene,  as  was
shown  in  all  the  general  and  special  treaties,  so  that  the  rest
of  Europe  had  long  given  up  wishing  to  disunite  them  and
only  thought  now  of  protection  against  them.  I  told  him
that  this  was  the  model  we  ought  to  follow  if  we  wished  to
prosper  both  within  and  without  the  kingdom,  and  so  raise
ourselves  to  the  point  of  becoming  the  dictators  of  Europe,
as  the  house  of  Austria  had  so  long  been, — even  after  it  had
tacitly  renounced  universal  sovereignty,  to  which  it  felt,  at
last,  it  could  never  attain.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

59

I  entreated  the  regent  to  remember  that  the  true  enemies
of  France  were  the  house  of  Austria  and  the  English  ;  that
the  knowledge  he  had  of  history  did  not  show  him  anything
else  than  their  hatred  and  jealousy  of  the  sole  crown  that
could  arrest  their  ambition  ;  that  these  passions  had  taken
a  fresh  increase  through  the  rivalry  of  Charles  V.  and
François  I.,  and  from  the  vahi  efforts  of  Philippe  IL,  in  the
days  of  the  League;  and  since  then,  as  regarded  England,
by  the  irreconcilable  hatred  of  the  late  king  for  the  Prince
of  Orange,  the  effects  of  which  had  been  felt  throughout  all
Europe,  and  by  the  protection  given  to  James  II.  and  his
family,  and  the  recognition  of  James  III.,  in  spite  of  the
solemn  engagements  of  the  Peace  of  Eyswick,  which  King
William,  dying  as  he  was,  had  made  use  of  to  unite  all
Europe  against  France,  and  to  rouse  the  hatred  of  English¬
men  into  fury.  I  begged  him  to  consider  that  although  a
cabal  of  women  at  the  Court  of  Queen  Anne  had  saved
France  from  fatal  disaster  by  separating  England  from  her
allies,  he  ought  to  see  that  the  treaties  of  peace  that  followed
were  only  the  work  of  a  Court  cabal,  which  found  them  for
its  own  interests,  in  spite  of  the  nation  and  even  against  the
majority  of  the  Court.

The  regent,  who  listened  to  me  with  great  attention,  had
nothing  to  oppose  to  the  force  of  these  natural  arguments.
He  agreed  to  the  principles  and  the  facts.  He  assured  me
that  his  intention  was  to  ally  himself  as  much  as  he  could
with  Spain  ;  hut  that  this  resolution  ought  not  to  be  allowed
to  penetrate  the  mind  of  Spain,  governed  as  it  was  by  an
ambitious  queen  and  a  very  dangerous  minister  [Alberoni],
who  could  turn  the  King  of  Spain  to  act  as  they  pleased,
and  were  very  capable  of  abusing  this  knowledge.1  Still

1  Saint-Simon’s  record  of  the  Regency  is  largely  made  up  of  the  history
and  intrigues  of  the  Court  of  Spain  ;  it  would  be  impossible  to  make  a

60

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  il

less  was  it  desirable  to  show  this  resolution  to  England
and  the  other  powers,  as  it  would  only  produce  a  coolness
towards  us,  redouble  their  jealousy  and  their  efforts  to  divide
us  from  Spain,  and  convince  them  that  we  were  always
considering  them  as  enemies.  He  went  on  to  say  that  such
cautious  management  was  all  the  more  necessary  because,
as  I  knew  very  well,  the  great  maxim  of  the  Court  of  Vienna,
especially  since  the  Peace  of  Eyswick,  was  an  indissoluble
alliance  with  the  maritime  powers,  like  that  already  formed
by  King  William  between  England  and  Holland,  which  com¬
mercial  jealousy  had  never  been  able  to  shake,  —  an  alliance
which  the  emperor,  being  master  of  the  empire,  could  force
to  take  up  arms  without  other  cause  than  his  will  and
personal  interests.

I  agreed  with  the  regent  as  to  the  solid  value  of  the
precaution  he  proposed,  provided  it  was  only  a  precau¬
tion,  and  that  he  would  agree  to  hold  to  the  maxims  I
had  just  suggested.  He  assured  me  that  that  was  his  firm
intention  ;  and  the  conversation  finished  thus,  —  turning
finally  on  the  mystery  and  caution  with  which  he  ought  to
aid  the  Pretender,  now  landed  in  Scotland,  concealing  the
help  he  gave  him  in  thickest  darkness,  unless  he  met  with
some  unhoped-for  and  rapid  success.  Nevertheless,  the
regent  had  not  the  strength  to  shake  off  that  pernicious
idea  of  two  usurpers  which  had  been  inculcated  in  him,  nor
to  resist  the  continual  talk  of  those  three  men,  who  in
concert  with  one  another  —  sometimes  together,  sometimes
separately  —  kept  always  at  him  and  put  constant  obstacles
in  the  way  of  everything  that  did  not  suit  their  views  with
regard  to  Stair  and  England.  I  often  had  bouts  with  the
regent  about  it.  If  I  had  not  known  his  feebleness,  I  might

clear  and  comprehensible  abridgment  of  them,  and  therefore  that  part  of
the  Memoir  is  chiefly  omitted.  —  Tr.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

61

often  have  hoped  to  make  him  change  his  course  ;  but  I
was  only  one  against  three,  whose  successive  assiduity  easily
knocked  over  all  that  I  said,  demonstrated,  and  even  con¬
vinced  him  of  ;  so  that  the  regent  was  invariably  hooked
in  by  them  as  he  floated,  against  his  inclination.  He  in¬
demnified  himself  for  this  by  jests  and  taunts  upon  them,
to  which  Dubois  was  accustomed,  and  bToailles  only  shook
his  ears;  but  Canillac’s  pride  was  often  wounded.  The
regent  let  him  sulk,  laughed,  and  presently  coaxed  him,  so
much  had  that  man’s  pompous  jargon  accustomed  the  regent
to  consider  him.

Stair  and  the  Huncio  Bentivoglio  were  two  rascals,  who
to  advance  their  own  fortunes  held  nothing  sacred,  and

were  now  working  for  the  overthrow  of
France;  and  if  either  of  the  two  was  more
corrupt,  blacker,  and  a  greater  scoundrel  than

Rascality  of
Stair  and
Bentivoglio.

the  other,  it  was  Bentivoglio.  Both  were  public  impostors
taken  almost  in  the  act,  and  so  well-known  and  dishonoured
even  in  their  own  Courts  that  their  recall  could  not  have
been  refused  if  asked  for  vigorously.  But  the  regent  kept
these  firebrands  near  him  under  the  name  and  character  of
Pope’s  nuncio  and  English  ambassador,  —  the  two  greatest
enemies  that  France  and  his  person  could  have  had.  We
shall  see  a  few  traits  of  that  infamous  nuncio,  who  was  not
ashamed  to  keep  an  opera  girl,  by  whom  he  had  two
daughters,  so  publicly  known  as  such  that  they  went  by
the  names  of  Unigenitus  and  Legend.  If  I  were  to  swell
these  memoirs  with  the  details  of  what  passed  concerning
the  bull  during  the  regency  and  the  nunciature  of  Bentivoglio
it  is  not  employing  too  strong  a  term  to  say  —  and  say
to  its  fullest  extent  —  that  the  reader’s  hair  would  stand  on
end  at  the  recital  of  the  daily  conduct  of  Bentivoglio.  He
was  sustained  by  the  former  Bishop  of  Troyes,  who  had

62

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

thought  very  differently  in  other  days,  though  now  his
friends  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  the  Rohans,  and  others  of
the  cabal  had  turned  him  round,  he  supposing  it  made  him
more  in  the  fashion  on  one  side,  and  more  important  on  the
other.

This  party,  immediately  after  the  death  of  the  king,  had
endeavoured  to  win  me  over,  or  at  any  rate  not  to  have  me
The  party  of  the  against  them.  They  were  not  ignorant  of  my
umgemtus  make  sentiments  through  Père  Tellier,  from  whom  I
proposition.  had  never  hidden  them.  Cardinal  de  Bissy,
and,  some  time  after,  the  Prince  and  the  Cardinal  de  Rohan,
both  together,  talked  to  me.  I  replied,  civilly  and  modestly,
that  I  was  not  a  bishop,  neither  was  I  learned  or  a  theo¬
logian  ;  and  on  that  line  I  beat  a  retreat.  It  did  not  satisfy
them.  The  Duc  de  La  Force,  who  was  devoted  to  the  Jesuits
from  the  time  of  his  conversion,  was  despatched  to  me  to
make  a  last  effort.  For  myself,  I  should  have  raised  no
standard  in  this  affair.  I  restrained  myself  within  the  bounds
that  were  proper  to  a  man  who  could  speak  and  give  his  opin¬
ion  in  the  Council  of  Regency,  or  in  private  to  the  regent  ;
but  they  knew,  from  the  days  of  the  late  king,  what  they
could  count  on  as  to  me,  and  they  were  alarmed  by  my  in¬
timacy  with  Cardinal  de  Noailles.  La  Force  argued  with  me
on  the  grounds  of  the  matter.  He  knew,  and  expressed  very
well  what  he  knew  ;  but  as  policy  was  his  religion,  and  in
order  to  convince  me  he  had  to  be  convinced  himself,  it
is  no  wonder  that  he  did  not  succeed.

At  an  end,  finally,  of  his  reasons  and  reasonings,  he  began
upon  the  regent’s  interest,  present  and  future,  implicating
Rome,  the  Jesuits,  and  most  of  the  bishops,  and  spread  him¬
self  upon  that.  But  as  politics  and  self-interest  can  never
take  the  place  of  religion  and  truth,  his  policy  was  as  vain
with  me  as  his  doctrine.  Not  knowing  what  to  do  further,

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

63

he  came  at  last  to  the  argument  ad  hominem,  from  which,  as
I  heard  afterwards,  he  and  those  whom  he  served  hoped
much.  He  said  he  must  own  to  me  that  he  did  not  under¬
stand  me,  and  that  he  could  not  reconcile  my  opinions  with
my  conduct;  that  I  was  openly  the  enemy  of  the  Duc  de
Noailles,  never  sparing  him  and  never  being  moved  by  all  he
did  to  soften  me  ;  that  I  even  piqued  myself  upon  this  ;  that
I  ran  a  tilt  against  him  at  every  meeting  of  the  Council  of
Eegency  and  wherever  else  I  met  him  ;  but  that  while  I  did
not  hide  my  desire  to  ruin  him  I  neglected  the  sure  and  cer¬
tain  means  I  had  in  hand,  and  continued  to  he  the  friend  and
supporter  of  the  Cardinal  de  Noailles.  I  asked  La  Force
what  was  this  sure  and  certain  means  that  I  had  of  destroy¬
ing  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  and  assured  him  that  he  would  do
me  the  greatest  pleasure  if  he  would  tell  me.  “  Destroy  his
uncle,”  he  replied.  “  You  can  do  it  by  simply  supporting  the
other  side.  The  uncle  lost,  the  nephew  necessarily  falls  with
him,  and  you  are  avenged.”  Horror  made  the  blood  rush  into
my  face.  “  Monsieur,”  I  said  angrily,  “  is  that  how  matters
of  religion  are  treated  ?  Convince  yourself  once  for  all,  and
tell  it  flatly  to  your  friends,  that  however  certain  I  might  be
of  causing  the  total  and  irrevocable  fall  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles
by  pulling  a  single  hair  from  the  head  of  his  uncle,  he  would
live  in  safety  from  me.  No,  monsieur,”  I  added  with  indig¬
nation,  “I  admit  that  there  is  nothing  honourable  that  I
would  not  do  to  crush  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  but  he  may
live  and  reign  two  thousand  years  before  I  would  kill  him
through  the  body  of  the  cardinal.”  La  Force  seemed  con¬
founded,  and  after  that  answer  he  never  tried  to  persuade
me  a  wain.  I  never  told  this  to  the  Cardinal  de  Noailles,  or

O

to  any  one  who  might  repeat  it  to  him.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry,  who  lived  in  the  manner  I  have
already  explained,  chose  apparently  to  spend  the  summer

64

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

nights  in  the  garden  of  the  Luxembourg  in  perfect  liberty.
Accordingly  she  had  all  the  gates  walled  up,  and  kept  none
The  Duchesse  de  open,  except  that  of  the  iron  railing  at  the

Berry  walls  up  f00f.  s^a^.cage  jn  middle  of  the

the  garden  of  the

Luxembourg.  palace.  This  garden,  public  at  all  times,  was
the  resort  of  the  entire  faubourg  of  Saint-Germain,  which  was
thus  deprived  of  it.  M.  le  Duc  immediately  threw  open  the
gardens  of  the  hôtel  de  Condé  and  made  them  public,  for  a
contrast.  The  uproar  was  great,  and  the  remarks  unreserved
as  to  the  reasons  for  this  closure.  The  princess  was  also
much  annoyed  at  having  to  wear  mourning.  The  merchants
of  stuffs  seized  the  moment  to  induce  her  to  ask  the  regent
to  shorten  the  regulated  periods  of  mourning,  which  he  did
with  his  usual  persuadability,  so  that  now  such  garments  are
scarcely  worn  for  the  nearest  relatives,  and  may  be  worn  for
those  who  are  not  relations  at  all,  with  the  utmost  inde¬
cency.  But,  as  the  bad  always  lasts  longer  than  good,  this
shortening  of  mourning  is  the  one  sole  regulation  of  the
regency  which  exists  in  the  present  day.

III.

Parliament  persisted  in  opposing  two  of  the  regent’s
edicts:  namely,  those  of  erecting  the  two  offices  of  grand¬
master  of  posts  and  superintendent  of  build-

Parliament  #

opposes  the  edicts  iugs.  They  pretended  that,  these  offices  hav-

of  the  regent.  ,  ,  -,  , ,

mg  been  suppressed,  and  the  suppression
enregistered  with  a  clause  that  they  should  not  be  re-estab¬
lished,  they  were  forced  to  reject  them.  It  was  not  that  the
matter  was  of  interest  to  themselves  or  to  the  people,  nor  yet
to  the  State  ;  but  this  assembly  wanted  to  figure,  to  make
itself  of  importance,  to  be  reckoned  with  ;  and  it  could  only
do  this  by  fighting  and  by  deliberate  opposition,  for  which
it  lost  no  occasion.  It  had  sounded  the  regent  and  then
fathomed  him  ;  his  weakness  assured  it  of  success.  He  was
surrounded  by  enemies  who  kept  him,  in  a  way,  in  awe  of
them,  and  who,  with  far  less  mind  and  knowledge  than  him¬
self,  deceived  and  fooled  him,  they  being  allied  with  the  par¬
liament,  which,  in  turn,  had  the  bastards  with  it,  and  held
the  princes  of  the  blood  in  check.  These  enemies  were  :  the
Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  whose  head  had  been  turned  by  hear¬
ing  conversations  about  the  Memoirs  of  Cardinal  de  Retz
and  Toly,  which  were  then  extremely  in  vogue,  and  who
wanted  to  be  another  Duc  de  Beaufort,  leader  of  the  Fronde,
king  of  the  halles  and  of  Paris,  the  supporter  of  parliament  ;
d’Effiat,  friend  of  Villeroy  and  the  Duc  du  Maine,  who  had
long  ago  sold  his  master  and  found  it  profitable  to  negotiate
between  him  and  parliament;  Besons,  a  dull  fool,  though
marshal  of  France,  who  had  put  himself  under  d’Effiat’s

VOL.  IV.  —  5

66  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

tutelage;  Canillac  ;  ISToailles,  of  whom  the  regent  was  in
mortal  terror  as  to  his  management  of  the  finances,  and  who
was  delighted  to  take  part  in  the  negotiations  with  parlia¬
ment,  and  see  troubles  arise  that  would  make  him  necessary  ;
Huxelles,  the  intimate  friend  of  the  president,  whose  theme
with  the  regent  was  the  necessity  of  a  good  understanding
with  parliament  in  order  to  restrain  it  in  all  matters  relating
to  the  hull  and  Borne;  and  finally,  Broglie,  ISTocé,  and  other
little  fellows,  taught  by  the  rest,  or  by  their  own  intimates,
to  slip  in  their  word  à  propos.  Thus,  first  on  one  matter,  then
on  another,  the  struggle  increased,  strengthened  itself,  grew
heated,  and  finally  brought  things,  as  we  shall  see,  to  the
edge  of  the  precipice.

I  had  talked  against  all  this  with  an  infinite  number  of
arguments  ;  the  weakness  and  fears  of  the  regent  set  them¬
selves  up  against  all  that  I  could  say  to  him.  In  the  end,  I
declared  to  him  that  I  washed  my  hands  of  what  would
happen  to  him  through  the  misery  of  his  conduct  with  par¬
liament,  the  audacity  of  the  performances  of  that  body,  the
rascality  of  the  men  who  surrounded  him,  who  had  flung
their  grapnel  on  him,  and  whom  he  was  loading  with  kind¬
ness,  confidence,  and  favours,  while  they  were  selling  him  to
their  own  interests  and  views,  and  to  the  parliament.  I
added  that  I  would  never  again,  in  all  my  life,  speak  to  him
of  anything  relating  to  the  parliament  ;  but  I  predicted,  and
begged  him  to  remember  it,  that  he  would  not  go  far  before
matters  reached  a  point  between  him  and  that  body  at  which
he  would  find  himself  forced  either  to  yield  all  authority  to
it,  and  all  exercise  of  the  regency,  or  have  recourse  to  violent
measures  that  were  dangerous.  I  kept  my  word;  and  we
shall  see  by  and  by  what  happened.

He  had  at  that  time  a  matter  to  bring  forward  which  all
these  men  were  using  to  make  him  docile  towards  parliament.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

67

A  Scotchman,  of  I  know  not  what  station,  a  great  gamester
and  a  great  combiner,  who  had  won  immensely  in  all  the
Law,  called  Lass  ;  countries  he  had  visited,  came  to  France  in
^  1  "  the  last  months  of  the  late  king’s  reign.  His

name  was  Law  ;  but  after  he  became  well  known  people  were
so  accustomed  to  call  him  Lass  that  his  real  name  of  Law
disappeared.  Some  one  spoke  of  him  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  as  a
man  profoundly  versed  in  matters  of  banking,  commerce,  the
movement  of  money,  currency,  and  finances.  This  gave  the
prince  a  desire  to  see  him.  He  received  him  several  times,
and  was  so  pleased  that  he  spoke  of  him  to  Desmarets  (then
minister  of  finance)  as  a  man  from  whom  he  could  get  ideas  ;
and  I  remember  that  he  often  talked  of  him  to  me  at  that
time.  Desmarets  sent  for  Law,  who  was  with  him  a  long
while  on  various  occasions  ;  but  I  never  knew  what  passed
between  them  or  what  resulted  from  these  interviews,  ex¬
cept  that  Desmarets  was  pleased  and  felt  some  esteem  for
him.

At  that  time  the  Duc  d’Orléans  only  saw  him  now  and
then  ;  but  after  the  first  opening  of  affairs  on  the  death  of  the
king  was  over,  Law,  who  had  made  acquaintance  with  the  sub¬
ordinates  of  the  Palais-Royal  and  some  alliance  with  the  Abbé
Dubois,  presented  himself  again  before  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
and  soon  after  saw  him  in  private  and  proposed  to  him  his
financial  scheme.  The  regent  made  him  work  with  the  Due
de  ÎN  oailles,  Rouillé,  and  Amelot,  the  latter  on  the  question
of  commerce.  The  first  two  were  afraid  of  an  intruder  put
by  the  hand  of  the  regent  into  their  administration,  so  that
he  was  long  bandied  from  pillar  to  post,  though  always  sup¬
ported  by  the  regent.  In  the  end,  the  idea  of  the  bank
project  became  so  pleasing  to  the  prince  that  he  resolved  to
carry  it  out.  He  spoke  privately  to  all  the  leading  men  of
finance,  in  whom  he  found  great  opposition.  He  had  often

6S  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON  [chap.  in.

talked  to  me  about  it,  and  I  had  contented  myself  with
simply  listening  to  a  matter  that  I  have  never  liked  and  con¬
sequently  never  understood;  the  accomplishment  of  which,
moreover,  seemed  to  me  very  far  off.  When  the  regent  had
fully  made  up  his  mind,  he  called  an  assembly  of  financial
and  commercial  leaders,  at  which  Law  explained  the  whole
plan  of  the  bank  which  he  proposed  to  establish.  He  was
listened  to  as  much  as  he  wished.  Some,  who  saw  that  the
regent  had  almost  determined  on  the  scheme  acquiesced  ;
but  the  greater  number  opposed  it.1

1  Extract  from  the  minutes  of  this  meeting,  held  Oct.  24,  1715,  for  the
institution  of  the  Bank  of  Law  :  “  The  idea  of  this  bank  is  to  transfer
all  the  revenues  of  the  king  to  the  bank  ;  to  give  the  receivers  and  farm-
ers-general  notes  of  ten  crowns,  a  hundred  crowns,  a  thousand  crowns  of
the  weight  and  standard  coin  of  the  present  day  ;  which  shall  be  called
bank-bills;  the  said  bills  shall  be  conveyed  by  the  said  receivers  and
farmers-general  to  the  royal  treasury,  which  shall  return  to  them  nego¬
tiable  receipts  [quittances  comptables ].  All  those  to  whom  payments  are
due  by  the  king  will  receive  at  the  royal  treasury  only  bank  bills,  the
value  of  which  they  can  immediately  go  to  the  bank  and  receive,  no  one
being  forced  to  keep  them  or  to  receive  them  in  commerce  ;  but  the  Sieur
Lass  asserts  that  the  convenience  will  be  such  that  every  one  will  be
charmed  to  have  these  bank  bills  rather  than  money,  because  of  the  facil¬
ity  of  making  payments  in  paper,  and  the  certainty  of  receiving  the  value
whenever  they  wish.  He  adds  that  it  will  be  impossible  ever  to  have
more  bills  than  money,  because  the  bills  will  only  be  made  pro  rata  to
coin  ;  and  by  this  means  all  costs  of  remittance,  the  danger  of  convey¬
ances,  the  multiplicity  of  clerks,  etc.,  will  be  avoided.”

After  opinions  had  been  given  by  all  present  the  regent  said  that
“  he  had  come  there  persuaded  that  the  bank  ought  to  be  established  ;
but,  after  the  opinions  he  had  just  heard,  he  agreed  wholly  with  that
of  M.  le  Duc  de  Noailles  ;  and  it  would  be  announced  to  every  one  that
same  day  that  the  bank  would  not  be  carried  out.”

John  Law  was  born  in  Edinburgh  in  April,  1671.  Through  his  mother,
Jane  Campbell,  he  belonged  to  the  family  of  the  Dukes  of  Argyll.  His
father  was  a  rich  banker  in  Edinburgh  and  possessed  the  manorial  estates
of  Lauriston  and  Randlestone.  The  above  statement  of  the  banking  sys¬
tem  does  not  fully  set  forth  John  Law’s  theory,  which  was  “  to  base  paper
money  on  some  other  article  of  value  than  specie,  and  not  redeemable  in
specie,  but  which  shall  maintain  an  equality  in  value  with  specie  ;  ”  and
also  “  that  a  commodity  may  be  purchased  and  its  price  be  retained.”

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

69

Law  was  not  disheartened.  People  talked  a  little  French
under  their  breaths  ;  the  same  assembly  was  called  again,
and,  in  presence  of  the  regent.  Law  again  explained  his  proj¬
ect.  This  time  there  were  few  to  oppose  him,  and  those  few
feebly.  The  Duc  de  Noailles  dared  not  hold  to  his  opinion,
as  he  was  urged  to  do  by  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  who
always  wanted  to  thwart  the  regent  and  had  no  other  reason,
for  he  knew  nothing  about  finances  or  anything  else;  in
consequence  of  which  he  usually  gave  his  vote  in  council  in
two  words,  or  if,  very  rarely,  he  had  to  say  more  he  brought
his  opinion  on  a  little  sheet  of  paper,  and  when  it  was  his
turn  to  speak  he  would  put  on  his  spectacles  and  read  off
hastily  the  five  or  six  lines  he  had  written.  I  never  saw
him  explain  his  opinion  in  any  other  way  ;  and  in  this  way
not  more  than  four  or  five  times  at  most.  The  hank  was
thus  approved,  and  it  now  became  necessary  to  propose  it  to
the  Council  of  Regency.

The  regent  took  the  trouble  to  explain  the  matter  in  pri¬
vate  to  every  member  of  the  Council  and  to  let  him  gently
understand  that  he  wished  the  bank  to  pass  without  opposi¬
tion.  He  talked  it  out  with  me  fully  ;  and  I  was  forced  to
reply.  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  conceal  my  ignorance  or
my  distaste  for  financial  matters  ;  yet  all  that  he  had  now
explained  seemed  to  me  good  in  itself,  in  so  far  that  without
levy,  without  costs,  and  without  causing  harm  or  embarrass¬
ment  to  any  one,  money  could  suddenly  he  doubled  by  the
bills  of  this  hank,  and  become  portable  with  great  ease  ;  but
that  I  saw  two  drawbacks  to  that  advantage  :  first,  to  govern

This  theory  had  already  been  rejected  by  the  Scotch  parliament.  The
speculation  of  the  Mississippi,  by  which  he  ruined  himself  and  France  was
only  an  incidental  circumstance  in  his  career,  at  the  close  of  it.  See
“  Recherches  Historiques  sur  le  Système  de  Law,”  par  M.  Levasseur  ;  and
«  Histoire  du  système  de  finances  pendant  les  années  1719  et  1720,”  par
Duhautcliamp.  —  Tk.

70  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

the  bank  with  enough  foresight  and  wisdom  not  to  make
more  bills  than  they  ought,  in  order  to  be  always  above  their
resources  and  so  be  able  to  boldly  face  all  contingencies  and
pay  coin  to  every  one  who  might  ask  it  for  the  bills  they
brought  ;  second,  that  what  was  excellent  in  a  republic,  or
in  a  monarchy  where  finance  is  wholly  popular  as  it  is  in
England,  became  dangerous  in  an  absolute  monarchy  like
that  of  France,  where  the  necessities  of  war  ill-undertaken
and  ill-sustained,  the  rapacity  of  ministers,  favourites,  mis¬
tresses,  the  luxury,  extravagant  expenditure,  and  prodigality
of  a  king  might  soon  exhaust  a  bank,  ruin  the  holders  of
bills,  and  overthrow  the  kingdom.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  agreed
to  all  this  but  insisted  that  a  king  would  have  so  great  and
essential  an  interest  in  never  injuring,  or  letting  minister,
favourite,  or  mistress  injure  the  bank  that  this  great  danger
need  never  be  feared.  On  that  point  we  disputed  long  with¬
out  in  the  least  convincing  each  other,  so  that  when,  a  few
days  later,  he  proposed  the  bank  to  the  Council  of  Regency,
I  gave  my  opinion  as  I  have  now  explained  it,  but  with  more
force  and  at  greater  length  ;  and  I  concluded  by  voting  to
reject  the  bank  as  a  fatal  temptation  in  an  absolute  mon¬
archy,  although  in  a  free  country  it  might  be  a  very  good  and
wise  establishment.

Few  present  dared  to  be  of  that  opinion  ;  the  bank  was
adopted.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  made  me  some  few  reproaches,
but  gently,  for  having  said  so  much.  I  excused  myself  on
the  duty  that  I  owed  to  my  honour  and  conscience  to  give
my  opinion  according  to  my  conviction,  after  having  thought
it  over  thoroughly  ;  and  also  to  explain  myself  sufficiently
to  make  my  opinion  clear,  as  well  as  my  reasons  for  hold¬
ing  it.  Immediately  after,  the  edict  was  enregistered  by
parliament  without  difficulty  [May  2,  1716]  ;  that  assem¬
bly  being  willing  occasionally  to  oblige  the  regent  with  a

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

71

good  grace,  in  order  to  stiffen  itself  against  him  later  more
effectually.

Some  time  later  (to  relate  the  matter  consecutively),  the
Duc  d’Orléans  wished  me  to  see  Law  and  let  him  explain  to
The  regent  puts  me  his  plans  ;  he  asked  it  as  a  kindness.  I
me  m  commum-  excusej  myself  as  best  I  could  ;  but  several
against  my  win.  times  the  regent  returned  to  the  charge,  and
finally  exacted  it.  Accordingly,  Law  came  to  see  me.  With
much  that  was  foreign  in  his  behaviour,  his  expressions  and
his  accent,  he  explained  himself  in  very  good  terms,  with
great  clearness  and  precision.  He  talked  to  me  long  about
his  hank,  which  was  really  an  excellent  thing  in  itself,  but
for  another  country  than  France,  and  with  a  prince  less  facile
than  the  regent.  Law  had  no  other  solution  to  give  me  of
my  two  objections  than  those  the  regent  had  already  given,
which  did  not  satisfy  me.  But  as  the  thing  was  done,  and
the  question  now  was  how  to  govern  it,  it  was  principally  on
that  point  that  our  conversation  turned.  I  made  him  feel,  as
much  as  I  could,  the  importance  of  not  showing  too  much
accommodation,  lest  it  be  taken  advantage  of  with  a  regent
so  kind,  facile,  open  to  influence,  and  so  environed.  I
masked  as  best  I  could  what  I  wanted  him  to  understand  as
to  that,  and  I  dwelt  on  the  necessity  of  his  holding  himself
ever  ready  to  face,  instantly,  every  holder  of  bank-bills  who
might  ask  for  payment  ;  on  which  readiness  depended  the
credit  or  the  overthrow  of  the  bank.  On  taking  leave  Law
begged  me  to  be  willing  to  receive  him  occasionally,  and  we
parted  well  satisfied  with  each  other,  at  which  the  regent  was
more  satisfied  still.

Law  came  several  times  to  see  me,  and  showed  a  strong
desire  to  ally  himself  with  me.  I  kept  to  mere  civilities  ;
because  finance  cannot  enter  my  head,  and  I  regarded  our
conversations  as  so  much  lost  time.  Some  time  later,  the

72  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

regent,  who  often  spoke  to  me  of  Law  with  very  great  liking,
said  that  he  had  a  kindness  to  ask,  and  even  to  exact  of  me  ;
it  was  that  I  would  receive  a  visit  from  Law  regularly  once
a  week.  I  represented  to  him  the  perfect  uselessness  of  such
interviews,  in  which  I  was  incapable  of  learning  anything,
and  still  more  of  enlightening  Law  about  matters  of  which
he  knew  all  and  I  knew  nothing.  I  excused  myself  in  vain  ;
the  regent  was  determined,  and  I  had  to  obey.  Law,  in¬
formed  by  him,  came  to  me,  and  owned  with  good  grace
that  he  had  asked  this  favour  of  the  regent,  not  venturing
to  ask  it  of  me.  This  visit  was  preliminary.  The  following
Tuesday  he  came,  and  continued  to  do  so  punctually  on  that
day  until  his  insolvency.  One  hour  and  a  half,  often  two
hours  was  the  usual  length  of  our  conversations.  He  always
took  care  to  inform  me  of  the  favour  his  bank  received  in
France,  and  in  foreign  countries,  of  his  proceeds,  his  pros¬
pects  and  his  conduct,  of  the  counteraction  he  met  with  from
leaders  in  finance  and  in  the  magistracy,  of  his  motives,
and,  above  all,  of  his  balance-sheet,  in  order  to  convince  me
that  he  was  more  than  in  a  condition  to  meet  all  holders  of
bills,  no  matter  what  sums  they  might  demand.

I  soon  knew  that  if  Law  desired  these  regular  interviews
it  was  not  that  he  expected  to  make  me  an  able  financier  ;
but  as  a  man  of  intelligence,  and  he  had  plenty  of  it,  he
wanted  access  to  a  servitor  of  the  regent  who  was  more
than  all  others  truly  in  his  confidence,  and  one  who  had  long
been  accustomed  to  speak  to  him  of  everything  with  the  ut¬
most  frankness  and  the  most  entire  liberty  ;  he  was  seeking
by  this  frequent  intercourse  to  win  my  friendship,  and  learn
from  me  the  intrinsic  quality  of  those  surrounding  the  regent,
whom  he  could  only  judge  by  the  outside  ;  and  little  by
little  get  counsel  from  me  on  the  obstacles  he  met  with
and  the  persons  with  whom  he  had  to  do.  The  bank  being

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

73

under  the  name
of  Voltaire,
exiled.

under  way  and  flourishing,  I  thought  it  necessary  to  sustain
it.  I  therefore  lent  myself  to  giving  the  information  that
Law  desired,  and  we  soon  began  to  talk  with  a  confidence
which  I  never  had  reason  to  regret.  I  shall  not  enter  into
the  details  of  this  bank,  or  of  the  other  schemes  that  followed
it,  and  the  operations  that  were  done  in  consequence.  It  is
a  matter  of  finance  which  might  well  fill  volumes.  I  shall
only  speak  of  it  as  it  relates  to  the  history  of  the  time,  or  to
something  that  concerns  me  personally.  I  might  add  here
who  and  what  was  Law  ;  but  I  postpone  that  to  a  time  when
the  satisfaction  of  such  curiosity  will  come  better  in  place.

Arouet,  son  of  a  man  who  was  my  father’s  notary  and
mine  until  his  death,  was  exiled  and  sent  to  Tulle  for  very
Arouet,  poet  satirical  and  very  impudent  verses.  I  should
not  amuse  myself  by  noting  such  a  trifle  if
this  same  Arouet,  becoming  a  great  poet  and
academician  under  the  name  of  Voltaire,  had  not  also  be¬
come,  through  many  tragical  adventures,  a  sort  of  personage
in  the  republic  of  letters,  and  even  an  important  one  among
certain  persons.  His  father  never  knew  what  to  do  with
this  unbelieving  son,  whose  irréligion  afterwards  made  his
fortune  as  Voltaire,  a  name  he  took  to  disguise  his  own.

Another  person  illustrious  for  the  effects  she  had  pro¬
duced,  but  of  very  different  stuff,  died  at  this  time,  and  her
Death  of  Mme.  death  did  not  make  the  noise  it  would  have
Guyon.  made  earlier.  This  was  the  famous  Mme.

Guyon.  She  had  been  exiled  to  Anjou  about  the  time  of  the
disturbance  and  end  of  the  affair  of  Quietism.  There  she
had  lived  virtuously  and  obscurely,  without  making  herself
talked  of.  About  eight  or  ten  years  previous  to  her  death
she  obtained  permission  to  live  at  Blois,  where  she  conducted
herself  in  the  same  manner,  and  where  she  died  without  any
singularity,  having  shown  none  since  her  last  exile,  —  always

74

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  iil

very  devout  and  very  retiring,  approaching  the  sacraments
frequently.  She  had  survived  her  most  illustrious  protectors
and  her  nearest  friends.

The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  took  the  king  to  see  the  Observa¬
toire.  He  was  at  all  times  a  friend  of  the  Chancellor  Pont-

chartrain,  now  living  in  retirement  at  the
Institution  [house  of  the  Oratorians]  or  rather
in  the  adjoining  building,  to  which  he  had  an
entrance  of  his  own,  though  he  never  used  it.

The  king  taken  to
visit  the  Chan¬
cellor  Pontchar-
train.

On  the  way  from  the  Tuileries  to  the  Observatoire  it  was
necessary  to  pass  his  door.  The  Maréchal  remembered  that
when  the  late  king’s  grandsons  went  to  Paris,  the  king
ordered  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  to  take  them  to  see  old
Beringhen,  in  order  to  show  them  a  man  he  loved,  who  had
had  a  fine  career,  and  then  had  done  justice  to  his  years
by  never  leaving  his  home  in  Paris  among  his  friends  and
family.  Villeroy,  for  once,  thought  very  rightly  that  it  was
good  to  let  the  king  see  a  man  still  sound  and  vigorous  and
in  a  state  of  body  and  mind  to  figure  long  in  the  ministry
and  as  chancellor  and  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  who,  without  dis¬
appointment  and  without  fear,  had  left  all  to  put  a  calm  and
saintly  interval  between  life  and  death,  in  a  perfect  retreat
where  he  saw  no  one,  and  was  wholly  occupied  by  his
religious  duties,  yet  without  abasement.  This,  the  Maréchal
thought,  would  accustom  the  king  to  honour  virtue.  He
therefore  sent  word  from  the  Observatoire  to  the  late  chan¬
cellor  that  on  his  way  back  the  king  would  enter  his  house
and  pay  him  a  visit.  Nothing  could  be  more  simple  than  to
receive  this  unusual  honour,  of  which  he  little  dreamed  ;  but
Pontchartrain,  consistently  modest  and  detached  from  the
world,  gave  orders  to  be  warned  in  time,  and  was  at  his  street
door  when  the  king  arrived.  He  did  vainly  what  he  could
to  prevent  the  king  from  getting  out  of  his  carriage,  but  he

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

75

succeeded,  by  force  of  mind,  obstinacy,  and  respect,  in  having
the  visit  paid  in  the  street;  it  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
after  which  the  king  re-entered  his  carriage.  Pontchartrain
watched  him  depart,  and  then  returned  to  his  dear  modesty,
where  his  perfect  renunciation  made  him  at  once  forget  the
honour  of  the  visit  and  the  pious  adroitness  with  which  he
had  avoided  as  much  as  he  could  of  it.  All  those  who  knew
him  admired  this,  and  praised  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  for  a
thought  so  honourable  and  so  becomingly  executed.

The  Huguenots,  of  whom  many  had  remained  in  Prance,  or
had  returned  here,  most  of  them  under  feigned  abjurations,
Assemblies  of  profited  by  a  period  which  might  pass  for  one
Huguenots.  The  0f  liberty  in  comparison  to  that  of  the  late

regent  inclined  to

recall  them.  king.  They  assembled,  clandestinely  at  first
and  in  small  numbers  ;  then  they  took  courage  from  the
scant  notice  taken  of  them,  and  soon  they  had  large  assem¬
blies  in  Poitou,  Saintonge,  Guyenne,  and  Languedoc.  They
even  marched  about  Guyenne,  where  one  of  their  preachers
made  vehement  exhortations  in  the  open  country.  These
men  were  not  armed,  and  soon  dispersed  ;  but  close  to  the
place  where  they  had  assembled  two  carts  laden  with  guns,
bayonets,  and  pistols  were  found.  There  were  also  little
nocturnal  assemblages  in  Paris  toward  the  end  of  the  fau¬
bourg  Saint-Antoine.

The  regent  spoke  to  me  of  this,  and  in  connection  with  it
about  the  contradictions  and  difficulties  with  which  the  edicts
i  persuade  him  and  declarations  of  the  late  king  concerning
not  to  do  so.  the  Huguenots  were  full,  so  that  they  could
neither  be  enacted  because  of  the  impossibility  of  recon¬
ciling  them  with  one  another,  nor  executed  in  the  matter
of  marriages  and  wills,  etc.  I  was  often  the  witness  of
this  truth  at  the  Council  of  Regency,  partly  in  suits  there
referred  because  there  was  no  one  but  the  late  king  who

I

76  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  m.

could  interpret  his  own  meaning  in  these  diverse  contra¬
dictions  ;  partly  in  reports  of  consultations  between  the
various  tribunals  and  the  chancellor  which  he  brought  to
the  Council.  From  complaining  of  these  embarrassments,
the  regent  came  to  that  of  the  cruelty  with  which  the
late  king  had  treated  the  Huguenots;  the  harm  done  by
the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes  ;  the  immense  injury
the  State  had  suffered  and  would  suffer  still  in  its  depopu¬
lation,  in  its  commerce,  in  the  hatred  this  treatment  had
awakened  in  all  the  Protestants  of  Europe.  I  abridge  a
long  conversation  in  which,  up  to  this  point,  I  found
nothing  to  gainsay.  After  much  solid  argument  that  was
perfectly  true,  the  regent  began  to  make  reflections  about  the
ruined  state  in  which  the  king  had  left  France  ;  and  then
about  the  gain  of  the  people,  the  arts,  finances,  and  com¬
merce  that  might  be  made  in  a  moment  by  the  recall  of  the
Huguenots  to  the  country  ;  and  finally  he  proposed  to  me  that
measure.  I  do  not  wish  to  accuse  any  one  of  having  sug¬
gested  this  thought  to  the  regent,  because  I  never  knew  from
him  the  quarter  whence  it  came  ;  but  in  the  extreme  desire
he  had  never  ceased  to  indulge  to  ally  himself  closely  with
Holland,  and  above  all  with  England,  ever  since  he  had  been
possessed  by  Noailles,  Canillac,  and  the  Abbé  Dubois,  sus¬
picion  is  not  very  difficult.  He  hoped  by  this  recall  to  flatter
the  maritime  powers,  give  them  the  greatest  possible  mark
of  esteem,  friendship,  and  condescension,  and  all  this  masked
by  the  apparent  hope  of  reviving,  enriching,  and  restoring  the
kingdom  in  a  moment.

I  was  glad  for  the  Huguenots.  But  I  felt  by  the  preface
he  employed,  as  here  stated,  that  although  his  desire  might
be  great,  he  saw  and  comprehended  the  full  weight  and
results  of  such  a  resolution,  for  which  he  was  seeking  ap¬
proval,  T  dare  not  say  support.  I  profited  instantly  by  this

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

77

fortunate  and  wise  timidity,  and  I  told  him  that,  abstract¬
ing  from  the  matter  all  that  religion  dictated  upon  it,  I
should  content  myself  by  speaking  a  language  which  was
certainly  more  becoming  in  me.  I  represented  to  him  the
disorders  and  civil  wars  which  the  Huguenots  had  caused  in
France  from  the  reign  of  Henri  II.  to  that  of  Louis  XIII.,
what  ruin  and  bloodshed;  I  reminded  him  that  under  their
shadow  the  League  had  been  formed  which  had  so  nearly
torn  the  crown  from  the  head  of  Henri  IV.  ;  and  all  that
this  had  cost  our  kings  and  the  State  against  both  Huguenots
and  leaguers  ;  each  of  them  supported,  as  they  were,  by
foreign  powers,  from  whom  we  had  to  bear  everything,  while
they  despised  us,  and  profited  by  our  internal  troubles  ;  so
that  actually  Henri  IV.  owed  his  crown  to  the  number  who
endeavoured  to  carry  it  off,  each  for  himself.  I  begged  the
regent  to  reflect  that  he  was  now  enjoying  the  benefit  of  a
great  domestic  repose,  which  he  ought  to  compare  with  what
I  had  now  represented  ;  that  it  was  from  this  quiet  and
peaceful  position  that  he  ought  to  reason  in  the  matter,  or
rather  be  convinced  that  it  needed  no  reasoning,  at  a  time
when  no  power  demanded  such  a  step  ;  which  the  late  king
had  had  the  courage  and  strength  to  reject  when,  exhausted
in  supplies,  money,  resources,  and  almost  in  troops,  his
frontiers  captured  and  open  and  on  the  eve  of  calamitous
disasters,  his  enemies  demanded  of  him  the  return  of  the
Huguenots  as  one  of  the  conditions  without  which  they
would  put  no  limits  to  their  conquests  or  end  a  war  the
king  had  no  longer  the  means  to  sustain.

I  likewise  made  the  regent  feel  another  danger  from  this
recall.  It  was  that,  after  the  sad  and  cruel  experience  the
Huguenots  had  had  of  the  prostration  of  their  power  under
Louis  XIII.,  of  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes  by  the
late  king,  and  the  rigorous  treatment  that  followed  it  and

78

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

still  continued,  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that  they  would
return  to  France  without  the  strongest  and  most  assured
safeguards,  which  could  only  be  the  same  as  those  imder
which  they  had  already  made  five  kings  groan.  I  ended  by
entreating  the  regent  to  weigh  the  advantages  he  expected
to  gain  by  this  return  with  the  disadvantages  and  manifold
dangers  which  would  inevitably  accompany  it  ;  I  assured
him  that  these  men,  this  commerce,  this  wealth,  which  he
believed  would  accrue  to  the  kingdom,  were  men,  wealth,
and  commerce  inimical  to  the  kingdom  ;  and  that  the  pleas¬
ure  and  satisfaction  the  maritime  and  other  Protestant
powers  would  show  in  the  event  would  be  solely  at  the
incomparable  and  irreparable  blunder  which  would  make
them  arbiters  and  masters  of  the  fate  and  conduct  of  France
both  within  and  without  our  borders.  To  these  and  many
other  strong  reasons  the  regent  had  nothing  to  oppose  that
could  balance  them  in  any  way.  The  conversation  lasted
a  long  time  ;  but  after  that  day  there  was  no  further  ques¬
tion  of  recalling  the  Huguenots,  or  of  departing  from  the
system  established  by  the  late  king,  except  where  the  con¬
tradictions  and  effective  impossibilities  in  the  letter  of  these
divers  ordinances  made  their  execution  impossible.

The  negotiations  between  France  and  England  occasion¬
ally  took  a  smiling  turn.  Both  were  anxious,  from  different
Louviiie  sent  on  points  of  view,  to  draw  Spain  into  their  con-
a  confidential  ferences.  The  regent  profited  by  this  to

King  of  Spain.  endeavour  to  obtain  for  Spain  the  restitution
of  Gibraltar,  which  was  the  one  thing  in  the  world  which
interested  her  most.  Gibraltar  was  really  a  burden  on  the
King  of  England,  standing  well  as  he  did  with  the  Barbary
States  and  much  superior  in  his  navy  to  Spain.  Possessing
Port-Mahon,  Gibraltar  was  very  inferior  in  usefulness  and  in
importance  to  the  outlay  and  consumption  that  it  cost  him.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

79

He  consented,  therefore,  to  return  it  to  Spain,  for  a  few
trifles  that  are  not  worth  remembering  ;  but  as  he  did  not
wish  to  expose  himself  to  the  outcries  of  the  political  party
against  him,  he  exacted  the  strictest  secrecy  and  a  formal
agreement.  He  requested  that  nothing  should  go  through
Alberoni,  nor  through  any  minister,  Spanish  or  English,  but
directly  from  the  regent  to  the  King  of  Spain  through  some
confidential  agent  chosen  by  the  regent,  and  on  condition
that  this  agent  should  he  admitted  to  speak  to  the  King  of
Spain  tête-à-tete.  This  confidential  envoy  was  to  carry  creden¬
tials  from  the  regent  ;  namely,  a  letter  relating  to  the  terms
of  the  treaty,  that  is  to  say,  a  document  specifying  the  trifles
demanded  by  the  King  of  England,  ready  for  signature,  and
a  positive  order  from  the  King  of  England,  written  and
signed  by  his  own  hand,  to  the  Governor  of  Gibraltar,  to
turn  over  that  place  to  the  King  of  Spain  the  moment  that
order  was  handed  to  him,  and  to  retire  with  the  garrison,
etc.,  to  Tangier.  At  the  time  of  execution  a  Spanish  general
was  to  march  quickly  to  Gibraltar,  on  pretence  of  exercising
his  men  ;  he  was  then  to  present  the  order  of  the  King  of
England,  be  received  in  consequence,  and  put  at  once  into
possession  of  the  place.  The  pretence  was  weak,  but  that
was  the  affair  of  the  King  of  England.

The  Duc  de  Noailles  was  then  in  great  favour  and  wanted
to  be  the  sole  doer  of  all  this.  It  is  best  not  to  be  vain¬
glorious.  I  knew  nothing  of  it  until  its  second  stage,  and
then  through  Louville  before  the  regent  spoke  to  me,  as  he
did  soon  after.  Without  being  shrewd,  I  should  have  dis¬
trusted  the  King  of  England  in  such  a  manoeuvre.  He  was
certainly  not  ignorant  with  what  care  and  jealousy  the  queen
and  Alberoni  kept  the  King  of  Spain  apart  and  inaccessible
to  every  one  ;  he  must  have  known  that  the  surest  way  to
fail  was  to  attempt  to  hold  intercourse  with  the  king  with-

80  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAENT-SIMON.  [chap.  ill.

out  their  knowledge,  or  in  spite  of  them  and  without  their
co-operation.  As  for  the  choice  of  agent,  of  all  the  men  in
France,  Louville  was,  in  my  opinion,  the  very  last  on  whom
it  should  have  fallen.  The  better  he  had  formerly  stood
with  the  King  of  Spain,  and  the  closer  he  had  been  in  his
confidence,  the  more  his  arrival  would  alarm  the  queen  and
Alberoni,  and  the  more  they  would  use  all  means  not  to  let
a  man  so  dangerous  to  their  influence  and  authority  approach
the  king.  I  said  so  to  Louville,  who  did  not  disagree  with
me  and  only  replied  that  in  his  surprise  at  the  mission  he
had  not  dared  to  refuse  it  ;  and  moreover,  if  he  succeeded  in
reaching  the  king,  the  rendition  of  Gibraltar  was  so  impor¬
tant  a  matter  that  he  should  be  unlucky  indeed  if  it  did
not  secure  to  him  the  payment  of  what  was  due  on  his
Spanish  pensions,  a  very  serious  object  to  him.  To  be  chosen
and  to  depart  was  one  and  the  same  thing.  He  had  time,
however,  to  come  and  talk  the  matter  over  with  me  ;  and
the  night  before  he  left  he  again  came  to  me,  and  told  me
with  what  kindness  and  confidence  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had
spoken  to  him  of  himself  and  the  mission  on  which  he  sent
him.  The  plan  was  that  Louville,  taking  a  circuitous  route
by  way  of  Foix  and  Arragon,  should  arrive  in  Madrid  before
any  one  got  wind  of  his  journey.  But  in  spite  of  all  his
precautions  the  secret  was  not  well  kept.

The  suspicions  of  the  King  of  Spain  against  Alberoni  were
strengthening  daily.  The  queen  exhorted  the  latter  to  suffer
in  patience  ;  while  the  minister  blamed  her  for  her  supineness,
her  compliance  to  the  king  when  she  ought  to  control  the
perpetual  distrust  of  his  feeble  and  irresolute  mind,  which
was  capable  of  yielding  to  any  one  who  chose  to  lay  hold  of
it  for  evil  purposes.  He  found  the  queen  indolent,  hating
trouble  and  business,  and  seeking  only  her  own  repose.  He
urged  her  not  to  allow  either  of  them  to  be  excluded  from

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

81

the  government  of  affairs,  and  to  be  on  her  guard,  amid  the
confusion  of  nations  and  languages  which  flooded  the  Court
of  Spain,  against  the  secret  and  determined  cabal  of  certain
Spaniards  who  were  seeking  to  recall  their  former  govern¬
ment.  Alberoni  warned  her  that  if  she  ceased  to  uphold  her
authority  in  public  affairs  she  need  not  count  on  any  influ¬
ence  or  consideration  in  the  world,  nor  on  the  respect  of  her
subjects.  Troubles  were  at  their  very  worst  in  Spain  ;  the
peoples  overwhelmed  with  taxation;  the  seigneurs  in  fear
and  degradation  ;  the  nobles  reduced  to  mendicity  ;  neither
troops,  nor  finances,  nor  navy,  nor  commerce,  and  no  one
capable  of  remedying  such  evils,  while  the  house  of  Austria
was  always  on  watch  with  her  partisans.  Alberoni  vaunted
his  own  projects  and  assured  the  queen  he  could  still  mend
all,  provided  he  were  sustained  in  them.

Things  were  at  this  point  when  Louville  arrived  at  Madrid,
and  went  to  lodge  with  the  Duc  de  Saint- Aignan  [ambassador
Gibraltar  lost  to  1°  Spain],  who  was  greatly  surprised,  having
Spain-  received  no  warning.  But  a  chance  courier,

who  had  met  Louville  at  some  distance  from  Madrid,  brought
word  to  Alberoni.  We  can  imagine  the  jealous  suspicions
that  tormented  him,  and  his  prompt  alarm.  He  well  knew
the  influence  Louville  had  formerly  had  on  the  King  of  Spain  ;
and  the  violent  manner  in  which  the  Princesse  des  Ursins
and  the  late  queen  had  torn  the  king  away  from  him.  His
alarm  at  this  wholly  unexpected  arrival  was  so  great  that
he  used  no  decency  in  getting  rid  of  him.  He  despatched  an
order  by  a  courier  instantly,  forbidding  Louville  to  come
nearer  to  Madrid.  The  courier  missed  the  envoy,  but  fifteen
minutes  after  his  arrival  at  Saint- Aignan’s  the  latter  received
a  note  from  Grimaldo  [Alberoni’s  secretary],  bearing  an  order
from  the  King  of  Spain  for  his  immediate  departure.  Louville
replied  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  credentials  to  the  king,  also

TOT..  IV.  —  6

82  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

of  a  letter  from  the  regent  to  the  king,  and  a  commission  to
his  Catholic  Majesty  which  did  not  permit  him  to  depart
until  it  was  executed.  On  receiving  this  answer,  a  courier
was  instantly  despatched  to  Prince  Cellamare  [Spanish
ambassador  to  France],  with  orders  to  ask  for  Louville’s
recall,  and  declaring  that  he  was  personally  so  disagreeable
to  the  King  of  Spain  that  he  would  not  see  him,  nor  allow
him  to  treat  with  any  of  his  ministers.  The  fatigue  of  the
journey  followed  by  such  a  reception  gave  Louville  a  ne¬
phritic  attack,  to  which  he  was  subject,  so  that  he  ordered
a  bath  to  be  prepared,  into  which  he  put  himself  in  the
course  of  the  morning.  Alberoni  went  in  person  to  see  him
and  induce  him  to  leave  at  once.  The  state  in  which  they
told  him  Louville  was  did  not  stop  him  ;  he  insisted  on  seeing
him,  against  his  will,  in  his  bath.  Nothing  could  he  more
civil  than  his  words,  nor  more  curt,  negative,  and  determined
than  their  meaning.  Louville  insisted  that  his  credentials
gave  him  a  public  character,  namely  :  to  execute  an  important
commission  from  the  King  of  France,  nephew  to  the  King  of
Spain  ;  so  that  his  Catholic  Majesty  could  not  refuse  to  hear
it  from  his  lips,  and  if  he  did  not  do  so  he  would  have  reason
to  regret  it.  The  dispute  was  sharp  and  long,  in  spite  of
Louville’s  condition,  but  he  gained  nothing.

Louville  dared  not  go  to  see  any  one  for  fear  of  committing
himself,  and  no  one  dared  to  go  and  see  him.  He  made  one
attempt  to  see  the  King  of  Spain  in  the  street,  to  try  whether,
if  the  latter  saw  him,  he  might  not  be  induced  to  speak
to  him,  in  case,  as  was  very  probable,  he  had  not  been
told  of  his  arrival.  But  Alberoni  had  foreseen  everything.
Louville  did  really  see  the  king  pass,  but  it  was  impossible  to
make  the  king  see  him.  Grimaldo  came  immediately  after
with  a  positive  order  for  him  to  depart,  and  a  warning  to  the
Duc  de  Saint-Aignan  that  the  King  of  Spain  was  very  angry

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

83

at  this  obstinate  delay,  and  that  he  would  not  answer  for
what  might  happen  if  Louville’s  stay  was  prolonged.  They
both  saw  that  it  was  useless  to  hope  for  an  audience,  and,
consequently,  that  a  longer  stay  could  do  no  good,  and  might
lead  to  violence,  which,  by  its  scandal,  would  embroil  France  ;
so  Louville  departed  at  the  end  of  a  week  and  returned  as  he
came.  Alberoni  breathed  again  after  his  fright,  and  consoled
himself  by  having  shown  his  power  in  a  way  that  would  save
him  in  future  from  the  approach  of  any  person  to  the  King
of  Spain  without  his  sanction.  But  he  cost  Spain  Gibraltar,
which  she  has  not  since  then  recovered.  Such  is  the  useful¬
ness  of  prime  ministers.

Louville  having  returned,  it  became  necessary  to  send  back
to  the  King  of  England  the  documents,  etc.,  that  he  had
taken  with  him  to  Spain  ;  and  thus  the  affair  of  Gibraltar
came  to  naught,  except  that  it  irritated  Alberoni  against  the
regent  for  having  sent  a  secret  commission  to  the  King  of
Spain  without  his  knowledge,  and  the  regent  against  Alberoni
for  having  made  the  project  miscarry  with  such  notoriety.

The  Maréchal  de  Montrevel,  whose  name  will  not  be
found  in  history,  the  pet  of  silly  women,  of  fashion  and  the
Death  of  gay  world,  of  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  and

Montrevel  from  almost  of  the  late  king,  from  whom  he  had
fear  of  spilt  sait.  qrawn  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  francs

a  year  in  benefits  which  he  still  received,  a  man  noted  for
nothing  but  that  in  which  he  had  the  smallest  part,  namely,
a  face  which  made  him  all  his  life  the  idol  of  women,  a
great  birth,  and  brilliant  valour,  died  about  this  time,  cheat¬
ing  his  creditors  by  leaving  nothing  but  three  thousand
louis,  and  much  plate  and  porcelain,  and  fearing  nothing  so
much  as  an  overturned  salt-cellar.  He  was  just  preparing
to  go  to  Alsace.  Dining  with  Biron  (afterwards  duke,  peer,
and  marshal  of  France),  a  salt-cellar  was  overturned  and  the

84

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  in.

salt  scattered  over  him.  He  turned  pale,  felt  ill,  and  said
he  was  a  dead  man  ;  they  were  obliged  to  leave  the  table
and  take  him  home.  There  was  no  restoring  the  small
amount  of  brains  he  had.  Fever  seized  him  that  night  and
he  died  four  days  later,  leaving  no  regrets  but  those  of  his
creditors.

The  Duchesse  d’Alba  married  about  this  time  the  Abbé
de  Castiglione,  whom  she  had  brought  with  her  to  Paris
Marriage  of  the  011  returning  from  Madrid.  I  have  already
Duchesse  d'Aiba.  Sp0pen  of  them  and  shall  only  say  here  that

the  pope  allowed  him  to  keep  the  quite  considerable
revenues  he  received  from  his  benefices,  and  that,  in  favour
of  this  marriage,  the  King  of  Spain  made  him  a  grandee  of
the  first  class  and  gave  him  a  place  as  gentleman  of  his
bedchamber,  an  office  which  had  long  had  no  functions.
He  took  the  name  of  Duc  de  Solferino.

The  year  ended  with  great  bitterness  openly  shown
between  the  princes  of  the  blood  and  the  legitimatized
princes.  This  struggle  of  the  bastard  against
the  legitimate  son,  this  equality  of  condition
in  the  issue  from  a  double  and  public  adultery
and  from  a  royal  wife,  this  identity,  so  com¬
plete,  between  children  horn  of  the  sacrament  and  of  crime,
revolted  nature  and  affected  the  son  and  the  posterity  of  the
Duc  d’Orléans  no  less  than  they  did  the  Bourbon  branch.
Therefore  justice,  truth,  reason,  religion,  nature,  claims  of
birth,  claims  of  power,  claims  of  honour,  interests  of  safety
(shall  I  dishonour  so  many  sacred  reasons  by  adding  a
motive  far  less  pure,  but  dear  and  keen  in  all  men  ?  ),  the
powerful  interests  of  vengeance,  all  concurred  in  the  Due
d’Orléans  to  make  him  rejoice  to  find  himself  at  last  in  a
position  to  strike  down  the  colossus  beneath  which  he  had
so  nearly  been  crushed,  and  to  shiver  it  easily  but  surely

Bitterness  be¬
tween  the  princes
of  the  blood  and
the  bastards.

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

85

into  fragments,  with  the  blessing  of  God  and  the  acclama¬
tion  of  all  orders  of  the  kingdom  and  everybody  else  except
a  mere  handful  of  henchmen  and  valets.  Who,  in  his  place,
would  not  have  dearly  bought  the  happiness  of  such  a  posi¬
tion  ?  It  did  not  cause  the  very  slightest  sensation  to  the
Duc  d’Orléans  !  And  yet  this  incredible  indifference,  this
amazing  detachment  from  himself  under  an  opportunity
which  might  have  made  the  greatest  saints  on  earth  tremble
for  their  own  conduct,  was  no  merit  in  him,  either  as  regards
this  world  about  which  he  blinded  himself  so  foolishly,  or
as  regards  the  other  on  which  he  never  made  the  slightest
reflection.  Alas  !  the  hand  of  God  was  upon  him  and  upon
the  kingdom.  In  this  affair  he  was  simply  the  prey  and  the
plaything  of  d’Efflat  and  other  men  of  that  stamp  whom  the
Duc  du  Maine  kept  near  him,  and  whom  the  regent  never
distrusted,  all  the  while  keeping  on  his  guard  against  his
well-tried  servitors.  I  had  made  it  a  rule,  as  I  did  about
the  parliament,  never  to  open  my  lips  to  him  about  the
bastards.  After  all  that  we  had  said  to  each  other  in  former
days  about  them  he  was  ashamed  and  embarrassed  before
me,  and  I  had  nothing  further  to  add.

The  inclinations,  example,  and  favour  of  the  late  king  had
made  Paris  the  sink  of  the  licentiousness  of  all  Europe  ;  and

it  continued  to  be  so  long  after  him.  Besides
the  mistresses  of  the  late  king,  his  bastards,
those  of  Charles  IX.  (for  I  have  seen  one  of
them,  a  widow,  and  her  daughter-in-law),  those

1717.

Paris  the  sink
of  all  Europe.

of  Henri  IV.,  those  of  M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans,  to  whom  his
regency  brought  immense  fortunes,  those  of  the  two  branches
of  the  two  Bourbon  brothers,  Malause  and  Busset,  the
Yertus  bastards  of  the  last  Duc  de  Bretagne,  the  bastard
daughters  of  the  last  three  Coudés  down  to  the  Bothelins,
bastards  of  bastards,  —  besides  this  population  of  French  bas-

86

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  m

tards,  Paris  has,  I  say,  gathered  in  the  mistresses  of  the
kin  us  of  England  and  Sardinia,  two  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria,
and  the  numerous  bastards  of  England,  Bavaria,  Savoie,
Denmark,  Saxony,  and  even  those  of  Lorraine,  who  have  all
made,  in  Paris,  great  and  rapid  fortunes,  piling  one  upon  an¬
other  wealth,  orders,  promotions  that  were  more  than  pre¬
mature,  an  infinite  number  of  favours  and  distinctions  of
all  kinds,  with  rank  and  the  most  distinguished  honours  ;
all  being  persons  who  would  not  even  have  been  looked  at
in  any  other  country  of  Europe  ;  down  to  the  infamous
fruits  of  public  incests,  such  as  the  little  Duc  de  Montbéliard,
declared  solemnly  to  be  such  by  the  Aulic  council  of  Vienna,
and  rejected  as  such  by  the  empire  and  the  whole  house  of
Wiirtemberg.  Such  scum  it  was  that  France  alone  was
capable  of  receiving  and,  sole  among  the  nations  of  Europe,
of  honouring  above  her  own  highest  nobility,  who  had  the
folly  to  concur  and  be  the  first  to  approve.  It  must,  how¬
ever,  be  admitted  that  a  bastard  of  England  and  another  of
Saxony  have  rendered  grand  services  to  their  States  by
gloriously  commanding  their  armies.

On  the  eve  of  the  Epiphany  several  of  us  were  supping  at
our  ease  with  Louville.  A  moment  after  the  fruit  was  served

some  one  entered  and  whispered  in  the  ear  of

D’Aguesseau,  pro¬
cureur-général,  Saint-Contest,  counsellor  of  State,  who  left  the

made  chancellor.  ,  -i  i  •  n  •  ,  tt-  i  i

table  immediately.  His  absence  was  short  ;
but  he  returned  so  preoccupied,  and  promising  to  tell  us  why,
that  we  thought  only  of  leaving  the  table.  As  soon  as  we
were  alone  and  had  gathered  round  the  fire,  he  told  us  the
news,  which  was  that  Chancellor  Voysin,  supping  at  home  with
his  family  and  apparently  well,  had  been  suddenly  stricken
with  apoplexy  and  had  fallen  over,  as  if  dead,  on  Mme.  de
Lamoignon,  and  would  not  live,  it  was  thought,  two  hours.
In  fact,  he  did  not  live  so  long,  and  never  regained  conscious-

1717]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  87

ness.  The  Duc  de  Noailles,  notified  of  this  event  that  even¬
ing,  or  during  the  night,  went  early  to  the  regent,  as  he  left
his  bed  with  his  stomach  undigested  and  his  head  very
heavy  with  sleep  and  the  supper  of  the  night  before,  as  he
was  every  morning  on  rising  and  for  some  time  after.
Noailles  sent  away  the  few  valets  who  were  present,  told
the  Duc  d’Orléans  of  the  chancellor’s  death,  and  immediately
bombarded  him  for  d’ Aguesseau.  The  latter  was  summoned
to  the  Palais-Royal  at  once,  where  Noailles  waited  for  him
as  a  matter  of  precaution.  D’Aguesseau  found  him  with  the
Duc  d’Orléans  in  the  cabinet  of  the  latter,  who,  with  the  flat¬
tering  compliments  that  always  accompany  the  bestowal
of  favours,  told  him  his  intentions.  Soon  after,  the  regent
left  the  cabinet  and,  taking  d’ Aguesseau  by  the  arm,  said  to
the  assembled  company  that  they  saw  before  them  a  new
and  very  worthy  chancellor.  Then,  getting  into  his  car¬
riage,  with  the  casket  containing  the  Seals  before  him  and
accompanied  by  d’ Aguesseau,  he  went  to  the  Tuileries,
spoke  in  praise  of  the  latter  to  the  king,  and  presented  to  him
the  casket  of  the  Seals,  on  which  the  king  laid  his  hand  to
signify  that  he  gave  it  to  d’ Aguesseau,  the  regent  still  hold¬
ing  it.

D’Aguesseau,  having  received  the  Seals  in  this  way,  was
modest  under  a  flux  of  compliments  ;  and,  escaping  as  soon
as  he  could,  went  home  with  the  precious  casket.  The
house  was  full  of  relatives  and  friends,  all  in  a  flutter  about
the  summons  from  the  regent.  D’Aguesseau,  his  mind
floundering  in  surprise,  went  up  to  see  his  brother,  a  sort
of  voluptuous  philosopher,  with  much  mind  and  much  learn¬
ing,  but  most  of  it  very  singular.  He  found  him  smoking
before  the  fire  in  his  dressing-gown.  “  Brother,”  he  said,  on
entering,  “  I  have  come  to  tell  you  that  I  am  chancellor.
The  brother  turned  round.  “  Chancellor  !  ”  said  he,  “  what

88

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ixi.

have  you  done  with  the  other  one  ?  ”  “  He  died  suddenly

last  night.”  “  Oh  !  well,  brother,  I  am  very  glad  ;  I  would
rather  it  were  you  than  I  ;  ”  and  that  was  all  the  congratula¬
tion  he  got  from  him.

A  chancellor  ought  to  be  a  personage,  and  in  a  regency
he  cannot  help  being  one.  This  one  has  been  a  personage
so  long,  for  he  still  lives,  and  has  been  so  battered  by  fortune
in  that  great  office,  which  seems  as  if  it  ought  to  be  a  haven
of  rest,  that  many  reasons  combine  to  make  me  break  the
rule  I  made  never  to  speak  at  length  about  those  who  are
still  in  the  world  at  the  time  I  write.

He  was  born  November  26,  1668;  made  avocat-général
January  12,  1691,  at  twenty-two  and  a  half  years  old;  pro¬

cureur-général  November  19,  1700,  at  thirty-
two  ;  chancellor  and  Keeper  of  the  Seals  of
France  February  2,  1717,  when  forty-six  years

Career  and
character  of
Chancellor
d’Aguesseau.

of  age.  He  was  under  middle  height  and  stout,  with  an
agreeable  and  very  full  face  until  his  last  trials,  and  always  a
countenance  that  was  virtuous  and  intellectual  ;  one  eye,  how¬
ever,  very  much  smaller  than  the  other.  It  is  remarkable
that  he  never  had  a  deliberating  influence  until  he  was  chan¬
cellor  ;  in  parliament  they  made  it  a  point  not  to  follow  his
conclusions,  out  of  jealousy  at  the  reputation  he  had  acquired,
which  prevailed  over  friendship  and  esteem.  Much  intelli¬
gence,  industry,  penetration,  knowledge  of  all  kinds,  magis¬
terial  gravity,  equity,  piety,  and  innocence  of  life,  formed  the
basis  of  his  character.  It  may  be  said  that  here  was  a  noble
spirit  and  an  incorruptible  man  (if  we  except  the  one  affair
of  the  Bouillons),  and  with  it  all,  gentle,  kind,  humane,  easy
of  access,  and  agreeable  ;  with  gayety  and  spicy  pleasantry  in
private,  though  never  wounding  any  one  ;  extremely  sober,
polite  without  assumption,  noble,  without  the  least  avaricious¬
ness  ;  naturally  lazy,  which  at  last  made  him  slow.  Who

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

89

would  not  suppose  that  a  magistrate  adorned  with  such
virtues  and  talents,  with  memory,  vast  reading,  eloquence
in  speaking  and  in  writing,  correctness  even  to  the  slightest
expressions  in  ordinary  conversation,  and  all  the  graces  of
fluency,  would  have  made  the  greatest  chancellor  seen  for
centuries  ?  It  is  true  that  he  would  have  made  a  splendid
president  of  the  parliament  ;  it  is  none  the  less  true  that,
as  chancellor,  he  made  such  men  as  Aligre  and  even  Bou-
cherat  regretted.  This  paradox  seems  hard  to  understand  ;
it  is  plain  to  the  naked  eye,  however,  during  the  thirty  years
that  he  has  been  chancellor,  and  on  such  evidence  that  I
might  well  rest  on  that  ;  but  so  strange  a  fact  deserves  to  be
investigated.

This  fortunate  assemblage  of  qualities  was  spoiled  in
various  ways  that  were  hidden  in  his  first  life,  but  revealed
at  once  as  soon  as  he  entered  the  second.  The  long  and  sole
nourishment  that  he  had  taken  from  the  breast  of  parliament
had  so  moulded  into  him  its  maxims  and  its  pretensions  that
he  regarded  it  with  more  love,  respect,  and  veneration  than
the  English  feel  for  their  parliaments,  which  have  nothing
but  the  name  in  common  with  ours.  I  shall  not  say  too
much  if  I  assert  that  he  looked  upon  all  that  emanated  from
that  assembly  as  a  believer  well  trained  in  his  religion  re¬
gards  the  decisions  on  faith  of  the  oecumenical  councils.
From  this  species  of  worship  came  three  defects,  which
appeared  very  frequently  throughout  his  career.

First,  he  was  always  for  the  parliament,  whatever  it
might  undertake  against  the  royal  authority;  whereas  his
office,  which  made  him  the  superior  and  the  moderator
of  the  parliaments  and  of  the  words  of  the  king  to  them,
obliged  him  to  restrain  them  when  they  passed  their
proper  limits,  and  above  all  to  repress  them  firmly  when
they  attacked  the  king’s  authority.  His  equity  and  his

90

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

intelligence  showed  him  plainly  enough  the  aberrations  of
parliament  in  this  respect  ;  hut  to  repress  them  was  more
than  he  could  do.  His  softness,  seconded  by  the  sort  of
worship  with  which  he  honoured  the  parliament,  was  pained
and  grieved  to  see  it  in  error  ;  but  to  let  it  be  known  that  it
was  in  error  was  a  crime  in  his  eyes  which  he  groaned  to  see
committed  by  others,  and  which  he  could  not  commit  him¬
self.  He  therefore  put  all  his  talents  to  palliating,  excus¬
ing,  covering-up,  and  making  specious  interpretations  of  its
faults,  negotiating  with  it  on  one  side,  and  with  the  regent
on  the  other;  profiting  by  the  latter’s  timidity,  supineness,
and  levity  to  blunt  and  enervate  all  resistance  on  his  part  ;
so  that  instead  of  having  in  this  highest  magistrate  a  firm
supporter  of  the  royal  authority,  and  a  true  judge  of  jus¬
tice,  all  that  could  he  got  from  him  was  a  few  stammering
words  which  enfeebled  the  little  that  he  really  meant  to
say,  and  gave  courage,  strength,  and  haughtiness  to  the
parliam  ent.

A  second  defect  was  the  extension  of  this  worship  of  par¬
liament  to  every  man  who  wore  the  legal  robe,  down,  I  may
say,  to  the  officers  of  royal  bailiwicks.  Every  man  who  wore
the  robe  ought,  according  to  him,  to  be  regarded  with  awe,
whatever  he  did  ;  and  must  not  he  complained  of,  unless
with  the  greatest  circumspection.  Complaints  were  not
listened  to  if  they  were  not  supported  by  the  plainest  legal
proof  ;  and  even  then  they  seemed  to  him  deplorable.  He
would  turn  himself  every  way  to  save  the  honour  of  the
robe,  —  as  if  the  robe  in  general  were  dishonoured  because
one  rascal  had  clothed  himself  in  it  for  money.  He  proposed
compromises  ;  and,  if  the  complainants  were  of  a  certain
sort,  discontinuance  for  the  purpose  of  reporting  to  him  ;  and
then  he  had  recourse  to  those  ruinous  delays  which  are
equivalent  to  the  denial  of  justice,  and  from  which  the  man

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

91

in  the  robe  came  out  cheaply,  always  as  white  as  he  could
be  made,  and  as  lightly  reprimanded.  In  this  spirit  he  could
not  understand  how  any  one  should  bring  himself  to  attack
a  decree  of  parliament.  He  employed  the  same  manœuvres
to  avoid  it,  and  it  was  only  after  a  long  defence  that  he  would
let  the  matter  he  carried  to  the  court  of  appeals.  That  court,
composed  by  him,  like  all  the  others  of  the  Council,  was
well  aware  of  this  repugnance  on  his  part.  We  may  believe
he  knew  how  to  manage  it,  and  very  clear  reasons  indeed
were  needed  to  oblige  the  court  to  carry  the  appeal  to  the
Council.  If,  in  spite  of  all,  the  evidence  dragged  it  there,
the  chancellor,  who  could  not  bring  himself  to  pronounce
the  blasphemy  of  quashing  a  decree,  was  the  first  to  invent
a  formula  which  enabled  him  to  pronounce  that  the  decree
was  non  avenu  ;  and  even  then,  it  was  not  done  without  a
peroration  of  defence  and  moans.  All  this  was  plainly  sub¬
versive  of  the  distribution  of  justice.

A  third  evil,  derived  from  the  same  source,  was  an  attach¬
ment  to  forms,  even  the  most  insignificant,  so  literal,  so  pre¬
cise,  so  servile  that  all  other  considerations,  even  the  most
evident  justice,  disappeared  to  his  eyes  before  some  petty
formality.  Long  service  at  the  bar  had  injured  his  mind.  It
was  naturally  extended  and  luminous,  and  endowed  with
much  reading  and  profound  knowledge.  The  duty  of  the
bar  is  to  gather,  examine,  weigh,  compare  the  reasons  of  two
or  more  parties,  and  to  spread  out  that  schedule,  if  I  may  so
express  it,  with  all  the  graces  and  flowers  of  eloquence  before
the  judges,  and  with  the  greatest  exactitude,  that  no  point  he
overlooked,  and  that  none  of  the  numerous  auditors  shall  he
able  to  guess  of  what  opinion  the  avocat-général  is  before  he
begins  to  sum  up.  This  continual  habit  for  twenty-four
years,  acting  on  a  mind  that  was  scrupulous  on  equity  and
on  form,  fruitful  in  ideas,  learned  in  law  and  customs,  had

92

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

brought  him  to  a  pitch  of  indecision  from  which  he  could
not  escape  ;  so  that  if  some  limit  of  time  were  not  absolutely
fixed,  affairs  were  prolonged  indefinitely.  He  was  the  first  to
suffer  from  this  ;  it  was  to  him  a  sort  of  parturition  to  make
up  his  mind  ;  but  woe  to  those  who  had  to  wait  for  it.

To  such  essential  defects,  which,  nevertheless,  came  chiefly
from  too  much  understanding  and  knowdedge  and  too  long  a
habit  at  the  bar,  and  were  far  indeed  from  detracting  from
an  honour  and  an  uprightness  which  were  only  increased  by
this  delicacy  of  conscience,  were  joined  others  that  came  only
from  his  natural  slowness  and  a  too  great  desire  to  do  well  ;
he  could  not  finish  turning  the  phrase  of  a  declaration,  a
decree,  or  even  a  business  letter,  however  unimportant.  He
touched  and  retouched  them  incessantly.  He  was  the  slave
of  the  most  exact  purity  of  diction,  and  never  perceived  that
this  servitude  made  him  often  obscure,  and  sometimes  unin¬
telligible.  His  taste  for  the  sciences  crowned  all  these  dis¬
abilities.  He  loved  languages,  especially  the  classic  ones  ;
he  took  infinite  pleasure  in  all  phases  of  physics  and  mathe¬
matics.  Nor  was  he  less  of  a  metaphysician.  For  all  those
sciences  he  had  breadth  and  talent  ;  he  loved  to  dig  into
them,  to  make  experiments  behind  closed  doors  in  all  the
different  sciences,  with  his  children  and  a  few  obscure  savants,
who  each  took  points  of  research  for  the  next  meeting.  In
this  sort  of  study  he  lost  a  vast  deal  of  time  and  irritated
those  who  were  depending  on  him  and  who  sometimes  had  to
go  to  his  house  a  dozen  times  before  they  could  reach  him,
through  the  functions  of  his  office  and  the  amusements  of
his  taste.  He  was  born  for  the  sciences.  It  is  true  that  he
would  have  made  an  excellent  president  of  the  parliament  ;
but  that  for  which  he  wras  best  fitted  was  to  be  at  the  head
of  all  literature,  —  of  the  Academies,  the  Observatory,  the
Royal  College  and  Library;  there  he  would  certainly  have

1717 J  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

93

excelled.  His  slowness  would  have  troubled  no  one  ;  his
ready  difficulties  would  have  helped  to  clear  up  questions,
and  his  indecision,  independent  then  of  conscience,  would
have  tended  to  the  same  end.  He  would  have  had  to  do
only  with  men  of  letters  and  not  with  the  world,  which  he
never  knew,  and,  save  for  politeness,  had  no  usage  in.

Enough  said,  but  still  one  other  touch  of  the  brush.  The
elder  Duc  de  Grammont,  who  was  very  shrewd,  related  to
me  how,  one  morning,  finding  himself  in  the  king’s  cabinet
while  the  king  was  at  mass,  tête-à-tête  with  the  chancellor,
he  asked  him,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  if,  since  he  had
been  chancellor,  the  great  knowledge  he  must  have  of  chican¬
ery  and  of  long  protracted  suits,  had  not  made  him  think  of
regulating  the  matter,  stopping  such  rascality,  and  shorten¬
ing  cases.  The  chancellor  replied  that  he  had  thought  so
much  about  it  that  he  had  begun  to  draw  up  a  regulation  on
paper  ;  but  as  he  advanced,  he  reflected  on  the  great  number
of  avocats,  'procureurs,  sheriffs,  etc.,  which  such  a  regulation
would  ruin,  and  the  compassion  he  had  felt  made  him  drop
the  pen  from  his  hand.  For  the  same  reason  archers  and
provosts  ought  not  to  arrest  thieves  or  put  them  in  the  way
of  their  heads  being  cut  off,  which  is  certainly  a  greater
reason  for  compassion.  In  other  words,  the  duration  and
number  of  suits  make  the  wealth  and  the  power  of  lawyers  ;
consequently  they  should  be  left  to  increase  and  multiply.
Here  is  a  long  disquisition;  but  I  think  it  the  more  useful
because  it  makes  plain  how  a  man  of  so  much  integrity,
talents,  and  reputation  is,  little  by  little,  brought,  through
issuing  from  his  true  centre,  to  make  his  integrity  equivocal
and  his  talents  worse  than  useless,  and  thus  lose  his  reputa¬
tion  and  become  at  last  the  plaything  of  fortune.

It  occurs  to  me  that  I  have  forgotten  a  thing  which  de¬
serves  to  be  noted  for  the  singularity  of  the  fact,  and  I  shall

94

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

now  record  it  for  fear  it  may  escape  me  again.  One  after¬
noon,  as  we  were  about  to  take  our  places  at  the  Council  of

Regency,  Maréchal  de  Villars  drew  me  aside  and
asked  if  I  knew  that  Marly  was  about  to  be  de¬
stroyed.  I  told  him  no,  for  in  fact  I  had  never

I  prevent  the  de'
struction  of
Marly.

heard  it  mentioned,  and  I  added  that  I  could  not  believe  it.
“  Then  you  do  not  approve  it  ?  ”  said  the  maréchal.  I  as¬
sured  him  that  I  was  far  from  doing  so.  He  repeated  that
the  destruction  was  resolved  upon  ;  that  he  knew  it  in  a  way
that  left  no  doubt  whatever,  and  that  if  I  wished  to  prevent
it  I  had  not  a  moment  to  lose.  I  answered,  as  we  were  tak¬
ing  our  seats,  that  I  would  speak  of  it  presently  to  M.  le  Duc
d’Orléans.  “  Presently  !  ”  exclaimed  the  maréchal,  hastily  ;
“  speak  to  him  at  once,  this  very  moment,  for  the  order  may
already  have  been  given.”

As  the  whole  Council  was  now  seated,  I  passed  behind
them  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  to  whom  I  whispered  what  I  had
just  heard,  without  saying  from  whom  it  came.  I  said  I
implored  him,  if  the  news  were  true,  to  suspend  the  order
until  I  could  speak  with  him,  and  I  would  go  to  the  Palais-
Royal  as  soon  as  the  Council  rose.  He  stammered  some¬
thing  as  if  annoyed  at  being  found  out,  but  agreed  to  wait.
When  I  reached  the  Palais-Royal  he  did  not  deny  the  matter.
I  told  him  I  should  not  ask  who  had  given  him  such  perni¬
cious  advice.  He  wanted  to  prove  to  me  that  it  was  good  by
saving  the  expense  of  keeping  the  place  up,  and  by  the  pro¬
duct  of  the  aqueducts,  materials,  furniture,  and  other  things
that  could  be  sold  ;  he  also  mentioned  the  unsuitableness  of
the  site  where  the  king,  at  his  early  age,  could  not  be  taken
for  a  number  of  years.  I  answered  that  the  reasons  pre¬
sented  to  him  were  those  of  the  guardian  of  a  private  indi¬
vidual  whose  conduct  should  not  resemble  in  any  way  that
of  a  guardian  of  a  Iving  of  France  ;  that  he  ought  to  accept

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

95

the  necessity  of  the  expense  of  keeping  up  Marly,  and  con¬
sider  that  it  was  hut  an  item  in  those  of  the  king,  and  put
out  of  his  head  the  proceeds  of  the  materials,  because  they
would  certainly  disappear  in  gifts  and  pillage  ;  moreover,  that
he  ought  not  to  view  the  matter  in  this  petty  way,  but  con¬
sider  how  many  millions  had  been  cast  into  that  old  sewer  to
make  it  a  fairy  palace,  unique  in  Europe  as  to  form,  still
more  unique  for  the  beauty  of  its  fountains,  unique  in  the
character  and  reputation  that  the  late  king  had  given  to  it,
making  it  an  object  of  curiosity  to  foreigners  of  all  stations
who  visited  France.  I  told  him  that  this  destruction  would
echo  throughout  Europe,  with  such  blame  that  France  would
be  openly  insulted  for  the  removal  of  so  remarkable  an  orna¬
ment.  Besides  which,  though  neither  he  nor  I  was  very
sensitive  as  to  what  had  been  the  taste  and  occupation  of  the
late  king,  still  he  ought  to  avoid  shocking  his  memory  after
so  long  a  reign,  so  many  brilliant  years,  and  such  great
reverses  heroically  borne.  And  finally  that  he  ought  to
remember  that  all  the  malcontents  would  cry  murder  ;  that
the  Duc  du  Maine,  Mme.  de  Yentadour,  and  Maréchal  de
Villeroy  would  not  refrain  from  making  a  crime  of  it  to  the
little  king.  I  saw  plainly  that  he  had  never  made  the  slight¬
est  reflection  on  all  this.  He  agreed  that  I  was  right,  prom¬
ised  that  nothing  should  be  touched  at  Marly,  and  thanked
me  for  having  saved  him  from  that  blunder.  When  I  was
quite  sure  of  this  result  I  said  to  him:  “You  must  admit
that  the  king  would  be  much  astonished  if  he  could  know
in  the  other  world  that  the  Duc  de  1ST oailles  had  urged  you
to  destroy  Marly,  and  that  I  was  the  one  to  prevent  it.”
“  Oh  !  as  for  that,”  he  replied  quickly,  “  he  would  never
believe  it.”  Marly  was  preserved  and  maintained,  and  it
was  Cardinal  Fleury  who,  with  the  miserliness  of  a  college
bursar,  robbed  it  of  its  river,  its  greatest  charm.

96

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

I  hastened  to  give  the  good  news  to  Maréchal  de  Villars.
The  Duc  de  Noailles  was  furious  at  having  this  economy
wrenched  from  him.  In  order  not  to  seem  totally  defeated,
lie  obtained  permission  (very  secretly,  for  fear  that  here  too
lie  might  fail),  to  sell  the  furniture  and  linen,  etc.  He  per¬
suaded  the  regent,  who  was  shy  with  him  about  the  retrac¬
tation  of  the  destruction,  that  all  such  things  would  be  spoilt
and  worthless  before  the  king  was  of  an  age  to  go  to  Marly  ;
that  in  selling  them  quite  a  relief  would  still  be  obtained  to
the  condition  of  the  finances,  and  that  later  the  king  could
refurnish  the  place  as  he  fancied.  There  were  several  fine
pieces  of  furniture,  and  as  all  the  lodgings  of  the  courtiers,
the  officers,  great  and  small,  and  the  wardrobe  people,  were
supplied  with  furniture  and  linen  that  were  the  property  of
the  king,  there  was  an  immensity  to  sell  ;  but  the  sale  was
small  in  its  results,  through  favours  and  pillage,  and  the
replacement  of  what  was  sold  has  since  cost  several  millions.
I  knew  nothing  of  the  sale  until  after  it  was  begun  ;  therefore
I  could  not  prevent  this  very  injurious  meanness.  Every¬
thing  was  sold  at  an  extremely  low  price.

Mme.  de  Maintenon,  forgotten  and  as  though  dead,  in  her
beautiful  and  opulent  retreat  at  Saint-Cyr,  was  seriously  ill

at  this  time,  almost  without  its  being  known,
and  wholly  without  its  making  any  sensation

among  those  who  heard  of  it.

IV.

Though  the  affair  of  the  bull  Unigenitus  does  not  enter
into  these  Memoirs,  for  reasons  already  given,  there  are  certain
.  facts  about  it,  which  either  concern  me  person-

My  prediction  at  •*-

the  Council  of  ally  or  are  well-known  to  me,  which  ought  to
’  v  find  a  place  here,  because  I  have  reason  to

doubt  whether  they  will  find  one  in  the  histories  of  this
famous  affair,  the  authors  of  which  may  well  desire  to  ignore
them.  On  one  of  the  earlier  days  of  the  month  of  January  the
matter  came  up  before  the  Council  of  Regency.  I  shall  not
enlarge  on  what  took  place,  for  I  have  no  intention  of  dwell¬
ing  on  the  subject.  I  saw  a  strong  inclination  to  exact  a
blind  submission  without  explanation  or  chance  to  reply  ;  and
also  that  the  party  now  inclining  to  absolute  obedience  was
increasing  steadily.  M.  de  Troyes  put  himself  forward  in
favour  of  the  bull  and  the  pretensions  of  Rome,  repenting,
apparently,  that  he  had  hitherto,  throughout  his  life,  opposed
them.

I  was  not  of  his  opinion  ;  he  grew  warm  ;  we  both  disputed
hotly,  and  he  let  out  his  ideas  so  freely  that  I  remarked  that
before  long  that  bull  would  have  made  its  way  amazingly,  for
I  saw  now  that  it  was  getting  nearer  and  nearer  to  being
made  an  article  of  faith  ;  whereupon  up  gets  M.  de  Troyes  to
declaim  against  the  calumny,  declaring  that  I  always  went
beyond  the  facts;  and  from  that  to  showing  that  the  bull
could  never  become  either  dogma,  rule,  or  article  of  faith  ;
that  even  in  Rome  such  a  thing  had  never  entered  the  mind
of  any  one,  and  that  Cardinal  Tolomeo,  who  was  all  his  life  a
YOL.  IV.  —  7

98

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tv.

Jesuit,  and  as  a  Jesuit  was  made  cardinal,  had  laughed  in
derision  whenever  that  string  was  touched.  When  he  had
made  his  outcry,  I  looked  round  at  the  council  and  said:
“  Messieurs,  pray  allow  me  to  take  you,  one  and  all,  to  wit¬
ness  as  to  what  I  have  now  predicted  about  the  future  of  the
bull,  and  all  that  M.  de  Troyes  has  said  to  prove  that  it  is
impossible  it  can  ever  be  made  an  article,  dogma,  or  rule  of
faith,  and  that  Rome  herself  laughs  at  the  idea  ;  and  per¬
mit  me  also  to  remind  you  of  all  this  hereafter,  when  the
bull  shall  have  reached  the  future  which,  I  repeat,  will  not
be  long  in  coming.”  M.  de  Troyes  cried  out  again  at  my
absurdity.  At  the  end  of  six  months,  and  even  less,  it  was
shown  I  was  a  prophet.

Cardinal  de  Noailles  proposed  to  me  a  meeting  in  his
cabinet  with  d’Aguesseau  (still  procureur-général),  in  order
D’ Aguesseau  that  we  might  listen  to  a  memorial  which  the

reads  to  Cardinal  latter  had  drawn  up  against  the  bull.  I  went

me  a  memorial  there,  the  door  was  closed,  we  were  all  three
against  the  bull.  aionej  an(i  the  reading  lasted  two  hours.  The

object  of  the  paper  was  to  show  that  there  was  no  means  of
receiving  a  bull  so  contrary  to  all  the  laws  of  the  Church,  to
the  maxims  and  usages  of  the  kingdom  founded  on  the  liber¬
ties  of  the  Gallican  Church  as  the  Unigenitus  ;  that  those
liberties  themselves  are  only  the  observance  of  canons  and
rules  established  from  all  time  in  the  Church  universal;
canons  which  have  been  maintained  in  their  integrity
against  the  encroachments  of  the  Court  of  Rome  by  the
Gallican  Church  alone.  Besides  the  erudition  which,  without
any  affectation,  was  displayed  throughout  the  document,  and
the  beauty  of  the  diction  without  an  effort  at  eloquence,  it
was  admirable  for  its  tissue  of  a  chain  of  proofs,  the  links  of
which  seemed  to  spring  naturally  from  one  another,  and
carried  along  the  proofs  of  the  whole  memorial  in  an  orderly

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

99

manner  which  made  them  clear,  and  formed  an  evidence
which  it  was  impossible  not  to  accept.  It  was  also  restrained
within  the  limits  which  the  primacy  of  Eome  over  all  other
churches  could  justly  require;  and  was  expressed  with  the
proper  respect  due  to  the  person  and  dignity  of  the  pope.
The  conclusion  arrived  at  was  to  send  back  to  him  his  bull,
having  vainly  sought  and  endeavoured  to  find  some  way  of
receiving  it,  solely  induced  thereto  by  the  desire  to  show
good-will  and  respect  for  the  Holy  See  and  the  pope.  I  was
charmed  with  the  document,  and  I  showed  d’ Aguesseau  to
its  fullest  extent  the  impression  made  upon  me.  Cardinal
de  Noailles  was  no  less  satisfied.  We  reasoned  it  over  to¬
gether  before  separating.  But  the  misery  was  that  religion
and  truth  were  not  the  rudder  of  this  unhappy  affair;  just
as  neither  had  been  the  source  of  it  in  Rome  or  in  those
who  had  been  employed  in  demanding  it,  supporting  it,  and
bringing  it,  for  their  ambition,  to  the  point  where  it  now
was,  at  the  cost  of  truth,  justice,  the  Church  and  State,
many  learned  colleges,  many  illustrious  ecclesiastical  bodies,
—  in  short,  at  the  cost  of  a  whole  people  of  saints  and  learned
men.

I  knew  the  weakness  of  the  regent,  and  (though  he  was
really  a  believer,  in  spite  of  himself)  the  little  account  he
piqued  himself  on  making  of  religion.  I  saw

The  regent  deliv-  1

ered  over  to  the  him  given  over  to  his  enemies  in  this  affair,  as
bull unxgemtus.  many  others:  to  the  Jesuits,  whom  he

feared  ;  to  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  who  had  impressed  him
from  his  earliest  youth,  and  who,  in  the  most  profound  igno¬
rance  of  the  real  matter,  piqued  himself  on  supporting  the
bull,  to  make  parade  of  his  gratitude  to  the  late  king  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;  to  the  Abbé  Dubois,  who,  in  his  under¬
ground  darkness,  was  already  groping  towards  the  cardinalate,
and  seeking  to  smooth  his  way  with  Rome  ;  to  the  manœu-

100  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

vres  of  Cardinal  de  Rohan,  the  tantrums  of  Cardinal  de  Bissy,
the  rascality  of  sundry  prelates  who  nursed  a  soft  chimera  of
attaining  to  the  hat  ;  and,  finally,  to  that  fallen  cedar,  to  that
unhappy  Bishop  of  Troyes,  whose  return  to  the  world  had
gangrened  his  very  vitals,  without  object,  without  reason,  and
against  all  the  notions  and  lights  he  had  had  and  maintained
throughout  his  life  until  he  entered  the  Council  of  Regency.
As  for  counter-weight,  there  was  none.

The  pope,  stiffening  himself  (unlike  the  usage  of  his
greatest  and  most  saintly  predecessors)  in  the  resolve  not
to  give  any  explanation  of  his  bull,  nor  suffer  the  bishops  to
give  any,  for  fear  of  undermining  his  pretended  infallibility,
but  more  because  he  was  puzzled  how  to  give  any  reasonable
explanation,  or  admit  any,  would  only  hear  of  blind  obedi¬
ence  ;  and  his  nuncio,  Bentivoglio,  at  the  head  of  the  Jesuits
and  Sulpicians,  thought  the  chance  too  good  to  abrogate  the
liberties  of  the  Gallican  Church  and  subject  it  to  the  slavery
of  Rome  (like  the  churches  of  Italy,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  the
Indies),  to  miss  the  occasion.  He  began  therefore  to  doff
his  cap,  and  those  of  the  Jesuits  and  Sulpicians,  to  the
bishops,  to  get  them  to  declare  the  bull  an  article  of  faith.

In  this  extremity  —  of  the  imposition  of  a  new  article  of
faith,  destitute  of  all  legitimate  authority,  because  such  au¬
thority  can  only  be  given  by  the  free  and  general  assembly
of  the  Church,  to  which  alone  the  promise  of  Jesus  Christ
to  be  with  it  throughout  all  ages  is  addressed  —  the  Sorbonne
and  four  bishops  thought  it  was  time  to  have  recourse  to
the  last  remedy  which  the  Church  has  provided  and  ap¬
proves  of  her  children  making  use  of,  in  order  to  suspend
proceedings  and  await  times  when  the  truth  would  be  more
readily  listened  to;  namely,  an  appeal  to  a  future  free
Council-general.  Bentivoglio  and  all  the  promoters  of  the
bull  uttered  loud  outcries.  They  felt  the  importance  in

1717]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

101

itself  of  this  great  step  ;  they  groaned  under  the  weight  of
suspended  proceedings  ;  they  felt  the  terrible  effect  upon
their  enterprise  from  the  consequences  of  this  example,  and
they  stirred  up  hell  to  arrest  it.  The  regent,  ever  ready  to
he  alarmed,  easily  dragged  along  by  his  treacherous  con¬
fidants,  yielded  to  their  demands,  and  proceeded  cruelly
against  the  Sorbonne,  and  against  the  four  bishops,  whom
he  exiled,  and  dismissed  to  their  dioceses.

It  was  then  that  Cardinal  de  1ST oailles  missed  a  grand
stroke  —  as  he  had  already  missed  others.  I  saw  him  fre¬
quently  at  his  own  house  and  at  mine.  He

Cardinal  de  .

Noaiiies  misses  came  on  this  occasion  to  talk  the  matter  over

stroke^ grand  with  me.  I  exhorted  him  to  appeal.  He  was

sure  of  the  Chapters  and  of  the  rectors  of
Paris,  of  all  the  principal  ecclesiastics,  and  the  most  noted
and  numerous  communities,  both  secular  and  regular.  He
was  also  sure  of  several  bishops  who  were  only  waiting  his
example,  and  pressed  him  to  give  it.  I  represented  to  him
that  he  ought  by  this  time  to  be  convinced  of  the  treachery,
the  craftiness,  and  the  real  object  of  the  party  which,  under
a  show  of  obedience  to  Rome,  was  forcing  the  hand  of  the
pope  in  order  to  triumph  in  France,  and  would  never  consent
to  anything  but  blind  obedience.  I  told  him  he  had  shown
enough  patience,  gentleness,  moderation,  and  desire  to  com¬
bine  obedience  with  the  truth  and  liberties  of  the  Gallican
Church,  and  that  it  was  now  time  to  open  his  eyes,  and  put
a  stop  to  this  fury  and  craft.

I  shook  him.  He  confided  to  me  that  his  appeal  was  all
written  and  ready;  but  he  thought  he  ought  still  to  delay
the  crash  in  order  not  to  reproach  himself  with  having  failed
in  patience.  I  could  not  get  him  out  of  that  ;  nor  could  he
allege  any  better  reason  than  this  vague  scruple.  After  a
long  discussion,  I  predicted  to  him  that  his  patience  would

102

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xv.

prove  fatal  ;  that  in  the  end  he  would  come  to  the  appeal,
hut  —  too  late  !

The  regent  avoided  the  subject  with  me,  —  all  the  more
easily  because  I  never  touched  upon  it,  and,  with  the  excep¬
tion  of  a  few  mercies  I  obtained  from  him  in
Tête-à-tête  be-  cases  0f  private  persons  against  whom  violence

tween  the  regent  r  r

and  me  in  his  had  been  extorted  from  him,  I  never  entered
upon  the  topic  with  him.  But  when  he  was
troubled  and  pressed  upon  some  special  point  he  never  could
prevent  himself  from  returning  to  me  with  perfect  openness  ;
and  this  about  matters  and  things  on  which  his  own  con¬
sciousness  and  the  influence  of  the  people  about  him  made
me  most  open  to  suspicion  in  his  eyes.  So,  being  pressed
and  harassed  by  these  appeals  and  contending  furies,  he
stopped  me  one  afternoon  as  I  was  preparing  to  leave  after
working  with  him  tête-à-tête,  as  I  usually  did  about  twice  a
week.  He  said  he  was  going  to  the  Opera,  and  wanted  me
to  go  with  him  to  talk  over  important  matters.  “  The  Opera,
monsieur  !  ”  I  exclaimed  ;  “  what  a  place  to  talk  over  busi¬
ness  !  Talk  here  as  much  as  you  please  ;  or,  if  you  must  go
to  the  Opera,  very  good  ;  and,  if  you  like,  I  will  come  hack
to-morrow.”  He  persisted,  and  said  we  could  shut  ourselves
up  in  his  little  box,  where  he  went  under  cover  from  his  own
apartment,  and  where  we  should  he  quite  as  well  off,  and
better  too  than  in  his  cabinet.  In  vain  I  objected  ;  he  only
laughed,  and  finally,  taking  his  hat  and  cane  from  a  sofa
with  one  hand,  and  me  by  the  arm  with  the  other,  he
marched  me  along.  On  entering  his  box,  he  sat  down  where
he  told  me  he  usually  sat,  facing  the  stage,  to  which  he  told
me  to  turn  my  back  that  I  might  sit  opposite  to  him.  In
this  position  we  were  in  full  view  from  the  stage,  the  neigh¬
bouring  boxes,  and  part  of  the  pit.  The  opera  was  just  be¬
ginning  ;  we  only  looked  a  moment  into  the  theatre,  which

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

103

was  very  full  ;  after  which  we  neither  heard  nor  saw  any¬
thing  until  the  play  was  over,  so  much  did  our  conversation
occupy  us.

The  regent  began  at  once  to  explain  the  embarrassment
he  was  in  about  the  appeal  urged  upon  him  by  parliament,
who  wanted  to  make  it,  also  several  bishops  and  the  whole
second  order  of  the  clergy,  following  the  example  of  the
Sorbonne.  I  listened  without  interrupting  until  he  had
ended,  and  then  I  began  to  reason.  Soon  after  I  had  begun,
he  stopped  me  to  observe  that  the  largest  number  were  on
the  side  of  the  bull,  and  the  smallest  for  the  appeals  ;  that
the  bull  had  the  pope,  most  of  the  bishops,  the  Jesuits,  most
of  the  members  of  Saint-Sulpice  and  Saint-Lazare,  conse¬
quently,  an  infinite  number  of  confessors,  rectors,  vicars,
scattered  through  the  towns  and  provinces  of  the  kingdom,
who  led  the  people  through  their  consciences  ;  besides  the
capuchins  and  a  small  number  of  other  mendicant  friars  ;
and  the  danger  was  that  all  these  Unigenitarians  might
join  the  King  of  Spain  against  him,  and,  what  with  intrigues,
and  Rome  behind  them,  become  a  great  embarrassment.  I
listened  without  interrupting,  and  then  I  asked  him  to  hear
me  in  turn  uninterruptedly.  I  began  by  saying  that  with
him  I  should  not  argue  on  religious  grounds,  though  I  could
not  avoid  telling  him  how  strange  it  was  to  treat  of  an
affair  of  doctrine  and  religion  with  views  and  means  that
were  purely  political,  and  could  only  serve  to  attract  God’s
wrath  upon  the  issue  ;  neither  could  I  avoid  reminding  him
of  all  that  he  had  thought  about  the  iniquity  of  the  whole
thing  and  the  violence  of  the  means  used  in  the  days  of  the
late  king,  and  of  all  that  he  and  I  had  confided  to  each
other  at  the  time  we  thought  the  king  would  carry  the
matter  to  parliament.  [After  a  very  long  argument,  in  which
the  case  was  laid  before  the  regent]  I  stopped  and  said  no

104  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

more,  to  judge  of  the  impression  I  had  made.  It  surpassed
my  expectations,  hut  did  not  reassure  me.  I  saw  a  man  con¬
vinced  by  the  evidence  of  my  argument  (he  made  no  diffi¬
culty  in  owning  this),  at  the  same  time  in  bonds  and  unable
to  free  himself.  He  reasoned  on  the  present  state  of  the
matter  and  the  equal  objections  on  both  sides  ;  acknowledg¬
ing,  however,  the  force  of  what  I  told  him.  Here  was  a
man  who  was  truly  convinced,  and,  by  his  own  admission,
without  reply  to  any  one  of  the  reasons  I  gave  him,  and  yet
in  the  travail,  as  it  were,  of  childbirth.  We  had  reached  that
point  when  the  curtain  fell  ;  each  of  us  was  surprised  and
sorry  that  the  play  was  over.  In  spite  of  the  hurly-burly
produced  by  the  haste  of  every  one  to  leave  the  theatre,  we
still  sat  on  a  few  moments  longer,  unable  to  finish  the  con¬
versation.  I  ended  by  telling  him  that  the  nuncio  knew
him  only  too  well  when  he  said  that  the  last  man  who
spoke  to  him  was  the  one  who  spoke  the  truth  ;  and  I
warned  him  he  was  being  watched  by  persons  whom  he
thought  faithful,  but  who  were  only  faithful  to  themselves,
their  views,  their  interests,  their  intrigues  ;  and  watched  as
by  birds  of  prey,  whose  victim  he  would  he  if  he  did  not
take  care.

To  return,  however,  to  the  appeals  ;  I  said  hut  too  true
to  the  regent  as  we  left  the  theatre.  He  was  so  watched,
by  relays  of  watchers,  that  they  boxed  him  up.  He  stopped
the  appeals  and  put  all  his  authority  into  preventing  that
of  the  parliament.  I  contented  myself  with  having  con¬
vinced  him,  and  I  let  him  alone,  without  arguing  again
with  a  prince  whom  I  knew  to  be  environed  in  such  a  way
that  his  pliancy  and  weakness  made  him  literally  incapable
of  resistance.  He  became  at  last  all  that  they  wanted,
dragged  along  by  their  torrent  ;  and  that  which  I  predicted
happened  to  him.  If  he  had  listened  to  me  —  or  rather,  if

1717]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

105

he  had  had  any  force  of  character  —  the  bull  would  have
fallen,  with  all  its  machinery  and  its  turmoils,  the  Church
of  France  would  have  lived  in  peace,  and  Home  would  have
learned  from  so  strong  a  lesson  not  to  trouble  it  again  with
its  schemes  and  its  ambitious  pretensions.

The  Duc  de  FToailles  was  seeking  every  expedient  in  the
management  of  the  finances,  but  more  especially  some

means  to  put  his  own  administration  of  them
m^IgainstPmy  under  cover.  He  worked  at  a  long  memorial
win,  on  a  com-  £0  foe  read  by  him  at  the  Council  of  Regency,

mittee  of  finance.  °  J

where  it  was  previously  announced.  I  have
already  remarked,  and  given  examples,  that  in  spite  of  his
intellect,  the  multitude  and  mobility  of  his  ideas  and  views,
which  successively  chased  each  other  off  either  wholly  or
in  part,  made  him  incapable  of  concluding  any  work  of  his
own  ;  neither  was  he  ever  satisfied  with  work  done  for  him,
which  he  would  order  done  over  again  or  (to  use  his  own
term)  recast.  This  is  why  we  waited  so  long  for  the  docu¬
ment  after  it  had  been  announced  and  he  had  prepared  us,
as  much  as  he  could,  to  admire  it.  Eight  or  ten  days  before
it  appeared  at  the  Council  of  Regency  the  regent  spoke  to
me  of  it  and  praised  it,  having  seen  certain  parts  of  it.
Then  he  told  me  that  he  should  form  a  committee  (in  those
days  people  talked  nothing  but  English)  of  certain  members
of  the  Council  of  Regency,  before  whom  the  Duc  de  Noailles
wished  to  explain  his  administration  of  the  finances  at
greater  length  and  with  more  leisure  ;  and  also  he  was
desirous  of  consulting  the  committee  on  certain  measures
that  he  intended  to  propose.  To  all  this  the  regent  added
that  the  committee  would  assemble  at  the  chancellor’s  house,
and  he  wished  me  to  be  a  member  of  it.

I  expressed  my  surprise  and  repugnance  ;  I  reminded  the
regent  of  my  incapacity  about  finances,  my  disgust  for  such

106  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

matters,  and  my  relations  to  the  Duc  de  Noailles  ;  I  assured
him  I  should  be  a  person  absolutely  null  on  such  a  com¬
mittee  ;  one  who  would  understand  nothing  ;  whom  the
others  could  make  believe  what  they  pleased  ;  that  I  should
be  perfectly  useless  and  only  waste  my  time  ;  and  I  implored
him  to  release  me.  “  But,”  he  said,  “  it  is  the  Duc  de  Hoailles
himself  who  wants  you  there  ;  he  not  only  asked  it,  but  he
urged  it.”  “  Monsieur,”  I  replied,  “  this  is  folly  indeed  !
Has  he  forgotten,  and  you  too,  how  I  have  ill-treated  and
abused  him,  I  can’t  tell  how  many  times,  before  you  in  pri¬
vate,  and  also  before  the  Council  of  Eegency  ?  What  fancy
can  he  have  for  scenes  in  which  he  always  bends  his  back
and  plays  a  miserable  part  ?  And  why  should  you  want  to
multiply  them  ?  ”  I  spoke  so  much,  and  so  well,  or  at  any
rate  so  strongly,  that  the  regent  made  no  reply  and  talked  of
other  things.  I  thought  myself  quit  of  the  danger.

Three  or  four  days  after  this  conversation  the  Duc  de
Noailles  began  the  reading  of  his  memorial  before  the  Coun¬
cil  of  Eegency.  When  he  had  finished,  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
and  nearly  all  present,  including  the  presidents  or  heads  of
the  various  councils,  praised  it  highly.  After  which  the
regent,  passing  his  eyes  over  the  assembly,  said  it  only  re¬
mained  to  appoint  the  committee,  and  then,  almost  imme¬
diately,  I  heard  myself  named  first.  In  my  surprise  I
interrupted  the  regent,  and  begged  him  to  remember  all  that
I  had  had  the  honour  to  say  to  him.  He  answered  that  he
had  not  forgotten  it,  but  that  I  should  do  him  a  pleasure  by
belonging  to  it.  I  replied  that  I  should  be  entirely  useless,
because  I  positively  could  not  understand  finances,  and  I
begged  him  to  excuse  me.  "  Monsieur,”  he  replied  in  a
kindly  tone,  but  the  tone  of  a  regent  —  it  was  the  only  time
he  ever  took  it  to  me,  —  “I  beg  you  to  belong  to  it,  and,  since
I  am  forced  to  say  it,  I  command  you  to  do  so.”  I  bowed

1717]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

107

low  over  the  table,  inwardly  very  angry,  and  replied,  “  Mon¬
sieur,  you  are  the  master  ;  I  can  only  obey  you  ;  but  at  least
you  will  allow  me  to  declare  before  these  gentlemen  my  re¬
pugnance,  and  make  a  public  admission  of  my  incapacity  as
to  finances,  and  my  consequent  uselessness  on  this  com¬
mittee.”  The  regent  let  me  finish,  then,  without  saying
more  he  proceeded  to  name  the  Duc  de  La  Force,  Maréchal
de  Villeroy,  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  Maréchal  de  Besons,
Pelletier-Sousy,  the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux,  and  the  Marquis
d’Effiat.

Not  being  able  to  avoid  this  bomb-shell,  in  spite  of  all  that
I  had  done,  I  thought  I  had  better  not  show  annoyance  and
give  that  pleasure  to  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  nor  get  my  ears
pulled  for  lack  of  assiduity  at  the  committee  and  punctuality
to  the  hours.  We  assembled  three  or  four  times  a  week
between  three  and  four  o’clock,  and  the  session  rarely  lasted
less  than  three  hours.  As  the  committee  continued  for  over
three  months  I  shall  not  say  more  here,  but  will  return  to
it  later.

By  an  extremely  rare  chance  a  man  employed  in  the  dia¬
mond  mines  of  the  Great  Mogul  found  means  to  insert  one
T  ..  of  enormous  size  into  his  rectum  :  and  what  is

chase  of  the  dia-  m0re  remarkable  still,  he  reached  the  coast  and

mond  afterwards

called  “  the  was  allowed  to  embark  without  the  precaution
Regent‘  invariably  taken  with  all  passengers  whose

name  and  place  of  employment  are  not  known,  namely,  that
of  giving  them  a  purgative  and  an  injection,  to  recover  what¬
ever  they  might  have  swallowed  or  hidden.  Apparently  he
was  not  suspected  of  having  been  to  the  mines,  or  of  having
any  dealings  in  precious  stones.  As  a  crown  of  good  luck,  he
reached  Europe  safely  with  his  diamond.  He  showed  it  to
several  princes,  whose  wealth  was  not  sufficient  for  the  pur¬
chase.  Then  he  took  it  to  England,  where  the  king  admired

108  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  it.

it,  but  could  not  resolve  to  buy  it.  A  crystal  model  of  it  was
made  in  England  ;  and  the  man,  the  model,  and  the  diamond
were  despatched  to  Law,  who  proposed  to  the  regent  to  buy
the  stone.  The  price  alarmed  the  regent,  and  he  refused.

Law,  who  thought  on  a  large  scale  about  many  things,
came  to  me  quite  disturbed,  and  brought  the  model  I
thought,  as  he  did,  that  it  did  not  become  the  grandeur  of  the
King  of  France  to  be  deterred  by  the  cost  from  purchasing  a
thing  unique  in  the  world  and  quite  inestimable;  and  the
more  other  potentates  had  not  dared  to  think  of  it,  the  more
we  should  be  careful  not  to  let  it  escape  us.  Law,  delighted
that  I  should  think  in  that  way,  begged  me  to  speak  to  the
Duc  d’Orléans.  The  state  of  the  finances  was  an  obstacle  on
which  the  regent  insisted  strongly.  He  feared  blame  for
making  so  large  a  purchase  while  there  was  so  much  diffi¬
culty  in  meeting  pressing  necessities,  and  such  numbers  of
people  were  suffering.  I  praised  that  sentiment  ;  but  I  told
him  he  ought  not  to  use  it  for  the  greatest  king  in  Europe
as  he  would  for  a  private  individual,  who  would  be  very
reprehensible  indeed  to  give  a  hundred  thousand  francs  for
his  own  adornment  if  he  owed  debts  and  had  not  the  where¬
withal  to  pay  them.  I  said  he  ought  to  consider  the  honour
of  the  crown,  and  not  throw  away  this  unique  opportunity  of
obtaining  a  priceless  stone,  which  eclipsed  all  others  in
Europe;  I  also  said  it  would  be  a  glory  for  his  regency
which  would  always  last  ;  and  that  no  matter  what  was  the
state  of  the  finances,  this  amount  of  saving  would  not  help
them  much.  In  short,  I  did  not  leave  the  Duc  d’Orléans
until  I  had  obtained  from  him  a  promise  to  purchase  the
diamond.

Law,  before  speaking  to  me,  had  said  so  much  to  the
merchant  about  the  impossibility  of  selling  the  stone  for  the
price  he  asked,  and  the  injury  and  loss  in  cutting  it  up,

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

109

that  he  brought  him  down  at  last  to  two  millions  of  francs,
with  the  parings  that  would  come  from  cutting.  The  bargain
was  concluded  on  those  terms.  The  man  was  paid  the
interest  on  two  millions  until  they  could  give  him  the
principal,  with  possession  of  two  millions  of  precious  stones
as  security  ;  which  he  was  to  keep  until  payment  in  full  of
the  two  millions  in  money  was  made  to  him.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  agreeably  disappointed  by  the
applause  which  the  public  gave  to  this  fine  and  unique  ac¬
quisition.  The  diamond  was  called  “  the  Regent.”  It  is
the  size  of  a  Reine  Claude  plum,  almost  round  in  shape,  of  a
thickness  equal  to  its  width,  perfectly  white,  free  from  all
blemish,  cloud,  or  speck,  of  admirable  water,  and  weighing
more  than  five  hundred  grains.  I  congratulated  myself
much  on  having  induced  the  regent  to  make  so  illustrious
a  purchase.1

Peter  I.,  Czar  of  Moscovy,  has  justly  made  himself  so
great  a  name  in  his  own  land  and  throughout  all  Europe
and  Asia  that  I  shall  not  undertake  to  make

The  czar,  Peter

I.,  comes  to  known  a  prince  so  great,  so  illustrious,  com¬
parable  only  to  the  greatest  men  of  antiquity,
who  has  made  himself  the  admiration  of  the  age,  and  will
be  that  of  centuries  still  to  come.  The  singularity  of  a
journey  to  France  by  a  prince  so  extraordinary  seems  to  me
an  event  that  deserves  to  be  unforgotten,  the  narration  of
which  should  not  be  interrupted.  For  this  reason  I  place
it  here,  a  little  later  than  it  ought  to  be  in  the  order  of
time,  but  the  dates  will  rectify  this  error.

We  have  seen  that  he  wished  to  come  to  France  in  the
last  years  of  the  late  king,  who  civilly  evaded  his  visit.
That  obstacle  no  longer  existing,  he  again  wished  to  gratify
his  curiosity,  and  sent  word  to  the  regent  through  Prince

1  It  is  now  improperly  called  the  “  Pitt  diamond.”  —  Tr.

110

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

Kurakin,  his  ambassador  here,  that  he  was  about  to  leave
Holland  to  come  and  see  the  king.  There  was  nothing  to  do
but  to  seem  pleased,  though  the  regent  would  willingly  have
been  spared  the  visit.  The  expense  of  it  was  great;  the
awkwardness  not  less  so,  with  a  prince  so  powerful  and  so
clear-sighted,  but  so  full  of  fancies,  with  the  remains  of  bar¬
barism  about  him,  and  accompanied  by  an  immense  suite  of
persons  whose  behaviour  was  very  different  from  that  of  our
own  people,  and  who  were  full  of  caprices  and  strange  habits,
—  and  their  master  and  themselves  very  sensitive  and  very
exacting  about  what  they  thought  their  due  and  their
rights.  Moreover,  the  czar  was  at  open  enmity  with  the
King  of  England,  —  an  enmity  that  went  to  the  verge  of  in¬
decency,  and  was  all  the  more  bitter  because  it  was  personal.
This  was  a  thing  that  harassed  the  regent  not  a  little,  because
his  own  intimacy  with  the  King  of  England  was  public,  and
had  been  brought  about  by  the  personal  interests  of  the
Abbé  Dubois,  also  to  the  verge  of  indecency.  The  dominant
passion  of  the  czar  was  to  make  his  country  flourishing
through  commerce.  He  had  made  a  great  number  of  canals
to  facilitate  this.  There  was  one  for  which  he  needed  the
concurrence  of  the  King  of  England,  because  it  had  to  cross
a  little  corner  of  his  German  States.  Commercial  jealousy
kept  George  from  consenting.  Peter,  engaged  in  the  war
with  Poland,  then  in  that  of  the  North,  in  which  George
also  took  part,  requested  this  compliance  in  vain.  That  was
the  source  of  their  hatred,  which  lasted  all  their  lives  with
the  utmost  bitterness.

This  great  monarch,  who  wanted  to  draw  both  himself
and  his  country  out  of  barbarism,  and  extend  his  power  by
Motives  of  the  conquests  and  treaties,  had  seen  the  necessity
to^jecome'^1"*”  marriages  to  ally  him  with  the  first  potentates
catholic.  0f  Europe.  This  reason  made  the  Catholic

1717J

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

Ill

religion  necessary  to  him,  —  that  religion  being  so  little
separated  from  the  Greek  faith  that  he  thought  there  would
be  no  difficulty  in  getting  it  received  among  his  people,  leav¬
ing  them,  however,  entire  liberty  of  conscience.  But  this
intelligent  prince  was  sufficiently  intelligent  to  desire  to  be
fully  enlightened  beforehand  as  to  Roman  pretensions.  For
this  purpose  he  sent  to  Rome  an  obscure  man,  though  one
who  was  capable  of  informing  himself,  who,  after  passing  six
months  in  that  city,  brought  back  to  him  nothing  satisfactory.
The  czar  unbosomed  himself  on  the  matter  in  Holland  to
King  William,  who  dissuaded  him  from  his  purpose  and
advised  him  to  imitate  England  and  make  himself  the  head
of  the  religion  of  his  own  country,  without  which  he  would
never  be  really  master  of  it.  This  advice  pleased  the  czar,
all  the  more  because  it  was  through  the  wealth  and  au¬
thority  of  the  patriarchs  of  Moscow,  his  grandfather  and
his  great-grandfather,  that  his  father  had  obtained  the
crown,  although  of  ordinary  condition  among  the  Russian
nobility.

Nevertheless,  the  passion  to  open  to  his  posterity  the
means  of  making  marriages  with  Catholic  princes,  above  all,
the  honour  of  allying  it  to  the  houses  of  France  and  Austria,
made  him  return  after  a  while  to  his  first  project.  He
persuaded  himself  that  the  man  he  had  sent  secretly  to
Rome  was  not  well-informed,  or  had  not  understood  the
matter  ;  he  resolved  to  fathom  his  doubts,  so  that  none  might
remain  as  to  the  course  he  ought  to  take.  With  this  design
he  fixed  on  Prince  Kurakin,  whose  intelligence  and  insight
were  well  known  to  him,  to  go  to  Rome  under  pretence  of
travelling  for  curiosity,  —  believing  that  a  seigneur  of  his
quality  would  obtain  an  entrance  to  all  that  was  best,  most
important,  and  most  distinguished  in  Rome  ;  and  also  that
by  living  there  under  pretext  of  loving  the  life,  wishing  to

112  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

see  all  at  his  ease,  and  to  admire  the  marvels  of  all  kinds
there  collected,  he  would  have  leisure  and  opportunity  to
become  well  informed  on  all  that  the  czar  was  desirous  of
knowing.  Kurakin  stayed  in  Rome  three  years,  mingling
with  learned  men  on  the  one  hand  and  the  very  best  society
on  the  other,  from  whom,  little  by  little,  he  drew  all  that
he  wanted  to  know,  with  the  more  facility  because  that
Court  openly  triumphs  in  its  temporal  pretensions  and  its
conquests  in  that  line,  instead  of  holding  them  secretly.
At  the  long  and  faithful  report  which  Kurakin  made  to
his  master  the  czar  heaved  a  sigh,  saying  that  he  must  be
master  in  his  own  land  and  could  not  put  it  in  the  power
of  any  one  who  was  greater;  after  that  he  never  thought
again  of  making  himself  a  Catholic.

That  is  the  good  that  popes  and  their  Court  do  to  the
Church,  the  good  that  these  vicars  of  Jesus  Christ  procure
for  the  souls  whom  He  redeemed,  and  of  whom  they  ought
to  be  the  great  pastors  ;  souls  for  which  they  have  to  answer
to  the  Sovereign  Pastor,  who  declared  to  Saint  Peter  and  the
other  apostles  that  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world  ;  and
who  asked  those  two  brothers,  when  they  wanted  him  to
judge  of  their  quarrel  about  their  heritage,  “  Who  made  me  a
judge  in  such  matters  over  you?”  —  and  would  do  no  good
work  for  them  except  to  reconcile  those  brothers,  in  order  to
teach  pastors  and  priests  by  so  great  and  clear  an  example
that  they  not  only  have  no  power  and  no  rights  over  the
temporal  for  any  reasons  whatsoever,  but  that  they  are
especially  excluded  from  them.

This  fact  about  the  czar  and  Pome,  Prince  Kurakin  did  not
conceal.  All  who  knew  it  heard  it  from  him  ;  I  often  dined
with  him  and  he  with  me,  and  have  talked  with  him  and
heard  him,  with  pleasure,  discourse  of  this  and  many  other
things.

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

113

The  regent,  informed  by  Kurakin  of  the  czar’s  approaching
arrival  in  France  by  the  maritime  coast,  sent  the  king’s
His  arrivai  in  equipages,  horses,  carriages,  coaches,  fourgons,

Pans'  tables,  and  beds,  with  du  Libois,  one  of  the

king’s  gentlemen-in-ordinary,  to  await  the  czar  at  Dunkerque,
pay  all  expenses  to  Paris  for  himself  and  suite,  and  to  show  him
the  same  honours  as  to  the  king  himself.  The  czar  proposed
to  give  a  hundred  days  to  the  trip.  The  apartment  of  the
queen-mother  at  the  Louvre  was  furnished  for  him.  The
regent  discussing  with  me  the  man  of  rank  he  had  better
choose  to  attend  the  czar  during  the  time  of  his  visit,  I
suggested  Maréchal  de  Tessé,  as  a  man  who  had  nothing
to  do,  was  well  versed  hi  the  language  and  usages  of  the
world,  knew  much  of  foreigners  through  his  travels  in  Spain
and  Italy,  and  was  very  gentle  and  polite.  The  regent
thought  I  was  right,  sent  for  him  the  next  day,  and  gave
him  his  orders.  The  hôtel  de  Lesdiguières  was  also  prepared
for  the  czar  and  his  suite,  under  the  supposition  that  he
might  prefer  a  private  house,  with  all  his  people  around  him,
to  the  Louvre.

The  czar  arrived  on  Friday,  May  7,  and  reached  the  Louvre
at  nine  in  the  evening.  He  went  all  over  the  apartment
of  the  queen-mother,  thought  it  too  magnificently  fur¬
nished  and  too  light,  and  immediately  got  hack  into  the
carriage  and  drove  to  the  hôtel  de  Lesdiguières,  where  he
preferred  to  lodge.  He  thought  the  apartment  prepared
for  him  also  too  fine,  and  ordered  his  camp-bed  to  be  set
up  in  a  dressing-room.  Maréchal  de  Tessé,  who  was  to  do
the  honours  of  the  house  and  table  and  accompany  him
wherever  he  went,  had  much  ado  to  follow  him,  and  even
to  rush  after  him.

The  monarch  excited  wonder  by  his  extreme  curiosity,
which  always  related  to  his  ideas  of  government,  commerce,

VOL.  IV.  —  8

114  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap  iv.

education,  police  ;  and  this  curiosity  looked  into  everything
and  despised  nothing,  however  slight,  that  had  consistent,
Great  qualities  evident,  and  wise  utility;  he  esteemed  only
of  the  czar.  that  which  deserved  esteem;  in  which  he

showed  the  intelligence,  discrimination,  and  quick  apprehen¬
sion  of  his  mind.  Everything  about  him  proved  the  wide
extent  of  his  ideas  and  something  that  was  unfailingly  con¬
sistent.  He  allied,  in  a  manner  altogether  surprising,  the
loftiest,  proudest,  most  sensitive,  sustained,  and  at  the  same
time  least  embarrassing  majesty  with  a  politeness  that  made
itself  felt  at  all  times,  though  still  as  the  master.  He  had  a
sort  of  familiarity  which  came  from  liberty  ;  hut  he  was  not
exempt  from  a  strong  tincture  of  the  ancient  barbarism  of
his  country,  which  made  his  manners  quick,  even  precipitate,
his  whims  uncertain,  and  himself  incapable  of  enduring
restraint  or  contradiction  to  any  of  them.  His  meals  were
often  scarcely  decent;  still  less  what  followed  them,  often
with  a  betrayal  of  the  audacity  of  a  king  who  felt  himself
everywhere  at  home.  What  he  desired  to  see  or  do  was
always  in  perfect  independence  of  the  means  of  accom¬
plishment,  which  had  to  be  forced  to  his  pleasure  at  a
word.  The  desire  to  see  at  his  ease,  the  annoyance  of
being  made  a  spectacle,  the  habit  of  liberty  in  all  things,
made  him  often  prefer  a  hired  carriage,  even  a  fiacre.  He
would  jump  into  the  first  vehicle  that  came  in  his  way,
belonging  often  to  people  who  had  come  to  his  house,
and  order  the  coachman  to  drive  him  about  town  or  into  the
country.  This  happened  to  Mme.  de  Matignon,  who  had
gone  to  gape  at  him,  and  was  much  astonished  to  find  her¬
self  obliged  to  go  home  on  foot;  for  he  took  her  carriage
to  Boulogne  and  other  places  in  the  country.  At  such  times
Maréchal  de  Tessé  and  his  suite,  from  whom  he  was  often
escaping,  had  to  fly  after  him,  often  not  finding  him.

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

115

He  was  a  very  tall  man,  very  well  made,  rather  thin,  the
face  somewhat  round  ;  a  grand  forehead  ;  beautiful  eyebrows  ;
His  face,  clothes,  Hie  nose  a  little  short,  but  not  too  much  so,
and  food.  thick  at  the  end  ;  bps  rather  thick  ;  complexion

brown  and  ruddy  ;  very  fine  black  eyes,  large,  vivid,  piercing,
and  well-shaped  ;  his  glance  majestic,  and  gracious  when  he
meant  it  to  be  so,  otherwise  stern  and  fierce  ;  and  with  all
this  a  tic,  which  was  not  frequent  but  convulsed  his  eyes  and
his  whole  face  and  was  very  alarming.  It  lasted  a  moment,
with  a  wandering,  terrible  look,  and  then  he  recovered
immediately.  His  whole  air  showed  his  mind,  his  reflection,
his  grandeur,  and  was  not  without  a  certain  grace.  He  never
wore  any  but  a  linen  collar,  a  round,  brown  wig,  without
powder,  which  did  not  touch  his  shoulders,  a  brown  coat
tight  to  the  body,  plain,  with  gold  buttons,  waistcoat,  breeches
and  stockings,  no  gloves  and  no  cuffs  ;  the  star  of  his  order
on  his  coat  and  the  ribbon  across  it,  the  coat  itself  often
unbuttoned;  his  hat  on  a  table,  never  on  his  head,  even
out  of  doors.  In  this  simplicity,  however  ill-attended  or
ill-vehicled  he  might  he,  it  was  impossible  to  mistake  the
air  of  grandeur  that  was  natural  to  him.

What  he  ate  and  drank  at  two  regular  meals  is  inconceiv¬
able,  — not  counting  all  the  beer  he  swallowed,  and  the  lemon¬
ade  and  other  kinds  of  drink  between  meals  ;  and  all  his  suite
much  more.  A  bottle  or  two  of  beer,  as  much  and  some¬
times  more  of  wine,  liqueur-wines  on  that,  and,  at  the  end  of
the  meal,  prepared  brandy,  half  a  pint,  sometimes  a  whole
pint  ;  this  was  about  the  ordinary  amount  he  drank  at  each
meal,  but  his  suite  while  at  table  swallowed  more,  and  were
eating  besides  from  eleven  in  the  morning  till  eight  at  night.
There  was  a  priest-almoner  who  dined  at  the  table  of  the
czar  and  ate  half  as  much  again  as  any  of  them;  which
amused  the  czar,  who  was  fond  of  him,  very  much.  Prince

116

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

Journal  of  the
czar’s  visit.

Kurakin  went  every  day  to  the  hôtel  de  Lesdiguières,  but  he
lodged  at  home.

The  czar  understood  French  very  well,  and  could,  I  think,
have  spoken  it  had  he  chosen  ;  but,  out  of  grandeur,  he  had
an  interpreter.  As  for  Latin  and  other  languages,  he  spoke
them  very  well.  He  had  a  guard-room  and  a  company  of
the  king’s  guards,  but  he  would  never  let  them  follow  him
out  of  doors.  He  would  not  leave  the  house,  no  matter  how
great  his  curiosity  was,  or  give  any  sign  of  life,  until  he  had
received  a  visit  from  the  king.

Saturday  morning,  the  day  after  his  arrival,  the  regent
went  to  see  him.  The  monarch  came  out  of  his  cabinet,
made  a  few  steps  towards  him,  embraced  him
with  a  great  air  of  superiority,  pointed  to  the
door  of  his  cabinet,  and  turning  instantly,  without  any  civil¬
ity,  entered  it  first  himself.  The  regent  followed,  and  Prince
Kurakin  after  him.  The  conversation  lasted  an  hour,  with¬
out  a  word  on  public  affairs  ;  then  the  czar  left  his  cabinet,
the  regent  after  him,  and  then  the  latter,  with  a  profound
bow,  only  half  returned,  took  leave.

The  following  Monday,  May  10,  the  king  went  to  see  the
czar,  who  received  him  at  the  carriage  door,  saw  him  get  out,
and  walked  before  him,  on  the  king’s  left  side,  to  his  room,
where  there  were  two  armchairs.  The  king  sat  down  in  the

o

one  to  the  right,  the  czar  in  the  one  to  the  left.  Prince
Kurakin  served  as  interpreter.  Every  one  had  been  aston¬
ished  to  see  the  czar  pick  up  the  king  under  his  two  arms,
lift  him  to  the  level  of  his  face,  and  kiss  him,  as  it  were,  in
the  air,  while  the  king,  young  as  he  was,  who  could  not  have
been  prepared  for  this,  was  not  the  least  frightened.  People
were  also  struck  with  the  graces  he  showed  before  the  king,
the  air  of  tenderness  he  had  for  him,  and  a  politeness  that
seemed  to  come  from  his  heart,  though  always  mingled  with

1717]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  117

grandeur,  claims  of  equal  rank,  and,  slightly,  of  superiority  of
rank;  all  of  which  he  made  distinctly  felt.  He  praised  the
king  and  seemed  charmed  with  him.  He  kissed  him  several
times.  The  king  made  his  short  little  compliment  very
prettily  ;  and  the  Duc  du  Maine  and  the  Maréchal  de  Ville-
roy  and  other  distinguished  persons  who  were  present  sup¬
plied  the  conversation.

Tuesday,  May  11,  the  czar  returned  the  king’s  visit,  with
the  same  ceremonial,  between  four  and  five  o’clock.  He
had  already  gone  as  early  as  eight  in  the  morning  to  see
the  Places  Eoyale,  des  Victoires,  and  Vendôme,  and  the
next  day  he  went  to  the  Observatoire,  the  manufactory  of
the  Gobelins,  and  the  Jardin  du  Eoi  for  simples.  Wher¬
ever  he  went,  he  examined  everything  and  asked  many
questions.

Friday,  14th,  he  went  at  six  o’clock  in  the  morning  to  the
great  gallery  of  the  Louvre  to  see  the  plans  in  relief  of  all
the  king’s  fortresses.  The  Maréchal  de  Villars  was  there
with  several  lieutenant-generals  to  explain  them.  He  ex¬
amined  the  plans  a  long  time  ;  then  he  visited  many  parts
of  the  Louvre,  and  descended  afterwards  into  the  gardens  of
the  Tuileries,  which  the  public  had  been  made  to  leave.  They
were  working  then  on  the  Pont  Tournant.  He  examined
that  work  minutely  and  stayed  there  a  long  time.  In  the
evening  the  Duc  d’Orléans  came  to  take  him  to  the  Opera  in
the  state  box  ;  the  two  alone  in  the  front  seats.  After  a  time
the  czar  asked  if  there  would  be  no  beer.  It  was  immedi¬
ately  brought  in  a  great  goblet  in  a  saucer.  The  regent  rose,
took  it,  and  presented  it  to  the  czar,  who  with  a  smile  and  a
bow  of  politeness,  took  the  goblet,  drank  it  off,  and  then
without  any  ceremony  put  it  back  on  the  saucer  which  the
recent  still  held.  At  the  fourth  act  he  went  away  to  supper,

o

but  would  not  let  the  regent  follow.  The  next  day  he  threw

118  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

himself  into  a  hired  coach  and  went  to  see  matters  of  inter¬
est  among  workmen.

May  16,  Whitsunday,  he  went  to  the  Invalides  where
he  wanted  to  see  and  examine  everything.  In  the  refectory
he  tasted  the  soldiers’  soup  and  their  wine,  drank  to  their
health,  slapping  them  on  the  shoulder  and  calling  them  com¬
rades.  He  admired  the  church,  the  dispensary,  the  infirmary,
and  seemed  charmed  with  the  order  of  the  establishment.
Maréchal  de  Yillars  did  the  honours.

Wednesday,  19th,  he  busied  himself  with  workmen,  and
various  work.  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  and  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans  sent  their  equerries  to  compliment  him.  They
had  both  hoped  for  a  compliment  themselves,  or  even  a
visit.  The  czar  replied  that  he  would  go  and  thank  them.
He  was  displeased  that  the  princes  of  the  blood  made  a
difficulty  of  going  to  see  him  unless  they  were  assured  that
he  would  pay  a  visit  to  the  princesses  of  the  blood.  This  he
rejected  with  great  haughtiness,  so  that  none  of  them  saw
him  except,  to  gratify  their  curiosity,  in  the  streets.

Monday,  24th,  he  went  to  the  Tuileries  early  before
the  king  was  up.  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  showed  him  the
crown  jewels.  He  thought  them  very  fine  and  many  more
than  he  expected,  but  said  he  knew  nothing  about  such
things.  He  made  rather  a  point  of  not  caring  for  beauty
that  was  purely  of  wealth  and  imagination  ;  especially  such
as  he  could  not  himself  attain.  Then  he  went  to  see  the  kins,
who  met  him  half-way,  in  Maréchal  de  Villeroy ’s  apartment.
This  was  arranged  so  as  to  seem  an  accidental  visit  without
ceremony.  The  king  held  a  roll  of  paper  in  his  hand  and
gave  it  to  the  czar,  telling  him  it  was  a  map  of  his  States.
This  little  gallantry  pleased  the  czar  immensely.  His  polite¬
ness  and  air  of  affection  and  friendship  were  the  same  as
before,  but  always  with  majesty  and  equality.

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

119

After  dinner  he  went  to  Versailles,  where  Maréchal  de
Tessé  left  him  to  the  Due  d’Antin,  charging  him  to  do  the
Goes  to  Ver-  honours.  Tuesday,  25th,  he  roamed  all  over
Triànon'ald663  ^ie  gardens  and  sailed  on  the  grand  canal,
Mar*y-  very  early  in  the  morning  before  dAntin  came

to  him.  He  saw  all  Versailles,  Trianon,  and  the  Menagerie.
His  principal  suite  were  lodged  in  the  chateau.  They
brought  with  them  ladies,  who  slept  in  the  apartment  of
Mme.  de  Maintenon.  Bloin,  governor  of  the  château,  was
extremely  scandalized  at  such  a  profanation  of  that  temple
of  prudery,  of  which  the  goddess  and  he,  now  aged,  would
have  thought  much  less  in  former  days.

Sunday,  May  30,  he  went  to  Fontainebleau,  where  he  slept  ;
the  next  day  to  hunt  the  stag,  with  the  Comte  de  Toulouse
to  do  the  honours.  The  place  did  not  please  him  much,  and
the  hunt  not  at  all,  for  he  nearly  fell  from  his  horse  ;  he
thought  the  exercise  too  violent,  and  he  really  knew  nothing
of  hunting.  He  chose  to  dine  alone  with  his  own  people  on
the  île  de  l’Étang,  where  they  made  amends  to  themselves
for  their  fatigues.  He  returned  alone  in  a  carriage  with
three  of  his  people.  It  appeared  in  that  carriage  that  they
had  eaten  largely  and  drunk  much.

Friday,  June  11,  he  went  from  Versailles  to  Saint-Cyr,
where  he  saw  the  whole  establishment  and  the  young  ladies
„  .  in  their  classes.  He  was  received  like  the

Maintenon  an  in-  king.  He  wished  to  see  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
who,  apprehensive  of  this  curiosity,  went  to
bed,  with  all  her  curtains  closed  except  one  that  was  only
half  open.  The  czar  entered  her  room,  went  to  the  windows
and  pulled  back  the  curtains  on  arriving,  and  immediately
after  those  of  the  bed  ;  gazed  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon  at  his
ease,  said  not  a  word  to  her,  nor  she  to  him,  and  without
making  her  any  sort  of  bow  went  away.  I  heard  afterwards

120

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAENT-SIMON.  [chap.  rv.

that  she  was  much  astonished  and  still  more  mortified  ;  hut
Louis  XIY.  was  no  longer  living.  The  czar  returned  to
Paris  Saturday,  June  12.

Tuesday,  June  15,  he  went  early  to  d’Antin’s  house  in
Paris.  Working  that  day  with  the  regent,  I  finished  in  half
T  an  hour  :  he  was  surprised  and  wanted  to  de-

I  go  to  see  the  '

czar  at  d’Antin’s  tain  me.  I  told  him  that  I  could  always  have

house.

the  honour  of  seeing  him,  but  not  the  czar,  wTho
was  going  away  and  whom  I  had  not  yet  seen,  and  there¬
fore  I  was  going  to  d’Antin’s  house  to  gape  at  my  ease.  Ho
one  was  to  be  there  but  invited  guests  and  a  few  ladies  with
Mme.  la  Duchesse  and  her  daughters,  who  were  also  going
to  gape.  I  entered  the  garden  where  the  czar  was  walking
about.  Maréchal  de  Tessé  saw  me  from  afar  and  came  to
me,  expecting  to  present  me.  I  begged  him  not  to  do  so,
and  not  to  seem  even  to  notice  me  in  the  czar’s  presence,
because  I  wanted  to  look  at  him  wholly  at  my  ease,  to  hover
about  him  and  wait  as  long  as  I  liked  to  contemplate  him,
which  I  could  not  do  if  I  was  known.  I  begged  him  to  tell
d’Antin  the  same  thing  ;  and,  with  that  precaution,  I  satis¬
fied  my  curiosity  as  I  pleased.  I  found  him  rather  talkative,
but  always  as  being  in  everything  the  master.  He  entered  a
cabinet,  where  d’Antin  showed  him  various  plans  and  curi¬
osities,  about  which  he  asked  many  questions.  It  was  there
that  I  saw  the  tic  I  mentioned.  I  asked  Tessé  if  it  happened
often  ;  he  said  yes,  several  times  a  day,  especially  when  he
was  not  on  the  watch  to  control  himself.  Returning  to
the  garden,  d’Antin  had  the  windows  of  the  ground-floor
apartment  thrown  open,  and  told  him  that  Mme.  la  Duchesse
and  other  ladies  were  there  and  had  a  great  desire  to  see
him.  He  made  no  answer,  hut  allowed  himself  to  be  con¬
ducted  past  the  house.  He  walked  slower,  turned  his  head
to  the  apartment,  where  they  were  all  standing  and  under

.  '//s/s  /■  /d*’'

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

121

arms,  but  as  sigbt-seers.  He  looked  at  them  well,  made-  a
very  slight  inclination  of  the  head  to  the  whole  party  and
passed  haughtily  on.  I  think  from  the  way  he  received
other  ladies  he  would  have  shown  more  politeness  to  these  if
Mme.  la  Duchesse  had  not  been  there  ;  he  was  displeased  by
the  pretension  of  the  princesses  of  the  blood  about  his  visit.
I  was  there  about  an  hour  and  did  not  cease  looking  at  him.
In  the  end  I  saw  that  he  noticed  it,  and  that  made  me  more
cautious  in  the  fear  that  he  would  ask  who  I  was.

The  king  gave  him  two  magnificent  Gobelins  tapestries.
He  wanted  also  to  give  him  a  beautiful  sword  with  diamonds,
which  the  czar  excused  himself  from  accepting.  On  his  side,
he  distributed  about  sixty  thousand  francs  to  the  king’s  ser¬
vants  who  had  waited  on  him,  and  gave  d’Antin  and  the
Maréchals  de  Tessé  and  d’Estrées  each  his  portrait  set  in
diamonds,  five  gold  medals,  and  eleven  silver  ones,  relating
to  the  principal  actions  of  his  life.

Wednesday,  June  16,  he  was  on  horseback  at  a  review  of
the  two  regiments  of  the  guards,  the  gendarmes,  the  light-
horse  cavalry,  and  the  mousquetaires.  No  one  was  with
him  but  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  He  scarcely  looked  at  the
troops,  and  they  perceived  it.

Friday,  June  18,  the  regent  went  early  to  the  hôtel  de
Lesdiguières  to  take  leave  of  the  czar,  and  was  some  time
His  departure  ;  with  him.  After  this  visit,  the  czar  went  to
luxury  "of  France;  the  Tuileries  to  bid  adieu  to  the  king;  by
his  prophecy.  agreement  there  was  no  ceremony.  It  would
have  been  impossible  to  show  more  intelligence,  grace,  and
tenderness  for  the  king  than  the  czar  displayed  on  all  these
occasions.  The  luxury  he  saw  surprised  him  much  ;  he
was  much  moved  on  parting  with  the  king  and  with  France,
and  said  he  saw  with  grief  that  luxury  would  prove  her
destruction.  He  went  away,  charmed  with  the  manner  in

122

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

His  passionate
desire  to  unite
himself  with
France.

which  he  had  been  received,  with  all  that  he  had  seen,  the
liberty  he  had  enjoyed,  and  showing  a  great  desire  to  unite
himself  closely  with  the  king,  to  which  the  interests  of  the
Abbé  Dubois  and  England  proved  a  fatal  obstacle,  for  which
the  country  has  often  had,  and  still  has,  great  reason  to
repent.

One  can  never  finish  about  this  czar,  so  essentially  and
truly  great;  whose  singularity  and  rare  variety  of  great
talents  and  many  grandeurs  will  always  make
him  a  monarch  worthy  of  admiration  to  even
remote  posterity,  in  spite  of  the  great  defects
of  barbarism  in  his  origin,  his  native  country,
and  education.  This  is  the  reputation  he  left  behind  him
in  France,  which  regarded  him  as  a  wonder,  with  whom  she
has  ever  since  remained  fascinated.  The  czar  had  a  pas¬
sionate  desire  to  unite  himself  with  France.  Nothing  could
have  been  better  for  our  commerce,  and  for  our  considera¬
tion  in  the  North,  in  Germany,  and  indeed  throughout
Europe.  This  prince  held  England  in  a  leash  through  her
commerce,  and  King  George  in  fear  for  his  German  States.
He  also  held  Holland  to  great  respect,  and  the  emperor  to
circumspection.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  his  was  a  great
figure  in  Europe  and  Asia,  and  that  France  would  have
profited  infinitely  by  a  closer  alliance  with  him.  He  did  not
like  the  emperor;  he  wished  to  loosen  little  by  little  our
dependence  on  England  ;  and  it  was  England  which  made
us  deaf  to  his  invitations,  even  to  incivility.  In  vain  I
pressed  the  regent  on  this  point,  and  gave  him  reasons,  of
which  he  felt  the  full  force,  and  to  which  he  could  make  no
reply.  But  by  this  time  his  bewitchment  with  the  Abbé
Dubois,  aided  by  d’Effiat,  Canillac,  and  the  Duc  de  Noailles,
was  stronger  than  reasons.  Since  then  we  have  indeed
had  cause  for  long  repentance  over  the  fatal  charms  of

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

123

England,  and  the  foolish  contempt  with  which  we  treated
Russia.  The  evils  that  resulted  have  never  ceased  ;  and  we
have  now  opened  our  eyes  only  to  see  clearly  the  irreparable
ruin  sealed  by  the  ministry  of  M.  le  Duc,  followed  by  that
of  Cardinal  Fleury.

When  Prince  Kurakin  was  in  Rome  (for  reasons  already
explained),  he  had  led  the  pope  to  hope  that  the  czar  would
grant  free  exercise  to  the  Catholic  religion  in  Russia.  The
pope  believed  that  Bentivoglio  could  obtain  this  by  speaking
to  the  czar,  hut  thinking  that  the  latter’s  stay  in  Paris  would
be  too  short  to  consummate  an  agreement,  he  told  Bentivoglio
to  induce  him  to  receive  a  nuncio  at  the  Russian  Court,
with  or  without  that  character.  The  pope,  however,  did  not
wish  the  negotiation  to  he  carried  on  in  Paris  under  the  re¬
gent’s  eye  without  informing  the  latter  of  what  was  going  on.
He  therefore  directed  Bentivoglio  to  tell  the  regent,  but  to  say
nothing  of  certain  secret  orders  he  had  sent  him  to  induce
the  czar  to  join  with  the  emperor  in  a  war  against  the  Turks.

The  czar  meantime  had  told  Maréchal  de  Tessé  that  he
was  not  averse  to  recognizing  the  pope,  as  the  head  orthodox
patriarch  ;  but  that  he  would  never  consent

Why  he  did  L  ’

not  become  a  to  a  certain  subjection  which  the  Court  of
Rome  assumed  to  impose  on  princes  to  the
prejudice  of  their  sovereignty  ;  that  he  was  very  willing  to
believe  the  pope  infallible,  but  only  as  the  head  of  the
Council-general.  The  fact  is,  truth  and  reason  are  of  all
lands,  and  this  monarch,  still  almost  a  barbarian,  was  teach¬
ing  us  an  excellent  lesson.

During  the  fête  of  Saint  Louis,  the  orchestra  of  the  Opera
is  accustomed  to  give  the  gratuitous  entertainment  of  a  fine
concert  in  the  Garden  of  the  Tuileries.  The

Choice  lesson  of

Maréchal  de  vine-  presence  of  the  king  in  that  palace  drew  a
roy  to  the  king.  greater  crowd  than  usual  this  year,  in  the  hope

124  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

of  seeing  him  appear  on  the  terraces,  which  are  on  a  level
with  the  royal  apartments.  A  marked  increase  of  zeal
and  loyalty  was  visible,  shown  by  the  number  of  those
who  flocked  into  the  gardens,  and  also  into  the  courtyards
on  the  other  side  of  the  palace.  They  did  not  leave  one
vacant  space,  either  on  the  ground  and  at  the  windows,
or  on  all  the  roofs  that  commanded  a  view  of  the  Tuileries.
The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  per¬
suading  the  king  to  show  himself,  first  on  the  garden  side
and  then  towards  the  courtyard,  where,  as  soon  as  he  ap¬
peared,  the  cries  of  “Vive  le  roi!”  resounded  on  all  sides.
The  maréchal,  making  the  king  take  notice  of  this  enormous
multitude,  said  to  him  sententiously  :  “  See,  my  master,  see
this  people,  this  influx,  this  vast  number  of  persons,  —  all
are  yours,  you  are  their  master  ;  ”  and  this  lesson  he  repeated
again  and  again  to  impress  it  well  upon  him.  He  was
afraid,  apparently,  lest  he  should  grow  up  ignorant  of  his
power.  The  admirable  dauphin,  his  father,  had  received
very  different  lessons,  by  which  he  profited.  He  was  deeply
convinced  that  while  power  is  given  to  kings  to  command
and  govern,  the  peoples  do  not  belong  to  kings,  but  kings  to
their  people,  to  do  them  justice,  to  make  them  live  accord¬
ing  to  laws,  to  render  them  happy  by  the  equity,  wisdom,
gentleness,  and  moderation  of  their  government.  That  is
what 'I  have  often  heard  him  say  with  effusion  of  heart  and
inward  conviction,  in  the  desire  and  firm  resolution  to  con¬
duct  himself  accordingly,  not  only  in  private  when  I  was
working  with  him  for  the  future  of  such  principles,  hut
openly  in  the  salon  at  Marly,  to  the  admiration  and  delight
of  those  who  heard  him.

An  amusement  suited  to  the  king’s  age  made  a  serious
quarrel  about  this  time.  A  tent  had  been  set  up  for  him  on
the  terrace  of  the  Tuileries,  before  his  apartment  and  on  a

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

125

level  with  it.  The  games  of  kings  have  always  some  dis¬
tinction  attached  to  them.  He  took  it  into  his  head  to
Quarrel  about  the  have  medals,  and  give  them  to  the  courtiers  of
medals.  his  own  age  whom  he  wished  to  favour;  and

these  medals,  when  possessed,  gave  the  right  to  enter  the
tent  without  being  otherwise  invited.  This  was  called  the
“  Order  of  the  Pavilion.”  The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  gave
directions  to  Lefèvre  to  make  the  medals.  He  obeyed  and
brought  them  to  the  maréchal,  who  presented  them  to  the
king.  Lefèvre  was  silversmith  to  the  king’s  household,  and,
as  such,  under  the  orders  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  Bed¬
chamber.  The  Duc  de  Mortemart,  who  was  one  of  the
latter,  was  on  duty.  He  had  had  several  squabbles  already
with  Maréchal  de  Yilleroy.  He  now  declared  that  it  was
for  himself  to  order  the  medals,  and  present  them  to  the
king.  He  was  very  angry  that  all  was  done  without  his
knowledge,  and  he  carried  his  complaint  to  the  regent.  It
was  the  merest  trifle  and  not  worth  notice  ;  not  one  of  the
three  other  gentlemen  of  the  Bedchamber  took  any  part  in
the  matter.  The  Duc  d’Orléans,  with  his  customary  viezzo-
termine,  said  that  Lefèvre  had  not  made  and  carried  the
medals  to  the  maréchal  as  silversmith  to  the  king’s  house¬
hold,  but  as  having  received  through  the  maréchal  an  order
from  the  king,  and  that  no  one  was  to  say  anything  more
about  it.  The  Duc  de  Mortemart  was  incensed,  and  did
not  restrain  his  tongue  about  the  maréchal.

The  Abbé  Dubois,  on  a  recent  visit  to  England,  had  found
the  Prince  of  Wales  arrested  and  confined  to  his  own  apart-
Hatredofthe  ment,  without  being  allowed  to  see  any  one
to  the^princ^of  but  his  necessary  attendant.  He  wrote  two
Wales.  letters  to  the  king,  his  father,  which  irritated

the  latter  still  more,  so  that  he  sent  an  order  to  the  prince,
on  receiving  the  second,  to  leave  the  palace.  He  was  lodged

126

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

by  Lord  Lumley  in  London,  and  soon  after  established  him¬
self  a  few  miles  from  London  in  the  little  village  of  Rich¬
mond.  All  Europe  had  known  of  the  horrible  catastrophe
of  Count  Konigsmarck,  whom  George,  at  that  time  Duke  of
Hanover,  had  caused  to  be  flung  into  a  hot  oven,  at  the  same
time  putting  the  duchess,  his  wife,  into  a  castle  carefully
guarded,  where  she  had  httle  or  no  hberty  until  George  was
made  King  of  England.  This  prince  could  not  endure  his
son,  under  the  conviction  that  he  was  not  his  own  ;  and  the
son  could  not  endure  the  father,  from  anger  and  vexation  at
this  conviction,  continually  and  openly  marked,  and  from
indignation  at  the  cruel  treatment  shown  to  his  mother.
His  wife,  Charlotte  of  Brandebourg- Anspach,  was  a  princess
of  spirit,  affable,  virtuous,  and  extremely  liked  in  England,
standing  very  well  with  her  husband  and  also  with  her
father-in-law,  between  whom  she  constantly  put  herself.
The  King  of  England  offered  to  let  her  continue  to  live  in
the  palace  with  her  children,  but  she  preferred  to  follow  her
husband.

V

The  finance  committee,  which  met  several  times  a  week,
kept  on  its  way.  The  Duc  de  Noailles  presented,  as  he
_  .  wished,  the  present  state  of  the  finances,

Committee  on  r  ’

finance  ;  my  pro-  showed  their  embarrassments,  offered  expedi-

posal  for  reform.  it,

ents,  and  read  memoranda.  1  was  there,  as
I  have  said,  against  my  will;  and  this  financial  language,
of  which  they  have  managed  to  make  a  science  that  is
Greek  to  others,  invented  to  hide  knowledge  from  those
who  are  not  initiated  into  it,  and  whom  magistrates,  ne¬
gotiators,  and  bankers  wish  to  keep  in  the  dark,  —  this
language,  I  say,  was  totally  unknown  to  me.  Neverthe¬
less,  as  my  constant  maxim  has  ever  been  that  personal
inclination  should  be  banished  from  public  affairs,  together
with  over-respect  for  persons  and  things  and  prejudice,  I
listened  with  all  my  ears,  in  spite  of  my  dislike  of  the  sub¬
ject  ;  and  what  I  did  not  understand  I  was  not  ashamed  to
acknowledge  and  ask  to  have  explained  to  me.  This  was
the  result  of  my  avowal  of  ignorance  in  finance,  which  I  had
made  so  plain  at  the  Council  of  Eegency  when  trying  to
excuse  myself  from  being  on  this  committee.

It  happened  quite  often  that,  there  being  diversity  of
opinions  and  sometimes  rather  sharp  ones,  I  found  myself  on
the  side  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  and  that  I  argued  hotly  in
support  of  him.  The  chancellor  afterwards  complimented
me  on  this.  The  Duc  d’Orléans,  to  whom  they  both  told  it,
assured  them  he  was  not  at  all  surprised,  but  he  did  not  fail
to  let  me  know  his  satisfaction.  I  said  to  him,  and  also  to

128

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

the  chancellor,  that  the  opinion  of  the  Duc  de  ISToailles,
good  or  had,  and  his  individual  person,  were  to  me  two
things  absolutely  distinct  and  separate  ;  that  I  sought  for
the  good  and  the  true,  and  attached  myself  to  them  wherever
I  thought  I  found  them,  just  as  I  stiffened  myself  against
whatever  I  thought  opposed  to  them  ;  that  in  this  latter  case
it  might  be  that  I  should  speak  harder  and  firmer  if  it  were
the  opinion  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles  that  I  was  fighting  ;  but
also  I  could  be  of  his  opinion  without  repugnance  when  I
thought  it  good,  and  at  such  times  I  rose  to  support  him
strongly  for  the  good  and  the  true  when  I  saw  him  attacked,
without,  for  all  that,  changing  my  feelings  as  to  him
personally.

The  work  of  the  committee  coming  to  an  end,  and  nearly
all  the  opinions  agreeing  on  each  point,  I  went  to  see  the
chancellor  in  private,  and  told  him  I  came  to  communicate
an  idea  I  had  not  liked  to  risk  in  the  committee,  and  to
reason  about  it  with  him,  and,  if  he  thought  it  good,  to  pro¬
pose  it,  he  and  I,  to  the  regent  ;  if  not,  to  forget  all  about  it.
I  told  him  that,  worried  to  see  the  difficulty  which  there  was,
even  in  these  times  of  peace,  in  making  the  king’s  receipts
equal  his  expenses,  I  thought  it  would  be  well  to  reduce  the
gendarmerie,  the  light-horse  of  the  guard,  and  the  two  com¬
panies  of  mousquetaires,  increasing  by  two  brigades  each
the  four  companies  of  the  body-guard.

The  chancellor  liked  all  the  reasons  that  I  gave  him  ex¬
ceedingly.  But  when  we  came  to  discuss,  not  the  means  of
convincing  the  regent,  because  the  evidence  was  palpable,  but
the  execution  of  this  reform,  we  both  agreed  that  we  should
never  succeed  in  inspiring  him  with  sufficient  resolution  ;  or,
if  he  did,  against  our  expectation,  undertake  it,  the  outcries
and  factions  of  interested  parties  would  never  let  him  exe¬
cute  it.  This  amazing  weakness,  which  constantly  ruined  a

1717]  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

129

regency  that  might  have  been  so  fine,  so  useful  to  the  king¬
dom,  so  glorious  for  the  regent,  the  results  of  which  could
have  been  in  all  ways  of  such  great  advantage  to  the  nation,
was  the  continual  obstacle  to  all  good,  and  a  perpetual  cause
of  sorrow  to  those  who  sincerely  desired  the  well-being  of  the
State  and  the  glory  of  the  regent.  We  finally  admitted,  the
chancellor  and  I,  that  if  we  proposed  to  the  regent  so  useful
a  reform  it  would  never  be  accomplished,  and  that  all  the
results  we  should  get  for  our  zeal  would  be  the  hatred  of
interested  parties.  This  consideration  closed  our  lips,  and  the
matter  was  known  only  to  ourselves.

The  long  and  wearisome  work  of  the  committee  was  over  ;
it  assembled  several  times  in  the  regent’s  cabinet,  where  the
Resolutions  of  final  resolutions  were  passed  unanimously.
madTtatoaT  The  principal  ones  were:  that  the  rentes  of
edlct-  the  Hôtel  de  Ville  [government  securities]

should  not  be  meddled  with  ;  that  the  tithe  tax  should  be
taken  off,  as  much  to  keep  the  promise,  solemnly  made  at  the
time  it  was  imposed,  to  suppress  it  in  times  of  peace,  as
because,  in  point  of  fact,  very  little  was  really  derived  from
it.  The  grant  of  one  million  and  two  hundred  thousand
francs  a  year  to  the  building  account  was  reduced  to  one-
half;  several  withdrawals  of  pensions  uselessly  given,  and
reduction  of  others  were  made  ;  the  king’s  private  money,  of
ten  thousand  francs  a  month,  and  his  wardrobe,  of  thirty-six
thousand,  were  reduced,  the  first  to  half,  the  second  to  twenty-
four  thousand  francs.  At  the  king’s  present  age  the  latter
went  chiefly  in  pillage.  There  were  several  other  things  cut
down,  and  a  diminution  of  interest  decreed  on  the  sums
borrowed  at  four  per  cent.  The  chiefs  and  presidents  of  all
the  councils  were  summoned  to  a  special  meeting,  at  which
the  Duc  de  Noailles  rendered  an  account  of  what  had  been
agreed  to  in  the  committee.  It  was  voted  that  an  edict  in

VOL.  IV.  —  9

130

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap;  v.

conformity  thereto  should  be  drawn  up  and  sent  to  parlia¬
ment  to  be  enregistered.

This  seemed  to  the  parliament  too  fine  an  opportunity  to
be  lost.  Messieurs  declared  that  they  must  see  a  detailed
account  of  the  revenues  and  expenses  of  the  king  before  they
could  decide  to  enregister  the  edict.  The  president  went  to
report  this  difficulty  to  the  regent,  who,  the  next  day,  received
a  deputation  from  the  parliament,  to  whom  he  said  that  he
should  allow  no  attack  on  the  royal  authority  as  long  as  he
was  the  guardian  of  it.  Parliament  assembled  soon  after  and
registered  the  suppression  of  the  tithe,  of  various  extortions,
and  some  of  the  other  articles.  As  for  those  that  remained,
the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  the  weakness,  instigated  by  the  fright
of  the  Duc  de  Noailles  and  his  own  desire  to  court  the
parliament,  to  have  them  discussed  between  the  duke  and
the  fourteen  members  of  the  deputation  in  his  presence.
This  took  place  on  Sunday,  September  5,  on  which  occasion
the  regent  brought  in  the  Sieur  Law,  that  he  might  explain
the  advantages  that  could  be  derived  from  the  Company
of  the  Mississippi.  Of  all  this,  not  a  word  to  the  Council
of  Eegency,  still  less  to  me  privately  ;  therefore  I,  on  my
side,  said  not  a  word  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  as,  indeed,  my
custom  was  in  relation  to  parliament.

The  Duc  de  Noailles,  jealous  of  the  confidence  the  regent
felt  in  Law  and  of  the  great  success  of  his  bank,  did  all  he

Manoeuvre  of  the  coul(i  to  trou1jle  &  Law  went  quietly  on,  but
Duc  de  Noaiiies  he  sometimes  complained  of  this,  modestly.

in  regard  to  Law.

Noailles,  who  wanted  to  be  rid  of  him,  so  as
to  be  fully  master  of  all  the  finances  himself,  set  all  machines
at  work  to  overthrow  him.  The  bank  was  by  this  time  one
of  the  chief  means  to  keep  matters  going.  The  regent  there¬
fore  wanted  the  pair  reconciled.  Law  was  ready  in  all  good
faith,  and  as  the  Duc  de  Noailles  could  not  well  draw  back

1717]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  131

he  made  the  finest  pretence  of  reconciliation  externally.
Precisely  at  this  lucky  moment  Mornay  died,  very  suddenly.
He  was  lieutenant-general,  and  also  governor  and  captain  of
Saint-Germain.  N oailles,  alert  to  all  things,  heard  of  this
death  on  waking,  and  rushed  instantly  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans
to  ask  for  the  post,  which  was  given  to  him  immediately.
My  father  had  had  it.  I  did  not  hear  of  Mornay’s  death  till
the  afternoon,  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  Noailles’  activity.  It
was  not  easy  to  get  up  earlier  than  he.

Nevertheless,  Noailles,  always  jealous  of  Law,  went  on
troubling  his  bank  and  his  schemes.  Not  only  did  he  bar
Law’s  way  by  the  manœuvres  and  authority  of  his  office  in
the  finances,  but  he  stirred  up  against  him  in  the  councils
and  in  parliament  all  the  opponents  that  he  could,  and  among
them  they  often  stopped  and  even  frustrated  plans  that  were
perfectly  reasonable.  Law,  who,  as  I  have  explained,  came  to
see  me  every  Tuesday  morning,  was  continually  complaining
of  this,  and  showing  me  the  injury  that  this  perpetual  thwart¬
ing  was  doing  to  the  business  of  the  bank.  I  have  often
owned  my  incapacity  in  the  matter  of  finances  ;  but  there  are
things  that  sometimes  depend  on  good  sense  more  than  on
knowledge  ;  and  Law,  with  his  strong  Scotch  accent,  had  the
rare  gift  of  explaining  himself  in  so  plain,  and  clear,  and  in¬
telligible  a  way  that  he  could  not  fail  to  be  perfectly  under¬
stood  and  comprehended.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  liked  him  and
enjoyed  him.  He  looked  upon  him  and  all  that  he  did  as
the  work  of  his  own  creation.  Moreover,  he  loved  unusual
and  indirect  ways,  and  he  clung  to  him  the  more  eagerly
because  he  saw  the  necessary  resources  of  the  State  and  the
ordinary  operations  of  finances  failing  him.  Law  was  an
independent  side,  and  this  side  pleased  the  regent;  but
Noailles,  who  wanted  to  govern  him  and  so  reach  the  post  of
prime  minister  (of  which  he  never  lost  sight  or  hope),  found

132

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

in  Law  a  serious  obstacle  on  his  own  ground  —  he,  who  en¬
croached  as  much  as  he  could  on  the  ground  of  others.

The  Abbé  Dubois,  always  seeking  to  recover  himself  in
the  mind  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  needed  outside  support,  and
intimacy  be-  had  no  sooner  obtained  it  by  his  negotiations

tween  Dubois
and  Law  ;  its
cause.

with  England  and  Holland  than  the  persons
he  had  used  became  suspected  by  him  as  soon

as  his  influence  no  longer  needed  theirs.  His  aim  also  was
the  post  of  prime  minister  ;  and  he  did  not  want  opponents
or  competitors.  The  one  he  feared  most  was  the  Duc  de
Noailles  ;  and  he  resolved  to  get  rid  of  him  early,  without
showing  anything  personally  against  him.  He  therefore  allied
himself  with  Law  ;  their  interests  in  forming  this  union  were
the  same.  What  passed  in  this  respect  was  in  a  darkness
that  all  Noailles’  art  could  not  penetrate.

Law  did  not  conceal  from  me  this  budding  intimacy,  or
the  use  he  expected  to  make  of  it  ;  but  he  did  not  tell  me
what  it  cost  him  to  make  it  solid.  By  this  time  he  was
beginning  to  get  money  to  expend  from  that  dawning  specu¬
lation,  so  well  known  since  and  so  fatal  through  the  abuse
that  was  made  of  it,  which  went  by  the  name  of  “  The  Missis¬
sippi.”  It  was  sweet  to  the  Abbé  Dubois  to  discover  a  secret
resource  for  which  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  any  one
but  a  man  whose  interest  it  was,  in  self-defence,  to  buy  his
protection.  Such  was  the  chain  which  bound  the  friendship
between  these  two  men,  and  carried  them  in  the  end  so  high,
or  so  far,  from  each  other.  The  rest  of  the  year  1717  went
by  in  perpetual  squabbles  between  Law  and  the  finances,
—  that  is  to  say,  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  —  and  in  appeals
which  Law  was  forced  to  make  to  the  chief  councils  and  to
parliament.

The  year  1718  opened,  on  the  first  day,  with  the  publica¬
tion  of  the  edict  in  favour  of  the  Company  of  the  West.

1718]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

133

Its  capital  was  fixed  at  one  hundred  millions,  and  it  was  de¬
clared  unattachable,  except  in  case  of  bankruptcy  or  decease
of  shareholders.  This  name  was  substituted  for
that  of  “  The  Mississippi  ”  (which  did  not  cease

1718.

Edict  in  favour  of

the  “  company  of  t,o  be  used),  that  enterprise  which  enriched

the  West.”  .

and  ruined  so  many  persons,  and  in  which
the  princes  and  princesses  of  the  blood,  especially  Mme.  la
Duchesse,  M.  le  Duc,  and  the  Prince  de  Conti,  found  the
mines  of  Potosi  ;  the  continuance  of  the  scheme  in  their
hands  being  the  mainstay  of  this  Company,  so  fatal  to
France,  whose  commerce  it  destroyed.  The  protection  they
gave  to  it  all  their  lives,  and  gave  publicly,  through  and
against  all,  equal  to  the  immense  profits  they  derived  with¬
out  sharing  any  loss,  maintained  the  Company  under  all
risks  and  perils  ;  and  after  them  came  powerful  magnates
of  finance,  who  have  kept  the  management  and  the  fatness
to  the  present  day.

The  regent,  being  more  and  more  goaded  and  provoked  by
the  perpetual  shackles  laid  on  Law’s  operations  by  the  Due
Defeat  of  Noaiiies  de  Noailles  and  by  the  dots  on  the  ï s  added
by  his  friend  the  chancellor,  who  increased  the
oppression  on  Law  by  the  weight  of  his  office
and  his  own  personality,  the  reputation  of  which  was  at
that  time  great,  —  the  regent,  I  say,  irritated  by  the  two  oppo¬
nents  who  stood  in  the  way,  but  determined  in  spite  of  all
obstacles  to  uphold  the  views  and  ways  of  the  Scotchman,
determined  to  make  a  last  effort  to  unite  them  with  Law,
and  also  to  find  out  for  himself  what  there  was  of  good  and
true  on  both  sides.  In  order  to  do  this  without  interruption,
and  quietly  at  leisure,  he  passed  a  whole  afternoon  with  them
at  La  Paquette,  a  pretty  little  house  which  the  Duc  de
ISToailles  had  hired,  and  where  he  gave  them  a  supper  after¬
wards.  This  was  on  the  6th  of  January.

and  the  chan
cellor.

134

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

The  chancellor  and  Law  went  early  to  La  Raquette.  The
session  was  long  and  earnest  on  both  sides,  but  it  proved  to
he  the  extreme  unction  of  the  two  friends.  The  regent  de¬
clared  that  he  found  bad  faith  in  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  and
blind  obstinacy  in  the  chancellor,  the  slave  of  forms,  against
the  all-powerful  arguments  and  evident  resources  of  Law.
As  I  have  said  before,  the  Scotchman,  without  a  fluent  enun¬
ciation,  had  such  clearness  in  argument  and  was  so  seductive
in  ideas,  with  a  great  deal  of  natural  shrewdness  under  a
surface  of  simplicity,  that  he  often  put  his  hearers  off  their
guard.  He  asserted  that  the  obstacles  which  stopped  him
at  every  step  made  him  lose  all  the  fruits  of  his  system,  and
he  knew  so  well  how  to  convince  the  regent  that  finally,  as
we  shall  presently  see,  the  latter  forced  all,  and  abandoned
himself  wholly  to  Law.

The  disorders  in  France,  inevitable  from  the  system  of
raising  the  taille  tax,  disturbed  the  regent  all  the  more  be-
Project  about  the  cause  the  fermentation  was  beginning  to  be
“taiiie "tax.  palpable  in  parliament  and  in  certain  of  the

provinces.  They  had  tried  to  establish  a  proportional  taille
in  the  généralité  of  Paris.1  Several  persons  had  been  work¬
ing  at  it  for  more  than  a  year  without  other  success  than  the
expenditure  of  eight  hundred  thousand  francs.  They  be¬
thought  themselves  next  of  the  royal  tithe  of  Maréchal
Vauban,  which  they  employed  the  Abbé  Bignon  and  little
Renault  to  improve;  the  latter  offering  to  go  at  his  own
expense  and  make  attempts  in  its  favour  at  several  elec¬
tions,  as  he  did  in  the  end.  But  all  these  efforts  did  harm
by  the  expense  they  caused,  without  producing  any  success.
Either  the  plans  were  vicious  in  themselves,  or  they  became
so  by  the  manner  of  carrying  them  out,  possibly  by  the

1  The  taille  was  a  poll-tax  levied  on  all  persons  who  were  neither  nobles
nor  ecclesiastics.  — Littré.

1718]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

135

obstacles  put  in  their  way  by  the  interest  and  jealousy  of
that  cruel  financial  phalanx  that  was  always  supported  by
the  magistracy  of  finance.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain
that  the  good  intentions  of  the  regent,  who  in  the  present
case  was  seeking  only  the  relief  of  the  people,  were  com¬
pletely  frustrated,  and  it  became  necessary  to  return  to  the
usual  method  of  levying  the  taille.

Though  I  had  never  been  willing  to  meddle  in  the  finances,
I  was  not  without  personal  experience  of  what  I  have  just
said  about  financiers  and  the  magistracy  of  finance.  I  had
been  struck  with  what  Président  Maisons  had  once  explained
and  shown  to  me  about  the  gabelle  [salt-tax]  ;  the  enormity
of  eighty  thousand  men  being  employed  to  collect  it,  and  the
horrors  that  were  practised  in  doing  so,  to  the  injury  of  the
people.  I  was  also  struck  with  the  difference  in  provinces
equally  subject  to  the  king,  in  some  of  which  the  gabelle
is  rigorously  enforced,  whereas  in  others  the  salt  is  free  ;  yet
the  king  does  not  derive  less  from  the  latter,  who  enjoy  a
liberty  in  this  respect  that  makes  one  regard  the  others  as
being  in  abject  servitude  to  those  scoundrels  of  gabeleurs
[salt-tax  collectors]  who  live  and  enrich  themselves  on
rapine.  I  conceived,  therefore,  the  idea  of  doing  away  with
the  gabelle  and  making  salt  free  and  merchantable  ;  and  for
this  purpose  letting  the  king  buy  up,  at  a  third  more  than
their  value,  the  few  salt  marshes  that  belonged  to  private
individuals,  —  the  king  to  own  them  all,  and  sell  the  salt  to
his  subjects  at  the  rate  put  upon  it  ;  not  obliging  any  one
to  buy  more  than  he  wanted.  In  point  of  fact  there  were
only  the  marshes  of  Brouage  to  buy.  The  king  would
profit  by  release  from  the  costs  of  this  odious  tax;  the
people  would  profit  by  their  liberty  and  freedom  from
endless  pillage  which  they  endured  under  that  monstrous
horde  of  employés,  who  would  die  with  hunger  if  they

136

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

depended  only  on  their  wages  ;  the  State  would  also  profit
considerably  in  the  matter  of  cattle,  as  any  one  can  see
at  a  glance  by  comparing  the  different  appearance  of  those
that  get  salt  in  the  provinces  where  there  is  no  galclle
with  those  where  the  dearness  and  restrictions  upon  salt
prevent  the  animals  from  getting  any.

I  proposed  this  to  the  regent,  who  entered  into  it  with
joy.  The  affair  was  brought  forward  and  about  to  pass,
when  Fagon  and  other  financial  magistrates,  who  did  not
venture  to  oppose  it  in  the  beginning,  were  found  to  have
taken  their  measures  so  well  that  the  plan  was  defeated.
Some  time  later  I  endeavoured  to  return  to  it,  and  had  every
reason  to  believe  the  thing  certain  and  that  it  would  be
accomplished  within  a  week.  Again  the  same  persons  got
wind  of  it  and  were  able  to  make  it  miscarry.  Besides  the
advantages  that  I  have  just  explained,  it  would  have  been
a  most  essential  benefit  to  have  forced  that  army  of  gabeleurs,
living  on  the  blood  of  the  people,  to  become  soldiers,  arti¬
sans,  or  labourers.

This  occasion  drags  from  me  a  truth  that  I  recognized
during  the  time  that  I  was  in  the  Council,  and  which  I
ah  good  impos-  would  not  have  believed  if  sad  experience  had
sibie  m  France.  n0£  taught  it  to  me  ;  and  that  is,  that  to  do

good  is  impossible.  So  few  persons  want  it  in  good  faith  ;
so  many  others  have  interests  contrary  to  each  kind  of  good
that  is  proposed.  Those  who  desire  it  are  ignorant  of  that
which  hedges  it  round,  and  without  that  knowledge  they
cannot  succeed,  they  cannot  ward  off  the  adroitness  and  the
influence  opposed  to  them  ;  and  this  adroitness,  being  sup¬
ported  by  the  power  of  persons  of  superior  authority  and  art
of  management,  becomes  so  complicated  and  underground
that  the  good  which  might  be  done  is  necessarily  defeated.
This  grievous  truth,  which  will  always  be  true  in  a  govern-

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

137

ment  such  as  ours  has  been  since  the  days  of  Cardinal
Mazarin,  becomes  eminently  consoling  to  those  who  feel  and
who  think,  hut  no  longer  take  part  in  anything.

The  more  harassed  the  regent  was,  the  more  he  turned  to
me  in  regard  to  the  men  and  matters  about  which  he  was

Manœuvres  now  upon  his  guard.  He  had  spoken  to  me
against  Law  by  more  than  once  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles  and  the

the  Duc  de

Noailles  and  the  chancellor  before  the  session  at  La  Raquette,
chancellor.  0f  the  jealousy  of  the  former  against  Law,  of

the  ineptitude  of  the  latter  in  State  affairs,  in  finance,  in  the
usages  of  the  world.  He  did  not  hide  from  me  his  disgust
at  both  of  them  and  at  their  intimate  union,  which  made  the
chancellor,  hi  all  and  for  all,  the  voluntary  slave  of  the  Due
de  Noailles.  The  language  of  the  latter  pleased  him  ;  his
easy  grace  of  manner  and  his  habits,  always  in  the  fashion
of  the  day,  whatever  it  was,  put  him  at  his  ease  with
him.  Noailles’  intellect  and  his  well-established  junto  made
the  regent  afraid  of  him.  On  the  other  hand,  he  could  not
part  with  Law  and  his  system,  because  of  his  natural  love
of  indirect  ways,  and  the  attraction  of  those  mines  of  gold
which  Law  made  him  foresee  all  opened  and  worked  by
his  operations.  Hopeless  of  making  Noailles  and  Law  agree
together,  after  all  that  he  had  done  to  bring  it  about,  his
uneasiness  became  extreme  when  he  saw  himself  at  last
compelled  to  choose  between  the  two.  He  often  spoke  of
this  to  me  ;  and  I  heard  also  from  Law  of  all  that  went  on.

Whatever  Law’s  system  may  have  been,  he  himself  had
the  best  faith  in  the  world  in  it.  His  personal  interests
Law’s  faith  in  his  never  mastered  him;  he  was  true  and  simple  ;
system.  he  had  integrity  ;  he  wished  to  walk  openly

and  frankly.  He  was  therefore  doubly  irritated  by  the
obstacles  raised  against  him  at  every  step  by  the  Duc  de
Noailles,  and  by  the  duplicity  of  the  latter’s  conduct  towards

138

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

him.  He  was  not  less  irritated  by  the  chancellor’s  slowness,
which,  concerted  with  Noailles,  checked  and  made  abortive
all  Law’s  operations.  He  was  often  forced  to  go  and  per¬
suade  the  principal  men  in  parliament  and  its  president  and
that  of  the  Cour  des  Comptes,  whom  Noailles  stirred  up
against  him  ;  and,  after  he  had  fully  convinced  them,  Noailles’
tricks  and  the  chancellor’s  delays  still  continued  and  made
useless  operations  which  had  seemed  determined  upon  and
without  any  difficulty.  Law  told  me  all  his  troubles  and
vexations  ;  often  he  was  very  near  to  throwing  up  the  whole
thing  ;  and  would  go  and  complain  to  the  regent,  whom  he
kept  informed  of  all  these  manœuvres.  Then  the  regent
would  speak  of  them  to  me  with  great  bitterness  ;  but  he
never  got  more  out  of  me  than  pity  for  such  annoyances,  and
assurances  that  my  ignorance  of  finance  prevented  me  from
giving  him  any  advice.

Before  the  departure  of  the  Abbé  Dubois  for  London,
being  urged  by  Law  and  his  own  interests,  he  had  worked
upon  the  regent’s  mind  against  Noailles  and  the  chancellor.
His  interest  in  doing  so  was  double.  He  was  beginning  to
draw  hugely  from  Law  ;  how  much  he  drew  was  shrouded
in  darkness  ;  he  thought  already  of  the  Cardinal’s  hat  and
the  need  he  should  have  for  money  in  Rome.  He  had  also
another  purpose,  that  of  governing  the  regent  all  alone.  To
do  this,  it  was  necessary  to  part  him,  little  by  little,  from
those  who,  in  one  way  or  another,  had  his  confidence.  A
man  like  the  Duc  de  Noailles  was  formidable  to  Dubois,
and  he  seized  this  occasion  to  get  rid  of  him,  convinced  that
after  the  notoriety  of  being  sacrificed  to  Law  Noailles  would
not  recover  confidence  or  be  once  more  a  man  to  fear.

I  knew  from  Law  that  Dubois’  blows  had  struck  home,
and  for  this  reason  he  was  grieved  at  his  absence.  Law
would  fain  have  had  me  fill  his  place  ;  but  I  knew  the  re-

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

139

gent’s  suspicious  feelings  too  well  ;  lie  regarded  me,  and
with  reason,  as  the  declared  enemy  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles  ;

my  remarks  against  him  would  therefore  have
My  conduct  m  miscarried.  Besides,  I  found  myself  unable
to  decide  in  my  own  mind  which  was  the
better  side  to  take  on  the  finances  ;  and  I  was  not  willing,
whatever  hatred  I  felt  to  Noailles,  to  take  upon  myself  to
throw  the  State  and  the  regent  into  the  arms  of  Law  and
his  novel  system.  I  therefore  let  things  go  their  way, —
careful,  however,  to  be  well-informed,  and  to  hold  myself
neutral  in  regard  to  the  regent  ;  not  to  chill  him  from  speak¬
ing  to  me  in  confidence,  hut,  above  all,  not  to  put  myself
forward  or  commit  myself  in  any  way.  This  conduct  on  my
part  lasted  until  the  meeting  at  La  Raquette,  after  which  I
saw  that  the  regent  had  decided  on  his  course,  which  was
only  retarded  by  the  feebleness  which  always  checked  him
at  the  moment  of  execution.

After  a  while  the  Duc  d’Orléans  expressed  himself  openly
to  me,  and  discussed  the  question  as  to  whom  he  should

intrust  with  the  finances  and  the  Seals.  His
object  was  to  give  the  finances  to  some  one
in  whom  Law  should  find  no  further  obstacle
to  his  operations.  Law  and  I  had  often  talked

D’Argenson
chosen  for  the
finances  and  the
Seals.

this  matter  over.  He  had  frequently  had  recourse  to
d’Argenson,  who  entered  into  all  his  ideas,  and  it  was
d’Argenson  whom  he  wanted  in  the  finances,  because  he
counted  on  being  fully  at  liberty  under  him.

D’Argenson  was  a  man  of  much  mind,  and  a  supple
mind,  which,  for  his  fortune’s  sake,  accommodated  itself  to
everything.  His  birth  was  better  than  that  of  most  men  of
his  calling.  He  had  long  managed  the  police,  and  with  it
a  species  of  inquisition,  with  transcendent  judgment.  He
was  wholly  without  fear  of  parliament,  which  he  often

140

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

attacked  ;  he  was  very  obliging  to  people  of  quality,  —  hiding
from  the  king  and  Pontchartrain  the  adventures  of  their
children  and  relations,  which  were  really  only  youthful
peccadilloes,  but  would  have  ruined  them  irretrievably  had
he  not  drawn  a  curtain  before  them.  With  a  terrifying
face,  which  recalled  that  of  the  three  judges  of  hell,  he
made  merry  at  all  things  with  excellent  wit,  and  had
brought  such  order  into  that  innumerable  multitude  of
Paris  that  there  was  no  inhabitant  whose  daily  conduct  and
habits  he  did  not  know,  with  rare  discernment  as  to  when
to  bear  down,  and  when  to  lighten  his  hand  in  each  affair
that  came  before  him,  —  leaning  always  towards  lenity,  but
with  the  art  of  making  even  innocent  persons  tremble  be¬
fore  him  ;  courageous,  bold,  audacious  in  riots,  and  in  that
way,  master  of  the  populace.  His  morals  were  very  much
the  same  as  those  that  were  constantly  brought  before  him  ;
and  I  don’t  know  whether  he  recognized  any  other  divinity
than  that  of  fortune.  In  the  midst  of  painful  functions,  all
apparently  rigorous,  human  nature  found  mercy  before  him
readily  ;  and  when  he  was  at  liberty  with  his  friends  of  low
estate  (in  whom  he  trusted  more  than  he  did  in  persons  of
higher  rank),  he  abandoned  himself  to  gayety  and  was
charming  as  a  companion.  He  had  some  knowledge  of
letters,  but  little  or  no  acquirement  in  other  studies  ;  his
natural  intelligence  supplied  the  want,  also  his  great  knowl¬
edge  of  the  world,  a  very  rare  thing  in  a  man  of  his  station.

I  begged  the  regent  to  let  me  inform  and  prepare
d’Argenson  ;  not  that  I  doubted  his  acceptance  of  such  dis-
i  prepare  d’Ar-  tinction,  but  I  wanted  to  profit  by  the  mo-
genson  ;  why.  ment  to  conciliate  the  future  Keeper  of  the
Seals  for  the  Cardinal  de  Noailles,  so  that  the  prelate  should
lose  as  little  as  possible  in  losing  d’Aguegseau.  The  regent
approved  ;  and  I  sent  a  note  to  d’Argenson  Thursday

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

141

morning  to  come  to  me  that  evening  between  seven  and
eight  for  urgent  and  important  business.  D’Argenson  came
at  the  appointed  time.  I  did  not  keep  him  in  suspense.
Before  me  I  then  beheld  a  man  terrified  at  the  burden
of  the  finances,  but  much  flattered  by  the  sauce  of  the
Seals,  and  sufficiently  himself,  even  in  this  moment  of
great  surprise,  to  make  many  difficulties  as  to  the  finances,
though  careful  at  the  same  time  not  to  risk  the  loss  of

the  Seals.  I  explained  to  him  at  full  length  the  wishes
of  the  regent  in  relation  to  Law,  and  not  less  clearly
with  regard  to  parliament  and  all  that  the  regent  desired
to  find  in  him  in  that  respect.  Law  and  the  finances,
I  told  him,  were  conditions  sine  qua  non,  which  he  must
accept.  As  for  parliament  he  thought  as  I  did,  and  as  the
regent  did;  in  that  respect,  therefore,  he  was  the  man  for
the  place.  His  ideas,  the  movement  of  the  cabal,  his  personal
interests,  all  led  him  to  accept  it.  It  can  be  imagined  what
he  said  to  me  on  the  honour  of  receiving  the  Seals,  which
he  felt,  and  with  reason,  that  he  owed  to  me,  and  about
which  I  was  modest,  though  at  the  same  time  allowing  him
to  feel  the  part  I  had  taken  in  the  matter.

On  the  28th  of  January  La  Vrillière  [secretary  to  the
Council  of  Regency],  who  had  been  summoned  to  the  Palais-
Royal  late  the  night  before,  went  at  eight
k,sesCthensea°I  o’clock  in  the  morning  to  demand  the  rendi-

and  is  exiled.  tion  0f  the  Seals  by  the  chancellor,  and  to  tell

him  from  the  regent  to  retire,  until  further  orders,  to  his
country-house  at  Presnes,  on  the  road  from  Paris  to  Meaux.
The  chancellor  asked  firmly  hut  modestly  if  he  could  see  the
regent  ;  being  refused,  whether  he  could  write  to  him.  La
Vrillière  said  he  would  take  the  letter.  The  chancellor
wrote  it,  read  it  to  La  Vrillière,  sealed  it  and  gave  it  to  him.
He  then  wrote  a  note  to  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  and  went  to

142  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  y.

inform  his  wife,  who  was  just  confined,  of  his  fall,  and  the
next  day  he  went  to  Fresnes.

Noailles,  warned  of  the  bomb  by  the  chancellor’s  note,  did
not  doubt  what  would  happen  to  him  as  to  the  finances.
He  determined  to  he  beforehand  with  the  regent  and  to  put
himself  in  a  position  to  get  some  good  out  of  it.  He  went  to
the  regent  at  once,  and  had  the  duplicity  to  ask  him  why  the
Seals  were  lying  on  his  table.  The  regent  had  the  kindness
to  tell  him  why.  N oailles,  with  the  easiest  manner  he  could
manage  to  assume,  asked  to  whom  he  meant  to  give  them.
The  regent  told  him  that.  Whereupon  Noailles  remarked
that  he  saw  the  cabal  had  got  the  upper  hand  and  he  could
not  do  better  than  yield  to  it  and  resign  his  commission  on  the
finances.  The  regent  instantly  said,  “  Do  you  ask  for  nothing
in  place  of  it?”  “Nothing,”  replied  Noailles.  “I  give  you,”
added  the  regent,  “  a  place  in  the  Council  of  Regency.”  “  I
shall  make  little  use  of  it,”  replied  Noailles  arrogantly,  pre¬
suming  on  the  regent’s  weakness.  He  lied  shamefully,  for  he
came  to  the  next  Council  and  never  missed  one  afterwards.

Thus  the  chancellor  was  the  victim  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles,
and  the  scapegoat  that  expiated  the  sins  of  Iris  friend.
Noailles  had  used  him  as  a  shield,  making  him  see  and  do
whatever  suited  him,  without  concealment.  He  abused  the
friendship,  gratitude,  and  confidence  of  a  man  of  worth  and
honour,  who,  in  his  total  ignorance  of  finances  and  of  the
world,  and  in  the  dimness  of  his  new  and  unaccustomed  life,
had  trusted  him  as  his  only  sure  guide.  He  was  exiled
and  lost  the  Seals  solely  because  he  was  Noailles’  slave.

I  will  not  omit  relating  a  mere  trifle,  because  it  helps  to
show  more  plainly  the  character  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  One
Trifles  between  day  when  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  had  gone  to
the  Due  d’ Orleans  Montmartre,  and  I  was  walking  alone  with  the

and  me.  0

regent  in  the  little  garden  of  the  Palais-Royal

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

143

talking  over  affairs,  he  suddenly  interrupted  himself  and
turning  to  me  said  :  “  I  am  going  to  tell  you  something
which  will  give  you  pleasure.”  Whereupon  he  told  me  how
tired  he  was  of  the  life  he  led  ;  that  neither  his  age  nor  his
desires  required  it  any  longer,  —  with  other  remarks  of  the
same  nature.  He  said  he  had  resolved  to  give  up  his
suppers,  and  spend  his  evenings  soberly  and  decently  either
in  his  own  apartments  or  with  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  ;  that
his  health  would  gain  by  it,  and  also  he  should  get  more
time  for  business  ;  hut  he  added  that  he  could  not  make  the
change  until  after  the  departure  of  M.  and  Mme.  de  Lorraine,
for  he  should  die  of  ennui  if  he  supped  every  evening  at  the
Duchesse  d’Orléans’  with  them  and  a  troop  of  women.  But
as  soon  as  they  were  gone,  I  might  rely  upon  it,  there  would
be  no  more  suppers  of  roués  and  wantons  (those  were  his
words)  ;  that  he  meant  to  lead  a  reasonable  and  decent  life,
and  one  more  suitable  to  his  present  age.

I  own  I  felt  enchanted,  because  of  the  deep  interest  that  I
took  in  him.  I  showed  my  feelings  to  him  with  heartfelt
warmth,  thanking  him  for  this  confidence.  I  said  he  knew
well  how  long  it  was  since  I  had  spoken  to  him  of  the  in¬
decency  of  his  life  and  the  time  he  wasted,  because  I  saw
that  I  was  wasting  mine,  and  had  given  up  all  hope  of
changing  him  ;  he  could  therefore  well  believe  the  surprise
and  joy  he  gave  me.  He  assured  me  his  resolution  was
taken  ;  and  thereupon  I  took  leave  of  him,  as  the  hour  for
his  supper  had  come.

The  next  day  I  heard,  from  persons  to  whom  the  roués
related  it,  that  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was  no  sooner  at  table  than
he  began  to  laugh  and  to  tell  them  how  he  had  played  a
fine  trick  upon  me,  into  which  I  had  tumbled  headlong.  He
related  our  conversation,  and  the  laughter  and  applause  were
great.  That  was  the  only  time  he  amused  himself  at  my

144  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

expense  —  I  should  rather  say  at  his  own  ;  and  I  certainly
had  the  folly  to  gobble  it  down  in  a  sudden  joy  that  deprived
me  of  reflection,  and  did  me  honour  and  him  none.  I  would
not  give  him  the  pleasure  of  telling  him  I  knew  of  his  joke,
nor  did  I  ever  remind  him  of  what  he  had  said  to  me  ;  and
he  himself  dared  not  speak  of  it.

I  never  could  discover  what  fancy  took  him  to  tell  me
that  tale,  —  me,  who  for  years  had  never  opened  my  lips  to
him  on  the  life  he  led,  nor  he  to  me.  Sometimes,  when
alone  with  his  confidential  valets,  never  before  others,  a  com¬
plaint  would  escape  him,  though  rarely,  that  I  ill-used  him,
and  treated  him  roughly  ;  but  only  in  two  words,  and  nothing
bitter  or  as  if  he  were  angry  with  me.  Besides,  he  told  the
truth  ;  occasionally,  when  I  was  pushed  to  extremes  by  his
unreasonableness  or  his  vital  blunders  in  important  matters
relating  to  himself  or  to  the  State,  especially  when  he  had
agreed  and  firmly  resolved  from  sound  reasoning  to  do  or
not  to  do  a  thing,  and  his  fatal  pliancy  turned  him  in  my
very  hand  and  made  him  do  the  contrary,  I  own  I  was
cruelly  exercised  by  him.  But  the  trick  he  liked  to  play
me  when  we  were  tête-à-tête,  never  before  others,  and  one  of
which  my  vivacity  was  always  the  dupe,  was  to  suddenly
interrupt  some  important  chain  of  reasoning  by  a  buffoonery.
I  could  not  bear  it  ;  and  I  was  sometimes  so  angry  that  I
attempted  to  go  away.  I  would  tell  him  that  if  he  wanted
to  joke  I  would  joke  as  much  as  he  liked,  but  to  mix
buffoonery  with  serious  matters  was  intolerable.  Then  he
would  laugh  with  all  his  heart,  and  all  the  more  because,
the  thing  not  being  rare,  I  ought  to  have  been  upon  my
guard,  and  never  was,  and  therefore  I  was  vexed  both  at  the
thing  itself  and  at  being  fooled  by  it.  After  this,  he  would
resume  the  subject  of  which  we  were  treating.  Princes
must  have  some  ways  of  relaxing  themselves,  and  jesting

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

145

occasionally  with  those  they  regard  as  friends  is  one  of
them.

Chance  showed  me  one  day  what  he  really  thought  of  me.
I  shall  tell  it  here  and  then  be  done  with  these  trifles.  The
Duc  d’Orléans,  returning  one  afternoon  from  the  Council  of
Eegency  to  the  Tuileries,  with  the  Duc  de  Chartres  and  the
Bailli  de  Conflans  alone  in  the  carriage  with  him,  began  to
talk  of  me,  and  made  such  a  eulogy  upon  me  that  I  dare
not  repeat  it.  I  don’t  know  what  had  happened  at  the
Council  to  give  rise  to  this.  I  shall  only  say  that  he  dwelt
upon  his  happiness  in  having  a  friend  so  faithful,  so  constant
at  all  times,  so  useful  as  I  was  and  had  been  to  him,  so  sure,
true,  disinterested,  firm  ;  such  as  he  had  never  found  the  like
of  ;  on  whom  he  could  count  on  all  occasions  ;  one  who  had
rendered  him  the  greatest  services,  and  who  told  him  the
truth,  straightforward  and  frank  in  all  things  and  without
self-interest.  This  praise  lasted  till  they  reached  the  Palais-
Boyal,  the  regent  telling  his  son  that  he  wanted  to  teach
him  to  know  me,  and  to  remember  the  happiness  and  support
—  bonheur  et  appui,  those  were  his  words  —  that  he  had
always  found  in  my  friendship  and  my  advice.  The  Bailli
de  Conflans,  surprised  himself  at  this  outpouring,  told  me  of
it  the  next  day  under  secrecy,  and  I  own  I  could  never  forget
it.  It  is  also  true  that,  no  matter  what  was  done  against  me,
or  I  myself  did  in  vexation  and  disgust  at  what  went  on,  he
always  came  back  to  me  (nearly  always  being  the  first  to
make  the  advance)  with  shame,  friendship,  confidence;  and
he  never  found  himself  in  any  trouble  that  he  did  not  seek
me,  open  his  heart  to  me,  and  consult  me  in  all  things  —
without,  however,  always  believing  what  I  told  him,  being
led  away  by  others.

Fagon,  after  losing  his  office  of  chief-physician,  (the  only
one  that  is  lost  on  the  death  of  a  king)  retired  to  the  Fau-

VOL.  IV.  — 10

146

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

bourg  Saint- Victoire  in  Paris,  where  he  had  a  fine  apartment
in  the  Jardin  du  Roi,  a  garden  where  simples  were  grown
and  rare  and  medicinal  plants,  the  management

Death  of  Fagon,

the  late  king’s  of  which  was  left  to  him.  He  lived  there,
physician.  always  very  solitary,  in  constant  enjoyment
of  science  and  belles-lettres  and  the  things  of  his  calling,
which  he  greatly  loved.  I  have  said  so  much  about  him
heretofore  that  there  is  nothing  left  to  add,  except  that  he
died  in  much  piety,  at  a  great  age  for  so  deformed  and  caco-
chymical  a  machinery  as  his,  which  his  knowledge  and  his
incredible  sobriety  had  preserved  so  long,  always  working
and  studying.  It  was  surprising  that  after  the  close  intimacy
and  perfect  confidence  always  existing  between  himself  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  had  made  him  the  king’s  physician
and  maintained  him  in  favour,  they  never  saw  each  other
again  after  the  death  of  the  king.

A  very  stupid  thing  made  a  monstrous  noise  about  this
time.  The  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre  was  a  man  of  intelligence.
The  Abbé  de  letters,  and  chimeras.  He  had  long  been  a
Saint-Pierre  pub-  member  of  the  Académie  Française  and  was

lishes  a  book.

always  rather  full  of  himself  ;  a  good  man  and
an  honest  man  withal,  great  maker  of  books,  projects,  and
reformations  in  politics  and  government  in  favour  of  the  public
good.  He  thought  himself  at  liberty  by  the  change  of  govern¬
ment  to  give  wings  to  his  imagination,  —  always  in  behalf  of
the  public  good.  He  therefore  wrote  a  book  which  he
entitled  “  La  Polysinodie,”  in  which  he  painted  to  the  life
the  despotic  and  often  tyrannical  power  that  the  secreta¬
ries  of  State  and  the  controller-general  had  exercised  under
the  late  reign  ;  he  called  them  vizirs,  and  their  depart¬
ments  vizirates,  and  expatiated  thereon  with  more  truth  than
prudence.

As  soon  as  the  book  appeared  it  caused  a  general  uprising

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

147

of  all  the  former  government  and  those  who  were  hoping  to
get  hack  to  it  after  the  regency.  The  former  courtiers  of  the
late  king  vied  with  one  another  in  a  grateful  loyalty  that  cost
them  nothing.  The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  signalized  himself
by  a  fearful  uproar,  and  stirred  up,  willing  or  not  willing,  the
whole  of  the  former  Court.  Outside  of  these  persons  nobody
was  scandalized  by  a  work  which  might  lack  prudence,  but  was
certainly  not  wanting  in  respect  to  the  king  ;  and  which  ex¬
posed  only  truths  which  all  then  living  had  witnessed  and  the
evidence  of  which  no  one  could  deny.  The  academies  and
men  of  letters,  and  the  rest  of  the  world  were  indignant  and
showed  it,  that  these  gentlemen  of  the  old  Court  could  not
bear  truth  and  freedom,  so  accustomed  were  they  to  servitude.
But  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  made  such  declamation  and  clamour
and  hubbub  that,  dragged  on  by  his  violence,  people  were
afraid  not  to  shout  in  echo  ;  so  that  finally  the  regent,  who
had  long  disliked  all  the  Saint-Pierres,  and  whom  Villeroy
had  rather  awed  from  his  youth  up,  did  not  resist  the  tumult.
The  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre  was  dismissed  from  the  Academy
against  the  will  of  the  Academy,  which,  however,  did  not
venture  to  resist  to  the  end.  The  hook  was  suppressed,  hut
the  Academy,  profiting  by  the  taste  of  the  regent  for  mezzo-
termine,  obtained  that  there  should  be  no  election,  and  that
the  seat  of  the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre  should  not  be  filled  ;
which  was  adhered  to  in  spite  of  the  cries  of  his  persecutors
until  his  death.

The  Petit-Pont  took  fire  April  17.  An  imprudent  fellow,
looking  for  something  with  a  candle  in  a  hay-boat,  started  it.
„  .  ,  Afraid  lest  the  fire  should  he  communicated

Burning  of  a

bridge  in  Paris.  to  other  boats  in  the  midst  of  which  he  was,
he  shoved  out  hastily  into  the  current  and  was  carried  against
a  pillar  of  the  arches  of  the  Petit-Pont.  The  flames  rose
and  caught  the  houses  of  the  bridge,  making  a  great  confia-

148

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  t.

gration.  The  Duc  de  Tresmes,  governor  of  Paris,  the  magis-.
trates  of  police,  and  many  persons  flocked  there.  Cardinal
de  Noailles  passed  the  night  in  having  the  patients  of  the
Hôtel-Dieu  carried  to  his  house,  and  in  succouring  them
when  there,  like  a  true  pastor  and  father  ;  his  house  was  full
and  his  rooms  not  spared.  There  was  a  moment  when  it
was  supposed  the  whole  Hôtel-Dieu  would  burn  down.  But
only  a  part  was  destroyed,  with  some  thirty  other  houses
either  burned  or  pulled  down.  The  Capuchins  distinguished
themselves  very  usefully,  and  so  did  the  Franciscans.  The
Duc  de  Guiche  sent  for  a  regiment  of  guards,  which  did  great
service,  and  the  Duc  de  Chaulnes  with  his  light-horse  cavalry
guarded  the  furniture  and  other  property  in  the  street.
People  laughed  a  good  deal  at  Maréchal  de  Villars,  who
brought  up  cannon  to  hatter  down  houses  ;  as  they  were  all
of  wood  and  huddled  together,  the  remedy  would  have
been  worse  than  the  disease.  The  master  of  firemen  gained
no  honour  on  this  occasion.

The  Queen  of  England  died  at  Saint-Germain  May  7,  after
an  illness  of  ten  or  twelve  days.  Her  life  since  she  came  to
Death  of  the  France  at  the  close  of  1688,  had  been  one  long
Queen  of  England.  series  0f  misfortunes,  heroically  borne  to  the
end  as  an  oblation  to  God,  in  detachment,  penitence,  prayer,
and  continual  good  works,  with  all  the  virtues  that  perfect
a  saint.  With  much  natural  sensitiveness,  much  intelligence,
and  innate  haughtiness,  which  she  had  learned  to  bring  under
and  humiliate,  with  the  grandest  air  in  the  world,  the  most
majestic,  the  most  imposing,  she  was,  withal,  gentle  and
modest.  Her  death  was  as  saintly  as  her  life.  She  saved
enough  from  the  six  hundred  thousand  francs  a  year  which
the  king  allowed  her,  to  support  poor  English  people,  of
whom  Saint-Germain  was  full.  Her  body  was  taken  to  the
Filles  de  Sainte-Marie  at  Chaillot,  where  she  frequently

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

149

retreated  in  her  lifetime.  The  Court  took  no  part  in  her
obsequies.  The  Duc  de  Noailles  went  to  Saint-Germain
merely  to  see  that  all  was  conducted  decently.

The  regent  granted  the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth  eight
thousand  francs’  increase  of  the  pension  of  twelve  thousand
.  francs  she  already  enjoyed.  She  was  very  old,  quite  con¬
verted,  and  penitent,  much  involved  in  her  affairs,  and  re¬
duced  to  live  in  the  country.  It  was  just,  and  a  proper
example,  to  remember  the  important  and  continual  services
she  had  rendered  with  such  good  grace  to  France  in  the
days  when  she  lived  in  England,  the  all-powerful  mistress
of  Charles  II.

Parliament  assembled  on  the  11th  and  12th  of  August,
and  vomited  all  its  venom  in  the  celebrated  decree,  of

Audacious  action  w^ich  the  following  was  the  main  clause  :
of  parliament.  “This  court  ordains  that  ordinances  and  edicts
bearing  creation  of  offices  of  finance  and  letters-patent  con¬
cerning  the  Bank  registered  in  this  court,  shall  be  executed.
That  being  so,  that  the  Bank  shall  be  reduced  to  the  limits
and  to  the  operations  established  by  the  letters  of  May  2d
and  20th,  1716  ;  and,  in  consequence,  it  is  forbidden  to  keep
or  retain,  directly  or  indirectly,  any  of  the  royal  funds  in  the
coffers  of  the  Bank,  or  to  make  any  usage  or  employment
of  them  for  the  account  of  the  Bank  or  the  profit  of  those
who  keep  it,  under  the  pains  and  penalties  named  in  the
ordinances  :  it  also  ordains  that  the  said  royal  funds  shall
be  remitted  and  conveyed  directly  to  all  the  responsible
officials,  to  be  by  them  employed  in  the  business  of  their
offices,  and  that  all  such  officers  and  others  handling  funds
shall  be  sureties  and  responsible,  in  their  proper  and  private
names,  each  for  himself,  for  all  the  said  royal  funds  which
shall  be  remitted  and  conveyed  to  them  through  the  medium
of  the  Bank  :  it  is  likewise  forbidden  to  all  foreigners,  even

150

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  y.

naturalized,  to  meddle  directly  or  indirectly,  or  to  participate
under  assumed  names,  in  the  handling  or  the  administration
of  the  royal  funds,  under  the  pains  and  penalties  enjoined  by
the  ordinances  and  declarations  registered  in  this  court.”

It  can  well  be  imagined  what  a  noise  this  decree  produced.
It  was  nothing  less  than  seizing  by  sole  authority  of  parlia¬
ment  the  whole  administration  of  the  finances,  putting  them
under  the  axe  of  that  assembly,  rendering  accountable  to  its
will  all  those  employed  by  the  regent  and  the  regent  himself,
interdicting  Law  personally,  and  putting  him  at  the  mercy
of  parliament,  which  would  certainly  have  been  more  than
unfavourable  to  him.  After  this  trial  of  strength,  there  was
but  one  step  for  the  parliament  to  make,  to  become  in  fact,
as  it  assumed  to  be  in  this  crazy  pretension,  guardian  of  the
king  and  master  of  the  kingdom,  with  the  regent  still  more
under  its  tutelage  than,  and  perhaps  as  much  exposed  as,
King  Charles  I.  of  England.

Parliament  assembled  again  on  the  20th  of  August  and
ordered  the  law  officers  of  the  king  to  ascertain  “  what  had
Extraordinary  become  of  the  notes  of  State  which  had  passed
toThektog^aw*  through  the  chamber  of  justice  ;  those  which
officers-  had  been  given  for  lotteries  held  once  a  month  ;

those  that  were  given  for  the  Mississippi  or  Company  of  the
West;  those  which  had  been  to  the  mint  for  change  into
specie.”  The  king’s  lawyers  went  at  once  to  the  regent  to
tell  him  of  the  duty  laid  upon  them.  He  answered  coldly
that  it  was  for  them  to  execute  their  commission.  They
asked  him  to  give  them  some  instructions  about  it.  The
regent,  for  all  answer,  turned  his  back  upon  them  and
went  to  his  own  room,  which  bewildered  them  a  good
deal.  I  must  now  relate  how  the  regent  put  back  the  curb
on  these  horses  that  had  taken  the  bit  in  their  teeth  and
were  preparing  so  boldly  to  excite  great  tumults.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

151

Immediately  after  this  commission  was  given  by  parlia¬
ment  to  the  king’s  law  officers  the  rumour  began  to  get
about  of  an  approaching  lit  de  justice.  It  was  not  that  the
regent  had  as  yet  thought  of  it  ;  the  idea  was  founded  solely
on  the  monstrous  attacks  of  parliament  against  the  royal
authority,  on  the  necessity  that  some  persons  saw  of  using
the  only  means  of  repressing  them,  and  on  the  fears  of  others.
But  the  grand  support  of  the  audacity  of  parliament  had
been  the  just  and  general  belief  in  the  regent’s  weakness
founded  on  his  whole  conduct,  and  this  gave  factious  persons
confidence  that  a  lit  de  justice  was  an  action  to  which  the
regent  would  never  dare  commit  himself,  at  the  point  to
which  he  had  now  allowed  cabals  and  interferences  to
attain.  The  reading  of  the  Memoirs  of  Cardinal  de  Betz,
Joly,  and  Mme.  de  Motteville  had  turned  all  heads.  Those
books  were  so  the  rage  that  there  was  neither  man  nor
woman  of  any  condition  who  did  not  have  them  continually
in  their  hands.  Ambition,  the  desire  for  novelty,  the  adroit¬
ness  of  those  who  gave  them  this  vogue,  made  many  of  their
readers  hope  for  the  pleasure  and  honour  of  figuring  and
reaching  the  summit,  like  the  personages  of  the  former
minority.  Some  persons  fancied  they  had  found  another
Cardinal  Mazarin  in  Law,  a  foreigner  like  himself,  and
another  Fronde  in  the  party  of  the  Due  and  Duchesse  du
Maine.  The  feebleness  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was  compared
to  that  of  the  queen-mother,  with  the  disadvantage  to  hoot
between  the  position  of  a  mother  and  that  of  being  nephew
to  the  king’s  grandfather.

To  tell  the  truth,  all  was  tending  to  some  extreme,  and  it
was  high  time  that  the  regent  should  wake  up  from  a
supineness  which  made  him  despised,  and  em-

The  regent  is  x

drawn  from  his  boldened  his  enemies  and  those  of  the  State
to  dare  all,  and  undertake  all.  This  lethargy

152

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

of  his  held  down  his  true  servitors  in  a  state  of  depression
at  the  utter  impossibility  of  doing  any  good.  It  had  led
him  at  last  to  the  verge  of  a  precipice,  and  the  kingdom  he
governed  to  the  eve  of  a  great  confusion.

The  return  of  the  Abbé  Dubois  from  England,  his  fortunes
threatened  by  the  diminution  of  his  master’s  power,  the
alarm  that  Law  had  good  reason  to  feel  lest  parliament
should  take  him  by  the  collar  and  that  others  would  then
abandon  him,  the  fear  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  (so  hated  by
parliament  whilst  ruling  the  police)  lest  he  should  lose  his
present  office,  made,  all  together,  a  combination,  into  which
Law  managed  to  bring  M.  le  Duc,  so  largely  interested  in
his  system,  under  the  inducement  of  seizing  this  occasion  to
overthrow  the  Duc  du  Maine,  his  bastard  uncle,  gratify  his
hatred  to  him,  and  step  into  his  place  beside  the  king.  This
conjunction  of  separate  interests,  all  tending  to  one  purpose,
formed  an  influence  which  acted  on  the  regent,  made  him
see,  all  of  a  sudden,  his  danger  and  his  only  remedy,  and
convinced  him,  moreover,  that  he  had  not  a  single  moment
to  lose.  Dubois  and  Law  roused  him  against  those  whom,
hitherto,  he  had  only  too  well  liked  and  whose  dangerous
advice  he  had  followed  ;  and  this  was  done  so  rapidly  that
no  one  had  any  suspicion  of  it.  I  must  now  explain  the
case.

Under  these  circumstances,  of  which  I  was  ignorant,  work¬
ing  one  afternoon  as  usual  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans  I  was
surprised  by  his  suddenly  interrupting  what
we  were  doing  by  speaking  bitterly  of  the
actions  of  parliament.  I  answered  with  my
usual  coldness  and  indifference  on  that  matter,
and  continued  what  we  were  about.  He  stopped  me,  and
said  he  saw  plainly  I  did  not  choose  to  answer  him  about  the
parliament.  I  owned  that  was  true,  and  that  he  must  have

The  regent
forces  me  to
speak  to  him
about  the  par¬
liament.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

153

observed  it  for  some  time.  Pressed  further,  and  then  very
urgently,  I  answered  coldly  that  he  surely  remembered  all
I  had  said  and  advised  before  and  after  his  regency  as  to
parliament  ;  that  I  was  not  willing  to  open  the  matter
again,  though  I  saw  advancing  with  great  strides  the  fulfil¬
ment  of  the  prophecy  I  had  made  to  him  ;  for,  master  as  he
had  long  been  to  repress  and  control  parliament  by  a  single
frown,  his  sluggish  compliance  had  let  that  body  do  so  much
and  undertake  so  much  that  it  had  brought  him  by  degrees
to  his  present  strait  and  to  the  borders  of  an  abyss.  A
speech  so  strong  and  rare  on  this  subject  from  my  lips,  and
dragged  from  me  by  him,  made  him  feel  how  little  I  thought
him  capable  of  good  and  of  sustaining  it  to  the  end,  and  also
how  little  trouble  I  would  take  to  induce  him  to  do  so.  He
was  inwardly  nettled,  and  as  this  came  to  clinch  the  impres¬
sion  Dubois,  Law,  and  d’Argenson  had  made  upon  him  (of
which  I  was  wholly  ignorant)  it  had  a  wonderful  effect.

The  decree  of  parliament  which  I  have  transcribed  had
not  been  published  ;  it  transpired  and  was  followed  by  that
Measures  of  commission  to  the  king’s  law  officers,  which
c^ture  anVhang  was  tlie  stroke  that  precipitated  things  and
Law-  brought  the  regent  to  a  determination.  It

became  known  that  parliament,  in  defiance  of  the  •procureur-
général,  had  appointed  commissioners  of  its  own  to  obtain
information  ;  that  it  was  judicially  acting  very  secretly  ;  had
taken  the  testimony  of  many  witnesses  ;  and  was  surrep¬
titiously  putting  matters  in  a  condition  to  send  bailiffs  some
morning  with  a  warrant  to  arrest  Law  and  hang  him  within
three  hours  in  the  prison-yard.  On  this  intelligence,  which
followed  closely  on  the  publication  of  the  above-named
decree,  the  Duc  de  La  Force  and  Fagon,  counsellor  of  State,
went  to  see  the  regent,  and  urged  him  so  much  that  he
ordered  them  to  go  to  my  house  in  the  course  of  the  day

154

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  t.

with  Law,  and  consult  as  to  what  should  be  done.  They
came,  and  this  was  my  first  intimation  that  the  Duc  d’Orléans
was  beginning  to  really  feel  his  danger  and  would  consent
to  take  some  step.  At  this  conference  I  saw  the  hitherto
créât  firmness  of  Law  shaken  even  to  tears.  Our  discussions

O

did  not  satisfy  us  at  first,  because  it  was  a  question  of  force,
and  we  could  not  count  on  that  of  the  regent.  The  safe-
conduct  with  which  Law  was  furnished  would  not  have
arrested  parliament  for  a  moment  ;  to  break  its  decrees  was
hopeless  ;  to  talk  of  appeals  was  a  weakness  that  parliament
would  only  despise,  and  regard  as  an  encouragement  to  go
on.  Difficulty,  therefore,  on  all  sides.  Law,  more  dead  than
alive,  knew  not  what  to  say,  still  less  what  to  do.  His  safety
seemed  to  us  the  most  pressing  thing  to  secure.  Had  he
been  arrested  his  affair  would  have  been  over  before  any
action  could  have  taken  place,  even  if  the  regent  could  have
resolved  to  enter  the  prison  with  a  regiment  of  guards, —
a  critical  means  in  such  a  case,  always  a  sorry  one  even  if
successful,  and  shocking  if,  instead  of  Law,  they  had  found
a  hempen  cord  and  a  corpse.  I  therefore  advised  Law  to  go
at  once  to  the  room  of  his  friend  N'ancré  at  the  Palais-Royal,
Nancrè  being  then  in  Spain.  He  could  have  been  in  safety
by  lodging  at  the  Bank,  but  I  thought  a  refuge  in  the  Palais-
Royal  would  make  more  noise  and  hind  the  regent  more,
and  would  also  he  a  means  by  which  Law  could  talk  with
him  at  all  hours  and  urge  him  up  to  the  mark.  The  Duc  de
La  Force  and  Fagon  approved  and  Law  went  to  the  Palais-
Royal  on  leaving  my  house.

This  settled,  I  proposed  a  lit  de  justice,  which  was
eagerly  seized  upon  by  the  other  three  as  the  only  means
i  propose  a  “in  remained  to  break  the  decrees  of  parlia-

de  justice  ”  at  the  ment.  But  while  the  discussion  was  going  on
a  thought  occurred  to  me;  I  told  the  others

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  155

that  the  Duc  du  Maine,  the  real  motive  power  of  all  the
enterprises  of  parliament,  and  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  as
much  allied  with  it  as  he,  though  he  concealed  it  more  care¬
fully,  would  never  allow,  if  they  could  help  it,  a  lit  de
justice  so  contrary  to  their  views,  their  proceedings,  their
projects  ;  that  in  order  to  defeat  it  they  would  allege  the
heat  (which  was  great),  the  fear  of  a  crowd,  of  fatigue,  of  bad
air  ;  they  would  take  a  pathetic  tone  about  the  king’s  health,
well  calculated  to  embarrass  the  regent  ;  and  if  he  persisted,
they  would  protest  against  what  might  happen  to  the  king
and  possibly  refuse  to  accompany  him,  and  the  king,  frightened
by  them,  might  refuse  to  go  without  them;  in  which  case
the  whole  thing  would  fall  through  and  the  impotence  of
the  regent  he  made  manifest.  These  reflections  stopped  us
short.  But  a  remedy  occurred  to  my  mind  which  I  instantly
proposed,  namely,  to  hold  the  lit  de  justice  in  the  Tuileries,
a  precedent  for  which  existed  in  the  time  of  the  late  king.
By  this  expedient  there  was  no  necessity  to  give  out  notices
till  the  morning  of  the  day,  and  in  this  way  all  concerned
would  be  taken  off  their  guard  ;  no  pretext  could  arise
about  the  king,  and  at  the  same  time  full  liberty  was
given  to  every  one.  On  this  we  settled.  Law  departed;
and  I  dictated  a  memorandum  to  Fagon  of  all  that  I
thought  necessary  in  order  to  carry  out  this  project  se¬
cretly,  insure  its  execution,  and  prevent  all  obstacles.  It
was  nine  o’clock  at  night  when  we  finished  it.

The  next  day,  Saturday,  August  20,  towards  the  end  of  the
morning,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  sent  me  word  to  be  with  him
The  regent  sends  four  o’clock  the  same  afternoon.  I  reached
for  me-  the  Palais-Boyal  at  that  hour,  and  a  moment

after  La  Vrillière  came  in  and  solaced  me  for  the  company
of  Grancey  and  Broglio,  two  of  the  roués,  whom  I  found  sit¬
ting  familiarly  in  the  grand  cabinet,  without  their  wigs.  I

156

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

was  soon  told  to  enter  the  new  gallery,  painted  by  Coypel,
where  I  found  a  quantity  of  maps  and  plans  of  the  Pyrenees,
which  Asfeld  was  showing  the  regent  and  Maréchal  de
Villeroy.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  received  me  heartily  and  as
if  he  had  need  of  me.  A  moment  later  he  said  in  a  low
voice  that  he  had  much  to  say  to  me  before  we  “  assembled,”
but  he  must  first  get  the  maréchal  away.  This  was  the  first
I  had  heard  of  any  assembly,  and  I  did  not  know  of  whom
it  might  be  composed.  At  last  the  maréchal,  after  his  usual
chatter,  went  away  ;  the  Duc  d’Orléans  drew  a  long  breath
and  led  me  into  the  cabinet  behind  the  great  salon  on  the
rue  de  Richelieu.

On  entering,  he  took  me  by  the  arm  and  said  that  he  was
at  the  crisis  of  his  regency,  and  everything  was  at  stake  for
He  proposes  to  him  on  this  occasion.  I  replied  that  I  saw

andthePDucment  onty  to°  we^ 5  but  that  all  depended  upon
du  Maine.  himself  at  this  critical  moment.  He  then  said

that  he  was  resolved  to  strike  a  great  blow  at  the  parliament  ;
that  he  approved  of  the  lit  de  justice  at  the  Tuileries  for
the  reasons  that  had  made  me  propose  it  ;  that  he  was  sure
of  M.  le  Duc  by  means  of  his  new  pension  of  one  hundred
and  fifty  thousand  francs  as  head  of  the  Council  of  Regency  ;
that  he  had,  that  morning,  obtained  the  pledged  support  of
the  Prince  de  Conti  ;  and  that  M.  le  Duc  wanted  the  educa¬
tion  of  the  king  taken  from  the  Duc  du  Maine,  a  thing  that
was  equally  to  his,  the  regent’s,  interest,  because  the  king
was  increasing  in  years  and  knowledge,  and  it  was  impor¬
tant  to  take  him  out  of  the  hands  of  his  enemy.  He  added
that  he  was  inclined  to  hold  the  lit  de  justice,  if  he  could,
on  the  following  Tuesday,  and  to  take  the  education  from
the  Duc  du  Maine.

I  interrupted  him  there,  saying  that  that  was  not  at  all
my  advice.  “  Eh  !  and  why  is  it  not  your  advice  ?  ”  he

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

157

demanded.  “  Because,”  I  replied,  “  it  is  undertaking  too
much  at  a  time.  What  is  now  your  most  urgent  matter
which  admits  of  no  delay  ?  The  parliament,  of

I  oppose  his  at-

tacking  the  Due  course.  That  is  the  grand  point;  he  satisfied
du  Maine ,  why.  Strike  the  great  blow  there  ;  know

how  to  maintain  it  afterwards;  and  you  will  regain  in  a
moment  all  your  authority  ;  after  which  you  will  have  time
enough  to  think  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.  Don’t  confound  him
with  the  parliament  ;  don’t  identify  him  with  it  ;  if  you  do
you  will  join  their  interests  by  a  mutual  disaster.  See  first
what  the  public  will  think,  and  do,  about  the  blow  that  you
level  against  parliament.  You  did  not  strike  down  M.  du
Maine  when  you  could  have  done  it,  and  should  have  done
it,  when  the  public  and  the  parliament  expected  it  and
desired  it  ;  you  have  let  them  be  manipulated  by  the  Due
du  Maine,  and  now  you  want  to  degrade  him  at  the  wrong
moment.  Besides,  will  M.  le  Duc  be  content  with  tak¬
ing  the  education  from  M.  du  Maine?  Does  he  not  want
it  for  himself  ?  ”  “  He  does  not  care  about  it,”  replied  the

regent.  “  That  is  well,”  I  replied,  “  but  try  to  make  him
hear  reason  about  your  wisest  course  now.  Piemember,
monsieur,”  I  added,  “  that  when  I  oppose  the  overthrow  of
M.  du  Maine  I  go  against  my  dearest  interests  ;  from  the
education  to  the  rank  is  only  a  step  ;  you  know  the  ardour
of  my  desires  on  that  point,  and  you  know,  moreover,  that  I
hate  M.  du  Maine,  who  has  done  us  such  wrongs  ;  but  the
good  of  the  State  and  yours  is  dearer  to  me  than  my  rank
or  my  vengeance,  and  I  conjure  you  to  reflect  upon  this.”

The  regent  was  surprised,  perhaps  as  much  at  my  control
over  myself  as  at  my  reasons.  He  embraced  me,  yielded
instantly,  and  said  I  spoke  to  him  as  a  friend,  and  not  as
a  duke  and  peer.  I  took  occasion  to  make  him  a  few  light
reproaches  for  his  suspicions  on  that  head.  We  agreed,

153

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

therefore,  that  the  Duc  du  Maine  should  be  left  for  another
and  less  complicated  time.  The  regent  then  returned  to
the  question  of  parliament,  and  spoke  of  dismissing  its
president,  Mesmes.  I  opposed  this  also,  and  told  him  the
man  was  too  bound  up  with  the  Duc  du  Maine  to  strike  at
the  one  and  leave  the  other.  That  in  this,  too,  I  spoke  as
a  friend,  because  my  keenest  pleasure  would  be  to  ruin  that
scoundrel,  the  author  and  instrument  of  all  the  horrors  that
had  happened  to  the  peers.  After  a  full  discussion  of  all
points  we  came  to  that  of  the  actual  machinery  in  detail
of  a  lit  de  justice.  I  explained  to  him  what  I  supposed
it  ought  to  he,  and  I  undertook  at  his  request  to  manage  it,
with  Fontanieu,  master  of  crown  properties,  without  the
knowledge  of  any  one.

All  this  being  arranged,  the  regent  entered  the  salon  into
which  the  cabinet  opened,  from  the  door  of  which  he  called
in  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  La  Vrillière,  and
the  Abbé  Dubois,  who  were  waiting  in  the
salon  beyond  it,  in  which  there  was  no  one
else.  This  was  where  the  regent  worked  in  summer.  He
took  his  usual  seat,  I  next  him,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  and
La  Vrillière  opposite.  After  a  short  conversation  on  the
subject,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  read  the  draft  of  an  edict
of  the  Council  of  Regency  and  of  letters-patent  breaking  the
decrees  of  the  parliament  ;  these  documents  were  those
that  were  afterwards  printed.  Just  as  the  reading  ended,
M.  le  Duc  was  announced.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  put  on  his
wig  and  went  to  meet  him  in  the  next  room,  but  soon
returned  with  M.  le  Duc  behind  him.  As  I  knew  the
meaning  of  their  friendliness  I  asked  the  regent,  laughing,
why  he  had  brought  in  M.  le  Duc  to  disturb  our  meeting.
“  You  see  him  now,”  he  replied,  taking  M.  le  Duc  by  the
arm,  “  and  you  will  see  him  here  again.”  The  other  three

Plans  laid  at  a
conference.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

159

men,  who  stood  at  some  distance,  seemed  much  surprised  at
this  entrance;  they  approached  us,  however,  and  we  sat
down,  M.  le  Duc  between  the  regent  and  me.  His  Eoyal
Highness  then  requested  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  to  read
the  documents  over  again,  which  he  did  without  any  in¬
terruption.  M.  le  Duc  approved  them  strongly,  speaking
to  me  in  a  low  voice  now  and  then.  When  the  reading
was  over  the  regent  rose  and  took  M.  le  Duc  to  the  end  of
the  salon,  where  he  called  me  up  to  him  a  few  moments
later,  and  said  that  the  most  pressing  thing  of  all  now  was
the  lit  de  justice  and  the  arrangements  for  it,  and  he  begged
me  to  see  Fontanieu  at  once  about  them.

As  I  was  getting  into  my  carriage  one  of  Law’s  lacqueys,
who  was  on  the  watch,  begged  me  earnestly  to  enter  his
master’s  room,  which  was  near  by.  I  found  him  alone  with
his  wife.  I  told  him  that  all  went  well  ;  and  that  M.  le
Duc  had  been  and  was  still  with  the  regent;  for  I  knew
that  Law  was  the  instrument  of  their  union.  I  added  that
I  was  in  a  hurry,  and  he  would  hear  more  from  his  Eoyal
Highness  as  soon  as  possible.  He  seemed  to  breathe  again  ;
and  I  went  off  at  once  to  Fontanieu  in  the  Place  Vendôme.

VL

When  Fontanieu  and  I  were  alone  in  his  cabinet,  I  talked
on  other  matters  to  give  the  valets  who  had  opened  the  doors
,  .  u  time  to  retire,  and  then,  to  his  great  astonish-

I  settle  with

Fontanieu  the  ment,  I  went  outside  to  see  if  they  were  gone,
mentsof  the  “in  and  closed  the  doors  myself.  I  then  told  Fon¬
de  justice.”  tanieu  that  the  matter  was  a  very  secret  one,

which  the  regent  had  charged  me  to  communicate  to  him
myself  ;  but  before  explaining  it,  I  must  know  if  his  Royal
Highness  could  count  absolutely  upon  him.  Fontanieu  trem¬
bled  through  his  whole  body,  and  turned  winter  than  his
linen  ;  he  stammered  a  few  words,  and  said  his  Royal  High¬
ness  could  count  on  him  so  far  as  his  conscience  permitted.
I  smiled  and  looked  at  him  fixedly,  and  that  smile  seemed  to
show  him  that  he  owed  me  excuses  not  to  feel  secure  when
the  matter  came  through  my  hands,  for  he  made  them  at
once.  I  then  told  him  that  the  matter  in  question  was  a
lit  de  justice,  for  the  detailed  arrangements  for  which  we
had  need  of  him.  I  had  scarcely  explained  the  matter  be¬
fore  the  poor  man  drew  a  loud  breath,  as  if  I  had  lifted  a
stone  from  his  stomach,  and  asked  me  many  times  if  that
was  all  we  wanted  of  him.  He  promised  everything  in  his
joy  at  being  let  off  so  cheaply,  and  truly  kept  his  word,  both
as  to  the  work  and  as  to  the  secrecy.  He  had  never  seen  a
lit  de  justice,  and  had  not  the  slightest  notion  of  one.  I
sat  down  at  his  desk  and  drew  out  the  plan  ;  I  discussed  it
with  him  a  full  hour,  and  when  I  thought  I  had  sufficiently
explained  it,  I  returned  to  the  Palais-Royal,  on  pretence  of
having  forgotten  something,  to  deceive  my  servants.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

161

Ibagnet,  the  concierge  of  the  Palais-Eoyal,  was  waiting  for
me  at  the  door  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans’  apartments,  with,  an
order  to  beg  me  to  write  to  him.  It  was  the  sacred  hour  of
the  roués  and  the  supper,  against  which  no  business  could
prevail.  I  sat  down  in  the  regent’s  winter  cabinet  and  wrote
him  an  account  of  what  I  had  done,  not  without  indignation
that  he  could  not  defer  his  pleasures  for  an  affair  of  this
importance.

The  next  morning,  Sunday,  21st,  on  leaving  my  bed  at  half¬
past  seven,  a  valet  de  chambre  of  M.  le  Duc  was  announced

M.  le  Due  writes  t0  m<3’  witl]L  a  letter  lie  WaS  to  give  into  mJ

to  me  to  ask  an  0wn  hands.  The  man  had  come  much  earlier.

interview.

and  had  gone  to  hear  mass  at  the  Jacobins,
while  waiting  until  I  woke  up.  M.  le  Due’s  letter  was  as
follows  :  —

“  I  think,  monsieur,  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  I  should
have  a  conversation  with  you  on  the  affair  you  know  of  ;  I
think  also  the  sooner  the  better.  Therefore,  I  should  wish,
if  it  could  be,  that  it  were  to-morrow,  Sunday,  in  the  morn¬
ing.  See  at  what  hour  you  could  come  to  me  or  that  I
should  go  to  you  ;  choose  which  you  think  will  excite  least
notice,  because  it  is  useless  to  give  the  public  cause  to  think.
I  shall  await  your  reply  to-morrow  morning  ;  and  beg  you,
meantime,  to  count  on  my  friendship,  and  continue  to  me
yours.  H.  de  Bourbon.”

I  went  at  once  to  the  hôtel  de  Condé,  where  I  found  M.  le
Due  in  the  act  of  dressing  himself  and  quite  alone,  as  his
valet  told  me  he  would  be  at  that  hour.  He

Long  interview

between  M.  le  finished  dressing,  and  begged  me  to  pass  into
Due  and  me.  ^is  cabinet,  where  he  shut  the  door,  offered
me  an  armchair,  took  one  himself,  and  we  sat  down  facing
each  other.  He  began  by  excuses  for  taking  such  a  liberty

TOL.  IT.  —  11

162  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yi.

with  me,  and,  after  a  few  compliments,  entered  upon  his
subject.  He  said  he  thought  it  best  to  lose  no  time  in  speak¬
ing  to  me  on  the  matter  broached  the  night  before  ;  and  first,
he  should  ask  in  confidence  whether  I  did  not  think,  as  he
did,  that  it  was  doing  nothing  to  strike  at  parliament,  if
at  the  same  time  the  blow  did  not  fall  on  its  principal  motor
power  ;  and  whether  the  Duc  d’Orléans  did  not  think  so  too.
Without  allowing  him  to  think  me  stupid,  I  was  not  sorry  to
force  him  to  be  the  first  to  name  the  Duc  du  Maine,  which
he  did  in  a  few  moments,  on  which  I  asked  him  in  what
way  he  proposed  to  strike  at  the  Duc  du  Maine.  “  By  taking
from  him  the  education,”  he  replied.  I  said  that  the  educa¬
tion  could  be  taken  from  him  independently  of  a  lit  de
justice,  and  the  two  things  done  at  different  times.  He
replied  that  the  regent  was  convinced  that,  this  appointment
having  been  conferred  or  confirmed  at  a  lit  de  justice,  it
could  not  be  taken  from  the  Duc  du  Maine  in  any  other
way.  I  contested  this  a  little,  but  he  cut  me  short  by  re¬
peating  that  such  was  the  opinion  of  the  regent,  that  he  had
told  him  so,  on  which  it  had  become  a  question  between
them  of  using  the  natural  occasion  of  the  lit  de  justice
now  about  to  be  held,  and  it  was  on  that  they  wished  to
know  what  I  thought.

I  tried  to  ramble  round  the  field,  but  was  incontinently
recalled  by  M.  le  Duc,  and  forced  to  enter  the  lists  seriously.
I  confess  that  the  more  I  had  thought  the  matter  over,  the
less  wise  I  thought  it  would  be  to  attack  the  Duc  du  Maine.
I  was  on  my  guard  against  my  inclination  to  do  so,  and  per¬
haps  the  sternness  with  which  I  held  myself  in  increased  my
sense  of  its  injudiciousness.  I  had  a  horror  of  bringing
dangerous  results  to  the  State  by  a  thing,  however  just  in
itself,  in  which  my  private  interests  were  mingled  ;  and  the
more  those  interests  were  dear  to  me,  the  more  I  turned  my-

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

163

self  forcibly  away,  that  I  might  do  nothing  unworthy  of  an
honourable  man.  I  therefore  stopped  all  verbiage,  urged  as
I  was,  and  answered  plainly  that  the  two  points  he  proposed
to  discuss  were  radically  different  ;  that  no  impartial  mind
could  deny  that  it  was  expedient  for  the  State,  the  king,  and
the  regent  to  take  the  education  from  M.  du  Maine  ;  but  I
also  thought  that  no  one  could  be  found  who  did  not  con¬
sider  that  step  extremely  dangerous.  After  which  I  detailed
to  him  at  full  length  the  reasons  I  had  already  given  to  the
Duc  d’Orléans.

M.  le  Duc  listened  to  me  very  attentively,  and  answered
that  for  his  part  he  considered  that  to  attack  the  Duc  du
Maine  was  the  only  remedy  against  civil  war.  I  asked  him  to
explain  to  me  that  proposition,  so  much  the  reverse  of  mine,
but  to  tell  me  first,  frankly,  what  he  should  think  of  civil
war  in  the  present  state  of  the  kingdom.  He  said  it  would
be  ruin.  Then  returning  to  his  idea,  he  repeated,  what  I
had  owned,  that  it  would  be  wise  to  take  the  king  from  the
hands  of  the  Duc  du  Maine  ;  that  settled,  we  should  see  if
there  were  any  certain  hope  of  doing  it  at  a  later  time,  and
with  less  danger;  that  the  longer  the  Duc  du  Maine  was
left  with  the  king,  the  more  the  king  would  get  accustomed
to  him,  and  that  the  king  himself  might  prove  an  obstacle
that  did  not  yet  exist;  also  that  M.  du  Maine  had  gained
ground  during  the  regency  through  the  mere  fact  of  his
having  the  education,  which  made  him  regard  himself  as  the
future  master  of  the  State  at  the  king’s  majority.

All  this  was  said  more  diffusely  than  I  report.  M.  le
Duc  then  begged  me  to  answer  him  straightforwardly.  I
could  not  deny  the  truths  that  he  advanced.

I  oppose  the

deposition  of  the  “  But,  monsieur,”  I  said,  “  will  that  prevent  a
Duc  du  Maine.  civjp  war  ?  It  proves  the  enormity  of  the

blunder  of  having  left  the  bastards  in  their  position  at  the

164

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.vi.

M.  le  Duc  de¬
clares  that  his
attachment  to
the  regent  de¬
pends  on  the
removal  of  M.
du  Maine.

death  of  the  king  and  after  it.  Every  one  expected  their
fall  then  and  desired  it  ;  but  at  present,  when  the  face  of
things  has  changed  by  habit,  and  still  more  by  the  judgment
rendered  between  the  princes  of  the  blood  and  the  bastards,
that  which  it  was  wise  to  do  on  the  death  of  the  king  will,
if  done  now,  precipitate  us  into  trouble.”  [After  a  long
statement  of  the  grounds  of  this  opinion]  M.  le  Duc,  who
had  listened  to  me  with  extreme  attention,  seemed  really
struck  and  remained  silent  for  a  few  moments  ;
then  in  a  gentle  but  firm  tone,  such  as  I
always  dread  in  public  matters,  because  it  in¬
dicates  that  a  course  is  determined  on,  he
said  :  “  Monsieur,  I  can  very  well  conceive  all
the  difficulties  that  you  make  ;  I  agree  that  they  are  great  ;
but  there  are  two  others  which  appear  to  me  incomparably
greater  on  the  other  side:  one  is  that  the  Duc  d’Orléans
and  I  are  lost  at  the  king’s  majority,  if  the  education  is  left
to  M.  du  Maine  till  then  ;  the  other  is  that  it  will  assuredly
be  left  to  him  if  on  this  present  occasion  it  is  not  taken  from
him.  Look  at  it  how  you  please,  that  is  the  fact;  as  to
trusting  to  anything  the  Duc  d’Orléans  may  promise  me  for
the  future,  that  is  a  snare  into  which  I  shall  not  fall,  and
to  let  myself  be  fooled  now  only  to  be  lost  four  years  hence
is  what  I  will  never  do.”  [A  long  argument  followed  and
then]  M.  le  Duc  declared  that  his  only  demand  was  that
M.  du  Maine  should  be  removed  from  the  king  ;  and  he

begged  me  to  see  the  Duc  d’Orléans  that  very  morning
and  say  that  he  would  consent  to  either  one  of  three  edicts,
the  drafts  of  which  he  had  carried  to  the  regent,  which
the  latter  preferred.  After  which  M.  le  Duc  declared  to  me
plainly  that  his  attachment  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  depended
wholly  on  the  removal  of  the  Duc  du  Maine  ;  without  which
he  would  not  take  one  step  either  for  or  against  him.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

165

I  returned  home,  and  went  to  mass  at  the  Jacobins,  a
church  which  I  could  enter  from  my  garden.  It  was  not
without  wandering  of  mind.  But  God  gave  me  grace  to
pray  with  a  good  and  honest  heart,  asking  that  I  might
conduct  myself  for  His  glory  and  the  good  of  the  State  with¬
out  personal  self-seeking.  I  may  even  say  that  I  received
the  grace  of  interesting  right-minded  people  in  this  affair
without  their  forming  any  idea  of  what  it  was,  so  that  I
obtained  rectitude  and  light  and  strength  from  them  against
my  own  inclinations  ;  and,  to  say  it  once  for  all,  my  prayer
was  granted,  and  I  had  nothing  to  reproach  myself  with  in
the  whole  after-course  of  this  affair,  in  which  I  followed
solely  my  ideas  of  what  was  best  for  the  State,  without  turn¬
ing  aside  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.

Fontanieu  was  awaiting  me  on  my  return  from  mass.  I
had  to  stand  his  questions  about  the  details  of  his  machinery
and  behave  as  if  I  had  nothing  else  upon  my  mind.  I
arranged  my  chamber  for  a  lit  de  justice  and  made  him  see
and  understand  various  local  points  of  the  ceremonial  which
he  had  not  understood,  but  which  it  was  very  important
not  to  omit.  I  had  requested  him  to  see  the  regent  that
morning  ;  but  as  it  was  necessary  to  enlighten  the  latter
beforehand,  I  told  Fontanieu  to  receive  his  orders  in  the
afternoon.

It  was  half-past  eleven  when  I  reached  the  Palais-Boyal,
and,  as  contretemps  always  happen  in  all  great  affairs,  I
,  .  found  the  regent  closeted  with  Maréchal

count  to  the  d’Huxelles  and  the  Cardinals  de  Bohan  and  de

regent  of  my  in-  ,  j.  -,

terview  with  M.  BlSSy^  wllO  W6T6  68CI1  r6ctCllIl^  I11IÏ1  cl  lOH^

le  Duc'  rigmarole  of  their  writing,  or  said  to  be  so,

under  the  specious  title  of  bringing  Cardinal  de  Noailles
to  their  way  of  thinking.  I  was  on  thorns  ;  and  presently
I  took  the  liberty  of  drawing  the  regent  to  a  window,  where

166  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

I  told  him  that  while  he  was  amusing  himself  with  those
two  cardinals,  who  were  making  him  lose  his  precious  time
about  a  reconciliation  they  did  not  wish  to  make,  I  had  to
oive  him  a  long  account  of  a  very  important  conversation
I  had  had  with  M.  le  Duc  before  he  could  see  the  latter
a  (rain  On  this  he  returned  to  the  others,  told  them  he  was
tired  and  that  their  affair  could  be  better  understood  if  heard
twice,  and  in  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  they  departed
with  their  portfolios  under  their  arms.  I  took  their  place,
and  closing  the  doors,  we  walked  up  and  down  the  long
gallery,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  I,  till  three  o’clock,  that  is
to  say,  more  than  two  good  hours.

Long  as  my  conversation  with  M.  le  Duc  had  been,  I
repeated  it  in  full  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  adding  my  reflec¬
tions  as  I  went  along.  He  was  surprised  at  the  strength  of
my  reasons  not  to  fall  upon  M.  du  Maine,  and  much  alarmed
at  the  tenacity  of  M.  le  Duc  on  that  point.  He  said  it  was
true  that  he  had  asked  him  for  the  three  proposals  of  different
edicts  and  that  M.  le  Duc  had  given  them  to  him,  saying  he
did  not  care  which  was  taken,  provided  it  ensured  the  dis¬
missal  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.  I  felt  then  that  the  regent  had
pledged  himself  again.  He  dared  not  tell  me  so,  hut  he  did
not  escape  my  reproaches.  “Well,  monsieur,”  I  cried  too
roughly,  “there  you  are  in  the  mud-hole  I  have  predicted
to  you  so  many  times  !  You  would  not  overthrow  the  bas¬
tards  when  the  princes  of  the  blood,  the  parliament,  the
entire  public  cried  out  for  it  and  the  whole  world  expected  it.
What  did  I  tell  you  then  ?  and  what  have  I  repeated  ever
since  ?  That  sooner  or  later  you  would  he  forced  to  it  by  the
princes  of  the  blood,  at  a  time  when  it  would  not  suit  you  to
do  it,  and  you  might  be  forced  to  abet  them  at  all  risks.
How  are  you  going  to  get  out  of  this  ?  Believe  me,  evil  for
evil,  this  is  the  most  dangerous.”

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

167

The  regent  groaned  ;  but  he  promised  he  would  hold  firm
against  M.  le  Duc,  and  added  that  he  wished  I  would  see  the
The  regent  prom-  latter  after  their  interview  and  report  to  him
agænstremovmg  the  next  <Aay  what  effect  it  had  upon  him.  He
m.  du  Maine.  then  said  that  he  doubted  whether  the  lit  de
justice  could  be  held  the  day  after  the  morrow  (Tuesday)
because  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  doubted  if  he  could  be  ready
with  the  documents  in  time.  This  delay  annoyed  me;  I
feared  it  was  the  prelude  to  a  longer  delay,  and  then  a  change.
I  asked  him  to  what  day  he  postponed  it,  remarking  that
such  strokes  determined  upon  and  then  delayed  were  sure
to  become  known,  and  with  dangerous  results.  “  To  Friday,”
he  replied.  “  Wednesday  and  Thursday  are  fete-days,  and  it
can’t  be  ear  her.”  “Very  good,”  I  said,  “provided,  in  any
event,  it  is  Friday.”  He  seemed  determined.  As  we  parted
he  said  :  “  We  must  avoid  taking  away  the  education  at  this
time.  It  is  my  interest  to  do  so  later,  all  in  good  time,  but
this  is  not  the  proper  time,  and  you  are  perfectly  right.  This
M.  le  Duc  frightens  me  ;  he  wants  it,  and  wants  it  so  stoutly.”
“  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ?  ”  I  said.  “  Did  you  not  tell  me
yesterday  that  M.  le  Duc  did  not  want  the  education  himself,
and  would  not  have  it?”  “Yes,”  replied  the  regent,  “I
understood  him  to  say  so  ;  but  you  see  he  has  his  say  and  his
unsay.  He  does  not  care  for  it,  but  he  makes  it  a  condition,
and  that  does  not  suit  me.”  “  Monsieur,”  I  said,  in  a  firm
tone,  “  indeed  it  does  not.  Make  up  your  mind  that  he  shall
not  have  it  ;  for  I  declare  to  you  that  if  he  has  it  you,  with
your  nature,  will  distrust  him,  he  will  perceive  it,  worthy
people  will  thrust  themselves  in  for  the  purpose  of  parting
you,  and  then  there  will  be  the  devil  between  you,  which
will  operate  upon  the  State,  the  present,  and  the  future.  With
these  reflections  I  leave  you  to  get  my  dinner.”  “  There ’s
my  gourmand  !  ”  he  said  ;  “  fine  reflections,  but  dinner  at  the

168

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

end.”  “Yes,”  I  said,  laughing,  “dinner  and  not  so  much
supper  ;  but  since  it  pleases  you  not  to  dine  at  all,  ruminate
over  this  while  awaiting  M.  le  Duc,  and  be  prepared  for  the
assault.”

Let  us  return  for  a  moment  to  the  origin  of  this  affair  ;
that  is  to  say,  to  the  original  cause  that  set  it  in  motion.  I
have  said  that  this  was  the  private  interests  of  Law,  d’Argen-
son,  and  the  Abbé  Dubois.  To  those  interests  must  be
added  that  of  the  Duc  de  La  Force,  who,  in  order  that  he
might  enter  the  Council  of  Regency,  stirred  up  Law,  who
was  napping,  and  through  him  M.  le  Duc.  So  true  is  it  that
in  matters  that  seem  to  rise  up  and  speak  for  themselves
(and,  generally  speaking,  in  all  great  affairs)  we  shall  find,
if  we  search  carefully,  that  their  original  cause  is  some  light
thing,  some  personal  interest,  very  incapable,  one  would
think,  of  causing  such  effects.

I  saw  the  Duc  d’Orléans  again  in  the  evening,  and  asked
him  where  he  now  was  with  M.  le  Duc.  He  answered,  stop-
The  regent  tells  Ping  short  and  turning  towards  me,  for  we
me  that  m.  le  were  walking  down  the  great  gallery,  that  he

Due  insists  on

having  the  educa-  had  never  seen  a  man  so  obstinate  and  that  he
tion  of  the  kmg.  frightened  him.  “But  the  result?”  I  said.

“  The  result,”  he  answered,  “  is  that  he  wants  the  education
of  the  king,  and  will  not  yield  the  point.”  I  did  not  conceal
from  him  that  the  accumulated  number  of  his  broken  prom¬
ises  to  M.  le  Duc  was  the  cause  of  the  latter’s  obstinacy  at
the  present  time.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  contested  this,  and
said  he  did  not  tell  the  truth  ;  but  he  let  it  be  seen  that  there
was  no  denying  the  just  complaints  of  M.  le  Duc  in  this
respect.

Then,  passing  to  the  mechanical  arrangements  for  the
lit  de  justice  (for  this  conversation  was  very  skippy),  I
said  to  him,  and  I  don’t  know  how  I  came  to  think  of  it,

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

169

that  the  high  seats  could  be  raised  only  one  step  on  account
of  the  want  of  height  at  the  Tuileries  ;  but  I  thought  that
would  be  quite  sufficient  to  mark  the  difference.  Thereupon
he  grew  excited  ;  told  me  that  things  could  not  be  done  in
that  way,  and  that  the  high  seats  in  parliament  were  always
raised  five  steps.  In  vain  I  represented  the  mechanical
difficulty  ;  I  told  him  that  if  I,  whom  he  thought  so  set
upon  rank,  was  satisfied,  he  ought  to  be.  Not  at  all.  He
ended  by  charging  me  to  tell  Fontanieu  he  must  find  some
means  to  remedy  this  impropriety.  This  nearly  drove  me
distracted  ;  for,  to  cut  the  matter  short,  as  the  Duc  d’Orléans
had  no  dignity  and  cared  for  none  either  for  himself  or
others,  I  strongly  suspected  that,  feeling  himself  worsted
by  M.  le  Duc,  and  brought  up  before  the  wall  of  a  lit  de
justice,  he  was  seeking  some  way  to  break  out  of  it.  I
feared  that,  not  venturing  to  openly  give  up  a  project  of  this
kind,  he  had  seized  on  what  he  could  find  to  make  a  delay,
in  the  hope  that  the  affair  would  be  noised  about  and  thus
be  defeated.  This  made  me  very  uneasy  ;  I  tried  during
the  rest  of  the  conversation  to  clear  up  the  point,  hut  if  the
regent  ever  had  the  thought  he  hid  it  from  me  with  the
utmost  caution.

From  that  he  passed  to  a  very  interesting  topic.  “  Did  I
tell  you,”  he  said,  “  of  a  conversation  I  had  Tuesday  last  with

the  Comte  de  Toulouse?”  On  my  replying

Conversation  be-  ,  ,

tween  the  regent  that  he  had  not,  he  told  me  that,  when  they
and  the  comte  de  were  ajone  together,  the  Comte  de  Toulouse

had  inquired  if  he  might  ask  him  a  question,
and  this  question  was,  whether  he  was  satisfied  with  him
and  his  conduct.  On  the  most  satisfactory  assurances
being  given  to  him,  followed  by  most  suitable  replies  on
his  part,  he  said  that  he  had  still  another  inquiry  to  make,
about  his  brother,  who  was  very  uneasy  at  a  rumour  going

170  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

about  that  he  and  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  were  about  tc
be  arrested.  At  this  the  regent  laughed  as  if  there  were
nothing  in  it  ;  but,  on  being  pressed,  he  replied  that  he  had
never  thought  of  it.  The  comte  asked  if  he  might  reassure
his  brother  ;  on  receiving  a  yes,  he  asked  if  the  regent  was
content  with  him,  and  whence  could  the  rumour  have  come.
The  regent  replied  that  as  to  the  rumour  he  was  ignorant
of  the  cause  of  it,  but  as  for  being  content  with  M.  du
Maine,  that  he  could  not  be.  The  comte  then  desired  to
know  more  ;  on  which  the  Duc  d’Orléans  asked  him  what
he  thought  of  intriguing  with  parliament.  The  comte  re¬
plied  frankly  that  it  would  seem  to  him  very  criminal  ;  and
he  asked  if  anything  of  that  kind  were  laid  to  the  charge
of  his  brother.  The  regent  replied  that  he  could  not  doubt
it,  from  very  sure  proofs,  and  immediately  asked  him  what
he  should  think  of  dealings  in  Spain  with  Cardinal  Alberoni
“Worse,”  replied  the  comte,  plainly,  “I  should  regard  that
as  nothing  different  from  a  State  crime.”  And  on  the
regent  telling  him  that  he  knew  the  Duc  du  Maine  to  be
guilty  of  it,  the  comte  said  he  could  not  suspect  his  brother
to  that  extreme  ;  and  he  begged  the  regent  to  be  very  sure
of  the  truth  of  it  ;  as  for  himself,  he  considered  the  State
and  his  Royal  Highness  as  one  and  the  same  thing  ;  there¬
fore  he  could  answer  for  himself,  though  he  could  not  answer
for  his  brother.  I  thought  this  conversation  very  important,
and  the  reflections  we  made  upon  it  prolonged  our  own.

After  this  the  regent  reverted  to  M.  le  Due.  He  talked
feebly,  and  I  again  conjured  him  to  think  well  of  the  con¬
sequences  of  attacking  M.  du  Maine  and  of  giving  the
education  to  a  prince  of  the  obstinate  temper  of  M.  le  Due.
After  renewing  those  arguments  once  more  I  entreated  him
to  feel  sure  that  if  he  did  take  the  education  from  M.  du
Maine  the  latter  would  not  be  more  furious  or  irreconcilable

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

171

Fontanieu
remedies  the
raised  seats.

if  reduced  to  his  proper  rank  in  the  peerage.  The  regent
replied  that  he  had  wished  to  do  that,  but  that  M.  le  Duc
was  opposed  to  it,  from  the  idea  of  separating  us  from  the
princes  of  the  blood  by  an  intermediate  rank  ;  and  he  was
very  glad  to  tell  me  this  plainly,  that  I  might  not  let  myself
be  fooled  by  the  talk  of  M.  le  Duc  ;  with  whom  the  point
must  be  settled  if  he  gave  him  the  education  of  the  king.
On  this  I  went  away,  with  a  beginning  of  hope,  —  always
supposing  that  the  education  changed  hands.

I  had  those  high  seats  on  the  brain,  and  being  resolved
to  take  from  the  regent  a  pretext  that  I  dreaded,  I  sent
word  to  Fontanieu  to  expect  me  at  his  house.
Together  we  found  a  way  to  give  those  high
seats  three  good  steps;  but  Fontanieu  was
miserable  at  the  delay,  fearing  that  his  workmen  might
understand  what  he  was  making  them  do.  Leaving  his
house  1  said  to  my  servants,  “Home!”  but  as  we  passed
the  Pont  Tournant  I  pulled  the  cord,  and  got  out  at  the
garden  of  the  Tuileries  as  if  to  enjoy  the  fine  weather,  and
sent  my  carriage  to  wait  for  me  at  the  end  of  the  Pont
Royal.

I  soon  found  M.  le  Duc  in  the  alley  which  runs  along
the  base  of  the  terrace  over  the  river.1  As  this  was  the
second  time  we  had  met  in  the  same  place
I  feared  unexpected  accidents  and  remarks.
I  made  him  take  off  his  blue  ribbon,  which
he  put  in  his  pocket.  He  had  seen  the  Due
d’Orléans  since  I  had  done  so,  and  I  soon  perceived  that

Meeting  with
M.  le  Duc  in  the
garden  of  the
Tuileries.

1  These  conversations  and  negotiations,  preliminary  to,  and  quite  essen¬
tial  for  an  understanding  of,  the  famous  lit  de  justice,  are  given  at
great  length  in  the  Memoir,  with  much  repetition  and  detail.  They  are
abridged  here  from  nearly  one  hundred  pages  ;  hut  all  the  important
points,  as  to  historical  facts  and  as  to  Saint-Simon’s  personal  conduct,
are  given.  — Tk.

172  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yi.

he  had  found  him  more  pliant.  That  angered  me,  for  I
felt  the  consequences,  and  knew  that  I  could  never  get
the  better  of  so  determined  a  man  after  he  had  once  seen
the  hope  of  obtaining  what  he  wanted.

[After  a  very  long  recapitulation  of  all  the  arguments]
“  Monsieur,”  replied  M.  le  Duc,  hastily,  and  like  a  man  who
T  ,  ,  was  determined  on  his  course,  “  pardon  me  if

effort  to  prevent  j  speak  to  you  freely.  Your  reasoning  leads

an  attack  on  the  .

Duc  du  Maine,  only  to  our  letting  these  Messieurs  the  bas-
m.  le  Duc  s  reply.  £ar(js  cuf.  our  throats  at  their  own  good  time

and  pleasure.  ISTow,  if  the  Duc  d’Orléans  is  of  that  humour
for  his  part,  I  am  not  so  peaceable  for  mine.  He  is  so  great
that  he  apparently  expects  to  escape  them  one  way  or  an¬
other,  by  force,  or  by  gratitude  for  not  having  crushed  them,
in  which,  as  I  believe,  he  will  find  himself  their  dupe.  I
have  not  the  same  resources  nor  the  same  grandeur  ;  in  a
word,  monsieur,  all  depends  on  the  education  being  given
on  Friday.  If  that  is  done  I  am  one  forever  with  the
Duc  d’Orléans  ;  and  we  shall  see,  the  princes  of  the  blood
being  united,  what  the  bastards  can  do.  Otherwise  my
resentment  will  be  too  strong  for  me.  It  will  never  leave
my  heart,  I  know  the  difference  between  the  regent  and
myself,  but  after  all  it  is  for  him  to  say  whether  he  wants
me  or  whether  he  does  not  care  if  he  loses  me.  He  is  regent
and  ought  to  be  master  enough  to  do  things  that  are  just,
reasonable,  and  for  his  own  personal  interest.  It  is  for  him
to  will  them,  and  to  know  how  to  do  them;  if  not,  it  is
not  worth  while  to  be  for  him.”

This  was  cutting  through  the  difficulties,  not  removing
them.  I  was  about  to  answer  after  a  moment’s  silence,
when  he  added  with  a  gentle,  subdued,  and  flattering  air,
“  Monsieur,  I  beg  your  pardon  for  speaking  so  firmly,  and
I  feel  that  I  must  seem  to  you  very  headstrong  and  very

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

173

obstinate.  I  shall  be  very  sorry  if  you  should  take  a  bad
opinion  of  me,  but  I  ask  you  to  put  yourself  in  my  place  ;
to  weigh  the  position  in  which  I  find  myself,  and  all  the
broken  promises  that  have  brought  me  to  where  we  now  are.
I  count  upon  your  friendship  ;  could  you  advise  me  to  let
myself  be  ruined  ?  And  do  you  not  see  that  the  end  of  this
would  be  the  firm  establishment  of  M.  du  Maine  over  the
king  ?  That  is  the  thing  that  makes  me  so  firm  ;  if  you
will  weigh  it  well,  what  now  seems  to  you  obstinacy  you
will  find  to  be  necessity.”

These  words  embarrassed  me  greatly,  not  for  their  polite¬
ness,  which  I  could  have  paid  off  in  compliments,  but  for
their  too  solid  determination,  which  was  all  the  more  griev¬
ous  because  it  put  us  between  two  reefs.  His  alienation
might  lead  to  anything  in  France  and  in  Spain  on  the  one
hand,  on  the  other  were  all  the  troubles  that  would  grow  out
of  the  course  proposed.  I  collected  myself  as  much  as  so
important  and  keen  a  conversation  would  allow;  I  saw
plainly  that  this  decision  of  M.  le  Duc,  coming  at  the  end
of  all  the  arguments  brought  against  him,  left  nothing  to
hope  for  from  him.  With  this  conviction  I  ceased  to  at¬
tempt  the  impossible  and,  content  within  myself  with  the
testimony  of  my  conscience  as  to  the  efforts  I  had  made
to  defeat  or  elude  his  designs  against  the  Duc  du  Maine,
I  thought  myself  at  liberty  to  profit  for  our  Order  by  that
which  I  could  not  prevent  for  the  good  of  the  State.

I  therefore  said  to  M.  le  Duc  that  after  having  repre¬
sented  to  him  what  I  believed  to  be  the  danger  in  itself

and  the  difficulties  of  this  great  affair,  I  should
mê  his  word  on  waste  his  time  in  vain  if,  having  nothing
the  reduction  of  further  to  bring  forward  I  repeated  the  same

the  bastards  to  o  j.

their  rank  in  the  things  ;  that  I  saw  with  pain  that  although  he

p66râ^6<

felt  the  infinite  embarrassment  of  the  whole

174  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

thing,  his  mind  was  made  up  ;  and  that  being  so,  and  there
being  no  remedy  for  it,  I  passionately  desired  its  success.
But  before  leaving  him,  I  must  entreat  him  to  explain  him¬
self  clearly  with  me  as  to  the  reduction  of  the  bastards  to
their  proper  place  in  the  peerage.

He  replied  that  he  consented  willingly  that  they  should
have  no  other,  and  that  I  ought  to  have  known  that  this
was  in  one  of  the  three  edicts  he  had  proposed  and  given
to  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  “  I  understand  you,”  I  replied,  “  hut
it  is  one  thing  to  allow  it  to  be  done,  and  another  to  will
it.  I  entreat  you  not  to  forget  that  the  intermediate  rank
is  what  has  alienated  the  dukes  from  you,  —  I  mean  all
those  who  have  blood  to  the  nails  ;  I  am  not  speaking  of
poor  creatures  like  a  Duc  d’Estrées,  a  M.  Mazarin,  a  M.
d’Aumont,  hut  of  all  those  peers  who  feel  themselves  and
hold  themselves  up,  —  dukes  who  were  most  at  the  hôtel
de  Condé  through  the  ancient  chrism  of  father  to  son  in
the  civil  wars.  We  do  not  now  appear  what  we  are,  because
we  are  a  hundred  times  worse  off  than  under  past  tyranny  ;
but  we  feel  ourselves  no  less,  and  we  hold  no  less  together,
as  you  must  have  remarked  on  all  occasions.  Here  is  an
occasion  to  devote  us  to  you.  Do  not  miss  it  ;  repair  the
past,  and  reduce  the  bastards  to  their  proper  rank  in  the
peerage.”  M.  le  Duc  did  not  answer  for  a  moment,  and
then  he  said  he  wished  I  had  seen  the  three  edicts  he
had  ordered  drawn  up  and  given  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  ;
that  it  was  Millain  who  drew  them  up  (I  knew  him  well
as  the  secretary  of  the  chancellor,  Pontchartrain),  that  he
was  a  very  capable  and  very  honest  man  and  I  could  trust
him.  We  agreed  that  Millain  should  come  to  me  the  next
morning  with  copies  of  the  three  edicts,  and  this  readiness
on  my  part  seemed  to  give  M.  le  Duc  great  pleasure.  “  Mon¬
sieur,”  he  said,  “  I  will  do  for  this  matter  as  I  shall  for  the

1718]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

175

education  ;  but  give  me  your  promise  that  you  will  do
your  best  for  that.”  “  Gently,  monsieur,”  I  replied  ;  “  with
your  word  you  have  mine,  and,  I  dare  to  tell  you,  that  of
all  the  dukes,  to  he  with  you  in  all  things,  the  king,  the
State,  and  the  regent  excepted,  against  whom,  however,  you
will  never  desire  anything  ;  but  as  for  M.  du  Maine,  I  can
promise  you  no  more  than  I  have  already  promised,  namely,
to  put  the  reasons  for  and  against  your  wishes  before  the
Duc  d’Orléans,  and  if  he  decides  as  you  wish,  to  put  myself
in,  up  to  the  neck,  for  your  success.”

After  this  I  told  him  I  thought  a  distinction  ought  to

be  made  between  the  two  brothers,  and  that  we  ought  for
I  propose  to  keep  the  good  of  the  State  to  yield  the  rank  he
comtTde^ou-  now  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  “With

louse  unchanged.  aR  my  heart,”  cried  M.  le  Duc  ;  “  you  know

that  I  love  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  and,  since  you  are
willing,  with  all  my  heart  I  will  contribute  to  leave  him
where  he  is.  But  how  can  it  be  done  ?  ”  “  Monsieur,”  I

said,  “  I  desire  that  one  and  the  same  decree  should  reduce
the  bastards  to  their  rank  in  the  peerage,  and  that  another,
made  at  the  same  moment,  should  restore  to  the  Comte  de
Toulouse,  for  him  alone,  the  full  rank  that  he  enjoys  to-day,
—  no  continuation  of  that  rank  in  itself  ;  the  children
excluded  should  he  marry  and  have  them.  He  will  then
have  two  courses  to  follow,  and  follow  instantly  :  accept  or
refuse.  Refuse  ?  he  will  think  twice  before  he  sacrifices  all
that  he  is  to  a  brother  he  neither  likes  nor  respects,  who,
against  his  advice,  has  exposed  himself  to  all  this  by  un¬
bridled  ambition,  which  he  has  openly  blamed  in  public  and
in  private  ;  nor  will  he  sacrifice  himself  in  this  way  to  the
caprices,  follies,  and  furies  of  a  sister-in-law,  whom  he  abhors
as  a  crazy  woman,  a  mad  woman,  who  has  pushed  his  brother
on  to  enterprises  of  which  this  is  the  issue.  He  would  be

176

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  vi.

mad  himself  to  refuse,  and  he  has  men  about  him  who
will  neglect  nothing  to  force  him  to  accept.”  “  Monsieur,”
replied  M.  le  Duc,  “  I  am  charmed  to  hear  you  say  so.  I
will  tell  Millain  to  draw  up  a  declaration  for  that  purpose.”
“  And  I,  monsieur,”  I  continued,  “  will  draw  one  up  myself  ;
so  that  it  may  be  known  that,  for  the  good  of  the  State,  the
peers  did  this  act  themselves  against  themselves.”

All  things  having  been  foreseen,  remedies  provided  in  case
of  mishaps,  secrecy  absolutely  maintained,  and  nothing  for-
aii  things  fore-  gotten,  I  took  leave  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  at

seen  and  provided  £en  0’c}0cp  0f  the  night  before  [the  lit  de  jus-
justice.”  tice] ,  exhorting  him  to  rest  as  much  as  he

could,  to  achieve  the  salvation  of  his  regency  by  the  acts
of  the  morrow,  and  the  triumph  of  those  acts  by  his  resolu¬
tion,  firmness,  presence  of  mind,  attention  to  little  things,
and  above  all  by  his  self-possession.  On  leaving  him,  I  asked
permission  to  tell  the  secret  to  the  Duc  de  Chaulnes,  inas¬
much  as  he  must  learn  the  shell  of  it  in  the  course  of  the
night  by  the  order  to  bring  out  the  light-horse,  of  which  he
was  the  captain  ;  and  he  consented.

On  my  way  home,  I  stopped  at  the  hôtel  de  Luynes,  which
is  close  to  my  house,  and  sent  in  to  ask  the  Duc  de  Chaulnes
i  confide  the  to  come  and  speak  to  me  in  my  carriage.  He
rDrr t0  came  Without  his  hat,  got  in,  and  immediately
chaulnes.  the  coachman,  who  had  his  orders,  drove  off

to  my  own  door,  without  my  saying  a  word  till  I  reached
my  cabinet  to  the  Duc  de  Chaulnes,  who  was  much  surprised
to  be  abducted  in  this  way.  He  was  still  more  so  when,
after  closing  my  doors,  I  told  him  of  the  great  spectacle  pre¬
pared  for  the  next  day.  We  gave  ourselves  up,  he  and  I,  to
the  rapture  of  a  re-establishment  that  was  so  unexpected,  so
sudden,  so  secret  ;  the  mere  hope  of  which,  founded  on  so
little,  had  alone  sustained  us  under  the  horrid  hammer  of

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

177

the  late  king.  The  dispersion,  the  melting  away  of  those
mountains,  piled  one  after  another  by  countless  degrees  upon
our  dignity  by  those  giants  of  bastards,  those  Titans  of
France,  their  coming  fall,  the  general  surprise,  but  so  differ¬
ent,  so  intense,  both  for  them  and  for  the  peers  ;  our  renas¬
cence,  our  re-existence  from  past  annihilation,  —  a  hundred
thoughts  at  a  time  dilated  our  hearts  in  a  manner  I  cannot
express.  M.  le  Duc  was  not  forgotten,  nor  Millain  either,
in  this  tête-à-tête.  We  parted  at  last  under  this  great
expectation.

About  five  o’clock  the  next  morning  [Friday,  August  26],
drums  were  heard  throughout  the  city,  and  presently  the
Notice  given  of  soldiers  were  seen  in  motion.  At  six  o’clock
the  “lit  de  jus-  La  Grange  was  at  the  parliament  delivering

tice  ”  at  six  in  .  0  r  °

the  morning  of  his  summons.  Messieurs  (to  use  their  lan-
August  26.  guage)  were  just  assembling.  They  sent  for
the  president,  who  called  the  Chambers  together.  All  this
took  half  an  hour  ;  after  which  they  replied  that  they  would
obey.  Then  they  debated  in  what  way  they  should  go  to
the  Tuileries,  whether  in  carriages  or  on  foot.  The  latter
was  chosen  as  the  ordinary  form,  and  in  the  hope  of  exciting
the  people  and  arriving  at  the  Tuileries  attended  by  a  howl¬
ing  mob.  The  rest  will  be  related  in  its  place  farther  on.
The  French  guards  and  the  Suisses  were  under  arms  in
quarters,  the  cavalry  patrol  and  two  companies  of  mous¬
quetaires  each  ready  in  their  guard-house,  and  only  the
ordinary  guard  of  the  regiments  of  the  French  and  Suisse
guards  on  duty  at  the  Tuileries.

If  I  had  slept  little  for  the  last  week  I  slept  still  less  on
this  last  night,  on  the  eve  of  events  so  important.  I  rose
before  six  and  soon  after  received  my  notification  to  attend
a  lit  de  justice.  At  seven  o’clock  an  usher  of  the  Due
d’Orléans  brought  me  a  notice  of  a  meeting  of  the  Council

VOL.  IV.  — 12

178

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vl

of  Regency  at  eight  o’clock,  with  an  order  to  come  in
mantle.  I  dressed  myself  in  black,  because  I  had  no  other
suit  with  mantle,  except  one  of  magnificent  gold  cloth,
which  I  would  not  wear,  —  to  give  no  ground  for  saying,
though  most  untruly,  that  I  intended  to  insult  parliament
and  the  Duc  du  Maine.  I  took  with  me  two  gentlemen  ;
and  I  went  to  be  a  witness  of  all  that  was  about  to  be
done.  I  was  full,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  of  fear,  hope,
joy,  reflection,  distrust  of  the  regent’s  weakness,  and  of  all
that  might  result.  I  was  also  firmly  resolved  to  serve  my
best  in  every  way  that  might  present  itself,  but  without
appearing  to  know  anything,  without  eagerness  ;  and  I
anchored  myself  on  presence  of  mind,  attention,  circum¬
spection,  modesty,  and  an  air  of  moderation.

Leaving  my  own  door,  I  went  to  that  of  Yalincourt,  who
lived  opposite  to  the  back  door  of  the  hôtel  de  Toulouse.
T  .,  „  He  was  a  man  of  honour,  great  intelligence,

de  Toulouse  of  mingling  in  the  best  company,  secretary-gen¬
eral  of  the  navy,  who  had  been  with  the  Comte
de  Toulouse  from  his  earliest  youth.  I  wished  to  let  no  per¬
sonal  fears  assail  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  or  expose  him  to
he  led  by  his  brother.  I  sent,  therefore,  to  ask  Yalincourt
to  come  and  speak  to  me.  He  came,  half-dresssed,  alarmed
by  the  noises  in  the  streets,  and  asked  me  what  it  meant.  I
took  him  by  the  head,  and  said  :  “  Listen  to  me  well,  and  do
not  lose  a  word.  Go  at  once  to  M.  le  Comte  de  Toulouse,
and  tell  him  from  me  to  trust  my  word  ;  to  he  wise.  Things
are  about  to  happen  which  may  displease  him  in  regard  to
others,  hut  he  may  rely  on  the  assurance  that  not  a  hair
of  his  head  will  be  touched.  I  wish  him  not  to  have  one
moment’s  uneasiness.  Go,  and  lose  no  time.”  Yalincourt
embraced  me  as  well  as  he  could.  “  Ah  !  monsieur,”  he  said,
“  we  have  long  foreseen  that  the  storm  would  come.  It  is

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

179

well  deserved  ;  but  not  by  M.  le  Comte,  who  will  be  eternally
obliged  to  you.”  He  warned  him  instantly,  and  the  Comte
de  Toulouse,  who  knew  later  that  I  had  saved  him  from  a
fall  like  that  of  his  brother,  never  forgot  it.

At  eight  o’clock  I  arrived  in  the  grand  courtyard  of  the
Tuileries,  without  having  remarked  anything  extraordinary
T  on  the  way.  The  carriages  of  the  Duc  de

1  arrive  at  the  *  o

Tuiienes.  The  Noailles  and  the  Maréchaux  de  Yillars  and

“  lit  de  justice  ”

promptly  and  d  Huxelles  and  some  others  were  already  there,
secretly  arranged,  j  went  up  without  meeting  many  persons,  and

I  had  the  doors  of  entry  and  the  issue  through  the  guard-
room  opened  for  me.  The  grand  antechamber  where  the
king  took  his  meals  was  prepared  for  the  lit  de  justice.
I  stopped  there  a  moment  to  consider  carefully  if  all  was
in  proper  order,  and  I  congratulated  Fontanieu  in  a  whisper.
He  told  me  that  he  did  not  arrive  at  the  Tuileries  with  his
workmen  and  his  materials  till  six  o’clock  in  the  morning  ;
that  all  had  been  so  luckily  put  up  and  handled  that  the
king  had  heard  nothing  of  it  ;  that  the  head  valet  de  chambre
coming  out  of  the  king’s  bedroom  about  seven  o’clock,  had
been  amazed  ;  that  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  had  only  heard
of  it  through  him  ;  there  had  been  so  little  noise  made  in
putting  up  the  materials  that  no  one  had  discovered  any¬
thing.  After  examining  everything  carefully  with  my  eye,
I  advanced  to  the  throne,  which  they  were  just  finishing,
intending  to  go  into  the  second  antechamber  ;  but  attendants
came  after  me  and  said  I  could  not  pass  that  way  for  it  was
closed.  I  asked  where  we  were  to  gather  while  awaiting  the
meeting  of  the  Council,  and  where  those  persons  were  whose
carriages  I  had  seen  in  the  courtyard.  Several  attendants
offered  to  show  me  the  way  upstairs,  and  ushered  me  through
a  door  which  was  guarded,  but  was  opened  to  admit  me
when  I  appeared.  There  I  found  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  and

180

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vi

La  Yrillière,  with  all  their  array  of  papers  and  things.  We
were  very  glad  to  be  once  more  alone  together  for  a  last  con¬
sultation  before  the  operations.  But  it  was  not  what  I  had
proposed  to  myself.  I  had  seen  no  carriages  hut  those  of
dangerous  persons  in  the  courtyard  ;  under  pretence  of  being
ignorant  of  everything,  and  without  affectation  of  any  kind,
I  wanted  to  go  where  they  were,  to  upset  their  conference
and  learn  from  their  behaviour  all  that  I  could.  But  as  I
had  tumbled  by  chance  into  the  room  of  the  Keeper  of  the
Seals  I  thought  it  would  seem  a  forced  thing  to  ask  to  be
taken  elsewhere,  so  I  gave  up  my  first  intention.

The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  was  standing,  holding  a  crust
of  bread,  as  much  himself  as  if  it  were  only  a  matter  of  the
usual  Council,  —  without  perplexity  as  to  all

Tranquillity  of

the  Keeper  of  that  was  about  to  devolve  upon  him,  or  em-
■'  ''  ed  "  barrassment  at  having  to  speak  in  public  on

matters  so  unusual,  so  important,  and  so  susceptible  of  mis¬
carriage.  He  seemed  to  me  anxious  only  as  to  the  firmness
of  the  regent  ;  filled,  and  justly  so,  with  the  thought  that  this
was  no  time  to  weaken,  still  less  to  recede  one  inch.  I  re¬
assured  him  as  to  that,  far  more  than  I  could  reassure  myself.
I  asked  them  if  their  measures  were  taken  to  be  informed
from  moment  to  moment  of  what  was  going  on  in  parliament.
They  answered  yes,  and  they  were,  in  fact,  very  well  served.
I  then  wished,  not  to  read,  for  that  was  useless,  but  to  see
all  the  documents  to  be  enregistered.  They  showed  them
to  me  in  their  order.  I  wished  also  to  look  more  closely  at
the  one  relating  to  the  reduction  of  the  bastards  to  their
rank  of  seniority  in  the  peerage.  “Here,”  said  the  Keeper
of  the  Seals,  showing  it  to  me,  “  Here  is  your  affair.”  I  men¬
tion  this  because  it  was  told  afterwards  as  a  proof  that  I  was
in  the  secret;  it  was  apparently  overheard  by  some  listener
with  his  ear  at  the  door  ;  for  we  were  all  three  alone  with

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

181

the  door  closed.  I  wished  to  look  over  the  principal  clauses  ;
they  assured  me  nothing  had  been  changed,  and  I  saw  that
later  when  I  listened  to  the  reading  of  the  document.  I
had  the  same  curiosity  about  the  declaration  in  favour  of
the  Comte  de  Toulouse  with  the  same  answer  and  the  same
assurance.  Then  I  made  them  show  me  the  Seals  uncovered
in  their  velvet  bag  and  the  instruments  de  'précaution,  signed
and  sealed,  and  all  ready  in  case  of  need.  There  were
two  large  velvet  hags  filled  with  these  things  which  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  never  left  out  of  his  sight  and  which
were  carried  under  his  eyes  and  placed  at  his  feet,  both
at  the  Council  and  at  the  lit  de  justice,  because  the  Seals
were  in  them.  Not  a  soul  knew  of  all  this  hut  the  regent,
M.  le  Duc,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  La  Vrillière  [secretary
to  the  Council  of  Regency]  and  myself.  The  wax  heater
with  the  sealing  implements  was  in  the  adjoining  room,  with
water  and  fire  lighted,  all  ready  without  any  one  observing  it.
As  we  were  finishing  our  survey,  still  planning  for  what
might  happen,  they  came  to  tell  us  that  the  regent  was
coming.  We  finished  in  a  second  what  we

The  regent  ar-

rives  at  the  still  had  to  look  at  and  to  say,  and  while  he
was  taking  his  robe  from  the  lit  de  justice
so  as  not  to  have  to  change  it  after  the  Council,  I  went
down  in  order  not  to  appear  to  have  come  with  him  ;  and  I
made  La  Vrillière  wait  awhile  that  we  might  not  enter  the
Council-chamber  together.

Since  the  great  heat  had  begun,  the  Council  had  been
Reid  in  the  last  room  of  the  suite,  because  the  king,  being
uncomfortable  in  his  very  small  bedroom,  had  come  to  sleep
in  the  Council-chamber;  but,  on  this  great  day,  as  soon  as
the  king  was  out  of  bed  he  was  taken  to  be  dressed  in  his
little  room,  and  thence  into  his  cabinet.  The  bed-clothes
were  then  taken  from  his  bed  and  from  that  of  the  Maréchal

182

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

de  Villeroy,  at  the  feet  of  which  they  placed  the  table  for
the  Council,  which  was  there  held.  Entering  the  preceding
room  I  found  it  full  of  people  whom  the  first  rumour  of
these  unexpected  events  had  doubtless  brought  there,  among
them  some  of  the  Council.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  in  a
knot  of  persons  at  the  farther  end  of  the  room,  and,  as  I
heard  later,  had  just  left  the  king,  with  whom  he  had  found
the  Duc  du  Maine  in  mantle,  who  had  followed  him  to  the
door  when  he  left  the  room,  though  neither  of  them  said  a
word  to  the  other.

After  a  slight  glance  at  this  crowd  I  entered  the  Council-
chamber,  where  I  found  most  of  those  who  composed  the

Council  scattered  about  with  serious  looks  and
an  air  of  great  concentration  of  mind,  which
increased  my  own.  Almost  no  one  spoke  to

Appearance  of
the  Council-
chamber.

Iris  neighbour  ;  and  each,  standing  or  sitting  here  and  there,
remained  where  he  was.  I  joined  no  one,  in  order  to  ex¬
amine  all.  A  moment  later  the  Duc  d’Orléans  entered,  with
a  gay,  free  manner,  without  any  emotion,  looking  round
upon  the  assembly  with  a  smiling  air,  which  seemed  to  me
of  good  augury.  A  moment  later  I  asked  him  how  he  was.
He  answered  aloud  that  he  was  pretty  well,  and  then  he
added  in  my  ear  that,  except  for  being  waked  to  give  orders,
he  had  slept  well  and  had  now  come  determined  not  to  give
way.  This  pleased  me  infinitely,  for  it  seemed  to  me,  from
his  whole  hearing,  that  he  told  the  truth,  and  I  exhorted
him  in  two  words  to  keep  to  it.

Next  came  M.  le  Duc,  who  was  not  long  in  coming  up
to  me  to  ask  if  I  augured  well  of  the  regent  and  whether
he  held  firm.  The  prince  had  an  air  of  high-strung  gayety
which  made  itself  felt  by  those  who  were  in  the  secret.
The  Prince  de  Conti,  morose,  absent-minded,  jealous  of  his
brother-in-law,  seemed  preoccupied,  but  about  nothing.  The

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  183

Duc  de  Noailles  devoured  all  with  his  eyes,  which  sparkled
with  anger  at  seeing  himself  left  out  on  so  great  a  day  —
for  he  knew  absolutely  nothing.  I  had  earnestly  requested
this  of  M.  le  Duc,  thinking  their  intimacy  greater  than  I
found  it  to  he.  He  regarded  him  with  distrust,  without
esteem,  still  less  friendship,  —  independently  of  what  he
now  had  to  fear  from  him  in  connection  with  the  Due
du  Maine.

The  latter  appeared  in  mantle,  entering  by  the  little  door
from  the  king’s  room.  Never  did  he  make  so  many,  nor
Entrance  of  the  such  profound  bows,  of  which  at  no  time  was
Duc  du  Maine.  pe  stingy.  He  stood  alone,  leaning  on  his  stick,
near  to  the  Council  table  on  the  side  of  the  beds,  observ¬
ing  every  one.  It  was  there,  directly  opposite  to  him,  the
table  between  us,  that  I  made  him  the  most  smiling  bow
I  ever  made  him  in  my  life,  and  with  the  most  deep-felt  de¬
light.  He  returned  it  in  kind,  and  continued  to  watch  every
one,  with  eyes  that  were  almost  staring,  and  an  agitated
face,  talking  the  while  to  himself  almost  continually.

No  one  seemed  to  ask  himself  what  all  this  might  mean;
each  member  of  the  Council  knew  of  the  resolution  to  break
the  edicts  of  the  parliament,  having  been  present  at  that
deliberation.  The  present  Council  was  the  special  Council
then  appointed,  afterwards  postponed,  to  receive  the  judg¬
ment  of  the  committee  on  annulling  the  edicts.  It  seemed
clear  to  all  that  this  was  now  to  be  done  and  the  decree
enregistered  at  once  ;  not  perhaps  without  some  vexation  at
the  surprise  of  a  lit  de  justice,  especially  among  those  who
thought  themselves  the  privileged  confidants  of  the  regent.
M.  le  Duc  came  to  me  again  to  express  his  regret  at  seeing
the  Duc  du  Maine  in  mantle,  and  to  urge  me  to  strengthen
the  regent.  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  came  to  me  for  the
same  purpose.  A  moment  later  the  regent  himself  came  up,

184  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vl

much  annoyed  at  the  mantle,  but  not  showing  any  weak¬
ness.  I  told  him  that  he  might  have  expected  it,  and  to
show  any  softening  now  would  be  his  ruin,  for  the  Rubicon
was  passed.  I  added  what  I  could  that  was  strong  and  con¬
cise  to  sustain  him,  and  not  seem  too  long  in  conference  with
him.  As  soon  as  he  left  me  M.  le  Duc,  uneasy  and  im¬
patient,  came  to  inquire  in  what  disposition  of  mind  I  found
him.  I  answered,  “  Good,”  in  a  monosyllable,  and  sent  him
to  talk  with  him.

I  do  not  know  if  these  movements,  on  which  all  present
began  to  fix  their  eyes,  alarmed  the  Duc  du  Maine,  but  no
sooner  had  M.  le  Duc  left  me  than  the  Duc  du  Maine  went
to  speak  to  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  and  to  d’Effiat,  who
were  seated  next  to  each  other  near  the  little  door  to  the
king’s  room,  with  their  backs  to  the  wall.  They  did  not
rise  for  the  Duc  du  Maine,  who  stood  opposite  and  very
close  to  them,  while  they  all  three  conferred  in  a  low  tone
for  some  time,  like  men  who  were  deliberating  with  em¬
barrassment  and  surprise  ;  so  it  seemed  to  me  from  the  faces
of  the  two  who  were  seated,  which  I  tried  not  to  lose  from
sight.  During  this  time  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  M.  le  Duc
were  talking  together  at  the  window  near  the  entrance,  where
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  who  was  rather  near  to  them,  joined
them.  M.  le  Duc  at  one  moment  turned  slightly,  which
enabled  me  to  make  him  a  sign  to  look  at  the  other  con¬
ference,  which  he  saw  instantly.  I  was  alone,  near  the
table,  very  observant  of  everything,  and  the  others,  scattered
about,  were  beginning  to  be  so.  Soon  after,  the  Duc  du
Maine  came  back  to  the  place  he  had  quitted,  the  other
two  remaining  where  they  were.  M.  du  Maine  was  there¬
fore  again  opposite  to  me,  the  table  between  us.  I  observed
his  distracted  air,  and  that  he  talked  to  himself  even  more
than  before.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

185

The  Comte  de  Toulouse  arrived  in  mantle  and  bowed  to
the  company  with  a  grave  and  concentrated  manner  ;  he
was  neither  approached  by  nor  approaching

Entrance  of  rr  j  rr

the  Comte  de  any  one.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  opposite  to
him  and  turned  to  me,  although  at  some  dis¬
tance,  to  show  me  his  regret.  I  lowered  my  head  and  looked
at  him  fixedly  as  if  to  say,  “  Well,  what  of  it  ?  ”  He  then
advanced  to  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  and  said  aloud,  in  the
hearing  of  those  who  were  nearest,  that  he  was  surprised  to
see  him  in  mantle  ;  that  he  had  not  had  him  notified  of  the
lit  de  justice  because  he  knew  that  since  the  last  decision
against  them  he  had  not  liked  to  attend  the  parliament.
The  Comte  de  Toulouse  replied  that  that  was  true  ;  but  when
the  good  of  the  State  was  concerned  he  put  all  such  con¬
siderations  aside.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  turned  round  instantly
without  replying,  and  came  to  me,  and  said  in  a  low  voice,
pushing  me  farther  away  :  “  That  man  cuts  me  to  the  heart.
Do  you  know  what  he  said  to  me?”  —  and  he  repeated  it.
I  praised  the  act  of  the  one  and  the  feeling  of  the  other  ;  and
reminded  the  regent  that  the  Comte’s  reinstatement  being
certain,  and  at  the  same  session,  he  need  not  feel  troubled
about  him,  and  I  gently  set  to  work  to  comfort  him.  He
interrupted  me  to  say  that  he  had  a  great  desire  to  tell  him
all.  I  represented  that  that  would  be  a  very  delicate  thing
to  do,  and  before  resolving  upon  it  it  was  better  to  wait  for
emergencies.  I  turned,  immediately,  to  bring  him  among
the  others,  so  as  to  shorten  this  private  colloquy,  which  I
feared  might  be  remarked.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse  noticed
us,  and  remained  where  he  was;  and  others  saw  us,  too,
standing  apart.

The  Duc  du  Maine  had  returned  to  the  Maréchal  de
Villeroy  and  d’Effiat,  the  two  still  seated,  and  he  in  front  of
them,  as  before.  I  saw  that  the  little  conclave  was  greatly

186

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vl

excited.  It  lasted  some  time,  during  which  M.  le  Duc  came
to  speak  to  me  and  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  joined  us,  both
uneasy  at  the  effect  produced  by  the  entrance

Colloquies  of  the  J  r  j

Duc  du  Maine  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  and  the  regent’s
private  talk  with  me.  I  told  them  what  had
occurred,  and  got  away  from  them  as  fast  as  possible.  What
hastened  me  the  more  was  that  I  perceived  that  the  Due
de  Noailles  never  took  his  eyes  off  me,  and  followed  by  sight
every  movement  that  I  made,  even  changing  his  place  or
posture  to  see  me  better.  The  Duc  de  La  Force  tried  to
join  me,  but  I  evaded  him;  then  La  Vrillière,  to  whom  I
said  a  word  and  sent  him  to  tell  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals
to  fortify  the  regent.  The  Duc  du  Maine  now  quitted  his
two  men  and  made  a  sign  to  his  brother  to  come  and  speak
to  him  at  the  foot  of  Maréchal  de  Villeroy’s  bed,  where
he  posted  himself.  He  spoke  briefly,  with  agitation  ;  the
other  replied  in  the  same  way,  apparently  not  agreeing.
The  Duc  du  Maine  spoke  again;  then  the  Comte  de  Tou¬
louse  passed  between  the  foot  of  the  two  beds  and  the  table
to  the  fireplace,  where  the  Duc  d’Orléans  stood  with  M.  le
Duc,  and  stopped  at  a  little  distance,  like  a  man  who  is
waiting  to  speak.  The  Duc  d’Orléans,  as  soon  as  he  per¬
ceived  him,  left  M.  le  Duc  and  went  to  the  Comte  de  Tou¬
louse.  They  turned  their  noses  to  the  wall,  and  this  lasted
some  time  without  any  one  being  able  to  judge,  because
nothing  was  seen  but  their  hacks,  and  there  seemed  no
emotion  and  scarcely  any  gesture.

The  Duc  du  Maine  still  stood  where  he  had  spoken  to
his  brother.  His  face  looked  half-dead  ;  he  glanced  fur¬
tively  at  the  colloquy  to  which  he  had  sent  his  brother  ;
then  he  passed  his  haggard  eyes  over  the  company  with  the
anxiety  of  a  guilty  man  and  the  agitation  of  a  condemned
one.  At  that  moment  the  Maréchal  d’Huxelles  called  me.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

187

He  was  opposite  the  Duc  du  Maine,  the  table  between
them,  but  his  back  was  towards  it,  consequently  towards
the  Duc  du  Maine.  The  maréchal  was  in  a  group  with
the  Maréchaux  de  Tallard  and  d’Estrées  and  the  former
Bishop  of  Troyes.  The  Duc  de  Noailles  joined  this  group
at  the  same  time  that  I  did.  Huxelles  asked  me  what
all  these  comings  and  goings  meant,  and  on  my  replying
by  asking  him  the  same  question,  he  inquired  if  there
would  be  any  difficulty  at  the  lit  de  justice  about  these
princes  or  the  children  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.  I  replied
that  with  regard  to  MM.  du  Maine  and  de  Toulouse  there
could  be  none,  because  the  judgment  given  between  the
princes  of  the  blood  and  themselves  left  them  in  the  en¬
joyment  of  their  honours  ;  but  that  as  for  the  children  of
the  Duc  du  Maine,  the  peers  would  certainly  not  allow  it.

We  remained  for  some  little  time  thus  grouped,  —  I  oc¬
cupied  in  looking  at  M.  du  Maine,  and  turning  sometimes
colloquy  of  the  to  look  at  the  colloquy  between  the  regent
Comte  de**1  the  an(l  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  which  still  went
Toulouse.  on.  They  separated  at  last,  and  I  had  time

to  observe  the  two  brothers  well,  because  the  Comte  de
Toulouse  came  past  us  along  the  foot  of  the  beds,  on  the
other  side  of  the  table,  to  his  brother  who  still  stood  alone,
leaning  on  his  stick,  at  the  foot  of  Maréchal  de  Ville-
roy’s  bed.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse  had  a  pained,  even  an
angry  air.  The  Duc  du  Maine,  seeing  him  come  to  him
in  that  way,  changed  colour.

I  was  standing  there,  very  attentive,  watching  them  meet
(the  Duc  du  Maine  not  stirring  from  his  place),  in  order  to
penetrate  their  conversation  with  my  eyes,  when  I  heard
myself  called.  It  was  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who,  after  making
a  few  steps  alone  past  the  fireplace,  wanted  to  speak  to  me.
I  joined  him  and  found  him  in  trouble  of  heart.  “  I  have

188

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  yl

just  told  him  all,”  he  said,  instantly  ;  “  I  could  not  keep  it
back.  That  is  the  most  honourable  man  in  the  world,  and
it  wrings  my  heart.”  “ How,  monsieur  ?”  I  asked  ;  “  what
have  you  said  to  him  ?  ”  “  He  came  to  me  from  his  brother,

who  had  spoken  to  him,  to  tell  me  of  the  embarrassment
in  which  he  found  himself  ;  he  said  he  felt  that  something
was  prepared  against  him;  that  he  saw  that  he  was  not
standing  well  with  me,  and  he  had  requested  his  brother
to  ask  me  if  I  wished  him  to  remain,  or  if  he  should  not
do  better  to  retire.  I  own  to  you  that  I  thought  I  did  best
to  reply  that  he  would  do  well  to  retire,  inasmuch  as  he
asked  me.  Thereupon,  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  wanted  to
enter  upon  explanations  ;  but  I  cut  him  short,  and  told  him
that,  for  himself,  he  might  rest  in  peace,  because  he  would
remain  what  he  was  without  any  alteration  ;  but  that  pain¬
ful  things  might  occur  for  M.  du  Maine,  which  he  would
do  well  not  to  witness.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse  asked  me
how  it  was  possible  for  him  to  remain  as  he  was  when  his
brother  was  attacked  ;  adding  that  they  were  one,  because
they  were  brothers  and  from  honour.  I  answered  that  I
was  very  sorry  for  that;  all  I  could  do  was  to  recognize
merit  and  virtue  and  keep  them  separate  ;  then,  after  a  few
friendly  remarks  which  he  received  coldly,  he  returned  to
his  brother.  Do  you  think  I  did  wrong?”  “  Ho,”  I  said,
for  it  was  no  longer  a  question  to  discuss,  and  still  less  did
I  want  to  dishearten  a  man  we  were  trying  to  strengthen.
“  I  am  very  glad  of  it,”  I  added.  “  It  was  speaking  plainly,
as  a  man  who  has  all  his  measures  taken  and  fears  nothing.

O

Therefore,  monsieur,  you  must  show  the  more  firmness
after  taking  that  engagement.”  He  seemed  very  resolute,
but  at  the  same  time  most  desirous  that  the  bastards  should
go  away,  which  was  (as  I  thought  I  saw)  the  true  motive
for  what  he  had  just  done.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

189

The  Duc  du  Maine,  pale  and  deathlike,  seemed  to  me  about
to  he  taken  ill  ;  he  moved  with  difficulty  to  the  lower  end
of  the  table,  which  was  near  him,  while  the
Comte  de  Toulouse  came  round  to  say  a  word

The  bastards
retire  from  the
Council  chamber.

to  the  regent  and  then  walked  the  length  of

the  cabinet.  All  these  movements  were  made  in  the  twink¬
ling  of  an  eye.  The  regent,  who  stood  close  to  the  king’s
armchair,  said  aloud,  “  Come,  messieurs,  let  us  take  oui-
places.”  Every  man  approached  his  own,  and  as  I  stood
behind  mine  I  saw  the  two  brothers  close  to  the  door  of
entry  as  if  they  were  going  away.  I  sprang,  so  to  speak,
between  the  king’s  armchair  and  the  regent  to  prevent  the
Prince  de  Conti  from  overhearing  me,  and  I  said,  with
emotion,  in  the  regent’s  ear,  “  Monsieur,  they  are  going  !  ”
“  I  know  it,”  he  said  tranquilly.  “  But,”  I  replied  excitedly,
“  do  you  know  what  they  will  do  when  they  are  once  out¬
side  ?”  “  Nothing  at  all,”  he  said;  “the  Comte  de  Toulouse

came  to  ask  my  permission  for  his  brother  and  himself  to
leave.  He  assured  me  they  would  act  properly.”  “But
suppose  they  do  not  ?  ”  I  urged.  “  But  they  will,  and  if
not,  sure  orders  are  given  to  watch  them.”  “  But  suppose
they  commit  some  folly  or  leave  Paris  ?  ”  “  They  will  he

arrested  ;  there  are  sure  orders,  I  assure  you.”  Thereupon,
feeling  more  tranquil,  I  took  my  seat.  I  was  hardly  in  it
before  he  recalled  me  and  said  that,  as  the  brothers  had
gone  away,  he  was  changing  his  mind  and  now  thought
he  had  better  tell  all  that  concerned  them  to  the  Council.
I  replied  that  as  the  sole  obstacle  to  this  was  removed  by
their  departure,  I  thought  it  would  he  a  great  mistake  not
to  tell  it  to  the  Council.  He  communicated  this  intention
to  M.  le  Duc  in  a  low  voice  across  the  table  and  the  king’s
armchair,  then  he  called  up  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  and
they  both  approved,  after  which  we  all  took  our  places.

190

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

All  these  movements  had  increased  the  trouble  and
curiosity  of  every  one.  The  eyes  of  all,  occupied  with  the
The  council  regent,  were  turned  away  from  the  door  of

take  their  seats,  entry,  so  that  most  persons  did  not  see  the

departure  of  the  bastards.  As  each  person  noticed  that
they  were  not  in  their  places  he  looked  round  in  search
of  them,  and  waited  for  them,  standing.  I  put  myself  in
the  seat  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  The  Duc  de  Guiche,
who  sat  on  the  other  side  of  me,  left  a  vacant  space  be¬
tween  us,  with  his  nose  in  the  air,  still  awaiting  the
bastards.  He  told  me  to  move  next  to  him,  and  said  I
had  mistaken  my  seat.  I  made  no  answer,  and  watched
the  assembly,  for  it  was  truly  a  spectacle.  At  the  second
or  third  summons,  I  answered  that,  on  the  contrary,  he
ought  to  come  to  me.  “  But  M.  le  Comte  de  Toulouse  ?  ”
he  persisted.  “  Come  here,”  I  said,  seeing  him  lost  in  aston¬
ishment  and  looking  for  the  Duc  du  Maine,  whose  seat  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  had  now  taken.  I  pulled  him  by  his
coat,  I  being  seated,  saying  to  him,  “  Come  here  and  sit
down.”  I  pulled  him  so  hard  that  he  sat  down  next  to
me,  comprehending  nothing.  “  But  what  is  all  this  ?  ”  he
said  to  me,  as  soon  as  he  was  seated;  “where  are  those
messieurs  ?  ”  “  I  don’t  know,”  I  said  impatiently,  “  but
they  are  not  here.”  Meantime  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  who
sat  next  the  Duc  de  Guiche,  furious  at  being  no  one  in  the
grand  preparation  of  the  day,  had  apparently  comprehended,
by  dint  of  gazing  at  me  and  examining  me,  that  I  was  in
the  game,  and,  vanquished  by  curiosity,  he  leaned  over  the
table  in  front  of  the  Duc  de  Guiche  and  said  to  me  :  “  In
God’s  name,  monsieur,  do  me  the  favour  to  tell  me  what
all  this  means  !  ”  I  was  not  on  any  terms  with  him,  as
I  have  often  shown,  but  was  much  accustomed  to  treat
him  very  badly.  I  therefore  looked  at  him  with  a  cold,

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  191

disdainful  air,  and  after  having  heard  him,  and  looked  at
him,  I  turned  away  my  head.  That  was  my  only  answer.
The  Duc  de  Guiche  pressed  me  to  tell  him  something;
he  even  said  that  I  knew  all.  I  denied  it  steadily.  Every
one  present  took  his  seat  very  slowly,  because  each  was
so  occupied  in  looking  and  divining  what  all  this  could
mean,  and  was  long  in  comprehending  that  we  were  ex¬
pected  to  take  our  places  without  the  bastards,  though  no
one  opened  his  lips  upon  the  subject.

But  before  entering  on  what  passed  at  the  Council,  it
is  best  to  give  a  sketch  of  the  session  of  that  day  and  the
Tableau  of  the  arrangement  of  the  room  in  which  it  was
council.  held,  to  make  what  I  have  already  related

more  intelligible,  and  to  throw  a  better  light  on  what
follows.

Fireplace.

Table.

Entrance  door.

W

King’s

chair.

P

0^

CD*

His  Royal  Highness,

M.  le  Duc,

CD

Pi

The  Prince  de  Conti,

Keeper  of  the  Seals,

Duc  de  Saint-Simon,

Duc  de  La  Force,

O

Duc  de  Guiche,

Maréchal  de  Villeroy,

O

Ê

Duc  de  Noailles,

“  de  Villars,

3

O

Due  d’Antin,

“  de  Tallard,

CD*

Maréchal  d’Huxelles,

“  d’Estrées,

o'

cc>

P-

Évêque  de  Troyes,

“  de  Besons,

Marquis  de  la  Vrilliere,

M.  le  Pelletier-Sousy,

Marquis  d’Effiat.

Marquis  de  Torcy.

I

I  should  remark,  as  to  these  sessions,  that  the  Maréchal
d’Huxelles  always  sat  on  the  right,  to  read  the  despatches
with  light  from  the  window,  and  the  Bishop  of  Troyes

192  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

always  sat  next  him  to  help  him  with  his  reading.  On
this  occasion,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  had,  on  the  ground
at  his  feet,  the  black  velvet  bag  in  which  were  the  Seals,
with  the  instruments  de  précaution,  signed  and  sealed  ;  the
other  hag  was  before  him  on  the  table,  where  he  had
arranged  all  the  documents  he  was  to  read  to  the  Council,
in  the  order  in  which  each  was  to  be  read,  and  those  that
were  also  to  be  enregistered  ;  all  these  papers  and  docu¬
ments  were  also  to  be  read  at  the  lit  de  justice.  The  king,
meantime,  was  in  his  cabinet,  and  did  not  appear  at  all  in
the  room  where  the  Council  was  held.

VIL

When  all  present  were  seated,  and  tlie  regent  had  ob¬
served  for  a  moment  the  whole  assembly,  whose  eyes  were
speech  of  the  fixed  upon  him,  he  said  that  he  had  called
regent-  together  this  Council  of  Eegency  to  listen

to  the  reading  of  what  had  been  resolved  upon  at  the  last
session.  lie  thought  there  was  no  way  to  enregister  the
edict  of  the  Council  which  they  were  about  to  hear,  except
that  of  a  lit  de  justice;  and  as  the  great  heat  did  not
permit  of  risking  the  health  of  the  king  in  a  crowd  at  the
Palace  of  the  parliament,  he  had  thought  best  to  follow
the  example  of  the  late  king,  who  had  sometimes  made
his  parliament  come  to  the  Tuileries.  Also,  inasmuch  as
it  was  necessary  to  hold  this  lit  de  justice,  he  judged  it
advisable  to  profit  by  the  occasion  to  cause  to  be  enreg-
istered  the  lettres  de  provision  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,
and  to  begin  the  session  by  so  doing;  and  he  ordered  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  to  read  them.

During  this  reading,  which  had  no  other  importance
than  that  of  seizing  an  occasion  to  force  parliament  to
Tableau  of  the  recognize  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  whose
Council.  person  and  commission  it  hated,  I  busied

myself  in  studying  the  faces  of  those  present.  I  saw  in
the  Duc  d’Orléans  an  air  of  authority  and  attention,  which
was  so  new  to  me  that  I  was  struck  by  it.  M.  le  Due,
gay  and  brilliant,  seemed  to  have  no  misgivings.  The
Prince  de  Conti,  dazed,  absorbed  and  self-contained,  seemed
to  see  nothing  and  to  take  no  part  in  anything.  The

VOL.  iv.  — 13

194  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap  vii.

Keeper  of  the  Seals,  grave  and  thoughtful,  appeared  to
have  too  many  things  in  his  head  ;  and,  indeed,  he  had
much  to  do  for  a  first  essay.  Nevertheless,  he  displayed
himself,  with  his  bag,  as  a  very  firm,  very  decided,  and
very  clear-headed  man.  The  Duc  de  La  Force,  with  furtive
eyes,  examined  everybody.  The  Maréchaux  de  Villeroy
and  de  Yillars  spoke  to  each  other  now  and  then  ;  both
had  irritated  eyes  and  crestfallen  faces.  No  one  com¬
posed  himself  better  than  Maréchal  de  Tallard,  but  even  he
could  not  stifle  an  inward  excitement  which  frequently
gleamed  externally.  Maréchal  d’Estrées  looked  stupefied,
and  as  if  he  saw  a  gulf  before  him.  Maréchal  de  Besons,
enveloped  more  than  usual  in  a  monstrous  wig,  seemed  to
be  nursing  his  wrath  with  an  angry  eye.  Pelletier,  his
manner  easy  and  simply  curious,  looked  about  him  at
everything.  Torcy,  thrice  as  stiff  as  usual,  seemed  consid¬
ering  all  things  stealthily.  D’Effiat,  fiery,  nettled,  incensed,
ready  to  fly  at  any  one,  frowned  at  everybody,  with  hag¬
gard  eyes,  which  he  cast  precipitately  and  by  dashes  on  all
sides.  Those  on  my  own  side  I  could  not  well  examine  ;
I  only  saw  them  at  moments,  through  changes  of  posture
of  one  or  another;  and  if  curiosity  made  me  advance  my
head  over  the  table  and  turn  it,  to  give  a  glance  at  them
obliquely,  it  was  rarely  and  very  briefly.  I  have  already
spoken  of  the  astonishment  of  the  Duc  de  Guiche,  and  the
curiosity  and  vexation  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles.  D’Antin,
always  so  free  in  his  bearing,  seemed  to  me  awkward,  em¬
barrassed,  almost  terrified.  Maréchal  d’Huxelles  tried  to
look  at  his  ease,  but  failed  to  cover  the  despair  that  stung
him.  Old  Troyes,  quite  bewildered,  showed  nothing  but
surprise,  embarrassment,  and  not  knowing  properly  where
he  was.

From  the  moment  of  this  first  reading,  coupled  with  the

1718]  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

195

departure  of  the  Duc  du  Maine  and  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,
every  one  saw,  after  what  had  passed  in  the  Council  chamber
before  the  sitting  began,  that  something  was  preparing  against
the  bastards.  The  more  or  the  less  of  that  something  and
its  nature  held  the  minds  of  all  present  in  suspense,  and
this,  joined  to  a  lit  de  justice  no  sooner  announced  than
ready  to  be  carried  out,  showed  a  great  resolution  taken
against  parliament,  and  also  revealed  such  firmness  and
decision  in  a  prince  considered  to  be  incapable  of  either
that  the  ground  fell  away  from  the  feet  of  the  cabal.  Each,
according  to  his  bias  for  the  bastards  or  for  parliament,
seemed  expectant  with  terror  of  what  was  to  happen.  Others
appeared  deeply  wounded  at  having  no  part  in  the  affair  and
being  left  to  the  general  surprise,  as  if  the  regent  were  escap¬
ing  them.  Ko  faces  were  ever  so  elongated,  no  perplexity
more  general  or  more  marked.  In  this  first  trouble  of
mind  I  think  that  few  gave  ear  to  the  letters  which  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  was  reading.  When  that  was  over,
the  Duc  d’Orléans  said  that  he  thought  it  was  not  worth
while  to  take  the  votes  one  by  one,  either  on  the  contents
of  those  documents  or  their  registration  ;  and  he  likewise
thought  that  all  would  agree  to  begin  the  session  of  the  lit
de  justice  in  the  same  way.

After  a  short,  though  marked  pause,  the  regent  stated  in
few  words  the  reason  that  had  led  the  last  Council  of  Tfe-
speechesofthe  gency  to  decide  upon  annulling  the  decrees  of
regent  and  the  parliament  which  had  been  read  before  it,  and

Keeper  of  r

the  seals.  to  do  this  by  an  edict  of  the  Council  itself.

He  said  that  under  the  present  behaviour  of  parliament,  to
send  that  edict  to  be  registered  by  parliament  would  only
compromise  anew  the  king’s  authority  ;  for  that  body  would
make  public  its  formal  disobedience  by  refusing  to  enregister
it  ;  that,  as  there  was  no  other  way  than  a  lit  de  justice

196

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chxp.  vu.

to  obtain  the  registration,  he  had  thought  it  wise  to  keep  the
summons  secret  to  the  last  moment,  in  order  to  give  no
opening  for  cabals  and  no  time  for  evil-intentioned  persons
to  prepare  for  disobedience  ;  that  he  thought,  together  with
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  that  the  frequency  and  the  manner
of  the  remonstrances  of  parliament  required  that  that  As¬
sembly  should  be  brought  back  within  the  limits  of  its  duty,
which,  for  some  time  past,  it  had  lost  sight  of  ;  that  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  would  now  read  to  the  Council  an  edict
which  contained  the  annulment  of  the  decrees,  and  the  rules
to  be  observed  by  parliament  in  future.  Then,  looking  at
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  “  Monsieur,”  he  said,  “  you  can
explain  this  better  than  I  to  these  gentlemen  ;  have  the
goodness  to  do  so  before  reading  the  edict.”

The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  then  spoke,  paraphrasing  what
his  Koyal  Highness  had  said  more  briefly  ;  he  explained
what  was  the  usage  of  parliamentary  remonstrance  ;  whence
it  came,  its  utility,  its  inconveniences,  its  limits,  the  abuse
that  had  been  made  of  it,  the  distinction  of  the  royal  au¬
thority  from  the  authority  of  parliament  emanating  from
the  king,  the  incompetence  of  the  tribunals  in  matters  of
State  and  finance,  and  the  necessity  of  counteracting  their
assumption  of  power  by  some  sort  of  code  (that  was  the
term  he  used),  which  should  be  in  future  the  invariable  rule
for  the  form  and  substance  of  the  said  remonstrance.  All
that  explained,  without  prolixity  and  with  precision  and
grace,  he  read  the  edict  as  it  is  printed  and  in  everybody’s
hands,  with  a  few  trifling  exceptions,  but  so  slight  that  they
escape  my  mind.

The  reading  over,  the  regent,  against  his  custom,  showed
his  own  opinion  by  the  praises  he  gave  to  the  document.
_  .  .  .  Then,  taking  an  air  and  tone  of  rearent  which

Opinions  given.  °  °

no  one  had  ever  yet  seen  in  him,  and  which

✓

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  197

completed  the  amazement  of  the  company,  he  added  :  “  For
to-day,  messieurs,  I  shall  depart  from  the  usual  method  of
taking  the  votes,  and  I  think  it  will  be  well  that  I  should
do  so  throughout  this  Council.”  Then,  after  a  slight  glance
down  each  side  of  the  table,  during  which  you  might  have
heard  a  worm  creep,  he  turned  to  M.  le  Duc  and  asked  his
opinion.  M.  le  Duc  gave  it  for  the  edict,  adducing  a  few
short  but  strong  reasons.  The  Prince  de  Conti  answered  in
the  same  direction  ;  I  next,  for  the  opinion  of  the  Keeper  of
the  Seals  was  given  on  reading  the  document.  I  gave  the
same,  more  generally  (though  quite  as  strongly),  in  order  not
to  fall  uselessly  on  parliament,  and  also  not  to  arrogate  to
myself  to  support  his  Royal  Highness  in  the  manner  of  the
princes  of  the  blood.  Every  one  spoke,  most  of  them  very
little  ;  some,  such  as  the  Maréchaux  de  Villeroy,  Villars,
Estrées,  Besons,  M.  de  Troyes,  and  d’Effiat  showed  their  sor¬
row  at  not  daring  to  resist  the  resolution  taken,  which  it
was  clear  they  had  no  hope  of  modifying.  Dejection  was
painted  on  all  their  faces  ;  and  he  could  see  who  chose  that
the  blow  to  parliament  was  neither  what  they  desired  nor
what  they  had  expected  to  happen.  Tallard  was  the  only
one  of  them  in  which  this  did  not  show  ;  but  the  choking
monosyllable  of  Maréchal  d’Huxelles  made  the  last  vestige
of  his  mask  disappear.  The  Duc  de  Noailles  controlled
himself  with  such  difficulty  that  he  said  more  than  he  meant
to  say.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  spoke  last,  but  with  very  unusual
force;  after  which  he  made  another  pause,  and  passed  his
eyes  slowly  over  the  whole  Council.

At  this  moment  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  full  of  his  own
thoughts,  said  between  his  teeth,  “  But  will  they  come  ?  ”
The  regent  gently  took  up  the  remark,  and  said  that  the
parliament  had  assured  Des  Granges  they  would  do  so;
remarking  that  he  did  not  doubt  they  would  obey  ;  adding

198  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tii.

immediately  that  notice  must  be  given  to  him  when  parlia¬
ment  had  begun  their  march.  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals
replied  that  this  would  be  done.  The  regent  went  on  to  say
that  it  would  be  better  to  give  an  order  at  the  door,  and  in¬
stantly  there  was  M.  de  Troyes  upon  his  feet.  Fear  seized
me  that  he  would  go  and  gabble  at  the  door,  and  I  ran  to
it  quicker  than  he.  As  I  returned,  d’Antin,  who  had  turned
to  catch  me  on  my  way  back,  begged  me  in  mercy  to  tell
him  what  all  this  meant.  I  slipped  past,  saying  that  I  knew
nothing  about  it.  “  Pooh  !  ”  he  said,  “  tell  that  to  others.”
As  I  sat  down,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  said  something,  I  don’t
know  what,  and  again  M.  de  Troyes  was  in  the  air,  and
I  too,  as  before.  Passing  La  Yrillière,  I  whispered  to  him
to  seize  upon  all  errands  to  the  door,  for  fear  of  M.  de
Troyes’  chatter,  or  that  of  others,  because,  from  the  distance
I  was  from  the  door,  my  going  was  too  marked.  This
proved  to  be  essential,  and  La  Vrillière  did  it  well.  As  I
returned  to  my  place,  d’Antin,  again  in  ambush,  implored
me  in  God’s  name  ;  but  I  held  firm,  and  said  to  him,  “  You
will  see.”  The  Duc  de  Guiche  also  pressed  me  uselessly,
even  to  saying  that  he  knew  I  was  in  the  bottle  ;  to  which
I  turned  a  deaf  ear.

These  little  movements  over,  the  Duc  d’Orléans  sat  up
erect  by  half  a  foot  on  his  seat,  and  said  to  the  assembly,
speech  of  the  in  a  tone  that  was  still  more  firm  and  more
masterful  than  before,  that  he  had  another
affair  to  propose,  more  important  than  the
one  they  had  just  listened  to.  This  prelude  revived  the
astonishment  on  all  faces,  and  made  all  hearers  motionless.
After  a  moment’s  silence,  the  regent  said  that  when  he  had
decided  the  suit  which  had  lately  arisen  between  tbe  princes
of  the  blood  and  the  legitimatized  —  légitimés  (that  was  the
term  he  used,  without  adding  the  word  “  princes  ”)  —  he

regent  on  the
reduction  of
the  bastards.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  199

had  reasons  for  not  going  farther;  but  he  was  none  the
less  bound  to  do  justice  to  the  peers  of  France,  who  had
demanded  more  at  that  time  of  the  king,  in  a  petition  of
their  whole  body  which  his  Majesty  had  received  and  which
he  himself,  the  regent,  had  communicated  to  the  légitimés  :
that  this  justice  due  to  so  illustrious  a  body,  composed
of  the  grandees  of  the  kingdom,  the  first  seigneurs  of  the
State,  all  persons  most  highly  endowed,  most  of  whom  were
distinguished  for  services  they  had  rendered  to  the  king,
could  no  longer  be  delayed:  that  at  the  time  their  petition
was  made  he  thought  it  best  for  certain  reasons  not  to  take
action  upon  it  ;  he  therefore  felt  it  the  more  urgent  not  to
defer  an  act  of  justice  which  ought  no  longer  to  be  held  in
abeyance,  and  which  the  peers  desired  above  everything  else  ;
that  it  was  with  pain  that  he  saw  persons  —  gens  (that  was
the  word  he  used)  —  who  were  so  nearly  related  to  him,
raised  to  a  rank  of  which  they  were  the  first  examples  ;  a
rank  continually  being  magnified  in  defiance  of  all  laws  :
that  he  could  not  close  his  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  favour
of  certain  princes,  and  this  quite  recently,  had  inverted  the
order  of  the  rank  of  the  peerage  :  that  such  detriment  done  to
that  dignity  had  never  lasted  longer  than  the  authority  which
had  forced  the  laws,  —  as  in  the  cases  of  the  Ducs  de  J oyeuse
and  d’Épernon  and  the  MM.  de  Vendôme,  who  had  been
reduced  to  their  seniority  of  rank  in  the  peerage  on  the
deaths  of  Henri  III.  and  Henri  IV.  :  that  equity,  good  order,
the  just  cause  of  so  many  persons  of  the  first  dignity  and
consideration  in  the  State  did  not  allow  him  any  further
denial  of  justice  :  that  the  legitimes  had  had  ample  time
to  reply,  but  they  had  failed  to  allege  any  valid  reason
against  the  force  of  the  laws  and  past  examples  :  that  the
question  now  was  simply  to  do  justice  on  a  petition  existing
and  pending,  of  which  it  could  not  be  alleged  that  any  one

200  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

was  uninformed  :  and  in  order  to  pronounce  that  judgment
he  had  caused  to  be  drawn  up  the  declaration  that  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  would  now  read  to  them,  in  order  that
it  might  he  enregistered  at  the  lit  de  justice  which  the
kins  was  about  to  hold.

A  deep  silence  followed  a  speech  so  little  expected,  and
which  began  to  unfold  the  enigma  of  the  departure  of  the
Effect  of  the  bastards.  A  sombre  brown  overspread  the
regent’s  speech.  faces  0f  many  present.  Anger  sparkled  on

those  of  the  Maréchaux  de  Villars,  de  Besons,  d’Effiat,  and
even  d’Estrées.  Tallard  became  stupid  for  several  moments  ;
the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  lost  countenance.  I  could  not
see  d’Huxelles,  which  I  regretted  much,  nor  the  Duc  de
Noailles  except  obliquely,  now  and  then.  I  had  my  own
face  to  compose,  for  the  eyes  of  all  were  turned  to  me  suc¬
cessively.  Upon  it  I  had  laid  a  veneer  of  additional  gravity
and  modesty.  I  ruled  my  eyes  to  slowness,  and  only  looked
out  horizontally  at  a  level.  As  soon  as  the  regent  opened
his  lips  in  the  matter,  M.  le  Duc  had  cast  a  triumphant
glance  to  me,  which  nearly  upset  my  composure  and  warned
me  to  double  my  gravity  and  not  expose  my  eyes  to  contact
with  his.  Restrained  in  this  manner,  attentively  devouring
the  air  of  all,  conscious  of  all,  and  of  myself  too,  motionless,
glued  to  my  seat,  rigid  in  body,  filled  with  all  that  joy  can
give  most  keen,  most  vivid,  —  agitation  that  was  charming,
enjoyment  immoderately  and  most  persistently  longed  for,
—  I  sweated  with  the  anguish  of  controlling  my  transports  ;
hut  that  anguish  was  a  delight  which  I  never  felt  before,
nor  since,  that  glorious  day.  How  inferior  are  the  pleasures
of  the  senses  to  those  of  the  mind  !  How  true  it  is  that  the
measure  of  our  woes  is  that  of  the  joys  that  end  them  !

A  moment  after  the  regent  had  finished  speaking  he  told
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  to  read  the  declaration.  He  read

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

201

declaration.
Effect  upon  the
Council.

it  immediately,  without  preliminary  remarks  such  as  he
had  made  on  the  preceding  matter.  During  this  reading,
Reading  of  the  which  no  music  could  equal  to  my  ears,  my  at¬
tention  was  divided  between  judging  whether
it  was  precisely  the  same  as  that  which  Millain
had  drawn  up  and  shown  to  me  (I  had  the  satisfaction  to
find  it  was)  and  observing  the  impression  made  on  those
present.  A  very  few  moments  showed  me,  by  the  new
alteration  of  their  faces,  what  was  passing  in  their  souls,
and  a  few  more  warned  me,  by  the  despair  that  seized  on
Maréchal  de  Villeroy  and  the  fury  which  overtook  Villars,
that  some  remedy  must  be  instantly  applied,  lest  the  excite¬
ment  of  which  they  were  no  longer  masters  might  drive
them  to  some  positive  act.  I  had  that  remedy  in  my  pocket,
and  I  drew  it  forth.  It  was  our  petition  against  the  bastards,
and  I  laid  it  before  me  on  the  table,  open  at  the  last  page,
which  contained  all  our  signatures  printed  in  huge  capitals.
They  were  incontinently  seen  and,  no  doubt,  recognized  by
the  two  marshals,  as  I  judged  by  the  sullen  depression  of
their  eyes,  which  immediately  succeeded  and  extinguished
a  certain  look  of  menace,  especially  in  Maréchal  de  Villars.
My  two  neighbours  asked  me  what  that  paper  was.  I  told
them  and  showed  them  the  signatures.  Everybody  looked
at  that  queer  document,  but  nobody  asked  about  a  thing
so  instantly  recognized  ;  the  fact  of  neighbourhood  alone
made  the  Prince  de  Conti  and  the  Duc  de  Guiche  ask  the
question  ;  though  they  were  two  men  who,  while  very  dif¬
ferent  from  each  other,  never  saw  what  they  did  see.  I
had  hesitated  a  moment  in  making  this  demonstration

between  the  fear  of  showing  too  plainly  that  I  was  in  the
secret,  and  the  risk  of  the  outbreak.  I  saw  the  two  marshals
so  near  to  making  one,  and  I  feared  the  success  that  outbreak
might  have.  Nothing,  I  knew,  could  control  them  so  much

202  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vii

as  the  sight  of  their  own  signatures.  But  to  show  that
document  after  they  had  spoken  would  only  have  served  to
cover  them  with  shame  and  would  not  have  stopped  the
harm  their  outbreak  would  have  excited.  I  therefore  did
what  I  thought  surest,  and  I  had  reason  to  think  it  was
useful.

The  whole  reading  was  listened  to  with  the  deepest  at¬
tention,  joined  to  the  deepest  emotion.  When  it  was  over,
the  regent  said  that  he  was  very  sorry  for

Votes  taken  ;  I  °  _  .

abstain  from  this  necessity,  which  affected  his  brothers-in-
law,  hut  that  he  owed  as  much  justice  to  the
peers  as  to  the  princes  of  the  blood.  Then,  turning  to  the
Keeper  of  the  Seals  he  ordered  him  to  give  his  vote.  This
he  did  briefly  and  worthily  in  good  language,  hut  like  a
dog  that  runs  on  embers  ;  and  he  voted  for  the  registration.
After  that,  his  Royal  Highness,  looking  round  on  every
one,  said  he  should  continue  to  take  the  votes  by  heads,
and  he  called  on  M.  le  Duc  to  give  his.  The  latter  was
short,  but  vigorous  and  courteous  to  the  peers  ;  the  Prince
de  Conti,  of  the  same  opinion,  hut  shorter.  Then  the  Due
d’Orléans  asked  for  mine.  I  made,  against  my  custom,  a
profound  bow,  hut  without  rising,  and  said  that,  having  the
honour  to  he  the  senior  peer  of  the  Council,  I  offered  his
Royal  Highness  my  most  humble  thanks,  together  with
those  of  all  the  peers  of  France,  for  the  justice  so  ardently
desired,  which  he  had  now  resolved  to  grant  to  us  on  a
matter  that  imported  so  essentially  to  our  dignity  and
touched  us  personally  so  keenly.  I  begged  him  to  he  con¬
vinced  of  our  gratitude,  and  to  rely  on  all  the  attachment  pos¬
sible  to  his  person  for  an  act  of  equity  long  desired  and  now
so  complete  ;  adding  that  in  this  sincere  expression  of  our
sentiments  he  would  find  our  opinion,  which,  being  parties
to  the  case,  it  was  not  permissible  for  us  to  give  otherwise.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

203

I  ended  these  few  words  with  a  deep  bow,  without  rising,
and  the  Duc  de  La  Force  did  as  I  did  immediately.  I
then  gave  all  my  attention  to  see  whom  the  regent  would
ask  for  votes,  intending,  if  he  asked  a  peer,  to  interrupt,  so
as  to  take  from  the  bastards  the  faintest  pretext  to  object
to  forms  ;  but  I  did  not  need  to  do  so.  The  Duc  d'Orléans
had  perfectly  understood  me,  and  he  skipped  to  Maréchal
d’Estrées,  who,  with  the  rest,  voted  almost  without  speak¬
ing,  approving  that  which  most  of  them  did  not  like  at
all.  I  had  tried  to  manage  my  tone  of  voice  to  make  it
barely  sufficient  to  be  heard  by  all  ;  I  even  preferred  that
those  at  a  distance  should  not  hear  me  to  the  impropriety
of  speaking  too  loud  ;  and  I  composed  my  whole  person
to  as  much  gravity,  modesty,  and  simple  gratitude  as  was
possible  to  me.  M.  le  Duc  made  me  a  mischievous  sign,
with  a  smile,  that  I  had  spoken  well;  but  I  kept  my
gravity  and  turned  to  watch  the  others.  It  would  be  im¬
possible  to  render  the  expression  of  their  countenances.
They  were  men  oppressed  by  a  surprise  that  overwhelmed
them,  unable  to  speak,  agitated,  some  irritated,  a  few  glad
like  La  Force  and  Guiche,  who  presently  told  me  so
freely.

The  opinions  taken  almost  as  soon  as  asked,  the  regent
said  :  “  Messieurs,  this  is  passed  ;  justice  is  done  ;  the  rights
speech  of  regent  of  the  peers  secured  to  them.  I  have  now  an
the^omtede2  act  favour  t°  propose  to  you  ;  and  I  do  it
Toulouse.  with  the  more  confidence  because  I  have  taken
pains  to  consult  the  parties  interested,  who  have  willingly
put  their  hands  to  it;  so  that  I  am  able  to  present  this
declaration  without  offending  any  one.  It  concerns  the
person  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.  No  one  is  ignorant  how
much  he  has  disapproved  of  all  that  has  been  done  in  their
favour,  and  that  he  has  only  supported  it  since  the  regency,

204  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMOK.  [chap.  vii.

out  of  respect  for  the  will  of  the  late  king.  All  the  world
also  knows  his  virtue,  his  merit,  his  industry,  his  integrity
his  disinterestedness.  Nevertheless,  I  was  not  able  to  avoid
including  him  in  the  declaration  you  have  just  listened  to.
Justice  could  make  no  exception  in  his  favour,  and  it  was
necessary  to  secure  positively  the  rights  of  the  peers.  Now
that  those  rights  can  fear  no  infringement,  I  think  we  may
return  by  favour  that  which  I  took  from  equity,  and  make
a  personal  exception  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  leaving  him
in  all  the  honours  he  has  enjoyed,  to  the  exclusion  of  all
others,  and  without  passing  those  honours  to  his  children
should  he  marry  and  have  them,  and  without  making  a
precedent  for  any  other  person  whatever.  I  have  the
pleasure  to  know  that  the  princes  of  the  blood  consent
to  this,  and  that  such  of  the  peers  as  I  have  been  able  to
consult  not  only  enter  into  my  feelings,  but  have  even
begged  me  to  do  this  thing.  I  do  not  doubt  that  the
esteem  he  has  won  here  will  make  this  proposition  agree¬
able  to  you.”  Then,  turning  to  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,
“  Monsieur,”  he  continued,  “  will  you  be  kind  enough  to
read  the  declaration  ?  ”  which  was  done  instantly.

The  declaration  read,  the  regent  praised  it  in  a  few  words
and  then  told  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  to  vote.  This  he
Effect  ;  the  vote  did  briefly  in  praise  of  the  Comte  de  Tou-
taken.  louse.  M.  le  Duc,  after  a  few  praises  of  the

same  sort,  testified  his  satisfaction  out  of  esteem  and  friend¬
ship.  The  Prince  de  Conti  said  but  two  words.  After
him,  I  expressed  to  his  Royal  Highness  my  joy  at  seeing
him  combine  justice  and  the  safety  of  the  rights  of  the
peerage  with  the  unusual  favour  he  did  to  the  virtue  of
the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  who  deserved  it  for  his  modera¬
tion,  his  truth,  and  his  attachment  to  the  good  of  the
State;  I  therefore  voted  with  joy  for  registration  of  the

1718]  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

205

declaration,  saying  that  I  did  not  fear  to  add  the  very
humble  thanks  of  the  peers,  inasmuch  as  I  had  the  honour
to  be  the  senior  of  those  here  present.  As  I  closed  my
lips,  I  looked  round  upon  them,  and  easily  perceived  that
my  approval  did  not  please,  and,  probably,  my  thanks  still
less.  The  rest  voted,  bending  their  heads  to  so  sharp  a
blow;  a  few  murmured  something,  I  know  not  what,  be¬
tween  their  teeth,  but  the  blow  to  their  cabal  was  not  less
felt  ;  and  the  more  reflection  succeeded  to  the  first  surprise,
the  more  a  bitter  and  angry  pain  showed  itself  on  their
faces  in  a  manner  so  marked  that  it  was  easy  to  see  it
was  high  time  to  strike.

The  opinions  given,  M.  le  Duc,  casting  a  brilliant  glance
on  me,  was  about  to  speak,  when  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,
m.  ie  Due  not  perceiving  this,  began  at  the  same  moment

demands  the
education  of  the
king.

to  say  something.  The  regent  told  him  that
M.  le  Duc  wished  to  speak  ;  and  immediately,

without  giving  the  latter  time  to  do  so,  he  straightened
himself  with  majesty  in  his  chair  and  said  :  “  Messieurs,
M.  le  Duc  has  a  proposition  to  make  to  you  ;  I  think  it
just  and  reasonable  ;  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  you  will  judge
of  it  as  I  do.”  Then  turning  to  the  prince,  he  said  :  “  Mon¬
sieur,  will  you  be  good  enough  to  explain  it  ?  ”  The  stir  that
these  few  words  created  in  that  assembly  is  inexpressible.
I  seemed  to  see  hunted  creatures,  pursued  on  all  sides,  and
surprised  by  some  new  enemy  rising  among  them  in  a  ref¬
uge  which  they  had  reached  breathless.  “  Monsieur,”  said
M.  le  Duc,  addressing  the  regent,  “  inasmuch  as  you  have
now  done  justice  to  the  peers,  I  think  I  have  a  right  to
ask  it  of  you  for  myself.  The  late  king  gave  the  education
of  his  Majesty  to  the  Duc  du  Maine.  I  was  then  a  minor  ;
and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  late  king,  the  Duc  du  Maine  was
a  prince  of  the  blood  and  capable  of  succeeding  to  the  crown

206

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vil

Since  then  I  have  attained  my  majority,  and  not  only  is
M.  du  Maine  not  a  prince  of  the  blood,  hut  he  is  now
reduced  to  his  rank  in  the  peerage.  M.  le  Maréchal
de  Villeroy  is  to-day  his  senior  in  rank  and  precedes  him
everywhere.  He  cannot,  therefore,  remain  governor  of  the
king  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.  I
ask  of  you  this  place,  which  I  think  ought  not  to  he  refused
to  my  age,  my  quality,  and  my  attachment  to  the  person
of  the  king  and  to  the  State.  I  hope,”  he  added,  turning
to  his  left,  “that  I  shall  profit  by  the  lessons  of  M.  le
Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  to  acquit  myself  well  and  deserve  his
friendship.”

As  he  heard  the  words  “  superintendence  of  the  education,”
Maréchal  de  Villeroy  almost  pitched  forward  ;  he  rested
Agitation  of  the  his  forehead  on  his  stick,  and  continued  some
Council.  moments  in  that  posture.  It  seemed  as  if

he  did  not  hear  the  remainder  of  the  speech.  Villars,  Besons,
and  Effiat  bent  their  shoulders,  like  men  who  have  received
their  last  blow.  I  could  see  no  one  on  my  side  but  the
Duc  de  Guiche,  who  approved  in  the  midst  of  his  prodigious
amazement.  Estrées  was  the  first  to  come  to  ;  he  shook
himself,  snorted,  and  looked  at  the  company  like  a  man
returning  from  the  other  world.

As  soon  as  M.  le  Duc  had  ended,  the  regent  passed  his
eyes  in  review  over  the  whole  company,  and  said  that  the
The  regent  takes  demand  of  M.  le  Duc  was  just;  he  did  not

the  vote.

think  it  could  be  refused  :  that  the  wrong

could  not  be  done  to  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  of  leaving  him
under  the  Duc  du  Maine,  inasmuch  as  he  henceforth  pre¬
ceded  him  :  that  the  superintendence  of  the  king’s  education
could  not  be  more  worthily  fulfilled  than  by  M.  le  Duc  ;
and  that  he  felt  persuaded  the  vote  would  be  unanimous.
Whereupon  he  immediately  asked  the  opinion  of  the  Prince

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

207

de  Conti,  who  gave  it  in  two  words  ;  then  that  of  the  Keeper
of  the  Seals,  which  was  not  long  ;  then  mine.  I  merely  said,
looking  at  M.  le  Duc,  that  I  voted  for  it  with  all  my  heart.
All  the  others,  except  M.  de  La  Force,  who  said  a  word,
voted  without  speaking,  simply  bowing,  the  marshals  scarcely
at  all,  and  d’Effiat  the  same,  his  eyes  and  those  of  Villars
sparkling  with  fury.

The  votes  taken,  the  regent,  turning  to  M.  le  Duc,  said  :
“  Monsieur,  I  believe  you  wish  to  read  what  you  intend  to
Maréchal  de  say  the  king  at  the  lit  de  justice .”  Where-
viiieroy  com-  upon  M.  le  Duc  read  his  speech,  such  as  it
regent  launches  a  is  now  printed.  A  few  moments  of  deep  and
thunderbolt.  gloomy  silence  succeeded  this'  reading,  during

which  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  pale  and  agitated,  muttered  to
himself.  At  last,  like  a  man  who  decides  on  a  course,  he
turned  to  the  regent,  with  lowered  head  and  ghastly  eyes,
and  said,  in  a  faint  voice:  “I  shall  say  but  two  words:
all  the  dispositions  of  the  king  are  overthrown  ;  I  cannot
see  it  without  pain;  M.  du  Maine  is  very  unfortunate.”
“  Monsieur,”  replied  the  regent,  in  a  sharp  but  loud  tone,
“  M.  du  Maine  is  my  brother-in-law  ;  hut  I  prefer  an  open
enemy  to  a  secret  one.”  At  that  grand  saying  several  of
those  present  lowered  their  heads.  Effiat  shook  his  from
side  to  side.  The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  seemed  near  faint¬
ing  ;  sighs  began  before  me  and  around  me,  here  and  there,  but
furtively  ;  all  present  felt  from  this  stroke  that  the  scabbard
was  flung  away,  and  no  one  knew  where  the  line  would  be

drawn.  In  order  to  create  a  diversion,  the  Keeper  of  the
Seals  proposed  to  read  the  speech  he  had  prepared  as  a
preface  to  the  edict  for  annulling  the  decrees  of  parliament,
which  he  intended  to  deliver  before  the  lit  de  justice.  As
he  finished,  some  one  entered  to  tell  him  that  he  was  wanted
at  the  door.

208

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

attempts  to
refuse  to  obey
the  summons.

He  went  ont,  and  returned  immediately,  not  to  his  place,
but  to  the  regent,  whom  he  drew  to  a  window,  the  minds
parliament  of  all  concentrating  on  them.  The  regent,
returning  to  his  place,  informed  the  Council
that  he  had  received  word  that,  the  Chambers
of  parliament  being  assembled,  the  president  (in  spite  of
what  he  had  said  to  Des  Granges)  advised  them  not  to  come
to  the  Tuileries,  asking  them  why  they  should  go  to  a  place
where  they  would  have  no  liberty,  and  proposing  that  the
king  should  be  informed  that  his  parliament  would  listen
to  his  will  in  its  usual  place  of  session  whenever  it  pleased
him  to  do  it  the  honour  of  coming  or  sending  there.  The
Council  seemed  bewildered  by  this  news  ;  but  his  Eoyal
Highness  said  with  an  easy  air  that  he  had  expected  a
refusal,  and  had  ordered  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  to  propose
what  he  thought  should  be  done  in  case  the  advice  of  the
president  should  prevail.

The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  declared  that  he  could  not  be¬
lieve  that  parliament  would  go  to  the  length  of  such  dis-
The  regent  un-  obedience  ;  if  it  did,  it  would  be  formal  and
voteUIndds’teps  contrary  to  law  and  usage.  He  enlarged  a
taken‘  little  to  show  that  nothing  could  be  so  dan¬

gerous  as  to  place  the  king’s  authority  in  a  position  to  be
disobeyed  ;  and  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  in  case  parliament
were  led  into  such  an  error  it  ought  to  be  immediately  sus¬
pended.  The  regent  added  that  there  must  be  no  hesitation
about  that,  and  took  the  opinion  of  M.  le  Duc,  who  gave  it
strongly,  the  Prince  de  Conti  the  same,  I  the  same,  and
MM.  de  La  Force  and  de  Guiche  even  more  so.  The  Maré¬

chal  de  Villeroy,  in  a  broken  voice,  seeking  vainly  for  grand
words  which  would  not  come  in  time,  deplored  this  extrem¬
ity,  and  did  all  he  could  to  avoid  giving  a  precise  opinion.
Forced  at  last  by  the  regent  to  explain  himself,  he  dared  not

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

209

oppose,  but  added  that  it  was  with  regret,  and  made  an
attempt  to  set  forth  the  evil  results.  But  the  regent  inter¬
rupted  him  again,  said  he  was  not  disturbed  by  that,  he
was  prepared  for  all;  the  results  would  be  far  worse  if  the
refusal  were  allowed.  Then  he  asked  immediately  for  the
opinion  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  who  answered  shortly,  in  a
deprecating  tone,  that  it  would  be  very  sad,  but  he  thought
it  should  be  done.  Villars  wanted  to  paraphrase,  but  re¬
strained  himself,  and  said  he  hoped  that  parliament  would
obey.  Pressed  by  the  regent,  he  proposed  to  wait  for  further
information  before  voting  ;  but  pressed  still  further,  he  voted
for  suspension,  with  an  air  of  angry  vexation,  which  was  ex¬
tremely  marked.  No  one  after  that  dared  to  stir,  and  most
of  them  voted  with  their  heads.

Presently  Des  Granges  returned,  and  came  up  to  tell  the
regent  that  parliament  was  on  the  march  on  foot  and  was
then  just  debouching  from  the  Palais.  This  news  refreshed
the  spirits  of  the  Council,  especially  that  of  the  Duc  d’Or¬
léans.  Des  Granges  having  retired,  with  an  order  to  give
notice  the  moment  that  parliament  arrived,  the  regent  told
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  to  be  careful,  when  he  proposed  the
affair  of  the  légitimés  at  the  lit  de  justice,  that  not  a  moment
of  suspense  should  occur  as  to  the  position  of  the  Comte  de
Toulouse,  because,  as  the  intention  was  to  reinstate  him,
not  even  a  momentary  stigma  should  rest  upon  him.  This
marked  attention,  given  in  such  terms,  struck  another  blow
at  the  elder  of  the  two  brothers,  and  I  noticed  that  his
partisans  seemed  still  further  overwhelmed  by  it.  The
regent  then  reminded  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  not  to  fail
to  make  the  registrations  at  the  lit  de  justice  during  the
session,  and  before  the  eyes  of  all.  The  importance  of
this  final  consummation,  in  presence  of  the  king,  was  very

marked.

VOL.  IV.  — 14

210  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

At  last  parliament  arrived,  and,  like  children,  we  went  to
the  windows.  They  came  in  their  red  robes,  two  and  two,
through  the  great  gate  of  the  courtyard,  which

Parliament  .

arrives  at  the  they  crossed  to  enter  the  Hall  of  the  Ambas-
Tuiienes  on  foot.  ga(jorSj  w}iere  the  president,  who  had  come  in

a  carriage  with  the  vice-president  Aligre,  awaited  them.
They  had  come  by  the  little  courtyard  beyond,  in  order  to
have  less  distance  to  walk.  As  soon  as  parliament  was  in
place,  the  peers  also,  and  the  presidents  had  taken  their  furs
from  behind  the  screens  arranged  in  the  room  adjoining.
Des  Granges  returned  to  notify  the  regent  that  all  was  ready.
There  had  been  a  discussion  as  to  whether  the  king  should
dine  while  waiting,  and  I  had  obtained  that  he  should  not  do
so,  for  fear  that  entering  the  lit  de  justice  immediately  after  eat¬
ing  so  much  earlier  than  his  usual  hour,  he  might  be  taken
ill,  which  would  be  a  great  annoyance.  As  soon  as  Des
Granges  had  announced  to  the  regent  that  he  could  start,
his  Eoyal  Highness  told  him  to  notify  the  parliament  to
send  a  deputation  to  receive  the  king  at  the  farther  end  of
the  guard-room  of  the  Suisse  body-guard  ;  and  then,  turning
to  the  Council,  he  said  aloud  that  we  must  now  go  and  fetch
the  king.

At  these  words  I  felt  a  trouble  of  joy  at  the  great  spectacle
about  to  take  place  in  my  presence,  which  warned  me  to  re-
we  &o  to  fetch  double  my  attention  to  my  own  conduct.  I
the  kmg.  had  notified  Villars  to  walk  with  us,  and  Tal-

lard  to  accompany  the  marshals  of  France,  and  to  yield
precedence  to  his  seniors,  because,  on  occasions  like  these,
the  “  ducs  vérifiés  ”  do  not  exist.  I  tried  to  supply  myself
with  the  strongest  dose  I  could  of  composure,  gravity,  and
modesty.  I  followed  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  entered  the
king’s  apartment  by  the  little  door,  and  found  the  king  in
his  cabinet.  On  the  way,  the  Due  d’Albret  and  others  made

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

211

me  very  marked  civilities  with,  a  great  desire  to  discover
something.  I  paid  them  in  politeness,  in  complaints  of  the
crowd  and  the  annoyance  of  my  mantle,  and  so  reached  the
cab  met  of  the  king.

He  wore  neither  mantle  nor  neck-bands,  but  was  dressed
as  usual.  After  the  regent  had  been  with  him  a  few  mo-
The  march  to  the  ments,  he  asked  if  it  pleased  him  to  start,  and
“in dejusttce."  immediately  the  way  was  cleared.  The  few
courtiers  who  were  there,  for  want  of  finding  a  place  to  poke
themselves  in  the  audience-chamber,  stood  aside,  and  I  made
a  sign  to  Maréchal  de  Villars,  who  slowly  started  for  the
door,  the  Duc  de  La  Force  after  him,  and  I  behind  them,
taking  care  to  walk  immediately  in  front  of  the  Prince  de
Conti  ;  M.  le  Duc  followed  the  latter,  and  the  regent  after
him.  Behind  the  regent  came  the  ushers  of  the  king’s
chamber  with  their  maces,  then  the  king,  surrounded  by
four  captains  of  the  body-guard,  the  Due  d’Albret,  grand
chamberlain,  and  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  his  governor.  Be¬
hind  came  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  then  the  Maréchaux
d’Estrées,  d’Huxelles,  de  Tallard,  and  de  Besons.  These  were
followed  by  the  chevaliers  of  the  Order,  and  such  of  the  gov¬
ernors  and  lieutenant-generals  of  the  provinces  as  could  be
notified  to  attend  the  king  ;  the  latter  were  to  sit  below,
uncovered,  and  without  votes.  This  was  the  order  of  march
from  the  terrace  to  the  hall  of  the  Suisse  guards,  at  the
lower  door  of  which  was  the  deputation  sent  by  parliament
to  receive  the  king,  with  four  judges  and  four  counsellors
as  usual.

While  the  latter  were  approaching  the  king,  I  said  to  the
Duc  de  La  Force  and  the  Maréchal  de  Villars  that  we  should
i  enter  ;  and  con-  do  better  to  go  and  take  our  seats  and  so  avoid
fide  the  reduction  ppe  C0nfusi0n  at  the  king’s  entrance.  They

of  the  bastards  to

certain  peers..  followed  me  accordingly,  one  by  one,  in  order  of

212

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

precedence,  marching  in  ceremony.  There  were  hut  we  three
who  could  walk  in  this  way,  because  d’Antin  did  not  come,
the  Duc  de  Guiche  had  vacated  his  seat,  Tallard  was  not  a
peer,  and  the  four  captains  of  the  guard  surrounded  the  king,
bearing  the  bâton,  at  these  great  ceremonies.

But  before  saying  more,  it  is  well  to  give  a  drawing,  show¬
ing  the  arrangement  of  the  lit  de  justice,  a  glance  at  which
will  assist  in  making  clear  what  follows.  I  think  it  will
be  useless  to  enter  into  a  more  detailed  description  of  the
session;  this  will  doubtless  suffice  to  make  it  understood
and  to  illustrate  the  local  scene  about  to  be  recounted.  I
shall  only  observe  that  I  have  named  the  peers  by  the  names
of  their  peerages  (which  is  done  in  taking  their  votes),  and
not  by  the  names  they  bear  usually  and  by  which  they  are
known  in  society.

As  parliament  was  in  place,  and  the  king  about  to  arrive,
I  entered  by  the  same  door.  The  way  was  partly  open  ;
the  officers  of  the  body-guard  cleared  a  passage  for  me  and
also  for  the  Duc  de  La  Force  and  Maréchal  de  Villars,
who  followed  me,  the  one  after  the  other.  I  stopped  a
moment  at  the  entrance  of  the  parquet,  overcome  with  joy
at  the  sight  of  this  great  spectacle,  and  the  thought  of  the
precious  moments  now  approaching.  I  had  need  to  do  so,
in  order  to  recover  myself  sufficiently  to  see  clearly  all  that
I  wished  to  observe,  and  to  put  on  a  fresh  veneer  of  gravity
and  modesty.  I  was  well  aware  that  I  should  be  attentively
examined  by  an  Assembly  which  had  been  carefully  trained
not  to  like  me,  and  by  inquisitive  spectators  convinced  that
some  great  secret  was  about  to  be  revealed  in  this  important
assemblage  called  together  so  hastily.  Moreover,  no  one
could  be  ignorant  that  I  knew  it,  if  only  in  the  Council  of
Regency,  from  which  I  came.

I  was  not  mistaken.  The  moment  that  I  appeared  all  eyes

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

213

Antechamber.

?  VJj

Bishops  of  Laon  &  Novon

O

P  D

F

M*  d’Estrées,  Huxelles,  Tallard,  Besons

D

M

The  Regent
M.  le  Duc
Pce  de  Conti
Ducs  :
de  Sully
St.  Simon
La  Rochefou¬
cauld
La  Force
Rohan
Grammont
Mazarin
Gesvres
Coislin
M  Aumont
Villars
Chaulnes
Rohan-Rohan
Hostun
Roannais
Yalentinois

D

M

^  Mesmes,  Près.  :  Novion.  Aligre,  Lamoignon,  Amelot,

Portail,  Pelletier,  Maupeou.

R

fs

02

O  «M  .

rr}'  °  £
fll  g  ci

c8  fc  ®
u  Szn

^  rô>  2

®  i£j

O  O

o  u

*  &
3  ®

Ci  n)

Œ-W

2  “

•g’Pj

<X>

Ph  s,

■g  a

Secty  of  State  Secty  of  Pt.
Counsellors  of  the  Parliament
King’s  lawyers.  idem  of  Pt.

idem.

idem.

Door  by  which  only
the  peers  entered  and  left.

Spectators  of  mark.
Spectators  of  consideration.
Crowd  of  spectators.

Q

O  o  if
O  H.®

o  ►d»

®  o  ct>
çt*<l  - i

jJ.  CD

P  P

poo

a®

S'"  &
®

oo«

CT3  S*

ÊFè

OQ  S
CD

M

Clerk  of  Pt.

WO

a®

■g  3

M

Entrance  to
Parquet.

Door  by  which
the  king  entered  and  left.

Guard  Room.

A.  The  king  on  his  throne.

B.  Steps  of  the  throne.

C.  Grand  chamberlain  seated  on  hassock,

covered  and  voting.

D.  Raised  seats  to  right  and  left.

E.  King’s  short  stairway.

F.  Provost  of  Paris,  with  his  baton,  seated

on  stairs.

G.  Ushers  of  the  king’s  chamber  on  their

knees.

H.  Keeper  of  the  Seals  in  his  chair  with

arms  and  no  back.

I.  Small  desk  before  him.

K.  Steps  to  reach  high  seats.

L.  Doorway,  from  which  the  Bishops  of

Troyes  and  Fréjus,  and  M.  de  Torcy
viewed  the  scene.

M.  Windows,  with  scaffoldings  for  spectators.

N.  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  on  a  stool,  covered

and  voting.

O.  Duc  de  Villeroy,  captain  of  the  guard,

seated,  covered  and  voting.

P.  Beringhen,  first  equerry,  uncovered,  not

voting.

Q.  Heralds  at  arms.

R.  Grand  master  of  ceremonies  seated,  but

not  covered  and  not  voting.

S.  Passage  from  the  high  seats  for  the

bishops,  bishop-peers,  and  marshals.

T.  The  parquet  or  open  space.

V.  Passage  on  a  level  with  the  high  seats.

V.  Folded  seat  in  case  of  need  for  lay  peers.

214  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tii.

were  turned  upon  me.  I  advanced  slowly  towards  the  table
of  the  chief-clerk  of  the  parliament  ;  there  I  turned  between
the  two  benches  and  crossed  the  whole  width  of  the  hall,
passing  in  front  of  the  king’s  law  officers,  who  bowed  to  me,
smiling,  and  then  I  mounted  the  three  steps  to  the  raised
seats,  where  all  the  peers  whose  names  I  have  marked  down
were  in  their  places,  but  rising  as  soon  as  I  approached  the
steps  ;  I  bowed  to  them  respectfully  from  the  top  of  the  third
step.  Advancing  slowly  I  took  La  Feuillade  [Eoannais]  by
the  shoulder,  although  I  had  no  intimacy  with  him,  and  I
told  him  to  listen  attentively  and  take  good  care  to  show
no  signs  of  life  ;  for  he  was  about  to  hear  a  declaration  re¬
garding  parliament,  and  after  that  two  others  ;  adding  that
we  were  now  approaching  the  happiest  and  most  unlooked-
for  moment,  when  the  bastards  would  be  reduced  to  their
rank  of  precedence  in  the  peerage,  the  Comte  de  Toulouse
alone  being  reinstated,  but  not  his  children  if  he  had  them.
La  Feuillade  was  a  moment  without  understanding  me,  and
then  so  filled  with  joy  he  could  not  speak.  He  pressed
against  me,  and  as  I  left  him  he  said,  “  But  how  —  the
Comte  de  Toulouse  ?  ”  “  You  will  see,”  I  said,  and  passed  on.

As  I  passed  the  Duc  d’Aumont  I  remembered  the  fine  ren¬
dezvous  he  had  made  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans  for  the  next
day  to  reconcile  him  to  the  parliament  ;  and  I  could  not  re¬
sist  looking  fixedly  at  him  with  a  mocking  smile.  I  stopped
between  M.  de  Metz  [Coislin]  and  the  Duc  de  Tresmes
[Gesvres]  to  whom  I  said  the  same.  The  first  sniffed,  the
second  was  enchanted,  and  made  me  repeat  it  to  his  joy
and  surprise.  I  said  as  much  to  the  Duc  de  Louvigny
[Grammont],  who  was  not  so  much  surprised  as  the  others,
but  equally  transported  with  joy.  At  last  I  reached  my
plkce  between  the  Ducs  de  Sully  and  de  La  Bochefoucauld.
I  bowed  to  them,  and  we  all  sat  down  at  once.  I  gave  one

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

215

glance  to  the  scene,  and  then  I  drew  the  heads  of  my  two
neighbours  to  mine  and  told  them  the  same  thing.  Sully  was
deeply  touched  ;  the  other  asked  me  harshly  why  the  Comte
de  Toulouse  was  excepted.  I  had  several  reasons  in  reserve  to
give  him,  but  I  contented  myself  with  answering  that  I  knew
nothing  about  that  ;  and  as  to  the  fact  itself  I  tried  to  make
him  like  it.  But  he  had  never  forgiven  the  Comte  de  Toulouse
for  taking  his  place  as  Master  of  the  Hunt.  His  coldness
was  such  that  I  could  not  refrain  from  asking  him  the
cause,  and  reminding  him  of  the  ardour  with  which  he
had  pressed  our  petition  against  the  bastards,  the  conse¬
quences  of  which,  so  far  beyond  our  hopes,  he  was  now
to  see  enregistered.  He  replied  as  he  could,  still  gloomy
and  cold  ;  after  which  I  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  speak
to  him  again.

Seated  in  my  place  in  an  elevated  position,  no  one  being
before  me,  because  the  bench  for  those  peers  who  could  find

no  room  on  ours  did  not  reach  farther  than

The  spectacle

of  the  “  ut  de  in  front  of  the  Duc  de  La  Force,  I  was  able

iustice.”  .

to  observe  all  present.  This  I  did  to  the
fullest  extent  and  with  all  the  keenness  of  my  eyes.  One
thing  alone  constrained  me  ;  this  was  that  I  dared  not  fix
my  eyes  as  long  as  I  wished  on  certain  persons  ;  I  feared
the  fire  and  the  vivid  signification  of  my  glances  ;  and  the
more  I  encountered  those  of  others  turned  upon  me,  the
more  I  felt  warned  to  balk  their  curiosity  by  my  reserve.
But  I  did  cast  a  glittering  eye  at  the  president  of  the
parliament  and  along  the  “grand  bench,”  in  relation  to
which  I  was  finely  seated.  I  cast  it  over  all  the  parliament,
and  I  saw  an  amazement,  a  silence,  a  consternation  for
which  I  was  not  prepared,  and  which  seemed  to  me  of
good  augury.  The  president  insolently  depressed,  the  vice-
presidents  disconcerted,  anxiously  attentive  to  what  was

216  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

happening,  furnished  me  with  a  most  agreeable  sight.  Those
who  were  simply  curious,  among  whom  I  class  all  those
who  had  no  vote,  seemed  to  be  not  less  surprised  than  the
others,  but  without  their  trouble  of  mind,  calmly  surprised
in  fact.  All  were  conscious  of  some  great  expectation,  and
were  seeking  to  forestall  knowledge  by  divining  the  faces  of
those  who  came  from  the  Council.

But  I  had  little  time  for  this  examination.  The  king
arrived.  The  bustle  of  this  entrance  lasted  until  his  Majesty
Entrance  of  the  and  all  who  accompanied  him  had  taken  their
bearin^ofthT  places,  and  presented  another  species  of  sin-
regent.  gularity.  Every  one  tried  to  penetrate  the

mind  of  the  regent,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  and  the  other
great  personages.  The  departure  of  the  bastards  from  the
Council-chamber  redoubled  attention,  and  those  who  did
not  already  know  of  it  now  perceived  their  absence.  The
consternation  of  the  marshals,  and  of  their  senior,  alone  in
his  place  as  governor  to  the  king,  was  evident.  It  increased
the  dismay  of  the  president,  who,  not  seeing  his  master
the  Duc  du  Maine,  cast  a  withering  glance  on  the  Duc  de
Sully  and  on  me,  who  occupied  the  places  the  two  brothers
would  have  filled.  In  an  instant  the  eyes  of  the  whole  as¬
sembly  fastened  upon  us  ;  and  I  remarked  that  the  air  of
concentration  and  expectancy  of  something  extraordinary
was  doubled  on  all  faces.  The  regent  wore  an  air  of  quiet
majesty  and  determination,  which  was  quite  new  to  him  ;
his  eyes  were  attentive,  his  bearing  grave,  but  easy.  M.  le
Duc  was  discreet,  cautious,  though  environed  with  an  in¬
describable  air  of  brilliancy  that  shone  from  his  whole
person,  and  which  one  felt  to  be  restrained.  The  Prince
de  Conti  seemed  sad,  pensive,  wandering  perhaps  in  distant
spaces.  I  could  scarcely  see  them  during  the  session,  un¬
less  under  pretext  of  looking  at  the  king,  who  was  serious,

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

217

majestic,  and  at  the  same  time  as  pretty  as  possible,  —  grave
but  graceful  in  all  bis  behaviour,  attentive  in  manner  and
not  at  all  bored,  maintaining  bis  dignity  well,  and  without
embarrassment.

When  all  were  placed  and  reseated,  the  Keeper  of  the
Seals  remained  a  few  moments  motionless,  looking  around
him,  and  the  fire  of  the  spirit  that  issued  from

The  bearing

of  the  Keeper  his  eyes  seemed  to  enter  the  breasts  of  all
of  the  seals.  before  him.  Profound  silence  eloquently  an¬

nounced  the  fear,  attention,  trouble,  and  curiosity  of  those
various  expectancies.  When  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  had,
after  the  manner  of  great  preachers,  accustomed  himself
to  the  sight  of  this  august  audience,  he  uncovered  his  head,
rose,  advanced  to  the  king,  and  knelt  upon  the  steps  of  the
throne  about  the  middle  of  the  same  step  on  which  the
grand  chamberlain  was  seated  on  a  cushion.  There  he  took
the  orders  of  the  king,  rose,  descended,  seated  himself  again
upon  his  chair,  and  replaced  his  hat.  I  will  say,  once  for
all,  that  he  performed  the  same  ceremony  at  the  beginning
of  each  declaration  and  also  before  and  after  taking  the  votes
on  each  of  them.

After  a  silence  of  a  few  moments  he  opened  this  great
scene  by  a  speech.  The  report  of  this  lit  de

He  opens  the  j.

great  scene  with  justice  made  and  printed  by  parliament  dis-
îiamentonits  penses  me  from  the  necessity  of  reporting

duties.  here  the  speeches  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,

the  president  of  parliament,  the  king’s  lawyers,  and  the
various  documents  read  and  enregistered.  This  first  speech,
the  reading  of  formal  papers,  the  order  to  open  and
keep  open  the  two  double  doors,  surprised  no  one;  they
only  served  as  a  preface  to  the  rest  and  whetted  the
curiosity  more  and  more  as  the  moment  approached  to
satisfy  it.

218  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vil

This  first  act  over,  the  second,  that  of  annulling  the
decree  of  parliament,  was  announced  by  the  speech  of  the
Consternation;  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  the  force  of  which  pen-
envenomed  etrated  the  minds  of  the  parliament.  General

speech  of  the

president.  consternation  overspread  their  faces.  Scarcely

any  of  the  members  dared  to  speak  to  his  neighbour.  I
remarked  that  the  Abbé  Pucelle,  who,  being  a  counsellor-
clerk,  was  on  the  benches  opposite  to  me,  stood  up  when
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  was  speaking,  to  hear  him  better.
Bitter  pain,  that  was  plainly  full  of  spite,  darkened  the  face
of  the  president;  shame  and  confusion  was  also  upon  it.
What  the  jargon  of  the  Palais  calls  the  “grand  bench”
lowered  its  head  all  at  once  as  if  at  a  signal  ;  and  these
proud  magistrates,  whose  arrogant  “  remonstrances  ”  did  not
yet  satisfy  then  pride  and  their  ambition,  struck  down  by
a  punishment  so  great  and  so  public,  found  themselves
brought  back  to  their  true  position  with  ignominy,  and  with¬
out  being  pitied  by  any  except  their  own  paltry  cabal.

After  the  vote  was  taken,  and  while  the  Keeper  of  the
Seals  was  announcing  it,  I  saw  this  “  grand  bench  ”  rousing
itself.  The  president  wished  to  speak  ;  and  he  made  the
remonstrance  which  is  printed,  full  of  the  most  refined
malignity  and  impudence  towards  the  regent,  and  insolence
towards  the  king.  But  the  scoundrel  trembled  as  he  uttered
it.  His  broken  voice,  the  constraint  of  his  eyes,  the  shock
and  trouble  visible  in  his  whole  person  counteracted  this
last  drop  of  venom,  the  libation  of  which  he  could  not  deny
to  himself  and  his  Assembly.  It  was  then  that  I  tasted,
with  delight  that  can  never  be  expressed,  the  spectacle  of
those  proud  civilians,  who  dared  to  refuse  to  bow  to  us,
prostrate  on  their  knees,  rendering  at  our  feet  their  homage
to  the  throne  ;  while  we,  seated  and  covered  in  our  high
places  beside  that  throne,  were,  veritably  and  effectively,

1718]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

219

latérales  Regis  against  this  vas  elect um  of  the  tiers-état.
My  eyes,  fixed,  glued  on  those  arrogant  bourgeois,  ran  over
that  whole  grand  bench  on  its  knees  or  standing,  the  ample
folds  of  its  fur  robes  undulating  at  each  genuflection,  pro¬
longed  and  redoubled,  and  not  ending  until  by  command
of  the  king  given  by  the  mouth  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals.
The  president’s  remonstrance  over,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals
mounted  to  the  king  ;  then,  without  taking  any  vote,  he
returned  to  his  place,  cast  his  eyes  on  the  president,  and  said,
“  The  king  chooses  to  be  obeyed,  and  obeyed  upon  the  spot.”
That  great  saying  fell  like  a  thunderbolt,  striking  down  the
presidents  and  counsellors  in  a  visible  manner.  They  all
bowed  their  heads,  and  most  of  them  were  long  before  they
raised  them.  The  rest  of  the  spectators,  except  the  mar¬
shals  of  France,  seemed  little  affected  by  their  disconsolate
condition.

After  an  interval  of  a  few  moments  succeeding  the  pro¬
nunciation  upon  the  parliament,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals
Reduction  of  the  again  mounted  to  the  king,  and  returnmg  to
r^nkTn  the  th£ir  place  again  remained  silent  for  a  while,

peerage.  Then  all  present  perceived  that,  the  affair  of

the  parliament  being  over,  still  another  was  to  come.  Each
man,  in  suspense,  endeavoured  to  foresee  it  by  thought.  Some,
warned  by  their  eyes  of  the  absence  of  the  bastards,  judged
rightly  that  something  was  to  happen  concerning  them  ;  but
no  one  guessed  what,  and  much  less  the  extent  of  it.

At  last  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  opened  his  bps,  and,  with
his  first  words,  he  announced  the  fall  of  one  brother  and  the
preservation  of  the  other.  The  effect  of  this  on  all  faces  is
not  to  be  expressed.  However  occupied  I  might  be  in  con¬
trolling  mine,  I  did  not  lose  a  single  thing.  Astonishment
prevailed  over  all  the  other  passions.  Many  seemed  glad,
either  from  equity  or  from  hatred  to  the  Duc  du  Maine  or

220  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tii.

affection  for  the  Comte  de  Toulouse;  others  showed  con¬
sternation.  The  president  lost  all  countenance  ;  his  face,  so
consequential  and  audacious,  was  seized  with  a  convulsive
twitching  ;  the  excess  of  his  rage  alone  kept  him  from
swooning.  This  was  much  worse  to  him  than  the  reading
of  the  declaration  about  the  parliament.  Each  word  was
legislative  and  carried  with  it  a  fall  The  attention  was
general,  holding  each  person  motionless  so  as  not  to  lose  a
word  ;  all  eyes  were  on  the  clerk  who  was  reading.  Towards
the  middle  of  the  lecture,  the  president,  apparently  grinding
his  remaining  teeth,  dropped  his  forehead  on  his  stick,  which
he  held  by  both  hands,  and,  in  this  singular  and  very  marked
posture,  he  listened  to  the  rest  of  the  reading,  so  crushing  to
him,  so  resurrecting  to  us.

I,  meantime,  was  fainting  with  joy.  I  even  feared  I  might
give  way  ;  my  heart,  dilated  to  excess,  could  find  no  space  to
expand  in.  The  violence  that  I  did  to  myself  in  order  to  let
nothing  escape  me  was  great,  and  yet  this  torture  was  deli¬
cious.  I  compared  the  years  of  our  servitude,  the  melan¬
choly  days  when,  dragged  into  parliament  as  victims,  we  had
many  a  time  swelled  the  triumph  of  the  bastards  ;  I  recalled
the  divers  degrees  by  which  they  had  mounted  to  their  zenith
on  our  heads  ;  I  compared  these  things,  I  say,  with  this  day
of  law  and  justice,  with  this  awful  fall  which  was  also  the
lever  that  once  more  raised  us.  I  thanked  myself  that  it
had  been  through  me  it  was  effected.  I  considered  the  radi¬
ant  splendour  of  this  hour  in  presence  of  the  king  and  that
august  assembly.  I  triumphed  ;  I  was  avenged  ;  I  swam  in
my  vengeance  ;  I  rejoiced  in  the  full  accomplishment  of  the
most  vehement  and  continued  desire  of  my  whole  life.  I
was  tempted  to  feel  that  I  would  never  care  for  anything
again.  All  the  while,  however,  I  never  ceased  to  listen  to
that  vivifying  reading,  —  every  word  of  which  resounded  on

*718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

221

my  heart  like  the  bow  upon  an  instrument,  —  examining  at
the  same  time  the  different  impressions  that  it  made  on  all
present.

At  the  first  word  which  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  said  of
this  affair  the  eyes  of  the  two  bishop-peers  met  mine.  Never
did  I  see  surprise  to  equal  theirs,  nor  a  transport  of  joy  so
marked.  I  had  not  been  able  to  prepare  them,  on  account  of
the  distance  between  our  seats,  and  they  seemed  unable  to
check  the  emotion  that  seized  them  suddenly.  I  swallowed
by  my  eyes  one  delicious  draught  of  their  joy,  and  then  I
turned  away  my  head,  fearing  to  succumb  to  this  excess  of
mine,  not  daring  to  look  at  them  again.

That  reading  ended,  the  other  declaration,  in  favour  of  the
Comte  de  Toulouse,  was  begun  immediately.  It  seemed  to
complete  the  despair  of  the  president  and  the  friends  of  the
Duc  du  Maine  by  the  contrast  between  the  two  brothers.
The  friends  of  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  rejoiced;  indifferent
persons  were  very  glad  of  his  exception,  but  they  thought
it  without  grounds,  and  without  legality.  I  remarked  very
divers  movements,  and  more  ease  in  speaking  to  one  another
during  this  reading  ;  to  which,  nevertheless,  all  present  were
attentive.

The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  mounted  as  before  to  the  king
and  then  took  the  votes,  beginning  with  the  princes  of  the
,  .  blood,  after  which  he  came  to  the  Duc  de  Sully

I  decline  in  a  J

marked  manner  and  to  me.  Happily  I  had  a  better  memory
than  he,  or  perhaps  than  he  chose  to  have  ;  be¬
sides,  it  was  my  affair.  I  held  towards  him  my  hat  with  its
bunch  of  plumes  in  front  in  a  very  marked  manner,  saying  in
a  loud  tone:  “No,  monsieur,  we  cannot  be  judges;  we  are
parties  to  this  affair,  and  we  can  only  render  thanks  to  the
king  for  the  justice  he  is  kind  enough  to  do  us.”  He  smiled
and  made  me  an  excuse.  I  pushed  him  off  before  the  Duc  de

222  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vil

Sully  had  time  to  open  his  mouth  ;  and  looking  about  me
I  saw  with  pleasure  that  every  one  had  noticed  this  refusal
to  vote.  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  now  turned  short  round
upon  his  steps,  and  without  asking  the  votes  of  any  of  the
peers,  or  of  the  two  bishop-peers,  he  went  to  the  marshals  of
Trance  ;  then  he  descended  to  the  president  and  judges,  and
so  to  the  lower  seats  ;  after  which  he  remounted  to  the  king,
returned  to  his  place,  pronounced  the  order  for  registration,
and  so  put  the  final  crown  to  my  joy.

Immediately  after  this  M.  le  Duc  rose,  and  bowing  low  to
the  king  he  forgot  to  sit  down  again  and  put  on  his  hat  to
speech  of  m.  le  speak,  which  is  the  right  and  usage  of  the  peers
the'edvication'of  of  France  ;  accordingly  not  one  of  us  rose.  He
the  king.  therefore  delivered  uncovered  and  standing  the

speech  which  is  printed  at  the  end  of  the  other  proceedings  ;
he  read  it  rather  unintelligibly,  because  his  voice  was  not
favourable.  As  soon  as  he  had  finished,  the  Duc  d’Orléans
rose,  and  committed  the  same  blunder.  He  said,  standing
with  his  head  uncovered,  that  the  demand  of  M.  le  Duc
seemed  to  him  just  ;  and  after  a  few  laudations  of  him,  added
that  as  M.  du  Maine  was  now  reduced  to  his  place  in  the
seniority  of  the  peerage,  M.  le  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  could
no  longer  remain  under  him,  which  was  a  new  and  strong
reason,  besides  those  that  M.  le  Duc  had  adduced.  This
demand  had  brought  the  amazement  of  the  assembly  to  the
highest  pitch,  and  the  president  and  the  few  persons  who  by
their  disconcerted  looks  seemed  interested  in  the  Duc  du
Maine,  to  despair.  The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  without  mov¬
ing  a  muscle,  looked  furious,  and  the  eyes  of  M.  le  Grand
filled  with  tears.  I  could  not  well  distinguish  the  behaviour
of  his  cousin  and  intimate  friend,  the  Maréchal  d’Huxelles,
who  sheltered  himself  under  the  huge  brim  of  his  hat  pulled
down  over  his  eyes,  but  the  hat  never  quivered.  The  presi-

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

223

He  obtains  his
demand.

dent,  crushed  by  this  last  thunderbolt,  lost  countenance  al¬
together,  and  I  thought  for  a  moment  that  his  chin  would
drop  down  upon  his  knees.

Presently,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  having  told  the  king’s
law  officers  to  speak,  they  answered  that  they  had  not  heard
the  proposal  of  M.  le  Duc  ;  whereupon,  the
paper  was  passed  down  to  them  from  hand  to
hand,  during  which  time  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  repeated  in
loud  tones  what  the  regent  had  added  about  the  seniority  of
rank  in  the  peerage  of  the  Maréchal  de  Yilleroy  over  the
Duc  du  Maine.  The  avocat-général  merely  cast  his  eyes
upon  the  paper  of  M.  le  Duc,  and  made  his  speech  ;  after
which  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  went  to  take  the  votes.  I
gave  mine  quite  loud,  saying,  “For  this  affair,  monsieur,  I
vote  very  willingly  to  give  the  superintendence  of  the  king’s
education  to  M.  le  Duc.”

The  result  announced,  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  called
upon  the  clerk  of  the  parliament  to  bring  his  papers  and
Registration  of  his  little  desk  close  to  his  own,  and  make  im-

byth'eUitde  mediately,  in  presence  of  the  king,  all  the

justice.”  registrations  of  what  had  now  been  read  and

O

decreed,  and  to  sign  and  seal  them.  This  was  done  without
any  difficulty,  under  the  eyes  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,
who  never  lifted  them  from  the  process  ;  but  as  there  were
five  or  six  decrees  to  enregister,  it  took  a  long  time  to  do  so.

I  had  closely  observed  the  king  when  the  question  of  his
education  came  up,  and  I  did  not  remark  in  him  any  sort  of
The  king’s  be-  emotion,  or  change,  not  even  constraint.  It

haviour  ;  his  was  phe  jast  acq  0f  the  spectacle,  and  he  was

indifference  about

m.  du  Maine.  still  quite  fresh  while  the  registrations  were
being  written.  During  that  time,  as  there  were  no  more
speeches  to  occupy  his  attention,  he  began  to  laugh  with
those  who  were  nearest  to  him,  and  to  amuse  himself  with

224  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

what  he  saw,  even  to  remarking  that  the  Duc  de  Louvigny,
though  at  quite  a  distance  from  the  throne,  wore  a  velvet
coat,  and  he  joked  about  the  heat  he  must  he  in  ;  but  all  this
gracefully.  This  indifference  to  M.  du  Maine  struck  every
one,  and  publicly  contradicted  what  the  partisans  of  the  lat¬
ter  endeavoured  to  spread  about  ;  namely,  that  the  king’s  eyes
had  reddened,  though  neither  at  the  lit  de  justice  nor  after¬
wards  had  he  dared  to  show  his  feelings.  The  truth  was,
his  eyes  were  dry  and  serene,  and  he  never  uttered  the  name
of  the  Duc  du  Maine  but  once  afterwards,  and  that  was  on
the  evening  of  the  same  day,  when  he  asked  where  he  was
going,  with  a  very  indifferent  air,  without  saying  more  either
then,  or  later,  or  even  naming  his  children.  The  latter  had
seldom  taken  the  trouble  to  go  and  see  the  king  ;  and  when
they  did  go  it  was  only  to  hold  their  own  little  court  apart
in  his  presence  and  amuse  themselves  together.

While  the  registration  was  going  on,  I  turned  my  eyes
gently  on  all  sides  of  me,  and  though  I  steadily  controlled
them,  I  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  compensate  myself
for  the  past  on  the  president  ;  I  crushed  him  with  a  hundred
glances  prolonged  and  vehement.  Insult,  contempt,  disdain,
triumph,  darted  from  my  eyes  to  the  marrow  of  his  bones  ;
often  he  lowered  his  own  glance  when  he  caught  mine  ;  once
or  twice  he  fixed  his  eyes  upon  me,  and  I  gratified  myself
by  spurning  him  with  stealthy  but  vindictive  smiles,  which
utterly  confounded  him.  I  bathed  myself  in  his  rage,  I  took
delight  in  making  him  feel  it  ;  I  joked  about  him  sometimes
with  my  two  neighbours,  making  them,  with  a  wink,  look  at
him  when  I  knew  that  he  would  see  it  ;  in  a  word,  I  gave
myself  free  rein  upon  him  as  much  as  I  possibly  could.

The  registrations  being  at  last  completed,  the  king  de¬
scended  from  the  throne  to  the  lower  seats  by  his  little  steps,
and  passed  behind  the  chair  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

225

followed  by  the  regent,  the  two  princes  of  the  blood,  and  the
necessary  seigneurs  of  his  suite.  At  the  same  moment  the
The  “  ut  de  marshals  of  France  descended  by  the  end  steps

justice”  ends.  from  their  raised  seats,  and  while  the  king
crossed  the  parquet  accompanied  by  the  deputation  which
had  received  him,  they  passed  between  the  benches  of  the
counsellors,  directly  opposite  to  us,  and  put  themselves  in
the  suite  of  the  king  at  the  door  of  the  hall,  by  which  the
king  went  out  as  he  had  come.  At  the  same  time  the  two
bishop-peers,  passing  before  the  throne,  came  to  put  them¬
selves  at  our  head,  in  front  of  me,  all  of  us  keenly  re¬
joicing.  We  followed  them,  two  and  two,  along  our  benches,
in  order  of  precedence,  descending  the  three  steps  at  the  end
and  continuing  straight  to  the  door  in  front  of  us,  through
which  we  issued.  The  parliament  then  began  its  march,  and
issued  by  the  other  door,  which  was  the  one  through  which
we  had  entered,  and  by  which  the  king  had  entered  and
issued.  Way  was  made  for  us  to  the  steps.  The  crowd,
the  company,  the  spectacle  restrained  our  talk  and  our  joy.
I  was  choking  with  it.  I  entered  my  carriage  at  once,  for  it
was  there  at  hand,  and  it  got  me  very  easily  out  of  the  court¬
yard,  so  that  I  had  no  detention,  and  from  the  session  to  my
own  house  took  me  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

VOL.  iv.  — 15

VIII.

Entering  my  own  house  about  half-past  two  o’clock,  I
found  at  the  foot  of  the  staircase  Humières,  Louville,  and

The  regent  forces  a-^  my  family,  including  my  mother,  curiosity
me  to  teii  the  having  dragged  her  from  her  room,  which  she

Duchesse  d’Or-  .  .

leans  of  the  fall  of  had  not  left  since  the  beginning  of  the  winter,
her  brothers.  remained  down  stairs  in  my  apartment,

where,  while  changing  my  suit  and  shirt,  I  was  answering
their  eager  questions,  when  M.  de  Biron  was  announced,
he  having  forced  an  entrance,  which  I  had  forbidden  in
order  to  rest  a  little  in  freedom.  Biron  put  his  head  into
my  cabinet  and  begged  to  he  allowed  to  say  a  word  to  me.
I  went,  half-dressed,  into  my  chamber  with  him.  He  told
me  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  expected  me  to  go  straight  to
the  Palais-Boyal  from  the  Tuileries,  as  I  had  promised  him.
I  asked  Biron  if  he  knew  what  the  regent  wanted  me  for.
He  replied  it  was  to  go  to  Saint-Cloud  and  inform  the
Duchesse  d’Orléans  from  him  of  what  had  taken  place.
This  was  to  me  a  thunderbolt.  Biron  agreed  with  me  as
to  the  painfulness  of  such  an  errand,  hut  exhorted  me  to
go  at  once  to  the  Palais-Royal,  where  I  was  impatiently
awaited.  I  returned  to  my  cabinet  so  changed  that  Mine,
de  Saint-Simon  cried  out,  supposing  that  some  alarming
thing  had  happened.  I  told  them  what  I  had  just  heard,
and  after  Biron  had  talked  with  them  a  moment  and  ex¬
horted  me  to  lose  no  time  in  obeying,  he  went  off  to  dinner.
Ours  was  just  served.  I  waited  a  while  to  recover  from
my  first  agitation,  then  I  concluded  not  to  annoy  the  Due

1718]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

227

d’Orléans  by  my  slowness  if  lie  was  absolutely  deter¬
mined  on  tbis  matter,  at  the  same  time  to  do  my  best  to
avoid  an  errand  so  hard  and  painful.  I  therefore  swallowed
some  soup  and  an  egg,  and  went  off  to  the  Palais-Koyal.

There  the  Duc  d’Orléans  told  me  he  knew  the  pain  it
would  be  to  me  to  announce  to  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  an
event  so  distressing  to  her  in  her  way  of  thinking,  but  he
must  own  that  he  could  not  write  it  to  her  ;  they  were
not  on  terms  of  tenderness  ;  that  she  would  keep  and  show
his  letter  ;  that  I  had  always  been  the  make-peace  between
them,  and  this,  joined  to  my  friendship  for  each  of  them,
made  him  beg  me,  for  love  of  both,  to  undertake  this  com¬
mission.  I  answered,  after  the  proper  compliments  and
respects,  that  of  all  men  in  the  world  I  was  the  one  least
suitable  for  this  errand  ;  that  I  was  known  to  be  extremely
sensitive  about  the  rights  of  my  rank;  that  the  rank  of
the  bastards  had  always  been  intolerable  to  me;  that  I
had  never  ceased  to  ardently  desire  what  had  now  hap¬
pened  ;  that  I  had  said  so  a  hundred  times  to  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans  and  once  to  the  Duc  du  Maine  ;  and  for  me  to
go  and  announce  to  her  this  news,  which  put  me  at  the
summit  of  joy,  was  not  only  a  want  of  respect  but  would
be  insulting  to  her,  to  whom  it  would  cause  the  deepest
grief.  “You  are  wrong,”  replied  the  Duc  d’Orléans;  “that
is  not  reasoning.  It  is  just  because  you  have  always
spoken  so  frankly  about  the  bastards  to  Mme.  d’Orléans,
and  have  always  behaved  head  up  in  this  matter,  that  I
ask  you  to  go.  Don’t  refuse  me  this  mark  of  friendship  ;
I  know  perfectly  well  how  distasteful  the  errand  is  ;  but
in  such  an  important  matter  you  ought  not  to  refuse  a
friend.”  I  protested,  I  contested;  great  verbiage  on  both
sides,  —  in  short,  no  way  of  getting  out  of  it  ;  in  vain  I
said  it  would  embroil  me  with  her  forever,  that  the  world

228  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chai-,  viii.

would  think  it  very  strange  I  took  such  an  embassy  ;  no
ears  for  all  that,  but  such  redoubled  eagerness  that  I  had
to  yield.

When  I  reached  Saint-Cloud  they  told  me  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans  was  at  vespers.  I  waited  in  the  apartment  of
_ ,  ,  .  the  Maréchale  de  Eochefort,  which  opens  on

to  the  Duchesse  the  vestibule  to  the  chapel.  A  moment  later

d’Orléans.

they  came  to  tell  me  that  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans,  hearing  of  my  arrival,  hgd  icturned  to  her  apart¬
ment  ;  and  presently  tV  ~  maréchale  de  Eochefort  arrived,
limping  along  her  stick,  and  sent  by  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans  „  bring  me  to  her.  On  entering  the  bedroom
thp  maréchale  left  me.  I  was  told  that  her  Eoyal  High¬
ness  was  in  the  marble  salon  that  adjoins  it,  though  lower
by  three  steps.  I  turned  and  saw  her,  and  then  bowed
with  an  air  that  was  wholly  different  from  my  usual  man¬
ner.  At  first  she  did  not  perceive  the  change,  and  called
to  me  to  come  down  to  her,  in  a  gay  and  natural  manner  ;
then,  observing  that  I  stopped  at  the  foot  of  the  steps,  she
cried  out,  “  Good  God,  monsieur  !  how  you  look  !  What
news  do  you  bring  me  ?  ”  Seeing  that  I  did  not  move  or
answer,  she  asked  again.  I  slowly  made  a  few  steps  for¬
ward,  and  then,  after  her  third  question,  I  said,  “  Madame,
have  you  heard  nothing  ?  ”  “  No,  monsieur  ;  I  only  know

there  has  been  a  lit  de  justice,  but  nothing  of  what  hap¬
pened  there.”  “  Ah  !  madame,”  I  said,  “  then  I  am  more
unfortunate  than  I  thought.”  “  What  is  it,  monsieur  ?  ”
she  asked  ;  “  tell  me  quickly  what  has  happened.”  So  say¬
ing,  she  sat  up  on  the  sofa  on  which  she  had  been  lying.
“  Come  here  ;  sit  down,”  she  added.  I  approached  and  told
her  I  was  in  despair.  She,  more  and  more  agitated,  said,
“  Speak,  speak  !  it  is  better  to  hear  bad  news  from  friends
than  from  others.”  Those  words  wrung  my  heart  and

1718]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

229

made  me  feel  the  pain  I  was  going  to  give.  I  went  up  to
her  and  told  her  that  the  regent  had  reduced  M.  le  Duc
du  Maine  to  his  rank  of  seniority  in  the  peerage,  reinstat¬
ing  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  in  all  the  honours  he  enjoyed.
Here  I  paused  for  a  moment  ;  then  I  added  that  he  had  given
the  superintendence  of  the  king’s  education  to  M.  le  Duc.

Her  tears  began  to  flow  in  abundance.  She  did  not
answer,  did  not  cry  out,  hut  wept  bitterly.  She  pointed
to  a  seat,  and  I  sat  down,  —  my  eyes  fixed  on  the  ground
for  some  time.  Then  I  told  her  that  M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans,
who  had  forced  upon  me  rather  than  given  me  so  sad  an
errand,  had  expressly  ordered  me  to  say  to  her  that  he  had
very  strong  proofs  in  hand  against  M.  du  Maine  ;  that  his
consideration  for  her  had  long  withheld  him,  but  that  now
it  had  been  impossible  to  delay  any  longer.  She  replied
gently  that  her  brother  was  very  unfortunate  ;  and  soon
after  she  asked  me  if  I  knew  his  crime,  and  of  what  nature
it  was.  I  told  her  that  the  regent  had  never  spoken  of  it
to  me,  and  that  I  had  not  ventured  to  question  him,  seeing
that  he  said  no  more.  A  moment  later  I  expressed  my  own
grief  in  knowing  hers,  the  repugnance  I  felt  at  this  painful
errand,  and  the  resistance  I  had  made  to  it  ;  to  all  of  which
she  replied  by  signs  and  a  few  kind  words  broken  by  sobs.
She  asked  me  if  I  knew  what  the  Duc  d’Orléans  wished
her  to  do  about  her  brothers  ;  adding  that  she  would  not
see  them  if  he  did  not  wish  it.  I  replied  that  the  fact  of
his  giving  me  no  orders  on  that  point  was  a  proof  he  would
think  well  of  her  seeing  them  ;  that  as  for  the  Comte  de
Toulouse  there  could  be  no  difficulty  ;  and  for  the  Duc  du
Maine  I  saw  none  either,  and  would  answer  for  it  if  need
were.  She  spoke  of  the  latter,  saying  that  he  must  have
been  very  criminal  ;  that  she  was  reduced  to  wish  he
were.  Here  a  fresh  flow  of  tears  interrupted  her  words.

230

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.viil

I  sat  still  on  my  chair  for  a  time,  not  venturing  to  raise
my  eyes,  in  a  most  painful  uncertainty  as  to  whether  1
ought  to  go  or  stay.  At  last  I  told  her  of  my  embar¬
rassment,  saying  that  I  thought  perhaps  she  might  like  to
he  alone  for  a  while  before  giving  me  her  orders.  After  a
short  silence  she  said  she  wished  for  her  women.  I  rose
and  sent  them  to  her,  telling  them  where  to  find  me  if  her
Royal  Highness  desired  to  see  me  again.  After  a  time  the
Maréchale  de  Rochefort  came  to  say  that  she  wished  to
speak  to  me.  I  found  her  on  the  same  sofa  where  I  had
left  her,  a  writing-desk  on  her  knees  and  a  pen  in  her  hand.
As  soon  as  Aie  saw  me  she  said  she  was  going  to  Mont¬
martre,  and  was  writing  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans  to  ask  his
permission  ;  and  she  read  me  her  letter,  which

She  dictates  to

me  a  singularly  was  begun  by  six  or  seven  lines  in  a  large
noble  letter.  handwriting  on  a  small  sheet  of  paper  ;  then,

looking  at  me  with  an  air  of  gentleness  and  friendship,  she
said  :  “  The  tears  blind  me  ;  I  have  sent  for  you  to  do  me
a  kindness  ;  my  hand  shakes  ;  will  you  write  it  for  me  ?  ”
so  saying  she  held  out  the  writing-case  with  the  paper  upon
it.  I  took  it,  and  she  dictated  the  rest.  I  was  struck  with
the  greatest  astonishment  at  a  letter  so  concise,  so  expres¬
sive,  with  sentiments  so  becoming,  in  words  so  well  chosen  ;
and  all  in  an  order  and  precision  that  the  most  tranquil
reflection  could  scarcely  have  produced  in  the  best  of  writers,
and  issuing  spontaneously  amid  violent  distress,  sudden
agitation,  the  tumult  of  many  passions  broken  by  sobs  and
torrents  of  tears.  I  shall  always  regret  that  I  could  not
copy  it.  It  was  so.  dignified,  so  just,  so  restrained,  that  it
was  equally  loyal  to  truth  and  to  duty,  —  a  letter  so  per¬
fectly  beautiful  that,  although  I  remember  in  the  main
what  was  in  it,  I  dare  not  write  it  down  for  fear  of  degrad¬
ing  it.  What  a  sad  pity  that  so  much  sense,  intelligence.

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

231

right-mindedness  in  a  spirit  so  capable  of  controlling  itself
in  moments  usually  uncontrollable,  should  he  spent  on  this
mania  of  bastardy,  which  ruined  and  devastated  everything.
The  letter  written,  I  read  it  to  her.  She  would  not  close
it,  and  asked  me  to  give  it  back  to  her.

The  Duc  du  Maine  and  the  Comte  de  Toulouse,  on  leav¬
ing  the  Council  chamber,  went  down  to  the  apartment  of
the  Duc  du  Maine,  where  they  shut  them-

Conduct  of  the  J

Comte  de  Tou-  selves  up  with  their  most  confidential  friends.

They  chose  them  well,  for  no  one  ever  knew
what  passed.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse  did  not  leave  to  go
to  his  own  house  till  five  o’clock,  when  he  seemed  inclined
to  follow  the  fortunes  of  his  brother  ;  but  d’O,  who  had
retained  over  his  mind,  as  he  had  over  his  household,  the
sort  of  control  of  a  former  governor,  dissuaded  him,  —  not
that  d’O  was  unfriendly  to  the  Duc  du  Maine,  but  he
was  more  attached  to  his  own  interests,  and  those  were
certainly  not  to  allow  his  master  to  annihilate  himself
by  going  into  exile  in  the  country.  We  heard  afterwards
that  the  frankness  with  which  the  Chevalier  d’Hautefort,
his  equerry,  and  lieutenant-general  of  the  navy,  spoke  to
him,  determined  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  to  take  the  wiser
course.  He  thought  of  himself  alone  at  Eambouillet,  out
of  all  condition  or  power  to  undertake  anything  ;  in  danger
of  a  degradation  like  that  of  his  brother  for  refusing  to
accept  the  declaration  in  his  favour  ;  dependent  on  the
fortunes  and  caprices  of  a  crazy  woman  whom  he  abhorred
and  a  brother  whom  he  neither  loved  nor  respected.  The
consequences  made  him  tremble,  and  he  determined  to
keep  his  rank  and  his  present  position.  The  next  day
but  one,  Sunday,  he  held  the  council  of  the  navy  as  usual
and  came  in  the  afternoon  to  the  Council  of  Regency
with  a  cold,  reserved,  and  serious  manner.  Some  persons

232  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yiii.

were  surprised  and  sorry  to  see  him  there.  Few  approached
him,  and  shortly  after  his  arrival  we  took  our  places.  As
soon  as  I  was  seated  I  whispered  to  him  that  I  should  only»
venture  to  say  one  word,  which  I  could  not  help  saying
namely  :  that  this  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  seated
myself  below  him  with  pleasure.  His  thanks  were  of  his
nature,  cold.  I  did  not  speak  to  him  again  during  this
Council.  His  coldness  lasted  some  time.  I  think  he
thought  it  was  decorous,  and  I  did  not  try  to  warm  him  ;
but  little  by  little  we  returned  to  our  old  relations  ;  and  I
heard  afterwards  from  the  Duchesse  Sforza  that  he  blamed
the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  very  much  for  her  hard  feelings
towards  me  and  for  refusing  to  see  me  ;  and  had  even  made
her  cry  about  it  more  than  once.

The  parliament  returned  from  the  lit  de  justice  on  foot,
with  very  little  satisfaction  from  the  people  in  the  streets,
none  of  whom  followed  them,  or  from  the

Clandestine  use

of  secret  registers  shops,  from  which  they  heard  remarks  very
by  parliament.  different  from  those  they  expected.  When

they  reached  their  own  Chamber  they  breathed  freer  from
the  fear  and  shame  they  had  endured,  and  tried  to  avenge
themselves,  clandestinely,  by  causing  to  be  entered  on  a  fly¬
sheet  of  a  secret  register  that  they  had  not  been  able  or
permitted  to  vote  at  the  lit  de  justice,  and  they  therefore
protested  against  all  that  was  done  there.

Thus  ended  this  great  affair,  so  important  to  the  peace  of
the  State,  by  consolidating  the  royal  authority  in  the  hands  of
the  regent,  and  preventing  a  division  of  it  which  would  soon
have  left  him  a  vain  and  empty  show  of  power  ;  a  compli¬
cated  affair,  the  success  of  which  was  due  equally  to  diligence
and  to  secrecy,  to  want  of  preparation  in  the  cabal  already
formed,  and  to  the  weakness  of  its  principal  leaders.  The
honour  that  this  action  won  for  the  regent  in  foreign  nations

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

233

is  inconceivable.  They  began  to  recover  from  the  fear  of
not  being  able  to  treat  securely  with  a  prince  who  allowed
his  power  to  be  wrested  from  him  by  legists;  this  is  how
the  King  of  Sicily  expressed  himself  freely  in  so  many
words  at  Turin  ;  and  the  other  powers  made  it  as  distinctly
understood.

The  day  after  the  lit  de  justice  M.  le  Duc  assumed  pos¬
session  of  the  education  of  the  king  and  began  his  functions.

m.  ie  Due  takes  He  established  himself  a  few  days  later  in  the
education  oTthe  apartment  occupied  by  the  Duc  du  Maine  at
king-  the  Tuileries.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  day

of  the  lit  de  justice  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  accompanied  by
M.  de  Fréjus  and  the  rest  of  the  education,  went  ostenta¬
tiously,  though  inwardly  raging,  to  the  hôtel  de  Condé,
where  the  supple  respects  on  one  side,  and  the  false  compli¬
ments  on  the  other  made  quite  a  spectacle.  The  next  day
the  king  went  to  drive  in  the  Cours,  and  M.  le  Duc  accom¬
panied  him  in  place  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  thus  making
public  his  function.

It  is  well  known  that  Mme.  de  Lévi  had  a  great  deal  to
do  with  making  M.  de  Fréjus  the  king’s  preceptor.  She
was  a  woman  of  much  mind,  lively  to  excess,
always  ardent,  seeing  persons  and  things  only
through  passion  ;  she  was  possessed  about  M.
de  Fréjus  to  folly,  if  the  truth  be  told,  but  also  in  all
propriety  and  honour;  for  this  woman,  with  her  transports
of  affection  and  the  reverse,  was  deeply  imbued  with  virtue,
honour,  religion,  and  decorum.  She  was  the  daughter  of
the  Duc  de  Chevreuse  and  therefore  intimately  my  friend,
and  always  in  the  closest  union  with  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon.
Talking  with  us  one  evening,  she  began  upon  the  subject
of  M.  de  Fréjus  and  blamed  me  for  not  liking  him.  I
showed  my  surprise,  for  I  really  had  no  reason  to  like  or

My  relations
with  Fleury,
Bishop  of  Fréjus.

234  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yiii.

dislike  him.  That  did  not  satisfy  her,  and  she  returned
to  the  charge  again  and  again.  I  concluded  therefore  that
this  was  done  by  agreement  with  M.  de  Fréjus,  who,  look¬
ing  afar,  desired  to  smooth  his  way.  I  always  answered
civilly  about  him,  for  I  had  no  reason  to  do  otherwise  ;  so
that  finally  he  addressed  me  one  day  in  the  king’s  cabinet,
and  soon  after  came  to  my  house  and  asked  himself  to
dinner.  After  that  he  came  quite  often,  frequently  to
dinner,  and  I  used  sometimes  to  go  and  see  him  in  the
evenings.  He  was  always  a  good  talker  and  good  company,
and  had  passed  his  life  in  choice  society.  Many  subjects
therefore  came  up  in  our  conversations.

One  evening  when  I  was  with  him,  soon  after  he  began
his  functions  as  preceptor,  they  brought  him  a  package.  As
it  was  late,  and  he  was  in  his  dressing-gown
and  night-cap  at  the  corner  of  his  fire,  I  made
as  if  to  go  away  and  let  him  open  his  packet.
He  prevented  me,  and  said  it  was  only  some

I  propose  to  him
an  easy,  novel,
agreeable,  and
useful  form  of  in¬
struction  for
the  king.

themes  of  the  king  which  he  made  the  Jesuits

correct,  and  they  had  sent  them  back.  He  had  good  reason
to  use  this  help,  for  he  himself  knew  nothing  but  the  great
world,  ruelle ,  and  gallantry.  Apropos  of  the  king’s  themes
I  asked  him,  as  if  not  approving  it,  whether  he  intended
to  put  much  Latin  into  his  head.  He  said  no,  only  enough
to  keep  him  from  being  entirely  ignorant  of  it  ;  and  we  soon
agreed  that  history,  especially  that  of  France,  general  and
special,  was  what  he  ought  to  study  most.  Thereupon  a
thought  came  into  my  head,  which  I  imparted  to  him  at
once,  of  a  means  whereby  to  teach  the  king  a  thousand  very
instructive  and  special  things  that  would  be  useful  to  him
all  his  life,  and  yet  amusing,  things  which  he  could  scarcely
learn  in  any  other  way.  I  told  him  that  Gaignières,  a
learned  and  judicious  virtuoso,  had  spent  his  life  in  all  sorts

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

235

of  historical  researches,  and  had,  with  much  trouble  and
expensive  journeys,  collected  a  great  number  of  portraits  of
men  and  women  of  all  kinds  who  had  figured  in  France,
especially  at  Court,  in  public  affairs,  and  in  the  army,  from
the  time  of  Louis  XI.  ;  and  in  the  same  way,  but  in  less
quantity,  those  of  foreign  nations.  I  said  I  had  often  seen
these  portraits,  though  only  in  part,  because  he  had  no  room
to  hang  them,  although  he  had  lived  in  a  vast  house,  opposite
the  Incurables  ;  and  that  Gaignières  before  his  death  had
given  this  vast  accumulation  to  the  king.1

X ow  the  cabinet  of  the  king  at  the  Tuileries  had  a  door
which  opened  into  a  very  long  and  handsome  gallery  which
was  entirely  bare.  This  door  had  been  walled  up  ;  and  a  few
plank  partitions  had  been  put  in  the  gallery  to  accommodate
the  valets  of  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  ;  and  I  proposed  to
M.  de  Fréjus  to  hire  rooms  for  the  latter  elsewhere,  open
the  door  of  communication  with  the  king,  cover  the  walls
with  Gaignières’  portraits  (which  were  probably  rotting  in
some  storage  room),  and  tell  the  preceptors  of  the  little  boys
who  came  to  pay  their  court  to  the  king  to  teach  their  pupils
to  know  these  personages  from  histories  and  memoirs,  so  that
they  could  talk  about  them  while  following  the  king  in  this
gallery,  while  he,  M.  de  Fréjus,  could  tell  the  king  about
them  fundamentally;  in  this  way  the  king  would  get  a
sketch  of  consecutive  history  into  his  mind,  and  a  thousand
anecdotes  very  useful  to  a  king  which  he  could  not  obtain
elsewhere:  I  said  he  would  be  struck  in  the  first  place  with
the  singularity  of  the  figures  and  clothes,  and  this  would
help  him  to  remember  the  facts  and  dates  of  these  personages  ;
that  neither  Christianity  nor  policy  forbade  his  knowing

1  The  Bibliothèque  Nationale  still  possesses  a  part  of  the  portraits  and
manuscripts  collected  by  Gaignières.  Much  curious  information  can  be
found  there  on  the  ancient  institutions  of  France.  (Note  by  the  French
editor.)

236  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viil

about  the  birth,  fortunes,  actions,  and  behaviour  of  persons
dead  themselves  and  all  who  belonged  to  them  ;  and  in  that
way,  little  by  little,  the  king  would  learn  what  were  good
services  and  ill  services,  how  fortunes  are  made  and  ruined,
the  rascalities,  the  scoundrelisms,  the  arts  and  shifts  by
which  persons  gain  their  ends,  deceive,  govern,  and  muzzle
kings,  set  up  cabals  and  minions,  thrust  out  merit,  mind,
capacity,  virtue,  —  in  a  word,  the  manoeuvres  of  Courts,  of
which  the  lives  of  these  personages  furnished  examples  of
all  kinds.  I  advised  him  to  bring  this  amusement  down
to  the  time  of  Henri  IY.  ;  for  it  would  put  historically  into
the  head  of  the  king  most  important  things  without  his
perceiving  the  instruction,  which  would  remain,  perhaps  to
the  end  of  his  life,  one  of  the  most  useful  he  ever  received  ;
for  the  portraits  would  always  remind  him  of  it  and  give
him  great  facility  for  more  serious  and  connected  study;
and  all  this  while  running  about  and  amusing  himself.  M.
de  Fréjus  expressed  himself  as  charmed  with  the  idea  and
extremely  glad  of  it.  But  he  did  nothing,  and  henceforth
I  saw  what  would  come  of  the  education  of  the  king,  and
said  no  more  to  M.  de  Fréjus  of  either  the  portraits  or  the
gallery,  where  the  valets  of  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  were  left
in  peace.

Cellamare,  the  Spanish  ambassador,  a  man  of  much  sense
and  ability,  had  busied  himself  for  a  long  time  in  secretly

Ceiiamare's  plot  stirring  UP  strifes.  His  object  was  nothing
against  the  less  than  to  bring  the  whole  kingdom  to  rebel

against  the  government  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
and,  without  seeing  clearly  what  could  be  done  with  the
regent,  to  put  the  King  of  Spain  at  the  head  of  affairs  in
France,  with  a  Council  and  ministers  appointed  by  him,  and
a  lieutenant  under  him,  who  should  be  in  fact  regent,  and
was  no  other  than  the  Duc  du  Maine.  These  plotters  reck-

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

237

oned  on  the  parliaments  of  Paris  and  the  provinces,  on  the
leaders  and  promoters  of  the  Unigenitus,  on  the  whole  of
Bretagne,  on  the  late  king’s  Court,  so  accustomed  to  the  rule
of  the  bastards  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;  and  they  had
never,  for  a  long  time,  ceased  to  attach  whomsoever  they
could  to  Spain  by  all  sorts  of  promises  and  hopes.  They
were  discovered  just  as  they  were  taking  their  very  last
measures;  but  the  regent  and  the  State  were  strangely
betrayed,  and  the  former  showed  an  almost  incredible
weakness.

Things  having  reached  this  point  on  the  part  of  Spain  and
of  those  who  were  conspiring  with  it  for  their  own  hopes  or

vengeance,  it  became  necessary  to  reveal  in
Madrid  the  exact  state  of  things  in  Prance,
and  all  the  names  of  those  concerned.  Cella-

His  despatches
captured  at
Poitiers.

mare,  too  wary  to  confide  to  any  of  his  own  people  a  despatch
of  such  consequence,  wished  the  messenger  to  be  chosen  in
Madrid,  saying  that  he  must  be  somewhat  above  a  courier,
but  not  of  such  quality  as  to  excite  suspicion.  Accordingly
they  chose  in  Madrid  a  young  ecclesiastic,  who  called  him¬
self,  or  others  called  him,  the  Abbé  Portocarrero,  and  they
gave  him  as  an  assistant  the  son  of  Monteleone.  Nothing
could  be  better  planned  than  for  two  young  men  to  meet
casually  in  Paris,  one  arriving  from  Madrid,  the  other  from
the  Hague,  and  to  subsequently  join  each  other  to  return  to
Madrid.  Whether  it  was  that  the  arrival  of  the  abbé  and
his  short  stay  before  returning  to  Madrid  excited  the  sus¬
picions  of  the  Abbé  Dubois  and  his  emissaries,  or  whether
Dubois  had  corrupted  some  official  of  the  Spanish  embassy  by
whom  he  was  warned  that  these  young  men  were  carrying  an
important  package,  or  whether  there  was  some  other  mystery,
I  cannot  say.  However  that  may  be,  the  Abbé  Dubois  sent
in  pursuit  of  them;  they  were  arrested  at  Poitiers,  their

238  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yiii.

papers  taken  from  them  and  brought  to  Dubois  by  the
courier  despatched  to  convey  the  news.

Chance  does  great  things  sometimes.  The  courier  from
Poitiers  reached  the  Abbé  Dubois  just  as  the  Duc  d’Orléans
was  going  to  the  Opera.  Dubois  looked  over  the  papers  and
told  the  news  of  the  capture  to  the  regent  as  he  came  from
his  box.  The  prince,  who  always  went  at  that  hour  to  his
roués,  did  so  as  usual,  under  pretext  that  the  Abbé  Dubois  had
not  had  time  to  examine  the  papers,  with  a  careless  indiffer¬
ence  to  which  everything  succumbed.  The  first  hours  of  his
morning  were  never  clear;  his  head,  bewildered  still  with
the  fumes  of  wine  and  the  digestion  of  the  viands  at  his
supper,  was  not  in  a  state  to  understand  ;  hut  this  was  the
time  chosen  by  Dubois  to  give  him  such  an  account  of  the
papers  seized  at  Poitiers  as  he  thought  proper.  He  said  and
showed  only  what  he  chose,  and  never  let  any  one  of  the
documents  go  hi  to  the  hands  of  the  regent,  much  less  into
those  of  others.  The  blind  confidence  and  careless  negli¬
gence  of  the  prince  on  this  occasion  are  incomprehensible  ;
and  what  is  still  more  so,  the  same  conduct  reigned  through¬
out  the  whole  of  this  affair  in  all  its  phases,  and  thus  ren¬
dered  the  Abbé  Dubois  sole  master  of  proofs,  suspicions,
convictions,  absolutions,  and  punishments.

But  whether  it  was  that  the  regent  knew  more  than  he
chose  to  show,  and  that  fear  of  the  number,  names,  position,
and  consideration  of  those  who  were  mixed  up  in  this  affair
made  him  take  the  course  he  did,  or  whether,  as  I  believe,
his  continual  negligence  and  his  subjection  under  the  yoke
that  Dubois  put  upon  him  left  him  in  ignorance  of  the  real
depth  and  importance  of  the  conspiracy  and  of  the  names  of
the  chief  persons  concerned  in  it,  certain  it  is  that  out  of
this  curious  obscurity  there  appeared  a  plot  of  M.  and  Mme.
du  Maine,  at  which  they  had  been  working  long  before  the

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

239

lit  de  justice,  and  immediately  after  the  beginning  of  the
regency,  —  a  plot  to  stir  into  rebellion  the  so-called  nobility,
the  parliament,  Bretagne,  and  all  who  could  be  set  to  work
to  carry  out  what  Mme.  du  Maine  had  once  declared  so  dis¬
tinctly  to  the  Duc  de  La  Force:  “When  persons  have  once
acquired  the  rank  of  princes  of  the  blood  and  the  right  of
succession  to  the  throne,  the  State  may  be  overthrown  and
set  ablaze  before  they  will  allow  it  to  be  wrested  from
them.”

The  day  after  the  arrival  of  the  courier  from  Poitiers  the
Prince  de  Cellamare,  warned  on  his  side  of  the  untoward

event,  but  flattering  himself  that  the  presence
of  a  bankrupt  banker  [who  was  with  them]
was  the  cause  of  the  arrest  of  the  two  young

Cellamare
arrested  ;  his
conduct.

men  and  the  seizure  of  their  papers,  concealed  his  uneasiness
under  a  very  tranquil  exterior,  and  went  at  one  o’clock  to
M.  Le  Blanc,  secretary  of  war,  to  ask  for  a  packet  of  letters
he  had  intrusted  to  those  young  travellers  on  their  return  to
Spain,  furnished  as  they  were  with  a  passport  from  the  king.
Le  Blanc,  who  had  had  his  lesson,  replied  that  the  packet
had  been  seen,  and  found  to  contain  important  matters,  and,
so  far  from  being  returned  to  him,  he,  Le  Blanc,  had  orders
to  take  Cellamare  back  to  his  own  house  with  the  Abbé
Dubois  —  for  the  abbé,  being  notified  of  Cellamare’s  arrival,
had  followed  him  promptly.  They  made  the  prince  get  into
Le  Blanc’s  coach  and  got  in  with  him.  The  ambassador,
who  felt  that  such  a  compliment  was  not  risked  without
due  precautions  for  its  execution,  made  no  difficulty,  an.]
did  not  lose  for  a  moment  his  coolness  and  tranquillity
during  the  three  hours  they  spent  in  rummaging  all  his
desks  and  boxes  and  in  selecting  the  papers  they  wanted.
He  behaved  like  a  man  who  fears  nothing  and  is  perfectly
assured  as  to  his  own  conduct.  He  treated  Le  Blanc  very

240  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viii

civilly  ;  as  for  Dubois,  with  whom  he  felt  he  need  keep  no
terms,  for  the  whole  plot  was  evidently  discovered,  he  treated
him  with  such  contempt  that  when  Le  Blanc  laid  hands  on
a  little  casket  he  called  out,  “  Monsieur  Le  Blanc,  Monsieur
Le  Blanc,  let  that  alone  ;  it  is  not  for  you  ;  it  is  only  fit  for
the  Abbé  Dubois  ;  ”  adding,  as  he  looked  at  Dubois,  “  he  has
been  a  pimp  all  his  life  ;  those  are  nothing  but  women’s
letters.”  The  abbé  laughed,  not  daring  to  be  angry.  Ap¬
parently  it  was  a  piece  of  malice  Cellamare  wanted  to  get
off,  for  he  was  already  old  and  looked  older  than  he  was.
He  had  a  great  deal  of  wit,  knowledge,  and  capacity,  all
turned  in  solid  directions,  no  sort  of  debauchery,  and  all
his  gallantry  was  merely  for  commerce  with  the  great  world,
to  discover  what  he  wanted  to  know,  to  make  and  hold  par¬
tisans  to  the  King  of  Spain  and  sow,  without  imprudence,
ill-will  to  the  regent.  In  other  respects  he  lived  retired  in
his  own  house,  reading  and  working.  As  soon  as  he  and
his  two  acolytes  reached  his  house,  a  detachment  of  mous¬
quetaires  guarded  the  building  and  doors.

I  heard  in  the  morning  of  the  seizure  at  Poitiers,  but
not  of  this  arrest.  While  I  was  at  dinner  a  servant  came
from  the  Duc  d’Orléans  to  tell  me  to  be  at  the  Tuileries
for  a  Council  of  Regency.  As  this  was  not  the  regular  day
for  it  I  asked  if  anything  new  had  happened.  The  man
seemed  surprised  at  my  ignorance  and  told  us  that  the
Spanish  ambassador  had  been  arrested.

Tuesday  is  the  day  on  which  all  the  foreign  ministers
go  to  the  Palais-Royal,  and  December  the  13th  was  the  first

The  other  foreign  Tuesday  after  Cellamare’s  detention  ;  they  were
ministers  make  all  there,  ambassadors  and  others.  Hone  of

no  remonstrance.  .  .  .  , .  .

them  made  the  slightest  complamt  as  to  what
had  occurred,  and  they  each  received  a  copy  of  two  let¬
ters  [captured  at  Poitiers  and]  read  to  the  Council,  which

1718]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

241

left  no  doubt  that  Cellamare  was  at  the  head  of  the
affair,  and  that  Alberoni  was  equally  involved  hi  it.  In
the  afternoon  the  Spanish  ambassador  was  made  to  get  into
a  carriage  with  du  Libois,  a  captain  of  cavalry,  and  a  captain
of  dragoons,  selected  to  accompany  him  to  Blois  and  remam
there  with  him  until  news  was  received  of  the  Duc  de  Saint-
Aignan’s  return  to  France.

The  regent  con¬
fides  to  me  and
others  that  M.
and  Mme.  du
Maine  are  in  the
conspiracy.

Sunday,  December  25,  Christmas  Day,  the  Duc  d’Orléans
summoned  me  to  go  to  him  at  the  Palais-Royal  at  four
o’clock.  I  found  myself  alone  with  him  and
M.  le  Duc.  We  sat  down.  It  was  in  his
little  winter  cabinet  at  the  end  of  the  short
gallery.  After  a  moment’s  silence,  he  told
me  to  look  and  see  if  any  one  was  in  that
little  gallery,  and  if  the  door  at  the  end  of  it  was  closed.
I  went  to  see;  it  was  closed  and  there  was  no  one  in  the
gallery.  That  settled,  the  regent  told  us  that  we  should
certainly  be  surprised  to  hear  that  M.  and  Mme.  du  Maure
were  up  to  their  necks  in  this  affair  of  the  Spanish  am¬
bassador,  and  that  he  held  the  written  proofs  of  it.  He
added  that  he  had  forbidden  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  the
Abbé  Dubois,  and  Le  Blanc,  the  only  ones  who  knew  of  it,
to  let  their  knowledge  transpire,  and  he  requested  the  same
secrecy  and  caution  from  us,  adding  that  he  had  wished  to
consult  M.  le  Duc  and  myself  before  deciding  what  course
to  take.  I  thought  to  myself  that  as  those  other  three  men
knew  of  it,  he  must  have  discussed  the  matter  with  them,
and  probably  had  already  decided  on  his  course  with  the
Abbé  Dubois,  and  was  only  wishing  to  flatter  M.  le  Duc  and
me  by  asking  our  advice.  M.  le  Duc  went  straight  to  the
point,  and  said  he  ought  to  arrest  both  of  them  and  put
them  in  a  place  where  they  could  do  no  further  harm.  I
supported  that  opinion,  and  dwelt  on  the  danger  of  not

YOL.  iv.

■  10

242  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viii

We  all  advise
their  arrest.

doing  this  at  once,  partly  to  stun  and  throw  into  confusion
the  whole  plot  by  removing  its  leaders.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  agreed  that  this  was  the  best  course,
hut  he  dwelt  on  the  rank  of  Mme.  du  Maine,  less  I  think
from  conviction  than  to  make  the  son  of  her
brother  talk.  M.  le  Duc  replied  that  that  was
an  objection  which  it  was  for  him  to  make  ;  but  so  far  from
thinking  it  ought  to  be  made,  it  was,  in  his  opinion,  a  reason
the  more  for  taking  that  course.  I  insisted  on  the  courage
and  firmness  the  regent  ought  to  show  at  so  critical  a
moment,  and  on  the  necessity  for  terrifying  this  dangerous
cabal  and  taking  from  it  its  chief  supporters  in  name,  intrigue,
and  means.  The  regent  then  gave  in,  without  reluctance.

Thursday  the  29th,  at  ten  in  the  morning,  La  Billarderic,
lieutenant  of  the  body-guard,  after  surrounding  the  house
at  Sceaux  without  being  seen  or  heard,  went

The  Duc  du

Maine  arrested  up  to  the  Duc  du  Maine  as  lie  was  leaving
the  house  to  hear  mass  in  the  chapel,  and
asked  him,  very  respectfully,  not  to  re-enter  the  house,  but
to  get  into  a  carriage  he  had  brought  for  him.  M.  du  Maine,
who  was  alone  at  Sceaux  with  the  servants,  and  had  had
time  to  put  his  papers  in  safe  order,  made  no  resistance  ;
he  merely  said  that  he  had  expected  this  compliment  for
some  days,  and  got  immediately  into  the  carriage.  La
Billarderie  sat  beside  him,  and  on  the  front  seat  was  Favan-
court,  brigadier  of  the  first  company  of  mousquetaires,  who
was  to  guard  him  when  in  prison.  The  Duc  du  Maine
seemed  surprised  and  agitated  on  seeing  Favancourt,  but
when  they  reached  the  end  of  the  avenue  of  Sceaux,  where
the  body-guard  came  in  sight,  he  turned  pale.  The  silence
in  the  carriage  was  scarcely  broken.  Now  and  then  M.  du
Maine  said  that  he  was  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  suspicions
against  him  ;  that  he  was  greatly  attached  to  the  king,  and

1718]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

243

not  less  so  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  would  certainly  not
fail  to  admit  it  ;  that  it  was  very  unfortunate  his  Royal  High¬
ness  gave  ear  to  his  enemies,  hut  he  did  not  name  them.
All  this  was  said  spasmodically  and  with  many  sighs  ;  now
and  then  there  were  signs  of  the  cross,  low  mutterings  like
prayers,  and  divings  down  of  the  body  at  each  church  or
each  crucifix  they  passed.  He  did  not  know  until  the  next
day  that  he  was  going  to  Dourlens.  I  heard  all  these  cir¬
cumstances  and  those  of  his  imprisonment  from  Favancourt,
whom  I  knew  well;  he  taught  me  the  exercise  and  was
corporal  of  the  first  company  of  mousquetaires  when  I  was
in  the  same  brigade,  and  since  then  had  always  courted  me.

The  same  day  Ancenis,  who  had  just  received  the  place  of
his  father  the  Duc  de  Charost  as  captain  of  the  body-guard,
J  arrested  the  Duchesse  du  Maine  at  her  own
Maine  arrested  in  house  in  the  rue  Saint-Honoré.  When  she
found  she  was  being  taken  to  Dijon  she  de¬
claimed  vehemently,  but  worse  when  she  entered  the  château
and  found  herself  a  prisoner  under  the  key  of  M.  le  Duc.
She  was  furious  against  her  nephew  and  the  horror  of  the
choice  of  that  place.  Nevertheless,  after  these  first  transports,
she  came  to  herself  and  saw  that  she  was  not  in  a  situation
to  show  passion.  She  then  shut  up  her  wrath  within  her,
affecting  indifference  to  everything  and  disdainful  secur¬
ity.  Her  sons,  the  Prince  de  Dombes  and  the  Comte  d’Eu,
were  exiled  to  Eu,  where  they  had  a  gentleman  in  ordinary
always  near  them.  Mlle,  du  Maine  was  sent  to  Maubuisson.

The  Comte  de  Toulouse,  ever  the  same,  went  immediately
on  the  arrest  of  M.  and  Mme.  du  Maine  to  see  the  Due
Excellent  d’Orléans.  He  told  him  distinctly  that  he  re-

straightforward  garded  the  king,  the  regent,  and  the  State  as

conduct  of the  °  °  .  °

Comte  de  one  and  the  same  thing  ;  he  assured  him  with¬

out  reserve  or  evasion,  that  he  would  never  he

244  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

found  in  any  way  contrary  to  the  duty  or  the  fidelity  he
owed  to  them,  nor  in  any  cabal  or  intrigue  ;  that  he  was
very  sorry  for  what  had  happened  to  his  brother,  adding,
immediately,  that  he  did  not  answer  for  him.  The  regent
repeated  this  to  me  the  same  day,  and  seemed,  with  good
reason,  charmed  by  this  straightforward  frankness.  The
blow  thus  struck  upon  M.  and  Mme.  du  Maine  completed
the  scattering  of  their  followers,  whom  they  had  used  and
fooled  with  so  much  art,  success,  and  subtlety  ;  the  bulk  of
them  opened  their  eyes  without  assistance  from  others  ;  the
small  number  of  confidants  who  had  led  and  blinded  the  rest
subsided  into  consternation  and  terror.

Parliament  rendered,  February  4,  a  decree  which  con¬
tented  itself  with  merely  suppressing  four  very  strange  docu-
I7Ï9  ments  and  forbidding  all  persons  to  print,  sell,

Forged  papers -,  or  discuss  them,  under  pain  of  being  prose-

come'from the  cuted  as  disturbers  'of  the  public  peace  and

Kmg  of  spam.  guilty  of  leze-maj  esty .  The  first  was  entitled

“  Copy  of  a  letter  from  the  Catholic  king,  written  by  his
hand,  which  Prince  Cellamare,  ambassador,  had  orders  to
present  to  the  Very  Christian  King  on  September  3,  1718
the  second  was  entitled  “  Copy  of  a  circular  letter  from  the
King  of  Spain  to  all  the  parliaments  of  France,  dated  Sep¬
tember  4, 1718  ;  ”  the  third  was  a  “  Manifesto  of  the  Catholic
king  addressed  to  the  Three  Estates  of  France;”  and  the
fourth  was  a  “  Petition  presented  to  the  Catholic  king  by  the
Three  Estates  of  France.”  One  did  not  need  to  be  very  well
informed  to  know  that  none  of  these  papers  ever  came  from
Spain.  They  certainly  were  not  found  in  the  valises  of  the
Abbé  Portocarrero  and  his  companion,  nor  among  the  papers
of  Cellamare.  They  made  some  noise  for  a  time,  but  were
soon  forgotten.  The  regent  despised  them,  and  they  did  not
disturb  him  in  the  least.  But  it  was  otherwise  with  certain

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

245

verses  that  appeared  about  the  same  time  under  the  name  of
“  Philippiques  ”  which  were  distributed  with  great  rapidity
and  in  extraordinary  quantity.  La  Grange,  formerly  page  of
the  Princesse  de  Conti,  the  king’s  daughter,  was  the  author,
and  never  denied  it.  All  that  hell  could  vomit  of  false  and
true  was  there  expressed  in  very  beautiful  verse,  a  most
poetic  style,  and  with  all  the  art  and  wit  imaginable.  The
Duc  d’Orléans  knew  of  the  poem,  which  was  long,  and  wanted
to  see  it,  but  was  never  able  to  do  so  because  no  one  dared
show  it  to  him.

He  spoke  to  me  several  times  about  it,  and  at  last  exacted
so  decidedly  that  I  should  bring  it  to  him  that  there  was  no

way  to  avoid  doing  so.  I  therefore  brought
it  ;  hut  as  for  reading  it  to  him,  I  declared  that
I  would  never  do  it.  He  then  took  it  and  read

Distress  of  the
regent  at  the
“  Philippiques.”

it  to  himself,  standing  by  the  window  of  his  little  winter
cabinet  where  we  were.  At  first  he  stopped  now  and  then  to
speak  of  it,  without  seeming  very  much  moved.  But  sud¬
denly  I  saw  his  face  change  ;  he  turned  to  me  with  tears  in
his  eyes,  looking  as  though  he  were  about  to  faint.  “  Ah  !  ”
he  said,  “  this  is  too  much  ;  this  horror  is  more  than  I  can
bear.”  He  had  reached  the  part  where  the  villain  exhibits
him  as  resolving  to  murder  the  king,  and  just  ready  to  com¬
mit  the  crime.  Here  the  author  redoubles  his  energy,  poesy,
invocations,  beauties,  terrible  and  terrifyirîg  invectives,  hid¬
eous  descriptions,  pathetic  pictures  of  the  youth  and  innocence
of  the  king,  and  of  the  hopes  he  gave,  adjurations  to  the
nation  to  save  so  dear  a  victim  from  the  barbarity  of  his
murderer,  —  in  a  word,  all  that  art  could  supply  most  delicate,
tender,  strong,  and  damnable,  imposing  and  affecting.  I  tried
to  profit  by  the  gloomy  silence  into  which  he  fell  to  take
away  from  him  that  execrable  paper,  but  I  could  not  manage
it  ;  he  expended  himself  in  just  complaints  of  such  horrible

246  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vhi.

wickedness,  in  tender  words  about  the  king,  and  then  he
chose  to  finish  the  reading,  interrupting  it  now  and  again
with  comments.  Never  did  I  see  a  man  so  grieved  to  the
soul,  so  deeply  moved  and  overwhelmed  by  an  injustice  so
monstrous  and  persistent.  I  myself  was  almost  beside  my¬
self.  Had  any  one  then  seen  him,  even  the  most  prejudiced
(provided  they  were  so  in  good  faith)  would  have  yielded  to
that  glow  of  innocence,  that  horror  of  the  crime  that  was
apparent  in  him.  I  had  great  difficulty  in  recovering  my¬
self,  and  all  the  pains  in  the  world  to  recover  him  by  even  a
little.

This  La  Grange,  who  in  himself  was  worth  nothing  in  any
way  whatever,  was  a  good  poet,  though  nothing  else  and
never  anything  else  ;  he  had  insinuated  himself  in  that
capacity  at  Sceaux,  where  he  soon  became  one  of  the  chief
favourites  of  Mme.  du  Maine.  She  and  her  husband  both
knew  of  his  life,  conduct,  morals,  and  mercenary  rascality  ;
they  also  knew  how  to  employ  him.  He  was  arrested  soon

A

after  and  sent  to  the  Iles  Sainte-Marguerite,  whence  he  ob¬
tained  a  release  toward  the  close  of  the  regency,  and  had  the
audacity  to  show  himself  everywhere  in  Paris.

We  have  seen  elsewhere  the  advice  I  gave  the  Due
d’Orléans  as  to  the  treatment  of  Père  Tellier  ;  namely,
Père  Teiiier  ;  i  try  that  he  should  be  sent  at  once  to  La  Flèche,
fmed'at^La'  C°n’  and  expressly  forbidden  to  sleep  away  from
Flèche-  it  or  to  receive  or  write  letters  unless  read  by

the  person  in  charge  of  that  duty  ;  that  the  king  should
grant  him  a  pension  of  six  thousand  francs,  besides  food,
lodging,  furniture,  wood,  books,  and  all  that  could  conduce
to  his  health,  comfort,  and  amusement,  with  two  valets  and
a  friar  to  attend  him,  perfect  independence  of  the  Jesuits
and  the  college,  and  freedom  to  dine  out  and  visit  in  the
neighbourhood.  I  wished  to  combine  a  recognition  of  his

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

247

past  services  with  public  tranquillity.  The  Duc  d’Orléans
strongly  approved  of  that  advice,  given  before  the  king’s
death,  hut  he  acted  very  differently.  The  pension  was
lessened,  but  the  liberty  was  greater.  Tellier  wanted  to  go
and  live  with  his  intimate  friend,  the  Bishop  of  Amiens,
and  was  allowed  to  do  so.  He  abused  the  permission  like
a  firebrand,  furious  and  enraged  at  no  longer  being  master.
His  machinations  in  France,  his  intrigues  in  the  Low-
Countries,  his  cabals  everywhere,  could  not  remain  secret.
He  slipped  away  to  Flanders,  and  went  himself  to  rouse
up  his  party,  which  was  far  too  languid  for  his  fiery  spirit.
He  did  so  much  that  the  Bishop  of  Amiens  was  strongly
reprimanded  and  Père  Tellier  was  finally  confined  at  La
Flèche.  This  tyrant  of  the  Church,  indignant  at  being  no
longer  able  to  cabal  (his  only  consolation  for  the  end  of
his  reign  and  his  terrible  tyranny),  found  himself  in  a  state
of  subjection  at  La  Flèche  both  new  and  intolerable.

The  Jesuits,  spies  upon  one  another,  jealous  of  those
who  have  the  secret  authority  and  the  consideration  that
ingratitude  of  authority  gives  them  over  the  heads  of  the
the  Jesuits.  monastic  orders  and  other  superiors,  are  also

amazingly  ungrateful  towards  those  who,  having  occupied
the  highest  places  and  served  their  Company  with  the
utmost  labour  and  great  success,  become,  through  old  age
or  infirmities,  useless  to  it.  They  then  regard  them  with
contempt,  and  far  from  respecting  their  age,  their  services,
or  their  merits,  they  leave  them  in  the  saddest  solitude
and  grudge  them  even  their  food.  I  have  seen  with  my
own  eyes  three  examples  of  this  in  three  Jesuits,  men  of
honour  and  true  piety,  who  had  held  positions  of  con¬
fidence  requiring  great  talents,  with  whom  I  had  been
intimately  acquainted.  The  first  was  the  rector  of  their
postulant  house  in  Paris,  superior  of  the  same  in  the  prov-

248  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

inces,  the  writer  of  several  excellent  books  of  piety,  and
for  some  years  assistant  to  the  general  in  Rome,  on  whose
death  he  returned  to  Paris,  because  it  is  the  Jesuit  custom
that  each  new  general  of  the  Order  should  have  new  assist¬
ants.  Returning  to  the  postulant  house  in  Paris,  aged
eighty  or  more,  he  was  lodged  under  the  tiles  on  the
top  floor,  in  solitude,  contempt,  and  the  lack  of  everything.
The  second  was  a  confessor  ;  he  was  long  ill,  and  finally
died.  They  scarcely  fed  him,  and  I  sent  him  his  dinner
daily  for  five  months  because  I  had  seen  his  pittance  and
his  remedies,  and  he  could  not  help  owning  to  me  how
much  he  suffered  from  the  treatment  he  received.  The
third,  very  old  and  very  infirm,  had  no  better  fate.  In  the
end,  being  unable  to  bear  it,  he  let  me  know  of  it,  and
asked  to  be  given  an  asylum  in  my  house  at  Versailles,
on  pretext  of  change  of  air.  Such  is  the  fate  of  all  Jes¬
uits,  without  excepting  the  most  famous,  unless  it  may  be
a  very  few  who  have  shone  at  Court  and  before  the  world
by  their  sermons  and  merits,  and  have  made  important
friends,  —  such  as  Pères  Bourdaloue,  La  Rue,  Gaillard.

It  was  therefore  to  this  neglect,  contempt,  and  tacit
reproach  that  Père  Tellier  was  reduced  at  La  Plèche,
although  it  is  true  he  had  a  pension  of  four  thousand
francs.  He  had  always  ill-treated  even  the  Jesuits.  Those
who  approached  him  when  confessor  to  the  king  did  so  in
trembling.  The  chief  superiors,  whom  he  governed  with  a
rod,  felt  his  harshness  and  tyranny  without  the  slightest
relief.  Even  the  general  was  forced  to  yield  to  Tellier
that  absolute  despotism  which  he  exercises  over  the  Com¬
pany  in  general  and  all  Jesuits  in  particular.  All  —  and
they  themselves  told  me  this  in  those  days  many  a  time  —
disapproved  of  the  violence  of  his  conduct,  and  felt  alarmed
for  the  sake  of  the  Company  ;  they  all  hated  him  as  a  brutal

1719]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

249

master,  hard,  inaccessible,  full  of  himself,  liking  to  make
his  scorn  and  his  power  felt.  His  exile  and  the  behaviour
that  drew  it  down  upon  him  was  another  motive  of  their
spite.  All  these  things  together  did  not  render  Père  Tel-
lier’s  enforced  retreat  at  La  Plèche  agreeable  to  him.  He
found  there  superiors  and  brethren  much  embittered,  who,
instead  of  feeling  the  terror  he  had  formerly  imposed,  now
felt  only  contempt  for  him  and  took  pleasure  in  letting  him
know  it.  This  king  of  the  Church,  and,  in  part,  of  the
State,  became  once  more  a  Jesuit  like  the  rest,  beneath
superiors  ;  and  we  can  well  imagine  what  a  hell  that  was
to  a  man  so  impetuous  and  so  accustomed  to  command
without  reply,  and  to  abuse  that  power  in  every  direction.
Consequently  it  was  not  for  long.  Ho  one  heard  of  him
again,  and  he  died  in  six  months  from  the  day  he  was
taken  to  La  Flèche.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry  was  living  after  her  usual  fashion,
in  a  mixture  of  the  loftiest  pride  and  the  basest  and  most
shameful  servitude,  with  austere  and  frequent

Strange  conduct  x

of  the  Duchesse  retreats  to  the  Carmelites,  suppers  with  vile
company,  profaned  by  indecent  and  impious
jests,  the  most  shameless  debauchery  mingled  with  horri¬
ble  fears  of  death  and  the  devil,  when  all  of  a  sudden  she
fell  ill  at  the  Luxembourg.  It  is  necessary  to  tell  all,  for
this  is  useful  to  history  ;  moreover,  there  will  not  he  found
in  these  Memoirs  the  relation  of  any  other  gallantries  than
those  which  are  necessary  to  an  understanding  of  important
and  interesting  events.  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  would  not
restrain  herself  in  any  way,  but  she  was  indignant  that  the
world  dared  to  speak  of  that  which  she  did  not  take  the
pains  to  conceal.  She  was  pregnant  by  Rion.  Mme.  de
Mouchy  was  their  convenience  in  the  matter,  though  all
tilings  went  on  openly  to  beat  of  drum.  Mme.  de  Saint-

250  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

Simon,  sheltered  from  much  of  this,  greatly  respected  and
beloved  by  the  whole  household,  and  seeing  the  Duchesse
de  Berry  only  at  such  times  as  she  attended  on  formal  duty
at  the  Luxembourg,  which  she  left  the  moment  that  duty
was  over,  was  able  to  ignore  what  was  happening,  although
she  was  thoroughly  informed  about  it.

The  pregnancy  reached  its  end,  and  this  end,  ill-prepared
for  by  suppers  washed  down  with  wines  and  the  strongest

The  sacraments  l^ors,  became  extremely  dangerous.  Mme.
refused  to  her  by  (je  Saint-Simon  could  not  avoid  being  assidu-

the  rector  and

cardinal  de  ous  when  danger  threatened,  but  she  would
Noaiiies.  not  yield  to  the  entreaties  of  the  Due  and

Duchesse  d’Orléans  to  sleep  at  the  Luxembourg.  The  dan¬
ger  becoming  imminent,  Languet,  the  celebrated  rector  of
Saint-Sulpice,  spoke  to  the  regent  of  the  sacraments.  The
first  difficulty  was  that  no  one  could  enter  the  room  to  pro¬
pose  them  to  the  duchess.  But  a  far  greater  difficulty  now
presented  itself.  The  rector,  a  man  who  knew  his  duty,
declared  that  he  would  not  administer  the  sacraments,  nor
permit  them  to  be  administered,  so  long  as  Bion  and  Mme.
de  Mouchy  were  in  the  chamber,  or  even  in  the  Luxem¬
bourg.  He  said  this  aloud,  in  the  hearing  of  every  one,  to
the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  was  less  shocked  than  embarrassed.
Taking  the  rector  aside  he  tried  to  make  him  yield  to
arguments.  Finding  him  inflexible,  he  proposed  at  last  to
refer  the  matter  to  Cardinal  de  Noaiiies  [Archbishop  of
Paris].  The  rector  accepted  instantly  and  promised  to  defer
to  his  orders  as  his  diocesan,  provided  he  was  allowed  to
explain  to  him  his  reasons.  The  matter  was  pressing  ;  the
Duchesse  de  Berry  had  meanwhile  confessed,  during  this
dispute,  to  a  Franciscan,  her  confessor.  The  Duc  d’Orléans
flattered  himself  no  doubt  that  the  diocesan  would  prove
more  amenable  than  the  rector,  to  whom  he  was  totally

1719]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  251

opposed  in  opinion  about  the  Unigenitus,  a  matter  on  which
the  cardinal  was  so  wholly  dependent  on  himself.  But  if
he  really  hoped  this,  he  was  greatly  deceived.

Cardinal  de  Noailles  arrived;  the  Duc  d’Orléans  took
him  aside  with  the  rector,  and  the  conversation  lasted  more
than  half  an  hour.  As  the  declaration  of  the  rector  had
been  public  the  cardinal-archbishop  judged  it  proper  that
his  own  should  be  so  also,  and  when  all  three  returned  to
the  company  and  to  the  door  of  the  chamber  he  said  aloud
to  the  rector  that  he  had  very  worthily  done  his  duty  ;  that
he  should  not  have  expected  anything  else  from  a  man  of
his  discernment  and  experience  ;  he  exhorted  him  not  to  let
himself  be  deceived  in  a  matter  of  such  importance,  and,  if
he  needed  anything  further  to  authorize  him,  he  forbade
him,  as  his  diocesan,  to  administer  the  sacraments  to  the
Duchesse  de  Berry  so  long  as  M.  de  Bion  and  Mme.  de
Mouchy  were  in  the  chamber,  or  even  in  the  Luxembourg
and  not  dismissed.  The  excitement  over  so  necessary  a
scandal,  the  effect  in  that  crowded  room,  the  embarrassment
of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  the  noise  it  made  in  the  world
can  be  imagined.  Nevertheless,  no  one,  not  even  the  pro¬
moters  of  the  bull,  the  most  violent  enemies  of  Cardinal  de
Noailles,  the  fashionable  bishops,  the  women  of  the  great
world,  nor  libertines  themselves  blamed  either  the  rector
or  the  archbishop;  some  because  they  knew  the  rules  and
dared  not  impugn  them,  but  the  greater  number  from  horror
at  the  conduct  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  and  the  hatred
that  her  haughtiness  drew  upon  her.

The  question  arising  between  the  regent,  the  cardinal,
and  the  rector,  all  three  standing  by  the  doorway,  which  of
them  should  announce  this  resolution  to  the  Duchesse  de
Berry,  who  had  meantime  confessed  and  expected  every
moment  to  see  the  holy  sacrament  arrive  and  to  receive  it,

252  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

the  cardinal  assumed  the  duty  of  speaking  himself  to  the
duchess,  and  was  moving  into  the  room  with  the  rector,
when  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  fearing  some  sudden  and  dangerous
convulsion  in  his  daughter,  implored  him  to  wait  until  he
could  himself  prepare  her,  and  went  to  the  door,  which  he
held  half  open  for  a  colloquy.  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  put
herself  in  a  passion,  answered  with  fury  against  canting
hypocrites  who  took  advantage  of  her  state  to  dishonour
her  before  the  world,  and  did  not  spare  her  father  for  his
folly  and  weakness  in  permitting  it.  ‘Who  could  have
believed  it  ?  she  said  ;  the  cardinal  and  the  rector  ought  to
have  been  kicked  downstairs  !  The  Duc  d’Orléans  returned
to  them  very  small  and  greatly  troubled,  not  knowing  what
to  do  between  his  daughter  and  the  Church.  The  attention
and  curiosity  of  the  large  company  who  filled  the  room
were,  naturally,  extreme.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  with  several
of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry’s  ladies,  was  seated  in  the  recess
of  a  window  at  a  little  distance  and  saw  the  whole  perform¬
ance,  being  informed  from  time  to  time  of  other  particulars.

Cardinal  de  Noailles  was  there  more  than  two  hours,  and
then,  seeing  that  he  could  not  enter  the  room  without  a  sort
of  violence  quite  the  contrary  of  persuasion,  he  thought  it
indecent  to  stay  longer.  He  therefore  reiterated  his  orders
to  the  rector,  and  told  him  to  watch  and  not  allow  the  sacra¬
ments  to  he  administered  clandestinely.  He  then  went  up
to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  took  her  aside,  and  told  her  what
had  passed,  regretted  it  with  her,  hut  said  he  could  not
avoid  the  scandal.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  hastened  to  tell  his
daughter  of  the  departure  of  the  cardinal,  which  was  a  great
relief  to  him.  But  on  leaving  her  room  he  was  much  aston¬
ished  to  find  the  rector  established  close  to  the  door,  and  to
be  informed  that  he  had  taken  that  post  and  there  he  should
stay  in  order  not  to  be  deceived  about  the  sacraments.  In

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

253

fact,  he  did  stay  there  firmly  four  days  and  nights,  except  for
short  intervals,  when  he  went  to  his  house  near  the  Luxem¬
bourg  for  food  and  rest,  leaving  two  priests  on  guard  till  his
return.  Finally,  the  danger  being  past,  he  raised  the  siege.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry,  safely  delivered  of  a  girl,  thought
only  of  recovery.  She  was  infinitely  pained  at  the  manner
in  which  every  one,  even  the  populace,  had  taken  her  illness
and  all  that  had  happened  concerning  it.  She  fancied  she
should  regain  something  by  opening  the  gates  of  the  gardens
of  the  Luxembourg,  which  she  had  long  since  closed  to  the
public.  People  were  very  glad  of  this,  and  profited  by  it,
hut  that  was  all.  The  duchess  vowed  herself  to  white  for
six  months  ;  at  which  vow  the  world  only  laughed.

Saturday,  April  15,  the  vigil  of  the  first  Sunday  after
Easter,  died  at  Saint-Cyr,  in  the  evening,  the  celebrated

and  fatal  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  What  a  noise

DeathofMme.de

Maintenon.  Her  this  event  would  have  made  in  Europe  had

life  at  Saint-Cyr.  . ,  ,  ,  »  ,  ,  ,

it  happened  a  few  years  earlier  !  It  was
little  known  at  Versailles,  which  is  so  near  Saint-Cyr,  and
scarcely  mentioned  in  Paris.  I  have  said  so  much  of  this
too  famous,  unhappily  famous,  woman  at  the  time  of  the
king’s  death  that  little  is  left  to  say  at  the  present  time  ;
though,  having  figured  so  powerfully  and  banefully  for
thirty-five  years  without  a  break,  everything,  even  to  her
last  years  of  seclusion,  is  of  interest.  She  retired  to  Saint-
Cyr  at  the  moment  of  the  king’s  death,  and  had  the  good
sense  to  assume  the  reputation  of  being  dead  to  the  world,
and  never  again  to  set  foot  outside  the  enclosure  of  that
establishment.  She  would  see  no  one  from  the  outside
(except  the  very  few  persons  I  shall  presently  mention),
nor  would  she  ask  for  anything,  nor  recommend  any  one,
nor  meddle  in  any  matter  whatsoever  in  which  her  name
could  he  mixed  up.  Cardinal  de  Bohan  saw  her  every

254  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yiii.

week  ;  the  Duc  du  Maine  also,  who  remained  with  her
three  or  four  hours  tête-à-tête.  All  things  beamed  upon
her  when  he  was  announced  ;  she  kissed  her  “  mignon  ”
(for  she  always  called  him  so)  with  the  utmost  tenderness.
Mme.  de  Caylus,  Mme.  de  Dangeau,  and  Mme.  de  Lévi
were  admitted;  also  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  for  whom  she
seemed  to  care  hut  little;  Maréchal  de  Yilleroy,  when  he
could  find  the  time,  was  always  very  warmly  welcomed  ;
Cardinal  de  Bissy  hardly  ever  went  there  ;  a  few  obscure
and  fanatical  bishops  occasionally  ;  Bloin  now  and  then  ;
and  the  Bishop  of  Chartres  (Merinville),  the  diocesan  and
superior  of  the  establishment  constantly.

Once  a  week  when  the  Queen  of  England  was  at  Saint-
Germain  she  came  to  dine  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;  but
never  from  Chaillot,  where  she  spent  much  time.  Both
had  their  armchairs  in  which  they  faced  each  other.  At
the  dinner-hour  a  table  was  placed  between  them  with
their  covers,  the  first  dishes,  and  a  bell.  The  young  ladies
of  the  house  waited  on  them,  served  them  with  drink,
plates,  and  other  dishes  when  the  bell  rang  ;  the  queen
was  always  very  kind  to  them.  The  meal  over,  they  re¬
moved  everything  from  the  room,  and  brought  in  coffee.
The  queen  stayed  two  or  three  hours  tête-à-tête  with  Mme
de  Maintenon,  after  which  they  embraced  and  parted.
Mme.  de  Maintenon  made  three  or  four  steps  in  receiving
the  queen  and  at  parting  from  her.  The  young  ladies,
who  were  in  the  antechamber,  accompanied  the  queen  to
her  carriage  ;  they  were  very  fond  of  her,  for  she  was
always  very  gracious  to  them.  They  were  also  charmed
with  Cardinal  de  Bohan,  who  never  came  with  empty  hands,
bringing  them  bonbons  and  confectionery  enough  to  regale
them  for  several  days.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  was  pleased
with  these  trifles.  Her  mornings  were  occupied  with  the

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

255

letters  she  received  and  answered,  chiefly  from  superiors
of  communities  of  priests,  and  seminaries,  from  abbesses
and  even  simple  nuns,  for  the  taste  for  ruling  had  survived
all  else,  and  as  she  wrote  singularly  well  and  easily  she
enjoyed  her  letter  writing.  All  these  details  I  obtained
from  Mme.  de  Tibouville,  a  Eochechouart,  without  prop¬
erty,  who  had  lived  from  childhood  at  Saint-Cyr.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  rose  early  and  went  to  bed  early,
as  she  had  always  done  at  Court.  Her  prayers  lasted  long  ;
she  read  to  herself  books  of  devotion,  and  sometimes  she
made  the  young  girls  read  to  her  a  little  history  and  took
pleasure  in  making  them  discuss  it,  and  in  giving  them
instruction  on  such  subjects.  She  heard  mass  from  a
gallery  that  was  close  to  the  door  of  her  room  ;  very  rarely
from  the  choir.  She  received  the  sacrament  twice  a  week,
usually  between  seven  and  eight  o’clock  hi  the  morning,
after  which  she  returned  to  her  gallery,  where  on  those
days  she  stayed  a  long  time.  Her  dinner  was  simple,  but
delicate  and  very  choice  in  its  simplicity,  always  abun¬
dant.  The  Duc  de  Hoailles,  Mornay,  and  Bloin  never  let
her  want  for  game  from  Saint-Germain  and  Versailles,  or
for  fruit  from  the  buildings.  She  took  nothing  in  the  even¬
ings.  Sometimes,  on  very  fine  days  without  wind,  she
walked  for  a  while  in  the  garden.

She  appointed  all  the  superiors,  chief  and  subaltern,  and
all  the  officers.  A  succinct  report  of  the  routine  of  the
house  was  made  to  her  daily,  and  for  all  else,  the  superior
took  her  orders.  She  was  “  Madame,”  to  the  household,
who  were  under  her  control,  and  though  her  manners  were
civil  and  gentle  to  the  ladies  of  Saint-Cyr  and  kind  to  the
young  girls,  they  all  trembled  before  her.  Ho  abbess,
daughter  of  France,  such  as  there  used  to  be  in  former
days,  was  ever  so  despotic,  so  punctually  obeyed,  so  feared,

256  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vra.

so  respected  ;  but  with  it  all,  she  was  loved  by  almost  every
one  at  Saint-Cyr.  The  priests  were  under  the  same  sub¬
jection,  the  same  dependence.  Never  did  she  speak  of
anything  relating  to  the  government  or  to  the  Court  before
the  young  ladies;  often  of  the  late  king  with  praise,  but
not  earnestly  in  any  way,  and  never  alluding  to  intrigues,
cabals,  or  public  business.

I  often  wondered  why  the  maréchals,  d’Harcourt  so  inti¬
mately  bound  to  her  Tallard,  Villars  who  owed  her  so  much,
Mme.  du  Maine  and  her  children,  for  whom  she  had  trodden
under  foot  all  human  and  divine  laws,  the  Prince  de  Eohan,
and  many  others,  never  went  to  see  her.  The  fall  of  the
Duc  du  Maine  at  the  lit  de  justice  at  the  Tuileries  gave
her  the  first  mortal  blow.  It  is  not  presuming  too  much  to
suppose  that  she  was  well  informed  of  the  schemes  and
measures  of  her  “  darling,”  and  was  sustained  by  that  hope  ;
but  when  she  heard  of  his  arrest  she  succumbed  ;  a  contin¬
ued  fever  seized  her,  and  she  died  at  the  age  of  eighty-three,
in  full  possession  of  her  mind  and  faculties.

I  have  spoken  elsewhere  of  the  Abbé  de  Vittement,  whose
merit,  and  that  alone,  had  made  him  sub-preceptor  to  the

curious  but  un-  king>  —  a  very  rare  thing  at  Court,  and  without
intelligible  state-  ever  thinking  of  it,  or  any  one  for  him.

ment  of  Fleury’s  °

power  over  the  He  lived  at  the  Court  in  solitude,  though  never

sulky  or  singular,  but  making  himself  gener¬
ally  liked  and  much  esteemed.  An  abbey  with  a  revenue
of  twelve  thousand  francs  a  year  became  vacant  about  this
time,  and  the  regent  proposed  to  the  king  to  give  it  to  his
sub-preceptor  and  to  tell  him  so  himself.  The  king  was  de¬
lighted,  sent  for  him  at  once,  and  told  him.  Vittement  ex¬
pressed  his  gratitude,  but  modestly  asked  to  be  excused  from
accepting  it.  He  was  urged  by  the  king,  the  regent,  and
Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  who  was  present  He  answered  that

1719]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

257

lie  had  sufficient  means  on  which  to  live.  The  Maréchal
insisted,  and  told  him  he  could  use  the  income  for  giving
alms.  Vittement  replied  humbly  that  it  was  not  worth
while  to  receive  charity  in  order  to  give  it,  held  firm,  and
retired.  This  action,  which  has  but  few  examples,  done  with
such  perfect  simplicity,  made  quite  a  noise  and  increased  the
esteem  and  respect  his  virtues  had  already  acquired.  But  it
vexed  M.  de  Fréjus,  who  saw  the  king’s  affection  for  the
abbé  increased  by  it.  As  soon  as  the  latter  perceived  this  he
considered  his  vocation  at  an  end,  —  all  the  more  because  he
felt  that  if  he  were  really  loved  and  liked,  he  could  hope
nothing  for  the  true  end  he  had  in  view.  Soon  after  M.  de
Fréjus  advised  him  very  gently  to  retire.  He  did  so  with
joy,  and  went  to  the  “  Christian  Doctrine,”  which  he  never
left  again,  and  where  he  received  scarcely  any  one.

Yittement  made  a  prophecy  as  celebrated  as  it  is  surpris¬
ing,  the  key  of  which  was  sought  in  vain.  Bidault  related
it  to  me.  Bidault  was  one  of  the  valets  de  chambre  whom
the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  selected  for  the  service  of  Mgr.  le
Duc  de  Bourgogne.  He  had  intelligence,  education,  and
sense,  and,  what  is  more,  a  true  and  solid  piety.  M.  de
Beauvilliers  loved  him,  and  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne  was  very
kind  to  him  and  gave  him  the  care  of  his  books.  This  had
made  me  know  him  well  and  the  more  familiarly  because
he  took  charge  of  all  the  affairs  of  La  Trappe  in  Paris.  He
was  placed  with  the  king  in  the  latter’s  childhood,  and  when
he  began  to  collect  a  few  books,  Bidault  took  charge  of  them.
This  brought  him  into  relations  with  the  Abbé  de  Yittement,
and  presently  allied  them  in  friendship  and  confidence.
Bidault  sometimes  came  to  see  me,  and  he  also  went  to  see
Vittement  in  his  retirement.  Becoming  alarmed  at  the  first
rays  of  the  omnipotence  of  Fréjus,  lately  made  cardinal,  he
spoke  of  it  to  Vittement,  who  showed  no  surprise  and  let
VOL.  iv.  — 17

258  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.viii.

Pirn  talk.  Bidault,  amazed  at  the  cold  and  silent  tranquillity
with  which  he  was  listened  to,  urged  Vittement  to  tell  him
the  reason.  “  His  omnipotence,”  replied  the  abbé,  quietly,
«  will  last  as  long  as  his  life,  and  his  reign  will  be  unbounded
and  without  trouble.  He  has  known  how  to  hind  the  king
by  such  strong  fetters  that  the  king  can  never  break  them.
What  I  tell  you  now  is  what  I  know.  I  cannot  tell  you
more  ;  but  if  the  cardinal  dies  before  me,  I  will  explain  to
you  what  I  cannot  explain  during  his  lifetime.”  Bidault  told
me  this  a  few  days  later,  and  I  have  heard  since  that  Vitte¬
ment  said  the  same  thing  to  others.  Unfortunately,  he  died
before  the  cardinal,  and  carried  off  with  him  this  interesting
secret.  Events  proved  but  too  well  that  Vittement  spoke
the  truth.1

Never,  after  his  retirement,  did  he  dream  of  going  to  see
the  king  or  of  visiting  any  one.  He  lived  at  the  “  Christian
Doctrine,”  in  penitence  and  frugal  mediocrity,  in  complete
aloofness,  in  constant  preparation  for  the  better  life,  and  he
died  a  saintly  death  at  the  end  of  some  years.  Maréchal  de
Villeroy  went  to  see  him  sometimes,  in  spite  of  his  own
wishes,  and  always  came  away  charmed,  though  he  some¬
times  met  with  short  but  well-placed  moral  observations,
which  perhaps  he  was  not  in  search  of.

i  The  Marquis  d’Argenson  [son  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals]  reports  the
same  fact  in  his  manuscript  Memoirs  :  “  I  forgot  to  say  that  the  Abbé  de
Vittement  said  to  his  friends  to  whom  he  confided  this  secret,  that  if  he
survived  the  cardinal  he  would  tell  what  was  that  indissoluble  bond  be¬
tween  the  king  and  Cardinal  Eleury.”  (Note  by  the  French  editor.)

IX.

Law  was  doing  wonders  with  his  Mississippi.  They  had
made  a  sort  of  language  to  suit  their  manipulations  and
The  wonders  of  facilitate  their  management,  which  I  shall  not
the  Mississippi.  undertake  to  explain  any  more  than  his  other

financial  operations.  It  was  who  should  have  Mississippi.
Immense  fortunes  were  made  by  it,  almost  at  a  stroke.  Law,
besieged  by  suppliants  and  aspirants,  saw  his  door  forced,  his
windows  entered  from  the  garden,  while  some  of  them  came
tumbling  down  the  chimney  of  his  cabinet.  People  talked
in  millions.  Law,  who,  as  I  have  said,  came  to  me  every
Tuesday  between  eleven  and  twelve  o’clock,  had  often  urged
me  to  accept  some  shares  in  it  without  their  costing  me
anything;  offering  to  manage  the  matter  without  my  med¬
dling  in  it,  and  to  make  it  bring  me  in  several  millions.

So  many  persons  of  all  conditions  had  made  fortunes  by
their  own  management,  that  there  was  no  doubt  Law  could
have  made  me  gain  more,  and  even  more  rapidly;  but  I
would  never  lend  myself  to  the  scheme.  Law  then  ad¬
dressed  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  who  was  equally  inflexible.
Enriching  for  enriching,  he  would  rather  have  enriched  me
than  many  others,  and  by  that  interest  have  bound  to  him  v
a  man  in  my  situation  with  the  regent.  He  spoke  to  the
latter,  asking  him  to  try  and  overcome  me  by  his  authority.
The  regent  began  to  speak  of  it  more  than  once,  but  I
evaded  him.

At  last,  one  day  when  he  had  given  me  a  rendezvous  at
Saint-Cloud,  where  he  went  to  work  and  to  walk  afterwards.

260  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

beins  both  of  us  seated  on  the  balustrade  of  the  orangery
which  overlooks  the  descent  into  the  Goulotte  woods,  he
Law  and  the  spoke  to  me  again  of  the  Mississippi,  and
regent  urge  me  urgec[  me  £0  receive  some  from  Law  :  the  more

some.  J  resisted,  the  more  he  urged,  and  the  more  he

branched  out  into  arguments.  At  last  he  grew  angry  ;  and
said  it  was  too  vainglorious  to  refuse  what  the  king  wanted
to  give  me,  for  he  was  acting  for  him,  and  that  other  people
of  my  rank  and  dignity  would  run  after  it.  I  told  him  that
such  feelings  would  be  those  of  a  fool  and  an  impudent  per¬
son,  instead  of  a  vainglorious  one,  as  he  said,  and  they  were
not  mine  ;  and  since  he  pressed  me  so  much  I  would  tell
him  my  reasons,  which  were  :  that  since  the  days  of  King
Midas  I  had  never  heard  of  and  still  less  seen  any  one  who
had  the  faculty  of  turning  into  gold  whatever  he  touched  ;
that  I  did  not  believe  that  virtue  was  given  to  Law,  but  I
thought  his  scheme  was  a  clever  game,  a  skilful  and  novel
trick  of  legerdemain,  which  put  the  property  of  Peter  into
the  pocket  of  John,  which  enriched  some  at  the  cost  of
others  ;  and  that  sooner  or  later  the  thing  would  dry  up,  the
game  would  be  exposed,  an  infinite  number  of  persons  ruined,
restitutions  would  be  difficult  if  not  impossible,  especially
restitution  of  gains  of  this  kind  ;  and,  finally,  that  I  abhorred
having  to  do  with  the  property  of  others,  and  for  nothing  on
earth  would  I  burden  myself  with  it,  even  indirectly.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  did  not  know  how  to  answer  that,  but
still,  displeased  and  persistent,  he  came  back  to  his  idea  of
i  refuse;  but  refusing  the  benefits  of  the  king.  Impatience

accent  payment  happily  laid  hold  of  me  ;  I  told  him  I  was  so
far  from  any  such  folly  that  I  would  make
him  a  proposal,  which  I  should  never  have  mentioned  but
for  what  he  had  said,  and  which,  in  fact,  only  came  into  my
head  at  the  moment.  I  explained  to  him  the  expenses  that

1719]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

261

had  ruined  my  father  for  the  defence  of  Blaye  against  the
forces  of  the  Prince  de  Condé,  who  had  besieged  the  place
eighteen  months.  My  father  had  paid  the  garrison,  fur¬
nished  the  rations,  ammunitioned  the  place,  cast  cannon,
and  supported  five  hundred  gentlemen  whom  he  had  col¬
lected  ;  besides  other  expenses  incurred  to  save  the  place  to
the  king,  —  all  drawn  from  his  own  means  and  not  from  the
country.  After  the  troubles  were  over,  five  hundred  thou¬
sand  francs  of  written  orders  for  payment  were  sent  to  him,
on  which  he  never  received  a  sou,  for  M.  Bouquet  was  ar¬
rested  just  before  he  was  about  to  begin  to  pay  them  off.  I
told  the  Duc  d’Orléans  that  if  he  chose  to  make  up  the  loss
of  that  sum,  a  loss  my  father  and  I  had  borne  so  long  a
time  for  services  so  essential  rendered  to  the  king  (not  to
speak  of  the  interest  due  for  so  many  years),  it  would  he  a
justice  which  I  could  take  with  a  good  grace,  and  would
accept  with  much  gratitude  ;  returning  to  him  the  written
orders  as  they  were  paid  off,  to  be  burned  in  his  presence.
The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  very  willing,  and  spoke  of  it  the
next  day  to  Law.  My  notes  and  orders  were,  little  by  little,
burned  up  in  the  regent’s  cabinet  ;  and  that  is  what  has  paid
for  the  improvements  I  have  made  at  La  Ferté.

Parliament,  more  irritated  than  subdued  by  the  lit  de  jus¬
tice  at  the  Tuileries,  had  now  recovered  from  its  first  bewil-
Absurd  but  per-  derment  ;  it  was  very  natural  and  perfectly
ofSparHament  as  consistent  that  it  should  not  only  think  itself
to  its  power.  not  pound  to  regard  what  had  been  done  at
the  lit  de  justice  in  spite  of  its  remonstrances,  but  that  it
should  claim  the  right  to  act  in  a  manner  diametrically
opposed  to  the  tenor  of  the  decrees  then  passed.  This  is
what  parliament  now  did,  step  by  step,  with  all  possible
firmness  and  continuity,  and  as  much  circumspection  as
would  insure  the  carrying  out  of  its  intentions,  by  opposing

262

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

all  the  registrations  necessary  to  the  various  operations  of
Law.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  was  accurately  informed  and
greatly  annoyed  at  this  conduct,  and  Law  was  extremely
embarrassed  ;  he  had  many  manœuvres  and  operations  on
hand  which  required  a  submissive  parliament,  and  he  had
to  do  with  a  regent  who  disliked  strong  measures  and  who
seemed  quite  exhausted  with  the  one  to  which  he  had  lately
been  compelled  to  have  recourse.  In  this  perplexity  Law
Law  proposes  a  imagined  a  way  to  cut  the  Gordian  knot.  His

scheme  to  hold
parliament  in
check.

paper  was  then  at  its  highest  mark  ;  the  ardour
of  Frenchmen  was  for  it  ;  there  were  few  per¬

sons,  in  comparison  with  the  many,  who  did  not  prefer  the
paper  to  specie.  He  therefore  proposed  to  the  regent  to
refund  with  this  paper,  by  agreement  or  force,  all  the  costs
of  parliament,  and  defend  the  step  towards  the  public  on
the  ground  of  removing  the  venality  of  the  offices,  which  led
to  such  great  abuses,  by  putting  them  all  in  the  hands  of
the  king  to  dispose  of  gratuitously  (as  they  were  before  they
became  venal)  ;  thus  making  him  master  of  parliament  by
granting  simple  commissions  to  hold  the  offices  from  one
vacation  to  another,  to  be  continued  or  changed  at  each  term
of  parliament  at  the  king’s  good  pleasure.

A  scheme  so  advantageous,  without  drawing  a  purse¬
string,  dazzled  the  regent.  The  Duc  de  La  Force  sup¬
ported  the  idea  in  concert  with  Dubois,  who  did  not  wish
to  appear  too  much,  but  was  making  others  act,  and,  in
fear  of  reverses,  was  keeping  behind  the  tapestry,  whence
he  directed  his  emissaries.  Dubois  saw  his  own  benefit
in  this  reimbursement,  full  as  he  was  of  being  master  of
the  kingdom  under  the  regent’s  name.  Nevertheless,  he
felt  the  risks  of  the  transition,  and  did  not  choose  to
commit  himself.  Law  had  never  opened  his  lips  to  me
in  any  way  that  could  make  me  surmise  this  project;

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

263

and  I  have  reason  to  think,  though  nothing  of  the  kind
was  evident,  that  they  dared  not  risk  an  examination  on
my  part,  hut  hoped  to  take  me  unawares,  in  what  they
imagined  to  be  my  hatred  and  my  interests,  by  the  prop¬
osition  which  the  regent  was  to  make  to  me,  and  thus
inveigle  me  into  an  approbation  to  which  impetus  could
afterwards  be  imparted.  I  have  always  leaned  to  the  be¬
lief  that  it  was  this  idea  that  led  the  Duc  d’Orléans  to
consult  me  on  the  matter.  They  knew  me  to  be  the  man
of  all  the  world  who  bore  most  impatiently  all  pretensions
and  enterprises  against  the  royal  authority,  and  who,  from
attachment  to  my  rank  and  dignity,  was  always  most
openly  and  publicly  exasperated  by  the  usurpations  of
parliament.

However  that  may  be,  one  afternoon  when  I  was  work¬
ing  as  usual,  tUe-à-tete  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  he  began
to  talk  about  parliament  without  anythin"

I  prevent  the  x  J  0

regent  from  giving  rise  to  it,  explaining  the  shackles  it
put  upon  him,  the  small  account  it  made,
publicly,  of  the  lit  de  justice  of  the  Tuileries,  the  little  fruit
he  had  gained  from  that  step  ;  and  then,  all  of  a  sudden,
he  proposed  the  above  expedient,  pulling  from  his  pocket
a  well-reasoned  paper  on  the  scheme,  of  which  I  had  never
heard  one  word  till  that  moment.  I  entered  into  all  his
complaints  of  the  conduct  of  parliament  and  agreed  with
his  reasons  for  compelling  it  to  its  duty  in  regard  to  the
royal  authority  ;  but  I  added  at  once  that,  as  for  the  proj¬
ect,  it  seemed  to  me,  at  a  first  view  of  it,  very  unjust  on
one  side  and  very  daring  on  the  other;  and  it  was  not,  I
thought,  a  matter  to  be  decided  on  without  mature  delib¬
eration,  and  after  considering  and  weighing  the  important
and  wide-spreading  consequences.  He  would  not  let  me
say  more,  and  insisted  on  reading  the  document  straight

264  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

through  without  interruption,  in  spite  of  his  bad  eyesight,
and  then  a  second  time,  stopping  and  arguing  upon  it.

This  second  reading  confirmed  me  in  the  aversion  I  felt
to  the  scheme,  and  I  said  so  and  argued  against  it;  but
the  regent,  delighted  and  already  carried  away  with  it,  was
not  pleased  with  my  resistance.  Seeing  him  so  biased  and
refolding  the  paper  to  put  it  in  his  pocket,  I  felt  all  the
danger  into  which  they  were  going  to  plunge  him.  I
begged  him  to  let  me  have  the  memorandum  and  take  it
home  to  consider  it  at  my  ease.  He  consented  on  condi¬
tion  that  no  one  should  see  it  but  myself,  and  he  exacted
a  promise  that  I  would  bring  it  back  the  day  but  one
following,  and  refused  to  allow  me  a  longer  time.  I  kept
my  word,  and  more  too;  for  I  wrote  with  my  own  hand
so  strong  an  answer  (which  I  read  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans)
that  he  became  convinced  the  project  was  a  dangerous
chimera.  Those  who  had  made  and  counselled  it  found
him  so  armed  against  their  reasons  that  they  had  nothing
to  reply,  and  kept  silence,  —  but  not  for  long.  The  scheme
was  too  dear  to  Law  and  to  Dubois  to  be  abandoned  :  to
Dubois,  as  removing  all  sorts  of  present  and  future  ob¬
stacles  to  the  establishment  and  preservation  of  his  omni¬
potence  ;  to  Law  for  his  own  support  in  his  tremendous
output  of  paper,  of  which  he  felt  from  afar  all  the  burden
in  spite  of  the  great  vogue  in  which  he  then  wras.  We
shall  see  that  the  following  year  was  spent  in  struggles
between  the  government  and  the  parliament.  Those  strug¬
gles  gave  the  promoters  of  the  abandoned  scheme  a  chance
to  resuscitate  it  ;  none  of  them  ever  mentioned  it  to  me,
except  Law,  who  once  or  twice  expressed  a  few  regrets  for
such  a  fine  stroke  wasted.

Money  was  in  such  abundance  —  that  is  to  say,  Law’s
bank-notes,  which  people  then  preferred  to  specie  —  that

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

265

four  millions  were  paid  to  the  Elector  of  Bavaria,  and
three  millions  to  Sweden,  mostly  old  debts.  Soon  after,  the
regent  gave  eighty  thousand  francs  to  Meuse,
the  Mississippi  ;  and  eight  hundred  thousand  francs  to  Mine,
an  heads  turned.  Q^teauthiers,  lady  of  the  Bedchamber  to

the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  who  had  loved  him  for  many  years.
The  business  of  the  shares  in  the  Company  of  the  Indies
[or  West]  commonly  called  “  The  Mississippi,”  established
for  the  last  few  months  in  the  rue  Quincampoix,  from  which
horses  and  carriages  were  excluded,  had  now  increased  so
enormously  that  persons  rushed  there  all  day  long,  and  it
was  necessary  to  place  guards  at  each  end  of  the  street,
with  drums  and  bells  to  give  warning  when  business
opened  at  seven  o’clock  in  the  morning  and  when  it  closed
at  night;  and  also  to  prevent  a  crowd  from  assembling
there  on  Sundays  and  fete-days.  Never  was  folly  and  mad¬
ness  like  it.  The  regent  made  a  great  distribution  of  these
shares  among  the  general  and  staff  officers,  according  to
grades,  who  were  employed  in  the  war  against

Diminution  of  &  ’  r  J  °

specie,  and  Spain.  Shortly  after,  the  treasury  began  to

diminish  specie  month  by  month  at  three  reg¬
ular  intervals,  and  next  came  a  general  recoinage  of  it.

Law’s  bank  as  well  as  his  Mississippi  were  now  at  their
highest  point.  Confidence  was  unbounded.  People  rushed
Law  desires  to  to  change  houses  and  lands  for  paper,  and
Ha°KKs  ctm-h°"  this  paper  caused  the  commonest  articles  to
verters.  become  of  enormous  price.  All  heads  were

turned.  Foreigners  envied  our  luck  and  tried  in  every  way
to  obtain  a  share  of  it.  The  English,  so  able  and  consum¬
mate  in  banks,  companies,  and  commerce,  were  taken  in  by
the  prospect,  and  repented  themselves  later.  Law,  though
cool  and  prudent,  felt  his  modesty  fail  him.  He  was  tired
of  being  a  subaltern.  He  now  aimed  to  be  great  amid  this

266  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

splendour  ;  and  so  did  Dubois  and  the  regent  for  him  ;  but
for  this  elevation  two  obstacles  would  have  to  be  overcome
in  the  case  of  Law:  the  condition  of  foreigner,  and  that  of
heretic.  The  first  could  be  changed  only  by  naturalization
preceded  by  abjuration.  Lor  this  a  converter  was  needed
who  would  not  look  too  closely  into  things,  and  of  whom
they  could  feel  perfectly  sure  before  committing  themselves.
The  Abbé  Dubois  found  him  as  it  were  in  his  pocket.  This
was  the  Ahbé  Tencin,  whom  the  devil  afterwards  helped  to
a  most  astounding  fortune  ;  for  true  it  is  that  he  sometimes
departs  from  his  usual  rule  and  rewards  his  own  ;  by  which
examples  he  dazzles  others  and  inveigles  them.  This  Abbé
Tencin  was  a  priest  and  a  rascal,  whose  real  name  was
Guérin;  his  sister  was  the  mistress  of  the  Abbé  Dubois,
soon  his  confidante,  and  then  the  directress  of  many  of  his
schemes  and  secrets.  This  connection  was  long  concealed  ;
at  any  rate  while  Dubois’  career  had  need  of  caution  ;  after
he  became  archbishop  (still  more  when  he  was  cardinal)  she
was  known  publicly  as  his  mistress,  ruled  his  household
openly,  and  held  a  sort  of  Court,  as  if  she  were  the  channel
of  all  favours  and  fortune.  Meantime  she  had  beeun  to
make  the  fortune  of  her  beloved  brother.  She  presented  him
to  her  lover,  who  soon  found  him  a  man  expressly  made  to
second  him  in  all  things  and  to  be  singularly  useful  to  him.

Such  were  the  apostles  of  a  proselyte  like  Law,  provided
for  him  by  the  Abbé  Dubois.  They  already  knew  each
other;  and  this  was  the  state  of  things  when  it  became  a
question  of  bringing  back  into  the  hosom  of  the  Church  a
Protestant,  or  an  Anglican,  —  for  he  scarcely  knew  what  he
really  was.  The  work  was  not  difficult  ;  but  they  had  the
sense  to  do  it  and  consummate  it  secretly,  so  that  for  some
time  it  was  a  problem  ;  and  thus  they  saved  appearances  while
the  instruction  was  going  on,  and  some  part,  at  least,  of  the

1719]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

267

scandal  and  ridicule  of  such  a  conversion  performed  by  such
converters.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  had  informed  me  about  this  time  of
the  fixed  intention  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  to  declare  her
,  secret  marriage  to  Pion.  I  was  not  surprised

Determination  of  0

the  Duchesse  de  at  the  marriage,  knowing  that  mixture  of

heTmamage31^  passion  and  fear  of  the  devil,  hut  I  was  ex-

to  Rion.  tremely  astonished  at  this  fury  for  declaring

it  in  a  person  so  superbly  haughty  and  vainglorious.  She

had  gone  to  Meudon,  and  thence  to  La  Muette,  lying  in  a

carriage  between  two  sheets.  She  grew  no  better  ;  the  pain

increased  at  shorter  intervals  ;  fever  was  always  marked  and

sometimes  very  strong.  The  fluctuations  of  hope  and  fear

supported  her  till  the  beginning  of  July,  but  then  her

malady  increased  so  much  that  on  the  14th  they  began  to

feel  serious  alarm  about  her.  The  night  was  so  restless

that  they  sent  to  rouse  the  regent  at  the  Palais-Royal;  and

at  the  same  time  Mme.  de  Pons  wrote  to  Mme.  de  Saint-

Simon,  urging  her  to  come  at  once  and  establish  herself  at

Mme.  de  Saint-  La  Muette.  She  yielded  to  this  request  and

Simon  goes  to  went  tkere  at  0nce,  and  did  not  leave  it  again
her  in  her  last

illness.  while  the  duchess  lived.  She  found  the  dan¬

ger  great  ;  one  bleeding  had  been  done  in  the  arm  on  that
day,  July  15,  and  another  in  the  foot;  her  confessor,  a
Franciscan,  had  been  sent  for.  I  shall  here  interrupt  the
course  of  this  illness,  which  lasted  seven  days,  to  give  a
brief  coup  d'œil  to  that  princess  as  a  whole,  at  the  risk  of
some  slight  repetition.

Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Berry  made  so  much  noise  in  the
brief  space  of  a  very  short  life  that,  sad  as  the  matter  is,  it
is  curious  and  deserves  to  be  dwelt  upon.

Brief  sketch  of  .  .

the  Duchesse  Born  with  a  superior  mind,  and  being,  when
de  Berry.  S}1G  cfloSe,  equally  agreeable  and  amiable,  with

268  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  ix

a  figure  that  was  imposing  and  on  which  the  eye  rested
with  pleasure  (though  injured  at  the  last  by  too  much  flesh),
she  talked  with  singular  grace  and  a  natural  eloquence  which
was  all  her  own  and  flowed  spontaneously  and  easily,  with
an  appropriateness  of  language  that  surprised  and  charmed.
What  might  she  not  have  made  of  these  talents  with  the
king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  only  wished  to  love  her  ;
with  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  who  had  made  her  marriage
and  regarded  her  as  her  very  own  ;  with  her  father,  regent
of  the  kingdom,  who  had  eyes  for  her  alone,  —  if  the  vices  of
her  heart  and  mind  and  soul  had  not  turned  so  many  noble
gifts  into  dangerous  poisons.  The  most  inordinate  pride,
the  most  persistent  falsehood  she  took  for  virtues  and  piqued
herself  upon  them  ;  while  irréligion,  which  she  thought
adorned  her  mind,  made  the  climax  of  all  the  rest.  What
seemed  extraordinary  was  the  amazing  contrast  between  a
pride  that  lifted  her  to  the  skies  and  a  debauchery  which
led  her  to  sup,  not  only  with  people  of  quality,  hut  with  such
a  man  as  Père  Riglet,  Jesuit,  a  teller  of  loose  stories,  and
other  canailles  who  would  never  have  been  admitted  into
decent  houses,  together  with  the  roués  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
with  him  or  without  him,  she  herself  taking  pleasure  in
exciting  their  indecency  and  impiety.

In  spite  of  a  depravity  so  universal  and  so  public,  she  was
indignant  that  any  one  dared  to  speak  of  it.  She  declared
boldly  that  it  was  not  permitted  to  talk  of  persons  of  her
rank,  not  even  to  blame  their  public  actions,  still  less  what
they  did  in  private.  It  was  this  that  irritated  her  against
every  one,  as  violating  the  sacred  rights  of  her  person,
criminally  wanting  in  respect,  and  undeserving  of  pardon.
Her  death  was  a  singular  spectacle.  The  long  suffering  she
had  endured  had  neither  induced  her  to  care  for  this  life  by
following  a  regimen  necessary  to  her  condition,  nor  to  think

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

269

of  the  life  to  come,  until  at  last  her  relations  and  physi¬
cians  were  compelled  to  speak  a  language  to  her  such  as
princes  never  hear  except  in  some  great  extremity.  She  then
submitted  to  remedies  both  for  this  world  and  the  next.  She
received  the  sacraments  with  open  doors  and  talked  to  those
present  on  her  life  and  state,  hut  as  a  queen  in  each.  After
the  scene  was  over,  and  she  was  again  shut  up  with  her
intimates,  she  applauded  herself  for  the  firmness  she  had
shown  and  asked  them  if  she  had  not  spoken  well,  and
whether  she  was  not  dying  with  grandeur  and  courage.

Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  seeing  that  the  end  approached
and  that  there  was  no  one  at  La  Muette  with  whom  the
Mme.  de  Saint-  Duc  d’Orléans  could  feel  at  liberty,  sent  me
m™0Griefdoffthe  wor(l  that  she  advised  me  to  come  and  be
regent.  with  him  in  these  sad  hours.  It  seemed  to

me  that  my  arrival  did  give  him  pleasure,  and  that  I  was
not  useless  by  reason  of  the  comfort  it  gave  him  to  pour
himself  freely  out  to  me.  He  wished  me  to  take  entire
charge  of  what  would  have  to  be  done  after  the  Duchesse
de  Berry’s  death,  such  as  the  opening  of  her  body,  and  all
the  other  details  which  demanded  his  orders  and  his  decision,
so  that  he  himself  might  not  be  importuned  by  such  agitat¬
ing  things  ;  he  wished  me  not  to  ask  his  orders  about  any¬
thing  ;  moreover  he  told  the  household  of  the  princess  that
he  had  given  me  those  orders,  and  that  it  was  to  me  that
they  must  go  for  theirs.

As  the  evening  advanced  and  the  Duchesse  de  Berry
became  worse,  being  now  without  consciousness,  her  father
returned  to  the  chamber  and  stood  by  the  pillow  of  her  bed,
the  curtains  of  which  were  open.  I  did  not  leave  him  there
long,  but  pushed  him  gently  into  the  cabinet,  where  there
was  no  one.  The  windows  were  open  ;  he  leaned  on  the  iron
baluster  and  his  sobs  redoubled  so  much  that  I  feared  he

270

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

would  suffocate.  When  this  violent  attack  was  over  he
beoun  to  talk  to  me  of  the  miseries  of  this  world  and  the
little  duration  of  what  is  most  pleasurable.  I  took  occasion
to  say  to  him  what  God  gave  me  to  say,  with  all  the  gentle¬
ness,  unction,  and  tenderness  that  was  possible  to  me.  Not
only  did  he  receive  well  what  I  said,  but  he  answered  it  and
continued  the  conversation.  After  we  had  been  there  about
an  hour  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  sent  me  softly  word  that  it
was  time  that  I  should  try  to  send  the  Duc  d’Orléans  away,
as  the  only  way  to  leave  the  cabinet  was  through  the
chamber.  His  carriage  was  ready,  for  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
had  been  thoughtful  enough  to  send  for  it.  It  was  not  with¬
out  difficulty  that  I  could  tear  him  away,  plunged  as  he
was  in  the  bitterest  grief.  I  made  him  cross  the  chamber
swiftly,  and  entreated  him  to  return  to  Paris.  That  was
another  difficulty  to  overcome  ;  hut  in  the  end  he  yielded.

The  Duchesse  de  Berry  died  at  midnight  on  the  21st  of
July.  Afflicted  as  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was,  comfort  was  not

long  in  coming.  The  yoke  under  which  she
had  held  him,  and  which  he  had  often  found  so
heavy,  was  broken.  Especially  was  he  relieved

Death  of  the
Duchesse  de
Berry.

of  the  horror  of  declaring  her  marriage  to  Bion  and  all  its
consequences,  —  an  embarrassment  all  the  greater  because  on
opening  her  body  the  poor  princess  was  found  to  be  pregnant  ;
a  derangement  was  also  found  in  the  brain.  All  this  prom¬
ised  great  future  troubles,  which  were  smothered  by  her
death.

Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  who,  as  we  have  seen  in  its  place,
was  forced,  and  I  too,  to  consent  that  she  should  be  lady  of
illness  of  Mme.  honour  to  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  had  not  been
Je  Samt-Simon.  ap]e  at  any  time  to  find  the  moment  when
she  could  properly  quit  that  office.  Every  sort  of  considera¬
tion  was  shown  her,  every  liberty  accorded  to  her;  hut

1719]

MEMOIRS  OETHE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

271

nothing  could  console  her  for  occupying  that  post,  so  that
she  felt  the  relief,  not  to  say  the  satisfaction,  of  a  deliverance
she  had  little  expected  from  a  princess  only  twenty-four
years  old.  But  the  extreme  fatigue  of  the  last  days  of  the
illness  and  of  those  which  succeeded  the  death,  caused  her
a  malignant  fever,  of  which  she  was  six  weeks  at  the  point
of  death  in  a  country-house  which  Fontanieu  had  lent  her
at  Passy  to  take  the  waters  at  Forges  and  to  rest.  She  was
two  months  in  recovering.  This  accident,  which  almost
drove  me  out  of  my  mind,  kept  me  from  the  knowledge  of
everything  for  two  months,  during  which  I  never  left  that
house,  scarcely  her  chamber,  hearing  nothing  and  seeing
none  but  a  few  indispensable  friends.  When  she  began
to  recover  I  asked  the  Duc  d’Orléans  for  lodgings  in  the
new  chateau  at  Meudon.  He  lent  me  the  whole  chateau
all  furnished.  We  passed  the  rest  of  the  summer  there,
and  several  other  summers.  It  is  a  charming  spot  for  walks
and  drives.  We  expected  to  see  only  our  intimate  friends  ;
but  its  proximity  to  Paris  overwhelmed  us  with  company,
so  that  the  new  château  was  often  full  of  lodgers,  not  to
speak  of  passing  visitors.

The  Duc  d’Orléans  paid  the  king  a  charming  compliment,
well-suited  to  his  years,  by  proposing  that  he  should  use
La  Muette  for  his  amusements,  and  go  out

La  Muette  given  #

to  the  king  for  there  and  have  collations.  The  king  was  en-
his  amusements.  cpante(p  jye  thought  he  was  really  having

something  of  his  own;  and  he  took  delight  in  going  there
and  eating  bread  and  milk  and  fruit  and  vegetables,  and
amusing  himself  with  all  that  diverts  a  boy  of  his  age.  The
place  in  changing  masters  changed  also  its  governor.  The
Duc  d’Humières  spoke  to  me  in  behalf  of  Pezé.  I  obtained
the  post  for  him,  and  he  knew  how  to  manage  the  place  in
a  way  to  make  it  more  and  more  agreeable  to  the  king.

272

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

We  have  now  reached  a  very  curious  and  interesting
epoch.  What  a  pity  that  the  ever-imposing  and  exacting
influence  of  the  Abbé  Dubois  over  the  Duc  d’Orléans  did
not  permit  the  latter  to  place  his  usual  confidence  in  those
who  were  most  faithfully  attached  to  him  !  This  misfortune
will  deprive  these  Memoirs  of  a  great  deal  of  curious
information.  I  will  not  and  I  cannot  write  down  anything
that  did  not  either  pass  before  my  own  eyes,  or  that  I  did
not  hear  from  those  who  were  concerned  in  it.  I  prefer  to
frankly  own  my  ignorance  rather  than  risk  conjectures
which  are  often  little  other  than  romances  ;  I  shall  often
be  reduced  to  that  dilemma,  and  I  would  rather  have  the
shame  of  owning  it  in  the  remainder  of  these  Memoirs  than
create  fictions  and  mislead  my  readers,  —  should  these
Memoirs  ever  see  the  light.

Working  one  day  as  usual  with  the  regent  towards  the
close  of  this  year,  he  interrupted  me  soon  after  we  had  be-
The  regent  gun  by  making  complaints  of  the  Maréchal
m^go^rn^Tof6  de  Villeroy.  He  often  did  so,  but  on  this
the  king.  occasion,  getting  more  and  more  excited,  he

suddenly  rose  and  said  it  was  not  to  be  endured  any  longer,
—  that  was  his  expression,  —  and  he  wished  to  turn  him  out
at  once  and  make  me  governor  to  the  king.  My  surprise
was  great,  but  I  did  not  lose  my  judgment.  I  smiled  and
replied  gently  that  he  could  not  really  think  of  it.  “I
think  of  it  very  much,”  he  replied  ;  “  so  much  that  I  intend
it  shall  be  done,  and  I  shall  not  delay  doing  what  ought  to
have  been  done  long  ago.  What  have  you  to  say  against
it  ?  ”  With  that  he  began  to  walk,  or  rather  to  twirl,  about
the  room.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  maturely  reflected  on  it.
Thereupon  he  delivered  himself  of  all  his  reasons  for  remov¬
ing  the  maréchal  and  those  for  putting  me  in  his  place,
which  latter  were  too  flattering  to  repeat  here.  I  let  him

1719]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

273

say  as  much  as  lie  wished,  and  then  I  talked  in  my  turn,
without  allowing  him  to  interrupt  me.  I  agreed  to  all  he
said  of  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  because  there  was  no  dis¬
agreeing  with  any  of  his  complaints,  his  reasons,  and  his
deductions  ;  but  I  stoutly  opposed  his  removing  him.  I  re¬
minded  the  regent  of  all  the  reasons  I  had  formerly  given
him  against  taking  the  superintendence  of  the  king’s  educa¬
tion  from  the  Duc  du  Maine,  which  he  himself  had  thought
sound  and  good,  and  was  only  prevented  from  following  by
the  persistent  persecution  of  M.  le  Duc.  I  told  him  that
the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  was  only  what  he  himself  made
him,  and  what  any  one  else  with  so  much  gas  and  self-con¬
ceit  and  so  little  mind  and  common-sense  would  inevitably
be  ;  that  he  had  spoiled  him,  and  the  maréchal  was  simply
taking  advantage  of  it  ;  that  every  one  in  public  and  in  pri¬
vate  was  astonished  to  see  how  he  awed  him  with  that  air
of  martial  superiority,  as  if  he  were  still  a  youth  in  the  days
of  Monsieur  ;  and  he  ought  therefore  not  to  be  surprised  at
the  advantage  the  maréchal  took  of  it.  I  told  him  he  had
only  to  change  this  singular  and  dangerous  conduct  and
keep  firmly  to  the  change,  and  he  would  see  that  Villeroy
would  fancy  himself  lost,  and  tremble,  cringe,  and  grow  sup¬
ple  and  respectful  ;  whereas,  if  he  turned  him  out,  he  would
make  him  a  public  martyr,  the  idol  of  parliament,  the  peo¬
ple,  and  the  provinces,  to  a  point  that  would  make  him,  if
not  dangerous,  at  least  embarrassing.

Shaken,  but  not  driven  from  his  intention,  the  regent  tried
to  weaken  me  by  increasing  the  temptation  of  the  post  of

governor,  and  by  overwhelming  me  with  what

I  dissuade  him.  °

he  said  about  it.  I  expressed  my  gratitude,
like  a  man  who  felt  very  deeply  the  value  of  the  appoint¬
ment  and  the  seasoning  he  gave  to  it,  but  whom  it  did  not
dazzle.  I  reminded  him  that  he  ought  never  to  appoint  as
VOL.  iv. — 18

274  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAENT-SIMON.  [chap,  ix

governor,  or  to  any  other  post  about  the  king,  any  person
who  was  particularly  attached  to  himself,  lest  the  monarch
should  die  young  without  posterity,  —  in  view  of  his  having
been  so  cruelly,  iniquitously,  and  universally  accused  of
many  recent  horrors  ;  and  this  argument,  so  strong  and
real,  resulting  from  the  perverse  nature  of  things,  made  me
the  last  man  in  the  world  on  whom  the  choice  ought  to
fall,  as  well  as  the  most  radically  excluded  by  nature  ;  so  that
I  believed  I  should  he  doing  him  a  bad  and  most  dangerous
service  by  accepting  his  offer.  We  argued  the  same  things
over  and  over;  and  the  conversation  ended  by  the  regent
saying  that  we  would  talk  of  the  matter  again.  To  which
I  replied  that,  as  for  me,  it  was  settled  now,  and  that  very
certainly  I  would  not  be  governor  to  the  king;  and  as  for
Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  he  ought  to  he  careful  against  the
influence  of  others  and  his  own  inclinations,  and  not  he  led
into  such  a  blunder.  We  said  no  more  then  ;  he  spoke  of
it  two  or  three  times  later,  but  always  more  feebly,  until  he
ended  by  agreeing  with  me  not  to  think  of  it  again,  and  to
treat  the  maréchal  as  I  advised  him  to  do.  But  this  he
never  had  the  strength  to  attempt.  He  treated  him  as  usual,
and  the  maréchal,  consequently,  went  on  assuming  an  inso¬
lent  air  to  him.  I  was  provoked,  hut  I  did  not  dare  to  say
anything,  lest  I  should  bring  the  regent  hack  to  the  desire
to  get  rid  of  him.

The  disorder  of  the  finances  was  increasing  daily,  also  the
squabbles  between  d’Argenson  and  Law,  each  of  whom  was

now  complaining  of  the  other.  Matters  had
1720.  A  0

confusion  in  the  finally  come  to  such  a  pass  that  it  was  neces-
made  controller-  sary  that  one  of  the  two  should  yield  to  the
general.  other  an  administration  in  which  their  rivalry

was  creating  the  utmost  confusion.  Whatever  intimacy  might
exist  between  d’Argenson  and  Dubois,  who  had  so  far  failed

1720]

MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

275

to  make  Law  and  d’Argenson  agree,  the  prospect  of  his  car-
dinalate,  and  the  necessity  of  having  plenty  of  money  to
spend  upon  it,  did  not  allow  Dubois  to  hesitate  in  this  ex¬
tremity  as  to  whose  side  he  should  take.  Law’s  conversion
had  an  object  which  it  was  now  high  time  to  attain.  D’Ar¬
genson,  seeing  the  storm  approach,  felt  he  was  in  a  fragile
place,  and  determined  to  save  himself.  He  had  too  much
sense  and  knowledge  of  the  world  and  of  those  with  whom
he  had  to  do  not  to  feel  that  if  he  clung  to  the  finances  they
would  drag  from  him  the  office  of  Keeper  of  the  Seals.  He
therefore  yielded  to  Law,  who  was  immediately  appointed
controller-general  of  the  finances,  and  who,  in  that  position
of  singular  elevation  for  him,  continued  to  come  and  see  me
every  Tuesday  morning,  endeavouring  always  to  convince  me
about  his  miracles,  past  and  to  come.  D’Argenson  contin¬
ued  to  be  Keeper  of  the  Seals.  The  public  murmured
greatly  on  seeing  a  foreigner  controller-general,  and  all
France  delivered  over  to  a  system  which  was  now  begin¬
ning  to  be  distrusted.  But  Frenchmen  accustom  themselves
to  everything,  and  many  were  consoled  by  getting  rid  of
d’Argenson’s  fantastic  hours  of  work  and  crabbed  temper.
The  Duc  d’Orléans  had  told  me  in  advance  what  he  was
about  to  do,  hut  he  did  not  consult  me.  The  Abbé  Dubois
had  by  this  time  completely  invaded  him;  and  I  avoided
putting  myself  forward  about  anything.

But  Law’s  system  was  drawing  to  an  end.  If  they  had
been  content  with  his  bank,  and  his  hank  reduced  to  wise
insecurity  of  and  equitable  limits,  the  money  of  the  king-
Law’s  system  (jom  ]mve  been  doubled  and  great  facil-

comes  apparent,  ity  introduced  into  the  country’s  commerce
and  into  that  of  private  persons  with  one  another  ;  because,
if  the  hank  were  able  always  to  face  its  liabilities,  its  notes,
being  continually  payable  at  their  full  value,  would  have

276

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

been  ready  money,  and  often  preferable  to  coin  through  con¬
venience  of  transportation.  But  it  must  be  admitted,  as
I  maintained  to  the  regent  in  his  cabinet,  and  said  boldly
to  the  Council  of  Regency,  when  the  bank  project  passed,
that,  good  as  this  system  might  be  in  itself,  it  could  only
be  good  in  a  republic,  or  a  monarchy  like  that  of  England,
where  the  finances  are  arbitrarily  governed  solely  by  those
who  furnish  them  and  who  furnish  only  so  much  and  as
it  pleases  them.  But  in  a  State  so  volatile  and  changeable
rather  than  arbitrary  as  that  of  France,  stability  is,  neces¬
sarily,  lacking  ;  consequently  also  a  firm  and  judicious  con¬
fidence,  —  inasmuch  as  a  king,  and  under  him  a  mistress,  a
minister,  favourites,  or  extreme  necessity  (such  as  that  the
late  king  met  with  in  the  years  from  1707  to  1710),  a
hundred  things,  in  short,  might  bankrupt  the  bank,  the
temptations  of  which  would  be  too  great  and  at  the  same
time  too  easy.  But  when  to  what  was  real  in  this  bank¬
ing  system  they  added  the  chimera  of  the  Mississippi,  its
shares,  its  lingo,  its  science,  that  is  to  say,  its  hocus-pocus
for  taking  money  from  some  and  giving  it  to  others,  it
would  surely  result  —  inasmuch  as  they  had  neither  mines
nor  the  philosopher’s  stone  —  in  those  shares  proving  worth¬
less,  and  in  a  very  few  persons  being  enriched  by  the  ruin
of  the  greater  number.  And  this  is  what  actually  happened.

The  overthrow  of  the  bank  and  the  system  w~as  hastened
by  the  inconceivable  prodigality  of  the  regent,  who,  with¬
out  limit,  and  even,  if  that  could  be,  without
selection,  was  unable  to  resist  importunity,  but
gave  with  both  hands,  and  often  to  persons
who  scoffed  at  hjs  act  and  gave  thanks  only  to  their  own
effrontery.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  what  one  actually  saw  ;
posterity  will  consider  as  a  fable  what  we  ourselves  re¬
member  now  as  a  dream.  So  much  was  given  away  to  a

Inconceivable
prodigality  of
the  regent.

1720]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  277

greedy  and  prodigal  community,  always  grasping,  always
necessitous  through  its  luxury,  its  licentiousness,  its  con¬
fusion  of  positions,  that  paper  lacked,  the  mills  could  not
furnish  enough.  From  that  fact  may  be  inferred  the  un¬
imaginable  abuse  of  what  was  established  originally  as  a
resource  always  ready,  hut  which  could  only  exist  as  such
by  balancing  the  two  ends,  and  reserving  enough  coin  to
answer  instantly  to  all  demands.  This  is  what  I  questioned
Law  about  every  Tuesday  morning.  He  put  me  off  with
specious  words  for  a  long  time  before  he  owned  to  me  his
embarrassments,  and  modestly  and  timidly  complained  that
the  regent  was  throwing  everything  out  of  windows.  I
knew  from  the  outside  more  than  he  thought,  and  it  was
that  knowledge  that  made  me  press  him  so  insistently  on
the  state  of  his  schedule.  When  admitting  at  last,  though
faintly,  what  he  could  not  conceal,  he  assured  me  that,
provided  the  regent  left  him  free  to  act,  he  was  not  lacking
in  resources.  That  did  not  convince  me.

The  bank-notes  were  already  beginning  to  depreciate,
soon  after  to  lose  credit,  and  then  their  discredit  became
Grievous  and  general.  Hence  the  necessity  of  forcibly  main-
mfimte  results.  Gaining  them,  inasmuch  as  this  could  no  longer
he  done  by  their  own  value  ;  and  the  moment  force  was
shown,  every  man  despaired  of  his  safety.  They  came  at
last  to  coercive  authority  ;  they  suppressed  the  use  of
gold,  silver  (I  mean  coined  money),  and  precious  stones  ;
and  they  tried  to  convince  the  nation  that  from  the  days
when  Abraham  paid  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  cur¬
rent  coin,  for  Sarah’s  sepulchre  to  the  present  day,  the
wisest  nations  of  the  earth  had  been  under  the  grossest
error  and  delusion  as  to  money  and  the  metals  of  which  it
was  made  ;  that  paper  was  the  only  profitable  and  necessary
medium,  and  that  we  could  not  do  a  greater  harm  to  for-

278  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

eign  nations,  jealous  of  our  grandeur  and  our  advantages,
than  to  pass  over  all  our  silver  and  gold  and  precious  stones
to  them.  But  no  one  was  convinced  of  this,  for  the  reason
that  permission  was  given  to  the  Company  of  the  Indies
to  inspect  all  houses,  even  those  of  royalty,  and  confiscate
the  louis  d'ors  and  ecus  that  were  found  there,  leaving
only  twenty-sous  pieces  and  under;  and  of  those  only
enough  to  make  change  for  notes  and  purchase  the  smallest
commodities.  All  this  with  heavy  pains  and  penalties  if
more  were  kept  back,  so  that  all  such  property  had  to  be
taken  to  the  bank,  lest  the  valets  of  the  households  should
denounce  its  retention.  Hence  a  recourse  to  more  and  more
authority,  which  opened  all  houses  to  visits  and  inquisitions,
to  make  sure  that  no  money  was  concealed,  while  severe
punishments  were  given  to  those  who  reserved  any.  Never
was  sovereign  power  so  violently  attempted  ;  never  did  it
meddle  with  any  matter  so  sensitively  felt  or  so  vitally
connected  with  the  temporal  well-being  of  the  community.
It  was  a  marvel,  and  not  the  effect  of  any  care  or  conduct
on  the  part  of  the  government,  that  not  only  ordinances  so
terribly  novel  did  not  produce  the  saddest  and  most  com¬
plete  revolution,  but  that  there  was  never  any  question
of  one,  and  that  so  many  millions  of  people,  absolutely
ruined  or  dying  of  hunger  or  want  beside  their  own  prop¬
erty  without  any  means  of  obtaining  it  for  their  daily
subsistence,  should  have  uttered  nothing  but  plaints  and
moans.

Such  violence,  however,  was  too  excessive,  too  indefensible
in  various  ways,  to  continue  long  ;  it  was  necessary  to  issue
new  paper  and  to  invent  fresh  tricks  of  legerdemain,  which
were  known  to  be  such  and  felt  to  be  such,  but  to  which
people  submitted  rather  than  not  have  twenty  crowns  in
safety  in  their  own  homes.  Hence  came  endless  manoeuvres,

1720]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

279

endless  different  aspects  given  to  the  finances,  all  aiming
to  take  np  one  kind  of  paper  by  another,  —  in  other  words
making  the  holders  of  these  different  papers  lose  hi  turn,
they  being  holders  by  force  and  the  bulk  of  the  people.
This  is  what,  in  the  matter  of  finance,  occupied  all  the  rest
of  the  regent’s  life  and  government,  drove  Law  from  the
kingdom,  increased  the  cost  of  all  merchandise,  all  pro¬
visions,  even  the  commonest,  sixfold,  caused  a  ruinous
increase  of  all  kinds  of  salaries,  destroyed  commerce,  both
general  and  private,  made,  at  the  cost  of  the  public,  the  sud¬
den  wealth  of  a  few  seigneurs,  who  wasted  it  and  were  all
the  poorer  in  a  very  short  time,  gave  monstrous  fortunes
to  the  employés  and  middlemen  and  clerks  of  the  finan¬
ciers  who  got  their  profit  quickly  and  shrewdly  out  of  the
Mississippi.  This  is  what  still  occupies  the  government
long  after  the  death  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  ;  from  it  France
will  never  entirely  rise,  though  it  is  true  that  landed  prop¬
erty  has  considerably  increased  in  value.

Meantime,  by  dint  of  turning  and  twisting  the  Mississippi
in  every  direction,  that  is  to  say,  juggling  the  balls  under

that  name,  the  idea  came  to  them  to  follow
the  example  of  Englishmen  and  make  actual
settlements  in  those  vast  regions.  To  people

Forced  levies
to  people  the
Mississippi.

them  they  made  forced  levies  in  Paris  and  all  over  the
country  of  vagrants  and  able-bodied  beggars,  both  men  and
women,  and  quantities  of  public  creatures.  If  this  had  been
done  with  wisdom,  discernment,  and  necessary  caution,  the
object  they  proposed  would  have  been  accomplished,  and
Paris  and  the  provinces  relieved  of  a  heavy,  useless,  and
sometimes  dangerous  burthen  ;  but  they  undertook  it  in
Paris  with  such  violence  and  so  much  trickery  in  seizing
whom  they  chose,  that  great  disapprobation  was  excited.
Not  the  slightest  pains  was  taken  to  provide  for  the  subsist-

280

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

ence  of  these  unfortunates  on  their  journey,  or  at  the  places
where  they  disembarked  ;  they  were  shut  up  at  night  in
barns  without  food,  or  in  cellars  from  which  they  could  not
issue.  Their  cries  excited  both  pity  and  indignation  ;  but
charity  could  not  suffice  to  eke  out  the  little  their  conductors
allowed  them,  so  that  a  frightful  number  of  them  died  on
the  way.  This  inhumanity,  added  to  the  cruelty  of  the  con¬
ductors,  and  the  violent  and  rascally  abduction  of  persons
who  were  not  of  the  class  prescribed,  but  whom  certain  per¬
sons  had  an  interest  in  getting  rid  of  by  saying  a  word  in
the  ear  and  putting  money  in  the  hand  of  those  who  made
the  levies,  caused  so  much  indignation,  expressed  in  terms
and  tones  so  forcible,  that  it  was  plainly  seen  the  thing  could
not  be  carried  on.  Some  companies  had  embarked  ;  others,
who  had  not  yet  started,  were  set  free  and  allowed  to  go
where  they  pleased,  and  the  levies  were  abandoned.  Law,
regarded  as  the  author  of  these  abductions,  became  odious,
and  the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  reason  to  repent  that  he  allowed
himself  to  be  dragged  into  permitting  them.

Extreme  folly  on  one  side,  and  immense  cupidity  on  the
other  led,  about  this  time,  to  the  strangest  marriage-contract
.  .  that  perhaps  was  ever  seen.  As  a  specimen

tract  produced  by  of  much  that  Law’s  system  produced  in  France,

Law's  system.  .  .

it  deserves  to  be  mentioned  here.  Any  one
who  could  and  who  would  relate  the  incredible  bargains,  the
transmutation  of  paper,  the  construction  of  fortunes,  their
immensity,  still  more  their  inconceivable  rapidity,  and  the
sudden  fall  of  most  of  them  through  luxury  and  mad  ex¬
travagance,  the  ruin  of  the  rest  of  the  kingdom,  the  deep
wounds  it  received  from  which  it  will  never  recover,  —  any
one,  I  say,  who  could  relate  all  this  would  make  a  most  curi¬
ous  and  amusing  history,  but  at  the  same  time  the  most
horrible  and  monstrous  ever  known.  Here,  then,  amono

77  O

1720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

281

other  extraordinary  things,  is  the  marriage  of  which  I  speak.
The  contract  was  drawn  and  signed  between  the  Marquis
d’Oyse,  thirty-three  years  old,  son  and  younger  brother  of
the  Ducs  de  Villars-Brancas,  and  the  daughter  of  d’ Andrés,
a  famous  Mississippian,  who  had  made  mounds  of  gold  out
of  that  affair  ;  the  girl  was  only  three  years  old,  and  the
agreement  was  to  celebrate  the  marriage  when  she  was
twelve.  The  terms  of  the  contract  were  six  hundred  thou¬
sand  francs  paid  at  once3  twenty  thousand  francs  a  year
till  the  day  of  the  marriage,  an  enormous  property  of  mil¬
lions  when  that  day  came,  with  profuse  presentations  mean¬
while  to  the  Ducs  de  Brancas,  father  and  son.  Bemarks

were  not  wanting  on  this  fine  marriage.  What  will  not

auri  sacra  fames  lead  men  to  do  ?  But  the  whole  scheme
miscarried  before  the  cooking  of  the  future  wife,  by  Law’s
overthrow.  The  Brancas,  who  expected  it,  had  got  their
pay  well  in  advance,  though  the  affair  produced  a  lawsuit
about  fifteen  years  later,  which  they  defended  without  shame,
—  but  the  Brancas  were  not  subject  to  that.

The  archbishopric  of  Cambrai  became  vacant  through  the
death  in  Borne  of  Cardinal  de  la  Trémoille,  that  is  to  say,  the
„  ,  .  richest  see  and  one  of  the  grandest  posts  in

How  the  Abbe  &  1

Dubois  made  France.  The  Abbé  Dubois  was  only  tonsured  ;

himself  Arch-

bishop  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  francs  a  year

cambrai.  tempted  him,  and  perhaps  this  rise  might  lift

him  more  easily  to  the  cardinalate.  Impudent  as  he  was,
and  great  as  was  the  empire  he  had  assumed  over  his  master,
he  was  much  embarrassed  how  to  make  his  request.  So,
masking  his  effrontery  slyly,  he  said  to  the  regent  that  he
had  dreamed  a  pleasant  dream,  namely,  that  he  had  just
been  made  the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai.  The  regent,  who  felt
to  what  this  tended,  turned  on  his  heel  and  made  no  answer.
Dubois,  more  and  more  embarrassed,  stuttered  and  para-

282  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

phrased  his  dream;  then,  rousing  himself  to  the  effort,  he
abruptly  asked  why  he  could  not  have  it,  as  his  Boyal
Highness  had  only  to  will  it  to  make  his  fortune.  The  Due
d’Orléans  was  indignant,  even  shocked,  little  scrupulous  as
he  was  in  the  making  of  bishops,  and  he  answered,  in  a  tone
of  contempt,  “  What  !  you  \toi\,  Archbishop  of  Cambrai  ?  ”
—  making  him  feel  his  baseness  and  the  scandal  of  his  life.
Dubois  had  gone  too  far  to  stop  on  so  fine  a  road,  and  cited
him  various  examples.  Unfortunately  there  were  but  too
many,  in  baseness,  ignorance,  and  low  morality,  —  thanks  to
Père  Tellier  and  the  Unigenitus.

The  Duc  d’Orléans,  less  moved  by  such  bad  reasons  than
embarrassed  how  to  escape  the  importunity  of  a  man  to
whom  he  was  now  accustomed  to  deny  nothing,  tried  to  get
out  of  the  affair  by  saying  :  “  But  you  are  damnable  ;  and
where  is  the  other  damned  fellow  who  would  consecrate
you  ?  ”  “  Oh  !  if  that  is  all,”  said  the  abbé,  hastily,  “  the

thing  is  done.  I  know  very  well  who  will  consecrate  me  ;
he  is  not  far  from  here.”  “  Who  the  devil  is  he  ?  ”  asked  the
regent.  “  Who  would  dare  to  consecrate  you  ?  ”  “  Do  you

want  to  know  ?  ”  replied  the  abbé  ;  “  does  it  only  depend
on  that  ?  ”  “  Who  is  it  ?  ”  said  the  regent.  “  Your  chief  al¬

moner,”  replied  Dubois.  “He  is  outside,  and  he  will  ask
nothing  better  ;  I  ’ll  go  and  tell  him  ;  ”  and  with  that  he
clasped  the  knees  of  the  regent,  who  stood  thunderstruck
without  strength  to  refuse.  Whereupon  the  abbé  went  out,
pulled  the  Bishop  of  Hantes  aside,  told  him  he  had  Cambrai,
asked  him  to  consecrate  him,  obtained  an  instant  promise,
returned  caracoling,  told  the  regent  he  had  arranged  with  his
almoner  for  the  consecration,  thanked  him,  lauded  him,  ad¬
mired  him,  and  sealed  the  affair  by  assuming  it  as  settled  and
forcing  the  regent,  who  dared  not  say  no,  —  that  is  how  Dubois
made  himself  Archbishop  of  Cambrai.  The  extreme  scandal

1720J  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

283

of  this  appointment  made  a  very  great  talk.  Impudent  as
Dubois  was,  he  was  much  embarrassed  by  it  ;  and  the  Due
d  Orleans  was  so  ashamed  that  scarcely  any  one  ever  men¬
tioned  the  matter  in  his  presence.

On  the  day  when  Dubois  took  all  the  orders  at  once  the
Council  of  Regency  was  held  in  the  old  Louvre,  because  the
The  Prince  de  measles  were  raging  in  the  Palais-Royal,  and

Dubois"1 hu  the  reSent  would  not  go  to  the  Tuileries.  The

consecration.  members  had  all  arrived,  the  regent  also,  and
were  standing  scattered  about  the  council-room.  I  was  in  a
corner  at  the  lower  end,  talking  with  the  Prince  de  Conti,
Maréchal  Tallard,  and  another,  whose  name  I  forget,  when  I
saw  the  Abbé  Dubois  enter,  in  a  short  coat  and  with  his
usual  manner.  We  did  not  expect  him  on  such  a  day,  so
that  we  naturally  exclaimed  on  seeing  him.  This  made  him
turn  his  head  ;  on  which  the  Prince  de  Conti  went  up  to  him
with  his  father’s  own  sneer  (though  it  was  far  from  having
his  father’s  grace,  and  was  in  fact  cynical),  spoke  of  his  sur¬
prise  at  seeing  the  abbé  there,  after  taking  so  abruptly  all
the  orders  at  once,  and  proceeded  to  make  him  a  ranting
speech  full  of  wit  and  malignancy  in  the  form  of  a  sermon,
which  would  certainly  have  disconcerted  any  other.  Dubois,
unable  to  get  in  a  single  word,  let  him  talk,  and  then  an¬
swered  coldly  that  if  he  were  better  informed  about  anti¬
quity  he  would  not  find  what  seemed  to  surprise  him  so
very  strange,  because  he,  the  abbé,  had  only  followed  the
example  of  Saint  Ambroise,  whose  ordination  he  began  to
relate.  I  did  not  hear  the  tale,  for  as  soon  as  I  heard  Saint
Ambroise  mentioned  I  fled  to  the  other  end  of  the  room,  in
horror  at  the  comparison  and  in  fear  lest  I  should  tell  him
to  be  silent.  His  impious  citation  of  Saint  Ambroise  went
the  rounds  of  society,  with  the  effect  that  can  easily  be
imagined.  The  Val-de-Grâce  was  chosen  for  the  consecration,

284

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

as  being  a  royal  monastery,  the  most  magnificent  in  Paris,
and  its  church  the  most  remarkable.  The  building  was
superbly  decorated;  all  France  was  invited;  no  one  dared
risk  not  appearing  and  remaining  throughout  the  whole
ceremony.  Galleries  with  screens  were  put  up  for  the  for¬
eign  ambassadors  and  Protestant  ministers.  There  was  a
gallery  of  great  magnificence  for  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  the
Duc  de  Chartres,  whom  he  took  with  him.  The  Duc  d’Or¬
léans  entered  from  the  monastery,  and  his  gallery  was  open
to  every  one  and  was  filled  with  refreshments  of  every  kind,
which  were  distributed  by  the  officers  in  profusion.  The
Duc  d’Orléans  gave  the  new  archbishop  a  diamond  of  great
value  for  his  ring.  The  whole  day  was  given  up  to  a  sort  of
triumph  which  drew  upon  it  neither  the  approbation  of  man
nor  the  blessing  of  God.  I  saw  nothing  of  it  ;  and  never
did  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  I  speak  of  it.

The  22nd  of  May  of  this  year  became  celebrated  by  the
issuing  of  an  edict  from  the  council  of  State  concerning  the
Edict  of  the  shares  of  the  Company  of  the  Indies  (the
council  of  state  ;  Mississippi)  and  the  notes  of  Law’s  bank.

which  reveals  the

condition  of  the  This  edict  diminished  by  degrees,  and  month
by  month,  the  value  of  the  shares  and  notes,
so  that  by  the  end  of  the  year  they  would  be  found  to  have
depreciated  to  half  their  value.  This  is  called,  in  affairs  of
finance  and  bankruptcy,  showing  tail  ;  and  this  decree  showed
it  so  openly  that  the  public  thought  all  was  lost  more  utterly
than  it  really  was,  because  it  was  not  even  a  remedy  for  im¬
pending  misfortunes.  The  uproar  was  general  and  frightful.
Every  rich  man  thought  he  was  ruined  beyond  redemption  ;
every  poor  one  believed  himself  reduced  to  mendicity.  The
parliament,  inimical  to  the  system  by  its  own  system,  was
careful  not  to  lose  so  fine  an  occasion.  It  made  itself  the
protector  of  the  public  by  refusing  to  enregister  the  edict

Ï720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  285

and  by  prompt  and  strong  remonstrance.  The  public  believed
it  owed  to  the  parliament  the  sudden  revocation  of  tlie
edict,  whereas  it  was  really  made  in  consequence  of  the  uni¬
versal  groans  and  the  tardy  discovery  of  the  fault  committed.
But  this  revocation  merely  showed  a  vain  repentance  for
having  made  manifest  the  internal  condition  of  Law’s  opera¬
tions  without  producing  a  cure.  The  little  confidence  that
remained  was  before  long  radically  extinguished,  and  could
never  afterwards  be  revived.

In  this  state  of  things  it  was  necessary  to  make  Law  a
scapegoat.  The  regent  played  the  comedy  of  not  seeing
^ ,  him  when  he  came  by  the  usual  door,  and
which  leads  to  seeing  him  the  following  morning  by  the
e  mm  o  aw.  way.  Dubois,  absorbed  in  his  ecclesias¬

tical  fortune,  which  was  now  advancing  towards  him  with
rapid  strides,  had  been  duped  by  the  edict  and  dared  not
support  Law  against  all  the  world.  He  contented  himself
by  remaining  a  neutral  and  useless  friend,  of  whom  Law
did  not  dare  to  complain.  Dubois  himself  was  careful  not
to  quarrel  with  a  man  from  whom  he  had  drawn  such
enormous  sums,  and  who,  if  rendered  hopeless,  might  tell
of  it;  but  also  he  was  cautious  not  to  protect  him  openly
against  a  whole  public  at  bay  and  exasperated.  All  this
kept  Law  suspended,  as  it  were,  by  the  hair,  having  his
footing  nowhere,  without  credit  or  dependence,  until,  as
we  shall  presently  see,  he  was  forced  to  yield  and  again
seek  other  lands.  Meantime  the  agency  of  the  company
was  removed  from  the  rue  Quincampoix  to  the  Place
Vendôme,  where  it  had  more  space  and  did  not  obstruct
the  streets.  Those  who  lived  in  the  Place  Vendôme  did
not  find  it  so  agreeable.  The  king  abandoned  to  the  bank
tha  shares  for  one  hundred  millions  that  he  held.

The  above-named  decree  was  given  and  retracted  during  a

286

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

short  vacation  of  the  Council  of  Regency  which  I  spent  at
La  Ferté.  The  evening  before  my  departure  I  went  to  take
leave  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  whom  I  found  in  the  little  gal¬
lery  with  very  few  persons  present.  He  took  me  aside  with
the  Maréchal  d’Estrées  and  one  or  two  others,  and  told  us  of
the  decree  on  which  he  had  determined.  I  told  him  that,
although  I  knew  little  of  finance,  this  step  seemed  to  me
very  hazardous  ;  that  the  public  would  never  quietly  see
itself  mulcted  of  half  its  property,  more  especially  as  it
would  feel  no  safety  for  the  rest;  that  there  was  no  sort
of  bad  remedy  that  was  not  better  than  this,  of  which  he
would  surely  repent.  It  has  been  seen,  in  various  places
in  these  Memoirs,  that  I  often  spoke  the  truth  and  was
not  believed;  and  also  that  when  results  I  had  predicted
happened  they  were  no  correction  for  another  time.  The
regent  replied  serenely  and  in  all  security.  The  others
present  seemed  to  be  of  my  opinion,  though  without  saying
much.  I  went  away  the  next  day,  and  the  affair  took
place  as  I  have  just  related.

Meantime  another  edict  was  proposed,  to  turn  the  Com¬
pany  of  the  Indies  into  a  commercial  company,  which
The  “Company  obliged  itself,  by  that  means,  to  redeem  within
made  a^o'mmer-  a  year  six  hundred  millions  of  bank-notes,
ciai  company.  by  paying  off  fifty  millions  per  month.  This
was  the  last  resource  of  Law  and  his  system.  He  was
forced  to  substitute  for  the  legerdemain  of  the  Mississippi
something  real,  especially  since  the  result  of  the  edict  of
May  22,  so  celebrated  and  so  fatal  to  his  paper.  The
scheme  now  was  to  substitute  a  real  Company  of  the  Indies
for  past  chimeras,  and  it  was  that  name  and  that  thing
which  took  the  place  of  what  had  been  known  previously
as  the  Mississippi.  But  in  vain  did  they  give  the  new
company  the  monopoly  of  tobacco  and  a  great  many  other

1720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

287

sources  of  immense  revenues  ;  they  were  all  as  nothing
towards  meeting  the  paper  shed  broadcast  among  the  people,
no  matter  what  pains  were  taken  to  diminish  it  at  all  risks
and  at  all  costs.

Other  expedients  had  to  he  found.  This  of  rendering
the  company  a  commercial  company  was  of  no  use  what-
Fatai  results  of  ever;  it  was  only  conferring  upon  it,  under
that  expedient.  a  specious,  but  obscure  and  vague  name,  the

right  of  exclusive  commerce.  We  can  imagine  how  such
a  resolution  would  be  received  by  the  public,  driven  to
extremities  by  the  stern  prohibition,  under  heavy  penalties,
of  keeping  more  than  five  hundred  francs  in  specie  in  their
homes,  which  were  liable  to  visitation  and  ransacking  ;
while  they  themselves  were  forbidden  to  pay  for  the  com¬
monest  necessaries  of  daily  life  in  anything  but  bank-bills.
This  new  scheme  worked  two  results:  first,  a  bitterness
which  grew  more  bitter  still  from  the  difficulty  each  man
had  of  getting  at  his  own  money  day  by  day  for  the  daily
needs  of  life,  —  and  the  wonder  is  that  the  disturbance
calmed  down  and  that  all  Paris  did  not  revolt  as  one  man,  —
and,  secondly,  that  parliament,  making  a  foothold  of  this
public  agitation,  held  firmly  to  the  end  against  registering
the  edict,  which  was  sent  to  it  July  17.

On  that  same  day,  17th,  there  was  such  a  crowd  about
the  bank  and  the  adjacent  streets  to  obtain,  each  man,  the
wherewithal  to  go  to  market,  that  ten  or  a  dozen  persons
were  smothered.  Three  of  the  dead  bodies  were  tumultu¬
ously  borne  to  the  gate  of  the  Palais-Royal,  where  the  popu¬
lace  demanded  an  entrance  with  loud  cries.  A  detachment
of  the  king’s  guards  was  hurriedly  brought  up.  The  lieuten¬
ant  of  police  arrived  and  harangued  the  people,  whom  by
gentleness  and  cajolery  he  managed  to  disperse,  getting  the
bodies  out  of  the  way  meantime,  so  that  by  ten  o’clock  in

288  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

the  morning  the  affair  was  over.  Law  took  it  into  his
head  to  go  to  the  Palais-Loyal,  and  was  followed  through
the  streets  with  imprecations,  so  that  the  regent  kept  him
there  and  gave  him  a  lodging.  He  sent  away  his  carriage,
the  glass  of  which  was  broken  by  stones  ;  his  house  was
attacked,  and  the  windows  of  it  broken  in  the  same  way.
The  next  day  an  ordinance  of  the  king  was  issued  forbid¬
ding  the  people  to  assemble,  under  heavy  penalties,  and
declaring  that  in  consequence  of  the  trouble  of  the  day
before  at  the  bank,  it  would  remain  closed  and  no  coin
would  be  issued  until  order  was  restored.  How  were  people
to  live  in  the  meantime  ?  Yet  no  disturbance  occurred,
which  only  proved  the  goodness  and  obedience  of  the  people
when  put  to  such  strange  trials.  Nevertheless,  troops  were
brought  in  from  Charenton,  several  regiments  of  cavalry
and  the  dragoons  from  Saint-Denis,  also  the  king’s  regiment
from  the  heights  of  Chaillot.  Specie  was  sent  to  Gonesse
to  bring  in  the  bakers  as  usual,  fearing  that  they  would
refuse,  as  did  nearly  all  the  shop-keepers  and  work-people
in  Paris,  to  take  paper  money.

The  year  ended  by  the  sudden  and  secret  departure  of
Law,  who  had  no  resources  left,  and  whom  it  was  now
Law  leaves  the  necessary  to  sacrifice  to  the  public  resentment,
kingdom  ;  his  His  son  was  with  him,  and  they  went  to

end  ;  his  family.

Brussels,  thence  to  Liège  and  Germany,  where
he  offered  his  talents  to  several  princes,  who  declined  them
with  thanks.  After  rambling  about  for  some  time,  he  passed
through  Tyrol,  saw  several  of  the  Italian  Courts,  none  of
which  detained  him,  and  finally  retired  to  Venice,  where  that
republic  made  no  use  of  him.  His  wife  and  daughter  fol¬
lowed  him  some  time  later.  Law  was  a  Scotchman  of
doubtful  nobility,  tall  and  very  well  made,  with  an  agree¬
able  face  and  countenance,  very  gallant,  and  standing  well

1720]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  289

with  the  women  of  all  countries  where  he  travelled.  His
wife  was  not  his  wife  ;  she  belonged  to  a  good  family  in
England  and  had  followed  Law  for  love  ;  she  had  a  son  and
a  daughter  by  him  and  passed  for  his  wife,  though  never
married  to  him.  This  was  suspected  towards  the  end  of
their  life  in  Paris,  and  after  their  departure  it  became  certain.
I  don’t  know  whether  her  influence  was  great  over  Law,  but
he  always  seemed  full  of  respect  and  attentions  to  her.
They  were  both,  at  the  time  they  left  France,  between  forty-
five  and  fifty  years  old.  Law  left  a  power  of  attorney  to
settle  his  affairs  with  the  grand  prior  of  Vendôme  and  with
Bully,  who  had  made  a  great  deal  out  of  him.  He  had  many
possessions  of  all  kinds,  hut,  more  than  all,  debts  ;  so  that
the  chaos  of  his  affairs  is  not  yet  disentangled  by  a  committee
of  the  council  appointed  to  settle  with  his  creditors.  I  have
said  elsewhere,  and  I  here  repeat  it,  that  there  was  no  avarice
and  no  knavery  in  his  make-up.  He  was  a  gentle,  kind,
respectful  man,  whom  inordinate  influence  and  fortune  had
never  spoiled,  and  whose  behaviour,  equipments,  table,  and
furniture  could  never  shock  any  one.  He  endured  with
patience  and  singular  consistency  the  obstacles  placed  in  his
way  to  thwart  his  operations,  until  quite  the  end,  when,
finding  himself  cut  short  of  means  while  striving  and  desir¬
ing  to  meet  his  obligations,  he  became  irritable,  ill-humour
seized  him,  and  his  answers  were  often  incautious.  Lie  was  a
man  of  system,  calculation,  comparison,  thoroughly  and  deeply
informed  on  that  line.  Without  ever  cheating,  he  had  won
enormously  at  play,  by  dint  of  possessing,  to  a  degree  that
seems  to  me  incredible,  the  faculty  of  combination  of  cards.

His  hank,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  would  have  been'  an
excellent  thing  in  a  republic,  or  in  a  country  like  England,
where  finance  is  essentially  in  a  republic.  As  for  his  Missis¬
sippi,  he  was  the  dupe  of  it  ;  he  believed  in  good  faith  that

VOL.  IV.  —  19

290  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  rx.

he  could  really  make  great  and  rich  settlements  in  America.
He  reasoned  like  an  Englishman,  and  ignored  how  contrary
to  commerce  and  such  enterprises  is  the  volatility  of  this
nation,  its  inexperience,  its  eagerness  to  get  rich  of  a  sudden,
the  impediments  of  a  despotic  government  wdiich  lays  its
hand  on  everything  and  has  little  or  no  continuity  —  for
what  is  done  by  one  minister  is  destroyed  or  changed  by  his
successor.  Law’s  proscription  of  specie,  then  of  jewels,  in
order  to  have  none  but  paper  money  in  France  is  a  system
that  I  have  never  understood,  nor  any  one  else,  as  I  think,
from  the  days  of  Abraham  down.  But  Law  was  a  man  of
systems,  and  so  profound  that  one  did  not  understand  him  ;
though  he  was  by  nature  clear,  with  a  fluent  elocution,  which
had,  however,  a  good  deal  of  English  in  its  French.  He
resided  several  years  in  Venice  on  very  small  means,  and
died  there,  a  Catholic,  —  having  lived  honestly,  soberly,  and
modestly,  though  poorly,  receiving  piously  the  sacraments  of
the  Church.

After  these  changes  in  the  ministry  of  finance,  everything
remained  for  a  time  inactive,  and  this,  joined  to  a  total  want
of  confidence,  destroyed  completely  the  credit  of  the  king,
and  left  the  fortunes  of  individuals  in  a  state  of  extreme
uncertainty.  All  business  of  this  kind  went  on  between  the
regent  and  La  Houssaye,  the  new  controller-general,  who,  in
addition  to  the  general  chaos  of  the  finances,  found  no
registers,  no  sources  of  knowledge  of  any  kind,  nor  any
person  to  give  any,  because  with  Law  fell  those  he  had
employed.  Circulation  was  paralyzed  ;  exhaustion  and  con¬
fusion  reigned  to  a  degree  that  is  difficult  to  imagine.  Ho
one  was  ignorant  in  the  main  of  the  disorder  of  the  finances,
but  when  [after  a  report  made  to  a  Council  of  Regency  at
which  the  facts  were  clearly  stated]  the  details  of  fictitious
millions  became  known,  bringing  ruin  to  the  king  and  to

1720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

291

private  individuals,  the  nation  was  terrified.  It  was  then
seen  plainly  to  what  this  jugglery,  by  which  all  France  had
been  seduced,  had  led,  and  what  had  been  the  prodigality
of  the  regent,  led  on  by  the  facility  of  coining  money  with
paper  and  thus  misleading  the  public  greed.  A  remedy  had
to  be  found  ;  for  things  had  now  arrived  at  their  worst  ;  and
this  remedy,  which  must  result  in  fatal  detriment  to  the
holders  of  shares  in  the  company  and  bank-notes,  could  only
be  found  by  exposing  the  whole  evil,  so  long  concealed  as  far
as  it  was  possible  to  do  so,  in  order  that  each  man  should  see
where  he  really  stood.  Added  to  this  pressing  necessity  was
the  difficulty  of  finding  any  remedy  at  all.

After  the  edict  of  the  22nd  of  May,  which  was  the  epoch
of  the  fall  of  what  had  been  known  as  the  Mississippi  and
the  Bank,  and  the  loss  of  public  confidence  by  the  sad  rev¬
elation  that  there  was  not  real  money  enough  to  meet  the
notes,  because  of  the  enormous  output  of  the  latter  beyond
the  amount  of  coin,  every  step  had  been  a  stumble,  every
operation  a  palliative,  and  a  feeble  one.  They  had  only
sought  to  gain  days  and  weeks,  in  the  darkness  they  inten¬
tionally  thickened  from  the  dread  they  had  of  letting  the
light  in  upon  so  much  seduction  and  such  horrors  of  public
ruin.  Law  could  not  cleanse  himself  before  the  world  of
having  been  its  inventor  and  its  instrument,  and  he  would
have  run  great  risk  had  he  still  been  here  at  the  final  moment
of  this  terrible  unveiling.  The  regent,  to  gratify  his  natural
pliancy  and  prodigality  and  to  satisfy  the  inordinate  greed
of  those  about  him,  had  forced  Law’s  hand  and  stripped  him
of  millions  of  notes  far  beyond  all  means  of  ever  meeting
them.  He  now  found  himself  brought  to  a  stand  and  com¬
pelled  to  show  in  the  light  of  day  the  state  of  the  finances,
and  the  management  of  that  enormous  enterprise  which  was
all  deception.

X.

The  Abbé  Dubois,  wbo  thought  of  nothing  but  how  to
facilitate  his  promotion  to  the  cardinalate,  and  who  sacrificed
Declaration  for  to  that  object  the  State,  the  regent,  and  every-
receivmg  the  bull  ^ing  eise  did  it  so  surely  that  we  were  taken

at  the  council.  by  surprise  at  a  Council  of  Regency  when  the
chancellor,  pulling  out  of  his  pocket  the  letters-patent  for
the  acceptance  of  the  bull  Unigenitus,  read  them  by  order  of
the  regent,  who  did  not  take  the  votes,  for  which  I  was  as
glad  as  I  was  astonished.  This  novel  method  of  dispensing
with  votes  struck  everybody,  and  marked  very  plainly  that
they  would  not  have  been  in  favour  of  the  declaration,  and
also  the  trickery  and  violence  of  boldly  assuming  approval
under  the  certainty  that  no  one  would  venture  to  object.
This  was  a  grand  merit  which  Dubois  acquired  with  the
Jesuits  and  the  whole  cabal  of  the  bull.

Parliament,  however,  would  not  enregister  the  king’s  dec¬
laration  for  this  acceptance,  and  Dubois,  anxious  about  the

interests  of  his  hat  and  desirous  of  giving  bril¬
liant  proofs  of  his  zeal  to  Rome  and  the  Jesuits,
made  the  regent  resolve  to  have  the  document

Parliament
refuses  to
enregister  it.

enregistered  by  the  Grand  Council,  to  which,  in  order  to
avoid  the  obstacles  he  feared,  the  regent  was  to  go  himself,
and  take  with  him  all  the  princes  of  the  blood,  the  peers,  and
the  marshals  of  France  ;  because  at  this  tribunal  all  the
officers  of  the  crown  have  a  seat  and  a  deliberating  voice  ;
which  is  different  from  the  parliaments,  where  they  have  no
vote  unless  the  king  is  present  and  takes  them  with  him.

1720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

293

Arriving  at  the  Palais-Royal  from  Meudon  one  morning,  I
found  the  Duc  d’Orléans  alone  in  his  great  apartment,  giv¬
ing  orders  to  the  red  waiters  to  go  round  and  notify  all
these  gentlemen  for  the  next  morning.  I  had  been  kept  in
ignorance  of  what  was  going  on,  for  Dubois  was  afraid  that  I
should  make  the  thing  miss  fire  by  convincing  the  regent  of
the  weakness  and  indecency  of  such  a  solemn  step,  so  novel
and  so  useless.  I  therefore  asked  the  Duc  d’Orléans  what  it
was  all  about.  He  told  me,  and  then  stretching  his  arms
towards  me  and  smiling,  he  begged  me  not  to  go  to  the
Council.  I  began  to  laugh,  and  told  him  he  could  not  give
me  a  more  agreeable  order  or  one  that  I  should  execute  more
willingly,  because  it  spared  me  the  pain  of  rising  publicly
against  his  wishes  and  arguing  with  all  my  strength  against
them.  He  said  he  knew  that  very  well,  and  that  was  why
he  begged  me  not  to  be  present.  Though  the  thing  was
done,  I  did  not  refrain  from  telling  him  in  two  words  that
he  was  being  made  to  commit  a  great  blunder,  by  advertising
his  perfect  powerlessness  to  make  a  valid  registration  in  loco
majorum  before  that  tribunal  ;  for  the  Grand  Council  and
all  tribunals  non-parliamentary  have  only  powers  within
their  own  jurisdiction,  and  none  at  all  over  public  matters
in  general.  I  contented  myself  with  these  few  words,  for
there  was  no  hope  of  breaking  a  plan  so  far  advanced  and
about  to  be  executed  the  next  morning  ;  above  all,  one  that
Dubois  regarded  as  his  own  most  vital  affair.  I  finished
the  work  I  had  to  do  with  the  regent  and  went  back  to
Meudon,  grieved  at  what  they  were  making  him  do,  but
much  comforted  at  being  released,  without  having  asked  it,
from  the  necessity  of  attending  the  Council.

The  affair  did  not  take  place  without  creating  a  stir.  Sev¬
eral  magistrates  at  the  Grand  Council  gave  their  opinion
against  the  declaration  with  intelligence,  force,  and  breadth,

294

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

and  were  not  discomfited  by  sundry  interruptions  made  by
the  regent,  whom  they  answered  respectfully,  but  with
arguments  and  nerve  :  and  it  was  shown  on

The  regent  carries  °

the  matter  to  the  the  count  of  votes  that  the  matter  was  carried
by  the  votes  of  the  peers  and  marshals,  who,
with  very  few  of  the  magistrates  of  the  Grand  Council,  made
a  majority.  I  heard  that  my  absence  was  much  remarked
upon,  and  some  persons  sent  to  the  courtyard  to  see  if  my
carriage  was  there.  I  dare  not  say  that  people  applauded
my  absence  and  that  Dubois  was  very  angry,  for  he  never
spoke  to  me  about  it,  but  I  think  he  was  much  surprised
when  he  heard  from  the  Duc  d’Orléans  that  it  was  he  himself
who  asked  me  to  stay  away.  The  result  was  just  what  I  pre¬
dicted.  People  scoffed  at  the  proceeding  and  the  show  ;  re-
Nuiiity  of  that  garding  it  as  a  useless  piece  of  cowardice,  an

registration.  avowal  of  weakness,  a  cringing  to  Eome.  No

one  mistook  the  selfish  motive  of  Dubois,  nor  did  any  one,
beginning  with  the  Grand  Council  itself,  regard  the  regis¬
tration  as  having  the  slightest  force  or  authority  in  the

kingdom.

Philippe  de  Courcillon,  called  the  Marquis  de  Dangeau,
died  in  Paris,  at  eighty-four  years  of  age,  September  7,  —  a
Death,  fortune,  harmless  sort  of  personage,  about  whom  curi-
and  Memoirs  of  0Slt7  apropos  of  his  singular  Memoirs  may
Dangeau.  require  me  to  say  a  few  words  here.  He  was

a  tall  man,  very  well  made,  grown  stout  with  age,  having  an
always  pleasant  face,  which  gave  a  promise,  and  kept  it,  of  an
insipidity  that  turned  one’s  stomach.  He  had  no  means,  or
very  little  ;  he  applied  himself  to  learn  perfectly  all  the
games  that  were  played  in  those  days,  —  piquet,  bête,  hombre,
great  and  little  prime,  hoc,  reversis,  brelan,  —  and  to  study
the  combinations  of  games  and  cards,  until  he  possessed
them  so  thoroughly  as  scarcely  ever  to  be  mistaken  even  at

1720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

295

lansquenet  and  bassette,  judging  them  accurately  and  staking
on  those  he  believed  would  win.  Such  knowledge  won  him
much  ;  and  his  gains  put  him  in  the  way  of  introducing  him¬
self  into  good  houses  and,  little  by  little,  at  Court.  He  was
soft,  obliging,  flattering,  with  the  air  and  tone  and  manners  of
society,  prompt  and  excellent  at  cards,  where,  no  matter  how
great  his  gains  (and  they  certainly  were  the  basis  and  the
means  of  his  fortune),  he  was  never  suspected,  and  his  repu¬
tation  was  always  clean  and  intact.  The  necessity  of  finding
heavy  players  for  the  game  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Montes-
pan  admitted  him  to  their  table  ;  and  it  was  of  him,  when
fully  initiated,  that  Mme.  de  Montespan  said  merrily  that  no
one  could  help  liking  him  and  laughing  at  him  ;  which
was  perfectly  true.  People  liked  him  because  nothing  ever
escaped  him  against  any  one  ;  he  was  kindly,  accommodating,
reliable  in  his  dealings,  a  very  honest  man,  obliging,  honour¬
able,  but  otherwise  so  flat,  so  insipid,  such  an  admirer  of
nothings,  —  provided  such  nothings  related  to  the  king  or  to
persons  in  place  and  favour,  —  so  grovelling  an  adulator  of
the  same,  and,  after  his  rise,  so  puffed-up  with  pride  and  silli¬
ness  and  so  occupied  with  exhibiting  and  making  the  most
of  his  pretended  distinctions,  that  no  one  could  keep  himself
from  laughing  at  him.

With  little  wit,  but  what  he  had  of  the  great  world,  the
result  of  being  always  in  good  society,  he  allowed  himself  at
times  to  scribble  verses.  The  king  had  a  fancy  at  one  time
for  bout-rimés.  Dangeau  was  ardently  desirous  of  a  lodg¬
ing  at  Versailles,  when  lodgings  were  scarce,  in  the  early
times  when  the  king  went  to  live  there.  One  day,  when  he
was  playing  at  cards  with  Mme.  de  Montespan,  Dangeau
sighed  pathetically  in  speaking  to  some  one  of  this  de¬
sire,  but  loud  enough  for  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Montespan
to  overhear  him.  They  did  so,  and  diverted  themselves

296

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

accordingly;  then,  finding  it  very  amusing  to  keep  Dam
o-eau  on  tire  gridiron,  they  invented  the  strangest  rhymes
they  could  imagine  and  gave  them  to  him,  feeling  quite
sure  he  could  do  nothing  with  them,  hut  promising  him  a
lodging  if  he  managed  to  compose  them  without  leaving  the
game,  and  before  it  ended.  It  turned  out  that  the  parties
duped  were  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Montespan.  The  muses
favoured  Dangeau  ;  he  won  his  lodging  and  received  it
immediately.

He  had  married  in  1632  a  rich  girl,  daughter  of  a  collec¬
tor  of  taxes  called  Morin  the  Jew.  Being  left  a  widower,
he  found  himself  rich  enough  to  remarry  with  a  Comtesse
Lœvenstein,  maid-of-honour  to  Mme.  la  Dauphine,  and  niece
of  Cardinal  de  Fiirstemberg,  who  had  several  sisters  very
grandly  married  in  Germany,  and  brothers  in  high  posi¬
tions.  We  have  seen  elsewhere  who  the  Lœvensteins  were,
and  what  a  fuss  Madame  made  on  seeing  the  arms  palatine
quartered  with  those  of  Courcillon  on  Mme.  Dangeau’s  sedan-
chair.  ’T  was  a  pleasure  to  see  with  what  delight  Dangeau
strutted  about  in  deep  mourning  for  his  wife’s  relations,  and
told  of  their  grandeur.  At  last,  by  dint  of  veneering  himself
with  this  one  and  that  one,  behold  a  seigneur,  affecting  all
the  manners  of  the  same  enough  to  make  one  die  of  laugh¬
ing  ;  for  did  not  Bruyère  say,  in  his  excellent  “  Characters  of
Theophrastus,”  that  Dangeau  was  not  a  seigneur,  but  after
a  seigneur  ?

From  the  time  he  first  came  to  Court,  that  is,  about  the
period  of  the  death  of  the  queen-mother,  he  began  to  write
in  a  journal  the  news  of  the  day,  and  he  was  faithful  to  the
work  until  he  died.  He  wrote  them  like  a  gazette,  without
any  comments,  so  that  one  reads  of  events  with  exact  dates
and  not  one  word  of  their  causes,  still  less  of  any  intrigues
or  any  sort  of  emotion,  either  at  Court  or  among  private  per-

1720]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  297

sons.  The  servility  of  a  humble  courtier,  the  worship  of  a
master,  and  of  all  that  is  or  smells  of  favour,  the  silliest
and  most  miserable  praise,  eternal  and  suffocating  incense,
even  about  the  most  indifferent  actions  of  the  king,  of  Mme.
de  Maintenon,  of  the  ministers,  all  that  the  king  did  each
day,  often  the  actions  of  the  princes  and  the  most  influen¬
tial  ministers,  are  there  written  down  dryly  as  to  facts,  hut
as  much  as  possible  with  servile  flattery,  and  for  things  that
no  other  than  himself  would  have  dreamed  of  lauding.  It
is  difficult  to  understand  how  a  man  could  have  had  the
patience  and  perseverance  to  write  such  a  work  every  day
of  his  life  for  fifty  years,  —  so  meagre,  so  dry,  so  constrained,
so  cautious,  so  literal  ;  writing  nothing  hut  a  mere  shell,  of
repulsive  aridity.  It  must  he  owned,  however,  that  it  would
have  been  difficult  for  Dangeau  to  have  written  real  memoirs
requiring  insight  into  the  various  machinations  of  a  Court.
Dangeau  had  a  mind  below  mediocrity,  very  frivolous,  very
incapable  in  every  way,  taking  readily  the  shadow  for  the
substance,  living  on  gas,  and  perfectly  contented  with  it.
All  his  capacities  went  solely  to  behave  himself  properly,
to  hurt  no  one,  to  acquire,  preserve,  and  enjoy  a  sort  of
consideration  ;  without  ever  perceiving  that,  beginning  from
the  king  down,  his  silliness  and  conceit  diverted  the  com¬
pany,  and  that  traps  were  laid  for  him  in  those  directions,
into  which  he  tumbled  headlong.  But  with  all  that,  his
memoirs  are  full  of  facts  about  which  the  gazettes  are
silent  ;  they  will  gain  much  by  age,  and  will  greatly  help
those  who  wish  to  write  correctly,  through  the  accuracy  of
their  chronology,  and  the  confusion  that  this  will  assist  such
writers  to  avoid.

For  a  long  time  past  the  Abbé  Dubois  had  shut  the  mouth
of  his  master  towards  me,  especially  on  the  matter  of  foreign
affairs.  This  did  not  prevent  a  few  scraps  escaping  the  Due

298

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

1721.

The  regent  con¬
fides  to  me  the
marriage  of  the
king  with  the
infanta.

d’Orléans  when  we  were  alone  together,  but  with  very  little
detail  and  connection  ;  and  I  was  always,  for  iny  part,  ex¬
tremely  reserved.  But  one  day,  early  in  June,
I  found  him  alone,  walking  up  and  down  the
large  apartment.  As  soon  as  he  saw  me  he
grasped  me  by  the  hand,  exclaiming  :  “  Ho  çà  !
I  can’t  keep  the  thing  I  most  desired  in  the
world  a  secret  from  you,  —  a  most  important  thing  for  me,
and  one  you  will  equally  rejoice  in  ;  but  you  must  keep  it  the
greatest  secret.”  And  then  he  added,  laughing  :  “  If  M.  de
Cambrai  knew  that  I  told  you  he  would  never  forgive  me.”
After  which  he  informed  me  of  his  reconciliation  with  the
King  and  Queen  of  Spain,  the  marriage  of  the  king  to  the  in¬
fanta  as  soon  as  she  was  marriageable,  and  that  of  the  Prince
of  the  Asturias  to  his  own  daughter,  Mlle,  de  Montpensier.

Though  my  joy  was  great,  my  astonishment  surpassed  it.
The  Duc  d’Orléans  embraced  me,  and  after  the  first  reflec¬
tions  on  the  personal  advantages  to  him  in  so  great  an  affair,
I  asked  him  how  he  had  managed  to  bring  it  about,  espe¬
cially  as  to  the  marriage  of  his  daughter.  He  said  it  was
done  in  a  twinkling,  for  the  Abbé  Dubois  wTas  the  devil  and
all  if  he  really  wanted  a  thing  ;  that  the  King  of  Spain  had
been  so  enchanted  at  the  request  of  the  king,  his  nephew,  for
the  infanta,  that  they  had  made  the  marriage  of  the  Prince  of
the  Asturias  a  sine  qua  non  condition  of  that  of  the  infanta,
which  forced  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Spain  in  spite  of  him¬
self.  After  we  had  talked  it  well  over  and  greatly  rejoiced,
I  told  him  that  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  ought  to  be
kept  secret  till  the  very  moment  of  her  departure,  and  that
of  the  king  until  years  would  permit  of  its  celebration,  so
as  to  prevent  the  jealousy  of  all  Europe  at  this  close  union
of  the  two  branches  of  the  Royal  House, — a  union  which
had  always  been  its  terror,  as  disunion  was  its  hope,  and  the

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

299

constant  object  of  its  policy  ;  for  which  reason  it  was  best
to  leave  the  world  ignorant  as  long  as  possible,  as  the
infanta  was  only  three  years  old,  being  born  in  Madrid  on
March  30th,  1718  ;  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  born  in
August,  1707,  was  fourteen,  and  Mlle,  de  Montpensier
twelve.  “  You  are  quite  right,”  replied  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
“  but  it  can’t  be  done,  because  in  Spain  they  wish  the  decla¬
ration  made  at  once,  and  the  infanta  sent  here  the  mo¬
ment  the  proposal  is  made  and  the  marriage-contract  signed.”
“  What  folly  !  ”  I  cried  ;  “  why  sound  such  a  tocsin  to  set  ah
Europe  in  a  ferment  ?  You  ought  to  make  them  understand
that,  and  be  firm  about  it  ;  nothing  is  more  important.”
“That  is  true,”  said  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  “I  think  just  as
you  do,  but  they  are  so  headstrong  in  Spain  they  would
have  it  so,  and  I  had  to  agree.  The  thing  is  settled,  done,
decided  ;  the  affair  is  so  important  for  me,  in  every  respect,
that  you  never  could  advise  me  to  break  it  off  for  such  a
whim.”  I  agreed,  shrugging  my  shoulders  with  impatience
at  such  perverse  ill-luck.

While  we  had  been  talking  the  matter  over,  I  had  thought
about  my  own  affairs  and  the  occasion  so  naturally  present¬
ing  itself  of  making  the  future  of  my  second

I  obtain  the  °  J

embassy  to  son.  I  said  therefore  to  the  regent  that,  inas-
spa'n.  much  as  matters  had  necessarily  come  to  the

point  he  mentioned,  it  became  important  to  send  at  once
and  make  a  solemn  demand  for  the  infanta  and  sign  the
marriage-contract  ;  that  for  such  a  purpose  a  seigneur  of
mark  and  high  rank  was  needed,  and  I  begged  him  to  give
that  embassy  to  me,  with  his  protection  and  recommendation
to  the  King  of  Spain  to  make  my  second  son,  the  Marquis
de  Ruffec,  a  grandee  of  Spain.  I  said  :  “  I  ask  for  him  a  thing
that  does  not  interfere  with  any  one,  that  gives  him  the
rank  and  honours  of  a  duke,  and  is  the  natural  result  of  an

300

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  x.

embassy  sent  to  make  a  marriage  for  the  king.  No  one  could
fail  to  approve  of  your  giving  me  the  mission  with  a  view  to
the  grandeeship.”  The  Duc  d’Orléans  would  hardly  let  me
finish  ;  he  granted  my  request  at  once,  promised  to  do  all
in  his  power  to  obtain  the  rank  for  the  Marquis  de  Euffec,
seasoned  his  promise  with  much  friendship,  and  asked  me
for  absolute  secrecy,  and  to  let  none  of  my  preparations  be
visible  until  he  should  tell  me  to  make  them.  I  understood
very  well  that,  besides  the  secrecy  of  the  affair,  he  wanted
time  to  coax  his  Dubois  and  make  him  swallow  the  pill.
My  thanks  being  made,  I  asked  him  two  favours  :  one  was,  not
to  give  me  any  salary  as  an  ambassador,  but  enough  in  bulk
for  an  outfit  to  save  me  from  being  ruined  ;  and  the  other
was,  not  to  charge  me  with  any  other  affairs,  because  I  did
not  wish  to  quit  him  or  take  root  in  Spain,  where  I  wished
to  go  solely  for  my  second  son  and  to  return  immediately.
The  fact  was  I  feared  that  Dubois  would  keep  me  there  in
exile  in  order  to  be  rid  of  me  here,  and  I  saw  later  as  things
turned  out  that  my  precaution  was  not  useless.  The  Due
d’Orléans  granted  both  requests,  with  many  obliging  assur¬
ances  that  he  hoped  my  absence  would  not  be  long.  I
thought  I  had  done  a  great  affair  for  my  family,  and  I  went
home  very  content  ;  but,  good  God  !  what  are  the  plans  and
successes  of  men  ?

As  time  went  by  after  the  accession  of  the  new  pope,
Dubois’  impatience  gave  him  no  rest.  He  was  stunned
Dubois  a  car-  when  he  heard  that  the  pope  had  made  one
His* conduct'  on  cardinal  all  alone  on  the  16th  of  June,  —  his
the  occasion.  brother,  the  Bishop  of  Terracina,  a  Benedictine

monk  of  Monte  Cassini.  Dubois,  expecting  that  no  promo¬
tion  would  be  made  unless  he  were  of  it,  breathed  fire  and
slaughter.  But  he  did  not  wait  long.  A  month  later,  July
16,  saw  him  cardinal,  together  with  Don  Alessandro  Albano,

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

301

nephew  of  the  late  pope  and  brother  of  the  cardinal-camer-
lingo.  Dubois  received  the  news  and  the  compliments  with
infinite  joy  ;  but  he  knew  enough  to  contain  himself  with
some  decency  and  to  give  all  the  honour  of  his  elevation  to
the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  had  little  or  no  part  in  it.  But  he
could  not  help  telling  everybody  that  what  honoured  him
more  than  even  the  Roman  purple  itself  was  the  unanimous
desire  and  eagerness  of  all  the  powers  to  procure  it  for  him.
He  exhaled  himself  on  that,  and  never  stopped  talking  of  it,
but  no  one  was  duped  in  that  way.

Though  he  and  I  were  on  the  terms  I  have  shown,  I
thought  I  ought  to  put  the  regent  at  his  ease  between  Dubois
and  me,  as  I  was  forced  to  have  a  certain  necessary  inter¬
course  with  him  during  my  embassy.  I  therefore  went  to
call  upon  him  ;  whereupon  he  overwhelmed  me  with  respects,
compliments,  protestations  of  gratitude  for  the  honour  I  did
him,  with  no  word  of  the  past.  Though  the  visit  was  one
of  ceremony  and  there  was  much  company,  he  used  his  red
hat  (which  he  had  just  received  from  the  hands  of  the  king)
as  if  it  were  a  black  one,  tossed  it  aside  like  dirt  to  offer  me
his  hand,  and  conducted  me  at  parting  to  the  very  end  of
his  apartment  and  even  to  the  courtyard  on  which  it  opened.
The  Duc  d’Orléans  expressed  to  me  his  pleasure  at  this  act
on  my  part,  and  after  that  I  never  met  the  new  cardinal  in
the  regent’s  apartments  that  he  did  not  come  to  me  and,
stepping  backward  from  the  door,  perform  marvels  ;  in
which  I  took  good  care  to  put  no  confidence.  On  receiving
his  hat  from  the  king  he  took  off  from  his  neck  his  episcopal
His  pectoral  cross  and  presented  it  to  the  Bishop  of  Fréjus

rassment^o^M.  who  was  standing  near,  telling  him  that  it

de  Fréjus.  brought  good  luck,  and  for  that  reason  he

begged  him  to  wear  it  for  his  sake.  Fréjus  reddened  and
received  it  with  much  embarrassment.  This  cross,  though

302

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  x

shaped  like  all  others,  was  very  peculiar  in  workmanship,
which  made  it  perfectly  distinguishable  ;  but  Fréjus,  liable
to  meet  the  cardinal  continually  in  the  king’s  presence,  dared
not  avoid  wearing  it.  He  was  dining  one  day,  with  the  cross
on  his  neck,  at  the  Duchesse  du  Lude’s,  with  M.  and  Mme.
de  Torcy  and  a  large  company,  when  Mme.  de  Torcy,  who
did  not  like  Dubois  and  was  much  displeased  with  Fréjus’
conduct  about  the  bull  and  whatever  was  charged  with
Jansenism,  accustomed,  moreover,  to  see  him  in  earlier  years
a  parasite  and  hanger-on  of  her  family,  attacked  his  cross
at  table  with  a  good  deal  of  wit,  freedom,  and  bitterness,
falling  foul  of  the  pair  with  stinging  sharpness,  and  putting
Fréjus  so  beside  himself  that  he  did  not  know  where  he
was  ;  while  the  company,  who  saw  and  regretted  such  a
scene  at  table,  tried  in  vain  to  call  the  dogs  off  the  hunt,
which  lasted  a  long  time  and  was  never  forgiven  by  Fleury,
either  to  Mme.  de  Torcy  or  her  husband,  who  really  had
nothing  to  do  with  it.  Torcy  himself  was  much  too  wise
and  cautious,  and  truly  it  was  a  great  imprudence  in  his
wife.

Fréjus,  intent  on  the  future,  but  the  future  of  this  world,
thought  of  nothing  so  much  as  attaching  the  king  to  him-
Conduct  of  Fréjus  self,  in  which  he  was  making  great  and  very
regent ^ vui'eroy ,  visible  progress.  Although  in  his  heart  op-
and  the  world.  posed  to  the  regent,  he  behaved  to  him  always
with  the  utmost  circumspection,  and  in  cultivating  the
opposite  party  he  did  it  with  caution.  Maréchal  de  Ville-
roy  was  the  coryphée  of  that  party.  He  was  the  object
of  Fleury’s  most  jealous  attention.  The  latter  dreaded  his
grandeur,  which  he  regarded  as  fatal  to  his  own  project  of
gaining  possession  of  the  king  with  an  authority  to  be
shared  by  no  one  ;  he  felt  the  disproportion  of  the  maré¬
chal  to  himself,  and  he  was  personally  hampered  by  all

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  303

that  he  owed  him  of  attachment  and  gratitude.  It  was
not  yet  time  to  relieve  himself  of  those  bonds,  but  he  was
careful  not  to  increase  them  by  serving,  or  by  encouraging
against  the  government  and  person  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
a  party  timid  at  heart,  badly  organized  for  action,  depressed
by  the  blows  it  had  received,  but  full  of  an  ardent  will  ;
a  party  which,  if  it  could  only  have  counted  on  the  king
through  Fréjus,  would  soon  have  recovered  strength  and
courage.  But  in  that  case  the  principal  fruit  would  have
been  gathered  by  Villeroy,  from  his  place  beside  the  king,
which  was  far  from  the  interest  or  the  intention  of  Fréjus,
who  was  toiling  from  afar  to  become  sole  master,  and  re¬
garded  the  ruin  of  the  maréchal  in  the  king’s  mind  as
essential  to  the  great  position  which  he  meditated  gaining
for  himself.

His  progress  in  the  king’s  affections  was  so  visible  that
he  was  rapidly  becoming  a  personage  whom  every  one
thought  it  was  well  to  conciliate.  If  he  felt  the  superiority
of  rank  and  position  which  Villeroy  held  over  him,  much
more  did  he  feel  that  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  the  weight  of
his  birth,  place,  talents,  age,  all  of  which  would  naturally
continue  his  authority  for  thirty  years  after  the  close  of
his  regency.  Moreover,  the  regent,  having  removed  the
Duc  du  Maine  from  his  duties  to  the  king,  might  also  re¬
move  him,  without  the  slightest  fear  of  exciting  opposition,
and  thus  destroy  his  hopes  and  plans  forever.  It  was  this
that  restrained  him  towards  the  regent  within  proper
bounds  ;  it  was  this  that  led  him  to  cultivate  me  with  so
much  care  and  the  outside  husk  of  confidence,  —  because  I
was  the  only  person  in  close  relations  with  the  regent
whom  a  bishop,  anxious  to  exhibit  the  virtues  and  behav¬
iour  of  his  calling  (from  which  he  drew  great  benefit  event¬
ually),  could  frequent  on  a  footing  of  personal  intimacy.

304

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

It  was  this  also  that  redoubled  his  sedulous  care  and
activity  in  attaching  the  king  to  him  more  and  more,  so
as  to  make,  if  possible,  a  sure  buckler  of  the  king’s  affec¬
tion  should  the  regent  at  any  future  time  take  a  fancy  to
dismiss  him.  I  saw  clearly  the  whole  manœuvre,  and  I
tried  to  rouse  the  negligent  indifference  of  the  Due
d’Orléans.  I  told  him  how  important  it  was  to  keep  on
good  terms  and  treat  wisely  the  only  man  for  whom  the
king  showed  friendliness  and  confidence,  for  he  was  in¬
wardly  more  than  alienated  from  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy.
I  must  here  admit  that  Fréjus  was  never  self-interested.
After  all  things  were  in  his  power,  he  took  no  benefice
whatever  for  himself,  and  it  has  never  appeared  that  he
made  himself  any  other  form  of  compensation.  At  the
very  height  of  his  omnipotence  and  his  cardinalate,  his
household,  his  equipments,  his  table,  his  furniture,  were
always  inferior  to  those  of  the  middle-class  prelates.

As  soon  as  the  marriages  were  declared  I  urged  that  my
embassy  should  he  announced,  in  order  that  I  might  work
My  embassy  at  my  outfit.  This  had  been  expressly  for-
The  Duc  de  bidden  to  me  so  tar,  and  with  good  reason,
Lauzun’s  advice.  t0  excite  no  comment  ;  but  that  reason  ceas¬
ing  with  the  declaration  of  the  marriages,  and  time  press¬
ing,  I  wanted  to  begin  my  preparations.  The  Duc  de
Lauzun  urged  me  very  strongly  to  ask  for  the  cordon  bleu
[Order  of  the  Holy  Spirit]  as  a  proper  decoration  to  wear
in  Spain,  and  which,  being  a  favour  here,  would  not  stand
in  the  way  of  my  obtaining  in  Spain  what  I  desired  for
my  children.  But  I  would  not  do  so.  This  impatience  to
wear  the  Order,  which  must  hi  time  be  mine,  was  repug¬
nant  to  me.  I  had  only  desired  this  embassy  for  the  sake
of  making  my  second  son  a  grandee  of  Spain,  and,  if
occasion  offered,  to  obtain  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Fleece

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

305

for  the  eldest.  To  succeed  in  that  and  to  get  the  cordon
bleu  at  the  same  time  seemed  to  me  too  greedy  a  piling
up  of  favours  ;  and  I  did  not  allow  myself  to  he  tempted.
Whoever  had  told  me  then  that  I  should  not  be  included
in  the  next  promotion  would  have  surprised  me  very  much  ;
hut  whoso  had  added  that  I  should  find  myself  one  of
eight  with  Cellamare,  two  sons  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  and
the  Duc  de  Richelieu,  in  the  following  promotion  would
have  amazed  me  far  more.

Cardinal  Dubois  hastened  my  departure  eagerly,  and,  in
truth,  there  was  no  time  to  lose.  He  even  sent  constantly
My  suite  ;  i  leave  to  hasten  the  workmen  engaged  in  prepar-
Pans  for  Madrid.  ^ng  my  outfit  ;  he  wanted  to  see  the  liveries

of  every  sort  of  servant,  and  insisted  on  making  them  very
magnificent  ;  he  also  had  all  the  suits  made  for  myself  and
my  sons  taken  to  him  to  see.  He  asked  for  the  names  of
my  suite,  and  exhorted  me  to  make  it  a  large  one.  I  took
with  me  the  Comte  de  Lorges,  the  Comte  de  Céreste,  my
two  sons,  the  Abbé  de  Saint-Simon,  his  brother,  the  major
of  a  regiment  that  had  served  in  Spain  and  was  well-known
there,  an  officer  of  great  distinction  who  was  infinitely  use¬
ful  to  me,  the  Abbé  de  Mathan,  a  friend  of  the  Abbé  de
Samt-Simon,  whom  I  took  for  his  health,  and  who  has  since
continued  to  he  my  friend  also.  The  Comte  de  Céreste
was  a  friend  of  my  sons.  He  wanted  to  make  the  journey,
and  I  felt  in  honour  hound  to  him.  He  and  I  made  great
acquaintance  on  the  way.  I  found  him  a  young  man  who
was  fully  a  man,  and  one  who  was  equally  agreeable  and
solid.  Esteem  formed  a  friendship  between  us  which  has
lasted  intimately  ever  since.  On  the  eve  of  my  departure
I  received  my  letters  from  the  king  and  the  regent  to  their
Catholic  Majesties,  the  dowager  queen  at  Bayonne,  and
the  Prince  of  the  Asturias.

VOL.  IV.  —  20

306

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

I  left  Paris  with  post-horses,  Oct.  23,  1721,  with  part  of
my  suite,  the  rest  of  the  company  joining  me  at  Blaye.

As  I  crossed  the  Pyrenees  and  quitted  France

Passage  of  the

Pyrenees,  i  go  I  also  quitted  the  rain  and  the  rough  weather
to  see  Loyola.  wj1[c}1  paq  followed  us  till  then,  and  found  a

cloudless  sky  and  a  charming  temperature,  with  points  of
view  and  perspectives,  changing  continually,  that  were  no
less  charming.  We  were  all  mounted  on  mules,  the  pace  of
which  is  long  and  easy.  I  turned  aside  in  crossing  the  high¬
est  mountain  to  visit  Loyola,  the  famous  birthplace  of  Saint
Ignatius.  It  stands  alone,  beside  a  rather  wide  brook  in  a
narrow  valley,  squeezed  on  both  sides  by  rocky  mountains,
which  must  make  it  a  glacier  when  covered  with  snow,  and
a  pudding  dish  in  summer.  We  found  there  four  or  five
Jesuits,  very  polite  and  intelligent  men,  who  are  in  charge
of  a  monstrous  building  they  are  erecting  for  over  a  hundred
Jesuits  and  an  infinite  number  of  scholars,  with  the  intention
of  making  this  house  a  novitiate,  a  college,  and  a  house  for
postulants,  to  serve,  in  short,  for  all  the  purposes  to  which
they  put  their  various  houses,  and  to  he,  as  it  were,  the
capital  of  their  Company.  They  showed  us  the  primitive
little  home  of  the  father  of  Saint  Ignatius,  a  small  house
with  five  or  six  windows,  which  has  only  a  ground-floor  for
the  housework,  a  floor  above,  and  over  that  a  garret.  It
would  be,  at  most,  the  lodging  of  a  curate,  and  has  nothing
resembling  a  château  about  it.  We  saw  the  chamber  where
Saint  Ignatius,  wounded  in  war,  lay  for  a  long  time  and  had
his  famous  revelation  about  the  Company  of  which  he  was
to  be  the  founder  ;  also  the  stable  where  his  mother  chose  to
give  birth  to  him  out  of  devotion  to  the  stable  in  Bethlehem  ;
this  stable  is  under  the  house.  Nothing  could  be  lower,
narrower,  more  confined  than  these  two  places  ;  nothing
more  dazzling  than  the  gold  that  shines  everywhere  about

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  307

them.  In  each  there  is  an  altar  hearing  the  Holy  Sacrament,
and  hoth  altars  are  of  the  utmost  magnificence.

The  Jesuits’  own  house,  which  they  are  going  to  pull
down  for  their  enormous  building,  is  a  very  small  affair,  only
fit  to  lodge  about  a  dozen  of  them.  The  new  church  is
nearly  finished.  It  is  a  rotunda,  of  surprising  size  and
height,  with  lofty  altars  all  around  it  placed  symmetrically.
Gold,  painting,  sculpture,  ornaments  of  all  sorts  and  the  very
richest,  are  spread  about  everywhere  with  amazing  hut
judicious  art.  The  architecture  is  correct  and  wonderful,
the  marbles  exquisite,  —  jasper,  porphyry,  lapis-lazuli,  —  the
columns  are  plain,  twisted,  fluted,  with  capitals  and  decora¬
tions  in  gilded  bronze.  A  row  of  balconies  are  between  each
altar,  with  little  stairways  of  marble  leading  to  them,  and
the  inlaid  lattices,  the  altars,  and  all  that  accompanies  them
are  wonderful.  In  a  word,  this  is  one  of  the  most  superb
edifices  in  Europe,  the  best  arranged  and  the  most  gorgeously
decorated.  We  drank  the  best  chocolate  I  ever  tasted  in
this  place,  and  after  several  hours  of  curiosity  and  admiration
we  regained  our  route  and  our  night’s  lodging,  very  late,  and
with  much  difficulty.

I  started  from  Burgos  on  the  19th,  finding  few  relays  and
those  very  poor  ones,  and  travelled  night  and  day  without
sleeping  anywhere,  and  chiefly  in  the  carriages  of  the  magis¬
trates  of  the  towns,  until  we  reached  Madrid  ;  the  last  dozen
leagues  we  were  forced  to  make  on  horseback.  We  arrived
in  this  way  at  Madrid  Friday,  21st,  at  eleven  at  night,  and
found  at  the  entrance  of  the  city,  which  has  neither  walls
nor  gates  nor  harriers  nor  suburbs,  a  number  of  men  on
guard,  who  asked  us  who  we  were  and  whence  we  came;
they  were  posted  there  to  watch  for  my  arrival  and  give
notice  of  it.  As  I  was  very  tired,  having  travelled  from
Burgos  without  stopping,  and  it  was  very  late,  I  answered

308

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

that  we  were  the  people  of  the  French  ambassador,  who
would  arrive  the  next  day.

The  next  day,  Saturday,  22nd,  very  early,  I  sent  my  secre¬
tary  to  the  Marquis  de  Grimaldo,  secretary  of  the  king,  also
Arrivai  in  the  other  customary  messages  on  arrival  to  the

Madrid.  ministers  of  foreign  courts.  Grimaldo,  sur¬

prised  and  very  glad  at  my  arrival,  which  he  did  not  expect
until  the  evening  of  this  day,  hurried  to  the  palace  to  tell
their  Catholic  Majesties,  who,  disliking  their  residence  in
Madrid,  were  impatiently  awaiting  my  coming  in  order  to
start  for  Term  a.  From  the  palace  Grimaldo  came  to  me,
instead  of  waiting  for  my  first  visit,  and  found  me  with
Maulevrier  [French  ambassador  at  the  court  of  Spain],  the
Duc  de  Liria,  and  some  others.  Grimaldo  expressed  to  me
the  joy  of  their  Catholic  Majesties  at  my  arrival,  and  after
making  me  the  most  graceful  compliments  on  his  own  behalf,
he  gave  me  my  choice  whether  to  go  and  make  my  bow
to  them  that  same  morning  or  wait  till  the  afternoon.  I
thought  eagerness  was  more  becoming;  and  I  went  with
him  at  once  in  Maulevrier’s  carriage.  In  this  way  all  the
difficulties  of  a  first  visit  were  avoided  in  regard  to  those  to
whom  it  was  due  on  my  part,  which  relieved  me  very  much.

We  arrived  at  the  palace  as -the  king  was  returning  from
mass,  and  we  awaited  him  in  the  little  salon  between  the
i  make  my  first  Salon  of  the  Grandees  and  the  Salon  of  Mirrors.
Cathouc  Majes-  Tu  a  few  moments  the  king  entered  and  came
ties-  to  me  at  once,  preceded  and  followed  by  a  good

many  courtiers,  hut  nothing  like  the  crowd  of  ours.  I  made
a  profound  how  ;  he  expressed  his  joy  at  my  arrival,  asked
news  of  the  king,  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  about  my  journey  ;
after  which  he  went  alone  into  the  Salon  of  Mirrors.  In  a
moment  I  was  surrounded  by  the  whole  Court,  with  compli¬
ments  and  assurances  of  joy  at  the  marriages  and  the  union

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

309

of  the  two  crowns.  Grimaldo  and  the  Duc  de  Liria  named
the  seigneurs,  who  all  spoke  French,  and  I  endeavoured  to
reply  to  their  civilities  by  mine.

In  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  king  had  retired  he
sent  for  me.  I  entered  alone  into  the  Salon  of  Mirrors,  which
is  very  vast,  but  much  less  wide  than  long.  The  king,  and
the  queen  on  his  left,  were  standing  at  the  other  end,  almost
touching  each  other.  I  approached,  with  three  profound
hows.  My  audience  lasted  half  an  hour,  during  which  they
expressed  their  joy,  their  desires,  their  impatience,  with  great
effusion  about  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  their  desire  to  make
Mlle,  de  Montpensier  happy.  At  the  close  of  the  conver¬
sation,  in  which  the  queen  talked  a  great  deal  more  than  the
king,  though  he  showed  his  joy  as  plainly,  they  did  me  the
honour  to  say  that  they  wished  to  show  me  the  infants,  and
ordered  me  to  follow  them.  I  have  never  seen  prettier  chil¬
dren  nor  better  made  than  Don  Ferdinand  and  Don  Carlos,
nor  a  finer  babe  than  Don  Philippe.  The  king  and  queen
took  pleasure  in  making  them  turn  about  and  walk  before
me  with  very  good  grace.  After  which  we  entered  the  room
of  the  infanta,  where  I  endeavoured  to  display  all  the  gal¬
lantry  that  I  could.  She  was  really  charming,  with  a  sen¬
sible  little  air,  and  not  at  all  embarrassed.  The  queen
remarked  that  the  infanta  was  beginning  to  speak  French
pretty  well  ;  to  which  the  king  added  that  she  would  soon
forget  Spain.  “  Oh  !  ”  cried  the  queen,  “  not  only  Spain,  but
the  king  and  me,  to  attach  herself  the  more  to  the  king,  her
husband  ;  ”  on  which  I  did  my  best  not  to  be  mute.  A  few
moments  later  the  king  called  me  to  see  the  Prince  of  the
Asturias,  who  was  still  in  the  Salon  of  Mirrors.  I  found  him
tall,  and  truly  a  picture  ;  fair,  with  beautiful  blond  hair,  a
white  skin  with  much  colour,  a  long  but  agreeable  face,  fine
eyes,  though  rather  too  near  the  nose,  and  with  plenty  of

310

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.x.

grace  and  politeness.  He  asked  with  interest  for  news  of  the
king,  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  and  Mlle,  de  Montpensieu  and  the
time  of  her  arrival.

The  first  sight  of  the  King  of  Spain,  after  I  had  made  my
how  to  him,  astonished  me  so  much  that  I  had  need  to
sketch  of  the  gather  myself  together  to  recover  from  it.

Kmg  of  spam.  p  could  see  no  vestige  of  the  former  Due
d’Anjou  in  that  changed  and  elongated  face,  which  told
even  less  than  it  did  when  he  left  France.  He  was  much
bent,  and  shortened  ;  his  chin  was  thrust  forward  very  far
from  his  chest  ;  the  feet  straight,  touching  each  other  and
interfering  as  he  walked,  though  he  walked  quickly  with  his
knees  a  foot  apart.  What  he  did  me  the  honour  to  say  was
well  said,  but  the  words  were  so  drawling,  his  air  so  silly,
that  I  was  quite  confounded.  A  tight  body  coat,  without
any  kind  of  gold  lace,  and  made  of  a  sort  of  brown  drugget
because  he  was  intending  to  hunt,  did  not  improve  either  his
looks  or  his  bearing.  He  wore  a  tied  wig,  thrown  behind
his  head,  the  cordon  bleu  over  his  coat,  —  this  at  all  times
and  everywhere,  —  so  that  the  Golden  Fleece,  which  he  wore
round  his  throat  on  a  red  ribbon,  could  scarcely  be  seen,  be¬
cause  his  cravat  and  chin  and  the  cordon  bleu  concealed  it.

But  though  I  was  surprised  at  this  first  sight  of  the  King
of  Spain,  I  must  say,  with  the  most  exact  and  literal  truth,
that  later,  on  my  formal  demand  for  the  infanta  in  marriage,
his  answers  surprised  me  equally.  They  were  made  to
each  point  of  my  discourse  in  their  proper  order,  with  dig¬
nity,  grace,  and  even  majesty,  and  especially  with  a  sur¬
prising  choice  of  expressions,  and  words  so  appropriate  and
so  judiciously  and  accurately  measured  out  that  I  seemed  to
hear  the  late  king,  that  master  of  such  replies  and  so  well
versed  in  making  them.  Philippe  V.  was  not  born  with
superior  intellect,  nor  with  anything  of  what  is  called  imagi-

1721]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

811

nation.  He  was  cold,  silent,  sad,  sober,  open  to  no  pleasure
but  that  of  hunting,  fearing  society,  fearing  himself,  solitary
and  secluded  by  choice  and  habit,  rarely  touched  by  others  ;
with  good  sense,  nevertheless,  and  an  upright  nature,  com¬
prehending  things  fairly  well,  obstinate  when  he  set  himself
to  will  a  thing,  and  at  such  times  impossible  to  change,  but
otherwise  perfectly  easy  to  lead  and  govern.

He  felt  little.  In  his  campaigns  he  stayed  where  they
put  him  ;  if  it  was  under  fire  he  was  not  the  least  shaken,
and  amused  himself  with  watching  if  others  were  afraid.
Under  cover  and  far  from  danger  he  was  just  the  same,
without  considering  whether  or  not  his  fame  would  suffer.
On  the  whole  he  liked  to  make  war,  though  still  with  the
same  indifference  as  to  whether  he  went  or  not,  whether
he  was  present  or  absent,  leaving  to  his  generals  the  whole
command,  without  ever  putting  in  a  word  of  his  own.  He
was  extremely  conceited,  and  would  not  tolerate  the  slightest
resistance  to  any  of  his  enterprises  ;  and  what  made  me
think  that  he  loved  praise  was  that  the  queen  praised  him
incessantly,  even  about  his  face  ;  asking  me  one  day  before
him  if  I  did  not  think  him  very  handsome,  handsomer  than
any  man  I  knew.  His  piety  was  only  custom,  scruples,  ter¬
rors,  small  observances,  without  knowing  anything  whatever
of  religion  ;  the  pope  was  a  divinity  when  he  did  not  oppose
him  ;  in  that,  a  shallow  imitation  of  the  Jesuits,  whom  he
passionately  admired.  Though  his  health  was  good,  he  was
always  feeling  himself  over,  and  uneasy  about  it.  A  phy¬
sician  like  the  one  whom  Louis  XI.  enriched  at  the  close
of  his  life,  another  Maître  Coyctier,  would  soon  have  become
a  rich  and  powerful  personage;  happily,  the  one  whom
Philippe  Y.  employed  was  a  man  of  worth  and  honour,  and
his  successor  was  wholly  devoted  to  the  queen  and  kept
in  order  by  her.

312  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

It  was  not  so  much  the  difficulty  of  speaking  well  as
laziness  and  distrust  of  himself  that  made  the  king  silent.
He  rarely  took  part  in  the  conversation,  which  he  let  the
queen  hold  with  those  who  followed  them  on  the  Mall  or
saw  them  in  private  audiences  ;  he  also  left  her  to  talk  with
this  one  and  that  one  in  passing,  scarcely  ever  saying  any¬
thing  himself.  Yet  he  was  the  man  of  all  others  who
took  most  note  of  defects  and  absurdities,  and  would  make
the  best  and  most  amusing  story  of  them.  I  have  said
with  what  dignity  and  appropriateness  he  replied  to  my
speech  at  the  formal  audience,  and  what  discriminating
words  he  used  about  the  marriages,  which  shows  that  he
could  express  himself  perfectly  when  he  chose,  though  he
seldom  took  the  pains  to  do  so.  Towards  the  end  of  my
stay,  after  I  had  made  him  familiar  with  me  at  my  private
audiences,  which  always  turned  into  conversations,  I  heard
him  talk  and  reason  well  on  several  occasions  ;  but  whenever
there  were  people  present  he  usually  said  a  mere  word  to
me,  a  short  question  or  something  of  the  kind,  and  never
entered  into  any  conversation.

He  was  kind,  easy  to  serve,  familiar  with  his  interior
household,  and  sometimes  with  certain  seigneurs.  Love  of
France  issued  from  every  pore  of  him.  He  retained  great
reverence  and  gratitude  for  the  late  king,  and  tenderness
for  the  late  Monseigneur,  and,  above  all,  for  Mgr.  the  Dau¬
phin,  his  brother,  for  whose  loss  he  was  never  consoled.  I
did  not  remark  an  interest  in  any  other  of  the  royal  family
except  the  present  king,  and  he  made  no  inquiry  about  any
one  belonging  to  the  Court  with  the  sole  exception  of  the
Duchesse  de  Beauvilliers,  and  as  to  her  with  friendship.

The  queen  alarmed  me  with  a  face  that  was  scarred,
seamed,  and  excessively  disfigured  by  the  small-pox.  The
garments  then  in  fashion  for  the  Spanish  ladies,  invented

1721]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

313

by  the  Princesse  des  TJrsins  and  totally  different  from  their
former  style,  is  as  favourable  to  young  and  well-made  women
sketch  of  the  as  it  is  distressing  in  those  whose  defects  of

Queen  of  Spam.  age  anq  figure  it  reveals.  The  queen  was  ex¬
tremely  well-made,  though  slender  ;  her  neck  and  shoulders
beautiful,  rather  full  and  very  white,  as  were  the  hands  and
arms  ;  her  figure  easy,  the  waist  long  and  extremely  tapering.
She  spoke  French  very  well  with  a  slight  Italian  accent,  in
good  language,  choice  but  not  studied,  her  voice  and  enuncia¬
tion  most  agreeable.  A  charming,  continual,  and  natural
grace  without  the  slightest  affectation  accompanied  her  words
and  her  countenance,  varying  as  they  varied.  She  united  an
air  of  kindness,  even  courtesy  and  amiable  familiarity,  with
one  of  grandeur  and  majesty  which  never  left  her.  From
this  mixture  it  resulted  that  when  one  had  the  honour  of
seeing  her  in  some  privacy  (though  always  with  the  king),
one  was  readily  at  ease  with  her,  without  forgetting  who
she  was,  and  quickly  accustomed  to  her  face.  In  fact,  after
seeing  her  for  a  while,  one  could  easily  distinguish  that  she
must  have  had  beauty  and  charm,  the  idea  of  which  that
cruel  small-pox  had  not  wholly  effaced.  I  must  add  here
that  night  and  day,  in  work,  audiences,  amusements,  devo¬
tions,  she  and  the  king  were  never  parted  for  a  single  instant,
except  for  formal  audiences  which  they  gave  separately.

The  queen  [Elizabeth  Farnese]  was  brought  up  very
harshly  in  a  garret  of  the  palace  in  Parma  by  the  duchess
her  mother,  who  had  never  let  her  see  life  until  after  the
proposal  of  her  amazing  marriage  ;  and  then  as  little  as  she
could,  and  always  under  her  own  eyes.  The  princess  was
born  with  a  good  mind  and  all  the  natural  graces  that  the
mind  knows  how  to  govern.  Sense,  reflection,  behaviour
made  use  of  her  intelligence  and  employed  it  pertinently,
drawing  from  its  graces  all  that  it  had  to  give.  She  felt  her

314  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

talents  and  her  forces,  but  without  that  pride  and  vanity  of
display  which  would  have  weakened  them  or  made  them
ridiculous.  Her  ways  were  simple,  unaffected  ;  sometimes  a
natural  gayety  sparkled  across  and  through  the  everlasting
tedium  of  her  life  ;  and  though  she  had  temper  and  some¬
times  sharpness,  which  this  unrelaxed  constraint  had  given
her,  she  was  really  a  woman  who  pretended  to  nothing  in
the  ordinary  current  of  her  life,  where  she  was  truly
charming.

On  arriving  in  Spain,  sure  of  dismissing  the  Princesse  des
Ursins  and  fully  intending  to  take  her  place  in  the  govern¬
ment,  she  grasped  the  reins  at  once  and  did  it  so  well,  seiz¬
ing  at  the  same  time  the  mind  of  the  king,  that  she  soon
ruled  the  one  and  the  other.  In  public  matters  nothing
could  he  hidden  from  her.  The  king  never  worked  except  in
her  presence.  All  that  reached  him  she  read  and  reasoned
over  with  him.  She  was  present  at  all  private  audiences,
whether  of  his  subjects  or  of  foreign  ministers,  so  that
nothing  escaped  her  with  regard  to  business  or  favours.
With  regard  to  the  king,  this  eternal  i tête-à-tête  which  day
and  night  she  had  with  him  gave  her  every  means  of  know¬
ing  him,  and  knowing  him,  as  one  might  say,  by  heart.
Nothing  could  equal  the  shrewd  and  clever  turns  she  knew
well  how  to  give  to  things,  and  the  wily  way  she  could  make
the  king  take  them,  and,  little  by  little,  assume  her  likings
and  aversions.  Rarely  did  she  go  to  her  point;  her  way
was  by  long  preparations,  turns  and  counter-turns,  compass
in  hand,  and  feeling  the  wind  of  the  king’s  humour,  which
she  had  long  had  time  to  know  and  could  not  mistake.  Her
praises,  flatteries,  compliances  were  perpetual  ;  never  was
the  ennui,  the  terrible  weight  of  the  burden  allowed  to  be
seen.

And  yet  her  life  was  cramped  and  agitated  beyond  what

1721]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

315

any  one  could  imagine  ;  and  however  great  her  power  was,
she  owed  it  to  such  art,  suppleness,  patience,  strategy,  that  it
is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  great  as  it  was,  she  paid  too
dearly  for  it.  But  she  was  so  lively,  so  active,  so  decided,  so
resolute,  so  vehement  in  her  desires,  her  interests  were  so
dear  to  her  and  seemed  to  her  so  great,  that  nothing  cost  her
anything  to  attain  her  ends.  Sometimes  the  chain  was
drawn  so  tightly  that  she  could  never,  for  one  instant,  leave
the  left  side  of  the  king.  I  have  seen  her  several  times
when  walking  on  the  Mall  and  excited  and  interested  by
some  tale  or  conversation,  walk  a  little  slower  than  the  king
and  so  lag  four  or  five  steps  behind  him  ;  the  king  would
then  look  back,  and  instantly  she  would  regain  his  side  in
two  jumps,  and  there  continue  the  conversation  with  the
seigneurs  who  followed  her,  and  I  with  them,  regaining  in
the  same  hasty  way  the  ground  we  had  lost.

Hunting  was  the  daily  pleasure  of  the  king,  and  therefore
it  was  forced  to  he  that  of  the  queen.  But  it  was  always
„  invariably  the  same.  Their  Catholic  Majesties

Hunting  the  J  J

daily  pleasure  of  did  me  the  honour,  a  very  unusual  one,  of  com-

the  king.

mandmg  me  to  be  present  at  one  of  these
hunts  ;  and  I  went  in  my  carriage.  So  I  saw  it  well  ;  and
whoso  sees  one  sees  all.  The  beasts,  black  and  red,  are  not
met  with  in  the  plains  ;  it  was  necessary  to  find  them  in  the
mountains  ;  but  the  ground  there  is  too  steep  to  hunt  the  stag,
the  boar  and  the  other  animals  as  we  do  here.  In  fact  the
plains  themselves  are  so  parched,  and  hard,  and  full  of  deep
fissures,  which  can  only  be  seen  when  right  upon  the  edge
of  them,  that  the  best  hounds  would  have  their  feet  torn
and  even  crippled  for  a  long  time.  Besides,  the  plains  are  so
covered  with  coarse  grass  that  the  dogs  would  get  no  help
from  their  noses.  As  for  shooting  on  the  wing,  the  king  had
long  given  up  that  sort  of  hunting  because  he  no  longer  rode

316

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

on  horseback.  Consequently,  his  hunts  were  confined  to
battues.

The  Due  del  Arco,  who,  by  his  office  of  grand  equerry,  was
master  of  the  hunt,  selected  the  spot  to  which  the  king  and
queen  went.  There  they  erected  two  large  arbours,  adjoining
each  other,  almost  entirely  closed  in  except  for  a  sort  of  large
open  window,  breast-high  from  the  ground.  The  king  and
queen,  the  captain  of  the  guards  in  quarters,  and  four  loaders
of  guns,  were  the  only  persons  in  the  first  arbour,  with  a  score
of  guns  and  the  wherewithal  to  load  them.  In  the  other  ar¬
bour,  on  the  day  that  I  was  at  the  hunt,  was  the  Prince  of  the
Asturias,  with  the  Duc  de  Popoli,  the  Marquis  del  Surco,  the
Marquis  de  Santa-Crux  and  the  Duc  de  Giovenazzo,  major-
domo  and  grand  equerry  to  the  queen,  two  or  three  officers  of
the  body-guard,  and  myself,  with  a  great  many  guns,  and  men
to  load  them.  A  single  lady-of-honour  attended  the  queen  ;
coming  alone  in  a  carriage,  which  she  did  not  leave,  having
brought  for  her  consolation  a  book  and  some  work,  for  none
of  the  suite  went  up  to  her.  Their  Majesties  made  the  trip
at  full  speed  with  relays  of  guards  and  horses  ;  the  moment
they  arrived  at  the  arbours  the  carriages  were  driven  away,
with  the  poor  lady-of-honour  and  the  riding  horses,  very  far
out  of  sight,  for  fear  they  should  frighten  the  animals.

Two,  three,  four  hundred  peasants  under  orders  had  made
a  great  circuit  during  the  night  to  form  an  inclosure  ;  and
very  early  in  the  morning  they  shouted  from  a  distance  to
frighten  the  animals  and  make  them  rise,  collect  them  to¬
gether  as  much  as  possible,  and  then  drive  them  gently  in
the  direction  of  the  arbours.  Within  the  arbours  no  one  was
allowed  to  speak  or  move  the  least  in  the  world  or  let  a  coat
be  seen  ;  all  had  to  stand  there,  silent.  This  lasted  an  hour
and  a  half,  and  did  not  seem  to  me  very  amusing.  At  last
we  heard  in  the  distance  the  sound  of  shouts,  and  soon  after

1721]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

317

came  troops  of  animals  passing  at  intervals  within  gunshot,
and  immediately  the  king  and  queen  began  to  fire.  This
pleasure,  or  this  species  of  butchery,  lasted  more  than  half  an
hour,  during  which  we  saw  killed,  crippled,  or  escaping,  stags,
does,  roedeer,  wild  hoars,  hares,  wolves,  badgers,  foxes,  and
weasels  without  number.  It  was  necessary  to  let  the  king
and  queen  fire  first,  who  sometimes  allowed  the  grand  equerry
and  the  captain  of  the  guards  to  fire  ;  and  as  we  did  not
know  from  which  hand  the  shot  came,  we  had  to  wait  till
the  king’s  arbour  stopped  firing,  and  then  let  the  Prince  of
the  Asturias  fire,  who  often  had  nothing  to  fire  upon,  and  we
even  less.  I  did,  however,  shoot  a  fox,  rather  too  soon  if  the
truth  be  told,  of  which  I  was  ashamed  and  made  my  excuses
to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  who  laughed,  and  the  com¬
pany  also  ;  so  I  followed  their  example,  and  all  this  very
politely.  According  as  the  peasants  drew  nearer  and  closer,
the  hunt  came  on  ;  and  it  ended  when  the  men  approached
the  arbours,  shouting  still,  because  there  was  nothing  be¬
hind  them.  Then  the  carriages  were  brought  back,  the  per¬
sons  in  both  arbours  came  out  and  met  together,  and  the
dead  game  was  laid  before  the  king.  It  was  packed  behind
each  of  the  carriages.  Meanwhile  the  conversation  turned
on  the  hunt.  We  carried  back  on  this  occasion  about  a
dozen  head  and  more  of  large  game,  and  several  hares,  foxes,
and  weasels.  This  is  the  pleasure  of  their  Catholic  Majesties
on  all  working  days.  The  peasants  employed  are  paid,  and
the  king  often  gives  them  something  besides  as  he  gets  into
his  carriage.

On  returning  home  after  the  ceremony  of  signing  the
marriage  contracts,  which,  owing  to  the  length  of  the  docu-
niumination  of  ments  to  be  read,  lasted  a  very  long  time,
wonderfui'and01^  Don  Gaspard  Giron  [the  king’s  majordomo]
surprising.  invited  me  to  go  and  see  the  illumination  of

318  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

the  Place  Major.  We  got  into  his  carriage,  and  the  princi¬
pal  personages  of  my  suite  into  carriages  of  my  own,  and
were  driven  through  hy-streets  to  prevent  our  seeing  the
brilliancy  of  the  illumination  as  we  approached  it.  We
arrived  thus  at  a  fine  house  with  windows  opening  on  the
centre  of  the  Place,  where  the  king  and  queen  always  go  to
see  the  fêtes  that  are  held  there.  We  saw  no  light  what¬
ever  on  getting  out  of  the  carriages  or  in  mounting  the
stairs  ;  every  part  of  the  house  had  been  carefully  closed  ;
hut  on  entering  the  room  which  looked  upon  the  Place,
we  were  dazzled,  and  immediately  went  out  upon  the
balcony,  where  speech  failed  me  for  five  or  six  minutes
from  surprise.

The  area  of  this  Place  is  far  more  vast  than  that  of  any
I  have  seen  in  Paris  or  elsewhere,  and  is  longer  than  its
width.  The  five-storey  houses  which  surround  it  are  of  the
same  height,  having  all  their  windows  at  equal  distances,
each  with  a  balcony  of  the  same  size  and  projection  as  the
rest,  with  iron  railings  also  alike,  and  all  perfectly  similar
on  each  of  the  five  storeys.  On  these  balconies  were  two
huge  torches  of  white  wax,  one  at  each  end  of  each  balcony,
simply  resting  against  the  balustrade,  slightly  tipping  for¬
ward,  without  being  fastened  to  anything.  It  is  incredible
the  light  these  torches  gave  ;  the  splendour  was  amazing,  and
a  sense  of  majesty  I  cannot  express  laid  hold  of  me.  One
could  read  with  ease  the  finest  print  in  every  corner  of  the
square,  though  the  ground-floor  rooms  were  not  lighted  at
all.

As  soon  as  I  appeared  upon  the  balcony  the  people
crowded  beneath  it,  crying  out  :  Senor  !  Toro  !  toro  !  This
was  their  way  of  requesting  that  I  would  obtain  a  bull¬
fight  for  them,  which  is  the  thing  in  the  world  for  which
they  have  the  greatest  passion,  and  which  the  king  had  for

1721]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

319

some  years  refused  to  permit,  from  scruples  of  conscience.  I
therefore  contented  myself  on  the  following  day  with  simply
telling  him  of  these  cries  of  the  people,  without  ashing  him
to  grant  the  request,  while  expressing  my  astonishment  at
so  surpassing  and  wonderful  an  illumination.  Don  Gaspard
Giron  and  the  Spaniards  who  were  in  the  house  where  I
was,  charmed  with  the  astonishment  I  showed  at  the  sight,
made  it  publicly  known,  with  all  the  more  complacency
because  they  were  not  accustomed  to  the  admiration  of
Frenchmen,  and  many  of  the  seigneurs  spoke  to  me  about  it
with  pleasure.  I  had  hardly  time  to  sup,  on  my  return  from
this  beautiful  illumination,  before  it  was  necessary  to  go  to
the  palace,  for  the  hall  which  the  king  was  giving  in  the
Salon  of  the  Grandees,  which  lasted  until  two  hours  after
midnight.

Thursday,  November  27,  was  the  day  appointed  for  the
departure  of  the  king  and  queen  for  Lerma  ;  I  went  after
dinner  to  the  palace  to  see  them  start,  and

Departure  of  the

king  and  queen  again  I  received  a  thousand  marks  of  their
kindness.  Both,  especially  the  queen,  insisted
two  or  three  times  that  I  must  not  delay  my  coming  to
Lerma,  on  which  I  assured  them  that  I  should  be  there  on
their  arrival,  to  assist  them  from  their  carriage.  The  Court
of  Spain  moves  like  a  tortoise,  and  was  not  expected  to  reach
Lerma  until  the  11th  of  December.  The  king  and  queen  al¬
ways  travel  in  a  large  coach  belonging  to  the  queen,  with
seven  windows,  so  that  on  passing  along  the  narrow  mountain
road  to  Balsaïm  there  were  not  two  inches  of  margin  between
their  wheels  and  the  precipice,  and  in  several  places  the
wheels  ran  in  air  sometimes  for  one  hundred,  sometimes  for
two  hundred  feet,  and  even  more.  The  peasants  of  the
neighbourhood  in  great  numbers  are  ordered  to  hold  the
carriage  up  with  long  leather  straps,  frequently  renewed  ;  and

320  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

these  men  are  changed  in  relays,  walking  over  the  rocks
with  the  utmost  difficulty  and  danger  both  to  the  carriage
and  themselves.  Nothing  was  done  to  this  road  to  make  it
more  passable,  yet  the  king  and  queen  were  not  the  least
afraid.  The  women  who  followed  the  queen  were  half-dead
with  terror,  though  they  were  in  narrower  carriages.  As
for  the  men  of  the  suite,  they  rode  on  mules.  I  shall  add
no  reflections  on  this  surprising  custom.

The  small  amount  of  lodging  room  that  Lerma  could
furnish  to  the  Court  allowed  of  no  one  being  billeted  there
except  those  on  duty  in  the  necessary  offices.

I  am  lodged  at

viiiahaimanzo  The  adjoining  villages  were  taken  for  the  Court,
the  grandees,  and  the  foreign  ambassadors.  I
had  the  choice  given  me  of  several,  and  I  chose  Viiiahaimanzo,
on  the  account  I  received  of  it.  It  is  a  short  half-league
from  Lerma  and  immediately  opposite,  —  a  little  valley  be¬
tween  the  two,  which  is  crossed  by  a  paved  road  with  a
stone  bridge  spanning  the  little  river.  They  arranged,  for
me  alone,  the  rector’s  house,  small,  airy,  pretty,  with  chim¬
neys  built  on  purpose,  and  all  the  other  houses  in  the
village  were  arranged  for  my  suite  and  others  who  were  with
me.  The  village  is  rather  extensive,  well-built,  well-situated,
and  very  agreeable  ;  and  there  was  no  one  there  but  our¬
selves,  the  rector,  and  the  inhabitants.  During  the  whole
of  our  stay  we  did  not  have  the  slightest  difficulty  with  any
of  them.  Their  houses  were  mueh  improved  by  the  conven¬
iences  added  to  them,  and  they  were  perfectly  content  with
us  and  friendly  with  our  servants.  We  did  not  do  the
least  wrong  in  any  way,  but  gave  them  certain  presents  on
leaving,  so  that  they  felt  an  affection  for  us,  and  really
regretted  us,  — some  of  them  with  tears.  This  journey  was
for  me  a  very  ruinous  transplantation  of  my  provisions
and  household.

1721]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

321

I  left  Madrid  for  Lerma  December  2nd,  and  reached  oui
village  of  Villahalmanzo  [after  passing  three  days  at  the
„  .  ,  Escuriall  on  the  9th,  where  I  found  myself

fail  iii  with  the  most  comfortably  settled,  and  so  did  all  who

were  with  me.  We  supped  very  gayly,  and  I
expected  the  next  day  to  walk  about  and  amuse  myself  by
reconnoitring  the  village  and  its  neighbourhood  ;  but  in  the
night  a  fever  seized  me,  increasing  the  next  day  and  becom¬
ing  violent  the  following  night  ;  so  much  so  that  there  was
no  question  of  my  going  on  the  11th  to  be  present  at  the
arrival  of  the  king  and  queen  at  Lerma.  The  malady  in¬
creased  with  such  rapidity  that  I  was  thought  to  be  in  great
danger,  and  finally  at  death’s  door.  I  was  bled,  and  shortly
after  the  small-pox,  which  was  very  prevalent  in  the  neigh¬
bourhood,  appeared.  The  climate  was  such  this  year  that
the  ground  was  frozen  hard  for  twelve  or  fourteen  hours  of
each  twenty-four,  while  from  eleven  in  the  morning  till  nearly
four  the  sun  shone  brightly,  and  the  heat  was  too  great
after  mid-day  to  walk  about  ;  although  where  the  sun  did
not  shine,  on  account  of  a  wall  or  some  obstacle,  the
ground  never  thawed  for  a  moment.  The  cold  was  all
the  more  stinging  because  the  air  is  pure  and  keen  and
the  sky  of  unbroken  serenity.

The  King  of  Spain,  who  feared  the  small-pox  extremely,
and  had  confidence  in  none  but  his  own  physician,  sent  him
to  me  with  orders  not  to  leave  me  a  moment  until  I  was  well.
I  had,  therefore,  five  or  six  persons  continually  with  me,  be¬
sides  my  servants,  and  one  of  the  wisest  and  best  physicians
in  Europe  ;  who  was,  moreover,  very  good  company,  and  who
did  not  leave  me  day  or  night.  Also  I  had  three  good  sur¬
geons,  one  of  whom  La  Fare  had  brought  with  him.  I  had
a  great  abundance  of  small-pox  pustules  of  a  good  type,  and
without  any  dangerous  crisis  after  they  once  appeared.  All

VOL.  IV.  —  21

322

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

those  who  saw  me,  and  the  valets  who  served  me,  and  even
my  kitchen,  were  separated  from  the  rest.  The  chief  physi¬
cian  provided  himself  nearly  every  day  with  fresh  remedies
in  case  of  need,  but  gave  me  none,  beyond  making  me  drink
nothing  but  water,  into  which  were  thrown  oranges  cut  in
two  and  allowed  to  simmer  slowly  before  my  fire  ;  with  an
occasional  spoonful  of  a  sweet  and  agreeable  cordial  at  the
height  of  the  suppuration  ;  after  which  a  little  wine  of  Rota,
with  broths  made  of  beef,  and  a  partridge.  Nothing  was  lack¬
ing  in  the  care  these  people  bestowed  upon  me,  their  only
patient,  and  nothing  was  lacking  to  my  amusement  when
I  was  able  to  take  it,  because  of  the  good  company  I  had
about  me  at  a  time  when  convalescence  from  this  particular
malady  is  so  wearisome  and  forlorn.  Quite  at  the  end  I  was
bled  and  purged  once  ;  after  which  I  lived  as  usual,  though
still  in  a  species  of  isolation.

XI.

The  year  1722  began  with  the  exchange  of  the  princesses,
the  future  wives  of  the  King  of  France  and  the  Prince  of

the  Asturias,  which  took  place  on  the  Isle
of  Pheasants,  in  the  little  river  of  Bidassoa
which  separates  the  two  kingdoms,  and  where

1722.

Exchange  of
the  princesses
January  g.

a  small  wooden  house  had  been  built  for  the  purpose.
The  exchange  was  made  on  the  9th  of  January;  and  after
reciprocal  compliments  and  presents  from  the  king  to
the  Spaniards,  each  princess,  with  her  suite,  continued
her  journey.  While  Mlle,  de  Montpensier  continued  hers
the  fortieth  day  of  my  quarantine  approached,  and  came
exactly  two  days  before  her  arrival  at  Lerma.  The  king
and  queen  had  had  the  kindness  to  send  me  several  mes¬
sages  that  they  wished  to  see  me  the  very  day  after  my
quarantine  ended  ;  but  knowing  the  king’s  dread  of  small¬
pox  I  waited  until  they  sent  me  an  absolute  command,
which  I  had  to  obey,  though  still  quite  red  (to  which  per¬
haps  the  cold  Contributed),  in  spite  of  certain  drugs  I  had
been  made  to  use  to  unredden  me.  I  went  for  the  first  time
to  Lerma  to  make  my  bow  and  thanks  to  their  Catholic
Majesties  on  the  19th  of  January.  After  compliments  and
remarks  about  the  small-pox,  the  care  and  capacity  of
M.  Hyghens,  the  king’s  physician,  they  did  me  the  honour
to  speak  of  Cardinal  Borgia,  who  had  arrived  at  Lerma  from
Rome  within  a  few  days  to  celebrate  the  marriage.  The
audience  ended  with  all  possible  expressions  of  kindness  on
the  part  of  the  king  and  queen,  and  I  had  good  reason  to

324

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [ciiap.  xi.

congratulate  myself  extremely  at  the  eagerness  of  the  whole
Court  to  express  their  joy  at  my  recovery  from  so  dangerous
an  illness.

Having  returned  to  dinner  at  my  own  quarters,  I  learned
that  their  Catholic  Majesties,  with  the  Prince  of  the  Astu-
The  king,  queen,  rias,  all  in  common  clothes  and  without  any
and  Prince  of  the  pendants,  had  got  into  a  carriage  in  the
meet  the  princess,  suite  of  the  Due  del  Arco,  and  had  driven
out  to  meet  the  princess  at  Cogollos,  a  poor  sort  of  place
about  four  leagues  from  Lerma,  where  she  was  expected  to
arrive  that  evening.  The  Due  del  Arco  found  her  already
there.  He  said  a  few  words  in  the  ear  of  the  Marquis  de
Santa  Crux  to  warn  the  Duchesse  de  Monteillano  and  the
other  ladies  to  restrain  all  notice  of  their  Majesties’  pres¬
ence  ;  after  which,  entering  the  princess’s  room,  he  made  her
his  compliment,  prolonging  it  as  much  as  possible  to  give
his  royal  suite  sufficient  time  to  examine  her  well.  He  then
asked  permission  to  present  to  her  a  lady  and  two  gentlemen
who  were  very  eager  to  pay  their  respects  to  her.  A  lady
coming  with  two  men,  in  the  suite  of  a  third  man,  spoilt  the
mystery.  The  princess  suspected  the  quality  of  these  attend¬
ants  and  caught  their  hands  to  kiss  them  and  was  instantly
embraced.  The  visit  passed  off  with  much  friendliness  on
one  side  and  respect  and  gratitude  on  the  other  ;  and  at  the
end  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour  their  Majesties  got  into  the
carriage  and  returned  to  Lerma.

I  had  arranged  with  Maulevrier  that  we  should  start
between  six  and  seven  o’clock  the  next  morning,  with  all
i  go  to  make  my  carriages  and  both  our  suites,  to  drive  out

my  bow  to  the  and  make  our  bow  to  the  princess  at  Cogollos.

princess.  ,

It  was  eight  leagues  there  and  back,  and  we
had  barely  time  to  do  this  and  return  before  her  own  arrival
at  Lerma.  We  left  together  at  seven  precisely,  and  the

1722]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

325

mules  went  fast.  We  were  presented  to  the  princess,  who
had  just  finished  dressing,  and  I  then  presented  to  her  the
Comte  de  Céreste,  my  sons,  and  the  Comte  de  Lorges  and
M.  de  Saint-Simon.  The  Duchesse  de  Monteillano,  the  other
ladies,  and  Santa-Crux  also,  did  their  best  to  induce  the
princess  to  say  a  word  to  us,  but  did  not  succeed.  They
endeavoured  to  make  up  for  this  by  every  possible  civility.
We  had  no  time  to  lose,  and  returned  to  my  quarters  to  eat
a  morsel  in  haste,  which  was  served  to  us  instantly,  and
then  we  started  for  Lerma  ;  and  well  we  did,  for  the  princess
arrived  within  half  an  hour.

The  moment  I  reached  the  house  I  went  up  at  once  to
the  Marquis  de  Grimaldo’s  apartment,  where  I  had  been  the
day  before.  His  room  was  opposite  the  end  of  a  very  large
hall,  at  one  end  of  which  a  space  had  been  taken  off  to
serve  as  a  chapel.  I  knew  I  had  again  to  deal  with  the
nuncio;  I  feared  he  would  remember  what  had  passed  at
the  signature  of  the  contract  [a  silent  dispute  as  to  pre¬
cedence],  and  I  wished  to  avoid  all  difficulty.  I  therefore
saw  very  imperfectly  the  reception  of  the  princess  by  the
king  and  queen,  who  lodged  on  the  lower  floor,  and  by  the
prince,  all  three  precipitating  themselves,  so  to  speak,  almost
to  the  door  of  her  carriage.  I,  meanwhile,  went  quickly  in
to  the  chapel,  which  I  had  already  taken  note  of  on  my
previous  visit  to  Grimaldo.

The  prie-dieu  of  the  king  was  directly  in  front  of  the
altar,  at  a  little  distance  from  the  steps,  precisely  like  the
Amusing  igno-  prie-dieu  of  the  late  king  at  Versailles,  hut
ranee  of  cardinal  nearer  the  altar;  two  hassocks  were  before

Borgia  who

celebrates  the  it,  side  by  side.  The  chapel  was  empty  of
courtiers.  I  stationed  myself  beside  the
king’s  hassock  on  the  right,  standing  just  outside  of  the
edge  of  his  carpet,  and  there  I  amused  myself  much  better

326  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

than  I  expected.  Cardinal  Borgia,  pontifically  garbed,  was
standing  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  altar,  his  face  turned
towards  me,  learning  his  lesson  between  two  chaplains  in
their  surplices,  who  were  holding  a  large  book  open  before
him.  The  worthy  prelate  could  not  read  it  ;  he  tried  hard,
reading  aloud  and  blundering.  The  chaplains  corrected
him  ;  he  got  angry  and  scolded,  began  again,  was  corrected
again,  and  grew  angrier  than  ever;  so  much  so  that  he
turned  upon  them  and  shook  them  by  their  surplices.  I
laughed  all  I  could,  for  he  noticed  nothing,  being  so  engaged
with  his  lesson.  Marriages  in  Spain  take  place  in  the  after¬
noon,  and  begin,  like  baptisms,  at  the  door  of  the  church.
The  king,  the  queen,  the  prince,  and  the  princess  arrived
at  the  door  with  all  the  Court,  and  the  king  was  announced
in  a  loud  voice.  “Let  them  wait,”  cried  the  cardinal,  very
angry  ;  “  I  am  not  ready.”  They  stopped  where  they  were,
and  the  cardinal  continued  Iris  lesson,  redder  than  his  red
hat  and  perfectly  furious.  At  last  he  went  to  the  door,
where  something  lasted  for  quite  a  time.  Curiosity  would
have  made  me  follow,  were  it  not  for  my  object  in  keeping
my  post.1  I  must  have  lost  some  diversion,  for  I  saw  the
king  and  queen  at  their  prie-dieu  laughing  and  talking,
and  the  whole  Court  laughing  also.  At  this  moment  the
nuncio  came  up  to  me  and  showed  his  surprise  at  my
position  by  gestures,  repeating,  “  Signor,  signor  !  ”  and  I,
being  determined  not  to  understand  him,  kept  showing  him
the  cardinal  and  laughing,  telling  him  he  ought  to  have
taught  him  better,  for  the  honour  of  the  Sacred  College.
The  nuncio  could  understand  French,  but  murdered  it  in
speaking.  This  joke  and  the  ingenuous  air  with  which  I
made  it,  without  seeming  to  be  aware  of  the  nuncio’s  dem-

1  His  object  being  to  prevent  the  nuncio  from  taking  the  post  of
honour.  —  Tk.

1722]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

327

onstrations,  made  so  happy  a  diversion  that  the  question
dropped;  and  all  the  more  because  the  cardinal,  continuing
the  ceremony,  neither  knew  where  he  was  nor  what  he  was
about,  being  corrected  every  minute  by  his  chaplains,  and
puffing  at  them  angrily,  so  that  the  king  and  queen  could
not  contain  themselves,  nor  any  one  else  who  witnessed
the  scene.  I  could  only  see  the  backs  of  the  prince  and
princess  on  their  knees,  each  on  a  hassock  between  the  prie-
dieu  and  altar,  and  the  cardinal  in  front  of  them  making
grimaces  of  utter  confusion.

Amid  the  amusement  that  the  poor  cardinal  was  giving
to  all  who  saw  him,  I  remarked  the  extreme  satisfaction  of
the  king  and  queen  in  seeing  the  accomplish-

I  am  made  a  ox  o  x

grandee  of  Spain  ment  of  this  marriage.  The  ceremony  over,

of  the  first  class.  ,  .  ,  .  ,  ,  .  .  ,

which  was  not  very  long  and  during  which
no  one  knelt  down  but  the  king  and  queen,  and,  where
necessary,  the  bridal  couple,  their  Catholic  Majesties  rose
and  retired  to  the  left-hand  lower  corner  of  their  carpet,
where  they  whispered  together  for  the  space  of,  perhaps,  a
good  credo  ;  after  which  the  queen  remained  where  she  was,
and  the  king  came  up  to  me,  who  was  still  standing  where
I  had  been  throughout  the  ceremony.  The  king  said,  as  he
reached  me  :  “  Monsieur,  I  am  so  content  with  you  in  every
respect,  but  particularly  in  the  manner  with  which  you  have
acquitted  yourself  of  your  embassy  to  me,  that  I  wish  to
give  you  marks  of  my  satisfaction,  my  esteem,  and  my
friendship.  I  make  you  grandee  of  Spain  of  the  first  class,
you  and  at  the  same  time  whichever  of  your  two  sons  you
may  choose  to  be  grandee  of  Spain  and  to  enjoy  that  dig-
My  eldest  son  nity  with  you  ;  and  I  make  your  eldest  son  a
is  made  Knight  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.”  I  immediately

of  the  Golden  &  ^

Fleece.  embraced  his  knees,  and  tried  to  express  my

gratitude  and  my  extreme  desire  to  render  myself  worthy  of

328  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xl

the  favours  bestowed  upon  me  by  my  attachment,  my  very
bumble  services,  and  profound  respect.  I  then  kissed  bis
hand,  and  turned  to  call  my  children,  who  immediately
came  up  to  me.  As  soon  as  they  approached  I  told  the
youngest  to  embrace  the  knees  of  the  king,  who  loaded  us
with  favours  by  making  him  a  grandee  of  Spain  with  me.
He  kissed  the  king’s  hand,  who  said,  as  he  raised  him  up,
that  he  was  very  glad  indeed  for  what  he  had  done.  I  then
presented  the  eldest  to  thank  him  for  the  Fleece  ;  for  this
he  merely  bent  very  low  indeed  and  kissed  the  king’s  hand.
After  that  was  over  the  king  returned  to  the  queen,  where
I  followed  him  with  my  children.  I  bowed  low  before  the
queen,  offering  her  my  personal  thanks  ;  then  I  presented
my  children,  the  youngest  first,  the  eldest  after.  The  queen
received  us  with  great  kindness,  saying  many  agreeable
things  ;  after  which  she  went  away  with  the  king,  followed
by  the  prince  and  princess,  who  held  each  other  by  the
hand  and  to  whom  we  bowed  as  they  passed.  I  wished  to
accompany  them,  but  I  was,  as  it  were,  carried  away  by  the
crowd  which  pressed  around  me  to  make  us  compliments.
I  paid  great  attention  to  answering  each  in  a  suitable
manner,  and  to  all  as  politely  as  I  possibly  could  ;  and
although  I  had  not  expected  to  receive  these  favours  at  this
time,  it  seemed  to  me  on  reflection  that  this  numerous  com¬
pany  wewe  satisfied  with  me.  I  was  anxious  to  testify  to
the  grandees  of  Spain  that  all  my  life  I  had  had  so  high  an
idea  of  their  dignity  that  although  I  had  the  honour  to  be
invested  with  the  highest  rank  in  the  Kingdom  of  France,
I  thought  myself  greatly  honoured  in  belonging  to  theirs.

The  Princess  of  the  Asturias  became  unwell  during  the
return  of  the  Court  to  Madrid,  at  the  latter  part  of  the
journey.  Pied  blotches  appeared  on  her  face  which  turned
to  erysipelas,  and  caused  some  fever.  I  went  to  the  palace

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

329

The  Princess  of
the  Asturias  be¬
comes  unwell.

as  soon  as  the  Court  arrived,  where  I  found  their  Majesties
much  alarmed.  I  tried  to  reassure  them  on  the  ground  that
the  princess  had  already  had  both  measles  and
small-pox,  and  that  it  was  not  surprising  she
should  feel  the  fatigue  of  such  a  journey,
and  the  total  change  of  life  that  had  happened  to  her.  My
arguments  did  not  convince  them,  and  the  next  day  I  found
their  uneasiness  still  greater.  Besides  which,  the  contretemps
annoyed  them  greatly.  All  the  prepared  fêtes  had  to  be
postponed.  The  Salon  of  the  Grandees  was  already  decorated
for  the  grand  ball,  and  it  long  remained  in  that  condition,
for  when  the  princess’s  convalescence  began,  and  as  it  pro¬
ceeded,  her  temper  showed  itself.  I  knew  from  those  who
were  with  her  in  private  that  she  obstinately  refused  to  go
to  the  queen,  after  all  the  care  and  the  marks  of  extreme
kindness  and  constant  visits  she  had  received  from  her  dur¬
ing  her  illness,  and  still  received  daily.  She  would  not  even
leave  her  bedroom,  but  amused  herself  looking  out  of  the
window,  where  she  appeared  in  good  health.  The  queen  her¬
self  spoke  to  me  about  it,  and  ordered  me  to  see  her  and
make  her  more  tractable.

I  had  already  seen  the  princess  several  times  during  her
illness,  even  in  her  bed  >  and  I  now  went  again  once  or
twice,  without  getting  more  than  a  yes  or  a  no
to  any  question  I  asked,  and  sometimes  not
that.  I  then  took  the  turn  of  saying  to  her
ladies  before  her  what  I  wished  to  say  to  her¬
self  ;  the  ladies  assisted  me  and  added  their  word.  The
conversation  thus  went  on  before  the  princess,  and  was,  in
fact,  a  regular  lesson,  in  which  she  took  no  part  whatever.
She  did,  however,  go  to  see  the  queen  once  or  twice,  but  in
dishabille  and  with  rather  a  bad  grace.

The  grand  ball  was  still  prepared  in  the  Salon  of  the

Extraordinary
conduct  of  the
princess  towards
the  king  and
queen.

330

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

Grandees  and  only  waited  for  the  princess  to  consent  to  go
to  it.  The  king  and  queen  liked  balls  ;  they  made  a  great
pleasure  of  this  one,  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  also  ;  in  fact
the  whole  Court  awaited  it  impatiently.  The  conduct  of  the
princess  was  beginning  to  transpire,  and  had  a  most  injurious
effect  upon  society.  I  was  privately  warned  that  the  king
and  queen  were  very  much  provoked,  and  the  princess’s
ladies  urged  me  to  speak  to  her.  I  went  and  held  a  conver¬
sation  with  her  ladies  about  her  health,  which  no  longer
retarded  the  pleasures  and  amusements  that  awaited  her.
I  brought  the  ball  on  the  tapis  ;  praised  the  arrangements,
the  scene,  the  magnificence,  saying  that  this  pleasure  was
particularly  suited  to  the  age  of  the  princess,  and  how  the
king  and  queen  loved  her  and  were  waiting  with  impatience
until  she  could  go.  Suddenly  she  spoke,  although  I  had  not
addressed  her,  and  said,  like  a  fretful  child  :  “  I,  go  to  it  !  I
shall  not  go.”  “  Well,  madame,”  I  said,  “  if  you  do  not  go
you  will  be  sorry  ;  you  will  deprive  yourself  of  a  pleasure,  at
which  the  whole  Court  expects  to  see  you,  and  you  have  too
many  reasons  to  wish  to  please  the  king  and  queen  to  fail  to
do  so  on  this  occasion.”

She  was  seated,  and  had  not  looked  at  me.  She  now
turned  her  head  towards  me,  and  said,  in  the  most  deter¬
mined  tone  of  voice  I  ever  heard:  “No,  monsieur,  I  repeat
it,  I  shall  not  go  to  that  ball  ;  the  king  and  queen  can  go  if
they  choose  ;  they  like  balls  ;  I  do  not  like  them  ;  they  like
to  get  up  late  and  go  to  bed  late  ;  I  like  to  go  to  bed  early.
They  can  follow  their  tastes,  and  I  shall  follow  mine.”  I
began  to  laugh,  and  told  her  she  wanted  to  amuse  herself  by
making  me  uneasy,  but  that  I  was  not  so  silly  as  to  take
such  jesting  seriously  :  at  her  age  [thirteen],  I  said,  nobody
gave  up  a  ball  willingly  ;  and  she  had  too  much  sense  to
deprive  the  Court  of  a  pleasure,  and  above  all,  show  a  taste  so

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  331

little  in  conformity  with  that  of  the  king  and  queen.  I
added  that  after  this  joke  was  over  it  would  be  best  not  to
prolong  the  delay,  which  was  now  becoming  indecent.  The
ladies  supported  me,  and  the  conversation  went  on  between
us  in  the  same  tone,  without  the  princess  giving  any  sign
that  she  heard  us.  On  leaving,  the  Duchesse  de  Monteillano
followed  me,  with  the  Duchesse  de  Liria  and  Mme.  de  Biscal-
dalgro.  They  surrounded  me  outside  the  door  of  the  cham¬
ber,  and  expressed  their  alarm  at  so  stubborn  a  will  against
duty  and  pleasure  in  a  girl  of  her  age,  in  a  country  where
she  had  just  arrived,  and  all  were  strangers  to  her.  I  was
just  as  much  alarmed  as  they,  foreseeing  consequences  capa¬
ble  of  producing  great  disasters.  But  I  tried  to  reassure
them  on  the  ground  of  remaining  illness  and  nervousness,
that  might  produce  this  effect,  which  would  cease  with  the
return  of  perfect  health.  But  I  went  away  very  far  from
expecting  it.

The  next  day  I  took  the  liberty  of  representing  to  their
Majesties  that  they  were  spoiling  the  princess  ;  to  which  I
added  that  they  would  some  day  repent  of  it,  and  try  to
remedy  the  evil  when  it  was  too  late.  I  told  them  the  Due
d’Orléans  would  be  in  despair,  and  would  speak  to  them  in
the  same  manner  that  I  did,  only  more  strongly,  as  became
him  ;  that  the  princess  was  a  mere  child,  who  ought  to  be
made  without  delay  to  submit  to  her  duties  ;  and  I  would
not  only  take  upon  myself  to  explain  the  matter  to  the  Due
d’Orléans,  but  I  would  answer  for  it  to  their  Majesties  that
he  would  be  extremely  obliged  to  them  for  taking  that
course.  I  did  not  go  again  to  see  the  princess,  because  I  felt
the  inutility.  The  next  day  the  queen  told  me  there  would
be  no  grand  ball,  and  that  orders  had  been  given  to  remove
the  decorations.  But  a  small  ball  was  given  in  the  little
interior  gallery,  at  which  no  one  was  present  but  the  sen

332  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

gneurs  on  duty,  the  chief  equerry,  the  majordomos  of  the
week,  the  earner  ara-m  ay  or,  the  ladies  of  the  palace,  the
young  senoras-of-honour,  and  the  cameristas.  The  king,
queen,  and  Prince  of  the  Asturias  amused  themselves  very
much,  everybody  danced  minuets,  and  still  more  quadrilles,
until  three  hours  after  midnight,  when  their  Majesties  and
the  prince  retired.

It  was  then  that  I  saw  and  fingered  at  my  ease  the  famous
“  Peregrine,”  which  the  king  wore  that  evening  on  the
turned-up  brim  of  his  hat,  as  a  pendant  to  a

The  “  Peregrine  '  r  r

an  incomparable  splendid  diamond  clasp.  This  pearl,  of  the
pear1’  finest  water  ever  seen,  is  shaped  and  dented

exactly  like  those  little  muscat  pears  which  are  called  “  seven-
in-the-mouth,”  and  come  to  maturity  about  the  end  of  the
strawberry  season.  That  name  indicates  their  size,  though
there  is  no  mouth  that  could  hold  more  than  four  without
danger  of  choking.  The  pearl  is  the  size  of  the  smallest  of
those  pears,  is  thick  and  long,  and  beyond  comparison  the
finest  in  existence.  It  is  unique.  They  say  its  mate  was
the  one  in  Cleopatra’s  earring  which  a  folly  of  love  and
magnificence  induced  Mark  Antony  to  dissolve  in  vinegar
and  give  to  the  queen  to  drink.  Though  the  apartment  of
the  Princess  of  the  Asturias  was  at  one  end  of  the  little
gallery  where  the  ball  was  given,  she  did  not  appear  for  an
instant.  I  predicted  only  too  truly  to  their  Catholic  Majes¬
ties.  The  princess  behaved  in  all  respects,  except  gal  Inn  try,
in  the  strangest  fashion.  After  her  return  to  France  we
had  time  to  see  what  she  was,  during  the  years  she  lived
there  as  a  widow  without  children.1

1  In  1724  Philippe  V.  resigned  his  government  of  Spain  in  favour  of  his
son,  Luis,  Prince  of  the  Asturias.  But  the  latter  dying  in  the  same  year,
he  resumed  it.  The  Princess  of  the  Asturias,  then  called  Queen  of
Spain,  returned  to  France  as  a  widow  the  following  year,  when  the
infanta  was  sent  back  to  Spain  on  the  treaty  being  signed  at  Vienna

1722]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

333

Lent  put  an  end  to  what  fetes  there  were  ;  and  their  Cath¬
olic  Majesties  left  the  palace  and  went  to  that  of  the  Buen-
Lent  •  very  Retiro.  Lent  is  very  grievous  in  the  Castries,
grievous  in  the  Inertness  and  distance  from  the  sea  result  in

CâstilcSa

a  fish-market  being  unknown.  The  largest
rivers  have  scarcely  any  fish  ;  the  small  ones  still  less,  because
they  are  torrents.  There  are  few  or  no  vegetables,  except
garlic,  onions,  cardoons,  and  a  few  herbs  ;  neither  milk  nor
butter.  They  have  salt-fish,  which  might  be  good  if  the  oil
were  sweet  ;  but  it  is  usually  so  rancid  that  the  stench  in¬
fects  the  streets  of  Madrid  through  Lent,  which  is  kept  by
every  one,  young  and  old,  men,  women,  seigneurs,  bourgeois,
and  populace.  One  is  therefore  reduced  to  eggs  cooked  in
every  possible  way,  and  chocolate,  which  is  their  great
resource.  But  I  tasted  some  buffalo  milk  at  Aranjuez,  which
is  most  excellent,  and  by  far  the  best  of  any.  It  is  smooth,
sweet,  but  not  insipid  ;  thicker  than  the  best  cream,  without
any  taste  of  the  animal,  or  of  cheese  or  butter.  I  am  sur¬
prised  that  they  make  no  use  in  Madrid  of  such  a  delicious
milk  product.  Spaniards,  though  always  very  moderate,  eat
as  much  as  we  do,  with  taste,  selection,  and  pleasure  ;  but  as
for  drink  they  are  very  abstemious.

I  chose  the  22nd  of  March  for  my  audience  to  take  leave
of  the  king  and  queen  ;  and  I  was  again  struck  with  the
dignity,  precision,  and  arrangement  of  the
king’s  expressions.  I  received  many  marks
of  personal  kindness  and  regret  at  my  depart¬
ure  from  the  king  and  queen,  especially  from  the  queen,  and
also  very  many  from  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias.  The  attach¬
ment  full  of  respect  and  gratitude  which  I  felt  for  the  king
and  queen  led  me  to  do  myself  the  honour  of  writing  to  them

I  take  my  au¬
dience  of  leave
March  22.

between  Spain  and  Austria,  while  England,  France,  and  Prussia  formed
the  “Hanover  Treaty.” — Tk.

334

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  sl

on  several  occasions,  more  especially  to  express  my  extreme
grief  at  the  sending  back  of  the  infanta.1  They  often  did
me  the  honour  to  reply  with  every  sort  of  kindness,  and  they
always  charged  their  new  ministers  in  France,  and  persons  of
consideration  who  came  to  travel  there,  to  renew  the  expres¬
sion  of  their  kindness  to  me.

But  before  starting  I  took  another  leave  of  a  very  different
nature,  and  one  so  surprising  that  I  cannot  help  writing
Extraordinary  it  down,  however  ridiculous  it  may  seem.  I
thTprincess  of  went,  with  my  whole  suite,  to  an  audience  of
the  Asturias.  the  Princess  of  the  Asturias,  who  was  standing
under  a  dais,  with  her  ladies  on  one  side  and  the  grandees
on  the  other.  I  made  my  three  hows,  and  then  my  compli¬
ment.  After  which  I  was  silent,  but  in  vain,  for  she  an¬
swered  not  a  word.  After  a  few  moments’  silence  I  thought
I  would  furnish  her  with  something  to  answer  ;  so  I  asked
for  her  orders  for  the  king,  the  infanta,  Madame,  the  regent,
and  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans.  She  looked  at  me,  and  then
gave  vent  to  a  hiccough  that  resounded  through  the  room.
My  surprise  was  such  that  I  stood  confounded.  A  second,
noisier  than  the  first,  went  off.  I  lost  countenance  ;  impos¬
sible  to  help  laughing  ;  and  casting  my  eyes  right  and  left  I
saw  the  whole  company  with  their  hands  on  their  mouths
and  their  shoulders  going.  Finally,  a  third,  louder  than  the
other  two,  put  all  present  into  disorder  and  me  to  flight
with  my  whole  suite  amid  peals  of  laughter,  all  the  more
incontinent  because  they  forced  the  harriers  by  which  each
had  tried  to  suppress  them.  Spanish  gravity  was  wholly
upset  ;  confusion  reigned  ;  every  one,  choking  with  laughter,
fled  as  he  could,  while  the  princess  never  lost  her  stolidity  or

1  April  5,  1725,  M.  le  Duc,  then  prime  minister,  sent  back  to  Spain
the  young  infanta,  who  was  being  educated  in  Paris  to  be  the  wife  of
Louis  XV.  since  her  arrival  in  1722.  —  Tk.

s

1722]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  335

expressed  herself  in  any  other  fashion.  We  all  stopped  in  the
next  room  to  laugh  at  our  ease  and  to  talk  of  it  freely.

I  left  Madrid  on  the  24th  of  March,  taking  the  route  by
Pampeluna,  and  arrived  at  Loches  on  the  13th  of  April  at
T1  five  in  the  evening:  and  on  the  15th  at  ten  in

I  leave  Madrid;  °  J

and  meet  Mme.  the  morning  I  reached  Chastres,  where  Mme.

de  Saint-Simon.  .

de  Saint-Simon  was  to  meet  me  to  dme  and
sleep,  that  we  might  enjoy  the  happiness  of  being  once  more
together  and  mutually  put  each  other  au  fait  of  everything
in  solitude  and  freedom,  which  we  could  not  hope  for
in  Paris  during  the  first  days  after  my  return.  The  Due
d’Humières  and  Louville  came  with  her.  She  arrived  an
hour  after  I  did  at  the  little  château  of  the  Marquis  d’Arpajon,
which  lie  had  lent  her,  where  the  day  seemed  short  indeed.

On  my  arrival  in  Paris  I  merely  changed  carriages  at  my
house  and  drove  to  the  Palais-Eoyal  and  went  straight  to
Long  interview  Cardinal  Dubois.  He  rushed  to  meet  me,  all
thlTegen'Tand"'1  flattery,  and  without  pausing  took  me  at  once
cardinal  Dubois,  to  the  regent,  whose  reception  was  just  as
warm  and  more  sincere.  He  was  in  his  little  cabinet  at
the  end  of  the  short  gallery.  We  sat  down,  I  opposite  to
him,  his  desk  between  us,  the  cardinal  beside  it.  I  rendered
them  an  account  of  many  things,  and  answered  many  ques¬
tions.  I  told  the  Duc  d’Orléans  of  the  conduct  of  the  Prin¬
cess  of  the  Asturias  to  their  Catholic  Majesties,  of  their
patience  and  kmdness  towards  her;  after  which  grave  mat¬
ters,  I  amused  him  with  an  account  of  my  parting  with  her,
at  which  he  laughed  much.

I  had  scarcely  arrived  at  home  before  it  became  neces¬
sary  to  conclude  a  marriage  which  had  been  proposed  to
Marriage  of  my  me  for  my  daughter  before  I  went  to  Spain,
daughter  to  the  There  are  some  women  so  made  that  they  are
chimay.  happier  to  remain  unmarried  with  the  income

336  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

of  the  dot  that  would  have  been  given  to  them.  Mme.  de
Saint-Simon  and  I  had  reason  to  believe  that  our  daughter
was  one  of  these  women,  and  we  wished  to  treat  her  in  that
way,  but  my  mother  thought  otherwise,  and  she  was  accus¬
tomed  to  decide.  The  Prince  de  Chimay,  in  wishing  to  marry
my  daughter,  misled  himself  by  chimeras  as  to  the  position  in
which  he  saw  me.  Before  going  to  Spain  I  disguised  noth¬
ing  from  him  either  of  what  I  thought,  or  of  the  very  small
foundation  of  that  which  had  induced  him  to  seek  this  mar¬
riage.  I  did  not  wish  to  settle  it  until  after  my  return,  in
order  to  leave  him  time  for  reflection  and  for  cooling  his  ardour
during  my  absence  ;  hut  he  did  not  cease  to  urge  his  suit  on
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  nor  she  to  discourage  it.  As  soon  as
I  returned  his  urgency  increased,  so  that  it  was  necessary  at
last  to  conclude  the  marriage,  which  took  place  at  Meudon
with  as  little  ceremony  and  company  as  was  possible.  His
name  was  Hennin-Liétard,  and  his  father  and  mother  were
known,  under  the  name  of  Comte  and  Comtesse  de  Bossut,
by  their  alliances,  their  immense  property  in  the  Low-
Countries,  and  by  the  high  offices  which  they  held  imder
Charles  V.  and  since  that  time.  Their  hobby  was  to  think
they  belonged  to  the  ancient  house  of  Alsace,  although  their
own  was  of  sufficiently  illustrious  antiquity  not  to  need
being  plastered  with  fables.  He  was  a  very  well-made  man
with  a  very  agreeable  face,  and  an  air  and  manner  that
breathed  the  great  seigneur,  which  he  was,  in  the  possession
of  large  and  very  fine  estates,  though  most  of  them  had
long  been  under  control  of  assignees.  He  was,  moreover,  a
man  without  system,  who  with  a  good  mind  and  the  best
sentiments,  governed  himself  and  his  affairs  very  badly  and
was  full  of  fancies  and  chimeras.  The  Duchesse  Sforza,
with  whom  he  was  very  intimate  at  the  time  of  his  first
marriage,  predicted  to  me  all  that  I  found  him  in  the  end.

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

337

It  was  determined  about  this  time  that  the  king  should
abandon  his  residence  in  Paris  forever,  and  that  the  Court
The  court  should  in  future  he  held  at  Versailles.  The

mlnenttytô  king  arrived  there  in  state  on  the  15th  of

versâmes.  June,  and  the  infanta  on  the  following  day.
They  occupied  the  apartments  of  the  late  king  and  the  late
queen,  and  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  established  himself  in
one  of  the  former  cabinets  of  Louis  XIV.  Cardinal  Dubois
had  the  entire  and  sole  charge  of  everything,  as  M.  Colbert
had  had  it,  and  after  him  M.  Louvois.  He  was  following
with  great  strides  his  settled  project  of  becoming  prime-
minister,  for  which  purpose  he  isolated  the  Duc  d’Orléans
as  much  as  he  could.

The  famous  Marlborough  died  in  London  June  27,  at
nearly  seventy-four  years  of  age,  —  the  richest  private  in-
Deathofthe  dividual  in  Europe,  but  without  male  heirs.
Duke  of  Mari-  His  sister  was  mother  to  the  Duke  of  Ber-

borough.

wick  and  had  made  him  Earl  of  Marlborough
and  captain  of  the  guards  of  James  II.  He  belonged  to
the  inferior  nobility  and  was  very  poor.  His  name  was
John  Churchill,  and  he  became  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,
peer  of  England,  captain-general  of  the  armies,  grand¬
master  of  artillery,  colonel  of  the  first  regiment  of  the
guards,  knight  of  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  and  the  most
successful  captain  of  his  era.  His  life,  his  actions,  his  for¬
tunes  are  too  well  known  to  need  mention  here.  His
victory  at  Hochstedt  made  him  Prince  of  the  Empire  and
of  Mindelheim,  —  an  estate  of  which  the  emperor  made  him
a  present.  To  perpetuate  the  memory  of  it,  he  caused  to
be  built  in  England  a  superb  castle,  to  which  he  gave  the
name  of  Plentheim  [Blenheim],  a  village  where  thirty-six
battalions  surrendered  to  him  without  waiting  to  be  at¬
tacked.  The  honours  of  his  obsequies  and  their  magnify
vol.  iv.  —  22

338

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

cence  equalled,  or  very  nearly  so,  those  of  the  kings  of
England.  He  was  buried  at  Westminster  in  the  chapel  of
Henry  VIL  ;  hut  this  honour  is  not  rare  in  England.  About
three  years  earlier  an  attack  of  apoplexy  had  so  enfeebled
him  that  he  wept  almost  without  ceasing  and  was  no  longer
capable  of  anything.

Sunday,  August  11,  the  regent  went  towards  the  end  of  the
afternoon  to  work  with  the  king,  as  he  was  accustomed  to
Maréchal  de  do  on  certain  fixed  days  of  the  week,  and  now,
tcfobey  the'*8*8  as  ^  was  summer,  on  the  king’s  return  from
regent.  his  drive,  which  was  always  early.  This  work

consisted  of  showing  the  king  the  distribution  of  vacant
offices,  benefices,  certain  magistracies,  superintendencies,  and
rewards  of  all  kinds  ;  in  explaining  to  him  in  a  few  words
the  reasons  for  these  selections,  preferences,  and,  sometimes,
distributions  of  money  ;  and,  lastly,  in  telling  him  the  earli¬
est  foreign  news  when  there  was  any  suited  to  his  capacity,
before  it  became  public.  At  the  end  of  this  work,  at  which
the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  was  always  present,  and  M.  de
Fréjus  occasionally  ventured  to  remain,  the  Duc  d’Orléans
entreated  the  king  to  be  so  good  as  to  go  with  him  into  his

little  back-cabinet,  as  he  had  a  word  to  say  to  him  tête-à-
tête.  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  instantly  opposed  it.  The  Due
d’Orléans  replied  civilly  that  the  king  was  entering  an  age
so  near  to  that  in  which  he  would  govern  for  himself  that

it  was  time  for  him,  who  meantime  was  the  trustee  of  the
king’s  authority,  to  render  him  an  account  of  matters  which
he  was  now  able  to  understand,  and  which  could  only  be
explained  to  him  alone  without  the  presence  of  a  third
party,  however  deserving  of  confidence  that  party  might
be  ;  and  he  requested  the  maréchal  to  cease  putting  ob¬
stacles  in  the  way  of  a  thing  so  necessary,  which  he,  the
regent,  blamed  himself  for  having  postponed,  solely  out  of

1722]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  339

consideration  for  him.  The  maréchal,  getting  fiery  and
shaking  his  wig,  replied  that  he  knew  the  respect  he  owed
to  the  regent  quite  as  well  as  he  knew  what  he  owed
to  the  king  and  to  his  own  office,  whereby  he  was  made
responsible  for  the  king’s  person;  and  he  protested  that
he  would  not  allow  his  Royal  Highness  to  see  the  king
alone,  because  it  was  his  place  to  know  all  that  was  said
to  him  ;  and  especially  he  would  not  allow  it  alone  in  a
room  out  of  his  sight,  because  his  duty  required  Tiim  not
to  lose  sight  of  the  king  for  a  moment,  and  in  all  ways
to  be  answerable  for  his  person.  At  these  words  the  Due
d’Orléans  looked  at  him  fixedly,  and  said,  in  the  tone  of
a  master,  that  he  forgot  himself  ;  he  ought  to  consider
to  whom  he  was  speaking  and  the  force  of  his  words,
which  he  was  willing  to  believe  he  did  not  mean  ;  adding
that  respect  for  the  presence  of  the  king  prevented  him,  the
regent,  from  replying  as  he  deserved  or  carrying  the  conver¬
sation  any  farther.  With  that  he  made  the  king  a  profound
how  and  went  away.  The  maréchal,  very  angry,  accompan¬
ied  him  a  few  steps,  muttering  and  gesticulating,  without  the
regent  seeming  to  see  or  hear  him,  leaving  the  king  aston¬
ished  and  Fréjus  chuckling  under  his  breath.

Less  than  two  hours  later  it  was  known  that  the  maréchal,
bragging  of  what  he  had  done,  declared  that  he  should  es¬
teem  himself  very  unfortunate  if  the  Duc  d’Orléans  thought
he  was  wanting  in  respect  when  he  was  only  seeking  to  ful¬
fil  his  most  precious  duty,  and  he  should  go  to  the  regent
the  next  morning  and  come  to  an  understanding  with  him,
which  he  flattered  himself  would  satisfy  that  prince.  Mean¬
time  all  necessary  steps  were  being  taken  to  arrest  him  ;  and
the  last  form  was  given  to  them  when  it  became  known  the
next  morning  that  the  maréchal  intended  to  run  straight
into  the  net.

340  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

Beyond  the  regent’s  bedroom  at  Versailles  was  a  large
and  handsome  cabinet,  with  four  windows  looking  on  the
garden  and  at  the  same  level  with  it,  —  two  facing  you  as
you  enter,  and  two  at  the  side,  and  all  these  opening  like
doors  from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor.  This  cabinet  formed  a
corner  room,  where  the  people  of  the  Court  always  waited,
and  adjoining  it  was  another  cabinet  where  the  regent
worked,  and  where  he  received,  from  the  waiting-room,  the
most  distinguished  or  favoured  persons  who  wished  to  speak
to  him.  Orders  were  given.  D’Artagnan,  captain  of  the
gray  mousquetaires,  was  in  this  room,  knowing  well  what
was  now  to  he  done,  with  many  trusty  officers  of  his  com¬
pany  whom  he  had  brought  there,  together  with  certain
former  mousquetaires  in  case  of  need  ;  they  all  saw  by  these
preparations  that  something  was  about  to  happen,  though
no  one  suspected  what  it  was.  There  were  also  a  number
of  light-horse  cavalry  scattered  around  under  the  windows,
all  in  the  same  ignorance,  and  many  principal  officers  and
others  in  the  regent’s  bedroom  and  in  this  large  cabinet.

All  being  thus  arranged,  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  arrived
about  mid-day  with  his  usual  bustle,  but  alone  ;  his  sedan-
is  arrested  and  chair  and  servants  were  left  at  a  distance
taken  to  Viiieroy.  011tside  of  the  guardroom.  He  entered  the¬
atrically,  paused,  gazed  about  him,  and  made  a  few  steps
forward.  Under  pretence  of  civility  d’Artagnan  and  the
others  grouped  themselves  about  him,  and  surrounded  him.
He  asked  in  a  tone  of  authority  what  the  regent  was
doing.  They  replied  that  he  was  busy  and  his  door  was
shut.  The  maréchal  raised  his  voice,  said  he  must  see  him,
and  should  go  in  ;  and  with  that  he  advanced.  La  Fare,
captain  of  the  guards  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  came  forward
in  front  of  him,  stopped  him  and  asked  for  his  sword.  The
maréchal  became  furious,  and  all  present  were  excited.  At

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

341

that  instant  Le  Blanc  presented  himself.  A  sedan-chair
which  had  Been  kept  hidden  was  placed  before  the  maréchal.
He  shouted,  tottered,  was  thrown  into  the  chair,  which  was
closed  upon  him  and  carried  off  in  a  twinkling  through  one
of  the  windows  into  the  garden,  La  Fare  and  d’Artagnan
on  either  side  of  the  chair,  the  mousquetaires  and  cavalry-
falling  in  behind,  and  only  knowing  by  results  what  had
happened.  The  pace  was  rapid  ;  they  descended  the  steps  of
the  orangery  on  the  side  of  the  grove,  found  the  great  gates
open  and  a  carriage  with  six  horses  outside.  The  chair  was
set  down  beside  it  ;  in  vain  the  maréchal  cursed  and  swore  ;
they  put  him  into  it,  d’Artagnan  jumped  in  beside  him,  an
officer  of  mousquetaires  was  on  the  front  seat,  du  Libois,
gentleman-in-ordinary  to  the  king,  beside  him,  twenty
mousquetaires  with  their  officers  on  horseback  surrounded
the  carriage,  and  —  whip  up,  cocher  !

It  is  surprising  that  an  affair  of  this  nature  remained  un¬
known  for  more  than  two  hours  in  the  chateau  of  Versailles.
The  servants  of  the  maréchal,  to  whom  no  one  had  said  a
word  on  leaving,  I  scarcely  know  why,  waited  with  his
chair  near  the  guardroom  ;  and  those  who  were  in  his  apart¬
ment  behind  the  king’s  cabinet  only  heard  of  his  arrest
after  the  regent  had  seen  the  king,  when  he  sent  them  word
that  the  maréchal  had  gone  to  Villeroy,  where  they  could
follow  and  take  him  all  that  was  necessary.

It  was  no  small  embarrassment  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans
to  carry  the  news  to  the  king.  He  entered  his  cabinet,
sent  away  the  courtiers  who  were  there,  leaving  no  one
present  but  those  on  duty.  At  his  first  words  the  king
flushed,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears,  he  turned  his  face  to  the
back  of  his  chair  and  did  not  say  a  word,  neither  would  he
leave  the  room  or  play.  He  scarcely  ate  a  mouthful  at
supper,  and  wept  and  could  not  sleep  all  night.  The  morn-

342  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

ing  and  dinner  of  the  next  day,  14th,  were  no  better.  That
day,  as  I  was  finishing  dinner  at  Meudon,  having  a  great
many  guests,  I  received  a  courier  from  Cardinal  Dubois,
with  a  letter  conjuring  me  to  come  at  once  to  him  at
Versailles  and  bring  some  trusty  person  who  could  be  sent
post  haste  to  La  Trappe  ;  and  not  to  crack  my  brains  in
guessing  what  that  meant,  because  it  was  impossible  to
guess  it,  and  he  was  waiting  with  the  utmost  impatience  to
tell  me.  I  sent  for  my  carriage  at  once  and  thought  it  very
long  in  coming  from  the  stables.

When  I  reached  the  cardinal’s  quarters  I  saw  him  watch¬
ing  for  me  at  the  window  and  making  signs  to  me,  and  I
The  king  much  found  him  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs  ready  to
distressed.  Ex-  meet  me.  He  told  me,  as  we  went  up,  about

traordinary  dis¬
appearance  the  king’s  tears,  greatly  increased  by  the

0  Frejus'  unaccountable  absence  of  M.  de  Fréjus,  who

had  disappeared,  and  had  not  slept  at  Versailles,  and  no
one  knew  what  had  become  of  him,  except  that  he  was  not
at  Villeroy  nor  on  the  road,  because  messengers  had  just
brought  news  from  there.  He  went  on  to  say  that  this
disappearance  had  put  the  king  in  despair  and  themselves
into  cruel  perplexity  ;  they  did  not  know  what  to  think  of
this  sudden  withdrawal,  unless  it  was  that  Fréjus  had  gone
to  hide  himself  at  La  Trappe  ;  and  for  that  reason  he  wanted
me  to  send  and  see  if  he  was  there.  Dubois  took  me
straight  to  the  regent.  We  found  him  alone,  in  great  dis¬
tress,  walking  up  and  down  his  cabinet.  He  told  me  at
once  that  he  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  the  king:,  who

cried  for  M.  de  Fréjus  and  would  not  listen  to  a  single
word  ;  and  with  that  the  regent  declaimed  against  so  strange
a  flight.

Dubois  urged  me  to  write  to  La  Trappe.  Everything  was
so  in  confusion  in  the  regent’s  apartments  ;  all  were  talking

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

343

at  once  in  his  cabinet  ;  impossible  in  such  a  racket  to  write
at  his  desk,  as  I  usually  did  when  alone  with  him  ;  my  own
apartment  was  away  in  the  new  wing,  and  probably  closed,
as  I  was  not  expected  on  that  day.  The  quickest  thing  was
to  go  up  to  Pezé’s  room,  which  was  directly  above  the  queen’s
apartment,  and  there  I  began  to  write.  My  letter  was  just
finished  when  Pezé  rushed  in,  exclaiming,  “  He  is  found  !
he  is  found  !  Your  letter  is  useless  ;  come  back  to  the  Due
d’Orléans  at  once.”  Then  he  told  me  that  some  one  who
knew  that  Préjus  was  a  friend  of  the  Lamoignons  had  met
Courson  [son  of  Président  Lamoignon]  in  the  great  court¬
yard,  and  asked  him  if  he  had  any  idea  what  had  become
of  Fréjus  ;  Courson  replied  he  did  not  know  why  they
should  trouble  about  that,  for  Fréjus  had  only  gone  out  to
sleep  at  Bâville,  where  Président  Lamoignon  was  staying.

Serenity  had  returned  to  the  regent’s  cabinet  by  the  time
we  reached  it  ;  Fréjus  was  well  mauled,  and  after  discussing
his  prank  for  a  time,  the  regent  went  to  tell  the  good  news
to  the  king,  while  I  awaited  his  return  with  Cardinal  Dubois,
who  then  told  me  they  had  news  of  Villeroy.  He  had
never  ceased  shouting  about  the  assault  committed  on  his
person,  the  audacity  of  the  regent,  the  insolence  of  him,
Dubois  ;  nor  did  he  stop  abusing  d’Artagnan  the  whole  way
for  lending  himself  to  such  criminal  violence.  After  which
he  invoked  the  manes  of  the  late  king,  exalting  the  con¬
fidence  he  had  placed  in  him,  the  importance  of  the  office
for  which  he  had  preferred  him,  Villeroy,  to  all  the  world,
the  uprising  this  bold  step  would  cause  in  Paris  and  the
kingdom,  the  scandal  created  in  foreign  countries;  after
which  came  deplorings  of  the  fate  of  the  king  and  the
kingdom,  outbursts,  invectives,  self-applause  for  his  services,
his  fidelity,  his  firmness,  his  unvarying  devotion  to  duty.
In  short,  he  was  a  man  so  astonished,  confounded,  and  full

344  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

of  spite  and  wrath  that  he  did  not  possess  himself  for  a
moment.

The  Duc  d’Orléans,  on  his  return  from  the  king,  told  us
that  the  news  had  greatly  pacified  him  ;  on  which  we  con¬
cluded  that  when  Fréjus  returned  in  the

The  king  consoled

by  the  return  of  morning  the  regent  had  better  receive  him
Frejus.  well,  take  his  escapade  in  good  part,  cajole

him,  and  tell  him  it  was  only  to  spare  him  that  the  secret
of  Villeroy’s  arrest  was  not  imparted  to  him;  and  explain
the  necessity  of  the  step,  which  was  all  the  more  easy  be¬
cause  Fréjus  hated  the  maréchal,  his  insolence,  his  jealousy,
his  caprices,  and  rejoiced  in  soul  at  his  banishment  and  the
opportunity  of  himself  possessing  the  king  at  his  ease.  The
maréchal  was  left  some  five  or  six  days  at  Villeroy,  to  exhale
and  calm  down,  after  which,  as  he  had  no  dangerous  talents
away  from  the  king,  he  was  sent  to  Lyon  and  allowed  to  ex¬
ercise  his  limited  functions  as  governor  of  the  town  and
province,  measures  being  taken  of  course  to  watch  him
closely,  leaving  du  Libois  near  him  to  blunt  his  author¬
ity  with  an  air  of  supervision  which  took  away  from  it  all
influence.  But  his  first  fury  was  spent  ;  this  total  removal
from  Paris  and  the  Court,  where  not  only  was  there  no  stir
in  his  behalf,  but  there  was  even  terror  and  stupor  at  an  act
of  this  importance,  left  him  without  hope,  subdued  his  pas¬
sion,  and  induced  him  to  behave  with  wisdom  in  order  to
avoid  more  grievous  treatment.

Such  was  the  fall  of  a  man  who  was  far  below  the  sta¬
tions  he  had  filled;  who  showed  his  clay  in  all  of  them;
who  put  audacity  and  vain  imaginations  in  the  place  of
prudence  and  sound  judgment;  who  behaved  everywhere
like  a  frivolous  comedian,  and  whose  profound  and  univer¬
sal  ignorance  (except  of  the  low  arts  of  a  courtier)  was
always  allowing  the  thin  crust  of  virtue  and  integrity  with

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

345

which  he  plastered  his  ingratitude,  his  mad  ambition,  his
thirst  for  making  himself  a  leader  in  spite  of  his  weakness
and  terrors,  for  holding  the  helm  of  which  he  was  radically
incapable,  to  crack  and  show  the  man.  It  is  enough  to
say  here  that  he  never  raised  himself  after  this  fall,  and
that  the  rest  of  his  life  was  only  bitterness,  regrets,  and
contempt.  He  had  persuaded  the  king  —  and  I  shall  give
proofs  of  this  if  I  have  the  time  to  complete  these  Memoirs
as  I  propose  —  he  had,  I  say,  persuaded  the  king  that  he
alone,  by  his  vigilance  and  his  precautions,  preserved  the
king’s  life,  which  others  were  seeking  to  destroy  by  poison.
This  was  the  reason  of  the  king’s  tears  when  he  was  taken
from  him,  and  of  his  well-nigh  despair  when  Fréjus
disappeared.

Fréjus’  prompt  return  dissipated  half  these  fears,  and  the
continuance  of  his  own  good  health  delivered  the  king,  little
by  little,  of  the  rest.  Fréjus,  who  had  so  great  an  interest  in
preserving  it,  neglected  nothing  to  remove  from  his  mind
such  fatal  ideas,  and  to  let  the  venom  fall  on  those  who
invented  or  inspired  them.  In  this  way  he  used  the  best
means  to  protect  himself  against  a  return  of  the  maréchal
and  to  attach  the  king  to  himself  without  reserve  ;  of  which
we  have  since  felt  but  too  well  the  tremendous  success.

On  one  of  my  ordinary  days  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans  I
went  from  Meudon  to  Versailles  at  four  o’clock,  the  hour

when  the  regent  had  no  one  with  him.  After

sation  between  a  tew  moments  of  general  conversation  1  laid
the  duc  d’Orkans  up0n  c]esp  tpe  papers  about  which  I  had

to  report.  He  sat  at  the  desk  and  I  opposite
to  him,  as  usual.  I  found  him  preoccupied,  absent-minded,
making  me  repeat  things,  —  he,  who  usually  understood
them  before  they  were  half  explained.  This  wandering  of
his  mind  was  so  unusual  that  I  finally  asked  him  the

346  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xi

cause.  He  hesitated,  stammered,  and  would  not  explain
it.  I  smiled,  and  asked  if  it  was  something  I  had  heard
whispered  about  his  thinking  of  making  Cardinal  Dubois
prime  minister.  The  question  appeared  to  me  to  relieve
him  ;  his  air  seemed  freer  and  more  serene  ;  and  he  told
me  it  was  true  that  Cardinal  Dubois  was  dying  of  a  de¬
sire  to  get  that  place  ;  that  as  for  him,  he  was  tired  to
death  of  business  and  the  constraint  he  was  under  to
spend  all  his  evenings  at  Versailles  ;  that  in  Paris  he  could
at  least  amuse  himself  with  his  suppers  and  his  com¬
pany,  who  were  always  at  hand  ;  but  to  have  his  brains
cracking  all  day  long  with  business  only  to  spend  his  eve¬
nings  in  being  bored  was  more  than  he  could  stand  ;  and  he
was  inclined  to  throw  the  burden  on  a  prime  minister,  who
would  give  him  some  rest  in  the  daytime  and  liberty  to
amuse  himself  in  Paris.  I  laughed  and  assured  him  I
thought  that  a  most  excellent  reason  to  which  there  was
no  reply.  He  saw  that  I  was  twitting  him,  and  said  I  did
not  feel  the  burden  of  his  days,  nor  the  dreadful  void  of  his
evenings,  and  the  horrible  ennui  of  spending  them  with  the
Duchesse  d’Orléans,  where  he  did  not  know  what  to  do  with
himself.

He  had  the  patience  to  listen  to  what  I  said  to  him  and  I
thought  I  had  produced  an  effect.  After  a  short  silence  he
sat  bolt  upright  on  his  chair  and  exclaimed  :  “  I  ’ll  go  and
plant  cabbages  at  Villers-Cotterets  ;  ”  and  with  that  he  got
up  and  began  to  walk  up  and  down  the  cabinet,  and  I  with
him.  I  asked  him  what  assurance  he  had  that  he  would  he
allowed  to  plant  them  in  peace,  or  even  safety  ;  I  told  him
every  one  would  pick  quarrels  with  his  administration,
scheme  dangerous  plots  and  alarm  the  king,  if  a  prince  of
his  mind,  vahie,  and  capacity,  who  could  not  be  removed
by  any  hand,  removed  himself  because  he  was  irritated  and

1722]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  347

disgusted  with  his  present  state.  He  made  a  few  turns
more  in  silence  ;  after  which  he  owned  it  required  reflec¬
tion  ;  and  then  he  began  to  walk  again.

Presently,  finding  himself  against  the  wall,  at  the  corner
of  his  desk,  where  there  happened  to  he  two  stools,  —  I  see
the  place  still,  —  he  pulled  me  by  the  arm
upon  one  and  sat  down  himself  upon  the
other,  and  turning  to  face  me,  he  asked
vehemently  if  I  did  not  remember  the  time
when  Dubois  was  valet  to  Saint-Laurent,  and  thankful  to
he  so  ;  and  from  that  he  went  over  all  the  steps  and  divers
degrees  of  Dubois’  rise  till  he  came  to  the  present  day,  and
then  he  cried  out  :  “  And  he  is  not  content  ;  he  persecutes
me  to  make  him  prime  minister;  and  I  am  very  sure  that
when  he  is  that  he  won’t  be  satisfied,  and  what  can  he  he
higher  than  that  ?  ”  adding,  as  if  replying  to  himself,  “  God
the  Father  if  he  could.”  “Most  assuredly,”  I  replied,  “you
can  count  on  that  ;  and  it  is  for  you,  monsieur,  who  know
him  so  well,  to  see  whether  you  want  to  he  his  stepping-
stone  to  mount  above  your  head.”  “  Oh  !  I  should  prevent
that,”  he  replied,  and  again  he  walked  about,  without  saying
more  ;  neither  did  I,  so  occupied  was  I  with  that  “  I  should
prevent  that,”  at  the  end  of  a  conversation  so  earnest  and
his  passionate  recital  of  the  life  of  Cardinal  Dubois  ab  in-
cunabulis,  which  up  to  this  time  I  had  given  no  occasion
for.  This  last  promenade  lasted  some  time,  still  in  silence,
he,  with  his  head  lowered,  as  was  usual  with  him  when
embarrassed  and  pained,  I,  as  having  said  all  and  waiting
until  he  should  break  the  silence.  At  last  he  sat  down
again  at  his  desk,  I  seated  opposite  as  before  ;  he  with  his
elbows  on  the  desk  and  his  head  between  his  two  hands.
He  remained  thus  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  without  stir¬
ring,  without  opening  his  lips,  and  I  the  same,  though  I  did

Dubois  well-
known  to  his
master;  incred¬
ible  weakness  of
the  regent.

348  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

not  take  my  eyes  off  him.  It  ended  by  his  raising  his
head,  without  otherwise  moving,  advancing  it  towards  me,
and  saying  in  a  low,  weak,  ashamed  voice:  “Why  wait
and  not  declare  it  at  once?”  Such  was  the  fruit  of  the
conversation  !  I  cried  out  :  “Oh  !  monsieur,  what  a  thing
to  say  !  What  is  urging  you  so  hard  ?  There  is  time
enough.  Take  time  for  reflection  on  what  we  have  just
said.  Let  me  explain  to  you  what  a  prime  minister  is,
and  the  prince  who  makes  him  one.”  He  gently  put  his
head  hack  into  his  hands  and  said  nothing.  I  felt  then
that  the  salvation  of  the  matter,  if  indeed  it  could  he  hoped,
lay  not  in  reasons,  which  were  all  exhausted,  hut  solely  in
delay.  Presently,  after  a  short  silence,  he  rose  and  said  :
“  Ho,  then  !  come  hack  to-morrow  at  three  o’clock  precisely
and  argue  the  thing  over  once  more  ;  we  shall  have  time.”
I  took  the  papers  I  was  to  carry  away  and  went  out;  he
ran  after  me  and  called  me  hack  to  say:  “To-morrow  at
three  o’çlock  ;  I  entreat  you,  don’t  fail,”  and  shut  the  door.

The  next  day,  August  22,  I  kept  the  appointment.  I
found  him  alone  in  his  cabinet,  walking  about  with  an
Another  strange  easier  air  than  the  day  before.  “  Well,”  he
between  the  said  as  soon  as  1  went  up  to  him,  what

regent  and  me.  more  can  we  say  about  the  affair  of  yester¬
day  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  all  is  said,  and  there  is  nothing
to  do  but  to  declare  the  prime  minister  at  once.”  I  recoiled
two  steps,  saying  that  for  a  step  of  such  importance  it  was
hasty  action.  He  answered  that  he  had  thought  it  over
well  ;  that  all  that  I  had  said  to  him  was  in  his  mind  ;
hut  the  end  was  that  he  was  worn-out  with  business  every
day,  with  ennui  every  evening,  with  the  persecutions  of
Cardinal  Dubois  every  instant.  His  walk  continued  for
seven  or  eight  turns  more,  and  then  he  seated  himself  at
his  desk  in  the  same  attitude  as  the  night  before,  and  I

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

349

opposite,  the  desk  between  us.  [Again  the  arguments  were
gone  over.]  A  rather  long  silence  succeeded  this  strong
statement.  The  regent’s  head,  still  between  his  hands
had  dropped  almost  to  the  desk.  He  raised  it  at  last  and
looked  at  me  with  a  dreary,  gloomy  air  ;  then  he  lowered
his  eyes,  it  seemed  to  me  in  shame,  and  remained  for  some
time  longer  in  that  position.  At  last  he  rose  and  made
several  turns  about  the  room,  still  saying  nothing.  What
was  my  horror  and  confusion  when  he  broke  that  silence  !
He  stopped,  turned  half  towards  me  without  raising  his
eyes,  and  said,  suddenly,  in  a  low,  sad  voice  :  “  There  must
be  an  end  to  this;  nothing  can  be  done  but  declare  it
instantly.”  “  Monsieur,”  I  said,  “  you  are  good  and  wise,
and,  above  all,  the  master.  Have  you  any  commands  for
Meudon  ?  ”  I  made  him  a  bow,  and  left  the  room  instantly,
as  he  cried  out  :  “  But  shall  I  not  see  you  again  soon  ?”  I
made  him  no  answer  and  shut  the  door.  Then  I  fled  to
Meudon  to  exhale  at  my  ease.

Towards  the  close  of  this  year  the  famous  Princesse  des
Ursins  died  in  Rome,  where  she  had  settled  for  the  last
six  vears,  preferring  to  govern  there  the  little

Death  of  the  J  >  r  0  0

Princesse  des  Court  of  Ellglcilicl.  tllclll  HOt  to  gOV6m  clt  cill.
ursms.  gpe  was  eighty-five  years  old,  still  fresh,  erect,

with  grace  and  charm;  her  health  perfect  until  the  rather
long  illness  of  which  she  died  ;  her  head  and  intellect  as
good  as  at  sixty,  and  she  herself  much  honoured  in  Rome.
She  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  Mme.  de  Maintenon  for¬
gotten  and  become  a  mere  nobody  at  Saint-Cyr,  and  then  to
survive  her.  Her  own  death,  which,  had  it  happened  a
few  years  earlier,  would  have  echoed  throughout  all  Europe,
made  no  sensation.  The  little  Court  of  England  regretted
her,  also  a  few  private  friends,  of  whom  I  was  one  without
concealment,  although,  on  account  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  I

350

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

did  not  keep  up  my  correspondence  with  her  ;  as  for  other
persons,  they  did  not  seem  to  be  aware  that  she  was  gone.
She  was,  however,  a  person  so  extraordinary  throughout
the  whole  course  of  her  long  life,  and  one  who  figured  so
grandly  and  strangely,  though  in  diverse  manners,  whose
spirit,  courage,  industry,  and  resources  were  so  rare,  and
her  reign  so  absolute  and  so  undisguised  in  Spain,  her
character  so  sustained  and  so  unique,  that  her  life  deserves
to  be  written  and  would  hold  a  place  among  the  most
curious  records  of  the  history  of  our  times.

The  world  of  letters  lost  Dacier  about  the  same  time,  who
had  made  himself  notable  by  his  works  and  his  erudition.
Death  of  Dacier  ;  He  was  seventy-one  years  old,  an  author  and
his  wife.  translator  in  charge  of  the  king’s  books,  which

made  him  well-known  and  esteemed  by  the  whole  Court.
His  wife,  who  was  far  more  solidly  learned  than  himself,
had  been  most  useful  to  him,  and  was  frequently  consulted
by  savants  in  Greek  and  Latin  belles-lettres,  in  antiquities,
and  in  criticism.  She  left  behind  her  a  number  of  fine
works.  But  she  was  only  learned  in  her  cabinet  with
learned  people  ;  elsewhere  she  was  simple,  unaffected,  agree¬
able  and  witty  in  conversation,  but  no  one  would  have
guessed  that  she  knew  more  than  ordinary  women,  with
whom  she  could  talk  fashions  and  all  the  other  trifles  of
common  intercourse  with  simplicity  and  naturalness,  as
though  she  were  not  capable  of  better  things.  She  died  in
the  deepest  sentiments  of  piety  in  1720,  aged  sixty-eight;
her  husband  two  years  later.

Madame,  whose  health  had  all  her  life  been  extremely
strong  and  unvarying,  had  not  felt  well  for  some  time  past
Death  of  Ma  an^  Hte  had  been  so  ill  as  to  be  convinced

dame;  her  she  was  about  to  fall  into  some  malady  from

character.  .

winch  she  should  never  recover.  We  have

1722]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  351

seen  how,  on  the  death  of  Monsieur,  she  had  taken  as  her
ladies  the  Maréchale  de  Clérembault  and  the  Comtesse  de
Beuvron,  whom  she  had  always  loved,  and  whom  Monsieur
had  driven  out  of  the  house  because  he  hated  them.  The
Maréchale  de  Clérembault  believed  she  had  a  great  knowl-
edge  of  the  future  through  the  science  of  little  dots,  hut  as,
thank  God,  I  do  not  know  what  that  is,  I  shall  not  explain
the  operation,  in  which,  however,  Madame  had  implicit
faith.  She  consulted  the  maréchale  therefore  about  her
going  to  Reims  for  the  king’s  coronation;  the  maréchale
answered  firmly  :  “  Go,  madame,  in  all  security  ;  I  am  per¬
fectly  well.”  This  meant  that  she  had  learned  from  the
little  dots  that  she  should  die  before  Madame  ;  strong  in
that  confidence  Madame  went  to  Reims.  But  on  her
return  from  the  coronation,  she  lost  the  Maréchale  de
Clérembault,  who  died  in  Paris,  November  27,  in  her
eighty-ninth  year,  having  up  to  that  time  had  perfect
health,  her  mind,  faculties,  and  the  use  of  all  her  senses
as  at  forty.

Madame  was  all  the  more  grieved  at  the  loss  of  her  old
and  intimate  friend  because  she  knew  that  though  the  little
dots  had  always  predicted  she  should  survive  her,  it  would
be  only  for  a  very  short  time.  And  in  point  of  fact,  she
followed  her  very  closely.  Dropsy  set  in,  and  made  in  a
very  few  days  such  progress  that  she  prepared  for  death,
with  great  firmness  and  piety.  She  desired  to  have  the
former  Bishop  of  Troyes,  brother  of  the  Maréchale  de  Clé¬
rembault,  constantly  near  her,  and  said  to  him  :  “  M.  de
Troyes,  this  is  a  very  strange  game  the  maréchale  and  I
have  played.”  The  king  went  to  see  her,  and  she  received
all  the  sacraments.  She  died  at  Saint-Cloud  on  the  8th  of
December,  at  four  in  the  morning,  aged  seventy-one  years.

Madame  was  a  princess  of  the  olden  time,  —  attached  to

352  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

honour,  virtue,  rank,  grandeur,  and  inexorable  as  to  their
observances.  She  was  not  without  intellect  ;  and  what  she
saw  she  saw  very  clearly.  A  good  and  faithful  friend,  safe,
■  true,  upright;  easy  to  shock  and  prejudice,  difficult  to  recall
from  a  prejudice  ;  coarse  ;  dangerous  in  her  public  attacks  ;
very  German  in  her  manners  and  customs,  frank,  ignorant
of  all  delicacy  for  herself  or  others,  sober,  solitary,  and  full
of  notions.  She  loved  dogs  and  horses,  hunting  and  theatres
passionately  ;  she  was  never  seen  except  in  full  dress,  or  in
a  man’s  wig  and  riding-habit,  and  was  more  than  sixty  years
old  before,  well  or  ill  (but  she  never  was  the  latter),  she
had  a  wrapper.  She  loved  the  regent  passionately,  also  her
own  nation  and  all  her  relatives,  though  she  had  never  seen
them.  She  spent  her  life  after  Monsieur’s  death  in  writing
to  them.  She  esteemed,  pitied,  and  almost  loved  the  Du¬
chesse  d’Orléans,  whom  she  treated  very  well  both  before  and
after  the  dismissal  of  Mme.  d’Argenton.  She  blamed  the
disorderly  life  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  was  supremely  in¬
dignant  at  that  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  ;  about  which  she
sometimes  unbosomed  herself  with  the  utmost  bitterness
and  perfect  confidence  to  Madame  de  Saint-Simon,  who,
from  the  first  of  her  coming  to  Court,  had  found  grace  in
her  esteem  and  friendship,  which  never  varied.  Madame
was,  in  all  respects,  more  of  a  man  than  a  woman.  She
was  strong,  courageous,  German  to  the  last  degree,  frank,
upright,  good,  and  benevolent,  noble  and  grand  in  her
manners,  but  petty  to  excess  in  all  that  related  to  what
was  due  to  her.  She  was  very  unsociable,  constantly  shut
up  in  her  room  and  writing,  save  for  the  short  hours  of
her  Court;  the  rest  of  her  time  she  spent  alone  with  her
ladies.  She  was  hard,  rude,  ready  to  take  dislikes  ;  terrible
for  the  tirades  she  would  sometimes  make,  and  to  any  one,
no  matter  who.  She  had  no  pliancy,  no  readiness  of  mind,

1722]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  353

though,  as  I  have  said,  she  was  not  without  intellect.  She
was  jealous  to  the  utmost  pettiness  of  all  that  she  consid¬
ered  her  rights  ;  her  face  and  figure  were  those  of  a  rustic.
Yet  she  was  withal  capable  of  a  tender  and  inviolable  affec¬
tion.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  loved  her  and  respected  her  much,
and  did  not  leave  her  during  her  illness  ;  he  had  always  paid
her  great  attentions,  but  was  never  influenced  by  her.  He
was  greatly  afflicted.  I  passed  several  hours  with  him  at
Versailles  on  the  day  after  her  death,  and  I  saw  him  weep
bitterly.1

1  The  letters  of  Elizabeth-Charlotte  of  Bavaria,  Princess  Palatine  and
Duchesse  d’Orléans,  addressed  chiefly  to  her  relations,  have  been  pub¬
lished  and  are  among  the  most  valuable  records  of  that  time  ;  a  selection
from  them  will  be  found  in  the  7th  volume  of  this  series  of  Historical
Memoirs.  —  Tk.

vol.  iv.  —  23

XII.

This  year,  1723,  the  end  of  which  is  the  limit  I  have
prescribed  for  these  Memoirs,  will  not  have  the  amplitude

or  the  details  of  its  predecessors.  My  heart

1*723.

was  wrung  to  see  the  regent  under  the  lash

Sterility  of  the  e  0

narrative  of  this  of  his  unworthy  minister,  not  daring  to  do
year ,  its  cause.  without  him  or  against  his  will  ;  the

State  a  prey  to  the  selfish  interests,  the  greed,  the  madness
of  that  unfortunate  man,  and  without  a  remedy.  What¬
ever  experience  I  had  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans’  amazing  weak¬
ness,  it  seemed  to  me  monstrous  that  he  should  have  made
that  man  prime  minister  after  what  I  had  said  to  him,
after  what  he  had  said  to  me,  and  after  his  own  statement
that  he  viewed  the  matter  himself  as  I  did,  all  of  which  I
have  related  in  its  place  with  the  most  exact  veracity.  I
no  longer  approached  that  poor  prince,  of  so  many  great
and  useful  talents  buried,  without  repugnance  ;  I  could  not
help  feeling  about  him  as  the  wicked  Israelites  said  to
each  other  in  the  desert  about  the  manna  :  Nauseat  anima
mea  super  cibum  istum  levissimum.  I  no  longer  deigned
to  speak  to  him.  He  saw  it  and  I  felt  that  he  was  pained
by  it  ;  he  tried  to  bring  me  back  to  him  though  never
daring  to  speak  to  me  of  public  affairs  except  lightly  and
always  with  constraint,  and  yet  not  able  to  keep  himself
entirely  from  doing  so.  I  scarcely  took  pains  to  answer  him,
and  I  ended  such  topics  as  soon  as  I  could  ;  I  shortened  and
delayed  my  audiences  ;  I  listened  coldly  to  his  reproaches.
And  truly,  what  could  I  have  to  say  or  to  discuss  with  a

1722]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  355

regent  who  was  not  one  at  all,  not  even  of  himself,  far  less
of  the  kingdom,  which  was  now  in  disorder  ?

Whenever  Cardinal  Dubois  met  me  he  almost  paid  court
to  me.  The  ties  of  all  times  and  without  interruption  were
so  strong  between  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  myself  that  the
prime  minister,  having  tested  them  more  than  once,  dared
not  flatter  himself  that  he  could  break  them.  His  resource
was  to  disgust  me  by  impelling  his  master  to  a  reserve  with
me  that  was  wholly  new  between  us.  But  it  cost  the  regent
more  than  it  did  me,  because  of  the  habit,  I  shall  even  ven¬
ture  to  say  the  utility,  this  confidence  had  been  to  him  ;
whilst  I  could  more  readily  give  it  up,  from  the  vexation  I
felt  at  seeing  no  fruit  of  it  for  the  good  of  the  State,  or  for
the  honour  and  welfare  of  the  regent,  now  wholly  delivered
up  to  his  pleasures  in  Paris  and  abandoned  to  his  minister.
The  conviction  of  my  perfect  uselessness  made  me  retire
more  and  more,  without  ever  having  the  faintest  suspicion
that  a  contrary  course  would  be  dangerous  to  me,  or  that,
weak  and  abandoned  as  the  regent  was  to  Cardinal  Dubois,
the  latter  could  ever  succeed  in  getting  me  exiled  like  the
Duc  de  Noailles  and  Canillac,  or  that  he  could  ever  make
me  feel  such  disgust  that  I  should  exile  myself.  I  contin¬
ued,  therefore,  my  customary  life  ;  that  is  to  say,  I  never  saw
the  Duc  d’Orléans  except  üte-h-tUe  ;  but  I  saw  him  less  and
less,  and  always  coldly,  briefly,  without  giving  an  opening
for  the  mention  of  public  affairs,  turning  them  aside  if  he
broached  them,  or  replying  in  a  manner  that  quickly  dropped
them.  With  such  conduct  and  such  strong  feelings,  it  will
readily  be  seen  that  I  could  be  and  do  nothing  ;  and  there¬
fore  what  I  have  to  relate  of  this  year  will  have  less  of  the
curious  and  instructive  interest  of  good  and  faithful  memoirs,
and  more  of  the  dryness  and  sterility  of  the  facts  of  a
gazette.

356  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xn.

February  the  19th  the  king  received  at  Versailles  the  re¬
spects  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  and  all  the  Court  on  his  majority,1
The  king  attains  and  he  then  declared  the  choice  of  three  new
his  majority.  dukes  and  peers  :  Biron,  Lévi,  and  La  Vallière,
cousin  of  the  Princesse  de  Conti.  The  next  day  the  king
went  in  state  to  Paris,  to  the  Tuileries  ;  and  on  the  22nd  he
went  to  parliament  and  held  his  lit  de  justice  for  the  declara¬
tion  of  his  majority  and  the  reception  of  the  three  new  dukes
and  peers.  The  session  ended  by  the  registration  of  a  new
edict  against  duels,  which  were  again  becoming  frequent.
On  the  23rd  the  king  received  at  the  Tuileries  the  harangues
of  the  great  societies,  and  those  of  all  other  bodies  that  are
accustomed  to  harangue.

The  Council  of
Regency  ends  ;
the  Council  of
State  takes  its
place.

The  Council  of  Regency  came  to  an  end.  The  new  Coun¬
cil  of  State  was  composed  of  only  the  Duc  d’Orléans,
the  Duc  de  Chartres,  M.  le  Duc,  Cardinal
Dubois,  and  Morville,  secretary  of  State,  until
then  without  functions,  to  whom  Cardinal
Dubois  turned  over  his  office  of  secretary  of
State  and  the  department  of  foreign  affairs.

It  was  now  some  time  since  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  had
taken  a  fancy  to  the  Marquise  de  Gondrin  at  the  Baths  of
Bourbon,  where  they  had  met  and  seen  much  of  each  other.
She  was  the  sister  of  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  whom  he  neither
liked  nor  esteemed,  and  widow,  with  two  sons,  of  the  eldest
son  of  the  Due  d’Antin,  with  whom  the  Comte  de  Toulouse
had  always  had  much  intercourse  of  a  proper  and  becoming
kind  because  they  were  both  sons  of  Mme.  de  Montespan.
Mme.  de  Gondrin  had  been  lady  of  the  palace  during  the
last  months  of  the  dauphine’s  life  ;  she  was  young,  gay,
and  thoroughly  Noailles,  her  bust  very  beautiful,  her  face

1  Louis  XV.  was  born  Feb.  10,  1710,  and  was  therefore  thirteen  years
old  ;  Rigaud’s  portrait  of  him  was  painted  at  this  time  —  Tk.

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

357

agreeable,  and  she  had  never  made  any  one  talk  of  her.  The
affair  led  on,  in  the  greatest  secrecy,  to  marriage.  The  bet-
Marriage  of  ter  to  conceal  that  event  the  Comte  de  Tou-

the  Comte  de  louse  took  the  occasion  of  the  lit  de  justice  on

Toulouse.  .

the  kings  majority,  from  which  he  was  ex¬
cluded,  because  the  bastards  could  no  longer  cross  the  floor,
and  for  that  reason  they  would  not  go  to  parliament.  Neither
did  the  Cardinal  de  Noailles,  because  his  purple  would  have
had  to  yield  precedence  to  the  peers-ecclesiastical.  The
Maréchale  de  Noailles  went  alone  with  her  daughter  to  the
archbishop’s  palace,  where  the  Comte  de  Toulouse  went  also,
alone  with  d’O.  The  cardinal  said  mass  and  married  them
in  his  chapel,  on  leaving  which  they  all  returned  as  they
came.  Nothing  transpired  about  this  wedding,  and  people
were  long  without  even  suspecting  it,  all  the  more  because
the  Comte  de  Toulouse  was  supposed  to  be  very  far  indeed
from  marrying.

About  this  time  the  plague,  which  had  so  long  devastated
Provence,  stopped  entirely,  so  that  the  barriers  were  raised,
commerce  re-established,  thanksgivings  were  offered  publicly
in  all  the  churches  of  the  kingdom,  and  at  the  end  of  a  few
months  trade  was  again  renewed  with  foreign  nations.

On  the  11th  of  June  the  king  went  to  live  at  Meudon.
The  pretext  was  to  clean  the  château  of  Versailles  ;  the  real
The  king  at  Meu-  reason,  the  convenience  of  Cardinal  Dubois,
don -for  the  Flattered  to  the  last  degree  by  being  called  to

convenience  of  o  J  o

cardinal  Dubois,  preside  over  an  assembly  of  clergy,  he  wished
to  enjoy  that  honour.  He  also  wished  to  be  present  from
time  to  time  at  the  meetings  of  the  Company  of  the
West  ;  Meudon  brought  him  nearer  to  Paris  by  half  way
than  Versailles,  and  spared  him  the  paved  road.  His  de¬
baucheries  had  given  him  very  painful  and  continual  suffer¬
ings  which  the  motion  of  a  carriage  aggravated,  though

358  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

he  concealed  them  with  great  care.  The  king  held  a  review
of  his  household  troops  at  Meudon,  at  which  the  pride  of  the
prime  minister  led  him  to  appear,  but  it  cost  him  dear.  He
appeared  on  horseback,  the  better  to  enjoy  his  triumph  ;  he
suffered  cruelly,  and  his  ailment  increased  with  such  vio¬
lence  that  he  was  forced  to  call  in  help.  He  saw,  in  the
deepest  secrecy,  the  most  celebrated  surgeons  and  physi¬
cians,  who  all  thought  ill  of  his  case  ;  and  through  their
reiterated  visits  and  a  few  indiscreet  remarks  the  matter
began  to  transpire.  He  could  no  longer  go  to  Paris  except
occasionally,  and  then  with  the  greatest  suffering,  and  solely
to  hide  his  malady,  which  gave  him  now  no  rest.  And  yet,
no  matter  what  his  condition  was,  his  ruling  passions  oc¬
cupied  his  thoughts  and  time  as  if  his  age  and  health  still
promised  him  forty  years  of  life  ;  the  desire  to  enrich  him¬
self  and  to  perpetuate  the  sole  and  sovereign  power  in  his
own  hands  tormented  him  with  the  same  intensity.

But  on  the  8th  of  August,  Saturday,  he  became  so  ill  that
the  surgeons  and  doctors  assured  him  that  he  must  submit
to  a  very  urgent  operation,  without  which  he

Illness  and  death  JO  r

of  cardinal  could  not  hope  to  live  for  more  than  a  few

days,  because  the  abscess  which  had  broken
when  he  rode  to  the  review  would  end  in  gangrene,  if  it
had  not  already  done  so,  by  the  suffusion  of  pus  ;  and  they
told  him  he  must  he  taken  at  once  to  Versailles  to  undergo
the  operation.  The  shock  of  this  terrible  announcement
was  so  great  that  he  could  not  he  moved,  even  in  a  litter,
till  Monday,  the  10th,  when  he  started  at  five  in  the
morning.

After  leaving  him  for  a  time  to  rest,  the  physicians  and
surgeons  proposed  to  him  to  receive  the  sacraments  first,
after  which  they  would  perform  the  operation.  This  was
not  accepted  peacefully.  He  had  scarcely  ceased  to  be  in  a

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

359

state  that  was  well-nigh  madness  since  the  day  of  the  re¬
view,  and  his  excitement  had  been  much  increased  by  the
proposal  of  the  operation.  However,  he  sent  for  a  Franciscan
friar  of  Versailles,  with  whom  he  was  alone  for  fifteen
minutes  —  so  great  and  good  a  man  and  so  well  prepared
could  not  need  more  ;  besides,  the  last  confessions  of  prime
ministers  are  privileged.  When  the  surgeons  re-entered  his
room  they  proposed  to  him  to  receive  the  viaticum  ;  on
which  he  cried  out  that  that  was  easy  to  say,  but  there
was  a  special  ceremonial  for  cardinals  which  he  did  not
know,  and  they  must  send  to  Cardinal  de  Bissy  in  Paris
and  inquire  about  it.  The  surgeons  looked  at  each  other,
seeing  plainly  that  he  was  only  wanting  to  gain  time;
hut  as  the  operation  was  pressing  they  prepared  to  per¬
form  it  without  waiting  any  longer.  On  this  he  drove  them
away  furiously,  and  would  not  hear  of  it  again.

The  Faculty,  knowing  the  imminent  danger  of  further  de¬
lay,  sent  word  of  it  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  was  at
Meudon,  but  went  immediately  to  Versailles  in  the  first
carriage  that  came  to  hand.  He  exhorted  the  cardinal  to
submit  to  the  operation,  and  asked  the  Faculty  if  they  were
sure  of  the  result.  The  surgeons  replied  that  they  could
promise  nothing,  but  that  the  cardinal  had  not  two  hours
to  live  if  it  was  not  done  at  once.  The  Duc  d’Orléans
then  returned  to  the  patient’s  bed,  and  begged  him  so  earn¬
estly  that  he  consented.  The  operation  was  performed  in
five  minutes  at  five  o’clock  by  La  Peyronie,  first  surgeon  to
the  king,  succeeding  Maréchal,  who  was  present  with  Chirac
and  other  celebrated  surgeons  and  physicians.  The  cardinal
screamed  and  stormed  terribly.  The  Duc  d’Orléans  returned
to  the  room  immediately  after,  when  the  Faculty  told  him
that  from  the  nature  of  the  sore  and  the  discharge  from  it
the  patient  had  not  long  to  live.  In  fact,  he  died  just

360  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xil

twenty-four  hours  later,  Tuesday,  August  11,  at  five  in  the
afternoon,  grinding  his  teeth  at  the  surgeons,  especially
Chirac,  whom  he  had  never  ceased  abusing.

They  brought  him  the  extreme  unction,  however.  As  to
communion,  nothing  more  was  said  about  that,  and  no  priest
was  near  him  ;  he  finished  his  life  in  despair  and  wrath  at
being  forced  to  quit  it.  Fortune  had  tricked  him  ;  he  had
bought  her  dearly  and  slowly,  with  all  sorts  of  troubles,
cares,  projects,  schemes,  anxieties,  toils,  and  torments  of
mind  ;  at  last  she  had  poured  upon  him,  in  torrents,  gran¬
deur,  power,  riches  incalculable,  to  let  him  enjoy  them  four
years  only,  and  then  to  tear  them  from  him  at  the  most
smiling  moment  of  his  joy.  He  died  at  sixty-six,  the  mas¬
ter  of  his  master,  less  a  prime  minister  than  possessing
royal  power  in  all  its  plenitude  and  independence,  cardi¬
nal,  Archbishop  of  Cambrai,  controller  of  the  posts,  enjoying
the  revenues  of  seven  abbeys,  and  receiving,  so  it  was  stated,

a  pension  from  England  of  forty  thousand

His  wealth.

pounds  sterling.  I  have  had  the  curiosity  to
look  up  his  revenues,  and  I  think  it  interesting  to  write
down  here  what  I  have  discovered  about  them,  —  diminish¬
ing  somewhat  those  from  his  benefices  to  avoid  all  danger  of
over-statement.  They  were  as  follows  :  —

Church  benefices . fra.  324,000

Prime  minister .  150,000

Posts .  100,000

Pension  from  England .  960,000

Total .  1,534,000

Add  to  this  that  he  had,  as  I  believe,  twenty  thousand
francs  a  year  from  the  clergy  as  cardinal  ;  but  this  I  do  not
know  with  certainty.  What  he  had  obtained  from  and
through  Law  was  something  enormous  ;  he  used  a  great
deal  of  it  in  Eome  to  obtain  his  cardinalate,  but  a  vast

«

'

5

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

361

amount  of  ready  money  still  remained  to  him.  He  had
an  immense  quantity  of  the  choicest  gilt  and  silver  plate  of
admirable  workmanship,  the  richest  furniture,  the  rarest
jewels  of  all  kinds,  the  finest  horses  in  any  country,  the
most  sumptuous  equipages.  His  table  was  exquisite  and
splendid  in  every  way,  and  he  did  the  honours  of  it  well,
though  extremely  sober  himself  by  nature  and  by  regimen.

What  a  monster  of  fortune,  when  we  think  whence  he
came  and  how  rapidly  he  fell  !  It  is  very  literally  to  him
that  we  may  apply  this  passage  in  the  Psalms  :  —

“  I  myself  have  seen  the  wicked  in  great  power  and  flour¬
ishing  like  a  cedar  of  Lebanon  ;  I  went  by  and  lo  !  he  was
gone  ;  I  sought  him  but  his  place  could  nowhere  be  found.  ”
Vidi  impium  superexaltum  et  elevatum  sicut  cedros  Libani  ;
et  transivi,  et  ecce  non  erat,  et  non  inventus  locus  ejus.

There  was  no  funeral  oration  at  his  obsequies,  for  no  one
dared  make  one.  His  brother,  older  than  himself,  a  worthy
man,  had  left  but  one  son,  a  canon  of  Saint-
Honoré,  who  had  never  wanted  places  or  ben¬
efices  and  lived  a  saintly  life.  He  received  an  enormous
inheritance,  but  would  scarcely  touch  any  of  it.  He  em¬
ployed  part  in  putting  up  a  species  of  mausoleum  to  his
uncle,  —  handsome,  but  modest,  built  against  the  wall  at  the
foot  of  the  church  where  the  cardinal  is  buried,  with  a  very
Christian  inscription  upon  it.  The  rest  of  the  money  he  dis¬
tributed  among  the  poor,  for  fear  it  might  bring  him  a  curse
if  he  kept  it.

There  is  many  an  example  of  amazing  fortune,  even  in
men  who  rise  from  nothing,  but  there  is  none  in  a  person
so  destitute  of  all  talent  (if  we  except  that

Sketch  of  him.  ...  .  _

of  base  and  underhand  intrigue)  as  Cardinal
Dubois.  His  mind  was  very  ordinary,  his  knowledge  most
common,  his  capacity  nil  ;  his  appearance  that  of  a  ferret

362  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

and  a  blackguard  ;  his  utterance  disagreeable,  jerky,  always
hesitating;  his  falseness  was  written  on  his  forehead;  his
morals,  unrestrained,  could  not  he  hidden.  Add  to  these
points  furies  that  might  pass  for  fits  of  madness  ;  a  head
incapable  of  containing  more  than  one  thing  at  a  time,  or  of
following  anything  that  was  not  for  his  personal  interest.
Nothing  was  sacred  to  him,  no  tie  respected;  open  contempt
for  faith,  promises,  honour,  truth,  integrity;  great  delight
and  continual  practice  in  making  game  of  all  such  things  ;
voluptuous  as  well  as  ambitious  ;  wanting  all  things  ;  count¬
ing  himself  as  everything  and  whatever  was  not  for  him  as
nothing,  and  considering  it  as  total  idiocy  to  think  or  act
otherwise.  With  that,  soft,  servile,  supple,  flattering,  admir¬
ing  ;  taking  all  sorts  of  forms  with  the  utmost  facility,  and
playing  any  kind  of  part,  often  contradictory,  to  attain  his
ends  ;  but,  nevertheless,  very  little  capable  of  persuading.
His  arguments  were  always  impulsive  and  fitful,  involved,  per¬
haps  unconsciously  so,  and  devoid  of  logic  and  precision  ;  un¬
pleasantness  followed  him  everywhere.  Nevertheless,  he  had
moments  of  amusing  vivacity  when  he  chose,  and  could  tell
diverting  stories  ;  though  these  were  disfigured  by  his  elocu¬
tion,  which  might  have  been  good  were  it  not  for  a  stutter
which  his  natural  duplicity  had  turned  into  a  habit,  from  a
desire  to  be  uncertain  in  what  he  said  and  replied.  With
such  defects,  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  the  only  man  he
was  ever  able  to  attract  was  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  who  had  so
fine  a  mind,  such  clear-sighted  intelligence,  and  who  could
seize  so  quickly  on  all  that  exhibits  the  real  man.  But
Dubois  won  him  when  a  child,  in  his  functions  as  tutor  ;  he
took  possession  of  him  as  young  man  by  encouraging  his
liking  for  liberty,  for  a  false  air  of  knowledge  of  the  world,
for  the  allurements  of  debauchery,  and  his  impatience  of  all
restraint  ;  he  spoilt  his  heart,  his  mind,  his  conduct  with

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

363

those  fine  theories  of  learned  libertines  from  which  the
poor  prince  could  never  free  himself,  any  more  than  he  could
free  himself  from  the  contrary  sentiments  of  reason,  truth,
and  conscience,  which  he  took  such  pains  to  smother.

Dubois  insinuated  himself  in  this  way,  and  had  no  study
more  at  heart  than  to  retain  by  every  sort  of  means  his  mas¬
ter’s  favour,  on  which  depended  his  own  advantages,  which
at  first  were  not  so  much  ;  though  even  then  they  were  con¬
siderable  for  the  valet  of  the  rector  of  Saint-Eustache,  and
later  of  Saint-Laurent.  He  therefore  never  lost  sight  of  his
prince,  whose  great  gifts  he  perceived,  and  whose  great  de¬
fects  he  knew  so  well  how  to  put  to  profit  ;  it  was  the  only
talent  of  which  he  was  master.

The  public  frenzies  of  Cardinal  Dubois,  especially  after
he  became  master  and  no  longer  restrained  them,  would
fill  a  volume.  I  shall  only  mention  a  few  as

His  crazy  capers.  .

specimens.  His  fury  would  sometimes  make
him  rush  round  and  round  the  room,  flying  from  chairs  to
tables  without  setting  foot  to  the  ground.  The  Due
d’Orléans  told  me  several  times  that  he  had  often  been
witness  of  these  occasions.  On  the  Easter-Sunday  after
he  was  made  cardinal,  he  woke  at  eight  o’clock  and  rang
till  he  pulled  down  the  hell-rope,  blaspheming  horribly  at
his  servants,  spluttering  filth  and  insults,  and  shouting  to
know  why  they  had  not  waked  him  earlier,  for  he  wanted
to  say  mass,  and  he  did  not  know  how  he  should  ever  get
time  with  all  the  rest  that  he  had  to  do.  The  best  thing  he
ever  did  was  not  to  say  it  at  all  after  this  fine  preparation,
and  I  do  not  know  that  he  ever  said  it  after  his  consecration.

Cardinal  Dubois  had  long  been  married,  and  therefore
very  obscurely.  He  paid  his  wife  well  to  hold  her  tongue
after  he  got  his  benefices  ;  but  when  he
dawned  into  grandeur  he  found  her  extremely

364  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

embarrassing  ;  be  was  always  in  terror  lest  she  should  make
him  miss  his  great  ecclesiastical  dignities.  His  marriage
had  taken  place  in  the  Limousin.  As  soon  as  he  was  Arch¬
bishop  of  Cambrai  he  confided  the  matter  to  Breteuil,  con¬
juring  him  to  get  rid  of  every  proof  of  his  marriage  cautiously
and  without  scandal.  The  wife  never  dared  to  say  a  word.
After  her  husband’s  death  she  came  to  Paris  and  received
a  large  sum  out  of  his  immense  property,  on  which  she
lived  obscurely  but  much  at  her  ease,  dying  in  Paris  about
twenty  years  after  Dubois,  by  whom  she  had  no  children.

I  shall  say  no  more,  because,  as  I  before  remarked,  it
would  make  a  volume.  I  have  said  enough  to  show  this
The  Due  d’Or-  monstrous  personage,  whose  death  was  a  com-
leUevfdby his  f°rt  to  great  an(l  small,  and,  in  truth,  through-
death.  out  Europe.  But  the  most  comforted  person

of  all  was  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  He  had  long  groaned  in
secret  under  the  weight  of  so  hard  a  tyranny  and  the
trammels  of  a  chain  he  had  forged  for  himself.  Hot  only
could  he  no  longer  direct  or  decide  anything,  but  he  was
forced  to  explain,  uselessly,  to  the  cardinal  what  he  desired,
whether  in  great  matters  or  in  small  ones.  He  was  com¬
pelled  to  submit  them  all  to  the  will  of  the  cardinal,  who
would  fly  into  fury,  reproaching  and  insulting  him  as  though
he  were  a  private  person  if  he  chanced  to  contradict  him.
The  poor  prince  also  felt  the  isolation  in  which  he  found
himself,  and  through  this  very  isolation  and  abandonment,
the  power  of  the  cardinal  and  the  eclipse  of  his  own.  He
feared  him  ;  the  man  became  intolerable  to  him  ;  he  longed
to  get  rid  of  him.  This  was  shown  in  a  thousand  ways,  but
he  did  not  dare  to  do  it;  in  fact  he  knew  not  how.  Iso¬
lated  and  perpetually  watched  as  he  was,  he  had  no  one  in
whom  he  could  confide,  and  if  he  had  attempted  to  do  so,
the  cardinal,  warned  of  it,  would  have  doubled  his  capers  to

1723]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

365

points  the  Due
d’Orléans  prime
minister.

hold  by  fear  what  he  knew  he  could  not  hope  to  keep  in
any  other  way.

As  soon  as  he  was  dead  the  Duc  d’Orléans  returned  to
Meudon  to  inform  the  king,  who  immediately  begged  him
The  king  ap-  to  take  charge  of  affairs,  declared  him  prime
minister,  and  received  his  oath  of  office  on  the
following  day  ;  the  letters-patent  for  which  were
at  once  drawn  up  and  certified  by  parliament.  This  declara¬
tion,  so  prompt  that  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was  unprepared  for  it,
was  wholly  due  to  the  fear  of  the  Bishop  of  Fréjus  that  some
private  person  might  become  prime  minister.  The  king
liked  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  as  I  have  said  already,  for  the
respect  he  received  from  him,  and  the  manner  in  which  he
worked  with  him,  making  him  always  the  apparent  master  of
the  favours  bestowed  by  the  choice  of  the  persons  he  proposed
to  him  ;  besides  which,  he  never  bored  him,  or  thwarted  his
amusements  by  his  hours  of  work.  Whatever  care,  whatever
suppleness  Cardinal  Dubois  had  employed  to  win  the  king’s
mind  and  coax  him  to  himself,  he  never  succeeded  in  doing
so  ;  and  it  was  easy  to  see,  without  having  very  good  eyes,  a
dislike  on  the  part  of  the  king  to  the  minister.  The  cardinal
was  in  despair,  but  he  kept  his  legs  going,  always  in  hopes  of
succeeding  in  the  end.

A  still  more  corrupt  man,  if  that  be  possible,  than  Cardinal
Dubois,  followed  him  twelve  days  later  ;  this  was  the  presi-
Death  of  dent  de  Mesmes  who,  already  weighted  by  a

dent'of  pariia-1"  ^ew  slight  apoplexies,  suffered  one  which
ment-  carried  him  off  in  twenty-four  hours  at  sixty-

one  years  of  age,  without  giving  a  sign  of  life  in  that  short
interval.  I  mean  more  corrupt  than  Dubois  through  his
profound  and  notorious  treachery,  and  because,  being  born  to
a  rich  and  honourable  position,  he  had  no  need  to  build  up
his  fortunes  like  Dubois,  who  came  of  the  dregs  of  the

366  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

people  ;  not  that  this  is  an  excuse  for  the  latter,  but  it  was
a  temptation  the  less  to  the  former,  who  had  only  to  enjoy
what  he  was,  with  honour.  I  have  had  so  many  occasions
to  make  known  this  magistrate,  who  was  equally  odious  and
contemptible,  that  I  think  I  may  dispense  with  soiling  my
pages  any  further  with  him.  I  was  peaceably  living  at  La
Eerté  with  excellent  company  for  more  than  two  months
without  choosing  to  leave  it,  in  spite  of  the  couriers  which
Belle-Île  and  others  despatched  to  me  on  the  death  of
Cardinal  Dubois,  urging  my  return.  Vanity  and  greed  for  a
pension  brought  me  another  courier  on  the  death  of  the
president,  from  his  daughters  [one  of  whom  was  married  to
the  Duc  de  Lorges],  entreating  me  to  return  and  obtain  it  for
them  from  the  Duc  d’Orléans.

I  yielded  on  this  occasion  to  the  virtue  and  piety  of
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  who  was  absolutely  determined  that
I  should  not  refuse  to  do  them  this  kindness  ;  I  therefore
started,  and  she  herself  returned  to  Paris  a  few  days  after
me.  The  Court  had  returned  from  Meudon  to  Versailles  on
the  13th  of  August,  that  is,  some  ten  days  earlier,  and  it  was
there  that  I  found  the  Duc  d’Orléans.

As  soon  as  he  saw  me  enter  his  cabinet  he  ran  to  me,  and
asked  me  eagerly  if  I  meant  to  abandon  him.  I  replied
I  find  the  Due  that  as  long  as  his  cardinal  had  lived,  I  felt

back  to^im^the  myself  useless  beside  him,  and  that  I  had
same  as  ever.  profited  by  it  for  my  freedom  and  for  my  re¬
pose  ;  but  now  that  that  obstacle  to  all  good  was  removed,
I  should  always  he  very  humbly  at  his  service.  He  made
me  promise  to  live  with  him  as  before,  and,  without  making
any  reference  to  the  cardinal,  he  began  to  talk  about  pres¬
ent  affairs,  domestic  and  foreign,  explaining  to  me  how  he
stood,  relating  to  me  the  flutter  of  England  and  Holland
regarding  the  new  company  of  Ostende  formed  by  the

1723]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

367

emperor,  which  he  wished  to  maintain  and  the  two  powers
wished  to  prevent,  for  the  sake  of  their  commerce  ;  and
how  France  was  affected,  both  for  and  against,  together  with
his  own  views  of  conduct  in  the  matter.  I  found  him  con¬
tent,  gay,  and  resuming  work  with  pleasure.  When  we
had  talked  over  everything  foreign  and  domestic,  and  about
the  king,  with  whom  he  was  much  pleased,  I  spoke  to  him
of  the  pension  for  which  the  daughters  of  Mesmes,  the
late  president,  requested  me  to  ask  him.  He  began  to
laugh  and  scoff  at  them  for  sending  to  him  again  after  the
quantities  of  money  he  had  given  to  their  father,  or  rather
that  their  father  had  so  often  filched  from  him  ;  and  he
laughed  at  me  for  being  their  solicitor  in  a  thing  so  absurd,
after  all  that  had  passed  between  me  and  the  president,
whose  funeral  oration  he  then  and  there  made  in  few  but
telling  words.  I  acknowledge  frankly  that  I  did  not  in¬
sist  upon  a  thing  that  I  myself  thought  unbecoming,  and
about  which  I  cared  nothing  at  all.  From  this  time  forth
I  lived  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans  as  I  had  always  done  be¬
fore  Cardinal  Dubois  was  made  prime  minister;  and  he
with  me  in  all  his  former  confidence.  I  must  admit,  how¬
ever,  that  I  did  not  seek  to  make  great  use  of  it.

The  new  château  de  Meudon  had  been  restored  to  me
after  the  return  of  the  Court  to  Versailles,  furnished  as
sad  condition  of  it  had  been  before  the  king  went  there.  The
his  health.  P)uc  anq  Duchesse  d’Humières  shared  it  with

us,  and  good  company  they  were.  The  Duc  d’Humières
asked  me  to  drive  him  to  Versailles  early  one  morning,  that
he  might  thank  the  Duc  d’Orléans  for  his  lodging.  We
found  him  not  dressed,  still  in  the  lower  room  he  had  made
into  a  wardrobe,  seated  among  his  valets  and  two  or  three
of  his  principal  officers.  I  was  frightened.  I  saw  before
me  a  man  with  his  head  hanging,  his  face  of  a  purplish  red,

368  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

and  so  stupefied  that  he  did  not  even  see  me  as  I  ap¬
proached  him.  His  servants  told  him  I  was  there.  He
turned  his  head  slowly  towards  me,  almost  without  raising
it,  and  asked  in  a  thick  voice  what  brought  me  there.
I  had  gone  there  to  hasten  his  coming  up  to  his  dressing-
room  in  order  not  to  keep  the  Duc  d’Humières  waiting
too  long  ;  but  I  was  so  astonished  that  I  stopped  short.  I
took  Simiane,  first  gentleman  of  his  Bedchamber,  aside  to
a  window,  where  I  expressed  my  surprise  and  alarm  at  the
state  in  which  I  saw  his  master.  Simiane  told  me  that  he
had  been  so  for  some  time  past  in  the  mornings  ;  there  was
nothing  extraordinary  in  his  state  that  day,  and  I  was  only
surprised  because  I  never  saw  him  at  those  hours  ;  he
assured  me  that  nothing  would  show  of  it  as  soon  as  the
prince  had  shaken  himself  together  and  was  dressed.  This
condition  did,  however,  appear  a  good  deal  when  he  came
up  to  dress.  He  received  the  Duc  d’Humières’  thanks  with
a  puzzled,  heavy  look  ;  and  he,  always  so  gracious  and  polite
to  every  one,  and  knowing  so  well  how  to  say  the  right  thing
at  the  right  time,  scarcely  answered  at  all.  A  moment  later
we  retired,  M.  d’Humières  and  I.  We  dined  with  the  Duc  de
Gesvres,  who  took  d’Humières  to  make  his  thanks  to  the  king.

This  condition  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  caused  me  to  make
many  reflections.  For  some  time  past  the  secretaries  of
State  had  told  me  that  during  the  early  morning  hours
they  could  make  him  agree  to  whatever  they  wished,  and
could  have  made  him  sign  anything,  even  to  his  own  injury.
This  was  the  fruit  of  his  suppers.  I  was  not  mute  to  him
on  that  subject,  but  all  representations  were  perfectly  use¬
less.  I  knew,  moreover,  that  Chirac  had  plainly  told  him
that  the  continuation  of  these  suppers  would  lead  either  to
sudden  apoplexy  or  to  dropsy  of  the  chest,  because  his
respiration  would  sooner  or  later  he  affected  ;  on  which,

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

369

he  rebelled  against  the  latter  evil,  as  being  slow,  suffocating,
interfering  with  everything,  and  always  threatening  death  ;
he  declared  that  he  much  preferred  apoplexy,  which  took
you  unawares  and  killed  you  suddenly  without  your  having
time  to  think  about  it.

Any  other  man,  instead  of  exclaiming  against  the  man¬
ner  of  the  death  that  threatened  him,  and  preferring  one
i  wam  Fréjus  of  so  terrible  to  another  that  gave  him  time  to
Du^dxh-ie'lns^  collect  himself,  would  have  thought  about
health-  living,  and  doing  what  he  could  to  promote

it  by  a  sober,  healthy,  and  decent  life,  which,  with  his  con¬
stitution,  might  have  given  him  a  great  many  years  and  very
agreeable  ones.  But  such  was  the  blindness  of  this  unhappy
prince  !  At  this  time  I  was  living  in  much  intimacy  with
M.  de  Fréjus  ;  and,  inasmuch  as  the  king,  in  default  of  the
Duc  d’Orléans,  would  need  some  other  master  until  he  was
of  age  and  ability  to  be  one  to  himself,  I  preferred  it  should
be  this  prelate  rather  than  any  one  else.  I  therefore  went
to  see  him,  and  told  him  what  I  had  seen  that  morning  of
the  Duc  d’Orléans’  condition;  I  predicted  that  his  death
could  not  long  be  deferred,  and  that  it  would  probably
happen  suddenly  without  any  warning.  I  therefore  ad¬
vised  the  bishop  to  take  measures  with  the  king  at  once,
without  losing  a  moment,  to  fill  his  place,  which  was  all
the  more  easy  because  he  could  not  doubt  of  the  king’s
affection  for  him,  Fréjus.  I  reminded  him  that  no  one  ap¬
proached  him  in  that  respect  ;  he  had  daily  long  tête-à-têtes
with  the  king,  which  gave  him  every  means  and  all  facilities
to  secure  his  immediate  succession  to  the  office  of  prime
minister  the  moment  it  became  vacant.  I  found  a  man
apparently  very  grateful  for  this  advice  and  desire,  but
modest,  cautious,  and  considering  the  office  above  his  con¬
dition  and  attainment.
vol.  iv.  —  24

370  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

This  was  not  the  first  time  that  our  conversations  had
turned  on  this  subject  in  general,  but  I  had  never  before
spoken  of  it  as  an  immediate  thing.  He  told
to  take  his  me  that  he  had  thought  much  about  it,  but

measures.  that  he  could  not  see  any  one  except  a  prince

of  the  blood  who  could  be  appointed  prime  minister  with¬
out  exciting  envy,  jealousy,  and  public  outcry  ;  in  fact  he
saw  no  one  but  M.  le  Duc.  I  exclaimed  against  the  danger
of  a  prince  of  the  blood,  who  would  put  every  one  under  his
feet,  whom  no  one  could  resist,  and  whose  relations  and
connections  would  pillage  the  country  ;  and  I  reminded
him  that  the  late  king  had  never  been  willing  to  put  one
of  the  princes  of  the  blood  into  the  Council,  in  order  not
to  let  them  aggrandize  themselves  and  assume  authority.
And  what  comparison  was  there  between  simply  being
of  the  Council  of  a  king  who  governed  and  was  so  jealous
of  governing,  and  being  the  prime  minister  of  a  child-king,
without  experience,  whose  majority  was  only  nominal,  and
under  whom  a  prime  minister  prince  of  the  blood  would
be  the  actual  king  ?  I  added  that  Fréjus  had  had  time
since  the  death  of  the  king  to  see  with  what  avidity  the
princes  of  the  blood  had  pillaged  the  finances,  with  what
obstinacy  they  had  protected  Law  and  all  that  favoured
their  pillage,  with  what  audacity  they  had  encroached  in
every  way  ;  and  he  ought  to  be  able  to  judge  from  that  what
would  be  the  rule  of  a  prime  minister  prince  of  the  blood  ;
and  more  especially  of  M.  le  Duc,  who  added  to  all  that  I
had  just  represented  a  silliness  that  was  almost  stupidity,
unconquerable  obstinacy,  inflexible  firmness,  insatiable  self-
interest,  with  which  all  France  and  himself  would  have  to
reckon  ;  or  rather  he  and  they  would  have  to  submit  to  a
will  that  was  solely  selfish.

Fréjus  listened  to  these  reflections  with  profound  placidity,

1723]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

371

Falseness  and
policy  of  that
prelate.

and  rewarded  them  with  the  amenity  of  a  tranquil,  gentle
smile.  He  did  not  answer  a  single  one  of  the  objections
I  had  raised,  except  by  telling  me  that  there
was  truth  in  what  I  said,  hut  that  M.  le  Duc
had  some  good  in  him  ;  he  had  honour,  integ¬
rity,  and  friendship  for  him  ;  that  he  ought  to  prefer  him  out
of  gratitude  for  the  friendship  his  father,  the  late  M.  le
Duc,  had  always  shown  him  ;  and  finally,  that  to  let  the
office  of  prime  minister  decline  upon  a  private  individual
would  be  too  great  a  fall,  and  would  crush  the  shoulders
of  any  such  person  who  accepted  it  ;  that  M.  le  Duc  was
the  only  one  of  the  princes  of  the  blood  who  was  fit  to  fill
that  important  place  ;  that  he  was  not  really  well-known
to  the  king  or  familiar  with  him,  though  the  place  of
superintendent  of  the  education  which  he  had  wrested  from
the  Duc  du  Maine  might,  and  ought  to  have  produced  it;
he  would  therefore  have  need  of  those  who  were  closest  to
the  king  in  his  liking  and  privacy  ;  and  with  this  help  and
the  relations  that  M.  le  Duc  would  be  obliged  to  hold  with
them,  all  would  go  right:  in  short,  the  more  he  thought,
and  he  had  thought  a  great  deal  about  it,  the  more  he  was
convinced  that  there  was  no  other  way  practicable.

His  last  words  stopped  me  short.  I  told  him  he  was
more  in  the  way  of  seeing  things  clearly  than  any  one  ;
that  I  contented  myself  with  having  warned  him  and  told
him  what  I  thought  ought  to  he  done  ;  that  I  could  not
help  regretting  he  should  let  the  office  of  prime  minister
escape  him  ;  but  that,  after  all,  I  yielded,  though  against
my  own  feeling  and  wish,  to  one  who  was  more  clear¬
sighted  than  I.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  with  what  assur¬
ances  of  gratitude,  friendship,  and  confidence  he  seasoned
his  remarks.  I  returned  to  Meudon  with  the  Due  d’Hu-
mières  fully  persuaded  that  Fréjus  was  only  hindered  by

372  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

his  timidity;  that  he  was  none  the  less  eager  for  sove¬
reign  power;  that  in  order  to  combine  his  ambition  with
his  fear  of  the  envy  and  jealousy  that  might  upset  him,  his
reflections  had  made  this  scheme  of  putting  a  prince  of  the
blood  in  that  place,  expecting  to  find  him  inept  and  a  mere
semblance  and  shell  of  a  prime  minister,  while  he,  Fréjus,
would  be  the  real  one,  through  his  power  with  the  king,
of  whose  heart  and  mind  he  knew  himself  to  he  the  sole
and  complete  possessor,  —  a  fact  which  would  render  him  so
essential  to  M.  le  Duc  that  the  latter  would  never  dare  to
do  the  least  thing  without  his  sanction,  and  thus,  without
exciting  envy  or  jealousy,  -and  preserving  always  his  ex¬
ternal  modesty,  everything,  in  point  of  fact,  would  be  in  his
hands.  To  butt  against  a  project  thus  thought  out,  and
a  project  of  this  nature,  would  have  been  to  break  my  nose
against  a  wall.  So  I  spoked  my  wheel  as  soon  as  I  felt
his  mind,  and  I  refrained  from  telling  him  that  Mme.  de
Prie  [M.  le  Due’s  mistress]  and  the  other  environers  of
M.  le  Duc  would  certainly  defeat  him,  because  they  would
choose  to  govern  and  profit,  and  would  consequently  make
the  prime  minister  shake  off  very  quickly  the  yoke  that
Fréjus  proposed  to  put  upon  him.  I  said  this  that  same
evening  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  from  whom  I  have  never
kept  any  secrets,  and  whose  great  good  sense  has  been  of
such  benefit  to  me  all  my  life.  She  thought  in  this  matter
as  I  did.

The  Duc  de  Lauzun  died  on  the  19th  of  November,  aged
ninety  years  and  six  months  ;  he  was,  as  I  have  said  already,
Death  of  the  extraordinary  in  all  ways  by  nature,  and  he
Duc  de  Lauzun.  took  pleasure  in  making  himself  appear  more
so.  Fte  forbade,  with  good  reason,  all  ceremonies  at  his
funeral,  and  he  was  buried  at  the  Petits-Augustins.  He
had  no  offices  from  the  king  but  his  old  company  of  the

1723]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

373

“Becs  de  Corbins,”  which  was  suppressed  two  days  later.
A  month  before  his  death  he  had  sent  for  Dillon,  chargé
d  affaires  in  Paris  of  King  James,  and  a  very  distinguished
general  officer,  to  whom  he  returned  his  collar  of  the  Order
of  the  Garter,  and  a  George  in  onyx  surrounded  by  very
large  and  beautiful  diamonds,  requesting  him  to  send  them
to  the  prince.

We  have  seen  recently  that  the  Duc  d’Orléans  dreaded
a  slow  death  which  he  could  long  foresee,  —  the  sort  of  death
Sudden  death  which  becomes  a  very  precious  mercy  when
of  the  Due  that  of  understanding  how  to  profit  by  it  is
added,  —  a  sudden  death  was  the  kind  he
preferred.  Alas  !  he  obtained  it  ;  and  it  was  even  more
sudden  than  that  of  his  father,  the  late  Monsieur,  whose
frame  struggled  longer  against  it.  I  went  on  the  21st  of
December,  immediately  after  dinner,  from  Meudon  to  Ver¬
sailles  to  see  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  I  was  alone  with  him
for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  in  his  cabinet,  where  I
had  found  him  by  himself.  We  walked  up  and  down  the
room,  talking  over  certain  matters  about  which  he  was  to
render  an  account  to  the  king  that  very  afternoon.  I  saw
no  difference  in  him  from  his  usual  condition,  which  of  late
had  grown  heavier  and  more  massive,  but  his  mind  was  as
clear  and  his  reasoning  as  sound  as  ever.  I  returned  im¬
mediately  to  Meudon,  where  I  talked  for  a  time,  on  arriving,
with  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon.  The  season  was  such  that  we
had  but  two  guests  ;  I  left  her  in  her  cabinet,  and  went  to
my  own  room.

At  the  end  of  an  hour,  at  the  most,  I  heard  cries  and  a
sudden  confusion.  I  left  my  room,  and  met  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon,  bringing  to  me  in  much  alarm  a  groom  of  my
son,  the  Marquis  de  Ruffec,  who  had  sent  him  to  tell  me
that  the  Duc  d’Orléans  was  seized  with  apoplexy.  I  was

374  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

keenly  shocked,  but  not  surprised  ;  I  had  expected  it,  as  I
have  shown,  for  a  long  time.  I  fretted  for  my  carriage,
which  kept  me  waiting  on  account  of  the  distance  of  the
new  chateau  from  the  stables.  When  it  came,  I  flung  my¬
self  into  it  and  started  as  fast  as  I  could  go.  At  the  gate  of
the  park  another  courier  from  the  Marquis  de  Buffec  stopped
me  and  told  me  that  all  was  over.  I  stayed  there  more  than
half  an  hour,  absorbed  in  grief  and  in  my  reflections.  After
a  while  I  decided  to  go  on  to  Versailles,  where  I  shut  myself
up  at  once  in  my  apartments.  Nangis  had  succeeded  me
with  the  Duc  d’Orléans  ;  he  was  soon  dismissed  and  was
followed  by  Mme.  Talari,  a  pretty  adventuress  who  had  mar¬
ried  an  adventurer,  a  brother  of  the  Duchesse  de  Béthune.
She  was  one  of  the  mistresses  of  this  unhappy  prince.  His
bag  was  all  prepared  to  go  and  work  with  the  king,  and  he
had  been  talking  nearly  an  hour  with  Mme.  Talari  while
awaiting  the  time  to  go.  She  was  very  near  him,  each  sit¬
ting  beside  the  other  in  their  armchairs,  when  he  fell  over,
sideways,  upon  her,  and  from  that  moment  showed  not  a
ray  of  consciousness,  nor  the  slightest  appearance  of  life.

La  Talari,  terrified  to  the  extent  we  can  imagine,  screamed
for  help  with  all  her  strength  and  redoubled  her  cries,  rind¬
ing  that  no  one  answered,  she  rested  the  poor  prince  as  best
she  could  upon  the  two  contiguous  arms  of  the  two  chairs,
and  ran  into  the  grand  cabinet,  into  the  chamber,  into  the
antechambers,  finding  no  one,  and  finally  into  the  courtyard
and  the  lower  gallery.  It  was  so  near  the  prince’s  hour  for
working  with  the  king  that  the  servants  were  sure  no  one
would  visit  him,  and  he  himself  had  only  to  go  up  his  own
little  staircase  which  opened  into  the  king’s  last  antechamber,
where  he  always  found  a  servant  in  waiting  to  take  his  bag.
At  last  La  Talari  found  persons,  but  no  help,  for  which  she
despatched  the  first  of  them  who  came  to  hand.  Chance,  or

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

375

to  speak  more  properly,  Providence  had  arranged  this  fatal
event  at  an  hour  when  every  one  had  gone  about  his  busi¬
ness  or  was  paying  visits,  so  that  a  good  half-hour  went  by
before  either  a  physician  or  a  surgeon  came,  and  nearly  as
much  before  the  servants  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  could  be
found.

As  soon  as  the  Faculty  looked  at  him  they  saw  there  was
no  hope.  He  was  hastily  laid  on  the  floor  and  bled  ;  but  he
gave  not  the  slightest  sign  of  life,  do  what  they  would.
The  moment  the  news  was  given,  everybody,  of  all  species,
flocked  in  ;  the  great  and  the  small  cabinet  were  crammed
with  people.  In  less  Dan  two  hours  all  was  over,  and,  little
by  little,  the  solitude  was  as  great  as  the  crowd  had  been.
As  soon  as  help  arrived  La  Falari  fled,  and  went  to  Paris  as
fast  as  she  could.

La  Vrillière  was  the  first  to  be  informed  of  the  seizure.
He  instantly  rushed  to  tell  the  king  and  the  Bishop  of  Fré¬
jus  ;  next,  M.  le  Duc,  — like  a  true  courtier  who  knows  that
every  moment  is  precious.  Believing  that  the  latter  would
surely  be  prime  minister,  he  then  hurried  home  and  wrote
out,  on  the  chance  of  it,  the  letters-patent,  which  he  copied
from  those  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  Notified  of  the  death  the
moment  it  occurred,  he  sent  word  of  it  to  M.  le  Duc,  and
went  back  to  the  king’s  apartments,  where  imminent  danger
had  already  collected  the  most  important  persons  belonging
to  the  Court.

Fréjus,  at  the  first  news  of  the  apoplexy,  had  settled
the  affair  of  M.  le  Duc  with  the  king,  whom  he  had,  no
m.  le  Duc  is  made  doubt>  prepared  in  advance  (prompted  by  the
prime  minister.  state,  so  visible,  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  espe¬
cially  after  what  I  had  said  to  him),  for  when  M.  le  Duc
went  to  the  king  at  the  moment  that  the  death  was  an¬
nounced,  the  most  distinguished  persons  who  were  gathered

376  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  in.

about  the  door  of  the  cabinet  were  shown  into  the  room  at
the  same  time,  and  then,  the  doors  being  closed,  Fréjus  said
aloud  to  the  king,  who  was  seen  to  be  very  sad,  with  his
eyes  red  and  tearful,  that  under  the  great  loss  he  had  just
met  with  in  the  Duc  d’Orléans  (to  whose  praise  Fréjus
gave  scarcely  two  words),  he  could  not  do  better  than  ask
M.  le  Duc  to  be  so  good  as  to  take  the  whole  burden  of
affairs  upon  him  and  accept  the  office  of  prime  minister.
The  king,  without  saying  a  word,  looked  at  Fréjus  and
consented  with  a  nod  of  his  head  ;  whereupon  M.  le  Duc
instantly  offered  his  thanks.  La  Vrillière,  transported  with
joy  at  his  own  prompt  action,  had  the  oath  of  the  prime
minister,  copied  from  that  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  all  ready  in
his  pocket,  and  he  proposed  aloud  to  Fréjus  that  M.  le  Duc
should  take  it  on  the  spot.  Fréjus  told  the  king  it  was  the
proper  thing  to  do,  and  M.  le  Duc  took  it  immediately.
Soon  after,  M.  le  Duc  went  away  ;  all  who  were  in  the  cabi¬
net  followed  him  ;  the  crowd  in  the  adjoining  rooms  swelled
his  train,  and  presently  there  was  but  one  thing  spoken  of,
namely,  M.  le  Duc  in  his  new  office.

The  Duc  de  Chartres,  a  clumsy  rake,  was  in  Paris  with  an
opera  girl,  whom  he  was  keeping.  There  it  was  that  a
courier  found  him  with  the  news  of  his  father’s

Gross  blunder  of

the  Duc  de  seizure;  on  his  way  to  Versailles  a  second  met
Chartres.  him  and  told  him  of  the  death.  He  found  no

crowd  when  he  got  out  of  his  carriage  at  Versailles,  only  the
Ducs  de  Noailles  and  de  Gniche,  who  offered  him,  very
civilly,  their  services  and  all  that  could  possibly  depend
upon  them.  He  received  them  as  importunate  persons  of
whom  he  was  in  haste  to  be  rid,  and  going  up  to  his  mother
the  Duchesse  d’Orléans’  apartment,  he  told  her  he  had  met
two  men  who  wanted  to  inveigle  him  finely,  but  he  knew
better  than  to  fall  into  that  trap  and  had  soon  got  rid  of

1723]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

377

them.  This  grand  stroke  of  judgment,  intelligence,  and
policy  promised  all  that  the  prince  has  since  then  proved
himself  to  be.  They  had  great  difficulty  in  making  him
understand  that  he  had  committed  a  gross  blunder,  and,
even  so,  he  continued  to  do  the  same  sort  of  thing.

As  for  myself,  after  passing  a  cruel  night,  I  went  to  the
king’s  lever,  —  not  to  show  myself,  but  to  say  a  word  more
securely  and  promptly  to  M.  le  Duc,  with  whom  I  had  been
in  constant  intercourse  since  the  lit  de  justice  at  the  Tui¬
leries.  He  always  stood  at  these  levers  in  the  recess  of  the
middle  window,  and  as  he  was  very  tall  he  could  easily  be
seen  from  behind  the  thick  hedge  that  surrounded  the  room.
On  this  occasion  it  was  immense.  I  signed  to  M.  le  Duc  to
come  and  speak  to  me.  He  instantly  pushed  through  the
crowd  and  came  to  me.  I  led  him  to  the  recess  of  the  win¬
dow  nearest  the  cabinet,  and  told  him  that  in  the  bag  which
the  Duc  d’Orléans  had  prepared  to  go  and  work  with  the
king  was  something  which  it  was  necessary  I  should  speak
about  immediately  to  whoever  succeeded  him  ;  that  I  was
not  in  a  condition  to  bear  seeing  people,  and  I  begged  him  to
send  me  word,  as  soon  as  he  had  a  free  moment,  that  I  might
go  to  him,  and  also  that  he  would  let  me  enter  by  the  small
door  of  his  cabinet,  which  opened  on  the  gallery,  to  spare  me
the  crowd  which  would  fill  his  apartments.  He  promised
this  in  the  course  of  the  day,  most  graciously,  adding  ex¬
cuses  about  the  confusions  of  the  first  day  of  his  new  posi¬
tion,  which  did  not  enable  him  to  fix  a  certain  hour  or  one
that  was  sure  to  suit  me.

From  there  I  went  to  the  Duchesse  Sforza  and  told  her
that  in  this  great  misfortune  I  felt  obliged,  from  respect  and
attachment  to  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  to  mingle
my  sorrow  with  that  of  all  who  were  nearest
to  him,  and  that  it  seemed  to  me  indecent  to

I  go  to  see  the

Duchesse

d’Orléans.

378  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xxi.

omit  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans.  She,  Mme.  Sforza,  knew  the
position  I  was  in  with  the  princess,  which  I  had  no  desire  to
change,  but  on  so  sad  an  occasion  it  seemed  to  me  that  I
ousht  to  render  to  the  widow  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  the
respect  of  calling  upon  her,  and  I  asked  Mme.  Sforza  to
ascertain  whether  she  would  receive  me  or  not  ;  saying  that
I  should  be  equally  content  with  a  yes  or  a  no  ;  feeling  that
I  had  done  what  I  thought  I  ought  to  do  in  this  respect
She  assured  me  that  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  would  he  glad
to  see  me  and  would  receive  me  well.  As  her  lodging  was
close  to  that  of  the  duchess  I  waited  her  return.  She
brought  me  word  that  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  would  be
pleased  to  see  me,  and  would  receive  me  in  a  manner  to
satisfy  me.  I  therefore  went  immediately.

I  found  her  in  bed,  a  few  of  her  ladies,  her  principal
officers,  and  the  Duc  de  Chartres  in  the  room,  with  all  the
decency  and  propriety  that  could  supply  the  place  of  grief.
As  soon  as  I  approached  she  spoke  of  our  common  sorrow,
but  not  a  word  of  what  had  passed  between  her  and  me;
in  fact,  I  had  so  stipulated.  The  Duc  de  Chartres  went
away,  and  I  shortened  the  languishing  conversation  as  much
as  I  could.  From  there  I  went  to  the  Duc  de  Chartres,  who
lodged  in  the  apartment  formerly  occupied  by  his  father
before  he  was  regent.  I  was  told  he  was  locked  in.  I
returned  three  times  in  the  course  of  the  morning.  The
last  time,  his  valet  de  chambre  was  ashamed,  and  went  to  call
him.  He  came  to  the  threshold  of  the  door  of  his  cabinet,
where  he  was  sitting  with  companions  indescribably  com¬
mon.  I  saw  a  man  full  of  his  new  position,  bristling  with
it,  not  afflicted,  but  so  embarrassed  as  scarcely  to  know
where  he  was.  I  made  him  the  strongest,  clearest,  most
energetic  compliment  that  I  could,  in  a  loud  voice.  He  took
me  apparently  for  some  henchman  of  the  Ducs  de  Guiche

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

379

and  de  Noailles,  for  he  did  not  do  me  the  honour  to  answer
a  word.  I  waited  some  moments,  and  seeing  that  he  did
not  intend  to  issue  from  that  ghost-like  state,  I  made  my
bow  and  retired,  without  his  taking  a  single  step  to  accom¬
pany  me,  as  he  was  hound  to  do'  the  length  of  his  apartment  ;
after  which  he  intrenched  himself  again  in  his  cabinet.  It  is
true  that  as  I  retired  I  cast  my  eyes  right  and  left  upon  the
company,  who  seemed  to  me  much  surprised.  I  then  went
back  to  my  own  rooms,  sick  of  running  about  the  château.

As  I  left  the  dinner-table  a  valet  de  chambre  of  M.  le  Duc
came  to  tell  me  that  he  awaited  me,  and  took  me  through
„  .  the  little  door  direct  to  his  cabinet.  He  met

between  me  and  me  at  the  door,  closed  it,  drew  an  arm-chair
for  me,  and  one  for  himself.  I  informed  him
about  the  matter  I  had  spoken  of  in  the  morning,  and  after
discussing  it  we  began  to  talk  of  the  event  of  the  day.  He
told  me  that  on  leaving  the  king  he  had  gone  to  the  Due
de  Chartres,  to  whom,  after  the  compliments  of  condolence,
he  had  offered  all  that  depended  upon  him  to  win  his  friend¬
ship  and  testify  his  true  attachment  to  the  memory  of  the
Duc  d’Orléans  ;  after  that,  as  the  Duc  de  Chartres  continued
silent,  he  had  redoubled  the  protestations  of  his  desire  to
serve  him  in  all  things  ;  on  which  he  received  a  curt  mono¬
syllable  of  thanks,  given  with  a  forbidding  air  which  induced
M.  le  Duc  to  withdraw.  I  told  him  what  had  happened  to
me  in  the  morning  with  the  same  prince,  about  whom  we
made  our  complaints  to  each  other.  M.  le  Duc  was  very
friendly  and  polite,  and  asked  me,  or  rather  urged  me  to
come  and  see  him  quite  often.  I  replied  that,  busy  as  I
knew  he  would  be  with  public  matters  and  social  affairs,
I  should  feel  a  scruple  in  troubling  him  and  those  who  had
business  with  him  ;  I  should  therefore  only  present  myself
when  I  had  something  to  say  to  him  ;  and  as  I  was  not

380

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

accustomed  to  attendance  in  antechambers,  I  begged  him
to  order  bis  servants  to  let  him  know  when  I  came  and  to
admit  me  to  his  cabinet  as  soon  as  he  conveniently  could.
Many  compliments,  much  friendliness,  and  urgent  invitations,
etc.  ;  the  interview  lasted  nearly  three  quarters  of  an  hour,
after  which  I  fled  away  to  Meudon.

Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  went  the  next  day  to  Versailles  to
pay  her  court  to  the  king  on  this  event,  and  to  see  the
Duchesse  d’Orléans  and  her  son.  M.  de  Fréjus

Mme.  de  Saint-  ^

Simon  goes  to  paid  a  visit  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  as  soon

Versailles  to  psy  1  i  i  i  ±.  tt  *n  i  i

her  court  to  the  as  he  heard  she  was  at  V  ersailles,  where  she
king‘  did  not  sleep.  Through  all  the  fine  things

that  he  said  to  her  of  me,  and  about  me,  she  thought  she
was  made  to  understand  that  he  would  rather  have  me
intimations  given  i11  Paris  than  at  Versailles.  La  Vrillière  also
to  her.  went  to  see  her  for  the  same  purpose  ;  he

was  more  afraid  of  me  than  even  Fréjus,  but  concealed  his
meaning  less  because  he  had  less  craftiness,  and  he  scandal¬
ized  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  the  more  because  of  his  ingrat¬
itude  for  all  that  I  had  done  for  him.  The  fellow  thought
that  he  had  so  ingratiated  himself  with  M.  le  Duc  by  his
haste  in  serving  him  and  in  swearing  him  in  that  he  should
get  the  duchy  that  he  longed  for  without  difficulty.  When
he  had  talked  to  me  about  it  in  the  Duc  d’Orléans’  time,  the
vagueness  '  of  my  replies  did  not  put  him  at  his  ease  in
regard  to  me.  He  wanted  to  throw  powder  in  the  eyes  of
M.  le  Duc  and  deceive  him  with  false  precedents,  and  feared
I  would  expose  them.

I  did  not  need  as  much  as  this  to  confirm  me  in  the
course  I  had  previously  resolved  to  take,  as  soon  as  I  became
i  am  confirmed  in  aware  of  the  threatening  condition  of  the  Due
long^aken' to'  d’Orléans.  I  went  to  Paris,  fully  resolved  not
retire  to  Paris.  to  appear  before  these  new  masters  of  the

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

381

kingdom,  except  from  rare  necessity  or  for  indispensable
decorum;  and  then  only  for  brief  moments,  with  the  dig¬
nity  of  a  man  of  my  sort  and  that  of  the  position  I  had  per¬
sonally  held.  Happily  for  me,  I  had  never  at  any  time  lost
sight  of  this  total  change  in  my  position  ;  and,  to  tell  the
truth,  the  loss  of  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  and  all  that  I
had  hoped  for  in  his  government,  had  blunted  my  feelings
to  any  other  loss  of  the  same  nature.  I  had  seen  that  dear
prince  taken  from  me  at  the  same  age  my  father  was  when
he  lost  Louis  XIII.  ;  that  is,  my  father  was  thirty-six  and
the  king  forty-one  ;  I  was  thirty -seven  when  the  prince,  not
quite  thirty  and  about  to  ascend  the  throne  and  bring  back
justice,  order,  and  truth  into  the  world,  was  taken  from  me  ;
and  now,  after  him,  I  had  lost  a  master  of  the  kingdom,
framed  to  live  a  century,  who  was  six  months  older  than  I,
and  such  as  I  have  shown  we  had  always  been,  he  and  I,  to
one  another.  All  these  things  had  prepared  me  to  survive
myself,  and  I  had  tried  to  profit  by  the  teaching.

The  death  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  made  much  noise  both
within  and  without  the  kingdom,  but  foreign  countries  did

him  incomparably  more  justice  and  regretted
The  effect  °fthe  far  more  than  Frenchmen.  Though  for-

death  of  the  Due  °

d’Orléans  on  eigners  knew  his  weakness,  of  which  England

foreign  countries.  ,  .  ,  ,

had  taken  singular  advantage,  they  were  none
the  less  convinced,  by  their  own  experience,  of  the  breadth
and  accuracy  of  his  mind,  the  grandeur  of  his  genius  and  his
ideas,  the  singular  penetration,  wisdom,  and  shrewdness  of
his  policy,  the  fertility  of  his  expedients  and  of  his  resources,
the  dexterity  of  his  conduct  under  changes  of  events  and
circumstances,  his  clearness  in  perceiving  aims  and  combin¬
ing  means,  his  superiority  over  his  ministers  and  those  whom
other  powers  sent  to  him,  his  exquisite  discernment  in  un¬
ravelling  and  interpreting  affairs,  his  easy  knowledge  of  how

382  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xil

to  answer  instantly  on  all  things,  when  he  chose.  Such
grand,  such  rare  gifts  for  governing  made  them  fear  him  and
treat  him  prudently  ;  but  the  gracious  manner  he  gave  to
all  things,  which  charmed  in  the  midst  of  opposition,  made
him  seem  to  them  always  amiable.  They  respected,  more¬
over,  his  grand  and  naïve  valour.  The  short  period  of  the
spell  by  which  that  wretched  Dubois  had,  as  it  were,  ex¬
tinguished  this  prince,  had  only  served  to  raise  him  in  their
eyes  by  comparison  of  his  conduct  when  it  was  truly  his
own,  with  his  apparent  conduct,  which  only  bore  his  name
and  was  really  that  of  his  minister.  They  saw  that  minister
die  and  the  prince  take  hack  the  helm  with  the  same  talents
they  had  formerly  admired  ;  moreover,  his  weakness,  which
was  indeed  his  great  defect,  was  felt  much  less  outside  the
kingdom  than  within  it.

The  king,  touched  by  his  unalterable  respect,  his  attention
to  please  him,  his  manner  of  speaking  to  him,  his  way  of
working  with  him,  mourned  him,  and  was
truly  grieved  at  his  loss;  so  much  so  that  he
never  spoke  of  him  afterwards,  and  he  did  so  often,  without
affection,  esteem,  and  regret  ;  so  surely  does  truth  make  itself
known,  in  spite  of  craft,  and  all  the  industry  of  lies  and
wicked  calumny,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  show  in  the
additions  that  I  propose  to  make  to  these  Memoirs,  should
God  give  me  time  to  do  so.

M.  le  Duc,  who  mounted  so  high  on  this  death,  showed
an  honourable  and  a  becoming  countenance  about  it.  Mme.
la  Duchesse  restrained  herself  very  properly.  The  bas¬
tards,  who  gained  nothing  by  the  change,  could  scarcely
rejoice.  Fréjus  kept  on  all  fours  ;  one  could  see  him  sweat¬
ing  under  the  constraint,  but  his  mute  hopes  escaped  at
every  moment,  —  his  whole  countenance  sparkled  in  spite
of  himself.

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

383

The  Court  was  little  divided,  because  the  sense  of  Courts  is
corrupted  by  passions.  There  were  some  men  with  sound
eyes  who  saw  him  as  foreigners  did  ;  and  they.

On  the  Court.  /  .  &  5  J

being  also  continual  witnesses  of  the  charm  of
his  mind,  the  facility  of  their  access  to  him,  his  patience,  his
gentleness  in  listening,  which  never  varied,  his  kindness,
which  came  to  him  so  naturally  (though  sometimes  it  might
be  only  a  mask),  the  pleasant  wit  with  which  he  could
evade  or  reject  without  ever  wounding,  —  these  men  felt  the
whole  weight  of  his  loss.  Others,  in  greater  number,  felt
sorry  also,  but  less  in  regret  for  him  than  from  knowledge  of
the  character  of  his  successor  and  of  those  who  surrounded
him.  But  the  bulk  of  the  Court  regretted  him  not  at  all  ;
some  because  they  belonged  to  opposing  cabals,  others  from
indignation  at  the  indecency  of  his  life,  or  at  the  game  he
had  played  of  promising  and  not  performing  ;  others,  again,
who  were  pure  malcontents,  with  little  ground  to  he  so,  a
crowd  of  ungrateful  beings,  of  whom  the  world  is  full  and
who  in  Courts  make  up  the  greater  number,  with  those  who
fancy  they  have  more  to  hope  from  a  successor,  and,  lastly,
the  mass  of  idlers,  stupidly  eager  after  novelty.

In  the  Church  the  saints  and  the  pious  people  rejoiced  at
their  deliverance  from  the  scandal  of  his  life  and  the  force  of
his  example  to  libertines  ;  while  the  J ansenists

On  the  Church,  x

Paris,  and  the  and  the  bullists,  either  from  ambition  or  fool¬
ishness,  agreed  for  once  in  being  all  consoled.
Paris  and  the  provinces,  that  is,  the  body  of  the  people,  des¬
perate  at  the  cruel  operation  of  the  finances  and  the  per¬
petual  juggling  to  draw  money  out  of  them,  which  made  all
fortunes  uncertain  and  ruined  families,  —  incensed,  moreover,
by  the  monstrous  dearness  of  everything,  whether  luxuries
or  the  commonest  necessaries,  produced  by  these  very  opera¬
tions, —  had  long  groaned  heavily  for  relief  and  deliverance.

384  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

Who  is  there  that  does  not  desire  to  count  on  something
certain  ?  Who  does  not  dread  the  schemes  of  financial
legerdemain  lest  he  fall,  in  spite  of  all  precautions,  a  prey  to
unavoidable  snares,  until  his  patrimony  or  his  fortune  slips
through  his  fingers,  and  he  finds  himself  without  protection
in  his  rights  or  in  the  laws,  not  knowing  how  to  live  and
maintain  his  family  ?

A  situation  so  harsh  and  so  general,  emanating  necessarily
from  so  many  contradictory  phases  given  successively  to  the
finances  under  the  false  idea  of  repairing  the
On  the  people.  cpaos  anq  ruin  which  they  were  found  on

the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  did  not  allow  the  public  to  regret
the  man  whom  it  considered  to  be  its  author.  This  was  just
what  I  foresaw  would  happen  in  the  arrangement  or  rather
the  derangement  of  the  finances,  the  onus  of  which  I
earnestly  desired  to  take  from  the  Duc  d’Orléans  by  the
assembling  of  the  States-general  which  I  proposed  to  him,
and  to  which  he  agreed  until  the  Duc  de  N oailles,  for  his
own  selfish  interests,  prevented  it,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,
on  the  death  of  the  king.  Little  by  little  as  the  years  have
rolled  on,  the  scales  have  fallen  from  many  eyes,  the  Due
d’Orléans  is  regretted  with  keen  regret,  and  that  justice  is
now  rendered  to  him  which  was  always  his  due.

The  day  after  the  death  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans  the  Comte
de  Toulouse  declared  his  marriage  with  the  sister  of  the
Duc  de  Xoailles,  widow  of  the  Marquis  de  Gondrin,  eldest
son  of  the  Due  d’Antin.  She  was  formerly  lady  of  the
palace  to  the  late  dauphine.  Society,  which  abounds  in
fools  and  jealous  souls,  did  not  see  her  assume  the  rank  of
her  new  position  without  some  envious  mutterings.  I  had
no  reason,  as  I  have  shown  elsewhere,  to  like  the  Duc  de
Xoailles,  and  I  had  never  restrained  myself  towards  him,
but  truth  compels  me  to  say  that  the  birth  of  a  Xoailles

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

385

is  such  that  there  could  have  been  no  cause  for  gainsaying
if  one  of  them  had  wedded  a  prince  of  the  blood.

I  have  now  reached  the  period  at  which  I  have  all  along

There  can  he  no  good

intended  to  close  these  Memoirs.1
conclusion  :  memoirs  unless  they  are  perfectly  true,  and

truth,  self-
restraint,  im¬
partiality.

no  true  ones  unless  written  by  one  who  has
either  seen  and  managed  himself  the  things

of  which  he  writes,  or  who  gathers  them  from  persons
worthy  of  the  utmost  confidence  who  have  themselves  seen
and  managed  them  ;  moreover,  he  who  writes  must  love
the  truth  to  the  point  of  sacrificing  all  things  to  it.  On  this
last  point  I  shall  venture  to  give  testimony  to  myself,  con¬
vinced  that  none  of  all  those  who  have  known  me  will  deny
it.  This  love  of  the  truth  has  even  been  an  injury  to  my
career.  I  have  often  felt  this,  but  I  have  preferred  truth
to  all  things  else,  and  I  have  never  bent  myself  to  any
concealment  ;  I  can  honestly  say  that  I  have  cherished
truth  against  my  own  interests.  Any  one  can  easily  see
the  traps  and  deceptions,  sometimes  very  coarse  ones,  into
which  I  fell,  seduced  by  friendship  or  by  love  of  the  State,
which  I  have  never  ceased  to  prefer  to  all  other  considera¬
tions  without  reserve,  and  always  to  any  personal  interest  ;
in  fact,  I  have  refrained  from  writing  of  many  occasions
because  they  concerned  myself  chiefly  and  were  without
enlightenment  or  interest  as  to  public  affairs,  or  the  course
of  events.  It  has  been  seen  that  I  persevered  in  obtaining
the  finances  for  the  Duc  de  Noailles  because  I  believed  him,

1  Saint-Simon  alludes  in  several  places  to  a  continuation  of  his
Memoirs.  Can  it  be  that  he  really  wrote  their  sequel  down  to  the  year
1743,  the  period  of  Fleury’s  death  1  The  doubt  can  only  be  cleared  up
by  obtaining  permission  to  study  the  papers  of  the  duke  which  are  pre¬
served  at  the  ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs.  We  have  tried  in  vain  to  do
this,  and  can  only  recommend  the  search  to  others  who  may  be  more
fortunate  than  ourselves.  (Note  by  the  French  editor.)
vol.  iv.  —  25

386  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

very  improperly,  the  most  capable,  richest,  and  best-provided
seigneur  among  all  those  from  whom  we  had  to  choose,  and
this  at  the  very  time  when  his  great  rascality  to  me  first
came  to  my  knowledge.  Also  the  Memoirs  show  all  that
I  did  to  save  the  Duc  du  Maine  against  my  dearest  and
most  vital  interests,  because  I  thought  it  dangerous  to  at¬
tack  both  him  and  the  parliament  at  the  same  time,  when
the  parliament  affair  was  the  most  pressing  and  could  not
be  deferred.  I  content  myself  with  those  two  facts,  without
dwelling  on  many  others  which  are  scattered  along  these
Memoirs  as  they  happened  in  the  course  of  events,  or  were
connected  with  the  affairs  of  the  Court  and  society.

It  remains  to  say  something  on  the  matter  of  impartiality;
that  inherent  point,  held  to  be  so  difficult,  I  do  not  fear  to
say  so  impossible  to  him  who  writes  and  who  has  seen  and
handled  that  of  which  he  writes  ;  for  such  a  man  is  charmed
with  those  who  are  true  and  upright  ;  he  is  irritated  against
the  scoundrels  who  swarm  in  Courts.  The  stoic  is  a  noble,
grand  chimera.  I  do  not,  therefore,  pique  myself  on  my
impartiality  ;  I  should  do  so  vainly  ;  it  will  too  plainly  be
seen  in  these  Memoirs  that  praise  and  blame  flow  out
spontaneously  as  I  myself  am  affected  towards  others  ;  that
both  are  lukewarm  about  persons  who  are  indifferent  to
me,  but  always  warm  for  virtue  and  against  dishonourable
persons  according  to  their  degree  of  vice  or  virtue.  Never¬
theless,  I  may  give  myself  this  further  testimony  —  and  I
flatter  myself  that  the  tissue  of  these  Memoirs  will  not
disprove  it:  I  have  been  infinitely  on  my  guard  against
my  affections  and  my  aversions,  especially  against  the
latter,  endeavouring  not  to  speak  of  either  without  scales
in  hand,  not  merely  that  I  might  not  exaggerate  but  even
overestimate  anything;  I  have  tried  to  forget  myself,  to
beware  of  myself  as  of  an  enemy;  to  do  exact  justice,  and

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  387

to  make  pure  truth  stand  high  over  all.  It  is  in  this  man¬
ner  that  I  claim  to  have  been  entirely  impartial,  and  I
believe  that  there  is  no  other  way  of  being  so.

As  for  the  truth  and  accuracy  of  what  I  have  related,  it
will  be  seen  by  the  Memoirs  themselves  that  nearly  all  is
drawn  from  what  has  passed  through  my  own  hands,  and  the
rest  from  what  I  knew  from  others  who  had  acted  in  the
matters  I  relate.  I  name  those  persons,  and  their  names,  as
well  as  my  intimate  relations  with  them,  are  beyond  sus¬
picion.  What  I  have  learned  from  less  sure  sources  I
point  out  ;  where  I  was  ignorant  I  have  not  been  ashamed
to  avow  it.  In  this  way,  these  Memoirs  are  from  the  foun¬
tain-head  and  at  first  hand.  Their  truth,  their  authenticity
cannot  be  called  in  question  ;  and  I  believe  I  may  say  that
until  now  there  have  been  no  others  which  have  comprised
more  varied,  more  discriminated,  and  more  detailed  topics,
nor  any  that  form  a  more  instructive  and  curious  group.

As  I  shall  know  nothing  of  it,  little  will  it  matter  to  me,
but  if  these  Memoirs  ever  see  the  light  I  do  not  doubt
they  will  excite  a  prodigious  rebellion.  Every  one  is  attached
to  his  own,  to  his  family,  his  interests,  his  pretensions,  his
chimeras,  not  one  of  which  will  submit  to  the  slightest
contradiction.  People  are  friends  of  Truth  only  so  far  as  she
favours  them,  and  she  is  apt  not  to  favour  them  in  all
things.  Those  of  whom  we  say  good  are  not  obliged  to  us,
because  truth  required  it.  Those,  and  they  are  far  the  greater
number,  of  whom  we  say  the  reverse,  are  furious  because
this  harm  is  proved  by  facts  ;  and  as  in  the  period  of  which
I  have  written,  especially  towards  its  close,  all  things
tended  to  decadence,  confusion,  chaos  (which  has  since
grown  worse),  and  these  Memoirs  stand  for  order,  law,  truth,
fixed  principles,  and  strive  to  show  plainly  what  was  contrary
to  them,  the  convulsion  against  this  mirror  of  truth  will  be

388  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

general.  But  they  are  not  written  for  those  banes  of  the
State  who  poison  it,  who  are  bringing  it  to  perdition  by  their
madness,  their  selfishness  ;  they  are  written  for  those  who
wish  to  be  enlightened  in  order  to  prevent  that  perdition,
but  who,  unfortunately,  are  carefully  set  aside  by  men  in
power  and  influence,  who  fear  nothing  so  much  as  the  light  ;
they  are  written  for  men  who  are  not  susceptible  of  any
interests  but  those  of  justice,  truth,  reason,  law,  and  sound
policy,  aiming  solely  for  the  public  good.

I  have  an  observation  to  make  on  the  conversations  I  have
had  with  many  persons,  especially  with  the  Duc  de  Bour¬
gogne,  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  the  ministers,
the  Duc  du  Maine  once,  three  or  four  times  with  the  late
king,  and  finally  with  M.  le  Duc  and  other  considerable
persons,  and  the  opinions  I  have  formed,  given,  and  argued.
They  are  such,  and  in  such  number,  that  I  can  well  believe
that  a  reader  who  has  never  known  me  will  be  tempted  to
class  them  with  those  fictitious  speeches  which  historians
often  put  into  the  mouths  of  generals,  ambassadors,  senators,
or  conspirators,  to  adorn  their  pages.  But  I  can  protest,  with
the  same  truth  that  has  so  far  led  my  pen,  that  there  is  not
a  single  conversation  or  discourse  of  all  those  that  I  have
held  and  reported  which  is  not  related  in  these  Memoir's
with  the  most  scrupulous  fidelity  to  truth.  If  there  he
anything  in  this  respect  with  which  I  can  reproach  myself,
it  is  that  I  have  weakened  rather  than  strengthened  my
own  remarks;  for  memory  sometimes  drops  the  point,  and
we  speak  more  vividly  and  with  greater  force  when  animated
by  scenes  and  persons  than  we  can  render  in  a  report.  I
will  add,  with  the  same  confidence  I  have  shown  above,  that
no  one  of  all  those  who  have  known  me  and  lived  with  me,
would  conceive  the  least  suspicion  as  to  the  fidelity  of  the
recital  I  give  of  those  conversations,  vehement  as  they  may

1723]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  389

seem  ;  there  is  not  a  person  among  them  all  who  would  not
recognize  me  word  by  word.

One  defect,  among  others,  has  always  displeased  me  in
memoirs  ;  and  that  is  that  when  the  reader  has  finished  them
he  loses  sight  of  the  principal  personages  and  the  interest  he
feels  in  the  rest  of  their  lives  remains  unsatisfied.  He  wants
to  know  immediately  what  became  of  them,  without  seeking
elsewhere  for  knowledge  which  his  laziness  will  not  take  the
trouble  to  get.  This  is  something  that  I  would  like  to
prevent  if  God  will  give  me  time;  though  I  cannot  do  it
with  the  same  accuracy  as  when  I  was  a  part  of  everything.
In  later  years,  it  is  true,  Cardinal  Fleury  never  hid  from  me
anything  that  I  wished  to  know  about  foreign  affairs  (being
himself  almost  always  the  first  to  speak  of  them),  or  about
certain  affairs  of  the  Court  ;  still,  all  this  was  so  little  fol¬
lowed  up  on  my  part  and  even  then  with  such  great  indiffer¬
ence,  and  with  great  gaps  occurring  in  my  knowledge,  that
I  have  every  reason  to  fear  this  supplement,  or  sequel  to  my
Memoirs  may  be  very  languid,  badly  elucidated,  and  wholly
different  from  all  that  I  have  hitherto  written.  But  at  any
rate,  the  reader  will  see  what  becomes  of  the  personages
who  have  appeared  in  these  Memoirs  down  to  the  death
of  Cardinal  Fleury,  which  is  all  that  I  propose  to  myself
to  do.

Shall  I  say  a  word  about  my  style,  its  negligence,  the
repetition  of  the  same  words  close  together,  the  synonyms
often  too  profuse,  above  all  the  obscurity  arising  from  the
length  of  sentences  and  perhaps  their  repetition?  I  have
felt  these  defects  ;  I  could  not  avoid  them,  carried  away  as  I
was  by  the  subject  and  little  attentive  to  the  manner  of
conveying  it,  except  that  I  might  make  it  understood.  I
was  never  academical;  I  never  could  prevent  myself  from
writing  rapidly.  To  make  my  style  more  correct  and  more

390

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xii.

agreeable  by  correcting  it  would  have  been  to  recast  the
whole  work,  and  toil  like  that  was  beyond  my  strength  and  ran
the  risk  of  failure.  To  properly  correct  what  one  has  written
requires  the  knowledge  of  how  to  write  ;  it  will  readily  be
seen  here  that  I  have  nothing  to  boast  of  in  that  respect.  I
have  thought  only  of  truth  and  accuracy.  I  dare  to  say  that
both  will  be  found  in  my  Memoirs  ;  that  they  are,  in  fact,  the
soul  and  the  law  of  them  ;  and  that  for  their  sake  the  style
deserves  a  benevolent  indulgence.  It  has  all  the  more  need
of  it  as  I  cannot  promise  to  do  better  in  the  sequel  I  propose
to  write.

INDEX  TO  VOL.  IV.

Aguesseau  (Henri-François  d’),  made
chancellor  of  France,  87  ;  his  charac¬
ter,  its  virtues  and  defects,  88-93  ;
reads  to  Saint-Simon  a  memorial
against  the  bull  Unigenitus,  98,  99  ;
becomes  the  victim  of  his  obedience
to  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  142.

Alba  (Duchesse  d’),  marries  the  Abbé
de  Castiglione,  84.

Alberoni  (Giulio,  Cardinal),  his  power
in  Spain,  how  he  defeated  George  the
First’s  proposal  to  return  Gibraltar  to
Spain,  79-83.

Argenson  (Marc-René  Voyer,  Mar¬
quis  d’),  appointed  head  of  finances
and  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  141.

Arouet  (François-Marie),  son  of  Saint-
Simon’s  notary,  takes  the  name  of
Voltaire,  his  early  career,  73.

Bentivoglio  (Guido,  Cardinal),  papal
nuncio,  his  infamous  character,  61,
62  ;  his  intrigues  with  the  Earl  of
Stair,  61-63.

Berry  (Duchesse  de),  takes  possession
of  the  Palace  of  the  Luxembourg,  30-
33  ;  attempts  to  usurp  the  honours  of
a  queen,  48  ;  infatuated  with  Rion,
her  slavery  to  him,  48-50  ;  retreat  at
the  Carmelites,  51  ;  closes  gardens  of
the  Luxembourg,  63,  64;  the  inde¬
cency  of  her  life,  249-253  ;  wishes  to
declare  her  marriage  to  Rion,  267  ;
her  portrait  and  character,  267-269  ;
her  last  illness  and  death,  270.

Besons  (Maréchal  de),  appointed  to
Council  of  Regency,  his  character,
24.

Borgia  (Cardinal),  his  comical  be¬
havior  at  the  marriage  of  the  Prince
of  the  Asturias,  326,  327.

Bourbon-Condé  (Duc  de),  called  M.  le
Duc,  appointed  by  regent  chief  of  the
Council  of  Regency,  9  ;  enormous
profits  obtained  by  him,  and  other
princes  of  the  blood,  from  “  The  Mis¬
sissippi,”  133  ;  insists  on  the  over¬
throw  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  156-175;
his  appearance  and  conduct  at  the
Council  of  Regency,  182-201  ;  made
superintendent  of  the  king’s  educa¬
tion,  204-207,  222,  223,  233  ;  made
prime  minister  by  Fleury  on  death  of
Duc  d’Orléans,  375,  376;  interview
with  Saint-Simon,  379,380.

Cellamare  (Prince),  Spanish  ambassar
dor  in  Paris,  his  conspiracy,  236-241.

Chartres  (Philippe,  Duc  de),  a  clumsy
rake,  his  behaviour  on  the  death  of
his  father,  the  regent,  376,  378,  379.

Court  (The),  novelties  introduced  at
beginning  of  regency,  32,  33  ;  the
Opera  masked-ball  first  established,
40,  41.

Dacier  (André),  translator  of  Homer,
his  death,  his  wife,  350.

D ange au  (Philippe  de  Courcillon,  Mar¬
quis  de),  death,  character,  family,  for¬
tune,  and  Memoirs,  294-297.

Dubois  (Guillaume,  Abbé,  then  Cardi¬
nal),  Madame  exacts  a  promise  from
the  regent  about  him,  15  ;  made  coun¬
sellor  of  State  for  the  Church,  47, 48  ;
intimacy  with  Law,  enormous  gains

392

INDEX.

from  him,  132;  works  for  the  over¬
throw  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  152;
forces  the  regent  to  make  him  arch¬
bishop  of  Cambrai,  281-283  ;  his  conse¬
cration,  284  ;  made  cardinal,  300, 301  ;
in  complete  possession  of  regent,  337  ;
forces  him  to  make  him  prime  minis¬
ter,  345-349  ;  his  illness,  death,  wealth,
character,  private  history,  and  fatal
power  over  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  357-
365.

England  (Mary  of  Modena,  Queen  of),
conduct  and  death,  148.

Fagon  (physician),  his  life,  after  death
of  Louis  XIV.,  and  death,  145,  146.

Finances  (The),  condition  in  which
they  were  found  at  beginning  of  re¬
gency,  31, 32  ;  public  disorders  result¬
ing,  the  taille-tax,  134  ;  Saint-Simon’s
proposal  about  the  gabelle,  134.

Fleury  (Bishop  of  Fréjus,  afterwards
Cardinal),  seeks  an  intimacy  with
Saint-Simon,  233-236  ;  anecdote  of,
301  ;  his  general  conduct,  302-304  ;
his  odd  disappearance  on  the  arrest
of  Villeroy,  despair  of  the  king,  342-
345  ;  his  reasons  for  not  wishing  to
be  prime  minister,  371,  372;  makes
the  king  appoint  M.  le  Duc  to  that
office,  375,  376  ;  gives  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon  a  hint  that  her  husband  is  not
desired  at  Versailles,  380.

Force  (Duc  de  La),  conversation  with,
and  shameful  proposal  to  Saint-
Simon,  62,  63.

George  I.  (King  of  England),  pro¬
poses  to  regent  to  return  Gibraltar  to
Spain,  how  the  negotiation  failed,
78-83.

Guyon  (Jeanne-Marie  Bouvier  de  la
Mothe,  Mme.),  her  death,  73,  74.

Huguenots  (The),  their  conduct  after
the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  75  ;  regent
inclined  to  recall  them  to  France,  75,
76  ;  Saint-Simon  dissuades  him,  why,
77,  78.

Jesuits  (The),  their  ingratitude  and
cruelty  to  each  other,  247,  248.

Lauzun  (Duc  de),  his  death,  372.

Law  (John),  who  he  was,  and  what  his
bank  and  theories  were,  68,  69;  de¬
sires  to  be  in  constant  communication
with  Saint-Simon,  71  ;  his  motives  for
this,  72,  73  ;  opposition  from  the  Due
de  Noailles,  130,  131  ;  seeks  intimacy
with  Dubois  to  counteract  it,  132  ;
edict  published  in  favour  of  Company
of  the  West,  132;  thwarted  in  his
scheme,  133,  134  ;  works  for  the  over¬
throw  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  152;
“  The  Mississippi,”  259  ;  his  scheme  to
check  parliament,  262-265  ;  his  con¬
version  and  converters,  266,  267  ;
made  controller  of  finances,  274  ;  dan¬
gers  thicken,  276-280,  284;  made  a
scapegoat,  286  ;  leaves  France  se¬
cretly,  288  ;  his  end,  family,  and
character,  289,  290.

Lent,  its  observance  and  discomforts  in
Spain,  333.

Lit  de  Justice  (The),  public  talk  of
it,  151  ;  proposed  by  Saint-Simon,  154,
155  ;  the  lit  de  justice  at  the  Tuileries,
177  ;  Saint-Simon’s  description  of  it
and  of  the  preceding  Council  of  Re¬
gency,  182-225-

Lospital  (Mme.),  how  she  saved  the
Pretender,  37-40.

Louis  XIV.,  quick  ingratitude  shown
to  his  memory,  15;  his  obsequies
almost  unattended,  17,  18.

Louis  XV.,  removed  to  Vincennes,  17  ;
his  reception  of  the  czar,  Peter  the
Great,  116;  unworthy  teaching  of
Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  123, 124  ;  quar¬
rel  over  his  medals,  125;  his  be¬
haviour  at  the  lit  de  justice,  223,  224  ;
his  alarm  at  the  removal  of  Villeroy
and  the  disappearance  of  Fleury,  341-
345  ;  attains  his  majority,  his  portrait
by  Rigaud,  356.

Louville  (Marquis  de),  how  his  mis¬
sion  to  return  Gibraltar  to  Spain
failed,  79-83.

INDEX.

393

“Madame”  (Élisabeth-Charlotte,  Du¬
chesse  d’Orléans,  wife  of  “  Monsieur  ”),
the  promise  she  exacts  from  her  son,
the  regent,  about  the  Abbé  Dubois,
15  ;  her  health  fails,  350;  the  science
of  little  dots,  351  ;  her  death,  351  ;
portrait  and  character,  352,  353  ;  her
letters,  353.

Maine  (Duc  du),  triumphant  arrival  in
parliament  for  reception  of  king’s
will,  2  ;  endeavours  to  uphold  the
codicil,  5  ;  his  speech,  6  ;  his  con¬
temptible  appearance  after  abroga¬
tion  of  will  and  codicil,  12;  declares
he  cannot  be  responsible  for  king’s
person,  is  taken  at  his  word,  13  ;  Du¬
bois,  Law,  and  d’Argenson  work  for
his  overthrow,  152,  160-171  ;  his  con¬
duct  and  appearance  at  Council  of
Regency  preceding  lit  de  justice,  182-
189  ;  his  overthrow,  203-224;  he  and
his  wife  concerned  in  the  conspiracy
of  Cellamare,  241  ;  his  arrest  and
that  of  his  wife,  242-244.

Maintenon  (Mme.  de),  illness  of,  96;
her  death,  253  ;  her  life  at  Saint-Cyr,
254-256.

Marlborough  (Duke  of),  his  death,
and  slight  sketch  of  him,  337.

Mesmes  (Président  de),  his  death,
365  ;  his  daughters  apply  to  Saint-
Simon  to  obtain  a  pension  for  them,
366.

“Mississippi,  The,”  its  capital  fixed
and  name  changed,  133  ;  at  the
height  of  its  mania,  265  ;  disasters
threaten,  its  amazing  history,  275-
281  ;  edict  respecting  its  shares  which
reveals  the  state  of  the  finances,
284-286  ;  is  made  into  a  commercial
company,  286;  general  ruin,  287-
291.

Monsieur  le  Duc.  See  Bourbon-
Condé.

Montfensier  (Louise-Élisabeth,  Mlle,
de)  arrives  in  Spain  for  her  marriage
to  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  323-327  ;
her  wilful  behaviour,  328-331  ;  her
future,  332  ;  droll  scene  at  her  fare¬
well  audience  to  Saint-Simon,  334.

Noailles  (Cardinal  de),  appointed  head
of  council  of  conscience,  20,  21  ;  ab¬
ject  truckling  of  his  opponents,  21-
23  ;  misses  a  great  opportunity,  101  ;
refuses  the  last  sacraments  to  the
Duchesse  de  Berry  unless  Rion  is
dismissed,  250-253.

Noailles  (Duc  de),  his  opposition  to
John  Law,  130,  132,  136,  138;  is  re¬
moved  from  the  council  of  finance
and  enters  the  Council  of  Regency,
142.

Orléans  (Duc  d’).  See  Regent.

Orléans  (Duchesse  d’),  her  dignified
reception  of  the  news  of  her  brother’s
overthrow,  228-231  ;  turns  against
Saint-Simon,  232.

Paris,  the  sink  of  all  Europe,  85,  86.

Parliament  (The),  opposes  regent  for
opposition’s  sake,  65,  66  ;  determined
to  oppose  regent,  130;  decrees  its
right  to  control  the  finances  and
openly  threatens  Law,  149,  150;  ag¬
gressive  action  towards  regent,  151;
continued  opposition  to  regent,  261,
264,  292.

Peregrine  (The),  a  famous  pearl,  de¬
scription  of,  332.

Peter  the  Great  (Czar  of  Russia),  ar¬
rival  in  France  ;  journal  and  inci¬
dents  of  his  stay  there,  109-123.

Pontchartrain  (the  late  chancellor),
Maréchal  de  Villeroy  takes  the  young
king  to  see  him,  74,  75.

Portsmouth  (Duchess  of),  her  pension
increased  by  regent,  149.

Pretender  (Tbe),  his  adventure  in
crossing  France  to  embark  for  Scot¬
land,  37-40.

Princes  of  the  blood  (The),  their
struggle  against  the  bastards,  84,
85.

Regency  (Council  of),  names  of  its
members,  27  ;  names  of  heads  of  other
councils  reporting  to  it,  27  ;  days
of  meeting,  31  ;  scene  of  Council  of
Regency  preceding  lit  de  justice  of

394

INDEX.

the  Tuileries,  182-209  ;  gives  place
to  Council  of  State,  356.

Regent  (Philippe  d'Orléans,  The),  un¬
prepared  for  king’s  death,  1  ;  presides
at  session  of  parliament  for  reading
king’s  will  and  codicil,  2,  3;  his
speech  on  the  will,  4-6;  unbecom¬
ing  dispute  with  Duc  du  Maine,  7-9  ;
his  speech  on  codicil,  11,  12;  parlia¬
ment  sustains  his  authority  as  regent,
12;  announces  the  establishment  of
councils,  14;  makes  an  unwise  visit
to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  16;  opens
prisons  to  all  but  criminals,  horrors
discovered,  18,  19;  his  fatal  pliancy,
23,  24  ;  selections  for  councils,  21-28  ;
action  in  the  matter  of  the  Pretender,
35-40  ;  resolved  to  keep  the  Court  in
Paris,  41,  42;  prevents  Saint-Simon
from  leaving  him,  42  ;  parliament
shows  him  its  teeth,  43  ;  his  policy
divide  et  régna,  44  ;  miserable  at  the
scandal  of  his  daughter’s  life,  51  ;  his
daily  life  and  personal  conduct,  51-
55  ;  is  committed  by  a  cabal  to  Eng¬
land,  55-61  ;  becomes  interested  in
John  Law  and  his  financial  projects,
67-73  ;  proposes  to  Saint-Simon  to
recall  the  Huguenots,  75-78;  his
supineness  in  not  supporting  the
princes  of  the  blood  against  the  bas¬
tards,  85  ;  his  weakness  in  the  matter
of  the  bull  Unigenitus,  99  ;  singular
discussion  with  Saint-Simon  in  his
opera-box,  102-105;  determined  to
uphold  Law,  133;  anxiety  about
finances,  134  ;  always  turns  to  Saint-
Simon  in  difficulties,  137  ;  dismisses
d’Aguesseau,  and  gives  the  Seals  to
d’Argenson,  141  ;  hoax  played  by  him
on  Saint-Simon,  142-144;  his  real
opinion  of  the  latter,  145;  aggressive
action  of  parliament,  is  roused  to  a
sense  of  his  danger,  151  ;  conversa¬
tion  with  Saint-Simon,  152;  accepts
proposal  of  a  lit  de  justice,  156;  dis¬
cussions  with  Saint-Simon  and  M.  le
Duc  as  to  overthrow  of  the  Duc  du
Maiue,  160-175  ;  his  dignified  appear¬
ance  and  action  at  Council  of  Re¬

gency  preceding  lit  de  justice,  182-
209,  and  also  at  the  lit  de  justice,
210-225;  his  distress  at  the  Philip-
piques,  245-246;  his  monstrous  ex¬
travagance  with  paper-money,  264,
265,  276,  290,  291  ;  grief  at  death  of
Duchesse  de  Berry,  269,  270  ;  power
of  the  Abbé  Dubois  over  him,  272,
280-283  ;  is  forced  by  him  to  receive
the  bull  Unigenitus,  292-294  ;  tells
Saint-Simon  of  the  Spanish  mar¬
riages,  and  appoints  him  ambassa¬
dor  to  Spain,  298-300  ;  Maréchal  de
Villeroy  refuses  to  obey  him,  result,
338-341  ;  difficulty  in  soothing  the
king,  341-345  ;  is  forced  by  Dubois
to  make  him  prime  minister,  scenes
with  Saint-Simon  on  that  subject,
345-349  ;  fatal  power  of  Dubois  over
him,  362-364;  his  relief  at  Dubois’
death,  365  ;  welcomes  Saint-Simon
back  to  him,  366  ;  alarming  condi¬
tion  of  his  health,  367,  368  ;  dread  of
a  slow  death,  373  ;  seized  with  apo¬
plexy  and  dies,  374,  375  ;  effect  of
his  death  on  France,  foreign  coun¬
tries,  and  persons,  381-384.

Rion  (lieutenant  of  the  guard),  48-
50.

Rcffec  (Marquis  de),  Saint-Simon’s
second  son,  made  grandee  of  Spain,
327.

Saint-Pierre  (Abbé  de),  his  book,
146  ;  offence  given  to  the  old  Court,
regent  requires  his  dismissal  from
the  Academy,  147.

Saint-Simon  (Duc  de),  discusses  with
regent  composition  of  councils,  1 9  ;
again  desires  to  retire  from  Court,
42;  receives  a  visit  from  Duc  du
Maine  and  returns  it,  44-46  ;  his  rela¬
tions  with  Comte  de  Toulouse,  46, 47  ;
asserts  that  the  regent  never  thought
or  desired  to  reign,  57  ;  argues  with
him  against  too  close  an  alliance  with
England,  58-61  ;  conversation  with
the  Duc  de  La  Force,  62,  63  ;  warns  re¬
gent  to  be  firm  with  parliament,  66  ;
at  regent’s  request  receives  John  Law

INDEX.

395

once  a  week,  71-73  ;  dissuades  regent
from  recalling  Huguenots,  why,  77,
78;  his  prediction  to  Council  of  Re¬
gency  about  bull  Unigenitus,  98,  99  ;
discussion  with  regent  thereon,  102-
105;  appointed  against  his  will  on
committee  of  finance,  105-107;  per¬
suades  regent  to  buy  the  “  Regent
diamond,”  107-109;  goes  incognito
to  see  the  czar,  120,  121;  proceedings
of  finance  committee,  127-130;  his
proposal  about  the  salt-tax,  135  ;  a
melancholy  truth,  136  ;  regent  turns
to  him  for  help,  137,  138  ;  so  does
Law,  139  ;  informs  d’Argenson  that
he  is  chancellor  and  Keeper  of  the
Seals,  why,  140,  141  ;  hoax  played
on  him  by  regent,  142-144;  regent’s
real  feeling  to  him,  145  ;  conversation
with  regent  as  to  parliament,  152,
1 53  ;  consultation  and  steps  taken
to  save  Law,  154  ;  proposes  lit  de  jus¬
tice,  154,  155;  resists  proposal  to
overthrow  the  Duc  du  Maine,  why,
156-158,  160-175;  undertakes  ar¬
rangements  for  lit  de  justice  at  the
Tuileries,  158;  yields,  against  his
judgment,  to  overthrow  of  the  Due
du  Maine,  173  ;  obliges  M.  le  Duc  to
consent  to  reduction  of  the  bastards
to  their  proper  rank  in  the  peerage,
174,  175;  stipulates  for  reinstatement
of  Comte  de  Toulouse,  178;  his  de¬
scription  of  Council  of  Regency  and
of  his  own  conduct  there,  179-208;
his  description  of  the  lit  de  justice
and  his  conduct  there,  210-225;  the
regent  forces  him  to  tell  the  Du¬
chesse  d’Orleans  of  her  brother’s
overthrow,  result,  226-232  ;  Fleury
seeks  an  intimacy  with  him,  233-236  ;
urged  in  vain  by  regent  and  Law
to  accept  shares  in  “  The  Mississippi,”
259  ;  receives  payment  of  king’s  debt
to  his  father  in  that  way,  260,  261  ;
frustrates  Law’s  scheme  against
parliament,  263,  264  ;  comforts  re¬
gent  for  death  of  Duchesse  de  Berry,
269,  270  ;  distress  at  his  wife’s  ill¬
ness,  goes  to  live  at  Meudon,  271  ;

refuses  to  be  made  governor  of  the
king,  why,  273,  274  ;  appointed  am¬
bassador  to  Spain,  299  ;  starts  on  his
embassy,  306  ;  visits  Loyola,  306,
307  ;  arrives  in  Madrid,  308  ;  his
account  of  his  mission  and  residence
in  Spain,  309-335  ;  is  made  a  grandee
of  Spain,  327,  328  ;  marriage  of  his
daughter  to  the  Prince  de  Chimay,
336;  scenes  with  regent  relating  to
Dubois,  345-349  ;  alienation  from  the
regent,  effect  on  Memoirs,  354,  355  ;
after  Dubois’  death  returns  to  his
old  relations  with  the  Due  d’Orle'ans,
366,  367  ;  warns  Fleury  of  the  latter’s
failing  health,  369  ;  urges  him  to
become  prime  minister,  370-372  ;  re¬
ceives  news  of  illness  and  death  of
the  Due  d’Orle'ans,  373,  374;  his
feelings  and  conduct,  377-379  ;  in¬
terview  with  M.  le  Duc,  379,  380  ;  on
a  hint  that  he  is  not  desired  at
Versailles  retires  to  Paris  according
to  a  previous  resolution,  380,  381  ;
conclusion  of  his  Memoirs,  their
truth  and  impartiality,  385-388  ;  al¬
ludes  to  a  continuation  of  them,
385,  389  ;  his  style  in  writing,  389  ;
end,  390.

Saint-Simon  (Duchesse  de),  refuses
to  live  with  Duchesse  de  Berry  in
the  Luxembourg,  30  ;  relief  in  being
released  by  the  death  of  the  duchess,
270;  her  dangerous  illness,  271  ;  re¬
ceives  a  hint  from  Fleury  and  La
Vrillière  that  her  husband  is  not
desired  at  Versailles,  380.

Scottish  Project  (The),  34-40.

Spain  (Philippe  V.,  King  of),  Saint-
Simon’s  description  of  him  in  Madrid,
310-312  ;  his  method  of  hunting,  315-
318;  and  of  travelling,  320.

Spain  (Elizabeth  Farnese,  Queen  of),
Saint-Simon’s  description  of  her  in
Madrid,  312-315.

Stair  (Earl  of),  emissary  at  the  Court
of  France,  35,  36  ;  his  efforts  to
destroy  the  Pretender,  36-40  ;  an  un¬
mitigated  rascal,  his  known  charac¬
ter,  61.

396

INDEX.

Tellier  (Père),  his  last  years  and  his
end,  246-249.

Torcy  (J.  B.  Colbert,  Marquis  de),  ap¬
pointed  to  Council  of  Kegency,  Saint-
Simon  happily  mistaken  about  him,
24,  25.

Toulouse  (Comte  de),  his  excellence,
46  ;  terms  on  which  he  was  with
Saint-Simon,  47  ;  Saint-Simon  urges
his  reinstatement  in  his  rank,  175,
176, 178;  his  action  at  the  Council  of
Regency  preceding  lit  de  justice,  185-
189;  is  reinstated  in  his  rank,  203,
205,  214,  219,  220;  his  conduct  on
the  arrest  of  the  Duc  du  Maine,  231,
232  ;  his  marriage  to  a  Noailles,  356,
357  ;  declares  his  marriage,  384.

Troyes  (Bishop  of),  appointed  to
Council  of  Regency,  Saint-Simon
fatally  mistaken  about  him,  26,  27  ;
scene  with  Saint-Simon  in  Council  of
Regency  respecting  bull  Unigenitus,
98,  99.

Unigenitus  (bull),  brought  up  before
the  Council  of  Regency,  97  ;  Saint-

Simon’s  prediction  about  it,  98  ;  re¬
monstrance  of  the  Sorbonne  and  four
bishops  against  it,  100,  101.

Ursins  (Princesse  des),  death  and  last
years  of,  349,  350.

Villars  (Claude-Louis- Hector,  Due
and  Maréchal  de),  appointed  head  of
council  of  war,  27  ;  his  mother’s
opinion  of  him,  amusing  incompe¬
tency  at  Council  of  Regency,  28,  29  ;
brings  up  cannon  to  stop  a  fire,  148.  ,

Villeroy  (François  de  Neufville,  Duc
and  Maréchal  de),  choice  lesson  given
by  him  to  the  king,  123  ;  refuses  to
obey  regent,  is  arrested  and  exiled
to  Lyon,  338-341  ;  his  fury,  343  ;
his  end,  344,  345.

Vittement  (Abbé  de),  refuses  a  bene¬
fice,  256  ;  his  remarkable  statement
and  prophecy  about  Fleury  and  Louis
XV.,  257,  258.

Voltaire.  See  Arouet.

Wales  (Prince  of),  quarrels  with  his
father  George  L,  125, 126.

Date  Due

CAT.  NO.  23  233  PRINTED  IN  U.S.A.

|

DC  130  .S2  A4  1909  &&

Saint  Simon  Louis  de  Rou  010101  uuu

Memoirs  of  the  Duc  de  Samt-oi

0

63  0201

118  8

TRENT  UNIVERSITY

DC130  . S2AU  1909  v.  U

Saint  Si.cn

Memoirs  of  the  uuc

S imon <  « •

date

—

ISSUE

446267

146267
