Memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon, Vol. 1 (Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon (Katharine Prescott Wormeley, trans.), 1829)
==========================================================
Saint-Simon's Mémoires (written 1691-1723, first published 1829) - the court of Louis XIV from the inside; the greatest memoirist of the age. Wormeley's English translation (1899-1901; 1909 printing), 4 vols. Vol. 1 of 4.

THE  DUC  de  SAINT-SIMON

Volume  One

MARIE  ANTOINETTE  EDITION

Limited  to  Six  Hundred  Numbered

and  Registered  Copies,  of  which  this  is

Number.

...JLxJLo...

ROMANCES  OF  ROYALTY

MEMOIRS

OF  THE

DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON

ON  THE  TIMES  OF

LOUIS  XIV  AND  THE  REGENCY

TRANSLATED  AND  ABRIDGED
BY

KATHARINE  PRESCOTT  WORMELEY

FROM  THE  EDITION  COLLATED  WITH  THE  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT
BY  M.  CHÉRUEL

Editor-in-chief

G.  K.  FORTESCUE,  LL.D.

Keeper  of  Printed  Books  at  the  British  Museum

IN  FOUR  VOLUMES

VOL.  I.

BOSTON

J.  B.  MILLET  COMPANY

1909

Copyright,  1899,

By  Hardy,  Pratt  &  Company.
All  rights  reserved.

SSntbrrsttjj  -press:

John  Wilson  and  Son,  Cambridge,  U.  S.A.

CONTENTS.

Page

Introduction,  bt  C.-A.  Sainte-Beuve .  1

Letter  from  the  Duc  de  Saint-Simon  to  M.  de  Rancé,  Abbé

de  la  Trappe . 32

Translator’s  Note . 35

CHAPTER  I.

Why  and  how  these  Memoirs  began.  —  My  first  intimacy  with  the  Due
de  Chartres.  —  Maupertuis,  captain  of  the  Gray  Mousquetaires.  —
Marriage  of  the  Duc  de  Chartres.  —  Cause  of  the  precedence  of
the  Lorrain  princes  over  the  dukes.  —  First  beginnings  of  the  Abbe
Dubois,  afterwards  cardinal  and  prime-minister.  —  Appartement. —

I  leave  the  Mousquetaires  for  the  Royal  Roussillon.  —  Promotion  of
the  seven  marshals  of  France.  —  Montai.  —  Death  of  Mademoiselle;
her  donations,  free  and  forced.  —  Death  of  my  father . 41

CHAPTER  H.

Origin  of  my  intimate  friendship  with  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  until  his
death.  —  Louville.  —  La  Trappe  and  its  reformer.  —  My  intimate
relations  with  him.  —  The  House  of  Luxembourg  established  in
France.  —  M.  de  Luxembourg;  his  branch,  and  his  fortune. —
Harlay.  —  The  opponents  of  M.  de  Luxembourg.  —  Iniquitous  con¬
duct  in  favour  of  M.  de  Luxembourg.  —  My  Letters  of  State.  —
Death  of  M.  de  Luxembourg.  —  Quarrels  of  Monsieur  and  the
princesses.  —  M.  de  Noyon  strangely  ridiculed  at  the  French  Acad¬
emy.  —  Deaths  of  La  Fontaine  and  Mignard . G2

VI

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  III.

Page

Origin  of  my  friendship  with  the  Duchesse  de  Bracciano,  afterwards
called  Princesse  des  Ursins.  —  The  Maréchal  de  Lorges.  —  My
marriage.  —  Marriage  of  my  sister-in-law  with  the  Duc  de  Lauzun.

—  The  Duc  de  Lauzun;  his  character,  etc .  94.

CHAPTER  IV.

The  Abbé  de  Fénelon.  —  Mme.  Guyon.  —  Secret  struggle  between  the
Archbishop  of  Cambrai  and  the  Bishop  of  Chartres.  —  Mme.
Guyon  dismissed  from  Saint-Cyr,  and  soon  after  sent  to  the  Bastille.

—  Death  of  Mme.  de  Sévigné.  —  Her  daughter,  Mme.  de  Grignan.  —
Death  of  La  Bruyère.  — Death  of  the  Marquis  de  Chandenier;  his
misfortunes.  —  Cavoye  and  his  luck.  —  Mme.  de  Castries.  —  Contin¬
uation  of  the  affair  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai.  —  He  resolves
to  carry  his  affair  to  Rome  ;  curt  answer  of  the  pope.  —  Is  exiled
by  the  king  to  his  diocese.  —  Italian  comedians  banished.  —  The
Peace  of  Ryswick.  —  Personal  hatred  of  the  king  to  the  Prince
of  Orange;  its  cause.  —  Preparations  for  the  marriage  of  the  Due
de  Bourgogne  ;  arrival  of  the  Princesse  de  Savoie.  —  Marriage
of  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne.  —  The  Moorish  nun  at  Moret  ;  very
enigmatical . 121

CHAPTER  V.

The  Czar  (Peter  the  Great)  and  his  travels.  —  The  camp  at  Compïègne
determined  and  announced.  —  Camp  at  Compïègne  superb.  —  Uu-
heard-of  magnificence  of  the  Maréchal  de  Boufïlers.  —  Ambassadors
insisting  on  the  “  for.”  —  Malicious  joke  of  M.  de  Lauzun.  —  Singu¬
lar  spectacle.  —  Return  from  Compiègne.  —  Condemnation  at  Rome
of  the  book  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai.  —  Death  of  Racine. —

Two  very  strange  robberies  from  the  king.  —  Brief  disgrace  of  the
Comtesse  de  Grammont.  —  Pontchartrain  made  chancellor;  himself
and  his  wife.  —  Death  of  Sir  William  Temple . 155

CHAPTER  VI.

Delfini,  nuncio  and  cardinal,  goes  home  without  his  presents.  —  Many
balls  at  Court.  —  The  king  pays  the  debts  of  Mme.  la  Duchesse.

—  The  Partition  Treaty  of  the  monarchy  of  Spain.  —  Death  of
Le  Nôtre;  be  created  the  gardens  of  Versailles,  Trianon,  and

CONTENTS.

Vil

Pag»

Tuileries. — Death  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  —  Le  Vassor. —
Death  of  M.  de  la  Trappe.  —  Truth  of  the  story  of  Mme.  de  Mont-
bazon  aud  M.  de  Ranee.  —  M.  de  la  Trappe,  painted  from  memory.

—  The  Spanish  Succession.  —  The  Council  of  Spain.  —  Celebrated
opinion  on  the  renunciations  of  Queen  Maria  Theresa.  —  Will  of
King  of  Spain  in  favour  of  the  Duc  d’Anjou.  — The  two  councils
in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartment.  —  Surprise  of  the  king  and  his
ministers.  —  Proclamation  of  the  King  of  Spain . 184

CHAPTER  VII.

Death  of  Bontems.  —  Mile.  Rose;  extraordinary  devotee.  —  Great  aug¬
mentation  of  troops;  taxation.  —  Quarrel  between  Monsieur  and
the  king. — Troubles  of  Monsieur.  —  Death  of  Monsieur.  —  Amaz¬
ing  treatment  of  Duc  de  Chartres,  now  named  Duc  d’Orléans.  —
Marriage  announced  of  Philippe  V.  —  The  Princesse  des  Ursins;
lier  character.  —  The  Queen  of  Spain  ;  a  vexatious  scene.  —  Death
of  James  II.,  King  of  England.  —  The  king  recognizes  the  Prince
of  Wales  as  King  of  England . 216

CHAPTER  VIII.

Balls  and  comedies  at  Versailles.  —  Death  and  adventures  of  the  Abbe
de  Vatteville.  —  Fagon,  the  king’s  physician.  —  Renewal  of  my
intimate  relations  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans.  —  Battle  of  Friedlingen.

—  Character  of  Villars.  —  Death  of  the  Duchesse  de  Gesvres.  —

Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  enters  the  councils.  —  Vauban. —
Vauban’s  book  on  the  royal  tithe.  —  Maréchal,  the  king’s  surgeon  ;
curious  fact  about  Port  Royal . 241

CHAPTER  IX.

Princesse  des  Ursins  takes  possession  of  Queen  of  Spain.  —  Character  of
Philippe  V.  —  The  affair  of  the  quête.  —  I  am  operated  upon  for  a
bleeding.  —  Death  of  the  celebrated  Bossuet. — Troisvilles  elected
and  refused  by  the  king  for  the  Academy.  —  Death  of  the  Abbesse  de
Fontevrault  ;  her  character.  —  Birth  of  the  first  Duc  de  Bretagne.

—  Brilliant  position  of  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  ;  Nangis.  —
Maulevrier . 273

vin

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  X.

Page

Death  of  the  Maréchal  de  Duras  ;  his  character.  —  Dazzling  triumph  of
the  Princesse  des  Ursins.  —  Death  and  singularities  of  Ninon,  called
Mlle,  de  l’Enclos.  —  Courtenvaux  cruelly  reprimanded  by  the  king.

—  Death  of  the  two  sons  of  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers.  —  Anecdotes
of  the  Abbé,  afterwards  Cardinal,  de  Polignac.  —  Many  fêtes  at
Marly  and  at  Versailles.  —  I  am  chosen,  without  expecting  it,  for
the  embassy  to  Rome.  —  My  situation  at  Court  after  this  choice  for
Rome.  —  Death  of  the  Comtesse  de  La  Marck.  —  Death  of  the  Comte
deGrammont;  his  character. — The  Comtesse  de  Grammont;  her
character.  — -  The  medals  of  the  king.  —  Vast  projects  for  the
campaigns;  reflections . 299

APPENDIX . 333

INDEX . 339

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page

Saint-Simon,  Louis  db  Rouvroy,  Dug  de  Frontispiece

By  Rigaud  y  Kos  (Hyacinthe-François);  in  possession  of  the
family.

Chapter

I.  Château  de  Versailles . 41

Painted  in  1722  by  Martin  (Pierre-Denis),  painter  to  the
king;  engraved  by  J.  Huguenet  in  “Galéries  Historiques  de
Versailles.”

II.  Anne-Marie-Louise  d’Orléans,  Duchesse  de  Montponsier,

called  La  Grande  Mademoiselle . 58

Painter  unknown;  of  the  seventeenth  century;  in  possession
of  Prince  Étienne  Galitzin,  Paris.

III.  The  Bastille . 104

From  an  old  engraving.

V.  Louis  XIV.  in  the  Costume  of  the  Cent-Suisses  ....  168

Painter  unknown;  of  the  seventeenth  century;  original  in  the
Louvre.

VIII.  Fagon,  Physician  to  Louis  XIV . 248

By  Jouvenet  (Jean)  ;  original  in  the  Louvre.

X.  Bedroom  of  Anne  of  Austria  at  Fontainebleau  .  .  .  306

INTRODUCTION.

By  C.-A.  SAINTE-BEUVE.

We  are  late  in  speaking  of  Saint-Simon  and  his  Memoirs  ;
it  seems  as  though  all  were  said,  and  well  said,  on  this  sub¬
ject.  In  fact,  it  would  be  impossible  that  for  more  than
twenty-five  years  a  sort  of  competition  had  been  open  for  the
appreciation  of  these  admirable  pictures  of  history  and  their
author  without  having  produced  all  the  right  ideas,  all  the
deserved  praises,  and  all  the  necessary  reservations  they  de¬
mand.  Therefore  it  can  only  be  question  here  of  recalling
and  fixing  with  precision  certain  of  the  principal  points  here¬
tofore  acquired  and  incontestable.

Saint-Simon  is  the  greatest  painter  of  his  times,  those  times
of  Louis  XI Y.,  in  their  fullest  development.  Until  his  work
appeared  no  one  suspected  the  interest,  the  life,  the  moving
and  ever-varying  drama  afforded  by  the  scenes  and  events  of
the  Court,  the  marriages,  the  deaths,  the  sudden  changes  ;
the  habitual  daily  living,  the  hopes,  the  disappointments
reflected  on  innumerable  countenances,  not  one  of  which
resembled  another  ;  the  flux  and  reflux  of  contending  ambi¬
tions  animating  more  or  less  visibly  all  those  personages,
and  the  groups  or  knots  formed  among  them  in  that
vast  gallery  of  Versailles,  pell-mell  apparently,  but  which,
thanks  to  him,  are  no  longer  confused,  yielding  henceforth
to  our  eyes  their  combinations  and  their  contrasts.  Until
Saint-Simon,  men  had  but  glimpses  and  slight  sketches  of
all  that  ;  he  was  the  first  to  give,  with  infinite  detail,  one

VOL.  I.  —  1

2

INTRODUCTION.

vast  impression  of  the  whole.  If  any  one  has  made  it  possi¬
ble  to  repopulate  in  thought  Versailles,  and  to  do  so  without
mental  weariness,  it  is  he.  To  him  must  be  applied  what
Buffon  said  of  the  earth  in  the  spring-time  :  his  memoirs
“  swarm  with  life.”  At  the  same  time  he  produces  a  singular
effect  in  relation  to  the  times  and  reigns  which  he  does  not
include  ;  if,  rising  from  his  pages,  we  open  a  volume  of  his¬
tory,  or  even  of  memoirs,  we  find  the  record  thin  and  pale
and  poor  ;  every  epoch  which  has  not  its  Saint-Simon  seems
deserted,  mute,  uncoloured  ;  there  is  something,  I  know  not
what,  uninhabited  about  them  ;  we  feel  and  we  regret  that
which  is  lacking,  that  which  is  not  transmitted  in  them.
Very  few  parts  of  our  history,  if  put  to  this  test,  will  bear
it  ;  they  cannot  stand  this  comparison,  for  painters  of  this
kind  are  rare  ;  in  fact,  up  to  the  present  time,  in  his  degree
of  vigour  and  amplitude,  there  is  but  one  Saint-Simon.

This  is  not  saying  that,  before  him,  we  have  not  had  fine
and  very  varied  forms  of  memoirs  ;  he  would  be  the  first  to
protest  against  an  injustice  which  would  disparage  his  pre¬
decessors  ;  he,  who  inspired  himself  by  their  example,  so
he  states,  to  gather  the  taste  of  history  —  animated,  living
history.  They  were  painters  also  in  their  narrations,  —  a
little  stilted,  but  always  with  a  charming  and  naïve  awk¬
wardness, —  these  Joinvilles  and  Villehardouins.  As  for  the
Froissarts  and  Commines,  they  attained  to  knowledge  and
art  with  graces  ever  simple.  What  a  generation  of  writers,
of  pen  and  sword,  was  produced  by  the  wars  of  the  six¬
teenth  century  :  Montluc,  Tavannes,  D’Aubigné,  Brantôme  !
What  speeches,  original  and  from  the  fountain-head  !  and
what  diversity  of  human  accents  in  the  record  !  Sully,  in
the  midst  of  his  dulness,  has  parts  that  are  really  fine,
cf  attractive  solidity  and  brightened  by  the  smile  of
Henri  IV.  And  the  Fronde  —  what  a  harvest  of  tales  of

INTRODUCTION.

3

all  kinds,  what  coveys  of  unexpected  historians  did  it  not
rouse  among  its  own  actors,  at  the  head  of  whom  Eetz
stands  out,  and  shines  among  them  all  as  the  greatest
painter  before  Saint-Simon  !

But  this  generation  of  authors  of  memoirs  issuing  from
the  Fronde  stops  short  almost  precisely  on  the  threshold
of  the  real  reign  of  Louis  XI Y.  From  that  time  on,  we
have  nothing  but  rapid,  unfinished  sketches,  drawn  by
elegant  and  clever  but  lazy  pens,  —  Choisy,  Mme.  de  La
Fayette,  La  Fare,  Mme.  de  Caylus.  They  give  a  taste,
but  do  not  satisfy  it;  they  begin,  but  they  leave  us  half
way.  Flow  there  is  no  one  who  fails  us  less  and  leaves
us  less  in  the  lurch  than  Saint-Simon  ;  none  so  little
lazy,  so  slow  to  be  discouraged.  He  gives  himself  to  his¬
tory  on  leaving  childhood  as  to  a  work,  a  mission.  He
is  not,  with  ready  pen,  amusing  himself  with  recollections
from  afar  as  he  grows  old,  like  Retz;  a  method  always
hazardous,  and  an  inevitable  source  of  mistakes  and  con¬
fusion.  No,  he  amasses  day  by  day;  he  writes  each  night;
he  begins  in  his  tent  when  nineteen  years  of  age,  and  he
continues  without  intermission  at  Versailles  and  wherever
else  he  may  be.  He  informs  himself  on  all  things  cease¬
lessly,  like  an  Herodotus.  On  the  topic  of  genealogies  he
can  teach  Père  Anselme  ;  he  reasons  on  the  past  like  a
Boulainvilliers.  In  the  present,  he  keeps  himself  abreast  of
all  ;  he  has  the  wind  of  every  trail,  and  he  records  it  im¬
mediately.  Every  hour  that  he  can  steal,  he  employs  in  this
way  ;  and  then  when  he  grows  old  and  retires  to  his  country-
seat,  he  classifies  this  mass  of  material,  and  puts  it  into  the
shape  of  a  narrative,  a  single  and  continuous  narration  ;
merely  dividing  it  into  paragraphs,  with  title  of  subjects  on
the  margin.  And  this  long,  vast  text  he  recopied,  wholly  in
his  own  handwriting,  with  a  clearness,  a  minute  exactness  —

4

INTRODUCTION.

genuine  characteristics  never  as  yet  sufficiently  remarked  —
without  which  more  religious  respect  might  have  been
paid  to  his  order  and  method  of  procedure,  his  style  and
his  phrasing,  which  are  indeed  negligent  and  redundant,  hut
hi  which  nothing  (I  speak  of  the  Memoirs,  and  not  of  the
notes)  is  placed  hap-liazard.

How  was  it  that  so  marked  an  historical  vocation  should
have  formed  itself  at  so  early  an  age  and  been  found  as
it  were  full-grown  in  the  bosom  of  the  Court?  Whence
came  this  mousquetaire  of  nineteen,  so  firmly  resolved  at
that  time  of  life  to  transmit  the  things  of  his  period  with
all  their  complications  and  their  circumstances  ?

His  father,  without  such  a  son,  would  have  remained  one
of  those  well  rewarded  but  obscure  favourites  whom  history
merely  mentions  in  passing.  As  a  young  page  he  had
pleased  Louis  XIII.  by  a  few  attentions  while  hunting  ;  pre¬
senting  opportunely  his  own  led  horse,  and  returning  the
horn  after  suitably  using  it.  No  doubt  he  had  a  fine  appear¬
ance  ;  he  was  certainly  a  man  of  discretion  and  honour.  By
the  way  Saint-Simon  speaks  of  his  father,  even  if  we  subtract
something  from  it,  we  see  him  to  have  been  a  man  of  capa¬
city,  faithful,  sufficiently  disinterested,  grateful,  and,  in  short,
of  a  moral  texture  little  common  at  Court.  His  attitude
towards  Richelieu  is  dignified  and  at  the  same  time  sensible  ;
he  is  neither  hostile  nor  servile.  We  can  even  perceive  in
the  father  of  Saint-Simon  a  quality  in  which  his  son  was  not
deficient,  —  a  sort  of  humour  which,  on  occasion,  could  be
biting.  It  was  for  giving  way  to  an  impulse  of  this  sort  that
the  father  fell  into  a  semi-disgrace  when  he  was  thirty-one
years  old,  and  left  the  Court  to  retire  to  his  governorship  of
Blaye,  where  he  remained  until  the  death  of  the  Cardinal.
If  I  had  to  define  in  two  words  the  father  of  Saint-Simon  I
should  say  that  he  was  a  favourite,  but  never  a  courtier  ;  for
he  had  both  honour  and  humour.

INTRODUCTION.

5

It  was  of  this  father,  already  old  and  married  a  second  time,
to  a  young  woman  not  in  her  first  youth,  that  Saint-Simon
was  born  in  January,  1665.  It  was  cited  in  a  book  printed
during  the  father’s  lifetime,  as  a  singularity  and  a  prodigy
that  he  had  this  child  when  seventy-two  years  old  ;  he  was,
in  fact,  hut  sixty-eight.  He  transmitted  to  him  his  own
marked  qualities,  which  had  something  fixed  and  obstinate
about  them,  namely  :  rectitude,  pride,  loftiness  of  heart,  and
racial  instincts  that  were  powerfully  strong  under  a  short
stature.  The  young  Saint-Simon  was  therefore  brought  up
beside  a  mother  who  was  a  woman  of  great  merit,  and  a
father  who  loved  to  recall  the  past  and  relate  a  thousand
anecdotes  of  the  old  Court.  Very  early  in  life  it  must  have
seemed  to  him  that  there  was  nothing  finer  than  to  remember.
His  vocation  for  history  was  marked  from  childhood  ;  at  the
same  time  he  was  and  continued  to  be  cold  and  indifferent  to
belles-lettres,  properly  so-called.  He  read,  doubtless,  with
the  idea  of  imitating  the  great  examples  he  saw  recorded,  and
of  making  himself  something  ;  but  in  the  depths  of  his  being
his  dearest  wish  and  ambition  was  to  be  that  something  for
the  purpose  of  knowing  the  most  he  could  of  the  affairs  of  his
period  and  of  writing  them  down.  This  vocation  of  writer,
which  stands  out  and  presents  itself  so  manifestly  to-day,  was
from  the  first  kept  secret  and  as  if  masked  and  muffled  up  by
the  assumptions  of  a  Court  personage,  a  great  seigneur,  duke,
and  peer,  and  all  the  other  accessory  ambitions  becoming  in
those  days  to  a  man  of  his  rank.

Saint-Simon,  on  entering  the  world  at  the  age  of  nineteen,
denotes  clearly  both  his  instincts  and  his  tastes.  From  the
morrow  of  the  battle  of  Neerwinden  (July,  1693)  in  which
he  takes  part  as  captain  in  the  Royal-Roussillon,  he  writes  a
detailed  bulletin  for  his  mother  and  certain  friends.  The
narrative  has  precision  and  firmness  ;  its  character  is  simple  ;

6

INTRODUCTION.

we  feel  within  it  the  love  of  the  True.  The  style  has  noth¬
ing  of  the  impetuous  spirit  and  the  irregularities  which  we
afterwards  find  at  times,  but  not  always  or  necessarily,  in
Saint-Simon.  In  striving  to  define  that  style  in  all  its  diver¬
sities  and  exuberances,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  think  it  a
distortion.  Very  often  it  is  only  the  most  direct  and  vivid
expression  of  his  thought,  escaping  from  a  mind  full  of  its
object.

The  following  year  (1694)  during  the  leisure  of  his  camp
life  in  Germany,  he  deliberately  begins  his  Memoirs,  giving,
from  that  day  forth,  sixty  entire  years  to  the  prosecution  and
achievement  of  them.  He  was  excited  to  do  this,  he  says,
“  by  the  pleasure  he  took  in  reading  those  of  the  Maréchal  de
Bassompierre.”  Bassompierre  had,  nevertheless,  said  a  most
insulting  thing  of  Saint-Simon’s  father  ;  but  that  did  not
prevent  the  son  from  thinking  the  Memoirs  remarkable,
though  “  disgusting  in  their  vanity.”

This  young  Saint-Simon  is  virtuous  ;  he  has  sound  morals
and  religion  ;  above  all,  he  has  by  instinct  a  liking  for  honest
men.  This  taste  declares  itself  early  in  the  singular  and
almost  whimsical  rush  of  feeling  which  carries  him  straight
to  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers,  the  most  honest  man  at  Court,  to
ask  for  the  hand  of  a  daughter  in  marriage,  the  eldest  or  the
youngest,  —  he  has  seen  neither,  and  he  does  not  care  which  ;
neither  does  he  care  about  the  dot  ;  what  he  wants  to  marry
is  the  family,  the  Due  and  Duchesse  de  Beauvilliers,  with
whom  he  has  fallen  in  love.  This  pursuit  of  a  marriage,
which  he  exhibits  with  so  candid  a  vivacity,  results,  although
it  fails,  in  binding  him  closely  to  the  Dnc  de  Beauvilliers
and,  through  him,  with  the  serious  and  upright  portion  of  the
Court.  It  is  in  that  way  that  he  soon  attached  himself
to  the  virtuous  hopes  given  to  honest  men  by  the  Duc  de
Bourgogne.

INTRODUCTION.

7

A  very  different  connection,  and  one  which  seems  diamet¬
rically  opposed  to  the  former,  although  it  dated  from  in¬
fancy,  is  the  friendship  and  familiarity  of  Saint-Simon  with
the  Duc  d’Orléans,  the  future  Begent.  But  there  again  the
mark  of  honesty  and  uprightness  is  visible.  It  is  by  the
good  side  of  the  prince,  by  his  praiseworthy  points,  sound,
yet  much  calumniated,  that  Saint-Simon  remained  inviolably
attached  to  him  ;  it  is  to  that  noble  half  of  his  nature  that  he
makes  energetic  appeal  in  the  critical  and  deplorable  situa¬
tions  into  which  he  sees  him  fall  ;  and  thus,  in  this  perpetual
contact  with  the  most  generous  and  wittiest  of  libertines,
Saint-Simon  nevertheless  preserves  himself  from  all  stain.

With  this  liking  for  honest  men,  he  has  also  an  antipathy
not  less  prompt  and  not  less  instinctive  against  rascals,
hypocrites,  base  and  mercenary  souls,  grovelling  and  self-
seeking  courtiers.  He  recognizes  them,  he  divines  them
from  afar,  he  denounces  them,  he  unmasks  them,  he  seems,
by  the  way  he  drags  to  the  light  and  bares  their  faces,  to  set
his  whole  heart  and  take  a  savage  pleasure  in  doing  so.  We
remember  among  the  first  pages  of  these  Memoirs,  that  almost
terrifying  portrait  of  the  pharisaical  magistrate,  the  false
Cato,  that  president  of  the  parliament  De  Harlay,  of  whom
under  such  austere  aspects  he  has  given  us  the  finished  type
of  a  consummate  hypocrite.

But  there  is  this  to  complain  of,  some  may  say  :  here,  as
in  other  cases  in  painting  men,  he  follows  the  prejudices  of
hatred  and  a  malicious  temper.  I  meet  the  objection  point-
blank.  After  a  study  of  Saint-Simon  made  and  remade  ten
times,  I  have  formed  to  myself  the  following  idea  of  him  :
He  is  endowed  by  nature  with  a  peculiar,  an  almost  exces¬
sive  sense  of  observation,  sagacity,  and  insight,  which  enters
and  fathoms  the  minds  of  men,  and  can  also  distinguish
their  interests  and  their  intentions  on  their  faces.  He  pre-

8

INTRODUCTION.

sents  in  himself  a  really  marvellous  and  phenomenal  in¬
stance  of  this  congenital  characteristic.  But  such  a  gift,
such  a  faculty  is  perilous  if  its  possessor  gives  way  to  it
wholly  ;  it  is  liable  to  injure  his  purpose  and  overshoot  his
aim.  Temptations  are  to  men  only  in  the  ratio  of  their
passions  ;  they  are  not  tempted  by  that  they  do  not  love.
From  the  start,  Saint-Simon,  son  of  an  elderly  father  and,
for  all  his  youthful  appearance,  rather  elderly  himself,  never
had  a  keen  taste  for  women,  or  cards,  or  wine  and  other
pleasures  ;  but  he  is  proud  and  self-sufficient  ;  he  clings  to
the  old  precepts  ;  he  makes  himself  an  ideal  of  patriotic
virtue,  which  he  combines  with  his  personal  pride  and  the
prejudices  of  his  rank.  Withal  he  is  an  artist,  and  doubly
an  artist  ;  he  has  a  glance  and  a  scent 1  which  in  the  gilded
and  apparently  tumultuous  crowd  at  Versailles  finds  amply
enough  to  satisfy  and  feast  him  ;  and  then  he,  the  secret  writer,
writing  with  delight  and  mystery  at  night,  behind  closed  and
bolted  doors,  flings  upon  his  paper  with  fire  and  flame  that
which  he  observed  in  open  day,  that  which  he  felt  about  the
men  he  saw  so  well,  saw  perhaps  too  well,  but  whom  he
seizes  at  a  point  which  has  touched  him  and  caught  his
interest.  There  are  chances  of  error  and  excess  even  in
truth.  It  is  perilous  for  even  an  honest  man,  if  he  is  also
an  ardent  one,  to  feel  that  he  writes  under  no  restraint,  that
he  paints  his  world  without  ever  being  confronted  by  it.  I
refer  at  this  moment  only  to  what  he  has  himself  observed
in  person  ;  as  for  what  he  knows  by  hearsay  and  gathers  in
conversation,  there  are  other  chances  for  error  to  slip  in.

Though  Saint-Simon  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  man
to  put  criticism  properly  so-called  into  the  practice  or  the

1  I  employ  this  word  because  he  himself  supplies  it.  He  says  some¬
where,  apropos  of  the  secret  joys  and  the  thousand  hopeful  ambitions  set
in  motion  by  the  death  of  a  prince  :  “  All  that,  and  all  at  the  same  moment,
was  smelt  by  the  nose.”

INTRODUCTION.

9

result  of  liis  researches,  and  though  he  seems  to  have  done
no  more  than  give  to  his  first  observation,  hot  and  vivid  as  it
came  to  him,  an  ardent  and  vivid  expression  (all  his  care  at
the  end  of  his  life  being  merely  to  classify  and  co-ordinate
the  whole),  he  was  not  without  serious  thoughts  as  to  this
temptation  to  which  he  was  exposed,  warned  of  its  danger
perhaps  by  the  singular  pleasure  he  found  in  yielding  to  it.
Eeligious  by  principle  and  sincerely  a  Christian,  he  had
scruples  of  conscience  ;  or  at  any  rate  he  endeavoured  to
prevent  their  birth,  by  securing  himself  against  the  remorse
and  weakness  which  might  some  day  assail  him  in  his  last
hours.  If  his  conscience  had  compelled  him  to  throw  these
Memoirs  into  the  fire  as  a  long  sin  committed  through  life,
what  a  pitiable  thing  it  would  be,  and  what  a  tearing  out  of
his  very  heart  !  He  thought,  therefore,  with  a  certain  art¬
lessness,  of  a  means  to  prevent  that  danger.  A  letter  writ¬
ten  by  him  to  the  Abbé  de  Eancé,  whom  he  consults,  almost
at  the  beginning  of  '  the  work,  as  to  the  limits  to  be  observed
in  preparing  his  Memoirs,  proves  plainly  this  foreseeing
thought  ;  he  seems  to  be  inducing  the  austere  abbé  to  give
him  once  for  all  a  plenary  indulgence.  Saint-Simon,  in  his
apology,  admits,  or  takes  for  granted  two  things  :  one,  that
he  tells  the  truth  and  the  truth  only  ;  the  other  that  he  is
not  impartial  and  does  not  pique  himself  on  being  so  ;  and
that  in  letting  praise  or  blame  well  from  their  fountain
sources  on  those  who  deserve  either,  he  obeys  his  inclina¬
tions  and  his  impetuous  manner  of  feeling,  while,  at  the  same
time,  he  flatters  himself  that  he  holds  the  scales  of  justice  in
his  hand.  In  the  narrative  of  the  first  trial  of  the  Duchy-
Peerage  against  M.  de  Luxembourg  there  comes  a  moment
when  the  latter’s  advocate  having  ventured  to  doubt  the
royalist  loyalty  of  the  opponents,  Saint-Simon,  who  was
present  at  the  session,  seated  in  a  box  or  tribune  between

10

INTRODUCTION.

the  Ducs  de  La  Rochefoucauld  and  d’Estrées,  sprang  up
crying  out  against  the  imputation  and  demanding  justice  on
the  rascal  who  made  it.  “  M.  de  La  Rochefoucauld  caught
me  round  the  body  and  made  me  hold  my  tongue,”  he  says,
«  and  I  felt  more  bitterly  against  him  than  against  the  man
himself.  My  movement  caused  an  excitement.”  Now,
when  a  man  is  subject  to  such  movements  or  impulses,  not
only  at  a  public  hearing  and  on  a  remarkable  occasion,  but
in  his  habit  of  life  and  even  in  writing,  there  is  a  chance,
not,  perhaps,  that  he  may  be  mistaken  as  to  the  ill  intentions
of  the  adversary,  but  that  he  may  be  carried  beyond  the
proper  tone  and  measure  of  his  own  conduct.  Such  a  man
has  moments  when  he  may  need  to  be  caught  around  the
waist.  I  indicate  the  precaution  as  one  that  might  be
taken  in  reading  Saint-Simon  ;  there  may  often  be  a  cer¬
tain  reduction  to  make  in  the  relief  and  the  colour  of  his
paintings.

Much  search  has  been  made  of  late  to  find  errors  of  fact
in  the  Memoirs  of  Saint-Simon,  and  little  difficulty  has
arisen  in  collecting  a  certain  number  ;  for  instance,  he  says
that  Eargues,  a  former  frondeur,  was  judged  and  condemned
by  Président  de  Lamoignon,  when  it  was  really  the  inten¬
dant  Machault  who  sentenced  him.  In  the  domain  of  lit¬
erature  I  myself  have  noted  one  incorrect  or  mistaken
statement.  Saint-Simon  imputes  to  Racine  the  awkward
absentmindedness  which  made  mention  of  Scarron  in  pres¬
ence  of  Louis  XIV.  and  Madame  de  Maintenon,  when  it
was,  on  the  contrary,  Boileau-Despréaux  who  committed  the
blunder,  while  Racine,  a  better  courtier,  made  signs  to  him
which  he  did  not  comprehend.  But  all  such  errors  may  be
dismissed.  The  question  of  the  truth  of  Saint-Simon’s  Me¬
moirs  cannot  be  narrowed  down  to  the  circle  of  such  petty
mistakes  as  these,  were  they  a  hundred-fold  more  numer-

INTRODUCTION.

11

ous  than  they  are.  Let  the  reader  consider  the  manner
in  which  memoirs  such  as  his  are  necessarily  composed.
Among  the  various  ways  of  writing  history  there  are  two
principal  divisions,  which  are  derived  from  the  nature  of
the  sources  whence  they  are  drawn.  One  species  of  his¬
tory  rests  on  documents,  State  records,  diplomatic  papers,
the  letters  of  ambassadors,  military  reports,  —  written  evi¬
dence  of  all  kinds.  We  have  a  recent  and  excellent  ex¬
ample  of  this  method  of  composition  in  the  work  of  M.
Thiers,  which  might  properly  be  entitled  :  “  History,  admin¬
istrative  and  military,  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire.”
Next,  comes  history  of  a  totally  different  character:  con¬
temporaneous,  moral  history  written  down  by  actors  and
witnesses.  A  man  lives  in  an  epoch,  —  at  the  Court,  if  it
be  a  Court  epoch  ;  he  spends  his  life  in  looking  and  listening,
and,  when  that  man  is  Saint-Simon,  in  looking,  gazing,  and
listening  with  a  curiosity,  an  avidity  unparalleled,  drink¬
ing  in  and  devouring  everything  with  eyes  and  ears.  He
devotes  himself  as  ably  as  he  can  to  learn  the  most  he
can  ;  if  he  desires  to  go  back  to  the  past  he  consults  old
men,  men  out  of  favour,  hermits  shelved,  subalterns  also,
and  former  valets  at  Court.  It  is  very  difficult,  in  whatever
a  man  does  not  see  with  his  own  eyes,  to  keep  himself  from
a  certain  amount  of  credulity  when  it  is  in  the  line  of  his
inclinations  and  also  of  his  talents  of  expression.  In  what
a  man  sees  for  himself  in  presence  of  men  with  whom  he
is  acting,  and  whom  he  judges,  ah  !  there  he  goes  more
surely.  If  he  has  the  gift  of  observation  and  the  faculty  of
which  I  spoke,  he  goes  far,  he  penetrates;  and  if  to  this
first  gift  of  observation  is  added  a  talent,  fully  its  equal,  of
expressing  and  painting,  that  man  makes  pictures,  living
and  consequently  true  pictures,  which  give  the  sensation,
the  optical  illusion  of  the  thing  itself,  which  replace  us  in

12

INTRODUCTION.

presence  of  a  human  nature  and  a  society  in  action,  a  society
that  had,  as  we  supposed,  disappeared.

Is  this  saying  that  another  observer  and  another  painter
placed  beside  the  first,  but  at  a  different  point  of  view,
could  not  present  another  picture,  with  other  colours,  and
perhaps,  also,  other  outlines,  other  forms  ?  No,  of  course
not  ;  so  many  painters,  so  many  pictures  ;  so  many  imagi¬
nations,  so  many  mirrors.  But  the  essential  thing  is  that
each  epoch  shall  have  one  at  least  of  these  great  painters,
one  of  these  immense  reflecting  mirrors  ;  for,  if  he  is  lack¬
ing,  there  will  be  no  pictures  at  all  ;  the  life  of  that  epoch,
the  sense  of  its  reality,  will  have  disappeared.  You  may
afterwards  make  and  compose  at  your  leisure  all  your  fine
narratives  out  of  your  evidence  called  positive,  and  even
your  documents  and  historical  pictures,  carefully  and  sym¬
metrically  arranged  and  painted  as  we  see  them  ;  but  these
narratives,  true  as  they  may  be  as  to  political  results,  are
artificial  ;  we  feel  they  are  ;  do  what  you  will,  you  cannot
make  us  live  in  the  time  you  are  recounting.

With  Saint-Simon  we  live  in  the  very  heart  of  the  times
of  Louis  XIV.;  there  lies  his  grandest  truth.  Do  we  not
know  those  times  through  him  ?  —  and  I  say  know,  as  if  we
had  actually  seen  them  ;  seen  the  very  features  of  the  coun¬
tenances  to  their  lightest  shades,  of  all  these  personages,
those  who  are  most  remarkable,  those  who  are  but  secon¬
dary,  and  even  those  who  merely  figure  for  a  moment  and
pass  on.  We  knew  their  names,  perhaps,  already,  —  names
which  had  but  a  vague  signification  to  our  minds  ;  to-day
those  personages  are  familiar  and  present  with  us.  I  take
at  random  a  few  instances:  Louville,  the  gentleman  at¬
tached  to  the  Duc  d’Anjou  (future  King  of  Spain)  who  is
soon  to  play  a  part  in  the  affairs  of  State  ;  Saint-Simon  uses
him,  at  first,  to  obtain  an  interview  with  M.  de  Beauvil-

INTRODUCTION.

13

liers  ;  lie  states  who  Louville  is,  and  adds,  as  it  were  by  the
way,  “  Louville  was  a  man  of  great  intelligence,  who,  with
an  imagination  which  made  him  always  fresh,  and  the
most  excellent  company,  had  ideas  and  perception  in  great
affairs,  and  could  give  the  most  solid  and  best  of  counsel.”
Louville  reappears  again  and  again  in  the  Memoirs  ;  he
has  left  memoirs  of  his  own  which  you  can  read  if  you
have  the  time  ;  but  meantime  we  are  told  as  to  the  man
and  his  distinctive  tone  and  freshness,  things  essential  and
acute,  such  as  no  other  person  could  have  told  us.  M.  de
Luxembourg  was  an  adversary  of  Saint-Simon  in  his  party
before  Parliament,  having  previously  been  his  general  in
the  army  ;  he  was  the  object  of  his  first  great  anger,  his
first  uplifting  of  the  lance  as  duke  and  peer.  But  will  any
one  say  that  Saint-Simon’s  portrait  is  the  less  true  with  a
truth  that  seizes  the  mind,  and  which,  moreover,  agrees
well  with  what  contemporaries  have  said,  except  that  it
follows  the  man  closer  than  they  could  have  done  ?  Do
you  believe  that  M.  de  Luxembourg,  thus  presented  in
all  his  brilliancy  as  a  hero  and  with  all  his  vices,  is
calumniated  ?

Less  known,  and  far  less  in  the  public  eye,  we  have  old
Montai,  “  that  grand  old  man  of  eighty,  who  had  lost  an  eye
in  the  war  and  was  covered  with  wounds,”  and  who  found
himself  unjustly  set  aside  in  a  numerous  promotion  of  mar¬
shals.  “  Every  one  cried  out  for  him  except  himself  ;  his
modesty  and  his  virtue  made  all  admire  him.”  This  Montai,
like  a  pure  and  innocent  Montluc,  rises  before  us,  at  his  full
height,  and  can  never  be  forgotten.  Saint-Simon  cannot
encounter  any  such  deserving  figure  without  seizing  it  and
making  it  live  again.  Even  to  those  who  would  seem  to
deserve  less,  or,  at  any  rate,  are  most  effaced  among  their
fellows,  he  restores  that  originality,  that  individual  imprint,

14

INTRODUCTION.

which  to  a  certain  degree  is  in  every  human  being.  By
merely  glancing  at  them  he  removes  their  insipidity  and
reveals  their  vital  spark.  To  attempt  to  count  the  num¬
ber  of  such  portraits  given  by  him  would  be  counting  the
sands  of  the  sea  —  with  this  difference,  that  Saint-Simon’s
grains  of  sand  do  not  resemble  one  another  ;  we  cannot  cast
our  eyes  on  a  page  of  these  Memoirs  without  a  coun¬
tenance  rising  out  of  it.  In  the  very  first  volume  we  have
(and  I  am  only  speaking  here  of  the  minor  ones),  Crécy,
Montgommery,  and  Cavoye,  and  Lassay,  and  Chandenier;
who  would  ever  have  known  what  those  men  were  without
him  ?  And  Dangeau,  so  comic  when  we  view  him  rightly  ;
who  recovers  our  respect  by  his  humble  services  of  gazetteer
for  posterity  ;  but  who,  nevertheless,  remains  forever  dec¬
orated  and  bedizened,  as  with  the  star  of  an  order,  by  the
complete  and  most  diverting  description  Saint-Simon  gives
of  him.  And  when  we  come  to  the  greater  figures,  his  pen¬
cil  rises  also,  and  takes  their  proportions.  Of  Fénelon,
whom  he  knew  by  sight  only,  but  whom  he  had  so  often
studied  through  the  Ducs  de  Beauvilliers  and  de  Chevreuse,
—  what  an  incomparable  portrait  he  makes  of  him  !  And
when  he  turns  to  painting  women,  he  has  all  those  airy
graces,  that  imagery,  that  suavity,  so  primitive,  almost  Ho¬
meric  (see  the  portrait  of  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne),  which
the  noted  painters  of  women,  the  malicious  and  lady-killing
Hamiltons,  could  never  equal.

But  with  Saint-Simon  it  is  impossible  to  cite  and  choose  ;
his  is  not  a  book,  but  a  world.  If  any  one  absolutely  wishes
it,  he  can  skip  or  repress  the  remembrance  of  a  few  portraits
which  may  be  open  to  suspicion  and  in  which  the  writer’s
hatred  is  visible;  that,  for  instance,  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.
But  in  general  Saint-Simon’s  talent  is  more  impartial  than
his  will  ;  if  there  is  any  great  quality  in  the  man  he  hates,  he

INTRODUCTION.

15

cannot  keep  himself  from  producing  it.  And  —  shall  I
venture  to  tell  my  whole  thought  and  conviction  ?  —  it  is
not  a  good  sign  to  my  eyes  when  a  man  is  greatly  mal¬
treated  and  held  up  to  scorn  by  Saint-Simon  ;  he  is  never  so
indignant  as  he  is  against  those  who  are  lacking  in  certain
fibres.  What  he  despises  above  all,  are  those  persons  “  in
whom  the  servile  comes  ever  to  the  surface  ”  or  those  to
whom  duplicity  is  a  familiar  instrument.  As  for  the  others,
he  may  be  severe  and  hard,  but  he  lets  us  see  there  are
compensations.

I  have  spoken  so  far  of  portraits  only,  but  there  is  many
another  thing  in  Saint-Simon  :  drama,  and  scenic  effect  ;
groups  and  interweavings  without  end  of  personages  ;  above
all,  there  is  action  ;  and  it  is  thus  that  he  comes  to  those
grand  historical  frescoes,  among  which  it  is  impossible  not
to  point  out  two  of  the  most  remarkable:  namely,  that  of
the  death  of  Monseigneur,  and  the  overthrow  of  hopes  and
interests  which  took  place  visibly  to  the  eye  on  that  night,
among  a  populace  of  princes  and  courtiers  ;  and  that  other
scene,  not  less  marvellous,  of  the  lit-de- justice  in  Parliament
under  the  Regency  for  the  degradation  of  the  bastards,  —  the
finest  day  of  Saint-Simon’s  life,  on  which  he  drank  with
ecstasy  long  draughts  of  vengeance.  But,  in  this  latter
instance,  the  painter,  too  much  interested  himself,  becomes
ferocious,  and  the  limits  of  art  are  passed.  Still,  though
such  remarks  may  be  made  upon  him,  there  is  certainly  no
exaggeration  in  saying  that  Saint-Simon  is  the  Rubens  of  the
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century.

The  life  of  Saint-Simon  scarcely  exists  for  us  outside  of
his  Memoirs.  He  there  relates  without  amplification  (except
as  to  his  nobiliary  disputes  and  trials)  the  events  which  con¬
cern  him.  In  default  of  the  daughter  of  the  Duc  de  Beau-
villiers,  he  married  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Maréchal  de

16

INTRODUCTION.

Forges,  the  goodness  and  truth  of  the  maréchal,  a  nephew
and  favourite  pupil  of  Turenne,  having  attracted  him  ;  and
the  amiable  and  noble  air  of  the  daughter,  a  certain  some¬
thing  of  majesty  tempered  by  natural  sweetness,  decided
him.  To  her  he  owed  an  unbroken  domestic  happiness,  and
he  lived  with  her  in  absolute  fidelity.  At  the  time  of  his
marriage  he  was  only  twenty,  duke  and  peer  of  France,
governor  of  Blaye,  governor  and  high-steward  of  Senlis,  and
commander  of  a  regiment  of  cavalry.  He  speaks  in  many
places  of  his  wife,  and  always  with  a  touching  sentiment  of
respect  and  affection,  comparing  her  with  other  women,
either  incapable  or,  if  capable,  ambitious,  and  praising  her
in  charming  words  for  the  “  perfection  of  her  sense,  exquisite
and  just  in  all  things,  but  gentle  and  tranquil,  which,  far
from  putting  forth  its  demands,  seems  always  to  ignore
itself,  and  this  with  uniformity  throughout  a  life  of  modesty,
pleasantness,  and  virtue.”  1

There  are  two  fine  portraits  of  Saint-Simon  and  his  wife,

1  The  following  is  from  the  5th  clause  in  Saint-Simon’s  will.  “Fifthly:
I  will  that  wherever  I  die  my  body  be  brought  and  buried  in  the  tomb  of
the  parish  church  of  the  said  La  Ferté  beside  that  of  my  very  dear  wife  ;
and  that  there  be  made  and  put  rings,  hooks,  and  iron  bands  to  attach
our  coffins  so  tightly  and  well  riveted  together  that  it  shall  be  impossible
to  part  them  without  breaking  both.  I  will  also  .  .  .  and  that  on  hers,  as
far  as  space  permits,  shall  be  engraved  her  incomparable  virtues  :  the  un¬
alterable  piety  of  all  her  life,  so  true,  so  simple,  so  constant,  so  uniform,
so  solid,  so  admirable,  so  singularly  lovable  that  they  made  her  the  de¬
light  and  admiration  of  all  who  knew  her  ;  and  on  both  our  plates  the
extreme  and  reciprocal  tenderness,  the  confidence  without  reserve,  the
perfect  and  unbroken  intimate  union  which  it  pleased  God  to  singularly
bless  throughout  the  whole  course  of  our  marriage,  which  made  me,  as
long  as  it  lasted,  the  happiest  of  men,  enjoying  ceaselessly  the  inestima¬
ble  price  of  that  unique  Pearl,  who  united  all  that  is  most  lovable  and
estimable  with  the  gift  of  wise  counsel,  without  the  least  complacency  in
herself,  resembling  so  well  the  woman  strongly  described  by  the  Holy
Spirit  ;  the  loss  of  whom  has  rendered  life  a  burden  to  me,  and  me  the  most
unhappy  of  men,  from  the  bitterness  and  sharpness  I  feel  day  and  night,
at  almost  every  moment  of  my  life,”  etc.  —  Tn.

INTRODUCTION.

17

by  Rigaud,  painted  at  tlie  time  of  tlieir  marriage  and  now  in
possession  of  the  present  Duc  de  Saint-Simon.  Though  we
should  take  care  not  to  argue  too  much  from  portraits,  and
in  this  instance  the  youthful  air  of  the  young  husband  con¬
flicts  a  little  with  the  idea  of  him  conveyed  by  the  Memoirs,
still  we  may  remark  that  Saint-Simon’s  face  and  its  expres¬
sion  are  sufficiently  those  of  his  work.  The  face  is  shrewd  ;
the  eye  rather  gentle,  but  capable  of  growing  angry  and  be¬
coming  terrible.  His  nose  is  in  the  air  and  somewhat  saucy  ;
the  mouth  satirical,  from  which  the  flashing  wit  finds  no
difficulty,  we  are  sure,  in  escaping.  But  the  idea  of  strength,
essential  in  the  talent  of  Saint-Simon,  is  absent,  concealed
no  doubt  by  his  youth.

Saint-Simon  had  served  creditably  and  usefully  in  the
war  during  several  campaigns.  After  the  peace  of  Ryswick
the  regiment  of  cavalry  of  which  he  was  mestre  de  camp
[colonel]  was  re-formed,  and  he  was  left  without  a  com¬
mand  and  unattached.  When  the  war  of  the  Succession
began  (1702),  seeing  various  promotions  made  of  men  far
younger  in  rank  while  he  himself  was  forgotten,  he  thought
of  retiring  from  the  service,  and  consulted  certain  friends,
three  marshals  and  three  men  of  the  Court;  and,  on  their
unanimous  opinion  that  “  a  duke  and  peer  of  his  birth,
established  as  he  then  was  with  wife  and  children,  should
not  serve  in  the  armies  as  a  mere  adventurer  [haut  le
pied]  and  see  so  many  men  lower  than  he  then  was  and,
worse  still,  had  been,  with  posts  and  regiments,”  he  sent  in
what  we  should  now  call  his  resignation  ;  that  is,  he  wrote
to  the  king  a  short  and  respectful  letter  in  which,  without
giving  any  other  reason  than  his  health,  he  expressed  to
him  the  regret  he  felt  at  leaving  his  service.  “  Well,  mon¬
sieur,  here ’s  another  man  who  leaves  us,”  said  the  king
to  the  secretary  of  State  for  war,  Chamillart,  repeating  the

VOL.  i.  — 2

18

INTRODUCTION.

terms  of  the  letter  ;  and  it  was  several  years  before  he  for¬
gave  Saint-Simon,  who,  though  he  occasionally  had  the
honour  of  being  appointed  for  the  candlestick  at  the  petit
coucher,  was  struck  out  in  petto  from  all  advancement  to
real  favour,  if  indeed  he  had  ever  had  a  chance  to  obtain
it.  He  was  at  this  time  twenty-seven  years  of  age.

A  year  or  two  later,  on  the  occasion  of  a  quête  [collection
in  church]  which  Saint-Simon  refused  to  let  his  wife  or  the
other  duchesses  make,  as  prejudicial  to  the  rank  of  dukes
vis-à-vis  to  the  princes,  the  king  was  angry,  and  a  storm
was  brewing  against  the  opinionated  and  recalcitrant  duke.
“  It  is  a  strange  thing,”  said  Louis  XIV.,  “  that  ever  since
he  quitted  the  service  M.  de  Saint-Simon  thinks  of  nothing
but  studying  precedence,  and  picking  quarrels  with  every¬
body.”  Saint-Simon,  warned  of  this,  asked  for  a  private
audience  with  the  king  in  his  cabinet.  He  obtained  it,
explained  himself,  and  thought  that  he  had,  partly  at  least,
brought  the  king  round  again.  In  the  minute  details  which
he  gives  us  of  this  scene,  our  finger  being  made  to  touch
each  circumstance,  we  see  that  the  annoyance  of  being
forced  to  ask  for  such  an  audience  is  fully  compensated  by
the  inquiring  pleasure  of  observing  the  master  closely,  and
by  that  other  pleasure,  inseparable  from  the  first,  of  de¬
scribing  and  relating  all  the  circumstances.

Soon  after,  on  the  occasion  of  an  embassy  to  Rome  which
he  was  very  near  receiving,  somewhat  against  his  will,  but
missed,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  expressed  an  opinion  on  Saint-
Simon  which  does  not  belie  her  reputation  for  common-
sense.  She  said  he  was  “  arrogant,  fault-finding,  and  full  of
views.”  Full  of  views  ;  that  is  to  say,  projects  of  systems
more  or  less  hazardous.  This  opinion,  which  Mme.  de
Maintenon  always  retained,  shows  the  antipathy  of  natures,
and  was  not  likely  to  give  the  king  any  better  idea  than

INTRODUCTION.

19

that  he  already  had  of  his  somewhat  indocile  courtier.  The
more  a  man  of  his  age  was  admitted  to  be  serious,  well-
informed,  and  independent  in  character,  the  more  impossible
and  irreconcilable  he  became  in  the  Court  frame-work  of
those  days.  Envious  people  and  those  who  wished  to  in¬
jure  him  found  it  to  their  interest  to  praise  him  in  these
respects  ;  they  made  him  appear,  by  his  freedom  of  speech
and  his  haughtiness,  as  a  man  of  strong  mind  who  was
more  to  be  feared  than  employed,  and  dangerous  withal.
No  matter  how  carefully  he  watched  himself,  he  had  at
times  expressive  and  eloquent  silences,  or  bursts  of  ener¬
getic  expression,  which  stung  to  the  quick  ;  “  out  of  the  ful¬
ness  of  his  heart  rushed  arguments  and  reproaches.”  As
we  read  him  to-day  we  have  no  trouble  in  imagining  how  he
then  appeared.  Such  a  nature,  that  of  a  great  posthumous
writer,  could  not  help  transpiring  now  and  then  in  his  life¬
time  ;  it  escaped  in  volleys,  the  trigger  was  pulled  ;  and  we
can  well  understand  how  it  was  that  Louis  XIV.,  to  whom
he  was  one  day  complaining  of  the  malicious  remarks  of
his  enemies,  should  have  answered  :  “  But,  monsieur,  you
talk  and  you  find  fault  ;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  others
talk  against  you.”  And  another  day  the  king  remarked:
“  But  you  ought  to  hold  your  tongue.”

However,  the  secret  author  of  the  Memoirs  really  gained
much  by  these  mishaps  of  fortune.  Saint-Simon,  with  lib¬
erty  and  leisure,  and  (save  for  the  favour  of  the  king  lost
without  recall),  swimming  at  ease  on  the  Court  wave,  over
many  a  hidden  reef,  to  be  sure,  but  never  incurring  any  open
disfavour,  and  intimately  allied  with  several  of  the  ministers
of  State,  was,  more  than  any  one,  on  the  watch  and  scent  of
learning  all  to  write  all.  His  special  intimacy  with  the
Ducs  de  Chevreuil  and  de  Beauvilliers  (with  the  latter  above
all,  “  without  whom  he  did  nothing  ”)  did  not  confine  him  to

20

INTRODUCTION.

one  side  or  set  of  views  ;  as  he  said  very  neatly  when  making
the  portrait  of  the  Abbé  de  Polignac,  the  amiable  and  witty
seducer  who  had  duped  them  :  “  Unfortunately,  charity  has
not  corked  me  up  in  a  bottle,  like  the  two  dukes.”  No,  he
had  his  feelers  out  on  all  sides,  and  his  openings  into  many
and  the  most  diverse  cabals  ;  and  by  his  friends,  by  women
young  and  old,  and  even  by  valets,  he  was  kept  informed,
day  by  day,  of  all  that  happened  in  more  than  one  sphere.
All  the  intelligence,  all  the  rumours,  which  circulate  so  rap¬
idly  about  a  Court  and  disappear,  fell  into  his  net  and  were
never  lost  ;  he  heaped  them  in  a  mass,  he  held  them  in  a
reservoir  for  us.  In  a  precious  chapter,  wherein  he  exhibits
his  method  of  proceeding  and  his  system  of  information,  he
says  :  “  I  was  thus  informed  daily  of  all  things  through  pure,
direct,  and  certain  channels,  and  of  all  things  great  and
small.  My  curiosity,  independently  of  other  reasons,  ob¬
tained  what  it  wanted  ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  every
one,  personage  or  nobody,  lives  at  Courts  on  this  sort  of
nourishment  only  ;  without  it,  he  would  merely  languish.”

The  man  of  ambition,  however,  was  not  without  his  share
of  hope.  He  was  young  ;  the  king  was  old.  Louis  XIV.
living,  the  case  was  hopeless  ;  but  after  him  the  field  was
open,  and  it  lent  itself  to  many  a  perspective.  Saint-Simon
therefore  applied  himself  secretly  to  the  study  of  reforming
the  State  ;  and  as  he  always  did  everything  with  method
and  pushed  it  to  a  conclusion  without  letting  go,  he  wrote
down  his  whole  scheme,  his  plans,  his  ways,  his  means,  his
system  of  Councils,  to  be  substituted  for  the  all-potent
rule  of  the  secretaries  of  State.  He  had,  he,  Saint-Simon,
his  Kingdom  of  Salento  all  ready,  his  Republic  of  Plato  in
his  portfolio,  with,  moreover,  such  details  that  he  kept,  care¬
fully  written  down,  precise  man  that  he  was,  the  names  of  the
persons  he  thought  it  well  to  put  in  office,  the  salaries,  the

INTRODUCTION.

21

cost,  the  whole  system  drawn  up  and  supposed  to  exist  ;  so
that  one  day  when  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse  came  to  see  him,
to  groan  with  him  over  the  evils  of  the  State  and  discourse
about  possible  remedies,  he  opened,  for  all  answer,  a  certain
closet,  and  showed  him  the  documents  in  proper  order.

There  came  a  moment  that  was  altogether  brilliant  and
smiling  in  Saint-Simon’s  career  at  Court  under  Louis  XIY.  ;
this  was  the  interval  of  time  which  elapsed  between  the
death  of  Monseigneur  (April  14,  1711)  and  that  of  the  Due
de  Bourgogne  (February  18,  1712), —  a  short  space  of  ten
months,  during  which  the  latter  was  dauphin  and  presump¬
tive  heir  to  the  throne.  Saint-Simon,  after  escaping  many
an  effort  to  trip  him  up,  many  a  foul  act  and  dastardly
calumny  which  came  near  making  him  at  times  throw  up
his  party  in  disgust  and  abandon  Versailles,  was  by  this  time
somewhat  re-established  in  the  mind  of  the  king.  The
Duchesse  de  Saint-Simon,  loved  and  honoured  by  all,  was
lady  of  honour  to  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  and  he  himself
was  advancing  daily,  by  serious,  tête-à-tête  conversations  on
matters  of  State  and  on  persons,  into  the  steadfast  confidence
of  the  dauphin.  He  worked  confidentially  with  him.  If  he
ever  hoped  for  the  acceptance  in  full  of  his  political  theory,
his  ideal  of  government,  it  was  then.  There  seems,  as  we
read  him,  no  sort  of  disagreement,  no  point  of  dissension
between  him  and  the  young  prince,  who  went,  of  himself,  in
advance  even  of  Saint-Simon’s  ideas  and  maxims.  From  the
very  first  opening  of  the  subject  everything  passed  between
them  as  if  in  virtue  of  a  pre-established  harmony.

What  was  this  political  theory  of  Saint-Simon  and  this
plan  of  reform  ?  He  explains  it  to  us  at  great  length,  both
in  his  conversations  with  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne  and  in
those  which  he  had  with  the  Duc  d’Orléans  on  the  eve  of
the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  and  the  coming  Regency.  If  we

22

INTRODUCTION.

go  to  the  bottom  of  it  and  free  the  system  of  the  thousand
details  of  etiquette  with  which  he  has  complicated  and,  to
our  eyes,  compromised  it  by  a  tinge  of  absurdity,  we  shall
see  the  inspiration  which,  in  Saint-Simon,  does  honour,  if
not  to  his  practical  capacity,  at  least  to  his  qualities  as
citizen  and  historian.  He  feels  the  wound  and  the  moral
weakness  of  France  as  she  issues  from  the  hands  of  Louis
XIV.  ;  all  has  been  lowered,  levelled,  reduced  to  the  state
of  an  individual;  the  king  alone  is  great.  We  must  not
expect  Saint-Simon  to  think  of  the  People  in  our  modern
sense  ;  he  cannot  see  them  ;  he  does  not  distinguish  them
from  the  ignorant  and  forever  incapable  populace.1  As  for
the  burghers,  who  form  the  head  of  the  people,  he  sees
them  already  ambitious,  able,  insolent,  selfish,  and  surfeited  ;
governing  the  kingdom  in  the  person  of  clerks  and  secre¬
taries  of  State,  or  usurping  and  aping  as  civilians  a  false
sovereign  authority  in  the  Parliaments.  As  for  the  nobil¬
ity,  of  whom  he  is  part,  and  on  whom  alone  he  counts  for
generosity  of  blood  and  devotion  to  the  country,  he  is  in¬
dignant  at  seeing  it  reduced,  weakened,  and  as  if  degraded
by  the  policy  of  kings,  especially  the  last.  In  fact,  he
accuses  almost  exclusively  Louis  XIY.  ;  he  does  not  suffi¬
ciently  remind  himself  that  the  work  by  him  consummated
was  the  constant  policy  of  all  the  kings  from  Philippe-
Auguste,  including  Henri  IV.  and  Louis  XIII.  whom  he
so  much  admired.  He  is  indignant  at  seeing  “  this  French
nobility,  so  famous,  so  illustrious,  become  a  people  of  the
same  sort  as  the  people  itself;  only  distinguished  from  it

1  It  is  singular  that  the  Due  and  the  Comte  de  Saint-Simon,  both  de¬
scended  from  Charlemagne,  and  one  claiming  to  be  inspired  by  him,
should  each,  in  his  generation,  set  himself  to  the  task  of  regenerating,
the  one  his  country,  the  other  the  world.  Can  it  be  that  the  spirit  or
the  instincts  of  the  man  who  regenerated  Europe  after  the  fall  of  the
Roman  Empire  should  have  survived  within  his  race? _ Tr.

INTRODUCTION.

23

by  the  fact  that  the  people  have  liberty  to  toil,  to  trade,
and  even  to  take  up  arms  ;  whereas  the  nobles  have  be¬
come  a  populace  with  no  other  choice  than  to  grovel  in
deadly  and  ruinous  idleness,  which  makes  them  a  burden
and  a  shame,  or  go  to  the  battle-field  and  get  themselves
killed,  amid  the  insults  of  the  clerks  and  agents  of  the  sec¬
retaries  of  State.”  He  desires,  therefore,  to  raise  the  nobil¬
ity,  and  see  it  restored  to  its  former  posts,  offices,  and  useful
employments,  with  all  the  degrees  and  ranks  of  gentle¬
man,  seigneur,  duke,  and  peer.  The  Peers  above  all,  in
whom  he  places  all  his  expectations,  and  of  whom  he
makes  the  key  of  the  arch  in  the  true  system,  seem  to
him  to  be  (as  they  once  were,  he  declares),  the  necessary
counsellors  of  the  king,  and  the  co-sharers  of  his  sover¬
eignty.  He  never  ceases  to  dream  of  this,  and  he  holds
his  reconstitution  of  the  French  monarchy  all  prepared
for  it.

Certainly,  if  any  prince  were  capable  of  entering  into
some  of  these  views,  which  are  at  the  same  time  cour¬
ageous  and  patriotic,  but  narrow,  haughty,  and  retrogres¬
sive,  it  would  have  been  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  such  as
Saint-Simon  presents  him  to  us,  with  a  mixture  of  good
intentions,  efforts  over  himself,  toilsome  and  industrious  edu¬
cation,  and  hot-house  principles  and  dogmas.  We  cannot
remake  history  by  hypothesis.  The  Duc  de  Bourgogne  did
not  reign,  and  the  French  monarchy,  driven  through  revo¬
lutions,  has  followed  another  course  than  that  he  dreamed
of  taking.  When  we  read  Saint-Simon  to-day,  after  certain
accomplished  events  and  in  presence  of  an  overflowing  and
triumphant  democracy,  we  ask  ourselves  with  more  doubt
than  ever  this  question  :  —

Was  there  any  possibility  of  thus  remaking,  after  Louis
XIV.,  after  Richelieu,  after  Louis  XL,  the  foundation  of  the

24

INTRODUCTION.

French  monarchy,  of  remaking  an  aristocratic  constitutional
monarchy,  with  all  the  hierarchies  of  rank  ?  Was  such  a
reconstruction  from  the  base  possible  when  the  conse¬
quences  of  the  universal  levelling  were  already  rolling  for¬
ward  more  and  more  on  a  rapid,  broad  incline?  And,
finally,  was  it  in  accord  with  the  genius  of  the  nation,  with
the  genius  of  the  nobility  itself,  which  loves  after  its  own
fashion  to  be  a  people  —  a  people  of  gentlemen  ?

The  only  answer,  as  we  said  before,  is  in  accomplished
facts  :  to  Saint-Simon  belongs  the  honour  of  having  re¬
sisted  the  abasement  and  the  annihilation  of  his  Order,
and  also  of  having  stiffened  himself  against  the  crouch¬
ing  and  the  servility  of  the  courtier.  His  theory  is  like
a  spasm  ;  a  last  supreme  effort  of  the  dying  nobility  to
recover  what  is  about  to  pass  to  that  Third  Estate  which
is  all,  and  will,  when  the  time  comes,  in  the  plenitude  of
its  installation,  be  the  Prince  himself.

The  sudden  death  of  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne  gave  a  cruel
blow  to  Saint-Simon,  and  destroyed  the  most  flattering  pros¬
pect  that  a  man  of  his  nature  and  stamp  ever  looked  for,
—  less  to  be  in  power  himself  than  to  see  the  realization
of  his  ideas  and  his  views,  that  chimera  of  the  public  good
which  he  mingled  with  the  gratifications  of  his  pride.  The
Duc  de  Bourgogne  dead  at  thirty  years  of  age,  Saint-Simon,
who  was  but  thirty-seven,  continued  to  be  much  consid¬
ered  and  much  relied  upon  in  consequence  of  his  intimate
relations,  nobly  professed  under  all  circumstances,  with  the
Duc  d’Orléans,  whom  no  calumny  and  no  cabal  could  pre¬
vent  from  becoming,  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  and
of  his  heirs  of  an  age  to  reign,  the  principal  personage  in
the  kingdom.

The  plans  that  Saint-Simon  developed  to  the  Duc  d’Or¬
léans  for  the  reform  of  the  government  were  only  followed

INTRODUCTION.

25

in  part,  after  the  duke  became  Eegent.  The  idea  of  Councils
to  take  the  place  of  secretaries  of  State  for  the  administration
of  public  affairs  was  his,  but  it  was  not  applied  and  executed
as  he  intended.  One  of  the  measures  which  he  proposed
with  the  most  confidence  was  the  convocation  of  the  States-
general  at  the  opening  of  the  Regency.  In  it  he  saw  a
useful  instrument  to  obtain  reforms,  on  which  responsibility
might  be  laid  by  way  of  excuse.  It  would,  he  thought,  be
wise  to  profit  by  the  popular  error  which  attributed  great
power  to  that  body,  by  favouring  that  innocent  error  without
fear  of  consequences.  In  this  Saint-Simon  may  have  mis¬
taken  his  date,  as  in  other  cases  ;  he  did  not  duly  reckon  the
effect  and  ferment  which  the  convocation  of  the  States-
general  in  1716  would  have  produced;  the  instrument  he
wanted  used  might,  even  then,  have  been  dangerous  to
handle.  We  go  fast  hi  France,  and,  in  default  of  an  Abbé
Sièyes  for  theorist,  the  Abbé  de  Saint-Pierre  was  on  the
scene,  and  would  have  found  more  eloquent  interpreters  and
exponents  of  his  thought  than  himself.  And  Montesquieu,
was  he  not  already  twenty -five  years  old  ?

From  this  period  (1715)  the  Memoirs  of  Saint-Simon
change  somewhat  in  character.  As  a  member  of  the  Council
of  Regency  he  becomes  a  personage  of  the  government  ;  and
although  his  advice  is  seldom  followed,  he  is  continually
admitted  to  offer  it,  and  is  by  no  means  backward  in  doing  so.
He  gives  us  interviews  without  number,  in  which  the  topics
overflow  from  his  pen  as  they  doubtless  overflowed  from  his
lips.  The  interest  which  is  still  to  be  found  in  certain
scenes,  and  in  the  admirable  portraits  of  the  actors,  flags  a
little  under  the  too  great  plenitude  and  redundance  of  these
parts.  The  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  under  which  he  was  re¬
strained,  was  better  suited  to  Saint-Simon  than  the  semi¬
favour  of  the  Regency,  in  which  he  had  more  space  to  move,

26

INTKODU  CTION.

without,  for  all  that,  having  any  power  of  decisive  action.
He  was  not  made  minister,  because  he  did  not  wish  it  ;  he
could  have  been  one  at  any  moment,  but  he  would  not  bend
to  any  of  the  various  combinations,  of  which  he  expected
nothing  good.  He  did  not  find  in  the  Duc  d’Orléans  the
man  he  wanted,  and  had  so  longed  for  and  regretted  in  the
Duc  de  Bourgogne  ;  he  reproached  him  for  being  a  man  of
compromises  and  neutral  terms  ;  and  the  prince,  on  his  part,
said  of  his  ardent  and  unaccommodating  friend  that  he  was
“  as  immovable  as  God,  and  of  a  maddening  persistency.”

At  a  certain  time  (1721)  Saint-Simon,  on  account  of  some
family  interest,  desired  to  be  sent  as  ambassador  to  Spain,  a
desire  that  was  granted  immediately.  This  mission  was  more
honorary  than  political,  but  he  relates  it  at  great  length.  It
was  his  last  appearance  in  public  life.  The  sudden  death  of
the  Regent  (1723)  came  soon  after  to  warn  him  of  what  the
death  of  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne  had  already  so  eloquently
told  his  heart,  namely,  that  the  things  of  this  world  are
perishable,  and  that  a  man,  if  a  Christian,  should  think  of
better  things.  A  cowardly  act  of  Fleury  only  strengthened
the  warning.  The  Bishop  of  Fréjus,  during  a  visit  to  Mme.
de  Saint-Simon,  let  her  know  that  her  husband  would  be
seen  with  greater  pleasure  in  Paris  than  at  Versailles.  Saint-
Simon  thought  too  much  aloud  for  the  low-voiced  ministry
that  Fleury  wanted.  He  did  not  allow  himself  to  be  told
twice,  and  from  that  moment  he  renounced  the  Court,  lived
more  habitually  on  his  estates,  and  busied  himself  in  the
final  preparation  of  his  Memoirs.  He  did  not  die  until
March  2,  1755,  at  the  age  of  eighty.

He  had  long  turned  his  back  to  the  new  era,  and  he  lived
in  his  memories.  He  died  when  Voltaire  reigned,  when  the
Encyclopaedia  had  begun,  when  Jean- Jacques  Rousseau  was
appearing,  and  just  as  Montesquieu,  having  produced  his

INTRODUCTION.

27

works,  had  died  himself.  What  did  he  think,  what  could  he
think  of  those  startling  novelties  ?  His  disdainful  remark  on
Voltaire  has  been  often  quoted  ;  he  calls  him  Arouet,  “  son  of
a  man  who  was  my  father’s  notary  and  mine.”  From  this  it
has  been  concluded,  too  hastily  as  I  think,  that  Saint-Simon
despised  men  of  letters  and  men  of  intellect  who  were  not  of
his  class.  Saint-Simon  in  these  Memoirs  shows  himself  much
more  attentive  than  people  suppose  to  all  that  concerns  men
of  letters  and  intellect,  hut  they  are  those  of  the  period  of
Louis  XIV.  :  Kacine,  La  Fontaine,  Bruyère,  Despréaux,  Nicole,
he  recalls  them  all.  He  says  some  noble  words  on  Bossuet  ;
he  speaks  of  Mme.  de  Sévigné  with  delightful  airy  grace.
These  are  the  literary  people  in  Saint-Simon’s  mind.  As  for
Voltaire,  he  speaks  of  him,  it  is  true,  as  an  adventurer  of
intellect  and  a  libertine  ;  the  reasons  for  this  are  obvious
enough  without  seeking  others  more  injurious  on  his  part
to  the  class  of  men  of  letters  than  they  really  were.

It  has  been  remarked  as  a  singular  thing  that,  whereas
Saint-Simon  speaks  of  everybody,  there  is  very  little  mention
of  him  in  the  memoirs  of  his  time.  Here  again  we  must
come  to  an  understanding.  What  memoirs  are  meant  ?
There  are  very  few  on  the  closing  years  of  the  reign  of  Louis
XIV.  Saint-Simon  was  young  at  that  time,  and  had  no
apparent  part  before  the  world  ;  his  chief  duty  was  the  one
he  gave  himself  as  the  champion  of  the  Duchy-Peerage,  and
the  most  punctilious  of  his  Order  as  to  rank.  But  if  me¬
moirs  of  the  Begency,  if  the  political  memoirs  of  the  Due
d’Antin  and  others,  which  must  be  in  the  State  archives,
should  ever  appear,  they  will  certainly  contain  very  much
about  Saint-Simon.

Saint-Simon,  to  all  who  saw  him  merely  as  they  met  and
passed  in  that  great  world,  must  have  had  the  effect,  as  I  can
easily  imagine,  of  a  stirring,  hurried,  secretive,  rather  fiery.

28

INTRODUCTION.

busy  personage,  always  having  confidences  and  tête-à-tête s  ;
sometimes  very  amusing  in  his  good  veins,  and  charming
at  certain  hours,  at  others  rather  tempestuous  and  uncom¬
fortable.  Maréchal  de  Belle-Isle  compared  him  in  his  old
age  to  the  most  interesting  and  most  agreeable  of  dictionaries.
After  his  retirement  from  Court,  he  came  occasionally  to
Paris,  where  he  stayed  with  the  Duchesse  de  La  Vallière,  or
the  Duchesse  de  Mancini  (both  of  them  Noailles).  While
there,  it  is  told  that,  using  the  freedom  of  an  old  man  and  a
great  seigneur  turned  into  a  countryman,  he  would  some¬
times,  to  put  himself  more  at  his  ease,  lay  off  his  wig  upon  a
chair,  and  his  head  smoked.

We  can  well  imagine  that  head,  heated  by  so  many
passions,  smoking  to  the  eye.

After  Saint-Simon’s  death,  his  Memoirs  had  many  vicis¬
situdes.  They  left  the  hands  of  his  family  to  become,  as
it  were,  a  species  of  State  prisoner  ;  indiscreet  revelations
were  dreaded.  We  know  that  Duclos  and  Marmontel  knew
of  them  and  made  ample  use  of  them  in  their  histories.
M.  de  Choiseul,  during  his  ministry,  lent  the  manuscript
volumes  to  Mme.  du  Deffand,  who  writes  her  impressions
of  them  to  Horace  Walpole,  to  whom  she  would  fain  have
lent  them.  “  We  are  reading  after  dinner,”  she  writes  (Nov.
21,  1770)  “the  Memoirs  of  M.  de  Saint-Simon,  and  it  is
impossible  for  me  not  to  regret  your  absence  ;  you  would
take  unspeakable  pleasure  in  them.”  She  says  again  in
another  place  (December  2  )  :  “  The  Memoirs  of  Saint-Simon
amuse  me  still  ;  and  as  I  like  to  read  them  in  company,  the
pleasure  will  last  a  long  time  yet.  They  would  amuse  you,
though  the  style  is  abominable,  the  portraits  ill-drawn.  The
author  was  not  a  man  of  intelligence  ;  but  as  he  was  well-
informed  about  everything,  the  things  that  he  relates  are
curious  and  interesting.  I  wish  you  could  read  them.”

INTRODUCTION.

29

She  returns,  however,  to  the  subject  and  corrects  what
may  seem  astonishing  in  this  first  tumultuous  judgment
(January  9,  1771):  “I  am  in  despair  at  not  being  able  to
let  you  read  the  Memoirs  of  Saint-Simon  ;  the  last  volume
that  I  have  read  has  given  me  infinite  pleasure  ;  it  would
put  you  beside  yourself.”  Yes,  indeed,  these  Memoirs  of
Saint-Simon  put  us  far  beside  and  outside  of  ourselves  ;
they  transport  us  to  the  heart  of  another  century.

After  1784  publicity  began  to  lay  hold  of  the  Memoirs  ;
but  timidly,  stealthily,  by  random  anecdotes  and  morsels.
In  1788  and  1791,  and  later  in  1818,  extracts  that  were
more  or  less  voluminous  appeared,  compiled  and  mangled.
The  first  edition  of  the  Memoirs  was  published  in  1829.
The  sensation  produced  by  the  first  volumes  was  very  keen  ;
it  was  the  greatest  success  since  that  of  the  novels  of
Walter  Scott.  A  curtain  was  lifted  suddenly  upon  the
finest  period  of  the  French  monarchy,  and  the  reader  took
part  in  it  as  though  he  were  there.  This  success,  however,
which  was  cut  short  by  the  revolution  of  1830,  was  ob¬
tained  in  society  rather  than  from  the  public  in  general  ;
success  with  the  latter  came  later  and  more  gradually.

There  remained  for  the  present  day  an  important  advance,
and,  truth  to  tell,  a  decisive  advance  to  be  made  for  the
honour  of  Saint-Simon,  the  writer.  The  first  edition,  liked  as
it  was,  had,  nevertheless,  been  prepared  on  a  singular  prin¬
ciple  and  with  a  strange  understanding  of  the  case  :  namely,
that  Saint-Simon,  because  he  had  his  own  phraseology,
which  was  not  academic  nor  like  that  of  everybody  else,
wrote  at  random,  did  not,  in  fact,  know  how  to  write,  and
that  it  was  necessary,  from  time  to  time,  in  his  interests
and  that  of  his  readers,  to  correct  his  style.  We  ought  to
come  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  style  of  Saint-Simon.  It
is  not  the  same  in  all  parts  and  at  all  times.  When  he

30

INTRODUCTION.

writes  notes  and  comments  on  Dangeau’s  Journal  he  writes
as  men  do  for  notes,  on  the  fly,  crowding  and  compressing
his  words,  trying  to  say  all  he  has  to  say  in  the  smallest
compass.  I  have  elsewhere  compared  this  petulance,  this
precipitation  of  matters  beneath  his  pen,  to  an  abounding
stream  trying  to  issue  through  too  narrow  a  channel  and
setting  choked  there.  In  his  Memoirs,  Saint-Simon  cor-
rects  his  first  dashed-in  pictures,  allows  them  greater  space
and  develops  them.  When  he  relates  conversations  it  often
happens  that  he  reproduces  the  tone,  the  vehemence,  the
flux  of  words,  the  redundancies,  the  ellipses.  Habitually
and  always  he  has,  in  his  vivacity  of  conception  and  depic¬
tion,  a  need  of  grasping  and  presenting  great  numbers  of
things  at  once,  so  that  often  one  limb  of  his  phrase  will  push
out  a  branch  which  gives  birth  to  a  third,  and  from  this
quantity  of  branches  interlacing  each  other  an  over-bushy
tree  is  formed.  But  we  must  avoid  thinking  that  this  ap¬
parently  instinctive  production  has  not  a  purpose,  a  majesty,
and  often  a  grace.

Let  us  respect  the  text  of  the  great  writers,  let  us  respect
their  style.  We  have  need  to  understand  that  nature  is
full  of  varieties  and  diverse  moulds  ;  the  forms  of  talent
are  infinite.  Editors  and  critics,  why  should  we  make  our¬
selves  strictly  grammarians  and  have  but  one  pattern  ?
And  here,  in  this  particular  case  of  Saint-Simon,  as  we
have  to  do  especially  and  essentially  with  a  painter,  ,we
must  clearly  understand  (and  on  this  I  ought  to  have
insisted  at  the  beginning)  what  is  the  species  of  truth  we
have  the  right  to  expect  and  demand  of  him,  —  his  nature
and  his  temperament  as  an  observer  and  writer  being  fully
understood.

The  accuracy  of  certain  particular  facts  is  less  important
and  less  to  be  sought  than  truth  of  impression,  into  which

INTRODUCTION.

31

must  and  should  enter  in  a  great  degree  the  sensibilities
and  affections  of  him  who  observes  and  who  expresses.
The  landscape  reflected  in  this  lake  with  frowning  banks
and  rather  bitter  waters,  in  this  mobile  human  lake  which
is  always  more  or  less  witching,  will  certainly  be  tinted
with  the  colour  of  its  waves.  Another  form  of  talent,  as  I
have  already  said,  another  magic  mirror  would  have  pro¬
duced  some  different  effects  ;  but  this  one  is  true,  it  is
sincere  ;  sincere  in  the  highest  degree,  and  in  the  sense  of
moral  and  picturesque  sincerity.  This  is  what  we  cannot
too  much  insist  upon,  and  Saint-Simon  was  strictly  right
when  he  judged  himself  on  his  last  page  thus  :  —

“  These  Memoirs  are  from  the  fountain-head,  and  at
first  hand.  Their  truth,  their  authenticity  cannot  be  called
in  question  ;  and  I  think  I  may  say  that,  until  now,  there
are  no  others  which  have  comprised  more  varied,  more  dis¬
criminated,  and  more  detailed  topics,  nor  any  that  form  a
more  instructive  and  curious  group.”

Posterity,  after  listening  with  attention  to  all  that  has
been  said,  and  will  be  said  again,  both  for  and  against,  will
not  come,  I  think,  to  any  other  conclusion.

Sainte-Beuve.

LETTER

FROM  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON  TO  M.  DE  RANCÉ,  ABBÉ

OF  LA  TRAPPE,  CONSULTING  HIM  ABOUT  HIS  MEMOIRS.

Versailles,  March  29,  1699.

I  must,  Monsieur,  be  well  convinced  of  your  extreme
kindness  for  me,  to  dare  to  take  the  liberty  that  I  do  in
sending  you,  by  means  of  M.  du  Charmel,  the  papers  about
which  I  had  the  honour  of  speaking  to  you  on  the  last  visit
which  you  permitted  me  to  make.  I  told  you  then  that  I
had  for  some  time  been  working  on  a  species  of  memoirs  of
my  life  which  included  all  that  had  a  special  relation  to  my¬
self,  and  also,  in  general  and  superficially,  a  sort  of  narrative
of  the  events  of  these  times,  principally  the  things  of  the
Court  ;  and  as  I  propose  to  speak  the  exact  truth  I  have  let
myself  loose  to  say  both  good  and  evil  precisely  as  they  seem
to  me,  about  one  and  all  ;  intending  to  satisfy  my  inclina¬
tions  and  passions  in  whatever  truth  may  permit  me  to  say  ;
considering  that  working  for  myself  and  for  very  few  of
mine  own  throughout  my  life,  and  for  whom  it  may  concern
after  my  death,  I  have  not  stopped  to  be  careful  of  persons
on  any  consideration  whatever.  But  seeing  this  species  of
work  growing  every  day,  with  some  complacency  in  leaving
it  behind  me,  and  yet  not  wishing  to  be  exposed  to  scruples
which  might  bid  me  burn  it  at  the  close  of  my  life,  —  as  my
first  plan  was,  or  even  earlier,  on  account  of  all  there  is  in  it
against  the  reputation  of  thousands  of  persons,  and  that  the
more  irreparable  because  truth  is  in  it  wholly,  and  passion
has  done  no  more  than  animate  its  style,  —  I  resolve  to  trou-

LETTER.

33

Lie  you  with  a  few  portions  of  it  ;  entreating  you  to  thereby
judge  of  the  work,  and  to  be  so  good  as  to  prescribe  me  a
rule  by  which  to  always  tell  the  truth  without  ever  wound-
ing  my  conscience  ;  and  also  to  give  me  salutary  counsels  as
to  the  manner  I  ought  to  maintain  in  writing  of  things
which  touch  me  particularly  and  more  keenly  than  others.
I  have  therefore  chosen  the  narrative  of  our  suit  against
MM.  de  Luxembourg,  father  and  son,  which  has  produced  en¬
counters  which  have  touched  me  in  nearly  all  my  strongest
passions,  in  a  manner  as  keen  as,  or  more  so  than  I  have
ever  felt  in  my  life,  and  which  I  have  expressed  in  a  style  to
make  it  remarked  upon.  It  is,  I  think,  the  harshest  and
most  hitter  thing  in  my  Memoirs  ;  hut,  at  least,  I  have  tried
to  he  faithful  to  the  most  exact  truth.

I  have  copied  the  said  part  from  where  it  is  written,  scat¬
tered  here  and  there  according  to  the  order  of  time  when  we
pleaded,  and  have  put  it  together  ;  but  instead  of  speaking
in  person  as  I  do  in  my  Memoirs,  I  have  named  myself  in
this  copy  like  the  others,  so  that  I  may  keep  it  and  use  it
without  its  being  manifest  that  I  am  the  author.  I  have
added  also  two  portraits  to  serve  as  a  specimen  of  the  rest  ;
for  goodness,  that  of  M.  d’ Aguesseau  may  sufficiently  serve
for  those  of  that  kind,  of  which  there  are  many  less  than
there  are  of  evil.

I  entreat  you,  very  humbly,  to  keep  what  I  send  you  until
I  go  myself  to  ask  for  it,  hoping  to  have  that  happiness  im¬
mediately  after  Easter,  and  to  take  you  at  the  same  time
some  sheets  of  the  Memoir  itself.  I  flatter  myself  that  in
the  midst  of  all  your  troubles,  all  the  pains  this  change  in
your  great  and  marvellous  monastery  have  caused  you,  you
will  have  the  charity  to  examine  what  I  send  you,  to  think
of  it  before  God,  and  to  dictate  the  opinion,  rules,  and  salu¬
tary  counsel  which  I  venture  to  ask  of  you  ;  so  that,  being

VOL.  I.  —  3

34

LETTER.

written  down,  they  may  not  pass  from  my  memory,  and  that
all  my  life  I  may  have  recourse  to  them.

I  think  it  would  be  useless  to  ask  you  to  take  precautions
as  to  secrecy,  and  as  to  the  tone  of  voice  in  which  these
papers  are  read  aloud  to  you,  that  nothing  may  he  heard
beyond  your  chamber.  They  themselves  will  make  you
remember  that  sufficiently.  Nothing  remains  for  me  to  add
here,  unless  it  be  to  ask  your  pardon  a  hundred  and  a  hun¬
dred  times  for  the  interruption  this  will  cause  to  those
sacred  and  admirable  occupations  by  which  you  nourish
your  soul  unceasingly,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  am  imbued
more  than  any  one  in  the  world,  Monsieur,  with  respect,
attachment,  and  gratitude  towards  you,  and  also  that  I  am
forever  your  very  humble  and  very  obedient  servant.

P.  S.  M.  du  Charmel  does  not  know  what  these  papers
are.

TABLE  SHOWING  THE  ANCESTRY  OF  Ti

ORLÉANS  AN

Charles  de  Boui
Duc  de  Vendôme
d.  1538.

Antoine  de  Bourbon  =  Jeanne  d'Albret
King  of  Navai  re.
d.  1502.

Charles,

Cardinal  de  Bourbon.

?ToiO.IV'  =  Marguerite  de  Valois-  =  2,  Marie  de'  Medici.

Louis  XIII.  =  Anne  of  A  ustria.

1043.

dau.  of  Philip  III.

of  Spain.

Gaston  d’Orléans  =  Marie  de  Bourbon
Monsieur.”
d.  1000.

Louis  X!V.  -  Manta  Maria  Philippe  d’Orléans  =  1,  Henrietta  of  =  2,  Eiisabe

Monsieur,
dau.  of  Philip  d.  1701.

IV.  of  Spain,
d.  1083.

England.

of  Bar

Louis  =  Marie- Anne  Philippe  de  Chartres  =  Fr,

Dauphin.
“  Monsei¬
gneur.”
d.  1711.

°A  ?,^ari,a“  Duc  d’Orléans,  Regent,

d.  1090.  d.  1723.

aneoise ,

dau.  of  Louis  XIV.
and  Mme.  de  Mon-
tespan.

Loms-H<»>  PWMPPe.  _  Charles,

Due  de
Bourgogne,
d.  1712.

,  „  ’  _  *  Duanes,

dau  of  Duc  Duc  d’Anjou.  Duc  de  Berry,
de  Savoie.  Plulippe  V.  of  d.  1714.

Spain.  m.  Marie  Louise

Elisabeth,  dau.  of

- -  Due  d’Orléans.

Louis,  d.1752.

Louis  XV.  d.  1774.  Two  sons.  d.  young.

m.  I

Louis  XVI.
grandson  of
Louis  XV.
d.  17113.

Louis  Philippe,  d.  1785.

Louis  Philippe  (Égalité).
Executed  1793.

Bastard
by  Louise  de  la  Vallière

_  :  ~1

Comte  de  Vermandois.  Marie-Anne
d-  y°lmg-  Mlle,  de  Blois.

m.  Louis  Armanc
Prince  de  Conti.

.OURBON  KINGS  OF  FRANCE,  AND  OF  THE
'3NDÉ  BRANCHES.

=  Françoise  d'Alençon.

[largue  rite.

*uc  de  Ne  vers.

Louis  I.  =  1,  Eleanor e  de  Boy e.
Prince  de
Condé.
d.  1569,

«th.

de
21  e.

uiise-  Four  daughters,

th.

Berry.

:  2,  Françoise  d'Orléans.

Henri  I.  =  Charlotte  de  la
Prince  de  Trémoille.
Condé.
d.  1588.

ree  daughters.

Henri  II.
Prince  de
Condé.
d.  1G4G.

:  Charlotte  de  Montmorency.

urlotte

La  Grande
Mademoiselle.

Louis  II.  =  Clémence  de

The  Great
Condé.
d.  1G8G.

Mailly-Brezé.

Armand  :
Prince  de
Conti,
d.  1666.

Anne  Martinozzi ,
niece  of  Card.
Mazarin.

Two  daus.  by
Henrietta  of
England.

Henri- Jules  =  Anne  of

M.  le  Prince,
d.  1709.

Bavaria.

Louis  Armand,
Prince  de  Conti,
m.  dau.  of  Louis
XIV.  and  Mile,
de  la  Vallière.
d.  1685.

François-Louis,
Prince  de  Conti,
m.  dau.  of  M.  le
Prince,
d.  1709.

Louis  III.  =  dau.  of  Louis  XIV.

Duc  de
Bourbon,
M.  le  Duc.

and  Mme.
tespan.

de  Mon-

Louis  Henri,

M.  le  Due.  Of  the  Council
of  Regency.

ouïs  XIV.

;  by  Mme.  de  Montespan.

Louis  Auguste,
Duc  du  Maine.

Louis  Alexandre,
Comte  de  Toulouse.

Louise,

Mlle,  de  Nantes,
m.  M.  le  Duc.

Françoise,

Mlle,  de  Blois,
m.  Duc  de  Chartres  and
d’Orléans,  Regent.

TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE.

In  abridging  the  twenty  volumes  of  so  teeming  a  work
into  the  limited  space  of  three  or  four,  a  system  of  some
sort,  however  simple,  was  necessary.  It  is  best  to  explain
to  the  reader  the  one  selected,  in  order  that  he  may  know
what  relation  this  abridgment  bears  to  the  great  original.

Perhaps  the  term  “abridgment”  can  hardly  be  applied
to  a  work  which  is  forced  to  omit  three-fourths  of  the
whole.  On  the  other  hand,  to  call  these  volumes  a  “  selec¬
tion  ”  would  do  them  some  injustice.  The  word  “  abridged  ”
is,  therefore,  placed  in  the  title,  trusting  that  this  explana¬
tion  will  keep  the  reader  from  being  misled  by  it.

The  translation  follows  mainly  the  indications  which  are
found  in  Sainte-Beuve’s  preface,  and  gives  as  follows:  the
outline  of  Saint-Simon’s  career  ;  a  selection  of  such  portraits
as  may  be  read  with  interest  by  the  general  reader  ;  several
of  the  great  historical  scenes  ;  and  something  of  the  mere
court  gossip  and  intrigue.  The  parts  relating  to  the  cam¬
paigns  have  been  omitted,  together  with  much  else  that  it
was  hard  to  forego  in  this  wonderful  historical  treasure  ;  for
whether  (using  the  words  of  M.  de  Montalembert)  we  judge
it  from  a  “  political,  moral,  or  religious  point  of  view,  there  is
no  reading  more  useful,  no  nourishment  more  wholesome,
more  substantial,  whether  for  youth,  now  so  strangely  luke¬
warm  and  proclaiming  itself  disillusioned  of  independence,
or  for  a  nation  weary  of  regenerating  effort  and  fallen  a
prey  to  speculators  of  all  kinds  and  classes,  or  for  a  society
invaded  by  scepticism,  where  the  savour  and  sentiment  of

36

TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE.

honour  tend  to  disappear,  and  where  all  things  turn  so  read¬
ily  to  the  lower  influence.  I  am  not  speaking  now  from  a
literary  point  of  view  ;  I  say  nothing  of  the  taste  or  the
style  ;  I  am  looking  at  the  soul,  the  soul  of  us  all,  under
all  conditions,  which  Saint-Simon  teaches  us  to  uplift,  to
purify,  to  bathe  afresh  in  true  grandeur  and  in  veritable
honour.  This  may  seem  hold  to  say,  but  it  is  simply  true.”

Sainte-Beuve  scarcely  does  justice,  or  at  least  he  does  not
seem  to  appreciate  fully  that  it  was  this  innate  Honour
that  kept  Saint-Simon  back  when  worldly  greatness  dawned
before  him  at  the  Begency.  How  could  that  man  of  pure
patriotic  spirit  (according  to  his  lights),  of  honour,  of  Chris¬
tian  honour  and  right-mindedness,  contend  against  Villeroy,
Fleury,  Dubois,  and  their  like;  or  against  the  continual
disappointment  which  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  with  his  crooked,
not  to  say  unprincipled  methods,  must  have  caused  him  ?

The  merits  and  defects  of  Saint-Simon’s  style  are  clearly
explained  hi  Sainte-Beuve’s  preface,  and  by  Sahit-Simon
himself  on  the  last  page  of  these  Memoirs.  With  all  its
great  narrative  merits  that  style  has  no  academic  qual¬
ity  ;  he  wrote  as  he  thought  and  spoke,  not  as  a  writer.
The  mistakes  in  French  grammar  have  not  been  copied
into  English  ;  and,  in  the  majority  of  cases  where  the  clauses
of  sentences  were  grammatically  non  sequiturs  (if  the  term
may  be  thus  applied)  the  construction  has  been  slightly
altered  ;  in  all  other  respects  an  effort  has  been  made  to
keep  the  translation  to  the  general  characteristics  of  Saint-
Simon’s  own  manner.  Although  these  memoirs  were  written
one  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  it  is  surprising  how  like
the  language  is  to  that  of  our  day.  The  reader  must  not
think  that  the  translation  has  turned  it  into  the  style  of
the  nineteenth  century.  Saint-Simon’s  own  method  of  ex¬
pressing  himself  is  very  like  the  easy  colloquial  talk  of  the

TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE.

37

present  day  ;  in  fact,  if  the  translation  seems  to  fall,  here
and  there,  into  modern  slang  it  is  a  literal  translation  from
the  French;  as,  for  instance,  where  he  says,  after  express¬
ing  himself  with  his  customary  frankness  to  friend'  or
foe,  “I  gave  it  him  fine,” — je  lui  en  donnais  belle.  He
takes  his  words  with  lordly  freedom  as  they  suit  him,  very
much  as  he  would  the  other  conveniences  of  life,  and  the
result  is  inimitable.  But  when  he  grows  conscious  that  he
is  writing,  composing,  making  a  discours  (like  that  on  the
Duc  de  Bourgogne),  his  style  becomes  involved  and  quite
impossible  to  translate.  Happily,  few  such  parts  come
within  the  limits  of  this  abridgment.

In  a  few  cases  it  has  seemed  best  to  put  together  certain
passages  scattered  through  the  volumes  relating  to  one  per¬
sonage  or  topic  ;  as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  Duc  de
Lauzun  and  in  that  of  M.  de  Rancé  of  La  Trappe.  The
marginal  titles  are  Saint-Simon’s  own.  He  prepared  his
manuscript  for  publication  without  chapters,  and  with  the
topics  noted  simply  on  the  margins.  To  relieve  the  reader,
the  French  edition  is  broken  up  into  chapters.  The  trans¬
lation  is  also,  for  the  same  reason,  in  chapters,  hut  of  greater
length,  and  the  marginal  topics  are  given  in  Saint-Simon’s
own  words.  The  reader  who  is  not  familiar  with  the
Memoirs  may  think  that  this  abridgment  makes  abrupt
transitions.  But  that  is  characteristic  of  the  work  itself.
Saint-Simon’s  narrative  is  not  consecutive;  it  passes  from
one  subject  to  another  in  the  same  disconnected  manner.
Indeed,  the  abridgment  of  foreign  topics  and  of  his  endless
dissertations  on  rank  and  precedence,  etc.,  seems  almost  to
make  the  thread  of  his  own  life  more  distinct,  and  to  re¬
veal  more  plainly  his  unconscious  portrait  of  himself,  which,
incomparable  as  his  portraits  are,  is  the  most  wonderful  of
them  all.

38

TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE.

The  French  edition,  from  which  this  translation  is  made,
is  not  a  reproduction  of  any  former  edition;  the  text  has
been  collated  with  the  original  manuscript  by  M.  Chéruel,
and  it  deserves  to  be  considered  the  veritable  editio  prin-
ceps  of  Saint-Simon’s  Memoirs.  The  portraits  collected  for
the  present  translated  edition  are,  almost  all,  from  carbon
photographs  of  the  MM.  Ad.  Braun  &  Cie,  of  Paris,  taken
from  the  original  pictures  painted  by  great  artists  from  the
personages  themselves.

As  the  conventional  titles  given  to  many  of  the  royal
personages  are  often  confusing  to  those  who  are  not  ex¬
tremely  familiar  with  the  history  of  the  time,  a  list  of  the
actual  names  of  those  personages  is  given  below.  Saint-
Simon  invariably  puts  before  the  titles  of  royal  personages
Mgr.,  or  M.,  or  Mme.,  as  :  “  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,”
“Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne.”  In  a  few  places  this
is  left  in  the  translation,  but  is  generally,  for  convenience
in  English,  omitted.

Monseigneur.  The  dauphin,  Louis,  son  of  Louis  XIY.  and  the  In¬
fanta  Maria  Theresa,  born  1661  ;  died  1711.  The  title  of  Mon¬
seigneur  was  given  to  him  by  his  father  in  jest  ;  but  it  became  in
time  his  only  name.  He  married  Anne  of  Bavaria  (who  d.  1690),
and  was  father  of  :  —

1.  Louis,  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  m.  Adélaïde  of  Savoie;  was  father

of  Louis  XY.  ;  d.  1712.

2.  Philippe,  Duc  d’Anjou,  afterwards  Philippe  Y.  of  Spain.

3.  Charles,  Duc  de  Berry  ;  d.  1714.

Monsieur.  Title  always  given  to  the  eldest  brother  of  the  king.  In
these  Memoirs  he  is  Philippe,  Duc  d’Orléans,  second  son  of  Louis
XIII.;  b.  1640,  d.  1701.  He  married,  1st,  Henrietta  of  England;
2ndly,  Élisabeth-Charlotte  of  Bavaria,  who  is  the  “  Madame  ”  of
these  Memoirs.  His  son  was  the  Duc  de  Chartres,  afterwards
Duc  d’Orléans  and  Regent.

M.  le  Prince.  The  head  of  the  house  of  Condé.  In  these  Memoirs
he  is  Henri-Jules,  son  of  the  great  Condé  ;  b.  1643,  d.  1709.

M.  le  Duc.  Title  given  to  the  eldest  son  of  the  Prince  de  Condé.
Here,  Louis  de  Bourbon  ;  b.  1688,  d.  1710.

TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE.

39

Mademoiselle.  The  eldest  daughter  of  Monsieur,  the  king’s  eldest
brother.  La  Grande  Mademoiselle,  daughter  of  Gaston,  Due
d’Orléans,  third  son  of  Henri  IV.,  was  so  called  to  distinguish
her  from  Mademoiselle  the  daughter  of  Monsieur,  Louis  XIV. ’s
brother.  La  Grande  Mademoiselle  was  b.  1630,  d.  1693.

Les  Princesses.  Term  applied  to  the  bastard  daughters  of  Louis  XIV.,
namely  :  —

1.  The  Princesse  de  Conti,  daughter  of  Louise  de  la  Vallière.

2.  Mme.  la  Duchesse,  wife  of  M.  le  Duc,  and

3.  The  Duchesse  de  Chartres,  afterward  d’Orléans,  —  daughters

of  Mme.  de  Montespan.

The  bastard  sons  of  Louis  XIV.  were  :  —

1.  The  Comte  de  Vermandois,  son  of  Louise  de  la  Vallière,  died

young.

2.  The  Duc  du  Maine,  and

3.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse,  —  sons  of  Mme.  de  Montespan.

M.  le  Grand.  Title  given  to  the  grand  equerry;  in  these  Memoirs
Louis  de  Lorraine,  Duc  d’ Armagnac,  brother  of  the  Due  and  the
Chevalier  de  Lorraine.

Princes  of  the  Blood.  Meaning  those  (of  both  sexes)  of  legitimate
royal  descent  outside  of  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  France  ;  this
included  a  number  of  branches  and  families.  In  1714  Louis
XIV.  gave  to  the  children  of  his  bastard  son  the  Duc  du  Maine
the  rank  and  privileges  of  princes  of  the  blood.

Royal  residences  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  Those  of  the  king,  Ver¬
sailles,  Fontainebleau,  Trianon,  Marly,  never  in  Paris  ;  of  Mon¬
sieur,  Saint-Cloud  ;  of  Monseigneur,  Meudon.

MEMOIRS

OF

THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

i.

I  WAS  born  on  the  night  of  January  16-17,  1675,  of
Claude,  Duc  de  Saint-Simon,  peer  of  France,  and  his  second
wife  Charlotte  de  L’Aubespine,  the  only  child

1691.

Where  and  how  of  that  marriage.  By  Diane  de  Budos,  my
these  Memoirs  father’s  first  wife,  he  had  one  daughter  and  no

began.

son.  He  married  the  daughter  to  the  Duc  de
Brissac,  peer  of  France,  only  brother  of  the  Duchesse  de
Villeroy.  She  died  in  1684,  without  children,  long  separ¬
ated  from  a  husband  who  did  not  deserve  her,  and  by  her
will  she  made  me  her  residuary  legatee.

I  bore  the  name  of  Yidame  de  Chartres,  and  I  was  brought
up  with  great  care  and  great  watchfulness.  My  mother,
who  had  much  virtue  and  a  mind  of  infinite  sense  and  per¬
severance,  gave  herself  continual  trouble  to  form  me  both  in
body  and  soul.  She  feared  for  me  the  fate  of  those  young
men  who  think  their  fortune  made  on  finding  themselves
their  own  masters  at  an  early  age.  My  father,  bom  in
1606,  could  not  live  long  enough  to  ward  that  evil  from
me,  and  my  mother  repeated  to  me  constantly  the  pressing
necessity  to  be  worth  something  in  himself,  for  a  young  man
entering  the  world  alone,  son  of  a  favourite  of  Louis  XIII.,

42  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

all  of  whose  friends  were  dead  or  not  in  a  condition  to  help
him,  and  of  a  mother  brought  up  by  the  old  Duchesse
d’Angoulême  (her  relation,  maternal  grandmother  of  the
Duc  de  Guise),  and  married  to  an  old  man,  never  seeing  any
but  her  husband’s  ancient  friends  and  never  being  able  to
make  friends  of  her  own  age.  To  this  she  added  the  lack
of  all  near  relations,  uncles,  aunts,  cousins-germains,  which
left  me  as  if  abandoned  to  myself,  and  increased  the  need
of  knowing  how  to  make  a  good  use  of  myself,  being  without
helpers  and  supporters  ;  for  her  two  brothers  were  obscure,
the  eldest  ruined  and  at  law  with  his  family  ;  and  my
father’s  only  brother  was  without  children  and  eight  years
older  than  himself.

At  the  same  time  she  applied  herself  to  raise  my  courage
and  to  excite  me  to  make  myself  such  that  I  could  repair  by
myself  alone  these  voids  so  difficult  to  overcome.  She  suc¬
ceeded  in  giving  me  a  great  desire  to  do  so.  My  taste  for
study  and  the  sciences  did  not  second  her  ;  but  that  which
is  innate  in  me  for  reading  and  for  history,  and  consequently
for  doing  and  becoming  something  through  emulation  and
the  examples  I  met  with,  made  up  for  this  coldness  toward
letters  ;  and  I  have  always  thought  that  if  I  had  not  been
made  to  lose  so  much  time  on  those  things  and  if  I  had
been  taught  to  make  a  serious  study  of  the  others,  I  might
have  been  able  to  become  something.

This  reading  of  history,  and,  above  all,  of  the  private
memoirs  of  our  time  and  the  times  succeeding  François  I.,
which  I  did  for  myself,  gave  me  a  strong  desire  to  write
the  memoirs  of  what  I  saw,  in  the  desire  and  hope  of  being
something  in  the  affairs  of  my  own  time,  and  of  knowing
all  I  could  about  them.  Objections  did  not  fail  to  present
themselves  to  my  mind  ;  but  a  firm  resolution  to  keep  the
secret  to  myself  alone  seemed  to  remedy  all  that.  I  began

1691]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

43

My  first  intimacy
with  the  Due
de  Chartres.

ray  Memoirs,  therefore,  in  July,  1694,  being  then  mestre  de
camp  [colonel]  of  a  regiment  of  cavalry  of  my  own  name,
in  the  camp  of  Guinsheim,  on  the  Vieux -Rhin,  in  the  army
commanded  by  the  Maréchal  Duc  de  Gorges.

In  1691  I  was  in  the  philosophy  class  and  beginning  to
ride  a  horse  at  the  academy  of  the  Sieurs  de  Mémon  at
Rochefort,  and  I  was  also  beginning  to  tire
much  of  masters  and  of  study,  and  to  wish
strongly  to  enter  the  army.  The  siege  of
Mons,  laid  by  the  king  in  person  at  the  first  opening  of
the  spring  of  that  year,  had  attracted  thither  all  the  young
men  of  my  age  for  their  first  campaign  ;  and  what  spurred
me  most  of  all  was  that  M.  le  Duc  de  Chartres  was  there.
I  had  been,  as  it  were,  brought  up  with  him,  —  younger
than  he  by  eight  months,  and,  if  age  permits  the  expression
between  young  men  of  rank  so  unequal,  friendship  united
us.  I  therefore  took  a  resolution  to  get  myself  out  of  child¬
hood,  and  I  suppress  the  tricks  I  used  in  order  to  succeed.
I  appealed  to  my  mother,  and  soon  saw  she  was  only  amus¬
ing  me.  I  then  had  recourse  to  my  father,  whom  I  induced
to  believe  that  the  king,  having  made  a  great  siege  this  year,
wrould  rest  the  year  after.  I  deceived  my  mother,  who  did
not  discover  the  plot  I  had  laid  until  it  was  on  the  point  of
execution,  and  I  spurred  up  my  father  not  to  let  it  be
defeated.

The  king  had  set  his  face  against  excusing  any  of  those
who  entered  the  service,  except  the  princes  of  the  blood  and
his  own  bastards,  from  the  necessity  of  passing  a  year  in
one  of  his  two  companies  of  mousquetaires,  whichever  they
chose.  From  there  they  had  to  go,  in  order  to  learn  more
or  less  slowly  to  obey,  either  to  the  head  of  a  company  of
cavalry,  or  as  subaltern  in  his  own  regiment  of  infantry
which  he  favoured  and  took  an  interest  in  above  all  others,

44

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

before  he  would  grant  them  permission  to  buy  a  regiment  of
cavalry  or  infantry,  according  as  each  of  them  had  chosen.
My  father  took  me  to  Versailles,  where  he  had  not  yet  been
able  to  go  since  his  return  from  Blaye,  at  which  place  he
came  near  dying.  My  mother  had  gone  down  with  post-
horses  to  find  him,  and  had  brought  him  home  still  very
ill,  so  that  up  to  this  time  he  had  not  been  able  to  see  the
king.  After  making  his  bow,  he  presented  me  to  become
a  mousquetaire,  on  the  day  of  Saint-Simon  and  Saint-Jude,
at  half-past  twelve  o’clock,  as  the  king  left  the  council.

His  Majesty  did  him  the  honour  to  embrace  him  three
times,  but  when  it  became  a  question  of  me,  the  king,  finding
me  small  and  delicate  in  appearance,  told  him  I  was  still
too  young  ;  on  which  my  father  replied  that  I  should  serve
him  all  the  longer.  Whereupon  the  king  asked  him  in
which  of  the  two  companies  he  wished  to  put  me,  and  my
father  chose  the  first,  on  account  of  Maupertuis,  his  par¬
ticular  friend,  who  was  captain  of  it.  Besides  the  care  he
expected  me  to  get,  he  was  not  ignorant  of  the  watchfulness
with  which  the  king  questioned  these  two  captains  about
the  distinguished  young  men  who  were  in  their  companies,
above  all  Maupertuis,  and  how  much  their  testimony  in¬
fluenced  the  first  opinions  formed  by  the  king,  the  conse¬
quences  of  which  involved  so  much.  My  father  was  not
mistaken,  and  I  have  reason  to  attribute  to  the  kind
offices  of  Maupertius  the  good  opinion  which  the  king  at
first  formed  about  me.

This  Maupertuis  said  he  belonged  to  the  house  of  Melun,
and  said  it  in  good  faith,  for  he  was  truth  and  honour  and
Maupertuis  uprightness  itself,  and  that  is  what  won  him
Gray  Mo  usque-  the  confidence  of  the  king.  Nevertheless,  he
was  no  Melun,  and  was  never  recognized  by
any  of  that  great  family.  He  had  risen  by  degrees  from

1692]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

45

the  grade  of  sergeant  of  mousquetaires  to  commanding  a
company  and  becoming  a  general  officer;  his  equity,  his
goodness,  his  valour,  had  won  him  such  esteem.  Trifles,
punctilios  of  all  kinds  as  to  precision  and  punctuality,  and
an  excitability  which  made  crime  out  of  nothing  with  the
best  faith  in  the  world,  caused  him  to  be  less  loved  than  he
might  have  been.  It  was  by  this  that  he  had  pleased  the
king,  who  often  gave  him  confidential  employments.  He
was  charged,  at  the  time  of  M.  de  Lauzun’s  last  disgrace,
with  the  duty  of  taking  him  to  Pignerol,  and  many  years
later  of  bringing  him  twice  to  Bourbon,  at  the  time  when
the  hope  of  his  liberty  and  the  interests  of  M.  du  Maine
joined  those  of  Mme.  de  Montespan,  and  forced  this  famous
unfortunate  to  yield  up  the  immense  legacy  of  Mademoiselle
merely  to  change  his  prison  into  an  exile.  Maupertuis’
punctiliousness  at  the  various  times  when  Lauzun  was  in
his  charge  drove  the  latter  to  such  despair  that  he  never
forgot  him  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  was  in  other  respects
a  manly  man,  polite,  modest,  and  respectful.

The  king,  concerned  for  the  establishment  of  his  bastards,
whom  he  exalted  day  by  day,  had  married  two  of  his  daugh-
1692  ters  P™10613  °f  the  blood.  Mme.  la  Princesse

Marnage  of  the  de  Conti,  only  daughter  of  the  king  and  Mme.
Duc  de  Chartres.  pa  ya]]jère,  was  a  widow  and  without  chil¬
dren  ;  the  other,  eldest  daughter  of  the  king  and  Madame
de  Montespan,  had  married  M.  le  Duc.  For  a  long  time
Madame  de  Maintenon,  even  more  than  the  king,  had
been  considering  how  to  elevate  the  bastards  still  higher,
and  both  desired  to  marry  Mlle,  de  Blois,  second  daugh¬
ter  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Montespan,  to  the  Duc  de
Chartres.  He  was  the  legitimate  and  only  nephew  of  the
king,  and  much  above  the  princes  of  the  blood  by  his  rank
as  grandson  of  France,  and  by  the  state  maintained  by

46

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

Monsieur.  The  marriages  of  the  two  princes  of  the  blood,
of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  had  scandalized  everybody.
The  king  was  not  ignorant  of  this,  and  by  it  he  judged  of
the  effect  of  a  marriage  more  startlingly  out  of  proportion.
For  four  years  he  had  been  turning  it  over  in  his  mind  and
taking  the  first  measures  for  it.  These  were  the  more  diffi¬
cult  because  Monsieur  was  deeply  attached  to  all  that  made
his  grandeur,  and  Madame  came  of  a  nation  which  abhors
bastardy  and  all  misalliances,  and  also  was  possessed  of  a
character  that  allowed  him  no  hope  of  ever  reconciling  her
to  the  marriage.

To  vanquish  these  obstacles  the  king  addressed  him¬
self  to  M.  le  Grand,  who  was  at  all  times  in  his  intimacy,
requesting  him  to  win  over  his  brother,  the

Cause  of  the  pre-  .

cedence  of  the  Chevalier  de  Lorraine,  who  was  known  to

Lorrain  princes

over  the  dukes  in  ru[e  Monsieur.  The  two  brothers  asked  no

the  promotion  of

l688,  better  than  to  make  their  court  to  the  king

in  a  matter  that  touched  him  sensibly,  and,  like  clever  men,
to  get  their  own  profit  thereby.  This  overture  was  made
in  1688.  Only  about  a  dozen  chevaliers  of  the  Order  were
left,  and  everybody  knew  that  a  promotion  could  not  be
long  delayed.  The  brothers  demanded  to  be  in  it,  and  to
be  given  precedence  of  the  dukes.  The  king,  who  had  never
yet  given  orders  for  this  assumption  to  any  of  the  Lorrains,
could  not  bring  himself  to  agree  ;  but  the  brothers  stood
firm  ;  they  carried  the  day  ;  and  the  Chevalier  de  Lorraine,
thus  paid  in  advance,  answered  for  the  consent  of  Monsieur
to  the  marriage,  and  for  the  means  of  bringing  Madame  and
the  Duc  de  Chartres  to  agree  to  it.

This  young  prince  had  been  placed  hi  the  hands  of  Saint-
Laurent  after  leaving  those  of  the  women.  Saint-Laurent
was  a  man  of  low  rank,  —  sub-introducer  of  ambassadors  to
Monsieur,  of  no  presence,  but,  to  say  the  thing  in  one  word,

1692]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

47

the  man  of  his  period  best  fitted  to  bring  np  a  prince,  and
form  a  great  king.  His  want  of  station  prevented  him  from
having  the  title  of  this  education  ;  his  great  merit  left  him
sole  master  of  it  ;  so  that  when  propriety  required  that
the  prince  should  have  a  governor,  that  governor  was  only
in  appearance,  and  Saint-Laurent  continued  in  the  same
confidence  and  the  same  authority.

He  was  a  friend  of  the  vicar  of  Saint-Eustache,  and  him¬
self  a  man  of  property.  This  vicar  had  a  valet  named  Dubois,
First  beginning  who  ha(l  formerly  been  that  of  the  Sieur - ,

of  the  Abbé  Du-  doctor  to  the  Archbishop  of  Beims,  Le  Tellier  ;

bois,  afterwards
cardinal  and
prime  minister.

and  the  doctor  finding  that  the  man  had  in¬
telligence,  made  him  study,  so  that  this  valet
knew  much  of  belles-lettres  and  even  of  history  ;  but  he  was
a  valet  who  owned  nothing,  and  after  the  death  of  his  first
master,  he  entered  the  service  of  the  vicar  of  Saint-Eustache.
This  vicar,  satisfied  with  the  valet,  for  whom  he  could  do
very  little,  gave  him  to  Saint-Laurent,  in  the  hope  that  he
would  do  better  by  him.  Saint-Laurent  was  pleased  with
the  man,  and  little  by  little  employed  him  to  write  out  the
studies  of  the  Duc  de  Chartres  ;  then,  to  make  better  use  of
him,  he  made  him  enter  the  priesthood  to  polish  him  ;  and  in
this  way  introduced  him  into  the  schoolroom  of  the  prince  to
help  him  in  preparing  his  lessons  and  writing  his  themes  ;
easing  the  prince  himself,  and  looking  out  the  words  in  the
dictionary.  I  have  seen  him  a  thousand  times  in  these
beginnings  when  I  went  to  play  with  M.  de  Chartres.  After
a  while  Saint-Laurent  became  infirm,  and  Dubois  taught  the
lessons,  and  taught  them  very  well,  though  he  made  them
pleasant  to  the  young  prince.

However,  Saint-Laurent  died,  and  very  suddenly.  Dubois,
in  the  interim,  continued  the  lessons  ;  but  by  this  time  he
was  almost  an  abbé  ;  he  had  found  means  to  pay  court  to

48

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

the  Chevalier  de  Lorraine  and  the  Marquis  d’Effiat,  first
equerry  to  Monsieur,  who  were  intimate  friends,  the  latter
having  great  influence  on  his  master.  To  make  Dubois
tutor  could  not  be  proposed  at  a  single  jump;  hut  his  pa¬
trons,  to  whom  he  appealed,  postponed  the  choice  of  a  tutor  ;
then  they  made  use  of  the  progress  of  the  young  prince  to
prevent  any  change  and  leave  Dubois  to  go  on  as  before.
Finally,  they  bombarded  him  into  the  place,  and  never  did  I
see  a  man  so  glad,  or  with  better  reason.  This  great  obliga¬
tion,  and  still  more  the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  position,
attached  him  closer  than  ever  to  his  protectors,  and  it  was  he
whom  the  Chevalier  de  Lorraine  made  use  of  to  obtain  M.  de
Chartres’  consent  to  his  marriage.

Dubois  had  won  his  confidence  ;  it  was  easy  at  his  age,
and  with  his  little  knowledge  and  experience,  to  make  him
afraid  of  the  king  and  Monsieur,  and  to  lead  him  to  see
on  the  other  side,  an  open  heaven.  All  that  Dubois  could
bring  to  bear,  however,  went  no  farther  than  to  prevent  a
refusal  ;  but  that  was  enough  for  the  success  of  the  enter¬
prise.  He  did  not  speak  of  the  matter  to  M.  de  Chartres
until  near  the  time  of  its  execution  ;  Monsieur  was  already
gained,  and  as  soon  as  the  king  had  received  Dubois’  answer,
he  hurried  the  affair  along.  A  day  or  two  earlier  Madame
had  got  wind  of  it.  She  spoke  to  her  son  of  the  indignity  of
such  a  marriage  with  all  the  force  she  never  lacked  ;  and  she
extracted  from  him  a  promise  that  he  would  not  consent.
So,  weakness  towards  his  tutor,  weakness  towards  his
mother,  aversion  on  one  side,  fear  on  the  other,  and  great
embarrassment  all  round.

One  afternoon,  quite  early,  as  I  was  passing  along  the
iipper  gallery,  I  saw  M.  de  Chartres  coming  out  of  a  door  at
the  back  of  his  apartment  with  a  sad  and  very  harassed  look,
followed  by  a  single  officer  of  Monsieur’s  guards.  As  I

1692 J  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

49

happened  to  be  there,  I  asked  him  where  he  was  going  so
fast  at  that  time  of  day.  He  replied  in  a  rough,  grieved
tone,  that  he  was  going  to  the  king,  who  had  sent  for  him.
I  did  not  think  it  well  to  accompany  him  ;  and  turning  to
my  governor  I  told  him  I  conjectured  it  was  something
about  a  marriage  which  would  soon  be  made  known.
Within  a  day  or  two  I  had  heard  a  rumour  of  it,  and  as  I
judged  that  the  scenes  would  be  strong,  curiosity  rendered
me  very  attentive  and  assiduous.

M.  de  Chartres  found  the  king  alone  with  Monsieur  in  his
cabinet,  where  the  young  prince  did  not  expect  to  find  his
father.  The  king  was  very  friendly  to  M.  de  Chartres  ;  told
him  he  wished  to  care  for  his  establishment  ;  that  the  war
raging  on  all  sides  deprived  him  of  the  princesses  who  would
have  suited  him  ;  and  as  to  the  princesses  of  the  blood,  there
were  none  of  his  age  ;  that  he  could  not  better  testify  his
affection  than  by  offering  him  his  daughter,  whose  sisters
had  both  married  princes  of  the  blood  ;  that  this  would  give
him  the  rank  of  son-in-law  as  well  as  that  of  nephew;  but,
nevertheless,  whatever  might  be  his  own  passionate  desire  for
this  marriage,  he  would  not  constrain  him,  and  would  leave
him  thereon  at  full  liberty.  This  proposal,  delivered  with  that
alarming  majesty  so  natural  to  the  king,  to  a  timid  prince
deprived  of  all  answer,  put  him  beside  himself.  He  fancied
he  could  escape  so  slippery  a  path  by  falling  back  on  Mon¬
sieur  and  Madame,  and  replied,  stammering,  that  although
the  king  was  master,  his  will  depended  on  theirs.  “  That
is  very  right  in  you,”  replied  the  king,  “  but  since  you  con¬
sent,  your  father  and  mother  will  not  oppose  it.  Is  not  that
true,  brother?”  he  said,  turning  to  Monsieur.  Monsieur
consented,  as  he  had  already  done  alone  with  the  king,  who
at  once  said  that  it  was  now  only  a  question  of  Madame  ;  for
whom  he  sent  immediately.  Then  he  began  to  talk  with

VOL.  i.  —  4

50

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

Monsieur,  and  neither  of  them  appeared  to  notice  the  trouble
and  depression  of  M.  de  Chartres.

Madame  arrived  ;  to  whom,  as  she  entered,  the  king  said
that  he  relied  on  her  not  opposing  a  matter  which  Monsieur
desired  and  to  which  M.  de  Chartres  had  consented  ;  and
that  was  her  son’s  marriage  with  Mlle,  de  Blois.  He
acknowledged  that  he  himself  desired  it  passionately,  and
repeated  briefly  the  same  things  he  had  just  said  to  M.  de
Chartres,  —  all  with  a  very  imposing  air  and  as  if  entirely
without  doubt  that  Madame  could  not  fail  to  be  delighted,
though  very  certain  to  the  contrary.  Madame,  who  had
counted  on  the  refusal  her  son  had  promised  her,  which
promise  he  had  really  kept,  as  far  as  he  could,  by  his  embar¬
rassed  and  conditional  answer,  found  herself  trapped  and
speechless.  She  darted  two  furious  glances  at  Monsieur
and  at  M.  de  Chartres,  said  that  since  they  wished  it  she
had  nothing  to  say,  dropped  a  short  curtsey,  and  went  off  to
her  own  apartments.  Her  son  followed  her  instantly,  at
whom,  without  giving  him  time  to  tell  her  how  the  thing
had  come  about,  she  railed  in  fury  and  drove  him  out  of  her
room.

Soon  after,  Monsieur,  leaving  the  king,  came  to  her,  and
except  that  she  did  not  drive  him  away  as  she  did  her  son,
she  spared  him  nothing  ;  so  that,  at  last,  he  left  her  quite  con¬
founded  without  having  had  a  chance  to  say  a  word.  The
whole  of  this  scene  was  over  by  four  o’clock  in  the  after¬
noon;  that  evening  there  was  an  appartement ,  which  hap¬
pened  in  winter  three  times  a  week,  the  other  three  times
comedy,  and  Sunday  nothing.

What  was  called  appartement  was  the  assembling  of  the
whole  Court  from  seven  o’clock  in  the  evening  until  ten
Appartement.  (when  the  king  sat  down  to  table)  in  the
grand  apartment  which  went  from  one  of  the  salons  at

1692]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON

51

the  end  of  the  great  gallery  as  far  as  the  antechamber  to  the
chapel.  At  first  there  was  music;  after  that,  tables  were
ready  in  all  the  rooms  for  every  kind  of  game  ;  a  lansque¬
net  at  which  Monseigneur  and  Monsieur  always  played  ;
a  billiard-table;  in  short,  perfect  liberty  for  all  to  play  at
what  they  liked,  and  to  call  for  more  tables  if  they  found
them  full.  Beyond  the  billiard-room  was  a  refreshment
room,  and  all  were  well  lighted.  In  the  beginning  of  this
arrangement  the  king  was  always  present  and  played  for
a  while  ;  but  it  was  now  a  long  time  since  he  had  done  so,
though  he  desired  others  to  be  assiduous,  and  they  went  be¬
cause  they  were  anxious  to  please  him.  He  himself  passed
his  evenings  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartments  working
with  the  different  ministers,  one  after  the  other.

Shortly  after  the  music  ended  the  king  sent  for  Monsei¬
gneur  and  Monsieur,  who  were  already  playing  at  lansquenet  ;
also  for  Madame,  who  could  scarcely  look  at  a  game  at
Inombre  beside  which  she  had  taken  her  seat;  and  for  M.  de
Chartres,  who  was  playing  gloomily  at  chess  ;  also  for  Mile,
de  Blois,  who  had  only  just  begun  to  appear  in  society,  and
was  this  evening  unusually  bedecked,  though  she  knew
nothing  and  suspected  nothing  ;  in  fact,  being  naturally
very  timid  and  horribly  afraid  of  the  king,  she  thought  she
was  sent  for  to  receive  a  reprimand,  and  trembled  so  much
that  Mme.  de  Maintenon  took  her  upon  her  lap  and  held
her  there,  being  scarcely  able  to  reassure  her.  The  rumour
of  all  these  royal  personages  being  summoned  to  Mme.  de
Maintenon’s  apartments  and  of  Mlle,  de  Blois  being  with
her,  made  the  news  of  the  marriage  known  to  the  Court  at
the  moment  when  the  king  was  announcing  it  in  private.
The  talk  lasted  but  a  few  moments,  for  the  same  personages
returned  to  the  appartement,  where  the  declaration  was  now
made  publicly.  I  arrived  at  this  moment.  I  found  the

52  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  l

company  in  groups,  and  great  astonishment  on  every  face.
I  soon  learned  the  cause,  which  did  not  surprise  me  at  all,
after  the  meeting  I  had  had  in  the  afternoon.

Madame  walked  about  the  gallery  with  Châteauthiers,
her  favourite,  and  worthy  of  being  so  ;  she  walked  with  great
strides,  her  handkerchief  in  her  hand,  weeping  without
constraint,  talking  quite  loud,  gesticulating,  and  admirably
representing  Ceres  after  the  abduction  of  her  daughter
Proserpine,  searching  for  her  everywhere,  and  demanding
her  of  Jupiter.  Everybody,  out  of  respect,  left  the  field
free  to  her,  and  only  passed  through  the  gallery  to  reach
the  appartement.  Monseigneur  and  Monsieur  had  returned
to  their  lansquenet.  The  first  seemed  to  me  to  be  just  his
usual  self,  but  never  was  anything  so  ashamed  as  Mon¬
sieur’s  face,  nor  so  disconcerted  as  his  whole  appearance  ;
and  this  first  condition  lasted  him  more  than  a  month.
His  son  seemed  wretched,  and  the  future  wife  in  a  state
of  extreme  sadness  and  embarrassment.  However  young
she  was,  and  however  marvellous  this  marriage,  she  saw
and  felt  the  whole  scene,  and  she  dreaded  the  consequences.
Consternation  was  general.

Policy  made  the  appartement  dull  to  all  appearance,  but
it  was  really  very  eager  and  curious.  I  found  it  short  in
its  ordinary  length  ;  it  finished  with  the  king’s  supper,  at
which  I  resolved  to  lose  nothing.  The  king  seemed  to
be  exactly  as  usual.  The  Duc  de  Chartres  was  next  to
Madame,  who  did  not  look  at  him  or  at  Monsieur.  Her
eyes  were  full  of  tears,  which  fell  from  time  to  time,  and
sometimes  she  wiped  them,  looking  about  her  as  if  to  see
what  countenances  people  were  taking.  Her  son’s  eyes
were  also  red,  and  they  both  ate  almost  nothing.  I  noticed
that  the  king  offered  Madame  nearly  all  the  dishes  that
were  before  him,  and  she  refused  them  with  a  gruff  air,

1692]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  53

which  did  not,  even  to  the  last,  rebuff  the  attention  and
politeness  the  king  showed  her.

It  was  also  much  remarked  that  on  leaving  the  table,
and  at  the  close  of  the  circle  which  stood  for  a  moment  in
the  king’s  chamber,  he  made  Madame  a  low  and  very  marked
bow,  during  which  she  turned  such  a  pirouette  that  when
the  king  raised  himself  he  saw  nothing  but  her  back,  as
she  moved  toward  the  door.

The  next  day  the  whole  Court  hurried  to  the  apartments
of  Monsieur  and  of  Madame,  and  of  the  Duc  de  Chartres  ;
but  no  one  said  a  word  ;  they  contented  themselves  with
making  their  bow;  and  all  took  place  in  perfect  silence.
After  which  they  went  as  usual  to  wait  in  the  gallery,  for
the  rising  of  the  council  and  the  king’s  mass.  Madame
came  there.  Her  son  approached  her,  as  he  did  every  day,
to  kiss  her  hand.  At  this  Madame  applied  such  a  sono¬
rous  box  on  his  ear  that  it  was  heard  at  a  distance,  and  be¬
ing  given  in  presence  of  the  whole  Court  it  covered  the
poor  prince  with  confusion,  and  filled  those  who  saw  it,  of
whom  I  was  one,  with  amazement.  The  same  day  an  im¬
mense  dot  was  declared;  and  the  following  day  the  king
went  to  pay  a  visit  to  Monsieur  and  Madame,  which  passed
off  very  gloomily  ;  after  which  nothing  was  thought  of  but
preparations  for  the  wedding.

Shrove  Sunday  there  was  a  grand  ball  of  ceremony  given
by  the  king  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  opened  by  a  promenade
[ branle ]  after  which  everybody  danced.  I  went  that  morn¬
ing  to  see  Madame,  who  could  not  keep  from  telling  me,  in
sour  and  grieved  tones,  that  I  was  apparently  very  glad  of
the  balls  they  were  going  to  have;  that  belonged  to  my
age,  but  she  who  was  old  wished  they  were  farther  off.
Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  danced  for  the  first  time,  and
led  the  'branle,  with  Mademoiselle.  It  was  also  the  first

54

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

time  that  I  had  danced  at  the  king’s  hall,  and  I  led  Mlle,  de
Sourches,  daughter  of  the  grand  provost,  who  danced  very
well.  Every  one  was  very  magnificent.  Shortly  after,  the
betrothal  and  the  signing  of  the  marriage  contract  took
place  in  the  king’s  cabinet,  in  presence  of  the  whole  Court.
That  same  day  the  household  of  the  future  Duchesse  de
Chartres  had  been  announced,  the  king  giving  her  a  cheva¬
lier  of  honour  and  a  lady  of  the  bedchamber,  until  now
reserved  for  the  daughters  of  France,  and  a  lady  of  honour,
which  was  also  a  strange  novelty.

Shrove  Monday,  all  the  royal  guests  and  the  bridal  pair
went  soon  after  mid-day,  to  the  king’s  cabinet  and  thence  to
the  chapel.  The  latter  was  arranged  as  usual  for  the  king’s
mass,  except  that  between  his  prie-Dieu  and  the  altar  were
two  hassocks  for  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  who  thus  turned
their  backs  to  the  king.  The  Cardinal  de  Bouillon,  already
robed,  arrived  in  the  sacristy  at  the  same  time,  married  them,
and  said  mass.  The  canopy  was  held  by  the  grand  master
and  the  master  of  ceremonies,  Blainville  and  Sainctot.
From  the  chapel  they  all  went  to  dinner.  The  table  was  in
the  shape  of  a  horse-shoe.  The  princes  and  princesses  of  the
blood  were  placed  to  right  and  left,  according  to  their  rank,
the  line  ending  with  the  two  bastard  sons  of  the  king,  and
after  them,  for  the  first  time,  the  widowed  Duchesse  de  Yer-
neuil,  so  that  the  Duc  de  Yerneuil,  bastard  of  Henri  IV.,
became  in  this  way  a  prince  of  the  blood  long  after  his
death,  which  he  certainly  never  expected  to  be.  The  Due
d’Uzès  thought  this  so  amusing  that  he  marched  before  her,
crying  out  as  often  as  he  could  :  “Room,  room  for  Mme.
Charlotte  Séguier!”  Ho  duchess  paid  her  court  at  this  din¬
ner,  except  the  Duchesse  de  Sully  and  the  Duchesse  du  Lude,
daughter  and  daughter-in-law  of  Mme.  de  Yerneuil,  which  all
the  others  thought  so  improper  that  they  did  not  dare  to

1693]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

55

return  there.  After  dinner  the  King  and  Queen  of  England
came  to  Versailles  with  their  court.  There  was  fine  music,
and  play,  at  which  the  king  appeared,  still  much  dressed  and
very  glad,  his  blue  ribbon  over  all,  as  it  had  been  the  night
before.  The  supper  was  the  same  as  the  dinner.  The  King
of  England  had  his  wife  on  his  right  and  the  king  on  his  left,
each  having  their  cadenas }  After  supper  the  married  pair
were  conducted  to  the  apartments  of  the  new  Duchesse  de
Chartres,  to  whom  the  Queen  of  England  gave  the  chemise,
the  King  of  England  giving  it  to  M.  de  Chartres,  who  refused
at  first,  saying  he  was  too  unhappy.  The  benediction  of  the
bed  was  done  by  the  Cardinal  de  Bouillon,  who  obliged  them
to  wait  a  quarter  of  an  hour  for  him,  which  made  people  say
that  such  airs  were  not  proper  in  one  who  had  just  returned
from  a  long  exile,  to  which  he  had  been  sent  for  his  folly  in
refusing  to  give  the  nuptial  benediction  to  Mme.  la  Duchesse
unless  he  were  admitted  to  the  royal  supper.

My  year  as  a  mousquetaire  was  slipping  away  and  my
father  asked  the  king  what  it  would  please  him  to  do  with
1693.  me.  The  king  leaving  the  choice  to  him,  he
1  leave  the  mous-  qegjqne(]  me  for  the  cavalry  because  he  had

quetaires  for  the  ^

Royal- Roussillon,  himself  commanded  in  it,  and  the  king  resolved
to  give  me,  without  purchase,  a  company  in  one  of  his  cavalry
regiments.  But  there  had  to  be  a  vacancy;  four  or  five
months  went  by  in  this  way,  and  I  still  did  my  mousquetaire
functions  assiduously.  At  last,  about  the  middle  of  April,
Saint-Pouange  sent  to  ask  if  I  would  accept  a  company  in
the  Koyal-Koussillon,  which  was  vacant  but  much  cut  up
and  now  in  garrison  at  Mons.  I  was  dying  with  fear  lest  I
might  not  be  in  the  campaign  about  to  open  ;  so  I  persuaded
my  father  to  let  me  accept  it.  I  thanked  the  king,  who

1  Coffer  of  precious  metal,  containing  knife,  fork,  and  spoon.  This
was  a  distinctive  sign  of  princes  and  seigneurs  of  the  highest  rank.

56

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

replied  very  obligingly.  The  company  was  entirely  reformed
in  fifteen  days.

I  was  at  Versailles  when,  Friday,  March  27,  the  king  pro¬
moted  to  be  marshals  of  France  the  Comte  de  Choiseul,  the
Promotion  of  the  Duc  de  Villeroy,  the  Marquis  de  Joyeuse,
France!1  afShalS  °f  Tourville,  the  Duc  de  Noailles,  the  Marquis  de
Boufflers,  and  Catinat.  M.  de  Boufflers  was  in  Flanders,  and
Catinat  on  the  borders  of  Italy  ;  the  five  others  at  Court  or  in
Paris.  The  king  sent  word  to  the  two  absent  ones  to  take
the  title,  rank,  and  honours  of  marshals  of  France  without
waiting  to  take  the  oath,  which,  in  fact,  is  not  necessary  to
give  them  their  position.  I  was  at  the  king’s  dinner  the
same  day.  Apropos  of  nothing,  the  king,  looking  round  on
the  company  said  :  “  Barbezieux  1  will  hear  of  the  promotion
of  the  marshals  of  France  along  the  roads.”  Nobody  said  a
word.  The  king  was  displeased  by  his  frequent  visits  to
Paris,  where  pleasures  detained  him,  and  was  nothing  loath
to  give  him  this  twitch  of  the  curb,  and  also  to  let  him  know
the  small  share  that  he  had  had  in  the  promotion.

This  promotion  made  a  crowd  of  malcontents,  less  for  real
merit  than  to  gain  merit  by  complaining  ;  but  people  chiefly
blamed  the  neglect  and  passing  over  of  the  Duc  de  Choiseul,
Maulevrier,  and  Montai.  The  cause  which  excluded  the  first
is  curious.  His  wife,  sister  of  La  Vallière,  handsome  and
made  like  a  goddess,  never  stirred  from  the  side  of  the  Prin¬
cesse  de  Conti,  her  cousin  and  intimate  friend.  She  had  had
gallantries  without  number,  which  had  made  a  great  noise.
The  king,  fearing  this  intimacy  for  his  daughter,  had  her
warned,  then  mortified,  then  sent  away,  but  subsequently
had  always  pardoned  her.  Seeing  her  incorrigible,  and  not
liking  to  make  scandals  himself,  he  determined  to  work
through  the  husband,  and  to  get  rid  of  her  once  for  all.  For

1  Minister  of  war,  third  son  of  Louvois.

1693]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

57

this  he  used  the  promotion,  and  charged  M.  de  La  Roche¬
foucauld,  the  intimate  friend  of  the  Duc  de  Choiseul,  to
represent  to  the  duke  the  harm  done  by  the  public  disorder
of  his  wife,  and  urge  that  he  should  put  her  in  a  convent  ;
and  also  to  make  him  understand,  if  he  showed  hesitation  in
resolving  to  do  so,  that  the  marshal’s  bâton  was  the  price
of  it.

What  the  king  did  not  foresee  happened.  The  Duc  de
Choiseul,  an  excellent  soldier,  was  rather  weak  and  the  kind¬
est  man  in  the  world.  Though  old,  and  somewhat  in  love
with  his  wife,  who  made  him  believe  at  least  a  part  of  what
she  pleased,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  such  a  scandal  ;  so
that  M.  de  La  Rochefoucauld,  coming  to  an  end  of  his  elo¬
quence,  was  forced  to  bring  forward  the  condition  of  the
bâton.  That  spoiled  all.  The  Duc  de  Choiseul  was  indig¬
nant  that  the  reward  of  his  services  and  the  reputation  that
he  had  justly  acquired  in  war,  should  be  attached  to  a  domes¬
tic  matter  which  concerned  himself  alone,  and  he  refused
with  an  obstinacy  there  was  no  conquering.  It  cost  him
the  bâton  of  marshal  of  France,  and  an  outcry  followed.
What  was  worse  for  him,  his  wife  was  soon  after  dismissed,
and  did  so  many  bad  things  that  the  Duc  de  Choiseul  was
obliged  to  put  her  away  and  separate  from  her  forever.

Montai  was  a  tall  old  man  of  eighty  who  had  lost  an  eye
in  war,  in  which  also  his  body  had  been  covered  with  wounds.
He  had  greatly  distinguished  himself  and  had  often
commanded  in  chief  on  important  occasions.  He  gained
much  honour  at  the  battle  of  Fleurus,  and  still  more  at
Steinkerke,  where  he  turned  the  fortunes  of  the  day.
Every  one  cried  out  for  him,  except  himself.  His  modesty
and  his  wisdom  made  all  admire  him.  Even  the  king
was  touched,  and  promised  to  repair  the  wrong  he  had
done  him.  He  went  away  to  his  own  home  for  a  time,

58

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

but  returned  and  took  service  again  on  the  hopes  held  out
to  him,  which  were  cheated  till  his  death.  The  good  man
died  at  Dunkerque,  where  he  commanded  a  separate  corps
towards  the  sea.  He  was  a  very  gallant  man  and  showed
himself  to  be  one  to  the  last,  when  over  eighty  years  of  age.

Mademoiselle,  La  Grande  Mademoiselle,  called  thus  to
distinguish  her  from  the  daughter  of  Monsieur,  or,  to  give
Death  of  Made-  her  her  proper  name,  Mlle,  de  Montpensier,
moiseiie  and  her  e[t[est  daughter  of  Gaston  d’Orléans  and  the

forced.  only  one  of  his  first  marriage,  died  in  her

palace  of  Luxembourg,  Sunday,  April  5th,  after  a  long
illness  of  retention  of  urine,  in  her  sixty-third  year,  the
richest  private  princess  in  Europe.  The  king  had  visited
her,  and  she  strongly  recommended  to  him  M.  de  Joyeuse,
as  her  relation,  to  be  made  marshal  of  France.  She  cous-
ined  and  brought  forward  and  took  immense  interest
in  all  who  had  the  honour  to  belong  to  her,  being  in  this,
though  very  haughty,  entirely  different  from  what  the
princes  of  the  blood  have  now  become  in  that  respect.
She  wore  mourning  scrupulously  for  very  ordinary  and
even  very  distant  relatives,  often  explaining  how  and  why
they  were  so.  Monsieur  and  Madame  never  left  her  during
her  illness.  Besides  the  intimacy  that  had  always  existed,
under  all  circumstances,  between  herself  and  Monsieur,  the
latter  was  hovering  over  her  rich  inheritance,  and  was,  hi
fact,  her  residuary  legatee.  But  the  fattest  morsels  had
escaped  him.

The  published  Memoirs  of  this  princess  reveal  plainly
her  weakness  for  M.  de  Lauzun,  and  the  folly  of  the  latter
for  not  marrying  her  the  moment  he  obtained  the  king’s  per¬
mission,  in  order  to  do  so  with  more  pomp  and  splendour.
Their  despair  at  the  withdrawal  of  the  king’s  permission  was
extreme,  but  the  donations  given  under  the  marriage  con-

1693]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

59

tract  were  already  made,  and  confirmed  by  other  deeds.
Monsieur,  prompted  by  M.  le  Prince,  had  urged  the  king
to  retract  ;  but  Madame  de  Montespan  and  M.  de  Louvois
had  even  greater  influence,  and  on  them  fell  all  the  fury  of
Mademoiselle  and  the  rage  of  the  favourite,  for  M.  de  Lauzun
was  really  that.  Though  not  for  long  ;  he  burst  forth  more
than  once  to  the  king,  and  oftener  still  to  the  mistress,  and
gave  fine  chances  to  the  minister  to  ruin  him.  It  ended
finally  in  his  being  arrested  and  sent  to  Pignerol,  where  he
was  extremely  ill-treated  by  Louvois’  orders  and  remained
for  ten  years.  Mademoiselle’s  love  did  not  cool  during  his
absence.  It  was  turned  to  profit  in  order  to  make  a  grand
establishment  for  the  Duc  du  Maine 1  at  her  expense  and
that  of  M.  de  Lauzun,  whose  liberty  was  thus  purchased.
Eu,  Aumale,  Dombes,  and  other  estates  were  given  to  M.  du
Maine,  to  Mademoiselle’s  great  regret.  And  it  was  under
a  pretext  of  gratitude  that  the  king,  for  the  real  purpose  of
elevating  his  bastards  more  and  more,  made  them  assume  the
livery  of  Mademoiselle,  which  was  that  of  M.  Gaston.  This
forced  heirship  was  very  little  agreeable  to  her,  and  she  was
always  on  the  defensive  for  the  rest  of  her  property,  lest
the  king  should  tear  it  from  her  for  his  beloved  son.

The  incredible  adventures  of  M.  de  Lauzun,  who  saved
the  Queen  of  England  and  the  Prince  of  Wales,  brought
him  back  to  Court.  He  had  quarrelled  with  Mademoiselle,
who  was  always  jealous  of  him  and  would  not  see  him,
even  before  her  death.  Out  of  her  donation  he  still  kept
Thiers  and  Saint-Fargeau.  He  allowed  it  to  be  understood
that  he  was  married  to  Mademoiselle,  and  at  her  death  he
appeared  in  full  mourning  mantle  before  the  king,  who
thought  such  behaviour  very  bad.  After  his  mourning,  he

1  Eldest  son  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Montespan.  Their  second  son
was  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.

60

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

never  took  back  his  own  livery,  but  made  himself  one  of  a
brown  that  was  almost  black,  with  blue  and  white  galloons,
to  testify  continually  his  grief  at  the  loss  of  Mademoiselle,
whose  portraits  he  kept  everywhere.

All  the  memoirs  of  the  civil  wars  and  Mademoiselle’s
own  Memoirs  have  made  her  too  well  known  to  make  it
necessary  to  add  anything  here.  The  king  never  forgave
her  conduct  on  the  day  of  Saint-Antoine  ;  and  I  heard  him
once  at  supper  reproach  her,  in  a  jesting  way  but  pretty
strongly,  for  having  fired  the  cannon  of  the  Bastille  upon
his  troops.  She  was  rather  embarrassed,  but  she  got  out  of
it  extremely  well.

On  the  3rd  of  May,  at  ten  o’clock  in  the  evening,  I  had
the  misfortune  to  lose  my  father.  He  was  eighty-seven  years
Death  of  my  old  and  had  never  fully  recovered  from  the
father.  severe  illness  he  had  at  Blaye  two  years  earlier.

For  the  last  three  weeks  he  had  suffered  a  little  from  the
gout.  My  mother,  seeing  him  advance  in  years,  had  pro¬
posed  to  him  some  domestic  arrangements  which  he  made
like  a  good  father,  and  she  was  thinking  of  getting  him  to
resign  his  dignity  of  duke  and  peer  in  my  favour.  He  had
dined  with  friends,  for  he  always  had  company.  In  the
evening  he  went  to  bed,  without  ill  or  accident,  and  while
they  were  talking  with  him  he  suddenly  gave  three  violent
sighs,  one  after  the  other  quickly.  He  was  dead  almost
before  he  could  cry  out  that  he  was  ill  ;  there  was  no  more
oil  in  his  lamp.

I  learned  the  sad  news  on  my  return  from  the  coucher  of
the  king,  who  was  to  purge  himself  the  next  day.  The
night  was  given  to  the  just  feelings  of  nature.  The  next
morning  early  I  went  to  find  Bontems  and  the  Duc  de
Beauvilliers,  who  was  on  duty  and  whose  father  had  been
a  friend  of  my  father.  M.  de  Beauvilliers  testified  the

1693]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

61

utmost  kindness  for  me  in  the  apartment  of  the  princes
whose  governor  he  was,  and  he  promised  to  ask  the  king,
when  he  opened  his  curtains,  to  give  me  my  father’s  gov¬
ernments.  He  obtained  them  at  once  ;  and  Bontems,  who
was  much  attached  to  my  father,  ran  to  tell  me  in  the
tribune  where  I  was  waiting.  Their  M.  de  Beauvilliers
came  himself  to  bid  me  be  in  the  gallery  at  three  o’clock,
when  he  would  send  for  me  to  enter  through  the  cabinets
after  the  king’s  dinner  was  removed.

I  found  the  crowd  dispersing  from  his  room.  As  soon  as
Monsieur,  who  was  standing  by  the  king’s  pillow,  saw  me,
he  called  out  quite  loud  :  “  Ah  !  here  comes  M.  le  Duc  de
Saint-Simon.”  I  approached  the  bed  and  made  my  thanks
by  a  low  bow.  The  king  asked  me  how  the  misfortune
had  come  about,  with  much  kindness  towards  my  father
and  me  ;  he  knew  well  how  to  season  his  favours.  He  spoke
to  me  of  the  sacraments  my  father  had  not  had  time  to
receive.  I  told  him  that  shortly  before  his  death  he  had
made  a  retreat  of  several  days  at  Saint-Lazare,  where  he
had  his  confessor  and  where  he  made  his  devotions,  and  I
added  a  word  on  the  piety  of  his  life.  The  colloquy  lasted
some  time,  and  ended  by  exhortations  to  be  virtuous  and  do
right,  and  he  would  always  take  care  of  me.

II.

My  mother,  who  had  felt  much  uneasiness  about  me  dur¬
ing  the  last  campaign,1  was  anxious  that  I  should  not  make
a  second  without  being  married.  There  was

1694.  0

origin  of  my  inti-  therefore  much  question  between  us  of  this

mate  friendship  great  affair.  Though  very  young,  I  had  no
Beauviiiiers  until  repugnance  to  it,  but  I  wished  to  marry  as  I
myself  pleased.  With  an  eminent  establish¬
ment,  I  yet  felt  myself  much  alone  in  a  situation  where
credit  and  consideration  did  more  than  all  the  rest.  The
son  of  a  favourite  of  Louis  XIII.  and  of  a  mother  who  had
lived  for  him  alone,  whom  he  had  married  when  she  her¬
self  was  no  longer  young,  without  uncles,  aunts,  cousins,  or
near  relations,  or  useful  friends  of  father  and  mother,  —  my
father’s  old  friends  being  so  outside  of  all  things  by  reason
of  their  age,  —  I  felt  myself  extremely  alone.  Millions  could
not  have  tempted  me  into  a  misalliance,  nor  could  fashion  or
my  own  needs  induce  me  to  stoop  to  it.

The  Duc  de  Beauviiiiers  had  always  remembered  that
his  father  and  mine  had  been  friends,  and  that  he  himself
had  lived  on  the  same  footing  with  my  father  so  far  as  the
difference  of  their  ages,  places,  and  ways  of  life  would  allow  ;
and  he  had  always  shown  me  so  much  attention  in  the
apartments  of  the  princes,  whose  governor  he  was  and  to
whom  I  paid  my  court,  that  it  was  to  him  that  I  addressed
myself  on  the  death  of  my  father,  and  subsequently,  as  I
have  already  stated.  His  virtue,  his  gentleness,  his  polite-

1  That  of  Neerwinden  and  Charleroy.

1694]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

63

ness  had  made  me  love  him.  His  favour  was  now  at  the
highest  pohit.  He  was  minister  of  State  since  the  death
of  M.  de  Louvois  ;  he  had  when  very  young  succeeded  the
Maréchal  de  Villeroy  in  the  position  of  head  of  the  coun¬
cil  of  Finances  ;  and  from  his  father  he  held  the  post  of
first  gentleman  of  the  Bedchamber.  The  reputation  of  the
Duchesse  de  Beauvilliers  also  touched  me,  and  the  inti¬
mate  union  in  which  they  lived  together.  The  difficulty
was  as  to  property.  I  had  great  need  of  cleaning  up  mine,
which  was  in  great  disorder,  and  M.  de  Beauvilliers  had
two  sons  and  eight  daughters.  In  spite  of  all  that,  my  de¬
sires  carried  the  day,  and  my  mother  approved  of  them.

The  decision  made,  I  thought  that  to  go  straight  to  my
end,  without  windings  or  third  parties,  would  seem  to  have
the  best  grace  ;  my  mother  put  into  my  hand  a  statement,
very  truthful  and  very  exact,  about  my  property  and  my
debts,  and  the  expenses  and  claims  against  me.  I  carried
it  to  Versailles,  and  sent  to  ask  M.  de  Beauvilliers  to  name
a  time  when  I  could  speak  with  him  privately,  at  leisure,
Louviiie.  and  at  our  ease.  Louville  was  the  one  I

sent  to  him.  He  was  the  son  of  a  gentleman  of  good  sta¬
tion,  and  his  mother’s  was  equally  good  ;  the  family  had
always  been  much  attached  to  my  father,  who  had  pro¬
tected  them  in  the  days  of  his  favour,  and  since  then
through  M.  de  Seignelay.  Louville,  brought  up  to  the
same  attachment,  had  been  advanced  from  captain  of  a
king’s  regiment  of  infantry  to  be  gentleman-in-waiting  to
the  Duc  d’Anjou  by  M.  de  Beauvilliers  on  my  father’s  re¬
commendation.  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  who  liked  him  much
afterwards,  had  not  known  him,  though  a  relation  of  his
own,  except  through  my  father.  Louville  was  a  man  of
great  intelligence,  who,  with  an  imagination  which  made
him  always  fresh  and  the  most  excellent  company,  had

64

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

ideas  and  perception  in  great  affairs,  and  could  give  tire
most  solid  and  best  of  counsel.

I  had  therefore  an  appointment  at  eight  o’clock  in  the
evening  in  Mme.  de  Beauvilliers’  cabinet,  where  the  duke
came  to  see  me  alone  without  her.  There,  I  made  him  my
compliment  as  to  what  brought  me  there,  and  as  to  my
preferring  to  address  myself  directly  to  him,  instead  of
employing  others  to  speak  to  him,  which  was  ordinarily
done  at  such  times  ;  and  then,  having  expressed  my  whole
desire,  I  laid  before  him  a  most  true  and  exact  account  of
my  property  and  affairs,  entreating  him  to  see  what  he  could
add  to  make  his  daughter  happy  with  me  ;  saying  that  that
was  the  only  condition  I  desired  to  make,  not  wishing  to
hear  a  word  of  discussion  on  any  other  ;  neither  on  the  more
nor  on  the  less  ;  and  that  all  the  favour  I  asked  of  him  was
to  grant  me  his  daughter  and  have  the  marriage  contract
made  as  it  pleased  him,  and  that  my  mother  and  myself
would  sign  it  without  examination.

The  duke  kept  his  eyes  glued  upon  me  during  all  the
time  I  was  speaking.  He  answered  like  a  man  who  was
filled  with  gratitude  for  my  desire,  my  frankness,  and  my
confidence.  He  explained  to  me  the  state  of  his  family,
and  asked  me  for  a  little  time  to  speak  to  Mme.  de  Beau¬
villiers  and  see  together  what  it  would  be  possible  for  them
to  do.  He  then  told  me  that  of  his  eight  daughters  the
eldest  was  between  fourteen  and  fifteen  years  of  age;  the
second  much  deformed  and  not  marriageable  ;  the  third
between  twelve  and  thirteen  ;  and  all  the  others  children
whom  he  kept  at  Montargis  with  the  Benedictines,  whose
virtue  and  piety  he  knew,  and  therefore  preferred  to  con¬
vents  in  the  neighbourhood,  where  he  might  have  had  the
happiness  of  seeing  them  oftener.  He  added  that  his  eldest
daughter  wished  to  be  a  nun  ;  and  that  the  last  time  he

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  65

had  been  to  see  her  at  Fontainebleau,  he  had  found  her
more  determined  than  ever.  That  as  for  property,  he  had
little,  and  he  did  not  know  if  that  would  suit  me;  but
he  assured  me  there  were  no  efforts  he  would  not  make
for  me  in  that  direction.  I  replied  that  he  must  see  from
the  proposal  I  had  made  to  him  that  it  was  not  property
which  brought  me  there,  nor  even  his  daughter,  whom  I
had  never  seen  ;  that  it  was  he  who  had  charmed  me,  and
whom  I  wished  to  marry  together  with  Mme.  de  Beau-
villiers.  “  But,”  he  said,  “  if  she  absolutely  persists  in  being
a  nun  ?  ”  “  Then,”  I  replied,  “  I  ask  for  your  third.”  To  this

proposal  he  made  two  objections  :  her  age,  and  also  the  jus¬
tice  of  giving  her  and  the  eldest  equal  property  if,  after
the  marriage  were  made,  the  eldest  changed  her  mind  and
no  longer  wished  to  be  a  nun.  To  the  first  objection  I
replied  by  the  example  in  his  own  family  of  his  sister-in-
law  who  was  younger  still  when  she  married  the  late  Due
de  Mortemart;  to  the  other,  that  he  could  give  me  the
third  on  the  footing  that  the  eldest  might  marry;  leaving
him  free  to  pay  me  the  rest  of  the  dowry  on  the  day  when
the  eldest  made  her  profession  ;  and  that  if  she  changed
her  mind  I  should  be  contented  to  have  married  the
younger,  and  glad  if  the  elder  found  a  better  husband
than  I.

Then  the  duke,  raising  his  eyes  to  heaven  and  moved
quite  beside  himself,  declared  that  he  had  never  felt  so
great  a  struggle,  and  that  he  needed  to  gather  all  his
strength  not  to  give  her  to  me  that  very  instant.  He  ex¬
patiated  on  my  treatment  of  him,  and  conjured  me,  whether
the  thing  succeeded  or  not,  to  look  upon  him  henceforth
as  my  father,  saying  that  he  would  serve  me  in  every  way,
and  that  the  obligation  I  put  him  under  was  such  that  he
could  not  offer,  or  be  bound  to  me,  for  less  than  all  that

VOL.  I.  —  5

66

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

was  in  his  power  of  service  and  counsel.  He  embraced
me  as  his  son  and  we  parted,  agreeing  to  see  each  other
again  at  the  hour  which  he  would  tell  me  at  the  king’s
lever  the  next  morning.  There  he  whispered  to  me,  in
passing,  to  be  in  the  cabinet  of  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne
at  three  o’clock  that  afternoon,  when  the  prince  would  be
playing  tennis  and  the  room  empty.  But  bores  are  every¬
where.  I  met  two  on  my  way  to  the  rendezvous,  who,
surprised  at  the  hour  at  which  they  saw  me  passing  along
a  corridor  in  which  they  thought  I  could  have  no  business,
importuned  me  with  questions.  I  got  rid  of  them  as  best
I  could,  and  at  last  I  reached  the  prince’s  cabinet,  where  I
found  his  governor,  who  had  stationed  his  confidential  valet
at  the  door  to  admit  no  one  but  me.  We  sat  down  face
to  face,  the  schoolroom  table  between  us.  There,  I  re¬
ceived  the  tenderest  answer,  but  a  negative  one,  founded
on  the  vocation  of  his  eldest  daughter  ;  on  his  want  of
means  to  equal  her  with  his  third  if,  after  the  marriage
took  place,  she  changed  her  mind  ;  on  the  fact  that  he
was  not  paid  for  his  offices,  and  on  the  unpleasantness  it
would  be  to  him  to  be  the  first  minister  who  did  not  re¬
ceive  the  gift  the  king  had  hitherto  always  made  on  the
marriage  of  his  ministers’  daughters,  and  which  the  present
condition  of  State  affairs  prevented  him  from  expecting.
All  that  was  possible  of  sorrow,  regret,  esteem,  prefer¬
ence,  and  tenderness  was  said  to  me;  I  answered  in  the
same  way,  and  we  separated,  after  embracing,  not  feeling
able  to  talk  to  each  other  longer.

The  next  day  I  again  saw  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  to  whom  I
said  with  an  air  of  fear  and  hope  that  the  conversation  of
the  day  before  had  so  afflicted  me  that  I  had  shortened  it  in
the  need  I  felt  to  pass  the  first  outbursts  of  my  sorrow  in
solitude,  —  which  was  true,  —  but  that,  since  he  allowed  me

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

67

to  refer  again  to  this  matter,  I  saw  but  two  principal  diffi¬
culties,  the  property  and  the  vocation  ;  that  as  for  the  prop¬
erty,  I  begged  him  to  take  that  statement  of  mine  which  I
again  brought  to  him,  and  settle  upon  it  as  he  pleased.
With  regard  to  the  convent,  I  drew  him  a  vivid  picture  of
what  was  too  often  taken  for  a  vocation  when  it  was  nothing
of  the  kind,  and  frequently  led  the  way  in  young  persons  to
poignant  regrets  for  having  renounced  that  of  which  they
were  ignorant,  and  afterwards  imagined  to  be  delightful;
confining  in  a  prison  both  body  and  soul  which  became  in
the  end  despairing;  to  this  I  added  another  picture  of  the
good  to  be  gained,  and  the  examples  of  virtue  which  his
daughter  would  find  in  his  home.

The  duke  seemed  to  me  profoundly  touched  with  the  pur¬
port  of  my  eloquence.  He  said  it  moved  him  to  the  bottom
of  his  soul,  and  that  he  repeated,  with  all  his  heart,  what  he
had  already  said,  that  between  me  and  M.  le  Comte  de  Tou¬
louse,  if  he  were  to  ask  his  daughter’s  hand,  he  would  not
hesitate  to  prefer  me,  and  that  he  should  never  in  his  life
be  consoled  for  not  having  me  for  his  son-in-law.  He  took
my  papers,  to  examine  with  Mme.  de  Beauvilliers  what
could  be  done  as  to  property  as  well  as  about  the  convent.
“  But,”  he  added,  “  if  it  is  her  vocation,  what  can  I  do  ?  We
must  blindly  follow  the  will  of  God  and  his  laws  in  every¬
thing,  and  he  will  be  the  protector  of  my  family.  To  please
and  serve  him  faithfully  is  the  only  desirable  thing,  and
it  ought  to  be  the  sole  end  and  object  of  our  actions.”
After  a  little  other  discourse  we  parted.

These  words,  so  pious,  so  detached  from  the  world,  so
grand  in  a  man  thus  highly  stationed,  increased  my  respect
and  my  admiration,  and  at  the  same  time,  if  possible,  my
desire.  I  related  all  to  Louville,  and  that  evening  I  went  to
the  music  at  the  appartement  and  placed  myself  so  that  I

G8

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

could  fix  my  eyes  on  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  who  was  behind  the
prince.  On  coming  out  I  could  not  refrain  from  whispering
in  his  ear  that  I  felt  I  could  never  live  happy  with  any
other  than  his  daughter  ;  then  without  waiting  for  an  answer
I  slipped  away.  Louville  thought  it  best  that  I  should  also
see  Mme.  de  Beauvilliers,  on  account  of  the  perfect  confi¬
dence  M.  de  Beauvilliers  had  in  her,  and  he  told  me  to  come
the  next  evening  to  her  apartments,  at  eight  o’clock.  There,
after  proper  thanks,  she  gave  me,  as  to  property  and  convent,
about  the  same  reasons  ;  but  I  thought  I  saw  plainly  that  the
property  was  an  obstacle  easy  to  overcome  and  would  stop
nothing,  but  that  the  stone  of  stumbling  was  the  vocation.
I  answered  as  I  had  done  to  M.  de  Beauvilliers.  The  duch¬
ess  was  surprised  by  the  force  of  my  reasoning  and  the  great
eagerness  for  their  alliance  which  caused  me  to  make  it.
She  said  that  if  I  had  seen  the  letters  of  her  daughter  to
the  Abbé  de  Fénelon  I  should  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of
her  vocation  ;  that  she  herself  had  done  all  she  could  to
incline  her  daughter  to  come  and  spend  seven  or  eight
months  with  her  and  see  the  Court  and  the  world,  without
succeeding,  unless  by  the  use  of  violent  authority;  that,
after  all,  she  was  answerable  to  God  for  her  daughter’s  vo¬
cation,  and  not  for  mine  ;  but  that  I  was  so  good  a  casuist
I  confused  her,  and  she  would  again  talk  with  M.  de  Beau¬
villiers,  because  she  should  be  inconsolable  to  lose  me  ;
with  other  tender  and  flattering  things  such  as  her  hus¬
band  had  already  said  to  me,  and  with  the  same  effusion
of  heart.

Two  days  later,  at  the  king’s  lever,  M.  de  Beauvilliers  told
me  to  follow  him,  at  a  distance,  into  a  dark  passage  between
the  tribune  and  the  gallery  of  the  new  wing  where  he
lodged  ;  this  passage  being  intended  for  a  grand  salon  to  the
new  chapel  the  king  wished  to  build.  There  M.  de  Beauvil-

1094]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

69

liers  returned  me  the  statement  of  my  property,  and  told  me
that  he  saw  I  was  a  great  seigneur  in  wealth  as  well  as  in
other  ways,  and  therefore  I  could  not  put  off  marrying.  He
renewed  his  regrets,  and  conjured  me  to  believe  that  God
alone,  who  wished  his  daughter  for  his  spouse,  had  the  pref¬
erence  over  me,  and  would  have  it  over  the  dauphin  himself
if  it  were  possible  for  him  to  marry  her.  The  end  of  the
interview  was  full  of  the  tenderest  protestations  of  an  in¬
terest  and  a  friendship  both  intimate  and  eternal,  which
would  serve  me  in  every  way,  with  counsel  and  with  in¬
fluence  in  small  things  and  in  great  things  ;  and  the  assurance
that  we  must  henceforth  look  upon  each  other  as  father  and
son-in-law  in  the  most  indissoluble  union.

I  have  gone,  perhaps,  into  too  many  details  on  this  affair  ;
but  I  think  it  best  to  give  the  key  to  this  union,  to  this  con¬
fidence,  so  intimate,  so  complete,  so  continual,  and  so  impor¬
tant,  placed  by  M.  de  Beauvilliers  in  me,  and  my  freedom
with  him  in  all  things  which  would  otherwise  seem  in¬
comprehensible  under  the  great  difference  of  age,  and  also
in  regard  to  the  reserved,  isolated,  peculiarly  circumspect,  or
rather,  self-contained  nature  of  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers.
The  attachment  that  I  have  always  felt  for  him  is  without
reserve  or  comparison.

I  had  therefore  to  seek  another  marriage.  Chance  threw
an  offer  to  my  mother  of  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Maré¬
chal  Duc  de  Borges,  but  the  matter  fell  through  at  the  time
and  I  went  to  La  Trappe  in  search  of  consolation  for  the
impossibility  of  an  alliance  with  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers.

La  Trappe  is  a  place  so  celebrated,  so  well-known,  and  its
reformer  is  so  justly  famous,  that  I  shall  not  dwell  here  upon
La  Trappe  and  portraits  or  descriptions,  hut  will  merely  say
its  reformer.  that  this  abbey  is  five  leagues  from  our  property
at  La  Eerté-au-Vidame,  or  Arnault,  which  is  the  true,  dis-

70

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

tinctive  name  of  this  Ferté  among  all  the  other  Fertés  of
France  which  have  retained  the  generic  name  of  what  they
once  were,  namely,  forts  or  fortresses  (  firmitas ).  Louis  XIII.
wished  my  father  to  buy  this  estate,  which  had  long  been
under  confiscation  after  the  death  of  that  La  Fin  who,  having
entered  the  conspiracy  of  the  Duc  de  Biron,  betrayed  him,  all
the  more  cruelly  because  the  duke  always  held  so  high  an
opinion  of  his  fidelity  that  his  confidence  was  the  cause  of  his
ruin.  The  proximity  of  Saint-Germain  and  Versailles,  from
which  La  Ferté  is  distant  twenty  leagues,  was  the  reason  of
the  purchase.  It  was  our  only  built-upon  estate,  and  it  was
there  that  my  father  passed  the  autumns.  He  had  known  M.
de  Rancé  well  in  society.  He  was,  in  fact,  his  intimate  friend,
and  their  intimacy  became  closer  and  closer  after  the  abbé’s
retreat  into  the  neighbourhood  of  my  father,  who  went  to  see
him  several  times  a  year,  and  had  taken  me  with  him.

Though  still  a  child,  as  I  might  say,  M.  de  la  Trappe  had
charms  for  me  which  attached  me  to  him,  and  the  holiness
My  intimate  reia-  the  place  enchanted  me.  I  was  always
tions  with  him.  wishing  to  return  there,  and  I  gratified  the

wish  every  year,  often  many  times  in  the  year  and  for  weeks
together  ;  I  never  wearied  of  so  grand  and  touching  a  specta¬
cle,  nor  of  admiring  all  that  I  observed  in  him  who  had
raised  it  for  the  glory  of  God  and  for  his  own  sanctification
and  for  that  of  so  many  others.  He  saw  with  kindness
these  feelings  in  the  son  of  his  friend  ;  he  loved  me  like  his
own  child,  and  I  respected  him  with  as  much  tenderness  as
if  I  had  really  been  so.  Such  was  this  intimacy,  singular  at
my  age,  which  admitted  me  into  the  confidence  of  a  man  so
grandly  and  so  sacredly  distinguished,  and  made  me  give  him
mine.  My  only  regret  is  that  I  did  not  profit  by  it  more.

On  my  return  from  La  Trappe,  where  I  always  went  clan¬
destinely  to  conceal  these  journeys  from  the  gossip  of  the

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

71

world  at  my  age,  I  fell  into  an  affair  which  made  a  great
talk  and,  for  me,  had  many  consequences.

M.  de  Luxembourg,1  proud  of  his  success  and  of  the
world’s  applause  about  his  victories,  thought  he  was  strong
enough  to  transport  himself  from  the  eighteenth  rank  of
seniority  which  he  held  among  the  dukes  of  the  second  class,
and  take  precedence  in  ours  after  M.  d’Uzcs.2

Before  entering  upon  an  explanation  of  M.  de  Luxem¬
bourg’s  claim,  a  short  genealogy  will  throw  light  on  what
The  house  of  is  to  follow.  The  too  famous  Louis  de  Luxem-
bourg,  so  well-known  under  the  name  of  Conné-
France.  table  de  Saint-Paul,  whose  head  Louis  XI.  cut  off

on  the  Place  de  Grève,  had  three  sons.  Antoine,  his  second
son,  had  two  sons:  Jean,  Comte  de  Brienne,  and  François,
who  was  made  Duc  de  Piney  and  peer  of  France  (1581).
The  second  Duc  de  Piney  (Henri)  died  so  young  that  we
hardly  know  what  he  might  have  been.  The  marriage  of
his  daughter  and  almost  sole  heiress  was  the  effect  and  effort
of  the  favour  of  the  all-powerful  Connétable  de  Luynes.  We
will  now  follow  this  duchess-heiress  of  Piney,  Marguerite-
Charlotte  de  Luxembourg.  She  lost  her  husband  about  ten
years  after  their  marriage,  having  married  at  twelve  and
being  then  twenty-two  years  of  age,  and  she  was  seventy-
two  when  she  died  in  1680.  It  seems  that  she  made  no
great  account  of  her  first  husband,  nor  of  the  two  children
she  had  by  him.  All  favour  had  disappeared  with  the  Con¬
nétable  de  Luynes,  and  it  is  not  strange  that  this  duchess-
heiress  could  not  be  prevented  from  employing  all  the

1  Maréchal  Duc  de  Luxembourg  ;  won  the  battles  of  Fleurus,  Stein-
kerke,  and  Neerwinden.

2  There  were  three  classes  of  dukes  :  1.  Ducs  et  pairs.  2.  Ducs  vérifiés.
3.  Dues  a  brevet.  The  first  two  were  essentially  the  same  ;  except  that  the
former  had  the  right  to  sit  and  vote  in  Parliament.  The  third  class  were
brevetted  by  the  king,  and  their  titles  were  not  hereditary.

72

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  il

authority  of  a  mother  over  her  children,  and  all  the  liberty
of  a  widow  in  marrying  again.  Love  was  apparently  the
cause  of  her  second  marriage  ;  and  as  it  involved  the  loss
of  name,  rank,  and  the  honours  of  a  duchess,  the  couple
went  to  live  in  a  house  of  the  new  wife  on  her  magnificent
estate  at  Ligny,  which  they  hardly  ever  quitted  till  they
died.  It  was  the  interest  of  the  new  pair  to  get  rid  of  the
son  and  daughter  of  the  first  marriage.  The  son  offered
the  means  himself,  for  he  was  imbecile.  They  had  him
judicially  dispossessed,  and  shut  up  in  Paris  at  Saint-
Lazare  ;  but  fearing  some  one  might  marry  him,  they  had
him  ordained  deacon  ;  and  in  that  condition  and  that
place  he  passed  a  long  life  until  his  death.  The  daughter
did  not  have  ordinary  common-sense,  but  she  was  not
imbecile.  They  made  her  a  nun  in  Paris,  at  the  Abbaye-
aux-Bois.  From  time  to  time  she  said  it  was  done  against
her  will,  but  she  lived  there  twenty  years  as  a  professed
nun,  and  was  for  several  years  mistress  of  the  novices,
which  showed  she  was  not  forced  ;  or  at  least  it  would
seem  from  that  employment  that  she  consented  to  it  and
took  pleasure  in  her  state,  inasmuch  as  she  was  trusted  to
form  the  novices.  She  was  still  in  this  function  when
M.  le  Prince  withdrew  her,  as  we  shall  presently  see.

M.  de  Luxembourg  crowned  his  fortunes  by  marrying
the  daughter  of  the  Duchesse  de  Piney’s  second  marriage.

He  was  the  only  son  of  the  M.  de  Bouteville

M.  de  Luxem-  *•

bourg;  his  branch  so  well-known  for  his  duels.  This  young

and  his  fortune.  _

Bouteville  was  born  six  months  after  the
death  of  his  father  ;  he  was  an  only  son,  younger  than  two
sisters.  Mme.  de  Yalencey,  the  elder,  died  in  1684,  having
made  no  figure,  neither  she  nor  hers.  The  younger,  hand¬
some,  witty,  very  gay,  and  still  more,  perhaps,  intriguing,
made,  all  her  life,  much  talk  in  the  world  in  her  three

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

73

conditions  of  young  girl,  Duchesse  de  Châtillon,  and  lastly
Duchesse  de  Mecklenbourg.  She  contributed  much  to  the
fortunes  of  her  brother,  with  whom  she  was  always  closely
united.

Young  Bouteville’s  great  name,  which  at  the  beginning
of  his  life  still  shone  with  the  memory  of  that  illustrious
branch  of  the  old  connétables  and  the  love  of  the  dowager-
princess  of  Condé,  his  great  valour,  an  ambition  that  nothing
could  restrain,  and  gifts  of  mind  —  although  a  mind  of  in¬
trigue,  debauchery,  and  the  gay  world  —  enabled  him  to
surmount  the  disadvantage  of  a  figure  which,  at  first  sight,
was  repulsive  ;  hut,  what  no  one  could  understand  unless  they
had  seen  him,  a  figure  to  which  one  soon  became  used,  and
which,  in  spite  of  a  small  hunch  in  front  and  a  very  large
and  pointed  one  behind,  with  the  other  accompaniments  of
this  deformity,  had  a  fire,  a  nobility,  and  natural  graces
which  appeared  in  his  most  simple  actions.  He  attached
himself,  on  entering  the  world,  to  M.  le  Prince,  and,  soon
after,  M.  le  Prince  attached  himself  to  his  sister.  The
brother,  as  little  scrupulous,  made  it  a  stepping-stone  of
fortune  for  both  of  them.

Bouteville  followed  M.  le  Prince  throughout  the  wars.  His
valour,  his  morals,  his  activity,  everything  about  him  pleased
the  prince,  and  all  sorts  of  affairs  strengthened  the  tie
between  them.  On  their  return  to  France  Mme.  de  Châ¬
tillon  resumed  her  empire.  Her  brother  was  then  thirty-
three  years  old  ;  he  had  acquired  a  reputation  in  war,  he  was
now  a  general  officer,  and  had  the  merit  toward  M.  le
Prince  of  having  followed  his  fortunes  to  the  very  end, —
a  merit  he  shared  with  very  few  men  of  his  feather.  They
looked  about  them  for  some  reward  which  should  do  honour
to  M.  le  Prince  and  make  the  fortune  of  Bouteville,  and
they  hunted  out  this  daughter  of  the  second  marriage  of

74  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  n.

the  heiress  of  Piney.  She  was  hideously  ugly  both  in  face
and  figure,  a  coarse,  slovenly  fishwife,  like  a  cask  ;  but  she
was  very  rich  in  default  of  the  children  of  the  first  mar¬
riage  ;  to  M.  le  Prince  her  position  seemed  a  foothold  where¬
by  to  make  Bouteville  a  duke  and  peer.  He  felt,  however,
that  he  had  better  make  sure  of  the  nun.  She  had  often
grumbled  against  her  vows.  He  feared  that  the  marriage
of  her  step-sister  might  lead  her  to  some  embarrassing  out¬
cry.  He  went,  therefore,  to  see  her  at  the  grating,  and  on
the  promise  of  a  dispensation  of  the  pope  to  unveil  her,
which  he  undertook  to  obtain,  and  also  of  a  tabouret  de,
grace  at  Court,  she  consented  to  all,  remained  in  her  vows,
and  signed  what  was  wanted.  The  pope  granted  the  dis¬
pensation  with  a  good  grace,  and  the  Court  the  tabouret  de
grace,  on  the  pretext  that  being  the  daughter  of  the  first
marriage  she  would  have  succeeded  to  the  duchy  of  Piney,
her  brother  being  unmarriageable,  if  she  had  not  been  a
professed  nun.  They  made  her  dame  du  palais  of  the
queen  under  the  name  of  Princesse  de  Tingry,  with  a  little
mark  on  her  headdress  of  the  Chapter  of  Poussay,  which  she
soon  got  rid  of.  As  to  the  brother,  they  played  the  comedy
of  removing  his  judicial  dispossession  and  bringing  him
from  Saint-Lazare.  After  which  he  immediately  made  a
donation  to  M.  de  Bouteville,  in  the  marriage-contract,  of  all
his  property  and  a  cession  of  his  dignities,  in  consideration
of  large  sums  of  money  received  for  that  purpose  from
M.  de  Bouteville.  This  clause  was  of  great  importance  in
the  suit.  He  also  was  present  at  his  half-sister’s  marriage.
As  soon  as  that  was  celebrated  they  dispossessed  him  judi¬
cially  once  more,  and  put  him  back  at  Saint-Lazare,  which
he  never  left  again.

The  marriage  accomplished,  March  17,  1661,  M  de  Boute¬
ville  took  the  arms  of  Luxembourg  by  inescutcheon  on  his

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SA^NT-SIMON.

75

own,  and  signed  himself  Montmorency-Luxembourg  ;  which
his  children  and  theirs  have  always  done  since.  Immedi¬
ately  after  this,  he  began  his  suit  for  the  dignity  of  Due
et  Pair  de  Piney,  and  M.  le  Prince  helped  him  by  obtaining
letters  of  re-erection  of  Piney  in  his  favour,  in  which  they
adroitly  slipped  the  words,  “  so  far  as  need  may  be,”  in  order
to  leave  him  free  to  lay  claim  to  the  precedence  of  the  first
creation  in  1581.  With  these  letters  he  was  received  as
duke  and  peer  in  the  parliament  (1662)  and  took  the  last
rank  behind  all  the  other  peers.

The  rest  of  his  life  is  well  known.  He  was  mixed  up  in
the  affair  of  La  Voisin  the  sorceress,  who,  worse  still,  was
accused  of  poisoning,  and  was  burned  by  sentence  of  parlia¬
ment  on  the  Place  de  Grève  ;  an  affair  which  turned  the
Comtesse  de  Soissons  out  of  the  kingdom  for  the  last  time,
and  also  the  Duchesse  de  P>ouillon,  her  sister.  M.  de  Lux¬
embourg  was  reproached  for  having  forgotten  on  this  occa¬
sion  the  dignity  he  had  coveted  so  much.  He  was  tried  in
the  dock  like  any  common  prisoner,  and  made  no  claim  to
the  privileges  of  the  peerage.  He  was  a  long  time  in  the
Bastille,  and  left  his  reputation  there  ;  after  which  he  was
supposed  to  have  lost  all  thought  of  disputing  the  rank  of
the  dukes  his  seniors.

The  great  war  which  broke  out  between  France  and  all
Europe  made  the  maréchal  hope  he  should  be  wanted,  and
thus  that  he  might  meet  with  some  lucky  moments  in  which
to  acquire  fame,  and  with  it  credit  by  which  to  win  his
precedence.  And  so  it  happened  ;  the  Maréchal  d’Humières,
creature  of  M.  de  Louvois,  having  succeeded  ill  in  Flanders,
M.  de  Luxembourg  was  substituted  for  him  by  the  all-
powerful  minister,  who  had  brought  on  the  war  for  his  own
ends  and  wanted  it  to  succeed.  For  the  sake  of  this  per¬
sonal  object  he  overcame  his  lack  of  interest  in  the

76  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  it

new  general,  who  reckoned  his  campaigns  by  battles  and
victories.  It  was  after  that  of  Leure,  which  was  only  a
great  cavalry  combat  ;  that  of  Fleurus,  which  was  followed
by  no  fruit;  that  of  Steinkerke,  where  the  French  army  was
surprised  and  expected  to  be  defeated,  betrayed  by  a  spy  of
the  general,  who  was  discovered,  and  with  a  dagger  at  his
throat  wrote  down  all  the  enemy  wanted  to  know;  and,
finally,  after  that  of  Neerwinden,  which  only  won  us  Charle-
roy,  that  M.  de  Luxembourg  thought  himself  strong  enough
to  undertake  in  earnest  his  suit  for  precedence.  Intrigue,
dexterity,  and,  when  he  chose,  baseness,  served  him  well.
The  glory  of  his  campaigns  and  his  brilliant  position  as
general  of  the  nearest  and  most  numerous  army  won  him
the  highest  credit.  The  Court  had  almost  become  his  own
as  it  gathered  about  him,  and  the  town,  dazzled  by  the
whirlwind  and  by  his  open  and  popular  greeting,  was  de¬
voted  to  him.  Persons  of  all  classes  were  counting  on  him,
especially  since  the  death  of  Louvois  ;  hot-brained  youth
regarded  him  as  its  father,  and  the  protector  of  its  debauch¬
ery  and  its  behaviour,  from  which  his  own  even  at  his  age
was  not  far  removed.  He  had  captivated  the  troops  and
the  general  officers.  He  was  the  intimate  friend  of  M.  le
Duc,  and  above  all  of  M.  le  Prince  de  Conti,  the  Germani-
cus  of  those  days.  He  had  gained  admittance  to  the  most
private  life  of  Monseigneur,  and  finally,  he  had  just  married
his  eldest  son  to  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Duc  de  Che-
vreuse,  who,  with  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers,  his  brother-in-law,
and  their  wives,  had  the  first  credit  and  all  the  most  inti¬
mate  private  relations  with  the  king  and  with  Madame  de
Main  tenon.

In  parliament  the  intrigue  was  already  hatched.  Harlay,
the  president,  led  that  great  body  with  a  wand  ;  he  had  so
subjected  it  to  his  will  that  he  believed  to  undertake  and

1694]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

77

succeed  were  to  him  the  same  thing,  and  that  this  great
affair  would  scarcely  cost  him  the  work  of  one  winter  to
carry  through.  In  favour  of  the  marriage  of  M.  de  Luxem¬
bourg’s  son,  the  estate  of  Beaufort  had  just  been  erected
into  a  duchy  and  verified  under  the  name  of  Montmorency,
and  on  this  occasion  the  maréchal  persuaded  the  whole  par¬
liament  that  the  khig  was  on  his  side  in  his  claim  against
his  seniors  ;  and  when,  soon  after,  he  began  to  prosecute  that
claim  in  earnest,  Harlay  helped  him  powerfully  in  this  de¬
ception,  so  that  by  the  time  it  was  discovered  the  strongest
remedy  proved  useless.  This  was  a  letter  to  the  president,
written  by  Pontchartrain,  controller-general  of  finances  and
secretary  of  State,  in  which  he  informed  him  that  the  king,
surprised  at  the  rumours  spread  in  parliament  as  to  his
favouring  the  cause  of  M.  de  Luxembourg,  wished  that  the
assembly  should  know,  and  be  fully  assured  by  him,  that
his  Majesty  was  perfectly  neutral,  and  should  remain  so
between  the  parties  throughout  the  whole  course  of  the
affair.

Harlay  was  the  son  of  a  former  procureur-général  of  the
parliament  and  of  a  Bellièvre,  whose  grandfather  was  the
famous  Achille  d’Harlay,  president  of  the  par¬
liament  after  the  celebrated  Christophe  de  Thou,
his  father-in-law,  who  was  the  father  of  the  famous  historian.
Issuing  from  these  great  magistrates,  Harlay  had  all  their
gravity,  which  he  cynically  overdid  ;  he  affected  their  disin¬
terestedness  and  their  modesty,  which  he  dishonoured,  the
one  by  his  conduct,  the  other  by  a  subtle  but  extreme  pride,
which,  in  spite  of  himself,  was  manifest  to  every  one.  He
piqued  himself,  above  all,  on  his  justice  and  integrity  ;  but
that  mask  soon  fell.  Between  Peter  and  James  he  main¬
tained  the  strictest  rectitude,  but  as  soon  as  he  saw  an  inter¬
est  or  a  favour  to  be  had  for  himself  he  was  sold  at  once.

78

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

These  Memoirs  will  furnish  many  examples  ;  meanwhile  this
suit  will  exhibit  him  for  what  he  was.

He  was  learned  in  the  law  ;  he  possessed  to  their  depths
the  various  jurisprudences  ;  he  equalled  all  who  were  most
versed  in  belles-lettres  ;  he  knew  history  well;  above  all,  he
knew  how  to  govern  his  assembly  with  an  authority  that
suffered  no  reply,  and  which  no  other  president  had  ever
attained  before  him.  A  pharisaical  austerity  made  him
formidable  by  the  license  he  gave  to  his  public  reproofs,
whether  to  parties  or  advocates  or  magistrates  ;  so  that  in
fact  there  was  no  one  who  did  not  tremble  in  having  any¬
thing  to  do  with  him.  In  other  respects,  sustained  in  all
things  by  the  Court,  of  which  he  was  the  slave,  and  the  very
humble  servant  of  those  who  were  in  its  true  favour,  wily
courtier,  singularly  shrewd  politician  ;  all  these  advantages  he
turned  solely  to  his  own  ambition  of  ruling  all,  of  attaining
all,  and  of  making  for  himself  the  reputation  of  a  great  man.
Without  effective  honour,  without  morality  in  secret,  with
no  integrity  that  was  not  exterior,  without  humanity  even,  —
in  a  word,  a  consummate  hypocrite,  without  faith  or  law,
without  God,  without  soul,  cruel  husband,  barbarous  father,
tyrannous  brother,  friend  to  himself  solely,  wicked  by  na¬
ture,  loving  to  insult,  outrage,  crush,  and  never  in  his  life
having  lost  an  occasion  to  do  so.  One  might  make  a  volume
of  his  characteristics,  all  the  more  marked  because  he  had
infinite  perspicacity,  a  mind  naturally  bent  in  that  direction,
and  was  always  so  master  of  himself  that  he  never  risked
anything  of  which  he  might  be  forced  to  repent.

Externally,  a  vigorous,  spare  little  man,  with  a  lozenge
face,  a  large  and  aquiline  nose,  handsome,  speaking,  piercing
eyes,  which  never  looked  at  anything  except  furtively,  and
yet,  when  fixed  upon  a  client  or  a  magistrate  were  enough  to
put  him  under  ground  ;  a  coat  rather  tight,  neck-bands  like

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

79

those  of  an  ecclesiastic,  and  cuffs  that  were  flat  like  theirs  ;
a  very  brown  wig  much  mixed  with  white,  and  bushy,  hut
short,  with  a  tall  cap  on  the  top  of  it.  He  held  himself  and
walked  a  little  bent,  with  a  false  air  more  humble  than
modest,  hugging  the  walls  to  make  way  ostentatiously,  and,
at  Versailles,  advancing  with  many  respectful  and  as  it
were  shame-faced  hows,  given  to  right  and  left.

He  was  hound  to  the  king  and  to  Madame  de  Maintenon
at  a  sensitive  spot  ;  it  was  he  who,  on  being  consulted  as  to
the  unheard-of  legitimatizing  of  children  without  naming
the  mother,  had  produced  the  case  of  the  Chevalier  de
Longueville,  which  was  put  forward  in  parliament,  and  under
cover  of  the  success  of  which  that  of  the  king’s  children
passed.  For  this  he  was  promised  the  office  of  chancellor
of  France,  and  obtained  the  entire  confidence  of  the  king,
his  children,  and  their  all-powerful  governess,  which  he
well  knew  how  to  preserve  and  how  to  turn  into  continual
privileges.

The  celebrated  Ptacine,  so  well-known  for  his  theatre
pieces  and  for  the  commission,  on  which  he  was  then  em¬
ployed,  to  write  the  history  of  the  king,  lent  his  fine  pen  to
polish  up  the  statements  of  M.  de  Luxembourg’s  case,  and  to
redeem  the  dryness  of  the  matter  by  an  agreeable  and  ornate
style,  in  order  to  get  them  read  with  pleasure  and  partiality
by  the  women  and  the  courtiers.  He  had  been  attached  to
M.  de  Seignelay,  and  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Cavoye,
both  of  whom  had  been  friends  of  M.  de  Luxembourg.  In  a
word,  the  ladies,  the  young  men,  all  the  fine  world  of  the
Court  and  the  town  were  on  M.  de  Luxembourg’s  side,  and
no  one  on  ours  could  counterbalance  the  grand  air  of  the
world  or  even  attempt  to  do  so.  If  to  all  this  is  added  the
long-standing  care  taken  to  capture  the  principal  men  in
parliament  by  relations,  friends,  mistresses,  confessors,  valets,

80

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ir.

promises  and  services,  it  will  be  seen  that  with  a  president
such  as  Harlay  at  the  head  of  it  all,  we  had  to  do  with  a
side  that  was  incomparably  stronger  than  our  own.

It  may  well  be  supposed  that  at  my  age,  the  son  of  a
father  attached  to  the  Court  of  the  late  king,  and  of  a  mother
The  opponents  who  had  known  nothing  but  domestic  duties,
bo^gdeLUXem  and  without  near  relations,  I  had  no  inter¬
course  with  any  of  those  whom  M.  de  Luxembourg  attacked.
But  they,  anxious  to  unite  together  as  much  as  possible,
counting  little  on  certain  dukes  and  deserted  openly  by
MM.  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Bouillon,  would  not  neglect  any
of  their  number,  each  of  us  having  friends  and  a  purse  for
the  costs,  which  were  paid  in  common.1  M.  de  la  Trémoille
therefore  came  up  to  me  at  the  king’s  lever  and  said  that
he  and  others  whom  he  named  were  attacked  for  precedence
by  M.  de  Luxembourg  ;  and  that  they  hoped  I  would  not
abandon  them  in  this  affair.  I  was  then  wholly  ignorant
of  the  matter,  but  my  decision  was  soon  made  ;  I  thanked
M.  de  la  Trémoille,  for  himself  and  for  the  other  gentlemen,
and  said  that  I  should  not  fear  to  go  wrong  in  such  good
company  by  following  my  father’s  example  ;  and  I  begged
him  to  believe  and  to  assure  the  others  that  nothing  would
separate  me  from  them.  M.  de  la  Trémoille  seemed  much
pleased,  and  in  the  course  of  the  day  M.  de  La  Rochefoucauld
and  several  others  sought  me  out  and  made  me  many
compliments.

Thus  enrolled,  I  thought  I  owed  certain  respects  to  M.
de  Luxembourg,  under  whom  I  had  made  one  campaign,  and
who  had  always  treated  me  well  (though  without  being

1  The  number  of  senior  dukes  thus  attacked  was  seventeen,  and  their
names  were  as  follows,  in  the  order  of  their  seniority  :  Ducs  d’Elboeuf,
Montbazon,  Ventadour,  Vendôme,  la  Trémoille,  Sully,  Chevreuse,  Les-
diguières-Gondi  (minor),  Brissac,  Ailly,  Richelieu,  Saint-Simon,  La
Rochefoucauld,  La  Force,  Valentinois,  Rohan,  Bouillon.

1694]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

81

known  to  him  except  for  what  I  was),  and  under  whom  I
might  serve  again.  I  went  the  next  day  to  see  him,  and
after  paying  my  compliments,  I  asked  his  permission  not
to  separate  myself  from  those  of  the  dukes  over  whom  he
claimed  precedence  ;  saying  that  in  all  other  matters  I  should
leave  him  absolutely  master,  and  even  in  this  I  did  not  wish
to  take  a  step  without  knowing  what  he  thought  of  it  ;  and
I  added  all  that  my  age  and  position  required  in  a  young
man.  This  was  received  with  the  greatest  politeness  and
gallantry  imaginable  ;  all  present  applauded,  and  M.  de  Lux¬
embourg  assured  me  I  could  not  do  less  than  follow  the

example  of  my  father,  and  that  he  himself  should  not  show
me  less,  etc.,  on  all  occasions.  This  duty  fulfilled,  I  thought
of  nothing  hut  how  best  to  help  on  our  common  affair  con¬
jointly  with  the  others,  without  doing  anything  that  could
reasonably  displease  M.  de  Luxembourg.  Here  follows  the
summary  of  the  case.

I  went  assiduously  to  all  the  sessions  ;  I  gathered  infor¬
mation  about  the  case  in  itself,  and  also  what  was  passing  in
relation  to  it  ;  and  what  I  ventured  to  say  during  the  sessions
did  not  displease  any  one.  We  were  not  long  in  discov¬
ering  the  ill-will  of  the  president,  who,  in  an  affair  which,  by
its  nature  and  right,  could  he  judged  only  by  the  Assembly
of  the  chambers  and  the  peers,  hastened  to  appoint  small
committees  to  examine  witnesses  at  his  own  house,  where  he
was  more  easily  their  master.

While  we  left  him  to  do  what  we  could  not  prevent,  we
were  suddenly  warned  of  a  new  statement  drawn  up  by  M.
Iniquitous  con-  de  Luxembourg  of  which  a  very  few  copies
m  ""Ve"  Luxem-0^  had  been  secretly  made  and  distributed  under
bourg.  rose  to  the  small  committees,  and  to  those

of  the  counsellors  on  whom  he  depended  most.  This  state¬
ment,  against  all  rules,  was  not  given  to  us,  and  in  default  of

VOL  i.  —  6

82

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  n.

this  could  not  serve  as  a  document  of  the  case  ;  but  it  was
all-important  to  hide  it  from  us  for  fear  of  an  answer,  and
the  counsel  of  M.  de  Luxembourg  hoped  to  influence  his
judges  by  this  statement,  although  it  was  not  openly  pro¬
duced.  Maunourry,  one  of  these  small-committee  men,  was
horrified  at  a  trick  which  was  likely  to  go  so  far  as  to  make
us  lose  our  case.  He  lent  the  secret  statement  to  Magneux,
M.  de  la  Trémoille’s  steward,  who  copied  it  off  in  a  single
night,  and  the  next  day,  which  was  a  Tuesday,  summoned  us
to  a  meeting.  There  the  statement  was  read.  We  found  it
full  of  false  assertions,  mangled  facts,  and  a  glittering  tis¬
sue  of  sophisms.  The  knowledge  of  Talon,  and  the  ele¬
gancies  and  graces  of  Racine  were  all  displayed  there.  It
was  felt  to  he  of  the  first  importance  to  answer  it  ;  and  as
judgment  was  to  be  rendered  on  the  following  Friday,  it
was  agreed  that  we  should  assemble  at  the  house  of  Ripar-
fonds  [a  celebrated  consulting  barrister],  and  go  from  there
to  the  president’s  house,  and  ask  for  a  delay  until  Monday;
representing  to  him  the  importance  of  our  making  an  answer
to  the  discovery  we  had  made,  and  that  from  Wednesday,
at  which  we  then  were,  to  the  following  Monday  was  not
too  long  a  time  to  write,  print,  and  distribute  our  defence  ;
and  to  facilitate  this  justice,  it  was  resolved  to  give  him
our  word  to  do  nothing  to  retard  the  judgment  later  than
Monday.

The  next  morning  we  met  at  Riparfonds,  rue  de  la  Harpe,
whence  we  drove  with  all  our  carriages  to  the  president’s
house  at  the  hour  when  he  gave  audience  on  returning  from
the  palace.  We  entered  the  courtyard,  the  porter  saying
that  he  was  at  home,  and  opening  the  gates.  The  noise  of
so  many  carriages  apparently  made  some  persons  look  from
the  windows  to  see  what  it  was,  and  as  we  were  waiting  to
enter  until  all  should  have  left  their  carriages,  so  that  we

1694]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

83

could  mount  the  steps  together,  the  valet  de  chambre  of  the
president,  as  composed  as  himself,  came  to  us  and  said  that
his  master  was  not  at  home.  As  we  could  not  make  him
tell  us  where  he  was,  nor  at  what  hour  he  would  be  visible,
there  was  no  other  course  to  take  than  return  to  our  lawyer’s
house  and  deliberate  upon  what  must  be  done.  Each  of  us
vented  his  bile  on  the  evident  determination  to  strangle  us  ;
and  on  the  insult,  for  one  thing,  and  the  denial  of  justice,  for
another,  in  sending  us  away,  which  the  president,  certain  to
be  at  home  at  that  hour,  had  committed.  The  embarrass¬
ment  was  great,  and  our  affair  seemed  hopeless,  when  one  of
the  notaries,  raising  his  voice,  asked  if  none  of  us  had  letters
of  State.1  We  looked  at  one  another  ;  not  one  of  us  had
them.  The  notary  who  had  asked  the  question  said  it  was
the  sole  means  of  saving  our  case  ;  he  explained  the  mecha¬

nism.  On  that  explanation  I  smiled,  and
said  that  if  that  was  all,  our  case  was  saved,

My  letters  of
State.

for  I  had  such  letters  of  State  as  an  officer  of  the  army,  and
would  give  them,  provided  they  were  used  only  in  regard  to
M.  de  Luxembourg  ;  thereupon  acclamations  from  dukes,
lawyers,  notaries,  —  compliments,  embraces,  praises,  thanks,
as  if  from  dead  men  brought  to  life  again  ;  and  MM.  de  la
Trémoille  and  de  La  Rochefoucauld  pledged  themselves,  in
presence  of  the  others,  that  my  letters  of  State  should  be
used  only  in  regard  to  M.  de  Luxembourg.

The  matter  was  pressing  ;  I  said  that  my  mother  had  the
letters  of  State  and  I  would  go  and  get  them.  I  woke  her
up  and  told  her  rather  abruptly  the  facts.  She,  half  asleep,
wanted  to  make  me  remonstrances  about  my  situation  and

1  Letters  of  State  were  given  to  ambassadors,  officers  of  the  army,  and
all  who  were  obliged  to  absent  themselves  in  the  public  service  ;  and  they
suspended  for  six  months  all  suits  against  such  persons.  At  the  end  of
six  months  they  could  be  renewed.  —  Tk.

84

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

M.  de  Luxembourg.  I  interrupted  her,  and  said  it  was  a
matter  of  honour,  indispensable,  promised,  expected;  and,
without  waiting  for  any  reply,  I  took  the  key  of  the  cabinet,
and  then  the  letters,  and  ran  off  with  them.  The  dukes
were  so  afraid  that  my  mother  would  not  consent  that
they  sent  MM.  de  Trémoille  and  de  Richelieu  after  me
to  exorcize  her.  I  had  my  letters  of  State  already  when
they  were  announced,  and  I  took  them  excuses  from  my
mothcj,  who  was  not  yet  visible.  This  delay  stopped  us  a
moment  and  gave  my  mother  time  to  bethink  herself.
While  we  were  on  the  steps  she  sent  me  word  that  on
reflection  she  could  not  consent  that  I  should  give  my
letters  of  State  against  such  a  man  as  M.  de  Luxembourg.
I  sent  the  messenger  to  the  right-ffbout  and  got  into  the
carriage  with  the  two  dukes,  who  were  not  less  comforted
than  I  to  see  the  letters  of  State  in  my  hand.  I  can  never
tell  with  what  satisfaction  I  returned  to  the  meeting,  nor
with  what  praises  and  caresses  I  was  received.  The  ani¬
mosity  was  great,  and  our  counsel  felt  it  as  much  as  our¬
selves;  so  dukes  and  counsel  vied  with  each  other  as  to
who  should  receive  me  with  most  applause  and  joy  ;  and  at
my  age  I  was  very  much  flattered.  It  was  arranged  that
the  next  day,  Thursday  (the  day  before  the  judgment  was
to  be  pronounced),  my  steward  and  my  solicitor  should
go  at  ten  o’clock  at  night  and  notify  M.  de  Luxembourg
and  the  porter  of  his  house  of  my  letters  of  State,  and  that
the  same  day  I  should  go  to  the  village  of  Longnes,  about
eight  leagues  from  Paris  where  my  regiment  was  quartered,
to  give  at  least  some  colour  to  the  pretext  of  the  letters  of
State.  It  is  easy  to  understand  with  what  vexation  M.
de  Luxembourg  saw  all  his  projects  disconcerted.  He
rushed  to  the  king  to  complain,  and  spared  none  of  us  in
what  he  said  to  the  public.

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

85

The  game  played,  I  returned  from  Longnes,  where  my
exile  had  lasted  only  six  days.  I  found  everything  on  fire  ;
M.  de  Luxembourg  had  lost  all  control  of  himself,  and  the
dukes  he  attacked  showed  as  little  self-control  against  him.
The  Court  and  the  town  were  taking  sides,  friends  against
friends  ;  no  one  was  neutral,  or  even  moderately  partisan.
I  had  to  stand  the  greatest  number  of  questions  as  to  my
letters  of  State.  On  my  side  were  reason,  justice,  necessity,
and  a  strong  and  well-organized  party,  and  dukes  who  stood
better  with  the  king  than  M.  de  Luxembourg.  I  had,  more¬
over,  taken  care  to  have  the  proceedings  all  in  order  ;  I
spread  this  about  ;  and  as  I  knew  that  M.  de  Luxembourg
and  his  side  were  launching  against  me  as  the  weakest
opponent  and  the  one  from  whom  the  blow  which  had
disconcerted  them  had  come,  I  did  not  restrain  myself
towards  any  of  them.  At  the  end  of  a  few  days  I  noticed
that  M.  de  Luxembourg  when  we  met  did  not  return  my
bow.  I  made  it  remarked  by  others,  and  then  I  ceased  to
bow  to  him  ;  by  which,  at  his  age  and  his  posts,  he  lost  more
than  I,  and  furnished  in  the  salons  and  galleries  at  Versailles
a  rather  ridiculous  sight.  Our  object  was  nevertheless  ful¬
filled.  AVe  had  wanted  to  gain  time,  and  by  this  means  the
case  was  placed  out  of  order  to  be  tried  that  year.

M.  de  Luxembourg  did  not  long  survive.  At  sixty-seven
years  of  age  he  thought  he  was  twenty-five,  and  lived  like  a
man  who  was  no  older.  In  all  the  campaigns

1695.

DeathofM.de  nothing  could  be  more  true  than  his  coup-
Luxembourg.  d’œil,  and  no  one  more  brilliant,  more  judicious,
more  prescient  than  he  before  the  enemy,  or  on  the  day  of
battle  ;  with  an  audacity,  a  cajolery,  and  at  the  same  time  a
cool  self-possession  which  allowed  him  to  see  and  foresee  all
in  the  midst  of  the  heaviest  fire,  and  where  success  was  most
endangered;  it  was  then  that  he  was  great.  Lor  the  rest,

86

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

laziness  itself.  Few  walks  without  great  necessity  ;  gam¬
bling  ;  conversations  with  his  intimates  ;  and  every  evening
a  supper  with  a  small  number  of  them,  generally  the  same,
and  if  they  were  near  a  town,  the  fair  sex  agreeably  inter¬
spersed.  At  last,  age,  temperament,  and  his  conformation
betrayed  him.  He  fell  ill  at  Versailles  of  peripulmony,  of
which  illness,  from  the  first,  Fagon  had  a  very  bad  opinion.
His  door  was  besieged  by  all  that  was  greatest.  The  princes
of  the  blood  scarcely  stirred  from  it,  and  Monsieur  went
several  times.  The  king  sent  occasionally,  as  an  honour
more  than  from  sentiment.  I  have  already  said  that  the
king  did  not  like  him  ;  but  the  brilliancy  of  his  campaigns
and  the  difficulty  of  replacing  him  made  him  anxious.  As
the  maréchal  grew  worse  Père  Bourdaloue,  the  famous  Jesuit,
whose  sermons  might  immortalize  him,  took  complete  posses¬
sion  of  him.  He  received  the  sacraments,  testified  his
religion,  and  died  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  January,
1695,  the  fifth  day  of  his  illness,  regretted  by  many  per¬
sons,  but,  as  an  individual,  esteemed  by  none,  and  loved
by  few.

This  winter  there  were  a  great  many  halls  and  several
fine  ones  at  the  Palais-Royal,  at  the  first  of  which  I  had
the  honour  to  lead  in  the  branle  Mme.  la

Quarrels  of  Mon¬
sieur  and  the  Princesse  de  Conti,  dowager,  daughter  of  the

princesses.  .  ,

king;  and  on  Shrove  Tuesday  there  was  a
great  masquerade  at  Versailles  in  the  grand  apartments,  to
which  the  king  brought  the  King  and  Queen  of  England
after  giving  them  a  supper.  The  ladies  were  divided
into  four  quadrilles,  led  by  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Chartres,
Mademoiselle,  Mme.  la  Duchesse,  and  Mme.  la  Princesse
de  Conti,  dowager.  In  spite  of  the  masquerade  they  began
with  the  branle,  and  I  led  the  only  daughter  of  the  Duc  de
la  Trémoille,  who  was  perfectly  well  made  and  danced

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

87

admirably.  She  was  in  Moorish  dress  for  the  first  quadrille,
which  carried  the  day  for  magnificence,  as  the  last  did  for
the  gallantry  of  the  costumes.

Certain  adventures  had  lately  happened  to  the  princesses.
This  was  the  distinctive  name  by  which  was  meant,  solely,
the  three  daughters  of  the  king.  Monsieur  had  requested,
with  reason,  that  the  Duchesse  de  Chartres  should  call  the
two  others  “  my  sister  ”  but  that  they  should  never  call  her
anything  but  “  Madame.”  This  was  just,  and  the  king  so
ordered  it,  at  which  the  two  others  were  much  annoyed.  The
Princesse  de  Conti,  however,  submitted  with  a  good  grace  ;
but  Mme.  la  Duchesse,  as  the  sister  of  the  same  amour,  took
to  calling  Mme.  de  Chartres  “  my  pretty  one.”  Now  nothing
could  be  less  pretty  than  her  face,  her  figure,  and  her  whole
person.  She  dared  not  show  that  she  disliked  it  ;  but  finally
Monsieur  heard  of  it;  he  felt  the  absurdity,  and  also  the
evasion  of  calling  her  “  Madame,”  and  he  broke  out  about  it.
The  king  forbade  Mme.  la  Duchesse  to  use  the  familiarity,
which  annoyed  her  still  more,  but  she  was  careful  not  to  show
it.  On  a  trip  to  Trianon,  the  princesses  slept  there;  and
being  young,  they  took  to  walking  together  in  the  night  and
enlivening  the  darkness  with  a  few  petards.  Whether  it  was
malice  in  the  two  elder  ones,  or  imprudence,  they  let  off  one
or  two  under  the  windows  of  Monsieur’s  room  and  woke  him
up,  which  he  thought  very  bad.  He  carried  his  complaints
to  the  king,  who  made  him  many  excuses  and  scolded  the
princesses  well,  but  had  great  difficulty  in  pacifying  Monsieur.
His  anger  was  chiefly  in  his  own  family  ;  Mme.  de  Chartres
long  felt  it  ;  but  I  don’t  know  that  the  two  others  were  sorry
for  that.  Mme.  la  Duchesse  was  even  accused  of  writing
certain  songs  upon  Mme.  de  Chartres.  However,  it  was  all
patched  up  at  last  ;  and  Monsieur  forgave  Mme.  de  Chartres
entirely  after  a  visit  he  received  at  Saint-Cloud  from  Mme.

88

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

de  Montespan,  whom  he  had  always  much  liked.  She  also
reconciled  her  two  daughters,  over  whom  she  still  retained
authority,  receiving  from  them  many  duties.

The  bishop  of  Noyon  furnished  another  adventure  after
our  return,  which  was  all  the  more  cutting  to  him  because  it
M.  de  Noyon  diverted  everybody  at  his  expense.  The  king
cuie^a/the*"  amused  himself  much  with  the  bishop’s  vanity,
French  Academy.  which  made  him  take  everything  to  his  own
distinction  ;  a  book  might  be  made  of  the  effects  of  this
vanity.  A  place  fell  vacant  in  the  Trench  Academy,  and
the  king  expressed  in  jest  a  wish  that  he  might  have  it.  He
even  told  Dangeau,  who  belonged  to  the  Academy,  to  say  so,
on  his  part,  to  the  academicians.  Such  a  thing  had  never
happened  before,  and  M.  de  Noyon,  who  piqued  himself  on
his  learning,  was  at  the  summit  of  satisfaction,  and  did  not
see  that  the  king  was  diverting  himself.  We  may  well  believe
that  the  prelate  received  all  the  votes  without  soliciting  any  ;
and  the  king  mentioned  to  M.  le  Prince  and  some  other
distinguished  persons  at  Court  that  he  should  be  glad  if  they
were  present  at  the  bishop’s  reception.  Thus  M.  de  Noyon
was  first  choice  by  the  king  and  by  the  Academy,  without
his  ever  having  thought  of  it,  and  the  first  for  whose  recep¬
tion  the  king  had  given  invitations.

The  Abbé  de  Caumartin  was  at  this  time  the  director  of
the  Academy,  and  consequently  it  was  for  him  to  reply  to  the
speech  of  the  prelate.  He  knew  the  latter’s  vanity,  and  his
peculiar  style,  which  was  his  alone.  The  abbé  was  witty  and
learned  ;  he  was  young  and  half-brother  of  Caumartin,  in¬
tendant  of  finances,  who  was  much  the  mode  in  those  days
and  was  working  under  Pontchartrain,  controller-general,  his
near  relation  and  intimate  friend.  This  intimacy  made  the
abbé  bold,  and  feeling  sure  of  being  approved  by  the  world
.and  sustained  by  the  minister,  he  proposed  to  himself  to  divert

1695]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

89

the  public  at  the  expense  of  the  bishop  whom  he  had  to
receive.  Accordingly,  he  composed  a  verbose  speech,  imitating
as  closely  as  possible  the  style  of  M.  de  Noyon,  which  was
only  a  tissue  of  the  most  exaggerated  praises  and  emphatic
comparisons,  the  pompous  fustian  of  which  was  a  continuous
satire  on  the  prelate’s  vanity  and  turned  him  openly  to  ridicule.

However,  after  rereading  his  work  he  was  frightened,  so
out  of  decorum  did  it  seem  to  him.  In  order  to  reassure
himself  he  carried  it  to  M.  de  Noyon  as  a  pupil  to  his  master,
and  a  young  man  to  a  great  prelate,  expressing  his  desire
to  omit  no  praises  that  were  due  to  him,  hut  to  say  nothing
that  was  not  to  his  taste  and  did  not  meet  with  his  approval.
A  respect  so  attentive  delighted  the  bishop.  He  read  and
reread  the  speech  ;  he  was  charmed  with  it,  but  he  made  a
few  corrections  as  to  style,  and  added  certain  touches  to  his
own  glorification.  The  abbé  saw  his  work  returned  to  him
with  great  satisfaction  ;  but  when  he  found  the  additions
made  by  the  hand  of  M.  de  Noyon  and  the  prelate’s  erasures,
he  was  enchanted  with  the  success  of  the  trap  he  had  set,
and  with  having  in  hand  a  proof  of  the  bishop’s  approba¬
tion,  which  put  him  under  shelter  from  all  complaint.

The  day  arrived  for  the  reception  ;  the  place  was  more
than  filled  by  all  that  was  most  distinguished  in  Court  and
city.  People  came  from  a  desire  to  pay  court  to  the  king,
and  in  the  hope  of  being  greatly  diverted.  M.  de  Noyon
appeared  with  a  numerous  suite,  bowing  and  smiling  to  the
illustrious  and  crowded  audience  with  a  satisfaction  he  did
not  conceal,  and  pronounced  his  harangue  with  his  usual
confidence,  the  verbosity  of  its  language  holding  the  atten¬
tion  of  his  auditors.  The  Abbé  de  Caumartin  replied  with  a
modest  air  and  decorous  tone  ;  and,  by  slight  inflections  of
the  voice  at  the  most  ridiculous  parts  and  those  which
chiefly  bore  the  earmark  of  the  prelate,  he  would  certainly

90

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

liave  roused  the  attention  of  all  who  listened  to  him  if  the
maliciousness  of  the  public  had  not  been  already  alert.
The  applause  was  therefore  great  and  general,  and  all  present,
as  if  in  concert,  intoxicated  M.  de  Noyon  more  and  more,
making  him  believe  that  his  own  speech  deserved  it  all,  and
that  of  the  abbé  was  liked  only  because  it  had  so  worthily
praised  him.  The  prelate  went  home  delighted  with  the
abbé  and  the  public,  and  without  conceiving  the  slightest
distrust.

It  can  well  be  imagined  what  a  talk  this  made  ;  and  what
sort  of  figure  M.  de  Noyon  cut  by  praising  himself  up  in
houses  and  companies  for  what  he  had  said,  and  what  had
been  said  to  him,  and  for  the  number  and  quality  of  the
audience  and  their  unanimous  admiration,  and  for  the  good¬
ness  of  the  king  on  this  occasion.  M.  de  Paris,  to  whom  he
went  to  triumph  over  it,  did  not  like  him.  He  had  long  had
upon  his  heart  a  humiliation  the  bishop  had  put  upon  him.
He  was  not  then  duke  ;  the  Court  was  at  Saint-Germain,
where  there  were  no  little  courtyards  as  at  Versailles.  M.
de  Noyon  was  driving  in  his  carriage,  when  he  met  M.  de
Paris  on  foot.  He  called  to  him  ;  M.  de  Paris  approached,
supposing  he  would  get  out.  Not  at  all;  he  leaned  from  his
carriage  and  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  thus  leashed,  led
him  to  the  steps,  talking  and  complimenting  the  archbishop,
who  raged  in  his  heart.  M.  de  Noyon,  still  in  the  same
tone,  went  up  with  him,  and  seemed  so  little  to  suspect  the
offence  he  had  given  that  M.  de  Paris  dared  not  make  an
affair  of  it.

We  can  imagine  what  a  joke  the  reception  at  the  Acad¬
emy  was  to  the  archbishop  ;  but  he  could  not  be  fully  satis¬
fied  so  long  as  M.  de  Noyon  continued  to  plume  himself
upon  it.  So  he  did  not  miss  the  occasion  of  his  visit  to  open
his  eyes  and  let  him  understand,  as  his  servant  and  brother,

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  91

what  he  did  not  venture  to  tell  him  outright.  He  turned
about  the  subject  for  a  long  time  without  being  understood
by  a  man  so  full  of  himself  and  so  far  from  imagining  that
it  was  possible  to  laugh  at  him.  In  the  end,  however,  he
got  him  to  listen,  and,  for  the  honour  of  the  episcopate,  he
said,  which  had  been  insulted  by  a  young  man,  he  begged
him  not  to  swell  the  victory  by  continuing  to  be  duped,  but
to  go  and  consult  his  true  friends.  M.  de  Noyon  jargoned  a
long  time  before  he  would  give  in  ;  but  finally,  as  he  could
not  avoid  suspicion,  he  thanked  the  archbishop,  and  agreed
with  him  to  inquire  of  Père  de  La  Chaise,  who  was  one  of
his  friends.  To  him  he  hastened  on  leaving  the  archbishop.
He  told  Père  de  La  Chaise  the  uneasiness  that  had  seized
him,  and  begged  him  so  earnestly  to  reply  in  good  faith  that
the  confessor,  who  was  kind  by  nature  and  who  hesitated
between  leaving  M.  de  Hoy  on  in  a  ridiculous  position  and
doing  a  bad  turn  to  the  Abbé  de  Caumartin,  finally  could
not  resolve  to  deceive  a  man  who  trusted  to  him,  and  so
confirmed,  as  gently  as  he  could,  the  truth  which  the  Arch¬
bishop  of  Paris  had  been  the  first  to  tell  him.  Excessive
wrath  and  vexation  succeeded  the  excess  of  delight.  In  that
state  he  returned  home  and  the  next  day  went  to  Versailles,
where  he  laid  before  the  king  the  most  bitter  complaints  of
the  Abbé  de  Caumartin,  who  had  made  him  his  plaything
and  the  laughter  of  all  the  world.

The  king,  who  had  meant  to  amuse  himself  a  little,  but
who  always  wanted  a  certain  order  and  decorum  in  every¬
thing,  had  already  heard  what  had  happened,  and  thought  it
extremely  improper.  The  bishop’s  complaints  irritated  him
the  more  because  he  felt  himself  the  innocent  cause  of  a
scene  so  ridiculous  and  so  public  ;  and  besides,  though  he
liked  to  divert  himself  with  M.  de  Noyon’s  foibles,  he  never¬
theless  felt  both  kindness  and  consideration  for  him.  He

92

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

sent  for  Pontchartrain,  and  ordered  him  to  comb  the  hair  of
his  relation  severely,  and  also  to  send  him  a  lettre  de  cachet
to  go  and  ripen  his  brains  and  learn  to  laugh  and  speechify
at  the  abbey  of  Busay  in  Brittany.  Pontchartrain  dared
not  reply  ;  he  executed  the  first  part  of  the  order  ;  as  for  the
rest  he  put  it  off  till  the  next  day,  when  he  asked  for  pardon,
and  made  the  most  of  the  abbé’s  youth,  the  temptation  to
profit  by  the  bishop’s  absurdity,  and  above  all,  the  speech
itself,  corrected  and  augmented  by  the  hand  of  M.  de  Noyon,
who  had  only  himself  to  blame  for  not  seeing  what  every¬
body  else  believed  they  saw.  This  last  argument,  cleverly
advanced  by  an  agreeable  and  witty  minister,  put  an  end  to
the  lettre  de  cachet,  but  not  to  the  king’s  indignation.  Pont¬
chartrain  asked  no  better.  He  made  the  most  of  the  regret
and  grief  of  the  abbé,  and  his  desire  to  go  and  see  M.  de
Noyon  and  ask  his  pardon  and  assure  him  he  never  meant
to  be  wanting  in  respect  or  to  displease  him.  In  fact,  he  did
ask  permission  to  go  and  make  this  apology,  but  the  angry
bishop  would  not  receive  him,  and  after  declaiming  much
against  the  Caumartins,  he  carried  his  mortification  to  his
diocese,  where  he  remained  in  seclusion  a  long  time.

I  must  say  at  once  that  soon  after  his  return  to  Paris  he
fell  ill  and  received  the  sacraments.  Before  receiving  them
he  sent  for  the  Abbé  de  Caumartin,  forgave  him,  embraced
him,  drew  from  his  finger  a  fine  diamond,  and  asked  him  to
keep  it  and  wear  it  always  for  his  sake  ;  and  when  he  re¬
covered  he  did  all  he  could  with  the  king  to  heal  the  matter.
He  worked  at  this  for  the  rest  of  his  life  with  warmth  and
perseverance,  and  neglected  nothing  to  make  the  abbé  a
bishop  ;  but  the  trick  had  injured  him  radically  in  the  king’s
mind,  and  M.  de  Noyon  had  only  the  good  before  God  of
this  great  action  and  the  honour  of  it  before  the  world.

About  this  time  died  the  Marquise  de  Saint-Simon,  at  the

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

93

age  of  ninety-one.  She  was  the  widow  of  my  father’s  eldest
Deaths  of  La  brother,  whose  property  she  had,  leaving  his
Fontaine  and  debts  to  us.  The  Duchesse  d’Uzês,  widow  of

Mignard.

the  son  of  her  brother,  only  daughter  of  the
late  Marquis  de  Montausier,1  died  at  the  same  time.  The
death  of  two  illustrious  men  made  more  noise  in  the  world
than  that  of  these  great  ladies,  —  La  Fontaine,  so  well-known
for  his  fables  and  his  tales,  so  heavy,  nevertheless,  in  con¬
versation  ;  and  Mignard,  illustrious  by  his  brush.  The  latter
had  an  only  daughter,  who  was  perfectly  beautiful.  It  was
she  from  whom  he  worked  by  preference  ;  she  is  repeated  in
many  of  those  magnificent  historical  pictures  which  adorn  the
great  gallery  of  Versailles  and  its  two  salons,  —  pictures
which  have  had  no  small  part  in  irritating  all  Europe
against  the  king,  and  in  leaguing  it  far  more  against  him
personally  than  against  his  kingdom.

1  The  husband  of  Julie  d’Angennes  de  Rambouillet,  and  the  original
of  Molière’s  Alceste.  —  Tr.

III.

During  this  winter  my  mother  was  solely  occupied  in  find¬
ing  me  a  good  marriage,  much  troubled  at  not  being  able  to
origin  of  my  do  s0  before.  I  was  an  only  son,  and  I  had
friendship  with  ranp  anq  establishments  which  made  some  per-

the  Duchesse  de  *■

Bracciano,  after-  sons  think  much  of  me.  There  was  a  question
Princesse  des  °f  Mlle.  d’Armagnac  and  Mlle,  de  la  Trémoille,
Ursms.  but  all  was  in  the  air,  and  so  with  several  others.

The  Duchesse  de  Bracciano  had  long  lived  in  Paris,  far  from
her  husband  and  from  Rome.  She  lodged  very  near  us  ;  she
was  a  friend  of  my  mother,  and  they  frequently  met.  Her
wit,  her  grace,  her  manners,  had  enchanted  me  ;  she  received
me  with  kindness,  and  I  hardly  stirred  from  her  house.  She
had  with  her  Mlle,  de  Cosnac,  a  relation  of  hers,  and  Mlle,  de
Royan,  daughter  of  her  sister,  and,  like  herself,  of  the  family
of  La  Trémoille,  both  heiresses,  and  without  father  or  mother.
Mme.  de  Bracciano  was  very  desirous  of  giving  me  Mile,
de  Royan.  She  often  spoke  to  me  of  establishment,  and
also  to  my  mother,  to  see  if  some  remarks  might  not  be
thrown  out  which  she  could  gather  up.  It  would  have
been  a  noble  and  rich  marriage  ;  but  I  was  alone,  and  I
wanted  a  father-in-law  and  a  family  on  whom  I  could  lean.

The  preceding  year  there  had  been  some  question  of  the
eldest  daughter  of  the  Maréchal  de  Borges  ;  it  was  broken  off
The  Maréchal  almost  as  soon  as  mentioned  ;  but  the  desire  was
de  Lorges.  great  on  both  sides  to  renew  it.  The  maréchal,
who  possessed  nothing,  and  whose  first  reward  was  the
marshal’s  bâton,  married  on  receiving  it  the  daughter  of  Pré-

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

95

mont,  warden  of  the  royal  treasury,  who,  under  M.  Colbert,
had  acquired  great  wealth.  The  maréchal  had  always  served
with  a  great  reputation  for  honour,  valour,  and  capacity,
commanding  the  armies  with  a  success  that  M.  de  Louvois’
hereditary  hatred  for  M.  de  Turenne  and  for  all  belonging
to  him  was  forced  to  allow  to  the  favourite  nephew  and
pupil  of  that  great  captain.  The  integrity,  uprightness,  and
frankness  of  the  Maréchal  de  Lorges  pleased  me  infinitely.
I  had  seen  those  qualities  closely  during  the  campaign  I  had
made  in  his  army.  The  esteem  and  love  which  that  whole
army  bore  him  ;  his  consideration  at  Court  ;  the  magnificence
with  which  he  lived  ;  his  distinguished  birth  ;  his  great  alli¬
ances  and  connections,  which  counterbalanced  the  marriage
that  he  had  found  himself,  the  first  of  his  race,  obliged  to
make  ;  an  elder  brother  much  considered  also  ;  the  sin¬
gularity  of  the  same  dignities,  the  same  offices,  the  same
establishments  in  both  brothers  ;  above  all,  the  intimate
union  of  the  two  brothers  and  the  whole  of  this  great  and
numerous  family  ;  and,  more  than  all  that,  the  goodness  and
truth  of  the  Maréchal  de  Lorges,  so  rare  to  find,  and  so
active  in  him,  —  had  given  me  an  extreme  desire  for  this
marriage,  in  which  I  felt  I  had  found  all  I  lacked  to
sustain  me,  to  help  me  make  my  way,  and  to  live  agreeably
in  the  midst  of  such  illustrious  connections  and  so  amiable
a  household.

I  also  found  in  the  virtue  above  reproach  of  the  maréchale,
and  the  talent  she  had  shown  in  reconciling  M.  de  Louvois
and  her  husband,  all  that  I  could  wish  for  the  conduct  of
a  young  wife  at  court,  where  her  mother  was  respected  and
applauded  for  the  courteous,  wise,  and  noble  manner  with
which  she  kept  an  open  house  for  the  best  company,  with¬
out  any  mixture,  behaving  with  such  modesty,  while  never
losing  anything  of  the  dignity  she  had  from  her  husband,

96

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

that  she  made  her  own  birth  forgotten  by  the  maréchal’s
family  and  by  the  Court  and  society,  where  she  had  won
complete  esteem  and  personal  consideration.  She  lived  only
for  her  husband,  who  had  the  most  perfect  confidence  in
her,  and  lived  with  her  and  her  relations  in  a  friendship
and  consideration  which  did  him  honour.  They  had  an
only  son,  whom  they  loved  distractedly  and  who  was  then
only  twelve  years  old,  and  five  daughters.  The  two  eldest,
who  had  passed  their  earliest  life  with  the  Benedictines  at
Conflans,  had  been  for  the  last  three  years  with  Madame
Frémont,  mother  of  the  Maréchale  de  Lorges,  the  houses  of
the  latter  being  contiguous  and  communicating.  The  elder
was  seventeen  years  of  age,  the  younger  fifteen.  Their
grandmother  never  let  them  out  of  her  sight.

Her  secret  preference  was  for  Mlle,  de  Lorges  ;  that  of
the  maréchale  for  the  second  daughter,  Mlle,  de  Quintin;

and  the  mother’s  wish  would  have  been  that

My  marriage.

the  eldest  should  have  chosen  a  convent  life  in
order  that  she  might  have  married  her  favourite  the  better.
The  latter  was  a  brunette  with  beautiful  eyes  ;  the  elder  a
blonde,  with  a  perfect  figure  and  complexion,  a  most  ami¬
able  face,  an  extremely  modest  but  noble  air,  and  some¬
thing,  I  know  not  what,  that  seemed  majestic  from  an  air
of  virtue  and  natural  sweetness.  It  was  she  whom  I  liked
best  as  soon  as  I  saw  them  both,  without  any  comparison  ;
I  hoped  for  the  happiness  of  my  life  with  her,  who  has
since  made  it,  solely  and  absolutely.  As  she  has  become
my  wife,  I  abstain  from  saying  more  ;  except  that  she  has
fulfilled  infinitely  beyond  what  was  promised  to  me,  and
what  I  myself  had  ever  hoped.

My  marriage  being  agreed  upon  and  arranged,  the  Maré¬
chal  de  Lorges  spoke  of  it  to  the  king  for  himself  and  for
me,  lest  the  matter  should  get  wind.  The  king  was  kind

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

97

enough  to  tell  him  that  he  could  not  do  better  and  to  speak
of  me  very  obligingly  ;  he  told  me  this  afterwards  with
pleasure.  I  had  pleased  the  maréchal  during  the  campaign
I  had  made  in  his  army,  where,  with  the  thought  of  renew¬
ing  the  marriage  negotiation,  he  had  secretly  followed  me
with  his  eye,  and  thenceforth  had  resolved  to  prefer  me  to
M.  de  Luxembourg,  the  Duc  de  Montfort,  son  of  the  Duc  de
Chevreuse,  and  many  others.  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  without
whom  I  did  nothing,  did  all  he  could  to  promote  this
marriage,  without  any  reference  to  the  views  of  his  nephew,
notwithstanding  the  intimate  relations  between  himself  and
the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,  and  the  fact  of  their  wives  being
sisters.

The  marriage  took  place  at  the  hôtel  de  Lorges  on  the
8th  of  April,  which  I  have  always  considered  with  great
reason  as  the  happiest  day  of  my  life.  My  mother  treated
me  as  the  best  mother  in  the  world.  On  the  Thursday
after  Easter  we  went  to  the  hôtel  de  Lorges  at  seven  in  the
evening.  The  contract  was  signed.  A  grand  repast  was
served  to  the  family,  small  on  both  sides,  and  at  midnight
the  vicar  of  Saint-Roch  said  mass,  and  married  us  in  the
chapel  of  the  mansion.  The  evening  before,  my  mother  had
sent  jewels  to  Mlle,  de  Lorges  to  the  value  of  forty  thou¬
sand  livres,  and  I  six  hundred  louis  in  a  corbeille  filled  with
all  the  elegancies  given  on  such  occasions.  The  next  day
M.  d’Auneuil,  who  lived  opposite,  gave  us  a  grand  dinner
after  which  the  bride  received  on  her  bed  at  the  hôtel  de
Lorges  all  France,  the  duties  of  civil  life  and  curiosity  at¬
tracting  the  crowd  ;  and  the  first  to  arrive  was  the  Duchesse
de  Bracciano  with  her  two  nieces.  My  mother  being  still
in  her  second  mourning,  and  her  apartments  black  and  gray,
we  preferred  the  hôtel  de  Lorges  in  which  to  receive  the
company.

VOL.  i.  —  7

98  MEMOIRS  or  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

The  day  after  these  visits,  to  which  we  devoted  only  one
day,  we  went  to  Versailles.  That  evening  the  king  wished  to
see  the  bride  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartment,  where  her
mother  and  mine  presented  her.  The  king,  on  his  way
there,  jested  with  me,  and  was  good  enough  to  receive  the
ladies  with  much  distinction  and  praise.  After  that  they
were  at  his  supper,  where  the  new  duchess  took  her
tabouret.  On  arriving  at  table  the  king  said  to  her  :
“  Madame,  if  you  please,  seat  yourself.”  The  king’s  napkin
unfolded,  he  looked  up  and  saw  all  the  duchesses  and  prin¬
cesses  still  standing,  and  half-rising  in  his  chair,  he  said  to
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  :  “  Madame,  I  have  already  asked  you
to  be  seated  ;  ”  on  which  all  those  who  had  the  right  sat
down,  —  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  between  my  mother  and  her
own,  who  sat  below  her.  The  next  day  she  received  the
whole  Court  on  her  bed  in  the  apartment  of  the  Duchesse
d’Arpajon,  which  was  the  most  convenient,  being  on  the
ground-floor.  The  Maréchal  de  Lorges  and  myself  were
present  only  during  the  visits  of  the  royal  family.  The  next
day  we  went  to  Saint-Germain  ;  then  to  Paris,  where  I
gave  a  grand  banquet  in  my  own  house  to  the  wedding
guests,  and  the  next  day  a  special  supper  to  all  who  were
left  of  my  father’s  old  friends,  to  whom  I  had  taken  pains
to  announce  my  marriage  before  it  was  made  public,  and
whom  I  have  always  cultivated  with  the  greatest  care  until
their  deaths.

Mlle,  de  Quintin  was  not  long  in  having  her  turn.  M.  de
Lauzun  saw  her  on  her  sister’s  bed  with  several  other  mar-
Marriage  of  my  riageable  girls.  She  was  then  fifteen,  and  he
the  Duc  de  Lau-  sixty-three.  This  was  a  strange  disproportion
zun-  of  age  ;  but  his  life  had  been  up  to  this  time

a  romance,  which  he  did  not  consider  over  ;  he  still  had  the
hopes  and  the  ambition  of  a  young  man.  Since  his  return

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

99

to  Court,  and  liis  restoration  to  the  distinctions  he  formerly
enjoyed  there,  and  since  the  King  and  Queen  of  England  had
ob tamed  for  him  the  rank  of  a  duc  vérifié ,  there  was  nothing
that  he  did  not  attempt  to  recover  the  confidence  of  the  king,
but  without  avail.  He  flattered  himself  that,  by  marrying
the  daughter  of  a  general  in  the  army,  he  should  in  some
sort  put  himself  between  the  king  and  the  general,  and  open
for  himself  in  the  affairs  on  the  Rhine  a  way  to  succeed  his
father-in-law  in  the  command  of  the  king’s  guards,  a  post  he
could  not  console  himself  for  having  lost.

Full  of  these  thoughts,  he  employed  some  one  to  speak
to  the  Maréchale  de  Lorges,  who  knew  him  too  well  by  rep¬
utation,  and  loved  her  daughter  too  much,  to  listen  to  a
marriage  that  could  not  make  her  happy.  M.  de  Lauzun
redoubled  his  urgency,  proposed  to  marry  without  a  dot,  and
laid  the  matter  in  that  light  before  Mme.  Frémont  and  MM.
de  Lorges  and  Duras,  by  whom  the  matter  was  considered,
concerted,  and  arranged  for  that  grand  reason  of  the  dot,  to
the  great  displeasure  of  the  mother,  who,  however,  gave  in  at
the  last,  from  the  difficulty  of  otherwise  making  her  daughter
a  duchess  like  the  eldest,  whom  she  wished  her  to  equal.
Phélypeaux  [only  son  of  Pontchartrain],  who  thought  him¬
self  on  the  level  of  everybody,  offered  to  take  her  without
a  dot,  on  account  of  her  connections  and  surroundings  ;  and
the  fear  that  Mlle,  de  Quintin  felt  of  that  marriage  made  her
consent  with  joy  to  marry  the  Duc  de  Lauzun,  who  had  a
name  and  rank  and  wealth.  The  disparity  of  years,  and  her
own  inexperience  led  her  to  regard  this  marriage  as  a  re¬
straint  of  two  or  three  years  at  the  most,  to  be  afterwards
free,  rich,  and  a  great  lady  ;  otherwise  she  would  never  have
consented,  as  she  frequently  owned  to  us  later.

The  affair  was  conducted  and  arranged  in  the  utmost
secrecy.  When  the  Maréchal  de  Lorges  spoke  of  it  to  the

100  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

king,  he  answered  :  “You  are  very  rash  to  put  Lauzun  into
your  family;  I  wish  you  may  not  repent  it.  You  are  the
master  of  your  own  affairs;  but  as  for  mine,  I  shall  not
permit  you  to  make  this  marriage,  except  on  condition  that
you  never  speak  of  them  to  him.”

The  day  the  matter  was  made  public  the  Maréchal  de
Lorges  sent  for  me  very  early,  to  tell  me  and  explain  his
reasons,  the  principal  of  them  being  that  he  was  not  obliged
to  give  a  dot ,  and  that  M.  de  Lauzun  had  made  immense
settlements  on  his  wife  after  his  death.  We  took  the  con¬
tract  to  the  king  to  sign,  who  joked  M.  de  Lauzun,  and
laughed  very  much.  M.  de  Lauzun  replied  that  he  was  only
too  happy  to  marry,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  first  time  since
his  return  that  the  king  had  laughed  with  him.  They
hurried  the  wedding  immediately,  so  that  nobody  could  have
new  clothes.  M.  de  Lauzun’s  gifts  were  stuffs,  precious
stones,  and  elegancies,  but  no  money.  Only  seven  or  eight
persons  were  present  at  the  marriage,  which  took  place  at  the
hôtel  de  Lorges  at  midnight.  It  met  with  nothing  but
censors.  People  could  not  understand  either  the  father  or
the  son-in-law.  The  reasons  of  the  former  could  not  be
imagined  —  for  that  of  the  no  dot  was  accepted  by  none  ;
and  there  was  no  one  who  did  not  predict  a  coming  rupture,
from  the  well-known  temper  of  M.  de  Lauzun.

The  intimate  union  of  the  two  sisters  whom  he  and  I  had
married,  and  our  continual  habitation  at  Court,  where  we

The  Duc  de  Lau  even  a  stated  pavilion  for  us  four  at  Marly
zun;  his  charac-  on  all  the  trips,  made  me  live  in  close  connec¬
tion  with  him  ;  in  Paris  we  saw  each  other
nearly  every  day,  and  took  our  meals  constantly  together,  at
my  house  or  at  his.  He  was  a  personage  so  extraordinary,
and  so  unique  in  every  way,  that  La  Bruyère  had  great  reason
to  say  of  him,  in  his  “  Caractères,”  that  men  were  not  per-

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

101

mitted  to  dream  as  he  had  lived.  To  those  who  saw  him
very  closely  in  his  old  age,  that  remark  seems  to  have  more
justice  still.  It  is  this  which  induces  me  to  enlarge  upon
him  here.

The  Duc  de  Lauzun  was  a  small,  fairish  man,  well-made  in
figure,  haughty  in  countenance,  which  was  full  of  intelhgence
and  imposing,  though  the  face  was  not  agreeable  in  youth,  as
I  have  been  told  by  the  men  of  his  time;  full  of  ambition,
caprices,  and  oddities  ;  jealous  of  everything  ;  always  wishing
to  get  beyond  the  goal,  content  with  nothing  ;  not  lettered,
without  any  adornment  or  charm  of  mind,  naturally  sour,
solitary,  savage  ;  much  of  a  noble  in  all  his  habits  ;  malicious
and  malignant  by  nature,  even  more  than  from  jealousy  and
ambition  ;  a  good  friend  when  he  was  a  friend,  which  was
rare,  and  a  good  relation  ;  a  ready  enemy  even  to  those  who
did  not  concern  him;  cruel  to  defects,  and  in  finding  and
applying  ridicule  ;  extremely  brave,  and  at  the  same  time
dangerously  foolhardy  ;  a  courtier  equally  insolent,  sarcas¬
tic,  and  base  to  servility;  full  of  all  resources  of  industry,
intrigue,  and  villany  to  attain  his  ends  ;  and  with  all  that,
dangerous  to  the  ministers,  dreaded  by  all  at  Court,  and  full
of  cruel  shafts  and  wit,  which  spared  no  one.  He  came  to
Court  without  any  means,  a  youth  from  Gascony,  arriving
from  his  province  under  the  name  of  Marquis  de  Puyguil-
hem.  The  Maréchal  de  Grammont,  cousin  of  his  father,
took  him  in.  The  maréchal  was  then  held  in  the  highest
consideration  at  Court,  in  the  confidence  of  the  queen-mother
and  in  that  of  Cardinal  Mazarin,  and  was  in  command  of  the
king’s  guards  with  survivance  to  his  eldest  son,  the  Comte  de
Guiche,  who  was  the  flower  of  chivalry  and  of  the  ladies,  and
much  in  the  good  graces  of  the  king,  and  the  Comtesse  de
Soissons,  niece  of  the  cardinal,  from  whose  side  the  king
never  budged,  she  being  at  that  time  the  queen  of  the  Court.

102  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

The  Comte  de  Guiche  introduced  to  her  the  Marquis  de  Puy-
guilhem,  and  he  in  a  very  short  time  became  the  favourite
of  the  king,  who  gave  him  a  regiment  of  dragoons  which  he
formed  for  him,  and  soon  after  made  him  a  general,  and
created  for  him  the  office  of  colonel-general  of  dragoons.

The  Duc  de  Mazarin,  wishing  to  resign  his  post  as
grand-master  of  artillery,  Puyguilhem  got  wind  of  it  among
the  first,  and  asked  the  king  to  give  him  the  place,  which
the  king  promised,  but  under  secrecy  for  some  days.  The
day  came  when  the  king  had  engaged  to  declare  the  ap¬
pointment.  Puyguilhem  awaited  his  arrival  in  the  council-
room  of  Finance,  where  he  found  Nyert,  first  valet  de
chambre,  on  duty.  Nyert  asked  him  what  he  was  doing
there.  Puyguilhem,  sure  of  his  appointment,  thought  he
should  hind  the  valet  to  him  by  making  him  a  confidant.
Nyert  expressed  his  pleasure,  looked  at  his  watch,  said  he
had  just  time  to  do  what  he  called  an  errand  for  the  king,
and  rushed  up,  four  steps  at  a  time,  to  Louvois’  office  and
warned  him.  Louvois  hated  Puyguilhem  as  the  friend  of  his
rival,  Colbert,  and  feared  his  favour  in  a  high  post  that  would
surely  interfere  with  his  war  department.  He  went  instantly
to  the  king,  told  him  he  heard  he  was  about  to  appoint
Puyguilhem  grand-master  of  artillery,  and  said  that  he  felt
it  his  duty  to  lay  before  him  the  troubles  that  would  arise  in
consequence  ;  which  he  did  at  length.

The  king  felt  extremely  annoyed  to  find  his  secret  known
to  the  very  man  from  whom  he  principally  wished  to  hide
it,  and  he  answered  Louvois  with  a  serious  air  that  the  thin 2
was  not  done  yet.  Shortly  after  the  council  ended,  and  the
king  on  his  way  to  mass  saw  Puyguilhem,  and  passed  with¬
out  speaking  to  him.  Puyguilhem,  much  astonished,  waited
the  rest  of  the  day,  and  finding  that  the  promised  appoint¬
ment  did  not  come,  spoke  to  the  king  about  it  at  the  little

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  103

coucher.  The  king  replied  that  it  could  not  be  done  yet,
and  he  would  see  about  it.  The  ambiguity  of  this  answer
and  the  curt  tone  in  which  it  was  said  alarmed  Puyguilhem.

When  it  became  certain  that  he  was  not  to  have  the
artillery  he  was  so  furious  at  missing  it  that  the  king  and  he
were  unpleasantly  constrained  with  each  other.  This  could
only  last  a  few  days.  Puyguilhem,  having  the  grandes
entrees,  watched  for  a  tête-à-tête  with  the  king  and  seized  it.
He  spoke  of  the  artillery,  and  summoned  the  king  audaciously
to  keep  his  word.  The  king  replied  that  Puyguilhem  had
not  kept  his  own,  and  that  he  had  only  given  him  the
promise  under  pledge  of  secrecy,  and  that  pledge  he  had
failed  to  keep.  Thereupon,  Puyguilhem  walked  away  a  few
steps,  turned  his  back  to  the  king,  drew  his  sword,  broke
the  blade  with  his  foot,  and  shouted  furiously  that  he  would
never  in  his  life  serve  a  prince  who  had  broken  his  word
so  villanously.  The  king,  in  a  transport  of  anger,  did  what
was  perhaps  the  finest  action  of  his  life.  He  turned  instantly,
opened  the  window,  and  flung  out  his  cane,  saying  that  he
should  be  sorry  to  strike  a  man,  and  left  the  room.  The  next
day  Puyguilhem,  who  had  not  dared  to  show  himself,  was
arrested,  and  taken  to  the  Bastille.  He  was  an  intimate
friend  of  Guitry,  a  favourite  of  the  king,  who  had  created
for  him  the  office  of  grand-master  of  the  wardrobe.  Guitry
ventured  to  speak  to  the  king  in  Puyguilhem’s  favour,  and
tried  to  restore  the  great  liking  the  king  had  had  for  him.
He  succeeded  in  so  touching  the  king  for  having  turned
Puyguilhem’s  head  by  refusing  the  great  post  when  he
thought  it  was  promised  to  him,  that  he  desired  to  make  up
for  the  refusal.  He  offered  the  position  of  captain  of  the
body-guard  as  compensation  to  Puyguilhem,  then  in  the  Bas¬
tille.  Puyguilhem,  seeing  this  inconceivable  and  rapid  return
of  the  king’s  kindness  towards  him,  recovered  sufficient  au-

104  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  iil

dacity  to  fancy  he  could  turn  it  to  better  purpose  ;  so  he
refused.  The  king  was  not  repulsed.  Guitry  went  to  the
Bastille  and  lectured  his  friend,  and  persuaded  him  with
great  difficulty  to  have  the  kindness  to  accept  the  king’s
offer.  As  soon  as  he  accepted  it  he  was  let  out  of  the
Bastille,  went  to  make  his  how  to  the  king,  took  the  oath
for  his  new  office,  and  sold  out  of  the  dragoons.

I  shall  not  speak  here  of  his  adventures  with  Mademoi¬
selle,  which  she  relates  herself  so  naïvely  in  her  Memoirs,
together  with  the  extreme  folly  that  he  showed  in  putting
off  his  marriage  with  her,  to  which  the  king  had  consented,
in  order  to  have  fine  new  liveries,  and  obtain  permission
that  the  marriage  should  be  celebrated  at  the  king’s  mass  ;
which  delay  gave  Monsieur,  instigated  by  M.  le  Prince,  time
to  remonstrate  with  the  king  and  get  him  to  withdraw  his
consent  ;  which  put  an  end  to  the  marriage.  Mademoiselle
breathed  fire  and  slaughter.  But  Puyguilhem,  who,  since
the  death  of  his  father,  had  taken  the  name  of  Comte  de
Lauzun,  made  the  great  sacrifice  to  the  king  with  a  good
grace,  and  more  wisely  than  was  natural  to  him.  He  was
given  the  company  of  the  hundred  gentlemen  of  the  king’s
guard,  and  was  made  lieutenant-general.

In  1670,  the  king  wished,  under  the  pretext  of  visiting
his  places  in  Planders,  to  make  a  triumphal  journey  with
the  ladies,  accompanied  by  an  army  corps  and  by  all  the
troops  of  his  household  ;  and  the  alarm  caused  by  this  was
so  great  in  the  Low-Countries  that  the  king  took  pains  to
reassure  the  inhabitants.  He  gave  the  command  of  the
whole  to  the  Comte  de  Lauzun,  with  the  patent  of  general-in¬
chief  of  the  army.  Lauzun  performed  his  functions  with
much  intelligence  and  with  extreme  magnificence  and  gal¬
lantry.  This  glory,  and  so  distinguishing  a  mark  of  Lauzun’s
favour  gave  much  to  think  about  to  Louvois,  whom  Lauzun

The  Bastille.  From  an  Old  Print

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  105

never  treated  with  propriety  in  any  way.  The  minister
joined  forces  with  Mine,  de  Montespan,  who  had  never  for¬
given  Lauzun  for  certain  atrocious  insults  he  had  offered  her  ;
together  they  managed  to  rouse  the  king  to  a  remembrance
of  the  broken  sword  and  the  insolence  of  having  refused
his  offers  while  still  in  the  Bastille,  and  they  made  him
consider  Lauzun  as  a  man  beside  himself,  who  had  inveigled
Mademoiselle  till  he  was  almost  on  the  point  of  marrying
her  and  securing  her  enormous  fortune  ;  in  short,  a  very
dangerous  man  on  account  of  his  audacity,  and  one  who
had  taken  it  into  his  head  to  gain  the  devotion  of  the  troops
by  his  magnificence,  by  his  services  to  the  officers,  and  by
the  manner  in  which  he  had  lived  with  them  while  in
Flanders,  which  caused  them  to  adore  him.  They  made  it
a  crime  on  his  part  to  continue  the  friend  of  the  Com¬
tesse  de  Soissons,  who  had  been  driven  from  the  Court  and
suspected  of  criminal  offences.  They  probably  laid  other
things  to  his  charge  that  I  never  heard  of,  judging  by  the
barbarous  treatment  they  finally  succeeded  in  giving  him.

These  proceedings  lasted  through  the  year  1671  without
Lauzun  ever  discoverimg  anything  on  the  faces  of  the  king
and  Mme.  de  Montespan,  who  treated  him  with  their  usual
familiarity  and  distinction.  He  possessed  great  knowledge
of  precious  stones  and  how  to  mount  them,  and  Mme.  de
Montespan  often  employed  him  on  hers.  One  evening,  in
November,  1671,  he  came  out  from  Paris,  Mme.  de  Montespan
having  sent  for  him  about  some  jewels,  and  he  had  scarcely
entered  his  room  when  the  Maréchal  de  Rochefort,  captain  of
the  guards  in  quarters,  entered  and  arrested  him.  Lauzun,
in  the  most  extreme  surprise,  wanted  to  know  why,  and  to
see  the  king,  or  at  least  to  write  to  him.  All  was  refused.
He  was  taken  to  the  Bastille,  and  shortly  after  to  Pignerol,
where  he  was  confined  in  a  low  vault  ;  and  his  post  as  cap-

106  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

tain  of  the  guards  was  given  to  the  Maréchal  de  Luxembourg.
We  can  judge  of  the  condition  of  mind  of  a  man  like  Lauzun,
precipitated  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  from  such  a  height
to  a  dungeon  in  the  fortress  of  Pignerol,  without  seeing  a
person  or  being  able  to  imagine  why.  He  bore  up,  however,
for  a  long  time,  but  finally  fell  so  ill  that  he  was  forced  to
think  of  confessing  himself.  I  have  heard  him  tell  how  he
feared  lest  the  priest  might  be  a  sham  one.  For  that  reason
he  obstinately  demanded  a  capuchin,  and  as  soon  as  the
capuchin  came,  he  jumped  at  his  beard  and  pulled  it  as
hard  as  he  could,  this  way  and  that,  to  be  certain  it  was
not  false.  He  was  four  or  five  years  in  the  dungeon.  Pris¬
oners  find  the  occupations  that  necessity  teaches.  Other
prisoners  were  beside  him  and  above  him,  and  above  that
again,  and  they  soon  found  means  to  speak  with  him  ;  and
this  intercourse  led  them  to  make  a  well-hidden  hole  through
which  they  could  hear  easily,  and  finally  to  enlarge  it  until
they  could  pay  each  other  visits.

The  surintendant  Fouquet  had  been  imprisoned  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  men  above  since  December,  1664;  and
he  learned  from  them  that  Lauzun  was  below  them.  Fouquet,
who  had  heard  no  news  from  the  outside,  hoped  to  get  some
from  Lauzun,  and  was  very  desirous  of  seeing  him.  He  had
left  him  a  young  man,  just  dawning  at  court  under  the
Maréchal  de  Grammont  and  well  received  by  the  Comtesse
de  Soissons,  from  whose  side  the  king  never  stirred.  The
prisoners  who  held  intercourse  with  Lauzun  persuaded  him
to  let  them  hoist  him  through  the  hole  to  see  Fouquet  in
their  cell,  Lauzun  being  very  glad  to  see  him.  So  there  they
were  together,  and  Lauzun  related  his  fortunes  and  his  mis¬
fortunes.  The  unhappy  surintendant  opened  his  eyes  and
ears  very  wide  on  hearing  from  this  youth  of  Gascony,  once
only  too  happy  to  be  received  and  sheltered  by  the  Maréchal

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  107

de  Grammont,  that  he  had  been  general  of  dragoons,  captain
of  the  guards,  with  the  patent  and  functions  of  the  general-in¬
chief  of  the  army.  Fouquet  did  not  know  what  to  make  of
it,  hut  supposed  Lauzun  was  crazy,  and  was  telling  him
delusions  when  he  related  how  he  had  missed  the  artillery,
and  all  that  had  happened  after  that;  but  he  no  longer
doubted  that  his  madness  had  reached  a  crisis  when  he  told
how  the  king  had  consented  to  his  marriage  with  Made¬
moiselle,  why  it  had  been  broken  off,  and  all  the  immense
property  with  which  she  had  endowed  him.  This  cooled
their  intercourse  on  Foucpiet’s  side,  who,  believing  Lauzun’s
brain  entirely  upset,  took  the  things  that  he  told  him  had
happened  in  the  world  between  the  imprisonment  of  the  one
and  the  imprisonment  of  the  other  as  so  many  fictions.

The  captivity  of  the  unfortunate  surintendant  was  slightly
modified  before  that  of  Lauzun.  His  wife,  and  a  few  officers
of  the  fortress  of  Pignerol  had  permission  to  see  him,  and
from  them  he  learned  the  news  of  the  world.  One  of  the
first  things  he  said  to  them  was  to  pity  that  poor  Puyguilhem,
whom  he  had  left  young  and  with  so  good  a  footing  at  Court
for  his  age,  and  who  was  now  crazy  and  put  away  to  conceal
his  madness  in  that  very  prison.  What  was  his  astonish¬
ment  when  they  told  him  and  assured  him  of  the  truth  of
the  very  things  he  had  heard  from  Lauzun  !  He  could  not
get  over  it,  and  was  inclined  to  believe  the  brains  of  all  were
deranged  ;  it  took  some  time  to  convince  him.  After  a  while
Lauzun  was  taken  from  the  dungeon  and  had  a  chamber,  and
soon  after  the  same  liberty  as  that  given  to  Fouquet,  and
they  were  allowed  to  see  each  other  as  much  as  they  liked.

I  never  knew  what  it  was  that  displeased  Lauzun,  but  he  came
out  of  Pignerol  Fouquet’s  enemy,  and  then  did  all  the  harm
he  could  to  him,  and  after  his  death  to  his  family.

Mademoiselle  was  inconsolable  for  this  long  and  harsh  im-

108  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

prisonment,  and  made  every  possible  effort  to  deliver  Lauzun.
The  king,  at  last,  resolved  to  profit  by  her  feelings  to  enrich
the  Duc  du  Maine,  and  to  make  her  buy  the  release  of  her
Lauzun  dearly.  He  caused  a  proposition  to  be  made  to  her,
which  was  nothing  less  than  to  secure,  at  her  death,  to  the
Duc  du  Maine  and  his  posterity,  the  county  of  Eu,  the  duchy
of  Aumale,  and  the  principality  of  Dombes.  The  gift  was
enormous,  as  much  for  its  value  as  for  the  dignity  and  the
extent  of  these  possessions.  She  had,  moreover,  settled  the
first  two  on  Lauzun,  with  the  duchy  of  Saint-Fargeau  and
the  beautiful  estate  of  Thiers  in  Auvergne,  at  the  time  of
their  proposed  marriage,  and  it  was  necessary  to  get  him  to
renounce  Eu  and  Aumale  before  Mademoiselle  could  dispose
of  them  in  favour  of  the  Duc  du  Maine.  Mademoiselle
could  not  bring  herself  to  pass  under  this  yoke,  and  deprive
Lauzun  of  her  benefits.  She  was  begged  with  the  utmost
importunity,  and  finally  threatened  by  the  ministers,  some¬
times  by  Louvois,  sometimes  by  Colbert,  with  the  latter  of
whom  she  was  rather  pleased,  because  he  was  at  all  times
friendly  to  Lauzun,  and  managed  her  more  gently  than
Louvois,  Lauzun’s  enemy,  who  was  held  in  reserve  to  say
the  harshest  things,  and  always  said  them  with  the  utmost
harshness.  She  felt  continually  that  the  king  did  not  like
her,  and  had  never  forgiven  her  for  the  journey  to  Orleans,
still  less  for  the  cannon  of  the  Bastille,  which  she  had
ordered  to  be  fired  in  her  own  presence  against  the  king’s
troops  ;  whereby  she  saved  M.  le  Prince  and  his  army  in  the
battle  of  the  Faubourg  Saint- Antoine.  However,  she  finally
comprehended  that  the  king,  estranged  beyond  recall,  would
never  consent  to  the  release  of  Lauzun  except  through  his
passion  to  raise  and  enrich  his  bastards,  and  would  never
cease  to  persecute  her  until  she  consented  without  hope  of
rebate  ;  so  that  she  finally  gave  in  with  groans  and  the

1695]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  109

bitterest  tears.  For  the  validity  of  the  thing,  it  was  thought
necessary  to  set  Lauzun  at  liberty  to  renounce  the  gifts  of
Mademoiselle  ;  so  the  shift  was  invented  that  he  needed
the  waters  of  Bourbon,  and  Mme.  de  Montespan  also,  in
order  that  they  might  confer  together  on  this  affair.

Mme.  de  Montespan  returned  from  Bourbon  triumphant.
Maupertius  (whose  stern  pedantry  of  punctuality  on  these
occasions  Lauzun  never  forgave)  and  his  mousquetaires  took
leave  of  him  at  Bourbon,  whence  he  had  permission  to  go  to
Angers  ;  and  soon  after,  his  exile  was  enlarged  to  the  full
liberty  of  Anjou  and  Touraine.  The  consummation  of  the
affair  was  put  off  till  February,  1681,  to  give  it  a  greater  air
of  perfect  freedom.  So  all  that  Lauzun  got  from  Made¬
moiselle  was  Saint-Fargeau  and  Thiers,  after  missing  a  mar¬
riage  with  her  and  the  possession  of  her  vast  estates,  merely
by  not  hastening  the  wedding.

Lauzun,  who  had  hoped  for  gentler  treatment,  remained
four  years  kicking  his  heels  in  the  two  provinces,  where  he
was  not  less  bored  than  Mademoiselle  by  his  absence.  She
scolded  and  was  furious  against  Mme.  de  Montespan  and  her
son,  and  complained  so  loudly  that  after  having  pitilessly
forced  her  to  ransom  him  they  cheated  her  still  further  by
keeping  him  in  exile,  and  made,  in  short  so  great  a  disturb¬
ance  that  she  finally  obtained  his  return  to  Paris  at  perfect
liberty,  on  condition  that  he  would  never  go  within  two
leagues  of  the  place  where  the  king  might  be.  He  returned
to  Paris,  where  he  saw  his  benefactress  assiduously.  The
annoyance  of  this  sort  of  exile,  though  greatly  softened,
threw  him  into  high  play,  at  which  he  was  extremely  lucky  ;
he  was  always  a  fine  and  sure  player,  neat  and  accurate  as
possible,  and  won  large  sums.  Monsieur,  who  made  little
stays  in  Paris,  and  played  high,  allowed  him  to  play  with
him  at  the  Palais-Eoyal  and  afterwards  at  Saint-Cloud,  where

110  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

he  made  long  visits  in  summer.  Lauzun  spent  in  this  man¬
ner  several  years,  winning  and  lending  large  sums  of  money
like  a  noble.  But  the  nearer  he  was  to  the  Court  and  the
great  world,  the  more  the  prohibition  to  approach  them
became  intolerable  to  him.  At  last,  unable  to  bear  it,  he
asked  permission  of  the  king  to  go  and  live  in  England,
where  they  gamble  much  and  high.  He  obtained  it,  and
carried  over  with  him  a  great  deal  of  money,  so  that  he
was  received  with  open  arms  in  London,  where  he  was  not
less  lucky  at  cards  than  in  Paris.

James  II.  who  was  then  reigning,  received  him  with  dis¬
tinction.  The  revolution  was  already  brewing.  It  broke  out
about  eight  or  ten  months  after  Lauzun’s  arrival  in  England.
James  II.,  not  knowing  what  would  become  of  him,  betrayed
by  his  favourites  and  his  ministers,  abandoned  by  the  whole
nation,  —  the  Prince  of  Orange,  master  of  hearts  and  troops
and  fleets,  about  to  enter  London,  —  the  unhappy  monarch  con¬
fided  to  Lauzun  all  that  was  most  dear  to  him,  the  queen  and
the  Prince  of  Wales,  whom  Lauzun  managed  to  take  safely  to
Calais.  The  queen  immediately  despatched  a  courier  to  Ver¬
sailles.  In  her  letter  she  insinuated  that  amidst  her  joy  at
finding  herself  in  safety  under  the  king’s  protection  she  had
the  pain  of  not  venturing  to  lead  to  his  feet  the  man  to  whom
she  owed  the  safety  of  herself  and  the  Prince  of  Wales.
The  answer  of  the  king,  after  he  had  said  everything  that
was  gallant  and  generous  to  her,  was  to  the  effect  that  he
shared  her  obligation,  and  was  in  haste  to  see  the  Comte  de
Lauzun  and  return  him  his  good  graces.  In  fact  when  she
presented  him  to  the  king  on  the  plain  of  Saint-Germain,
where  the  whole  royal  family  went  out  to  meet  her,  the  king
received  him  perfectly  well,  gave  him  then  and  there  the
grandes  entrees,  and  promised  him  an  apartment  in  the
Chateau  of  V ersailles,  which  he  gave  him  the  next  day.  From

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  Ill

that  time  forth  he  had  one  at  Marly  and  one  at  Fontainebleau
on  all  the  trips,  so  that  until  the  death  of  the  king  he  never
left  the  Court  again.  We  may  imagine  the  delight  of  so
ambitious  a  courtier  whom  this  dazzling  and  unique  recall  to
favour  dragged  from  the  depths  and  placed  once  more  upon
the  wave.  The  king  allowed  him  to  receive  in  Notre-Dame
at  Paris  the  order  of  the  Garter  from  the  hands  of  the
King  of  England,  granted  him  a  second  journey  to  Ireland  as
general  of  the  auxiliary  forces,  permitting  him  at  the  same
time  to  be  a  general  of  the  King  of  England,  who  in  that
campaign  lost  Ireland  at  the  battle  of  the  Boyne,  and  returned
to  France  with  the  Comte  de  Lauzun,  for  whom  he  obtained
letters  patent  as  duke,  which  were  verified  by  the  parliament
in  1692.  A  miraculous  return  of  fortune!  But  what  was
this  fortune  in  comparison  with  a  public  marriage  to  Ma¬
demoiselle,  with  the  possession  of  her  vast  estates,  and  the
title  and  actual  dignity  of  Duc  et  Pair  de  Montpensier?
What  a  stupendous  pedestal  !  and  with  children  from  that
marriage,  where  might  not  Lauzun  have  winged  his  way,  and
who  can  say  to  what  he  might  not  have  attained  ?

For  the  rest  of  his  long  life  he  preserved  his  privileges
with  the  king,  his  distinctions  at  Court,  great  consideration,
great  abundance,  the  life  and  maintenance  of  a  very  great  sei¬
gneur,  and  the  pleasure  of  possessing  one  of  the  most  magnifi¬
cent  establishments  at  Versailles,  the  best  table,  honourably
frequented  from  morning  till  night,  and  the  same  in  Paris
after  the  death  of  the  king.  But  all  that  did  not  content
him.  He  never  approached  the  king  familiarly  except  on
the  outside  ;  he  felt  that  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  mon¬
arch  were  always  on  their  guard  against  him,  and  at  a  dis¬
tance  which  his  utmost  art  and  study  could  never  lessen.
It  was  this  that  made  him  marry  my  sister-in-law,  in  the
hope  of  recovering  a  serious  intercourse  with  the  king,

112  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

being  ignorant  of  the  precautions  and  express  prohibition  of
the  king  at  the  time  the  marriage  was  announced  to  him.
He  was  forever  fretting,  and  believed  he  was,  and  called
himself,  in  disgrace.  Ho  chance  escaped  him  to  pay  his
court,  with  a  depth  of  inward  meanness  and  an  exterior  of
dignity.  Every  year  he  made  a  sort  of  anniversary  of  his
downfall  by  doing  something  extraordinary,  of  which  tem¬
per  and  solitude  were  the  cause,  and  some  extravagant  act
the  fruit.  He  spoke  of  this  himself,  and  said  he  was  not
in  his  full  senses  at  the  annual  return  of  that  period.  He
thought  he  pleased  the  king  by  this  refinement  of  courtier-
ship,  not  perceiving  that  the  monarch  laughed  at  it.

He  was  extraordinary  in  everything  by  nature,  and  he
liked  still  further  to  affect  it,  even  in  his  household,  and
among  his  valets.  He  would  pretend  to  be  deaf  and  blind
in  order  to  hear  and  see  without  being  distrusted  ;  he  de¬
lighted  in  fooling  fools,  even  those  in  high  places,  by  con¬
versing  with  them  in  language  that  had  no  sense.  His
manners  were  cautious,  reserved,  soft-spoken,  even  respect¬
ful  ;  but  out  of  his  low  and  honeyed  tones  came  piercing
shafts,  overwhelming  in  their  justice,  farce,  or  sarcasm,
and  that  in  two  or  three  words  only,  —  sometimes  uttered
with  an  air  of  innocence  or  absent-mindedness,  as  if  he  was
not  thinking  of  what  he  said.  He  was  therefore  feared  by
every  one  without  exception  ;  and  with  innumerable  acquaint¬
ances,  he  had  few  or  no  friends,  although  he  deserved  them
for  his  ardour  in  serving  them,  and  his  freedom  in  opening
his  purse.  He  liked  to  receive  strangers  of  distinction,  and
did  the  honours  of  the  court  admirably  ;  but  the  never-
dying  worm  of  ambition  poisoned  his  life.  He  was  a  good
and  very  helpful  relation.

A  review  of  the  king’s  household  troops  was  to  take  place
on  the  plain  along  the  edges  of  the  Bois  de  Boulogne.

1695]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  113

Passy  is  on  the  other  side  of  it,  and  there  M.  de  Lauzun
had  a  pretty  house.  Mine,  de  Lauzun  was  staying  there
with  an  agreeable  party,  and  I  went  out  to  pass  the  night
before  the  review.  The  company,  at  supper,  were  consid¬
ering  how  to  attend  it,  when,  amidst  the  gayety  of  the
plan,  M.  de  Lauzun  arrived  from  Paris,  where  he  had  gone
in  the  morning.  They  turned  to  tell  him  about  it.  Ho
sooner  did  he  hear  it  than  he  burst  into  a  fury,  stopped
it  almost  foaming,  and  said  the  most  unkind  things  to  his
wife,  not  only  in  the  harshest  but  in  the  most  violent,
insulting,  and  crazy  language.  She  took  it  gently,  with  the
tears  in  her  eyes  ;  Mme.  de  Poitiers  sobbed  aloud,  and  the
whole  company  were  greatly  embarrassed.  The  evening
seemed  a  year,  and  the  gloomiest  refectory  a  banquet  of
gayety  in  comparison  with  that  supper.  Lauzun  was
sulky  in  the  midst  of  the  deepest  silence,  each  person
hardly  and  rarely  saying  a  word  to  his  or  her  neighbour.  He
left  the  table,  as  usual,  with  the  fruit  and  went  off  to  bed.
The  company  wished  to  comfort  themselves  by  saying
something,  but  Mme.  de  Lauzun  stopped  it,  politely  and
wisely,  and  called  for  cards  immediately  to  prevent  all
return  to  the  topic.

The  next  day,  early,  I  went  to  see  M.  de  Lauzun  and  tell
him,  very  strongly,  my  opinion  of  the  scene  he  had  made
the  night  before.  I  had  no  time  to  do  so  ;  as  soon  as  he
saw  me  he  threw  out  his  arms,  exclaiming  that  I  saw
before  me  a  madman,  who  deserved  the  asylum  ;  made  the
greatest  eulogy  on  his  wife,  —  which  she  certainly  deserved,
—  declared  that  he  was  not  worthy  to  have  her,  that  he
ought  to  kiss  the  places  where  her  feet  had  trod,  and  over¬
whelmed  himself  with  abuse.  Then,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,
he  said  that  he  was  more  deserving  of  pity  than  of  anger  ;
that  he  would  now  acknowledge  to  me  his  shame  and  his

YOL.  I.  —  8

114  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

misery,  namely  :  although  he  knew  that  he  was  more  than
eighty  years  old,  with  neither  child  nor  any  to  come  after
him,  and  that  he  who  had  once  been  captain  of  guards  was
now  incapable  of  performing  those  functions  could  he  be
so  again,  and  although  he  told  himself  this  incessantly,
nevertheless,  he  could  not  he  consoled  after  all  these  years
for  losing  that  position  ;  he  had  never  been  able  to  pull
the  dagger  from  his  heart;  anything  that  reminded  him
of  it  put  him  beside  himself  ;  and  to  hear  that  his  wife  was
to  take  Mme.  de  Poitiers  to  see  a  review  of  those  very  guards
in  which  he  was  no  longer  anything  turned  his  head,  and
had  made  him  outrageous,  as  I  had  seen  him.  He  said
he  dared  not  show  himself  to  any  one  after  such  an  act
of  madness  ;  that  he  was  going  to  shut  himself  up  in  his
room  ;  but  he  would  throw  himself  at  my  feet  to  conjure
me  to  go  and  find  his  wife  and  try  to  obtain  that  she  would
have  pity  on  a  half-insane  old  man,  who  was  dying  of
shame  and  grief,  and  deign  to  pardon  him.  This  confes¬
sion,  so  sincere  and  so  painful  to  make,  touched  me  deeply.
I  thought  only  of  consoling  and  recovering  him.  The
reconciliation  was  not  difficult;  we  got  him  out  of  his
chamber,  though  not  without  trouble;  and  it  seemed  to
distress  him  much  for  several  days  to  show  himself,  —  at
least,  so  they  told  me,  for  I  went  away  that  evening,  my
occupations  in  those  days  holding  me  very  short.

I  often  reflected,  as  to  this  occasion,  on  the  great  mis¬
fortune  of  letting  ourselves  he  carried  away  by  the  intoxica¬
tion  of  the  world  ;  and  on  the  dreadful  state  of  an  ambitious
man  whose  grasp  on  worldly  hopes  neither  wealth,  nor  the
most  agreeable  home,  nor  acquired  dignity,  nor  age,  nor
bodily  weakness  could  loosen  ;  and  who,  instead  of  enjoying
tranquilly  what  he  possesses  and  feeling  the  happiness  of  it,
exhausts  himself  in  regrets  and  useless  and  perpetual  hitter-

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

115

ness,  and  cannot  bring  himself  to  see  that,  without  children
and  near  his  end,  the  possession  of  what  he  regrets  would
he  to  gain  deceptive  ties  binding  him  to  a  life  just  ready  to
escape  him,  and  could  only  increase  his  bitter  regrets  in
leaving  it.  But  we  die  as  we  live  ;  it  seldom  happens  other¬
wise.  How  great  the  importance,  therefore,  of  trying  to  live
so  as  to  know  how  to  die  to  the  world  and  fortune  before
they  and  life  itself  shall  leave  us,  — to  know  how  to  live
without  them,  and  to  hope  and  try  to  die  well.

With  all  Lauzun’s  policy  and  servility  he  fell  upon  every¬
body  ,  always  with  the  lash  of  the  sharpest  speech,  and
always  with  the  gentle,  timid  air  that  was  so  peculiar  to
him.  Ministers,  generals  in  the  army,  and  happy  people
and  their  families  were  those  he  most  maltreated.  He  had
as  it  were  usurped  the  right  to  say  all  and  do  all  without
any  one,  no  matter  who,  daring  to  be  angry,  —  the  Gram-
monts  alone  excepted.  He  remembered  the  hospitality  he
had  found  in  their  house  at  the  beginning  of  his  career.
He  loved  them,  he  was  interested  for  them  ;  he  behaved  to
them  with  respect.  The  old  Comte  de  Grammont  abused
him  and  avenged  the  Court  with  squibs  which  he  launched
against  him  on  many  occasions  without  the  Duc  de  Lauzun
ever  returning  one  of  them,  or  getting  angry  ;  but  he  gently
kept  out  of  his  way.  He  and  I  lived  together  in  con¬
tinual  intercourse  ;  he  had  even  done  me  true  services,  solid
and  friendly,  of  his  own  accord;  and  I  paid  him  all  sorts
of  attentions  and  regards,  as  he  to  me.  Nevertheless,  I
did  not  escape  his  tongue  once  by  a  flash  that  might  have
ruined  me.  To  have  been  angry  would  only  have  given
it  more  currency  ;  so  I  took  the  thing  as  the  scratch,  draw¬
ing  blood,  of  a  cross  cat,  and  I  never  let  Lauzun  perceive
that  I  knew  of  it.

Two  or  three  years  before  his  death  he  had  an  illness

116  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  iil

that  brought  him  to  extremities.  Biron  and  his  wife  (daugh¬
ter  of  Mme.  de  Nogent,  Lauzun’s  sister)  risked  entering
his  room  on  tiptoe,  keeping  behind  the  curtains,  out  of
sight;  but  he  saw  them  in  the  glass  over  the  fireplace,
while  they  were  fully  persuaded  that  he  could  neither  see
nor  hear  them.  The  sick  man  rather  liked  Biron,  but  not
at  all  his  wife,  who  was  his  niece  and  principal  heir¬
ess  ;  he  thought  her  very  selfish,  and  her  manners  were
intolerable  to  him.  He  was  disgusted  by  her  surreptitious
entrance  into  his  room,  understanding  fully  that,  impatient
for  her  legacy,  she  came  there  to  see  for  herself  whether  he
were  likely  to  die  soon.  He  determined  to  make  her  re¬
pent,  and  also  to  get  some  amusement  out  of  it.  So  he

suddenly  began  to  say  aloud,  like  a  man  who  thinks  him¬
self  alone,  an  ejaculatory  prayer,  asking  pardon  of  God
for  his  past  life,  expressing  himself  like  one  who  feels  that
death  is  near,  saying  that  in  the  sorrow  and  impotence  of

his  repentance  he  desired  to  at  least  use  the  property  that

God  had  given  him  to  redeem  his  sins  and  leave  it  all  to
hospitals  without  reserve  ;  for  that  was  the  only  way  which
God  left  open  to  him  to  attain  salvation  after  so  long  a
life,  passed  in  never  thinking  as  he  ought  ;  and  he  thanked
God  that  this  resource  was  left  to  him,  which  he  seized
with  all  his  heart.  He  uttered  this  prayer  and  resolution
in  so  contrite,  convinced,  and  determined  a  tone  that  the
Birons  never  doubted  for  a  moment  that  he  would  execute
his  design  and  they  would  thus  he  deprived  of  their  in¬
heritance.  They  had  no  desire  to  spy  longer,  but  came
away  confounded  to  tell  the  Duchesse  de  Lauzun  what
they  had  heard  and  to  entreat  her  to  do  something  to  pre¬
vent  it.  Thereupon  the  sick  man  sent  for  the  notaries,  and
Mme.  de  Biron  was  in  despair.  This  was  just  what  the  tes¬
tator  wanted.  He  kept  the  notaries  waiting  ;  then  he  called

1695]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

117

them  in  and  dictated  his  will,  which  was  a  deathblow  to
Mme. .  de  Biron.  However,  he  put  off  signing  it  ;  and  find¬
ing  himself  better  and  better  still,  he  did  not  sign  it  at
all.  He  diverted  himself  much  with  this  comedy,  and
could  not  help  laughing  over  it  with  some  of  us  after  he
got  well.  In  spite  of  his  age  and  the  severity  of  his  illness
he  recovered  quickly  to  his  former  condition  and  seemed
none  the  worse  for  it.

His  health  was  of  iron,  with  a  misleading  external  appear¬
ance  of  delicacy.  He  dined  and  supped  heavily  every  day  ;
had  very  fine  fare  and  very  delicate,  always  with  good  com¬
pany,  morning  and  evening  ;  he  ate  everything,  feast  and
fast,  with  no  sort  of  choice  except  his  taste,  and  no  caution  ;
always  took  chocolate  in  the  morning  and  kept  near  him  on
several  tables  fruits  in  their  season  and  pastry  at  other  times  ;
with  beer,  cider,  lemonade,  and  other  such  liquids  iced  ;  and
going  and  coming,  he  ate  and  drank  the  whole  afternoon  and
exhorted  others  to  do  likewise.  He  always  left  the  table  at
night  with  the  fruit,  and  went  to  bed  directly.  I  remember
once,  among  many  other  times,  that  he  dined  with  me  after
his  illness,  and  ate  so  much  fish,  vegetables,  and  all  sorts  of
things,  without  our  being  able  to  prevent  him,  that  we  sent
in  the  evening  to  inquire  very  gently  if  he  did  not  feel  the
worse  for  it;  the  messenger  found  him  at  table  eating  his
supper  with  a  good  appetite.

Gallantry  lasted  him  a  long  time.  Mademoiselle  was  very
jealous,  and  they  quarrelled  often.  I  have  heard  Mme.  de
Fontenilles,  a  very  amiable  woman  with  much  wit,  very
truthful,  and  of  singular  virtue,  tell  how,  being  at  Eu  with
Mademoiselle,  M.  de  Lauzun  came  there  to  pass  some  time.
He  could  not  keep  himself  from  running  after  girls  ;  Made¬
moiselle  found  it  out,  was  furious,  scratched  him,  and  drove
him  out  of  her  presence.  The  Comtesse  de  Fiesque  recon-

118  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

ciled  them  ;  Mademoiselle  appeared  at  one  end  of  a  gallery
when  Lauzun  was  at  the  other,  and  he  went  the  whole
length  on  his  knees  up  to  Mademoiselle’s  feet.  These
scenes,  more  or  less  violent,  often  began  again  before  they
were  well  over.  He  grew  tired  at  last  of  being  beaten,  and
took  to  beating  Mademoiselle,  well  and  soundly,  himself.
This  happened  several  times,  till  finally,  mutually  tired  out,
they  quarrelled  once  for  all  and  never  saw  each  other  again.
He  had,  however,  many  portraits  of  her  and  never  spoke  of
her  except  with  great  respect.  No  one  ever  doubted  that
they  were  secretly  married.

His  natural  temper,  sad  and  captious,  increased  by  im¬
prisonment  and  the  habit  of  solitude,  had  made  him  lonely
and  musing,  so  that  although  his  house  was  filled  with  the
best  company  he  would  leave  them  all  to  Mme.  de  Lauzun
and  retire  alone,  sometimes  for  the  whole  afternoon,  but
always  for  many  hours  together,  generally  without  a  book,
for  he  read  only  fancy  things  without  any  purpose,  and  very
little  of  them  ;  so  that  he  knew  almost  nothing  of  what  he
had  seen,  and  to  the  very  last  busied  himself  only  about  the
Court  and  the  gossip  of  society.  I  have  regretted  a  thousand
times  his  radical  incapacity  for  writing  down  what  he  had
seen  and  done.  It  woxdd  have  been  a  treasury  of  the  most
curious  anecdotes  ;  but  he  had  no  continuity  and  no  applica¬
tion.  I  often  tried  to  draw  out  of  him  a  few  fragments.
Another  provoking  thing  !  He  would  begin  to  relate  ;  in
the  tale  came  names  of  people  who  played  a  part  in  what  he
was  telling  ;  instantly  he  quitted  the  principal  object  of  his
tale  to  attach  himself  to  one  of  these  persons,  and  soon  after
to  some  other  person  connected  with  the  first,  and  then  to  a
third,  after  the  manner  of  novels.  He  would  meander  thus
through  a  dozen  histories  at  a  time,  which  made  him  lose
ground,  chasing  from  one  to  the  other  and  never  finishing

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  119

any,  and  with  it  all,  a  very  confused  style  of  speech,  so  that
it  was  not  possible  to  learn  anything  clearly  from  him  or
retain  what  he  said.  Moreover,  his  conversation  was  always
hampered  by  temper  or  by  policy  (it  was  pleasant  only  by
fits  and  starts),  and  by  the  spiteful  shafts  which  darted
from  him.  A  few  months  before  his  death,  when  he  was  over
ninety,  he  was  still  breaking  horses,  and  he  passaded  a  colt
he  had  just  broken,  or  indeed  only  half  broken,  again  and
again  before  the  king  on  the  way  to  La  Muette,  amazing  the
spectators  by  his  dexterity,  firmness,  and  grace.  There  is  no
end  to  what  might  be  told  of  him.

His  last  illness  came  upon  him  without  warning,  almost  in
a  moment,  by  the  most  horrible  of  all  ills,  a  cancer  of  the
mouth.  He  bore  it  to  the  end  with  firmness  and  incredible
patience  ;  without  complaint,  without  ill-humour,  without
the  least  contrariety  —  he  who  was  then  intolerable  to  him¬
self.  When  he  found  that  the  evil  was  increasing,  he  with¬
drew  to  a  small  apartment  which  he  had  hired  with  this
intention  in  the  precincts  of  the  convent  of  the  Petits-
Augustins,  into  which  he  could  enter  from  his  own  house,
there  to  die  in  peace,  inaccessible  to  Mme.  de  Biron  or  any
other  woman,  except  his  wife,  who  had  permission  to  go
to  him  at  all  hours  accompanied  by  a  maid.

He  thought  only  of  putting  to  profit  his  dreadful  state  and
of  giving  all  his  time  to  pious  conversations  with  his  con¬
fessor  and  a  few  of  the  religious  of  the  convent,  to  good
reading  and  to  all  that  could  best  prepare  him  for  death.
When  we  saw  him,  nothing  offensive,  nothing  lugubrious,
nothing  painful;  politeness,  tranquillity;  conversation  little
animated,  very  indifferent  to  what  was  passing  in  the  world  ;
speaking  seldom  and  with  difficulty;  little  or  nothing  of
moral  topics,  still  less  of  his  condition  ;  and  this  courageous,
peaceful  uniformity  was  equably  maintained  until  the  end  ;

120  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

but  the  ten  or  twelve  last  days  he  refused  to  see  his  nephews
and  brothers-in-law;  he  would  see  his  wife  only,  but  he
quickly  sent  her  away.  He  received  the  sacraments  with
much  edification  and  kept  his  mind  clear  to  the  last  instant.

I  see  that  I  have  been  very  prolix  over  a  man,  the  ex¬
traordinary  singularity  of  whose  life,  together  with  the  con¬
tinual  intercourse  which  our  close  connection  gave  me  with
him,  seemed  to  me  to  require  that  I  should  make  him  known,
—  all  the  more  because  he  has  never  figured  in  public  affairs
enough  to  expect  anything  from  future  historians.

Note.  —  The  king,  who  had  a  strong  dislike  to  Paris,  lived  wholly
at  Versailles,  with  trips  to  Marly  and  semi-annual  visits  of  two  or
three  weeks  at  a  time  to  Fontainebleau.  The  Château  of  Versailles,
to  which  he  was  constantly  adding,  contained  innumerable  suites  of
rooms,  in  which  were  lodged  the  officers  of  the  Court,  and  courtiers
without  offices,  and  their  families  ;  it  was  in  fact  a  vast  apartment-
house.  The  king  distributed  the  lodgings  as  he  pleased,  and  each
courtier  furnished  his  own  and  had  his  own  kitchens  and  retinue.
Most  of  these  persons  had  houses  in  Paris  (Saint-Simon  had  his  in
the  rue  de  Grenelle,  also  a  country  house  at  La  Ferté),  but  the  king
was  extremely  jealous  of  their  living  in  them  ;  he  liked  to  keep  his
world  about  him,  under  his  own  eye.  Saint-Simon  describes  later
the  trips  to  Marly,  where  the  king  went  several  times  in  the  course
of  the  year,  with  a  number  of  the  members  of  his  Court,  usually
selected  by  him  for  each  trip.  —  Tr.

IV.

Before  speaking  of  what  took  place  after  my  return  Irom
the  army,  I  must  tell  what  happened  at  the  Court  during  the
The  Abbé  de  campaign.  The  Archbishop  of  Cambrai  was
dead,  and  the  king  had  given  that  great  morsel
to  the  Abbé  de  Fénelon,  preceptor  to  the  children  of  France.
Fénelon  was  a  man  of  capacity  who  had  nothing,  and  who,
conscious  of  much  intellect  and  of  that  sort  of  insinuating
and  fascinating  intellect  which  goes  with  many  talents  and
graces  and  much  knowledge,  was  also  ambitious.  He  had
long  rapped  at  many  doors  without  being  able  to  open  them.
Piqued  against  the  Jesuits,  to  whom  he  had  addressed  him¬
self  in  the  first  instance  as  masters  in  the  graces  of  his  pro¬
fession,  and  vexed  at  being  unable  to  lay  hold  of  them,  he
turned  to  the  Jansenists  to  recover  his  complacency  by  the
reputation  he  expected  to  make  out  of  them  through  his
talents,  and  so  win  the  gifts  of  fortune  which  had  hitherto
passed  him  by.  He  was  some  time  in  becoming  initiated,
but  attained,  after  a  time,  to  the  private  repasts  which  the
most  important  among  them  made  together  once  or  twice  a
week  at  the  house  of  the  Duchesse  de  Brancas.

I  do  not  know  whether  he  seemed  to  them  too  shrewd,  or
whether  he  hoped  to  do  better  elsewhere  than  with  persons
who  had  nothing  to  share  except  their  troubles,  but  little  by
little  his  connection  with  them  cooled,  and  by  dint  of  hover¬
ing  about  Saint-Sulpice  he  succeeded  in  forming  another,
from  which  he  had  better  hopes.  That  society  of  priests  was
just  beginning  to  show  its  head  and  from  a  mere  seminary

122

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

of  a  parish  church  to  enlarge  its  borders.  Ignorance,  petty
practices,  the  lack  of  all  protectors,  and  a  want  of  members
of  distinction  in  any  way,  inspired  its  company  with  a  blind
obedience  to  Rome  and  all  its  maxims,  a  great  aversion  to
whatever  passed  for  Jansenism,  and  much  dependence
on  bishops  who  successively  made  them  useful  in  several
dioceses.  They  seemed  a  convenient  middle-way  to  prelates
who  were  equally  afraid  of  the  Court  on  questions  of  doctrine,
and  of  the  Jesuits,  who  put  them  under  their  yoke  as  soon  as
they  could  insinuate  themselves  among  them.  Hence  the
Sulpicians  made  their  way  rapidly.

None  among  them  could  enter  into  comparison  with  the
Abbé  de  Fénelon,  so  that  he  found  it  easy  to  take  the  lead  in
everything  and  make  himself  protectors  whose  interest  it
would  be  to  advance  him  in  order  that  they  might  be  pro¬
tected  in  turn  by  him.  His  piety,  which  made  him  all  things
to  all  men,  and  his  doctrine,  which  he  formed  on  theirs,
abjuring  under  his  breath  all  he  had  contracted  that  was
unsound  in  those  he  abandoned,  the  charm,  the  grace,  the
gentleness,  the  insinuating  quality  of  his  mind,  made  him  a
dear  friend  to  this  rising  Society,  and  he  found  there  what
he  had  long  sought,  —  persons  to  rally  with,  and  who  could
and  would  advance  him.

In  those  days,  being  still  obscure,  he  heard  of  Mme.
Guy  on,  who  has  since  made  so  much  noise  in  the  world,
„„  where  she  is  too  well  known  for  me  to  speak  of

Mme.  Guyon.  #  #  r

her  in  particular.  He  saw  her  ;  their  minds
pleased  each  other  ;  their  sublimities  amalgamated.  I  do  not
know  if  they  clearly  understood  one  another  as  to  their  sys¬
tem  and  the  new  language  which  was  later  to  issue  from
their  intercourse,  but  they  persuaded  themselves  they  did,
and  a  tie  was  formed  between  them.

The  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  had  become  the  governor  of  the

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

123

sons  of  France,  without  expecting  that  post  and  almost  in
spite  of  himself.  By  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the  king
the  entire  management  of  preceptors,  sub-governors,  and  all
the  servants  of  the  young  princes,  was  left  to  him,  no  matter
what  resistance  he  made  to  it.  Perplexed  as  to  choosing  a
preceptor,  he  applied  to  Saint-Sulpice,  where  he  had  long  con¬
fessed,  and  which  he  loved  and  protected  strongly.  Already
he  had  heard  the  Abbé  de  Fénelon  highly  spoken  of;  the
Sulpicians  now  praised  his  piety,  his  mind,  his  learning,  his
talents,  and  proposed  him  to  the  duke,  who  saw  him,  and  was
charmed,  and  made  him  the  preceptor.  Scarcely  was  Féne¬
lon  appointed  before  he  saw  the  importance  to  his  future  for¬
tunes  of  completely  winning  the  man  who  had  thus  put  him
in  the  way  of  making  them,  and  also  his  brother-in-law  the
Duc  de  Chevreuse,  both  of  them  being  at  the  very  highest
point  in  the  confidence  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon.
This  was  his  first  care,  in  which  he  succeeded  so  far  beyond
his  hopes  that  he  became,  very  rapidly,  master  of  their
hearts  and  minds  and  the  director  of  their  souls.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  dined  regularly  once,  sometimes  twice,
a  week  at  the  hôtel  de  Beauvilliers  or  de  Chevreuse,  a  fifth
between  the  two  sisters  and  the  two  husbands,  with  a  bell  on
the  table,  so  as  to  have  no  footmen  around  them  and  to  talk
without  restraint.  It  was  a  sanctuary  which  held  the  whole
Court  at  its  feet,  and  to  which  Fénelon  was  at  last  admitted.
He  had  almost  as  much  success  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  as
with  the  two  dukes.  His  spirituality  enchanted  her.  The
Court,  before  long,  perceived  the  giant  strides  of  the  lucky
abbé  and  pressed  about  him.  But  the  desire  to  be  free  and
to  follow  his  own  purpose  wholly,  and  the  fear  of  displeasing
the  dukes  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  whose  tastes  were  all  for
an  aloof  and  private  life,  caused  him  to  set  up  a  shield  of
modesty  and  of  his  duties  as  preceptor  ;  and  this  made  him

124

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

dearer  still  to  the  persons  he  had  captivated,  and  whose
attachment  he  had  so  great  an  interest  in  retaining.

Among  these  cares  he  did  not  forget  his  good  friend  Mme.
Guyon  ;  he  had  already  lauded  her  to  the  two  dukes,  and
he  now  did  so  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  He  even  produced
her  to  them,  hut  as  if  with  difficulty,  and  only  for  brief
moments,  as  being  a  woman  who  was  wholly  given  to  God,
and  whom  humility  and  the  love  of  meditation  and  of  soli¬
tude  confined  to  narrow  limits,  dreading  of  all  things  to  he
noticed.  This  spirit  pleased  Mme.  de  Maintenon  extremely  ;
Mme.  Guyon’s  reserve,  mingled  with  the  most  delicate  flat¬
tery,  won  her.  She  wished  to  hear  her  on  matters  of  piety,
and  there  was  difficulty  in  bringing  her  to  speak  of  them.
She  seemed  to  yield  at  last  to  the  charms  and  the  virtue  of
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  whom  the  net  so  well  laid  captured.

Such  was  Fénelon’s  situation  when  he  became  the  Arch¬
bishop  of  Cambrai.  Little  by  little  he  had  appropriated
to  himself  a  few  of  the  distinguished  lambs  of  the  little  flock
which  Mme.  Guyon  had  gathered,  but  whom,  nevertheless,
he  did  not  lead  under  the  direction  of  that  prophetess.  The
Duchesse  de  Mortemart,  sister  of  the  Duchesses  de  Clievreuse
and  de  Beauvilliers,  Mme.  de  Morstein,  daughter  of  the  first,
and,  above  all,  the  Duchesse  de  Béthune  were  the  principal
ones.  Cambrai  was  a  thunderbolt  to  the  little  flock.  They
saw  the  archbishopric  of  Paris  lost  to  them  ;  and  it  was
Paris  that  they  wanted,  not  Cambrai,  which  they  regarded
with  contempt  as  a  country  diocese,  where  there  was  no
avoiding  an  occasional  residence  which  would  deprive  them
of  their  pastor.  Paris  would  have  put  him  at  the  head  of
the  clergy,  in  a  place  of  immediate  and  lasting  influence
that  the  world  would  accept,  and  in  which  he  could  dare
all  successfully  for  Mme.  Guyon  and  her  doctrines,  which
were  still  kept  in  secrecy  among  them.  Their  grief  was  deep

1695]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  125

for  that  which  the  world  was  thinking  a  dazzling  piece  of
good  fortune.

The  new  Archbishop  of  Cambrai,  however,  applauded  him¬
self  much  for  his  success  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon;  the
secret  struggle  hopes  he  conceived  from  it,  with  such  supports
ArchbLhop^f  as  the  two  dukes  beside  it,  were  great  ;  hut  he
cambrai  and  the  peiieveci  ]ie  could  not  reach  with  safety  the

Bishop  of

Chartres.  ends  he  proposed  unless  he  could  make  him¬

self  master  of  her  mind  without  a  sharer.  Godet,  Bishop  of
Chartres,  was  hound  to  her  by  the  closest  ties  ;  he  was  dio¬
cesan  of  Saint-Cyr  ;  he  was  also  its  sole  director  ;  moreover,
he  was  that  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  herself  ;  his  morals,  his
doctrine,  his  piety,  his  episcopal  labours,  all  were  irreproach¬
able.  He  went  to  Paris  only  on  short,  infrequent  trips,
stayed  at  the  seminary  of  Saint-Sulpice,  rarely  appeared  at
Court,  and  then  like  a  flash  of  lightning,  and  saw  Mme.  de
Maintenon  long  and  often  at  Saint-Cyr,  but  otherwise  did
his  business  with  her  by  letter.  He  was  therefore  an  odd
rival  to  cast  down.  But  however  well  anchored  he  might
he,  his  external  appearance,  that  of  a  squalid  pedant,  was
reassuring.  Pénelon  believed  that  such  he  really  was,  from
his  long,  untidy,  fleshless  face,  thoroughly  Sulpician,  his
seemingly  simple  air  and  silly  aspect,  and  his  intimacies
with  none  but  the  inferior  priests;  in  short,  he  took  him
for  a  man  without  connections,  without  talents,  with  little
mind,  and  short  of  knowledge,  whom  the  good  luck  of  Saint-
Cyr  being  planted  in  his  diocese  had  brought  where  he
was  ;  a  man  sunken  hi  his  functions,  and  with  no  supporters
and  no  acquaintance.  With  this  idea,  Pénelon  never  doubted
he  could  soon  make  him  lose  ground  through  the  new  spir¬
ituality  of  Mme.  Guyon,  already  so  enjoyable  to  Mme.  de
Maintenon  ;  he  was  aware  that  the  latter  was  not  insensible
to  novelties  of  all  kinds  ;  and  he  flattered  himself  he  could

126  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

in  this  way  knock  over  M.  de  Chartres  whenever  Mme.
de  Maintenon  could  be  brought  to  feel  and  despise  his
ignorance.

To  reach  this  end,  he  endeavoured  to  persuade  Mme.  de
Maintenon  to  let  Mme.  Guyon  enter  Saint-Cyr.  He  suc¬
ceeded.  Mme.  Guyon  went  to  Saint-Cyr  two  or  three  times.
Then  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  liked  her  more  and  more,
made  her  sleep  there,  and  from  one  thing  to  another,  but
always  nearer  and  nearer,  her  stays  were  prolonged,  and,
by  her  own  acknowledgment,  she  sought  among  its  inmates
persons  whom  she  thought  suitable  to  become  her  disciples,
and  made  them  so.  Soon  there  was  collected  within  Saint-
Cyr  a  little  flock,  whose  maxims,  and  even  their  spiritual
language  seemed  very  foreign  to  the  rest  of  the  establish¬
ment,  and  presently  extremely  strange  to  M.  de  Chartres.
This  prelate  was  very  far  from  being  what  M.  de  Cambrai
thought  him.  He  was  a  learned  and  very  profound  theolo¬
gian;  to  this  he  joined  much  wit,  gentleness,  firmness,  and
even  grace  ;  and,  what  was  more  surprising  in  a  man  who
had  been  brought  up  in,  and  had  never  left  the  depths  of
his  profession,  he  was  so  competent  for  the  Court  and
for  society  that  the  finest  courtiers  would  have  found  it
hard  to  follow  him,  and  might  have  profited  by  his  lessons.
But  this  was  in  him  as  a  talent  buried  from  others,  because
he  never  employed  it  except  for  real  needs.  His  disinter¬
estedness,  his  piety,  his  rare  integrity  restricted  all  his
wants,  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  on  the  terms  he  was  with
her,  supplied  them.

As  soon  as  he  got  wind  of  this  strange  doctrine  he  managed
to  get  admitted  to  a  knowledge  of  it  two  of  the  ladies  of
Saint-Cyr,  on  whose  spirit  and  discernment  he  could  rely,  and
who  could  fully  impress  it  on  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  mind.
He  chose  them  carefully  himself  and  instructed  them  well

1696]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  127

The  new  proselytes  seemed  at  first  delighted,  then,  little  by
little,  bewitched.  They  attached  themselves  more  closely
than  any  of  the  rest  to  their  new  instructress,  who,  aware  of
their  mental  powers  and  their  reputation  in  the  establishment,
congratulated  herself  on  a  conquest  which  smoothed  the  way
for  her  purposes.  She  devoted  herself  therefore  to  winning
these  young  women  completely  ;  she  made  them  her  dearest
disciples.  She  opened  herself  to  them  as  to  those  most  capable
of  profiting  by  her  doctrine  and  making  it  acceptable  to  the
community.  She  and  M.  de  Cambrai,  whom  she  kept  in¬
formed  of  her  progress,  triumphed,  and  the  little  flock  exulted.
M.  de  Chartres,  by  whose  consent  Mme.  Guy  on  had  entered
Saint-Cyr  and  become  an  “  external  ”  mistress,  let  her  do  what
she  liked.  He  followed  her  with  his  eye;  his  faithful  pair
rendering  him  an  exact  account  of  all  that  they  were  learning
as  to  dogmas  and  practices.  He  informed  himself  fully,  he
examined  the  whole  matter  minutely,  and  when  he  thought
the  time  had  come,  he  blazed  forth.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  was  strangely  surprised  at  what  he
told  her  of  her  new  school,  and  still  more  when  he  proved  it
1696.  to  her  from  the  bps  of  two  of  her  most  trusted
Mme.  Guyon  dis-  pUpps  wq0  qad  also  put  it  in  writing.  Mme.

Saint-Cyr-,  and  qe  Maintenon  questioned  the  other  scholars,

soon  after  sent  to  .  .  .

the  Bastille.  and  saw  by  then-  answers  that,  more  or  less
instructed  and  more  or  less  admitted  into  the  confidence  of
their  new  mistress,  all  were  tending  to  the  same  end,  and
that  that  end  and  the  path  to  it  were  most  extraordinary.
She  was  now  in  great  trouble  with  a  great  scruple.  She
resolved  to  speak  to  M.  de  Cambrai;  he,  not  suspecting
how  well  informed  she  was,  entangled  himself  in  his  replies,
and  increased  her  suspicions.  All  of  a  sudden,  Mme.  Guyon
was  dismissed  from  Saint-Cyr,  and  every  effort  was  made
to  efface  even  the  slightest  trace  of  what  she  had  taught

128  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

there.  There  was  great  difficulty  in  doing  this.  She  had
charmed  many  who  were  truly  attached  to  her  and  to  her
doctrines  ;  and  M.  de  Chartres  profited  by  this  to  show  the
danger  of  the  poison  ;  rendering  M.  de  Cambrai  more  and
more  distrusted.  Such  a  reverse,  so  little  expected,  be¬
wildered  the  archbishop  but  did  not  cast  him  down.  He
faced  it  out  with  sense,  mystical  authorities,  and  firmness
in  his  stirrups.  His  principal  friends  sustained  him.

M.  de  Chartres,  satisfied  with  having  solidly  strengthened
himself  in  the  mind  and  confidence  of  Mine,  de  Maintenon,
did  not  wish  to  push  to  the  wall  a  man  so  supported.  But
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  piqued  at  having  been  led  so  near  to  the
edge  of  a  precipice,  grew  colder  and  colder  to  M.  de  Cambrai
and  more  and  more  irritated  against  Mme.  Guyon.  It  was
known  that  the  latter  continued  to  see  society  in  an  under¬
hand  way  in  Paris.  She  was  forbidden  to  do  so  under  such
great  penalties  that  she  hid  herself  closely,  but  even  then  she
could  not  give  up  dogmatizing  in  secret,  nor  could  her  little
flock  be  prevented  from  collecting  about  her  at  different
places.  This  conduct  being  known  she  was  ordered  to  leave
Paris.  She  obeyed,  but  instantly  returned,  and  hid  herself  as
before  in  an  obscure  little  house  in  the  faubourg  Saint-Antoine.
A  servant  who  carried  to  her  bread  and  vegetables  was
followed  so  closely  and  adroitly  that  she  was  found  and  taken
immediately  to  Vincennes,  with  an  order  to  treat  her  well,  but
also  with  the  most  rigorous  injunctions  not  to  let  her  see,  or
write  to,  or  receive  news  from  any  person  whatever.  This  was
like  a  stroke  of  lightning  to  M.  de  Cambrai  and  his  friends,
and  to  the  little  flock,  who  never  met  again.

I  should  have  said  above  that  before  she  was  arrested  she
had  been  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Bishop  of  Meaux,  the
celebrated  Bossuet,  and  was  a  long  time  with  him,  or  with
the  sisters  of  Sainte-Marie  de  Meaux,  where  that  prelate

1696]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  129

studied  her  doctrine  to  the  bottom,  without  being  able  to
make  her  change  her  sentiments.  At  last,  weary  of  being
a  prisoner  in  his  hands,  she  pretended  to  open  her  eyes
to  the  light,  and  signed  a  retractation  such  as  he  made  out
for  her  ;  in  return  for  which  he  was  very  kind,  and  was  in
all  good  faith  her  dupe;  he  procured  her  liberty,  and  the
abuse  she  made  of  it  by  holding  secret  conclaves  with  the
most  faithful  of  her  school  led  to  her  being  driven  from
Paris.  It  was  on  her  secret  return  thither  that  she  was  shut
up  in  Vincennes.  The  bad  faith  of  this  false  conversion,
joined  to  the  fruit  of  the  conferences  at  Meaux,  and  the
celebrated  stratagem  performed  so  nimbly  by  M.  de  Cambrai
in  confessing  to  M.  de  Meaux  in  order  to  shut  his  mouth,
combined  to  put  a  pen  in  the  hand  of  the  latter  prelate,
in  order  to  expose  to  the  public  the  doctrine,  the  behaviour,
and  the  proceedings  of  all  from  the  beginning  of  the  affair,
under  the  title  of  “  Instruction  on  States  of  Prayer.”  Before
printing  it  he  gave  a  sight  of  his  work  to  M.  de  Chartres,  to
the  Archbishops  of  Reims  and  Paris,  and  also  to  M.  de  Cam¬
brai  himself.  The  latter  felt  the  full  burden  and  necessity  of
forestalling  it.  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  he  had  his  matter
long  prepared  and  written  down  ;  otherwise  the  speed  of
his  composition  would  be  incredible,  especially  in  a  compo¬
sition  of  that  nature.  He  wrote  a  book,  unintelligible  to
all  who  are  not  theologians  versed  in  the  deepest  mysti¬
cism,  which  he  entitled  “  Maxims  of  the  Saints,”  and  printed
it  in  two  columns,  the  first  containing  the  maxims  which
he  gave  as  orthodox  and  as  those  of  the  saints  ;  the  other
containing  dangerous,  suspicious,  or  erroneous  maxims,  which
showed  the  abuse  that  might  be  made  of  good  and  health¬
ful  mysticism.  In  his  eagerness  to  bring  out  the  book
before  M.  de  Meaux  produced  his,  he  had  it  printed  with
all  possible  rapidity,  and  in  order  to  lose  not  an  instant,

VOL.  I.  —  9

130  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

the  Duc  de  Chevreuse  established  himself  at  the  printing-
office  to  correct  each  sheet  as  it  was  printed.  Hardly  any
one  who  was  not  a  theologian  could  understand  it,  and
those  who  did,  after  three  or  four  readings  only.  He  had,
therefore,  the  disgust  of  receiving  no  praises,  and  very  few
thanks,  and  those  mere  compliment.  Connoisseurs  thought
they  found  in  its  mystical  language  pure  quietism,  —  de¬
tached,  refined,  and  purified  of  all  uncleanness  ;  separated  from
all  grossness,  which,  however,  was  apparent  enough  ;  and
with  all  this,  subtleties  that  were  very  novel,  and  very  hard  to
understand,  and  still  harder  to  practise.  I  am  not  report¬
ing  my  judgment,  as  may  well  be  believed,  but  that  which
was  talked  at  the  time,  —  and  people  really  talked  of  noth¬
ing  else,  even  among  ladies  ;  apropos  of  which  a  saying
was  revived  of  Mme.  de  Sévigné  at  the  time  of  the  hot
disputes  about  grace  :  “  Do  weight  religion  for  me  a  little  ;
it  is  evaporating  by  dint  of  being  subtilized.”

Mme.  de  Sévigné,  so  amiable,  and  such  excellent  company,
died  about  this  time  at  Grignan,  in  the  house  of  her
Death  of  Mme.  daughter,  who  was  her  idol,  but  deserved  it
de  sévigné.  0nly  moderately.  I  was  very  much  the  friend
of  the  young  Marquis  de  Grignan,  her  grandson.  This
woman,  by  her  ease,  her  natural  graces,  the  sweetness  of
her  mind,  gave  those  qualities,  through  her  converse,  to
those  who  had  none  ;  she  was  extremely  good  withal  ;
knowing  much  on  all  subjects  without  ever  wishing  to
appear  to  know  anything.  My  friend  was  the  only  son
„  .  of  the  Comte  de  Grignan  and  the  daughter  so

Her  daughter,  °  o

Mme.  de  Gri-  adored  in  Mme.  de  Sévigné’s  letters,  the  eter-

gnan.

nal  repetition  of  which  is  their  only  defect.
They  married  their  son  to  the  daughter  of  a  rich  farmer-
general.  Mme.  de  Grignan,  in  presenting  her  to  the  world,
made  excuses  ;  and  used  to  say,  with  her  mincing  manner,

1696]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

131

and  dropping  her  little  eyes,  that  it  was  very  necessary,
now  and  then,  to  manure  the  best  soil.  She  was  much
pleased  with  herself  for  this  speech,  which  other  people
justly  thought  impertinent,  she  having  made  the  marriage,
and  especially  to  say  it  half  aloud  before  her  daughter-in-
law.  Saint- Amant,  the  father,  who  had  lent  them  enough
to  pay  their  debts,  heard  of  it  at  last,  and  was  so  affronted
that  he  shut  the  faucet.  His  poor  daughter  was  none  the
better  for  that.  But  it  did  not  last  long.  Her  husband,
who  distinguished  himself  very  much  at  the  battle  of  Hoch-
stedt,  died  at  Thionville  of  what  was  said  to  be  small-pox.
He  had  a  regiment,  was  a  brigadier,  and  on  the  point  of
promotion.  His  widow,  who  had  no  children,  was  a  saint,
but  the  saddest  and  most  silent  saint  I  ever  saw.  She  shut
herself  up  in  her  house,  where  she  passed  the  rest  of  her
life,  perhaps  twenty  years,  going  out  of  it  only  to  church,
and  never  seeing  any  one,  no  matter  who.

The  public  lost  soon  after  a  man  illustrious  for  his  intel¬
lect,  his  style,  and  his  knowledge  of  men.  I  mean  La
Death  of  La  Bruyère,  who  died  of  apoplexy  at  Versailles,
Bruyère.  after  surpassing  Theophrastus  in  working  like
him,  and  painting  the  men  of  our  time  in  his  “  Nouveaux
Caractères  ”  inimitably.  He  was,  besides,  an  extremely
worthy  man,  very  good  company,  simple,  without  anything
pedantic,  and  very  disinterested.  I  knew  him  well  enough
to  regret  him  and  the  works  which  his  age  and  health  led  us
to  expect  from  him.

About  this  time  died  the  Marquis  de  Chandenier  the
elder,  of  the  house  of  Bochechouart,  so  celebrated  for  his

downfall  and  for  the  magnanimity  with  which
Marquis^de 6  he  bore  it  for  more  than  forty  years  until  his

Chandenier;  his  ^ea^h.  He  Was  chief  Captain  of  the  body-
misfortunes.

guards,  and  singularly  respected  for  his  valour,

132

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

his  sense,  and  his  extreme  integrity.  He  lost  his  post,  with
the  other  captains  of  the  body-guards,  at  the  affair  of  the
Feuillants  in  1648,  which  is  no  concern  of  these  Memoirs
and  can  be  found  in  all  those  of  that  period  ;  and  he  was
the  only  one  of  the  four  to  whom  it  was  not  restored,
although  he  had  in  no  way  differed  from  them  in  his
conduct.  A  lofty  man,  full  of  honour,  intelligence,  and
courage,  of  a  great  birth  withal,  he  was  irksome  to  Car¬
dinal  Mazarin,  though  the  latter  had  never  found  him  in
the  slightest  degree  in  fault,  or  eager  to  ask  for  anything.
The  cardinal  felt  it  a  point  of  honour  to  make  the  captain  of
his  own  guards  the  chief  captain  of  the  king’s  body-guards,
and  did  not  lose  this  occasion  to  place  in  that  position  so
faithful  a  henchman  as  M.  de  Noailles.  M.  de  Chan  denier
refused  to  resign  ;  the  cardinal  thereupon  ordered  the  price
he  put  upon  the  office  to  be  deposited  with  a  notary,  and  he
made  Noailles  take  the  oath  and  enter  upon  his  functions
without  Chandenier’s  resignation.  Chandenier  was  poor,
and  they  hoped  in  this  way  to  conquer  his  obstinacy.  But
the  Court  got  tired  of  the  fruitless  attempt  and  he  was  sent  a
prisoner  to  the  château  de  Loches,  on  the  “  king’s  bread  ”  like
any  criminal,  and  all  his  little  revenue  was  stopped  in  order
to  force  him  to  receive  the  money  of  M.  de  Noailles,  and  con¬
sequently  give  in  his  resignation.  They  mistook  him.
M.  de  Chandenier  lived  on  the  “  king’s  bread  ”  and  on  what
the  bourgeois  of  Loches  sent  him  for  dinner  and  supper  in
a  little  porringer  which  made  the  rounds  of  the  town.
Never  did  he  complain,  never  did  he  ask  for  his  property
or  his  liberty.  Two  years  passed  in  this  way.  In  the
end,  the  Court,  ashamed  of  a  violence  so  unexampled  and
so  little  deserved,  and  still  more  at  being  vanquished  by
a  courage  they  could  not  subdue,  released  his  revenues  and
changed  his  prison  into  exile,  where  he  remained  many

1696]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  133

years,  always  without  deigning  to  ask  for  anything.  As
before  about  his  imprisonment,  shame  in  the  end  made
them  revoke  his  exile.

He  returned  to  Paris,  where  he  would  only  see  a  very  few
friends.  He  was  a  close  friend  of  my  father,  who  took  me
to  see  him,  and  asked  him  pretty  often  to  dinner.  He  also
took  him  sometimes  to  La  Ferté  ;  and  it  was  he  who  made
my  father,  when  he  wanted  to  build,  open  a  cross-ways
through  which  he  could  draw  wood,  which  is  a  great  beauty
near  the  house,  where  my  father  was  thinking  of  cutting
down  the  trees,  not  considering  either  how  or  where  to  do
so.  After  my  father’s  death  I  saw  M.  de  Chandenier
several  times,  with  true  respect,  in  the  simple  but  very
pretty  retreat  he  had  made  for  himself  at  Sainte-Geneviève,
where  he  died.  He  was  a  man  of  great  taste  and  excellent
company,  who  had  seen  and  known  much  ;  for  a  long  time
before  his  death  he  was  very  religious.  They  made  use  of
this  during  the  last  year  of  his  life  to  put  scruples  of  justice
to  his  creditors  into  his  mind,  saying  they  could  be  paid
only  by  his  taking  M.  de  Noailles’  money  and  giving  his
resignation.  And  when  they  had  finally  conquered  him  on
that  point  the  same  people  undertook  to  make  him  see
M.  de  Hoailles’  son,  who  had  succeeded  his  father  in  M.  de
Chandenier’s  office.  The  force  of  religion  made  him  submit
to  receive  this  visit,  which  on  his  part  passed  coldly  but  hon¬
ourably.  He  had  lost,  many  years  earlier,  his  wife  and  his
only  son,  a  young  man,  as  I  have  heard,  of  great  promise.

At  all  courts  there  are  singular  personages,  who,  without
mind,  without  distinguished  birth,  without  connections  or
cavoyeandhis  duties,  make  their  way  into  the  familiarity
Iuck-  of  all  that  is  most  brilliant,  and  end,  no  one

knows  how,  in  obliging  the  world  to  reckon  with  them.
Such  was  Cavoye,  all  his  life,  a  very  paltry  gentleman  at  the

134  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

most,  whose  real  name  was  Oger.  He  was  grand-marshal
of  the  king’s  houses  ;  and  the  tale  which  won  him  this
office  ought  not  to  be  forgotten,  after  saying  what  there  is
to  say  about  him  at  the  present  time.  He  flattered  him¬
self  he  should  be  made  chevalier  of  the  Order  of  the  Holy
Spirit  in  the  promotion  of  1688.  The  king  arranged  it  with
M.  de  Louvois,  who  was  chancellor  of  the  Order.  That
minister,  who  was  then  designing  the  great  war  he  had
already  declared,  thought  only  of  using  this  promotion  to
make  himself  followers.  He  therefore  made  it  wholly
military,  the  first  time  it  had  ever  been  done  in  that  way,
and  paid  great  attention  to  excluding  all  those  whom  he
did  not  like.  Cavoye’s  friendship  with  Louvois’  enemy
Seignelay,  put  him  among  the  latter  number  ;  he  was  not  in
the  promotion,  and  he  felt  he  must  die  of  grief.  The  king,
to  whom  he  spoke  himself  and  also  through  Seignelay  and
other  persons,  softened  his  distress  by  kind  remarks  and
hopes  for  another  occasion.  Divers  little  promotions  were
made  subsequently,  but  Cavoye  was  always  left  out,  because
they  were,  in  fact,  made  on  particular  occasions  concerning
the  persons  who  were  thus  promoted.  Finally,  Cavoye,
tired  and  outraged,  wrote  the  king  a  rhapsody  about  his
health  and  his  prospects,  and  asked  permission  to  resign
his  office.  The  king  said  nothing  to  him  about  it  at  the
time  and  sent  him  no  message  ;  and  Cavoye  made  all  his
arrangements  publicly  to  retire  from  Court,  which  I  think
he  would  have  cruelly  repented.  Ten  or  twelve  days  after
his  sending  his  letter  to  the  king  came  a  trip  to  Marly,  and
Cavoye  attended  officially,  as  usual.  Two  days  later,  the
king  on  entering  his  cabinet  called  to  him,  and  said  kindly
that  they  had  been  too  long  together  to  part  now;  that  he
did  not  wish  him  to  leave  him,  and  he  would  take  care  of
his  interests.  To  this  he  added  hopes  of  the  Order.  Cavoye

135

1696]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

asserted  later  that  he  had  the  promise;  and  behold  him
enrolled  at  court  more  closely  than  ever.

He  was  one  of  the  best  made  and  handsomest  men  in
France,  and  he  dressed  well.  He  profited  by  this  among
the  ladies.  Those  were  days  when  people  fought  duels  in
spite  of  the  edicts  ;  Cavoye,  courageous  and  skilful,  acquired
such  a  reputation  in  this  way  that  the  name  of  “  the  brave
Cavoye”  stayed  by  him.  Mlle,  de  Coëtlogon,  one  of  the
maids  of  honour  of  Queen  Marie-Thérèse,  fell  in  love  with
him,  —  madly  in  love  with  him.  She  was  ugly,  virtuous,
artless,  much  loved,  and  a  very  good  creature.  Nobody  took
it  into  his  head  to  think  her  love  was  queer,  and,  what
is  really  remarkable,  everybody  pitied  her.  She  made  all
the  advances.  Cavoye  was  cruel,  and  sometimes  brutal ,
he  was  importuned  to  death.  It  went  so  far  that  the  king,
and  even  the  queen,  reproached  him,  and  requested  him  to
be  more  humane.  He  was  sent  to  the  army,  where,  how¬
ever,  he  had  only  a  petty  employment.  Behold  the  Coët¬
logon  in  tears  and  outcries;  she  left  off  her  ornaments
throughout  the  campaign,  and  never  put  them  on  again  till
Cavoye’s  return.  No  one  did  more  than  smile.  There  came
a  time  when  Cavoye  served  as  second  in  a  duel,  and  was  put
in  the  Bastille  ;  more  grief  ;  and  everybody  went  to  condole
with  her.  She  took  off  all  her  finery  this  time,  and  dressed
herself  as  badly  as  she  could.  She  spoke  to  the  king  about
Cavoye,  and  not  being  able  to  get  the  release,  she  quarrelled
with  him,  even  to  the  point  of  insulting  him.  The  king
laughed  with  all  his  heart,  which  made  her  so  furious  that
she  showed  him  her  claws,  to  which  the  king  thought  it
wise  not  to  expose  himself.  He  dined  and  supped  every  day
in  public  with  the  queen.  The  Duchesse  de  Richelieu  and
the  maids  of  honour  waited  on  them.  As  long  as  Cavoye
was  in  the  Bastille,  Coëtlogon  would  never  serve  the  king

136

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

with  anything,  no  matter  what  ;  either  she  evaded  it  or  she
flatly  refused,  saying  that  he  did  not  deserve  to  be  waited
on  by  her.  Jaundice,  hysterics,  despair  seized  upon  her.
Things  went  so  far  at  last  that  the  king  and  queen  seri¬
ously  requested  the  Duchesse  de  Richelieu  to  take  the  Coët-
logon  to  see  Cavoye  in  the  Bastille;  which  was  done  once
or  twice.  He  got  out  at  last,  and  Coëtlogon,  enraptured,
adorned  herself  once  more  ;  but  it  was  only  with  difficulty
that  she  consented  to  forgive  the  king.  Pity,  and  the  death
of  M.  de  Froulay,  grand-marshal  of  the  king’s  houses,  came
to  her  succour.  The  king  sent  for  Cavoye,  whom  he  had
already  vainly  sounded  as  to  the  marriage.  This  time  he
told  him  he  wished  it,  and  instead  of  a  dot  with  a  girl  who
had  nothing,  he  would  present  him  with  the  office  of  grand-
marshal  of  his  houses.  Cavoye  still  sniffed,  but  he  had  to
come  to  it.  Since  then  he  has  lived  very  well  with  her,  and
to  this  day  she  has  always  the  same  adoration  of  him  ;  it  is
a  joke  sometimes  to  see  the  caresses  she  gives  him  before
all  the  world,  and  the  vexed  gravity  with  which  he  receives
them.  Other  stories  of  Cavoye  might  make  a  little  hook  ;
it  is  enough  here  to  report  this  history  for  its  oddity,  which
is  certainly  unexampled,  for  never  has  the  virtue  of  Mme.
de  Cavoye,  before  or  after  her  marriage,  received  the  slight¬
est  smirch.  Her  husband,  connected  all  his  life  with  the
most  brilliant  persons  about  the  Court,  has  erected  a  species
of  judgment-seat  in  his  home  which  must  not  be  displeased,
but  reckoned  with  and  respectfully  treated  even  by  minis¬
ters  ;  but  for  all  that  he  is  a  kind  man,  and  a  very  honest
man,  who  can  be  trusted  in  all  things.

On  our  return  from  the  army,  we  found  Mme.  de  Castries
established  at  Court  as  lady-in-waiting  to  Mme.  la  Duchesse

de  Chartres,  in  place  of  Mme.  de  Mailly.

Mme.  de  Castries.

Through  the  bastardy  of  the  princess,  Mme.

1696]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

137

de  Castries  was  her  cousin-german,  they  being  the  daughters
of  brother  and  sister.  The  Duc  du  Maine  had  obtained  this
post  from  the  king,  and  from  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  without
whose  consent  such  appointments  were  never  granted.  Mme.
de  Castries  was  a  mere  scrap  of  a  woman,  a  kind  of  half-
made  biscuit  ;  so  extremely  small,  though  well-formed,  that
she  might  have  passed  through  a  medium-sized  ring  ;  neither
a  behind,  nor  a  before,  nor  a  chin  ;  very  plain,  always  a  dis¬
tressed,  astonished  look;  but  with  it  all  a  countenance  that
shone  with  intellect,  and  kept  its  promise.  She  knew  every¬
thing:  history,  philosophy,  mathematics,  learned  languages;
and  never  did  it  appear  that  she  knew  more  than  how  to
speak  French;  but  her  speech  had  a  correctness,  an  energy,
an  eloquence,  a  grace  even  in  the  commonest  things,  and
above  all  that  unique  turn  to  it  which  belongs  only  to  the
Mortemarts.  Amiable,  amusing,  gay,  serious,  all  things  to
all  men,  charming  when  she  wished  to  please,  with  natural
humour  of  the  utmost  keenness  but  without  intending  it,
flashing  a  satire  that  was  never  forgotten,  loftily  proud,
shocked  at  a  thousand  things  in  a  plaintive  tone  that  brought
down  the  house  ;  cruelly  malicious  when  it  pleased  her  to  be
so;  but  a  very  good  friend,  polite,  gracious,  obliging  in  gen¬
eral  ;  wholly  without  coquetry,  delicate  in  spirit,  amorous  of
a  soul  when  she  found  it  to  her  liking  ;  and  with  all  this,
possessing  a  gift  of  narration,  and,  when  she  chose  to  make
a  tale  upon  the  spot,  a  well-spring  of  production,  variety,  and
charm  which  astonished  every  one.  With  all  her  pride,  she
thought  herself  well-married  from  the  friendship  which  she
had  with  her  husband.  She  expatiated  on  whatever  belonged
to  him,  and  was  quite  as  vainglorious  for  him  as  for  herself;
from  him  she  received  reciprocity,  and  all  sorts  of  attentions
and  respect.

She  was  found  one  morning  in  her  bed  unconscious,  and,  in

138  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iy.

spite  of  all  remedies,  did  not  come  to  till  eight  at  night,
when  she  died,  leaving  no  children.  She  was  perfectly  well,
and  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  had  passed  a  part  of  the  previous
evening  with  her.  But  she  was  all  soul  and  spirit  with
scarcely  any  body;  hers  was  so  tiny  and  slender  that  a
breath  could  have  blown  it  away.  ’T  was  a  great  pity.

M.  de  Cambrai  had  not  been  able  to  face  the  poor  success
of  his  book,  which  met  with  no  praises  except  in  the  “  J our-
i6q7  nal  des  Savants”  published  by  a  Calvinist  in
continuation  of  Holland.  He  started  for  his  diocese,  where  he
AixhbiThop  of6  went  now  and  then,  but  fell  ill  immediately,  and
cambrai.  to  be  nearer  his  friends,  remained  with  Male-
zieux,  a  friend  whose  house  was  a  few  leagues  from  Versailles.
The  two  books 1  so  opposed  in  doctrine  and  style  and  so  dif-
erently  received  by  the  world,  made  a  very  great  hubbub.
The  king  interposed,  and  obliged  M.  de  Cambrai  to  allow  his
hook  to  be  examined  by  the  archbishops  of  Reims  and  Paris,
and  by  the  bishops  of  Meaux,  Chartres,  Toul,  Soissons,  and
Amiens  ;  that  is  to  say,  by  his  adversaries,  or  the  prelates
who  agreed  with  them.  The  Bishop  of  Amiens,  formerly
Abbé  de  Brou  and  almoner  to  the  king,  was  very  learned,
and  an  intimate  friend  of  M.  de  Meaux,  thinking  with  him
on  all  kinds  of  doctrine.  He  was  also  a  very  amiable  man,
well-trained  to  the  world,  much  relished  and  sought  ;  hut  a
saintly  bishop  wholly  devoted  to  his  study  and  his  diocese,
which  he  left  as  little  as  he  could,  giving  all  that  he  had
to  the  poor.

I  cannot  refrain  from  relating  here  an  anecdote  which  will
make  him  known  in  two  words.  A  scruple  seized  him  on
his  entrance  to  the  episcopate  ;  and  after  reflecting  upon  it
he  went  to  see  Père  de  La  Chaise,  to  whom  he  said  that  he

1  “  Maxims  of  the  Saints,”  by  M.  de  Cambrai  (Fe'nelon)  ;  “  Instruction
on  States  of  Prayer,”  by  M.  de  Meaux  (Bossuet).

1696]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

139

had  bought  the  office  of  almoner  to  the  king  solely  for  the
purpose  of  making  himself  a  bishop  ;  that  he  knew  it  was  an
obtrusion,  and  therefore  he  had  brought  with  him  his  resm-
nation,  pure  and  simple  ;  that  he  wished  for  no  abbey  in
leaving  a  bishopric  he  had  so  wrongly  entered,  and  he  asked
him  to  take  his  resignation  to  the  king  and  get  him  to  ap¬
point  his  successor.  Père  de  La  Chaise  admired  his  delicacy
and  refused  to  take  the  resignation.  They  argued  the  matter
and  separated.  A  few  months  later  M.  d’Amiens  brought
back  his  resignation  and  seeing  that  it  would  have  as  little
success  as  before,  he  declared  that  if  the  confessor  did  not
take  charge  of  it,  he  would  carry  it  himself  to  the  king.
Père  de  La  Chaise  finding  his  resolution  so  determined,  took
the  resignation  and  promised  to  deliver  it  to  the  king.  He
did  so  ;  the  answer  was  prompt,  and  worthy  of  all  three.
The  confessor  told  the  prelate  that  the  king  accepted  his
resignation  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  appointed  him  again
as  Bishop  of  Amiens,  and  commanded  him  positively  to
accept.  In  this  way  the  scruple  ceased,  and  the  affair  ended  ;
but  it  had  no  small  part  in  another  scruple  which  the  king,
in  his  turn,  took  up  as  to  the  venality  in  the  office  of  his
almoners,  and  the  attention  he  subsequently  paid  to  putting
an  end  to  it.

To  return  to  the  subject  from  which  this  parenthesis
enticed  me.  M.  de  Cambrai  submitted  to  the  examination
he  could  not  escape,  and  from  which  he  had
nothing  to  expect  ;  but  he  took  the  resolution
to  write  to  the  pope  and  lay  the  matter  before
him,  asking  permission  of  the  king  to  go  to
Pome  and  defend  his  cause  ;  this  the  king  for¬
bade.  M.  de  Meaux  thereupon  sent  his  book  to  the  pope
and  M.  de  Cambrai  had  the  grief  of  receiving  a  curt  answer
from  his  Holiness,  and  of  seeing  M.  de  Meaux  triumph  in

M.  de  Cambrai
resolves  to  carry
his  affair  to
Rome.  Curt
answer  of  the
pope.

140

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

the  one  received  by  him.  All  this  irritated  the  king,  who,
Exiled  by  the  without  being  willing  to  see  M.  de  Cambrai,
diocele1"3  sent  him  word  to  go  to  Paris  at  once,  and

thence  to  his  diocese,  which,  since  then,  he  has  never  left.

It  was  at  this  time  that  M.  de  Troyes  surprised  the  world
by  his  brave  and  beautiful  retirement.  He  had  benefices
m.  de  Troyes;  very  early  in  life,  he  was  almoner  to  the  king,
tirement”S  re"  and  became,  while  still  young,  bishop  of  Troyes.
He  had  learning,  and  he  also  knew  more  of  the  temporal
affairs  of  the  clergy  than  any  of  his  body  ;  so  that  he  was
called  to  all  the  assemblies  of  the  clergy  and  shone  in  alL
He  had,  moreover,  a  good  intellect,  much  worldly  wit,  badi¬
nage  with  women,  and  the  tone  of  good  company  ;  he  passed
his  life  among  the  best  and  most  distinguished  persons  of
the  Court  and  city  ;  sought  by  all,  especially  for  high  play
and  among  the  ladies.  He  was  their  favourite.  They  called
him  “  Le  Troyen,”  and  “  chien  d’évêque  ”  and  “  chien  de
Troyen  ”  when  he  won  their  money.  He  went,  every  now
and  then,  to  bore  himself  at  Troyes,  where,  either  from  pro¬
priety  or  for  want  of  something  better  to  do,  he  never  failed
to  perform  Iris  functions  ;  but  he  seldom  stayed  long  ;  and
once  returned,  it  was  hard  for  him  to  tear  himself  away.

It  was  thus  that  up  to  this  time  he  had  passed  his  life.
But  now  reflections  came  to  trouble  his  pleasures.  He  tried
not  to  yield  to  them  ;  he  struggled  with  them,  till  finally  expe¬
rience  made  him  understand  that  he  would  always  be  van¬
quished  if  he  did  not  break  his  bonds  in  such  a  manner  that
they  could  never  be  resumed.  Never  had  he  seemed  better
company  nor  gayer  than  he  did  at  a  dinner  given  at  the
hôtel  des  Lorges  to  a  large  and  select  party  ;  leaving  which
he  went  to  sleep  at  Versailles  as  previously  arranged  with
Père  de  La  Chaise.  The  next  morning  when  the  king  left
his  prie-dieu  he  asked  for  a  moment’s  audience,  which  was

1697]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  141

given  in  the  cabinet  before  mass.  There  he  made  his  con¬
fession  ingenuously.  He  acknowledged  to  the  king  the  need
he  felt  for  retirement  and  repentance,  and  said  that  he
should  never  have  the  strength  for  it  so  long  as  certain
pretexts  held  him  to  the  world.  He  presented  to  the  king
his  resignation  of  his  bishopric,  saying  that  if  he  wished  to
gratify  him  he  could  give  it  to  his  nephew,  the  Abbé  Cha-
vigny,  whose  age  was  suitable  and  who  had  more  merit,
learning,  and  virtue  than  himself  ;  and  that  he  himself  would
retire  to  his  own  house  in  Troyes,  which  he  would  share  with
his  nephew  and  live  in  solitude  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  The
bishopric  was  worth  little  ;  the  king  loved  M.  de  Troyes  in
spite  of  his  dissipations,  and  he  granted  his  requests  im¬
mediately.  Leaving  the  cabinet,  M.  de  Troyes  went  to  Paris,
saw  no  one,  and  started  the  next  day  for  Troyes,  where  he
did  exactly  as  he  had  purposed,  without  seeing  any  one  but
his  nephew  and  the  priests,  and  without  writing  letters  or
holding  any  communication  with  others,  entirely  given  up  to
prayer,  repentance,  and  perfect  solitude.

The  king  turned  away  this  winter  in  a  violent  hurry  the
troupe  of  Italian  comedians,  and  would  have  no  others  in
Italian  comedians  their  place.  As  long  as  they  merely  over¬
driven  away.  flowed  with  filth  at  their  theatre,  and  some¬

times  with  impiety,  they  had  only  been  laughed  at;  but
they  suddenly  chose  to  act  a  play  which  was  called  “  The
Sham  Prude,”  in  which  Mme.  de  Maintenon  was  easily  rec¬
ognized.  Every  one  ran  to  see  it,  but  after  three  or  four
representations,  which  they  gave  one  after  another  on  ac¬
count  of  their  great  gains,  the  company  received  orders  to
close  their  theatre,  and  leave  the  kingdom  within  a  month.
The  affair  made  a  great  noise  ;  and  though  the  comedians
lost  their  establishment  by  their  boldness  and  their  folly,
she  who  had  driven  them  away  gained  nothing,  on  ac-

142

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

count  of  the  license  which  this  ridiculous  event  gave  to
speech.

The  first  news  received  of  the  signing  of  the  peace  of
Kyswick  was  from  an  aide-de-camp  of  Maréchal  de  Boufflers,
The  peace  of  who  arrived  Sunday,  Sept.  22,  at  Fontaine-

Ryswick.  bleau,  sent  by  the  maréchal  on  receiving  news

that  the  peace  was  signed  the  preceding  Friday  at  midnight.
The  King  and  Queen  of  England  were  at  Fontainebleau,  to
whom,  of  course,  the  recognition  of  the  Prince  of  Orange
was  very  hitter  ;  but  they  saw  the  necessity  of  having  peace,
and  knew  very  well  that  that  article  was  as  unwelcome  to
the  king  as  to  themselves,  the  reason  for  which  I  will
presently  explain.  They  consoled  themselves  as  best  they
could,  and  seemed  to  he  much  obliged  to  the  king,  who  stood
firm  in  not  allowing  that  they  should  leave,  or  even  quit  for
a  time  their  residence  at  Saint-Germain.  These  two  points
had  been  eagerly  demanded  (the  last  especially  in  the  expected
impossibility  of  obtaining  the  other)  as  much  at  Byswick  as  in
the  conferences  with  the  Duke  of  Portland.  The  king  had
the  thoughtfulness  to  say  to  Torcy,  on  the  eve  of  the  signa¬
ture,  that  if  the  courier  who  brought  the  news  should  arrive,
one,  or  many,  or  one  after  another,  they  were  not  to  come  and
tell  him  if  he  was  with  the  King  or  Queen  of  England  ;  and
he  forbade  the  musicians  to  sing  anything  relating  to  the
peace  until  after  their  departure.

As  for  the  private  reasons  which  made  it  so  hitter  to  the
king  to  recognize  the  Prince  of  Orange  as  King  of  England,
Personal  hatred  they  are  these.  The  king  was  very  far,  when
Prince  ofOrange*  first  had  his  bastards,  from  thoughts  which,
its  cause.  by  degrees,  grew  up  in  him  as  to  their  elevation.

The  Princesse  de  Conti,  whose  birth  was  the  least  odious,  was
also  the  first  ;  the  king  believed  he  could  magnificently  marry
her  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  had  the  proposal  made  to

1697]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

143

him  at  a  time  when  the  prince’s  prospects  and  his  position  in
Europe  persuaded  the  king  that  he  would  receive  it  as  the
the  greatest  honour  and  advantage.  He  was  mistaken.  The
Prince  of  Orange  was  the  son  of  a  daughter  of  the  King  of
England,  Charles  I.,  and  his  grandmother  was  the  daughter  of
the  Elector  of  Brandebourg.  He  remembered  all  this  with
much  haughtiness,  and  replied  curtly  that  the  princes  of
Orange  were  accustomed  to  marry  the  legitimate  daughters  of
great  kings,  and  not  their  bastards.  That  speech  entered  the
heart  of  the  king  so  deeply  that  he  made  it  his  business,  and
often  against  his  most  obvious  interests,  to  show  how  much
the  indignation  that  he  felt  had  sunk  into  his  soul.

Nothing  was  omitted  on  the  part  of  the  Prince  of  Orange
to  efface  this  impression  ;  respect,  concessions,  good  offices,
patience  under  insults  and  personal  provocations,  and  renewed
efforts,  all  were  rejected  with  contempt.  The  ministers  of  the
king  in  Holland  were  expressly  instructed  to  thwart  the
prince,  not  only  in  the  affairs  of  State,  but  in  those  that  were
personal  and  private  ;  to  rouse  as  much  as  possible  the  people
of  the  towns  against  him  ;  to  scatter  money  about  in  order  to
elect  to  the  magistracies  those  who  were  most  opposed  to  him  ;
to  openly  protect  those  who  had  declared  against  him  ;  and
to  refuse  to  see  him,  —  in  a  word,  to  do  him  all  the  harm  and
all  the  personal  rudeness  that  they  could.  Never  did  the
prince,  up  to  the  opening  of  the  late  war,  cease  endeavouring,
both  publicly  and  in  hidden  ways,  to  appease  this  anger  ;
never  did  the  king  relax  it.  At  last,  in  despair  of  recovering
the  king’s  good  graces,  and  in  the  expectation  of  his  own
approaching  invasion  of  England  and  of  the  effect  the  formi¬
dable  league  he  had  called  together  would  have  on  France,
the  prince  said  openly  that  all  his  life  he  had  worked  uselessly
to  obtain  the  king’s  good-will,  but  that  now  he  hoped  to  be
more  lucky  in  deserving  his  respect.  We  can  therefore  im-

144  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

agine  what  a  triumph  it  was  for  him  to  force  the  king  to
recognize  him  as  King  of  England,  and  also  what  it  cost  the
king  to  do  so.

The  Princesse  de  Savoie  had  arrived  early  on  Tuesday,
October  16,  1696,  at  the  bridge  of  Beauvoisin.  There  she
Preparations  for  rested  in  a  house  on  the  Savoie  side,  and  dressed
Mgrmfhe  Duc  de  kerself  ;  she  then  went  to  the  bridge,  which  is
Bourgogne.  Ar-  -wholly  [n  France,  at  the  entrance  of  which  she

rival  of  the  Prin-  "

cesse  de  Savoie.  was  received  by  her  new  household  and  con¬
ducted  to  the  French  house  prepared  for  her  on  the  other
side.  There  she  slept  ;  and  the  next  day  she  parted  from  her
Italian  household  without  shedding  a  tear,  and  was  followed
only  by  a  single  waiting-maid  and  her  physician,  who  were
not  to  remain  in  France,  and  were  soon  sent  back.

Sunday,  November  4,  the  king,  Monseigneur,  and  Mon¬
sieur  went  separately  to  Montargis  to  meet  the  princess,  who
arrived  at  six  in  the  evening,  and  was  received  by  the  king
at  the  door  of  his  carriage.  He  took  her  to  the  apartment
prepared  for  himself  at  a  house  in  the  town  and  there  pre¬
sented  to  her  Monseigneur,  Monsieur,  and  the  Duc  de
Chartres.  All  that  was  reported  of  her  graceful  ways  and
her  flatteries,  which  were  full  of  sense,  and  the  absence  which
she  showed  of  embarrassment,  together  with  a  sedate  air
and  respectful  manners,  surprised  every  one  immensely  and
charmed  the  king  at  once.  He  praised  her  incessantly,
caressed  her  repeatedly,  and  hastened  to  send  a  courier  to
Mme.  de  Maintenon  with  a  letter  to  tell  her  of  his  joy  and  to
praise  the  princess.  The  king  ruled  that  she  should  he
called  “  The  Princess  ”  merely,  that  she  should  dine  alone,
served  by  the  Duchesse  du  Lude,  and  see  only  her  own
ladies  and  those  to  whom  the  king  might  give  express  per¬
mission  ;  also  that  she  should  hold  no  Court  as  yet,  and  that
Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  should  visit  her  only  once  a  fort-

1697]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  145

night,  and  MM.  his  brothers  once  a  month.  The  whole
Court  returned  on  the  8th  of  November  to  Versailles,  where
the  princess  was  given  the  apartment  of  the  late  queen,  in
which,  on  arriving,  all  the  most  distinguished  persons'  in
Paris  were  presented  to  her.  The  king  and  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon  made  a  doll  of  the  princess,  whose  caressing,  insinu¬
ating,  attentive  spirit  pleased  them  infinitely,  and  little  by
little  she  usurped  with  both  a  freedom  never  attempted
by  any  of  the  children  of  the  king,  and  which  enchanted
them.  It  seems  that  her  father,  the  Duc  de  Savoie,  who
was  well  informed  even  to  the  depths  of  our  Court,  had
carefully  instructed  his  daughter  ;  but  what  is  really  sur¬
prising  is  that  she  knew  so  well  how  to  profit  by  the  instruc¬
tion,  and  with  what  grace  she  did  so.  Nothing  was  ever
seen  like  the  cajoleries  by  which  she  soon  bewitched  Mme.
de  Maintenon,  whom  she  always  called  “  aunt,”  and  to  whom
she  showed  as  much  dependence  and  respect  as  she  could
have  done  to  a  mother  and  a  queen  ;  but  with  it  all  a  famil¬
iarity  and  an  apparent  freedom,  which  delighted  Mme.  de
Maintenon  and  the  king  also.

The  king,  who  took  more  and  more  pleasure  in  the  prin¬
cess,  whose  cleverness,  attentions,  and  graces  immeasurably
surpassed  her  age,  would  not  lose  a  day  beyond  her  twelfth
birthday  in  celebrating  the  marriage,  and  he  therefore  fixed
it  for  December  7,  which  fell  of  a  Saturday.  He  had  ex¬
pressed  himself  as  desirous  that  the  Court  should  appear  on
this  occasion  very  magnificently;  and  he  himself,  who  for
a  long  time  past  had  worn  simple  clothes,  ordered  some  very
superb  ones.  This  was  enough  to  allow  of  no  question  as  to
consulting  one’s  purse  or  even  station,  unless  it  were  ecclesi¬
astical  or  magisterial.  It  was  who  could  surpass  all  others
in  richness  and  invention.  Gold  and  silver  were  soon  scarce
enough.  The  shops  of  the  merchants  were  emptied  in  a  very

VOL  I.  —  10

146

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

few  days  ;  in  a  word,  unbridled  luxury  ruled  court  and  town
as  well,  for  the  fête  had  a  vast  crowd  of  spectators.  Things
went  to  such  a  point  that  the  king  repented  having  given
rise  to  it,  and  said  he  could  not  comprehend  how  husbands
could  be  foolish  enough  to  let  themselves  be  ruined  for  their
wives’  clothes  ;  he  might  have  added,  for  their  own.  But  the
bridle  was  loose  and  there  was  no  time  to  remedy  the  matter,
and,  in  his  heart,  I  don’t  know  that  the  king  would  have  been
glad  if  it  could  have  been  remedied,  for  he  took  great  pleasure
during  the  fêtes  in  examining  the  clothes.  It  was  easy  to
see  that  this  profusion  of  materials  and  rarities  of  industry
pleased  him,  and  with  what  satisfaction  he  praised  the  most
superb,  and  the  best  arranged  toilets  ;  and  having  once
launched  his  little  word  of  policy,  he  said  no  more,  and  was
delighted  that  no  one  paid  heed  to  it.

It  was  not  the  first  time  that  this  thing  had  happened  to
him  ;  he  loved,  passionately,  all  sorts  of  sumptuousness  at  his
Court,  above  all  on  marked  occasions,  and  whoever  had
minded  what  he  said  would  have  paid  their  court  unwisely.
There  was  no  possibility  of  being  wise  in  the  midst  of  such
folly.  Many  suits  were  required.  As  for  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon  and  me,  it  cost  us  twenty  thousand  francs  between
us.  Workmen  were  lacking  to  get  all  these  sumptuosities
finished  in  time.

Saturday  morning,  December  7,  the  whole  Court  went
early  to  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  after  which  the  duke  went

Marriage  of  the  to  ^ie  princess.  Her  toilet  was  finished,  and

duc  de  Bour-  there  were  very  few  ladies  with  her,  most  of

them  having  gone  to  the  tribunes  or  to  the
scaffoldings  placed  in  the  chapel  to  witness  the  ceremony.
All  the  royal  family  had  already  seen  the  princess,  and  were
now  waiting  in  the  king’s  room,  where  the  bridal  pair  arrived
soon  after  twelve  o’clock.  The  king  was  in  the  salon,  and

1697]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  147

immediately  led  the  way  to  the  chapel.  The  march  and
all  the  rest  was  exactly  like  the  marriage  of  the  Duc  de
Chartres,  except  that  the  Cardinal  de  Coislin  began  with
the  betrothal,  and  everybody  stayed  on  their  knees  during
a  middling  pause  between  the  betrothal  and  the  marriage.
The  cardinal  said  a  low  mass,  after  which  the  king  and
the  royal  family  returned  as  they  came,  and  immediately
sat  down  to  dinner.  A  courier,  all  ready  at  the  door  of
the  chapel,  started  for  Turin  the  moment  that  the  marriage
was  celebrated.  The  day  passed  rather  dully.  About
seven  o’clock  in  the  evening  the  King  and  Queen  of  Eng¬
land  arrived,  the  king  having  invited  them  several  days
earlier.  They  remained  in  the  colonnade,  and  at  eight
o’clock  entered  the  salon  at  the  end  of  the  gallery  adjoining
the  apartment  of  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  before
which,  in  spite  of  the  rain,  fireworks  were  let  off  from  the
Swiss  quarters.  The  supper  was  like  the  dinner,  with  the
addition  of  the  King  and  Queen  of  England,  the  queen  being
seated  between  the  two  kings.  On  leaving  table,  the  com¬
pany  went  to  the  coucher  of  the  bride,  from  which  the  king
rigidly  excluded  all  the  men.  The  ladies  remained,  and  the
Queen  of  England  gave  the  chemise,  which  the  Duchesse
du  Lude  handed  to  her.  Monseigneur  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne
undressed  in  the  antechamber,  seated  on  a  folding  stool.  The
king  was  there  with  all  the  princes.  The  King  of  England
gave  the  chemise,  handed  to  him  by  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers.

As  soon  as  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  was  in  bed,
Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  entered  and  placed  himself  in  the
bed  to  the  right,  in  presence  of  the  kings  and  all  the  court  ;
and  immediately  after  the  King  and  Queen  of  England  went
away,  the  king  retired  to  bed,  and  everybody  left  the  nuptial
chamber  except  Monseigneur,  the  ladies  of  the  princess,  and
the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers,  who  remained  beside  the  pillow  of

148

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

his  pupil,  with  the  Duchesse  du  Lude  on  the  other  side.
Monseigneur  remained  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  convers¬
ing  ;  after  which  he  made  M.  his  son  rise,  having  previously
told  him  to  kiss  the  princess,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of
the  Duchesse  du  Lude.  It  proved  that  she  was  right.  The
king  thought  it  very  wrong,  and  said  that  he  did  not  choose
his  grandson  to  kiss  so  much  as  the  tip  of  his  wife’s  finger
till  the  time  came  for  them  to  live  together.

Sunday  a  circle  was  held  at  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bour¬
gogne’s.  The  king  came  towards  the  end,  and  conducted
all  the  ladies  into  the  salon  near  the  chapel,  where  they
found  a  fine  collation,  then  music,  after  which  they  remained
in  the  colonnade.  At  nine  o’clock  the  king  conducted  the
Due  and  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  to  the  princess’s  apart¬
ment,  and  all  was  over  for  the  day.  She  continued  to  live
as  before  the  marriage,  but  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  went
to  see  her  every  day,  and  the  ladies-in-waiting  had  orders
never  to  leave  them  alone  together.  Sometimes  they  supped
tête-à-tête  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  Wednesday,  Dec.  11,
the  king  came  at  six  o’clock  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne’s
apartment,  where  there  was  a  crowded  Court.  He  waited  for
the  King  and  Queen  of  England,  and  then  entered  the  great
gallery,  where  there  were  seats  erected  and  splendidly  deco¬
rated  for  the  balls.  The  Due  d’Aumont,  who  managed  all
these  fêtes,  lost  his  head  ;  the  crowd  was  so  great  and  the
disorder  was  such  that  the  king  himself  was  overwhelmed
by  it,  Monsieur  was  thrown  down  and  trampled  upon  in  the
press  ;  and  so  it  may  be  judged  what  became  of  the  rest.
Ho  room  at  all;  by  force  and  necessity  people  pushed  where
they  could.  It  spoilt  the  fête.  There  was  a  branle,  and
just  the  right  number  of  princes  and  princesses  of  the  blood
with  M.  le  Comte  de  Toulouse  to  lead  ;  for  the  rest,  there
were  many  more  gentlemen  than  ladies.

1697]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

149

Apropos  of  the  privacy  of  the  king  and  his  intimate
domestic  affairs,  I  must  not  forget  one  circumstance.  Peo-
„  . .  pie  were  surprised  at  Fontainebleau,  where  the

at  Moret  ;  very  princess  had  hardly  arrived,  on  her  way  to

enigmatical.

Versailles,  before  she  was  taken  by  Mme.  de
Maintenon  to  an  obscure  little  convent  at  Moret,  in  which
there  was  nothing  to  interest  her,  nor  any  nuns  who  were
known  at  all.  She  returned  there  several  times  during  this
journey,  which  aroused  curiosity  and  rumours.  Mme.  de
Maintenon  often  went  there  from  Fontainebleau;  so  often
that  people  had  grown  accustomed  to  it.  In  this  convent
was  a  Moorish  nun,  unknown  to  every  one,  and  who  was
never  seen  by  visitors.  Bontems,  the  king’s  first  valet  de
chambre,  and  governor  of  Versailles,  to  whom  all  the

domestic  secrets  of  the  king  passed  at  all  times,  had

placed  her  in  this  convent  when  quite  young,  paying  a
dot,  which  was  never  mentioned,  together  with  a  large
annuity  every  year.  He  took  great  care  that  she  had  all
she  needed,  and  all  that  might  be  thought  abundance  for  a
nun  ;  and  everything  she  could  want  in  the  way  of  sweet¬
meats  was  sent  to  her.  The  late  queen  constantly  went  to
Fontainebleau,  and  took  much  pains  for  the  well-being  of
the  convent,  and  so  did  Mme.  de  Maintenon  after  her.
Heither  the  one  nor  the  other  took  any  direct  care  that

could  be  remarked  upon  of  the  Moorish  nun  ;  but  they

were  none  the  less  very  attentive  to  her.  They  did  not  see
her  every  time  they  went  to  the  convent,  but  they  did  so
quite  often,  and  they  paid  great  attention  to  her  health,  and
her  conduct,  and  that  of  the  superior  towards  her.  Mon¬
seigneur  went  sometimes,  and  his  sons  once  or  twice,  and
they  all  asked  to  see  the  Moorish  nun,  and  were  kind  to
her.  She  received  as  much  consideration  from  the  nuns  as
any  well-known  and  distinguished  person,  and  she  plumed

150

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

herself  much  on  the  care  that  was  taken  of  her,  and  the
mystery  that  was  made  of  her  life;  but  though  she  lived
in  the  convent  conformably,  it  was  easy  to  see  that  her
vocation  had  been  prompted.  Once,  it  escaped  her  to  say
heedlessly  on  hearing  Monseigneur  hunting  in  the  forest:
“  There ’s  my  brother  hunting.”  It  was  said  she  was  a
daughter  of  the  king  and  queen,  hidden  on  account  of  her
colour,  while  the  news  was  given  out  that  the  queen  had
had  a  miscarriage  ;  and  many  persons  about  the  Court  were
convinced  of  this.  However  that  may  be,  the  matter  has
always  remained  an  enigma.1

Galleran,  secretary  of  the  Abbé  de  Polignac  (envoy  to
Poland),  had  arrived  Thursday,  July  11  of  this  year,  very
early  at  Marly,  with  the  news  of  the  election

Election  of  the  J  J

Prince  de  Conti  as  of  M.  le  Prince  de  Conti 2  as  King  of  Poland.
Kmg  of  Poland,  jqng  pept  jq  secret  and  sent  for  Monsei¬

gneur  and  the  Prince  de  Conti.  During  the  promenade,  at
which  the  Prince  de  Conti  joined  the  king,  nothing  was  said
of  Poland  ;  the  king  returned  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apart¬
ment  and  sent  again  for  the  prince,  who  threw  himself  on
his  knees  before  him.  He  had  received  by  the  same  courier
a  letter  from  the  Abbé  de  Polignac  and  one  from  the  Abbé
de  Châteauneuf,  both  very  short,  to  the  address  of  his
Majesty  of  Poland.  The  king,  after  congratulating  the  prince
and  receiving  his  thanks,  wished  to  treat  him  as  King  of
Poland,  but  the  prince  entreated  him  to  wait  until  his  elec¬
tion  was  more  certain  and  beyond  all  fear  of  reversal,  in

1  It  is  singular  that  Saint-Simon  makes  no  mention  of  the  Man  in  the
Iron  Mask,  although  he  died  in  the  Bastille  in  1703,  and  his  identity  was
so  much  a  subject  of  comment  that  Louis  XIV.  himself  said:  “If  you
were  told  who  he  was  you  would  not  think  it  in  the  least  interesting.”  —  Tr.

2  François-Louis,  Prince  de  Conti,  brother  of  Louis-Armand,  Prince  de
Conti,  who  m.  the  daughter  of  the  king  and  Mlle,  de  laVallière,  and  d.  1685.
The  present  Prince  de  Conti  was  the  favourite  nephew  of  the  Great
Condé.

1697]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  151

order  that  no  embarrassment  should  be  created  in  case  of
a  revolution  in  favour  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony.  This
modesty,  which  really  came  of  his  own  desire  to  avoid  the
crown,  was  much  praised  ;  the  king  consented,  though  he
still  chose  to  make  the  news  public  at  once.  He  there¬
fore  left  the  chamber  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  entered
the  grand  cabinet,  where  there  were  many  ladies  having
the  privilege  of  entrance,  to  whom  the  king  said,  pointing
to  the  Prince  de  Conti:  “I  bring  you  a  king.”  Instantly
the  news  spread  everywhere;  the  Prince  de  Conti  was
smothered  in  compliments,  and  he  went  to  Saint-Germain
to  tell  it  to  the  King  and  Queen  of  England,  to  whom  the
king  despatched  it  by  the  Duc  de  la  Trémoille,  sending
him  also  to  Monsieur  at  Saint-Cloud.

On  the  30th  of  August  a  courier  arrived  with  further
news,  which  furnished  matter  for  resolutions  taken  that  day
and  the  next,  and  for  a  long  audience  given  by  the  king,
Sunday  morning,  September  1,  in  his  cabinet  at  Versailles
before  mass,  to  the  Prince  de  Conti,  who  came  out  with  tears
in  his  eyes  ;  and  it  was  known  immediately  after  that  he  was
going  to  Poland.  He  begged  the  king  not  to  treat  the  Prin¬
cesse  de  Conti  as  queen  until  he  could  send  him  the  news
of  his  coronation,  to  avoid  all  embarrassment  in  case  the
affair  fell  through  and  he  was  forced  to  return.  The  king
gave  him  two  millions  in  money,  and  four  hundred  thousand
francs  to  carry  with  him,  and  a  hundred  thousand  francs  for
his  outfit,  besides  all  the  remittances  to  be  made  in  Poland,
either  from  the  king  or  from  his  own  property,  which  Samuel
Bernard  was  charged  to  see  paid.  The  prince  passed  Mon¬
day  in  Paris,  and  started  Tuesday,  September  3,  for  Dun¬
kerque.  The  celebrated  admiral,  Jean  Bart,  promised  to  take
him  safely  in  spite  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  which  lay  off  that
port,  and  kept  his  word.

152  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  it.

Very  different  motives  were  visibly  at  work  in  this  great
separation.  The  king  was  delighted  to  find  himself  gloriously
rid  of  a  prince  to  whom  he  had  never  forgiven  his  journey  to
Hungary,  still  less  the  fame  of  his  deserts  and  the  applause
which  followed  him  even  to  Court  and  under  the  very  eyes
of  the  king,  and  was  not  repressed  by  the  desire  to  please
him  or  by  fear  of  his  indignation.  He  could  not  conceal  his
joy,  or  his  eagerness  to  see  the  Prince  de  Conti  removed
forever.  It  was  easy  to  distinguish  this  private  sentiment
from  the  feeble  satisfaction  of  having  a  prince  of  his  blood
at  the  head  of  a  nation  which  figured  little  among  those  of
the  North,  and  gave  no  chance  for  its  king  to  distinguish
himself.  Every  one  wanted  the  Prince  de  Conti  at  the  head
of  our  armies  ;  this  departure  released  the  king  from  the
importunity  of  that  desire  and  from  a  judgment  so  univer¬
sal  ;  it  released  also  his  best-beloved  son  from  so  mortifying
a  contrast,  and  delivered  the  king  himself  from  the  presence
of  the  only  member  of  his  family  the  purity  of  whose  blood
was  not  tarnished  by  admixture  with  bastardy  ;  and  one  too,
standing  alone,  whose  poverty  excited  murmurs,  to  say  the
least,  against  the  immense  establishments  of  those  who  were
born  in  illegal  obscurity,  and  those  others,  who,  being  of  the
blood  of  kings,  had  gained  their  wealth  through  their  mar¬
riages  with  natural  children.

Mme.  la  Princesse  de  Conti,  who  felt  the  weight  which  lay
upon  a  husband  whom  she  loved,  and  whose  fortunes  she
shared,  seemed  transported  with  joy  at  the  thought  of  reign¬
ing;  M.  le  Prince,  more  delighted  still  at  the  glory  of  a
crown  for  a  son-in-law  whom  he  respected  and  could  not
help  loving,  hid  beneath  that  covering  his  joy  at  the  peace
of  his  family.  M.  le  Duc  floated  between  the  fury  of  his
jealousy  of  so  superior  a  merit  thus  rewarded,  and  the  satis¬
faction  of  seeing  himself  relieved  from  the  daily  sense  of  the

1697]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  153

pricks  of  that  merit,  not  to  speak  of  others  still  more  irri¬
tating  to  a  husband  of  his  temper.  Who,  then,  was  to  be
pitied  ?  Mme.  la  Duchesse,  who  loved,  and  was  loved,  and
could  not  doubt  that  she  was  dearer  than  the  glory  of  a
crown.  But  she  had  to  take  part  in  a  glory  so  near  to
her,  —  in  the  joy  of  the  king,  and  in  that  of  her  family,  who
watched  her  at  every  moment,  and  saw  clear;  but  nothing
was  shown  that  offended  propriety.  Monseigneur  was  a  little
touched,  but  on  the  whole,  glad  of  other  people’s  pleasure  ;
his  apathy  was  not  much  stirred.  M.  du  Maine,  transported
to  the  bottom  of  his  soul  at  a  deliverance  so  great  and  so
little  hoped  for,  put  on  the  face  and  bearing  he  thought  most
proper,  and  the  public  remained  divided  between  the  grief
of  losing  its  delight  and  the  joy  of  seeing  him  crowned.
Monsieur  and  his  son  were  rather  glad.  Mme.  de  Mainte-
non  triumphed  in  her  retreat,  and  the  armies,  no  longer
hoping  to  see  him  at  their  head,  were  less  afflicted  at  the
fact  that  they  had  utterly  lost  him  than  that  they  could
take  no  part  in  the  royal  establishment  to  which  he  was
called.  As  for  himself,  sunk  in  the  deepest  grief,  at  an  end
of  all  his  obstacles,  difficulties,  and  delays,  it  must  be  owned
that  he  bore  very  ill  this  brilliant  choice,  and  that  he  did  not
conceal  either  his  desire  or  his  hope  that  in  the  end  it  might
still  be  reversed.

On  the  25  th  of  September  the  Prince  de  Conti  arrived  in
the  roadstead  of  Dantzig,  where  the  Abbé  de  Châteauneuf
awaited  him.  The  town  had  declared  for  the  Elector  of
Saxony,  and  gave  no  sort  of  welcome  to  the  Prince  de  Conti.
Few  Poles,  and  those  of  no  mark,  went  on  board  to  salute
him.  The  town  of  Dantzig  refused  provisions  to  our  frig¬
ates,  or  even  to  allow  them  to  remain  in  port.  The  Prince
de  Conti,  who  was  still  on  board  in  the  roadstead,  was
firmly  resolved  not  to  go  ashore  until  he  saw  troops  at  hand

154  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

and  ready  to  support  him.  But  instead  of  the  army,  which
did  not  take  a  single  step  towards  him,  he  found  only  greedy
Poles,  urging  him  to  fulfil  the  immense  promises  made  to
them  by  the  Abbé  de  Polignac.  The  desire  to  succeed  in
this  great  affair,  —  from  which  he  hoped  the  purple,  —  had
blinded  Polignac,  and  drawn  him  into  impossible  engage¬
ments,  so  that,  deceived  himself  in  the  first  place,  he  de¬
ceived  and  misled  the  king  and  the  Prince  de  Conti.
Neither  the  army  nor  anybody  of  nobility  made  the  slightest
movement  to  come  and  receive  the  prince;  and  this  was
more  than  enough  to  induce  the  return  of  a  candidate  far
more  eager  than  the  Prince  de  Conti,  who  was  forced  to
play  a  very  sad  and  humiliating  part  for  himself  and  for
Prance,  —  welcomed  by  none,  barked  at  by  all,  and  not
venturing  to  set  foot  in  an  enemy’s  town,  which  refused
him  provisions,  or  even  an  entrance  to  the  port  for  any  of
his  vessels.  He  sent  the  king  word  of  his  resolution  and
his  reasons,  and  on  the  6th  of  November  Jean  Bart  set
sail  to  return,  though  he  could  not  get  out  of  the  roadstead
before  the  8th,  capturing  on  his  way  five  of  the  Dantzig  ves¬
sels.  On  the  12th  of  December  the  prince  reached  Paris,
which  was  more  to  his  liking  than  being  king  in  Warsaw.
The  next  day  he  went  to  Versailles  to  make  his  bow  to  the
king,  who  received  him  wonderfully  well,  profoundly  vexed
as  he  was  at  seeing  him.

V.

The  czar  had  already  begun  his  travels.  He  has,  justly,
made  so  much  noise  in  the  world  that  I  shall  be  succinct
1698.  about  a  prince  so  great  and  so  well-known,  and

The  czar,  Peter  Qne  wpQ  wpp  n0  pe  g0  the  latest

the  Great,  and

his  travels.  posterity,  for  having  made  himself  alarming  to
all  Europe  and  mingled  necessarily  in  the  affairs  of  this
part  of  the  world,  with  a  Court  which  had  never  hitherto
been  a  Court,  and  a  nation  despised  and  utterly  disregarded
for  its  barbarism.  This  prince  had  gone  to  Holland  to  learn
for  himself  and  work  with  his  own  hands  at  the  building  of
ships.  Although  incognito,  pursuing  his  purpose,  and  not
allowing  his  rank  or  his  grandeur  to  hamper  him,  he  made
everything  yield  to  him,  but  after  his  own  fashion  and  as  he
chose.

He  was  inwardly  displeased  that  England  did  not  hasten
to  send  him  an  embassy  when  he  was  thus  in  her  close
neighbourhood,  and  all  the  more  because,  without  committing
himself,  he  was  very  desirous  of  allying  himself  with  her  for
commerce.  The  embassy  at  last  arrived.  At  first  he  post¬
poned  giving  it  audience  ;  finally,  he  named  a  day  and  hour,
but  the  place  was  on  board  of  a  large  Dutch  vessel  which  he
wished  to  examine.  There  were  two  ambassadors  and  they
thought  the  place  barbarous,  but  they  had  to  accept  it.
Matters  were  still  worse  when  they  got  on  board.  The  czar
sent  them  word  he  was  in  the  main-top,  and  it  was  there  he
would  receive  them.  The  ambassadors,  whose  sea-legs  were
not  sufficiently  steady  to  risk  the  shrouds,  excused  them-

156

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

selves  ;  tlie  czar  insisted,  and  the  ambassadors  were  much
disturbed  by  so  strange  and  obstinate  a  proposal.  At  last,
after  a  few  rough  answers  to  their  next  messages,  they  felt
they  must  needs  attempt  the  horrid  ladder,  and  up  they  went.
In  that  narrow  space  and  swinging  in  mid-air,  the  czar  re¬
ceived  them  with  as  much  majesty  as  if  he  were  sitting  on
his  throne.  He  listened  to  their  harangue  and  answered
obligingly  to  the  king  and  the  nation  ;  then  he  joked  at  the
fear  he  saw  depicted  on  the  ambassadors’  faces,  and  laugh¬
ingly  let  them  feel  it  was  a  punishment  for  having  come  to
him  too  late.

King  William,  on  his  side,  had  by  this  time  understood
the  great  qualities  of  the  czar,  and  now  did  all  he  could  to
stand  well  with  him.  So  much  went  on  between  them  that
the  czar,  curious  to  see  and  learn  everything,  went  over  to
England,  still  incognito,  but  after  his  own  fashion.  He  was
received  as  a  monarch  whom  it  was  desirable  to  placate,  and
after  fully  satisfying  his  objects  he  returned  to  Holland.  He
designed  to  go  to  Venice  and  Rome  and  all  through  Italy,
and,  above  all,  to  see  the  king  and  France.  He  caused  the
king  to  he  sounded  about  it,  and  was  much  mortified  because
the  king  politely  declined  his  visit,  not  wishing  to  have  the
trouble  of  it.  Soon  after,  losing  all  hope  of  this,  he  resolved
to  travel  in  Germany  and  to  go  to  Vienna.  The  emperor
received  him  at  the  Favorita.  At  the  end  of  three  weeks  the
czar  was  warned  of  a  great  conspiracy  in  Moscow,  and  started
hastily  for  that  city.  Passing  through  Poland  he  saw  the
king,  and  it  was  then  that  the  first  foundations  of  their  friend¬
ship  and  alliance  were  laid.  Peaching  home,  he  found  the
conspiracy  wide-spread,  and  his  own  sister  at  the  head  of  it.
He  had  always  loved  her  and  treated  her  well,  hut  had  never
married  her.  The  nation  at  large  was  incensed  at  finding  he
had  cut  his  heard,  shortened  the  tails  of  his  long  coat,

1698]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

157

dropped  quite  a  number  of  Ms  barbarous  customs,  and  now
took  foreigners  into  his  confidence  and  put  them  in  high
places  ;  all  this  led  to  a  great  conspiracy,  which  was  about  to
break  forth  into  revolution.  He  pardoned  his  sister,  whom
he  put  in  prison,  and  he  hanged  to  the  bars  of  her  window
the  guilty  leaders,  as  many  each  day  as  could  hang  there.

The  king,  being  henceforth  fully  at  peace,  desired  to
astonish  Europe  by  a  show  of  his  power,  which  she  had
The  Camp  at  reason  to  suppose  exhausted  by  a  war  so  long
mined  and  an-  and  so  general,  and  at  the  same  time  to  give,
nounced.  more  especially  for  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  a

superb  spectacle  in  the  name  of  Mgr.  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne.
It  was  under  the  pretext  of  letting  the  duke  see  an  image  of
war,  and  of  giving  him  a  first  lesson  in  it,  so  far  as  times  of
peace  permitted,  that  he  announced  a  camp  at  Compiègne,  to
be  commanded  by  Maréchal  de  Boufflers  under  the  young
prince.  The  troops,  of  whom  a  vast  number  were  to  compose
it,  were  named  and  the  general  officers  selected.  The  king
also  fixed  the  time  when  he  expected  to  go  to  Compiègne
himself  ;  and  he  made  it  understood  that  he  should  be
pleased  if  a  very  large  court  attended  him.

Nothing  was  talked  of  but  Compiègne,  where  sixty  thou¬
sand  men  were  brought  into  camp.  The  same  thing  hap-
camp  at  Com-  pened  in  this  matter  as  at  the  marriage  of  the
piègne  superb.  J)uc  (Je  Bourgogne.  The  king  intimated  that
he  expected  the  troops  to  be  splendid  and  that  each  man
should  show  emulation.  That  was  enough  to  excite  an
emulation  of  which,  afterwards,  they  had  every  reason  to
repent.  Not  only  was  there  never  anything  so  perfectly
splendid  as  the  troops,  —  to  such  a  point,  indeed,  that  it  was
impossible  to  give  the  palm  to  any  of  the  corps,  —  but  their
commanders  added  to  the  majestic  and  warlike  beauty  of  the
men  the  splendour  of  arms,  horses,  trappings  and  court  mag-

158

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [cha?.  v.

nificence;  while  the  rest  of  the  officers  exhausted  their
means  on  uniforms  that  were  fit  to  adorn  a  fête.

The  colonels,  and  many  of  the  simple  captains,  kept
abundant  and  delicate  tables  ;  six  lieutenant-generals,  and
unheard  of  mag-  fourteen  brigadier-generals  distinguished  them-
mfioence  °f  the  sc}ves  }jy  vast  display  ;  but  Maréchal  de
Boufflers.  Boufflers  astonished  all  by  his  lavishness,  and

by  the  surprising  order  of  his  profusion,  with  its  choiceness,
its  magnificence,  and  its  courtesy,  throughout  the  whole
period  of  the  camp  and  at  all  hours  of  the  day  and  night,
teaching  even  the  king  himself  what  it  was  to  give  a  really
superb  and  magnificent  fête,  and  M.  le  Prince,  whose  art  and
taste  were  thought  to  surpass  those  of  everybody  else,  what
elegance,  novelty,  and  exquisite  choiceness  really  were.
Never  was  there  a  spectacle  so  brilliant,  so  dazzling,  and
it  must  be  said,  so  alarming,  while,  at  the  same  time
nothing  was  more  composed  than  the  maréchal  and  his  sur¬
roundings  amid  this  universal  hospitality,  nothing  more
silent  than  all  the  preparations,  more  easy  than  this  pro¬
digious  splendour,  nothing  so  simple,  modest,  and  free  of
all  care  as  the  great  general  who  had  ordered  all  and  was
ordering  it  unceasingly,  although  he  seemed  to  be  occupied
only  by  the  duty  of  commanding  the  army.  Tables  without
number,  freshly  replenished  and  served  at  all  moments  as
officers,  courtiers,  or  spectators,  even  the  most  unknown
idlers,  came  to  them  ;  all  were  received,  invited,  and  as  if
captured  by  the  attention,  civility,  and  promptitude  of  the
multitude  of  officials.  All  sorts  of  hot  and  cold  liquors
were  also  served,  everything,  in  short,  that  could  be  most
splendidly  included  in  that  class  of  refreshment  ;  French
wines,  foreign  wines,  the  choicest  liqueurs  were  lavished  in
profusion  ;  and  measures  were  so  carefully  taken  that  an
abundance  of  game  and  venison  arrived  from  all  directions  ;

1698]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

159

and  the  seas  of  Normandy,  Holland,  England,  Brittany,  and
even  the  Mediterranean  furnished  whatever  they  had  that
was  rarest  and  most  costly  day  after  day  at  the  right
moment,  with  inimitable  order,  and  by  means  of  couriers
and  small  post-chaises.  Even  the  water,  which  it  was
feared  might  be  exhausted  or  made  turbid  by  so  many
mouths,  was  brought  from  Sainte-Reine,  from  the  Seine,  and
other  esteemed  sources.  It  is  not  possible  to  imagine  any¬
thing  of  any  kind  that  was  not  there  to  hand,  and  for  the
poorest  comer  as  for  the  most  important  and  well  attended
guest.  Wooden  houses  furnished  like  the  most  superb
Parisian  houses,  all  being  new  and  made  expressly  for  the
purpose  with  taste  and  charming  gallantry;  immense  and
magnificent  tents,  the  number  of  which  alone  formed  a
camp  in  themselves  ;  kitchens,  offices,  and  the  innumerable
officials  required  for  this  uninterrupted  service  of  the
tables,  the  butlers,  the  cellars,  —  all  these  things  formed  a
spectacle  the  order,  silence,  punctuality,  rapidity,  and  per¬
fect  cleanliness  of  which  filled  every  one  with  surprise  and
admiration.

This  trip  was  the  first  in  which  the  ladies  yielded  their
usual  fastidious  demands  in  a  way  that  no  one  would  have
ventured  to  propose  to  them  ;  but  there  were  so  many
who  wanted  to  be  of  the  party  that  the  king  relaxed  his
hand  and  allowed  all  who  wished  to  go  to  Compiègne  to  do
so.  The  court  of  men  was  very  numerous,  so  much  so
that  for  the  first  time  the  dukes  were  billeted  in  couples.
I  was  put  with  the  Duc  de  Rohan  in  a  fine  large  house  be¬
longing  to  the  Sieur  Chambaudon,  where  we  and  our  ser¬
vants  were  much  at  our  ease.

All  the  ambassadors  were  invited  to  go  to  Compiègne.
Old  Ferreiro,  from  Savoie,  put  it  into  their  heads  to  insist
upon  the  for.  He  assured  them  that  he  had  always  had  it

160

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

during  his  first  embassy  to  Paris.  The  ambassador  from
Portugal  declared  that  Monsieur,  on  taking  him  to  Mon-
targis,  had  made  his  stewards  give  it  to  him  ;

Ambassadors  _  _  °

insisting  on  which,  said  he,  was  only  done  to  follow  the
king’s  example  ;  whereupon  the  nuncio  main¬
tained  that  the  Nuncio  Cavallerini  had  had  it  before  being
made  a  cardinal.  Pomponne,  Torcy,  the  introducers  of
ambassadors,  and  Cavoye  all  protested  that  it  could  not  he
so,  that  no  ambassador  had  ever  claimed  it,  and  there  was
not  one  word  about  it  on  the  records.  The  fact  was  the
ambassadors  felt  that  the  king  wanted  to  spread  the  mag¬
nificence  of  this  camp  before  their  eyes  and  they  thought
they  could  profit  by  this  desire  to  obtain  a  new  privilege.
The  king,  however,  held  firm  ;  the  negotiations  to  and  fro
were  kept  up  to  the  very  day  of  the  trip,  and  the  ambas¬
sadors  ended  by  not  going  at  all.  The  king  was  so  annoyed
that  I  heard  him  —  he,  so  moderate  and  so  close-mouthed
—  say  at  supper  at  Compiègne  that  if  he  did  right  he  should
deprive  them  of  coming  to  Court  except  for  an  audience,  as
was  done  in  other  countries.

The  for  [le  pour ]  is  a  distinction  of  which  I  do  not  know
the  origin,  and  it  is  in  fact  mere  nonsense  ;  it  consists  in
writing  with  a  piece  of  chalk  on  the  doors  of  the  apartments
“ for  M.  such  a  one”  instead  of  writing  “M.  such  a  one.”
The  stewards  of  the  king’s  houses  mark  in  that  manner  the
lodgings  assigned  on  these  trips  for  the  princes  of  the
blood,  cardinals,  and  foreign  princes.  M.  de  la  Trémoille
also  obtained  it,  and  the  Duchesse  de  Bracciano,  afterwards
Princesse  des  Ursins.  What  makes  me  call  this  distinction
silly  is  that  it  carries  with  it  neither  preference  nor  preced¬
ence  ;  cardinals,  foreign  princes,  and  dukes  being  lodged  pre¬
cisely  alike  without  any  distinction  whatever  ;  the  whole
matter  is  in  the  word  for,  which  operates  in  no  way  at  all.

1698]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

161

Thursday,  August  28,  the  Court  started  for  Compiègne;
the  king  passed  through  Saint-Cloud,  slept  at  Chantilly,
stayed  there  one  day,  and  arrived  at  Compiègne  on  the  Satur¬
day.  Headquarters  were  in  the  village  of  Condun,  where
the  Maréchal  de  Boufflers  had  houses  as  well  as  tents.  The
king  brought  with  him  Mgr.  le  Duc  and  Mme.  la  Duchesse
de  Bourgogne,  etc.  ;  they  were  given  a  magnificent  collation
at  the  maréchal’s  quarters,  and  then  saw  all  the  arrangements
I  have  mentioned  above,  which  so  surprised  them  that  on  his
arrival  at  Compiègne  the  king  told  Livry,  who  by  his  order
had  prepared  the  camp  tables  of  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  that
the  young  prince  must  not  keep  them,  for  do  what  he  would
they  could  not  compare  with  what  he  had  just  seen,  and  that
whenever  his  grandson  went  to  the  camp  he  was  to  dine  with
the  maréchal.

The  king  amused  himself  greatly  in  seeing  and  in  showing
to  the  ladies  the  troops,  their  arrival,  their  camping,  their
distribution,  in  a  word,  all  the  details  of  a  camp,  detachments,
marches,  foragings,  exercises,  sham  fights  and  convoys.  The
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  the  princesses,  and  Monseigneur
often  took  collation  with  the  maréchal,  where  Mme.  de
Boufflers  did  the  honours.  Monseigneur  dined  there  some¬
times  and  the  king  took  the  King  of  England,  who  spent
three  or  four  days  at  the  camp,  to  dinner  with  the  maréchal.
It  was  many  a  long  year  since  the  king  had  done  that
honour  to  any  one,  and  the  singularity  of  entertaining  two
kings  together  was  great.  Monseigneur  and  the  three  prin¬
cesses  dined  there  also,  and  ten  or  a  dozen  of  the  principal
men  of  the  Court  and  army.  The  king  urged  the  maréchal
strongly  to  sit  at  table,  hut  he  would  not  do  so  ;  he  served  the
king  and  the  English  king  himself,  and  his  father-in-law,  the
Duc  de  Grammont,  served  Monseigneur.  On  their  way  they
had  inspected  the  troops  in  camp,  and  on  returning  they

VOL.  I.  —  11

162

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

witnessed  the  exercising  of  the  whole  infantry  in  parallel  lines
facing  each  other.  The  previous  evening  the  king  had  taken
the  King  of  England  to  a  review  of  the  army.  The  Duchesse
de  Bourgogne  saw  it  from  her  carriage.  She  had  with  her
Mme.  la  Duchesse,  Mme.  la  Princesse  de  Conti,  and  other
titled  ladies.  Two  of  her  carriages  followed,  filled  with  her
own  ladies.

An  amusing  adventure  happened  at  this  review  to  the
Comte  de  Tessé,  colonel-general  of  the  dragoons.  M.  de
Malicious  trick  of  Lauzun  had  asked  him,  two  days  earlier,  with
m.  de  Lauzun.  that  gentle  air  of  kindness  and  simplicity  he
was  always  assuming,  whether  he  had  thought  of  all  he  needed
to  salute  the  king  at  the  head  of  the  dragoons  ;  on  which  the
count  gave  him  a  description  of  the  horse  and  trappings
and  the  clothes  with  which  he  meant  to  appear.  After
praising  them  all,  “  But  the  hat,”  said  Lauzun,  kindly,  “  I  did
not  hear  you  mention  the  hat.”  “  Why,  no,”  said  the  other,
“  I  expect  to  wear  a  cap.”  “  A  cap  !  ”  cried  Lauzun  ;  “  what
are  you  thinking  of  ?  A  cap  !  That  may  do  for  others,  hut
the  colonel-general  in  a  cap  !  Monsieur  le  comte,  you  must
he  dreaming.”  “  What  then  ?  ”  said  Tessé  ;  “  what  ought  I
to  wear  ?  ”  Lauzun  held  back,  and  made  him  beg  a  long
time,  making  him  believe  he  knew  more  than  he  was  willing
to  say  ;  but  at  last,  won  by  entreaty,  he  said  he  could
not  let  him  commit  such  a  blunder,  especially  as  the  office
had  been  created  for  himself  and  he  knew  well  all  the
points  of  etiquette,  one  of  which  was  that  when  the  king
reviewed  the  dragoons  the  colonel-general  should  wear  a  gray
hat.  Tessé,  much  surprised,  admitted  his  ignorance  and,
frightened  at  the  blunder  he  might  have  committed  without
this  timely  warning,  exhausted  himself  in  thanks  and  then
rushed  home  to  send  a  messenger  to  Paris  to  fetch  him  a  gray
hat.  On  the  morning  of  the  review  I  was  at  the  king’s  lever

1698]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

163

and  I  noticed  that,  contrary  to  his  usual  custom,  M.  de
Lauzun  remained,  although,  having  the  grandes  entrées ,  he
always  withdrew  when  the  courtiers  came  in.  Presently  I
saw  Tessé  with  a  gray  hat,  a  black  feather,  and  a  big  cockade,
puffing  and  pluming  himself  on  his  appearance.  It  seemed
to  me  extraordinary,  and  the  colour  of  the  hat,  to  which  the
king  had  so  great  aversion  that  no  one  had  worn  it  for  several
years  past,  struck  me  and  made  me  look  at  him  attentively  ;
for  he  was  almost  opposite  to  where  I  stood,  with  M.  de
Lauzun  quite  near  but  a  trifle  behind  him.  The  king,  after
putting  on  his  shoes  and  stockings  and  speaking  to  some  one,
noticed  the  hat.  In  his  first  surprise  he  asked  Tessé  where
he  had  got  it.  Tessé,  with  an  air  of  satisfaction,  replied  that
he  had  sent  to  Paris  for  it.  “What  for?”  said  the  king.
“  Sire,”  replied  the  other,  “  because  your  Majesty  does  us  the
honour  to  review  us  to-day.”  “  Well,”  said  the  king,  more
and  more  surprised,  “what  has  that  to  do  with  a  gray
hat  ?  ”  “  Sire,”  said  Tessé,  beginning  to  be  embarrassed  by  this

questioning,  “it  is  the  privilege  of  the  colonel-general  of
dragoons  to  wear  on  that  occasion  a  gray  hat.”  “  A  gray
hat  !  ”  exclaimed  the  king  ;  “  where  the  devil  did  you  get  that
idea  ?  ”  “  From  M.  de  Lauzun,  sire,  for  whom  you  created

the  office  ;  he  told  me.”  On  which  the  worthy  duke  burst
out  laughing  and  disappeared.  “  Lauzun  was  making  fun  of
you,”  said  the  king,  rather  sharply.  “  Take  my  advice,  and
send  that  hat  to  the  prior-general  of  the  Prémontrés.”  Never
did  I  see  any  man  more  confounded  than  Tessé.  He  stood
with  his  eyes  dropped,  gazing  at  that  hat  with  a  sadness  and
shame  that  made  the  scene  perfect.  None  of  the  spectators
restrained  their  laughter,  but  the  whole  Court  told  him  what
they  thought,  and  asked  him  why  he  did  not  know  M.  de
Lauzun,  who  was  laughing  at  him,  better  than  that.  Tessé
did  not  dare  to  be  angry  ;  and  the  whole  thing,  though  rather

164  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

strong,  remained  a  joke,  about  which  Tessé  was  long  teased
and  much  ashamed.

Nearly  every  day  the  sons  of  France  dined  with  Maréchal
de  Boufflers  ;  sometimes  also  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bour¬
gogne,  the  princesses,  and  the  ladies,  but  they  went  more
frequently  to  collation.  The  beauty  and  the  profusion  of  the
silver  services,  sufficient  to  serve  everything  and  all  marked
with  the  arms  of  the  maréchal,  were  immense  and  incompar¬
able.  And  what  was  not  less  remarkable  was  the  punctuality
of  the  hours  and  the  moments  of  all  service  everywhere.
Nothing  was  waited  for,  nothing  lagged,  as  little  for  the
hangers-on  of  the  people  and  even  the  lacqueys  as  for  the
greatest  lords  ;  all  was  there  at  all  hours  and  for  all  comers.
For  ten  miles  around  Compiègne  the  villages  and  the  farm¬
houses  were  filled  with  people,  French  and  foreign,  till  they
could  hold  no  more,  and  yet  things  all  went  on  without
disorder.  The  gentlemen  and  valets  de  chambre  of  the  maré-
chal’s  household  were  a  world  in  themselves  ;  all  courteous
and  most  attentive  to  their  functions,  retaining  those  who
came  and  serving  them  with  what  they  needed  from  five  in
the  morning  till  ten  or  eleven  at  night,  without  stint  or
measure,  and  doing  the  honours,  together  with  a  great  con¬
course  of  liveried  pages.  I  repeat  all  this  in  spite  of  myself,
because  whoever  saw  it  can  never  forget  it,  or  cease  from
admiration  and  astonishment  at  the  abundance,  the  sumptu¬
ousness,  and  the  order  which  never  failed  for  a  single  instant,
nor  at  a  single  point.

The  king  desired  to  present  an  image  of  all  that  is  done  in
war,  and  a  regular  siege  was  therefore  laid  to  Compiègne,  with
all  due  forms  though  much  abridged,  —  lines,  trenches,  batter¬
ies,  mines,  etc.  Crenan  defended  the  place.  An  ancient
rampart  ran  round  the  chateau  on  the  side  toward  the  open
country  ;  the  top  of  it  was  on  a  level  with  the  king’s  apart-

1098]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

165

ment  and  it  overlooked  the  whole  slope.  At  its  foot  was  an
old  wall,  and  just  beyond  the  king’s  apartment  was  a  wind¬
mill  on  the  rampart  which  had  neither  buttress  nor  breastwork
before  it.  Saturday,  September  1 3,  was  the  day  appointed  for
the  assault.  The  king,  followed  by  all  the  ladies,  and  in  the
finest  weather  ever  known,  went  to  this  rampart,  where  were
flocks  of  courtiers  and  all  the  foreigners  of  distinction.  From
there  the  whole  plain  and  the  disposition  of  all  the  troops
could  be  seen.  It  was  the  finest  coup-d’ceil  imaginable,  that
splendid  army  and  the  crowds  of  spectators  on  horse  and  foot,
at  a  proper  distance  from  the  troops  in  order  not  to  embarrass
them  ;  together  with  the  play  of  the  attacking  force  and  the
uncovering  of  the  defenders,  —  because,  there  being  nothing
serious  but  the  show,  no  precautions  had  to  be  taken  by  either
side  except  as  to  the  precision  of  their  movements.  But  a
spectacle  of  another  sort  which  forty  years  hence  I  could
describe  as  I  do  to-day,  so  forcibly  did  it  strike  me,  was  that
which  the  king  gave  on  the  top  of  that  rampart  to  his  whole
army  and  to  the  innumerable  crowd  of  assistants  of  all
conditions,  whether  on  the  plain  or  on  the  rampart  itself.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  sat  facing  the  plain  and  the  troops  in
a  sedan  chair,  behind  its  three  windows  ;  her  porters  were
singular  dismissed.  On  the  front  pole  of  the  chair  to  the
spectacle.  left,  sat  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  ;  behind
her  on  the  same  side,  in  a  sort  of  semicircle,  stood  Mme.  la
Duchesse,  Mme.  la  Princesse  de  Conti,  and  all  the  other
ladies,  and  behind  them  again  the  courtiers.  Beside  the
right-hand  window  of  the  sedan  chair  stood  the  king,  and  a
little  behind,  also  in  a  semicircle,  were  the  most  distinguished
of  the  men.  The  king’s  head  was  uncovered  nearly  the  whole
time,  and  at  every  instant  he  lowered  it  to  the  window  to
speak  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  to  explain  to  her  what  she  was
seemg  and  the  reasons  for  every  manœuvre.  Each  time  that

166  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

he  did  so  she  politely  lowered  the  glass  four  or  five  inches,
never  half  way,  as  I  particularly  noticed  ;  for  I  confess  I  was
more  attentive  to  this  spectacle  than  to  that  of  the  troops.
Sometimes  she  opened  it  herself  to  ask  questions  of  the  king,
hut  it  was  nearly  always  he  who,  without  waiting  for  her  to
address  him,  bent  down  low  to  give  her  information  ;  and  at
times  when  she  did  not  notice  him  he  rapped  upon  the  win¬
dow  to  make  her  open  it.  He  spoke  only  to  her,  except  to
give  orders  in  a  few  words  and  very  seldom,  and  to  answer
briefly  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  who  tried  to  make
him  talk  to  her,  and  to  whom  Mme.  de  Maintenon  spoke
from  time  to  time,  but  without  opening  her  front  window,
through  which  the  young  princess  screamed  back  a  few  words
in  reply.  I  examined  closely  the  faces  of  those  present  ;
they  all  showed  a  stealthy,  timid,  and  ashamed  surprise  ;  and
all  those  who  were  behind  the  chair  and  the  semicircles
watched  this  scene  far  more  than  they  did  the  army,  and
all  with  an  air  of  respectful  fear  and  embarrassment.  Often
the  king  laid  his  hat  on  the  top  of  the  chair  in  order  to
speak  within  it  ;  and  this  continual  bending  must  have  tired
his  loins  greatly.  Monseigneur  was  on  horseback  on  the
plain,  together  with  his  younger  sons,  and  Mgr.  le  Duc  de
Bourgogne  was  with  the  Maréchal  de  Boufflers,  who  per¬
formed  the  functions  of  general  in  command.  It  was  five  in
the  afternoon,  and  the  weather  the  finest  that  heart  could
wish.

Directly  in  front  of  the  sedan-chair  was  a  steep  pathway
not  visible  from  above,  with  an  opening  made  in  the  old
wall  at  the  bottom  to  allow  a  messenger  to  go  up  from  be¬
low  and  take  the  king’s  orders  if  necessary.  The  case
occurred.  Crenan  sent  Canillac,  colonel  of  the  Rouergue,
one  of  the  regiments  defending  the  place,  to  take  the  king’s
orders  on  some  point  of  which  I  am  ignorant.  Canillac

1698]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  167

began  to  ascend,  and  rose  to  about  the  height  of  his  shoul¬
ders  —  I  can  see  him  now  as  distinctly  as  I  saw  him  then.
By  degrees  as  his  head  rose  he  beheld  the  sedan-chair,  the
king,  and  all  the  assistants,  which  he  had  not  before  seen,
his  post  being  at  the  foot  of  the  rampart,  from  which  he
could  see  nothing  above  him.  The  spectacle  struck  him
with  such  amazement  that  he  stopped  short,  with  his  mouth
open  and  his  eyes  staring,  while  the  utmost  astonishment
was  depicted  on  his  face.  There  was  no  person  present  but
who  noticed  it.  The  king  saw  it  so  plainly  that  he  said,
with  some  emotion,  “  Come,  Canillac,  come  up  !  ”  Canillac
remained  stock  still,  and  the  king  said  again,  “  Come  up  ;
what  is  the  matter  ?  ”  Canillac  then  came  up  and  ap¬
proached  the  king,  but  with  slow  steps,  trembling,  turning
his  eyes  to  right  and  left  with  a  bewildered  air.  I  was
standing  within  three  feet  of  the  king  ;  Canillac  passed  in
front  of  me  and  stammered  something  in  a  low  tone.  “  What
is  that  you  say  ?  Speak  out  !  ”  said  the  king.  Canillac  could
not  recover  himself,  and  got  out  only  what  he  could.  The
king,  who  did  not  fully  understand  the  matter,  but  saw  that
he  could  get  no  better  out  of  him,  answered  shortly,  adding
with  a  displeased  air,  “  Go,  sir.”  Canillac  did  not  wait  to
be  told  twice,  but  regained  his  pathway  and  disappeared.
Hardly  had  he  done  so,  when  the  king,  looking  about  him,
said,  “  I  don’t  know  what  is  the  matter  with  Canillac,  but  he
has  lost  his  wits  and  forgot  what  he  had  to  say  to  me.”  No
one  answered.

Just  before  the  capitulation  Mme.  de  Maintenon  ap¬
parently  asked  permission  to  retire,  for  the  king  called  out  :
“  The  porters  of  madame  !  ”  They  came  and  carried  her
away  ;  and  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  the  king
withdrew,  followed  by  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  and
nearly  all  the  others  on  the  rampart.  Many  persons  spoke

168  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

to  one  another  with  eyes  and  elbows  as  they  retired,  and
afterwards  in  low  whispers  ;  none  could  recover  from  the
sight  they  had  seen.  The  same  effect  was  produced  among
those  on  the  plain.  Even  the  soldiers  asked  the  meaning
of  that  chair  to  which  the  king  was  stooping  continually,
and  it  was  necessary  to  gently  hush  up  the  officers  and  stop
the  questions  of  the  troops.  We  can  imagine  what  the
foreigners  said,  and  the  effect  produced  upon  them  by  such
a  spectacle.  It  made  a  noise  throughout  all  Europe,  and
was  as  much  talked  of  as  the  camp  at  Compiègne  itself,
with  its  pomp  and  its  amazing  splendour.  In  other  respects
Mme.  de  Maintenon  showed  herself  very  little  at  the  camp,
and  always  in  a  carriage  with  three  or  four  of  her  intimates  ;
she  went  to  see  the  Maréchal  de  Boufflers  and  the  marvels
of  his  prodigious  magnificence  once  or  twice.

The  last  act  of  this  great  scene  was  the  representation  of
a  battle  between  the  first  and  second  entire  lines,  one  against
the  other.  M.  Bose,  the  first  of  the  lieutenant-generals  of
the  camp,  commanded  on  this  occasion  against  the  Maréchal
de  Boufflers,  with  whom  was  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  as
general.  The  king,  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  the
princes,  the  ladies,  the  whole  Court,  and  a  multitude  of
curious  spectators  were  present  at  the  spectacle  ;  the  king
and  all  the  men  on  horseback,  the  ladies  in  carriages.  The
execution  was  perfect  in  all  its  parts  and  lasted  a  long
time.  But  when  it  became  the  duty  of  the  second  line  to
give  way  and  beat  a  retreat,  Bose  could  not  bring  himself  to
do  so,  which  greatly  prolonged  the  action.  M.  de  Boufflers
sent  him  several  messages  in  the  name  of  the  Duc  de  Bour¬
gogne,  telling  him  that  the  time  had  come.  Bose  flew  into
a  passion  and  would  not  obey.  The  king,  who  had  planned
it  all  and  saw  the  going  and  coming  of  the  aide-de-camps,
and  the  long  delay,  laughed  heartily  and  said,  “  Bose  does

1698]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

169

not  like  to  play  the  beaten  role.”  Finally  he  sent  him
word  himself  to  end  the  thing  and  retreat.  Eose  obeyed,  but
very  unwillingly,  and  was  even  rough  to  the  messenger.
This  made  conversation  on  the  return  and  for  all  that
evening.

At  last,  after  attacks  on  the  intrenchments,  and  all  sorts  of
representations  of  what  is  done  in  war,  and  after  a  multitude
of  reviews,  the  king  left  Compiègne  on  Monday,  the  22nd  of
September,  and  went  with  the  same  carriage-full  to  Chantilly
where  he  spent  Tuesday,  arriving  on  Wednesday  at  Ver¬
sailles,  with  as  much  rejoicing  on  the  part  of  the  ladies  as
they  had  shown  of  eagerness  to  be  of  the  trip.  They  did
not  eat  with  the  king  at  Compiègne,  and  they  saw  as  little  of
Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  as  at  Versailles.  But  they
were  forced  to  go  to  the  camp  every  day,  and  the  fatigue  of
it  was  greater  than  the  pleasure,  and  far  greater  than  the  dis¬
tinction  they  had  looked  for.  The  king,  extremely  pleased
with  the  beauty  of  his  troops,  who  were  all  in  full  dress  and
wearing  every  ornament  their  leaders  could  devise,  gave,  on
leaving,  a  present  of  six  hundred  francs  to  every  captain  of
cavalry  and  dragoons,  and  three  hundred  francs  to  every  cap¬
tain  of  infantry  ;  he  gave  the  same  to  the  majors  of  all  regi¬
ments,  and  distributed  certain  gifts  among  the  household.
To  Maréchal  de  Boufflers  he  sent  a  present  of  one  hundred
thousand  francs.  In  the  aggregate  this  cost  him  a  great
deal,  but  to  each  person  it  was  merely  a  drop  in  the  bucket.
There  was  not  a  single  regiment  but  what  was  ruined  for
many  years,  corps  and  officers  ;  and  as  for  the  Maréchal  de
Boufflers,  I  leave  it  to  be  imagined  how  far  one  hundred
thousand  francs  could  go  toward  the  inconceivable  magnifi¬
cence  with  which  he  had  terrified  all  Europe,  through  the
tales  that  were  told  abroad  by  the  foreigners  who  witnessed
it,  and  who  could  scarcely,  day  by  day,  believe  their  eyes.

170  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

The  affair  of  M.  de  Cambrai  was  reaching  its  close  and
making  more  noise  than  ever.  The  prelate  was  daily  issuing
1699  some  new  work  to  elucidate  and  support  his
condemnation  at  «  Maxims  of  the  Saints  ”  into  which  he  put  all

Rome  of  the  book  .  ,

of  the  Archbishop  imaginable  ability.  His  three  antagonists  each
of  cambrai.  replied  separately;  bitterness  came  to  the  sur¬
face  on  both  sides,  and  with  the  exception  of  M.  de  Paris,
who  controlled  himself  with  great  moderation,  M.  de  Cambrai
and  MM.  de  Meaux  and  de  Chartres  treated  each  other  very
ill.  The  king  was  urgent  for  the  judgment  of  Rome;  he
thought  to  hasten  the  affair  by  giving  M.  de  Cambrai’s
lodging  at  Versailles  to  Mme.  de  Lévi,  and  by  forbidding
the  prelate  to  retain  the  character  of  preceptor  of  the  sons
of  France  (the  salary  for  which  he  had  already  taken  from
him),  and  made  this  last  act  known  to  the  pope  and  to  the
congregation  appointed  to  judge  of  the  book.  The  pope
pronounced  the  condemnation,  which  was  drawn  up  in  the
form  of  a  declaration,  in  which  the  Court  of  Rome,  sure  of
the  king’s  impatience  to  receive  it,  inserted  terms  of  assump¬
tion  which  France  does  not  admit.  The  nuncio,  who  re¬
ceived  it  by  courier,  carried  it  instantly  to  the  king,  who
publicly  evinced  his  joy.  The  nuncio  spoke  to  the  king  be¬
tween  his  lever  and  mass.  This  was  Sunday,  March  22.

When  the  king  returned  from  mass  he  found  M.  de  Beau-
villiers  in  his  cabinet,  ready  for  the  council  which  was  then
to  be  held.  As  soon  as  he  saw  him  he  went  up  to  him
and  said:  “Well,  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  what  will  you  say
now  ?  Here  is  M.  de  Cambrai  condemned  in  full  form.”
“  Sire,”  replied  the  duke,  in  a  respectful  but  firm  tone,  “  I
have  been  the  intimate  friend  of  M.  de  Cambrai,  and  I
shall  be  so  always  ;  but  if  he  does  not  submit  himself
to  the  pope  I  shall  hold  no  further  intercourse  with  him.”
The  king  was  silent,  and  the  spectators  were  full  of  ad-

1699]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

171

miration,  on  the  one  hand  for  so  firm  a  generosity,  on  the
other  for  so  clear  a  declaration,  the  submission  of  which,  how¬
ever,  was  only  toward  the  Church.  Rome,  as  if  to  do  worse
still,  showed  by  the  sentence  itself  that  it  was  given  more  for
the  king  than  to  weigh  upon  M.  de  Cambrai.  Twenty- three
propositions  in  the  “  Maxims  of  the  Saints,”  were  qualified  as
bold,  dangerous,  erroneous,  but  in  globo  ;  and  the  pope  excom¬
municated  all  persons  who  should  read  the  book,  or  keep  it
in  their  houses.  M.  de  Cambrai  learned  his  fate  almost  at
the  same  time,  and  at  a  moment  which  would  surely  have
overwhelmed  one  who  had  less  resources  within  himself.  He
was  about  to  enter  the  pulpit  ;  he  did  not  allow  himself  to
be  disturbed  ;  he  laid  aside  the  sermon  he  had  prepared,  and
without  delaying  for  a  moment  to  preach,  he  took  for  his
theme  the  submission  due  to  the  Church  ;  he  treated  the
subject  in  a  strong  and  touching  manner,  announced  the  con¬
demnation  of  his  book,  retracted  his  opinions  therein  ex¬
pressed,  and  concluded  his  sermon  by  perfect  acquiescence,
and  by  submission  to  the  sentence  pronounced  by  the  pope.
Two  days  later  he  published  a  very  short  charge  to  his
clergy,  again  acquiescing,  and  submitting  himself  to  his  con¬
demnation,  and  in  the  most  concise,  clear,  and  forcible  terms,
putting  out  of  his  power  all  means  of  reconsideration.  A  sub¬
mission  so  prompt,  clear,  and  public  was  generally  admired.

The  king  sent  a  letter  to  all  the  metropolitans  of  the
kingdom,  charging  them  to  assemble  their  suffragans  to
hear  and  pronounce  upon  the  condemnation  given  by  the
pope  to  the  “  Maxims  of  the  Saints  ”  of  M.  de  Cambrai,  send¬
ing  them  at  the  same  time  a  copy  of  the  declaration.  M.  de
Cambrai  endured  this  last  affront  with  the  same  grandeur  of
soul  with  which  he  had  received  and  accepted  his  sentence.
He  assembled  his  suffragans,  like  the  other  metropolitans,
and  met  in  that  assemblage  with  an  opportunity  to  render  his

172  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  t.

forbearance  illustrious,  as  he  had  already  made  illustrious  his
submission.  Valbelle,  bishop  of  Saint-Omer,  a  Provençal,
eager  after  fortune,  was  not  ashamed,  expecting  to  please,
to  add  sorrow  to  sorrow.  He  declared  to  the  assembly  that
it  was  not  sufficient  to  condemn  the  “  Maxims  of  the  Saints,”
unless  at  the  same  time  all  the  works  written  by  M.  de
Cambrai  to  sustain  it  were  condemned.  The  archbishop
replied  modestly  that  he  accepted  with  all  his  heart  the  con¬
demnation  of  the  “  Maxims  of  the  Saints,”  and  he  had  not
waited,  as  every  one  knew,  for  this  assembly  before  giving
public  signs  of  entire  submission  to  the  sentence  rendered  ;
but  he  thought  that  sentence  ought  not  to  extend  to  matters
which  had  not  been  judged  ;  that  the  pope  had  been  silent
as  to  the  writings  put  forth  in  support  of  the  condemned
book;  and  he  believed  he  was  conforming  entirely  to  the
judgment  of  the  pope  by  retracting  the  book  that  he  had
condemned,  and  by  keeping  silence,  as  he  had  done,  about
all  the  other  writings.  Nothing  could  have  been  wiser,  more
moderate,  or  more  conformable  to  reason,  justice,  and  truth
than  that  answer.  But  it  did  not  satisfy  M.  de  Saint-Omer,
who  wanted  to  distinguish  himself  and  make  people  talk  of
him.  He  flew  into  a  rage,  and  insisted,  with  long  and  violent
arguments.  M.  de  Cambrai  listened  peaceably,  and  said  noth¬
ing.  When  the  Provençal  was  exhausted,  the  archbishop  said
that  he  had  nothing  to  add  to  his  first  answer,  that  it  now
remained  for  the  other  two  prelates  to  decide,  and  that  he
should  accept  without  reply  whatever  their  decision  might
be.  MM.  d’ Arras  and  de  Tournai  thereupon  hastened  to
side  with  M.  de  Cambrai,  and  to  put  down  with  indignation
M.  de  Saint-Omer,  who  did  not  cease  to  mutter  and  threaten
between  his  teeth.  He  missed  his  mark,  however,  for  most
people  rose  against  him  ;  even  the  Court  blamed  him,  and
when  he  reappeared  there  he  met  with  nothing  but  coldness

1699]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

173

among  persons  whom  he  had  thought  his  friends,  and  who
were  now  neither  M.  de  Cambrai  s  nor  his.

About  this  time  we  lost  the  celebrated  Eacine,  so  well
known  for  his  noble  plays.  No  one  had  a  greater  fund  of
intellect,  nor  one  more  agreeably  employed;
Death  of  Racine.  q£  the  poet  jn  his  behaviour;  always

the  honest  man,  the  virtuous  man,  and,  towards  the  last,  the
man  of  means.  His  friends  were  the  most  illustrious  persons,
whether  at  Court  or  among  men  of  letters  ;  I  leave  it  to  the
latter  to  speak  of  him,  better  than  I  am  able  to  do.  He  wrote
for  the  amusement  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and
to  practise  the  young  ladies  of  Saint-Cyr,  two  masterpieces,
—  Esther  and  Athalie;  ah  the  more  difficult  to  do  because
there  is  no  love  in  them,  and  because  they  are  sacred  trage¬
dies,  in  which  the  truth  of  history  had  to  be  preserved  be¬
cause  the  respect  due  to  Holy  Writ  would  not  allow  of
alteration.  The  Comtesse  d’Ayen  and  Mine,  de  Caylus  ex¬
celled  in  playing  them  before  the  king  and  a  very  narrow
and  select  company  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartments.
The  whole  Court  was  sometimes  admitted  at  Saint-Cyr,  but
generally  a  selection.  Racine  was  appointed  to  write  the
history  of  the  king  conjointly  with  his  friend,  Boileau-
Despréaux.  This  mission,  and  these  plays  obtained  for  him
many  privileges.  It  sometimes  happened  that  when  the
king  was  not  working  with  his  ministers  in  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon’s  apartments,  as  on  Fridays,  and  especially  on  stormy
winter  days  when  the  sessions  had  been  very  long,  they
would  send  for  Eacine  to  amuse  them.  He  desired  to
be  buried  at  Port-Eoyal  des  Champs,  with  the  illustrious
inmates  of  which  he  had  had  relations  since  early  youth,
little  interrupted  by  his  poetic  career,  though  that  was  very
far  from  meeting  with  their  approbation.  It  would  be  hard
to  tell  how  piqued  the  king  was  by  this  interment.

174  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

A  very  bold  robbery  took  place  in  tbe  great  stables  at
Versailles  during  tbe  night  of  the  3rd  and  4th  of  June.

The  king  was  at  Versailles,  and  all  the
Jo'bberieTfrom"26  hammer-cloths  and  caparisons  were  carried  off,
the  kmg.  the  value  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  thou¬

sand  francs.  The  thieves’  measures  were  so  well  taken
that  not  a  person  perceived  anything  in  a  building  fully
inhabited  ;  and  in  that  very  short  night  all  was  carried  off
and  no  news  ever  obtained  of  it.  Forces  were  sent  along
the  roads,  and  Paris  and  Versailles  were  searched,  quite
uselessly.  And  this  reminds  me  of  another  robbery,  which
happened  just  before  the  time  I  began  these  Memoirs.  The
grand  apartment,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  gallery  to  the
chapel,  was  furnished  in  crimson  velvet  with  gold  gimps
and  fringes.  One  fine  morning  it  was  found  that  the  latter
were  all  cut  off.  This  seemed  amazing  in  a  place  where
persons  were  passing  all  day  long,  which  was  closed  at  night
and  watched  at  all  hours.  Bontems,  in  despair,  made  and
caused  to  be  made  every  possible  inquiry,  but  all  without
the  slightest  success.  Five  or  six  days  later  I  was  at  the
king’s  supper  ;  there  was  no  one  but  Daquin,  the  king’s  phy¬
sician,  between  me  and  the  king,  and  no  one  at  all  between
me  and  the  table.  As  the  entremets  were  being  served,  I
saw  I  can’t  say  what  that  was  big  and  as  if  black  in  the
air  above  the  table,  which  I  had  no  time  to  discern  or  point
out  before  the  big  thing  fell  on  the  end  of  the  table  in  front  of
the  places  of  Monsieur  and  Madame,  who  happened  that  day
to  be  in  Paris,  but  always  sat  at  table  on  the  left  of  the  king
with  their  backs  to  the  windows  looking  on  the  courtyard.
The  noise  the  thing  made  in  falling  was  great,  and  its  weight
seemed  like  to  break  the  table,  making  all  the  dishes  jump
though  none  were  broken,  for  luckily  it  fell  upon  the  cloth,
and  not  upon  the  dishes.  The  king,  at  the  blow  it  gave,

1699]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  175

half  turned  his  head,  and  without  the  slightest  emotion  said,
“  I  believe  those  are  my  fringes.”  It  was  in  fact  a  package
about  the  breadth  of  a  priest’s  hat,  tied  up  in  a  badly  made
pyramid  about  two  feet  long.  It  was  thrown  from  far  behind
me,  through  the  two  antechambers,  and  a  scrap  of  the  fringes
getting  detached  in  mid-air  fell  on  the  king’s  wig;  which
Livry,  who  was  on  his  left,  saw  and  lifted  off.  He  went  to
the  edge  of  the  table,  and  found  it  was  really  the  fringes
twisted  up  in  a  bundle  ;  and  we  all  saw  them  then,  as  he
did.  As  Livry  was  about  to  lift  the  bundle  he  saw  a  note
attached  to  it.  He  left  the  bundle  and  took  the  note.  The
king  held  out  his  hand  for  it,  saying,  “  Let  me  see  ;  ”  but
Livry  very  properly  would  not,  and  stepping  backward  read
it,  and  gave  it  to  Daquin  behind  the  king  with  whom  I  read
it  as  he  held  it  in  his  hands.  It  was  written  in  a  long,
feigned  hand,  like  that  of  a  woman,  and  said  :  “  Take  back
your  fringes,  Bontems  ;  the  trouble  was  more  than  the  pleas¬
ure  ;  my  kiss-hands  to  the  king.”  It  was  folded,  but  not
sealed.  The  king  wished  to  take  it  from  Daquin,  who  drew
back,  smelt  it,  rubbed  it,  turned  it,  and  returned  it,  and  then
showed  it  to  the  king,  but  would  not  let  him  touch  it.  The
king  told  him  to  read  it  aloud,  and  read  it  himself  at  the
same  time.  “  That  is  very  insolent,  said  the  king  ;  but  he
said  it  in  an  equable  and,  as  it  were,  historical  tone.  Then
he  told  them  to  take  away  the  package.  Livry  found  it  so
heavy  that  it  was  all  he  could  do  to  lift  it  from  the  table.
From  that  moment  the  king  said  no  more  about  it,  and  no
one  else  dared  say  anything,  at  any  rate  out  loud,  and
the  rest  of  the  supper  passed  as  if  it  had  never  happened
Nothing  was  discovered  about  this  theft,  nor  about  the  bold
manner  of  restitution.

The  king,  who  always  spent  the  octave  of  the  Holy  Sacra¬
ment  at  Versailles,  on  account  of  the  two  processions  and  the

176

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

benedictions,  was  also  in  the  habit  of  going  to  Marly  after
the  benediction  of  the  octave.  He  discovered  this  year  that
the  Comtesse  de  Grammont  had  gone  to  spend

Brief  disgrace  of

the  comtesse  de  several  days  of  the  octave  at  Port-Eoyal  des
Champs,  where  she  had  been  educated  and
for  which  she  had  always  retained  a  great  attachment.  This
was  a  crime,  which  in  any  other  person  would  have  been
irredeemable  ;  but  the  king  had  a  true  regard  for  Mme.  de
Grammont  personally,  a  friendship  which  greatly  displeased
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  had  never  been  able  to  break  it  up,
and  suffered  from  her  inability  to  do  so.  She  never  ceased
to  show  her  jealousy  by  flashes  of  ill-temper,  though  usually
guarded  ;  and  the  countess,  who  was  very  haughty  and  had
all  the  air  and  manner  of  a  great  lady,  with  the  remains  of
beauty,  and  more  wit  and  grace  than  any  other  woman  at
Court,  did  not  give  herself  the  trouble  to  notice  them,  and
on  her  side  let  Mme.  de  Maintenon  feel,  by  her  want  of
cordiality  towards  her,  that  she  gave  her  the  little  attention
she  did  give  only  out  of  respect  for  the  feelings  of  the  king.
So  Mme.  de  Maintenon  endeavoured  to  turn  this  trip  to
Port-Eoyal  to  profit,  but  it  ended  only  in  slight  punishment
and  not  in  a  permanent  disgrace.  The  countess  was  always
on  the  trips  to  Marly  and  wherever  else  the  king  went,  but
she  was  not  summoned  on  this  occasion.  This  was  some¬
thing  new  ;  and  she  laughed  over  it  secretly  with  her
friends.  In  other  respects  she  kept  silence  and  went  off
to  Paris.  Two  days  later  she  wrote  to  the  king  by  her
husband,  who  was  free  to  go  to  Marly,  but  she  did  not
write  nor  did  she  send  any  message  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon.
The  king  replied  to  the  Comte  de  Grammont,  who  tried
to  justify  his  wife,  that  she  could  not  be  ignorant  of  what
he  thought  of  a  house  that  was  wholly  Jansenist,  a  sect
he  held  in  horror.  Shortly  after  the  return  to  Versailles

1699]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

177

Mme.  de  Grammont  arrived  there  and  saw  the  king  privately.
He  scolded  her,  and  she  promised  she  would  not  go  again  to
Port-Royal,  unless  she  wholly  abjured  the  world,  and  they
were  reconciled,  to  the  great  displeasure  of  Mme.  de  Mainte-
non,  who  made  no  show  in  the  affair.

M.  Boucherat,  chancellor  and  keeper  of  the  Seals  of  France,
died  in  Paris  Wednesday,  September  2,  about  eight  o’clock

Pontchartrain  in  the  evening.  MM.  d’Harlay  and  de  Fourcy,
made  chancellor.  pis  sons-in-law,  immediately  brought  the  Seals
to  the  king,  who  started  for  Fontainebleau  the  next  day,  tak¬
ing  the  Seals  with  him.  M.  de  Pontchartrain,  the  presi-
dent  of  the  parliament,  and  MM.  Courtin,  d’Aguesseau,
Pomereu,  La  Reynie,  councillors  of  State,  were  the  six  men
chiefly  spoken  of  for  the  place.  Of  these,  the  president,
the  only  real  antagonist,  being  excluded,  the  choice  of  the
king  was  soon  made  ;  it  fell  upon  M.  de  P ontchartrain,  con¬
troller  of  the  finances,  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  assisted  in
determining  his  wishes,  which  were  always  favourable  to
Pontchartrain,  even  in  times  of  fog  and  tempest.  M.  Pelle¬
tier,  formerly  the  controller  of  finances,  had  made  him
first  intendant  of  finances,  and  then  obtained  for  him  his  own
post  in  1689,  when  he  wanted  to  leave  that  painful  employ¬
ment.  Pontchartrain  had  the  utmost  difficulty  in  bringing
himself  to  accept  it,  and  instead  of  gratitude  to  Pelletier  for
so  great  an  advancement,  he  was  angry  and  declared  that
he  could  never  forgive  him.  From  that  time  forth  he
made  many  urgent  requests  to  be  relieved  from  the  finances.
As  a  man  of  capacity  he  stood  well  with  M.  de  Louvois,  who
refused  to  have  any  one  else  in  control  of  the  finances  ;  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  to  whom  his  wife  was  also  agreeable,
was  still  more  averse  to  any  change.  The  controller-general
was  of  all  the  ministers  the  one  she  courted  most.  Her  prin¬
cipal  interest  centred  in  him  for  the  many  affairs  which  she
VOL.  I.  —  12

178  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

protected,  and  also  because  it  was  in  his  power  to  approach
or  remove  from  the  king  both  men  and  things  as  she  wished,
for  it  was  with  him  that  the  king  ordinarily  worked,  and  he
therefore  had  the  principal  influence.  No  one  was  better  at
this  sort  of  management  than  Pontchartrain.  He  was  a  very
small  man,  thin,  well  set-up  in  his  little  figure,  with  a  coun¬
tenance  from  which  the  fires  of  the  mind  sparkled  incessantly,
and  kept  even  more  than  its  promises.  Never  was  there
such  promptitude  of  comprehension,  such  lightness  and
charm  of  conversation,  such  neatness  and  quickness  of
repartee,  such  facility  and  solidity  of  work,  such  rapid  per¬
ception  of  men,  and  such  cleverness  in  getting  hold  of  them.
With  these  qualities,  an  enlightened  simplicity,  a  sensible
gayety  which  overflowed  all  and  made  him  charming  in
trifles,  and  in  business  also.  His  nicety  was  remarkable,  and
extended  to  everything,  and  throughout  all  his  gallantry,
which  lasted  in  his  soul  to  the  very  end,  much  piety  and
goodness,  and  I  must  add  equity,  both  before  and  after  his
career  in  the  finances,  and  even  during  his  administration  of
them,  as  much  as  they  allowed  to  exist.  He  himself  ad¬
mitted  the  difficulty  of  this,  and  it  was  that  difficulty  which
made  the  post  so  painful  to  him;  he  often  spoke  with
bitterness  to  the  parties  who  made  him  feel  it.  Frequently
he  wanted  to  resign,  and  it  was  only  by  various  wiles  that
his  wife  made  him  keep  his  office,  asking  sometimes  for  two,
sometimes  for  four,  sometimes  for  eight  days’  delay.  I  have
heard  him  say  many  a  time  that  his  castle  in  the  air  was
to  end  his  days  as  honorary  counsellor  to  parliament  and
have  a  house  in  the  cloisters  of  Notre-Dame.

His  wife  was  a  woman  of  great  sense,  wise,  solid,  enlight¬
ened  in  conduct,  equable,  consistent,  unaffected,  with  nothing
bourgeoise  about  her  but  her  appearance  ;  liberal,  free  with
her  gifts,  and  in  the  art  of  imagining  and  executing  fêtes

1699]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  179

noble,  magnificent  to  the  highest  point,  and  with  it  all  an
admirable  and  orderly  manager.  No  one,  and  this  is  sur¬
prising,  knew  the  Court  or  people  of  the  world  better  than
she,  or  had,  and  her  husband  also,  more  graces  and  charms
of  mind.  She  was  of  great  use  to  him  both  in  counsel  and
conduct  ;  and  he  had  the  sense  to  know  this  and  to  profit
by  it.  Their  union  was  always  intimate.  Her  piety  rested
on  a  great  foundation  of  virtue,  which  constantly  increased  ;
it  turned  her  to  reading  and  to  prayer,  and  made  her,  when
she  was  able,  devoted  to  good  works  ;  she  was  the  mother
of  the  poor  ;  and  with  it  all,  gay,  capital  company  ;  indeed,
they  both  did  much  for  conversation,  though  very  far  from
gossiping,  and  both  were  highly  capable  of  friendship  —
he  of  serving  and  also  of  injuring.  What  they  gave  to  the
poor  is  incredible.  Mme.  de  Pontchartrain  always  had  her
eyes  and  hands  open  to  their  needs  ;  she  was  always  in
quest  of  persons  reduced  to  poverty,  gentlemen  and  young
women  in  need,  girls  in  danger,  seeking  to  draw  them  from
peril  and  suffering  ;  marrying  or  finding  places  for  some,
giving  pensions  to  others,  and  all  in  the  utmost  secrecy.
Besides  the  large  sums  devoted  to  the  poor  of  their  parish,
both  she  and  her  husband  were  ingenious  in  assisting  those
of  other  places  ;  and  this  ingenuity,  this  gallantry  of  spirit,
she  employed  in  succouring  persons  who  hid  their  needs,  of
which  she  herself  pretended  to  be  ignorant.  She  was  a  stout
woman,  very  ugly,  of  an  ignoble  and  coarse  ugliness,  who
sometimes  showed  temper,  which  she  controlled  as  best  she
could.  Never  were  there  better  relatives,  or  better  friends
than  this  couple,  nor  persons  more  courteous,  I  might  some¬
times  say  respectful,  nor  who  remembered  better  what  they
had  been  and  what  others  were,  in  spite  of  that  leaven  which
mingles  with  all  favour,  authority,  and  public  posts.

They  stood  a  long  time  very  well  with  Mme.  de  Mainte-

180

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

non,  but  little  by  little  a  coldness  grew  up  between  her  and
Pontchartrain,  whom  she  found  she  could  not  manage  with
the  facility  she  wished.  His  wife,  whom  she  liked  at  all
times,  tried  to  make  Pontchartrain  more  complying,  and  for
her  sake  Mme.  de  Maintenon  put  up  with  an  inflexibility
she  would  not  have  borne  from  any  one  else  ;  but  the  ball
rolled  up  so  much  that  she  was  quite  delighted  to  get  rid
of  him  honourably  by  the  Seals.  Pontchartrain  had  read
enough,  amid  his  application  and  his  assiduity  in  his  func¬
tions  and  his  taste  for  society  and  good  company,  to  be
well  informed  on  many  things.  He  was  brought  up  in
parliament  and  in  its  maxims,  to  which  he  was  not  in
the  least  a  slave,  though  he  had  taken  what  was  good  in  the
maxims  of  France  in  relation  to  Pome.  Of  these  matters,
which  often  came  up  in  council  under  divers  aspects,  none
escaped  him.  The  extreme  facility  of  his  apprehension,  and
the  firm  and  vigorous  agility  of  his  elocution  often  annoyed
the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers,  whose  mind  and  conscience  could
not  agree  with  his  in  those  matters,  and  who,  though  in
the  main  he  was  always  for  the  maxims  of  France,  was  in
minor  details  forever  escaping  them  in  favour  of  Pome.
This  soured  them  towards  each  other,  —  sometimes  even  to
indecency  on  the  part  of  Pontchartrain,  who,  having  more
depth  than  the  duke,  did  not  always  spare  him  on  such
occasions,  which  made  them  as  much  enemies  as  right-
minded  men  ever  can  be.  The  burden  of  providing  for  the
enormous  number  of  created  offices,  and  additional  employ¬
ments  to  which  the  necessities  of  war  had  led,  fell  in  part
upon  Pontchartrain,  and  it  was  this  that  urged  him  cease¬
lessly  to  get  free  of  the  finances.  He  had  been  pressed  to
establish  the  poll-tax,  and  the  dixième,  both  invented  by
the  powerful  Bâville  (master  of  Languedoc  under  the  name
of  intendant),  who  proposed  them  incessantly  in  order  to

1699]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

181

pay  his  court.  The  poll-tax  had  been  forced  upon  Pontchar-
train  after  resisting  long  and  with  all  his  strength.  He
foresaw  the  terrible  consequences,  and  knew  that  such  a
tax  was  of  a  nature  never  to  cease.  But  in  the  end,  by  dint
of  outcries  and  needs,  his  hand  was  forced.  Pontchartrain
had  a  horror  of  both  taxes,  believing  that  their  facility  of
levying  and  of  increasing  would  make  them  perpetual,  and
of  ever  increasing  weight.  He  rejected  the  dixième ,  not
allowing  it  even  to  be  considered  ;  but  he  could  not  escape
the  other.

The  day  that  Boucherat  died,  which  was,  as  I  have
already  remarked,  a  Wednesday,  the  day  before  the  king
went  to  Fontainebleau,  the  latter  said  to  Pontchartrain  as
they  left  the  council,  “  Should  you  like  to  be  chancellor  of
France  ?  ”  “  Sire,”  replied  he,  “  if  I  have  urgently  asked  you

more  than  once  to  relieve  me  of  the  finances  and  let  me  be
a  simple  minister  and  secretary,  you  can  imagine  whether  or
not  I  would  leave  that  office  with  a  glad  heart  for  any
place  that  might  be  given  to  me.”  “Well,”  said  the  king,
“say  nothing  about  this  to  any  one;  but  if  the  chancellor
dies,  as  he  probably  will  to-day,  I  make  you  chancellor,  and
your  son  shall  be  a  secretary  of  State.”  Pontchartrain
retired  in  the  greatest  joy  he  ever  felt;  less  for  being
made  chancellor  —  though,  as  I  have  heard  him  say,  he  was
greatly  gratified  —  than  for  being  delivered  from  the  burden
of  the  finances,  which,  in  spite  of  the  peace,  were  becoming
more  intolerable  to  him  every  day.

England  lost  this  year,  in  the  person  of  a  simple  gentle¬
man,  one  of  her  principal  ornaments.  I  mean  the  Chevalier
,  .  Temple,  who  figured  with  the  highest  reputation

Death  of  Sir  r  7  °  .

wm.  Temple.  equaUy  in  letters,  in  sciences,  and  also  m  the
science  of  politics  and  government,  and  who  made  for  him¬
self  a  great  name  in  most  important  embassies,  and  in  the

182

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

first  negotiations  for  a  general  peace.  He  was,  with  a
great  mind,  penetration,  firmness,  and  dexterity,  a  simple
man,  who  did  not  seek  to  make  a  figure,  and  who  liked  to
enjoy  himself  and  live  free,  like  a  true  Englishman,  without
any  care  for  elevation,  or  property,  or  fortune.  He  had
many  friends  everywhere,  illustrious  friends,  who  felt  them¬
selves  honoured  by  his  intercourse.  During  a  journey
which  he  made  to  France  for  pleasure,  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,
who  knew  him  through  his  works,  saw  much  of  him.  They
met  one  morning  in  the  gallery  at  Versailles  and  set  about
discussing  machines  and  mechanics.  M.  de  Chevreuse,
always  oblivious  of  time  when  arguing,  kept  him  so  long
that  two  o’clock  struck.  At  that  sound  the  chevalier  in¬
terrupted  the  duke  and  taking  him  by  the  arms,  “  I  assure
you,”  he  said,  “  that  of  all  sorts  of  machines  I  know  none  so
fine  at  this  time  of  day  as  a  spit,  and  I  am  off  in  haste  to
test  it.”  So  saying  he  turned  his  back  on  the  duke,  leaving
him  astonished  that  he  could  be  thinking  of  dinner.

The  year  ended  with  an  ecclesiastical  rumpus,  which  the
king  quelled,  between  the  Jesuits,  who  apparently  desired
his  interference  inasmuch  as  they  forced  him  to  speak,  and
the  Benedictines.  The  latter  had  lately  published  a  fine
edition  of  Saint  Augustine,  whose  morality  is  not  that  of
the  Jesuits.  To  smother  it  down  they  employed  their
usual  weapon,  which  has  always  served  them  well.  The
book,  they  declared,  was  Jansenist  ;  they  attacked  it.  The
Benedictines  replied;  both  sides  got  angry.  The  Jesuits,
getting  to  an  end  of  their  proofs  and  reasons,  but  not  of
their  insults  and  assertions,  which  were  more  than  bold,
were  unable  finally  either  to  blast  the  edition  or  get  it
suppressed.  This  failure  was  very  bitter  to  them,  but  at
least  they  had  the  credit  of  stopping  the  fight,  when  they
found  they  were  worsted,  by  getting  the  king  to  forbid

183

1699]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

both  sides  to  either  write  or  say  another  word  of  any  kind
about  that  edition.  It  was  Pontchartrain  who  wrote  this  to
each  of  them.  The  Jesuits  had  the  annoyance  soon  after  of
seeing  this  edition  of  Saint  Augustine  solemnly  approved
at  Rome.

VI.

The  nuncio  Delfini  was  made  a  cardinal  at  the  begin¬
ning  of  this  year  in  a  promotion  of  nuncios  and  Italians.

The  courier  of  M.  de  Monaco  arrived  before

1700.

Deifini,  nuncio  that  of  the  pope.  The  king,  having  reasons  for
home  without  wishing  to  do  mm  a  peculiar  favour,  wrote  him
presents.  a  note  with  his  own  hand  to  inform  him  and

congratulate  him.  As  soon  as  Delfini  received  it  he  went  to
Versailles  to  thank  the  king  in  person.  The  nuncio  was  very
clever  and  certainly  had  the  face  of  it.  Never  did  I  see  two
such  little  eyes,  or  two  that  said  so  much.  He  was  very  gallant
and  maybe  something  more  ;  he  liked  to  amuse  himself,  and
went  often  to  the  opera.  The  king,  who  was  at  that  time  more
austere  in  his  piety  than  he  became  afterwards,  was  scandal¬
ized,  and  caused  it  to  be  delicately  insinuated  to  the  nuncio
that  it  was  not  the  custom  here  for  bishops  and  priests  to  go
to  the  theatre.  To  this  he  turned  a  deaf  ear  and  pretended
not  to  understand  ;  on  which  the  king  sent  him  a  message.
The  good  Delfini,  gliding  over  the  conscience  side,  turned  to
that  of  custom,  and  was  overwhelming  in  his  thanks  for  the
care  the  king  was  taking  of  his  fortune,  hut  declared  that  he
never  expected  to  make  it  in  France,  but  only  in  Italy,  where
the  opera  and  theatres  were  no  obstacle  to  anything,  and  he
continued  to  attend  them  all  the  same.  The  king,  seeing  that
the  hat  arrived  for  the  nuncio  in  spite  of  the  opera,  wished
perhaps  to  efface  the  little  bitterness  of  his  advice  by  the
marked  attention  of  his  note,  —  not  wishing  to  send  back  to
Dome  a  discontented  cardinal.

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

185

But  a  difficulty  of  another  kind  arose  which  mortified  the
king.  He  had,  little  by  little,  brought  all  the  ambassadors  to
visit  MM.  du  Maine  and  de  Toulouse  as  princes  of  the
blood  and  without  the  slightest  difference.  The  nuncio
Cavallerini,  the  predecessor  of  the  present  one  (made  cardinal
in  France,  like  Delfini),  had  allowed  himself  to  visit  the  bas¬
tards  in  that  way.  He  was  rebuked  for  it,  and  so  ill  received
on  his  return  to  Rome  that  Delfini  dared  not  do  likewise.
The  cardinals,  accustomed  to  the  general  precedence  which
they  enjoyed  everywhere,  felt  it  was  even  a  descent  from  the
days  of  Richelieu  and  Mazarin  to  treat  as  equals  the  true
princes  of  the  blood  and  take  their  hands,  which  was  never
done  in  the  time  of  those  two  cardinals.  But  to  do  it  to  the
bastards  of  the  king,  in  a  public  act  of  ceremony,  seemed  to
them  monstrous.  The  matter  was  negotiated  for  a  whole
month  without  inducing  Delfini  to  give  way,  and  so,  although
in  other  respects  his  acts  as  nuncio  were  very  satisfactory,  he
was  unable  to  obtain  an  audience  to  take  leave  or  even  a  pri¬
vate  audience,  to  present  his  letters  of  recall,  and  he  was
also  deprived  of  the  gift  of  eighteen  thousand  francs  in
silver-plate  which  it  is  customary  to  make  to  nuncio-cardinals
on  their  departure,  so  that  he  went  away  without  saying
good-bye  to  any  one.

From  before  Candlemas  up  to  Lent  there  was  nothing  hut
halls  and  gayety  at  Court.  The  king  gave  them  at  Versailles
Many  bails  at  and  at  Marly,  with  ingenious  masquerades  and
Court-  scenic  interludes,  a  species  of  fête  which  amused

the  king  much,  though  they  were  all  given  under  pretence
of  amusing  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne.  Monseigneur
also  gave  balls,  and  the  principal  personages  piqued  them¬
selves  on  giving  entertainments  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bour¬
gogne.  M.  le  Prince,  in  his  apartment  of  few  rooms  and
those  very  small,  found  means  to  astonish  the  Court  with  a

186

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

most  gallant  fête,  the  best  planned  and  the  best  arranged  of
all:  a  full-dress  ball,  with  masks,  interludes,  booths  of  all
nations,  and  a  collation,  the  decorations  of  which  were
charming  ;  and  all  without  refusing  invitations  to  a  single
person  of  the  Court,  and  yet  there  was  no  crowd  or  confu¬
sion.  Not  a  single  evening  passed  without  a  ball.  Mme.
de  Pontchartrain  gave  one  at  the  Chancellerie  which  was  the
most  elegant  and  most  magnificent  of  them  alL  The  chan¬
cellor  received  Monseigneur,  his  three  sons,  and  Mme.  la
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  at  the  door  of  their  carriages  about
ten  o’clock  and  then  went  off  to  bed  at  the  château.  There
were  separate  apartments  for  the  full-dress  hall,  for  the  mas¬
querade,  for  a  superb  collation,  and  for  booths  of  all  nations,
Chinese,  Japanese,  etc.,  where  many  choice  things  both  for
beauty  and  singularity  were  sold,  though  without  money;
they  were  presents  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  and  the
ladies.  Besides  all  this  there  were  songs  to  her  praise,  a
comedy  and  ballet.  Nothing  was  ever  so  well  managed  or  so
superb  and  so  perfectly  planned.  Mme.  de  Pontchartrain
acquitted  herself  with  a  politeness,  a  gallantry  and  freedom
and  ease,  as  if  she  had  had  nothing  at  all  to  do.  All  present
amused  themselves  much,  and  it  was  past  eight  o’clock  in
the  morning  when  they  left.  Madame  de  Saint-Simon,  who
always  followed  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  (which  was
a  great  favour),  and  I  were  three  weeks  without  seeing  day¬
light.  It  was  held  de  rigueur  that  certain  dancers  should  not
leave  the  ball  before  the  duchess,  and  one  morning  when  I
tried  to  get  away  to  Marly,  she  had  the  doors  closed  to  me  ;
and  there  were  others  in  the  same  predicament.  I  was  de¬
lighted  when  Ash-Wednesday  arrived  ;  but  I  continued  to
feel  giddy  for  two  or  three  days.  Mme.  de  Saint  Simon,  quite
worn-out,  was  not  over  it  by  the  Mardi-gras.  The  king
played  at  brelan,  and  low  stakes,  with  certain  chosen  ladies

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

187

in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartments,  and  sometimes  at  reversi
on  the  days  when  there  were  no  ministers  or  when  his  work
with  them  had  been  short  ;  and  this  amusement  was  pro¬
longed  into  Lent.

Mme.  la  Duchesse,  whose  debts  the  king  had  paid  not
long  before,  which  amounted  to  very  large  sums,  to  her
.  .  tradespeople,  and  also  to  other  persons,  had  not

debts  of  Mme.  la  dared  to  tell  him  of  her  losses  at  play,  which

DuchsssCi

were  very  heavy.  These  debts  were  still
increasing  ;  she  knew  she  was  powerless  to  pay  them,  and
was  thus  in  the  greatest  embarrassment.  What  she  feared
the  most  was  that  M.  le  Prince,  and  above  all  M.  le  Duc
should  know  of  them.  In  this  extremity  she  resolved  to
appeal  to  her  old  governess;  and  she  explained  her  posi¬
tion  plainly  in  a  letter,  with  a  confidence  which  won  her
that  all-powerful  protection.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  took  pity
on  her,  persuaded  the  king  to  pay  her  debts,  made  her  no
reprimands,  and  kept  her  secret.  Langlée,  a  species  of  man
peculiar  to  courts,  was  appointed  to  draw  up  with  her  a  list
of  the  debts,  obtain  the  money  from  the  king,  and  pay  it
to  those  to  whom  Mme.  la  Duchesse  owed  it  ;  so  that  in  a
few  weeks  she  was  clear,  without  the  persons  whom  she
feared  knowing  anything  of  the  debts  or  of  their  payment.

The  Treaty  of  Partition  of  the  monarchy  of  Spain  was
beginning  to  make  a  great  noise  in  Europe.  The  King  of
Spain  had  no  children,  and  no  hope  of  having

The  Partition  ,

Treaty  of  the  mon-  any.  His  health,  which  had  always  been  very
archy  of  spam.  feeble,  had  become  extremely  bad  for  two  or
three  years  past,  and  he  had  been  at  the  point  of  death  on
several  occasions.  King  William  of  England,  who,  since  his
usurpation,  had  greatly  increased  his  credit,  through  the  con¬
fidence  of  all  the  members  of  the  great  Alliance  he  had  formed
against  France,  and  of  which  he  had  been  the  soul  and  leader

188

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  ti

until  the  peace  of  Ryswick  (having  since  maintained  himself
on  the  same  footing),  undertook  to  provide  for  this  great
succession  in  a  manner  which  should,  when  the  time  came,
prevent  a  war.  He  did  not  like  France  or  the  king,  and  in
truth  he  had  good  reason  to  hate  them  thoroughly  ;  he  feared
their  aggrandizement;  and  he  had  just  experienced,  during
the  union  of  all  Europe  against  France  through  a  ten  years’
war,  what  a  power  she  was  after  such  a  tissue  of  conquests
as  the  present  reign  had  seen.  In  spite  of  the  queen’s  re¬
nunciations,  he  dared  not  hope  that  the  king  would  allow
that  vast  inheritance  to  pass  by  without  drawing  something
out  of  it  ;  and  besides  this,  he  had  seen  by  the  conquests  of
Franche-Comté  and  a  part  of  Flanders  how  very  slight  a
check  those  renunciations  had  proved  to  he.1  He  therefore
thought  of  a  partition  of  this  inheritance  which  the  tempta¬
tion  of  its  being  made  peaceably,  and  under  the  guarantee  of
the  principal  Powers,  might  induce  the  king  to  accept,  and  at
the  same  time  be  such  as  should  not  increase  his  power  ;  be
nothing  more  in  fact  than  a  slight  addition  to  his  present
frontiers  ;  while  all  the  rest  of  his  gains  should  be  so  distant
from  France  that  the  difficulty  of  preserving  them  would  keep
his  hands  full,  and  those  of  his  successors  after  him.  At  the
same  time  King  William  wanted  to  secure  the  coasts  of  the
sea  towards  England,  and  to  protect  his  dear  Dutch  against

1  Louis  XIV.  claimed  the  right  of  succession  for  his  grandson  through
his  wife  Maria  Theresa,  daughter  of  Philip  IV.,  father  of  Charles  II.,  the
present  King  of  Spain.  By  her  marriage  contract  Maria  Theresa  had  re¬
nounced  all  claims  to  the  succession  for  herself  and  children,  on  condition
of  the  payment  of  her  dowry.  This  dowry  was  never  paid  ;  and,  further¬
more,  Maria  Theresa,  being  a  minor  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  could  not,
it  was  said,  sign  away  her  rights.  The  Emperor  of  Austria,  on  the  other
hand,  claimed  the  succession  for  his  son  by  right  of  his  mother,  a  sister  of
Philip  IV.,  and  his  wife,  a  younger  daughter  of  Philip  IV.,  neither  of  whom
had  made  “  renunciations.”  A  third  claimant,  a  son  of  the  Elector  of
Bavaria,  need  not  be  mentioned,  as  he  died  before  the  question  became
vital.  —  Te.

1700]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

189

France,  besides  giving  the  Emperor  of  Austria  such  a  slice  as
must  content  him,  and  stop  all  regret  for  the  total  inheritance,
which  Austria  was  not  powerful  enough  to  even  hope  for
against  France.  He  destined  to  the  latter  only,  so  to  speak,
the  parings.  For  that  reason  he  wanted  to  make  sure  of  her
consent,  as  being  the  least  likely  to  be  satisfied  with  his
offer,  feeling  certain  that  if  she  accepted  it,  he  had  only  to
show  the  emperor  that  the  richest  and  largest  share,  together
with  a  name  that  might  pass  for  all,  ought  to  console  him
for  what  was  lacking,  and  thus  make  him  accept  so  ample
a  monarchy,  won  without  a  blow.

His  plan  was  to  give  to  the  archduke,  second  son  of  the
emperor,  Spain  and  the  Indies,  with  the  Low-Countries  and
the  title  of  King  of  Spain;  to  France,  Guipuscoa,  because
its  aridity  and  the  difficulties  of  its  frontier  were  such  that
it  was  left  in  peace  throughout  all  the  wars  against  Spain  ;
Naples  and  Sicily,  the  distance  and  poor  revenues  of  which
made  them  more  of  an  embarrassment  and  a  salve  to  honour
than  an  aggrandizement,  while  the  necessity  of  keeping
possession  of  them  would  hold  France  in  check  to  the  mari¬
time  powers  ;  Lorraine,  which  was  certainly  a  rounding  of
the  frontier,  though  it  did  not  carry  France  beyond  where
she  now  was,  and  in  case  of  war  would  not  help  her  further
than  by  an  occupation  which  it  cost  her  nothing  to  make  ;
and  finally,  by  way  of  compensation,  the  territory  of  Milan
to  M.  de  Lorraine,  who  thus,  from  being  a  vassal  of  France
through  the  cession  of  Lorraine,  would  become  a  free  and
powerful  prince  of  Italy.

The  King  of  England  made  these  proposals  first  to  the
king,  who,  being  weary  of  war  and  now  of  an  age  and  a
position  which  made  him  long  for  rest,  disputed  but  little,
and  finally  accepted  them.  M.  de  Lorraine  was  not,  by
interest  or  condition,  in  a  state  to  refuse  a  change  of  coun-

190

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vt

try  proposed  to  him  by  England  and  Holland  on  one
side,  and  by  the  king,  who  sent  Caillières  to  talk  with  him,
on  the  other.  That  done,  it  was  only  a  question  of  the  em¬
peror  ;  and  it  was  here  that  the  cleverness  and  influence
of  the  English  king  broke  down.  The  emperor  was  de¬
termined  to  have  the  whole  inheritance  ;  he  held  firmly  to
the  renunciations  of  Queen  Maria-Tlieresa  ;  he  would  not
hear  of  the  house  of  Austria  being  turned  out  of  Italy  (for
it  was  wholly  that  by  the  plan  of  the  King  of  England,  which
gave  to  France  the  maritime  ports  of  Tuscany  held  by  Spain,
and  known  under  the  name  of  gli  Presidi).  Pressed  by
Villars,  sent  to  him  by  the  king,  by  England,  and  by  Holland,
who  had  signed  the  treaty  and  who  made  him  understand
that  they  should  join  against  him  if  he  obstinately  refused
so  fine  a  partition,  he  firmly  answered  that  it  was  unheard-of
and  against  all  natural  law  to  divide  an  inheritance  before
it  fell  in,  and  that  he  would  never  listen  to  such  a  thing
during  the  lifetime  of  the  King  of  Spain,  the  head  of  his
house  and  his  near  relation.  This  resistance,  and  still  more
the  spirit  of  it,  divulged  before  long  a  secret  which  was
intended  to  be  kept  until  the  death  of  the  King  of  Spain,
who  was  warned  of  the  partition  by  the  emperor,  and  urged
to  make  his  will  in  favour  of  the  archduke  and  his  own
family.

The  King  of  Spain  cried  out  vehemently  that  they  were
trying  to  rob  him  in  his  lifetime,  and  his  ambassador  made
such  a  fuss  in  England  and  in  terms  so  little  respectful  (call¬
ing  the  King  of  England  King  William)  that  that  prince
told  him  to  leave  the  country  in  four  days,  which  he  did,
retiring  to  Flanders.  But  the  emperor,  though  much  dis¬
pleased  with  the  King  of  England,  wanted  to  soften  what
was  not  really  the  point  between  them.  He  offered  to
interpose,  and  did  so  manage  as  to  patch  up  this  accessory

191

1700]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

quarrel  so  that  the  Spanish  ambassador  returned  to  Lon¬
don.  The  emperor,  however,  thought  of  nothing  else  than
of  strengthening  his  party  in  Spain.  But  in  France,  people
were  satisfied  with  the  Treaty  of  Partition,  and  it  was
signed.

About  this  time  died  Le  Nôtre,  after  having  lived  eighty-
eight  years  in  perfect  health,  with  all  his  faculties  and  in
Death  of  Le  the  fulness  of  his  good  taste  and  capacity  ;
Nôtre.  (Created  illustrious  as  being  the  first  to  give  designs  for

those  fine  gardens  which  decorate  all  France,  and

the  gardens  of
Versailles,  Tri-

Tuileries.)  have  so  effaced  the  reputation  of  the  gardens  of

Italy  — which  are,  in  fact,  nothing  by  comparison  —  that  the
most  famous  masters  of  this  art  now  come  from  Italy  to  learn
and  admire  here.  Le  Nôtre  had  an  integrity,  a  scrupulos¬
ity,  an  uprightness  which  made  him  respected  and  beloved
by  every  one.  Never  did  he  issue  from  his  own  position,
nor  fail  to  recognize  it;  and  he  was  always  disinterested.
He  worked  for  private  persons  as  he  did  for  the  king,  and
with  the  same  earnestness.  He  sought  only  to  aid  Nature,
and  to  evoke  the  truly  beautiful  at  as  little  cost  as  pos¬
sible;  he  had  an  artless  simplicity  and  truth  that  were
charming.  The  pope  begged  the  king  to  lend  Le  Nôtre
to  him  for  a  few  months.  Entering  the  pope’s  room,  in¬

stead  of  falling  on  his  knees,  he  ran  to  his  Holiness  and  fell
on  his  neck,  embraced  him  and  kissed  him  on  both  cheeks,
crying  out:  “Eh!  good-day,  my  reverend  father;  how  well
you  look  !  how  glad  I  am  to  see  you  in  such  fine  health  !  ”
The  pope,  who  was  Clement  X.,  Altieri,  laughed  with  all
his  heart;  he  was  enchanted  with  this  queer  greeting  and
was  very  friendly  to  Le  Nôtre  ever  after.

On  his  return,  the  king  led  him  into  the  gardens  of
Versailles  and  showed  him  what  had  been  done  during
his  absence.  When  he  saw  the  colonnade,  he  said  not  a

192

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yi.

word.  The  king  pressed  him  to  give  his  opinion.  “  Well,
sire,  what  do  you  expect  me  to  say  to  you  ?  You  have
made  a  gardener  out  of  a  mason  ”  (meaning  Mansart),  “  and
he  has  given  you  a  dish  of  his  trade.”  The  king  was  si¬
lent,  and  everybody  smiled,  for  it  was  quite  true  that  that
bit  of  architecture,  which  is  nothing  of  a  fountain,  though
meant  for  one,  is  wholly  out  of  place  in  the  garden.  A
month  before  his  death,  the  king,  who  liked  to  make  him
talk  and  to  show  him  things,  took  him  into  the  gardens  and,
on  account  of  his  great  age,  had  him  put  in  a  chair  which
the  porters  rolled  beside  that  of  the  king  ;  on  which  Le
Nôtre  exclaimed:  “Ah!  my  poor  father,  if  you  could  have
lived  to  see  your  son,  a  poor  gardener  like  me,  rolling  in
his  chair  beside  the  greatest  king  of  all  the  earth,  nothing
would  be  wanting  to  my  joy.”  He  was  intendant  of  build¬
ings  and  lived  in  the  Tuileries  ;  he  had  charge  of  the  gar¬
dens,  which  were  his  own  making,  and  also  of  the  palace.
All  that  he  did  is  still  far  above  all  that  has  been  done
since  his  day,  no  matter  what  pains  have  been  taken  to
imitate  him,  and  work  after  him  as  nearly  as  possible.  He
used  to  say  that  flower-beds  were  only  good  for  the  wet
nurses,  who,  being  unable  to  leave  their  nurslings,  could  look
down  upon  them  from  the  second-story  windows.  Never¬
theless,  he  excelled  in  them  as  in  all  other  parts  of  a  garden  ;
but  he  held  them  in  poor  esteem,  and  he  was  right,  for  it
is  there  that  people  seldom  walk.

The  King  of  England  lost  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  heir
presumptive  to  his  crowns.  He  was  eleven  years  old  and
_  .  .  u  the  only  son  of  the  Princess  of  Denmark.  His

Death  of  the  J

Duke  of  giou-  preceptor  was  Doctor  Burnet,  Bishop  of  Salis-

ccstcr»

bury,  who  was  in  the  secret  of  the  affair  of  the
invasion,  and  who  went  to  England  with  the  Prince  of  Orange
at  the  time  of  the  revolution,  of  which  he  has  left  a  very

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

193

false  history,  and  several  other  works  in  which  there  is
neither  truth  nor  good  faith.

The  sub-preceptor  was  the  celebrated  Le  Yassor,  author  of
the  “  History  of  Louis  XIII.,”  which  would  be  read  with  still

more  pleasure  if  he  had  put  into  it  a  little  less

Le  Vassor.  .  ,

wrath  against  the  Catholic  religion,  and  less
passion  against  the  king  and  many  other  persons.  With
that  exception,  it  is  excellent  and  true.  He  must  have  been
singularly  well  informed  about  the  anecdotes  which  he  re¬
lates,  and  which  have  escaped  most  historians.  I  found,  for
example,  the  Day  of  the  Dupes  told  precisely  as  it  was  told
to  me  by  my  father,  who  was  so  principal  and  close  an  actor
in  it  ;  besides  other  curious  anecdotes  which  are  no  less
accurate.  This  author  has  made  so  much  noise  that  it  is
worth  while  for  me  to  say  something  about  him.  He  was
a  priest  of  the  Oratoire,  devoted  to  study,  and  standing  well
in  his  congregation  ;  a  man  otherwise  of  low  position.  No
one  distrusted  him,  and  he  was  even  considered  as  a  man
whose  life  was  without  reproach,  whose  mind  and  knowledge
did  honour  to  the  Oratoire,  and  who  was  likely,  in  time,  to
reach  the  highest  positions  in  it.

The  surprise  was  therefore  very  great  when,  during  the
session  of  a  general  assembly,  Père  de  La  Chaise  showed
much  bitterness  to  the  principal  superiors  of  the  Oratoire  on
account  of  a  resolution  which  the  latter  believed  to  have  been
kept  profoundly  secret.  Suspicion  of  betrayal  could  fall  only
on  Père  Le  Yassor,  who  knew  the  fact  through  the  confidence
they  had  placed  in  him.  The  superiors  searched  his  papers.
His  very  table  betrayed  him  ;  he  had  left  upon  it  letters  to
and  from  him,  memoranda,  and  other  things,  that  gave  the
most  complete  proof  of  his  treachery,  and  showed  that  from
the  time  he  had  first  taken  orders,  he  had  never  ceased  to  be
a  spy  of  the  Jesuits.  This  honest  man,  on  returning  to  his
VOL.  I.  — 13

194  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

room,  cast  his  eyes  on  the  table,  saw  it  much  cleared  of
papers,  looked  it  over,  and  discovered  what  were  missing.
Behold  him  in  despair.  He  hunted  everywhere  with  a  rem¬
nant  of  hope,  rather  than  uncertainty,  that  he  had  put  them
away  himself,  and  was  still  searching  when  the  superiors
returned  to  the  room  and  saved  him  further  trouble.  Fury  at
being  discovered  succeeded  anxiety  ;  he  packed  up  his  things
and  departed  the  next  day.  In  despair,  he  went  to  Père  de
La  Chaise  and  asked  for  an  abbey,  pointing  out  to  him  the
hardship  of  his  case.  But  a  spy  who  becomes  useless  has  no
merit  in  himself.  The  discovery  which  dishonoured  him  fell
like  lead  upon  the  Jesuits,  who  felt  no  pressure  to  reward  his
imprudence.  Maddened  by  despair,  and  shame  and  hunger,
and  the  hope  of  a  living  which  never  came,  he  flung  himself
into  La  Trappe.  But  the  views  that  led  him  there  were  not
straightforward,  and  no  blessing  rested  on  them  ;  in  a  very
few  days  his  vocation  dried  up,  and  he  went  to  the  abbey  of
Perseigne,  where  he  hired  the  abbatial  lodge,  and  lived  for
several  months.  He  had  endless  squabbles  with  the  monks  ;
so  that  one  day  he  caught  most  of  their  hens,  and  cut  off
their  beaks  and  spurs  with  his  shears,  and  flung  them  back
to  their  owners  across  the  hedge.  This  cruelty  was  so  marked
that  I  record  it.  Such  a  surly  retreat,  of  which  God  was  not
the  object,  could  not  last.

He  returned  to  Paris  to  make  a  last  effort  to  get  some¬
thing  to  live  on,  and  the  reward  of  his  treachery,  but  did
not  succeed.  Furious  and  hungry  he  went  to  Holland,  made
himself  a  Protestant,  and  set  to  work  to  live  by  his  pen.  It
soon  made  him  known.  His  position  as  proselyte,  though
usually  despised  in  that  country,  and  with  good  reason,  was
supported  in  his  case  with  intellect,  knowledge,  talent,  and
a  fine  genius.  A  man  discharged  from  the  Oratoire  as  a
Jesuit  spy  gave  hopes  of  learning  a  good  deal  out  of  him.

1700]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

195

All  this  together  procured  him  acquaintances,  friends,  pro¬
tectors.  He  was  known  by  reputation  in  England,  where
he  hoped  to  make  his  fortune  more  readily  than  in  Hol¬
land  ;  and  he  went  there,  recommended  by  friends.  Burnet
received  him  with  open  arms.  His  “  History  of  Louis
XIII.”  rejoiced  the  hatred  against  the  Catholic  religion  and
the  king  ;  Burnet  made  him  known  to  the  King  of  Eng¬
land  and  obtained  him  as  suh-preceptor  under  himself  to  the
Duke  of  Gloucester.  It  was  difficult  to  have  the  latter  in¬
structed  by  two  greater  enemies  to  Catholics  and  to  France,
and  nothing  suited  King  William  better  for  the  education  of
his  successor.  The  Duke  of  Portland,  utterly  disgusted,  had
retired  altogether  to  the  Hague,  and  the  King  of  England
was  forced  to  swallow  many  insults  from  parliament,  where
they  called  him  publicly  King  of  Holland,  and  Stadtholder
of  England.

In  October  of  this  year,  while  at  Fontainebleau,  I  suffered
one  of  the  greatest  afflictions  I  could  possibly  meet  with,  in
Death  of  M.  de  la  the  loss  that  came  to  me  of  M.  de  la  Trappe.
Trappe.  While  attending  the  king’s  coucher  one  evening,

M.  de  Troyes  showed  me  a  letter  which  announced  his  alarm¬
ing  illness.  I  was  the  more  surprised  because  I  had  not
received  news  from  him  for  ten  or  twelve  days,  and  at  that
time  his  health  was  as  usual.  My  first  impulse  was  to
hasten  there,  but  reflections  which  I  was  urged  to  make
arrested  me.  I  sent  instantly  to  Paris  for  an  admirable
doctor  named  Audri,  whom  I  had  already  taken  to  Plom¬
bières,  who  started  at  once,  but  on  arriving  he  found  M.  de
la  Trappe  no  longer  living.  These  Memoirs  are  too  worldly
to  relate  anything  here  of  a  life  so  sublimely  sacred,  and
a  death  so  great  and  so  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  I  shall
only  say  that  the  grief  and  the  praises  of  all  were  deep  and
prolonged  ;  that  the  king  made  his  eulogy  in  public  ;  that  he

196

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

wished  to  read  the  accounts  of  his  death,  and  that  he  spoke
of  him  more  than  once  to  his  grandsons  in  the  way  of  in¬
struction.  In  all  parts  of  Europe  people  seemed  to  be  sensi¬
ble  of  this  great  loss  ;  the  Church  mourned  him,  and  the
world  itself  did  him  justice.  This  day,  so  happy  for  him,  so
sad  for  his  friends, was  the  26th  of  October;  he  died  towards
mid-day,  in  the  arms  of  his  bishop,  and  in  presence  of  his
community,  at  the  age  of  seventy-seven,  forty  years  of  which
had  been  passed  in  the  deepest  penitence.  I  cannot  omit  to
mention  a  most  touching  and  honourable  mark  of  his  friend¬
ship.  As  he  lay  on  the  ground,  on  straw  and  ashes,  to  die
as  do  all  the  brotherhood  of  La  Trappe,  he  deigned  to  think
of  me  and  he  charged  the  prior  of  La  Trappe  to  tell  me
from  him  that  he  was  very  sure  of  my  affection  for  him,
and  he  relied  upon  my  never  doubting  his  tenderness  for  me.
I  stop  short;  all  that  I  could  add  would  be  out  of  place
here.1

The  Princesse  de  Guéméné,  who  died  Duchesse  de  Mont-
bazon  in  1679,  was  that  beautiful  Mme.  de  Montbazon  of

whom  the  following  tale  was  told,  which  has
ofMme.  défont-  always  received  belief.  It  was  said  that  M.
bazon  and  m.  de  (]e  j>anc£  was  very  much  in  [0Ve  with  her

and  beloved  in  return  ;  that  he  left  her  at
Paris  in  good  health  to  make  a  little  tour  in  the  country  ;
that  soon  after,  having  heard  she  had  fallen  ill,  he  hurried
back,  and  on  entering  her  room  abruptly  the  first  object
on  which  his  eyes  fell  was  her  head,  which  the  surgeons  on
opening  had  separated  from  the  body,  and  in  that  way  he

1  The  following  is  a  clause  in  the  Duc  de  Saint-Simon’s  will  :  “Ninthly,
I  beg  Mme.  la  Maréchale  de  Montmorency  to  kindly  receive  as  a  mark  of
my  true  friendship  the  cross  of  wood  bound  by  metal  with  which  the
sainted  abbe',  reformer  of  La  Trappe,  was  blest,  and  which  from  the  day  of
his  death  I  have  always  worn  ;  also  the  things  which  he  used  that  have
remained  to  me.”  —  Tk.

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  197

knew  of  her  death  ;  that  the  sudden  shock  and  horror  of
that  sight,  joined  to  the  grief  of  a  man  so  passionately  in
love,  had  converted  him,  and  caused  his  retreat  from  the
world,  his  entrance  into  the  Order  of  Saint-Bernard,  and
his  subsequent  reform  of  La  Trappe.  There  is  nothing
true  in  all  that  except  the  facts  which  gave  rise  to  the
fiction.  I  asked  M.  de  la  Trappe  frankly  about  it;  not
coarsely  as  to  his  love,  still  less  as  to  his  happiness,  but
as  to  the  facts;  and  this  is  what  he  told  me:  —

He  was  intimately  one  of  her  friends,  constantly  at  the
hotel  de  Montbazon,  and  a  friend  of  all  the  personages  of
the  Fronde,  of  M.  de  Châteauneuf,  Mme.  de  Chevreuse,  M.
de  Montresor,  and  all  who  were  then  considered  most  im-'
portant,  but  more  particularly  of  M.  de  Beaufort,  with
whom  he  frequently  hunted  ;  and  he  was  also  in  the  closest
intimacy  with  Cardinal  de  Betz,  which  lasted  until  the
latter’s  death.  Mme.  de  Montbazon  died  of  measles  after
a  very  few  days’  illness.  M.  de  Bancé  was  beside  her,  and
never  left  her  ;  he  saw  her  receive  the  sacraments,  and  was
present  at  her  death.  The  truth  is  that,  being  already  touched
in  soul,  and  pulled  both  ways  between  God  and  the  world,
already  meditating  for  some  time  past  a  retreat,  the  reflec¬
tions  which  a  death  so  sudden  brought  to  his  heart  and  spirit
determined  him,  and  shortly  after  he  went  to  his  estate  of
Véret  in  Touraine,  and  that  was  the  beginning  of  his  separa¬
tion  from  the  world.

The  attachment  that  I  felt  to  M.  de  la  Trappe  and  my
admiration  for  him  had  long  made  me  extremely  desirous
to  preserve  his  personal  resemblance  after  his
raintedlafromaPPe  lifetime,  just  as  his  works  would  perpetuate
memory.  pig  min(]  and  its  marvels.  His  sincere  humil¬

ity  would  never  permit  me  to  ask  for  the  kindness  of  letting
himself  be  painted.  A  sketch  of  him  had  been  caught  in

198  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

the  choir,  which  produced  a  few  medals  that  were  fairly  like
him  ;  but  that  did  not  content  me.  Besides,  having  become
extremely  infirm,  he  seldom  left  the  hospital,  and  was  never
in  a  place  where  a  sketch  of  him  could  be  seized.  Bigault
was  then  the  first  painter  of  Europe  for  likenesses  of  men
and  for  durable  painting  ;  but  to  get  him  I  should  have  to
persuade  a  man  already  overrun  with  work  to  leave  Paris  for
several  days  ;  and,  moreover,  I  should  have  to  convince  him
that  his  head  was  strong  enough  to  make  a  likeness  from
memory.  This  latter  proposition,  which  frightened  him  at
first,  was  perhaps  the  real  cause  of  his  acceptance  of  the
work.  A  man  who  excels  all  others  in  his  art,  is  piqued  to
excel  in  a  unique  way.  He  wanted  to  make  the  attempt,
and  was  willing  to  give  the  necessary  time.  The  money,
too,  may  have  pleased  him.

Returning  from  Fontainebleau,  I  slept  but  one  night  in
Paris,  where  I  took  my  measures  with  Rigault,  who  started
with  me  the  next  day.  On  arriving  at  the  monastery  I
told  M.  de  la  Trappe  that  an  officer  of  my  acquaintance  had
such  a  passion  to  see  him,  that  I  entreated  him  to  consent
(for  he  now  saw  almost  no  one)  to  allow  him  to  do  so.  I
added  that  on  the  hope  I  had  given  my  friend,  he  was
about  to  arrive  ;  that  he  stammered  badly,  and  therefore
would  not  ask  to  be  spoken  to,  but  would  be  quite  content
with  looking  at  him.  M.  de  la  Trappe  smiled  kindly,
thought  the  officer  inquisitive  about  a  very  small  matter,
and  promised  to  see  him.  The  next  morning  the  père-
abbé  and  I  took  Eigault  to  a  sort  of  study  in  which  M.  de
la  Trappe  usually  worked,  and  where  I  was  accustomed  to
see  him  when  he  came  from  the  hospital.  This  study  was
lighted  on  two  sides,  and  had  nothing  but  white  walls,
—  on  which  were  a  few  devotional  prints, — straw-chairs,
and  a  desk  on  which  M.  de  la  Trappe  had  written  all  his

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  199

works.  Eigault  found  the  place  to  his  liking  as  to  the  light  ;
the  père-abbé  sat  down  where  M.  de  la  Trappe  was  accus¬
tomed  to  be  seated  with  me  in  the  corner  of  the  study,  and
Eigault  fortunately  found  everything  suitable  to  watch
him  at  that  point.  Next,  the  père-abbé  and  I  took  him  to
another  place,  where  we  were  quite  sure  he  would  not  be  seen
or  interrupted  by  any  one  at  his  work.  Eigault  found  it  all
that  he  desired  as  to  light,  and  he  at  once  set  up  whatever
he  needed  for  the  execution  of  the  work.

That  afternoon  I  presented  my  officer  to  M.  de  la  Trappe,
and  he  sat  with  us  in  the  place  he  had  chosen  in  the  morn¬
ing,  remaining  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  in  the  room
with  us.  His  difficulty  of  speech  was  made  the  excuse  of  his
not  entering  into  conversation,  and  he  then  went  off,  as  I
have  said,  to  throw  upon  his  canvas,  which  was  all  prepared,
the  image  and  ideas  with  which  he  had  filled  himself.  M.  de
la  Trappe,  with  whom  I  remained  some  time  longer,  trying
to  divert  his  mind  rather  than  seriously  converse  with  him,
suspected  nothing,  and  only  complained  of  the  officer’s  tongue-
tied  condition.  Next  day,  the  same  thing  repeated.  M.  de
la  Trappe  began  to  think  that  a  man  whom  he  did  not  know,
and  whose  difficulty  of  speech  prevented  him  from  entering
into  conversation,  had  seen  him  sufficiently  ;  and  it  was  only
out  of  kindness  to  me  that  he  did  not  refuse  to  let  him  come
ao-ain.  I  hoped  there  would  be  no  need  of  it,  and  what  I  saw
of  the  portrait  confirmed  me,  for  I  thought  it  extremely  well
taken  and  very  like.  But  Eigault  absolutely  insisted  on  an¬
other  sitting  to  perfect  it  to  his  liking,  and  I  was  forced  to
obtain  it  of  M.  de  la  Trappe,  who  was  now  tired  by  him,
and  refused  me  at  first.  But  I  said  so  much  that  I  finally
snatched,  rather  than  obtained,  the  third  visit.  M.  de  la
Trappe  remarked  that  merely  to  see  a  man  who  deserved
no  notice,  and  only  wished  to  remain  obscure,  was  a  waste

200  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vi

of  time  and  ridiculous  ;  that  for  this  once  he  yielded  to  my
importunity,  and  the  fancy  I  had  to  oblige  a  man  whom  he
could  not  comprehend,  who  did  not  know  himself  what  he
wanted,  and  had  nothing  to  say  ;  but  only  on  condition  that
it  was  the  last  time,  and  that  I  would  not  speak  of  it  again.
I  told  Eigault  he  must  manage  to  do  without  returning  again,
for  there  was  absolutely  no  hope  of  it.  He  assured  me  that
half  an  hour  was  all  he  asked  for,  and  that  he  really  did  not
need  to  have  more.  He  kept  his  word,  and  was  there  for
barely  the  half-hour.

When  he  went  out  M.  de  la  Trappe  expressed  to  me  his
surprise  at  being  so  long  and  so  attentively  looked  at  by  a
species  of  mute.  I  told  him  my  friend  was  the  most  inquisi¬
tive  man  in  the  world,  who  had  long  had  the  greatest  desire
to  see  him,  and  had  owned  to  me  he  was  so  happy  in  doing
so  that  he  could  not  take  his  eyes  off  him  ;  and  moreover,
that,  dumb  as  he  was  and  unable  to  enter  into  conversation,
he  had  only  thought  of  satisfying  his  eyes  and  looking  at  him
as  much  as  he  could.  I  changed  the  conversation  as  fast  as
possible,  under  pretence  of  saying  things  which  I  could  not
mention  before  Eigault  ;  I  was  anxious  to  stop  reflections
about  looks,  —  which  were  certainly  not  what  I  had  repre¬
sented  them,  being  in  fact  very  peculiar,  —  for  I  was  dying
with  fear  lest  our  real  motive  should  come  into  his  head;
or  at  any  rate  that  he  should  have  suspicions  which  might
make  the  termination  of  my  enterprise  difficult.  Happily,
he  suspected  nothing.

Eigault  worked  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  all  the  next  day
without  seeing  M.  de  la  Trappe  again,  and  he  made  as  perfect
a  masterpiece  as  if  he  had  painted  it  openly  from  the  original.
The  resemblance  was  exact  :  the  gentleness,  the  serenity,  the
majesty  of  the  face;  the  noble,  vivid,  piercing  fire  of  the  eyes;
the  delicacy,  the  soul,  the  grandeur  expressed  in  the  counte-

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  201

nance  ;  the  candour,  the  wisdom,  the  interior  peace  of  a  man
who  possessed  his  soul,  —  all  was  rendered,  even  to  the  graces
which  had  not  left  that  face,  attenuated  though  it  was  by  peni¬
tence,  age,  and  suffering.  The  next  morning  I  made  Eigault
take  a  sketch  of  the  père-abbé  seated  at  M.  de  la  Trappe’s
desk,  for  the  attitude  and  clothes,  and  even  the  desk  itself  ;
and  the  next  day  he  departed  with  the  precious  head  he  had
caught  so  well,  and  had  so  perfectly  rendered,  to  adapt  it  in
Paris  to  a  larger  canvas,  with  the  body,  the  desk,  and  all  the
rest.  He  was  moved  to  tears  at  the  grand  spectacle  of  the  choir,
and  the  general  communion  of  the  high  mass  on  All-Saints’
day,  and  he  could  not  refuse  to  make  for  the  père-abbé  a
copy  in  full  of  my  original.  He  was  transported  with  joy  at
having  so  perfectly  succeeded  in  a  new  and  quite  unex¬
ampled  manner  ;  but  he  owned  to  me  that  the  effort  he  had
made  at  La  Trappe,  and  the  repetition  in  his  mind  of  the
images  which  he  kept  recalling  in  order  to  execute  the
copies  had  almost  turned  his  brain,  so  that  he  was  power¬
less  for  several  months  to  work  at  his  other  portraits.  I  was
much  annoyed  at  the  talk  this  made  in  the  world  ;  but  I
.consoled  myself  by  thinking  that  I  had  forever  preserved
a  resemblance  so  dear  and  so  illustrious,  and  had  given  to
posterity  the  portrait  of  a  man  so  grand,  so  accomplished,  and
so  celebrated.

I  did  not  dare  acknowledge  to  him  by  word  of  mouth  my
robbery  ;  but  on  leaving  La  Trappe  I  left  with  him  the  whole
story  in  a  letter  in  which  I  begged  his  pardon.  He  was
greatly  pained,  annoyed,  and  afflicted  ;  but  he  could  not  keep
anger  against  me.  He  wrote  me  that  I  was  surely  not  igno¬
rant  of  what  a  Roman  emperor  had  said  :  that  he  liked  the
treachery,  while  he  hated  the  traitor;  but,  for  himself,  he
thought  quite  otherwise  ;  he  loved  the  traitor,  but  could  not
help  hating  his  treachery.  I  made  a  present  to  La  Trappe  of

202

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

a  copy  full  length,  one  smaller,  and  also  two  smaller,  that  is.
half-lengths,  to  M.  Maisne,  the  père-abbé,  and  to  M.  de  Saint-
Louis,  formerly  a  colonel  of  cavalry  much  esteemed  by  the
king,  who  had  long  retired  to  La  Trappe.  M.  de  la  Trappe
had  for  several  years  had  his  right  hand  disabled  so  that  he
could  not  use  it.  As  soon  therefore  as  I  received  my  own  orig¬
inal  picture  in  which  he  is  painted,  pen  in  hand,  seated  at  his
desk,  I  wrote  this  circumstance  on  the  hack  of  the  canvas,
in  order  that  in  future  it  might  not  be  misleading  ;  and  I  also
wrote  the  manner  in  which  the  portrait  was  painted  from
memory,  that  he  might  never  he  suspected  of  complying  with
a  desire  to  have  it  taken.

The  news  from  Spain  was  growing  daily  more  and  more  in¬
teresting.  We  have  seen  already  the  extreme  anger  of  Charles
The  Spanish  sue-  II.  on  the  news,  to  him  so  odious,  of  the  Treaty
of  Partition,  the  complaints  he  had  made,
echoed  by  his  ministers  throughout  all  Europe,  and  particu¬
larly  in  what  terms  he  had  made  his  ambassador  in  London
complain  to  the  King  of  England,  and  the  results  of  the  bitter¬
ness  of  that  complaint.  The  Council  of  Spain  was  constantly
assembled  to  deliberate  on  a  matter  so  important  that  it  awak¬
ened  the  men  who  composed  the  Council  from  that  deep
lethargy  which,  outside  of  Madrid  and  whatever  happens
there,  renders  the  great  Spanish  seigneurs  indifferent  to  all
the  rest  of  the  world.  The  first  step  of  the  Council  was  to
beg  the  King  of  Spain,  in  order  to  spare  his  health  and  avoid
hearing  the  frequent  discussion  of  matters  that  could  only
pain  him,  to  allow  them  to  assemble  out  of  his  presence  as
often  as  he  judged  necessary  ;  and  to  render  him  an  abridged
account  of  the  result  of  the  measures  he  saw  fit  to  take,
and  the  consequent  orders  which  he  might  give  under  the
circumstances.  Besides  the  Council  itself,  several  of  the
great  officers  of  the  State  deliberated  with  it.

1700]

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

203

Of  the  Council,  Villafranca  was  the  first  who  opened  his
eyes  to  the  only  course  they  could  take  to  prevent  the  dis-
The  Council  of  memberment  of  the  monarchy.  He  was  the
Spain.  head  of  the  house  of  Toledo,  a  man  of  seventy,

Spanish  to  the  teeth,  attached  to  the  maxims,  customs,
morals,  and  etiquettes  of  Spain  to  their  last  minutiae,  coura¬
geous,  lofty,  proud,  stern,  full  of  honour,  valour,  integrity,
virtue  ;  a  person  of  the  antique,  universally  liked  and  re¬
spected,  without  enemies,  much  beloved  and  revered  by  the
people,  and,  with  all  that  I  say  of  him,  a  mind  of  mediocrity.
He  saw  that  to  preserve  the  grandeur  of  the  State  and
for  its  people  to  remain  the  subjects  of  a  great  king,  the
succession  ought  to  fall  upon  the  second  son  of  the  only
son  of  the  Queen  of  France,  sister  of  the  King  of  Spain.
He  opened  himself  cautiously,  feeling  his  way,  to  Medma-
Sidonia,  though  the  latter  was  not  of  the  Council,  hut  by
office  and  by  intellect  a  great  figure  and  much  in  favour,
and  with  whom  he  was  particularly  intimate.  Medina-
Sidonia,  who  respected  Villafranca,  and  knew  him  to  he  as
good  an  Austrian  as  himself,  and  who,  governed  by  his  own
interests,  feared  above  all  things  the  dismemberment  of  the
monarchy,  entered  into  Villafranca’s  views  and  confirmed
them  by  his  own  convictions  and  arguments.  The  latter
were  clear:  the  power  of  France  was  great  and  in  high
reputation  in  Europe;  the  country  was  contiguous  by  sea
and  land  to  all  sides  of  Spain,  consequently  in  a  situation
to  either  attack  or  support  her  with  success  and  prompt-
tiude;  it  formed  the  whole  frontier  of  the  Low-Countries,
and,  moreover,  was  in  a  position  to  defend  the  Milanese
territory,  Naples,  and  Sicily  against  a  feeble  emperor  who
was  contiguous  to  none  of  those  States,  but  distant  from  all.
They  communicated  their  thoughts  to  Villagarcias  and  Vil¬
len  a,  who  at  once  entered  into  them.  They  next  thought  it

204

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vi

wise  to  win  over  San-Estevan,  the  wisest  head  in  the  Council;
Villena  was  the  husband  of  his  sister,  and  his  intimate  friend;
Villagarcias  stood  well  with  him  ;  together  they  undertook
the  matter  and  succeeded.  Thus  five  of  the  principal  men
of  Spain  were  determined  to  give  its  crown  to  one  of  our
princes.

They  felt,  nevertheless,  two  great  difficulties  :  the  solemn
and  repeated  renunciations  of  our  queen,  both  in  the  peace
celebrated  opin-  of  the  Pyrenees  and  in  her  marriage-contract  ;
ion  on  the  renun-  anq  fqie  natural  reluctance  of  their  own  king

ciations  of  Queen  °

Maria-Theresa.  to  withdraw  the  succession  from  his  own
house,  in  the  adoration  of  which  he  had  been  brought  up
and  nurtured  all  his  life  ;  and  to  withdraw  it,  too,  in  favour
of  a  house  the  enemy  and  rival  of  his  throughout  all  time.
This  last  obstacle  they  felt  there  was  no  one  able  to  remove
except  the  Cardinal  Portocarrero,  and  he,  through  the  work¬
ings  of  conscience.

With  regard  to  the  difficulty  of  the  renunciations,  Villa-
franca  delivered  an  opinion  which  cut  them  short.  He  de¬
clared  that  the  renunciations  of  Maria-Theresa  were  good  and
operative  so  long  as  they  were  kept  to  the  purpose  for  which
they  were  demanded  and  granted  ;  namely,  to  prevent,  for  the
peace  of  Europe,  that  the  two  crowns  of  France  and  Spain
should  he  united  on  one  head,  as  might  have  happened  with¬
out  this  wise  precaution  in  the  person  of  the  dauphin.  But
since  that  prince  had  now  three  sons,  the  second  of  whom
could  be  called  to  the  throne  of  Spain,  the  renunciations  of
the  queen  his  grandmother  were  nil,  since  there  was  no  such
effect  as  that  for  which  alone  they  were  made,  but  on  the
contrary  another,  not  affecting  the  peace  of  Europe  and
unjust  in  itself,  because  dispossessing  a  prince  without  a
State,  and  yet  a  legitimate  heir,  in  order  to  invest  with  his'
rights  those  who  were  not  heirs,  —  a  disposition,  moreover,

1700]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

205

which  would  have  the  effect  of  dispersing  and  totally  destroy¬
ing  a  monarchy  for  the  preservation  of  which  those  very
renunciations  had  been  made.  This  celebrated  opinion  was
approved  by  all;  and  Villafranca  was  charged  with  stating  it
in  open  Council.  Up  to  this  time  there  were  but  six  persons
in  the  secret:  the  four  councillors  named,  Medina-Sidonia,
and  the  Cardinal  Portocarrero.  They  justly  felt  the  secret
must  still  remain  inviolably  guarded  among  them  until  the
cardinal  had  persuaded  the  king.  The  difficulty  of  doing
this  was  immense.

Besides  the  innate  and  unbounded  passion  of  the  King  of
Spain  for  the  grandeur  of  the  house  of  Austria,  he  had  already
made  a  will  in  favour  of  the  archduke.  It  was  necessary
therefore  to  make  him  destroy  his  own  act,  the  masterpiece
of  his  heart,  the  consolation  for  the  premature  end  of  Ins
grandeur,  which  was  to  leave  all  to  his  own  house,  branch¬
ing  it  anew  after  the  manner  of  Charles  Y.  Furthermore,
to°base  on  this  destruction  for  the  house  of  Prance,  the
perpetual  enemy  and  rival  of  the  house  of  Austria,  the  hke
arandeur,  was  to  destroy  with  his  own  hands  all  that  was
most  precious  to  him  only  to  enrich  his  enemy  with  the
crowns  that  the  house  of  Austria  itself  had  accumulated  on
his  head.  But  to  succeed  in  bringing  the  kmg  to  reason  it
was  necessary  to  struggle  against  the  power  and  influence  of
the  queen,  which  were  firmly  established,  and  to  conduct
this  plot  under  the  eyes  of  the  emperor’s  ambassador,  Comte
d’Harrach,  who  had  his  own  scheme,  long  since  formed,

and  his  eyes  well  open.

The  king  was  watched  and  closely  surrounded,  m  the
hope  which  the  cardinal  had  of  bringing  him  to  a  perfect
and  prompt  obedience,  so  that  when  the  time
came  for  the  decision  required  of  him,  nothing
would  be  left  to  conquer  but  the  impotent  re-

Will  of  the  King
of  Spain  in  favour
of  the  Due
d’Anjou.

206

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yi.

mains  of  his  repugnance,  in  which  case  the  work  could  be
carried  through  in  earnest.  Ubilla,  secretary  of  the  Council,
admitted  to  the  secret,  drew  up  another  will  in  favour  of  the
Duc  d’Anjou,  giving  the  motives  and  causes  which  have
seemed  to  all  disinterested  minds  so  full  of  equity,  prudence,
force,  and  wisdom,  and  are  now  so  public  that  I  shall  say  no
more  about  them.  When  the  will  had  been  thoroughly  ex¬
amined  by  the  Councillors  who  were  in  the  secret,  Ubilla
took  it  to  the  King  of  Spam,  with  the  other  will  in  favour  of
the  archduke,  which  latter  was  burned  by  him  in  presence  of
the  king,  the  cardinal,  and  the  king’s  confessor,  while  the
other  was  immediately  signed  by  the  king,  and,  as  soon  as  it
was  closed,  certified  on  the  outside  by  the  signatures  of  the
cardinal,  Ubilla,  and  several  others.  The  fact  that  the  King
of  Spain  was  in  extremis  was  not  known  for  several  days
after  the  signing  of  the  will.  As  soon  as  the  news  of  his
dying  condition  reached  Versailles,  the  king  gave  orders  to
the  Marquis  d’Harcourt  to  hold  himself  ready  to  assemble  an
army  at  Bayonne,  for  which  all  necessary  preparations  were
made,  and  Harcourt  started  on  the  23rd  of  October,  intend¬
ing  to  seize  all  the  places  on  that  frontier,  such  as  Fontarabia
and  others,  and  enter  Spain  from  there.  Guipuscoa  belong¬
ing  to  France  by  the  Treaty  of  Partition,  nothing  was  to  be
done  in  that  direction.

As  soon  as  the  King  of  Spain  had  expired,  the  object  was
to  open  his  will.  The  Council  of  State  assembled,  and  all
the  grandees  of  Spain  who  were  then  in  Madrid  came  also.
Curiosity  to  behold  the  grandeur  of  an  event  so  rare,  and  in
which  so  many  millions  of  men  were  interested,  drew  all
Madrid  to  the  palace,  where  the  crowd  were  nearly  smothered
in  the  rooms  adjoining  that  in  which  the  grandees  and  the
Council  were  opening  the  will.  All  the  foreign  ministers
besieged  the  doors,  contending  among  themselves  who  should

207

1700]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

be  the  first  to  know  the  choice  of  the  king  who  was  just
dead,  in  order  to  inform  their  own  Court  instantly.  Our
ambassador,  Blécourt,  was  there  with  the  others,  and  not
knowing  more  than  they.  He  did  not  wait  to  hear  more
[than  the  announcement],  but  rushed  home  to  write  the
news  and  despatch  his  courier.  While  he  was  doing  this
Ubilla  sent  him  an  extract  from  the  will,  which  he  held  all
ready,  and  Blécourt  had  only  to  put  it  in  his  packet,  which
Barbézieux  received  and  carried  instantly  to  the  king  at
the  Council  of  finances,  on  Tuesday  morning,  November
the  9  th.

The  king,  who  was  to  hunt  that  day,  countermanded  the
party,  dined  as  usual,  showed  nothing  by  his  countenance,
The  two  Councils  and  merely  announced  the  death  of  the  King
in  Mme.  de  Main-  f  spain,  and  the  fact  that  he  should  wear

tenon’s  apart-  r  >  .  .  ,

ments.  mourning  for  him  ;  adding  that  there  would

not  be  during  the  whole  winter  either  appartement  or  come¬
dies,  or  any  amusements  whatever  at  Court.  As  soon  as  he
re-entered  his  cabinet,  he  sent  word  to  the  ministers  to  meet
him  at  three  o’clock  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartments.
Monseigneur  had  just  returned  from  a  wolf-hunt,  and  he,
too,  was  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  at  three  o  clock.  The
council  lasted  till  nearly  seven  o’clock,  after  which  the  king
worked  till  ten  with  Torcy  and  Barbézieux.  The  next  day,
Wednesday,  there  was  council  of  State  in  the  morning  as
usual,  and  the  king,  on  returning  from  a  hunt,  held  another,
as  on  the  previous  evening,  in  Mme.  de  Maintenons  apart¬
ments  from  six  in  the  evening  till  nearly  ten.  However
accustomed  the  Court  was  to  the  favour  of  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon,  it  was  not  prepared  to  see  her  taking  an  open  part  m
public  matters.  The  surprise  was  therefore  extreme  when  it
was  known  that  two  councils  of  State  had  assembled  in  her
room  for  the  greatest  and  most  important  deliberation  which

208  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

during  this  long  reign,  and  many  another  reign,  had  been
brought  upon  the  floor.

The  king,  Monseigneur,  the  chancellor,  the  Duc  de  Beau-
villiers,  and  Torcy  were  the  only  ones  who  discussed  this
great  affair,  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  whom,  being  silent  out
of  modesty,  the  king  obliged  to  give  her  opinion  after  all  had
expressed  theirs,  except  himself.  The  speakers  were  divided
in  opinion  :  two  were  in  favour  of  the  Treaty  of  Partition  ;
two  others  for  accepting  the  will.

The  first  two  maintained  that  good  faith  was  pledged.
That  in  accepting  the  will  a  long  and  bloody  war  must  he
expected,  because  of  the  insult  of  the  rupture  of  the  treaty,
and  also  because  of  the  interest  of  all  Europe  in  opposing  a
colossus  such  as  France  would  become  for  a  time,  if  allowed
to  take  possession  of  so  vast  an  inheritance.  That  France,
exhausted  by  a  long  succession  of  wars,  had  not  had  time  to
breathe  since  the  peace  of  Byswick,  and  was  not  in  a  con¬
dition  to  meet  another  struggle.  That  the  acceptance  of  the
will  involved  questions  of  which  no  man  could  see  the  re¬
sult  ;  but  which,  considered  in  general,  showed  plainly  that
human  prudence  was  against  such  committal.  That  by  hold¬
ing  to  the  treaty  of  Partition,  France  conciliated  Europe  by
keeping  her  word,  and  by  a  great  example  of  moderation,
and  would  thus  attract  the  confidence  of  all  Europe  of  which
she  would  become  the  dictatress,  —  a  thing  she  could  never
hope  to  be  by  arms  ;  while  the  interior  of  the  kingdom,
restored  by  long  peace,  enriched  at  the  expense  of  Spain  and
with  all  the  commerce  of  the  Levant,  would  form  a  State  so
powerful  that  it  would  in  future  be  the  terror  and  the  refuge
of  all  others,  and  in  a  sure  position  to  turn  the  affairs  of
Europe  as  she  chose.  Torcy  opened  with  this  opinion,  which
the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  supported  powerfully.

The  chancellor,  Pontcliartrain,  who  throughout  this  argu-

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  209

ment  liad  applied  himself  solely  to  discovering  the  king’s
wishes,  and  believed  that  he  had  finally  done  so,  spoke  next.
He  established,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  choice  lay  with  the
kins  whether  to  allow  the  house  of  Austria  to  branch  for
the  second  time  with  far  less  present  power  than  she  had  in
the  days  of  Philip  II.,  or  whether  he  should  take  the  same
advantage  for  his  own  house.  That  the  kingdom  of  France,  the
most  extended,  the  most  abundant,  the  most  powerful  in
Europe  (each  State  considered  separately),  had  the  advantage
of  not  depending  on  the  opinion  of  any  one,  no  matter  who,
and  of  taking  its  own  steps  by  the  sole  will  of  its  king,  which
rendered  its  action  prompt  and  secret;  also  that  of  being
contiguous  from  one  sea  to  another  with  Spain,  and  able
by  both  those  seas  to  increase  her  commerce  and  her  navy,
protect  those  of  Spain,  and  profit  by  this  union  for  the  trade
of  the  Indies.  That  France  and  Spain,  by  their  contiguity,
made  one  and  the  same  province,  and  could  act  at  all  times
without  the  knowledge  of  any  neighbour  ;  and  that  all  these
advantages  were  not  balanced  by  the  acquisition  of  Lorraine.
That  the  Treaty  of  Partition  had  only  been  accepted  because
no  better  could  then  be  hoped  for.  The  face  of  things,  en¬
tirely  changed  since  the  time  of  its  signature,  gave  the  king
full  liberty  of  action  without  accusing  him  of  want  of  faith  ;
and  to  refuse  this  succession  against  all  interests,  such  as  had
now  been  shown,  would  win  less  confidence  from  those  who
had  signed  the  Treaty  of  Partition  than  contempt,  and  the
conviction  of  an  impotence  which  would  embolden  them
to  attempt  to  despoil  France  herself.

These  two  opinions,  of  which  I  give  here  a  mere  synopsis,1
were  far  more  extended  on  both  sides,  and  much  disputed  by
each.  Monseigneur,  smothered  as  he  was  in  fat  and  apathy,
seemed  like  another  man  at  these  two  councils,  to  the  great

1  Very  much  abridged  in  the  translation.  —  Tr.

VOL.  I.  — 14

210  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

surprise  of  the  king  and  the  rest.  When  the  time  came  for
him  to  speak,  he  expressed  himself  with  vigour  in  favour  of
an  acceptance  of  the  will,  and  went  over  a  part  of  the  best
reasons  of  the  chancellor.  Then,  turning  to  the  king  with  a
respectful  hut  firm  manner,  he  told  him  that  having  now
given  his  opinion  with  the  others,  he  should  take  the  liberty
to  demand  of  him  his  heritage,  inasmuch  as  he  was  in  a
position  to  accept  it;  that  the  monarchy  of  Spain  was  the
right  of  the  queen  his  mother,  consequently  of  himself,  and,
for  the  tranquillity  of  Europe,  of  his  second  son,  to  whom  he
ceded  it  with  all  his  heart  ;  but  that  he  would  not  yield  one
inch  of  ground  to  any  other  ;  that  his  demand  was  just  and
in  conformity  with  the  honour  of  the  king,  and  the  interests
and  grandeur  of  his  crown,  and  that  he  hoped  it  might  not
he  rejected.  This  was  said  with  an  excited  face  which  sur¬
prised  every  one  exceedingly.  The  king  listened  very  atten¬
tively  ;  then  he  turned  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  said  :
“  And  you,  madame,  what  do  you  say  on  all  this  ?  ”  She
played  the  modest,  but  after  a  while,  being  pressed  and  even
commanded,  she  answered  in  a  few  words  of  becoming  em¬
barrassment,  and  then  praised  Monseigneur  (whom  she
feared  and  did  not  like,  nor  he  her),  adding  that  she  was
in  favour  of  accepting  the  will.

The  king  closed  the  council  without  expressing  himself.
He  said  that  he  had  listened  to  all,  and  understood  all  that
had  been  said  ;  that  there  were  strong  reasons  on  both  sides  ;
that  the  matter  deserved  to  be  slept  upon  ;  and  also  that  it
were  best  to  wait  twenty -four  hours  for  further  news  from
Spain,  and  see  if  the  Spaniards  were  of  the  same  mind  as
their  king.  He  then  dismissed  the  council  and  ordered  them
to  return  at  the  same  hour  to  the  same  place  the  following
evening.  The  next  day,  Thursday,  the  king,  between  his
lever  and  hearing  mass,  gave  audience  to  the  Spanish  ambas-

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  211

sador,  at  which  Monseigneur  and  Torcy  were  present.  The
ambassador  presented,  on  behalf  of  the  queen  and  the  Junta,
an  authentic  copy  of  the  will.  None  of  us  doubted  that  the
king,  though  he  did  not  commit  himself  explicitly,  gave  great
hopes  of  acceptance  to  the  ambassador,  after  whose  departure
he  sent  for  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  to  whom  he  confided
the  secret  of  his  decision.

The  necessary  continuation  of  so  interesting  a  narrative
has  not  allowed  me  to  break  the  thread  of  it.  But  now  that
it  reaches  a  halting-place,  I  return  for  a  mo-
king  and  his  min-  ment  on  my  steps.  The  astonishment  of
isters'  Blécourt  in  Madrid  at  so  unlooked-for  an

event  was  inconceivable.  The  surprise  of  the  king  and  his
ministers  at  Versailles  was  unparalleled.  Neither  he  nor
they  could  believe  what  they  read  in  Blécourt  s  despatches,
and  it  took  them  several  days  to  recover  themselves  suffi¬
ciently  to  deliberate  carefully  on  so  important  a  matter.  As
soon  as  the  news  was  made  public,  it  made  the  same  im¬
pression  upon  the  whole  Court,  and  the  foreign  ambassadors
spent  whole  nights  in  conferring  and  meditating  on  the
course  the  king  would  take,  and  on  the  interests  of  their
masters,  all  the  while  preserving  the  strictest  silence  ex¬
ternally.  The  courtiers  busied  themselves  in  arguing,  but
nearly  all  were  in  favour  of  accepting.  The  manner  of
acceptance  was  much  discussed  in  the  councils  ;  it  was
even  proposed  to  play  a  comedy  to  the  world  and  smuggle
the  Due  d Anjou,  under  convoy  of  the  Nuncio  Gualterio,
into  Spain.  I  knew  of  this,  and  was  thinking  about  being
of  the  party.  But  so  miserable  an  evasion  was  at  once
rejected,  out  of  shame  at  accepting  in  such  a  manner  the
offered  crowns,  and  also  because  of  the  necessity  of  throw¬
ing  off  the  mask  in  order  to  support  Spain,  which  was
too  feeble  to  be  left  to  her  resources.  As  nothing  was  talked

212  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

of  at  Court  but  the  course  to  be  followed,  the  king  amused
himself  one  evening  in  his  cabinet  by  asking  the  princesses
their  opinion.  They  replied  that  the  Duc  d’Anjou  ought  to
be  sent  to  Spain  at  once,  that  this  was  the  general  sentiment
and  one  that  they  had  heard  on  all  sides.  “  I  am  certain,
replied  the  king,  “  that  whichever  course  I  take,  there  will  be
plenty  of  people  to  condemn  me.”

On  Tuesday,  November  16,  the  king,  directly  after
his  lever,  took  the  Spanish  ambassador  to  his  cabinet,
Proclamation  of  which  the  Duc  d’Anjou  had  already  entered
the  King  of  spam,  py  tpe  pr[vate  door.  The  king,  pointing  to

the  duke,  told  the  ambassador  that  he  might  now  salute
him  as  his  king.  Instantly  he  threw  himself  on  his  knees,
after  the  Spanish  fashion,  and  made  the  prince  a  long  com¬
pliment  in  that  language.  The  king  told  him  that  his
grandson  did  not  yet  understand  it,  and  that  he  himself
would  reply  for  him.  Immediately  after  this  the  king,
against  all  custom,  ordered  the  folding-doors  of  his  cabinet
to  be  thrown  wide  open,  and  commanded  the  company,
who  were  almost  a  crowd,  to  enter.  Then,  turning  his  eyes
majestically  on  the  numerous  assembly  he  said,  motioning
to  the  Duc  d’Anjou  :  “  Messieurs,  here  is  the  King  of  Spain.
Birth  has  called  him  to  that  throne  ;  the  late  king  also,  by
his  will  ;  the  nation  desires  it  and  urges  it  upon  me  ;  it  is
Heaven’s  command  ;  and  I  grant  it  with  pleasure.”  Turning
to  his  grandson  :  “  Be  a  good  Spaniard  ;  that  is  now  your
first  duty  ;  but  remember  you  were  born  a  Frenchman  to
uphold  the  union  of  the  two  nations.  That  is  the  means
to  make  them  happy  and  preserve  the  peace  of  Europe.”
Then,  speaking  to  the  ambassador  and  pointing  with  his
finger  to  his  grandson,  he  added:  “If  he  listens  to  my
counsel,  you  will  be  a  great  seigneur,  and  that  soon  :  he
cannot  do  better  than  follow  your  advice.”

1700]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

213

The  first  tumult  among  the  courtiers  having  subsided,
the  two  other  sons  of  France  came  forward,  and  all  three
embraced  each  other  tenderly  and  with  tears  in  their  eyes
aeain  and  again.  Monseigneur,  who  knew  the  hour  which
the  king  had  determined  for  the  declaration  of  the  King
of  Spain,  told  it  to  those  who  were  at  Meudon.  Monsieur,
who  also  knew  the  secret,  stood  beneath  his  clock  impa¬
tient  to  announce  it;  and  a  few  minutes  before  the  hour
could  not  keep  himself  from  informing  his  Court  that  it  was
about  to  hear  great  news,  which  he  accordingly  told  them
when  the  hands  of  the  clock  touched  the  hour.  Since  the
preceding  Friday,  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  M.  le  Due
d’Anjou,  and  the  ambassador  of  Spain  knew  it  and  kept
the  secret  so  well  that  nothing  transpired  in  their  air  or
manner.  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  heard  it  on
arriving  from  Fontainebleau,  and  M.  le  Duc  de  Berry  on
Monday  morning.  Their  joy  was  extreme,  though  mingled
with  the  bitterness  of  parting  ;  the  brothers  were  tenderly
united,  and  if,  at  times,  their  vivacity  and  youth  excited  a
few  little  squabbles  between  the  elder  and  the  younger,  it
was  always  the  second,  naturally  cool,  sensible,  and  reserved,
who  pacified  them.

On  the  same  day  it  was  made  known  that  the  King  of
Spain  would  start  on  the  4th  of  December  ;  that  he  would
be  accompanied  by  the  princes  his  brothers,  who  had
begged  to  go  as  far  as  the  frontier  ;  that  M.  de  Beauvilliers
would  have  authority  throughout  the  journey  over  the
princes  and  courtiers,  and  the  sole  command  of  the  guards,
the  troops,  the  officers,  and  the  suite  ;  and  that  he  alone
would  regulate  and  order  all  things.

On  Saturday,  Dec.  4,  the  King  of  Spain  went  to  the
Departure  of  the  king  before  any  one  was  admitted,  and  stayed
King  of  Spain  and  him  a  w  time.  He  then  descended

the.  nrinces.  o

214

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ri.

to  Monseigneur,  with  whom  he  was  alone  for  a  time.
They  all  heard  mass  together  ;  the  crowd  of  courtiers
was  incredible.  Coming  out  from  mass  they  got  at  once
into  the  carriage,  —  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  be¬
tween  the  two  kings  on  the  back  seat,  Monseigneur  on
the  front  between  his  other  two  sons,  Monsieur  being  at
one  door,  Madame  at  the  other,  surrounded  with  the  pomp
of  more  guards,  men-at-arms,  and  outriders  than  usual.
The  whole  road  to  Sceaux  was  lined  with  carriages  and
people.  At  Sceaux,  where  they  arrived  about  mid-day,  they
found  the  palace  filled  with  courtiers  and  ladies  and  guarded
by  both  companies  of  the  mousquetaires.  As  soon  as  they
left  their  carriage  the  king  passed  rapidly  through  the
lower  apartment  and  entered  the  last  room  alone  with  the
King  of  Spam,  leaving  the  others  in  the  salon.  A  quarter
of  an  hour  later  he  called  Monseigneur  from  the  salon,
and  shortly  after  the  ambassador  from  Spain,  who  took
leave  of  his  new  master.  The  king  then  summoned  to¬
gether  Mgr.  le  Duc  and  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,
M.  le  Duc  de  Berry,  and  Monsieur  and  Madame  ;  next,
after  a  short  interval,  the  princes  and  princesses  of  the
blood.  The  double  doors  were  then  left  open  and  from  the
salon  they  could  be  seen,  all  weeping  bitterly.  The  king
said  to  the  King  of  Spain,  presenting  to  him  the  princes  :
“  These  are  the  princes  of  my  blood  and  of  yours  ;  the  two
nations  must  henceforth  look  upon  themselves  as  one
nation;  they  must  have  the  same  interests;  therefore  I
wish  these  princes  to  be  attached  to  you  as  well  as  to
me  ;  you  can  have  no  friends  more  faithful  nor  more  last¬
ing.”  All  this  took  an  hour  and  a  half.  At  the  close
they  were  forced  to  separate.  The  king  conducted  the
King  of  Spain  to  the  end  of  the  apartment,  where  he  em¬
braced  him  many  times  and  held  him  long  in  his  arms.

1700]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  Zlo

Monseigneur  the  same.  The  scene  was  extremely  touch¬
ing.  The  king  retired  for  some  time  to  recover  himself,
Monseigneur  got  alone  into  his  calèche  and  returned  to
Hendon  ;  and  the  King  of  Spain,  with  his  brothers  and
M.  de  Noailles  in  the  same  carriage,  drove  off  to  sleep  at
Chartres.

M.  de  Beauvilliers,  who  had  crammed  himself  with
quinine  to  check  an  obstinate  fever  accompanied  by  a
distressing  diarrhoea,  went  away  with  his  wife  and  Mmes,
de  Chevemy  and  de  Itasilly.  The  king  absolutely  insisted
that  he  should  start  and  attempt  to  make  the  journey.
We  will  let  them  go,  and  admire  the  ways  of  Providence,
which  plays  with  the  thoughts  of  men  and  disposes  of  na¬
tions.  What  would  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  Charles  A .,
or  Philip  IL  have  said,  they  who  attempted  to  invade
France  so  often,  they  who  have  been  accused  of  aspiring
to  universal  monarchy,  nay,  Philip  IV.  himself,  with
all  his  precautions  at  the  marriage  of  the  king  and  the
peace  of  the  Pyrenees,  —  what  would  he  have  said  to  see
a  son  of  France  become  King  of  Spain  by  the  will  of  the
last  of  his  blood  in  Spain,  and  by  the  universal  desire  of
the  Spaniards  themselves,  without  design,  intrigue,  or  cabal
of  ours,  without  the  knowledge  of  our  king  and  to  his
extreme  surpri.se,  he  feeling  nothing  but  embarrassment  in
deciding,  and  pain  in  accepting?  What  great  and  sage
reflections  could  here  be  made  !  But  in  these  Memoirs  they
are  out  of  place.  Return  we  now  to  other  events,  leaving
this  curious  and  interesting  tale,  the  current  of  which  I
have  not  been  willing  to  interrupt.

VIL

1701

Death  of
Bontems.

Bontems,  the  first  of  the  king’s  four  valets  de  chambre
and  governor  of  Versailles  and  of  Marly,  having  the  entire
administration  of  the  houses,  the  hunts,  and
a  quantity  of  all  sorts  of  expenses,  died  about
this  time.  Of  all  the  household  valets,  he
was  the  one  to  whom  the  longest  and  most  entire  confi¬
dence  of  the  king  in  all  private  and  personal  matters  was
given.  He  was  a  tall  man,  very  well-formed,  who  had
grown  stout  and  heavy  and  was  almost  eighty  years  of
age;  he  died  on  the  17th  of  January,  after  four  days’  ill¬
ness,  of  apoplexy.  No  man  was  ever  more  profoundly
discreet,  faithful,  and  completely  the  king’s  own  than  he  ;
to  say  all  in  one  word,  it  was  he  who  arranged  the  nocturnal
mass  in  the  king’s  cabinet  at  Versailles,  said  by  Père  de
La  Chaise  in  the  winter  of  1683-84,  at  which  the  king
married  Mme.  de  Maintenon  in  presence  of  Harlay  the
Archbishop  of  Paris,  Montchevreuil,  and  Louvois.

We  may  say  that  Bontems  and  the  king  were,  in  this
respect,  like  master,  like  man  ;  for  he  was  a  widower,  and
had  in  his  apartments  at  Versailles  a  Mlle,  de  La  Roche
(mother  of  the  La  Roche  who  followed  the  King  of  Spain
and  was  his  head  valet  de  chambre  for  twenty-five  years
until  his  death).  Mlle,  de  La  Roche  was  never  visible  else¬
where,  and  seldom  in  Bontems’  apartments,  which  she  never
left,  and  where  she  ruled  him  without  appearing.  No  one
doubted  that  she  was  his  Maintenon,  and  that  he  had
married  her.  But  why  not  acknowledge  it  ?  That  no  one

1701]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

217

has  ever  known.  He  was  bluff  and  brusque,  but  with  it
all  respectful  and  always  in  his  place,  which  was  never
anywhere  except  in  his  own  apartments  or  those  of  the
king,  which  he  entered  at  all  hours  by  the  back  way.  He
had  no  other  thought  than  to  serve  his  master  well,  and
to  him  he  was  utterly  devoted  without  ever  leaving  his  own
sphere.  Besides  the  very  intimate  functions  of  his  two  em¬
ployments,  it  was  through  him  that  all  secret  orders  and
messages  passed;  secret  audiences  were  admitted  by  him,
secret  letters  to  the  king  or  from  the  king,  and  all  else  that
was  mysterious  were  intrusted  to  him  It  was  enough  to  spoil
a  man  to  have  lived  for  fifty  years  in  such  intimacy,  with  the
Court  at  his  feet,  beginning  with  the  king’s  children  and  the
most  influential  ministers,  and  continuing  through  the  great¬
est  seigneurs  ;  yet  never  did  he  step  beyond  his  place  ;  he
had  less  assumption,  without  comparison,  than  the  most  in¬
significant  of  the  blue-coated  waiters,  who  were  all  under  his

O

orders.  Never  did  he  do  harm  to  any  one  living,  and  he
used  his  influence  solely  to  oblige.  Many  persons,  even  per¬
sonages,  owed  their  success  in  life  to  him,  about  which  his
modesty  was  such  that  he  would  have  quarrelled  with  them
had  they  ever  mentioned  it  to  him.  He  liked  and  wished  to
procure  favours  solely  for  the  pleasure  of  doing  good  ;  it  may
be  said  of  him  that  he  was  all  his  life  the  father  of  the  poor,
the  resource  of  afflicted  and  unfortunate  persons  whom
he  little  knew  ;  he  was  perhaps  the  best  of  human  beings,
not  only  with  hands  that  were  perfectly  clean,  but  with
an  absolute  disinterestedness  and  extreme  application  to
everything  that  was  under  his  charge.  So,  although  his
influence  for  others  was  much  lessened  by  his  age  and
heavy  weight,  his  death  caused  public  mourning  at  the
Court,  in  Paris,  and  in  the  provinces  ;  every  one  felt  it  as
a  personal  loss.  Equally  memorable  and  unexampled  was

218  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

the  tribute  rendered  voluntarily  to  his  memory  of  solemn
services  celebrated  for  him  everywhere.  In  him  I  lost
a  sure  friend,  full  of  respect  and  of  gratitude  to  my  father,
as  I  have  mentioned  elsewhere.  He  left  two  sons,  who
resembled  him  in  nothing  :  one  succeeded  him  as  head
valet  de  chambre  ;  the  other  was  head  valet  of  the  wardrobe.

M.  le  Cardinal  de  Noailles,  lately  returned  from  Eome,
drove  from  his  diocese  about  this  time  Mile.  Rose,  a  cele¬
brated  béate  of  ecstasies,  visions,  and  very  ex-

Mlle.  Rose  ;  .

extraordinary  traordinary  conduct,  who  directed  her  directors,
and  was,  in  fact,  a  real  enigma.  She  was  an
old  Gascon,  or  rather,  she  came  from  Languedoc,  having  the
gift  of  speech  to  excess  ;  square-shouldered,  neither  tall  nor
short,  very  thin,  her  face  yellow  and  extremely  ugly,  eyes
very  bright,  countenance  eager,  though  she  knew  how  to
soften  it  ;  lively,  eloquent,  learned,  with  a  prophetic  air  which
impressed  others.  She  slept  little  and  on  planks,  ate  almost
nothing;  was  ill-clothed,  poor,  and  only  to  be  seen  with
mystery.  This  creature  has  ever  been  an  enigma,  for  it
is  true  that  she  was  wholly  disinterested  ;  that  she  made
great  and  surprising  conversions,  which  have  lasted  ;  that  she
said  most  extraordinary  things,  some  very  secret  things,  which
had  happened  ;  others  that  were  to  happen,  which  have  since
come  to  pass  ;  that  she  made  amazing  cures  without  reme¬
dies  ;  and  that  she  had  for  her  supporters  very  wise,  very
learned,  very  pious  persons,  and  some  of  superior  genius,  who
did  not  and  could  not  gain  anything  from  this  attachment,
which  they  preserved  to  her  throughout  their  lives  ;  such,
for  instance,  as  M.  Duguet,  so  celebrated  for  his  works,  for
the  vast  extent  of  his  erudition,  which  might  even  be  called
universal,  for  the  sincere  humility  and  sanctification  of  his
life,  and  for  the  charms  and  solidity  of  his  conversation.

Mile.  Rose,  having  long  lived  in  her  own  province,  where

1701]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  219

slie  nursed  the  poor,  and  where  her  piety  gained  her  many
proselytes,  came  to  Paris,  I  don’t  know  for  what  reason.
Of  particular  doctrine  she  had  none,  except  that  she  was
strongly  opposed  to  that  of  Mme.  Guy  on,  and  altogether
on  the  Jansenist  side.  I  don’t  know  how  she  made  acquaint¬
ance  with  the  M.  Boileau  who  was  dismissed  by  the  arch¬
bishop  on  the  publication  of  his  “  Problem,”  and  who  lived
immured  and  almost  savagely  in  his  cloister  at  Saint-
Honoré.  There  she  met  M.  du  Charmel  and  others,  and
M.  Duguet,  all  of  whom,  to  tell  the  truth,  were  as  much
infatuated  with  her  as  M.  de  Cambrai  with  Mme.  Guyon.
After  she  had  led  a  hidden  life  for  a  long  time  in  Paris,
M.  du  Charmel  and  M.  Duguet  desired  that  M.  de  la  Trappe
should  see  her,  whether  to  get  the  opinion  of  that  great
master  on  so  extraordinary  a  person,  or  to  win  his  appro¬
bation  and  raise  their  saint  by  such  great  testimony  I  do
not  know.  They  therefore  started,  all  three,  without  saying
a  word,  and  went  to  La  Trappe,  where  nothing  was  known
of  their  project.

It  so  happened  that  I  went  also  to  La  Trappe  at  the  time
they  were  there.  I  had  never  met  M.  Duguet  or  his  saint.
She  saw  no  one,  and  hardly  left  her  room  except  to  go  to
mass  in  the  chapel  which  adjoins  the  abbatial  house  out¬
side  the  walls,  where  women  may  hear  it.  During  M.  de  la
Trappe’s  lifetime  I  was  in  the  habit  of  spending  six,  eight,
and  sometimes  ten  days  there.  I  had  therefore  an  oppor¬
tunity  to  see  M.  Duguet  and  Mlle.  Pose  several  times,
which  was  quite  a  favour.  I  acknowledge  that  I  thought
Mile.  Pose  was  more  queer  than  anything  else  ;  but  as  for
M.  Duguet,  I  was  charmed  with  him.  We  walked  together
every  day  in  the  gardens  of  the  abbatial  house.  Matters  of
devotion,  in  which  he  excelled,  were  not  the  only  topics
of  our  conversation  ;  a  flower,  an  herb,  a  plant,  the  first

220  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

thing  that  offered,  arts,  trades,  stuffs,  all  gave  him  subjects
for  instruction,  but  so  naturally,  so  easily,  so  fluently,  and
with  such  eloquent  simplicity,  in  terms  so  just,  appropriate,
and  exact,  that  one  was  equally  elevated  by  the  tone  of
his  conversation  and  amazed  at  the  extent  of  his  knowledge,
which  enabled  him  to  explain  things  as  a  botanist,  chemist,
artisan,  or  as  well  as  the  most  capable  of  merchants  might
have  done.  His  attention  and  veneration  for  Mile.  Eose,
his  satisfaction  and  rapt  delight  in  the  little  that  she  said,
astonished  me.  M.  de  Saint-Louis,  always  frank  and  open,
did  not  like  her,  and  said  so  very  freely  to  M.  du  Charmel,
who  let  M.  Duguet  know  of  it,  and  both  were  grieved
thereby.

But  what  troubled  them  far  more  was  the  gentle  and
polite  firmness  with  which,  during  the  six  weeks  they  were
there,  M.  de  la  Trappe  avoided  seeing  Mile.  Eose,  although
he  was  still  able  to  be  about  and  could  easily  have  gone
outside.  He  excused  himself,  less  on  the  ground  of  impossi¬
bility  than  on  his  own  remoteness  from  extraordinary  ways  ;
saying  that  he  had  no  mission  and  no  turn  for  that  species
of  examination  ;  that  his  own  state  of  death  to  all  earthly
things  and  his  life  of  secret  repentance  occupied  him  enough,
and  did  not  allow  him  to  be  distracted  by  useless  inquiries  ;
and  he  thought  he  did  better  to  form  no  judgment  and  pray
to  God  on  her  behalf,  than  to  see  her  and  enter  upon  a  dis¬
sipation  of  thought  which  was  not  in  his  line.  They  went
away,  therefore,  as  they  came,  being  much  mortified  by  the
non-success  of  their  visit.  Mile.  Eose  remained  hidden
for  a  long  time  among  her  proselytes  in  Paris,  until  the
number  of  them  so  increased  that  she  showed  herself  more
openly  and  became  their  directress  ;  which  made  a  great
talk.  The  Cardinal  de  Noailles  examined  her,  and  so,  I
think,  did  M.  de  Meaux.  The  end  was  that  they  drove

1701]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

221

lier  away  and  she  went  to  Annecy,  and  no  one  ever  heard
of  her  again,  though  she  lived  to  a  great  age.

The  king  seeing  that  the  alliance  formed  against  him  in
the  late  war  was  reuniting  and  preparing  to  renew  hostilities,
while  at  the  same  time  the  Powers  were  trying

Great  augmen-  #  .  ,  .

tation  of  troops.  to  ftlHtLSB  llllO.  SO  clS  t/O  gctlll  tllHO  t»0  pilt  tll6ir

Taxation.  own  affairs  in  order,  began  to  think  of  his  own

preparations.  He  increased  his  infantry  by  fifty  thousand
men,  formed  seventy  battalions  of  militia,  and  increased  his
cavalry  by  sixteen  thousand,  and  his  dragoons  in  proportion.
These  expenses  renewed  the  poll-tax,  the  invention  of  which
was  due  to  Bâville.  It  was  first  levied  towards  the  end  of
the  late  war.  Pontchartrain  had  resisted  it  as  long  as  he
could,  as  a  most  pernicious  tax,  from  the  ease  of  increasing
it  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen,  the  inevitable  injustice  of  its
working  (it  being  necessarily  dependent  on  the  will  of  the
provincial  collectors),  and  the  temptation  to  make  it  per¬
manent,  as  finally  happened,  in  spite  of  edicts  and  declara¬
tions  full  of  the  strongest  pledges  that  it  should  cease  at  the
peace.  This  time  it  was  made  far  heavier  than  the  first,
which  is  always  the  way  with  taxes  ;  they  go  on  increasing.

At  the  same  time  the  armies  were  placed  as  follows  :  in
Flanders  under  Maréchal  de  Boufflers  ;  and  in  Germany  under
Maréchal  de  Villeroy.  The  king  intended  that
tween  Monsieur  IVlgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  should  command
and  the  kmg.  ^  ]atter,  but  that  intention  was  changed  in

consequence  of  the  annoyance  Monsieur  showed  that  his
son,  the  Duc  de  Chartres,  was  not  allowed  to  serve.  M.  de
Chartres  had  made  various  escapades,  very  ill-regulated,  but
still  of  his  age,  which  angered  the  king  and  embarrassed
him  ;  he  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  this  nephew,  whom
he  had  forced  to  be  his  son-in-law,  and  with  whom,  except  as
to  written  contracts,  he  had  not  kept  a  single  promise  of

222  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

wliat  he  had  allowed  him  to  hope  for.  The  king  spoke  to
Monsieur  about  his  son,  and  reproached  him  for  his  weak¬
ness  in  not  knowing  how  to  assert  his  authority  over  him.
On  that  Monsieur  became  angry,  and  taking  courage  from
his  anger,  he  asked  the  king  what  he  expected  him  to  make
of  his  son  at  his  age  ;  saying  that  he  was  tired  of  kicking
his  heels  in  the  galleries  of  Versailles  and  on  the  stones  of
the  courtyard,  and  of  being  married  as  he  was,  and  kept  bare
of  everything,  while  his  brothers-in-law  were  loaded  with
offices,  governments,  establishments,  and  a  rank  for  which
there  was  no  reason,  policy,  or  example  ;  that  his  son  was  in
a  worse  condition  than  any  other  man  of  his  age  in  Trance  ;
that  idleness  was  the  mother  of  all  vice  ;  that  it  was  very
painful  to  him,  a  father,  to  see  his  only  son  abandoned  to
debauchery,  bad  company,  and  folly  ;  but  that  it  was  cruel
to  blame  him  for  not  being  able  to  manage  a  young  brain
that  was  justly  incensed,  and  yet  was  not  allowed  to  accuse
the  man  who  had  driven  him  into  such  ways  by  his  refusals
to  let  him  serve.  Who  was  the  amazed  party  at  such  plain
language  ?  The  king.  Never  before  had  Monsieur  come
within  a  thousand  leagues  of  taking  such  a  tone,  which
was  all  the  more  irritating  because  it  presented  reasons  to
which  there  was  no  reply,  but  to  which  the  king  was
determined  not  to  yield.  Still,  in  the  surprise  of  this  em¬
barrassment  he  was  sufficiently  master  of  himself  to  answer,
not  as  a  king,  but  as  a  brother.  He  told  Monsieur  he
forgave  everything  to  his  paternal  tenderness  ;  he  caressed
him,  and  did  all  he  could  to  bring  him  round  by  gentleness
and  friendship.  But  the  fatal  point  was  the  service  that
Monsieur  wanted,  which  in  the  end  must  have  led  to  the
post  of  commander-in-chief  ;  and  which,  for  that  very  reason,
the  king  would  not  grant,  —  a  reason  which  was  not  uttered
between  either  of  them,  but  which  the  one  understood  as

1701]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

223

Troubles  of
Monsieur.

fully  as  the  other.  The  conversation  lasted  a  long  time  and
went  far;  Monsieur  always  on  the  high  tone,  the  king
always  on  the  lower.  They  separated  at  last  ;  Monsieur
incensed,  but  not  daring  to  hurst  forth  again,  and  the  king
much  hurt  and  yet  not  wishing  to  estrange  Monsieur,  and
still  less  that  their  quarrel  should  he  known.

Monsieur  remained  at  Saint-Cloud  in  the  same  frame  of
heart  and  mind.  This  to  him,  in  his  present  feebleness,
was  being  off  his  centre  ;  for  the  habit  of  his
life  was  great  submission  and  great  attach¬
ment  to  the  king,  and  of  living  with  him  in  private  in  the
freedom  of  a  brother,  and  of  being  treated  like  a  brother,
with  all  sorts  of  attentions,  and  with  friendship  and  regard
in  everything  so  long  as  it  did  not  tend  to  make  Monsieur
a  personage.  Neither  he  nor  Madame  could  have  a  finger-
ache  but  the  king  went  instantly  to  see  them  and  continued
to  do  so  as  long  as  the  ache  lasted.  Other  matters  troubled
Monsieur’s  mind.  For  some  time  past  he  had  had  a  con¬
fessor  who,  albeit  a  Jesuit,  held  him  as  tightly  as  possible.
He  was  a  gentleman  of  good  family  in  Bretagne,  and  his
name  was  Père  du  Trévoux.  He  cut  off  not  only  Monsieur’s
improper  pleasures,  but  also  those  which  were  really  permis¬
sible,  by  way  of  penance  for  his  past  life.  He  frequently
told  him  that  he  did  not  choose  to  be  damned  for  him,  and
that  if  his  treatment  seemed  harsh  to  Monsieur,  he  should
not  feel  at  all  displeased  if  he  took  another  confessor.  To
which  he  added  that  Monsieur  had  better  take  heed  to
himself  ;  that  he  was  old,  worn-out  with  excesses,  fat,  short¬
necked,  and,  to  all  appearance,  likely  to  die  of  apoplexy,
and  that  soon.  These  were  dreadful  words  to  the  most
sensual  of  princes  and  the  most  attached  to  life  that  the
world  had  seen  for  many  a  long  day  ;  one  who  had  passed
that  life  in  luxurious  idleness,  and  was  utterly  incapable

224  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

by  nature  of  application  of  any  kind,  of  any  sort  of  serious
reading,  or  even  of  turning  his  mind  upon  himself.  He
feared  the  devil;  he  remembered  that  his  preceding  con¬
fessor  was  not  willing  to  die  in  that  capacity  ;  and  that
before  his  death  he  had  talked  to  him  in  about  the  same
way.  The  impression  now  made  did  force  him  somewhat
to  look  within,  and  to  live  in  a  manner  which  might
pass  for  amendment  on  his  part.  He  made,  now  and  then,
a  great  many  prayers,  obeyed  his  confessor,  rendered  him
an  account  of  the  conduct  the  latter  had  prescribed  as  to
gambling,  as  to  his  other  extravagances,  and  a  variety  of
matters,  put  up  patiently  with  frequent  interviews,  and  re¬
flected  a  good  deal.  But  he  grew  very  sad  and  depressed
and  talked  less  than  usual,  —  that  is  to  say,  about  as  much
as  three  or  four  women,  —  so  that  everybody  soon  perceived
the  change.  These  inward  distresses  and  the  outward  dis¬
agreement  with  the  king  were  too  much,  coming  all  at
once,  for  a  man  as  feeble  as  Monsieur,  so  little  accustomed
to  restrain  himself  and  quite  unable  to  bear  any  personal
annoyance.  It  would  have  been  singular  if  it  had  not  pro¬
duced  a  great  disturbance  in  a  body  so  plethoric  and  accus¬
tomed  to  much  eating,  not  only  at  meals,  but  all  day  long.

On  Wednesday,  June  8,  Monsieur  came  from  Saint-
Cloud  to  dine  with  the  king  at  Marly,  and,  as  usual,  entered
his  cabinet  as  soon  as  the  council  of  State  had  left  it.  He
found  the  king  irritated  with  certain  annoyances  which
M.  de  Chartres  was  intentionally  giving  his  daughter.  The
duke  was  in  love  with  Mlle,  de  Séry,  a  maid  of  honour  to
Madame,  and  was  carrying  on  the  affair  to  beat  of  drum.
The  king  took  that  for  his  theme,  and  reproached  Monsieur
sharply  for  his  son’s  conduct.  Monsieur,  who  in  his  present
state  needed  but  little  to  make  him  angry,  replied  with
bitterness  that  fathers  who  had  led  certain  lives  could

1701]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  225

hardly  have  the  grace  and  the  authority  to  reprove  their
sons.  The  king,  who  felt  the  force  of  the  answer,  retreated
to  the  patience  of  his  daughter,  and  said  that  at  least  such
sights  should  he  hidden  from  her  eyes.  Monsieur,  with
the  bit  in  his  teeth,  reminded  him,  in  stinging  words,  of
the  care  he  had  shown  for  the  queen’s  feelings  when  he
made  his  mistresses  take  journeys  with  her  in  the  same
carriage.  The  king,  incensed,  retorted,  so  that  they  both
began  to  talk  at  the  top  of  their  voices.

At  Marly  the  king’s  room  opened  on  a  little  salon,  always
full  of  courtiers  at  this  hour  to  see  the  king  pass  to  dinner  ;
and  by  one  of  those  usages  set  up  in  the  different  palaces
without  knowing  why,  the  door  of  this  cabinet,  unlike  those
of  the  other  houses,  always  stood  open  at  Marly,  except
during  the  council,  and  there  was  only  a  portière,  which
the  usher  drew  hack  to  allow  of  entrance.  At  the  noise
now  made  the  usher  entered,  told  the  king  that  he  was
heard  distinctly  in  the  salon,  and  Monsieur  also,  and  went
out  again.  The  other  cabinet  of  the  king  adjoined  the
first  and  had  neither  door  nor  portière.  The  in-door  valets
were  always  stationed  in  this  second  cabinet,  and  they  heard
from  end  to  end  the  dialogue  I  have  now  reported.

The  notice  given  by  the  usher  lowered  the  tones  but  did
not  stop  the  reproaches,  so  that  Monsieur,  off  his  hinges,
told  the  king  that  in  marrying  his  daughter  his  son
had  been  promised  wonders,  and  yet  he  had  not  so  much
as  wrenched  a  government  from  him  ;  that  he  himself  had
passionately  desired  to  get  him  away  from  his  love-affairs,
and  that  his  son,  too,  had  wished  it,  as  the  king  well  knew,
for  he  had  asked  for  service  earnestly;  and  as  the  king
would  not  give  it,  he  did  not  intend  to  prevent  his  son  from
amusing  himself  by  way  of  consolation.  He  added  that  he
now  saw  only  too  well  the  truth  of  what  had  been  predicted

YOL.  i.  — 15

»

226  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chaf.vii.

to  him,  namely,  that  he  would  only  have  shame  and  dis¬
honour  from  that  marriage,  without  getting  any  profit  from
it.  The  king,  more  and  more  incensed,  replied  that  the  war
would  soon  oblige  him  to  make  certain  retrenchments,  and
that,  as  Monsieur  showed  himself  so  little  complying,  he
should  begin  by  cutting  off  his  pensions  before  retrenching
on  himself.

At  this  moment  the  king  was  informed  that  dinner
was  served.  They  left  the  room  to  sit  down  to  table, —
Monsieur  a  flaming  scarlet,  his  eyes  sparkling  with  anger.
His  burning  face  made  several  of  the  ladies  at  the  table
and  the  courtiers  who  stood  behind  them  say  that  he
ought  to  be  hied.  The  dinner  passed  as  usual.  Monsieur
ate  enormously,  as  he  always  did  at  his  two  meals,  not  to
speak  of  his  abundant  chocolate  in  the  morning,  and  all
that  he  managed  to  swallow  of  fruits,  pastries,  confec¬
tionery,  and  every  sort  of  other  dainty  during  the  day.
On  leaving  the  table  Monsieur,  who  had  brought  the
Duchesse  de  Chartres  to  dine  with  the  king,  took  her

Death  of
Monsieur.

to  Saint-Germain,  and  soon  after  returned  with  her  to
Saint-Cloud.

That  evening,  after  supper,  while  the  king  was  still  in
his  cabinet  with  Monseigneur  and  the  princesses,  Saint-
Pierre  arrived  from  Saint-Cloud  and  asked
to  speak  with  the  king  on  the  part  of  the
Duc  de  Chartres.  He  was  brought  to  the  cabinet  and
told  the  king  that  Monsieur  had  been  seized  with  a
faintness  while  supping  ;  he  was  bled  and  felt  better,  but
they  had  given  him  an  emetic.  The  real  truth  was  he  was
supping  as  usual  with  the  ladies  when,  towards  the  last,  as
he  was  pouring  out  a  glass  of  liqueur  for  Mme.  de  Bouillon,
it  was  noticed  that  he  stammered  and  pointed  to  something
with  his  hand.  As  he  sometimes  talked  Spanish  some  of

1701]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  227

the  ladies  asked  him  what  he  said,  others  cried  ont  ;  it  all
happened  in  a  moment,  and  then  he  fell  over  on  the  Due
de  Chartres  in  a  fit  of  apoplexy.  They  carried  him  to  his
room,  shook  him,  walked  him  about,  bled  him,  gave  him
an  emetic,  but  without  his  showing  more  than  a  faint  sign
of  life.

At  this  news  the  king,  who  for  mere  nothings  was  in
the  habit  of  hurrying  to  Monsieur,  went  to  Mme.  de
Maintenon’s  apartment  and  woke  her  up.  He  was  with
her  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  then,  about  midnight,  he  returned,
ordered  his  carriages  to  be  kept  ready,  and  sent  the  Marquis
de  Gesvres  to  Saint-Cloud  with  orders  to  come  back  and
wake  him  if  Monsieur  were  worse,  and  then  went  to  bed.
I  think  the  king  suspected  some  pretence  in  order  to  get
out  of  the  position  they  were  in  ;  and  he  went  to  Mme.
de  Maintenon  to  consult  her  about  it.  He  would  rather,
I  think,  offend  all  propriety  than  run  the  risk  of  becoming
a  dupe.

An  hour  and  a  half  after  the  king  had  gone  to  bed
Longueville  arrived  from  the  Duc  de  Chartres,  and  woke
up  the  king  to  inform  him  that  the  emetic  had  had  no
effect  and  Monsieur  was  very  ill  indeed.  The  king  rose
and  started,  meeting  the  Marquis  de  Gesvres  on  the  way,
who  was  coming  for  him.  Ho  one  can  imagine  the
excitement  and  disorder  of  that  night  at  Marly,  or  the
horror  at  Saint-Cloud,  that  palace  of  delights.  Everybody
at  Marly  rushed,  as  best  they  could,  to  Saint-Cloud.  Those
first  ready  got  off  at  once;  men  and  women  sprang  into
the  carriages  and  piled  themselves  up,  without  selection  or
ceremony,  IVfonseigneur  went  with  Mme.  la  Duchesse.  He
was  so  shocked,  remembering  a  late  attack  of  his  own,
that  it  was  all  the  equerry  of  Mme.  la  Duchesse  could  do
to  drag  and  almost  carry  him,  trembling,  to  the  carriage.

228  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

The  king  arrived  at  Saint-Cloud  by  three  in  the  morning.
Monsieur  had  not  had  a  conscious  moment  since  he  was
taken  ill.

The  king  was  much  afflicted.  It  was  natural  to  him
to  weep  easily,  and  he  was  now  dissolved  in  tears.  He
had  never  had  reason  to  do  otherwise  than  love  Monsieur
tenderly;  however  opposed  they  had  been  for  the  last  two
months,  these  sad  moments  renewed  all  his  tenderness  ;
perhaps,  too,  he  reproached  himself  for  having  hastened
this  death  by  the  scene  of  the  morning.  Monsieur  was
his  younger  by  two  years,  and  all  his  life  had  had  the
same  fine  health  as  himself,  only  better.  The  king  heard
mass  at  Saint-Cloud,  and  about  eight  in  the  morning,  there
being  no  hope  for  Monsieur,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  entreated  him  not  to  remain  any
longer,  and  they  returned  with  him  in  his  carriage  to
Marly.  As  he  was  leaving,  he  said  a  few  kind  words  to
the  Duc  de  Chartres,  both  weeping  bitterly,  and  the  young
prince  profited  by  the  moment  to  say,  embracing  him,
“  Ah,  sire  !  what  will  become  of  me  ?  I  lose  Monsieur,
and  I  know  that  you  do  not  like  me.”  The  king,  surprised
and  much  touched,  said  all  that  was  tender.

On  the  departure  of  the  king  the  crowd  slipped  away
from  Saint-Cloud,  little  by  little,  so  that  Monsieur,  dying
upon  the  sofa  in  his  cabinet,  lay  exposed  to  the  eyes  of
the  scullions  and  lower  servants,  who,  for  the  most  part,
either  from  interest  or  affection,  were  much  afflicted.  The
head  servants  and  others  who  lost  their  places  and  pensions
rent  the  air  with  their  cries,  while  all  the  women  at  Saint-
Cloud,  who  lost  by  this  death  all  their  importance  and  all
their  amusement,  ran  hither  and  thither  with  dishevelled
heads  like  bacchantes.  Madame,  who  had  never  had  any
great  affection  or  esteem  for  Monsieur,  but  who  felt  his

1701]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  229

loss  and  her  own  downfall,  was  in  her  cabinet  crying  out
in  her  distress  :  “No  convent  !  don’t  talk  to  me  of  a  con¬
vent  !  I  will  not  have  any  convent  !  ”  The  worthy  princess
was  not  out  of  her  head  ;  she  knew  that  by  her  marriage
contract,  she  was  to  choose,  on  becoming  a  widow,  between
a  convent  or  living  in  the  château  of  Montargis.  Whether
she  thought  she  could  get  out  of  the  latter  more  easily
than  out  of  the  former,  or  whether  she  dreaded  the  king,
she  seemed  to  he  most  afraid  of  a  convent.  As  soon  as
Monsieur  had  expired  she  got  into  a  carriage  with  her
ladies  and  went  to  Versailles,  followed  by  the  Due  and
Duchesse  de  Chartres  and  all  the  persons  who  belonged  to
them.

The  next  morning,  Friday,  M.  de  Chartres  went  to  the
king,  who  was  still  in  bed,  and  who  spoke  to  him  with  the
greatest  kindness.  He  said  he  must  look  to  him  henceforth
as  a  father  ;  that  he  would  take  charge  of  his  interests  and
his  grandeur.  He  added  that  he  had  forgotten  all  the  little
subjects  of  annoyance  that  he  had  against  him,  and  hoped
the  duke  would  forget  them  also  ;  and  he  begged  him  to  allow
these  advances  of  friendship  to  wm  his  attachment  and  that
he  would  give  him  hack  his  heart,  as  he  himself  gave  him
back  his  own.  We  can  imagine  the  answer  of  the  Duc  de

Chartres.

The  Court  lost  much  in  losing  Monsieur,  for  it  was  he
who  kept  it  in  amusements,  vivacity,  and  pleasures,  and
when  he  left  it  all  became  lifeless  and  inactive.  He  loved
the  great  world  ;  his  affability  and  courtesy  drew  every  one
about  him,  and  the  difference  he  knew  how  to  make,  and
never  failed  to  make,  towards  others  according  to  what
they  were,  contributed  to  this  attraction.  By  his  greeting,
and  by  his  attention,  more  or  less  great  or  negligent,  he
continually  marked  a  difference  which  distinguished  birth

230  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

and  dignity,  age  and  merit,  and  people’s'  condition  ;  and
this  with  a  dignity  that  was  natural  to  him,  and  an  ease
in  all  his  movements  which  was  acquired.  His  familiarity
gratified  ;  but  he  always  maintained  his  natural  grandeur,
without  repulsing  any  one,  and  without  allowing  heedless
persons  to  infringe  it.  He  visited  and  paid  attentions  exactly
where  he  ought  to  do  so  ;  and  he  gave  in  his  own  house
entire  liberty  to  every  one,  without  allowing  the  slightest
diminution  of  the  grand  court  air  and  respect.  He  had
learned  from  the  queen  his  mother  the  art  of  holding  a
Court,  and  had  well  retained  it.  He  liked  also  to  have  it
full,  and  in  this  he  succeeded.  The  crowd  was  always  great
at  the  Palais-Royal.

Though  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  be  more  timid
and  submissive  than  Monsieur  to  the  king,  even  to  flattering
his  ministers,  and  in  former  days  his  mistresses,  he  never¬
theless  preserved,  with  a  great  air  of  respect,  the  free  and
easy  manners  and  the  tone  of  a  brother.  In  private,  he
took  many  liberties  ;  seating  himself  always  in  an  armchair,
not  waiting  until  the  king  should  ask  him  to  sit  down.
He  never  could  bring  himself  to  bend  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
or  keep  from  letting  fly,  from  time  to  time,  little  sneers  to
the  king  or  scoffs  to  the  world.  It  was  not  her  favour  that
annoyed  him,  but  the  thought  that  “la  Scarron”  was  his
sister-in-law;  that  idea  was  intolerable  to  him.  He  was  a
small  man  with  a  big  stomach,  who  seemed  to  be  mounted
on  stilts,  so  high  were  the  heels  of  his  shoes  ;  always
bedecked  like  a  woman,  covered  with  rings,  bracelets,  and
jewelry  everywhere  ;  wearing  a  long  wig,  black  and  powdered
and  spread  out  in  front,  ribbons  wherever  he  could  put
them,  quantities  of  all  sorts  of  perfumes,  and  cleanliness
itself  in  every  way.  He  was  accused  of  wearing  a  modicum
of  rouge.  His  nose  was  very  long,  his  mouth  and  eyes  fine,

231

1701]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

his  face  full,  but  also  very  long.  All  his  portraits  are  like
him.  I  was  always  provoked  to  see  how  his  looks  re¬
minded  every  one  that  he  was  the  son  of  Louis  XIII.,  that
great  prince  to  whom,  in  true  value,  he  was  so  completely
dissimilar.

The  king  gave  to  the  Duc  de  Chartres,  besides  the  allow¬
ances  he  had  always  had  and  still  kept,  all  those  of  Monsieur,
amounting  to  six  hundred  and  fifty  thousand

Amazing  treat-  °  ,  ,  ,

ment  of  the  Duc  francs  ;  so  that,  with  his  appanage  and  other
property,  he  had,  after  paying  Madame's  dowry
Duc  d’Orléans.  and  a]p  charges,  a  revenue  of  one  million

eight  hundred  thousand  francs,  together  with  the  Palais-
Royal,  Saint-Cloud,  and  other  houses.  He  had  also,  what
was  never  given  before  except  to  the  sons  of  Prance,  guards
and  Suisses,  like  those  of  Monsieur,  his  own  guardroom  at
Versailles,  a  chancellor,  an  attorney-general,  in  whose  name
he  pleaded  and  not  in  his  own,  and  the  nomination  to  all
the  offices  of  his  appanage,  except  to  bishoprics  ;  in  other
words,  all  that  Monsieur  had  had  was  made  over  to  him  in
full.  While  keeping  his  own  regiments  of  cavalry  and
infantry  he  now  had  those  of  Monsieur,  also  his  companies
of  men-at-arms  and  light  dragoons,  and  he  took  from  this
time  forth  the  name  of  Duc  d’Orléans.  Honours  so  great
and  so  unheard-of,  with  an  allowance  larger  by  several
hundred  thousand  francs  than  that  of  Monsieur,  were  solely
due  to  the  consideration  of  his  marriage,  to  the  recent
reproach  of  Monsieur  that  he  had  only  got  shame  for  it  and
nothing  else,  and  to  the  grief  the  king  felt  for  the  angry
feelings  between  Monsieur  and  himself,  and  the  fear  that
they  had  hastened  his  death.

The  marriage  of  the  King  of  Spain  was  announced,  to

1  Sons  and  grandsons  of  the  kings  of  France  in  the  succession  to  the
throne.

232

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yii.

the  second  daughter  of  the  Duc  de  Savoie,  younger  sister
of  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  to  whom  it  was  a  great

joy;  while  at  the  same  time  it  was  a  great
honour  and  advantage  to  her  father  to  have
as  sons-in-law  the  two  most  powerful  kings  of

Marriage  of
Philippe  V.
announced.

Europe.  An  ambassador  extraordinary  was  sent  to  Turin
to  sign  the  marriage  contract  and  carry  to  the  Prince  de
Carignan,  that  famous  mute  so  wise  and  capable,  the  proxy
to  marry  the  princess  in  the  king’s  name.  This  ambassador
was  a  man  of  much  intellect,  good  sense  and  conduct,
and  well  accustomed  to  courts.  He  wTas  named  Homodeï,
brother  of  the  cardinal  of  that  name.  The  Comte  de  San-
Estevan  del  Puerto  was  appointed  the  major-domo  of  the
new  queen.  Nothing  could  be  better  than  these  appoint¬
ments  to  the  two  offices  ;  but  there  was  still  a  third  to
be  made  that  was  far  more  important,  for  it  concerned  the
bringing  up  and  forming  of  the  young  queen  ;  namely,
that  of  her  camarera-mayor.  A  lady  of  our  Court  would
not  be  proper;  a  Spanish  lady  was  not  safe,  and  might
easily  rebuff  the  young  queen.  Search  was  made  for  some
neutral  person,  and  the  choice  fell  on  the  Princesse  des
Ursins.  She  was  French,  she  had  lived  in  Spain,  and  had
passed  the  greater  part  of  her  life  in  Rome  and  Italy.
Her  first  husband  was  Adrien-Blaise  de  Talleyrand,  who
called  himself  the  Prince  du  Chalais,  and  her  second  the
Duke  de  Bracciano,  head  of  the  house  of  Orsini  [des  Ursins],
a  grandee  of  Spain,  and  Prince  du  Soglio,  who  was  regarded
as  the  first  laic  in  Rome  and  received  great  distinctions.
Mme.  des  Ursins  was  now  a  widow  without  children,  and
not  rich  since  the  death  of  her  husband  ;  she  had  passed
enough  time  in  France  to  be  well-known  at  court  and  to
have  made  many  friends  there.  It  was  there  that  I  knew
her  and  that  I  made,  I  may  say,  a  very  close  friendship  with

1701]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

233

her.  She  became  later  so  grandly  singular  a  personage  that
I  willingly  dwell  upon  her  here.

Age  and  health  were  suitable,  and  her  appearance  also.
She  was  tall  rather  than  short;  a  brunette  with  blue  eyes,
which  said  at  all  times  exactly  what  she  meant

The  Princesse

des  ursins;  her  them  to  say  ;  a  perfect  figure,  a  beautiful  bust,  and
character.  &  face  without  beauty  but  charming  ;  extremely

noble  in  air,  something  majestic  in  her  whole  bearing,  with
graces  so  natural,  so  constant  in  all  things,  even  in  those
that  were  small  and  insignificant,  that  I  never  knew  any
woman  approach  her,  whether  in  person  or  intellect,  of
which  she  had  a  vast  deal  of  all  kinds.  She  was  flattering,
caressing,  insinuating,  but  circumspect  ;  wishing  to  please  for
pleasing’s  sake,  and  with  charms  against  which  there  was
no  defending  one’s  self  if  she  wished  to  seduce  and  win  ;
and  with  it  all  an  air  of  grandeur  that  attracted  rather
than  repelled;  a  delightful  gift  of  conversation  that  never
flagged,  and  was  always  most  amusing  about  what  she  had
seen  and  known  of  countries  and  persons  ;  a  voice  and  speech
extremely  agreeable,  and  a  gentle  manner  ;  also  she  had  read
a  great  deal  and  was  a  person  of  much  reflection.  Great
art  in  selecting  the  best  society,  much  usage  in  receiving
it,  and  even  in  holding  a  Court,  much  politeness,  but  always
with  great  distinction,  and  above  all,  with  great  care  never
to  make  advances  unless  with  dignity  and  discretion.  The
most  suitable  person  in  all  the  world  for  intrigue,  who
had  passed  her  life  in  it  at  Rome  by  her  own  choice  ;  much
ambition,  but  vast  ambitions,  far  above  those  of  her  own
sex  or  the  ordinary  ambition  of  men,  and  a  great  desire
to  be  and  to  govern.  She  was  also  a  person  of  very  shrewd
wit,  although  she  seldom  showed  it,  and  many  contrivances
in  her  brain;  and  one  who  had  an  immense  talent  for  judg¬
ing  her  world  and  knowing  how  to  handle  it  and  lead  it.

234  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

Coquetry  and  infatuation  for  her  own  person  were  the
dominant  weaknesses  of  her  character  and  survived  every¬
thin'?,  even  to  old  age  ;  the  consequence  was,  personal  adorn¬
ment  that  no  longer  became  her  and  which  from  year  to
year  she  pushed  farther  still.  Proud  to  the  bottom  of  her
soul,  going  to  her  ends  without  troubling  herself  very  much
about  the  means,  hut,  as  much  as  possible,  with  a  creditable
outside  ;  naturally  kind  and  obliging  in  general  ;  but  never
liking  half-way  things  ;  she  wanted  her  friends  to  be  hers
without  reserve  ;  she  was  a  warm  and  excellent  friend  her¬
self,  with  a  friendship  that  neither  time  nor  absence  could
weaken  ;  consequently  a  cruel  and  implacable  enemy,  follow¬
ing  her  hatreds  to  hell.  To  sum  up  all,  she  had  a  unique
turn  to  her  grace,  her  art,  her  precision,  with  a  simple  and
natural  eloquence  in  what  she  said,  which  enabled  her  to  say
all  she  wished  and  as  she  wished,  with  never  a  word  or  tone
that  she  did  not  wish;  very  secret  about  herself,  and  very
safe  for  her  friends  ;  with  an  agreeable  gayety  that  had
nothing  in  it  but  what  was  becoming  ;  of  extreme  propriety
in  all  external  matters,  and  even  in  those  internal  ones  which
seemed  to  permit  it  less  ;  with  an  equability  of  temper  which
enabled  her  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances  to  be
mistress  of  herself.  Such  was  this  celebrated  woman  who
so  long  and  so  publicly  governed  the  Court  and  the  whole
monarchy  of  Spain,  and  who  has  made  such  noise  in  the
world,  by  her  reign  and  by  her  downfall,  that  I  have  thought
I  ought  to  make  her  known  and  give  that  idea  of  her  which
persons  need  to  have  in  order  to  reach  the  truth.

A  woman  of  this  character  was ,  deeply  gratified  by  a
choice  which  opened  to  her  a  career  so  much  to  her  liking  ;
but  she  had  the  good  sense  to  feel  that  it  only  fell  upon  her
for  want  of  finding  another  whose  circumstances  were  as
manifestly  suitable,  and  also  that  the  place  once  offered  to

1701]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

235

her  she  would  not  he  permitted  to  refuse  it.  She  therefore
allowed  herself  to  be  entreated  sufficiently  to  increase  the
desire  to  obtain  her,  —  not  enough  to  displease  or  to  seem  to
behave  with  a  bad  grace,  but  so  as  to  win  a  certain  gratitude
for  her  final  acceptance.  She  went  direct  from  Eome  to
Genoa  and  from  Genoa  to  Villafranca,  where  she  awaited
the  new  queen.

The  marriage  took  place  in  Turin,  with  very  little  cere¬
mony,  on  the  11th  of  September;  and  the  queen  left  on  the
13th  to  reach  Nice  the  following  week  and  embark  on  the
Spanish  galleons,  commanded  by  the  Comte  de  Lermos,  which
were  to  take  her  to  Barcelona.  On  arriving  at  Nice  in  the
French  ships,  she  found  herself  so  fatigued  by  a  sea-voyage
that  she  determined  to  continue  her  journey  by  land,
through  Provence  and  Languedoc.  Her  grace,  her  presence
of  mind,  the  propriety  and  politeness  of  her  short  replies,
her  judicious  interest  in  everything,  so  surprising  in  a
princess  of  her  age,  gave  the  greatest  hopes  to  Mme.  des
Ursins.  When  they  arrived  at  Figuières,  the  king,  impa¬
tient  to  see  her,  met  her  on  horseback  and  rode  back  to
the  town  beside  her  carriage-door,  —  Mme.  des  Ursins,  un¬
known  at  that  time  to  the  king  and  very  little  known
to  the  queen,  being  a  great  relief  to  them  under  their  first
embarrassment.

On  arriving  at  Figuières,  the  diocesan  bishop  remarried  the
royal  pair  without  much  ceremony,  and  they  sat  down  soon
after  to  supper,  served  by  the  Princesse  des

The  Queen  of  ,  .  . .  ,

Spain;  a  vexa-  Ursins  and  the  other  ladies  of  the  palace,
tious  scene.  The  qighes  were  half  French,  and  half  Span¬

ish.  This  mixture  displeased  the  Spanish  ladies  and  many
of  the  Spanish  seigneurs,  who  agreed  together  to  show
their  displeasure  openly  ;  the  affair  was  scandalous.  Under
one  pretext  or  another,  the  weight  or  the  heat  of  the  dishes,

236  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tii.

or  the  awkward  way  in  which  they  were  presented,  not  a
single  French  dish  reached  the  table,  all  were  upset,  while
the  Spanish  dishes  were  served  without  accident.  The
stiff  and  displeased  air,  to  call  it  nothing  worse,  of  the
Spanish  ladies  was  too  visible  not  to  be  observed  ;  but
the  king  and  queen  had  the  wisdom  to  take  no  notice,  and
Mme.  des  Ursins,  much  astonished,  said  not  a  word.

After  a  long  and  sorry  repast  the  king  and  queen  retired.
Then  all  that  the  queen  had  been  restraining  broke  forth,
and  she  began  to  cry  for  her  own  friends.  Like  the  child
that  she  was,  she  fancied  she  should  be  lost  in  the  hands
of  such  insolent  women,  and  when  it  became  a  question  of
going  to  bed,  she  said  flatly  she  would  not  do  anything  of
the  kind  and  wanted  to  go  home.  They  said  everything
they  could  to  soothe  her,  and  their  embarrassment  and
amazement  were  great  when  they  found  it  impossible  to
succeed.  The  king  was  waiting  for  her,  and  finally  the  Prin¬
cesse  des  Ursins,  at  an  end  of  her  arguments  and  persua¬
sions,  was  forced  to  go  and  tell  him  the  truth.  He  was
piqued,  and  more  than  that,  very  angry.  Until  now  he
had  always  lived  in  the  most  entire  reserve  ;  which  had,  in
fact,  helped  him  to  find  the  queen  to  lois  liking.  He  was
therefore  much  nettled  at  this  caprice,  although  convinced
that  she  would  not  carry  it  beyond  that  night.  They  did
not,  consequently,  see  each  other  until  the  next  day,  and  then
only  in  public.  Fortunately  it  is  not  the  custom  in  Spain,
as  it  is  in  France,  to  assist  at  the  coucher  of  bride  and  bride¬
groom,  so  that  this  very  annoying  matter  was  known  only
to  the  married  pair,  Mme.  des  Ursins,  one  or  two  maids,
two  French  valets,  and  to  Louville  and  Marsin.  The  two
latter  consulted  with  Mme.  des  Ursins  as  to  how  they
could  conquer  a  child  whose  resolutions  were  expressed
with  such  force  and  decision.  The  night  was  passed  in

1701]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

237

exhortations  and  promises  and  also  in  discussions  of  what
had  happened  at  the  supper,  until  at  last  the  queen  con¬
sented  to  remain  a  queen.  The  Duke  of  Medina-Sidonia
and  the  Count  of  San-Estevan  were  consulted  the  following
day,  and  they  gave  it  as  their  opinion  that  the  king  in  his
turn  should  absent  himself  on  the  following  night  to
mortify  and  subdue  her.  This  was  done.  They  did  not
see  each  other  in  private  the  whole  of  that  day.  At  night
the  queen  grew  very  unhappy.  Her  pride  and  her  little
vanities  were  wounded,  and  perhaps  she,  too,  had  found  the
king  to  her  liking.  Strong  lectures  were  made  to  the  ladies
of  the  palace,  and  still  more  to  the  seigneurs  who  were
suspected  of  conniving  with  them,  and  to  those  of  their
relations  who  happened  to  be  with  them.  Excuses,  par¬
dons,  fears,  promises  ;  all  was  settled  and  overlooked,  and
the  third  day  was  tranquil.  On  the  fourth,  everything  be¬
ing  now  as  it  should  be,  they  went  to  Barcelona,  where
nothing  was  thought  of  hut  fêtes  and  amusements.

The°health  of  the  King  of  England  languished;  since
the  middle  of  August  he  had  grown  feebler,  and  on  the
8th  of  September  he  fell  into  a  condition  of
James  in,  King  paralysis  with  other  evils  that  left  no  hope,
of  England.  The  kin<q  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and  all  the

royal  personages  visited  him  often.  He  received  the  last
sacraments  with  a  piety  which  answered  to  the  edification
of  his  life,  and  his  death  was  expected  at  any  moment.
In  this  conjuncture  the  king  took  a  resolution  more  worthy
of  the  generosity  of  Louis  XII.  and  François  I.  than  of
his  own  wisdom.  He  went  from  Marly,  where  he  was,
to  Saint-Germain,  on  Tuesday,  September  13.  The  King
of  England  was  so  low  when  the  king  was  ushered  m  to
him,  that  he  scarcely  opened  his  eyes  for  even  a  moment
The  kin-  told  him  that  he  had  come  to  assure  him  that

238  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

he  might  die  in  peace  as  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  whom
he  intended  to  recognize  as  King  of  England,  Scotland,
and  Ireland.  The  few  Englishmen  who  were  present  threw
themselves  at  his  feet,  hut  the  King  of  England  gave  no
sign  of  life.  The  king  then  entered  the  apartment  of  the
Queen  of  England  to  whom  he  gave  the  same  assurance  ;
and  they  sent  for  the  Prince  of  Wales,  to  whom  they  told
it.  We  can  imagine  the  gratitude  and  the  expressions
of  the  mother  and  son.  Returning  to  Marly,  the  king
announced  to  the  whole  Court  what  he  had  just  done.
Nothing  was  heard  but  applause  and  praise.  The  theme
was  fine,  but  the  reflections  were  not  less  prompt,  though
certainly  less  public.

Nothing  could  be  more  contradictory  than  the  king’s
present  position  and  the  recognition  he  had  solemnly  made
King’s  recogni-  at  the  peace  of  Ryswick  of  the  Prince  of
tion  of  Prince  of  Orange  as  King  of  England,  which  hitherto
of  England.  he  had  not  less  solemnly  maintained.  It
was  offending  King  William  in  his  tenderest  spot,  and  all
England  with  him,  and  Holland  besides  ;  it  was  showing
them  the  little  reliance  they  could  place  on  that  treaty
of  peace,  and  it  gave  them  a  fine  opening  to  rally  to  their
side  all  the  princes  who  had  signed  the  peace  under  the
alliance,  and  to  declare  war  openly  on  their  own  account,
not  to  speak  of  that  of  the  house  of  Austria.  With
regard  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  this  recognition  was  of  no
solid  value  to  him  ;  it  only  roused  the  jealousy,  suspicions,
and  passions  of  those  who  were  opposed  to  him  in  England,
and  bound  them  still  more  closely  to  King  William,  and
to  the  establishment  of  the  succession  in  the  Protestant
line,  which  was  their  own  work  ;  it  made  them  more
vigilant,  more  active,  more  violent  against  all  that  was
Catholic,  or  suspected  of  favouring  the  Stuarts  in  England  ;

1701]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  239

it  ulcerated  their  minds  more  and  more  against  the  young
prince  and  against  France,  who  wanted  to  give  them  a
king  and  dispose  of  their  crown  against  their  will;  and  all
this  without  the  king’s  having  any  more  means  of  replac¬
ing  the  Prince  of  Wales  than  he  had  had  of  replacing  his
father  during  a  long  war,  when  he  was  not  hampered  as
he  was  now  with  the  difficulties  attending  the  succession
of  his  grandson  to  the  monarchy  of  Spain.

The  King  of  England,  in  his  few  conscious  intervals,
seemed  very  grateful  for  what  the  king  had  done.  He
made  him  promise  that  he  would  not  allow  the  slightest
ceremony  to  take  place  over  him  after  his  death,  which
occurred  at  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  of
September,  1701.  This  prince  has  been  so  well-known
to  the  world  as  Duke  of  York  and  King  of  England  that
I  may  dispense  with  speaking  of  him  here.  He  was  very
distinguished  for  worth  and  for  kindness,  still  more  so  for
the  constant  magnanimity  with  which  he  bore  his  great
misfortunes,  and,  finally,  for  his  eminent  piety.

Kincr  William  received  the  news  of  the  death  of  James
II.,  and  of  the  king’s  recognition  of  his  son,  at  his  house
of  Loo  in  Holland,  while  he  was  at  dinner  with  several
German  princes  and  other  seigneurs.  He  said  not  a  word
beyond  announcing  the  news  ;  but  he  flushed,  pulled  his
hat  over  his  eyes,  and  could  not  control  his  countenance.
He  sent  orders  to  London  to  drive  Poussin  from  the  coun¬
try  and  send  him  across  the  sea  as  fast  as  possible.
Poussin  was  managing  the  affairs  of  the  king  in  England
in  the  absence  of  an  ambassador  and  envoy.  He  arrived
incontinently  at  Calais  soon  after.

This  outbreak  was  followed  closely  by  the  signing  of
the  great  alliance,  offensive  and  defensive,  against  France
and  Spain  between  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the  Empire

240  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vu.

(which  had  no  interest  in  it,  but  under  the  house  of  Austria
had  no  liberty),  and  England  and  Holland,  into  which  these
leaders  were  very  sure  of  drawing  the  other  Powers,  —  con¬
siderations  which  compelled  the  king  to  make  a  still
greater  augmentation  of  his  troops.

VIII.

The  year  began  with  balls  at  Versailles,  and  a  quantity
of  them  masked.  Mme.  du  Maine  gave  several  in  her
i7o2  bedchamber,  because  she  was  pregnant,  which
Bails  and  come-  made  rather  a  queer  spectacle.  There  were

dies  at  Versailles.  paqg  gjs0  ^  ]\parly;  but  those  Were  IUOStly

without  masks.  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  amused
herself  greatly  at  all  of  them.  The  king  saw,  in  great
privacy,  but  often,  and  always  in  Mme.  de  Maintenons
apartments,  sacred  plays,  such  as  “  Absalom,”  “  Athalie,”  etc.
Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans,  the
Comte  and  Comtesse  d’Ayen,  the  young  Comte  de  Noailles,
and  Mlle,  de  Mélun  (put  forward  by  the  Noailles)  played
the  principal  characters  in  very  magnificent  stage  costumes.
Old  Baron,  an  excellent  actor,  trained  them  and  played  with
them,  also  a  few  of  M.  de  Noailles’  servants.  The  latter  and
his  clever  wife  were  the  inventors  and  instigators  of  these
private  amusements,  to  introduce  themselves  more  and  more
into  the  king’s  intimacy,  helped  by  their  alliance  with  Mme.
de  Maintenon.  There  was  only  space  for  forty  spectators.
Monseigneur  and  his  two  sons,  Mme.  la  Princesse  de  Conti,
M.  du  Maine,  the  ladies  of  the  palace,  Mme.  de  Noailles
and  her  daughters  were  alone  admitted.  Madame  was  there
in  deep  mourning  ;  the  king  invited  her  because  she  was
fond  of  plays,  telling  her  that  as  it  was  all  in  the  family
her  state  of  mourning  need  not  exclude  her  from  what  was
done  so  privately  in  his  presence.  This  favour  was  much

prized.

VOL.  i.  — 16

242  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

Longepierre,  who  had  lately  returned  to  Court  and  had
fastened  upon  the  Noailles,  had  written  a  singular  play
under  the  title  of  “Electra”  which  was  played  with  the
greatest  success  on  a  magnificent  stage  at  the  house  of
the  Princesse  de  Conti  [wife  of  François-Louis]  in  Paris.
Monseigneur  and  all  the  Court  had  hastened  to  see  it  on
several  occasions.  The  play  had  no  love  in  it,  but  plenty
of  other  passions,  and  situations  that  were  very  interesting.
I  think  it  was  written  thus  in  the  hope  of  inducing  the  king
to  see  it.  But  he  contented  himself  with  hearing  about  it  ;
and  the  representations  were  confined  to  the  hôtel  de  Conti,
for  Longepierre  would  not  allow  it  to  be  played  elsewhere.
He  was  a  queer  fellow  ;  an  intriguer  with  much  wit  and
cleverness;  soft-spoken,  insinuating,  and  under  a  tranquil,
indifferent  manner  and  a  very  deceptive  philosophy  had
wormed  himself  everywhere  and  mingled  in  everything,  in
order  to  push  his  way.  He  succeeded  in  entering  the  house
of  M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans,  where  we  shall  find  him  again,
and  where,  with  all  his  art  and  his  savoir-faire,  he  showed
the  cloven-foot  and  was  ignominiously  dismissed.  Among
other  knowledge  he  knew  Greek,  of  which,  likewise,  he
had  the  morals.

The  death  of  the  Duchesse  de  Sully  deprived  the  balls  of
the  noblest  dancer  of  his  day,  the  Chevalier  de  Sully,  her
second  son,  whom  the  king  persisted  in  making  dance,
although  his  age  would  have  led  him  to  renounce  it.

The  death  of  the  Abbé  de  Yatteville  made  less  noise,  but
the  singularity  of  his  life  deserves  not  to  be  omitted.  The

Death  and  adven-  Vattevilles  were  people  of  quality  in  Franche-
tures  of  the  Abbé  Comté.  This  one,  being  a  younger  son,  be-

de  Vatte ville.  .  °  J  ’

came  a  Carthusian  very  young,  and  after  his
profession  was  ordained  priest.  He  had  great  intelligence,
but  a  free,  impetuous  spirit,  which  soon  became  impatient

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  243

of  the  yoke  he  had  taken.  Incapable  of  remaining  subject
to  such  galling  observances,  he  began  to  look  about  him  for
means  of  escape.  He  managed  at  last  to  get  secular  clothes,
money,  pistols,  and  a  horse,  stationed  at  a  little  distance.  All
this  could  not  be  done  without  exciting  some  suspicion.  His
prior  suspected  him,  and  entering  his  cell  with  a  pass-key,
he  found  him  in  secular  clothes  on  a  ladder  and  about  to
jump  the  wall.  The  prior  shouted  ;  the  other,  without  dis¬
turbing  himself,  shot  him,  and  fled.  Two  or  three  days
after  that  he  stopped  to  dine  at  a  lonely  tavern  in  the
country,  for  he  avoided  as  much  as  he  could  all  inhabited
places.  He  got  off  his  horse  and  asked  what  there  was  in
the  house.  The  landlord  replied,  “A  fowl  and  a  leg  of
mutton.”  “  Good  !  ”  said  the  unfrocked,  “  put  them  to  roast.”
The  landlord  began  to  remonstrate,  saying  that  that  was
all  he  had  in  the  house,  and  it  was  too  much  for  a  single
man.  The  monk  was  angry,  declaring  that  he  had  good
enough  appetite  to  eat  it  all,  and  if  he  paid  for  what  he
wanted  he  had  a  right  to  it.  The  landlord  dared  not  reply,
but  turned  the  spit.  Just  as  the  roast  was  ready  to  be
served,  another  man  on  horseback  arrived,  also  alone,  ex¬
pecting  to  dine  at  the  tavern.  He  asked  what  there  was
to  eat,  and  found  there  was  nothing  but  what  was  just
ready  to  come  off  the  spit.  Hearing  that  it  was  being  pre¬
pared  for  a  single  man  he  proposed  to  share  it  and  pay
his  share,  and  was  much  astonished  when  the  landlord  told
him  he  doubted,  from  the  manner  of  the  man  who  had
ordered  the  dinner,  whether  he  would  allow  it.  There¬
upon  the  traveller  went  upstairs  and  spoke  civilly  to  Vatte-
ville,  asking  him  to  be  so  kind,  since  there  was  nothing
else  in  the  house,  as  to  let  him  share  the  dinner  and  pay
his  part  of  it.  Yatteville  would  not  consent;  quarrel  —
hotter  and  hotter;  briefly,  the  monk  treated  the  traveller

244  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viil

as  he  did  the  prior,  and  shot  him.  After  which,  he  went
downstairs  tranquilly,  amid  the  terror  of  the  landlord  and
his  household,  ordered  them  to  serve  the  fowl  and  the  leg  of
mutton,  ate  them  clean  to  the  hone,  paid  the  bill,  remounted
his  horse,  and  rode  away.

Not  knowing  what  else  to  do,  he  went  to  Turkey,  and,
to  make  a  long  story  short,  had  himself  circumcised,  put
on  a  turban,  and  entered  the  militia.  Abjuring  his  faith
promoted  him  ;  his  wits  and  his  valour  distinguished  him  ;
he  became  a  pacha  and  greatly  trusted  in  the  Morea,  where
the  Turks  were  fighting  the  Venetians.  He  took  their  strong¬
holds,  and  behaved  so  well  for  the  Turks  that  he  thought
he  was  strong  enough  to  get  some  good  for  himself  out  of
the  situation,  knowing  that  he  should  never  be  at  ease  in  it.
He  had  means  of  communication  with  the  generalissimo  of
the  Venetian  republic,  and  made  a  bargain  with  him.  He
promised,  verbally,  to  deliver  up  several  strongholds  and
secret  forces  of  the  Turks,  provided  the  Venetians  obtained
for  him,  in  proper  form,  the  pope’s  absolution  for  all  the
misdeeds  of  his  life,  his  murders,  his  apostasy  ;  also,  perfect
security  against  the  Carthusians,  and  against  being  sent  into
any  other  Order  ;  and  besides  this,  plenary  restitution  to  all
rights  as  though  he  had  never  abandoned  any,  especially
to  the  exercise  of  his  order  of  priesthood,  and  the  power  of
possessing  benefices  of  any  and  every  kind.  The  Venetians
knew  their  own  interests  too  well  to  spare  their  efforts,
and  the  pope  thought  the  interests  of  the  Church  required
the  support  of  the  Christians  against  the  Turks,  so  he  granted
with  a  good  grace  the  demands  of  the  pacha.  When  the
latter  was  well  assured  that  these  concessions  had  reached
the  generalissimo  in  proper  form,  he  took  his  measures  so
well  that  all  he  had  promised  to  the  Venetians  was  promptly
executed.  Immediately  after,  he  escaped  to  their  army,  and

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  245

went  on  board  one  of  their  vessels,  which  took  him  to  Italy.
He  went  to  Rome,  where  the  pope  received  him  well  ;  and
thus  supported,  he  returned  to  his  family  in  Franche-Comté,
where  he  amused  himself  by  defying  the  Carthusians.

These  singular  events  made  him  known  at  the  time  of  the
first  conquest  of  Franche-Comté.  He  was  felt  to  be  a  man
who  was  ready  for  anything,  and  full  of  intrigues.  He  be¬
gan  one  soon  after  with  the  queen-mother,  then  with  the
ministers,  who  made  good  use  of  him  at  the  second  conquest
of  that  province.  He  served  them  well,  but  not  for  nothing.
He  had  stipulated  for  the  archbishopric  of  Besançon,  to
which,  in  fact,  shortly  after  the  second  conquest,  he  was
appointed.  The  pope  could  not  bring  himself  to  give  him
the  papal  bulls  ;  he  brought  up  the  murders,  the  apostasy ,
the  circumcision.  The  king  joined  in  with  the  arguments  of
the  pope  ;  but  he  compromised  with  the  Abbé  de  Y atteville,
who  contented  himself  with  the  Abbey  of  Baume,  the  second
in  Franche-Comté,  another  good  benefice  in  Picardy,  and
various  other  advantages.  He  lived  at  his  Abbey  of  Baume,
sometimes  on  his  own  estates,  occasionally  at  Besançon,  raiely
in  Paris  or  at  Court,  where,  however,  he  was  always  received
with  distinction.

He  kept  everywhere  high  living,  many  equipages,  a  fine
pack  of  hounds,  profuse  table,  and  good  company.  He  did
not  restrain  himself  as  to  ladies,  and  lived  not  only  like  a
great  lord,  feared  and  respected,  but  in  the  ancient  fashion,
tyrannizing  over  his  estates,  his  abbeys,  and  sometimes  over
his  neighbours  ;  in  his  own  house  he  was  absolute.  The  king  s
intendants  shrugged  their  shoulders  and  put  up  with  him ,
by  express  orders  from  Court  they  let  him  do  what  he  liked
as  long  as  he  lived,  and  did  not  venture  to  oppose  him  in
anything,  neither  in  the  taxation,  which  he  managed  pretty
much  as  he  pleased  in  all  his  dependencies,  nor  in  his  various

246  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

undertakings,  though  they  were  often  very  violent.  With
such  habits  and  behaviour  he  made  himself  feared  ;  every  one
stood  in  awe  of  him.  He  took  great  pleasure  in  going  some-
times  to  see  the  Carthusians,  to  boast  of  having  torn  off  their
frock.  He  played  very  well  at  hombre,  and  so  often  won
codille  [term  in  the  game,  meaning  to  win  without  having
played],  that  he  went  by  the  name  of  the  “Abbé  Codille.”
Thus  he  lived;  always  with  the  same  license,  and  in  the
same  consideration,  until  he  was  nearly  ninety  years  of  age.
His  brother’s  grandson  married,  many  years  later,  a  half-
sister  of  M.  de  Maurepas.

Fagon,  the  king’s  physician-in-chief,  was  operated  upon
by  Maréchal,  a  celebrated  surgeon  in  Paris,  whom  he  pre¬

ferred  to  those  of  the  Court  and  elsewhere.
Fagon,  asthmatic,  very  much  deformed,  al¬
most  fleshless,  extremely  delicate  and  subject

Fagon,  the

king’s

physician.

to  attacks  of  epilepsy,  was  a  difficult  case,  to  use  the
surgical  term.  Nevertheless  he  was  cured,  thanks  to  his
own  composure  and  to  the  skill  of  his  surgeon,  who
extracted  from  him  a  very  large  stone.  This  operation
made  Maréchal  soon  after  surgeon-in-chief  to  the  king,
who  had  felt  the  utmost  uneasiness  about  Fagon,  in
whom  for  his  own  health  he  placed  implicit  confidence.
He  gave  Maréchal  one  hundred  thousand  francs  on  this
occasion.  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  sought  to  hold  the
king  by  every  avenue  and  considered  that  of  physician-
in-chief  held  by  a  skilful  man  of  intelligence  to  be  one
of  the  most  important,  especially  as  the  king  grew  older
and  his  health  feebler,  had  succeeded  at  last  in  persuading
him  to  take  Fagon.  Fagon  was  one  of  the  finest  and
best  minds  in  Europe,  —  eager  about  everything  that  related
to  his  profession;  great  botanist,  good  chemist,  an  able
connoisseur  in  surgery,  excellent  physician,  and  a  fine

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

247

practitioner.  Moreover,  he  knew  much  besides  ;  no  better
physician  than  he,  hut  he  also  understood  well  the  dif¬
ferent  divisions  of  mathematics.  Very  disinterested;  an
ardent  friend,  hut  an  enemy  that  never  forgave  ;  he  loved
virtue,  honour,  courage,  knowledge,  industry,  merit;  and
always  tried  to  uphold  them,  without  other  cause  or  in¬
terest,  and  he  never  failed  to  fall  pretty  roughly  on  those
who  opposed  them,  as  if  they  were  personally  opposing  him¬
self.  He  was  dangerous  because,  though  very  enlightened,
he  was  easily  prejudiced  about  anything,  and  once  prejudiced
he  scarcely  ever  got  over  it  ;  but  if  by  chance  he  did  so  he
acted  with  the  best  faith  in  the  world,  and  did  all  he  could
to  repair  whatever  harm  his  prejudice  had  done.  He  was
the  most  implacable  enemy  to  those  he  called  charlatans,
that  is  to  say,  persons  who  pretended  to  have  secrets  and
gave  remedies  of  their  own,  and  his  prejudices  carried  him
much  too  far  in  that  direction.  He  loved  his  Faculty  of
Montpellier,  and  all  concerning  his  profession,  to  idolatry.
In  his  opinion  it  was  not  permissible  to  be  cured  except
by  the  regular  way  of  doctors  accepted  by  all  Faculties,
the  laws  and  directions  of  which  were  to  him  sacred.  M.
de  Beauvilliers,  who  suffered  from  a  dysentery  of  long
standing  combined  with  a  fever  which  consumed  him,
was  given  over  by  Fagon,  who  sent  him  to  Bourbon.
Hearing  this  I  rushed  to  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse  and  ex¬
horted  him  to  throw  policy  to  the  winds  and  send  at  once
for  Helvetius.  I  had  the  great  joy  of  knowing  that  he
took  my  advice  and  started  himself  the  next  day  with
Helvetius.  This  was  a  stout  Dutchman,  who  for  not
having  taken  his  degree  as  doctor,  was  the  aversion  of  all
physicians,  and  the  particular  horror  of  Fagon.  He  was
called  in  their  language  an  empiric,  who  deserved  nothing
but  contempt  and  persecution,  and  to  employ  him  brought

248  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

down  the  wrath  and  the  ill-offices  of  Fagon  on  whoever
did  so.  Nevertheless  Helvetius  had  been  a  long  time  in
Paris,  curing  people  who  were  given  up  by  the  regular
doctors,  and  especially  the  poor,  to  whom  he  was  very
charitable.  He  received  them  every  day  at  a  fixed  hour,
as  many  as  chose  to  come,  and  gave  them  remedies  and
often  food.  He  excelled  particularly  in  obstinate  diarrhoeas
and  dysenteries.  ’T  is  to  him  that  we  owe  the  use  of
the  divers  preparations  of  ipecacuanha  in  such  cases,  and
the  discernment  of  those  in  which  that  specific  is  not
timely,  or  even  not  proper.  It  was  this  that  gave  Helvetius
his  vogue.  He  was  a  very  kind  and  honest  man,  upright
and  sincere.  He  was  also  excellent  in  small-pox  and  such¬
like  venom  diseases  ;  in  other  respects,  only  a  middling
doctor.

M.  de  Chevreuse  told  the  king  what  he  meant  to  do,
and  the  king  approved,  hut  the  strange  part  was  that
Fagon  was  glad,  though  on  other  occasions  he  would  have
been  furious  ;  but  as  he  was  fully  persuaded  that  M.  de
Beauvilliers  could  not  escape  and  would  certainly  die,  he
was  delighted  that  he  should  do  so  under  Helvetius,  in
order  that  he  might  triumph  over  him.  Thank  God,  the
contrary  happened.  Helvetius  found  him  at  the  worst;
but  in  seven  or  eight  days  he  brought  him  into  a  condition
of  certain  cure  and  made  him  able  to  return  to  Versailles.

The  re-forming  of  the  army  after  the  peace  of  Ryswick
was  very  extensive  and  most  strangely  managed.  The  ex-
I  leave  the  cellence  of  the  regiments,  above  all  in  the

cavalry,  and  the  merit  of  the  officers  and  of
those  who  commanded  them  were  not  considered  by
Barbézieux  [minister  of  war],  who  was  young  and  impetuous,
and  whom  the  king  left  master  of  the  business.  I  myself
had  no  relations  with  him.  My  regiment  was  disbanded,

249

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

and  as  it  had  been  a  very  good  one,  he  made  a  present  of
fragments  of  it  to  the  Eoyals,  and  to  Duras’  regiment;  my
company  was  incorporated  into  that  of  the  Comte  d’Uzès,
his  brother-in-law,  of  which  he  took  special  care.  That  my
fate  was  common  with  that  of  many  others  was  no  con¬
solation  to  me;  the  colonels  of  these  dispersed  regiments
were  put  at  the  tail  of  the  other  regiments;  and  my  lot
threw  me  into  that  of  Saint-Moris,  a  gentleman  of  Franche-
Comté,  whom  I  had  never  seen  in  my  life.

After  a  time  they  restored  some  of  the  colonels  who
were  my  juniors  ;  but  these  were  old  officers  who  had  ob¬
tained  their  regiments  by  dint  of  services  and  time  ;  and
that  reason  satisfied  me.  There  was  talk  of  promotion,  but
it  did  not  stir  me  ;  this  was  no  longer  a  time  when  birth
and  dignities  availed  ;  except  for  actions,  and  those  on  the
field,  no  distinctions  were  obtainable.  Besides,  too  many
ranked  me  for  any  hope  of  my  being  a  brigadier.  What  I
wanted  was  a  regiment,  and  to  serve  at  its  head  now  that
another  war  was  opening  ;  and  not  to  have  the  disgust  of
beginning  that  war  as  mere  aide-de-camp  to  Saint-Moris
—  I,  who  had  been  recommended  for  distinction  on  return¬
ing  from  the  campaign  of  FTeerwinden,  and  had,  I  dare
to  say  it,  commanded  with  industry  and  reputation  during
the  four  following  campaigns  which  ended  the  war.

The  promotion  was  made,  and  it  amazed  every  one  by  its
great  numbers;  never  had  there  been  so  many,  nor  any¬
thing  like  it.  I  read  the  list  of  the  cavalry  brigadiers
eagerly,  expecting  to  see  my  name.  I  was  astonished  when
I  saw  five  of  my  juniors  at  the  tail  of  it.  Their  names
have  never  left  my  memory.  I  was  silent,  however,  in
order  to  do  nothing  unwdse  in  anger.  M.  le  Maréchal  de
Lorges  was  incensed  for  me  as  well  as  for  himself.  His
brother  was  not  less  so.  The  hatter  felt  a  friendship  for

250  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viil

me.  They  both  proposed  that  I  should  leave  the  service.
Vexation  gave  me  a  strong  desire  to  do  so  ;  hut  the  thought
of  my  age,  the  opening  war,  the  renunciation  of  all  the
hopes  of  my  profession,  the  dread  of  idleness,  the  pain
of  the  summers  when  all  the  talk  would  be  of  war,  the
departures,  the  promotions  of  those  who  distinguished  them¬
selves,  who  raised  themselves,  who  acquired  reputation  —
all  this  held  me  back  powerfully.  I  passed  two  months  thus
torn  in  mind,  —  resigning  every  morning  and  yet,  directly
after,  unable  to  resolve  upon  it.

Driven  to  an  end  of  this  conflict  with  myself,  and  urged
by  the  two  marshals,  I  resolved  to  seek  judges  to  whose
opinion  I  would  yield,  and  to  take  them  from  different
stations  ;  I  chose,  therefore,  the  Maréchal  de  Choiseul,  under
whom  I  had  served  and  a  good  judge  of  such  matters,
M.  de  Beauvilliers,  M.  le  Chancelier,  and  M.  de  La  Boche-
foucauld.  I  had  already  made  my  complaint  to  them  ;  they
were  indignant  at  the  injustice,  hut  the  last  three  were
courtiers.  That  was  precisely  what  I  wanted.  That  spirit
was  calculated  to  temper  their  counsel,  and  as  I  was  only  seek¬
ing  that  which  would  be  approved  by  the  world,  by  men  of
weight  who  approached  the  king,  and  above  all,  a  counsel
which  should  not  be  capable  of  thoughtlessness,  imprudence,
nor  he  liable  to  repentance,  it  was  to  those  men  that  I
determined  to  resign  the  decision  as  to  my  conduct.

The  expectation  I  formed  was  mistaken  ;  the  three
courtiers  were  of  the  same  opinion  as  the  three  marshals.
They  all  told  me  forcibly  that  it  would  be  shameful  and
indefensible  that  a  man  of  my  birth,  my  dignity,  who  had
served  with  some  honour,  assiduity,  and  approbation  at  the
head  of  a  fine  and  good  regiment  disbanded  for  no  reason,
left  out  of  a  numerous  promotion,  and  seeing  five  of  his
juniors  passed  over  him  with  the  greatest  injustice,  should

251

1702]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

return  to  the  field  not  only  without  a  brigade,  but  without
regiment,  without  troops,  without  company,  and  with  no
function  other  than  to  be  in  the  suite  of  Saint-Moris.
They  declared  that  a  duke  and  peer  of  my  birth,  established
as  I  then  was  with  wife  and  children,  ought  not  to  serve
in  the  armies  as  a  mere  adventurer,  and  see  other  men
so  different  from  what  I  was,  and,  worse  still,  from  what
I  had  been,  obtaining  the  employments  and  the  regiments.

I  had  not  taken  them  for  judges  to  appeal  against  their
judgment.  My  course  was  therefore  chosen  for  me;  but
though  I  believed  that  it  was  done  wisely,  I  felt  that  I  still
hesitated.  I  needed  all  my  anger,  all  my  vexation,  and  to
remember  what  I  had  seen  happen  to  the  Maréchal  de
Lorges  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  the  Rhine.  Nearly  thiee
months  went  by  in  this  inward  anguish  before  I  could
make  my  determination.  Finally  I  made  it  ;  and  then
came  the  method  of  execution.  Again  I  followed  the  ad¬
vice  of  the  same  persons.  I  allowed  no  words  of  discontent
to  escape  me;  1  was  satisfied  to  leave  to  the  public,  abo\e
all  to  the  military,  my  neglect  in  the  promotion.  As  for
myself,  the  king’s  anger  was  inevitable.  These  gentlemen
had  already  prepared  me  for  that,  and  I  fully  expected  it.
Shall  I  venture  to  say  that  it  was  not  indifferent  to  me  ?
He  was  always  offended  if  any  one  ceased  to  serve  him.
He  called  it  leaving  him,  especially  if  the  persons  were  dis¬
tinguished.  But  what  stung  him  to  the  quick  was  to  be
quitted  on  account  of  an  injustice  ;  he  made  whoever  did
so  feel  it  a  long  time.

I  therefore  wrote  a  very  short  letter  to  the  king,  without
complaint  of  any  kind,  or  the  least  mention  of  any  displeas¬
ure,  merely  expressing  my  regret  that  the  necessity  of  my  ill-
health  obliged  me  to  leave  his  service,  for  which  I  could  only
console  myself  by  an  assiduity  towards  his  person  which

252  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.viii.

would  procure  me  the  honour  of  seeing  him  and  of  paying
him  my  court  continually.  The  letter  was  approved  by  my
advisers,  and  on  Tuesday  of  Holy  Week  I  gave  it  to  the  king
myself  at  the  door  of  his  cabinet  as  he  returned  from  mass.
I  learned  afterwards  from  the  chancellor  that  on  entering  the
king’s  cabinet  with  the  council,  he  found  him  reading  my
letter;  he  called  to  the  chancellor  and  said  with  emotion:
“Well,  monsieur,  here  is  another  man  who  leaves  us,”  and
thereupon  repeated  to  him  my  letter,  word  for  word.

For  three  consecutive  years  he  never  neglected  the  slight¬
est  trifle  (in  default  of  important  occasions)  to  make  me  feel
how  much  he  was  angered.  He  never  spoke  to  me  ;  his  eyes
never  fell  upon  me  except  by  accident.  He  never  mentioned
my  letter  to  the  Maréchal  de  Lorges,  nor  the  fact  that  I
had  left  the  service.  I  no  longer  went  to  Marly  ;  and  after
a  few  of  those  trips  I  ceased  to  give  him  the  satisfaction
of  refusing  me.

To  make  an  end  of  these  petty  affairs  :  fourteen  or  fifteen
months  later  the  king  made  a  trip  to  Trianon.  The  princesses
were  accustomed  to  each  name  two  ladies  to  be  present  at
his  supper,  and  the  king  never  meddled  with  that  pleasure.
But  after  a  while  he  grew  tired  of  it.  The  faces  that  he
saw  at  his  table  displeased  him,  for  he  was  not  accustomed
to  them  ;  and  he  took  to  making  a  list,  and  a  very  short
one,  of  the  ladies  he  himself  wished  at  the  supper,  and  sent
it  every  day  to  the  Duchesse  du  Lude,  in  order  that  she
should  inform  those  ladies.  This  trip  to  Trianon  was  from
a  Wednesday  to  Saturday,  consequently  three  suppers.  We
did,  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  I,  on  that  Trianon  day  as  we
usually  did  on  the  Marly  days  ;  we  dined  with  the  Chamil-
larts  at  l’Etang,  intending  to  go  from  there  to  sleep  in  Paris.
Just  as  we  were  about  to  sit  down  to  dinner  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon  received  a  message  from  the  Duchesse  du  Lude,  in-

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  253

forming  her  that  she  was  on  the  king’s  list  for  the  supper
of  that  day.  The  surprise  was  great,  and  we  returned  to
Versailles.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  found  herself  the  only
woman  of  her  age  at  the  king’s  table,  with  Mmes,  de
Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvilliers,  the  Comtesse  de  Grammont,
and  three  or  four  other  favourite  duennas,  the  necessary
palace  ladies,  and  no  others.  Friday  she  was  again  named
with  the  same  ladies.  After  that,  the  king  invited  her
always  on  his  trips  to  Trianon.  X  was  soon  aware  of  his
reason,  and  I  laughed  at  it.  He  never  named  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon  for  Marly,  because  the  husbands  had  a  right  to  go
there  when  their  wives  were  invited  ;  they  slept  there,  and
no  one  saw  the  king  except  those  who  were  on  his  list.  The
king  intended  to  mark  in  this  way  that  the  exclusion  was  for
me  alone,  and  that  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  had  no  part  in  it.
However,  we  persevered  in  our  customary  assiduity,  though
without  ever  asking  for  Marly  ;  we  lived  agreeably  with  our
friends,  and  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  continued  to  enjoy  as
usual  all  the  pleasures  which  were  not  to  he  shared  by  me,
and  which  the  king  and  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne
had  long  before  this  been  in  the  habit  of  giving  her,  and
which,  indeed,  went  on  increasing.  I  have  preferred  to  ex¬
haust  this  whole  topic  at  once  ;  in  view  of  the  king’s  char¬
acter,  it  has  its  interest.

I  said  in  the  beginning  of  these  Memoirs  that  from  my
earliest  childhood  I  had  seen  much  of  the  Duc  de  Chartres,—
Period  Of  my  mu-  now  Duc  d’Orléans.  This  intimacy  lasted
mate  relations  until  he  had  fully  entered  into  the  world,  and

d’Orléans.  UC  even  until  after  the  campaign  of  1693,  when

he  commanded  the  cavalry  of  the  army  of  M.  de  Luxem¬
bourg,  in  which  I  served.  The  tighter  he  was  held,  the
more°'he  piqued  himself  on  being  a  libertine.  The  unregu¬
lated  lives  of  M.  le  Duc,  and  M.  le  Prince  de  Conti  inspired

254  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vnt

him  with  a  sad  emulation  ;  the  debauchery  of  the  Court  and
city  laid  hold  of  him  ;  disgust  at  his  forced  and  unsuitable
marriage  made  him  seek  compensation  in  other  pleasures;
and  the  vexation  he  felt  at  finding  himself  held  at  arm’s
length  from  the  command  of  the  armies,  and  deceived  as  to
the  governments  and  other  favours  that  were  promised  to
him,  —  all  these  things  had  contributed  to  fling  him  into  a
most  licentious  course  of  conduct,  which  he  piqued  himself
on  carrying  to  its  farthest  limits  in  order  to  mark  the  con¬
tempt  he  felt  for  his  wife,  and  for  the  anger  shown  to  him
by  the  king.  This  life,  which  could  not  square  with  mine,
withdrew  me  from  the  prince  ;  I  only  saw  him  on  rare  occa¬
sions,  and  then  for  a  few  moments  only,  as  a  matter  of  cour¬
tesy.  For  six  or  seven  years  I  seldom  met  him,  but  when  I
did  so,  he  always  spoke  to  me  with  the  same  frank  air.  My
life,  however,  did  not  suit  him  any  more  than  his  life  suited
me  ;  so  that  the  separation  had  by  this  time  become  complete.
The  death  of  Monsieur,  though  of  necessity  it  brought  him
back  to  the  king,  and  also  to  his  wife,  did  not  break  up  his
customary  engagements  and  pleasures.  He  behaved  more
decently  to  his  wife,  and  more  respectfully  to  the  king,  but
the  bent  of  debauchery  was  taken  ;  it  had  entered  his  mind
as  a  fine  and  distinguished  thing  which  belonged  to  his
age,  and  protected  him  against  the  ridicule  which  he  fancied
was  attached  to  a  life  that  was  less  disorderly.  He  admired
those  who  were  most  outrageous  and  most  persistent  in  li¬
centiousness,  and  this  slight  change  on  his  part  towards  the
Court  did  not  alter  his  habits,  or  put  an  end  to  his  secret
pleasures  in  Paris,  which  now  kept  him  going  and  coming
between  the  Court  and  city  continually.  It  is  not  yet  time
to  give  an  idea  of  this  prince,  whom  we  shall  see  so  powerful
on  the  stage  of  the  world  and  in  such  different  situations.

Mme.  de  Fontaine-Martel  was  at  Saint-Cloud;  she  was

255

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

one  of  the  ladies  of  Monsieur’s  former  Court,  and  all  her
life  extremely  distinguished  in  the  great  world.  In  con¬
sequence  of  seeing  each  other  frequently,  Mme.  de  Fontaine-
Martel  and  I  had  formed  a  friendship,  which  lasted  ever
after.  She  often  asked  me  why  I  no  longer  saw  M.  le  Duc
d’Orléans,  and  said  it  was  ridiculous  on  both  sides,  because,
in  spite  of  the  difference  in  our  lives,  we  suited  each
other  at  a  thousand  points.  I  laughed,  and  let  her  talk.
One  day  at  Saint-Cloud  she  attacked  the  Duc  d’Orléans  on
the  same  matter,  while  he  was  talking  with  her  and  the
Duchesse  de  Villeroy  and  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  ;  all  three
of  whom  said  very  obliging  things  of  me.  The  duke  ex¬
pressed  his  regrets  that  I  thought  him  too  much  of  a
libertine,  and  spoke  of  his  desire  to  renew  his  relations  with
me.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  was  asked  to  write  to  me;  I
answered  as  I  ought;  but  when  she  returned  to  La  Ferté,
she  told  me  that  things  had  gone  to  a  point  at  which  I
could  not  resist.

I  had  taken  it  all  as  a  fancy  of  Mme.  de  Fontaine-Martel
and  a  politeness  on  the  part  of  the  Duc  d  Orléans,  in  short,
one  of  those  plans  or  projects  which  never  get  themselves
executed.  The  difference  in  our  tastes  and  lives  persuaded
me  that  the  prince  and  I  would  never  again  suit  each  other,
and  that  I  should  do  much  better  to  keep  where  I  was,
after  paying  him  on  my  return  to  Versailles  a  visit  of  respect
and  thanks,  and  nothing  further.  I  was  mistaken.  The
visit,  which  after  my  return  I  constantly  postponed  until
M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans  reproached  the  ladies  for  my  neglect,
was  received  with  eagerness.  Whether  it  was  that  our
early  friendship  revived  or  that  he  desired  to  have  some
one  at  Versailles  with  whom  he  could  be  intimate,  for  he
was  often  greatly  bored  there,  our  meeting  went  off  with
such  favour  on  his  part  that  I  felt  I  was  back  in  our  old

256  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.viii.

Palais-Royal.  He  begged  me  to  come  and  see  him  often  ;
lie  urged  my  visits  ;  I  may  venture  to  say  that  he  boasted
of  my  return  to  him,  and  neglected  nothing  that  could  once
more  bind  me  to  him.  This  renewal  of  our  friendship  was,
on  my  part,  the  result  of  the  advances  with  which  he
honoured  me  ;  and  an  entire  confidence  soon  became  the
seal  of  that  friendship  which  lasted  to  the  end  of  his  life
without  a  break,  in  spite  of  some  brief  interruptions  caused
by  intrigues  after  he  was  master  of  the  State.  Such  was
the  renewal  of  that  intimate  relation,  which  exposed  me
to  many  dangers,  made  me  figure  for  a  time  before  the
world,  and  I  may  dare  to  say  with  truth,  was  not  less
useful  to  the  prince  than  to  the  servitor,  and  from  which
it  rested  with  M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans  to  draw  very  great
advantages.

The  necessity  of  succouring  the  Elector  of  Bavaria,
molested  by  the  Imperial  army,  and  that  also  of  being  re-
Battie  of  Fried-  inforced  by  him,  led  to  a  decision  to  endeav-
hngen-  our  to  cross  the  Rhine.  It  was  proposed  to

Maréchal  Catinat,  perhaps  with  too  few  troops  and  too  little
means.  I  say  perhaps,  because  I  do  not  know  it  to  have
been  so  ;  I  only  suspect  it  from  his  refusal  to  undertake  the
move.  On  his  default,  Villars,  who  saw  fortune  on  the
other  side  of  that  passage,  accepted  the  enterprise,  sure  of
risking  nothing  if  he  failed  where  Catinat  had  refused  the

attempt.  But,  like  an  able  man,  he  chose  to  be  in  force,
and  he  waited  for  a  large  detachment  from  the  army  of
Flanders.  He  then  marched  straight  to  Huningue,  recon¬
noitred  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  chose  the  place  for  his  bridge
directly  opposite  Huningue  where  a  large  island  would  be
useful  to  him,  the  broadest  arm  of  the  river  being  between
him  and  the  island,  the  narrowest  between  the  island  and
the  other  bank  of  the  Rhine,  on  which  was  the  little  town

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  257

of  Neubourg,  field  and  intrenched  by  the  Imperial  forces.
He  arrived  at  Huningue  on  the  30tli  of  September  ;  making
the  bridge  was  an  affair  of  twenty-four  hours.  On  the  1st  of
October  at  mid-day,  he  sent  over  forty  pieces  of  cannon  with
the  Champagne  and  Bourbonnais  regiments,  whom  he  quar¬
tered  on  the  island  and  began  to  work  on  the  second  bridge.
Master  now  of  the  passage  of  the  Rhine,  he  intended  to  wait
for  news  from  the  Elector  of  Bavaria  ;  but  Prince  Louis  of
Baden  and  many  of  his  general  officers  intrenched  themselves
at  Eriedlingen.  On  the  12th,  Laubanie,  with  a  detachment
of  the  garrison  of  Neuf-Brisach,  crossed  the  Rhine  in  small
boats,  carried  the  village  of  Neubourg,  sword  in  hand,  and
was  followed  by  M.  de  Guiscard  over  the  bridge  with  twenty
squadrons  of  horse  and  ten  battalions  of  infantry.  Prince
Louis,  on  receiving  this  news,  never  doubting  that  Villars
would  cross  at  that  point,  left  Eriedlingen  and  marched  to
Neubourg  on  the  14th.  But  that  same  morning  Villars,
warned  of  his  march,  left  Huningue  and  passed  his  whole
force  over  the  first  bridge  to  the  island.  From  there  the
cavalry  forded  the  narrow  arm  of  the  river  and  the  infantry
with  the  artillery  went  over  the  second  bridge,  which  he  had
had  time  to  move  and  carry  to  Eriedlingen.  Thereupon
Prince  Louis,  then  on  the  march,  turned  the  flank  of  a  little
mountain  and  gained  the  crest  with  five  of  his  squadrons,
while  thirty-seven  other  squadrons  marched  upon  'Yillars
sooner  than  he  expected.  Three  charges  threw  the  Imperial
cavalry  into  disorder  ;  but  the  other  battalions  being  posted
on  the  mountain  it  was  necessary  to  dislodge  them.  This
attack  on  the  mountain  was  such  that  the  troops  were  blown
and  slightly  in  disorder  on  arriving,  so  that  they  could  not
resist  a  compact  and  rested  infantry,  which  caused  them  to
lose  ground  and  retreat  to  the  base  in  greater  disorder  than
that  in  which  they  had  gone  up.  All  this  took  time,  so

VOL.  I.  — 17

258  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vm.

that  Villars,  who  remained  at  the  base,  losing  sight  of  his
cavalry  (which  was  then  two  miles  beyond  him  in  pursuit  of
that  of  the  emperor),  lost  his  head,  believed  the  battle  lost,
and  was  tearing  his  hair  under  a  tree,  when  he  saw  Magnac,
first  lieutenant-general  of  the  army,  hurrying  up  at  a  gallop,
with  a  single  aide-de-camp.  Villars,  not  doubting  then
of  a  catastrophe,  called  out  to  him,  “  Hey  !  Magnac,  are
we  lost  ?  ”  At  his  voice  Magnac  rode  up  to  the  tree  and
was  greatly  amazed  to  see  Villars  in  such  a  state.  “  What
are  you  doing  there  ?  ”  he  cried.  “  What  are  you  thinking
about  ?  They  are  beaten  ;  the  day  is  ours  !  ”  Thereupon
Villars  brushed  off  his  tears,  and  hurried  with  Magnac  to
his  infantry,  both  of  them  shouting  victory.  Their  victorious
cries  gave  our  troops  fresh  courage,  so  that  after  several
charges,  the  enemy  retired  and  were  pursued  for  some  time.
Villars  faced  the  thing  out  with  effrontery  and  Magnac
dared  not  speak  of  the  adventure  except  under  his  breath.
But  when  he  found,  later,  that  Villars  was  taking  all  the
credit  and  getting  all  the  rewards  and  sharing  none,  he
burst  forth  to  the  army,  and  then  to  the  Court,  where  his
tale  made  a  great  noise  ;  but  Vdlars,  who  had  won  the  prize
of  the  victory  and  had  Mme.  de  Maintenon  on  his  side,
only  shook  his  ears  and  said  nothing.

This  child  of  fortune  will  be  henceforth  and  continually
a  personage  so  considerable  that  it  is  proper  here  to  make
Character  of  him  known.  He  was  a  rather  tall,  dark  man,
viiiars.  well-made,  growing  fat  as  he  grew  older,

without  becoming  heavy;  with  a  lively,  open,  impulsive
face,  in  truth  a  little  wild,  to  which  both  gestures  and
behaviour  answered  ;  inordinate  ambition,  which  never
stopped  for  means  ;  a  great  opinion  of  himself,  which  he
was  never  able  to  communicate  except  to  the  king  ;  gal¬
lantry,  the  outside  skin  of  which  was  always  romantic  ;

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

259

great  baseness  and  great  suppleness  towards  those  who
could  serve  him,  being  himself  incapable  of  loving  or  serv-
ing  any  one,  or  of  any  sort  of  gratitude  ;  a  brilliant  valour,
a  great  activity,  audacity  unparalleled,  effrontery  which
dared  all  and  stopped  at  nothing,  with  a  swagger  driven
to  the  last  excess,  and  which  never  left  him  ;  enough  mind
to  impose  on  fools  by  its  own  self-confidence;  facility  of
speech,  but  over-abundant,  and  the  more  repulsive  because
it  always  harked  back  upon  himself,  praising  himself,  and
boasting  that  he  had  foreseen  all,  advised  all,  done  all,  with¬
out  ever,  if  he  could  help  it,  allowing  anything  to  others.
Under  a  Gascon  spirit  of  magnificence,  extreme  avarice,  the
greed  of  a  harpy,  which  won  him  piles  of  gold  during  the
wars  ;  for,  after  he  reached  the  head  of  the  armies,  it  was
piled  up  hand  over  hand  ;  at  which  he  sometimes  joked
himself,  without  the  least  shame  in  employing  detachments
and  directing  their  movements  for  this  end.  Incapable  of
details  as  to  subsistence,  transportation,  forage,  marches, —
all  of  which  he  left  to  whoever  among  his  general  officers
would  take  the  trouble  to  attend  to  them,  —  but  always
taking  the  credit  thereof  himself.  His  cleverness  consisted
in  making  much  of  slight  things  and  all  chances.  Com¬
pliments  stood  him  in  good  stead  ;  but  anything  more  solid
it  was  needless  to  expect  —  he  himself  was  nothing  so  little
as  solid.  Always  occupied  with  futilities,  when  he  was  not
dragged  away  from  them  by  the  imminent  importance  of
events.  He  was  a  repertory  of  novels,  comedies,  operas,
scraps  of  which  he  quoted  at  all  times,  even  in  the  most
serious  conferences.

His  ignorance,  and,  if  I  may  say  the  word,  his  ludicrous
incapacity  for  business  were  inconceivable  in  a  man  who  had
been  so  long  and  so  grandly  employed.  His  mind  lost
itself,  and  he  could  not  recover  it  ;  conception  was  lacking  ;

260  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vra

he  constantly  said  the  contrary  of  what  others  saw  that  he
meant  to  say.  I  have  often  been  amazed  by  this,  and  forced
to  set  him  right  or  speak  for  him,  after  I  was  engaged  with
him  in  public  matters  during  the  Regency.  Nothing  could
ever  stop  his  gambling,  because  he  was  very  lucky  and  won
enormous  sums.  His  only  concern  was  to  maintain  his
position,  and  let  others  do  what  he  ought  to  have  done  or
seen  done  himself.  Such  a  man  could  not  be  amiable  ;  con¬
sequently  he  had  neither  friends  nor  attached  followers  ;
and  no  man  ever  lived  in  such  great  employments  with  less
consideration  from  others.

The  fame  which  his  unfailing  luck  will  give  him  in  days
to  come  has  often  disgusted  me  with  history;  and  I  have
known  an  infinite  number  of  persons  who  have  made  the
same  reflection.  His  family  have  had  the  imprudence  to
let  Memoirs  (which  no  one  can  fail  to  see  are  his)  appear
too  soon  after  his  death.  I  was  young  and  only  the  colonel
of  a  regiment  of  cavalry  in  1694  and  the  following  years;
but  in  the  first  I  was  son-in-law  of  the  general  of  the  army  ;
and  during  the  other  years  in  the  most  intimate  confidence
of  the  Maréchal  de  Choiseul,  who  succeeded  my  father-in-law.
That  is  enough  to  enable  me  to  see  very  distinctly  that  the
boastfulness  of  those  Memoirs  as  to  those  campaigns  is
without  the  least  foundation,  and  that  all  that  he  says  of
himself  is  pure  romance.  I  have  known  the  principal
officers  who  served  with  him  and  under  him  in  the  other
campaigns  which  he  relates,  in  which  all  is  false,  many  of
the  facts  being  entirely  invented,  or  with  a  mere  foundation
on  which  he  has  built  up  his  own  praises,  and  robbed  others
of  a  merit  which  he  appropriated.

As  for  his  negotiations  in  Bavaria  and  at  Vienna,  which
he  describes  in  such  fine  colours,  I  asked  the  truth  of  M.  de
Torcy,  to  whom  at  the  time  he  had  to  report,  and  upon

261

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

whose  orders  and  instructions  he  was  obliged  to  govern
himself.  Torcy  assured  me  that  he  admired  the  romance,
in  which  everything  was  a  lie  ;  that  no  fact  and  no  word
of  it  was  true.  Torcy  was  then  minister  and  secretary  of
State  for  foreign  affairs,  and  everything  passed  through  his
hands.  His  integrity  and  truthfulness  have  never  been
doubted  in  France  or  hi  foreign  countries.

Such  was  the  vanity  of  Ahllars  in  seeking  to  be  a  hero  of
all  kinds  to  posterity,  at  the  cost  of  lies  and  calumnies,
which  form  the  tissue  of  the  romance  of  his  Memoirs,  and
the  folly  of  those  who  hastened  to  publish  them  before  the
death  of  the  witnesses  of  those  things,  the  spectators  of  a
marvellous  man,  who,  with  all  his  art,  his  unexampled  luck,
the  greatest  dignities,  and  the  highest  positions  in  the  State,
was  never  anything  but  a  strolling  comedian,  and  more  often

a  mountebank  on  his  platform.

Among  so  many  and  such  great  defects  it  would  not
be  just  to  deny  him  certain  qualities.  He  was  a  Captain.
His  projects  were  bold,  vast,  and  nearly  always  good ,  no
man  was  better  fitted  for  the  execution  of  them,  in  the
handling  of  troops,  in  concealing  his  designs  and  bringing
them  up  at  the  right  moment,  and  in  posting  them  for  the
attack.  His  coup  d’œil,  though  good,  was  not  always
equally  true;  in  action  his  head  was  clear,  but  liable  to
too  much  ardour,  and  in  that  way  he  was  often  confused.
The  incoherence  of  his  orders  was  extreme  ;  seldom  written,
always  vague  and  general  —  under  pretence  of  esteem  and
reliance  —  and  wordy,  reserving  carefully  the  chance  to  at¬
tribute  to  himself  success  or  throw  the  blame  of  failure
on  the  executors.  After  attaining  to  the  head  of  the
armies,  his  audacity  was  only  in  words.  Always  the  same
in  personal  valour,  he  was  altogether  different  in  courage  of
mind.  Intrigues  were  no  mystery  to  him.  He  managed

262  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

the  king  by  adoration,  and  kept  Mme.  de  Maintenon  true
to  him  by  yielding  to  her  will  without  reserve  and  without
repugnance.  I  cannot  better  finish  this  too  long  portrait,
in  which  I  think,  however,  I  have  said  nothing  useless,
and  have  scrupulously  respected  the  obligations  of  truth,  —
I  cannot,  I  say,  better  close  than  with  the  following  maxim
of  Villars’  mother,  who  from  the  first  dazzle  of  his  fortune
constantly  said  to  him  :  “  My  son,  always  talk  to  the  king
about  yourself,  but  never  speak  of  yourself  to  others.”  He
profited,  usefully,  by  the  first  part  of  this  advice,  but  not
by  the  second,  for  he  never  ceased  to  stun  and  weary
everybody  with  his  affairs.

The  Duchesse  de  Gesvres  died  in  the  course  of  this
summer,  separated  from  a  husband  who  was  the  scourge

of  his  family  and  had  wasted  its  millions.
Her  name  was  Du  Yal,  the  only  daughter
of  Fontenay-Mareuil,  ambassador  of  France

Death  of  the
Duchesse  de
Gesvres.

to  Rome  at  the  time  of  the  enterprise  of  the  Duc  de  Guise
at  Naples.  She  was  a  species  of  ghost,  very  tall  and  thin,
and  she  walked  like  those  great  birds  that  are  called
Numidian  cranes.  She  sometimes  came  to  Court  in  her
odd,  peculiar  way,  with  a  look  of  the  famine  to  which  her
husband  had  reduced  her.  She  had  much  virtue,  mind,
and  dignity.  I  remember  that  one  summer,  when  the
king  had  taken  a  fancy  to  go  often  in  the  evening  to
Trianon,  and  permitted  the  whole  Court,  men  and  women,
to  follow  him,  there  was  always  a  grand  collation  served
to  his  daughters,  the  princesses,  who  brought  their  friends,
and  to  any  of  the  other  ladies  who  went  if  they  chose.  It
happened  one  evening  that  the  Duchesse  de  Gesvres  took
it  into  her  head  to  go  to  Trianon,  and  take  the  collation.
Her  age,  the  rarity  of  her  presence  at  Court,  her  accoutre¬
ments,  her  figure  excited  the  princesses  to  make  fun  of

1702]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  263

her  in  whispers  among  their  favourites.  She  saw  it,  and
without  disturbing  herself,  gave  them  a  piece  of  her  mind
so  neatly  and  dryly  that  she  stopped  their  tongues  and
made  them  lower  their  eyes.  That  was  not  all,  for  after
the  collation  was  over  she  expressed  herself  so  freely  and
yet  humorously  about  their  behaviour  that  terror  brought
them  to  the  point  of  making  excuses  and  begging  for
quarter.  Mme.  de  Gesvres  was  very  willing  to  grant  it,
but  she  let  them  be  informed  that  it  was  only  on  condition
that  they  learned  how  to  behave.  Ever  after  they  dared
not  look  in  her  eyes.

Nothing  could  be  more  magnificent  than  these  evenings
at  Trianon.  All  the  flower-beds  changed  their  compartments
every  day  ;  and  I  have  seen  the  king  and  the  whole  Court
obliged  to  leave  the  gardens  because  of  the  tuberoses,  the
fragrance  of  which  perfumed  the  air,  but  was  so  strong
on  ^account  of  their  quantity  that  no  one  could  stay  in  the
gardens,  vast  as  they  were,  nor  on  the  terrace  along  the
arm  of  the  canal.

On  Monday,  December  4,  when  leaving  the  council
of  despatches,  at  which  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  was
Mgr.  the  Duc  de  present,  the  king  said  to  him  that  he  gave
Bourgogne  enters  admittance  to  the  council  of  finances

and  even  to  the  council  of  State  ;  that  he  expected  him
to  listen  and  inform  himself  for  some  time,  without  ex¬
pressing  his  opinion;  but  that  after  doing  so  he  should
be  very  glad  to  have  him  enter  fully  into  affairs.  The
prince  had  no  expectation  of  this,  for  Monseigneur  was
not  admitted  until  he  was  very  much  older,  and  accord¬
ingly  he  was  greatly  touched  by  this  honour.  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  out  of  friendship  for  the  Duchesse  de  Bour¬
gogne,  had  a  large  share  in  it;  and  so  had  the  testimony
which  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  gave  to  the  king  as  to  the

264  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tiii.

maturity  of  mind  and  the  application  of  the  young  prince.
The  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  was  transported  with  joy;  and
M.  de  Beauvilliers  was  delighted.

The  celebrated  Vauban,  who  had  been  the  soul  of  all
the  sieges  made  by  the  king  in  person,  was  named
I7o3  Leprêtre,  a  plain  gentleman  from  the  Nivernois,
Maréchal  vauban.  put  perhaps  the  most  honest  man  and  the
most  virtuous  of  his  epoch.  With  the  highest  reputation
for  knowledge  in  the  art  of  sieges  and  fortifications,  the
most  simple,  the  most  true,  the  most  modest  of  human
beings.  He  was  a  man  of  medium  height,  rather  thick¬
set,  with  the  look  of  a  warrior,  but  also  a  bluff  and  coarse
exterior,  not  to  say  brutal  and  ferocious  ;  whereas  he  was
nothing  of  the  kind.  Never  a  man  more  gentle,  com¬
passionate,  obliging;  respectful  hut  without  politeness;  the
most  sparing  manager  of  the  lives  of  men  ;  a  gallant
heart  that  took  all  upon  himself  and  gave  all  to  others.
It  is  inconceivable  that  with  such  uprightness  and  such
frankness,  incapable  of  lending  himself  to  anything  that
was  false  or  base,  he  should  have  won  to  the  point  he  did
the  friendship  and  confidence  of  Louvois  and  the  king.

The  latter  had  disclosed  to  him  the  previous  year  his
desire  to  make  him  maréchal  of  France,  and  Vauban  had
entreated  him  to  reflect  that  this  dignity  was  not  intended
for  a  man  of  his  station,  and  one  who  could  never  command
the  armies  ;  and  moreover  that  great  embarrassment  would
ensue  if  in  laying  a  siege  the  general  in  command  should
be  of  younger  rank  than  himself.  A  refusal  so  generous,
supported  by  reasons  which  virtue  alone  suggested,  increased
the  desire  of  the  king  to  reward  him.  Vauban  had  laid
fifty-three  sieges,  twenty  in  presence  of  the  king,  who  felt
that  he  was  making  himself  a  marshal  of  France  and  hon¬
ouring  his  own  laurels  in  giving  the  bâton  to  Vauban.  The

1703]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

265

latter  received  it  with  the  same  modesty  he  had  shown  in
his  disinterested  refusal.  Every  one  applauded  this  honour,
to  which  no  one  in  his  position  had  ever  reached  before
or  has  ever  reached  since.  Later,  at  the  time  of  the  siege
of  Turin,  Vauban  did  a  noble  action.  He  offered  himself
to  the  king,  urging  him  to  send  him  there  to  give  his  advice,
with  orders  to  keep,  during  the  intervals,  at  two  leagues
from  the  army,  so  as  not  to  interfere  with  anything  else
while  there.  He  added  that  he  would  fling  his  baton
behind  the  door  ;  that  it  was  not  just  that  the  honour  to
which  the  king  had  raised  him  should  make  him  useless
in  his  service,  and  rather  than  that  he  would  prefer  to
give  it  back.  This  Roman  offer  was  not  accepted.

We  have  seen  what  Vauban  was  on  the  occasion  of  his
elevation  to  the  office  of  maréchal  of  France.  We  shall
Vauban’s  book  on  now  see  him  brought  to  the  grave  by  the
the  royal  tithe.  bitterness  of  grief  for  that  which  ought  to
have  crowned  him  with  honour,  and  would,  anywhere  but
in  France,  have  won  him  everything.  To  understand  the
force  of  what  I  have  to  say,  the  above  brief  portrait  must
be  remembered  ;  and  it  should  also  be  known  that  what  I
have  said  and  shall  say  is  derived  from  his  actions  and  a
reputation  contradicted  by  none,  either  while  he  lived
or  since  his  death,  and  that  I  never  had  with  him,  or
with  any  one  belonging  to  him,  the  slightest  connection.

Patriot  that  he  was,  he  had  all  his  life  been  touched  by
the  misery  of  the  people  and  the  trials  which  they  suffer.
The  knowledge  which  his  employments  gave  him  of  the
necessity  of  expenditures,  and  the  little  hope  there  was  that
the  king  would  retrench  those  for  splendour  and  amuse¬
ments,  made  him  groan  at  seeing  no  remedy  for  an  oppres¬
sion  the  weight  of  which  was  increasing  day  by  day.  With
this  upon  his  mind,  he  never  made  a  journey  (and  he  crossed

266  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

the  kingdom  often  and  in  all  directions)  that  he  did  not
gather  exact  information  everywhere  as  to  the  value  and
product  of  land,  as  to  the  sort  of  commerce  and  industry  in
the  different  provinces  and  towns,  as  to  the  nature  and
levying  of  taxes,  and  as  to  the  manner  of  collecting  them.
Not  content  with  what  he  could  see  and  do  by  himself,  he
sent  secretly  wherever  he  could  not  go,  and  even  where  he
had  been  and  where  he  meant  to  go,  in  order  to  learn
everything  and  compare  the  reports  with  what  he  was  able
to  ascertain  for  himself.  The  last  twenty  years  of  his  life
were  passed  in  these  researches,  on  which  he  spent  much
money.  He  verified  them  often  with  all  the  accuracy  and
precision  he  could  bring  to  bear,  and  he  excelled  in  both
qualities.  Finally,  he  convinced  himself  that  land  was  the
only  solid  property,  and  he  set  to  work  to  construct  a
new  system.

He  was  well  advanced  in  this  work  when  there  began  to
appear  various  little  books  by  the  Sieur  de  Boisguilbert,
lieutenant-general  at  the  siege  of  Bouen,  a  man  of  much
mind,  industry,  and  detail,  who  had  been  stirred  by  the
same  ideas  as  Yauban,  and  had  also  worked  at  them  for
a  long  time.  He  had  already  made  progress  before  the
time  when  Pontchartrain,  leaving  the  finances,  became
chancellor.  Boisguilbert  came  to  Paris  expressly  to  see
him.  Pontchartrain,  disgusted  with  the  many  givers  of
advice  who  passed  through  his  hands,  and  who  was
all  saltpetre  himself,  began  to  laugh,  answered  roughly,
and  turned  his  back  upon  him.  Boisguilbert  returned  to
Rouen,  not  discouraged  at  his  ill-success,  and  set  to  work
more  indefatigably  than  ever  at  his  plan,  which  was  much
the  same  as  that  of  Yauban,  without  the  two  ever  knowing
each  other.  From  this  labour  was  born  a  book  that  was
very  learned  and  profound  upon  this  subject.

1703]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  267

Yauban,  always  engaged  in  his  own  work,  saw  this  book
and  read  it  with  attention,  together  with  others  by  the
same  author  which  followed  it.  He  then  desired  to  talk
with  Boisguilbert.  Little  attached  to  his  own  writings,  but
ardent  for  the  relief  of  the  People  and  the  good  of  the
State,  he  retouched  them  and  perfected  them  on  Bois-
guilbert’s  work  and  put  the  final  touches.  The  two  men
agreed  perfectly  on  the  principal  points,  but  not  on  all
others.

Yauban  had  the  advantage  over  Boisguilbert  of  having
examined,  weighed,  compared,  and  calculated  himself  in
his  various  journeys  during  twenty  years,  also  in  what  he
had  gathered  from  the  labours  of  others  whom  he  sent
into  the  provinces  for  that  purpose  during  many  years ,
things  which  Boisguilbert,  being  sedentary  at  Bouen,  could
not  have  compassed.  Also  he  had  had  the  advantage  of
rectifying  his  work  by  the  lights  and  the  works  of  the
latter,  and  thus  he  might  flatter  himself  to  surpass  him
in  accuracy  and  precision,  the  fundamental  basis  of  such

labour.

The  system  of  Yauban  abolished  all  kinds  of  taxes,  for
which  he  substituted  one  only,  divided  into  two  branches,
to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  “  royal  tithe  ;  ”  one  branch  on
the  land  to  a  tenth  of  its  product,  the  other  lightly  laid  by
appraisal  upon  commerce  and  industry,  which  he  thought,
far  from  being  burdened,  should  be  encouraged.  He  enjoined
regulations,  that  were  very  simple,  very  wise,  and  very  easy,
for  the  levying  and  collecting  of  the  two  imposts,  according  to
the  value  of  the  land,  and  in  regard  to  the  number  of  men
on  whom  to  count  with  most  precision  throughout  the  king¬
dom.  He  added  a  comparison  of  the  system  of  assessment
then  in  use  with  that  which  he  proposed,  the  objections  to
both,  and,  reciprocally,  their  advantages;  concluding  by

268  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viil

proofs  in  favour  of  his  own,  of  a  clearness  and  obviousness
which  could  not  he  rejected.  The  work  received  the  public
plaudits  and  approbation  of  those  persons  who  were  most
competent  to  judge  of  such  calculations  ;  and  all  who  were
versed  in  those  matters  admired  the  depth,  the  accuracy,  and
the  clearness  of  his  work.

But  the  book  had  a  great  defect.  It  gave,  in  truth,  to  the
king  more  than  he  could  derive  from  any  of  the  means  here¬
tofore  employed  ;  it  also  saved  the  people  from  distress  and
from  vexations  ;  it  enriched  them  by  leaving  them  all,  or
nearly  all,  that  did  not  go  into  the  coffers  of  the  king,  lut
it  ruined  an  army  of  financiers,  clerks,  employés  of  all  kinds  ;
it  reduced  them  to  seek  to  live  at  their  own  charge,  and  not
on  that  of  the  public;  it  sapped  the  foundations  of  those
immense  fortunes  which  we  have  seen  grow  up  in  such  little
time.  That  was  enough  to  wreck  the  scheme.

The  crime  was  that  under  this  new  system  there  would
come  an  end  to  the  authority  of  the  controller-general,  his
favour,  his  fortune,  his  omnipotence,  and,  in  proportion,  to
that  of  intendants  of  finance,  intendants  of  the  provinces,
their  secretaries,  clerks,  protégés,  to  the  private  means  of
information  of  these  persons,  to  their  influence  ;  and  more¬
over,  by  the  same  blow,  they  would  all  be  deprived  of  the
power  of  doing  good  or  evil  to  any  one.  It  is  not  surprising
that  so  many  powerful  persons  of  all  kinds,  from  whose  hands
the  book  wrenched  everything,  should  conspire  against  a  sys¬
tem  so  useful  to  the  State,  so  fortunate  for  the  king,  so  bene-
eficial  for  the  people  of  the  kingdom,  but  so  ruinous  to
themselves.  The  whole  long-robe  roared  for  its  interests.
The  legal  body  is  the  regulator  of  taxes,  through  the  offices
that  belong  to  all  sorts  of  administration,  and  to  these  it
has  exclusive  access  over  others.  In  a  word,  none  but  the
powerless  and  the  disinterested  were  for  Yauban  and  Bois-

1703]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

269

guilbert,  —  I  mean  the  Church  and  the  nobility  ;  as  for  the
people,  they  gained  everything,  but  they  were  ignorant  how
near  they  were  to  salvation;  the  lower  bourgeoisie  alone

deplored  its  failure.

It  was  therefore  no  wonder  that  the  king,  hemmed  about
and  prejudiced  in  this  way,  received  Maréchal  Yauban  very
ill  when  he  presented  to  him  his  book,  which  was  addressed
to  himself  throughout  the  whole  work.  We  can  imagine
whether  the  ministers  to  whom  Yauban  also  presented  it
gave  it  a  better  welcome.  From  that  moment  his  services,
his  military  capacity,  which  was  unique  in  its  own  line,  his
virtues,  the  affection  the  king  had  always  shown  him,  even
to  thinking  he  crowned  his  own  head  with  laurel  in  elevating
Vauban,  all  this  disappeared  from  the  king’s  sight  in  a
moment.  He  saw  him  now  as  a  man  crazed  by  his  love  for
the  people  ;  a  criminal,  attacking  the  authority  of  his  min¬
isters,  and  consequently  his  own.  He  expressed  himself  in
this  manner  without  reserve.  The  echo  reverberated  sharp  y
through  the  nation,  and  all  the  offended  parties  abused  their
triumph  unmercifully.  The  unhappy  maréchal,  borne  upon
the  hearts  of  Frenchmen,  could  not  survive  the  loss  of  the
good  graces  of  a  master  for  whom  he  had  done  all.  Fie
died  a  few  months  later,  seeing  no  one,  consumed  with  sor¬
row  and  an  affliction  that  nothing  softened;  to  which  the
kino1  was  insensible,  even  pretending  not  to  notice  that  he
had^ lost  a  servant  so  useful  and  so  illustrious.  But  Yauban
was  none  the  less,  celebrated  throughout  all  Europe,  even
by  his  enemies  ;  nor  was  he  less  regretted  in  France  by
those  who  were  not  financiers,  or  the  tools  of  financiers
Fa^on,  the  king’s  chief  physician,  who  possessed  all  ns
confidence  and  that  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  as  to  their
health,  had  induced  the  king  to  take  Maréchal,  surgeon  o
the  Charité  in  Paris,  as  his  surgeon-in-chief,  he  being  the

270  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

first  of  all  in  skill  and  reputation.  Besides  his  capacity  in
his  profession,  Maréchal  was  a  man  who,  with  very  little
mind,  had  very  good  sense,  knew  his  men

Maréchal,  the

king’s  surgeon.  well,  was  full  of  honour,  equity,  integrity,
aboùTpon-Royai  and  aversion  to  the  contrary  ;  straightforward,
des  champs.  frank,  and  true  ;  very  ready  to  he  serviceable
either  from  justice  or  friendship,  and  committing  himself
willingly  to  break  the  ice  with  the  king  after  he  was
fairly  initiated,  which  he  soon  was,  in  his  various  familiar
employments  about  him.

I  remember  that  he  related  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and
me  a  circumstance  that  happened  to  him,  and  which  deserves
to  be  recorded.  Less  than  a  year  after  he  became  chief-
surgeon,  but  still  seeing,  as  he  had  always  done,  patients  of
every  kind  who  needed  his  skilful  hand  in  Versailles  and  its
neighbourhood,  he  was  asked  by  the  surgeon  of  Port-Boyal
des  Champs  to  go  there  and  see  a  nun  whose  leg  it  seemed
to  him  desirable  to  amputate.  Maréchal  engaged  to  do  so
the  next  day.  On  that  next  day,  as  he  left  the  lever  of  the
king,  another  operation  was  proposed  to  him.  He  excused
himself  on  the  ground  of  the  engagement  he  had  already  made
for  Port-Royal.  At  that  name  one  of  the  Faculty  drew  him
aside,  and  asked  him  if  he  knew  what  he  was  doinçr  in  goino-
to  Port-Royal.  Maréchal,  very  simple  hearted,  and  quite
unaware  of  the  matters  which  under  that  name  had  made  so
much  disturbance,  was  surprised  at  the  question,  and  still
more  when  told  that  he  risked  being  dismissed.  He  could
not  understand  that  the  king  should  object  to  his  going  to
see  whether  or  not  they  should  cut  off  the  leg  of  a  nun.  By
way  of  compromise  he  promised  to  speak  to  the  king  before
he  went.  Accordingly,  he  waited  for  the  king  on  his  return
from  mass,  and  as  that  was  not  the  hour  when  he  was  accus¬
tomed  to  present  himself,  the  king,  surprised,  asked  him

1703]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

271

what  he  wanted.  Maréchal  related  with  simplicity  what
had  brought  him,  and  mentioned  his  own  surprise.  At  the
name  of  Port-Royal  the  king  drew  himself  up,  as  he  always
did  when  anything  displeased  him,  and  stood  for  two  or
three  Paters  without  answering,  grave  and  reflective.  Then
he  said  :  “  I  am  willing  that  you  should  go,  hut  on  condition
that  you  go  at  once,  so  as  to  have  plenty  of  time  before  you,
and  thus,  under  pretext  of  curiosity,  see  everything  about
the  house,  the  nuns  in  the  choir  and  wherever  you  can  find
them  ;  make  them  talk,  examine  them  well  and  closely,  and
come  back  to-night  and  give  me  an  account  of  it.”  Maré¬
chal,  still  more  surprised,  made  his  trip,  saw  everything,
and  did  not  fail  to  do  exactly  as  prescribed.  He  was  awaited
with  impatience  ;  the  king  asked  for  him  several  times,  and
after  his  arrival  kept  him  more  than  an  hour  asking  questions
and  hearing  his  tale.  Maréchal  made  a  eulogy  on  Port-
Royal;  he  told  the  king  that  the  first  words  said  to  him
were  an  inquiry  as  to  the  king’s  health,  and  it  was  often
renewed;  that  there  was  no  institution  where  his  Majesty
was  so  prayed  for,  as  he  witnessed  himself  during  the
services  in  the  choir.  He  admired  the  charity,  patience,
and  contrition  he  saw  everywhere,  and  he  added  that  he
had  never  been  in  any  house  where  the  piety  and
saintliness  made  so  great  an  impression  on  him.  At
the  end  of  this  narration  the  king  gave  a  sigh,  and  said
they  were  saints  who  had  been  harassed  too  much;  their
irmorance  of  facts,  and  their  obstinacy  had  not  been  suffi¬
ciently  considered,  and  matters  had  gone  much  too  far  in
regard  to  them.  Here  we  see  just  and  natural  feeling  pro¬
duced  by  the  straightforward  narrative  of  a  fresh  and  neutral
man,  who  tells  what  he  has  seen,  — a  man  whom  the  king
could  not  distrust,  and  who  had  full  liberty  to  speak  his
mind  But  the  king,  sold  to  the  other  side,  gave  access  to

272  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

none  other;  so  that  this  chance  impression  of  the  actual
truth  was  soon  annihilated.  He  had  no  remembrance  of  it
some  years  later,  when  Père  Tellier  obliged  him  to  destroy
Port-Royal,  even  to  its  very  stones  and  material  foundations,
and  pass  a  ploughshare  through  them.

IX

If  we  remember  what  I  said  of  the  Princesse  des  XJrsins
at  the  time  she  was  chosen  to  be  camarera-mayor  to  the
Princesse  des  Queen  of  Spain  on  her  marriage,  and  since
ursins  takes  Pos-  ^en  unqer  her  apparent  regency  during  the

session  of  Queen  .  ,,  ,

of  Spain.  journey  of  the  king  to  Italy,  we  shall  see  that

Mme.  des  Ursins  wished  to  reign.  She  could  only  attain  to
this  end  by  giving  the  queen  a  taste  for  business  and  the
desire  to  rule  ;  using  the  temperament  of  Philippe  Y.  and  the
graces  of  his  wife  to  enable  her  to  share  a  sceptre  which,  leav¬
ing  externals  to  the  king,  should  pass  the  essential  powei  to
the  queen,  in  other  words  to  herself,  who  would  govern  the
latter  and  through  her  the  king  and  the  monarchy.  So  great
a  project  had  an  indispensable  need  of  being  supported  by  the
King  of  Prance,  who,  especially  in  these  beginnings,  governed
the  Court  of  Spain  no  less  than  he  did  his  own  with  entire
influence  upon  everything.  In  this  vast  scheme,  conceived
as  soon  as  she  had  met  and  fathomed  the  king  and  queen,
she  was  assisted  by  the  thoughtless  folly  of  the  Spanish
ladies  on  the  journey  between  Provence  and  Barcelona,  which
led  the  queen  to  feel  that  she  had  no  other  resource  than  in
the  princess  to  whom  she  now  gave  herself  up  entirely.
The  queen  had  been  brought  up  no  less  carefully  than  the
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  nor  was  she  less  well-educated.
She  was  born  with  a  mind  ;  in  her  first  youth  a  good  mind,
sensible,  firm,  consistent,  capable  of  accepting  advice  and
restraint,  which,  when  developed  and  formed  by  after  events,
showed  a  constancy  and  courage  that  the  sweetness  and

VOL.  I. —  18

274

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

natural  graces  of  this  same  mind  lifted  higher  still.  A
spirit  of  this  kind,  led  in  the  first  instance  by  a  spirit  like
that  of  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  at  all  hours  and  without
witnesses,  was  likely  to  go  far,  as  it  did.

We  can  well  believe  that  Mme.  des  Ursins  did  not  neglect
to  pay  assiduous  attention  to  our  Court,  and  to  render  an
exact  account  of  all  that  related  to  the  queen  down  to  the
smallest  details,  and  to  make  the  most  of  her  own  services.
These  accounts  were  addressed  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and
given  by  her  to  the  king.  At  the  same  time  she  was  not  less
careful  to  keep  the  King  of  Spain  when  in  Italy  fully  in¬
formed,  while  inducing  the  queen  to  write  to  him  and  also  to
her  sister  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne.  The  praises  which
the  Princesse  des  Ursins  gave  the  queen  in  these  letters  led,
little  by  little  and  very  naturally,  to  public  affairs  ;  and  as
she  was  a  witness  of  all  that  went  on,  she  began  also,  little
by  little,  to  enlarge  on  those  affairs,  and  so  to  accustom  the
two  kings  to  see  her  well-informed  about  such  matters  as
the  result  of  her  attendance  on  the  queen,  without  giving
them  cause  to  suspect  her  of  ambition  or  the  desire  to  meddle.
Thus  insensibly  anchored,  and  almost  sure  of  Spain  if  France
supported  her,  she  flattered  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  by  degrees
so  as  not  to  advance  without  reason,  until  she  succeeded
in  persuading  her  that  the  influence  she  obtained  could  only
be  for  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  interests  ;  that  if  she  were
allowed  authority  in  public  matters  she  would  use  it  only
to  obey  her  blindly;  that  by  her  in  Madrid  she,  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  at  Versailles  would  reign  over  Spain  more  ab¬
solutely  than  she  reigned  in  France,  because  she  would  have
no  need  of  byways,  she  had  only  to  command  ;  and  finally,
that  she  could  only  attain  this  degree  of  power  through  her,
Mme.  des  Ursins,  who  would  neither  have  nor  hope  for  any
other  support;  whereas  the  ambassadors  were  governed  by

1703]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

275

the  ministers  in  France,  and  would  act  together  against  the
King  of  Spain  and  independently  against  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
who  would  thus  he  ignorant  of  much  and  without  a  clue  to
events,  and  therefore  not  in  a  position  to  influence  affairs
except  by  long  and  circuitous  ways,  and  then  only  in  such
affairs  as  she  would  learn  from  the  king.

Mme.  de  Maintenon,  whose  passion  was  to  know  all,  share
in  all,  and  govern  all,  was  bewitched  by  the  siren.  This
way  of  governing  Spain  without  ministers  seemed  to  her  a
great  political  stroke.  She  seized  it  with  avidity,  not  per¬
ceiving  that  she  would  govern  only  in  appearance  and  would
enable  Mme.  des  TJrsins  to  govern  in  fact,  inasmuch  as  she
herself  would  know  things  only  through  her,  and  see  them
on  the  side  only  which  the  latter  would  choose  to  present.
Hence  the  intimate  union  between  these  two  important
women  ;  hence  the  unbounded  authority  of  Mme.  des  Ursins.

This  great  step  made,  and  the  secret  and  intimate  alliance
contracted  between  the  two  women  to  govern  Spain,  it  was
character  of  necessary  to  make  the  King  of  Spain  fall  into
Philippe  v.  the  same  net  ;  nature  had  provided  the  way,
and  the  necessary  art  achieved  it.  This  prince,  the  younger
brother  of  a  passionate,  violent,  impetuous  elder,  who  was
full  of  intellect  but  terrible  in  temper  and  unreasonable  in
will  (I  say  this  the  more  freely  because  in  the  end  the
triumph  of  his  virtue  will  be  seen),  —  this  younger  brother,
I  say,  had  been  brought  up  in  a  dependence,  a  submission,
which  were  necessary  to  avoid  trouble  and  establish  the
tranquillity  of  the  royal  family.  Up  to  the  time  of  the  will
of  Charles  II.  the  Duc  d’Anjou  had  been  regarded  by  every
one  as  a  subject  for  life,  who,  the  greater  he  was  by  birth,
had  the  more  to  fear  under  a  king  and  brother  such  as
I  have  just  represented,  and  who,  consequently,  could  not
be  too  much  kept  under  by  education  and  coated  with

276  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

patience  and  dependence.  Supreme  law,  in  other  words
reasons  of  State,  required  this  supremacy  of  the  elder
over  the  personality  of  the  younger  brother,  for  the  safety
aud  happiness  of  the  kingdom.  His  mind,  and  all  that
depended  on  it,  was  dwarfed  and  kept  down  by  this
necessary  sort  of  education,  which,  falling  upon  a  gentle,
tranquil  nature,  accustomed  him  to  neither  think  nor  pro¬
duce,  but  to  let  himself  be  easily  led;  although  enough
right-mindedness  still  remained  to  choose  the  best  of  what
was  offered  to  him,  and  even  to  express  himself  in  good
terms  when  the  slowness,  not  to  say  laziness,  of  his  mind
did  not  prevent  him  from  speaking  at  all.  The  great  piety
which  had  been  carefully  instilled  into  his  soul  and  which
he  always  retained,  not  finding  in  him  the  habit  of  judging
and  discerning,  dwarfed  and  subdued  him  still  further  ;  so
that  with  sense,  intelligence,  and  a  faculty  of  expression
slow  but  accurate  and  capable  of  good  terms,  he  was,
nevertheless,  a  prince  trained  expressly  to  be  shut  up  and
governed.

After  the  return  of  the  king  to  Madrid  the  queen  was
not  excluded  from  the  secrets  or  the  affairs  of  the  admin¬
istration.  She  no  longer  presided  over  the  Junta,  but
nothing  was  there  deliberated  without  her  knowledge.  The
confidence  and  affection  she  had  for  her  camar  era-may  or
was  soon  passed  by  her  to  the  king  who  sought  only  to
please  her.  Before  long  the  Junta  became  a  show  ;  every¬
thing  went  privately  to  the  king,  usually  before  the  queen,
who  decided  nothing  on  the  spot,  but  made  her  decision
later  between  herself  and  Mme.  des  Ursins;  this  conduct
was  not  forbidden  by  our  Court.  The  Cardinals  Portocarrero
and  d’Estrées  in  vain  complained  of  it  and  appealed  to  our
ministers.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  laughed  them  to  scorn  ;
and  the  king  thought  it  a  fine  stroke  of  policy  to  in-

1703]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  277

crease  more  and  more  the  influence  of  the  Queen  of  Spain,
in  the  belief  (which  Mme.  de  Maintenons  personal  inter¬
ests  put  into  his  head)  that  he  could  govern  the  king  his
grandson  more  surely  through  the  queen  than  in  any  other
way.1

Another  affair  ended  this  year  in  which  I  took  a  part.
There  were  certain  great  feast-days  when  the  king  attended
The  affair  of  the  both  high  mass  and  vespers,  at  which  some
quête-  lady  of  the  Court  collected  [quêtoit]  for  the

poor.  It  was  the  queen  or,  if  there  were  no  queen,  the
dauphine  who  appointed  this  lady  on  the  occasion  of  each
quête ;  in  the  interval  between  the  two  dauphines  Mme.
de  Maintenon  took  the  duty  of  notifying  her.  As  long  as
there  were  maids  of  honour  to  the  queen  or  to  Mine,  la
Dauphine  it  was  always  one  of  them.  But  after  the  office
of  maids  of  honour  was  abolished,  the  ladies  of  the  Court
were  appointed.  The  house  of  Lorraine  (which  only  gained
its  rank  by  enterprises  in  the  days  of  the  Ligue,  adroitly
maintained  and  increased  afterwards  by  its  watchfulness
and  continual  encroachments),  attentive  to  everything,  was
imperceptibly  avoiding  the  quête  in  order  later  to  gain  a
distinction  and  the  right  not  to  collect,  so  as  to  assimilate
themselves,  in  this  as  in  their  betrothals,  to  the  princesses
of  the  blood.  It  was  a  long  time  before  this  was  noticed
and  remarked  upon.  At  last,  however,  the  Duchesse  de
Noailles,  the  Duchesse  de  Guiche  her  daughter,  and  the
Maréchale  de  Boufflers  observed  it.  Some  others  did  so
likewise  and  spoke  of  it  among  themselves  and  to  me.  On
a  day  of  the  Conception  when  there  was  no  high  mass  in
the  morning  and  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  had  forgotten

1  It  is  impossible  to  give  in  full  Saint-Simon’s  account  of  the  reign  of
the  Princesse  des  Ursins,  and  equally  impossible  to  make  it  understood
through  a  long  course  of  intrigue,  by  an  abridgment.  Therefore,  only
the  leading  features  of  it  are  given  here.  — Tb.

278  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

to  appoint  the  quêteuse,  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  being  in  full
dress  at  the  king’s  vespers,  the  bag  was  thrown  to  her  at
the  moment  of  the  collection.  She  collected,  and  at  the
time  we  had  no  suspicion  that  the  Lorrain  princesses  in¬
tended  to  make  that  a  ground  for  not  quêting  themselves.

After  I  was  warned  of  this  intention  I  promised  myself
well  that  the  duchesses  should  be  as  adroit  as  they,  until
the  chance  came  to  make  things  equal.  The  Duchesse  de
Noailles  spoke  to  the  Duchesse  du  Lude,  who,  supine  and
fearful  of  everything,  only  shrugged  her  shoulders.  There
was  always  some  duchess,  new  and  ignorant  or  base,  who
now  and  then  collected.  At  last,  the  Duchesse  du  Lude,
driven  to  the  point  by  Mme.  de  ISToailles,  spoke  of  the
matter  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  who,  finding  how
matters  were,  wished  to  see  what  the  princesses  meant  to
do.  Accordingly,  on  the  next  festival  she  appointed  Mme.
de  Montbazon,  the  daughter  of  M.  de  Bouillon,  young  and
beautiful,  and  in  every  way  well  fitted  to  perform  the  part.
She  excused  herself,  though  perfectly  well,  on  the  ground
of  illness,  stayed  in  bed  for  half  a  day,  and  then  went  out
as  usual.  After  that  nothing  further  was  needed  to  show
their  intentions.  The  Duchesse  du  Lude  dared  not  push
the  matter  further,  nor  did  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,
although  she  felt  annoyed  ;  hut  after  this  no  duchess  either
would  or  dared  to  collect.  The  ladies  of  quality  soon
found  it  out.  They  felt  that  the  quête  was  thrown  upon
them  alone,  and  they,  in  their  turn,  began  to  avoid  it,  so
that,  after  a  time,  it  fell  into  all  sorts  of  hands,  and  some¬
times  it  was  not  made  at  all.  The  matter  went  so  far  that
the  king  was  very  angry,  and  was  on  the  point  of  making
the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  collect,  as  a  lesson  to  all.  I
was  warned  by  the  ladies  of  the  palace,  who  tried  to  make
me  afraid  that  the  storm  would  fall  on  my  head  because

279

1703]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

I  had  not  recovered  the  king’s  good-will  since  I  left  the
service.  I  never  went  to  Marly  and  was  still  in  the
situation  with  the  king  which  I  have  already  described
in  its  proper  place,  and  which  these  ladies  warned  me
might  now  cease  5  and  they  entreated  me  not  to  go  to
Paris  for  the  fête.  I  consented,  on  condition  that  I  should
have  an  assurance  that  my  wife  should  not  be  appointed
for  the  quête  ;  and  as  that  was  not  given  to  me  we  went  to
Paris.  The  Maréchale  de  Cœuvres,  as  a  grandee  of  Spam,
refused  to  collect;  and  the  two  Duchesses  de  Chamillart,
who  had  not  been  able  to  avoid  being  at  Versailles  on
that  day,  were  appointed,  and  both  refused.  On  this  the
bomb  hurst.

The  king,  provoked  at  all  this  manoeuvring,  himself
ordered  M.  le  Grand  to  make  his  daughter  collect  on  the
first  day  of  the  year  1704.  The  next  day  I  was  warned
by  the  Comtesse  de  Eoucy,  to  whom  the  Duchesse  de
Bourgogne  (who  was  present)  related  it,  that  the  king  had
entered°  Mme.  de  Maintenons  apartment  very  serious,  and
said  to  her  in  an  angry  tone  that  he  was  much  dis¬
pleased  with  the  dukes,  whom  he  found  less  obedient  than
the  princes,  for  while  the  duchesses  had  refused  the  quête
he  had  no  sooner  proposed  it  to  M.  le  Grand  for  his
daughter  than  it  had  been  accepted.  He  added  that  there
were  two  or  three  dukes  in  this  affair  whom  he  should
always  remember.  The  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  would
not  tell  her  their  names,  hut  she  whispered  them  to  Mme.
de  Dangeau,  who,  a  moment  later  begged  Mme.  de  Eoucy
to  warn  me  to  he  careful,  for  a  storm  was  brewing  over
my  head.  This  advice  was  given  me  at  the  chancellors
house,  he  being  a  third  in  the  conversation,  and  not  doubt¬
ing,  nor  I  either,  that  I  was  one  of  the  three  the  king  had
mentioned.  I  explained  to  him  what  had  happened  and

280  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

asked  his  advice;  which  was,  to  wait,  and  do  nothing  by
groping  in  the  dark.

The  next  morning  I  went  to  see  Chamillart  [controller
of  finance]  very  early,  and  he  told  me  that  the  night
before  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s,  before  he  had  time  to
open  his  bag,  the  king  asked  him  angrily  what  he  thought
of  the  dukes,  in  whom  he  found  less  obedience  than  in
the  princes.  Chamillart  replied  that  such  matters  did  not
reach  his  office  and  he  had  only  heard  of  the  affair  the
night  before  ;  but  the  dukes  were  very  unhappy  that  the
king  imputed  it  to  them  as  a  crime  that  they  had  not
guessed  his  wishes  ;  because  if  he  had  spoken  to  them  as
he  did  to  M.  le  Grand,  they  would  have  hastened  to  obey.
The  king,  without  replying  except  to  himself,  went  on  to
say  that  it  was  a  very  strange  thing  that  since  M.  de
Saint-Simon  had  left  his  service  he  thought  of  nothing
but  studying  precedence  and  picking  quarrels  with  every¬
body  ;  that  I  was  the  prime  author  of  this  one,  and  if  he
did  right  he  should  send  me  off  to  a  distance,  for  I  had  an¬
noyed  him  a  long  time.  To  which  Chamillart  answered  that
if  I  looked  into  such  matters  rather  closely  it  was  because  I
was  more  capable  and  better  informed  about  them  than
others  ;  and  that  as  such  dignities  had  come  to  me  from  the
kings,  his  Majesty  ought  to  be  pleased  with  me  for  seek¬
ing  to  maintain  them.  Then  he  added,  smiling,  in  order
to  soothe  him,  that  every  one  knew  he  could  send  persons
where  he  pleased,  but  it  was  hardly  worth  while  to  use
that  power  when  a  word  would  do  equally  as  well.  The
king,  not  at  all  appeased,  replied  that  what  annoyed  him
most  was  the  refusal  of  Chamillart’s  daughters-in-law,
through  their  husbands,  especially  the  younger,  apparently
at  my  instigation.  On  which  Chamillart  replied  that  one
of  his  sons  was  absent,  and  the  other  had  only  made  his

281

1703]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

wife  conform  to  what  the  others  did.  This,  however,  did
not  pacify  the  king,  who,  still  angry,  grumbled  for  a  while
and  then  began  to  work.

On  leaving  Chamillart  I  went  to  the  chancellor  and

told  him  what  I  had  just  learned.  He  advised  me  to

speak  to  the  king,  and  that  instantly  ;  saying  that  to  wait
would  only  confirm  him  in  his  irritation,  and  speaking  later
would  do  no  good  ;  that  I  must  trust  to  the  result,  ask  to
speak  to  him  in  his  cabinet,  and  if  (as  I  feared)  he  should
stop  and  draw  himself  up  to  listen  at  once,  I  must  tell  him

that  I  saw  he  would  not  do  me  the  favour  then  to  appoint

an  hour  to  hear  me,  hut  I  hoped  he  would  do  so  later,  and
retire  instantly.  It  certainly  was  not  a  small  matter,  at
my  age  and  standing  as  I  did  doubly  ill  with  the  king,
to  go  and  attack  him  in  conversation.  I  generally  did
nothing  without  the  advice  of  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers ,
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  did  not  want  me  to  take  it,  feeling
sure,  she  said,  that  he  would  advise  me  to  write  instead
of  speaking,  which  would  not  have  the  same  grace  nor  the
same  force  ;  also  that  a  letter  was  never  answered  ;  and
moreover  that  this  advice,  being  contrary  to  that  of  the
two  ministers,  would  only  embarrass  me.  I  believed  her,
and  I  went  at  once  and  waited  till  the  king  passed  from
dinner  into  his  cabinet,  where  I  asked  permission  to  follow
him.  Without  replying,  he  made  me  a  sign  to  enter,  and
went  himself  to  the  recess  of  a  window.

As  I  was  about  to  speak,  I  saw  Fagon  and  several  of  the
household  passing,  on  which  I  said  not  a  word  until  I  was
quite  alone  with  the  king.  Then  I  told  him  it  had  reached
my  ears  that  he  was  displeased  with  me  about  the  quête ,
that  I  had  so  great  a  desire  to  please  him  that  I  could  not
defer  entreating  him  to  let  me  give  him  an  account  of  my
conduct  as  to  that.  At  this  exordium  he  took  on  a  very

282

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

stern  air,  and  answered  not  a  word.  “  It  is  true,  sire,”  I  con¬
tinued,  “  tliat  after  the  princesses  refused  to  collect  I  avoided
it  for  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  ;  I  wished  the  duchesses  to  avoid
it  also,  and  there  are  some  whom  I  prevented  from  collecting
because  I  did  not  believe  your  Majesty  wished  it.”  “  But,”
interrupted  the  king,  in  the  tone  of  an  angry  master,  “  to
refuse  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  is  to  fail  in  proper  respect
to  her  ;  it  is  refusing  me,  myself  !  ”  I  answered  that  by  the
way  in  which  the  collectors  were  named  we  did  not  think
that  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  had  a  part  in  it  ;  it  was
the  Duchesse  du  Lude,  and  more  often  one  of  the  palace
ladies,  who  named  whomsoever  she  chose.  “  But,  monsieur,”
interrupted  the  king  once  more,  in  the  same  loud  and  angry
tone,  “you  have  said  things  —  ”  “No,  sire,”  I  said,  “none.”
“  What  !  do  you  mean  to  say  you  have  not  talked  —  ”  and
he  was  going  on  in  the  same  loud  tone,  when  at  this  point  I
dared  to  interrupt  him  too,  and  I  said,  raising  my  voice
louder  than  his,  “  No,  sire,  I  tell  you  ;  and  if  I  had  said
things  I  would  acknowledge  them  to  your  Majesty,  just  as
I  have  now  acknowledged  that  I  avoided  the  quote,  for  my
wife,  and  that  I  have  prevented  other  duchesses  from  accept¬
ing  it.  I  have  always  believed,  and  have  had  reason  to  be¬
lieve,  that  as  your  Majesty  never  expressed  yourself  about
it,  you  were  either  ignorant  of  what  was  happening  or,
knowing  it,  did  not  care.  I  entreat  you  very  earnestly
to  do  us  the  justice  to  believe  that  if  the  dukes,  and  I
in  particular,  had  thought  that  your  Majesty  desired  it  the
least  in  the  world,  we  should  all  have  been  eager  to  do  it,
and  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  too,  at  all  the  festivals  ;  and  if
that  did  not  suffice  to  prove  to  you  my  desire  to  please  you,
I  myself  would  willingly  have  collected  in  a  plate  like  a
parish  beadle.  How,  sire,”  I  continued,  “  can  your  Majesty
imagine  that  we  consider  any  function  beneath  us  in  your

1703]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

283

presence,  and  one  which  duchesses  and  princesses  peiform
every  day  in  the  churches  and  convents  of  Paris  without
making  the  least  difficulty  ?  But  it  is  true,  sire,  that  the
princes  are  so  much  on  the  watch  to  get  advantages  in  every¬
thing  that  they  oblige  us  to  be  careful,  especially  now  that
they  have  once  refused  the  quête.”  “  But  they  have  not  re¬
fused  it,”  said  the  king  in  a  rather  milder  tone,  “  they  were
never  told  to  collect.”  “  They  have  refused  it,  sire,”  I  said
firmly,  “  not  the  Lorrains,  but  others  ”  (by  which  I  meant  to
designate  Mme.  de  Montbazon).  “The  Duchesse  du  Lude
may  have  told  your  Majesty,  and  ought  to  have  done  so,  and
that  was  what  made  us  take  our  action;  but  as  we  know
how  much  your  Majesty  is  annoyed  by  all  that  requires
discussion  and  decision,  we  thought  it  would  be  enough  to
evade  the  quête  in  order  not  to  let  the  princes  take,  that
advantage  of  us  ;  persuaded,  as  I  have  had  the  honour  to  tell
you,  that  your  Majesty  knew  nothing  or  cared  nothing  about
it,  inasmuch  as  you  made  no  sign.”  “  Oh  !  very  good,  mon¬
sieur,”  replied  the  king,  in  a  low  voice  completely  softened,  “  it
will  not  happen  again,  because  I  have  said  to  M.  le  Grand
that  I  wish  his  daughter  to  collect  on  the  first  day  of  the  year;
and  I  am  very  glad  that  she  sets  that  example,  because  of
the  friendship  that  I  feel  for  her  father.”  I  answered,  looking
at  the  king  fixedly,  that  I  entreated  him  once  more,  for  my¬
self  and  for  all  the  dukes,  to  believe  that  no  person  was  more
submissive  to  him  than  we  ;  none  more  persuaded,  I  most  of
all,  that,  our  dignities  emanating  from  his,  and  our  persons
filled  with  his  benefits,  he  was,  as  king  and  as  benefactor  of
us  all,  despotically  the  master  of  those  dignities,  to  lower
them  or  raise  them,  or  do  with  them  as  with  something  that
was  absolutely  his,  and  in  his  hand.  Thereupon,  taking  a  tone
that  was  altogether  gracious,  and  an  air  wholly  kind  and
familiar,  he  said  to  me,  several  times  over,  that  that  was  the

284  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

proper  way  to  think  and  speak,  that  he  was  satisfied  with  me,
and  other  things  equally  obliging.  I  then  took  occasion  to
say  that  I  could  not  express  to  him  the  grief  it  had  been  to
me  to  see  that,  much  as  I  tried  to  please  him,  there  were  some
who  never  ceased  to  do  me  the  blackest  ill-turns  with  him  ;
that  I  owned  to  him  I  could  not  forgive  those  who  were
capable  of  it,  neither  could  I  help  suspecting  M.  le  Grand,
«  who,”  I  added,  “  has  never  forgiven  me  since  that  affair  of
the  Princesse  d’Harcourt,  because,  when  I  had  the  honour  to
give  you  an  account  of  it,  your  Majesty  saw  that  I  told  you
the  truth,  and  M.  le  Grand  did  not  ;  which  I  think  your
Majesty  must  remember  so  well  that  I  will  not  fatigue  you
by  repeating  it.”  The  king  replied  that  he  remembered  it
perfectly  well,  and  he  would,  I  think,  have  listened  to  the
repetition  patiently,  by  the  considerate,  gentle,  and  courteous
way  in  which  he  said  it  ;  but  I  thought  it  better  not  to  keep
him  so  long.  I  therefore  ended  by  entreating  him,  whenever
he  had  anything  against  me  that  did  not  please  him,  to  do  me
the  favour  of  having  me  notified  in  case  his  Majesty  did  not
deign  to  speak  to  me  himself,  and  he  would  see  that  that
kindness  was  immediately  followed  either  by  a  justification
or  by  an  acknowledgment  of  my  fault  and  a  request  for
pardon.  He  waited  a  moment  after  I  had  ceased  speaking,
as  if  expecting  that  I  had  something  more  to  say.  Then  he
left  me  with  a  very  gracious  little  bow,  saying  it  was  now  all
right,  and  that  he  was  satisfied  with  me.  I  retired,  making
him  a  profound  bow,  extremely  comforted  and  content  that  I
had  had  the  time  to  put  into  him  all  that  I  wished  about
myself,  about  the  dukes,  about  the  princes,  and  particularly
about  the  grand  equerry,  and  more  than  ever  convinced,  by
the  king’s  remembrance  of  the  affair  of  the  Princesse  d’Har¬
court  and  his  silence  about  M.  le  Grand,  that  it  was  to  him
I  owed  what  I  had  now  once  more  defeated.

1703]

285

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

Leaving  the  king’s  cabinet  with  a  very  satisfied  air,  I  saw
M.  le  Duc  and  several  distinguished  courtiers,  who  were
awaiting  his  booting  in  his  chamber;  they  looked  hard  at
me  as  I  passed,  surprised  at  the  length  of  my  audience,
which  had  lasted  half  an  hour,  — an  audience  being  a  very
rare  thing  for  even  the  more  ultimate  ones  to  obtain,  and
never  lasting  for  any  one  more  than  half  the  time  that  I  had
had  I  went  up  to  my  own  rooms  to  relieve  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon’s  anxiety,  and  then  I  went  to  Chamillart.  He  wanted
to  know  all  about  it  instantly,  because,  he  said,  he  was  to
work  that  day  extra  with  the  king,  and  he  wished  to  be  fully
informed,  certain  as  he  was  that  the  king  would  not  fail  to
speak  of  the  matter,  and  he  wanted  to  be  in  a  position  to  do
me  service.  I  then  related  to  him  the  whole  audience,  and
he  congratulated  me  for  having  spoken  so  well.

He  afterwards  told  me  that  before  he  had  opened  his  bag
the  king  told  him  he  had  seen  me,  and  related  the  whole
conversation,  seeming  quite  satisfied  with  me,  but  still
annoyed  with  the  dukes  ;  and  that  he,  Chamillart,  had  been
unable  to  bring  him  round  entirely,  so  much  did  his  prej¬
udice  and  weakness  for  M.  le  Grand,  and  the  preference  of
his  Maintenon  for  the  princes  against  the  dukes  obscure

his  mind.

The  chancellor  was  amazed  at  my  boldness  and  delighted
at  my  success.  I  explained  matters  later  to  the  Duc  de
Beauvilliers,  as  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  had  advised,  and
found  she  was  quite  right.  I  told  the  duke  that,  not  having
a  moment  to  see  him  before  the  king’s  dinner,  I  had  decided
to  speak  at  once.  He  said  he  was  very  glad  that  the  audi¬
ence  had  passed  off  so  well,  but  that  he  himself  should  have
advised  me  to  avoid  it  and  write,  though  the  event  proved
that  I  had  done  better.  Several  dukes  spoke  to  me  of  tie
affair,  which  made  a  great  talk.  Nothing  ever  equalled  the

286

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

surprise  and  fright  of  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,  with  whom
I  was  intimate  and  to  whom  I  told  all.  But  when  he  heard
that  I  had  said  to  the  king  that  we  all  knew  he  feared  dis¬
cussions  and  decisions,  he  recoiled  six  steps.  “  You  said
that  to  the  king,”  he  cried,  “in' just  those  words?  You  are
very  bold  !  ”  “  And  you  are  not,”  I  replied,  “  you  old  seigneurs,
who  stand  so  well  and  are  so  familiar  with  him,  and  yet  are
too  weak  to  dare  say  a  word  ;  for  if  he  listens  to  me,  a
young  man,  to  whom  he  is  not  accustomed  and  standing  ill
with  him  besides,  and  specially  about  this  very  thing,  and  if
the  conversation  begun  in  anger  ended  with  such  kindness
and  civilities  after  it  had  lasted  just  as  long  as  I  chose,
what  would  it  be  if  you  others  had  the  courage  to  profit  by
the  manner  in  which  you  are  with  him,  and  tell  him
what  he  ought  to  be  told,  and  which  you  see  I  told  him
not  only  with  impunity,  but  with  good  results  to  myself  !  ”
Chevreuse  was  delighted  that  I  had  spoken  in  that  way,  but
still  he  was  frightened.  I  heard  through  M.  Laon  that  the
king  had  said  to  Monseigneur  that  I  had  spoken  to  him
with  a  great  deal  of  spirit,  force,  and  respect  ;  that  he  was
satisfied  with  me  ;  that  things  were  very  different  from  what
M.  le  Grand  had  told  him,  and  that  the  princesses  did
refuse  the  quête,  which  Monseigneur  confirmed  to  him.

I  have  perhaps  dwelt  too  long  on  an  affair  which  might
be  more  compressed.  But,  besides  its  being  my  own,  it
seems  to  me  it  is  by  such  detailed  accounts  of  private  Court
matters  that  the  Court  itself  is  best  made  known,  and
above  all,  a  king  so  shut  in  within  himself,  and  so  difficult
to  penetrate,  so  rarely  approached,  so  formidable  to  his  most
familiar  attendants,  so  full  of  his  despotism,  so  easy  to
irritate  on  that  point  and  so  difficult  to  change  if  once
irritated,  even  when  seeing  the  truth  on  one  side  and  false¬
hood  on  the  other,  and  yet  able  to  hear  reason  when  he

1703]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

287

took  it  into  his  head  to  listen  and  when  the  person  who
spoke  to  him  did  it  forcibly,  provided  always  he  flattered
him  on  his  despotic  power  and  seasoned  his  remarks  with
the  most  profound  respect.  All  that,  it  seems  to  me,  can
he  better  shown  by  narratives  than  in  any  other  way  ;  as
may  he  seen,  quite  naturally,  in  the  present  case.

Not  long  after,  I  met  with  an  unlucky  accident.  I  had  my¬
self  hied,  because  I  felt  that  the  blood  was  going  to  my  head,
and  I  thought  the  bleeding  had  been  well
upTnlT6'  done.  In  the  night  I  felt  a  pain  in  the  arm,

bleeding.  whicb  Le  Dran,  a  famous  surgeon  who  had

hied  me,  declared  was  caused  by  a  too  tight  bandage.  To
make  a  long  story  short,  in  two  days  the  arm  swelled  up
biaaer  than  the  thigh,  with  fever  and  great  pam.  They
kept  me  two  more  days  with  outside  applications  to  draw
the  trouble  through  the  wound  of  the  bleeding.  Then
M.  de  Lauzun,  who  rightly  thought  me  very  ill,  insisted
on  having  Maréchal,  and  went  himself  to  Versailles  to  ask
him  of  the  king,  without  whose  permission  he  could  not
come  to  Paris,  or  sleep  away  from  the  place  where  the
kina  was  living.  On  arriving  he  opened  the  arm  from  one
end°  to  the  other.  It  was  high  time,  for  the  abscess  was
spreading  to  the  body,  manifesting  itself  by  severe  chills.
The  skill  and  nimbleness  of  the  operation,  the  dressing
and  the  care  to  make  me  comfortable,  pass  all  imagination.
Maréchal  and  Fagon  thought  a  tendon  had  been  injured.
By  the  weights  they  made  me  carry,  my  arm  was  kept  at
its  natural  length,  and  I  never  felt  anything  more  of  it
Nioht  and  day  I  had  the  best  surgeons  m  Paris  around
me!  relieving  each  other.  Tribouleau,  surgeon  of  the  French
Guards,  with  a  great  reputation,  said  to  me  that  M.  de
Marsan  must  he  a  great  friend  of  mine,  for  he  had  stopped
him  in  the  streets  to  ask  news  of  me,  and  all  the  details,

288

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [ciiap.  ix.

with  the  deepest  interest.  The  fact  was  that  Marsan
wanted  my  government,  and  asked  the  king  for  it.  The
king  asked  him  in  return  whether  I  had  not  a  son,  which
silenced  and  confounded  him.  Chamillart,  though  no  one
had  said  a  word  to  him,  had  already  made  sure  of  it  for
my  son,  in  case  I  did  not  recover.  I  never  showed  after¬
wards  to  M.  de  Marsan  that  I  knew  of  this  proceeding  ;  in
fact,  as  with  all  the  Lorrains,  I  had  very  little  intercourse
with  him.

The  Church  and  the  epoch  lost  about  this  time  the  two
most  distinguished  prelates  then  living  :  the  famous  Bossuet,
Bishop  of  Meaux,  and  the  celebrated  Cardi-

1704.  i

Death  of  the  ceie-  nal  von  FUrstenburg.  Both  are  too  well-
brated  Bossuet.  pn0wn  for  me  to  say  anything  about  men  so

grandly  and  diversely  illustrious.  The  first,  ever  to  be
regretted,  and  who  is  so,  universally,  shamed  by  his  great
labours  at  his  advanced  age  the  robust  lives  of  bishops,
theologians,  and  the  most  learned  and  the  most  laborious
of  savants.

The  king  rejected  Troisvilles  (custom  pronounces  the
name  Tréville)  for  the  French  Academy,  to  which  he  had
Troisvilles  elected  been  elected,  saying  that  he  did  not  approve
k^forthe157 thC  him,  and  they  must  elect  another.  Trois-
Academy.  villes  was  a  gentleman  of  Béarn,  of  mind  and

culture,  very  agreeable  and  very  gallant.  He  entered  society
under  fortunate  circumstances,  and  was  much  sought  and
welcomed  by  ladies  of  the  highest  lineage,  intelligence,
and  even  pride,  with  whom  he  stood  for  a  long  time  more
than  well.  He  did  not  like  war  as  well  as  he  liked  the
Court  ;  the  fatigues  of  it  did  not  suit  his  laziness,  nor  the
rattle  of  arms  his  delicate  tastes.  His  courage  was  ques¬
tioned.  However  that  may  be,  he  was  soon  disgusted  with
a  profession  for  which  he  felt  he  was  not  made.  He  could

1704]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  289

not  hold  himself  superior  to  the  effect  produced  by  such
conduct,  and  he  flung  himself  into  devotion,  abjured  the
Court,  and  left  the  world.  The  sort  of  piety  that  reigned  at
the  famous  Port-Royal  was  that  of  persons  of  education,  in¬
telligence,  and  good  taste.  Accordingly  he  turned  in  that
direction,  and  for  many  years  persevered  in  solitude  and
créât  devotion.  But  he  was  fickle  and  yielding.  Amuse-

O

ment  tempted  him  ;  he  went  to  his  own  part  of  the  countiy
and  there  led  a  dissipated  life;  returned  to  Paris,  took  up
his  religious  duties  to  atone  for  his  weakness,  and  frequented
the  ladies’  toilettes.  His  foot  slipped,  and  from  being  pious
he  became  philosophical  ;  began  once  more  to  give  choice  re¬
pasts,  and  to  excel  in  giving  them  with  a  taste  that  few  could
equal  ;  in  a  word,  he  was  thought  to  he  grossly  epicurean.
His  old  Port-Royal  friends,  alarmed  at  his  life  and  by  the
pretty  verses  he  again  took  to  writing,  the  gallantry  and  deli¬
cacy  of  which  were  charming,  recalled  him  at  last  to  himself
and  to  what  he  had  been.  But  again  he  escaped  them,  and
his  life  degenerated  into  an  up  and  down  of  devotion  ;  lax¬
ness  and  duty  succeeded  each  other  in  patches  like  a  sort  of
puzzle,  which  without  the  wit  that  sustained  him  and  made
him  welcome  would  have  wholly  dishonoured  him  and  made
his  name  ridiculous.  His  last  years  were  more  consistent
in  regularity  and  penitence,  and  agreed  better  with  the  de¬
votion  of  his  earlier  life.  What  he  maintained  steadily
throughout  his  life  was  his  absolute  separation  from  Court,
which  he  never  approached  after  once  quitting  it  ;  a  delicate
satire  on  what  went  on  there,  and  which  the  king  pardoned
less,  it  may  he,  than  his  attachment  to  Port-Royal.  It  was
this  attachment  that  drew  upon  him  the  rejection  of  the
king  for  the  Academy,  where,  however,  his  great  profession
of  devotion  would  have  been  out  of  place;  hut  the  king
would  not  miss  the  occasion  for  his  birch  rod,  in  default  of
VOL.  I.  — 19

290

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

Death  of  the
Abbesse  de
Fontevrault  ;
her  character.

a  better.  Troisvilles  was  rich  and  was  never  married.  He
died  in  Paris  ;  his  true  friends  had  brought  him  back  to
himself,  and  in  his  last  years  he  lived  retired  and  more
especially  occupied  with  his  salvation.

The  death  of  the  Abbesse  de  Fontevrault  at  an  advanced
age,  which  occurred  in  the  course  of  this  summer,  deserves
to  be  noticed.  She  was  daughter  of  the  first
Duc  de  Mortemart  and  sister  of  the  Duc  de
Yivonne,  Mme.  de  Thianges,  and  Mme.  de
Montespan.  She  had  more  beauty  than  the  latter,  which  is
saying  not  a  little,  more  mind  than  all  of  them,  with  the
same  ineffable  charm  which  no  one  ever  had  but  they  (unless
it  was  caught  by  perpetual  communication  with  them),  and
is  felt  so  quickly,  and  with  so  much  pleasure  ;  very  learned
withal,  a  good  theologian  even,  with  a  superior  faculty  for
government,  an  ease  and  facility  which  made  it  play -work
for  her  to  manage  her  Order  and  the  many  great  affairs  she
had  taken  up,  in  which,  it  is  true,  her  influence  contributed
much  to  their  success  ;  very  regular,  very  exact,  but  always
with  gentleness,  grace,  and  manners  that  made  her  adored
at  Fontevrault  and  by  all  her  Order.  Her  slightest  letters
were  documents  to  treasure  ;  and  all  her  conversations,  even
those  on  discipline  or  business,  were  charming,  and  her  dis¬
courses  to  the  Chapter  at  festivals  admirable.  Her  sisters
loved  her  passionately,  and  in  spite  of  their  natural  imperi¬
ousness,  increased  as  it  was  by  favour,  they  felt  a  true
deference  for  her.  How  comes  the  reverse  of  the  picture.
Her  business  affairs  took  her  often  to  Paris  ;  this  was  at  the
height  of  the  king’s  amour  with  Mme.  de  Montespan.  She
was  at  the  Court  and  made  long  stays  there.  It  is  true  she
saw  no  one  and  never  left  her  sister’s  apartments.  The
king  liked  her  so  much  that  he  could  scarcely  do  without
her:  he  would  have  liked  her  to  be  present  at  all  the  Court

1704]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

291

fêtes,  then  so  gallant  and  magnificent.  Mme.  de  Fontevrault
obstinately  refused  all  public  appearances,  but  could  not
avoid  the  more  private  ones.  This  made  her  an  extremely
peculiar  personage.  It  must  be  said  that  her  father  forced
her  to  take  the  veil  and  her  vows,  but  she  made  a  virtue
of  the  necessity  and  was  always  a  good  nun.  What  was
very  rare  is  that  she  preserved  at  all  times  an  extreme
personal  decency,  in  places  and  in  companies  where  her
habit  was  out  of  place.  The  king  had  for  her  an  esteem,  a
liking,  and  a  friendship  which  neither  the  discarding  of
Mme.  de  Montespan,  nor  the  extreme  favour  of  Mme.  de
Maintenon  could  deaden.  He  regretted  her  deeply,  and  took
a  sad  comfort  in  showing  it.  He  gave  her  abbey  at  once
to  her  niece,  a  nun  of  the  same  house  and  a  person  of  great
merit.

I  ought  to  have  mentioned  rather  earlier  the  birth  of  the
eldest  son  of  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  which  happened  at
Birth  of  the  first  Versailles  on  Wednesday,  June  5,  at  five  in
duc  de  Bretagne.  tpe  afternoon.  It  was  great  joy  for  the  king,

in  which  the  Court  and  town  took  part,  almost  to  madness,
in  the  excess  of  the  demonstrations  and  fetes.  The  king
gave  one  at  Marly,  on  which  occasion  he  made  the  most
elegant  and  magnificent  presents  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bour¬
gogne,  who  had  then  recovered.  There  was  good  reason  to
repent  of  so  much  joy,  which  only  lasted  a  year,  and  of  the
money  spent  on  fêtes  so  ill  timed  at  the  conjuncture  in

which  public  affairs  then  were.

An  anecdote  here  presents  itself,  very  wise  to  be  silent
about,  very  curious  to  write  down  for  whoever  has  seen

Brilliant  position  things  as  closely  as  I  did:  what  determines
of  the  Duchesse  me  to  tape  tpe  second  course  is  that  the  fact

Nangis g  S  at  large  has  never  been  unknown  ;  and  that
thrones  throughout  all  ages  and  nations  swarm  with  such

292

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

adventures.  It  must  therefore  be  told.  We  had  a  charming
princess,  who,  by  her  graces,  her  attentions,  her  unique  ways,
had  captured  the  heart  and  will  of  the  king,  of  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  and  of  her  husband,  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne.
The  extreme  displeasure,  too  justly  conceived,  against  the
Duc  de  Savoie,  her  father,  had  not  caused  any  alteration  in
their  tenderness  towards  her.  The  king,  who  hid  nothing
from  her,  who  worked  with  his  ministers  in  her  presence,
whenever  she  chose  to  enter  and  remain  there,  was  always
careful  not  to  open  his  lips  before  her  on  anything  concern¬
ing  her  father.  In  private  she  would  spring  upon  his  knees
and  put  her  arms  round  his  neck,  and  tease  him  with  all
sorts  of  playfulness  ;  she  rummaged  his  papers,  opened  and
read  his  letters  in  his  presence,  sometimes  in  spite  of  him  ;
and  she  did  the  same  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  With  this  ex¬
cessive  freedom,  nothing  ever  escaped  her  against  any  one  ;
gracious  to  all,  even  to  warding  off  blows  whenever  she
could,  attentive  to  the  household  servants  of  the  king,  not
disdaining  the  lowest,  good  to  her  own,  and  living  with  her
ladies,  young  and  old,  as  a  friend  and  in  all  liberty  ;  she
was  the  soul  of  the  Court,  and  every  one  adored  her,  great
and  small  they  strove  to  please  her  ;  if  she  were  absent  each
lacked  something,  and  each  was  filled  with  her  presence
when  she  returned  ;  her  extreme  favour  made  her  infinitely
relied  upon,  while  her  manners  attached  all  hearts.  In  this
brilliant  situation  her  own  heart  was  not  insensible.

Nangis,  whom  we  see  to-day  a  very  dull  marshal  of
France,  was  then  the  pink  of  fashion  ;  a  pleasing  face,  but
nothing  rare  ;  well-made,  but  nothing  wonderful  ;  brought
up  to  intrigue  and  gallantry  by  the  Maréchale  de  Bochefort,
his  grandmother,  and  Mme.  de  Blansac,  his  mother,  who
were  past  mistresses  in  all  that.  Introduced  by  them  while
still  young  into  the  great  world,  of  which  they  were  a  species

1704]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

293

of  centre,  lie  had  no  mind  beyond  pleasing  women,  talking
their  language,  and  reassuring  the  most  desirable  by  a  dis¬
cretion  which  was  not  of  his  age  nor  of  his  period.  No  one
was  more  the  fashion  than  himself.  He  obtained  a  regiment
while  still  a  lad  ;  he  had  shown  will,  application,  and  bril¬
liant  valour  during  the  war,  which  the  ladies  magnified,
though  it  was  indeed  sufficient  for  his  age.  He  was  much
at  the  Court  of  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  of  about  his  own
age,  and  very  well  treated  by  him.  This  prince,  passionately
in  love  with  his  wife,  was  not  made  like  Nangis  ;  but  the
princess  responded  so  perfectly  to  his  ardour  that  he  died
without  ever  suspecting  that  she  had  had  eyes  for  any  but
himself.  They  fell,  however,  on  Nangis,  and  soon  they
rested  there.  Nangis  was  not  ungrateful  ;  but  he  feared
the  lightning,  and  his  heart  was  captured  elsewhere.

Mme.  de  la  Yrillière,  without  beauty,  though  pretty  as
the  loves  and  all  their  graces,  had  made  a  conquest  of  him.
She  was  the  daughter  of  Mme.  de  Mailly,  lady  m  waiting
to  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  and  was  constantly  m  the
latter’s  Court;  jealousy  soon  enlightened  her.  Far  from
yielding  to  the  princess,  she  felt  it  a  point  of  honour  to
keep  her  conquest,  defend  it,  and  carry  the  day.  This
struggle  put  Nangis  into  strange  embarrassment  ;  he  feared
the  'fury  of  his  mistress,  who  seemed  to  him  more  capable
of  an  outburst  than  she  really  was.  On  the  other  hand,  his
reserve  would  injure  him  not  less  with  a  princess  who  could
do  much  now  and  might  one  day  do  all,  and  who  was  not
one  to  yield  to  or  even  to  permit  a  rival.  This  perplexity,
to  those  who  knew  the  actual  facts,  was  a  continual  drama.
I  was  a  constant  visitor  at  that  time  to  Mme.  de  Blansac
in  Paris,  and  to  the  Maréchale  de  Bochefort  at  \  ersailles  ;
I  was  the  intimate  friend  of  several  of  the  palace  ladies,
who  saw  all  and  hid  nothing  from  me  ;  with  the  Duchesse

294

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

de  Villeroy  I  was  on  a  footing  of  solid  confidence  ;  the
duchess  knew  everything  from  Mme.  d’O  and  the  Maréchale
de  Cœuvres,  who  adored  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  ;  so  did
my  sister-in-law  the  Duchesse  de  Lorges,  who  told  me  every
evening  what  she  had  seen  and  heard  during  the  day.  I
was  therefore  fully  and  accurately  informed  from  one  day  to
the  next.  Besides  the  fact  that  nothing  amused  me  more,
the  consequences  might  be  great,  and  it  was  important  for
ambition  to  be  well  informed.  Finally  the  whole  assiduous
and  devoted  Court  perceived  what  had  at  first  been  hidden
with  the  greatest  care.  But  whether  from  fear,  or  for  love
of  a  princess  whom  they  all  adored,  the  same  Court  kept
silence,  saw  all,  talked  among  themselves,  and  guarded  the
secret  which  had  never  been  confided  to  them.  This
struggle,  which  was  not  without  acerbity  on  the  part  of
Mme.  de  la  Vrillière  to  the  princess,  sometimes  insolently
expressed,  nor  without  repugnance  and  aversion  gently
shown  by  the  princess  to  her,  was  for  a  long  time  a
singular  spectacle.

Whether  it  was  that  Hangis,  faithful  to  his  first  love,
needed  a  few  grains  of  jealousy  or  whether  the  thing  came

about  naturally,  there  appeared  upon  the  scene

Maulevrier.  #  x

a  rival.  Maulevrier,  son  of  a  brother  of  Colbert
(who  died  of  grief  at  not  being  made  maréchal  of  France  in
the  promotion  which  made  a  maréchal  of  Villeroy),  had
married  a  daughter  of  Maréchal  de  Tessé.  Maulevrier  had
not  a  pleasant  face,  and  his  figure  was  very  common.  He
was  not  at  all  in  the  way  of  gallantry.  He  had  a  clever
mind,  but  a  mind  fertile  in  underhand  intrigues,  unbounded
ambition  which  nothing  could  restrain,  so  that  it  almost
approached  to  madness.  His  wife  was  pretty,  with  very
little  mind,  quarrelsome,  and,  under  an  innocent  exterior,
ill-natured  to  the  last  degree.  Maulevrier  was  among  the

1704]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  M  0

first  to  pick  up  what  was  happening  about  Nangis.  He
persuaded  his  father-in-law  to  get  him  some  privileges  in
the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne’s  circle;  he  became  assiduous,
and  finally,  excited  by  example,  he  dared  to  sigh.  Weary
at  last  of  not  being  understood,  he  ventured  to  write.  It
was  said  that  Mme.  Cantin,  Maréchal  de  Tessé’s  intimate
friend,  deceived  by  Maulevrier,  received  letters  from  him
thinking  they  were  from  his  father-in-law,  and,  supposing
them  of  no  consequence,  delivered  them.  Maulevrier  in
the  name  of  his  father-in-law  received  the  answers  by
the  same  hand.  I  will  not  add  the  surmises  on  all  this.
However  that  may  he,  this  affair  was  perceived  like  the
other,  and  perceived  in  the  same  silence.  Under  pretence
of  friendship  for  Mme.  de  Maulevrier  the  princess  went
more  than  once  to  condole  with  her,  during  the  trips  to
Marly,  on  the  approaching  departure  of  her  husband  for  the
war,  and  sometimes  Mme.  de  Maintenon  went  with  her.
The’  Court  smiled;  whether  the  tears  were  for  him  or  for
Nanms  was  doubtful.  Meantime  Nangis,  roused  by  this
rivalry,  threw  Mme.  de  la  Vnllière  into  sufferings  and  a
temper  of  which  she  was  not  always  mistress.

But  the  tocsin  had  sounded  for  Maulevrier.  What  will
a  man  not  do  when  love  or  ambition  gets  possession  of
himi  He  made  himself  out  a  consumptive,  took  to  a
milk  diet,  made  believe  to  have  lost  his  voice,  and  was
sufficiently  master  of  himself  never  to  utter  a  word  above
his  breath  for  a  whole  year;  in  this  way  he  evaded  the
campaign  and  stayed  at  Court.  He  was  fool  enoug  i  to
tell  this  project  and  other  things  to  the  Duc  de  Lorges,
his  friend,  from  whom  I  heard  it.  The  fact  was  that  by
obliging  himself  to  whisper  to  everybody  he  was  enabled
to  speak  in  the  same  way  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne
before  the  whole  Court  without  impropriety  or  suspicion.

296  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ir.

He  had  so  fully  accustomed  the  Court  to  this  performance
that  no  one  paid  any  heed  to  it  unless  it  were  to  pity  so
sad  a  state.  But  after  a  while  Mme.  de  la  Vrillière’s  ill-
humour  tortured  him;  he  fancied  that  Nangis  was  favoured,
and  he  did  not  choose  that  he  should  be.  Jealousy  and
rage  excited  him  to  the  point  of  risking  an  extremity  of
folly.

He  went  to  the  chapel  at  the  end  of  the  mass  of  the
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne.  Coming  out  he  offered  her  his
hand.  The  equerries  were  accustomed  to  allow  him  that
honour  because  of  his  faint  voice  ;  in  this  way  they  enabled
him  to  speak  as  he  walked,  and  they  always  fell  back  so  as
not  to  overhear  him.  The  ladies  also  followed  at  a  distance  ;
so  that  through  all  the  suites  of  rooms  from  the  chapel  to
the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne’s  apartments  he  had  the  con¬
venience  of  a  tête-à-tête,  which  he  had  already  given  himself
at  other  times.  On  this  occasion  he  railed  at  ISTangis,  called
him  by  all  sorts  of  names,  threatened  to  tell  everything  to
the  king,  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  to  her  husband,  squeezed
her  fingers  as  if  to  crush  them  in  his  fury,  and  behaved  in
that  way  until  they  reached  her  apartments.  On  arriving,
trembling  and  ready  to  faint  away,  she  went  at  once  to  her
dressing-room  and  sent  for  Mme.  de  Nogaret,  whom  she
called  her  little  nurse,  and  to  whom  she  always  went  for
counsel  when  she  found  herself  in  trouble.  To  her  she
told  what  had  happened,  saying  she  did  not  know  how  it
could  be  she  had  not  sunk  through  the  floor,  or  why  she  was
not  dead,  or  how  she  had  ever  got  back  to  her  own  rooms  ;
never  was  she  so  terrified.  That  same  day  Mme.  de  Nogaret
related  all  this  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  me  in  the
deepest  secrecy  and  confidence.  She  advised  the  princess
to  put  up  with  the  insults  of  so  dangerous  a  madman  and
one  so  out  of  his  senses  and  all  decency  ;  and  above  all  to

297

1704]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

avoid  committing  herself  with  him  in  any  way.  The  worst
of  it  was  that  from  that  day  he  threatened  openly,  and  said
many  things  against  Nangis  in  the  tone  of  a  man  who  was
deeply  wronged  and  determined  to  get  satisfaction  and  to
attack  him  everywhere.  Though  he  did  not  tell  the  cause,
it  was  plain  to  every  one.  We  can  imagine  the  terror  of
the  princess,  and  the  fears  of  Mme.  de  la  Yrilhère  as  to
what  would  become  of  Nangis.  As  for  him,  he  was  too
brave  to  fear  any  one  and  was  ready  to  try  conclusions  with
whoever  it  might  be  — but  to  try  them  on  such  a  subject!
he  shuddered  with  fright.  He  saw  his  fortunes  and  the
dreadful  results  in  the  hands  of  a  furious  madman.  Finally
he  took  the  course  of  avoiding  him  with  the  utmost  care,
appeared  very  little,  and  held  his  tongue.

The  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  lived  in  mortal  terror  and
dismay  for  more  than  six  weeks,  without  anything  worse
happening  to  her  than  the  great  fright.  I  never  knew  what
happened,  nor  who  warned  Tessé,  but  he  was  warned,  and  he
played  the  stroke  of  a  clever  man.  He  persuaded  his  son-in-
law  to  follow  him  to  Spain,  where  he  made  him  see  the
heavens  opening  for  him.  He  spoke  to  Fagon,  who  from  the
depths  of  his  chamber  and  the  king’s  cabmet  saw  all  and
knew  all.  Fagon  was  a  man  of  infinite  sense  and  with  it  a
aood  and  a  kind  man.  He  understood  with  half  a  word,
and  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that,  after  all  the  remedies  that
Maulevrier  had  tried  for  the  extinction  of  his  voice  and  the
state  of  his  lungs,  there  was  nothing  for  him  but  a  warmer
climate  ;  that  the  winter  which  was  just  beginning  would
infallibly  kill  him  in  France,  but  would  also  be  salutary  to
him  in  a  country  where  that  season  is  the  finest  and  most
temperate  of  the  whole  year.  So  it  was  on  the  ground  of
remedy,  and  as  if  he  were  going  to  the  baths,  that  Maulevrier
went  to  Spain.  That  was  how  it  was  given  out  at  Court

298  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

and  to  the  king,  whom  Fagon  could  persuade  to  believe  what
he  pleased  by  medical  arguments  in  which  he  feared  no  con¬
tradictors  between  the  king  and  himself;  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon  the  same,  for  they  both  took  his  judgment  for
certain  and  doubted  nothing.  As  soon  as  the  word  was
given,  Tessé  lost  no  time  in  taking  his  son-in-law  from  the
Court  and  the  kingdom,  and  putting  an  end  to  his  follies
and  the  terrors  he  caused.

X.

During  the  winter  of  this  year  died  the  Maréchal  de
Duras,  the  senior  of  the  marshals  of  France,  and  elder  brother
by  eight  years  of  the  Maréchal  de  Lorges.

Death  of  the  Mar-  Jo  .  »

échai  de  Duras  ;  He  was  a  tall,  thin  man,  with  a  majestic  face

his  character.  ^  &  perfect  figure  .  Jn  bis  yOUtll  and  for  long

after  it  the  master  of  other  men  in  manly  exercises,  gallantry,
and  good  standing  with  ladies  ;  of  a  strong  mind  and  a  free
wit,  the  piercing  shafts  of  which  he  never  denied  himself  ;
hasty,  but  polite  with  discrimination  and  dignity,  magnificent
in  his  table  and  equipages  ;  very  lofty,  unbending,  and  with¬
out  compliance  ;  always  on  his  guard  against  favourites  and
ministers,  always  firing  at  them,  and  always  obliging  them
to  reckon  with  him.  I  never  could  imagine  how  with  these
qualities  he  came  to  so  great  a  position.  To  the  princes  of
the  blood  and  the  daughters  of  the  king  he  never  restrained
his  sayings,  and  the  king  himself  when  talking  with  him  had
a  taste  of  them  more  than  once  before  the  whole  Court  ;  and
when  this  happened  the  king  would  laugh  and  look  round  at
the  company,  who  lowered  their  eyes.  On  one  occasion  the
king  was  speaking  of  Père  de  La  Chaise.  “  He  ’ll  be  damned
to  all  the  devils,”  said  M.  de  Duras;  “but  I  can  understand
that  a  monk  in  restraint,  subjection,  and  poverty  should
want  to  get  out  of  them  and  into  plenty,  and  rule  his  Order,
and  meddle  in  everything,  and  have  everybody,  Court  and
clergy,  at  his  feet  ;  but  what  surprises  me  is  that  he  can
get  a  confessor  ;  for  that  man  will  certainly  be  damned  with
him,  and  yet  he  won’t  get  a  morsel  the  more  ;  not  a  gram

300

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

more  liberty,  nor  more  respect  in  his  convent.  A  man  must
be  a  fool  to  damn  himself  as  cheap  as  that.”  He  did  not
like  the  Jesuits  ;  he  always  had  a  grudge  against  them  after
an  intercourse  with  the  priests  attached  to  Port-Royal  at
the  time  of  his  conversion,  and  he  kept  it  up  all  his  life.

He  had  followed  M.  le  Prince,  to  whom  he  attached  him¬
self  chiefly  out  of  regard  for  his  uncles  de  Bouillon  and  de
Turenne.  He  was  the  best  cavalry  officer  the  king  had,  and
the  most  brilliant  for  leading  a  wing,  or  a  large  detached
corps.  At  the  head  of  an  army,  he  had  neither  the  same
opportunities  nor  the  same  diligence;  still,  he  commanded
very  well  at  the  siege  of  Philippsbourg,  and  through  the  rest
of  that  short  campaign,  in  which  the  king  confided  to  him
Monseigneur  for  his  first  essay  at  arms.  Always  on  ill  terms
with  Louvois  on  account  of  M.  de  Turenne,  and  disgusted
with  the  burnings  of  the  Palatinate,  and  with  the  conflicting
orders  he  received  as  to  the  relief  of  Mayence,  and  finding
himself  in  possession  of  a  large  fortune,  he  threw  everything
to  the  winds  and  never  served  again.  He  had  played  a
brilliant  part  in  the  war  in  Holland,  and  the  two  conquests
of  Franche-Comté,  of  which  he  had  the  government.  The
king  had  given  him  while  very  young  the  brevet  of  duke  to
facilitate  his  marriage  with  Mlle,  de  Ventadour,  with  whom
he  was  long  happy,  until  a  domestic  demon  parted  them.  He
loved  no  one  but  his  brother,  and,  slightly,  Mme.  de  Saint-
Simon,  for  whose  sake  I  found  grace  in  his  sight,  so  that  I
always  received  all  sorts  of  kindness  and  marks  of  friend¬
ship  from  him.  Of  his  children  he  made  no  account  ;  noth¬
ing  ever  disturbed  him,  or  affected  for  a  moment  his  freedom
of  mind  or  his  natural  gayety.  He  said  this  one  day  to  the
king,  adding  that  he  defied  him  with  all  his  power  to  cause
him  a  vexation  that  should  last  more  than  a  quarter  of  an
hour.  His  cleanliness  was  excessive  and  pushed  to  extremes.

1704]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  301

At  eighty  years  of  age,  he  broke  horses  that  had  never  been
mounted.  He  was  also  the  finest  and  best  rider  m  France.
Wlren  the  sons  of  France  were  of  an  age  to  seriously  learn  to
ride,  the  king  asked  M.  de  Duras  to  he  so  good  as  to  see
them  mount,  and  to  preside  at  their  lesson.  He  did  so  a  few
times  ;  went  to  the  stables,  and  also  rode  out  with  them  ;
then  he  told  the  king  he  should  not  go  any  more,  that  his
grandsons  had  neither  grace  nor  skill  on  horseback,  and  he
had  better  give  up  the  idea  of  having  them  taught,  whatever
the  equerries  might  tell  him,  for  they  would  never  be  any¬
thing  on  a  horse  but  pairs  of  tongs.  He  kept  his  word,  and

they  their  promise.

He  was  attacked  with  dropsy  (of  which  he  died),  but  sti
kept  on  duty  with  the  bâton.  He  refused  for  a  long  time  to
mve  it  up,  but  finally  he  had  to  yield,  feeling  for  himself  that
he  should  never  recover.  He  took  leave  of  the  king  m  is
cabinet,  who  loaded  him  with  friendly  words,  and  was  moved
to  tears.  The  king  asked  what  he  could  do  for  mi.  n
reply  he  asked  for  nothing  and  got  nothing  ;  it  is  very  certain
that  he  might  have  obtained  his  office  or  his  government  for

his  son  ;  but  he  did  not  care.  ,

Some  time  later  the  king  went  to  Fontainebleau;  tlier
was  angry,  because  the  ladies  disliking  to  wear  full  dress  for
the  comedy,  avoided  going  to  it;  and  kept  apart  to  escape
being  forced  to  dress  themselves.  Four  words  that  he  said,
and  the  report  he  ordered  made  to  him  as  to  the  execution
of  this  rule,  made  all  the  Court  ladies  extremely  assiduous
as  to  their  full  dress.  Just  then  we  received  news  of  the
dying  condition  of  M.  de  Duras.  The  constant  attendance
which  the  king  exacted  from  those  who  were  usually  at  the
Court  had  hitherto  prevented  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  Mme.
de  Lausun  from  absenting  themselves  from  Fontainebleau ,
but  on  receiving  this  news  they  went  to  tell  the  Duchesse

302

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

de  Bourgogne  that  they  must  leave  the  next  day,  and  they
begged  her  to  excuse  them  from  the  comedy  that  evening.
The  princess  thought  they  were  right,  but  said  that  the  king
would  never  hear  of  it.  So  they  compromised  on  dressing
themselves,  and  going  to  the  comedy  with  her,  and  then  a
moment  later,  leaving  it  on  pretence  that  they  could  find  no
seats,  so  that  the  princess  could  thus  explain  it  to  the  king.
I  mention  this  very  insignificant  trifle  to  show  how  the  king
considered  himself  only  and  would  be  obeyed,  and  how  con¬
duct  which  would  not  have  been  elsewhere  pardoned  in  the
nieces  of  M.  de  Duras  in  his  then  condition  was  made  a
duty,  requiring  both  skill  and  protection  to  keep  it  from
appearing  a  gross  impropriety.

Mme.  des  Ursins  [then  on  a  visit  to  France]  was  present
on  the  occasion  of  the  next  trip  to  Marly.  Her  lodging  was
at  the  Perspective  ;  nothing  could  equal  the
air  of  triumph  she  assumed,  pr  the  continual

Dazzling  triumph

of  the  Princesse  attention  of  the  king  to  do  her  the  honours,  as

des  Ursins.  •  p  i  .  t  up*  tip

it  she  were  the  proxy  ot  a  toreign  queen  ;  all  of
which  she  received  with  a  majestic  manner  in  which  was  that
due  proportion  of  grace  and  respectful  politeness,  now  too
much  neglected,  which  made  one  remember  that  of  the  old
courtiers  in  the  time  of  the  queen-mother.  She  never  made
her  appearance  that  the  king  was  not  wholly  absorbed  by
her,  talking  with  her,  pointing  out  to  her  the  various  objects,
seeking  her  taste  and  approbation  with  an  air  of  gallantry,  of
flattery  even,  which  never  lessened.  The  frequent  private
interviews  that  she  had  with  him  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s,
lasting  for  hours,  and  sometimes  twice  a  day,  those  that  she
often  had  in  the  mornings  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  alone,
made  her  the  divinity  of  the  Court.  The  princesses  sur¬
rounded  her  the  moment  she  showed  herself,  and  they  even
went  to  see  her  in  her  chamber.  Nothing  was  more  amazing

CTQ  Crq

303

1705]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

than  the  servile  eagerness  shown  to  her  by  all  who  were
reatest,  most  in  favour,  and  highest  in  office.  Her  very
lances  were  treasured,  and  her  words  addressed  to  the  most
distinguished  women  were  received  with  an  air  of  rapture.

I  went  to  her  nearly  every  morning  ;  she  rose  early  and
always  dressed  herself  and  did  her  hair  at  once,  so  that  no
one  ever  saw  her  at  her  toilet.  I  preceded  the  hour  of
important  visits,  and  we  talked  together  with  the  same  free¬
dom  as  in  former  days.  I  heard  from  her  many  details  as
to  public  matters,  and  as  to  the  king’s  ways  of  thinking
about  persons,  and  especially  Mme.  de  Maintenon  s.  We
often  laughed  together  over  the  baseness  she  saw  in  the
most  important  persons,  the  contempt  they  drew  down  upon
themselves,  although  she  never  showed  it  openly,  and  the
falsity  of  others,  who,  having  done  her  all  the  harm  they
could,  especially  on  her  first  arrival  in  Paris,  were  now
prodigal  of  protestations,  boasting  of  their  attachment  at  all
times  and  making  the  most  of  their  services.  I  was  flat¬
tered  by  this  confidence  on  the  part  of  the  directress  of  the
Court.  It  excited  a  notice  that  drew  upon  me  instant  con¬
sideration,  for  many  of  the  distinguished  personages  found
me  alone  with  her  in  the  mornings,  and  the  messages  which
rained  upon  her  also  found  me  there,  which  sometimes
caused  the  messengers  to  report  that  they  could  not  get
speech  with  her.  She  often  called  me  up  in  the  salon,  or
else  I  went  to  her  myself  to  whisper  in  her  ear,  with  an  air
of  ease  and  freedom  much  envied  and  little  imitated.  She
never  saw  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  without  going  up  to  her,
praising  her,  and  putting  her  into  the  conversation  that  was
going  on,  often  taking  her  to  a  mirror  and  adjusting  little
matters  in  her  toilet  or  head-dress,  as  she  might  have  done
in  private  to  a  daughter.

The  most  solid  part  of  all  was  the  many  kind  things  she

304

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

said  of  me  to  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  on  several
occasions  ;  and  we  knew,  through  sources  that  were  sure  and
far  removed  from  Mme.  des  Ursins,  that  she  told  them  more
than  once  they  had  no  woman  at  the  Court,  of  any  age,  so
suitable,  so  expressly  formed  in  virtue,  behaviour,  and  wis¬
dom  to  be  lady  of  the  palace,  and,  though  still  so  young,
lady  of  honour  to  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  should  that
place  become  vacant,  nor  one  who  would  acquit  herself  with
such  good  sense  and  dignity,  or  more  to  their  liking  and
that  of  others.  She  even  spoke  of  this  several  times  to  the
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  which  did  not  displease  her,  for
from  that  time  the  princess  kept  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  in
view  in  case  the  Duchesse  du  Lude  (who  survived  her)
should  cease  to  serve.  I  am  persuaded  that  besides  the
good  opinion  that  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the
whole  Court  had  of  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  this  testimony  of
Mme.  des  Ursins  made  an  impression  upon  them,  of  which
the  effects  were  felt  in  the  end,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,
much  more  than  we  desired.  This  manner  of  being  with  us
and  acting  for  us  did  not  relax  before  the  return  of  the  prin¬
cess  to  Spain.

Ninon,  the  celebrated  courtesan,  who,  since  age  had  made
her  leave  her  business,  was  known  as  Mlle,  de  l’Enclos,  died
Death  and  about  this  time.  She  was  a  fresh  example  of

the  triumph  of  vice  conducted  with  intelli-
Miie.de  l’ Enclos.  gence  anq  redeemed  by  some  virtue.  The
stir  she  made,  and  still  more  the  licentiousness  she  caused
among  the  highest  and  most  brilliant  youth  of  the  day  com¬
pelled  the  queen-mother,  in  spite  of  the  extreme  indulgence
which  she  showed  (not  without  private  reasons)  to  persons
of  gallantry  and  more  than  gallantry,  to  send  her  an  order
to  retire  to  a  convent.  A  police  sergeant  of  Paris  carried  to
Ninon  the  lettre  de  cachet  ;  she  read  it,  and  seeing  that  there

1705]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

305

was  no  particular  convent  designated,  “Monsieur,’  she  said
to  the  officer,  without  being  disconcerted,  “  as  the  queen  has
had  the  goodness  to  leave  to  me  the  choice  of  the  convent
to  which  she  wishes  me  to  retire,  I  beg  you  to  say  to  her
that  I  choose  that  of  the  Grands  Cordeliers  of  Paris,”  and
she  returned  him  the  lettre  de  cachet  with  a  fine  curtsey.
The  officer,  stupefied  by  such  unparalleled  effrontery,  had  not
a  word  to  say,  and  the  queen  thought  it  so  amusing  that
she  let  her  alone.  Ninon  never  had  more  than  one  lover  at
a  time,  hut  adorers  in  crowds  ;  and  when  she  was  tired  of
the  tenant  she  told  him  so  frankly,  and  took  another.  The
deserted  one  might  groan  and  complain  as  he  pleased  ;  the
decree  had  gone  forth,  and  this  creature  had  usurped  such
empire  that  no  one  dared  to  be  angry  with  the  man  who
supplanted  him,  too  happy  to  be  still  admitted  as  a  friend
of  the  house.  Occasionally  she  kept  faithful  to  her  tenant,
when  he  pleased  her  much,  through  a  whole  campaign.

Ninon  had  illustrious  friends  of  all  kinds,  and  so  much
wit  and  cleverness  that  she  retained  them  all  and  kept
them  united  among  themselves,  or,  at  any  rate,  without
the  slightest  disturbance.  Everything  was  done  in  her
house  with  respect  and  an  outward  decency  seldom  main¬
tained  by  great  princesses  who  were  frail.  In  this  way
she  had  as  friends  the  highest  and  most  noted  men  at
Court,  so  that  after  a  time  it  became  the  fashion  to  be
received  at  her  house;  persons  had  reason  to  desire  it  on
account  of  the  intimacies  formed  there.  Never  any  gam¬
bling,  nor  loud  laughter,  nor  disputes,  nor  remarks  about
religion  or  government  ;  much  wit  and  very  cultivated,  anec¬
dotes,  ancient  and  modern,  tales  of  gallantry,  but  always
without  opening  the  door  to  malicious  gossip;  all  was  deli¬
cate,  airy,  and  circumspect  ;  toning  the  conversations  which
she  knew  well  how  to  sustain  by  her  wit  and  by  her  knowl-
vol.  i.  —  20.

306  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

edge  of  the  facts  of  the  period.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  the
consideration  she  had  acquired,  the  number  and  distinction
of  her  friends  and  her  acquaintances  still  continued  when
her  charms  had  ceased  to  attract,  and  when  propriety  and
fashion  forbade  her  to  unite  any  longer  the  body  with  the
soul.  She  knew  all  the  intrigues  of  the  old  and  the  new
Court,  serious  or  otherwise  ;  her  conversation  was  charming  ;
disinterested,  faithful,  secret,  safe  to  the  last  degree  ;  in  fact,
it  might  be  said,  frailty  apart,  that  she  was  virtuous  and
full  of  integrity.  She  often  succoured  her  friends  with
money  and  influence,  and  entered  for  their  sakes  into  very
important  matters,  keeping  faithfully  the  deposits  of  money
and  secrets  they  intrusted  to  her.  All  this  gave  her  a
reputation  and  an  esteem  that  were  altogether  singular.

She  had  been  the  intimate  friend  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon
in  the  days  when  the  latter  lived  in  Paris.  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon  did  not  like  to  be  spoken  to  about  her,  hut  she  dared
not  disown  her.  She  wrote  to  her  from  time  to  time  until
her  death,  with  friendship.  L’Enclos  (for  Ninon  took  that
name  after  she  left  the  trade  of  her  youth,  which  was  far
prolonged)  was  not  so  reserved  with  her  intimate  friends,
for  when  it  happened  that  she  was  strongly  interested  for
some  person  or  thing  (which  she  knew  how  to  render  sel¬
dom  and  judicious),  she  wrote  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who
served  her  efficaciously  and  promptly  ;  hut  since  the  latter’s
grandeur  they  had  only  seen  each  other  two  or  three  times,
and  then  secretly.  L’Enclos  made  admirable  repartees.
Among  others  there  were  two  made  to  the  Maréchal  de
Choiseul  which  were  never  forgotten  ;  one  an  excellent
rebuke,  the  other  a  sketch  from  nature.  Choiseul,  who  was
one  of  her  early  friends,  had  been  in  those  days  gallant  and
well-made.  He  quarrelled  with  M.  de  Louvois  and  was
deploring  his  fate,  when  the  king  put  him,  in  spite  of  the

Bedroom  of  Anne  of  Austria  at  Fontainebleau

1705]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

307

minister,  in  the  promotion  of  the  Order  in  1688.  He  did
not  expect  it  in  the  least,  although  of  the  highest  birth
and  one  of  the  oldest  and  best  lieutenant-generals.  He  was
so  overjoyed  that  he  kept  looking  at  himself  in  the  glass
with  much  complacency,  decked  with  his  blue  ribbon.

L’Enclos  surprised  him  at  it  two  or  three  times.  Provoked
at  last,  she  said  to  him  before  all  the  company,  “  Monsieur
le  comte,  if  I  catch  you  at  that  again,  Ill  name  you  your
comrades.”  There  were  in  truth  members  of  the  Order  who
were  fit  to  make  a  man  weep  ;  but  what  were  they  in  num¬
ber  or  character  to  those  of  1724,  and  others  since  !  The
worthy  maréchal  was  all  the  virtues  in  one,  but  not  enliv¬
ening,  nor  had  he  any  mind.  After  a  very  long  visit
TEnclos  yawned,  looked  at  him,  and  quoted  the  lhie  of  a
certain  play  :  “  Heavens  !  how  many  virtues  you  do  make
me  hate  !  ”  We  can  imagine  the  laughter  and  scandal.  The
sally,  however,  did  not  make  them  quarrel.  L’Enclos  lived
to  be  much  over  eighty,  always  sound  and  healthy,  visited
and  considered.  She  gave  to  God  her  last  years  and  her
death  was  regarded  as  a  piece  of  news.  The  unique  singu¬
larity  of  this  person  makes  me  enlarge  upon  her.

Shortly  after  the  Court  was  at  F ontainebleau,  and  a  terrif  j  -
ing  incident  happened  to  Courtenvaux.  He  was  the  eldest  son
Court envaux  of  M.  de  Louvois,  who  had  first  given  him  and

cruelly  repn-  ^hen  taken  away  from  him  the  succession  to

king.  his  office,  finding  him  totally  incapable,  lo

console  him  he  bought  him  the  captaincy  of  the  Cent-Suisses
guards,  which,  after  the  great  offices  of  the  king’s  household,
was  undoubtedly  the  first  and  finest.  Courtenvaux  was  a
small  man,  obscurely  debauched,  with  a  ridiculous  voice,
who  had  served  little  and  always  ill  ;  despised  and  counted
for  nothing  in  his  own  family  and  at  the  Court,  where  no
one  visited  him  ;  niggardly  and  nagging,  though  humble  and

308  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

respectful,  passionate  and  little  master  of  himself  when  out
of  temper  ;  in  fact,  a  very  foolish  man  and  treated  as  such,
even  by  the  Duchesse  de  Villeroy  and  the  Maréchale  de
Cœuvres,  his  sister  and  sister-in-law;  he  was  never  met
anywhere.

The  king,  more  eager  to  know  what  was  going  on,  and
more  inquisitive  to  get  reports  than  any  one  could  believe
(though  they  believed  a  good  deal),  had  authorized  Bontems
and  afterwards  Bloin,  governor  of  Versailles,  to  hire  a
quantity  of  Suisses  besides  those  of  the  Cent-Suisses,  who
were  stationed  at  the  doors,  and  in  the  parks,  the  gardens,  the
gallery  of  the  grand  apartment  at  Versailles,  and  the  salons
of  Marly  and  Trianon.  These  other  Suisses  were  to  wear
the  livery  of  the  king,  but  not  to  be  under  the  same  orders.
They  were  secretly  charged  to  loiter  in  the  evenings  and
nights  and  mornings  about  the  steps,  the  corridors,  the  pas¬
sages,  and,  when  the  weather  was  fine,  in  the  courts  and
gardens  ;  to  prowl  and  conceal  themselves,  take  note  of  people,
follow  them,  watch  them  enter  and  issue  from  the  places
they  went  to  ;  know  what  was  happening,  listen  to  whatever
they  could  hear,  remember  how  long  a  time  each  person  had
stayed  in  the  place  he  had  gone  to,  and  render  a  report  of
whatever  they  discovered.  This  system,  in  which  other
subalterns  and  some  valets  were  employed,  was  carried  on
assiduously  at  Versailles,  Marly,  Trianon,  Fontainebleau,
and  wherever  the  king  was.  These  Suisses  were  very  dis¬
pleasing  to  Courtenvaux,  for  the  reason  that  they  did  not
obey  his  authority  in  anything,  and  they  deprived  his  own
Cent-Suisses  of  posts  and  perquisites  which  he  could  have
sold  to  the  latter  ;  so  that  he  was  constantly  striving  to
thwart  them.  Between  the  great  hall  of  the  Suisses  and
the  king’s  guard-room  at  Fontainebleau  is  a  narrow  passage
leading  from  the  staircase  to  the  apartments  then  occupied

1705]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

309

by  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  at  the  end  of  which  is  a  square
room  into  which  opens  the  door  of  these  apartments  ;  and
this  room,  if  crossed  straight,  also  opens  into  the  guard-room,
and  has  a  door  upon  a  balcony  which  runs  round  the  whole
court,  which  balcony  has  many  stairways  leading  up  to  it-
This  square  room  is  a  public  passage-way,  indispensable  for
the  whole  château  and  consequently  a  very  suitable  place  to
observe  the  comings  and  goings  both  there  and  through  its
various  communications.  Until  this  year  a  few  of  the  body¬
guard,  and  some  of  the  Cent-Suisses  had  always  slept  there,
and  when  the  king  entered  or  left  Mme.  de  Maintenons
apartments  they  put  themselves  under  arms,  so  that  this
room  became  as  it  were  an  extension  of  the  two  guardrooms.
This  year  the  king  took  it  into  his  head  to  have  Bloin’s
Suisses  sleep  there,  instead  of  the  Cent-Suisses  and  the
guards.

Courtenvaux,  without  saying  a  word  to  the  captain  of
the  guards  on  service,  had  the  folly  to  take  this  change  as  a
fresh  encroachment  of  these  Suisses  upon  his  Suisses,  and  he
flew  into  such  a  passion  that  there  were  no  threats  he  did
not  make  to  them,  nor  any  abuse  he  did  not  lavish.  They
let  him  bark  and  took  no  notice  ;  they  had  their  orders
and  were  wise  enough  to  say  nothing.  The  king,  who
did  not  hear  of  it  till  evening  when  he  left  his  supper,
entered  the  great  oval  cabinet  as  usual,  accompanied  by  his
family  and  the  ladies  of  the  princesses  (who  at  Fontaine¬
bleau,  for  lack  of  other  cabinets,  were  always  in  that  of  the
king),  and  sent  for  Courtenvaux.  The  moment  he  appeared,
the  king  spoke  from  the  other  end  of  the  room,  not  allowing
him  time  to  approach,  in  a  tone  of  such  terrible  anger,  so
unusual  and  extraordinary  a  thing  in  him,  that  not  only
Courtenvaux  trembled,  but  the  princes,  princesses  and  ladies,
and  every  one  in  the  room.  The  king’s  voice  was  even

310

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

heard  in  his  chamber.  Threats  to  dismiss  him,  in  the  harsh¬
est  language  and  most  unusual  from  the  king’s  lips,  rained
upon  Courtenvaux,  who,  speechless  with  terror  and  ready  to
drop,  had  neither  time  nor  power  to  say  a  word.  The
reprimand  ended  by  the  king’s  saying  impetuously  :  “  Go
out  !  ”  on  which  he  scarcely  had  the  strength  to  drag  himself
away.  After  a  time  the  king  was  pacified,  but  he  let  Cour¬
tenvaux  know  that  at  his  very  next  folly  he  would  dismiss
him  and  take  away  his  office.  The  cause  of  this  strange
scene  was  that  the  uproar  made  by  Courtenvaux  about  a
change  the  motive  for  which  challenged  the  minds  of  all
observers,  pointed  a  finger  for  the  eyes  of  the  whole  Court,
and  the  king,  who  concealed  his  spying  with  the  utmost
care  and  had  thought  this  change  would  pass  unnoticed,  was
furious  at  the  fuss  which  had  made  it  seen  and  felt  by
every  one.

I  shared,  at  this  time,  with  the  deepest  bitterness,  the
great  misfortune  of  M.  and  Mme.  de  Beauvilliers.  They  had

Death  of  the  two  two  sons>  sixteen  and  seventeen  years  of  age,
sons  of  the  Due  sound  in  body,  and  both  of  whom  promised

de  Beauvilliers.

great  things.  The  eldest  had  just  received  a
regiment  without  other  employ,  and  the  youngest  was  about
to  receive  another.  The  younger  died  of  the  small-pox  at
Versailles  November  25.  The  same  disease  attacked  the
elder,  who  also  died  December  2.  The  father  and  mother,
grieved  to  the  heart  at  the  loss  of  the  first,  went  instantly  to
make  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  at  which  they  both  received
the  communion  ;  on  the  death  of  the  second  they  showed  the
same  faith,  the  same  courage,  the  same  piety.  Their  affliction
was  extreme,  and  this  inward  sorrow  lasted  to  the  end  of
their  days,  but  no  outward  change  appeared.  M.  de  Beau¬
villiers  continued  his  ordinary  functions.  At  home  he
allowed  himself  some  relief,  and  for  several  days  saw  none

311

1705]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

but  his  immediate  family  and  nearest  friends.  I  know  no
sermon  so  touching  as  the  sorrow  and  the  deep  resignation
of  both  parents,  their  tender  sensibility,  never  lessening  their
submission  and  abandonment  to  God,  their  silence,  their
external  manner,  ever  gentle,  apparently  tranquil,  but  con¬
centred,  and  always  with  some  words  of  life  which  sanctified
their  tears.  After  the  first  few  days  I  gently  turned  aside
the  conversation  when  M.  de  Beauvilliers  began  to  talk
about  his  children  ;  lie  noticed  it,  and  told  me  that  while  I
thought  I  did  right  in  turning  his  thoughts  from  the  object
of  his  grief  and  he  thanked  me  for  it,  still  he  had  so  few  to
whom  he  could  allow  himself  to  speak  that  he  begged  me  to
continue  the  subject  whenever  he  spoke  of  it,  because  it
soothed  him,  and  he  only  did  so  when  his  heart  was  too
oppressed.  I  obeyed  him,  and  very  often  when  we  were  quite
alone  we  talked  of  his  sorrow,  and  I  saw  that  it  did,  m  fact,
comfort  him.  The  husband  of  his  only  married  daughter
was  not  one  to  give  him  consolation;  moreover,  he  kept  his
wife  in  Paris,  and  all  M.  de  Beauvilliers’  other  daughters

were  nuns.

Before  closing  this  year,  I  must  sketch  an  anecdote,  the
conclusion  of  which  will  be  found  later.  The  Abbé  de  Po-
Anecdotes  of  lignac,  after  his  adventures  in  Poland  and  the

the  Abbé,  after-  exile  w|qcq  followed  them,  came  back  to  the

r“naI’  surface.  He  was  a  tall  man,  very  well  made,

with  a  handsome  face,  much  cleverness,  and  above  all,  grace
and  polished  manners  ;  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  a  most  agree¬
able  way  of  expressing  himself,  a  touching  voice,  a  gentle
eloquence,  insinuating,  manly,  exact  in  terms,  charming  m
style  a  gift  of  speech  that  was  wholly  his  own  ;  all  about  lnm
was  original,  and  persuasive.  No  one  knew  more  of  belles-
lettres  ;  delightful  in  putting  abstract  things  within  common
reach  ;  amusing  in  narratives  ;  possessed  of  a  smattering  o

312  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

all  the  arts,  all  the  manufactures,  all  the  professions.  In
whatever  belonged  to  his  own,  that  is,  learning  and  the
ecclesiastical  calling,  he  was  rather  less  versed.  He  wanted
to  please  valet  and  maid,  as  well  as  master  and  mistress.
He  was  always  aiming  to  touch  the  heart,  the  mind,  and
the  eyes.  All  who  conversed  with  him  easily  thought  them¬
selves  clever  and  well-informed  ;  he  adapted  his  conversation
to  the  range  of  the  people  he  talked  with,  and  his  gentle,
complying  ways  made  his  person  beloved  and  his  talents
admired  ;  in  other  respects,  he  was  wholly  occupied  with
his  own  ambition,  without  friendship,  without  gratitude,
without  any  feeling  except  for  himself  ;  false,  lax,  indifferent
to  the  means  of  success  ;  without  restraint  from  God  or  man,
but  always  with  a  cloak  of  delicacy  which  gave  him  dupes  ;
above  all,  a  libertine,  more  from  facility,  coquetry,  ambition,
than  from  natural  debauchery  ;  so  that  while  the  heart  was
false  and  the  soul  not  upright,  his  judgment  was  nil,  his
actions  erroneous,  his  mind  inaccurate,  which,  in  spite  of
the  most  gracious  and  deceptive  exterior,  caused  the  failure
in  his  hands  of  every  enterprise  intrusted  to  him.

With  a  face  and  talents  so  fitted  to  impress  others,  he  was
aided  by  his  birth,  to  which,  however,  his  property  did  not
respond  ;  but  that  fact  dispelled  all  envy  and  conciliated
favour  and  good  will.  The  most  amiable  ladies  of  the  Court,
those  even  of  advanced  age,  the  men  most  distinguished  for
place  or  reputation,  the  persons  of  both  sexes  who  chiefly  set
the  tone,  —  he  had  won  them  all.  Even  the  king  succumbed
to  him  through  M.  du  Maine,  to  whose  wife  he  was  devoted.
He  was  on  all  the  Marly  trips,  and  every  one  was  eager  to
enjoy  his  charms  ;  he  had  them  for  all  sorts  of  conditions,
persons,  and  minds.

With  all  his  wiles,  he  once  let  out  a  flattery  the  meanness
of  which  was  caught  up  and  long  remembered  and  despised

1705]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  313

by  the  courtiers.  He  was  following  the  king  about  the  gar¬
dens  of  Marly,  when  it  came  on  to  rain  ;  the  king  made
some  civil  remark  about  his  coat  not  being  a  sufficient  pro¬
tection.  “  That  is  nothing,  sire,”  he  replied  ;  “  the  rain  of
Marly  does  not  wet.”  People  laughed  much,  and  the  saying
was  laid  up  against  him.

Such  triumphs  as  he  had,  however,  did  not  suffice  him  ;  he
wanted  something  more  solid.  The  arts,  the  letters,  the
knowledge,  the  public  business  he  had  already  handled  made
him  aspire  to  be  received  into  the  cabinet  of  Mgr.  le  Duc
de  Bourgogne,  convinced  that  he  could  attain  to  all  if  once
admitted  there.  To  reach  it,  it  was  necessary  to  win  those
who  had  the  key.  First  among  them  was  the  Duc  de  Beau-
villiers,  who,  after  completing  the  education  of  the  young
prince,  had  retained  his  utmost  confidence.  His  ministry
and  his  office  occupied  his  whole  time.  He  was  neither  a
learned  man,  nor  much  a  man  of  letters.  The  abbé  was  not
connected  with  a  single  one  of  his  friends  ;  he  could  not
therefore  reach  him  directly.  But  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,
apparently  less  busy,  seemed  to  the  abbé  more  accessible.
In  fact  he  was  so,  through  the  sciences,  and  through  letters  ;
once  tapped,  he  was  very  easy  ;  and  on  that  side  the  assault
began.  At  first  he  was  approached  for  an  instant  during
the  few  moments  he  appeared  in  public  in  the  king’s
cabinet,  and  tempted  by  the  bait  of  some  problem  to  solve,  or
some  curious  question  to  fathom  ;  after  that  it  was  easy  to
stop  him  and  detain  him  in  the  gallery  for  some  time,  and
before  long  the  Abbé  de  Polignac  opened  the  door  of  the
duke’s  apartment  hitherto  closed  to  him.  In  a  very  short
time  he  had  charmed  M.  de  Chevreuse  ;  lucky  chances
brought  M.  de  Beauvilliers  to  the  spot  j  the  abbé  was  dis¬
creet,  reserved,  aloof.  Little  by  little,  he  was  detained  in
the  moments  of  leisure.  Chevreuse  lauded  him  to  M.  de

314  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

Beauvilliers  ;  the  abbé  watched  bis  time  ;  the  two  dukes
were  of  one  heart,  one  soul  ;  pleasing  one,  he  pleased  the
other  ;  received  by  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,  he  was  presently
received  by  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers.

They  were  two  men  solely  occupied,  not  to  say  drowned,  in
their  duties,  who  in  the  midst  of  a  Court  where  their  posts
and  their  favour  made  them  personages,  lived  as  if  in  a
hermitage,  in  the  most  self-willed  ignorance  of  what  was
passing  around  them.  Charmed  with  the  Abbé  de  Polignac
and  knowing  nothing  more,  they  both  thought  it  was  doing
a  good  thing  to  bring  so  agreeably  informed  a  man  into  the
company  of  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  himself  so  well-informed
and  so  capable  of  being  amused  and  also  of  profiting  by  the
abbé’s  conversation.  To  resolve,  will,  and  act  were  to  them
the  same  thing  ;  and  there  was  the  abbé  at  the  summit  of  all
his  desires  !

I  saw  the  whole  manœuvre  of  Polignac  round  Chevreuse.
Unhappily  for  me,  charity  does  not  cork  me  up  in  a  bottle,
like  the  two  dukes.  One  evening  at  Marly  I  went,  as  I
usually  did  every  day,  to  talk  with  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers
tête-à-tête.  His  confidence  in  me  went  far  beyond  my  age,
and  I  was  allowed  to  say  and,  in  fact,  was  in  the  habit  of
saying  what  I  thought,  even  about  himself.  I  told  him
therefore  what  I  had  noticed  for  some  time  about  the  Abbé
de  Polignac  and  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse  ;  I  added  that  there
were  not  two  men  at  Court  who  suited  each  other  less
than  they  did,  and,  with  the  exception  of  Torcy,  all  the  men
with  whom  that  abbé  was  intimate  were  contraband  to  the
duke.  I  told  him  that  M.  de  Chevreuse  was  the  dupe
of  the  abbé,  and  was  only  the  bridge  by  which  he  proposed
to  get  to  him  ;  and  the  object  of  it  all  was  solely  to  open
for  himself  through  them  the  door  of  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bour¬
gogne’s  cabinet.  I  was  too  late  ;  Beauvilliers  was  already

315

1705]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

seduced.  “Well,”  he  said,  “what  is  the  object  of  all  this
reasoning  ?  What  do  you  conclude  from  it  ?  ”  “  What  I
conclude,”  I  said,  “is  that  neither  of  you  knows  who  and
what  the  Abbé  de  Polignac  is  ;  you  will  both  be  his  dupes  ;
you  will  introduce  him  to  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  and
that  is  all  he  wants  of  you.”  “  But  what  duping  is  there
in  that  ?  ”  he  said,  interrupting  me.  “  If  his  conversations
can  be  useful  to  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne,  what  can  we  do
better  than  let  him  profit  by  them?”  “Very  good,”  I
said;  “you  stop  me,  and  you  will  follow  your  own  idea;
but  I  tell  you,  for  I  know  him  well,  that  you  are  the  two
men  at  Court  that  suit  him  least  and  shackle  him  most,
and  once  established  by  you  in  the  Duc  de  Bourgogne’s
circle,  he  ’ll  charm  him  like  a  wizard  siren,  and  you  your¬
self,  to  whom  I  speak,  who  think  yourself,  with  so  much
reason,  in  the  heart  and  mind  of  your  pupil,  will  be  ex¬
pelled  by  him  and  he’ll  establish  himself  on  your  rums.”
At  these  words  the  whole  expression  of  the  duke’s  face
changed;  he  looked  displeased  and  said  with  austerity
that  he  could  not  listen  to  me  any  longer;  I  was  going
much  too  far;  I  had  too  bad  an  opinion  of  everybody,
and  that  what  I  assumed  to  predict  was  neither  in  the
mind  of  the  abbé  nor  in  the  possibility  of  events;  and,
without  pushing  the  conversation  any  further,  he  must  beg
me  to  say  no  more  to  him  on  the  subject.  Monsieur,  I
replied,  angry  myself,  “you  shall  be  obeyed;  but  you  will
feel  the  truth  of  my  prophecy  ;  though  I  promise  never  to
say  another  word  to  you  about  it.”  He  remained  a  few
moments  cold  and  stiff;  I  spoke  of  other  things;  he  took
them  up  and  became  once  more  his  usual  self  to  me.

I  do  not  know  if  the  misfortunes  of  the  year  which  had
just  ended,  or  the  great  enterprises  planned  for  the  com¬
ing  year  induced  the  king  to  command  the  festivities  of

316

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

this  winter,  as  a  policy  to  give  courage  to  the  kingdom
and  show  to  his  enemies  the  little  uneasiness  their  suc-
1706.  cesses  gave  him.  However  that  may  be,
Many  fêtes  at  every  one  was  surprised  when  he  announced

Marly  and  at  J  x

Versailles.  in  the  first  days  of  the  year  that  there  would

he  balls  at  Marly  on  all  the  trips  from  the  beginning  of
the  year  till  Lent,  together  with  the  names  of  the  men
and  women  who  were  to  dance  at  them.  He  also  gave
notice  that  he  should  be  very  glad  if  halls  were  given
without  preparation  at  Versailles  to  Mme.  la  Duchesse  de
Bourgogne.  Accordingly  many  were  given  to  her;  and  at
Marly  there  were  several  masquerades.  On  one  occasion
the  king  required  that  all  who  were  at  Marly,  the  oldest
and  the  gravest,  men  and  women,  should  appear  masked
at  a  hall;  he  himself,  to  make  no  exception,  came  and
stayed  there  with  a  gauze  mantle  over  his  coat  ;  but  that
slight  masking  was  for  himself  alone  ;  others  had  to  be
entirely  disguised.  M.  and  Mme.  de  Beauvilliers  were  so,
completely.  Whoso  says  that  to  whosoever  knows  the
Court  tells  all.  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them,  and
of  laughing  with  them  privately  about  it  afterwards.  The
Court  of  Saint-Germain  came  to  all  these  balls,  and  the  king
made  many  persons  dance  who  had  long  passed  the  age  of
it,  such  as  the  Duc  de  Villeroy,  M.  de  Monaco,  and  others.
As  for  the  Comte  de  Brionne  and  the  Chevalier  de  Sully,
their  dancing  was  so  perfect  there  was  no  age  for  them.

For  the  last  five  years  Cardinal  de  Janson  had  been  in
Rome,  charged  with  attending  to  the  king’s  affairs.  He
1  am  chosen,  had  done  so  with  dignity,  and  more  as  an

without  think-  honest  Frenchman  than  as  a  cardinal;  this

ing  of  it,  for  the  7

embassy  to  did  not  please  either  the  pope  or  his  Court.

He  stood  unpleasantly  with  the  first  and  not
very  well  with  the  second,  which  expects  to  see  everything

317

1706]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

bend  before  it.  He  was  quite  ill  and  bad  long  asked  per¬
mission  to  return,  which  was  finally  granted.  But  there
was  no  cardinal  who  could  replace  him,  and  the  Abbé  de
la  Trémoille,  for  want  of  a  better,  was  chargé  des  affaires
after  his  departure.  This  obliged  the  king  to  think  of
promptly  sending  an  ambassador  to  Home,  where  theie  had
been  none  since  the  short  stay  of  the  Duc  de  Chaulnes  at
the  time  of  the  death  of  Innocent  XI.

The  Nuncio  Gualterio  spoke  to  me  of  this  embassy ,  lie
was  wholly  a  Frenchman,  and  it  was  not  a  matter  of  indiffer¬
ence  to  him  to  have  a  friend  as  ambassador  of  France  to
Borne  on  whom  he  could  rely.  At  thirty  years  of  age,  as  I
then  was,  I  regarded  the  idea  as  a  chimera,  especially  in  view
of  the  king’s  objection  to  young  men,  and  his  reluctance  to
employ  them.  Eight  days  after  the  nuncio  had  spoken  to
me  he  came  into  my  room  of  a  Tuesday,  an  hour  after  mid¬
day,  with  his  arms  open,  his  face  joyful,  and  embraced  me,
begged  me  to  close  my  door,  and  even  that  of  my  ante¬
chamber,  so  that  no  one  should  see  his  liveries,  and  then  told
me  he  was  at  the  height  of  his  wishes,  for  I  was  to  go  as
ambassador  to  Borne.  I  made  him  repeat  it,  not  believ¬
ing  it  ;  telling  him  his  wishes  made  him  think  the  thing
really  so,  but  that  it  was  wholly  impossible.  With  joy  and
impatience  he  swore  me  to  secrecy,  and  then  said  that  Torcy,
whom  he  had  just  left,  confided  to  him  that  at  the  council
that  morning  the  thing  had  been  decided,  but  that  he  was
not  to  announce  it  to  me  on  the  part  of  the  king  till  after
the  next  council.  If  one  of  the  portraits  in  my  room  had
spoken  I  could  not  have  been  more  surprised.  Gualterio
exhorted  me  all  he  could  to  accept  the  post.  The  hour  of  a
dinner  to  which  he  was  invited  having  come,  we  parted.
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  to  whom  I  went  to  tell  the  news
instantly,  was  equally  astonished.

318

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

I  acknowledge  that  I  was  flattered  by  the  choice  for  so
considerable  an  embassy  at  my  age,  without  having  thought
of  it,  and  without  being  urged  for  it  by  any  one.  At  that
time  I  had  not  the  slightest  relations  or  even  acquaintance
with  Torcy  ;  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  was  too  cautious  to
have  proposed  me  without  first  ascertaining  whether  the
employment  was  compatible  with  the  state  of  my  affairs  ;
the  chancellor  was  not  in  that  line  ;  and  Chamillart  would
not  have  taken  such  a  step  without  my  knowledge,  and
besides,  not  being  on  the  best  terms  with  Torcy,  he  would
never  have  risked  a  suggestion  to  the  king  about  the  other’s
ministry.

After  the  death  of  the  king,  Torcy  and  I  being  brought
together  in  a  friendship  which  lasted  ever  after,  I  asked  him
by  what  chance  I  had  been  chosen  for  the  embassy  to  Borne.
He  declared  to  me  he  knew  nothing  of  it  except  that  at  the
council  the  king,  already  determined  to  send  an  embassy  to
Borne,  stopped  Torcy  as  he  was  beginning  to  read  the  de¬
spatches  from  there,  and  said  to  the  ministers  that  an  ambas¬
sador  must  be  chosen,  that  he  wanted  a  duke,  and  the  best
way  was  to  look  down  the  list,  and  see  whom  he  would
choose.  He  then  took  up  a  little  almanac  and  read  out
the  names,  beginning  with  M.  d’Uzès.  My  seniority  soon
brought  him  to  my  name,  at  which  he  made  a  pause,  and  then
said  :  “  What  do  you  think  of  that  one  ?  He  is  young,  but
he  is  good,”  etc.  Monseigneur,  who  wanted  D’Antin,  said
nothing  ;  M.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  supported  me  ;  the  chan¬
cellor  and  M.  de  Beauvilliers  likewise  ;  Torcy  praised  their
opinion,  but  proposed  to  continue  the  list  ;  Chamillart  opined
that  they  could  not  find  any  one  better.  The  king  then
closed  the  almanac,  and  concluded  that  it  was  not  worth
while  to  go  farther  ;  and  he  settled  the  choice  on  me,  but
ordered  the  secret  kept  for  some  days,  until  he  should  decide

1706]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  319

to  have  me  told.  The  thing  was  discussed  and  weighed  no
more  than  that,  and  lasted  no  longer.  Torcy  then  read
his  despatches.  This  is  what  I  was  told  more  than  ten
years  later  by  a  truthful  man,  who  could  have  no  interest
or  reason  to  disguise  anything  from  me.

Beauvilliers  and  Chamillart,  each  separately,  examined
my  debts,  my  revenues,  the  expenses  of  an  embassy  and  its
salary,  —  the  first  on  documents,  which  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
took  to  them  and  examined  with  them  ;  the  others  by  esti¬
mation.  They  both  concluded  for  acceptance  ;  the  duke,
because,  after  serious  examination,  he  saw  that  I  could  afford
this  embassy  without  ruining  myself,  and  also  because,  if  I
refused  it,  the  king  would  never  forgive  me,  especially  after
leaving  the  service  ;  he  would  always  regard  me  as  an  idler,
who  preferred  to  do  nothing,  and  would  take  pains  to  make
me  feel  his  displeasure  by  all  sorts  of  annoyances,  and  re¬
fusals  of  things  which  I  might  really  need  of  him.  All  of
which  would  be  more  injury  to  my  interests  and  to  my
situation,  present  and  future,  than  any  ill  success  I  might
have  in  the  embassy.

Vanquished  at  last,  I  accepted  ;  that  is  to  say,  I  resolved  to
do  so.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  more  wise  and  prudent,  and
grieved  to  leave  her  family,  although  persuaded,  was  pained.
I  cannot  refuse  myself  the  pleasure  of  relating  here  what
the  three  ministers,  and  all  three  separately,  and  all  three
without  my  saying  a  word  to  them,  said  to  me  about  a
woman  of  twenty-seven  (as  she  was  then)  whom  long  obser¬
vation  in  the  affairs  of  Court  and  family  had  made  well
known  to  them.  They  advised  me,  all  three,  and  all  three
forcibly,  to  keep  no  secrets  from  her  in  the  affairs  of  the
embassy  ;  to  have  her  at  the  end  of  my  table  when  I  read
and  wrote  my  despatches,  and  to  consult  her  on  everything
with  deference.  I  have  rarely  tasted  any  counsel  so  sweet

320

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

to  me,  and  I  hold  it  to  have  been  an  equal  merit  in  her  to
deserve  it,  and  yet  to  have  lived  ever  after  as  if  she  were
ignorant  of  it;  for  she  knew  it,  —  she  knew  it  from  me,
and  from  themselves.

I  had  no  opportunity  to  follow  this  advice  in  Eome,
where  I  did  not  go  ;  but  I  had  long  practised  it  even  then,
and  I  continued  all  my  life  to  keep  nothing  from  her.  I
must  he  allowed  to  say  still  further,  that  I  found  no  counsel
so  wise,  so  judicious,  so  useful  ;  and  I  acknowledge  with
pleasure  that  she  guarded  me  from  many  small  and  many
great  annoyances.  I  used  her  help  in  all  things  without
reserve  ;  and  the  support  it  was  to  me  was  infinite  both  in
my  own  conduct  and  in  my  share  of  public  affairs,  which
was  not  insignificant  during  the  last  part  of  the  king’s  life
and  throughout  the  Regency.  It  is  a  very  sweet  and  very
rare  contrast  to  those  useless  women  who  spoil  all  ;  whom
ambassadors  are  often  prevented  from  taking  with  them,
and  are  forbidden  to  let  into  their  secrets,  and  who  form  a
contrast  great  indeed  to  those  rare  and  capable  women  who
make  their  true  weight  felt,  with  a  sense  that  is  accurate
and  exquisite  in  all  things,  hut  gentle  and  tranquil  ;
women  who,  far  from  attracting  notice  to  their  worth,  seem
ignorant  of  it  themselves  through  a  lifetime  of  unvarying
modesty,  charm,  and  virtue.

The  matter  was  delayed,  and  it  came  to  pass  that,  although
not  announced,  the  fact  that  the  choice  had  fallen  on  me
was  known  both  at  Rome  and  in  Paris.  M.  le  Duc  de
Bourgogne  made  me  at  Marly,  secretly,  certain  civilities
about  it,  although  at  that  time  I  had  not  any  privileged
relations  with  him.  He  thought  the  delay  too  prolonged  ;
and  on  my  replying  with  modesty  about  the  employment,
he  encouraged  me  and  said  that  I  could  not  do  better  than
begin  now  to  form  myself  for  public  affairs  and  for  great

I

321

1706]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

offices.  He  added  that  for  that  reason  he  was  very  glad
I  had  resolved  to  accept  it,  and  all  the  more  because  the
king  would  never  have  forgiven  a  refusal.

To  shorten  at  once  this  too  long  story  of  my  embassy  to
Home,  I  was  dragged  along  in  this  way  till  the  middle  of
April,  when  I  learned  that  my  fate  would  he  certainly
decided  at  the  next  council.  We  were  then  at  Marly  and
lodged  with  Chamillart  in  the  same  pavilion.  I  begged
him,  when  he  returned  from  the  council,  to  come  into  my
rooms  before  he  went  up  to  his  own,  and  let  me  know  in
private  what  was  to  be  done  with  me.  He  came  therefore
to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon’s  room,  where  we  awaited  him  with
anxiety.  “  You  will  be  very  glad,”  he  said,  “  and  I  very
sorry.  The  king  sends  no  ambassador  to  Rome.  The  pope
has  at  last  agreed  to  make  the  Abbé  de  la  Trémoille  cardi¬
nal  ;  and  also  the  promotion  which  his  repugnance  to  include
the  abbé  has  delayed  so  long.  The  new  cardinal  is  to  be
intrusted  with  the  affairs  of  the  king,  and  no  ambassador
will  be  sent.”  Madame  de  Saint-Simon  was  delighted  ;  it
really  seems  as  if  she  had  a  foreboding  of  the  strange  dis¬
credit  into  which  the  affairs  of  the  king  m  Italy  were
about  to  fall,  of  the  embarrassment  and  disorders  into
which  our  misfortunes  were  to  throw  the  finances,  and
the  cruel  situation  to  which  all  these  things  taken  together
were  to  reduce  us  in  Italy.

The  reflections  which  I  had  had  so  much  time  to  make
consoled  me  easily  for  the  loss  of  an  employment  which  had
certainly  flattered  me  ;  but  little  did  I  think

court  aftelThiï  of  the  harm  this  affair  was  to  do  me.  D’Antin
choice  for  Rome.  and  j)angeau  had  been  furious  at  my  selec¬
tion,  and  the  Maréchal  d’Huxelles  also,  who  had  wanted
to  be  asked  himself  in  order  to  request  as  a  condition  that
he  be  made  duke  ;  for  which  he  had  been  abruptly  set  aside.

VOL.  I.  —  21.

322  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

Not  being  able  to  do  worse  to  cut  short  the  career  of  a
young  man  whom  they  saw  about  to  dawn  at  their  expense,
and  knowing  how  much  the  king  was  on  his  guard  against
intelligence  and  education,  they  began  to  praise  me  for
those  qualities  to  excess,  —  applauding  the  king’s  choice
which,  in  consequence  of  the  delays,  became  public.  M.
and  Mme.  du  Maine  had  never  forgiven  me  for  evading
their  invitations  to  Sceaux,  and  for  showing  myself  unshaken
by  all  the  advances  they  had  repeatedly  made  to  me.  I
had  never  concealed  what  I  felt  about  the  rank  that  the
bastards  had  usurped.  To  see  me  about  to  dawn  in  public
affairs  filled  them  with  fear  and  vexation,  and  I  could  only
attribute  to  M.  du  Maine,  so  naturally  timid  and  malevolent,
the  strange  aversion  which  Mme.  de  Maintenon  had  to  me
even  now,  though  I  never  suspected  it  until  later.  After
the  death  of  the  king,  Chamillart  told  me  of  it  and  said
it  was  such  that  he  had  had  disputes  with  her  about  it  ;
that  she  had  been  the  obstacle  which  prevented  me  from
being  reconciled  with  the  king  earlier;  but  that,  being  urged
by  him,  Chamillart,  she  could  not  allege  anything  in  partic¬
ular  that  she  had  against  me,  for  herself  or  her  friends,  except
vaguely  that  I  was  arrogant,  fault-finding  and  full  of  views,
from  which  opinion  he  could  never  stir  her,  nor  could  he
deaden  the  impression  ;  he  said  also  that  she  had  done  me
many  an  ill  turn  with  the  king.  This  talk  of  intellect  and
study,  capacity  and  application,  and  of  my  fitness  for  the
management  of  public  affairs  was  easily  carried  to  the  king
by  these  channels,  —  namely,  that  of  M.  du  Maine  in  poison
praises,  that  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  more  openly.  M.  du
Maine,  at  that  time  closely  allied  with  Mme.  la  Duchesse,
who  was  also  on  the  closest  terms  with  D’Antin,1  had  urged

1  The  legitimate  son  of  Mme.  de  Montespan;  half-brother  of  M.  du
Maine  and  of  Mme.  la  Duchesse.

1706]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

323

the  appointment  of  the  latter  and  was  piqued  at  not  suc¬
ceeding  ;  he  was  also  against  me  for  the  reasons  above
stated.  That  was  enough.  They  put  the  king  so  much  on
his  guard  against  me  that  they  even  made  him  dread  me  in
order  to  alienate  him  more  completely  and  surely  ;  so  that
I  soon  perceived  a  change  in  him  which,  like  those  lan¬
guors  which  can  only  end  in  a  dangerous  illness,  brought
me  into  a  species  of  disgrace,  from  which  I  eventually
succeeded  in  extricating  myself  ;  but  we  are  not  concerned
with  that  as  yet.

The  same  impression  about  me  was  given  to  Monseigneur.
For  that  purpose  they  needed  assistance,  and  Mlle,  de  Lisle-
bonne  and  Mme.  d’Espinoy  were  at  hand.1  The  sisters  were
not  ignorant  of  my  sentiments  nor  of  my  conduct  in  regard
to  the  usurpations  of  their  house  [that  of  the  Lorrains].
This  was  their  tender  spot.  They  ruled  that  kind  Mon¬
seigneur,  who  took  up  all  the  opinions  they  were  pleased  to
give  him  about  me  ;  and  Mme.  la  Duchesse  at  the  same
time,  for  the  reasons  given,  worked  upon  him  with  the  same
eagerness.  The  Choin  let  herself  be  persuaded  by  them,  her
best  friends,  and  also  by  the  Maréchal  d’Huxelles,  who
courted  her  assiduously,  and  by  whom  poor  Monseigneur
was  induced  to  believe  himself  the  wisest  head  in  the
kingdom.  Such  became  from  this  time  my  situation  at
Court;  and  I  was  not  long  in  finding  it  out.

1  “Sisters,”  says  Saint-Simon  elsewhere,  “of  one  heart,  one  soul,  one
mind.  Mlle,  de  Lislebonne  was  so  long  and  so  closely  united  with  the
Chevalier  de  Lorraine  that  every  one  believed  her  to  be  secretly  married
to  him.  They  made  their  court  to  the  Princesse  de  Conti,  and  through
her  to  Monseigneur,  who  held  them  in  great  affection.  They  were  the
repositories  of  his  soul,  and  the  confidants  of  his  affection  for  Mile.  Choin.
No  one  doubted  that  they,  with  Mile.  Choin,  would  govern  him  after  the
death  of  the  king,  who  himself  treated  the  sisters  with  great  distinction,
and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  placated  them.”  Their  mother  was  the  daughter
of  Due  Charles  IV.  de  Lorraine.  —  Tr.

324  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

While  I  was  thus  an  object  of  public  interest,  the  Comtesse
de  La  Marck  died  in  Paris  of  the  small-pox.  She  was
daughter  of  the  Duc  de  Rohan,  as  I  mentioned

Death  of  the  °

comtesse  de  La  at  the  time  of  her  marriage.  She  was  an
intimate  friend  of  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  and
also  of  Mme.  de  Lauzun,  her  former  companions  in  a  convent.
She  was  a  tall  woman,  very  well  made,  but  ugly,  with  a
noble,  intelligent  air  which  reconciled  us  to  her  face.  She
had  infinite  mind,  and  she  had  it  vast,  manly,  full  of  views  ;
much  discernment,  accuracy,  and  precision  ;  a  simple,  natural
air  and  charming  conversation  ;  very  safe,  a  little  stern,  and
an  excellent  heart,  which  troubled  her  life  by  the  violent  con¬
trast  of  her  nearest  relations.  She  was  a  person  whose
views,  ambition,  courage,  and  dexterity  would  have  led  her
far.  She  was  the  niece  of  Mme.  de  Soubise,  who  loved  her
passionately.  Her  merits  made  her  deeply  regretted.  Mme.
de  Saint-Simon  mourned  her  bitterly,  and  I  was  greatly
touched  myself.  Five  or  six  hours  after  the  news  of  her
death  reached  us,  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  her  sister  were
forced  to  dance  at  Court,  with  red  and  swollen  eyes,  for  no
excuse  would  be  accepted.  The  king  knew  little  of  the  laws
of  nature  or  the  emotions  of  the  heart.  He  spent  all  his
on  matters  of  State  or  else  in  frivolous  amusement,  with
equal  interest.  He  made  the  Duchesse  de  Duras  come  and
dance  at  Marly  in  the  first  days  of  her  mourning  for  the
Maréchal  de  Duras.  And  we  have  seen  how  little  the  most
common  decency  was  considered  and  spared  by  him  at  the
time  of  Monsieur’s  death.

The  Comte  de  Grammont  died  in  Paris,  where  he  seldom
went,  in  the  middle  of  this  winter,  being  more  than  eighty  -
Death  of  six  years  old,  and  having  always  had  the

Grammont; his  111  ost  perfect  health  and  all  his  faculties  until
character.  he  was  eighty-five  and  even  later.  He  was

325

1706]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

brother  to  the  father  of  Maréchal  de  Grammont,  whose
mother  was  a  daughter  of  Maréchal  de  Roquelaire,  while
that  of  the  Comte  de  Grammont  was  sister  of  Bouteville,
beheaded  in  Paris  for  duelling,  the  father  of  the  Maréchal
Duc  de  Luxembourg.  He  had  formerly  attached  himself  to
M.  le  Prince,  whom  he  followed  to  Flanders  ;  after  which  he
travelled  in  England,  where  he  married  Miss  Hamilton,  with
whom  he  was  notoriously  in  love,  so  that  her  brothers,  who
were  scandalized,  forced  him  to  make  her  his  wife.  He  was
a  man  of  much  mind,  but  a  mind  of  the  sort  that  spends
itself  in  wit,  repartee,  shrewdness,  and  accuracy  in  seeing
the  evil,  the  absurdity,  and  the  foibles  of  every  one,  and  in
painting  them  with  one  ineffaceable,  irreparable  stroke  of
his  tongue;  boldly  doing  this  in  public,  preferably  before
the  king  than  elsewhere,  without  allowing  either  merit,
grandeur,  favour,  or  office  to  protect  any  men  or  any  women
whatever.  In  this  way  he  amused  the  king  and  put  into  his
mind  many  cruel  things  which  he  had  finally  acquired  the
liberty  of  saying  to  him,  even  about  his  ministers.  He  was
a  mad  dog  whom  nothing  escaped.  His  known  cowardice
put  him  beneath  all  consequences  of  his  bite;  withal  a
cheat,  and  an  impudent  one,  cheating  at  cards  openly,  and  all
his  life  a  heavy  gambler.  Grasping  at  everything  with  both
hands,  he  was  always  begging  ;  though  the  gifts  of  the  king,
from  whom  he  drew  a  great  deal  of  money,  never  sufficed  to
put  him  even  a  little  at  his  ease.  He  had  received  for
no  cost  the  government  of  La  Rochelle  and  the  district  of
Aunis  on  the  death  of  M.  de  Navailles,  and  he  sold  them
afterwards  for  a  great  price  to  Gacé,  Maréchal  de  Matignon.
He  had  the  first  entrées  and  seldom  stirred  from  Court.
Ho  meanness  cost  him  anything  towards  persons .  whom  he
had  previously  torn  to  pieces,  if  he  wanted  anything  out  of
them  ;  ready  to  begin  again  as  soon  as  he  had  got  what  he

326

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

wanted.  Neither  word  nor  honour  in  anything  whatever;
so  that  he  even  told  a  thousand  tales  of  himself  and  gloried
in  his  turpitude  ;  in  fact,  he  has  left  it  to  posterity  in  certain
memoirs  of  his  life,  now  in  the  hands  of  everybody,  which
his  greatest  enemies  would  never  have  dared  to  publish.
To  sum  up  all,  everything  was  permitted  to  him,  and  he
permitted  himself  everything.  He  grew  old  on  that  footing.

On  one  occasion  he  met  the  Archbishop  of  Eeims  com¬
ing  out  of  the  king’s  presence  with  his  head  bowed,  after
an  audience  on  the  affair  of  the  monk  of  Auville.  “  Mon¬
sieur  l’archevêque,”  he  said  aloud  with  an  insulting  air,
“  verba  volant,  but  scripta  manent.  Your  servant,  sir.”  The
archbishop  bristled  up,  but  made  no  answer.  He  was  very
ill  when  eighty-five  years  old,  a  year  before  his  death,  and
his  wife  spoke  to  him  of  God.  The  entire  forgetfulness  in
which  he  had  lived  all  his  life  threw  him  into  a  state  of
the  strangest  surprise  about  the  mysteries.  At  last,  turn¬
ing  to  her  he  said:  “But,  countess,  are  you  telling  me
the  truth  ?  ”  Then,  hearing  her  say  the  Lord’s  Prayer,
“  Countess,”  he  said,  “  that  is  a  very  fine''  prayer  ;  who
made  it  ?  ”  He  had  not  the  faintest  tincture  of  any  reli¬
gion.  Of  his  sayings  and  doings  one  might  write  volumes,
but  they  would  all  be  deplorable  if  we  left  out  the  wit,  the
effrontery,  and,  often,  the  foulness.  With  all  these  vices,
unmixed  with  a  vestige  of  virtue,  he  had  bullied  the  Court
and  held  it  in  terror  and  respect.  Accordingly,  it  felt
itself  delivered  of  a  scourge  whom  the  king  had  favoured
and  distinguished  all  his  life.  He  was  chevalier  of  the
Order  of  the  Saint-Esprit  in  the  promotion  of  1688.

Félix,  the  king’s  surgeon,  lived  during  his  lifetime  in  a
little  house  in  the  park  of  Versailles,  at  the  end  of  the
The  comtesse  de  canal  into  which  the  waters  lead.  He  had

Grammont;  her

character.  made  it  extremely  pretty.  After  his  death

1706]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

327

the  king  had  given  it  to  the  Comtesse  de  Grammont.
The  strange  memoirs  of  her  husband,  written  by  himself,
have  told  the  world  that  her  name  was  Hamilton,  and  how
he  married  her  in  England.  She  had  been  very  hand¬
some,  and  was  very  well-made,  and  still  preserved  the
remains  of  her  beauty  and  also  a  most  haughty  mien.  No
one  could  have  more  intelligence  or,  despite  her  haughti¬
ness,  more  charm,  more  politeness,  more  choice.  She  had
trained  herself  to  it;  having  been  lady  of  honour  to  the
late  queen,  she  had  passed  her  life  in  the  best  company  at
Court,  and  was  always  very  well  with  the  king,  who  en¬
joyed  her  wit,  while  she,  on  the  other  hand,  put  up  with
his  free  manners  in  the  matter  of  his  mistresses.  She  was
a  woman  who  had  had  her  gallantries,  but  had  never  failed
to  make  herself  respected  ;  and,  having  teeth  and  nails,  she
was  very  strong  at  Court,  even  with  the  ministers,  whom
she  cultivated  little.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  feared  her,  hut  had  never  been  able
to  remove  her  ;  the  king  amused  himself  too  much  with  her
conversation.  She  felt  the  aversion  and  jealousy  of  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  whom  she  had  seen  issuing  from  the  earth  and
rapidly  o’er-topping  the  tallest  cedars  ;  never  could  she  bring
herself  to  pay  her  court  there.  She  was  born  of  Catholic
parents,  who  had  sent  her  when  very  young  to  Port-Royal,
where  she  was  educated.  There  had  always  remained  m
her  soul  a  germ  of  that  training,  and  it  recalled  her  to
piety  before  age,  the  world,  and  her  mirror  had  made  her
think  of  a  change  of  conduct.  With  piety,  trained  as  she
had  been,  a  love  for  those  to  whom  she  owed  her  education,
and  whom  at  all  periods  of  her  life  she  had  respected  and
admired,  rose  higher  than  policy  in  her  mind.  It  was  this
by  which  Mme.  de  Maintenon  hoped  at  last  to  separate
her  from  the  king.  Hitherto  she  had  always  failed  ;  the

328

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

countess  evaded  tlie  danger  with  so  much  wit  and  grace,
often  with  such  freedom,  that  the  king’s  reproaches  had
come  to  nothing;  in  fact,  she  stood  better  and  was  more
familiar  with  him,  even  to  risking  a  few  haughty  glances
at  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and  a  few  spicy  pleasantries  that
verged  upon  bitterness.  Too  much  emboldened  by  long  suc¬
cess,  she  ventured  at  last  to  shut  herself  up  at  Port-Eoyal
for  the  whole  octave  of  the  Fête-Dieu.  Her  absence  made
a  void  which  bored  the  king  and  gave  Mme.  de  Maintenon
her  chance.  The  king  told  his  opinion  very  sharply  to  the
Comte  de  Grammont,  and  ordered  him  to  impart  it  to  his
wife.  She  was  forced  to  come  down  to  excuses  and  en¬
treaties  for  pardon,  which  were  very  ill  received.  She  was
sent  back  to  Paris  and  a  trip  to  Marly  was  made  without
her,  during  which  she  wrote  to  the  king  by  her  husband,
but  she  could  not  resolve  to  write  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon
or  say  to  her  a  single  word  on  the  subject.  The  letter
remained  without  reply,  and  was  apparently  unsuccessful.
Some  days  after  the  return  to  Versailles,  the  king  suddenly
sent  her  word  by  her  husband  to  come  back.  He  saw  her
alone  in  his  cabinet,  entering  by  the  back  way,  and  though,
very  decidedly,  she  held  firm  about  Port-Royal,  they  made
it  up  on  condition  that  there  should  be  no  more  of  “  these
disappearances,”  as  the  king  called  them.  She  did  not  go
near  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  whom  she  never  saw  except  in
presence  of  the  king,  with  whom  she  was  now  on  better
terms  than  ever.  This  had  happened  the  previous  year;
and  the  gift  of  the  Moulineaux,  the  little  house  lately
belonging  to  Félix,  which  was  now  given  to  her,  made  a
great  talk,  and  showed  plainly  how  well  she  stood  with  his
Majesty.

It  seemed  as  if  the  flatterers  of  the  king  were  now  fore¬
seeing  that  the  end  of  the  prosperities  of  his  reign  was

329

1706]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

approaching,  and  that  henceforth  they  would  have  nothing
to  laud  but  his  constancy.  A  great  number  of  medals,  struck
,  ,  ,  on  all  sorts  of  occasions,  of  which  even  the
the  king.  commonest  were  not  forgotten,  were  about  this

time  collected  and  engraved,  with  the  intention  of  making  a
metallic  history.  The  Abbé  Tallemant,  Toured,  and  Dacier,
three  of  the  principal  savants  of  the  French  Academy,  had
been  intrusted  with  the  explanation  of  these  medals  to  be
placed  beside  each  in  a  thick  volume,  of  the  magnificent
printing  of  the  Louvre.  A  preface  was  needed;  and  as
this  sort  of  history  began  at  the  death  of  Louis  XIII.,  his
medal  was  necessarily  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  hook,
and  something  was  therefore  required  to  he  said  about  that
prince  in  the  preface.  One  of  their  acquaintances  bethought
himself  of  my  just  gratitude,  and  believed  it  would  lend  me
the  proper  qualifications,  if  I  did  not  have  them  otherwise,
for  the  small  piece  of  the  preface  which  should  concern
Louis  XIII.  ;  or  else  he  used  as  a  note  beneath  his  medal,
which  was  placed  at  the  head  of  those  of  Louis  XIA  .  They
proposed  to  me  to  write  it.  My  mind  was  the  dupe  of  my
heart,  and,  without  consulting  my  incapacity,  I  consented  on
condition  that  I  should  be  spared  the  ridicule  of  the  world,
and  that  the  secret  shoud  be  faithfully  kept.

So  I  did  it  ;  keeping  guard  against  myself,  lest  I  should
obscure  the  son  in  a  work  that  was  wholly  to  his  glory,  and
into  which  that  of  his  father  only  came  by  accident  and
through  the  necessity  of  an  introduction.  My  theme  accom¬
plished,  and  it  only  took  me  a  morning  because  it  was  not  to
be  very  extended,  I  sent  it  in.  I  had  the  fate  of  authois .
my  piece  was  praised  ;  it  seemed  to  exceed  in  nothing.  I
congratulated  myself ,  —  delighted  to  have  consecrated  two  or
three  hours  to  my  just  gratitude  ;  for  that  was  all  the  time

I  gave.

330

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

When  it  became  a  question  of  inserting  it,  the  gentlemen
were  frightened.  There  are  truths  the  simplicity  of  which,
untouched  by  art,  casts  a  glory  which  effaces  the  toil  of  an
eloquence  that  magnifies  or  palliates.  Louis  XIII.  furnished
many  such  truths.  I  had  contented  myself  with  simply
pointing  them  out  ;  but  the  sketch  had  dulled  the  succeed¬
ing  pictures  ;  at  least  it  so  appeared  to  those  engaged  upon
them.  They  applied  themselves  therefore  to  pruning,  weak¬
ening,  and  veiling  all  they  could,  so  as  not  to  obscure  their
hero  by  a  comparison  that  was  only  too  obvious.  This  effort
did  not  satisfy  them  ;  they  perceived  at  last  that  it  was  not
I  whom  they  had  to  correct,  but  the  thing  itself,  the  lustre
of  which,  springing  from  within,  could  be  extinguished  only
by  suppression.  They  felt  the  falsehood  of  such  corrections,
which,  while  concealing  certain  facts,  certain  truths,  could
not  omit  all,  and  yet  all  were  of  a  nature  to  obscure  their
subject.  This  embarrassment,  swollen  by  the  dominant
spirit  of  adulation,  determined  them  at  last  to  issue  their
work  with  the  medal  of  Louis  XIII.  in  the  beginning,  but
without  notice,  saying  nothing  about  that  prince  except  to
mention  that  his  death  gave  place  to  his  son  upon  the  throne.
Reflections  on  this  sort  of  iniquity  would  lead  too  far.  It
was  not  done  towards  me.  The  matter  remained  under  the
silence  which  had  been  promised  to  me.

The  projects  for  the  campaigns  which  were  about  to  begin
were  worthy  of  the  years  of  the  king’s  prosperity  and  of
t  .  r  those  happy  times  of  abundance  of  men  and
the  campaigns  ;  money,  of  ministers  and  generals  who  by  their

reflections.

capacity  were  competent  to  give  the  law  to
Europe.  The  king  desired  to  open  with  two  battles,  one  in
Italy,  the  other  in  Flanders,  to  forestall  the  assembling  of
the  Imperial  army  on  the  Rhine,  throwing  back  in  this  way
the  enemy’s  line  ;  and  afterwards  to  lay  siege  to  Barcelona

1706]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

331

and  Turin.  The  exhaustion  of  Spain  and  that  into  which
France  itself  was  now  falling  answered  but  little  to  these
vast  ideas.  Chamillart,  crushed  under  the  weight  of  the
double  ministry  of  Colbert  and  Louvois,  resembled  those  two
great  ministers  as  little  as  the  generals  of  the  army  resem¬
bled  M.  le  Prince  and  M.  de  Turenne  and  the  pupils  of  those
heroes  who  were  no  more.  The  present  men  were  generals
of  taste,  fancy,  favour,  cabinet-making,  to  whom  the  king
thought  he  gave,  as  to  his  ministers,  capacity  with  their  com¬
missions.  Moreover,  he  was  persuaded  that  it  was  he  him¬
self  who  directed  his  armies  from  his  cabinet.  The  generals,
thus  in  leading  strings,  no  longer  had  the  disposition  of  affairs,
or  the  liberty  to  profit  by  any  contingency  that  might  arise
before  the  return  of  the  courier  despatched  with  reports  to
bring  back  orders.  Thus,  always  checked,  always  in  leading-
strings,  always  in  fear  and  uncertainty,  they  were  compelled
to  await  the  orders  of  the  Court  at  every  step.  Luxury  had
invaded  the  armies,  where  they  now  fared  as  delicately  as
in  Paris,  and  this  prevented  the  generals  from  living  with
their  officers,  knowing  them,  being  known  by  them,  and
consequently  being  able  to  discern  and  choose  men  for  com¬
mands  which  required  confidence  and  capacity.  No  more
tales  of  war  as  in  other  days,  whereby  instruction  was  given
in  reciprocal  narrative  and  dissertations  ;  men  would  have
been  ashamed  in  those  days  to  talk  and  occupy  themselves
with  other  things  ;  the  young  men  listened  to  the  older  men,
who  discussed  together  what  they  had  seen  well  done  and  ill
done,  with  reasons  and  reflections.  The  men  of  to-day,  of
all  ages,  unable  to  talk  of  that  of  which  they  know  nothing,
talk  of  cards  and  women,  the  older  ones  of  nothing  better
than  forage  and  equipage.  Thus  the  prospects  of  the  war
were  far  below  the  grandeur  of  the  king’s  projects.

appendix.

GENEALOGY  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

Taken  (without  collaterals  or  details)  from  an  un¬
published  “Notice  on  the  House  of  Saint-Simon

WRITTEN  BY  HIMSELF,  AND  NOW  IN  THE  ARCHIVES  OF

the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs.

emperor  of  the  West,  left  a  second  son,
succeeded  his  father  as  King  of  Italy,  and  left
King  of  Italy;  died  April  17,  818,  and  left
Seigneur  of  Péronne  and  Saint-Quentin.  Left
(brother  of  Beatrix,  wife  of  king  Robert  of  France)

Left

Comte  de  Yermandois.  Left

Comte  de  Yermandois  (and  many  other  children,
among  them  Leutgarde,  who  married,  about  940,
William  I.,  Duke  of  Normandy).  Albert  left
Comte  de  Vermandois,  who  left
Comte  de  Vermandois,  who  left

Comte  de  Vermandois;  was  present  at  the  coronation
of  Philippe  I.,  1059.  Still  living  in  1076.  Married,
1068,  Adèle,  Comtesse  de  Crespy  and  de  Valois,
sister  of  the  Blessed  Simon,  Comte  de  Crespy.
Herbert  left

,  Comte  de  Vermandois,  later  Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon.
Still  living  in  1083.  Married  Avide,  daughter  of
the  Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon,  whose  seigneurie,  be¬
tween  Ham  and  La  Fère,  passed  to  Eudes,  and  is
now  the  duché-pairie  of  Saint-Simon.  Eudes  left
Eudes  II.  .  .  .  Comte  de  Vermandois,  who  left

Charlemagne,

Pepin .

Bernard  .  .  •
Herbert  I. .  .
Herbert  II.  .

Herbert  III.  .
Albert  .  .  .  .

Herbert  IV.
Othon  •  .  •
Herbert  V.

Eudes  I.  .  .

334

APPENDIX.

jEAN  I . He  was  the  first  to  take  the  name  of  Saint-Simon  ;

quitting  that  of  Vermandois,  and  ceding  his  rights
and  pretensions  to  Vermandois  and  Valois  to  King
Philippe-Auguste.  This  Jean  accompanied  the
latter  to  the  Holy  Land,  1188,  and  served  at  the
siege  of  Acre,  1191.  He  was  living  in  1195,  and
left

Jean  II.  .  .  .  Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon  ;  was  at  the  battle  of  Bou¬
vines,  1214.  Married  Marguerite  de  Beauvoir,
and  left

Simon . Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon,  still  living  in  1269.  Mar¬

ried  Beatrix  de  Condun,  and  left

Jacques  .  .  .  Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon,  the  last  male  of  this  elder
branch  of  the  Vermandois  seigneurs  of  Saint-
Simon.  He  had  one  son,  who  died  unmarried
before  1333,  and  two  daughters.  The  eldest,
Marguerite,  married  Matthieu  de  Rouvroy,  and
from  this  marriage  issues  the  whole  family,  from
father  to  son,  of  the  Ducs  de  Saint-Simon;  as
follows  :  —

Jean . de  Rouvroy,  Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon,  married

Jeanne  de  Montigny  ;  died  before  1392,  leaving

Matthieu  .  .  de  Rouvroy,  Seigneur  de  Saint-Simon  ;  he  served  as  a
knight-banneret  at  Arras,  and  was  killed  at  Agin-
court,  1415,  with  his  brother.  Married  J.  de  Haves-
querque  (called  de  Wicque),  and  left

Gilles  ....  de  Saint-Simon,  brought  up  with  Charles  VII.

Served  in  all  the  wars  of  that  period.  He  died
about  1490,  Chevalier  de  Saint-Michel,  at  the  age
of  about  100,  full  of  reputation  and  honour  de¬
served  by  long  and  great  services.  He  married
J.  de  Flocques,  and  left

Guillaume  .  .  de  Saint-Simon,  chamberlain  to  François  I.,  whom  he
followed  to  Italy  in  1514.  Married  J.  de  la  Vac-
querie,  and  died  in  1525,  leaving

Louis . de  Saint-Simon.  Served  in  the  wars  of  François  I.  ;

Henri  II.  made  him  governor  of  Senlis  in  1547.
Married  Antoinette  de  Mailly;  died  1578,  set.  84,
and  left

François  ...  de  Saint-Simon  ;  served  Charles  IX.,  Henri  III.,  and
Henri  IV.,  through  all  the  wars  of  his  time;  was
wounded  at  the  siege  of  Rouen,  1562,  and  at  the

APPENDIX.

335

battle  of  St.  Denis,  1567  ;  married  A.  d’ Ansae  ;
died  1620  ;  and  left

Louis . de  Saint-Simon  ;  served  Henri  IY.  in  all  his  wars  ;

was  at  the  battle  of  Ivry,  the  sieges  of  Rouen,
Paris,  and  Amiens.  He  lived  through  the  reign
of  Louis  XIII.  ;  married,  April  28,  1594,  Denise
de  la  Fontaine;  died  June,  1643,  æt.  75,  and  left
Claude  ....  de  Saint-Simon  ;  made  duc  et  pair  by  Louis  XIII.

Commanded  the  cavalry  of  M.  le  Prince,  father  of
the  Great  Coudé  ;  married  Charlotte  de  l’Aubes-
pine  ;  died  May  3,  1693,  æt.  87,  and  left

Louis . Duc  de  Saint-Simon,  author  of  the  Memoirs,  born

January  16,  1675;  married,  April  8,  1695,  Marie-
Gabrielle  de  Durfort  de  Lorges;  died  March  2,
1755,  æt.  80.

Order  for  the  Conveyance  of  the  Papers  of  the  Duc  de
Saint-Simon  to  the  Archives  of  the  Ministry  of  For¬
eign  Affairs.

21  December,  1760.

De  par  le  Roi.

His  Majesty,  being  informed  that  the  manuscripts  found  at  M.  le
Duc  de  Saint-Simon’s  house  at  the  time  of  his  decease,  the  greater
part  of  which  concern  the  service  of  the  King  and  the  State,  have  been
packed  in  several  cases  and  left  to  the  care  and  in  possession  of  the
Sieur  Delaleu,  notary  of  the  Châtelet  of  Paris,  orders  that  on  the
simple  presentation  of  the  present  order,  and  notwithstanding  all
oppositions  made  or  to  be  made,  the  said  cases  and  manuscripts,  in
the  state  in  which  they  now  are,  shall  be  consigned  to  the  Sieur
le  Dran,  head  clerk  of  the  Archives  of  Foreign  Affairs;  and  this
on  his  simple  receipt  for  them.  It  is  enjoined  also  on  the  Sieur
Delaleu,  notary,  and  all  other  holders  of  the  said  cases  and  manu¬
scripts  to  conform  to  the  present  order  ;  and  so  doing  they  will  be
well  and  truly  discharged  of  their  responsibility.

Done  at  Versailles,  Dec.  21,  1760.

Louis.

The  Duc  de  Choiseul.

336

APPENDIX.

I,  the  undersigned,  head-clerk  of  the  Archives  of  Foreign  Affairs,
acknowledge  that  M.  Delaleu,  notary,  in  consequence  of  and  to  satisfy
the  orders  of  the  King,  has  made  over  to  me  five  large  cases,  contain¬
ing  the  manuscripts  of  M.  le  Duc  de  Saint-Simon,  with  which  he  was
charged  on  the  vacation,  July  2,  1755,  of  the  inventory  of  the  said
late  seigneur,  Duc  de  Saint-Simon  ;  the  which  five  cases  he  has  made
over  to  me,  bound  with  stout  ropes  and  furnished,  each  of  them,  with
three  locks  or  padlocks  ;  the  keys  of  the  said  locks  or  padlocks  he
declares  to  me  he  has  not,  and  never  has  had,  they  being  placed  on
the  day  of  said  vacation  of  inventory,  one  in  the  hands  of  M.  Boudot,
attorney  at  the  Châtelet  ;  .  .  .  another  in  the  hands  of  M.  Gauzen,
representing  Mme.  la  Comtesse  de  Valentinois  [Saint-Simon’s  grand¬
daughter],  sole  presumptive  heiress  of  the  said  Duc  de  Saint-Simon  ;
the  third  in  the  hands  of  M.  Girardin.  .  .  .

Done  in  Paris,  this  22nd  of  December,  1760.

P.  Le  Dran.

INSCRIPTION  ON  THE  COFFIN  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

Cy  gît

Louis,  Duc  de  Saint-Simon,  Pair
de  France,  Comte  de  Rasse,

Grand  d’Espagne  de  la
Première  Classe  ;  Marquis
de  Ruffec,  Comte  de  la
Ferté-Arnaud,  Yidame  de
Chartres,  Gouverneur  des
Ville,  Citadelle,  et  Comté
de  Blaye,  Bailli  et  Gouverneur
de  Senlis  ;  Chevalier  des
Ordres  du  Roy  ;  Cy  devant
du  Conseil  de  la  Régence  dès

son  établissement.  Depuis  ,

Aaibassadeur  Extraordinaire
en  Espagne.  Décédé  le  2  Mars,

1755,  ÂGÉ  DE  80  ANS,  OU  ENVIRON.

Requiescat  in  Pace.

This  inscription,  engraved  on  a  brass  plate,  was  deposited  in  1878
in  the  Archives  of  Foreign  Affairs,  by  M.  Theodore  Bustin,  of  Vieux-

APPENDIX.

337

Condé.  It  came,  evidently,  from  Saint-Simon’s  coffin,  which  was
buried,  together  with  that  of  his  wife,  in  the  parish  church  of  La
Ferté,  where  it  was  broken  open  and  destroyed  during  the  Revolu¬
tion.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  died  on  the  24th  of  January,  1743;  the
Duc  de  Saint-Simon  on  the  2nd  of  March,  1755.  It  is  not  recorded
whether  the  two  coffins  were  riveted  together  according  to  his  will
(see  note  on  page  16).  Presumably  they  were  ;  and  if  so  the  ashes
of  both  husband  and  wife  were  scattered  to  the  winds  by  the
Revolution.

von.  i.  —  22

INDEX  TO  VOL.  L

Amiens  (Bishop  of  ),  his  honourable
scruples,  138,  139.

Anjou  (Due  d’),  made  King  of  Spain
by  will  of  Charles  II.,  205,  206.  See
Philippe  V.

Appartement,  50-52.

Barbézieux  (minister  of  war),  56.

Beauvilliers  (Duc  de),  6  ;  origin  of
Saint-Simon’s  friendship  with,  62-69  ;
promotes  his  marriage,  77  ;  appoints
Fénelon  preceptor  to  princes,  1 23  ;
the  little  flock,  124  ;  accepts  Fe'nelon’s
condemnation  by  Rome,  170;  opinion
for  accepting  will  of  King  of  Spain,
208  ;  accompanies  Philippe  V.  to
frontier,  215;  health  restored  by
Helvetius,  248  ;  his  caution,  285  ;
grief  and  resignation,  311,  312;  is
duped  by  the  Abbé  de  Polignac,  314,
315.

Beauvilliers  (Duchesse  de),  6,  67,
310.

Boileau-Despréaux  (Nicolas),  death
of,  173.

Boisguilbert  (Sieur  de),  his  system
of  taxation  same  as  Vauban’s,  266,
267.

Bontems  (king’s  headvalet),  death  and
character,  216-218;  prepares  altar
for  marriage  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
216;  his  disinterestedness  and  kind¬
ness  to  others,  217.

Bossuet  (Bishop  of  Meaux),  obtains
retractation  from  Mme.  Guyon,  129  ;
exposes  the  new  doctrine,  129  ;  his
book,  138  ;  sends  it  to  the  pope,  139  ;
death,  288.

Boufflers  (Maréchal  Marquis  de),
magnificent  display  at  Compïègne,
157-169.

Bouillon  (Duchesse  de),  exiled,  75.

Bourbon  (Duchesse  de),  “  Madame  la
Duchesse,”  daughter  of  King  and
Mme.  de  Montespan,  45,  86  ;  debts
paid,  187.

Bourgogne  (Louis  de  France,  Duc  de),
marriage,  146—148;  admitted  to  the
councils,  263.

Bourgogne  (Marie- Adélaïde  de  Savoie,
Duchesse  de),  arrival  in  France,
144  ;  charms  the  king,  144  ;  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  1 45  ;  marriage,
146-148  ;  charming  ways  with  the
king,  292;  affair  of  Nangis,  292-
298  ;  terror  caused  by  Maulevrier,
296,  297.

Bouteville,  see  Luxembourg,  Maré¬
chal  Duc  de.

Bracciano  (Duchesse  de),  see  Ursins,
Princesse  des.

Bretagne  (Duc  de),  birth  and  death,
291.

Burnet  (Bishop  of  Salisbury),  192,193.

Canillac  (Colonel  de),  amazement  at
scene  at  Compïègne,  167-168.

Castries  (Mme.  de),  death,  appear¬
ance,  and  character,  136-138.

Caumartin  (Abbé  de),  director  of
French  Academy,  88  ;  plays  a  trick
on  Bishop  of  Noyon,  89;  anger  of
the  bishop,  91  ;  noble  conduct  of  the
bishop,  92.

Cavoye  (grand  marshal  of  king’s

|  houses),  his  career,  his  reluctant

340

INDEX.

marriage,  his  excellent  character,

132,  136.

Chaise  (Père  de  La),  tells  the  truth  to
Bishop  of  Noyon,  90  ;  138,  139.

Chamillart  (Michel  de),  controller  of
finance,  28  ;  opinion  on  Mme.  de
Saint-Simon,  319;  tells  Saint-Simon
of  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  opinion  of
him,  322.

Chandenier  (Marquis  de),  his  down¬
fall,  noble  character,  and  death,  131—

133.

Charles  II.  (King  of  Spain),  anger  at
Treaty  of  Partition,  190;  makes  will
in  favour  of  Austrian  archduke,
205  ;  makes  another  in  favour  of
Duc  d’Anjou  ;  dies,  206.

Chartres  (Duc  de),  see  Orleans,
Due  d\

Chartres  (Françoise  de  Bourbon),  see
Orle'ans,  Duchesse  d’.

Chartres  (Vidame  de),  see  Saint-
Simon,  Duc  de.

Chartres  (Godet,  Bishop  of),  char¬
acter,  1 25  ;  watches  Mme.  Guyon,
126  ;  warns  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
127.

Chatillon  (Duchesse  de),  73.

Chevreuse  (Duc  de),  76;  acquaint¬
ance  with  Sir  William  Temple,  182;
Saint-Simon  laughs  at  his  timidity
with  the  king,  286  ;  is  duped  by  the
Abbé  de  Polignac,  314.

Ciioin  (Mile.),  relations  with  Monsei¬
gneur,  323.

Choiseül  (Duc  de),  56;  anecdotes  of,
306,  307.

Coëtlogon  (Mlle,  de),  falls  in  love
with  Cavoye  ;  his  cruelty,  her  despair,
marriage,  and  subsequent  life,  133-
136.

Compïègne,  the  camp  at,  157  ;  unheard-
of  magnificence  and  extravagance,
157-169;  the  “for,”  160;  trick  of
M.  de  Lauzun,  162;  strange  act  on
part  of  king,  165,  168.

Conti  (François-Louis,  Prince  de),  76;
elected  King  of  Poland,  150;  dislike
to  it,  151  ;  king’s  satisfaction  and
sentiments  of  family,  152;  goes  to

Dantzig,  not  received,  and  returns,
152-154.

Conti  (Marie-Anne,  Princesse  de),  wife
of  Louis-Armand,  and  daughter  of
king  and  Louise  de  la  Vallière,  45,  86.

Court,  Balls  at,  86,  148,  185,  187,
241,  316.

Courtenvaux  (son  of  Louvois),  anger
of  king,  why,  307.

Czar  (Peter  the  Great),  his  travels,
155;  reception  of  English  ambassador
in  a  main-top,  155,  156;  visits  Eng¬
land  and  other  countries  ;  anxious  to
go  to  France;  Louis  XIV.  declines
his  visit,  156,  157.

Dangeau  (Marquis  de),  14.

Delfini  (nuncio),  lectured  by  king,
184;  made  cardinal,  184;  would  not
visit  bastards,  185.

Dubois  (Cardinal),  his  beginning,  47.

Duquet  (M.  de),  his  learning  and
charm,  219  ;  devotion  to  Mile.  Rose,
a  seer,  takes  her  to  La  Trappe,  219,
220.

Duras  (Maréchal  Duc  de),  death  and
character,  229  ;  anecdotes  of,  300,
301.

Espino  y  (Mme.  d’),  intimate  relations
with  Monseigneur,  323.

Fagon  (king’s  physician),’  character,
246-248  ;  advice  to  Maulevrier,  297.

Fénelon,  Archbishop  of  Cambrai,
(François  de  Salignac  de  la  Mothe),
14  ;  early  career,  121  ;  joins  Sulpi-
cians,  122;  friendship  with  Mme.
Guyon,  122;  made  preceptor  to  sons
of  France,  123;  pleases  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  123;  made  Archbishop
of  Cambrai,  124;  introduces  Mme.
Guyon  to  Saint-Cyr,  129;  beginning
of  his  troubles,  129  ;  Bossuet  exposes
the  new  doctrine,  129  ;  Fénelon’s  an¬
swer,  130;  their  two  books,  138;
refers  his  cause  to  pope,  so  does
Bossuet,  139;  exiled  to  Cambrai,
140;  his  book  condemned  at  Rome,
170;  his  dignified  and  honourable

INDEX.

341

conduct,  171  ;  insults  of  Bishop  of
St.  Omer,  172.

Fontevrault  (Abbess  of),  sister  of
Mme.  de  Montespan,  her  charm,  290  ;
reverse  of  picture,  291  ;  death,  re¬
gretted  by  king,  291.

Eürstenberg  (Cardinal  de),  death  of,
288.

Gesvres  (Duchesse  de),  death,  portrait,
and  anecdotes  of,  262,  263.
Gloucester  (Duke  of),  192.

Grammont  (Comte  de),  death,  history,
character,  324,  325  ;  anecdotes  of,  326.
Grammont  (Comtesse  de),  king’s  re¬
gard  for  her,  displeasure  at  her  going
to  Port-Royal,  176,  177,  328;  gives
her  a  house  in  the  park  at  Versailles,
326  ;  Mme.  de  Maintenon  jealous  and
afraid  of  her,  327;  appearance  and
character,  327.

Grand  (M.  le),  284.

Grignan  (Mme.  de),  daughter  of  Mme.
de  Sévigné,  130.

Gualterio  (nuncio),  desires  Saint-
Simon  ambassador  to  Rome,  317.
Guyon  (Mme.),  and  Fénelon,  122;
pleases  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  126;
collects  a  little  flock  at  Saint-Cyr,
126;  exposed  by  Bishop  of  Chartres
and  dismissed,  127  ;  retracts  to  Bos¬
suet,  129;  imprisoned,  128,  129.

Harlay  (president  of  parliament),  7  ;
the  Luxembourg  claim,  76;  his
family,  77;  character,  78;  person,
79  ;  reason  of  favour  with  king,  79  ;
iniquitous  proceeding  in  Luxembourg
case,  82,  83  ;  foiled,  how,  85,  86.
Helvetius  (Dutch  physician),  hated
by  Fagon,  247,  248.

IIumières  (Maréchal  Duc  de),  75.

James  II.  (King  of  England),  takes
refuge  in  France,  111;  considera¬
tion  shown  by  Louis  XIV.  about
Peace  of  Ryswick,  142;  death  and
character,  237  ;  Louis  XIV.  assures
him  he  will  recognize  his  son  (the  Pre¬
tender)  as  King  of  England,  238,  239.

La  Bruyère  (Jean  de),  remark  on
Duc  de  Lauzun,  100;  his  death,  131.

La  Fontaine  (Jean  de),  death  of,  93.

La  Trappe,  see  Trappe,  Abbé  de  la.

La  Rochefoucauld  (Duc  de),  80.

Lauzun  (Duc  de),  and  La  Grande
Mademoiselle,  59;  Lauzun  marries
the  sister  of  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  99  ;
king  warns  the  Maréchal  de  Lorges
against  him,  96  ;  his  character  and
beginnings,  101  ;  quarrels  with  the
king,  102,  103;  sent  to  Bastille,  but
recovers  favour,  104  ;  misses  marriage
with  Mademoiselle,  104;  Mme.  de
Montespan  and  Louvois  crush  him,
105;  sent  to  Pignerol,  105;  meets
Fouquet  there,  106;  who  thinks  him
mad,  107;  compelled  to  give  up
Mademoiselle’s  property,  108  ;  re¬
turns  from  exile,  110;  goes  to  Eng¬
land,  saves  Queen  and  Prince  of
Wales,  111  ;  recovers  position  at
Court,  112;  unhappy  nature,  112-
115;  illness  and  trick  on  heirs,  116;
health  and  eating,  117;  Gallantry
and  quarrels  with  Mademoiselle,
117;  undoubtedly  married  to  her;
respect  for  her,  1 1 8  ;  unable  to  write
or  relate  events,  118  ;  breaking  horses
at  ninety,  1 1 9  ;  last  illness  nobly
borne,  119  ;  trick  at  Compi'egne,  162.
Lauzun  (Mlle,  de  Saint-Quintin,  Du¬
chesse  de),  daughter  of  the  Maréchal
de  Lorges,  marries  Lauzun,  99  ;  his
testimony  to  her,  114.

Le  Nôtre  (celebrated  for  his  gardens),
death  and  character,  191,  192.

Le  Vassor  (Père),  a  Jesuit  spy,  193,

1 94  ;  goes  to  Holland,  becomes  a
Protestant,  writes  Hist,  of  Louis
XIII.,  and  is  made  preceptor  of
Duke  of  Gloucester,  194,  195.
Lislebonne  (Mlle,  de),  intimate  rela¬
tions  with  Monseigneur,  323.
Longepierre,  his  play,  242.

Lorges  (Maréchal  de),  his  character,
93  ;  Saint-Simon’s  proposals  of  mar¬
riage  accepted  by,  97.

Lorges  (Mme.  de),  character,  95,96;
her  daughters,  96.

342

INDEX.

Lokraine  (the  Princes  of),  their
claim  of  precedence  over  dukes,
how  it  came  about,  46.

Louis  XIV.,  remark  on  Saint-Simon,
18,  19;  marriage  of  daughter,  45,
49,  50  ;  promotes  marshals,  56  ;  jest
of  Bishop  of  Noyon,  88-91  ;  approves
Saint-Simon’s  marriage,  97  ;  disap¬
proves  of  Lauzun’s,  100;  treatment
of  Fe'nelon,  138,  140,  170;  dismisses
Italian  comedians,  141  ;  reasons  for
hatred  to  Prince  of  Orange,  142, 143  ;
desires  display  at  Duc  de  Bourgogne’s
marriage,  146  ;  at  Camp  of  Com¬
pïègne,  157-169;  stops  a  dispute
between  Jesuits  and  Benedictines,
182  ;  receives  news  of  will  of  Charles
II.,  207;  deliberations,  208-211;
presents  King  of  Spain  to  the  Court,
212,  213  ;  takes  leave  of  Philippe  V.,
214,  215  ;  sees  alliance  forming  against
him  in  consequence  of  Spanish  suc¬
cession,  prepares  for  war,  221  ;  quar¬
rels  with  Monsieur,  223-226  ;  grief
at  Monsieur’s  death,  228  ;  kindness
to  Duc  de  Chartres,  228,  229,  231  ;
recognizes  Pretender  as  King  of  Eng¬
land,  237,  238  ;  sees  Racine’s  plays,
241  ;  anger  against  Saint-Simon,  252,
253,  279-286;  hardness  of  his  nature,
301,  302,  324  ;  attentions  to  Princesse
des  Ursins,  302  ;  his  system  of  spies,
308-310;  dread  of  men  of  talent,
322,  323  ;  regard  for  Mme.  de  Gram-
mont,  jealousy  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
327  ;  his  medals,  329,  330  ;  makes
vast  plans  of  campaign  for  1706,
330;  prospects  for  it  bad,  why,  331.

Louville  (M.  de),  13,  63.

Louvois  (Marquis  de),  75,  76.

Luxembourg  (Maréchal  Duc  de),  claim
of  precedence,  71  ;  family  and  career,
71,  72  ;  in  Bastille,  75  ;  glory  as
general,  76;  renews  claim,  76  ;  Saint-
Simon  visits  him,  81  ;  iniquitous
proceedings,  81,  82;  how  foiled,  83,
85;  resentment  against  Saint-Simon,
death,  85,  86.

“Madame”  (Élisabeth-Charlotte  of
Bavaria,  wife  of  Philippe,  Duc  d’Or¬

léans,  “  Monsieur  ”),  anger  at  son’s
marriage,  48,  52  ;  her  behaviour  at
Monsieur’s  death,  229.

“Mademoiselle  ”  (Anne-Marie-Louise
d’Orléans,  “  La  Grande  ”),  death  and
memoirs  of,  58,  86  ;  misses  marriage
with  Lauzun,  104  ;  her  anger  at  his
imprisonment,  105-108;  quarrels  with
him,  117;  his  respect  for  her;  un¬
doubtedly  married  to  him,  118.

Maintenon  (Mme.  de),  opinion  of
Saint-Simon,  18  ;  intimacy  with  Beau-
villiers,  Chevreuse,  and  Fénelon,  123  ;
receives  and  admires  Mme.  Guyon,
124;  shocked  on  discovering  her  doc¬
trine,  128;  turns  against  Fénelon,
the  beginning  of  his  troubles,  128,
129;  strange  scene  between  her  and
the  king  at  Compïègne,  166,  168;
consulted  by  king  about  accepting
will  of  King  of  Spain,  210,  211  ;  in¬
timacy  with  Ninon  de  l’Enclos,  306  ;
her  opinion  of  Saint-Simon,  and
efforts  to  injure  him,  322.

March  (Comtesse  de  la),  death,  ap¬
pearance  and  character  of,  324.

Maréchal,  king’s  surgeon  ;  character,
269,  270  ;  anecdote  relating  to  Port-
Royal,  270,  272.

Maulevrier,  56  ;  pretends  to  be  a
lover  of  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,
294,  295  ;  threatens  her,  296  ;  Maré¬
chal  Tessé,  his  father-in-law,  takes
him  to  Spain,  297,  298.

Maupertuis,  captain  of  the  Gray
Mousquetaires,  44,  108.

Mignard  (Pierre),  painter,  death  of,
93  ;  his  daughter  his  model,  93.

“  Monseigneur  ”  (Louis  de  France),
son  of  Louis  XIV.,  gives  his  opinion
with  unwonted  vigour  on  Spanish
succession,  209,  210  ;  by  whom  sur¬
rounded,  323.

“  Monsieur  "  (Philippe,  Duc  d’Or¬
léans),  son’s  marriage,  48-52  ;  squab¬
bles  with  the  princesses,  87,  88  ;
quarrel  with  the  king,  223;  threats
of  his  confessor,  224  ;  another  quarrel
with  the  king,  225,  226  ;  illness  and
death,  226,  227  ;  character  and  ap-

INDEX.

343

pearance,  223,  224,  229,  230,  231  ;
dislike  to  “  la  Scarron,”  230.

Montal,  13,  57.

Montespan  (Mme.  de),  88.

Moket,  the  mysterious  nun  of,  149.

Nangis,  affair  with  Duchesse  de  Bour¬
gogne,  292  ;  in  love  with  Mme.  de  la
Vrillière,  293;  danger  from  Maulev-
rier,  295.

Ninon  de  l’Enclos,  death,  character,
society  at  her  house,  304-307  ;  inti¬
macy  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  306.

Noyon  (Bishop  of),  his  vanity,  the  king
plays  upon  it,  88  ;  how  elected  to
French  Academy,  88  ;  trick  upon  him,
89  ;  his  anger  on  discovering  it,  91  ;
noble  conduct,  92.

Orange  (Prince  of),  reason  of  Louis
XIV. ’s  dislike  to  him,  142,  143;  tries
to  placate  the  king,  remark  when
unable  to  do  so,  143  ;  is  recognized
King  of  England  by  Treaty  of  Rys-
wick,  142.  See  William  III.

Orléans  (Philippe,  Due  d’),see  “Mon¬
sieur.”

Orléans  (Élisabeth-Charlotte,  Du¬
chesse  d’),  see  “Madame.”

Orléans  (Philippe,  Due  d’),  7  ;  mar¬
riage,  45  ;  how  compelled,  49-52  ;
wedding,  53-55  ;  king’s  displeasure
about  Mlle,  de  Séry,  224;  kindness
of  king  on  Monsieur’s  death,  enor¬
mous  settlements,  228,  229,  231;  his
dissipated  life,  253,  254;  renewal  of
intimacy  with  Saint-Simon,  255,  256.

Orléans  (Françoise  de  Bourbon,
Duchesse  d’),  daughter  of  king  and
Mme.  de  Montespan,  marriage,  45-
55  ;  squabble  with  her  sisters,  87,  88.

Partition  (Treaty  of),  signed,  191.

Philippe  V.  (Duc  d’Anjou  and  King
of  Spain),  will  of  Charles  II.,  205  ;
presented  to  Spanish  ambassador  and
Court  at  Versailles  as  King  of  Spain,
212,  213  ;  departs  for  Spain,  214,  215;
his  marriage,  231  ;  nature  and  educa¬
tion,  275,  276.

Piney  (Duchesse  de),  71,  72.

Polignac  (Abbe',  afterwards  Cardinal
de),  intrigues  in  Poland,  150  ;  his
portrait,  311,  312  ;  manoeuvres  to
enter  confidence  of  Duc  de  Bourgogne,
312,  313  ;  Saint-Simon  gives  an  opin¬
ion  of  him,  314.

Pontchartrain  (Comte  de),  92  ;  made
controller  of  finance,  his  dislike  of  the
office,  177  ;  character  and  portrait,
178  ;  favour  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon
won  and  lost,  180;  dislike  to  poll-tax
and  dixième,  181;  made  chancellor  of
France,  181  ;  his  argument  for  ac¬
cepting  will  of  King  of  Spain,  208,
209.

Pontchartrain  (Comtesse  de),  charac¬
ter  and  abilities,  178,  179.

“Pretender”  (Prince  of  Wales,  The),
son  of  James  II.,  recognition  by
Louis  XIV.  as  King  of  England  of
no  solid  value,  238.

Prince  (M.  le),  and  Bouteville,  73.

Quintin-Saint  (Mlle,  de),  see  Duchesse
de  Lauzun.

Quête,  affair  of  the,  277-281.

Racine  (Jean),  prepares  statement  of
Luxembourg  claim,  79  ;  death  of,  re¬
lations  with  king  and  Mme.  de  Main¬
tenon,  buried  at  Port-Royal,  173  ;  his
plays  at  Court,  241.

Rancé  (Armand-Jean  le  Boutheiller
de),  see  Trappe,  Abbé  de  la.

Renunciations  (The),  what  they
were,  188;  celebrated  opinion  of  the
Marquis  de  Villafranca  upon  them,
204.

Rose  (Lieutenant-general),  at  Com¬
pïègne,  does  not  like  to  play  a  beaten
rôle,  168.

Rose  (Mile.),  a  seer  ;  her  singular
career,  218-221.

Royal  personages,  familiar  names  of,
38,  39.

Ryswick  (The  Peace  of),  142.

Saint-Laurent,  director  of  the  Duc  de
Chartres,  46.

344

INDEX.

Saint-Simon  (Louis  de  Rouvroy,  Duc
de),  Sainte-Beuve  on,  1-31  ;  letter  to
M.  de  Rance',  32-34  ;  political  theory,
21  ;  memoirs,  28  ;  style,  29,  36  ;  birth,
41  ;  education,  42  ;  memoirs  begun,
43  ;  enters  army,  44  ;  Royal  Roussil¬
lon,  55  ;  death  of  father,  60  ;  ques¬
tion  of  marriage,  62  ;  origin  of  life¬
long  friendship  with  the  Duc  de
Beauvilliers,  62-69  ;  Luxembourg
claim,  80  ;  visit  to  Maréchal  de  Lux¬
embourg,  81  ;  letters  of  state,  83  ;  joy
at  foiling  claim,  84,  85  ;  proposals  of
marriage  for  daughter  of  Maréchal
de  Lorges,  94  ;  accepted,  97  ;  king
approves,  97  ;  marriage,  97,  98  ;  inti¬
mate  relations  with  Duc  de  Lauzun,
100;  singular  confession  of  Lauzun,
1 14  ;  scratch  of  a  cross  cat,  1 15  ;  tries
in  vain  to  make  Lauzun  relate  events,
118;  why  he  makes  him  known,  120;
leaves  the  army,  the  cause,  248,  249  ;
takes  advice  as  to  his  course  and  fol¬
lows  it,  250,  252  ;  anger  of  the  king,
how  shown,  252,  253  ;  renewal  of
intimacy  with  the  Duc  de  Chartres
(d’Orléans),  244-256  ;  affair  of  the
quête,  277  ;  king’s  anger  with  him,
279,  280  ;  interview  with  the  king,
281-286  ;  severe  illness  after  being
bled,  287  ;  intimacy  with  Princesse
des  Ursins  at  Marly,  303,  304  ;  com¬
forts  Duc  de  Beauvilliers  in  his  grief,
310  ;  warns  the  duke  against  the  Abbé
de  Polignac,  314,  315  ;  chosen  for  em¬
bassy  to  Rome,  316-320  ;  opinion  and
advice  of  three  ministers  of  State
about  his  wife,  319,  320  ;  his  reliance
upon  her,  320  ;  injury  this  proposal
for  Rome  does  him,  321,  322;  Mme.
de  Maintenon’s  opinion  of  him,  322  ;
asked  to  write  of  Louis  XIII.,  329,
330  ;  his  genealogy,  333  ;  memoirs
and  papers  placed  at  his  death  in
the  archives  of  ministry  of  foreign-
affairs,  335  ;  inscription  on  his  coffin,
fate  of  coffin,  .336,  337.

Saint-Simon  (Marie-Gabrielle  de  Dur-
fort,  Duchesse  de),  15  ;  marriage,  97,
93  ;  her  husband’s  life-long  confi¬

dence  in  her,  16,  21,  96,  320;  at  the
death  of  the  Duc  de  Duras,  301  ;
opinion  of  three  ministers  of  State
about  her,  319.

Saint-Simon  (Claude,  Duc  de),  father
of  Saint-Simon,  4,  60.

Saint-Simon  (Charlotte  de  l’Aubes-
pine,  Duchesse  de),  mother  of  Saint-
Simon,  5,  42,  83,  97.

Saint-Simon  (Marquise  de),  death  of,
92.

Savoie  (Marie-Adélaïde  de),  see  Bour¬
gogne  (Duchesse  de).

Savoie  (Louise  de),  see  Spain,  Queen  of.

SÉviGNÉ  (Marquise  de),  remark  on  the
doctrine  of  grace,  death,  sentiment
for  her  daughter,  130.

Soissons  (Comtesse  de),  accused  with
Mme.  le  Voisin,  a  reputed  sorceress,
exiled  from  France,  75.

Spain  (Louise  de  Savoie,  Queen  of),
her  marriage  to  Philippe  V.,  232  ;
the  Princesse  des  Ursins,  her  cam-
arera-matjor,  232  ;  arrival  in  Spain
and  marriage  to  king,  235  ;  behav¬
iour  of  Spanish  ladies  and  courtiers,
235,  236  ;  her  resentment,  desire  to
go  home,  236  ;  education  and  charac¬
ter,  273,  274  ;  close  relations  with
Princesse  des  Ursins,  274-277.

Spain  (Charles  II.,  King  of),  see  Charles
II.

Spanish  Succession,  202;  action  of
Spanish  council,  202-204;  celebrated
opinion  on  Renunciations,  204;  diffi¬
culties,  205  ;  King  of  Spain  induced
to  make  a  will  in  favour  of  Due
d’Anjou,  205,  206  ;  the  announce¬
ment,  206,  207.

Sülly  (Duchesse  de),  death  of,  242.

Sully  (Chevalier  de),  his  dancing
famous,  242.

Sulpicians  (The),  121,  122.

Temple  (Sir  William),  death  and  char¬
acteristics,  181,  182.

Tingry  (Princesse  de),  74.

Torcy  (J.  B.  Colbert,  Marquis  de),
opinion  in  favour  of  accepting  will  of
King  of  Spain,  208.

INDEX.

345

Translator’s  note,  35-39.

Trappe  (M.  de  Rance,  reformer  and
Abbé  de  la),  9;  Saint-Simon’s  letter
to,  32-34  ;  visit  to,  69  ;  friendship
with,  70;  his  death,  195,  196  ;  his
private  history,  196,  197  ;  Saint-

Simon  desires  his  portrait,  197,  198;
the  painter  Hyacinthe  Rigaud  (spelled
by  Saint-Simon  “Rigault”)  consents
to  paint  him  unknown  to  himself  ;  the
portrait,  192-202;  M.  de  la  Trappe
declines  to  see  Mile.  Rose,  220.

Trémoille  (Duc  de  la),  80,  86.

Trianon,  the  gardens  of,  263.

Troisvilles  (M.  de),  rejected  by  king
for  French  Academy,  288  ;  character
and  ups  and  downs  of  piety,  289.

Troyes  (Bishop  of),  his  life  and  retire¬
ment  from  the  world,  140,  141.

Ursins  (Anne  de  la  Trémoille,  Prin¬
cesse  des),  beginning  of  Saint-Simon’s
intimacy  with,  94  ;  appointed  cam-
arera-mayor  to  Queen  of  Spain,  why
selected,  232  ;  her  family,  nature,  and
appearance,  232-235  ;  difficult  scene
with  queen,  236,  237  ;  her  scheme  for
reigning  in  Spain,  273  ;  method  of
persuading  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  274;
bond  between  the  two  women,  275  ;
triumph  at  Marly,  302,  303  ;  atten¬
tions  to  Saint-Simon  and  his  wife,

303  ;  praises  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  to
king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  304.

Uzès  (Duchesse  d’),  death  of,  93.

Vatteville  (Abbé  de),  singular  life,
adventures,  and  death,  242-246.

Vatjban  (Sebastien  le  Prestre,  Maré¬
chal),  portrait  and  character,  264  ;
reason  for  refusing  the  bâton,  264,
265  ;  studies  to  relieve  the  burdens  of
the  People,  265  ;  his  scheme  of  taxa¬
tion  ;  the  “  royal  tithe,”  266-268,  269  ;
his  death  from  disappointment,  269.

Versailles  (Château  de),  bold  rob¬
beries  at,  174,  175.

Villars  (Maréchal  Duc  de),  crosses
Rhine,  256  ;  conduct  on  that  occasion,
258  ;  his  character,  258-260  ;  falsity
of  his  memoirs,  261  ;  his  merits,  261.

Voisin  (Mme.  le),  accused  of  sorcery
and  burnt,  75.

Wales  (Prince  of),  see  Pretender.

William  III.  (King  of  England),  re¬
ceives  the  Czar,  Peter  the  Great,  150;
Treaty  of  Partition  proposed  by  him,
accepted  by  Louis  XIV .  rejected  by
Emperor,  187-190;  insulted  by  Louis
XIV. ’s  recognition  of  Pretender,  239  ;
forms  the  alliance  between  Austria,
England,  and  Holland,  against  France
and  Spain,  239,  240.

Date  Due

DC130  .S2kb  1909  v.  1
Saint  Simon,  Louis  de  Rouvroy
Memoirs  of  the  Duc  de  Saint-
Simon.  .  .

DATE

1  SS

146264

146264
