Memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon, Vol. 3 (Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon (Katharine Prescott Wormeley, trans.), 1829)
==========================================================
Saint-Simon's Mémoires (written 1691-1723, first published 1829) - the court of Louis XIV from the inside; the greatest memoirist of the age. Wormeley's English translation (1899-1901; 1909 printing), 4 vols. Vol. 3 of 4.

THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON

Volume  Three

MARIE  ANTOINETTE  EDITION

Limited  to  Six  Hundred  Numbered
and  Registered  Copies,  of  which  this  is

Number. .  . . .

V

•*

ROMANCES  OF  ROYALTY

MEMOIRS

OF  THE

DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON

ON  THE  TIMES  OF

LOUIS  XIV  AND  THE  REGENCY

TRANSLATED  AND  ABRIDGED
BY

KATHARINE  PRESCOTT  WORMELEY

FROM  THE  EDITION  COLLATED  WITH  THE  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT

BY  M.  CHÉRUEL

Editor-in-chief

G.  K.  FORTESCUE,  LL.D.

Keeper  of  Printed  Books  at  the  British  Museum

f

IN  FOUR  VOLUMES

VOL.  III.

BOSTON

J.  B.  MILLET  COMPANY

1909

DC /30  .Sa HH

HO'?-  V.3

Copyright,  1899,

By  Hardy,  Pratt  &  Company.
All  rights  reserved.

Mnibtvsttg  13rcss:

John  Wilson  and  Son,  Cambridge,  U.  S.  A.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  I.

Page

Precautions  of  my  conduct  towards  the  dauphin.  —  Tête-a-tête  with
the  dauphin.  —  Dignities,  government,  ministry.  —  Noble  and  just
hopes.  —  Rank;  princes  of  the  blood;  the  legitimatized  princes.

—  Noble  words  of  the  dauphin  on  bastards.  —  I  often  see  the
dauphin  tête-a-téte.  —  The  dauphin  discovered  alone  with  me  by
the  dauphine.  —  I  try  to  unite  the  Due  d’Orléans  with  the  dauphin.

—  My  memoir  on  the  degradation  of  the  dignity  of  duke  and  peer.

—  Death  and  character  of  Maréchal  de  Boufflers.  —  Charost  made
captain  of  the  guards  by  the  dauphin.  —  Princesse  des  Ursins
forms  a  plan  for  sovereignty  in  her  own  right.  —  Wickedness  of
the  Jesuit  plot  against  the  Cardinal  de  Noailles.  —  The  affair  of
Cardinal  de  Noailles  trusted  wholly  to  the  dauphin .  1

CHAPTER  II,

Warning  given  by  Boudin  and  by  the  King  of  Spain.  —  Eulogy  and
death  of  Maréchal  Catinat.  —  The  dauphine  at  Marly  for  the  last
time.  —  Singular  loss  of  a  snuff-box.  —  The  dauphine  changes
her  confessor;  her  death.  —  Eulogy,  traits,  and  character  of  the
dauphine.  —  The  dauphin  at  Versailles  and  Marly.  —  State  of  the
dauphin,  whom  I  see  for  the  last  time. — The  dauphin’s  death;

I  wish  to  quit  the  world.  —  Eulogy,  traits,  and  character  of  the
dauphin . S2

CHAPTER  HI.

Pontifical  obsequies  in  Rome  for  the  dauphin.  —  Funeral  procession  of
the  bodies  of  dauphin  and  dauphine  to  Saint-Denis.  —  Death  of
the  little  dauphin.  —  State  of  M.  de  Beauvilliers  ;  and  my  own.
—  The  dauphin’s  cassette  puts  me  in  great  peril.  —  The  dauphin
and  dauphine  poisoned.  —  The  king  persuaded  that  they  were
poisoned  by  the  Due  d’Orléans.  —  Pernicious  advice  given  to  the
Due  d’Orléans.  —  The  king  at  Marly  ;  orders  cards  and  the  usual

146266

VI

CONTENTS.

Page

life. — Death  of  the  princess  of  England.  —  I  pass  four  or  five
weeks  at  La  Eerté  ;  cause  of  it.  —  Renunciations  exacted  by  the
allies  in  authentic  and  sure  form.  —  Forms  for  renunciations  dis¬
cussed.  —  Interests  of  the  Due  de  Berry  and  the  Due  d’Orléans.  —
Methods  of  reasoning  of  the  Due  de  Chevreuse.  —  The  Due  de
BeauviUiers  declares  for  my  opiuion . 65

CHAPTER  IV.

Conferences  on  the  renunciations  between  M.  de  BeauviUiers  and  me. —
Proper  course  for  the  Dues  de  Berry  and  d’Orléans  to  have  taken.

—  Ambassadors  appointed  between  England  and  France.  —  Death
of  the  Due  de  Chevreuse.  —  Music  and  comedies  at  Mme.  de
Maintenon’s. — The  Earl  and  Countess  of  Shrewsbury  at  Court. —

The  renunciations  ;  abridged  reflections.  —  The  Dues  de  Berry  and
d’Orléans  go  from  Versailles  to  the  parliament.  —  Session  of  the
parliament.  —  Return  to  Versailles  ;  despair  and  reflections  of  the
Due  de  Berry.  —  Peace  signed  at  Utrecht,  and  announced.  — Death
of  Sévigué.  —  Deep  and  underhand  manœuvres  of  Père  Tellier. —
Daubenton  and  Fabroni  employed  to  draw  up  the  bull. — The  bull
Unigenitus  posted  in  Rome.  —  General  rising  against  the  bull  on  its
reception  in  France . 94

CHAPTER  V.

Singular  conversation  between  Père  Tellier  and  me.  —  Beginning  of
the  persecutions  in  favour  of  the  bull  Unigenitus.  —  Fall  of  Mme.
des  Ursins  iu  the  miuds  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —

Mme.  des  Ursins  hastens  to  make  a  marriage  for  the  king  of  Spain.

—  Death  of  the  Due  de  Berry;  his  character.  — Enigmatical  saying
of  the  king  about  Mme.  des  Ursins.  —  Retirement  of  the  chancellor,
Pontchartrain.  —  The  bastards  and  their  posterity  made  capable  of
succeeding  to  the  throne.  —  Registration  of  the  edict  by  parliament.

—  Death  of  Queen  Anne  of  England . 125

CHAPTER  VI.

Deep-laid  schemes  of  the  Due  du  Maine  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon. —
Methods  employed  to  carry  out  those  schemes.  —  Stern  language  of
the  king  to  M.  du  Maine.  —  Speech  of  the  king  in  giving  his  will
to  the  custody  of  parliament.  —  His  speech  to  the  Queen  of  Eng¬
land  about  the  will.  —  Place  and  precantions  for  guarding  the
will.  —  General  consternation. — Feelings  and  conduct  of  the  Due
d’Orléans  about  the  will.  —  Last  mark  of  friendship  from  the  king
to  Due  de  BeauviUiers.  —  The  last  from  M.  de  BeauviUiers  to

CONTENTS.

vii

Page

me.  —  Death  of  the  Duc  de  Beauvilliers.  —  His  character  and
eulogy.  —  Characteristics  of  the  Duchesse  de  Beauviiiiers.  —  My
situation  at  Court.  —  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  appointed  head  of  tiie
council  of  finance.  —  The  king  disturbed  about  the  bull  Unigenitus.

—  Amelot  sent  to  Rome  to  arrange  a  national  council.  —  Père
Tellier  makes  me  a  proposal . 156

CHAPTER  VII.

Character,  conduct,  and  death  of  Fénelon,  Archbishop  of  Cambrai.  —
Schemes  of  Fleury,  Bishop  of  Fréjus.  —  Fall  of  the  Princesse  des
Ursins.  —  Refiections.  —  Princesse  des  Ursins  in  Paris;  mortifica¬
tions  she  endures.  —  I  pass  eight  consecutive  hours  with  her.  —

A  more  than  doubtful  Persian  ambassador.  —  His  audience  and
behaviour.  —  Bets  in  England  on  the  approaching  death  of  the

king.  —  Boulainvilliers  ;  his  predictions,  true  and  false.  —  The  king
decides  to  hold  a  h't  (fejwstfce  to  enregister  the  bull . 187

CHAPTER  VIII.

Necessity  for  interrupting  the  story  of  the  last  days  of  the  king. —

First  part  of  the  character  of  the  Due  d’Orléans.  —  Character
of  the  Abbé,  afterwards  Cardinal,  Dubois.  —  Second  part  of  the
character  of  the  Due  d’Orléans.  —  Character  of  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans.  —  Singular  behaviour  of  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  to
me.  —  His  character.  —  Reflections  on  the  present  government,  and
on  that  to  be  established.  —  I  propose  the  various  councils  to  the
Due  d’Orléans.  —  I  refuse  positively  that  of  the  finances  ;  my  rea¬
sons. —  The  Due  d’Orléans  destines  me  to  the  Council  of  Regency  216

CHAPTER  IX.

Precautions  suggested  by  me  to  the  Due  d’Orléans.  —  Suggestions  that
I  made  as  to  education  of  the  future  king.  —  Discussion  on  the
choice  of  members  of  the  Council  of  Regency.  —  I  propose  the  con¬
vocation  of  the  States-general.  —  Great  advantages  to  be  obtained
from  it. —  Court  waves.  —  Embarrassing  curiosity  of  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans.  —  Maisons  makes  me  a  monstrous  proposition.  —  Reflec¬
tions  on  his  purpose.  —  The  Due  d’Orléans  gives  up  the  idea  of  the
States-general.  —  The  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  alarmed,  has  recourse
to  me.  —  Quarrel  of  the  king  with  d’Aguesseau. — Journal  of  the
king’s  last  days.  —  Receives  the  last  sacraments.  —  Writes  the
codicil  to  his  will,  and  speaks  to  the  Due  d’Orléans.  —  The  fare¬
wells  of  the  king.  —  Mme.  de  Maintenon  retires  to  Saint-Cyr. —

The  king,  very  ill,  sends  for  her.  —  His  last  words  ;  his  death  .  .  248

VIU

CONTENTS.

CHAPTEE  X.

Character  of  Louis  XIV.  —  His  early  years.  —  Mme.  de  La  Vallière;
her  character.  —  Hatred  of  intellect  and  nobility  of  sentiment;
desire  to  reign  alone.  —  Eagerness  for  glory.  —  Virtues  of  Louis
XIV.;  his  miserable  education.  —  His  liking  for  detail.  —  His
pleasure  in  flattery.  —  Rarity,  but  advantage,  of  an  audience  with
him.  —  His  extreme  pride  ;  the  causes  and  results  of  it.  —  The
Court  removed  to  the  country;  reasons  for  this.  —  Origin  of  Ver¬
sailles.  — Desire  of  the  king  for  a  full  Court.  —  Pains  taken  by  him
to  obtain  information  ;  spies  ;  police.  —  Secrets  of  the  post-offlce.  —
Personal  charm  of  the  king.  —  His  politeness.  —  His  patience. —
His  natural  grace  in  everything.  — Love  of  air  and  exercise.  — His
devotion  to  the  services  of  the  Church.  —  His  dress  ;  his  love  of
splendour  and  profusion. — Ratal  and  lasting  effects  of  it.  —  His
passion  for  building;  his  bad  taste.  —  Abandons  Saint-Germain  for
Versailles. —  Versailles;  its  miserable  defects.  —  King’s  desire  to
force  nature. — Marly.  —  Items  of  king’s  expenditure  in  building
[Note] .

CHAPTER  XL

Amours  of  the  king.  —  The  three  queens.  —  Beautiful  unknown,  very
well  known. — Another,  chiefly  unknown.  —  Mme.  Scarron;  her
early  life.  —  Brings  up  in  secret  the  children  of  the  king  and  Mme.
de  Montespan.  —  The  king  cannot  endure  her.  —  Little  by  little  she
is  brought  nearer  to  him.  —  Mme.  de  Maintenon  supplants  Mme.
de  Montespan.  —  The  king  marries  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —  Charac¬
ter  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —  Persecution  of  Jansenism.  —  Revo¬
cation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.  —  Establishment  of  Saint-Cyr. —
Mme.  de  Maintenon  misses  for  the  second  time  the  declaration  of
her  marriage.  —  Bossuet;  his  influence  drives  Mme.  de  Montespan
from  Court.  —  Life  and  conduct  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —  Her
skilful  method  of  governing  the  king.  —  Her  desire  to  play  a  part
in  ecclesiastical  matters.  —  Usefulness  of  the  bull  Unigenitus  to
Mme.  de  Maintenon.  —  Last  3mars  of  Louis  XIV.;  his  reverses  of
fortune.  —  His  domestic  calamities.  —  Firmness  and  true  grandeur
of  the  king  ;  his  piety.  —  Reflections.  —  Other  reflections.  —  Aban¬
donment  of  the  king  in  his  last  days.  —  Louis  XIV.  was  little
regretted .

INDEX

Page

280

311

341

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

Louis  de  France,  Due  de  Bourgogne  and  Dauphin  .  .  Frontispiece
From  an  old  engraving,  proof  before  letters.

Chapter

II.  Maeie-Adblaide  de  Savoie,  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  and

Dauphine . 34

By  Sauterre  (Jean-Baptiste);  original  at  Versailles.

VIII.  Louis  XIV.  in  his  Youth . 240

Marble  medallion,  sculptor  unknown  ;  owned  by  M.  Dela-
herche,  at  Beauvais.

IX.  Bedroom  op  Louis  XIV.  at  Versailles  ;  the  bed  in  which

he  died . 264

From  a  photograph  by  Neurdein,  Paris.

X.  Bonne,  Nonne,  and  Ponne,  Hunting  Dogs  op  Louis  XIV.  304

By  Desportes  (Francois);  original  in  the  Louvre.  This  picture
hung  in  Louis  XIV. ’s  bedroom  at  Marly.

XL  Facsimile  op  a  Letter  prom  Due  de  Saint-Simon  to  the

Duke  of  Berwick . 328

MEMOIRS

OP

THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

I.

The  Court  being  changed  by  the  death  of  Monseigneur,  it
became  a  question  for  me  to  change  my  conduct  in  regard
Precautions  of  to  the  ncw  dauphin.  M.  de  Beauvilliers

my  conduct
towards  the
dauphin.

spoke  to  me  about  it  immediately  ;  but  he
thought  this  change  should  be  made  slowly,

and  in  a  way  to  accustom  people’s  minds  to  it  without  start¬
ling  them.  I  had  at  divers  times  escaped  strange  calumny  ;
I  ought  therefore  to  expect  that  eyes  would  be  fixed  upon
me  in  proportion  to  the  envy  and  jealousy  excited  ;  I  could
escape  those  dangers  only  by  veiling  my  present  situation,
so  changed  by  the  changing  of  the  whole  Court  scene.  For
this  reason,  he  said,  I  ought  to  approach  the  prince  little  by
little,  according  to  the  protection  he  was  able  to  afford  me,
that  is  to  say,  according  as  he  grew  into  the  king’s  confidence
and  so  into  authority  over  public  affairs  and  in  society.

Nevertheless,  I  thought  it  well  to  sound  the  dauphin
after  the  first  few  days  of  his  new  scope.  One  evening
when  I  joined  him  in  the  gardens  of  Marly,  there  being  but
few  persons  with  him  and  no  one  to  alarm  me,  I  profited  by
his  cordial  greeting  to  say  in  his  ear  that  many  reasons  of
which  he  was  not  ignorant  had  hitherto  kept  me  at  a  neces-

VOL.  III.  —  1

2

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

sary  distance  from  him,  but  that  now  I  hoped  to  he  able  to
follow  with  less  constraint  my  attachment  and  my  inclina¬
tion  ;  and  I  flattered  myself  that  he  agreed  to  it.  He  an¬
swered,  also  in  a  low  voice,  that  there  were  indeed  reasons
which  had  sometimes  restrained  liim  ;  he  thought  they  had
now  ceased  ;  he  knew  very  well  what  I  was  for  him  ;  and
that  he  counted  with  pleasure  on  our  henceforth  seeing
each  other  with  greater  freedom  on  both  sides.  I  write  the
exact  words  of  his  answer  so  as  to  record  the  extreme  polite¬
ness  of  those  that  ended  it.  I  looked  upon  them  as  a  happy
pledge  that  my  bait  was  taken  as  I  wished.  After  this  I
became,  httle  by  little,  more  assiduous  in  joining  his  walks,
but  not  continually  or  when .  dangerous  persons  were  with
him  ;  and  I  spoke  to  him  oftener  and  with  greater  liberty.
I  was  sober  about  seeing  him  in  his  own  apartments  with
society  about  him,  and  I  only  approached  him  in  the  salon
when  I  saw  it  was  suitable  to  do  so.  I  was  not  ignorant  of
what  he  thought  about  the  form  of  the  government  of  the
State  and  of  many  other  topics  allied  to  it;  his  sentiments
were  the  same  as  mine  and  as  those  of  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse
and  Beauvilliers  on  all  of  them.  I  had  already  shpped  in  a
few  words  to  him  on  the  dignity  of  the  peerage,  to  which  I
knew  him  to  be  favourable  from  principle.  This  was  aU  too
fine  an  opening  not  to  endeavour  to  draw  a  noble  result  in
that  direction  from  it.  I  therefore  made  myself  very  watch¬
ful  to  seize  upon  whatever  could  lead  me  naturally  to  enter
upon  that  topic  with  him  ;  nor  were  the  opportunities  long
in  coming.

A  few  days  later  the  dauphin  sent  for  me.  I  entered
through  his  dressing-room,  where  Duchesne,  his  first  valet

Tête-k-tête  of  the
dauphin  with
me.

de  chambre,  a  very  sure  man  who  had  his  full
confidence,  awaited  me  to  usher  me  into  his
cabinet,  where  he  was  alone.  My  thanks  were

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

3

not  unmingled  with  an  expression  of  joy  at  the  change  in
his  position.  He  at  once  entered  upon  our  topics,  like  a
man  who  fears  less  to  unbosom  himself  than  to  let  himself
fall  into  the  vanity  of  his  new  lustre.  He  told  me  that
until  now  he  had  only  sought  to  instruct  and  occupy  himself,
not  meddling  in  anything,  because  he  did  not  think  he  ought
in  any  way  to  put  himself  forward  ;  but  since  the  king  had
ordered  him  to  take  cognizance  of  all  things  and  to  work
with  the  ministers  in  order  to  relieve  him,  he  felt  that  all
his  time  was  due  to  the  State  and  to  the  pubhc,  and  that  if
he  abstracted  any  from  the  public  business  or  from  whatever
would  make  him  more  capable  of  performing  those  duties,  it
was  robbery  ;  therefore  he  only  took  amusement  as  a  rest,
and  to  make  his  mind  better  fitted  to  begin  afresh  and  more
usefully  after  the  relaxation  that  nature  needed.  From  that
he  dilated  on  the  king,  speaking  with  extreme  tenderness
and  gratitude,  and  told  me  that  he  felt  himself  in  a  very
close  manner  bound  to  contribute  all  he  could  to  his  relief,
inasmuch  as  the  king  had  felt  confidence  enough  in  him  to
desire  it.  I  entered  heartily  into  such  worthy  sentiments,
but  I  was  troubled  lest  tenderness,  gratitude,  and  respect
might  degenerate  into  dangerous  admiration.  Therefore  I
shpped  in  a  few  words  about  the  king  being  in  ignorance
of  many  things  which  he  had  put  himself  out  of  the  power
of  hearing,  and  to  which  his  goodness  would  certainly  not  be
insensible  if  they  could  only  reach  him.

This  chord,  so  lightly  touched,  gave  forth  immediately  a
decisive  sound.  The  prince,  after  a  few  words  of  preface
about  knowing  from  M.  de  Beauvühers  that  I  could  be
Dignity;  govern-  spokeu  to  with  Safety,  acknowledged  the  truth
ment  ;  ministry.  q£  what  I  Said,  and  fell  incontinently  on  the
ministers.  He  enlarged  upon  the  unbounded  authority  they
had  usurped,  on  the  power  they  had  obtained  from  the  king,

4

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

on  the  dangerous  use  they  could  make  of  it,  on  the  impos¬
sibility  of  getting  anything  to  the  king,  or  from  the  king
to  any  one,  except  through  them  ;  and,  without  naming  per¬
sons,  he  made  me  clearly  understand  that  this  form  of
government  was  entirely  contrary  to  his  hking  and  to  his
ideas.  Eeturning  from  that  very  tenderly  to  the  king,  he
regretted  the  evil  education  he  had  had,  the  pernicious  hands
into  which  he  had  successively  fallen,  and  by  which,  under
pretexts  of  policy  and  authority  (the  real  power  and  utihty
being  for  the  ministers),  his  heart,  naturally  good  and  just,
was  constantly  deflected  from  the  right  way,  without  himself
being  aware  of  it  ;  long  usage  having  now  confirmed  him  in
these  courses  by  which  the  kingdom  had  been  rendered  most
unhappy.  Then,  returning  to  himself,  he  gave  me  great
grounds  to  admire  him.  After  which,  as  he  recurred  again
to  the  conduct  of  the  ministers,  I  took  occasion  to  lead  him
round  to  their  usurpations  over  the  dukes  and  other  persons
of  the  highest  nobility.  As  he  hstened  to  my  statement
indignation  broke  through  his  reserve.  I  can  scarcely  repeat
to  what  point  this  audacity  and  the  distinction  so  insanely
favourable  to  the  bourgeoisie  over  the  nobility  shocked  him.
I  let  him  talk,  as  much  to  enjoy  the  worthy  sentiments  of
one  so  near  to  the  power  of  making  laws  and  regulations  as
to  inform  myself  to  what  degree  a  roused  sense  of  equity
might  carry  him.  After  that  I  went  back  to  the  beginnings
of  this  subversion  of  true  order.  AU  this  was  the  subject  of
an  hour’s  talk  ;  it  diverted  us  from  that  we  had  met  to
speak  about,  but  in  itself  it  was  far  more  important  than
that  other  matter,  which  was  foreign  to  it.

It  is  difficult  to  express  what  I  felt  on  leaving  the
dauphin.  A  near  and  magnificent  future  opened  before
Noble  and  ^  ^  prince  enlightened,  pious,  just,

just  hopes.  approachable  ;  one  who  was  seeking  for  more

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

5

and  more  enlightenment,  and  with  whom  the  trivial  —  always
so  principal  a  feature  with  such  personages  ' —  was  useless.
I  felt  also  by  this  experience  another  thing,  unusual  in  most
of  them,  —  namely,  that  esteem  and  a  sense  of  attachment
once  conceived  by  this  prince  would  resist  non-usage  and
habitual  separation.  I  tasted  with  delight  a  confidence  so
precious  and  so  full,  at  a  first  interview,  and  on  matters  so
vital.  I  saw  with  certainty  a  change  of  government  to  its
very  essence.  I  foresaw,  without  illusions,  the  fall  of  those
oppressors  of  the  State,  and  the  all-powerful  enemies  of  the
seigneurs  and  nobles,  whom  they  had  reduced  to  powder
beneath  their  feet  ;  but  who,  brought  to  hfe  by  the  breath
of  this  dauphin,  become  king,  would  recover  their  Order,
their  estate,  their  rank,  and  would  restore  all  else  to  its
natural  condition.  This  desire  of  his  for  the  re-estahlish-
ment  of  the  orders,  and  of  rank  in  general,  had  all  my  life
been  the  principal  desire  within  me,  and  far  superior  to
that  of  any  personal  prosperity.  I  felt  therefore  all  the
sweetness  of  this  prospect,  and  the  deliverance  of  my  Order
from  a  servitude  which  was  secretly  intolerable  to  me,
impatience  of  which  did  sometimes  rise  to  the  surface
against  my  will.

I  cannot  refuse  myself  a  charming  comparison  of  the
reign  of  Monseigneur,  which  I  had  never  anticipated  with¬
out  all  possible  dread,  both  public  and  private,  with  the
solid  comforts  of  this  ante-reign  soon  to  become  the  actual
reign  of  his  son,  who  was  already  opening  his  heart  to  me,
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  path  of  hope,  the  best-founded
hope  of  all  that  a  man  of  my  sort  could  legitimately  place
before  him,  desiring  as  I  did  order,  justice,  reason,  the  good
of  the  State,  and  that  of  individuals  by  all  honest  and
honourable  methods  wherein  truth  and  integrity  could
show  themselves.  I  resolved  to  conceal  with  the  utmost

6

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

care  this  favour,  so  likely,  if  perceived,  to  startle  and  rouse
my  enemies  against  me,  but  also  to  cultivate  it  under  that
precaution,  and  to  procure,  with  discretion,  many  such
audiences  in  which  I  might  learn  and  sow  and  gently
inculcate  much,  and  fortify  my  own  position.

I  should  have  thought  it,  however,  a  robbery  and  deep
ingratitude,  had  I  failed  to  give  full  homage  for  this  favour
to  him  to  whom  I  owed  it.  Certain  as  I  was  that  the  Due
de  Beauvilliers  held  the  pass-key  to  the  heart  and  mind  of
the  dauphin,  I  did  not  think  I  committed  an  infidelity  in
relating  to  him  all  that  had  passed  between  the  prince  and
myself.  I  therefore  went  at  once  and  repeated  the  con¬
versation  to  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  who  was  not  less  delighted
than  I  was  myself.  The  duke,  in  spite  of  a  piety  that  was
almost  that  of  the  other  world,  a  timidity  too  conscious  of
shackles,  a  respect  for  the  king  that  was  little  short  of  the
adoration  of  the  latria,  was  not  less  concerned  than  I  at
the  evils  of  the  present  form  of  government,  the  effrontery
of  the  power  of  the  ministers  and  the  manner  of  its  exer¬
cise,  they  being  absolute  kings  within  their  departments,
and  even  outside  of  them,  for  in  fact  they  were  not  less
dukes  and  peers  than  I  was  myself.  He  was  much  aston¬
ished  at  so  great  an  unbosoming  to  me,  and  surprised  at
the  remarkable  effect  of  all  that  he  had  taken  pains  to
plant  and  cultivate  on  my  behalf  in  his  pupil’s  mind.

A  few  days  later  I  had  another  audience.  I  will  say
here,  once  for  all,  that  Duchesne  usually,  M.  de  Beauvüliers
Another  tête-à-  rarely,  and  sometimes  the  dauphiu,  in  a  low

tête  of  the  .  .

dauphin  with  V01C6  WllGIl  Out  WcllJvlIlg,  told.  1116  tllG  llOlir  8,t

which  I  was  to  go  to  him.  If  it  was  I  who
wanted  an  audience,  I  told  Duchesne,  who  at  once  conveyed
the  request  and  brought  me  an  appointment.  Wherever  we
were,  at  Fontainebleau,  Versailles,  or  Marly,  I  always  em

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

7

tered  secretly  througli  the  dressing-room,  where  Duchesne
was  careful  to  be  stationed  alone  to  introduce  me  im¬
mediately,  and  to  wait  until  I  left  to  usher  me  out;  so
that  no  one  ever  knew  of  these  visits,  except  the  dauphine
once,  but  she  kept  the  secret  perfectly.

At  the  third  interview  I  have  just  mentioned  the
daupliin  fell  at  once  upon  the  insolence  of  the  ministers
Dignity  spare  them  that  term),  and  on

princes  of  the  the  great  repression  of  the  seigneurs.  As  I
legitimatized  had  principally  intended  to  sound  him  on
princes.  coucemed  our  dignities,  I  evaded

every  topic  that  led  away  from  that  point,  bringing  back
the  conversation  to  it,  and  leading  him  through  all  the
phases  of  it.  I  found  him  well  informed  as  to  our  dignities,
their  proper  relation  to  the  State  and  crown,  and  all  that
history  furnished  him  on  that  and  kindred  subjects,  but
not  much  else,  though  full  of  its  being  the  strong  interest
of  the  State,  of  the  majesty  of  the  kings  of  France  and
the  supremacy  of  their  crown,  to  re-estabhsh  and  maintain
this  highest  dignity  of  the  kingdom,  —  together  with  the
desire  to  do  so  himself.  I  made  him  make  certain  natural
reflections  on  the  extreme  injury  which  the  tolerance  of
this  abuse  did  to  the  kings  and  to  their  crown,  an  injury
bearing  down  upon  the  most  sohd  things  of  the  State  by
the  weakening  of  the  idea  of  their  grandeur.  I  showed  him
very  clearly  that  the  degrees  of  this  descent  were  the  same
as  ours,  and  that  we  the  peers  being  lowered  and  degraded
gave  cause  for  the  discredit  of  the  throne  itself,  through
the  degradation  of  the  highest  thing  that  emanated  from  it.

The  dauphin,  earnestly  attentive,  liked  my  arguments,
completed  them  in  several  instances,  and  eagerly  received
the  impression  of  all  these  truths.  We  discussed  them  in  a
manner  both  agreeable  and  instructive.  The  dauphin,  ex-

8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

tremely  well-informed  on  all  historical  facts,  groaned  over  the
ignorance  and  the  want  of  reflection  in  the  king.  I  did  but
little  more  than  open  the  points  of  discussion  and  present
them  successively,  leaving  to  him  the  pleasure  of  speaking,
and  to  myself  that  of  seeing  him  so  well-informed,  and  of
giving  him  the  chance  to  persuade  himself  by  himself,  to
excite  himself  and  spur  himself,  while  I  looked  on  at  his
sentiments,  his  method  of  conceiving  and  of  taking  impres¬
sions,  in  order  to  profit  by  that  knowledge  and  more  easily
increase  along  the  same  line  his  convictions  and  his  ardour.

The  usurpations  of  the  princes  of  the  blood  over  the  peers
was  one  of  the  points  on  which  I  found  him  best  informed
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  princes,  but  at  the  same  time
perfectly  equitable,  as  he  had  shown  himself  on  all  other
points.  He  was  less  mformed  as  to  the  times  and  the  occa¬
sions  of  those  usurpations  than  of  the  fact  of  usurpation
Itself.  I  therefore  told  him  of  some,  to  his  great  satisfaction,
being  more  careful  to  follow  his  lead  and  answer  his  ques¬
tions,  which  kept  up  his  eagerness  and  his  curiosity,  than  to
make  him  a  statement  and  a  connected  discourse.  When  I
thought  I  had,  for  this  time,  sufficiently  instructed  him  about
the  princes  of  the  blood,  I  alluded  to  the  assumption  of  the
bastards,  which  had  done  so  much  to  increase  that  of  the
princes,  in  order  to  lead  the  dauphin  to  speak  of  them  ;  for
that  was  a  chord  I  wished  him  to  touch  first,  that  I  might
feel,  by  the  tone  he  gave  to  it,  the  tone  I  myself  ought  to
take  on  that  subject.  My  sensitiveness  on  all  that  they  had
snatched  away  from  us,  and  the  respect  of  the  dauphin  for
the  king,  his  grandfather,  made  me  cautious,  so  that  it  was
long  before  I  brought  him  to  my  point.  But  at  last  he  fell
upon  it  himself.  Speaking  in  a  much  lower  tone  and  with
measured  words,  but,  in  exchange,  with  a  far  more  significant
expression  of  face  (for  my  eyes  were  at  work  with  even

1711]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

9

greater  intentness  than  my  ears),  he  began  to  excuse  the
king,  to  praise  him,  to  dwell  on  the  misfortune  of  his  educa¬
tion,  and  that  of  the  position  in  which  he  had  put  himself  of
never  hearing  the  truth  from  any  one.  I  did  not  gainsay
him  ;  hut  by  manner  and  countenance  I  modestly  made  him
feel  how  this  misfortune  bore  full  upon  us.  He  understood
the  meaning  of  that  mute  language  well,  and  he  encouraged
me  to  speak.  I  preluded,  as  he  did,  by  praises  of  the  king,
by  the  same  regrets  that  he  had  uttered,  and  then  I  feU
upon  the  harm  that  resulted.  I  used,  not  without  cause,  the
arguments  of  piety,  —  the  example,  the  powerful  temptation,
added  to  that  of  the  thing  itself,  which  precipitated  all
women  into  the  arms  of  a  king,  the  scandal  of  the  absolute
equahty  between  the  children  of  the  sacrament  and  those
of  the  double  adultery;  for,  after  the  second  generation,
there  was  perfect  equality  in  the  legitimate  and  the  illegiti¬
mate  offspring  of  kings,  as  was  now  seen  in  those  of  M.  le
Duc  de  Chartres  and  the  children  of  M.  du  Maine;  these
remarks  were  not  lukewarm.

The  dauphin,  satisfied  with  his  exordium  and  content,
perhaps,  with  mine,  excited  later  by  my  words,  interrupted
me  and  grew  heated.  He  spoke  of  the  differ-
the  dauphin  on  cncc  of  an  extraction  which  derived  all  that
bastards.  distinguished  it  so  grandly  from  its  congenital

qualification  of  royalty,  with  that  other,  due  only  to  seduc¬
tive  and  scandalous  crime,  that  bore  within  itself  only  in¬
famy.  He  went  over  the  divers  and  numerous  degrees  by
which  the  bastards  (for  he  often  used  that  word)  had
mounted  to  the  level  of  the  princes  of  the  blood,  who,  in
self-defence,  had  raised  their  own  level  so  many  degrees  at
the  expense  of  the  dukes.  Throughout  it  all  many  returns
of  respect,  tenderness,  and  even  compassion  for  the  king,
which  made  me  admire  the  just  mingling  of  the  good  son

10

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

and  the  good  prince  in  this  enlightened  dauphin.  At  length,
concentrating  his  mind  upon  himself,  he  said  :  “  It  is  a  great
misfortune  to  have  such  children.  So  far  G-od  has  given  me
the  grace  to  keep  away  from  that  path  ;  but  no  man  can
boast  ;  I  do  not  know  what  may  happen  to  me  in  future  ;  I
may  fall  into  many  evil  ways  ;  I  pray  God  to  preserve  me
from  them  !  hut  I  think  that  if  I  should  have  bastards,  I
would  take  great  care  not  to  bring  them  up  as  these  are,  and
even  not  to  recognize  them.  But  that  is  a  feeling  I  have
now,  by  the  grace  of  God  who  gives  it  to  me.  As  no  man
can  be  sure  of  deserving  his  grace  and  keeping  it  always,
we  should  curb  ourselves  perpetually,  that  we  may  not  fall
into  such  unseemliness.”

A  sentiment  so  humble  and  at  the  same  time  so  virtuous
charmed  me,  and  I  praised  it  with  aU  my  strength.  The
conversation  lasted  more  than  two  hours,  and  at  the  end  he
again  referred  to  the  losses  of  our  dignity  as  dukes  and
peers  and  to  the  importance  of  repairing  them,  adding  that
he  would  be  very  glad  if  he  could  he  informed  on  the  sub¬
ject  to  the  very  bottom.  At  the  beginning  of  the  conver¬
sation  I  had  said  that  he  would  he  surprised  at  the  number
and  greatness  of  our  losses  if  he  saw  them  collected  together
at  a  glance.  I  therefore  proposed  to  him  now  to  search
them  out  and  lay  them  before  him.  Not  only  was  he  will¬
ing,  but  he  begged  me  eagerly  to  do  so.  I  asked  for  a  little
time,  so  as  not  to  bring  him  anything  that  was  not  strictly
correct,  and  I  left  him  the  choice  of  the  order  in  which  I
should  present  the  subject,  whether  according  to  the  nature
of  the  things  and  matters,  or  by  the  dates  of  losses.  He
preferred  the  latter,  though  much  less  clear  for  him,  and
more  toilsome  for  me.  I  represented  tliis  at  once,  but  he
persisted  in  his  choice,  and  it  was  too  important  to  serve
him  in  the  way  he  wished,  to  spare  myself  any  trouble.  He

1711]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

11

gave  me,  when  I  took  leave,  full  liberty  not  to  see  him  in
public  except  when  I  thought  it  could  he  done  without  risk,
but  in  private  whenever  I  desired  to  discuss  the  matters
about  which  I  wished  to  speak  to  him.

It  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the  delight  in  which  I  issued
from  an  interview  so  interesting.  The  confidence  of  a
daupliin,  just,  enlightened,  and  so  near  the  throne,  already,
as  it  were,  sharing  it,  left  nothing  to  he  desired  for  present
satisfaction  nor  for  future  hopes.  The  happiness  and  order
of  the  State,  and  after  that  the  restoration  of  our  dignity,
had  been  through  all  the  days  of  my  life  the  object  of  my
most  ardent  desires,  leaving  far  behind  it  that  of  my  own
fortunes.  I  had  found  that  same  object  in  the  dauphin  ;  I
saw  myself  in  a  situation  to  contribute  to  that  great  work,
to  raise  myself  at  the  same  time,  by  careful  conduct,  into
tranquil  possession  of  those  precious  advantages.  I  now
thought  only  of  how  to  make  myself  worthy  of  the  one,
and  the  faithful  co-operator  of  the  others.

After  this  I  often  saw  the  dauphin  in  private,  and  im¬
mediately  rendered  to  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers  an  account
I  often  see  the  what  had  passcd.  I  profited  by  his  advice,
dauphin  tête-à-  and  I  spoke  to  the  dauphin  about  all  things.

tête  •

ISTeither  his  reserve  nor  his  charity  took  fright
at  anything  ;  not  only  did  he  enter  easily  and  with  freedom
into  aU  that  I  brought  upon  the  tapis  about  things  and
persons,  but  he  encouraged  me  and  charged  me  with  ren¬
dering  an  account  of  many  persons  and  many  things  to  him.
He  gave  me  notes,  which  I  returned  to  him  with  the  com¬
ments  he  had  asked  for  ;  and  I  gave  him  others,  which  he
kept,  and  then  discussed  with  me  before  returning  them.
I  filled  all  my  pockets  with  quantities  of  papers  every  time
I  went  to  one  of  these  audiences,  and  I  often  laughed  to
myself  as  I  passed  through  the  salon  and  saw  so  many

12

MEMOmS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

people  who  were  actually  at  the  moment  in  my  pockets,
and  yet  so  far  from  imagining  the  important  discussion  then
to  be  made  about  them.

The  dauphin  was  lodged  in  one  of  the  four  great  suites  of
rooms  on  the  same  floor  as  the  salon.  In  his  own  chamber
the  bed  stood  with  its  feet  to  the  windows  ;  at  the  side  of
it  towards  the  fireplace  was  the  door  of  the  dark  dressiug-
room  through  which  I  entered  ;  between  the  fireplace  and
one  of  the  windows  was  a  little  movable  secretary  or  desk
at  which  he  worked  ;  opposite  to  the  usual  door  of  entrance
and  behind  the  desk  and  the  seat  before  it  was  a  door  into
another  room  leading  to  the  dauphine’s  apartment  ;  between
the  two  windows  stood  a  bureau,  used  only  for  papers.

There  were  always  a  few  moments  of  conversation  before
the  dauphin  seated  himself  at  his  desk,  and  ordered  me  to
The  dauphin  dis-  sit  down  opposite  to  him.  Become  quite  free
covered  alone  hiTn,  I  took  the  liberty  to  say  one  day,

with  me  by  the  ^  .  .

dauphine.  whüe  we  Were  standing  and  talking  during

those  flrst  moments,  that  he  would  do  weU  to  run  the  bolt
of  the  door  behind  him.  He  said  that  the  dauphine  would
not  come,  as  it  was  not  one  of  her  hours.  I  replied  that  I
was  not  afraid  of  the  princess,  but  very  much  afraid  of  the
train  of  ladies  who  accompanied  her  everywhere.  He  was
obstinate,  however,  and  would  not  run  the  bolt.  I  dared
not  press  him  farther.  He  then  sat  down  at  his  desk,  and
told  me  to  sit  as  usual.  The  session  was  long  ;  after  which
we  sorted  our  papers.  He  gave  me  his  notes  to  put  in  my
pockets,  and  took  mine,  some  of  which  he  locked  up  in  the
bureau  ;  after  which  he  stood  talking  with  his  back  to  the
chimney,  the  rest  of  the  papers  in  one  hand  and  his  keys  in
the  other.  I  was  standing  by  the  desk  searching  for  certain
papers  with  one  hand  and  holding  others  in  my  left,  when
the  opposite  door  opened  and  the  dauphine  entered.

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  13

The  first  glance  of  all  three  —  for,  thank  God,  she  was
alone  —  the  astonishment  of  our  three  countenances  have
never  left  my  memory.  The  fixed  glance,  the  statne-hke
immobility,  the  silence,  the  awkwardness  lasted  fully  through
a  slow  Pater.  The  princess  was  the  first  to  speak.  She
said  to  the  prince  in  a  very  uneasy  voice  that  she  did  not
know  she  should  find  him  in  such  good  company,  smiling
at  him  and  then  at  me.  I  had  time  to  smile  too  and  lower
my  eyes  before  the  dauphin  spoke.  “As  you  have  found
me,  madame,”  he  said,  smiling  himself,  “  go  away.”  She
stood  an  instant  smiling  at  him  in  return,  and  he  to  her  ;
then  she  looked  at  me,  smiling  with  more  freedom  than  at
first,  turned  quickly  and  went  out,  closing  the  door,  which
she  had,  in  truth,  scarcely  entered.

Never  did  I  see  a  woman  so  astonished  ;  and  never  did  I
see  a  man  —  I  shall  risk  the  word  —  so  sheepish  as  the
prince,  even  after  she  had  left  the  room  ;  and  never  man,  if  it
must  be  told,  was  more  frightened  than  I,  —  though  I  felt
easier  when  I  saw  she  was  not  accompanied.  As  soon  as
she  had  closed  the  door,  “  Well,  monsieur,”  I  said  to  the
dauphin,  “  if  you  had  only  pleased  to  bolt  the  door  !  ”  “  You
are  right,”  he  rephed,  “  I  was  wrong.  But  there  is  no  harm
done  ;  happily  she  was  alone,  and  I  will  answer  for  her
secrecy.”  “  I  am  not  anxious  about  that,”  I  said  (I  was,
though  !),  “  but  ’t  is  a  miracle  she  was  alone.  With  her
usual  following  you  might  have  escaped  with  a  reprimand,
but  I  should  have  been  ruined  without  return.”  He  ad¬
mitted  his  wrong  once  more,  but  assured  me  as  to  secrecy.

After  this  discovery  the  dauphine  often  smiled  at  me  as  if
to  remind  me  of  it,  and  took  an  air  of  marked  attention  to
me.  Fond  as  she  was  of  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  she  never
mentioned  the  matter  to  her.  She  was  afraid  of  me  in  a
general  way  because  she  greatly  feared  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse

14

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

and  de  Beanvilliers,  whose  grave  and  serious  ways  were  not
hers,  and  she  was  not  ignorant  of  my  long  and  close  in¬
timacy  with  them.  Their  strict  morals  and  their  influence
over  the  dauphin  disturbed  her;  the  aversion  of  Mme.  de
Maintenon  did  not  tend  to  reassure  her;  the  confidence  of
the  king  in  them  and  their  position  with  him  kept  her,  timid
as  she  was,  uneasy.

Among  the  many  matters  of  general  and  private  interest
which  occupied  me,  not  the  least  was  a  desire  on  my  part  to
I  work  to  unite  bring  the  Due  d’Orléans  into  union  with  the
the  Due  d’Or-  (jauphin,  and,  with  that  object,  to  ally  him  to

leans  to  the  ^  .  i  i

dauphin.  the  Duc  de  Beanvilliers.  All  things  seconded

me,  except  himself  and  his  daughter  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  ;
strangely  enough,  because  the  prince  felt  both  the  need  and
the  propriety  of  this  union  and  he  desired  it.  The  close
intimacy  always  maintained  between  the  dauphin  and  the
Duchesse  d’Orléans,  that  which  existed  after  their  fashion
between  himself  and  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,  the  open  partial¬
ity,  never  relaxed,  of  the  prince  for  M.  de  Cambrai,  and  the
httle  niche  he  had  always  managed  to  keep  for  himself
among  the  Jesuits,  were  all  great  advances  towards  the  end
I  wanted.  But  the  hindrances  were  scarcely  less.  The
morals  of  the  Duc  d’Orléans,  his  affectation  of  adorning  him¬
self  with  debauchery  and  impiety,  his  extremely  misplaced
indiscretions  in  those  matters  led  the  dauphin  to  shun  him,
and  repulsed  his  old  governor.  The  gleam  of  reason  and  of
religion  which  shone  about  him  after  his  separation  from
Mme.  d’Argenton  had  not  been  of  long  duration,  though
wholly  sincere  for  some  time,  prolonged  possibly  for  the
sake  of  the  marriage  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  which  fol¬
lowed  the  separation  in  about  six  months.  Ennui,  habit,
and  the  bad  company  he  still  saw  whenever  he  went  to
Paris  dragged  him  away  again.  He  plunged  once  more

15

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

into  debauchery  and  impiety,  though  without  a  leading
mistress  and  without  any  quarrels  with  the  Duchesse  d’Or¬
léans,  except  a  few  in  connection  with  the  Duchesse  de
Berry.  It  was  a  race  between  the  father  and  daughter
which  of  them  could  most  ridiculously  inveigh  against
morality  and  rehgion  ;  sometimes  such  talks  were  before  the
Due  de  Berry,  who  had  much  of  both  principles  and  thought
the  sentiments  of  father  and  daughter  very  strange  and  as
bad  as  he  dared  to  think  them,  and  also  the  attacks  they
made  upon  him  to  do  hkewise,  which  never  succeeded.

The  king  was  not  ignorant  of  his  nephew’s  conduct.  He
had  been  much  shocked  by  his  return  to  debauchery  and
his  scandalous  companions  in  Paris.  The  prince’s  assiduity
to  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  and  his  attachment  to  her  made
the  disgust  the  king  now  felt  for  his  grandson’s  wife  and
his  displeasure  at  her  open  insults  to  her  mother,  to  whom
he  felt  as  a  father  and  a  protector,  and  for  love  of  whom
he  had  made  the  marriage  in  spite  of  Monsieur’s  repug¬
nance,  faU  back  upon  the  duke.

Conscious  of  all  this  I  nevertheless  urged  strongly  on  M.
de  Beauvilhers  the  importance  and  the  necessity  of  not  being
revolted  and  so  allowing  the  principal  fruit  of  that  marriage,
namely  the  union  of  the  royal  family,  to  escape  us,  and  I
showed  him  that  the  more  we  had  been  deceived  in  the
character  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  the  more  we  ought  to
ourselves  to  avert  and  correct  the  evil  consequences,
which  could  alone  be  done  by  the  means  I  proposed  to  him.
-^t  first  the  duke  was  excited,  but  on  my  begging  him  to
listen  to  me  he  allowed  me  to  say  all  without  interruption.
He  agreed  as  to  the  truth  of  it,  but  at  the  same  time  he
brought  up  against  me  the  morals  of  the  duke  and  the  loose
talk  which  sometimes  escaped  him  before  the  dauphin,  and
alienated  the  latter  infinitely;  and  he  showed  me  without

16  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  i.

difficulty  that  such  indiscretion  was  an  obstacle  that  put  the
strongest  barrier  to  their  intercourse.  I  felt  this  too  much
to  he  able  to  deny  it,  hut  I  urged  that  that  obstacle  at  least
could  be  removed,  on  which  I  saw  him  inwardly  give  way.
Then  I  stopped,  feeling  that  everything  depended  on  that
condition,  which  it  was  necessary  to  work  at  before  all  else  ;
for,  knowing  as  I  did  the  levity  of  the  Due  d’Orléans  and
his  detestable  heroics  of  impiety,  which  he  affected  far  more
than  he  felt,  I  could  not  answer  even  to  myself  for  success.

I  did  not  delay  attacking  him,  and  I  found  no  difficulty
in  making  him  sincerely  agree  as  to  the  solid  advantages  he
would  gain,  not  only  at  the  present  moment,  but  in  future
from  a  union  with  the  dauphin.  From  this  acknowledgment
I  led  him  easily  to  a  wish  for  it,  which  I  thought  it  well  to
sharpen  by  the  difficulty  which  lay,  as  he  himself  felt,  m
his  morals  and  conduct.  I  tossed  him  about  for  a  long
time  on  that  point;  and  then  I  said  that  I  abstained  from
exhorting  him  about  his  morals  or  his  pretended  opinions,
which  he  did  not  hold  in  his  heart  and  only  deceived  him¬
self  about,  and  should  merely  tell  him  that  the  present
necessity  was  for  two  things  :  first  to  be  on  his  guard  con¬
tinually  against  the  shghtest  licentious  talk  before  the
dauphin,  and  also  at  the  Princesse  de  Conti’s,  where  the
dauphin  went  sometimes,  and  whence  it  was  certain  to
reach  his  ears.  I  told  him  that  his  indiscretion  on  such
matters  alienated  the  prince  far  more,  and  more  dangerously,
than  he  could  imagine,  and  that  what  I  said  about  it  was
not  opinion,  but  knowledge.  The  other  point  was  to  go
less  often  to  Paris,  and  to  do  his  debauchery,  since  he  was  so
unfortunate  that  he  must  do  it,  behind  closed  doors,  and  also
to  put  such  restraint  on  himself  and  those  who  were  with
him  that  there  should  be  no  talk  about  it  the  very  next

morning.

1711]

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

17

This  expedient,  which  did  not  attack  his  pleasures,  pleased
him,  and  he  promised  to  follow  it.  He  was  faithful  to  his
word,  especially  in  his  talk  before  the  dauphin  and  in  all
places  whence  his  remarks  might  reach  him.  I  told  what
I  had  done  to  the  Due  de  Beauvilhers.  The  dauphin  soon
after  noticed  the  change  himself,  and  spoke  of  it  to  the  duke,
from  whom  it  came  back  to  me.  Little  by  httle  the  two
approached  each  other.

Among  all  these  cares  and  other  business  I  had  to  work
at  the  memoir  of  our  losses  as  dukes  and  peers  which  the
My  memoir  on  daupMn  had  asked  of  me.^  At  all  times  I

ofthtSaro"  gathered  them,  with  the  occasions  that

duke  and  peer.  causcd  them,  as  much  as  I  could.  I  had  had
this  interest  from  my  earliest  youth,  and  I  had  followed  it
ever  since,  applying  continually  for  information  to  the  old
dukes  and  duchesses  who  were  most  at  Court  in  their  day,
and  the  best  informed.  I  verified  by  others  what  I  learned
from  them  ;  and  above  all  I  sought  corroboration  from  non-
titled  persons,  elders,  well-informed  and  versed  in  the  usages
of  the  Court  and  of  the  world,  who  had  been  much  in
both  and  had  seen  them  with  their  own  eyes  ;  to  these  I
added  certain  old  and  leading  valets.  I  started  aU  these
persons  upon  their  own  track  and  gently,  by  conversation,  I
trapped  them  into  relating  what  I  wanted  to  get  out  of
them.  I  had  written  the  information  down  as  I  gathered
it  ;  consequently,  I  had  my  materials  ready  ;  to  these  I
added  the  losses  in  my  own  time,  to  which  I  had  been  a

1  Sainte-Beuve  in  his  preface  explains  Saint-Simon’s  political  theory.
He  felt  the  moral  weakness  of  France  caused  hy  the  degradation  of  his
Order,  through  the  jealousy  of  kings,  from  the  duties  of  statesmanship  to
the  despicable  idleness  of  mere  courtiers.  The  Memoir  is  brimming  with
the  topic  in  all  its  aspects  ;  instinct  throughout  with  a  lofty  sense  of
Honour  and  patriotism  (as  patriotism  could  alone  he  understood  in  those
days)  ;  but  unutterably  wearisome  in  details  of  rank  and  precedence,  degen¬
erating  sometimes  into  woful  pettiness.  —  Te.

VOL.  III.  —  2

18

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap,  l

witness  together  with  all  the  Court.  Without  this  previous
work  a  present  gathering  of  these  facts  would  have  been
impossible,  and  the  search  would  have  led  me  too  far.  As
it  was,  the  arrangement  which  the  dauphin  had  chosen
made  the  work  long  and  fatiguing,  and  I  could  get  no  help
from  any  one  ;  M.  de  Chevreuse  was  not  at  Marly,  M.  de
Beauvilhers  too  busy,  and  I  dared  not  employ  a  secretary.
However,  I  concluded  it  just  as  the  long  stay  at  Marly,  from
the  time  of  Monseigneur’s  death  in  April  to  July  15th,  came
to  an  end.  I  put  a  short  preface  addressed  to  the  dauphin.
This  document  will  he  found  among  my  papers.  Since  it

was  written  many  a  strange  supplement  might  be  added

«

to  it.

Though  the  dauphin  was  much  occupied  with  the  affair
which  later  gave  birth  to  the  famous  bull  Unigenitus,  the
king  having  placed  it  in  his  hands  for  settlement,  he  gave
me  an  hour  in  his  cabinet.  I  had  some  trouble  to  hide  in
my  pockets,  without  their  bulging  being  perceived,  the  many
papers  I  took  to  him.  He  put  some  of  them  away  with
his  own  most  important  documents,  others  with  less  impor¬
tant  ones,  and  I  could  not  help  admiring  the  precise  and
careful  manner  in  which  he  kept  his  papers,  in  spite  of  the
constant  change  of  residence  of  the  Court,  which  was  not
the  least  among  his  many  annoyances.  Before  putting  the
memoir  under  lock  apd  key,  he  ran  his  eye  over  our  deca¬
dence  and  was  horrified  at  the  number  of  items.  I  read  him
the  preface,  and  explained  the  sources  from  which  I  had
gathered  ah  that  preceded  my  own  time.  He  admired  the
fulness  of  the  work,  the  order  and  convenience  of  the  tables  ;
he  thanked  me  for  the  pains  I  had  taken  as  if  I  had  not
been  a  party  interested.  He  said  that  he  should  read  the
whole  at  Bontainehleau  (where  the  king  was  soon  going),  in
order  to  furnish  his  head  with  it,  after  which  he  would  dis-

19

1711]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

CUSS  the  whole  matter  with  me.  He  added  that  he  only
postponed  the  reading  untü  Fontainebleau  because  he  was
oppressed  by  an  affair  the  king  had  almost  entirely  left  to
him,  and  which  occupied  his  mind  all  the  more  because
rehgion  was  involved  in  it.  I  understood  of  course  that  it
was  that  of  the  Cardinal  de  Hoailles,  which  led,  as  I  have
said,  to  the  famous  constitution  Unigenitus.

I  thought  it  not  best  to  prolong  an  audience  in  which  I
had  nothing  to  add  to  the  subject  that  procured  it,  seeing
that  he  was  not  disposed  to  speak  to  me  on  other  matters.
As  he  did  not  say  more  about  the  affair  which  occupied  biTu
so  much  (in  fact,  too  much),  I  contented  myself  with  thank¬
ing  him  for  the  time  he  promised  to  bestow  upon  my
memoir  ;  representing  in  a  general  way  how  desirable  it  was
that  the  present  state  of  things  should  soon  end  ;  and  how
dangerous  were  the  passions  and  altercations  which  obscured
and  prolonged  it.  He  answered  with  his  usual  humihty
about  himself  and  with  kindness  to  me,  after  which  I  left
him.

The  Maréchal  de  Boufflers  died  at  Fontainebleau,  aged
sixty-eight.  I  have  so  often  mentioned  him  in  these  Me-
Death  and  moirs,  that  there  is  little  left  to  say.  Hothmcr

character  of  the  .  .  .

Maréchal  de  IS  moro  surprismg  than  the  fact  that  with  little
Boufflers.  mind,  and  a  mmd  so  courtier-like  (but  never

to  ministers,  with  whom  he  knew  well  how  to  hold  his  own),
he  still  preserved  an  integrity  without  the  slightest  stain,  a
generosity  that  was  perfectly  pure,  a  nobility  in  all  things  of
the  first  order,  and  a  true  and  sincere  virtue,  all  of  which
continually  showed  forth  in  his  conduct  throughout  his  life.
He  was  strictly  just  to  the  merits  and  actions  of  others  with¬
out  respect  to  persons  or  distinctions,  and  often  at  his  own
expense  ;  kind  and  adroit  in  excusing  faults  ;  bold  in  snatch¬
ing  occasions  to  replace  a  dismissed  man  in  the  saddle.  He

20

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

had  a  true  passion  for  the  State,  its  honour,  its  prosperity ,
and  he  had  the  same,  through  gratitude  and  admiration,  for
the  glory  and  the  person  of  the  king.  No  one  loved  his  fam¬
ily  and  his  friends  better,  nor  was  more  essentiaUy  an  honest
man,  nor  more  faithful  to  all  his  duties.  Men  of  honour
and  good  officers  were  held  by  him  in  the  highest  esteem.
With  the  magnificence  of  a  king  he  knew  how  to  regulate
his  life  and  was  singularly  disinterested  ;  he  was  sensitive  to
respect,  confidence,  and  friendship;  discreet  and  secret  to
the  last  degree  and  of  rare  modesty  at  all  times  ;  which,
however,  did  not  prevent  him  from  feeling  his  importance
on  certain  occasions,  as  we  have  seen,  and  making  himself
heavily  felt  by  whoever  showed  presumption  in  regard  to
him.  He  derived  what  he  was  from  his  love  of  the  good,
from  the  excellent  uprightness  of  his  intentions,  and  from
labours  of  many  kinds  which  exceeded  ordinary  powers  ;  so
that,  notwithstanding  the  limited  extent  of  his  ideas,  he  was
often  applied  to  for  memoranda,  projects,  and  letters  on  pub-
hc  affairs,  which  were  very  correct  and  very  sensible.  He
showed  me  several  of  them  ;  I  communicated  to  him  some  of
my  own  ;  and  he  had  a  very  important  one  in  his  desk  when
I  heard  of  his  extreme  illness,  which  was  such  that  he  died
the  next  day.  I  had  hoped  for  his  recovery  aU  along,  and
was  reluctant  to  show  any  uneasiness.  On  hearing  the  news
I  rushed  to  his  house  in  fear  of  seals  and  inventory  ;  I  told
him  I  hoped  all  from  the  state  in  which  I  found  him,  but
that  his  illness  being  severe  it  would  be  long  before  he  could
apply  himself,  and  that  meantime  I  wanted  to  use  my
memoir,  and  if  he  would  kindly  give  it  to  me  I  would  return
it  when  he  liked.  He  was  not  at  all  disturbed  by  these
remarks  ;  called  his  wife,  who  had  arrived  the  night  before,
and  asked  her  to  go  and  find  his  desk,  opened  it  when  she
brought  it,  took  out  the  paper  and  gave  it  to  me.

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

21

The  rare  and  most  fortunate  service  which  he  rendered  at
the  battle  of  Malplaquet  had  turned  his  head  to  the  point  of
daring  to  demand  the  sword  of  connétable,  and,  on  beincr
refused,  the  post  of  colonel-general  of  the  infantry,  also  sup¬
pressed,  and  still  more  dangerous.  The  refusal  of  the  latter,
which  was  even  more  curt  than  that  of  the  former,  angered
him  ;  he  forgot  his  rewards  and  saw  only  these  refusals,  in
contrast  with  what  was  lavished  on  Maréchal  de  Villars  in
recompense  for  the  same  battle  and  a  campaign  of  which  all
the  merit  of  every  kind  was  on  Boufflers’  side,  and  on  that  of
Villars  all  possible  demerit.  It  drove  him  to  despair.  The
king  was  disgusted,  as  if  he  were  an  ambitious  man  who  was
insatiable,  and  did  not  restrain  himself  from  saying  so.
Boufflers  loved  the  king  as  one  loves  a  master;  he  feared
him,  admired  him,  and  adored  him  almost  as  a  god.  He
felt  the  impression  now  made,  and  soon  after  he  saw  it
was  irremediable.  He  sank  into  a  deep  depression,  bitter,
gloomy,  which  made  him  count  all  his  glory  as  of  no  value,
and  little  by  httle  this  brooding  cast  him  into  strange  mfirm-
ities  which  the  doctors  were  unable  to  understand.  I  lost
my  time  and  efforts  in  trying  to  console  him  ;  for  he  never  hid
anything  from  me,  except  those  two  requests  before  he  made
them,  but  not  their  sad  result.  Sometimes  he  complained  to
Monseigneur,  who  was  kind  to  him  and  sought  to  comfort
him  ;  often  to  the  Due  de  Bourgogne,  and  again  after  he  was
dauphin;  the  latter  loved  and  esteemed  him  and  went  to
see  him  with  affection  during  his  illness.  He  had  just  re¬
turned  from  Paris  when  he  was  seized,  and  four  or  five  days’
illness  brought  him  to  death’s  door.  An  empiric  gave  him
a  remedy  which  put  him  out  of  danger  by  sweating,  but  the
man  forbade  him  to  take  any  purgative.  The  next  morning
the  Faculty,  much  astonished  to  find  him  in  such  good  con¬
dition,  persuaded  him  to  take  a  medicine  which  killed  him

22

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

within  twenty-four  hours,  with  signs  that  showed  it  worked
as  a  poison  in  conjunction  with  the  other  remedy,  and  did
no  honour  to  those  who  gave  it.  He  was  universally  re¬
gretted,  and  his  praises  sounded  from  all  lips,  although  his
influence  had  by  this  time  been  wholly  lost.  The  king
spoke  well  of  him,  hut  little,  and  felt  extremely  relieved  by
his  death.  The  Maréchale  de  Boufflers  was  taken  to  the
apartment  of  the  Duchesse  de  Guiche,  where  the  dauphin
and  the  dauphine  went  to  see  her.  She  wished  to  return
immediately  to  Paris,  and  would  not  allow  that  anything
should  he  asked  in  her  behalf,  even  rejecting  the  idea  with
indignation.  Nevertheless,  as  it  proved  that  their  affairs
were  much  embarrassed,  her  friends  forced  her  at  last  to
accept  a  pension  from  the  king  of  twelve  thousand  francs.

The  office  of  captain  of  the  guards  made  vacant  by
this  death  had  many  aspirants.  I  risked  putting  myself
charost  made  among  them  by  a  letter  which  I  presented  to
captain  of  the  king.  I  heard  afterwards  that  it  had

dauphin.  pleased  him  enough  to  give  me  hope  of  the

place.  But  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  withoiit  whom  I  did  nothing
important,  and  who  had  urged  me  to  the  step,  presently
brought  me  down  about  it.  The  maréchal  died  on  the  22nd
of  August.  Friday,  September  4,  the  king  worked  as  usual
with  Père  Telher,  and  then  sent  for  the  dauphin.  He  told
him  that  at  his  present  advanced  age  it  was  no  longer  for
himself  that  he  ought  to  choose  men,  who  would  serve  him
for  a  short  time  only  but  the  dauphin  all  their  lives,  and  he
ordered  him  to  say  frankly  to  which  of  the  applicants  he
gave  the  preference.  The  dauphin,  after  suitable  acknowl¬
edgments,  named  the  Due  de  Charost  as  the  one  that  would
be  most  agreeable  to  him,  and  obtained  the  appointment
instantly.  The  king  went  soon  after  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s
apartment,  and  sent  for  Charost  and  gave  him  the  post  with

1711]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

23

a  patent  of  five  hundred  thousand  francs,  the  same  as
Maréchal  de  Boufïiers  had  received,  telling  him  that  he
owed  this  preference  to  the  dauphin,  to  whom  he  had  left  the
choice,  and  ordering  him  to  send  the  news  at  once  to  his
father,  to  whom  it  would  give  great  pleasure.

Charost  was  heutenant-general,  but  had  not  served  for  a
long  time.  He  was  not  upon  such  a  footing  with  the  king
as  made  him  feared  by  the  other  aspirants  for  the  place  ;
there  was  therefore  extreme  surprise  and  much  buzzing  over
an  event  which  impressed  the  whole  Court  with  great  respect
for  the  dauphin  and  a  perfect  persuasion  of  what  he  could
now  do.  Hot  obtaining  the  office  myself,  I  was  delighted  to
have  one  of  my  most  intimate  friends  in  it.  He  and  I  had
reciprocally  wished  it  for  the  other.  I  never  saw  a  man  so
pleased,  both  at  the  thing  and  at  the  manner  of  it.  The
dauphin,  through  all  his  modest  reserve,  seemed  extremely
well-satisfied  ;  the  dauphine  too,  but  only  by  sympathy  ;  we
have  seen  the  rank  held  by  his  mother  the  Duchesse  de
Béthune  in  the  little  flock  of  M.  de  Cambrai,  and  among  the
disciples  of  Mme.  G-uyon,  and  how  that  re-acted  for  the  Due
de  Charost  on  the  dauphin  and  on  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse
and  de  Beauvüliers.  The  latter,  who  considered  the  Due  de
Charost  fitted  for  only  the  external  offices,  and  had  always
approached  him  to  the  dauphin  on  that  footing,  was  glad  of
this  appointment,  which  rewarded  the  faithfulness  of  the
mother,  and  favoured  the  little  flock  by  placing  a  man  of
their  own  in  so  important  a  place.

As  for  me,  he  had  other  views,  which  he  now  did  not
delay  to  explain  to  me,  and  in  which  I  was  soon  after  con¬
firmed  by  the  dauphin  himself.  It  was  to  make  me  governor
of  M.  le  Duc  de  Bretagne,  born  January  8,  1707,  as  soon  as
he  should  be  of  an  age  to  leave  the  hands  of  women,  —  a
place  there  was  every  appearance  that  the  king  would  leave

24

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

to  the  dauphin’s  disposal,  inasmuch  as  he  had  just  given  him
that  of  another  principal  post,  but  less  important  and  less
close  to  him.  Grod,  whose  breath  is  on  the  projects  of  men,
did  not  permit  the  accomplishment  of  this  one.  We  shall
soon  see  this  little  prince  interred  in  the  same  grave  with
him  who  was  the  hope  and  the  happiness  of  the  nation,  and
with  her  who  made  all  the  grace  and  charm  and  pleasure
of  the  Court.

About  this  time  it  was  known  that  the  King  of  Spain  had
given  to  the  Elector  of  Bavaria  in  full  sovereignty  all  that
remained  to  him  of  the  Low-Countries.  Of

The  Princesse

des  ursins  forms  cities,  there  were  only  Luxembourg,  JNamur,
LeSty  iï  her  Charleroy,  and  Kieuport  ;  the  promise  of  this
own  right.  cession  had  long  been  made  to  the  Elector.
The  Priucesse  des  Ursins,  not  content  with  reigning  virtually
in  Spain  with  aU  authority  and  power,  dared  to  dream  of
having  something  to  reign  over  actually  in  her  own  right.
She  seized  the  occasion  of  the  gift  made  by  the  King  of
Spain  to  the  Elector  to  stipulate  that  the  latter  should  give
her  territory  producing  a  revenue  of  one  hundred  thousand
francs  a  year,  to  be  held  by  her  in  full  sovereignty  during
her  lifetime.  Soon  after  it  was  agreed  with  the  Elector  that
the  chief  town  of  this  territory  should  he  Eoche  in  Ardennes,
and  that  the  new  sovereignty  should  bear  that  name.  It
will  he  seen  in  the  end  that  this  sovereignty  took  divers
forms,  changed  its  locality,  and  went  up  finaEy  in  smoke,  but
the  notion  of  it  lasted  a  long  time.  Mme.  des  Ursins  was
so  sure  of  it  that  she  built  thereon  a  splendid  project,  which
was  to  exchange  with  Louis  XIY.  the  sovereignty  assigned
to  her  on  the  frontier  for  another,  namely  a  sovereignty  in
Touraine  and  the  country  about  Amboise  for  her  lifetime,
reverting  afterwards  to  the  crown  ;  intending  to  leave  Spain
and  go  there  to  enjoy  it  for  the  rest  of  her  days.

1711]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  25

With  this  design,  which  she  thought  infaUible,  she  sent
d’Auhigny,  her  favourite  equerry,  to  France,  with  orders  to
prepare  a  fine  dwelling,  that  she  might  find  everything  ready
to  receive  her  when  the  time  should  come.  He  bought  a
field  near  Tours,  hut  nearer  still  to  Amhoise,  without  lands
or  rights  of  seigneurie,  because  when  sovereign  of  the  prov¬
ince  she  would,  of  course,  need  none.  D’Aubigny  immedi¬
ately  began  to  erect,  as  if  for  himself,  very  rapidly  but  very
solidly,  a  vast  and  superb  castle,  with  immense  inner  court¬
yards,  enormous  offices,  the  finest  and  most  beautiful  gardens,
and  furnished  in  a  manner  which  responded  in  magnificence
to  all  the  rest.  The  provinces,  the  neighbouring  country,
Paris,  the  Court  itself,  were  filled  with  amazement.  Ho  one
could  understand  so  prodigious  an  expense  for  a  simple
country-box,  a  mere  house  in  the  middle  of  a  field,  without
lands,  without  revenue,  without  seigneurie,  and  still  less  why
a  cage  so  vast  and  so  superb  was  wanted  by  the  bird  who
was  building  it.  It  was  long  an  enigma  ;  and  this  folly  of
Mme.  des  Ursins  was,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  first  cause  of
her  downfall  I  shaU  say  no  more  as  to  the  fate  of  her
chimera,  except  that  the  king  obliged  the  King  of  Spain  to
leave  out  of  the  treaty  the  stipulation  with  the  Elector,
which  the  allies  had  always  sneered  at  contemptuously,
never  allowing  it  to  appear  in  the  formal  agreements  ;  but,
in  order  not  to  return  to  the  subject,  let  us  see  what  became
of  this  wonderful  palace,  which  was  wholly  completed  and
furnished  before  Mme.  des  Ursins  lost  hope  of  playing  the
sovereign  within  it.

Ho  one  could  suppose  that  a  man  of  small  account  like
d’Auhigny,  no  matter  what  wealth  he  might  have  amassed,
would  have  dared  to  build  such  a  structure  for  himself,  hut
it  was  only  little  by  little  that  the  obscurity  cleared  up.  It
was  suspected,  certainly,  that  Mme.  des  Ursins  was  behind

26

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  l

him  ;  it  was  thought  that  she  might  weary  Spain,  or  be  her¬
self  wearied  out  with  her  life  there,  and  wish  to  end  her  days
ia  her  own  country  ;  without,  however,  hanging  about  the
Court  or  in  Paris  after  so  despotically  reigning  elsewhere.  But
a  palace  that  was  nothing  really  but  a  wayside  country-box
could  not  be  understood  as  her  retreat.  It  was  not  until
the  noise  that  her  proposed  sovereignty  made  throughout
Europe  that  people  began  to  open  their  eyes  about  Chante-
loup,  — that  was  the  name  of  the  palace,  — the  destination  of
which  now  became  evident.  The  total  downfall  of  this  ambi¬
tious  woman,  which  will  be  told  in  its  proper  place,  did  not
allow  her  to  inhabit  this  beautiful  dwelling.  It  remained  in

the  possession  of  d’Aubigny,  who  received  there,  very  suit¬
ably,  the  neighbours  and  inquisitive  persons,  and  travellers
of  consideration,  to  whom  he  made  no  concealment  of  the
fact  that  it  was  not  for  himself  nor  with  his  own  means  that
he  had  built  and  furnished  it.  He  settled  there,  however,
with  his  family,  and  was  liked  and  respected.

Bet  us  now  return  for  a  moment  to  Cardinal  de  Hoailles.
He  was  a  man  with  whom  my  age  and  my  position  had
given  me  no  sort  of  intimacy  or  even  inter-
^ejesuS^piL  course.  His  deplorable  weakness  in  the  utter
against  Cardinal  ruin  of  Port-Koyal  des  Champs  and  the  exile
of  Charmel,  of  which  I  spoke  at  the  time,  had
even  given  me  some  aversion  to  him.  But  the  trap  laid  for
him  by  the  Jesuits,  the  hypocritical  insolence  with  which  it
was  supported,  his  evident  innocence,  caught  in  their  toils
and  oppressed  by  an  injustice  that  was  equally  evident,  and
that  innocence  at  a  disadvantage  through  patience,  charity,
confidence  in  the  goodness  and  simplicity  of  his  cause,  and
through  a  fatal  slowness  of  nature,  had  roused  me  against
the  iniquity  of  the  plot,  which  was  palpable,  the  progress  of
which  went  on  advancing.  I  was  the  intimate  friend  of

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  27

several  of  his  friends,  both  men  and  women,  who  spoke  to
me  often  of  the  matter;  and  Père  Telher,  while  sounding
me  about  it  in  his  sly  way,  had  not  slyness  enough  to
cover  its  gross  rascahty.  He  had  already  used  his  influence
with  the  king  to  forbid  Cardinal  de  Noailles’  presence  at
Court  unless  summoned.  All  this  had  so  revolted  me  that
I  went  to  the  archbishop’s  palace  one  morning  at  the  close
of  his  audience  hour  to  testify  to  him  the  sense  I  had  of  the
wrong  done  hhn.  He  was  extremely  touched  by  my  visit,  and
also  by  the  little  caution  I  showed  in  coming  to  him  at  so
pubhc  an  hour.  He  testified  in  return  how  much  he  felt
about  it,  and  then  he  entered  upon  the  matter  freely,  and
from  that  moment  an  intimacy  was  bom  between  us,  which
ever  broadened,  and  ended  only  with  his  hfe.  Soon  after  he
had  permission  to  see  the  king,  and  not  long  after  that  his
affair  was  made  over  to  the  dauphin.

The  Court  had  scarcely  returned  from  Fontainebleau  to
Versailles  before  the  mine,  laid  with  such  art,  exploded
with  all  the  effect  the  sappers  and  miners  expected.  The
khig  was  overwhelmed  with  letters  of  bishops,  hypocritically
trembhng  for  the  faith,  who,  in  the  extreme  peril  brought
upon  it  by  Cardinal  de  Noailles,  felt  themselves  forced  by
their  conscience,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  precious
trust  confided  to  them,  to  fling  themselves  at  the  feet  of  the
elder  son  of  the  Church,  the  destroyer  of  heresy,  the  Con¬
stantine,  the  Theodosius  of  these  our  days,  to  ask  a  protec¬
tion  he  had  never  refused  to  sound  doctrine.  The  pathos  of
these  missives,  expressed  in  various  styles,  was  further  sup¬
ported  by  the  anxious  terror  of  these  poor  humble  bishops,
who  found  themselves  forced  to  combat  the  archbishop  of
the  capital,  adorned  with  the  Eoman  purple,  and  powerful  in
family,  in  friends,  in  favour,  in  influence.  The  uproar  was
great  ;  and  the  king,  to  whom  these  letters  were  presented

28

MEMOIKS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

by  Père  Tellier  (whose  hands  were  full  of  them),  and  by  him
commented  upon,  fell  into  a  state  of  alarm,  as  if  religion
itself  were  being  destroyed.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  also  re¬
ceived  letters  of  the  same  kind  which  the  Bishop  of  Meaux
made  her  believe,  for  he  too  was  in  the  battle,  and  she  stirred
up  the  king  still  further.  But  at  the  height  of  this  triumph
a  misfortune  occurred  which  would  have  defeated  forever
the  affair  thus  powerfully  conducted,  if  Cardinal  de  hToailles
had  taken  the  trouble  to  profit  by  it.

I  repeat  here  that  I  shall  not  swell  these  Memoirs  by  the
tale  of  an  affair  which  has  filled  folio  volumes,  but  merely
skirt  it  in  places  where  it  passed  through  my  hands.  I  refer
the  reader,  therefore,  to  those  volumes  for  comment  as  to  this
present  matter  and  all  the  rest.  Now  it  so  happened  that
the  original  letter  of  Père  Tellier  to  the  Bishop  of  Clermont
urging  him  to  write  to  the  king,  informing  him,  in  order  to
persuade  him,  of  the  promise  made  to  him.  Père  Tellier,  by
several  other  bishops  to  take  the  same  step,  and  enclosing  a
draught  for  his  letter  to  the  king  which  he  had  only  to  copy,
sign,  and  send  through  him,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Cardinal  de
Noailles.  It  showed  the  plot  so  manifestly  that  there  was
neither  cloak  nor  cover  to  be  put  upon  it.  The  cardinal  had
only  to  go  to  the  king  instantly,  and,  without  letting  these
important  papers  be  taken  from  him,  make  the  king  read
them,  point  out  to  him  briefly  the  outrage  of  the  whole  affair
and  the  consequences  of  what  was  brewing  so  darkly  against
him  at  the  cost  of  the  king’s  peace  and  that  of  the  Church,
and  ask  him  for  justice,  in  general,  and  in  particular  that
Père  Telher  should  be  dismissed  to  such  a  distance  that  no
one  should  ever  hear  of  him  again  ;  and  also  to  speak  in  the
same  way  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and  make  all  the  public
stir  about  it  that  such  profound  wickedness  deserved.  Père
Tellier  would  then  have  been  ruined  beyond  recall;  the

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

29

letter-writing  bishops  convicted  ;  the  affair  reduced  to  ashes,
and  the  cardinal  in  greater  credit  and  safer  than  ever.

Instead  of  taking  this  wise  and  easy  course,  the  good  man,
full  of  confidence  in  the  proofs  he  held,  talked  about  them,
showed  them,  and  waited  for  the  day  of  his  audience.  The
matter  transpired  ;  Père  Tellier  was  warned  ;  the  excess  of
his  danger  gave  wings  to  his  strength;  he  prejudiced  the
king  as  he  knew  so  well  how  to  do,  and  succeeded  so
utterly  was  that  prince  abandoned  to  him.  The  cardmal
found  himself  forestalled.  His  surprise  and  indignation
at  seeing  the  king  cold  to  so  monstrous  an  imposture,  thus
clearly  exposed,  bewildered  him.  He  did  not  sufficiently
perceive  that  the  king  was  still  uncertain  and  shaken  ;  it
was  a  moment  when  force  was  needed  to  carry  the  day  ;  he
ought  not  to  have  left  the  king,  as  he  did,  through  an  interval
of  eight  days  till  his  next  audience,  to  be  caught  still  further
in  the  toils  of  the  confessor.  Instead  of  force,  he  showed  only
gentleness  and  feeble  distress,  and  was  wrecked  in  port.  Père
Tellier,  who,  in  spite  of  his  audacity,  his  lies,  and  his  tricks,
trembled  for  the  effect  of  this  audience,  was  reassured  when
he  saw  there  was  none.  He  profited  by  it,  like  a  clever
scoundrel  who  felt  with  whom  he  had  to  do  ;  having  escaped
with  only  the  greatest  fright  that  he  and  his  ever  had  in  their
lives.  They  now  worked  without  ceasing  on  the  king  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;  but  it  was  some  little  time  before  they
dared  to  push  against  Cardinal  de  NoaiUes,  fearing  the  public
which  was  making  an  outcry.  They  gave  time  for  the  uproar
to  subside  and  for  themselves  to  get  breath;  after  which  they
continued  boldly  the  scheme  they  had  undertaken.

The  dauphin  could  not  be  hoodwinked  like  the  king.  He
and  the  dauphine  spoke  openly  ;  the  prince  told  me,  and
also  told  others,  that  Père  Tellier  ought  to  be  dismissed.
Before  the  end  of  the  Fontainebleau  trip  the  king  had  turned

30  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  i.

over  totally  to  the  dauphin  the  affair  of  the  Cardinal  de
Noailles.  The  prince  had  worked  over  it  too  theologically.
The  affair  of  Car-  hut  I  thought  I  saw  that  he  was  brought  to
dinai  de  Noailles  distrust  of  the  Jesuits  by  this  affair;  in

given  wholly  to  o  ^

the  dauphin.  fact,  this  is  dear  from  his  remark  which  I
have  just  quoted  about  Père  Telher.  And  what  convinced
me  of  it  was  that  the  last  time  I  worked  with  him  (which
was  two  days  before  the  return  to  Marly  from  Versailles,
and  four  or  five  days  before  the  illness  which  ended  in  the
dauphine’s  death),  after  a  sitting  of  two  hours  in  which  there
had  been  no  question  of  the  affair  of  Cardinal  de  ISToailles,
he  began  to  speak  of  it  as  we  were  putting  up  our  papers,
and  the  conversation  that  followed  was  long.  In  the  course
of  it  he  said  a  remarkable  thing.  Praising  the  piety,  candour,
and  gentleness  of  the  cardinal,  “  Never,”  he  added,  “  will
they  persuade  me  that  he  is  a  Jansenist  and  he  went  on  to
give  proofs  for  his  opinion.

This  conversation  ended  by  his  ordering  me  to  inform
myself  to  the  bottom  about  aU  matters  relating  to  the  liber¬
ties  of  the  GaUican  Church,  and  also  about  this  affair  of  the
Cardinal  de  NoaiUes,  which  the  king  had  completely  made
over  to  him  to  settle  finally.  He  had  worked  much  over  it  and
he  wished  now  to  finish  it  with  me  ;  he  requested  me  two  or
three  times  over  to  inform  myself  thoroughly,  especially  on
the  two  points  above  named  ;  to  go  to  Paris  and  consult  with
whom  I  thought  best  ;  to  find  the  most  instructive  books  on
Pome  and  our  liberties,  because  he  wanted  to  work  funda¬
mentally  on  those  two  points  with  me,  and  to  finish  the
cardinal’s  affair,  which  he  thought  was  going  too  far  and  too
slowly,  and  he  now  desired  to  end  it  without  appeal  by  my
assistance.  Never  had  the  prince  given  me  any  idea  of  this
intention,  although  he  had  often  spoken  to  me  of  the  affair,
I  have  since  believed  that  he  conceived  it  only  from  the

31

1711]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

disgust  and  suspicions  excited  in  him  by  the  manifestation
of  the  infamy  of  the  intrigue  revealed  by  the  discovery  of
Père  Tellier’s  letter.  He  made  me  promise  to  apply  myself
without  delay  to  the  execution  of  his  orders,  and  not  to  lose
an  instant  in  putting  myself  in  a  condition  to  work  at  the
matter  with  liim.  I  went,  in  consequence,  for  several  days
to  Paris,  when  I  was  stopped  by  the  dauphine’s  illness,  and,
a  few  days  later,  by  the  most  fatal  blow  that  Prance  could
possibly  have  received.

IT.

Monday,  January  18,  the  king  went  to  Marly.  I  note
this  trip  expressly.  Scarcely  was  the  Court  established
iyi2.  there  when  Boudin,  now  first  physician  to  the
waminggivenby  (Jauphine,  whom  he  amused  immensely,  warned
her  to  be  careful,  because  he  had  sure  infor¬
mation  that  persons  were  seeking  to  poison  her,  and  the  dau-
pPin  also.  He  spoke  in  the  same  way  to  the  dauphin ,  hut
not  content  with  that,  he  talked  of  the  matter  openly  in  the
salon,  with  a  frightened  air  which  terrified  everybody.  The
king  wished  to  speak  to  him  in  private.  He  told  the
king  that  the  warning  was  sure,  without  his  knowing  how
it  reached  him  ;  and  he  held  firm  to  that  contradiction
for  if  he  was  ignorant  of  whence  it  came,  how  could  he
think  and  assert  that  it  was  sure  ?  This  was  a  first  puff
of  something  mysterious,  which  his  friends  at  once  put  a
stop  to;  but  public  rumour  was  started  and  re-echoed  it.
What  was  still  more  singular  is  that  twenty-four  hours
after  Boudin  had  given  this  warning,  the  dauphin  received
another  like  it  from  the  King  of  Spain,  given  vaguely,  and
without  quoting  any  one,  but  as  if  he  were  convinced  of
the  truth  of  it.  In  this  latter  warning  the  dauphin  only
was  clearly  mentioned  ;  the  dauphine  obscurely  and  by
imphcation.  At  least,  this  was  how  the  dauphin  spoke  of
it  to  me,  and  I  do  not  know  that  he  said  more  to  any  one.
Every  one  assumed  an  air  of  despising  so  vague  a  tale,  of
which  the  origin  was  not  known  ;  but  inwardly  people  were
much  struck;  and  a  gloom  of  consternation  and  silence

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  33

spread  about  the  Court  and  through  all  the  usual  occupa¬
tions  and  amusements.

Not  long  before  this  a  shock  of  earthquake  had  been
felt  at  Paris  and  at  Versailles  ;  but  so  hght  that  many
persons  did  not  perceive  it  ;  in  Touraine,  however,  and
other  places  on  the  same  day  and  hour,  and  in  Saxony  and
the  neighbouring  German  towns,  it  was  very  perceptible.
At  this  time  a  new  tontine  was  established  in  Paris.^

I  have  often  spoken  of  Maréchal  Catinat,  of  his  virtue,
liis  wisdom,  his  modesty,  his  disinterestedness  ;  of  the  rare
superiority  of  his  sentiments,  of  his  great

Eulogy  and  death  ^  ^  .

of  Maréchal  parts  as  a  Captain,  so  that  little  remains  to

Catinat.  death,  which  took  place  at  a  very

advanced  age  in  his  little  house  of  Saint-Gatien  near  Saint-
Denis,  where  he  had  retired,  having  never  married  or  laid
by  any  wealth,  and  where  of  late  years  he  seldom  received
any  one.  He  recalled,  by  his  simplicity,  his  frugahty,  his
contempt  for  worldly  things,  by  the  peace  of  his  soul  and
the  uniformity  of  his  conduct,  the  memory  of  those  great
men  who,  after  triumphs  well-deserved,  returned  tranquilly
to  their  ploughs,  always  lovers  of  their  country  and  little
sensitive  to  the  ingratitude  of  the  Pome  they  had  served
so  well.  Catinat  put  his  phüosophy  to  profit  by  true  piety.
He  had  mind,  great  sense,  mature  reflection,  and  he  never
forgot  his  lowly  station.  His  clothes,  his  equipments,  his
furniture,  his  house,  were  all  of  the  utmost  simplicity ,  so
were  his  air,  his  manner,  and  his  whole  bearing.  He  was
tail,  dark-complexioned,  thin,  with  a  pensive,  rather  slow

1  What  was  called  a  tontine  was  a  financial  association  composed  of
persons  who  each  put  into  a  common  capital,  in  order  to  draw  an  annuity
either  on  his  own  head  or  on  that  of  somebody  else  ;  with  the  condition
that  the  interest  should  revert  at  each  decease  to  the  survivors.  The
name  tontine  came  from  the  Neapolitan,  Laurent  Tontin  [Lorenzo  Tonti],
who  obtained  from  Louis  XIII.,  in  1635,  the  authority  to  found  in  Paris
an  establishment  of  this  description.  (Note  by  the  French  editor.)

VOL.  III.  —  3

34  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

and  somewhat  common  air,  and  beautiful  eyes  that  were
very  intelligent.  He  deplored  the  signal  faults  he  saw
succeeding  one  another  ceaselessly:  the  extinction  of  aU
emulation;  the  luxury,  the  vacancy,  the  ignorance;  the
confusion  of  classes;  the  inquisition  put  in  place  of  the
pohce;  he  saw  aU  these  signs  of  destruction,  and  he  said
that  nothing  but  some  very  dangerous  crisis  of  disorder
would  ever  restore  order  to  the  kingdom.

The  king,  as  I  have  said,  went  to  Marly  on  Monday  the
18  th  of  January.  The  dauphine  had  gone  there  early  with
,  a  swelling  in  her  face,  and  on  her  arrival  went

at  Marly  for  the  instantly  to  bed.  She  rose  at  seven  in  the
evening  because  the  king  wished  her  to  pre¬
side  in  the  salon.  She  played  cards  in  dishabille  with  her
head  wrapped  up  ;  saw  the  king  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s
a  little  before  his  supper,  and  then  went  to  bed,  where  she
supped  herself.  She  did  not  rise  the  next  day  until  it  was
time  to  play  cards  in  the  salon  and  see  the  king,  after
which  she  went  to  bed  as  before  and  supped  there.  On
the  20th  the  swelling  diminished,  and  she  was  better.  She
was  rather  subject  to  these  swellings  on  account  of  her
teeth.  She  lived  the  next  few  days  as  usual.

Saturday,  January  30,  the  dauphin  and  the  Due  de  Berry
went  with  M.  le  Duc  to  a  battue.  It  was  freezing  hard;
chance  willed  that  the  Due  de  Berry  should  be  on  one  side
of  a  long  and  wide  pond  and  M.  le  Duc  on  the  other,  opposite
to  him.  The  Due  de  Berry  fired  ;  a  grain  of  shot  slipped,  re¬
bounded,  and  struck  M.  le  Duc,  puttiug  out  his  eye.  The
king  heard  of  the  accident  while  in  the  gardens.  The  next
day,  Sunday,  the  Due  de  Berry  went  to  throw  himself  at
the  feet  of  Mme.  la  Duchesse.  He  had  not  dared  to  go  the
evening  before,  nor  to  see  M.  le  Duc,  who  bore  his  misfortune
with  much  patience.  The  king  saw  him  Sunday  ;  the  dauphin

oa/'/  e

1712]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

35

and  dauphine  the  day  before.  The  Court  returned  to  Ver¬
sailles  the  next  day,  Monday,  February  1  ;  Mme.  la  Princesse
and  all  her  family,  and  several  ladies  famihar  with  Mme.  la
Duchesse  estabhshed  themselves  at  Marly.  The  Due  de
Berry  was  bitterly  grieved.  M.  le  Duc  was  seriously  ill  for
quite  a  long  time  ;  then  he  had  the  measles  at  Marly,  and
after  a  short  interval  of  recovery  the  small-pox  at  Saint-
Maur.

Friday,  February  5,  the  Due  de  Noailles  gave  a  very  beau¬
tiful  box  filled  with  excellent  Spanish  snuff  to  the  dauphine.
Singular  loss  of  who  took  some  and  thought  it  very  good,
a  snuff-box.  ^  momiug.  Entering  her

cabinet,  where  no  one  went,  she  put  the  box  upon  the  table
and  left  it  there.  That  evening  fever  seized  her  with  chills.
She  went  to  bed  and  could  not  rise,  not  even  to  go  to  the
king’s  cabinet  after  supper.  The  next  day,  although  she  had
had  fever  all  night,  she  rose  at  her  customary  hour  and
passed  the  day  as  usual,  but  at  night  the  fever  seized  her
again.  She  was  tolerably  well  through  the  night,  but  less  so
the  next  day  (Sunday),  and  at  six  o’clock  that  evening  she
was  suddenly  seized  with  a  pain  below  the  temple,  covering
a  space  of  only  the  size  of  a  six-sous  piece,  but  so  violent
that  she  begged  the  king,  who  was  coming  to  see  her,  not  to
enter.  This  fury  of  pain  lasted  without  relief  till  Monday
the  8th,  resisting  the  smoking  and  chewing  of  tobacco,  quan¬
tities  of  opium,  and  two  bleedings  from  the  arm.  The  fever
grew  worse  as  the  pain  quieted.  She  said  she  had  suffered
more  than  in  childbirth.

A  state  so  violent  roused  rumours  in  her  chamber  about
the  box  which  the  Due  de  Noailles  had  given  her.  When
she  went  to  bed  after  the  fever  seized  her  on  the  day  she
had  received  it,  she  spoke  of  it  to  her  ladies,  praising  both
the  box  and  the  snuff,  and  she  asked  Mme.  de  Lévi  to  go

36

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  ii.

and  fetch  it  from  her  cabinet  where  she  would  find  it  on  the
table.  Mme.  de  Lévi  went  and  could  not  find  it  ;  in  a  word,
to  make  a  long  story  short,  in  spite  of  all  mqniry,  nothing
was  ever  seen  or  heard  of  the  box  which  the  dauphine  had
left  in  her  cabinet  on  that  table.  This  disappearance  seemed
very  extraordinary  at  the  time  it  was  first  noticed;  hut
the  fruitless  search  which  was  continued,  followed  by  such
strange  and  rapid  illness,  roused  dire  suspicions.  They  did
not  go  so  far  as  to  involve  the  man  who  gave  the  box,  or
at  any  rate  they  were  restrained  so  carefully  that  they  never
touched  him.  The  whole  talk  was,  in  fact,  confined  to  a
very  restricted  circle.  She  used  tobacco  unknown  to  the
king,  though  with  confidence  because  this  habit  was  known
to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;  but  it  would  have  caused  real  anger
in  the  king  had  he  known  of  it  ;  and  that  is  why  those  about
her  feared  to  divulge  the  singularity  of  the  loss  of  the  box.

Tuesday,  February  9,  the  drowsiness  was  great  all  day,
the  fever  strong,  short  wakings  with  the  mind  confused,  and
certain  marks  on  the  skin,  which  gave  hopes
ciÏÏnïrheïLn-  of  the  disease  being  measles;  because  it  was

lessor;  her  death.  Well-knOWU  perSOUS

were  attacked  by  it  at  the  same  time  both  at  Versailles  and
in  Paris.  The  night  of  Tuesday  to  Wednesday  was  all  the
worse  because  the  hope  of  measles  vanished.  In  the  morn¬
ing  the  king  came  to  see  the  dauphine,  to  whom  they  had
given  an  emetic.  The  operation  of  it  was  aU  that  was
desired,  but  it  produced  no  rehef.  They  forced  the  dauphin,
who  had  not  left  her  bedside,  to  go  down  into  the  gardens  to
take  the  air,  of  which  he  had  great  need  ;  but  his  anxiety
brought  him  back  incontinently  to  the  room.  The  disease
increased  towards  night  and  at  eleven  o’clock  a  paroxysm  of
fever  came  on.  The  night  was  very  bad.  Thursday,  the  11th,
the  king  came  at  nine  o’clock  into  the  dauphine’s  room,  which

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  37

Mme.  de  Maintenon  scarcely  left  except  when  the  king  was
in  hers.  The  princess  was  now  so  ill  that  they  resolved  to
speak  to  her  about  the  sacraments.  Low  as  she  was,  she
was  nevertheless  surprised;  she  asked  questions  about  her
state,  to  which  they  made  their  answers  as  little  alarming
as  they  could,  but  without  giving  up  the  proposal.  She
thanked  them  for  their  sincerity  and  said  she  would  prepare
herself.

After  a  short  time  they  began  to  fear  a  sudden  change.
Père  La  Eue,  Jesuit,  her  confessor,  whom  she  had  always
seemed  to  like,  went  to  the  bedside  and  exhorted  her  not  to
delay  her  confession.  She  looked  at  him;  answered  that
she  understood  him,  and  said  no  more.  La  Eue  then  pro¬
posed  that  she  should  make  it  at  once,  and  received  no
answer.  Like  a  man  of  sense  he  felt  what  the  trouble  was,
and  like  a  man  of  tact  he  changed  his  course  instantly.  He
said  to  her  that  she  might  have  some  repugnance  to  confess
herself  to  him,  and  if  so  he  conjured  her  to  feel  no  constraint,
above  all  not  to  fear  anything  whatever  ;  he  promised  to  take
all  upon  himself,  and  he  begged  her  to  tell  him  whom  she
would  like,  and  he  would  go  himself  and  fetch  him.  She  then
said  she  would  be  very  glad  to  confess  to  M.  Bailly,  priest  of
the  mission  of  the  parish  church  of  Versailles.  He  was  a
much  respected  man,  who  confessed  the  more  sober  persons
of  the  Court,  and  who,  in  the  language  of  the  day,  was  clean
of  all  suspicion  of  Jansenism,  which  was  rare  among  his  kind.
He  proved  to  be  in  Paris.  The  princess  seemed  distressed,
and  inclined  to  await  his  return  ;  but  on  Père  La  Eue  telling
her  it  was  best  not  to  lose  precious  time,  which,  after  she
had  received  the  sacraments,  could  be  usefully  employed  by
the  doctors,  she  asked  for  a  Franciscan  friar,  called  Père
Noël,  whom  Père  La  Eue  went  to  find  immediately,  and
brought  to  her.

38

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAENT-SIMON.  [chap,  il

It  may  be  imagined  what  excitement  was  caused  by  this
change  of  confessor  at  so  critical  and  fearful  a  moment,  and
all  that  was  thought  of  it.  I  shall  return  to  that  ;  I  cannot
now  interrupt  a  narrative  so  fatally  interesting.  The  dauphin
had  succumbed.  He  had  hidden  his  iUness  as  long  as  he
could  in  order  not  to  leave  the  pillow  of  the  dauphine’s  bed.
His  fever  became  too  strong  to  be  further  concealed,  and
the  doctors,  who  wished  to  spare  him  the  horrors  they  fore¬
saw,  neglected  nothing,  urged  by  the  king,  to  keep  Mm  in
his  own  room  and  to  support  him  there  from  moment  to
moment  with  false  news  of  his  wife  s  state.

The  confession  was  long.  Extreme  unction  was  admin¬
istered,  immediately  followed  by  the  holy  viaticum,  which
the  king  went  to  receive  at  the  foot  of  the  grand  staircase.
An  hour  later,  the  dauphine  asked  for  the  prayers  for  the
dying.  They  told  her  she  was  not  yet  in  that  condition,
and  with  words  of  consolation  they  exhorted  her  to  try  to
go  to  sleep.  The  Queen  of  England  came  early  after  dinner  ;
she  was  taken  by  the  gaUery  into  the  salon  wMch  separates
the  gallery  from  the  chamber  of  the  dauphine.  The  king
and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  were  in  the  salon,  where  the
doctors  were  brought  to  consult  in  their  presence;  there
were  seven,  either  belonging  to  the  Court  or  summoned
from  Paris.  They  all  with  one  voice  decided  on  bleeding
from  the  foot  before  the  return  of  the  fever  ;  and  if  that  did
not  have  the  success  they  expected,  to  give  an  emetic  in  the
morning.  The  bleeding  of  the  foot  was  done  at  seven
o’clock  iu  the  evening.  The  paroxysm  came  on,  but  they
thought  it  less  violent  than  the  preceding  one.  The  night
was  cruel.  The  king  came  very  early  into  the  dauphine’s
room  ;  the  emetic  which  she  had  taken  at  nine  o’clock  had
little  effect.  The  day  went  by  in  symptoms  that  were  each
more  distressing  than  the  others;  consciousness  at  rare

1712]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

39

intervals.  Towards  evening  all  who  were  in  the  chamber
lost  their  heads  ;  many  persons  were  allowed  to  enter,
although  the  king  was  there.  A  few  moments  before  she
expired  he  left  the  room,  got  into  his  carriage  with  Mme.
de  Main  ton  on  and  Mme.  de  Caylns,  and  went  to  Marly.
Both  were  in  the  most  bitter  grief  ;  and  had  no  strength  to
go  and  see  the  dauphin.

Never  did  any  princess  arriving  at  a  strange  Court  so
young  come  better  trained  and  instructed,  or  knowing

better  how  to  profit  by  the  instructions  she

Eulogy,  traits,  >'

and  character  of  Pad  rcceivcd.  Her  able  father,  who  knew

the  dauphine.  .

our  Court  to  its  depths,  had  pictured  it  to
her,  and  shown  her  plainly  the  way  in  which  alone  she
could  make  herself  happy.  Much  natural  intelligence  and
adaptability  seconded  him,  and  many  amiable  qualities
which  attached  all  hearts,  while  her  personal  situation
with  her  husband,  with  the  king,  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
drew  to  her  the  homage  of  ambition.  She  had  worked  for
this  from  the  moment  of  her  arrival,  and  she  never  ceased
so  long  as  she  hved  a  work  so  useful,  of  which  she  gathered
the  fruits  continually.  Gentle,  timid,  but  clever,  so  kind  that
she  dreaded  to  give  the  slightest  pain  to  others,  and,  though
lively  and  volatile,  very  capable  of  views  and  of  long-con¬
tinued  and  persevering  action,  she  bore  constraint  even  to
torture,  of  which  she  felt  the  weight,  although  apparently
it  cost  her  nothing.  Kindness  was  natural  to  her,  spon¬

taneous  ;  she  showed  it  in  all  things  even  to  her  Court.

Eegularly  plain,  with  pendent  cheeks,  a  forehead  too
prominent,  a  nose  that  said  nothing,  thick,  cracking  lips,
hair  and  eyebrows  of  a  chestnut-brown  well-planted,  the
most  speaking  and  beautiful  eyes  in  all  the  world,  few
teeth  and  those  decayed  (of  which  she  was  the  first  to
speak  and  laugh),  the  finest  complexion,  and  the  softest  skin,

40

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

Httle  bust  but  admirable  in  shape,  the  throat  long,  with  a
touch  of  goitre  that  was  not  unbecoming  to  her,  a  noble
carriage  of  the  head,  graceful  but  majestic,  and  a  glance  in
keeping,  with  a  most  expressive  smile,  a  long  waist,  round
and  slender,  easy  and  perfect  in  outline,  the  walk  of  a
goddess  on  the  clouds,  —  she  pleased  to  the  last  degree.
Graces  were  born  at  every  step,  from  her  manners,  from
her  commonest  words.  Always  a  simple  and  natural  air,
naïve  very  often,  but  seasoned  with  intelligence,  charming
all  who  approached  her  with  the  ease  that  was  in  her,  so
that  she  communicated  that  ease  to  all.

She  wanted  to  please  even  the  most  useless  and  common¬
place  persons,  without  ever  seeming  to  seek  it.  Each  was
tempted  to  think  that  she  was  whoUy  and  solely  for  the  one
who  was  with  her.  Her  youthful  gayety,  hvely,  active,
animated  everything,  and  her  nymphhke  airiness  and  hght-
ness  carried  her  along  like  those  whirling  vapours  that  fiU
many  places  in  a  moment,  giving  life  and  motion  to  aU.
She  adorned  all  spectacles  ;  she  was  the  soul  of  fetes,  of
pleasures,  balls,  where  she  enchanted  by  her  grace  and  by
the  perfection  and  precision  of  her  dancing.  She  loved
cards,  amused  herself  with  small  play  (for  everything  amused
her),  but  preferred  high  stakes,  was  prompt,  clear-headed,
and  the  prettiest  player  in  the  world,  detecting  the  game
of  every  one  in  a  moment  ;  but  she  was  equally  gay  and
amused  in  the  afternoons  with  sober  reading  and  conversa¬
tion  on  what  was  read,  and  in  working  with  her  serious
ladies,  as  she  called  the  older  ladies  of  the  palace.  She
never  spared  herself,  not  even  as  to  her  health;  she  for¬
got  not  the  slightest  little  things,  and  this  persistently,  to
win  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  king  through  her.  Her
suppleness  towards  them  was  unequalled,  and  it  never
failed  for  a  moment.  She  accompanied  it  with  a  discretion

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

41

she  had  gained  from  the  thorough  knowledge  of  them  which
study  and  experience  as  to  proper  degrees  of  freedom  or
caution  had  given  her.  Her  pleasure,  her  amusements,  —
even,  I  repeat,  her  health,  —  were  sacrificed  to  them.  In
this  way  she  acquired  a  freedom  in  their  presence  which
none  of  the  king’s  children,  not  even  his  hastards,  had
approached.

In  public  she  was  serious,  circumspect,  respectful  with  the
king,  and  timid  in  her  decorum  towards  Mme.  de  Mainte-
non,  whom  she  always  called  “  Aunt,”  to  prettily  mingle
friendship  with  respect.  In  private  she  chattered  and
jumped  and  hovered  about  them  ;  sometimes  perched  on  the
arms  of  their  chairs,  sometimes  on  their  knees  ;  fiinging  her
arms  about  their  necks,  kissing  them,  caressing  them,  rumpling
them,  holding  them  by  the  chin,  teasing  them  ;  rummaging
among  their  papers,  their  letters,  opening  and  reading  some
occasionally  in  spite  of  their  remonstrances  (but  only  when
she  saw  that  they  were  ready  to  laugh),  and  chattering  about
what  she  read.  Admitted  at  all  times,  even  when  couriers
bringing  the  most  important  news  were  received,  and  during
the  councils,  she  was  always  seeking  to  ohhge,  to  serve,  to
excuse,  to  do  good  ;  unless  she  was  violently  opposed  to
some  one  like  Pontchartrain,  whom  she  called,  to  the  king,
“your  one-eyed  villain.”  She  was  so  free  in  speech  that
one  evening,  hearing  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  king
talkiag  with  affection  for  the  English  Court,  at  the  time
when  they  hoped  for  peace  from  Queen  Anne,  “  Aunt,”  she
said,  “  it  must  be  owned  that  in  England  the  queens*  reign
better  than  the  kings  ;  and  do  you  know  why  ?  ”  skipping
about  the  room.  “  Because  under  kings  the  women  govern,
hut  the  men  under  queens.”  The  wonder  is  that  they  both
laughed  and  said  she  was  right.

One  evening  as  she  was  going  to  bed,  where  the  Due  de

42  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

Bourgogne  awaited  her,  she  began  to  talk  to  Mmes,  de
Noaaret  and  du  Châtelet,  who  told  it  to  me  the  next  day,
of  the  luck  of  those  witches  [Mme.  de  Mamtenon  and  Mile.
Choin],  and  added,  laughing  ;  “I  should  hke  to  die  before
M.  le  Duc  de  Bourgogne  and  see  what  would  happen,
am  certain  he  would  marry  a  Gray  Sister,  or  the  doorkeeper
at  the  Billes  de  Sainte-Marie.”  She  was  quite  as  attentive
to  please  the  Due  de  Bourgogne  as  to  please  the  king  him¬
self  ;  though  sometimes  she  risked  a  good  deal,  trusting  too
much  to  his  passion  for  her  ;  hut  she  took  the  keenest  in¬
terest  in  his  personal  grandeur  and  in  his  fame.  We  have
seen  how  she  felt  the  events  of  the  campaign  of  Lille  and
its  results,  and  ah  that  she  did  to  rescue  him  in  many  ways
so  essential  that  he  owed  his  safety  prmcipally  to  her.  ^  The
king  could  not  do  without  her.  All  was  blank  to  him  in  his
private  life  when  the  parties  of  pleasure,  which  his  tender¬
ness  and  consideration  wished  her  to  make  for  her  diversion,
kept  her  away  from  him  ;  and  until  his  puhhc  supper,  which
she  rarely  missed,  a  cloud  of  gravity  and  silence  appeared
upon  his  whole  person.  So,  whatever  liking  she  had  for
such  parties,  she  was  very  sober  about  them,  and  only  made
them  when  especially  told  to  do  so.  She  took  great  care  to
see  the  king  before  starting,  and  immediately  on  her  return  ;
and  if  a  hall  in  winter  or  a  fête  in  summer  kept  her  up  late
at  night,  she  so  arranged  matters  that  she  could  go  and  kiss
him  as  soon  as  he  woke,  and  amuse  him  with  an  account  of

the  festivity.

I  have  said  so  much  about  her  constraint  before  Monsei¬
gneur,  and  especially  the  treatment  of  his  private  Court,  that
I  shall  say  nothing  of  it  here.  But  she  felt  it  much,  and  after
Monseigneur’s  death  she  promised  herself  to  return  it.  One
evening  at  Fontainebleau,  where  the  princesses  and  all  their
ladies  were  in  the  king’s  cabinet  after  supper,  she  had  been

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

43

chattering  to  the  king  in  a  variety  of  languages  and  playing  a
hundred  childish  tricks  to  amuse  him,  which  he  liked  ;  she
noticed  that  Mme.  la  Duchesse  and  the  Princesse  de  Conti
were  looking  at  each  other  and  making  signs  and  shrugging
their  shoulders  with  an  air  of  contempt  and  disdain.  The
king  rose  and  went  as  usual  into  his  back  cabinet  to  feed  his
dogs,  after  which  he  always  returned  to  say  good-night  to
the  princesses.  The  dauphine  caught  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
by  one  hand  and  Mme.  de  Lévi  by  the  other,  and  nodding
towards  Mme.  la  Duchesse  and  the  Princesse  de  Conti,  who
were  only  a  few  steps  off,  she  exclaimed,  “  Did  you  see,
did  you  see  ?  I  know  as  well  as  they  do  that  there  is  n’t
common-sense  in  what  I  say  and  do  ;  it  is  all  miserable  ;  but
he  must  have  a  stir,  and  these  things  amuse  him.”  And
with  that,  leaning  on  their  arms,  she  began  to  dance  and
sing  :  “  Hey  !  I  laugh  at  it  J  hey,  I  scoff  at  them  !  I  shall  be
their  queen  !  I  don’t  care  for  them  !  either  now  or  ever  !  but
they  must  care  for  me,  for  I  shall  he  their  queen,”  jumping
and  dancing  with  all  her  might.  The  two  ladies  cried  to  her
in  a  low  voice  to  be  silent,  that  the  princesses  heard  her,  and
that  everybody  was  watching  her  behaviour  ;  they  even  told
her  she  was  crazy  (for  from  them  she  thought  all  was  right),
but  still  she  jumped  and  sang,  only  louder  still:  “Hey,  I
laugh  at  them  !  I  don’t  care  for  them  !  I  shall  be  their
queen  !  ”  and  did  not  stop  until  the  king  returned.

Alas!  she  thought  so,  the  charming  princess,  and  who
would  not  have  thought  it  with  her  ?  It  pleased  God,  for  our
misfortune,  to  arrange  it  otherwise.  So  far  was  she  from
thinking  of  the  coming  end  that  on  Candlemas  day,  Feb¬
ruary  2,  being  almost  alone  with  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  in
her  bedroom,  the  other  ladies  having  preceded  her  to  the
chapel,  and  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  waiting  to  accompany  her,
because  the  Duchesse  du  Lude  had  the  gout,  the  daupliine

44  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  ii.

began  to  talk  of  tbe  quantities  of  people  about  the  Court
whom  she  had  known  and  who  now  were  dead;  and  then  of
what  she  would  do  when  she  was  old,  and  of  the  life  she
would  lead,  and  how  no  one  would  be  left  of  her  young  days
but  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  Mme.  de  Lauzun,  and  how  t  ey
would  talk  together  of  ah  they  had  seen  and  done  ;  and  she
kept  this  topic  up  until  it  was  time  to  go  to  sermon.

With  so  many  great  and  unusual  and  lovable  quahties  she
had  another  side  both  as  princess  and  woman,  not  m  fidehty  or
secrecy,  for  in  that  she  was  a  pit,  nor  yet  in  thoughtfulness  and
circumspection  for  the  interests  of  others,  but  in  faults  that
were  human  shadows  on  the  picture.  Her  friendships  fol¬
lowed  her  acquaintance,  her  amusement,  her  habits,  her  need.

I  know  no  one  but  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  excepted.  She
herself  acknowledged  it  with  a  grace  and  naïveté  which
made  this  strange  defect  almost  endurable.  She  wanted,  as
I  have  said,  to  please  everybody  ;  and  her  choice  among  those
of  her  own  age  who  surrounded  her  was  mostly  made  less
for  virtue  than  from  favouritism.  The  natural  phancy  of  die
princess  made  her  conform  to  persons  with  whom  she  was
famihar  ;  although  (and  this  was  never  sufficiently  put  to
profit),  she  took  as  much  pleasure,  and  was  as  much  at  her
ease  and  amused  in  reasonable  afternoons,  mingled  with  read
ing  and  useful  conversation,  either  pious  or  historical,  with
the  older  ladies  of  her  suite,  as  in  the  freer  and  stealthy  talk
of  others  who  led  her  away  much  farther  than  she  went  of
her  own  will,  restrained  by  her  natural  shyness  and  the
remains  of  delicacy.  It  is  nevertheless  true  that  they  led
her  far,  and  that  a  princess  less  amiable  and  less  universally
beloved,  not  to  say  adored,  might  have  found  herself  in  cruel
straits.  Her  death  indicates  something  of  these  mysteries,
while  it  plainly  shows  the  tyranny  which  the  king  never
ceased  to  exercise  over  the  souls  of  his  family.  What  was

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

45

his  surprise  and  that  of  the  Court  when,  in  those  terrible
moments  when  we  fear  nothing  hut  that  which  is  coming
and  when  the  present  disappears,  she  wished  to  change  her
confessors  in  order  to  receive  the  last  sacraments.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  loved,  or  rather  she  adored  the
princess,  whose  manners  and  charms  had  won  her  heart  and
amused  the  king  most  usefully  for  her;  she  herself  was
amused  and,  what  is  very  true  although  surprismg,  she  leaned
on  the  princess  and  sometimes  consulted  her.  With  all  the
dauphine’s  gayety  and  gallantry,  never  woman  cared  so  little
for  appearance,  or  took  so  little  heed  or  precaution  about  it.
Her  toilet  was  made  in  a  moment;  she  did  not  care  for
adornments  except  for  balls  or  fêtes  ;  and  the  jewels  she  wore
at  other  times  (and  they  were  as  few  as  possible)  were  only
worn  to  oblige  the  king.  With  her,  all  joy,  all  pleasure,  all
amusements  even,  and  every  species  of  grace  were  eclipsed  ;
darkness  covered  the  whole  Court  ;  she  had  animated,  she
had  lighted  every  corner  of  it  ;  she  had  filled  it,  she  had
pervaded  its  most  inward  parts.  If  the  Court  existed  with¬
out  her  it  was  only  to  languish.  Never  was  a  princess  so
regretted,  or  so  deserving  of  it  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  regrets
have  never  passed  away  ;  involuntary  and  latent  sorrow
has  remained,  with  an  awful  void  which  has  never  been
diminished.

The  king,  filled  with  the  keenest  grief,  the  only  true  grief
that  he  ever  had  in  his  life,  entered  Mme.  de  Maintenon  s
apartment  on  reaching  Marly  ;  he  supped
îersSthen  aloue  iu  his  bedroom  and  saw  only  the  Due
at  Marly.  d’Orléaus  and  his  natural  children.  The  Due

de  Berry,  full  of  his  own  affliction,  which  was  true  and  great,
and  even  more  concerned  for  that  of  his  brother,  had  stayed
with  the  latter  at  Versailles.  The  dauphin,  ill,  and  broken¬
hearted  by  the  bitterest  grief,  did  not  leave  his  room,  where

46

MEMOmS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap,  ii

he  would  see  no  one  but  his  brother,  his  confessor,  and  the
Due  de  Beauvilliers.  The  latter,  who  had  been  ill  for  a  week
at  his  house  in  Paris,  made  a  great  effort  to  leave  his  bed,  to
admire  in  his  pupil  all  that  God  made  him  that  was  grand ,
a  grandeur  which  never  appeared  so  great  as  on  this  awful
day  and  those  that  followed  until  he  died.  It  was  the  last
time  that  friend  and  pupil  met  on  earth.  Cheverny,  d’O,
and  Gamaches,  the  dauphin’s  pages,  passed  the  night  in
his  apartments,  hut  did  not  see  him  except  at  moments.

Saturday  morning,  February  13,  they  urged  him  to  go  to
Marly,  to  spare  him  the  horror  of  the  noise  that  he  would
hear  in  the  room  above  him,  where  the  dauphine  lay  dead.
He  went  away  at  seven  in  the  morning  by  a  back  door  and
threw  himself  into  a  blue  chaise  which  took  him  to  his  car¬
riage.  He  found  beside  it  a  few  indiscreet  courtiers,  who
made  their  bows  to  him,  which  he  received  with  an  air  of
politeness.  His  three  pages  entered  the  carriage  with  him  ;
on  reaching  klarly  he  went  to  the  chapel  and  heard  mass,
and  was  then  taken  in  a  sedan-chair  to  the  window  of  his
apartment  by  which  he  entered.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  came  to
him  instantly  ;  we  can  judge  of  the  agony  of  that  interview  ;
she  could  not  bear  it  long,  and  returned  to  her  room.  He
was  forced  after  that  to  endure  the  princes  and  princesses,
but  they,  out  of  discretion,  stayed  only  a  moment,  even  the
Duchesse  de  Berry  and  with  her  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,
towards  .whom  the  dauphin  turned  with  a  look  expressive  of
their  common  sorrow.

After  this  the  dauphin  was  a  long  time  alone  with  the
Due  de  Berry.  The  king’s  hour  for  waking  arrived  ;  and
state  of  the  then  the  pages  entered  the  dauphin’s  room,  and

dauphin,  whom  I  j  ventured  to  enter  with  them.  He  showed  me

see  for  the  last

time.  that  he  perceived  my  entrance  by  a  look  of

gentleness  and  affection  that  deeply  moved  me.  But  I  was

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  47

horrified  at  his  eyes,  whicli  were  fixed,  constrained,  with
something  wild  about  them,  and  by  the  change  in  his  face,
on  which  were  spots  more  hvid  than  red  ;  I  noticed  many
that  were  rather  large,  and  others  in  the  room  observed  them
also.  He  was  standmg  up  ;  a  few  moments  later  they  came
to  tell  him  that  the  king  had  waked  ;  the  tears  he  had  long
restrained  were  rolling  from  his  eyes.  Eeceiving  the  message
he  turned  away  and  stood  still.  No  one  was  there  but  the
three  pages  and  I  and  Duchesne.  The  pages  proposed  to
him  two  or  three  times  to  go  to  the  king  ;  he  neither  moved
nor  answered.  I  went  to  him  and  made  him  a  sign  to  go  ;
then  I  proposed  it  in  a  low  voice.  Seeing  that  he  stood  still
and  was  silent,  I  ventured  to  take  him  by  the  arm,  represent¬
ing  that  sooner  or  later  he  must  go  to  the  king,  who  was
waiting  for  him,  and  surely  with  a  desire  to  see  him,  and
embrace  him  ;  I  said  it  was  more  gracious  not  to  delay  ;
thus  pressing  him  I  took  the  liberty  to  push  him  gently.
He  cast  upon  me  a  look  which  pierced  my  soul,  and  went.
I  followed  him  a  few  steps  ;  then  I  took  myself  away  to  get
my  breath.  I  never  saw  him  again.  May  God  in  his
mercy  please  that  I  shall  see  him  eternally  in  the  place
where  His  goodness  has  doubtless  placed  him.

As  soon  as  the  king  saw  him  he  embraced  him  tenderly
and  long,  and  many  times.  These  first  touching  moments
were  passed  in  broken  words  mingled  with  tears  and  sobs.
Presently  the  king,  looking  at  the  dauphin,  was  frightened
by  the  same  things  we  had  noticed  in  his  chamber.  All  who
were  with  the  king  were  frightened  likewise,  the  doctors
most  of  all.  The  king  told  the  latter  to  feel  his  pulse,  which
they  found  very  bad  ;  so  they  said  afterwards  ;  at  the  time
they  contented  themselves  with  saying  it  was  not  quite
ricrht  and  it  would  be  well  if  he  went  to  bed.  The  king
embraced  him  again,  urged  him  very  tenderly  to  take  care

48  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  ii.

of  himself  and  ordered  him  to  go  to  bed;  he  obeyed,  and
never  rose  again.

It  was  late  in  the  morning,  for  the  king  had  passed  a
cruel  night  and  his  head  ached.  He  saw  a  few  of  the
principal  courtiers  who  presented  themselves  at  his  dinner  ;
after  dinner  he  went  to  see  the  dauphin,  whose  fever  was
increasing  and  the  pulse  worse  than  ever  ;  then  he  went  to
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and  supped  alone  in  his  own  room.
The  dauphin  saw  only  his  pages  at  intervals,  the  doctors
occasionally,  his  brother,  his  confessor,  and  M.  de  Chevreuse
for  a  short  time  ;  he  spent  the  day  in  prayer  and  in  sacred
reading.  The  list  for  Marly  was  made,  and  those  admitted
were  notified  as  at  the  death  of  Monseigneur.

The  next  day,  Sunday,  the  king  hved  as  he  did  the  day
before.  Anxiety  for  the  dauphin  increased.  He  himself
did  not  conceal  from  Boudin,  in  presence  of  Duchesne  and
M.  de  Cheverny,  that  he  did  not  think  he  should  recover,
and  hy  what  he  felt  he  did  not  doubt  that  the  warning
Boudin  had  given  him  was  fulfilled.  He  said  the  same
thing  more  than  once,  but  with  great  detachment,  indiffer¬
ence  to  the  world  and  all  that  was  earthly  grandeur,  with  a
submission,  and  a  love  of  God  incomparable.

It  is  impossible  to  express  the  public  consternation.
Monday,  the  15th,  the  king  was  bled  ;  the  dauphin  was  no
better  than  the  day  before.  The  king  and  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon  saw  him  separately  more  than  once  during  the  day.
As  for  the  rest,  no  one  but  his  brother  occasionally,  his
pages  scarcely  at  all,  M.  de  Chevreuse  a  short  while  ;  his
time  stiU  spent  in  prayer  and  reading.  Tuesday  morning,
16th,  he  was  much  worse;  he  felt  as  if  consumed  hy  a
devouring  flame,  to  which  the  external  appearance  of  fever
did  not  respond  ;  hut  the  pulse,  deep  sunk  and  very  extraor¬
dinary,  was  most  alarming.  The  day  was  still  worse,  hut

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

49

it  caused  a  deception  ;  the  spots  on  his  face  extended
over  his  whole  body  ;  they  were  taken  for  measles  ;  those
about  him  flattered  themselves  with  hope,  hut  the  doctors
and  the  best  informed  about  the  Court  did  not  forget  that
the  same  spots  had  appeared  on  the  body  of  the  dauphine,
which  was  not  known  beyond  her  chamber  until  after  her
death.

Wednesday,  17th,  he  was  still  growing  worse.  I  heard  news
of  him  continually  from  Cheverny,  and  when  Boulduc  could
leave  the  room  he  came  to  speak  to  me.  Boulduc  was  an
excellent  apothecary  to  the  king,  who,  succeeding  his  father,
had  long  been  and  still  was  ours,  with  great  attachment  to
us.  He  knew  at  least  as  much  as  the  doctors,  as  we  had
found  by  experience,  and  with  his  knowledge  he  had  much
spirit  and  honour,  discretion  and  judgment.  He  hid  nothing
from  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  me  ;  letting  us  know  clearly
what  he  thought  of  the  dauphine.  He  had  also  spoken
to  me  plainly  from  the  second  day  about  the  dauphin.  I
hoped  no  longer  ;  but  it  seems  that  people  hope  to  the  end
against  all  hope.

The  sufferings,  as  of  a  devouring  inward  fire,  increased
throughout  the  day.  In  the  evening,  quite  late,  the  dauphin
sent  to  ask  permission  of  the  king  to  take  the  communion
very  early  the  next  morning,  without  ceremony,  and  without
assistants,  at  the  mass  that  was  said  in  his  bedroom.  But
no  one  knew  this  that  night,  they  only  heard  it  in  the  course
of  the  next  morning.  That  same  Wednesday  evening  I  went
quite  late  to  the  Due  and  Duchesse  de  Chevreuse,  who  lodged
in  the  first  pavihon  next  to  the  village,  and  we  in  the  second.
My  misery  was  extreme  ;  I  could  hardly  see  the  king  once
a  day  ;  I  went  out  only  to  obtain  news  and  solely  to  the
pavilion  of  M.  and  Mme.  de  Chevreuse,  with  whom  I  was
wholly  free.  Mme.  de  Chevreuse  had  no  more  hope  than  I.

TOL.  III.  — 4

50

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAENT-SIMOK  [chap,  ii

M.  de  Chevreuse,  always  equable,  always  hopeful,  always
seeing  everything  in  white,  tried  to  prove  to  us  that  we
had  more  to  hope  than  fear,  by  arguments  about  constitu¬
tions  and  medicines,  uttered  with  a  tranquilhty  that  exas¬
perated  me  and  made  me  swoop  down  upon  him  with  some
indecency,  but  to  the  comfort  of  Mme.  de  Chevreuse  and  the
few  that  were  with  us.

I  returned  home  to  pass  a  cruel  night.  Thursday  morn¬
ing,  February  18,  I  learned  that  the  dauphin  had  awaited
midnight  with  impatience,  had  heard  mass

The  dauphin’s  °  •  ,  j  j  i,  J

death.  I  wish  to  immediately  after,  and  communicated,  and  Had
quit  the  world.  passed  two  hours  in  great  communication

with  God,  after  which  his  head  became  confused.  Mme.  de
Saint-Simon  next  told  me  that  he  had  received  extreme
unction  ;  and  then,  that  he  had  died  at  half-past  eight  o’clock.
These  Memoirs  are  not  written  to  render  an  account  of  my
feelings.  Those  who  read  them  will  only  too  well  understand
what  I  felt.  If,  long  after  I  am  gone,  they  should  see  the
light  it  win  be  known  the  state  in  which  I  was,  and  Mme.
de  Saint-Simon  also.  Suffice  it  to  say  here  that  we  could
scarcely  appear,  either  of  us,  for  the  first  few  days  ;  that  I
wanted  to  quit  all  and  retire  from  the  Court  and  the  world,
and  it  was  only  the  wisdom,  guidance,  and  power  of  Mme.
de  Saint-Simon  upon  me  that  prevented  it  ;  and  even  so  with

much  difficulty.

This  prince,  first  heir-presumptive,  and  then  heir-apparent
of  the  crown,  was  born  terrible,  and  his  early  youth  made
men  tremble  ;  hard  and  choleric  to  the  utmost

Eulogy,  traits,

and  character  ot  violence,  even  agaffist  inanimate  things  ;  im-

the  dauphin.

petuous  to  fury  ;  incapable  of  bearing  the
shghtest  resistance  even  of  hours  and  elements  without
fiying  into  passions  which  made  one  fear  that  his  very  body
would  give  way  ;  obstinate  to  excess  ;  eager  for  every  species

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

51

of  sensual  pleasure,  for  women,  for  wine,  for  good  eating,  for
hunting  with  fury,  for  music  with  a  sort  of  ravishment,  and
for  cards,  at  which  he  could  not  tolerate  being  beaten,  so
that  the  danger  of  playing  with  him  was  extreme  ;  in  short,
given  over  to  all  the  passions  and  transported  by  all  the
pleasures  ;  often  savage  ;  naturally  inclined  to  cruelty  ;  bar¬
barous  in  sarcasm  and  in  showing  up  absurdities  with  an
accuracy  that  crushed  the  delinquents.  From  the  height  of
his  skies  he  looked  on  men  as  atoms  with  whom  he  had  no
resemblance,  whoever  they  might  be.  His  brothers  scarcely
seemed  to  him  intermediaries  between  himself  and  the  human
race,  although  they  had  always  been  brought  up  together  in
perfect  equality.  Intellect,  penetration  sparkled  from  him
on  every  side.  Even  in  his  furies  his  replies  astonished.
His  arguments  always  tended  towards  correctness  and  depth,
even  when  most  excited.  He  acquired  with  the  greatest
facility  the  most  abstract  knowledge.  The  extent  and
vivacity  of  his  mind  were  amazing  and  prevented  him  from
applying  himself  to  one  thing  at  a  time,  so  that  he  became
absolutely  incapable  of  doing  so.  The  necessity  of  letting
him  draw  while  he  studied,  for  which  art  he  had  much  taste
and  cleverness,  without  which  his  study  would  have  been
fruitless,  may  perhaps  have  injured  his  figure.

He  was  short  rather  than  tall  ;  his  face  long  and  dark  ;
the  upper  part  perfect,  with  most  beautiful  eyes  ;  a  glance
that  was  keen,  touching,  striking,  wonderful,  usually  gentle,
always  penetrating  ;  and  a  pleasing  expression  of  counte¬
nance,  lofty,  refined,  intellectual,  and  inspiring  to  things  of
mind.  The  lower  part  of  the  face  was  rather  pointed  ;  the
nose  long  and  high,  not  handsome,  and  less  pleasing  ;  chest¬
nut  hair,  closely  curling  and  in  great  quantity,  puffing  out  to
excess  ;  lips  and  mouth  agreeable  when  he  did  not  speak,
but,  though  his  teeth  were  not  bad,  the  upper  row  projected

52

memoirs  OE  the  duc  de  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

too  much  and  almost  closed  over  the  under  one,  which  had
when  he  spoke  or  laughed,  a  disagreeable  effect.  He  had
the  handsomest  legs  and  the  handsomest  feet,  except  those
of  the  king,  that  I  have  ever  seen;  the  thighs,  however, were
too  long  in  proportion  to  his  body.  When  he  came  from  the
hands  of  the  women  he  was  straight  ;  but  it  was  noticed  after
a  time  that  his  figure  began  to  turn.  They  put  on^  mstantly
and  made  him  wear  for  a  long  time  a  coUar  and  iron  cross,
which  he  wore  continuously  in  his  own  apartment,  even
before  the  courtiers  ;  and  nothing  was  neglected  m  his  plays
or  exercises  to  correct  the  trouble.  But  nature  was  the
stronger.  He  became  hump-backed  ;  so  much  so  m  one
shoulder  that  he  finally  hmped,  — not  but  what  his  thighs
and  legs  were  perfectly  straight  and  equal,  but  because  as
the  shoulder  grew  out  there  was  no  longer  the  same  distance
to  the  feet  ;  for,  instead  of  standing  plumb,  he  leaned  to  one
side.  He  did  not,  however,  walk  less  easily,  nor  less  far,  nor
slower,  nor  unwillingly;  he  was  fond  of  walking,  and  of
riding,  which  he  did  very  badly.  What  was  surprising  is
that,  having  eyes  and  a  mind  so  intelligent,  and  having
attained  to  such  extraordinary  virtue  and  to  the  most  emi¬
nent  and  sohd  piety,  the  prince  never  saw  himself  as  he  was
in  figure,  or  at  any  rate  was  never  reconciled  to  his  defect.  It
was  a  weakness  which  kept  others  on  the  watch  against  inad¬
vertence  and  indiscretion,  and  gave  much  trouble  to  those  of
his  people  who  had  charge  of  his  toilet  ;  they  arranged^  his
clothes  and  hair  to  mask  the.  deformity  as  much  as  possible,
but  were  very  careful  not  to  let  him  feel  that  they  saw  what
was  indeed  so  visible.  We  must  conclude  from  this  that  it
is  not  given  to  any  man  to  be  perfect  here  below.

So  much  mind,  and  mind  of  such  a  sort,  joined  to  so  much
vivacity,  so  much  sensibihty,  to  such  passions  and  all  so
ardent,  was  not  easy  to  educate.  The  Due  de  Beauvühers,

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

53

who  felt  both  the  difficulties  and  the  consequences,  sur¬
passed  himself  by  his  perseverance,  his  patience,  and  the
variety  of  his  remedies.  Little  aided  by  the  sub-governors,
he  strengthened  himself  by  those  persons  who  were  under
his  own  hand,  by  Fénelon,  Fleury  the  sub-preceptor  (who  has
given  us  that  tine  “  History  of  the  Church  ”),  several  of  the
gentlemen  in  attendance,  and  by  Moreau,  the  head  valet  de
chambre,  who  was  far  above  his  station  without  ever  mistak¬
ing  it,  some  few  of  the  other  valets,  and  by  the  Due  de
Chevreuse  ;  all  of  these,  put  to  work  in  the  same  spirit,  strove
each  in  his  way  towards  the  same  end  under  the  direction  of
the  governor,  whose  art  in  this  matter,  if  revealed  in  a  narra¬
tive,  would  make  a  volume  equally  instructive  and  curious.
But  God,  who  is  the  master  of  hearts,  and  whose  divine
breath  breathes  on  whom  he  wül,  made  of  this  prince  a
work  of  his  own  right  hand  ;  and  between  the  ages  of  eigh¬
teen  and  twenty  that  work  was  accomphshed.  From  the
abyss  there  issued  a  prince  who  was  affable,  gentle,  humane,
moderate,  patient,  modest,  repentant,  and,  as  far  as  his  position
properly  allowed,  humble  and  severe  to  himself.  Wholly
devoted  to  his  duties,  and  understanding  them  to  be  im¬
mense,  he  thought  no  longer  of  anything  but  of  joining  his
duties  as  son  and  subject  with  those  to  which  he  saw  him¬
self  destined.  The  shortness  of  the  days  distressed  him.  He
put  all  his  strength  and  found  his  comfort  in  prayer,  and  his
preservatives  in  pious  reading.  His  taste  for  abstract  sciences,
his  facihty  in  acquiring  them,  robbed  him  at  first  of  a  time
which  he  soon  recognized  he  ought  to  spend  on  his  training
for  the  duties  of  his  state,  and  on  the  social  decorums  of  a
rank  that  was  destined  to  reign,  and  was  called  upon  mean¬
time  to  hold  its  proper  Court.

His  apprenticeship  to  piety  and  the  fear  of  his  own  weak*-
ness  for  pleasures  made  him  at  first  both  shy  and  aloof.

54  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  HE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  il

Vigilance  over  himself,  in  whom  he  overlooked  no  fault  and
thought  none  should  be  overlooked,  shut  him  up  in  his
cabinet  as  an  impenetrable  asylum  at  times.  How  strange
the  world  is  !  It  would  have  abhorred  him  in  his  first  state,
and  it  was  ready  to  despise  the  second.  The  prince  felt
this,  and  he  bore  it  ;  he  attached  this  sort  of  opprobrium
with  joy  to  the  cross  of  his  Saviour  ;  it  humbled  him  with
the  bitter  memory  of  his  past  pride.  This  opprobrium  was,
however,  the  more  painful  because  he  felt  it  in  the  oppressed
looks  of  his  own  family.  The  king,  with  his  surface  devo¬
tion  and  observance  of  rules,  saw  with  secret  irritation  a
prince  of  this  age  censuring  his  life  unconsciously  by  his
own  ;  refusing  to  himself  a  new  desk  that  he  might  give  the
cost  of  it  to  the  poor;  declining  modestly  a  fresh  gilding
with  which  they  desired  to  brighten  his  Little  apartment.
We  have  seen  how  vexed  the  king  was  at  his  obstinate
refusal  to  go  to  a  hall  on  the  night  of  the  Epiphany.  Truly,
that  was  the  fault  of  a  novice.  He  owed  that  respect,  let  us
say  the  word,  that  charitable  condescension,  to  the  king  his
grandfather,  in  order  not  to  irritate  him  by  this  strange  con¬
trast  ;  but  at  the  bottom,  and  in  itself,  it  was  a  noble  action,
which  exposed  him  in  its  results  to  that  disgust  which  he
caused  in  the  king,  and  to  the  talk  of  a  Court  which  made
the  king  its  idol  and  turned  into  ridicule  so  great  a
singularity.

Monseigneur  was  no  less  a  sharp  thorn  in  his  side.  Given
over  to  materialism  he  had  long  dreaded  the  young  prince,
seeing  only  the  strictness  of  his  outside  shell  and  alienated
from  him  as  a  censor.  The  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  alarmed
at  so  austere  a  husband,  neglected  nothing  to  soften  his
manners  and  ways.  Her  charms  which  filled  his  soul,  the
schemes  and  heedless  importunities  of  the  younger  ladies  of
her  suite,  the  temptation  of  pleasures  and  parties  to  which

1712]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  55

he  was  far  from  being  insensible,  were  daily  displayed  before
him.  In  addition  to  this,  from  the  inner  chambers  came  the
remonstrances  of  their  pious  witch  and  the  sarcastic  speeches
of  the  king.  It  needed  a  very  strong  soul  to  bear  such  trials,
and  to  hear  them  every  day,  without  being  shaken  ;  he  must
have  been  powerfully  supported  by  the  Hand  Invisible,  when
other  help  was  denied  him.  Nevertheless,  drawing  more  and
more  within  himself  through  a  scruple  of  displeasing  the
king,  disgusting  Monseigneur,  and  of  causing  in  others  an
estrangement  from  virtue,  the  rough,  stern,  outside  bark
softened  of  itself  little  by  httle,  though  never  affecting
the  solidity  of  the  trunk.  He  understood  at  last  what  it
means  to  quit  God  for  God’s  sake;  he  became  aware
that  the  faithful  practice  of  virtues  proper  to  the  state  to
which  God  has  called  us  is  solid  piety  and  the  most  agree¬
able  to  Him.  He  therefore  applied  himself  to  those  things
which  would  instruct  him  in  government  ;  he  also  lent  him¬
self  more  to  society,  and  did  it  with  such  grace  and  so
natural  an  air  that  the  reason  of  his  avoiding  it  became  felt,
and  society,  which  likes  so  much  to  he  liked,  began,  after  a
while,  to  be  reconciled  to  him.

So  much  virtue  found  at  last  its  recognition  in  this  world,
and  it  was  all  the  more  pure  because  the  prince,  far  from
contributing  to  it,  held  himself  much  in  the  background.  I
have  explained  already  this  precious  revolution.  The  minis¬
ters  and  the  Court  were  at  his  feet,  and  he  himself  was  the
depositary  of  the  king’s  heart  and  of  his  authority  in  public
affairs,  in  favours,  and  in  care  for  the  details  of  government.
It  was  then  that  he  redoubled  his  application  to  the  duty
of  governing,  instructing  himself  in  all  that  could  make  him
more  capable  of  it.  He  banished  his  amusement  in  sciences
to  divide  his  time  in  his  cabinet  between  prayer,  which  he
shortened,  and  instruction,  which  he  multiplied  ;  and  ex-

56  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  ii.

temally  between  his  assiduity  to  the  king,  his  attentions  to
Mme.  de  Mamtenon,  courtesy  and  love  for  his  wife,  and  care
in  holdiug  a  Court  and  in  making  himself  accessible  and
liked  by  every  one.  The  more  the  king  elevated  him,  the
more  he  showed  that  he  held  himself  submissive  beneath
his  hand;  the  more  consideration  and  confidence  the  king
gave  to  him,  the  more  he  responded  by  feeliug,  judgment,
comprehension  ;  above  all,  by  moderation,  far  removed  from
all  desire  and  complacency  about  himself  and  from  all
presumption.  The  king’s  secrecy  and  that  of  others  was
impenetrable  through  him.

The  discernment  of  the  prince  was  not  yet  fully  under
control;  but  like  the  bee  he  gathered  his  honey  from  the
best  and  sweetest  flowers.  He  tried  to  know  men  ;  to  ex¬
tract  from  them  the  lessons  and  the  ideas  for  which  he
sought.  He  conferred  at  times,  though  rarely,  with  some  of
them  and  as  it  were  in  passing,  on  certain  special  matters.
I  never  heard,  and  I  think  it  would  not  have  escaped  me,
that  he  worked  habitually  with  any  except  the  ministers,
the  Due  de  Chevreuse  being  considered  as  one,  and  with  the
prelates  in  the  afl’air  of  the  Due  de  Hoailles.  Outside  of
that  number  I  was  the  only  person  who  had  frequent  and
free  access  to  him,  either  at  his  request  or  mine.  To  me,  he
revealed  his  soul  as  to  the  present  and  as  to  the  future  with
confidence,  but  always  with  judgment,  with  reserve,  with
discretion.  He  let  himself  freely  out  on  plans  which  he
believed  to  be  necessary  ;  he  talked  plainly  on  pubhc  mat¬
ters,  but  was  reserved  upon  private  ones,  and  especially  as
to  private  persons  ;  but  feeling  that  he  wished  to  draw  all
he  could  out  of  me,  I  adroitly  gave  him  chances  for  little  out¬
bursts,  often  successfully  because  of  the  confidence  he  grew
to  feel  in  me  more  and  more,  —  a  confidence  which  I  owed
first  to  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers,  and  secondly  to  the  Due  de

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

57

Chevreuse.  A  vohime  could  not  sufficiently  describe  these
diverse  Ute-à-tètes  between  the  prince  and  me.  What  love
of  the  right  !  what  renouncing  of  self  !  what  study,  what
search,  what  fruits  !  How  pure  those  objects  —  shall  I  dare
to  say  it  ?  —  what  reflection  of  the  Divinity  in  that  candid,
strong,  and  simple  soul,  which  had  preserved,  as  much  as
is  given  to  man  on  this  earth.  Its  image!  There  I  beheld
the  shining  marks  of  an  education  that  was  equally  laborious
and  industrious,  equally  wise,  virtuous,  and  Christian,  re¬
flected  in  a  luminous  disciple  who  was  born  for  command.

With  so  many  great  qualities  this  admirable  prince  was
not  without  some  human  drawbacks,  that  is  to  say,  defects,
and  those  at  times  but  httle  seemly.  And  this  was  some¬
thing  which,  with  aU  that  was  solid  and  grand  about  him,
people  found  hard  to  imderstand,  because  they  did  not  choose
to  remember  that  he  was  once  all  vice  and  fault,  or  to  reflect
on  the  prodigious  change  and  what  it  must  have  cost  him  to
make  himself  a  prince  already  so  near  perfection  that  he
amazed  them  —  although  he  had  not  yet  reached  its  summit.
I  have  touched  elsewhere  on  some  of  these  defects  ^  which,
in  spite  of  his  years,  were  still  boyish;  day  by  day  they
were  being  so  corrected  as  to  give  sound  augury  that  they
would  disappear  entirely.  One  defect,  that  was  more  impor¬
tant,  reflection  and  experience  would  surely  have  corrected  ;
namely,  that  he  had  intercourse  with  a  few  persons  for  whom
his  esteem  and  his  liking  did  not  go  together.  His  scruples,
his  constraint,  his  pettiness  of  devotion  were  diminishing
daily  ;  above  all,  he  was  getting  cured  of  the  opinion  that  he

1  These  defects  are  not  specified  in  the  Memoirs  ;  hut  in  the  “  Discours  ”
there  is  some  mention  of  them.  They  seem  to  have  been  horseplay  and
practical  jokes  with  men  during  his  two  first  campaigns,  silly  pranks
at  Versailles,  misplacing  shutters,  romping  with  his  wife’s  young  ladies,
making  caricatures,  blowing  up  toads  with  gunpowder,  and  other  boyish
tricks.  —  Tb.

58

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.ii.

ought  to  choose  piety  before  talent;  that  is  to  say,  that  a
minister,  an  ambassador,  a  general  ought  to  be  appointe^
more  for  his  devoutness  than  for  his  capacity  and  experi¬
ence.  He  was  still  more  corrected  as  to  the  credit  to  be
given  to  pious  persons  ;  becoming  convinced  that  very  hon¬
est  men,  useful  in  many  ways,  might  be  so  without  devotion  ;
and  he  saw  the  danger  of  making  hypocrites.  His  confi¬
dence  in  his  confessor  did  not  go  into  public  affairs,  and  I
have  shown  two  memorable  instances,  very  important  to  the
Jesuits,  in  which  he  was  against  them  vath  all  his  strength.
Whether  he  would  have  had  more  confidence  in  M.  de  Cam¬
brai  cannot  be  known  ;  we  can  only  judge  by  that  he  showed
in  M.  de  Chevreuse,  and,  above  all,  in  M.  de  BeauviUiers.

As  his  own  feelings  were  very  quick,  he  overlooked
hastiness  in  others,  and  did  not  like  them  or  esteem  them
less.  No  man  was  ever  a  greater  lover  of  order,  or  under¬
stood  it  better,  or  was  more  desirous  to  re-establish  it  in
everything,  to  correct  all  mixed  confusion,  and  to  put
persons  and  things  in  their  places.  Informed,  in  the
highest  degree,  of  all  that  should  regulate  that  order  by
maxims,  by  justice,  by  reason,  he  was  attentive,  before  be¬
coming  master,  to  render  to  age,  merit,  birth,  rank,  the
distinction  proper  to  each,  and  to  mark  it  on  all  occasions.
His  designs  for  the  future  would  prolong  these  Memoirs
too  far.  To  explain  them  would  need  a  work  by  itself  —
a  work  to  make  one  die  of  regret.  Without  entering  into
a  thousand  details,  I  cannot  refuse  myself  here  a  brief
mention  of  the  subject  in  general.

The  abasement  of  the  nobles  was  odious  to  him,  and
their  equality  among  themselves  intolerable.^  This  last

1  Nobles  were  the  highest  privileged  class  by  right  of  birth  ;  gentils¬
hommes  were  of  noble  race  in  the  service  of  princes  ;  seigneurs  of  like  race
with  feudal  authority  over  persons  or  property.  —  Tk.

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  59

innovation,  which  yielded  only  to  offices  and  confounded
the  nobles  with  the  gentlemen,  and  the  latter  with  the  sei¬
gneurs,  seemed  to  him  of  the  utmost  injustice,  and  this
want  of  gradation  an  approaching  cause  of  ruin,  and  de¬
structive  of  a  military  kingdom.  He  remembered  that
France  had  owed  her  safety  in  great  perils  under  Philippe
de  Valois,  Charles  V.,  Charles  VIL,  Louis  XII.,  François  I.,
his  grandsons,  and  Henri  IV.,  to  that  nobility,  which  knew
its  ground  and  held  itself  securely  within  its  respective
differences,  having  the  will  and  the  means  to  march  to
the  succour  of  the  State,  by  companies  and  provinces,  with¬
out  confusion  or  embarrassment,  because  no  one  issued  from
his  own  condition  or  made  any  difficulty  in  obeying  a
greater  than  himself.  He  saw  at  the  present  time  this
succour  extinct,  —  not  a  person  who  did  not  claim  equahty
with  all  others  ;  consequently  nothing  organized,  no  com¬
manding,  no  obedience.

As  to  the  present  time,  he  was  touched  to  the  heart  at
the  ruin  of  the  nobles,  at  the  means  taken  and  pursued  to
reduce  them  to  it,  and  to  keep  them  there,  the  degeneracy
which  poverty  and  the  mixture  of  blood  by  constant  mis¬
alliances  to  get  bread  had  brought  about  in  courage,  in
valour,  in  virtue,  in  sentiments.  He  was  indignant  at
seeing  this  French  nobility,  so  celebrated,  so  illustrious,
become  a  people  almost  of  the  same  sort  as  the  people
itself  ;  only  distinguished  from  it  in  one  way,  namely  :
that  the  people  have  liberty  for  work,  for  commerce,  even
for  arms,  while  the  nobles  have  become  another  people,  with
no  choice  left  except  that  of  a  deadly  and  ruinous  idleness
which  renders  them  by  their  inutility  in  every  way  burden¬
some  and  despised,  or  else  to  go  to  war  and  be  killed  among
the  insults  of  clerks,  of  ministers,  and  intendants.  Above
all,  he  could  not  contain  himself  against  the  insult  shown  to

60

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  it

the  career  of  arms,  by  which  this  monarchy  was  founded
and  maintained,  when  veteran  ofdcers,  often  covered  with
wounds,  lieutenant-generals  of  the  armies  it  may  be,  retired
to  their  homes  with  esteem,  reputation,  and  a  pension,  are
actually  taxed  with  the  taille,  like  all  the  other  peasants  of
their  parish,  if  they  are  not  noble,  and  ground  down  by  it;
as  I  have  seen  happen  to  knightly  old  captains  like  Samt-
Louis,  without  appeal  that  can  exempt  them,  whereas
exemptions  are  numberless  for  the  lowest  employés  of  petty
lawyers  and  financiers.

I  shall  not  repeat  what  he  thought  on  the  power  and
elevation  of  the  secretaries  of  State,  the  other  ministers,
and  the  form  of  their  government.  We  have  seen  that
already  ;  also  what  he  thought  of  the  tithe,  of  finances,  and
financiers  ;  of  the  immense  number  of  persons  employed  to
levy  and  collect  the  taxes  both  ordinary  and  extraordinary  ;
the  method  of  levying  them;  the  enormous  multitude  of
offices,  and  of  officers  of  justice  of  all  kinds,  for  suits,
quibbles,  costs;  the  iniquity  of  the  prolongation  of  suits;
the  ruin  and  the  cruelty  therein  committed — all  these
things  were  the  objects  of  an  impatience  which  almost
amounted  to  that  of  being  in  power  to  remedy  them.

A  comparison  which  he  had  made  of  the  pays  d  états  ^
with  other  provinces  gave  him  the  idea  of  forming  the
kingdom  into  divisions,  as  nearly  equal  in  wealth  as  they
could  be  made;  to  have  each  administrated  by  its  own
assembly,  simplified,  to  keep  down  clamour  and  disorder ,
and  a  draft,  also  much  simplified,  from  these  provincial
assemblies  to  form,  at  times,  the  general  or  State  assembly
of  the  kingdom.  I  scarcely  dare  to  add  a  grand  saying,  the
saying  of  a  princely  conviction,  that  “  a  king  is  made  for

1  Pays  d’états,  under  the  old  monarchy,  were  those  regions  which  en¬
joyed  the  privilege  of  having  provincial  assemblies.  —  Tk.

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

61

his  subjects,  and  not  his  subjects  for  him,”  which  he  did
not  restrain  himself  from  uttering  even  in  the  salon  at
Marly,  the  saying  of  a  father  of  liis  people,  but  one  that
outside  of  his  reign,  which  God  has  not  permitted,  would
be  a  frightful  perjury.  To  return  to  the  States-general.  It
was  not  that  he  intended  them  to  exercise  power.  He  was
too  well-informed  to  be  ignorant  that  such  a  body,  august
as  its  representation  renders  it,  is  only  a  body  of  com¬
plainants,  remonstrants,  and,  when  the  king  consents,  a
body  of  proponents.  But  the  prince,  who  would  have  hked
to  feel  himself  in  the  midst  of  his  assembled  nation,  believed
there  would  be  infinite  advantages  in  being  informed  of
evils  and  their  remedies  by  deputies  who  would  know  the
first  through  experience,  and  be  able  to  consult  as  to  the
latter  with  those  on  whom  they  would  bear.

With  regard  to  rank,  dignities,  and  offices  we  have  seen
that  the  novel  ranks,  so-called,  were  not  to  his  taste  or
his  maxims,  which  were  all  for  the  regulation  of  rank.
Neither  did  he  like  perpetual  offices,  governments  becoming
a  patrimony  by  the  habit  of  handing  them  down  from  father
to  son.  His  project  of  freeing,  httle  by  little,  all  the  offices
of  the  Court  and  army,  in  order  to  remove  them  forever  from
venality,  was  not  favourable  to  patents  of  retention  and  sur¬
vivance  which  left  nothing  for  young  men  to  aspire  to.

As  for  war,  he  did  not  hke  the  system  of  the  talleau,  ^
which  Louvois  introduced  by  his  personal  authority,  to  place
on  one  line  rank,  merit,  and  nothingness,  and  make  a  populace
of  all  who  served.

1  The  system  of  the  tableau,  established  by  Louvois,  regulated  promo¬
tion  by  length  of  service.  Saint-Simon  returns  to  the  subject  several
times.  “  By  means  of  this  rule,”  he  says,  “  it  was  established  that,  no
matter  what  a  man  might  be,  all  who  served  remained  where  they  were  as
to  service  and  rank,  in  absolute  equality.  Hence  the  seigneurs  were
mingled  in  a  crowd  of  officers  of  all  descriptions  ;  hence  the  mixing  up
that  the  king  desired.” — Tb.

62

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

This  grand  and  sacred  maxim,  that  kings  are  made  for
their  peoples,  and  not  their  peoples  for  them,  was  so  im¬
pressed  upon  his  soul  that  luxury  and  even  war  were  odious
to  him.  At  times  this  caused  him  to  speak  too  hastily  as  to
the  latter,  led  away  by  a  truth  too  hard  for  the  ears  of  the
world,  which  made  people  sometimes  say  maliciously  that  he
did  not  like  war.  His  justice  was  supplied  with  that  in-
penetrable  bandage  which  makes  for  safety.  He  took  the
trouble  to  study  all  matters  presented  to  the  king  for  decision
at  the  councils  of  finance  and  despatches  ;  if  they  were  im¬
portant,  he  worked  with  the  persons  concerned  in  such
business,  from  whom  he  drew  their  knowledge  without  being
a  slave  to  their  opinions.  He  took  the  communion  at  least
every  fortnight  with  a  collected  mind  and  a  lowliness  that
was  striking,  always  wearing  the  collar  of  the  Order  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  and  with  bands  and  mantle.  He  saw  his  Jesuit
confessor  once  or  twice  a  week,  sometimes  at  great  length,
which  he  shortened  after  a  time,  while  approaching  the
communion  oftener.

His  conversation  was  amiable,  solid  as  far  as  he  could  make
it  so,  and  choice,  but  always  adapted  to  those  with  whom  he
talked.  He  relaxed  very  much  when  walking  ;  it  was  then
that  his  personal  qualities  showed  most.  If  he  found  himself
with  any  one  who  could  talk  of  the  sciences,  that  was  a
pleasure  to  him,  but  a  modest  pleasure,  taken  to  amuse  and
instruct  himself,  expatiating  little  and  listening  all  the  more.
But  what  he  searched  for  most  was  the  useful;  men  who
could  talk  of  the  war  and  the  fortresses,  of  the  navy  and
commerce  ;  of  foreign  countries  and  Courts  ;  sometimes  on
special  but  public  acts,  and  on  questions  of  history  and  former
wars.  He  set  up,  in  place  of  the  theatre  (as  to  which  he  had
long  restricted  himself),  a  moderate  stake  at  cards,  which
even  slender  purses  could  manage,  in  order  to  vary  those  who

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

63

had  the  honour  to  play  with  him,  and  so  to  render  himself
visible  to  every  one.  He  was  always  alive  to  the  pleasures
of  the  table  and  hunting.  The  latter  he  allowed  himself
without  many  scruples,  but  he  feared  his  weakness  for  the
former.  He  was  excellent  company  when  he  let  himself
out.

He  understood  the  king  perfectly;  he  respected  him  and
towards  the  end  he  loved  him  as  a  son  and  paid  him  court  as
a  subject,  but  always  like  one  who  felt  his  own  position.
He  cultivated  Mme.  de  Maintenon  with  the  care  that  their
respective  situations  demanded.  As  long  as  Monseigneur
lived  he  rendered  what  he  owed  to  him  scrupulously.  He
loved  his  brothers  tenderly,  and  his  wife  with  the  utmost
passion.  Sorrow  for  her  loss  entered  his  very  marrow.  Piety
rose  above  it  by  mighty  efforts.  The  sacrifice  was  entire,
but  it  was  agonizing.  In  this  terrible  affliction  nothing  was
low,  nothing  petty,  nothing  indecent.  We  saw  a  man  dis¬
traught,  yet  extorting  from  himself  a  calm  exterior,  and
succumbing  under  it.  The  days  of  that  effort  were  short.
He  did  not  expect  to  recover  ;  he  reasoned  about  it  with  the
doctors,  not  hiding  the  grounds  on  which  that  opinion  was
founded;  and  what  he  felt, from  the  first  day  to  the  last,
confirmed  it.  What  an  awful  conviction  as  to  his  wife’s
end  and  his  own  !  But,  great  God  !  what  a  spectacle  Thou
gavest  us  in  him  ;  the  inmost  secrets  and  sublimity  of  which
are  not  permitted  to  be  revealed,  for  it  is  only  Thou  who
knoweth  their  cost.  What  an  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ
upon  the  cross  !  —  not  only  in  regard  to  death  and  suffering,
but  what  tender,  tranquil  views  !  what  growth  of  detach¬
ment  !  what  ardent  outbursts  of  thanksgiving  that  he  was
saved  from  reigning  and  from  the  great  account  he  would
have  had  to  render  !  what  submission,  and  how  perfect  !
what  love  to  God  !  how  keen  his  glance  upon  his  nothingness

64

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ii.

and  his  sinfulness  !  how  magnificent  his  sense  of  the  infinite
mercy  !  what  religions,  humble  awe  !  what  tempered  con¬
fidence  !  what  quiet  peace!  what  continual  prayer!  how
earnest  his  desire  for  the  last  sacraments!  how  sacred
that  inward  communing  !  how  invincible  his  patience  !  how
constant  his  kindness  for  all  who  approached  him  !  how
pure  the  love  that  pressed  him  ever  to  go  to  God  !  France
fell  at  last  under  chastisement  ;  God  showed  her  a  prince
whom  she  did  not  deserve.  Earth  was  not  worthy  of  him  ;
he  was  ripe  already  for  the  blessed  eternity.

III.

The  consternation  was  real  and  general.  It  reached
foreign  courts  and  nations.  While  the  peoples  wept  for  one
who  thought  for  their  relief,  and  all  France

Pontifical  obse-  °

quies  in  Rome  for  moumed  a  ruler  who  wished  to  reign  solely  to

the  dauphin.  tit  j

make  her  happy  and  prosperous,  the  sovereigns
of  Europe  puhhcly  deplored  the  loss  of  a  prince  whom  they
regarded  already  as  an  example,  whose  virtues  would  have
made  him  their  arbitrator  and  the  revered  and  pacific
moderator  of  the  nations.  The  pope  was  so  affected  that
he  resolved  of  himself  and  without  being  requested,  to  pass
over  all  rules  and  formalities  of  his  Court,  and  in  this  he
was  unanimously  applauded.  He  held  a  consistory,  at  which
he  deplored  the  infinite  loss  to  the  Church  and  to  Christen¬
dom  ;  he  made  a  eulogy  on  the  prince  whose  death  caused
just  regrets  throughout  all  Europe  ;  and  declared  that  in
consequence  of  his  extraordinary  virtues  and  the  public
grief,  so  far  beyond  what  was  customary,  he  should  himself
perform  in  his  own  chapel  the  public  and  solemn  obsequies.
He  then  appointed  a  day  for  the  service,  at  which  the  Sacred
College  and  all  the  Court  of  Eome  assisted,  applauding  an
honour  so  unusual.

Friday,  19th,  the  body  of  the  dauphin  was  opened,  about
twenty-four  hours  after  his  death,  and  his  heart  conveyed
.  at  once  to  Versailles  and  placed  beside  that  of

Funeral  procès-  ^

sion  of  the  bodies  ^^0  dauphinc.  The  same  day  the  two  hearts
ainaupifinew  Were  taken  to  the  Val-de-Grâce  in  Paris.  Sat-
Saint-Denis.  ^irday,  20th,  the  king  sent  word  to  the  Duchesse

VOL.  III.  —  5

66

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

de  Ventadour  that  Mgr.  le  Duc  de  Bretagne  would  hence¬
forth  take  the  name  and  rank  of  dauphm.  Tuesday,  25th,
the  two  bodies  were  taken  from  Versailles  to  Saint-Denis
on  the  same  funeral  car.  The  king  appointed  the  Due
d’Orléans  to  accompany  the  body  of  the  dauphin,  and  four
princesses  that  of  the  dauphine.  The  procession,  which  left
Versailles  at  six  in  the  evening,  entered  Pans  by  the  Porte
Saint-Honoré  at  two  in  the  morning,  issued  by  the  Porte
Saint-Denis  at  four,  and  reached  Saint-Denis  between  seven
and  eight  o’clock.  Great  order  prevailed  in  Paris,  and  no

hindrance.

Sunday,  March  6,  the  two  children,  sons  of  Prance,  aihng  for
some  days,  became  very  ill  with  spots,  apparently  of  measles,

,  like  those  which  had  appeared  on  the  dauphin

dauphin.  and  the  dauphine.  They  had  both  been  pri¬

vately  baptized  without  ceremonies  when  born.  The  king
now  sent  word  to  the  Duchesse  de  Ventadour  to  have  the
full  baptismal  ceremonies  performed  ;  to  order  the  children
held  by  whom  she  pleased,  and  to  name  each  of  them  Louis.
Mme  de  Ventadour  chose  the  most  distinguished  persons
who  were  at  hand.  She  herself  held  the  little  dauphin  with
Comte  de  La  Mothe  ;  the  Marquis  de  Prie  and  the  Duchesse
de  la  Perté  held  the  Duc  d’Anjou,  now  King  Louis  XV.
The  next  day,  Tuesday,  the  doctors  called  in  five  others  from
Paris.  The  king,  however,  held  the  council  of  finances,  went
shooting  after  dinner,  and  worked  with  a  mmister  m  the
evening  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartment.  The  bleedings
and  other  remedies  were  unable  to  save  the  little  dauphm  ;
he  died  the  same  day  just  before  midnight.  He  was  five
years  and  some  months  old  ;  well-made,  tall  and^  strong  for
his  age.  He  had  given  great  hopes  as  to  intelligence  and
the  correctness  he  showed  in  everything,  but  he  also  gave
anxiety  by  an  obstinate  will  and  extreme  haughtiness.

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

67

The  Due  d  Anjou  was  still  suckling.  The  Duchesse  de
Ventadour,  aided  by  the  women  of  the  bed-chamber,  took
possession  of  him  and  would  not  allow  him  to  be  bled  or  to
take  any  remedy.  The  Comtesse  de  Verue,  when  poisoned  at
Turin  and  almost  dying,  had  been  saved  by  a  counter-poison
sent  to  her  by  the  Due  de  Savoie.  She  had  brought  some
with  her  when  she  returned.  Mme.  de  Ventadour  sent  for
it  and  gave  it  to  the  Due  d’Anjou.  He  was  very  ill,  but  he
recovered,  and  is  to-day  the  King  of  France.  He  knew  this
subsequently,  and  has  always  shown  great  distinction  to
Mme.  de  Verue  and  all  belonging  to  her.  Thus  three
dauphins  died  within  a  year  ;  and  in  twenty-four  days  the
father,  mother,  and  eldest  son.  Wednesday,  March  6,  his
body  was  opened,  his  heart  taken  to  the  Val-de-Grâce,
and  his  body  to  Saint-Denis  and  placed  beside  those  of  his
father  and  mother.  The  Due  d’Anjou,  henceforth  the  only
remaining  heir,  succeeded  to  the  title  and  rank  of  dauphin.
The  king,  on  waking  and  hearing  of  the  death  of  M.  le
Dauphin,  embraced  the  Due  de  Berry  many  times,  tenderly
saying  to  him  :  “  I  have  none  left  but  you.”  The  prince
burst  into  tears  ;  no  one  was  ever  more  bitterly  afflicted,  and
his  sorrow  lasted  a  long  time.

M.  de  Beauvilliers  was  ül  in  bed  at  Versailles  ;  in  order  to
be  more  quiet  he  was  in  his  house  in  the  town,  at  the  foot
state  of  M.  de  l’Orangerie.  It  would  be  difficult

BeauviUiers  and  to  Comprehend  the  extent  of  his  grief,  the

my  own.  i  /»  i  •  ^

grandeur  of  his  piety,  his  resignation,  his  cour¬
age.  I  have  never  seen  anything  so  hard  to  describe,  so
impossible  to  emulate,  nor  so  incomparable  to  admire.  The
day  of  our  dauphin’s  death  I  could  not  leave  my  room,
where  I  barricaded  myself  until  I  went  out  to  join  the
king  who  walked  about  the  gardens,  and  spent  the  after¬
noon  very  close  to  my  pavilion.  Curiosity  may  have  taken

68

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  iil

me.  But  the  irritation  of  seeing  him  almost  as  usual  made
me  unable  to  endure  the  walk.  I  could  see,  in  the  distance,
that  they  were  carrying  away  the  body  of  the  dauphin.  I
flung  myself  hack  into  my  own  room  and  scarcely  left  it
(except  to  go  and  pass  the  afternoons  with  the  Due  de
Beauvilliers)  during  the  rest  of  the  stay  at  Marly.  I  was
not  supported  by  either  the  lofty  faith  of  M.  de  Beauvüliers,
nor  by  that  of  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  who  did  not  suffer  less
than  we  did.  The  truth  is,  I  was  in  despair.  To  whoever  sees
the  point  to  which  I  had  attained,  this  condition  will  seem
less  strange  than  that  I  was  able  to  endure  at  all  so  complete
a  misfortune.  It  happened  to  me  precisely  at  the  very  age  my
father  was  when  he  lost  Louis  XIII.  ;  hut  at  least  he  had  long
enjoyed  him  ;  and  I, — gustavi  paululum  mellis,  et  ecce  morior  !

In  the  dauphin’s  document  box  were  several  memoranda
which  he  had  asked  me  to  make  for  him.  I  had  done  so  in
aU  confldence,  and  he  was  keeping  them  in  the
Tsseu^puTs  me  samc.  There  was  one  very  long  one  in  my
in  great  peru.  handwriting,  perfectly  recognizable,  which  alone

would  have  sufiiced  to  ruin  me  irretrievably  with  the  king.
No  one  imagines  beforehand  such  catastrophes.  The  king
knew  my  writing  ;  he  may  not  have  known  my  sentiments,
hut  he  had  some  suspicion  of  them.  I  had  given  some
ground  for  it,  and  good  friends  at  Court  had  done  their  best
to  advance  it.  The  king  would  also  have  discovered  the  free
and  most  entire  confldence  between  the  dauphin  and  me,
and  on  most  important  topics  little  agreeable  to  him  ;  he
meanwhile  having  no  suspicion  that  I  was  nearer  to  his
grandson  than  all  the  other  courtiers.  It  was  the  duty  of
the  Due  de  Beauvilliers  to  take  the  box  to  the  king,  the  key
of  which  Duchesne  had  already  taken  to  him.  The  danger
was  great  ;  there  was  every  reason  to  wager  that  I  should  he
lost  and  exiled  during  the  rest  of  the  king’s  reign.

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON,

69

What  a  contrast  between  the  open  skies  I  had  lately
seen  without  illusions  and  the  abysses  now  yawning  beneath
my  feet  !  Such  is  a  Court  and  the  world  !  But  I  was  feeling
then  the  nothingness  of  the  most  desirable  things  with  an
inward  sentiment  which  showed  how  much  I  clung  to  them  ;
so  that  this  alarm  about  the  box  took  scarcely  any  hold  upon
me.  I  had  to  make  reflections  in  order  to  return  to  it.  Ee-
grets  for  what  had  escaped  me,  more,  beyond  comparison,
for  that  which  France  had  lost  in  that  incomparable  dauphin,
pierced  my  heart  and  suspended  all  the  faculties  of  my  soul.
I  wanted,  for  a  long  while,  to  flee  away  and  never  see  the
treacherous  face  of  the  world  again.  My  grief,  so  little
capable  of  consolation  and  reasoning,  betrayed  what  I  had
hidden  until  now  with  so  much  care  and  policy,  and  mani¬
fested  in  spite  of  myself  all  that  I  had  lost.  Mme.  de
Saint-Simon,  not  less  feeling,  not  less  sorrowful,  and  as  little
capable  of  dissimulating  it,  but  with  greater  sense,  stronger,
and  all-relying  upon  God,  had,  in  her  wise  caution,  a  deeper
impression  of  anxiety  about  those  papers.

M.  de  Beauvilhers  was  determined  not  to  allow  the  box  to
leave  his  hands,  although  the  king  had  the  key,  and  to  wait
until  his  health  allowed  him  to  dehver  it  himself,  and  en¬
deavour,  in  the  king’s  presence,  to  hide  the  papers  from  him
under  cover  of  the  rest.  The  scheme  was  diflicult,  for  he
did  not  even  know  the  position  of  the  papers  in  the  box,  and
yet  it  was  the  only  resource.  This  terrible  anxiety  lasted
fifteen  days.  At  the  end  of  that  time  the  king  saw  the  Due
de  Beauvilhers  for  the  first  time,  the  latter  not  having  been
in  a  condition  to  go  earlier.  On  his  return  the  duke  came  to
my  apartment  and  told  Mme.  de  Saint-Shnon  and  me  that
the  king  had  ordered  him  to  bring  the  dauphin’s  box  of  papers
to  him  the  following  evening  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s,  and
he  assured  us  that,  without  being  able  to  promise  anything,

70

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

he  would  be  most  attentive  to  prevent  the  king,  if  possible,
from  seeing  anything  of  mine  ;  and  he  promised  to  come  to
us  the  next  evening  on  his  return  from  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s
and  tell  us  what  had  happened.  It  can  be  imagined  how
we  awaited  him,  with  doors  weU-closed  to  every  one.  He
arrived,  and  before  sitting  down  made  us  a  sign  to  feel  no
uneasiness.  He  told  us  that  the  whole  upper  part  of  the
box  was  filled  with  memoranda  and  projects  about  the
finances,  and  also  about  matters  relating  to  the  interior  of
the  kingdom  j  that  he  had  read  a  q^uantity  of  these  to  the
king  in  order  to  tire  him,  and  had  succeeded  so  well  that  at
last  the  king  was  satisfied  to  hear  only  the  titles,  and  after
a  while,  fatigued  at  finding  nothing  else  and  concluding  that
the  rest  was  of  the  same  sort,  he  told  the  duke  it  was  not
worth  while  to  go  further  and  he  had  better  throw  all  those
papers  into  the  fire.  The  duke  assured  us  he  did  not  let  him¬
self  be  told  twice,  especially  as  he  saw  at  the  bottom  some
words  in  my  handwriting,  which  he  promptly  covered  in  tak¬
ing  out  other  papers.  As  soon  as  the  word  was  given  he
flung  back  into  the  box  all  that  he  had  taken,  and  then  threw
the  whole  contents  into  the  fire  between  the  king  and  Mme.
de  Maintenon,  taking  great  care  that  my  memorandum,
which  was  large  and  thick,  should  be  covered  with  the
others,  holding  them  down  with  the  tongs  that  no  scrap
might  escape.  He  had  thus  seen  everything  burned  before
leaving  the  room.  We  embraced  one  another  with  mutual
comfort,  proportioned  at  the  moment  to  the  danger  we  had
run.

Horrors,  the  relation  of  which  can  no  longer  be  delayed,
paralyze  my  hand.  I  would  suppress  them  if  truth  were
,  not  wholly  due  to  what  I  write,  and  if  other

The  dauphin  and

the  dauphine  hoiTors  (increasing  if  possible,  the  first)  and
poisoned.  publicity  that  made  them  echo  throughout

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  71

all  Europe,  together  with  the  important  consequences  to
which  they  gave  rise,  did  not  force  me  to  expose  them  here
as  an  integral  and  considerable  part  of  what  has  passed  be¬
fore  my  own  eyes.  The  illness  of  the  dauphine,  so  sudden,
singular,  rapid,  and  little  understood  by  the  doctors,  had,  in
its  short  duration,  blackened  imaginations  already  excited  by
the  recent  warning  of  Boudin,  confirmed  by  that  of  the  King
of  Spain.

The  report  of  the  opening  of  the  body  brought  nothing
comforting  ;  no  natural  cause  of  death  was  found,  but  others
not  natural  appeared  in  the  interior  parts  of  the  head  near
to  the  fatal  spot  where  she  had  suffered  so  severely.  Fagon
and  Boudin  had  no  doubt  of  her  being  poisoned,  and  they
said  so  plainly  to  the  king  in  presence  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon.
Boulduc  assured  me  that  he,  too,  was  convinced  of  it,  and
the  few  others  who  assisted  at  the  opening  to  whom  the
king  spoke  confirmed  the  fact  by  their  gloomy  silence.
Maréchal  alone  maintained  that  there  were  no  signs  of
poison,  except  some  so  equivocal  that  he  had  opened  many
bodies  and  found  the  same  in  cases  where  there  was  not  the
faintest  suspicion  of  poison.  He  said  the  same  to  me,  from
whom  he  hid  nothing  ;  adding,  nevertheless,  that  from  what
he  had  seen  he  would  not  swear  yes  or  no  ;  but  it  was
murdering  the  king,  kilhng  him  by  inches,  to  let  him  take
an  opinion  in  itself  so  distressing,  and  which  in  its  bearing
on  the  future,  even  for  his  own  life,  would  leave  him  no
peace.

When  the  body  of  the  dauphin  was  opened  Fagon,  Boudin,
and  some  others  declared  they  found  the  most  violent  effects
of  a  very  subtle  and  virulent  poison,  which  like  fire  had  con¬
sumed  the  whole  interior  of  the  body  ;  the  heart  had  no
consistence,  its  substance  hquefied  and  ran  to  the  ground
within  their  hands  ;  the  blood  was  corrupted  ;  but  the  head,

72

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

which  was  the  only  part  seriously  affected  in  the  dauphine,
was  not  attacked.  Maréchal,  who  performed  the  opening,
was  decided  in  his  opinion  against  Fagon  and  the  rest.  He
declared  that  there  were  no  distinct  marks  of  poison  ;  that
he  had  seen  many  bodies  opened  in  nearly  the  same  state
about  which  there  had  never  been  suspicion  ;  that  the  poison
which  had  carried  those  persons  off  and  killed  the  dauphin
was  the  natural  venom  of  the  corruption  of  a  mass  of  blood
by  a  fever  which  had  appeared  the  less  because  it  was  in¬
ternal  ;  from  that  had  come  the  corruption  which  had
putrefied  all  the  parts,  and  there  was  no  need  to  search
for  other  causes  than  this,  which  was  a  natural  end,  as  he
had  seen  in  many  persons,  though  rarely  to  so  great  a  degree.
Fagon  replied  ;  Boudin  also,  and  both  with  bitterness.  Maré¬
chal  grew  angry  and  hotly  maintained  his  opinion.  He
ended  the  discussion  by  telling  the  king  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  before  all  the  doctors,  that  he  told  the  truth  as
he  saw  it  and  thought  it  ;  that  to  speak  otherwise  was  guess¬
work,  and  at  the  same  time  to  do  a  thing  which  would  give
the  king  a  miserable  hfe,  always  distrustful  and  full  of  the
worst  suspicions,  which  would  act  like  a  poison  on  him.
He  therefore  exhorted  him,  for  the  peace  and  prolongation  of
his  hfe,  to  shake  off  these  ideas,  so  terrible  in  themselves,
false  according  to  all  his  own  knowledge  and  experience,
which  could  only  give  birth  to  vague  suspicions  and  poignant
anxiety  ;  and  he  spoke  very  angrily  against  those  who  were
endeavouring  to  inspire  them.^

1  In  Saint-Simon’s  account  of  the  palace  of  Versailles  there  is  a  very
significant  passage  unconsciously  hearing  upon  this  matter  ;  he  says  :
“The  king’s  apartments  and  those  of  the  queen”  [the  latter  occupied  by
the  dauphin  and  dauphine  after  Monseigneur’s  death,  and  by  the  Due  de
Berry  after  theirs]  “  are  of  the  utmost  inconvenience,  looking  out  at  the
back  upon  privies  and  all  that  is  dark,  close,  and  evil-smelling.  The  gar¬
dens,  the  magnificence  of  which  is  amazing  by  the  quantity  of  water

1712]  MEMOIES  OP  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

73

He  related  this  circumstance  to  me  afterwards,  saying  at
the  same  time  that,  while  he  thought  the  death  might  be
natural  (although  he  doubted  all  from  the  extraordinary
things  he  had  remarked),  yet  he  had  principally  insisted  upon
it  out  of  compassion  for  the  state  of  heart  and  mind  into
which  the  suspicion  of  poison  would  fling  the  king,  and
also  from  indignation  at  a  cabal,  which  he  had  seen  forming
itself  in  the  interior  cabinets  from  the  beginning  of  the  ill¬
ness,  and  especially  since  the  dauphine’s  death,  to  lay  the
crime  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  of  which  he  then  warned  me
as  his  nearest  friend  ;  for  Maréchal  was  a  man  who  acted
up  to  his  opinions  ;  he  was  integrity,  truth,  and  virtue  itself  ;
though  rather  rough,  and  never  knowing  either  the  force  or
the  proper  measure  of  terms  ;  hut  always  respectful,  and  far
from  stepping  out  of  his  place.

I  was  not  long,  in  spite  of  my  seclusion,  in  hearing  what
was  now  beginning  to  be  told  about  the  Due  d’Orléans.  The
first  low  secret  sounds  whispered  in  the  ear

The  king  per-

suaded  that  the  did  not  long  remain  such.  The  rapidity  with
poiloned'by^the  which  the  rumour  filled  the  Court,  Paris,  the
Due  d’Orieans.  proviuces,  the  remotest  corners  of  France,  the
distant  monasteries,  the  desert  solitudes,  and  spread  finally
to  foreign  countries  and  all  the  peoples  of  Europe,  remmded
me  of  those  black  attempts  during  the  campaign  in  Flan¬
ders  against  the  honour  of  him  whom  the  world  was  now
mourning.

The  author  and  the  protectress  of  these  horrible  rumours
were  the  Due  du  Maine  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  M.  du
Maine,  the  most  timid  of  men,  though  the  greatest  of  sub¬
terranean  workers,  lived  in  mortal  terror  about  his  grandeurs  ;

forced  into  them  to  render  them  verdant,  and  actually  muddy,  exhale  an
unhealthy  dampness  which  can  he  felt,  and  an  odour  that  is  even  more
so.”  A  malignant  fever  in  such  apartments  was,  sooner  or  later,  almost
inevitable.  — Tk.

74

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  iit

he  had  too  much  intelhgence  not  to  tremble  for  his  enormous
but  httle  assured  gains  when  the  throne  he  had  built  for
himself  should  fall  away  from  him.  His  children  were
growing  up  ;  the  king  was  getting  old  ;  he  trembled  with
fear  at  the  prospect  which  the  king’s  age  told  him  could  not
be  far  off.  He  had  no  influence  of  any  kind  with  the  dau¬
phin  or  the  dauphine  through  which  to  obtain  support,  and
he  saw  no  remedy.  Their  deaths  were  to  him  therefore  a
true  dehverance,  and  in  the  same  degree  that  they  were  for
France  the  crown  of  all  misfortunes.  What  a  rising  star.!
what  a  touch  of  some  fairy  wand  !  what  a  sudden  passage
from  terrors  of  the  fate  of  Enceladus  to  the  firm  hope  of
that  of  Phaeton  1  He  revived,  therefore,  under  the  tears  of
the  nation.  But,  always  underhand  and  master  of  dark  arts
(I  will  not  say  the  blackest,  for  no  notion  of  it  came  to  me  —
je  ne  dirai  pas  Us  plus  noirs,  parce  que  nulle  notion  ne  mUn
est  revenue),  he  thought  it  wise  to  fix  suspicions  upon  some
one  ;  and  his  interests  told  him  to  muffle  them  around  the
Due  d’Orléans.  The  death  of  aU  the  princes  of  the  blood  of
an  age  to  take  part  in  the  world  had  won  him  his  latest  and
most  important  grandeur.  By  crushing  this  member  of  the
royal  family  with  so  fearful  a  calumny,  and  by  inducing  the
king  and  society  to  believe  it,  he  counted  on  destroying  him
forever  in  the  most  odious  and  ignominious  manner ,  and  if
the  same  wand  did  not  do  him  a  like  service  in  regard  to  the
Due  de  Berry,  he  had  reason  to  beheve  that  that  timid  prince
would  not  oppose  the  wishes  of  the  king  in  his  behalf.^

Madame  de  Maintenon  now  had  eyes  for  the  Due  du  Maine
only  ;  in  him  was  concentrated  all  her  tenderness  after  the

1  Sainte-Beuve  in  his  preface  says  plainly  that  Saint-Simon  was  wrong
in  fearing  the  Due  du  Maine  so  much  ;  and  that  his  portrait  of  him  is  one
into  which  hatred  visibly  enters.  For  this  reason  the  most  severe  pas¬
sages,  often  reiterated,  have  been  omitted  in  this  abridgment  ;  the  parts
given  are  in  all  probability  just.  — Tk.

1712]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

75

death  of  her  dear  dauphine,  wliile  her  hatred  to  the  Due
d’Orléans  was  ever  the  same.  Her  nursling,  therefore,  had
no  difficulty  in  persuading  her  of  a  charge  which  gratified
that  hatred,  and  in  bringing  her  not  only  not  to  doubt  it  her¬
self  but  to  make  the  king  believe  it,  and  so  to  infatuate  the
pubhe.  She  became  the  protectress  of  the  calumny,  and  was
even  irritable  to  Maréchal  before  the  king.  Words  escaped
her  to  the  effect  that  it  was  well  known  whence  the  blow
had  come  ;  and  she  named  the  Due  d’Orléans  ;  the  king
assented,  with  horror,  as  if  not  doubting  it,  and  both  ap¬
peared  to  take  it  ill  that  Maréchal  should  exclaim  against
the  accusation.  Fagon,  with  his  nods,  seemed  to  approve
of  this  monstrous  allegation  ;  and  Boudin  was  mad  enough
to  dare  to  say  that  he  had  never  doubted  the  prince  was
guilty,  and  to  shake  his  head  impudently  at  the  outburst
which  Maréchal  had  the  courage  to  make  upon  him.

Fatal  external  circumstances  served  the  purpose  of  the
Due  du  Maine,  which  he  well  knew  how  to  handle  power¬
fully  with  an  art  in  which  he  was  singularly  adept.  The
Due  d’Orléans,  married  by  force,  shown  the  indignity  of  his
marriage  by  Madame’s  anger,  by  pubhe  outcry,  by  Monsieur’s
weakness,  was  just  then  entering,  as  it  is  called,  the  world.
The  more  his  education  up  to  that  time  had  been  restricted,
the  more  he  then  sought  compensations.  He  fell  into  evil
ways  ;  he  preferred  the  most  dissolute  companions  ;  his  great
position  and  his  youth  made  him  fancy  that  all  was  permis¬
sible  ;  he  imagined  that  he  recovered  in  the  eyes  of  the  world
what  he  thought  he  had  lost  through  his  marriage  by  despis¬
ing  his  wife  and  exhibiting  himself  as  living  among  and
liking  the  most  licentious  roués.  Hence  the  attraction  of
irréligion,  and  the  extravagant  vanity  of  making  open  pro¬
fession  of  it  ;  hence  his  dull  weariness  in  everything  that
was  not  startling  debauchery.  Pleasures  ordinary  and

76

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

reasonable  were  to  him  insipid;  the  utter  idleness  of  the
Court,  where  he  could  not  bring  his  baneful  company,  and
wherJ,  however,  he  was  forced  to  spend  some  of  his  time,
want  of  tact  in  drawing  better  persons  about  him,  mutual
constraint  with  his  wife  and  all  that  concerned  her,  made
him  prefer  solitude;  but  this  sohtude  he  was  too  much
accustomed  to  excitement  to  be  able  to  bear.

Cast  thus  upon  the  arts  for  amusement,  he  began  to  ex¬
periment  in  alchemy,  —  not  under  the  idea  of  seeking  for
gold,  at  which  he  always  laughed,  but  to  amuse  himself  with
curious  experiments  in  chemistry.  He  built  himself  a  labo¬
ratory  and  supplied  it  thoroughly  ;  he  obtained  a  chemist  of
great  reputation,  named  Humbert,  who  had  no  less  honour
and  virtue  than  he  had  capacity  in  his  profession.  He  made
him  undertake  a  variety  of  experiments,  and  worked  with
him,  but  very  openly  ;  he  had  freq^uent  discussions  with
others  of  the  same  profession  at  the  Court  and  in  town,  and
took  them  sometimes  to  see  Humbert  and  himself  at  work.
In  former  times  he  had  piqued  himself  openly  on  trying  to
see  the  devil,  though  he  owned  he  had  never  succeeded;
and  after  he  was  in  love  with  Mme.  d’Argenton  and  hving
with  her,  he  took  to  other  inquiries  of  the  same  nature  and
hable  to  be  as  dangerously  interpreted.  I  have  related
already  certain  singular  things,  which  were  merely  unfor¬
tunate  pastimes,  and  far  indeed  from  the  shghtest  idea  of
crime.

But  with  that  idea  he  was  now  so  rapidly  drenched  that
on  February  17,  when  he  went  with  Madame  to  give  the
holy  water  to  the  dauphine,  the  crowd  in  the  streets  shouted
aloud  all  sorts  of  folhes  against  him,  which  he  and  Madame
heard  distinctly,  and  dared  not  notice  ;  but  the  grief,  indig¬
nation,  and  embarrassment  they  felt  can  be  imagined.  There
was  even  reason  to  fear  worse  from  an  excited  populace  on

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

77

the  day,  February  21,  when  he  went  alone  to  give  the  holy
water  to  the  dauphin.  He  was  forced  to  endure  all  the  way
the  most  atrocious  insi^lts  from  the  crowd,  which  openly  cast
monstrous  accusations  in  his  face,  pointing  their  fingers  at
him  with  the  coarsest  epithets,  which  no  one  silenced,  seem¬
ing  to  think  that  they  showed  mercy  in  not  tearing  him  to
pieces.

After  the  dauphin’s  death  I  scarcely  left  my  chamber,
except  to  see  the  king  for  a  moment,  and  go  to  Versailles
in  the  afternoons  to  he  with  M.  de  Beauvilliers.

Pernicious  advice  i

given  to  the  One  evening  after  my  return  the  Duchesse

Duc  d’Orléans.  (j>Qj.i4ans  Sent  me  word  that  the  duke  and

herself  were  troubled  at  never  seeing  me,  and  they  both  re¬
quested  that  I  would  go  to  them,  because  they  had  some¬
thing  very  urgent  to  say  to  me.  I  had  not  seen  them  since
the  puhhc  calamity.  Though  Maréchal  had  spoken  to  me
as  I  have  related,  I  had  not  been  master  enough  of  my  own
sorrow  to  go  elsewhere  to  see  another  hke  it.  I  was  not  in
a  state  to  speak,  still  less  to  reason  ;  my  mind  had  so  httle
spring  ;  and  besides,  I  saw  nothing  to  do  under  such  atro¬
cious  hut  such  crazy  calumny,  forged  in  the  face  of  the
tenderest  regard.  I  therefore  begged  the  Due  and  Duchesse
d’Orléans  to  permit  me  to  defer  seeing  them  till  the  next
day.

I  went  then.  I  found  the  Duchesse  d  Orléans  in  deep
distress.  She  told  me  that  the  Marquis  d’Effiat  had  come
the  night  before  from  Paris  to  warn  them  of  the  awful
rumours  which  were  universally  spread  about,  and  the
general  effect  produced  ;  he  had  also  said  that  the  king  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon  were  not  only  convinced  by  the  report
of  the  physicians,  but  that  they  believed  all  that  was  said
against  the  Due  d’Orléans,  and  spoke  of  it  with  such  angei
that  d’Effiat  believed  the  duke  was  not  in  safety,  and  there-

78  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

fore  determined,  in  spite  of  the.  horror  of  the  thing,  to  come
and  warn  them,  and  to  press  the  Due  d’Orléans  to  have  an
explanation  at  once  with  the  king,  which  ought  not  to  be
delayed  a  moment;  and  that  the  simplest,  clearest,  most
persuasive  argument  was  to  insist  that  the  king  should  put
him  in  the  Bastille,  and  arrest  Humbert  and  all  those  of
his  people  whom  the  king  might  think  proper,  until  the
matter  was  cleared  up.  “  Madame,”  I  cried,  “  what  does
M.  le  Duc  d’Orléans  intend  to  do?”  “Monsieur,”  she
replied,  “  he  went  to  the  king  this  morning  ;  he  found  him
very  grave,  very  cold,  even  stern  and  silent,  about  the  com¬
plaints  he  made  and  the  justice  he  asked.”  “But  the
Bastille,  madame,”  I  interrupted  ;  “  he  surely  did  not  speak
of  that  ?  ”  “  Yes,  indeed  he  did,  monsieur,”  she  rephed,

“hut  it  was  not  agreed  to.  The  king  took  an  air  of  dis¬
dain,  which  did  not  change,  although  he  insisted  strongly.
At  last,  the  Due  d’Orléans  fell  hack  on  requesting  that  at
least  Humbert  should  be  put  in  the  Bastüle,  and  inter¬
rogated.  The  king  still  refused,  with  very  bad  grace.  At
last  he  said  he  should  not  have  him  arrested,  hut  he  would
give  an  order  to  the  Bastille  to  receive  him,  if  he  went
there  of  his  own  accord.”  I  exclaimed  at  such  perni¬
cious  advice  so  hastily  acted  upon.  By  this  conduct  the
Due  d’Orléans  lowered  himself  to  the  condition  of  the
smallest  individual,  to  that  of  a  valet  in  a  house  that  has
been  robbed,  instead  of  taking  a  high  tone  and  that  of  a
prince  of  his  rank  on  whom  no  suspicion  can  hold,  who
defies  with  dignity  the  possibility  of  producing  or  setting
forth  the  shghtest  ground  or  the  shghtest  appearance  for
any.

From  these  first  days  when  the  scandal  broke  forth  at
Marly  and  elsewhere,  the  Due  d’Orléans  was  not  only
abandoned  by  every  one,  but  a  clear  space  was  left  around

1712]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

79

him  in  presence  of  the  king  and  in  the  salon  ;  if  he  ap¬
proached  a  group  of  courtiers,  each  one,  without  the  least
hesitation,  turned  away  to  the  right  or  left  and  collected
again  at  the  farther  end  of  the  salon  ;  so  that  it  was  not
possible  for  him  to  speak  to  any  unless  he  took  them  by
surprise,  and  even  then  he  was  immediately  left  with  the
most  marked  indecency.  Even  the  ladies  deserted  the
Duchesse  d’Orléans,  and  some  of  them  no  longer  went  near
her.  After  so  pitiable  a  beginning,  there  was  nothing  to
be  done  but  to  let  the  storm  pass;  but  the  storm  was  too
carefully  managed  to  be  allowed  to  pass.  It  was  maintained
with  the  same  shrinking  at  his  approach,  the  same  aliena¬
tion  until  the  last  Marly  of  the  king’s  hfe,  when  the  condi¬
tion  of  the  monarch’s  health  openly  threatened  ruin.  When
the  rumours  weakened  in  Paris  and  the  provinces,  adroit
and  watchful  emissaries  renewed  them,  others  made  them
echo  about  the  Court;  and  this  continued  long  after  the
death  of  the  king,  with  the  same  artfulness.  In  a  word,  I
was  the  only  man,  I  say  it  distinctly,  the  sole  person  who
continued  to  see  the  Due  d’Orléans  in  my  usual  manner
either  in  his  apartments  or  the  king’s  ;  I  joined  him,  I  sat
with  him  in  a  corner  of  the  salon  (where  assuredly  we  had
no  listener  to  fear)  ;  I  walked  with  him  in  the  gardens,  in
full  view  from  the  windows  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon.  At  Versailles  I  lived  with  him  in  the  same
daily  intercourse  as  at  Marly.

M.  de  Beauvilliers,  the  chancellor,  and  all  my  friends  of
both  sexes  warned  me  perpetually  that  I  should  ruin  myself
by  a  conduct  so  opposed  to  that  of  others  and  to  the  feel¬
ings  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  Hot  to  break
with  him,  they  said,  by  an  entire  cessation  of  intercourse
was  an  honest  thing,  which  might  be  allowed,  but  to  live
continually  and  publicly  in  intercourse  with  him  before  the

80  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

very  eyes  of  the  king  and  Court  was  a  folly,  useless  to  the
Due  d’Orléans,  and  which  could  not  fail  to  offend  until  it
ruined  me.  I  held  firm  ;  I  thought  that  in  cases  of  such
rare  misfortunes  we  ought,  not  only  not  to  abandon  friends
when  we  were  sure  they  were  innocent,  hut  to  draw  nearer
to  them,  more  and  more,  for  one’s  own  honour,  and  for  the
consolation  that  we  owed  to  them,  and  thus  exhibit  to  the
world  the  indignation  that  we  felt  at  the  calumny.  They
kept  on  insisting,  however,  and  let  me  know  that  the  king
thought  it  very  wrong,  and  that  Mme.  de  Maintenon  was
irritated  ;  they  neglected  nothing  to  frighten  me.  I  was
quite  insensible  to  all  they  said.  I  never  ceased  seeing  the
Due  d’Orléans  daily,  and  usually  for  two  or  three  hours
at  a  time.  This  matter  will  he  recurred  to.  It  is  now
necessary  to  take  up  the  current  of  the  year’s  events.  I
shall  only  add  that  it  was  Maréchal  who  prevented  Humbert
from  going  to  the  Bastille.

The  king,  when  the  Due  d’Orléans  left  him,  after  making
the  proposal  first  for  himself  and  then  for  Humbert,  went  to
his  dressing-room,  where,  being  full  of  the  thing,  he  told  it
to  Fagon  and  Maréchal,  who  were  there.  Maréchal,  with  his
brave  freedom,  asked  the  king  what  he  had  ordered.  On
receiving  an  answer,  he  praised  the  candour  and  frankness  of
the  Due  d’Orléans,  and  the  prudence  of  the  king  in  refusing
to  let  him  go  to  the  Bastille,  but  disapproved  of  the  permis¬
sion  given  to  Humbert.  “  What  do  you  expect  to  gain  by
that,  sire?”  he  said  boldly.  “To  proclaim  everywhere  a
shame  in  your  nearest  family  ?  Wliat  would  he  the  result  ?
Hothing  can  be  found,  and  the  shame  would  remain.  If  by
any  possibihty  you  should  find  proof,  and  I  will  answer  that
you  do  not,  will  you  cut  off  the  head  of  your  nephew  who
has  married  your  daughter,  and  publish  judicially  his  crime
and  his  ignominy  ?  If  you  find  nothing  —  and  most  as-

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  81

suredly  there  is  nothing  to  he  found  —  will  you  let  all  his
enemies  and  yours  say  it  was  because  you  did  not  choose  to
find  it  ?  Beheve  me,  sire,  the  result  will  be  dreadful  ;  spare
yourself,  revoke  the  permission  you  have  given,  put  these
horrors  out  of  your  head,  —  these  black  falsehoods,  which
will  only  shorten  your  days  and  make  them  very  miserable.”
This  prompt  and  eager  outburst  from  a  man  whom  the  king
knew  to  be  really  and  truly  attached  to  liim,  had  its  effect
for  Humbert.  The  king  said  at  once  that  Maréchal  was
right  ;  that  he  had  only  let  himself  agree  about  Humbert
through  importunity,  and  that  he  would  not  allow  him  to
go  to  the  Bastille.  In  fact,  a  few  hours  later,  when  the  Due
d’Orléans  presented  himself  before  him,  he  ordered  him  to
send  word  to  Humbert  to  give  up  the  thought  of  it.  Maré¬
chal  told  me  this  the  next  day.  He  said  that  Bagon  and
Bloin  never  uttered  a  word.  I  embraced  him  for  his  virtu¬
ous  act  which  had  succeeded  so  well,  and  I  did  not  leave  the
Due  and  Duchesse  d’Orléans  in  ignorance  of  it.

The  king  went,  on  Wednesday,  April  6,  to  Marly,  where,
although  the  dauphin  and  dauphine  were  not  yet  buried,
The  king  at  he  re-established  his  games  in  Mme.  de  Main-
Mariy  ;  re-estab-  {^g^on’s  apartment,  wished  the  salon  to  be  as
the  usual  life.  usual,  and  Ordered  the  Due  and  Duchesse  de
Berry  to  hold  public  lansquenet  and  brélan  with  tables  for
different  games  for  the  whole  Court.  It  was  not  long  before
he  dined  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  once  or  twice  a  week,
and  heard  music  with  the  usual  intimate  ladies.

It  was  at  this  time  that  the  Abbé  de  Vasé  refused  the
bishopric  of  Mans.  He  was  a  man  of  great  excellence  all
his  life,  who  thought  of  nothing  but  of  how  to  be  so.  He  was
not,  however,  without  seeing  good  company  and  being  much
considered  in  it.  Being  over  sixty  he  refused  to  he  tempted
by  a  bishopric  at  that  age,  although  it  was  among  the  estates

VOL.  III.  — 6

82

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

of  his  own  family.  I  have  not  been  willing  to  omit  this
refusal,  for  its  rarity,  and  for  the  greater  rarity  of  a  man  of
merit  and  quahty  having  been  selected;  it  was  indeed  a
phenomenon  on  the  part  of  Pere  Telher.

The  King  of  England  had  the  small-pox  at  Saint-Germain
and  received  the  sacraments.  It  is  not  known  for  what
reason,  but,  like  the  dauphine,  he  refused  his

Death  of  the  p  i  i.  £  j-V

Princess  of  Jesuit  coufessor  and  sent  for  the  rector  oi  tne

England.  parish  church,  to  whom  he  confessed.  The

queen  his  mother  took  every  possible  precaution  to  protect
her  daughter  from  the  contagion.  All  were  useless  ;  small¬
pox  attacked  her,  and  she  died  on  the  seventh  day.  It  was
a  great  affliction  for  the  Queen  of  England,  with  the  sad
prospect  before  her  of  parting  with  her  son  under  the  neces¬
sities  of  the  coming  peace  and  the  embarrassment  of  his
presence  in  Prance.  The  body  of  the  princess  was  taken  with¬
out  ceremonies  to  the  convent  of  the  Filles  de  Sainte-Marie
at  Chaülot,  where  the  queen  frequently  retired  subsequently.

It  was  during  this  trip  to  Marly,  when,  as  I  have  said,  the
amusements  began  again,  that  the  uneasiness  of  my  friends  at
my  conduct  with  the  Due  d’Orléans  became

I  pass  four  or  five  •  •  t  i  J

weeks  at  La  gO  It  W6Ilt  OH  inCXO&^SlTlg.  I  COlliCl  IlOt

Ferte;causeofit.  advice,  which  for  a  long  time  I

thought  showed  want  of  courage.  In  the  end  their  unanimity,
without  concert  among  them,  forced  me  to  make  reflections.
Without  despising  the  threats  of  the  king’s  anger  and  Mme.
de  Mai  U  ten  on ’s  spite,  I  could  not  heheve  the  results  to  he
such  as  they  tried  to  persuade  me,  because  I  could  not  un¬
derstand  that  my  being  more  or  less  with  the  Due  d’Orléans,
whom  everybody  shunned  with  the  most  marked  indecency,
could  have  any  effect  in  rendering  him  less  guilty  in  the
eyes  of  the  world.  This,  however,  was  the  point  which  made
my  crime  and  the  anxiety  of  the  two  dukes,  the  chancellor,

1712]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

83

and  all  my  other  friends.  They  warned  me  many  times  that
the  king  was  displeased,  sometimes  at  having  seen  me  in  the
gardens  with  his  nephew,  sometimes  when  Mme.  de  Mainte-
non  expressed  surprise  that  I  alone  of  all  the  Court  ventured
to  approach  him  and  be  with  him.  Finally  M.  de  Beau-
vilhers  pressed  me  to  go  to  La  Ferté  from  Marly,  and  not
return  to  Versailles,  in  order  to  conjure  from  a  distance  the
storm  he  saw  ready  to  burst  upon  my  head.

I  resisted  stül  ;  but  he  came  one  morning  to  see  Mme.  de
Saint-Simon  while  I  was  attending  the  king’s  mass,  and  told
her  that  he  knew  very  positively  that  Mme.  de  Maintenon
was  about  to  break  forth  against  me,  and  that,  without
alleging  any  cause,  I  should  be  dismissed  from  Court  if  I
did  not  myself  retire  for  a  certain  time.  He  added  that  he
would  take  upon  himself  to  keep  me  informed  of  how  things
went  and  let  me  know  at  once  when  it  was  safe  to  return  ;
and  he  requested  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  to  think  of  some
sort  of  cipher  language,  but  not  an  actual  cipher,  which  she
could  use  to  let  me  know  the  information  he  should  tell  her
to  send  me  during  my  absence.  He  conjured  her  to  do  this
that  very  day,  so  that  I  might  start  for  La  Ferté  the  next
morning  as  if  summoned  there  by  pressing  business.  I
found  him  still  with  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  on  my  return
from  mass.  The  great  alarm  which  I  saw  in  his  face  made
much  less  impression  upon  me  than  his  dictatorial  and  deter¬
mined  manner  of  speaking,  and  the  air  of  authority  with
which  he  explained  himself.  Nothing  was  less  characteristic
of  him,  and  for  years  nothing  so  strange  had  come  between
us.  A  secret  intrusted  to  him  was  impenetrable,  but  his
tone  and  expression  made  me  feel  what  he  did  not  tell  ;  it
seemed  to  me  assumed  expressly  to  show  by  such  imperative
and  determined  advice  that  he  was  acting  under  an  order
he  was  not  at  liberty  to  avow.

84

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iii.

Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  I  saw  that  there  was  no  room
for  further  objection.  I  employed  the  rest  of  the  day  in
gently  spreading  about  the  pretended  necessity  of  my  jour¬
ney,  in  paying  my  court  as  usual,  seeing  the  Due  and
Duchesse  d’Orléans,  and  in  getting  ready  to  start,  which
I  did  the  next  morniug.  I  never  saw  a  stern  face  change
to  such  serenity  as  did  that  of  the  duke  as  soon  so  I  gave
him  my  promise  to  go.  He  never  said  another  word  to  me
about  it  ;  but  I  am  well  convinced  that  the  king  had  sent
him  to  me,  and  had  told  him  I  should  be  sent  away  if,  fol¬
lowing  his  advice,  I  did  not  take  myself  off  with  a  good
grace.  My  departure  and  my  absence  made  no  talk;  no
one  suspected  anything.  I  was  kept  informed  carefully,  but
always  in  the  concerted  way,  as  to  whether  I  must  remain
or  return.  I  never  knew  what  led  to  my  return,  which  was
notified  to  me  in  the  same  way.  My  absence  lasted  about
a  month  or  sis  weeks  ;  after  which  I  returned  to  Court  and
lived  with  the  Due  d’Orléans  precisely  as  before.

The  Peace  came  very  near  faümg  between  France  and
England,  the  latter  of  which  had  answered  for  its  aUies.  I
Renunciations  have  already  said  more  than  once  that  I  should
exacted  by  the  g  details  of  that  great  event  in  silence,

and  sure  form.  bccause  they  will  be  found,  written  by  the  hand
of  a  master,  among  my  Documents,  from  Torcy  s  journey  to
the  Hague  to  the  signing  of  the  Peace  of  Utrecht,  iuclusively.
Torcy  himself  wrote  down  the  whole  narrative,  which  he
communicated  to  me,  a  faithful  copy  of  which  wiU  be  found,,
as  I  have  said,  with  my  papers.  I  have  only  to  add  to  this
curious  item  of  the  history  of  our  times  what  could  not  have
been  given  in  the  narrative  because,  not  being  part  of  the
negotiation,  Torcy  was  unable  to  write  it,  although  it  had  a
direct  bearing  on  the  affair  of  the  Peace,  of  which  he  was
not  ignorant.

1712]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  85

Our  domestic  misfortunes  gave  rise  to  a  difficulty  which
endangered  that  Peace  (already  drawn  up  in  London)  and
delayed  it  greatly.  Queen  Anne  and  her  council  were
stopped  by  the  question  of  the  right  of  the  King  of  Spain  to
succeed  to  the  throne  of  France  if  the  august  and  precious
thread  of  a  single  remainmg  life,  which  alone  excluded  him,
should  break;  for  it  was  not  possible  for  England  or  any
of  the  other  powers  at  war  with  us  to  consent  to  see  the  two
first  crowns  of  Europe  on  the  same  head.  The  difficulty  was
propounded.  The  king  was  not  in  a  position  to  disregard  it.
It  was  necessary  to  meet  it  in  some  such  solid  manner  that
the  case  could  never  happen,  and  that  the  Powers  should
feel,  once  for  aU,  entire  security  about  it.  They  were  justly
alarmed  at  the  recent  failure  of  the  king’s  renunciations,  so
solemnly  made  in  the  Treaty  of  the  Pyrenees  and  in  that  of
his  marriage,  signed  in  pubhc  after  twenty-four  conferences.
A  will  made  by  Pliihppe  V.  was  no  security  to  them.  They
had  not  forgotten  the  writings  that  the  king  published  four  or
five  years  after  the  Peace  of  the  Pyrenees,  when  on  the  death
of  the  King  of  Spain,  he  seized  the  great  part  of  the  Spanish
Low-Countries  and  Franche-Comté,  under  pretence  of  the
rights  of  the  queen  ;  and  the  Treaty  of  Partition,  to  which
the  emperor,  alone  of  all  Europe,  had  refused  to  consent,  was
another  strong  cause  for  fear.  A  third  was  not  forgotten.
The  same  renunciations  had  been  made  by  the  marriage
treaty  of  Louis  XIII.  ;  nevertheless,  a  short  time  after
Philippe  V.  arrived  in  Spain,  he  caused  to  be  recognized  and
re-established,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  said  renunciations,  the
right  of  the  Due  d’Orléans  to  succession  to  the  crown  of
Spain,  derived  from  the  queen,  his  grandmother,  wife  of
Louis  XIII.  In  truth,  all  this  was  enough  to  induce  the
powers  of  Europe  to  take  precautions  and  to  have  the  matter
settled  in  some  sohd  manner.  But  there  lay  the  trouble;

86  MEMOIES  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  hi,

treaties,  reminciations,  oaths  seemed  a  feeble  reliance  after
these  examples.  Something  stronger  was  wanted;  it  could
not  be  found  in  the  renunciation  itself,  because  nothing  could
be  more  sacred  among  men  than  those  to  which  it  had  been
proved  they  could  not  trust  ;  it  was  necessary,  therefore,  to
look  for  legal  forms  which  should  supply  the  want  with  the
greatest  solemnity  that  could  be  given  to  them.

This  was  long  discussed.  Although  the  king  offered  all
that  could  be  asked  of  him  to  reassure  Europe  as  to  the
danger  of  seeing  two  crowns  on  one  head,  he  would  really
grant  nothiug  at  all,  —  not  to  reserve  a  hack  door  to  let  in
his  family,  hut  simply  out  of  the  obstinate  maintenance  of
his  authority,  which  he  felt  that  aU  legal  forms  attacked,
so  far  as  they  were  demanded  to  support  that  authority
and  add  to  its  solidity.  On  this  point  he  was  wounded  in
his  tenderest  spot.  He  had  made  himself  absolute  without
reply  ;  he  had  extinguished  and  absorbed  to  their  very  last
traces,  even  to  their  idea,  the  memory  of  any  other  authority
or  power  in  France  that  did  not  emanate  from  himself  alone.
The  English,  httle  accustomed  to  such  principles,  and  want¬
ing  their  own  security  and  that  of  their  aUies  (who,  even
had  they  been  willing,  would  not  have  been  persuaded  to
pass  lightly  over  this  essential  point),  insisted,  and  proposed
that  the  States-general  of  the  kingdom  should  he  convoked
to  ratify  the  renunciations.  They  said,  with  reason,  that  it
was  not  sufficient  for  the  permanent  verification  of  the  thing,
consequently  for  the  safety  of  Europe,  that  the  King  of
Spain  should  renounce  the  crown  of  France  if  the  kingdom
of  France  did  not  also  renounce  it  for  him  and  for  his  poster¬
ity  by  accepting  and  ratifying  his  renunciation  ;  that  this
formality  was  necessary  to  break  the  double  tie  attaching
the  branch  in  Spain  to  France,  as  France  was  attached  to
the  branch  of  Spain.

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  87

The  English,  accustomed  to  their  parliaments,  which  are
in  fact  their  States-general,  believed  that  ours  had  the  same
authority.  They  wanted  ours  to  support  and  consolidate  the
renunciations  by  an  authority  according  to  their  ideas  legal,
the  highest  that  could  be  appealed  to,  and  one  which  sup¬
ported  solidly  the  authority  of  the  king.  To  show  him  that
they  distrusted  the  weakness  of  his  power  had  an  inexpres¬
sible  effect  on  the  soul  of  a  prince  who  was  almost  deified
in  his  own  eyes,  and  in  the  constant  exercise  of  illimitable
despotism.  To  let  him  see  that  they  wanted  from  his  sub¬
jects  an  authority  confirming  his  own  was  a  blow  on  the
most  sensitive  spot  of  his  head,  which  a  crown  could  not
cover.  The  English  were  made  to  understand  the  weakness
and  inutdity  of  the  additional  authority  they  demanded.
The  nature  and  impotence  of  the  States-general  were  ex¬
plained  to  them,  and  they  understood  at  last  how  vain  such
concurrence  would  be,  were  it  even  granted.

They  were  told  the  truth  ;  but  good  care  was  taken  at  the
same  time  not  to  tell  them  where  there  existed,  by  right,
by  nature,  by  examples,  what  they  were  seeking  without
being  able  to  find  it,  —  perhaps  not  wishing  to  do  so,  because
of  Philippe  de  Valois  and  the  Salic  law.  However  that  may
be,  they  beat  about  for  a  long  time  ;  France  insisting  that  a
treaty  of  renunciations,  an  express  and  confirmatory  declara¬
tion  by  the  king,  simply  registered  by  the  parliament,  sufficed ,
the  English  replying  by  the  results  of  past  renunciations,
treaties,  and  marriage  contracts  of  Louis  XIII.  and  Louis
XIV.  Thus  the  peace,  agreed  to  by  the  English,  and  much
beyond  our  hopes,  hung  fire.  The  renunciations  were  agreed
to  in  Spain,  where  there  was  no  difficulty  as  to  form  ;  the
whole  trouble  was  in  France.  It  was  this  that  caused
Bolingbroke  to  be  despatched  from  London  to  Fontainebleau.
This  journey,  even  to  its  slightest  particulars,  is  so  well

88

MEMOmS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  in.

0xpla,iii6d.  in  tli6  Documents  th&t  I  abstain  from  saying  any*
thing  about  it  here.

From  the  beginning  of  this  difficulty  it  had  been  discussed
between  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvilliers  and  my¬
self.  The  Due  d’Humières  was  admitted  after
fe^u^ciatto'^s''  a  time  as  a  fourth,  and  the  Due  de  Noaüles  as

discussed.  ^  ^  of  thoSO  five

persons  only  the  Due  de  Chevreuse  was  really  weU-informed
about  it.  M.  de  Beauvüliers  had  never  studied  the  subject
to  the  bottom,  and  for  years  he  had  not  had  time  to  add
reading  to  his  many  functions.  I  shall  not  have  the  bold¬
ness  nor  the  fatuity  to  mention  myself  ;  I  submit,  very
sincerely,  to  the  judgment  that  may  be  formed  of  me  by
examining  the  Documents.  We  all  fell  readily  into  agree¬
ment  on  the  view  that  I  myself  took,  which  was  approved
and  supported  by  the  Due  de  Chevreuse.  But  when  it  came
to  details  this  was  a  labour  for  which  M.  de  Chevreuse  had
no  leisure,  being  wholly  occupied  with  affairs  of  State,  nor  M.
de  Beauvilliers  and  M.  de  Humières,  who  were  busy  with
theirs.  I  felt  my  loins  too  weak  ;  so  that  the  Due  de
Noailles  offered  to  draw  up  a  memorandum  embracing  the
whole  matter,  explaining  by  proofs  and  arguments  the  proper
forms  for  consolidating  the  renunciations  as  desired  by  the
Enghsh  in  a  firm,  stable,  and  legal  manner.  He  promised
the  Dues  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvilhers,  in  presence  of  us
all,  that  it  should  be  done  and  ready  for  examination  among
all  five  of  us  before  the  Court  went  to  Fontainebleau.  From
time  to  time  I  asked  him  news  of  it,  and  so  did  the  others,
to  which  he  always  replied  that  he  was  getting  on  with  the
work  and  would  keep  his  word.

Meantime  there  remained  the  great  difficulty,  —  how  to
bring  the  king  to  consent  to  legal  forms  ;  and  MM.  de
Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvilliers,  whose  particular  work  this

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

89

was  as  ministers,  were  much  concerned  about  it.  But,  per¬
suaded  as  they  were  that  there  was  no  other  way  to  secure
validity  and  safety,  and  moreover  that  it  could  only  he  em¬
ployed  by  the  express  will  of  the  king,  they  flattered  them¬
selves  he  could  be  induced  to  believe  that  his  authority  was
thus  protected,  and,  being  pressed  by  the  necessity  for  peace
which  the  English  would  not  otherwise  agree  to,  he  would
in  the  end  bring  himself  to  consent  in  view  of  so  great  a
good,  which  in  fact  his  exhausted  forces  did  not  allow  him
to  delay.

While  this  state  of  things  was  going  on  I  was  constantly
pressed  by  the  Due  de  Berry  and  the  Due  d’Orléans.  The
Interests  of  the  latter  believed  me  well-informed  as  to  the
Tnd  the  necessary  forms  for  the  validity  of  the  renuncia-

d’Oriéans.  tions,  and  he  readily  persuaded  the  other  to

thmk  so,  too.  He  himself,  isolated  by  the  scandal  of  the
poisonings,  had  none  but  me  with  whom  he  could  speak
and  consult  ;  the  Due  de  Berry,  shy  to  excess  and  always
under  the  hard  and  jealous  yoke  of  the  king,  had  none  either.
Both  had  the  strongest  interest  in  not  renouncing  the  crown
of  Spain  in  a  sohd  manner  beyond  recall  through  the  laws  of
the  country  unless  every  precaution  was  also  taken  to  secure
to  them  the  crown  of  France  by  an  equally  sohd  and  safe  re¬
nunciation  on  the  part  of  the  King  of  Spain  and  his  posterity.
It  was  on  this  point  that  they  consulted  me.  At  first  I
temporized  with  them  easily,  on  pretence  of  the  difficulty  of
the  whole  matter,  which  had  to  be  studied  and  discussed  to
its  depths.  But  at  last  they  pressed  me  hard,  pressed  them¬
selves  by  news  from  England.  I  stiff  evaded  them  ;  but
when  I  found  that  we,  that  is,  the  five  I  have  named,  were
agreed  on  the  form  to  be  proposed,  and  that  the  details  only
depended  on  the  memorandum  of  the  Due  de  Koailles,  I  felt
I  ought  not  to  play  any  longer  with  the  two  princes  so

90

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  hi.

deeply  interested,  who  placed  all  confidence  in  me,  and  had
no  one  else  to  whom  they  could  go.  I  explained,  therefore,
what  I  thought  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  who  was  well-informed
himself  upon  our  history.  He  saw  the  solidity  of  what  I
proposed,  and  took  upon  himself  to  iaform  the  Due  de  Berry,
whom  he  easily  convinced  because  he  was  convinced  himself.

Matters  were  in  this  state  when  the  trip  to  Fontainebleau
approached.  The  Due  de  Hoailles  had  not  finished  his
report.  He  excused  himself  on  the  importance  of  the  matter
and  the  number  of  things  he  had  to  examine,  select,  and
arrange.  Delays  were  prolonged  ;  and  at  last  we  discovered
that  he  had  obscure  persons  hidden  away  in  the  upper  part
of  his  lodging,  to  whom  he  had  given  the  work  ;  remodelling
it  continually  himself,  so  that  there  was  no  end  to  it.  This
discovery  was  made  known  to  him,  and  as  he  could  not  deny
it  he  was  much  embarrassed.

M.  de  Beauvilliers,  greatly  pressed  by  the  English,  was
unwilling  to  wait  any  longer.  He  asked  me  to  draw  up  the
report.  I  objected  for  many  reasons;  I  had  brought  few
hooks  to  Fontainebleau  and  none  that  would  serve  me  for  the
work.  It  was  useless,  however,  to  produce  the  best  excuses  ;
I  was  forced  to  yield  to  the  authority  over  me.  I  went  to
work  in  a  place  where  I  could  get  no  help,  and  where  I  had
no  freedom  for  such  labour,  compelled  as  I  was  to  be  assidu¬
ous  in  the  usual  Court  attendance,  to  dine  in  company  (and
Fontainebleau  was  the  place  of  all  others  where  people  were
most  iuvited  to  sup  and  diue)  ;  I  had  moreover  to  seem  un¬
employed,  because  no  suspicion  should  be  given  that  I  was
seriously  occupied.  Consequently,  my  toil  was  much  inter¬
rupted,  which,  of  all  things  in  the  world,  is  the  most  injurious
to  good  work,  especially  in  such  cases.  I  often  used  the
nights.  Every  evening  M.  de  Beauvilliers  came  alone,  with¬
out  lacqueys  or  torches,  and  felt  his  way  up  my  stairs

1712]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

91

during  the  king’s  supper  to  make  me  read  to  him  what  I  had
written  during  the  day.  We  had  an  hour  together  and  then
he  returned  as  he  came.  He  was  satisfied  with  what  I  did,
and  said  so  to  the  three  others.  Meantime  the  Due  de
Noailles  was  making  his  unknown  writers  sweat  ;  so  that
his  report,  which  was  rather  short,  was  finished  about  the
same  time  as  mine.

I  shall  not  make  an  analysis  here  of  either  of  them.  Mine
will  he  found  among  the  Documents.  It  appeared  that  the

Due  de  Noailles  and  I  differed  on  one  point.

Methods  of  rea¬
soning  of  the  Due  I  thought  that  none  but  the  duke-peers,  the

dc  Ohcvrcusc.  •  i  i  i  1 1  or*  ü  j_i

verified  dukes,  and  the  omcers  oi  the  crown
could  be  summoned.  The  Due  de  Noailles  thought,  or
wanted  to  think,  that  the  governors  of  the  provinces  and  the
Knights  of  the  Order  should  be  added.  On  this  we  argued.
He  afterwards  went  to  see  the  Due  de  Chevreuse  without
saying  a  word  to  me,  and  persuaded  him  ;  for  M.  de  Chevreuse,
with  all  the  knowledge,  illumination,  and  candour  a  man
could  have,  was  subject  to  perverted  reasoning.  His  mind,
always  geometrical,  misled  him  by  rule  as  soon  as  he  had
started  on  a  false  principle  ;  and  as  he  had  extreme  facility
and  much  natural  grace  in  expressing  himself,  he  dazzled  and
carried  away  his  hearers,  even  when  he  was  most  in  error,
having  dazzled  himself  to  begin  with  and  being  convinced
that  he  was  right.  This  is  what  happened  to  him  in  the
management  of  his  domestic  affairs,  which  he  improved,
mended,  and  destroyed  geometrically  by  rule  until  he  brought
them  to  such  radical  ruin  that  he  would  certainly  have  died
of  hunger  but  for  the  government  of  Guyenne  ;  and  Mme.  de
Chevreuse  after  him,  if  the  king  had  not  given  her  a
pension  of  thirty  thousand  francs  from  the  revenues  of  that
government.

Meantime  the  affair  pressed  ;  the  English  wished  to  know

92

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.iii.

what  to  expect.  M.  de  Beauvilliers  appointed  an  afternoon
on  which  we  should  assemble  in  the  httle  apartment  of  the
Due  de  Chevreuse  on  the  ground-floor  near  the  chapel.  We
all  arrived  at  the  same  time.  After  a  few  words  in  general
as  to  what  had  brought  us  together,  M.  de  Beanvilliers  looked
at  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse  and  Noailles  and  asked  them  to
explain  what  they  had  to  say.  M.  de  Chevreuse  wished  to
leave  it  to  M.  de  Noailles,  from  whom  he  had  received  the
opinion  he  embraced.  M.  de  Noailles,  in  deference  to  age
and  older  rank  and  wisdom  (and  stiU  more  for  the  effect  he
expected  to  produce  on  the  Due  de  BeauviUiers),  insisted
that  M.  de  Chevreuse  should  speak  first  ;  which  he  did,  and
I  must  say  briefly,  not  to  prolong  this  narrative,  that  I  never
saw  a  worse  cause  sustained  with  better  grace,  or  with  more
wit,  eloquence,  and  elegance;  if  everything  was  lacking  as
to  reasons,  the  perfection  of  the  utterance,  aided  by  wit  and
knowledge,  left  nothing  to  he  desired.

I  spoke  in  my  turn  ;  and  though  I  restrained  myself  as
much  as  possible,  the  importance  of  the  matter,  the  necessity
of  disentangling  it,  of  making  it  palpable,  and
viiiiers  declares  of  replying  to  the  sophisms,  inductions,  and

for  my  opinion.  couvolutious  iu  wMch  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse
excelled,  and  by  which  he  knew  how  to  mask  a  fallacy  with  an
appearance  of  simpheity  and  justice,  made  me  speak  more  at
length  than  I  wished.  Silence  was  complete  during  both
speeches,  and  the  attention  of  the  listeners  great  ;  M.  de  Beau-
villiers  in  particular  did  not  lose  a  word.  He  looked  at  the
Duc  d’Humieres  as  if  to  ask  his  opinion,  who  said  he  was  of
mine  more  than  ever.  Then  I  beheld  a  prodigy  which  filled
me  with  embarrassment,  and,  I  may  say,  covered  me  with  con¬
fusion.  M.  de  Beauvilhers  summed  up  in  a  very  few  words
the  points  of  the  matter  and  the  diversity  of  the  two  opin¬
ions;  and  then,  suddenly,  this  cautious,  sage,  and  modest

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  93

man,  accustomed  to  be  of  one  sentiment  in  all  things  with
the  Due  de  Chevrense,  and  to  defer  to  him  in  every  way,
changed  into  another  man.  He  hushed,  and  seemed  hardly
able  to  contain  himself.  He  said  he  could  not  understand
or  even  think  like  M.  de  Chevreuse  on  the  points  that  divided
us,  explained  his  reasons  briefly  but  not  forgetting  anything
essential,  unveiled  the  sophistries  with  an  extreme  precision
and  justice  ;  and  with  that  (here  is  the  prodigy,  which  over¬
whelmed  me)  he  fell  upon  M.  de  Chevreuse  like  a  falcon,
and  treated  him  as  a  teacher  treats  a  boy  who  brings  him  an
exercise  fuU  of  the  grossest  solecisms,  and  makes  him  look
at  them  aU  while  he  reprimands  him.  I  will  not  enlarge
upon  discourse  so  animated,  in  which  nothing  was  forgotten.
His  opinion  was  on  my  side.  M.  de  Chevreuse,  like  a  httle
schoolboy  before  his  master,  embarrassed,  confused,  but
without  resentment,  acquiesced  at  once.  M.  de  Noailles,
bewildered  to  know  where  he  was,  did  likewise.  M.  de
Beauvilliers,  rising,  looked  at  us  all  to  confirm  his  judgment,
while  he  said,  “  Messieurs,  the  matter  is  now  agreed  upon  ;
the  opinion  of  M.  de  Saint-Simon  is  taken.”  This  was  said
with  an  air  approaching  his  usual  manner.  MM.  de  Chev¬
reuse  and  de  Noailles  rephed  that  they  accepted  his  decision,
and  they  had  no  sooner  said  the  words  than  I  went  away
without  speaking  to  any  one,  and  reached  my  room  in  the
greatest  astonishment,  —  not  that  my  opinion  was  taken,  but
at  the  way  the  thing  had  happened.  As  for  M.  de  Chevreuse,
whom  I  avoided  for  a  day  or  two,  he  never  showed  any
vexation,  and  was  just  as  usual  with  M.  de  Beauvilliers  and
with  me,  —  always  the  same  gentleness,  simpheity  and  truth  ;
truly  a  most  estimable  nature.

IV.

It  was  now  for  MM.  de  Clievreuse  and  de  BeauviUiers,  but
the  latter  especially,  to  see  how  they  should  dare  to  make  to
the  king  a  proposal  so  shocking  to  the  author-

Conferences  on  tt*  •

the  renunciations  ity  ll6  i(loliz6(ij  OEL  tll6  d.6ifiC&,tiOIl  01  WlllCll  116

Beauvmie'fs'''  bad  employed  his  whole  reign.  They  never
told  me  what  passed,  and  I  did  not  think  I
ought  to  hook  it  from  friends  so  estimable,  and  who,  besides,
had  perfect  confidence  in  me  ;  perhaps  when  it  came  to  the
point  they  dared  not,  after  feehng  about  and  reconnoitring
the  ground,  make  the  proposition  to  the  king  at  aU  (which  is
what  their  secrecy  to  me  made  me  suspect)  j  or  else  they
were  really  repulsed  without  hope.  At  any  rate,  towards  the
end  of  that  Fontainebleau  visit,  M.  de  BeauviUiers  declared
to  me  that  the  king  would  never  agree  to  the  forms,  and
would  hear  of  nothing  but  a  simple  recording  of  the  renun¬
ciations  by  parhament,  and  at  the  most  he  would  only  aUow
the  two  princes  interested  and  the  peers  to  be  present  ;  and
even  that  he  would  not  promise.

I  told  him  that  in  this  as  in  all  things  the  king  was  mas¬
ter  ;  but  that  the  act  would  have  no  vaUdity  ;  that  the  allies
would  be  simple  indeed  if  they  were  contented  vrith  it  ;  and
the  two  princes  concerned  still  more  so,  for  it  cut  their
throats.  The  words  alarmed  him,  and  I  explained  them.
I  told  him  that  those  renunciations  were  reciprocal  ;  that
in  Spain  the  form  of  all  legislation  was  fixed  and  recognized  ;
that  a  form  was  used  for  the  recognition  of  a  king  and  of
his  heir,  for  his  inauguration,  for  the  oaths  that  he  took  ;  in

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  95

a  word,  for  all  that  he  did  that  was  grandest  and  most  august  ;
that  this  form  lay  in  the  action  of  the  States-general  (called
in  their  language  las  Cortes),  at  which  grandees,  prelates,
nobles,  councillors,  judges,  and  deputies  from  the  towns  as¬
sembled  ;  that  the  kiug  presided,  and  all  that  was  done  by
that  body  was  immutable  ;  that  the  renunciations  of  the
Due  de  Berry  and  the  Due  d’Orléans  would  there  be  passed
upon,  admitted,  and  registered  as  laws,  without  return  for
them  or  their  posterity  ;  whereas  the  renunciation  of  the
King  of  Spain  and  his  posterity  of  the  crown  of  France
would  have  no  vahdity  whatever  if  received  in  the  manner
proposed,  —  a  state  of  things  which  might  result  in  the
exclusion  of  the  princes  and  their  posterity  from  their  rights
of  succession.  M.  de  BeauviUiers  was  convinced,  but  he  had
no  hope  in  regard  to  the  king.

The  next  day  we  met  again.  He  represented  to  me  the
urgent  necessity  of  peace,  the  continual  pressure  of  the
English  in  the  matter  of  the  renunciations,  the  impossibility
of  conq^uering  the  king  on  so  sensitive  a  point  as  that  of  his
sole  authority  ;  he  repeated  that  all  the  king  would  consent
to  was  the  registration  by  parliament,  as  an  integral  part  of
the  treaty  of  peace,  not  to  confirm  his  authority,  but  simply
to  promulgate  it.  He  conjured  me  to  bring  the  princes  round
to  those  views  and  to  persuade  them  to  yield  to  an  absolute
necessity.  I  replied  that  the  affair  was  theirs,  and  it  was  for
them  to  take  their  course,  and  not  for  me  to  abuse  their  con¬
fidence  in  a  matter  so  vitally  important  to  them  and  their
posterity  ;  that  I  had  shown  them  what  were  the  only  valid
forms  for  the  renunciation  of  the  King  of  Spain  to  the  crown
of  France,  and  that  I  could  not  go  to  them  and  hold  another
language.

He  returned  to  the  impossibility  in  regard  to  the  king  ;  I
insisted  that  it  was  not  my  affair,  but  that  of  the  princes ,  if

96

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

they  had  informed  the  English  (as  was  easy  and  probable)
that  they  themselves  were  only  in  safety  under  the  forms
proposed,  and  if,  for  the  safety  of  Europe  and  the  sake  of
peace,  they  should  hold  firm,  the  king  would  be  compelled  to
agree  to  the  forms,  as  much  by  the  urgent  necessity  for  peace
as  to  prevent  Europe  from  believing  that  by  a  feigned  sensi¬
tiveness  as  to  his  authority  he  was  really  tricking  it.  This
suggestion,  being  true  and  solid,  frightened  the  duke;  he
again  said  all  he  could,  and  I  kept  silence.  We  separated
thus.

The  next  morning  as  I  was  dressing  he  sent  to  beg  me  to
come  to  him.  He  said  he  had  not  slept  all  night  in  the
straits  where  I  had  put  him.  He  exhorted  me  again  ;  but
I  stood  firm.  When  we  parted  he  begged  me  to  see  him
again  at  the  same  hour.  I  was  in  true  anguish  at  thus
resisting  for  the  first  time  a  man  whom  all  my  hfe  I  had
regarded  as  my  father  and  oracle,  and  for  whom  my  closest
esteem,  my  heart’s  tenderness,  the  admiration  of  my  mind,
and  gratitude  for  all  that  he  had  done  for  me  with  the
dauphin  had  only  increased  my  entire  deference.  I  found
him  more  troubled  than  he  was  when  I  left  him  the  night
before.  He  went  over  the  same  reasons.  While  he  was
talking  I  talked  with  myself,  and  I  determined  to  get  out  of
this  lacerating  trouble.  Suddenly  I  interrupted  him,  and
looking  at  him  with  fire,  I  said  :  “  Monsieur,  it  is  beating  the
air  to  repeat  these  things  ;  spare  yourself  the  trouble,  for  I
declare  to  you  that  never  will  they  persuade  me.  But  take
another  course.  You  are  a  minister  of  State  and  a  good
man  ;  all  my  life  I  have  regarded  you  as  my  father,  and  my
respect  and  confidence  have  made  you  my  oracle.  I  will
give  you  a  signal  proof  of  it,  —  such  as  I  would  not  give  to
any  other  man  on  earth.  Cease  arguing,  because,  I  tell  you
again,  you  can  never  persuade  me  ;  but  take  the  tone  of  au-

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  97

thority  ;  say  to  me  plainly  and  shortly,  ‘  I  will  that  you  shall
do  this  thmg  ;  ’  and  against  my  closest  conviction,  against
the  work  I  have  done,  which  is  fully  completed,  I  will  obey
you  like  a  child.  You  know  more  than  I,  by  far,  in  pubhc
matters,  you  are  still  more  above  me  in  pious  illumination  ;

I  will  rest  upon  that  and  sacrifice  my  dearest  feehngs  and
my  strongest  convictions  to  you.”

I  kept  my  eyes  fixed  upon  his,  which  were  wet.  Never
did  I  see  a  man  so  touched.  He  flung  himself  on  my  breast
and,  speaking  with  difficulty,  “No,”  he  said,  “it  is  too
much  ;  it  is  not  just  ;  I  cannot  consent.”  “  At  any  rate,”  I
replied,  “the  debate  between  us  can  only  end  thus.  Hope
nothing  from  arguments,  but  expect  all  from  authority.”  A  ,
thousand  tender  things  from  a  man  touched  to  the  heart
followed  this  new  declaration,  and  finally  he  told  me  he
would  take  a  day  to  think  of  it  and  would  let  me  know
on  the  morrow,  same  place  and  same  hour,  what  he  had  de¬
cided.  I  went  to  the  rendezvous.  He  began  by  all  that
friendship,  or  the  humüity  of  a  great  and  good  man  alarmed
by  the  greatness  of  the  sacrifice  and  feehng  its  full  extent,
could  express.  He  said  he  had  been  unable  to  sleep  all
night  ;  that  he  could  not  resolve  on  taking  upon  himself
what  I  proposed  and  abusing  my  deference  for  him  to  such
a  point;  and  again  he  began  to  argue.  I  stopped  him.

“  Monsieur,”  I  said,  “  I  shall  go,”  making  a  motion  to  rise.

“  Arguments,  I  cannot  hsten  to  ;  it  is  your  decision  I  await  ;
either  leave  me  my  liberty  with  the  two  princes  or  say  two
words  with  authority.  Put  it  out  of  your  mind  that  there
can  be  any  other  issue  to  this  matter.”  He  was  some  time
without  replying  ;  his  eyes  fiUed  with  tears.  Then,  looking
at  me  tenderly,  “  Since  there  is  no  other  way,  and  you  ab¬
solutely  will  have  it,”  he  said,  with  an  air  of  modesty  and
even  shame  which  cannot  be  described,  “  I  must  take  the

VO  I..  III.  —  7

98  MEMOIES  or  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  it.

only  course  you  leave  me,  whatever  pain  I  feel  in  doing  so.

I  require  you  therefore  to  try  to  destroy  that  which  you
have  been  doing,  —  not  that  it  is  not  right,  but  because  the
king  will  never  agree  to  it,  and  we  must  have  peace.  I  exact
that  you  shall  bring  the  princes  to  being  satisfied  with  the
mere  registration  in  their  presence  and  in  that  of  the  peers.”

“  You  will  it,  monsieur,”  I  rephed,  “  and  you  shall  he  obeyed.

I  wdl  let  you  know  from  time  to  time  what  I  do  in  conse¬
quence.  Let  us  keep  firmly  to  this,  and  above  all,  no  useless
arguments.”  He  embraced  me  again  tenderly,  and  said  all
that  could  express  the  effect  on  his  heart  and  mind  of  such
an  extraordinary  act  of  deference  ;  saying  that  he  should  feel
.  it  all  his  life.

The  work  I  had  undertaken  was  very  strange;  I  had
blown  hot,  talked  reason,  rules,  laws,  rights,  justice,  the  most
palpable  interests,  and  I  had  fully  persuaded  and  convinced
the  princes  ;  nothing  remained  hut  to  come  to  an  agreement
with  the  Enghsh,  who  of  course  could  not  hke  so  informal
a  ratification,  and  one  so  superficial,  for  renunciations  that
were  vital  to  all  Europe  and  to  themselves,  as  that  of  a  mere
registration  used  for  all  treaties,  none  of  which  it  had  ren-
dered  lasting.  Men  as  accustomed  and  attached  to  legal
and  judicial  forms  as  the  Enghsh  naturally  demanded  those
which  alone  could  render  permanently  vahd  renunciations  so
important  ;  about  which  their  alhes  trusted  wholly  to  them
to  secure  their  interests  in  the  treaty  of  which  the  Enghsh
were  now  the  masters.

The  proper  course  for  the  Due  de  Berry  and  the  Due
d’Orléans  (themselves  being  informed  and  convinced  on  the

Proper  means  for  suhject)  was  to  let  the  Enghsh  act;  to  show
the  Dues  de  Berry  allow  the  king  to  form  what  sus-

have  taken.  picious  he  liked,  avoiding  all  that  could  give
him  proofs,  and  to  comfort  themselves  under  his  rebukes  and

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

99

ill-humour  by  the  safety  they  gained  from  the  mutual  valid¬
ity  of  their  renunciations  and  those  of  the  King  of  Spain  ;
for  the  king  in  this  case  would  have  no  choice  but  that  of
submitting  to  the  forms  the  Enghsh  demanded,  or  else
breaking  off  the  Peace  and  continuing  the  war,  which  it  was
now  no  longer  possible  for  him  to  maintain.

All  these  things  were  in  my  mind  and  I  had  inculcated
them  well  into  the  two  princes,  who  were  convinced  of  them.
To  undo  that  work  was  a  sorry  business.  To  persuade
against  one’s  own  convictions  is  strangely  perplexing.  Still,
I  had  to  go  to  work  in  conformity  with  that  which  M.  de
Beauvilliers’  great  weight  with  me  had  induced  me  to  prom¬
ise.  The  details  would  here  be  too  long  and  too  wearisome.
I  shall  merely  say  that  I  began  by  postponing  and  then  pre¬
venting  all  communication  and  concert  with  the  Enghsh.

I  was  thus  occupied  at  the  close  of  the  Fontainebleau  trip
when  I  was  warned  of  a  thing  I  did  not  at  the  moment
deserve.  ISTancré  had  been  hovering  around  us  ;  he  had
overheard  once  or  twice  the  last  words  of  conversations
between  the  Due  d’Orléans  and  me,  interrupted  by  his
presence.  He  had  been  insinuating  himself  with  M.  de
Torcy,  whom  he  wanted  to  commission  him  to  speak  with
the  Due  d’Orléans  on  the  subject  of  the  renunciations.
Annoyed  at  not  getting  this  honour  from  Torcy,  he  told  him
it  was  I,  out  of  my  infatuation  for  the  peerage,  who  had
turned  the  duke’s  head  about  forms  and  stopped  the  peace.

Torcy,  with  whom  at  that  time  I  had  not  the  slightest
intimacy,  and  who  was  the  friend  of  many  persons  with
whom  I  would  have  no  dealings  whatever,  went  to  the  king
and  told  him  what  N’ancré  had  reported.  The  king  in  his
anger  spoke  to  the  Due  de  Berry  and  cited  his  authority.
The  latter  told  me  of  this  himself  ;  which  led  me  to  entreat
him  to  think  it  well  that  I  should  not  see  him  again,  in

100  MEMOIRS  or  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMOH.  [OH^P.  .u

order  to  remove  eU  ground  from  the  king’s  mind,  and  that
our  interoourse  might  be  carried  on  solely  through  Mme.
de  Saint-Simon  and  the  Due  d'Orléans.  The  king,  however,
showed  nothing  of  this  to  me,  and  as  I  really  succeeded  in
makiim  the  princes  satished  with  simple  registration  m
presence  of  the  peers,  this  rascality  of  Nancré,  and  Torcy  s
ill  offices,  had  no  results.  I  let  the  matter  drop,  and  saw
no  reason  to  say  anything  or  have  anything  said  to  the

king  about  it.  ,  n-

■  Wkatever  obstacles  and  whatever  spite  the  aUies  had

opposed  to  the  Peace,  matters  had  gone  so  far  in  England
Ambassadors  ap-  that  the  Duke  of  Hamüton  was  declared
pointed  between  p^ssador  to  Erance,  and  the  Due  d’Aumont

France.  Sent  to  England  with  an  embassy,  ine

Duke  of  Hamilton  was  a  rather  young  nobleman,  wholly  on
the  side  of  the  queen  and  much  considered.  He  was  a
Douglas.  Anne  Hamilton,  eldest  daughter  of  James,  Mar¬
quis  of  Hamilton,  had  married  Wilham  Douglas,  Earl  of
Selkirk.  The  Marquis  of  Hamilton  was  made  duke  and
knight  of  the  Garter  hy  Charles  I.,  and  after  varied  fortunes
was^’beheaded,  a  few  days  later  than  that  unfortunate  mon¬
arch.  Charles  II.,  on  his  restoration,  made  this  Earl  of  Sel¬
kirk  Duke  of  Hamilton,  he  heing  the  son-in-law  of  the  late
duke,  who  left  no  sons.  This  new  Duke  of  Hamilton  acquired,
with  the  dignity,  nearly  all  the  estates  of  his  father-in-law
(whose  name  and  arms  he  took),  which  were  restored  to  him.
This  was  the  grandfather  or  great-grandfather  of  the  man
of  whom  we  are  speaking.  The  party  opposed  to  the  queen,
incensed  at  being  unable  to  prevent  the  Peace,  fell  back  on
doing  her  all  the  spite  it  could  in  other  ways.  Hamilton
had  lately  won  a  suit  in  Parliament  against  Lord  Mohiin  of
the  opposite  party.  This  party  goaded  the  latter  all  it
could  until  it  forced  him,  in  spite  of  himself,  to  fight  a  duel

1712]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  101

with  Hamilton.  Mohun  was  killed  on  the  ground,  hut
Macartney,  who  served  him  as  second,  ran  the  Duke  of
Hamilton  through  the  hack  with  his  sword  and  fled  the  coun¬
try.  The  queen,  who  felt  whence  the  blow  had  come,  was
grieved  and  outraged  both.  She  then  appointed  as  ambas¬
sador  to  France  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  knight  of  the
Garter,  one  of  her  most  trusted  ministers,  and  the  head  of
the  house  of  Talbot.

A  courier  from  Spain  arrived  in  Paris  in  Hovember  with
a  copy  of  the  act  of  renunciation  of  the  King  of  Spain,  made
The  King  of  Spain  Kovember  5  before  the  Cortes  in  presence  of  the
renounces  the  Enghsh  ambassador.  This  courtier  also  brought

crown  of  France  ®

before  the  Cortes.  ^  project  foT  tliat  of  the  Duc  de  Beiiy,  cind  a
letter  to  the  prince  from  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Spain,  con¬
taining  the  tenderest,  strongest,  most  precise  assurance  of  his
sincerity  in  this  act,  which  advanced  his  brother  to  his  own
place  in  the  succession  to  the  crown  of  France,  and  express¬
ing  with  joy  the  love  that  had  led  him  to  do  it.  The  Duc
de  Berry  and  the  Duc  d’Orléans  showed  me  the  letter
because  I  asked  to  see  it.  It  seemed  to  me  so  important
that  I  earnestly  advised  them  to  preserve  it  carefuUy  as  a
document  most  valuable  to  their  future  interests.  They
acknowledged  that  the  thought  had  not  occurred  to  them,
but  they  now  beheved  I  was  right.

The  death  of  the  Duc  de  Chevreuse,  which  took  place  in
Paris  November  5,  gives  me  occasion  to  say  more  of  a  per-
Death  of  the  Duc  sonage  wlio  has  figured  so  much  and  so  notably
de  Chevreuse.  world,  and  with  wliom  I  lived  so  many

years  in  the  most  intimate  confidence  and  privilege.  Though
I  have  said  many  things  about  him  on  many  occasions,  far
more  remains  to  teU,  if  space  did  not  prevent,  that  would  be
most  interesting  and  still  more  profitable.  Born  with  much
natural  inteUigence  and  charm  of  mind,  with  taste  for  appli-

102  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

cation,  facility  for  work  and  for  all  sorts  of  sciences,  with
correctness  of  expression,  which  came  naturally  and  without
search,  with  abundance  of  thoughts,  and  ease  in  rendering
them,  and  in  explaining  abstract  or  perplexing  things  with
clearness  and  precision,  he  had  received  a  most  perfect
education  from  masters  in  the  art,  who  gave  him  all  their
affection  and  all  the  benefit  of  their  rare  talents.

His  father,  the  Due  de  Luynes,  had  no  less  mind,  nor  less
facihty  and  precision  in  speaking  and  writing,  nor  less  apph-
cation  and  knowledge.  The  neighbourhood  of  Dampierre
alhed  him  with  the  solitaries  of  Port-Eoyal  des  Champs,
and  after  the  death  of  his  first  wife,  who  was  buried  there,
he  retired  to  the  community  ;  taking  part  in  their  austerities
and  in  several  of  their  works.  To  them  he  confided  the  care
of  his  son’s  education,  to  which  those  gentlemen  gave  every
attention,  out  of  attachment  to  the  father,  and  also  from
affection  to  their  pupil,  won  by  the  gentleness,  goodness,  and
gifts  they  found  in  him  to  cultivate.

The  retirement  of  the  Due  de  Luynes  to  Port-Eoyal  lasted
several  years.  His  mother,  so  famous  in  all  the  great  cabals
and  events  of  her  day  under  the  name  of  her  second  husband,
the  Due  de  Chevreuse  (dead  without  posterity  in  1657),  was
deeply  pained  to  see  her  son  as  it  were  buried.  M.  de  Chev¬
reuse,  her  husband,  the  youngest  son  of  the  Due  de  Guise,
killed  at  Blois  in  1588,  had  hved  with  his  wife  in  the  closest
union  ;  and  as  she  had  always  passionately  loved  her  son,  the
Due  de  Luynes,  who  lived  with  them,  M.  de  Chevreuse  loved
him  also,  and  bequeathed  to  him  and  to  his  mother  all  the
advantages  that  he  could.

The  Due  de  Chevreuse  [son  of  the  Due  de  Luynes]  who
was  rather  tall,  well-made,  with  a  noble  and  agreeable  face,
had  no  estates  at  all.  But  he  obtained  an  immense  property
by  his  marriage,  in  1667,  with  Colbert’s  eldest  and  beloved

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  103

daughter.  Besides  the  dot  and  continual  and  very  consider¬
able  gifts,  he  derived  through  the  interests  of  this  marriage
the  re-erection  in  his  favour  of  Chevreuse  as  a  duchy-verified.

I  have  had  occasion  in  many  places  to  speak  of  the  character
of  his  mind,  his  dangerous  method  of  reasoning,  the  upright¬
ness  of  his  heart,  and  the  candour  with  which  he  persuaded
himself  at  times  of  the  most  erroneous  things,  and  en¬
deavoured  to  persuade  others  of  them  ;  always  with  that
gentleness  and  insinuating  politeness  which  never  left  him,
and  was  so  sincerely  far  from  any  assumption  of  domineering
or  even  of  superiority  of  any  kind.  Oblique  arguments,  exu¬
berance  of  views,  a  rapid  but  natural  piling  up  of  inductions
of  which  he  did  not  see  the  error,  were  in  the  line  of  his
genius  and  his  practice.  He  set  them  forth  so  vividly  and
forcibly  and  with  such  adroitness  that  you  were  lost  if  you
did  not  stop  him  in  the  beginning  ;  because  after  you  had
allowed  two  or  three  propositions  that  seemed  simple,  and
which  he  drew  naturally  one  from  another,  to  pass,  he
would  lead  you,  drums  heating,  to  his  end  ;  and  though  you
might  feel  the  falsity  of  what  was  dazzling  you,  there  was
never  a  joint  or  crevice  through  which  to  get  in  an  opposing
word.  Though  a  lover  by  nature  of  crooked  ways  in  argu¬
ment,  but  always  in  sincere  good  faith,  he  was  long  in  shak¬
ing  off  the  doctrines  of  Port-Royal,  up  to  a  certain  point,
for  he  knew  how  to  harmonize  the  strangest  mixtures,  —  and
even  then  without  yielding  his  esteem  and  liking  for  his
old  masters,  and  his  secret,  but  firm  aversion  to  the  Jesuits  ;
above  all,  never  abandoning  the  morals,  integrity,  love  of
truth  and  piety,  of  the  Port-Royalists.  The  same  taste  for
unreasonable  argument  led  him  to  throw  himself,  with  an
enthusiasm  that  lasted  all  his  life,  into  the  precepts  of  La
Guyon  and  the  flowery  views  of  M.  de  Cambrai.  It  also
ruined  his  affairs  and  his  health;  and  had  he  lived  a  few

104  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

y6&rs  loiig6r  li6  would  vory  C6rt3,iiily  liavs  toon  infatuatod,
but  without  the  slightest  personal  interest,  in  the  system  of
John  Law.

Never  man  possessed  his  soul  in  peace  as  he  did  ;  he  bore
it  in  his  hand,  as  the  psalm  says.  The  disorder  of  his  affairs,
the  dangers  of  the  storm  of  Quietism,  which  came  near  up¬
setting  him,  the  loss  of  his  children,  that  of  the  perfect  dau-
pPin,  —  in  short,  no  event  could  agitate  him  or  make  him  stir
from  his  occupations  and  usual  condition  of  mind,  though
his  heart  was  ever  tender  and  kind.  He  offered  all  to  God,
of  whom  he  never  lost  sight  ;  and  in  that  sight  he  directed
his  life  and  his  actions.  To  his  very  valets  he  was  gentle,
modest,  and  polite;  in  the  freedom  of  his  home,  among
friends  and  his  intimate  family,  he  was  gay  and  excellent
company,  without  constraint  for  himself  or  others,  whose
pleasure  and  amusement  he  loved  ;  but  so  reserved,  from  an
inward  contempt  for  society  and  the  love  and  habit  of  his
own  cabinet,  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to  draw  him  into
the  world.

The  horses  of  M.  de  Chevreuse  were  often  harnessed
twelve  or  fifteen  hours  at  a  stretch.  Once  this  happened  at
Vaucresson,  whence  he  intended  to  go  to  dinner  at  Dam-
pierre.  The  coachman,  then  the  postilion,  grew  tired  of
watching  the  horses  ;  it  was  summer  ;  the  horses  grew  tired
themselves.  About  six  o’clock  in  the  evening  a  rumpus  was
heard  which  shook  everything.  People  rushed  ;  the  carriage
was  found  smashed,  the  great  gate  shattered,  the  railing  of  the
gardens  on  either  side  driven  in,  —  in  short,  a  disaster  which
took  a  long  time  to  repair.  M.  de  Chevreuse,  who  had  not
been  disturbed  by  the  din,  was  quite  surprised  when  they
told  him  of  it.  M.  de  Beauvilhers  amused  himself  a  long
time  by  reproachyig  his  friend  and  asking  him  to  pay  the
costs.  Another  adventure,  which  M.  de  Chevreuse  did  not

1712]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  105

like  to  be  reminded  of,  also  happened  at  Vaucresson,  and  it
was  fun  to  see  his  embarrassment  when  any  one  referred  to
it.  About  ten  o’clock  one  morning  they  announced  to  him
a  certain  M.  Sconin,  who  had  been  his  bailiff  and  was  now
employed  in  ways  more  profitable  to  himself,  in  which  M.
de  Chevreuse  aided  him.  He  sent  him  word  to  take  a  turn
in  the  garden  and  come  back  m  half  an  hour  ;  then  he  con¬
tinued  what  he  was  about  and  forgot  the  man  entirely.  At
seven  o’clock  in  the  evening  Sconin  was  announced  again.
“  In  a  minute,”  he  replied,  without  stirring.  Fifteen  minutes
later  he  called  him  in.  “  Ah  !  my  poor  Sconin,”  he  said,  “  I
beg  your  pardon  for  having  made  you  lose  your  day.”  “Not
at  all,  monseigneur,”  replied  Sconin  ;  “  as  I  have  had  the
honour  to  know  you  for  many  years  I  was  aware  that  the
half-hour  might  be  long  ;  so  I  went  to  Paris  and  attended  to
my  business,  before  and  after  dinner,  and  I  have  just  re¬
turned.”  M.  de  Chevreuse  was  confused.  Sconin  did  not
hold  his  tongue,  neither  did  M.  de  Chevreuse’s  servants  ;
]M.  de  BeauviUiers  diverted  himself  much  with  the  tale,  and
however  used  M.  de  Chevreuse  was  to  his  friend’s  teasing,
he  never  could  stand  it  when  this  story  came  on  the  tapis.
I  have  told  these  two  anecdotes,  among  hundreds  of  others
of  the  same  nature,  because  it  seems  to  me  that  they
characterize.

The  chancellor  said  of  these  brothers-in-law  that  they
were  “  of  one  heart,  one  soul  ;  what  the  one  thought  the
other  thought  mstantly,  but  when  it  came  to  execution,  M.
de  Beauvilhers  had  a  good  angel  who  kept  him  from  acting
in  any  way  like  M.  de  Chevreuse,  however  much  he  thought
like  him.”  This  was  exactly  true.  It  is  almost  inconceiv¬
able  that  two  men,  so  opposed  in  methods  of  action  should
have  passed  their  hves  together,  in  the  most  intimate  and
indissoluble  union,  never  interrupted  for  a  single  instant.

106

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.it.

They  lived  in  the  same  places,  lodged  together  at  Marly,
and  side  by  side  at  Versailles  ;  they  took  their  meals  to¬
gether  continually,  and  there  was  never  a  day  that  they  did
not  see  each  other  three  and  four  times,  and  their  wives  also.

M.  de  Chevreuse  wrote  easily,  agreeably,  and  admirably
well,  both  for  style  and  handwriting,  the  latter  being  very
rare.  He  was,  not  loved  but,  adored  in  his  family  and  in
his  home,  where  he  was  always  affable,  gracious,  and  oblig¬
ing.  To  those  who  did  not  know  him  familiarly  he  was
externally  erect,  stiff,  starched,  proper,  with  a  touch  of  the
pedant,  which  sometimes  alienated  those  to  whom  he  did  not
unbend.  He  was  taken  ill  in  Paris  and  suffered  extreme
pain  with  incredible  patience  and  resignation  ;  received  the
sacraments  with  ardent  piety,  and  died  peaceful  and  tran¬
quil  amid  his  sufferings,  and  as  much  himself  as  he  had
ever  been  in  health.  On  opening  him  it  was  found  that

his  stomach  was  perforated.

Ennui  had  taken  possession  of  the  king  during  his  hours
with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  in  the  intervals  of  his  work  with
the  ministers.  The  void  left  by  the  death  of

Music  and  come-

dies  at  Mme.  de  the  dauphino  could  not  be  filled  by  the  amuse-
Maintenon’s.  meuts  of  the  Very  small  number  of  elderly

ladies  who  were  sometimes  admitted  to  those  apartments.
Dinners,  musicals,  lotteries,  dinners  at  Marly,  sometimes  at
Trianon,  always  with  the  same  little  number  and  the  same
ladies,  were  frequent,  but  they  soon  languished.  It  was  pro¬
posed  to  enliven  them  with  detached  scenes  from  Moliëre’s
comedies  acted  by  the  king’s  musicians  in  the  costume  of
comedians.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  had  already  brought  the
Maréchal  de  Villeroy  back  to  Court  in  order  that  he  might
amuse  the  king  with  old  stories  of  their  youth  ;  and  she
now  introduced  him,  the  only  man  thus  admitted,  into  the
privacy  of  these  little  reunions,  to  brighten  them  up  with

1712]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

107

his  social  chatter.  He  was  a  man  at  all  times  under  her
thumb,  and  who  owed  her,  moreover,  his  return  to  favour.
He  was  useful  in  suggesting  certain  things  which  were  not
in  the  sphere  of  the  ministers,  and  about  which  she  wanted
the  king  to  speak  with  her;  in  this  way  she  could  urge
these  matters  the  more  dehcately  because  they  did  not
seem  to  come  from  her.  The  death  of  the  princes  of  the
blood,  leaving  only  children,  and  those  of  the  dauphin  and
dauphine,  the  worse  than  nothingness  into  which  black  and
subtle  calumny  had  reduced  the  Due  d’Orléans,  and  the  in¬
ward  trembling  of  the  Due  de  Berry  before  the  king,  care¬
fully  fostered,  opened  a  vast  field  to  the  unlimited  ambition
of  M.  du  Maine  and  the  fondness  of  his  now  all-powerful
governess.  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  was  a  vile  courtier  and
nothing  else  ;  no  instrument  could  serve  them  better  ;  Mme.
de  Maintenon  kept  him  therefore  at  hand  to  use  him  when¬
ever  wanted.

The  Earl  and  Countess  of  Shrewsbury  had  arrived.  I
Imve  mentioned  this  ambassador  already.  He  had  his  first
private  audience  as  usual.  As  there  was  no

17^3*

The  Earl  and  queen  Or  dauphine,  the  Countess  of  Shrews-
shrewTbu^at  presented  to  the  king  between  the

Court.  council  and  dinner  by  the  Duchesse  d’Aumont,

accompanied  by  the  Baron  de  Breteuil,  introducer  of  am¬
bassadors.  That  evening  the  Duchesse  d’Aumont  led  her
to  her  tabouret  at  the  king’s  supper.  The  English  are
great  travellers.  This  earl,  who  had  borne  the  sword
of  state  at  the  coronation  of  James  II.,  whose  confidence  he
possessed,  having  been  his  grand  chamberlain,  abandoned
him  in  1680  and  went  over  to  Holland  to  offer  his  services
to  the  Prince  of  Orange.  He  afterwards  went  to  Italy  and
to  Ptome,  and  there  he  married  a  daughter  of  the  Marchese
Paleotti  and  Catherine  Dudley,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of

108  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

Northumberland  and  Marie-Madeleine  Gronfder  de  Brazeux.
There ’s  mixture  enough  !  Eehgion  did  not  hamper  the
Itahan  lady.  She  followed  her  husband  to  England,  where
the  Prince  of  Orange  was  then  reigning  ;  the  latter  gave  him
the  order  of  the  Garter  and  appointed  him  secretary  of  State.
Queen  Anne  took  him  into  her  privy  council  and  made
him  grand  chamberlain.  After  his  return  from  France  he
was  viceroy  of  Ireland,  and  died  in  London  in  1718.

His  wife  was  a  tall,  stout,  masculine  creature,  middle-aged
or  past  it,  who  had  been  handsome  and  pretended  to  he
so  still  ;  very  décolletée,  hair  dressed  behind  her  ears,  covered
with  rouge  and  patches,  and  full  of  affectations.  From  the
moment  she  arrived  she  was  at  her  ease,  —  talked  loudly
and  much,  in  very  had  French,  and  was  hand  in  glove  with
every  one.  Her  manners  were  those  of  a  crazy  woman,
but  her  card-tables,  her  dinners,  her  magnificence,  and  even
her  general  familiarity,  made  her  the  fashion.  She  soon
declared  that  the  head-dresses  of  the  women  were  ridicu¬
lous,  and  so  they  were,  —  erections  of  iron  wire,  ribbons,  hair,
and  all  sorts  of  gew-gaws,  more  than  two  feet  high,  which
put  the  faces  of  the  wearers  in  the  middle  of  their  bodies  ;
and  the  old  women  were  the  same,  except  that  their  head-
gear  was  made  of  black  gauze.  At  the  least  httle  movement
the  building  trembled,  and  its  inconveniences  were  great.
The  king,  so  master  of  everything,  down  to  the  smallest
matters,  could  not  endure  these  erections  ;  but  they  lasted
ten  years  without  his  being  able  to  change  them,  no  matter
what  he  said  and  did  to  contrive  it.  But  what  this  mon¬
arch  could  not  do,  the  words  and  example  of  a  crazy  old  for¬
eign  woman  accomplished  with  surprising  celerity.  From  the
extremity  of  the  high,  the  ladies  flung  themselves  down  to
the  extremity  of  the  flat,  and  these  more  simple,  convenient,
and  becoming  head-dresses  have  lasted  to  the  present  day.

109

1713]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

Reasonable  people  are  now  waiting  with  impatience  for
some  other  foreign  maniac  who  shah  rid  our  ladies  of  their
circular  defences  called  paniers,  hitolerable  to  themselves
and  also  to  others.

The  affair  of  the  renunciations  was  now  ripe.  Peace  was
agreed  upon  5  the  king  was  most  anxious  for  his  own  inter¬
ests  to  have  it  signed,  and  the  Court  of  Eng-
tions  ;  abridged  land,  to  wliich  WO  owcd  it,  was  not  less  in
reflections.  Pastc  to  consummate  the  great  work,  in  order

to  enjoy,  in  addition  to  the  glory  of  having  imposed  it  on
the  alhed  powers,  that  internal  repose  which  the  opposing
faction,  incited  by  the  outside  opponents  of  the  Peace,  kept
ceaselessly  disturbed.  The  King  of  Spain  had  fulfilled  his
part  in  the  renunciations  with  all  the  solidity  and  solemnity
which  the  laws,  customs,  and  usages  of  Spain  required ,  it
only  remained  for  Prance  to  do  likewise.

I  have  already  said  on  this  subject  nearly  all  that  there
is  to  say.  It  would  be  useless  repetition  to  point  out  again
what  would  be  the  value  of  renunciations  of  the  crown  of
France  by  the  elder  branch  in  favour  of  the  younger,  against
unvarying  order  never  interrupted  since  the  days  of  Hugh
Capet,  unless  France  accepted  it  by  a  new  law  abrogating
that  of  centuries,  —  a  new  law  clothed  with  the  forms  and
the  powers  which  alone  would  give  the  necessary  force  and
permanence  to  so  important  an  act  ;  renunciations,  too,
which  the  most  arbitrary  of  kings  and  one  most  jealous  of
his  absolute  power,  the  grandfather  of  one  prince,  the  uncle
and  father-in-law  of  the  other,  compelled  them  both,  with
their  peers  in  parliament  assembled,  to  hear  and  see  reg¬
istered,  without  previous  explanation  or  discussion,  still
more  without  the  right  of  offering  an  opinion  or  even,  were
that  allowed,  to  say  a  word  in  simple  approbation.  Yet
this  was  all  that  was  done  to  execute  a  great  act  destined  to

110  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

regulate,  in  a  manner  hitherto  unheard  of  in  France,  a  new
order  of  succession  to  the  throne.  The  worship  of  the  king
for  his  own  authority,  of  which  he  was  so  jealous  because  its
establishment  had  been  the  dearest  and  most  persistent  care
of  his  whole  hfe,  would  not  allow  the  slightest  attainder  to
it,  not  even  under  the  thought  that  this  idol  to  which  he
had  sacrificed  everything  was  about,  at  his  age,  to  escape
him  and  leave  him  naked  before  God  like  the  lowest  of  his
subjects.  All  that  could  be  obtained  from  him  to  render
the  act  solemn  was  the  presence  of  the  peers  in  parhament  ;
and  even  then,  his  sensitiveness  was  so  great  that  he  intended
merely  to  say  in  general  that  he  hoped  the  peers  would  be
present  m  parliament  for  the  renunciations.  I  heard  of  this
four  days  beforehand.  I  spoke  to  several  peers,  and  I  told
the  Due  d’Orléans  that  if  the  king  did  notliing  more  he
might  rely  upon  it  that  not  a  single  peer  would  go  to  the
parliament.  This  strong  opinion  conveyed  by  the  Due
d’Orléans  and  the  Due  de  Berry  to  the  king  had  its  effect,
and  the  peers  were  invited  by  the  grand  master  of  ceremonies
to  be  present.  The  English,  unable  to  obtain  anything  better,
and  eager,  as  I  have  said,  to  the  last  degree  to  finish  the
matter,  were  willing  to  persuade  themselves  that  it  was  all
that  could  be  done.  Here  follows  what  was  actually  done
finally.

The  session  was  to  open  by  a  complimentary  address  from
the  president  (de  Mesmes)  to  the  Due  de  Berry,  who  was
then  to  reply.  The  latter  was  much  disturbed  about  this
reply.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  to  whom  he  confided  his  feel¬
ings  found  means  through  a  subaltern  to  obtain  a  copy  of
the  speech  of  the  president  ;  and  she  gave  it  to  the  Due  de
Berry  as  a  basis  for  his  answer.  The  work  seemed  too  hard
to  him  ;  he  acknowledged  this  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  saying
he  did  not  know  how  to  do  it.  She  proposed  to  him  to  let

1713]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

Ill

me  do  it  for  him,  and  he  was  delighted  with  the  expedient.
Accordingly  I  wrote  a  reply  of  a  page  and  a  half  of  common
letter-paper  in  an  ordinary  handwriting.  He  thought  it
very  good,  but  longer  than  he  could  learn  by  heart  ;  I  short¬
ened  it  ;  he  wanted  it  still  shorter  ;  then  I  cut  it  down  till
there  was  not  more  than  three-quarters  of  a  page  of  it  ;  after
which  he  set  to  work  to  learn  it.  He  managed  to  do  so,  and
recited  it  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon,  alone  with  her  the  evening
before  the  session  ;  she  encouraged  him  the  best  she  could.

Wednesday,  March  15,1  went  at  six  in  the  morning  in
parhament  robes  to  the  Due  de  Berry,  and  soon  after  the
^  Due  d’Orléans  arrived,  in  the  same  equipment,

de  Berry  and  with  a  great  suite.  Ahout  half -past  six  the

d’Orléans  go  from  .  n  n  >

Versailles  to  the  two  princes  got  into  the  Due  de  Berry  s  car-
parhament.  riage,  the  Duc  de  Saint-Aignan  and  I  being
on  the  front  seat.  Many  carriages  of  the  two  princes
followed,  filled  with  their  suites,  and  the  guards  of  the  Duc
de  Berry  with  their  officers  around  the  carriages.  He  was
very  silent  on  the  way.  I  sat  opposite  to  him,  and  he
seemed  to  be  much  occupied  with  what  he  had  to  say  and
do.  The  Duc  d’Orléans,  on  the  contrary,  was  very  gay,  and
told  tales  of  his  youth  and  his  nocturnal  tramps  on  foot
about  Paris  which  had  taught  him  the  streets,  in  all  of
which  talk  the  Duc  de  Berry  took  no  share.  We  arrived
thus  at  the  Porte  de  la  Conférence  ;  that  is  to  say  (as  it  is
now  pulled  down),  the  end  of  the  terrace  and  quay  of  the
garden  of  the  Tuileries.  There  we  found  the  trumpeters
and  drummers  of  the  Duc  de  Berry,  who  made  a  great

noise  all  the  rest  of  the  way,  which,  however,  was  only  a
step  to  the  Palais,  where  we  went  straight  to  the  entrance  of
the  Sainte-Chapelle  at  which  the  Abbé  de  Champigny,
treasurer,  received  the  sons  of  France  in  the  accustomed

manner.

112

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

Low  mass  having  been  said  at  the  great  altar,  we  left  the
chapel  ;  at  the  door  were  two  judges  and  two  counsellors  of
the  grand  chamber  of  deputies  to  parhament,  waiting  to
receive  the  Due  de  Berry.  Brief  compliments  received  and
rendered,  the  march  began,  —  the  two  presidents  on  either
side  the  Due  de  Berry,  and  the  Due  d’Orléans  between  the
two  counsellors.  I  walked  directly  in  front  of  the  latter
prince,  and  the  Due  de  Saint-Aignan  directly  in  front  of  me,
the  principal  officers  of  the  two  princes  and  many  persons  of
quahty  walkmg  confusedly  behind.  The  crowd  of  people
from  the  Sainte-Chapelle  to  the  grand  chamber  was  so  thick
that  a  pin  could  not  have  fallen  to  the  ground  among  them  ;
and  men  had  clambered  to  all  the  places  they  could  reach.
The  session  was  open,  and  the  members,  namely,  the  princes
of  the  blood,  the  legitimatized  princes,  aU  the  other  peers,
and  the  parhament  were  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  Due
de  Berry.  All  present  rose  and  uncovered  at  the  entrance
of  the  princes,  and  did  not  sit  down  again  nor  cover  them¬
selves  until  they  were  seated.  The  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,
accompanied  by  the  introducer  of  ambassadors  and  several
Englishmen  of  his  suite,  were  above  in  a  gaUery  beside  the
chimney,  which  had  been  prepared  for  him  as  a  necessary
witness  of  the  act  on  behalf  of  England.

There  were  twenty-five  peers  absent  for  various  reasons  ;
counting  the  Due  de  Berry,  we  were  twenty-nine  present.
Session  of  the  The  chancellor  might  have  troubled  himself
parliament.  pg  j^ot  like  ceremouies,  and

this  one  appeared  to  him  to  be  out  of  rule.  The  king,  who
had  scarcely  consented  to  anything  beyond  the  mere  regis¬
tration,  did  not  propose  to  him  to  go,  and  he  kept  himself
carefully  out  of  the  way  of  being  asked.

The  Due  de  Berry  having  taken  his  place,  there  was  some
trouble  in  getting  silence.  The  president,  as  soon  as  he  could

1713]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

113

be  heard,  made  his  comphmentary  speech  to  the  Due  de
Berry.  That  over,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  prince  to  reply.
He  half-raised  his  hat,  replaced  it  immediately,  looked  at  the
president,  and  said  :  “Monsieur  —  ”  After  a  moment’s  pause
he  repeated  :  “  Monsieur  —  ”  He  looked  at  the  company,
and  then  he  said  again  :  “  Monsieur  —  ”  He  turned  to  the
Due  d’Orléans,  both  of  them  as  red  as  fire,  then  to  the  presi¬
dent,  and  finally  stopped  short,  not  another  word  than
“Monsieur — ”  coming  from  his  lips.  I  was  opposite  the
fourth  judge,  and  I  could  plainly  see  the  prince’s  discom¬
fiture  ;  I  sweated,  but  there  was  no  remedy.  He  turned
again  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  who  lowered  his  head.  Both
were  aghast.  At  last,  the  president,  seeing  that  there  was  no
other  resource,  ended  the  cruel  scene  by  taking  off  his  cap  to
the  Due  de  Berry  and  making  him  a  profound  bow  as  if  his
answer  were  finished,  and  immediately  told  the  king’s  officers
to  proceed.  One  can  imagine  the  embarrassment  of  all  the
Court  people  present  and  the  surprise  of  the  magistracy.

The  king’s  officers  then  stated  the  matter  concerned,  and
made  a  long  piece  of  eloquence,  saying  that  it  was  necessary
to  withdraw  from  the  records  of  parliament  the  letters-patent
which  preserved  the  crown  of  France  to  the  King  of  Spain
and  his  branch,  and  to  read  his  renunciation  of  the  crown  of
France,  and  that  of  the  Due  de  Berry  and  the  Due  d’Orléans
of  the  crown  of  Spain,  for  themselves  and  their  posterity,
and  then  to  register  all  three  renunciations.  The  president
next  explained  the  intentions  of  the  king.  The  advocate,
Joly  de  Fleury,  then  rose  and  made  the  requisition  ;  and
this  was  voted  upon  au  bonnet  pDlindly].  The  whole  affair
was  very  long.

The  order  for  registration  being  given,  the  president  rose,
and  all  the  magistracy,  and  made  a  profound  bow  to  the
Due  de  Berry  (who  uncovered  his  head  without  rising),  and

VOL.  III.  —  8

114  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

passed  into  the  rohing-room,  all  the  magistracy  following,
where  they  went  to  assume  their  grand  red  robes  and  hoods
and  caps  of  state.  On  their  return  the  president  called  out
an  order  to  open  the  doors  and  let  every  one  enter.  This
was  only  a  form;  for  the  doors  had  never  been  shut  a
moment  throughout  this  long  morning,  and-  the  chamber  was
already  so  full  that  not  another  person  could  have  entered.
When  the  tumult  of  ushers  was  over,  and  silence  had  been
cried,  and  the  noise  somewhat  lessened,  they  began  to  read
and  state  over  again,  though  in  slightly  different  terms,  to
vary  the  eloquence  of  the  king’s  officers,  the  same  things  that
were  said  and  read  in  the  morning  to  promulgate  the  matter,
so  that  the  length  of  the  whole  affair  was  excessive,  and  it
was  very  late  before  the  registration  was  made  and  the  cere¬
mony  over.

The  princes  returned  with  the  same  pomp  with  which
they  had  entered  Paris  in  the  morning.  The  Due  de  Berry,
who  did  not  recover  himself  during  the  whole

Return  to  Ver-  ^  .

saiiies.  Despair  -ç^ray,  kept  those  in  the  carriage  very  serious
ometucl"'  and  silent.  At  Versailles  the  princes  got  out
in  the  Cour  des  Princes,  apparently  because
the  Due  de  Berry’s  guards  could  not  follow  him  into  the
grand  courtyard.  They  found  at  their  carriage-door  a
messenger  awaiting  them.  The  Duchesse  de  Tallard,  who
had  been  betrothed  the  day  before,  and  married  at  night,  was
now  receiving  visits  on  the  bed  of  the  Duchesse  de  Ventadour.
The  latter  sent  to  entreat  the  princes  to  he  so  good  as  to
come  to  her  granddaughter’s  apartment  before  returning  to
their  own,  because  the  visits  were  over  and  she  was  only
awaiting  theirs  to  leave  her  bed.  They  went  at  once.

They  were  received,  among  others,  by  the  Princesse  de
Montauhan,  who,  with  her  usual  flattery,  and  not  knowing  a
word  of  what  had  happened,  began  to  exclaim  as  soon  as  she

1713]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

115

saw  the  Due  de  Berry  about  the  grace  and  noble  eloquence
with  which  he  had  spoken  before  parliament,  paraphrasing
the  theme  with  all  the  praises  it  afforded.  The  Due  de
Berry  coloured  with  annoyance,  and  without  saying  a  word
marched  towards  the  bed,  she  following,  admiring  his
modesty  which  made  him  blush  and  not  reply.  This  lasted
till  they  reached  the  bride.  The  Due  de  Berry  remained  a
few  moments,  standing,  and  then  went  away,  pursued  by
congratulations  for  the  wonders  he  had  done  and  for  the
plaudits  of  Paris  and  the  parliament.  Delivered  at  last,  he
went  to  the  Duchesse  de  Berry,  where  he  found  company.
He  said  not  a  word  to  any  one,  scarcely  to  the  Duchesse  de
Berry,  hut  taking  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  with  him  he  carried
her  off  into  his  cabinet  and  shut  the  door.

There  he  flung  himself  into  a  chair  and  declared  he  was
dishonoured  ;  and  with  that  he  wept  hot  tears,  uttering  loud
cries.  He  related  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  in  the  midst  of
his  sobs  how  he  had  stopped  short  in  parliament,  unable  to
say  a  word  ;  and  the  shame  it  was  to  him  before  that
assembly  ;  it  would  be  known  everywhere,  he  said,  and  he
should  pass  for  a  fool  and  an  idiot.  Then  he  fell  upon  the
compliments  made  him  by  Mme.  de  Montauhan,  who  meant,
he  knew,  to  laugh  at  him  and  insult  him,  for  she  must  know
what  had  happened.  Nothing  comforted  him.  Moans  and
silence  succeeded  the  tears.  Then,  all  of  a  sudden,  he  turned
upon  the  Due  de  Beauvilhers  and  the  king,  blaming  his  educa¬
tion.  “  They  wanted,”  he  said,  “  to  stupefy  me  and  smother
what  I  might  have  been.  I  was  the  youngest  ;  I  used  to
hold  my  own  against  my  brothers,  and  they  were  afraid  of
it  ;  they  taught  me  nothing  but  how  to  play  cards  and  hunt,
and  they  have  succeeded  in  making  me  a  fool  and  a  dolt,
incapable  of  everything  and  fit  for  nothing  ;  and  now  I  shall
always  be  the  scorn  and  laughter  of  the  world.”  Mme.  de

116  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

Saint-Simon,  filled  with  compassion,  did  everything  she
could  to  comfort  him.  This  strange  tête-à-tete  lasted  two
hours,  until  it  was  time  to  go  to  the  king’s  supper.  The  next
day  he  began  again,  but  with  less  violence.  Little  by  httle
Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  consoled  him,  though  imperfectly.
The  Duchesse  de  Berry  dared  not  speak  of  the  matter  to
him  ;  the  Due  d’Orléans  still  less.  No  one,  after  that,  ever
ventured  to  say  a  word,  either  to  him  or  before  him,  of
that  session  of  parliament  or  of  his  entry  into  Paris.  The
same  day,  on  leaving  the  parhament,  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury
despatched  couriers  to  England  and  to  Dtrecht,  which  hast¬
ened  the  signature  of  the  Peace  by  all  the  Powers  except
the  Emperor.

On  Good  Friday,  April  14,  about  eight  o’clock  in  the  even¬
ing,  Torcy  entered  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartment,  present-
ing  to  the  king  the  Chevalier  de  Beringhen,
announced.  charged  by  the  Maréchal  d’  Huxelles

to  bring  the  long  desired  news  of  the  signing  of  the  Peace,
done  the  preceding  Monday,  10th,  very  late  at  nignt,  by  Eng¬
land,  Holland,  Portugal,  and  the  two  new  kings  of  Sicily
and  Prussia.  On  the  22nd  the  proclamation  of  the  Peace
was  made  in  Paris  with  great  solemnity.  M.  and  Mme.  du
Maine,  who  were  now  most  anxious  to  make  themselves
popular,  came  from  Sceaux  to  the  Due  de  Bohan  s  house  in
the  Place  Eoyale  to  see  the  ceremony.  They  appeared  upon
the  balcony,  and  threw  money  to  the  people,  a  liberality
which  would  certainly  not  have  pleased  the  king  if  done  by
others.  At  night  there  were  many  fires  lighted  before  the
houses,  several  of  which  were  illuminated,  klay  25th  the  Te
Deum  was  sung  in  Notre-Dame,  and  at  night  fireworks  were
let  off  on  the  Grève,  followed  by  a  superb  banquet  which  the
Due  de  Tresmes,  governor  of  Paris,  gave  at  the  Hôtel  de
ViBe  at  his  own  cost  to  the  ambassadors  and  a  great  number

1713]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

117

of  distinguished  persons  of  both  sexes,  with  twenty-four
violins  during  the  repast.

Sévigné  died  at  this  time,  without  children,  having  for
some  time  past  retired  with  his  wife  to  the  faubourg  Saint-
.  Jacques,  where  he  hved  in  great  piety.  He

Death  of  Sevigne.  or.;

was  the  son  of  Mme.  de  Sévigné,  so  well-
known  for  her  letters.  She  had  put  him  much  before  the
world  and  in  the  best  company.  He  was  a  good,  honest
man,  but  less  a  man  of  mind  than  one  who  consorted  with
minds  ;  he  had  had  odd  adventures  and  sertmd  little  but
well;  he  was  a  rather  clumsy  mixture  of  the  charming,
effusive  nature  of  his  mother  and  the  stiff  and  angular

affectations  of  his  sister.

Père  Tellier  was  advancing  with  long  strides  towards  the
object  he  had  proposed  to  himself  all  his  life,  and  for  which
he  was  toiling  ceaselessly  in  the  king’s  cabinet  ;

Deep  and  under-  .  ^  t  i  •  •  n

hand  manœuvres  his  office  and  the  immense  influence  he  had
ofPere  Teiher.  acquired  putting  him  in  a  position  to  dare

all  to  reach  it.  We  have  seen  the  terrible  character  of  this
Jesuit.  All  things  were  now  favourable  for  the  carrying  on
of  his  projects.  He  had  to  do  with  a  king  who,  by  his  own
admission,  was  profoundly  ignorant  in  these  matters  ;  who
had  been  brought  up  by  the  queen,  his  mother,  in  the  opinion
that  what  were  called  Jansenists  were  a  republican  party  in
the  Church  and  State,  enemies  to  the  authority  which  he
made  his  idol  ;  a  king  who  was  inaccessible,  throughout  his
life,  to  all  that  was  not  entirely  devoted  to  the  opposite
party  ;  accustomed,  by  the  ultramontane  ideas  of  his  mother
and  Cardinal  Mazarin,  to  reverence  the  Court  of  Pome,  to
display  his  authority  over  the  parliaments  and  make  them
bow  the  knee;  to  exile,  and  even  to  imprison  individuals
who,  in  their  learned  writings,  affronted  Eome  by  protesting
ar^ainst  its  usurpations  over  the  Church  and  over  crowns  ;  in

118  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

all  of  which  he  was  carefully  maintained  by  his  confessors,
always  Jesuits,  and  by  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  governed  so  long
by  the  same  spirit.

What  Père  Tellier  had  sought  to  do  was  to  put  such
trouble  and  division  into  the  affair  of  Père  Quesnel’s  book,
“Eéflexions  Morales  sur  le  Nouveau  Testament,”  that  his
party  would  seem  to  be  forced  to  take  the  matter  to  Eome,
against  custom  and  reason  and  all  the  laws  of  the  Church,
which  require  that  contestations  shall  be  decisively  judged
in  the  places  where  they  arise,  except  in  cases  of  appeal  to
the  pope,  who  then,  by  his  legates,  sent  to  the  place  itself,
reviews  and  reforms  the  judgment  or  confirms  it  in  a  man¬
ner  that  is  also  judicial.  Now  this  can  only  be  done  at  a
council,  before  which  the  author  of  the  book  which  excites
the  contestation  is  summoned  and  heard  on  the  reasons  of
his  faith,  and  on  the  terms  and  meaning  of  the  propositions
which  are  being  examined  ;  and  this  Père  Quesnel,  who  was
still  living,  had  never  ceased  to  loudly  demand,  both  by  voice
and  by  letter  to  the  pope  and  bishops.  But  that  was  by  no
means  the  game  of  Père  Telher.  He  knew  too  weE  what
would  be  the  result  of  the  affair  if  treated  in  that  way.  He
wanted  the  book  strangled  by  papal  authority,  and  then
made  a  matter  of  persecution  for  many  long  years,  in  order
to  establish  the  Jesuit  teaching  as  a  dogma  of  faith,  wliich,
up  to  this  time,  had  been  barely  tolerated  in  the  Church.

His  design,  therefore,  in  getting  the  matter  referred  to  the
pope  was  to  make  him  pronounce  judgment  by  a  constitution
[or  bull]  which,  by  condemning  a  great  number  of  proposi¬
tions  drawn  from  the  book,  should  condemn  them  wholesale
in  a  virulent  manner,  hold  up  to  honour  the  school  of  Mo¬
lina,  and  thus  ruin  all  the  Catholic  schools  hitherto  followed
and  rehed  on  by  the  Church.  As  this  could  not  be  hoped
for  in  plain  terms  which  would  have  brought  their  own

1713]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

119

anathema  with  them,  he  wanted  a  condemnation  in  gloho,
which,  sparing  none  and  falhng  upon  all,  could  save  itself
by  a  vagueness  to  be  applied  or  evaded  as  the  need  might
be  ;  and  so  contrive  the  condemnation,  in  this  book,  of  doc¬
trines  extracted  in  express  terms  from  Saint  Paul  and  other
parts  of  Scripture,  and  also  from  Saint  Augustine  and  the
Fathers.  To  attain  tliis  object,  as  much  adroitness  and
stealthiness  as  audacity  were  required  in  framing  the  bull
[or  constitution],  and  m  keeping  it  from  the  knowledge  of
the  cardinals  and  the  theologians  in  Eome,  especially  the
partisans  without  number  of  Saint  Augustine  and  Saint
Thomas.

Division  being  cleverly  sown  between  the  various  parties
among  the  bishops  assembled  in  many  parts  of  France  on
this  affair,  they  were  all  brought  to  believe  that  there  was
no  issue  except  through  an  appeal  to  Rome.  The  king  wrote
to  the  pope,  asking  in  the  most  urgent  terms  for  a  decision,
hut  on  very  partial  grounds,  against  Père  Quesnel’s  book.
The  pope  thought  he  had  got  out  of  it  by  the  sort  of  con¬
demnation  he  had  made,  to  which  Cardinal  de  ISToailles  had
assented  by  withdrawing  the  approbation  he  had  formerly
given.  But  that  which  sufficed  in  itself  was  not  at  all  what

o

Père  Telher  wanted.  He  wanted  a  bull  which  should  con¬
demn  a  crowd  of  propositions  extracted  from  the  hook  in  the
way  and  for  the  reasons  I  have  just  explained.  The  king
redoubled  his  urgency  with  the  pope,  and  Père  Tellier,  to  put
it  out  of  the  power  of  either  to  draw  back,  contrived  to  make
the  king  pledge  himself  to  the  pope,  on  the  strength  of  his
authority  in  his  own  kingdom,  that  the  hull  should  be  ac¬
cepted  without  difficulty  whatever  it  might  he.^

1  The  hull  Unigenitus  condemned  one  hundred  and  one  propositions  in
Père  Quesnel’s  hook.  Saint-Simon  relates  elsewhere  that  when  Amelot
was  sent  the  following  year  as  ambassador  to  Rome  he  told  him  (Saint

120  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  iv.

Père  Tellier  possessed  in  Eome  certain  opportunities  not
less  favourable  to  him  than  those  iu  France.  Père  Dauben-
Daubentonand  ton,  US  determined  a  Jesuit  as  himself,  French
Fabroni  employed  ^ggjg|;a,nt  to  the  General  of  the  Order,  and

to  draw  up  the

bull  Unigenitus.  Cardinal  Fabroni,  with  whom  he  lived  in  the
most  intimate  relations  and  with  mutual  confidence  as  to
the  secret  mysteries  of  their  Company,  wrote  out,  by  order
of  the  pope,  the  draft  of  the  bull.  The  affair  got  wind.  A
dogmatic  decision,  given  for  France,  roused  the  Court  of
Eome.  The  Sacred  College  declared  the  thiug  sufficiently
important,  and  even  precisely  of  a  nature  to  be  submitted
to  them  for  consultation.  Some  of  the  older  and  more
important  members  spoke  to  the  pope  ;  who  thought  it
weE  to  take  their  advice,  and  promised  in  the  most  positive
manner  that  the  draft  of  the  bull  should  be  presented  to
them,  and  should  only  be  issued  in  conformity  with  the
opinion  of  a  majority  of  the  cardinals.  He  gave  the  same
promise  to  Cardinal  de  la  Trémoille  as  chargé  d’affaires  of
the  king.

Daubenton  and  Fabroni  came  to  the  end  of  their  dark¬
some  work  without  any  third  person  knowing  what  they

The  bull  Unigeni-  Were  actually  doing,  except  in  general  that
tus  drawn  up  and  working  On  a  bull  for  the  affairs  of

lished  in  Rome.  Frauco.  The  documeut  was  perfected,  as  Père
Telher  had  commanded,  in  the  deepest  secrecy.  It  shone
with  everything  —  except  truth.  Art  and  audacity  were  on
the  throne,  and  the  points  proposed  were  amply  accomplished.

Simon)  on  his  return  that  he  had  taken  the  liberty  to  ask  the  pope  (Clem¬
ent  XI.)  why  he  had  condemned  such  a  very  odd  number.  On  which  the
pope  began  to  weep,  and  seizing  his  arm  cried  out  :  “  Eh,  Monsieur
Amelot,  Monsieur  Amelot,  how  could  I  help  it  1  I  fought  hard  to  keep
them  down  ;  but  Père  Tellier  had  told  the  king  there  were  more  than  a
hundred  condemnahle  propositions  in  that  hook,  and  with  his  foot  on  my
throat  he  obliged  me  not  to  make  him  tell  a  lie,  —  hut  I  only  added  one
more.”  —  Tr.

1713]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

121

Art  was  exhausted  ;  audacity  surpassed  that  of  past  ages,  for
it  went  so  far  as  to  condemn  in  actual  words  the  very  texts
of  Saint  Paul,  which  all  the  centuries  since  Jesus  Christ  had
respected  as  the  oracles  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  excepting
heretics,  who  contented  themselves  with  twisting  passages
of  Holy  Writ  to  forced  and  foreign  meanings,  and  never
dared  to  go  so  far  as  to  reject  or  condemn  them.  Here,
however,  the  bull  went  far  beyond  them  in  contempt  and
condemnation  of  Saint  Paul,  Saint  Augustine,  and  the
other  Fathers,  whose  doctrine  has  ever  been  accepted  by
popes,  general  councils,  and  indeed  by  the  whole  Church
as  its  own.

This  impediment  was  rather  strong,  but  altogether  inevi¬
table  for  the  purpose  in  hand.  The  two  authors  felt  this.
They  did  not  hope  to  get  their  document  agreed  to  by  the
cardinals,  whom  such  an  amazing  innovation  would  revolt,
and  especially  not  by  Cardinal  de  la  Trémoille  on  account  of
the  ultramontane  maxims  absolutely  necessary  to  gain  Eome
to  their  cause.  Daubenton  had  furnished  the  art,  Fabroni
supplied  the  impudence.  They  shut  themselves  up  with  the
printers,  struck  off  as  many  copies  as  they  chose,  set  a
watch  on  the  type  and  the  printers  as  long  as  their  secret
was  important,  and,  when  all  was  ready,  they  went  to  the
pope  and  read  the  bull  to  him  hastily.

But  not  so  hastily  that  Clement  XI.  was  not  struck  by  the
condemnation  of  the  texts  of  Saint  Paul,  Saint  Augustine,  and
the  Fathers.  He  exclaimed  against  it,  and  wished  to  keep
the  document  to  re-read  it  at  his  ease  and  make  corrections.
Fabroni  treated  him  as  once  before;  he  stunned  him  and
bullied  him.  The  pope  thought  to  escape  on  a  side  issue,
and  represented  to  Fabroni  the  danger  of  submitting  such  a
document  censuring  the  texts  of  Saint  Paul  and  even  of
Saint  Augustine  to  the  cardinals.  But  that  consideration  did

122

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  it.

not  stop  Fabroni,  who  repHed  that  it  would  he  a  pretty
thing  indeed  to  give  his  work  to  revisers,  and  he  certainly
should  not  let  himself,  or  the  pope,  in  whose  name  the  work
was  done,  be  put  in  the  dock.  Clement  said  that  his  word
was  passed,  especially  to  Cardinal  de  la  Trémoille,  that
nothing  should  be  issued  except  in  concert  with  him,  and
that  he  was  solemnly  bound  to  the  Sacred  College  that  the
document  should  not  appear  until  they  had  exammed  it,
and  then  only  in  conformity  with  the  opinion  of  the  major¬
ity.  Fabroni  was  angry,  and  treated  the  pope  as  a  weakling
who  behaved  like  a  httle  boy  ;  declared  that  the  bull  was
fine  and  good  and  exactly  what  was  wanted  ;  and  that  if  the
pope  had  had  the  folly  to  give  that  promise  he  ought  not  to
crown  his  folly  by  keeping  it.  Whereupon  he  left  the  pope
aghast,  and  went  off  to  affix  the  document  in  all  the  public
places  in  Rome  where  it  is  the  custom  to  post  and  pubhsh
the  bulls  and  constitutions  when  newly  made.

This  act  made  a  great  uproar  among  the  cardinals,  who
saw  themselves  tricked,  unexpectedly  but  surely,  by  the
breaking  of  this  promise.  They  assembled  in  groups  at
one  another’s  houses,  and  strong  complaints  were  resolved
upon.  The  heads  of  the  College  and  the  most  important
personages  among  the  others  went  by  eights  and  tens  and
sixes  to  see  the  pope,  to  whom  they  testified  their  astonish¬
ment  at  so  signal  a  failure  of  a  promise  solemnly  made  by
his  own  lips,  and  their  scandalized  feeling  at  seeing  a  doc¬
trinal  bull  emanate  without  consultation  with  them,  as  their
rights,  their  purple,  their  office  as  appraisers  and  counsellors
in  matters  of  this  importance  and  character  demanded.
The  pope,  confused,  knew  not  what  to  answer.  He  protested
that  the  pubhcation  was  done  without  his  knowledge  ;  and
put  them  off  with  compliments,  excuses,  and  even  tears,
which  were  always  at  his  command.

1713]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

123

The  same  day  that  the  hull  was  posted  in  Eome,  it  was
sent  to  Père  Tellier  by  a  secret  courier,  who  arrived  a  few
Generainsing  days  earlier  than  the  one  who  brought  it  to
on  its  reception  huucio.  The  latter  received  his  copy  at

in  France.  Fontainebleau,  October  2,  and  presented  it  the
next  morning  to  the  king  at  a  private  audience.  He  made
the  king  a  fine  discourse  in  Italian,  to  which  the  king,  who
understood  that  language,  replied  in  French  very  favour¬
ably,  Père  Tellier  having  had  time  to  prepare  him.  It  was
remarked  that  a  grand  promenade  ordered  around  the  canal
for  the  afternoon  did  not  take  place,  because  the  king  was
working  on  this  affair  with  Voysin  tiU  six  in  the  evening.
Père  TeUier,  in  order  to  sound  people’s  minds,  had  launched  a
few  copies  of  the  bull  before  the  nuncio  had  taken  it  to  the
king.  He  had  also  sent  a  copy  to  the  judges  of  the  Court,
who,  greatly  alarmed  at  the  ultramontane  maxims  it  con¬
tained,  came  out  from  Paris  the  next  day  to  present  a
memorial  to  the  king.

The  bull  had  in  France  the  same  fate  it  had  already  met
with  in  Eome  ;  the  outcry  was  universal.  Cardinal  de
Eohan  declared  that  it  could  not  he  received,  and  even  Bissy
protested  against  it.  Some  were  very  indignant  at  its  birth
in  outer  darkness  ;  others  at  the  proposition  relating  to  ex-
communication,  which  rendered  the  pope  obliquely  master
of  all  crowns  ;  others  again  were  shocked  at  the  condemna¬
tion  of  the  doctrine  and  passages  from  Saint  Augustine  and
the  Fathers  ;  and  all  were  terrified  at  that  of  the  words  of
Saint  Paul.  There  were  not  two  opinions  during  the  first
eight  days.  Cardinal  de  la  Trèmoille,  to  whom  the  pope
had  particularly  failed  to  keep  his  word,  as  he  had  to  the
rest  of  the  Sacred  College,  sent  a  courier  expressly  to  justify
himself  for  having  allowed  the  publication  of  a  bull  so
directly  contrary  to  the  maxims  of  the  kingdom  which  it

124  MEMOmS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SALNT-SIMON.  [oh.p.  iv.

attacked  face  to  face,  -  rousing  aU  the  ministers  agamst  it,
except  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers.  The  Court,  the  toy,  e
provinces,  as  soon  as  the  nature  of  the  huU  was  made  known,

were  equally  aroused  and  up  in  arms.

Père  Tellier  held  firm;  frowned  at  Bissy  as  at  a  man
dependent  upon  Um,  who  had  not  yet  won  hie  hat,  and
whom,  by  saying  a  word  here  and  at  Rome,  he  could  depnve
of  it;  and  he  spoke  decidedly  to  Eohan.  and  made  him
understand  the  peril  he  ran  of  losing  his  promised  chance
for  the  office  of  grand  almoner;  besides  which,  he  neg  ec  e
nothing  to  make  himself  master  of  all  the  bishops  he  con
lay  hands  on,  and  to  intimidate  those  who  were  already  his,
SO  that  none  of  them  dared  to  escape  him.

The  hull,  however,  had  to  he  accepted,  and  the  manner  of
compelling  this  was  embarrassing  enough,  through  the  great
opposition  it  encountered  on  its  first  appearance.  Telher,
who,  as  I  have  said,  always  cultivated  me,  had  often  spoken
to  me  of  this  affair  both  before  and  after  it  was  taken  to
Borne  ;  and  I,  who  evaded  such  conversations  hut  could  not
shut  my  doors  against  him,  especially  at  Fontainebleau  where
he  hved  during  the  stay  of  the  Court,  used  to  answer  him
frankly  and  strongly  according  to  the  truth  and  my  own
thought,  for  which  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  often  reproved  me  ;
telling  me  I  should  he  driven  into  exile  and  possibly  put  in
the  Bastille.

V.

The  bull  having  arrived,  Përe  Tellier  asked  for  an  appoint¬
ment  to  talk  with  me.  I  thought  he  meant  to  show  me
Singular  conver-  the  document,  for  as  yet  hardly  any  one  had

p^ér^TemeT^d  ^^®  J®^  taken

me.  it  to  the  king.  When  we  were  tète-à-tête  I

asked  to  see  it.  He  told  me  he  had  but  one  copy,  on  which
they  were  working,  but  that  he  would  give  it  to  me  the  first
possible  day  ;  he  assured  me  that  it  was  right  and  good,  and

such  that  I  should  be  well  content  with  it  ;  and  he  said  that
the  reason  he  had  asked  for  the  conversation  was  to  consult
me  on  the  manner  of  getting  it  received.  I  began  to  laugh
at  his  asking  me  about  something  which  he  knew  much
better  than  I,  and  probably  had  already  determined  on.  He
spread  himself  in  talk,  —  half  compliment,  half  discussion
of  the  difficulty  of  the  thiag  in  the  first  alarm,  which  was
already  beginning  to  buzz.  He  urged  me  so  much  that  I
told  bim  it  seemed  to  me  he  had  his  lesson  traced  out  for
him  in  the  manner  in  which  the  king  had  caused  the  con¬
demnation  of  M.  de  Cambrai  to  be  received,  which  was

perfectly  judicial,  without  hindrance,  and  according  to  the
highest  ecclesiastical  forms.

I  had  scarcely  said  the  words  when,  with  an  air  of
ingenuous  confidence  which  I  have  never  forgotten,  he  said,
in  so  many  words,  that  he  should  never  play  at  that  game,
the  form  was  too  dangerous  ;  he  should  take  good  care  not
to  deliver  the  bull  over  to  the  provincial  assemblies  of  each
metropolitan,  to  the  mercy  of  the  notions  of  every  bishop  in

126  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

the  kingdom,  or  to  any  of  them  who  were  not  in  Paria
under  his  own  eye.  I  felt  instantly  the  violence  he  meant
to  exercise,  and  that  excited  me  to  argue  with  him  and  to
represent  the  irregularity  of  merely  receiving  the  hull  hy
bishops  who  might  chance  to  he  in  Paris.  “  Chance  !  ”  he
exclaimed,  “  I  don’t  mean  to  trust  to  chance  ;  I  shall  summon
from  the  provinces  the  bishops  who  suit  me,  and  prevent
those  I  know  to  be  difficult  to  manage  from  coming  at  all  ;
and  as  I  can’t  prevent  those  who  are  in  Paris  from  attend¬
ing  the  assembly  we  are  forced  to  call  to  receive  the  hull,
some  of  whom  wiU  certainly  he  hard  to  get  along  with,  I
shall  slip  in  the  bishops  in  partibus  and  even  those  who  are
just  appointed  and  have  not  yet  got  their  warrants,  which
will  make  our  side  the  stronger  and  stop  all  those  who  want
to  argue.”  Such  language  made  me  shudder,  and  I  replied
that  was  called  picking  and  choosing.  “  Precisely,”  he  said
hotly,  “and  that  is  what  I  mean  to  do;  I  shall  not  put
myself  at  the  mercy  of  provincial  deputations.”  “  But,”  I
said,  “  what  power  have  these  bishops  accidentally  in  Paris,
or  sent  for  hy  you,  to  accept  for  their  co-provincials  unless
they  have  proxies  from  them  ?”  “I  admit  that  difficulty , ’
replied  the  confessor,  “hut  of  two  evils  avoid  the  worst;
now  the  worst  is  to  trust  to  chance  and  not  to  make  very
sure  beforehand.  Provided  the  hull  is  accepted  hy  the
assembly,  I  don’t  trouble  about  the  rest.  With  that  shoe¬
horn  in  hand  we  ’ll  see  who  will  dare  resist  the  pope  and
the  king.  Flaws  can  he  covered  by  authority,  and  the  hull
will  have  been  accepted  anyway,  and  that  is  the  point.”

We  argued  and  discoursed  for  some  time  longer  about
these  bishops  in  partibus,  and  those  appointed  hut  as  yet
without  warrants,  —  less  on  my  part  to  convince  him  than  to
make  him  talk,  —  and  I  wondered  within  me  at  this  depth  of
fraud,  cunning,  violence,  and  contempt  of  law,  together  with

1713]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

127

the  incredible  coolness  of  showing  it  to  me  openly.  It  was
a  frankness  I  have  never  been  able  to  comprehend  in  a  man
so  false,  so  artful,  so  deep  ;  and  still  less  have  I  been  able  to
see  in  what  way  he  thought  it  would  be  useful.  I  departed,
alarmed  at  him,  and  at  the  consequences  I  foresaw.

We  made  another  appointment  to  talk  of  the  bull  itself
after  he  had  given  me  a  copy.  This  took  place  a  few  days
before  a  departure  for  Fontainebleau.  I  found  him  radiant.
He  had  subjected  Bissy  and  Eohan  to  his  wiU,  and  had
received,  apparently,  very  good  news  from  his  batteries  in
Paris.  I  did  not  try  to  win  over  to  truth  and  reason  a  man
whom  I  saw  cared  so  Little  for  either,  and  was,  in  fact,  so
far  advanced  in  repressing  them  ;  but  I  dared  not  break  with
one  so  dangerous  and  who  was  evidently  trying  to  manage
me  by  a  sort  of  crazy  confidence.  I  told  him,  therefore,  that
although  I  had  heard  a  great  deal  said  about  the  bull,  and
was  shocked,  like  everybody  else,  at  the  mass  of  condemned
propositions  (condemned  in  general  with  atrocious  insults
which,  falling  upon  all,  really  fell  on  none  in  particular),  and
although  I  was  frightened  by  the  direct  censure  of  the  texts
of  Saint  Paul  and  httle  edified  by  a  bull  of  doctrine  wrapped
in  obscurity  instead  of  bearing  upon  the  mind  with  instruc¬
tive  clearness,  distinctness,  and  precision,  still,  I  was  too  igno¬
rant  to  fling  myself  into  theological  arguments  with  him.  But
as  for  what  related  to  the  Eoman  pretensions,  in  particular
the  proposition  of  excommunication,  I  had  the  presumption
to  think  myself  competent  to  tell  him  that  those  parts  of
the  bull  were  indefensible  and  would  never  be  accepted.  He
said  that  we  would  return  to  that  point  later,  and  immedi¬
ately  slipped  off  into  a  rather  long-winded  statement  about
the  doctrine,  which  I  did  not  contradict,  for  I  felt  how  use¬
less  it  was  to  do  so.  This  topic  took  up  nearly  all  the  time
of  our  conference.

128

MEMOmS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

Returning  to  the  matter  of  excommunication  he  began  to
ramble  in  his  talk,  admitted  that  his  answers  were  not
weighty,  hut  added  that  he  would  like  to  have  another
interview  with  me  at  Versailles  on  the  Friday  after  the  first
Friday  of  the  king’s  return  ;  and  in  that  conversation  he  was
confident  he  could  convince  me  that  the  censure  I  com¬
plained  of  did  not  attack  in  any  way  the  rights  of  the  kmg
or  the  crown.  He  then  told  me,  still  with  the  same  naïvcts
which  my  ears. could  scarcely  believe,  the  number  of  bishops
whom  he  had  summoned  from  the  provinces,  which  he  had
probably  done  before  he  mentioned  the  subject  to  me  the
first  time,  and  other  general  matters  with  the  same  strange
effusion.  We  parted,  agreeing  to  meet  again  at  my  apart¬
ment  in  Versailles  on  the  day  named.

Père  Telher  did  not  miss  the  interview.  I  told  him  he
had  chosen  a  bad  hour,  because  the  Due  and  Duchesse  de
Berry  had  asked  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  to  give  them  a  col¬
lation,  and  they  were  just  about  arriving.  Père  Telher
seemed  so  much  annoyed  at  the  circumstance,  and  insisted
so  strongly  on  our  finding  some  retreat  inaccessible  to  the
company,  in  order  not  to  put  off  our  conference  for  another
week,  that  I  told  him  I  knew  of  but  one  expedient,  which  was
to  send  away  his  attendant  friar  from  my  antechamber  and
lock  himself  up  with  me  in  my  den,  which  I  showed  him,
where  we  would  light  candles  and  be  in  perfect  safety  from
outside  promenaders  and  hold  our  tongues  should  any  one
enter  my  cabinet  which  adjoined  the  den.  He  thought  the
plan  excellent,  sent  away  his  friar,  and  we  locked  ourselves
in  and  sat  down  opposite  to  each  other  with  my  writing-table
and  two  hghted  candles  between  us.

There  he  began  to  expound  the  excellences  of  the  bull
Unigenitus,  a  copy  of  which  he  laid  on  the  table.  I  inter¬
rupted  him,  to  get  to  the  clause  of  excommunication.  We

1713]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  129

discussed  it  with  much  pohteness,  but  very  little  agreement.
All  the  world  knows  that  the  censured  doctrine  was  that  “  un¬
just  excommunication  ought  not  to  prevent  the  performance
of  duty;”  consequently,  the  result  of  the  censure  is  that  an
unjV/St  excommunication  ought  to  pvcvent  the  'pcTfoTmance
of  duty.  The  enormity  of  this  conclusion  is  more  striking
than  the  simple  truth  of  the  censured  doctrine.  It  is  a
shadow  that  sets  it  in  relief.  The  awful  consequences  of
the  censure  strike  the  eye  at  once.  I  shall  not  pretend  to
repeat  our  dispute.  It  was  sharp  and  long.  To  condense
it,  I  pointed  out  to  him  that  in  the  present  condition  of
things  the  king  and  dauphin,  being  each  at  the  extremity
of  life,  might  both  die  ;  the  crown  by  right  of  birth  would
belong  to  the  King  of  Spain,  and  by  virtue  of  his  renuncia¬
tions,  to  the  Due  de  Berry  ;  but  if  the  two  brothers  should
dispute  it,  they  each  had  forces,  allies,  and,  in  France,  parti¬
sans  ;  the  pope  would  then  have  the  game  in  his  own  hands,
for  if  this  buU  of  his  were  received  and  adopted  without  re¬
striction,  he  could  give  the  crown  to  whichever  contestant
he  pleased,  excommunicating  the  other;  and  however  just
might  be  the  right  of  the  excommunicated  person,  whatever
duty  was  upon  him  to  sustain  his  cause,  he  must  abandon
all  to  the  other  side  because  it  was  estabhshed  that  un¬
just  excommunication  forbade  the  performance  of  duties  ;
and  thus,  in  one  way  or  another,  the  pope  was  master  of  all
the  crowns  in  his  communion,  to  take  them  off  from  whoever
wore  them  and  give  them  to  whom  he  pleased,  —  a  right
that  many  popes,  from  Gregory  VII.  down,  had  dared  to
claim  whenever  they  thought  they  were  strong  enough  to
attempt  it.

This  argument  was  simple,  present,  natural,  and  urgent;
it  spoke  for  itself.  The  confessor  was  bewildered  ;  the  colour
came  into  his  face  and  he  began  to  ramble.  I  held  him  to

VOL.  III.  —  9

130

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  y.

it.  Little  by  little  be  recovered  bis  wits,  and  then,  with  a
smile  of  satisfaction  at  the  peremptory  solution  he  was  about
to  give  me,  “  You  don’t  understand,”  he  said.  “  See,  with  a
single  word  I  can  knock  down  your  argument  ;  hsten  to  me.
If,  in  the  case  you  suppose,  which  unfortunately  is  but  too
hable  to  happen,  the  pope  should  actually  take  sides  for  one
of  the  two  contestants  and  excommunicate  the  other  and  all
connected  with  him,  then  that  excommunication  would  not

be  the  censure  referred  to  in  the  buU,  for  it  would  not  be
unjust  only,  it  would  be  false,  because  the  pope  would  have
no  grounds  for  excommunicating  either  party.  Never  has
it  been  held  that  a  false  excommunication  could  deprive  a

man  of  performing  his  duties,  and  this  excommunication
being  false  it  would  be  as  though  there  were  none.”  “  That
is  admirable,  father,”  I  replied;  “the  distinction  is  subtle
and  skilful,  I  allow,  and  I  did  not  expect  it  ;  but  allow  me
a  few  more  httle  objections,  I  entreat  you.  Will  the  ultra-
montanes  agree  to  the  falseness  and  nullity  of  the  excom¬
munication  ?  Is  it  not  null  when  it  is  unjust  as  well  as
when  it  is  false  ?  WIio  can  enjoin  the  commission  of  in¬
justice,  and  enjoin  it  under  pain  of  excommunication  ?  If
the  pope  has  the  power  to  excommunicate  unjustly  and  to

compel  obedience  to  it,  what  hmits  a  power  so  unhmited,
and  why  should  not  his  false  and  null  excommunication
be  respected  and  obeyed  as  well  as  his  unjust  excommu¬
nication  ?  And  when,  by  means  of  confession  and  sermons,
it  has  been  well  established  and  inculcated  in  all  sorts  of
persons  that  unjust  excommunication  ought  to  prevent  the
performance  of  duties,  and  the  question  arises  in  France,  do
you  think  it  will  be  easy  to  make  your  subtle  distinction  un¬
derstood  among  the  people,  the  soldiery,  the  bourgeois,  the
seigneurs,  the  women,  in  short,  the  bulk  of  the  world,  and
prove  to  them  the  difference,  and  apply  that  difference  to  a

1713]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  131

fulminated  excommunication,  at  a  time  when  the  whole
question  may  he  to  act,  and  to  take  up  arms  ?  There,  father,
are  great  difficulties  ;  and  I  see  none  in  not  receiving  the
bull  and  not  allowing  the  pope  to  take  this  new  right  which
he  gives  to  himself  of  deposing  kings,  dispensing  subjects
from  their  oath  of  fidelity,  and  disposing  of  crowns,  against
the  express  words  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  whole  of
Scripture.”

This  short  exposition  exasperated  the  J esuit  because  it  laid
a  finger  on  the  letter,  in  spite  of  his  sophistries  and  his  cun¬
ning.  He  avoided  saying  anything  personal  to  me,  but  he
inwardly  raged  ;  and  the  more  he  controlled  himself  towards
me,  the  less  he  did  so  on  the  subject,  and,  as  if  to  compensate
his  own  feehngs  for  this  moderation,  the  more  he  launched
forth  violently  on  the  necessity  of  forcing  the  kingdom  to
accept  the  bull  without  modifying  it  in  the  shghtest  degree.

In  this  passion,  not  being  master  of  liimself,  he  let  out
several  remarks  which  I  am  certain  he  would  have  bought
back  at  any  cost  afterwards  ;  he  said  things,  on  the  violence
necessary  to  force  acceptance,  so  monstrous,  so  atrocious,  so
frightful,  and  with  such  extreme  fury  that  I  fell  into  a  sort
of  coma.  I  saw  him,  beak  to  beak,  between  the  two  candles,
with  only  the  width  of  the  table  between  us.  (Elsewhere  I
have  described  his  horrible  countenance.)  Stunned  in  sight
and  hearing,  I  was  seized,  as  he  talked,  with  a  sense  of  what
a  Jesuit  can  be  when,  hoping  nothing,  through  his  personal
and  avowed  nonentity,  for  himself  or  family  from  his  office
or  his  vocation,  not  so  much  as  an  apple  or  a  cup  of  wfiie,
and  standing  at  his  age  on  the  verge  of  rendering  an  account
to  God,  he  deliberately,  with  great  craft,  determines  to  throw
religion  and  the  State  into  conflagration  and  begin  the  most
awful  of  persecutions  for  questions  that  are  nothing  to  him,
and  merely  touch  the  honour  of  their  Molina  school.

132

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

The  depths,  the  violence  that  he  showed  me,  the  whole
tocether  threw  me  into  snch  a  trance  that  I  was  suddenly
poisLd  to  interrupt  Hm  and  say:  «  Fatlrer,  Irow  old  are
you  ?  ”  His  extreme  surprise,  for  I  was  looking  at  him  with
all  my  eyes  and  saw  it  painted  on  his  face,  recalled  my
senses,  and  his  answer  brought  me  back  to  myself.  “  Hey  !
what  do  you  ask  me  that  for  ?  ”  he  said,  smiling.  The  effort
that  I  made  to  get  out  of  so  singular  a  scrape,  the  alarming
danger  of  which  I  felt,  inspired  me  to  find  an  issue.  “  Be¬
cause,”  I  replied,  “  I  have  never  seen  you  so  near  as  between
these  two  candles  ;  and  your  face  is  so  sound  and  healthy  in
spite  of  all  your  work  that  I  felt  surprised  at  it.”  He  swal¬
lowed  the  reply,  or  made  believe  to  do  so,  and  nothing  ever
came  of  it  either  then  or  afterwards  ;  he  did  not  cease  to
talk  to  me  very  often,  and  on  all  his  trips  to  Versailles  as
before,  though  I  never  sought  him  in  any  way.  He  replied
that  he  was  seventy-four  years  old,  and  that  he'  was,  in  fact,
very  well  in  health,  and  had  been  accustomed  all  his  days  to
a  hard  and  toilsome  life;  and  with  that  he  went  hack  to
what  he  was  saying  when  I  stopped  him.

We  parted  without  convincing  each  other  ;  he  assuring  me,
with  many  compliments  on  my  intellect,  that  I  did  not  un-
,  derstand  this  matter,  and  stopped  short  at  specious  futihties
'in  a  way  that  surprised  him,  and  he  begged  me  to  make
further  reflections,  I  declaring  roundly  that  they  were  all
made  and  that  my  capacity  could  go  no  farther.  In  spite
of  this  frankness  he  seemed  then  and  afterwards  perfectly
satisfied  with  me,  though  he  never  got  anything  more  out
of  me.  I  of  course  was  careful  not  to  appear  less  satisfied

with  him.

The  interview  lasted  two  hours.  I  made  him  go  out  hy
the  little  hack  door  of  my  cabinet,  so  that  no  one  saw  him  ,
and  as  soon  as  I  had  closed  it,  I  flung  myself  into  a  chair

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

133

like  a  man  out  of  breath,  and  stayed  a  long  time  alone  in
my  cabinet,  reflecting  on  the  mystery  of  my  trance  and  the
horror  he  had  caused  me.

The  consequences  of  the  bull  began  incontinently  after
the  assembly  of  the  bishops  in  Paris.  They  belong  to  the
Beginning  of  the  history  of  the  bull  itself,  where  I  shall  leave
persecutions  m  tlieiu,  and  Only  return  to  this  subject  when  I
Unigenitus.  have  to  relate  what  passed  through  my  hands,
or,  in  some  manner  equally  certain,  beneath  my  eyes,  or
through  my  ears.  Before  long  we  reached  the  period  of  the
first  coups  d’État  in  favour  of  the  bull  Unigenitus,  and  of  the
persecution  which  has  since  made  many  thousands  of  victims
and  some  martyrs  ;  which  has  emptied  schools  and  offices,
encouraged  ignorance,  fanaticism,  and  license,  crowned  vices,
thrown  whole  communities  into  confusion  and  disorder,
estabhshed  the  most  arbitrary  and  the  most  barbarous  in¬
quisition;  and  all  these  horrors  have  gone  on  ceaselessly
increasing  for  the  last  thirty  years.  I  am  content  with  this
word  upon  the  subject;  I  shall  not  blacken  my  Memoirs
with  the  record.  Besides  what  our  own  eyes  can  tell  us
daily,  many  pens  are  occupied,  and  will  be  occupied  in  relat¬
ing  more.^  This  history  of  the  reverend  fathers  and  their
ambitious  clients  is  not  that  of  the  apostleship  of  Jesus
Christ.

The  Queen  of  Spain  had  long  been  violently  attacked  with
scrofula  in  the  face  and  throat,  and  was  now  at  the  last  ex-
1714-  tremity.  Unable  to  obtain  rehef  from  doctors,
Quelnofs^ain.  shc  wishcd  to  scc  Hclvetius,  and  sent  a  courier
to  the  king  asking  for  him.  Helvetius,  much  inconvenienced
by  the  request,  and  knowing  the  state  of  the  queen’s  health,
did  not  wish  to  go  ;  but  the  king  commanded  him  to  do  so,
peremptorily.  He  started  therefore  in  a  post-chaise,  with

1  See  “L’Esprit  Révolutionnaire  avant  la  Re'volution,”  by  M.  Rocquain.

134

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap,  v,

another  behind  him,  in  case  his  own  should  break  down.
He  arrived  in  Madrid  on  the  11th  of  February.  As  soon  as
he  saw  the  queen  he  said  that  nothing  hut  a  miracle  could
save  her.  She  had  a  Jesuit  confessor  ;  hut  she  did  as  her
sister,  the  dauphine,  had  done  ;  when  it  became  a  question
of  the  last  sacraments  and  of  thinking  actually  of  death,
she  dismissed  him,  and  took  a  Dominican.  She  died  on
Wednesday,  14th,  with  much  courage  and  piety,  and  with
full  consciousness.

The  king  left  the  palace  immediately  and  went  to  the
other  side  of  the  city  of  Madrid  to  a  very  beautiful  house
occupied  by  the  Due  de  Medina-Cœli,  very  near  to  the  Buen
Eetiro,  where  his  children,  the  Spanish  princes,  were  taken
soon  after.  This  choice  of  the  Medina-Cceli  palace,  instead
of  the  Buen  Eetiro,  seemed  singular,  hut  it  is  not  yet  time  to
speak  of  that.  Sorrow  for  the  death  was  general  in  Spain,
for  the  queen  was  universally  beloved  ;  there  was  no  family
in  any  condition  of  hfe  that  did  not  grieve  for  her  ;  and
few  in  Spain  were  consoled  for  her  loss,  as  I  afterwards  had
occasion  to  know  during  my  embassy.  The  King  of  Spain
was  extremely  touched,  hut  a  little  in  the  royal  way.  They
made  him  hunt  and  shoot  to  get  the  air  ;  and  on  one  of
these  excursions  he  came  within  sight  of  the  funeral  pro¬
cession  of  the  queen,  whom  they  were  taking  to  the  Es-
curial.  He  looked  at  it,  followed  it  with  his  eyes,  and
continued  the  hunt.  These  princes  —  are  they  made  like
other  men  ?

We  remember  the  sovereignty  that  the  Princesse  des  Ursins
had  expected  to  obtain  by  the  treaty  of  peace  ;  she  had  so
fully  counted  upon  it,  and  upon  exchanging  it
Mml  Ls  Ursins  aftcrwards  with  the  king  for  Touraine  and  the
îhlwnîi^dMle.  country  about  Amboise,  that  she  had,  as  we
de  Maintenon.  have  Seen,  Commissioned  her  faithful  d’Au-

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

135

bigny  to  buy  land  and  build  her  a  vast  palace,  now  called
Chanteloup.

The  thought  of  this  sovereignty  shocked  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon,  who  had  failed  so  signally  in  obtaining  her  own.  The
difference  between  them  affronted  her  pride;  it  made  her
feel  the  distance  above  her  of  the  princess’s  rank  and  birth,
which  was  the  basis  of  such  mighty  soaring.  She  remem¬
bered  jealously  that  the  unlimited  influence  which  had  car¬
ried  Mme.  des  Ursins  so  high  was  only  the  result  of  the
protection  which  she  herself  had  given  her.  She  could  not
endure  that  she  should  abuse  it  to  the  point  of  rising  so
high  above  her  as  this  sovereignty,  to  be  enjoyed  before  her
very  eyes.  The  king  also  felt  the  enormity  of  this  scheme.
It  can  be  imagined  what  was  the  rage  of  Mme.  des  Ursins,
wUen,  after  pushing  her  point  with  such  determined  obsti¬
nacy,  she  found  herself  a  spectacle  to  all  Europe,  with  noth¬
ing  to  gather  but  the  shame  of  so  foohsh  an  enterprise.  This
was  the  stone  of  stumbling  which  now  came  between  the
two  supreme  moderatrixes  of  France  and  Spain.

We  have  seen  with  what  art  Mme.  des  Ursins  had  isolated
the  King  of  Spain,  and  to  what  point  she  had  kept  him  shut
up  with  the  queen  and  made  him  inaccessible,  not  only  to
his  Court,  but  also  to  his  grand  officers,  to  his  ministers,  and
even  to  his  valets,  only  three  or  four  of  whom  were  allowed
to  serve  him,  and  they  were  French  and  wholly  devoted  to
her.  The  pretext  of  his  grief  for  the  queen’s  death  con¬
tinued  this  solitude  ;  and  the  retirement  to  the  Medina-Cœli
palace  in  preference  to  that  of  the  Buen  Re  tiro  still  further
restricted  it,  in  a  house  which  was  far  less  extensive  than  the
royal  palace,  where  courtiers  could  abound,  and  where  it
miaht  have  been  far  more  embarrassing  to  keep  the  king
from  being  approached.  She  herself  took  the  place  of  the
queen  ;  and  in  order  to  have  some  sort  of  pretext  to  be  with

136  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

him  in  such  solitude,  she  had  herself  appointed  governor  of
his  children.

It  was  suspected  that  she  thought  of  becoming  far  more
than  the  king’s  companion.  Rumours  were  spread  about
which  seemed  equivocal  and  frightened  many  ;  it  was  said
that  the  king,  being  blessed  by  God  with  several  sons,
needed  no  other  posterity,  but  only  a  woman  who  could
crovern  them.  Not  content  with  passing  all  her  days  with
the  king,  and,  like  the  late  queen,  only  aRowing  him  to
work  with  his  ministers  in  her  presence,  the  Princesse  des
Ursins  felt  that  she  must  make  this  system  of  supervision
continuous  about  him  at  all  moments.  He  was  accustomed
to  take  the  air,  and  was  now  the  more  eager  for  it  because
he  had  been  much  shut  up  during  the  latter  part  of  the
queen’s  life.  Mme.  des  Ursins  chose  four  or  five  men  to
accompany  him  everywhere,  in  preference  to  the  grand
officers  and  aR  others.  Chalais,  Masseran,  Robesque,  and
two  more  on  whose  devotion  she  could  count,  were  ap-
poiuted  to  follow  the  king  whenever  he  went  out.  They
were  caRed  the  recreadores  of  the  king,  —  those  who  were
charged  with  his  amusements.  liVith  such  measures,  obses-
sions,  and  preparations,  Rttle  doubt  was  felt  that  she  meant
to  marry  him.  This  opinion  and  fear  became  general ,  the
king,  his  grandfather,  was  greatly  alarmed,  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  who  had  never  succeeded  in  being  declared  a
wife,  after  grazing  the  moment  very  closely  two  or  three
times,  was  driven  to  an  extreme  of  jealousy.  But  if  Mma
des  Ursins  ever  thought  of  a  marriage  it  was  not  for  long.

The  King  of  Spain,  always  eager  for  news  from  France,
often  asked  it  of  his  confessor,  the  only  man  to  whom  he
could  speak  who  was  not  in  the  interests  of  Mme.  des
Ursins.  The  clever  and  daring  Père  Robinet,  as  uneasy
as  everybody  else  at  the  progress  of  a  scheme  not  doubted

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

137

by  any  one  at  the  French  or  Spanish  Courts,  let  questions
he  put  to  him  in  the  embrasure  of  a  window  to  which
the  king  had  drawn  him,  and  played  the  reserved  and
the  mysterious  to  pique  his  curiosity.  When  he  saw  the
king  at  the  point  he  wished,  he  said  that  since  his  Maj¬
esty  forced  liim  to  say  so,  he  would  acknowledge  that
the  news  from  France  related  wholly  to  rumours  received
from  Spain,  where  no  one  doubted  that  he  intended  to
do  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  the  honour  to  marry  her.  The
King  coloured  and  answered  hastily  :  “  Oh  !  as  for  that,
no;”  and  left  him.

Whether  Mme.  des  Ursins  was  informed  of  this  decided
reply,  or  whether  she  already  despaired  of  success,  she
Mme.  des  Ursins  tumed  shoit  rouud,  and  judging  that  the
hastens  to  make  blockade  of  the  Medina-CoeH  palace  could
King  of  Spain.  not  last  forcvcr,  she  resolved  to  make  sure
of  the  king  through  another  queen,  who  owing  to  her
so  great  a  marriage  would  throw  herself  into  her  arms
from  gratitude  and  necessity.  With  this  view  she  opened
her  mind  to  Alberoni,  who  was  then  in  Madrid  in  charge  of
the  affairs  of  Parma,  and  proposed  to  him  the  marriage  of  the
Princess  Ehzabeth,  daughter  of  the  Duchesse  of  Parma  and
of  the  late  duke,  brother  of  the  reigning  one,  who  had  mar¬
ried  his  brother’s  widow.  Alberoni  could  scarcely  believe
his  ears;  a  marriage  so  disproportioned  seemed  to  him  the
more  incredible  because  he  could  not  hope  that  the  Court
of  France  would  consent  to  it,  and  he  did  not  believe  the
King  of  Spain  would  dare  to  conclude  it  without  that  con¬
sent.  In  truth,  a  person  issuing  from  a  double  bastardy,
from  a  pope  through  the  father,  from  a  natural  daughter
of  Charles  V.  through  the  mother,  and  daughter  herself  of
a  petty  Duke  of  Parma,  was  not  a  choice  that  any  one  was
likely  to  dream  of  for  Queen  of  Spain.

138

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

Nothing  of  this  kind,  however,  stopped  the  Princesse  des
Ursins;  her  own  urgent  interests  were  the  strongest  con¬
sideration.  She  controlled  the  will  of  the  King  of  Spain ,
she  felt  the  change  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  in  the  kmg,
and  hoped  for  no  return  of  their  confidence;  she  even
thought  she  ought  to  strengthen  herself  against  the  au¬
thority  which  had  so  powerfuUy  placed  her  where  she  was,
and  might  still  destroy  her.  She  therefore  pushed  on  the
marriage  from  which  she  expected  so  much,  intendmg  to
make  the  same  use  of  the  new  queen  that  she  had  made  of
the  one  she  had  just  lost.  The  King  of  Spain  was  devout  ;
he  needed  a  wife  ;  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  was  of  an  age
when  her  charms  were  those  of  art;  in  short,  she  put
Alberoni  to  work,  and,  as  may  well  be  imagined,  the  mat¬
ter  was  not  difficult  to  arrange  as  soon  as  Parma  could  be
convinced  that  it  was  not  being  hoaxed.

Monday,  April  30,  the  king  took  medicine,  and  worked
after  dinner  with  Pontchartrain  ;  about  six  in  the  evening
he  went  to  see  the  Due  de  Berry,  who  had

Berry  rhis'"'''  had  fcvcr  aU  night.  The  duke  had  risen  as
character.  prcscnt  at  the  king’s  medi¬

cine  ;  he  expected  to  hunt  the  stag,  but  on  leaving  the
king’s  room  at  nine  o’clock  he  had  a  strong  chill,  which
obliged  him  to  go  back  to  bed.  The  fever  that  followed
was  very  violent.  He  was  bled,  the  king  in  his  chamber,
and  the  blood  was  found  to  be  very  bad.  At  the  king’s
coucher  the  doctors  told  him  that  the  malady  was  of  such
a  nature  as  to  make  them  think  it  was  a  venomous  disease.
He  had  vomited  much,  and  the  matter  was  black.  Pagon
said  positively  that  it  was  blood;  the  other  doctors  thought
it  was  chocolate  which  he  had  taken  on  Sunday.  Prom  that
day  I  knew  what  to  think.  Boulduc,  the  king’s  apothecary,
extremely  attached  to  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  me,  whom

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

139

I  have  mentioned  once  or  twice,  whispered  in  my  ear  that
he  would  never  recover  ;  for,  with  some  shght  differences,
it  was  really  the  same  thing  that  the  dauphin  and  dauphine
had  died  of.  This  he  confirmed  to  me  the  next  day,  and
never  varied  from  this  opinion  during  the  short  illness.  On
the  third  day  he  told  me  that  none  of  the  doctors  who  saw
the  prince  doubted  it  or  concealed  their  opinion  from  him.

Tuesday,  May  1,  bleeding  from  the  foot  at  seven  in  the
morning,  after  a  very  bad  night;  two  emetics  which  had
great  effect  ;  then  a  purgative,  hut  two  attacks  of  fever.
After  the  king’s  mass  he  held  the  council  of  finances,  but
would  not  go  to  shoot  as  he  had  planned,  and  walked  in
the  gardens.  The  doctors,  contrary  to  their  custom,  did
not  reassure  him.  The  night  was  cruel.  Wednesday,  after
mass,  the  king  went  to  see  his  grandson,  who  was  again  bled
in  the  foot.  Coettenfao,  gentleman  in  waiting  on  the  Du¬
chesse  de  Berry,  came  with  a  request  from  the  latter  to  the
king  that  he  would  allow  Chirac,  a  famous  doctor  of  the
Due  d’Orléans,  to  see  the  Due  de  Berry.  The  king  refused
on  the  ground  that  the  doctors  were  all  agreed,  and  if  Chirac
were  of  a  different  opinion  it  would  only  embarrass  them.
Later  Mmes,  de  Pompadour  and  de  La  Vieuville  came  from
the  Duchesse  de  Berry  begging  the  king  to  allow  her  to
come  ;  and  saying  that  in  her  great  anxiety  she  would  even
come  on  foot.  If  she  had  really  so  much  desired  to  see  her
husband  she  ought  to  have  come  in  a  carriage,  and  before
getting  out  have  asked  the  king’s  permission.  The  truth  is
she  had  no  more  desire  to  see  the  Due  de  Berry  than  he  to
see  her  ;  he  never  mentioned  her  name,  or  spoke  of  her  even
indirectly.  The  king  gave  reasons  to  the  ladies  against  her
coming,  but,  as  they  insisted,  he  said  he  would  not  close
the  doors  against  her,  but  he  thought  in  the  present  condition
of  her  health  it  would  be  imprudent.  He  afterwards  told

140

MEMOIES  of  the  dug  de  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

Madame  and  the  Due  d’Orléans  to  go  to  Versailles  and
prevent  her  from  coming  to  Marly.  The  Due  de  Berry  was
acain  bled  from  the  arm,  and  vomited  much  all  day,  in  which
there  was  a  great  deal  of  blood;  he  took  eau  de  Ralel  three
times  to  arrest  it.  This  vomiting  postponed  the  communion  ;
Père  de  La  Eue  was  with  him  from  the  Tuesday  morning,
and  found  him  very  patient  and  resigned.

At  six  o’clock  on  the  evening  of  Thursday  he  choked  so
much  that  he  could  not  stay  in  bed;  at  eight  he  was  so
much  better  that  he  said  to  Madame  he  hoped  he  should  not
die  ;  but  soon  after  he  grew  worse  and  Père  de  La  Eue  told
him  it  was  time  to  think  only  of  God,  and  to  receive  the
viaticum.  The  poor  prince  seemed  himself  to  desire  it.  A
little  after  ten  o’clock  the  king  went  to  the  chapel,  where
they  had  kept  ready  a  consecrated  wafer  from  the  first  days
of  his  illness.  The  Due  de  Berry  received  that  and  extreme
unction  in  presence  of  the  king  with  much  devotion.  He
died  on  Friday,  May  4,  at  four  in  the  morning,  in  his  twenty-
eighth  year,  —  having  been  born  at  Versailles  in  August,
1686.  He  was  of  the  ordinary  height  of  most  men,  plump
aU  over,  a  fair  complexion,  with  a  fresh  face,  rather  hand¬
some,  which  denoted  brilhant  health.  He  was  made  for
society  and  pleasure,  both  of  which  he  loved  ;  the  kindest
of  men,  most  compassionate,  most  accessible,  without  vanity
or  pride,  but  not  without  dignity  and  a  sense  of  what  he  was.
He  had  a  very  ordinary  mind,  with  no  views  and  no  imagina¬
tion  ;  but  very  good  sense,  and  sound  sense  ;  capable  of
hstening,  and  understanding,  and  always  taking  the  right
side  among  specious  ones.  He  loved  truth,  justice,  and
reason;  all  that  was  contrary  to  rehgion  pained  him.
extremely,  without  his  piety  being  remarkable  ;  he  was  not
without  firmness,  and  he  hated  restraint.  This  was  what
made  people  fear  that  he  might  not  prove  as  supple  as  was

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

141

desirable  in  a  younger  son  of  France,  who  in  his  early  youth
could  never  understand  that  there  was  any  difference  between
himself  and  his  elder  brother;  hence  the  boyish  quarrels
which  had  caused  some  fear.

He  was  the  handsomest  and  the  most  cordial  of  the  three
brothers,  consequently  the  most  hked,  caressed,  and  followed
by  society  ;  and  as  his  nature  was  open,  free,  and  gay,  much
was  said  of  his  boyish  repartees.  He  laughed  at  all
masters  and  tutors,  and  often  at  punishments  ;  he  never
knew  more  than  to  read  and  write,  and  he  learned  nothing
after  he  was  once  delivered  from  the  necessity  of  learning.
Education  had  weighed  upon  him  ;  but  the  want  of  it
blunted  his  mind,  lowered  his  courage,  and  made  him  so
extremely  timid  that  he  became  inept  at  most  things,  even
the  duties  of  his  station,  not  knowing  what  to  say  to  persons
to  whom  he  was  unaccustomed,  and  seldom  daring  to  reply
or  to  utter  a  civility  from  fear  of  making  blunders  ;  so  that
finally  he  came  to  think  he  was  really  a  fool,  and  a  dolt,  fit
for  nothing.  This  excessive  distrust  of  himself  did  him
infinite  harm.  He  blamed  his  education,  and  gave  the  true
reason  ;  but  this  sense  of  a  wrong  done  him  never  lessened
his  affection  for  those  who  took  part  in  it.  As  the  Due  de
Bourgogne,  after  their  boyhood,  had  never  made  him  feel  his
seniority,  and  had  always  lived  with  him  on  terms  of  intimate
friendship  and  familiarity,  the  Due  de  Berry,  who  was  frank
and  good,  did  not  resent  his  superiority.  The  Duchesse  de
Bourgogne  loved  him  well,  and  was  often  as  much  intent  on
giving  him  little .  pleasures  as  though  he  were  her  own
brother,  and  the  return  on  his  part  was  tenderness  itself  and
the  most  sincere  and  marked  respect  for  both  of  them.  He
was  overcome  with  grief  at  their  deaths,  especially  that  of
the  dauphine,  —  a  grief  that  was  true,  for  never  was  a  man  so
incapable  of  feigning  as  he.  As  for  the  king,  he  feared  him

142

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  v.

to  such  a  point  that  he  scarcely  dared  approach  him, ^  and
was  so  confused  if  the  king  merely  looked  at  him  with  a
serious  eye,  or  spoke  of  other  things  than  cards  and  hunting,
that  he  scarcely  understood  him,  and  his  thoughts  and  speech
dried  up.  It  will  readily  he  imagined  that  such  terror  did
not  go  in  company  with  much  affection.

He  had  begun  with  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  as  nearly  ah
men  do  who  marry  young.  He  became  extremely  fond  of
her,  and  this,  added  to  his  natural  sweetness  and  compliance,
had  an  opposite  effect  upon  her  ;  it  completely  spoiled  her.  It
was  long  before  he  perceived  this  ;  but  love  in  the  end  opened
his  eyes.  He  found  a  haughty,  proud,  ill-tempered  woman  ;
incapable  of  returning  love  ;  a  woman  who  despised  him  and
let  him  feel  it,  because  she  had  infinitely  more  mind  than
he,  and  was  moreover  supremely  false  and  thoroughly  deter¬
mined.  She  even  piqued  herself  on  being  so,  and  on  scoffing
at  religion,  laughing  at  her  husband  disdainfully  because  he
respected  it.  These  things  in  the  end  became  intolerable  to
him.  All  that  she  did  to  embroil  him  with  the  Due  and
Duchesse  de  Bourgogne  (in  which  she  never  succeeded  as
to  the  two  brothers)  incensed  him.  Her  gallantries  came
so  quickly  and  were  so  little  restrained  that  he  could  not
conceal  them  from  himself.  Violent  and  renewed  scenes
took  place  between  them.  The  last,  which  occurred  at  Eam-
bouillet,  ended  with  a  threat  to  shut  her  up  in  a  convent  for
the  rest  of  her  life  ;  and  he  was  engaged,  when  his  last  ill¬
ness  seized  him,  in  twisting  his  hat  before  the  king  hke  a
boy,  telling  bim  his  wrongs  and  begging  him  to  dehver  him
from  his  wife.  These  things  thus  stated  in  general  are  suffi¬
cient  ;  the  details  are  too  miserable  and  shocking  ;  one  must
suffice  for  all  ;  She  wanted  with  all  her  force  to  make  La
Haye,  the  Due  de  Berry’s  equerry,  whom  she  had  taken  as
her  own  chamberlain,  elope  with  her  from  the  Court.  The

1714]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

143

most  passionate  and  frantic  letters  on  this  subject  were
discovered  ;  and  from  such  a  project  —  the  king,  her  father,
and  her  husband  being  alive  and  active  —  we  can  judge  of
the  brain  that  hatched  it  and  urged  its  execution.  We
shall  see  more  of  such  conduct  in  the  future.  She  felt  her
faU  on  the  death  of  the  Due  de  Berry  less  than  her  dehver-
ance  ;  she  counted  on  enjoying  her  hberty,  freed  from  irri¬
tating  remonstrance  on  the  part  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  who  would  no  longer  have  the  same  reason  to
control  her  behaviour.

The  Due  and  Duchesse  d’Orléans  felt  the  greatness  of
their  loss.  It  was  a  tie  that  had  bound  them  to  the  king.

o

The  thought  of  a  possible  regency  did  not  comfort  the  Due
d’Orléans.  He  had  always  been  aware  of  his  mental  superi¬
ority  to  his  son-in-law,  with  whom  his  interests  were  in
common  and  whom  he  could  always  necessarily  guide.  He
was  truly  afflicted  both  from  interest  and  affection.

The  nature  of  the  illness  which  had  carried  off  the  Due
de  Berry  became  publicly  known,  and  the  effect  was  like
that  of  the  preceding  losses.  The  more  such  rumours  in¬
creased,  the  more  the  Due  d’Orléans  was  left  alone,  and  the
stronger  the  effort  to  cover  him  with  all  that  was  most  odious,
and  render  him  such  to  the  king  and  the  world.  The  king
showed  nothing  externally  ;  but  the  worthy  workmen  lost
no  labour,  and  they  were  sure  of  a  good  foundation  to  work
upon.  The  Due  d’Orléans  had  never  recovered  his  footing
with  the  king  nor  with  society  after  the  first  rumours  excited
against  him.  Those  who  had  invented  them  knew  better
than  to  let  them  die  ;  and  they  now  revived  these  scandals
and  formed  a  dangerous  group  of  them,  before  which  he
could  only  lower  his  head  and  shrug  his  shoulders.

The  king  lived  in  his  customary  manner  at  Marly  im¬
mediately  after  the  death  of  his  grandson,  but  the  musi-

144

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

cals  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartments  did  not  begm
acain  until  the  return  to  Versailles.  I  was  at  Marly  as
Enigmatical  say-  usual,  though  Mme.  do  Saint-Simon  had  re-
ing  of  the  king  jjjained  at  Versailles  near  the  Duchesse  de

about  Mme.  des  ,  i  p  4.1,

Ursins.  Berry.  The  king  had  not  yet  heard  trom  tJie

King  of  Spain  that  he  thought  of  remarrying,  much  less  with
a  daughter  of  Parma,  but  the  information  had  reached  him
in  other  ways.  This  proceeding,  following  the  desired  sov¬
ereignty  of  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  and  her  whole  conduct
with  the  King  of  Spain  since  the  death  of  the  queen,  sealed
the  resolution  to  bring  about  her  downfall  The  king,
always  master  of  himself  and  his  words,  allowed  an  expres¬
sion  and  a  smile  to  escape  him  on  the  subject  of  Mme.  des
Ursins  that  was  so  enigmatic  and  at  the  same  time  so  strik¬
ing  that  Torcy,  to  whom  he  said  it,  was  puzzled.  In  his
surprise  he  mentioned  it  to  Castries,  his  intimate  friend,  and
the  latter  told  it  to  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  who  related  it
in  turn  to  the  Due  d’Orléans  and  me.  M^e  cracked  our
brains  to  understand  what  was  coming.  At  any  rate  a
saying  so  unintelligible  about  a  person  like  Mme.  des  Ursins,
who  until  now  had  been  on  such  perfect  terms  with  the
king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  did  not  seem  to  me  favour¬
able.  I  was  confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  what  had  lately
happened  about  her  sovereignty  ;  but  still  I  was  a  thousand
leagues  from  dreaming  of  the  thunderbolt  which  this  flash
of  lightning  preceded.  It  was  only  made  apparent  to  us
when  the  downfall  came.  But  it  is  not  yet  time  to  speak
of  that.

The  chancellor  now  did  a  thing  for  which  there  was  no
precedent  and  which  astonished  people  greatly,  one  might
say  direfully.  All  his  life  he  had  nursed  a

Retirement  of  the  .  tp  j

chancellor,  Pont-  project  to  put  an  interval  between  iite  ana
chartrain.  death;  often  had  he  told  me  so.  His  wife

1714]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

145

had  frequently  kept  him  from  retiring  before  he  was
chancellor  ;  and  before  she  died  she  made  him  promise  that
if  he  again  thought  of  doing  so  he  would  take  six  weeks  to
reflect  upon  it.  After  her  death  he  went  to  the  institution
of  the  fathers  of  the  Oratory,  to  a  little  apartment  he  kept
there  to  which  he  always  retired  on  holidays,  and  there  he
reflected  on  the  means  to  carry  out  his  design,  and  secretly
took  his  measures.  They  were  not  so  hidden  that  they  did
not  transpire  in  his  family.  I  was  warned  and  urged  to
speak  to  him  about  the  injury  not  only  to  himself  but  to
that  detestable  son  whom  he  would  thus  leave  without
protection.  I  said  all  I  could  to  him,  and  gained  nothing.

He  bided  his  time  and  spoke  to  the  king,  whose  surprise
was  extreme;  he  said  he  did  not  think  a  chancellor  could
resign  ;  and  it  is  true  there  is  no  example  of  it.  The  king
omitted  nothing  to  retain  him  ;  neither  arguments  nor  tender
assurances  that  proved  his  esteem  ;  he  found  him  firm  and
resolved.  The  king  then  fell  back  on  asking  him  to  take
fifteen  days  to  consider  it.  This  period  ended  with  the
month  of  June.  The  chancellor  returned  to  the  charge,
and  obtained,  though  with  great  difficulty,  the  freedom  for
which  he  longed  and  of  which  he  subsequently  made  so
brave  and  saintly  a  usage.  The  house  which  Charmel’s
death  had  left  vacant  he  arranged  for  himself,  and  there  he
retired.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  of  his  soHtude  and
of  the  hfe  he  led  there,  which  was  equally  religious  and
contented.

Besides  his  age,  his  grief  for  the  loss  of  his  wife,  and  the
liberty  her  death  gave  him  to  carry  out  the  resolution  of
years  and  place  an  interval  between  life  and  death,  he  felt
in  haste  to  escape  events  which  he  foresaw  would,  day  by
day,  become  more  difficult  to  bear  in  his  office.  He  saw  the
schemes  of  Père  TeUier,  the  progress  of  the  affair  of  the

VOL.  III.  —  10

146

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

bull,  the  overthrow  of  the  hherties  of  the  Gallican  Church
and  those  of  the  schools,  the  persecution  that  was  smoulder¬
ing,  and  which  the  most  sacred  barriers  would  not  be  able
to  prevent.  He  foresaw  that  the  tyranny  of  the  Jesuits
and  their  supporters,  who  had  transformed  their  cause  into
that  of  the  king’s  authority  in  this  world  and  his  salvation
in  the  next,  would  be  carried,  little  by  little,  to  all  species
of  violence.  He  did  not  choose  to  be  the  minister  of  such
deeds  by  the  Seals,  or  even  their  mute  witness.  To  re¬
monstrate  and  refuse  the  Seals  would  have  stopped  nothing
and  only  ruined  himself.  This  was  one  of  his  most  urgent
reasons  for  no  delay  in  setting  himself  aside.  Another,
which  hastened  him  scarcely  less,  was  the  rapid  soaring
upward  of  bastardy,  which  now,  delivered  by  the  deaths  of
the  sons  of  France  and  of  the  princes  of  the  blood  of  an
age  to  restrain  it,  set  no  bounds  to  its  audacity  and  its
conc[uests.  This  again  was  a  point  which  must  come  before
the  chancellor’s  ministry,  and  to  which  he  had  a  horror  of
lending  himself.  But  opposition  on  his  part  could  have
borne  no  fruit  and  would  only  have  resulted  in  destroying
him.  The  rapid  course  of  events  has  since  made  evident
the  sagacity  of  his  views.  He  was  controller-general  ten
years  ;  shortly  after,  minister  of  State  ;  then  secretary  of
State  on  the  death  of  Seignelay  in  1690  ;  and  in  1699
chancellor  and  Keeper  of  the  Seals.  At  the  time  he  retired
he  was  seventy-one  years  old,  without  ever  having  had  the
slightest  infirmity,  and  his  head  as  clear  as  at  forty.

Soon  after  he  left  the  king’s  presence,  the  latter,  who  had
had  time,  since  Pontchartrain  had  first  spoken  of  his  resigna¬
tion,  to  choose  a  chancellor,  sent  for  Voysin,  gave  him  the
casket  containing  the  Seals,  and  declared  him  chancellor.
It  was  supposed  that  he  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  resign
his  place  of  secretary  of  State  to  the  ministry  of  war;  but

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

147

his  appetite  was  good,  and  he  kept  both  places.  The  king
took  great  amusement  in  exhibiting  him  in  the  two  parts.
At  the  council,  and  even  on  the  mornings  when  there  was
none,  Voysin  was  robed  as  the  chancellor;  after  dinner  he
appeared  in  a  short  damask  cloak  and  worked  with  the
king  as  minister  ;  in  the  evening,  for  it  was  summer,  he
abandoned  his  cloak  and  followed  the  king  on  his  prome¬
nade  in  the  damask  justaucorps  of  a  courtier.  All  this
seemed  extremely  ridiculous  and  very  novel.  M.  de  Lauzun
having  gone  into  Paris  from  Marly,  some  one  asked  him
news  of  the  Court.  “  ISTone,”  he  said  in  his  soft  and  guile¬
less  voice,  “  there  is  no  news  ;  the  king  amuses  himself  by
dressing  and  undressing  his  doll.”

On  returning  to  my  room  at  Marly  late  on  the  morning
of  Sunday,  July  29,  I  found  a  lacquey  of  Maisons  [a  judge
The  bastards  and  ^^6  parliament  courts]  with  a  note,  in

mIdeTapS7of  conjured  me  to  drop  all

succeeding  to  the  Other  busincss  and  come  to  him  at  once  in
Paris,  where  I  should  find  that  the  matter  on
which  he  wished  to  speak  to  me  admitted  of  no  delay,  could
not  be  written,  and  was  of  the  most  extreme  importance.
The  lacquey  had  waited  for  me  a  long  time.  I  was  to  dine
that  day  with  M.  and  Mme.  de  Lauzun.  To  miss  this
dinner  would  have  roused  the  curiosity  and  the  mischief¬
making  of  M.  de  Lauzun  ;  I  dared  not  disappear.  But  I
ordered  my  carriage,  and  as  soon  as  dinner  was  over  I
eclipsed  myself.  No  one  saw  me  get  into  my  chaise,  and
on  reaching  Paris  I  went  immediately  to  Maisons’  house
with  an  eagerness  that  may  well  be  imagined.

I  found  him  alone  with  the  Due  de  Noailles,  and  I  saw
before  me  two  men  apparently  aghast,  who  told  me  with
an  agonized  air  that  the  king  had  declared  his  two  bastard
sons  and  their  male  heirs  forever  true  princes  of  the  blood,

148  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  p.

with  right  to  the  quality,  rank,  and  honours  of  such  and
capacity  of  succeeding  to  the  throne  in  default  of  all  the
other  princes  of  the  blood.  At  this  news,  which  I  did  no
expect,  the  secret  having  been  kept  without  a  word  of  it
transpiring,  my  arms  fell  at  my  side.  I  dropped  my  head
and  remained  in  dead  silence,  absorbed  m  ^  my  reflections.
They  were  soon  interrupted  by  cries,  wbicb.  roused  me.
The  two  men  were  marching  about  the  room,  stamping
their  feet,  pushing  and  striking  the  furniture,  as  if  seemg
who  could  strike  hardest,  and  making  the  room  echo  with
their  shouts.  I  confess  that  all  this  seemed  to  me  suspi¬
cious.  I  asked  them  if  they  were  crazy,  and  if,  mstead  of
such  storming,  it  were  not  more  useful  to  reason  the  matter
over  and  see  if  nothing  could  be  done.  They  cried  out  that
it  was  just  because  there  was  nothing  to  be  done  —  for
the  thing  was  not  only  proposed,  but  executed,  declared,
and  the  declaration  sent  to  parhament  —  that  they  were  so
incensed;  the  Due  d’Orléans,  they  said,  on  the  terms  m
which  he  was  with  the  king,  could  say  nothing,  the  prmces
of  the  blood  were  children,  the  dukes  had  no  power  to
oppose,  and  parhament  was  reduced  to  slavery  and  with
that  they  swore  louder  than  ever,  and  spared  neither  words
nor  terms  nor  persons.

I  was  very  angry  myself,  but  it  is  true  that  this  pandemo¬
nium  made  me  laugh  and  preserved  my  coolness.  I  agreed
with  them  that  I  saw  no  remedy  and  nothing  to  be  done  ;
but  meantime,  until  some  future  event  happened,  I  preferred
to  have  the  bastards  princes  of  the  blood  with  a  right  to  the
throne,  than  as  they  were,  possessing  an  intermediate  rank
between  ourselves,  the  peers,  and  the  princes.  And  it  is  true
that  I  thought  so  as  soon  as  I  recovered  my  senses.  The
tempest  lulled  a  little  and  we  talked  more  reasonably.  They
told  me  that  the  president  of  the  parhament  and  the  procu^

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

149

reur-général  had  gone  that  morning  very  early  to  Marly,
had  seen  the  king  in  his  cabinet,  and  immediately  after,
returned  to  Paris  bringing  the  declaration  with  them.  Mai¬
sons  must,  however,  have  known  of  the  matter  previously,
because  at  the  hour  when  his  lacquey  must  have  left  Paris
to  come  to  me,  these  gentlemen  could  not  have  returned
from  Marly.  Onr  talk  resulting  in  nothing,  I  took  my  leave
and  returned  to  Marly  as  fast  as  possible,  that  my  absence
might  not  be  noticed.

It  was  nearly  the  king’s  supper  time.  I  went  straight  to
the  salon  and  found  every  one  very  gloomy.  They  looked
at  each  other,  but  scarcely  dared  to  speak  ;  at  the  most  a
covert  sign  or  a  word  in  brushing  past  each  other.  I  saw
the  king  sit  down  to  table  ;  he  seemed  to  me  more  haughty
than  usual  and  looked  about  him  from  right  to  left.  It  was
only  one  hour  since  the  news  had  become  known;  people
were  stiU  under  the  shock  and  very  much  on  their  guard.

When  a  matter  is  without  resource  one  must  choose  one’s
course  ;  and  this  is  easier  done  and  more  suitably  when  that
matter  does  not  bear  directly  upon  ourselves,  as  did  the
intermediary  rank  to  which  the  bastards  had  attained  and
about  which  they  never  won  a  word  of  comphment  from
me  nor  the  least  appearance  of  it.  I  therefore  took  my
resolution.  As  soon  as  the  king,  who  had  looked  at  me  very
fixedly,  sat  down  to  table,  I  went,  although  the  hour  was
late,  to  see  M.  du  Maine.  The  doors  flew  open  before  me  ;
I  saw  a  man  surprised  and  dehghted  at  the  visit  ;  he  came
forward  to  meet  me,  treading  on  air,  lame  as  he  was.  I  told
him  that  this  time  I  came  to  pay  my  comphment,  and  a
sincere  comphment;  that  the  dukes  had  no  pretensions
against  the  princes  of  the  blood  ;  that  what  we  claimed,  and
what  was  due  to  us  was  that  no  intermediaries  should  stand
between  the  princes  of  the  blood  and  ourselves,  the  peers  ;

150

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  y.

that  as  soon  as  he  became  one  of  them  we  could  only  rejoice
that  we  had  no  longer  to  endure  that  intermediate  rank
which,  I  was  free  to  teU  him,  was  intolerable  to  us.  His  joy
hurst  forth  at  this  compliment.  All  that  he  said  and  did
had  a  politeness,  an  air  of  deference  even,  which  the  trans¬
port  of  his  triumph  inspired.

The  Due  d’Orléans  was  angry,  hut  angry  in  his  way,  and
had  no  great  trouble  in  not  showing  it.  Dukes  and  foreign
princes  were  furious,  but  with  silent  fury.  The  Court
broke  forth  into  underhand  mutterings  far  more  than  might
have  been  expected.  Paris  was  open-mouthed,  so  were  the
provinces  ;  parhament  (but  each  man  aside)  did  not  restrain
itself.  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  delighted  with  her  work,  re¬
ceived  the  congratulations  of  her  famihars.  She  and  the
Due  du  Maine  had  not  forgotten  what  had  happened  on  the
elevation  of  the  latter’s  children.  Though  there  was  no  one
now  of  legitimate  blood  to  fear,  they  nevertheless  trembled,
and  the  kmg  was  closely  watched,  and  flattered  by  fletitious
tales  of  the  joy  and  the  universal  approbation  for  what  he
had  done.  The  kmg,  in  spite  of  his  affection  for  his  bas¬
tards,  had  still  the  remains  of  his  former  principles  ;  what
he  did  to  bring  them  within  range  of  the  throne  he  did  in
so  astonishing  a  manner  by  degrees  that  it  ought  to  he
exhibited  here  and  seen  at  a  glance,  in  order  to  compare  the
first  steps  taken  by  an  unheard-of  use  of  power  to  make  them
equal,  little  by  httle,  to  other  men,  with  the  last  steps  which
brought  them  actually  within  reach  of  the  crown.^

1673.  Legitimatizing  of  Louis-Auguste  (Duc  du  Maine),  Louis-César
(Comte  du  Vexin,  died  young),  and  Louise-Françoise  (Mme.
la  Duchesse).

1  The  following  list  is  abridged  in  some  of-  its  terms,  not  its  items  ;
and  Saint-Simon’s  comments  and  explanations,  which  are  long,  are
omitted.  —  Tr.

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  151

1674.  Louis-Auguste  de  Bourbon,  æt.  4,  appointed  colonel-general  of
the  Suisses  and  Grisons.

1676.  Louis-Auguste  de  Bourbon  declared  competent  to  possess  all
offices  and  named  Due  du  Maine.

1676.  The  Comte  de  Vexin,  æt.  4,  deformed,  appointed  to  the  Abbeys
of  Saint-Germain  des  Prés  and  Saint-Denis.

1680.  Letters  patent  giving  to  all  the  bastards  and  their  legitimate

heirs  the  surname  of  Bom'bon.

1681.  Gift  made  (that  is  forced  from  Mademoiselle,  to  get  the  Due

de  Lauxun  out  of  Pignerol)  to  Due  du  Maine  of  the  princi¬
pality  of  Dombes.

1681.  Legitimatizing  of  all  the  other  bastard  children.

1682.  The  Due  du  Maine,  æt.  12,  appointed  to  the  government  of

Languedoc.

1683.  The  Comte  de  Toulouse,  æt.  5,  appointed  admiral  of  France.

1685.  Louise  de  Bourbon  married  to  M.  le  Duc.

1686.  The  Duc  du  Maine,  æt.  16,  made  chevalier  of  the  order  of  the

Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost.

1688.  Due  du  Maine  made  general  of  the  galleys.

1689.  Comte  de  Toulouse,  æt.  11,  made  governor  of  Guyenne.

1689.  Duc  du  Maine,  æt.  19,  made  commander  of  the  cavalry  in

Flanders.

1692.  Marie-Françoise  de  Bourbon  married  to  the  Due  de  Chartres
(Due  d’Orléans).

1692.  Duc  du  Maine  married  to  a  daughter  of  Prince  de  Condé.

1692.  Duc  du  Maine  made  lieutenant-general.

1693.  Comte  de  Toulouse,  æt.  15,  made  chevalier  of  the  order  of  the

Holy  Spirit.

1694.  Declaration,  giving  to  the  Due  du  Maine  and  Comte  de  Tou¬

louse,  and  their  legitimate  heirs  precedence  immediately
after  the  princes  of  the  blood  in  all  acts  and  ceremonies,
and  before  parliament,  preceding  peers,  dukes,  and  other
seigneurs.

1694.  Letters  patent  to  the  peerage  of  Eu  given  to  the  Due  du  Maine,

to  enjoy  all  the  ranks,  titles,  and  honours  of  the  ancient
Comtes  of  Eu  since  the  first  erection  of  their  peerage  in
1458.

1695.  Letters  of  erection  and  re-establishment  of  the  seigneurie  of

Aumale  to  the  title  and  dignity  of  duchy-peerage  in  favour
of  the  Due  du  Maine  and  his  heirs,  male  and  female.

1697.  Letters  of  erection  of  the  seigneurie  of  Penthièvre  to  the  title
and  dignity  of  duchy-peerage  in  favour  of  the  Comte  de
Toulouse  and  his  heirs  male  and  female.

152

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

1698.  Comte  de  Toulouse  made  governor  of  Bretagne.

1703.  Comte  de  Toulouse  made  lieutenant-general  and  commander  of
the  cavalry  in  the  Meuse.

1703.  Letters  of  erection  of  the  lands  of  Arc  and  Chateauvillain  to  a

duchy-peerage  given  to  Comte  de  Toulouse.

1704.  Comte  de  Toulouse  made  chevalier  of  the  order  of  the  Golden

Fleece.

1704.  Due  du  Maine  appointed  grand-master  of  artillery.

1710.  Patent  securing  to  the  Duchesse  du  Maine  her  rank  as  princess
of  the  blood.

1710.  Declaration  of  the  king  that  the  children  of  the  Due  du  Maine
(Prince  de  Dombes  and  Comte  d’Eu)  should  have,  as  grand¬
sons  of  his  Majesty,  the  same  rank,  honours,  and  emoluments
as  the  Due  du  Maine.

1710.  Prince  de  Dombes,  æt.  10,  appointed  to  succeed  his  father  as
colonel-general  of  Suisses  and  Grisons.

1710.  Comte  d’Eu,  æt.  8,  appointed  to  succeed  his  father  as  grand¬

master  of  artillery.

1711.  Decree  of  the  king  that  his  legitimatized  sons,  and  their  sons,

shall  in  virtue  of  their  peerages,  represent  the  older  peer¬
ages  at  coronations  ;  have  the  right  of  entrance  and  vote  in
parliament  and  in  the  councils  after  the  age  of  20,  with
seats  immediately  after  the  princes  of  the  blood,  and  preced¬
ing  all  dukes  and  peers,  even  those  whose  peerages  are  most
ancient.

1711.  Declaration  of  the  king  that  the  Due  du  Maine  and  Comte  de
Toulouse  shall  enjoy  during  their  lifetime,  at  the  Court  and
in  the  royal  family,  and  at  all  public  and  private  cere¬
monies,  audiences  of  ambassadors,  etc.,  the  same  honours
which  are  and  will  be  rendered  to  the  princes  of  the  blood
and  immediately  after  them.

1711.  Declaration  of  his  Majesty  that  it  is  his  will  that  the  children,

sons  and  daughters,  of  the  Due  du  Maine,  the  king’s  grand¬
children,  shall  enjoy  the  same  privileges  as  above  mentioned.

1712.  Letters  of  re-erection  of  Marquisate  of  Rambouillet  given  to

Comte  de  Toulouse  ;  survivance  of  government  of  Langue¬
doc  to  Prince  de  Dombes  ;  same  to  government  of  Guyenne
to  Comte  d’Eu.

1714.  (The  dauphin  and  the  dauphine  being  dead  in  1712  and  the
Due  de  Berry  in  1714,  those  events  were  put  to  profit.)
Edict  registered  in  parliament  August,  1714,  calling  to  the
succession  to  the  crown  the  Due  du  Maine,  the  Comte  de

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  153

Toulouse,  and  their  male  descendants  in  default  of  the
princes  of  the  blood.

1715.  The  Prince  de  Dombes  takes  seat  in  parliament  in  the  manner
and  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  princes  of  the  blood.

1715.  Declaration  of  the  king,  registered  in  parliament,  that  the  Due
du  Maine  and  Comte  de  Toulouse  and  their  legitimate  heirs
and  descendants  shall  always  have  the  quality  of  princes  of
the  blood.

I  pause  here,  because  what  the  king  did  afterwards  to
secure  this  unheard-of  grandeur  belongs  to  the  matter  of  his
will,  which  we  have  not  yet  reached  ;  for,  though  he  made
it  at  this  same  time,  its  contents  were  not  known  until  the
opening  of  both  will  and  codicil  after  his  death.  It  was  not
even  known  until  two  weeks  later  that  he  had  made  one,
as  we  shall  see  presently,  and  no  one  suspected  it.

If  we  examine  this  immense  group  of  facts,  which,  rising
from  the  utter  non-existence  of  doubly  adulterine  children
bears  them  within  reach  of  the  crown,  we  shall  be  less  im¬
pressed  with  the  imagination  of  the  poets  who  piled  moun¬
tains  one  upon  another  for  the  Titans  to  scale  the  skies.
At  the  same  time  the  example  afforded  by  the  poets  of  an
Enceladus  and  a  Briareus  comes  naturally  to  the  mind  as
the  just  reward  of  such  actions.

After  this  great  act  of  declaring  the  succession  to  the
crown,  and  before  the  registration  of  the  edict,  which  fol¬
lowed  it  closely,  the  king,  overwhelmed  by  a  sense  of  what
he  had  done,  could  not,  master  as  he  was  of  himself  and  his
words,  refrain  from  saying  with  a  sigh  to  the  Due  du  Maine,
in  presence  of  a  few  intimate  courtiers  and  the  valets  who
were  always  in  his  cabinet  at  Marly,  that  he  had  done  for
them  (meaning  himself,  his  brother,  and  their  children)  all
that  he  could  ;  but  that  the  more  he  did,  the  more  they  had
to  fear,  and  the  more  they  must  endeavour  to  make  them¬
selves  worthy  of  it,  in  order  to  maintain,  after  he  was  gone.

154

memoirs  of  the  dug  de  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  v.

the  position  in  which  he  had  placed  them,  which  could  only
be  done  by  themselves  and  their  own  deserving.  It  was
thus  that  he  revealed  what  he  felt,  but  did  not  say  ;  and  his
words  were  known  incontinently  by  every  one  at  Court.

It  is  not  yet  time  to  show  the  means  by  which  the  king  was
led  to  his  last  act.  We  shaU  come  to  it  presently,  for  only
a  fortnight  elapsed  between  the  two  declarations.

Thursday,  August  2,  was  the  day  appointed  for  the  regis¬
tration  of  this  new  decree.  M.  le  Duc,  the  Prince  de  Conti,

.  ,  and  a  score  of  peers  were  present.  I  was
the  edict.  witness  of  the  general  shudder  when  the  bas¬

tards  appeared,  which  was  followed  by  a  sort  of  smothered
murmur  as  they  slowly  crossed  the  floor.  Hypocrisy  was
painted  on  the  face  and  countenance  of  M.  du  Maine  ;  and
a  shamed  modesty  on  the  whole  person  of  the  Comte  de
Toulouse.  The  elder,  bending  over  his  stick  with  marked
humihty,  stopped  at  every  step  to  bow  profoundly  to  aU
sides;  I  fancied  he  was  about  to  prostrate  himself  at  one
time  ;  his  face,  restrained  to  a  gentle  gravity,  seemed  to
express  the  non  sum  dignus  of  his  soul,  but  his  eyes,  spark-
hng  with  the  passion  of  his  joy,  contradicted  that  expression
and  wandered  to  every  one  as  if  furtively.  Peaching  his
seat,  and  before  sitting  down,  he  bent  his  body  in  every
direction  and  was  wonderful  to  contemplate  throughout  the
whole  session,  and  also  when  he  left  it.  The  princes  of  the
blood  were  the  ones  who  received  the  least  of  his  bowings  and
scrapings,  but  they  were  too  young  to  signify  much  to  him.

The  Comte  de  Toulouse,  erect  and  cold  as  usual,  kept  his
eyes  lowered,  his  bows  reserved,  not  multiphed.  His  whole
person  denoted  his  sense  of  being  led,  and  his  discomfiture
at  what  was  passing.  He  was  motionless  and  never  opened
his  lips  as  long  as  he  was  there,  looked  at  no  one  and  seemed
absorbed.  A  suPen  silence  prevailed,  interrupted  sometimes

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON

155

by  a  wave  of  low  murmurs  restrained  with  difficulty,  and
glances  (save  those  of  the  president,  which  swam  in  joy)  that
betrayed  the  horror  that  had  seized  on  all.  The  president,
Mesmes,  gave  a  grand  dinner  to  the  new  successors  to  the
throne,  at  which  Maréchal  d’Huxelles  outdid  himself  ;  many
servants  of  these  two  gentlemen,  one  or  two  magistrates
looking  for  preferment,  and  d'Antin,  but  no  other  dukes  or
men  of  any  note,  were  present.  Maisons  was  there  ;  during
the  session  he  had  kept  a  very  grave,  serious,  and  formal
aspect.  In  the  evening,  the  two  bastards  returned  to  Marly.

The  dangerous  condition  of  Queen  Anne’s  health  recalled
the  Duke  of  Marlborough  to  England,  where  fortune  suddenly
Death  of  Queen  made  friends  with  him.  Anne  died  on  the  1st  of
Anne  of  England.  ^ged  fifty-three,  a  widow  without  liv¬

ing  children,  after  a  reign  of  twelve  years,  the  last  harassed
by  factions  and  many  troubles.  It  was  thought  that  she
had  the  intention  of  taking  steps  to  enable  the  king,  her
brother,  to  succeed  her,  and  that  she  constantly  worked
with  this  end  in  view  ;  that  it  was,  in  fact,  the  secret  reason
of  the  complete  change  of  the  Enghsh  niinistry,  the  down¬
fall  of  Godolphin  and  Marlborough,  and  of  the  Peace.  The
king  lost  in  her  a  sincere  friend,  who  had  ardently  desired
him  to  accept  the  order  of  the  Garter,  as  did  his  father
and  several  of  his  predecessors.  But  the  king,  who  would
gladly  have  accepted  it  out  of  friendship  to  her,  could  not
bring  himself  to  add  to  the  wrongs  of  the  true  King  of  Eng¬
land  and  that  of  the  queen,  his  mother,  at  Saint-Germain,
a  fresh  and  strikmg  mark  of  his  recognition  of  the  rights  of
Queen  Anne.  He  had  good  reason  to  regret  her.  Mourning
was  ordered  for  six  weeks,  which  he  wore  in  violet.  The
Elector  of  Hanover  was  immediately  proclaimed  in  London,
the  ministry  was  changed  soon  after,  and  the  one  to  which
we  owed  the  Peace  was  abandoned  to  hatred  and  suspicion.

VI.

It  is  time  now  to  come  to  the  king’s  wiU,  which  was  soon
to  he  revealed  with  singular  precautions  for  secrecy  as  to  its
contents  and  for  inviolable  safety  in  guarding
it.  The  king  was  aging  visibly,  and  without
any  change  being  made  in  the  tenor  of  his
hfe  those  who  were  nearest  to  him  began  to
fear  that  he  would  not  hve  much  longer.  Overwhelmed  by
the  most  painful  reverses  of  fortune  after  a  long  lifetime  of
dominating  all  things,  he  was  stiU  more  crushed  by  domestic
misfortunes.  All  his  children  had  departed  before  him,
leaving  him  a  prey  to  very  dreadful  reflections.  He  ex¬
pected  for  himself  the  same  sort  of  death.  Instead  of  flnding
comfort  in  this  distress  among  those  who  were  nearest  to
him  and  who  saw  him  continually,  he  only  found  fresh
trouble  Except  Maréchal,  who  strove  incessantly  to  quiet
his  suspicions,  aU  the  others,  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  M.  du
Maine  Eagon,  Bloin,  and  the  other  personal  valets  who  were
sold  to  the  bastard  and  his  former  governess,  only  en¬
deavoured  to  increase  them  ;  and  to  tell  the  truth,  there  was
'  httle  difliculty  in  doing  so.  Ho  one  doubted  poison  ;  no  one
could  doubt  it  seriously;  and  Maréchsh  as  fiiUy  persuaded
of  it  as  the  rest,  only  differed  from  them  when  speakmg  to
the  king,  in  order  to  dehver  him  from  a  useless  torture  which
would  do  him  great  harm.  But  M.  du  Maine,  and  Mme.
de  Maintenon  also,  had  too  deep  an  interest  m  this  dread
not  to  endeavour  to  increase  it  and  to  make  the  horror  fall
on  the  only  prince  left  of  the  royal  house  of  an  age  to  oppose

Deep-laid
schemes  of  the
Due  du  Maine
and  Mme.  de
Maintenon.

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  157

them,  whose  overthrow  they  were  now  determined  upon.
The  king  having  constantly  before  his  eyes,  at  his  table  and
in  his  cabinet,  this  prince,  whom  they  assured  him  was
guilty  of  these  crimes,  we  can  well  understand  the  continual
fever  of  his  mward  sentiments.

Together  with  his  own  children,  he  had  lost,  in  the  same
cruel  manner,  an  irreplaceable  princess  who,  besides  being
the  soul  and  ornament  of  his  Court,  was  all  his  amusement,
all  his  joy,  all  his  affection,  all  his  pleasure  during  nearly
the  whole  time  he  was  not  engaged  in  public  matters.  Never
since  he  came  into  the  world  had  he  been  so  famihar  with
any  one  as  with  her.  Nothing  could  fill  so  great  a  void;
and  the  bitterness  of  being  deprived  of  her  was  increased  by
the  total  loss  of  relaxation.  This  wretched  state  made  him
seek  it  where  he  could,  and  he  abandoned  himself  more  and
more  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  M.  du  Maine.  Firmly
fixed  as  they  were  in  his  heart  and  mind,  and  in  perfect
accord  together,  it  was  now  a  question  of  how  to  profit  by  a
precious  period  which  they  both  felt  could  not  be  long.  If
the  crown  itself  was  not  their  object,  which  seems  diffictdt
to  doubt  after  what  we  have  observed  about  the  edict  which
made  the  bastards  capable  of  succeeding  to  it,  at  least  they
were  determined  to  keep  the  grandeurs  granted  to  them,  and
to  make  as  sure  as  possible  of  a  power  at  the  king’s  death
which  would  not  only  maintain  those  grandeurs  permanently,
but  force  the  regent  to  reckon  with  them.

All  things  smiled  upon  this  design  ;  they  themselves
prepared  the  way  by  the  execrable  calumnies  with  which
they  blackened  the  prince  whose  right  to  the  regency  could
not  he  contested.  They  had  succeeded,  by  dint  of  artifice
and  of  underhand,  but  vigilant  manœuvres,  by  convincing
ignorant  and  simple  persons  and  making  others  suspicious,  in
rendering  the  Due  d’Orléans  obnoxious  to  all  Paris  and  the

158

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

provinces,  and  still  more  to  the  Court  itself,  where  no  one
dared  even  to  approach  him.  By  this  conduct,  in  which
they  were  assisted  by  the  valets,  they  confirmed  the  king’s
feeling  through  the  pubhc,  and  the  puhhc  through  the  king,
whose  estrangement  from  his  nephew  now  became  daily
more  and  more  visible  to  the  Court  and  to  those  who  were
producing  it.  This,  in  itself,  was  enough  to  alienate  the
principal  courtiers  from  the  Due  d’Orléans,  either  from  real
suspicion  or  from  fear  of  doing  injury  to  themselves.  Wbiat
could  an  isolated  prince  oppose  to  such  treatment  in  the
cruel  situation  in  which  he  was  placed  ?  How  could  he  clear
himself  in  the  eyes  of  a  king  who  was  thus  beset,  or  in  those
of  a  foolish,  wicked,  or  timid  society  ?  Could  M.  du  Maine
have  held  better  cards  ?  He  felt  this  so  much,  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon  also,  that  no  sooner  had  they  brought  matters
securely  to  this  point  than  they  set  about  gathering  from  it
what  they  had  aimed  for  in  the  present  and  in  the  future.
It  was  no  longer  a  question  in  their  minds  of  offices,  govern¬
ments,  survivances,  still  less  of  honours  and  distinctions  of
rank.  What  they  wanted  now  was  quite  another  thing.

It  was  no  less  than  a  will  of  the  king,  dictated  by  them¬
selves,  through  which  they  hoped  for  stability  in  their  new
position  out  of  respect  for  the  testator,  and  also  for  certain
higher  degrees  of  power  in  which  it  should  establish  them.
M.  du  Maine  had  contrived  to  convince  the  king  and  the
bulk  of  the  nation  of  the  horrors  relating  to  the  Due  d’Or¬
léans  ;  it  was  now  a  question  of  gathering  the  fruit.

This  fruit  was  to  induce  the  king,  for  conscience’  sake,  for
the  preservation  of  his  sole  direct  heir  who  was  about  to
succeed  him,  and  thus  for  the  safety  of  the  kingdom,  to
reduce  as  much  as  possible  the  power  of  a  prince  so  suspected,
who,  in  consequence  of  the  renunciations,  had  nothing  be¬
tween  the  crown  and  himself  but  this  infant  scion  ;  and

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

159

to  do  this  by  clothing  (in  default  of  princes  of  the  blood
of  suitable  age)  his  bastard  son  with  an  authority  subtracted
from  that  of  the  future  regent,  —  to  make,  in  short,  the  Due
du  Maine  the  absolute  master  of  the  person  of  that  precious
scion  ;  to  surround  the  mfant  prince  with  none  but  persons
in  the  bastard’s  interests,  and  to  give  the  latter,  independ¬
ently  of  the  regent,  complete  control  of  the  civil  and  mihtary
household  of  the  future  king.  M.  du  Maine  had  reason  to
think  that  the  impression  made  and  nursed  by  him  against
the  Due  d’Orléans  in  Paris  and  the  provinces  would  be
greatly  strengthened  by  an  arrangement  so  dishonourable,
and  that  every  one  would  applaud,  instead  of  being  shocked
at  his  being  named  guardian  and  protector  of  the  royal  child
on  whom  the  safety  of  France  depended.  In  attainmg  that
great  position  it  would  be  essential  to  have  about  the  young
prince  none  but  dependents  of  his  own,  on  whom  he  could
count;  and  these  he  determined  to  make  the  king  choose
and  appoint  by  will  for  all  the  educational  offices,  in  order,
first,  to  make  them  invulnerable  to  the  regent,  and  next,  to
avoid  the  appearance  of  assuming  absolute  power  by  choosing
them  himself.

Still  another  point  remained,  which  was  not  the  least
difficult,  and  which,  hke  the  preceding  matters,  did  more
than  one  thing  at  a  time  ;  this  was  the  safety  of  the  will
after  the  king  had  been  brought  to  make  it,  —  safety  beyond
a  doubt,  safety  that  would  increase  the  respect  felt  for  the
document  by  the  singular  precautions  taken  to  protect  it  ;
a  safety,  moreover,  which  should  render  the  execution  of
the  contents  the  proper  work  of  the  parhament  and  magis¬
tracy  of  the  kingdom.  But  by  what  means  was  it  possible
to  overcome  the  king’s  prejudice  against  the  parliament,
acquired  in  the  days  of  his  minority  ?  To  confide  his  will
to  the  keeping  of  parliament  did  not,  it  was  true,  strengthen,

160

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

still  less  did  it  confirm  his  acts  by  the  authority  of  parha-
ment,  but  it  was  in  some  sort  a  recognition  of  that  authority
as  a  means  of  safety  for  the  instrument.  To  whoso  knew
the  king,  the  firmness  of  his  principles,  the  force  of  a  habit
never  interrupted,  his  extreme  sensitiveness  about  anythmg
that  could  remotely  or  imperceptibly  touch  his  authority,
even  in  the  far  future,  this  difficulty  seemed  almost  insur¬
mountable.

But  it  was  written  above,  for  the  punishment  of  the
scandal  given  to  the  world  by  the  dual  adultery,  that  the
king,  \v'hile  feeling  the  iniquity  of  the  act  in  all  its  force  and
shame,  should  yet  be  dragged  in  spite  of  himself  to  do  it,
and  step  by  step,  each  mounted  against  his  will,  should
come  at  last,  groaning  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul  and  in
despair  at  his  own  weakness,  to  crown  his  crime  by  a  most
amazing  and  portentous  apotheosis.

The  two  consuls,  M.  du  Maine  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
and  their  hctor,  Voysin,  agreed  together  as  to  the  part  that
Methods  em-  each  should  play  in  this  baneful  tragedy,

ployed  to  carry  ppev  did  not  doubt  the  resistance  and  hitter-

out  these

schemes.  j^ess  v/ith  which  such  a  strange  proposition,

based  on  the  approaching  death  of  a  king  who  was  seventy-
six  years  old  and  in  mortal  fear  of  death,  and  of  the  sort
of  death  that  his  children  one  and  all  had  died,  would  he
met.  Consequently,  they  advanced  httle  by  little,  and  with
wise  delays,  fearing  to  have  their  mouths  shut  by  some
sudden  order  nevermore  to  re-open  them  on  so  cruel  a  sub¬
ject.  This  undermining,  though  cautiously  done,  found
nothing  but  rock,  and  rock  so  hard  that  it  blunted  their
tools.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  M.  du  Maine  then  changed
their  batteries.  Up  to  this  time  they  had  thought  only  of
pleasing  and  amusing  the  king,  each  in  his  or  her  own  way  ;
since  the  dauphine’s  death  they  had  become,  both  of  them,

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

161

his  sole  resource.  Findiug  themselves  unable  to  bring  him
to  their  will  in  the  matter  so  vitally  important  to  them,  and
yet  resolved  at  any  cost  to  wring  compliance  from  him,  they
took  another  tone,  with  entire  confidence  that  they  risked
nothing.  Both  became  serious,  often  gloomy,  —  so  silent  as
to  take  no  part  in  conversation,  letting  everything  that  the
king  forced  himself  to  say  drop,  sometimes  not  answering
at  all  unless  he  asked  a  direct  question.  In  this  way  the
constant  presence  of  Mme.  de  Main  tenon  in  her  room  when
the  king  was  there,  and  of  M.  du  Maine  in  the  king’s
cabinets  during  his  private  hours,  only  served  to  make  him
feel  a  weight  that  was  all  the  heavier  because  hitherto
unknown  to  him.  An  air  of  constraint  and  sadness  per¬
vaded  the  very  small  number  of  those  admitted  to  the
cabinets  and  the  very  few  ladies,  always  the  same,  who
were  received  by  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  admitted  to  the
dinners,  musicals,  and  card  parties  on  the  days  when  the
king  did  not  work  with  his  ministers.  All  his  usual  amuse-
'  ments  and  relaxations  were  turned  of  a  sudden  in,to  ennui  and
embarrassment,  without  his  being  able  to  seek  others.

These  ladies  were  Mme.  d’O,  Mme.  de  Caylus,  and  Mme.
de  Lévi,  the  latter  the  intimate  friend  and  confidant  at  all
times  of  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  and  me.  They  took  their
cue  from  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  At  first  they  were  duped
by  an  excuse  of  her  health  ;  but  seeing  that  the  state  of
things  lasted  beyond  all  reason,  that  her  usual  hfe  was  not
changed  and  her  face  betrayed  no  illness,  and  that  the  king
grew  daily  more  serious  and  sad,  they  began  to  ask  them¬
selves  what  it  meant.  The  fear  of  something  which  miglit
affect  their  own  interests  troubled  them,  and  this  fear  made
them  still  worse  company  than  Mme.  de  Maintenon  prompted.
In  the  cabinets.  Maréchal  and  the  others,  amazed  at  M.  du
Maine’s  gloom,  looked  at  each  other  unable  to  guess  the

VOL.  III.  —  11

162

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

cause.  They  saw  the  king  sad,  unhappy,  bored  ;  they  began
to  fear  for  his  health,  but  not  one  of  them  dared,  or  knew
how,  to  say  a  word.  Time  went  by  and  the  gloom  still
thickened.  This  was  all  that  the  best  informed  of  those
most  closely  around  the  king  could  penetrate  ;  I  should  be
writing  a  novel  if  I  tried  to  give  the  scenes  which  doubtless
passed  in  the  tête-à-tètes  of  the  long  period  that  these  man¬
œuvres  lasted  without  relaxing  in  any  way.  Truth  demands
equally  that  we  relate  what  we  know  and  declare  our  ignor¬
ance  of  that  we  do  not  know.  I  shall  therefore  go  no  farther,
nor  try  to  pierce  the  darkness  of  this  mystery.

Certain  it  is  that  the  two  interiors,  those  of  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon  and  of  the  king’s  cabinets,  brightened  suddenly  ;  pro¬
ducing  as  much  surprise  and  wonder  to  the  witnesses  as  the
long-continued  gloom  had  done  ;  for  the  reason  that  they
were  unable  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  end,  any  more  than
that  of  the  beginning,  of  the  trouble  until  several  days  after
Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  M.  du  Maine  had  resumed,  and
almost  with  usury,  their  customary  manner  to  the  king  ;
that  is  to  say,  not  until  the  thunderbolt  fell  on  Trance,  and
astonished  all  Europe.  We  come  now  to  the  black  event
which  closely  followed  the  other  I  have  already  related,  for
they  were,  in  fact,  resolved  upon  together.

We  have  seen  by  the  speech  which  escaped  the  king  to
M.  du  Maine  on  the  favour  he  had  granted  him  in  the  mat¬
ter  of  succeeding  to  the  throne,  and  his  tone

stern  language  °

of  the  king  to  the  and  manner  in  saying  it,  how  that  enormity
Due  du  Maine.  peen  forcibly  wrung  from  him  in  spite  of

himself.  We  shall  now  see  how  the  monarch,  of  all  men  liv¬
ing  most  master  of  himself,  betrayed  in  the  same  transparent
manner  his  inward  feeling  about  his  wdl.  A  few  days  be¬
fore  the  news  of  it  became  public,  the  king,  being  in  his
cabinet  with  the  bastards  and  d’O  and  d’Antin,  and  the  little

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

163

circle  of  valets,  looked  at  his  sons  with  a  sour,  crabbed  ex¬
pression,  and  said,  addressing  M.  du  Maine  sternly:  “You
would  have  it  ;  but  remember  that  however  great  I  make
you  in  my  hfetime,  you  are  nothing  after  me  ;  it  is  for  you
to  make  a  good  use  of  what  I  have  done  for  you,  if  you  can.”
All  present  trembled  at  such  a  thunderclap,  so  sudden,  so
little  expected,  so  far  removed  from  the  king’s  nature  and
habit,  and  which  revealed  so  plainly  the  ambition  of  the
Due  du  Maine  and  the  violence  he  had  done  to  the  weakness
of  the  king,  who  seemed  in  that  speech  to  reproach  himself
for  his  feebleness,  and  the  bastard  for  his  ambition  and
tyranny.  It  was  then  that  the  curtain  was  hfted  before  the
eyes  of  the  interior  household,  up  to  this  time  so  puzzled,
amazed,  and  troubled  by  the  changes  that  were  taking  place.
M.  du  Maine’s  consternation  at  this  sudden  outburst,  to
which  no  previous  words  had  given  rise,  seemed  extreme.
All  present,  with  their  eyes  fixed  upon  the  floor,  held  their
breath.  The  silence  was  profound  for  a  noticeable  time,  and
was  not  broken  until  the  king  had  passed  into  his  dressing-
room,  and  every  one  could  breathe  again.  His  heart  was
swelling  at  what  they  had  made  him  do  ;  but,  hke  a  woman
who  gives  birth  to  twins,  he  had  as  yet  produced  but  one
fierce  fury,  and  he  bore  another  of  which  he  must  needs
deliver  himself,  for  he  felt  its  agony,  without  any  relief
from  the  sufferings  caused  him  by  the  first.  Two  days
later  a  second  event  completed  the  raising  of  the  curtain.

The  Court  was  then  at  Versailles.  Sunday,  August  27,
Mesmes,  president  of  the  parhament,  and  d’ Aguesseau,  pro-
cureur-qénéral,  for  whom  the  king  had  sent,

Remarkable  ^  °

speech  of  the  king  entered  the  royal  cabinet  after  the  lever  ;  they
to  the*  custody  of  had  previously  seen  the  chancellor,  Voysin,
parliament.  proper  means  of  guarding  the  deposit

was  agreed  upon  among  them.  We  may  be  certain  that,

164

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

as  soon  as  M.  du  Maine  was  sure  of  the  will,  he  had  fully
discussed  with  the  president,  his  creature,  the  means  of

securing  it.

As  soon  as  they  were  alone  with  the  king  he  unlocked  a
drawer  and  took  from  it  a  large  package,  sealed  with  seven
seals  ;  giving  it  to  them  he  said  :  “  Messieurs,  this  is  my
will  ;  no  one  knows  its  contents  except  myself.  I  place  it
in  your  hands  for  safe  keeping  by  parhament  ;  to  which  I
could  not  give  a  greater  proof  of  my  esteem  and  confidence
than  hy  thus  making  it  the  depositary  of  this  document.
The  example  of  the  kings,  my  predecessors,  and  that  of  the
will  of  the  king,  my  father,  do  not  allow  me  to  he  ignorant
of  what  may  become  of  this,  my  will  ;  hut  they  would  have
it  ;  they  tormented  me  ;  they  left  me  no  peace,  no  matter
what  I  said.  Oh,  well  !  I  have  bought  my  peace  at  last.

There  it  is  ;  take  it  away  ;  it  will  become  what  it  can  ;  hut
at  least  I  shall  have  rest  and  hear  no  more  about  it.”  He
finished  the  words  with  a  short  nod,  turned  his  hack  upon
them  and  went  into  the  next  cabinet,  leaving  the  two  men
almost  changed  into  statues.  They  looked  at  each  other,
frightened  at  what  they  had  heard,  and  still  more  at  what
they  had  seen  in  the  eyes  and  countenance  of  the  king.  As
soon  as  they  recovered  their  senses  they  retired,  and  went  to
Paris.  It  was  not  known  untü  afternoon  that  the  king  had
made  a  will  and  placed  it  in  their  hands.  As  the  news
spread,  consternation  fell  upon  the  whole  Court  ;  though  flat¬
terers,  at  heart  as  shocked  as  the  rest  of  the  Court,  and  Paris
later,  spent  themselves  in  congratulations  and  eulogy.

The  next  day,  Monday,  28th,  the  Queen  of  England  came
from  ChaiUot,  where  she  usually  stayed,  to  visit  Mine,  de
King’s  speech  to  Maintenon.  The  king  went  in  to  see  her.  As
the  gooji  as  pe  entered  he  said,  in  the  tone  of  a

England  about

the  will.  man  who  was  full  of  his  wrath  ;  “  Madame,  I

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  165

have  made  my  will  ;  they  tormented  me  to  make  it  ”  (turn¬
ing  his  eyes  on  Mme.  de  Maintenon).  “  I  have  bought  my
peace.  I  know  its  impotence  and  xiselessness.  We  can  do
all  we  choose  as  long  as  we  exist  ;  after  us  we  can  do  less
than  private  individuals  ;  one  has  only  to  see  what  became
of  the  will  of  the  king,  my  father,  directly  after  his  death,
and  that  of  many  other  kings.  I  know  this  very  well  ;  hut
they  would  have  it  ;  they  gave  me  no  peace  or  rest  until
I  made  it.  Oh,  well  !  it  is  done,  madame  ;  it  will  become
what  it  can  ;  but  at  least  I  shall  not  be  tormented  any
longer.”

Words  so  expressive  of  violence  endured  and  of  a  long
and  obstinate  combat  before,  weary  of  the  struggle,  he
yielded,  need,  when  reported,  proofs  as  clear  and  precise  as
the  words  themselves.  Here  they  are.  I  hold  those  said  by
the  king  to  the  president  and  the  procureur-général,  who
could  never  forget  them,  from  the  first-named  ;  it  is  true
that  this  was  a  long  time  after  they  were  said  ;  for  one  ought
to  be  exact  in  reporting  such  things.  I  also  heard  them
from  the  procureur -général,  who  repeated  them  to  me,  apart
and  at  another  time,  in  precisely  the  same  language,  and  such
as  I  have  here  written  down.  With  regard  to  what  the  king
said  to  the  Queen  of  England,  which  is  even  stronger  and
more  explicit  because  he  was  more  free  with  her,  perhaps
also  because  Mme.  de  Maintenon  was  present,  on  whom  the
greater  part  of  the  reproaches  were  intended  to  fall,  I  knew
it  two  days  later  from  M.  de  Lauzun,  to  whom  the  Queen  of
England  told  it  while  still  in  her  first  surprise.  We  were  so
surprised  ourselves  that  Mme.  de  Lauzun,  for  whom  the
queen  had  much  friendship  and  frankness,  went  to  pay  court
to  her  (as  she  often  did,  frequently  seeing  her  tète-d-téte)  in
order  to  get  her  to  relate  it.  The  queen  did  not  wait  to  he
asked,  so  full  was  she  of  the  singular  speech,  which  she  re-

166  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ti.

peated  word  for  word  as  M.  de  Lauzun  had  told  us,  and  pre¬
cisely  as  I  have  here  written  it  down.

As  soon  as  the  president  and  procureur-général  reached
Paris  they  sent  for  workmen,  whom  they  took  to  a  tower  of
the  palace  which  is  behind  the  robing-room

tions  for  guarding  3/11(1  tll6  prcsidsnt  S  C3l)1116t.  TllSy  II13Cl6  tllGni

the  will.  hollow  a  great  space  in  the  wall  of  the  tower,

which  is  very  thick,  and  there  they  placed  the  will  ;  then
the  opening  was  closed,  first  by  an  iron  door,  then  by  an  iron
gratmg  outside  of  the  door,  after  which  the  whole  was  walled
up  as  before.  Parhament  was  sitting  at  the  time,  and  the
president  at  once  rendered  a  most  flattering  account  to  the
assembly  of  the  honour  and  confidence  shown  by  this  deposit,
and  by  the  rehance  the  king  placed  on  parliament  to  main¬
tain  the  provisions  of  the  will  it  contained.  The  king’s
officers  at  the  same  time  presented  an  edict  received  from
the  chancellor  that  morning.  It  was  short.  In  it  the  king
declared  that  the  packet  intrusted  to  the  president  and  the
procureur-général  contained  his  will,  by  which  he  had  pro¬
vided  for  the  care  and  guardianship  of  the  minor  king,  and
for  the  choice  of  a  council  of  regency  ;  which  arrangements,
for  sound  reasons,  he  did  not  think  proper  to  make  puhhc.
He  desired  that  the  document  he  kept  in  the  custody  of
parhament  until  the  end  of  his  life,  and  he  further  ordered
that  as  soon  as  it  pleased  God  to  remove  him  from  this
world,  the  chambers  of  parhament  should  assemble,  with
all  the  princes  of  the  royal  family  and  ah  the  peers  who
might  be  at  hand,  and  in  their  presence  the  wiU  should
be  opened,  read,  and  the  dispositions  it  contained  made
public  and  executed,  without  power  of  interference  from
any  one,  and  that  duplicates  of  the  said  will  should  be
sent  to  all  the  parliaments  of  the  kingdom  to  be  by  them
enregistered.

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

167

The  consternation  was  great  when  the  existence  of  the

General  con¬
sternation.

will  became  known.  It  was  M.  du  Maine’s  fate  to  obtain
what  he  wanted,  but  with  public  malediction.
That  fate  accompanied  the  will,  and  as  soon
as  he  felt  it  he  was  overwhelmed  ;  Mme.  de  Maintenon  was
furious,  and  their  watch  redoubled  that  nothing  of  these
murmurs  should  reach  the  king.  They  busied  themselves
more  than  ever  in  amusing  and  pleasing  him,  and  in  echoing
around  him  reports  of  the  praises,  joy,  and  puhhc  admira¬
tion  for  an  act  so  great  and  generous,  and  one  so  wise  and
necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  order  and  of  public  tran-
quilhty,  which  would  make  him  reign,  they  said,  gloriously,
beyond  the  period  of  his  own  life.  The  consternation  of  the
puhhc  was  very  natural  ;  and  here  it  was  that  M.  du  Maine
had  deceived  himself.  He  thought  he  had  fully  prepared
and  smoothed  the  way  by  rendering  the  Due  d’Orléans
suspected  and  odious  ;  in  that  he  had  succeeded,  hut  not  as
much  as  he  heheved;  his  wishes  and  his  emissaries  had

magnified  success  ;  instead  of  the  public  acclamations  with
which  he  flattered  himself  the  news  of  the  will  would  he
received,  the  result  was  precisely  opposite.

It  was  not  that  people  failed  to  see  very  clearly  that  the
will  could  only  have  been  made  against  the  Due  d’Orléans,
because  if  there  were  no  wish  to  fetter  him  there  was  no
reason  to  make  it  ;  matters  would  otherwise  have  taken  the
usual  course  in  a  natural  way.  Nor  was  it,  either,  that
opinions  and  doubts  sown  and  cultivated  with  so  much  art
and  persistency  against  the  prince  had  changed.  But  what¬
ever  was  thought  of  him,  however  sinister  were  current
suspicions,  no  one  was  so  blind  as  not  to  see  that  he  must,
by  incontestable  right,  be  regent  ;  that  no  dispositions  in  the
will  could  weaken  that  right  except  by  establishing  a  power
that  balanced  it;  and  that  such  an  act  would  form  two

168

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  fcHAP,  vi.

parties  in  the  State,  the  heads  of  which  would  each  maintain
himself  and  abase  the  other  hy  all  the  means  in  his  power  ;
that  no  one  could  avoid  the  necessity  of  choosing  sides,  and
that  in  such  choice  there  lay  a  thousand  dangers,  and  no
sound,  reasonable  hope  for  any  one.  The  public  had  desired
that  the  king  should  leave  order  in  the  government  that  was
about  to  succeed  his  own,  but  not  to  do  so  in  darkness  and
mystery.  They  desired  that  he  should  establish  during  his
lifetime  a  government  such  as  he  wished  to  leave  behind
him,  and  put  at  once  into  his  council,  and  into  the  of&ces  and
functions  they  were  to  fill,  those  whom  he  wished  to  come
after  him  ;  in  a  word,  that  he  should  execute  his  will  him¬
self,  that  there  might  be  no  change  at  his  death,  not  even
on  the  surface  of  affairs,  hut  that  all  should  he  continued,
immediately  and  steadily,  as  he  himself  had  established,
directed,  and  consolidated.

The  Due  d’Orléans  was  stunned  by  the  blow  ;  he  felt
how  directly  it  bore  upon  himself  ;  and  he  saw  no  remedy
„  .  during  the  king’s  lifetime.  Eespectful  and

duct  of  the  Due  total  silence  seemed  to  him  the  only  course

d’ Orleans.

he  could  take  ;  any  other  would  surely  give
rise  to  redoubled  precautions.  I  leave  the  matter  here;  it
is  not  yet  time  to  enter  upon  the*  measures  and  views  of
the  prince  as  to  the  future.  The  king  avoided  all  mention
of  the  subject  to  his  nephew,  beyond  a  simple  declaration
after  the  act  ;  M.  du  Maine  the  same.  The  duke  contented
himself  with  a  single  monosyllable  of  acquiescence,  as  a
courtier  whose  place  it  was  to  make  no  comment,  and  did
not  mention  the  subject  to  any  one,  not  even  to  his  wife.
I  was  the  only  person  with  whom  he  dared  to  seek  comfort
and  talk  over  the  matter  plainly;  with  all  the  rest  of  the
world  he  was  as  usual,  —  on  his  guard  against  all  appearance
of  displeasure  and  against  the  curiosity  of  prying  eyes.  The

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

169

unspeakable  abandonment  in  wliicb  be  lived  at  Court  and
in  society  saved  him  from  chance  comments  about  the  will,
for  no  one  approached  him  near  enough  to  make  them.

The  king  must  have  been  reflecting  for  some  time  on
making  provision  for  the  education  of  the  dauphin  after
Last  mark  of  his  death.  It  was  very  natural  that,  thinking
the”kfng^to*^^de  made  him  think  of  the  Due

Beauviiiiers  ;  and  d’Orléaus,  hc  should  wish  uot  to  Icavc  that

from  the  latter  ...

to  me.  provision  to  liim,  but  to  make  it  himself

during  his  hfetime.  Perhaps  it  was  on  this  point  that
Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  Due  du  Maine  first  opened
the  trenches  upon  him,  through  Voysin.  However  that
may  be,  it  is  certain  that,  when  I  had  gone,  soon  after
the  death  of  the  Due  de  Berry,  to  Vaucresson,  where  M.  de
Beauvilhers  happened  to  be  ill  in  bed,  he  asked  me  to  be
alone  with  him,  and  then,  without  preface  or  any  leading
up  of  the  conversation,  he  said  he  had  a  question  to  put
to  me,  but,  before  telling  me  what  it  was,  he  wanted  my
promise  to  answer  without  mere  compliance,  without  con¬
straint,  but  naturally  and  precisely  as  I  thought;  on  that
foundation  alone  could  he  speak  to  me.

I  was  surprised  at  this  opening,  and  said  so.  I  asked
him  why,  after  so  many  years  of  kindness  and  private  con¬
fidences  from  him  to  me,  during  which  many  matters  of
importance  had  been  discussed  between  us,  and  so  much
frankness  and  absolute  freedom  on  my  part  to  him,  he  did
not  feel  assured  that  he  would  always  find  me  the  same.
He  answered,  with  all  the  friendliness  to  which  I  was  ac¬
customed  from  him,  that  if  I  would  give  him  the  promise
he  asked  I  would  see,  from  what  he  would  then  tell  me,
that  he  had  good  reason  for  wishing  to  make  sure  of  it.  I
then  gave  it  to  him,  being  still  more  surprised  at  this  per¬
sistency  and  very  curious  as  to  what  might  cause  it.

170

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vt

He  told  me  that  the  king,  scarcely  hoping  to  live  until
the  dauphin  was  old  enough  to  he  put  into  the  charge  of
men,  felt  obliged  to  make  plans  himself  for  his  education  ;
that  he  wished  him,  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  to  take  charge  of
it  and  of  all  relating  to  it,  as  he  had  done  in  the  case  of  the
dauphin’s  father  and  uncles.  To  this  he  had  rephed  by
excusing  himself  on  the  ground  of  his  age  and  his  infirmi¬
ties,  which  would  not  allow  him  either  to  take  the  necessary
assiduous  care  or  to  indulge  the  hope  of  completmg  the
education  if  he  undertook  it;  but  the  king,  he  said,  persisted
in  his  desire,  and  consented  that  he  should  do  only  what  he
could  and  would  do  in  the  position.  Then  suddenly  M.  de
Beauvilliers,  fixing  his  eyes  most  attentively  upon  me,  said .

“  You  are  duke  and  peer,  and  you  rank  me  ;  would  it  pain
you  to  he  the  dauphin’s  governor  conjointly  with  me,  to  do
all  that  I  cannot  do,  to  act  in  this  function  m  exact  accord
with  me  ;  in  a  word,  while  equal  in  functions  and  of  higher
rank  than  myself,  not  to  be  first  in  this  position  ?  It  is^  on
this  point  that  I  conjure  you  to  answer  me  truthfully,  with¬
out  compliance,  and  feeling  sure  that  I  shall  not  he  hurt  by
what  you  may  say.  You  see,”  he  added,  “  that  I  had  good
reason  to  ask  your  promise.  You  gave  it  to  me,  and  you
must  now  keep  it.”

I  answered  that  I  could  keep  it  without  difficulty  ;  that  I
fully  understood  that  the  position  was  that  of  governor  under
him  in  all  things  and  places  ;  that  I  knew  no  one,  without
exception,  hut  himself  under  whom  I  would  accept  it  ;  hut
that  for  him,  whom  I  had  all  my  life  looked  upon  as  my
father,  who  had  served  me  as  such,  whose  talents  and  virtues
I  had  regarded  with  veneration  all  my  life,  and  whose  friend¬
ship  and  confidence  I  had  experienced  for  the  same  period,  ■  •
I  could  he  with  him  and  under  him,  in  all  things  and  in  all
ways,  without  the  slightest  pain  ;  and  also  that  my  heart

1714]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  171

was  so  attached  to  him  that  I  should  find  my  joy  in  thus
proving  to  him  constantly  my  respect  and  deference.  He
embraced  me,  told  me  that  I  gave  him  infinite  comfort,  and
a  thousand  other  touching  things.  He  asked  me  to  keep  the
matter  profoundly  secret,  and  from  the  way  he  spoke  I  had
reason  to  think  that  as  soon  as  he  had  weighed  all  arrange¬
ments,  and  made  selections  for  the  whole  education,  the
king  would  at  once  declare  the  matter  pubhcly.

This  idea  was  not  new  to  me;  for  Monseigneur  the
dauphin  had  been  fully  determined  to  ask  the  king  to  ap¬
point  me  governor  of  the  elder  brother  of  the  present  king.
I  was  not  ignorant  of  this  intention,  and  that  the  prince  had

been  strengthened  in  it  by  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers,  who
/

could  not  undertake  it  himself,  burdened  as  he  then  was  with
his  functions  for  the  dauphin  and  as  minister  of  State.

Such  was  the  last  mark  which  M.  de  Beauvilhers  gave  me
of  his  esteem,  his  friendship,  his  confidence.  Such  was  also
the  last  proof  received  by  him  of  the  king’s  confidence,  be¬
stowed  in  spite  of  the  unremitting  hatred  of  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon.  His  waning  health  lasted  too  short  a  time  after  this
conference  to  allow  of  the  matter  being  carried  forward.  He
was  naturally  dehcate  ;  his  hfe,  divided  between  pious  exer¬
cises,  the  functions  of  his  various  offices,  of  which  he  neg¬
lected  none  unless  they  clashed,  and  State  affairs,  left  him
scarcely  any  time  for  relaxation  in  the  bosom  of  his  family
and  among  his  friends  ;  and  this  did  not  conduce  to  strengthen
a  health  already  feeble.  The  loss  of  his  sons  had  profoundly
undermined  him.  We  have  seen  with  what  courage  and  signal
piety  both  he  and  Mme.  de  Beauvilliers  made  instant  sacrifice
of  their  feelings,  but  neither  of  them  was  ever  consoled  for
it.  The  death  of  the  dauphin  was  a  blow  of  another  kind,
as  he  often  owned  to  me.  All  his  tenderness  had  gathered
itself  about  that  prince,  whose  mind,  talents,  toil,  purposes,

172  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DB  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

virtues,  sacrifices,  and  total  metamorphosis,  produced  and
confirmed  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  admired  with  wonder  and
respect.  He  was  keenly  sensible  to  the  unreserved  confi¬
dence  of  the  prince,  and  their  mutual  freedom  in  communi¬
cating,  discussing,  and  solving  all  things.  He  rejoiced  in  the
love  of  the  State,  of  order,  of  rehgion  which  he  saw  about  to
bloom  as  if  reborn  in  the  coming  reign.  Meantime  he  en¬
joyed  his  pupil’s  prudence,  wisdom,  justice,  his  moderation,
his  industry,  and  the  ascendency  which  the  king  had  taken
pleasure  in  granting  him  over  the  Court,  over  public  affairs,
and  over  himself.  However  convinced  he  was  of  the
dauphin’s  sanctity  and  eternal  happiness,  his  death  over¬
came  him  to  such  a  degree  that  from  that  time  forth  he  led
a  languishing,  sorrowful,  bitter  life,  without  respite  or  con¬
solation,  until,  finally,  the  death  of  the  Due  de  Chevreuse,
his  heart,  his  soul,  the  depositary  and  often  the  arbiter  of  his
most  secret  thoughts,  even  those  of  his  piety,  and  for  all  his
hfe  another  himself,  gave  him  his  death-blow.

He  was  ill  for  about  two  months  at  Vaucresson,  whither
he  had  retired  to  shelter  himself  from  the  world,  even  from
Death  of  the  Due  ^is  intimate  friends,  and  think  only  of  his  fu-
de  Beauviiiiers.  salvation,  to  which  he  devoted  every  mo¬

ment  of  his  solitude.  He  died  on  Friday,  the  last  of  August,
the  death  of  the  righteous,  having  kept  his  mind  clear  to  the
last.  He  was  very  nearly  sixty-sis  years  old,  —  three  years
younger  than  the  Due  de  Chevreuse,  having  been  born  on  the
24th  of  October,  1648,  of  a  very  ancient  and  very  nobly  alhed
family.  He  was  tall,  extremely  thm,  with  a  long,  and  highly
coloured  face,  a  very  large  aqttihne  nose,  a  sunken  mouth,
mtelhgent  and  piercing  eyes,  a  charming  smile,  a  very  gentle
manner,  but  usually  extremely  serious  and  self-contained
He  was  born  eager,  fiery,  hot-headed,  and  loving  pleasure.
He  had  much  natural  intelligence,  absolute  integHty  ‘of  mind,

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  173

great  exactitude,  at  times  too  much  precision  ;  his  utterance
was  easy,  agreeable,  correct,  natural  ;  his  apprehension  quick,
his  discernment  good,  his  wisdom  remarkable  ;  his  foresight,
which  stretched  to  a  vast  distance,  never  lost  itself  ;  his  sim¬
plicity  and  sagacity,  both  extreme,  never  conflicted  ;  and  after
God  touched  him,  which  was  early  in  life,  I  think  I  may  as¬
sert  that  he  never  lost  the  sense  of  His  presence,  from  which
it  may  he  judged  to  what  heights,  enlightened  as  he  was,  he
bore  his  piety.  Gentle,  modest,  equable,  courteous  with  dis¬
tinction,  sufficiently  ohhging,  easily  and  frankly  accessible  to
the  humblest  persons  ;  never  exhibiting  his  piety,  hut  never
concealing  it  ;  troubling  no  one,  but  watching  his  servants,
a  trifle  too  closely  it  may  he  ;  sincerely  humble,  without
neglecting,  however,  what  he  owed  to  what  he  was  ;  and  so
detached  from  all  things  (as  I  have  related  on  several  occa¬
sions)  that  I  think  no  monk,  however  saintly,  was  ever
more  so.

His  charity  for  his  neighbour  hound  him  in  fetters  which
contracted  him  by  restraining  his  lips,  his  ears,  and  his
His  character  and  thoughts  ;  the  iuconvenience  of  which  we  have
eulogy.  seen  in  various  places.  His  ministry,  his  cau¬

tious  policy,  and  too  great  fear  of  the  king  still  further  in¬
creased  this  perpetual  watchfulness  over  himself,  out  of
which  grew  a  constraint,  a  reserve,  shall  I  say  a  stiffness,
which  ahenated  some,  and  also  a  love  for  restricted  intercourse
and  sohtude,  which  comported  ill  with  his  duties,  and  by
isolating  him  (except  as  to  his  functions)  made  him  live  at
Court  as  in  a  desert,  and  kept  him  ignorant  of  everything
except  what  related  necessarily  to  State  affairs  and  his  own
offices.  In  private,  at  his  own  house,  especially  in  that  of
the  Due  de  Chevreuse  and  at  Vaucresson,  he  was  gay  and
free,  could  joke  spicily,  trifle  jauntily,  and  laugh  readily  ;  in
fact  he  liked  to  have  people  joke  him.

174  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

But,  excessively  as  the  king  awed  him,  and  weak  as  he
often  seemed  in  speaking  to  him  through  the  timidity  of
his  nature,  he  was  not  recognizable  in  council,  as  I  have
heard  Chamillart  and  the  chancellor  Pontchartrain  say,
when  matters  of  law  and  equity  or  important  affairs  of
State  came  up.  He  gave  his  judgment  then  with  firmness,
took  in  the  whole  extent  of  the  affair  with  clearness  and
precision,  developed  it  luminously,  based  his  opinion  on  a
real  foundation  and  maintained  it  modestly,  but  with  a
force  which  any  leaning  shown  by  the  king  was  unable  to
shake.  In  other  matters  he  gave  way  to  his  natural  mild¬
ness  and  timidity.

We  have  seen  with  what  grandeur  of  soul,  what  de¬
tachment,  what  submission  to  God  he  bore  the  storm  of
Quietism,  the  disgrace  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai  and
those  who  were  involved  in  it,  and  his  own  extreme  peril
at  that  time  ;  we  have  seen,  too,  the  acquiescence  with
which  he  received  the  news  of  the  condemnation  of  M.  de
Cambrai’s  book  in  Eome.  But  aU  rare  pictures  have  their
shadows,  and  truth  obliges  me  not  to  hide  those  of  this
model  of  all  the  virtues.  In  considering  them  we  shall
not,  if  we  are  equitable,  esteem  him  less;  we  shall  only
tremble  the  more  at  the  profundity  of  the  ways  of  God,
and  humiliate  ourselves  by  seeing  what  the  most  perfect
of  men  can  do  and  be.

This  man,  of  inborn  honour,  with  an  ardent  and  most
sincere  love  and  thirst  for  truth,  of  scrupulous  purity,  con¬
scious  habitually  of  God’s  presence  in  all  his  daily  functions
and  avocations,  and  reporting  to  Him  with  sacred  care  his
most  important  and  his  most  trivial  actions,  his  work,
his  functions,  his  friendships  and  intimacies,  his  thoughts,
his  opinions,  his  pleasures,  even  his  needs  of  body  and
mind,  this  man  so  upright  and  so  on  his  guard  against  his

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

175

own  nature,  allowed  himself  to  be  bewitched,  he  and  M.
de  Chevreuse,  by  the  charms  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai
to  such  an  extent  that,  although  he  did  not  see  him  after
his  exile,  that  prelate  never  ceased  to  be  the  soul  of  his
soul,  and  the  mind  of  his  mind  ;  and  notliing  was  done  in
his  inward  conscience  or  in  his  home  that  was  not  regu¬
lated  by  M.  de  Cambrai,  or,  under  the  same  spell,  by  Mme.
Guyon,  whom  he  never  regarded  otherwise  than  as  a  saint  ;
for  although  she  risked  making  various  distinct  prophecies
which  he  saw  fail,  the  bandage  never  fell  from  his  eyes.
On  all  such  topics  and  on  the  matter  of  the  bull  Unigenitus
he  spoke  to  me  first  (not  I  to  him),  either  from  his  confidence
in  me,  or  from  a  desire  to  convert  me,  until  quite  the  close  of
his  hfe,  when  one  day,  after  arguing  about  the  bull  in  my
chamber  at  Versailles  he  asked  me  never  to  speak  of  the
matter  again,  for  it  agitated  him  too  much  ;  and  after  that
we  never  referred  to  it.

However  inaccessible  he  was  to  all  that  was  not  strict  duty
and  necessary  social  decorum,  without  real  intercourse  with
the  Court,  and  very  willingly  aloof,  even  in  the  king’s  pres¬
ence  (far  more  so  than  M.  de  Chevreuse),  it  is  amazing  how
much  he  awed  every  one  in  that  presence  and  wherever  else
he  appeared.  Mmes,  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvilliers  the
same,  but  mingling  rather  more  with  the  Court,  though
still  with  great  reserve.  The  princes  of  the  blood,  even  the
bastards,  the  most  important  seigneurs,  the  ministers,  ap¬
proached  bim  with  an  air  of  respect,  deference,  and  some¬
times  of  embarrassment.  They  watched  to  see  with  whom
he  conversed  ;  and  I  often  amused  myself,  especially  at
Marly,  by  observing  the  eyes  of  the  principal  courtiers
darting  at  me  when  he  was  whispering  in  my  ear  as  I  sat,
apart  from  the  others,  beside  him.  I  have  never  seen  any
one  on  so  grand  a  footing  at  Court  5  and  that,  too,  a  few

176  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yi.

weeks  after  the  tempest  of  Quietism,  and  as  long  as  he
continued  to  live,  even  after  the  death  of  the  dauphin.

After  that  fatal  epoch  he  retired  more  and  more  from
the  world;  sustaining  himself  wholly  by  force  of  piety,
complete  abandonment  to  God,  and  conformity  to  His  wül.
The  joints  of  his  soul,  if  I  may  use  that  expression,  were
wrung  ;  he  saw,  at  a  glance,  the  fatal  results  to  France  ;  he
stood  amid  the  nothingness  of  that  horrible  void;  he  lived
the  sacrifice  and  subdued  his  soul  by  an  effort  so  terrible
that,  as  he  often  owned  to  me,  the  loss  of  his  own  chüdren
had,  comparatively,  cost  him  nothing.  But  all  was  laid  by
him  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  The  death  of  the  Due  de
Chevreuse  completed  the  destruction  of  his  animal-man.
His  sohtude  thenceforth  was  that  of  a  prison.  Agonizing
sacrifices  became  the  tissue  of  his  life.  A  suhhme  purifica¬
tion  of  his  soul  rising  ever  towards  God  completed  the
dissolution  of  matter,  and  made  his  death  a  holocaust.

The  chancellor,  Pontchartrain,  once  said  to  me,  jestingly,
of  the  two  brothers -in-law,  that  “  it  was  remarkable,  bound
together  as  they  were  by  the  habits  of  a  hfetime  until  they
were  not  two  hut  one  heart,  one  soul,  one  mind,  one  feeling,
that  nevertheless  M.  de  Beauvilliers  had  a  guardian  angel
who,  at  a  given  point,  stopped  him  and  turned  him  away
from  what  was  injurious  and  sometimes  intolerable  in  M.
de  Chevreuse  ;  an  angel  who  made  him  practise  just  the
opposite,  hut  never  in  other  respects  troubled  their  union.
And,  in  truth,  nothing  could  he  more  opposed  than  the  order
and  the  disorder  of  their  respective  affairs  ;  the  austerity
and  sobriety  of  one,  and  the  luxury  of  the  other  (the  latter
led  by  philosophy  and  Cornaro’s  hook,  the  other  by  Fagon)  ;
the  punctuality  to  the  minute  of  M.  de  Beauvilhers,  that
miser  of  time,  who  would  make  excuses  to  his  coachman  if
he  were  not  ready  the  moment  the  carriage  was  ordered.

1714J

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

177

and  the  thoughtless  indifference  of  M.  de  Chevreuse  about
keeping  people  waitiug,  and  his  ignorance  of  hours,  though
he  too  was  jealous  of  his  time  ;  and  finally  the  exactness  of
the  one  in  properly  doing  and  finishing  all  he  did  with
precision,  whereas  the  other  was  always  doing  and  never
finishing.  Thus  M.  de  Beauvilliers,  who  wanted  the  good
in  all  things,  was  contented  with  it  ;  while  M.  de  Chevreuse,
seeking  the  better,  often  missed  both.  M.  de  BeauviUiers
saw  things  as  they  were  ;  he  was  opposed  to  chimeras,  weighed
all  with  accuracy,  compared  all  sides  of  a  question  fairly,
and  remained  unshaken  in  his  decisions,  on  certain  founda¬
tions.  M.  de  Chevreuse,  with  more  mind  and,  beyond  com¬
parison,  more  knowledge  of  all  kinds,  saw  everything  in
white  and  full  of  hope,  even  that  which  offered  least,  and
had  neither  the  accuracy  of  his  friend  nor  his  straightfor¬
ward  good  sense  ;  his  rush  of  ideas,  never  sufficiently  col¬
lected,  dazzled  him  with  false  lights  ;  and  his  amazing
facility  for  conceiving  and  reasoning  opened  to  him  so  many
paths  that  he  was  apt  to  lose  his  way  without  perceiving  it,
hut  always  with  the  best  faith  in  the  world.  To  complete
the  contrast  of  two  men  who  were  so  united  that  they  were
hut  one,  the  Due  de  Chevreuse  could  neither  get  up  nor  go
to  bed  ;  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers,  regular  in  all  things,  rose
early  and  went  to  bed  early  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  left  the  table
when  the  fruit  was  brought  on  and  was  often  in  bed  before
supper  was  ended.

There  was  no  woman  at  Court  with  a  better  mind  than
Mme.  de  Beauvilliers,  more  penetrating,  more  keen,  more

just,  or  wiser,  better  regulated,  and  of  which
the  owner  was  more  thoroughly  mistress.
Never  did  she  seek  to  show  it  ;  but  she  could

Character  of  the
Duchesse  de
Beauvilliers.

not  keep  others  from  perceiving  it  as  soon  as  she  opened  her
lips  ;  often,  in  fact,  before  she  spoke  at  all.  When  she  did

VOL.  III.  —  12

178

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

SO  it  was  natiiraUy  and  fnU  of  grace,  with  a  facüity  of  ex¬
pression  which  so  adorned  her  as  to  make  others  forget  her
ugliness,  which,  without  deformity,  for  her  shape  was  good,
wls  uncommon.  There  was  even  a  turn  of  gallantry  to  her
mind.  She  loved  to  give  ;  and  I  have  never  known  any  one
but  herself  and  Mme.  de  Pontchartrain  who  had  the  art  to
do  so  with  such  graceful  address.  Her  taste  was  exquisite
and  universal,  —  in  furniture,  adornments  for  all  ages,  and
her  table  ;  in  short,  about  everything.  She  was  very  noble,
very  magnificent,  very  courteous,  but  with  much  circumspec¬
tion  and  dignity.  By  nature  she  might  have  had  a  penchant
for  the  world  ;  but  a  true  piety  from  her  earhest  years  and
the  desire  to  please  M.  de  Beauvilhers  restrained  her.  She
was  however,  well-suited  for  society,  as  every  one  felt  from
the  grand,  noble,  easy  manner,  cordial  yet  discerning,  with
which  she  kept  her  household,  where  strangers  of  distinc¬
tion  abounded  at  dinner.

Her  wit,  which  sometimes  escaped  her,  though  always
with  great  circumspection,  showed  itself  sufficiently  to  make
one  regret  that  she  did  not  allow  it  greater  freedom.  Her
conversation  was  agreeable,  charming  when  she  felt  herself
at  liberty,  with  keen,  shrewd,  piercing  flashes,  after  which  it
was  amusing  to  see  her  disappear.  Wherever  she  was  con¬
strained,  however,  she  communicated  constraint,  and,  on  the
whole,  it  may  be  true  to  say  that  very  few  persons,  even
the  most  familiar,  were  wholly  at  their  ease  with  her,  just
the  reverse  of  Mme.  de  Chevreuse,  who,  wfith  quite  as  much
piety,  had  far  less  mind.  In  other  respects,  Mme.  de  Beau¬
vilhers  was  absolutely  true  and  sincere,  a  tender  friend  and
an  excellent  relation.  The  alms  and  good  deeds  of  M.  de
Beauvilhers  may  be  said  to  have  been  immense  ;  it  was
their  foremost  care  and,  with  prayer,  their  dearest  occupation.
Mme.  de  Beauvihiers,  so  tenderly  and  religiously  one  with

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

179

her  husband  throughout  their  life,  was  inconsolable  for  his
death,  hut  she  bore  it  as  a  Christian,  and  a  strong  woman.
He  had  asked  to  he  buried  at  Montargis  in  the  Benedictine
convent,  where  eight  of  Iris  daughters  were  professed  nuns,
the  eldest  being  the  perpetual  superior,  none  of  them  having
been  willing  to  even  hear  of  an  abbey.  Mme.  de  Beau-
villiers  went  there,  and  by  an  act  of  rehgion  which  it  is
dreadful  to  think  of,  she  was  present  at  his  interment.  The
place  became  for  the  rest  of  her  hfe  her  most  cherished
retreat,  where,  oftener  sometimes  than  once  a  year,  she
lived  among  her  daughters  and  other  near  friends,  of  whom
the  convent  was  full,  in  austere  penitence,  and  poignant
grief,  no  sign  of  which  appeared  in  the  hours  of  recreation
for  the  sisterhood.

I  confess  that  I  find  it  hard  to  tear  myself  away  from  objects
so  dear  to  me,  which  will  ever  remain  so  to  the  end  of  my
My  situation  at  üfe.  But  it  is  time  to  take  up  a  new  idea  of
Court.  position  at  Court,  now  become  very  differ¬

ent  to  what  it  had  been.  The  loss  of  the  dauphin  and  the
dauphine,  the  dispersion  of  the  latter’s  ladies,  who  no  longer
figured  at  Court,  the  disgrace  of  Chamillart,  the  retirement
of  the  chancellor  Pontchartrain,  the  death  of  Maréchal  de
Boufïlers,  that  of  the  Due  de  Chevreuse,  and,  finally,  that
of  the  Due  de  Beauvilhers,  left  me  in  a  void  (I  do  not  say
of  the  heart,  for  this  is  no  place  to  speak  of  that),  which
nothing  could  fill,  or  even  diminish.  I  had  been  in  the
closest  intimacy  and  confidence  of  all  those  ministers  and
seigneurs,  and  in  that  of  the  best-informed  and  most  impor¬
tant  ladies,  who  had  now  in  various  ways  disappeared  from
the  scene.  Of  all  the  king’s  private  interior  of  every  kind,
only  Maréchal  was  left  to  me.  In  the  ministry  I  had  no
one;  all  the  successors  of  my  most  intimate  friends  were
either  opposed  to  me  or  perfectly  indifferent.  In  a  word,

180

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

I  had  no  hold  on  any  one;  no  support  in  the  ministry,
the  interior  circle  of  the  king  was  against  me,  and  in  the
Court  many  lances  were  lowered  upon  me,  in  fear  and
jealousy  of  a  not  distant  future  under  the  inevitable  regency
of  the  Due  d’Orléans.

The  intimacy  between  him  and  me  was  a  matter  of  our
whole  lives.  It  was  well-known  that  his  separation  from
Mme.  d’Argenton,  his  reconciliation  with  his  wife,  the  union
iu  which  he  now  lived  with  her,  and  the  marriage  of  his
daughter  to  the  Due  de  Berry  were  my  doing.  The  dislike
of  the  king  to  him,  so  profound  and  shown  so  plainly,  the
dangerous  affair  in  Spain,  the  scandal,  perpetually  renewed,
of  the  poisonings,  the  general  avoidance  of  his  presence,
which  never  ceased,  the  advice  and  the  private  threats  con¬
veyed  to  my  ears,  —  none  of  these  things  had  been  able  to
separate  me  from  him  or  prevent  me  from  being  the  sole
man  at  Court  who  saw  him  openly  and  appeared  with  him
publicly  in  the  gardens  of  Marly  and  under  the  very  eyes
of  the  king.  The  uniformity  of  this  conduct  could  not  he
imputed  to  future  hopes,  because  it  had  been  precisely  the
same  in  the  days  of  Monseigneur  and  his  sons,  when  I  could
only  expect  to  he  injured  by  it.  In  fact  it  was  then  consid¬
ered  a  piece  of  hardihood,  in  the  position  in  which  the  duke
stood  with  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  ;  for  no  one
was  ignorant  of  that  — which,  indeed,  was  made  manifest
when  the  will  of  the  king  became  known  and  turned  all
steps  to  the  Due  du  Maine.  The  latter  could  never  forget
the  inutility  of  his  own  steps  towards  me,  nor  my  extreme
horror  of  the  ranks  he  had  successively  obtained.  Moreover,
my  conduct  with  the  Due  d’Orléans  gave  the  lie  forcibly  to
the  execrable  imputation  laid  upon  that  prince  by  the  Due
du  Maine.  I  had  always  preserved  a  reputation  for  truth,
honour,  and  uprightness,  which  no  jealousies,  no  quarrels

1714]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

181

about  rank,  and  none  of  the  divers  storms  around  me  had
ever  attacked.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  was  all  her  hfe  on  the
highest  ground  of  reputation  of  all  kinds.  No  one  was
ignorant  (though  merely  in  the  main)  of  what  we  had  lost
in  the  dauphin  and  dauphine,  for  the  present  and  for  the
future,  and  the  bitterness  of  our  grief  in  losing  them.  I
had  never  been  reckoned  able  to  restrain  myself.  It  was
therefore  evident  that  I  should  certainly  have  broken  with
the  Due  d’Orléans,  without  hesitation  or  regard  for  the
future,  had  I  suspected  him  in  the  slightest  degree.  This
was  in  fact  universally  admitted;  and  I  saw  him  too  con¬
stantly,  too  intimately,  not  to  suspect  him  had  there  been
any  cause  for  it.  This  it  was  that  kept  me  aloof  from
advice  and  even  threats  from  many  quarters,  urging  me  to
change  my  conduct  towards  the  prince.  But  the  inutility
of  those  threats  rebounded  upon  me  in  the  wrath  of  Mme.
de  Maintenon  and  M.  du  Maine,  who  hoped  to  deprive  the
duke  of  the  only  man,  wilhng  to  see  him,  with  whom  he
could  reason  and  consult.

Although  it  was  very  apparent  that  the  king  was  begin¬
ning  to  fad,  nothing  as  yet  seemed  threatening.  I  saw
before  me  a  long  sea-voyage  through  which  to  steer  alone
amid  reefs  and  whirlpools.  I  beheld  them  rising  or  opening
before  me  ;  I  felt  how  my  intimacy  with  the  prince  they
hated  weighed  upon  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  Due  du
Maine  ;  how  dangerous  I  seemed  to  them  in  that  relation
after  the  king’s  death  ;  how  envy,  jealousy,  and  foes  filled
with  the  same  thoughts  under  other  aspects,  were  all  about
me.  And  I  without  my  intimate  and  principal  adviser,
with  no  one  of  influence  to  defend  and  support  me  !  God
permitted  that  I  should  not  be  troubled  in  mind.  I  resolved
to  be  wise  in  conduct,  but  not  to  change  my  ways  ;  to  seek
no  one  ;  to  live  with  the  Due  d’Orléans  precisely  as  I  had

182

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.ti.

always  done,  in  public  and  in  private,  and  not  to  give  any
one  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  me  flinch  or  try  to  secure
myself.  This  short  explanation  is  necessary  for  the  under¬
standing  of  what  follows.  Let  us  now  return  to  the  world
at  large,  which  we  have  perhaps  neglected  too  long.

The  place  of  the  chief  of  the  council  of  finances  was  no
sooner  vacant  by  the  death  of  the  Due  de  Beauvilhers  than
Maréchal  de  word  to  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy

viiieroy  made  that  he  bestowed  it  upon  him.  This  was  an-
counciiof  other  man  sold  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and

finances.  consequently  to  the  Due  du  Maine.  He  ar¬

rived  at  Fontainebleau  from  Lyon,  Tuesday,  September  18,
having,  luckily  for  himself,  been  absent  during  the  late
crisis  of  the  bastards  and  the  wiU,  and  out  of  reach  of  the
stormy  struggle  in  the  king’s  domestic  hfe  to  which  he  would
otherwise  have  been  admitted.  He  was  received  as  a  favour¬
ite  and  crowned  with  honours,  was  declared  minister  at  once,
and  took  his  seat  at  the  council  of  State  the  following  day.
It  is  curious  that  this  post,  the  most  important  of  all,  is  the
only  one  which  requires  no  oath,  —  a  custom  founded  on  the
fact  that  on  the  morning  of  each  council  the  usher  goes  to
notify  the  members  to  be  present  ;  any  member  whom  he
does  not  .'notify  does  not  go,  and  considers  himself  dismissed.
This  never  really  takes  place,  however  ;  the  dismissal  is
announced  by  an  order  to  retire,  either  from  Court  or  to
some  place  of  exile.  Years  later  Torcy  told  me  that  at  the
council  the  king  spoke  first  and  tried  to  make  Yilleroy  un¬
derstand  the  matters  under  discussion  ;  but  the  maréchal
said  and  asked  such  foolish  things  that  the  king  coloured
and  lowered  his  eyes  in  embarrassment,  sometimes  inter¬
rupting  Villeroy  to  answer  in  advance  ;  and  that  he  never
got  accustomed  to  the  ignorance,  the  sproposito,  the  inepti¬
tude  of  the  man,  who  in  spite  of  his  great  position  at  Court,

1714]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

183

in  command  of  armies  and  in  the  confidence  of  the  king,
astonished  everybody  by  never  knowing  what  he  said  or
what  he  wanted  to  say.  As  for  me,  I  was  astonished  myself
to  the  last  degree  after  the  death  of  the  king.

The  king  returned  from  Fontainebleau,  Wednesday,  Octo¬
ber  23.  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon  who  was  in  his  carriage  told
me  that  he  was  not  in  good-humour  and  that,  seeing  him
The  king  dis-  hourly,  it  was  plain  to  her  that  his  health

turbed  about  the  was  faüing.  This  was,  in  fact,  his  last  trip  to

bull  Unigenitus.

Fontamebleau.  He  was  much  harassed  at  this
time  about  the  bull  Unigenitus,  into  the  acceptance  of  which
Père  Tellier  had  forced  him  to  put  his  conscience  and  his
authority.  He  had  had  many  negotiations  with  Cardinal  de
Hoailles.  Cardinal  d’Estrées,  by  the  king’s  order,  had  taken
part  in  the  affair,  but  speedily  withdrew,  indignant  at  the
continual  trickery  of  Père  Tellier  and  Bissy,  about  which  he
did  not  hold  his  tongue.  All  of  the  episcopate  who  were
learned  and  sincere  went  with  Cardinal  de  Hoailles;  so
did  the  famous  universities  in  a  body,  the  religious  and  regu¬
lar  Orders,  the  chapters  and  the  rectors  of  Paris,  together
with  an  infinite  number  in  the  provinces  ;  added  to  these
were  the  parliaments  and  all  educated  laymen  who  were  not
slaves  to  the  Jesuits  ;  even  at  Court  there  was  dumbly  but
one  voice.

Among  those  who  accepted  the  bull  there  was  not  the
shadow  of  uniformity.  A  small  number  of  bishops  and
others  adhered  to  what  had  been  done  by  the  assembly  of
the  Forty  ;  but  even  among  these  there  were  diversities  ;  the
majority  of  the  acceptors  having  different  interpretations
among  them;  the  Forty  themselves  varied  the  meaning  of
their  acceptation.  In  short,  it  was  chaos  and  a  Tower  of
Babel,  as  was  proved  by  extracts  made  from  all  the  charges
of  the  bishops,  which  contradicted  each  other  in  the  terms

184

MEMOIES  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAENT-SIMOH.  [chap,  tl

of  their  acceptance,  about  which  none  of  them  agreed.  It
was  seen  more  clearly  than  ever  that  without  threats  and
promises,  rewards  and  cruel  punishments,  artfulness  and
open  violence,  the  buU  would  have  been  universally  rejected,
and  that  it  was  only  a  question  among  the  acceptors  of  how
to  accept  the  words  and  reject  the  meaning.

The  pope,  much  displeased  at  not  finding  the  blind  obedi¬
ence  promised  him  by  Père  Tellier,  without  which  he  would
never  have  embarked  on  this  detestable  business,  had  made
all  parties,  especially  the  Forty  bishops,  feel  his  anger  at  their
audacity  in  daring  to  interpret  his  bull,  instead  of  bhndly
accepting  it.  So  that  those  who  had  done  the  most  in  its
behalf  had  irritated  the  pope  as  much  as  those  who  were
against  it.  AH  these  annoyances  brought  the  king  to  resolve
on  making  an  effort  to  induce  the  pope  to  come  to  an  agree¬
ment,  or  else  to  allow  a  national  council  to  be  held  in  France.
Amelot,  a  friend  of  the  Jesuits,  but  a  man  of  high  honour
and  of  great  talent  for  negotiation  and  for  State  affairs  (as
he  proved  in  his  various  embassies),  was  sent  to  Eome  with¬
out  other  character  than  that  of  simple  minister  of  the
king.

The  king  had  arrived  from  Fontainebleau,  October  25  ;  he
appointed  Amelot  on  the  29th.  All-Saints  feU  of  a  Thurs-
dav,  and  next  day  he  went  to  Marly,  where  he

Père  Tellier  ’

makes  me  a  stayed  till  Saturday,  December  1.  About  the
proposal.  beginning  of  this  trip.  Père  Tellier,  who  al¬

ways  courted  me,  and  was  never  tired  of  talking  about  the
bull,  httle  satisfaction  as  he  got  from  me  in  these  conver¬
sations,  came  to  see  me  to  talk  over  this  national  council  and
make  me  a  proposition  which,  coming  from  a  man  of  so
much  intelligence  and  knowledge  in  manoeuvring  and  arti¬
fice,  I  have  never  been  able  to  understand.  After  many
remarks  designed  to  make  me  approve  of  the  council  (which

1714]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  185

I  should  have  done  heartily  had  it  been  possible  to  have  it
completely  free),  he  told  me  it  was  determined  to  hold  it  at
Senhs.  It  was  impossible,  he  said,  to  hold  it  in  Paris  for
many  reasons,  which  he  alleged,  all  tending  to  make  him  sole
master  and  tyrant  of  the  council  ;  it  must  be  held  in  a  town
near  Paris  to  draw  its  ideas  (that  is,  his  orders)  from  there  ;
but  distant  enough  to  keep  members  from  going  to  the  city
too  often,  especially  the  prelates,  and  far  enough  from  the
Court  not  to  give  rise  to  an  idea  that  the  king  coerced  it  ;
then,  looking  at  me  with  an  affable  but  keen  eye,  he  added  ;
“  You  are  governor  of  Senhs,  and  you  must  be  the  king’s
commissioner  to  the  council;  no  one  is  as  capable  as  you,
and  nothing  can  suit  better.”  “  I,  father  !  ”  I  exclaimed
in  terror,  “  commissioner  to  that  council  !  Hot  for  all
the  world  would  I  accept  it  ;  don’t  let  yourself  even  think
of  it.”

The  confessor’s  surprise  was  inexpressible,  and  for  a
man  of  so  much  intellect,  I  repeat  that  the  stupidity  of  his
answer  was  unintelhgible.  “  What  !  monsieur,”  he  said  in
a  gentle  voice  that  was  meant  to  coax  me  round,  “  do  you
think  the  position  beneath  you  because  you  are  a  duke  ?
Why,  the  emperors  gave  it  to  their  Eastern  counts  for  the
councils  of  their  day.”  I  burst  out  laughing  and  told  him
I  was  far  from  thinking  that  our  dukes  compared  with  the
Eastern  counts,  or  that  the  position  of  kmg’s  commissioner
to  the  council  was  not  extremely  honourable,  but  it  was
altogether  above  my  capacity,  and  so  contrary  to  my  taste
that  I  entreated  him  not  to  let  his  idea  go  any  farther,
because  I  should  be  in  despair  to  cause  displeasure  by  a
refusal,  which  I  most  assuredly  should  give.

The  worthy  father’s  astonishment  was  great,  but  he  said
nothing.  I  tried  to  soften  the  vehemence  of  my  first  ex¬
clamation  in  order  not  to  uselessly  irritate  so  dangerous  a

186  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vi.

man,  who,  I  saw  clearly,  had  flung  his  lasso  on  me  to  make
me  the  hangman  of  his  council,  and  the  executor  of  his  will
under  the  kiug’s  name.  He  never  spoke  to  me  agam  of
the  matter;  hut  continued  to  treat  me  in  his  accustomed

manner.

VIL

1715

Character,  con-

At  the  beginning  of  January  of  this  year,  1715,  Fénelon,
now  councillor  of  State,  lieutenant-general,  governor  of  Ques-
noy,  and  chevalier  of  the  Order,  having  been
ambassador  to  Holland,  came  to  my  apart-
duct,  and  death  of  ment  at  Versailles  just  as  I  was  finishing

Fenelon,  Arch-  -ni  im-TT

bishop  of  dinner.  He  said  he  was  greatly  amicted  by

Cambrai.  news  just  received  by  courier  that  his  uncle,

the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai,  was  very  ill,  and  he  came  to
beg  me  to  ask  the  Due  d’Orléans  to  send  his  physician  to
Cambrai  instantly,  and  that  I  would  lend  him  my  post-
chaise.  I  left  the  table  at  once,  sent  for  the  chaise,  and
went  myself  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  who  sent  for  Chirac  and
ordered  him  to  go,  and  to  remain  at  Cambrai  as  long  as
it  was  necessary.  Not  an  hour  elapsed  between  Fénelon’s
entrance  into  my  room  and  Chirac’s  departure.  He  found
the  archbishop  beyond  hope  and  not  in  a  condition  to  at¬
tempt  any  remedy.  He  stayed  however  twenty-four  hours,
until  he  died.  Thus  I,  whom  the  archbishop  dreaded  for
after  years,  as  being  so  near  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  I  was
the  one  to  do  him  a  last  service.  This  personage,  so  well-
known  and  celebrated,  has  appeared  in  so  many  parts  of
this  Memoir  that  it  seems  needless  to  add  much  about  him,
although  it  is  impossible  not  to  pause  for  a  moment  on  his
character.

We  have  seen  that  he  was  bom  of  an  ancient  and  good
nobility,  illustrious  in  embassies  and  divers  offices  and  alli¬
ances,  and  decorated  with  the  collar  of  the  Holy-Spirit

188  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  til

under  Henri  HI.  ;  we  have  also  seen  his  personal  poverty,
his  obscure  beginnings,  his  various  feelers  and  attempts
towards  the  Jansenists,  the  Jesuits,  the  fathers  of  the  Ora¬
tory,  the  seminary  of  Saint-Sulpice,  to  which  at  last  not
without  difficulty  he  fastened  himself,  a  connection  which
made  him  known  to  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Beau-
vilhers,  the  rapid  progress  he  made  in  their  esteem,  the
post  of  tutor  to  the  sons  of  France  which  that  esteem  ob¬
tained  for  him,  what  he  did  with  it,  the  sources  and  the
progress  of  the  catastrophe  of  his  opinions  and  his  fortunes,
the  disgrace  of  his  friends,  his  partisans,  his  protectors,  and
how  near  it  came  to  being  the  ruin  of  the  two  dukes,  the
divers  aspects  of  his  affair  when  carried  to  Home,  the
promptitude,  the  distinctness,  the  glory  of  his  submission,
his  admirable  conduct  before  his  own  diocesan  assembly,  his
exile,  and  finally,  his  great  good  fortune  in  preserving  whoUy
and  forever  the  heart  and  the  esteem  of  Mgr.  the  Due  de
Bourgogne,  of  the  Dues  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvüliers,  and
of  his  friends  ;  not  one  of  them  weakening,  in  spite  of  the
harshness  and  depth  of  his  fall,  the  ever-active  persecution
of  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  the  open  precipice  on  the  side  of
the  king,  and  seventeen  years  of  total  exile.  All  these
friends  were  as  watchful  for  him  as  they  were  ardent  ;  mak¬
ing  everything  that  concerned  him  their  chief  object,  always
as  submissive  to  his  direction,  as  earnest  in  the  work  of
some  day  replacing  him  in  his  old  position,  as  they  had  been
in  the  earliest  days  of  his  disgrace  ;  always  with  a  great
measure  of  respect  for  the  king,  but  never  conceahng  their
sentiments  ;  and  less  than  any  among  them  the  Dues  de
Chevreuse  and  de  Beauvilhers  and  their  famihes,  and  even,
it  may  be  added,  the  Due  de  Bourgogne.

The  prelate  was  a  tall,  thin,  well-made  man,  pale,  with  a
large  nose,  eyes  from  which  the  fire  and  soul  issued  hke  a

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

189

torrent,  and  an  expression  of  countenance  such  as  I  have
never  seen  in  any  other  man,  and  which,  though  seen  hut
once,  could  never  be  forgotten.  It  gathered  in  aU  things;
but  its  contrasts  did  not  conflict.  There  was  gravity  and
gallantry,  solemnity  and  gayety  ;  it  was  equally  expressive
of  the  learned  man,  the  bishop,  and  the  great  seigneur  ;  but
what  exceeded  the  rest,  pervading  indeed  his  whole  person,
was  refinement,  intellect,  grace,  propriety,  and,  above  all,
nobility.  An  effort  was  needed  to  cease  looking  at  him.
AU  his  portraits  are  speaking  likenesses,  without,  however,
being  able  to  catch  the  harmony  which  was  so  striking  in
the  original,  or  the  delicacy  of  each  characteristic  which
the  face  combined.  His  manners  responded  to  his  person
in  the  same  proportion,  with  an  ease  which  they  conveyed
to  others,  and  that  air  of  good  taste  that  comes  only  from
the  habit  of  the  best  company  and  of  the  great  world,  which
shed  itself,  as  it  were,  throughout  his  conversation  ;  and  with
it  aU  a  natural,  sweet,  and  flowery  eloquence,  an  insinuating
politeness,  though  always  noble  and  discriminating,  an  easy,
distinct,  and  agreeable  elocution,  a  clearness  and  precision
that  made  him  understood  on  matters  that  were  difficult
and  puzzling  ;  and  yet  a  man  who  never  sought  to  show
that  he  had  more  mind  than  those  to  whom  he  spoke,  who
put  himself  on  the  level  of  others  without  letting  it  be  felt
that  he  did  so,  with  the  result  that  none  could  desert  him,
or  defend  themselves  against  his  charm,  or  avoid  endeav¬
ouring  to  seek  him.  It  was  this  rare  talent,  which  he  had
to  the  highest  degree,  that  kept  his  friends  so  thoroughly
attached  throughout  his  Ufe,  in  spite  of  his  fall,  and
which,  after  their  dispersion,  brought  them  still  together  to
talk  of  him,  to  regret  him,  to  long  for  him,  to  hold  them¬
selves  more  and  more  for  him,  as  the  Jews  for  Jerusalem;
sighing  for  his  return,  hoping  ever,  as  that  unhappy  people

190  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

still  wait  and  sigh  for  their  coming  Messiah.  It  was
through  this  authority  —  truly  that  of  a  prophet  —  acquired
over  his  flock  that  he  grew  to  have  a  dominion  which,
gentle  as  it  was,  brooked  no  resistance.  It  is  certain  that
he  would  not  long  have  borne  an  equal  had  he  returned
to  Court  and  entered  the  council,  —  always  the  great  object
of  his  life  ;  —  once  anchored  and  beyond  aU  need  of  help
from  others,  it  would  have  been  dangerous  not  only  to  resist
him  hut  to  have  failed  in  homage  and  submission  to  him.

Exiled  to  his  diocese,  he  lived  there  with  the  piety  and  dili¬
gence  of  a  pastor;  with  the  art  and  the  magnificence  of  a
man  who  renounced  nothing,  hut  wisely  managed  all  things
and  aU  men  in  his  interests.  No  man  ever  had  a  stronger
passion  for  pleasing  than  he,  and  for  pleasing  the  valet  as
well  as  the  master  ;  no  man  ever  carried  this  passion  farther,
with  a  persistent,  constant,  universal  application  ;  and  never
man  was  more  completely  successful  with  it.  Cambrai  is  a
much  frequented  place,  a  great  thoroughfare  -5  nothing  could
equal  the  courtesy,  discernment,  and  charm  with  which  he
received  everybody.  In  the  first  years  of  his  exile  people
avoided  him,  and  he  never  sought  them  ;  hut  little  by  little
the  charm  of  his  manners  drew  a  knot  about  him.  Encour¬
aged  by  this  httle  multitude,  others,  whom  fear  had  re¬
strained,  were  very  glad  to  find  occasions  to  pass  through
Cambrai.  One  after  another,  they  all  came  finally.  When
the  Due  de  Bourgogne  began  to  figure  before  the  world  the
prelate’s  court  increased,  and  it  grew  to  he  an  effective
power  as  soon  as  the  disciple  became  dauphin.  The  num¬
ber  of  persons  going  to  and  from  the  armies  whom  the
archbishop  received  and  welcomed,  the  quantity  of  those
he  lodged  in  his  own  house  as  they  passed  through  Cam¬
brai,  the  care  he  took  of  the  sick  and  wounded  on  the  many
occasions  when  they  were  brought  to  the  town,  had  won

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  191

him  the  heart  of  the  military.  Assiduous  at  the  hospitals
among  the  men  and  sub-officers,  attentive  to  their  leaders,
whom  he  often  kept  for  months  until  their  perfect  recovery,
vigilant  as  a  true  pastor  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  and
always  with  that  knowledge  of  the  world  that  won  all  hearts
and  made  them  trust  him,  —  it  is  amazing  to  what  point  he
became  the  idol  of  the  army,  and  how  his  name  re-echoed
thence  to  the  very  centre  of  the  Court.

But,  with  all  this  art  and  ardour  in  pleasing,  nothing  base,
nothing  common,  affected,  out  of  place  ;  aU  was  suitable  in
respect  to  every  one.  His  establishment  answered  to  that  of
a  great  seigneur,  and  yet  there  was  nothing  about  it  that  did
not  have  the  episcopal  flavour  and  the  strictest  rule  amid  a
sweet  and  virtuous  freedom.  He  himself  was  an  example,
ever  visible,  to  which,  however,  none  could  attain  ;  always  a
true  prelate,  always  the  great  seigneur,  always  the  author  of
“Télémaque”;  but  never  a  word  about  the  Court,  or  about
pubhc  matters  ;  nothing  that  could  possibly  be  blamed  ;  no
regrets,  no  flattery,  no  baseness,  not  a  reminder  of  what  he
had  been,  nor  a  suggestion  of  what  he  might  be  still.  In  the
midst  of  all  these  hospitalities,  great  order  reigned  in  his
household  and  strict  regulations  in  his  diocese,  but  without
pettiness  or  pedantry  ;  no  one  of  any  opinion  was  ever  im¬
portuned  as  to  doctrine.  The  Jansenists  lived  in  profound
peace  in  the  diocese  of  Cambrai,  where  there  was  a  vast
number  of  them  ;  they  held  their  tongues,  and  so  did  the
archbishop.  It  might  have  been  desired  that  he  should  do
the  same  outside  of  his  diocese  ;  but  he  was  too  intimately
allied  with  the  Jesuits,  and  hoped  too  much  from  them,  not
to  give  them  what  help  he  could  if  it  did  not  trouble  his  own
people.

He  was  also  too  watchful  of  the  chosen  little  flock,  of
which  he  was  the  heart,  the  soul,  the  life,  and  the  oracle,  not

192  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vn.

to  feed  it  from  time  to  time  with  various  writings,  which  were
passed  from  hand  to  hand  with  avidity  amid  echoing  praises.
The  Jansenists  roughly  refuted  him  ;  and  it  would  have  been
better  certainly  if  an  author  solemnly  condemned  for  his
“Maxims  of  the  Saints,”  had  kept  silence  as  to  doctrine.
But  ambition  was  very  far  from  dead  ;  the  blows  the  J ansen-
ists  gave  him  in  their  rephes  were  fresh  merits  in  the  eyes
of  his  friends,  and  new  reasons  why  the  Jesuits  should  do
more  and  undertake  more  to  restore  him  to  places  of  rank
and  authority  in  the  Church  and  in  the  State.  As  the  reign
of  his  dauphin  drew  nearer,  this  ambition  was  powerfully
roused,  though  stiU  kept  hidden  in  a  manner  which  must
have  cost  him  much.  Père  Telher  was  now  all-powerful  and
was  wholly  for  him  ;  so  was  the  inner  essence  of  the  govern¬
ment  of  the  Jesuits,  and  the  whole  Company  professed  its
attachment  to  him  after  the  death  of  Père  Bourdaloue.
Even  the  king  had  not  been  able,  on  two  or  three  occasions,
to  avoid  praising  him.  Eénelon,  regaining  at  last  the  high¬
est  and  most  flattering  hopes,  left  the  seed  to  germinate.

But  it  never  came  to  maturity.  The  death,  so  little  ex¬
pected,  of  the  dauphin  crushed  him  ;  that  of  the  Due  de
Chevreuse  deepened  the  wound,  and  that  of  M.  de  Beauvilhers
made  it  incurable,  and  overwhelmed  him.  Still,  in  spite  of
his  profound  grief  at  the  dauphm’s  death,  he  did  not  fad.  to
lay  hold  of  a  plank  in  the  shipwreck.  Ambition  rose  to  the
surface  and  clung  to  what  it  could.  His  mind  had  always
pleased  the  Due  d’Orléans.  M.  de  Chevreuse  had  cultivated
and  encouraged  the  esteem  and  friendship  between  the  two,
and  I  had  also  contributed  something  out  of  regard  for  the
Due  de  Beauvilhers.  After  so  many  losses  and  cruel  trials
the  prelate  was  still  a  man  of  hopes  ;  and  he  did  not  place
them  ill.  But  it  was  written  above  that  hopes  they  should
remain.  His  feeble  constitution  could  not  resist  the  shock

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  193

of  SO  much  care  and  such  reverses.  The  death  of  the  Due
de  Beauvilliers  gave  him  the  final  blow.  He  bore  up  for
a  while  by  an  effort  of  courage,  hut  his  strength  was  gone.
The  waters,  like  those  of  Tantalus,  had  too  persistently  run
hack  from  his  lips  each  time  that  he  thought  to  quaff  them
and  quench  his  thirst.

He  was  making  a  short  episcopal  visitation  when  his
carriage  was  overturned  in  a  dangerous  place.  Ho  one  was
hurt,  hut  he  saw  the  whole  danger,  and  his  feeble  machinery
was  unable  to  bear  the  shock.  He  reached  Cambrai  much
overcome,  fever  and  other  complications  supervened,  but  his
mind  remained  clear  and  sound  to  the  last.  He  died  on  the
7th  of  January,  1715,  amid  inward  regrets,  at  the  very  door
of  the  summit  of  his  hopes.  He  knew  the  failure  of  the
king’s  health,  and  he  knew  what  it  meant  for  himself.
Already  he  was  consulted  privately,  and  courted  pubhely,
for  the  rising  sim  was  visible.  What  powerful  motives  to
regret  hfe  !  How  bitter  death  must  have  been  under  such
perfect  circumstances  shining  on  all  sides.  He  made  no  sign
of  it.  Whether  it  was  love  of  reputation,  always  an  object
to  which  he  gave  the  preference,  or  disgust  for  a  world
that  had  ever  deceived  and  now,  once  more,  escaped  him,
or  piety  strengthened  by  long  practice,  re-animated,  per¬
haps,  by  these  sad  but  powerful  considerations,  he  seemed
insensible  to  all  he  quitted  and  solely  occupied  with  that  he
was  about  to  meet,  in  a  tranquilhty,  a  peace  that  excluded
trouble,  and  dwelt  only  on  repentance,  detachment,  and  care
for  the  things  spiritual  of  his  diocese.

Take  him  for  all  in  all,  he  was  a  noble  spirit  and  a  great
man.  Humanity  blushed  for  him  in  regard  to  Mme.  Guy  on,
for  whom  his  admiration,  real  or  feigned,  lasted  his  hfetime,
though  his  morals  were  never  in  the  shghtest  degree  sus¬
pected.  He  died  a  martyr  to  his  admiration  for  her,  for  it
VOL.  HI.  — 13

194  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  HE  SAIHT-SIMON.  [chap.  vii.

was  never  possible  to  separate  liim  from  it.  In  spite  of  the
notorious  falseness  of  her  prophecies,  she  was  always  the
centre  round  which  revolved  the  little  flock  and  the  oracle
by  which  Fénelon  lived  and  guided  others.

I  have  been  led  to  dwell  on  this  personage  by  the  singu¬
larity  of  his  talents,  his  hfe,  his  varied  fortunes,  the  figure
and  the  fame  that  he  has  made  in  the  world  ;  convinced  also
that  I  owed  it  to  the  Due  de  BeauviUiers  to  represent  a
friend  and  master  so  dear  to  him,  and  to  show  why  it  was
no  wonder  that  he  was  enthralled,  he  who  with  aU  his  can¬
dour,  saw  nothing  in  that  friend  but  the  most  subhme  piety,
and  never  for  an  instant  suspected  his  ambition.  AU  was
so  precisely  regulated  and  adjusted  in  M.  de  Cambrai  s  hfe
that  he  died  without  owing  a  penny  or  leaving  a  penny

behind  him.

A  prelate  more  fortunate  in  this  world,  but  whose  only
object  was  to  render  himself  happy,  laid  about  this  time  the
,  first  foundation  of  a  reign  which  astonished  aU

Schemes  of  “

Fleury,  Bishop  of  Furopc,  and  has  bccome  the  greatest  and  most
Stor’^tr^^  lasting  evil  of  France.  I  speak  of  the  too
Louis  XV.  famous  Fleury,  who  rendered  to  God  just  two

years  ago  an  account  of  his  long  hfe  and  his  aU-powerful
and  fatal  administration,  of  which  it  is  not  yet  time  to  speak.
All  his  life  he  had  been  a  courtier  of  Maréchal  de  ViUeroy,
and  now  that  he  saw  supreme  favour  shown  to  the  maréchal
by  the  king,  especially  in  making  him  the  successor  of  the
Due  de  BeauviUiers  in  the  council,  he  concluded  that  by
courting  the  Due  du  Maine  and  making  cautious  advances  he
might  succeed  in  getting  himself  appointed  preceptor  to  the
future  king.  The  Jesuits  knew  him  too  well  to  trust  him  ;
but  this  was  really  what  determined  his  success  ;  for  Mme.
de  Maintenon,  as  we  know,  hated  them,  and  the  Maréchal  de
ViUeroy  did  not  inwardly  love  them  any  better  than  she.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

195

Fleury,  who  had  never  made  knowledge,  morals,  or  reli¬
gion  the  capital  of  his  life,  had  always  avoided  questions  of
doctrine.  Dishked  by  the  Jesuits,  and  allied  to  the  best
company,  he  had  not  restrained  himself  in  blaming  the
tyranny  and  inquisition  exercised  on  Jansenism,  and  he  had
always  left  his  diocese  in  peace  on  that  subject.  But  this  idea
of  being  preceptor  made  him  change  his  conduct  ;  he  wanted
to  smooth  reefs  and  get  forward  in  so  delicate  and  excluding  a
matter  ;  so  that  what  proved  to  be  the  last  six  months  of  his
stay  in  Fréjus  were  employed  in  looking  up  doctrine,  examin¬
ing  books  and  confessors,  and  tormenting  the  few  nuns  whom
he  had  in  the  diocese.  He  made  more  noise  than  he  did  harm  ;
but  this  noise,  which  was  what  he  wanted  and  helped  his
friends  at  Court  to  push  his  cause,  echoed  as  far  as  the  Low-
Countries  and  into  the  retreat  of  the  famous  Père  Quesnel.
How  Père  Quesnel  had  just  finished  his  seventh  memoran¬
dum,  to  he  used  in  examining  the  hull  Unigenitus,  and  he
was  writing  the  preface,  when,  already  irritated  at  the  rôle  of
persecutor  assumed  by  Fleury,  he  received  a  copy  of  a  charge
addressed  by  Fleury  to  his  diocese.  Père  Quesnel  could  not
resist  the  temptation  to  chastise  this  new  zeal  of  the  Bishop
of  Fréjus  by  ridicuhng  the  charge,  and  he  contrived  to  in¬
troduce  the  subject  into  his  preface  with  the  most  bitter  and
contemptuous  sarcasm,  which  tore  the  fine  mandate  to  pieces.
Inde,  irœ.  Fleury,  with  his  gentle,  smiling,  modest  air,
was  the  haughtiest  man  inwardly,  and  the  most  implacable
that  I  have  ever  known.  He  never  forgave  Père  Quesnel  ;
and  that  was  the  sole  cause  which  produced  in  Fleury  that
ferocity,  until  his  time  unknown,  which  bore  with  such  ex¬
cess  of  cruelty  and  tyranny  against  the  Jansenists  and  the
anti-constitutionalists  [opposed  to  the  bull],  and  the  infernal
measures  which  he  took  to  perpetuate  that  fury  after  his
death,  to  the  lasting  injury  of  Church  and  State.

196

MEMOmS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAIHT-SIMON.  [chap.  tii.

We  have  seen  how  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  destroyed  her¬
self  with  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  The  king  could
Fauofthepnn-  Hot  forgivc  the  audacitj  of  her  effort  for  sov-
cesse  des  Ursins.  ereigntj,  an  ohstacle  which  her  obstmacy,  m-
spiring  the  King  of  Spain,  had  opposed  to  the  Peace,  m  spite
of  aU  the  king  could  do  ;  and  he  only  succeeded  m  making
his  grandson  give  up  that  condition,  to  which  none  of  the
allies  would  Hsten,  hy  threatening  to  abandon  him  to  his
own  resources.  The  king  had  also  felt  much  alarm  at  the
undisauised  and  unhmited  authority  the  princess  had  as¬
sumed  over  the  King  of  Spain  after  the  death  of  the  queen,
and  was  in  dread  lest  he  should  end  by  marrymg  her.  But
more  than  all,  the  king  was  piqued  to  the  soul  at  the  Parma
marriage,  negotiated  and  concluded  without  allowmg  him
the  slightest  participation.  King  everywhere,  especially  m
his  own  family,  he  was  not  accustomed  to  see  his  children
marrying  as  they  pleased.  The  choice  itself  did  not  please
him,  but  its  manner  of  proceeding  made  matters  worse.
Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  had  placed  and
supported  Mme.  des  Ursins  on  the  pinnacle  of  authority  and
power  solely  for  the  purpose  of  reigning  through  her  in  Spam,
felt  keenly  the  throwing  off  of  her  yoke,  made  manifest  by
the  complete  independence  in  which  the  princess  governed
the  king  after  his  wife’s  death.  She  was  also  more  alarmed
than  the  king  at  the  prospect  of  seeing  her  Queen  of  Spain
when  she  herself  had  twice  missed  her  own  declaration  as
Queen  of  France,  although  it  had  been  positively  promised
to  her  ;  and  finally,  the  Parma  marriage,  made  wholly  with¬
out  the  knowledge  of  the  king  and  herself,  left  her  no  fur¬
ther  hope  of  governing  Spain  through  the  Princesse  des
Ursins.  The  fall  of  the  latter  was  therefore  determined  on
between  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  but  in  a  manner
so  secret,  both  before  and  after  the  event,  that  I  have  known

1715]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

197

no  one  who  ever  penetrated  the  secret  of  what  they  did,  or
whom  they  employed  to  bring  it  about.  It  is  honest  to
acknowledge  ignorance,  and  not  give  fictions  and  inventions
in  place  of  that  wliich  we  do  not  know.  It  is  proper  to
relate  events  exactly  as  they  happened,  and  only  offer  brief
reflections  for  what  they  may  be  worth.

The  new  Queen  of  Spain  was  advancing  towards  Madrid
with  the  household  and  guards  of  the  King  of  Spain,  who
had  gone  to  the  frontier  to  receive  her.  Alberoni  was  in
her  suite  from  Parma,  and  the  Due  de  Saint- Aignan  from
the  frontier.  The  Princesse  des  Ursins  had  taken  for  herself
the  post  of  earner arcL-^ay or,  which  she  had  held  under  the
late  queen  ;  and  she  had  also  appointed  the  new  queen’s
household,  filhng  it  with  her  own  creatures,  both  men  and
women.  She  was  careful  not  to  quit  the  king,  and  followed
him  to  Guadalaxara,  a  little  town  on  the  road  to  Burgos,
about  as  far  from  Madrid  as  Fontainebleau  is  from  Pans.
To  this  point  the  king  advanced  to  meet  the  queen,  and  in
the  chapel  of  the  palace  he  intended  to  celebrate  his  mar¬
riage,  which  had  already  been  performed  by  proxy  in  Parma.
The  journey  was  so  arranged  that  he  reached  Guadalaxara
the  evening  before  the  arrival  of  the  queen.

He  made  the  little  journey  accompanied  by  those  whom
the  Princesse  des  Ursins  had  stationed  about  him,  to  keep
him  always  company  and  allow  no  others  to  approach  him.
She  herself  followed  in  her  own  carriage,  reaching  Guada¬
laxara  at  the  same  time.  As  soon  as  they  arrived  the  king
shut  himself  up  alone  with  her,  and  saw  no  one  else  until  he
went  to  bed.  The  next  day,  December  23,  the  Princesse
des  Ursins  started  with  a  small  suite  to  meet  the  queen  at  a
little  country-house  named  Quadragué,  where  the  queen  was
to  sleep  that  night.  Mme.  des  Ursins  expected  to  meet  with
the  utmost  gratitude  for  the  unhoped-for  grandeur  she  had

198

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

procured  for  the  Princess  of  Parma,  and  to  spend  the  even¬
ing  with  her,  accompaning  her  the  next  day  in  her  carriage
to'^Guadalaxara.  She  went  in  full  court-costume  and  jewels,
with  her  hair  dressed.  On  arrival  she  merely  arranged  her
dress  shghtly,  and  went  at  once  to  the  queen.  The  coldness
and  stiffness  of  her  reception  surprised  her  extremely  ;  hut
she  laid  it,  at  first,  to  the  queen’s  embarrassment,  and  did
her  best  to  warm  the  ice.  Every  one  present  shpped  away
respectfully  in  order  to  leave  them  alone.

The  conversation  then  began.  The  queen  did  not  allow  it
to  continue;  she  at  once  reproached  the  princess  for  her
want  of  respect  in  appearing  before  her  in  such  a  dress,  and
also  for  her  manners.  Mme.  des  Ursins,  whose  dress  was
correct,  and  whose  manners  were  respectful  and  her  remarks
proper,  knew  that  she  was  very  far  from  deserving  such  an
attack  ;  she  was  greatly  surprised,  and  began  to  excuse  her¬
self  ;  hut  the  queen  instantly,  with  offensive  remarks,  called
out  for  the  officers  of  the  guard  and  ordered  them,  most
insultingly,  to  remove  Mme.  des  Ursins  from  her  presence.
The  princess  endeavoured  to  speak  and  defend  herself ,  hut
the  queen,  growing  more  and  more  furious  and  threatening,
began  to  scream  out  an  order  to  put  that  crazy  woman  out
of  her  presence  and  out  of  the  house  by  the  shoulders.  She
then  called  to  Amenzaga,  heutenant  of  the  body-guard,  who
commanded  the  detachment  sent  to  meet  her,  and  to  the
equerry  who  had  charge  of  her  carriages,  and  ordered  the
first  to  arrest  Mme.  des  Ursins  and  put  her  in  a  carriage,
with  two  officers  of  the  guards,  and  a  dozen  of  their  men
around  the  carriage  ;  and  send  the  princess  instantly  to
Burgos  and  Bayonne,  and  not  to  stop  a  moment  by  the  way.
Amenzaga  tried  to  represent  to  the  queen  that  no  one  but
the  King  of  Spain  had  the  power  which  she  took  upon  her¬
self;  on  which  she  asked  him  haughtily  whether  he  had

199

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

not  received  an  order  from  the  King  of  Spain  to  obey  her
in  all  tilings,  without  reserve  or  remonstrance.  It  was  true
that  he  had  received  such  an  order,  though  he  had  never
mentioned  it,  and  no  one  had  so  far  known  of  it.

Mme.  des  Ursins  was  therefore  instantly  arrested  and  put
into  a  carriage  with  her  maid  and  two  officers  of  the  guard,
without  having  time  to  change  her  dress  or  the  arrangement
of  her  hair,  or  to  take  any  precaution  against  the  cold,  or
obtain  money  or  anything  else,  either  she  or  her  maid  ;  nor
was  there  any  sort  of  food  or  clothing  in  the  carriage,  not
a  chemise,  nor  anything  whatsoever  for  a  change,  or  to  sleep
in.  It  was  then  seven  o’clock  in  the  evening  ;  the  ground
was  covered  with  ice  and  snow,  the  cold  extreme  and  piercing,
as  it  always  is  in  Spain.  As  soon  as  the  queen  knew  that
the  Princesse  des  Ursins  was  out  of  Quadragué  she  wrote  a
letter  to  the  King  of  Spain  and  sent  it  by  an  officer  of  the
CTuards  to  Guadalaxara.  The  night  was  so  dark  that  the

O

roads  were  seen  only  by  the  glimmer  of  the  snow.

It  is  not  easy  to  imagine  the  state  of  Mme.  des  Ursins  in
that  carriage.  Astonishment  and  bewilderment  at  first  pre¬
vailed,  and  suspended  all  other  emotions  ;  but  before  long,
sorrow,  anger,  rage,  despair  forced  themselves  forward.  Then
came  sad  and  searching  reflections  on  so  violent  and  un¬
heard-of  an  action,  founded  on  a  trivial  pretext,  and  without
authority;  on  this  thought  followed  hopes  of  the  king’s
surprise,  his  anger,  his  friendship  and  his  confidence  in  her  ;
hopes,  too,  in  that  group  of  faithful  followers  with  whom  she
had  surrounded  herself,  and  whose  interest  it  was  to  excite
the  king  in  her  favour.  That  long  winter’s  night  passed
wholly  thus,  — the  cold  terrible,  no  protection  from  it,  and  so
severe  that  the  coachman  lost  a  hand.  Towards  morning
it  was  necessary  to  stop  and  bait  the  horses  ;  but  for  human
beings  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  in  the  hostelries  of  Spain,

200  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tii.

where  they  merely  show  you  places  where  the  things  you
need  are  sold.  But,  even  so,  the  meat  is  usually  ahve,  the
wine  thick  and  heady,  the  bread  sticks  to  the  wall,  the  water
is  often  undrinkable,  and  as  for  beds,  they  are  only  for  mule¬
teers.  Consequently  a  traveller  must  take  everything  with
him,  and  Mme.  des  Ursins  had  not  a  single  thing  of  any
description  with  her.  Eggs,  when  they  were  able  to  obtain
any,  were  her  sole  resource,  fresh  or  not,  throughout  the
journey.

Up  to  this  moment  of  baiting  the  horses  the  silence  had
been  profound  and  uninterrupted.  It  was  now  broken.
Throughout  that  long  night  the  princess  had  had  leisure
to  think  of  the  tone  she  would  take  and  to  compose  her
features.  She  now  spoke  of  her  great  surprise  and  of  the
very  few  words  that  had  passed  between  herself  and  the
queen.  The  two  officers  of  the  guards,  accustomed,  like  all
Spain,  to  fear  and  respect  her  even  more  than  their  king,
rephed  as  best  they  could  from  the  depths  of  the  astonish¬
ment  into  which  they  were  flung.  Soon  the  horses  were
put-to  and  they  started  again  ;  the  help  that  the  princess
hoped  for  from  the  king  of  Spain  had  not  arrived.  No  rest,
no  food,  no  means  of  undressing  until  they  reached  Saint-
Jean  de  Luz.  As  time  went  on  aûd  the  distance  increased
and  no  news  overtook  her,  she  realized  at  last  that  hope  was
vain.  We  can  fancy  the  anger  that  succeeded  in  the  heart
of  a  woman  so  ambitious,  so  accustomed  to  reign  before
the  eyes  of  all,  thus  hastily  and  msultiugly  flung  from  the
summit  of  omnipotence  by  the  hand  of  one  whom  she  her¬
self  had  chosen  to  be  a  solid  support  for  the  duration  of  her
grandeur.  She  was  faithful  to  herself.  No  tears,  regrets,
reproaches,  nor  the  slightest  weakness  escaped  her,  —  not  a
complaint,  even  of  the  cold  or  the  terrible  fatigue  of  such
a  journey.  The  two  officers  who  were  guarding  her  could

1716]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DHC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

201

not  restrain  tlieir  admiration.  At  last  she  reached  the  end
of  her  bodily  sufferings  and  the  presence  of  her  guards  at
Saint-Jean  de  Luz,  where  she  arrived  on  the  14th  of  January
and  was  able  to  obtain  a  bed,  to  borrow  a  change  of  clothing,
and  get  food  and  rest.  There  she  was  set  at  hberty.  The
guards,  the  officers,  and  the  carriage  which  had  brought  her
returned  to  Spain,  and  she  had  time  to  think  of  what  might
await  her  at  Versailles.  In  spite  of  her  folly  about  the
sovereignty,  so  persistently  carried  on,  and  her  audacity  in
having  made  the  marriage  of  the  King  of  Spain  without
the  concurrence  of  the  king,  she  flattered  herself  she  stiU
possessed  resources  at  a  Court  she  had  long  mastered.
From  Saint- Jean  de  Luz  she  despatched  a  courier  with
letters  to  the  king,  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and  her  friends,
giving  a  brief  account  of  the  thunderbolt  which  had  just
overwhelmed  her,  and  asking  permission  to  go  to  Court  and
relate  it  in  detaü.  She  awaited  the  return  of  her  courier
in  this  first  spot  of  rest  and  freedom,  which  in  itself  is  a
very  agreeable  residence.  Let  us  now  return  for  a  moment
to  Guadalaxara.

The  officer  of  the  guards  whom  the  queen  had  despatched
with  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Spain  found  him  about  to  go
to  bed.  He  seemed  moved  by  the  letter,  wrote  a  short
reply  to  the  queen,  but  gave  no  order.  The  officer  returned
at  once.  Strange  to  say,  the  secret  of  what  had  happened
was  so  well  kept  that  it  did  not  transpire  till  after  ten
o’clock  on  the  following  morning.  It  can  be  imagined
what  emotions  then  seized  the  whole  Court.  Ho  one,  how¬
ever,  dared  to  speak  to  the  king  ;  they  waited  anxiously  to
discover  what  his  answer  to  the  queen  contained.  The
whole  morning  went  by  and  nothing  was  heard;  then
indeed,  they  began  to  think  that  all  was  really  over  for  the
Princesse  des  Ursins  in  Spain.  Her  nephews,  Chalais  and

202

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.vii.

Santi,  ventured  to  ask  permission  of  the  king  to  go  to  her,
and  accompany  her  in  her  abandonment.  Not  only  did  he
permit  it,  but  he  gave  them  a  letter  for  her,  a  letter  of
simple  courtesy  in  which  he  said  he  was  very  sorry  for  what
had  happened;  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  oppose  his
authority  to  the  will  of  the  queen,  hut  he  should  contmue
her  salaries  and  would  take  care  that  they  were  paid.  He
kept  his  word,  and  as  long  as  she  lived  she  received  them
promptly.  The  king,  his  grandfather,  showed  not  the  shght-
est  surprise  when  a  courier  despatched  by  the  Due  de
Saint-Aignan  from  Quadragué  itself  brought  him  the  news
of  what  had  happened,  —  news  which  threw  our  Court  into  a
state  of  amazement  and  horror,  after  seeing  the  princess  so
triumphant  in  its  midst.

Let  us  now  gather  together  a  few  sparks  of  hght  which
may  help  us  to  see  through  this  darkness  :  First,  the  speech
that  escaped  the  king  to  Torcy  about  Mme.
Reflections.  Ursius,  and  which  seemed  to  us  so

mysterious  that  even  then  I  thought  it  portended  her  dis¬
grace  ;  next,  the  groundless  quarrel,  without  apparent
reason,  cause,  or  pretext,  picked  by  the  queen  at  the  very
first  moment  of  their  interview,  and  pushed  by  her  at
once  to  the  utmost  extremity.  Can  we  heheve  that  a
daughter  of  Parma,  brought  up  in  a  garret  by  an  im¬
perious  mother,  would  have  dared  to  take,  of  herself,  so
hold  a  step,  unheard-of  in  fact,  towards  a  person  of  such
consideration,  one  in  the  closest  confidence  of  the  King  of
Spain,  whom  she  had  not  yet  seen  and  who  was  only  seven
leagues  distant  from  her  ?  The  matter  clears  itself  a  httle

O

when  we  remember  the  secret  and  very  unusual  order  given
by  the  King  of  Spain  to  Amenzaga,  namely  :  that  he  should
obey  without  reserve  or  reply  any  order  the  queen  might
give  him,  —  a  command  that  Amenzaga  did  not  make  known

1715]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

203

until  the  queen  had  given  him  the  order  to  arrest  the  princess
and  send  her  to  the  frontier.

Let  us  remark  also  the  tranquillity  with  which  the  king
and  his  grandson  received  the  first  news  of  the  event  ;  the
inaction  of  the  King  of  Spain,  the  coldness  of  his  letter  to
Mme.  des  Ursins,  and  his  perfect  indifference  to  what  a  per¬
son,  so  dear  only  the  night  before,  might  suffer  night  and
day  on  icy  roads  and  deprived  of  everything.  Alberoni,  who
had  been  employed  by  Mme.  des  Ursins  to  negotiate  the
Parma  marriage,  and  who  followed  the  queen  from  Parma  to
Madrid,  relates  that  being  in  the  room  alone  with  her,  she
seemed  much  agitated,  walked  up  and  down  with  restless
steps,  muttering  certain  words,  among  which  he  caught  the
name  of  Mme.  des  Ursins,  adding  immediately:  “I  wül
drive  her  away  at  once.”  On  this  he  represented  to  the
queen  the  danger,  the  madness,  the  inutility  of  such  a  thing,
the  mere  thought  of  which  put  him  quite  beside  himself.

“  Be  silent  on  what  you  have  heard,”  replied  the  queen  ;  “  let
it  never  escape  you.  Don’t  talk  to  me  ;  I  know  what  I  am
doing.”  AU  these  things,  taken  together,  throw  a  strong
Hght  on  a  catastrophe  equally  amazing  as  to  the  thing  it¬
self  and  as  to  the  manner  of  doing  it,  and  plainly  shows
Louis  XIV.  as  the  author,  the  King  of  Spam  as  consenting
and  contributing  by  the  order  given  to  Amenzaga,  and  the
*  queen  the  actor  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  plot  by
the  two  kings.  Subsequent  events  in  Prance  confirm  this

opinion.

When  Mme.  des  Ursins  reached  Paris  she  went  to  the
house  of  her  brother,  the  Due  de  Noirmoutiers,  in  the  rue
Princesse  des  Saiut-Dominique,  next  door  to  mine.  This
Ursins  in  Paris;  journey  must  have  seemed  to  her  very  differ-
she  endures.  ent  from  the  last  she  had  made  to  Prance,

when  her  presence  had  been  that  of  a  queen  at  Court.  Pew

204  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vii,

persons,  except  her  old  friends  and  those  of  her  former  cabal,
went  to  see  her.  The  Due  d’Orléans,  now  completely  recon¬
ciled  with  the  King  of  Spain,  felt  that  it  was  seriously  for
his  interests,  far  more  than  a  mere  matter  of  weak  revenge,
to  show  by  some  marked  action  that  it  was  only  to  the
hatred  and  manœuvres  of  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  that  he
owed  his  troubles  in  Spain,  which  so  nearly  brought  his’
head  to  the  scaffold.  To  this  he  was  urged  by  his  wife,
and  still  more  by  Madame,  until  finally  he  requested  the
king  to  forbid  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  to  go  to  any  place,
even  at  Versailles,  where  himself  and  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,
Madame,  and  the  Duchesse  de  Berry  might  meet  her  ;  and
aU  four  of  them  gave  the  strictest  orders  to  their  households
not  to  visit  her,  even  requesting  the  same  from  the  friends
who  were  particularly  attached  to  them.  This  request,
which  the  king  granted,  made  a  great  noise  and  proclaimed
openly  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  abandonment  of  the  princess
and  the  king’s  dishke,  and  caused  her  great  embarrassment.

I  could  not  blame  the  Due  d’Orléans  for  taking  this  course,
which  was  plain  retribution  for  the  scandals  imputed  to  him,
hut  I  represented  to  him  that  having  been  the  particular
friend  of  Mme.  des  Ursins  (setting  aside  her  conduct  to  him,
and  not  comparing  my  attachment  to  him  with  my  friend¬
ship  for  her),  I  could  not  forget  the  kindness  she  had  always  ^
shown  me,  particularly  on  that  last  triumphant  visit  of  hers,
and  that  it  would  be  very  hard  upon  me  to  he  asked  not  to
see  her.  We  therefore  compromised,  and  the  duke  agreed
that  I  should  see  her  twice  ;  once  when  she  arrived  and
again  when  she  left  ;  under  a  promise  that  I  would  not  go
to  see  her  a  third  time,  and  that  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
should  not  see  her  at  all,  on  account  of  her  position  in  the
Duchesse  de  Berry’s  household, —  a  matter  we  both  digested
very  unwillingly,  but  were  forced  to  swallow.  As  I  wished

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  205

at  any  rate  to  get  the  fuH  benefit  of  my  innings  I  sent  word
to  Mme.  des  Ursins  of  these  shackles,  and  told  her  that  I
should  let  the  first  days  of  her  visit  go  by  before  asking  an
audience.  My  message  was  very  well  received;  she  had
known  through  many  years  how  I  stood  with  the  Due
d’Orléans  and  was  not  surprised  at  the  restrictions  ;  ^  ®

contrary  she  was  pleased  with  what  I  had  obtained.  A  ew
days  after  she  had  paid  her  visit  to  Versailles  I  went  to  her
at  two  in  the  afternoon;  she  instantly  closed  her  doors  to
every  one,  without  exception,  and  I  was  tête-à-tête  with  her

tül  ten  at  night.

It  can  weU  be  imagined  how  many  thmgs  passed  in  revie
before  us  in  so  long  an  interview.  I  found  the  same  fnen  -
ship  the  same  confidence,  much  discretion  as
to  th  Duo  d’Orl&ns  and  his  family,  perfect
With  her.  frankness  as  to  all  the  rest.  She  related  her

catastrophe,  without  involving  either  the  king  or  the  King  of
Spain,  whom  she  still  praised  ;  but  as  to  the  queen,  withou
gfvinv  wholly  loose  to  her  tongue,  she  predicted  to  me  what
L  since  happened.  She  told  me  all  that  she  had  gone
through,  spoke  very  naturally  of  her  visit  to  Vemdles.  of
her  pLful  position  in  Paris,  of  the  late  queen  and  the  Kmg
Spain,  of  the  many  persons  who  had  hgured  m  the  govern¬
ment  and  outside  of  it.  and  finally  of  her  various  uncertain
71  as  to  where  she  could  retire  with  dignity  about  which
ter  seemed  a  struggle  in  her  mind.  Those  eight  hours  o
conversation  with  a  person  who  could  relate  so  many  curious

“  h.  Lpm»  1.  «-  I"  "■  “  «

together.

206  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vn.

Her  visit  to  Versailles  had  not  been  agreeable.  She  had
gone  there  on  the  morning  of  Wednesday  to  dine  with  the
Duchesse  du  Lude,  with  whom  she  remained  until  the  hour
when  the  king  went  as  usual  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  where
she  went  too,  expecting  to  see  him  alone  with  the  latter,  hut
found  she  was  no  longer  allowed  to  he  tête-à-tête  with  them  ;
after  which  she  retired  into  the  town  to  the  house  of  Mme.
Adam,  wife  of  the  head-clerk  of  foreign  affairs,  who  gave  her  a
bed  and  a  supper.  The  next  day  she  dined  with  the  Duchesse
de  Ventadour,  and  then  returned  to  Paris.  All  she  obtained
from  the  king  was  the  change  of  her  pension  into  a  sum  in
the  public  funds,  which  gave  her  forty  thousand  francs  a
year.  This,  which  doubled  the  amount,  was  safer  than  a
pension,  which  she  feared  she  should  lose  as  soon  as  the
Due  d’Orléans  became  regent.  She  thought  of  retiring  to
Holland,  but  the  States-General  would  not  have  her,  either
at  the  Hague  or  at  Amsterdam.  She  had  counted  on  the
Hague.  She  then  thought  of  Utrecht,  but  she  was  soon
disgusted  with  the  idea  and  turned  her  plans  on  Italy.  She
owed  the  pecuniary  benefit  thus  granted  by  the  king  to  the
infiuence  of  the  Due  du  Maine,  in  acknowledgment  of  the
grandeurs  she  had  obtained  for  the  Due  de  Vendôme  in
Spain.

An  ambassador  from  Persia  had  arrived  at  Charenton,  all
his  expenses  paid  from  the  time  of  his  disembarkation.  The

king  made  his  coming  a  grand  affair,  and  Pont-

A  more  than  °  .  .  ,  .

doubtful  ambas-  chartrain,  the  minister  in  charge  of  it,  used  it

sador  from  Persia.  ,  ,  .  ,  t  e  i

as  a  means  to  pay  his  court,  in  tact  he  was
accused  of  creating  the  embassy,  in  which  there  really  seemed
to  be  nothing  genuine,  the  manners  of  the  ambassador  belying
it,  as  well  as  the  miserable  suite  who  attended  him,  and  the
poverty  of  the  presents  which  he  brought.  This  singular  am¬
bassador  brought  no  credentials  or  powers  from  the  King  of

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  207

Persia  or  any  of  his  ministers.  He  seemed  to  he  a  sort  of
provincial  bailiff  charged  by  the  governor  of  his  province  with
certain  business  negotiations,  whom  Pontchartrain  metamor¬
phosed  into  an  ambassador,  —  the  king  alone  being  duped  by
the  affair.  He  made  his  entry  into  Paris  on  horseback,  be¬
tween  the  Maréchal  de  Matignon  and  the  Baron  de  Breteuil,
introducer  of  ambassadors,  to  whom  he  did  so  many  vulgar
things,  and  made  such  foolish  squabbles  about  the  ceremonial
that  when  the  procession  reached  the  hotel  of  the  special  am¬
bassadors,  they  left  him  at  the  door  without  accompanying
him  inside,  as  the  rule  is,  and  went  off  to  Versailles  to  com¬
plain  to  the  king,  who  approved  of  their  course  and  thought
the  ambassador  very  uncouth.  Torcy  went  to  see  the  envoy,
who  excused  his  impertinences  on  the  ground  of  the  present
moon  being  contrary  to  him,  for  which  reason  he  obtained
a  postponement  of  his  audience  with  the  king.

About  this  time  Dippy  died,  he  being  the  interpreter  of
oriental  languages  to  the  king.  It  was  necessary  therefore
to  send  for  a  curé  living  near  Amboise,  who  had  passed  some
years  in  Persia.  It  so  happened  that  I  knew  him  well  and
I  now  talked  with  him.  He  was  a  man  of  much  consid¬
eration,  wise  and  sensible,  who  knew  the  manners  and  cus¬
toms  and  government  of  Persia  as  well  as  the  language.
Prom  what  he  saw  and  knew  of  this  ambassador,  with
whom  he  hved  as  long  as  the  latter  remained  in  Paris,  it
was  his  opinion  that  the  embassy  was  fictitious,  and  the
ambassador  some  common  kind  of  merchant,  who  was  much
embarrassed  to  sustain  his  part,  and  was  lacking  in  every
way.  The  king,  however,  to  whom  he  was  always  spoken
of  as  genuine,  and  who  was  almost  the  only  man  of  his
Court  who  beheved  him  to  he  so,  was  extremely  flattered
that  an  embassy  from  Persia  should  be  sent  to  him  without
an  invitation  on  his  part.  He  talked  of  it  with  much  com-

208

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yii.

placency,  and  expressed  a  wish  that  the  whole  Court  should
appear  in  the  utmost  magnificence  on  the  day  of  the  audi¬
ence,  which  was  fixed  for  Tuesday,  February  19.  He
himself  set  the  example,  which  was  followed  with  great

extravagance.

A  magnificent  throne,  raised  several  steps,  was  placed  at
the  end  of  the  gallery,  with  tiers  of  steps  down  each  side  of
«d  the  gallery,  wUch  was,  together  with  aU  the
behaviour.  apartments,  superbly  decorated.  The  steps

nearest  the  throne  were  for  the  ladies  of  the  Court  ;  those
lower  down  for  men  and  gapers  ;  hut  no  one  was  allowed  to
enter  who  was  not  in  full  dress.  The  king  lent  for  this
occasion  a  set  of  pearls  and  diamonds  to  the  Due  du  Maine,
and  a  set  of  coloured  stones  to  the  Comte  de  Toulouse.
The  Due  d’Orléans  wore  a  coat  of  blue  velvet,  embroidered
in  mosaic  with  pearls  and  diamonds,  which  carried  off  the
palm  for  splendour  and  good  taste.

The  courtyards,  roofs,  and  avenues  swarmed  with  people  ;
which  amused  the  king  much  as  he  looked  from  the  windows
and  took  great  pleasure  in  watching  for  the  arrival  of  the
ambassador,  who  came  at  eleven  o’clock  in  the  king  s  coaches,
attended  as  before  by  Maréchal  de  Matignon  and  the  Baron
de  Breteuil.  They  all  mounted  their  horses  at  the  end  of
the  avenue,  and  rode,  preceded  by  the  suite  of  the  ambassador,
into  the  great  courtyard,  where  they  dismounted  at  the
door  of  the  colonel  of  the  guards.  The  suite  seemed  very
wretched  in  every  way  ;  the  so-called  ambassador  was  greatly
embarrassed,  and  very  badly  dressed  ;  the  presents  beneath
notice.  Then  the  king,  accompanied  by  all  who  were  with
him  in  the  cabinet,  went  to  the  gallery  and  showed  himself
to  the  ladies  on  the  steps,  the  nearest  to  the  throne  being
occupied  by  the  princesses  of  the  blood.  He  himself  wore  a
coat  of  black  and  gold  stuff  with  the  Order  above  it;  the

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

209

coat  was  decorated  with  the  finest  of  the  crown  diamonds
to  the  value  of  over  twelve  niilhons  of  francs  ;  he  bent  be¬
neath  the  weight  of  them  and  seemed  rnuch  broken,  thinner,
and  looked  very  ill  in  the  face.  He  seated  himself  on  the
throne,  the  princes  of  the  blood  and  the  bastards  standing
beside  him,  with  their  heads  uncovered.  The  Duchesse  de
Ventadour  stood  on  the  right  of  the  throne,  holding  the
present  king  in  leading  strings.  The  Elector  of  Bavaria
was  on  the  second  tier  of  steps  with  the  ladies  he  brought
with  him,  and  the  Comte  de  Lusace  (that  is,  the  Prince-
Elector  of  Saxony)  was  on  that  of  the  Princesse  de  Conti,
daughter  of  M.  le  Prince.  Coypel,  the  painter,  and  Boze,
secretary  of  the  Academy  of  Inscriptions,  were  at  the  foot
of  the  throne,  one  to  make  a  picture  of  the  scene,  the  other
to  write  a  record  of  it.  Pontchartrain  had  forgotten  nothing
that  might  flatter  the  king  and  make  him  beheve  that  this
embassy  recalled  the  apogee  of  his  early  glory  ;  in  a  word  he
fooled  him  impudently  merely  to  please  him.

By  this  time  no  one  but  the  king  was  duped.  The  am¬
bassador  arrived  by  the  grand  staircase  of  the  ambassadors,
crossed  the  grand  apartments,  and  entered  the  gallery  through
the  salon  at  the  farther  end,  opposite  to  where  the  throne
was  erected.  The  splendour  of  the  spectacle  completely
disconcerted  him.  He  was  angry  two  or  three  times  during
the  audience  with  the  interpreter,  and  gave  reason  for  suspi¬
cion  that  he  understood  French.  After  the  audience,  he  was
entertained  at  dinner  by  the  king’s  officers  ;  he  then  paid  a
visit  to  the  future  king  in  the  late  queen’s  apartments,
superbly  decorated  for  the  occasion  ;  after  which  he  visited
Torcy  and  Pontchartrain,  and  returned  to  Paris.  The  pres¬
ents,  as  little  worthy  of  the  King  of  Persia  as  of  the  King  of
France,  consisted  in  all  of  four  hundred  very  ordinary  pearls,
two  hundred  worthless  turquoises,  and  two  gold  boxes  fuU  of
VOL.  in.  — 14

210

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

a  rare  balsam  which  issues  from  one  rock  inclosed  in  another
rock,  and  congeals  after  a  certain  space  of  time.  It  is  said

to  be  marvellous  for  wounds.

Though  it  is  not  yet  time  to  speak  of  the  king’s  state  of
health,  it  was  seen  to  decline  visibly,  and  his  appetite,  always
so  great  and  so  regular,  was  very  considerably
on  the”<feaS“?  diminished.  Wliile  the  attention  of  the  Court
the  king.  this,  not  the  slightest  change

took  place  in  his  accustomed  way  of  life,  nor  m  the  divers
arrangements  of  his  day,  always  the  same  in  their  diversity.
Foreign  countries  also  were  not  less  watchful  or  less  weU
informed.  Bets  were  made  as  to  whether  his  life  would  or
would  not  last  beyond  the  1st  of  September,  that  is  to  say,
three  months  ;  and  though  the  king  always  wanted  to  know
everything,  it  can  well  be  imagined  that  no  one  was  willing
to  tell  him  the  news  from  London.  He  usually  made  Torcy
read  him  the  gazettes  from  Holland  after  the  council  of
State.  One  day,  not  having  previously  looked  over  the
paper,  Torcy  came  suddenly  on  a  mention  of  these  bets  in
an  article  from  London  ;  he  stopped,  stammered,  and  skipped
the  passage.  The  king  observed  this  and  asked  the  reason,
what  he  skipped  and  why.  Torcy  coloured  to  the  whites  of
his  eyes,  said  what  he  could  about  its  being  some  imperti¬
nence  not  worthy  of  being  read.  The  king  insisted,  and  then
Torcy,  in  the  greatest  embarrassment,  read  the  bets  from  end
to  end.  The  king  did  not  show  that  he  was  hurt,  but  he
was,  profoundly;  so  much  so  that  when  soon  after  he  sat
down  to  table  he  could  not  refrain  from  speakmg  of  the
matter  and  looking  round  at  the  company,  though  without
mentioning  the  gazette.  This  was  at  Marly,  and  it  so
chanced  that  I  was  present.  The  king  looked  at  me  as  he
did  at  the  others,  but  more  as  if  he  expected  me  to  reply.
I  took  good  care  not  to  open  my  hps,  and  I  dropped  my

1715]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

211

eyes.  The  king  seemed  moved,  like  a  man  who  did  not  wish
to  show  it.  He  made  an  effort  to  eat,  and  to  eat  with  appetite,
but  it  was  noticed  that  the  morsels  turned  in  his  mouth;
and  this  trifling  event  increased  the  watchfulness  of  the
Court,  especially  of  those  who,  by  their  position,  had  more
reason  to  be  wary  than  the  others.

Boulainvilliers,  with  whom  I  became  acquainted  through
the  Due  de  Noailles,  was  a  man  of  quality,  who  claimed  to
be  related  to  the  house  of  Croï  ;  he  was  not

Boulainvilliers  ;

his  predictions,  Very  prosperous,  and  had  served  little,  but  he
true  and  false.  ^  good  mind  and  knew  much  of  letters.

He  possessed  a  great  knowledge  of  history,  especially  that  of
France,  to  which  he  applied  himself,  particularly  as  to  the
ancient  spirit  and  the  ancient  government,  and  the  various
steps  of  its  decline  to  the  present  form.  He  had  also  delved
into  the  genealogies  of  the  kingdom  ;  no  one  doubted  his
capacity,  and  few  his  superiority  in  those  two  lines  of  in¬
quiry,  in  which  a  perfectly  clear  and  accurate  memory  served
him  much.  He  was  a  gentle,  simple  man,  humble  by  nature,
though  he  felt  himself  strong,  far  indeed  from  boasting  of
his  knowledge  and  ready  to  explain  it  without  seeking  to
show  it  off;  his  modesty  was  rare  in  every  way.  But  he  was
eager  for  information  to  the  highest  degree,  and  his  mind
was  so  free  that  nothing  was  capable  of  restraining  his
curiosity.  He  had  given  himself  up  to  astrology,  and  had
the  reputation  of  being  very  successful.  He  was,  however,
extremely  reserved  on  this  subject  ;  none  but  his  intimate
friends  were  allowed  to  speak  of  it,  and  to  them  alone  would
he  make  reply.

He  often  resided  on  his  estate  of  Saint-Cère,  near  the  sea,
not  far  from  Forges,  where  he  would  go  to  visit  his  acquaint¬
ance,  and,  I  rather  think,  pick  up  the  news,  about  which  he
was  always  inquisitive.  When  Mme.  de  SainDSimon  went  to

212

MEMOIKS  OE  the  duc  de  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  vil

take  tlie  waters  at  Forges  he  came  to  see  her,  and  asked  so
much  about  the  king  that  she  felt  sure  he  thought  he  had
some  surer  knowledge  on  that  subject  than  was  known  to
others.  She  told  him  her  thought.  At  first  he  denied  it,
but  finally  yielded.  She  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  the
king’s  health,  which  was  visibly  declining,  although  there
was  no  sign  whatever  of  a  speedy  end.  This  was  on  the  fif¬
teenth  or  sixteenth  of  August.  BoulainviUiers  told  her  that
he  believed  the  king  would  not  hve  long,  and,  being  pressed,
added  that  he  thought  he  would  die  on  the  day  of  Saint-
Louis,  but  he  had  not  yet  been  able  to  verify  his  calculations
precisely  ;  he  was,  however,  certain  that  the  king  would  be
in  extremis  on  that  day,  and  if  he  survived  it  he  would  cer¬
tainly  die  before  the  third  of  September.  Boulainvdhers
had  predicted,  long  before  the  death  of  the  King  of  Spain,
that  neither  Monseigneur  nor  any  of  his  three  sons  would
reign  in  France.  He  foresaw  by  several  years  the  death  of
his  only  son,  and  his  own,  which  the  event  verified ,  but  he
was  mistaken  about  that  of  many  others,  specially  that  of
the  present  king,  Louis  XV.,  who  he  thought  would  die
young.  The  Due  d’Orléans,  he  said,  would  die  after  two
years  in  a  prison,  which  he  would  never  leave.  I  need  not
cite  other  instances  of  the  false  and  the  true  ;  these  are
enough  to  show  the  falsity,  the  nothingness  of  this  pretended
science,  which  seduces  so  many  men  of  intellect,  and  which
BoulainviUiers  himself,  captivated  as  he  was  by  it,  had  the
sincerity  to  admit  was  founded  on  no  principle.

Père  Tellier,  who  had  not  yet  managed  to  get  his  national
council,  at  which  he  and  Bissy  expected  to  have  the  hull

accepted,  saw  with  despair  the  risk  it  ran  if
f-ïtlr  tbe  king  died  before  its  acceptance.  He  made
justice”  to  en-  effort.  The  king  sent  several  messages

register  the  bull.  ^

on  the  subject  to  the  chief-justice  and  the  oifi-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  213

cers  of  the  law.  D’Aguesseau,  procureicr-général,  was  the
one  who  held  out  against  it  naost  firmly  ;  the  chief-justice
floated  between  the  Court  and  his  party  ;  Fleury,  first  avocat-
général,  put  all  his  wits  and  all  his  shrewdness  (and  no  one
had  more)  into  gaining  time,  without  too  much  open  oppo¬
sition.  Chauvelin,  another  avocat-général,  full  of  cleverness,
knowledge,  and  ideas,  who  had  neither  God  nor  law  but  his
own  fortunes,  was  sold  to  the  Jesuits  and  to  all  that  could
advance  them.  Tellier,  sure  of  his  support,  had  brought
him  for  a  year  past  into  secret  confidence  with  the  king,
who  admitted  him  the  back  way  and  worked  with  him
tête-à-tête.  Some  violent  course  was  suspected,  judging  by
certain  words  which  escaped  the  king,  —  said,  no  doubt,  ex¬
pressly  to  intimidate.  The  wife  of  d’ Aguesseau,  a  sister  of
Ormesson,  exhorted  her  husband  to  stand  all  the  more  firm,
because  he  was  surrounded  by  such  companions  ;  and  on  his
starting  for  ]\darly,  whither  the  king  had  summoned  them,
she  conjured  him,  as  she  embraced  him,  to  forget  that  he
had  a  wife  and  cliildren,  to  count  his  own  office  and  fortune
as  nothing,  hut  his  honour,  his  conscience  as  all.  Those  vir¬
tuous  words  had  their  effect.  He  sustained  the  assault  all
but  alone  ;  but  he  spoke  with  such  respect,  such  force,  such
clearness,  that  the  others  dared  not  wholly  abandon  him  ;
so  that  the  king,  incensed  by  the  opposition,  turned  angrily
upon  him,  and  he  was  for  a  time  in  danger  of  losing  his
office.  But  such  violence,  which  would  only  have  embittered
the  minds  of  aU,  was  not  Père  Telher’s  idea.  Though  keenly
sensible  to  the  charms  of  vengeance,  he  was  not  going  to
turn  aside  for  it,  and  he  urged  the  king  so  strongly  that  he
forced  him,  against  his  almost  invincible  repugnance,  and  to
the  injury  of  his  health,  to  declare  that  on  his  return  from
Marly  he  would  go  to  Paris  to  hold  a  lit  de  justice  and  see
himself  whether  or  not  he  had  the  power  to  have  the  bull

214  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  vii.

registered  by  parliament  without  modification.  He  sent
word  of  this  to  parliament,  where  it  spread  consternation,
hut  not  so  generally  that  opinions  were  not  fairly  balanced,
both  there  and  at  Court,  and  in  society,  where  nothing  else
was  talked  of.

The  Due  d’Orléans,  who  was  not  ignorant  of  what  I
thought  about  the  bull  and  had  often  told  me  what  he
thought  himself,  asked  me  what  I  should  do  on  this  occa¬
sion.  I  rephed  that  the  duty  and  oath  of  the  peers  are
precise  as  to  the  obligation  of  assisting  the  king  in  all  high
and  important  affairs  ;  and  that  I  should  not  hesitate  to  be
present.  But  first,  I  should  leave  everything  in  a  state  to  be
found  exactly  as  I  wished  ;  I  should  have  money  and  my
post-chaise  ready,  and  then  I  should  go  to  the  lit  de  justice,
and  having  my  conscience,  my  honour,  the  laws  of  the  king¬
dom,  and  justice  and  truth  to  guard  and  answer  for,  I
should  speak  with  all  my  strength  against  the  bull,  its  reg¬
istration,  its  acceptance,  with  as  much  respect  for  the  king
and  his  authority  as  I  could  command,  perfectly  convinced
that  I  should  not  return  to  my  own  home,  and  should  get
off  cheaply  with  an  exile,  if  I  did  not  go  to  the  Bastille.  At
this  prompt  answer,  the  Due  d’Orléans,  who  knew  me  too
well  to  doubt  the  truth  and  firmness  of  my  resolution,  looked
at  me  a  moment,  and  then  embraced  me.  He  said  he  not
only  approved  of  my  decision,  but  that  he  should  do  the
same  himself,  with  this  difference,  that  he  should  speak  from
a  place  where  there  was  nothing  between  himself  and  the
king,  who  should  not  lose  one  word  of  his  discourse,  and
would  see  him  from  head  to  foot  as  he  spoke,  and  would
probably  so  tremble  with  rage  at  finding  himself  resisted
to  his  face  that  no  one  could  tell  what  might  come  of  it.
We  spoke  again  of  the  matter  several  times,  preparing  our¬
selves  mutually,  until  the  day  when  the  king  returned  to

1715]

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

215

Versailles,  and  was  on  the  point  of  going  to  parhament,
when  his  health  gave  way,  the  lit  de  justice  was  given  up,
and  with  it  the  registration  on  which  Père  Telher’s  heart
was  set.

I  should  not  have  dwelt  so  long  on  a  matter  which  never
took  place,  if  I  did  not  think  it  both  curious  and  important
to  show  the  Due  d’Orléans  as  he  showed  himself  to  me  at
this  time,  in  order  to  see  him  as  he  was  afterwards  in  the
same  matter,  which  was  wholly  the  same,  without  change  ex¬
cept  in  being  more  developed,  more  evident,  and,  if  possible,
more  odious  in  every  respect.

VIII

The  reign  of  Louis  XIY.,  now  approaching  its  end,  leaves
little  to  report  beyond  the  circumstances  of  the  last  month
Necessity  for  of  Ms  hfe.  These  events,  so  curious  and  so
st^r^onaft^days  important  to  relate  with  the  most  exact  truth
of  the  king.  and  clearness  and  in  their  own  precise  order,

are  so  linked  with  those  that  immediately  followed  the
death  of  this  monarch  that  it  is  impossible  to  separate  them.
Nor  is  it  less  curious  and  even  necessary  to  reveal  the  pro¬
jects,  thoughts,  difficulties,  and  different  plans  which  revolved
in  the  mind  of  the  prince  who  must  inevitably  become  the
head  of  the  kingdom,  no  matter  what  measures  Mme.  de
Mamtenon  and  the  Due  du  Maine  might  take  to  leave  him
only  the  name  of  regent,  of  which  they  could  not  deprive
him,  and  what  sort  of  administration  he  desired  to  estabhsh.
This  is  therefore  the  place  to  explain  many  things,  after
which  I  shall  return  to  the  narration  of  the  last  month  of
the  king’s  life  and  the  events  that  immediately  followed  it.

But  before  entering  this  thorny  path  it  is  well  to  make
known,  if  I  can,  the  character  of  the  leading  personage,  his
internal  and  his  external  shackles,  and  all  that  personally
concerned  him.  I  say  if  I  can,  for  I  have  never  in  my  hfe
known  any  one  so  eminently  and  perfectly  contradictory  in
all  things  as  the  Due  d’  Orléans.  It  will  be  perceived  that
although  I  knew  him  undisguisedly  for  many  years,  during
which  he  had  hidden  nothing  from  me,  and  during  these
latter  years  I  had  been  the  only  man  he  wished  to  see
and  the  only  one  to  whom  he  could  open  his  heart, — ■

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

217

and  he  did  open  it  from  confidence  and  from  necessity, —
it  will  he  felt,  I  say,  in  what  follows,  that  I  did  not  yet
know  him  perfectly,  nor  did  he  fully  know  himself.

The  Due  d’Orléans  was  of  scarcely  medium  height,  very
plump  without  being  fat,  his  air  and  carriage  easy  and  very
noble,  his  face  large,  agreeable,  high-coloured

First  part  of  the  ’  b  b

character  of  the  On  a  dark  skui,  encEsod  in  a  black  wig.
Due  d  Orleans.  'phough  lie  WES  alwEys  a  bad  dancer  and  had

succeeded  rather  poorly  at  the  Academy,  he  had  an  infinite
grace  of  expression,  gesture,  and  manner,  which  was  so  nat¬
ural  that  it  shone  in  all  his  actions,  even  the  most  ordinary.
With  much  ease  when  nothing  constrained  him,  he  was
gentle,  cordial,  frank,  charmingly  accessible,  with  a  dehghtful
tone  of  voice  and  a  gift  of  speech  that  was  quite  pecuhar  to
himself,  in  whatever  direction  it  might  take  ;  possessing  a
fluency,  clearness,  and  precision  which  always  fascinated.
His  eloquence  was  natural,  even  on  the  commonest  and
most  every-day  topics  ;  with  equal  precision  and  accuracy  on
matters  of  abstract  science,  which  he  rendered  clear,  on  the
affairs  of  government,  politics,  finance,  questions  of  law,  the
armies,  the  Court,  in  ordinary  conversation,  and  about  aU
sorts  of  arts  and  mechanics.  History  and  memoirs  he  knew
well  and  employed  usefully  ;  the  personages  of  all  time  and
their  lives  were  present  with  him,  and  he  knew  the  intrigues
of  former  Courts  as  he  did  those  of  his  own  day.  To  hear
him,  one  would  have  thought  him  a  vast  reader.  Hot  at  all.
He  skimmed  hghtly  ;  but  his  memory  was  so  remarkable
that  he  forgot  neither  things,  names,  nor  dates,  which  he  gave
with  precision  ;  and  his  apprehension  was  so  quick  that  in
skimming  he  gained  as  much  as  though  he  read  carefully.
He  excelled  in  speaking  impromptu,  with  aptness  and  vi¬
vacity,  either  in  repartee  or  wit.  He  often  reproached  me
(and  so  did  others  even  more  than  he)  that  I  never  flattered

218

MEMOIKS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viii

him  ;  hut  I  often  gave  him  one  praise  which  is  deserved  by
very  few  and  belongs  to  none  so  justly  as  it  does  to  him,
namely  ;  that  although  he  had  immense  intelligence,  and  of
aU  sorts,  his  singular  perspicacity  was  joined  to  such  just¬
ness  and  accuracy  that  he  would  never  have  been  mistaken
in  any  affair  had  he  followed  the  first  perceptions  of  his  own
mind.  Sometimes  he  took  this  praise  of  mine  for  blame;
he  was  not  always  wrong  as  to  that,  but  it  was  none  the
less  true.  With  aU  these  gifts,  no  assumption,  no  trace  of
superiority  of  mind  or  knowledge,  arguing  always  as  an
equal  with  equals  ;  nothing  imposing  or  constraining  about
him  in  society,  and  while  he  thoroughly  felt  who  and  what
he  was,  so  that  others  could  never  forget  it  in  his  presence,
he  put  all  at  their  ease  and  himself  at  their  level

Although  he  had  no  liking  for  gossip,  still  less  for  being
what  is  called  malicious,  he  was  dangerous  in  his  opinions
on  the  valour  of  others.  He  never  sought  to  speak  of  cour¬
age,  and  was  modest  and  silent  about  himself  personally  in
that  respect,  and  if  he  related  things  of  that  nature  in  which
he  had  played  the  chief  part,  he  always  equitably  gave  full
praise  to  others  and  said  nothing  of  himself  ;  but  he  seldom
avoided  biting  those  who  were  not,  as  he  expressed  it,  francs
du  collier,  willing  to  press  on  ;  and  for  them  he  made  one
feel  his  contempt  and  repugnance.  He  had  the  foible  of
fancying  he  resembled  Henri  IV.  in  everything  ;  he  affected
his  ways,  his  repartees  ;  he  even  persuaded  himself  that  he
was  like  him  in  face  and  figure,  and  no  other  flattery  or
homage  so  touched  his  heart.  This  was  a  complaisance  to
which  I  never  could  bend  myself  ;  I  felt  too  strongly  that
he  sought  that  resemblance  as  much  in  the  vices  of  the  great
king  as  in  his  virtues,  and  that  he  admired  the  former  as
much  as  the  latter.  Like  Henri  IV.  he  was  naturally  kind,
humane,  compassionate  ;  and  this  man,  so  cruelly  accused

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

219

of  the  blackest  and  most  inhuman  crime,  was  the  one  most
naturally  opposed  to  the  injury  of  others  whom  I  have  ever
known  ;  nay,  a  man  so  singularly  averse  to  even  paining
them  that  it  may  truly  he  said  that  his  gentleness,  his  human¬
ity,  his  accommodating  spirit  became  defects  ;  in  fact,  I  do
not  fear  to  say  that  he  turned  the  supreme  virtue  of  the  for¬
giveness  of  enemies  into  vice,  so  that  its  generosity  without
reason  or  discrimination  came  very  near  being  insensihihty,
and  caused  him  many  grievous  annoyances  and  evils,  ex¬
amples  and  proofs  of  which  will  he  found  in  the  sequel.

I  remember  that  about  a  year  before  the  king’s  death,
having  gone  up  early  after  dinner  to  see  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans  at  Marly,  I  found  her  in  bed  with  a  headache,
and  the  Due  d’Orléans  alone  with  her,  sitting  in  a  chair  by
the  bedside.  I  was  hardly  seated  before  the  duchess  began
to  tell  me  a  fact  about  the  Prince  and  the  Cardinal  de  Eohan
lately  occurring  and  proved  by  the  clearest  evidence,  which
concerned  measures  taken  against  the  Due  d’Orléans  based
on  those  execrable  imputations  fomented  by  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon  and  the  Due  du  Maine.  I  exclaimed  against  the
infamy,  all  the  more  because  the  Due  d’Orléans  had  always,
I  don’t  know  why,  favoured  the  two  brothers  and  relied
upon  them.  “  And  what  do  you  say,”  she  added,  “  of  the
Due  d’Orléans,  who,  since  he  knows  that  fact,  and  does  not
and  cannot  doubt  it,  is  just  as  kind  to  them  as  usual  ?  ”  I
looked  at  the  duke,  who  was  lolhng  in  his  chair  and  had
merely  uttered  a  few  words  to  confirm  the  narrative,  and  I
said  to  him  :  “  I  shall  say  the  truth,  monsieur,  and  that  is
that  since  Louis  le  Débonnaire  there  has  never  been  any  one
as  débonnaire  as  you.”  At  these  words  he  bounded  up  in
his  chair,  red  with  anger  to  the  whites  of  his  eyes,  stuttering
with  wrath  against  me,  who,  he  declared,  was  saying  spiteful
things  to  him,  and  against  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  who  had

220  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tiii.

brought  them  down  upon  him,  and  who  was  laughing.

“  Courage,  monsieur,”  I  said  ;  “  find  fault  with  your  friends
and  indulge  your  enemies.  I  am  delighted  that  you  are
angry  ;  it  shows  I  have  put  my  finger  on  the  boil  ;  press
hard  and  the  patient  cries.  I  should  hke  to  sc[ueeze  all  the
pus  out  of  it,  and  then  you  would  be  another  man.”  He
growled  still,  but  was  soon  pacified.  This  was  one  of  the
only  two  occasions  when  he  was  really  angry  with  me.  The

other  I  will  relate  in  due  time.

He  loved  liberty  ;  and  as  much  for  others  as  for  himself.
He  often  praised  up  England  on  this  point,  where,  he  said,
there  were  no  exiles,  no  lettves  de  cachet,  and  where  the  king
could  forbid  nothing  but  the  entrance  to  his  own  palace,  nor
put  any  one  into  prison  of  his  own  will.  Ambition  to  reign
or  to  govern  was  not  in  him.  If  he  did  a  perfectly  foohsh
thing  iu  Spaiu,  it  was  solely  because  some  one  had  put  it
into  his  head.  He  never  thought,  as  we  shall  see,  seriously
of  governing  until  he  was  forced  either  to  exercise  his  rights
of  birth  or  be  crushed  and  dishonoured.  As  for  reigning,  I
am  not  afraid  to  declare  that  he  never  desired  it,  and  had
the  occasion  come,  he  would  have  been  both  embarrassed
and  irked  by  it.  Then  what  did  he  want  ?  I  shall  be  asked.
To  command  the  armies  as  long  as  the  wars  lasted,  and  to
amuse  himself  the  rest  of  the  time,  without  restraint  for
himself  or  others.

This  was  really  what  he  was  fitted  for.  A  natural,  tran¬
quil  valour,  which  allowed  him  to  see  and  foresee  all,  and
remedy  all  ;  a  great  breadth  of  miud  for  the  chess-board  of  a
campaign,  for  the  plans  of  it,  and  for  gathering  all  he  needed
in  their  execution  ;  for  establishing  in  advance  his  re¬
sources,  and  knowing  how  to  hold  them  ready  and  profit  by
them  from  first  to  last  ;  and  also  for  using  with  wise  vigour
and  promptitude  all  the  advantages  that  the  chances  of  war

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  221

might  give  him.  It  may  he  said  truly  that  he  was  com¬
mander,  engineer,  and  commissary  ;  that  he  knew  the  effec¬
tive  force  of  his  troops,  the  names  and  capacity  of  his  officers,
the  distinguishing  points  of  each  corps  ;  that  he  knew  also
how  to  make  himself  adored  and  yet  maintain  discipline
and  execute,  even  when  he  lacked  everything,  the  most  diffi¬
cult  manoeuvres.  It  was  for  this  he  was  so  admired  in
Spain,  and  so  regretted  (because  so  thwarted)  in  Italy,  where
he  foresaw  the  enemy’s  advance  and  Marsin  stopped  his
arm.  His  plans,  whether  in  matters  of  war  or  in  those  of
the  State,  were  judicious  and  firm  ;  it  was  surprising,  the  de¬
tail  with  which  he  took  in  all  questions  without  confusion
and  saw  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  courses
that  presented  themselves;  also  the  clearness  with  which
he  could  exhibit  them  to  others;  in  short,  the  infinite
variety  and  accuracy  of  his  knowledge  without  ever  put¬
ting  it  on  exhibition  or  having,  in  truth,  a  better  opinion
of  himself.

Wliat  a  man  !  —  so  above  all  others,  and  so  informed  on
every  point  !  W^here  can  we  find  one  more  expressly  formed
to  make  the  happiness  of  France  when  he  came  to  govern  it  ?
Let  us  add  here  one  essential  quality:  he  was  thirty-six
years  old  at  the  death  of  the  dauphin,  and  nearly  thirty-
eight  at  that  of  the  Due  de  Berry  ;  he  had  spent  those  years
as  a  private  individual,  wholly  removed  from  all  idea  of  ever
coming  to  the  helm  ;  as  a  courtier,  battered  by  storms  and
tempests,  who  had  lived  in  a  manner  to  know  all  men  who
were  personages,  and  most  of  those  who  were  not;  in  a
word,  he  had  had  the  advantage  of  leading  a  private  life
among  men  and  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  them  which  with¬
out  that  life  could  not  otherwise  have  been  supplied  to  him.
All  this  was  the  fine  side  of  his  nature  — very  fine  un¬
doubtedly,  and  very  rare.  Unhappily  there  is  another,  and

222

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  viil

a  contrasting  one,  which  must  here  be  revealed  at  the  risk
of  some  shght  repetition  of  what  has  been  said  already.

This  prince,  born  to  be  the  honour  and  the  master-work
of  a  noble  education,  was  not  fortunate  in  his  preceptors.
Saint-Laurent,  a  man  of  no  position,  who  held  merely  a
small  office  in  Monsieur’s  household,  was  the  first  to  whom
he  was  confided.  He  was,  however,  a  man  to  have  chosen
by  preference  throughout  all  Europe  for  the  education  of
kings,  but  he  died  before  his  pupil  was  of  an  age  to  profit  by
him  ;  and,  by  the  greatest  of  all  misfortunes,  his  death  was
so  sudden  that  he  had  no  time  to  remember  the  hands  m
which  he  left  him,  nor  could  he  have  imagined  that  those
hands  would  be  fastened  on  him  permanently.  We  have
seen  (at  the  beginning  of  these  Memoirs)  who  and  what  was
the  Abbé  Dubois,  why  he  was  employed  by  Saint-Laurent,
how  he  succeeded  in  worming  himself  into  the  friendship
and  confidence  of  a  lad  who  knew  no  one,  and  the  enormous
use  he  made  of  it  to  hope  for  fortune,  and  meantime  to  earn
his  bread.  This  man  became  after  the  death  of  Louis  AIM.
so  great  a  personage  that  it  is  necessary  to  make  him
known.

The  Abbé  Dubois  was  a  thin,  slender,  sorry-looking,  little
man,  with  a  blond  wig  and  a  weasel  face  that  was  clever
but  full  of  what  in  vulgar  French  is  called

Character  of  the  j.i  •  i.

Abbé,  afterwards  [^CUrSGdllBSS],  DTlt  CQjIlIlOt  0tn6rWlS6  06

Cardinal  Dubois,  yices  fought  witliln  Mm

for  mastery.  They  kept  up  a  constant  uproar  and  conflict
among  themselves.  Avarice,  debauchery,  ambition  were  his
gods  ;  treachery,  flattery,  servility,  his  means  ;  utter  impiety
his  rest  ;  the  opinion  that  integrity  and  honesty  were  mere
shams  with  which  people  adorn  themselves,  having  no  reality
in  their  lives,  his  principle  ;  consequently  all  means  to  his
ends  were,  to  his  mind,  good.  He  excelled  in  base  intrigues

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  223

in  fact,  he  lived  in  them  and  could  not  do  without  them  ;
hut  always  for  some  object,  to  which  all  his  proceedings
tended  with  a  patience  which  never  ceased  until  he  obtained
success  or  the  reiterated  demonstration  that  success  could
never  be  obtained,  —  unless,  indeed,  while  groping  thus  in  the
depths  and  darkness,  he  chanced  on  a  gleam  of  hght  in  some
other  mine.  He  passed  his  life  in  sapping.  The  boldest
lying  was  second  nature  in  him,  and  he  did  it  with  a  simple,
upright,  sincere,  and  often  deprecating  air.  He  could  have
talked  with  grace  and  facility  if,  in  his  desire  to  penetrate
others,  the  fear  of  advancing  more  than  he  wished  had  not
accustomed  him  to  a  fictitious  stammering,  which  was  dis¬
agreeable  and  became,  when  much  increased  by  the  impor¬
tance  of  a  topic,  absolutely  intolerable,  and  sometimes
unintelligible.  Otherwise  his  conversation  would  have  been
agreeable.  He  had  mind,  some  knowledge  of  letters,  history,
and  books  ;  much  knowledge  of  the  world,  and  a  great  desire
to  please,  and  insinuate  himself.  But  all  this  was  spoilt  by
the  fumes  of  falseness,  which  issued,  in  spite  of  himself,
through  the  pores  of  his  skin,  deadening  even  his  gayety.
It  became  known,  as  soon  as  he  dared  cease  to  restrain  him¬
self,  how  selfish,  debauched,  inconsistent,  ignorant  essentially,
passionate,  blaspheming,  and  crazy  he  was  ;  and  how  he
openly  despised  his  master,  the  State,  and  society  without
exception,  in  order  to  sacrifice  them  all  to  himself,  to  his
influence,  his  power,  his  greatness,  his  avarice,  his  fears,  and
his  revenges.  Such  was  the  sage  to  whom  Monsieur  con¬
fided  the  morals  of  his  only  son.

So  good  a  master  did  not  lose  time  with  a  disciple  still
fresh,  in  whom  the  excellent  principles  of  Saint-Laurent  had
not  had  time  to  strike  root,  whatever  esteem  and  affection
he  retained  throughout  his  life  for  that  excellent  man.  I
must  here  acknowledge  with  bitterness,  because  everything

224  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

must  1)6  S3.crific6d  to  trutli,  tlitit  tli6  Due  d.  Orlétiiis  brouglit
into  the  world  a  pliancy,  or  to  call  things  by  their  right
names,  a  weakness  which  marred  all  his  talents  incessantly,
and  was  to  this  preceptor  a  marvellous  assistance  all  his  hfe.
Dubois  flattered  him  on  the  side  of  his  morals  to  entice  him
into  debauchery,  and  on  the  side  of  his  mind  to  persuade  him
he  had  too  much  of  it  to  be  duped  by  rehgion,  which  was
from  all  time,  according  to  the  abbé’s  ideas,  a  mere  inven¬
tion  of  policy,  to  frighten  ordinary  minds  and  keep  the
peoples  in  subjection.  He  infatuated  the  youth  with  his
favourite  principle  that  integrity  in  man  and  virtue  in
woman  were  myths  without  reahty  in  any  one,  —  unless  it
might  be  a  few  fools  who  had  let  such  shackles  as  those  of

o

rehgion  be  imposed  upon  them,  and  perhaps  a  few  other  per¬
sons  who,  having  minds  and  capacity,  had  allowed  themselves
to  be  dwarfed  by  the  prejudices  of  education.  This  was  the
doctrine  of  the  worthy  ecclesiastic,  whence  followed  hcense
for  lies,  craft,  infldelity,  treachery,  every  species  of  means  ;
in  a  word,  all  crime  and  all  rascahty  under  the  specious
names  of  capacity,  cleverness,  grandeur,  freedom,  and  depth
of  mind,  ideas,  and  conduct,  provided  only  that  men  knew
how  to  conceal  their  convictions  and  avoid  the  prejudices
and  suspicions  of  common  people.

Unhappily,  everything  concurred  in  the  Due  d’Orléans  to
open  his  heart  and  mind  to  this  execrable  poison.  A  fresh
Second  part  of  youth,  much  vigor  and  health,  the  transports
If  the  of  a  first  escape  from  the  yoke,  the  mortifica-

d’orie'ans.  pf  pjg  marriage,  and  his  enforced  idleness

with  its  consequent  ennui,  a  liking,  so  fatal  at  an  early
age,  for  that  fine  air  of  man  of  the  world  which  the  youth
desires  to  imitate  and  surpass,  together  with  the  seductions
of  passion  and  the  example  of  the  young  men  about  him,
accustomed  him  to  debauchery,  and  still  more  to  the  racket

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  225

of  debauchery,  so  that  finally  he  could  not  do  without  it,
and  could  he  amused  only  by  noise,  tumult,  and  excess.

Eeturning  more  assiduously  to  Court  after  the  death  of
Monsieur,  ennui  laid  hold  of  him  and  threw  him  into  that
study  of  chemistry  which  was  so  cruelly  used  against  him.
He  was  horn  ennuyé,  and  was  so  accustomed  by  this  time
to  live  outside  of  himself  that  it  was  intolerable  to  him  to
live  within  ;  and  yet  he  was  incapable  of  seeking  an  occupa¬
tion.  He  could  only  live  in  the  movement  and  torrent  of
affairs,  as  for  instance,  at  the  head  of  an  army,  or  busy  with
the  cares  of  preparing  what  was  needful  for  a  campaign,  or
in  the  midst  of  the  noise  and  vivacity  of  debauchery.  He
languished  when  there  was  no  noise,  no  excess,  no  tumult.
He  threw  himself  into  painting,  after  his  great  taste  for
chemistry  was  deadened  by  all  that  was  so  cruelly  said
of  it.  He  painted  almost  every  afternoon  at  Versailles  and
at  Marly.  He  was  a  judge  of  pictures  and  loved  them,  and
made  a  collection  which  in  number  and  character  were  not
behind  those  of  the  crown.  Never  man  was  born  with
more  talents  of  all  sorts  or  so  much  readiness  and  ease  in
using  them  ;  yet  never  was  any  life  so  vacant,  so  delivered
over  to  the  bore  of  emptiness.

Madame  used  to  say  that  all  the  fairies  had  been  invited
to  her  son’s  birth,  and  they  all  came,  and  each  of  them  gave
him  a  talent,  so  that  he  had  every  one  of  them  ;  but  un¬
luckily,  one  old  fairy  was  forgotten,  and  being  piqued  at  the
neglect  and  at  getting  there  so  late  that  the  other  fairies
had  given  them  all,  she  revenged  herself  by  endowing  him
with  a  faculty  that  made  them  worthless  ;  so  that,  although
he  had  them  all,  he  had  never  been  able  to  use  any.  It  must
be  owned  that  in  the  main  the  portrait  is  striking.

One  of  the  misfortunes  of  this  prince  was  to  be  incapable
of  perseverance,  even  to  the  point  of  not  being  able  to  com-

VOL.  III.  — 15

226  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DDC  DE  SAIHT-SIMON,  [ch.p.  vm.

oangeruus,  ~  - - -  -  _

friendship,  of  gratitude  and  vengeance,  is  the  same,  and
he  lacked  this  principle,  the  results  were  many  and  per¬
nicious.  He  was  timid  to  excess  ;  he  felt  this,  and  was  so
ashamed  of  it  that  he  affected  the  contrary,  even  to  pride
himself  upon  his  boldness.  But  the  truth  was,  as  every
one  felt  when  his  authority  developed,  nothing  could  he
obtained  from  him,  neither  favour  nor  justice,  except  throug
fear,  or  by  excessive  importunity.  He  tried  to.  escape  by
words,  then  by  promises,  of  which  his  facile  nature  made
him  prodigal,  hut  only  those  who  had  the  strongest  grip
could  make  him  keep  them.  Hence  so  many  broken
pledges  that  his  word  at  last  came  to  mean  nothing ,  an
so  many  promises  made  to  so  many  persons  of  the  same
thing  which  could  only  be  granted  to  one  person,  were  a
fruitful  source  of  discredit  and  discontent.  Nothing  mis¬
led  or  injured  him  more  than  his  opinion  that  he  was  horn
to  know  how  to  deceive  the  rest  of  mankind.  He  was
never  heheved,  even  when  he  spoke  sincerely,  and  his  facile
readiness  lessened  the  value  of  all  he  did.  Besides  all  this,
the  obscure  and,  for  the  most  part,  rascally  company  which
he  kept,  and  which  he  himself  did  not  refram  from  publicly
calling  his  “  roués,”  drove  away  the  good  that  was  in  him

and  did  him  infinite  harm.

Though  we  often  talked  of  religion,  which,  as  long  as  I
could  hope  to  bring  him  hack  to  it,  I  presented  in  all  ways,
so  as  to  treat  that  important  subject  in  a  manner  that  should
not  repulse  him,  I  was  never  able  to  make  out  the  system,  if
any,  which  he  invented  for  himself  ;  and  I  finally  became  con¬
vinced  that  he  floated  hither  and  thither  without  being  able  to

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  227

form  one.  His  passionate  desire,  as  it  is  with  all  men  of  like
morals,  was  to  be  sure  there  was  no  God  ;  but  he  had  too
much  intelhgence  ever  to  be  an  atheist,  —  which  is  a  particu¬
lar  species  of  madman  much  less  common  than  people  think.
A  mortal  soul  would  have  been  a  comfort  to  him,  but  he
never  succeeded  in  his  efforts  to  persuade  himself  he  had
one.  A  living  God  and  an  immortal  soul  drove  him  into
an  awkward  strait,  for  he  could  not  blind  himself  as  to  the
truth  of  either.  Deism  seemed  to  him  a  refuge,  but  his  deism
found  so  much  to  combat  within  him  that  I  had  no  great
difficulty  in  bringing  him  back  to  the  true  path  after  I  had
made  him  break  with  Mme.  dArgenton.  Unfortunately,  his
return  to  debauchery  threw  him  back  to  where  he  had  been.
He  hstened  to  nothing  but  the  racket  of  passions,  —  accom¬
panied,  to  make  it  the  more  vertiginous,  with  his  old  impiety,
or  rather  the  silly  affectation  of  impiety.  I  therefore  only
know  what  he  was  not,  and  I  do  not  know  what  he  was  in
the  matter  of  religion.  But  I  cannot  forget  his  extreme
uneasiness  on  that  great  subject,  nor  convince  myself  that
he  would  not  have  sent  for  all  the  priests  and  capuchins  he
had  despised  and  held  up  to  ridicule,  had  a  dangerous  illness
given  him  time.  His  foible  was  to  plume  himself  on  his
irrehgion,  and  to  try  to  surpass  the  boldest  scoffer.

I  remember  one  Christmas  night  at  Versailles,  when  he
accompanied  the  king  to  matins,  and  to  the  three  midnight
masses,  how  he  surprised  the  Court  by  his  absorbed  reading
in  the  book  he  carried,  which  seemed  to  be  a  prayer-book.
The  head  waiting-maid  of  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  long  in
the  family,  much  attached  to  them,  and  like  all  other  good
old  servants,  very  free,  was  so  transported  with  joy  at  this
devoutness  that  she  complimented  him  upon  it  the  next  day
before  the  duchess  and  some  company.  The  Due  d’Orléans
amused  himself  for  a  while  in  making  her  dance  to  that

228  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

tune,  and  then  he  said  :  “  You  are  very  silly,  Mme.  Imbert.

Do  you  want  to  know  what  I  was  reading  ?  It  was  Eabelais,
which  I  took  with  me  for  fear  of  being  bored.”  The  fact
was  so,  hut  it  was  pure  bravado.  Not  to  compare  places
or  things,  the  music  of  the  chapel  was  far  above  that  of  the
Opera,  and  of  all  the  hands  in  Europe  ;  and  as  the  matins,
lauds,  and  three  low  masses  of  Christmas  night  last  a  long
time,  the  music  on  that  occasion  surpasses  itself.  Moreover,
nothing  could  he  more  magnificent  than  the  decoration  of
the  chapel  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  lighted.  It  was
crowded  ;  even  the  recesses  of  the  tribune  were  fiUed  by  the
Court-ladies,  not  in  full  dress,  hut  under  arms.  The  beauty
of  the  spectacle  was  great  to  the  eye,  and  the  ears  were
charmed.  Now  the  Due  d’Orléans  loved  music  extremely  ;
he  knew  it  sufficiently  to  compose  it,  and  had  even  amused
himself  by  making  a  httle  opera,  for  which  La  Fare  wrote
the  verses,  which  was  sung  before  the  king.  This  music  in
the  chapel  was  therefore  quite  enough  to  dehght  and  occupy
him,  not  to  speak  of  the  accompaniment  of  so  dazzhng  a
scene,  without  recourse  to  Eabelais  ;  hut  he  wanted  to  play
the  free-thinker  and  scoffer.

Mme.  la  Duchesse  d’Orléans  was  another  sort  of  person.
She  was  tall  and  at  all  points  majestic;  her  complexion,
throat,  and  arms  admirable  ;  her  eyes  also  ;
ÎÜ^DuchesIe  mouth  rather  good,  with  fine  teeth,  a  little

d’Orléans.  long  the  cheeks  too  full  and  pendent,  which

injured  hut  did  not  spoil  her  beauty.  What  disfigured  her
most  were  the  places  for  the  eyebrows,  which  were  red  and
as  if  raw,  with  very  few  hairs  ;  her  eyelashes  were  fine,  and
her  chestnut  hair  well  planted.  Without  being  lame  or  de¬
formed,  one  side  was  larger  than  the  other,  so  that  she  walked
sidling.  She  had  not  less  intelligence  than  the  Due  d’Or¬
léans,  but  far  more  perseverance  of  mind  ;  with  a  natural  elo-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  229

qiience,  a  correctness  of  expression,  an  unexpectedness  in  her
choice  of  words  that  was  quite  original  and  always  pleas¬
ing,  and  with  it  the  wondrous  charm  peculiar  to  Mme.  de
Montespan  and  her  sisters,  and  possessed  by  none  but  her
family  or  those  brought  up  in  it.  The  Duchesse  d’Orléans
said  all  she  wished  to  say,  and  as  she  wished  to  say  it,  with
force,  delicacy,  and  affability  ;  she  even  said  what  she  did
not  utter,  and  could  make  herself  understood  to  the  precise
extent  she  chose.  But  her  speech  was  slow  and  guttural,
and  so  difficult  to  ears  that  were  not  accustomed  to  it  that
this  defect,  of  which  she  did  not  seem  to  he  aware,  was  ex¬
tremely  disparaging  to  what  she  said.

The  total  abandonment  of  the  Court,  the  absolute  soli¬
tude  of  the  Due  d’Orléans,  and  the  laziness  of  the  Duchesse
d’Orléans,  who  thought  she  ought  not  to  make  a  step  towards
any  one,  her  pride  and  her  laziness  being  perfectly  agreed  to
await  all  homage  without  taking  pains  about  it,  made  their
life  languishing,  mortifying,  indecorous,  and  despised.  That
was  one  of  the  first  things  to  remedy.  They  both  felt  this,
hut  it  must  he  said  that  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  once  con¬
vinced  and  resolved,  gave  herself  to  the  work  with  much
more  courage  and  perseverance  than  the  duke.  I  say  cour¬
age,  because  of  the  continual  mortifications  that  her  pride
was  forced  to  put  up  with  in  her  long  efforts  to  get  out  of  this
condition.  The  ladies  she  invited  to  her  dinners  were  fertile
in  excuses.  They  feared  the  company  of  the  Due  d’Orléans.
The  shrewdest  watched  for  his  trips  to  Paris  in  order  to  dine
with  his  wife,  and  thought  themselves  quit  of  the  duty  for
a  long  period  after  one  dinner.  They  feared  the  king,  that
is,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  M.  du  Maine;  refusals  were
constant,  excuses  many,  until  it  was  impossible  to  refuse
any  longer.  The  Duchesse  d’Orléans,  aware  at  last  of  the
importance  of  breaking  down  so  indecent  a  barrier  which

230  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.yiii.

separated  her  from  society  on  account  of^  her  husband,  and
also  convinced  that  she  could  not  do  this  without  coaxing
the  world  to  approach  her,  did  not  flinch.  She  assumed  the
most  ingratiating  manner  that  was  possible  in  her  to  melt
the  ice  and  make  her  apartments  and  her  table  attractive.
The  labour  was  odious  and  continual,  hut,  in  the  end,  success¬
ful.  Some  grew  holder  from  the  example  of  others,  and  the
number  of  her  guests  increased  little  by  little,  and  more  and
more.  The  dinners  were  exquisite;  and  after  a  while,  re¬
spectfulness  and  propriety  being  observed,  constramt  was  but
little  perceptible.  The  Due  d’Orléans  restrained  the  freedom
of  his  talk  ;  little  by  httle  he  began  to  converse  on  topics
that  were  not  contraband,  such  as  pubhc  affairs,  and  general
matters  that  were  suitable  and  incapable  of  embarrassing
others  or  himself.  Card-tables  foUowed  the  dinners,  and
retained  the  company  till  the  hour  came  for  the  king’s  salon.
People  began  to  praise  these  dinners,  and  to  feel  surprise  at
the  repugnance  they  had  shown  to  them  ;  the  apparent  in¬
difference  of  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon  put  them  at
their  ease  and  made  them  rather  ashamed  of  having  feared
their  displeasure.  Still,  for  all  this,  the  king  s  salon  did  not
become  more  favourable  to  the  Due  d  Orléans,  where  a  great
number  of  courtiers  who  were  not  invited  to  the  dinners
continued  to  keep  at  a  distance  from  him,  and  where  he  was
avoided  even  by  those  who  had  just  left  his  table.  No
change  occurred  in  this  state  of  things  until  the  last  of  the
king’s  illness.

The  Duchesse  d’Orléans  was  thoroughly  convinced  that
the  Due  d’Orléans  conflded  in  me  without  reserve,  and  that
I  influenced  him  strongly  in  what  he  thought  and  what  he
would  do,  in  the  present  and  in  the  future.  She  had  had
experience  of  this,  and  she  saw,  more  distinctly  even  than
outsiders,  that  I  was  the  only  man  with  whom  he  could  open

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

231

himself  on  matters  that  were  most  important.  She  was  not
less  convinced  that  I  was  full  of  reflections  and  plans  about
the  change  that  would  follow  the  present  reign.  She  was
therefore  extremely  watchful  to  discover  what  I  thought,
and  she  endeavoured  to  lead  me  on  in  our  frequent  tête-à-
tetes  to  speak  of  persons  and  coming  events.  I  was  on  my
guard  about  both  ;  less  reserved  on  persons,  perhaps  (though
very  circumspect),  because  she  was  not  ignorant  of  my
opinion  of  many  ;  as  for  events,  I  escaped  her  by  generali¬
ties  ;  also  I  dwelt  on  the  carelessness,  volatility,  and  laziness
of  the  Due  d’Orléans,  who  was  living  as  if  the  present  time
was  to  last  always;  and  though,  perhaps,  I  exaggerated  to
her  this  complaint,  it  was  only  too  true,  as  we  shall  see  in
the  end,  that  it  was  well-founded.

The  Duchesse  d’Orléans  was  not  the  only  person  who  was
curious  and  rmeasy  about  my  intentions.  I  have  mentioned
Singular  behav-  in  Several  places  that  my  intimate  friendship
?h^°de  vukroy'  with  the  old  Maréchal  and  the  Duchesse  de
to  me.  Villeroy  until  their  deaths  had  never  vanquished

my  aversion  to  the  present  Maréchal  de  Villeroy,  which  I
did  not  conceal  from  them  ;  in  fact,  they  sometimes  amused
themselves  by  hemming  me  into  a  corner  to  prevent  me
from  leaving  their  apartments  when  he  entered  the  room,  in

order  to  see  the  face  that  I  made  at  him.  I  had  not  changed,
and  beyond  inscribing  my  name  at  his  door  on  certain
occasions  (a  ceremony  never  omitted  without  an  open
quarrel),  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  him,  and  never  ap¬
proached  him  in  the  places  where  we  met.  My  surprise
was  great  therefore  when,  about  a  fortnight  after  the  death
of  the  Due  de  Berry,  he  began  to  make  me  polite  advances,
accosting  me  and  engaging  me  in  conversation  wherever  we
met.  Often  I  avoided  him  adroitly  ;  answering  with  civility
when  he  addressed  me,  but  always  with  a  measure  of  stiff-

232

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.viix

ness  and  resers^e.  Nothing  repelled  Mm.  TMs  manœuvring
lasted  some  time  without  touching  on  public  matters  or
persons,  —  I  being  well  on  my  guard  against  him  and  swim¬
ming  always  on  the  surface.  Little  by  little  he  began,  as  if
impromptu,  in  his  rambling  style  of  conversation,  to  talk  more
famdiarly  ;  and  one  day  he  came  as  we  were  sitting  down  to
table  and  asked  for  a  dinner  ;  after  that  he  came  in  to  dmner
or  supper  constantly,  sometimes  during  the  first  course  or  later.

I  was  in  despair.  Wherever  I  have  lived,  I  have  always  kept
a  very  plentiful  table  for  a  number  of  familiar  friends
and  acquaintance,  who  came  to  it  without  an  invitation  ;
I  liked,  and  so  did  they,  such  freedom  ;  but  the  Maréchal
de  Villeroy  weighed  cruelly  upon  us.  I  was  extremely  an¬
noyed  because  I  saw  clearly  that  he  came  to  pump  me  on
the  plans  of  the  Due  d’Orléans  for  the  future,  and  on  what  I
thought  myself.  Never  did  I  go  to  his  house,  or  make  any
advances  when  we  met,  but  he  never  seemed  to  perceive  it.
We  used  to  laugh,  the  Due  d’Orléans  and  I,  over  this  per¬
sonage.  After  he  came  back  from  Lyon  the  triumphant
successor  of  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers  in  the  council,  and  more
brilliant  than  ever,  I  saw  nothing  of  him  ;  the  golden  calf
had  none  of  my  incense  nor  any  congratulations  on  my  part  ;
on  these  terms  we  remained  until  after  the  death  of  the
king.

The  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  has  figured  so  extensively,  before
and  after  the  king’s  death,  that  it  is  necessary  to  make  him
known.  He  was  a  tall,  well-made  man,  with  a
very  agreeable  face,  very  vigorous  and  healthy,
who  could  do  what  he  pleased  with  his  body  without  incom¬
moding  himself.  Fifteen  or  sixteen  hours  on  horseback,  or
a  night-watch,  were  nothmg  to  him.  All  his  life  he  had
lived  and  breathed  among  the  highest  of  the  great  world.
Son  of  the  king’s  governor  and  brought  up  with  the  king  in

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  233

the  intimacy  of  their  early  years,  a  gallant  by  profession,
perfectly  an  fait  of  all  the  intrigues  of  Court  and  town,
with  which  he  amused  the  king,  whom  he  understood
thoroughly  with  all  his  foibles,  by  which  he  knew  well  how
to  profit,  —  his  behaviour  had  been  that  of  a  willow-wand  at
Court  during  all  the  mishaps  that  overtook  him  before  I
came  upon  the  scene.  He  was  magnificent  in  everything;
very  noble  in  his  manners  ;  a  fine  player,  without  ever  caring
for  the  game  ;  not  gratuitously  harmful  ;  his  language  and
ways  those  of  a  great  seigneur  and  a  man  bred  to  Courts  ;
vainglorious  to  excess  by  nature,  cringing  to  excess  when
he  thought  it  necessary,  and  towards  the  king  and  Mme.  de
Maintenon  a  valet  of  all  work.

He  had  the  wit  of  Courts  and  of  society  which  great  usage
gives,  and  intrigues  and  experience  sharpen  ;  together  with
that  jargon  which  is  learnt  there  and  is  only  tinsel,  though
it  dazzles  fools  ;  all  of  which  the  habit  of  famiharity  with
the  king,  of  favour,  distinctions,  and  command  rendered
still  more  brilhant,  although  supreme  conceit  was  at  the
bottom  of  it.  He  was  a  man  made  expressly  to  preside  at  a
ball,  at  a  review,  and  (if  he  had  had  a  voice)  to  sing  the
rôles  of  kings  and  heroes  at  the  Opera  ;  well-fitted  also  to  set
fashions,  but  nothing  more.  He  knew  nothing  really  of  either
men  or  things  ;  not  even  of  pleasures  ;  he  spoke  and  acted
by  what  was  said  ;  was  a  great  admirer  of  all  that  impressed
him,  consequently  a  perfect  dupe,  —  as  he  was  throughout
his  life  of  Vaudemont,  Mme.  des  Ursins,  and  other  dazzling
personages.  He  was  incapable  of  good  counsel,  still  more
incapable  in  managing  affairs,  knowing  really  nothing  but
the  shell  of  them  ;  so  that  when  he  entered  the  council  the
king  was  so  distressed  by  his  ignorance  that  he  lowered  hia
head  and  coloured  as  he  tried  in  vain  to  make  him  under*
stand  the  matters  in  hand.  This  was  what  I  heard  from

234

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.viii.

Torcy,  who  was  amazed  to  the  last  degree  at  the  foolishness
of  a  man  so  trained  to  Courts.  The  truth  is  he  was  so
trained  to  them  that  he  was  corrupted  for  everything  else.
He  piqued  himself  on  being  a  very  honest  man,  but  as  he
had  no  sense  his  lack  of  brains  soon  betrayed  him  when  his
desires,  hopes,  and  interests,  even  his  wish  to  please  and
flatter,  did  not  accord  with  integrity.  He  was  personally
brave  ;  as  for  his  military  capacity,  we  know  its  fatal  fruits.
His  pohteness  had  a  haughtiness  which  repelled;  and  his
manners  could  be  very  insulting  when  he  thought  the  sort
of  people  he  addressed  released  him  from  politeness.  Tor
this  reason  he  was  less  liked  than  other  men  and  intercourse
with  him  was  felt  to  be  unpleasant,  because  there  was
nothing  in  him  but  a  tissue  of  conceit,  self-seeking,  and  self¬
applause,  an  exhibition  of  his  favour  and  the  grandeur  of  his
fortrme,  while  his  talk  was  a  series  of  questions  which  inter¬
rupted  the  answers  and  often  never  waited  for  them,  and
were  themselves  without  any  relation  to  one  another;  and
in  any  case  they  related  to  nothing  but  Court  gossip,  adven¬
tures,  gallantries  ;  no  reading,  no  education,  crass  ignorance
about  aU  things,  flat  jokes,  much  gas,  and  perfect  emptiness.
He  treated  with  the  harshest  tyranny  those  who  were  de¬
pendent  upon  him.  It  is  incredible,  the  treatment  he  con¬
tinually  gave  to  his  son,  who  returned  him  unanswering
submission  and  solicitude.  I  have  heard  from  friends  of
Tallard,  who  was  very  intimate  with  the  son,  that  he  drove
him  almost  to  the  verge  of  despair,  even  after  he  became  com¬
mander  of  the  army.  Falseness,  and  the  highest,  the  most
inflated  opinion  of  himself  under  every  aspect  may  add  a  last
touch  to  the  correctness  of  this  too  veritable  portrait.

I  had  long  been  thinking  of  the  future,  and  had  made
many  reflections  on  a  time  so  important  and  so  critical.
The  more  I  discussed  within  myself  the  things  that  should

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

235

be  done,  the  more  I  was  filled  with  bitterness  for  the  loss
of  a  prince  who  was  born  for  the  happiness  of  France  and
of  Europe  :  and  by  whom  all  that  could  most

Reflections  on  ^  i  j

the  present  gov-  contribute  to  it  had  been  mapped  out,  and
tha”tTb’e^"'^°”  for  the  most  part  determined  and  arranged,
established.  order,  a  precision,  an  equity,  not  only

in  the  main  and  generally,  but,  as  much  as  possible,  in  detail,
with  the  wisest  foresight.  That  was  a  blessing  of  which  we
were  not  worthy  ;  which  was  only  shown  to  us  that  we
might  see  the  possibihty  of  a  just  and  judicious  government,
and  a  forecast  that  the  arm  of  God  would  not  be  shortened
to  render  this  kingdom  happy  and  flourishing  whenever  we

deserved  of  his  mercy  a  king  who  was  truly  according  to  his
own  heart.  The  prince  on  whom  the  regency  must  fall  was
far  indeed  from  that  condition  so  happy  for  himself,  so  fortu¬

nate  for  France  ;  and  indeed,  had  he  been  perfect  as  a  re¬
gent,  he  could  not  execute  as  a  king.  All  this  I  felt  to  its
fullest  extent,  and  it  was  difficult  indeed  not  to  yield  to

discouragement.

I  had  to  do  with  a  very  enhghtened,  thoroughly  informed
prince,  who  had  aU  the  experience  that  the  life  of  a  private
person  far  removed  from  the  throne  or  the  regency  could
give  ;  well  aware  of  the  great  faults  he  had  seen  committed,
some’  of  which  he  had  personally  felt,  but  a  prince  in  whom
laziness,  weakness,  and  abandonment  to  dangerous  company
had  created  defects  and  obstacles  as  grievous  as  they  were
difficult,  not  to  say  impossible  to  correct,  or  even  diminish.
A  thousand  times  had  we  reasoned  together  over  the  defects
of  the  government  and  the  evils  resulting.  Current  events,
even  those  of  the  Court,  gave  us  matter  for  discussion  inces¬
santly.  He  and  I  did  not  differ  as  to  their  cause  nor  as  to
their  effects.  The  question  was  therefore  how  to  make  a
just  and  permanent  system  that  should  govern  in  a  manner

236

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

exempt  from  those  defects  ;  and  how  to  arrange  that  system
under  the  impending  possibility  of  a  regency  ;  and  also  to
keep  in  view  the  education  of  the  king  to  good  and  sensible
maxims  ;  to  make  him  hke  them  while  youth  permitted  ;
and  to  so  open  his  eyes  and  train  his  will  that  after  his
majority  he  should  carry  on  that  which  the  regency  would
not  be  able  to  attain  or  complete.  This  it  had  been  my
object  and  all  my  study  to  instil  into  the  Due  d’Orléans,
together  with  the  measures  that  seemed  proper  to  lead  to  it,
even  before  the  death  of  the  Due  de  Berry,  whose  counsehor
in  the  regency  the  Due  d’Orléans  could  not  fail  to  he.  How
much  more  so,  therefore,  when  no  hfe  stood  between  the  Due
d’Orléans  and  the  regency  ;  and  as  I  saw  the  event  approach-
ing  ky  degrees  as  the  king’s  health  faüed,  I  entered  more  and
more  into  details,  as  I  shall  now  relate.

That  which  I  beheved  the  most  important  to  do,  the  most
pressing  to  execute,  was  the  complete  overthrow  of  the
system  of  internal  government  in  which  Cardinal  Mazarin
had  imprisoned  the  king  and  the  kingdom.  A  foreigner,  from
the  dregs  of  his  people,  hound  to  nothing  and  having  no
god  but  his  own  greatness  and  power,  he  did  not  consider
the  State  he  governed  except  as  it  bore  upon  himself.  He
despised  its  laws,  its  genius,  its  interests;  he  ignored  its
rules  and  its  forms  ;  he  thought  only  of  subjugating  and
amalgamating  all  into  one  level  mass  ;  and  as  that  could  not
he  done  except  in  the  name  of  the  king,  he  did  not  shrink
from  making  the  king  odious  by  putting  his  pernicious
policy  into  his  mind.  He  insulted  the  blood-royal,  made
the  king  dread  him,  maltreated  the  queen-mother  but  ruled
her  always,  overthrew  the  Orders  of  the  kingdom  and  risked
its  ruin  twice  by  its  internal  divisions  on  that  subject,  and
perpetuated  wars  for  his  own  safety  and  gain  rather  than
resign  the  helm  he  had  usurped.  He  reigned  of  himself,  in

1716]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  237

his  own  person  and  by  his  authority,  leaving  the  king  to  he
nothing  hut  the  figure-head  of  monarchy.

Nothing  is  good  or  useful  except  in  its  proper  place.
Without,  therefore,  going  uselessly  farther  hack,  I  shall  only
say  that  the  League,  which  aimed  for  nothmg  less  than  the
throne,  and  the  Protestant  party  had  upset  all  order  under
the  sons  of  Henri  II.  All  that  Henri  IV.  by  the  help  of  the
faithful  nobles  could  do  was,  with  great  labour,  to  make
himself  recognized  for  what  he  was  by  right  ;  buying,  as
one  might  say,  the  crown  from  his  subjects  by  the  treaties
and  the  milhons  of  money  it  cost  him  in  vast  estabhsh-
ments  and  positions  of  security  for  the  Cathohc  and  Huguenot
leaders.  Seigneurs  thus  established,  who  nevertheless  thought
themselves  much  reduced,  were  not  easy  to  manage.  Union
subsisted  among  most  of  them.  The  majority  still  kept  up
their  understanding  with  foreign  countries  ;  the  king  was
forced  to  treat  them  cautiously  and  even  to  negotiate  with
them.  Nothing  could  be  more  destructive  of  good  order,  of
the  rights  of  the  sovereign,  of  the  weal  of  the  subject  how¬
ever  great  he  may  be,  of  security  and  tranquilhty  in  the
kingdom.  The  regency  of  Marie  de’  Medici  only  increased
an  evil  which  had  lessened  after  the  death  of  Maréchal
Biron.  The  power  and  grandeur  of  Maréchal  d’Ancre,  his
wife,  and  the  crowd  of  miserable  hirelings  under  his  orders,
revolted  the  nobles,  the  great  bodies,  and  the  people.  The
death  of  that  foreign  adventurer,  the  dispersion  of  his  creat¬
ures,  the  dismissal  of  an  arrogant  mother  who  had  no  eyes
except  for  herself,  restored  some  calmness  to  Prance  for  a
time,  but  only  by  soothing  the  nobles,  whose  power  and
dangerous  estabhshments  made  their  obedience  capricious.

Cardinal  Eicheheu  felt  both  the  evils  within  and  those
without,  equally  ;  and  in  course  of  years  he  applied  the
remedy.  Little  by  Httle  he  diminished  the  excessive  power

238  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SEHON.  [chap.  viii.

of  the  nobles,  which  connterhalanced,  and  even  obscured  that
of  the  king  ;  by  slow  degrees  he  reduced  them  to  the  proper
measure  of  honours,  distinctions,  respect,  and  authority
which  was  their  due,  hut  under  which  they  could  neither
be  restless  nor  talk  high  to  the  king,  who  no  longer  feared
them.  This  was  the  result  of  a  long  course  of  conduct
wisely  and  uninterruptedly  directed  to  this  end.  Louis
XIII.  unfortunately  did  not  live  long  enough  for  the  hap¬
piness  of  France,  for  the  comfort  of  good  men,  and  for  the
example  of  one  of  the  best  and  greatest  of  our  kings.

The  minority  of  a  young  king,  always  a  period  of  weak¬
ness,  instigated  the  nobles  to  recover  possession  of  the
usurped  rights  which  had  been  wrested  from  them,  and
which  the  vile  government  of  the  master  whom  the  queen-
mother  fastened  on  herself  and  the  country  seemed  to  render,
if  not  necessary,  at  least  endurable.  This  was  enough  to
make  Mazarin  swear  the  ruin  of  aU  grandeur  and  all  author¬
ity  except  his  own.  His  whole  care  and  attention  was  now
turned  to  the  annihilation  of  dignities  and  rank  by  any
means  he  could  find,  and  to  depriving  persons  of  quality  of
every  sort  of  authority,  and,  for  that  purpose,  removing  them
from  all  posts  in  State  affairs,  and  putting  in  men  of  base
extraction  like  himself,  whose  offices  he  magnified  in  power,
distinctions,  influence,  and  wealth,  persuading  the  king  to
consider  all  nobles  and  seigneurs  the  natural  enemies  of  his
authority,  and  to  prefer,  for  the  handling  of  State  affairs,
men  of  no  account,  whom  he  could  on  the  shghtest  discon¬
tent  reduce  to  nothingness  by  taking  away  their  posts  as
easily  as  he  had  given  them;  whereas  the  nobles,  already
great  by  birth,  marriage,  and  often  by  their  grand  establish¬
ments,  would  become  a  formidable  power  in  the  ministry
and  its  various  offices,  and  make  it  dangerous  to  cease  em¬
ploying  them.  Hence  the  elevation  of  clerks  and  lawyers

1715]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  239

and  the  annihilation  of  the  nobles  by  the  degrees  we  have
all  witnessed,  leading  to  the  extraordinary  state  of  things
which  we  see  and  feel  to-day,  and  which  those  gentry  of  the
pen  and  robe  have  known  so  well  how  to  maintain,  each  day
aggravating  their  yoke,  until  matters  have  come  to  such  a
pass  that  the  greatest  seigneur  can  do  no  good  to  any  one,
and  even  depends  himself,  in  innumerable  ways,  on  the
lowest  upstart.  That  is  how  things  go  from  one  extreme
to  another!

I  had  groaned  in  spirit  ever  since  I  had  been  old  enough
to  think  of  this  abyss  of  nothingness  into  which  the  nobles
had  fallen.  I  remember  that  one  day,  before  I  was  admitted
to  the  perfect  confidence  of  the  Dues  de  BeauviUiers  and  de
Chevreuse,  though  already  very  free  with  them,  I  did  not
restrain  my  complaints  of  this.  They  let  me  talk  for  some
time,  but  at  last  the  colour  came  into  M.  de  Beauvilhers’
face,  and  he  asked  me  in  a  stem  tone  :  “  But  what  is  it  you
want  to  satisfy  you  ?”  “I  will  tell  you,  monsieur,”  I  re¬
plied,  eagerly.  “  I  want  to  be  born  of  a  good  and  ancient
family;  I  want  to  have  some  fine  landed  property,  with
ample  rights,  without  desiring  to  be  very  rich.  I  should
have  the  ambition  to  rise  to  the  first  dignity  in  my  own
region,  to  be  governor  of  its  chief  town,  to  be  possessed  of
those  powers  of  action,  and  that  would  content  me.  The
two  dukes  listened,  looked  at  each  other,  smiled  and  said
nothing,  and  soon  after  changed  the  subject.  They  them¬
selves,  as  I  discovered  later,  thought  exactly  as  I  did,  and
I  could  not  doubt  the  unison  between  them  and  me  and  the
prince  of  whom  I  can  never  think  without  tears.

However  crushed  I  was  by  his  loss,  my  thoughts  and
my  desires  had  never  changed  ;  and  whatever  disproportion
I  felt  between  that  unique  prince  and  the  one  who  was
about  to  govern,  and  also  between  the  powers  of  a  king  and

240  MEMOIES  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tiii.

those  of  a  regent,  I  could  not  renounce  the  hope  of  at  least
a  part  of  what  had  escaped  me.  My  purpose,  therefore,
was  to  begin  by  putting  the  nobles  into  the  ministry,  with
the  dignity  and  authority  that  became  them,  in  place  of
lawyers  and  clerics,  and  so  wisely  to  manage  matters  that,
by  degrees  and  according  to  circumstances,  those  classes
should  lose  all  the  administrations  that  are  not  pure  judica¬
ture,  and  the  nobles  and  seigneurs  be  substituted  for  them  ;
hut  always  with  necessary  precautions  against  abuses.  The
depression  of  the  nobility,  its  poverty,  its  misalliances,  its
lack  of  union  after  more  than  a  century  of  annihilation,
cabals,  and  conflicting  parties,  made  this  change  without
danger  at  that  time,  and  means  would  not  he  lacking  to
keep  it  from  ever  becoming  so.

The  real  difliculty  was  the  ignorance,  the  frivolity,  the
want  of  application  in  that  nobility,  accustomed  to  he  good
for  nothing  hut  to  get  itself  killed  ;  to  rise,  even  in  war,  by
seniority  alone  ;  and  as  for  all  things  else,  to  stagnate  in  a
fatal  uselessness  which  dehvered  it  over  to  idleness  and  to
dislike  of  aU  education  but  that  of  war,  because  of  the
incapacity  in  which  it  was  held  to  serve  in  any  other  way.
It  was  impossible  to  make  the  first  step  to  correct  this  evil
without  overthrowing  the  monster  which  had  devoured  the
nobility;  that  is  to  say,  the  controller-general  and  the
ministers,  otherwise  called  secretaries  of  State,  who  were
often  at  variance  with  each  other,  hut  always  united  against
the  nobles.  With  this  idea  in  my  mind  I  had  imagined
the  councils  of  which  I  have  already  spoken  ;  those  that  so
surprised  the  Due  de  Chevreuse  in  1709  when  he  talked  with
me  about  the  same  idea  in  order  to  obtain  my  advice,  and
discovered  the  whole  scheme,  as  he  had  already  conceived
it,  written  out  by  my  own  hand.  The  Due  de  Bourgogne
had  accepted  it  ;  and  it  was  on  that  fact  that  the  regent

JCTV

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  241

dwelt  when  he  proposed  the  estahhshment  of  these  councils
to  parhament  ;  declaring  that  he  had  found  the  plan  among
the  Due  de  Bourgogne’s  papers,  —  not  those,  I  may  here
remark,  which  caused  me  such  anxiety  and  were  burned  by
the  Due  de  Beauvilhers.

The  formation  of  these  councils  was  therefore  one  of  the
first  thhigs  of  which  I  spoke  to  the  Due  d’Orléans.  He
was  no  less  offended  than  I  at  the  tyranny  which  the
ministers,  those  five  kings  of  France,  exercised  as  they  saw
fit  in  the  name  of  the  real  king,  almost  without  his  knowl¬
edge,  and  the  intolerable  height  to  which  they  had  chmbed.
I  proposed,  therefore,  to  extinguish  two  of  their  offices  (those
of  war  and  of  foreign  affairs),  which  could  be  directed  by
councils,  and  the  actual  business  carried  on  by  the  secre¬
taries  of  those  councils.  I  proposed  that  the  remaining
secretaries  of  State  should  not  enter  any  of  the  councils,
where  the  shadow  of  what  they  had  been  would  still  make
them  dangerous  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  suggested  the
admission  without  a  voice,  either  deliberative  or  consulta¬
tive,  of  one  secretary  of  State  to  the  Council  of  Eegency,  to
keep  the  records,  which  records  should  be  verified  monthly
by  members  of  the  Council  in  turn.  As  may  well  be  be¬
lieved,  I  also  proposed  to  extinguish  the  office  of  controller-
general,  and  to  give  its  work  and  authority  to  the  council
of  finances,  substituting  the  signature  of  the  head  of  the
council  for  that  of  the  controller-general.

To  this  general  plan  many  details,  of  course,  had  to  be
added.  The  plan  of  these  councils  will  be  found  among  my
Documents.  They  were,  as  to  character  and  name,  the
same  that  the  Due  d’Orléans,  when  regent,  established  ;  but
this  was  done  with  much  confusion,  too  many  members,
and  a  lack  of  order  which  I  had  never  put  there,  the  reason
for  which  will  appear  in  its  proper  place.  I  wished  also

VOL.  III.  — 16

242

memoirs  OE  the  duc  de  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  yiii.

for  regular  days  on  which  to  hold  the  councils  in  the  king  s
housed  and  other  days  for  the  Council  of  the  Eegency,  to
hear  the  affairs  of  each  council.  I  insisted  on  separating
each  department  of  each  council  in  a  manner  so  clear,  dis¬
tinct,  and  precise  that  no  part  of  any  councü  could  impinge
upon  or  conflict  with  another;  so  that  the  puhhc^  should
have  no  difficulty  in  knowing  to  whom  to  address  itself  m
all  matters.  Eor  this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  separate
with  the  same  precision  and  distinctness  the  particular
functions  of  each  member  of  each  councü;  guarding  thus
against  jealousies  and  conducing  to  the  union  of  the  members
by  cutting  off  aü  causes  of  counter  pretensions  ;  and  the
same  as  to  the  councüs  themselves,  respectively,  facilitating
mature  examination  and  the  prompt  execution  of  business.
I  proved  the  utihty  and  facility  of  this  by  the  example
of  the  Court  of  Vienna,  where  nothing  is  smothered  and
nothing  delayed  among  the  many  councils  which  are  there
estahhshed.  After  this  came  a  discussion  as  to  the  men  to
be  admitted  or  excluded  ;  and  next,  that  of  the  position  to
he  held  by  each  of  those  who  would  be  employed.

The  Due  d’Orléans  hked  the  project  exceedingly  ;  and  it
was  many  and  many  a  time  gone  over  and  discussed  between
us.  He  felt  the  importance  of  secrecy  and  maintained  it,
both  about  the  thing  itself  and  about  all  that  related  to  it.
The  resolution  once  taken,  it  was  necessary  to  debate  the
details.^

When  the  council  on  foreign  affairs,  and  that  on  de¬
spatches  or  the  interior  of  the  kingdom  came  to  he  discussed,
I  said  to  the  Due  d’Orléans  that  there  were  two  men,  on
whom  he  could  not  rely,  hut  who,  from  their  position  before
the  public,  must  not  he  put  aside,  namely,  Harcourt  and

1  These  are  given  at  great  length,  and  are,  comparatively,  of  little  inter*
est  now.  —  Te.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  243

Huxelles  ;  that  I  thought  they  ought  to  he  placed  at  the
head  of  those  councils,  hut  I  did  not  see  that  he  was  con¬
strained  to  give  them  the  highest  places  unless  he  chose.
The  situation  of  the  Due  d’Orléans  towards  Spain,  and  the
close  intimacy  of  Harcourt  with  that  country  and  with  Mme.
de  Maintenon  and  the  Princesse  des  Ursins  decided  him  to
give  the  foreign  affairs  to  Huxelles,  and  those  of  the  interior
to  Harcourt.  This  was  soon  settled.  But  before  the  deci¬
sion  was  made  the  Due  d’Orléans  said  :  “  But  you,  you  are
proposing  others  to  me  and  do  not  say  a  word  of  yourself  ;
what  do  you  want  to  be  ?  ”  I  rephed  that  it  was  not  for  me
to  propose  myself,  still  less  to  choose  my  place,  but  for  him
to  see  of  what  he  thought  me  capable,  and  whether  he  wished
to  employ  me,  and  if  he  did,  to  decide  himself  on  the  place
he  desired  me  to  occupy.  This  was  at  Marly,  in  his  own
chamber;  I  shall  always  remember  it.

After  a  short  debate,  which  among  equals  would  be  called
comphmentary,  he  proposed  to  me  the  presidency  of  the
I  refuse  positively  councü  of  financcs  ;  in  other  words  that  the
that  of  the  finances  should  be  managed  by  as  great  an

reasons.  imbecüe  in  that  line  as  the  Maréchal  de  Ville-

roy  himself.  I  thanked  him  for  the  honour  and  confidence
and  refused  respectMly.  He  was  much  astonished  and  did
his  best  to  persuade  me.  I  told  him  I  had  no  aptitude  for
finances  ;  that  was  a  detail,  now  become  a  science,  which  was
Greek  to  me  ;  that  commerce,  money,  exchange,  circulation,
a  knowledge  of  which  was  essential  to  the  management  of
finances,  were  mere  names  to  my  mind  ;  that  I  did  not  know
the  first  rules  of  arithmetic,  and  had  never  meddled  with  the
administration  of  my  property,  nor  yet  of  my  household  ex¬
penses,  because  I  felt  incapable;  how  much  more  unfit  was
I  to  handle  the  finances  of  a  kingdom,  and,  especially,  when
embarrassed  as  they  were.  He  represented  to  me  the  help

244  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  tiii.

and  instruction  I  could  obtain  from  tbe  other  members  of
the  council  of  finances,  adding  all  that  could  flatter  me  ;  he
dwelt  on  my  integrity,  and  on  my  disinterestedness,  a  matter
so  important  in  the  management  of  finances.  To  which  I
rephed  that  the  question  was  not  whether  I  should  rob  the
public  or  let  it  be  robbed  through  my  incapacity,  for,  truly,  I
thought  I  could  answer  to  him  and  to  myself  for  my  fidehty
on  that  score,  but,  with  the  same  sincerity,  I  did  not  feel
within  me  the  intelligence  necessary  to  discover  even  gross
cheatery,  much  less  the  many  shrewd  snares  of  which  the
business  was  susceptible.  The  end  of  an  hour’s  debate  was
to  make  him  angry  ;  and  he  requested  me  to  reflect  upon  the
matter,  which  we  would  talk  of  again  the  next  day.

As  for  my  reflections,  they  had  long  been  made.  Since
the  death  of  the  admirable  dauphin,  and  still  more  since  that
of  the  Due  de  Berry,  I  had  not  been  without  debating  in  my
own  mind  over  the  government  to  come,  over  this  project  of
councüs,  and  who  should  fiU  the  places  ;  nor  without  think¬
ing  —  I  shall  say  this  with  simplicity  —  not  of  that  which
would  suit  me,  but  of  that  which  I  should  suit,  myself ,
which  is  the  only  way  to  place  men  suitably,  either  for  the
public  interests  or  for  themselves.  That  of  the  finances  had
crossed  my  mind  like  the  rest.  I  shall  not  have  the  vul¬
garity  to  pretend  that  I  did  not  feel  assured  the  Due  d  Or¬
léans  would  never  pass  me  by  without  giving  me  a  place  m
the  government  ;  I  felt  that  there  was  no  presumption  in
expecting  such  a  place,  and,  consequently,  in  reflecting  about
it.  The  finances  were  repugnant  to  me  for  the  reasons  I  had
given  to  the  Due  d’Orléans  and  for  many  others,  of  which
the  labour  was  the  least.  The  injustices  which  public  neces¬
sities  compelled  frightened  me  ;  I  could  not  bring  myself  to
be  the  scourge  of  the  people,  to  endure  the  groans  of  the  op¬
pressed,  or  even  the  false  complaints,  often  apparently  true,  es-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  245

pecially  in  tliis  line,  of  scoundrels,  and  malignant  or  envious
minds.  But  wliat  determined  me,  above  all,  was  the  straits
to  which  the  country  was  reduced  by  wars  and  by  other
monstrous  expenses,  so  that  I  could  see  nothing  before  it
but  a  choice  of  two  evils,  namely,  to  continue  and  even
increase  as  much  as  possible  the  taxation  in  order  to  pay  off
the  immense  debts  of  the  present  monarchy,  and  consequently
end  by  a  total  crash  ;  or  else  make  public  bankruptcy  by  a
decree  declaring  the  new  king  free  of  all  debts  and  not  bound
by  those  of  the  king  his  grandfather  and  predecessor,  —  an
enormous  injustice,  which  would  ruin  an  infinite  number  of
families  both  directly  and  indirectly.  The  horror  that  I  felt
at  either  of  these  iniquities  was  enough  to  prevent  me  from
taking  charge  of  them.

These  reasons,  which  could  not  be  openly  alleged,  prompted
my  decision,  but  I  was  still  more  strongly  influenced  by  an¬
other  which  I  can  only  explain  here  in  trembling.  No  curb
was  possible  to  stop  the  government  on  the  footing  of  costs
it  had  now  reached.  Whatever  addition  the  discovery  of  the
treasures  of  America  had  brought  to  the  gold  and  silver  of
Europe  since  the  seas  were  constantly  importing  them,  it  did
not  in  any  degree  correspond  to  the  enormous  difference
between  the  revenues  of  our  past  kings  and  those  obtained
by  Louis  XIV.,  which  more  than  doubled  them.  Notwith¬
standing  this  increase,  which  amounted  to  something  in¬
credible,  I  had  before  my  eyes  the  deplorable  situation  of
the  end  of  a  reign,  so  long,  so  abundant,  so  glorious  ;  which
shows  that  no  wealth  will  suffice  to  a  squandering  govern¬
ment,  that  the  safety  of  a  State  depends  on  the  wisdom  with
which  its  finances  are  conducted,  and,  consequently,  its  pros¬
perity,  its  happiness,  the  duration  of  its  glory,  and  its  pre¬
ponderance  over  other  nations.

It  will  be  agreed,  I  am  certain,  that  nothing  demanded

246  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  viii.

more  pressingly  a  remedy  than  this  state  of  things  ;  hut  the
remedy  had  long  evaporated.  What  could  he  substituted?
how  could  the  kings  and  the  kingdom  be  rescued  from  this
abyss  ?  The  incomparable  dauphin  felt  all  this  and  had
resolved  upon  his  course.  But  to  execute  it,  a  king,  not  a
regent,  was  needed;  and  more  than  a  king,  for  he  needed
to^'be  king  of  himself  and  divinely  superior  to  his  own
throne.  Who  could  hope  for  a  kmg  of  that  sort  after  seemg
the  model  formed  by  the  hand  of  God  Himself  withdrawn
from  us  at  the  moment  when  about  to  attain  the  crown  and
execute  the  plans  inspired  in  his  soul  and  graven  on  his
heart  by  the  Divine  finger  ?  It  was  the  earnest  consideration
of  these  pregnant  reasons,  so  much  above  all  other  considera¬
tions,  that  led  me  to  beheve  that  the  greatest  service  to  be
rendered  to  the  State  —  for  which  kings  are  made  and  not
kings  for  the  State,  as  the  dauphin  felt  and  did  not  fear  to
gay  —  and  the  greatest  service  that  could  be  rendered  to
kings  themselves,  was  to  put  it  out  of  their  power  to  fall  into
the  gulf  that  yawns  at  the  feet  of  monarchs  ;  a  thing  that
can  only  be  done  by  protecting  them  from  the  ambitious
suggestions  of  ministers  hke  Louvois,  and  from  their  own
seductions,  their  tastes,  their  passions,  and  the  intoxication
of  their  power  and  glory.  The  monarchy  is  not  elective,
and  is  not  hereditary.  It  is  a  trust,  entailed  by  the  nation
on  one  family,  to  enjoy  and  to  reign  over  it  by  male  heirs,
born  in  legitimate  marriage,  perpetually  and  always,  from
eldest  son  to  eldest  son  as  long  as  the  family  lasts,  to  the
exclusion  of  females  in  whatever  line  or  degree  they  may  be.

The  Due  d’Orléans  found  me  no  more  willing  to  take
charge  of  the  finances  after  the  reflections  he  had  given  me
TheDucd’Orieans  time  to  make  than  before.  Same  eagerness,
same  entreaties,  same  arguments  on  his  part  ;
same  replies,  same  firmness  on  mine.  Then

destines  me  to
the  Council  of
Regency.

247

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

he  grew  angry  and  sulked  for  three  weeks.  He  was  the  first
to  tire  of  that  ;  and  one  day,  in  the  midst  of  a  languishing
conversation,  in  which  I  noticed  that  he  was  more  embar¬
rassed  than  usual,  he  said,  looking  at  me  ;  “  So  that  is  set¬
tled,  is  it  ?  You  are  determined  not  to  take  the  finances  ?”

I  dropped  my  eyes  respectfully  and  rephed  in  a  low  tone
that  I  hoped  there  was  no  further  question  of  it.  He  could
not  restrain  a  few  complaints,  hut  without  bitterness,  or
getting  angry  ;  then  he  rose  and  began  to  walk  about  the
room  with  his  head  down  and  not  saying  a  word,  as  he
always  did  when  embarrassed.  Presently,  turning  to  me  ab¬
ruptly,  he  said  :  “  Then  whom  can  we  put  there  ?  ”  I  named
the  Due  de  Noailles.  .  .  .  After  that  was  settled  between  us
he  exclaimed  :  “  But  you,  what  do  you  want  to  be  ?  ”  And
then  he  pressed  me  so  hard  to  tell  him  my  wishes  that  I
did  so,  and,  in  the  spirit  I  have  stated  above,  I  said  that  if  he
were  willing  to  put  me  into  the  council  of  the  interior  (that
of  the  despatches)  I  thought  I  could  do  better  there  than  else¬
where.  “  The  head  of  it,  then,”  he  said  quickly.  No,  I
said,  “  not  that  ;  simply  a  place  in  the  council.”  We  both
insisted,  he  for,  I  against.  I  told  him  that  the  work  in  itseh
and  that  of  reporting  the  affairs  of  the  council  to  the  Council
of  Kegency  alarmed  me  ;  and  besides,  if  I  accepted  the  first
place  I  saw  no  other  for  Harcourt.  “A  mere  seat  in  the
council  of  the  interior  for  you,”  he  said,  “  is  ridiculous,  and  I
shall  not  hear  of  it.  As  you  absolutely  decline  to  he  the
head  of  that  council,  there  is  but  one  other  place  suitable  for
you,  and  it  suits  me  too,  very  well  indeed  :  you  must  he  in
the  council  where  I  am  myself,  — the  supreme  council,  that
of  the  Eegency.”  I  accepted  and  thanked  him.  Prom  that
moment  the  matter  was  definitively  settled.

IX.

The  councils  determined  upon,  their  heads  or  presidents
chosen,  I  represented  to  the  Due  d’Orléans  that  he  ought  to
Precautions  sug-  profit  by  what  remained  of  the  present  reign
to  examine  the  choice  of  those  whom  he
d’Orléans.  might  Select  to  fill  them.  I  exhorted  him  to

keep  to  the  smallest  number  that  the  nature  of  each  council
allowed,  and  to  begin  to  make  hsts  at  once  (to  be  kept  under
his  own  lock  and  key)  of  those  persons  whom  he  thought  of  ;
filling  up  the  place  of  each  name  he  might  erase,  as  if  the
councils  existed;  and  to  plan  out  in  this  way  all  that  he
could  in  advance  ;  so  as  to  have  nothing  but  the  announce¬
ments  to  make  at  the  death  of  the  king  ;  because,  when  that
occurred,  he  would  find  himself  overwhelmed  with  so  many
different  things,  business,  orders,  ceremonial  disputes,  deci¬
sions,  and  an  inundation  of  persons,  that  he  would  have  no
leisure  to  think,  and  would  find  himself  forced  to  give  his
time  to  trifles  instead  of  to  serious  affairs  ;  for  on  such  oc¬
casions  trifles  are  often  pressing  matters  of  the  moment
which  must  be  considered  at  once  and  which  succeed  each
other  incessantly.  The  result  would  be  that  he  could  neither
weigh,  compare,  reason,  nor  make  his  choice,  carried  away  as
he  would  be  by  the  torrent,  the  necessity  ;  and  that  matters
decided  and  a  choice  made  in  such  a  tumult  might  cause
him  long  and  bitter  repentance,  if  nothing  worse.  I  did  not
cease  repeating  this  to  him  during  the  whole  remainder  of
the  king’s  life  ;  he  assured  me  constantly  that  he  would  do
it,  and  sometimes  he  half  said  he  was  doing  it  ;  but  he  never
did  do  it,  out  of  laziness.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

249

I  did  not  like  to  question  him  about  his  choice  or  his
regulations,  in  order  not  to  let  him  mistrust  me.  I  con¬
tented  myself  with  indicating  points  in  the  main  and  the
heads,  or  presidents,  of  the  councils,  as  being  the  most  im¬
portant.  As  for  details,  and  the  persons  to  compose  the
councils,  I  thought  I  ought  not  to  rouse  the  slightest  sus¬
picion  in  him  that  I  sought  to  influence  him  in  those
respects.  It  was  he  himself  who  had  brought  me  into  con¬
sultation  with  him  on  the  form  of  the  future  government,
and  who  gave  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  of  aU  I  have
here  related.  I  waited,  wisely,  until  he  put  me  under  the
necessity  of  speaking  of  the  rest,  which  happened,  as  we
shall  see,  quite  frequently.

All  these  matters  passed  between  us  before  there  was
any  question  of  the  king’s  will.  About  the  time  we  talked
Suggestions  that  as  I  have  here  related,  I  spoke  to  him  of  the
I  made  as  to  the  eq^^cation  of  the  young  king.  I  told  him  that
future  king.  it  Seemed  to  me  most  unlikely  that  the  king
should  not  provide  for  it  in  some  way  or  other  ;  and,  if  this
happened,  however  ill  he  might  do  it,  either  in  regard  to  the
education  itself  or  as  it  related  to  his  Eoyal  Highness,  it
ought  to  he  a  matter  forever  sacred  to  him,  from  various
considerations,  hut,  above  all,  that  of  the  horrors  with  which
some  had  sought  to  destroy  him,  the  vülany  of  which  might
he  renewed.  And  for  this  reason,  if  the  king  should  die
without  providing  for  the  education  of  his  successor,  he
ought  firmly  to  exclude  from  all  participation  in  it  every
man,  myself  the  first,  who  had  been  particularly  attached
to  him,  while  at  the  same  time  he  should  avoid  choosing
opponents  or  those  who  might  prove  dangerous.  We  talked
of  the  position  of  governor,  as  to  which  he  said  many  things
about  me  which  I  shall  not  here  repeat.  The  discussion
ended  by  my  advising  him  to  choose  the  Due  de  Charost  ;

250

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

not  that  either  he  or  I  thought  him  fully  capable  ;  but
such  is  the  misfortune  of  princes  and  the  necessity  of  com¬
promises.  We  could  find  but  few  who  were  suitable,  and

they  were  dangerous.

Another  question  was  the  composition  of  the  Council  of
Regency  and  its  mechanism.  The  mechanism  was  far  easier
to  manage  than  the  choice  of  its  members.

Discussion  on  o  •  p  n  1  *  J

the  choice  for  JlexB  was  wlicTB  all  State  affairs  of  all  kinds
iLgency.*"'^  would  be  taken,  and  decided  without  appeal  by

plurality  of  votes,  and  where  the  vote  of  the  regent  was  the
same  as  all  others,  unless  it  happened  to  be  a  casting  vote.
Estabhshed  as  the  bastards  were,  how  could  we  exclude
them  ?  And  yet,  consider  what  it  was  to  have  the  Due  du
jy^aine  !  —  who  would,  moreover,  hold  the  Comte  de  Toulouse
very  tightly  to  his  side.  There  was  no  prince  of  the  blood
of  an  age  to  be  admitted,  and  if  the  rule  were  broken  in
favour  of  M.  le  Duc  (who  was  the  oldest  of  them,  born

August  28,  1692),  he  was  still  under  the  wing  of  Mme.  la
Duchesse  and  the  tutelage  of  d’Antin,  and  had  neither  edu¬
cation  nor  ideas,  showing  so  far  only  obstinacy  and  brutality,
without  the  slightest  spark  of  intellect.  And  yet  what  step
could  be  taken  to  set  aside  the  Due  du  Maine  without  the
support  and  legal  requisition  of  the  princes  of  the  blood,  all
children  !  This  was  a  matter  we  could  not  then  dwell  upon  ;
it  would  have  to  be  reserved  till  the  time  and  the  occasion
came  about.  Something  must  depend  on  the  conduct  of  the
Due  du  Maine,  who  was  too  great  to  attack  without  having
taken  the  wisest  measures,  too  firmly  established  to  attack
without  certainty  and  strong  determination  of  wiU  to  push
the  matter  through  to  its  last  extremity,  so  that  neither  he

nor  his  children  could  ever  rise  again.  I  could  not  therefore
counsel  the  exclusion  of  the  Due  du  Maine,  as  to  which  the
Due  d’Orléans  felt  the  difficulty.  But  to  put  M.  du  Maine

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  251

and  tlie  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  in  the  Council  of  Regency  was
simply  admitting  two  certain  enemies,  and  two  enemies  in
the  closest  concert,  whom  there  was,  of  course,  the  strongest
necessity  to  counterbalance  ;  aU  the  more  because  the  Comte
de  Toulouse  would  have  to  be  admitted,  and  we  could
not  wholly  count  on  him.  We  could  rely  on  d’Aguesseau,
but  his  nature  was  feeble  and  timid,  and  he  was,  besides,
quite  new  to  everything  that  was  not  in  his  profession,  and
without  the  slightest  knowledge  of  the  Court  or  the  world.
We  talked  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cambrai,  and  the  discussion
was  not  long.  The  inchnations  of  the  Due  d  Orléans  led
him  in  that  direction  ;  and,  as  I  have  remarked  elsewhere,  I
had  always  encouraged  that  liking  and  esteem.  After  these
two  were  chosen,  we  searched  again  and  again  ;  one  was  not
trusty,  another  not  distinguished,  a  third  wanted  weight,  a
fourth  would  never  he  approved  by  the  public,  not  to  speak
of  the  difficulty  of  finding  capacity,  trustworthiness,  and
firmness  united  in  one  man.  At  each  discussion  this  em¬
barrassment  stopped  us  short  and  obliged  us  to  postpone  all
choice  for  further  reflection  and  examination;  and,  to  tell
the  truth  at  once,  these  postponements  (both  before  and  after
the  affair  of  the  will)  brought  us,  with  the  choice  not  made,
to  the  death  of  the  king.

I  had  long  been  thinking  of  an  assemblage  of  the  States-
general,  and  revolving  in  my  mind  the  pros  and  cons  of  so
important  a  resolution.  I  went  over  in  my

I  propose  the  con-  ^  ,  j  ü  'j.  f

vocation  of  the  memory  the  disquietudes  and  the  iruits  oi
States-generai.  various  hoMings  ;  these  I  combined  and

compared  with  the  present  state  of  things.  The  more  I  felt
the  difference,  the  more  determined  I  grew  on  their  convo¬
cation.  Parties  in  the  State  no  longer  existed  (for  that  of
the  Due  du  Maine  was  only  an  odious  cabal)  ;  there  was
nothing  left  of  the  old  factions  of  Orléans  and  Bourgogne  ;

252

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chaf.  ix.

no  one  of  the  house  of  Lorraine  whose  merit,  talents,  posses¬
sions,  influence,  or  power  recalled  the  League  ;  no  more  Hu¬
guenots,  no  more  real  personages  of  any  sort  or  condition,  so
much  had  this  long  reign  of  the  bourgeoisie,  adroit  in  gov¬
erning  for  its  own  interests,  and  in  managing  the  king  hy
his  foibles,  degenerated  all  things,  and  prevented  men  from
being  men,  by  extinguishing  emulation,  capacity,  the  fruits
of  education,  and  by  carefully  setting  aside  or  destroying
every  man  who  showed  a  desire  for  usefulness,  or  a  senti¬
ment  of  duty.  This  sad  truth,  which  had  hindered  the  Due
d’Orléans  and  me  in  selecting  the  proper  persons  for  the
Council  of  Legency,  so  completely  had  this  condition  of
things  annihilated  individuals,  became  a  security  against
danger  in  assembling  the  States-general.  So  that  Anally,
after  long  and  frequent  dehberations  within  myself,  I  deter¬
mined  to  make  the  suggestion  to  the  Due  d’Orléans.

I  begged  him  not  to  take  alarm  at  the  idea  until  he  had
listened  to  the  reasons  that  convinced  me  ;  and,  after  stating
those  I  have  just  explained,  I  endeavoured  to
place  in  the  best  light  the  advantages  he  would
it-  of  it.  I  told  him  that  the  only  danger  of

an  assembly  of  the  States-general  would  be  to  those  who  now
had  the  administration  of  pubhc  affairs,  rebounding,  it  might
be,  on  those  who  employed  them.  That  this  danger  could
not  touch  his  Royal  Highness,  because  it  was  pubhely  noto¬
rious  that  he  had  had  no  share  and  could  take  none  in  any
of  the  king’s  ministries,  or  in  choosing  or  placing  the  men
who  flUed  them.  That  this  reason,  if  other  considerations
spurred  him,  ought  to  induce  him  not  to  let  an  hour  go  by
after  the  death  of  the  king  without  commanding  the  secre¬
taries  of  State  to  draw  up  the  necessary  formal  documents
for  convocation  ;  exacting  that  this  should  be  done  and  the
papers  forwarded  within  twenty-four  hours.  And  I  added

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  253

that  the  moment  they  were  sent  off  he  ought  publicly  to
announce  the  convocation,  and  to  appoint  it  for  the  earhest
moment,  both  for  the  election  of  deputies  by  the  boroughs,
and  for  the  assembling  of  those  deputies  to  form  the  States-
general.  I  told  him  that  Frenchmen,  volatile,  lovers  of
change,  crushed  under  a  yoke,  the  weight  and  the  goads  of
which  had  reached  a  chmax  under  the  present  reign,  which
they  ardently  longed  to  see  ended,  would  hail  with  delight
this  ray  of  hope  and  of  liberty,  proscribed  for  more  than  a
century,  and  towards  which  no  one  now  dared  to  lift  his
eyes  ;  it  would  fill  them  with  all  the  more  joy,  gratitude,  love,
and  attachment  for  him  to  whom  they  owed  the  benefit,  be¬
cause  it  came  from  his  pure  good-will  in  the  first  moment  of
his  power,  before  any  one  had  thought  of  it,  and,  far  less,  had
the  boldness  to  demand  it.  Such  an  opening  of  the  regency,
which  would  draw  to  him  all  hearts  without  the  shghtest
risk,  could  not  help  having  great  results  for  him,  and  would
surely  baffle  his  enemies.  The  state  of  the  finances  being
what  it  was, — ignored  in  the  main  by  none,  the  remedies
to  be  chosen  each  more  cruel  than  the  others,  —  it  was  most
important  for  him  to  show  clearly  and  unmistakably  how
matters  stood  before  he  himself  touched  them  ;  to  declare  to
the  States-general  that,  the  evil  being  extreme  and  the  reme¬
dies  extreme,  his  Koyal  Highness  beheved  he  owed  it  to  the
nation  to  place  this  matter  in  their  hands,  after  revealing  the
depth  of  the  evil  and  proposing  the  only  means  that  he  could
see  to  operate  upon  it  ;  leaving  them  full  liberty  of  discussion
and  choice  ;  reserving  to  himself,  first,  the  office  of  furnishing
all  the  information  in  his  power  that  they  might  need  to
choose  among  the  means  he  suggested,  or  find  some  other
solution  ;  and,  secondly,  after  they  had  decided  alone  and  in
full  liberty,  that  of  executing  faithfully  and  literally  what¬
ever  the  assembly  should  declare  in  the  form  of  advice  in

254

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  ix.

this  great  matter.  I  proposed  also  that  he  should  end  his
speech  by  saying  a  few  words  —  not  to  render  an  account,
which  was  not  due,  and  for  which  he  should  he  careful  not
to  set  a  precedent  —  but,  as  I  say,  a  few  words  lightly,  with
an  air  of  kindness  and  confidence,  about  the  establishment  of
councils,  which  ought  to  be  declared  and  already  in  functions
before  the  first  session  of  the  States-generaL

“  I  do  not  think,”  I  added,  “  that  it  needs  any  eloquence
to  convince  you  of  the  immense  effect  that  such  a  speech
would  cause  in  your  favour.  The  ignorant  multitude,  who
think  the  States-general  are  clothed  with  great  powers,  will
swim  in  joy,  and  bless  you  as  the  restorer  of  the  lost  rights
of  the  nation.  The  lesser  number  —  who  know  that  the
States-general  are  without  power  essentially,  and  are  only
deputed  by  constituents  to  make  known  their  wrongs,  their
complaints,  and  ask  for  justice  and  favours  in  their  behalf,
in  a  word,  simply  complainants  and  petitioners  —  will  con¬
sider  your  action  as  the  earnest  of  a  more  just  and  milder
government  ;  while  those  who  have  clearer  eyes  than  the
rest  will  see  plainly  that  you  are  doing  essentially  nothing
more  than  all  our  kings  have  done  in  convoking  assemblies
of  either  the  States-geneM  or  the  Notables,  whom  they
have  always  consulted  in  the  matter  of  finances  ;  and  that
you  are,  in  fact,  only  relieving  yourself  by  laying  upon  them
the  choice  of  remedies  that  are  equally  cruel  and  odious,
but  which,  if  made  by  them,  no  one  can  complain  of,  or  at
least  no  one  can  reproach  you  for  his  ruin  and  the  public
disasters.  .  .  .

An  idea  never  executed  is  a  dream,  and  its  development
in  detail  a  romance  ;  I  felt  this  before  I  began  to  write  of
mine.  But  I  thought  I  owed  it  to  myself  to  show  that  I

1  The  subject  is  continued  in  great  detail  and  covers  many  pages  ;  the
essential  points  are  given  here.  —  Tk.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,

255

did  not  beget  chimeras  ;  also  to  show  the  necessity,  importance,
and  equity  of  the  things  I  suggested  by  the  strongest  and
most  evident  reasons.  Eomance  would  be  a  most  improper
name  to  give  to  the  re-establishment  of  a  wise  and  cautious
government;  to  the  revival  of  a  crushed,  ruined,  despised
nobility,  long  trampled  underfoot  ;  to  the  restoration  of  tran¬
quillity  to  the  Church  ;  the  alleviation  of  the  yoke  (without
lessening  in  the  smallest  degree  the  rights)  of  the  royal
authority,  —  a  yoke  so  felt  that  there  can  be  no  need  of
explaining  it,  and  which  had  led  Louis  XIV.  to  the  verge  of  a
precipice.  Shall  it  be  called  romance  to  leave  to  a  nation  the
choice  of  its  form  of  suffering,  since  it  was  impossible  to
dehver  it  from  that  burden  ;  to  preserve  the  crown  from
ambitious  schemes,  the  reigning  family  from  the  loss  of  its
prerogative  so  uniquely  distinct,  and  the  tranquillity  of  the
State  from  the  peril  of  Titanism?  —  things  so  monstrously
novel  that  one  must  needs  state  them  in  words  invented
to  express  them.  If  projects  of  this  character,  the  execution
of  which  was  feasible,  have  not  succeeded,  it  is  because  they
did  not  find,  in  a  time  most  favourable,  a  regent  of  sufficient
firmness  and  persistency  of  nature.  Ought  I  for  that  reason
to  repent  me  of  having  thought  of  them  and  proposed  them  ?
I  have  always  believed  that  it  is  not  success  which  de¬
cides  the  value  of  things  ;  still  less  when  that  success
depends  on  another  who  neglects  to  carry  them  out  con¬
sistently,  or  will  not  undertake  them  at  all.

The  more  the  external  failure  of  the  king  was  evident,
though  his  days  and  his  occupations  remained  the  same,  the
more  did  each  one  think  of  himself;  though
Court  waves.  terror  always  felt  for  the  monarch  now

visibly  dying  was  such  that  the  Due  d’Orléans  was  still  left
alone  in  the  salon  at  Marly.  But  I  remarked  that  every¬
one  was  seeking  to  come  nearer  to  me,  namely,  the  bulk

256

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

of  the  courtiers,  together  with  the  most  important  men,
and  those  pohticians  whose  shameless  manœuvres  pursue
even  those  to  whom  they  have  never  spoken,  as  soon  as
they  think  they  can  make  them  useful.  I  had  often  scoffed
at  these  prompt  friends  of  influence  and  office,  and  now  I
laughed  to  myself  at  this  vüe  ardour  for  a  man  who  had
nothing  as  yet  hut  hopes  ;  and  I  amused  the  Due  d’Orléans
with  an  account  of  it,  partly  to  warn  him  in  advance  of

what  would  happen  to  himself.

The  Duchesse  d’Orléans  was  not  the  least  uneasy  person
as  to  the  limbo  of  the  future.  She  felt  the  situation  of  the
Embarrassing  Duc  du  Maine.  She  could  not  conceal  from
curiosity  of  the  ^Pat  he  deserved  from  the  Duc

d’Orléans.  d’Orléaus.  That  interest  apart  (and  it  was

the  one  she  felt  most),  she  was  touched  by  those  of  her
husband,  and  by  the  projects  he  might  form  and  the
measures  he  might  take  after  the  death  of  the  king.  Her  tête-
à-tètes  with  me,  especially  after  the  will  and  the  manœuvres
of  her  brother  became  known,  turned  almost  entirely  on
this  topic  and  put  me  to  torture.  She  knew  that  the  Duc
d’Orléans  had  perfect  confidence  in  me,  and  that  there  was
no  one  else  with  whom  he  could  consult  and  plan  for  the
future.  Her  curiosity  was  therefore  extreme  and  her  ques¬
tions  were  many,  and  they  were  cleverly  contrived  with  inde¬
fatigable  persistency  to  take  me  unawares.  I  had  to  do
with  a  very  superior  woman,  very  clear-sighted,  very  re¬
flective,  very  persevering,  and  who,  by  all  that  I  had
managed  in  concert  with  her,  knew  me  too  well  to  allow
of  my  concealing  that  I  had  thoughts  of  the  future.  The
intimate  friendship  and  perfect  confidence  established  be¬
tween  us,  ever  since  I  had  reconciled  her  with  the  Duc
d’Orléans  by  separating  him  from  Mme.  d’Argenton,  had
continued  without  the  slightest  alteration  to  the  present

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

257

time,  and  it  now  became  a  very  embarrassing  shackle  to
me.  I  had  to  maintain  and  judiciously  manage  that  friend¬
ship  and  confidence  and  that  air  of  community  of  interests,
and  at  the  same  time  keep  myself  from  letting  anything  be
seen  or  suspected  of  secrets  that  were  not  my  own,  talking
and  replying  to  everything  as  to  a  sister  of  the  Due  du
Maine,  for  whose  grandeur  she  would  joyfully  have  sacrificed
her  husband,  her  children,  and  herself.

I  found  no  resource  except  in  long-winded  verbiage  to
consume  time;  I  talked  of  the  difficulty  of  making  plans,
the  danger  of  thinking  of  them  during  the  king’s  lifetime,
the  inutility  of  projects  in  case  the  king  should  leave  direc¬
tions  ;  and  if  he  did  so,  the  folly  of  thinking  they  could  be
attacked,  —  this  was  my  safest  intrenchment,  —  and  finally
the  mental  laziness,  the  volatility,  the  want  of  persistency,
that  she  knew  so  well  in  the  Due  d’Orléans.  I  rung  the
changes  on  these  points,  paraphrasing  them  in  every  way,
and  guarding  myself  on  remarks  about  persons  as  to  whom
she  tried  to  draw  me  out,  asking  me  what  I  thought  of
them.

It  was  thus  that  I  tried  to  escape  the  snares  of  all  kinds
which  were  continually  laid  for  me.  But  this  indispensable
falseness  cost  me  so  much  that  I  was  always  in  dread  of
betrayal  by  my  face,  the  tones  of  my  voice,  the  expression  of
my  countenance.  It  is  not  possible  to  express  the  struggle
that  went  on  in  the  depths  of  a  frank,  straightforward,  natu¬
ral,  and  sincere  soul  who,  in  the  midst  of  the  perils  of  the
most  dangerous  Court  in  the  world,  had  never  been  able  to
wear  a  mask,  or  learn  by  experience,  though  many  a  time  it
had  cost  him  dear.  What  torture,  I  say,  did  that  soul  suffer
when  it  found  itself  in  these  straits,  either  to  injure  the
State  which  I  wanted  to  save  and  restore,  destroy  the  Due
d’Orléans  whose  secrets  I  held,  and  myself  also,  or  deceive

VOL.  III.  —  17

258

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

with  care,  art,  and  industry  a  princess  with  whom  I  had
lived  for  many  years  in  the  most  intimate  and  mutual
friendship  and  confidence!

We  have  seen  that  the  edict  which  made  the  kmg’s  bas¬
tard  sons  successors  to  the  crown,  as  having  the  honour  to
be  his  sons  and  grandsons,  was  dated  July,
“etron'tus  1714,  registered  the  2nd  of  August  of  the  same

proposition.  deposited  his  will  with  the

president  and  procureur-général  on  Sunday  morning,  August
27,  same  year  ;  there  were  therefore  twenty-six  days  between
thé  edict  and  the  will,  which  the  Due  du  Maine,  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  and  the  chancellor,  Voysin,  employed  to  advance
their  own  ends.  On  that  Sunday  morning,  August  27,^  when
Mesmes,  the  president,  and  d’ Aguesseau,  procureur-général,
left  the  king’s  cabinet,  they  returned  to  Paris.  On  arrivmg
there  they  sent,  as  we  have  seen,  for  workmen,  and  walled  up
the  king’s  will  in  a  safe  (of  which  they  each  had  a  key)  in
the  wall  between  the  chamber  of  parhament  and  the  room
of  the  president.

On  the  following  Sunday  I  received  a  visit  from  Maisons,
judge  of  the  courts,  who,  as  I  have  already  said,  was  in  the
habit  of  coming  to  see  me  on  Sundays  after  the  king’s  mass.
He  made  me  a  pathetic  discourse  in  which  he  declaimed
strongly  against  the  scandal,  the  venom,  the  motives,  more
than  apparent,  of  the  will,  and  the  dangers  with  which  the
Due  d’Orléans  was  threatened.  He  did  not  omit  to  stir  me
up  by  dwelling  on  the  increase  of  rank  and  power  which
would  result  to  M.  du  Maine  and  to  bastardy ,  interspers¬
ing  what  he  said  with  vehement  declamations  against  the
authors  and  co-operators  of  a  document  so  fatal  to  the
State  and  to  the  royal  family.

When  he  had  perorated  for  some  time  I  told  him  he  con¬
vinced  me  of  nothing  new  ;  that  I  saw  the  truth  of  the  mat-

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  259

ter  as  he  did,  and  on  the  same  evidence  ;  but  the  trouble
was,  there  was  no  remedy.  “No  remedy!”  he  exclaimed
with  his  sly  laugh,  “  there  is  always  a  remedy,  for  even  des¬
perate  matters,  to  courage  and  sense.  I  am  surprised,  with
all  you  have  of  both,  to  find  you  balked  by  a  thing  which
will  throw  the  whole  country  into  confusion.”  And  from
that  he  went  on  to  say  it  was  of  the  utmost  conseq[uence  to
the  Due  d’Orléans  that  a  document  which  could  only  have
been  fabricated  by  M.  du  Maine,  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and
the  chancellor,  and  was  undoubtedly  for  M.  du  Maine  and
against  the  Due  d’Orléans,  should  never  see  the  light.  I
agreed  that  that  would  he  much  the  shortest  way  out  of  the
difficulty,  but  I  asked  him  how  it  was  possible  to  suppress
a  will  publicly  and  solemnly  declared,  and  deposited  with  so
much  ceremony  and  with  precautions  known  to  all,  in  the
very  recesses  of  parhament.  “  You  are  strangely  at  a  loss,”
rephed  Maisons.  “You  should  have  safe  troops  and  wise
and  trusty  officers  ready  at  the  moment  of  the  king’s  death
to  march,  with  masons  and  locksmiths,  to  the  chamber  of
parhament,  break  the  wall,  force  the  safe,  carry  off  the  will,
and  let  it  never  he  seen  again.”

In  my  extreme  surprise  I  asked  him  what  results  he  ex¬
pected  from  such  amazing  violence  ;  adding  that  there  was
always  a  possible  hope  that  the  wiU,  like  that  of  Louis  XIII.,
might  never  be  put  into  execution,  a  thought  the  king  him¬
self  had  not  concealed  ;  moreover,  there  was  no  comparison
between  enduring  its  arrangements,  whatever  they  might  be,
and  violating  with  armed  hand  a  public  and  solemn  trust,
in  the  very  sanctuary  of  law,  in  the  midst  of  the  capital,  —  an
act  which  would  rouse  the  people  and  the  provinces,  their
reason,  their  natural  feehngs,  and  all  that  men  held  sacred
among  them  ;  it  would  give  the  most  specious  weapon  to  the
enemies  of  the  Due  d’Orléans;  it  would  lose  him  all  wise

260  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

and  intelligent  friends,  lend  weight  to  the  horrors  already
laid  at  his  door,  and  fill  the  parliament  thns  outraged  with  a
fury  which,  at  this  most  critical  moment,  would  make  itself
felt  throughout  the  regency.

All  this  was  said  at  much  greater  length,  without  shaking
Maisons  in  the  least  ;  although  he  had  nothing  to  reply  ex¬
cept  the  importance  of  suppressing  a  will  which  was  cer¬
tainly  made  against  the  Due  d’Orléans  and  in  favour  of
the  bastards.  Maisons  went,  on  leaving  me,  to  make  the
same  proposal  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  hoping  apparently  to
persuade  him  before  he  could  talk  with  me.  Happily,  he
was  no  better  received.  We  both  made  him  about  the  same
objections,  because  they  presented  themselves  as  the  natural
ones  ;  but  he  did  not  change  his  opinion,  as  we  related  to
each  other  afterwards,  the  Due  d’Orléans  and  I,  with  the
utmost  astonishment.

The  deadliest  enemy  of  the  Due  d’Orléans  could  not  have
imagined  any  advice  more  fatal  to  him  ;  and  I  do  not  tliink
many  persons  could  have  been  found  so  de-
his  purpose.  prived  of  common-sense  as  to  give  it.  W  nat,
therefore,  must  we  think  of  a  great  legal  judge,  respected  as
Maisons  was  at  the  Palais,  the  Court,  and  in  the  town,  where
all  his  life  he  had  passed  for  a  man  of  sense,  wisdom,  judg¬
ment,  intelligence,  capacity,  and  caution  ?  M  as  he  really  so
infatuated  with  the  necessity  for  the  Due  d  Orléans  to  destroy
that  will  that  he  could  not  see  the  frightful  results  of  what
he  proposed,  although  I  put  them  clearly  before  his  eyes  ?
Or  (remembering  his  former  intimacy  with  the  Due  du
Maine),  could  he  have  been  base  enough,  in  concert  with
him,  to  open  this  abyss  beneath  our  feet  and  strive  to  push
us  down  to  our  destruction  ;  and  thus,  by  the  fall  of  the
Due  d’Orléans,  the  sole  prince  of  the  blood  of  an  age  to
receive  the  regency,  make  the  Due  du  Maine  regent  ?

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  261

whence  to  the  crown  there  was  hut  one  step  to  make,  and  he
knew  the  means.  So  mighty  an  object  to  a  soul  hke  that
of  the  Due  du  Maine,  who  for  years  had  been  preparing  for
it  with  so  much  art,  is  far  from  incredible  when  we  remember
by  what  ways  that  son  of  darkness  had  scaled  all  the  steps
to  the  throne,  and  all  that  he  had  set  in  motion  to  blacken
with  fatal  crime  the  only  obstacle  who  still  remained  to  him
to  overcome.

I  perceived  towards  the  end  of  a  stay  at  Marly  that  the
Due  d’Orléans  had  discussed  the  matter  of  assembhng  the
The  Due  d’Orié-  States-geueral  with  the  Due  de  Noailles.  He
ans  gives  up  the  matter  too  closely

idea  of  the  States-

generai.  conuected  with  the  finances  to  conceal  it  from

the  duke  when  he  told  him  his  destination.  The  Due  de
Noailles  mentioned  it  to  me  himself  with  some  embarrass¬
ment,  and  it  seemed  to  me  soon  after  that  the  Due  d’Orléans
was  no  longer  so  determined  to  convoke  them.  In  other
matters  I  saw  him  weaken  altogether  ;  and  I  knew  him
too  well  to  expect,  under  the  circumstances,  to  carry  more
than  one  point  with  him.  As  that  of  the  States-general
seemed  to  me  of  extreme  importance  in  so  many  great
respects,  I  did  not  hesitate  to  sacrifice  all  else  ;  I  therefore
gathered  up  my  forces  to  keep  him  to  that,  which  he  had
always  approved  and  was  fully  determined  upon  up  to  this
—  a  thing  that  cost  him  nothing,  but,  on  the  contrary ,
favoured  him  in  every  way,  and  would  gratify  all  France.
I  continued  to  do  this,  but  with  little  progress,  until  the
night  before  the  king’s  death,  when  he  declared  to  me  suc¬
cinctly  that  the  matter  must  not  be  thought  of  again.  From
that  moment  I  augured  ül  of  what  would  happen.  I  felt
the  selfish  influence  of  the  Due  de  Noailles,  who  under  the
convocation  of  the  States-general  would  not  have  been
master  of  the  finances,  and  had  made  the  regent  feel  that  he

262

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  ix

himself  would  not  be.  I  do  not  deny  that  this  was  true  ;  it
was  even  one  of  the  benefits  I  looked  for.  The  experience
of  what  afterwards  happened  with  the  finances  wiU  show

that  I  was  right.

At  the  very  end  of  this  Marly  visit  the  king  seemed  so
enfeebled,  although  he  had  not  changed  any  of  his  daüy
The  Duchesse  habits,  that  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans  approached
d’Orléans,  me  on  the  subject  of  her  brothers,  and  after  a

alarmed,  has  re-  ,  ,  .  i  j.-  £  +1,

course  to  me.  few  rather  tangled  circumlocutions,  tor  tne

Luciferian  pride  hated  to  bend  to  it,  she  expressed  to  me  her
anxiety  about  the  first  session  of  parliament  after  the  king’s
death,  and  said  that  she  would  feel  under  the  greatest  obliga¬
tion  to  me  if  I  would  prevent  the  peers  from  doing  anything
against  her  brothers  at  that  overwhelming  moment.  I  felt
no  embarrassment  in  replying.  I  told  her  that  I  did  not
believe  the  peers  were  thinking  of  anything  more  than  the
indispensable  matters  to  come  before  the  session,  and  that
she  might  set  her  mind  at  rest  about  it.  But,  monsieur,
she  said,  “  will  you  not  give  me  your  word,  or  at  any  rate
promise  me  to  do  all  that  in  you  lies  so  that  the  peers  shall
not  attempt  anything  on  that  day  against  my  brothers’
rank?”  “Yes,  madame,”  I  replied,  —  “if  possible,  be  it
understood  ;  for  I  am  not  the  master  of  my  equals  ;  but  I  will
promise  to  do  all  that  I  can  to  prevent  it  ;  and  I  can  promise
all  the  more  freely  because  I  do  not  see  that  tney  are  think¬
ing  of  it.  But  at  the  same  time,  madame,  since  your  Eoyal
Highness  forces  me  to  speak  on  so  delicate  a  subject,  I  warn
you  to  beware  of  the  princes  of  the  blood.  It  is  their  affair
more  than  ours  since  your  brothers  have  been  made  eligible
to  the  throne,  and  the  title  and  dignity  of  princes  of  the  blood
have  been  bestowed  upon  them  ;  regard  yourself  as  warned
that  if  the  princes  of  the  blood  attack  your  brothers,  we,  the
peers,  will  immediately  assert  our  rank,  refuse  to  allow  pre-

263

1715]

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

cedence  to  any  one  between  ourselves  and  tbe  blood-royal,
and  require  that  all  sucb  persons  shall  take  their  rank
among  us  in  the  peerage.”

This  declaration,  bitter  in  itself  to  the  Duchesse  d’Orléans,
was  accepted  readily  by  her  because  of  the  respite  it  offered,
and  also  because  of  the  profound  contempt  she  chose  to  feel
for  the  young  princes  of  the  blood  and  their  mothers.  She
thanked  me  kindly,  with  many  marks  of  friendship  and
confidence.  She  feared  me  extremely  on  this  point  of  her
brothers,  whom  she  always  called  so,  not  venturing  to  name

the  Due  du  Maine.

On  Friday,  August  9,  Père  Tellier  tutored  the  king  a
long  time  in  the  morning  about  the  registration  in  parlia¬
ment  of  the  bidl  Unigenitus,  pure  and  simple,
as  it  stood.  The  king  afterwards  saw  the
d’Aguesseau.  president  and  the  procureur-général  on  the
subject,  whom  he  had  summoned  the  night  before.  After
dinner  he  hunted  the  stag  in  his  calèche,  which  he  drove

himself  as  usual,  for  the  last  time  in  his  life,  but  seemed
much  exhausted  on  his  return.  There  was  a  grand  concert
that  evening  in  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartment.  Saturday,
August  10,  he  walked  before  dinner  in  the  gardens  of  Marly.
He  returned  to  Versailles  at  six  in  the  evening  and  never
again  saw  that  strange  work  of  his  hands.  In  the  evening
he  worked  with  the  chancellor  and  seemed  very  ill  to  every
one.  Sunday,  the  11th,  he  held  a  council  of  State,  and
afterwards  walked  about  Trianon,  —  tbe  last  time  that  he  was
ever  out-of-doors.  He  sent  for  the  procureur-général,  d’Agues¬
seau,  with  whom  he  had  a  violent  quarrel  (having  previously
argued  angrüy  with  him,  two  days  before,  in  presence  of  the
president  and  the  chancellor)  on  the  registration,  pure  and
simple,  of  the  buU.  On  this  second  occasion  he  found  the
procureur-général  armed  with  the  same  reasons  and  the  same

264  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

resolution.  He  no  longer  felt  able  to  go  himself  to  parlia¬
ment,  as  announced  ;  but  he  did  not  give  up  the  hope  of  the
registration,  and  was  therefore  so  angry  with  d’Aguesseau
that  his  natural  self-possession  forsook  him,  and  he  threat¬
ened  the  pTomreur-général  to  take  away  his  office,  and  so
saying  turned  his  back  upon  him.  That  ended  an  interview
which  did  not  shake  in  the  least  d’Aguesseau’s  determination.

Monday,  August  12,  he  took  medicine  as  usual,  and  lived
as  usual.  It  became  known  that  he  complained  of  sciatica
,  ,  in  the  leg  and  thigh.  He  never  before  had

Journal  of  the  ^  o

king’s  last  days.  rheumatism  or  sciatica,  he  never  took  cold,

and  it  was  years  since  he  had  even  had  a  twinge  of  gout.

Tuesday,  August  13,  he  made  his  last  effort  (on  returning
from  mass,  to  which  he  was  carried)  to  give  a  farewell  audi¬
ence  to  the  make-believe  ambassador  of  Persia.  His  strength
did  not  allow  of  the  former  magnificence,  and  he  contented
himself  with  receiving  the  envoy  in  the  throne-room,  which
was  not  decorated.  This  was  the  last  public  action  of  the
king,  about  which  Pontchartrain  had  so  grossly  tricked  his
vanity  to  pay  court  to  him.  The  minister  was  not  ashamed
to  end  the  farce  by  signing  a  treaty,  which  proved  in  the
end  the  forgery  of  this  embassy.  The  audience,  which  was
rather  long,  fatigued  the  king  very  much  ;  but  he  resisted  the
desire  to  rest,  held  the  council  of  finances,  dined  alone,  and
was  carried  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  apartment,  where  there
was  music.

The  king’s  health,  had  been  failing  for  more  than  a  year.
His  personal  valets  first  perceived  it,  and  noted  its  progress
without  daring  to  open  their  hps.  M.  du  Maine  saw  it,  and,
aided  by  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  chancellor,  hastened
all  that  concerned  him.  Fagon,  now  much  weaker  in  body
and  mind,  was  the  only  one  of  the  intimate  circle  who  did
not  see  it.  Maréchal  spoke  to  him  several  times  and  was

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  265

roughly  repulsed.  Urged  at  last  by  his  duty  and  his  attach¬
ment  to  the  king,  he  ventured,  about  Whitsuntide,  to  speak
to  Mme.  de  Maintenon.  He  told  her  what  he  saw,  and  how
completely  Fagon  was  mistaken.  He  assured  her  that  the
king,  whose  pulse  he  often  felt,  had,  for  a  long  time,  had  a
shght  internal  fever  ;  hut  his  constitution  was  so  good  that,
with  proper  remedies  and  attention,  there  was  no  danger,
but  if  the  evd  was  allowed  to  go  on  there  would  soon  be  no
hope.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  was  angry,  and  all  he  got  for  his
zeal  was  her  displeasure.  She  told  him  that  none  but  per¬
sonal  enemies  of  Fagon  thought  as  he  did  about  the  king’s
health,  and  that  the  sagacity  and  experience  of  the  first  phy¬
sician  could  not  be  mistaken.  Maréchal  was  incensed;  he
told  me  of  the  affair,  hut  he  could  do  nothing  further,
and  from  that  day  he  began  to  mourn  the  death  of  his  mas¬
ter.  Fagon  was  really  in  knowledge  and  experience  the  first
physician  in  the  country,  but  his  health  had  long  prevented
him  from  keeping  up  his  experience,  and  the  height  of  au¬
thority  to  which  his  capacity  and  favour  had^  carried  him  had
finally  spoilt  him.  He  would  not  hear  of  any  reasons  or  re¬
ply,  and  continued  to  manage  the  king’s  health  as  he  did  in
his  younger  days,  and  killed  him  by  his  obstinacy.

The  gout,  by  which  in  former  years  the  king  was  often
attacked,  had  induced  Fagon  to  swaddle  him,  so  to  speak,
in  a  mass  of  feather  pillows,  which  made  him  sweat  so
much  at  night  that  he  had  to  he  changed  and  rubbed  dry
every  morning  before  the  grand  chamberlain  and  the  gentle¬
men  of  the  Bedchamber  could  enter.  For  years  he  had
been  made  to  drink,  instead  of  champagne,  to  which  he  was
accustomed,  only  Burgundy  with  half  water,  and  so  old
that  it  had  no  strength.  He  used  to  say,  laughing,  that
foreign  lords  were  often  well  taken  in  by  wanting  to  taste
his  wine.  He  never,  at  any  time,  drank  it  without  water  ;

266

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.ix.

nor  did  he  use  any  kind  of  liquor,  nor  even  tea,  coffee,^  or
chocolate.  When  he  rose,  instead  of  a  httle  bread  and  wine
and  water,  he  took  two  cups  of  sage  and  veronica  ;  and  often,
between  his  meals  and  before  going  to  bed,  glasses  of  water
flavoured  with  orange-flower  which  held  a  pint,  and  were
always  iced.  He  drank  the  same  on  his  medicine  days  and
at  his  meals  ;  between  which  he  never  ate  anything  except
a  few  cinnamon  pastilles  which  he  put  in  his  pocket  after
dinner  with  a  great  many  sweet  biscuits  for  the  setters  in
his  cabinet.  Fagon  made  him  begin  all  his  meals  with  iced
fruits,  mulberries,  melons,  and  figs  (and  those  half-rotten
from  over-ripeness),  with  other  fruits  at  his  dessert,  which
he  finished  with  sweet  things  in  amazing  quantities.  All
the  year  round  he  ate  an  enormous  amount  of  salad  at
supper.  His  soups,  of  which  he  ate  several  both  morning
and  evening,  were  strong  with  meat-juice  and  very  rich  ;
everything  that  was  served  to  him  was  highly  spiced,  to
the  double  of  what  is  ordinarily  used,  and  of  great  strength.
The  spices  and  sweets  were  not  approved  by  Fagon,  who
would  often  make  very  amusing  faces  when  he  saw  the
king  eating  them,  but  without  daring  to  say  anything,  except
now  and  then  to  Livry  and  Benoist,  who  replied  that  it  was
their  business  to  make  the  king  eat,  and  his  to  purge  him.
He  never  ate  any  kind  of  venison  or  water-bird,  but,  with
those  exceptions,  everything,  feast  and  fast,  which  he  always
kept  (except  in  Lent,  during  which  he  kept  certain  days
only)  for  a  score  of  years.  This  last  summer  of  his  life  he
doubled  this  regimen  of  fruits  and  drink.

In  the  end  these  fruits,  taken  after  his  soup,  drowned  his
stomach,  dulled  his  digestion,  and  took  away  his  appetite,
which  had  never  failed  in  all  his  life  ;  although  he  had
never  been  hungry  or  felt  the  need  of  food,  however  much
delayed  his  meals  might  he.  At  the  first  spoonfuls  of  soup

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

267

his  appetite  appeared,  as  I  have  heard  him  say  a  dozen  times  ;
and  he  ate  so  enormously  and  solidly  for  dinner  and  supper,
and  so  steadily,  that  one  never  grew  accustomed  to  seeing  it.
So  much  water  and  so  much  fruit,  not  being  corrected  by
anything  sphituous,  turned  his  blood  to  gangrene  by  dint
of  diminishing  his  vigor  and  depleting  him  by  forced  night-
sweats,  and  were  the  cause  of  his  death  ;  as  was  proved  on
the  opening  of  his  body,  when  all  the  parts  were  found  so
fine  and  healthy  that  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  he
might  have  lived  a  century.  His  stomach  was  amazing,  the
intestines  in  their  size  and  length  were  double  those  of  other
men,  which  was  the  cause  of  his  being  so  great  and  so  equal
an  eater.  Ho  remedies  were  thought  of  until  too  late,  bC'
cause  Fagon  would  never  agree  to  think  him  ill  ;  and  Mme.
de  Maintenon’s  blindness  was  equally  extreme,  although  she
could  take  precautions  enough  about  Saint-Cyr  and  M.  du
Maine.  The  king  had  felt  his  failing  condition  for  some
time,  and  had  spoken  of  it  to  his  valets.  But  Fagon  re¬
assured  him,  and  continued  to  do  nothing.

Saturday,  August  17,  the  night  was  bad  ;  he  remained  in
bed,  held  the  council  of  finances,  saw  the  whole  Court  at  his
dinner  ;  but  rose  afterwards  and  went  to  Mme.  de  Mainte¬
non’s  apartment,  where  he  worked  with  the  chancellor.
That  night  Fagon  slept  for  the  first  time  in  the  king’s
chamber.

Sunday,  18th,  Fagon  declared  that  he  had  no  fever.  He
held  a  council  of  State  before  and  after  his  dinner,  and  after¬
wards  worked  on  the  fortifications  with  Pelletier,  and  then
went  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s,  where  there  was  music.  The
king’s  state,  which  manifestly  showed  that  he  could  not  last
more  than  a  few  days  longer,  and  about  which  I  heard
opinions  from  Maréchal  more  reliable  than  those  of  which
Fagon  tried  to  persuade  himself  and  others,  made  me  think

268

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  jx.

of  Chamillart,  who  had,  on  leaving  office,  received  a  pension
from  the  king  of  sixty  thousand  francs.  I  asked  its  con¬
tinuance  and  a  promise  to  that  effect  from  the  Due
d’Orléans,  with  permission  to  send  Chamillart  word  of  this
in  Paris.  He  was  greatly  moved  at  the  king  s  illness,  and
very  httle  by  anything  else.  Nevertheless  he  was  agreeably
surprised  by  my  letter,  and  very  grateful  for  a  care  on  my
part  which  he  had  never  thought  of  taking  for  himself.
He  sent  me  a  letter  of  thanks,  which  I  conveyed  to  the
Due  d’Orléans.  I  never  did  anything  that  gave  me  more
pleasure.  The  matter  was  secret  until  after  the  death  of
the  king  ;  hut  I  lost  no  time  in  having  it  declared  as  soon
as  the  regency  began.

Monday,  August  19,  the  night  was  equally  bad,  but  Fagon
still  would  not  allow  that  the  king  had  fever.  He  worked
with  Pontchartrain,  heard  music  at  Mme.  de  Maintenon  s,
announced  that  he  should  not  go  to  Fontainebleau,  hut
would  review  the  gendarmerie  from  his  balcony  on  the
following  M^ednesday.  This  same  day  Mme.  de  Saint-Simon
came  hack  from  Forges.  As  the  king  returned  after  supper
to  his  cabinet  he  saw  her,  stopped  his  wheeled-chair,  and
spoke  to  her  with  great  kindness  of  her  journey  and  her
return.  She  was  the  last  lady  of  the  Court  to  whom  he
spoke.  That  evening  she  told  me  she  should  never  have
recognized  him  had  she  met  him  elsewhere  than  in  his  own
rooms;  yet  she  had  only  left  Marly  for  Forges  on  the  6th
of  July.

Wednesday,  August  21,  four  physicians  came  to  see  the
king  ;  they  were  careful  to  say  nothing  except  praises  of
Fagon,  who  now  made  the  king  take  cassia.  He  put  off
reviewing  the  gendarmerie  till  Friday,  held  the  council  of
State,  and  worked  with  the  chancellor.  Mme.  de  Maintenon
came  to  his  room  with  her  ladies,  where  there  was  music.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  269

Thursday,  22nd,  the  king  was  much  worse.  Four  more
physicians  came  to  see  liim,  and  they,  hke  the  first  four,  did
nothing  but  admire  the  learned  knowledge  and  sagacious
treatment  of  Fagon,  who  made  him  take  q^uinine  and  water
and  ass’s-milk  when  he  went  to  bed.  The  king’s  state,
which  was  now  known  to  every  one,  had  already  changed
the  desert  of  the  apartment  of  the  Due  d’Orléans  into  a
crowded  waiting-room.

Friday,  23rd,  the  night  was  as  usual,  the  morning  also.
The  king  worked  with  Père  Telher,  who  made  fruitless
efforts  to  get  him  to  appoint  certain  persons  to  several  large
and  important  benefices  which  were  then  vacant  ;  in  other
words,  to  dispose  of  them  himself,  Tellier,  and  not  leave  them
to  he  given  by  the  Due  d’Orléans.  The  worse  the  king
grew,  the  more  Père  Telher  urged  him,  fearing  to  lose  so
rich  a  prize  and  the  occasion  to  provide  himself  with  hench¬
men,  with  whom  his  bargains  were  made,  not  in  money,  but
in  cabals.  The  king  told  him  that  he  had  accounts  enough
to  render  to  God  without  burdening  himself  with  those  of
more  appointments,  being,  as  he  was,  about  to  appear  before
Him  ;  and  he  forbade  Père  Telher  to  speak  of  it  again.  He
dined  standing  up  in  his  room  in  his  dressing-gown,  and
received  the  courtiers.

Saturday,  24th,  his  leg  was  considerably  worse,  and  gave
him  more  pain.  He  supped,  standing  up  in  his  dressing-
gown,  in  presence  of  the  Court  for  the  last  time.  I  noticed
that  he  could  swaUow  only  hquids,  and  was  annoyed  at
being  looked  at.  He  could  not  finish,  and  said  to  the  cour¬
tiers  that  he  begged  them  to  pass,  that  is,  leave  the  room.
He  then  went  to  bed  ;  his  leg  was  examined  and  black  spots
were  found  upon  it.  He  sent  for  Père  Telher  and  confessed.
Confusion  reigned  among  the  doctors  ;  they  had  tried  milk
and  quinine,  and  now  suppressed  both  without  knowing

270  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

what  else  to  do.  They  admitted  that  he  had  had  a  slow
fever  since  Whit-Sunday,  but  excused  themselves  for  doing
nothing  on  the  ground  that  he  did  not  hke  remedies.

Sunday,  August  25,  was  the  fête  of  Saint-Louis;  the
night  had  been  very  bad.  No  mystery  was  now  made  of
the  danger,  which  was  seen  to  he  great  and  imminent.
Nevertheless,  the  king  would  not  allow  the  slightest  change
in  the  accustomed  order  of  the  day;  that  is  to  say,  the
drums  and  the  hautboys  stationed  under  his  windows  gave
him,  as  soon  as  he  waked,  their  usual  music,  and  the  twenty-
four  violins  played  in  his  antechamber  during  dinner.  After
which  he  was  alone  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  chan¬
cellor,  and,  for  a  short  time,  the  Due  du  Maine  ;  Maréchal,
Lagon,  and  the  valets  in  the  next  room.  The  night  before,
he  had  asked  for  paper  and  ink  during  his  work  with  the
chancellor  ;  they  were  again  produced  on  this  occasion,
Mme.  de  Maintenon  being  present,  and  it  was  on  one  or
other  of  these  days  that  the  chancellor  wrote,  under  his
dictation,  a  codicil  to  his  will.  M.  du  Maine  (thinking  ever
of  himself  )  and  Mme.  de  M!aintenon  felt  that  the  king  had
not  done  enough  for  him.  They  resolved  to  remedy  this  hy
a  codicil,  which  shows  ec^ually  the  enormous  abuse  they
made  of  the  king’s  weakness  in  his  extremity,  and  the  ex¬
tremes  to  which  ambition  can  lead  a  man.  By  this  codicil
the  whole  civil  and  mihtary  household  of  the  king  was  sub¬
jected  to  the  Due  du  Maine,  absolutely  and  without  reserve  ,
and,  under  his  orders,  to  the  Maréchal  de  Villeroy  ;  thus
making  them  sole  masters  of  the  person  and  dwelling  of
the  king,  of  the  city  of  Paris,  of  the  two  regiments  of  the
guards  and  the  two  companies  of  mousquetaires,  of  the
whole  service  of  bedchamber,  wardrobe,  chapel,  kitchens,
stables,  etc.,  so  that  the  regent,  having  hut  the  mere  shadow
of  a  nominal  authority,  would  find  himself  at  their  mercy.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,

271

continually  exposed  to  arrest  and  imprisonment  whenever  he
did  not  please  the  Due  du  Maine.

As  soon  as  the  chancellor  left  the  king  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
who  remained,  sent  for  her  usual  ladies  and  for  the  hand,
Receives  the  whicli  arrived  at  seven  o’clock.  The  king  fell
last  sacraments,  asleep  during  Ms  conversation  with  the  ladies,

and  woke  up  with  his  mmd  wandering,  which  frightened
them  and  made  them  send  in  haste  for  the  doctors  ;  who
found  the  pulse  so  bad  that  they  did  not  hesitate  to  advise
the  king,  who  had  meantime  recovered  his  senses,  to  make
no  delay  in  receiving  the  sacraments.  Père  Telher  was  sum¬
moned  with  Cardinal  de  Kohan,  and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour
all  was  ready  and  the  music  and  the  ladies  sent  away.
Père  TeUier  confessed  the  king,  while  the  cardinal  fetched
the  holy  sacrament  from  the  chapel  with  the  priests  and  the
sacred  oüs.  Two  of  the  king’s  almoners,  summoned  by  the
cardinal,  and  seven  or  eight  torches,  borne  by  the  footmen
of  the  chateau  and  by  two  of  Pagon’s  lacqueys  and  one
of  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s,  made  up  the  small  procession  that
followed  the  cardinal  up  the  little  staircase  to  the  king’s
chamber.  Père  Telher,  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  and  a  dozen
others,  masters  or  valets,  received  or  followed  the  holy
sacrament.  The  cardinal  said  a  few  words  to  the  king  on
this  great  and  final  action,  during  which  the  king  was  very
firm,  but  seemed  much  moved  by  what  he  was  doing.  As
soon  as  he  had  received  Our  Lord  and  the  holy  oils  every
one  left  the  chamber  either  preceding  or  following  the  Host  ;
no  one  remained  but  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  the  chancellor.
Immediately  —  and  this  immediate  action  was  rather  strange
Writes  the  cod-  —  a  sort  of  book  or  little  table  was  put  upon
icii  to  his  will.  pg^^  t;P0  chancellor  laid  the  codicil  upon

it,  to  which  the  king  added  five  or  six  lines  in  his  own
handwriting  and  then  gave  it  back  to  the  chancellor.  After

272

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

which  the  king  asked  for  drink,  and  then  called  to  Maréchal
de  Villeroy,  who,  with  a  few  others  of  note,  was  standing  at
the  door  between  the  chamber  and  the  council-room.  He
talked  to  him  alone  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  then
he  sent  a  summons  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  with  whom  he
talked  rather  longer  than  he  had  done  to  the  maréchal.  He

And  speaks  to  the  much  esteem,  confidence,  and  friend-

Duc  d’Orieans.  gpjp  ^nd  —  which  is  terrible  with

Jesus  Christ  upon  his  bps— he  assured  him  that  he  would
find  nothing  in  his  wbl  with  which  he  would  not  he  con¬
tent  ;  and  he  commended  to  his  care  the  State,  and  the
person  of  the  future  king.  Between  his  communion  and
extreme  unction  and  this  conversation  not  half  an  hour  had
elapsed  ;  he  could  not  have  forgotten  the  strange  provisions
which  had  been  forced  from  him  with  so  much  difficulty,
and  during  that  short  interval  he  had  added  words  to  the
codicil  just  written  which  put  the  knife  to  the  throat  of  the
Due  d’Orléans,  and  its  hüt  in  the  hand  of  the  Due  du  Maine.
This  brief  interview,  the  first  the  king  had  had  with  the
Due  d’Orléans,  gave  rise  to  a  rumour  that  the  king  had
declared  him  regent.

Monday,  August  26,  the  night  was  no  better.  His  leg
was  dressed,  and  he  heard  mass.  Every  one  left  the  room
The  fareweUs  of  ^fter  the  service,  hut  the  king  detained  the
the  king.  Cardinals  de  Eohan  and  de  Bissy.  Mme.  de

Maintenon  remained,  as  she  always  did,  and  with  her  Maré-
.  chal  de  Villeroy,  Père  Telher,  and  the  chancellor,  —  Eagon,
Maréchal,  and  the  valets  within  sight  as  usual  and  near
the  bed.  The  king  called  the  two  cardinals  to  him  and
protested  that  he  died  in  the  faith,  and  in  submission  to
the  Church.  Then  he  added,  looking  at  them,  that  he  was
sorry  to  leave  the  affairs  of  the  Church  in  the  state  they
were  ;  that  he  himself  was  perfectly  ignorant  ;  they  knew,

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  273

and  he  called  them  to  witness,  that  he  had  done  all  that
they  wished  him  to  do  ;  it  was  therefore  for  them  to  answer
to  God  for  what  had  been  done,  whether  too  much  or  too
little  ;  he  protested  once  more  that  he  charged  them  with  it
before  God  ;  that  his  own  conscience  was  clear,  as  that  of
an  ignorant  man  who  had  yielded  himself  absolutely  to  them
throughout  the  whole  affair.  What  a  fearful  thunderbolt!
But  the  two  cardinals  were  not  so  easily  frightened  ;  their
calmness  was  beyond  peradventure.  They  rephed  with
praises  and  assurances  of  safety  ;  and  again  the  king  re¬
peated  that,  in  his  ignorance,  he  thought  he  did  all  for  the
best  in  allowing  them  to  guide  him,  and  therefore  his  re-
sponsibihty  before  God  would  he  laid  upon  them.  He
added  that  as  to  Cardinal  de  Hoailles,  God  was  his  witness
he  did  not  hate  him,  and  had  always  been  sorry  for  what
he  had  thought  it  his  duty  to  do  against  him.

That  same  Monday,  August  26,  after  the  two  cardinals
left  him,  the  king  dined  in  his  bed  in  presence  of  all  those
who  had  the  entrée.  When  the  meal  was  cleared  away  he
requested  those  present  to  approach  him,  and  said  to  them
the  frill  owing  words,  which  were  written  down  within  an
hour  :  “  Messieurs,  I  ask  your  pardon  for  the  had  example
I  have  set  you.  I  have  much  to  thank  you  for,  both  for
the  manner  in  which  you  have  served  me,  and  for  the
attachment  and  fidehty  you  have  always  shown.  I  am
very  sorry  not  to  have  done  for  you  all  that  I  wished  to  do.
The  hard  times  are  the  reason.  I  ask  of  you  for  my  grand¬
son  the  same  devotion,  the  same  fidehty  you  have  always
shown  to  me.  Let  your  example  guide  the  conduct  of  my
other  subjects.  Follow  the  orders  that  my  nephew  will
give  you  ;  he  will  govern  the  kingdom  ;  I  hope  he  will  do
it  well.  I  hope  also  that  you  will  contribute  to  harmony,
and  if  any  one  breaks  away  from  it,  that  you  will  endeavour

TOL.  III.  —  18

274

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

to  bring  him  back—  I  feel  that  I  am  moved,  and  I  am
moving  you;  I  beg  yonr  pardon.  Adieu,  messieurs,  I  rely
upon  the  thought  that  you  will  sometimes  remember  me.”

Soon  after,  the  king  asked  for  Maréchal  de  ViUeroy  and
said  these  words,  which  he  remembered  well  and  often  re¬
peated  :  “  Monsieur  le  maréchal,  I  give  you  a  fresh  proof  of
my  friendship  and  confidence  when  dying.  I  make  you  gov¬
ernor  of  the  dauphin,  the  most  important  post  that  I  can
give.  You  will  know  by  what  is  in  my  wül  what  you  will
have  to  do  with  regard  to  the  Due  du  Maine.  I  do  not
doubt  that  you  will  serve  me  after  my  death  with  the  same
fidelity  you  have  shown  to  me  in  hfe.  I  hope  that  my
nephew  will  live  with  you  in  the  consideration  and  confi¬
dence  he  ought  to  show  to  a  man  whom  I  have  loved.
Adieu,  Monsieur  le  maréchal  ;  I  trust  that  you  wül  remem¬
ber  me.”

Some  time  after  this  he  sent  word  to  the  Duchesse  de
Ventadour  to  bring  the  dauphin.  He  had  him  brought  to
his  side  and  said  these  words  before  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
a  few  privileged  persons,  and  the  valets,  who  repeated  them  :
“  My  child,  you  are  about  to  be  a  great  king.  Do  not
imitate  me  in  the  taste  I  had  for  buüding,  nor  in  that  I
had  for  war.  Strive,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  peace  with
your  neighbours.  Render  to  God  that  which  you  owe  to
Him  ;  recognize  your  obligations  to  Him  ;  make  Him  hon¬
oured  by  your  subjects.  Follow  good  counsels  ;  try  to
solace  your  people,  which  I  have  been  so  unfortunate  as
not  to  be  able  to  do,  Never  forget  the  gratitude  you  owe
to  Mme.  de  Ventadour.  Madame,”  he  added,  addressing
her,  “  let  me  kiss  him  ;  ”  and  as  he  kissed  him  he  said  :  “  My
dear  child,  I  give  you  my  blessing  with  all  my  heart.”  As
they  lifted  the  little  prince  from  his  bed,  he  asked  for  him
again,  kissed  him  once  more,  and  raising  his  hands  and  eyes

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

275

to  heaven,  blessed  him  again.  The  scene  was  extremely
touching.  Mme.  de  Ventadour  hastened  to  remove  the
dauphin,  and  carried  him  back  at  once  to  his  room.

The  following  day,  August  27,  the  kmg  remarked  to  Mme.
de  Maintenon  that  he  had  always  heard  it  said  that  it  was
difficult  to  resign  one’s  self  to  die,  hut  as  for  him,  who  was
now  at  the  moment  so  formidable  to  mankind,  he  did  not
find  it  painful  to  accept.  She  rephed  that  it  was  very
painful  when  people  had  attachments,  or  hatred  in  their
hearts,  or  restitutions  to  make.  “  Ah  !  ”  said  the  king,  “  as
for  restitutions,  I  owe  none  to  individuals,  and  for  those  I
owe  to  my  kingdom  I  must  hope  in  the  mercy  of  God.”
The  night  that  followed  was  very  agitated.  They  saw  him
clasp  his  hands  repeatedly,  and  they  heard  him  say  the
prayers  he  had  always  said  in  health,  and  saw  him  beat
his  breast  at  the  Conjiteor.

Early  on  the  morning  of  Wednesday,  August  28,  he  said
an  affectionate  thing  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  which  did  not
please  her  and  to  which  she  made  no  reply.  He  told  her
that  his  one  consolation  in  leaving  her  was  the  hope  that
at  her  age  she  would  soon  rejoin  him.  About  seven  o’clock
that  morning  he  called  for  Père  Telher,  and  as  he  was  speak¬
ing  with  him  of  God  he  saw  in  the  mirror  over  his  mantel¬
piece  two  of  his  valets  sitting  at  the  foot  of  his  bed  and
weeping.  He  said  to  them  :  “  Why  do  you  weep  ?  Did  you
think  me  immortal  ?  I  never  thought  so,  and  you  ought,
at  my  age,  to  expect  to  lose  me.”

A  Provençal  peasant,  extremely  rough  and  common,  came
to  Versailles  in  the  course  of  the  day  with  a  remedy  which,
he  said,  would  cure  gangrene.  The  king  was  so  ill,  and  the
doctors  so  much  at  a  loss,  that  they  consented,  in  presence
of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  M.  du  Maine,  to  make  use  of  it.
Fagon  wanted  to  say  something,  hut  the  peasant,  whose

276

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  lx.

name  was  Le  Brun,  browbeat  him  so  brutally  that  Fagon,
accustomed  to  browbeat  others  and  to  be  obeyed  in  trem¬
bling,  was  quite  dumfounded.  They  gave  the  king  ten  drops
of  the  elixir,  in  wine  of  Alicante,  about  eleven  in  the  morn¬
ing.  He  seemed  much  stronger  for  it  ;  but,  the  pulse  having
failed  again,  they  asked  him  to  take  another  dose,  saying  it
would  restore  him  to  life.  He  answered  as  he  took  the
glass,  “  For  life  or  death,  as  God  pleases.”

Meantime  Mme.  de  Maintenon  had  left  the  king  s  room
with  her  hood  drawn  down,  and  was  led  by  the  Maréchal
de  Villeroy  past  her  own  apartments,  which

Mme.  de  Mainte-  ^  ,  p  ,  e  xi  a

non  retires  to  sll6  did.  HOt  GntGr,  tO  tll6  foot  01  tllG  graillCl

Baint-Cyr.  gtaircasc.  There  she  raised  her  hood,  embraced
the  maréchal,  saying  to  him  with  dry  eyes,  “  Adieu,  Monsieur
le  maréchal,”  got  into  the  kiug’s  carriage,  which  she  always
used,  where  Mme.  de  Caylus  awaited  her,  and,  with  all  her
women  following  in  her  own  carriage,  went  off  to  Saint-Cyr.
That  same  evening  the  Due  du  Maine  gave  a  most  amusing
account  in  his  own  house  of  Fagon  s  encounter  with  Le
Brun.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  later  of  his  conduct,
and  that  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  and  Père  Tellier  during  the
very  last  days  of  the  king.  Le  Brun’s  remedy  was  con¬
tinued  as  he  wished,  and  each  time  he  saw  the  king  take  it.
When  some  broth  was  proposed  to  the  king  he  replied  that
they  ought  not  to  speak  to  him  as  they  would  to  another
man,  because  it  was  not  broth  he  wanted,  but  a  confessor.
Once  when  he  returned  to  himself  after  a  loss  of  conscious¬
ness,  he  asked  Père  Tellier  for  a  general  absolution  from  his
sins.  Père  Tellier  asked  him  if  he  suffered  much.  “  Eh  !
no,”  replied  the  king,  “  that  is  what  troubles  me  ;  I  wish  I
suffered  more  in  expiation  of  my  sins.”

Thursday,  August  29,  the  night  had  been  very  bad  ;  the
absence  of  the  usual  tenants  of  the  king’s  room,  who  had  no

1715]

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

277

need  of  being  there  after  what  they  had  accomplished,  left
the  entrance  free  to  the  chief  officers,  who  had  hitherto  been
excluded.  No  mass  had  been  said  the  evening  before,  and
there  seemed  no  prospect  of  any  in  future.  The  Due  de
Charost,  captain  of  the  guard,  who  had  shpped  in  with  the
rest,  very  naturally  thought  this  wrong,  and  he  made  one
of  the  valets  ask  the  king  if  he  would  not  be  glad  to  hear
one.  The  king  said  he  desired  it.  They  then  sent  about
for  the  proper  persons  and  the  necessary  things,  and  con¬
tinued  to  do  so  on  the  following  days.  In  the  course  of  this
Thursday  he  seemed  much  stronger;  the  news  flew  round
on  all  sides,  and  was  much  exaggerated.  I  went  about  two
o’clock  to  the  Due  d’Orléans,  whose  apartments  had  so
swarmed  with  people  for  the  last  week  that  there  was
scarcely  room  to  drop  a  pin,  and  found  no  one.  As  soon  as
he  saw  me  he  began  to  laugh,  and  told  me  I  was  the  first
man  who  had  been  near  him  that  day;  his  rooms  were

deserted.  Such  is  the  world  !

I  took  this  moment  of  leisure  to  speak  to  him  of  many
things;  and  then  it  was  that  I  became  aware  he  was  no
longer  in  favour  of  the  convocation  of  the  States-general,  and
(except  as  to  what  we  had  agreed  upon  concerning  the
councils),  that  he  had  not  given  the  rest  a  thought  about
which  I  took  the  liberty  of  giving  him  strongly  my  opinion.

The  evening  of  that  day,  the  29th,  did  not  answer  to  the
hopes  of  the  morning  ;  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  evening  the
king  again  took  the  elixir  of  the  Provencal  peas-
.îs?ndffo7Mme.  ant^  his  mind  seemed  to  wander  and  he  said
de  Maintenon.  that  he  felt  Very  ill.  At  eleven  o’clock

they  examined  his  leg,  and  the  gangrene  was  found  in  his
foot  and  his  knee,  with  the  thigh  much  swelled.  He  fainted
during  the  examination.  He  obseived  with  pain  the  ab¬
sence  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  did  not  mtend  to  return

278

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  ix.

Several  times  in  the  course  of  the  day  he  asked  for  her,  and
it  became  impossible  at  last  to  hide  her  departure.  He  then
sent  to  fetch  her  from  Saint-Cyr,  and  she  returned  that
evening.

Friday,  August  30,  the  day  Avas  as  had  as  the  night  had
been.  Much  drowsiuess  ;  at  intervals  the  mind  wandered.
No  one  was  in  the  chamber  hut  the  necessary  valets,  the
doctors,  and  Mme.  de  Mahitenon,  with  rare  apparitions  of
Père  Tellier,  whom  Bloin  or  Maréchal  summoned  constantly,
for  he  did  not  remain  as  before  in  the  cabinets,  nor  did
M.  du  Maine.  The  king  responded  readily  to  pious  thoughts
whenever  Mme.  de  Maintenon  or  Père  TeUier  took  moments
when  his  mind  did  not  wander,  but  these  moments  were
now  few  and  short.  At  five  o’clock  Mme.  de  Maintenon
went  to  her  own  apartment,  where  she  distributed  what
furniture  she  possessed  among  her  servants,  and  went  back
to  Saint-Cyr,  which  she  never  left  again.

Saturday,  August  31,  the  day  and  night  were  terrible,
with  only  a  few  short  periods  of  consciousness.  The  gan-
His  last  words  ;  g^eue  had  gained  the  whole  thigh.  They  gave
his  death.  him  a  remedy  of  the  late  Abbé  d’Aignan,  sent

by  the  Duchesse  du  Maine,  which  was  excellent  for  the  small¬
pox.  The  doctors  consented  to  anything  because  there  was
no  hope.  About  eleven  at  night  the  king  was  thought  so
ill  that  the  prayers  for  the  dying  were  said.  The  ceremony
recalled  him  to  himself;  and  he  recited  the  prayers  in  so
strong  a  voice  that  he  was  heard  above  the  voices  of  a  number

o

of  priests  and  of  other  persons  who  had  entered  the  room.
At  the  close  of  the  prayers  he  recognized  Cardinal  de  Eohan,
and  said  to  him  :  “  These  are  the  last  favours  of  the  Church.”
The  cardinal  was  the  last  person  to  whom  he  spoke.  He
repeated  several  times.  Nunc  et  in  hora  mortis  ;  then  he
added,  “  Oh,  my  Ood,  come  to  my  help  ;  hasten  to  succour

279

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

me  !  ”  Those  were  his  last  words.  AU  night  he  lay  without
consciousness,  and  the  lingering  death-agony  ended  on  Sun¬
day,  September  1,  1715,  at  a  quarter  past  eight  in  the  morn¬
ings —three  days  before  he  was  seventy-seven  years  old,  and
in  the  seventy-second  year  of  his  reign.

X.

Louis  XIV.  was  a  prince  in  wlioni  we  cannot  deny  much
that  was  good,  even  great,  while  we  recognize  still  more  that
Character  of  was  petty  and  bad,  without  being  able  to
Louis  XIV.  discern  what  was  native  in  him,  and  what
was  acquired.  As  to  either,  nothing  is  more  rare  than
writers  who  are  well-informed;  nothing  more  difficult  to
find  than  men  who  knew  him  of  their  own  knowledge  and
experience  and  are  capable  of  writing  about  him,  who  yet,
at  the  same  time,  are  sufficiently  masters  of  themselves  to
speak  of  him  without  hatred  and  without  flattery  ;  saying
only  that  which  is  dictated  by  the  naked  truth  as  to  the
good  and  evil,  equally.  With  regard  to  the  first  qualifica¬
tion,  it  may  here  be  relied  upon  ;  as  to  the  second,  I  shall
endeavour  to  attain  it  by  sincerely  holding  all  passion  in
abeyance.

I  shall  not  speak  here  of  his  earliest  years.  King  almost
at  birth,  smothered  by  the  policy  of  a  mother  who  wished
to  govern,  stiU  more  by  the  selfish  interests  of  a  pernicious
minister,  who  risked  the  welfare  of  the  State  a  thousand
times  for  his  own  personal  grandeur,  and  rmder  subjection
to  that  yoke  as  long  as  the  minister  lived,  this  period  of  his
life  is  just  so  much  cut  off  from  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.
Still,  he  was  dawning  beneath  the  yoke.  He  felt  love  ;  he
comprehended  that  idleness  was  the  enemy  of  renown  ;  he
had  made  feeble  efforts  in  both  directions  ;  he  had  enough
perception  to  feel  himself  delivered  by  Mazarin’s  death,
though  he  did  not  have  the  force  to  deliver  himself  earlier.

1715]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  281

That  event  produced,  in  fact,  one  of  the  fine  moments  of  his
life,  and  it  bore  fruit  in  the  maxim,  which  nothing  ever
shook,  to  eschew  prime  ministers  and  all  ecclesiastics  in  his
council  He  learned  another  at  the  same  time,  which  he
did  not  maintain  with  the  same  consistency  because  he
never  perceived  that  in  practice  it  was  constantly  escaping
him;  namely,  to  govern  by  himself,  —  the  thing  on  which
he  most  piqued  himself,  about  which  he  was  praised  and
flattered  most,  but  of  which  he  actually  did  least.

Born  with  a  mind  below  mediocrity,  but  a  mind  that
was  capable  of  forming,  trainmg,  and  refining  itself,  and  of

acquiring  from  others  without  imitation  or

His  early  years.  j.  o  ^  i  i  •

constraint,  he  profited  immensely  from  having
all  his  hfe  hved  among  people  of  the  world,  both  men  and
women  of  all  ages  ;  persons  who  had  the  most  knowledge  of
life  and  the  best  minds  of  different  sorts  and  descriptions.
If  I  may  so  speak  of  a  king  twenty-three  years  of  age,  on
his  first  entry  into  the  world  he  was  fortunate  in  being
surrounded  by  distinguished  intellects  of  all  kinds.  His
ministers,  within  and  without  the  country,  were  the  strong¬
est  in  all  Europe  ;  his  generals  the  greatest  ;  their  seconds
the  best,  becoming  afterwards  leaders  of  the  same  school;
all  were  men  whose  names  have  passed  to  posterity  by
unanimous  consent.  The  tumults  by  which  the  State  was
so  furiously  agitated,  within  and  without,  after  the  death
of  Louis  XIII.  had  produced  a  body  of  men  who  formed
a  court  of  able  and  illustrious  personages  and  refined
courtiers.

The  apartments  of  the  Comtesse  de  Soissons,  who,  as
superintendent  of  the  household  of  the  queen-mother,  lodged
in  Paris  at  the  Tuüeries  and  reigned  over  the  Court,  partly
by  the  remains  of  the  splendour  of  her  late  uncle.  Cardinal
Mazarin,  but  more  by  her  own  intellect  and  cleverness,  had

282

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

become  the  centre  of  everything,  hut  a  very  select  one.

It  was  there  that  aU  the  most  distingnished  men  and  women
of  the  time  assembled,  rendering  those  apartments  the  centre
of  Court  gallantries  and  of  the  secret  manoeuvres  and  in¬
trigues  of  ambition,  upon  which  noble  descent  and  parentage,
as 'much  prized  and  respected  in  those  days  as  it  is  now
forgotten,  had  great  influence.  It  was  into  this  important
and  brilliant  vortex  that  the  king  first  threw  himself  ;  it  was
here  that  he  acquired  that  air  of  courtesy  and  gallantry
which  he  retained  all  his  life  and  knew  so  well  how  to  com¬
bine  with  decorum  and  majesty.  It  may  be  said  that  he
was  made  for  majesty  ;  amid  all  other  men  his  figure,  his  car¬
riage,  the  graces,  beauty,  and  the  noble  mien  that  succeeded
beauty,  even  to  the  tones  of  his  voice  and  the  supple,  natural,
and  majestic  grace  of  his  whole  person,  distinguished  him  to
the  day  of  his  death  as  king  of  the  world’s  hive  ;  so  that  had
he  been  born  to  private  life  he  would  still  have  had  the
talent  of  fêtes,  pleasures,  gallantry,  and  the  same  turn  for
love  and  its  license.  Happy  would  it  have  been  for  him  had
all  his  mistresses  resembled  Mme.  de  La  V allière,  shamed  in
her  own  eyes  by  being  what  she  was  ;  still  more  by  the  fruits
M  de  La  (acknowledged  and  brought  for-

Vaiiiere  ;  her  ward  agaiust  her  wishes)  5  modest,  disinterested,
character.  gg^tle,  kind  to  the  last  degree,  struggling  ever

against  herself,  and  victorious  at  last  over  her  wrong-doing
through  the  cruel  effects  of  love  and  jealousy,  her  torture
and  her  resource  ;  for  she  used  them  finally  to  tear  herself
away  and  consecrate  her  life  to  the  harshest  and  most
saintly  repentance.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  king
was  more  to  be  pitied  than  blamed  in  giving  himself  up  to
love,  and  that  he  deserves  commendation  for  having,  at
times,  torn  himself  away  from  it  for  the  sake  of  military
glory.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

283

/-

The  intrigues  and  adventures  that,  king  as  he  was,  he
shared  in  this  vortex  of  the  Comtesse  de  Soissons,  made
Hatred  of  in-  impressions  upon  him  which  grew  fatal  for
teiiect  and  nobil-  reason  that  they  ruled  him  ever  after.

ity  of  sentiment  ;

desire  to  reign  Intellect,  nobility  of  sentiments,  self-respect,
a  lofty  heart,  an  educated  mind,  all  became
suspicious  to  him  and  presently  hateful.  The  farther  he
advanced  in  life,  the  more  this  aversion  was  confirmed.  He
felt  it  towards  his  generals  and  his  ministers,  and  it  was  only
counterbalanced  by  his  need  of  them.  He  wanted  to  reign
alone.  His  jealousy  on  that  point  amounted  to  madness.
He  reigned  in  small  things  ;  to  the  great  he  never  attained  ;
and  even  in  the  small  he  was  often  governed.  His  first
seizure  of  the  reins  of  empire  was  marked  with  extreme
harshness  and  extreme  gullibility.  Fouquet  was  the  luckless
man  who  felt  the  first  ;  Colbert  was  the  active  agent  of  the
second,  by  seizing  the  sole  management  of  the  finances  while
making  the  king  believe  that  everything  was  in  his  own
hands,  by  reason  of  the  signatures  with  which  he  over¬
whelmed  him  after  the  suppression  of  Fouquet’s  office.

Soon  after  this,  the  death  of  the  King  of  Spain  made  the
young  prince,  who  was  eager  for  glory,  seize  upon  a  pretext
Eagerness  for  for  war,  from  which  his  recent  renunciations,
so  carefully  stipulated  in  the  queen’s  marriage-
contract,  did  not  deter  him.  He  marched  into  Flanders;
his  conquests  were  rapid;  the  passage  of  the  Ehine  was
memorable;  the  triple  alliance  of  England,  Sweden,  and

Holland  only  spurred  him  on.  He  took,  in  the  depth  of
winter,  all  Franche-Comté,  which  served  him,  at  the  peace
of  Aix-la-ChapeUe,  to  preserve  his  conquests  in  Flanders
by  relinquishing  that  province.  All  was  prosperous  in  the
State;  aU  was  affluent.  Colbert  had  brought  the  finances,
the  navy,  commerce,  manufactures,  even  letters,  to  the  high'

284

memoirs  of  the  dug  de  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

est  point  ;  and  tliis  era,  like  that  of  Augustus,  produced,  in
emulation  of  one  another,  ülustrious  men  in  every  walk  of
hfe,  even  to  those  who  were  good  for  nought  hut  pleasure.

Le  Telher  and  his  son  Louvois  trembled  at  the  success
and  influence  of  Colbert,  and  had  no  trouble  in  putting  a
new  war  into  the  king’s  head,  the  successes  of  which  caused
such  alarm  in  Europe  that  France  could  never  overcome  it,
and,  after  nearly  succumbing  to  it  many  years  later,  she
still  feels  the  weight  and  the  misfortune  of  it.  Such  was
the  true  cause  of  that  famous  war  in  Holland,  into  which
the  king  allowed  himself  to  be  pushed,  and  which  his  love
for  Mme.  de  Montespan  rendered  so  mortifying  to  his
kingdom  and  to  his  own  fame.  All  being  conquered,  all
taken,  and  Amsterdam  ready  to  send  him  her  keys,  the  king,
yielding  to  the  impatience  of  love,  left  the  army,  flew  back
to  Versailles,  and  destroyed  in  a  moment  the  triumph  of  his
arms.  He  repaired  this  shame  later  by  a  second  conquest
of  Franche-Comté  in  person,  which  thenceforth  belonged  to
France.

The  war  of  1688  had  an  equally  strange  origin,  the  narra¬
tive  of  which,  ahke  authentic  and  curious,  serves  so  well  to
War  of  1688  ;  its  characterize  both  the  king  and  Louvois  that
curious  origin.  ought  to  find  a  place  here.  Louvois,  on  the

death  of  Colbert,  took  his  place  as  superintendent  of  build¬
ings.  The  little  porcelain  Trianon,  built  for  Mme.  de
Montespan,  dissatisfied  the  king,  who  always  wanted  palaces.
He  amused  himself  immensely  in  building  ;  he  had  a  com¬
pass  in  his  eye  for  proportions,  accuracy,  and  symmetry,  but
taste  was  lacking,  as  we  shall  see  elsewhere.  The  new
château  was  going  up,  when  the  king  observed  a  defect  in
a  window  which  was  just  being  finished  among  a  hne  of
others  on  the  range  of  the  ground-floor.  Louvois,  who  was
rude  by  nature  and  so  spoilt  that  he  would  scarcely  allow

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

285

his  master  to  find  fault  with  him,  disputed  the  matter
stoutly  and  maintained  that  the  window  was  right.  The
king  turned  his  back  upon  him,  and  walked  off  elsewhere.

The  next  day  he  saw  Le  Notre,  a  good  architect,  though
more  famous  for  his  taste  in  gardens,  which  he  was  the
first  to  introduce  into  France,  bringing  them  to  a  state  of
the  highest  perfection.  The  king  asked  him  if  he  had  been
to  Trianon.  He  said  no.  The  king  then  explained  what
had  struck  his  eye,  and  told  him  to  go  and  look  at  that
window.  Next  day  the  same  question,  same  answer;  and
the  day  after,  the  same.  The  king  saw  that  Le  Nôtre  would
not  risk  finding  either  himself  or  Louvois  to  blame.  He  was
angry,  and  ordered  him  to  he  at  Trianon  the  next  day,  when
he  should  he  there  himself  and  Louvois  also.  This  time
there  was  no  means  of  getting  out  of  it.  The  king  found
them  both  at  Trianon  when  he  arrived  there.  The  question
of  the  window  came  up  at  once.  Louvois  disputed  the
point;  Le  Nôtre  said  nothing.  At  last  the  king  told  the
latter  to  go  and  measure  it  by  rule  and  come  and  tell  him
the  result.  While  he  was  doing  this,  Louvois,  furious  at
the  proceeding,  grumbled  aloud,  crossly  declaring  that  the
window  was  exactly  the  same  size  as  all  the  others.  The
king  said  nothing  and  waited  ;  but  he  was  plainly  displeased.
When  the  measurements  were  made  he  asked  Le  Nôtre  the
result.  Le  Nôtre  hesitated.  The  khig  was  angry  and
ordered  him  to  speak  out.  Le  Nôtre  then  admitted  that
the  king  was  right  by  several  inches.  He  had  scarcely  said
the  words  before  the  king,  turning  to  Louvois,  told  him  he
could  not  put  up  with  his  obstinacy  any  longer;  that  if  it
had  not  been  for  his  own  eye  that  window  would  have  been
crooked  and  the  whole  building  must  have  been  torn  down
as  soon  as  finished;  in  short,  he  washed  his  head  for  him.

Louvois,  incensed  at  this  rebuke,  given  in  presence  of  the

286

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  .i.

courtiers,  the  workmen,  and  the  valets,  went  home  furious.
He  there  found  Saint-Pouange,  Villacerf,  the  two  Tilladets,
and  others  of  his  henchmen,  who  were  much  alarmed  to  see
him  in  such  a  state.  “  It  is  all  over,”  he  said  to  them  ;  “  I
am  ruined  with  the  king  after  his  treating  me  in  this  way
about  a  mere  window.  I  have  no  resource  but  a  war  which
will  put  building  out  of  his  head  and  make  me  necessary  to

him,  and  by - !  he  shall  have  it.”  He  kept  his  word,  and

within  a  few  months,  in  spite  of  the  king  and  the  other
powers,  war  was  general.  It  ruined  Prance  within,  and
gained  her  nothing  without,  for  in  spite  of  the  prosperity
of  our  arms,  it  only  led  to  shameful  results.

The  peace  that  followed  that  war,  for  which  the  king  and
the  country,  now  reduced  to  their  last  shifts,  had  long
sighed,  was  shameful.  We  were  forced  to  go,  how  and
where  the  Due  de  Savoie  chose,  in  order  to  detach  him  from
the  allies  ;  to  recognize  the  Prince  of  Orange  as  King  of
England  after  long  efforts  of  hatred  and  personal  contempt
against  him  ;  and  to  receive  the  Duke  of  Portland,  his  am-
bassador,  as  a  species  of  divinity.  Moreover,  our  pressing
need  of  peace  cost  us  Luxembourg  ;  and  the  mihtary  igno¬
rance  of  our  plenipotentiaries,  who  were  not  properly  in¬
structed  by  the  cabinet,  gave  the  enemy  great  advantages
in  forming  their  frontier.  Such  was  the  Peace  of  Eyswick,
concluded  in  September,  1697:  The  lull  of  arms  lasted  hut
three  years,  during  which  we  felt  all  the  loss  of  the  restitu¬
tion  of  the  countries  and  plaees  we  had  conquered,  added  to
the  weight  of  what  the  war  had  cost.  Here  ends  the  second
era  of  the  king’s  reign.

The  third  opened  with  a  great  show  of  glory  and  pros¬
perity,  —  a  period  that  was  only  momentary.  It  intoxicated
every  one  and  paved  the  way  to  strange  misfortunes,  our  issue
from  which  has  been  a  species  of  miracle.  Other  misfor-

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

287

tunes  of  a  different  kind  henceforth  accompanied  the  king
and  conducted  him  to  his  grave;  fortunate  indeed  would
he  have  been  had  he  survived  the  accession  of  his  grandson
to  the  throne  of  Spain  by  a  few  months  only.  This  last  era
of  his  reign  is  so  near  to  the  present  time  that  I  shall  not
enlarge  upon  it.  But  what  I  have  now  recalled  of  the  reign
of  the  late  king  was  necessary  to  make  what  is  said  of  him
personally  more  intelligible.

I  must  repeat  that  the  mind  of  Louis  XIV.  was  beneath
mediocrity,  but  very  capable  of  improving  itself.  He  loved
slorv,  he  wanted  order  and  regularity.  He  was

Virtues  of  Louis  o  .

XIV.  ;  his  miser-  bom  prudent,  moderate,  secretive,  master  of
able  education.  emotions  and  of  his  tongue,  and  —  will  it  be

beheved  ?  —  he  was  also  born  kind  and  just.  God  had  given
him  the  makings  of  a  good  king,  perhaps  even  of  a  great
king.  Evil  came  to  him  from  the  outside.  His  early  youth
was  so  neglected  that  no  one  dared  to  approach  his  apart¬
ment.  He  was  often  heard  to  speak  of  those  years  with
bitterness  ;  he  would  even  relate  how  they  found  him  one
night  fallen  into  the  fountain  of  the  Palais-Eoyal,  where
the  Court  then  resided.  His  dependent  condition  was  ex¬
treme.  He  was  scarcely  taught  to  read  and  write  ;  and  he
remained  ever  after  so  ignorant  that  he  never  knew  the  best-
known  facts  of  history,  events,  fortunes,  careers,  rank,  or
laws.  By  reason  of  this  deficiency  he  often  fell,  and  some¬
times  in  public,  into  the  grossest  absurdities.

One  might  have  thought  that  the  king  would  have  liked
a  great  nobility,  and  not  have  desired  to  level  it  with  any
other  class.  Ear  from  this  ;  the  aversion  he  felt  to  nobility
of  sentiment,  and  his  weakness  for  his  ministers,  who  hated
and  kept  down,  in  order  to  raise  themselves,  all  that  they  were
not  and  never  could  be,  had  given  him  a  like  aversion  to
noble  birth.  He  feared  it  as  much  as  he  feared  intellect .

288  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  x.

and  if  these  two  qualifications  were  united  in  one  person,
and  he  knew  it,  it  was  all  over  with  that  person.

His  ministers,  his  generals,  his  mistresses,  his  courtiers
perceived,  very  soon  after  he  became  master,  his  foible,  rather
than  his  real  taste,  for  glory.  They  vied  with

His  pleasure  in

flattery.  each  Other  in  praismg  him,  and  they  spoilt

him.  Praise,  or  to  speak  more  truly,  flattery  pleased  him
to  such  a  degree  that  the  coarsest  was  well  received,  the
basest  with  most  relish.  It  was  only  in  this  way  that  any
one  ever  reached  him.  It  was  this  that  gave  such  power  to
his  ministers  through  the  constant  opportunities  that  they
had  to  adulate  him,  especially  by  attributing  to  him  what¬
ever  they  did  themselves  and  letting  him  think  he  inspired
them.  Suppleness,  baseness,  an  admiring,  cringing,  and
dependent  air,  above  all,  an  air  of  nulhty  except  through
him,  were  the  only  means  of  pleasing  him.  Leaving  that
path,  there  was  no  recovery,  and  it  was  this  that  eventually
ruined  Louvois.  Year  by  year  the  poison  spread,  tiH  it
reached  an  almost  incredible  height  in.  a  prince  who  was  not
without  some  intelligence,  and  who  had  experience.  He,  who
had  neither  voice  nor  music  in  him,  would  sing  in  his  private
rooms  the  prologues  of  plays  and  operas  that  praised  him ,
he  was  so  bathed  in  that  dehght  that  sometimes  at  his
public  suppers  if  the  violins  played  the  tune  of  those
praises  he  would  hum  the  words  between  his  teeth  as  an
accompaniment.

Hence  came  also  the  desire  for  glory,  which  tore  him  at
intervals  from  love  ;  hence  the  facility  with  which  Louvois
involved  him  in  great  wars  (partly,  on  Louvois  side,  to  over¬
throw  Colbert,  partly  to  aggrandize  himself)  ;  hence  the  ease
with  which  the  minister  convinced  him  he  was  a  greater  cap¬
tain  than  all  his  generals,  both  for  plans  and  for  execution  of
campaigns,  —  an  idea  which  the  generals  themselves  abetted

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUO  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

289

in  order  to  please  him.  He  appropriated  all  with  an  admiring
complacency  in  himself,  and  heheved  he  was  really  such  as
they  depicted  him.  Hence  his  taste  for  reviews,  which  he
pushed  to  such  lengths  that  his  enemies  called  him  the
“  review  king  ;  ”  hence  his  liking  for  sieges,  where  he  could
show  his  courage  cheaply,  exhibit  his  capacity,  foresight,
vigilance,  and  his  fatigues,  to  which  his  robust  and  splendidly
formed  person  was  so  marvellously  suited  that  he  never
suffered  from  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  heat,  rain,  or  any  kind  of
weather.  He  was  very  conscious  of  hearing  himself  ad¬
mired,  as  he  rode  among  the  camps,  for  his  grand  air,  his
noble  bearing,  and  the  skül  with  which  he  managed  his
horse.  It  was  chiefly  about  his  campaigns  and  his  troops
that  he  talked  to  his  mistresses,  and  sometimes  to  his  cour¬
tiers.  He  spoke  well,  in  good  language  and  correctly  ;  he
told  an  anecdote  better  than  any  other  man  living;  also  a
narrative.  His  commonest  remarks  were  never  without  a
certain  natural  and  conscious  majesty.

His  mind,  dwelling  naturally  on  small  things,  found
pleasure  in  every  sort  of  detail.  He  was  constantly  busy
His  liking  for  with  those  of  the  troops;  clothing,  arms,  evo-

detaiis.  lutions,  cxerciscs,  discipline,  —  in  short,  the

minor  details.  So  with  his  buildings,  his  civil  household,
his  table  ;  he  believed  that  he  was  teaching  others  in  such
matters,  about  which  they  knew  more  than  he,  though  they
received  as  novices  lessons  they  had  long  known  by  heart.
This  loss  of  time  on  details,  which  seemed  to  the  king  to
have  the  merit  of  persevering  industry,  was  a  blessing  to
the  ministers,  who,  with  a  little  art  and  experience  in  twist¬
ing  him,  were  able  to  make  anything  come  from  him  that
they  wanted  themselves  ;  and  while  he  was  applauding  him¬
self  over  details,  they  were  conducting  the  greater  affairs
according  to  their  own  ideas,  and  often  their  own  interests.

VOL.  III.  — 19

290

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

Vanity  and  pride,  which  always  go  on  increasing,  and  which
were  fed  and  increased  in  him  perpetually,  even  from  the
pulpit  and  without  his  consciousness,  became  the  basis  of
the  elevation  of  his  ministers  above  aU  other  grandeur  in
the  land.  They  cunningly  convinced  him  that  their  ability
was  only  his  own  put  into  them,  and  being  derived  from
him,  its  vast  extent  became  of  course  immeasurable.

But  however  spoilt  the  king  was  as  to  his  grandeur  and
his  authority,  which  had  smothered  all  other  considerations
Rarity,  but  within  him,  there  was  always  something  to  he

advantage  of  gained  by  an  audience  with  him,  if  it  could

an  audience  &  v  ^  i

with  him.  pe  obtained,  and  if  one  knew  how  to  behave

with  the  respect  that  his  majesty  and  his  habits  demanded.
Besides  what  I  have  known  from  others,  I  myself  had  ex¬
perience  of  this.  At  such  audiences,  however  prejudiced  he
might  he,  whatever  displeasure  he  thought  he  had  reason
to  feel,  he  listened  with  patience,  with  kindness,  with  a
desire  to  he  informed  and  enlightened  ;  he  did  not  interrupt
unless  to  make  things  clearer.  He  showed  a  spirit  of  equity,
a  desire  to  know  the  truth,  and  this  though  he  might  he
angry  ;  it  was  so  to  the  end  of  his  life.  At  such  an  audience
all  could  he  said,  provided,  I  repeat,  that  it  was  done  with
that  air  of  respect,  submission,  and  dependence  without  which
things  would  he  worse  than  they  were  before.  But  with  it,
one  could  interrupt  the  king,  deny  the  facts  ho  stated,  raise
one’s  voice  above  his  in  speaking,  and  do  this  not  only  without
his  thinking  harm  of  it,  hut  so  as  to  make  him  congratulate
himself  for  the  audience  he  had  given,  and  praise  the  man
who  obtained  it  ;  laying  aside  the  prejudices  he  had  taken  up
or  the  falsehoods  put  into  him,  and  showing  this  subsequently
by  his  behaviour.  Consequently,  the  ministers  took  great
care  to  inspire  the  king  with  a  dislike  to  audiences,  in  which ,
they  succeeded,  as  in  everything  else.

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

291

His  extreme
pride  ;  causes
and  results  of  it.

It  is  therefore  with  great  reason  that  one  ought  to  deplore
with  tears  of  sorrow,  not  only  an  education  solely  arranged
to  smother  the  heart  and  mind  of  this  prince,
and  the  abominable  poison  of  bare-faced  flat¬
tery  which  made  a  god  of  him  in  the  very
bosom  of  Christianity,  but  the  cruel  policy  of  his  ministers
who  hemmed  him  in,  and,  for  their  own  grandeur,  power,
and  fortune,  so  intoxicated  him  with  ideas  of  his  authority
and  glory  that  they  corrupted  him  ;  and  if  they  did  not
smother  in  his  soul  all  the  goodness,  equity,  and  desire  to
know  the  truth  with  which  God  had  endowed  him,  they
blunted  them  and  hindered  him  from  making  any  true  use
of  those  virtues,  to  the  lasting  injury  of  himself  and  his
kingdom.  From  these  pestilential  and  outside  sources  he
acquired  a  pride  so  great  that  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,
without  the  fear  of  the  devil,  which  God  implanted  in  him
even  in  the  midst  of  Iris  loosest  living,  he  would  have  had
himself  worshipped,  and  would  have  found  worshippers  ;
witness  those  extravagant  monuments  (to  speak  soberly)  ;
especially  his  statue  in  the  Place  des  Victoires  and  its  pagan
dedication,  at  which  I  was  present,  and  in  which  he  took
such  keen  delight.  From  this  pride  came  all  that  ruined
him;  we  have  seen  its  fatal  effects  already,  and  others  still
more  fatal  are  to  come.

The  Peace  of  Eyswick,  so  dearly  bought,  so  necessarily
desired  after  such  great  and  protracted  efforts,  seemed  to
enable  France  to  breathe  at  last.  The  king  was  sixty  years
of  age,  and  he  had,  in  his  opinion,  won  every  sort  of  glory.
His  great  ministers  were  dead  and  had  left  no  pupils.  His
great  captains  were  also  dead,  and  the  men  they  had  trained
were  dead  too,  or  no  longer  of  an  age  or  health  to  be
reckoned  in  future  wars;  and  Louvois,  who  had  groaned
with  wrath  under  the  weight  of  the  great  chieftains,  had

292

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

taken  good  care  tkat  no  more  of  them  skonld  be  formed
whose  merits  could  give  umbrage  to  him.  He  aUowed  none
to  rise  but  those  who  would  always  have  need  of  him  to
sustain  them.  He  did  not  bve  to  gather  the  fruit  of  this,
but  the  country  bore  the  penalty,  and,  from  hand  to  hand,
bears  it  to  this  day.

We  were  scarcely  at  peace,  without  as  yet  having  had
time  to  enjoy  its  benefits,  before  the  king’s  pride  stirred  him
to  astonish  all  Europe  by  a  show  of  his  power,  which  she
had  thought  subdued;  and  he  did,  in  truth,  amaze  her.
This  was  the  cause  of  that  famous  camp  at  Compiegne,
where,  under  pretence  of  showing  his  grandsons  an  image
of  war,  he  displayed  a  magnificence,  both  in  his  Court  and
in  his  troops,  unknown  to  the  greatest  kings  and  the  most
famous  tournaments.  This  was  a  new  form  of  exhaustion,
following  so  long  and  exhausting  a  war.  The  whole  army
felt  it  for  many  years  ;  some  regiments  were  still  m  debt  for
it  twenty  years  later.  It  was  not  long  before  we  had  rea¬
son  to  regret  a  prodigahty  so  immense  and  so  uncalled-for,
coming  at  the  close  of  a  ruinous  war,  instead  of  aUowing
the  kingdom  to  recover  and  repeople  itself  by  quiet  ease,
to  refill  slowly  the  king’s  coffers  and  the  storage  places  of
ah  kinds  ;  to  revive  the  navy  and  commerce  ;  to  let  hatreds
and  distrust  die  out,  separating  little  by  httle  ahies  so  united
and  formidable,  and  giving  by  prudence  just  cause  for  the
radical  dissolution  of  a  league  which  had  been  so  fatal  to  us
and  might  he  again.  As,  in  fact,  it  proved  to  be  four  years
after  the  Peace  of  Eyswick,  on  the  death  of  the  King  of
Spain  and  the  failure  of  King  Wihiam,  who  did  not  long
survive  him.  Then  it  was  that  the  vanity  of  the  king
brought  this  great  and  noble  kingdom  within  an  inch  of  its
destruction,  as  a  consequence  of  the  great  event  [the  Spanish
succession]  which  caused  ah  Europe  once  more  to  take  up
arms.  This,  however,  will  be  referred  to  farther  on.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

293

The  Court  was  another  phase  of  the  king’s  domineering
policy.  Many  things  contributed  to  remove  the  residence
The  Court;  its  0^  ^he  Court  from  Paris  and  establish  it

removal  to  the  permanently  in  the  country.  The  troubles  of

for  this.  his  mmority,  of  which  the  city  was  the  great

theatre,  had  impressed  him  with  a  great  aversion  to  it  and  a
conviction  that  his  stay  there  was  dangerous  ;  also  that  the
residence  of  the  Court  elsewhere  would  make  cabals  with
Paris  less  easy,  although  the  distance  might  not  be  great,
and  more  difficult  to  conceal  because  absences  would  readily
be  noticed.  Louis  XIV.  could  never  forgive  Paris  for  his
fugitive  departure  from  it  on  the  Eve  of  the  Epiphany,
1649,  nor  for  having  witnessed,  in  spite  of  himself,  his  tears
at  the  first  retreat  of  Mme.  de  La  Vallière.  Moreover,  the
embarrassment  of  his  various  mistresses,  the  danger  of  carry¬
ing  on  such  great  scandals  in  the  midst  of  so  populous  a
capital  fiUed  with  minds  of  aU  descriptions,  had  no  little
influence  in  sending  him  from  it.  Besides  which,  his  taste
for  outdoor  life  and  hunting  could  be  better  indulged  in  the
country  than  in  Paris,  far  from  forests  and  sterile  of  places
for  walking  or  driving.  The  taste  for  building,  which  came
later  and  grew  by  degrees,  could  not  have  been  gratified
in  a  city  where  he  was  continually  a  spectacle  to  the  eyes
of  a  crowd  ;  and  finally,  the  idea  of  making  himself  more
venerated  by  withdrawing  from  the  eyes  of  the  multitude
and  ceasing  to  be  seen  daily,  was  added  to  aU  the  other
considerations  that  led  the  king  to  fix  his  residence  at  Saint-
Germain  after  the  death  of  the  queen-mother.

The  amour  with  Mme.  de  La  Vallière,  at  first  a  mystery,
gave  rise  to  constant  excursions  to  Versailles,  then  a  mere
Origin  of  house  of  cards,  built  by  Louis  XIII.  on  the  site

Versailles.  ^  wretched  tavern  with  a  windmill,  where

he  and  his  suite  had  sometimes  slept  when  tired  out  with

294  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

their  long  hunts  in  the  forest  of  Saint-Léger  and  farther  still.
These  short  trips  of  Louis  XIV.  and  his  mistress  to  Versailles
gave  birth  little  by  little  to  the  vast  buildings  that  he  con¬
structed  there.  The  accommodation  they  afforded  for  a
numerous  Court  (so  different  from  the  lodgings  at  Saint-
Germain)  induced  the  king  to  fix  his  dwelling  permanently
in  Versailles  not  long  before  the  death  of  the  queen.  He
made  a  vast  number  of  lodgings,  to  ask  for  which  was  a
means  of  paying  court  to  him  ;  whereas  at  Saint-Germain
nearly  every  one  had  the  inconvenience  of  lodging  in  the
town,  and  the  few  who  lodged  in  the  château  were  terribly
cramped.

The  frequent  fêtes,  the  drives  to  Versailles,  and  the  various
trips  elsewhere  were  means  which  the  king  employed  to
distinguish,  or  mortify,  the  persons  who  were  or  were  not
invited  to  join  them,  and  thus  to  keep  every  one  attentive
and  assiduous  to  please  him.  He  felt  that  he  had  not
enough  real  favours  to  shed  around  him  continually;  he
therefore  substituted  ideal  ones,  little  preferences  which  were
shown  daily,  one  might  say  momentarily,  with  an  art  that
was  all  his  own.  The  hopes  that  these  small  preferences
and  distinctions  excited,  the  consequence  that  people  derived
from  them,  were  amazing,  and  no  one  was  ever  more  ingenious
than  he  in  contriving  such  occasions.  Marly,  in  the  end,
was  of  great  use  to  him  in  this  respect,  and  also  Trianon
where  every  one,  it  is  true,  might  go  and  pay  their  court
to  him,  but  where,  alone,  ladies  had  the  honour  of  eating
with  him  and  were  chosen  specially  for  each  meal.  There
was  also  the  honour  of  the  candlestick  to  be  held  at  his
coucher  by  a  courtier  whom  he  wished  to  distinguish  and
named  aloud  after  he  had  finished  saying  his  prayers.
The  justaucorps  à  brevet  was  another  of  these  inventions.
It  was  blue,  lined  with  red,  the  facings  and  waistcoat  also

295

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

red,  embroidered  magnificently  in  a  gold  design  touched  up
with  silver  in  a  style  reserved  for  these  garments.  Only  a
certain  number  of  them  existed  ;  of  which  the  king,  his
family,  and  the  princes  of  the  blood  had  each  one,  but  the
latter,  hke  the  rest  of  the  courtiers,  only  had  them  when  a
vacancy  occurred.  The  most  distinguished  personages  at
Court  asked  for  them,  either  for  themselves  or  for  others,
and  it  was  thought  a  great  favour  to  obtain  them.  The
king  invented  them  for  those  persons,  very  few  in  number,
who  had  the  privilege  of  accompanying  him  in  his  walks  at
Saint-Germain  and  at  Versailles  without  being  invited  ;  and
after  the  walks  ceased,  the  coats  ceased  to  give  any  privilege,
except  that  they  might  be  worn  when  there  was  court  or
family  mourning.  The  different  ingenuities  of  this  nature
which  succeeded  each  other  as  the  king  advanced  in  years,
and  fêtes  increased  or  diminished,  and  the  attention  he  gave
to  keeping  a  numerous  Court  about  him,  would  be  endless  to

relate.

Not  only  was  he  desirous  of  the  continual  presence  of

distinguished  persons,  but  he  was  just  as  anxious  for  that  of

the  inferior  ranks.  He  looked  about  him  to

Desire  of  the  lever,  coucher,Q.t  his

king  to  keep  a  o  t  i  j.  j.

fuii  Court  about  meals,  as  he  passed  through  the  apartments,
and  in  his  gardens  at  Versailles,  where  alone
the  courtiers  had  the  hberty  of  following  him.  He  saw  and
noticed  every  one  ;  no  one  escaped  his  eye,  not  even  those
who  scarcely  hoped  to  be  seen.  He  noted  in  his  own  mind
the  absence  of  such  as  were  usually  present,  also  that  of
occasional  persons  who  came  more  or  less  often  ;  he  informed
himself  as  to  the  causes,  general  or  special,  of  such  absences,
and  never  lost  the  slightest  occasion  to  act  towards  the
persons  in  consequence.  In  his  eyes  it  was  a  great  demerit
in  the  most  distinguished  personages  if  they  did  not  make

296

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  [chap.  x.

the  Court  their  abode;  it  was  another  in  those  who  came
seldom  ;  and  it  was  certain  disgrace  to  those  who  never,  or
almost  never,  came  at  aU.  When  some  favour  was  asked  for
one  of  the  latter,  “I  don’t  know  him,”  he  would  reply,
haughtily.  About  those  who  came  seldom,  he  would  say,
“  That  is  a  man  I  never  see  ;  ”  and  the  decision  against  such
persons  was  irrevocable.  It  was  another  crime  not  to  go  to
Fontainebleau,  which  he  regarded  as  a  second  Versailles;
and  for  certain  persons  not  “  to  ask  for  Marly,”  some  always,
others  often,  it  needed  a  vahd  excuse  to  save  them,  men
and  women  both,  from  disgrace.  Above  all,  he  could  not
endure  that  persons  should  go  to  Paris  and  amuse  them¬
selves.  He  was  rather  easy  with  those  who  hked  to  go  to
their  country-seats,  hut  they  had  to  be  careful  not  to  stay
too  long,  or  else  have  taken  precautions  to  give  notice  of  it.

Louis  XIV.  took  the  greatest  pains  to  be  informed  of  all
that  happened  everywhere,  in  public  places,  in  private  houses.
Pains  taken  by  in  social  life,  in  the  privacy  of  families  and
informftion°'^^^'"  üitimacies.  His  spies  and  reporters  were  num-
Spies  and  police,  perlcss.  He  had  them  of  all  kinds  ;  many  of
them  did  not  know  that  the  information  they  gave  was  taken
to  him  ;  others  did  know  it  ;  some  wrote  to  him  directly  and
sent  their  letters  by  secret  ways  which  he  prescribed  to  them
(those  letters  were  never  seen  except  by  him),  and  finally
there  were  some  who  entered  by  the  hack  way  and  with
whom  he  talked  privately  in  his  cabinet.  These  secret  re¬
ports  broke  the  necks  of  an  infinite  number  of  persons  of  all
stations  without  their  ever  discovering  the  cause,  frequently
most  unjust  ;  hut  the  king,  once  prejudiced,  never  recovered
from  it,  or  so  rarely  as  scarcely  to  he  mentioned.

It  was  to  this  curiosity  that  the  dangerous  functions  of  the
lieutenant  of  police  owed  their  establishment.  Once  estab¬
lished  they  went  on  steadily  increasing.  These  officers  were

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

297

more  feared,  more  cautiously  treated,  more  considered  than
even  the  ministers,  even  by  the  ministers  themselves  ;  and
there  was  no  one  in  France,  not  excepting  the  princes  of  the
blood,  who  did  not  think  it  their  interest  to  pay  respect  to
them,  or  who  failed  to  do  so.  Besides  the  more  serious  reports
which  the  king  received  in  these  ways,  he  amused  himself  by
learning  all  the  gallantries  and  folhes  of  Paris.  Pontchartrain,
who  had  Paris  and  the  Court  in  his  department,  paid  court  to
him  by  these  base  means  (which  incensed  his  father,  the
chancellor),  so  that  his  usefulness  in  this  way  maintained
him  with  the  king,  by  the  king’s  own  admission,  against
various  rough  attacks,  under  which  he  would  otherwise  have
succumbed.  This  was  known  more  than  once  through  Mme.
de  Maintenon,  the  Duchesse  de  Bourgogne,  the  Comte  de
Toulouse,  and  the  personal  valets.

But  the  most  cruel  of  all  the  means  by  which  the  king
obtained  information,  for  many  years  before  it  was  suspected,
Secrets  of  the  aided  by  the  ignorance  and  imprudence  of  many
Post-office.  unfortunate  persons  throughout  his  hfe,  was  the
opening  of  letters.  ISTo  one  would  believe  the  quickness  and
dexterity  with  which  this  was  done.  The  king  read  extracts
from  all  letters  that  the  heads  of  the  post-office  and  the  min¬
ister  who  ruled  them,  thought  advisable  to  show  him  5  also
whole  letters,  when  it  was  considered  worth  while  to  send  them,
either  for  their  contents  or  because  of  the  importance  of  those
to  whom  they  were  addressed.  Thus  the  principal  agents  of  the
post-office,  masters  and  clerks,  were  in  a  position  to  impute
what  they  liked  and  to  whom  they  liked.  A  word  of  contempt
for  the  king  or  the  government,  a  jest,  a  sarcasm,  a  fragment
of  a  letter  speciously  detached,  destroyed  a  man  hopelessly,
without  inquiry  ;  and  this  power  was  continually  in  their
hands.  Whether  the  accusations  were  true  or  false,  it  is  in¬
credible,  the  number  of  persons  who  were  more  or  less  ruined

298

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

in  this  way.  The  secrecy  was  impenetrable;  nothing  cost
the  king  less  than  to  hold  his  tongue  absolutely,  or  to  dis¬
simulate.  This  latter  talent  he  possessed  even  to  falseness,
hut  never  to  falsehood  ;  and  he  piqued  himself  on  keeping
his  word  ;  for  which  reason  he  seldom  gave  it.  As  for  the
secrets  of  others,  he  kept  them  as  religiously  as  he  did  his
own.  He  was  even  flattered  by  receiving  confessions  and
confldences,  and  none  of  his  mistresses,  ministers,  or  favourites
could  get  them  from  him,  not  even  when  the  secret  con¬
cerned  themselves.

Ho  one  ever  gave  with  better  grace  or  so  enhanced  in  that
way  the  value  of  his  benefits.  No  one  ever  sold  his  words,
his  smiles,  his  very  glances  to  better  advan-

Personal  charm  ’  ^  ^  •  r.  •

of  the  king.  tage.  He  made  them  all  precious  by  their

choiceness  and  majesty,  to  which  the  brevity  and  rareness
of  his  words  gave  additional  value.  If  he  addressed  any  one,
either  to  question,  or  to  speak  of  indifferent  matters,  all
present  looked  at  that  person  ;  it  was  regarded  as  a  distinc¬
tion,  talked  about,  and  the  recipient  of  that  favour  was  the
more  considered.  It  was  the  same  with  all  attentions,  dis¬
tinctions,  and  preferences,  which  he  gave  in  their  due  pro¬
portions.  Never  did  he  say  a  disobliging  thing  to  any  one  ;
and  if  he  had  to  reprove  or  reprimand  or  punish,  which  was
very  rare,  he  did  it  always  with  an  air  that  was  more  or  less
kind,  seldom  harsh,  and  never  angry,  except  in  a  few  solitary
cases,  like  the  affair  of  Courtenvaux,  which  I  related  in  its
place  ;  though  he  was  not  exempt  from  anger,  and  he  some¬
times  wore  an  air  of  severity.

Never  was  a  man  so  naturally  polite,  with  a  politeness
that  distinguished  age,  merit,  rank,  both  in  his  answers,
when  they  went  beyond  the  usual  “  I  will  see,”
His  politeness.  ^  manners.  Those  three  stages  were

marked  precisely  in  his  manner  of  bowing  and  acknowledging

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  299

salutations.  He  was  admirable  in  his  different  ways  of  re¬
ceiving  the  salutes  of  the  various  army  corps  in  the  field  or
at  reviews.  But  above  all,  towards  women  his  politeness
was  unequalled.  Never  did  he  pass  a  petticoat  without
raising  his  hat,  even  to  the  waiting- women,  whom  he  knew
to  be  such,  as  often  happened  at  Marly.  To  ladies  he  took
off  his  hat  entirely,  but  more  or  less  far  as  the  case  might
be.  To  titled  men  he  took  it  half  off  and  held  it  against
his  ear  for  a  few  moments,  more  or  less  marked.  To  seig¬
neurs  he  simply  touched  his  hat.  If  he  joined  the  ladies
he  did  not  cover  his  head  until  he  left  them.  All  this  was
out-of-doors  ;  in  the  house  he  wore  no  hat.  His  bows,  more
or  less  marked,  but  always  slight,  had  a  grace  and  majesty
that  were  really  incomparable,  even  to  his  manner  of  half
rising  from  his  chair  at  supper  to  every  dame  assise  [lady
with  right  to  tahouretl  who  arrived,  no  other.  Towards  the
end  of  his  life  this  tired  him,  and  though  he  never  gave  it
up,  those  ladies  avoided  entering  the  room  after  his  supper
had  begun.

If  he  was  made  to  wait  for  anything  when  he  dressed,  he
always  did  so  patiently.  He  was  punctual  to  the  hours  he

appointed  himself  for  his  whole  day,  with  the

His  patience.  ....  i

clearest  precision  in  his  orders.  If  it  happened
that  in  rainy  weather,  when  he  could  not  go  out,  he  went  a
little  earlier  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  than  the  time  he  had
fixed,  so  that  the  captain  of  the  guards  in  quarters  was  not
present,  he  never  failed  to  say  to  him  afterwards  that  it  was
his  own  fault  not  to  have  warned  him  in  time.  This  regu¬
larity,  which  never  flagged,  caused  him  to  be  served  with  the
utmost  punctuality  ;  and  it  was  also  an  infinite  convenience
to  the  courtiers.

He  treated  his  valets,  especially  his  personal  attendants,
kindly.  It  was  among  them  that  he  felt  most  at  his  ease.

300

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  x.

and  talked  familiarly,  especially  to  the  chief  of  them.  Their
good-will  or  their  dislikes  often  had  great  results.  They  fre¬
quently  did  good  or  ill  turns  ;  reminding  one  of  those  power¬
ful  freedmen  of  the  Eoman  emperors,  to  whom  the  senate
and  the  grandees  of  the  empire  paid  their  court,  and  cringed
humbly.  These  of  this  reign  were  not  less  reckoned  upon
or  less  courted.  The  most  powerful  ministers  treated  them
with  circumspection  ;  so  did  the  princes  of  the  blood,  even
the  bastards,  not  to  speak  of  aU  the  lesser  people  about  the
Court.  The  insolence  of  most  of  them  was  great,  and  such
that  it  was  necessary  to  know  how  to  avoid  it,  or  else  endure
it  patiently.

Nothing  could  equal  the  king  at  reviews,  at  fêtes,  and
wherever  an  air  of  gallantry  prevailed  through  the  presence
of  ladies.  I  have  already  said  that  he  learned

His  natural  ^  ^  •  i

grace  in  every-  this  at  the  Court  of  his  mother  and  in  the
salon  of  the  Comtesse  de  Soissons.  The  com¬
pany  of  his  mistresses  had  more  and  more  accustomed  him
to  it;  hut  always  majestically,  though  sometimes  with
gayety  ;  never  anything  before  the  world  that  was  unbecom¬
ing  or  hazardous;  his  shghtest  gesture,  his  walk,  carriage,
his  whole  countenance,  proper,  decent,  noble,  grand,  majestic,
and  yet  very  natural,  to  which  habit  and  the  incomparable
advantage  of  his  fine  figure  added  great  ease.  Also,  at
serious  moments  —  the  reception  of  ambassadors,  ceremonies,
etc.  —  no  man  ever  so  awed  others  ;  it  was  necessary  to  begin
by  getting  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  him,  if  the  person
who  made  the  harangue  did  not  wish  to  he  taken  aback.
His  answers  on  such  occasions  were  always  brief  and  to  the
point,  very  rarely  without  something  courteous,  frequently
flattering  when  the  previous  discourse  deserved  it.  The
respect  felt  for  his  person,  wherever  he  was,  imposed  silence
and  even  a  sort  of  terror.

301

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

He  was  very  fond  of  the  open  air  and  of  exercise,  as
long  as  he  was  able  to  take  it.  He  had  formerly  excelled
His  love  of  air  ^  dancing,  and  in  playing  maille  and  tennis.^
and  exercise.  j'qj.  others  to  play  Well  Or  ill  before  him  was  a

merit  or  a  demerit.  He  said  that  such  things  were  not
necessary,  and  if  people  could  not  do  them  well  they  had
better  not  do  them  at  all.  He  was  very  fond  of  shooting,
and  there  was  no  better  shot  than  he,  nor  one  so  graceful.
He  chose  out  the  best  setter  bitches,  and  always  had  seven
or  eight  in  his  cabinets,  whom  he  fed  himself  to  make  them
know  biTn  better.  He  delighted  in  hunting  the  stag,  but
did  so  in  a  calèche  after  he  broke  his  arm  while  riding  to
hounds  at  Fontainebleau  after  the  queen’s  death.  He  went
alone  in  a  sort  of  cabriolet,  drawn  by  four  small  horses  in
five  or  six  relays,  which  he  drove  himself  at  full  speed  with
a  skiU  and  precision  which  the  best  coachmen  could  not
equal,  and  always  with  the  same  grace  in  all  he  did.  His
postilions  were  children  nine  or  ten  years  of  age,  and  he
guided  them.  Air  was  essential  to  him,  and  when  deprived
of  it  his  health  suffered  from  headache  and  depression,  first
caused  by  his  inordinate  use  of  perfumes  in  former  days,
which  had  been  so  great  that  for  many  years  past  he  could
bear  none,  except  that  of  orange-flowers  ;  and  it  was  necessary
to  be  very  careful  not  to  have  any  about  you  if  you  had  to
approach  him.  As  he  was  not  sensitive  to  cold  or  heat  or
even  rain,  nothing  but  great  extremes  of  weather  hindered
him  from  going  out.  He  had  only  three  objects  in  doing
so  :  to  hunt  the  stag  at  least  once  a  week,  usually  oftener,
at  Marly  or  Fontainebleau,  with  his  own  hounds  and  those

1  Maille,  or  pak-maille  (0.  F.),  a  game  in  which  a  hall  is  struck  by  a
mallet  through  iron  arches  in  the  ground  ;  precisely  the  same  as  the
modern  croquet.  Hence  Pall-Mall,  a  place  in  London  where  the  game
was  played,  and  the  present  word  mall  —  Tr.

302  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

of  others  ;  to  shoot  in  his  preserves,  and  no  man  in  France
shot  better,  or  with  such  grace  ;  he  always  went  out  once
or  twice  a  week,  especially  on  Sundays  and  festivals,  on
which  days  he  did  not  choose  to  have  great  hunts,  and  the
workmen  were  not  employed  upon  his  buüdiugs;  on  all
other  days  he  went  to  walk  in  his  gardens  and  to  watch
the  progress  of  those  buüdmgs  ;  sometimes  he  drove  with
his  ladies,  taking  collations  for  them,  in  the  forests  of  Marly
and  Fontainebleau  ;  at  the  latter  place  his  drives  around  the
canal,  where  several  courtiers  appeared  on  horseback,  pre¬
sented  a  magnificent  spectacle.

Never  but  once  in  his  hfe  did  the  king  miss  a  mass,  and
that  was  with  the  army  on  the  day  of  a  great  march,  or  a
,  .  fast-day,  unless  from  some  real  and  very  rare

His  devotion  to  ’

the  services  of  indisposition.  Some  days  before  Lent  he  al¬
ways  gave  a  public  discourse  at  his  lever,  in
which  he  made  known  that  he  should  think  it  very  wrong
if  any  one  ate  gras  under  any  pretext  whatever;  and  he
ordered  the  grand-provost  to  keep  his  eye  on  this  and
render  him  an  account  of  it.  He  missed  few  sermons  in
Lent  or  Advent,  and  none  of  the  devotions  of  Holy  Week,
nor  the  two  processions  of  the  Holy  Sacrament,  nor  the
Saints’-days,  the  day  of  the  Order  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  nor
that  of  the  Assumption.  He  was  very  respectful  in  church.
All  persons  at  his  mass  were  obliged  to  kneel  at  the
Sanctus,  and  to  stay  on  their  knees  till  after  the  commu¬
nion  of  the  priest  ;  and  if  he  heard  the  slightest  noise  or
saw  any  one  talking  during  the  mass  he  thought  it  very
bad  indeed.  At  the  mass  he  said  his  own  chaplet  (he
did  not  know  anything  else),  and  always  on  his  knees,  ex¬
cept  during  the  Gospel.  At  the  high  masses  he  never  sat
in  his  chair  except  at  the  times  when  it  is  customary  to
be  seated.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

303

He  was  always  dressed  in  some  colour  more  or  less  brown,
with  a  slight  embroidery,  but  never  on  the  skirts  of  his  coat,

sometimes  nothiug  but  a  gold  button,  at  other

Xxis  Qicss  y  ms

love  of  splendour  times  black  velvet.  Always  a  waistcoat  of

and  profusion.  ,  ...  i  i  i

cloth  or  satm,  either  red,  blue,  or  green,  much
embroidered.  Never  any  ring,  or  jewelry,  except  the  buckles
of  his  shoes,  his  garters,  and  his  hat,  which  was  edged  with
Spanish  point  and  carried  a  white  feather.  He  wore  the
blue  ribbon  beneath  his  coat,  except  at  weddings,  or  on
similar  great  occasions,  when  he  wore  it  outside,  and  very
long,  with  eight  or  ten  millions  in  value  of  precious  stones
upon  it.  He  loved  splendour,  magnificence,  profusion  in  all
things.  This  taste  he  turned  into  a  maxim  in  pohtics,  and
he  inspired  it  in  the  whole  Court.  It  was  pleasing  him  to
expend  one’s  self  on  luxuries  for  the  table,  on  clothes,  equi¬
pages,  buildings,  cards.  Those  were  occasions  to  make  him
speak  to  you.  The  end  of  it  was  that  he  exhausted  the  means
of  every  one  by  making  luxury  an  honour,  and  for  some  a
necessity  ;  and  he  thus  reduced  the  whole  Court  to  depend
entirely  on  his  benefactions  for  subsistence.  He  found  satis¬
faction  for  his  pride  in  a  Court  superb  in  all  things,  in  a  con¬
fusion  of  splendour  which  annihilated  more  and  more  all
natural  distinctions.  This  was  a  sore  which,  once  set-up,  has
since  become  a  cancer  that  gnaws  the  vitals  of  private  hfe  ;
Fatal  and  lasting  because  from  the  Court  it  spread  to  Paris,  to  the
effects  of  it.  provinces,  to  the  armies,  where  persons  in  any
office  are  not  considered  except  in  proportion  to  their  luxury
and  magnificence  ever  since  this  unhappy  introduction  of
extravagance,  which  eats  into  private  fortunes,  forces  men  in
a  position  to  steal  to  do  so,  chiefly  from  the  necessity  of
meeting  their  expenses,  and,  through  pride  and  the  folly  of
swelling,  goes  on  increasing,  till  the  results  are  infinite  and
point  to  nothing  less  than  pubhc  overthrow  and  ruin.

304

MEMOmS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

Nothing,  until  the  time  of  Louis  XIV.,  ever  approached
the  variety  and  magnificence  of  his  hunting  equipments  and
of  aU  his  other  sorts  of  equipage.  His  build-
ingThisbad*^  iugs,  who  Can  count  them?  And  who  does  not
deplore  the  pride,  capriciousness,  and  bad  taste
they  exhibit  ?  He  abandoned  the  beautiful  Saint-Germain,
and  never  did  anything  for  the  adornment  and  convenience
of  Paris,  except  (from  pure  necessity)  the  Pont  Eoyal,  so
that  Paris,  with  her  incomparable  site,  is  inferior  to  many
cities  in  various  parts  of  Europe.  When  the  Place  Vendôme
was  built  it  was  made  square.  Louvois  superintended  the
building  of  the  four  fronts.  His  intention  was  to  put  the
Bibliothèque  du  Roi,  the  mint,  the  cabinet  of  medals,  aR
the  academies,  and  the  grand  Council  (which  still  holds  its
sittings  in  a  hired  house),  within  this  inclosure.  The  first
act  of  the  king  on  the  day  of  Louvois’  death  was  to  stop  that
work,  and  to  give  orders  to  fill  in  diagonaUy  the  four  corners,
to  place  none  of  the  proposed  pubhc  offices  in  the  buildings,
but  to  finish  them  for  private  houses,  such  as  we  now  see
them.

Saint-Germain,  a  spot  unique  for  its  coRection  of  deRght-
ful  views  and  the  immense  extent  of  level  forest  that  ad-
ioins  it  ;  unique  also  for  the  beauty  of  its

Abandons  Saint-  ....

Germain  for  troes,  its  soR,  its  situation,  the  abundance  and

Versailles.  .  •  r  i.

convemence  of  its  sprmgs  of  water,  the
charm  of  its  gardens,  its  slopes  and  terraces,  and  for
the  beauty  and  convenience  of  the  Seine  ;  in  fact  a  city
ready  made,  the  position  of  which  provided  it  with  every¬
thing  needful, —  aR  this  he  abandoned  for  Versailles,  the
gloomiest  and  most  thankless  of  places  ;  without  view,
without  woods,  without  water,  without  soil,  for  aR  is
either  sand  or  bog,  consequently  with  an  air  that  cannot
be  pure.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

305

He  delighted  in  tyrannizing  over  nature,  in  subduing  it  by
force  of  art  and  money.  He  raised  buildings  one  after  an-

Versaiiies  its  Other  OU  that  spot  without  any  general  design  ;

miserable  de-  the  fine  and  the  villanous  were  huddled  to-

fccts  )  kind's

desire  to  force  gothor,  the  vast  and  the  cramped.  His  apart-

nature.  meuts  and  those  of  the  queen  are  most  in¬

convenient,  looking  out  at  the  back  on  privies  and  other
dark,  closed-in,  and  evil-smelling  places.  The  gardens,  the
magnificence  of  wliich  amazes,  while  the  shghtest  use  of
them  is  repulsive,  are  in  the  worst  taste.  One  can  only
reach  shade  by  crossing  a  vast  torrid  zone,  at  the  end  of
which  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  go  up  or  down  a  hill,  which
is  very  short  and  ends  the  gardens.  The  rubble  pavement
burns  the  feet,  but  without  it  one  would  sink  in  the  sand  or
the  mud.  The  violence  everywhere  done  to  nature  repels
and  disgusts  the  miud.  The  volumes  of  water  collected  and
forced  in  on  all  sides  make  these  gardens  verdant,  rank,  and
miry;  they  exhale  an  unhealthy  dampness  which  is  very
perceptible,  and  an  odour  that  is  more  so.  Their  vistas,
which  have  been  carefully  managed,  are  incomparable  ;  but
that  is  all,  and  the  result  is  that  we  admire  and  flee.  On
the  courtyard  side,  the  narrowness  is  suffocatmg,  and  the
vast  wings  of  the  château  spread  away  without  holding  to
anything.  On  the  garden  front,  one  might  enjoy  the  beauty
of  the  tout-ensemUe,  but  the  building  looks  like  a  half-
burned  palace  with  the  upper  story  and  the  roofs  missing.
The  chapel,  which  overtops  everything  because  Mansart
wanted  to  oblige  the  king  to  put  on  a  whole  upper  story,
presents  on  all  sides  the  melancholy  appearance  of  a  great
catafalque.  The  workmanship  of  every  kind  is  exquisite  ;
the  plan  of  it  nil  ;  it  is  built  entirely  with  regard  to  the
king’s  pew  above,  for  he  never  entered  the  chapel  from  be¬
low.  It  would  be  endless  to  mention  the  monstrous  defects

VOL.  III.-

■20

306  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

of  a  palace  so  immense  and  so  immensely  expensive,  with
its  adjuncts  that  were  even  more  so.  This  Versailles  of  Louis
XIV.,  this  masterpiece  so  ruinously  dear  and  in  such  bad
taste,  where  the  mere  changes  of  fountains  and  groves  have
buried  more  money  than  could  ever  appear,  he  never  fin¬
ished.  Among  all  the  many  salons  crowding  one  upon  an¬
other  there  is  no  banqueting  hall,  no  ballroom,  no  theatre.
Before  and  behind  the  palace,  much  remains  to  be  done.
The  parks  and  avenues,  newly  planted,  have  still  to  grow  ;
gutters  many  leagues  in  length  are  still  to  be  made  ;  even
the  walls,  that  within  their  vast  contour  inclose  a  httle
province  of  the  gloomiest  and  most  wretched  bit  of  land  in
the  world,  are  not  wholly  finished.

Trianon,  in  the  same  park,  at  the  gates  of  Versailles,  was
first  a  little  porcelain  building  for  collations,  then  enlarged  in
order  to  sleep  there,  and  finally  made  into  a  palace  of  marble,
jasper,  and  porphyry,  with  dehcious  gardens,  a  menagerie  op¬
posite,  and  a  canal  beside  it.  Clagny,  also  at  the  end  of  the
park  of  Versailles,  built  for  Mme.  de  Montespan  and  passing
into  possession  of  the  Due  du  Maine,  was  a  fine  château  with
fountains,  gardens,  and  park.  Aqueducts  worthy  of  the
Romans  led  from  aU  directions.  Neither  Asia  nor  anti¬
quity  could  show  anything  more  vast,  profuse,  elaborate,
superb  than  these  buildings  and  pleasure-grounds,  or  so
filled  with  the  rarest  relics  of  ah  ages,  in  marbles  the  most
exquisite,  in  bronzes,  paintings,  carvings,  and  aU  so  perfect.

But  water  lacked  ;  no  matter  what  was  done,  these  marvels
of  art  m  fountains  went  dry  (as  they  still  do  at  times),  in
spite  of  the  seas  of  reservoirs  which  had  cost  so  many
millions  to  build  and  to  conduct  through  the  quicksands
and  bogs.  Who  would  believe  that  this  failure  of  water
caused  the  ruin  of  our  infantry  ?  Louvois  was  then  super¬
intendent  of  buildings  ;  peace  reigned  in  the  land.  It

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

307

occurred  to  him  to  turn  the  river  Eure  between  Chartres
and  Maintenon  and  bring  it  bodily  to  Versailles.  Who
shall  tell  the  gold  and  the  men  that  this  attempt,  persisted
in  for  many  years,  cost  the  country  ?  Finally,  it  was  for¬
bidden  in  the  camp  there  established,  under  great  penalties,
to  speak  of  the  sick,  still  less  of  the  dead  whom  the  hard
toil  and  the  exhalations  of  the  freshly  turned  earth  had
killed  and  were  kilhng.  Many  were  years  in  recovering
their  health  from  this  infection  ;  while  others  have  never
recovered  it  at  all.  ISTot  only  the  subordinate  officers,  but
the  colonels,  the  brigadiers,  and  even  the  general  officers
employed  there  were  not  allowed  to  absent  themselves  for
a  day,  nor  miss  a  single  hour  of  their  duty  on  the  works.
The  war  of  1688  interrupted  this  enterprise,  which  has
never  been  taken  up  again.  Nothing  is  left  but  shapeless
mounds  to  perpetuate  the  history  of  this  cruel  folly.

After  a  while,  the  king,  weary  of  splendour  and  a  crowd,
persuaded  himself  that  he  wanted  somethmg  small  and

sohtary.  He  searched  around  Versailles  for

Marly.

a  place  that  might  satisfy  this  new  whim.
He  visited  various  places,  particularly  the  slopes  leading
down  from  Saint-Germain  to  the  vast  plain  below,  where
the  Seine  winds  and  waters  the  rich  meadows  and  lowlands
after  leaving  Paris.  He  was  urged  to  choose  Lucienne,
where  Cavoye  has  since  made  a  country-seat,  the  view  from
which  is  enchanting  ;  but  he  answered  that  so  delightful  a
situation  would  ruin  him  ;  he  wanted  a  mere  nothing,  and
therefore  he  must  choose  a  situation  which  would  not  allow
of  his  having  more  than  that  mere  nothing.

He  found  behind  Lucienne  a  deep,  narrow  valley,  with  steep
and  craggy  sides,  inaccessible  on  account  of  its  marshes  ;
with  no  view,  hemmed  in  by  hills  on  every  side,  extremely
confined,  with  a  wretched  village  on  one  of  its  slopes  which

308

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.x.

was  named  Marly.  This  inclosure  without  view,  or  means
of  getting  any,  was  the  attraction.  The  narrowness  of  the
valley,  which  could  not  possibly  he  widened,  was  another
merit.  He  fancied  he  was  choosing  a  minister,  a  favourite,
a  general.  It  was  a  great  piece  of  work  to  dram  this  sewer,
into  which  the  whole  region  sent  its  refuse,  and  to  bring
earth  to  form  a  soil.  The  hermitage  was  built.  It  was  only
to  sleep  there  three  nights,  from  Wednesday  to  Saturday,
twice  or  thrice  a  year,  with,  at  most,  a  dozen  courtiers  in  the
most  indispensable  offices.

Little  by  httle  the  hermitage  grew;  and  as  it  grew  the
hills  were  cut  into  to  make  room  for  the  buildings  ;  one,  at
the  end,  being  almost  levelled  to  give  a  vista  to  a  view  that
was,  after  aU,  very  imperfect.  In  short,  in  buildings  and
gardens,  in  fountains,  aqueducts,  and  waterworks,  so  well-
known  and  so  curious  under  the  name  of  the  “  Machine  de
Marly,”  in  forests  improved  and  inclosed,  in  statues  and  pre¬
cious  furniture  of  aU  kinds,  Marly  became  what  we  now  see
it,  though  much  despoiled  after  the  king’s  death.  Many  tall
trees  in  leaf  were  repeatedly  brought  there  from  Compiegne,
and  from  even  greater  distances,  to  make  instant  shade ,
three-quarters  of  which  died  and  were  immediately  replaced
by  others  ;  vast  spaces  of  thick  woods  and  dark  alleys  were
suddenly  changed  to  sheets  of  water  where  people  were
rowed  in  gondolas,  and  then  as  suddenly  the  forest  was
replaced  so  thickly  that  day  fight  was  not  visible  the  moment
the  trees  were  planted.  I  speak  of  what  I  have  seen  myself
within  the  space  of  six  weeks.  Fountains  and  basins  of
water  were  changed  a  hundred  times  ;  cascades  were  formed
in  successive  shapes  and  all  different  ;  retreats  for  the  carp,
decorated  with  gilding  and  exquisite  paintings,  were  scarcely
finished  before  they  were  taken  to  pieces  and  set  up  else¬
where  by  the  same  artists  ;  and  this  was  done  an  infinity  of

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

309

times.  The  mighty  waterworks  mentioned  above,  with  their
vast  aqueducts  and  conduits,  and  their  enormous  reservoirs,
were  consecrated  to  the  sole  use  of  Marly  and  did  not  supply
Versailles.  It  is  httle  to  say  that  Versailles,  such  as  we  see
it,  did  not  cost  as  much  as  Marly.

Such  was  the  fortune  of  a  den  of  snakes  and  buzzards,
toads  and  frogs,  selected  solely  because  it  gave  no  opening
for  expense.  Such  was  the  had  taste  of  the  king  in  every¬
thing,  and  his  proud  hking  for  forcing  nature,  which  neither
the  burdens  of  war  nor  his  rehgious  devotion  could  ever
hlunt.^

1  The  following  list  of  Louis  XIV.’s  expenditure  on  buildings  from
1664  to  1690  is  taken  from  the  accounts  of  Marinier,  clerk  of  the  build¬
ings  of  the  king,  under  Colbert,  Louvois,  and  Mansart;  preserved  in
the  Library  of  Versailles.  The  document  is  entitled  ;  “  Interesting  items
from  the  Building  account  of  the  king  since,  and  comprising,  the  year
1664,  when  the  late  M.  Colbert  was  superintendent  of  buildings,  and  when
the  expenses  began  to  be  considerable,  until,  and  comprising,  the  year
1690,  when  his  Majesty  retrenched  them  on  account  of  the  war.”

[These  items  include  only  the  first  costs  of  Marly,  which  was  not  begun
till  1679  The  waterworks  and  forestry  expenses  are  not  included,  nor  all
that  the  king  spent  upon  the  place  from  1690  to  1715,  the  years  when  he
chiefiy  embellished  it.]

Sum  total  from  1664  to  1690, 153,282,827  frs.,  10  sols,  6  deniers.

Of  this  sum  the  items  are  :  —

87,736,836  frs.,  4  sols,  4  den,
6,455,561  “  18  “  0  “

4,501,279  “  12  “  3  “

10,608,969  “  4  “  3  “

2,773,746  “  13  “  6  “

Total  for  Versailles

“  Saint  Germain

“  “  Marly .

“  “  Louvre  and  Tuileries

“  “  Eontainebleau  .  .  .

The  remainder  of  the  sum  total  was  spent  (for  all  but  one  under  Colbert)
on  the  following  works  :  —

Château  de  Chambord  ;  Arc  de  Triomphe  ;

Observatoire  ;  Hôtel  and  Church  of  the  Invalides;

Place  Vendôme  and  Convent  of  the  Capucines;

Val-de-Grâce  ;  Convent  of  Meulan  ;

Manufactories  of  the  Gobelins  and  the  Savonnerie.

And  curiously  enough,  on  pensions  to  gens  de  lettres,  men  of  literature,
and  the  Academies  of  Paris  and  Eome,  the  costs  of  which  were  charged

310  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  x.

to  the  king’s  building  account.  These  items  were  as  follows  (for  the  same
years)  :  —

Pensions  to  gens  de  lettres  ....  1,707,148  frs.,  13  sols,  4  den.

Académie  Française .  189,000  “  0  “  0

Academy  of  Architecture .  94,500  “  0  “  0

Academy  of  Painting  and  Sculpture,

in  Paris .  243,000  «  0  “  0  “

Academy  of  Painting  and  Sculpture,
in  Rome .  1,620,000  «  0  «  0  »

The  costs  of  maintaining  the  royal  residences  during  those  twenty-
seven  years  from  1664  to  1690  were  :  43,200,000  frs.  If  we  estimate  the
same  to  king’s  death  in  1715 :  81,600,000  frs.  This  included  the  wages  of
the  ofidcials.  There  seems  evidence  in  this  document  that  all  the  costs  of
the  king’s  residences  were  not  included  in  the  above  account.  Tk.

XL

From  such  excesses  of  a  power  so  ill-understood  we  must
turn  to  others  more  conformed  to  nature,  but  which,  in  their
Amours  of  the  waj.  Were  still  more  baneful;  I  mean  the
king.  amours  of  the  king.  Their  scandal  filled  all

Europe,  confounded  France,  shook  the  State,  and,  without
doubt,  brought  down  upon  the  king  the  maledictions  beneath
the  weight  of  which  he  found  himself  so  imminently  near
the  verge  of  the  precipice,  with  his  legitimate  posterity  re¬
duced  to  a  single  thread  and  in  danger  of  extinction  in
France.  These  were  evils  that  turned  to  scourges  of  all
kinds,  which  will  long  be  felt.

Louis  XIV.,  in  his  youth,  more  made  for  love  than  any  of
his  subjects,  tired  of  fluttering  from  one  to  another  and
“The three  gathering  passing  sweets,  fixed  at  last  upon
queens.”  ValHère.  The  progress  and  fruit  of  that

connection  are  well  known.  Mme.  de  Montespan  s  rare
beauty  touched  him  next,  while  Mme.  de  La  Vallière  s  reign
stiU  lasted.  She  soon  perceived  it  and  urged  her  husband  in
vain  to  take  her  to  his  country-seat  in  Guyenne.  His  foolish
confidence  would  not  listen  to  her  ;  but  she  spoke  sincerely.
After  a  while  she  hstened  to  the  king,  who  took  her  from
her  husband  with  that  shocking  notoriety  which  echoed
abhorrently  among  the  nations,  and  gave  to  the  world  the
novel  spectacle  of  two  mistresses  at  once.  He  took  them
with  him  to  the  frontiers,  to  the  camps,  sometimes  before
the  army,  and  both  in  the  queen’s  carriage.  People  hurried
from  all  parts  of  the  country  to  see  the  sight,  asking  one

312  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.xi.

another  with  simplicity  if  they  had  seen  “  the  three  queens.”
In  the  end,  Mme.  de  Montespan  triumphed,  and  ruled  alone
over  king  and  Court  with  a  display  that  wore  no  veil  ;  and,
as  if  nothing  should  be  lacking  to  the  public  license  of  this
hfe,  M.  de  Montespan,  for  having  resisted,  was  put  in  the
Bastille  and  then  exiled  to  Guyenne,  while  his  wife  received
the  office  of  superintendent  of  the  queen’s  household.  The
births  of  her  children  were  made  public  ;  her  Court  became
the  centre  of  the  Court  itself,  of  pleasures  and  fortunes,  of  the
hopes  and  terrors  of  ministers,  of  generals,  and  the  humilia¬
tion  of  all  France.  It  was  the  centre  of  wit  and  of  a  charm
so  pecuhar,  so  dehcate,  so  refined,  but  always  so  natural  and
winning  that  its  unique  character  can  never  be  forgotten.

Mme.  de  Montespan  was  satirical,  full  of  whims,  with
much  temper,  and  haughty  to  the  skies,  —  a  temper  from
which  no  one  was  exempt,  the  king  as  httle  as  others.  The
courtiers  avoided  passing  under  her  windows,  above  all
when  the  king  was  with  her  ;  they  said  it  was  getting  under
fire,  and  the  saying  became  a  proverb  at  Court.  It  is  true
that  she  spared  no  one  in  her  sarcasm,  which  was  often  with¬
out  other  object  than  that  of  amusing  the  king,  and,  as  she
had  plenty  of  wit  and  delicate  pleasantry,  nothing  was  more
dangerous  than  the  satire  that  she  could  deliver  better  than
any  one.  Nevertheless  she  loved  her  family  and  friends,  and
never  neglected  to  serve  those  for  whom  she  had  taken  a
liking.  The  queen  could  scarcely  endure  Mme.  de  Monte-
span’s  haughty  manner  to  her,  so  different  from  the  constant
respect  and  careful  consideration  of  Mme.  de  La  Valliëre,
whom  she  liked,  and  sometimes  it  escaped  her  to  say  :  “  That
strumpet  will  be  the  death  of  me.”  We  have  seen  in  its
place  the  subsequent  retirement,  the  austere  repentance,  and
the  pious  end  of  Mme.  de  Montespan.

During  her  reign  she  was  not  without  causes  of  jealousy.

1715]  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

313

Mile,  de  Fontanges  pleased  the  king  sufficiently  to  become
an  acknowledged  mistress.  Her  beauty  sustained  her  for
some  time,  but  mind  was  lacking  to  amuse  and  hold  the
king.  He  bad  no  time,  however,  to  be  completely  disen¬
chanted.  A  sudden  death,  which  caused  some  wonder,
ended  this  brief  lov^  ;  and  nearly  all  the  others  were  mere
passing  fancies.

One  attachment,  however,  existed  for  a  long  time,  and  was
converted  into  an  affection  that  lasted  to  the  very  end  of  the
lady’s  life,  and  from  it  she  managed  to  derive

Beautiful  un-  •'  .

known,  very  euormous  advantages  even  in  her  grave  5  for
well  known.  abominable  and  mag¬

nificent  inheritance,  of  which  they  well  knew  how  to  make
the  most.^  The  infamous  policy  of  her  husband  willingly
allowed  this  love,  and  gathered  the  fruits  of  it  ;  he  stayed  in
Paris,  scarcely  ever  went  to  Court,  and  secretly  used  the
money  and  all  the  advantages  which,  in  concert  with  him,  his
beautiful  better-half  drew  out  of  it.  He  changed  his  narrow
little  house  in  the  Place  Eoyale  for  the  palace  of  the  Guises,
the  extent  and  sumptuousness  of  which  those  princes  would
never  have  recognized  after  it  passed  into  his  hands  and  those
of  his  two  sons.  The  king  put  these  sons  of  the  lady  (who
was,  however,  red-haired)  in  positions  to  rise  and  enrich
themselves  and  their  families  more  and  more,  even  after  their
mother’s  death,  so  that  down  to  the  third  generation  in  the
present  day  they  are  living  in  splendour.  This  is  knowing
how  to  obtain  great  results,  the  wife  from  her  beauty,  the
husband  from  his  policy  and  infamy,  the  children  by  the
means  placed  in  their  hands  by  such  parents  —  but  as
the  sons  of  a  beauty.

Another  woman  obtained  a  great  deal  throughout  her  life

1  Mme.  de  Soubise.

2  Mlle,  de  Chausseraye,  formerly  maid-of -honour  to  Madame.

814  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

by  tbe  same  conduct,  but  without  the  beauty,  art,  or  social
... nosition  of  the  other,  and  without  a  husband  ;

Another,  chiefly

unknown.  conseq^uently  this  affair  did  not  last  as  long,

nor  had  it  the  continuity  or  the  open  prosperity  which  the
former  obtained  and  bequeathed  to  her  sons  and  her  grand¬
sons.  Still  the  king  took  much  dehght  in  it,  because  the
lady  was  very  amusing  and  entertaining  when  she  chose  to
be,  and  had  the  art  of  hiding  her  mental  superiority  from
him  (which  was  in  fact  her  great  point),  playing  the  ingénue
and  the  careless  creature  who  took  no  part  or  sides  in  any¬
thing.  In  this  way  she  accustomed  the  king  not  to  distrust
her,  to  be  at  his  ease,  to  talk  to  her  in  confidence,  to  listen  to
her  advice  ;  and  it  is  incredible  the  number  of  persons  she
contrived  to  serve  or  injure  in  this  way,  without  the  king
ever  perceiving  that  she  cared  in  the  slightest  degree  for
those  about  whom  they  talked.  This  influence  lasted,  though
the  full  extent  of  her  favour  was  never  generally  known,  to
the  end  of  the  king’s  hfe.

That  of  the  other  was  much  greater.  She  had  only  to  wish
a  thing  and  she  had  it.  Though  the  amour  itself  was  long  at
an  end,  every  one  at  Court  knew  her  power  and  all  were  re¬
spectful  before  her  ;  ministers,  princes  of  the  blood,  no  one
resisted  her  wishes.  Her  notes  went  direct  to  the  king  and
he  answered  them  instantly.  If,  very  rarely,  she  desired  to
speak  to  him,  a  thing  she  avoided  as  much  as  possible,  she
was  admitted  the  moment  she  asked  for  an  audience.  If  she
had  but  a  word  to  say  she  would  stand  at  the  door  of  his
cabinet,  and  all  present  could  see  by  the  way  the  king  ap¬
proached  her,  listened  to  her,  and  parted  from  her,  that  he
was  far  from  indifferent,  and  this  to  the  very  last  of  her
life,  which  ended  several  years  before  his  own.  She  was
beautiful  to  the  last.  Once  in  three  years  she  went  to  Marly,
where  she  was  never  in  private  with  the  king,  not  even  with

1715]  MEMOIKS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  315

other  ladies.  She  was  often  present  at  his  supper,  where  he
never  distinguished  her  in  any  way.  This  was  the  agree¬
ment  with  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who,  on  her  side,  to  reward
such  behaviour,  did  everything  else  she  could  desire.

I  must  not  forget  to  mention  the  beautiful  Ludre,  Demoi¬
selle  de  Lorraine,  maid-of-honour  to  Madame,  who  was  loved
for  a  moment  openly.  But  this  affair  passed  off  with  the
rapidity  of  hghtning,  and  Mme.  de  Montespan  remained
triumphant.

We  now  pass  to  another  sort  of  love,  which  amazed  the
nations  no  less  than  the  former  had  scandahzed  them  ;  a  love
Mme  scarron  ■  wMch  the  king  Carried  with  him  to  the  grave,
her  early  life.  Drom  these  fcw  words  every  one  will  recognize

the  celebrated  Françoise  d’Aubigné,  Marquise  de  Maintenon,
whose  unbroken  reign  lasted  no  less  than  thirty-two  years.
She  was  horn  in  the  Isles  of  America,  where  her  father,  pos¬
sibly  a  gentleman,  had  gone  with  her  mother  in  search  of  a
living,  and  where  obscurity  has  smothered  them.  Arriving
alone  and  by  chance  in  France,  and  landing  at  La  Eochelle,
she  was  picked-up  out  of  pity  by  Mme.  de  Neudlant,  mother
of  the  Duchesse  de  Navailles.  Deduced  by  her  own  poverty
and  the  parsimony  of  the  elder  woman  to  keep  the  keys  of
the  stable  and  measure  out  the  oats  for  the  horses,  she  finally
came  to  Paris  in  her  suite,  young,  clever,  witty,  and  beautiful,
without  means  and  without  relations.  Fortunate  accidents
brought  her  to  the  knowledge  of  the  famous  Scarron.  He
thought  her  lovable  ;  his  friends,  perhaps,  still  more  so.  She
thought  it  a  great,  unhoped-for  good  fortune  to  marry  that
jovial  and  learned  legless  torso,  and  persons  who,  perhaps,
had  greater  need  of  a  wife,  succeeded  in  persuading  him  to
rescue  this  charming  unfortunate  from  her  misery  by  wed¬
ding  her.

The  marriage  took  place  ;  the  new  wife  pleased  the  various

316

MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.xi.

companies  who  visited  Scarron.  He  received  the  best,  and
of  all  kinds  ;  it  was  the  fashion  to  go  to  him  ;  persons  of
intellect,  courtiers  and  men  of  the  world,  all  that  was  best
and  most  distinguished,  whom  he  was  not  in  a  condition  to
visit  himself,  came  to  him,  attracted  by  the  charms  of  his
mind,  his  knowledge,  his  imagination,  that  incomparable

gayety  amid  his  sufferings,  that  rare  fecundity  and  wit  of
the  best  taste,  which  we  may  still  admire  in  his  works.

By  this  means  Mme.  Scarron  made  acquaintances  of  aU
kinds  ;  but  this  did  not  prevent  her  from  being  reduced  after
the  death  of  her  husband  to  the  charity  of  the  parish  of
Samt-Eustache.  She  took  a  chamber  for  herself  and  a  ser¬
vant  in  an  attic,  where  she  lived  very  poorly.  Little  by
little  her  charms  relieved  her  indigence.  Villars,  father  of
the  maréchal,  Beuvron,  father  of  Harcourt,  the  three  Villar-
ceaux,  who  remained  in  possession,  and  many  others,  kept
her.  This  floated  her  once  more,  and,  little  by  little,  intro¬
duced  her  to  the  hôtel  d’Alhret  and  elsewhere.  In  such
houses  Mme.  Scarron  was  not  on  the  footing  of  a  guest.
She  was  there  to  make  herself  useful,  to  call  for  fuel,  to  see
if  dinner  were  ready,  and  whether  the  carriage  of  this  one
or  that  one  were  in  waiting,  —  in  short,  to  do  the  thousand
little  errands  which  the  use  of  bells,  introduced  long  after,
has  now  superseded.

The  Maréchal  d’Albret  lived  in  the  closest  intimacy  with
his  cousin,  M.  de  Montespan,  and  his  wife.  But  when
the  latter  became  the  king’s  mistress,  he  be¬
came  her  adviser,  and  abandoned  M.  de  Mon¬
tespan,  by  which  conduct  he  maintained  him¬
self  in  the  highest  favour  until  his  death  at
the  age  of  sixty-two.  Mme.  Scarron  owed  to  this  near
relationship  between  Maréchal  d’Alhret  and  M.  de  Monte¬
span  the  introduction  that  led  to  the  incredible  position  she

Brings  up  in
secret  the  chil¬
dren  of  the  king
and  Mme.  de
Montespan.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

317

attained  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  later.  M.  and  Mine,
de  Montespan  were  constantly  at  the  hôtel  d’Albret,  where
the  maréchal  kept  a  grand  and  hospitable  establishment,  to
which  the  most  distinguished  and  choicest  company  of  the
Court  and  the  city  resorted.  The  respectfulness,  anxiety  to
please,  and  the  wit  and  charm  of  Mme.  Scarron,  succeeded
in  making  her  agreeable  to  Mme.  de  Montespan,  who  took  a
likhiCT  to  her,  and  when  she  had  her  first  children  by  the
king  (M.  du  Maine  and  Mme.  la  Duchesse),  whom  at  first
they  concealed,  she  proposed  to  the  king  to  confide  them  to
Mme.  Scarron.  This  was  done,  and  a  house  in  the  Marais
was  given  to  her  in  which  to  keep  them,  with  means  to
bring  them  up  properly,  but  in  the  utmost  secrecy.  In  the
end  these  cliildren  were  taken  to  the  palace,  shown  to  the
king,  and  soon  after  openly  acknowledged.  Their  governess,
now  settled  with  her  charges  at  Court,  became  more  and
more  pleasing  to  Mme.  de  Montespan,  who  persuaded  the
king  to  make  her  presents  on  various  occasions.  He,  on
the  contrary,  could  not  endure  her,  and  what  he  gave  her,
which  was  little  enough,  he  gave  to  please  Mme.  de  Monte¬
span,  and  with  a  reluctance  he  did  not  conceal.

The  estate  of  Maintenon  being  for  sale,  its  proximity  to
Versailles  tempted  Mme.  de  Montespan  in  Mme.  Scarron’s
The  king  cannot  behalf,  and  she  left  the  king  no  peace  tdl  she
endure  her.  gQ^  cnough  out  of  him  to  buy  it  for  that

woman,  who  then  took  the  name  of  Maintenon.  She  also
obtained  enough  to  repair  the  chateau,  after  which  she
attacked  the  king  for  means  to  restore  the  gardens.  This
last  scene  took  place  at  Mme.  de  Montespan’s  toilet,  the
captain  of  the  guards  in  quarters  being  the  only  person  pres¬
ent.  He  happened  to  be  my  father-in-law,  the  Maréchal
de  Lorges,  the  most  truthful  man  that  ever  was,  who  has
often  related  to  me  the  scene  that  he  witnessed  that  day.

318

MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

At  first  the  king  turned  a  deaf  ear;  then  he  refused.  Fi¬
nally,  provoked  that  Mme.  de  Montespan  would  not  give  up
the  point  but  still  insisted,  he  was  angry,  and  told  her  that
he  had  done  too  much  already  for  that  creature,  that  he
could  not  understand  Mme.  de  Montespan’s  fancy  for  her,
nor  her  obstinacy  in  keeping  her  after  he  had  asked  her  so
many  times  to  send  her  away.  He  added  that  she  was
intolerable  to  him,  but,  provided  he  was  never  asked  again,
he  would  give  once  more,  though  he  had  already  done  too
much  for  a  creature  of  that  species.  Maréchal  de  Lorges
never  forgot  those  words,  and  always  repeated  them  to
me  and  to  others,  in  precisely  the  same  order.  Mme.  de
Montespan  was  silent,  and  seemed  troubled  at  having  vexed
the  king.

M.  du  Maine  was  very  lame,  in  consequence,  it  was  said,  of
his  falling  from  the  arms  of  a  nurse.  AU  that  was  done  to
cure  him  not  having  succeeded,  they  decided  to

Little  by  little  she  ®

is  brought  nearer  Send  him  to  Certain  practitioners  in  Flanders,
thence  to  some  baths,  among  others,  those  of
Barèges.  The  letters  which  the  governess  wrote  to  Mme.  de
Montespan  were  shown  to  the  king  ;  he  thought  them  well-
written  ;  he  enjoyed  them,  and  in  the  end  they  lessened  his
aversion.  Mme.  de  Montespan’s  temper  did  the  rest.  It
was  high,  she  was  wholly  unaccustomed  to  restrain  it.  The
king  was  its  object  oftener  than  any  one.  He  was  stiU  in
love  with  her,  but  he  suffered.  Mme.  de  Maintenon  would
sometimes  reproach  Mme.  de  Montespan  for  this  ;  the  king
heard  of  it,  and  spoke  now  and  then  to  Mme.  de  Mainte¬
non,  telling  her  what  he  wanted  her  to  say  to  Mme.  de
Montespan,  until  at  last  he  confided  aU  his  griefs  to  the
governess  and  consulted  her  about  them.

Admitted  thus,  little  by  little,  into  the  secret  relations  of
the  lover  and  mistress,  and  this  by  the  king  himself  the

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  319

astute  governess  cultivated  her  opportunity,  and  did  it  so
well  that  she  presently  supplanted  her  mistress,  who  per-
Mme.  de  Mainte-  ceived  too  late  that  she  had  made  herself
necessary  to  the  king.  Having  attained  to
Montespan.  that  point,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  complained
in  her  turn  to  the  king  of  all  she  had  to  suffer  from  a
mistress  who  spared  her  as  httle  as  himself  ;  and  so,  through
these  complaints  from  one  to  the  other  of  Mme.  de  Montespan,
she  finally  took  her  place  completely,  and  knew  well  how
to  keep  it.

Fate,  —  not  to  name  Providence  in  this  connection,  — -
which  was  preparing  for  this  proudest  of  kings  the  deepest,
most  public,  most  lasting,  and  most  unheard-of  humiliations,
strengthened  more  and  more  his  taste  for  this  able  woman,
so  expert  at  her  business  ;  the  jealousy  of  Mme.  de  Monte¬
span  made  that  taste  more  solid  by  the  frequent  outbreaks
which  her  embittered  temper  drove  her  to  make  against  the
king  and  her  supplanter.  Mme.  de  Sévigné  has  described  this
very  prettily  in  enigmas  in  her  letters  to  Mme.  de  Grignan,
whom  she  sometimes  amuses  with  these  anecdotes  of  the
Court,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  having  been  somewhat  in  the
society  of  Mme.  de  Sévigné,  Mme.  de  Coulanges,  and  Mme.
de  La  Fayette  in  Paris,  where  she  was  then  beginning  to
make  her  importance  felt.  This  same  fate,  —  or  Providence,
—  absolute  ruler  of  times  and  events,  ordered  them  now  so
that  the  queen  lived  long  enough  to  let  this  new  love  rise
to  its  height,  but  not  so  long  as  to  let  it  cool.

The  king  passed  the  first  few  days  of  his  widowhood  at
Saint-Cloud,  with  Monsieur;  after  which  he  went  to  Fon¬
tainebleau,  where  he  spent  the  autumn.  It  was  there  that
his  new  liking,  goaded  by  absence,  made  the  separation
seem  mtolerable.  On  his  return  it  is  said  —  for  I  wish  to
distinguish  what  really  was  from  that  which  was  merely

320

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.xi.

said  to  be  —  that  be  spoke  more  plainly  to  Mme.  de
Maintenon,  and  that  she,  venturing  to  try  her  strength,
intrenched  herself  cleverly  behind  religion  and  the  propriety
of  her  present  life  ;  and  finding  that  the  king  was  not
rebuffed  by  this  tone,  she  preached  to  him  a  dread  of  the
devil,  and  so  worked  with  great  art  upon  his  love  and  his
conscience  that  she  succeeded  in  becoming  what  our  eyes
have  seen  and  what  posterity  will  refuse  to  beheve.

However  this  may  be,  what  is  very  certain,  very  true,  is
that  after  the  return  of  the  king  from  Fontainebleau,  about
the  middle  of  the  winter  succeeding  the  queen’s
Mme^'de  death, —  a  thing  that  posterity  wiU  hardly  be-

lieve,  though  perfectly  true  and  authenticated,

—  Père  de  La  Chaise,  the  king’s  confessor,  said  mass  at  mid¬
night  in  one  of  the  king’s  cabinets.  Bontems,  governor  of
Versailles,  first  valet-de-chambre  on  duty,  the  most  trusted
of  the  four  personal  valets,  served  the  mass  at  which  the
monarch  and  the  Maintenon  were  married,  in  presence  of
Harlay,  Archbishop  of  Paris,  as  diocesan,  and  of  Louvois,

—  both  of  whom  had,  it  was  said,  extracted  from  the  king  a
promise  that  he  would  never  declare  the  marriage,  —  and,
thirdly,  of  Montchevreuil,  relation  and  friend  of  Villarceaux,
to  whom  in  former  days  he  had  lent  his  country-house  every
summer,  where  Villarceaux  kept  this  queen  (as  he  did  in
Paris),  paying  all  the  expenses  because  his  cousin  was  poor,
and  because  he  was  ashamed  of  this  concubinage  in  presence
of  his  cousin’s  wife,  whose  patience  and  virtue  he  respected.
The  satiety  of  wedlock,  usually  so  fatal  in  marriages  of  this
description,  served  only  to  consolidate  the  favour  of  Mme.
de  Maintenon.  Prom  that  moment  the  king  passed  several
hours  a  day  with  her  to  the  end  of  his  life.

Mme.  de  Maintenon  was  a  woman  of  much  intelligence,
whom  the  best  company,  in  which  at  first  she  was  only

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

321

tolerated,  and  of  which  she  soon  became  the  dehght,  had
greatly  polished  and  adorned  with  a  knowledge  of  the
Character  of  world,  whilc  gallantry  had  given  her  the  art

Mme.  de  Main-  to  bc  agreeable.  Her  various  states  of  life

tenon.  ,  •  ••  •  i,.

had  made  her  nattering,  insmuatmg,  obligmg,
seeking  always  to  please.  The  necessity  of  intriguing,  the
intrigues  of  more  than  one  kind  which  she  had  seen  and  in
many  of  which  she  had  taken  part,  either  to  serve  herself
or  others,  had  trained  her  to  duplicity  and  had  given  her  a
habit  of  artfulness.  Incomparable  grace  in  all  she  did,  an
air  of  ease,  and  yet  of  reserve  and  respect,  which,  from  her
long  servitude,  had  grown  natural  to  her,  aided  her  talents
marvellously,  —  together  with  a  quiet,  correct  method  of
speaking,  in  good  language,  which  was  naturally  eloquent
and  brief.  Her  best  days  (she  was  three  or  four  years  older
than  the  king)  were  those  of  that  period  of  fine  conversations
and  gallantry  which  were  called  in  the  language  of  the  time
les  ruelles,  and  she  had  so  imbibed  their  spirit  that  she
always  retained  a  taste  and  a  tincture  of  them.  The  pré¬
cieuse  and  pretentious  air  of  those  days  had  been  increased
by  the  varnish  of  importance,  and  later  by  that  of  piety,
which  became  in  the  end  her  principal  characteristic  and
made  semblance  of  absorbing  the  rest.  It  was  her  capital,
by  which  to  maintain  herself  at  the  height  to  which  it  had
brought  her,  and  enable  her  to  govern.  To  govern  was  her
very  being;  all  the  rest  was  sacrificed  without  reserve  to
that.  Candour  and  integrity  were  too  difficult  to  harmonize
with  such  an  object  and  its  attendant  fortunes  to  allow  her
to  retain  more  than  the  outside  adornment  of  them.  She
was  not  so  essentially  false  that  falsehood  was  her  veritable
liking,  but  necessity  had  long  forced  the  habit  upon  her,  and
her  natural  fickleness  made  her  seem  twice  as  false  as  she
reaUy  was.

VOL.  III.  —  21

322  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

She  had  no  stabihty  in  anything,  except  by  constraint  and
force.  Her  inclination  was  to  flutter  about,  as  much  in
regard  to  friends  and  acquaintances  as  in  amusements;
excepting  always  a  few  faithful  friends  of  her  early  days
from  whom  she  never  parted,  and  some  new  ones  of  her
later  period  who  were  necessary  to  her.  With  regard  to
amusements,  she  was  unable  to  vary  them  after  she  found
herself  queen.  Her  fickleness  showed  itself  therefore  in
serious  matters,  and.  caused  great  evils.  Easily  infatuated,
she  became  so  to  excess  ;  as  easily  disenchanted,  her  liking
turned  to  disgust,  often  without  there  being  cause  or  reason
for  either.  The  abject  position  and  distress  in  which  she
had  hved  so  long  had  narrowed  her  mind  and  degraded  her
heart  and  her  feelings.  She  thought  and  felt  in  so  small  a
way  about  all  things  that  she  was  actually  less  a  person
than  Mme.  Scarron  ;  and  in  all  things  and  all  places  this  was
so.  Nothing  could  be  more  repulsive  than  such  meanness
joined  to  a  position  so  radiant  ;  no  greater  impediment  could
there  be  to  aU  good,  and  nothing  so  dangerous  as  this  facil¬
ity  in  changing  friends  and  confidants.

She  had  the  weakness  of  being  governed  by  confidences,
or,  rather,  by  confessions,  and  to  be  their  dupe  in  consequence
of  the  narrow  limits  within  which  she  had  shut  herself  up.
She  had  also  the  disease  of  direction,  which  deprived  her  of
the  little  liberty  she  might  otherwise  have  enjoyed.  The
time  that  Saint-Cyr  made  her  waste  is  incredible,  and  that
which  a  hundred  other  convents  cost  her  is  as  much  so.
She  thought  herself  abbess  universal,  specially  in  spiritual
matters,  and  in  this  conviction  she  undertook  the  details  of
diocesan  management.  This  was  her  favourite  occupation.
She  imagined  herself  a  Mother  of  the  Church.  She  sat  in
judgment  on  the  pastors,  the  superiors  of  seminaries  and
communities,  of  monasteries  and  convents,  and  the  nuns

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

323

who  managed  them.  Hence  a  sea  of  frivolous  occupations,
illusory,  toilsome,  always  deceptive.  Endless  were  the  let¬
ters  to  receive  and  answer,  the  directions  to  be  given  to
chosen  souls,  and  all  the  puerihties  that  usually  ended  in
nothing,  though  sometimes  in  things  of  importance,  when
deplorable  mistakes  were  made  in  decisions,  in  selections,
and  in  judging  of  the  results  of  actions.

The  piety  which  had  crowned  her,  and  by  which  she  kept
herself  safe,  led  her  by  craft  and  taste  to  rule,  to  which  suc-
Persecution of  cecdcd  domineering  in  all  these  occupations;
Jansenism.  while  her  vanity,  which  met  with  nothing  but

adulation,  fed  upon  it.  In  the  king,  who  thought  himself
an  apostle  for  having  all  his  life  persecuted  Jansenism,  or
what  he  was  told  was  such,  she  found  her  opportunity  ;  the
field  seemed  a  suitable  one  in  which  to  fill  the  king  with  a

sense  of  her  zeal,  and  so  introduce  herself  into  the  heart  of
everything.

The  crass  ignorance  of  all  kinds  in  which  so  much  pains
had  been  taken  to  educate  the  king  and  to  maintain  him  in

after  years  ;  the  distrust  that  from  his  youth  up  had  been  in¬
culcated  in  him,  and  the  narrow  limits  within  which  he  was
barricaded  under  the  lock  and  key  of  his  ministers,  his  con¬
fessors,  and  those  who  had  an  interest  in  his  ignorance,  had
given  him  a  pernicious  habit  of  taking  sides  on  the  word  of
others  in  questions  of  theology  and  in  the  disputes  arising
between  the  different  schools  of  Cathohcism.  The  queen-
mother,  and  the  king  even  more  than  herself  in  the  end,
seduced  by  the  Jesuits,  had  allowed  themselves  to  be  per¬
suaded  of  the  exact  and  precise  opposite  of  a  truth  ;  namely,
that  all  other  schools  than  theirs  aimed  at  attacking  the  royal
authority,  and  were  moved  by  a  spirit  of  independence  and
republicanism.  About  this  the  king  (as  about  many  other
things)  knew  no  more  than  a  babe.  The  Jesuits  were  well

324  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xi

aware  with  whom  they  had  to  do.  They  were  in  possession,
as  it  were,  being  confessors  of  the  king  and  the  disposers  of
the  benefices  ;  moreover,  the  fear  these  priests  inspired  in  the
ministers  gave  them  perfect  liberty.  The  vigilant  care  with
which  the  king  kept  himself  barricaded  from  the  world  in
pnbhc  matters  was  a  rampart  to  them,  and  enabled  them
to  get  his  ear  on  all  matters  relating  to  rehgion,  secure  that
they  alone  would  be  listened  to.  It  was  therefore  quite
easy  to  fill  him  with  the  idea,  even  to  infatuation,  that  who¬
ever  spoke  otherwise  than  as  they  did  was  Jansenist,  and
that  Jansenists  were  enemies  to  the  monarch  and  to  his
authority.

It  was  thus  that  they  managed  to  disperse  those  illustrious
solitary  saints  whom  study  and  repentance  had  assembled
at  Port-Eoyal,  —  saints  who  made  such  great  disciples  and
to  whom  all  Christians  should  be  forever  grateful  for  the
famous  books  which  have  shed  so  vivid  and  strong  a  light
to  enable  truth  to  be  distinguished  from  appearances,  the
kernel  from  the  husk,  and  to  make  visible  to  the  eye  a  vast
horizon,  so  httle  known,  so  darkened,  so  disguised;  books
well  fitted  to  enlighten  faith,  to  kindle  charity,  to  develop  the
heart  of  man,  reform  his  morals,  give  him  a  faithful  mirror,
and  guide  him  between  just  fears  and  reasonable  hope.

The  king  became  devout,  —  and  devout  in  the  deepest
ignorance.  To  religion  the  Jesuits  united  politics  ;  they
touched  him  on  the  spots  that  affected  him  most  sensitively,
devotion  and  authority.  They  painted  the  Huguenots  in  the
darkest  colours;  a  State  within  the  State;  having  reached
that  stage  of  hcense  by  revolts,  riots,  civil  war,  foreign
alliances,  and  open  resistance  to  the  kings  his  predecessors,
while  even  he  himself  was  reduced  to  hve  in  treaty  with
them.  But  they  carefully  avoided  telling  him  the  source  of
all  these  evils,  the  origin  of  their  rise  and  progress,  why  and

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

325

by  whom  the  Huguenots  were  first  armed  and  then  supported  ;
above  all,  they  did  not  tell  him  a  single  word  of  projects
long  planned,  of  the  horrors  and  outrages  of  the  League
against  his  crown,  his  house,  his  father,  grandfather,  and  all
belonging  to  him.  They  kept  from  his  knowledge  with
jealous  care  what  the  Gospel  and  divine  law,  the  apostles,
and  the  Fathers  and  their  followers  have  taught  as  to  the
true  way  of  preaching  Jesus  Christ,  of  converting  infidels
and  heretics,  and  of  the  right  behaviour  in  all  that  con¬
cerns  religion.  They  stirred  his  piety  by  the  comfort  of
doing  an  easy  repentance  at  the  cost  of  others,  which  they
persuaded  the  king  would  secure  for  him  the  other  world  ;
and  they  worked  upon  his  pride  by  showing  him  a  course  of
action  which  was  beyond  the  power  of  his  predecessors.
They  made  him  —  who  piqued  himself  chiefly  on  govern¬
ing  by  himself  —  perform  a  master-action  of  religion  and
pohcy,  an  action  which  should  make  their  truth  triumph  by
the  ruin  of  others,  and  render  the  king  absolute  by  breaking
all  ties  with  the  Huguenots  and  destroying  forever,  as  they
said,  those  rebels,  who  were  biding  their  time  to  rise  and
give  the  law  to  their  kings.

The  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Hantes,  without  the  slight¬
est  pretext  or  the  slightest  need,  and  the  divers  proscrip¬
tions  which  followed  it,  were  the  fruits  of

Revocation  of

the  edict  of  that  dreadful  plot,  which  depopulated  one
Nantes.  fourth  of  the  kingdom,  ruined  its  commerce,

weakened  it  in  all  its  parts,  gave  it  over  so  long  to  the
public  and  avowed  pillage  of  dragoons  and  authorized  tor¬
tures  and  executions,  by  which  so  many  innocents  of  both
sexes  died  by  thousands,  —  an  awful  plot,  which  ruined  a
whole  people,  rent  in  twain  a  host  of  families,  armed  rela¬
tives  against  relatives,  drove  our  manufactories  into  foreign
countries,  where  they  glutted  with  prosperity  those  States

326  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAIHT-SIMON.  [chap.  xi.

at  the  expense  of  ours,  giving  to  the  world  the  spectacle  of
a  whole  people  proscribed,  naked,  fugitive  without  crime,
seeking  safety  away  from  their  own  land,  —  a  plot  which  sent
nobles,  rich  men,  old  men,  men  much  respected  for  their
piety,  their  learning,  their  virtue,  delicate,  sick,  and  feeble
men  to  the  galley-oars  for  the  sole  reason  of  religion,  and
which,  to  crown  all  other  horrors,  filled  the  provinces  of
the  kingdom  with  perjurers,  who  sacrificed  their  consciences
to  their  goods  and  their  peace,  buying  them  by  pretended  ab¬
jurations,  being  forced,  without  a  moment  s  interval,  to  adore
what  they  did  not  believe,  and  to  receive  upon  their  bps  the
divine  body  of  the  Saint  of  saints,  while  in  their  hearts  they
remained  convinced  that  it  was  only  bread  which  they  ought
to  abhor.  Such  was  the  general  abomination  in  the  land,
begotten  by  flattery  and  cruelty.  From  torture  to  abjura¬
tion,  and  from  that  to  communion,  there  were  often  not  four
and  twenty  hours.

Nearly  all  the  bishops  lent  themselves  to  this  hasty  and
impious  action.  Most  of  them  urged  the  conversions  and
forced  these  strange  converts  to  partake  of  the  sacred
mysteries,  in  order  to  swell  the  number  of  their  conquests,
of  which  they  sent  a  record  to  Court,  to  gain  consideration
and  to  win  their  recompense.  The  king  received  from  all
sides  the  details  of  the  persecution  and  its  conversions.
Those  who  had  abjured  and  communicated  were  counted  by
thousands,  —  two  thousand  in  one  place,  six  thousand  in
another,  and  all  at  once,  in  an  instant.  The  king  gloried  in
his  power  and  his  piety  ;  he  thought  he  was  reviving  the
times  of  the  apostles,  and  took  to  himself  all  the  honour.
The  bishops  wrote  him  panegyrics;  the  Jesuits  made  the
pulpits  and  the  missions  ring  with  acclamations.  All  France
was  filled  with  horror  and  confusion,  but  never  were  joy
and  triumph  higher  or  praises  so  profuse.  The  monarch

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

327

felt  no  distrust  of  the  sincerity  of  these  conversions  ;  the
converters  took  good  care  to  beatify  him  in  advance.  He
drank  in  that  poison  with  long  draughts  ;  never  had  he  felt
himself  so  great  before  men,  so  advanced  before  God  in
reparation  of  his  sins  and  the  scandals  of  his  life.  Nothmg
but  praises  reached  his  ears,  while  good  and  true  Catholics
groaned  in  spirit  at  seeing  the  orthodox  imitating  against
errors  and  heretics  what  heretical  and  pagan  tyrants  had
done  against  the  truth,  against  behevers,  against  martyrs.
Above  all,  they  could  not  be  consoled  for  the  horror  of
those  sacrilegious  perjuries.  Bitterly  did  they  weep  for  the
lasting  and  irremediable  odium  cast  by  such  detestable
means  on  true  religion  ;  while  neighbouring  countries  ex¬
ulted  in  seeing  us  destroy  ourselves,  and  profited  by  our
folly  to  build  schemes  upon  the  hatred  we  were  drawing
down  upon  ourselves  from  all  Protestant  powers.  But  to
such  crying  truths  the  king  was  inaccessible.

The  magnificent  establishment  of  Saint-Cyr  followed  very
closely  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  Mme.  de
Establishment  Montespan  had  built  a  noble  house  in  Paris
ofsamt-cyr.  Filles  de  Saint- Joseph,  for  the  educa¬

tion  of  young  girls  and  also  to  teach  them  all  species  of
hand-work  ;  from  this  house  issued  very  beautiful  specimens
of  church  ornamentation  and  other  superb  articles  for  the
king,  and  for  any  one  who  ordered  them.  It  was  to  this
house  that  Mme.  de  Montespan  retired  when  she  was  forced
to  quit  the  Court.  Emulation  led  Mme.  de  Maintenon  to
visions  more  vast,  which,  by  gratifying  the  poorer  nobility,
should  make  them  regard  her  as  a  protectress  in  whom  the
whole  nobility  should  feel  confidence.  She  hoped  to  smooth
the  way  to  the  declaration  of  her  marriage  by  making  herself
illustrious  in  a  public  work  which  would  amuse  and  entertain
the  king  while  it  amused  herself,  and  might  in  the  end  he-

328

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xi

come  her  retreat  should  she  have  the  misfortune  to  lose  him.
The  rich  revenues  of  Saint-Denis,  which  she  induced  the  king
to  unite  with  Saint-Cyr,  diminished  the  cost  of  so  great  an
undertaking  in  the  eyes  of  the  king  and  the  people  ;  more¬
over,  the  object  was  in  itself  so  useful  that  it  met  with
nothing  hut  just  applause.

The  declaration  of  her  marriage  was  always  Mme.  de
Maintenon’s  most  ardent  desire.  Soon  after  the  death  of
Mme  de  Mainte-  dauphine  [of  Bavaria,  Monseigneur’s  wife]
non  misses  for  it  was  OU  the  point  of  being  made.  But  the
the  declaration  of  king,  remembering  all  that  had  happened  in
her  marnage.  matter,  consulted  the  celebrated  Bossuet,

Bishop  of  Meaux,  and  Fénelon,  Archbishop  of  Cambrai,  who
both  dissuaded  him,  and  so  earnestly  that  they  ended  the
matter  forever.  The  archbishop  was  already  in  bad  odour
with  Mme.  du  Maintenon  on  account  of  Mme.  Guyon,  hut
Bossuet  escaped  her  wrath  because,  without  ever  intending
it,  he  had  done  her  a  most  eminent  service.

Bossuet  was  a  man  from  whom  honour,  virtue,  and  in¬
tegrity  were  as  inseparable  as  knowledge  and  erudition.

His  office  of  preceptor  to  Monseigneur  had

Bossuet  ;  his  in¬
fluence  drives
Mme.  de  Monte-
span  finally  from
Court.

familiarized  him  with  the  king,  who  had  gone

to  him  more  than  once  about  his  scruples  of
conscience.  He  had  often  spoken  to  the  king
with  a  freedom  worthy  of  the  first  ages  and  the  first  bishops
of  the  Church.  He  had  stopped  the  course  of  the  king’s
immorahties  more  than  once  ;  he  had  even  dared  to  pursue
the  king,  who  evaded  him. .  In  the  end  he  stopped  all  evil
practices  and  crowned  his  work  by  giving  the  last  blow
which  drove  Mme,  de  Montespan  forever  from  the  Conrt.
Her  departure,  never  to  return,  was  a  great  deliverance
to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  who  was  not  ignorant  that  she  owed
it  wholly  to  M.  de  Meaux.  This  was  the  period  of  the  closer

Letter  of  the  Duke  de  St.  Simon  to  the  Duke  de  Berwick.

Paris,  22  Sept.  1720.

They  tell  me,  Monsieur,  that  M.  the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux
is  contesting  with  you  the  precedence  at  the  sitting  of  the  Parle¬
ment.  1  do  not  touch  the  question  what  constitutes  the  right  as
between  him  and  the  Governor  or  Commandant  of  the  Province
in  the  quality  of  their  office,  but,  you  being  a  Peer  of  France,  it
is  a  matter  not  to  be  brought  into  question.  I  can  have  the
honour  to  assure  you  of  this.  The  sittings  of  all  the  Parlements
furnish  countless  examples  of  this  practice  in  our  favour  and
it  does  not  admit  of  being  contested.  Do  me  the  justice
always,  Monsieur,  to  be  persuaded  that  no  one  honours  you
more  than  I  do  or  is  more  entirely  your  very  humble  and  very
obedient  servant.

Le  Dug  he  St.  Simon.

Yel-y^cJ^^

Vcrixt.  ^li^iAjUc  Gc  ^{v^ecn^l^  uVl,

of  Ga  ^TrYn'i£<f  '  ùi^  ^ irvw€^tm^iAY~  ,YPt  ZJ  Cyr^wi^-t*^  ■

^  ^YYt'GlyC^  C'^t  «'fî'i'  ^  i,vl£Ué  XVH)

C«y(  cllYiC  (ptM-  t  ie. ^Ci^i  O'X^’vT.  YVU^Z  e*\  cp/Ml {X-YiAjT  I
^tuAyinetA</  Ve,  iznit  cei  o^ejMeee'-  t&i  jeeuunji^  Od.  ^tnu  Gej

^^i.r>i^e»'ii-  ^Ci  Ja,txi  yuryvtGye.  e^-nYi-âw  e/ce-ùt't^  ^

jxt.tAt.  CA^yv  .  ^tôdél  wtfry  ?2rvij<ru.trs  ^ jAA^hce.-  ^eA/hyî£^ ^

M^tnUA^  ^CtnytAA-xe  M  -w^  l^n^e  ipHeje^et^à  (yviett

Wfc  ?yrs  LteytUt’  eJ^yrJ

1716]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

329

and  perfect  \mion  of  M.  du  Maine  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
and  of  her  virtual  adoption  of  liim,  which  grew  deeper  and
more  consohdated  ever  after,  and  cleared  his  way  to  those
incredible  grandeurs,  which  would  have  ended  by  putting
him  on  the  throne,  had  it  been  within  the  power  of  his
former  governess.

The  great  step  of  Mme.  de  Montespan’s  expulsion  forever
having  been  gained,  Mme.  de  Maintenon  took  another  course.
Having  missed,  for  the  second  time,  the  declaration  of  her
marriage,  she  saw  that  it  was  best  to  let  the  matter  go  and
not  revive  it  ;  she  had  sufficient  power  over  herself  to  shp
gently  over  her  disappointment  and  not  to  turn  into  a  wrong
the  refusal  to  make  her  queen.  The  king,  who  felt  himself
freed,  was  very  grateful  for  this  conduct,  which  redoubled
his  affection,  respect,  and  confidence.  She  might  possibly
not  have  succeeded  under  the  weight  of  the  dignity  which
she  coveted  ;  at  any  rate  she  estabhshed  herself  more  firmly
by  keeping  up  her  transparent  enigma.

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  she  needed  no  skill,  no
art  to  maintain  herself.  Her  reign,  on  the  contrary,  was
L’f  d  nduct  manœuvring  on  her  part,  while  the

of  Mme.  de  king,  OU  his,  was  perpetually  duped.  A  queen
am  enon.  private,  scatcd  in  presence  of  the  king,  of

Monseigneur,  Monsieur,  the  Court  of  England,  and  whoever
else  might  be  there,  she  was  a  very  simple,  private  individual
elsewhere,  and  always  in  the  lowest  places.  I  have  seen
her  at  the  lower  end  of  the  king’s  table  at  Marly,  eating  with
him  and  the  other  ladies,  and  at  Fontainebleau,  in  full  dress
in  the  Queen  of  England’s  apartment,  always  yielding  her
place,  drawing  back  for  titled  women,  and  even  for  women  of
distinguished  quahties  ;  never  allowing  herself  to  be  forced
to  do  so,  but  doing  it  with  an  air  of  civility  ;  and  at  all
times  polite,  affable,  talkative,  hke  a  person  who  pretends

330  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

to  nothing,  makes  no  display,  and  considers  only  those  who
are  about  her  ;  and  yet  for  aU  that,  a  presence  which  awed
others  greatly.

She  was  always  well  dressed,  nobly,  neatly,  with  good  taste,
hut  very  modestly,  and  in  a  manner  older  than  her  years.
After  she  ceased  to  appear  in  puhHc,  nothing  was  ever  seen
hut  her  hood  and  her  scarf,  both  black,  if  by  chance  a
glimpse  was  caught  of  her.  She  never  went  to  the  king
unless  he  were  ül,  or  on  the  mornings  of  the  days  when  he
had  taken  medicine.  When  the  king  was  in  her  room,  they
each  sat  in  an  armchair  at  either  side  of  the  fireplace,  with
a  table  before  them;  the  king  with  his  back  to  the  wall
and  two  stools  beside  his  table,  one  for  the  minister  who
came  to  work  with  him,  the  other  for  the  minister’s  bag.

During  their  work  Mme.  de  Maintenon  read,  or  did  tapes¬
try.  She  heard  all  that  passed  between  the  king  and  the
minister,  who  spoke  loud.  She  seldom  said  a

Her  skilful  ^

method  of  gov-  word.  Sometimes  the  king  would  ask  her
eming  the  king.  gpg  answered  with  great  deference

and  reserve.  Never,  or  almost  never,  did  she  seem  to  wish
for  anything,  still  less  to  be  interested  in  any  one  ;  but  all
the  while  she  had  an  understanding  with  the  minister,  who
had  not  dared  in  a  previous  private  interview  with  her  not  to
agree  to  do  as  she  wished,  and  who  dared  still  less  to  flinch
from  doing  it  in  her  presence.  When  there  was  any  favour
or  office  to  be  given,  the  matter  was  settled  between  them  be¬
fore  the  work  with  the  king  at  which  the  decision  was  made  ;
this  retarded  the  matter  sometimes  without  the  king  or  any
one  else  knowing  the  cause.  She  would  send  word  to  the
minister  that  she  wished  to  speak  to  him.  He  dared  not
bring  the  matter  forward  to  the  king  until  he  had  received
her  orders.  That  done,  the  minister  would  propose  a  list  of
names.  If  by  chance  the  king  stopped  at  the  one  Mme.  de

1715]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

331

Maintenon  intended,  the  minister  held  him  to  it  and  did  not
go  further.  If  the  king  selected  another  name,  the  minister
proposed  to  examine  the  rest,  let  the  king  talk,  and  contrived
to  exclude  the  one  selected  ;  he  seldom  proposed  expressly
the  one  they  wanted,  but  always  several  whose  qualifications
he  tried  to  balance  equally  so  as  to  puzzle  the  king  as  to  his
choice.  Then  the  king  would  ask  his  opinion,  and  he  would
run  over  the  reasons  for  several  candidates,  ending  on  the  one
they  wanted.  The  king  nearly  always  hesitated  and  asked
Mme.  de  Maintenon  what  she  thought.  She  smiled,  played
the  incompetent,  said  a  few  words  about  some  other  person,
and  then  returned,  as  if  she  had  not  considered  it  before,  to
the  name  the  minister  had  dwelt  on,  and  the  matter  was
settled  ;  so  that  three-quarters  of  the  favours  and  offices,  and
three-fourths  of  the  last  fourth  of  what  took  place  in  her
presence  between  the  king  and  the  ministers,  was  done  as
she  directed.

Another  manoeuvre  was  practised  if  the  king  was  obsti¬
nate  ;  they  avoided  all  decision  by  muddling  and  prolonging
the  matter  and  substituting  some  other  as  growing  out  of  it,
and  thus  turning  off  the  king’s  mind,  or  else  by  proposing
to  get  more  information.  In  this  way  his  first  ideas  were
dulled,  and  they  returned  to  the  charge  later  and  usually
succeeded.  All  foreign  affairs  were  decided  in  the  council
of  State.  It  was  Mme.  de  Maintenon’s  extreme  desire  to
meddle  in  those  affairs,  but  as  it  was  impossible  to  have  the
work  done  in  her  presence,  she  took  to  the  manoeuvres
(which  I  related  in  their  proper  place)  by  which  she  made
the  Princesse  des  Ursins  mistress  of  all  Spain  and  kept  her
so,  in  spite  of  Torcy  and  the  French  and  Spanish  ambassa¬
dors,  to  the  injury  of  Spain  and  France,  simply  because
Mme.  des  Ursins  was  clever  enough  to  make  everything  pass
through  her  hands  and  to  persuade  her  that  she  herself  gov-

332

MEMOmS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap,  xt

erned  the  Court  and  kingdom  of  Spain  under  her,  Mme.  de
Maintenon’s,  express  will  and  orders.

To  play  a  part  in  ecclesiastical  affairs  was  long  her  most
ardent  desire.  She  made  certain  attempts  in  this  direction
Her  desire  to  ^  relation  to  Jansenism  and  the  revocation  of
play  a  part  in  gf  JSfantes.  The  time  came  when  she

ecclesiastical  _  ...  ^  •

matters.  succeeded  in  taking  a  prmcipal  part  m  tins

section  of  the  government,  and  in  seizing  from  the  king  the
key  to  the  only  class  of  affairs  and  favours  on  which  she  had
hitherto  had  but  a  moderate  influence.  Henceforth  she
thought  herself  the  prophetess  who  was  to  save  the  people
of  God  from  error,  revolt,  and  impiety.  With  this  idea,
instigated  by  Cardinal  Bissy,  she  stirred  up  the  king  to  all
the  horrors,  the  violences,  the  tyranny  which  under  the  ter¬
rible  affair  of  the  bull  Unigenitus  were  exercised  upon  the
consciences  and  persons  of  those  of  whom  the  prisons  and
dungeons  were  full.

It  was  then  that  she  swam  into  the  full  direction  of  Church
affairs,  so  that  even  Père  Tellier,  in  spite  of  his  profound
Usefulness  of  the  dislike,  was  forced  to  reckon  with  her.  It
bull  Unigenitus  -^^eished  upon  him  cruelly:  but  the  persecu¬
Maintenon.  tiou  hc  had  Undertaken,  and  the  triumph  of

his  modern  school  upon  the  ruin  of  all  others,  were  to  him
the  objects  of  such  keen  and  eager  interest  that  there  was  no
sacrifice  he  would  not  make  to  them.  The  affair  of  the  bull,
carried  on  with  such  persistency,  rancour,  craft,  violence,  and
tyranny,  was  at  its  start,  as  we  have  seen,  the  bitter  fruit  of
the  pressing  necessity  to  which  their  Chinese  and  Indian
affairs  had  reduced  the  Jesuits.  It  now  became  the  inter¬
est  of  Mme.  de  Maintenon  in  governing  the  Church  as  she
had  long  governed  the  State,  and  so  important  a  matter  did
not  escape  her  sway.  The  path  once  opened,  there  was  no
limit  to  it.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

333

The  barbarous  treatment  shown  to  the  Huguenots  after
the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes  became,  in  the  main,  a
model  for  that  which  was  given  to  all  those  who  could  not
accept  the  bull.  Hence  stratagems  without  number  to  in¬
timidate  and  win  over  the  bishops,  the  schools,  and  the
lower  orders  of  the  clergy  ;  hence  the  incessant  hail  of  lettres
de  cachet  ;  hence  that  struggle  with  the  parliaments  ;  hence
those  arrests  without  number  or  restraint,  those  indictments
before  every  court  in  the  kingdom,  that  total  and  public
denial  of  justice  to  whosoever  would  not  bend  his  conscience
to  the  yoke.  Hence,  too,  that  open  inquisition  upon  simple
laymen,  that  frank  persecution  of  a  whole  people,  exiled,  or
shut  up  in  prisons,  and  many  in  dungeons  ;  hence  the  troubles
and  subversions  in  the  monasteries  ;  hence,  too,  that  inex¬
haustible  pot  of  black  with  which  to  daub  whomsoever  they
would,  and  brand  to  the  king  those  whom  they  wanted  to
get  rid  of  and  proscribe;  hence  that  innumerable  cloud  of
persons  of  all  classes  and  of  both  sexes  suffering  the  same
trials  as  the  Christians  had  suffered  under  the  Arian  emperors,
especially  under  Julian  the  Apostate,  whose  policy  and  vio¬
lence  seemed  to  have  been  imitated  ;  and  if  there  was  no
blood  precisely  shed,  —  I  say  precisely,  because  it  cost  the
life  of  another  sort  to  many  a  victim,  —  it  was  not  the  fault
of  the  Jesuits,  whose  rage  on  this  occasion  exceeded  their
prudence,  for  they  did  not  refrain  from  saying  that  blood
ought  to  have  been  shed.

Such  were  the  last  years  of  this  long  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,
so  little  his  own,  so  continually  and  successively  that  of
others.  During  its  latter  period,  crushed
king;  his  reverses  under  the  Weight  of  a  fatal  war,  relieved  by
of  fortune.  because  of  the  incapacity  of  his  minis¬

ters  and  his  generals,  a  prey  to  a  crafty  domestic  plot,  pierced
with  sorrow,  not  for  his  own  wrong-doing,  which  he  neither

334

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

knew  nor  chose  to  know,  but  for  his  impotence  against  all
Europe  united  against  him,  reduced  to  the  saddest  extremities
to  maintain  the  finances  and  the  frontier,  he  had  no  resource
hut  to  fall  back  upon  himself,  and  to  weigh  down  his  family^
his  Court,  the  consciences  of  men,  and  his  unhappy  kingdom
beneath  a  hard  despotism,  by  which,  in  attempting  to  extencl
it  too  far,  he  revealed  his  weakness.

After  the  year  1709,  his  domestic  troubles  increased  yearly,
and  were  never  again  lifted  from  the  royal  family.  The
His  domestic  Pnnce  do  Conti  and  M.  le  Prince  were  the  first

calamities.  (jjg  with  in  sis  weeks  of  each  other.  M.  la

Due  followed  them  in  the  same  year,  when  the  oldest  re’
maining  prince  of  the  blood  was  only  seventeen  years  of  age.
Monseigneur  died  next.  And  then,  soon  after,  the  king  was
struck  by  a  blow  that  he  felt  far  more  ;  his  heart,  of  which
he  himself  had  been  ignorant,  was  torn  by  the  loss  of  that
charming  dauphine  ;  his  hopes  were  wrecked  by  that  of  the
dauphin  ;  his  tranquillity  was  shaken  as  to  the  succession  to
the  crown  by  the  death  of  the  little  dauphin  eight  days  later,
coupled  with  the  tender  age  and  fragile  health  of  the  only
remaining  offspring  of  that  precious  race,  who  was  hut  five
and  a  half  years  old  ;  and  all  these  blows  fell  rapidly  upon
him,  before  the  Peace,  and  during  the  most  terrible  woes  and
perils  of  the  kingdom.  And  who  can  tell  the  horrors  that
accompanied  the  last  three,  their  causes,  the  suspicions  they
aroused,  suspicions  so  artfully  spread  and  inculcated,  and  the
cruel  effect  of  them  ?  The  pen  refuses  to  dwell  on  that
mystery  of  abomination.  Let  us  mourn  its  fatal  success,  the
source  of  other  baneful  successes  worthy  to  issue  from  it;
let  us  mourn  them  all  as  a  master-work  of  darkness  which
will  shadow  France  for  generations,  the  culmination  of  all
crimes,  the  final  seal  to  the  misfortunes  of  the  nation,  for
which  French  tongues  will  cry  to  God  for  vengeance.

1716]  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,

335

Such  were  the  long  protracted,  cruel  circumstances  of
most  painful  sorrows  which  tried  the  constancy  of  the  king,

His  firmness  and  Same  time,  did  a  service  to  his  fame

true  grandeur;  greater  far  than  the  glory  of  his  conquests  or
the  long  continued  years  of  his  prosperity.  I
mean  the  bringing  forth  of  a  grandeur  of  soul  which  showed
itself  throughout  these  great  reverses  and  amid  these  cruel
domestic  shocks  in  a  king  accustomed  to  the  most  omnipotent
internal  empire,  and  to  the  splendour  of  successes  abroad,
who  saw  himself,  at  last,  abandoned  on  all  sides.  Over¬
whelmed  without  by  foreign  enemies  who  played  upon  his
impotence,  for  they  saw  it  was  helpless,  and  who  scoffed  at
his  past  glory,  he  found  himself  without  resources,  without
ministers,  without  generals,  because  he  had  made  and  sus¬
tained  them  from  pure  hking  and  fancy,  and  from  the  fatal
vanity  of  choosing  and  training  them  himself.  Agonized
within  by  the  most  poignant  domestic  catastrophes,  without
consolation  from  any  one,  the  prey  of  his  own  weakness,
compelled  to  struggle  alone  against  horrors  more  terrible
than  his  worst  misfortunes,  constantly  kept  before  his  eyes  by
those  who  were  nearest  and  dearest  to  him,  —  in  the  midst
of  all  this  was  seen  that  constancy,  that  firmness  of  soul,
that  external  equanimity,  that  care  to  hold  the  helm  so  long
as  he  could  grasp  it,  that  hope  against  hope  through  courage,
wisdom,  and  not  bhndness,  that  kingly  bearing  in  all  things,
of  which  few  men  indeed  would  have  been  capable,  and
which  earned  him  the  right  to  bear  the  title  of  Great,  pre¬
viously  bestowed  upon  him  prematurely.  It  was  this  that
won  him  the  true  admiration  of  all  Europe  and  that  of  his
subjects  who  witnessed  it  ;  it  was  this  that  brought  back
to  him  so  many  hearts  which  his  long,  harsh  reign  had
alienated.

He  humiliated  himself  in  secret  under  the  hand  of  God  ;

336  MEMOIRS  OE  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

he  recognized  His  justice  and  implored  His  mercy,  without
degrading  either  himself  or  his  crown  in  the  eyes  of  men  ;
on  the  contrary,  he  moved  them  to  a  sense  of  his  magnanim¬
ity.  Happy  would  it  have  been  if,  while  adoring  the  hand
that  struck  him,  and  receiving  its  blows  with  a  dignity  which
gave  to  his  submission  an  honour  so  illustrious,  he  had
turned  bis  eyes  to  the  causes  still  reparable,  instead  of  con¬
sidering  only  those  which  had  no  other  remedy  than  avowal,
sorrow,  and  useless  repentance.

What  an  amazing  mixture  of  light  and  darkness  !  A
perfect  conviction  of  his  injustice  and  his  impotence,  to

which  his  own  lips  testified  in  his  words

Reflections.

to  those  who  received  his  will,  to  the  Queen
of  England,  and  to  his  bastards  ;  yet  a  complete  surrender  to
the  latter  of  his  family,  his  sole  heir,  his  fame,  his  honour,
his  reason,  the  inward  motions  of  his  conscience,  his  person,
his  will,  his  hberty.  But  the  proud  monarch  groaned  under
his  fetters.  These  groans,  stronger  than  his  own  will,  burst
forth  occasionally  ;  they  cannot  be  mistaken  in  what  he  said
to  the  parliament  people  and  to  the  Queen  of  England;
namely,  that  he  had  “  bought  his  peace.”  He,  so  master
of  himself  that  he  never  said  aught  but  what  he  chose  to
say,  even  he  could  not  restrain  himself  from  saying  that  his
will  had  been  extorted  from  him  ;  they  had  made  him  do
that  which  he  did  not  wish  to  do  and  thought  he  ought  not
to  do.  Strange  violence,  strange  weakness,  strange  avowal
wrenched  forth  by  feelings  and  by  sorrow  !  What  a  contrast
of  strength  and  grandexir  of  soul  superior  to  all  disasters
with  abject  weakness  before  a  shameful,  illegitimate,  and
tyrannical  domestic  plot  !  and  what  a  verification  of  the
warning  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  all-wise  books  of  the  Old
Testament,  of  the  fate  of  those  who  are  delivered  over  to
licentiousness  and  the  empire  of  women  !  What  an  end  to  a

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON.  337

reign  so  long  admired,  and  until  its  last  reverses,  so  dazzling
in  grandeur,  in  lavishness,  in  courage,  in  strength  !  and  what
an  abyss  of  weakness,  misery,  and  shame,  felt,  abhorred,  and
yet  endured  to  its  fullest  extent  !  0  Nebuchadnezzar  !  who

can  fathom  the  judgments  of  God  ?  Who  shall  dare  not  to
abase  himself  in  His  presence  ?

But  what  are  we  to  think  of  the  constant  and  tranquil
firmness  of  the  king,  admired  by  all  in  these  last  days  of
his  hfe  ?  For  it  is  quite  certain  that  in  leaving  the  world  he
regretted  nothing,  and  that  the  quietude  of  his  soul  was  proof
against  all  anxiety;  that  he  was  troubled  by  none  of  his
last  directions  ;  that  he  looked,  spoke,  foresaw,  and  regulated
what  should  be  done  after  his  death  with  the  usual  ease  of
a  man  in  perfect  health  and  a  mind  at  rest  ;  that  he  main¬
tained  to  the  last  that  external  decency,  that  gravity,  that
majesty  which  had  accompanied  every  action  of  his  hfe,  and
with  them  a  perfect  naturalness,  an  air  of  truth  and  sim-
phcity  which  banished  even  the  faintest  suspicion  of  acting
or  pretence.  Absorbed  in  the  great  future  he  was  about  to
enter,  with  a  detachment  from  life  in  which  there  was  no
regret,  a  humüity  that  was  not  cringing,  a  contempt  for  aU
that  was  no  longer  to  be  his,  a  kindness  and  composure  of
soul  that  remembered  to  comfort  even  his  valets,  surely  he
presented  a  most  moving  spectacle,  and  the  more  admirable
because  he  sustained  it  throughout  precisely  the  same.  The
consciousness  of  his  sins  was  there  without  terror  ;  confidence
in  God  —  shall  we  so  call  it  ?  —  without  doubt,  without  un¬
easiness,  founded  on  His  mercy  and  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ;  resignation  as  to  his  personal  condition,  as  to  his
length  of  life,  and  regrets  that  he  did  not  suffer  more.  Who
does  not  admire  an  end  so  great,  so  Christian  ?  But  who
does  not  also  shudder  1

What  shall  we  say  of  his  last  words  to  his  nephew,  after

VOL.  III.  — 22

338  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

his  will,  and  immediately  after  writing  the  codicil  and  re¬
ceiving  the  last  sacraments?  What  can  he  said  of  his
positive  assurances,  clear,  precise,  and  twice
repeated,  that  nothing  would  he  found  in  those
documents  to  trouble  him  ;  whereas,  they  were  solely  drawn
up  to  dishonour  and  to  rob  him,  or  rather,  let  us  speak  the
truth,  to  cut  his  throat.  Nevertheless  he  reassured  him,  he
praised  him,  he  caressed  him  ;  he  recommended  to  him  his
successor,  —  whom  he  had  totally  abstracted  from  him,  —
his  kingdom,  which,  he  told  him,  he  was  about  to  govern,
knowing  well  that  he  had  taken  all  authority  from  him  and
had  dehvered  him  over  hound  to  his  enemies.  Was  this  craft  ?
was  this  deception  ?  was  it  derision  in  the  act  of  dying  ?
What  an  enigma  to  explain  !  Let  us  endeavour  to  believe
that  in  some  way  the  king  was  able  to  explain  it  to  himself.

Perhaps  he  explamed  it  by  what  he  seemed  to  think  the
impotence  of  the  deed  that  had  been  extorted  from  him.
Let  us  go  further  and  say  he  did  not  doubt  this,  and  may
have  hoped  that  an  iniquitous  and  scandalous  will,  fit  to
throw  his  family  and  the  kingdom  into  flames,  would  meet
with  no  greater  support  than  that  obtained  by  the  will  of
his  father,  so  wise,  weighty,  and  just,  which  he  himself  had
made  pubhc  amid  general  and  genuine  applause.

Thus  died  one  of  the  greatest  kings  of  this  world,  in  the
arms  of  an  unworthy  and  secret  wife  and  of  his  double  bas¬
tards,  master  of  himself  and  provided  with  the  sacraments
of  the  Church  by  a  confessor  like  Père  Tellier.  If  such  was
the  death  of  the  saints,  certainly  the  assistants  were  not  of
that  order.

And  even  those  assistants  did  not  remain  till  the  end.
Masters  of  the  king  and  of  his  chamber,  admitting  no  one
hut  themselves  and  a  few  necessary  attendants,  their  assi¬
duity  never  lessened  so  long  as  there  was  any  need  of  it.

1715]  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  DUG  DE  SAINT-SIMON.

339

But  as  soon  as  the  codicil  was  written  and  consigned  to  the
chancellor  they  were  not  ashamed  to  withdraw.  We  have
,  seen  how  the  tender  compliment  of  the  king

Abandonment  of  o

the  king  in  his  to  Mme.  de  Maintenon  on  the  hope  of  her
last  days.  rejoining  him  displeased  that  aged  witch  ;

and  we  have  also  seen  how,  on  the  Wednesday,  four  days
before  the  king’s  death,  she  abandoned  him  forever;  and
how  the  kmg,  observing  this  with  pain,  asked  for  her  re¬
peatedly,  and  finally  obliged  her  to  return  from  Saint-Cyr;
though  even  then  she  had  not  the  patience  to  await  his  death
before  she  left  him  again  and  returned  no  more.  Cardinals
Bissy  and  Rohan,  and  Telher,  his  confessor,  troubled  them¬
selves  so  httle  to  show  any  assiduity  that  the  king  was  left
without  a  mass,  although  he  was  in  full  possession  of  his
senses  and  desired  it;  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  Charost,
as  I  have  already  said,  he  would  not  have  had  one.

Louis  XIV.  was  regretted  by  none  but  his  personal  valets,
a  few  other  persons,  and  the  leaders  of  the  affair  of  the  hull
Louis  XIV.  was  Uuigenitus.  Paris,  weary  of  a  subjection  which
little  regretted.  smothcrcd  it,  breathed  again  with  the  hope

of  regaining  its  hberty,  and  rejoiced  at  the  end  of  the  author¬
ity  of  so  many  men  who  had  abused  it.  The  provinces,  long
despairing  at  their  prostration  and  ruin,  quivered  with  joy  ;
their  parliaments  and  aU  classes  of  the  judiciary,  crushed  by
the  edicts  and  the  indictments  consequent  on  the  bull,  flat¬
tered  themselves  they  were  free  at  last.  The  people,  ruined,
crushed,  desperate,  gave  thanks  to  God,  with  scandalous  dis¬
plays  for  a  dehverance  their  ardent  wishes  thought  secure.
Foreign  countries,  delighted  to  be  rid  of  a  monarch  who,  for
so  many  years,  had  imposed  the  law  upon  them,  nevertheless
restrained  themselves  with  more  propriety  than  Frenchmen.
The  marvels  of  the  first  three-quarters  of  a  reign  that  was
more  than  seventy  years  long,  and  the  personal  magnanimity

340  MEMOIES  OF  THE  DUC  DE  SAINT-SIMON,  [chap.  xi.

of  a  sovereign  till  then  so  fortunate,  and  after  that  period  so
deserted  by  fortune,  dazzled  and  affected  them.  They  made
it  a  point  of  honour  to  render  him  after  death  that  which
they  had  constantly  refused  to  him  in  his  lifetime.  No
foreign  court  exulted  ;  each  and  all  they  vied  with  one  an¬
other  in  lauding  and  honouring  his  memory.

We  shall  see  presently  whether  the  French  nation  was
right  or  wrong  in  the  feelings  to  which  it  gave  expression,
and  whether  it  formd  out  later  if  it  had  gained  or  lost.

INDEX  TO  VOL.  Ill

Aguesseau  (Henri  François  d’),  procu¬
reur-général,  opposes  acceptance  of
bull  Unigenitus,  213  ;  bis  wife  ex¬
horts  him  to  stand  firm,  213.

Anjou  (Due  d’),  Louis  XV.,  his  life
saved  by  Mme.  de  Ventadour,  67.

Beauvilliees  (Due  de),  his  state  on
death  of  dauphin,  67  ;  saves  Saint-
Simon  by  burning  dauphin’s  papers,
68-70;  requested  by  king  to  take
the  education  of  little  dauphin,  169  ;
asks  Saint-Simon  to  accept  the  office
under  him,  169-171  ;  his  illness,  death,
and  character,  171-176.

Beauvilliees  (Duchesse  de),  her  char¬
acter,  and  conduct  after  husband’s
death,  177-179.

Beeet  (Due  de),  puts  out  an  eye  of
M.  le  Duc  at  a  battue,  34,  35  ;  his
affliction  at  the  dauphine’s  death,  45  ;
his  position  as  to  the  renunciations,
89,  98,  99  ;  his  speech  before  parlia¬
ment,  110-113;  its  fiasco,  his  mortifi¬
cation,  113-116  ;  taken  ill,  138  ;  death
and  character,  140-142;  relations
with  his  wife,  142  ;  his  illness,  143.

Beeet  (Duchesse  de),  her  behaviour  on
Due  de  Berry’s  death,  139  ;  her  gal¬
lantries,  relief  at  his  death,  142,  143.

Bossuet  (Bishop  of  Meaux),  pre¬
vents  declaration  of  king’s  marriage
to  Mme.  de  Maintenon,  328  ;  obliges
king  to  dismiss  Mme.  de  Montespan,
328,  329.

Boudin  (physician),  warns  the  dau¬
phine  that  she  and  her  husband  will
be  poisoned,  32  ;  openly  accuses  Due

d’Orléans  of  poisoning  dauphin  and
dauphine.

Boufflees  (Maréchal  de),  death  and
character,  19-22;  grief  at  losing  the
king’s  regard,  21.

Boulainvillibes  (M.  de), foretells  day
of  king’s  death,  211,  212.

Bouegogne  (Due  de).  See  Dauphin.

Bouegogne  (Duchesse  de).  See  Dau¬
phine.

Beetagnb  (Duc  de),  the  little  dauphin,
dies,  66.

Catinat  (Nicolas,  Maréchal  de),  eulogy
and  death,  33,  34.

Chaeost  (Due  de),  appointed  captain
of  the  guards  at  dauphin’s  request,
23  ;  action  at  king’s  death,  276.

Cheveeuse  (Due  de),  his  death  and
parentage,  102;  character,  103,104;
anecdotes  of,  104,  106;  Chancellor
Pontchartrain’s  remark  on  the  two
dukes,  105  ;  the  devotion  of  the  two
to  each  other,  106.

Clement  XI.  (Pope),  the  bull  Unigen¬
itus  forced  from  him,  his  speech  to
Amelot,  119-122.

CoLBEET  (Jean-Baptiste),  father  of  the
Duchesses  de  Chevreuse  and  de  Beau-
villiers,  102.

CouET  (The),  consternation  of  Court,
Paris,  and  provinces  at  king’s  decla¬
ration  of  competency  of  his  bastards
for  the  throne,  149,  150,  167,  168.

Dauphin  (The),  his  interviews  and  con¬
fidences  with  Saint-Simon,  2-1 1  ;  is
drawn  by  Saint-Simon  towards  Due

342

INDEX.

d’Orléans,  15,  16;  occupied  with  the
affair  that  led  to  bull  Unigenitus,  18,
19  ;  king  turns  that  affair  over  to  him
wholly,  27,30;  is  warned  by  Philippe
V.  that  he  will  be  poisoned,  32  ;  an¬
guish  at  his  wife^s  death,  38,  46  ;  his
illness  and  death,  47-50;  believes
himself  poisoned,  48  ;  public  conster¬
nation,  48  ;  his  portrait  and  charac¬
ter,  50-57;  his  opinions,  57-64;  uni¬
versal  regret  for  his  death,  65  ;  the
pope  says  mass  for  him  himself,  65.

Dauphine  (The),  discovers  the  dauphin
and  Saint-Simon  together,  12,  13;  her
timid  distrust  of  dauphines  best
friends,  14  ;  warning  given  her  of
poison,  32  ;  goes  with  king  to  Marly,
34  ;  receives  a  box  of  snuff,  its  mys-

.  terious  disappearance,  35,  36  ;  her  ill¬
ness  and  death,  35-39;  her  portrait,
character,  and  life,  39-45.

Dubois  (GuiUaume,  Abbé,  afterwards
Cardinal),  portrait,  character,  222,
223  ;  infamous  training  of  Due  d’Or¬
léans,  224.

England  (Princess  Royal  of),  her  death,
82.

England  (Anne,  Queen  of),  death  of,
her  friendship  for  Louis  XIV.,  155.

Pagon  encourages  belief  that  the  dau-
])Iiin  and  dauphine  were  poisoned,
72,75.

Fénelon  (Archbishop  of  Cambrai),
death,  portrait,  career,  character,  and
hopes,  187-194.

Fleurt  (André-Hercule,  Abbé,  after¬
wards  Cardinal),  his  beginning,  194;
without  convictions,  persecutes  the
Jansenists  to  be  made  preceptor  of
little  dauphin,  194,  195.

Hamilton  (Duke  of),  appointed  ambas¬
sador  to  France,  but  is  killed  in  a
duel  with  Lord  Mohun,  100.

Lauzun  (Due  de),  his  remark  about
Voysin’s  absurdities,  147.

Louis  XIV.,  grief  at  the  death  of  the

dauphine,  45, 46, 48  ;  action  in  regard
to  slander  against  Due  d’Orleans,  80,
81  ;  resumes  his  usual  life,  81  ;  unwill¬
ing  to  allow  parliament  to  ratify  re¬
nunciations,  85,  86  ;  his  jealousy  of
authority,  86,  87,  109,  110;  his  ennui
after  the  dauphine’s  death,  106;  singu¬
lar  remark  about  Princesse  des  Ursins,
144  ;  regret  at  losing  Chancellor  Pont-
chartrain,  145  ;  declares  his  bastard
sons  competent  for  succession  to  the
throne  in  default  of  princes  of  the
blood,  147-150;  is  coerced  to  make  a
wiU,  how,  why,  and  by  whom,  156-
169  ;  gives  it  to  the  custody  of  parlia¬
ment,  extraordinary  speech  in  so  do¬
ing,  163,  164;  speech  to  Queen  of
England,  165;  his  health  begins  to
fail,  181, 183  ;  worried  by  the  troubles
of  the  bull  Unigenitus,  183  ;  undoubt¬
edly  the  author  of  Mme.  des  Ursins’
fall,  203  ;  is  deceived  and  pleased  with
a  sham  embassy  from  Persia,  206,
207,  209;  health  fails  visibly,  210;
urged  by  Père  Tellier  to  have  the
bull  enregistered,  212,  213;  indigna¬
tion  with  d’ Aguesseau  for  opposing
it,  213  ;  his  end  approaches,  255,  262  ;
journal  of  his  last  days,  264-279  ;
last  public  act,  264  ;  his  appetite,  266  ;
persists  in  working,  267,  268  ;  refuses
to  make  appointments  for  Père  Tel¬
lier,  269  ;  M.  du  Maine  and  Mme.
de  Maintenon  force  him  to  make
a  codicil  to  his  will,  270;  receives
the  last  sacraments,  shocking  fal¬
sity  to  the  Due  d’Orleans,  271,  272;
places  responsibility  to  God  for  his
church  actions  on  the  church  authori¬
ties,  272, 273  ;  takes  leave  of  courtiers,
273  ;  last  words  to  Maréchal  de  Ville-
roy  and  to  the  little  dauphin,  274;
affectionate  speech  to  Mme.  de  Main-
tenon,  275  ;  she  leaves  him  four  days
before  his  death,  276;  he  misses  her
and  sends  for  her,  277  ;  she  leaves
him  again  and  finally,  278  ;  his  death,
279  ;  his  character,  early  years,  vir¬
tues,  vices,  acts,  habits,  charm,  etc.,
280-303  ;  passion  for  building,  304  ;

INDEX.

343

delight  in  tyrannizing  over  nature,
305;  Versailles,  304^07  ;  Marly,  307-
310;  his  amours,  311-315;  Mme.  de
Mainteuon,  315  ;  his  early  dislike  to
her,  317  ;  how  she  supplanted  Mme.
de  Montespan,  318,  319;  his  marriage
to  her,  320  ;  his  ignorance,  323  ;  be¬
comes  devout,  324  ;  the  infamy  of  the
revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes,
325-327  ;  last  years,  333  ;  his  reverses
of  fortune,  334  ;  his  firmness  and  true
grandeur,  why  he  deserved  the  name
of  Great,  335  ;  reflections  on  his  last
acts,  336-338  ;  his  abandonment  in
his  last  hours,  339  ;  rejoicings  in
France  at  his  death,  were  they  justi¬
fied  1  340.

Luynes  (Due  de),  son  of  the  famous
Duchesse  de  Chevreuse,  a  recluse  at
Port-Royal,  102.

Madame  (Elisabeth  Charlotte,  Du¬
chesse  d’Orléans),  her  description  of
her  son,  the  Due  d’Orléans,  225.

Maine  (Due  du),  author  and  dissemi¬
nator  of  the  calumny  against  Due
d’Orléans,  73-76;  declared  by  king
competent  for  succession  to  the  throne,
147-150;  list  of  steps  by  which  the
king  had  raised  him,  150-152;  ap¬
pearance  before  parliament,  154,  155  ;
king’s  speech  to  him,  153  ;  coerces
the  king  to  make  a  will,  156-163;
obtains  from  king  complete  power
over  future  regent,  270;  jokes  about
a  circumstance  at  king’s  death-bed,
276  ;  having  obtained  all  he  wanted,
neglects  the  king,  277.

Maintenon  (Mme.  de),  says  openly
that  the  Due  d’Orléans  poisoned  the
dauphin  and  dauphine,  75  ;  efforts  to
amuse  the  king,  recalls  Villeroy  to
Court  for  that  purpose,  106,  107  ;  co¬
erces  king  to  make  a  will,  why  and
how,  156-163;  speech  of  king  to
Queen  of  England  aimed  at  her,  1 64,
165  ;  assists  Due  du  Maine  in  forcing
king  to  put  a  codicil  to  the  will,  270  ;
not'pleased  by  an  affectionate  speech
of  the  king  on  his  deathbed,  275  ;

leaves  the  king  four  days  before  his
death,  276  ;  king  sends  for  her,  leaves
him  again  and  retires  finally  to  Saint-
Cyr,  278;  her  history,  early  career,
how  she  supplanted  Mme.  de  Montes¬
pan,  315-319  ;  married  to  the  king,
320  ;  her  character,  321-323  ;  estab¬
lishes  Saint-Cyr,  327  ;  ardent  desire
for  recognition  of  her  marriage,  328  ;
resigns  herself  to  that  disappoint¬
ment,  329  ;  life  and  conduct,  329-331  ;
desire  to  play  a  part  in  ecclesiastical
affairs,  usefulness  to  her  of  the  bull
Unigenitus,  332,  333.

Maréchal  (surgeon),  denies  that  the
dauphin  and  dauphine  were  poisoned,
72, 75  ;  brave  defence  of  Due  d’Orléans
to  the  king  and  Mme.  de  Maintenon,
78,  80,  81  ;  warns  Mme.  de  Maintenon
of  king’s  failing  health,  her  anger  and
denial  of  it,  183.

Marly,  the  château  and  pavilions  of,
their  wretched  situation  and  cost,  307-
310.

Noailles  (Cardinal  de),  wicked  plot  of
the  Jesuits  against  him,  26-31  ;  his
slow,  gentle  behaviour  ruins  him,  29,
30.

Orléans  (Dued’)  efforts  of  Saint-Simon,
to  bring  him  and  dauphin  together,
14-17;  accused  of  poisoning  dauphin
and  dauphine,  70-78  ;  insulted  in  the
streets,  76,  77  ;  bad  advice  given  him
under  the  accusation,  78  ;  deserted  by
all  the  Court,  79  ;  his  position  as  to
the  renunciations,  89,  98,  99  ;  affliction
at  death  of  the  Due  de  Berry,  further
suspicions  of  him  in  connection  with
it,  143  ;  angry  at  king’s  declaration  of
competency  of  bastards  for  the  throne,
but  accepts  it  silently,  150;  his  opin¬
ion  about  bull  Unigenitus,  214,  215;
his  portrait  and  character,  216-221  ;
his  unfortunate  education  by  Dubois,
222-224  ;  his  ennui,  225  ;  character
continued,  225-228;  approves  Saint-
Simon’s  idea  of  councils,  242  ;  cour¬
tiers  begin  to  seek  him  as  the

344

INDEX.

king’s  death  approaches,  255;  ap¬
proves  of  Saint-Simon’s  request  to
convoke  the  States-General,  then
weakens,  261  ;  courtiers  crowd  and
then  desert  his  apartment  in  view  of
king’s  death  or  recovery,  277.

Orléans  (Duchesse  d’),  portrait  and
character,  228  ;  efforts  to  recover  from
alienation  of  the  Court,  229,  230  ;  en¬
deavours  to  discover  Saint-Simon’s
future  course  in  reference  to  her
brother,  the  Due  du  Maine,  230,  231,
256,  257.

Philippe  V.  (of  Spain),  warns  his
brother  the  dauphin  that  he  will  be  poi¬
soned,  37  ;  royal  grief  at  death  of  his
wife,  Louise  de  Savoie,  134  ;  denies
the  idea  of  marrying  Princesse  des
Ursins,  137  ;  his  marriage  with  Eliza¬
beth  Parnese,  Princess  of  Parma,  and
heartless  treatment  of  Mme.  des  Ur-
sins,  196-202.

PoNTCHAETEAiN  (Chancellor),  retires
from  active  life,  his  motives,  144-146.

Renunciations  (The),  history  of,  84-
101  ;  the  Peace  of  Utrecht  dependent
on  them,  84  ;  merely  registered  by  par¬
liament,  110;  scene  on  that  occasion,
112-114.

Saint-Simon  (Due  de),  change  in  his
relations  to  dauphin,  1  ;  their  inter¬
views  and  discussions  on  matters  of
State,  2-1 1  ;  unexpected  interruption,
12,  13  ;  endeavours  to  bring  the  Due
d’Orléans  and  dauphin  together,  14-
17;  his  memorial  showing  degrada¬
tion  of  peerage,  17,  18;  rescues  a
dangerous  paper  from  Maréchal  de
Boufflers,  20  ;  asks  for  post  of  captain
of  the  guards,  but  is  pleased  when
Due  de  Charost  gets  it,  22,  23  ;  Due
de  Beauvilliers  and  dauphin  wish  him
to  be  governor  of  the  Due  de  Bre¬
tagne,  23,  24  ;  ordered  by  dauphin  to
study  the  questions  of  the  Gallican
Church  and  report  to  him,  30  ;  last
interview  with  the  dauphin,  47  ;  his

anguish,  47,  50  ;  condition  of  mind  at
dauphin’s  death,  68,  69,  77  ;  fear  lest
the  king  should  see  his  papers  in
dauphin’s  desk,  68-70  ;  warned  by  all
his  friends,  but  persists  in  being
faithful  to  the  Due  d’Orle'ans,  79,  80  ;
forcibly  urged  to  leave  the  Court  for
a  time,  does  so,  82,  84  ;  his  services
in  connection  with  renunciations^
88-93  ;  extraordinary  submission  to
Due  de  BeauviUiers,  96-98  ;  amaz¬
ing  interviews  with  Père  Tellier  on
the  bull  Unigenitus,  125-133;  hears
of  king’s  declaration  of  competency
of  his  bastards  to  the  throne,  147-
149  ;  visits  the  Due  du  Maine,  149,
150;  Due  de  Beauvilliers  proposes
to  share  with  him  the  education
of  the  little  dauphin,  his  reply,  169-
171;  grief  and  loss  on  the  death
of  the  Due  de  Beauvilliers,  179-
181;  Père  Tellier’s  proposal  to  him,
184-186  ;  how  he  meant,  as  peer,  to
act  on  registration  of  the  bull  by  par¬
liament,  214, 215  ;  tells  Due  d’Orléans
a  home  truth,  219,  220  ;  Duchesse
d’Orléans  endeavours  to  ascertain  his
course  after  king’s  death,  230,  231  ;
reflections  on  the  future,  234  ;  on
present  government  and  that  which
ought  to  be  established,  235,  236  ;
brief  review  of  the  past,  showing  de¬
gradation  of  nobles,  237,  238  ;  his  life¬
long  sentiments  on  this  subject,  239  ;
his  views  of  how  to  remedy  it,  240  ;
advises  Due  d’Orléans  to  form  coun¬
cils,  241  ;  this  plan,  accepted  by  Due
de  Bourgogne,  is  afterwards  used,
though  weakened,  under  regency,

241,  242;  Due  d’Orléans  proposes  to
make  him  head  of  council  of  finance,

242,  243  ;  refuses,  why,  243-246  ;  is
chosen  by  Due  d’Orléans  for  Council
of  Regency,  247  ;  urges  Due  d’Orléans
to  be  prepared  for  immediate  action
on  king’s  death,  248  ;  advice  as  to
education  of  young  king,  249  ;  desires
convocation  of  States-General,  why,
251-255  ;  courtiers  begin  to  seek  him,
256  ;  Duchesse  d’Orléans  questions

INDEX.

345

him,  256,  257,  262,  263  ;  endeavours
to  escape  all  snares,  257  ;  monstrous
proposition  of  Maisons,  258-261.

Saint-Simon  (Mme.  de),  helps  and  com¬
forts  the  Due  de  Berry  about  his
speech  in  parliament,  110,  115,  116.

SÉVIGNÉ  (Marquis  de),  death  of,  a
clumsy  mixture  of  his  mother’s  charm
and  his  sister’s  affectation,  117.

Sheewsbukt  (Earl  of),  appointed  am¬
bassador  to  France  in  place  of  Duke  of
Hamilton,  101  ;  personal  history,  107,
108  ;  present  at  the  registration  of
renunciations,  112.

Sheewsbdet  (Countess  of),  her  por¬
trait,  does  what  Louis  XIV.  could  not
succeed  in  doing,  108.

Spain  (Louise  de  Savoie,  Queen  of),  her
death,  133,  134.

Spain  (Elizabeth  Farnese,  Queen  of),
married  to  Philippe  V.  by  the  agency
of  Mme.  des  Ursins,  137  ;  her  ex¬
traordinary  treatment  of  Mme.  des
Ursins,  196,  197,  202.

Tellier  (Père),  his  infamous  plot
against  Cardinal  de  Noailles,  laid
bare,  28,  29;  deep  and  dangerous
manoeuvres,  117;  origin  of  the  bull
Unigenitus,  118-124;  his  extraordi¬
nary  interview  with  Saint-Simon  on
this  subject,  125-133;  makes  a  pro¬
posal  to  Saint-Simon,  184-186;  neg¬
lects  the  king  on  his  deathbed,  276,
277,  278.

Tontine,  origin  of  the  thing  and  the
name,  33.

Toulouse  (Comte  de),  his  reluctant
appearance  before  parliament,  154.

Unigenitus  (bull),  origin  of,  117,  118,
119;  by  whom  prepared  and  forced
upon  the  pope,  120-122  ;  anger  of  the
cardinals,  122;  outcry  in  France,  123,
124;  horrors  resulting,  133;  impossi¬
bility  of  getting  it  accepted  in  France,
183-186.

Ursins  (Princesse  des),  her  project  for
becoming  an  independent  sovereign,
24;  builds  Chanteloup  mysteriously,
25,  26  ;  her  position  with  king  and
Mme.  de  Maintenon  lost,  134,  135;
her  behaviour  after  death  of  Queen  of
Spain,  136;  her  scheme  in  marrying
Philippe  V.  to  a  Princess  of  Parma,
137  ;  singular  remark  of  the  king
about  her,  144  ;  her  fall,  extraordinary
treatment  by  the  new  Queen  of  Spain,
her  cruel  arrest  and  journey,  196-202  ;
evidently  the  work  of  Louis  XIV.,
202,  203  ;  arrival  in  Paris,  203  ;  inter¬
view  lasting  ten  hours  with  Saint-
Simon,  204,  205  ;  retires  to  Italy,
206.

Utrecht  (The  Peace  of),  signing,  and
rejoicings,  116.

Vase  (Abbé  de),  declines  a  bishopric,

81.

Versailles  (Château  de),  its  wretched
situation  and  cost,  304-310.

ViLLEROY  (Maréchal  de),  Mme.  de
Maintenon  has  him  recalled  to  Court
to  amuse  the  king,  106,  107  ;  appear¬
ance  at  the  Council  in  place  of  Due  de
Beauvilliers,  182;  fastens  upon  Saint-
Simon  to  discover  his  future  course
towards  Due  du  Maine,  231,  232  ;
portrait  and  character,  232-234.

K  ff.  '

4  ' ..  :

•  «.  ..  W  f  ’.  '  ■  ^

•  ■  ‘■'>  "  '  1^.  -  %

/■,  ■-;  •■,

>  •;  .«  *v

♦  '  ^  j  ^  ♦  V  ••  -  v  V  •  f  y  «

^  >  X  1

:.y

V,»  .  ^  j

‘.*1  'itr*.  ■  ■  V  VI--:

''V^.  ''‘'

■  .  ..

f.' .

I-

‘  i  I .?  '  -»'■  #-'l  •

.  •;.  ‘  >  j  :

•  •  •_  '  •

'  rtf'.'.'i-'  ••'  .’  '

• .  •.*•  ?*■  ?y  >  »  j

‘.•v.*.^.-:  t.ii  ■

■  •  <  «  “  »  J  I  ■

•  i  ..  <-,»■«

•  •.  ,'  '.•'  y/rt  i  '  1

^«4  ,*

-  '.I  .

tsi  <  ■#

è  -«J  y  i  .h^t  '.  '  f  ' /)  V

'-  •.  .  ■  «  /m*)  ;.  ■

*  ’  I  wr

•  >-i  }  1.  .

•:.  .f^l

y>  ff  111'.,  <
*'  Î

'V  1  ,

.  ,4..v  *  ■"  .

-  é

.f

.ii  I  .,

•*|  »  4  •  I  .  J  •

.•'.  r

.  rj

V  «

’■'  f'S).  !.  ■■ .

.  I  I

y'-

ifiri^’it  rf'iVfiVfi  I  I  'iii  *Mr/h  .

Date  Due

V,',  ,  . .

fiM

l\.

W  ^  4  ■■%  h.  -  ^r..

.  V.'  \  ^  ■
'"■]  ^  '■■:  '

DC  130  .52  A4  1909  ^3

Saint  Simon,  Louis  de  Rou  010101  uuu

Memoirs  of  the  P^p,/ ®  j  *n|‘  ji  m  ii  i  iji

0

I  1163  0201117  0

TRENT  UNIVERSITY

'■:’  >

■•  i  '  ,,  ♦'•'

V  ’  1.  '  'v

'  \  '*•

1

5  /7%<;  ',.

w  '

R.  ■■  .

_  Ü  .

n. ,  !

■  -  '

,J

J'IVV  f-'

f  ¥

M

C130  ^a^de  Rouvroy

SUro’.  X  .UC  ae  SaLnC-

noti.  «  ♦

1

f  'l  ,•  k  '  -

1

■  /■'  .:

•  .  •  '  J

-

■  V  ^

ry*-.  ;'•  ;  >  /':

1

;.M'7

V
