Salaman and Absal (Jami (trans. Edward FitzGerald), 1856)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1856 first edition (https://archive.org/details/salmnandabslana00jmgoog). FitzGerald's rendering of Jami's Sufi allegory, from the translator of the Rubaiyat.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


at |http : //books . google . com/


</


, ^ . 2o


Cj ♦


Digitized by CjOOQ IC


Digitized by LjOOQIC


L


Digitized by VljOOQIC


Digitized by LjOOQIC


^u t/^' Oy /t^/tty, a/?^<i!y ^^Zn '£ //t^- : ':\lC<^ /'


Digitized by CjOOQIC


SALAMAN AND ABSAL.


AN ALLEGORY.


IBANSLATED FROX THE FEKSIAN


J AMI.


LONDON:
J. "W. PAEKEB AND SON, WEST STEAND.


MDOCCLTI.


Digitized byCjOOQlC


JOHN CHILDS AND SON, BUNGAY.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


Mt deae Cowell,

Two years ago, when we began (I for the first time)
to read this Poem together, I wanted you to translate it, as
something that should interest a few who are worth inter-
esting. You, however, did not see the way clear then, and
had Aristotle pulling you by one Shoulder and Prakrit
Vararuchi by the other, so as indeed to have hindered you
up to this time completing a Version of Hafiz' best Odes
which you had then happily begun. So, continuing to like
old Jdmi more and more, I must try my hand upon him ;
and here is my reduced Version of a small Original. "What
Scholarship it has is yours, my Master in Persian and so
much beside; who are no further answerable for all than
by well liking and wishing publisht what you may scarce
have Leisure to find due fault with.

Had all the Poem been like Parts, it would have been all
translated, aaoid in such Prose lines as you measure Hafiz in,
and such as any one should adopt who does not feel himself
so much of a Poet as him he translates and some he trans-
lates for— before whom it is best to lay the raw material as
genuine as may be, to work up to their own better Fancies.
But, unlike Hafiz' best — (whose Sonnets are sometimes as
close packt as Shakespeare's, which they resemble in more


Digitized by CjOOQIC


IV


ways than one) — Jdmi, you know, like his Countrymen ge-
nerally, is very diffuse in what he tells and his way of tell-
ing it. The very structure of the Persian Couplet — (here,
like people on the Stage, I am repeating to you what you
know, with an Eye to the small Audience beyond) — so often
ending with the same "Word, or Two Words, if but the fore-
going Syllable secure a lawful Ehyme, so ofben makes the
Second Line but a slightly varied Eepetition, or Modifica-
tion of the First, and gets slowly over Ground often hardly
worth gaining. This iteration is common indeed to the He-
brew Psalms and Proverbs^ — ^where, however, the Value of
the Eepetition is different. In your Hafiz also, not Two
only, but Eight or Ten Lines perhaps are tied to the same
Close of Two— or Three — words; a verbal Ingenuity as
much valued in the East as better Thought. And how
many of all the Odes called his, more and fewer in various
'Copies, do you yourself care to deal withP — ^And in the
better ones how often some lines, as I think for this reason,
imworthy of the Eest — ^interpolated perhaps from the Mouths
of his many Devotees, Mystical and Sensual— or crfept into
Manuscripts of which he never arranged or corrected one
from the First ?

This, together with the confined Action of Persian Gram-
mar, whose organic simplicity seems to me its difficulty
when applied, makes J;he Line by Line Translation of a
Poem not line by line precious tedious in proportion to its


Digitized by CjOOQIC


length. Especially — (what the Sonnet does not feel) — in
the Narrative ; which I found when once eased in its Collar,
and yet missing somewhat of rhythmical Amble, somehow,
and not without resistance on my part, swerved into that
" easy road " of Verse — easiest as unbeset with any exigen-
cies of Ehyme. Those little Stories, too, which you thought
imtractable, but which have their Use as well as Humour by
way of quaint Interlude Music between the little Acts, felt
iU at ease in solemn Lowth-Isaiah Prose, and had leam'd
their tune, you know, before even Hiawatha came to teach
people to quarrel about it. Till, one part drawing on an-
other, the "Wliole grew to the present form.

As for the much bodily omitted — it may be readily guess-
ed that an Asiatic of the 15th Century might say much on
such a subject that an Englishman of the 19th would not
care to read. Not that our Jami is ever licentuyus like his
Contemporary Chaucer, nor like Chaucer's Posterity in^
Times that called themselves more Civil. But better Men
will not now endure a simplicity of Speech that Worse men
abuse. Then the many more, and foolisher, Stories — pre-
liminary Te Deums to Allah and Allah's-shadow Shah —
very much about Alef Noses, Eyebrows like inverted Nuns,
drunken Narcissus Eyes — and that eternal Moon Eace
which never wanes from Persia — of all which there is surely
enough in this Glimpse of the Original. No doubt some
Oriental character escapes — the Story sometimes becomes


Digitized by CjOOQIC


too Skin and Bone without due interval of even Stupid and
Bad. Of the two Evils ? — At least what I have chosen is
least in point of bulk ; scarcely in proportion with the length
of its Apology which, as usual, probably discharges one's own
Conscience at too great a Price ; people at once turning
against you the Arms they might have wanted had you not
laid them down. However it may be with this, I am sure a
complete Translation — even in Prose — ^would not have been
a readable one— which, after aU, is a useful property of
most Books, even of Poetry.

In studying the Original, you know, one gets contentedly
carried over barren Ground in a new Land of Language —
excited by chasing any new Game that will but show Sport ;
the most worthless to win asking perhaps all the sharper
Energy to pursue, and so far yielding all the more Satis-
faction when run down. Especially, cheer' d on as I was by
•such a Huntsman as poor Dog of a Persian Scholar never
hunted with before ; and moreover — but that was rather in
the Spanish Sierras — ^by the Presence of a Lady in the Eield,
silently brightening about us like Aurora's Self, or chiming
in with musical Encouragement that all we started and ran
down must be Eoyal G^me !

Ah, happy Days ! When shall we Three meet again —
when dip in that unretuming Tide of Time and Circum-
stance ! — In those Meadows far from the World, it seemed,
as Saldm4n's Island — ^before an Iron Eailway broke the


Digitized by CjOOQIC


Heart of that Happy Valley whose Gossip was the Mill-
wheel, and Visitors the Summer Airs that momentarily
ruffled the sleepy Stream that turned it as they chased one
another over to lose themselves in "Whispers in the Copse
beyond. Or returning — I suppose you remember whose
Lines they are —

When Winter Skies were ting'd with Crimson still
Where Thombush nestles on the quiet hill.
And the live Amber round the setting Sun,
Lighting the Labourer home whose Work is done,
Bum'd like a Golden Angel-ground above
The solitary Home of Peace and Love —

at such an hour drawing home together for a fireside Night
of it with ^schylus or Calderon in the Cottage, whose walls,
modest almost as those of the Poor who cluster' d — and with
good reason — round, make to my Eyes the Tower' d Crown
of Oxford hanging in the Horizon, and with all Honour
won, but a dingy Vapour in Comparison. And now, should
they beckon from the terrible Ganges, and this little Book
begun as a happy Eecord of past, and pledge perhaps of
Future, Fellowship in Study, darken already with the sha-
dow of everlasting Farewell !

But to turn from you Two to a Public — ^nearly as numer-
ous — (with whom, by the way, this Letter may die without a
name that you know very well how to supply), — here is
the best I could make of Jdmi's Poem — " Ouvrage de peu
d'^tendue," says the Biographic TJniverselle, and, whatever


Digitized by CjOOQIC


vm


that means, here collapsed into a nutshell Epic indeed;
whose Story however, if nothing else, may interest some
Scholars as one of Persian Mysticism — perhaps the grand
Mystery of all Eeligions — ^an Allegory fairly devised and
carried out — dramatically culminating as it goes on; and
told as to this day the East loves to tell her Story, illus-
trated by Fables and Tales, so often (as we read in the latest
Travels) at the expense of the poor Arab of the Desert.

The Proper Names — ^and some other "Words peculiar to
the East — are printed as near as may be to their native
shape and sound — "Sulayman" for Solomon — " Tusuf " for
Joseph, &c., as being not only more musical, but retaining
their Oriental flavour unalloyed with European Association.
The accented Vowels are to be pronounced long, as in
Italian — Saldmdn — ^Abs41 — Shirin, &c.

The Original is in rhymed Couplets of this measure —
«^ 1-^ l-^-l I

which those who like Monkish Latin may remember in

Dum Salami verba Regis cogitat,
Pectus intrCi de profundis sstuat.

or in English— by way of asking, "your Clemency for us
and for our Tragedy " —

Of Sal&m&n and of Abs&l hear the Song;
Little wants Man here below, nor little long.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


LIFE OF JiMI.


[7 Jvope the following disproportionate Notice of JamVs Life toill be
amusing enough to excuse its length. I found most of it at the last
moment in Rosenztoeig* s " Biographische Notizen ** of Jami, from
whose own, and Commentator* s. Works it purports to be gathered.]

NuRUDDiN Abdurrahman, Son of Maulana Nizamuddin * Ah-
med, and descended on the Mother's side from One of the Four great
"Fathers'* of Islamism, was born a. h. 817, a. d. 1414, in Jam, a
little Town of Khorasan, whither (according to the Heft Aklim —
" Seven Climates ") his Grandfather had migrated from Desht of
Ispahan, and from which the Poet ultimately took his Takhalus,
or Poetic name, Jami. This word also signifies " A Cup j "
wherefore, he says, " Bom in J4m, and dipt in the " Jdm " of Holy
Lore, for a double reason I must be called Jami in the Book of
Song." He was celebrated afterwards in other Oriental Titles —
" Lord of Poets "— ** Elephant of Wisdom," &c., but often liked to
call himself " The Ancient of Herat," where he mainly resided.

When Five Years old he received the name of Nuruddin — the
" Light of Faith," and even so early began to show the Metal, and
take the Stamp that distinguished him through Life. In 1419, a
famous Sheikh, Khwajah Mehmed Parsa, then in the last Year of
his Life, was being carried through Jam. " I was not then Five
Years old," says Jami, "and my Father, who with his Friends
went forth to salute him, had me carried on the Shoulders of one


» Such final uddins signify " op the Faith."
taken as ** Master" in Learning, Law, &c.

b


" MaulAna " may be


Digitized by CjOOQIC


LIFE OF jAmI.


of the Family and set down before the Litter of the Sheikh, who
gave a Nosegay into my hand. Sixty Years have passed, and me-
thinks I now see before me-the bright Image of the Holy Man, and
feel the Blessing of his Aspect, from which I date my after Devo-
tion to that Brotherhood in which I hope to be enrolled.**

So again, when Maulana Fakhruddin Loristani had alighted at
his Mother's house — " I was then so little that he set me upon his
Knee, and ^ith his Fingers drawing the Letters of * Ali * and
* Omar * in the Air, laughed delightedly to hear me spell them.
He also by his Goodness sowed in my Heart the Seed of his Devo-
tion, which has grown to Increase within me — in which I hope to
live, and in which to die. Oh God! Dervish let me live, and
Dervish die ; and in the Company of the Dervish do Thou quicken
me to Life again!**

Jami first went to a School at Herat; and afterward to one
founded by the Great Timur at Samarcand. There he not only
outstript his Fellows in the very Encyclopaedic Studies of Persian
Education, but even puzzled the Doctors in Logic, Astronomy, and
Theology ; who, however, with unresenting Gravity welcomed him
— "Lo! a new Light added to our Galaxy!** — In the wider Field
of Samarcand he might have liked to remain ; but Destiny liked
otherwise, and a Dream recalled him to Herat. A Vision of the
Great Sufi Master there, Mehmed Saaduddin Kaschgari, of the
Nakshbend Order of Dervishes, appeared to him in his Sleep, and
bade him return to One who would satisfy all Desire. Jami went
back to Herat ; he saw the Sheikh discoursing with his Disciples
by the Door of the Great Mosque ; day after day passed by with-
out daring to present himself; but the Master's Eye was upon
him; day by day draws him nearer and nearer — till at last the
Sheikh announces to those about him — "Lo! this Day have I
taken a Falcon in my Snare !**

Under him Jami began his Sufi Noviciate, with such Devotion,
and under such Fascination from the Masted, that going, he tells


Digitized by CjOOQIC


LIFE OF jAmI.


US, but for one Summer Day's Holiday into the Country, one
single Line was enough to " lure the Tassel-gentle back again ; *'

** Lo ! here am I, and Thou look'st on the^Rose ! "

By and bye he withdraws, by course of Sufi Instruction, into
Solitude so long and profound, that on his Return to Men he has
almost lost the Power of Converse with them. At last, when duly
taught, and duly authorized to teach as Sufi Doctor, he yet will not,
though solicited by those who had seen such a Vision of Him as
had drawn Himself to Herat; and not till the Evening of his Life
is he to be seen with White hairs taking that place by the Mosque
which his departed Master had been used to occupy before.

Meanwhile he had become Poet, which no doubt winged his
Reputation and Doctrine far and wide through Nations to whom
Poetry is a vital Element of the Air they breathe. " A Thousand
times," he says, " I have repented of such Employment ; but I
could no more shirk it than one can shirk what the Pen of Fate
has written on his Forehead" — " As Poet I have resounded through
the World ; Heaven filled itself with my Song, and the Bride of
Time adorned her Ears and Neck with the Pearls of my Verse,
whose coming Caravan the Persian Hafiz and Saadi came forth
gladly to salute, and the Indian Khosru and Hasan hailed as a
Wonder of the World." " The Kings of India and Rum greet me
by Letter : the Lords of Irak and Tabriz load me with Gifts ; and
what shall I say of those of Khoras4n, who drown me in an Ocean
of Munificence?"

This, though Oriental, is scarcely Bombast. J^mi was honoured
by Princes at home and abroad, and at the very time they were
cutting one another's Throats ; by his own Sultan Abou Said ; by
Hasan Beg of Mesopotamia — "Lord of Tabriz" — by whom Abou
Said was defeated, dethroned, and slain; by Mahomet II. of
Turkey — " King of Rum" — who in his turn defeated Hasan; and
lastly by Husein Mirza Baikara, who extinguished the Prince


Digitized by CjOOQIC


Xii LIFE OP jImI.


whom Hasan had set up in Abou's Place at Herat. Such is the
House that Jack builds in Persia.

As Hasan Beg, however — the Usuncassan of old European An-
nals — ^is singularly connected with the present Poem, and with
probably the most important event in Jami*s Life, I will briefly fol-
low the Steps that led to that as well as other Princely Intercourse.

In A. H. 877, A. D. 1472, Jami set off on his Pilgrimage to
Mecca. He, and, on his Account, the Caravan he went with, were
honourably and safely escorted through the intervening Countries
by order of their several Potentates as far as Bagdad. There
Jami fell into trouble by the Treachery of a Follower he had re-
proved, and who (bom 400 Years too soon) misquoted Jami's Verse
into disparagement of Alt, the Darling Imam of Persia. This
getting wind at Bagdad, the thing was brought to solemn Tribunal,
at which Hasan Beg*s two Sons assisted. Jami came victoriously
off; his Accuser pilloried with a dockt Beard in Bagdad Market-
place : but the Poet was so ill pleased with the stupidity of those
who believed the Report, that, standing in Verse upon the Tigris'
side, he calls for a Cup of Wine to seal up Lips of whose Utter-
ance the Men of Bagdad were unworthy.

After 4 months' stay there, during which he visits at Helleh the
Tomb of All's Son Husein, who had fallen at Kerbela, he sets
forth again — to Najaf, where he says his Camel sprang forward
at sight of All's own Tomb— crosses the Desert in 22 days, medi-
tating on the Prophet's Glory, to Medina; and so at last to Mecca,
where, as he sang in a Ghazal, he went through all Mahommedan
Ceremony with a Mystical Understanding of his Own.

He then turns Homeward : is entertained for 45 days at Damas-
cus, which he leaves the very Day before the Turkish Mahomet's
Envoys come with 5000 Ducats to carry him to Constantinople.
Arriving at Amida, the Capital of Mesopotamia (Diyajf bakar), he ^
finds War broken out in full Flame between that Mahomet and
Hasan Beg, King of the Country, who has Jami honourably


Digitized by CjOOQIC


LIFE OP JAMI.


xni


escorted through the dangerous Roads to Tabriz; there receives
him in Divan, "frequent and full** of Sage and Noble (Hasan
being a great Admirer of Learning), and would fain have him abide
at Court awhile. Jami, however, is intent on Home, and once
more seeing his aged Mother — for he is turned of Sixty ! — and at
last touches Herat in the Month of Schaaban, 1473, after the
Average Year's absence.

This is the Hasan, " in Name and Nature Handsome ^ (and so
described by some Venetian Ambassadors of the Time), of whose
protection Jiimi speaks in the Preliminary Vision of this Poem,
which he dedicates to Hasan's Son, Yacub Beg : who, after the due
murder of an Elder Brother, succeeded to the Throne ; till all the
Dynasties of " Black and White Sheep" together were swept away a
few years after by Ismael, Pounder of the Sofi Dynasty in Persia.

Arrived at home, Jami finds Husein Mirza Baikara, last of
the TimuridcB, fast seated there ; having probably slain ere Jami
went the Prince whom Hasan had set up ; but the date of a Year
or Two may well wander in the Bloody Jungle of Persian History.
Husein, however, receives Jami with open Arms ; Nisamuddin Ali
Schir, his Vizir, a Poet too, had hailed in Verse the Poet's Advent
from Damascus as " The Moon rising in the West;" and they bbth
continued affectionately to honour him as long as he lived.

Jami sickened of his mortal Illness on the 13th of Moharrem,
1492 — a Sunday. His Pulse began to fail on the following Friday,
about the Hour of Morning Prayer, and stopped at the very mo-
ment when the Muezzin began to call to Evening. He had hved
Eighty-one Years. Sultan Husein undertook the Burial of one
whose Glory it was to have Hved and died in Dervish Poverty ;
the Dignities of the Kingdom followed him to the Grave ; where
20 days afterward was recited in presence of the Sultan and his
Court an Eulogy composed by the Vizir, who also laid the first
Stone of a Monument to his Friend's Memory — ^the first Stone of
**Tarbet'i Jami," in the Street of Mesched, a principal Thoro'fare


Digitized by LjOOQIC


Xiv LIFE OF jImI.


of the City of Herat For, says Rosenzweig, it must be kept in
mind that Jami was reverenced not only as a Poet and Philosopher,
but as a Saint also ; who not only might work a Miracle himself,
but leave the Power lingering about his Tomb. It was known that
once in his Life, an Arab, who had falsely accused him of selling
a Camel he knew to be mortally unsound, had very shortly after
died, as Jami had predicted, and on the very selfsame spot where
the Camel felL And that Libellous Rogue at Bagdad — ^he, put-
ting his hand into his Horse's Nose-bag to see if "das Thier" has
finisht his Com, had his Fore-finger bitten off by the same — " von
demselben der Zeigefinger abgebissen'* — of which "Verstiimm-
lung" he soon died— I suppose, as he ought, of Lock-jaw.

The Persians, who are adepts at much elegant Ingenuity, are fond
of commemorating Events by some analogous Word or Sentence
whose Letters, cabalistically corresponding to certain Numbers,
compose the Date required. In Jami's case they have hit upon the
word " Kas," a Cup, whose signification brings his own name to
Memory, and whose relative Letters make up his 81 years. They
have Tariks also for remembering the Year of his Death : Rosenz-
weig gives some ; but Ouseley the prettiest, if it will hold —

* Ddd az Khoras&n bar 4med —

" The smoke " of Sighs " went up from Khor^s^n."

No Biographer, says Rosenzweig cautiously, records of Jami
that he had more than one Wife (Grand-daughter of his Master
Sheikh) and Four Sons ; which, however, are Five too many for
the Doctrine of this Poem. Of the Sons, Three died Infant ; and
the Fourth (bom to him in very old Age), and for whom he wrote
some Elementary Tracts, and the more famous " Beharistan," lived
but a few years, and was remembered by his Father in the Preface
to his Chiradnameh Iskander — a book of Morals, which perhaps
had also been begun for the Boy's Instruction.

Of Jami's wonderful Fruitfulness — " bewunderangswerther
Fruchtbarkeit'* — as Writer, Rosenzweig names Forty-four off-


Digitized by CjOOQIC


LIFE OF jImT.


XV


springs — the Letters of the word " Jam'* completing by the aforesaid
process that very Number. But Shir Khan Ludi in his " Memoirs
of the Poets," says Ouseley, counts him Author of Ninety-nine
Volumes of Grammar, Poetry, and Theology, which " continue to
be universally admired in all parts of the Eastern World, Iran,
Turan, and Hindustan" — copied some of them into precious Manu-
script, illuminated with Gold and Painting, by the greatest Penmen
and Artists of the Time ; one such— the " Beharistan" — said to have
cost some Thousands of Pounds — autographed as one most precious
treasure of their Libraries by two Sovereign Descendants of TmtiR
upon the Throne of Hindustan ; and now reposited away from " the
Drums and Tramphngs** of Oriental Conquest in the tranquil
Seclusion of an English Library.

Of these Ninety-nine, or Forty-four, Volumes few* are known,
and none except the Present and one other Poem ever printed, in
England, where the knowledge of Persian might have been politi-
cally useful. The Poet's name with us is almost solely associated with
his " YusuF AND ZuLAiKHA," which, with the other two I have men-
tioned, count Three of the Brother Stars of that Constellation into
which Jami, or his Admirers, have clustered his Seven best Mys-
tical Poems under the name of " Heft Aurang "—those " Seven
Thrones " to which we of the West and North give our charac-
teristic Name of " Great Bear" and " Charles's Wain."

He must have enjoyed great Favour and Protection from his
Princes at home, or he would hardly have ventured to write so
freely as in this Poem he does of t)octrine which exposed the
Sufi to vulgar abhorrence and Danger. Hafiz and others are
apologized for as having been obliged to veil a Divinity beyond
what " The Prophet" dreamt of under the Figure of Mortal Cup
and Cup-beai'er. Jami speaks in Allegory too, by way of making
a palpable grasp at the Skirt of the Ineffable ; but he also dares,
in the very thick of Mahommedanism, to talk of Reason as sole
Fountain of Prophecy ; and to pant for what would seem so Pan-


Digitized by CjOOQIC


LIFE OF JAMI.


thcistic an Identification with the Deity as shall blind him to any
distinction between Good and Evil.^

I must not forget one pretty passage of J ami's Life. He had a
nephew, one Maul4na Abdullah, who was ambitious of following his
Uncle's Footsteps in Poetry. J Ami first dissuaded him ; then, by
way of trial whether he had a Talent as well as a Taste, bid him
imitate Firdusi's Satire on Shah Mahmud. The Nephew did so well,
that Jami then encouraged him to proceed ; himself wrote the first
Couplet of his First (and most noted) Poem — Laila and Majnun —

This Book of which the Pen has now laid the Foundation,
May the diploma of Acceptance one day befall it, —

and Abdallah went on to write that and four other Poems which
Persia continues and multiplies in fine Manuscript and Illumina-
tion to the present day, remembering their Author under his
Takhalus of Hatifi — " The Voice from Heaven" — and Last of the
80 reputed Persian Poets,

^ " Je me souviens d*im Fr^dicateur a Ispahan qui, prSchant un jour dans
une Place publique, parla furieusement contre ces Soufys, disant qu'ils
6toient des Ath^es a bruler ; qu' il s' ^tonnoit qu' on les laiss&t yivre ; et
que de tuer un Soufy 6toit une Action plus agr^able a Dieu que de con-
serrer la Vie a dix Hommes de Bien. Cinq ou Six Soufys qui ^toient
parmi les Auditeurs se jetterent sur lui apres le Sermon et le battirent ter-
riblement ; et comme je m* effor^ois de les emp^cher ils me disoieut — * Un
homme qui pr^che le Meurtre doit-il se plaindre d' dtre battu ? * "—CJiardin,

gg I - =!


ERRATA.

Page 1 (Note). For Sect XXI. read Sect. XX.

— 3 (Note). For Sect. XX. read Sect. XIX.

— 13 (Note). For Isaiah xt. read xxxt.

— 35, line 6. Dele comma after Fortune's Shadoir.

— 69, line 14. Read, And Join with Thee true Men to keep the Flock.

The several Spellings of some Proper Names, especially the Prophet's, in Memoir 'and
Appendix, must be excused by the seTeral Writers they are quoted from.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


SALAMAN AND ABSAL


PROLOGUE.


Oh Thou whose Memory quickens Lovers' Souls,
Whose Fount of Joy renews the Lover's Tongue,
Thy Shadow falls across the World, and They
Bow down to it ; and of the Rich in Beauty
Thou art the Riches that make Lovers mad.
Not tiU thy Secret Beauty through the Cheek
Of Laila smite does she inflame Majnun,^
And not tiU Thou have sugared Shirin's Lip
The Hearts of those Two Lovers fill with Blood. ^
For Lov'd and Lover are not but by Thee,
Nor Beauty ; — ^Mortal Beauty but the Veil


1 All well-known Types of Eastern Lovers.
Suitors figure in Sect. XXI.

B


SmRiN and her


Digitized by CjOOQIC


SALibfiN AND ABSAl.


Thy Heavenly hides behind, and from itself

Feeds, and our Hearts yearn after as a Bride

That glances past ns Veil'd — but ever so

As none the Beauty from the Veil may know.

How long wilt thou continue thus the World

To cozen ^ with the Fantom of a Veil

From which Thou only peepest ? — Time it is

To unfold thy perfect Beauty. I would be

Thy Lover, and Thine only — I, mine Eyes

SeaPd in the Light of Thee to all but Thee,

Yea, in the Revelation of Thyself

Self-Lost, and Conscience-quit of Good and Evil.

Thou movest under all the Forms of Truth,

Under the Forms of all Created Things ;

Look whence I will, still nothing I discern

But Thee in all the Fniverse, in which

Thyself Thou dost invest, and through the Eyes

Of Man, the subtle Censor^ scrutinize.

To thy Harim Dividuality

No Entrance finds — no Word of This and That ;

Do Thou my separate and Derived Self

Make One with thy Essential ! Leave me room

* The Persian Mystics also represent the Deity Dice-ing with
Human Destiny behind the Curtain.
2 " The Apollonius of Keats' Lamia."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImAn and absal.


On that Divdn which leaves no Eoom for Two ; ^

Lest, like the Simple Kurd of whom they tell,

I grow perplext, oh God ! 'twixt " /" and " THO U ;''

If / — this Dignity and Wisdom whence ?

If THO U — then what this abject Impotence ?


A Kurd perplext by Fortune's Frolics
Left his Desert for the City,
Sees a City full of Noise and
Clamour^ agitated People,
Hither, Thither, Back and Forward
Running, some intent on Travel,
Others home again returning.
Right to Left, and Left to Right,
Life-disquiet everywhere !

* This Sufi Identification with Deity (further illustrated in the
Story of Sect. XX.) is shadowed in a Parable of Jelaladdln, of
which here is an outUne. " One knocked at the Beloved's Door ;
and a Voice asked fix)m within, *Who is there?' and he an-
swered, * It is I.' Then the Voice said, * This House will not
hold Me and Thee.' And the Door was not opened. Then went
the Lover into the Desert, and fasted and prayed in Solitude. And
after a Year he returned, and knocked again at the Door. And
again the Voice asked, *Who is there?' and he said, * It is Thy-
self! * — and the Door was opened to him."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


Kurd, when he beholds the Turmoil,
Creeps aside, and. Travel-weary,
Fain would go to Sleep ; ^' But,^ saith he,
" How shall I in all this Hubbub
" Know myself again on waking ? "
So by way of Recognition
Ties a Pumpkin round his Foot,
And turns to Sleep, A Knave that heard him
Crept behind, and slily watching
Slips the Pumpkin off the Sleeper's
Ancle, ties it round his own,
And so down to sleep beside him.
By and by the Kurd awaking
Looks directly for his Signal-
Sees it on another's Ancle —
Cries aloud, " Oh Good-for-Nothing
" Rascal to perplex me so !
" That by you I am bewildered,
" Whether 1 be I or no!
" i/T I — the Pumpkin why on You ?
''^Yov— then Where am I, and Who ?"


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salamIn and absIl.


Oh God ! this poor bewildered Kurd am I,
Than any Kurd more helpless ! — Oh, do thou
Strike down a Ray of Light into my Darkness !
Turn by thy Grace these Dregs into pure Wine,
To recreate the Spirits of the Good !
Or if not that, yet, as the little Cup
Whose Name I go by,^ not unworthy found r'^y
To pass thy salutary Vintage round !

* The Poet's name, "Jami/* also signifying "-4 Cup:* The
Poefs YusuF and Zulaikha opens also with this Divine Wine,
the favourite Sjmbol of Haliz and other Persian Mystics. The
Tavern spoken of is The World.

I listen in the Tavern of Sweet Songs,

And catch no Echo of their Harmony :

The Guests have drunk the Wine and are departed,

Leaving their empty Bowls behind— not one

To carry on the Revel Cup in hand !

Up Jami then ! and whether Lees or Wine

To offer— boldly offer it in Thine !


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


And suddenly arrests me for liis own.
Wherefore once more I take — best quitted else —
The Field of Verse, to chaunt that double Praise,
And in that Memory refresh my Soul
Until I grasp the Skirt of Living Presence.


One who traveVd in the Desert

Saw MajntJn where he was sitting

All alone like a Magician

Tracing Letters in the Sand.

" Oh distracted Lover! writing

** What the Sword-wind of the Desert

" Undecyphers soon as written^

" So that none who travels after

" Shall be able to interpret! " —

MajniJn answered, " / am writing

" « LAILI'—toere it only * LAILI'

" Yet a Book of Love and Passion ;

" And^ with but her Name to dote oiiy

" Amorously I caress it

^^ As it were Herself, and sip

" ffer Presence till I drink her Lip.^^


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


III.


When Night had thus far brought me with my Book,

In middle Thought Sleep robb'd me of myself;

And in a Dream Myself I seem'd to see,

Walking along a straight and even Road,

And clean as is the Soul of the Sufi ;

A Road whose spotless Surface neither Breeze

Lifted in Dust, nor mix'd the Rain to Mire.

There I, methought, was pacing tranquilly.

When, on a sudden, the tumultuous Shout

Of Soldiery behind broke on mine Ear,

And took away my Wit and Strength for Fear.

I look'd about for Refuge, and Behold !

A Palace was before me ; whither running

For Refuge from the coming Soldiery,

Suddenly from the Troop a Sh^hzeman,^

* " Lord of the World, Sovereign ; Hasan, Beautiful, Good."
Hasan Beg of Western Persia, famous for his Beauty, had helped
Jami with Escort in a dangerous Pilgrimage. He died (as History
and a previous line in the Original tell) before Salaman was writ-
ten, and was succeeded by his Son YActs.

c


Digitized by CjOOQIC


10 salXmAn and absIl.


By Name and Nature Hasan — on tlie Horse

Of Honour mounted — probed in Royal Robes,

And wearing a White Turban on his Head,

Tum'd his Rein tow'rd me, and with smiling Lips

Open'd before my Eyes the Door of Peace.

Then, riding up to me, dismounted ; kiss'd

My Hand, and did me Courtesy ; and I,

How glad of his Protection, and the Grace '

He gave it with ! — ^Who then of gracious Speech

Many a Jewel utter'd ; but of these

Not one that in my Ear tiU Morning hung.

When, waking on my Bed, my waking Wit

I questioned what the Vision meant, it answered ;

" This Courtesy and Favour of the Shah

" Foreshows the fair Acceptance of thy Verse,

" Which lose no moment pushing to Conclusion."

This hearing, I address'd me like a Pen

To steady Writing ; for perchance, I thought.

From the same Fountain whence the Vision grew

The Interpretation also may come True.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salXmIn and absIl.


11


Breathless ran a simple Rustic

To a Cunning Man of Dreams;

" Loy this Morning I was dreaming —

" Andy methought, in yon deserted

" Village wandered — all about me

" Shattered Houses — andy Behold!

" Into one, methought, I went — and

" Searched — and found a Hoard of Gold!**

Quoth the Prophet in Derision,

" Oh Thou Jewel of Creation,

" Go and sole your Feet like Horse^s,

" And returning to your Village

" Stamp and scratch with Hoof and Nail,

" And give Earth so sound a Shakingy

** She must hand you something up^

Went at once the unsuspecting

Countryman ; with hearty Purpose

Set to work as he was told;

Andy the very first Encountevy

Struck upon his Hoard of Gold !

Until Thou hast thy Purpose by the Hilt,
Catch at it boldly — or Thou never wilt.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


12 SA.lAhXn and ABsi.L.


IV.
THE STORY.


A SHAH there was who ruled the Eeakn of Y(in/
And wore the Ring of Empire of Sikander ;
And in his Reign A SAGE, who had the Tower
Of Wisdom of so strong Foundation built
That Wise Men from all Quarters of the World
To catch the Word of Wisdom from his Lip
Went in a Girdle round him.— Which THE SHAH
Observing, took him to his Secresy ;
Stirr'd not a Step nor set Design afoot
Without that Sage's sanction ; till, so coimserd,
From K&f to K6.f ^ reach'd his Dominion :
No Nation of the World or Nation's Chief

* Or "Yavan,** Son of Japhet, from whom the Country was
called " YuNAN," — Ionia, meant hy the Persians to express Gbeecb
generally. Sikander is, of course, Alexander the Great, of whose
Ethics J ami wrote, as Nizami of his Deeds.

* The Fahulous Mountain supposed hy Asiatics to surround the
World, hinding the Horizon on all sides.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salXmIn and absIl.


13


Who wore the Ring but under span of his
Bow'd down the Neck ; then rising up in Peace
Under his Justice grew, and knew no Wrong,
And in their Strength was his Dominion Strong.

The Shah that has not Wisdom in Himself,
Nor has a Wise Man for his Coimsellor,
The Wand of his Authority falls short.
And his Dominion crumbles at the Base.
For he, discerning not the Characters
Of Tyranny and Justice, confounds both.
Making the World a Desert, and the Fount
Of Justice a Serab.^ Well was it said,
" Better just Kafir than Believing Tyrant^


* Mirage ; but, of two Foreign Words, why not the more origiQal
Persian ? — identical with the Hebrew Sharah ; as in Isaiah xv. 7,
" The Shdrdh (or Mirdge) shall become a Lake ; " — ^rather, and bet-
ter, than our Version, " The parched Grotmd shall become a Pool."
See Gesenius.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


14 salImIn and absIl.


God said to the Prophet David, —

'* David, speak, and to the Challenge

'^Answer of the Faith within Thee.

^^ Even Unbelieving Princes,

" Unreported if Unworthy,

" Yet, if They he Just and Righteous,

" Were their Worship of The Fire —

" Even These unto Themselves

" Reap Glory and redress the World.^


Digitized by CjOOQIC


&alAwAn and absAl.


15


One Night THE SHAH of Y6nan, as his wont,

Considered of his Power, and told his State,

How great it was, and how about him sat

The 'Robe of Honour of Prosperity ;

Then found he nothing wanted to his Heart,

Unless a Son, who his Dominion

And Glory might inherit after him.

And then he tum'd him to THE SHAH, and said ;

" Oh Thou, whose Wisdom is the Rule of Kings —

" (Glory to God who gave it !) — answer me ;

" Is any Blessing better than a Son ?

" Man's prime Desire ; by which his Name and He

" Shall live beyond Himself ; by whom his Eyes

"Shine living, and his Dust with Roses blows ;

" A Foot for Thee to stand on, he shall be

" A Hand to stop thy Falling ; in his Youth

" Thou shalt be Young, and in his Strength be Strong ;

" Sharp shall he be in Battle as a Sword,

" A Cloud of Arrows on the Enemy's Head ;

" His Voice shall cheer his Friends to better Plight,

" And turn the Foeman's Glory into Flight."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


16


salImIn and absIl.


Thus much of a Good Son, whose wholesome Growth
Approves the Root he grew from ; but for one
Eiieaded of Evil — Well, could one undo
His Generation, and as early pull
Him and his Vices from the String of Time.
Like Noah's, puff'd with Ignorance and Pride,
Who felt the Stab of " HE IS NONE OF THINE ! ''
And perish'd in the Deluge.^ And because •
All are not Good, be slow to pray for One,
Whom having you may have to pray to lose.

^ In the Kuran God engages to save Noah and his Family, —
meaning elU who believed in the Warning. One of Noah's Sons
(Canaan or Yam, some think) would not believe. "And the
Ark swam with them between waves like Mountains, and Noah
called up to his Son, who was separated from him, saying, * Em-
bark with us, my Son, and stay not with the Unbelievers/ He
answered, * I will get on a Mountain which will secure me from the
Water/ Noah replied, * There is no security this Day from the
Decree of God, except for him on whom he shall have Mercy/
And a Wave passed between them, and he became one of those
who were drowned. And it was said, * Oh Earth, swallow up thy
waters, and Thou, oh Heaven, withhold thy Rain ! ' And imme-
diately the Water abated and the Decree was fulfilled, and the Ark
rested on the Mountain Al Judi, and it was said, * Away with the
ungodly People !' — Noah called upon his Lord and said, * Oh Lord,
verily my Son is of my Family, and thy Promise is True; for
Thou art of those who exercise Judgment' God answered, * Oh
Noah, verily he is not of thy Family ; this intercession of thine for
him is not a righteous work."— /Safe'« Kurdn, vol. ii. p. 21.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImAn and absIl.


17


Crazy for the Curse of Children^
Ran before the Sheikh a Fellow^
Crying out, " Oh hear and help me !
^^Pray to Allah from my Clay
** To raise me up afresh young Cypress^
" Who my Childless Eyes may lighten
" With the Beauty of his Presence"
Said the Sheikh, ** Be wise, and leave it
« Wholly in the Hand of Allah,
" Who, whatever we are after,
" Understands our Business best,"
But the Man persisted, saying,
" Sheikh, I languish in my Longing ;
" Help, and set my Prayer a-going /"
Then the Sheikh held up his Hand —
Pray'd — Aw Arrow flew to Heaven —
From the Hunting-ground of Darkness
Down a musky Fawn of China
Brought — a Boy — who, when the Tender
Shoot of Passion in him planted
Found sufficient Soil and Sap, '
Took to Drinking with his Fellows ;
From a Comer of the House-top
111 affronts a Neighbour's Wife,
Draws his Dagger on the Husband,
Who complains before the Justice,
And the Father has to pay.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


IS salImIn and absXl.


Day and Night the Youngster's Doings
Such--the Talk of all the City;
Nor Entreaty, Threat^ or Counsel
Held him ; till the Desperate Father
Once more to the Sheikh a-running.
Catches at his Garmenty crying —
" Sheikh, my only Hope and Helper !
" One more Prayer ! that God who laid
J " Will take that Trouhltfrom my Head /"
But the Sheikh replied: ^^ Remember
" How that very Day I warned you
" Better not importune Allah ;
" Unto whom remains no other
" Prayer^ unless to pray for Pardon.
" When from this World we are summoned
" On to hind the pack of Travel
" Son or Daughter ill shall help us;^
'^ Slaves we arcy and unencumbered
^* Best may do the Master's mind;
" And, whatever he may order,
« Do it with a Will Resigned:*


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salAmAn and absal.


19


VI.


When the Sharp-witted SAGE

Had heard these Sayings of THE SHAH, he said,

" Oh SHAH, who would not be the Slave of Lust

" Must still endure the Sorrow of no Son.

" — ^Lust that makes blind the Reason ; Lust that makes

" A Devil's self seem Angel to our Eyes ;

" A Cataract that, carrying havoc with it,

'' Confounds the prosperous House ; a Eoad of Mire

" Where whoso falls he rises not again ;

" A Wine of which whoever tastes shall see

" Redemption's face no more — one little Sip

" Of that delicious and unlawful Drink

" Making crave much, and hanging round the Palate

" Till it become a Ring to lead thee by ^

" (Putting the rope in a Vain Woman's hand),

" Till thou thyself go down the Way of Nothing."

* " Mihar/* — A Piece of Wood put through a Gamers Nose to
guide him hy.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


20 salImIn and absIl.


" For what is Woman ? A Foolish, Faithless Thing-

" To whom The Wise Self-subjected, himself

" Deep sinks beneath the Folly he sets up.

" A very K&fir in Rapacity ;

" Clothe her a hundred Years in Gold and Jewel,

" Her Garment with Brocade of Susa braided,

" Her very Night-gear wrought in Cloth of Gold,

" Dangle her Ears with Ruby and with Pearl,

" Her House with Golden Vessels all a-blaze,

" Her Tables loaded with the Fruit of Kings,

" Ispahan Apples, Pomegranates of Yazd ;

" And, be she thirsty, from a Jewell'd Cup

" Drinking the Water of the Well of Life —

" One little twist of Temper, — all you 've done

" Goes all for NothiQg. * Torment of my life ! '

" She cries, ' What have you ever done for me ! ' —

" Her Brow's white Tablet — Yes — 'tis uninscrib'd

" With any Letter of Fidelity ;

" Who ever read it there ? Lo, in your Bosom

" She Kes for Years — you turn away a moment,

" And she forgets you — worse, if as you turn

" Her Eye should light on any Younger Lover."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


SAhiidis AND ABSAL.


21


Once upon the Throne of Judgment^

Telling one another Secrets,

Sat SULATMAN aTid BALKf s ; ^

The Hearts of Both were turned to Truth,

UnsuUied by Deception.

First the King of Faith Sulatman

Spoke — " Though mine the Ring of Empire^

" Never any Day that passes

" Darkens any one my Door-way

" But into his Hand I look —

*^ And He who comes not empty-handed

" Grows to Honour in mine Eyes^

After this BALKfs a Secret

From her hidden Bosom uttered,

Saying — " Never Night or Morning

" Comely Youth before me passes

" Whom I look not longing after ;

" Saying to myself ^ Oh were he

" ' Comforting of my Sick Soul!--' "

" If this, as wise Ferdusi says, the Curse

" Of Better Women, what should be the Worse ? "

^ Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


22


salXmIn and absAl.


VII.


THE SAGE his Satire ended ; and THE SHAH

With Magic-mighty Wisdom his pure Will

Leaguing, its Self-fulfilment wrought from Heaven.

And Lo ! from Darkness came to Light A Child,

Of Carnal Composition Unattaint, —

A Rosebud blowing on the Royal Stem, —

A Perfume from the Realm of Wisdom wafted ;

The Crowning Jewel of the Crown ; a Star

Under whose Augury triumph'd the Throne.

For whose Auspicious Name they clove the Words

" Salamat " — Incolumity from Evil —

And " AusemIn" — ^the Heav'n from which he came-

And haU'd him by the title of SALIMAN.

And whereas from no Mother Milk he drew.

They chose for him a Nurse — her name Absal —

Her Years not Twenty — from the Silver Liae

Dividing the Musk-Harvest of her Hair

Down to her Foot that trampled Crowns of Kings,


Digitized by CjOOQIC


sajjAmAn and absIl.


23


A Moon of Beauty Pull ; who thus elect

SAL AmAN of Auspicious Augury

Should carry in the Garment of her Bounty,

Should feed Him with the Flowing of her Breast.

As soon as she had opened Eyes on him

She closed those Eyes to all the World beside,

And her Soul crazed, a-doting on her Jewel, —

Her Jewel in a Golden Cradle set ;

Opening and shutting which her Day's DeKght,

To gaze upon his Heart-inflaming Cheek, —

Upon the Darling whom, could she, she would

Have cradled as the Baby of her Eye.^

In Bose and Musk she wash'd him — to his Lips

Pressed the pure Sugar from the Honeycomb ;

And when, Day over, she withdrew her Milk,

She made, and having laid him in, his Bed,

Bum'd all Night like a Taper o'er his Head.

Then still as Morning came, and as he grew.
She dress'd him like a Little Idol up ;
On with his Robe — ^with fresh Collyrium Dew
Touched his Narcissus Eyes — the Musky Locks


* Literally, Mardumak — the Mannikin, or PupU, of the Eye,
corresponding to the Image so frequently used by our old Poets.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


24 salXman and absIl.


Divided from his Forehead — and embraced
With Gold and Ruby Girdle his fine Waist. —

So rear'd she him till fiill Fourteen his Years,
Fourteen-day full the Beauty of his Face,
That rode high in a Hundred Thousand Hearts ;
Yea, when Salaman was but Half-lance high.
Lance-like he struck a wound in every One,
And bum'd and shook down Splendour like a Sun.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absal.


25


VIII.

Soon as the Lord of Heav'n had sprung his Horse
Over the Horizon into the Blue Field,
Salaman rose drunk with the Wine of Sleep,
And set himself a-stimip for the Field ;
He and a Troop of Princes — Kings in Blood,
Kings too in the Kingdom-troubling Tribe of Beauty,
All Young in Years and Courage,^ Bat in hand
Gallop'd a-field, toss'd down the Golden Ball
And chased, so many Crescent Moons a Full ;
And, all alike Intent upon the Game,
Salaman still would carry from them all
The Prize, and shouting " Hal ! " drive Home the
BaU.^

* The same Persian Word serving for Both.

* The Game of Chugan, for Centuries the Royal Game of Per-
sia, and adopted (Ouseley thinks) under varying modifications of
Name and Practice by other Nations, was played by Horsemen,
who, suitably habited, and armed with semicircular-headed Bats or
Sticks so short the Player must stoop below the Saddle-bow to
strike, strove to drive a Ball through a Goal of upright Pillars.
See Frontispiece and Appendix.

E .


Digitized by CjOOQIC


26 SAlImIn and ABSiL.


This done, SalamAn bent him as a Bow
To Shooting — from the Marksmen of the World
Called for an imstrung Bow — himself the Cord
Fitted unhelpt,^ and nimbly with his hand
Twanging made cry, and drew it to his Ear :
Then, fixing the Three-feather'd Fowl, discharged.
No point in Heaven's Azure but his Arrow
Hit ; nay, but Heaven were made of Adamant,
Woidd overtake the Horizon as it roll'd ;
And, whether aiming at the Fawn a-foot.
Or Bird on wing, his Arrow went away
Straight — ^like the Soul that cannot go astray.

When Night came, that releases Man from Toil,
He play'd the Chess of Social Intercourse ;
Prepared his Banquet Hall like Paradise,
Simmion'd his Houri-faced Musicians,
And, when his Brain grew warm with Wine, the Veil
Flung off him of Reserve. Now Lip to Lip
Concerting with the Singer he would breathe

* Bows being so gradually stiffened, to the Age and Strength of
the Archer, as at last to need five Hundredweight of Pressure to
bend, says an old Translation of Chardin, who describes all the
Process up to bringing up the String to the Ear, " o« if to hang it
there^ before Shooting. Then the First Trial was, who could
shoot highest j then, the Mark, &c.


Digitized byLjOOQlC .


satAvlAn and absAl.


27


Like a Hessias Life into the Dead ;
Now made of the Melodious-moving Pipe
A Sugar-C6ine between his Lips that ran
Men's Ears with Sweetness : Taking up a Harp,
Between its dry String and his Finger fresh
Struck Fire ; or lifting in his arms a Lute
As if a little Child for Chastisement,
Pinching its Ear such Cries of Sorrow wrung
As drew Blood to the Eyes of Older Men.
Now sang He like the Nightingale alone,
Now set together Voice and Listrument ;
And thus with his Associates Night he spent?


His Soul rejoiced in Knowledge of all kinds ;

The fine Edge of his Wit would split a Hair,

And in the Noose of Apprehension catch

A Meaning ere articulate in Word ;

His Verse was like the Pleiads ; * his Discourse

The Mourners of the Bier ; his Penmanship,

(Tablet and running Reed his Worshippers,)

* i. e. compactly strung, as opposed to Discursive Rhetoric,
which is compared to the scattered Stars of The Bier and its
Mourners, or what we call The Great Bear. This contrast is
otherwise prettUy applied in the Anvari Soheili — *^ When one grows
poor, his Friends, heretofore compact as The Pleiads, disperse
wide asunder as The Mourners.**


Digitized by CjOOQIC


28 salIman and absAl.


Fine on the Lip of Youth, as the First Hair,
Drove Penmen, as that Lovers, to Despair.

His Bounty was as Ocean's — ^nay, the Sea's
Self but the Foam of his Munificence,
For it threw up the Shell, but he the Pearl ;
He was a Cloud that rain'd upon the World
Dirhems for Drops ; the Banquet of whose Bounty
Left Hatim's ^ Churlish in Comparison —

^ The Persian Type of Liberality, infinitely celebrated.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salAmIn and absIl.


29


IX.


Suddenly that Sweet Minister of mine

Rebuked me angrily ; " What Folly, J&mi,

" Wearing that indefatigable Pen

" In celebration of an Alien Shah

" Whose Throne, not grounded in the Eternal World,

" Yesterday was. To-day is not ! " ^ I answer'd ;

" Oh Foimt of Light ! — ^under an Alien Name

" I shadow One upon whose Head the Crown

" Both Was and Is To-day ; to whose Firman

" The Seven Kingdoms of the World are subject,

" And the Seas Seven but droppings of his Largess.

" Good luck to him who under other Name

" Taught us to veil the Praises of a Power

" To which the Initiate scarce find open Door."

» The Hero of the Story being of YdNAN— Ionia, or Greece
generally, (the Persian Geography not being very precise,)— and so
not of THE Faith.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


30


SAlImIn and ABSiL.


Sat a Lover solitary

Self'discoursing in a Corner^

Passionate and ever-changing

Invocation pouring out;

Sometimes Sun ancl Moon ; and sometimes

Under Hyacinth half-hidden

Roses; or the lofty Cypress^

And the little Weed below,

Nightingaling thus a Noodle

Heard him, and, completely puzzled, —

" What!^ quoth he, ^^ And you, a Lover,

" Raving not about your Mistress,

" But about the Moon and Roses I "

Answered he ; '* Oh thou that aimest

" Wide of Love, and Lover^s Language

" Wholly misinterpreting ;

** Sun and Moon are but my Lady's

" Self, as any Lover knows ;

*^ Hyacinth I said, and meant her

" Hair — her Cheek was in the Rose —

" And I myself the wretched Weed

" That in her Cypress Shadow grows^


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absXl.


31


X.


Now was Salaman in his Prime of Growth,
His Cypress Stature risen to high Top,
And the new-blooming Garden of his Beauty-
Began to bear ; and Abs&l long'd to gather ;
But the Fruit grew upon too high a Bough,
To which the Noose of her Desire was short.
She too rejoiced in Beauty of her own
No whit behind Salaman, whom she now
Began enticing with her Sorcery.
Now from her Hair would twine a musky Chain,
To bind his Heart — ^now twist it into Curls
Nestling innumerable Temptations ;
Doubled the Darkness of her Eyes with Surma
To make him lose his way, and over them
Adom'd the Bows ^ that were to shoot him then ;
Now to the Rose-leaf of her Cheek would add


* With dark Indigo Paint, as the Archery Bow with a thin
Papyrus-like Bark.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


32 ^alAmAn and absIl.


Fresh Eose, and then a Grain of Musk * lay there,
The Bird of the Beloved Heart to snare.
Now with a Laugh would break the Ruby Seal
That lockt up Pearl ; or busied in the Room
"Would smite her Hand perhaps — on that pretence
To lift and show the Silver in her Sleeve ;
Or hastily rising clash her Golden Anclets
To draw the Crowned Head under her Feet.
Thus by innumerable Bridal wiles
She went about soliciting his Eyes,
Which she would scarce let lose her for a Moment ;
For well she knew that mainly by The Eye
Love makes his Sign, and by no other Road
Enters and takes possession of the Heart.

* A Patch, sc. — " Noir comme le MmcJ* De Sacy.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


33


Burning tvith Desire Zulaikha

Built a Chamber, Wall and Ceilifig

Blank as an untarnisht Mirror,

Spotless as the Heart of Yusuf.

Then she made a cunning Painter

Multiply her Image round it ;

Not an Inch of Wall hut echoed

With the Reflex of her Beauty,

Then amid them all in all her

Glory sat she down, and sent for

Yusuf — she began a Tale

Of Love — and Lifted up her Veil,

From her Look he turned, but turning

Wheresoever, ever saw her

Looking, looking at him stiU.

Then Desire arose within him —

He was almost yielding — almost

Laying Honey on her Lip —

When a Signal out of Darkness

Spoke to him — and he withdrew

His Hand, and dropt the Skirt of Fortune,


Digitized by CjOOQIC


34 salImjCk AND absXl.


XI.


Thtis day by day did Absal tempt Salaman,

And by and bye her Wiles began to work.

Her Eyes Narcissus stole his Sleep— their Lashes

Pierced to his Heart — out from her Locks a Snake

Bit him — and bitter, bitter on his Tongue

Became the Memory of her honey Lip.

He saw the Ringlet restless on her Cheek,

And he too quiver'd with Desire ; his Tears

Tum'd Crimson from her Cheek, whose musky spot

Lifected aU his soul with Melancholy.

Love drew him from behind the Veil, where yet

Withheld him better Resolution —

" Oh, should the Food I long for, tasted, turn

" Unwholesome, and if all my Life to come

" Should sicken from^<5lie momentary Sweet ! **


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salXmIn and absIl.


35


On the Sea-shore sat a Raven,
Blind, and from the bitter Cistern
Forced his only Drink to draw.
Suddenly the Pelican
Flying over Fortunes Shadow
Cast upon his Head,^ and calling —
" Come, poor Son of Salt, and taste tf
" Sweet, sweet Water from my Maw,^^
Said the Raven, ^^If I taste it
" Once, the Salt I have to live on
" May for ever turn to Loathing ;
" And I sit a Bird accurst
** Upon the Shore to die of Thirst''

» Alluding to the Phoenix, the Shadow'of whosewings foretold
a Crown upon the Head it passed over.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


36


salImIn akd absXl.


XII.

Now when Salaman's Heart tum'd to Absal,
Her Star was happy in the Heavens — Old Love
Put forth afresh — Desire doubled his Bond :
And of the running Time she watch'd an Hour
To creep into the Mansion of her Moon
And satiate her soul upon his Lips.
And the Hour came ; she stole into his Chamber —
Ran up to him, Life's offer in her Hand —
And, falling like a Shadow at his Feet,
She laid her Face beneath. Salaman then
With all the Courtesies of Princely Grace
Put forth his Hand — ^he rais'd her in his Arms —
He held her trembling there — and from that Fount
Drew first Desire ; then Deeper from her Lips,
That, yielding, mutually drew from his ,
A Wine that ever drawn from never fail'd —

So through the Day — so through another still —
The Day became a Seventh — ^the Seventh a Moon —
The Moon a Year — ^while they rejoiced together.
Thinking their Pleasure never was to end.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


37


But rolling Heaven wliisper'd from his Ambush,

" So in my License is it not set down.

" All for the sweet Societies I make

" At Morning and before the Nightfall break ;

" Ah for the Bliss that with the Setting Sun

" I mix, and, with his Rising, all is done ! '^


Into Bagdad came a hungry

Arab — after many days of waiting

In to the KhalifaKs Supper

Pushed, and got before a Pasty

Luscious as the Lip of Beauty,

Or the Tongue of Eloquence.

Soon as seen. Indecent Hunger

Seizes up and swallows down :

Then his mouth undaunted wiping —

" Oh Khalifah, hear me Swear,

^^ Not of any other Pasty

" Than of Thine to sup or dine,^^

The Khalifah laughed and answered;

^^Fool! who thinkest to determine

" What is in the Hands of Fate^

" Take and thrust him from the Gate ! ''


Digitized by CjOOQIC


38


salImIn and absIl.


XIII.


While a Full Year was counted by the Moon,
SalAman and Absal rejoiced together,
And for so long he stood not in the face
Of SAGE or SHAH, and their bereaved Hearts
Were torn in twain with the Desire of Him.
They questioned those about him, and from them
Heard something; then Himself in Presence sum-
moned,
And, subtly sifting on all sides, so plied
Interrogation till it hit the Mark,
And all the Truth was told. Then SAGE and SHAH
Struck out with Hand and Foot in his Eedress.
And First with Reason, which is also Best ;
Reason that rights the Retrograde — completes
The Imperfect — ^Reason that unties the Knot :
For Reason is the Fountain from of old
From which the Prophets drew, and none beside.
Who boasts of other Inspiration lies —
There are no other Prophets than The Wise.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absXl.


39


XIV.

FiBsr spoke THE SHAH ;— " SalAman, Oh my Soul,

" Oil Taper of tlie Banquet of my House,

" Light of the Eyes of my Prosperity,

" And making bloom the Court of Hope with Rose ;

" Years Rose-bud-like my own Blood I devour'd

" Till in my hand I carried thee, my Rose ;

" Oh do not tear my Garment from my Hand,

" Nor wound thy Father with a Dagger Thorn.

" Years for thy sake the Crown has worn my Brow,

" And Years my Foot been growing to the Throne

" Only for Thee — Oh spurn them not with Thine ;

" Oh turn thy Face from Dalliance unwise,

" Lay not thy Heart's hand on a Minion !

" For what thy Proper Pastime P Is it not

" To mount and manage Rakhsh ^ along the Field ;

" Not, with no stouter weapon than a Love-lock,

" Idly reclining on a Silver Breast.

" Go, fly thine Arrow at the Antelope

* ** Lightning.'* The name of Rustam's famous Horse in the
Shah-Nameh.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


40 salIm^n and absIl.


" And Lion — let not me my Lion see

" Slain by the Arrow eyes of a Ghaz&l.

" Go, flash thy Steel among the Ranks of Men,

" And smite the Warriors' Necks ; not, flying them,

" Lay down thine own beneath a Woman's Foot.

" Leave off such doing in the Name of God,

" Nor bring thy Father weeping to the Ground ;

" Years have I held myself aloft, and all

" For Thee— Oh Shame if thou prepare my Fall ! "


When before SHiRfiEH's Feet

Drencht in Blood fell Kai Khusrau,^

He declared this Parable —

" Wretch /— There was a Branch that, waxing

** Wanton der the Root he dranhfrom,

" At a Draught the Living Water

" Drained wherewith Himself to crown ;

" Died the Root — and with it died

" The Branch— and barren was brought down I "

» Khuseau Parviz (Chosroe The Victorious), Son of NoshIra-
VAN The Great; slain, after Thirty Years of Prosperous Reign,
by his Son Shirueh, who, according to some, was in Love with
his Father's Mistress SmEiN. See further, Section XXL, for one
of the most dramatic Tragedies in Persian History.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


aillAmAn and absIl.


41


XV.


Salaman heard — ^the Sea of his Soid was moVd,
And bubbled up with Jewels, and lie said ;
" Oh SHAH, I am the Slave of thy Desire,
" Dust of thy Throne ascending Foot am I ;
" Whatever thou Desirest I woidd do,
" But sicken of my own Incompetence ;
" Not in the Hand of my infirmer Will
" To carry into Deed mine own Desire.
"Time upon Time I torture mine own Soul,
" Devising liberation from the Snare
" I languish in. But when upon that Mocm
" / think, my Soul relapses — ^and when hok —
" I leave both Worlds behind to follow her ! "


Digitized by CjOOQIC


42


salImjCn and absIl.


XVI.

THE SHAH ceased Counsel, and THE SAGE began.

" Oil Thou new Vintage of a Gkirden old,

" Last Blazon of the Pen of ^ Let there be,' ^

" Who read'st the Seven and Four ; ^ interpretest

" The writing on the Leaves of Night and Day —

" Archetype of the Assembly of the World,

" Who hold'st the Key of Adam's Treasury —

" (Know thine own Dignity and slight it not,

" For Thou art Greater yet thaa all I tell)—

** The Mighty Hand that mix'd thy Dust inscribed

" The Character of Wisdom on thy Heart ;

" Oh Cleanse thy Bosom of Material Form,

" And turn the Mirror of the Soul to Spmrr,

" Until it be with Spirit aU possest,

" Drown'd in the Light of LiteUectual Truth.

" Oh veil thine Eyes from Mortal Paramour,

" And follow not her Step ! — For what is She ? —

* The Pen of « Kun "— " Esto ! "— -The famous Passage of Cre-
ation stolen from Genesis by the Kuran.

* Planets ? — ^adding Sun, Moon, and the Nodal Dragon's Head
and Tail; according to the Sanscrit Astronomy adopted by Persia.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


SALiClilN AND ABSXl.


43


*' What is She but a Vice and a Reproach,

" Her very QBrment-hem Pollution !

" For such Pollution madden not thine Eyes,

" Waste not thy Body's Strength, nor taint thy Soul,

" Nor set the Body and the Soul in Strife !

" Supreme is thine Original Degree,

" Thy Star upon the Top of Heaven ; but Lust

" Will fling it down even unto the Dust ! '*


Qtcoth a Mtiezzin unto Crested
Chanticleer — "Oh Voice of Morning,
"Not a Sage ofaUthe Sages
" Prophesies of Dawn, or startles
" At the wing of Time^ like Thee.
" One so wise methinks were Jitter
" Perching on the Beams of Heaven,
" Than with these poor Hens about him^
"Raking in a Heap of Dung. ^
" And^ replied the Cock, " in Heaven
" Once I was ; but by my Evil
"Lust am fallen down to raking
" With my wretched Hens about me
" On the Dunghill. Otherwise
" I were even now in Eden
" With the Bird of Paradise.''


Digitized by CjOOQIC


44 salXmIn and absIl.


XVII.


When firojn THE SAGE these words Salaman heard,

The breath of Wisdom round his Palate blew ;

He said—" Oh Darling of the Soul of Plato,

" To whom a hundred Aristotles bow ;

" Oh Thou that an Eleventh to the Ten

" Original Intelligences addest,^ —

" I lay my Face before Thee in the Dust,

" The humblest Scholar of thy Court am I ;

" Whose every word I find a Well of Wisdom,

" And hasten to imbibe it in my Soul.

" But clear unto thy clearest Eye it is,

" That Choice is not within Oneself — To Do,

" Not in The Will, but in The Power, to Do.

" From that which I originally am

" How shoidd I swerve ? or how put forth a Sign

" Beyond the Power that is by Nature Mine ? "

^ This passage finds its explanation in the last Section.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


skhAidis AND absIl.


45


XVIII.


Unto the Soul that is confused by Love
Comes Sorrow after Sorrow — ^most of all
To Love whose only Friendship is Reproof,
And overmuch of Counsel — ^whereby Love
Grows stubborn, and increases the Disease.
Love unreproved is a delicious food ;
Reproved, is Feeding on one's own Heart's Blood.

SalAman heard ; his Soul came to his Lips ;
Reproaches struck not Absal out of him.
But drove Confusion in ; bitter became
The Drinking of the sweet Draught of Delight,
And wan'd the Splendour of his Moon of Beauty.
His Breath was Indignation, and his Heart
Bled from the Arrow, and his Anguish grew —
How bear it P — ^Able to endure one wound.
From Wound on Wound no' remedy but Flight ;
Day after Day, Design upon Design,
He tum'd the Matter over in his Heart,
And, after all, no Remedy but Flight.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


46


salImIn and absIl.


BesolVd on that; he Tictuall'd and equipped
A Camel; and one Night he led it forth.
And mounted — ^he and Absal at his side,
The fair Salaman and Absal the Fair,
Together on one Camel side by side,
Twin Kernels in a single Almond packt.
And True Love murmurs not, however small
His Chamber — ^nay, the straitest best of all.


fFhen the Moon of Canaan Yusuf

Darkened in the Prison of j^gypt^

Night by Night Zulaikha went

To see him—for her Heart was broken^

Then to her said One who never

Yet had tasted of Lovers Garden:

^^Leavest Thou thy Palace- Chamber

" For the Felon's narrow Cell f "

Answered She, ** Without my Lover^

" Were my Chamber Heavens Horizon, \

" It were closer than an An£s eye ;

** And the Ants eye wider were

" Than Heaven, my Lover with me there ! '


Digitized by CjOOQIC


SAlAmIm and ABSiL.


47


XIX.

Six days SalamAn on the Camel rode,
And then Remembrance of foregone Reproach
Abode not by him ; and upon the Seventh
He halted on the Seashore, and beheld
An Ocean boundless as the Heaven above,
That, reaching its Circumference from Kif
To K^f, down to the Back of Gau and Mahi *
Descended, and its Stars were Creatures' Eyes.
The Face of it was as it were a Range
Of moving Mountains ; or as endless Hosts
Of Camels trooping from all Quarters up.
Furious, with the Foam upon their Lips.
In it innumerable glittering Fish
Like Jewels polish-sharp, to the sharp Eye
But for an Instant visible, glancing through
As Silver Scissors slice a blue Brocade ;

^ The Bull and Fish— the lowest Substantial Base of Earth.
" He first made the Mountains ; then cleared the Face of Earth
from Sea ; then fixed it fast on Gau • Gau on Mahi ; and Mahi
on Air ; and Air on what ? on Nothing ; Nothing upon Nothing,
all is Nothing— Enough.** Attar 5 quoted in De Sac/s Pend-
namah, xxxv.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


48 salImIn and absIl.


Though were the Dragon from its Hollow roused,
The Dragon of the Stars ^ woidd stare Aghast.
Salaman eyed the Sea, and east about
To cross it — and forthwith upon the Shore
Devis'd a Shallop like a Crescent Moon,
Wherein that Sun and Moon in happy Hour
Entered as into some Celestial Sign;
That, figured like a Bow, but Arrow-like
In Flight, was feather'd with a little Sail,
And, pitcht upon the "Water like a Duck,
So with her Bosom sped to her Desire.

When they had sail'd their Vessel for a Moon,

And marr'd their Beauty with the wind o' tV Sea,

Suddenly in mid Sea revealed itself

An Isle, beyond Description beautiful ;

An Isle that all was Garden ; not a Bird

Of Note or Plume in all the World but there ;

There as in Bridal Retinue array'd

The Pheasant in his Crown, the Dove in her Collar ;

* The Sidereal Dragon, whose Head, according to the Pauraiiic
(or Poetic) Astronomers of The East, devoured the Sun and Moon
in Eclipse. ** But we know,** said Ramachandra to Sir W. Jones,
''that the supposed Head and Tail of the Dragon mean only the
Nodes, or Points formed by Intersections of the EcUptic and the
Moon's Orbit." Sir W. Jones' Works, voL iv. p. 74.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absXl.


49


And those who tuued their Bills among the Trees
That Arm in Arm from Fingers paralyz'd
With any Breath of Air Fruit moist and dry-
Down scattered in Profusion to their Feet,
Where Fountains of Sweet Water ran, and round
Sunshine and Shadow chequer-chased the Ground.
Here Iram Garden seem'd in Secresy
Blowing the Rosebud of its Revelation ;
Or Paradise, forgetful of the Day
Of Audit, lifted from her Face the Veil.

Salaman saw the Isle, and thought no more
Of Further — ^there with Absal he sat down,
Absal and He together side by side
Rejoicing like the Lily and the Rose,
Together like the Body and the Soul.
Tinder its Trees in one another's Arms
They slept — ^they drank its Fountains hand in hand-
Sought Sugar with the Parrot— or in Sport
Paraded with the Peacock — traced the Partridge —
Or fell a-talking with the Nightingale.
There was the Rose without a Thorn, and there
The Treasure and no Serpent to beware —
What sweeter than your Mistress at your side
In such a Solitude, and none to Chide 1

H


Digitized by CjOOQIC


60 salAmIn and absXl.


Whispered one to WImik i— « Oh Thou

" Victim of the Wound of Azra^

*^ What is it that like a Shadow

" Movest thou about in Silence

" Meditating Night and Day f "

WXmik answered, " Even this —

" To fig with Azra to the Desert ;

" There by so remote a Fountain

" That^ whichever way one traveWd

" League on League, one yet should never,

^* Never meet the Face of Man —

" There to pitch my Tent-^for ever

" There to gaze on my Beloved;

" Gaze, till Gazing out of Gazing

" Greio to Being Her I gaze on,

" She and I no more, but in One

" Undivided Being blended.

^*All that is not One must ever

" Suffer with the Wound of Absence;

" And whoever in Love's City

" Enters, finds but Boom for One,

^*And but in Oneness UnionJ^

> Another Typical Lover of Azra, A Virgin.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salXmAn and absXl.


51


XX.

When by and bye THE SHAH was made aware
Of that Soul- wasting absence of his Son,
He reached a Cry to Heav'n — ^his Eye-lashes
Wept Blood — Search everywhere he set a-foot,
But none could teU the hidden Mystery.
Then bade he bring a Mirror that he had,
A Mirror, like the Bosom of the Wise,
Reflecting all the World,^ and Ufting up
The Veil from all its Secret, Good and Evil.
That Mirror bade he bring, and, in its Face
Looking, beheld the Face of his Desire.

* Mythically attributed by the East — and in some wild Western
Avatar — to this Shah's Predecessor, Alexander the Great. Per-
haps (V. Hammer thinks) the Concave Mirror upon the Alexan-
drian Pharos, which by Night projected such a fiery Eye over the
Deep OS not only was fabled to exchange Glances with that on the
Rhodian Colossus, and in Oriental Imagination and Language to
penetrate " The World,'* but by Day to Reflect it to him who looked
therein with Eyes to see. The Cup of their own Jamshid had, whe-
ther Full or Empty, the same Property. And that Silver Cup found
in Benjamin's Sack — " Is not this it in which my Lord drinketh,
and whereby indeed he Divineth f "—Gen. xliv. 5. Our Reflecting
Telescope is going some way to realize the Alexandrian Fable.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


52 salImIn and absIl.


He saw those Lovers in the Solitude,

Tum'd from the World, and all its ways, and People,

And looking only in each other's Eyes,

And never finding any Sorrow there.

THE SHAH beheld them as they were, and Pity

Fell on his Eyes, and he reproached them not ;

And, gathering all their Life into his hand.

Not a Thread lost, disposed in Order all.

Oh for the Noble Nature, and Clear Heart,

That, seeing Two who draw one Breath, together

Drinking the Cup of Happiness and Tears *

TJnshatter'd by the Stone of Separation,

Is loath their sweet Communion to destroy,

Or cast a Tangle in the Skein of Joy.


The Arrows that assail the Lords of Sorrow
Come from the Hand of Retribution.
Do Well, that in thy Turn Well may betide Thee ;
And turn from 111, that 111 may turn beside Thee.


* Kparripa fiaxpov ridovtic cat datpviav
KipvutvrtQ i^tmvov axpiQ €C fif^v.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absXl.


53


FirhId, Moulder of the Mountain,
Love-distracted hoJCd to SnfRfN,
And SHfRJN the Sculptor's Passion
Saw, and turned her Heart to Him.

Then the Fire of Jealous Frenzy
Caught and carried up the Harvest
Of the Might ofKAi Khusrau.

Plotting with that ancient Hag

Of Fate, the Sculptor's Cup he poisoned.

And remained the Lord of Love,

So — But Fate that Fate avenges
Arms Shibi^eh with the Dagger,
That at once from Snf RfN tore him,
HurVd him from the Throne of Glort/^

* One Story is that Khusrau had promised if Firhad cut through
a Mountain, and brought a Stream through, Shirin should be his.
Firhad was on the point of achieving his Work, when Khusrau
sent an old Woman (here, perhaps, purposely confounded with
Fate) to tell him Shirin was dead ; whereon Firhad threw himself
headlong from the Rock. The Sculpture at Beysitun (or BesitiSn),
where Rawlinson has decyphered Darius and Xerxes, was tradi-
tionally called Firhad's.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


54 salAhIn and abs^Cl.


XXI.

But as the days went on, and still THE SHAH

Beheld SalAman how sunk in'ABSAL,

And yet no Hand of better Effort lifted ;

But still the Crown that shoidd adorn his Head,

And still the Throne that waited for his Foot,

Trampled from Memory by a Base Desire,

Of which the Soul was still imsatisfied —

Then from the Sorrow of THE SHAH fell Fire ;

To Gracelessness Ungracious he became,

And, quite to shatter his rebeUious Lust,

Upon Salaman aU his WILL discharged.*

And Lo ! Salaman to his Mistrdss tum'd,

But coidd not reach her — ^look'd and look'd again,

And palpitated tow'rd her — ^but in Vain !

Oh Misery ! what to the Bankrupt worse

Than Gold he cannot reach ! To one Athirst

Than Fountain to the Eye and Lip forbid ! —

Or than Heaven opened to the Eyes in Hell ! —

* He Mesmerizes Him !— See also further on this Power of the
Will in Sections XXIII. and XXVI.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


55


Yet, when Salaman's Anguisli was extreme,
The Door of Mercy open'd in his Face ;
He saw and knew his Father's Hand outstretcht
To lift him from Perdition — ^timidly.
Timidly toVrd his Father's Face his own
He lifted. Pardon-pleading, Crime-confest,
As the stray Bird one day will find her Nest.


A Disciple aslCd a Master^

" By what Token should a Father

" Vouch for his reputed Sonf"

Said the Master, " By the Stripling, /0x^~i^: ^

" Howsoever Late or Early, (^ ^t^^ i^-

" Like to the reputed Father \^^<w^

" Growing — whether Wise or Foolish"

" Lo the disregarded Darnel

« With itself adorns the Wheat-field,

" And for all the Early Season

" Satisfies^the Farmet^s Eye;

^^ But come once the Hour of Harvest,

" And another Grain shall answer,

" * Darnel and no Wheat, am /.' "


Digitized by LjOOQIC


56 salImIn and absAl*


XXII.

When THE SHAH saw Salaman's face again,

And breath'd the Breath of Reconciliation,

He laid the Hand of Love upon his Shoidder,

The Kiss of Welcome on his Cheek, and said,

" Oh Thou, who lost. Love's Banquet lost its Salt,

" And Mankind's Eye its Pupil !— Thy Return

" Is as another Sun to Heaven ; a new

" Rose blooming in the Garden of the Soul.

" Arise, Oh Moon of Majesty unwaned !

" The Court of the Horizon is thy Court,

" Thy Kingdom is the Kingdom of the World ! —

"Lo! Throne and Crown await Thee — Throne and

Crown
" Without thy Impress but uncurrent Gold,
"Not to be stamp'd by one not worthy Them;
" Behold ! The Rebel's Face is at thy Door ;
" Let him not triumph — ^let the Wicked dread
" The Throne under thy Feet, the Crown upon thy

Head.
" Oh Spurn them not behind Thee ! Oh my Son,


Digitized byCjOOQlC


salImIn and absIl.


67


" Wipe Thou the Woman's Henna from thy Hand :
" Withdraw Thee from the Minion who from Thee
" Dominion draws ; ^ the Time is come to choose,
" Thy Mistress or the World to hold or lose."

Four are the Signs of Kingly Aptitude ;

Wise Read — clean Heart — strong Arm — and open

Hand.
Wise is He not — Continent cannot be —
Who binds himself to an unworthy Lust ;
Nor Valiant, who submits to a weak Woman ;
Nor Liberal, who cannot draw his Hand
From that in which so basely he is busied.
And of these Four who misses All or One
Is not the Bridegroom of Dominion.

" "Shdh** and ** Shdhid'' (Mistress)— a sort of Punning the
Persian Poets are fond of.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


58 salImIk and absAl.


XXIII.


Ah the poor Lover ! — In the changing Hands

Of Day and Night no wretcheder than He !

No Arrow from the Bow of Evil Fate

But reaches him — one Dagger at his Throat,

Another comes to wound him from behind*

Wounded by Love — then wounded by Reproof

Of Loving — and, scarce stauncht the Blood of Shame

By flying from his Love — ^then, worst of all,

Love's back-blow of Revenge for having fled !

Salaman heard — ^he rent the Robe of Peace —
He came to loathe his Life, and long for Death,
(For better Death itself than Life in Death) —
He tum'd his Face with Absal to the Desert —
Enter'd the deadly Plain ; Branch upon Branch
Cut down, and gathered in a lofty Pile,
And fired. They look'd upon the Flames, those Two —
They look'd, and they rejoiced ; and hand in hand


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIk and absIl.


59


They sprang into the Fire. THE SHAH who saw,
In secret all had order'd ; and the Flame,
Directed by his Self-fulfilling Will,
Devouring utterly Absal, pass'd by
Salaman harnaless—the pure Gold retum'd
Entire, but all the baser Metal bum'd.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


60 salXmIn and absjCl.


XXIV.

Heaven's Dome is but a wondrous House of Sorrow,

And Happiness therein a lying Fable.

When first they mix'd the Clay of Man, and cloth'd

His Spirit in the Robe of Perfect Beauty,

For Forty Mornings did an Evil Cloud

Rain Sorrows over him from Head to Foot ;

And when the Forty Mornings pass'd to Night,

Then came one Morning-Shower — one Morning-Shower

Of Joy — to Forty of the Rain of Sorrow ! —

And though the better Fortune came at last

To seal the Work, yet every Wise Man knows

Such Consummation never can be here !

SalamAn fired the Pile ; and in the Flame

That, passing him, consumed Absal like Straw,

Died his Divided Self, and there survived

His Individual ; and, Uke a Body

From which the Soul is parted, all alone.

Then rose his Cry to Heaven — his Eyelashes

Dropt Blood — ^his Sighs stood like a Smoke in Heaven,


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


61


And Morning rent her Gannent at his Anguish^*

He tore his Bosom with his Nails — ^he smote

Stone on his Bosom — looking then on hands

No longer lockt in hers, and lost their Jewel,

He tore them with his Teeth. And when came Night,

He hid him in some Comer of the House,

And communed with the Fantom of his Love.

" Oh Thou whose Presence so long sooth'd my Soul,

" Now burnt with thy Remembrance ! Oh so long

" The Light that fed these Eyes now dark with Tears !

" Oh Long, Long Home of Love now lost for Ever !

" We were Together — that was aU Enough —

" We Two rejoicing in each other's Eyes,

" Lifinitely rejoicing — all the World

" Nothing to Us, nor We to aU the World —

" No Road to reach us, nor an Eye to watch —

" All Day we whisper'd in each other's Ears,

" All Night we slept in one another's Arms —

" All seem'd to our Desire, as if the Hand

" Of unjust Fortune were for once too short.

" Oh would to God that when I lit the Pyre

* " When the Cloud of Spring beheld the Evil Disposition of
"Time,
"Its Weeping fell upon the Jessamine and Hyacinth and
"Wild Rose." ^ ^Hafiz,


Digitized by CjOOQIC


62 salIhIn and absIl.


" The Flame had left Thee Living and me Dead,
" Not Living worse than Dead, deprived of Thee !
" Oh were I but with Thee ! — at any Cost
" Stript of this terrible Self-solitude !
" Oh but with Thee Annihilation — ^lost,
" Or in Eternal Intercourse renew'd !


Slumber-drunk an Arab in the

Desert off his Camel tumbled.

Who the lighter of her Burden

Ran upon her road rejoicing^

When the Arab woke at morning,

Rubb'd his Eyes and hoKd about him —

« Oh my Camel! Oh my Carnal!''

Quoth he, " Camel of my Soull'-

" That Lost with Her I lost might be,

" Or found. She might be found with Me ! "


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salXmIn and absIl.


63


XXV.

When in this PKght THE SHAH SalamAn saw,

His Soul was struck with Anguish, and the Vein

Of Life within was strangled — ^what to. do

He knew not. Then he tum'd him to THE SAGE—

" Oh Altar of the World, to whom Mankind

" Directs the Face of Prayer in Weal or Woe,

" Nothing but Wisdom can untie the Knot ;

" And art not Thou the Wisdom of the World,

" The Master-Key of all its Difficulties P

" Absal is perisht ; and, because of Her,

" SalImAn dedicates his Life to Sorrow ;

" I cannot bring back Her, nor comfort Him.

" Lo, I have said ! My Sorrow is before Thee ;

" From thy far-reaching Wisdom help Thou Me

" Fast in the Hand of Sorrow ! Help Thou Me,

" For I am very wretched ! " Then THE SAGE—

" Oh Thou that err'st not from the Road of Right,

" If but Salaman have not broke my Bond,

" Nor lies beyond the Noose of my Firm&n,

" He quickly shall unload his Heart to me,

" And I will find a Remedy for all."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


64 salImIn and absIl.


XXVI.

Then THE SAGE coui^sell'd, and Salaman heard,

And drew the Wisdom down into his Heart ;

And, sitting in the Shadow of the Perfect,

His Soul found Quiet under ; sweet it seem'd,

Sweeping the Chaff and Litter from his own,

To be the very Dust of Wisdom's Door,

Slave of the Firm^ of the Lord of Life.

Then THE SAGE marvelled at his Towardness,

And wrought in Miracle in his behalf.

He pour'd the Wine of Wisdom in his Cup,

He laid the Dew of Peace upon his lips ;

And when Old Love retum'd to Memory,

And broke in Passion from his Lips, THE SAGE,

Under whose waxing WILL Existence rose

Responsive, and, relaxing, waned again,

Raising a Fantom Image of Absal,

Set it awhile before Salaman's Eyes,

Till, having sow'd the Seed of Quiet there.

It went again down to Annihilation.

But ever, for the Simi of his Discourse,

THE SAGE would tell of a Celestial Love ;


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl. 65


" ZuHBAH," ^ he said, " the Lustre of the Star

" 'Fore whom the Beauty of the Bri^^itest wanes ;

" Who were tahe to reveal h» perfect Beauty,

" The Sun and Moon would craze ; Zuhrah," he said,

" The Sweetness of the Banquet — ^none in Song

*^ Like Her — ^her Harp filling the Ear of Heaven,

" That Dervish-dances to her Harmony."

Salaman listened, and inclined — again

Bepeated, Liclination ever grew ;

Until THE SAGE beholding in his Soul

The Spirit * quicken, so effectually ^

With ZuHRAH wrought, that she reveal'd herself

Li her pure Beauty to Salaman's Soul,

And washing AbsAl's Lnage from his Breast,

There reign'd instead. Celestial Beauty seen.

He left the Earthly ; and, once come to know

Eternal Love, he let the Mortal go.

* " ZumuH." The Planetary and Celestial Venus.
2 " Jtfiiany." The Mystical pass-word of the Sufis, to express
the Transcendental New Birth of The Soul.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


66 salImXn and absXl.


XXVII.


The Crown of Empire how supreme a Lot !
The Throne of the Sultin how high ! — But not
For All — ^None but the Heaven- ward Foot may dare
To mount — The Head that touches Heaven to wear ! —

When the Belov'd of Royal Augury

Was rescued from the Bondage of AbsaL,

Then he arose, and shaking oflf the Dust

Of that lost Travel, girded up his Heart,

And look'd with undefiled Robe to Heaven.

Then was His Head worthy to wear the Crown,

His Foot to mount the Throne. And then THE SHAH

Summoned the Chiefs of Cities and of States,

Summoned the Absolute Ones who wore the Ring,

And such a Banquet ordered as is not

For Sovereign Assemblement the Uke

In the Folding of the Records of the World.

No arm^d Host, nor Captain of a Host,

From all the Quarters of the World, but there ;


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salIaiIn and absIl.


67


Of whom not one but to Salaman did

Obeisance, and lifted up his Neck

To yoke it under his Supremacy.

Then THE SHAH crowned him with the Qolden

Crown,
And set the Golden Throne beneath his Feet,
And over aU the Heads of the Assembly,
And in the Ears of all of them, his Jewels
With the Diamond of Wisdom cut, and said : —


Digitized by CjOOQIC


68 iuiJIwAk iuo^ AmlL,


XXVIII.

" My Son,^ the Kingdom of The World is not

" Eternal, nor the Sum of right Desire ;

" Make thou the Faith-preserving Intellect

" Thy Counsellor ; and considering To-day

" To-morrow's Seed-field, ere That come to bear,

" Sow with the Harvest of Eternity.

" All Work with Wisdom hath to do — by that

" Stampt current only ; what Thyself to do

" Art wise, that Do / what not, consult the Wise.

" Turn not thy Face away from the old Ways,

" That were the Canon of the Kings of Old ;

" Nor cloud with Tyranny the Glass of Justice ;

" But rather strive that aU Confusion

" Change by thy Justice to its opposite.

" In whatsoever Thou shalt Take or Give,

* One sees Jami taking Advantage of his Allegorical Shah to
read a Lesson to the Real — whose Ears Advice, unlike Praise,
scarce ever reached unless obliquely. The Warning (and doubt-
less with good Reason) is principally aimed at the Minister.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImjCn and absXl.


Look to the How ; Giving and Taking still,
Not by the backward Counsel of the Godless,
But by the Law of Faith increase and Give.
Drain not thy People's purse — ^the Tyranny
Which Thee enriches at thy Subjects' cost.
Awhile shall make Thee strong ; but in the End
Shall bow thy Neck beneath a Double Burden.
The Tyrant goes to Hell — follow not Him —
Become not Thou the Fuel of its Fires.
Thou art a Shepherd, and thy Flock the People,
To save and not destroy ; nor at their Loss
To lift Thyself above the Shepherd's calling.
For which is for the other, Flock or Shepherd ?
And join with True men to keep the Flock —
Dogs, if you will — ^but Trusty — ^head in leash.
Whose Teeth are for the Wolf, not for the Lamb,
And least of all the Wolf's Accomplices,
Their Jaws blood-dripping from the Tyrant's Sham-
bles.
For Shahs must have Vizirs — ^but be they Wise
And Trusty — ^knowing well the Realm's Estate —
(For who eats Profit of a Fool P and least
A wise King girdled by a Foolish Council — )
Knowing how far to Shah and Subject bound
On either Hand — ^not by Extortion,


Digitized by LjOOQIC


70


salImIn and absal.


^ Nor Usury wrung from the People's purse,

' Their Master's and their own Estates (to whom

^ Enough is apt enough to make them Rebel)

^ Feeding to such a Surplus as feeds Hell.

' Proper in Soul and Body be They — pitiful

' To Poverty — ^hospitable to the Saint —

^ Their sweet Access a Salve to wounded Hearts,

^ Their Vengeance terrible to the Evil Doer,

^ Thy Heralds through the Country, bringing Thee

* Report of Good or HI — which to confirm

' By thy peculiar Eye — and least of all

^ Suflfering Accuser also to be Judge —

^ By surest Steps builds up Prosperity."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salXmIn and absXl.


71


XXIX.

EPILOGUE.

Under the Outward Form of any Story
An Inner Meaning lies — This Story now
Completed, do Thou of its Mystery
(Whereto the Wise hath found himself a way)
Have thy Desire— No Tale of / and THO U,
Though /and THOU he its Interpreters.^
What signifies THE SHAH P and what THE SAGE ?
And what SAL AM AN not of Woman bom ?
And what ABSAL who drew him to Desire ?
And what the KINGDOM that awaited him
When he had drawn his Garment from her Hand ?
What means that FIERY PILE ? and what THE

SEA?
And what that Heavenly ZXJHRAH who at last
Clear'd ABSAL from the Mirror of his Soul ?
Learn part by part the Mystery from me ;
All Ear from Head to Foot and Understanding be.

* The Story is of Generals^ though enacted by Particulars,


Digitized by CjOOQIC


72 salImIn and absal.


XXX.

The Incomparable Creator, when this World
He did create, created First of All
The FiKST Intelligence^^ — First of a Chain
Of Ten Intelligences, of which the Last

' " These Intelligences are only another Form of the Neo-Pla-
tonic Deemones. The Neo-Platonists held that Matter and Spirit
could have no Intercourse — they were, as it were, incommensurate.
How then, granting this premise, was Creation possible ? Their
answer was a kind of gradual Elimination. God, the 'Actus
Purus,* created an (Eon; this CEon created a Second; and so on,
until the Tenth (Eon was sufficiently Material (as the Ten were in
a continually descending Series) to affect Matter, and so cause the
Creation by giving to Matter the Spiritual Form,

Similarly we have in Sufiism these Ten Intelligences in a cor-
responding Series, and for the same End.

There are Ten Intelligences, and Nine Heavenly Spheres, of
which the Ninth is the Uppermost Heaven, appropriated to the
First IntelHgence ; the Eighth, that of the Zodiac, to the Second ;
the Seventh, Saturn, to the Third; the Sixth, Jupiter, to the
Fourth ; the Fifth, Mars, to the Fifth ; the Fourth, The Sun, to the
Sixth ; the Third, Venus, to the Seventh ; the Second, Mercury, to
the Eighth ; the First, The Moon, to the Ninth ; and The Earth
is the peculiar Sphere of the Tenth, or lowest Intelligence, called
The Active."


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImIn and absIl.


73


Sole Agent is in this our Universe,
Active Intelligence so call'd ; The One
Distributor of Evil and of Good,
Of Joy and Sorrow. Himself apart from Matter,
In Essence and in Energy — ^his Treasure
Subject to no such Talisman — He yet
Hath fashion'd aU that is — ^Material Form,
And Spiritual, sprung jfrom Him — ^by Him
Directed aU, and in his Bounty drown'd.
Therefore is He that Firmkn-issuing SHAH
To whom the Worid was subject. But because
What He distributes to the Universe
Himself from still a Higher Power receives.
The Wise, and aU who comprehend aright.
Will recognise that Higher in THE SAGE.

His the Prime Spirit that, spontaneously
Projected by the Tenth Intelligence,
Was jfrom no Womb of Matter reproduced
A Special Essence called The Soul — a Child
Fresh sprung from Heaven in Baiment undefiled
Of Sensual Taint, and therefore caU'd SALIMAN*.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


74


SAL^Mibr AND ABsAl.


And who Absal P — ^The Lust-adoring Body,

Slave to the Blood and Sense — through whom The

Soul,
Although the Body's very Life it be,
Does yet imbibe the Knowledge and Desire
Of Things of Sense ; and these united thus
By such a Tie God only can unloose,
Body and Soul are Lovers Each of other.

What is The Sea on which they sail'd P— The Sea
Of Animal Desire — the Sensual Abyss,
Under whose Waters lies a World of Being
Swept far from God in that Submersion. •

And wherefore was it Absal in that Isle
Deceived in her Delight, and that SalamAn
Fell short of his Desire ? — That was to show
How Passion tires, and how with Time begins
The Folding of the Carpet of Desire.

And what the turning of Salaman's Heart
Back to THE SHAH, and looking to the Throne
Of Pomp and Glory ? What but the Return
Of the Lost Soul to its true Parentage,
And back from Carnal Error looking up
Repentant to its Intellectual Throne.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


salImAn and absIl.


75


What is The Fire ? — ^Ascetic Discipline,

That bums away the Animal Alloy,

Till aU the Dross of Matter be consumed,

And the Essential Soul, its raiment clean

Of Mortal^Taint, be left. But forasmuch

As any Life-long Habit so consumed,

May well recur a Pang for what is lost.

Therefore THE SAGE set in Salaman's Eyes

A Soothing Fantom of the Past, but stiU

Told of abetter Venus, till his Soul

She fill'd, and blotted out his Mortal Love.

For what is Zuhrah ? — That Divine Perfection,

Wherewith the Soul inspired and all array'd

Li Intellectual Light is Royal blest.

And mounts The Throne, and wears The Crown, j

and Reigns
Lord of the Empire of Humanity.

This is the Meaning of This Mystery,
Which to know wholly ponder in thy Heart,
TiU aU its ancient Secret be enlarged.
Enough — The written Summary I close.
And set my Seal :

THE TRUTH GOD ONLY KNOWS.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


Digitized by CjOOQIC


APPENDIX.


What follows concerning the Royal Game of ChOqan comes from the
Appendix to Vol. L of Sir William Ouseley's Travels in the East,

FiRD(rsi tells of Siavesh and his Iranian (Persian) Heroes aston-
ishing Afrasiab of TuRAN with their Skill at this Game 600 years
before Christ; and Gushtasp (Hystaspes), to the sound of Dram
and Trumpet, drives the Ball Invisible with his Blow. NizAmi
sets ShIrin and her Maidens playing at it, against her King,
Khusrau PARviz, and his Ministers ;

** On one side was the Moon and her Stars,

" On the other THE SHAH and his Firman-bearers."

Ouseley however (allowing for Poetic License) believes the Game
was played " through almost every Reign of the Sassanian Dynasty
— as much esteemed by the Mahommedan Kings as by their Fire-
worshipping Predecessors."

"We find the Greek Emperor, Manuel Commenus, with his
Byzantine Princes and Nobles, enjoying this Amusement on Horse-
back in the 12th Century; the Wooden Ball having been ex-
changed for one more soft, form*d of stuflfd Leather; and the
Stick, or Wand, instead of a Hammer-like Head, terminating in a
Hoop; which, as our Battledores or Tennis-rackets, presented to
the Ball a reticulated space. This Imperial Sport is well described
by the Historian Cinnamus, who probably was a Spectator.** It


Digitized by CjOOQIC


78 APPENDIX.

went by the slightly altered name tsukanisterion — which word^
however, since Chugan means the Bandy-stick employed, more
properly signifies, I suppose, the Ground played on ; and equally
related to the Persian, had they chosen to affix, as so often, the
Verb common to themselves, the Greeks, the Latins, and us, and
called the place of Exercise CHijGksistdn ; or, CHUGAN-«to»rf.

Pietro della Valle, who saw it played in Shah Abbas' time
(1618), calls it '* PallamagHo,*' and found both Game and Name
subsisting in the Florentine " Calcio " — only that the Florentine
played a-foot, and the Persian " piu nobilmente a Cavallo." The
Spanish Jesuit Ovalle found it also (also on Foot) under the name
of "Chueca," in South America, in 1646.

Ducange finds Name and Game also in the " Chicane" of Lan-
guedoc, fix)m which he naturally thinks it borrowed j not daring to
push Derivation to the EngUsh word " Chiquen," he says, " qui
signifie un PouUet ; en sorte que * Chiguaner * seroit imiter les Poul-
lets qui ont contAme de courir les uns apres les autres pour arra-
cher les morceaux du Bee," &c.

Englishmen know the Game well (on Foot too, and with such
Leather Balls as the Persians perhaps knew not how to harden),
under many Forms and Names — Golfi Stow-Ball, Shinty, Hocky,
Bandy, &c.


And now with regard to the Frontispiece. It is "accurately
copied" fix)m an Engraving in Sir William's Book, which he says
(and as those who care to look into the Bodleian for it may see),
is " accurately copied fix)m a very beautiful Persian MS., contain-
ing the Works of Hafiz, transcribed in the Year 956 of the Hejirah,
1549 of Christ; the MS. is in my own Collection. This DeUnea-
tion exhibits the Horsemen contending for the Ball ; their short
Jackets seem peculiarly adapted to the Sport ; we see the Mf L, or


Digitized by LjOOQIC


APPENDIX.


79


Goals; Servants attend on Foot holding Chugans in readiness for
other Persons who may join in the Amusement, or to supply the
place of any that may be broken. A young Prince — as his Parr,
or Feather, would indicate — ^receives on his Entrance into Ihe
Meidan, or Place of Exercise, a Chugan from the hands of a
bearded Man very plainly dressed ; yet (as an intelligent Painter
at Ispahan assured me, and as appears from other Miniatures in
the same Book) this Bearded Figure is meant to represent Hafiz
himself," &c.

The Persian legend at the Top Corner is the Verse from Hafiz
which the Drawing illustrates ;

Shahsuvdra E.h6sh bemeiddn dmedy giiiy bezann.

Though the Sticks, or Bats, are here represented lonfff they really
were (as Chardin and others report) so short as to cause the Rider
to stoop below the Saddle-bow to strike ; which, the Horse going
full Gallop, was great part of the Difficulty. And Tabri describes
Events in the Eighth Century (just before his own Time), when
Harun Alraschid was still little, so that when on Horseback, " he
could not reach to strike the Ball with a Chugdn." Ouseley also,
judging from the Illustration (in which Persian Artists are not very
accurate), thinks the Chugan sticks were onXy generally ^ or partially,
semicircular at the striking End. But that they were so (var3dng
perhaps a little in degree as our Bandy sticks do) is proved by the
Text of the Present Poem, as also by a previous line in the
Original, where —

" The Realm of Existence is the space of his Meidan,
"The Ball of Heaven in the Crook of his Ch^jgAn."

And passages in Hafiz speak of his Heart as being carried off by
his Beloved's Eyebrow ; which no Persian Lover ever dreamt of
but as arched indeed.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


80 APPENDIX.


As the " Fair One " of Persian Mysticism is the Deity's Self—
so the Points of that Beauty (as in our Canticles) adumbrate so
many of the Deity's Attributes; varying however with various
Poets, or their Commentators. Sir W. Jones speaks of The Hair
as emblematic of " The Expansion of Divine Glory " — ^The Lips
as of " Hidden Mysteries "—The Down of the Cheek as " Spirits
round the Throne," whose central point of excessive Light is dark-
en'd into The Mole upon the Cheek !— Tholuck, from a Turkish
Commentary, interprets the Ringlets as "The Divine Mysteries;"
the Forehead their Manifestation, &c.

The Beauty of Absal, though Sensual, yet seduces Salaman
(The Soul) with its Likeness to The Divine ; and her Tresses, as
we see, play their part, involving him in their Intricacies. The
following Ode of J ami's on the subject very happily entangles the
Ear with its repetitions of that mysterious Zulf which closes the
first two, and every alternate Line, to the End. " Le Texte de
cette Ode," says De Sagy, " est d' une Charme inexprimable que
r on chercheroit inutilement dans une Traduction." The Persian
therefore is here vocalized as nearly as possible in English Notes,
to give the Reader a Notion of the harmony which is its chief
Merit. But I subjoin for the Lover of literal Translation a very
literal one, which he can if he chooses place word for word under
the Persian, and, if he will accept a very Uttle help at starting, may
construe into what form he pleases : supplying for himself a Verb
and a Point where the Reader of the original has to do so.

The apostrophized 't (here written, but in Persian only pro-
nounced) either denotes that the following Noun, Pronoun, or
Adjective belongs to it as Genitive or Epithet — as in the first line
** dil 't man "=" heart of I (Me) ; " or acts merely as a passing Note
of harmony (with a People who hate all harshness but in Deed)
between any two Consonants and a third, or between any conso-
nanted long Vowel and a succeeding Consonant, unless that long
Vowel's Consonant be n. " Tamam' i zulf " in line 3 is an in-


Digitized by CjOOQIC


APPENDIX.


81


stance of the V in its latter use. In both cases it is common in
quantity.
The ra in the 5th and last lines mark the Dative.

Ay di? i man sayd' i dam* i zulf i t6
Dam* i dilha gashta nam' i zulf i to
Banda shud dar zulf' i to dilha tamam
Dam u band amad tamam' i zulf i to
Dad' i tashrif ' i ghiilam' i-bandara
Zulf i to ay man ghiilam' i zulf i to
Laik' i rukhsar' i gulrang' i t6 nist
Juz nikab' i mushkifam' i zulf i to
Ram kunand az dam' i murghan way ajab
Jan' i bi aram' i ram' i zulf i to
Zulf i to bala' i mah darad makam
Bas buland amad makam' i zulf i to
Subh' i ikbal' ast' i tali* har nafas
Banda-Jami-ra zi sham' i zulf i to.

Ah heart I prey snare Ringlet You
Snare Hearts become name Ringlet you
Bound are in Ringlet you Hearts wholly
Snare and bond become wholly Ringlet you
Give honour Slave-bound
Ringlet you Ah I Slave Ringlet you
Worthy cheek rose-colour'd you not is
Except Veil musky-natured Ringlet you
Escape make from Snare Birds Ah strange
Soul without peace obsequious of Ringlet you
Ringlet you above Moon has place
Very high is place Ringlet you
Dawn Bliss is revealed every breath
Bondman-Jami from Night Ringlet you.


Digitized by LjOOQIC


82 APPENDIX.

Page 7. " The Master," whose Verse is quoted, is Jellaladin,
the Great Sufi Teacher. The "King Himself" is Yaciib Beg,
whose Father's Vision appears in the next Section.

Page 22. " Mussulman " is very usually derived from the same
" Salem " element as " Salaman." So " Solomon," &c.

Page 26. " Premierement, k bander V arc ; dont V Art consiste
a le bien tenir, ale bander, et a laisser partir la Corde a Taise,
sans que la main gauche qui tient V arc, et qui est toute etendue,
ni la main droite qui manie la Corde, remuent le moins du
monde. On en donne d'abord d'aises a bander; puis de plus
durs par degr^s. Les maitres de ces Exercises apprennent i ban-
der r arc deyant soi, derriere Boi, k cote de soi, en haut, en has —
href, en cent postures differentes, toujours vite et aisement. lis
ont des arcs fort difficiles a bander, et, pour essayer la force, on les
pend contre un mur a une Cheville, et on attache des poids a la
Corde de 1* arc a 1* endroit ou 1* on appuie la coche de la Fleche.
Les plus durs portent cinque cents pesant avant d'etre bandes,"
&c. — Sir John Chardin, vol: iii. 43?. He elsewhere says, " La
bonte d'un Arc consiste, comme on le dit en Perse, en ce que
d'abord il soit rude a bander, jiisqu' a ce^que la Fleche soit k
moitie dessus ; et qu' ensuite il soit mou et aise, jusqu* a ce que le
bout de la Fleche soit entre dans la Corde."

Page 39 and elsewhere The Throne is spoken of as under Foot
The Persepolitan Sculpture still discovers its King keeping his
Chair as Europeans do with a separate Footstool. But in Jami's
time. The Throne was probably of the same Fashion that Chardin
saw Soliman twice crowned on * 200 years after — perhaps the very
same—" Un petit Tabouret carre," 3 feet high. Golden and Jew-

> Solf man's 2nd Coronation came abont because of his having fallen so ill
from Debauchery, that his Astrologers said his First must have taken place
under an Evil conjunction of Stars— so he must be crowned again — which
he was— Chardin looking on both times.


Digitized by CjOOQIC


APPENDIX.


83


elled, on which the Prince gathers up his feet in Oriental fashion,
so as it serves for Throne and Footstool too. " Ce Tabouret, hors
le Temps quMl sert a cette Oeremonie se garde avec grand Soin
dans le Tresor Royal qui est au Donjon de la Forteresse d' Ispa-
han,** where also, to prove the Conservatism of Persia so far as
Habits go, — " J' ai vu," he says, " des Habits de Tamurlan ; ils sont
tallies tout comme ceux qu' on fait aujourd' hui, sans aucune dif-
ference." So the Mirrors used in Persia 200 years ago were com-
monly of polished Metal, just as Jami so often describes.

Page 40. " Kat," which almost signifies " Gigantic King," pro-
perly belongs to Khusrau, 3rd king of the Kaianian Dynasty ; but
is here borrowed for Parviz as a more mythical Title than Shah or
King.

Page 42. I have proposed " The Planets " for those mysterious
" Seven and Four." But there is a large Choice, especially for the
ever mystical " Seven " — Seven Commandments ; 7 Climates ; 7
Heavens, &c. The " Four " may be the 4 Elements, or even the 4
acknowledged Mahommedan Gospels— namely. The Pentateuch,
Psalms, New Testament, and Kuran. For Sal4man, though
fabled not of The Faith, yet allegorically represents The Mirror of
all Faith, and as The original Form of The Human Soul might be
intuitively enlightened with all the Revelations that were to be —
might even be, in esoteric Sufiism, The Come and Coming Twelfth
Imam who had read all the previous Eleven; it being one Doc-
trine in the East that it is ever the Last and most perfect Prophet
who was First Created and reserved in the Interior Heaven nearest
to God till the Time of his Mission should come.

Sir John Chardin quotes Seven Magnificats written in gold upon
azure over Shah Abbas* Tomb in the great Mosque at Kom— com-
posed, he says, " par le docte Hasan-Cazy,'* mainly in glory of Ali
the Darhng Imam of Persia, but of which the First Hymn " est
tout de Mahomet." This has some passages so very parallel with
the Sage's Address to Sal4man, that (knowing how little worth


Digitized by CjOOQIC


84


APPENDIX.


such parallels are, especially in a Country where Magnificent Titles
of Honour are stereotyped ready to be lavished on Prophet or
Khan) nevertheless really seem borrowed by "le docte Hasan-
Cazy," who probably was hard set to invent any new. They show
at least how Jami saluted his Alien Prince with Titles due to
Mahomef s Self, and may perhaps light any curious Reader to a
better understanding of these Seven and Four. He calls Mahomet,
" Infaillible Expositeur des Quatre Livres " — those Gospels ; * " Con-
ducteur des huit mobiles '* — the 8 Heavens of the Planets, says the
Editor ; " Gouverneur des Sept Parties " the Climates ; " Arche-
type des Choses creSes ; Instrument de la Creation du Monde : le
plus releve de la race d'Adam. Ce Peintre incomprehensible, qui a
tire tout d'un seul Coup de Pinceau *KoUN Fikoun,' n* a jamais

fait un si beau portrait que le Globe de ton Visage.** ■

Page 49. " Tram Garden." " Mahomet," says Sir W. Jones,
" in the Chapter of The Morning, towards the end of his Alcoran,
mentions a Garden called * Irem,' which is no less celebrated by
the Asiatic Poets than that of the Hesperides by the Greeks. It
was planted, as the Commentators say, by a king named Shedad,"
— deep in the Sands of Arabia Felix — " and was once seen by an
Arabian who wandered far into the Desert in search of a lost
Camel."


1 So Sir John : but the Kuran being one, this looks rather addrest to All
than Mahomet.


THE END.


JOHN CBILDS AND SON, BUNGaY.


' ^


Digitized by CjOOQIC


Digitized byLaOOQlC '


^"JS^


Google


K- - '; r f?=. *.iJ ~'


.•■1 ',


^/-'


mm
'"'mm


'•:m'i


■iK
